 

■1 
_ I 
T. -7, 

THE 
GODFREY F. SINGER MEMORIAL PRESENTED BY 
MR. AND MRS. JACOB SINGER 
I 

r ^ 

Ci®.'' ' ■■ 
VA' ■'; va'' T O.: -. 
.-'■ ■. ■ CL;, V ‘..; : -; ■■.- 

•> r. ’ ■., •*''.-( 0 ' T' ' • * 

■'•. ik tcl‘ .' 1. i V: ■■•: '■ V -,, ' ■■ - ^ 
> vc. ’ : Y:; 1 
( 
l \ 
r •, rc '•/ ■ '■'''■ 
■'■ \ '.; v. ■•. ■' ■- 
sti ■ V • ” ’ > • 
HA 

C. V 
, 1; ■ ' 
LA 
r. ^ r • A 


‘ st'. j .* 
: >■« - S 


THE 
VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS, 
A 
NOVEL. 
V • L I. 


f T. pm; r'v«r 'TT"; 
1. V i i. e i.. - j.. .i. y 1 t I 
o h: 

T H E 
VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS,, 
A n 
V E L 
IN A SERIES OF LETTERS, 
By JOHN POTTER, M. B. Author of the Curate of Coventry, 
C. CC— 
— -- -- scripts matrona, libellus. 
Martial, 
To mend the heart, to raise the mind, our view. Ye modest fair, this book is writ for you. 
IN two.vonumis. 
VOL. I. 
Printed for W, cas, lamb’s Conduit Street, Holborn. 
M ® CC LXXXIT, 
11 LI T 
. •r.i I O VI 
^ '■ r '; o i: : ’ /, •' i 
.n .If .^cittost /: 7.: 
.'it / po i;;; '17 0 vfh V •’< ’■ 
rd rid, 
r : nt u ■ rh'' '',.. r 

1 I f /■ 
j, OF PA. 
liibrakv 
ADVERTISEMENT. 
^ r Author of the following work 
1 
thinks it necessary to observe, that 
V 
he has studioussy endeavoured to avoid Subscribing to the wishes of juvenile indiscretion, in not indulging the erratick idelussons and extravagances of romance His aim has been Solely, to correal the mistakes of the heart; to enlarge the boundaries of human understanding; to point out the Social obligations j to display the beauties of domestic felicity; and to give ardour and confidence to virtue. 
^3 
THE 


/ 
- ' ( 'r -- j r 
LD. r J. 
LC ll.. V • " ^01 ’rrldv' 
* ■ • ' ' ■'! • *•* ".<■ ••! ••• [. t. f i. V : 
... >, ^ t - 
f 7 LT: .' n 
‘ ' ■ ■ i • ’ '■■1 ■ ‘ t ‘ 
T II E 
VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS, 
LETTER I. 
Miss Bellamy to Miss Melville. 
Belle vuey April 14, 1783. 
EALTH, tranquillity, and hap piness, to my dearest and affectionate friend Melville ', who, 
in addition to the charms os personal beauty, poffeffcs the graces of'gaiety, and the captivating sprightliiiess of wit. 
vol. I, 
B 
O! 
2 THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
O! thou enchanting beguiler of tedious hours, how do I Seel the loss of thee, since my sather’s retreat from London to the country! — You must make us a visit: indeed, my dear girl, you must; Sori long to See you as much as I do to be married, almojl; and that is a bold word, let me tell you, for a young woman to Say, whose humble Strephon is So pretty and worthy a Sellovv, as the Souhdissolving Billy Bellamont* 
Surely, my dear Miranda, he is a pattern of everything that is valuable and praiseworthy!! — is manly without rudeness; — modest without effeminacy elegant without affeffation affable without superciliousness; — prudent without meannessgenerous without extravagance; — learned without dulness— — accomplished without conceit. 
What 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 5 
What a figure; — what a Sace; — what an eye, or, rather, what a pair of eyes! — What' adhas of old might be, I Cannot Say; but, if ever there was an Adonis, my Bellatnont is one. — In short, my friend, he is everything a man should be, or that a woman ought to hope Sor in a husband— —! my dear Miranda, I could dwell on his perse^ions from morn to midnight hour, and should then retire Sfom the pleasing talk as from a talc half told. 
Perhaps you will laugh at the portrait I have drawn of this miracle of his Sex, and accuse me of partiality, but you will wrong me if you do, for my pencil is not capable of touching the picture in a style of colouring equal to the original. I defy the genius of a Reynolds to accomplish it. — But stop; I must not let B a my 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS, 
my extasies and heroics carry me too far, lest you should envy my conquest and itappiness, and, presuming on the Superiority of your beauty and accomplishments, prove a rival candidate Sor this pirince of perfe£iion. Friendship, I know, ought to forbid it, but love over powers every other con sideratioiv^^nd I ought to have every ng to fear from the matchless influ nce of Such an opponent. All my Security would rest on the uncorrupted principles and integrity of his heart, which I think would remain unshaken and unbiaised, amidst the bribery of captivating eloquence, or the refulgent blaze of beauty. 
I shall here close the Scene on my lovely Beilamont for this time, and pass 
on to other particulars. -- --? 
'........ : AIN 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS., 5 
In your last letter, my dear Miranda, you desircd a description os our new Situation, which I now shall endeavour to give you with all poshble brevity. 
The house and estate my father has purchased, is situated on a j^stn^ eminence, adjoining to one of th most pii,, villages in the kingdom, The cottages are neatly built, and regularly disposed. — The paisish church, which is plain and neat, stands on a ristng piece of ground; and, having a beautiful Spire, forms a pleasing termination to the prospedt of the village from our house. The cottages are mostly covered with thatch, but the houses belonging to the vicar of the parish, the apothecary, and an attorney, are very respeffabic struffures, and figure above the rest, ih proportion to the importance and. opt(i b 3 lence 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS,. 
lence of their owners, over the other inhabitants. 
My father’s villa is a manor house; and, as he has purchased the whole manor, he is the lord os it. This was once a Villa rcgis, and consequently a royal Scat, while the kings of great brl tain held the manor in their own de inesae. — The original house,. you must suppose, is not now standing. The present one was built a few years since, in the modern style, by the late lord, — and is a very elegant and magnificent mansion. My father calls it his uiile dulcei but the late owner called it Belle vue^ which is the name it still is distinguished, by, — The lands belonging to the whole manor are prodigioussy extensive, and S ccurse comprise the little village in the valley, So that the Inhabitants are all my 
father’s 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 7. 
father’s tenants. — The late proprietor was a dissipated man of fashion, perpetually involved in difficulties, in conse quence of the extravagant mode of his living; the bad effects of which were most Severely felt by his tenants, whose rents were continually increasing, So that, at the time of my father’s purchase, they were, one and all, reduced to a state of poverty and distress, from which neither their appeals, remonstrances, nor their unremitting industry could extricate them. The only prosperous persons throughout the whole manor, were the vicar and the lawyer. — I'he former raised himsels into consequence, by being the tale bearer os every trifling indiscretion he could either find out or invent against the tenants; and the latter has acquired a fortune by encouraging and litigating b4 frivo' 
55 n ie VIRTUOUS TILL.AGERS', 
frivolous disputes betwixt the lord and tlieau 
As Soon as my father came to ressde here, he invited all bis tenants to a Sumptuous entertainment; a circumstance unknown at the manor house in the memory of the oldest man living. They came, it is true, but with fear and trembling, in Sorrowful expeffation of hearing of additional impositions from their new lord; and the Solemnity of theircoun tenances, favoured the appearance of a public funerate instead of a public feast ing. 
My father receiveddiis guests in the great hall, with that affability and complacency which So strongly mark his character. He made them welcome; • and lie wished them to relax Srom their 
earcs;,,, 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS., 
cares, and pass a Sew hours in innocent merriment. In this he found himself mistaken. A melancholy gloom was marked on every Sace, and they beheld their new master with looks of terror, instead of meeting his Smiles of good nature with cheersulness and heartfelt Satisfaffion. • — He looked around the room, and remarking the general appearance of their countenances and diff tant and awful mode of their behaviour, readily perceived that they had visited him under the idea of being his staves', called forth to new oppressions, and nor to partake of his hospitality,, as free mcoy neighbours, and friends. 
The liberality of his benevolent mind was Sensibly assessed;; Soon as the' dinner ' was removed, and the hall cleared of' the Servants, he addressed himself to' Si 1 B 5 th 
xo 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
the company in general in the following manner: 
Neighbours and friends (for Such I wish you to be), the intent of ray coming to live amongst you, is to Spend the remainder of my days in ease, tranquillity, and happiness, after a life of fifty years employed in the various Solicitudes attendant upon business. The gifts of fortune have rewarded my industry, far, very far beyond my expe(5lation, or my merit. Providence hath been graciously bountiful to me; and 1 daily bow with reverential gratitude for the benefits, blessings, and proteffion, he hath been pleased to bestow upon me. I consider wealth of no importance to the possessor, but as it is applied for the general good of ourselves and others; and, as I now do not wish to live for myself alone, I 
shall. 
THE virtvotrs VILLAGERS. 
IT 
shall, on every occasion, most willingly stretch forth my hand, to relieve the accidental and unavoidable distreffes of those around me, whose Situations are too indigent to provide for them; but my charity will never be extended a Second time to artificial distress, or fraudulent imposition; for, well 1 know, half the miseries os the lowest rank of men have their origin in want of industry, or want of economy. — The middle order of men' are So circumstanced, as generally to be provided with the conveniences and comforts of life : and they Seldom experience any calamity, or distress, unless produced by the imprudence of figuring beyond their situation and circumstances or the vanity of aping their Superiors in the extravagancies, follies, and vices of she gay world. — The first rank of men as they are salsely called), I mean those B 6 bom 
12 THE vlrtirovs VILLAGERS. 
( 
born to fortunes and titles, generally live a lise of dissipation and debauchery,, by which they shorten their days; wantonly expend the wealth of their prudent and worthy progenitors; involve numbers of their dependants in their difficulties and distressesand at last close the Scene of their folly and wickedness, by banishing themselves from their native country, oc by. impious ais of Suicide. 
I'wish not to disturb the ashes of the dead, but you are Sensible I must know., that the late lord of this manor was a man of the east I last described; and that this important estate,, once the Seat of kings; and pride of' his illustrious ancestors; was Sold to me even before his death, to Satisfy, in part only, the demands of his injured aeditors. — Thus it is, and thus 
lam. 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
I am afraid it ever, will be, that the fortunes of our nobility are Squandered away; and that their palaces come to be occupied by the Sons os commerce, retiring from the fatigues of business with Splendid fortunes, obtained by industry and prudence 
I am no stranger to the repeated hardships your late lord imposed upon you, in raising your rents beyond the value of your possessions for the Support of his extravagance, and relief of his distresses. I am no stranger to the miserable Situations most of you have been reduced to, by his tyranny and oppressions. And it is not unknown tome,, how grossly you were frequently misre presented to him, by the artful and fallacious insinuations of designing and interested tnen; by which his affeffions Sor 
yo 
H 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
you were alienated, and you obliged to" give up points to the injury os yourselves and your posterity, from your inability to change your situations, or Support lawsuits unjustly brought against yon.’*’ • — (Here my Sather looked at the vicar and the lawyer, who were psesent, with a countenance full os contempt and indignation.) However, ’* continnedi he, your oppressor is levelled with the dust, and his tale bearing raiscreants will meet with no encouragement Srora me. F will judge Sor mysels, in whatever relates to your connexion with me. And while I tell you I mean to ai: with generosity towards you, I would have itunderstood, -- that I expect fidelity and justice on your parts towards me, I will reward merit' wherever 1 meet with it; but rest assured that ingratitude, or perfidy, will find no favour in my sight. 
I will 
THE VIRTUOUS wiiil'agers. IS 
“I will release you all from your present difficulties and oppressions, shy lowering your rents to an equitable standard bettt^een myseif and you; for, if you pay for your possessions beyond their real value,, your difficulties and distrefses will still continue, and under Such circumstances there can be no Security of your being able to answer iny demands upon you. — I will yet go further; — •.many of you depend on the success of your agriculture for the payment of your rents; and as the uncertainty of the seasons, and the effefis of accidental storms and tempests, may Sometimes render your utmost industry unprofitable, or fruitless, 
I shall think it my duty, as a man and a Christian, to take Such circumstances into consideration, and mitigation; Sor, if you labour in vain, I cannot expest to reap, ’* 
From 
i6 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
“From this day, it is my hope, that no brow will be wrinkled with diseontent; that every sorrowsul heart will be happy; that wherever distress, or despair, has encouraged inattention and idleness, they may be banished from your habitations; Sor industry will prove a never-failing friend if you encourage it, and shortly relieve all your wants,, and gratify all your wishes. — “Lhe race is not always to the fivifty ?ior the battle ts the jirongj^ But more depends upon your selves than you may imagine. — Let Sociability and friendship dwell amongst you; for when, animohties Subsist betwixt' neighboiir and neighbour, they alienate the affestions from one another, and check the Springs of universal interests. 
“Let no circumstance, but the invasion of property,, tempt you to enter into ' law 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. ly 
Jaw suits. — If you cannot Settle your private differences yourselves, rescr them to the judgement and decision of disinterested persons; for the event of verdicls is a lortery, ^ where the odds is against your having a prize; and the only gainers in the adventure, too general, are thpse, xvhose interest it is to encourage feuds and litigations. — The calamities of siek ness are frequently insupportable to the laborious poor, espeially where their families are numerous. Should distresses of this nature happen' to objeifls round tne, I will most willingly direst, that every necessary attention and Support shall be given them, at my own expense. 
Encourage matrimony amongst the younger branches of your families and dependants; and give no countenance to resolutions of celibacy, for they are ridiculous 
Ig THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
diculoiis and immoral. Marriage, it must be confessed, is Sometimes produfiive of infelicity; but it is capable of affording the highest happiness human beings can experience, it checks the progress of unlawful connexions, that frequently give isise to private, as well as public disgrace and inconvenience. It is one of the most important obligations we owe to the community; and, above all, it is the dictate of nature,, and the institution of Providence. 
One thing more, and I have done. ♦ Never suffer drunkeniiefs and gaming to get a footing amongst you, for they are destroyers of the peace, harmony, and rational pleasures os domestic life. Let the amusements os your leisure hours be exhilarating and innocent, and, is they are conducted under proper regulations, 
they 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
they may be made productive of profit,, as well as delight. 
It is the wish of my heart, jto see you all prosperous and happy; and it .shall not be my fault if you are not So. I entreat you to Spend the remainder of this day with me, in unrestrained festivity >■ and when you return home to your wives and families, let cheerfulness Sport on your Countenances, and happiness dwell, in your hearts. We will Set the world an example worthy of imitation, and by reviving the golden age amongst ourseives,,. lead posterity to wish they had added to the number of the virtuous vil ■ lagers.’’ 
Here my father ended his harangue; which had So astonished the hearers, and impressed itselfon their sensations, y hat theoi 
there 
20 The virtuous villagers. 
there was Scarcely a face not bespriiikled with tears. — Grateful admiration Soon took its turn to reign over every countenance; and when the company, at my father’s request, gave into merriment, it was an universal Scene of heartfelt joy, and unremitting rapture. — If diffatisfadhon pos sibly could exist, it must be Solely with the Vicar and the Attorney, who evidently understood, that the dominion of fallacy and oppression was at an end. — 
I must here finish my letter, and defer the relation of numberless interesting particulars, relative to our new Situation, to Some other opportunity; for, O my dear girl, Bellamont is this moment arrived at the gate with my brother Benjamin, whom he has been to fetch from Oxford, to Spend th.c vacation with us. I must, 
there 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 21 
therefore, lay down ray pen, and fly to meet him; besides, you know, I must go to welcome my brother’s return home. Adieu, adieu, my dear/riend. I am truly 
-.. * X t.. t 
Yours, 
Belinpa Bellamy, 
V -. ry: yr;; 
io.. :;.. ' 
.'iw. noli 1. IV v..od, 
, 'TCT it ••. I!; 
eji 
'. 1 • 
2'. II o: > w 
■ LI ■: 
L E T. 
22 THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS 
r 
L E T T E ■ R II 
Miss Melville to Miss Bellamy. 
Loftdsn, April 20, 1785 
My DEAR Belinda, 
Your long and very entertaining letter is now before me, and you have my warmest thanks Sor the favour. For heaven’s Jake, my dearest girl, how long have you been a dealer in tropes, figures, and hyperboles? when was the ceremony of deifying this (2.16. Billy bella mont performed \ and how does his god ship look after his metaraorphosis? he 6 has, 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 23 
has, doiibtless, quitted his earthly territory, and dwells in the celestial regions? In what manner does he make his visits from his aerial abode? I take it for granted, he descends in a triumphant chariot, drawn by peacocks, or rather a pair of turtle doves, the emblems os his chaste passion! and though late of mortal race, I suppose, now he is deified, he is to partake ot immortality aster death, and be reckoned among the number of 
the gods! -- -- Haha, ha! -- -- -- How it 
moves my merriment, to read of a young fellow exalted to the Skies, only because he is tall, straight, and well proportioned; with his ears, eyes, nose, and mouth, just where they should be. And amidst all the extravagance of your bombastic fustian, more perfedlions are ascribed to him, than the whole list attributed to Jupiter himself contains— — 

24 the vlrtuolfs VILLAGERS 
Ha, ha, ha! — Manly without rudeness— — without effeminacy; — prince of perseflion — cc. o. And to conclude the curious catalogue of conceits, the immaculate Billy bella mont is compared to the beautiful Adonis; who, by the by, according to the heathen mythology, though the Son of Cynaras^ king of Cyprus, was rather a naughty kind of young gentleman, and too familiar with a certain lady called madam Juno. — Ha, ha, ha! you must excnse me, my dear Belinda, for making myself merry with your farfetched comparison. Your fears of my becoming your rival, are fanciful in the extreme. No, my dear, my merit would have little weight when placed in the Scale against your innumerable perfeffions; but to tell you the truth, Belinda, though the man is well enough, I confess, I would not re 2 linquisst 
the virtuous villagers. 25 
linquish that worthy, happy creature, your brother Lhomas^ Sor all the Billy Bellamonts in Christendom. Perhaps he is not So perse£l an Adonis as your Sweet Strephon, yet bis amiable mind, and generous, honest heart, will for ever overpower, with me, the consideration of consummate beauty of person, or the golden temptations of opulence. 
You will, I am persuaded, pardon my making myself a little merry with the first part os your letter. I know, experimentally, how far the enthufiasm of a fond female heart will extend, in the praises of the objest of all its wishes. O! my dear friend, to use a vulgar phrase, I wdil honestly confess to you, that I am as deep in the mud with your brother, as you are in the mire with Bellamont. — Let this remain a Secret, hill vol. I. C ' ' your 
i6 
the virtuous villagers. 
your brother writes to your Sather on, the Subject; which, he informed me yesterday, he proposes to do in a few days. Tell me ingenuousty in your next letter, how will you like, the mad cap Miranda for a sister inflaw? — What will old squarehoes Say to this matter, I wonder? but S have no unfavourable apprehensions from that quarter. The sensibility of your father’s mind, and the refutude of his actions, on every other occasion, leave me nothing to fear refpe^l*.. iiig this point of all points, with me, the < becoming your brother’s wife. — O! Belinda! Tom is an angel! that is, an angel of a man; for 1 durst not. venture to raise him to the aerial region, in bumble, imitation of your rhetorical flourishes, lest 1 lose him. — I will throw jesting aside, to ash my favouisite and Saithful friend ojje serious^question. Is there one 7 merit. 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 2y. 
merit, one perfe61ion, or one virtue, in Bellament, that the dear Sellow, your brother, does not poffessi* answer me truly But why have I ashed for an answer to Such a question, when I am Sully persuaded besore you Send it, the preinises must be granted? — His person is captivating in the extreme; — his temper is angelic, and hiscondufi: amiable on every occasion He is generous; he is saith full; he is virtuous; — and to Sum up all, he is everything I wish him to be, and what can I Say more.? — yes, my dear Belinda, I can s^y one thing more; but be Secret; — I love him toto— — dis tradtion! and now the murder is discovered. — ^ 
You proraise, my dear friend, to write again Soon; pray keep your word, and let me know all I desire to know; but C 2 pray 
28 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
pray, my dear, don’t sill your letters with any more hyperbolical descriptions of Idellamont: Sor really, Belinda I think Such things too trifling to afford entertainment. You are in love with him, to dis traffion, I perceive; but I hope you will pardon me when I tell you, that the less you Say about it the better, for the delicacy of the Subject will not admit of exposition. — 
I admire the noble generosity of your father towards his tenants. It does the highest honour to his understanding and his virtue. — To deliver the industrious poor from the oppressions of tyrann;,; to give them opportunities of reaping the just rewards of their labours; and to assist them in those distreffes and calamities that have their origin from chance, and not from imprudence; are the most exalted ads of beneficence, and infinitely 
Superior 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
29 
Superior to bestowing alms on those wandering vagrants that daily infest our streets, loaded with artificial and pretended miseries, and after colledling the gifts of mistaken liberality retire to their nightly haunts to riot in extravagance and drunkenness. — Charity is a noble virtue, but the discharge of its duties should be regulated and adjusted by the rules os justice. Your father has Set posterity an example of rational and virtuous charity worthy of imitation. — But to me, my dear Belindas there is not any part of your father’s discourfe, Superior to the encouragement he gives to matrimony, dear matrimony.' — Oh! he’s a charming man, and I think I could kiss him for it, were he here at this moment. Surely, after what he has Said, he can have no objection to permit matrimony into his own family I have had ten C .3 thousand 
30 the virtuous villagers. 
thousand anxieties on this head os late, blit jour letter has dispersed them; Sori am well persuaded, a man of his understanding and benevolence, will not, under the Sanffion of parental authority, oppose the wsilhes of his children, in any circumstance relative to their h, appiness, The cruelties of Some parents respecting the marriage of their children, are detestable to Serious resteflion, and by being violations of the laws of nature, become injurious to the interests of Society. there’s a flourish of philosophy for you, piy dear. Well, I vow, your letter has put rne in tip Top Spirits, and I arn glad of it, for I expefl your brother will dine with me today on his return from the Exchange, after which we are to go to the play. O rapture! whenever he is with me, I have neither wishes nor wants; every sense is dissolved in extasy; and 

THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 3 I 
His elysium Hark!! instant 
he knocks at the door! blessed moment! Now / hear his welcome feet tell the lovely charmer near V — excuse my abrupt conclusion, and believe me, most Sincerely, 
Yours, 
Mirakpa Melville. 
A 5. I do most earnestly entreat you to Send hie no more flourishes in favour of Belldmont; for it is a trifling Subjest, and I wish for Something of more importance. — » 
C 4 
LET 
32 THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS.. 
LETTER III 
Mr. Bell a MONT to Mr, Bellamv, Junior. 
Bell vuti April 25, 1783. 
Dear friend Tom, 
I HAVE been fast bourid in the fetters of felicity ever Since I first arrived at this terrestrial paradise. — Benevolence, generosity, mirth, music, and love, have So absolutely engrossed my attention, that I have not recolleffed the least idea of my existence besore I came to this enchanting place. — Oh! Bellamy! your father is one of the happiest men in the universe. I do not allude to the opulence 
of 
THR VIRTUOUS Villagers. 
of his fortune, or the innumerable beauties of his new Situation. No, my friend, these abstrafted from other things would be important trifles. It is the extent of his knowledge, the liberality of his disposition, the great ness of his Soul, the amiable and virtuous qualifications of his affe^lionate wise, and the obedience and good conduct of his children, on which the importance of his felicity is to be estimated. His con duff to the distressed tenants of his manor is So singularly benevolent and exemplary, that it almost approaches divinity. His delight in goodiiess is from the noblest of principles, the Sole good of others; for which he merits more than mortal praise, since we read of very few like him in the history of human nature. But'ifow to business— — 
5 
I hav( 
54 the virtuous villagers. 
I have at last ventured to inform your father of my immutable love of your Sister Belinda, and of my wishes to become his son-in-law. He received my declaration with the most cheersul attention; and, O generous man! replied in the following manner : 
Mr. Bellamontd.x have long viewed you with attention, admiration, and re spedt, as an accomplished man, a man of prudence, and a man of virtue. I am no stranger to your love of Belinda, or of her regard for you. Your intimacy has Subsisted for a considerable length of time, therefore it is no Sudden start of passion; and it has been carisied on with an opcnncss of behaviour, by both, that does you honour; for art and secresy are usually prafiifed on thesc occasions, by young people, under the restraint of 
parental 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 35 
parental observation and authority. — IS 1 had not been Satisfied of your merit, I should not have Suffered my daughter to have continued the intimacy without making remonstrance. I had no doubts, and therefore I could have no objedlions. Your fortune, I know, is considerable; but that would have had little weight with me, if your merit, your love of ray daughter, and her attachment to you, were not circumstances fully Sufficient for me to court your alliance and comply with your wishes" A virtuous man is the greatest blessing a father can bestow upon his daughter. You have my free consent to marry, if you and she mutually wish it, and, in that case, I will contribute a fortune equal to your own. — I am informed you have expressed a wish, when this union takes place, to build yourself a house and live near C 6 me 
36 THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
me. It will be a pleaong circumstance to me if you do So, but I fear yours is too early a time os life to relish retirement; yet I must observe, that the Sooner you retreat Srom the Sollies, at tifices, and vices, of the world, the Sooner you will Secure tranquillity and happiness. — My children have all been truly obedient; and they have striddy attended to my wishes of their being virtuous., On this account I have nothing to Sear respeffing their condufi: through life, and this is one of my greatest felicities. I will difcourse with Belinda on the Subject now before us, and when you and she have Settled the preliminaries of this union, I will most readily ratify them. Bellamont, use my daughter as she merits, and I shall place you as near my heart as the rest of my children.” 
After 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 37 
aster having Said thus much, your father bowed and retired. — O, Bellamy! where shall we find his equal? Where .shall we meet with goodness like unto his ^ Such men merit immortality! — ■ True it is that mutual beneficence is the great end of Society, and hence every generous mind, after enlarging its own influence, wishes to exert it for the benefit of mankind, and from this Source derives its owm tranquillity; for what Satisfaction must men of this disposition not enjoy whenever they take a review of their conduff, and perceive that the study of their lives has been to diffuse happiness, give ardour to virtue, and confidence to truth. Cicero well observes, Homines ad Deos nulla re propius acce dunti quam falutem hominibus dandov By being Serviceable to mankind, we 
bring 
38 THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
bring human nature as near as possible to the Divine. -- - 
With your sister’s approbation, I have determined to build me a house on Some part of your father’s manor, and, by retiring from the delusive blandishments and false pleasures of the gay world, become one of the Virtuous Villagers. 
I shall conclude, for the present, with an earnest request, that when the day is fixed for the celebration of our nuptials, you will lay business aside, and make us a visst, to joist in the joyful jubilee. — I am, without ceremony, 
Yours, 
William Bellamont, 
letteil 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
39 
LETTER IV 
Miss Bellamv to Miss Melville. 
Bell vue, Afrit 30, 1783. 
NO weakness of human nature is more conspicuous than our blindness to our own foibles and faults, and our quickfightedness in discoveriug similar foibles and faults in others. 
You have displayed your raillery and wit, on the generous confessions of my heart, respe^iing my Sentiments of the man I love; which confessions vere made from the Sincerity of friendship. You 
have 
40 THE virtuotfs villagersr '♦ 
have censured my frankness; yet Surely your praise os my brother, is Sull as extravagant, as my flourishes in favour of Bellamont, as you style them. — It is Said, that similarity of virtue is the firmest basis of friendship. I hope, similarity of foible will not prove the destrufiionof our faithful intimacy. Your censure hurt me; but I will forgive it, because I know forgiveness is necessary to the maintenance of friendship— — will not pull your cap when ^ next we meet, ‘‘ Many (Says a great writer) who could have conquered their anger, are unable to conquer their pride, and pursue offences to extremity of vengeance, lest they should be insulted by the triumph of an enemy.” But I will aft on nobler principles, and indulge the gentle Sentiments of humility, benevolence, and peace. 
5 ^ glory 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
42 
I glory in my love of Bellamottt, be eause he is a man possessed of every virtue that gives dignity to human nature, and because my good father approves of him. — O, Miranda! how laudable would it be, if the generality of young men of family and fortune would, like Bella' mont, follow those paths of honour and virtue, that lead to reputation and hap piness, instead of pur Suing those Scenes of dissipation and riot that end in dis grace, misery, and ruin. 
It gives me the highest fatisfaflion, my dear friend, to hear of my brother constancy, and of your happiness in consequence of it. He is a good young man, and that is a great character; but you must excuse me if I say I do not think his person captivating in the extreme Ha, ha, ha, indeed, my 
dear. 
42 THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
dear, you have Screwed the peg of the fiddle a little to high in that particular. But no matter, “you are in love with him to dijirafiion, I perceivev he. he,, he. You understand me, my dear, So I shall Say no more, “or it is a trifling fubjefffl you know, he. he. he. Youstl pardon me for being jocular, as' old Vellum Says in the play. — 
My, father, in the most generous manner, has given his consentto my marriage with Bellamonty So is you don’t make haste, I shall be a wife besore you, “0 rapturev’ — ‘‘ ’.DV Elysium all V — Lhe delicacy of the fuhjefi will not admit of ex ^ pofttiem f you know what I mean, my dear. So I shall Say no more, but that I am in tipaop fpiritsd. — I shall not an swer your fetdous queflio72 respedting my brother; compatisons are Said to be odious. 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGER. 43 
ous. 1 have allowed him to be a good young man, and I have no doubt but you will find him So; but further this deponent Sayeth not. You will pardon my merriment; by love and the graces, I cannot help it, Sor you must have been in a delirium, or a dream, when you ■compared Lorn Bellamy to Bill beuarngnt; and as it is more than probable, your reverie still continues, I have too great a regard for you to dispell the delusion. “Lhe man is well enough., I confefsp cc. c. ha, ha, ha! you must excuse me, my dear girl, for nothing can be more preposterous or uncorrespondent, than to compare my brother (who! am asraid you will find a little Swarthy, with a Small cast in one of his eyes, if I mistake not), to the more than elegant, beautifully blooming, and brilliant eyed Billy Bellamqnt j the mirror of manhood; 
and 
44 the virtuous villagers. 
and pattern of persetsiion. So pray, my dear, donst Send me any more of your rapturous extravagances respeffing that plain, homely fellow, Tom Bellamy — But to be Serious : — 
Tom has not yet written to my father about that awkward business you mentioned in your last letter; I mean, his intention of taking unto hirafelf a wife. What the consequence will be I cannot take upon me to pronounce. My father, you know, retired from business with what the citizens call a plumb j nay, almost a plumb and a half; and he left Tom to pursue his track and obtain another plumb. He is the eldest hope of the family; — my father may think him too young to marry; or that he had better wait a few years longer; or that his Situation in life entitles him to a woman 
with 

THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 45 
with a larger Sortune than you have, for you know yours is but twenty thousand pounds; — or — or — or — five hundred things more that I could mention, only I do not like to make you uneasy — In short, my dear, I don’t like to Say much ■ — but — I — am — os— — — my — father — who you know is a very Singular — fort — of — a — man — cannot give his consent to your marriage before — before — he — is — asked — and when that is done, I — am — pretty Sure he — will — not — resuse. Ha, ha, ha, now I think I have paid your Scores off in your own coin. 
I have been Secret respeffing that part of your letter wherein you mention ray brother’s intentions, yet I have ventured to feel the pulse of the family. 
My 
46 ihe virtvous villagers 
My brother Pom being the Subjcff of ' conversation yesterday, while we were at tea, I, without the appearance of design observed, that I thought miss Mef ville would be a good match for him. — ' “It is time enough for Such boys as he to think of a wife, ” replied my aunt Bridget. “Boys, Sister, ” Said ray mother, a litttle picqued at the expression, “Tom is in the twenty-fifth year of his age.” ' — Well, if he is, it’s too Soon to think of marriage, ” Said my aunt. I did not think of a husband at those years, ” continued she, “but times are strangely altered Since I was a young woman, for now girls and boys marry before they come to years of discreiion, or are even out of their teens. Mercy on me! the world’s come to a fine pass, and people grow wickeder and wickeder every day, I think— — father Smiled, and 
Said, 
The virtuous villagers. 4^ 
Said, ‘‘ he did not think the times altered from what they Sonnerly Were, or that wickedness prevailed more now than in past ages. The Same wishes, inclinations, and passions existed amongst mankind from the beginning os creation, as exist now, ” continued he, because human nature then was what it now is, and will be to all eternity— — Sister, accustom yoursels to view the dark Side os things. You Survey the back ground of the picture with too much attention, and overlook the principal figures in the sore ground, which are the most pleasing and j)erse<tt parts of the piece. 'She world is not So wicked as you imagine, or as it is painted by folly, ignorance, and interest. We were designed for happiness, and notwithstanding the evrls we experience in life, the consequenees of our imper sedlions as finite beings, 1 am Sully persuaded 

4'8 THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
Suaded there is more good than evil, more happiness than misery in the world. You pasted your youthsul days a stranger to that enterprise and hope which are the most amiable ornaments of young minds. You entertained too fond and too high an opinion of your own importance, and this led you to rejeff happiness, when she courted your acceptance. sprightliness and ardour were not ingredients in your composition; and though you gave not into the delusions and Sollies of the world, you pursued the wrong path to those felicities peculiar to your Sex; and by entertaining false ideas of things, failed of that happiness you sought for, and aimed to Secure. You endeavoured to engage every attention, by a Singularity of behaviour and opinion, but was left unmarked and unnoticed in the obscurity of the crowd. You 
have 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 49 
have Sacrificed a life of sixty years to irascibility and peevishness, and as you now feel your mind embittered by celibacy and old age, you are morose, fretful, and captious.. This will ever be the cafe with those who overlook the dignity of human nature, and Suffer un easmess from fortuitous inadvertencies unworthy notice— — differ from you in opinion, that early marriages are not ad viseable; however, I think late ones more improper. Youth, and not age, is the feason for marriage. If the Sexes enter into union under the auspices of mutual love, in the bloom of life, it will be the Surest means of promoting and Securing harraoisy and friendship in old age. — Marriage in the decline of life is too frequently founded on interest or fraud, and therefore generally ends in disappointment and discord. — vol. I. D If 
50 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
IS my Son Pom has tsirned his thoughts upon marriage, it will give me pleasure, for the greatest happiness of iny life has had its origin from my union with his mother. He is old enough to judge properly, and if he meets with adeserv ing young woman, who prefers him to all other men, and she is the object of his love, he will do right to marry her, and if he consults me on the Subjeff, I shall Signify my approbation of it. — I know he is intimate wdth miss Melville and I shall be happy if So amiable a young lady should prove the object of his choice : her parents were amiable and virtuous, and she has had the wis dom, hitherto, to imitate them 
My aunt, you may be certain, dicfnot relish what ray father Said, yet Such is her predominant love of him, being her 
only 
THE virtuotjs villabers. 

^only brother, she Seldom makes any reply to his observations, but takes them patiently, as is it was agreed she Snould be the butt os the Samily. She changed countenance Several times whiie he was Speaking, and now and then bduled herself up a little in the antediluvian style of an old maid. My mother joined in Sentiment with my father, and wished there might be a match going Sorward betwixt Tom and you. Bellamont and I Spoke in your praise, and my Sister and brother Ben all joined in the cliorusi. You must excuserny aunt, fortc?/ is her greatest favourite, and what she Said had its rise from her good wishes Sor Ills welfare. The faci is, she was too nice and particular when she was young and handsome, and So overstood her market; and now she is prown an old maid, I fancy she repents of her condust, and this, D 2 renders 
52 THE VIRTUOUS viliagers. 
renders her fretful; yet she is a good woman, atid poffeffess many virtues. I believe it is a hateful thing to be an old maid; however, my dear, I think there is little danger of our being So. 
Well, now I suppose I shall be a charming creature; a dear girl; a jewel; an angel; and a thousand other things too tedious to enumerate. “0 how pleasing 'tis to please Says the old Song, and So Say I; or rather, how pleasing it is to be pleased! though I confess, with the stisidest sincerity, that I have ever experienced as great Satisfaction in contributing to the hapinefs of others, as in receiving happiness myself. Perhaps you will say, this is going too far; but I Say, no; for if that conformity in nature, called Sympathy, is considered in its full extent, it must comprehend general 

THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. “^3 
neral fellow-feeling, and contribute its efficacy and power's to pleasure as well as pain, to happiness as Well as misery. — You may laugh at my philosophy, but I shall disregard it if you do, for if I am wrong, the error is a pleasing one, and as it means friendship to others, instead of injury, I will amuse iny« Self with the delusion. 
My brother will doubtless write to my father on the Subjefl he intended, though he will know his Sentiments on your reading what I have Said respeffing it, for a man of ray fathers noble disposition merits every attention, honour, and duty that can be paid to him. — I was not enjoined to secrecy, yet, as ray father may wish to communicate his Sentiments to ray brother himself, I shall rely oh the wisdom and faithfulness of D 3 both 
5-4 the virtuous VILLAC er&. 
both of you not to betray theurust IS have repcsed. in you. 
siihall write to yoil again very Soonj,., when 1 will give you a Surther account of our Situation Believe me to be. most siaoerely,, 
’ Yours,, 
beljkta. bellaimy.. 
LETTER: 
TUB VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. SS 
h E T T E R V 
Miss Melville to Miss Bellamy. 
London, May lo, 1783. 
HAT shall I say to you to ex press my gratitude? What shall I Say to tell you how much I respeft and love you? I will not indulge the extravagance of rapture; neither will I sty to the unworthy arts of stattery; but in the plain language of Sincerity and truth tell you, that I thank you from my heart for your generous and friendly intelligence. O 1 Heaven! how graci oussy propitious art Thou to my wishes! O ] my dear friend! how generousty d4 bene 
^ the virtuous rillagers. 
benevolent art thou, to remove my anx • % * 
jeties respedling the Sum of all my felicity! — The first part os your last letter gave me infinite satissaffion of mind, where you acquainted me of every point being Settled Sor your approaching happiness. — The next part Sunk me into a Situation I will not describe, before I discovered your wanton ind wicked intention. However, I merited the temporary pain you gave me, for the liberties I had taken with the overflowings of your heart respefting your beloved Bdlamont. 
'— The concluding part of your epistle was rapturous in the extreme, and I found my senses transported into new regions of delight, and Such as I never felt, or understood before. OI my dearest friend! what language can express that bliss of blisses which diffuses itself through all sensation, on the certainty of 
being 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 57 
being united with the obje6l of one’s af feffion! It is impossible that words can paint the ecstatic rapture of the mind on Such occasions. The bliss of lovers, lovers only know! — OJ Belinda! I am not what I was. Your letter has given me new life; — 1 have quitted association with Anxiety and her melancholy mourn -- full train; and, by regeneration, am clothed in the habiliments of transporting pleasure and soul dilsolving happiness- -- -- -- - 
brother has Seen your letter. I could not with hold it from him. He wept when he read your father’s dis course with your aunt; and with heartfelt gratitude, and excess of joy, laid, “What a blessed man have I for a father! — Heaven grant him happiness and] life! Now, my dear, my beloved D 5 Miranda, 
5^ THE VIRTUOUS' VILLAGERS. 
Mh anda, I am wholly yours ’^ ~sucte a moment of delicious delight I never experienced before, my dear friend, and if is imposhble for me to gite you any descriptive account of my feelings at this’ junslure; you must fancy the rest; but 
0! imagination’s powers are all too weak, to paint the transpor t of my happy mind! — don’t censure me for the warmth of ray exprestionsi for L can truly say, with Shakespeare“ “pas sions are made of nothing but the finesi: ^ part of pure love” ” perhaps, will say, r ought to conceal my Sentiments; and that I Suffer the gaiety of my heart to carry me beyond the prescriptions of modesty. I think otherwise. 
1 hate that ungenerous'and fallacious af testation peculiar to most of our Sex, 
* Antmj and cuapatrui 
which' 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
59 
which leads them to conceal the impres sions of the first and most noble of all human passions. Is it a crime to love I Certainly no. How then is it a crime to confess that we love? It is often a crime not to acknowledge it. III knovr myself beloved by a worthy man, and my heart discovers that it loves him, why should I, from mistaken ideas of modesty, keep him indoubt, suspense,. and uneasiness?? would be ungenerous, cruel, and unjust to do it. Let a Woman be 
Chafle as the icicle. 
“that’s curdled Ly the froil troiu purest stream, 
and haugs on Di an’s temple 
yet she may with propriety, and virtuous honesty, confess that she loves. — That 
^ Shaliefpeard5 Coriolanm. 
D 6 generous 
6o THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
generous fellow, your brother, has taken infinite pains to assure me of his love, and to engage mine; and I should have been a vixen of a prude not to have rewarded his liberal and noble condufl by an honest confession of my love for him. I have confessed to him, because I knew he was anxious to be Satisfied of it. ft was a point on which his happiness appeared to rest; and therefore honour and truth required that I should be explicit. I am happy that I have been So, because it has contisibuted to his felicity; to the felicity of the only man in the world on whom my own happiness depends. — 
O, my dear Beiindaj your father is a charming man. There are Sew like him. Ke delights in goodness; and it must be the wish of every generous heart, that 
he 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGER. 
6% 
he may be rewarded with immortal felicity. — I am obliged tohr, Bellamontf your Sister, and brother, for their good opinion of me, and the friendly part they took in my favour. — Say what you please of Bellamont in future, I will read it with pleasure, and believe it all: but, remember, ' my dear, you must. allow that your brother Lorn is a jewel of a man, as well as Bellamont. You really was wickedly naughty and perverse when you Said, my divine fellow was swarthy and had a caji in one of hts eyes. Gracious heaven! how different is he from this description! His form is elegant and majestic; he has the finest eyes of any man in the universe; and his complexion is the pride of excellence: 
^ ’tis beauty blent, whose red and white ** Na, tiire’s own Sweet and cunning hand laid on 
shakefpeare’s Twelfth Night. 
Tom 
6-2; THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
om has written a long letter to your father, which he will Send by this nighfi^ posh He has not shown me the con* tents, nor shall I aik him Such a Savour; perhaps it may be best that I do not See what he has written. I know the main point is to aik his father's conscnt to marry. How impatient shall I be for an answer h and yet I shall tremble when it arrives! I do not despair of success, as we have So many friendly advocates in our favour. — We laughed most incessantly at your aunt’s primitive notions of purity. Poor creature! I pity her. She is now wishing for what she will never obtain, and envies that happiness in others Sue can never enjoy herself. You must pardon me,, my dear, when I tell you, that Such charaffers are the screech owls of aatare. 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
^3 
I shall hope for the favour of hearing from you often, and that you will fulfil your promise, of giving me a particular account of Belle Vue, I confess, my curiosity is greatly raised, till I hear what effect your father’s benevolence and advice 
has had on his tenants. Send me 
\ 
all the news and intelligence yoq can; for I affure you, with the stridlest truth,, your letters afford me infinite Satisfadliom I remain, as 1 always shall while I exist, most sincerely, 
'yours, 
Miranda melvilleo 
LET 
64 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS 
LETTER VI 
Mr. Bellamy to his Son Mr. 
T. B £ L L A M T. 
BU viicf May 15, 17s3. 
Dear Tom, 
Your letter is now before me, in which you mention your attachment and love for miss Melville, and your wish of making her your wife, if it meets with my approbation. — It gives me pleasure that you have turned your thoughts upon marriage; and I admire you for not thinking filial duty unworthy 
of 
, THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS 65 
f your notice, like the generality of young men of your age. — I will not keep you in fuspense on a point that I perceive concerns your happiness, but reward your dutiful Solicitation with that gene rous acquiescence it most truly merits. I approve of your choice, and you have my full content to marry when you please. — You have known Miss Mehille from your infancy; you are no stranger to her disposstion of mind; and you can be no stranger to the amiableness and virtue of her condufl. If ever woman was qualified to render the mai: ^ ^tge state happy, I think she is. You are both blessed with minds capable of contributing to mutual pleasure and happiness, and theresore your marisiage is a consummation devoutly to be wished, and I shall rejoice greatly whenever it is accomplished. — 
And 
66 
THE VIRTUOUS vlltacers#* 
And now, my dear Son, give me leavt to einbr ce this opportunity of ostering a few documents to your attention, which may be of ule to you in you prog through life 
In the choice of companions, prefer those of a kindred mind to your own;, for then there may be hope that you wo.ll unite in confidence and friendship, since it !S' of jthe utmost importance that .you do not commit your happiness to tliose that are unworthy of sh.greatsa trust— — situation in life has its p culiar desires, Sears, vexations, and pleasures for human happiness is Srequently injured’ by interest and passion. If you Suffer yourself, on any occasson, to be driven Srom the path of virtue, you will pursue the road that is foreign to your welfare and peace of mind. ^you will 
avoid 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
avoid the follies and vices of the world by having the fortitude and the virtue t resist the influence and Seduffion of custom. — Indulge not too much in present gratification, lest you rob yourself of it in future: the grand busmess of life is to moderate the desires and appetites, and to aist So as to obtain the favour of mankind. — You must not always judge of right and wrong by the opinion of the world. In your converse with mankind, let it be your principal objesi: to promote universal benevolence, and to dispose every heart to fondness and friendship. — the faculty of reason is the great prerogative of human nature; but this distin£iion of man from th brute, loses its divine importance if it either is not used, or not properly used for the good of ourselves and others. — Cherish humility and Submishon in your 
breast % 
68 
THE VIRTUOUS tillager'sr 
breast; yet be not wanting in Spirit anti resolution to repel encroachment, or op pose violence. — You are now arrived at an age when reason and judgement ought to r. ign, and when pleasure should give way to interest j therefore let nothing lull your vigilance, or withdraw your attention, foresight, and prudence, from the grand object of acquiring independence by industry and honourable means. Indolence Seldom admits of reformation. I would not have you be either mean or abjeist; but while you carry bufipefs on, it will be necessary to study the arts by which favour is obtained, and to accommodate yourself to the caprice of those with whom you trasssc. — hate the idea of Suspicion, it is always ungenerous, and frequently allied to guilt; but as integrity dwells not in every breast, nor veracity on every tongue. Some caution 
will 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS, 6^ 
will be necelsary in your transa£lions with mankind, lest you become the dupe of treachery and fraud; for numerous are the dangers to which your connexions with the world will expose you. So that it will be a point of prudence not to be wholly without distrust; for the utmost powers of human Sagacity are Sometimes basiled, — Never be negligent of the most tristing promise, more especially respedl ing trade; for, remember, the word of an English tnerchant should be as Secure as his bond, — Should your industry and success enlarge your influence, avoid an increase of indulgence to your own desires, but endeavour to exert your growing power for the beneft of mankind. — Every man is rich or poor, ’’ Says a great writer, “according to the proportion between his desires and, enjoyments.’^ Never let folly or ambition tempt you to 
imitate 
'5 
yo 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS, 
imitate those who stand in the highest order os Society, but live upon the level with mankind in the general, for thus you will be most Secure of happiness. — Be not milled by the Smiles of prosperin^, lest you form a wrong judgement of your self and others : neither be ambitious, of acquiring wealth too hastily, for it may tempt you to trample on the principles of faith and justice, and to commit astions irreconcilable with the laws of honour and virtue. Do not let your condust verify the observation of the poet Juvenal: 
■sidera cado 
Ut distant, stainma mari, stc utile reito*. 
Almost every maii wishes to be rich, but if you Suffer this wish to give birth to impatience, you will relinquish the 
Sooner stiall jarring elements unite. 
Than truth with gain, than interest with right. 
certain 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
7* 
certain benefit arising Sroni industry and prudence, and sty to the delusive opportunities of becoming rich by casual adventure. There must be Some hazard in trade, but I would by no means have you compare this hazard to the delusions ot rash adventure, or the dreams of fortuitous riches. -- If you imitate my conduct, 
you will acquire wealth with reputation and honour; and, when you have done So, regulate your future life by the advice of Morad to his Son jhu zaid'^» 
Aspire not to public honours, enter not the palaces of kings; thy wealth will Set thee above insult; let thy moderation keep thee below envy. Content thyself with private dignity, diffuse thy riches among thy friends, let every day extend thy benevolence, and Suffer not thy heart 
* rambler, No. 190. 
to 
.72 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
to be at rest till thou art loved by all t whom thou art known. In the height of my power, I Said to defamation, who will hear thee? and to artifice, what canst thou perform } but, my Son, despise not thou the malice of the weakest, remember that venom Supplies the want of strength, and that the lion may perish by the pundure of an asp.” 
I must inform you that your dear mother approves of your choice, and So do your sister and brother. Your, aunt" thinks you too young to marry, but you know the Singularity of her disposition of mind and opinions. She is a good woman, but has lived a life of caprice doubt, and mistake, in the midst of a constant intention to do right. I wish you to pay her Some compliment on your intended marriage, for though we may 
be 
THE VSRT UOUS^ V It LAGERS 
75 
be Sorry for her mistaken ideas, she has never merited contempt, and theresore we are bound to treat her with kindness and respeff. You was ever her greatest favourite, on which account, lam per suaded, she will be pleased if you write to her on the fubjeff of your marriage Never despise old friends because their conduff. may not always be pleasing, for if you acquire new friends you will not find them exempt from follies and im persediions. Your aunt is faithful to those for whom she professes a regard, and that is the most important ingredient of friendship. 
present my respecsts to Miss mdvlue, and tell her I shall now consider hei, and love her, as my child. May you both be happy, if love, integrity, and virtue, can make you So! which is the vol. IE devout 
74 The virtuous villagers. 
devout wish of myself and the rest of the family. I am, dear Son, most af fcftionately, 
Yours, 
Benjamin bellam^t* 
LET. 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
75 
L E T T E R VH. 
Mr. T. Bellamv to Mr. Beliaitont. 
Lindsn, May io, 1783. 
Dear Belxamont, 
I HAVE long been Sailing for the issand of love, and now the port of matrimony opens to view at no great distance. I shall be truly happy when I am Securely anchored in the harbour, which I hope to accomplish in a few days, as ray Sails are properly Set, and I have Secured a pilot. The Sadi is, my father has coiisented to my marrying, mts Melville', the licence is purchased, E % the 
S THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
the day fixed, and the parson engaged. 
I am happy to find, by your last letter, that a match is Settled between you and my sister Belinda, and I wish you a Series of happiness when it is consstmmated. — O! ray friend! what prospe£l is there of complete happiness without a worthy woman! how transient are the pleasures arising from connexions with women abandoned to intrigue, and the debauchery of promiscuous commerce! what permanent satissaxion, what fidelity, what real love, can there be but in marriage! Matrimony, like every other situation, may have its inselicities; but the caresses of a fond wife, the indulgence of a chaste passion, and the satisfaxion the mind enjoys from the consideration of having obeyed the dixates of nature 7 in 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 77 
in the track of honour and virtue, must overpower every gratification that can aisife from the indulgence of lavvless love; which, whatever momentary pleasure it may give, will not bear recollection with put the reproaches of guilt, or the agonising horrors of perturbation and reraorse. 
As I know I am writing to a man of Sense and virtue, I am not afraicj of ridicule when I declare, that I never was a votary to licentious love. The baits and blandishments of bad women never tempted me, nor have I ever been guilty of the crime of Seducing innocence; and I have always felt too Senfibly for the misery and wretchedness of deluded virtue, to add to its Sorrows by encouraging the repetition of shameless guilt. Perhaps the early affeffion my heart entertained E 3 for 
76 tn E, V IRTUOUS VIL L AGER f. 
tor Mtfs Melmlle might prevent my gte kig into an indulgence of lawless paitioii, for the inhuence of pure love ever powerfully resists the temptations, and depravity of levvdness. 
I have no doubt of happiness in mai riage, because we have known each other too long not to have discovered our real tempers and inclinations, which we have confirmed by mutual approbation, without giving into the incidents of love as larence calls them in his Eunuch vizi cold entertainment, imreafonable jealousies, quarrels of pride, treaties for reconciliation, hurricanes of passion, and tumults of fondness.” We have, like Upneresus and. lranquiua, allowed our minds to form no unreasonable expefla^ tions, „nor vitiated our fancies in the soft hours of courtship with visions of felicity 
which 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 79 
which human power cannot bestow, or of perfeffion which human virtue cannot attaindc — Our hope is to give mutual pleasure, and I am Sully persuaded we stiall not experience disappointment. 
“Oxir nuptial bed may smiling concord dress, And’ v'^enxis still the happy union bl.elsd Wrinkled with age, nxay mutual love and truth To our dim eyes recall the bloom of youth I” 
Marriages from Sudden starts of pas fion, short courtships, or lucrative views, are Seldom productive of permanent hap piness, for nothing is more common, under Such circumstances, than for the parties to display their excellencies, and conceal their imperfeslions, till the match is concluded, when they throw off the malk, and discover themsclves in their true colours; and then avowed artifice, deception, and Sraud, Soon give rise to E 4 those 
§0 THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
those destroyers os cor jugal felicity, dis cord and strife, jealousy and vexation, misery and ruin — The trite observation, that “men show all their love, and women all their modesty, besore marriage, ^* is frequently too true to merit contempt, or ridicule; for this is often the cafe where either a salse idea of human nature, or the gratification of interest, brings a young couple into, the lists of love; and this, with the Solly of expe(st ing to enjoy more advantages, and of enduring fewer inconveniences, than is consistent with reason, or tsie lot of life, generally Saps the foundation of marriage happiness. 
I do not mean to be ludicrous by quoting the above old Saying; I allow modesty to be one of the most amiable ornaments of the fair Sex, and even when it is af 
seed j 
THE VIRTUOUS villagers. 
St 
sessed; if it means only to please, the intention is laudable; however, I am fully persuaded, its assumptions are not always natural, but frequently calculated to excite reiterated tokens of amorous respeft from the other Sex, Modesty aad coyness are Sometimes carried to an extreme, under the idea that an early or easy cohdescension is improper in women, till a Sufficient trial is made of the constancy of men. On the other Side, Some men imagine it necessary to purchase the love of women, by extravagant professions inconsistent with the unalterable decrees of human nature, and hence raise expeffations which can never be gratified. So that disappointment must Succeed, and give birth to diffatisfadion. — I by no means wish to insinuate that the ladies should hold themselves cheap, for innocence can never be too much on its guard 
s 
against 
8'2 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS; 
agiiicst the artifice and fallacies of intentional in vaders; but I would not have them blend hypocrisy with camion and prudence. And I must observe further, on our own Sex, that if we were to be less luxuriant of flattery and pr otestatioir, in the Soft hours of courtship, than we generally are, conjugal felicity would preserve itself with greater durability than it' usualiy does. — It is of the utmost im -- porrance to human happiness on every occasion, but in none more than matrimonial engagements, not to indulge the amusements and excursions of imagination too far, Sor real and fancied enjoyments bear very distant proportions to each other; and I am convinged,. many of the indiscretions, errors, and miseries of life, arise from the folly, or inattention, of making no just distinstion between real and imaginary happiness;; 
ths 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
the limits of fruition are fixed by positive boundaries, .but the imagination knows of no circumscription. But no more on this Subjefi. 
Your praise of my father gave me pleasure, for his goodness would endear me to himv did I stand unconnedted by the ties of consanguinity, or filial duty. He has raiscd himself to greatness by the mere force of merit, and has retired from the fatigue of business, to ease, domestic pleasures, and the exercise of benevolence. He has lived a life of virtue, and meets old age without its avarice, or peculiar failings. May Isis days yet be long and happy !' and when the cold hand of death withdraws him from this earthly Scene, whatever shall be the Sentence of mankind respeciing his actions in general,. I think it will be acknow 
E. 6 
ledged 
§4 VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
ledged, that he left the world an example of wisdom, virtue, and happiness. 
I wish much to be with you all'at Belle Vuej to share in the felicity of my family but I shall not make you a visit till after my marriage, when I will bring Mrs Bellamy with me, but of this I shall give my father notice. You have my sincere wishes for your happiness; for, rest assured, I am truly. 
Yours, 
Thomas Bellamy. 
LET 
THS tirtirotnr VILLAGERS. 8^ 
LETTER VIII 
Miss Bellamy to Miss Melville. 
- r ■; ^ • 
■ Belti’vutf yune i7&3. 
Dear Miranda, 
T HAVE Seen that part of my brother's letter to Kellamonty wherein he mentions that the day is fixed for your nuptials. You may assure yourself all here join in a wish for the happy event of your union. I have not yet Settled the day for my marriage, but when 1 am determined you shall have notice of it. 
My 
u 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS 
My dear Bellamont is gone to visit my brother Ben at Oxford who does not come home the ensuing vacation, and I embrace the leisure opportunity to fulfil my promise of giving you a further account of Belle vue, and the Virtuous Villagers 
My father lays it down as a maxim, that to preserve health, labour should be intermixed with indulgence. In con sequence of this opinion, he is frequently amusing himself with alterations and? improvements upon his manor. Sometimes be plants trees, not only Sor ornament,, but for the benefit of posterity; at another time he builds temples for convenience, and to improve the different pro fpefis from the house by pleasing terminations. He is, now enlarging a Serpentine canal in his park, in breadth, depth, 
and 
THE virttrous VILLAGERS 8/ 
and length, to add to the beauty of the general Scene, and be a reservoir for water in dry seasons for the use of the inhabitants of the village, who are then frequently distressed for that useful article By Such undertakings as these he preserves his own health, and employs a great number of poor men, which is one of the best Species of charity, for it encourages industry, and teaches the lowest order of human beings the true value of money; for what they obtain through labour, they will always consi' der of more importance than any acquisition arising from easier means. It is glorious to encourage industry among the poor, for it generally raises poverty above contempt, and always relieves the asshsting struggles of distress., 
My 
s8 THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
'My mother and my aunt, unwilling to be eclipsed by my father’s benevolence, employ much of their time for the benefit of thosc poor villagers whose numerous families render them incapable of providing against unforeseen calamity and distress. By the former, they are occasionally Supplied with provisions and medicines, and by the latter, the indecency of rags and nakedness is removed. Hunger, disease, and uncleanliness, are driven from the lowest cottage in the village, while cheerfulness and health reign in the countenance of every inhabitant. The banishment of misery has produced universal gladness, and excited the Sons and daughters of calamity to entertain a true sense of their dignity as human beings, So that Supplicating beggary no longer interrupts the accidental palsenger, and cheerful industry displays 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
si 
plays itsels at every dwelling. Among the farmers and occupiers of estates, the murmurs of oppression are heard no more. They prosecute their respeffive labours with unremitting ardour, under the heartfelt Satisfaffion that they will now enjoy the benefits of their industrious endeavours themselves, and not have them unjustly wrested away by lawless tyranny, usurpation, and fraud, to Support the exiravagance and debauchcisi^s of an abandoned and oppressive master. 
The adoration and gratitude of the villagers has been So abundant to my father, and the whole family, that we have had Some difficulty to suppress it The parson and the lawyer are no longer dreaded, or treated with the most dif taut respeff. The villagers had prepared to burn the two miscreants in effigy, a 
few 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
few days after my father gave the entertainment I mentioned in a former letter, but my father, receiving information of their desgn, Sent a request that it might not be carried into execution. However, neither his interference, nor the fear of offending him, could operate wllolly to suppress their contempt and indignation of these men; for though they gave up their first plan, in obedience to his request, it was not many days before a Satyisical Song was composed, printed, and publicly chanted throughout the whole village, m which the parson and the lawyer were Severely ridiculed, in tolerable verse, and with Some degree of humour. This my father endeavoured to suppress, but without ef feff. ' It is certain that it requires no common degree of philosophy to be able readily to forgive injuries Revenge is 
Said 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
91 
Said to be Sweet; but if this assertion is fully examined, it will be found to be immoral on every view. If revenge is not a vicious disposition os the mind, it undoubtedly is what the poet styles it. The weakcjl frailty of a feeble mind.v However, 1 do not mean to condemn the villagers for the step they pursued, for the objefls of their Satire had been the wicked plotters of all the oppressions they laboured under at the time my father purchased the manor; and though little ought to be Said in favour of retaliation of injuries, there is much reason in the following observation of a celebrated writer: “A Single injury may be Soon dismissed from the memory, ” Says he, but a long Succession of ill offices by degrees associates itself with every idea, a long contest involves So many circumstances, that every place and a6: ion 
will 
92 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
will recall it to the mind, and fresh remembrance of t^exation must still enkin ‘ die rage, and irritate revenge.” -- -- -- -- 
The lawyer talks of quitting hhe village, with a view, I imagine, of retiring to Some place where he is not known, to Spend his ill got wealth free from the stigma of contempt; and the parson, as ^ we hear, is about to engage a curate to! avoid attending the duty of the church himself; Sor Since my father’s liberality to the inhabitants has released them from his mean arts and invidious designs, he perceives that he is despicable,, their eyes, and he appears to shridk ' with‘shame from the remembrance of his own base conduct. 
i 
I must now acquaint you that Some of | the principal farmers, and tenants of the j 
mancfj; 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS 
93 
manor, are making great preparations for a public jubilee, which is to be celebrated on a Spacious green in the village, on midsummer>day, to commemorate their deliverance Srom oppression and stavery, and as a token of their gratitude to my father for his generosity,. Some of the heads in this undertaking have been in form, to Solicit the favour of my father and the family to honour the festival with our presence. The request was made with the utmost Submission, and fear of giving offence. My father Saw the meisit of their intention, and with a ready cheerfuiness promised to accept of their invitation. They retired highly pleased with his acquiescence, and are taking great pains, as our Philip inform us, to make it a very elegant rural entertainment j the particulars 

THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
lars of which you shall know in lily next letter. 
You desire I will excuse the warmth of your expressions in your last; but really I do not See how I can with propriety, for, I declare, my dear, you are extravagantly luxurious in your descriptions. Your style, it must be conscised, is san cisul and florid, and you deal much in the pathos and pathetic, but I think Some of your rhetorical flourishes rather too ludicrous and hyperbolick for the pen of a delicate lady. — What think yon of ‘‘ bliss of blisses dissusing itself through all fensation I The habiliments of transporting pleasure and soul diffolving happiness?? — of delicious delight cc. c. Do these Sentiments correspond with the idea of a young lady whose ‘‘ passions are made of nothing 2 but 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 95 
but the finest part of pure love Ha, ha, ha, chaste as the icicle, ” c— — my word, it is all very fine, very full of farce and fustian, very full of “Lhe tinsel glitter, and the fpedous mienv and very full of rant and rapture. — I shall expe^i Soon to see you exhibit in print, and amuse the world with Some amorous Anacreontics; Love Lamentations; or Sigh > mg Sonnets; or, perhaps, you mean to display your genius in one of those pretty compositions called Novels, under the title of Conjugal Conjlancy; The Delicious Delirium; The Labyrinth of Love; or The Sorrows ofsenfbility. — For my part, I think you, who abound with Such a stock of Sentiment, glow of pashon, and force of fancy, would Succeed upon the stage, and rear the drooping head of tragedy. The managers of our Theatres would jump at Such a genius; and you 
can 
96 
THE vlrttrcus: VILLAGERS. 
can never make the attempt in a happier feason, while there is a crai&ford and a Siddons to give energy to the brilliancy of your language, beauty of your Sentiments, and interesting situation of your Scenes. — Come, try the strength of your genius; and I will give you a few titles which may Serve as hint s, or themes, for you to work upon, Such as, Lhe Cruel Cmdofity; — The Dreadful Difafer; — Lhe Fatal Favour y ^love and Liberty — pa rentar Perfidy — The Secret satiifaduon\ The Triumph of Truth; ^virtue Viflorious, See, he. See, 
Should you want i nstruffions how to cotnpose a tragedy, never give yourselftlle trouble of studying the ancient critics, or of perplexing your mind with the rules laid down by them, but copy the moderns j that is, steal a plot Sroin the French) or 
from 
.THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
from one of the operas of Metafiafid. the Italian Change the Scene of affion, and the names of the Dramatis Perfonat; derange the incidents in order to dis guise them, and give a new turn to the catastrophe if you can, but if you cannot it will not signify much; borrow your diffion and Sentiments from the beauties of the dramatic poets, which have been published in alphabetical or der. So that you can easily turn to ex preshons of joy, grief, rage, or despair, as you may' occasionally want either; and thus you will have little more to do than compile, by which you will avoid the laborious taste of harraffmg yoursels by exercising the powers of fancy and invention. This is no bad receipt for making a modern tragedy; I could enumerate fifty, all cooked upon the Same plan. 
vol. I. F To 
90' THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
To write a good comedy is a more arduous undertaking, for you cannot So readily procure Similar ashstance; but if you should be disposed to fabricate one of those farragos usually styled an eng ujh Comic opera^ yo\x will find the talk extremely easy if you pursiie the following direfiions : ^ 
Take an obsolete comedy; change the title, and reduce the five a^is.into three; then, here and there,, turn a Sentiment, or passage, into verse for the purpose of a Song, of which you must have two or three in every Scene throughout the whole; and be Sure to tag the last al,, least, with a Sew stanzas by way of a chorus song, and then your work is finished, without the trouble of a prologue and epilogue,, which you must have to a play. As for the music, it may be 
easily 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 

casily procured by employing Some thrummer of wire, or Scraper of cat gut, to coinpose, if he can,, or else compilej it for you, which will do full as well, and perhaps better, if he introduces three or four Irish and Scotch airs, with a popular Vauythall ballad of the preceding Summer. This may all be done, at a trivial expense, by Some blind organist, or Scotch fiddler, and render the genius of a Bach, or a Barlhelemon unnecessary, who, as celebrated composers will not descend to the mean arts of compilation and plagiarism. — You must remember a few years since the memorable Doffor compiled music to 
an opera of this Sort, and introduced Handers gavot to the overture of Otho for a soiit and vivaldi*s celebrated con certo for a chorus. — Never mind the absurdity of Such jumbles, you may find - Fa plenty 
100 THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
plenty of precedents for them if you look into the compilations of Some of the modern music mongers. 
I must observe to you, that the critics are always very favourable to a female dramatist; a circumstance which has induced many ladies to become candidates for literary fame, and has crowded the stage with an endless string of insipid things called plays, sans plot, sans cha raffer, sans wit, or fans anything but dulness insupportable, mournful comedies, and mirthful tragedies. — 
How pretty it will be to read the playbills, and See Lhe Sentimental Stflers, a comedy, by miss Melville \ Lhe Hapless Ixvers, a tragedy, by miss Mehtlle; Lhe Cunning Conceit, a Comic opera, by miss Melville, the music composed — no 
— com 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. loi— 
— by Doctor fiddlejiickj with the assistance of Signor Ilookirini,. cc. c. 
Pray, my dear, give me timely notice of the appearance of your piece, that I may came to town and form a large party to Support it; and don’t forget to Secure the interest of Peter Paragraph the puffing printer, who Sets up for a theatrical critic, Sor he will use his en deavour to Serve you if you please him; that is, you must purchase his praise both before the appearance of your piece, and after it, or you’u never Succeed, for the powers of puffing, are or more importance on these occasions, than is generally imagined; 
The world’s a puff, and all things show it,. 
news papers read, and then you’ll know it,. 
F 3 there’s 
102 THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
there’s a parody on Gay for you; — and now J think it i s time for me to give over jesting, Sor it has just entered my head, that you may misapprehend my real intention in what I have Said, and punish my presiimption with a lampoon, or introduce me in a ridiculous Situation in your first dramatic performance. — ’ 
lam mightily obliged to you for your great condescension in giving me leave to Say what I please in favour of Bellamont\ but the conditions of this obligation are, I perceive, that I must permit you to magnify my brotlier’s perfeflions to the extreme of extravagance, either of rliymc or reason. Do So, if it gives you pleasure, in the name of liberty and love; but, after all, you can make no more than a man of him, and I should think, if you make •him less, you may repent of — - your 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. IO 
Your bargain— — ‘‘ finest 'eyes of any ** man in the universc, ’’ — bravo! — * ‘‘ His complexion the pride of excel ‘‘ fence, ’* — braviffimo! — “Ais beauty blentf' c— — Sbakefpeare., Shakespeare! if in thy grave thou wast not “waded marrowy bones, and aup thou ’would’st start up indignant on having thy immortal lines So injudiciouny applied. Thou wonld’st do this if thy more than human observation had not carried thee beyond the visual nervel and shown 'thee nature’s choioe and hidden .Soul; but thou hast closely viewed the lover’s heart, and Seen its Secret partialities. — > 
don’t entertain any unfavourable opinion of my aunt; you must not do ir, for though she has her oddities, she has many virtues; and we should always incline to that Side on which the balance favours, F 4 when 
I VIRTUOUS villagers. 
when we are about to determine on the merit of others. 
I shall not write to you again till after the jubilee, before which, I suppose, I shall have a letter from young Mrs. Bellamy. you’ll change your name, but never change your mind, That is, my dear, do not let what you give to love weaken the power of that friendship you shave ever shown to 
llllkda bsilamv. 
LETTER 
JHE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 10^ 
LETTER IX 
Mrs, Bellamy jumor, to Miss bel lawy, 
London June lo, 1783. 
Dear Sister, 
For So I now may call you; yesterday made me one of the happiest of women; yesterday made me your brother’s wife; yesterday consummated the ultimate end of all my wishes. O! my dear friend, my mind, heart, and soul, are ' not what they were. don’t start — believe it, as an incontestable truth, the sensations of lovers before, and after F 5 marriage, 
Io THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
marriage, are So widely different they will not admit os comparison. joonst Smile at the word lovers, and think I have used it improperly. Lovers are endeared friends before marriage, I allow; but when inansiage takes place from mutual inclination and love, endearment becomes Infinitely more heightened and irnpor.tant, and will never ex perience diminution while the parties continue lovers. During the courtship of a young couple, their sensations maybe compared to the blossoms. of trees,, but it is matrimony that ripens and 'brings the fruit.to perfection.. But hold.. r i forgot I was not writing to a married lady, therefore, my dear miss Bel. latiiy., I shall not Say any more on this Siibjed, till you are aclmdtted into the order of matrimony; for there are Secrets in mansiage, as well as in Sree 
masonry, 
. THE'. VIRTCTOUS VILLAGERS. TO 
misohry, and I must not divulge them to yoiirig gilds. You afe to be married Soon, you knbw> child, and will then fayiwidhime;, 'An vllna V ' * •» 
“Hail wedded love !” supreme of all delight! nature’s best gift to mortals here below, Surpaffing far the fragrant breath of morn (When Phoebus gilds the face of dewy flow’rs), * Or perfum’cftofes in the lap of June, 
Or hybla’s sweets, or -- -- -- 
Or, I know not what, for really, my dear, the god of poetry is not with me at this moment; — celestial Cupid governs every sense. But, Softly, — -! must not let the ardour of love hurry me into irregularity and vehemence, for life is a long race, and if I run too fast I may grow Satigued with pleasure before I complete my course. 
F 6 
You 
108 THE YIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
You must excuse the brevity of this letter; for, as I commenced mistress of your brother’s housc yesterday, I must look after my family affairs. I remain ear Sister, 
Yours most truly, 
Miranpa Bellamy 
LETTES 
THE VIRTUOUS vlllagerg, lo 
LETTER X 
Mrss Bellamy to Mrs. Bellamy, Junior. 
btu vuti Just »5, 1783. 
Dear Sister, 
A LL here join their wishes with mine ^ for the happy event of your mar tiage with my brother i but, for heaven’s Sake, endeavour to bring the raptures of your mind into a little regularity, or I am really afraid the transports of love will transport you to the lunatic hospital. I could not avoid laughing at the pomposity of your importance as a 
married 
tl6 VIRTVOVS vrilaobrs, 
married woman over me, whom you are pleased to consider as a child, or a young girl, though older than yourself, be cause jteu hake juinped irf'|b matriii|ony a few days before me. However, if youir deliriums please you, be assured I do not envy you, -.. ^ 
I was ever os opinion', before you told me. So, that the'endearment of lovers before marriage, must be heightened after it, where love is mutual and’that niarriage happiness is best Secured by the preservation of that attention.and mutual Complacency which reigned during courtship, for this will bring every view, every wish, and everj'^ astron, of eacte dther into general agreement and ap* probatiofi, and hence admit participation of the Same ^ hlippinsssj and the Same pleasures. When'souls are thus' united: 
‘ " ■ by 
THE virtijous Villagers. Hr 
by harmonic union, marriage cannot Sail to prove the Supreme of all delight, ” and I should think it really mhst surpass the “fragrant breath of morn, ” the perfumes of roses, or the sweetness of siduan honey collected by the bees of Mount liyhla. Ha, ha, ha, what Similes. 
-- -- But to go on. — 
I 
I take it for granted, that with young persons, the time, of marriage is a period of mental change; that it is, or ought to be, the time when judgement commences her reign; the time when, losing sight of the painted valiies of youthful imagination, happiness is improved by the Sunshine of affual fruition. We then distinguish' between imaginary and real pleasures, ' and,, if we have Sufficient foresight to discover, that providence has fixed the, limits of humaii enjoyment'by bound a" 
‘ “‘ ries 
112 THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
ries that admit of no extension, prudence will diredf us to be Satisfied with our condition, as the ultimate persedion of terrestrial gratification. IS our understandings lead us to make this observation and determination, our minds will rest at ease in the contemplation of present enjoyments, without indulging wishes for new felicities, whether in the married, or any other station in life. — Contentment is the Source of true happiness, and, therefore, I have long Since determined to make the best of all events, and to be pleased with things as they occasionally happen. If our wishes are numerous, our disappointments will bear an adequate proportion, for we Seldom know the real condition of what we desire till it is in our poffeshon, when we frequently find it inferior to expe^iation. To destroy present happiness by anxious 
hopes 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. II 
hopes of what is to happen in future, is to live a life of incessant importunity and vexation, and to waste those years allotted for felicity in Secret anxiety and hopeless resentment. — 
Our public jubilee, last tuesday, exceeded every idea that could be formed of it. 
About two o’clock in the afternoon, a mesfenger was Sent to inform us, that everything waited for the presence of my father and the family. We accordingly Set out in form, rmd full dress, with every Servant, from the highest to the lowest, for all were invited, and my father gave them permlffion to go. — As we entered the village, the church bells saluted us with a peal. When We arrived at the green, we were met 
by 
114 the virtuous villaigers. 
by Some of the principal tenants, who received us with homage, and cotidu£led us through a lane os humble spedl’ators, to a beautisul arbour, in the centre of the green, curioussy constructed with trees and interwoven boughs, and pleasingly ornamented with a great variety of flowers On the top of this arbour was affixed a high pole, from the extremity of which, a large streamer, or stag, displayed itself, on Which were imprinted these words in large eharadlers — Sacred to gratitude— — equal distances round this grand .arbour, were ere^fed a number os smaller arbours, formed in the Same manner, but less elegant and less decorated. To one .of these our Servants were conduced. 
in.the centre of our arbour was a large table covered with as large a cloth, which was taken away as Soon as we enieresi, r and 
THE VIRTUOUS villaders. 
and displayed a profusion of dishes silled with every kind of provision and dainty. the country, and season of the year, afforded, with a great variety of sine fruit intermixed. The collation, as .you must suppose, was a cold one. We Sat down to it with cheerfulness and pleasure, and were waited on by Some of the heads of the jubilee, who Supplied us with beer, cyder, and wine, from lide boards within the arbour. As Soon as we had dined, and drunk a few toasts, we were conduced round the green to every arbour, where we found different parries of the tenants and villagers, with their wives and families, regaling themselves. The stisi£lest regularity and order reigned throughout; and I assure you, the dresses of the company were neat in the extreme. The disposition and decorations of the different arbours, with the nnra ’ * ber 
ii 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
ber and variety os the company, formed altogether a most pi£luresque and pleas ing Scene, to which the beauty of the day contributed not a little. 
As Soon as we had taken a Survey of the whole, we returned to our arbour, and when Seated, two of the principal sar mers led forward a very beautisul youth, about eighteen years of age, and well dressed. As Soon as they had approached the front of the arbour, the youth placed himself between the two elders, and fister bowing to my father, in a mod respeciful manner, Spoke as follows i 
“Accept, great sir, the humble, but grateful acknowledgements osyour lowly tenants, whose hearts have been made gkd Since you condescended to come among them, and with a bounteous liberality, 
unpre' 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
I I 
unprecedented in the history os man, rescued them from the oppressions of lawless imposition and tyranny. But for you, most worthy Sir, this village would have been depopulated, and its miserable inhabitants, with their aged parents and helpless offspring, been obliged to wander far hence in Search of the common wants os life. Where, O where would the wretched have Sound compassion? Where would infirmity and desease have met with relief? Where would helpless infancy, and spotless innocence, have received shelter and proteffion? Where would the naked have been clothed, or the hungry fed? Or where would totter ing age have found a resting place.'’ — Few have the means of kindness in their power; and out of these, few poffess the inclination to exercise it. You, sir, have not overlooked, or negleffed, the opportunities 
118 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
tunities that presented themselves of alleviating misfortune and misery, but with godlike beneficence have “imped all tears from off all faces f and restored the Wretched to plenty, happiness, and virtue; by which you have raised to yourself monuments more durable than brafsy and more conspicuous than pyramidsv — Here the youth bowed and ended his address; and was about to retire, when my father rose up and Said to him“ “gentleman, the gratitude of my tenants does them the highest honour, but I wish they had omitted the address they have made to me by you for my conduff towards them had not its origin in ostentation, or any expect: arion of the reward of flattery; what I have done had its foundation in humanity and justice, and I wish for no otfier Satisfaflion than V hat I receive from self approbation and the 
gratulations 
5 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
II 
gratulations of conscience. — 'She delicacy of your deportment, young gentlemanj (continued my father) and the Seeling fensibility you have shown while you delivered the generous acknowledgements of my grateful neighbours, most ir resistibly lead me to wish for an explanation of your'name, situation in life, and. whether you belong to any of the inhabitants of the village; for that' modest diffidence which appears most' strongly ta mark your characser, convinces me, that you poffess latent merit worthy o f encouragement not to be met with in obscurity. Let me know your wishes and your wants, and you may depend on my asistance. and proteffion. Enter here among us with the friends who brought you hither, and let us be companions of the dayd’ 
The 
120 THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
The youth blushed and bowed, and walked into the arbour with the two elders, but appeared highly embarrassed between Sear and hope, joy and Submission; he was encumbered with ‘‘ villatlc hajhfulnefsp as Doficr Johnson styles rustic timidity. — My father Seated the young orator between himself and mi mother, at the head of the table, and made Some inquiries into his history; from which we understood that he was a nephew to one of the elders, as I call them, and Son to a clergyman of abilities and strict: moral charaffer, who Served the cure of an adjoining parish, and whose name was Belljield. — aster Some time, the conversation became general, and we all endeavoured to render ourselves familiar with him, in‘hopes of removing his embarrassment, but without effect, for Sensibility Suppressed ardour, 
and 
tste. VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 12 I 
and want of courage stifled merit. His curiosity strongly excited an attention to what my father Said, and he appeared to enjoy much Satisfadlion in observing a charaffer nearly, which he had heard extolled and reverenced by others. — All .our endeavours to inspire cheerful fa iiniliarity were ineffectual, for he was too timorous to extricate hiraself from the shackles of modest diffidence. He had never till now been introduced to Such an assembly, and theresore you must not wonder when I tell you, that he bluffed when he caught the eyes of any os the company looking at him. I affure you, it was next to an impossibility to avoid looking at him, Sor the graces of his per spn, the neatness of his dress, and the delicacy of his manners, were circumstances too singularly stdking to be overlooked. I fancy my Bellamont was just vol. I. G Such 
122 
■THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
Such an elegant and pleassng figure at his age, by what he now is. Shake/. fear most admirably describes the Situation os Such a youth, in respecl to his years, in the comedy of the Twelfth Night, which I Snail here give you. “Not old enough for a man, nor young enough' for a hoy; as a Squash is before his a peascod, or a codlin when his almost an apple; his with him in standing water, betwixt boy and man.’^ 
My aunt took it into her head' to be highly pleased with master Bellfield, which was rather uncommon for one of her'reserved and Saturnine difposition; and she whispered to me, that “So good a youth deservcd encouragement, and i my father meant to do anything for him, she would readily contribute towards it.” don’t laugh, and be wicked enough to 
imaizine 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 12^ 
imagine the good old lady was pierced with a dart Srom cupid’s bow, on the sight of this beautisul lad. The satis, she is a humourist, and has her fits of liking and distiking; and though she is rather too avaricious, she now and then lakes it in her head not to be outdone in assis os generosity. Hovrever, I do noe know what the con Sequence of his in' troducfion to our Samily may hereafter before I assure you my Sister vldnfj appeared to take uncommon notice of hiin, ^ and was So very extravagant in his praise, thar I am suspicious more was meant than 7iiet the ear; but Time, the great dis coverer of all things, will rejest or confirm my Suspicion. He is about her own age, and if she Oiould be enamoured, the loveiiness, of his person, and the gentle ness of his manners, are circumstances Sufficient to plead her excuse, if not support her justification. — ^ 
G 2 About 
124 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
About six in the evening, the green became a Scene os general diversion — .cricket, trap ball, quoits, wrestling, cud 'gel playing, Singing, and dancing, displayed themselves at different Situations, and took place os inebriety and riot, which might have been expected Srom So general a relaxation from business and restraint. But, to do the direfiors of this festival strist justice, it must be acknowledged, the whole was most excellently planned for innocent amusemenr, divested of confusion and irregularity of every kind. — 
At Seven, we were entertained with coffee and tea, which was no Sooner over, but we were invited to dance under a rural canopy near our arbour, where a platform had been laid for the purpose. My father, unwilling to baulk the inno 
7 cent 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
12: 5 
cent and grateful intentions of the people, led us all Forth to the place, where, with the assistance oi Bellamont, who you may be Satisfied was my partner, Mafier Bellfield, who danced with Maria, and a few of the Sons and daughters of the most respeffable inhabitants, we made up a tolerable good Set, and had an excellent band of music, which had been procured from warzvlcl My father gave exceedingly into mirth, and Would make ray aunt join him to open the ball, at which the old lady was not a little pleased, I a Tore you. We danced till it was dark, and then returned to our arbour, which was well illuminated, and found the table spread with a fresh repast. As Soon as we had refreshed ourselves after our dance, and the'stable was cleared, we observed a great con course of the villagers arranging them g 3 Selves 
12 6 THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS'.’ 
Selves in order besore the front of ouf arbour, and in a few moments, we were Saluted with the following Song, or ode, chanted by Some pleasing voices, accompanied with imisic, 
I. 
Herald of praise, thy trumpet sound,! 
The song of gratitude proclaim; 
Let distant echoes quick rebound, 
While we ezalt a worthy’s same. 
II 
Hail I noblest of the human race! 
For god like charity is thine f To thee belongs each earthly'grace, 
And all that we believe divine! 
III 
When we furyey thy noble plan, 
(Which well record in life’s great stor}', )« Blame not that, we adore" the man So full of goodness, and of glory. 
IV 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS 
127 
■ IV 
Here, lately, what was wretched life. But broken spirits, restless care, 
Unjust oppreilion, endleis strife, 
Too great for mortal men to bear? 
V 
But now, how blessed a change we feet How pleasingly revers’d the scene!! 
heart from misery is free — 
The storm is past, and all’s, fercne. 
VI 
'In general plaudits all unite, 
Let gratitude her pow’rs display { 
ev’ry tongue confess it right, 
To dole with smiles this joyful day. 
My Sather, I perceived. Would rather have dispensed with this Song, as it ap. 
peared to place him under Some em' 
''■* ' 
barraffment, for generous minds receive g 4 little 
128 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS 
little satissaflion from praise. However, he Saw the merit and liberality os its intention, and Secretly approved of it, as an instance os the fidelity of the people towards him— — much inquiry, we were informed that the poetry is the composition of Mafier belijield. I shall say nothing on it.myself, but Submit it to your opinion, who understand tliese things better than I pretend to do. But pray, good critic, be favourable in your decision. 
I ought to have told you Some time ago, that thelntention bf this jubilee was known throughout the whole country, long before it took place, So that people came from all parts to be Spedlators of it, but none were admitted within the boundary of a fence formed with posts and .ropes, which incloscd the different rows 
of 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
12^ 
of arbours round the green. The con course; os people brought together on this occasion, was exceedingly great, and computed at many thousands, who all had Sufficient room to See the different amusements going forward, and contented themselves with being silent Spedators, without attempting the least intrusion. — The arbours were all well illuminated as Soon as it became dark, So that the night scene, as well as the day scene, had its peculiar, piffurefque beauty. 
After the Song, we lest our arbour, and walked round the green to take a view of what was going forward in the different arbours. Wherever we turned our eyes, we beheld content, cheerful ness, or merriment, in every countenance j and here and there, by-the-bye, a little innocent courtship visibly displayed itself G 5 amcsig 
f^o THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
among the younger branches of the villagers, which did not appear to meet any restraint from the elder branches. How Satisfadlorily pleasing are Scenes like these, when animated by youthful ardour, and conduced under the dominion of uncontaminated innocence! 
When we had fiilly Surveyed the night Scene, and amused ourselves with everything worthy notice, my father thought it most prudent for us all to retire; which was agreed to. Our intention being made known, She whole company withdrew from their different arbours, and formed themselves into a double rank from our arbour to the end of the green, through which we vere conduced by the elders who met us when we went; and, as we pasted, received the honour of a general acclamation and plau 
ditt 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS 1^1 
dite from the grateful and Virtums Villagers, who much to their prudence put an end to the jubilee as Soon as we retired, instead of returning to their amuse ments as might have been expeffed, when any restraint from my father’s presence being removed, they might have prolonged their enjoyments till irregularity of Some kind had taken place, which would have destroyed the recollection of their pleasure in future, by its being joined with condemnation for indiscretion. — Upon the whole, it was planned by gratitude and ingenuity; conducted with decency, and a generous Spirit; and concluded with prudence and reputation. It did credit to human understanding; and will rested honour on the Virtuous vtlhgcrsy till time shall be no more. — 
G 6 
Not 
132 THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS, 
Notwithstanding the account I have given you os Majler Pellfieldfs great diffidence and modesty, I must acquaint youj( that the young rogue mustered up courage this morning, and ventured to make us a visit to inquire after the health of his partner and the rest of the family Was not this like a man of Spirit? He apologised to my father for the boldness of the liberty he had taken, and placed it to the account of inspired gratitude for the generous reception he met with among us the day before. What do you think of that, my dear? here was a Surprising animation in the course of a few hours. Time will show its origin. My Suspicions increase, but I will not be too hasty in pasting Sentence till I have tried the cause. — My father appeared to be pleased with the lad’s courage in making us a visit, and told 
him 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS, 
him an apology was “not necessary; for as he had promised him any assistance and protection he might want, he should not recede from his offer, and theresore would be welcome whenever he .chose 
ii 
to make a risit at Belle Vue, and then gave him an invitation to Spend the day with us, which he accepted. 
It turns out, that this lad has received an education in the learned languages and the mathematics under his; father, who is a man of eminent abilities j and that he is a proficient in rausic and painting; which latter qualifications he has principally acquired by the force of his own genius. He plays inimitably on the harpsichord, and he brought my father Some excellent drawings of his own executing, for his inspeclion. In short, take him altogether, he is a pro digy. 
Il 
134 
The virtuous villagers. 
It is now full time for me to put aii end to this long letter, and therefore I shall beg leave to conclude, and remain. 
Dear sisteiv 
Yours,, ' 
I 
Belinda Bellamy. 
LET 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 

LETTER XL 
Mr. Bellamont to Mr. T. Bellamy, 
Belk vue, June th, 1783. 
D EAR Tom, 
'HE correspondence of Belinda and Miranda renders it unoeceffary for me to write to you often, for they are the fountains of intelligence. 
I most Sincerely hope, my friend, that the exalted ideas you entertained of conjugal felicity before marriage, have not been lessened by affual enjoyment. The union of Such Souls as you and Miranda 
polsess 
i THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS, 
poffess ought to produce the nephts ultra of human felicity. I, therefore, never expeff to hear that your honeymoon is in the wane, for if ever that should be the case, I will venture to affirm (without the intention of a pun) that Sublunary enjoyments have no positive existence from the decrees of nature, but are merely fortuitous. 
Your detestation of the allurement and indulgence of lawless love, and your observations on the best methods of obtaining and Securing felicity in marriage, do honour to your understanding, and the dignity of human nature. The felicities, as well as the infelicities, of matrimony, have long been the Sport of wit and ridicule; and the virtues of constancy and conjugal astestion have frequently been placed in unpleasing points 
of 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
h7 
of view, by the interested ralleries of li centiousness. Hence vve abound with epigrams, jests, puns, and Satires, all pointed against the married station of life, and calculated to discountenance and condemn it; but when the Satirical gaieties of wit and ridicule direct; their arrows against marriage, the institution of Providence, they merit the interposi* scion of public wisdora, and the cou" demnation of public justice, for attempting to injure the grand foundation of reciprocal obligation, and for daring ta destroy the interests of human happiness and virtue. 
The trite observation mentioned in your last letter, that men show all their love, and women all their modesty, before mansiage, ’^ may be true in Some few instances, as you remark; but when 
k 
138 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
it is taken in a general Sense, it becomes indecent and immoral, and as Such de serves the striffest censure. — Equally licentious and malignant is the Satire of one of the Greek poets on marriage, where he says, that “its two days of happiness are the first and the last.” — This may be considered as wit by the pupils of iniquity; but I venture to affirm, that the authors os So depraved a Species of wit deserve the utmost Severity, of School discipline; for whatever has a rendcncy to vitiate the minds of the different Sexes, to render them diffident of each other, or to alienate their affections by false representations of human nature, is to wound the interests of Society, ’ and to oppose the institutions of Providence 
yoai*' 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
fj9 
Your remarks on the affe<sted coyness and modesty of Some vv^omen, calculated to excite reiterated tokens of amorous respedt from their lovers, and the ill judged condudiof Some men during their hours of courtship, in raising expedla tions in the minds of women beyond the limits of truth, or the powers of nature, are not .unworthy notice; but these mistakes of the understanding, and depravities of the mind, are not general, and only happen where accidental circumstances render deceptioii and fraud necessary for the gratification of particular passions, or the Support of particular kv terests. 
You censure the fair Sex for Sometimes blending hypocrisy with, caution and prudence in their intercourse wdth menon this I shall only observe, that 
Some 
140 THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS 
Some hypocrisy in women will always be praffiscd till the fidelity and truth of men can be established on positive Security. The faithleffness of men gives birth to hypocrisy in women, and we shave no right to condemn what we ourselves render necelsary. Bead with attention the numerous histories os the multifarious Sedudlions of innocence, and the hypocrisy of women you Speak of will be commended and justified. 
Belinda has Sent your wife a circumstantial account of our village jubilee, and therefore I shall not Say anything concerning it, but that those miscreants the par Son and the lawyer were not in -- vited to partake of its ainusements; So openly are they detested by the inhabitants in general, who, being released from their machinations and power, now 
boldly 
the virtuous villagers. 14! 
boldly Speak their wrongs, and resent them with that becoming indignation which human nature will ever discover when she is agitated by the sense of injuries, and contemplates her own dignity. — The lawyer withdrew himself from the village that day; but the parson was less politic, and chose to have a peep at the pastimes; to accomplish which, he mounted himself on the top of a high tree in his garden, from whence he had a full prospeff of the whole; but Some of the people on the green having discovered him in this Situation, began to point him out to the rest, which he perceived, and, in endeavouring to make a precipitate retreat, Sell from the tree and broke his right leg. 
The Service of the church was performed yesterday by Mr. Bellfield^ a 
neigh 
142 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
neighbouring clergyman, and father of a very extraordinary young man, of whom your Sister made honourable mention in her letter. The congregation was abundantly more numerous than had been known for many years, for th conduct of the parson has drove the people from the church, and I have been informed that, before your father came here, he has been known to preach to very few besides the clerk and the Sexton; but your father has rcasoned the greatest part of the villagers out of their resent ments, by persuading them that the remission of injuries is necessary to happi ness, and that no circumstance wshatevcr ought to render them inattentive to their God. 
Mr. Belijield gave us a most excellent disconrse; the Subjcff of which was, an 
exami 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 143 
examination f the rise and progress of the dispositions and faculties of the mind, in the gradations from pleasure to ambition and avarice; to which he added an enumeration of the Sources from whence its tranquillity is generally derived. The eloquence of his oratory, the purity and propriety of his language, and the cogency of his arguments, were, altogether, Superior to anything I ever heard before from the pulpit. — Subjects of this nature are infinitely more important than the discussion os those ab struse points which the clergy Sometimes perplex themselves and their auditors with; because only a Small part of mankind has understanding Sufficient to comprehend them, on which account. Such Subjeffs only should make their way into the pulpit, as the multitude is qualified to utlderstand, and from which 
they 
144 the virtuous villagers. 
they can receive benefit. It would be well if our divines were to pursue the advice of one of the Greek poets who Says, according to a good English trans ssation, 
On life, on morals, be thy thoijghts employ’d; Leave to the Ichools their atoms and their void. 
Mr. Bellfield is as eminent for the amiableness of his disposition, and the purity of his life, as he is for his great learning, and, the universality of his knowledge; and what, is still more remarkable, he has lived in obscurity ever since he first went into orders, and has Supported a wife, and brought up a numerous faniily with the highest credit on a curacy of forty pounds a year, and 
* Automedon. 
the 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 145 
•the profits arising from keeping a Small School. As a Scholar and an orator, he has few equals; and, as a divine, hestandsun rivalled for an unremitting attention to the duties o f his office, and his constant regard to the welfare and happlness of inankiiid. If the clergy in general were like this extraordinary man, our churches would be filled as full as our places of public amusement. — Many are So weak asto think learning the only effentiai qualification of a divine; but this, without an alliance with beneficence and moral conduff, will avail but little, for he who endeavours to persuade others to be good, ought to be good himself, Precepts and example aifist each other when they are united. — 
How different is the charafier of Mr. Bellfield from that of the vicar! The one vol. I. II an 
r4si 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
sn ornament to human nature, and the 
other a disgrace to it. 
This Said vicar is a Welshman by birth, but does not inherit that honest integrity of heart, which is the chara£le ristic of the Cambrian Britons. Born of mean parents, he received his education at the expense of a public charity, and was Sent on the Soundation to the univer vsty as a Servitor, where the depravity of his mind and a thirst for gain led him to become the assistant to his Superiors, in all t hqfe extravagances and vices too general ly ptirsued by young men of birth and fortune. By Such abjest and iniquitous Submissions he acquired favour and property, till reason and virtue occasionally took their turns to reign over the indiscretions of his associates, when he Soon became as much despised, as he before 
had 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. i47 
had been courted and caressed. However, having gained the staunch friendship of the late lord os this manor while he was at .college with him, he was presented to this endowed vicarage on a vacancy wshich happened Soon after the young gentleman came to the possession of the estate. 
This fortunate circumstance, and the sacredness of his funffion, ought to have produced a change of principles and con duff, but this was not the case. Lusus plum mutate non mentem. — Notwithstanding his mean original, he was not Satisfied with upwards of three hundred pounds a year, the profits of the vicarage, but Sought to raise himself into higher consequence, by Subscribing t his patron’s debaucheries, extravaganc^ and unprecedented oppressions of his te h 2 nants. 
I' 
143 THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS,. 
nants, by which he held him and his dependants in constant Subjeflion, and giving himself up to indolence, gluttony, and drunkenness, neglected all study, and the duties of his office, and fattened on the wages of iniquity. — He is a most miserable orator, and his Sermons display neither genius nor judgement, but consist of a few trite observations wretchedly jumbled together, in which, as Shakespeare Siys, “he draweth out the thread of his verbosity finer than the staple of his argument 
We have been exceedingly entertained with Mr. beljfieu\ Son, a' youth of great beauty of person, and uncommon genius. He appears to pos sess his father’s virtues, and time will 
^ love’s Labour Loll, 
enable 
THE VIRTUOUS villagers. i49 
enable him to acquire his abilities. From the variety of his accompliihments his ashduity must have been unremitting and this must have arisen from that ardent curiosity which appears to be one of the predominant principles of his mind, — Your father is much pleased with him, and means to take him under his patronage,, by making him his steward. 
The lawyer has advertised the lease of the estate he holds under your father for Sale, on which there is a good house and premises annexed, being about to change his situation now he finds ihei'e is no chance of his.ever being establi{]\ed with your father, or of a.vo’dino; the contempt of' the. villagers. He bnik the housc and offices only three years ago, and Spared no expense in making i H 3- a very 
150 THE TIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
a very convenient and elegant manston. The Situation is delightstil, and as I mean to Settle here, I propose to purchase it at any rate, as it will render my plan of building a house unnecessary, and expedite my marriage. The villagers gave this place the name of Crtpi hall Oil account of the merciless condufi: of the owner to the poof, arid his oppressive usury, and I think it was a very appofne appellation; but, if I purchase it, as i doubt pot bliti shall, I pfojibse to call it Belvidere. — H \\5 is a lucky circumstance to fne, for building a hostse would be a work of time; and 
“Ihvear to thee by cupid’s Strongest bow, 
**■ By his best arrow with the golden head, 
“'By the fimjhicity of venus’cloves, 
- “By that which khitteth souls and prospers love 
I am iii'ipatiem till I am married. 
shakefpc aie’s Midsummer night’s Dream. 
I have 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 151 
I have been to visit your brother at Oxford. He will take the degree os Master os Arts at the public aci, which is the twelfth of next month. It gives me infinite pleasure, to acquaint you, that the heads of his college give him the highest commendation for his learning and virtuous condudf, and appear! to pay him great respe<5t, — 
I shall conclude with my respects to 
• •51 - »aa 
the young lady you have lately taken in keeping, Dear Tom, 
Yours, 
Wm. Bell a MONT. 
h4 
LETTER 
IA THE VIRTUOUS VILLAOERS. 
LETTER XII 
Miss iviaria Bellamy to Mrs. Bellamy 
junior. 
Dear Sister, 
TTAVING had every generous al Surance of your love and friendship for me, I have ventured to make you my considenr, in a matter I vvish to conceal, from every one else, till I am favoured with your opinion and advice, which I most earnestly entreat you to give, withal possible expedition, under the hope that I shall then be released from my present solicitude, 
5 OATH 
VIRTUOUS. VILLAGERS., I 
,. On the day ps, our village jubilee, a very extraordinary young gentleman was introduced to my Sather, and .he danced with me in the evening. From that day I have not been So happy as, 1 used to be, and I find an embarrassment and anxiety increasing daily. As I never knevy what uneasiness and pain were before 1 Saw this young man, I am rather, afraid the Sight of him has been the cause of what I .now Suffer. — My Spirits g^re strangely agitated, I sigh for whole days together; and 1 am teased and perplexed witfi I know not wha.r. I'he night is as burthensome to me, as the day, I toss and tumble bout, without being able to obtain rell; or if, percliancc, | do sieep, am pestered with a variety of dreams, and ali,, this young man. 
HS 
% 
154- the vlrtcbus vltlagfiks'. 
My father hds encouraged Him to vistt us, which he now does almost daily; and when he cornes into a rbofn where I am, my heaii: flutters violeh'tly *, noy countenance Suffers h variety of Sudden changes; and 1 frequently find inyself lost in a reverie. The beauty of Ms persbn has Soraetitnes So engaged my attention, that I have been Searful lest it Should meet the observation of the family; and if he looks at me I blush and am confounded, which I am afraid he has often perceived. When he is present, I wish him away; and when he is gone, am impatient for his return. Sometimes I resolve not to enter the parlour lest he should be there; and at other times, when Tknow of his coming, place myshlf in readiness to See him an hour before his arrival. — Pray, my dear Sister, tell me what all this means, for I 
really 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS, 155 
really am unable to explain to myself, why what I have related should only have happened since I have known young Mr. Belljield. If you should pronounce my complaint to be love, point out some method of cure, lest the disorder should in crease, which I am asraid it does daily, and all remedy be ineffefiual. — Condemn me not for the openness and sincerity of this epistle; and be faithful to Secrecy, if you regard 
Your 
Affeflionate sister-in-law 
Maria Bellamy. 
P. S. I should have made this matter known to my Sister who, doubt 
H 6 less, 
156 THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
less, is a very amiable young woman, but elder sisters are apt to affurae an unpleasing authority over their juniors, andi they Sometimes think Saraily interests Su -- .perior to every other consideration. 
LETTER 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 1*57 
L E T T E R Xim 
Mrs. Bellamy junior to Miss Maria Bellamy. 
Fondon, Jtint 30, 1783. 
UPON; my word, my dear Maria, the contents os your letter have given me much concern, and I feel for you very Sensibly, for the Symptoms you have enumerated prove your disorder to be very desperate. The name of your complaint is Love, proof positive Love; and this the whole body of members of the Royal College of Phyjtcians would agree in, were they all assembled together 

158 THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
their in consultation. It is a disease incident to human nature, and has been rise from the days of Adam and Eve to the present time j but it is an unsortunate circumstance, that Sor this disorder there is but one certain cure, and it is Sometimes difficult to obtain it, as it cannot be purchased at a chymist’s, or an apothecary’s. The Sarragoes os physic are all ineffectual in the cure of love. 
The effects of Some complaints are removed by that which produced he original cause. So, if a young woman is in love with a young man, and the disorder becomes desperate, the best, and only infallible cure, must be had from him who was the cause of it. — I laboured under your present complaint for Several years, and, at last, have been happily cured by one I) off or Bellamy, 
and, 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 159 
and, I am well persuaded you have a physidan in your neighbourhood, who wouldffoon Velfeve you, if fm Can procure him; I mean door Bellfield\ only I am afraid your father will think him too young to be trusted.j 
physicians Say, that love is not a difease, but a passion of the foul.^however, let them give it what appellation they please, they cannot deny, that it has been productive of as many evils as ever pandora’s box contained. Some medical writers Say, that the wiser part of mankind, ‘‘ when they find themselves in lovcy 'seek pleafani company and active enter tainm'ents''ri” This is rather an idle affer fion, if Set up for the cure of love, ■these divert the anxiety of persons 
- ' '. - C 
* See Dr. Mother^’} Medical Disiionary, under the arsicle Amor. 
, troubled 
ibo 
THE VIRTUOUS. VILLAGERS. 
troubled with the passion, and may relieve the pangs of disappointed love, L gonfess, but will Seldom cure it 
Many curious observations on this fubjecst, may be been in the works of orik^us'znd Phutus jegifieta; the fonner, a profelfor of physic in Alexandria, who wrote some of his works, by order D 'Julian the Apoflate, and flouriflred about the end of third century; the latter, a physician of 'note of the seventh century; and, likewise, in a valuable treatise professedly wxitt en'on love, as it is a disease, by James Frrrand, and printed at Oxford, in the year 1640. 
The above James perrand was a Dotstor in physic, born at Again, a city of France, in the province oi Guienne, and the work was' fird published at, Paris, in 162, 2. The author was evidently a irian of great learning. His aim was to confider love as it sometimes degenerates into bodily distemper; yet he mentions many things which may be referred to love in general; for he displays, with great stiow of argument, the pains, as veil as the ■pieafures, attendant upon the pallion 
Place 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
ii 
“Place may be chang’d, but who can change his mind 
Believe me, my dear girl, I Seel much for your situation of mind, for, it is evident, that sty rogue Cupid has pierced your heart with one of his keenest arrows, and the wound appears to be deep Why this has not happened before, I cannot say; but, from the account I have had of Majler bellfiejd from Belinda in her last letter, I do not wonder that it has happened now. She, I must inform you, suspeffs that you are enamoured. There are times when particular objefis do not strike us Sufficiently to produce' the passion of love; and there are times when we feel its powers instantane ousty; but this is generally when Some beautiful objeff engages our observation, 
^ 
You. 
i62 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
You are critically circumstanced re fpefling this matter, and I am perplexed in my wishes to give you advice; for you have not given the least hint that Majler Belljield has shown any dispofition of love for you. — What if his heart Oiould be engaged, which is not at all improbable in a youth of his sensibility; how dreadful will the situation of your mind be, if you encourage the irapref fions you have already received besides, should his mind be free, it does not follow, because you have entertained favourable Sentiments of him, that he may be disposed to answer them as they merit, and you may wish. But should you meet with a return of love, he is at a very early stage of site; and notwithstanding his singular accomplishments, your father may have insuperable objefiions to your 
union 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. l 
Miiion wshich you cannot foresee. There sore, all these things considered, I think it will be most advisable Sor you to stiste your passion, if you can, till you know more of this young gentleman than you do at present. — I must observe to you, that it is the most delicate, and unthankful office in the Vterld, to give advice to people in loves 
Compose your mind, if possible, and let reason govern till you can give a loose to the reigns of your wishes with Security of success. — 
I am persuaded, notwithstanding your fears and caution, that whenever you think proper to disclose your mind to Belinda she will prove your steady and faithful Sriend. — The confidence you have placed in me gives me pleasure, 
and 
164 the virtuous village Rs. 
and does me honour, and you may rely on my friendship and secresy, I am, my dear girl, most Sincerely 
Yours, 

beltam y 
LAY 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS, 
t6s 
LETTER XIV 
Miss Maria Bellamy, to Mrs. Bellamy, junior,. 
Belk'vuej 'July 2, 1783. 
Dear Sister, 
Your Speedy and obliging answer to my letter merits my warmest thanks. It was a great comfort to me, though it could not absolutely dissipate the perplexities of my bewildered .mind,. I must acquaint you, that just as I had formed the resolution to use my utmost endeavour to compose my Spirits, and 
to 
i66 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
to check a passion I had encouraged too hastily, I received a letter Srom Majier Belljield, which has thrown me into new difficulties, and made it necessary for me to trouble you a Second time, for your kind opinion and advice, as to the mode of conduct I now ought to pursue. — I have Sent you an exa(5t copy of the latter. Submitting it to your consideration; and only ’request the favour of your Speedy answer, which will oblige. 
Yours, 
Maria Bellamv. 
P. S. I shall not take any notice of bellfield.s letter till after I hear Srom you. 
letter 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
167 
LETTER XV 
Mr. Bellfield Junior, to Miss Maria Bellamv. 
'cajuetoriy July L 1783. 
Dearest Miss, 
IF ever distress of mind merited pity, if ever wretchedness deserved compassion, pardon the presumption of a young man, alternately embarrassed by fear and hope, when he ventures to inform you, that from the moment he first beheld your transcendent beauty, and, as he imagines, viewed the lovely features of your mind, he enjoyed Sensations 
unknown 
i68 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
unknown to him before; and losing, in them, ail recollcdlion of himself, and your exalted station, became a votary to love. 't forgive, O Sairest of the fair, the Sensibility os a heart Sormed by benevolent nature Sor the reception of all the tender passions. 
Contemplate the powersul influence of those charms and graces, those per feffions of person and mind, which the bounteous favour of heaven has bestpw'ed upon you; then blame if you can, 
“When I your lovely form survey, 
Your fmiies a thousand wounds impair; each/feature steals my soul away, 
Each glance deprives me of my heart.” And chasing thence each other stiir, 
Leaves her own image only there. 
Condemn me not, that I aspire to love you: the most Simple moth flies to the * Philips. 
brightest 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. ib^ 
brightest flame! -- A thousand times I have Said to myself, “Vain youth forbear and as often, has Hope replied, “Proceed and prosper.’^ 
But ah! how strong a bar tsee Betwixt my happirvefs and me.” * 
If your heart is devoted to another, t shall be wretched in the extreme; yet, while I exist, I will pray for your felicity; and to know that you are happy will be Some alleviation to the distresses of my mind. Say that you do not hate me, and 1 will trust to time and chance for all the rest. — 
Believe me to be. 
With the striffest Sincerity, Dearest miss, 
Your devoted stave, 
Charles Bellfield. oratorio of Saul. 
Voi, .I. I LETTER. 
lyo THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS 
LETTER XVL 
Mrs. Bellamy junior, to Miss Maria Bellamv. 
Lbtidon, July 4, 1783. 
My dear girl, 
IN P W think, though your situation is extremely critical, that you stand upon better ground than you did when I last wrote to you. I most sincerely congratulate you on your satissaffion of mind, that your love of young Bellfield meets with So warm a return; for unless this passion between the Sexes is stristly 
mutuab 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. II 
mutual, there can be no true and permanent happiness in the marriage station. 
beujield, in my mind, is a charming fellow. I am pleased with the ingenu ousness of his letter; and I am inclined to think he is capable of writing in a more expressive manner, did not modesty check the enthusiasm of his loul He posteffes a liberal mind, and a generous heart; and, iherefore, he is worthy of your love, were you the daughter of a king. — But here comes the rub. Though the path is strewed with flowers, there are thorns concealed. But there is no pleasure without Some alloy. Neither you, or beujield, must Suffer the impulse of pashon to transport you too far, before you Submit yourselves to the decisions of those who have an authority I z over 
172 THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS, 
over you. Your love must be governed by reasoe, or you may raiscarry in the midst of imaginary Security. Avoid delay; Sor it may be produfiive of evil consequences. ■ present your cause to the court of parents, and, if possible, form’ a resolution to be Satisfied with the verst iff. Engage your {fxtx Belinda in your interest, by a Speedy and generous dis dosure of the matter, and, I am fully persuaded, she will prove a friendly and a powerful advocate for you. Your judge (I mean your father) delights not in dominion; his heart abounds vrith all the sensations of humanity, and he will ■ not attempt to govern the'inclinations of nature by his owm will. He has through life, been the distributor of happiness, and therefore he will not attempt to distress those who have the highest claim 10 his favour and proteffiom You have 
much 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 173 
much to hope, and little to fear; on which account, let me advise you to be particularly cautious, not to lessen your pretensions to his generosity, by any al of indiscretion whatever. 
Let the recolleffion of your own Solicitude lead you to relieve the anxiety of bellfiells mind; Sor as he has made an ingenuous confession of his love, you ought to do the Same; and if you do not, you will be a hypocrite. After this, let him declare his wishes to your father, and then the matter will b e put in a fair and honourable track. Do not let false delicacy, or imaginary fears, lead either of you to conceal your amour, for if you do, you will render yourselves unworthy parental indulgence, and the dread of discovery will make your days pafs away in Sorrow and terror; but if 
you 
174 VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
you readily Subscribe to that obedience you owe to your parents, you will have the gratulations of your own minds, on the recollecrion that you have done what you ought; and having done So, yom have Some claim to a compliance with your wishes. 
Let me hear from you as often as opportunity Suits, while this affair is ia agitation; and rest assured no one will rejoice at its being brought to a. happy couclusion more than,. 
Yours, most truly, 
Miranda Bellamy. 
End of the First Volume, 
THE 
VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
NOVEL. 
Vol. IL 

■■■ 

- rr 'I 1 f ^ - ^ ' ' r 
ji V i ‘ - •■-, i.: :, / t' -* 
r. -.? 
V 
'VN 
A f TAY AA 
VV r ~ ' -- -- 
THE 
VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS, 
A 
NOVEL. 
TN A SERIES OF LETTERS. 
By JOHN potter, M. B. Author os the Curate of Coventry, cc. 
. — Tibi fcriptus, matrona, libellus. 
Martial. 
To mend the heart, to raise the mind, our view. Ye modest fair, this book is writ for you. 
I N Two VOLUMES. 
)U vol. II 
Printed by W, Cass, lamb’s Coiiduit Street, Holborn. M CC LXXJCIV, 
W" 
if u' r I 1 '■ 
f ' rt tt 
, 0 ’ i C y ■ 
0 

r ist ^. 
i -<> •; hir 
- ‘ il.: 
A 
, ?Zi. .>. V 
THE 
VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
h^.f 
^ r 
LET E R xvir. t Mrs. Bellamy, Jun. to Miss Bellamy. 
lc/utonrijune zj, > 
.DEAR Belinda, 
Beg you will accept .my most grate Sul thanks for the entertaining account you gave me, in your last letter, of your Village jubilee., and the interesting particulars relative to that extraordinary young man, Majier Bellfidd. The festival does the highest honour to the voli. II B gratitude 
2 THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
gratitiade and ingenuity of the villagers, and is a proos that the dignity of human nature may display kself as nobly in an humble, as in an exalted station of lise, 
If your brother could have been with me, I should have liked to have been of your party, but without him I should not have enjoyed the pleasures of the day; for, O, my dear girl I hp is the Soul of my Soul, and the Source of all my delight— — not, my friend, though our honeymoon is past, that we have taken the last draught of pleasute. It is just the reverse;; the accomplishment of our wishes is not folio wed by neglect,, has poffeshon given birth to dis gust. Every day is productive of additional delight, and every hour increaseth the account of our felicity. We never shall experience disappointment in our 
cohiiishial 
tfl£ VIRTUOVI VILLAGERS. 5 
connubial hopes, because We enteted into union with no expectations, but what we have the inclination and the ability to gratify. We look forward every moment with infinite Satisfaction, and perceive that our stores of happiness are inexhaustible. 
I read your account of young belt field with admiration. He is one of the first favourites os nature; and, therefore, you must not be surprised if you should find your suspicions true, that he is the favourite of your sister Maria. Well, fuppose he should be the object of her soul’s choice, what objection can your father have to him, provided he approves of your Sister, and makes her a return of love? None, I hope, should this be the cafe; for though they are both young, and he, perhaps, may have no fortune, B 2 still. 
4 .the virtuous villagers. 
•still, as your father’s delight is in the happiness of his children, and the good of mankind, I think he will yield wdth pleasure to their union, should it be their mutual wish, because be delighteth not in the misery of any one. 
bejlamont and you must be their friends, if love has taken place between them. You must, feel for them as you felt for yourselves, and not be regardless of the happiness of others now you have carried your own point with your father, I will not suspect you of such want of .generosity, because I know the general .turn of your disposition. Bellamont^ I think, must possess a noble soul, and 1 much approve of‘his last letter to your brother. Upon my word, my dear, the young man has merit, and writes Try and I believe b.c. poffcffes a.... eood 
prettily 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
s 
good heart, because he is an advocate for the fair Sex; for that, you know, is a strong proof of every man’s understanding. Indeed, 1 begin to approve of your choke, and wish the happy day was fixed for your nuptials. 
I commend the managers of your jubilee for not inviting the lawyer and the vicar; and I own I was So wicked as to laugh at Belkmonfs account of the accident the latter met with. Certain it i?, notwithstanding the counsels of philoso phy, and the injunctions of religion, strongly enforce universal compashon and forgiveness of injuries, we cannot easily persuade ourselves to stifle resentment, or to commiserate the misfortunes of those our hearts do not approve 
B 

THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
I hope Bellamont will not be disappointed in his intention of purchasing the lawyer’s house and estate; Sor really, my dear, now all points are Settled Sor .your marriage, it must be a teasing thing to have, it delayed for want of a house. However, though the poet Says Procrajiinatlon is the thief of time, the .citpedtations of lovers are not without their enjoyments. Day glides after day through elyjian preffebs, and thjt heart dances to the sang of Hope 
. We received great pleasure on reading Bellamonfs account of your brother benjatmps reputation at Oxford. Your father is a happy man to be So blessed with his children; but the good example he Sets them, cannot fail to inspire them with a love for virtue. 1 am, most truly, yours, 
Miranda Beelajmt^ 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
LETTER XVIII 
Miss Bellamy to Mrs. Bellamy, Jun. 
\ Belle Vue, July i, *783. 
Dear Miranda, 
IT gives me infinite Satisfaction to know that your connubial happiness has known no remission. 0 may it laji for life, as the old Song Says. And So it will, if you continue to think and act through the whole Scene of lise as you have hitherto done. For when the transports of pashon, now Supported by the ardour of youth, begin to decay, B 4 and 
a 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
and vivacity dwindles into lifileffness and Satiety, the recolledsion of past pleasures mutually enjoyed, and mutually bestowed, will give birth to Friendship, the sister of Love, with all her endearing attendants and graces. happiness like this is the prerogative only of good minds, and the reward of uncontami' nated virtue. 
If Maria has, as I imagine, entertained a partiality for young Bcllfield^ I cannot, blame her; for, notwithstanding his early age, his person, dispofition, and accomplishments, are Sufsicient to allure the attention and attachment of older heads, and older hearts, than mcivid.u I am mistaken if almighty Love has not fiiced his Station in both their tender bo soms; for their eyes Sparkle, and their hearts bound at the presencc of each 
other 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS., 
Other too visibly to escape observation; and, a few days ago, I think I over heard Bellfield desiring old Fhilip to give Maria a letter, but not till he had left the house. It appeared to me, that Fhi, lip, who is an ox^xrobin, zs the Sayingts, demurred to the business, and, I Sancy, at last resused to do it, in defiance of a bribe which was offered. I heard him Say, his duty to his master forbid his meddling in Such matters; and whether ■ Marla had the letter by any other means I do not know at present. What do you think osphilip? Tell me os a courtier, poffested of equal integrity. 
IS this matter comes to anything, as I think it VW, Maria shall have my most cordial advice and Sriendly ashstance; but I am afraid it will not meet with my father’s approbation; for Bellfield is B 5 rather 
lo 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
rather too young for matrimony, wtfo there no other objections. However, I shall consult my sister’s happiness to the extent of my power whenever she discloses her mind to me; and Bellatnonty you may rest Satisfied, will join in ashst 
ing me. -- -- -- Upon my word, Miranda 
by the by, you rather give yourself too many airs about Bellatnont. “The young ‘‘ man Has merit, and writes very pret ‘‘ tily.” Ha, ha, ha, what a consequential manner you talk in! Can your pounds, shillings, and pence gentleman, Mr. Trade and Barter, Mr. Debtor and Creditor, alias humdrum Pom Bellamy write better? But you ever was a madcap, and therefore I must excuse you, especially as you are So good as to ap iprove of my choice. 
Our 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
I E 
Our vicar made his exit yesterday That is, he died of a mortification of his broken leg; which became So inflamed; and Swelled, owing to a bad habit of body, that it could not be Set, and the gonsequence was dissolution. Poor wretch! he lived detested, and his death will be unlaraented. For my own part, I am not Sorry this man is net more; though. Sor no other reason than because his moments must have been embittered by the reproaches of a guilty conscience, and his life burdened by the weight of that greatest of all calamities, a tainted reputation. 
Bellamont has been fuccessfui in purchasing the lawyer’s estate, and likewise buying the best of the furniture belonging to the house; but as he proposes to sit up fbme off the rooms in the present B 6 fastsion. 
12 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS, 
fashion, he has, this day, Sent a cosii miffion to London, to Sandell of Eew bond street, who is esteemed a man of the first taste in the upholstery and cabinet business, and has the reputation of dealing with the stridest integrity. 
My father was visited yesterday by Sir Iiarry Hariot, a neighbouring baronet, who came to Solicit his intimacy and connexion. — This gentleman, or rather, ' this rude, uncultivated Savage, for he has little more of human than his form, is descended from one of the most ancient and respectable families in the 
county of W -- -- -; but coming to his 
title and estate at a very early age, before education and observation bad Settled his judgement, or reason restrained the force of inclination and passion, lie entertained false ideas of the consequence os autho ‘ rity 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 1$ 
rity and power; and by treating every one with contempt whosc estate and sor tune could not be Set in competition with, his own, and pursuing the debaucheries and vices of the world re gardless os decency and honour, he has Jong since been almost universally de spised; and is reduced to the nefceffity of associating with an order of men, who court his alliance for dependence, and join in his riotousness and dishpation at the expense of health, reputation, and virtue. 
He came to Belle viie without Sending any previous notice, and entered into great Samiliarity with my father at first sight. My father, who had heard his history, and who cannot conceal his approbation or prejudice on any occasion," did not appear pleased with this visitor; ' 
and. 
14 the virtuous villagers.. 
and, except observing the common forms of civility, was rather cool in his behaviour. Whether this was perceived by the Baronet I cannot Say, but is it was, it had no effect on the pride of con Sequence, as he came with views not to be Set aside by the punctilios of ceremony. But, in order that you may view the portrait of this honourable gentleman in its true light, I shall give you the particulars of what pasted during the time of his visit. 
On his being shown into the parlour, where we were all Sitting, he Said to my father, “Your Servant, Mr, Bellamyf Servant; ’* and to us, Your Servant, “ladies, your Servant, rm Sk Harry Hariot^ os Hariot hally a near neigh“ “os yom*s, Majler Bellamy, born a. baronet and bred a baronet, with one 
“of 
THE virtuotts VILLAGERS, 
IS 
of the best estates in the county of 
(( j/fl., ive been high sheristi and 
“parliament man, I keep the bess pack “of hounds, and the best hunters in the kingdom, and will leap a hedge, gate, “or style, and wade a river in pursuit of a stag, with any man in the county. O, it’s a fine thing tq be bred a gentie “man. You was bred to'trade, I un stand, Majler Bellamy. Odds bodikins, ‘‘ it’s a pity the lord of Such a manor as. yours had not been bred a gentleman, I hate the name of trade; though, for the matter of that, my mother’s father was a tradesman. My father, you must know, had run his estate out at the elbows, and So he married a calicoe printer’s daughter of Putney, with a devilish good fortune, which. 
6c 
Set all to rights, ” — Then, Sir, ” Said my father, ‘‘ your mother’s father could 
“not 
i6 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
not be a gentleman, according to your idea.” — “Yes, yes, ” replied the baronet, he was a gentleman, I affure you, ’ “though he was a calicoe printer, for ‘‘ he was worth more than a hundred thousand pounds; and any man’s a gen tleman that’s worth a hundred thousand pounds. Yes, yes, the old Sellow'^ was a gentleman at last, though he began the world with .a trifle; and after he became rich, he was willing, to make his daughter a lady, and he came down handsomely Sor it; and So he' ought: for is plebeians will make la“ “of their daughters, they ought to ‘‘ pay for it, you know. — But, odds bo ^ ‘‘ dikins, I had liked to have Sorgot one “thing, Majier Bellamy.; they tell me; ‘ as how, you are devilish kind .to your tenants, and have lowered their rents, • and the devil knows what; but i’m 
‘‘ conic 
mm 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. i7 
come to Scold you for it; for it is the worst thing you can do, to fall their ‘‘ rents. Zouns, man, you had better have raised them by half.’* 
Sir, ” replied my father, I thought ‘‘ it my duty, as a man and a Christian,, “to relieve my tenants from the op pressions of the late lord of this manor, because I found he had imposed << burdens on them they were unable to ** shear. I live not for mysdf alone; *•' and 1 have the gratulations of my own! ** heart for what I have done.” 
** Indeed, Mafier bellamyp said the baronet, “you have done a very wrong ** thing; and it is a pity you had not “beeri bred a gentleman, for then you’d have known howto manage your estate ‘‘ better. Fd see all my tenants at the 
“devil 
xb 
THE VIRTVOUS VILLAGERS. 
devil before Td lower their rents. “How is a gentleman to live if he does not make the, most of his estate > Tell me that if you can, Majler bel lamyp 
\ 
“I know my income. Sir, ” replied my father, “and I take care not to let my expenses exceed it; by which method I am never in want and I hold it one os the highest acts of cri ‘‘ minality any man can be guilty os, to “let his extravagance lead him to prey upon the distreffes of the poor.” 
‘‘A figs end for criminality, ” Said the baronet: ** where’s the criminality “of making the most of one’s estate What are tenants but staves, hound to work for their Superiors? Youstl ner ver be a gentleman, Majler bellamy y 
“while 
C 
tc 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 19 
while you entertain Such plebeian no“ “Why, man, you have made ** your tenants as blithe as birds, and “they’re all jumping about like a Set of morris dancers. Why, they’ll all get rich, and Set up for gentlemen Soon. O, ’tis a burning shame to make gen tlemen of beggars, Majler bellatnyv 
I shall never consider my tenants as bound to me by the laws of stavery, ” ' replied my father, “but as freemen, ** who have a right to be benefited by “their labours; and it is the wish of my heart that they may be prosperous and happy. I detest the idea of every Species of oppression; but of none “more than where a landlord, by extor tion, robs his tenants of what they ought to enjoy. I consider Such im positions as adks of legal cruelty, ^ highly injurious to the lower orders of 
men. 
20 THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
“men, because they feldoiii have it in ‘ctheir power to resist oppression; and hence relinquish that Sortitude and in ‘‘dustry, which would enable them to provide for the exigences of life with ** credit and happiness.” 
O sie, Majier Bellamy, *^ Said the baronet, ** there’s neither rhyme, nor ** reason, in what you Say; and I am “Sorry for you, now you’re Set up ** for a gentleman, that you know no «< better. Why, zounds, man,, you’u ** have all the gentlemen in the county ** up in arms against you, if you continue to go on as you’ve begun. Why, “they tell me, you allow all your te nants to kill as much game as they like; and we sha’ii’t have a hare or a ** partridge in the country if you Suffer ‘‘ this. You must Support the game -- 
laws 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 21 
laws with strict kvqxxty ^ Mafier Bellamy or you’re no gentleman; for every gentleman is bound to Support them?, because they have the authority 6f parliament. O, I play the very devil with poachers whenever I catch them.” 
tc 
u 
6( 
, (( 
u 
t( 
(( 
4( 
ti 
If the gentlemen of the county rise against me for having shown lenity to my tenants, ” replied my father, “they will exjxifc their own ignorance and in., humanity; and I shall consider them as men lost to every generous sentiment, and meriting the general con. tempt of all social beings. The game laws, as you call them, were ever considered by me, as one of the most arrogant and unnatural ads ever established by the legistative authority of this kingdom, highly derogatory to the wisdom and dignity of parliament, 

and 
a2 THE virtuous VILLAGERS. 
and usurpations of the common claims “of mankind : for what right have any fsset os men, in particular, to exclude ** the rest os their fellow creatures Sroin the bounteous gifts os Nature? I shall ever be of opinion, that the “humblest rank p.s. men have an equal “right with the highest to the general bleshngs of Providence; and that the ‘‘ game laws are an affront to common ^ seirse, and a disgrace to humanity. And, I am well persuaded, that this illiberal and arbitrary prohibition has never been observed with that alten tion and Submission generally paid to other acts os the legistature. On the contrary, poaching has become gene ral, because restriction has made that important, which besore was not con sidered of much value j and thus, the 
law 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
law proves the destruction, instead of the preservation, of the game, ” 
Well, well, Majier Bellamy Said the baronet“ “will have your way I See, “So it does not signify arguing with you, “for we shall never agree on these “points. So wehl drop them, and call a “new cause. — you’ve got Some hand“ “daughters, I understand; and I “came to tell you that I mean to marry “one of them, if you’ll give a fortune “equal to my rank and title. Tm k “baronet, you know; and if i marry into your family, 1 shall ennoble it, “'you know; for your daughter will be “a lady; and that, let me tell you, Ss “worth a good round Sum; So you must “draw your purse strings to Some tune, “or I shash’t bargain with you. The “never entered intb alliance with 
“plebeians 
24 .the virtuous villagers, 
** plebeians but oftce before, as I told you, and then: ’twas for no less a Sum than half a plumb, as you tradesmen term fifty thousand pounds. Well, f‘ what say you, Old Boy, have you a ** mind to ennoble your family V 
** Sir, ” replied my father, “my eldest daughter is engaged, and my youngest P is at too early an age of life for a man of your years; besides, Sir, I wish not to lay any restraint on her inclina tions in So nice a point as that of mar riage; neither do I chuse to bargain for a husband as I might bargain for a “horse. Pedigree and title will never induce me to part with my daughter, to any man who has not other quasi fications to recommend him, or who may be destitute of those virtues I wifii to find in a son-in-law.” 
Zouns, 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS, i5 
Zouns, Sir, ” cried the baronet, have I not offered to make your daughter a lady; and is not that do, ing an honour to a man brought up to trade.? — I am a gentleman. Sir; a man of title; a man of estate. Sir; i’ve an estate that contains twice the number of acres of your manor; and I must tell you, Sir, I once pre sented a ‘‘ petition to the king in person, and had “the honour to kiss his majesty’s hand, and all that, and a great deal more Sir, and” - — -- -- -- - 
‘‘ Sir Harry, ” Said my father interrupting him, “your offer to make my daughter a lady, is an honour I do not aspire to, and I am persuaded she wdll prefer happiness to a title without it. Your estate may be ten times more important than mine, Sor anything I vol. II C either 
si 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
either know or care; but there are Such things as mortgages. And as to the honours you mention, of attending the “king, and Saluting his majesty’s hand, ‘‘ I think little of them; Sori do not apprehend my daughter’s marrying a man who had kissed hands with all the kings in Christendom, and the pope’s toe into the bargain, would be any Southeast“ “for happiness. It is my ardent wish that my children should be vsir tuous and happy •; circumstances infi nitely Superiordo the pomp os title, “which 1 consider as a trissing bauble, of little importance when placed in ‘‘ competition with the Splendid lustre of real merst. — If by the term plebeian “you mean, as I apprehend, a man wdth out^ti title, I must observe to you, that “I Nish for no badge of honour beyond that of having the character of an ho ‘ 
■ 5 “nest 
THE WIRTUOVS villagers, 1*] 
nest man. Shave no arnbition but that of rendering mysels beloved by mankind;; which my ultimate hope is to Secure the favour of heaven, when Time shall call me hence, and I atli no more seen, ’^ 
Well, youhe the first man bred to trade I ever heard of, Majier bellatnyi^^ Said the baronet, who did not wish to make his daughter a lady. And what a fuss you make about happiness! Do you give your daughter a good for tune, and Isti give her a title.; and if we are not happy together, we can be happy asunder, you know. She can go her way, and I will go mine, like other great folks; and if we Separate, “that will not rob her of her title : once a lady, always a lady, you know, 
28 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
“Bellamy, But youste the strangest 
Old Humdrum I ever met with. “Odds bodikins, your pounds, shillings, and pence works in London have de stroyed your reason; and i’m afraid I ** shall never make a gentleman os you if I talk till doomsday.” 
Indeed, Sir Harry, ’* replied my father, ‘‘I do not wish to be otherwise than what L am; and I am persuaded all the pains you can bestow upon me ‘‘ will not improve me to your wishes. I shall never envy your greatness, or strive to Sollow your example; and as we are not likely to be better friends, “it will be most agreeable to be greater “strangers.” 
'“Well, well, ” Said the baronet a little nettled, “you may think better of 
if. 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
29 
it, in a few days, mayhap; but if you “don’t make haste it will be too late, and then you may be Sorry you resused “my kind offer. However, be it as it will, come and See me. 1 can give you Some of the best Stingo of any “man in the county. Your vicar, who died this morning, used to praise mj^ Stingo. O, I have made him precious “merry V ith it. Well, he was a jolly Sellow, poor Soul, and loved good ean ing and drinking; and preached deadly short Sermons; and Sang a deadly good *‘fong; and told a deadly good story. ** O, he’d a budget full of deadly good “Songs, and merry stories; and was a devilish clever fellow to Set the table in a roar for a whole day together. But he’s no more. ■ death’s a terrible thing; but it’s wdiat we must all come to I So Majier Bellatny^ your Servant 
C 3 
youj 
30 THE VIRTUOUS vlllagersi 
your Servant; — ladies, your Servant,, ** your Servant.^’ And thus she departeds 
During this conversation, my mother, my aunt, Bellamont, mysels, and Maria, all Sat mute, and Srequently, with diffi. €ulty, refrained Sroni laughter; however, it broke out universally as Soon as he retired, Sor my father joined in chorus with us. — My mother Said little; mmt defj^ised hint j my father pitted’ him I and my aunt declared him a Hot lentot. 
This aniraal, for Such 1 must call him, has Spent a very capital fortune, and mortgaged his estate So fully, that he has little more than a nominal right to it. He has Seduced the innocence of one hals of his tenants daughters, and ruined the parents of the rest shy every 
Species. 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
Si 
ijtecies of oppreshon, because they have had the courage to oppose the ruin of their ohildren. He has long been de spised and rejected by, every gentleman in the county for acts of meanness and rascality : and now, except in the sport ingteason; he drinks all night with a Set of low companions, and steeps through the days Or, as Shakespeare Says, he is, “one who loves a cup of hot wine with a drop of allaying Liber mv; o/te that converses more with the buttock of the mght than the forehead of the. morning This wretch has gone to the length of his tether; and hoped to wind up his bottoms, and run a new race of dissipation and debauchery, from an opinion, that my father, having acquired a large Sortune by trade, would part with Some of it as a marrirge por — 
* Coriolanus. 
C 4 
tloii 
32 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
tion to one of his daughters for the sake 
of a title. -- -- 1 think it is time I put aa 
end to this letter; and, therefore, I shrift lemain, as usvial, 
Yours, 
'Most trulf. 
Belinda 
LETTER 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 33 
LETTER XIX 
Miss Maria Bellamy to Mrs. Bellamy, Jun. 
Btlle Vue July z, 17s3. 
Dear Miranda, 
Thankyou Sor your last kind letter; and now acquaint you, that aster Several days Spent in stuiggling with thosc feelings I suppose every young woma experiences circumstanced as I then was, I wrote to Belljield, and told him, that the generous conseshon he had made obliged me to deelare, that he was not wholly indifferent to me. But, as I C 3 trembled 
34 
THE virtuovs VILLAGERS 
trembled for the consequence of givingway to ideas which might embarrass both our minds, in case my father should not approve, of our indulging an intimacy on the Sooting of lovers, it appeared to me most prudent not to attempt it; and that my duty to the best of parents would not Suffer me to carry on a clandestine intimacy with him; being resolved never to receive the addresses of any one without their knowledge and approbation. 
Before I Sent the letter, I disclosed myself fully to my Sister, who behaved ■ nobly on the occasion, and approved of what I had written. 
On Friday, Bellfield was wholly with my Sather on buiiness relative to the commencement of his stewardship. He must have Said Something to my father 
respefting 
THE VIRTUOUS yirlagers, 
35 
respersting me; for as Soon as he went away in the evening, my father called me into, a private room, and ashed me if anything had pasted between me and Belljield on the Subject of love?, — I was greatly shocked at the question; and the more, especially as his countenance was more Serious than usual, I burst into' tears, and, falling on my knees at his, feet, begged he would forgive me; and, conseffed that my heart had entertained a partiality for Belljield, and that, from a letter I hast received from him, I had. reason to think it vas mutuah 
He raiscst me from the ground, and with tears in fits eyes Said, My dear girl, don’t dshress your mind; I am “pleasest with the honesty of your open confeshon; and though it may be ra“ “too Soon for you to turn your 
C 6 
y thoughts 
^5 THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
thoughts on a husband, or, however,, on So young a man as Belljteld, I do' “not condemn you, or mean to reprove' “you'for it. You are both at a time of life when the pashom of love will take place in the heart; and as it is ^ unavoidable, it is neither a crime or a’ “fault. If this matter has made too' deep an impreshon to Be removed, T am forr}t for it; however, be com fortedh ad: like a dutiful child, and' you shall have no reason to be diffa -- tissied'with me.” ^ — After Shying this, he left me; and I was So affected witit surprise on this unexpected conversation, that I shreamed out, and' fainted' away as Soon as he retired; • and’ when I reco ^ vered, I found myself Surrounded bv my mother, aunt, and Sister. This circumstance led to a general discovery of the' eaufe; and, f assure you; my aunt behaved 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGSRS, 
haved with uncommon tenderness on the occasion. I retired to my chamber, accompanied by Bdlatnont and my sister, who used every poshble persuasion to have me compose mysels j — but, alas I I was in a dreadful situation of mind. 
What my father Said to Bellfield I know not; but he has now been absent two days; and I am greatly alarmed with the apprehension that my father did not treat what he Said favourably O, Miranda! my distress of mind, at this moment, is Such, that I am truly wretched; and all Bellamont (who behaves like an angel) and my sister can say, does not relieve me. 1 am lost in doubt in endeavouring to account for bellfield.s absence, for I have not received a single line from him; but, indeed. Old Philip is So particular and cautious of 
doing 
3® 
THE virtuoers viei^agrrsv. 
doing wong,. that I am'asraid He wouldii not take a letter in; coming from him, should he attempt to Send one. O why should love be the cause of Such Sorrow as I now, feel?, - My mind is all anarchy and confusion!, 1 am lost in miseryl Dark is the fun, and loathsome is the day I Pray write to me by the return of the post, for your thoughts on; my present situation will be Some comfort to your ashitsted friend, 
Maria Bellamy 
LETTER 
lihb vlsttuovs vlltagerso. 
L E T T E R XX 
The Rev., Mr. Bellfield to Mr. Bellamy, 
Cafiklon, 'duly i, 17s3,. 
Worthy, ir.,., 
situation of life, in which chance and circumstance have placed me, ever gave me the dreadful uneafmefs of niind I now Suffer. O Sir, L am embarrassed beyond the powers of description,, the folly and imprudence of my fon, 
who' 
40 the virtuous villagers 
who has informed me of having endeavoured to gain the love of your fair daughter. I am shocked at the idea of his ingratitude to So noble a benefactor; and I tremble while I write. What arrogance and presumption, for one So humble, to aspire .to Such greatness!' Be assured, most Worthy Sir, I have not been privy to the affair. I have treated it with the indignation and abhorrence it merits the moment I was acquainted of it. And though 1 most humbly Solicit you to pardon the juvenile indiscretion of my Son, I shall think it my duty to punish his crime with the stridtest Severity of parental power. If he knows not who he is, it is time he was taught It. I declare, on the word of a Christian, this is the first crime I ever knew him commit: may Heaven grant it be the ■last. Hitherto he has been obedient and 
virtuous; 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 4! 
virtuous j but this action obliterates all his former goodness. This apostasy from generous gratitude, and humble’ virtucj will, I fear, brand him with endless disgrace — I have so ishid him to approach your house again; being content that he shall relinquish the benefits you So generousty meant to confer upon him father than violate the laws of hospitality and Sriendship. — I have interrogated my Son, in the stridsest manner, as to the nature of his design, and cannot discover even the shadow of a base intention against your daughter’s innocence. His crime is not of So black a complexion; and though highly reprehensible, I am persuaded it had its rise from the im pulse os simple nature, wholly divested of licentiousness. This is Some comfort to me; and this, I trust, will incline you to forgive what, I am persuaded, you 
never 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
ncvercan forget. — 1 am, with tst e greatest’ refpe<^t and reverence Sor all your‘vin tus, most Worthy tsir,; 
Your dutisui. 
'^, Humble Servant;. 
t' ’ ' ' ' 
• tsomaj eaufibi, ®, 
LETTER 
the virtuous VILLAGIRS* 
43^ 
LET E R XXL 
Bellamy to The Rev. Mr. 
bell.fi ELU. 
^jvdj if I 
Reverih© Sir, - 
I Admire the humility of your letter beyond all expressionjsheeause humility Seldom marks the character of the clergy. I reverence the honesty of your Sentiments, because few prefer integrity tc interest. I am Sorry your son’s conduct should give you uneafiness, for i declare it has not had that effecfl: with me. He has been guilty of doing what 
youi 
44 
THE vlrtvors VILLAGERS, 
you and I have done before him. His crime is great indeed; for he has given way to'the irresistible infiuence of the first passion of the Soul, and has ventured, in the ssower of youth, to be in love wsith a good young woman, nearly of his own age. You Say you are Jhocked at the idea of his ingratitude \ now I think he has shown a contrary disposition by choosing my daughter for the object of his love. His arrogance and prefumpticn is rather general than singular, because it is natural with most men to love the fair Sex. You assure me you have not been privy to the affair: I will take your word for it; though it is not much to your credit that you have not, for it is a part of your duty, as a divine, to encourage honourable love, and promote holy matrimony. If you punish your Son for doing what he has done, you 
will 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 45 
will oblige me to relinquish the good opinion 1 now entertain of you, and I shall think you more culpable Than he is. If he knows not who he is at present, I presume he will shortly know me for his father. I rejoice exceedingly, that the Jirft crime he ever committed is, his love of my daughter; and I Say with you, vtay Heaven grant it he the laf. What right you have to forbid my steward to attend on me to prosecute my business, I cannot readily conceive, but, in doing this, 1 thipk you, instead of your Son, violate the laws of hospitality and friendship— — / interrogated my daughter, in the jiriftejl manner, as to the nature of her deftgn, and I cannot discover even the shadow of a hase intention againji your fords innocence, beyond that of wishing to be married to him; and 1 am persuaded this had its rise from the impiilfe 
of 
4^ THE vtrtuous VILLAGERS 
of Jimpk nature, wholly divejted cf. Iken -- tioujnefs. 'Phis is some comfort io me ^ and this, I triifi., will incline you to pygive my daughter for being in love, with your Son, which I am Satisfied she is. If you do this, I shall most readily forgive your Son; though 1 astiire you, if he marries my daughter, and uses her welli, I shall ne’oer forget him while I have life.. 
I hope you will pardon me for making myself merry with your letter.' You have eonsidered the matter in too Serious a light; and, from your humility, have Suffered the integrity of your heart to condemn that as a crime, which you 'ought to commend as a virtue, I do not want to part with my daughter; yet, I have no obje.diion to give her to a wmrthy young man; and as wealth 
has 
THE VIRTVOUS VILLAGERS. 4^ 
ihas now no attr anions for me, the want ►of it in a son in Jaw shaii not create a difficulty, provided he possesses a good understanding, and a virtuous disposition. — Your Son is rather too young Sot marisiage :; but if the happinefeof him and my daughter depends ..upon theit being united, 1 shall readily consent to it, if it meets vsith your coitcurrence; I have little doubt but he will conduct: himself through life with ntanly dignity : for he is a youth of bright parts; and he has a noble exaniple of moral condikst from you.' — Do not let your fears, or your humility, lead you to losc “sight of your merit and virtue, for these have raised you very high in my opinion and esteem. It is not wealth alone that can give, reputation to human nature The different stations of mankind, from the petifant to the monarch, have little 
.claim 
4 THE virttlotrs VILLACERS. 
claim Co particular distindfion without the ornament of moral virtue. 
Do not distress your own, or your fon’s mind, with an opinion that he has done wrong to indulge a love for my daughter. Love is an inevitable passion, and therefore the indination is not in the power os the wdll; for it instils itself into the heart by imperceptible communications, and continues dormant till its influence acquires Susticient strength to predominate over every other 
<^esire. -- -1 entreat you to let your Son 
return to the bussness os his stewardship, and to his happiness, if it centres in being with my daughter. I promise you, be shall not marry her withpur your knowledge; and when he does So, I hope it will be wsith your hearty approbation. 
You 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
49 
You will, I hope, pardon me when t tell you, that your own native modesty prevents your viewing your Son in the amiable light he is Seen by every one else— — has received a learned and virtuous education; in the acquisition of which, it is evident, he has been assisted by a strong genius, an adrive diligence, and the powersul efforts of a well dis posed mind. He is now at an age when enterprise and hope press him forward with irresistible ardour towards exaltation, and his couragio will carry him through to fuccess. You must not wonder, Then, that his first attempt to Soar above the shadow of your wing, should be marked with Some striking design. He has shown great Skill, I think, for So young a praditioner, by uniting love and interest into one point; for I apprehend the young rogue not only means to steal vol. 11. P my 
5® 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAOERS, 
my daughter, but intends to lighten the weight of my purse, by expecting to have a marriage portion with her. You ought to admire bis dexterity, and consider his ambition as a quality natural to a young mind. But you have been contented, through life, to let laborious; ndustry Supply your wants. You have modestly checked the desires, of emir nence, and have deprived yourself of the rewards due to merit, under the general idea, that the wishes of mankind are more numerous than their attainments, i do not condemn your conduct, as you are a divine; but it is not for the interests of fcciety that all men should ad as you have done. You have not aspired to what the world calls greatness; yet vou might have shared much higher than you have without either ambition L vanity. I am of opinion your mo 2 destv 
THE VIRTUOUS vixlaoers. 
desty and prudence would not be destroyed by astluence, and that your wis dom would let you taste the in Spiring cup of Fortune, without danger of inebriation. Take courage. Sir, and make a trial; you are the Hooker of the present time; and you must not languish in old age for those wants the industry of yostr youth Supplied you with. I will have mu relinquish the indolence of ymur present contentment, and embrace the secu nty of future advantage, by accepting the vicarage in my gift, vacant by the death of the late incumbent; and I request that the first adt of your ministry, after your indudlion, may be to marry my eldest daughter to Mr. Bellamont I am, Reverend Sir, most sincerely. 
Yours, 
- Benjamin Bellamv. 
.D 2 
LETTER 

THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
LETTER XXII 
The Rev. Mr. Bellfield to Mr Bellamy. 
Ci'jikton, July 3, 1783^ Most respected .Sir, 
I Have received the honour os your noble letter, and I consess, that the obligations you mean to conser on my Son, rather distress my mind than give it pleasure, because I Sear he may not conduct himself as he ought amidst Such Sudden and unmerited prosperiry; for, Srom what I have Seen of human nature, 
I Sub 
THE VIRTWOUS VILLAGERS. 
53 
I Subscribe to the observation of a great writer, who siiys, “that Sew men are “made better by affluence or exaltation; “and that the powers of the mind, when they are unbound and expanded by' the Sun shine of felicity, more Sre ‘‘ quently luxuriate into follies, than “blossom into goodness.” “prosperity is too apt to obstrcdt the inlets to self knowledge, which is the happy preservative against indiscretion. It is Seldom success in life will permit reason to keep guard over the imagination, without which, there is little Security that we shall consider the constant pursuit of virtue as the highest excellence, though it ought to be made the principal employment of our lives. — At present 1 think I may assert, with the strictest truth, that my son’s principles are untainted; and as I have constantly informed him, that D 3 the 
54 tiile VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS 
the pleasures of contemplation and virtue are far preferable to tliose of the lenses, it is my hope that they will continue So. His gratitude to you, Sir, for your unbounded goodness, will, I trust, be the principal security of this point. 
1 hope he will know, that industry andl caution are necessary to the Support of reputation. 'That distant and lasting felicity is only to be Secured by the sor bearance of present gratisi cations. That the best advantages arising Srom hope are .acquired by wisdom and Sortitude,. That time will be his most valuable estate, because the labours of industry will Supply all his w' ants. That the importance of friendship is best known by studying the qualities requisite to form, and establisti it, and the measures necef siiry to maintain aiitl continue it. That 
rcsolutioni 
thii VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
55 
resolution and firmness of mind must constantly be preserved for the cultivation and increase of virtue; and that the only certain direction to happiness, is to have a steady regard to the lustre of moral and religious truth, as the best means os obtaining the confidence of divine favour. 
O, most worthy Sir, I will use my utmost endeavours, that it shall be the study of my son’s life to acknowledge your great goodnes^ to him,, by every aft of condescension and gratitude in his power. But, with all Submishon to you, I think your noble intention of permitting him to marry your daughter, is extending your generosity too far,;, as ic will place him in a situatiob .beyond what, I fear, he will ever merit, and. ia which, I am inclined to think, he will D 4 want 
5^ 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
want judgement to conduct himsels. — However, I most humbly Submit this matter to you; for it would be the highest arrogance in me were I to attempt to interfere; besides I do not think myself capable of forming a just opinion of it; for my mind is greatly embarrassed with hope^and fear on this occasion; and I am Sometimes So lost in the consideration of your beneficence, that I Scarcely can credit the information os my senses. 
With respecst to myself, your liberal opinion honours me too highly. And you appear to think more of my humble situation than I ever thought of it myself; for by accustoming myself to compare my lot with that of mankind in the general, 1 Seldom experience anxiety; and though my station in life has never been exalted, it has been blessed with advantages 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
57 
vantages Sufficient to over balance its in conveniences. Affluence may have its charms and its graces, but adversity affords Some comforts not to be found in the dwellings of prosperity. — I foresaw, in my youth, that the gratifications of sensual pleasures tended to corrupt and debase the mind; on which account I avoided them, and contented myself with the pleasures of contemplation and domestic felicity. I panted not for wealth, because I observed that the arts by which it is geiterally procured, were Seldom rcconcileable with virtue. I never aimed to be rich; yet I have ever avoided distress; and though I have been married upwards of thirty years, have had twenty children, and my yearly income never exceeded eighty pounds, I have, with prudence, found means to provide myself and family with the Cottle 5 yeniencies 
5® THE VIRTVOITS' vileaoelsi 
veniencies and comsorts of sise, without' obligation to any one; So gracioiissy hath Providence been pleased to favour my honest endeavours to live a lise of reputation. Thus circumstanced,. I anv beheld without envy, and I dwell in: Safety, becausb my property is not worth’ invasion. — The great obje«st of my pursuits has been to gain knowledge mysielf,, an d to impart it to others. I confessj Sir, of late years 1 have Suffered Some tmeasiness,, lest the infirmities of old age should oblige me to relax from my labours, .- when I necessarily should be robbed of Some of the comforts I now enjoy. But you, most worthy Sir have rendered those fears vainyou have done away all my anxiety on that head; and, with god like beneficence, have anchored me in the harbour of leeurity, in. the calm of peace and sunshine of; 
prosperity - 
VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 59 
V 
prosperity. O, great Sir, I want words to thank you as I ought, Sor your liberality to my Son, and Sor the unmerited honour you have conferred upon me, by being graciousty pleased to present me to your vacant vicarage. May the providence of the Almighty bestow length of days and happiness on you,, and yotir virtuous family! And may Infinite Wisdom teach me to conduct myself, as I ought in the station to which you have appointed me, and to behave wdth due submission and gratitude to the only benefactor I ever had during my whole lise! 
It gives me great pleasure, Sir, that the first act os my new office will be signalised by celebrating, a matrimonial 
union iis your family. -- -- -- -1 have the 
D S honour: 
6o THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
honour to remain, most worthy Sir, 
Your dutiful Humble Servant, 
Thomas Bellfield, 
P. S. My Son attends you with this and has my injundtions to Submit himself to your pleasure; and I trust you will find him obedient and faithful. 
letter 
THE Virtuous villagers. 6i 
LETTER XXIIL 
Miss Bellamy to Mrs.. Bellamy, Jun. 
Belle ye, July 3, 1783*. 
Dear Sister, 
YOU now find that everything has turned out as I expected it would respedting Maria and young Belljield^ However, do not chronicle me for a witch. — Here has been sine work about this affair; but all ismow happily Settled, much to the benevolence and honour of our good father, whose soul posteffes 7, most 
62 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
most abundantly the milk of humane kindness Finding, on inquiry, that Maria and Belljield were mutually attached to each other by genuine love, he has consented to their union, on that noble principle which governs all his actions, that the happiness os mankind is Superior to every other consideratbn ir. life. 
Some letters have pasted between Doflor Beiyield and my father on the fubje<st, which do honour to human understanding; and my father has presented the Doeftor to the vicarage,, in order to refeue unprecedented merit from the Shade of obfeurity, and to bestow affluence, in old age; oh a worthy man,, whose life has hitherto been one continued seen of anxious labour. how glorious ishliis ast ofsliberality in my 
father,. 
'THE VIRTUOUS vlleagersi ^ 
Sather, at a time when his own Son, now going to enter into holy orders, might have Succeeded to the vacancy I 
What are the boasted actions of the Alexanders zvidi Cafars of former times, when compared with generosity like this? What are the lawless conquests, and inglorious triumphs, of men excited by ambition, and hurried on by passion, ta plunder and destroy their fellow-creatures, when placed in competition with that influential benevolence which is constantly exerted for the benesit of mankind ?- — My father’s general munii licence is the highest panegyric of private virtue. 
The late vicar was inter’d yesterday; and the bells arc now ringing for the in dudion of the new one, whose amiable 
character. 
$4 the virtuous villagers. 
character is not more generally known to our villagers, than it is universally admired and revered. 
, Young bellfieu came to us again today, and my father appears persedtly Satisfied with the choice Maria has made. My aunt is very partial to him; and she told my father yesterday, she would contribute Something towards establishing a fortune for the young couple, whenever he thought it a proper time for them to be married. 
. beuamoni is busily employed in fitting up our house, having received the furniture he ordered ixovrx London, which, I affure you, is truly elegant, without the glittering glare of gaudiness, or the tristing insignificance os inutility. san dell has displayed a judicious combination 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 65 
tion os genius and judgement, and the moderation of his charges does him honour. 
, Doflor Bellfield dines with us tomorrow;; on Sunday he is to unite me with the object of all my wishes in holy matrimony. O joysul da ' — I desire, madam, when you write again, that I may have no more os your scornsul expressions of child, girl. See. — but that you will consider me on an equal Sooting with yoursels, and treat me as‘ a married woman. Remember, you are in Suture to direct your letters to Mrs. beuatnont at Behidere. O charming Sound! “Mote tuneable than lark t Jhepherd's earp 1 remain as usual, 
Dear Miranda 
Yours, 
Belinda Bellamy. 
LETTER 
€5 
tbs VIRTUOVS VILLAG2RSV 
L E T T E H XXIV 
Mu. brlla!vio^r to Mr. T. beimaisit. 
Bthldire, Julj 9, i78j. 
Dear Tom 
Am now Benedick the married man And O, my friend, every day, every hour, every moment, leads me to behold new beauties, nevr graces, and new perfections in my adorable Benidke. — I have heard much of ccxnj.ugal felicity j but every idea I had formed of it fell short of reality. — There is Something divine in chaste love. It raises the genius,, and improves the heart. It arouses all 
the 
THE VIRTUOUS vlllagersti. Of 
the faculties, and coagitates every noble and refined passion of the Soul. Were the giddy votaries to lawless love capable of knowing the heartffdt Satisfadlion and gratulations of conscience, arising from the’sruition of marriage happiness, they would Soon abandon the noisome paths of licentiousness, and fly to the flowery vale of virtue, where balmy Peace and Sweet Coniientment dvrell But, I am of opkiion, if once we cloth ourselves in the habiliments of vice, the mind becomes So debased, and lost to' cveiy generous and noble idea, that it is too often found impracticable to returm to the habits of virtue. And there appears in human nature Such an aversiorn,. to acknowledge error, even Srom sels conviction, that pride, or obstinacy, prevents reformation and men rush on to 
ruin, ^ 
68 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
ruin, though the dangers of the gulf os licentiousness are open to the view. 
Your sister’s mind is as beautiful as her person : 
Hcrlook^ do argue her perfeitions, 
* ‘ Her words do show her wit incomparable 
I now feel myself different from what I ever was before, having entered on the great business of life with a partner capable of rendering my days happy under any circumstance, or in situation; and I think I may truly say with the poet, 
“Place me, where never Summer breeze Unbinds the'glebe, or warms the trees 3 Where ever louring clouds appear, 
And angry ove deforms th’ inclement year; ‘‘ Love and the nymph (Iiall charm my toils, 
“The nymph, who fvveetly rpeaks, and fvveetly “smiles” ” 
* Henry VI Third Part. 
I 
TH VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 69 
I am pleased and happy with my purchase, It comprehends whatever is requisite in a country Seat for convenience and pleasure; and its vicinity to your father’s house is a pleasing circumstance; for, I affure you, were I not united with him in the 'endearing obligation I am, the cheersulness of his temper, the extent of his understanding, and the noble ness of his mind, would render an intimacy with him truly desirable. 
There are few Such men in the world; for it Seldom happens, where the gifts of Fortune are abundantly bestowed, that they are applied to any but self interested purposes; but he considers wealth of little importance, but in its distribution for the general benefit of Such as want its ashstance. His liberality to Doctor bell field is Sufficient to render his memory 
immortal. 
70 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
immortal. Thirty years has this worthy man laboured in obscurity for a bare maintenance, though possessed of profound erudition, and a universality of rknowledge, that would do honour to the diighest station of life. He was bred at Dxford, where he first took the degree of Master of Arts, and afterwards of Doctor of Divinity; but marrying early in life, he was obliged to accept the only preferment that then offered, which was the humble curacy he possessed when your father first heard of him. 
He preached his first Sermon, as vicar, last Sunday; the design of which was to show, that mutual beneficence is the ■great end of Society. The Subject was treated in a aiasterly manner; and for perspicuity of reasoning, grammatical purity, and elegance of language, it 
would 
THE yirtuovs VILLAGERS. 71 
would have done honour to the metropolitan of the kingdom. — He concluded his discourse with an eulogy on gratitudei in which he introduced a polite acknowledgement of the honour conferred on .him, by his appointment to the station he then held. There was Something singularly beautiful in the delicacy of his expression, astd elegance of his periods; highly ' Superior to the indecent, and fulsome, commonplace language of panegyric— — church was prodigioussy crowded; and it gave me infinite pleasure to observe, that the paisishioners paid every mark of resped: to this great and good man. — We are informed, that his Sermon on Sunday Seshnight is to consist of Some general observations concerning' the marriage station, with an inquiry sin.. to the Sources of those felicities which frequently attend it, where it has, its 
foundation 

*52 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
foundation in virtue. This, we apprehend, is intended in compliment to our recent marriage, which was the first duty he performed in the church after his induction. I consess the Subjedf is extremely interesting, and I expect great pleasure and edification from it. 
By desertion and death the village is cleared of two very troublesome beings: I mean the lawyer and the late vicar. There yet remains one miscreant I do not approve of, and that is the apothecary. This fellow is conspicuousty ignorant in his profession; irritable in his temper; and oppreshve to the poor. — I intend to resume my practice as a physician, not for emolument, but to keep this medi castor in Subjection, and to take care he shall do justice to those whose circumstances will not permit them to subscribe 
to 
THE VIRTUOVS VILLAGERS. 73 
to the farce and imposition of physical fraud. 
The Sovereign contempt in which this mifcreant tnedicajlor (to ' whom I have given the name of Menecrates^) affects to hold the abilities of every person of his profession near him — his vain boasting of Superior skill— — his illiberal treatment of my advice, in Several des pcrate cases which came under my observation, — have led me to inquire into the origin of this man; and I fancy you will not find his memoirs unentertaining. 
He Served part of an apprenticeship to a comtry pra8lhoner; and then went 
* The name of a vain boasting medicaftor of Macedon; who, in a letter to Philip the father of Alexander the Greats compared hiinfdf to Jupiter and altumed his name. 
vol. II E t 
74 thb virtuous villagers, 
to London under an apothecary, known to be inattentive to his business, who closed the Scene os his practice very dishonourably to the world, and Satally for him felt*. — During the time he was at the capital, according to his own confession, he lived a dissipated lise. Under these circumstances, though he entered himsels a pupil at an hospital Sora short time, and attended two eburses of the late Dofior hunted.s lectures; it is highly improbable he improved much srom what he cither Saw or heard. He has, it must be conseffed, a testimonial from a Scottifi doftor, certif)ing, that he was his pupil in midwiser)". lie might; or he might not be his. pupil; for it is well known to the world, that the distresses 
* He embezzled some money entrnfled to his care belonging to a public charity, and afierwards put ah end to his .exiiience by an adl of suicide, 
and 
THE VIRTUOUS vlllagerss 
75 
and rascality of this man Srequently led him to grant testimonials to persons never under his instrudtion, even Sor the humble Sum os half a guinea. And is also known, that he was an unlkilful^’ lawless dabbler in the profeshon; guilty of the most horrid practises; and, as Such, was driven, through the interpos tion of an enraged populace, in the most ignominious • manner, from an hosnital, he kept in Lsndon for the purposes of midwifery, where he exercised the most unwarrantable impositions on the cretht ■ lous and the neceshtcus, and commitvti cruelties shocking to human nature. 
That you may clearly understand tlst.s matter, it will be neceiiary for me. L inform you, that most of this scorifo d(?5'orv patients were young women, o'" happily circumstanced, who wcnctr^ I E 2 hoshi'ai 
76 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
hospital (as he called it) for a temporary retirement; few of whom did well under his unikilful, or inattentive management. And it was observed, that many went there, but few came away, either alive or dead. The populace got to the knowledge of this, and drove the Dofior from his house; after which it was discovered, that the bodies of a considerable number of women, who had been his patients and died there, were clandestinely buried in the cellars belonging to the house, notwithstanding, as was proved, he had received Sums of money from their friends for the proper interment of them 
* The reader may rest assured, that these particulars, however extraordinary they may appear, and the anecdotes related of the person mentioned by the name of Menecrates, are indisputable fasts. 
7 After 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 77 
After the trifling introduction to the knowledge of Surgery, midwisery, and physic, just mentioned, Menecrates returned into the country to Seek his fortune; and had his humility kept pace with his abilities, all might have been well; though it is evident he Sat out on a very slender foundation, and consequently was unequal to the extensive bu siness which the death of three pratstiti oners in the place threw him into. 
An avaricious disposition, and the pride of consequence, led him to grasp at everything that fell in his way; on which account, as he has conseffed, he never allowed himself time either to read or think; without which, I positively affirm, any practitioner in physic (to Say nothing of the other branches) must stand on a very Sandy basis. The E 3 knowledge 
78 THE VIRTUOUS vfllagers. 
knowledee of a rational theory oupht t •precede practice; otherwise it can neither be reeuiar or certain. — To be’able 
O, 
to prepare the Farragos of the shops, and a few i; ofirums used in rash and unwarrantable quackery, as that honest practitioner, the late Dacior Huxham, observes, is a very smah Step towards a proper knowledge in ■this Stupendous Sdenee. A diligent study of the ancients, and a tliorounh aequaintanee with the laws of the animal economy, as rationally delivered by the moderns, shculd be the business of every practitioner. in physic ^ But Some, as he remarks, are more cxpe ditiousty popped into the world; and. witha good stock of vanity and assurance, instead of real knowledge, practice by rotel and prefcisibe at a venture, to the reproach of the profession, and the danger of ibciety. To which let me add, 
that 
'THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 79 
that when .a man has taken time and pains to study the Science, it is his duty to relieve the complaints of his patients with the use of as few medicines as pof sible; 'for unnecessary physic is often produdfive of mischievous conseqnences. To make use glpkty thihgs^ as Menecrdtes terms unnecessary medicines, is a very unwarrantable conduct;; in many cases, that time or opportunity may, be lost which can never be regained, and the life of the patient Sacrificed to the base pursiiits of self intefesh 
It is a painful circumstance to me, my dear lo?n, to’ be under the' necessity of Scrutinising this mifereant’s conduct; but the calls of h'umanitjq and the duty I owe to Society, as a man and’a physr cian, wdri not permit'me to be silent. I declare to God, my hope is, that my in e 4 tcrference 
So 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
terference with this man will be the means of exciting him to study his profession;; reforming his errors; and of convincing him, that while he is consulting his own interest by his practice, the moral and eternal fitness of things requires him to pay Some attention to the good of his fellow-creatures. And happy shall I be if it ever appears that I have been instrumental in producing So laudable an effect. 
He lately attended a tradesman’s daughter, whose case was a violent fleuro peripneumonia, which he mistook for the acute rheumatism. I Saw this patient a few days aster he had attended her; and the proofs of his having mistaken the complaint, and treated it most injudiciousty, were tpo evident to be overlooked. I made Some observations 
on 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 8b 
on the case; and, with the utmost ten derness to him, recommended a different mode of treating it from that he had pursued; for I clearly Saw he had paid his attention (if any attention he did pay) to the effesl, and not to the cause; but he, with an air of contempt, natural to the pride of self conceit, paid little attention to what I Said, though he might then have corredied his error, and availed himself of my remarks. Though he had evidently trifled Several days away at the time I first Saw the patient, I was Sensible it was not then too late to procure relief by bleeding, and I recommended this step to be taken; but he rejected it because the pulse was oppressed Now this evinced how little he knew of his profession: : an oppressed pulse is frequently the conseq.uenee of too great a fulness of blood. This is manifest by E 5, the 
Sz 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
the vibrations of the artery becoming: mo e free and strong after bleeding in these kind of cases, as Huxhatn well observes, and as common experience would have taught him if he had ever attended to it: for when the pulse is oppressed, a load of humours overbear the power of the heart; and hence it is that bleeding is indispensably necessary. — After blundering on for Several days, till a violent delirium took place, and every unpromising Symptom became greatly aggravated, he at last became Sensible of danger; yet he was unwilling to confess his’ error, and too proud to ask for advice. Now, when it could be of no use, he ventured to bleed. What was the con seqnence? The appearance of the blood, on an examination Some time after it was drawn, evidently showed, that had this step been taken at first, it must have, 
thr virtuous villagers. 83 
proved of the utmost Service. — In the midst of his perplexity, he applied a blister to the region of the stomach; but had he been Sensible of the true state of his patient at that time, he would have known that the opportunity was. past for epispastics to be of Service. The event proved this; Sor the blister never operated. — In a short time after, the inflammatory Symptoms abated; the delirium ceased; and the patient became Sensible and composed. these circumstances led this phyfical idiot to imagine (touse his own words), that “the fever “would intermits In con Sequence of this strange idea, he left his patient to attend on a public dinner; but being of opinion that the barjz might be administered towards the evening, he gave directions to his assistant accordingly. However, the patient had been dying E 6 many 
84 the virtuous villagers. 
many hours before he came to this singular resolution, as he ought to have known, and expired under the painsul and horrible circumstance of Suffocation, about two hours after the time that he had proposed the bark to be administered. Thus fell a young lady, in the prime of life, a Sacrifice to phyfical ignorancel — I shall Say no more of this matter at pre. Sent, as I propose to exhibit this and Some other cases, with the extraordinary conduct: of Menecrates, and Some general observations, before the members of the. Royal College of Phyjldans. 
In the remarkable cafe of a farmer in the neighbourhood, I recommended the free use of mujk, ^ which, 1 was per suaded, would have given the man a chance for his life; but Menecrates rejected my advice; and observed, Mujk 
was 
it 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
vjas too dear an article to he used in ** countrv PRACTICE," — It was not administered; and the man died. I do not pretend positively to Say his hse might have been Saved is my advice had been Sol lowed; but the experiment ought to have been tried. To refuse a patient a medicine on account of expense, wshen lise is at stake, is a conduct too shocking Sor animadversion. 
Some time since, a poor labouring man of the village lay in a dangerous situation wsith a stow nervous fever, and metres were got to the last state. me necrates was called in, and pronounced it a lost case. I imagine he thought the man’s situation in life too humble to command his attention; or he thought his death might be a refiedsion on his physical credit For Some Such reason as 
this 
86 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
this he was glad to consign the man to my care. 
The cafe, I consess, was an unpromifi ing one; but not So desperate as to be given up. He either did not understand the pulse, or he did not pay Sufficient attention to it, or he would not have made the fuss he did about it; Sor, by the by, the state and variations of the pulse were not the worst of the attending Symptoms. I undertook the care of this patient, and paid him every necessary attention. I was not, like Menecrates, much alari^ed at this cafe, because I did not perceive any great impediment to fuccess. He once or twice looked on, and as often pronounced, that the man would ^‘jlip through my fingers V for this was his expression, I was perfe(ffly conversant with the complaint t^nd, consequently, - 
no 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 8/ 
no stranger to the attending Symptoms and effeois. I took the man’s mode of living and labour, with the antecedent and present season of the year, into consideration. I Saw him often, in order to attend to the variety of the Symptoms, and the difference of his pulse at different periods; and by sthese means I was not at a loss how to proceed with Safety. On the last visit Menecrates condescended to make, he still held fast his first opinion, that he would Jlip through my fingerbut I then knew better; for I had brought matters to So favourable a crisis, I did not despair of my patient, and So I told him. This did not sit easy with himfor I perceived I had stepped beyond the narrow boundaries of his physical knowledge, and hence ywas offended. Or perhaps the catalogue of my preferiptions was not extended in 
2. p roportion, 
88 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
proportion to the magnitude of the cafe, — True it is, I prescribed with a Sparing hand; not alone in consequence of the man’s circumstances, but because 1 well knew that much was to be done, in his case, with what I may with propriety term kitchen phyjick; viz. wine, wine and mustard wheys, weak broths, c;; which, as Httxhatn observes (who most admirably describes the nervous fever, and the methods of treating it), without any more pompous apparatus, are not contemptible medicines for the rich,, as well as for the poor, in these kind of cafes. For they gently stimulate the torpid vessels, and raise the oscillatory powers 5 they attenuate the humours, and dilute them; and by these means promote Salutary Sweats, which Soon carry off the erethism. This, Says he, is hippocraiic phyjtc; and I am Sure it is as 
rational 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
89 
rational and well founded as any of the modern. 
I acquainted the man’s master’s family of the neceshty there was for his having these things; to which, highly to the honour of their humanity, they most liberally Subscribed, and Supplied him in abundance; and that good lady, Mrs. Lupus the firstborn daughter of Benevolence, stretched forth her ever willing hand to his assistance. — The bounty of these worthies was used under my direction, with Such medicines as were only absolutely necejfary. I was fortunate in my endeavours; and the Satisfaction of my heart, in being the happy instrument of restoring an almost dying man to his wife and children, amply rewarded my anxiety and labour; and it is but just I acknowledge, that his gratitude did him 
as 
90 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
as much honour, as his cure did me credit. 
I shall Set out for Oxford tomorrow,, order to be present at the ordination of your brother; who will then quit the university, and return to Bellevue— — Sather was yesterday So Sortunate as to purchase, on very moderate terms, the perpetual advowson os a redtory in the neighbourhood, of the yearly value of Seven hundred pounds; the present incumbent is upwards of eighty years of age; and being in a bad state of health, there is a chance of its Soon becoming vacant; So that, hereafter, if your brother out lives Poflor Bellfield, he will have upwards of one thousand pounds a year in church preferment, exclusive of his present private fortune left by your uncle, or what he 
may 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 9.1 
may have at your father’s death. I understand your fatiier consulted your brother before he presented Doctor Btilfield to the vicarage, who, much to his honour, generousty aequiefced with your iather’s wisiies to provide for So worthy a man. 
I propose to make a present of an organ for our parish church, and have Sent a commission for that purpose to'gray, the ingenious pupil of the celebrated Crangy of famous memory. — I have drawn a bill on you, in favour of Mr. Sandell, for the elegant furniture he Sent me Sor Behidere; and I beg you wilt present my best respedts to shim for his strict attention to my orders, and the singular expedition he used in Sending me what I wrote for. 
Your 
92 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
Your sister informed your wife of your aunt’s intention to draw her purse strings in favour of young Bellfield whenever a match takes place between him and Maria; and yesterday, I affure you, she was So generous as to Send dobor .Bellfield a present of a banknote for one hundred pounds, under the idea that money might be a welcome offering to him on Settling his affairs at Cajikton, 
I remain, most sincerely, 
Yours, 
William Bellamont; 
LETTER 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 9^ 
LETTER XXV 
Mrs. Bellamy Jun. to Mrs Bella 
MONT. 
London, July 13, 1783. 
JOY, peace, happiness, and never ending love to my amiable sister Miranda Bellamont, — Your brother and myself received the joyful notice of your marriage with heartfelt rapture; and we most devoutly wish you every felicity this world can afford. — We read with astonishment and admiration the accounts of our father’s noble conduct to Doffor Bellfield and his Son i and we rejoice 
greatly 
94 the, virtuous villagers. 
greatly that marid.s mind is made happy. Your aunt’s behaviour and generosity has Sealed her peace with me for ever; and I shall stencesorward entertain a better opinion os her than I once did. — IS Doctor beufield had been a single gentleman, I should have been inclined to believe her liberality to him was founded on interested views, and that the good lady had been inspired by love in her old age; but, as it is clearly otherwise, I shall Sreely bestow on her all due praistr. 
But, bless me! I had forgot your wish not to be treated as a young girl; So, dear Mrs bellaiugnt, I hope Mr. bella 7nont is in j^jcrfedt good health. Upon my word. Madam, your spouse is a very Sensible gentleman; and writes very prettily on matisimonial felicity; chaste love;; virtue' and vice; and all that. 
But 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 95 
But whatever his other qualifications may be, this I am assured of, he possesses a generous mind, and an honest heart; and these, in rny opinion, are of more real importance than a competent understanding. ■ 
I wish I could be with you to hear Doflor bellfield.s matrinionial Sermon. It would be a high treat to me. His amiable character must add to the weight of his arguments; for certain it is, the cooperation of example and precept are very powerful. 
Your brother Benjamin, I hope, will be a shinino; ornament to the ehurch. I suppose you will Soon have a Specimen of his oratory after his return from the university. I admire his liberality in. readily consenting that your father should 
present 
■^6 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
present dosior Bellfield to the vicarage t it does him the highest credit; and he is justly rewarded for it by the re<5tory that is purchased Sor him. 
I remain, most truly. 
Yours, 
'Miranda Bellamy. 
r. 
LETTER 
VIRTUOUS VIITAGERS, 
97 
LETTER XXVI 
Mr. Bellamont to Mr. T. Bellamy. 
Belvldergf July 21, ijsj. 
Dear Tom,.. „ 
.DUR brother is now at Belle vue^ I was present at his ordination, aiid a joyfiil witness of the high respect.. to him by Some of the heads of the university on his quitting college. You may be assured, this gave me infinite pleasure, as every other circumstance always will which tends to the felicity of your family. 
vol. II 
dcsfor 
^8 THE VIRTUOUS' VILLAGERS. 
Doff or Bellfeld honoured us yesterday With the Sermon I mentioned. Upon the whole, it was one of the most pleas ing discourses I ever heard Srora the pulpit; and did infinite credit to his understanding, and the feelings os his heart for the happiness of others, — I took the liberty to thank him for it, and to request the favour that I might read it, on which he most politely begged me to accept of it. 
Such discourses, on Subjects immediately interesting to mankind in general, are of more real importance than ail the philosophy of the Schools. The minds of men not accustomed to observation and restedtion are naturally full of con fused ideas respedting moral truths, which are often, understood but faintly, and therefore nothing can please more 
than 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 99 
than when any os these ideas are presented to them by judgement and wisdom, well illustrated, and placed in a clear point os view. For though the foundations of human happiness and misery, all the Springs and Sources of our affections, are, in the main, the Same, and common to all mankind; yet their images must vary according to the different stations in which they are placed.. 
The fubjedf of this Sermon is, as I mentioned in my last, an inquiry into the Sources of those felicities which attend the marriage station, where it - has its foundation in virtue. — The whole is in a florid, figurative style; possessing great perspicuity of thought and reasoning; elegant conciseness; energy of ex preshon; and nobleness of Sublimity. He concludes with an address to the F z married 
100 THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
married part of his audience, which is as Sollows: 
A thousand pleasing expedations ^ays he) Swarm in the fancy of lovers before marriage, which can never be gratified when it takes place, without an unremitting endeavour to excite mutual complacency; a constant study to steal upon the affections of each other; and a disposition of the heart to encourage reciprocal sondness and friendship. 
“When Hymen joins the hands, let both agree, “To vow eternal love and amity.” 
“sweetness os discourse and manners, ‘‘ Sreedom and affability; should be stridly observed; Sor these are no in considerable ingredients to love and friendship. — By all means avoid Sadness 

THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 101 
nessand Severity on every occasion, Sor it is the most beautiful thing in though world So to mingle serioufness with “good-humour, that the one may not sink into melancholy, nor the other isise up into w’’antonness. And have it always in remembrance, that what ever infelicities, or Sufferings, this state may accidentally have, they will ** always yield to the remedies love, friendship, or reason, is capable os ad ministering. Mutual esteem and Sond complacency Seldom fail to Solten the Solicitudes of life. — Study new arts of “' bestowing; mutual pleasure, as it is of the utmost importance to conjugal southeast iicity; Sor all enjoyment derives its agreeableness Srorn novelty; and there ’ Sore it is the highest wisdom to encou rap e and cultivate it. — Where there iso 
f 
the greatest and most honourable loves 
3 k 
102 THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
“it is Sometimes better to be joined by “death, than Separated by lise. How pleasing must it be to hear a fond huf “band declare, in the words of Terence, 
• -- -- -- -- “I never will forsake her. 
Though all mankind with haste pursue my “fondness“ 
“wilh’d for her, and have her; we agree “In tempers; and I here fh; ike hands wdih all “That would foment difi'entions to divide us; *‘ fr nought but death shall snatch her from “my arms.’* 
It must be granted, that the married “have desires, Sears, vexations, and mer “‘riments, peculiar to themselves. Cares “which the single cannot feel; plea“ “which they cannot participate; 
and sensations which they cannot un^ “derstandi — The endearments of pro“ “are Secrets only known to pa“ “Methinks I hear Some happy 
“father 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
father Say, 
103 
• “Set before my face 
“My seven bright daughters, and my seven lov’d fons, 
“Their hu(bands, and their wives, and alk me then 
“To what attractive Source I owe my joy *.’* 
“To conclude, let virtue concur with pleasure, that your gratifications may discriminate themselves from vicious “indulgences. When lawless pleasures “gain an ascendency over the mind, the “greatest virtues necessarily fall. Mar“ “is a noble enterprise, if it is pro“ “with virtue. Bear this in mind “yourselves, and teach it to your chil “drcn, that love governed by tempcr ance may be the ambition of the riling generation.” 
The tvhole Sermon is full of the most pleasing:, noble, and moral Sentiments. 
* ovid’s Metamorphoses. 
F 4 Surely 
104 the virtuous Villagers 
Surely nothing can afford more real pleasure than accurate and familiar, inquiries into Such interesting Subjects as the business of this discourse; for we attend with Secret complacence to ideas similar to those of our own minds; and that man must be as void of sense as of virtue, who does not feel in hinifelf the liron; est emotions of admiration and pleasure, when he hears such beautiful fcntlmcnts, exprdfed with ail the graceful powers of elocution r — What subject is there that can better grace the pulpit than the recommendation of chaste love between the sexes, under the dominion of temperance and virtue? For love is the most prevailing pastion of human nature; and the great business of the world, both public and private, is chiefly governed by it. — Doflor beujield pays the stridtest attention to the duties of his 
function; 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. los 
fundfion; but in none more than his preaching; for it appears to be his particular study, to discover the attradtions of virtue, and expose the delusions of vice; to inflame the mind with the love of goodness; to recount the workfi of the Almighty, and to Set forth all his praises. In doing this, he Seems to have the power of inspiring Spiritual ardour; of triumphing, as it were, by divine authority, over the souls of his auditors, and winging them up to heaven. 
Your brother is to favour us with Sermon next Sunday; and I dare Say we shall be highly entertained with it. — As your father has consented to a match between young Bellfield and Maria, I think he has but one family point more to Settle, and that will be the marriage of your brother, who doubtless will Soon be F 5 looking: 
Io THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
looking out for a wife; for the Bellamys have much of the amore abundas m their composition. 
Your father has erected a beautiful stone obeufi, on the centre of the Green where the jubilee was held, on which is the following inscription: 
On Mldfuminer day, 
1783. 
(A Day on vtfhich kind Heaven propitious fmil’d,) Was celebrated, on this (pot, 
A Rural Festival, 
As a triumph of injured innocence Over the oppressions of lawless tyranny. 
This Obelisk was erected by Bekjamin Bellamy, 
Lord of the manor, 
To commemorate the gratitude of his tenants, And to teach posterity That the noblest generosity of the mind Is to acknowledge benefits received. 
Wc 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. IO 
We have just been informed, that Sir Harry Hariofs whole estate is taken in execution, and will shortly be Sold for the benefit of his creditors. He is now 
under arrest in JV -- -- Castle, without 
the hope of obtaining his liberty, his property being insufficient Sor the discharge of his debts. It is a melancholy ressedtion, that a man of family, in whom fortune had liberally placed the means of happiness, should, by the depravity of his mind, come to So inglorious and miserable an end. This man’s fate will show the importance of regulating our conduct by the dictates of wisdom and virtue. — Though your father despises the principles and conduct of the man, he appeared shocked when he heard of his being in prison, without any means of Support, except the common allowance; and generousty Sent young Bells 6 field 
il08 THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
field to F— 
—, orders for his being properly Supplied with every necessary accommodation at his own expense. When he did this, he remarked, that misery, from whatever Source, was in titled to Some compashon, notwithstanding the discharge of the duties of benevolence ought to be regulated and adjusted by the rules of strict: jusiice; because few minds were possessed of Sufficient Sortitude and virtue to resist the Solicitations of folly and vice; and because it required the utmost efforts of resolution and wisdom to conquer the influence of custom. 
The improvements your father has made at Belle vue are astonishing, and do the highest credit to his taste and benevolence; for though it must be confessed, that what he has done 6 greatly 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. IO 
greatly adds to the beauty and Splendour of the whole, his principal motive has been to erpploy the poor. A noble Spe# ^ies of charity. 
I am, most truly. 
Yours, 
William Bellamont. 
LETTER 
no THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
letter XXVII 
Miss Maria Bellamv to Mrs. Bellamy, Jun. 
Belle Vue, duly 26th, 1783. 
Dear Sister, 
The fortunate turn of my affair, respecting bellfid.idy rendered it unnecessary for me to trouble you any more on that head, and theresore I did not ansvver your last kind letter. 
O, my Miranda, I am now happy beyond the power of expreshon. My 
father’s 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. IT 
fathers goodness to me has restored peace to niy troubled mind, and all is now tranquillity and rapture, I See and converse with my beloved Bellfield every day; and I have no wish Sor anything but what his presence can bestow. — Every time he is with me is a pleasing novelty; for I constantly discover new graces, new perfections, and new merits, unobserved before. Beauty os person, elegance os address, delicacy of manners, pleasantry of wit, and Sensibility of understanding, all contend Sor my notice, and lead me into perplexity which to admire most. I am happy to find no declension of his first ardour, or of my influence. On the contrary, both appear to increase daily. But thus, I apprehend, it ever is with virtuous love. 
When 
112 THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS 
When we are together, every objedfe os pleasing contemplation is present, and the soul feels every receptacle of ideas occupied with joysul transport. The faculty of anticipation is busily engaged; and the powers of pleasure are upon the stretch of employment. Our eyes Sparkle with the gaiety of love, and our hearts triumph in the satisfactory hope of future union, undisturbed by Sear or anxiety. As in Sorrow the mind sinks to a level with its condition, So in joy it instantly rises itself to the standard of its felicity. 
I We know on what footing we now meet, and are shortly to be united for life; therefore the arts of design employ none of the moments allotted to enjoyment. We are strangers to the glance of command, or the frown of prohibition : 
TH VIRTVOCS villagers. II ] 
don I neither do we offer the tribute of feigned sighs, or false praises, to each other, though perhaps we may be pleased with the Gentle munnurs of amorous iimi^ Vows of constancy and adoration engage Some of our courting hours, but these arise only from the gradual increase and improvement of affection, which every day becomes more fervent, more refined, and more Satisfactory to the fenses, Our care is to afford each other new delight, and to quicken life by the activity of reciprocal complacency. — As the old Song Says, Sure this is tnuiual love! — What the pleasures of conjugal felicity may be, I cannot Say; yet I think they must exceed all idea, as the prelude to them is So ecstatic. — don’t condemn me for the freedom of my expressions in telling you the transports of my happy mind. I have heard my father 
114 the virtuous villagers. 
there Say, Love is no crime; and, I think, if it is, the whole world must be universally guilty. 
I affure you, my dear Miranda, bell field is a most accomplished young man, and in the poffeshon of one os the best of hearts. I have divested mysels of partial fondness, and have tried him by the rules of reason and truth. 
“He has no faults, or I no faults can spy;; 
is all virtue, or all blindnel's I.’* 
The charms of his person are, doubt less, singularly attradsing; but his hien tal qualifications are os much greater importance. these, I confess, first struck me on the day of the jubilee, which you know, he pasted with us. 
*tv/as not an eye, or cheek, or dealing grace, 
Gr delicate jproportion of the face, 
The 
THE'VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
The fancy warm’d; ’twas no external charm j The beauties of his mind first gave th’ alarm 
He has been educated in the. calm regions of domestic happiness, a stranger to that Succeshon of unimportant pleasures, by wshich the thoughts of most young men of his age are dishpated. He posseffes generous Sentiments; and his mind is elevated to noble enjoyments. He appears to think all the excellencies of the female world centred in me, yet entertains an humble opinion of his own importance, — Of his person I must be Silent, for it beggars all description; but it does not surpass the amiableness of his mind; So that I think I may Say what Shakejpeare Said on another occasion: Lhe hand that hath made him fair, hath “made him good; the goodness that is cheap in heautfy makes beauty brief in 
goodness; 
Il THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
*’ goojdnefs; but grace being the soul cf his‘ complexiorffloau keep the body of it ever 
fair 
Perhaps I shall tyre your patience by dwelling on a Subject no way interesting to you 5 yet, remember, you once thought the object of your wishes the most important Subjedh you could write upon, if you recollect your own partialities, I am persuaded you will pardon iiiine, - 
My Sister Belinda is Superlatively happy. Bellamont adores her, and behaves more like a God than a man, — hly brother Benjamin admires my beufield, ancl has expressed his approbation of my father’s generous intention to make us happy. 
Me, assure for Msafure. 
We 
le VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. Iiy 
We have just received an account Srom j that my lover, as would have 
been, Sir Harry Hariot, has put an end to Isis miserable existence by a horrid ad of Suicide. I shudder at the thought of So impious a crime, which is an offence against the laws of nature and religion; it makes me tremble as I write; therefore, I shall beg leave to conclude myfdf, 
Yours, 
\ 
Most sincerely, 
Maria Bellamy. 
LETTER 
ri THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
LETTER xxviri. 
Mrs. Bell A MONT to Mrs. Bellamy, Jun, 
Beividere, July 28, 17s3. 
idear Miranda, 
Thank you most sincerely for your last Sriendly letter, wherein youffo fervently wish for my felicity in marriage. 
O Sister! what are the joys of courting lovers to connubial happiness! They bear the most distant proportion, and consequently have only a faint similitude 
to 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. II 
to each other, — Bellamont is more than I ever supposed a husband could be; for it is the study of his life to convince me of his fidelity, and to show me every ad: of kindness in his power. His happiness depends on my felicity; and his heart breathes forth emanations of affection whenever we are together. We view each other in the morning with new plea -- Sures, and retire when the day is Spent to partake of fresh delights. Every day increases the cement of our friendship; and Time, as it pastes, takes notice of our growing love. 
“We live but one, and mingle mind with mind, “esteem’s warm pledges from our dear employ, “While words are found too rude to speak our joy* ’’ 
In short, my dear Sister, Bellamont is a noble being; for to a fund of learning, 
• Seymoufs Abelard to Eloifa. 
7 virtue. 
120 THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
virtue, and good sense, is joined good breeding, poiiteness of manners, with Solidity, energy, and greatness of mind. All the accomplishments of mind and person Heaven ever distributed to earthly beings, appear to, centre in him, to form the, complete man. He is animated with a desire to please, and to be pleased; and the ardency of his affetstion for me is Such, that he Sways every wish of my heart. ' ' 
If I attempt to expatiate on the beauty .of his person, I well know you will ridicule it, by Setting up your homely young man in competition; and theresore I shall decline it. And, indeed, it has been well observed, that to define in what beauty consists, would be a difficulty of the highest nature; for as every eye makes its own beauty, fo every mind has 
its 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. it 
its own definition, and of consequence it is imposhble to determine u, poti its perfection. However, Bellamont is the finest figure, and has the most beautiful Sace of any man I ever beheld,, young bell excepted; but he wants time to give him that dignity os manliness the other So eminently possesses. Bellamont is exquisiteness itself: 
“A breath ibore Tweet than all Arabia blows; 
“Lips that excel the ruby and the role; t On these, as bees on fragrant roses play, 
“I could in killes wear my life away 
Perhaps you will Say, I am rather too. luxuriant. — Do fois you please. 1 hold it no crime for a woman to be pleased with her husband, and to consess her love of him. There is Something truly Sublime in affedsion like ours. It is, 
* Sejmoufs Abelard to Eloifa, 
vol. II G “Lovelier 
122 THE VIRTUOUS. VILLAGERS, 
“Lovelier, than light! jhan mafic’s self more “Sweet! 
. .... f ' f"; 
<( Which hever ftiould be ihentioned but with 
“joy i ■ ' 
Whence comes.it’, myaezvi^kmrania, : that as conjugahfelicity is tlib highest of all human enjoyments, wc' hear of fb. many unhappy matrimonial’ engagements } '.carried on'witst deception, or fraud, will doubtless;; in disappointment. Bsic how is it poshble for two piersons, whose Ibbe was mutual before ifiarriage, to become indifferent to each other after it How can tl; ijs happen where the tempers are congenial, where the parties are sin the blooisi of lise, whin the heart is easily fsilceptible of pleasure, and every tender .paffiosi? From wshat causes do matrimonial infe 
* Sejmufs Abelard to eloisa. 
licities 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. i23 
iicities arise? Is it for want of that resolution and firmness of mind which is necessary to the cultivation and increase of virtue? — Does the fault rest Solely with the men? I am afraid not; and yet it is generally Said, that a good hus band makes a good wife. — I am of opinion, that Some are apt to flatter their imaginations with higher hopesj pleasures, and advantages in marriage, than human nature can gratify; and the disappointments they meet with in these respedts produce unhappiness. 
Some men think their wives are to be absolutely subservient to their caprice and arbitrary authority, as beings of an inferior order with themselves. And Some women imagine they have a right to govern, and hold their husbands in captivity, when they consent to join G 2 hands. 
124 VIRTUOUS .VILLAGERS. 
hands. — Some are ignorant of the arts of pleasing; and others are negligent of them after marriage, : because they are So weak, or ib base, as not to think them any longermecestary. But Surely person s adsing upon these principles must either be void of understanding, or kss suscep tible .of virtuous passions. than the rest of mankind. 
Why is attainment followed by neglect, and poffeshon with disgust? Why ' should fruition destroy that affection which gave rise to it? — Here my philosophy is at a stand; I am unable to solve this question; yet I think it must arise from depravity of mind; that, having attained what we wished, the end is answered, and there is no more to be done. Surely much is to be done after marriage to Iiipport happiness. What a 
learned 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 125 
learned writer Says on another Subject, may be justly applied to the married station. “Nothing is ended with honour, which does not conclude better'than it “beganu It is not Sufficient to maintain the first vigour; Sor excellence loses “its effet upon the mind by custom, as light after' a time ceases to dazzle. Admiration must be continued by that ‘miovelty which first produced it; and “how much Soever is given, there must always be reason to imagine that more “remains.” 
I have quoted the common observation already, that a good husband generally makes a good wise and I am So partial to my own Sex, as to believe it is Seldom otherwise;; for, abstracted from love, generosity and gratitude are the charadteristics of the Sex. I agree with G 3 our 
126 THE VIRTUOUS YILLAGER3, 
our judicious enghjb Traveller that the English women are the best wives “under heaven — and shame be on the men who make them bad hushandss* 
Men have generally more advantages from marriage than women; notwithstanding which,, when their point is carried, they Srequently become indifferent, to Say nothing of their infidelities. Women Soon perceive.'this; tranquillity forsakes the breast; doubts embarrass and perplex; neglect depresses, or exaspe rates; till, at last. Sensible of injury, they burst out into clamour, reproach, and denunciation. As the women become more violent, the men generally advance in obstinacy; and when once hostilities commence, they very Seldom are Settled by a lasting or honourable peace. Here, 1 am sorry.to observe it, women Seldom 
* The Rev., Manin Sherlock. 
preserve 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 12^ 
preserve their dignity, or adt with prudence. For it is no uncommon case tor a slighted, or injured wife, to revenge herself upon hersels; an action no provocation whatever can justify. And, Setting its criminality aside, it must prove an insuperable objection to all terms of reconciliation. 
Married women are apt to be too Suddenly impatient under their husbands neglect, or infidelity. It would be prudent if they could conceal their observation'of the one, 'and their knowledge of the other; aild to endeavour to recall ‘the thoughtless, or faithless'fugidve, to love and honour by acts of Supererogation. ' Men are Seldom, at first. So lost in 'hopelcfs degeneracy, as not to perceive 'the inconvenience, or turpitude of pro g 4 - fligacy; 
128 THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
fiigacy; and the married infidel would be frequently reclaimed, if his injured wise could prevail on hersels to meet him with Smiles instead os frowns, and with caresses in the place of reprobation— — grant it is a hard talk for a wise to perform; but, I am persuaded, it would often Succeed if it vrere tried; and it wouldbe highly commendable to make the experiment, should it fail to produce the end desired. — Men are apt to disregard the admonition of their wives, and to be exasperated by reproof, under a fajse idea that they are absolute respedt ing their own conduct; and women claim a right to inspedt into the indiscretions of their husbands, from a belief that they relinquish their free agency when they marry. This opposition of opinions is the common Source os conjugal infelicity, and prevents the elevation 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. I 29 
tion of the mind to virtue and to honour. 
— love— — you would be lopd again f is an anxiom I would have placed in a conspicuous point of view in every married man’s house, as a necessary memento. 
I by no means think our Sex wholly exempt from error in their conduct after marriage; but they would be - Seldom wrong if the men did not lead the way to it. How frequently do we see hus bands, who have sought through many difficulties to obtain their wives, shortly after marriage treat them with unmerited indifference and neglect— — wretches consider the prize of no importance after they have gained the possession of it; and the increasing affedliou of a good woman is most ungeneroussy considered as officious, troublesome, and difgusting. The wife Sees her mistake;.. 
G 5 
1^0 THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
she perceives the deceit and perfidy of all the proseffions and protestations of friendship and love made to her before marriage. Her mind becomes distressed, embittered, and perhaps malignant. She sighs, she complains, she reproves; and, unless she poffeffes uncommon prudence, at last pursues Some method of revenge. — The apostate hstfoand, though Sensible of his ungrateful conduct,, advice, arid Scorns reproof. He Suffers ideas of fresh pleasure from novelty to stash on his‘fancy; he resolves to give a loose to his desires; to revel in new enjoyment; and to release himself Srom the uneasi ness of domestic Squabbles by desertion. But, Surely, to treat a deserving and affectionate wife with the cruelty of neglect and sinsidelity, after she has given him the preference os all other men, by resigning her person, and perhaps her 5 ' fortune. 
THE VIRTUWS 'VILIACERS. 13 I 
fortiahe^ rintb hi’s handsy' 'is a ffpecibs of corruption ’ beyond the gommon degrees of wickediiefs*; Rnd -!■ think sit is greatly to be regretted that our laws Suffer Such wretches to reign with impunity. 
howcmiserable is the situation.of an amialble woman abandoned, withoiit provocation, .by the object of her affection, in whom she had placed all her wishes, all her hopes, and all her Selicity? Few circumstances, if .any, can be more dread ^su'lly distreffing to a delicate and Sensible mind; for. No plants Fan curs thewmnds of Jove. \ 
I will drop this disagreeable Subject,, it is shocking to rcstedion; and I think I may venture to affirm, 'that our kushands will never prove themselves of " G 6 the 
732 THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
the above description. Their minds arc too liberal, and their principles too virtuous, ever to relax into Such base depravity. 
My brother Benjamin favoured us with a Sermon yesterday, and acquitted himself with the highest reputation. He has a Sweet, commanding voice, and a winning address, without either affectation or singularity. The Subject of his discourse was to show, that the constant pursuit of virtue is the highest excellence. His arguments and illustrations were natural and evidential; and his language florid and forcible. In short, he is an eixcellent preacher, and a very amiable young man; and I have no doubt but he will prove an ornament 
to his proseshon. -- -- -- -- 1 think it is full 
time 
TME VIRTUOUS VILIAGERS. 133 
time for me to put an end to this letter, and conclude myself, 
Dear Sister, 
Yours, sincerely, 
Belinda bellamo^t* 
\ 
LETTER 
THS WS wtl/l^aig Biss; 
o: '.An ': r jlc 
h, i?. 
■; (st riizlj 
zr : > -; u. 
r: C 
LETTER : IX. 
., : ■ 
t ■' - ’ ' ’ i.' H 1 S ' - • 
thr Rev. Mr. Bellamy to Mr. T. Bellamy. 
Belle fug, Augujl i, 1783. 
Dear Brother, 
1 Ought to apoligize greatly for not having written to you since 1 quitted Oxford, and came to this place; but I am persuaded you will not think it necessary when I tell you, I have been much engaged in study. 
I 
th virtuous villagers. 

I have now taken the gown, agreeable to my good father’s wishes; and I think myself stridtly bound to pay an unremitting attention to the duties of the character I have assumed. I mean not to be a pedant, or a puritan; but, as much is expedfed' Srom men of my function, I shall endeavour to acquit myself to the Satisfaction of the world, and to merit the esteem of all good mien Opulence shall not sink me into ’ indolence, — Shave no ambition to gratify, but that of living a life of virtue, consistent with the character of a good man, and a divine; and‘ this 1 hope ever to pur Sue with constant ardour. — Nature has Sormed man of an inquisitive genius, and placed him in the world to behold and admire its wonders; not as an idle Spectator, but as a party concerned in its busy Scenes of action, virtue, and glory; 
in 
136 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS 
in which it is the highest wisdom to take care that the pashons of the mind be not exalted above, ^ nor depressed below, the didlates of reason. — Hitherto I have pasted my time with the Greek and Roman writers; whose great examples expand the Soul; whose bright a(stions, and Splendid principles, kindle the most noble passions in the mind. It is now necessary that 1 properly digest what I have read; compare ancient and modern manners; and apply my knowledge to the purposes of general good, consistent with the duties of my station, and the felicity of human life, with a mind uncorrupted by sensuality or ambition. It shall be my study, Lo graft the love of human racev This particularly belongs to my office : and it should, in Some portion, be the study of every man; though, in an unlimited sense, it 
cannot 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
cannot be compatible with the necessary toils and active offices which Providence has assigned to the generality of men. — To refine, dignisy, and exalt the affections; to heighten the sense of humanity; to render the heart susceptible of every Soft impression, for the purposes of uni versal beneficence; and to elevate the mind to an admiration of that Being who is the Wise Author of all that is great and good in the universe; is the true and ultimate business of moral philosophy. Subjects of this nature are infinitely more important to Society, and better become the pulpit than physical contemplations. 
The present incumbent on the living my father lately purchased, is at this time in a dangerous state of illness, from which it is imagined he will not 6 recover; 
139 THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS 
recover; So there is a chance, that will shortly fall into hand. However, I do not wish for the death of any man; my fortune is more..than fushcienti for my wants and wishes:;, and tliereforejl shall not be impatient for the postession of the redtory.i .shall accept of no curacy,, but pursue my studies dosely; and occasionally ease Doctor Bellfieid of a Sermon,. Sor the opportunity of improving my oratory. — I am much delighted with this learned and amiable man.. He is what every divine should beand it gives me the high st pleasure, that my father has rendered his future life comfortable and happy by the certainty Gf jindepen dencc. He and his virtuous family are ornaments to the dignity of human'nature. — Charles Bellfieid, considering his agej is a prodigy of ingenuity aind ek eeuengev - I carpby.: ino ■ measisi wonder at 
^ Maria's 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 139: 
Maria's partiality Sor him; and I applaud my sather’s liberality in consenting to their union. — beuamont and Belinda appear truly happy with each other; and in short, everything here wears the face of rational and uninterrupted happiness but how can it be otherwise, when the government of our family interests and felicities are influenced by the noble examples of our amiable father ^ 
beuamont has been fortunate in purchasing, upon easy terms, the late Sir Harry Hariofs Seat and manor, which is a most valuable acquisition. The house is a very elegant structure, and beautifully situated. He has also purchased all the paintings, and the best of'the furniture; and proposes to remove there as soon as he conveniently can. This ■delightful seat is situated about two miles - • from 
t40 THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
from Bdle vue; but the estate joins my' father’s. — Bellamond has very politely made me an offer of Behddere Sor my residence, in case I marry, till the redtory, on which there is an excellent pcarsonage holise, becomes vacant. I assure you, my dea, r brother, this is a pleasing circumstance to me, and will facilitate my giving into an inclination I have formed X since I came from Oxford. — Doctor beil field eldest daughter is, of all women I ever Saw,, or conversed with, the. woman i most corresponding with'my wishes respecting a wise... She is, without any exaggeration, a pattern, of excellence,, both for beauty of person and amiable ness os disposition... In short, she is a most accomplished, young lady; and I am fully persuaded she is formed by nature Sor domestic happiness. I have mentioned my wish to enter into a matrimonial t 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. IT 
tiimonial alliance with this worthy woman to my father, who generousty de sirved .me to pursue it, is my inclination led that way.; and I have opened the business to dohor beufieidy who made no objection but what arose from his great modesty, respecsting his daughter’s want of fortune, and the humility of her situation, as he styles it. — these are circumstances of no importance to me; for she is worthy or a man in a more exalted station in life than mine. I have the Satisfaction of knowing that her affectionis not engaged; and I am re solved to marry her if she approves of me. ' Should this be the cafe, I shall consider myself as one of fortune’s favourites; for a union with So divine a woman is Superior to every other worldly consideration. 
We 
1 
1^2 
THE VIRTUOUS. VILLAGERS. 
- We hope you and your wise will shortly make a visit to Bellevue ^ my Sather and the whole family are very desirous of Seeing you. 

I remain, dear Brother, 
Most truly, 
Yours., 
B. Bellamy. 
LETTER 
the ■ VIR TVOU S VI LX AGERS. .143 
CT; C‘ | 
L L T T E R XXX 
l!s, 0. ’ i C L 
j)n 
o r rof; 
Mr. Bellamont to Mr. T. Bellamy. 
■ A ^ rt A r r - 
r ‘ - - ^ .1.. ^, 
(..... ^ Behidere, Auguji 7th, 1783.. 
V : ■ J : » J ■ 1 > • '. • ' r -. _ 
Dear. Tom,; 
11 Think we may all here say with mtu L tfi.tiaa iiowa banning is domejiic ease” /” find niyself stappy beyond ex; pg'^a ?< ti^fi, or the, powers of description.; Your sister is the. delight of my heart.? She appears more and more amiable as. I know more of her. Such will ever be the enjoyment of a union with virtue. 
Your 
144 the virtuous villagers. 
Your brother is in the highroad to matrimony, with the prospeft of every felicity Sull in view. We all admire and approve his choice. When this matter and the marriage of Mana is Settled, all your sather’s cares will then be over, and he will Sully enjoy the reward of his goodness. 
I am much pleascd with my new purchase; it is a noble house; and the estate round it is beautisully pid: uresque. I have no wish beyond that happiness I can enjoy in Such a situation with my adorable wife. — I am preparing to remove from Belvidtre. — Charles Bellfield has made a beautisul drawing of Beile^ vue houfe and the estate, which is a very accurate and masterly performance. He is to make a duplicate, which will be Sent as a present to you, who are hereafter 
THE VIRTUOUS VILXAGERS:. i45 
after to enjoy this delightsul place. — Grey writes me word, that he has a very fine organ by him, lately sinifited, .sit for onr church. I have agreed to have it, and have given directions for its being brought down, and erected immediately. Your father has voluntarily offered to Settle a Salary on. an organist, that this, addition to the church shall not be any expense to the parish. How nobly generous! but So is every action of his life! 
• — We are determined to have a good player; for nothing is more disgusting than to hear church music injudiciously performed; or the Solemnity of divine worship disgraced by the wild extravagances of Some organists; who, for want of having rightly considered the duties of their ostice, make no distinction between things Sacred, and things profane. — I am of opinion, with the great addf vol. II H ' fon, 
146 THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
fon^ that the pashons that are excited by ordinary compositions, generally stow from Such silly and absurd occasions, that a man is ashamed to restedt upon them Seriousty; but the Sear, the love, the Sorrow, and the indignation that are awaked in the mind by hymns and anthems, make the heart better, and proceed from Such causes as are altogether reasonable and praiseworthy. plcasure and duty go hand in hand; and the greater our satissadtion is, the greater is our delight. Methinks, ” Says he, “there is Something very laudable in “the custom os a voluntary besore the “first lesson; by this we are supposeff to be prepared for the adnsishon os “those divine truths which we are shortly “to receive. We are then to cast all “worldly regards from our hearts; all tumults within are then becalmed; and 
‘‘ there 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
h7 
there should be nothing near the Soul “but peace and tranquillity. So that “in this short office of praise, the man is raised above himsels, and is almost lost already amidst the joys os futurity.’^ — Certainly the importance of good church music, judicioussy performed, is Sufficiently visible, though it is Seldom Sufficiently attended to. — When the organ is erected, Mr. Belljieldy who is an incomparable player, will officiate as organist, till we can procure. Some person os real merit to undertake the office. 
If WT are So fortunate as to have a good player, we shall now and then be able to make up a little concert; for Mr. Bellfield and myself are no bad performers on the violin, and Dofior bell field plays the violoncello. — For my own part, I must confess, I owe some of the H 2 .happy 
14s THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
happy moments os my life to the pleas ing effecis of music. It is a noble Sch ence, capable of expreshng all the agitations of the soul; of entering into the different sensations of the human heart; and of having an irresistible influence ever the passions of mankind. 
“Thus long ago, 
Ere heaving bellows learn’d to blow. 
While organs yet were mute, 
^imotheus to his breathing Bute, 
And sounding lyre, 
Could swell the soul to rage, or kindle soft dellre 
The powerful effetsts of music over the paffionst have been too long known, 
and 
^ Dryden, 
f Even the ancients ascribe miraculous effects to their music, notwithstanding its great stmplicity when compared with modern mustc. But the learned Dr. Wallii has endeavoured to account for 
the 
THE VIR'TUOVS viltagers. 
and too generally acknowledged, to render 
the farprifing effects aflrif ed to their nutfic; ■ and charges them principally on the novelty of the art, and the hyperboles of the ancient writers. Apt! there is great reafoii to think his opinion right; ■ for, as Malcohn observes, they seem to have beqn entirely unacquainted with harmony, the soul of modern music; in all their explications of the me /bperaj, they mention not a'word of concert, or tli0 harmony of parts. We have inllances, ' indeed, of their joining several voices, or instruments, in consonance;; then there voices, or iniirumtnis,, a'.'o sot fo joined as that each had diihtied and ptoper 'melody, and fo made a succession of various cun eords j but were either unif ns or odfaves in every note; and fo all performed the same individual melody, and copftititted tlte fatne song But the late learned and ingenious Dr. &r.ith^ of Cambridge, ^ in his Harmonics, differs from this opinion. ' “Since “the invention of a temperament, ” says he, “all ancient systems have justly been laid aside, as *‘‘‘ being unfit for the execution of musical compo “■fttions in Several parts. But to conclude from H 3. thence 
*1$0 THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
der it necessary for me to insist further on this head; for the greatest writers 
thence, that the ancients had no music in parts, “would be a weak inference. Because it is much “easier for pratlical musicians to follow the judge“ “cf the ear, which leads naturally to an oc“ “temperament of any disagreeable con cords, than to learn and put in practice the theo ries of philosophers;; also because we arc ** assured from hillory, that experience and necessity did introduce something of a temperament before the reason of it was discovered, and the method and meafare of it reduced to a regular “theory.” It must, however, be granted, that music remained in an. infant Rate, and received but few improvements among the ancients. Nor did it begin to afrive at any degsee of perfection till towards the latter end of the lall century; when some ingejiicus musicians began to display the powers of harmony in their compositions. These, as it Were, enlightened others, and spread abroad a musical enthuhafm. Then it was that musical variety began to extend itself, and (hew he force ad pewer of harmony io the combination of parts, 
and 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. II 
and poets have Sufficiently illustrated this point; particularly Shakespeare miltohy and Congreve. Innumerable pas sages occur in their writings in praise of music, and its effects; but they are So celebrated, that quotation would be ufe less. However, I cannot resist the temptation of giving you a passage from m/7 iops celebrated lallegro, where he considers music as the Sweet Softener of cares. But Milton well understood the powers of Sounds; for he'was a good musician, as well as a great poet; 
“And ever against eating car 
** me in soft Lydian airs; 
“Sooth me with immortal verse“ 
“as the meeting soul may pierce “In notes with many a winding bout ** Of linked sweetness long drawn out, 
** With wanton heed, and giddy cunning, 
** The melting voice through mazes running j “Untwifting all the chains that tie “The hidden soul of harmony.” 
H 4 
The 
r': 2 Till VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
The greatness and. Sublimity of music juiliy entitles it to the character of a divine Science, capable of producing simi]: .ir, effects with poetry. And it is difficult to determine, whether music or poetry requires the greatest powder of ■ imagination, the longer experience, and the more wearied application.. For it .appears equally Surprising, either by - Sounds, or vv’ords, to, inspire ail the various paitions in, the human bre.ash The .musician and the poet may: think alike.;, but they exjiress their thoughts by very different powers. And L am osopinion, that the descriptive power of music is more difficult tiian that os poetry; and ret|uires a stronger faculty os imagery, and a juster manner os conception.. Mr. Addison seemed to think that music cannot be very descriptive; Yet it is cer “tain, ’hays he, “there may be confused 
notions 
% 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS; 
** notions of this nature raised in the imagination, by an artificial compo sition of notes; and we find that great masters in the art, are able Sometimes to Set their hearers in the heat and hurry of a battle, to overcast their minds with melancholy Scenes and apprehensions of deaths and funerals, or to lull them into pleasing dreams of groves and elysiums.” — With Submission to the abilities of this great man, I must remark, that he does not appear to have acquired Sufficient information respecting this Subject, But, pray, has he ’not allowed music to be capable of descriptive powers? — Had he lived to have heard the great haitdevs Oratorios, he would have felt, in the most forcible manner, thedescriptive powers of music for he has there given proofs of it, too numerous to render the matter disputable.. 
H 5 Let 
154 the virtuous villagers. 
Let the choruffes in Israel in Egypt, and the symphony of horror and confujion when Satnfon destroys the Philifiines, be alone instanced, without further enumeration. But I am now Ipeaking of the greatest master of musical effect the wmrld, probably, ever produced; for, as the author of Memoirs of Handel observes, ‘‘ in his “choruffes he is without a rival.” And, Speaking of them in another place, he says,. “in short, there is Such a Sublimity “in many of the effects he has worked up by the combination of instruments “and voices, that they Seem to be rather “the effect of inspiration than of know ledge in music.” 
Perhaps 1 shall tyre you with my observations on a Subject to which you may not have turned your thoughts; and therefore 1 will desist. But as you are a 
votary 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS, 15^ 
votary to love, I think you cannot be insensible to the charms and powers of music; for they appear to have Some connedsion one with the other, " 
I beg my respedts to Mrs, Bellamy; and may your mutual love 
— -- -- - “Long joys afford 
“To th’ honest nuptial bed, and in the wane “Of life, rebate the mifeiies of age 
Yours, most truly, 
William Bellamonp, 
^ vhiup, 
h6 
LETTER 
15-6 THE V 1.RTU0US vielagersi 
LETTER XXXI 
MRS.DELLAMY JUU. tomrs. eelitamo^tiv 
London, Aug. 15, 1783. 
.DEAR Belinda, ^ 
I Ought to have answered your last very entertaining letter Sooner, but I have been much engaged wsith receiving, and returning visits; and, for Some days past, have been Somewshat indis posed. O Belinda! I find mysels in a situation to produce your worthy brother an endearing pledge of our fond love; which vfill, I doubt not, six our affection' '; on 
THE tirtirous VILLAGERS. I 
©11 a firmer basis, If possible, than it now stands. The knowledge of this appears to give joy to your brother’s Soul; it has taught him new modes of contributing to my delight; and increased the power os his generous attachment. It is the study of every hour of relaxation from his business to add to my happiness; and, by Some fond endearment, to convince me of his unalterable affedsion, We taste no Separate pleasures; nor do we wander abroad in Search of enjoyment, being perfectly Satisfied with do^ mestic felicity; and your brother often repeats, with Some degree of heartfelt rapture, the maxim of a celebrated and virtuous writer, that “to be happy at home is the ultimate result of all am *'* the end to which every enter“ “and labour tends, and of which every desire prompts the prosecution.’^ 
Wc 
158 THE virtirous VILLAGERS, 
We have read Mr. Beliamont's letters with infinite fatissaftion, and rejoice greatly to hear os the happy situation of •you and the rest os the family, — Maria has favoured me with a letter Sull of the highest encomiums on Belljield^ who appears to be her soul’s deliglit. But I must tell you, my dear, she has caught the infedhon from you; for Surely nothing can be more extravagant than your account of Belhmont; who is not more than a man, I Suppose!! can anything be more invidious than to Set my charming and delightful fellow up as a soil to display the lustre of your precious gem. ‘‘ Homely young manp forsooth. O Vanity! thy name is B. Bellamonh Madam, I must beg leave to inform you, that your brother is the handsomest man in the parish of St. Stephen Walbroke; and the deputy’s lady of our ward shy?, 
ho 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. i59 
he is a paragon of his Sex. His picture was more admired than any portrait at the Royal Academy; and yet, I assure you, Sir Jofiua has not flattered him; or, in my opinion, done him justice. I fancy, if Bellamonfs picture had been exhibited there ^ would not have been much noticed; for, by the by, at best k would have been but an ordinary piece of business. 1 wish, my dear, you would divest yourself of the Satirical turn of your mind, and learn to be less captious than you are on Some occasions. You have married a man, who, perhaps, is well enough, take him altogether; but really, Belinday your partiality carries you too far, wshen you attempt to Say much about him. Thus much by way of retaliation. 
Your observations, respedting the infelicities 
lo THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
felicities of the marriage station, please me much; and though 1 cannot be So, partial to my own Sex, as to think they are wholly exempt from fault; yet, I am fully persuaded, there would be few bad wives if there were no bad husbands; Women generally marry for love, and men for interest. The former are apt to expect too much from marisiage; and the latter are Seldom disposed to bestow what they ought to do after they have accomplished their wishes. An ungenerous and insincere husband is a wretch of the first magnitude. 
-- -- -- -- - “He ill deserves 
Or love, or pity; friendlel’s let him see “Uneasy, tedious days, defpis’d, forlorn, 
As stain of human race; but may the man “That cheerfully recounts the females praise“ “equal love, and love’s untainted sweet“ 
“with honour.” 
Philips, 
We 
THE, VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. ll 
We hope ■. your brother Benjamin wmf Succeed with nryi Beltfield^ os whom ho Speaks in very exalted terms. There is no reason to doubt that she merits his praise, relpedting her amiable and virtuous disposition, as little less'is to be expected from the daughter os So. great and worthy a - man as her father. — mr<r bellaniond.s last letter, containing Some obfervatiosts on music, afforded us much entertainment; and I .coi^fess I have, frequently experienced the truth of his remarks, relpedling theestecsts of particular musical compositions. I well remember the astonishing choruffes in' the Oratorio of Israel in Egypt; for they not only raised my admiration, shtlt realised, as it were, the plagues orf Egypt, we read of, around me. “Oe Spake, and the locusts came without number, and devoured the fruit of their ground. — He gave ' themr 
l6z THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
them hailstones for rain : sire mingled “with hail ran along upon the ground, ” c— — short, my dear. So great has iiandel studied the descriptivc power of music in these choruffes, you would fancy, were you to hear them, that you was Surrounded by crawling locusts; and not only heard the rattling os hailstones, but Saw them running along upon the ground intermingled wsith fire, as the words relate. — Such wonderful effects are strokes of art, not to be produced by every ordinary genius, 
I remain, most sincerely, 
Yours, ^ 
Miranda Bellami^ 
LETTER 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. i63 
LETTER XXXII 
Mr. Bellamont to Mr. T. Bellamy. 
Behictere, Aug. 25, 1783. 
Dear Tom, 
That you may know how the affairs of your family go on, I take .the liberty of acquainting you, that a matrimonial engagement is Settled between your brother and Miss Belljield, which is to be consummated on the thirtieth of this month; at which time your father has con Tented to the union of ivir. Bellfield and your Sister. — May“ 
“passions souls together bind.’* 
Our 
164 XHE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
Our new organ was erected in the church last week; and yesterday it was opened by Mr. Bellfieldy who did great justice to the instrument, which is a very sine one, and consists os a great variety of beautisul stops. — Your brother read prayers, and dokor Bellfield favoured us with an admirable Sermon bit the powers of music in general, and on the importance of church music in particular. This elegant discourse ‘'was the more pleasing, becastse it was unexpebted. 
After saying much in praise of this divine art, he concluded in the following 'manner. 
The inimitable art of music was ‘‘ considered, by many of the wisest an dents, to have derived its. original from Heaven, as one of the most beneficial 

THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. l 
^ neficial gifts of Divine goodness to mankind, to draw and allure the un taught world into civil Societies; and to Soften and prepare their minds for ‘‘ the reception of wisdom and virtue. —. “It has always been the employment of “this Sublime Science to teach humanity; to civilise nations; to adorn courts; to inspirit armies; to Sweeten ‘‘ and reform the fierce and barbarous pashons; to excite the brave and mag“ “and, above all, to inflame “the pious and devout. — For these rea sons, it has long received the encou “ragement and favour of the greatest, wisest, most heroic, and most religious persons of all ages; and it appears “but reasonable that they should encou “rage this highborn Science, wdiose Souls are more elevated than others, “and Seem most to participate that natural 

l66 THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
‘‘ tural and divine harmony it profcffes to teach. 
CC 
Among the innumerable advantages arising to mankind Srom this wonder sul art, its power of heightening the natural impreshons os religion and humanity is the most important. For, as it has been well observed by an elegant writer, too much reason is there Sor believing, that the interests of religion and humanity are not So strongly guarded, or So firmly Secured, as easily to Spare those Succours, or forego those ashstances, which are administered to them from the elegant arts. They refine and exalt our ideas of pleasure; which, when rightly understood, and properly pursued, is the very end of our existence. They improve and Settle our_.ideas of taste; which, when 
‘‘ founded 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS* l6'j 
founded on Solid and consistent principles, explains the causes, and heigh' ' the effects, of whatever is beau“ “or excellent, whether in the works ‘‘ os creation or in the productions of “■ human Skill. They adorn and em“ “the face of nature; the talents of men they sharpen and invigorate; “the manners they civilise and polish; 
in a word, they Soften the cares of life, “and render its heaviest calamities much ‘‘'more Supportable, by adding to the “number of its innocent enjoyments. 
“We have it from the highest autho “rity, that, anciently, all laws divine “and civil; exhortations to virtue; the “knowledge of divine and human “things; lives and actions of illus“ “persons, were written in verse, “and publicly Sung by a chorus to the 7 “Sound 
a68 THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
“■ Sound of instruments; which was found the most effedlual means to im press morality, and a right sense of duty on the mind. — Among the people who were styled chosen, it was a reli gious art. The Songs os Siony which we have reason to believe were in high repute among the courts of the eastern monarchs, were nothing else but plalms and pieces of poetry that adored or celebrated the Supreme b.c. ing. The greatest conqueror in this holy nation, after the manner of the old Grecian lyrics, did not only com pose the words of his divine odes, but generally Set them to music himself; after which, his works, though they were consecrated to the tabernacle, became the national entertainment, as well as the devotion of his people. 
« The 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 1^9 
The compositions of our best masters, for the Service of the church, when properly performed, tend not a little to purify and exalt our pashons; give “our thoughts a proper turn; and che rish those divine impulses in the Soul, which every one Seels that, has not stisted them by sensual and immode rate pleasures, and Suffered them to prevail over innocence and religion. — ‘‘ Music, wshen thus applied, raises noble hints in the mind of the hearer, and sills it with great conceptions. It strengthens devotion, and advances, praise into rapture. It lengthens out every adt of worship, and produces more lasting and permanent impres fions on the mind, than those which ac“ “any transient form of words that are uttered in the ordinary method of religious worship. Nor can 
vol. II 
I 
f 
we 
I the virtuous villagers. 
(f 
we doubt, as a great writer'well ob“ “that the Sublimest poetry, Softened in the most moving strains of “music, can ever fail of .humbling or ‘‘ exalting the Soul to any pitch of devo tion. Who can hear the terrors of ‘‘ the Lord of Hosts, described in the ‘vmost expreshve melody, without being awed into a veneration } Or who can hear the kind and endearing attributes of a merciful father, and not be Soft enedinto love towards him V 
laffure you, the whole of this discourse had singular merit, and did infinite honour to the understanding and Sensibility of its author. — I must also inform you, that ivfr. Bellfield had Seledted a few good voices out of a fet of singers belonging to the parish, whom he bad in strudted, with no small fuecefs, to perform 
THS vlrtltotts VIL1AGBR3. 17v 
form the hymn os Adam and Eve, taken from Miltorfs Paradise Lost, and beautifully Set to music by the late mrigalliard^ which they executed with a degree of accuracy that would have done credit to more accomplished persormers. This is a justly celebrated performance; and I know not which to admire most, the beautiful Sublimity of the poetry, or the chaste and natural simplicity of the music. The Sormer is too well known and admired to render any comment necef sary; and of the latter I shall only observe, that the composer has paid a most judicious and meritorious attention to the design os the illustrious and Sublime author os the words. I call this delicate and beautisul composition os galliard\s, emphatical music; for it most significantly expresses every idea meant to be 'Conveyed, to the mind by the poet. — — 
I 2 With 
172 THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
With, respedt to the organ, it is a majestic and noble instrument, and will be an everlasting monument oath ingenuity and taste of Grny, the builder. 
About the middle of this week we fiiall have moved all I intend to take from Behidere, to Eariot half when we shall quit it, in order to leave the house entirely to your brother and his lady, who are to take poffeshon of it next Saturday, the day of their nuptials. Mr. Bellfield is to reside at Belle yiie after his marriage, not being provided with a house; and, indeed, I believe it is your sather’s wish to keep him with him for a time; which may be best when the early atze of him and your sister is considered. However, as your father proposes to give Maria a handsome fortune, and your aunt, who is fond of Belifield, means to 
contribute 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. i75 
contribute Something to the young couple, I have resolved not to be out done in generosity; and theresore I shall make them a present of behidere houfei whenever your brother takes poffcshon of his redlory, which is likely to happen Soon, for the death of the present incumbent is hourly expected. 
Great preparations are making at Belle vue, I assure you, against the double wedding day; and your father and mother appear as juvenile and jocund on the occasion, as a young couple os twenty years of age. How pleasing it is to See old age happy; and also to’ behold it divested of its. peculiar infelicities and vicesreceiving pleasure from a review of those transports in others, with which k has Sormerly been delighted; and, as k were, entering a Second time into the I 3 bleshngs 
174 thl VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
blessings of youth. those who are capable, of Supporting this amiable disposition, amidst the natural consequences of old age, are entitled to the highest veneration from the rest of mankind; for it is a very uncommon qualification;, discovering So singular a liberality of principle, as can only have its origin sront a review of a life exerciscd in virtue. Such generous and exalted characters as your father and mother, will most deservedly gain admission to every heart not fortified against affection by malevolence, artifice, or interest. 
The disgraceful conduct of the late Sir Harry Harlot, and the recollection of his last impious act, have given me a disgust to the name of my new Seat; I have therefore rejected that o( hahot hali and have called it Montpelier which it 
well 
THE VIRTUOUS VILBAGER3. 
well deservcs, for the delightsulness of its situation. To this place. I must beg you to dked; the next letter you favour me wkh. 
O lomj ray felicity in your sister is iaexpressihk !' She is truly amiable in every point o view. I knew not half the. blessings of this life till love gave her to my arms.. She improves daily in my estimation from the loveliness of her disposition, and every idea of my soul is V devoted'to her. 
“She invifcs' 
“With respect chase, forbidtliug loose desire“ 
“smiling;; whose heav’nly eye “Sits purest love enthron’d -- -- -- 
In short, Sir, Belinda is superlatively amiable; and is blessed with fo cheerful 
Pbittpu I 4 
and 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLASERS. 
and happy a disposition of mind, that she inspires pleasure, joy, and happiness,. wherever she comes. — According to the judgement of our law, the will of a married woman is Subject to that of her husi band; whence it is Said, she has no will, hutfuiget radiis tnardtiy shines with her hushand’s lustre. ' Be this as k may with others, it is not So with us; for, I assure' you, your sister’s virtues are So transcen dent, and So Superior to what I ever met with in other women, that they alone, exclusive of the endearing obligation of her being my wife, absolutely govern. 7tiy Will, and command my every wish; and, as under these circumstances, I consider myself indebted to her for my felicity, and hence owe my dignity to her, I am persuaded / zuith her lujire. 
We behold each otsher with Secret and 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS 1/7^ 
perfect Satisfadlion; and have no wish beyond what wt have powers to gratify. 
“Here Love his golden (hafts employs, here lights ** His condant lamp, and waves his purple wings, 
“Reigns here, and revels 
If we ever experience any Solieitude, it arrfes from the dread of Separation, by that dissolution to which human nature is decreed. But, while we live, may 
“No chance our tender joy remove, 
• While (lie can please, and I can love f.” 
L am, most truly. 
Yours, 
William Bellamont. 
Milton' -|' 
15 
LETTER 
lys THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS 
LETTER XXXIII 
The Rev. Mr. Bellamy to Mr. T. Bellamy. 
beholdersept. 2, 1784. 
Dear Brother, 
Last Saturday made me one of the happiest of men, by uniting me in marriage with the lovely and amiable Mfe beufield; whose virtues, more than her personal charms, attracted my notice; commanded my respect;; inspired me with love. — Our dear Sister Maria was, at the Same time, made 
happy 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. i79> 
happy in marriage with Mr. Belljield i one of the most extraordinary young men I ever met with. — The ceremony was performed by that worthy divine dobcr bellfield.i but the feelings of his mind, on the occasion, were So great, that he was not able to persorm the office without the frequent interruption os shedding tears. — My Sather, mother, aunt, and Mr. and Mrs. Bellamotit, were present; and I think I may venture to Say, that the virtue of all our minds rendered the ceremony truly awful; as, indeed, i think it ought always to be; for marriage is one of the most important obligations we can enter into; though I arn afraid it is not always considered So. Certain it is, nature excites particular sensations in good minds on occasions like this, which are either not Self, or understood, by those who have no other object 16 in 
lo THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
in view biit the gratification os sensual pleasure; and who never extend their minds to a diffusion of Sociability; a warmth of benevolence; or a distribution of generous passions; but live for themselves alone, and Set virtue at defiance. 
My father has given Marfa ten thousand pounds for her present fortune • half of which only is to be Settled upon her; and my aunt has generousty presented Mr„ Bellfield with five thousand' pounds; fo that he will have a tolerable fortune to begin the world with. And rnv Sather chuses to continue him in his 
j 
stewardship, for V hich he has a handsome allowance, because he judges it most proper for So young a man to have Some engagement to employ his mind, and exclude idleness; which, he Says, is 
the 
THE VIRTUOUS vjillvgers*^ it 
the parent of every evil. This extraordinary adt of generosity of my aunt, ' has pleased us a-11 very muclt; and we view her ilia different light from what we ever did besore. She has, it must be confessed, been a singular charadfer through life; yet, though her Sentiments were never very elevated, or her views extensive, her principles vvere justj.and her intentions virtuous; and though Some, undoubtedly, have more perfections, Scarce any have fewer faults.. 
I have now entered upon the grand business of life, as every man ought to do, by marriage; for without it the true felicity of mankind can never be known. I shall not pleash my mind with the extravagant luxuries of fancy, lest I am led into the pursuit of sensual gratifications; ' but shall resolve to. indulge those pleasures 
isz THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. 
sures only which give lasting Satisfaction to the mind when they are recollected. For what are the false charms of lawless pleasures, to the Soft feelings of humanity, and the durable gratulations of the mind, arising from an indulgence of the domestic and Social affections? these create no reproaches or embarrassments, neither do they stifle those Serious thoughts which tend to prepare us for the Savour of Heaven. 
“Virtue my soul fhalj still embrace; 
“Goodness shall make me great. 
** Who build s upon this steady base“ 
“no event of fate 
I affure you, my dear Brother, I ara Superlatively happy; for I have engaged the affection of a truly amiable and virtuous woman, to whom I have united 
^ Morell. 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. I 83 
myself for lise, by the most endearing of all obligations; and as this engagement had its foundation not only in love, but in virtue, I am persuaded it will be Supported by happiness and honour. “Love prompts to love, and virtue reverence sains 
I have this moment received the news of the death of the incumbent on the redlory my father purchased for me; So I am now fully fixed, and provided with affluence for life. — I shall take poffes sion of the parsonage house, as Soon as convenient, in order to give Mr. Bella mont an opportunity of fulfilling his generous intention of presenting Mr. bell field with Behidere, wshich he informed you he meant to do. This ads of liberality will do him the highest honour,. 
and 
t84 "rhe VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS'. 
and evince his firm at:; achment to thu .general interest of our Samily. 
My father’s generosity to his tenants has been productive of the most happy effects. ‘ Friendship and unanimity urri veistally prevail among them. Industry, health, and contentment, is Seen on every view; and poverty, difease, and dissatis faoiion, dwell no longer in the habitat tions of Virtuous vihagers. Cpulencs is beginning to rear its head, under the dominion of prudence and economy; while moderation and temperance check every indulgence of excess, and “With gentle hand restrain Those who fondly court their bane, 
“One extreme with caution Htunning, 
‘‘ To another blindly running, 
“Kindly teach how blessed are they, 
Who nature’s equal rules obey; 
THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. is 
'■ «« safety ftcer two rocks between, 
, “and prudent, keep the golden mean 
r 
The happiness os Dcffor Kellfield, respecting his own situation, and the Successful fortune of his Son and daughter, has dissipated his fornier anxiety for hiiti felf and them; and by unwrinkling the brow of care, given place to calm contentment and Sweet Serenity. His gratitude, as a man, does him unprecedented honourand his unremitting attention to the duties of his office, as a divine, is So highly exemplary, as to render him not only esteemed, but adored.. 
'Doff or and his lady dined with us at beue vue on our wedding' day; and,, L affure you, the happiness of my father, mother, and the whole family, is not to 
^ Milton.. 
LI 
ls6 THE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS 
be described as it really was.. All around was gay and gladlome; and our Sericity So general, that every eye Sparkled with pleasure, and on every cheek Sat heartfelt Satisfaction, If our transport Suffered any alloy, it was on account of the absence of you and your beloved wife. 
A short time before we withdrew in the evening, my father addressed himself to us in the foliowsing words: 
My dear children, this to me is a joy sul day; for I now hope I have finally Settled the felicity of my family. I have most cheerfully complied with all “your wishes, because they were Sounded on honour and virtue. You have be ea truly obedient to me, and I hope I have been generous and just to you. — ' “Your brother and his amiable wife are 
“not 
THE virtuous villagers. 1s7 
not with us. Were they now here, I think my happiness would be coni’* plete. It was their intention to have joined in the general joy; but your ‘‘ brother has informed me by a letter, that an unavoidable attendance on bu“ “rendered it impossible. Bis ship “is embarked in the ocean of trade ' and it is highly meritorious not to quit “it till he is Safely anchored in the harbour of Security. I applaud his vigi* “lance; and I trust that Providence will begraciousty pleased to crov?ashis industry with suceess. 
I think I have sheltered you all under the shield of virtue; and, therefore, I have nothing to dread in this life, but ** that final Separation from you which is fixed by the unalterable decrees of na ture I for the parting from those who 
are 
r88 THE VIRTUOVS VILLAGERS 
are dear to us, is one of the most dis ^^ treffing calamities the human miiicf “can undergo. But I subscribe to the maxim, ‘ Whatever isis. right 
Permit me to give you a few words of advice before we Separate this night; to vrhich I hope you will pay Some attention in your progress through life. 
Stridtly guard against domestic animosities: — when once these take place, there remains little hope of return to kindness; and they ever insensibly undermine happiness— — give up the blessings of fisicndship and love, lest discontent and hatred reign in their stead— — while you. live, be the protedlors of. injured innocence; and endeavour to teach mankind, by your — “own 
« 
u 
u 
southeast 
C 
ce 
es 
TKE VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS. -189 
own example, the godlike dignity of virtue. — use the gifts os Sortune with caution and prudence, that you always may have Something in store to assist you in unforeseen exigencies, ‘‘ and to indulge your hearts in acts of benevolence. Prodigality should never be countenanced; for it has been Sensibly remarked, that, ‘ he that is extravagant will quickly be poor, and “poverty will enforce dependence, and ‘‘invite corruption; it will almost ak “ways produce a passive compliance “with the whekedners of others; and “there are few wsho do not learn by de“ “to pradtise those crimes which they cease to censure.’ — resolve never to indulge the vice of gaming; for if you are So weak as to hazard your Sor “tune, or happiness, on the chance of cards, or dice, you will voluntarily 
“Seek 
VIRTUOUS VILLAGERS 
Seek your own misery and ruin; and will bear the burden os either, unpi tied and unlamented by those, who, on other occasions, might extend their benevolence towards you. — Never en ‘‘ deavour to free yourselves from ineon venience, or calamity, by dishonour able means; for it will be better to “bear with distress, than to purchase your deliverance by injustice. — Should difficulties and dangers ever Surround you, it will be mur best Security to commit yourselves to the care of omnipotence— — me entreat you, ever to live in the strictest harmony and friendship; never forgetting the obligations you stand in one to another; always Supporting a generous emula tion to goodness and virtue; which ** will extend the boundaries of your “knowledge and happiness. — For the 7 “blessings 
THE virttrous vllilagers. II 
** bleshngs you enjoy in this lise, ^, 
.... “To God return year thanks, 
“As I do iiiine : we al! are to his goodness“ 
“deep; to him be all the praiiie.” 
My dear children — be happy, if “opulence, love, and innocence, can “make you So, And may it she the am“ “of you and your posterity, to add to the number of The Virtuous 
“vl llaoers '!’" 
I remain, most sincerely. 
Your affectionate Brother, 
Benjamin Bellamt. 
FINIS. 
ibooks sold by W. CASS^ 
T. Laura and Augustus; an authentic Story, in a Series of Letters, by a Young Lady. Three Vols. ys. 6d. Sewed. 
NB. The Reviewers Say, This Novel does credit both to the head and heart of the writer; that the characters are common and naturate the situations “probable, affecting, and well conducted: : a production that will both instruct and entertain that class “of readers who delight in works of fancyd* 
2. The Errors of Nature; or the History of Charles Manley; in a Series of Letters. Three Vols, ys. 6d. siewcel, 
3, abelart) to’ Eloisa; a Poetical Epistle, by Mr. Seymour. Price is. 

nt 




... (^€ /\d€vs kit LI 
?K 
3C3f 
VVV5 
i7^y 

VS': i'"^: 5ATN'S^^^ 
• A VV' ■ V 
Cr'// ' ^ ■■*'*. i 'f - ifl f i 
‘ ■. .Scc' 

'•' 1 
i 4 V.; ■ 
'1,; rfi 

in: : -; 

'- 
, > L 
r ■ ■ 
W ri 
1 


