 

TKRVOE.. 
j5 

.Nti". - rv ' ^V4PS it ■ 1,;; • -• ■■■. 
. h: V. ‘•W. -- h 
L - ■' ' ■ ' V' '■' ■; - s ■ ^ r AM Avr 
: if ■.. ' *'■ .■' 



, #; 
isc; 
h'. ri 
h 
lu 
A i 
..??f 
V 4 
■ ij ■ ■ 


> ■ 
( 

X 

'VC'. 
V h' h 
"?v.v » 
'*C 'tf 
TV - 
s ^ 
- S V 
^ r Jr ry jr'c ky 
the 
AMERICAN 
WANDERER, 
THROUGH 
VARIOUS PARTS of EUROPE, 
I N 
A SERIES OF I. ETTERS 
T O 
A LADY, 
(interspersed with a Variety of interesting Anecdotes) 
By a VIRGINIAN. 
Fos fatriuefines, & dulda linquimus arva; 
Nos patriam fugimus: tu, Fityre, lentus in umbra, formofiam refonare daces amarjuida sylvas. Virgil, 
Round the wide world in banishment we roam. 
forc’d from our pleasing fields and native home : 
While ftretch’d at ease, you fing your happy loves; 
And Amaryllis fills the shady groves. Drydsx. 
LONDON; 
Printed FOR J. ROBSON, Bookseller, ii.. Bond Street. 
M DCC LXXXIII 
•ji., ■» 

!. 
TO THE PUBLIC, 
These unstudied travelling (ketches were written, at the request of and for the amusement of a Lady and her friends, during a residence abroad in the years 1776 and 77. 
With unaffected diffidence they are now submitted to the Public. — It is a moot point, whether that hackneyed asi fertion, the Author wrote not for the public eye, ” be a valid apology for the imperfection and inaccuracy incident to human productions — Yet it is Sanctified by usage;; he who now, he fears too rashly, steps out of his private line before the awful tribunal of criticisin. Sensible how much he will need indulgence, hopes it may be admitted in palliation. 
a That 
ivr TO THE PUBLIC. 
That the excuse is founded in fact, he appeals to the intelligent reader, who wsill judge for himself and decide, whether, if these letters weres fabisicated in the closet with a vain view to popular celebrity, the writer would'riot have been less lavish of his panegyric upon a rival nation, more prodigal of his incense to the people by whose fiat his literary reputation must: stand or fall? 
It may be objected, that the fields of France and Switzerland are fo beaten by various descriptions of learned travellers; have been fo reeently trod by the ingenious and ironical Moore, that little worthy of observation is left to be gleaned by their fucceftors, efpecialiy by him who feels Iiirafelf, though ‘a cordial*a mere Tyro in‘fcientee, ’^a'mere; aiqvice in the arts which pollfli *^411 d adorn life. — ‘ But, as "a fishple portrait, '^ flietched by the pencil of genius, prefehts diiferent ideas 
of 
TO THE PUBLIC. V 
df its technical'merit, bros its likeness to the' original, as it is viewed in different yloints of light, * or by moi of dif ferehf degrees of jadgmeht' and taffe^fb the' grand historic picture of fhahkind, though often gazed at, and still more 6fteh described by the cognofeenti, will yet' thto# out new lights and Shades, to every Feholcler‘ of comnaoii Tenie, “vvho contemplates it withstfie honest c!elite Tf extracting pleasure and improvement : — if the present individual has, haply. Seized any new tints, any slight nuances, or gradations of colouring, with which this nch, interesting, and inexhaustible hleau is replete, he is very Sure, that he has, unfeduced by the love of Singularity, So fafcinatiiig to all travellers, delineated them, if not with power, at least with justice and candour. 
With the million the author is lenfible fbnie few Sentiments he has hazarded, 
respect 
a 2 
VI TO THE PUBLIC. 
respecting the French nation, may invidious. — The liberal and judicious, he trusts, will think, with him, that we may allow our gay neighbours a preeminence in the light and pleasing virtues, flowing naturally from their assiduous cultivation of les felites morales, without depreciating the sterling value of the old Englisti national character. — All exile from his native clime, the writer aspires to the philosophic character of a citizen of the world y — if, however, a predilection for any people may be imputed to him, his private history, a slight allusion to which may be discovered in this Series of letters, will prove, beyond a doubt, how fatally he felt it for the Bisitisti nation : he has indeed little apology to offer for his opinions, since he again declares, they were governed by truth— — “truth, to be loved, needs but to be Seen.” 
One 
TO THE PUBLIC. vil 
One merit these letters may be proved to poftefs — They are genuine, and were written, by a traveller, upon the Spot. This circumstance, with the candid, will extenuate their faults. 
It is but too probable, that those who have the happiness to be born with cool' pastions, ever under the control of sober prudence, will condemn many of the writer’s Sentiments, as outre if not reprehensible. — He can only say, that the simple meaning of the word cor respon dence implies effusions from the heart, and letters, though glowing with the pathos of Sentiment, and fancifully arrayed in the gaudy attire of language, if they have not this merit, have no merit at all. The author is a young man, who has not yet had the cares of a family to compose the mind. He was born under vertical sunbeams, which rarefy the imagination and melt the soul 
a 3 to 
vili .TOO THE piublic. 
to a Sublimation unknown, and perhaps unadmired by the chilly natives of humid climes. He is, in Short, replete .with thp flugifton of eiithufiafm, and, with more gallantry than policy, wages eternal war against that very numerous, ycry respectable, very dull, and, of course, impenetrable body of men whose foie merit consists in having cold hearts and cupning .heads. * 
Long since these Letters were written the wisiter has difcqvered, that an inci dent to .which, they .allude, conveys, he owns, without .his having dreamed of it, a species of. moral; which he. has, with pleasure, Seen recently anticipated by the elegant author, Abe .borrows of Wenei\ — Iiisinitely, less masterly in their composition, the Letters whi^h now see the light, have, the .advantage pf embracing the memoirs of real personages, and, therefore, it is presumed, may be held 
up 
TO THE PUBLIC. 
IX 
up a more conspicuous beacon to candid and impetuous youth, than the most Splendid and pathetic dispiay of fictitious distress. -- c..; 
Subject, sto which these Letters perhaps too often allude, is an additional evidence, that, originally, they were not intended for, and would naturally have precluded them from publication, but for, an .event for ever to be deplored — The Lady, for whose amuse ment they were written, ^ uniting almost delicate frame 'to a still more, delicate mind, now steeps with her fathers, leaving the ill-fated Author the poignant recollection to have adored, and to have lost the most amiable of her sex!! 
her memory he infcrlbes this feeble monument of his attachment and her unfading merit — If, unwittingly, he ever offended her while alive, let these literary 
a 4 wreaths. 

TO THE PUBLIC. 
wreaths, shcred to friendoiip, twining around her bier, plead expiation, and let the Sons of Sentiment, “striking their pensive breasts, ” exclaim with him, 
Be the turf ever hallow’d Which pillows her head! ” 
The a n d e r e r. 
THE 
THE 
O N T E N T S. 
Letter I. 
CAUSE of exile — Exiles arranged in their various clajfes — Lhe author under the class of Ovidlus naso — Sketch of his fellow-travellers from London i 
Let. II aion of Dover Cliff — Calais and Dover Antipodes in manners 11 
Let. III A noble ruin — might race between a beautiful Duchess and a learned law Lord, — Pays bas, the European Arabia faelix, 29 Let. IV Lijle — peut maitre — Learned Abbes — Pronunciation of Latin — Cambray, 38 
Let. V St. ^enttm — De Breifac — beautl full English Lady — A French family., 50 
Let. VI St. ^entin — French Lady upon the T on — A woman born in England and bred in France a nonpareil— — female education 
X CONTENTS. 
/ 
cation — Boarding fchoot mtjjes — Society between the Jexes;. a reciprocal Jchool of humanity — Panegyric on old maids., 6 7 
Let. VII hsv. ^entm — Erench "courtjhlp — 
< ^ ' I • V 
Erench air contagious — Erench babies ppute in their cradles — Americans profit and loys in the Wade of gallantry fated — Madame de plefison’j garter— — Improvements in geography^profejfors of kijing, > '75 
Let. VIII "* Dominon place travellers — St. ^eniin deferibed — Its beauty and its ag re mens, 88 
Let. IX Amusements of St. ^entin — Sketch of the charming Mrs. C— — de petit rien ^americaps concert yete cham ^txxei — Maid of the Odks., pp 
Let. X Eanwetl to the belled, beauxj affesy dogfy And cdfs of St. ^tentin, ’ 109 
Let. XI Paris — The genuind. agreeable companion In a piof chaife delineated.a — My friend Chatham— — d’(56il of Paris — Parifan 
beau -- Potter dam cit — His opinion of Paris 
— Th American' C ho fen chaperone to the 
-........... cifs 
C OB T EM r S. 
XI 
CVS daughter — *^IL declares war agamft her ’ ^zig %ag approaches — rall her out~wprks carried — aurd parallel for tried — General dif pofiions for a Jlorni — Siege raised by papa, 
,, .........,. ..i118 
Let. XII Paris— — of Paris and London compared— — walksfa. pious amusement— — manners of a French and English lady — Palais royal — fuilleries — l’o be jajhionably drejfed, and to be happy fynommous at Paris — Foppery con iagious : Red heels a pasite par tout — A philosophic motive for dfefs — Boulevards — fafvu^n. a perp0ual dlflapr at Paris — Receipt to make. Scotland Eadry Land' ' 
Let. XIIL Gallery ofrrubens — tpalais royal — Vanity of deferiptionrr — Raphael — fitiaes Venus — Paintings music— — Gainjhorough^ 
. Reynolds scots -- — Italian musc— — — 
Flemish and Italian fchobl — Guido Reni ^ 
opera rr ballets — Italian comedy -- Garrick 
• — Previllc - — Ecole mi lit air e ■ — - Churches French lady s legs and feet — Hotel Dieu 
* — 'Gallic 

CONTENTS. 
— Gallic and briti/h charity compared — laurfes — French king wafiing the feet of the beggars — Beguine — Corporal Lrim ~ — Receipt to excite love — New theory of phyfc — 
Duchejfe of D -- -- -- -- h hand a panacea., 
142 
Let. XIV Palaces — Why more fuperp in Paris than in London — Umverfal trait in the French character— — ofracifm — ver failles the Montpellier for all nervous complaints incident to the French nobility — Tour Frenchman s being, end and aim — -- Villas — Conversation of Paris 'with London compared Why the Parifan preferable — Litterati of London and Paris — Parifan predilewton for learned men — Palatable bribe to a feholar — Voltaire, Roujfeau and de Berni introduced to a rich London cit — Their reception — Paris an Utopia for the amateurs of Apollo, j6z Let. XV A Frenchman s prominent mental feature — St. Cloud — Verfallies — The moment of a Frenchman s triumph — Naked Venus — Madame Pompadour, her delicacy — Proserpine. 

CONTENTS. 

pine her aj^air — 'Trianon — St, ynhn ^ Rape of Orithia — Trianon private gardens — Le Rot — La Reine — een of England— — — Gobelins., 1 
Let. XVI Retrograde movemenp boulognefur mer — English Baronet on his travels — charac “ter of Sir Harry Hardinhand — horfe racing improved — Tour of Europe performed against time — Sir Harry's observations upon foreign countries — His critique updn deux re nommes — Rencontre with the Venus off tian — hi liberal propoftion — Our parting, 
163 
Let. XVII Sketch of Seymour — Americans second sally— — thought — Peripatetic travelling, why preferable to feel spring ditto — American s efate, why borrowed by his countrymen — Deprecates the wit of mi Lord Anglois — Coup d'ceil of the Boulonnois — Apt flence, a facial charm — Chords in conversation equally as in music— — of travelling topics adapted Ao a pofi road, or a devious path — Odd thought of the Captain of the British Guards — Americms digression— — 

XIV 
C O NORTHEAST N T S. 
Mh modesty wounded by the philofoplolc franv' - iiefs of the French ladies — Flying ftflure of ~ - the'beauties of Europe Ajia, f Africa and America — Paphtan bill of fare fet before Seymour., who falls to — American's false appetite — Why he quitted his country — Grand objesi of his travels — Etiquette of the court of Fez — Eventual nuptials with a maid of honour to an africanpvtncefs, 196 
le t. xviil. Capucin of Montreuil ^irif recollet — Sterne's Peer Lorenzo — Rencontre of an Irish monk with an Englif petw maitre, 212 
Let.. XIX Abbeville, la Pucdle, d.eot ped of -. virgin beauty — Fille de chanibffisenfjnen tal barter^le bon march — t l’nm/ du ' Qafd — Wafiington — Pa a belle Pdifanne et le I 'Mome — ’dhe'wifo'y. t Vfr \ -234 
Let. XX Lhe^ family .of the - M soldier — > 
■ Fontenoy — Amiens ^lhirdp bdttle Pf sham' 
■'. why" indispensable— — 'acquire 
milord Angiois, ^ 246 
Let. XXL Amiens Ldthedral — Chantilly— — 
the flag with the Prince of Condi — 
Hunt 
CON T E N T S. 
XV 
Hunt deicribeti r -- Marquis de Sans Soud., Ahe Winchejitr h'ltjhel of i vrai politesife. An elegant card — Burgundy., amoral drink — An antidote aigalnfi human frailty — Small beer a cutthroat liquid — phcafantfooting — isle d’amour — Chantilly for eft — Night hunt withftamheaus in honour of the King of Denmark, 255 
Let. XXII Coache. dleau, its agremeus — Mademoiselle dlartaux — Seine — Night fcens — Aftronomic reveries — Aurora — Julia, 26^ 
Let. xxlil Vontainbleau -- -- -- Sens, Joigny 
‘ — petit maitre, coquettes, jilts auxerre, 
Dijon, 280 
Let. XXIV Dijon -- -- -- Trial of a lawyer for 
a bagatelle — Civil inftituuons — Public buildings, curioftties, agremens — Chartreuse, 
297 
Tet. XXV Monks of Citeaux -- -- Story of the 
noble Austrian, 310 
Let. XXVI Dole — Beftantfon, ' 323 
jlet. XXVII Befangon deferibed — Its great 
antiquity — Public buildings du Vache — 
'uns of the Holy Ghost— — du Roi ■ — Cha 
XVI 
CONTENTS. 
-- -- Chamars -- -- Its beauty -- -- Marquise de 
St.slmond -- -- River Doube, Leucadian Lakey 
33^ 
Let. XXVIII Marquis d.entragues — Adventures of a Put of claret — Iioly handkerchief — Procejfons -- -- -- Devotees— — de Juffi, -- -- -- -343 
Let, XXIX XXX Nuns and nunneriesy 
361, 
Let. I. II III Foliticaly commercial moraly 
381, 
THE 
AMERICAN 
WANDERER. 
LETTER I. 
MADAM, 
io you I do mysels the honour to address my travelling ideas of men and manners — Such as they are, there is a propriety in dedicating them to you; for you are the cause that I travel. — In the various climes through which it is my fate to wander, if, haply, I observe any object, any incident worthy your attention, I will transport it an offering to the Slirine of british beauty — 
A I Shall 
^ AMERICAN 
I shall feel a femblanee of happinefi while I fix, for even a fleeting hour, the Sweetest: eyes that illumine the banks of the Thames — A heart, a yet agonising heart, tells me that it is not for me, for many Succeeding years, to indulge the hope of a return to a region which I now call my country. Exiled, by almost the same fatality which, whilom, banished Ovid from the banks of Tiber; like Ovid too I contemplate the charms of my Bntilli Julia! like him I drop the fllent tear; like him, striking my pensive breast, I cry. What, banished because I loved? 
I feel no alleviation, when I compare mine with the banistiment of the heroes of ancient or modern story — Some were interdicted fire and water, because they became obnoxious to men poffested of more power and lest virtue than themfeives; Some, because their 
Superior 
va N D E R E R. 
fopeisior talents, riches, or felicity held them up objects of the envy and hatred of their fellow citizens; some few, because, they were really too bad, and many because they were too good to assimilate with the common mass of humanity in their own, or in any country. Of this last class of illustrious exiles Aristides the Just is a memorable example — All of these entertained hopes, of a return to their friends, their houstiold gods, the wives of their bosom, their little ones; their darling country! — phi lofophersj pardon me the word. Madam; since you teach me the practice, philosophers assert that pain or misery is less to be meafiired by its acuteness than by extent of duration — He who knows, that in all probability, there will be an end to his borrows, stretches his aching eye to this gladsome though distant prospect, while he tufas his head from the bitter cup of evil which the present moment holds but to 
A 2 him; 
4 
The VIRGINIA 
him; and, if he must taste, he meliorates the flavour with the idea of the nectareous draught domestic love prepares for him at the end of his pilgrimage : thus he journeys on, hugging to his bosom the fairy tisifler Hope — But where is my hope once more to kifs my mother earth !- — to feast, once more, my eyes with the chalky cliffs of Albion; once more to indulge the melancholy pleasure of gazing upon the lovely cause of my ruin! You request, and, from the lips of beauty, a request is law — you enjoin me to wander until I shall forget the fairest maid of a country where thousands are fair! or, until some more amiable foreign lady shall deface from my bosom the picture of my dove eyed Julia— —! your humility fliading your exquisite judgement permitted you not to see the inhumanity of your Sentence — had you glanced those dove eyes upon your mirror; had you reconnoitred a form that might give to 
the 
WANDERER. 5 
the creator of the Medicean Venus new ideas of beauty, your fine taste would have instnuated that decreeing a return, under Such conditions, was, virtually, decreeing a perpetual banistiment — For in what far country stiall I find a woman like you? This is not the age of miracles — the difcisiminating philosophic eye, or even the poet’s eye, “in a fine frenzy rolling, ” from Indus to the Pole, lights upon few phenomenons! prodigies stioot not spontaneous on the sunny margin of the Ganges, nor on the heights of Nova Zembla, robed in eternal Snow — But, ’tis yours to be inexorable, and to ordain' — ’tis mine to larnent, and to obey. 
One morning, the beginning of June, escaping from myself, I leapt into the Dover post coach* I had no clothes with me, except a few unforted things in a portmanteau, which had remained in it, A 3 since 
6 
The VIRGINIA 
flnce my last vistt to your uncle in Berk ^ stiire. I had made the necestary arrangements respecting my foreign credits, and that Small effort exhausted my resolution. Often I attempted to pack up my trunks; but when I opened my drawers, if I chanced to see or touch any the most tnffuig token which in those halcyon days, when I posteffed your confidence, you had given me, I forgot my purpose, I pressed it to ray burning lips with adoration pure and holy as ever animated devotee killing the crucifix; — I let fall the lid of niy trunk, and remained absorbed in thought, looking “like Patience on a monument, Smiling at grief!” 
I remember that the day harmonised not with my feelings; for the fim darting his beams through the bin filing mantle of Aurora, Seemed to infnk my woe. My companions were an Englifii mil 
leneiv 
WANDERER. 
lener, who had ingrafted French air and manner upon Britldi iieatnefs and Simplicity. She had been pretty, but was verging towards thirty, and, having met with many difagremens in the course of her peregrinations between Paris and. London, that preyed upon her sensibility, the Lancashire roses had vanished from her cheeks, to which a slight tinge of French rouge afforded a succedaneum;; prepoffesting figure, and a large languishing jetty eye, a lasting feature, yet remained. A young muscular Italian, who, by order of the good man her huff band, attended in the capacity of cava liere Serviente, the wife of a rich citizen of London, who had escaped from the polite circle in the environs of fisti street hill, with a view to imbibe Spa water, by way of reparation to her deranged nerves. The city lady, though nervous, was by no means consumptive; She was more than en bon point, and stiaded 
A 4 with 

The VIRGINIA 
with the left wing of her petticoat a meagre yet interesting figure, who, with that modesty and felf rdenial, ever the companion of genuine merit, contenting himseif with a corner seat, had ceded tq the Sex his priority of pretenstons with respect to rank. His outre figure, the vivacity of his look, and the strong lines of genius which marked each working feature of his face, inimediately struck me. I cannot defcisibe him; but if you will dip into smollet’s Humphry Clinker you will see him in the person of lifma hago. Had this gentleman sent to smol let, the resemblance could not have been more perfect. He was Secretary to the 
Duchess of -- -- -- -- --, whom he was going 
to join at Calais. He added to the birth and manners of a gentleman a competent knowledge of the dead and living languages; and was stngularly learned in the Italian, which he wrote with the preciston of atufcan, and pronounced 
WANDERER. 
nounced with the true Roman melody. As a proof of this the young Roman, our companion, held a diliufive conversation with him the whole day, believing he was converling with a learned countryman. At Dover the millener with the young Roman, who, under the pretence of Spending the evening with a friend at another inn, whiled away his time with the fair millener, parted from us, Submitting to our protection the better moiety of a city tradesman, the amiable deputy from the first coterie of fisti street hill. The Secretary of the duchess, and the faithful stave of Julia advanced, with profound respect, and presting to their bosoms either arm of the lady, usti cred her, with infinite gallantry, into the best room in the best inn of Dover. I begged the Secretary to do the honours of the house, as, in a whisper, I told him, though my body was present, my soul yet hovered about a certain villa in 
Berk 
10 The VIRGINIA 
Berkfliire; nor could the agremens of the lady before us call it from those groves, and lawns, and meads, which it still delighted to haunt. 
Adieu, 
LETTER 
•WANDERER. 
I i 
LETTER II 
ge H O L D us at supper;; Secretary on the right, your chevalier on the left of the fair denizen of London, Our petites attentions awoke her fenlibi lity, or, if you will, her vanity: the millener having quitted the field to her, file resolved to annoy us with all the round and grape in the park of Paphian artillery, Conscious of the advantage of our position, which embraced the right and left flank of the enemy, we were unanimously of opinion, we could, at least, maintain our ground. In this moment of time the action began, by a languistilng glance from two sweet blue eyes, manifestly pointed at the heart of your chevalier! Haply the wling of a capon, enveloped in its culinary fafcine Salary sauce, which, in that instant, the chevalier was convoying to the plate of 
the 
i: 
The VIRGINIA 
the lady, broke the force of the fire; the spent Shot struck upon his knife, and, rebounding, 
gleamed along 
the 
table, staggering the susceptible Secretary! I make a point of looking my enemy in the face, and I observed that file was rather animated than discouraged by my contumacy. She stretched forth an arm, plump, round, and white, by way of meeting me halfway with her plate. On this arm the only thing that interested me was a pearl bracelet, with a miniature. From the chalk and putty colour of the large vacant eye; the inanity, quietifm, and perfect exemption from thought in each composed feature of the face, I conceived it must be designed for Some rich city head; perad venture, the noddle of her husband. Before the Secretary could recover from the impression of the spent Shot, the lady, observing that her appetite was prostrate, carelesty threw herself, with 
head 
WANDERER. 
I'j 
head half reclining, eyes half Shut and langnifliing, upon the back of her chair, and seemed, a few Seconds, absorbed in a reverie. This manoeuvre, which made demonstration of giving up the battle, threw us off our guard : however, in this studied degagee attitude the enemy contrived, partly, to unmask a battery which did decistve execution. Her bosom seemed yet to retain the reststance to external pressure, the elasticity of 
fifteen! -- -- the undulating pillows, on 
which the bantling of Venus delights to loll, gently agitated the gauze which played around her travelling Oiirt; for She was k la chaste, in an elegant green and stiver riding habit. Well, you know, Madam, how obstinately I cling to a fine neck! Had not my glowing imagination continually exhibited to me a neck nonpareil, the fair citizen would have chained me to her car, a wfilling stave, to have graced her triumphant 
i 
The VIRGINIA 
uniphant entry into Brussels!! Secretary was guarded by no divine influence of course our right wing, strongly preft ed, gave ground; and by a heavy well directed stre. Supplied from the undulating battery aforesaid, was, in a few minutes, turned— — avoid having my works jlormedt mine being only an entrenched camp, I beat the chamade, offering to capitulate upon certain conditions. The terms granted us were; 
that the forces of general B -- -- r stiould 
Surrender prisoners of war; that his allied forces, belonging to the sovereign princess Julia, headed by general - — — - stiould be allowed to march off with the customary honours The lady called for glasses of claret, the number of the graces, and, with that mutual respect and urbanity which ought ever to obtain amongst polite enemies, the victors and the vanqulstied kissed goblets, drinking to the health of all the Sons and daughters 
WANDERER. 
^5 
ters of humanity. The lady, the remainder of the evening, considering her prisoners as her guests, did the honours of the house, and continued her display of accoiiiplisbments, lisping barbarous Italian to the Secretary, and chattering good French, for aught I know to the contrary, for I am yet a novice, to the chevalier. Our harmony was however interrupted by the faux pas of the Italian ferviente. The lady arraigned him, for neglect of duty, in the following harangue; I believe I stiall send the idiot back to my husband;; is as ignorant of the attentions due to per Sons of a certain fastiion, as ungrateful for the condescension of his Superiors. My huff band Sent him to attend me as a kind of travelling steward, or upper Servant, to preside over the minutiae of expenditure, a department beneath my attention. be caufe I, whose weakness is milkiness of soul, permitted him to dine with us today 
i6 
The VIRGINIA 
day at Canterbury, he absolutely forgets his routine of duty. To be sure half bowing on each fide of her, I have had the good fortune to be left under the protection of men of the world, of men who can diflinguifli between ladies of a certain rank and mere canaille; in a word, who are gentlemen : yet, for aught he knows to the contrary I might be committed with stock jobbers or stiop lifters, mountebanks or ministers, Jews or contractors, pimps or privy counfcl lors.’^ The Secretary affected to be the advocate of the haplels ferviente, and, under pretence of Soothing the lady, by an artful strain of irony, irritated her angry passions. Your chevalier, composing the muscles of his face to the mysterious gravity of a chamber counfellor, or a midwife;; his left breast with his right hand extended, making a profound obeisance, by way of retort courteous for her implied compliment, 
thus 
WANDERER; 
I? 
thus compounded the anodyne draught of jflattery, according to the prescription of the fair denizen of fifli street hill. For luyfelf I am free to declare, that far from pleading justification, I cannot find in my heart the least palliation for the young Roman. Sure I am his conduct will be covered by no precedent in the page of modern or of ancient reporters of Paphian common or statute law Born in a clime prodigal of public virtue and of private gallantry, where men were heroes; and heroes gods! I marvel that the Shade of a Casfar or of an Anthony did not arise to warn him of this faux pas! A c^far! who in playing the Sublime parts of the invincible Soldier and consummate statesman, forgot not that he was also born the finest gentleman of his own or of any age! ananthony! who in raffling, with the petits maitres of his day, for the prize of ancient beauty, gallantly Set a world upon a cast; and 
B the 
i8 
The AMERICAN 
the noble Castor, with all the Sangfroid and collection of mind worthy a student of almaclcs or of brookes^s, cooly stood the hazard of the die I Would to God! taking his hand from his own and place ing it on the breast of the Secretary, would to God, my dear Sir, the young roman’s had been yours or my lot! Trust me, our conduct would not have called tears from eyes fo Sweet, or sighs Srom a bosom So lovely I We would not, like him, have retired from an angel to feed upon garbage! We would not have bartered the Sweetest roses in the parterres of Flora for the cnmson dye of the Iberian fleece I We would not have embraced a cloud instead of a Juno I We would not for a millener have exchanged a Madonna I This unlucky hint disturbed the benign operation of my Specific anodyne, which, mixing with the whole mass of blood, had in the eourse of circulation flowed in balmy rills to the 
aorta 
WANDERER. 
'^9 
^lorta, there communicating with the sympathetic ducts, which lead to the breast and eye, had just began to excite pleafureable palpitations in the bosom and radiant Smiles in the countenance 1 The chevalier was broke in upon — — What I did he go off with the millener? Be composed, ray dear madam, — yet — • if I must Speak the truth — I fear he did — I Saw, or Seemed to See, the young Roman give his arm to the degagee March and de modes — in a twinkling, that milkiness of blood which stie had Sucked in, infused into her portion of twopenny, at her alma mater in the polite environs of St. Giles, fled, never more to inhabit the breast of the fair denizen! those bon-ton maxims which had been instilled into her, even from her girlisti years, when fly was admitted a novice into the coteries of fisti ftreet hill, were totally effaced; and, oh wondrous change! the rib of a mild, placid city alderman exhi 
B 2 bited 
20 
tise am eric an 
blted the picture of Alectra, environed by her hissing snakes. In this unpropi tious moment the poor ferviente opened the door. Unconscious of his crime, he gaily advanced halfway into the room. He saw indignation flash from the eye of his fair patroness. Italian action is upon a large Scale — off dropped his hat, dallied by his uplifted hands; his eyes now upraised to heaven, imploring divine interposition;; fixed upon the fifli ftreet fury, who was hastily advancing to him. So Hamlet stands appalled at the apparition of his royal father, fo Garrick retires from the approach of the ghost! But here the comparifbn drops. Benignity beamed not in the eye of the fair citizen; every working feature menaced annihilation to the hapless ferviente. thetecre tary, with moregenerostty than prudence, threw himself between the combatants; the chevalier, beckoning the young man, retired with him from the Scene of action, 
and. 
WANDERER. 
21 
and, after explaining to him, with unrelaxed muscles, the enormity of his ote fence, advised him to attempt no justification, but to plead at the tribunal of mercy. He, for fear is credulous, thanked the chevalier and beoq; ed his interposition— — that, e’er this, the Tuscan melody stowing from B — — r’s tongue had mollified the lady’s ire, he ventured to advance arm in arm with his client, Sprung from the banks of Tibur. The chevalier had done justice to the wit and elotjuence of his friend — ^ as he opened the door he saw a lambent Smile dawning in the lady’s dimples, while file listened, nothing loath, to the eloquence of a Murray, clothed in the language peculiarly adapted to the ex prestion of tender Sentiments. At the sight of the ferviente the fever of resentment again began to fiusti her cheek, but pur humility permitted it not to predor piinate. We fell on our knees, each dc 
B 3 vouring 
22 
The AMERICAN 
vouring a hand of the lady; the Chevalier, animated by compassion, deprecated the lady’s rage, mingling with his pleadings slight infusions of his anodyne Specific — to be cruel, to be inexorable is not, nor ought to be, the characteristic of the sex. The fair citizen was a woman stie Smiled forgiveness, and harmony was again restored to our little Society — in half an hour the lady retired, the Roman in another half hour.. The tea tables in Dover, and the polite world in its environs did not Scruple to whisper the next morning, that, like his great progenitor jeneas, 
Diffugient comites, et nocte tegentur opaca i Speluncam Dido dux & Trojanus eafidem Devenient. Virgil. 
But your Chevalier, following the maxim of Lord Chesterfield, never believes above half of wlrat the world says. 
Pardon 
WANDERER. 
23 
Pardon however the Latin quotation; when I aftert a piece of scandal, I always veil it under the shade of a dead language, thoroughly fenlible that this is a Subject ever painful to the ear of a ladin 
about four hours we were landed in France; how short the time which transported us to a new world of manners; continual commercial intercourse, 
you would think, might Soften the angles of difference between the inhabitanta os Calais and Dover — the very contrary is the fact; the hind of Canada glistering with icicles, and the mild Otahitean bashing under meridian sunbeams, exhibit not a contrast more complete! when I crossed the Atlantic, at the distance of two thousand miles, I found niyfelf at home; the same style of living, the same language, the same manners : here the difference was extreme — the tall, B 4 meagre. 
24 
The AMERICAN 
meagre, perpendicular, bien poudre French Soldier, on the ramparts of Calais, Seemed of a Species quite distinct frorn the fat eyed, rubicund citizen of Dover — in one particular, the canaille of each place Seem to play into each others hands most happily, iq raistng contributions upon the adventurous traveller; but their rapacity has been fo Severely animadverted upon by the jaundiced Sniollet, that I Shall wave the Subject. Immediately upon, nay, previous to my landing, I underwent the usual transformation into mi Lord Anglois, which you know was countenanced by my old buff and gold waistcoat; one fprigshtly Subject of the grand raonarque Seized my portmanteau, another my cane, and soon to my Sword, and even my laced hat, each parcel had its peculiar protector; absent from you, I was a mere nonentity, but had I been myself, I never fume upon 
thesq 
WANDERER. 
these occasions; I Swim with the stream; 
I Submit to the etiquette dictated by all respectable bodies, and the canaille of all eountnes is, from its numbers at least, a very respectable body trwith arms across, carelessly bowing conlent, I followed my ragged guides— — led me to the doui anc; here I was aroused from my reverie, by observing a monstrous figure drested in coarse blue and gold, a greasy bag, ears adorned with gold bobs, a huge upper lip embrowned by a quantity of strasburgh Snuff — his right paw was jusc forcing its way into my portmanteau; I seized it, while I jabbered a remonstrance. I found I could not extract the paw. I was ignorant of French customs, but, at this moment, happening to recollect the passage in the .Dneid of the wonderful efficacy of a Sop upon the Dog Cerberus, I applied the precedent j; q the cafe in point. Imperceptibly infi 
nuatipg 
, 6 
The AMERICAN 
nuating a half crown into the left paw, instantaneously, as if by a mechanic connexion, the right one flew out of my port mail; this was not all, the figure turned round upon its heel, a placid smile played around its muflachios, and whispering his companion in a way that I might hear, apparament Pejl un seigneur infiniment amiable, gave me a profound bow; I was not accustomed to a bow upon fo large a scale;; was, of itself, intrinsically worth three half crowns; I had, indeed, nothing contraband, but by this manoeuvre I avoided having my clothes deranged; I received an earnest of Gallic politefle, and, above all, I prevented the precious trifles, the gifts of my fair British rnaid, being touched by unhallowed hands. 
Here I am marched to Monfleur Deff fein’s; my veneration for the Shade of 
Yorick 
WANDERER, 

Yorlck led me to his hotel; I have stood looking wistfully at the very coach door, where once he prested the half willing hand of the gentle Madame de L— —. 
have lolled in the very same disobligeant immortalised by him; but, far be it from me to attempt to write a chapter in it, or, in any respect, to presume I emulate that darling child of Sentiment! 
The Secretary, the Italian friend to the young Roman ferviente, and myself, are now Set down to a dinner of fisti, ftd.con deau da veait, tin fonllard roti et du fai lad; we imbibe occastonally goblets of fajfaaement hon burgundy; this is Said to be a potation oblivious of corroding care; yet, trust me, it has not the power to make me forget the horrid thought' that, at this moment, the sea roars between me and my blue eyed angel of light I I name no names, for well I know 
that 
28 
The AMERICAN 
that your mind, equally with your external form, renders you the phoenix of your sex: while they eagerly gulf down the nectar of flattery, presented even by profane hands, you, like the sensitive flower flirinking from the beams of the fun, obstinately elude all semblance of praise at the very moment your fine sense rnust tell you it is critically just. ' 
A D i E U, 
LETTER, 
WANDERER. 
29 
letter III 
I 
calaisy Lijle, camhra^l 
Forgot to mention to you, that previous to our dining, B -- - — r carried 
me with him when he went to wait upon his patroness; I was, I own, curious to See a woman, whose beauty, wit, and fingulstr fortune had excited the admiration and astonifliment of the polite world; her recent exhibition in the house of lords, and the cause of it, rendered her acquaintance a very desirable acquisition to the curious traveller; her grace received me with that politeness, condescension, and affability, which sits easy as your glove upon persons of genuine breeding; sire Said, My Secretary tells 
me 
3^ 
The AMERICAN 
me you mean to make the tour of France and Switzerland, e’er you return; let me advise you, by all means, to penetrate as far as Italy; what a laudable vanity prompts a Frenchman to say of his own capita! (z7 ^z’y a qvun Paris) may, vrith more justice, be Said of Rome. Italy too is certainly the garden of Europe, and the Italian women the forbid ^ deuy yet most delicious fruit of that garden; if your palate waters for garden fruitsy I will give you commendations to my friends. Lord Tilney and Lord Brook.” I thanked the duchess as well as I knew how, for a condefcension I had So little claim to; imbibed a glass of her sack, and made my bow. 
The fair Chudleigh is a noble ruin! not that I insinuate her grace is not yet a very desirable object; no, it is the privilege of a sine woman'never to grow 
old; 
WANDERER 
31 
old; her grace is a beauty in the grand and majestic style; her stdn of a singular whiteness, yet retains all the fmoothnels of youth; this added to a German plumpness of person, yet enables her grace to excite ideas of the most voluptuous kind. 
When the late Lord C -- -- -- -- -- ^r, her bail, 
stepped in her grace’s house at knight’s bridge, he dreamed that his principal was running off; this So affected his imagination, that he jumped out of bed, and, forgetting the dignity of the wool lack, ran downstairs in his stiirt to Secure the, noble fugitive; the noise put the duchess in such a fright, that Springing out of bed in a delicious night drefs, stie began to run in good earnest, old A — y met and jostled against her grace in the past Sage; this apparition realising his dreaming ideas, the luminary of the law, like another Apollo, vigorousiy pursued the British Daphne, and could he have overtaken her, dans uns dijhahille ft appetif 
fantcy 
32 The AMERICAN 
fantcy I dare Say the collision would have been interesting : probably the laws of nature, paramount to common statute; and chancery law, would have stimulated the Sage to attempt the enormity which our wise Queen Elizabeth deemed So arduous, if not impracticable 
The Italian and myself hired of moii jlieur Destein a post-chaise to St. omefsi, where we arrived about nightfall. III the morning I was aroused from a delicious dream, by the vociferous execrations of the Italian, who swore by St. Anthony, that he would annihilate deftein^s postilion, who peremptorily demanded payment of a Louis, the hire of the chaise, although we had, the day before, paid the aforesaid Louis to destein’s waiter, at the same time that we discharged the dinner bill. I remember that the Italian asked me for a guinea for that purpoie. This being rather unusual in 
England, 
WANDERER. 
33 
England, I objected; but he observed that it would thus be but one trouble; and I Saw him pay it to the waiter. This objection the postilion listened to with philosophic sang froid. I Saw myfnencss eloquence made no impression;; the postilion, in return for the italian’s oaths, puffed, from a tremendous pipe, volcanos oc Smoke, vibrating his head in token of contumacious adherence to his demand; and, at length, knocking his pipe against his jack boot, the enormity of' which formed a fine contrast to his Spindle stiank, he declared, that, if he were not paid, he would order the postman of St. Omer (who was unluckily our landlord) to refuse us horses. He was as good as his word. My fellow traveller Swore he would stay at St. Omer from the Flood to the Conflagration e’er he would Submit to an impofl tion fo flagrant. I had previously concerted to stay all that day. The Italian 
C has 
34 
The AMERICAN 
has his young Tonne at the Jesuits College, and it would not have been fair to have parted them foonct. We were strewn the town, the college, and the superb church of the Jesuits by a fenstble, handsome, polite, young Jesuit, a Mr. H —, one of the profeftors of their college. He invited us to dine that day with his brethren. The Italian related to them his grievance. They were all of opinion with me, that, if it was in fisted upon, we stiould be obliged to repay for the chaise. They however added, that they would represent the matter properly at Calais, and, if practicable, recover for us our money. Next morning, as we were upon the point of departing for Liste, deftein’s postilion returned with a letter from his master, denying the receipt of the Louis. Finding, that il fal, hit pajfer parhiy jjfhe Italian threw at his Lead the stfcond Louis; adding ta it a reasonable quantity of oaths and curses, 
by 
W A N D E R E R. 
35 
by way of Small change. In England no reputable tavern keeper would venture to believe a waiter, in contradiction to the aftertion of two gentlemen; especially as their assertion was corroborated by 
a third, Mr. E -- -- ra person wholly elite 
interested 
Such a manceuvre might have hurt his house;; chaqtie faqs chaque faqon. 
At this season of the year the journey from St. Omer to Lille is delightful : from the heights of caftel especially, the eye commands the richest landscape I ever beheld. Innumerable hamlets, villages, and towns, variegated with noble woods, streams, and stocks grazing on meads beyond defcisiption Superb and luxuriant. The whole country of French Flanders is, now, a mere nosegay. The wings of Zephyr continually emit perfume, embalming the ambient air with odours So fragrant, that the fanciful trac 
2 veller 
36 
theaxmerican 
Teller almost persuades himself he approaches the confines of Arabia the happy. I saw the Sweet Flemish maids with robes Succinct, fair, plump, and rosy; Some tolling the new mown hay; Some, with limbs half bare, lolling upon the cocks, their breasts kisised by the ardent beams of the fun, whose amorous rays halfway met their bosoms, heaving with sensations excited by their innocent yet fanciful dreams, and I could not help repeating. 
Oh had I been by fate decreed Some humble cottage Swain -- - 
Ah me! did I but posies yon smiling mead, with the stocks feeding upon it; yon simple modest cottage, stiaded from Boreas by the melancholy myrtle. Sacred to Venus, flanked on one fide by a Sweet wood, on the other a brawling trout stream, and, might I persuade my Julia to preside over and give relief to the 
Scene. 
WANDERER. 
37 
scene, wrapped in the contemplation of my own riches, with what contempt, mingled with pity, should I look down upon Such, comparatively, poor devils, as kings and princes. 
Adieu. 
c3 LETTER 
The AMERICAN 
LETTER IV 
Y ISLE, where we arrived to dinner, is a fliperb populous city, the capital of French Flanders. It is Situated in a country environed by a variety of little rivers, all of whom confining, large bat teaux are capable of passing from the river Lis to a Suburb of the town, which is indeed now Sliut up within the town by the fortifications which Lewis the Fourteenth had constructed by Marstial Vauban. These fortifications join to the citadelle, which is esteemed one of the strongest in Europe. It held out three months, after open trenches, in the year 1708, against the whole allied army, headed by two of the lirist generals of the age, Mariborongh and Eugene — yet Lewis had taken it in Seventeen days. This fact is of itself a Sufficient eulogium upon the abilities of the celebrated Vauban. 
The, 
WANDERER. 
39 
The grand Square is Surrounded by handsome well built houses. There are in Lide above fifty churches and a noble hospital. It has also a change, for the accommodation of its merchants, who traffic largely, particularly in. camlets, for which this place is famous. 
My fellow traveller’s rout, who was bound to Italy, here deviated from mine. He is good-natured, and I agreed to accompany’ him in the Paris road as far as Lens, a Small town lying on the little river de Souchers. I recollect nothing for which this town is celebrated, unless it be for the antiquity of its collegiate church, founded about 700 years ago, and for the victory gained in the year 1648 by the Prince of Conde over the Archduke of Austria. The town remains to France from cestion at the Pyrenean treaty. In the morning we parted, and, as I had not French enough to venture C 4 alone 
40 Tun AMERICAN 
alone in a post chalfe, the Italian put me in a diligence, which goes from Lens to Cambrav. Ithoiiglit I poireiled enotigli of the language to serve me, with my pnrfe, by way of commentary, for my exigencies on the road from Calais to Sr. Qiientin; but I was egregiously miss taken, my pronunciation was fo vicious, that I was totally unintelligible; my situation became struly painful, and gladly would I have been again in London, but this retrogade motion tvas at once Shameful, and more difhcult than a forward movement. My companions in the diligence were a petit maitre from lisle, two Abbes, and two of the foss ter sex. Now and then I could catch a sentence from my fellow traveff lers, from the two ladies efpeclally; for I was more attentive to them, while their exprestive eyes translated their words; but they could not understand a fyilable I said; the petit-maitre wreathed 
WANDERER. 
41 
ed hlmfels into a thousand attitudes to affio; my comprehension, but in vain; this was the more mortifying, as I found he was very voluble, and full of Some interesting Subject; before he had been half an hour in the coach, he had, as I ^ understood afterwards, given the ladies a detail of his innumerable bonnes fortunes, from thirteen years of age, the period when he first entered his career of gallantry, until that day, when he was twenty feven years old; concluding that he was then on his way, by the command of his grandmother, a Ketahlir^ that is, marry himself to a lady of cam bray, who, indeed, he had never Seen, mals quel ramoit a la foua, for stie was dune famille diftingiiee, was fuijfamment rich, and, fitr toiites choses, fon coufm, qu troifieme degre, avoit line charge d la cour. He was not a little anxious to pialie me his confident; from his gestures. 
4- 
The AMERICAN 
a stranger would have thought us intimate for years. The coach stopped about eight o’clock, the petit-maitre jumped out, and taking me in the most fnendly manner by the arm, bowing, capering, and crying out, Allans, avancez monsieur, ustiered me into a room of the Auberge, where he Swore all the French oaths at the waiter, and Seemed as anxious to get me breakfast, as if my life depended upon it. At the same time that he was plying me with jambon, faucijfon et du •vin blanche was recapitulating to me his love adventures, and his present matrimonial project; he Seemed as earnest and as pleased as if I had understood him; he might have recollected that I comprehended not a Syllable; but to recollect or combine is not the sort of a Frenchman. He peremptorily refused to let me pay for my breakfast; having done the honours of it, according to French etiquette, the right of 
/ pay 
WANDERER. 
43 
payment was in him, and he was au defefpoir at every attempt I made to defraud him of this privilege. My new friend reconducted me, wsith the same Sedulous air, to the diligence, and, as if I could understand his flattery, told the ladies in a whisper he took care 1 should hear, nia foi, monsieur, quoiqtte rev cur a l^angloife, a hiftnimetit d’ef prit! the ladies reiterated their attempts to entertain the dumb stranger. Messrs. les abbe’s too joined their endeavours; they at length addressed me in Latin, and here, for the first time of niy life, I found my Small knowledge of the Latin tongue of elfential Service. I told them that I had been bred at —; — college, and had read the elastics; they seemed pleased to hear this, and immediately began to tjuote upon me with true French volubility. I had been very little accustomed to speak the language; 
they 
44 
The AMERICAN 
they pronounced with foreign accent, and of course quite different from the Englilli manner. I believe, after Searching Europe, the bell Latin Scholars will be found in the englisti Schools; but the Scotch, I believe, the irisli and all foreigners, pronounce it nearly alike; the englisli adopt a pronunciation similar to that of their own language, which I think an absurd method, because it s different from the usage of all other nations. Had not they better adopt a pronunciation common to other people; thus they will understand their neighbours, and this medium of learned commerce will become more generally beneficial. No living people, I verily believe, pronounce the Latin properl}^ I make no doubt but that an old Roman apple woman, were She now alive, would be competent to correct the pronunciation of the first Oxonian or Cantab. Pardon 
me. 
WANDERER. 
45 
me, madam, if I approach a lady with an air So pedantic; I mean these en pash fant observations for your learned acquaintance. However, a pronunciation to which I had been unused, added to Gallic volubility, confused me not a little. I had just told Meftrs. les abbe’s that I had read the classics, and I feared they might impute to me a ridiculous vanity. I recollected my lead pencil, by the medium of which we held a kind of disjointed conversation;; the course of it, they informed me of the contents of the petit maitre’s narrative, he being too fine a gentleman to understand a word of Latin. At night we arrived at Cambray, where, by the assistance of the learned churchmen, I got proper accommodations; they begged I would allow them to introduce me to an Engliili family then at Cambray, which I declining, they politely took their 
leave, 
46 
The AMERICAN 
leave, promising to breakfast with me in the morning. I then descended, with my French grammar in one hand, dictionary in the other, to the kitchen * with their astistance, but chiefly by pointing to, or laying violent hands on what I chose, I got a comfortable supper * 
situation of Cambray is, I think, more happy than that of Lisle;; is the capital of the Cambrefls, a country fitna ted between Picardy, Artois, and ha nault, abounding in fertile plains, watered by the river Efcaut. This river also runs through the town, which, by the fide of the river, is defended by a sort. The town being on this fide rather low, the approaches to it may be laid under water; but the principal strength of Cambray results from the citadel, built by Charles the Fifth, at the expense of the inhabitants, lest, as he pretended, the French might take pof 
fefiion 
WANDERER. 
47 
session of die town. It is a regular pentagon, environed by ditches, cut out of the solid rock. So early as the year of Christ 445, the Emperor Clodion made himself master of Cambray; it was afterwards burnt by the Danes; it then became a free and imperial city : and was frequently the cause of war amongst the emperors, the kings of France, and the counts of Flanders. Francis the First granted it a neutrality during the war which he waged against the Emperor Charles the Fifth; but the less generous Charles, refusing to accede to this neutrality, took posteffion of it in the year 1543; afterwards the Duke of alen^on, brother to the ' third Harry of France, gave this city to John of Montluc, Lord of Balagry, whbni Henry the Fourth sirst made Marsiial of France, and then created prince of Cambray. The cathedral church, dedicated to the Virgin, is among the finest in Europe; it is replete with rich chapels; 
the 
48 
The AMERICAN 
the pillars are adorned with sculpture fine wrought marble tombs: there are many other churches of note in cam bray, many handsome monastries of either Sex. It is one of the most: opulent and commercial towns of the Low Countries, and celebrated for the beauty of its cambrics, which derive their name from this town, though St. Quentin has stolen from Cambray the most shilful of the cambric weavers, and is, at present; the first mart for this beautiful manufacture. In stiort, Cambray, with its environs, Is one of the Sweetest sttuations I ever Saw. I promise myself again to vistt it during my restdence at St. qiien tin; I will make my vistt at the time of the grand procestion, performed annually on the day of the assumption of the Holy Virgin, which is celebrated with Such pomp, that it attracts to the exhibition at least thirty thousand strangers; from description it is a noble light, but 
I will 
VA N D E R E R. 
49' 
I will give you a shetch of it, when I see it with my own eyes. At present I fancy you will readily wave this detail, especially, as my letter is already protracted to a most fatiguing length; of this I am the more ashamed, as upon reading it over, I find the real matter might be reduced to a very small compass. 1 really have not the courage to attempt an abridgment of a letter, in itself, I fear, little interesting. I will rely on your benevolence to pardon it. 1 flatter myself the charming town of St. Quentin, where 1 now live, may hold out some Subject more worthy the pen of a traveller, and eye of a fine lady, and foi bid you good night. 
Adieu. 

LET 
5^ 
The AMERICAN 
LETTER V 
St. ^entht. 
"'HE morning after my arrival, by the assistance of my interpreter, a fair pretty Englidi fille de chainbre to 
Madame de -- -- -- --, a still more pretty 
Englisti lady, I announced my bulinefs at St. Quentin, and got myself introduced, with my credentials, to Monlieur de breisac, a French merchant of the town, who has, it Seems, a valuable landed estate, independent of the great emoluments derived from his commerce in cambrics; happily he Speaks eng lioi; he made me dine with him, and treated me with excellent champagne. Monlieur de Breifac is a phssnomenon, for to the thoroughbred merchant, he unites the urbanity of a courtier. At. 
the 
WANDERER. 
51 
the age of fifty he poftelfes infinitely more vivacity than falls to the lot of an English youth of fifteen; between the first and second course, while his daughter, the elegant Madame Nandine, puffed round the long corked burgundy, he fu ng chansons a loire, des chanfonettca tendresy and danced round the room with all the agility of a Vestris, all the €njou'iment of an emancipated schoolboy. A genuine Englishman, who has never travelled beyond the limits of a fok chase, twere he to read this letter, would, without ceremony, fet this picture down ttne' caricature., or the fitetch of a half madman; not fo, Monfieiir de Breii'ac is a man of understanding, and of fa stiion, but he is a Frenchman. Finding I intended to reside sometime at St. Qtientln, to accj[uire the French language, whidi is here Spoken, by the better sort of people, tvith great purity, 
Monsieur de B -- -- -- -- exerted hinifelf to 
D z establisti 
s 
The AMERICAN 
establish me in a reputable French family, and, by a pleasant stratagem, V succeeded;; family consists of an elderly lady and three daughters — the mother being, extremely Short sighted, de Breifac palmed me upon her for a gentleman of forty years of age; which manoeuvre was to be countenanced by my presenting myself next day iinstiaven, dusty travelling dress. Sec. the fatigue of a winter’s campaign in London, added to the poignant anxiety resulting from your absence, throwing a gloom upon my visage, highly' favoured the deception. I had invited to dinner today my French master, Mr. Brown, an Irisii gentleman, bred at St. omer’s. Mademoiselle hen riette told me, by means of our interpreter, elle etoit enchantee de me trouver un cavalier jetirtf et infinirnent aimahle, (sweet creature!) Car Monsieur de Breifac faifoit crfire d fa mere, que Monsieur etoit dhtn certain age The more I re 
siect 
WANDERER. 
53 
fleet upon my polidon, the more I feel myself obliged by the stratagem of de Breifac. I have now So firmly establistied myself with the old lady, that stie forgives me for my youth, calls me her Son, desires me to honour her daughter with the appellation of stster — says, stie has too high an opinion of the morality of mon steur to conceive he would form a design upon his ststers; and Sometimes stie condescends to beg I would Spare them. This with me is a more efficacious argument than the appeal to my morality — for when my power is even by implication acknowledged, I Seldom abuse it. The girls therefore stiall be spared. 
You will expect a ffietch of the amiable family with whom I now while away the weary hours of exile, and you stiall not be disappointed. 
D 3 
Madame 
54 
The AMERICAN 
Madame Hemy is the widow of a gentleman of the long robe, who hveci at Perronne, and held there a place under the king of 10, 000 livres a year j but, being addicted to hospitality and hew, died without having Set apart any portion of his income for the maintenance of a widow and nine young children, wdio liad been bred in habits of expense. Jh this untoward Situation the widow took a resolution which does her honour. Instead of, like most widows, exhibiting lierfelf in all the pomp of woe, wailing, and leaning, like our mother earth in its fallen state, askew upon her axis, immer, diately quitted Perronne and came to reside here, a few leagues from her former 
abode- -- a genteel house, Set out a 
large elegant millener’s Oiop, and a Species of general warehouse for Paisistan perfumery, ribbons, gloyes, Sword knots, See, People of a liberal way of thinking pitied her, and admired the effort Oie 
had 
WANDERER. 
55 
had made. She was countenanced by the rich Protestant merchants here, obtained a considerable credit at Paris, and Succeeded in her Scheme. By her industry and by the talents of the three daughters who now live with her, fire has been enabled to Settle in the matrimonial walk two others — a sixth, consulting lier mirror, and having the singular humility to See herself less handsome than her listers, and the candour to consess it; lire was advised to dedicate herself to the 
love of God -- -- having the modesty to 
think, 71 etant tn puijfamment rich ni dia hlement jolicy She had little likelihood of killing her man; lire embraced this as heir pis aller — lire is now in a convent in the Suburbs of this town. I Sometimes go to See my nun lister, who Seems to Submit to the cruel law of necessity with a tolerable grace. The eldest Son is happily married, in Germany, to a Saxon lady, who, a la Alamandct loves good cheer. 
D 4 
goes 
: 6 
The AMERICAN 
goes tame about her house, obeys her husband, and is a fruitful vine, breeding, like any German princess. The young ell Son was born for and bred to the profession of petit-maitre, in which he is at present eminent. He dresses, games, lies, and makes love en honnit homme; he has Served a few years in the army, partly by way of satisfying the martial sentiment coeval with the birth of every Frenchman, and partly to guarantee his approaches to the Softer sex. A uniform, you know, is, with the ladies of all polite countries, un pajfe par tout, These ac compiifhrnents, added to his being handsome and endowed with a modest alflir ance, renders him, comme de raison, the favourite with the mother. The three youngest daughters insinuate they might e’er this have had portions to buy them husbands, but for the abfoliite necestity of answering the large drafts of the young gentleman, to supp^x the necest 
WANDERER, 
57 
fary demands for odeur de rose et de jep min^ play money, polite forms for billet douxy Valenden^ Brujfels, and point ruf flesy requisite to enable Monsieur de Henry to roll in the orb described by his brother petit maitres. As the young nentleman is more of the coxcomb than 
O 
the gambler, he is generally duped, and, en denier re forty has*always recourse to his fond mama. m^denioifelle Henry is verging upon forty, en bon pointy good teeth and eyes, replete with the milk of human kindness, and learned in the culinary Science -- -- by the bye. She would 
Suit admirably as a housekeeper to your cousin P — r, who piques himself upon being an adept in the mystery of sauces, and, if I mistake not, has lately been ballotted for and chosen a member of the calapash and calapee cogno fcentit — Sleek rogues, who delight to roll their white eyes and stiake their green fat, waddling between the congenial regions 

58 
The AMERICAN 
gions of temple^bar and Leadenhall ( Mademoiselle Collette, la fcettr fuifriee, appears to be about twenty-five; of a (lender but exquisitely elegant form — height nor tall nor stiort — complexion rather inclining to the pallid, but extremely fair and delicate; coral lips, ivory teeth, large black eyes, radiant with vivacity, long eye laflies, full eyebrows, which give relief to her Snowy forehead, terminated by a head of hair, though black, extremely fine in quality, and in quantity beautifully redundant! By turns She is witty aud'fentimental, and is Said to have happy writative talents— — genteel, glides a minuet with grace, hops a cotillon with vivacity, and touches a harpsichord with wonderful judgement and power — fire is indeed an elegant echantillon of Gallic beauty; yet will I, if you can spare him. Spare her to my rival the gallant Col. G --. 
Ma 
WANDERER. 
Mademoirdle Henriette, la cadettey appears to be about twenty-two. She is, I think, full as tall as you, consequently the exact standard height of a fine woman. Her air, her Shape, her whole person, though bold in the contour, yet beyond conception easy, natural, and graceful: the French terms lefie et delfe Singularly apply to her : her features ro rnan, her hair a dark chestnut, in huge ringlets Sporting on her neck, and Shading a polistied forehead : her upper teeth a little uneven,, but white as feathered Snow; her under lip Swelling, blub, and pulpy. When stie Smiles two dimples, visible only to the eye of taste, play on either side of her mouth just where her lips terminate. I have not courasie to attempt the drawing of her eyes; they must be Seen, and if Seen by a man they must also be felt; but Fll answer for it nor pen nor pencil can deferibe them. They do not Seem created by Some godlike 
6o 
The AMERICAN 
like power merely to See, but to Speak, to ordain, to give law! The moment they streamed celestial lightning upon your faithful chevalier, he recollected and thought no longer ridiculous those lines of, I believe, ^ Dry den; 
“Then only hear her eyes! Tho’ they are mute they Speak, nay more command! For beauteous eyes have arbitrary power \ • 
You who too well know, that the rays of a blue eye have already poisoned my soul with the never dying fever of tenderness, will not wonder that I dwell fo long upon the beautiful though irregular eye brow, the long Silken eyedash, and the large sunny full eye of Mademoiselle Henisiette: undoubtedly they are the finest black eyes that ever blazed, languistied, and died away in the head of woman 1 I have now reconnoitred every ostenlible part of lier tout ensemble, except her neck. As my drawings are all from the 
life, 
WANDERER. 
6i 
life, I cannot delineate it, for I have sworn by the bosom of the goddess of love, an oath with me most sacred I never to touch, or, if I can help it, glance ray eye upon a mortal neck until you agam permit me to gaze! But I must not trust myself with this idea — Her complexion a clear brunette, animated by cheeks flustied with the downy red of foutherri sunbeams. She is more of the languisti ing than the fpisitely beauty : the venom of her charms is therefore less dreaded, though more deadly; less noxious to mea of levity than of fentinient. An air of simplicity, mildness, piety, and resignation Soften the majesty of her countenance J You have, I dare say, Seen in England, some specimens of guido’s manner: her’s is just such a head as Guido Reni would like to paint, and just such a style of beauty as a man of fine feeling would wisti to iiifpire with love! Figure to yourself, Madam, this gentle, elegant 
in 
u 
The AMERICAN 
interesting mortal sitting at dinner visavis Monsieur le Chevalier : behold her anxiousty attentive to his every movement; anticipating every wisti, and, though we are mutually ignorant of each other’s language, translating into very good French, each glance of his eye I See her with the agility of a wood nymph, the e?nprejfement of a courtier, and the grace of a maid of honour, springing from her chair, and making the servant resign to her the agreeable tastt. of pouring vift de champagne or de muscat pour fon aimahle Anglois, Behold this real picture, and blame me if you can when I confess, file has awaked in my soul a tender fisiendstiip that stiall never die I 
i 
If the national manners resemble those of this agreeable family, France is indeed a polite nation, and the most eligible country in the world for the abode of a stranger. The whole family distress me by their Sedulous yet polite attention; 
their 
WANDERER. 

their unremitting efforts to translate my wishes; their anxiety lest their ignorance of my language should preclude them from any the most: trivial occasion of ob liging me. My Sweet sister Henriette, in the absence of the French master. Is the family interpreter. I do believe there is a congeniality, a Sympathy of souls. I have met with no other French person who can make me understand a Sentence, much less can they comprehend me, yet they persecute me with an iinceafing babble. Henriette, on the contrary. Speaks much less, and with less eagerness than her 
I 
countrywomen in general; but when stie does Speak, heaven born melody vibrates on my ravistied ears! I may not understand the force of each particular word, but I comprehend the Scope of each Sentence, and my French, though vicious, aided by my signs and express five gestures, enables her generally to comprehend me. While I Speak I watch 
atten 
64 
The AMERICAN 
attentively the motion of her eye lidsj if I find chagrin and disappointment fliading her countenance, I know I am not understood, and attempt Some other turn, but the moment she has me celestial rays stream from her sunny eyes, stie bows, Smiles with the benignity of a Seraph, and immediately translates me to the whole circle. She has also undertaken to be my mistress— — hate her. Madam, I only mean my mistress in the native language of politeness. vshe there it proceeds frorn her niore happy liianner or my more stned attention, I will not determine, but fare I am, that I receive ten times more profit from her lestbns than from those of my master. In the morning stie makes me read to her a story from the simple elegant marmon tel; in the afternoon stie sills out my tea, and at intervals reads to me a chapter of lamitatiofi de Jesu Chrijl; a book wrote inastyle at once simple and Sublime, and, 
'being 
WANDERER 
65 
being calculated to pour the balm of conlb lation into the hearts of devout Christians of ail denominations, when read and Commented upon by this amiable mortal, what a noble effect it must produce in the soul of your fisiend, who, amidst all Ills vagaries and back stidings, happily, never lost his taste for pure religion. This book is richly and modifhly bound : She has given it to me comme un souvenir;; if ever I alienate or lose it, may my good angel lose sight of me! 
The price I give for my lodging, board, cc. is called, in France, une fenfion cheer; and yet I have for 100 livres a month three rooms, two of which are very genteely furnished, and all of them look upon la grande place, one of the finest Squares in France. I have tea or coffee for breakfast and afternoon. I have at dinner and Supper two courses and a defers, red champagne, a pretty dry 
E wine 
66 
The AMERICAN 
wine for orclinary drink, white champagne whenever I choose it, vin de mute eat and liquers, and all these handed to me by three 'nymphs who might well lit for the picture of the Graces, Surely I ought to bejiappyv y^t why is it that I So eagerly point to the northern hemisphere?? I So frequently feel the big tear starting from my aching eye, the involuntary ligh heaving from my agonising heart I Go to your mirror and answer this problem. — You see the air of France begins to have its usual effect, I begin to be a polite gentleman; for 1 do not quit you until I place you with the most charming company for a fine woman, her own image. 
A d IE Vc 
L E T T E K 
WANDERER. 
^7 
LETTER VI 
St. ^entift, 
order me to communicate to you my observations upon the customs and manners of the French; though the stiort time I have lived amongst them can afford but Superficial views of a field So Spacious, yet as the commands of a fine woman are to me among the most Sacred of all obligations, I hasten to obey you to pay due deference to rank, I will first handle the Softer Sex. Nature was Surely in a playful mood when stie created a French woman. The Graces are constant attendants at the toilette of a fine French lady, and where the Graces loiter en familk, the Loves will not long be ab sent. Conceive all that is gay, all that is witty, fpritely, vivacious; give to this creature of your fancy’ a female form; 
JE 2 though 
68 
Thr AMERICAN 
thoiigli not absolutely beautiful yet enchanting; though not perhaps of Symmetry critically just, yet more piquante, more interejfante^ more apetijfante than the most perfect lifdefs harmony of proportion — a stiape, though unconstneci, easy and free, yet not inelegant; a com plection though seldom fair, yet free from a certain instpidity which frequently soils the charms of the snowy beauties of 
northern climes -- -- -- it is a clear animated 
brunette; ivory teeth, hair dark, and beautifully redundant; eyes black, vivid, and exprefiive! When you have collected in your fancy these united agvir mens you will have a faint idea of the tout enfemhle of a fine French woman. Had not the Supreme already, by a decree unchanging, fixed my fate, had I yet a choice to make, I would wisti for a nymph born and bred in England until eleven years of age. By this time she would probably be grounded in that true 
genuine 
WANDERER, 
69 
genuine neatness and purity, both of person and mind, peculiar to the girls of the Thames and their American descendants; I would then transport her to France, to imbibe, with the language, that chastened frankness of manner, ease, elegance, and politeness endemial in the air of this country. With this stnistiing file would Surely be the Fc plus ultra of feminine perfection! Could I then, as peradventure I might, for French women too have their caprices, could I but infuse into her a predilection for such an oddity as myself, I stiould certainly be a thrice happy mortal, unenvied only by angels! Indeed the French language, which is In a great measure made up of phrases, and is, beyond a doubt, the best conversation language now living, is a happier medium of urbanity than our downright Englisti. This, and a slight tincture of the Italian, are the only advantages I recollect a French girl of 
E 3 fasliiou 
70 
The AMERICAN 
fasliion can boast over our Britisti ladies. They are each educated, v^diat a pity I far from the parental eye, in feminaisies different in name, but nearly Similar in their objects — Miss in a board!ng fchool. Mademoiselle in a convent. Of the two, I think, and I could Support my opinion with many plausible reasons, the latter infinitely the least liable to exception. To be Sure there are many Engiiili ladies educated in boarding schools whose virtues adorn human nature; but these exceptions prove not the advantage of a boarding school, they only prove that there are Some feminine natures So in trinsecally pure, that neither the contagion of precept or example can adulterate them. Be this as it may, the young 
5 
lady in a cloister converses only with her own Sex. This is by no means calculated to inspire those ideas of civility, complaisance, and attentive politeness which the Sexes, by a happy contagion, usually 
imbibe 
WANDERER 
7^ 
imbibe from a chastened intercourse with each other. I have ever thought, that what the poet Says of learning is much more justly applied to the Sentiment which results from a Social mingling of the Sexes — 
“Mniollit mores me smit ejfe feros I 
It Softens our manners, it will not permit “us to be rude! ” 
Woman was certainly made to temper man! We had been brutes without them” — and, vice versa, the maxim is equally appolite — Eve, the fairest, the Sweetest of her daughters, was, I own, formed by the hands of the Supreme, mild and benign as the dewdrops trickling from the trestes of Aurora! yet let it be remembered, with gratitude, that she was built out of the lide of man! Woman therefore must ever pant after, must ever stgh for her natural, her original home^inust ever be best pleased, and 
E 4 there 
72 
The AMERICAN 
therefore most prone to give pleasure when stie is or vifa vis, or aupres that noble whole of which stie is only a part. This certainly is the secret bias of female nature — some few half witted prudes may affect to deny this; yet, allowing them to Speak their real Sentiment?, they only prove, that they are unnatutal, and of course vicious. If then the conversation, of even the most amiable of their own sex is not the happiest School of female poutenefs, much less can be expected from the Society of nuns — from a group of old maids, if maids indeed they be, from their situation without hope, and therefore, in all probability, less placid than their venerable body in general — • This is a large body in all civilised coun tries ^every paltry witling can break his jest upon them. God forbid that I stiould insult their dillrefs! — if they have less of the milk of humanity flowing in their rigid veins than others of their sex, 
the 
WANDERER, 
73 
the fault is not in them but imputable to man, and his unnatural capricious institutions. Time was, when they were fusceptible of and might communicate tender imprestions — as a bow long unbent losses its native elasticity, fo, by Jong clifufe, the sources of their fine feelings are dried up. Chaste, lovelorn maids, neter will I obtrude upon your retirements but to administer confola tipn — 7 if ye are less apt to inspire loye. than young hoyden stirts, well I ween ye are more grateful for the love ye inspire; more tender, more constant, more learned in the refinements and mysteries of that noble Sentiment] Would my capability but walk hand in hand with my charity, I would wipe the streaming tear from off all thine eyelids; 
I would Smother with kistes those sighs, the offspring of the hopeless wisti, for you know not what — and I would ^yonderfully diministi the frightful number 
74. 
The AMERICAN 
ber cf forlorn tabbies foredoomed to lead apes ill hell. Far from insulting, could I be the happy instrument of banistiing malice, envy, and all uncharitableness for (Ever from thy lonely asylums, my worst fm were done away! 
Adieu, 
LETTER 
WANDERER.' 
IS 
LETTER VII 
St, ^tentin. 
gut to return, a French girl thus ' educated never sees a male animal, her own relations excepted, until She is taken front her asylum to the arms of her husiband, who perhaps file never Saw! If mama is disposed to outre her tenderness and indulgence, She will once or twice bring the cavalier to the grate with her; but what is a lover in the presence of mama? a mere Shadow of himself. Mademoiselle, however. Seldom protests against this arrangement — stie is glad, on any terms, to escape from iron bars matins, nones, complies, fusty abbesses, and tattling nuns — She Submits to take a man from the hands of mama rather than have no man at all. Now and then too, 
bv 
The AMERICAN 
by the force of bribery, a modern French novel has made its way to the devouring eyes of monastic mistes — the young Jady sucks in the estence of modern matrimonial morality — ^stie learns, that a husband is an animal born at once to be an object of hatred and a cloak for love — Be this as it may, Madernoifelle, the moment She escapes from monastic gloom, as if by the power of enchantment, blazes out in ctl the effu]gence of courtly beauty ^stie is critically jiist in the complicated manoeuvres of a drawipg room, exhibits her patits riens, her petites attentions with due regard— — nilnute defer rence to tiine, place, and rank, Sfie knows as well as hey mother, the exact moment when it is proper to flirt her San against the brilliant epaulette of mpnsieur le Mar quis, while at the same time She darts ^ tender fide glance at Morifieur le Chevar lier dcmalte, who tells of his hairbreadth Tcapes and wond’rous raiscbanccs by 
flood 
WANDERER. 
11 
flood and field during his caravans; then dropping her glove, file permits Monsieur pahbef qui fait le hel esprit aupres ties dames, d^avoir la felicite et Vhonneur de le remajfer, de le presenter jolliment, et de lui foupirer quelque chose de galant; thus engaged, you would Suppose that the lady’s attention was ab foished — not fo — Is a fashionable author announced; does 2.petifmaitre hahille au dernier gout glide into the room; the one lire annoys with a fascinating bow, and an inimitable flirug of her flioaiders; the other file annihilates by riling fliddenly from her bow, endeavouring to suppress an involuntary sigh, and throwing herself upon the back fauteuil, which 
naturally produces a palpitation of her handkerchief that might rekindle the embers of desire in the bosom of a frozen hermit! Recovenng from this manoeuvre fire calls the pretty thing to her, and charms him with the most: bewitching 
perfiflage. 

The AMERICAN 
perftflage. In a word, a French avo^ manj like a true philolbpher, is at home in whatever situation her fortune Shall place her— — bredin an anchorite’s cell, and wafted, at once, by the force of magic, to the gallery of ver failles, die breathes the air of that polite region with almost as little embarrafp ment, as if She had imbibed it with her nurfe’s milk I 
I know very well that in England there' are persons of birth and fastiion, as ealy and as well-bred as any people in the world; but commend me to untutored, innate urbanity, to a frifeur wdio is au defefpoir if you complain of a headache | a fille de chamber qui fe trouve aneamec jde chagrin ft par une malheureuse hazard, die auroit ouhliee dechauffcr le lit de monsieur!! a cobbler who bovvs to you with the air df a gentleman ustier; to a milkmaid 
WANDERER. 
79 
maid who presents you curds and cream with the grace of a maid of honour! There is a young lady of Some distinction, who frequently visits les mefdemoiselles ' Henrys. Byway of acquiring the fastiion able babble of the country, I Sometimes make love to this finistied coquette, who is only nine years old. She comports herself in this emergency, as if She had long expected the declaration. She Sports the fide glance, the languid Smile, the half supprefted ligh, the affected reverie, thet, encouraging leer, gleaming through a look of anger and disdain! and when catechised even in the more occult mys teries of the belle faffion, stie Seems wonderfully adroit, and ready in her respon ses. Last night, upon my attempting to ravisti a kiss before her aunt, stieflung from me with a well diitenibled air of a little fury; waved her little arm, bidding me an eternal adieu! protesting, flnce monsieur misconstrued mere civility, sans con > 
fe queue e 
8o 
tke AMERICAN 
fequeuee, into predilection, stie woiilc! never more come here; or be at home to hint when he called on her aunt and mama! Looking just now out of my window; this being Sunday, to reconnoitre the brigade of belles and petit maitres, from six years old to Sixty, astembledi habillees en toutes stein choses to grin; ogle, sigh, and caper in the beautiful Square, vis a vis Madame H. I observe my little mistress floating along, en habit de fete a footman carrying her parafol and lapdog, a watch by her fide, and cane in her hand; painted, patched, powdered a la marechale, and menacing annihilation to her love fick Anglois; who with his right hand, prefted upon his left breast, profoundly bows, is disregarded, he retires three paces and bows again, still the lady affects not to see him; and when he defeended, the fly jade played off an air of high surprise, 
and 
WANDERER. Bs 
and vowed (lie Supposed monlieur had gone a D campagne, to ramble in the gardens of his friend Monsieur de breisac; for indeed She would never have thought of trujung lierself with him again, when he had So recently forgot himself, behaving cvmme un Anglois, Pest a dire £omnm un veritable harhur I Wdiile I coquette with this fine woman in miniature, a thought occurs to rrie, I could wish her just as She is now drefted, d fe tronver^ to find herself, as the French idiom has it, in an elegant aftembly in London. 
I slake my Ion tonne reputation, file would be chez elk; ftie would betray no affectation on the one hand, mmivaife honte or embarrassment on the other., In her movement, air, and manner, the would be upon a par with a young Engliflilady of eighteen; in her enjoiiementy her Skill at repartee and raillery, fire would far exceed her; I will not answer for her 
F fuftatn 
Sz 
The AMERICAN 
Sustaining her character fb well, after stie has fed for sometime on roast beef, and imbibed the thick ale and foggy air of your country. If this Sweet girl is So interesting, when She only limulates the passion, what must She be after a trip to Pans, when, peradventure, some stnistir ed petit-maitre, born to make woman, frail, stiall have realised her now imagir nary feelings, and by his inconstancy, blended an air of languishment and melancholy tenderness, with the natural vivacity of her countenance? Certainly stie will be irreststible! 
You are curious to know my progress in the world of gallantry, and thus the account stands. I have Sometimes the honour to give my arm to Mademoiselle de H. the only daughter of the commandant, I am en famille with the Mefdemoifelles Laney, who fing ks ^etites chanfonnettes^ 
amoureux 
WANDERER. 83 
'nrnoureux comme des Sipens; I am enfant de la maison with Monsieur I’abbe be iioit et [on agreahle fsur, gens diune fa milk dijlingiik. I make love to Madame 
I « 
L dame Suijfe, belle, fpirituelle, et file unique de Monsieur R. un des pmfonds fa' vants qui compiloit rencqclopedie, I attend the toilette of the lovely Madame Nardine, and I once had the honour and felicity to tie the garter of the beautiful Madame de plefton 1 unlearned in the etiquette of French toilettes, you tv ill here tax my vanity with violating histo * rical truth. You are to understand then, madam, that in the first place, the left leg of Madame de plefton, the only one I had the honour to reconnoitre, is a luxury that might stimulate the gusto of the most refined connoisteur; and you are also to know that the tying on a lady’s garter, which, in this country is F 2 generally 
84 
The AMERICAN 
generally below knee, with these degagee people, is not a favour So decisive as you would naturally conceive; with you Suspicious Bisitiflr nymphs, who cautiously guard every out post, it is preparatory to, and leads in a direct line to Elyfiuni! In France a stmple kifs of the cheek is a much higher favour, for to kifs a French lady’s lips, when stie is full dressed, is hi ^ against the statutes of the toilette 1 of this I had an instance a few nights 
ago. Monsteur tabbe B -- -- -- -- -- with niy 
very good friend his agreeable stster. Supped at our house; as this lady has long lost light of her teens, never was a prodigious beauty, and those charms which nature lent her, are now past uheir meridian lustre, I did imagine a little decent impudence would not be difrelilitied. I sat next to her, had frequently drank fes amities in vin muscat 
and 
WANDERER. 85 
alid had I hoped, by my attentions and Slattery, lulled to rest every prudish idea, if any such dwell in the bosom of a french woman. Whilst her brother the .elegant churchman was gallanting the fan, and whispering tender things to Mademoiselle Henriette, I adventured to kifs his lifter: this attention She was ungrateful enough to return with a few Smart strokes of her fan, which totally demolislied one of my fide curls, and crippled the other; I was piqued and astonished at this rebuff, the reason of which I could not conceive; for when tite h the with her at her brother’s, far greater encroachments had been permitted with Christian resignation. When I retired to bed, the enigma was unravelled; I found my Ups and one of my cheeks plentifully tinged with the die of the Iberian fleece 1 the next morning I consulted 
F 3. my 
86 
The AMERICAN 
my Apollo in etiquette le Marquis de petit isien, who, with our elegant friend le Comte de Tour de Pin, were of opinion that I had committed a great enormity; — they observed to me that there were only two kiftable Spots in a full dressed French lady’s face; they were very minute on each fide of her face, between her cheeks and her lips; that there were French masters who 'got a comfortable living by instructing foreigners in this art; and that these learned gentlemen were called maidres de la geography du ^ifage des dames paths. As I am determined to i'espect, not only the religion, but even les petites morales of every country in which I reside, I ordered a profestbr of this delicate art to attend me the next morning. I begin to make a progress, and that I may not forget what I have taken Such pains to acquire, • I siiali 
r 
i 
WANDERER. 
87 
t Qiall be happy to practice with you, and will even assign to you my knowledge, gratis, if ever I return to England. 
Adieu. 
f4 LETTER 
The AMERICAN 
LETTER VIII 
Su ^entin. 
That it may not be fupposed I affect to deviate from the beaten 
path trod by the host of travellers, of all ♦ 
ranks and denominations, who have, unluckily for my celebrity, preceded me in the tour of France, I will attempt a stiort Sketch of the principal places through which I pafss I shall thus elude the imputation of stngularity; but as I feel, I Sliali be auk ward in the execution, and as you may, at any time, have recourse to the elaborate manufacture, in this way, of a variety of mechanical authors already extant, I shall very much generalise my descriptions of streets of towns, brooks and rivers, dales and mus, mountains and Seas A landscape 
. - Sketched 
WANDERER. 
gi 
Sketched by the'even of genius, conveys but a vague and confuscd idea of a country unexplored by the eye of feti/e. Indeed I confess I am too indolent to Succeed in this wallc, nor Shall I ever envy those who can. It has often been my misfortune to be taxed with a mechanical traveller, who, instead of relaxing himself from his fatigue, by exploring the new style of beauty and manners of the inhabitants of the town; instead of acquiring its origin and public history, from the communicative mon steur tabbe, or the Secret history of the present inhabitants, by flattering into frankness the naive and degagh mille ner, casts a look of pity, blended with contempt, upon his feilow travellers; exhibits an enormous common place book | draws out his Scale and compastes falls to meastiring the length of an old church, or the heiglit of a mutilated statue, and Scribbling alternately j all this he does 
with 
90 
The AMERICAN 
with the most unrelaxed solemnity of phiz. • He introduces his vade mecum at his meals; he sips his tea with a gravity quite edifying, then writes, looks wise; and writes and stps, and Sips and writes by turns. In vain do we attempt, by the introduction of nonpareil burgundy to call him off; in vain does exhilarating champagne mantle and Sparkle near his olfactory nerves! Hermitage, coat roti, noin de nuit or vin du pas, are all one to him; he fills his glass, pastes the bottle, drinks, is stlent, and writes on. When he is disposed to be what, in a stagecoach is called pretty compan^j, he will read to iis his travels. Here a town, there a village, here a post houfe is accurately delineated; now we pafs a river, then we ford a brook, now we again pals a river, and arrive at a valley refrestied by a babbling stream. We are then informed that a certain number of trees 
which 
WANDERER, 
91 
which (oh, wondrous strange!) stioot up fpontaiieous and suspended, hang on the margin of the stream, produce a refreshing Shade! “If these trees were wanting, this retreat would be less commodious to the weary traveller! that in the fall, the leaves of these trees wither, fade, and die, leaving the branches and trunk without raiment, and of course wholly exposed to the biting frost, and nipping northern blasts which are apt, in this valley to howl during the winter months, ” transforming the grass which is naturally green, into a rust'et brown lingular melancholy change I This giyes him a happy ' occasion to moralife; he tells his fair readers that roses will fade, pinks will sicken, lilies languisti and hang their pallid heads: he prettily plays with this novel discovery during two or three pages— — he draws a corollary equally singular and striking, 
to 
02 The AMERICA N 
to witj that when ladies are old, they will be no longer young! he now thinks it high time to quit this delicious valley 5 we, in consequence, mount a hill; here a melancholy coup d’oeil opens upon us I a wide extended barren plain; not a a tree nor even a Shrub on which to rest our aching eyes I not one drop of water with which to allay our parching thirst I here no flocks bleat 1 no wood pigeons coo! no cows bellow for their Simple calves I Dreading to be overwhelmed in a whirlwind, which, peradventure, might fpising up in this Sandy desart, we dasli boldly on, and, at length we are relieved from our apprehensions by the unexpected apparition of a Sweet wood; which opens upon a pleasant villagcj which again leads us to a waste, prettily terminated by a picturesque prospect of a Swamp, or a gallows, or an hermitage, or an abbey, or an old woman paying 
WANDERER. 
93 
ing her vows to the goddess, or a gibbet, or Some other object equally ■peculiar to foreign countries. We then fall foul of an ancient castle, which he accurately delineates, and leaves in our imagination a confused jumble of pillars, of cornices of bastb relievo, of orders Gothic, Doric, Jonic, but not one stngle distinct idea. 
If you wisti for accurate descriptions of steeples, churches, columns, streets, send over Some such elaborate fellow as I have described, whose head is. equally hard with the stone he will haie to work upon; for me, mine be the laudable ambition to Soar at higher game, manners, and mankind, that nobler part, especially \yoman kind, 'are my darling objects! these I stiall unceasingly explore; these divine forms I stiall, with philofb phic ardour, eagerly pursue even to their more hidden retreats; and though qiy feeble talents little befriend me in 
the 
p4 
The AMERICAN 
the curious investigation, my zeal may enlighten my powers, or I may console myself in my defeat, magnis tamen occidit aufus I in great attempts ’tis glorious e’en to sail I 
St. Quentin is a town in Picardy, hanging upon the Confines of that part of French Flanders called the Cambrefis; it has twelve parishes; the chanoins appertaining to the cathedral church have genteel and liberal stipends aisistng from wheat which is commuted for money. The town, may contain about nine thousand souls; the principal of whom, with respect to riches, are French protestants, whose opulence results from a liberal and ex » tenlivetraffic in the cambric manufacture, of which they have in Some measure robbed Cambray. This town, I believe, was formerly more populous than it now is; it is famous for a great victory obtained here by the Spaniards, monuments 
W A N D E R E R, 
95 
jnents of which yet remain in the town. In iionour of this victory, and in consequence of a vow made to obtain it, the escurial at Madrid was built by Philip IL of Spain. St. Quentin Stands upon a site very elevated, upon a hill riling on both lides gradually, from the adjacent plains The air is consequently Subtle and elastic. The ramparts, which in the provincial towns of this country generally form the .Mall, are Said to be the highest and most beautiful of any in France; they are about a mile and a half round, finely Shaded on each fide of the walk, by trees planted for that purpose, which here and there open to a country picturesque, and lovely beyond defcisiption. The height of the ramparts gives large Scope to the eye, which ranging over a Sweet and beautiful vancty of hills, meadows, and water, rests upon woods, rich, tall, and luxuriant, isifing, in bold amphitheatre and Sweetly robing the lides of 
the 
g6 
The AMERICAN 
the circumjacent mountains; the lowing of thekine, the bleating of the sheep, who in one field crop the tender grass; the blithe Picarde female peasants, who with fuccino: cotillons, bleach Cambric in the contiguous closes, form a happy contrast. Flere people of fashion, of either sex, assemble about five o’clock, after their dinner, which is at a very early hour III all provincial French town; here they walk, chat, caper, make love, make parties to vingt un, hr el an, r ever see, or high mafs, a religious ceremony, with these pleasant people, being a party of pleasure. In the morning here sat Abbes walk and get an appetite to their vermicelli Soup, while they ponder upon divine things, ladies and lapdogs;; students ambulate, ruminating the cud of Science; here too, in the evening, lovelorn Swains and damsels, of all orders, arm in arm, or walk, or loll on the inviting benches; expressing the big 
wistis 
WANDERER 

wisli, letting fall tears of Sentimental teu dernefs, and bartering sighs, Soft as the vernal breeze, which gently agitating the imminent branches, harmonifes with their innocent feelings! Here too, at nightfall, the anti platonic swain, stung with lawless love, urges to the unhallowed bower, the half willing, half affrighted maid, while the confeious stars and^the pale moon blusti and steken at the impious abuse of that modest light they dispense to frail mortals! Often alone in my robe de chamber, I ramble round these delightful ramparts, a philosophic Spectator of the motley exhibitions they afford; Sometimes I Sally forth in a style, gallanting my two younger stff ters, la 'petite Collette on one fide, la belle Henriette on the other, and mingle with the delighting and delighted throng \ What a vain stlly people, quoth the splenetic traveller! thrice happy country, say I! thrice happy pleashnt beings! 
G who 
98 
The AMERICAN 
who can extract felicity from Sources So trivial! to be contented with little, is Said to be wisdom; not only to be contented, to be gay, blithsome, dehonnairz with a little, often with nothing, this is the eligible fcjuvoir vivre; this is true philosophy. 
Farewell. 
LET 
WANDERER. 
'99 
LETTER IX 
St, ^entin. 
'^jphere are twenty convents and churches at St. Quentin. One of the convents very/liberally endowed, and fb Spacious that it occupies almost one whole fide of la bellerue St. Vincent — It is appropriated to ladies of rank and fortune, nuns and pensioners, that is, in English, boarding fchool mistes, who re stde here, learning to knot, make Jile^ pointy en attendant mart. The abbess is nominated by the King. It is called fer vacque, or la convent de riches danes. The richer sort of people here are Protestants; but have no religious place of worlliip. They are however allowed a Sepulture, which is, I believe, a piece of ground belonging tomonlieur debreifac. 
G 2 The 
TOO The AMERICAN 
o 
The streets are wide, the buildings of brick : there is, I think, no house of singular architecture; nor indeed any church of note, except la grande Eglife^ or Cathedral, which is certainly a noble pile of building, and, viewed from the ramparts, lists the eye most happily, exhibiting, in my poor opinion, very Sweet, just, elegant, and bold proportions. There is one of the many Sacred paintings within worth regarding — the features of the Virgin give an idea of sweetness, innocence, and majesty, harmoniousty blended. To this church I frequently attend mademoiselle H— —. Sometimes 
chants the hymns, and methinks I hear the choral symphony of angels! 
Society is upon a liberal plan in this town. A gentleman who comes here for health, amusement, or, as many do, to learn the language, is commended to Some merchant in the town, it being 
not 
WANDERER. 
loi 
not a town of noblesse;; have they the military amongst them. This gentleman attends his friend to each particular house of the quanier^ as they’ ar called — that is, to the principal people of the place. These visits are sure to be returned, and this is all the introduction requisite — You are, from this time, expected to present yourself at all their routes, concerts, c. They, in turn, give astemblies frecyuently, and elegant astemblies too. They have in winter two concerts a week; performers gentlemen, and of course it is an amusement you have gratis — there are many musical cognofeenti in this town. There is also a very elegant little theatre, which is frequently" filled by good actors. At their routes or card parties they play for bagatelles, almost pour pajjh' h temps — sofar from your expecting a formal invitation to them, the lady thinks herself }u nfcd if you do not make your entrh^ 
G 3 
102 The AMERICAN 
to fill up her room — and this is the less onerous, since if you just make your appearance it is Sufficient — You play or not, glide in or out, when and as often as you please— — have wine, and cake, and comfitures handed to you, or displayed on a sideboard, and the lady during the evening engages as many as will fill her table to Sup with her. There is a route or card party every night, at Some one house or another. In fine weather you give your arm to the ladies, gallant them to the ramparts, and taste as Sweet a landscape as ever filled the ravistied eye. Thus, if a stranger has a Social bias, his time will be easily killed at St. Qiientin. We have frequently Englisti families residing here. There is at present a lovely young Englisti married lady, a Madame 
de -- -- -- at St. Quentin — her husband, 
though a German, in his ideas of domestic government is as liberal as a Frenchman — He has Surely no acquaintaee with 
the 
WANDERER. 
03 
the green ey’d monster, or he would not leave this lovely jewel at St. Quentin, while he trudges over Europe, chewing the cud of Some half digested mercantile project. Were stie mine, I would be the oak and She the ivy. She is indeed a diamond of small magnitude, but of a most exquistte water! of course She is adored by every St. Qiientin petit-maitre from fourteen to fourscore. We have also a Mrs. Hunter, an Englisti lady, who has for many years restded here. She is the widow of a general officer — is a woman of birth and of finistied breeding, and highly respected at St. Quentin -- -- stie understands Italian; Speaks 
French eepaally well with a native, and pronounces with more grammatical purity 
than the French ladies in general -- -- stie 
contributes to render this town agreeable to her countrymen. There are four gentlemen with myself restding here, 
a Mr. Fane, bro 
to learn the language 
G 4 
104 The AMERICAN 
brother to Lord W -- da very handsome 
fasliionable young man; a Mr. Chatham, eldest Son of a gentleman of a, large fortune, a very good fellow;; the only Son of a younger brother of the late Lord A. who I call the marc}uis de petit rien — as I love a stnistied character, I cannot but be partial to him. ‘the Marquis de petit rien is certainly unique !> He whirls with splendid eccentnclty from the brilliant Trb of petit niaitres^ and blazes a comet 1 lam delighted to see hini carry the war into the enemy’s country! to soil them at their own weapons i It is charming to see the descendant of the 
gallant Duke of O -- - shine a coxcomb 
worthy the envy and admiration of a region which ha, for ages, been stippofed the European hotbed for the growth, production, and manufacture of true genuine unadulterated coxcombs! He Is indeed very young, a mere boy; has vyit ahd talents — speaks French prettily, 
hums 
WANDERER, 
ioj 
hums an Italian air, dances divinely plays upon the mandolin, knots file, and makes sweetmeats!! the levity of youth and the vagaries of self-love recede; when years Shall have mellowed his fancy and matured his judgement, 1 hope aiid believe my amiable little friend the Marqiils Me petit rien will be a usefuj member of Society, and. Should issue of his cousin fail, : auoenantcnt to thehoufe of Peers. We countrymen mingle with each other as much as our attention to the object for which we reside here will 
permit -- Sometimes we dine with each 
Other; Sometimes we give little fetes, to which we invite the fashionable young people of St. Qiientin. I once a fortnight exhibit a public breakfast with a little concert in my way : the Marquis de petit rien touches his mandolin, the honourable Mr. F. the German flute, the Count de Chamble, the violoncello; the t\vo mesdemoiselles Laney, mes lionnes 
amies, 
so 
The AMERICAN 
amiesy ling dcs f elites chanfonnettes tendres. Mr. Chatham and I talk nonsense to the ladies. My breakfast conlists of tea, coffee, de petits faucijfottsy du jam horiy du vin hlanc, et des comfitures — the whole, together with my concert des amateiirsy costs me about a quarter of a guinea. When the concert is over petit ricn teaches by example his petite chienne to make entre chats! Madame Nardine fvvims a minuet with M. le Count detour 
de Pin; Monli C -- -- m drinks du vin 
muscat comme un pojfedvy the bewitching Mademoiselle Montpeffan, Snatching the hand of Mons. le Chevalier, whifks him two or three mazes of an allemand, and most cruelly, at the very critical part of the tune, where the gentleman is obliged to dwell I minute 45 Seconds upon the lips of the lady to fill up the time. She skips like a fawn out of the Saloon, bounding across the square to the houk vardy leaving her less mercurial partner ‘ to 
WANDERER: 
: 
to fall after her with his invaluable freight — the ladies farafol in one arm, his shaggy rival Monsieur Jou jou in the 
other -- the whole party file off in pairs, 
and either lounge on the ramparts, or stroll to the beautiful wood lafayette, about a mile from the town, in whose lovely lawns, copses, and groves we ramble or loll on the mossy grass, crown our mistreffes with young honeytuckle, interwoven with woodbine and wild roses— — we folatre until the hour of dinner approaches; the whole party' unceasingly capering, gambolling, and laughing with or at each other, God knows which. 
L 
This wood with the adjoining villa is, I think, at present possessed by a Dowager of the Noaille family. It is thrown open to the people of St. Qiientin, and highly contributes to the recreation and health of the inhabitants — art with nature conspires to render it a delicious retreat, a happy asylum fyom the noise and hurry 
pf 
io T, he AMERICAN 
of the town. Once a year, hi September, there is a fete champetre exhibited at Fayette. It is composed of the beau jnonde of St, Quentin, and the Swains and nymphs of the adjacent villages. It continues three days, and is an uninterrupted Scene of feasting and hilarity little bands of muck are assembled in the various bowers, where cotillon.parties are formed, coquetting parties arranged, and love matches adjusted good humour and glee pervade the whole forest. In a word, of lafayette, though 
less georgous, less brilliant, yet, well I ween a happiness rnore unmixed, more pure, and exalted, did not inspire the British youth, who adorned the fete cham petre in honour of the lovely maid of the. oaks! 
Adieu. 
LETTER 
WANDERER. 
16^ 
LETTER X 
Sr, ^tentin, 
jpardon a profound Silence during an interval of two months. Your menacing letter lies before me, and I kiss the rod which chaftises me. Although your approbation is ever the utmost boundatry of my ambition, yet, believe me, I admire you in your reproofs, % feel that I must be culpable. Since I have offended you, ' and I prostrate myself, with all becoming humility, at your feet a suppliant for mercy. 
Thought and recollection are no friends to a man in my unpleasant predicament i have therefore endeavoured to stiun such uncivil intruders : lulled in though oblivious lap of careless philosophic French indolence, I have been whiling away 
mf 
110 tme AMERICAN ' 
my time, the world forgetting by the world forgot. I thus endeavour to elude the agonizing'remembrance of the anarchy which pervades my country; the misfortunes of my family; the dispersion of my friends, and the wreck of my own private fortune. I was taking leftons of this merry people in the happy science of frivolity; I was beginning to make a progress in my studies; I was indeed reducing my science to pradice, while in my Indian nightgown and African slippers I sauntered with my profestbr, an honest rofy cheeked friar of the steek order of St. Bernard, when I was aroused from my Lethean stupor by your epistle. As darkness vanisties at the approach of Aurora, fo at thy e’en ideal presence I awake to fenstbility! the big wish swells my heart, the tear of sentiment fuffufes my eye at the poignant reflection that yet, oh yet! the sea roars between heaven and me! 
Yet, 
WANDERER. 
111 
Yet, trust me, it was mere terrestiai ideas of which I sought an oblution. I felt I could not succeed in the attempt; nor indeed did I wisti to forget things divine! the lock of hair which you deigned to tie about my neck yet vibrates on my palpitating bosom!! it stiall ever rest, a sacred talisman, protecting its faithful owner ’gainst the numerous mischances by flood or field which await him in his weary journey, in his hopeless attempt to flee from the voice of the charmer! 
Forgive me if an air of melancholy pervades this letter. I cannot avoid it just now — if I would write cordially — It is really a faithful transcript of my present feelings; for I am upon the point of quitting, perhaps for ever, St. Qiientin, and its amiable inhabitants. The day after tomorrow I fet out for Paris. I dread it is my lot perpetually to wander; 
yet 
m3 The American 
yet a heart, too fusceptible of the contagion of friendship, tells me nature formed me not for a traveller — never yet did I stray one four and twenty hours in the most homely modest village without feeling my Social affections Springing forth, arid attaching themselves to Some particle of organised matter! Never did I say to myself, I see this sweet village maid, who with the blustiing innocence of a Hebe presents me, for the lajl time, a cup of milk; or this mutilated Soldier who, for the lajl time, boasts of his seats; for the lajl time bares his head, embroidered by the shbres of the enemy; for the lafi time with his cicatrized arm waves to me a cordial farewell, without breathing an unbidden stgh, without feeling an involuntary pang! nay I never, for the iaji time, behold the purring of a village cat, receive the blandishments of an old houfe dog, or e’en theadieu of an honest jack afs, without exclaiming in the 
bitter 
WANDERER. 
113 
blttcrnefs of my grief, mine honest fisiend, ere we both return to dust, I will again, if it be within the laws of postibility, return to thee! again I will listen, hi^h pleased, to thy indignant brayings against the ingratitude of mankind! again I will Solace mine eyes withteontemplating, wistfully, thy sincere, artless, simple philosophic phiz I If then I do, as indeed I do, respire the sigh of regret at the idea of breaking off these the less stiining part of acquaintance, how must my heart bleed to be torn from the Social elegantly learned converse of the lettered churchman; the bruiiant ebullitions of the gay accomplistied petit-maitre; the feast of Sentiment and flow of soul, with my heaven born Picard Madonna I Dear, angelic, long sufferiiig maid, who with the person of a Venus, and the fbul of a dying Saint, is yet doomed to a precarious dependance upon the capricious and the vain, — kis not a pasting hour 
H since 
II The AMERICAN 
Since thou didst present me with thyr purse, the work of thine hands, with the night ribbon, wherewith to bind my weary temples; thy sunny eyes were humid with tears, through which thou fmiledst more beautiful than a Hourie; — thou faidst, mon chevalier fouvenez vous, de nos amidi'ts! fouvenez vous queiquefois de la malheureuse Henriette et de fon trifle, histoire!! the hapless Henrietta and her story! her story, which not till now, wouldst thou ever tell him; it is indeed a tale of woe, — you must not hear it; it would be too much for your gentle heart; it would extract sympathetic tears from the eyes of apathy! mild, lovely, fascinating maid! fo may the god of Sentiment deal with me, as I remem ber, gratefully remember thee! and if ever wir, the plague most dreadful which God in his wrath has permitted to visit the unhappy children of men, if horrid war lliall cease to rage in my native country. 

WANDERER. 
” 5 
try, I will Speak peace to thy wounded spirit! or if this beatitude is denied me at least, I may open an asylum to persecuted beauty! thou mayest seek stielter under my vine, and repose under my fig tree : and my household gods, proud of such a guest. Shall protect thee with their divine influence. 
Gentle petit maidres of St. Qiientin I dehonnairey blithe Picard maids, coquet ifli, fascinating nymphs, fain would your pauvre Atiglois express to you his never dying thanks for the Sweet emotions, your brilliant wit, your still more bisil liant eyes, have impressed on his susceptible soul! But here exprestion sails! fain would he, while his hand prefses his beating breast, breathe out the word adieu! but his grateful heart Swells too big for utterance, and the fatal word, lost in an agonising flgh, dies upon his trembling lips I 
H 2 And 
ii 
The AMERICAN 
And thou finished model, designed by fairy hands, elegant petit rieti^ though last, not least in love! farewell! Whenever the thorns which So plentifully spring under the feet of an hapless wanderer, (hall be contrasted by a bed of roses;; I strall behold a lily of the valley, or an iisis robed tulip, or a a pink flaunting in all the pride of its birthday Suit, then will a cafustl afloci atioii of ideas recall thy fairy form to my view! then will I recollect thy delicacy of soul harmonising with thy still more delicate frame! I have made a vow, ancl I will, at Paris cull for thee, the quintessence of choice boqisets, and wafted on the wings of love, it shall be conveyed to thy bosom! 
Pity me, and do not laugh at this, rhapsody, for indeed, fair lady, I am at present in what the French call a mood larmo^ante I I feel that a wandering life, 
to 
WANDERER. 
117 
to which it Seems you and fate condemn me, cannot lead to a happy end! I am going yet farther from you, and that idea would died gaul and wormwood in my path, did the journey lead me, not to Paris, the Utofia of coxcotnhs, but e’en to the paradise of Mahomet, where ga nymedes wmuld pour out nectar to the weary traveller, and all lovely, half willing, blushing Houries Smooth his pillow. 
Farewell. 
h3 
LET 
ii The AMERICAN 
LETTER XL 
Paris, 
Taking a French leave of my Madonay and the fair town where file deigns to abide, I arrived here ten days ago, accompanied by Mr. Chatham, an englisli gentleman residing at St. Quentin, whose partiality to me, induced him to take a trip in my company to the capital. We pafted through co/iupeigne, a royal residence, and its princely forest, but met with no incident in our flying journey, worthy your attention. The morning after our arrival, we hired a caroffe de remise, and with our valet de flace behind, sallied out to reconnoitre the town. This capitol has been So minutely described by a variety of travellers, wliofe talents and opportunities far exceeded mine, that an elaborate detail 
would 
WANDERER. 
119 
Would be Superfluous and presuniptuous. There are, I am informed, many dif fufiye writers upon this Subject, yet; Smollet excepted, I do not recollect I have read any of them; the few remarks, therefore, which I will venture to make to you, if not interesting, will at least have the merit of being original. It is my way to derineate my ideas limply as they arise upon the Subject before me. I have too much indolence to beat my noddle for a brighter thought, or a more brilliant dress in which to robe it; and I have too much pride to copy; if then my observations are trivial or ridiculous, 1 frankly confess the folly is my own; yet, in my cursory remarks upon this place, my fellow traveller, while he con ^ tin Lies with me, shall share the ridicule. You have long ago, I dare say, Set me down, if bistfted at all, guilty of a Angular prejudice for an engiislrman, a predilection for the French nation. Mr. 
H 4 Chatham 
120 
The AMERICAN 
Chatham is as opposite to me in this, as Indus to the Pole; this gave me a singular Satisfaction in his company. A different style of thinking, upon points not essential to morals, or honour, when softened by philanthropy and breeding, in my opinion, forms the basis of the agreeable in a fellow traveller. An insipid famenfefs of conception, a monotony, if I may be indulged the expression, of thought, renders two travellers like two parallel lines; they glide on side by sid to eternity! no hopes of touching, no hopes therefore of combining in social fisiendiliip, harmony, and love; in strort, a voyage even through the Elysian Fields, with such a chalk and cream fouled wight, would to me be as dull and melancholy as a lover’s lute, ” or the drone of a Highland bagpipe, or that consummation of dullness, a city feast I Conceive not from what I have just Said, that I would Submit to loll in the same post chaife with that noxious animal, a 
pro 
WANDERER. 
ir 
professional disputant. No, I would chase a companion who would keep attention awake by feeing really, not affecting to see, the same object in a different point of view from mine; this would mutually excite emulation; we should adduce various reasons in support of our different opinions; and thus the subject, whether vegetable or animal, pisimrofepetit maitre or coquette, would be turned topfy turvy, aiid accurately handled; and thus the miffs of error receding before the rays of truth, our mutual prejudices, clafliing against; each other, might be dissipated. 
Now, my friend C — -- -- -- -- -- mis as 
thorough bred an Englishman as ever hanged himself in a November fog; he carries the war into the enemies country', fronding most unmercifully, man, woman, and child, all the animal, all the vegetable kingdom, which has the misfortune to be of French origin; — not a blade of grass escapes him. He is as robust. 
122 
The AMERICAN 
bust, hearty, handsome, rofy cheeked ad Englifltmaii as you shall wish to see; he has a remarkable fine head of hair, yet upon our first: acquaintance at sr<t Quentin he lamented with tearful eye, * that his father confined him' in this noxious climate. I think it my duty. Sir; said he, to inform you, that the men are all scoundrels, the women all w— — j there is no flavour or nurnment in their beef or mutton, insomuch, that my hair has fallen off' through deprivation of radical moisture. If I stay here another twelvemonth, I expect to become quite bald! We happened at the time to be walking through the market, which, adapted to the size of the town, is as good a one with respect to meat, vegetables and butter, as I ever saw: : my word. Sir, those cabbages have the semblance of being good cabbages, such large oies I never before beheld. I grant you the cabbages are large, firm and white, yet, 
upon 
WANDERER; 
123 
npoii honour. Sir, I know by experience there is no nutriment in them, they are notenglisli cabbages; this being a truilin I had no more to fay: though naturally a good-natured, and really a Sensible fellow, never did I find my friend looking at the bright side of a French prospect until we came to Paris. As we drove up the Street St. Honore, his muscles began to dilate to a Smile; but, when turning to the left, our coach stopped upon the pont neuli where the eye takes in a prodigious Scope of building, on every side upon a Scale bold, grand, and Superb in the extreme! while I was lost in speechless admiration, my friend exclaimed .with an air of high Satisfaction, blended with strong marks of furprise and astonistiment, good God! I must allow Paris to be a noble town! never before, not even in London, did I behold Such a grand coup (Tcoil I certainly Paris, however, it may be Smaller, 
have 
Hi The AMERICAN 
have less beautiful Squares, be less coni modlous and comfortable, is upon a more sublime Scale of beauty than London; The grand range of fine Stone houses on each Side of the Seine; the princely building called the Louvre, one fide of which opens to a view of the Tulleisie> create a high idea of the riches, power; and magnificence of the Bourbon family. The streets of Paris are in general narrow, destitute of foot paths or trotoirs, consequently by no means fo commodte ous as those of London. Indeed of all the cities I ever Saw, Paris is the least eligible for peripatetics of all denominations, whether the habit arises from poverty, or her lister, philosophy. If you are abstracted for a moment you will be brought to yourself by a broken leg. Reveries in the streets of Paris are extremely mal a propos, tout a fait hors dq saison. From the in commodity of the streets, the hackney coachmen are more 
numerous. 
WANDERER, 
25 
niuuerous, the drivers, if possible, less civil than their brethren of London. You have only a choice of difficulties and dish graces; you must either let a fiacre drive against you, to the danger of your limbs, or you must plunge into a heap of mud to the danger of your muff, chapeau brass, and all your Parisian parapharnalia; it must be confefted these bout de Parts asylums are very plentifully distributed on each fide of the streets, and are the dernier reforte of the walking inhabitants. Wonderful is the stdll derived from cush tom, and from a destre to enjoy the ruling pastion. Looking out of the window of my hotel, this morning, I observed a petit-maitre about five feet six inches high, he had on a coat velour, de printems, a rich Lyons waistcoat, gre de lind small clothes, ' chapeau brass cane, parapluie and a huge muff. You would apprehend Such a cargo was enough to overset the poor little gentleman. I admired his address 
in 
126 The AMERICAN 
in the emergency. No general ever reconnoitred with more eager eye, or chose his ground with more sedulous and anxious attention previous to a battle that might decide the fate of kingdoms! I I felt for him, it was the Rue St. ho nore, the most frequented in Paris; every rude charioteer who darted by my little friend, made me tremble with him and for him. While he glided on tiprtoe, | followed him with my aching eye, near a quarter of a rnil^> id I had the happiness to find that he surmounted all hi difficulties, without the least speck on his silk stocking, or the least stain upon his embroidered vest. Gentle fluttering, flitting thing! from my soul I congratulate your victory, and I honour you for your masterly manoeuvres!! may you elude the dire mifliaps which await your profession! fb may Bon yon, the favourite lapdog of your mistress, forego his hold, and spare your chatfau brass[ fo may 
her 
WANDERER. 
12' 
her peroqnet forbear to consecrate to the goddess, your swanlike muff! Foreigners, are not So adroit. We had a rich citizen of Rotterdam, with his only daughter, who took a Suite of apartments in our hotel, arriving in Paris, with a view of residing three months, to siiew miss the capitol, and its environs. The morning after his arrival, the Dutchman Sallied put to take a comfortable walk, see sights, and get an appetite to his dinner. The day before I had offered myself, and had been accepted as chaperone to the young lady; in a few minutes papa returned, and never did I before see phlegmatic Dutchman in Such an immortal rage! he swore that, of all places in the world, Paris was the most barbarous; its inhabitants were as boorifli as Tramontanes, were totally destitute of breeding! a Dutchman criticising upon Parisian inci pivility was a novelty that excited our at pntion j he Said, he had been trudging 
quietly 
128 The AMERICAN 
quietly along, ruminating upon a purchase in the english stocks, when he was alarmed by a fplasti of mud plump in his face, Succeeded by a cry of, gave Mynheer, gnre! gave / endeavouring to make way, he stumbled into a d -- -^ — d quagmire; recovering, stiaking and adjusting himself, he advanced, stinking along, stunned and abastied all the way by the hues of gartyon feruquiers, the tittering of grisfetts, and the chattering and grinning of Marquis, he believed they called them. He, however, arrived as far as the barrier, when he was induced to halt by a file of bayonets, pointed at his breast, and glittering in his eyes, which it seems was, lest he stiould be in the way of the running footman, preceding the chaise of Madame la Duchesse de Chartres. Finding the military law beginning to prevail over the civil, he wheelled to the right about, with a determination to quit this execrable town 
imrne 
WANDERER. 
129 
immediately, declaring that he thought a Dutch hogsty an abode much more neat and comfortable than the capitol of France. Immediately after dinner, he hoisted his fat fided, though comely daughter, into a chaise de poji, and drove off with precipitation Singular indeed for a Dutchman! hurrying back Mils, bien a contre cm to dabble in her native dikes, far from brutality and Frenchmen! to acquire, far from Versailles and Marli, the last refinements of poli teffe, by frequenting the beatt monde of Rotterdam !!! I thought myself the principal Sufferer, by the retreat of the indignant Dutchman; for I had finistied with incredible dispatch, and in the preceding evening had opened a battery of my French artillery against the Dutch hulk of a daughter, which Seemed to make practicable breaches through the clumly timbers of her left fide. I had also poured In upon her a fiiower dcs petites lotianger^ 
I des 
^30 The AMERICAN 
des fetites attentions, et des petits riens. tonnes neeufs dc Varfenal de V erf allies! in short, I had So egregiousiy flattered Miss, that I began to flatter myself Miss vas upon the point of beating the chainade with an offer of cart blanche, when this wily Dutchman thus railed the liege, wresting from me my prey in the very moment of victory, and with dutchified unhallowed hand, tearing away the laurels which were beginning to wreathe themselves around my glorious brows! 
F A R E w E L L 
LET 
WANDERER. 
131 
LETTER 
XII 
Paris. 
jf the streets are incommodious for the walker, the noble andpleafant gardens, to which he may at all times have recourse, make him ample amends. Sauntering in public walks and gardens is an innocent and Salutary amusement, of which the French are much enamoured. The gardens of London, I think, are not comparabte to those of Paris, either for the elegant design of the gardens themselves, or the brilliant dress of those who frequent them. The Tuileries, Palais Royal, Lnxemburgh, elystanfields, and Bois de Boulogne, as efforts of art, are Undoubtedly superior to St. james’s, the Green Park, and Kensington — altho’, for myself, I think Kensington and St. 
I z james’s 
IS 
The AMERICAN 
james’s Park more prodigal of natural beauty than any of thepariflan gardens — Undoubtedly the sudden burst of the Tuileries, from the grand entrance of the Louvre, strikes the Spectator with au idea of the grand and beautiful, blended with the picturesque and romantic, which enr chants the soul, and hurries him in imagination to thole gardens of Elylium So, sweetly Sung by ancient bards, a faint Semblance of which he sees terminating: the vievv of the Tuileries, and like them, called Champs Elifes. Yet, metlfmks the hand of art is not enough concealed; the eye of taste is Soon sated, and wisties to range over die less gorgeous, but more natural, more Sweet, more lovely Mall of St. james’s! Your fair countrywomen too, more artless, less gaudy, more innocent, more natural, harmonise with the Simply elegant style of beauty predominant in St. james’s Park; exalting the soul of the enamoured gazer 
from 
WANDERER. 
33 
from those lovely types of divine power to the Supreme Architect hinifelf: thus, ^ walk in St. james’s Park, to a man of a right tiirh of thinking, is not only benign and Salutary; it is also a religious and truly orthodox exercise— — I generally prefer this ftth dio worsliip to going to church. A fine woman, I have ever been of opinion, exhibits a most: persuasive d fofteriord. argument in favour of a first: cause. I own indeed one painful idea occurs to me upon the oc eafion : I see in St. james’s Park many Alining female constellations gliding iil a Sphere sofar above me, that it pains mine eyes to look up to them — especially when I look up to them with Tittle hope of their coming within my Sphere of attraction; So little hope, indeed that I am fain to gaze upon them as fo many Virgin Marys — Now this is an idea that never strikes you in your ramble through the Tuileries; a French wo 
I g man’s 
i34 
The AMERICAN 
man’s air and manner is by no means calculated to preclude hope — however a French lady may be determined to dispute every inch of ground, to make a belle defence, yet is the imagination of her admirer always tickled with the ecstatic prospect of being soon ustiered to the fan ft um fan Bor urn of the Cyprian temple! I do not instnuate, that chastity is a flower peculiar to British soil — Genius may hereafter arise in Holland, humility in. Scotland, modesty in Ireland, and pure patriotism in England — and I do believe that chastity, though a northern plant, will Sometimes live in a Southern hotbed— — certain it is, a French woman totally degagee and deliee in her air, is also in her manners more philosophical, less confined, less strait laced than she ladles of your humid hemisphere. 
The Palais Royal is a pretty garden j she grand alley or mall in the spring and 
Sum 
WANDERER. 
^3^ 
summer Season is enchanting. The tops bf the noble trees on each fide mutually incline, entwine their amorous branches and embrace each other with expsteffive tenderness, exhibiting a natural and very instructive lefton to the brilliant animals bf either Sex that fit; or loll in chairs, or play around the margin of the stieet of water, or walk in the stiady alley below; Haunting in all the elegance of fashion, dazzling each other by the brilliancy of their wit; and the still more brilliant hue of their dress; displaying the most attractive astemblage of the beauties of art and nature that ever feasted the eye of a contemplative traveller. Paris Surely is the native region of wit, politeness, e; i jouehitent, vivacity, and total exemption from Serious thought and corroding Care — gay, engaging happy people, you say to yourself every step you take in the Tuileries — upon my honour they appeared to me a Society of itself, who had 
I 4 cn 
136 
The AMERICAN 
entered into a compact to forget or laugh at every care, every ill, every anxiety of life! — the whole group seemed animated by this one single idea — never could I trace a gloomy thought in the face of a French man or woman parading the mazes of the Tuileisies! — the lady is eternally bowing, fidgeting. Smiling;, languilliing, or flirugging her shoulders: the petit-maitre flattering, chattering, laughing, cringing, hopping, flopping, making entre chats, and buffetting the ambient air with his red heels! This air is certainly contagious. Falstafffays, that he “is not only witty himself, but the cause of wit in others fo may a Parisian petit-maitre boast, that he is not only a coxcomb himself, but he inspires strangers with his native puppyifm. Would you think it? I too have my red heels! and, since I have arrived at Paris, 
I find I iiave taken wonderful pains to render myseif completely ridiculous, if 
ever 
WANDERER. 137 
ever I return to London. With respect to my Parilian metamorphose in genera it proceeds from Sheer vanity, which you will fuppose not a little gratified whenever I bear, as I flit along the Mall, in answer to an'audible whisper, void un homme de condition Eeji il pas? — cieji 
monsieur un tel vo^ageur Anglois moii 
Dieul Je Paurait cru veritable Cavalier frant^ois I il fe form rapidement! il attrape la maniere de nous autresl appara* mentis a diefprit / I take Shame to myself, and acknowledge this may be my general motive; but my order to my slioe maker for a crimson heel was rather a political than a vain manoeuvre. The argumentum ad hominejn, in plain english, the driving the nail that will go, is a Species of reasoning to which I frequently have recourse : now you must know, that a crimson heel is a pafh par tout into many places here worthy of being explored by a curious traveller. It a 
mazin gly 
13^ The american 
niazingly Smoothes and facilitates an in troductio^ to the Softer Sex. I love td dress as a man of fashion, calculated td the meridian of the Spot where I reside— — not that I affect dress myself— — from it — put it on or off as a medium of engine of approach to the confines of Sublunary bliss 1 will therefore, governed 
by this principlcj without a blufll buckle on my cisimfon heerd pump, stand Upon one leg or both, walk or hop, according to the reigning mode of the ' court at which I happen to figure; Nay; I would go naked were I to meet with fine women philosophical enough to delight in the contemplation of the wonderful works of nature! 
The boulevards or ramparts around Paris is a very fastiionable refdrt. They exhibit a beautiful prospect, and may be Very well in the Spring and fall, but iri the Summer and winter months they 
would 
WANDERER 
^39 
would Seem to be rather incommodious hov/ever, in this, as in everything elle at Paris, fashion predominates over every other consideration, She gives laws from which there lies no [appeal. In obedience to her mandate thousands in chariots, on horseback ^ on foot, rim with eagerness from the sweetest gardens in France, in their own neighbourhood tpo, to jostle, crowd, and dust each other upon the boulevard I some kick up the dust and mud, which others fnufif up, with exquisite delight and fatifac tion — all return charmed, inchantecl, fatigued, and dirty! 
The garden of Luxembourgh, fo called from the palace of that name, which looks upon it, though less flaunting, lesh gaudy, less gorgeous in her appearance than the Tuileries, smiles in the modest: garb of nature with a wild luxuriance, highly pleasing to a pensive mind. The 
Tuile 
!40 The AMLRIGABI 
Tuileries, the Palais Royal, the Luxeni^ bolirgh are filled with a style of company peculiar to each. The Luxembourgll is the resort of the church, the robe, the faculty, politicians, and the learned in general — Here friars lounge; here students ruminate; here ill-fated lovers haunt: here too, leaving my gay travelling companion, enveloped by the brilliant circle of belles and beaux, at the Palais Royal, 
I delight to retire there is a certain 
melancholy silence, a monastic gloom; which reigns over the Luxembourgh gardens that harmonises with my present feelings — here. too I can indulge that air difirait, very unfastiionable in a Frenchman, but extremely natural to any man of taste and sentiment who knows and is absent from you 
I fancy you are heartily tired with the long walic I have led you in the gardens of Paris. As they strike me to be one 
of 
WANDERER. 
141 
pf the first agremens of the capital, I have detained you the longer in them rr^not that they, with all their natural and acquired charms, can fill my Soul — Ahfent from you the celebrated hanging gardens of Semiramis would, to me, be a wilderness— — you the most craggy rock in the most barren istand of Scotland would seem a revived Eden 1 Scotland would be fairyland, the rock an in chanted palace, and the cataract dastiing from the rock would, to my glowing imagination, seem the chiming of the Spheres!, The Highland hind’s cottage would be a nuptial bower; and — the nuptial bower would be — oh heaven! — here description fails! here too let me paufer — lest the mere idea of my immortal bliss ex pite the envy of demigods!! 

EETTER 
142 The AMERICAN 
LETTER XIII 
Paris. 
are just returned from a walk in the famous gallery of Rubens, The preceding morning we had pasted in contemplating, with infinite delight, the collection of paintings in the Palais Royal, belonging to the Duke of Orleans. I wisti with all my heart you had been with us, because I am sure you would have been enchanted by viewing with your own eyes such masterly efforts of genius in this sweet imitative art, I am sure too that a description of them, however studied, would fatigue your mind, ^ and leave upon it no adequate idea of objects not to be equaled by modern pencils, far less described by the pen of a novice. I could indeed take this occasion to write 
a very 
WANDERER. 
a very curious epistle; I could make a parade of great reading and learning; I could ring the changes upon the technical terms want of keepings holdnefs of con --. toiitf harmonj of design— — ten' ' of colouring; Le brim’s fluttering of drapery; the glowing tints of TL tiano [ the beautiful heads of Raphael! the rich flowerpots of Wanuzzen! the niasterly execution of Michael Angelo I the inimitable clear obscure ofcaravagio! the horrible Sublime of Ribera, and the wild majesty of Salvator Rosa;; I Should make you just as wise after reiad^ ingy as I was when I wrote a letter fo affected, fo trite, fo ridicnloufly pompous. I frankly confess, that, though I feel exquisite sensations when I gaze on Some ver few of the great number of paintings adored by the initiated, I pretend to no critical Skill in the art. Of painting, as of music, I am an amatettr, but by no iiieans a connoijfeur. Admitting that I 
was. 
j44 The AMERICAN 
was, still I think a laboured description of things, which to be felt must be seen, a kind of paper fcratching very idle, ufe lest, and reprehensible. Unread as I own myself to be in the refined mysteries of this blushing sister of poetry. Suffice it for me to Say, that the gallery of Rubens did not meet the exalted ideas I had formed of it, His conception is bold and daring, his execution always strong, sometimes masterly; yet methinks in the style of Rubens a grace, an ease, a delicacy is wanting; there is a roughnest, a want of sinilhing in many of his pieces. 
I know what I hazard by this criticisin; but to 'jou I have ever been accustomed to Speak the real Sentiments of piy heart: no doubt I am wrong, and must lament my want of taste, for Paul Rubens is, established by the Cognofcenti as a very 
celebrated painter -- Remember that I 
except the landscapes of Rubens from 
this 
WANDERER. 
HS 
this cruicism. I have Seen many of them in a sweet and picturesque style. 
With the paintings at the Palais Royal I was highly delighted — particularly So with those of the divine Raphael, and a Venus aisistng from the lea by Tkiano : to be candid, I confess, that the pleasure 1 felt in gazing upon this Titian Venus might arise (notwithstanding the colours are certainly most sweet, tender, and glowing) more from the striking likeness the face had to that of a lady whose acquaintance is my highest honour, than from my power ofdifcriminating and tasting the leading beauties of the piece, I continued jn the Palais Royal all that morning, and t am Sure I could pafs two hours in the day there for six months, and the longer I gazed the rnore exquisite pleasure Istiould Sect, I flatter myself, could I dedicate such a portion of time to this study, in Such a theatre, it would in Some degree ' K form 
146 
The AMERICAN 
form my taste. I am apt to believe, that a taste in painting and music is less innate and more within the po wer of application than is generally Supposed. I have been told by an eminent master here, that he has known many people, by application and attention, dance very well to time, who, when he first took them in hand, could not distinguish handel’s water piece from the black joke. In London I always felt myself little at the exhibition of painting, or at the opera. I confess I was afraid and ashamed to praise a painting, however it might please me, without looking at the book, lest 
I stiould take the rude daubing of — -- -- -- 
for the masterly touches of a West, againf borough, or a Reynolds. At the opera I was still more out of my element. I lost all patience, when I saw a great fatheaded fellow wreathing himself into a thousand grotesque, painful, and laughable attitudes, to express what I suspected 
he 
WANDERER. 
47 
he never felt. I flattered myself it was all ridiculous grimace and affectation, and I wished him and the performers at the devil. I flghed after plaintive Caledonian melody; after a simplicity of harmony that I could follow with my ear, while I execrated the quick, and, as I thought, unnatural vibrations of the Italian school: but, when I return, I promise you I Shall be a better judge of the business— — boldly shut my book and bet the odds, that I lay my finger on the delicate delicious swellings, and point to the graceful attitudes of Reynolds — and at the opera, I shall know when to exclaim, with half fupprefted sighs. Ah cidl ancora / ancora i 
Be this as it may, with respect to mufi.e and painting, I prefer tenderness and simplicity to boldness of design or masterly execution. I still think Italian music would make more lasting impresiions, 
K 2 even 
The AMERICAN 
even upon die most chastened, refinedl ear, were it less intricate, iess violent anc Surprising in its changes : it would melt more though it astonished less. In painting, while I turn away my eye sated with the gaudy colouring of Le Brun and the Flcmisti School in general — I am never tired with the modest demeanour, die mellow colouring, die air of mildness, delicacy, and divine Simplicity, the characteristics of my beloved Guido, 
The opera at Paris, you will readily Siippofe, excels every other theatre in the world for the elegance of its dancers. This is, I own, the part of the theatrical fare most to my palate; their ballets are inimitable; my eye is highly delighted, and my imagination Sired, while I gaze upon a delicious exquilitely formcd female, swimming, volting in the air, and exhibiting limbs that would force a dying saint to recollect he was a man. The 
powers. 
WANDERER. 
powers of the high dancers are indescribable i they really recalled to my mind the hyperbole of the Gascon, who observing that he had been a shining character at the late masquerade, was asked what part he played — he afnwered> a la gafconcy je faifois des entrechats — ei quc je ni ennnis dans Fair / 
I often frequent the French arid Italian comedy. They are good Schools to learn the French pronunciation. I am hot yet reconciled to the violent action of the players— — me it Seems outre and ridiculous f I therefore give the preference to the Italian comedy, where laughter and grimace are So d fropos. It, must be corlfelted howeverj that Le Kairi is a masterly player in the tragic walk — ' His manner is equally majestic and pathetic. I never law Garrick in lustg nan; but I have been So charmed with ile kain’s acting in that character, that I 
K 3 have 
^50 
The AMERICAN 
have little regret on the account. The accomplished comedian Preville mentions an anecdote highly exprefiive of garrick’s command of muscle. When Garrick was last at Paris Preville invited him to his villa — Our Roscius, being in a gay humour, proposed to go in one of the hired coaches that go to Versailles, on which road the villa of Preville lies. When they got in he ordered the coachman to drive off — who answered, that be would do fo as Soon as he got his compliment of four pastengers. A caprice immediately Seized him; he determined to give his brother player a Specimen of his art. While the coachman was attentively plying for pastengers Garrick ship ed out of the door, went round the coach, and by his wonderful command of countenance, a power which he fo happily displays in Abel Drugger, palmed himself upon the coachman for a stranger. This be did twice, aitd was 
admitted 
WANDERER. 
15^ 
Admitted each time into the coach as a fresh paftenger, to the astonifliment and admiration of Preville 1 He whipped out a third time, and addressing himself to the coachman, he was answered in a fiirly tone, that he had already got his compliment, and would have drove off without him had not Preville called out, that as the stranger appeared to be a very little man, they would, to accommodate the gentleman, contrive to make room. 
The Hotel cles Invalids creates a very grand idea of the magnificence of the reign of Lewis the Fourteenth. The dome is highly and justly admired. It is in a bold, lofty, Sublime style, and richly ornamented with marble. An asylum for maimed Soldiers was, in a great measure, a debt Lewis owed to his people, as a propitiation for his unbounded ambition — 
K 4 yet 
is The AMERICAN 
y^tlsliould conceive, that a walk in the Invalids was calculated to fill the mind of that prince with pain and humility, rather than prkle : So many honsidly mutilated human remains of his ambition must have exhibited to him the dark fide of his character. A point of light in ’which we neither wish to See ourselves or to be viewed by others. 
L’ecole Militaire, was built towards the close of the late reign. It is a noble pile of building, and well adapted to its design. At present it is stint up, I am told, from motives of economy, as well as from an idea of its being unnecestary. Count Saxe slid, when this building was Suggested, that France rather wanted a School for ministers than a military School, for every Frenchman was born a Soldier. The total disuse of this grand and commodious building Seems a sine comment 
upon 
upon 
tain. 
wandtrer. 153 
the idea of that consummate cap 
We have taken an en faff ant view of the churches. Notre Dame [s' a fine Gothic building, a good deal like Westminster Abbey; near the high altar, which is composed of nch Egyptian marble, is an image of the Virgin, with a dead Saviour upon her knees, an admirable work! On one side of this" image is a, statue of Louis NIIJ. on the other, that of his Son Louis XIV both in postures of adoration. The high altar of the church, St. Sulpice, is richly decorated with precious stones; near it is an image of the Virgin of stiver, as large as life. The windows of this church are curiously painted. In the church of the Celestines you see two most beautiful marble statues of angels; their legs and feet are To delicate, fo harmoniousty proportioned, fo‘exquisttely fashioned, that the 'eye is 
never 
154 
The AMERICAN 
never tired with gazing upon them. If a Frenchman were the statuary, I presiime he worked from imagination, for the fi^ench ladies are not famous for pretty legs and feet; their legs, at least those, with very few exceptions, which I have had the honour of reconnoitring, are enormousty thick. Un pie mignon, a delicate little foot in France is a phenomenon. 
While I contemplate the beautiful feet of the angels in the St. Celestins, I recollect the barefooted Carmelites, I recollect the history, the sorrows, and magnanimity of Madame delavaliere. What pathetic example of human vicisfitude! This lady, born of a noble house, was many years favourite mistress to Louis the xivth. of course had been long habi .mated in the court of that polite mo .narch, to see herself at the head of the Splendid, the luxurious, the elegant, and 
the 
WANDERER. 
155 
the gay; the object of the envy of her own sex, the admiration of ours; environed and dazzled by every allure that is wont to fascinate the human heart; and yet Madame de la Valiere voluntarily defcendecl from the effulgent throne of vanity, Spurned from her the rattle of ambition, which has fo often lulled the understanding of the good and the wife; with alacrity robed her delicate body in the Simple attire of a Carme de chaujfee; with perseverance adhered to the privations of a most rigid order, and, in her last hour, declared stie had tasted pure happiness, not under the canopy of a royal penetralia not in the arms of a grand monarch, but in the lonely haunts of a cloisterj in the adoration of a Supreme! Blusti, ye haughty lords of the creation! tell it not in Gath, no longer proclaim it in the streets of Afcalon! that ambition and levity are chat*^cterif tics of the sex;; historians tell us, 
that 
i'56 The AMERICAN 
/ 
that this exalted being did not defceiicl immediately from heaven, but was reallyi and hona fidey born of a woman f 1! 
Surely ambition petrifies the hearts much I fear that Some royal Slight from the sickle Louis, first induced this un tunate lady to sicken at her situation; Conscious that flic loved not the monarch, but the man, her delicate Soul could not tolerate a rivalry dictated by sordid motives. Had I been Louis I feet that I should have shrunk with horror from a throne braided with the thorns of ingratitude! I should have fallen at the feet of the woman who loved me, and if it were not given me to Soothe her generous soul into an act of oblivion and reunionj quitting with disdain the antiquated widow of Scaron, tearing with indignation the crown from my brows, I would have exchanged it for a tonfured head and amonk, Lwould have confejfed 
WANDERER. 
IS 
%1 
la charmante de la Valtere I A fine picture of her, as large as life, in an inclining posture, is now placed in the church of their convent. I beheld it not with the cold, Scientific, hypercritic eye of a rnere connoifteur. I Saw, or thought I Saw, the noble Soul of the fair Carmelite irradiate her features, and dart a gleam of light around the whole dome! I gazed at her with the ineffable luxury of a congenial mind; ikisted her barediose bleeding feet So often lacerated by theruthless Stones, with rapturous ecstafies, emulating the burning kifses that a fond lover imprints upon the hando^hs darling mistress, in the moment She flammers or Uoks the celestial ycj; and might my eager eyes, responsive to the feelings of a glowing heart, have been permitted to flash pro methean^vqf and animate the picture, not Venus herself, a candidate for my choice 
in 
158 The AMERICAN 
In the delightful undress in which She won the apple, would have challenged competition! the mortal would have beat her hollow! — let who would arrange with the goddess, I am not proud, I pant after humble, but real happiness, 
the wife of -- ’s bofbm Should have 
been the charming de la vaiiere I 
Not far from the church of Notre Dame stands the celebrated hospital Hotel Dieu; this charity is upon a most extenstve and liberal Scale; individuals of all ages, religions, and countries, are admitted, nor are incurables turned out, as I be*! sieve they are, in all the hospitals of London, where they are difmisted to peristi in the streets for the very realbn that stiould heighten commiseration, that they are incurable. The wards of the Hotel 
Dieu 
WANDERER. 
59 
Dleu are neat*and decent; the patients are attended with the utmost assiduity and tenderness by nuns, whose vocation it is to act as nurses in this hospital. The Englisti are highly celebrated for their charity — as far as parting with your money deserves the name, you certainly are charitable; but contenting yourselves with this effort, which is indeed highly meritorious, you take little care that your donations are properly applied. The French give not So much money, but they are watchful that all the little offices and attentions which smooth the stck man’s pillow. Should be never wanting. It is not uncommon to see ladies of the first rank performing the tender office of nurse to patients In the Hotel Dieu, whose Sole merit is derived from their misery Perhaps the waffiing the feet of the twelve beggars, in imitation of our saviour’s v’^ffiing the feet of the 
- f 
Apostles, 
1^0 Thb AMERICAN 
Apostles, which every Easter week is performed by the King of France, is the precedent from whence this fastiion orl ginates. Whatever may be its origin, the performance must certainly be attended with salutary confet^^uences — fticli is the constitution of man, that even upon the bed pf steknefs, where other pastions are dead, he is all alive to vanity. You remember, while the fair Beguine rubbed the limbs of Corporal Trim, what tender sensations (he excitecl in the breast of that honest fellow; notwitlit standing all her charities, had the Saint Sceiir omitted this ceremony, the cprporal had never loved; iipv, though the pastioir of love may not be necessary to the coiur pletion of the cure of corporeal malady, yet it is allowed that pleasurable ideas wonderfully conduce to that end. Let us suppose the Ducheste of D — stooping to the office of the fair Beguine; how 
vivify? 
WANDERER. 
ii 
vivifying the consequence! if the patient were not yet dead, every torpid limb would instantaneously palpitate with new life! and nature be regenerated by the magic touch of a hand divine I 
D I E u, 
L 
LET 
i62 The AMERICAN 
LETTER XIV 
"1 JARIS abounds in Superb palacea for the nobility; they cover a great deal of ground, are elegantly and gorgeously furniflied, and, being built of fine white stone, form, I think, one of the pisincipal beauties of Paris. The palace of Bourbon, belonging to the Prince of Conde, hanging upon the Seine, would be thought a princely rest dence for any crowned head in Europe. The reason is obvious why the town hgufes of the French nobility arc, in general, upon a larger Scale than those of the like defeription in England. It is the fastiion for the nobility of England to Spend a certain portion of the year upon their domains in the country, where they enjoy their freedom and rank in a higher degree than at court; 
on 
WANDERER. 
163 
on the contrary, the French noblemen, and men of fortune live the year round at Paris, where they deem themselves a hporvq to Versailles, having little villas contiguous to the capital, where they sometimes dine, or give a petit foupe to a few choice friends, and generally return to town the same evening. A Frenchman is never truly happy out of the court atmosphere;; air inhaled by the lips of majesty is his congenial clime; this is an axiom So invariable, that they have here a punishment, which is termed a banishment to your own estate. And a grievous punishment it is; although called Monseigneur, although looked up to, by the hinds around bis chateau, with an air of adoration, your true Frenchman can tajle no power, no distinction, unless reflected from the royal Smile, beaming upon his delighted countenance! Although, when exiled to his household gods, he is himself a little god L 2 below, 
i64 The AMERICAN 
below, the roses retire from his cheek! he loses even French vivacity, he Sickens ■ — and, if the agrcmens of his wife, his daughter, his mother, or the irresistible charms of his grand mother*, cannot fosten the prince, or the minister cannot procure him a recall to Versailles, the, sick frenchman’s true Montpelier, he stirugs his stioulders, cries out, sacra Dieu! pejie! wisties that a hundred thousand devils may sty away with the reigning Madame Pompadour! damns the minister, blestes his king! drops a tear of respectful love as he pronounces the Sacred word le roi 1 and, giving about three half Seconds to recollection and meditation, he exclaims. Pen eft fait! il Ey a qiiun parti a prendre — he sends for his priest, confestes, and dies! 
* Alia Sion to the predilestion of Several French monarchs for old women. 
Those. 
WANDERER. 
is 
Those little elegant villas of the nobility, gentry, and richer citizens hanging round the town, render the environs of Paris singularly enchanting; they have more the air of elegant cottages than country houses; are all white on the outside, which contrasts happily with the verdant waving hills on which they stand. Within they are the fandluaries of conviviality, governed by taste; where genuine burgundy elicits pure genius; where sparkling champagne, fermenting in the imagination, produces brilliant ideas; * wdiere the wit of the men is only equalled by the graces of the women! That conversation at Paris generally takes a more refined turn than at London, I believe, will not be disputed by any man who has had an opportunity of tasting the Select Societies of each— — is allowed; but I do not think the real cause has been hitherto afiigntd. It appears 
L 5 ‘, to 
i66 The AMERICAN 
to me to result from the custom, prevalent at Paris, of not only admitting, but courting the literati to adventure into the heau monde — in London learned men are seldom to be met with, unless you trace them to their own cells, break in upon them in their nightgown and slippers, or view them in streets at their bookfeller’s — here you behold them, ha hille du dernier gout, blended with red coats and stroulder knots, giving zest to fetits fouph, figuring at court, or adapting ovid’s art of Love to the genius of modern toilets! With all the levity a feribed to this people, they certainly exceed their more grave northern neighbours in a taste for, or at least, in the encouragement they give to the sciences. I grant some few literary Comets have made their fortune, and arrived at the pinnacle of same in England; but very few there are whose modesty or mauvaise home, if you will, too often the concomitant 
WANDERER. 
Lj) 
mitant ofgenlus, has not excluded from the haunts of the polite world, and the Smiles of their Superiors in riches, birth, and rank — rewards infinitely more pleasing to a liberal mind, than the mere accumulation of money, a Sordid idea to which men of learning are Superior. be stdes, in Paris, a man of letters may look up to a genteel annual income, as well as to literary honours during his life; with you it depends a good deal upon caprice and the chapter of accidents, if they live comfortably; honour attends them not till they are dead, when peradventure their bodies, neglected, if not contemned while living, may have the glory to rot with those of kings and princes. At Paris, the sex hold out a reward to learning, which, with a man of Sentiment, is beyond all price. I believe most women of birth and breeding at Paris or Versailles would L 4 prefer 
is The AMERICAN 
prefer the approbation and attentions of Voltaire, roufteau, or de Berni, to the frothy adoration of a court meteor. Should Such figures presume to knock at the door of a mere rich citizen of London, Voltaire would be thought a pleasant sort of buffoon, and might be admitted occaflonally to a sunday’s pudding and glass of port, which he was to pay for, by making jokes for the children; the elegant de Berni would be taken for a presbyterian parson, and as for that awkward bafliful dog, Rousseau, he might be sent to the round houfe as a thief, or admitted to a glass of twopenny, with the butler, just as the citizen should have had a good or a bad digestion the preceding evening, or as he had got a good portion of Scrip, or as omnium was high or low. 
Paris certainly is the true Utopia for literary men. But whither am I wandering? 

WANDERER. 
169 
ing? I am chattering about learning, and learned men, to a fine English lady I a symptom So characteristic of a fit of dullness indicates an approaching crisis to my letter; I dread to be branded with the name of pedant, and I bid you. 
Farewell. 
LETTER 

f 
The AMERICAN 
LETTER XV 
Parts. 
'J^WO days ago Mr. C — and I drove to the stand of coaches, called Les Carojfes de la Cour with an intention of going to Versailles. We jumped into a coach in which a Frenchman, genteely drested, had already entered. Upon our appearance he began to exhibit a frenchman’s natural penchant a fe fair valoir. He ordered the coachman, with an air of consequence, to drive off instantly; who replied, that he would not until his vehicle was full, unless he would pay the fourth place. Cent mille diahles demporte^ cries the indignant Frenchman, dcpeche tot, vous me ferez manque des affairs! vous me per dr ez h la cour', monte, allezvite — eji pour moi d*entendre raison dtuns un tel 
cas / 
WANDERER. 

cas] eji pour toi, malotrui dc contraricr un homme tel que moi I He then Shook his cane at the coachman, and raved and swore as if he had been poftefted by the devil — He could not impress an idea of his consequence upon the coachman' — he could neither move him or his horses— — however had gained his point by Showing away before hs Anglais 
We promised the coachman to pay the vacant place, and he drove off. Our companion, after offering the above sacrifice to vanity, descended from the stilts of tragic rage, relaxing to the good nature and hilarity congenial to his real difjposttion. 
The road from Paris to Versailles Is strewed with beautiful villas on each stde of the river. Six miles from Paris and halfway from thence to Versailles you behold, on your right, St. Cloud, an elegant, delightful village, hangingupoii 
the 
The AMERICAN 
the declivity of a boldly nliiig hilli which giving the houses the form of an aniphi theatrcj exhibits the town in a full point t)f view, and holds out a striking object to the numerous cavalcades which are continually going to Versailles. It was Sunday, always a court day, and more' crowded than any other. I was astonisti ed at the prodigious number of people whom we overtook and who overtook us. ninety-nine out of a hundred had frequently seen the pageantry, to arrive at which they now So eagerly jostled and dusted each other — but their avidity was 
yet unsated- -- see again, and again to 
see le Roy is the first object of a French * man’s ambition — In a circle of fifty people you will readily discover the happy man who has recently been at Versailles— — imposing air, his consequential look, the air of deference, if not of envy, with which he is regarded by the gompany, fo 
strongly 
WANDERER 
?73 
strongly mark him, that you cannot inish take your man. 
At about half a league’s distance from Versailles you arrive at a noble avenue, consisting of three rows of trees, extending quite up to the palace — the middle avenue is very Spacious; through this vista you have the first coup distill of the palace, which at a distance makes a Superb appearance. At the extremity of this vista is a grand parade. The king’s stables are on the right and left — they aye princely, but not fo grand as those of the Prince of Conde at Chantilly. From the stables, having pasted the parade, you enter through the gate of the iron paliifade into the first court, flanked with four pavilions. From this you past the gate of another iron paliifade, and enter the Second court. This, tho’ not fo large as the first, is built in a more magnificent style of beauty, and prepares 
the 
174 The AMERICAN 
the mind of the spectator to taste the third court, which is terminated by a grand pile of buildings. Here is a noble portico, with three large doors, elegantly gilt, through which you enter the hall. The grand staircase is extremely wide, and composed of marble exquisttely beau tiful Against the wings and front of this court there are several busts, and in the centre of it a fountain, adorned with gilt statues. The fide of the palace which fronts the garden is far the most beautiful; and, take it for all in all, Verfaillas, though of made ground, and by no means eminent for that natural beauty of which St. Germains and fon tainbleau are prodigal, is replete with right royal magnificence. Many of the apartments are, however, too Small for the grand Ideas excited by viewing the external edifice. The Hall of Mercy is painted principally by Titiano; a fufh cient euloginm. In the Hall of Mars 
there 
WANDERER. 
*75 
there is an excellent painting of the family of Darius, Supplicant at the feet of Alexander the Great, by Le Brun — an air of tenderness Softens the majesty of the hero — while he ga2es upon his weeping Statira, the conqueror of the world Seems to have a prefendment of his approaching thraldom. 
The Gallery of Versailles is in a bold majestic style. It is of a prodigious length, and wide in proportion. The ceiling, painted by Le Brun, represents the victories of Lewis the Fourteenth. On the stde of this gallery, which looks upon the garden, are Seventeen lofty windows — the opposite fide is wainscotted with looking glafs ^thls has a happy effect, and must be Singularly congenial to the taste of French petits maitres, who may reconnoitre their Sweet persons as they trip after their royal master. Most pf the apartments are gilt. The noble 
front 
276 Tjie AMERICAN 
front which looks upon the gardens is of beautiful stone. The vast length of the Palace of Versailles, disproportioned to its height, at a distance, gives it a heavy look. 
J have now introduced you to the gardens of Versailles, and were I to instst upon your parading quite through them, I Should fatigue you exceedingly. They are immensely fpacious ~ are ornamented with a profusion of statues by masterly hands— — would be endless tq particularise, A statue of Venus must not be pasted unheeded. Several young noblemen, pages of Louis Quinze, are said to have died for love of this marble goddess. The statue certainly conveys the idea of a most lufeious person. Had I not myself been pre engaged to an animated marble hearted goddess, I might have met a stmi lar fate. At present a fig leaf veils the beauty paramount to all beauties! — a 
nia 
WANDERER. 
177 
- manoeuvre dictated by the humanity of that celebrated moralist and politician Madame Pompadour, to Save the lives of his majesty’s pages. 
In the first walk you behold Several beautiful fountains, with dolphins and various figures of animals, out of whose mouths water gusties to a great height and again descends, in imitation of re frestiing stiowers. From this walk you view the famous fountain of Latona, around which are several statues, highly finished.. Apollo, Diana, and Latona. As you descend you will have a prospect of the rape of Proferplne, admirably well done — you recollect how your favourite Milton happily touches it : 
“Not that fair field 
Of Enna, where proserpinc gathering flowers, 
“Herself a fairer flow’r, by gloomy Dis 
Was gather’d, -- Might with this paradise 
“Of Eden vie, ” — — 
M A 
178 
The AMERICAN 
At the corner of every turning you meet either a statue or a fountaln ^lo deed the marble statues, the cascades, the labyrinths, the groves are So vaisious and So pleasing; the babbling of the birds and the murmurmg of distant waterfalls fo delightful, that the fanciful traveller seems to wander o’er inchantecl ground, feasting his ravistied eyes with gay scenes and luxuriant landscapes which beggar defer! ption. 
The Lrianofty or fummer houfe, is situated at the entrance of a wood, ornamented in front by a lovely peisistiie, and supported by pillars. At the extremity of the wings of the Lriamn are two pillars, and on the top a sine ballustrade. From the noble gallery of this building you have a more happy prospect of the gardens of Versailles than even from the great gallery of the palace — You here see a masterly painting of St. John the Evangelist. 

WANDERER. 
79 
gelift, by Le Brnn. The rape of Orithia, which you see in die great hall, is a delicious performance. You who are pal fionately fond of flowers would love to haunt the prettily disposed parterres of the L Ianon private gardens. They a bound in the most choice flowers, as well exotics as natives The basons and fountains have marble borders, and are environed by beautiful groves. 
We saw their majesties at chapel as well as at the grand convent. They Seem very abstemious — The Qiieen drank nothing but water; which, confldeising fly is a German lady, is rather Angular. The King is of a Ackly habit — Judging from die lines of his face, he will not be supposed a shining genius, but, what is preferable, a very good man — He poitef fes in a high degree^the virtue of economy— — very great becanfe useful virtue for a prince. He is free from strong 
M 2 Tedious 
io The AMERICAN 
passions — no darling vice has yet appeared -- 1 am inclined to think he possesses 
in an eminent degree that milkincfs of soul, the characteristic of the Bourbon race. 
I stood very near the Qiieen the whole time She was at table. She Seems extremely affable. When She rose from the table stie turned round and conversed sometime with a lady exaffly before me, fo that I had a complete view of her majesty. The Queen would have been called a very pretty girl had stie been born in the most humble Sphere; judge then how stie must be admired as Queen of the most polite, gallant, and loyal nation in the world I Her majesty is fair, and light haired;; not the thick lips fo common to the Austrian family. In her countenance rweetnefs with dignity are happily blended. She is much addicted to dress and public amusements;; 

WANDERER. 
ir 
frequently goes to the opera at Paris, and returns to Versailles the Same night, as the King never deeps in the capital. She Sometimes appears at a court masque^ rade, and affects to personate the mofl lowly characters. Her majesty lately ex: hibited in the character of a boulangiere, or baker’s girl, and distributed her petits pains with inexprefiible grace — when She 
ply’d the Duke de N -- -- -- -- with her hot 
rolls, he addrested her in the happy extempore which you will see in the recueil of poetry for the last year I herewith Send, beginning thus; 
ymth Boulangiere, 
\ ' 
To the gayer accomplijlients of a pretty woman stie is said to unite great sweetness 
of difpolition -- -- many acts of her 
charity evinpe, that file follows [baud paffibus equis) at an awful distance, the sublime virtues of our august Queen. 
M S 
We 
i82 
The AMERICAN 
We staid at Versailles three clays. On our return to Paris we visited Marli, built by Lewis the Fourteenth. It is a pretty fummer houfe. The gardens are elegant. The first curiosity, however, of Marli is the stupendous machine that forms the grand reservoir, by which the waterworks of Versailles and Marli are supplied. But as I have no mechanical head, and you, I fancy, still less me clianical taste, I Oiall wave the defenp tion. From Marli we returned to Paris. The next morning we drove to the suburbs of St. Germains, to view the Gobelin manufacture. This I think the fitst cunofity in France. With respect to delicacy of colour the French scarlet cloth, as well as their silks, far exceed those of England. The Gobelin tapestry is exquisitely beautiful; the vivid glow of its tints and the happy disposition of the iiglits and stiades are unique. 
'Adieu. 
WANDERER, 
jb 

LETTER XVI 
Boulogne fur mer, 
unexpected and disagreeable event on your fide of the water occasioned this retrograde movement. I expected to be obliged to go to London, but a letter has met me here, adviling me, that the bnflnefs has been arranged. I had the honour of being franked from Paris to this place in the led carriage of a young English baronet, of great hopes, on his return from his travels, to whom I was introduced by his governor, in consequence of an acclclentai acquaintance I mads with him at the opera. This young gentleman is all over English— — high sense of honour, naturally good-natured, generous, sensible, but impetuous, impatient of control, replete 
M 4 with 
i84 The AMERICAN 
with attachment to the customs of his country, and with ineffable contempt for the manners of all other nations. Sir. Harry was a very happy man at the period when our acquaintance commenced When we are pleated with ourselves we. are the less difficult to be pleased with others, which was I presume the reason the Baronet took Such a fancy to me at the first interview. The cause of his happiness was singular: : had betted ten thousand pounds to perform the Tour of Europe against time. In four months, upon three horses of his own stud, he engaged to dasti through all the polite courts: see everything in them worthy of being Seen by. an Englishman; take his travelling notes, anecdotes of great men, cc. and, on his return, publisti the travelling thoughts and opinions of Sir Harry hand in hand. When I had the honour of first beholding him he told me, “it was now a hollow thing — he had two weeks, one 
day, 
A N D E R E R. 

day, fortyfive minutes, and Some few Seconds to do his work; he had Set his stop watch by the Horse Guards as he mounted, and, wind permitting, he could bring his horses in at the post of starting, within eight and forty hours; but that fearing accidents, he had made running through the courts of Italy and Germany; yet, in Italy he had been a good deal impeded by the numerous religious processions crowding the public. roads — he \yas under the necessity of riding over Several priests and devotees, whose outre garbs and grotesque countenances had well nigli made his hunting mare, though a steady tit, run rusty. As for Spain, he had not Iain upon a bed, or indeed Seen a bed to lay upon; he was obliged to pussi through whip and spur, for the whole kingdom of his most Catholic Majesty would'not furnissi a bait fit to be Set before an Englistx horse;; would therefore pull up in 
France, 
j86 
The AMERICAN 
France, for he had really begun to have a better opinion of the country, since horfe racing had been introduced; this was, he conceived, the fifst step to civir lization in any country. He was making interest to get introduced to the Count dartois and the Duke de Chartres; he wistied nothing better than to make a match withth^m — they must be all dupes — far from being knowing, he verily believed they did not know how to make a horfe stioe in any catholic country; for which reafbn he had taken the precaution to difpatcli, ere he would venture to start upon the grand tour, a certain quantity of enghsti horfe shoes, to be deposited, at certain distances, upoq the great post road of Europe. Without this precaution, he was very fare, he had never laved his distance. He then ashed me, if I would take a walk with him to see the Tnilleries — he had never yet seen them — It will give us an appetite 
WANDERER, 
tlte to dinner, says she honest: baronet, when rii treat you with a glass of port my banker has obliged me with at half a guinea a bottle; you must be Satiated 
with your CL -- d cholicky French wines 
— Before I could bow a consent to his proposttion, he Said, with my leave, having on his boots and Spurs, he would gallop through the Bois de Boulogne, and meet us in the Elystan Fields. He immediately mounted, while his bearleader and myself strolled through the Palace Royal, to the Tuilleries to meet him. However, before we could arrive aux champs eufes, we descried Sir Harry on his return — he was on foot, examining with accurate attention, and high delight, the two beautiful equestnan statues by Coyzevox, bearing les deux Rettonrmhy standing at the bottom of the Tuillerie garden. He asked me if I knew from what Englisti horses those statues were destgned; he could wisti to have 
their 
T H E A M E R I C A N 
their pedigrees. i‘told him I believed the statuary had never been on Englisti ground; he Shook his head, afsuring me I must bemistnformed, that Such thorough bred horse could be the production of Old England only; he was convinced that the statues were also Englisti; for no Frenchman could have had Such a taste in horfe stestr, as to have executed thern in a rnanner fo masterly. I ventured not to distent from fo learnecl a judge as I verily believe hiai to be iq equestrian statues — We went on, and, at the clestre of his governor, I had the good fortune to persuade him to take a peep at the Duke of Orleans collection of paintings. However, his admiratioq and panegyric had been exhausted upon the eciueftisian statues — he glared arouncl him with a look, in which contempt and apathy were blended, and then sunk into en glisti reverie, stghing bitterly — I feared he was stck, but he relieved me, by exclaiming 
WANDERER. 
189 
claiming, with the moll woe begone phiz — “My dear Sir, what have I not 
lost by my governor’s d -- d hankering 
after virtue! what a Soft morning! how the scent would lie! had we not have been eating of frogs in this infernal town, we might have had a sup of mild ale and cold cut this morning; I might have been in at the death! I hoped to call my friend off from his hounds, by introducing him to the Venus of Titiano; he gave a fide leer at the lady— — the model to have been a poor piece — be could have a finer wench at king’s Place for a guinea; and wheeling round from the goddess, he gave a Smack with his whip which startled the Parisian /e tit maitresy and had nearly cut off one of the golden locks of Venus, that hung glistering with sea drops, and luxuriantly floating upon her neck 1 then taking me by the arm, he quitted the Palace Royal, and hurried me away to dinner 
upon 
Ipo Ths AMERICAN 
upon a round of beeli corned under his own direduoii; whistling as we retired, the technical terms, youks, forward; tally oh I wind him; c to the wonderful astonifliment of my Lord duke’s servants, and the whole group of Parisian cognofeenti! they could not articulate a word, but contented themselves with uplifted eyes and llirugs of admiration * In mutual feelings of contempt, my friend was at least upon a par with them. Had the Venus of Medicis been there, or had the goddess herself defeend ed from Mount Ida to fafeinate the baronet, he would not, (unless her deiti fliip had put herself up to the highest bidder, and consented to barter her per ibn fro des foufirs sterling) have, staid a second to run the isistc of having the round over done, especially as that had been the cafe with Some beef stakes the preceding day, although he had in pne day rode round Belvoir and Blarli, and 
imrried 
W A N D E R E R 
191 
hurried through the Gallery of versailles in order to return to Paris to dine upon this Antigallican delicacy, to which he had been invited by a countryman. The port wine again recalled Old England and a fox chase to his imagination; he determined to fet off that very night, lest he Should lose the whole hunting sea fbn — So fond am I of every Species of character, that I could not refuse the reiterated invitation of travelling with him, or rather with his governor; for Sir Harry, to fulfil the terms of his bet, as well as through inclination, was to ride on horseback;; twelve o’clock at night precisely, he mounted, and saying he would order us breakfast at Chantilly, rode off; his bear leader and friend followed in his post chaife. We stepped most of the way to this place; we could only now and then have a view of our leader. Our motion was too rapid to see anything on the road. I could have wistied to 
have 
Ip 
The AMERICAN 
have had more of his company. I longed to get a view of his travels — his im petuoufity gave little Scope for my interrogations — his criticism upon one of the most entire remains of Roman grandeur now in the wotid, I Hiall never forgets. I ashed him how he liked the amphitheatre at Nifmes^ “Re Said, whilfc his horses took their seed, he had walked round it, aiid he thought if the huts within, and the rubbisli about the Areiie were removed, it might make an excellent pit for a main of cocks; or an outriding house— — Astley had it, he would make a penny by it; but the CL -- clin 
habitants of Nifmes knew how to make nothing but onion Soup and 111k stockings This Specimen of Sir harry’s turn for observation, increased my longing after his port feuille^hut the Short time of our accpaintance countenanced me not in Such a request — we were obliged to part — He would have laughed me out of 
my 
WANDERER. 
93 
my ridiculous desire to make the tour of Europe — Said nothing, but the hopes of taking in knowing ones, would have tup ported him through the journey — He would be glad I would Spend the winter with him in Nottinghamshire. I Should have good dogs, his second best hunting mare, mild October, and roly cheeked farmers daughters. He concluded with mentioning a resolution, which, ^ as it does honour to his understanding of heart, I will give you as the finistiing to his picture — He said, it was by no means a love of money, but through ajaudable ambition to immortalise Englisti hunters, that he had made this match, with the European map for his race ground — r that he had two Sisters, good Englisti bony fillies, full of hard meat, and standing well upon their pins ^that his mother had led them in hand through most of the watering places, and had started them last season at Bath; but he 
N • was 
194 
The AMERICAN 
was informed that they had not yet gone off, which he imputed to their having more blood than money. — His father’s expenses on the finest pack of hounds in all England, a great, but necessary expense for an Englisti gentleman, had been a heavy weight upon the rent roll, and prevented him from leaving his daughters more than five thousand pieces each; but he would make it ten; and, if either of the girls took a capricio for me, and I for her, he would give her to me, for he thought me a very honest 
fellow, only a little queer. Penetrated 
{ 
with admiration and gratitude for his unexpectedly generous offer, to a character fo opposite to his own, my heart Swelled too big for utterance; I could not articulate my unceasing remembrance of this affecting mark of his partiality, of which a stranger and a fugitive was fo 
little 
WANDERER. 
w5 
little worthy! but the tear of gratitude gufliing from my eye, spoke for me. I bowed, rung his hand, and he rode osf. 
Adi e u. 
N 2 
L E T. 
196 
The AMERICAN 
LETTER 
XVII 
Boulogne, Montreiiil. 
J^OULOGNE fur Mer appears to me a very agreeable retirement during the Summer and Spring seasons. There are Several britisli merchants fettled in it; to one of them, a Mr. Ballyndine, I am indebted for many marks of esteem and hospitality;; is a very sensible, amiable, intelligent man; and is, I am convinced, 
i 
the character So often talked of, and So Seldom Seen, a liberal merchant! I am proud of giving this testimony of. his merit and my gratitude.. 
I have the good fortune to have commended to me, by a fctend III London, an Englisti gentleman, a very different character from Sir Harry hard in hand, a 
Ca ptaia 
W A N D E R E R. 
197 
'Captain Seymour, an officer of the Guards, a man of birth and breeding, a polite scholar, a man of nice honour, a very •agreeable companion, and a gentleman in the most exalted sense of the word — to finisti the character, in the eyes of st lady, he is also a very handsome man. I have the less fear of mentioning this circumstance, as I am told he is engaged to the most beautiful woman in England; you will readily conjecture that my informer had not the honour of your acquaintance. In company with this gentleman, behold me beginning my Second Sally in the wide world, in quest of adventures. The day we Set out, ' we had invited to dinner our amiable friend B — —, who with a Son of Admiral Taylor, had just arrived at Boulogne, in their way to Paris. I had the pleasure of accommodating them with the lodgings we were about to leave, at the the house of Monlieur I’avocat Rutter 
N 3 
and 
198 The AMERICAN 
and his lady, a family in a very genteel Situation here, where they would live very well, and hear good French. Taking a Sew glasses of burgundy with my countryman B — e, to the health of our friends in London, we Set out on bidets — Arriving at Samers, instantaneously, and in the same moment of time, as if obeying a voice from heaven, we Sprung off our horses, paid our post, and determined to make the tour of Europe on foot! Although this deciston Seemed merely the effect of enthustafm, upon reflection, upon weighing the pro and the con, we found that it was good; 
^ we recollected that we were both debtors to cash; the officer of the Guards had anticipated his pay, the American had neither pay or estate, the great inen of his country having borrowed his fortune, without interest, to amiife themselves by waging war against their king. Unincumbered with horses, unembarrassed with a 
load 
WANDERER. 
99 
load of ecyuipage, or a numerous Suite of servants, we Slioukl be enabled at our ease, to reconnoitre each devious path, and every curious object, on, or near the great road — ‘knowledge too, which is purchased by the Sweat of man’s brow, is indelible. From our infancy, even to our gaudy years, our dispositions Inclined us to a partiality for the Groves of Academus and the peripatetic 
sect- -- to your Sagacity, Madam, 
to determine which of these reasons had the most weight with us — and deprecating the wit of those travellers whom kinder stars permit to read men and manners, while they stumber through the courts of Europe in well liung post 
chaises- -- them, that they 
would not lavisti their Attic fait upon beings So little worthy of their attention; that they would reserve it to befprinkle their own memoirs, which, haply, may Save them from that rust and oblivion to 
N 4 which 
200 The AMERICAN 
which their insipidity would Seem to condemn them, — we took our resolution with a good grace. Our legs being firm and our hearts contented, we marched on almost a French post every hour. It was as sweet an afternoon as you stiall see of a springtide. The uneven but verdant country of the Boulonnois, finely waving in hill and dale, clothed with wood and refrestied by streams, stretched, on every fide, a happy landscape. The fun, hastening to hide himself in the arms of Thetis, illumined our faces with his oblique rays; our faces Smiling with goodwill to all our fellow-travellers by land and water, beaming philosophic resignation to the will of fate, and expresting, in each composed feature, a firm conviction of the maxim of Pope, “whatever is, is right” -- -- -- and that an honest 
man may have a chance of walking as Well as riding to heaven. We were congenial souls, yet, fearing Satiety, Sometimes 
WANDERER. 
261 
times one or the other fell back, enjoying his own conversation, and inly muling until he recovered the Social tone; for there are chords in harmonious converse as well as in music— — liiould remain distended too long or too iiitensely Stretched, lest they relax to the languid by one extreme, or from the other vibrate harlii discord. He who lirst felt himsels in colloquial tune would stay for or advance to his friend — we would then trudge ilde by fide, chattering of philoso phy, of the belles lettresy of men, of things, of women, and of heaven! An odd idea came across the powdered head of the captain ostheenglisttguards — he thought it was a pity, that an apple tree had happened to be planted in the garden of pa radise, as it was but too probable that our great grand mother Eve, during a lit of the green lickness, would have a longing to nibble at unripe fruit. The captain was going on to observe, that had not 
flic 
202 The AMERICAN 
Are eaten of those apples, two of her children would not be, now, forlorn wanderers, on foot; in fearcli of happiness from Dan to beersheba But your chevalier, not piquing himself upon being fo very profound as his friend, and, learning frorn you to be very godly, to feel a high respect for the mysteries of holy writ, broke in upon the captain’s theology, contenting himself with lamenting, that there were many usages in foreign countries not at all to his taste — He observed, that the Supreme took pleasure in forming minds as well as bodies different in different climates — halting the captain -- - 
and, according to custom when anything strikes him, placing the forefinger of his left hand upon the left fide of his nose, his right hand presting the bosom of his friend, his look and woe begone — he thus continued, deducing, philosopher like, particular truifms from general propositions — “What a pity, my dear 
friend. 
wanderer 
203 
friend, that, in the best of possible worlds the Souls as well as the bodies of the French ladies have a lest delicate contexture than those of your fair country Women. I am more and more of opinion, that climate has an effect upon the animal as well as vegetable kingdoms; and, while each country has its peculiar productions, there is in each an analogy between the productions of the earth and of human nature. In America, plants and trees grow elegantly tall and Render, fo the men and women of the western world are not strongly but elegantly fastiioned; Flanders mares and Flanders women are the reverse. In Holland, the very cabbages emulate their High Mightinesses; they are Squab, ssiort, and thick. In all other countries you will find this rule 
hold good.” -- -- But to the Shade I was 
about to give to the picture of the French 
lad ies -- fo long, my friend, as these 
sweet creatures obstinately persist to entertain 
204 The AMERICAN 
\ 
tertaih dieir company, men as well as women, widi a detail of their maladies and their remedies; of the necessity under which they labour of exhibiting a p — e or 2ilavementi can one chase away the unhappy idea, that in spite of all their charms, in spite of the fafciiiation that accompanies all their footsteps, the dear creatures have! 
Ah Celia! Celia! Celia! 
Castera desunt — D. Swish 
In vain do the admirers of this unseemly yet philosophic custom contend, that, while the mind of the hearer is forced to dwell on this dark stde of human nature, a casual concatenation of ideas will relieve the fatigued imagination, by leading it to contemplate adjacent beauties! beauties which no pen can defcisibe, and none but an inspired imagination trace! The contemplation of this lovely part of the perspective is, I own, consolatory— — 

WANDERER. 
2q5 
yet however con Soling, however relievr ing to the eye of fancy, when we are thus obliged to think of them together, it only occasions an unhappy confusion of ideas which shades and injures the more noble and divine parts of the prospect! The French ladies pic|ue themselves upon being more polite than the fair sex of any other country — generally Speaking they are right, but Surely candour must allow this to be a solecism in their politeness— — them but abolisti this one custom, and I will forget they are mere mortals; I will adore them as angels! But, to pursue the chain of reasoning from which 
V 0 
the French ladies have led me to deviate, according as you feel yourself born to taste a particular style of beauty, you stiould stiape your course to that corner of the globe where Such beauty abounds — Does your heart beat high when your eye glances upon a little, delicate, finely turned foot {un pie mignon) a leg firm, 
taper, 
2o6 
The AMERICAN 
taper, and Swelling gradually as it riles towards the knee, Serving as an outward visible Sign of delicious invisible things! Are ye touched by delicate features, a complexion where the lily predominates over the rose!! to my country, to America — Love you the fair complexion, a shape Small and elegant — cheeks where the rogue Cupid tranquilly slumbers almost Smothered in roses!! mouth! lips moist, blub, and Swelling! Do you wisti to taste Such cheeks! do you love to Smack stich lips 1 Travel not not at all — stay in England — Do you sigh for a stiape rather de^fgee than delicate, a luxuriant head of hair, which tickles the imagination with the ambition of touching “hairs less in Sight, or any other hairs!” — are you planet struck by eyes glowing with fire and vivacity I teeth white like feathered Snow | prepof selling phifiognomy — free, bold, ealy person!! politeness! frank manners! 
little 
WANDERER. 
little attentions, little nothings, as in French they are called, which, insinuating themselves inlenfibly, make way to the inmost recestes of the human heart? — are these your objects, live in France — here you will find alh or most of these accomplishments even in a village maid I Do you pant after a fine neck, a bofoni highly formed, delicate, yet swelling, relisting yet Suing to be prefs’d! a person en ho?z point, full, lufeious, yet in symmetry harmonious as a model! hips which rise and fall as the nymph like a goddess walks! do Such delicacies stimulate your palate, travel to the country famed for ancient virtue and modern music ?- — you an Englisti roast beef appetite; that is, do you hone for large joints of raw fat meat. Succulent indeed, but divested of poignant high feafoning? pusti on to the Swiss Cantons, the Dutch States, or the German Courts — you cannot be taken in when you cheapen beauty at 
these 
2o8 T h e a M E R I C a N 
these markets — Beauty and butter are there sold by the same measure, by the pound. A happy expedient, by which German and Dutch petit maitres elude those frequent and Sanguinary duels, sought by impetuous lovers of Southern climes to afeertain the Specific quantum of charms poflested by their respective mistreltes; when Such a dispute arises between two nymphs, py two of their dying Swains at Amfterdani, the ladies are immediately thrown into the Scales, being previously ffnpt, to the end that (their heads always excepted) the Dutch miltes may carry no lead about them — In proportion as a lady isifes in the Scale, her charms fink in value; in these markets you may cheapen breasts, white indeed like Snow, but in size rather too luxunant; prodigious hips! and -- but I have ventured 
on to the brink of my ruin! here let me halt! — you see, my friend, I have fet before you all the dilhcs in Europe, fall to, 
choose 
WANDERER. 
209 
choose according to your palate; happily for you, yon love simple meats, for me, partial as you know to ragouts, my delicacy is the Source of my distress, and my travels in foreign countries, aggravates my misfortune — for accustomed to behold beauty array herself in a thousand different forms, the charms of stmple nature to me are instpid. In vain does a lady dazzle me with eyes black and streaming meridian sunbeams, if llie owns not a taper leg! in vain does stre Show me even a taper leg, if, as with en thustaftic ardour I travel on, the adjacent limbs harmonise not with the Symmetry of the leg and ankle! unhappy delicacy 1 for this I t]uit my darling country! for this, foregoing all hopes of Shining, of Soaring to immortality, as a general, or a consul, I trusted myself to the horrid Atlantic, to waves, to winds, tempests, and storms! for this I flee Albion, a country prodigal of stmple beauty; for this, in coach, on horse 
O back. 
210 The AMERICAN 
back, in chariot, or on Soot, I have, and I will explore all the towns, villages, and hamlets in France, Switzerland, and Germany — I will mount the frozen hills of Savoy — The Alps and Perineans finking before me, I wul make my court to the haughty Spanish Donnas, and I will attempt to fofcen the beautifully furious Italian Senoras — If it is not given me to Satiate my capricious hunger, by tasting the charms peculiar to the fair sex of Europe, I will chew opium and sip coffee with the Cadi of Constantinople; and taking, en pajfant, a Smack of Turkisti beauty, I will travel to the polite court of Fez, — peradventure I may have the honour to be presented to his sable majesty, according to the etiquette of this august court, riding in state upon a jack afs — a courtier on each fide of me, holding one of my feet, a privy counsellor mounted behind me, to whisper in my ear, as we move on, how I shall demean myself in 
"th 
WANDERER, 
Sit 
the presence— — this court I have a pre sentiment, I ball Succeed. I flattest myself I may, in time, aspire to the honour of being cuflinguiflied by the enviable dignity of the bastinado;; which aggrandisement her gracious majesty of Morocco, pursuing the dictates of her partiality, may venture to celebrate the connubial rite between her favourite American, and the most amiable of her Sooty maids of honour! — but I must, however reluctantly descend from the mysterious beatitude of my nuptial bed to make a little progress in my journey. 
A D I E tr^ 
O 2 
LET 
212 The AMERICAN 
LETTER XVIII 
Montt'ciiih 
J JAVTNO finillied this fine digrefiion, we tinickened our pace, and, descending a hill, about nightfall, we overtook a little monk, a poor Capuchin, riding upon an ass. He was of the same order with yorick’s monk; but, after his pathetic chapter which I never read without weeping, who will dare describe a monk? Not I. Besides I cannot say this monk had a very prepofteffing countenance. He was indeed no interesting figure, yet his face exprested milkiness of soul. He was rather old than young, little beard, less hair on his head, fo that he had no need of the tonsure. His eyes little, but black and vivid. He might be verging towards fifty. His manteau, 
i which 
WANDERER. 
213 
which Seemed rudely attacked by the deleterious hand of time, and had been a long Sufferer from rain, Snow, and hail, was about the length of the cloaks worn by the lower order of englisli women; no stockings, Sandals, much worn. Supplied the place of stioes although the poor fellow was not above four feet five inches high, he held in his hand a Herculean club; his Short cloakj fiis Sandals, his club, his little eyes stiining in a head large and sat as the noddle of a common council man, rendered him rather a grotelliue than an interesting figure; — he ceased to beat his afs, who brayed horribly every stroke the little monk gave him, immediately as we came fide by stde, and looked at us with a Smile. Tanstate this Smile into universal language, the construdlion will run thus, Gentlemen, we are denizens of the world, we are Sociable animals, there is a decency, there is a propriety 
Q 3 in 
214 
The AMERICAN 
in our Softening the fatigues of travel by familiar converse: : answer to this civil proposition, we Saluted him in good French; the little monk Seemed agreeably furpisized at this, for we had on English nding frocks; Seymour too, though a persedly well-bred Englilii gentleman, had not yet caught those fetitaaiensy on which Frenchmen are too apt to pique themselves— — we are only a Short league from mon treuil, we may go on at our leisure, without fear of having the gates shut upon us; besides I have interest enougii, in the worst event, to introduce us all, for I am fourth cousintoone of the Montreuil noblelfe, whose power is astonistiing. In his discourse he, now and then, mingled a word of bad Englisti, of which he Seemed not a little proud; he told us he had the good fortune to learn Englisti of an Iristi footman to an Englisti Lord, with >yhom he had lived in habits of intimacy 
at 
WANDERER. 
2 r 
vlt Dunkirk; he aedus whether the englisli Monks, Abbes, and Bifibops travelled on foot or upon afses; we informed him that we had neither Friars or Abbes in England, and that englisli Bishops were too rich and too dignified to bestride jack astes; then, quoth the monk, they are prouder than their Lord and master, who rode post to Jerusalem upon an afs, perhaps not better than mine. his poor creature, miserable in himself, derived consequence from the number and nifluence of his order, “although his habit was coarse, his purse empty, and he rode upon a jack afs, ” yet, Dieu fait loue, he drank almost daily, very good wine, of vyhich we might be convinced, would we honour his brethren with our company at dinner the next day. The recollection of this good wine dilating his muscles, made him laugh fo cordially, that he stiewed every tooth in his head, and then he Smacked his lips as if he had 
O 4 just 
2i6 The AMERICAN 
just imbibed a glass. Barring a little roguery, of which this poor fellow Seemed destitute, this is the portrait of capuchins in general; few of them have I Seen, whole looks and manner were not revolting; yet, how pathetic the description of Sterne, how he makes you love the hapless Peer Lorenzo! a propos of Mr. Sterne, Since I have lived in France, 
I have learned to admire his genius still more, if possible, but I am less affected at his interesting descriptions, because I believe they were not taken from nature, but were the work of his own brain, I inquired particularly of Monfleur Deffeiu about Peer Lorenzo, he assured me, that no monk any way answering that description, ever in his time, lived at Calais; indeed, whoever has resided much in catholic countries, will have his mind made np relative to the chapter of the monk; the disciples of St. Francois, with a few illustisions exceptions, at the head 
of 
I 
WANDERER. 
217 
of which was Ganganelli, are little esteemed either by 'the clergy or laity of catholic countries; they too often merit the appellation of sturdy beggars; they are fo importunate, that a modest stranger cannot elude their demands. I stiall never forget an Iristi Recollet, who had the urbanity to pay me a visit during my residence at St. Qiientin, in Spite of the endeavours of my valet, who well knowing the object of his visit, and, thinking that a fugitive could little bear fleecing from two rogues at once, told him that his master was that moment going to gallant Some ladies to their villa; but capuchins are dull at taking hints, the brawny Hibernian monk brustied by my Servant, and without knocking, stood confessed before me. 
Monk, Bon jour, Monsieur Ic Chevalier — 1 on ma dit qiie vous etes ^ Bojlonian — 
* The common name at this time given in France to she North Americans. 
Ameri^ 
2i8 The AMERICAN 
American, — Monsieur, mon saint peer fai phonne ur de vous saluer, ayez la home de prendre un fateul — et faites moi la grace de me fair fdvoir a qiii p'arle je? a qui aurai je Phonneur de fair mes remercl mens de Phonnetete de cette visite?? nom, Monsieur, sll vous plait — 
Monk, 1 am called: I 1 was born 
in Ireland — I had a brother in your very province — he was a celebrated physician, very rich, rode in his coach; without doubt he was known to you ^ 
Amer. I have heard of him, my holy father; I have, indeed. Seen him; but he was not then in a coach, he was upon a sorry pony — I am told, he was happy in his manner of playing upon a fiddle and drawing of teeth — he died about a year before I quitted my country — Your niece, a buxom young hufly, very pretty, left her mother a little while after the death 
of 
WANDERER. 
Ii 
of her fadier, to throw herself into the road of fortune, or perhaps to visit her rich Irish relations. The tea tables of our parisii hinted that our Governor had the benevolence to offer Miss a state room in. the same stiip, and adjacent to his own — but I will not vouch for this. 
Monk. Very postible. The jade has her allurements, and 1 venture to astert, your Governor would have been content with her manner of comporting herself in such a trying sttuation. At present She starves, for the love of God, in a miserable convent in Flanders, far from the douceurs of Governors. What a pity stie had the stupidity to decline an eligible arrangement with this gentleman; as you tell me he is a man of wit, of predilection for the Sex, and has been an officer in the guards, stie would have been happy in his Society. Though a Fa; pucin myself, I am quite Sensible that 
a de 
220 
The A M E R IC AN 
a decent arrangement with a governor is preferable to meagre fare in a convent — but the I -- -- -- -- -- family were ever 
raulifli -- -- (lie must flister for her contumacy — -- -- -- — 
Amcr* I am inclined to be of your opinion; but (looking on his vvatch) how chagrined I am, my dear Sir, to be unable longer to taste your Society; an unlucky pre engagement permits me not a continuation of my happiness. In France, yon know, we are staves to the prince, staves to the climrch, to the army, and, to complete our misfortune, we are staves also to the ladies — 
Monk, ^ You are in the right. Sir 5 France is a villainous country — - 
Amer. Pardon me, my holy father, I was Speaking of their misfortunes, not of their crimes. France is, in itself, a happy country; the climate and the 
nian^ 
WANDERER. 
221 
manners mild; the gentlemen, those of the army particularly, elegantly polite; the ladies have the most engaging address and most brilliant eyes. I Shall be ever indebted to the attentive civility of the men and the tender friendstiip of the women. I never countenance the least reflection upon the French nation. Bestdeg, holy father, as you live by the bounty of the French people, the least instnuatioa against them is, in you, most unfeemly™ 
Monk. Keep yourself cool, Sir; you are born in a hot country : your zeal for the French has urged you to hazard a very odd argument. If the poor French people might reckon upon the protection of all the tonfured heads whom they support, they would have for their friends a third of the kingdom : for that will be found the proportion of property in the hands of the church. But we monks treat the people as the peasant does his 
ast. 

222 The AMERICAN 
ass. We iside them, male or female as it may happen; we goad them — and, if they manoeuvre badly, we reiterate the spur. But there is^a distinction in Savour of the honest afs — when he is Spurred, he is allowed to console himself by braying most heartily; but the poor of catholic countries must not indulge the luxury of sighs and groans. This would be a crime inexpiable in the eyes of their proud masters I What! persuade a churchman to be grateful to those who give him bread! You are dispofed to be pleasant. Sir! Were Peter, James, or Paul, or our Blested Master himself, with his old fastiioned habit, now upon earth, think you they would have a general invitation to dine at the house of Monsieur tabbe, who • tops his part as a man of wit and sire in a Parisian circle? 
Amer. Upon my soul, father, I fear not. Perhaps indeed our Redeemer 
might 
WANDERER. 
223 
might now and then, for decency Sake, be invited, provided always that he came full dressed — that is to Say, that he put off his coat made without a Seam, and consented to give into the rage — to the end that Madame lamarquife might not blusli to receive from his hand her fallen fan, nor Madame la compteite the Brelan fish— — how I am embarrafsed by this unlucky engagement — 
Monk. A prof os, Monfleur — you have 
just been writing -- -- ‘wliat letters are 
thole? 
Amer. A modest question! -- Father, 
these are letters which I write to my relations and friends in America. It is true that war, that plague of humankind 
! -- -- War, the vicious hobby horfe 
which my beloved countrymen are now riding through thick and thin, will prevent my transmitting them -- -- -- But, in 
throw 
224 The AMERICAN 
throwing my thoughts upon paper, I feel my mind relieved from a melancholy 
weight -- -- It is a Sweet pleasure to converse, 
even ideally, with those we love — - 
Monk, But it is possible you may have an occasion of sending your letters. I wish fo with all my heart, because, while you walk out, I will make use of your pen and ink, to write to my sister and nieces — Poor things, they will be charmed with a letter from their uncle— — will put these letters in your envelope; the charge will be final I. 
Amer, Bagatelhy bagatelle! don’t men* tion it — you do me honour. But, my dear Sir, I must quit you. My vctet will be flattered by your orders. He will serve you tea a kangloife, or caffe^ petit pates cream and strav>iberries a la Frangoife — You are in your own house, my father; think yourself fo, and be at your ease— — 
leave 
WANDERER. 
22 
1 leave you with regret, penetrated with your humility, modesty, and urbanity, and have the honour to be, with my whole heart, Sir, your most obedient humble servant— — 
Stop, Sir, pray stop — 
Amer Can I be useful to you, Sir? pray command me, Speak frankly. 
Monk. Look at those feet— — that leg — 
Amer. Hem — Sir “I do behold them; the feet as well as the leg seem to want soap— — foot has but half a flioe; but for the leg — > 
> Monk. Tis lame, Sir — Well — It is n long and tiresome road from St. Quentin to Douay, the town where I live; the fun is very hot, and, hard fortune, although my brother lolled in his coach, 
I have not a Single Sous! Without money 
F there 
V 
226 The AMERICAN 
there is no place for me in the diligence. You, Sir, have felt the frowns of fortune: the ears of the unhappy are ever open to the complaints of a fellow fufferer. Madame H -- --, Monsieur P — - — your acquaintance, 
have befriended me — • 
Amet\ Madam H — > — is the wife of a general, Mr. P — — the only fon of a gentleman of two thousand a year — possibly he will be heir to the title and estate of Lord O — y —. I am a poor fugitive, I am almost a capuchin — But here is two crowns. It is my wisti I could do better, but I am not able — 
Monk, I am much obliged to you. Sir — ^ your address— — am not like my order in general; I am, no beggar — I mean to repay you — 
Amer, Sir, I wisti no repayment, I am too well paid in having the honour to be tifeful to you. What little I have giveua freely I give for the love of God — 
monl 
WANDERER. 
127 
Monk. Sir, you are a gallant gentle tiian. 
Amer. Father, you are too partial; 
but I am beyond my hour -- -- -- 1 must bid 
you adieu. I quit yon, highly sensible 
of the politeness of your visit. 1 then 
broke away, and ordered my servant, after the fisiar had his tea, to get rid of him by Some siiieste — I went away, hap py to get clear for two French crowns, and heartily praying, that the devil would have the benevolence to fly away with the whole capuchin tribe. My Servant told him, that Mr. P -- -- had company 
with him; that there would be very good eating; that his master would be there, and most of the English gentlemen— — to yourself an interview between this giant in fable and little petit rlen, who is by nature So delicate that, even In France, it Subjects him to the imputation of being supposed a beautiful P 2 English 
228 
The AMERICAN 
English girl in boys clothes. Supposh you*fee this little Adonis sitting of a fuin iuer*s moon fliine night in his armchair;; face suffused with a languid smile; his nightgown of white muffin, quilted and doubled with gris de lind taffete; his green slippers, embroidered with Silver and crimson Cupids; his Sine hair sustained by a comb, mother of pearl studded with emeralds; his little Italian bitch Cloe on one arm ns fateuily his Squirrel on the other; his chamber without lights, lest the glare of the candle might injure his complexion; the moon llione upon him; and, leaning at the window, he played upon his mandolin a tender Italian air, accompanying it with his voice broken by his sighs; his Spaniel and Squirrel looking wistfully and charmed with his fong~behold the Iristi friar break in upon him with the menacing air of a French drum major! he had alfb a very strong resemblance of his mother,, 
who. 
WANDERER. 
229 
who, as I since learned, had die honour to be the granddaughter of the famous Cartouchey who dying, like many great men. Suddenly, the poor girl, deprived of Such an illustrious protector, condescended to give her hand to an Insti Sergeant in the pay of his most Christian majesty. Some time after this alliance the Hibernian took French leave of his colours, and retired, with his beloved wife, to the kingdojn; where, reposing under his laurels, he led a philosophic life. Their little villa happening to be burnt the very night Mrs. J -- -- found stie had occasion 
for obstetric aid; on a bog adjacent to their domain the lady was delivered of the hero who now glares his ox eyes upon the luckless descendant of the 
renowned Duke of O -- -- -- The Scene 
struck me So forcibly that it is this moment before my eyes! the petit-maitre did not recognise him. He believed, that the devil himself had honoured him 
P 2 with 
23© The AMERICAN 
with a visit to fly away with him, in pii nisiiment of the enormous crime of having touched his cheeks with a little Spa 
nisli wool he gave a dreadful fliisiek, 
and fell fainting on the floor, fliattering his mandolin in the fall! His Squirrel laid hold of his left ear. Scratching, dish composing his curls, and muttering in the ear of his master, as if he was anxious to know the reason of his discomfiture;; in vain he testified his curiosity: : beloved master heard nor hini, nor the indignant barldng of little Chloe, who tore the capuchin’s robe, and, bury ‘ing her teeth in his lame leg, made him roar and dance round the room like a half strangled bear. Wdien I had returned to my lodgings, the moment my rogue of a Servant tpld me the trick he had played my friend rather than my enemy, I dreaded the melancholy consequences. I immediately ran to the astistance of litr le petitutcn. The howling of the dog 
the 
WANDERER. 
231 
the bellowing of the Capuchin, and the cries of my friend’s Italian valet, convinced me that I had reason for my fears. On entering the room the Scene was irre fstibly ridiculous. I enjoyed it a few moments, and then leaving the field of battle free for the dog and the monk, I threw a pail of cold water upon the petit maltre and the Squirrel. The one Scampered off, the other opened his eyes; but he was not right for Some minutes he still believed he was vis a vis du diable He was going to relapse in a fainting fit! I ordered candles. I made the Capuchin turn four or five times round the petit-maitre, who, as he turned, followed him with anxious eye. At length he recollected his habiliments; and, as the Capuchin had now got the weather^gage of the petit-maitre, he began to Snuff up certain odours, less aromatic than those which lod the gales in Araby the Blessed, ex 
p4 
232 The AMERICAN 
haling from die monk’s Skin. these being a Succedaneum for afsa fetida, began to revive petit rien, He recognised the monk, and conceived the trick I had played him. Gentle creature! he is too polite, too delicate to Scold, far less to Swear, but he protested by his laylock gloves, that he would not give me a boquet for ever fo long! In the mean time he beseeched me to dnve away the fable monster. I ordered his Italian to insinuate into the monk’s paw a six livre piece, and he retired — But this rogue of a monk has induced me to be guilty of a piece of rudeness to his brother of mon treuil. The poor little fellow had the mortification to find the gates of mon treuil strut — He was in a fearful pastion, that they opened not at the will of a monk, who had for his relation a nobleman of the town. Captain Seymour and J clambered over the gates, and threw 
an 
WANDERER. 
233 
an argument, that is, a fonr and twenty Sous piece, to the sentinel — The gate immediately flew open as if of itself. We politely received the little monk and his jack afs. We invited them both to Sup with us at the Sign of the Crown of France; where we found a roasted capon, a. wild duck, fricafleed hare, a salad, and a flask of pretty good Burgundy. We are now at Supper, It has cost me many streets of paper to make out eight leagues of my travels. You must be as tired with the length of my letter as I am with the length of my walk. 
Good Night. 
LET 
234 
T H V AMERICA 
LETTER XIX 
Abbeville la Pucelle 
^FTER supper we called a council, to determine upon the plan of our pedestrian travels. seymour’s servant Supped in the room next to us with his companions of the diligence. While we walked he rode to attend our baggage — Bestdes, Frank being a man of the world, and of a convivial turn, and following, with unequal step, his younger and more robust master, had given a good deal into fastiionable dissipation, by which he had acquired an occastonal slight attack of the gout. His master therefore was too humane to allow him, as he Seemed difposed, to walk withus^ — unsupported by our enthusiasm 
VL 
W A N D E R E' R 
23s 
it would have been too fatiguing for the poor fellow : we resolved therefore that we would Send our Servant before with our baggage, ordering him to stop at any great town until tve overtook him. Wc were to follow as inclination and the cii fiollties of the road permitted. Just as we had arranged our line of march, Francisco came into the room to attend our commands; but the Jille de chamber having informed us, that there was a Portuguese Cavalier Supping with the party who came in the coach, who was, in her opinion, a polite, pretty gentleman, and a great favourite with the fair part of his fellow-travellers — Thinking it a pity to degrade the poor fellow, when be entered the room his master gave him a hearty stiake by the hand — was happy to meet with his friend fo unexpectedly — made him drink a glass of Burgundy, and, giving his orders in English, he, n French, inststed upon his returning 
to 
2^6 
Tnr AMERICAN 
to his company, left his absence Should reduce the ladies au defefpoir t 
/ 
In the morning, after indulging in the luxury of green tea, we marched off about nine o’clock, and at dusk arrived at Abbeville la Pucelle, This lovely maiden city, the capital of Lower Picardy, though built in a modest, unelevated Situation, is environed by an agreeable country. It would make as Sweet a place of residence as a man of a philosophic disposition could desire. I quitted it with regret, I Should have endeavoured to persuade my friend to stay here with me a few months; but, being told the inhabitants Spoke bad French, it would not Suit our plan. 
Abbeville is highly and deservedly famous for the linenefs of its clothes and the beauty of its virgins. It is furpnling how the quality of this last manufacture 
differs 
WANDERER. 
^37 
differs in a very short difference of dl fiance. As France abounds in hard featured peasants, fo has the French language a much stronger phrase to express iigllnefs than I recollect in Englisti. Between this virgin city and Montreuil it is only ten French leagues, yet the women of Montreuil, in general, deserve the French epithet — elle font richement laides, au diun laideur amove. At Abbeville every street and little court is crowded with Hebes. I pretend not to account for this prodigious diverstty. It is the bustnefs of a traveller to record facts worthy of reflection — It is the study of the naturalist to trace effects up to their causes— — 
Post here is an exceeding good inn. Our hoftejfe a widow lady; a genteel, intelligent woman — consequently She Immediately discovered the gentlemen through our dilguife — gave us an excellent Supper, 
238 
The AMERICAN 
per, good beds, and pretty wine, which was poured out by two fair fillfs de chamber— — delicate Samples of Abbevillian beauty did, I own, not a little heighten our regret at quitting this maiden town — * 
Paying without a murmur the bilf, and kisting the cheek of the amiable widow, whose blushes emulated those with which Aurora tinged the window of her bedchamber, the Scene of our audience of leave, — thrice fly waved her hand and bad us adieu; and thrice She pointed the path to Amiens, and hoped file flrould, on our return, be honoured by a call of two Such amiable cavaliers— — we vowed, that if heaven lent us life, we would again commune with her, again we would contemplate, high pleased, the fair daughters of Abbeville — thrice we returned to inquire the near road fly had So often pointed out to us in vain — 
She 
WANDERER. 
239 
She felt the full force of the implied compliment, her jetty eyes beamed the Smile of gratitude; She flirugged her Shoulders; elle etourderie dit~elle I ha ga tenez, Collette vous aurez Vhonneur d'‘accompagncr Messieurs les Anglois, mes tres dignes amis, jufqvau but de la ville. Tres volontiersmadatne — Behold us under the convoy of the fair fille de chamber— — air naive, degage person, delicious en bon point, the glimple of a delicate ankle and Swelling calf, which, as She walked, fly contrived to exhibit, combined to render our conductrefs interesting, and give a pathos to our last adieus. — Bon voqage, Mejfieurs, qui’l me tardera de vous revoir en bon jantl — Adieu, belle Collette — fi nous reftions a Abbeville vous trouverlons nous aujfi cruelle que belle? 0 
Dame! apparemment vous me moquez -- -- - 
hs cavaliers tels que vous, font faits pour pi air e, aux dames bien nes, en tout pais, mais pour trouver des cruelles jamais — 
The 
240 The AMERICAN 
The pill was So happily compounded, Co congenial to man’s constitutional weakness, we could not but Swallow it; we put our hands to our purfc strings, blushing that we had forgot to reward our conductrefs, we both gave her, I will not say what we gave her; be the sum what it will, we could expect no praise from the gift, for we were actuated rather by self-love than charity. Without prying too cuisiousiy into the motive, I shall ever recollect, with ineffable pleasure, the incident. Prudence, laid we, had given too much — but Prudence is an old maid, with whom a man of spirit seldom forms mi arrangement honnhe. When we saw the happiness we procured the poor girl; when we saw joy, - affection, gratitude luffuse her countenance, and irradiate her eyes, we sighed that we could give fo little ^t/; / Mejjienrs, quejevous dois des remercimens, mats je northeast fuls Ilus parur^ que mes pleurs 
^arlent 
WANDERER. 
24.1 
parhnt pour moi! De votrs Cadeau je grojj'erai mon dot~hcureufement ma grande mere a laiffee quatre vingt ecus — pour Letablir chez nous une file doit etre pap fablement rich, car les hommes d.aujourd hui nous recherchent moinspar sentiment qite par ambition. I Saw the tear of sensibility and of joy hang upon the cheek of my friend; never did I myself feel more delicious sensations!! could not help killing the amiable creaaire, and, by heaven! a more innocent Platonic pref sure of a female lip never was imprinted by man! we promlfed her,. that if her little fortune, and her numberless accom plihiments, procured her not a husband worthy of her tenderness, when we returned to England, which ever of us was first; married, .would create her first; maid of honour to the wife of our bosom ’ — She reiterated her thanks, and made her courtesy;; broke from her, exulting in our stciii at Sentimental commerce, 
d in 
242 
The AMERICAN 
in the cheap bargain we had struck; with a few gmins of yellow earth, we had pnrchafed the never dying gratitude, the guileless heart of one of creation’s fairest forms. When the heart is glad, the feet are light. Gay, blithfome, debon aiaire, we marched on rapidly, pondering upon the beauty and simplicity of the fair fille de chamber; for many miles we spoke not a word; real happiness contents itself with its own sensations, it is not loquacious; it is a semblance only of felicity, which inspires garrulity. Our hearts were fo full, that we had marched near five leagues, without recol ledling that we had not breakfasted; the recollection came too late, we were near a league from the last post houfe, we were therefore fain to elude the calls of hunger, by feasting ideally upon the charms of the Sweet maidens of Abbeville. At length we defcisied the little town of Pecquigny on our left, lying upon our 
roach 
WANDERER. 
243 
road, at about the distance of an hour’s walk; Somewhat nearer, on our right, we beheld a goodly looking chateau, hanging upon the lide of a gently declining hill, clothed with a rich wood that arose in amphitheatre behind it, and Stretching on each fide, circularly, nearly envellopped the whole pile of building, covering it from the Summer sunbeams, and penetrating winter winds. We immediately concluded it to be the asylum of holy men; General wasti ington exhibits not more shill in chustng* his ground; the positions of each are always the best the nature of the country will admit, always masterly; we understood from a peasant that it was fabbaye du Guard, a monastery of the Order of clteaux, and indeed having Just arrived at the brow of the hill, we 0-3 descried 
244 
The AMERICAN 
clescried at the extremity of the vale beneath a monk apparently in very earnest colloquy with a country girl, who was lolling Supinely upon the grass, by the fide of the father, leaning her head upon the mosty fragment of a rock that overlooked a pellucid stream, which crossing the highroad, flowed and babbled along an adjoining meadow. Ah! the liquoisifli holy finner, cries the Captain of the Guards, how he prefles the infant devotee to taste the manna of fpiisitual love! Come on, my friend, let us step between the fpiisit and the flesh. Essay this adventure alone, heaven forbid that I Should ever rival a friend, or that the man I love should rival me; the occasion is inviting, the village maid is tempting — yet, in my breast, it excites 
only one darling wish— — but tiie 
1/ ■ ■■ 
village 
iftl 
WANDERER. 
village maid transformed to Julia! the 
American in the habit of the Friar! 
if then, the village maid would be an angel of mercy, the Friar would be a God! 
Fare w e L L 
as 
LET 
246 
The AMERICAN 
LETTER XX 
The family of the Old Soldier 
AS we drew near, we bluflicd at the uncharitable ideas, actuated by which we had approached the holy man and the village maid; we learned to doubt appearances, to be ashamed of the insipid frothy common place we recently played off against the church. The object of our obloquy was the prior of the adjacent convent, a venerable imposing figure t — his head, whitened by time, and by reflecting upon the frailties of humankind, united with an air of un confciolis piety and benignity, an address modest, simple, awe infpiring, Soon convinced us that the God of desire must have long ago retreated from a bosom fo chilly, to baulk his pinions in the sunshine 

WANDERER: 
2.; 
s7 
shine of young and gaudy years: he held in his hand a little book, it was the ca tec hifin used in catholic Schools; he was examining the daughter of a tenant of a fruall farm held of the convent; we observed no criminal confusion flulli his cheek at our approach; his Sweet disciple too Smiled conscious innocence; but, at once to dissipate all remaining doubt, at the distance of a few paces, we discovered the father and mother of the girl, the one 
i 
weaving ozier bastcets, the other Spinning flax, at the door of a Small cottage, Qiadcd by a clump of oak trees, which had, till now, hid it from our view — Observing two strangers conversing with the holy father, whose exotic appearance excited their curiosity, they advanced towards us. The dame, though long past her meridian, had not that rigid look, fb common to the old women of this country; Ilie had a plump mellow countenance — the husband with no 
T 4 
248 
The AMERICAN 
clistingulflilng traits by his afliired look, his easy disengaged walk, we guefsed had served; this was confirmed by a long deep Scar running across his temple; he Soon informed us, that he had the honour of wading through the bloody field of Fonteno), and had got his head thus em embroidered, on that memorable day, by an Englilli cutlass. His wife told us that her family was upon the point of setting down to a dinner of milk, cheese, and fricafeed eggs. Vous etes encore hien loin dd Ami ens -- Messieurs fait es nous rhonneur de fair maigre avec nous. The captain of the guards made polite excuses for us both, adding, that we Should be obliged by a glass of her milk and water; this request called up Mademoiselle, their daughter, who stdpped like a young fawn, ' to their cottage, and in a moment came bounding back with a large stiver goblet of the beverage we had demanded. In her face Mademoiselle 
Dupont 
WANDERER. 
h9 
; ec 
Dupont could not be called a regular beauty, yet her features blended together, produced an interesting effect, frequently wanting to lifeless symmetry;; complexion fair, vivid, and glowing, with the rouge of nature; her eyes of a Sapphire blue, full of capability, but Seemed yet untaught to express any wisties. Save those stowing from a pure heart, unadulterated by too familiar commerce with betraying man; her hair, a light glosty auburn, stoated in rich ringlets around her polistied neck; her nose was greek — A Severe connoisseur would have contended that her month was too wide, had not the Seeming defect been richly compensated by the coral hue of a dewy under lip, which. Swelling a little outr wards, discovered a Set of teeth elegantly Small and Superlatively white. Though not tall, the delicacy of her ’stiape exhibited her to the eye above the Common 
stze; 
2^6 The AMERICAN 
size; file was drefsed in her holiday garb; 
a white cotton jacket, faced with lay 
lock ribbons; the waist of her jacket 
tightly hugging her stiape, happily threw 
out the whole contour of her person, 
which had all the luxunance that consists 
with symmetry; although scarcely 
fourteen, the tempting mellowness of her 
whole person Seemed to render her an 
eligible candidate for hymeneal rites : fo 
early does love emancipate those votaries 
whom he destines to the Support and 
ornament of his empire! Observing us 
eye attentively the stiver goblet, the old / 
man told us, that it was a present from his colonel, a French nobleman, who fell mortally wounded the first charge he made upon the Britisti infantry at fontenoy;; he had the honour of carrying him off from the field of battle, that his present wife was at the time hlaiz chijfeufe to his dear colonel; iiad nursed him the few languistiing days he Survived 
the 
WANDERER. 
2^1 
the Sanguinary action, and that he had given him his purse, and her this cup, as a reward of their fidelity. The poor fellow Spoke this with a voice broken with gratitude and with love, yet, with that innate politeness, never quitting a true Frenchman, he added, not re fille a ju hien anticipie nos souhaits, car nous northeast montrons CC goblet jamais ft ce riefl qti^ temoigner noire blenvicllance a ceux qtien font dignes I 
'01 
'll 
ll 
f 
at 
lit 
The good Prior, as fbon as we approached, had put up his book, not with the quick abrupt motion of guilt, but as if he would avoid an ostentatious display of piety. He greeted us with a tender affectionate unbuous air, only becoin .ing from age to youth, begging us with a look So benign and hospitable, that we would eat our Soup with his brethren, that we were induced to quit the old Soldier and his amiable fhmily, to follow 
the 
The AMERICAN 
the man of God — The Bernardlnes are sleek order; “they little wreck to find the way to heaven, ” by fasting and mortification. The priors five brethren had rubicund countenances. It was a day of Lent; our dinner was simple, but delicately drested; they gave us a Small white wine at dinner, and at the desert a glass of excellent red champagne; declining the offer of a bed, and bidding adieu to our holy hosts, we fet off for Amiens where we arrived with the setting fun. Supper had been ordered by our servant, finding ourselves a little exhausted by this day’s march, and it having been, at ourout fet, determined that the difference of our expenses between walking and posting stiould be dedicated to charity, love, and wine, we resolved to sacrifice a bottle of champagne, as a libation to each of our mistrestes — these were soon imbibed, and whether from wearte lids. or languistiment at the absence 
of 
WANDERER. 
253 
of our goddesses, our low Spirits still contiiiliing, Seymour, who at all times ingenious, is ^stngularly brilliant when good wine Is the object, observed, that as either of our Dulcineas would, without doubt, have won the apple had they been exhibited in a stmi lar dress with the three goddesses of Mount Ida, and, as they combined in their persons all the united charms of the three Graces, we could not hope to render them propitious by a Sacrifice So niggardly. — The logic was good — there could be one only proper answer to it. Garmon! apportons nous encore une hou teille de champagne tnoujfout — ford hien mi Lors — in France the third bottle always creates you a peer — instead of the gar ^on, the landlady herself entered with the third bottle, ' and informed us that the Prince of Conde was to hunt the stag at Chantilly, the day after tomorrow— — 

254 
The AMERICAN 
this intelligence determined us to go post next day, that we might have the honour of attending the Prince — hm 
Joir^ ma hdle prinfejfe*, 
A D X E 
LETTER 
WANDERER. 
25s 
LETTER XXL 
Amiensi Chantilly, 
j^^miens, the capital of Picardy, a large commodious French town, is situated upon the river Somme. It has fine, large streets, ornamented by many well built houses. Part! of the ramparts afford a beautiful walk, stiaded by lofty oak trees— — the principal ornament of Amiens certainly is its cathedral church, dedicated to the Virgin. It is adorned with paintings, three of which, representing the triumph of ourblested Lady, are in white marble, of exquisite workman stiip. The iste of the church is 213 paces, that at Notre Dame at Paris is only 170. It is said to have been built by our Englisti ancestors. A more beautiful dome certainly is not in the world. 
We 
356 
The AMERICAN 
We were prepared to admire it, but found it surpass our ideas. Never did I behold an arch fb sweet, bold, and delicate 1 it seemed to us no mortal work, but created by the fiat of some God! We gazed at it a considerable time with ineffable delight; went out, returned, gazed again, and, at length, with infinite regret, hurried ourselves away. 
Among the sacred curiosities in the cabinet of this church the pious are shown the head of St. John the Baptist, yet in good preservation. It was found at the taking of Constantinople, in the year of Chisist 1204, by Valon de Sarton, a gentleman of Picardy, who being a good Christian and patriot as well as a good soldier, made a compliment of it to decorate the principal church of his province. 
We left Amiens at one o’clock; at night we arrived sit Chahdlly — In the morning 
O 
WANDERER. 
257 
ing we hired the best bidets we could procure, and dastiing in amongst princes, counts, ‘marquis, and chevaliers de Malt, partook of the hunt — The stag had just been started, and was followed by the Prince of Conde, the Duke of Bourbon his fon, and about thirty French gentlemen, most of them officers of the Condh regiment — They were all mounted upon fine Englisti hunters, which they rode with manege bits — were equipped with enormous jackboots, and wore the Prince of conde’s hunting livery. This, though here an honour, would, with Englisti noblemen, have been a distinction by no means enviable. The French say, this prince piques himself upon bunting a la Angloife^ on avec la vitejfe d'un diable; yet we Soon overtook the whole hunt, capering along at a hand gallop. Seymour, who is a very genteel and bold rider, was eager to dasti with his little bidet up to the dogs; observing that this 
R ma 
258 The AMERICAN 
manoeuvre would introduce us gallantly to the hunt and announce us as engujj? gentlemen. But this the etiquette to the prince, which in English chase would have been Suspended, did not permit — We kept with the hunt for two hours, and until our Sorry bidets were blown. The Prince of Bourbon frequently rode up to us, politely pointing the way that the buck had took; and, without committing his own dignity, treated us with that obliging familiarity which young nobility know not how to aftnme. The Marquis de Sans Soucy, a tall, genteel figure, an i officer of distinction in the regiment of Conde, rode up to Seymour, and told him, that he had the honour to Serve against the Englisti last war in Germany — and if ever I am disposed to indulge an emotion of vanity, says the polite mart|iiis, It is when I recollect that I had the honour to Serve in the regiment that once puffied bnrgoyne’s 
lighl^ 
WANDERER. 
'59 
light horse. That regiment was not in Germany, retorted the Englishman, with a tone Surly enough— — Marquis was not rebuffed— — d.etoit les che vaux legers lelliot; Petoit, certainement, ou run Qu rautre; deft un souvenir qui me fera cher, jufqua mon dernier soupir— — English officer of the horfe guards could hot relilli this attack upon the bisitish cavalry, however executed with Gallic urbanity; and the elegant Marquis happening to mention les insurgents y he Snatched the opportunity to Shift him to me — Saying) that I was an American, nephew to General -- -- -- of the republican 
army (a travelling title which he had thought proper to give me — that, of course, I was more competent to Satisfy his curiosity relative to General wafliing tonne, the congress, c. 
About one o’clock they took L daind, nd the hunt ended. The Prince and his Suite had a cold collation prepared 
K 2 for 

26o The AMERICAN 
for diem at a little temple in the wood; after which they proposed to flioot pheasants until night, when they were to return CO Paris. 
Captain Seymour had heard me, after I thought I had won the Marquis’ heart, by giving a picture of Washington, which Ifaw pleafedhim, in reply to his inquiry whether we were well accommodated at the hotel, carelessly answer in the negative; saying, “We were not a little surprised that an inn, built expressly for the accommodation of strangers who resorted here, to see the noble palace and princely forest of Chantilly, should have Such indifferent wine — ‘this was the more extraordinary as the Prince was also governor of Burgundy.” The Marcpiis had given me the opening and I resolved to hit it. The hint was a good one : if he understood it not the fault was not in me. However, my friend had the laugh against 
me 
WANDERER. 
261 
me when we Sat down to dinner — But just as the Second course was Serving one of the Prince of conde’s domestics was announced — qui dc la pane de Monsieur le Marquis de Sans Souci avoit a parler d Mejfieurs les Anglais he entered — Never 
did I behold a more pleafant looking fellow, for he held in his left hand a wicket basket, in his right a card from the Marquis, “who did himself the honour to request we would be fo ohlig png as to taste the Prince of conde’s Burgundy; wistiing it might stand the test of Such good judges.” — He added, “that he was au defefpoir, we did not intend any stay in Pans, as Such an arrangement militated against his ambition of cultivating our acquaintance.” The bashet contained six bottles of exquisite Burgundy and two of Muscat. The more I imbibe the more I am convinced, that pure Burgundy is a moral drink. Never do I taste it genuine, but I feel my heart 
R 3 ex 
262 The AMERICAN 
expanding in philanthrophy and good will to all humankind : next to love it is the greatest inspirer of generous ac. dons. Man is a frail being, and, warned by me, let him beware of relying too much upon his native virtue : let him continue to nourilli that tender, fickiy ostspising of the soul by generous infusions of this moral mixture. For myself I frankly declare, that I ever find myself calculating compound interest and the vibrations of stock, e’er I finisti my pint of port; I Humber and dream of my tithes over a cup of mild ale, and confined to small beer, I am capable of loaceif] and all ungentlemanly misdemeanours: : while I sip imperial Burgundy I feel myself a hero or a demigod I I have, or wisti I had, kingdoms tq give away to others, and kneeling sta tiras to keep to myself and press to my glowing bosom 1 
We 
WANDERER, 
263 
We imbibed a bottle to the health of the Prince, and resolved to stay all the next day, to review his royal domain and do justice to his moral potation. 
To a real sportsman the diversion of pheasant stiooting was rather ridiculous. About threescore peasants beat the bustles of the forest, and drove up to the Scene of action, stocks of game as large as stocks of turkeys. You would really have supposed they were driving the birds to their roost. The French Sporting petits maitres were arranged in a group, prepared with fusees a deux coups to astail the winged foe. They did not ever give themselves the trouble to load or reload their pieces — over grown valets attended for that purpose. In about half an hour they brought down about twenty couple of pheasants, to my astonistiment and the indignation of Seymour. Before we coujd recover from our reverie of adml 
R 4 ration 
264 The AMERICAN 
ration, they had put the buck and the rest of the game into a led coach, and rode off for Paris. 
The palace of Chantilly is a venerable, ancient castle, and abounds with valuable paintings. There has been lately erected a detached building, some hundred paces from the old castle, merely intended as a nursery for the Pnnee of conde’s grandson and his fuite. I think it is'above 100 feet long, containing a fuite of rooms in one continued range. I admire exceedingly this modern building. The rooms are much in the eng listi taste; not large or lofty, but commodious and neat — furnistred with great elegance and propriety, but rather in a simple than a fiiperb or rich style. 
The Prince of conde’s refldence for his horses is much more admired than that for himself, I have not seen such 
noble 
W A N D E R E R. 
265 
I 
noble stables in die postestion of any monarch whom I have yet had the honour to vistt — They are elegantly built of fine stone, may contain near 300 horses; and, when we Saw them, they had at least a hundred of their stalls filled with fine engusti hunters. 
The gardens are well disposed. The Ijle (Tamour is an asylum worthy of the laughter loving goddess: : is indeed inchanting!! Mount Ida been So bewitching, Adonis had never stray’d'from the arms of Venus. The Forest of Chantilly is a beautiful, immensely spacious, rich wood, abounding with prodigious c|uantities of every species of game — con fcious of the respectability of their asylum, of the protection they enjoy under fo powerful a prince, they are as tame as fowls in an Englisti farmyard— — is no exaggeration. I persuade myself, that, at many seasons of the year, you 
might. 
266 The AMERICAN 
might, with your guilelels countenance, encourage the pheasant to eat out of your hand, the infant partridge to nestle in your bosom!! asylum to be envied by his princely master! 
Well may the stag, the chevreui, and the whole feathered throng, tenants of the groves and copses of Chantilly, be fearless, gay, and happy. In England, and still more foin America, a peasant would deem it a meritorious action to destroy them, could he do it with impunity. In France, 1 verily believe, there is not a Single hind but would blustr to be thought guilty of it — I verily believe, he would almost starve e’er he would lay his hands upon a little tomtit., sacred to the pleasure of his prince: fo pure, ardent, and inviolable is the homage they pay not only to their kings, but to all the princes of the blood. 
The 
WANDERER. 
267 
The Prince of Conde always hunts in a royal style, and upon English horses, great numbers of which are held by valets, at different distances, in this imnienfe forest, to be ready to mount occasionally the prince and his Suite. It is indeed a noble sight. This prince treated his guest the King of Denmark with a hunt in the forest of Chantilly in the night. The whole extended wood for twenty miles round, being lighted up with flambeaus, exhibited the brilliant appearance of a ballroom!! concourse of people of all ranks, you will Slippofe, must be prodigious; the neighing and trampling of the horses;; iiilific of the hounds dying along the boundless avenues of the forest; the bounding of the astoniflied deer; the flitting of the affrighted birds; and the prattling of the Swains and village maids, who in the groves danced cotillions, appealing like wood nymphs or fairies, who, 
under 
268 
The AMERICAN 
under the influence of the pale moon, celebrated their mysteries; all these uniting rendered the hunting /ebe of Chantilly a most enchanting fete — ^iiighly worthy of the Prince of Conde! But I stiould think, that a being who could behave fo iinfastiionably, not to say brutally, to the lister of our royal master, deserved na such honour. 
Adieu, 
LETTER 
WANDERER. n6g 
LETTER XXII 
Coache d^eau, 
N the evening of the day, after our hunting with the Prince of Conde, we went to Paris; in the morning we found ourselves, bag and baggage in the Coache d'eau^ which travels from Paris to Auxerre in Burgundy — this mode of conveyance was strongly recommended to us. It is a lage vestel with different compartments, which is drawn along the river by means of horses on the adjoining Shore. It is certainly very cheap and commodious for baggage — Were the pastengers in this vestel ailowed> as they are in the same vehicles in the South of France, to steep on Shore at night, they would be eligible; however, to curious travellers as we profess ourselves to be, 
this 

tife AMERICAN 
this Species of conveyance is well worthy of efsay. It was a fine day, and as we slowly moved along, the windings of the rivet Seine afford a rich variety of country. Elegant villas, well disposed gardens, mossy hills, and sweet little towns blending together, exhibited a very pleasing, picturefqne landscape. noah’s ark contained not fo great a diversity of human animals as did this coache Peau of Auxerre. Fiddlers, perfumers, mountebanks, milliners, monks, mantua makers, coquettes, abbes, village maids, soldiers, statesmen, old women, pimps and petits maitres! motley group! yet not unworthy the contemplation of a philosophic eye! It was a microcosm, a world in miniature! various is the taste of man, yet the coache d'eau of Auxerre afforded Society congenial to the most capricious palate. At first we conversed promifcii oufiy, feeling the Social pulse of each other; quadrilles were Soon formed in 
the 
WANDERER. 
LI 
i 
271 
the cabin, and on various parts of the deck. The Captain of. the guards had arranged a party of reverfee, with the wife of a citizen of Fontainbleau 5 an Abbe and a Chevalier de St. Louis; the the lady was comely, appetijfante, rather fat, but having from her infancy sucked in the court air, her demeanour was gentle and insinuating; (lie Seemed to listen nothing loth to the fleurets of h belle Anglois; the good man, her husband, bowed to the captain, in acknowledgement how fenlible he was aitx pro cedes; to the captain’s predilection for a branch of his family. For myself, I glided from one party to the other, like a bee extracting the estence of various flowers in va noiis parterres; at length I fettled upon a family piece, who were at breakfast in a retired corner, defended from the fun by a temporary awning; it was an interesting group! I was meditating how I should introduce myself. I was hover 
ins: 

2; 2 The AMERICAN 
ing near, undetermined, when their Son, a rofy cheeked urchin, about Sour years old, jumping from the lap of his Sister, who was powdering his golden locks, and Sliding along the vestel, caught hold of the stiver and laylock tastcls of my cane, on which I leaned nonchalentlj my chin, while my eyes ran over the charms of his stster; the young rogue Seemed deliglited with the string — I took it off, hung it about his neck, and having caught him in my arms, without ceremony, went and sat myself down bestcle his mother; She Seemed pleased, yetstie chid the Vittlepollifon, as stie called him, for his rudeness, while I hugged and kisted him, declaring I felt myself highly indebted to the politeness of the young gentleman for introducing me to a family So amiable; the mother thanked me for my partial compliment. The turn of her conversation was So delicate, her choice of words So happy, that I conjectured stie must 
have 
WANDERER. 
73 
have been educated far above her present sphere;; husband, by birth a Swiss, had the air of fimpiicity and honesty, So frequently Seen in the fhces of those virtuous people; he urged me to take a coup of wine and a stice of ham, which I declining, Mademoiselle Nannette presting her undulating bosom with the most delicate hand I ever beheld; Said, au moins, monjjcur, voudra hien nous'faire Vhonneur de pretidre une tajfe de we attached 
onrfelves entirely to this party, insisting iipon their dining with us upon the best fare our travelling hotel would furnisti. 
Mademoiselle Artaux was not tall. Which is an idea we generally have in burr minds, as a part of the delicious toiit mfemhlcy which goes to the composition of a sine woman; but I think 1 never Saw fo pretty a woman in any country. True beauty; like genuine wit, is to be felt, not described;; will 1 ens 
deavour 
74 
The AMERICAN 
deavour to give a faint copy of this perfect original. When I portray feminine beauty, I generally begin with the hair, because I think a fine head of hair a beauty, in a woman, the deprivation of which is not to be palliated by any, or every other charm; but in this I regard quantity more than colour — there cannot, I humbly think, be too great a profusion upon a female head — this bewitching redundancy always makes my fancy glow with a casual astociation of ideas, wonderfully pleasing to a man, whose predominant passion is woman t This lady’s hair was in colour a clear silky flaxen — its growth encroached upon her forehead, and terminated there in a point — it was braided up after the Grecian faoiion — Her forehead low, her languislilng eyes a glossy blue — long eyelashes, and, as well as the eyebrows. Several shades darker than the hair of her head — Under her left eye there was a 
little 
WANDERER. 
MS 
little purple Spot, which I Should have taken for a blood drop from the point of the arrow of love, had riot her mama told us it was the natural mark of a grape stone — her every limb, her every feature Seemed the more perfect the longer you gazed upon them — If, however, there could be Said to be a gradation in her charms, the preference must be given to her hand and arm, leg and foot — the mere glimpse of her ankle would have made a Stoic forget his apathy — his palpitating bosom would tell him he was made to feel pleasure, if not pain — Her neck long and exqullitely’' white, terminated by falling stioulders — ^ a waist rounded by the hands of the Graces — her complexion 
Fairer to be Seen, 
Than the fair lily on the fiow’ry green! 
More fresh than May herself in blossoms news 
2 This 
2; 6 The AMERICAN 
This Sweet girl had been with her parents to Paris, upon Some affair relative to their commerce in wine; — for Mademoiselle Artaux, with all the glowing graces of a wood nymph, all the easy politeness of a court meteor, was the daughter of a simple Vigneron! I understood afterwards, that her father had been steward to the Marechal D -- -, and, marrying the favourite 
maid of Madame la Marechale, two Sons and this daughter were the fruit of their loves. Little Nannette insinuating herself into the good graces of the only daughter of the Marechal, was con, tint!ally at her side participating the lesions in the various polite accompllsii ments taught her noble patroness. — Her present elegant manners siiewed how well stie had profited by her opportunities — though not sixteen, siie Sung with taste, danced with ease and elegance — and her mother, in the effusions of paternal fondness, told us, that Nannette 
pent 
WANDERER. 
277 
pent piticer Pharpe tres joument: an instrument happily calculated to display the beauty of a fine arm. After dinner, to which two remaining bottles in the wicker bafketgave a zest — Seymour, with a milliner of Dijon, 2. petite brunette tres appetiffantey the lady of Fontaiiibleau, and an old Croix de Su Louis, Mademoiselle Nannette, andmyfelf danced cottillions on the deck, Mademoiselle having previousty enchanted us by her naive manner of Singing some of the airs of the Deserter, particularly, 
t 
, affliger cequ’on aime! 
We continued our dancing by moonlight, until twelve o’clock, when we Separated to pay tribute to the stumbering god — There were five beds for one hundred people; this being no age of miracles, they could not Suffice — three of them were postested by the two families I 
S % ' hav 

The AMERICAN 
have already mentioned. — Seymour and I kept guard at the door of the chamber, graced by Nannette and the little milliner of Dijon, who slept together — We were fain to elude the attacks of Morpheus, by diverting our eimui with a rubicund Cordelier, who sang us chansons a loire, while nymphs, swains, priests, and old women, on the deck, slumbering around us, breathed a chorus to his songs— — length, wrapping ray Spanisti cloak about me, I too laid me down, having for my pillow the plump jowl of the rosy gillccl Cordelier; but the spiritual rogue fnored foabominably^ that steep was denied me; I therefore amused myself by counting the trees by which our boat glided, whole branches reflected the pale rays of the stiver moon upon the watery bofoni of the Seine — I gazed upon the Pleiades, the Milky way I pondered upon the fixed stars, upon comets; I was calculating the tranfic of Venus, and 
lament 
WANDERER. 
279 
lamenting the absence of Julia! At this critical moment, Aurora displayed her gre de lind robe de chamber upon the dewy orient— — started up, planet struck, believing it was you, but alas! I called you, and you would not anfvver — I looked for you, but my blue eyed nai’ed of the Thames would not be found! 
Adieu. 
S 4 
L E .D, 
aso 
The AMERICAN 
LETTER XXIII 
Fontainhleauy Auxerre Dijon. 
E continued in the coache d'eau until the Succeeding evening, when, dreading to pafs another night without Sleep, and wishing to See Fontainbleau, whose noble foreff we now descried at a distance on our left; ye Submitted our baggage to the charge of Frank, and, promising to rejoin our acquaintance at Auxerre, we again became peripatetic travellers. 
Tyre Sun was near Setting when we ar rived at this romantic Sorest his declining rays gleaming through the branches of the lofty oaks, and blazing upon the gigantic craggy rocks, which Seem to have been planted here coeval with the 
crea 
WANDERER. 
281 
creation, rendered the Scene worthy the pencil of Salvator Rosa!! beautiful horror pervaded the whole wood I the coup datu was gloomy, awful, and fub linie 1 yet, as we penetrated the bosom of the wood, the pheasants and partridges flitting; the chevreul and fawns gambolling around us, softened and enlivened the awful majesty of the prospect— — grand Sheets of water around fontain blean, from the beauty of which the chateau takes its name; the numerous craggy rocks growing among the oaks, give a niofl hiterefting wildness to this landscape, rendering Fontainbleau, to my taste, much more pleasing than either Conipeigne, Versailles, or Marli. 
By the bye, I know not a more eligl ble retirement to acquire the French tongue : it being a court, the language is Spoken in all its purity; and when the court is absent, which is ten months in 
the 
zsz 
The AMERICAN 
the year, I am told a stranger may live reasonablv at Fontainbleau, 
We viewed the different apartments of the chateau. The gallery of cerfs, about loo paces in length, is the most striking. The quantity as well as stze of the bucks horns, trophies of the royal hunt ting at Fontainbleau, is stupendous. There are few paintings here worth com? nienting on. I am told Lewis the Fourteenth took the inost valuable of them to adorn his favourite residence Versailles, There are few statues of value in the extensive and romantic gardens adjoining this palace; that which pleased me most was two.infants playing with a Serpent: the expressive ionoceiice iq their countenances finely contrasts the guile of their insidious play mate. Fontainbleau is an antique— — Some say, by St. Louis, others by Francis the First. It was em bellillied by Henry the Fourth. The present 
WANDERER. 
Sent King Seldom visits this place. The Prince d’artois resides here a great part of the hunting season, to which diversion the forest feenis well adapted. Le Jar din d^eiang is Surrounded by a number of canals, full of the largest carp lever Saw. The garden of pines, the grottoes, cascades, and grand canal are on the same magificent Scale with the forest. Next morning, with the rising fun, we left Fontainbleau, and, without encountering anything remarkable, arrived at Sens. 
Sens, the capital of Senonois, is situated upon the river Yonue, over which we pafs to the town upon a long stone bridge. ' Tho’ I have hardly faith enough to belfeve, with the inhabitants, that this place was built by Samotes, one of the four Sons of Japhet p yet its narrow and winding streets are strong marks of its great antiquity. It is among the largest 
and 
2b4 The AMERICAN 
and most agreeable towns of France. The iiumberlels rivulets meandering across the street must be very refrestiing In the Summer season, and commodious for various domestic uses. They arise from the river Vanne, which, dividing in various canals, renders the environs of the town one continued garden. 
The metropolitan church of Sens, de? dicated to St. Etienne, is very large, and richly adorned with Sacred paintings. The dome Is highly celebrated : it is beaiitl fill, but much less fb than that of Amiens. The glastes of this church are of a most singular beauty— — were painted by one Jean Goufiii, a native of Sens, Among many lovely chapels there Is one tranfceodently fb — Its cloister represents a Sphere, with all its constellations— — fub bate of the grand altar, only exhl bited on sites, is a bas relief upon a table of gold covered with jewels; which re 
prefeiits 
WANDERER. 
285 
prefeiits St. Etienne on his knees in the middle of the Sour Evangelists — Loitering a good while in this churchj we could not leave Sens until twelve o’clock of the day after dur arrival. We frequently saw the coache d’eau gliding in the mean drnig river Yonne, which hung along our road Upon the right; and once we saw, or thought we saw, la petite Nan nette wave to us her Snowy hand. Certain that we (liould arrive at Auxerre as Soon as our baggage, we contented ourselves with making Seven leagues, arriving about an hour by fun at the agreeable little town of Joigny, which hanging upon the declivity of a hill, and looking upon the rivers Amancon and Yonne, which join at the bottom of the town, and, thus united, Sweetly slow and meander through a large fertile meadow, renders Joigny a delicious retreat. — As we entered the hotel, a young petit xnaitre accosted us with true Gallic cash, 
crying, 
286 
The AMERICAN. 
crying, regdrdez) aiejjteun, voila le beau mionde de yoignj, qui va fe dijjiperi allons nous milerpile mile avec eux— — took us each by an arm, but being a little dusted we excused ourselves, begging his company at Supper; he was nz/ defefpoivy he could not have the honour of introducing us to the ladies, bowed and ran after them — in effect, looking out of the window, we Saw a large group of belles and beaux, elegantly dressed, walking on the banks of the stream which stowed through the beautiful meadow, at the foot of the town — the despairing petit-maitre was already romping with one of the girls — On his return he told us, in confidence, that he pitied this Sweet maid with his whole soul, car ejfeftiisemetit elle eft sort a plaindre, — a fnon arrive ici je miavijois, pour pajfier le temps, de fioupirer aupres dells— — pauvre enficint, die a pris ce fiimple badinage aux J'erieux! tant pis pour elle— — je dois epouj^er, incefia ment, une file diun rang difiingue que Ihais 
de 
WANDERER. 
28' 
de tout mon cwur, mats une femme ef faite four cela. — For the first time, my spleen rose against a Frenchman— — of all characters, I think a male coquette, or a female jilt the most abominable; the latter especially is a monster in petticoats — to be Sure, in an age where sensibility is an object of ridicule, when to be frivolous, is to be fastiionable, my ideas on this occasion may appear outre; but if the crime most fatal to the peace of a generous soul, if the crime most subversive of the happiness of its devoted object, may be fairly deemed the most enormous, surely I am right. A writer of your country, whose views into the human heart were profound, thus indignantly and pathetically portrays the effects of this enormity, - — “Affure yourself, my Lord, he who has never felt the anguisli of being betrayed by the person he pastionately loves, has but a faint idea of the Sorrows incident to human life. The shipwreck of a brilliant fortune, at 
least, 
288 
The AMERICAN 
least, leaves us the advantage of displaying our magnanimity of Soul either by evincing our moderation in supporting the reverse, or exhibiting that noble firmness which elevates the man above the misfortune — The excessive vanity with which every human heart is replete, is often a consolation in its niost poignatit chagrins • happy he who can feed in Secret upon the delicious banquet of felf admiration! but what resource remains to the devoted wretch, who having rashly concentered all his joy and felicity III one single object. Sees himself in a moment bereft of it, aecufes, as the eaufe of his tears of blood, the very hand he would have ehofen to wipe them away if any other grief could have caiifed them to flow? To be wretched and wretched, because one loves, is an intolerable Species of misery, which it is impossible even to comprehend, without having made the melancholy trial 
Auxerfe 
WANDERER. 
289 
Anxerre, where we arrived next day to dinner, is a frontier town of Burgundy, lying partly on a hill, and partly on a valley, watered by the river Yonne which divides it from the province of Nivernois — This river is a very commodious medium of commerce between Anxerre and Paris, and is likewise resorted to as a passage to and from the most constclerable towns of France. 
The church of St. Germains in this town is worthy of being explored, on account of the many tombs and bones of of saints it contains, in high preservation. 
We had the pleasure of arriving in time to hand Mademoiselle Nannette out of the coache cpeau — her countenance lighted up vnth innocence and joy at our approach — with a happy mixture of gaiety and naivete She gave each of us ah 
T arm. 
290 The AMERICAN 
arm, saying, mes amis je me fie a vous -- -- -- 
(lie was now dressed from head to foot CI la Grecque — we flew with this fair Cyprian enibafladrefs to the hotel — The old Chevalier de St. Louis, an amiable young soldier, his nephew, the rubicund friar, the family of Artaux, Seymour, and I spent the evening together — Mademoiselle sang, played upon the guittar, and danced an allemande with the nephew of the Chevalier, while the uncle entertained us with an account of the seats, which he did notf the day he ran from Roshach, The Franciscan recounted the history of his transformation from a drummer to a mountebank, and then to a monk of the order of St Francis — In the capacity of phyflcian he had, he feared, put many a Christian to death, but now he would 
show them the way of eternal life. we 
all seemed happy with each other, and regretted that th approaching morning 
wmuld 
WANDERER. 
291 
Would disperse ns — Madame A -- -- told 
us that file lived in Franche Compte on the borders of Switzerland; that it would be in our way to the Cantons, and that (lie and Nannette would be infinitely happy to entertain us at their hermitage. — We afturcd her that a visit to a family for which we had So just a predilection could never be out of the way of men 
of Sentiment She then retired, followed 
by the fair Greek, who left us all in admiration of the delicacy of her person, the Sweetness of her manners, and the traces of her wit. 
O 
There being no stated conveyance from Auxerre to Dijon, we hired a coach, rather for the accommodation of our baggage than olirfelves, for we were now become fond of walking and fo corroborated by it, that we could walk thirty and forty miles a day, with less fatigue, than we could make ten when we first began our march. 
T 2 We 
292 The AMERICAN 
We had a Sourdi Seat to curpose of, with which we complimented the clieva lier de St. Louis, who was going to Dijon to Sec his relations — He was a good-natured, garrulous, companionable old fellow; was lame, and living entirely upon the Small pension incident to his ribbon. Such a favour was not unacceptable. In the morning Seymour and I generally walked before or behind our coach — we had fo much the foot of it, that we could explore the wild country of Burgundy at our leisure, arriving in time to order dinner, and get acquainted with the landlady and fille de chamhiay before the coach with the old Soldier came up. After our repast, we got into the coach, where the Chevalier let us to numbering over his steges and battles : for he was a modest Frenchman, and was not the little hero of his tale until his vanity was awakened by the juice 
of the grape. journeying on, in this 
man 
WANDERER. 
293 
manner, we, the third afternoon, arrived in the capital of the Duche of Burgundy, and were fet down at the Hotel 
de condl 
We went next morning to the coffeehouse, where we met with Several of our countrymen of rank and fashion. Mr. 
R -- -- -, Son of L Langford, of Ireland, a 
gentleman, whose opulent fortune is his least merit; the two fons of Sir James Campbell, with their governor, a fenstble Scots gentleman; a Mr. Jackson, an Iisisti gentleman, of most sweet, arniable manners; a Mr. Alexander, of Edinburgh, who has resided sometime with his two accomplistied daughters indijon ||; lastly, a Mr. Rubijo, a Welsti gentleman — a mixed character, seldom to be found in nature, a violent politician, and most 
II The youngest daughter, an amiable girl, has been since married to the grandson of Dr. Franklin, and Secretary to the American erabalty. 
T 3 pom 
294 The AMERICAN 
pompous and elaborate antiquarian; he is exceedingly entertaining — in the course of an hour’s conversation at a coffee liouse, he made an oration upon the Olympic games of the Greeks, the gymnasia, pugiles, and baths of the Romans — then dived into the profound receltes of Herculaneum, emerged, loaded with moll choice antiques, and finihied with panegyrics upon the Congress;; the Sacred fire of Roman virtue, which well nigh extinguished by the Goths, was rekindling with redoubled blaze, in the hearts of the Americans! 
We have received Such polite invitations from the English to dine with tlieni in rotation, that we fiiall stay longer than we intended; for finding Dijon an extravagant French town, we Soon agreed it would not answer our purpose, as a place of halt, for a few moiuhs, to improve 
WANDERER. 
295 
prove our knowledge of the French language, to which this town is well adapted — .The French is Spoken here with 
the utmost purity -- a vicious phrase is 
Seldom to be found in the mouth of a peasant around Dijon. 
The Hotel de Conde, where we now are, is as dear as any Hotel in London; an anecdote relative to the unbounded avarice of our host, was mentioned to us by our friend the antiquarian. Lord A. P. with his lady, arrived there from the South — upon her arrival. Lady P. was brought to bed — his Lordstiip ordered the landlord not to let a wagon or a coach enter the yard until his lady was recovered — to make his bill, stating what he stiould iofe by the above arrangement— — had the modesty to charge fifty pounds a day — had it been a thou 
T 4 Sand, 
296 The AMERICAN 
fand, in Such a situation. Lord P. niufl have acquiesced— — ten days her ladyship got well enough to continue her route to Paris. Exclusive of all other ex pences, Lord P. paid sive hundred pounds for the tranquillity of the hotel. 
F A R E W E L L 
LETTER 
WANDERER. 
297 
LETTER xxlyv 
'Dijon, 
This is an elegant and commodious town; the streets are wide; the houses built low, and more in the English manner than I have yet Seen in France; the ramparts exhibit a very beautiful picturesque country 5 Several pleasant little villages, situated on high hills, whole declivities are clothed with vines, are happy objects, terminating the different views; thoy^ have adjoining the ramparts, a retreat called Vaiix hall; the only particular in which there is a similitude between this and the celebrated Vstux hall of your country j k is to be Sure a faint imitation, biit if, as’ I am told it does, it tends to concenter Society in the siini 
mer months, the principal end of a pleasure 
298 The AMERICAN 
sure garden is answered: : the en 
/ 
of Dijon are one continued pleasure garden. The town lies at a little distance from Lai an and Fmtaincs^ between two hills, at the entrance of a vast plain which extends about eight leagues to the South; to the west it looks upon a long chain of monntainouscountry, robed with vineyards, stowing with the most delicious wine in the world. 
There are Seven parish churches in Dijon, none of them very remarkable for the beauty of the workmanstiip, or of their paintings; I must except thefagade 
of Notre Dame, which is highly, and I 
o' I 
think justly admired. The public buildings are magnificent, and arranged witii propriety; the parliament was establilhecl by Lewis XI in the place of the Dukes of Burgundy in 1480. Great form and dignity are observed in French parliamentary proceedings. We were present 
at 
WANDERER. 
299 
at a pleading; it was upon a cafe fingu^ tar enough; an attempt was made to dl vest an advocate of his gown; the pretext immoral conduct; a tender connexion with a lady, whose reputation was rather problematical, and whose humble rank in life countenanced not her dissipated manners, was adduced in proof of the allegation; the poor devil of an advocate was upon his legs at least four hours, and laboured hard to exonerate himself from the charge; insisting much upon the innocent sentimental nature of the arrangement; however, as the lady’s apron was observed by the sage and pe uetrafmg judges to be too Short for a profesfor of the Platonic system, the advocate lost his gown : in France it is expected that lawyers preserve, at least the outward Semblance of honesty. 
There are three Superb hospitals of Dijon; one in the city, called Sb, atmcy for the accommodation of orphans; a 
sine 
300 
The AMERICAN 
fine, well adapted building; the feconci, in the Suburb d’ouche, is ruopital de St. Efpritf founded and built by Eudes the third Duke of Burgundy, in 1204. It is of the order of St. Efpric de Montpellier, Served by les pretres hofpitalietd^ for pilgrims and travellers; the third, in the Same Suburb, is a Superb building, at the ex pence of the principal magistrates and inhabitants of the town — it is called riiopital General de la charlie— — is appropriated to the use of poor helpless Sick, and i? Served by nuns, who had, for their institutor, a certain Benigne Jolio, Doctor of Sorbonne, who, dying a faint, perfumed with holiness, was burted in this hospital. 
One of the principal curiostties of Dijon is the Chartreuse, situated about a mile without the town — it is richly endowed, and makes a good use of part of its revenues — it gives a very considerable 
WANDERER. 
301 
able Sum annually to the phopital de St. Esprit, and to the poor, six hundred large loaves of bread a week. There are from ten to a dozen monks in this house, who are Such strict observers of silence, that you would think yourself in a desert— — chartreuse was built and endowed by the last Dukes of Burgundy; its cir clunference is prodigious; the cloisters and the church itself beautiful; in the middle of the choir you may see two Superb tombs of black marble; upon one of which is most naturally represented Duke Philip the Bold, upon the other the figure of his Son, Duke John, sans peuvy with that of his wife, Margaret of Bavaria; you are Shown the body and the head of this last Duke, who was killed upon the bridge of Montfeau Faut yoniie; around these noble tombs yon see a number of little figures, in white marble, about a foot and a half high, representing the convoy of this prince — 
their 
302 
The AMERICAN 
their different attitudes, and the expressed flons of their countenances are very interesting 

Among the paintings; oiir Saviour taken down from the cross, has great merit — > I think I never saw anything more naturally represented than the blood stowing from his feet that had been nailed to the cross: : was So horribly fine, it made me stiudder! 
I must not omit to mention a curiostty Shown in one of the principal churches of this town, la Saint Chapel founded by Hugh, the Third, and Sixth Duke of Burgundy, of the first race, at his return from the Holy Land. In the cloister of the canons which joins this church, you see a miraculous host, marked with drops of blood which stie Shed when stie was pierced with Several strokes of a penknife, by the Sacrilegious hand of a certain 
WANDERER. 
303 
tain Jew! It was Sent in the year 1436, by Pope Eugene the Fourth, to Philip the Good Duke of Burgundy, who made a present of it to this church, where it is preserved in a golden coffer, garnished with precious stones, a gift of the Duke of Epernon. It is exposed in an annual fete, placed in a golden fun of mastive weight, adorned with jewels. In this church you see the escutcheons painted of the Knights of the Golden Fleece, instituted by Philip the Good, at Brussels. 
The last and most celebrated curiosity of Dijon is an edifice behind the church of the order of St. Benigne. It is a rotunda, and has strong marks of extreme antiquity; it is composed of three vaults, one above another. Sustained by one hundred and four pillars, each of one entire piece j it receives no light, but from an opening at the top of the building; it is supposed to have been a temple 
of 
304 The AMERICAN 
of the Pagan gods, now consecrated to the god of Christians by means of several chapels worked in it, as well as by the devotion of the faithful, who there revere the tombs of primitive Christians, or unknown martyrs, to whom this iduilding has Served as a place of asylum, or burying place. 
As we were with our guide descending to this gloomy edifice, we deferred a glimmering taper moving about the pagan temple by a hand that appeared, in the darkness visible, to be that of a giant! We called a halt in front, — the dead silence reigning around the awful vault! the idea of the impious pagan rites that had been celebrated there; their abominable Sacrifice of the pnmitive Christians, rustling upon our disordered fancy, made us conceive this figure to be Some uii liappy soul reconnoitring his dreary abode! Our guide appalled, fell headlong 
WANDERER. 
3^5 
long down die steps, upon this gigantic phantom I the guide Screamed most woefully, while the phantom cuffed and 
The bad French in 
ciirsed the guide, which he clothed his execrations, led me to discover him; Surely, I cried, this must be the flower of modern antiquarians, the profound Ruhijo! none but a genius like him would quit Dijon, its ladies and its agrimens, to bury himself with heathen gods and Christian martyrs! 
He clasped me in his arms, my dear! -- -- -- 
none but a man of your taste would have traced me in my philosophic haunts! 
He posicely offered to be our guide; strewed us a large aperture on one fide of the wall; he was convinced this was the door at which the beast was introduced at the ancient Sacrifice j he adduced fo many arguments in favour of the conjecture, that we were fain to be convinced likewise; he traced the build 
U ing 
3o6 
theamerican 
ing beyond the time of Christ. Having filled his pocket handkerchief with antique dust, purloined from the fides of the door of facisifice, he led us to certain figures of wild beasts (tigers) very plainly wrought in Mosaic, pn the pavement; this tvas, with Semblance of truth, fiip pofed to be a remain of Roman superstition;; gave Rubijo occasion to expatiate diffufively upon the cats, dogs, monkeys, and other gods and godclest'es of the Egyptians, aftyrians, Grecians, and Romans. This broiiglit us to two o’clock; we afeended to dinner. We have been Solicited by our countrymen here to reside in this town; they have in their turns entertained us in a fimiptuoiis and elegant style : indeed the very agreeable manners of the Engliili red ding at Dijon is a principal reason for c|uitting them; we perceive their focieiy will seduce us from our first object, the attainment of the French language. As a place of 
adoacl 
r ■ 
: ' 
WANDERER, 
307 
abode, Dijon is very eligible; it is the capital of a most Sweet country; containing, within itself, everything requisite to the luxuries, as well as necesi* siaries of life. Ceres and Bacchus walk hand In hand, dispensing to their favourite Burguignons, their peculiar bleft ings, 
Dijon is also the seat of a parliament. Once in three years the states are here astembled by their governor, the Prince of Conde, when the town blazes with royal splendour. 
They have a good theatre; the first actors of Paris frequently resort to Dijon, at the meeting of parliament, or the astembly of the states. Some of the principal nobility, and a great number of the learned, particularly the learned of the long robe, reside here, Dijon has at present a concert, gentlemen peril ^ for 
3o8 The AMERICAN 
formers. All amateurs of the city, and travellers of fashion, are here received with politeness. 
Lectures on botany, natural and experimental philosophy are given gratis by profesisors appointed for that purpose;; of decent appearance may readily procure an introduction, and here they meet with the citizens of rank and fastiion of both Sexes. Women are thought by these polite people, by no means out of their Spheres in a philosophic circle. I coincide with French ideas upon this occasion;; have ever thought the fair Sex postested a happy dispofition to the study of natural philosophy, nor do I taste the experimental part of the Science, unless the fair are the objects of my experiments. 
tomorrow we Shall ride out of town, about twelve miles, to see the monks 
and 
WANDER E R. 
3^5 
and the celebrated Abbey of Citeaux — after which we shall, though with regret, bid adieu to this town and its numerous agritnens; from efienced petits maitres, we Shall again become peripatetic philosophers, and shape our course to be fan^on. 
Adieu. 
U 3 
LET 
310 The AMERICAN 
LETTER 
XXV 
Monks of Citeaux in Btirgtindy, Story of the Noble Austrian. 
were furnislred with a letter of introduction to the prior of the convent, from Mons. I’abbe Butler, a native of Ireland, deservedly respected here, who takes all occasions of evincing his benevolence to his countrymen. Seymour and I, attended by our servant, went on horseback, and arrived at Citeaux a few moments before dinner was Served. It was a lent funday — We were not expected, yet I have seldom. Seen a 
repast at once lb Superb and elegant -- 
There was no meat, yet we had, in the different courses, at least fifty disties, exclusive of the desert, which conlisted of fmcetmeats, a variety of fruits, and half a 
dozen 
WANDERER. 
11 
dozen different kinds of exqnlfite cheese. The dinner confided of white Soups, a Species of aquatic wildfowl, vegetables and eggs drelled in various manners, all delicious. The Abbe of Citeaux is a younger brother of one of the first families in France. The man of birth, of education and breeding is conspicuous in his ^ every afdion; he is too a very handfbme man, polite, easy, geilteel, and, although stbove fifty, yet such is the elegant otium cum dignitate he enjoys, as monarch of Citeaux, that he appeared to me not more than thirty; He invited, with the prior, half a dozen of his Subjects to dine at his table with his Englifll guests — in all we made the number of the Muses, with Apollo at our head; — If bisilliant wit flows from Sparkling wine ours was of the purest: water. The fympofium Dei, as defcisibed by the ancient poets, was rather a boisterous club — the pjmpofium Dei, ^ U 4 * at ' 
312 
The AMERICAN 
at Citeaux was the feast of reason and the stow of Soul V 
This monastery was founded by a Duke of Burgundy, The Abbe walks next to the Prince of Conde in procestions,. and is deemed the Second man, with respect to rank, in the duchc His revenues, about 50001. a year, an enormous Sum in this country, arise principally from the exquistte wines made upon the lands contiguous to and belonging to the convent — Besides white, he gave us nine different kinds of red Burgundy, with each of which Bacchus himself might have deigned to purple his mouth! The noble Abbe drank moderately, yet feeing the captain of the guards and the wild American smack their lips after each glass, he had the happy talent of inducing his guests to imbibe cheerfully. His cufeourfe was To powdered with Attic fait that it excited thirst. His look was 
fo 
WANDERER. 
v3 
Co benign, fo friendly, he would beg us So earnestly to taste yet another and another glass; he was So desirous that Such good judges stiould give him their opinion of the comparative value of his Several kinds of wine : he had such an art of exhibiting a better and still better bottle, that we were fain to oblige our noble host — Potations fo exquisite, uniting with our Sensibility of a reception fo very friendly and polite, heightened our Spirits and stimulated our natural desire to please. We gave the Abbe and his brethren a sketch of the ridiculous incidents of our travels. We had the happiness to see that our attempt to divert the good monks was crowned with success— — holy countenances were lighted up, and their fat sides Shook with laughter — They became full of enjod.i mfntt replete with repartee — Indeed the benign air of the Abbe, the peculiar garb 
of 
^14 The AMERICAN 
of him and his holy brethren, their fiaflies of wit and merriment, contrasting with the Solemn awfnl silence pervading the whole Scene around us, operating upon imaginations flustered by most exquisite beverage, induced us to conceive that we were far above the terrestial hemisphere, and 
c 
Purpureo hihimus ore nectar I 
Without incurring the imputation of va iiity we may suppose our Society was agreeable to these honest Bernardines — ^ Secluded by the rules of their institution from the world, Seeing little company but those whom curioflty excites to viflt them, I know no description of men more eaflly pleased, more suscepdble of the charms of Society than monks in general. — In the busy Scenes of life, in the public haunts of men, where almost every 
Source of enjoyment is exhausted, a 
weari 
WANDERER. 315 
weariness, a tedium hangs upon the mind, which makes it delicate and fastidious to excess, and, in a manner, impervious to agreeable sensations — With the man of the world novelty is exhausted, wdth the recluse everything is new — every little incident therefore becomes an object stimulating curiostty — Tasting, as we did, the refined pleasure of pleasing, we were ourselves highly pleased— — agreed that we never had pasted a more agreeable day. 
Of the monks invited to dine with Us there was one by birth an Austrian — a tall, manly, commanding figure! Courage and dignity beamed in his countenance — He had more the air of a general than of a monk! We since learned that he was a man of birth; that, in early life, he had been a Soldier — had loved, but a disappointment in the most tender and irresistible of all human uastions had induced 
him 
3i6 Thb AMERICAN 
him to dedicate the remains of his unhappy life to the Service of God — In this holy asylum he endeavours, by meditation,. and by acts of beneficence, love, and charity, to obliterate or Soothe the remembrance of his melancholy lot! I don’t know how it was, but a certain presentiment that his might one day be my destiny, immediately gave me a predilection for the nobly unfortunate Austrian! He is now old and infirm, and looks as if the grave, the only Sure re stige for Sorrows like his, will Soon close upon him! He had the gout, the Abbe told us — I loved the good Abbe for the respect and attention he paid the old man~cheer up, my father, Said the Abbe, the fit is going off; you will Soon be out os pain; drink cheerfully of this old wine — good wine is a panacea Lov the ills of all you Germans. — Here is to the health of the empress your amiable 
Queen -- The Englisti gentlemen will 
pledge 

WANDERER. 
I 
317 
pledge you. The £nglish gentry were once knight errants in the Service of your 
Imperial mistress- -- sigh that heaved 
the manly breast of the noble Austrian, and a big tear that trembled upon his woe worn cheek, told Us that his sickness was in his heart, and that he would never be out of pain until his pulse stiould forget to move! — Yet he drank to the health of his royal mistress, and taught his countenance to wear the Semblance of joy, lest Sympathy for his Sufferings might flied a gloom over the Social circle. 
After coffee the Abbe very politely prested us to take a bed, and stay at Sew days at the convent, Saying, he would give us meat for Supper, which we stiould have had at dinner had he; known of the honour we intended him — He asked us to look at his convent, medal room, library, cc. — Seeing our predilection for the ill-fated Austrian, he de ‘ fired him to accompany us. 
The 
3i8 The AMERICAN 
The church is beautiful and ornamented with a great number of pictures, chiefly copies taken at Rome of the first pieces in that city. So celebrated for the meric of its paintings — The library is well chosen;; medals neither numerous nor intrinsically valuable; they are most of them in brass— — head of Otho and one of the emperor Julius c^far are much admired — In the last you trace or fancy you trace all the singular talents of that eminent warrior and statesman in the lines of his countenance. — While the Austrian held the head of Casfar in his hand he descanted, with an amiable enthusiasm, upon the virtues of his royal master the reigning Emperor, and, by way of relief to the pidure, was lavish of his Satire upon the pruflia.n Frederick* ^ He lamented, that by our joining this Sanguinary Scoundrel, as he called him, the last war, we had precipitated, hien a contre ctbur^ his beloved mistress Theresa 
into 
WANDERER, 
319 
"
into the arms of the French, in violation of true policy and of the natural byas of the Austrians to the Englisti people : for. Said he, our habits and our manners are in Linifon — We love the Englisti, and our love is heightened by our remembrance of and gratitude for your generous and powerful protedion of our young Qiieen, when a combination of her enemies niade her totter on her throne. Our alliance with the instdious French is not countenanced by our feelings; it is auk >vard : we are took frank, they are too crafty. On the other hand, connected with the Englisti, it is ever thus, said the honest Austrian, eagerly Snatching my hand to his mouth and kijftng it. He then begged we would examine if 'we bad any medals, that is half pence, of the Kings and Queens of England. It is tjie greatest present you could make me, said he — A true Austrian infinitely prefers a brass head of an Englisti king to a 
golden 
3*0 
The AMERICAN 
golden statue of a French monarch! The captain of the guards was highly delighted with this elegant and Sincere eu logium upon his country and his Sovereign — By the assistance of his man Frank he had the happiness to accommodate our friend with a half Score of the medals to which he was So partial — Never did he receive So many thanks for So trivial a gift — The old man’s heart overflowed at the sight of two individuals of a nation he loved — He Said, fiiould we, as we had given room to hope, vific their convent on our return from Switzerland, he would tell us the story of his life — The lady I adored was a native of your happy country. Said he — She is now no more — I have the additional anguifii to know, that her attachment to me precipitated her fate! e’er I go to my 
dear Adelaide I will confide to you the history of our loves. — Her countrymen and her lover stiall with tears of Sentiment 
VIV 
WANDERER. 
321 
tlment and of pity moisten her urn! Here the voice of our noble friend faltered — He sighed, Seemed confnfed at betraying a tenderness unsuited to his holy garb — He bkistied, elapsed his folded hands to his agonising breast, which laboufd to contain a broken heart! threw a longing, fixed look to the heavenly abode of his inistrefs! — ^stindder’d! — with his Succinct robe; * candid type of ail unspotted Soul, he veiled his gushing eyelids, and abruptly retired! 
S' ' 
Thrice worthy ill-fated mortal! fare thee Well! could I but Speak peace to thy wounded Spirit my worst sin were done away! Mayest thou hereafter meet thy beloved Adelaide in a purer world, where no cross accident stiall break in Sunder the indiftoluble bond of love; no cares cloud yolir joy! 
* White, the dress os the monks of Citteaux, 
X To 
3^2 
The AMERICAN 
To recover our tone, we took a walk around the offices of the convent. The monks of Citteaux retain only the rational part of devotion : they clog not their 
way to heaven with useless restraints -- - 
They have for relaxation a tennis court, and even a billiard table — They are lords of many villages and large tracts of land 
in the environs -- -- They go a stiootingf 
and have a proper sporting apparatus for the life of their visitors. — They again insisted upon our tarrying two or three days in their retirement— — an indifpenfableengagement, we made polite excuses to the Abbe, and, promising to visit him on our return home, we rode back to Dijon. 
D i E U. 
LET 
WANDERER. 
323 
LETTER XXVL 
bole, Befangon. 
WE arrived here a week ago — about sunrise, two days after I last wrote. We left Dijon, which; from the sweetness of the air and luxurlancy of its viands, some call the Capua of France — we too found it a Capua alluring us into the fault for which Hannibal is So highly censured— — had enervated ourselves by loitering too long, add tasting too freely the luxuries presented by our amiable countrymen, temporary restdents of Dijon. We had lost much of our enthusiasm, and walking was not fo pleasant as in the afternoon we had entered this elegant town; however, we determined to strake off a languor fo unmanly, and to perfe vere in our ambulating scheme— — stop 
X 2 ped 
3m 
The AMERICAN 
ped to breakfast at the hamlet of Genlis, and then pustiing on with ardour, pasted through Auxonne, a little fortified town, determinino; not to haltuntil we arrived at 
O 
\ 
Dole. — Just as we Saw an extensive plain open upon us, we were overtaken by the most dreadful storm of rain, hail, and thunder I ever Saw in an European country — we were in a moment wet to the Ikin — The fall of rain continued the whole day. — It was So pitchy dark that we had not the consolation to see each other 5 ’ but when a stasti of lightning gleaming along the plain, stiewed to each the steek countenance of his friend' — we trudged on gloomy and unsocial— — Captain of the Guards, ever and anon ejaculating a few French oaths as the hail beat upon his indignant phiz — the American, pen stve and resigned, educated in the School ofadverfity, enured to patience and long fnsteising, followed the footsteps of his Friend, inly muling, ruminating on the 
chequered 
rii 
WANDERER. 
325 
chequered scenes of his life, and eluding the wearifomenefs of the march, by comparing the lowering of the flty to the frown on your brow, the fialliing of lightning to the blaze of your eyes. — Just as we descried the town of Dole the ftorin pafted away. — The declining fun faintly glimmering upon the cops of the houses, and blushing upon the sweet river Doube, whose waves washed a vast meadow lying before the town, exhibited Dole and its environs in a beautiful light. — It was a Sweet picturesque scene, not wild like the rocky landscapes of Salvator Rosa, or Poussin, but mild, gay, and inviting, like the rural views of Titiano, 
Dole was formerly the capital of 
Franche Compte -- -- The parliament has 
been transferred to bcnfan^on — The streets are wide, the houses large and 
well built -- There are many remains of 
Roman greatness to be Seen here; part 
X 3 of 
II 
326 The A xm E R I G A N 
of an amphitheatre; near the river, fragments of a mod Superb palace, and two aqueducts; there are also vestiges of Several Roman temples in the environs of Dole, almost hidden by villages, whose names are evidently Roman; for instance Joue, and many others Situated along the pent of a hill covered with vines, which look upon a delicious valley, from its amenity, called the valley of Love. There are two mineral Springs at the village of Jotte, highly esteemed; take Dole for all in all, I hardly know a Spot better adapted to the restdence of a man who pants not after the gew gaw of life, and is content with Simple, yet elegant Sylvan Scenes. At the moment we arrived. Dole and its environs had few charms for us; we were ihivenng with cold, and dripping with the remains of the hail storm; of course a good fire, generous wdne, and an elegant Supper would have been more wejeome than a 
panic ’ 
WANDERER, 

fartie quarrh \vith. prlnceflesof Circassian, beauty, in the enchanting gardens of Alcinous; our first object therefore was the best inn in the town; but how to make a hand Some entre was the difficulty. innkeepers have no predilection for peripatetic philosophers : add to this, we were wet and overwhelmed with dirt and mud; our appearance was rather piteous or grotesque than brilliant and prepoftessing. To be Sure the coup diwil we exhibited was not at all prevenante. The captain ordered me in front, observing that an old green Satin riding waistcoat, laced with gold, that I had on, might peradventure plead for us. I threw open my Englisti frock to make the most of my plea; I Spoke in a commanding Surly tone, because humility, especially on Soot, in all civilised countries, excites fuspicion: happily for us, as we entered the door of the hotel, a rubicund capuchin demanded quelques fous for the 
X 4 loye 
328 
The AMERICAN 
love of God! we had luckily the day before united in one purse the remains of our travelling ftroag box, I was the then purfe bearer; I pulled out, with a careless air, all our riches, and threw the fat monk a twelve Sous piece; Some precious few pieces of gold gave a rich relief to the large French crowns with which the purse was filled; the landlady’s daughter, a plump, handsome, buxom hufsey, tall as a grenadier, leering her jetty eye obliquely at the precious metal, Smiled benignly, and immediately opened the best room in the house. Having no led stiirts, we hinted Something about expecting a Servant with pur baggage, Mademoiselle, with true French ease and politeness, offered us a pouple of her faifts by way of succedaneum; in our predicament, the offer was respectable; stie brought in her stiifts and a pair of petticoats in lieu of Small ploaths; stie ec|uipped Seymour with a 
taffy 
WANDERER. 
529 
fasty silk polonese, and me with a de? gagee niprning dress, or dijjjahilvce of a Safliionable gristette; she drefsed us herself, and Seemed mightily pleased with the metamorphose of her hands, saying, Mon Dieii! qttelle dommage qiiii forth caremc) cur viola de tres beaux masques— — transformed, we sat down to Supper— — complete the number pf the graces, we inlifled that mademoisblle Slionld Set at the head of the table — A French woman never lets slip an opportunity of displaying all her accomplishments, a fe fair valoir — she hinted file could flng; her voice, though not powerful, * was mellow — file sang chansons; h loire des chanfonettes tendres, and aided by a bottle of old wine, Soon (dissipated all remembrance of the storm. 
We Slept with Mademoiselle— — stiifts, and in the morning exchanged them for pur Shirts. About twelve p’clpck we quitted 
33® 
The AMERICAN 
ted Dole, marching on for besan^on, with a pleasant hilly country on our left, the valley of Love and the river Doube on our right — We dined at St. V and was overtaken about Sunset by the diligence and our man Frank. besan^on, being a garrison town, we were apprehensive the gates might be Strut upon us, we therefore got into the diligence, and under covert of the night arrived here 
Adieu, 
LET 
WANDERER. 
331 
LETTER XXVII 
BENSANCON, now the capital of the Compte of Burgundy, called Franche Gompte, lies in a vale surrounded by hills fo gigantic, that they rather deserve the appellation of mountains; it is situated upon the river Doube, which divides the town into two unequal parts, the largest: of which forms a peninsula, washed by the river; this peninsula is closed by a high mountain, on which they have built a strong citadelle. The citadelle stands upon a rock, and commands the whole town, but is itself commanded by xhq'obadauf a mountain, where formerly Sacrifices were made in honour of Piana, 
Many 
33^ The AMERI C A N 
Many monuments remain, evincing besa^on to be one of the most ancient towns ill Europe; on the mountain, Sacred to the goddess Diana, you see the remains of a Pantheon, now called hs Cqllonned; the remains of an aqueduct; the following names of places at belan ^on are evidently Roman, as Chamars^ (Campus Matdis) Chamufe (Campus Mu fartmj Chailla (Campus Lunae h"c.) On the foot of the mountain on which the citadelle now stands, Julius, Ctefar cut a hole above forty feet through the Solid rock; this Serves at present for one of the principal gates of the town \ through this pastage his victorious legions entered and took the city from the Gauls; an in feription of this event is now placecf on the gatcr 
The streets of Befancon are liand r Some, straight, and very Spacious. The houses are built with fine stone, and 
in 
WANDERER. 
333 
1 
in a commodious style. There are several Iquares : diat of Battan is orna ^ meiued by a fountain, which gives its water through a figure of Bacchus. The town house is a large building, of four wings, which form a Square court. On the Cascade you see a brazen statue of the emperor Charles the Fifth, who in one hand holds a globe, in the other a Sword, with these words, Plut h Dieu! expref stve of his supposed thirst for universal empire. The Imperial eagle rises, dish playing his wings over a large basin, Ipouting water through his beak. 
The governor’s palace is well arranged. A fountain before it is embellished by the statue of a woman; stie is in a sitting posture, ' and dispenses her water by means of apertures artfully wrought in two little globes embosted upon her bosom. befan^on, it Seems, is Sultry during the Summer : the inhabitants therefore stock 
to 
334 
The AMERICAN 
to fountains, and, by the above exhibition, seem desirous of indulging two senses at the same time; 
The parliament was transferred III 1676 from Dole to this town; fo was the university in 1691. The grand hospital of befan^on, of the order of the Holy Ghost of Montpelier, is a noble and magnificent building. A Mons, de Vache, a very amiable man, our acquaintance, is principal physician to this hospital. He has carried us to see it. The interior disposition is admirable : the utmost neatness and regularity is observed. I tasted ' their broth, which was excellent. I saw large quantities of fine mutton and veal hanging in their kitchen. The sick are attended by a number of nuns. They are arrayed in a very modest and becoming style: a French grey robe with a large, snowy, fine, white linen veil, sitting like a close cap their heads, and 
stow 
WANDERER. 
335 
flowing negligently upon their necks and fiioulders. They are many of them very hanclsome. The simplicity of their dress gives a zest to their charms. Under the auspices of our agreeable little friend de Vache we often stroll to the hospital, which is infinitely neater than many ballrooms I have Seen, to conveffe with these amiable nuns, and partake of their re* frestiment of coffee and Sweetmeats. The refined sense and elegant manners we discovered in many of them excited at once our admiration and pity — Admiration, that sense and elegance Should abide with the recluse inhabitants of an hospital; pity, that women So happily moulded by nature to top their parts in the most tender Scenes of connubial bliss. Should, by a barbarous law, be destined to converse with man only in his fallen state! 
Befancon, 
il 
136 The AMERICAN 
befan^o^, hanging upon the swia frontier, is strongly fortified, and has generally a garrison from sik to ten thou faiid men. A regiment of dragoons, one of artillery, two of Swiss, and the regiment du Roi, of four battalions, are now here. The world cannot produce a finer regiment of infantry than the regiment du Roi. It may indeed be styled rather a moving military academy than a stmple body of Soldiers Besides their colonel, the King, it has two other colonels, whose pay, 1 am told, is mncll larger than that of the colonels of other regiments, because they are presumed to preside over, not only the military discipline of the regiment, but the morals and polite improvement of the numerous noble youth attached to it— — of whom serve for Some years in this regiment without pay They have a riding and a mathematical master attending the The reason why So many 
more 
regiment. 
WANDERER. 
337 
more young noblemen and youth of distinction Serve than are conlistent with the proper number of officers necessary for each company arises, I am told, from certain privileges which two years Serving in this regiment confer upon them, under cover of which they may, in Some measure, anticipate their years, and pusli the natural interest stowing from their high birth. Through the politeness of my friend of the guards, wkofe coat, independent of his amiable manners, is a Sufficient introduction to all the European military, I am acquainted with most of them. They are men of stnistied breeding; many of them Knights of Malta, who confecjuently have travelled, and are generally men of observation. We were this morning upon the parade, and had the honour to be introduced to the commandant Mons. le Marquis d’entragues, and to the governor Mons. le Marquis de Saint Sjmohd — Men of high birth and polistied 
Y man ^ 
33^ 
The AMERICAN 
manners. Than the former, I think, I never Saw a person who had more the air of a man of falliion. He is about forty, a bachelor; very handfoine, a modest Frenchman, an address, elegance blended with ease. He was, it Seems, a very great favourite of the late King of France, and always made one of his private whist parties, of which game Louis Quinze was very fond. 
The parade is at the entrance of the Chamars, which is the principal rural beauty of befan^on. I believe no fortified town can boast a more stlvan Scene. It is an enchanting promenade, filled with beautiful walks, and planted with noble trees, in imitation of the Elysian fields terminating the Tullleries at Paris. The mall singularly pleases me : on one fide you have the whole garden of Chamars^ on the other the trees waving over the verdant margin of the ramparts, which 
partly 
WANDERER. 
339 
partly Qiade the river Donbe from the eye of the Spectator. The view from this walk is again bounded on the other fide of the river by' the Chadan^ one of the most gigantic mountains in the world, whose tremendous head threatens to fall upon the beau monde walking in this alley. This awful coup d'atil fills the mind with a Species of fear, inspiring rather penllve than unpleasant ideas. From this mountain Lpuis the Magnificent, or, as the French will have it, Louis le Grand, attacked and carried the town; and is Said to have had a horse shot under him. — But let me retire from the ostentatious Louis, to pursue my ramble III this delicious mall. The zephyrs unceasingly flap their downy wings, and the birds for ever fing in the impending Sprays of the lofty oaks nodding o’er thq pasting flood. The Sweet view of the Elysian fields on your left, contrasted with the awful mountain on the right of 
Y 2 the 
340 The A MERIC AN 
the river, which, well nigh hid from the sight, dallies along its rocky shore, its distant murmurs Simulating the sighs of unhappy lovers, combines a pleasing, melancholy, bewitching seen. La belle Marquise de St. Slmond tells me, there is a tradition, that the water of this silver stream posiestes virtues similar to those aferibed by the ancients to the leu cadian Lake; accordingly, if a swain sinds all efforts fruitless, if he finds that the lady is neither moved by oaths or vows; is deaf to the Syren voice of flattery, he has recourse to this dernier resort. Frevioufly taking leave of his relations and friends, he plunges in, and generally drinks death, or oblivion to his love, in the benign waters of the Doube. This experiment is, it seems, fo common, that a lover’s leap here is as little^at tended to, by the mail, as a duel fought hy Iriflimen at Lucas’ coffee houfe in Dublin is regarded by the fpectgjtors. I ... Saw 
WANDERER. 
141 
saw a well dressed petit maltre plunge in the other day. I was running to his assistance, when I was stopped by a Knight of Malta, with whom I was walking— — ^ 
vous derangez pas, Monsieur, dit il — ce ?i ejl qvun amoureux transi que appa retnment ‘went fe prcvaloir de la virtue du Doube» 
Wstien the stiver moon, gleaming through the rich foliage of the trees, darts her pale beams along the mountain sacred to the goddess of innocence, and kistcs the passing stream, here I delight to ramble — here I endeavour to pervade the future volume of my life — here I anticipate the pleasures and the pains which you and fate doom me to Suffer — < and, stirinking from the chain of my gloomy ideas, I Sometimes have caught myself in the clefponding attitude of the ill requited Sappho; I hear myself repeating her Sweet invocation previous to her tell; 
Y 
Ye 
342 
The AMERICAN 
‘ Ye gentle gales! beneath my body blow, 
‘ And Softly lay me on the waves below : 
‘ And thou, kind Love! my Sinking limbs Sustain, 
‘ Spread thy sost wings and waft me o’er the main, > * Nor let a lover’s death theguiltless stood profane.’ J 
But hitherto I recoil from the unmanly action: for, though my malady tinges my whole life with shades of sorrow, yet cannot I wish ^ 
F AREWELL. 
LETTER 
WANDERER. 
345 
LETTER XXVIII 
i’he Holy Handkerchief. 
dined yesterday widi that amiable nobleman, the Marquis d'entrauges — there were about fifty covers — the repast Sumptuous to excess; the wines delicate; the Marquis ordered to be sat before Seymour and myself a couple of bottles of claret of a hogstiead that had ■ travelled to Pondicherry in the east, reposed one twelvemonth in the cellar of the ill-fated Count de Lally^ thence wandering to the wefi, had received its utn\ost amelioration at Martinico, under the aii fpices of that accomplistied soldier and elegant gentleman, the Marquis de la Bouille. The commandant politely observed“ “always recollect with pleasure and with pride, the intimacy and friencl 
Y 4 stiip 
344 
The AMERICAN 
ship I have tasted with my Lord Clair and Several other noblemen, your countrymen; I recollect their predilection for claret and I was charmed to be informed by my butler this morning, |; hat I had still a few choice bottles to Set before my Englisti friends.” Partial to all englisti men, and, of coiirfe, to their prejudices, I am willing to allow, that of all heresies' ' sound orthodox hurgiind^^ the claret herefj is the least damnable, yet, well aware of the dangerous tendency of all heterodox opinions, I sip it with the most pious caution. I imbibed a few glastes, as a 'decent retort courteous to the Mar' quis’ elegant compliment, and for the remainder of the afternoon, devoted myself to pure worstiip at the burgundy stiisine. The commandant’s burgundy was the more plealiog to me, as it convinced me I was a connoisteur; upon tasting it, I Said, I thought it liad the same 
flavour 
WANDERER. 
!45 
flavour with a bottle given to ns by the Abbe of Citteaux — the Marquis replied, that he had purchased it from that convent. We had 'at dinner, the Governor, le Marquis de St. Simond, the Intetidand.^ and about forty officers and gentlemen of distinction. Amongst a variety of topics, the conversation rolled upon the approaching ceremony of St Suaire, which a Knight of Malta recommended to our observation, as the most curious religious pageant exhibited in any catholic country; we are just returned from this exhibition. St Suaire is the holy handkerchief With which Christ wiped his face during his fiifferings upon the cross. There is only one moiety of this precious handkerchief at Benfanqon, the remainder is at Rome Voltaire says, that when the town was taken by Lewis the Fourteenth, the only article of capitulation insisted upon by the inhabitants 
was, 
346 The AMERICAN 
was, that their conqueror should not remove from benfan^on the holy handkerchief, and, as Lewis was more of the politician than the saint, he readily ac ceeded to this article, 
St. Suaire has the marvellous power of driving out devils; at benfan^on it is said to be llngularly efficacious in its power of curing les femmes poffedes; this being the cafe, what a pity we have not a fragment of the holy handkerchief in every country of the universe; for where is the country in which a curious observer may not discover ladies possessed of the devil? 
St. Suaire is ffiewn twice a year. east ter and Whitfun monday, from the gallery belonging to the church of St, John, by the Archbiffiop of befan^on, who is also prince of the empire. 
The 
Wanderer. 
347 
The church of St. John lies at the foot of a prodigious moimtain; the gallery from which the holy handkerchief is exhibited, looks upon the fide of this mountain; which, by eight o’clock in the morning, was covered with Spectators, assembled from all parts of the adjacent country, to the number of forty thousand, to behold this singular phenomenon. The grand street of befan^on leading up to the church, was lined on each stde by Soldiers, about two thousand men under arms, to prevent riots, and to add to the pomp of the Scene. All the windows fronting the street were thrown open, from which were suspended rich tapestry hangings, paintings, and carpets; on these the whole collected beauty of the town reclined, arrayed in their holiday clothes, stretching out their lovely necks, and stastiing around their sunny eyes, at once to indulge the eyes of their lovers, and to Satiate their own 
curiosity; 
348 The AMERICAN 
curiosity. A coup lativ move pleasing, more pompous, more magnificent, I never Saw! through the hay formed by the soldiery, Seymour and I advanced up the street to the Summit of the hill, under the protection of the young officers of the regiment du Roi upon duty, who were ordered to advance a detachment to the fide of the hill, to keep off the mob, who, stimulated by curiosity, erpud^ ed around the pojpjfed* 
There was one person only who presented herself to Saint Suaire — a hancl Some country girl, about seventeen years of age. The xvrchblstiop, Surrounded by his canons now appeared in the gallery, in their blue silk capes, faced with red taffety, the dress of the order. The bishop unfurled the holy handkerchief, which yet retained the spots of blood impressed upon it by Jesus Christ, while the drums beat, the music struck up, 
and 
WANDERER. 
349 
and awe, reverence, and eager expectation beamed in the faces of the devout! The officers, Seymour and myself, at this moment, surrounded the postefted darn" fel; we had therefore an opportunity of observing all her manoeuvres. I had often the honour of lifting her up when ffie was over born by the waving to and fro of the imnienfe multitude. While the holy handkerchief was flying, the devil Seemed strong upon her, evincing himself by inward groanings of the fpiisit, foamings at the mouth, and a thousand antic tricks; but as soon as the good biffiop took in his anti fatanic handkerchief, the postefted lady remained placid and composed;; even attended to the ffaiirets of a young urchin of an officer in the king’s regiment, the Son of the 
Duke de N -- -- -- — s; this profane rogue 
would make love to her, tickle her, flatter her: ffie Seemed to listen nothing: Jotli to his attentions; would even laugh 
I 
and 
sso The AMERICA N 
and totally forget the part it became her to play, until the roll of the drum, and and the fluttering of saittb Suaire again disturbed the devil within her; fly would then reiterate her murmurs and groans. Thrice the good bishop with anxious and dismayed countenance displayed the holy handkerchief, and thrice he retired it without visible effect. The devil still poflefted the woman, Sor sibe yet attended to the blandishments of the young ofsicw:! the devotees were scandalised;; bishop was in a dilemma; thousands of gaping believers stood appalled, fearing that the tutelar saint of befant^on would no more shower down his blessings upon such miserable sinners! I really myself sympathised with Suffering humanity, and thinking that the devil, from the contumacy he had recently evinced, must be partial to the company of the military, I was endeavouring to persuade the young Soldier to retire. 1 had just 
gained 
WANDERER. 
55^ 
gained my point, and hearing a murmur insinuating, that the presenee of heretics must have dilgusted the Saint, Seymour and myself were escaping with him, when there arrived an order from the bishop to withdraw the young girl from the spot appropriated to the possessed;; that stie^ was a liar, and neither the truth or the devil was in her; for that had stie been poftested by a free citizen of hell, the Sacred handkerchief would infallibly have made her whole. We had observed an elderly man who appeared indignant at the unseemly demeanour of the pojfejfed, pusti through the crowd to the church; it seems he had informed the bistiop of the poor girl’s inconsistent behaviour, which information induced the above order. This officious fellow now came back, reviled bitterly the poor maid, and I believe would have actually beat her, had stie not been protected by the military. 
No 
352 
The AMERICAN 
No other demoniac appearing to claim the interpolltion of St. Suaire that day, the holy handkerchief was returned to its place of deposit, under the altar of St. John, dedicated to the mother of Jesus, and the crowd began to dilperfe. I was now well nigh paying dear for my curiosity— — the waving of the immense crowd upon the fide of the mountain, which is almost as steep as a precipice, I had negligently Suffered myself to be jostled by, the multitude; far from the sphere of attraction described by my mi litary friends. It was early in the morning, and I was muffled up in an English surtout; thus unknown and unprotected, 
I was endeavouring to stem a very heavy column of human beings, whose weigiit, aided by their inclining pofitioiij pressed with great momentum upon me, and those who were contiguous to me. There was a cluster of fixed bayonets just below glistening in our eyes, and pointed at 
our 
WANDERER. 
353 
our breasts, by way of keeping order, where order was impracticable! a poor little petifmaitre of the lower rank, was immediately behind me — his strength unequal to mine, could not relist the column, he slipped by under my arm, and immediately a bayonet, fixed to the firelock of a grenadier, insinuating itself into the mouth of the petit-maitre, induced him to swallow three of his fore teeth — the bayonet in advancing to salute th.q petit maitrps mouth, had struck through my surtout and waistcoat — My indignation at this shameful display of power, 'not permitting me to see my own danger, I peremptorily ordered him to desist, ashing him how he dared to punish thus cruelly the poor fellow for what he must see was not his own fault? for the hapless petit-maitre was a mere dwarf, deformed, and sickly, and had, moreover, a prodigious muff, a lapdog, and a chapeau brass to take care of — how then 
Z could 
354- 
The AMERICAN 
could he oppose his foihh to the forte of the multitude? The loud menacing air with which I Spoke, made the grenadier conceive I must be un homme comme il faut — He hesitated— — that moment my friend the Marquis de fontine^y happening to see my danger, called out to the grenadier — feeing I had the honour of being known to his officer, whom he had wistied to please by this barbarous display of zeal, he instantaneousty recovered his firelock, and dropped into the elegant attitude of a present, crying, Monseigneur I demand mille pardons! Je fuis ail defefpoir d “avoir fait une tell me prife! Such was my hatred of the fellow for his recent act of unprovoked barbarity, that, for the first time of my life, the dose of flattery was bitter to my palate I left him in disgust;; I immediately had the pleasure of feeing him arrested; haply for him the pastion of vanity had absorbed all the deadly revengeful 
W XV N D E R E R. 
355 
full passions in the breast of the poor 
petit matre. — We dined with Fontinej that day, a collection after dinner was made to enable the difcomfitted beau to pnrchaie three teeth and a new muff — upon which the gentle creature insisted upon their pardoning the grenadier, and made me a present of his lapdog— — is a perfect: beauty, and ambitious of the honour of being your pet. 
I went home reflecting upon the marvellous power of faith, — which would make forty thonfand rational beings believe, not only that a piece of cloth had the power of exorcising devils, but that the holy handkerchief with which Christ, under cthe agonies of the cross, wiped his face near 1800 years ago, should seem to Suffer no injury from Such an immense length of time! 
It 
356 The AMERICAN 
It appeared to be a large cotton Slieet, here and there clotted with gore, rather than the moiety of a handkerchief, unless handkerchiefs of that day were much larger than those of the present fashion— — thought too, that had the handkerchief been older, it would have made it look more natural. 
lam told that this ceremony, which Seems to be adapted to the dark ages of monkish Sway, is now kept up, more with a view of being beneficial to the city of befan^on, than from a conviction of its healing power over individuals poftefted of the devil. —. For two or three days, twice a year, the exhibition collects a prodigious multitude; of course merchants, milliners, and innkeepers are great friends and believers in the virtue of the holy handkerchief; be this as it will, I was far from Suffering the least; Semblance of incredulity to settle upon my countenance this 
morning 
WANDERER. 357 
morning — I was really vexed at the levity of the young officer. I ever show an outward air of respect for the religious ceremonies of all countries where I reside— — contrary conduct is at once indecent, imprudent, and impolitical in Catholic countries especially, the good will and countenance of the church is a great relief to the character of a traveller — At befan^on I have frequent occasion to evince the tolerating turn of my mind r— — inhabitants having blended the 'French tvith the Spanish and imperial saints, processions and religious spectacles of all kinds occur frequently — Hosts of devotees continually line the 
I 
streets, and block up the passage, fo that I pafs much of my time upon my knees on the bare pavement. If I have a quarter of a mile to walk, on particular saints days, I am not certain of arriving in less 
Z 3 thah 
1 
35® 
The AMERICAN 
than two hours. — Last week, being holy’" week, procestions were innumerable. — One afternoon I had Sallied out, full drelted, to pay my devoirs to the beautiful Mademoifelies de jujfi a procpffion 
crowded the whole street, St. Vincent. Anxious to get within their sphere of attraction, I attempted several detours to arrive unnoticed to the house of their father — ILIAD well nigh gained my point, when, just oppoiite to the window, I fell in with a column of kneeling devotees. ^ — Such contumacious holiness appeared in their countenances; their knees seemed fo glued to the pavement, that I soon perceived the defile to be impaffawe — to retreat was equally impracticable — I stood gaping like Tantalus with delicious fruit which I could not taste, bobbing at my lips; for the two lovely Sisters were leaning 
over 
WANDERER. 
359 
over the window, contemplating the host and the crowd — A pious old lady pulling at the Skirt of my coat, I had the grace to kneel down beside her, and prayed in ‘union with her a full hour; to the no Small Satisfaction of my fair friends at the window, who were highly tickled to see an errant heretic in a post tiire So edifying. 
We live at present at the king’s Academy at befan^on with Monftettr deforno, a Swiss gentleman of family, who has been an officer in the Coitnt diartois's guards, but is now master of the Royal Riding Academy here, a genteel place 
in this country -- -- He and his lady, a 
Parisian, are agreeable, polite, and fen lible — they keep the first company, and have introduced us to the principal fa 
Z 4 milies 
: 6o 
The AMERICAN 
rnilies in befan^on — an eligible circumstance, as, not onginally intending to make a stay here, we came with no commendations. 
A D I E TJ, 
L E T 
WANDERER. 361 
LETTER XXIX 
Nunneries and Nuns 
JJAVING pasted much of my time in France with the Church, I ought to be, in Some degree, competent to Satisfy your curiollty relative to Monks and Monasteries, particularly Nunneries, 
In the first ages of Christianity, when the history of the Apostles, who had Sealed by their blood the truth of their doctrines, was yet recent, a few enthufiasts, ambitious to emulate the virtues and austerities of these Sacred men, taught, that works of Supererogation were estential to celestial beatitude— — deemed a recluse and contemplative life more meritorious than the performance of the Social duties strictly enforced by the Divine Legistator. 
Such 
362 
The AMERICAN 
Such is the origin of these religious mass querades, one of the most stisiking spectacles exhibited in catholic countries. — But my particular intimacy vith several learned Abbes, many of whom are communicative, has given me occasion to know, that, whatever might have been the original principles upon which monasteries were instituted, they are, in this enlightened age, suffered to exist merely from political and economical motives. These motives apply equally to monafteisies of either sex. At present I will treat particularly of Nunneries. — A father of a family is happy to find a cheap yet honourable provision for one of his daughters — Probably he has many of them. The ugliest is always Selected for this barbarous facisifice; because stie has the worst chance of getting a livelihood through the channel of matrimony. — If, of two or three, it is unluckily difficult to Select the niost ugly; they cast lots, 
and 
WANDERER. 
3b3 
and the fortune of the victim goes to her sisters, or to the establistunent of the elder brother — Thus nothing is more erroneous than the vulgar notion, that Nunneries are crowded with beauty — That there are sine women in convents I will not deny, but they are envelloped in a deep shade of surrounding uglinels. afture yourself, in this country, monastic beauty is scarce. A sine French woman knows her value too well to submit to this cruel facrisice. If sire is not restrained by self-love, her love of justice will turn her footsteps from the grate — She would deem such a procedure to be a violation committed against the rights of men of taste, a robbery of the polite world! 
There remains, however, yet one past sion which too often illumines a grate 
with the rays of beauty -- Female jealousy 
— Maiden aunts and old women, of 
all 
The AMERICAN 
all denominations and of every country, who never have and never hope to eltay connubial ecstacies themselves, form a combination much more dangerous to the nglits of Love than the family compact of Bourbon will ever be to the liberties of Europe— — piously hating each other, they cordially conspire with family pride to dash from the purple and thirsty lips of beauty that mystic cup of felicity which, alas! they can never taste. It is but too frequent that the mother, forgetting maternal love, joins the diabolical conspiracy— — — if a haneffome woman happens to marry young, her daughters will probably have pretenstons to and will be throwing out lures for admiration and flattery long e’er mama inclines to withdraw her’s, A pretty woman, like the Grand Turk, will bear no, rival near the throne. Mothers, in France, have very extenflvelegal powers. A jealous woman will uie her power to its utmost 
extent. 

WANDERER. 
3^5 
extent. In this unequal contest the daughter, unless her wit emulates her beauty, will be defeated, and be Surely doomed by her enraged and victorious foe to exile for life — to, 
‘ these deep walks and awful cells, 
‘ Where, heavshly pensive, contemplation dwells. 
. 
The father, although he may love his child. Seldom protests against this arrangement; for notwithstanding it is also probable he may cordially hate his wife, yet, according to French immemorial usage or common matrimonial law, he deems it by no means hienfeant to interfere with his wife in domestic details; Such interference would be flying in the face of the Gallic female Magna Charta. 
In modern times a fine woman is Seldom immured but from the above Selfifli motive— — a contrary usage obtained — When the minds as well as bodies 
of 
366 
The AMERICAN 
of the female world were under monkisli undue influence, beauties were Selected for this Sacrifice. -- As it is called a marriage 
to God, they presumed the more beautiful the bride the greater the compliment. This idea. So insulting to the Supreme, seems to be borrowed from the Pagans, who deemed a Sacrifice estimable in the eyes of their gods in proportion as it was valuable amongst mortals! It was this abominable idea that guided the bloody hand of the infernal Grecian priest to the palpitating bosom of the heaven born Iphigene! 
Thus, anciently. Nunneries were the pisifons of the most lovely of the loveliest: work of creation! That they are not So uow, had I no positive information upon the point, I stiolild deduce from this certain fact -- -- Formerly Sacrilegious etileve ^ 
?nenrs, or ravistiings of women from convents, were frequent: they are now very 
rare 
WANDERER. 
367 
rare — A strong proof this that nunneries actually contain but few ravistiing objedfs; for what avail bars, bolts, stone walls, or iron laws, if Love in Spires the attack and Beauty is the reward of victory? 
Monastic simplicity of dress, added to that pity which their unhappy situation excites, powerfully interest the Spectator, and give reliefe to the few charms nuns may postefs. We behold the sex, whom nature prompts us to love and protect, inhumed in living Sepulchres — We feel it impracticable to extricate them — It is not given us to extend to them any thiiig but ourtendernefs; and to complete our indignation against the tyrannical law to which they are martyrs, our iruagination fondly paints the objects of our poignant regret in beauty’s fascinating form! Thus, whatever may be the intrinsic personal merit of nuns, they are always viewed 
with 
368 
The AMERICAN 
with partial eyes; they always excite pleasing blended with melancholy sensations 
Voluptuaries look up with envy to the post of monastic confesibr — This is one, among the numerous cafes, in which we find our punishment in the gratification of our wishes— — may be presumed, that where a number of females are immured together, who have little occupation but to pray. Sleep, and confess, there will be great identity and insipidity in their confefiions. Their idleness will be fruitful of imaginary crimes; their enniti^ flowing from a natural impatience of unjust restraint, will give acidity to their tempers; they will be continually teiz ing their holy guides Vvfith vain scruples and ridiculous chimaeras. A confesibr of a certain nunnery here is of my acquaintance; he is old, yet a cheerful, agreeable companion; he has himself confessed 

WANDERER. 
369 
ed to me, that, especially after a certahi. age, the coiifcflion of nuns is, to a man, st fatiguing'hwcmtiis — Cejl un vilam me ‘ tier, Monsieur, cpoth the honest monk, after I have rendered him communicative by the mediation of a Second bottle of Burgundy. At St. Qiientin I knew a monk of a monastery at Soistbns; he is however a native of St. Quentin — all his relations lived there, and his wisti was to reside among them — ■ He told me, that he might Sojourn in his native place, if he would undertake the department of con festbr to the convent of Fervaque, or, as it is called, Le convent de riches dames — lie was young, muscular, and rubicund, and, while I envied him the promotion, I was not a little surprised at hisrefufal; but he told me, that he would Sooner suffer perpetual banistiment from his, kindred and friends than Submit to a drudgery more intolerable than the labours of sysiphus! 
Adieu. 
A a LET 
370 The AMERICAN 
LETTER XXX 
Nuns and Nunneries, in continuation, 
^ERTAINLY the fequestered situation of Nuns must produce many little foibles that will render them irksome and 
I 
fastidious to each other and to their spiritual guides — Yet, abandoned by Society, left to themselves alone, and at liberty to meditate e’en to madness upon the Sanguinary law under which they groan, who does not marvel, that their failings are fo trivial, their virtues So exemplary! Who does not lose the memory of their faults in the recollection of their Sufferings! 
I cannot pafs one of these monuments of bigotry, of family pride and feminine resentment, without feeling my breast. Swell 

WANDERER. 
.371 
Swell with indignation and pity! The very walls Seem to groan, re echoing the sighs of agonising humanity! beyond the bourn of those walls they cannot, pass! — Here they must langnifli and wither, like tender flowers exposed to the rays of meridian sunbeams!! pale, wan visage of these interesting victims is less imputable to abstinence than to the blighting power of passions to which all human beings, all creation’s children, for godlike purposes, are liable — Passions which rage more violent because they are concentered, and have no external object to dissipate them! Thus a cruel and premature death mines them! — Like birds in a cage they beat their wings, and 
struggle for emancipation -- But, can I 
utter it without indignation! it is too late; eternal decrees sever them from Society! In vain do they implore humanity and the laws — the laws are deaf to, their cries, regard them as dead, and 
A a i abandon 
372 The AMERICAN 
abandon them to their Sat the moment those dire vows are pronounced which an age of repentance cannot recall! The only consolation that remains to them is a melancholy consolation indeed, from which the most manly heart recoils with horror! It is to groan in silence; it is daily to retire, and bathe with tears, streaming from the heart, the stirowds enveloped in which their bodies stiall repose. 
To a just God I appeal can it be 
supposed, that a Supreme of infinite benevolence can delight in the perpetual imprisonment of his innocent creatures! can be pleased to behold the fairest work of his hand, which he created “free and gay as air, ” deprived almost of the fun oiine and the day! interdicted, by an impious decree, the Soft endearments, the tender chaisities, the delicious fenfa tiojiis stowing from the various connexions 
WANDERER. 
173 
tlons of social life! At an institution So inhuman, fo unnatural, So repugnant to the grand end for which woman was created, I am astonlstied all Europe does not revolt, for the Europeans boast they 
are a philosophic people. -- -- -- Were I a 
prince, far from tolerating it in my own domains, I would carry fire and sword into the dominions of my neighbours, animated with the laudable tho’ Singular ambition of unrivetting the chains by which humanity is wounded, I would open wide the doors of all convents, all Spiritual pnfons of all orders and denominations, and I would marry the males of the one to the females of the other. -- Angelic Sufferers! Sweet bleeding 
daughters of humanity! from my soul I pity you! and could my faint representation of feelings unspeakably indignant, be the humble means of banisti ing tears from thine eyes and stghs from thy bosoms, I stiould, while I forget my 
A a 3 own 
374 The AMERICAN 
own misfortunes, taste, by anticipation, celestial beatitude! 
I think there might be a laudable imitation of monasteries. There are misfortunes incident to humanity, the unhappiness resulting from which religion and philolbphy may palliate, but can never 
totally Subdue— — are strokes to 
which sensibility is liable not to be parried or obliterated by philosophy— — are woes that “stesti is heir to, ” not to be wastied away by an age of Tears! Mighty Sorrows enervate and relax the soul, rendering all Social pleasures fastidious. — The mind for years fixed to the painful contemplation of a single object can Seldom be So estranged from it, as to be made again susceptible of the little duties and proprieties requisite to thofewho would please, while they mingle with the gay and busy world! To these hapless beings, of either sex, I would open an asylum 

WANDERER. 
375 
lum — Their woes would be a tax upon Society — Here they might pour them in the bosoms of fellow Sufferers — Here they might taste the only comfort left them to hope — The pleasure of receiving and giving consolation and pity for wounds to fenlibility not to be healed! 
But as it is devoutly to be wistied, that griefs, pf a magnitude fo painful, sire Seldom the lot of humanity, I would have the number of these asylums very limited. None stiould be admitted who were not of that age when the law deems them competent to judge for themselves— — who were admitted Should always be at libertyi at certain Jlated periods, to quit the retreat and mingle again with the world. 
Travellers, especially protestants, are apt to devour with eager ears, and to dwell with an air of triumph upon the various 
A a 4 anec*» 
A 
The AMERICAN 
anecdotes Seminated respecting monastic incontinence — For my part, I believe that, in general, these tales are rather the offspring of malignity than of truth — It is 
A 
very difficult to penetrate the interior of convents. — Where certainty is precluded the mind must have recourse to conjecture, and I stioukl suppose the yaisious incentives to devo|: ion, the silence and the awful gloom which reign over monastic abodes would have a tendency to estrange the mind from vice and dispose it to the contemplation and practice of virtue and piety — - — That disorders dp sometimes arise there can be little doubt. I presume priests and monks are but men— — is not probable, that a fable habit, a band, and a tonlurecl head have the magic power to regenerate a human being — Where monks are the only male kind admitted to the toilettes of women, whose restrained situation must give a stimulus to their tender pastions, an electrical 
ffiock. 
WAND E R E R, 
0f 
(hock, from the genius of Love, /tern ming in the eyes of the fair miuy may ba^ nidi, for a moment the genius of religion, and the monk may recollect his manhood : for laws have an intermitting sway hut nature is a power always aflive, av ways' watchful, always eager to seize her rights. When this critical minute does arrive, I blame neither the monk nor the frail devotee, but point my just indignation at the framer? of laws ahro gating the first, the divine, uniyarfal law of nature— — and 7nultiply% 
Pardon me, if an air of melanclioly pervades this letter— — a mind given to reflection the subject presents not gay ideas — I cannot write in a careless, dif pigaged manner upon this instance of tyranny inflicted upon the sex, stom which flowed all my former happiness;; which I have a pre feutinienc that 
I can, 
, 
378 The A M E R I C A N 
I cannot conquer, all my future sorrows may be derived 
Farewell, 
Never, for a moment, forget that you are the bright, though cold northern Star, on which I gaze, by which I shape my adventurous course; — bear in mind that my hopes of retribution are as just as they are pure and dijinterejicd, ~^m2.y your firmness emulate your beauty, and fbon I shall have letters of recall to my lawful princess— — know to what ineffable bliss I am to look up, ili two long years a Wanderer, I Shall confess you the female nonpareil!! probation draws to a period, my hourglass of patience and self-denial is almost run — I am like the dove envoy from the ark of No— — can find no place of rest for my foot, no quietus for my agonising soul, no country, however productive of brilliant 
fojflls, 

WANDERER. 
379 
fossils, which can boast a load fione, drat may, for a moment, attract my ardent fixed gaxe from the Superior magnetiftn^ blazing in the blue eyes of — a charming nymph of the Lhamesl -- -- -- -1 have reconnoitred 
palpitating beauty of every jpe cies, of every of qyeey clime — Irish pure and constant from the celestial ordeal — and now — en savant Conttoijfeur et praix Chevalieri I throw my gauge — I will fliiver a lance in the teeth of the most valorous knight, erring by land or water, and hurl him to his native country, the Antipodes of Tajlc, who rastily refuses to recognise you — the singular Phoenix of your sex, from whose asiies no similar 
Phoenix stiall ever arife. confcious of 
the strength of my arm and of my courage, becaush conscious that my caush is just, my good angel tells me, I stiali Surely conquer. — When loaded with the Spoils of the vanquished I prostrate myself, with 
be 
380 The AMERICAN 
becoming humility, a Suppliant at your feet — be content' — be grateful. 
So may God guide all your footsteps and bless all your days. 
'The Wanderer. 

WANDERER. 
381 
'To a Noble Lord -- — whose genius is informed bef the Spirit, and whose title is ex prejfed h) letters the Sacred number of the Nine. 
LETTER I. 
. 
Befangon. 
Last week I had the honour of answering your lordlliip’s letter of February, which I received at Bijon, while we halted there to recover ourselves from the fatigues of a forced march from the seato that place. — I Sent my letter by a Mr. Jackson, an Irish gentleman of family and infinite merit, with whom we commenced an acquaintance during our short residence at Dijon — Having finifiied his travels, he was returning to his native country, and was upon the 
wing 
382 The AMERICAN 
wing when I left the elegant capital of Burgundy — I then did mylels the honour to return your lordship every acknowledgment in my power for the politeness of your offers — It is likely that the above letter is received, but as it is possible that the agremens of Paris, Seducing Mr. Jackson, may have induced him to procrastinate his journey to London, I will in the postscript of this letter, repeat that part of the former relative to the bustnefs your lordship mentioned — 
When you destre a shetch of the persons, manners, habits, commercial genius and military usages of the French nation, a destre stowing from politeness, not real want of information, you impose a weight much too heavy for my stioulders — I feel that my humble talents are incompetent to such Subjects — besides these details have been copiously descanted upon by able pens. Upon a topic on which fo 
much 
WANDERER. 
3s3 
much has been Said, it becomes me to say little : however, as it is my wish rather to oblige than to shine, I may hazard, occasionally, a few of my ideas upon these points; yet I Shall hope that your lorddiip may receive my letters, when, with brows unclouded and totally exempt from the weight of your Serious affairs, you are in your nightgown and slippers, relaxing with your chaplain over a bottle of French wine. 
I before hinted our method of travelling — It may be thought fatiguing for gentlemen, yet giving us the opportunity of investigating common as well as high life, the disadvantages incident to it were more than compensated. — Most other English travellers Set off and conk 

tlnue in the strait line marked out by their fortune or rank in life — we, while with our stmple English frocks and oaken sticks, we trudged cheerfully on, tasting 
every 
3h 
The AMERICAN 
every curiosity incident to devious roads, exploring every little hamlet, and conversing, upon a footing of eciuality, with each artless village maid, had always in our pockets commendations to persons of condition in every great town where we proposed to halt — We had too a fervanc with a convoy of fashionable habiliments adapted to the external appearance of gentlemen — confecjuently, from the humble gulfe of vagrant philosophers, from the companions of friars, milleners, mantua makers, strolling players, hinds, and rural nymphs, we would suddenly be transformed to pctits maitrcs du dernier tonne, and find ourselves wafted, as if by enchantment, to the toilette or at the feet of Madame la Compteste or Madame la Marqnife, astonistiing by the' recital of our surprising adventures, her brilliant circle: a transition at once striking, agreeable and useful— — is there danger attending the metamorphose, 
for, 
W A N D E R E R. 
385 
for, be you where you will, the French 
are ‘ too hienfeant to aslc how you came there— — if they knew, would they less ambition your Society; for walking in this country, by no means lets a man down as it does in England — accordingly, many French gentlemen, particularly officers. who have more curiosity than money, adopt the pradice. We have now tried it from the North of France to the Confines of Switzerland, and we find it gives us Inch variety of access, and of course Such inlets to knowledge, that while we are not limited by time, and have good health and Spirits, we ffiall walk on. 
With the advantage I have hinted at, I would yet wiffi to wave the invidious subject,, discrimination or comparison between the manners of nation and nation. were I not convinced that all eng liffi travellers, whose writings I have 
B b had 
286 The AMERICAN 
had access to, have viewed the French through the medium of national prejudice, and consequently have misted — most of them have been actuated by the natural and perhaps amiable partiality of Englistimen to everything Englisti — A late writer (Smollet) to this, if you will, laudable prejudice. Suffered his brstliant talents to be clouded by a stck fancy, and the irritability of his nerves — regarding with the jaundiced eye of disease the natural history of this fine country through a diministiing, its moral turpitude through a magnifying mirror — prompted by my love of truth, by my gratitude for the friendly attentions I have received from this amiable people, I wist! to render them more justice, and' though the mediocrity of my talents may frustrate the completion of my wisti, yet will the attempt, I hope, pafs uncensured. 
It 
WANDERER. 
387 
It must be confefted, nature has been lingulaisty lavilli in her dispensations to the kingdom of France. — The climate is benign arid Soil fruitful — almost every particular province hath, within iifelf^ not only the necestaries, but the luxuries of life — It is no exaggeration to astert that it is naturally a modern land of Canaan, abounding in corn, wine, oil, 
milk, and honey -- -- -- confequehtly the 
French have a chance of obtairiing wholesome Sustenance, and of growing to tl>e height common to human beings; yet most Englisti writers upon the Subject will have it a nation of dwarfs, sickly, deformed, and starved. This is Surely not true, nor is the astertion a just compliment to the Shrine of Englisti self-love; for as you generally tilt yostrfelf against the French with success and with glory, 1 stiould think depreciating the merit of the vanquistied would tarnisti the laurer of the victors. 
B b ^ It 
388 
The AMERICAN 
It is true, certain vices, inherent in the French political constitution, may, in fomc measure, be fuppoled to counter aby but can never vjhou^ Founterpoijh the many great natural advantages to which I have alluded : it is true that the lands here are by no means So highly and neatly cultivated, or fo well enclosed as they are in England, yet it is certain that agriculture, the bountiful mother of population, is rapidly improving in this country; their productions are at present more than adequate to the confumptioh of the numerous inhabitants. 
'The common people of France, generally Speaking, are not fo florid, So plump, fo handsome as the Englisti pea stintry; but Surely this is not owing to the freer government, or better nouisi ture of the latter; the common people of Holland are equally free, have equally good appetites, and full as much to eat; 
yet. 
WANDERER. 
3s9 
yet. In the domains of their High Migh’* tineftes, beauty is almost as great a phas nomenon as wit. In every age the fair and rosy cheeked Albion peasantry have won the apple from all other nations, while they have disputed it with their lister kingdom, the Iristr. Csfar in his commentaries, if my recollection serves me, celebrates Englisti beauty, yet at the period of the descent of Csfar, the peasantry, as well as nobles, groaned under a tyranny, of all others, the most onerous, the ecciestastical tyranny of the Druids. It is probable we must trace their peculiar beauty, not from their style of living, but from their German ancestors. Csfar also celebrates the Germans for their lovely complexions; to this day the Saxons, the women especially, are remarkably handsome;; mean that fpecles of beauty which results from fair lldns, andlufcious persons;; style well exprefted by the epithet comely, or by the Scotch B b 3 word 
390 
The AMERICAN 
word bounty which is I think the characteristic of Britisti beauty. This defect in the French style is perhaps richly compensated by exprestion in the countenance, vivid eyes, animated piquante air, and by what the French term fittcjfe of visage— — have Seen more comely Englishmen, or rather Iristimen, than of any other nation, yet I may say that Some of the handsomest men I ever Saw, were Frenchmen, and though, in general, candour must own that the lilies of France fade and stcken at the Sight of the blushing English rose, yet there are French village maids of Circastiaa 
Motiiefquieu asterts that \onour is the pervading principle of monarchies — with respect to the native country of that il lustnous man, I am sure the astertion is perfectly just. I know not a people who postefs Such polistied and delicate minds, 
fo 
WANDERER. 
391 
So jealous of personal character, So impatient of personal affronts, So polite, fo anxious to please. So avid of personal respect. I have often met with a French Soldier, whose manners would adorn a drawing-room, whose Sentiments would do honour to a nobleman; nor are they merely Jcntmental, they evince the delicacy of their feelings by actions and by an appeal to the sword. This being garrison town, a week Scarcely pafics without a duel between private Soldiers, generally upon a punctilio; there are four now in the hospital wounded; onq of them, last night, died of his wounds. 
When I instance the manners of the French Soldiery, I mean to characterise the French in general, from the pervading Sentiment of honour and attachment to the prince, Scope to which Sentiment is given by the judicious policy of enlisting their Soldiery for a term of years, B b ^ almost 
392 
The AMERICAN 
almost: every Frenchman, of a proper height, in rotation becomes a Soldier. A Frenchman from his infancy is So accur ftomed to unite the profestiors of a Soldier as inseparably annexed to birth and honour, that he cannot for the soul of him sever them; the first question he is Sure to aan individual who has the appearance of a gentleman, is, Monsieur a fervi sans double,; if you answer no, notwithstanding every effort of his politeness, involuntarily and instantaneousty Shrinking from you; he will eye you with Surprise, wonder, and momentary alienation! 
The French .are accused of indulging an overweening contempt of all other nations; with respect to their haughty neighbours and immediate rivals the en glisti, I am Sure the imputation is not founded. It is true, your glorious termination of last war, exhibiting you in an invidious light, you are not loved by ‘ the 
WANDERER. 
393 
the common people of France; yet the French refpefiyow more than they do any nation in the world, in some instances more than they do themselves; compar ing your mental faculties with those of other nations, and even with their own, they style the english genius the igng of Genius; it is pleasant to observe the miss takes this general idea sometimes induces them to make; they will frequently dignify the invincible stupidity of a Common Council Man with the name of philofophf - — when he is Sullen, it is greatness of mind; when he is dozing over repletion, he is in a reverie, he is lost in the profundity of his cogitations; or they will palliate his impolite absence of mind, by observing, en verite, Monjieur eft un pen lourd, mais il a du talent, or Monfietir mange beaucoup, mais en revanche, ilpenfe! 
Such is their preposteflion in this respect, that whenever they observe an 
English 
394^ 
The AMERICAN 
Englishman totally Silent, and obstinately contemptuous of all around him, and when, peradventure a philosophic fports man, beating his noddle for a fortnight, could not Spring a hajhe of ideas, a Frenchman will gaze at him with unaffected admiration, and will exclaim, ma foi, voua un hphilofoph^ Anghisl 11 
I have the honour to be, c. 
•TD 
A. W, L 
LETTER 
W A, N D E R E R. 
39s 
LETTER II 
JNDEED it Is not uncommon to hear your French politicians asiert, that it is the interest of the two countries to be 
united -- that things go badly on each 
fide of the narrow sea which rolls between Dover and Calais, because we are not willing to understand one another. They arraign your mutual jealousies, jealousies reduced to a System, as pitiful and destructive chimaeras. They have ever in their mouths this maxim, that were England and France in alliance, they might awe and control the world united against them. 
It is certain that the factitious existence of Europe, Such as it is established by treaties, which form at present the rights and regulate the Jiate of nations, would 
be 
39^ 
The AMERICAN 
be affected by an alliance of England with France; that is to say, the other powers who gain So much by our divisions, because they either render themselves formidable to us, or oblige us to pay them Sublidies, would lose by our reunion. In tracing the real original of our dissensions we find not their fourco in the motives of animosity which ti€ntlj Subsisted. On the contrary, they are the work of those whose interest it was to foment them, and if possible make them a Jiate maxiai Lov the two nations. After their establistiment upon the throne, the princes of the house of Stuart were not enemies to France; sofar from it, they were sometimes her allies, and almost continually neuter.. This circumstance aided the enterprizes of Lewis the Fourteenth. Europe y'cd his force, and from thence stie must have concluded, that it was necessary to oppose to him Great Britain, — Hence, may be deduced the 
com 
WANDERER. 
397 
combination. So happy in other respects against James the Second. It was resolved to place on the throne a prince that would point his arms against France. — By means of Snares thrown in the way of James, whose monkisti bigotry would surely make him eagerly catch at the bait, they plucked the crown from his head and wreathed it round the brows of his fon in law the Prince of Orange. — Ancient animosities, though their objects existed no more, were awakened; animosities which Since that period have taken root, deep indeed, but fatal to the two countries, who have often waged war with each other merely because it was 
convenient for their neighbours. -- -- The 
secret history of Europe evinces, that the affrighted princes of the Empire formed, at Berlin, the confederacy that produced this revolution. Thus the ambition of Lewis the Fourteenth hath been the cause of all the unhappy errors that 
Sue 
398 The AMERICAN 
\ 
Succeeded : but now that this restlesh thirst: of vainglory and of conquest hath fnbfided as nations, as well as individuals, bof^oine more philosophical, the two Governments ought to see what duped they are loi ruin themselves for the convenience or emolument of others instead of pointing their power (a' thing very practicable) to the object of mutually enriching themselves. 
Remember I am not, in the above political slight, giving you my own original Sentiments — No; I am not Sufficiently conversaiit in a matter So momentous as to have my mind made up upon the sub^r ject — Arguments Such as these are very common now among liberal Frenchmen — They are thrown in a beautiful light by the elegant author of Le ^in zaine Angloife. 
I own, 
WANDERER. 
399 
1 own, however, I am inclined, with them, to think there is great force in this Species of reafbning — It is a political axiom, that intereji is the cement of all unions — Now, whoever beholds with philosophic eye the ph^fical sttuation of the two countries will see, that nature intended them for fijier kingdoms — No two countries can be more a port to hold out to each other reciprocal commercial advantages. — It would seem indeed, from a view of the opposite banks of the two kingdoms, that, originally, they were' one continent or peninsula, violently levered from each other by Ibme natural convulsion of the existence of which, though political history is stlent, natural history exhibits very Specious presumptive proofs. The breaks in the cliffs between Calais and Dover, Boulogne and Margate, wdiich are opposite points, correspond surprisingly wfith each other. The convexity of the one Surface always answering 
400 
The a m E R I C A N 
fvvenng to the concavity of its nelglibonr oh the opposite siiore. Though the two countries are contiguous, yet their different climates, cooperating with the different laws and manners, flowing from hiodern political innovations, have given to each different productions, different manufactures, and different wants; fo that great and mutual advantages in trade are held out as commercial baits for a reunion. 
The wars waged between the two nations have only tended to multiply their mutual calamities. The successes of England, in the last war, gave her scope indeed for felf gratulation. She made herself mijlrefs of the commerce which France would have participated with her : but was the part She could ravifi from her neighbour the onl^ one capable to flatter her interest: and ambition? It is but too probable, that the event of the 
pre 
WANDERER. 
401 
resent coinmotlons in Amerka will demonstrate, that the profits wrested from France by the Splendid seats preceding the treaty of Fontainhleau will not be ecpiivalent to the cornmercial advantages that must have resulted to England from a connexion with France— — however it may make Britisti merchants and Antigalllcans in general stare, it postibly might be demonstrated, that the more France aggrandized herself, pre fuppor ing a commercial union, the more the commerce they and us would have together would be advantageous to each. — This investigation would lead us into a field too extensive for the limits of this letter — However, he who wisties to illiif tratc the paradox fully, will do well to take his measures and the terms of his coniparifons from the traffic, immense indeed, which Holland usurps' from both countries — He must also put into the account the prodigious clandestine traffic 
C C which 
402 
The AMERICAN 
which the industry of individuals opposes to the abufiveordonnances, which ancient prejudices have dictated to governments led astray by popular animosity. 
In infant countries, where manufactures are in a rude state, commercial jealousy, the parent of all commercial taxes upon exports and imports, may be wise — But the arguments which appl^ to evince such expediency are inapplicable to a country where manufactures, as in England, are arrived to fiich a marvellous pitch of per feilion as to defj all attempts at competition. 
The patriot on this occasion would an xiously inquire on which fide thq balance of trade would turn. — To Solve this difficulty the aid of the philosopher must be called in, to enlighten the views of the mere patriot or mere merchant. 
If 
WANDERER. 
403 
If ever a commercial intercourse between the two countries obtains the Sanction of law, it will be found that the consequential trade will be rather of luxury o^vatiit^y than of necejfitj — and I, though far from arrogating the title of philosopher or merchant, will boldly affirm, that the balance of vanity, ever pro^onde^ rating with the Frenchy will always throw the balance of mone^ into the English fcalf, The most Superficial observer immediately sees, that vanity is the prominent feature in the character of this polite and witty nation. It may be no exaggeration to affirm, that their fock of this precious commodity nearly equals that of all the rest of Europe united. If this is granted, let us appl^ it to the articles of commerce in the respective countries to which it will naturally attack To 
be Sure the rich, jolly, and luxurious Englisti gentlemen would imbibe deeply those light, delicate French wines, the 
C C 2 natural 
404 The AMERICAN 
natural corrector of John saturnine crrifis. This, indeed, would be the firfty and a very extensive article : but this luxury would be confined to the gentry and more opulent citizens. It is true also, no country ever has, and I pro phely never will, vie with the French in the arts and manufactures which depend 
upon tajle. the magic power of the 
Paisifian mantua maker, ' the creative genius of her rnillener, are yet unrivalled! The masterly hand of the French hair drester vies with the light heel of the Scientific dancing master, who volting from Calais to Dover, propagates the fine arts and immortalises his country; while he drills John Bull in the manoeuvres of the cottillon, while he gives the word to my Lady Mayorefs, and flic Swims through the minuet de la Pain! These arts and' their professors are indeed invaluable in the estimation of the cognofeenti, but weighed in the commercial scale will Soon 
kick 
VV A N D E R E R. 
405 
kick the beam opposed to englisli horses, Coventry ribbons, Birmingham toys, hardware of every denomination, tunbridge ware, English boots, Slioes, Caddies, coarse clothes, long wool, ale, London porter, and all the articles which Supply the African trade. 
In short, exclusive of your decided Superiority in the finijjkng of every com mercias article, the present French rage is for everything englisli merely because it is English. Your enthuliafm for French frippery is of ancient date, and time, which Softens almost every pastion, must in Some degree have dissipated its fervour. The French caprice is recent and consequently more impetuous and incontroul able. If a Frenchman accosts you with hauteur and uncommonfeif complacency, you may certainly infer, that he has, or flatters himself he has. Something English .about him— — will look cunning and 
C C 3 Seem 
4o6 The AMERICAN 
Seem anxious you Should make the important discovery yourself. — If, out of affectation or negligence, you fail to do So, he can contain no longer, but exclaims, regarclez doncy and Showing his button or laying hold of his Sleeve, sacra Diett I mats cela vient d. Angle ter re! 
But every consideration united will not So much tend to throw the balance into the hands of theenglisli as t\\q different genius of the two nations. With you commerce derogates not from the gentleman', on the contrary, those mere Sons of earth, who have no other pretensions to this Sacred character, will, while they oftentatiously boast of their wealth, from that very circumstance, arrogate it — a thorough Frenchman hlujh.es to be found making money by trade, and when he has made it, is almost ashamed to confejs it! 
I am 
WANDERER. 
407 
I am no judge, and I will not pretend that I am on strong ground in the above commercial reveries : but of this I am fttrcy that there are no two nations in Europe So happily formed to enter into partnerjjoip in a Species of commerce, compared to the returns on which, in the eyes of a man of Sentiment, the ingots of Peru, the Sands of Pactolus, and the gems of Golcond are bagatelles — I allude to a branch of commerce little known upon your Royal Exchange, facial commerce. — Every liberal Frenchman, while he hates a Spaniard, loves not a German, and loathes a Dutchman, thinks it his highest honour, however averse to trade, to traffic largely, in this wa, with Mejfeun les angiois. -- — The pride of the Englistiman is gratified by the frenchman’s deference and unfeigned respect, while the influence of his November fogs is dil flpated by the frenchman’s gay and 
C C 4 
40 8 
The AMERICAN 
degagi manners; So. that the most congenial happy mixture of male company I know is a judicious combination of well-bred Frenchmen with sensible eng llflim'en. 
I have the honoiir to be, c. ctc. 
L E T 
WANDERER. 
409 
LETTER III 
^■jphe French are, I think, the most passionate people I ever Saw; their natural impetuosity frequently hurrying them beyond themselves, induces them to commit actions which they are the first to condemn. An old Swish Knight of St. Louis told me, that at the storming of bergen op 2, oomfw\\gyq he was present, he saw the French Soldiery staughter a great number of the enemy, after the place was evidently carried, consequently farther butchery was unnecestary, and therefore cruel — yet. Said he, I am persuaded they did fo, not from a. principle of cruelty, and I saw Some of them stied tears for what they had done; but the impetuosity of the French temper, combining with their 
natural 
410 The A M E R I C A N 
natural courage, gives them in the heat of action, a momentary madness. It is this enthuliafm which makes them the best; troops in the world for a coup de maina 
A general officer with whom I dined the other day at the Marquis dietragues, thus expressed himself— — was impossible for politeness to be carried to a greater length, than by the English last war in Germany to ' the French, ” — we endeavoured to return it ^we dined with each other almost everyday — ^ The French and Englisti Soldiers would cull potatoes very Sociably together in the Same field, although they expected to come to blows the next morning. I remember, Said he, that I was one day at dinner with an Englisti captain, my very good friend, who had done me the same honour the day before; I was saying that I did not know what I stiould do, for that my men 
had 
W A N D E R E R. 
411 
had neglected to collect the rations of forage required of me that mornings — » Mine, Said he, have collected near twice as much as my compliment, and if you will send to such a post, I will have the Surplus delivered to you — To be Sure, continued the Frenchman, it is against: the principles of war to give provision. to your enemy, yet, in armies of one hundred thoufiuid men of a fide, what hurt could the common cause receive from this particular instance of politeness?? intimacy between the two armies was fo conspicuous, that Marshal Broglio gave orders that it stiould be discontinued, and this was the only particular in which we wistied to disobey him. The mutual respect was fo great, that I have known French private Soldiers turn off with indignation any Swiss who presumed to obtrude upon them, when they had the honour to entertain their Englisti friends; and I am told the Eng 
listi. 
413 The AMERICAN 
lisfi, the war before last, testified a similar disgust to their Dutch allies.” 
I every day see four French with two Swiss regiments paraded together, and I have remarked that the privates never converse with each other. Mshen the parade is over, they respectively diverge, and express a reciprocal stiynefs and dislike. They never commune together but in the capacity of master and scholar. The French Soldiers teach their Swiss allies to dance. It is pleasant to pafs by their quarters, where you will often observe a French Soldier with a becoming gravity, leading a great Swiss boor the mazes of the minuet de la cour, and the louvre or whifking him through the quicker vibrations of the allemande — the Swiss dispenses for his accomplistiments, part of his fubfistence, and thus makes Some atonement for the invidious distinction 
W A N DER E R. 
^^3 
tlnction arising from the difference of their pay. 
Indeed the difference of manners between the French and Swiss is So obvious, and the Superiority of pay to the latter, render them fo obnoxious, that, at first; view, it would' Seem impolicy in the French to employ them; but a little reflection will tell us that Switzerland forms an excellent barrier to the east: of France: a Sufficient reason to induce the French to conciliate that country, by dealing largely in its principal article of merchandise id eft, 'soldiers;; distinction in pay is a Sufficient Solution of the hatred of the French to the Swiss;; thc; distike of the latter must arise from dip fimilarity of manners, 
The French troops are the best Set up, and march better than any troops I have Seen — A nice sense of honour, the soul of 
their 
IA The AMERICAN 
ehctr armies, extends itself to the meanest private; he will not, under the idea of discipline, submit to personal insult — his officer must not strike him — Frequent attempts have recently been made to introduce this usage, common in Germany, and but too prevalent in England; but the soldiery have universally Shown such abhorrence of it, that it is now entirely abolished, and imprisonment Substituted in its place. Some little inconveniences may arise from this, yet they confestedly Ipring from a noble cause. 
In England officers and Soldiers are regarded by their countrymen, rather with suspicion than with love. With you a man goes into the army to get a livelihood — here the point of honour is to ruin yourself in the Service of your king. This certainly is a most artful policy for a court to inculcate, yet to individuals it induces many bad consequences— — 
WANDERER. 415 
though the strongest reasons may concur to reader it expedient, it is a most difficult thing, in France, to retire front the army, even in time of peace, and preserve your honour untinged; in war it is absolutely impostible. I have an. intimacy wcth a young gentleman of family and fortune, of the regiment du R oi, the Chevalier de G -- -- -- -- y;; acquaintance 
originated from his earnest desire to speak the English language, which he reads very well for a young Frenchman, he has an amazing turn for study, and a distike for the noisy, yet brilliant Scenes of life hers a valetudinarian; is Sometimes affected with slight attacks of the epilepsy; thus is he entirely unfit for, and I know he is averse to military habits. He and his intimate friend the elegant Count de Beaumont, partial to everything English, frequently do me the honour to breakfast with me a l^angloife, I this morning took the 
liberty 
4i6 
The AMERICAN 
liberty to inflnuate to the young Cheva ’ Her, my surprise that he continued in the army; he replied, “neither my health or my dispofition incline me to it 5 I would indeed most cheerfully give half of my estate to quit the army and retain my honour unblemistied but I might as well/n'i^/yo myself as retire I should inevitably be despised, even by my own relations; my native country would afford no countenance, no asylum for me; in Francey a man of birth to be refpebed, must he a soldier i — ln France there is no such character as ?iri^rivate countr'^ gentle maui a character with you So highly and fo deservedly rcspcfted. 
A late writer asserts, that of all people, the French have the least compassion;; must have been very unlucky in the choice of his acquaintance; indeed the natural hilarity of the French dispofition precludes that pensive air, that languisti* 
ment 
WANDER ER. 
417 
ment of countenance, the general index ■of deep fenllbility — yet, withal their apparent levity and frivolity, they have hearts very susceptible, hearts feelingly alive to the distfestes of humanity; they are born in too mild, too fweet a clime to partake of that insensibility characteristic of the icy hearts, organised in the environs of the northern pole; a Frenchman has great delicacy of nerve. I have often observed that the relation of a pathetic story hath cast a gloom over a whole group — tears have immediately Succeeded to the highest excestes of laughter and glee. I once Saw an old French officer weep like an infant at the woes of Luftgnan, So admirably represented by Le iiain. One would think age is more callous, less used to the melting mood than youth, yet is it here very common to see tears fall from the eyes of age; nor are they barren tears: the purse of the Frenchman, in proportion to his abi 
D d lity. 
41^ 
The AMERICAN 
jity, is equally open to the demands of distress;; heart, equally with his richer neighbour, susceptible of godlike charity. 
Permit me to adduce a recent instance of the fisiendstiip of a Frenchman to myself, which has exceedingly affected me. My friend and travelling companion has preceded me in our intended jaunt to Switzerland; Since which, having had a slight fever; and being alone, left to my own thoughts, I brooded too much over my own unpleasant, uncertain situation upon a point on which the whole happiness or history of my future life must hinge — This threw the fever upon my nerves, and I was frequently fo low fpirited as to refuse all visits, and entirely to evade society. I have before mentioned our little agreeable friend du vacjk, the principal phyflcian here — he visited me, and prescribed very rationally 
WANDERER. 
419 
tionally to me during my indispofition, Upon finding that he absolutely refused all his fees, I as peremptorily refused his visits, which Seemed to dlstress him very lenfibly; I was for Some days at a loss to account for this conduct, but he at length explained himself; he came one morning and inflsted to See Monsieur his friend; he had conceived, as he was informed, that all my refburces from America were cut off, that my lowness of spirits proceeded from derangement of finance. — After Some hesitation and much circumlocution, he told me that he loved me like a brother; how happy should he be, would I honour him with that title; to convince him that I did So, I must put confidence in him, I must: let my elder brother know the real situation of my affairs. “I am now a 'widower; until you, my dear brother, can get the income of your estate in America remitted to yon, most cheerfully will I D d 2 stiare 
420 The A MT R I C A N 
Share mine widi you; it is not large, but' you know my Salary as principal physician of the hospital, makes a great part of it certain; in this cheap country it will amply Suffice us both !” I was So astonisiied, that I let him run on — “We have an amiable sister, my dear brother, who lives in a most delightful villa upon the margin of the noble Lake of Geneva, n vous faut. la grande air, mon cher enfant — I will carry you to reside at her house until the winter siiall induce you to return hither — I am convinced the change of air and her attentions will restore your health.” — Upon my refusing his offers with warmth, he reiterated them in the most presting manner, saying, II le faut mon frere — ici vous Petes pas fur 'votre paille — chez vous je ferois fier de vous etre redevable de ces m'emes I astured him, candidly, that my proceeded by no means from 
- a pecii 
WANDERER. 
421 
a pecuniary cause;; my mind was above the loss of fortune, and that I flioiild think he meant to affront me if he Said another word upon the Subject. Upon my absolute refusal, he retired with 
strong marks of chagrin. From the amiable character of the man, I perstiade mysels his friendly overtures were dictated by stncerity, and I feel myself cordially his debtor. 
There is a trait in the character of this good creature, in a Frenchman fo singular, that honourable mention strould be made of it. He has lost a beautiful and amiable wife, and, though stie has been dead six months, he still laments her with tears unceasing!!! He is like Rachel weeping for her children, and will not be comforted; he refused for many weeks to take any fustenance, and his friends are yet fearful that this bagatellef as they term it, will cost him his life. I know 
him 
422. The AMERICAN, See. 
him well, and I am convinced his Sorrow is unfeigned, yet it is not of a Solitary kind, it is woe a la Frangoife — one moment he Shrugs his Shoulders and laments his fate, the next lings, dances, and Shuffles the cards, and, while he deals them, the dew drops of despair for the wife of his soul moisten the brelan fifht 
FINIS. 

■. '5v';. 
■.' ' ■ 
■ ' • ■ 
r -■ ■.; 
'- cru: 
■: ' 
‘ S : r ^ ' - 
t3^■‘='^?’»■■r 
^v‘ ' 
z LA., 
■’i ' ^ I,,.. 
^ ■ 1 
•v>: tv " ^ 
; V 
‘ b' ■' 


/'■, A ‘ 
1%» j * 

.0 

... 
V 's s ‘ i i ri’ 
.N';, 
% sr' 
'
•: j. /- ...'.'. ".t' 
.'A > > - ' T ' L ■ -.. k ■ " SC: 
,; > ^^r\^akav ■- >• - • ■•. - witj > >• '■. - ■-' ^ ■ j_' 1^ 

'■''^ r ■ -. ' ■ ' SCI 
■' •' 
'■ ■’ w.' S -.. \ 
■ .',. 
: 
'- i, '’-; ■ ' • * v „- 
imaiuri I nil ma 1 





j 

'N 

TC' 

., : vj 
fi 
.. tete, 
"_hf 
v'/.ih, 
/ r 
I 
■■ ■■; ■ ^ TT 
* ''■•■' r 'vftsl' 
/ ^: 'i ^ 'i 
At ' ». } ■ 
i. 
. ^ 
A -- ' 

■ SC --. 
"to - WV ■ ■ -. '. ■■■«-,,, : ■ ilr; 
. ‘ y' 
'




, ■ LH --, ■ 


: it": V - V - "■■' 

■. 
; V ■ ■ ’ 



_ - t ^ ___ 
■ 
h 

see 
O j, J (AUL 
P 
11? 
sir 
\riu 

; y. ' " V - ■: ’ ■ - - 

f ■ \ ’ ' ■ -^ ^ 
1 T ■ .i 
J '■ ■: ■ - ■' j i 
.1 - 'I » *■ ■ ■ ■ ' *..? 
'j, ' ’1 : V : • • ' -^ / • ■ '■ '. ■/, Lw.. 
^■ imt SC •, '. „■; 
- 
ir 

AL " be ^5* 
'■* 

': d 

A.. ■’ '. — lm 
I i 7 'FALL I' I 
i; s. \, .^„te.. 7: 1 

, fda ■ F Si io l‘:. .i, '" <;. >!' 
smfc ' i r? I I ' 
^■- d. F frje R 
'■kvf^ " X f L Si, 
^,.. .^^77 j jij 
., '; f s < •■ ■ 
II \; TV ^ 
'A i i * 4 
r h 
p tvtvrtf'v": : 
, st - y > \ ■- t / 
r * t*ppk 
:, ’vf 
^7^ ’lvq^ "'W ^ 
^; V asz 
.cit 
i vf ■n^kts' V; 


fil 
THK AMERIC/C wahdehfh, Through Various tnrtb of Europe, 
In 3 s«rle« of Letters to & Lady, (Intorspersod with s Variety of interesting Anecdotes By a Virginian. 
to, eont^ffiporary issottled eslf, rod leather label 
Loadoai Robson, 17s3. $15.00 
First edition. 

30382 
