

I “
(N
o

(U
DO
L^J
^	j?
r^
00
(N



CO
(U
	• • DO A
• • CO	w Q
3	0
0	1“
T3	CO
0 U-	CD DO CU
	O-
O
U
:N*W

x<»s»w<»»a»»»»»»qco8flee{

■.••■isr.sv.v.'S*;'
.•.•••.•;s*;*.‘:".*.ss‘.*iv;*
.yv.S’.*.*.*.'



•ss <•>
CO
c
o
u
CO
S9ee»eww66»
.VW»«V«>WbVSV.«OTK

■J-*



centimeters
iQl I I I II I I te I I. iji I I I |2" I I I I I I I31 I I I I I I I |4l I I I I I I I |5l I I I I I I I |6i I I I I I I I |7i II I I I I I |8i I I I I I I I |9i I I I I I I I I 70
SOO 200
1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10	11 (A)	12	13	14	15
39.12	65.43	49.87	44.26	55.56	70.82	63.51	39.92	52.24	97.06	92.02	87.34	82.14	72.06	62.15
13.24	18.11	-4.34	-13.80	9.82	-33.43	34.26	11.81	48.55	-0.40	-0.60	-0.75	-1.06	-1.19	-1.07
15.07	18.72	-22.29	22.85	-24.49 .	-0.35	59.60	-46.07	18.51	1.13	0.23	0.21	0.43	0.28	0.19
600
700
300
IT •
D50 llluminant, 2 degree observer
Density
0.04
0.09
0.15
0.22
0.36
0.51
'e/r

16 (M)	17	18(B)	19	20	21	22	23	24	25	26	27	28	29	30
49.25	38.62	28.86	16.19	8.29	3.44	31.41	72.46	72.95	29.37	54.91	43.96	82.74	52.79	50.87
-0.16	-0.18	0.54	-0.05	-0.81	-0.23	20.98	-24.45	16.83	13.06	-38.91	52.00	3.45	50.88	-27.17
0.01	-0.04	0.60	0.73	0.19	0.49	-19.43	55.93	68.80	-49.49	30.77	30.01	81.29	-12.72	-29.46
%
0.75
0.98
1.67
2.04
2.42
SN: OLO007
Colors by Munsell Color Services Lab
»♦	^ » H ■ liw
9^’	^7^^
■.Vrf*A
£^gg?-a4»3i,"Jir


riA^ ■ - i

-f
'-%'■* ■

,-^.-N'* '





• V \
N
\ ^
i I
>v..
'■■r- * _ < -'	-
• '; ^ * ^
^ D
>
4 ' f •
,« •
' V ».

• . --.'v <	'
*	.:-. X. -
'i • . *'


rSfV':
/
A
N


i
E, THE

I S T O R Y OF
ifs
E D L E y.
By A YOUNG LAD
X
IN TWO VOLUMES.
VOL. I

D U B L I IT-:
.Dinted by W. S L k a t E r.
/
M.DCC.LXXXVII.
f. *	- sj
"


i : -
* ■ »■
A r
f . I
A
i V ^
« ... T .
T . '<
I
i
p

( 5 )
n
> it

r% •*%
A R
N
O R, THE
HISTORY OF
MiSs
D L
LETTER
THE HON. HENR Y BEL FORD, TO StRi
I
EDWARD HAVILAND, .BART.
‘#TT4
1 HREE
Mountford Abbey,
here, and not a tingle line have I wrote to my dear Haviland. You mu'fl pardon me—a man happy, well, and moving for the prefent in a fphere that affords no great variety, is naturally a bad cor-
A %
refpondent
9

refpondent. Here I am in a tcrreffnai paradife, for fuch is Mountford Abbey : it has all the advantages which iNature and her faint copier Art can give it. The Abbey, a perfect and admirable Gothic ffructure, is fituate on an eminence, commanding an unbounded profpect; there is a pleating gloom in the dark groves, contraffed •^vith the livelier verdure of the gar-
O
• IIS, and ctill Tuore with the barren mountains that rife above them. But know my gay friend will not bear a longer defcription of rural beauties, and Shall therefore have done—I had very near faid—my letter., for I never was in a worfe mood for writing. You cannot conceive what a quiet and fober life I lead, upon reflection, yet whilst the fcenes pafs, I think myfelf happy, beyond meafure happy. We ride out in the* morning, and have a hundred agreeable parties propofed for the fucceeding evenings. Balls, Concerts in private, reading and walking, ferve to pafe aw’ay the time, which I Sometimes indeeddancy pastes quicker
away
( 5 )
away than ever I found it before. The old CounteSs is revered, by every one: the delights in having all her vilitors and the family amnSed, though fhehas paffedthe period of life which would enable her to partake of thofe enjoyments ^ fhe rejoices in the pleafure fhe diffufes; in every a6tion and word fliews a difinterefl;ed, an expanded heart : how much therefore is fuch a cliaracter to be admired. But I am fummoned. to the drawingroom, and mufi: haften to conclude. I forgot to tell you. the young Earl is at Bologna, and Mr. Mountford in Germany j he is expeded Shortly—I am Sorry for it. Adieu—affure yourfelf of always having a Share in the heart of
Henry Belford.
As
Letter
( 6 )
LETTER II.
SIR EDWARD HAVILAND TO THE
HON. MR. BEDFORD.
London.
----
Share in the heart of my dear Belford-----oh! I nnderffand—a capa-
city indeed much lefs brilliant might
fee into the foul of my Henry-are happy—beyond meafure happy
you
the time paffes quickly
Ah! my
nothing
triend, you call Mountford a Paradife ---take care it does not produce an Eve. Thou art changed, fadly changed—never once in thy letter didft thou mention our Coterie—if you return to it a lover, and your head filled with
but your mifirefs, fylvan fioades, &c. you will cut a very awkward figure among us. Belford, you will fancy the contrary; but believe me there is nothing fo ,eafy as to Shake off a modern penchant—it is just as eafy as it was once difficult to our forefathers to difcard their old-fafhion-
ed
( 7 )
my
but
ed notions of conftancy. A modern attachment is feldom proof to a trip to Bath or Scarborough', and always erafed by a tour to the Continent. I know you will Smile archly at fuppofing that a lover you are j you muff banifh any impreffions which you may have received by the Sweet blufhes and downcaff air of Some ruf-Z/V^/r/who came colouring Vi-p the aile of a country church. Scarce daring to lift her eyes when So great a beau as Capt. Belford,' young, handSome, and once gqy^ lay lolling and yawning, tir-
ed to death over a,pew door. “ But for heaven’s fake have done Haviland with your raillery,” I think I hear you exclaim. Well, I fhall be obedient.
You See by the' date 1 have left Morton Houfe. Mr. Morton is with me in town, tho’ he hoped to have done Something to the Settlements while here, and we both write to Mrs.
Morton to Solicit her niece.--Belford,
I feel Some flings of conScience—but oh! avaunt recollection. Mifs Seymour is an amiable girl j her fortune
A 4
IS
( 8 )
is extremely large, and I know my own character. I know I could not make quite that kind of hufband which-fhe would deferve, not but if married I Should lead a very different life from, my prefent one—but ffill—Still—Mifs Seymour I take to pofTefs a fenfibility which v/ould make her very difficult to pleafe in her choice. I know her fentiments j fhe would live but for her hufband if She loved him j he muff do^ the fame j that hufband muff be her constant companion ^ She likes refiding. in the country and rational pleafures* All theSe, Harry, I am afraid I fhould be Scarce able to comply with. One merit you muff allow your Edward,, perhaps it is his only one, that he is fenfible of his errors—the next Step to amendment the wife ones fay ; amendment which I know I require, would, fo overturn the wheel of my affairs ah! ’tis that dread of commencement,, my friend exclaims, which deters us thus are all vicious courfes purfued. Upon honor, I believe I have caught
thy fentimental strain. The good
Countefs
( 9 )
CounteSs invited me (when She was in towm) to go down to the Abbey, but I am undetermined whether I Shall or not. Were it not for an odd Ball or Concert which you fay they give, I know I Should be devoured with the vapours. You talk of rural charms, and Sfudy nature like a Thom,pfon vegetable life—infipid—country Scenes
quite bore--for me crouds—for me
the brilliant circles of delight. If any thing could tempt me to Mountford Abbey, it would be to fee my Belford and his new charmer.—This moment Mr. Morton is come in. “ My dear “ Sir Edward, will you not write to this provoking Emily ?”—How fond uncles, parents, guardians, &c. are of match-making. Adieu.
E. Havilani>.

As
Letteb.
'A%'.
VI-, t£^. r>^yr*5^.^ i s.
IVd:S'■■'''^h■' N‘'; '■ N ;NV: -'A- -
' A< AK'A'-^ ./' 'A'	-v>
Sfci.«^3ri,-'-?i:<>: 'd'^'■^' ' ’ **••.''7.*^*'	--.^v..,'
''• •i^-'"i- N- .s-	-.-^-.x---
LETTER
kT-^e.N^;^'v
A	'iv ‘h^‘
c.,‘v^-^<-J’^>'c*	i^=.	-fi
^	'.•'"^	«-a *	•	'"i
• «• • ^ *
22^?‘
THE HON. CAPT. BELFORD TO LORD
MOUNTFORD.
Mountford Abbey.
Wh Y art thou not here. Mount
ford, to complete the happinefs of
your friend ?—Why Italy fuch charms for you ?
The
Countefs, the whole family murmur
at your abfence ; yet,
Charles, Shall I
Shall I own to
you before
you
a
heart
lay
heart
my
whofe inmofl
thoughts from my earliefl infancy you
know, that were you not pre-engaged,
(an engagement founded in the warm-
eft attachment) I would not wiSh your
prefence. Your brother thinks of
coming home j I regret that alfo.
Surely on reflection by prepofteflion
we fink in all other duties. The men
I moft esteem I wifh abfent—and why
Caroline is here—yes, Mountford
Mifs
is now
a gueft
m
this
hofpitable manfion. I know you have
never feen this young Lady. Why
ihe
lefs beautiful
or
I
( II )
regular features
or oh! why is not Belford leSs fuS-ceptible. Caroline is all I could wifh her to be, uniting every virtue to every grace. She is juft nineteen, her features and her form are uncommonly delicate, (and Mountford, you know my paffion for delicacy of form) proportioned with the niceft fymmetry; fhe is dazzlingly fair, and to a fet of
joins an irrefiftible animation ; her eyes fparkle with the mildeft luftre, a carmine blufh over-fpreads her cheeks, her mouth beauty itfelf, and Caroline’s whole appearance displays the moft becoming dignity, fweetnefs, innocence, and above all, an interefting countenance: gay or grave fhe appears to equal advantage ; her obfervations Shew fometimes her amiable mind, at others her fine un-derftanding, an underftanding uncommon in a girl of nineteen, and added to every deferving fentiment and the moft lively fenfibility, makes her a character worthy the higheft admiration j when to this fuch a form is added, fay can yoy be .amazed, Mount-ford, at my wifhing you—your brother
( 12 )
ther—all other men—to abfent them-felves from the Abbey. You will wonder in fo fhort a time I have developed her charadfer, but fhe has a noble candour and a generofity above all women I ever met with. Charles, you know my penetration, and that I foon difcover the foul of a female. I have v/rote to Haviland, but did not mention her. I have often told you my difiipatcd companion (he does not deferve the name of friend) pofTeffed I believed the glafs of Lao. From a few ambiguous wurds, (and really the openings would not be traced by a flight obferver) he faw the heart of your Henry, and wrote a fmart rallying letter. The match between him and Mifs Seymour I find is on the
tapis
In one part of his letter he
threw out fome hints of paft mifcon-dudf and the awful reproaches of con^ fcience. This is a fubjed he has more than once hinted at, but from delicacy I forbore enquiry. Sir Edward I am not long acquainted with j he has fome merits, mbiny imperfedions, but
on
( 13 )
on the whole I conceive him to be quite—a man of the world. I hear the band ffruck up in the lawn, and muff fly.^—A Ball is given—’tis your birth-day I recoiled.—Why are you at Bologna—the worthy Countefs never fails to celebrate it though you are not here.
IN CONTINUATION.
1.
I led Caroline to the fet; fhe loves dancing and performs with an elegance peculiar; the is all life, her form light, grace in every movement—conceive then to what advantage fhe muff appear. Charles^ if fhe does not Shew'
Some imperfedion, I am undone------
Lady Amelia^—you know—that fatal
contract.
Letter
( H )
LETTER
IV,
THE SAME TO THE SAME.
Th E recolledion of my fituatiori made me conclude my laft Somewhat abruptly.—To be tied down, Mount-ford, in Such a manner, heaven and earth it is infufferable.—Ingrpffed Solely by my Caroline—why did 1 fay Caroline-7-that file can never be. I forgot to tell you how elegantly your birtEday was celebrated. A thoufand loves, a thoufand congratulations are fent you^ and none more warmly than that from the heart of Belford. But a description of our. entertainments that happy day I am unable to give you, I can defcribe nothing but my own feelings and the circumffanccs I am in. You are well acquainted with the (fate of my affairs and that of Lady Amelia Belville: whoever declines the contradi, the other poffeffes ;he bequeathed eftate j the relinquifh-ing a fortune in favour of an object I
loved^
( 15 )
loved, I Should coniider no lofs, but there is an embarrafiing delicacy in my Situation in refujing the Lady along with it.—My father, my whole family I Should difoblige by fuch a Step. Lord Belford has a properly-exalted notion of the digp^ity to be kept up in our connediops; and therefore would inSift on fny marrying a woman at leaft of equal confequence with the one I rejedfed : my fentiments intirely join with his. Thus you fee what infuperable bars—but bars to what ? I will not fuffer myfelf to believe I have an affedfion for this Mifs Sedley. I am very difficult to pleafe thou kno'wefl in females, how much more fo Should I be in a woman I loved ^ as yet She is all my imagination had formed, but on a longer acquaintance I may find out defedfs.—
“ thou looking for perfedfion ?” believe I have taken fomething like it into my head; the woman who is not free from defedfs (except they be very trifling) cannot, Shall not, be the wife cf Belford.
CC
And art
I
Letteb
( i6 )
LETTER
V.
MISS SEYMOUR TO MISS SEDLEY.
Morton HouSc,
We
not Sor the dangerous
Harry I fhould haften to the Abbey, to get rid if poflible of this Sir Edward, not indeed (to do the creature juftice) that he is himfelf fo tormenting as all iny relations are about him. I am not in fo great a hurry to lofe my liberty, were it fuch a man as I have heard: this Belford defcribed indeed, (you have not mentioned him to me yet, Caroline i what do you think of him, my dear ?) but Haviland, notwith-Itanding he does not ftrike your gay, faucy Emily, would I dare fay be the choice of nine women out of ten. You have never feen him I believe j he is tall, his perfon fine, quite of a manly make, his face agreeable, ex-prefiive, penetrating: he is fenfible, well bred, and extremely lively; very
agreeable
his charader
feelings would
feem bent
( '7 )
agreeable qualities in my beau for fo far. But then, Caroline, his dilpojltionsy
the former are judged by the latter, which is wild, more than wild, amongff the most distipated of the age. You know the delicacy of my
never bear Such a hufband, I have therefore repeatedly refufed; yet still Mr. and Mrs. Morton
on an union, which fhall never take place. I have faid he would be the choice of most women women who had not too great a stiare of fenfibility or difcerriment, fuch would pafs over or not regard his errors ; his manner is instnuating, entertaining, gay, delightful, and whilst in his company one would almost forget there was a blemifh in the picfure. Our tastes in most things are directly oppostte,—a w^ant of attention to that occastons but too many unhappy marriages : the number fhall not be added
to by your

Emily Seymour.
\
Letter
( )
LETTER
VI
MISS SEDLEY TO MISS SEYMOUR.
I T is unnecefTary to fay my fenth merits coincide witte yours;—already you know them well. To marry with indifference—deteftable and indifference is all you can feel for a man effabliihed unworthy.-—Do not let interceffions in behalf of Sir Edward, have any effedf on you^ he can never make my amiable friend aa happy as She deferves,—fly from perfecution, fly into the arms of your true friends, and above all, of your dearefl: one, your Caroline j you and only you are w^ant-ing to complete the happy party at Mountford Abbey, there are feveral agreeable vifltors at it, and alfo my dear Mrs. OflDorne, the guardian, the proteOrefsof my youth 5 what obligations have I to that moft deferving of women !—As I loft my mother at an early age, Mrs. Ofborne becoming acquainted with my father, begged to
have
( 19 )
* .
have the care of my education; he joyfully confented, and how well did my patronefs fulfil the promifed talk ! I remained with her for feveral fucceeding years, at the end of which period Lady Mountford (who is a relation to my father) invited me hither.—But what in the world am I fcribbling, repeating what my Emily muff have heard an hundred times at leaft. You afk my opinion of our new vifitor Mr. Belford ?—I do not know how to anfwer that queffion. He is of the middle fize, his perfon rather delicate and elegantly proportioned, with an irrefiflable tout en-femhle in his air and manner, and a grace fuperior to all men I ever faw; his face is finely adorned with a glowing bloom, and the moft dazzling eyes in the world,—Such penetration, fuch arch brilliancy, I can never bear, Emily to look up at him. He is the only fon of Lord Belford, and is in the army; his regiment is now at and he having leave of abfence, came to fpend a few weeks here in his way
to
( 20 >
r
I ,
to his. father’s. As to dellneatins: hls>
O
charadler, that muft be a work of time. We are liable to be deceived in the moft amiable. Capt. Belford is but two^ or three and twenty, and: is^gay as polTible ; he appears when in public formed only for pleafure, and yet in private no man of his age- is more agreeable ; his underftanding is uncommonly brilliant^, and every aid which the art of education can give it has received. From all I have been able to judge (which can only be from his observations) his difpolitions appear the moft amiable,, and indeed it is the cliaradier every one gives him j a flow of fpirits which nature has beftowed on him makes him the fweeteft companion,, and whilft poflefled of all the fire of youth, he has the moft delicate fenfibility,—a fenftbility liable to the quickeft impreflions which it cannot fo eafily fhake off. The Mountfords pcrfedlly adore him.—But if I fay any more you will be afraid to come to the Abbey on account of this dangerous Belford as you call him.
Adieu my Emily.
(
21
)
LETTER VII.
SIR BDWA'RD HAVILAND,, TO CAPT
BEL FORD.
Morton Hoiife.
N O T a line from the Abbey,—what
nre you about.?—Mifs Sedley I hear is in the houfe with you. Take care, my friend j remember your engagement with Lady Amelia.—But how can I write on other people’s affairs
when my own are fo perplexing-------
the women have no tajie or my glafs deceives me, (as they fay themfelves.) I have refu fed-
been refufed—^yes, Belford, for ever. As you perceive
by the date I accompanied Mr. Morton down, and again folicited his niece, when I got my final difmifflon.—To fay I am firry., would be deviating from truth. My family tea zed me to think of the alliance. I did not wifli to change my fituation; if I had, Mifs Seymour indeed would have been the objedt. The fortune named to her is
twenty

V '.t'- *
( 22 )
twenty thoufand pounds ; this in the power of a peevifh maiden aunt who is on her journey to the other world, and promifes to Have this to her niece; but. were it not for my fhattered circumllances, pecuniary advantages would never be a motive with me in an alliance. Mifs Seymour did not name any motive for declining the addreffes of your Edward, and is affable, mild, and lively as ever. Mr. Morton requeffed I would flay a few days longer here; I intend to comply; two of them are already paffed, and I cannot defcribe to you how much I have been pleafcd with the behaviour of Emily. After refufing a man,
how
at a
lofs
to but fhe
• »
many women are condu6l themfelves, to them feems happily infenfible to this difficulty—appears as if no fuch event had happened, and is affable and agreeable without encouraging a continuation of addreffes—from my window I fee her going to ride, I will fly and afk permiffioi
I am returned.—Really, Belford, this
Emily
( 23
)
Emily is a charming girl, infenfibility was the only error I fancied fhe was pofTefTed of,—but I was miffaken; when I left off, I haflened to the court-yard where my charmer was mounting; fhe faid fhe would call on Mifs Barclay who would accompany her j I afked, might I alfo have that honour ?—you know my way, Harry, that I never appear anxious when afk-ing a favour, tho’my heart and foul were centered in receiving it—I always fpeak with a provoking indifference, becaufe the women expect the contrary—fhC'confented, and we fet out, called on Mifs Barclay, file declined riding, to my no fmall fatif-faction : Emily would not appear fo affected as to return home rather than ride with me., but with her ufual propriety proceeded, tho' I perceived by her looks not altogether with her own approbation. The weather, the country around, the new improvements at Morton Houfe, the diverfions in London, fafhionable news, drefs, &c. were the infipid topics on our firfl fetting
V	out,
( 2+ )
out, hut one thing introducing ano-> ther, added to my dexterity, ended in more intereffing fubjedfs.—Tho’ qualified by nature, education, and travelling, to be a companion for the moft refined, I have been you know Harry, but too much in the fociety of depraved women.—Some hours indeed every day were pafled in the fociety of amiable and juppofed amiable ones, but it was in public where opportunity never offered for rational and feldom for an uninterrupted eonver-lation; if a girl did enter a fentimental one., it was purfued in a romantic flrain, unnatural and of courfe dif-agreeable ; and at another time perhaps in the middle of an entertaining converfation, a Lady has afked
me
what I thought of the new play, or if
I meant to go to the feffino.?-----^If
women knew in how contemptible a light their underffandings appear to men, by paying no attention to the cultivation of their minds, and abforb-ing every idea in admiration of their perfons, I flatter mytelf they would
change
(	25 )
change their fyflem —but where have I rambledi—you will fay, in praifing Emily I lefTeii the reft of her Sex—no, Belford, I mean no general reJleLh'ons. You cannot imagine what pleafure'I received in my tete a teie : Were Mifs Seymour Lady Haviland, fhe would certainly have the glory of reforming me.—How^ I regretted the paft mif-fpent hours of my life. The fociety of a woman, tenfible and entertaining, filled with delicacy and fenfibility, is -one of the moft rational and delightful ^pleafures which a man can poflibly receive. We had proceeded about three miles (I thought the moments .flew) when a chaife and four met us on the road driving very fmartly up 5 two gentlemen were in it, one young and handfome, the other old j the moment they beheld Mifs Seymour they ftopped: her pleafure at feeing the young one was manifefted by her fweet blufhes, which appeared like a pafling cloud veiling for a moment the beauties of the morning; he feemed tranfported. The evident joy fhe dif-
VOL. I.
B
played
!! !;
I T i
t
■ ‘ . • • i
'fN' [ ! *
f
i *
. , I
(	26
played at feeing Mr. Woodley (that was his name) Shewed her fenfibility
in the mod advantageous light;-------
Empires I thought would have been trifling in comparifon of the joy in her benign countenance, had that joy been raifed on beholding me. The old Squire looked delighted at his children,^ (I fuppofe he intends ojie day to call Emily daughter) whilfl the young one amidfl his raptures looked now and then at me—afraid of a rival per-
haps.
The whole country is ac-
quainted with my having made pro-pofals at Morton,—he will of courfe hear it. After a number of queflions and enquiries after' Morton’s and Woodley’s (the families on both fides) which convinced me he had been for Some time abfent. After as much converfation as the fituation we were in would permit, we feparated; - the chaife papa and his [on drove off, and Mifs Seymour and I rode home j fhe was more thoughtful and referved as, fhe came back, her own meditations then Solely ingroSfed her, and more
than
a
( 27 )
i(;
than once by mi flake called me Mr. Woodley—for which you may fuppofe a good deal of raillery was levelled at her. “ This name of Woodley is deeply engraven on your heart, Mifs Seymour.” “ You are miffaken. Sir Edward j I regard this gentleman quite in the light of a Brother, as from our infancy we have known each other. A few years ago he was fent to travel, which has de-“ tained him until now j this is the “ firff time I have feen him fince his
iC

(C
cc


“ return.” Thus the fweet Emily apologized (tho’ it was not the cafe here:) by apologies women often en-
tangle
W
themfelves
greater openings
At
more, it leaving for fufpicion, dinner fhe acquainted her uncle and aunt with the return of Woodley, and the former this evening fet out to fee
them to
the gentleman and fpend fome time here. I retired foon after to my apartment; ’tis one of the fweeteff fummer evenings 1 ever beheld. I am growing quite fond of rural beauties, Harry j fo you may
B 2	vrrite
I >
(28)
write as many descriptions of Mount-ford Abbey as you pleafe; the country, from my bow-window looks So beautifully picturefque, I cannot pof-libly afford you another word
IN CONTINUATION.
• I
Belford, how have I been agitated ! why, my friend, by the gratification of a moment do we lay up ftores of remorfe?—Ah! that I could drown recollection—that oblivion fhould conceal my errors from myfelf!—how I wifh to draw a veil over my paft, and to acquire refolution to begin a new life.-—But how I moralize. When I threw afide my pen I haffened down, invited as I told you by the beauty of the evening, and the enchanting pro-fpect of the country. I reached the great hall, from the back of which a glafs-door opened into the lawn; Mifs Seymour was juft going out, and I begged we might take a walk together —She confented, tho’ I believe fhe would rather have been alone that
file
11
( 20 )
We
and
fhe might have indulged her meditations on Woodley. We proceeded through the lawn^ then into the park, which is laid out in a beautiful manner j indeed the whole demefne is romantic beyond conception rambled through a great part of it, and at length into a little copfe; wc had then paffed the boundaries of the demefne, and the beauty of the evening induced us to lengthen our walk. We proceeded through glens groves, woods, &c. unmindful of the length of way we had Frayed: at length a little winding country path feduced us Fill further to fee where it terminated, which from the thick trees was inviFble. We fauntered on, —at laF it opened ; vre pierced as if into the bofom of retirement. Emily and I gazed on it and on each other in wonder; enchantment'feemed to have formed an abode the moF enchanting. The fun which was Setting with majeFic grandeur in the WeF, and Freaked the partly azure Fvy with crimfon’d clouds,
B

( 3° )
its faint rays in the mofi manner on' a cottage whofe neatnefs, fimplicity, and uncommonly romantic fituation flruck us with amazement and delight. It was nicely thatched, feemed to contain but a few little rooms, and myrtle in the moft artlefs manner grew round the cafement. It was fituated in a little garden which Hoped gently down a hill hanging over a valley, extenfive and commanding a variegated profpect of nature. The rich corn fields where Ceres waved the golden heads in triumph, the farm-houfes, trees, a little diftant village and its church, with a river meandring in the bottom, and lofing itfelf in a copfe. The garden round the cottage was laid out in the fweetefi art-lefs taffe, and the flowers uncommonly feleded. The cottage and all its improvement were enbofomed in a thick grove, open only at a front to command a view of the valley beneath and impending hills, and acceffible only by the little ruflic path which
had brought us to it. But to return
to
Tr
( 3t )
to the garden I give, you perceive, a wandering account, for my ideas, Harry, are confufed A little green wicker gate opeited into it, it was enclofed by a double but very low hedge of fweetbriar and wild rofes, a little branch of honeyfuckle here and there alfo peeping through, feve-ral little green feats were lhaded at top with jeffamine and hofe trees in blow interwining; a few mofs rofes floie their beauteous heads through the myrtle, which artlefsly grew round the windows ; every lily, every Shrub Seemed to raife its head in triumph and Shew the taffy hand which had laid out the whole. We were loft in admiration and delight when our attention was roufed by a faint found like a Scream. Emily and me looked around. A little dark walk wdiich Jed to a mofs-houfe in the garden was the place from which it proceeded. A very elegant looking girl from the mofly couch funk on the ground as in a faint, and an intercepting tree prevented us from feeing her face.
B 4	“ Oh!
/
i 1 * i •
n
i 1
u
> I
(
n n
)
cc
Oh 1 Sir Edward, let us fly to her “ affiftance,” Said the Sweet Emily. We tried if the little gate was locked, we found not, it hofpitably received us, but before I reached the Sufferer, changed my mind and reSolved to go down to the valley and procure a little water from the ffream, whilfl my companion ffaid with the young lady. I haffened away, and having got it, returned impatiently j but arriving at the moSs-hpufe, I beheld my Cecilia my once—my ffill lovely Cecilia, Sup-jK^rted in the arms of MiSs Seymour.
The cup of water fell from my trembling hand—Emily chid me for Spilling it—I minded her not.——-My mind a chaos of ideas, and flruck dumb with aftonifhment, I gazed on the pale face and cloSed eyes of my
once beloved.--------But, Belford, you
know not w'hom I mean by my Cecilia^ my next letter fhall inform you 5 at nreSent I can write no more.
Letter
I i
iiii
( 33 )
LETTER
VIII.
THE HON. CAPTi BELFORD TO SIR

EDWARD HAVILAND, BART.
Real yLY, Edward, you have left
off in a critical manner^—fufficiently fo to torment a perfon pofTefTed of more patience than I afpire to. Hea ven and earth who is your Cecilia, and why have you always been fo referved to me ? But really my friend, you excel in rural descriptions : I fhall fall quite Short of you, and will never attempt a Sketch of Mountford Abbey. But, Haviland, you mull not come here: Mifs Scdley has
vou are a d
eyes— d handfome fellow
and
But what is Mifs Sedley to me ? Surely nothing—convinced of a Situation peculiarly circumSfaneed, being engaged to be the huSband of another. Yet contradls are certainly unfair, improper engagements, with which were I a parent I Should never deSire a Son to comply. The Earl of Ongly on
B s
I:
5	»
■	i
i-1
i:
L
tii
I:
* k
r* *
tl,
■ 1 i
'■* : ■
■t
U .
(	34 )
his death-bed called me to him, my father Lord Belford was feated by him, and his only child Lady Amelia Bel-ville. By the time I was Summoned every thing was fettled. I was not much more than twelve years old, and the young Lady eight. “ Mr. Belford, (Said he) you are very young to be addrefl'ed on fuch a Subject; but I think myfelf juffified in doing So, as a very Short time will Separate us for ever, and it is an affair which will very much “ determine the happineSs of your “ future life.” You may- fuppofe, Edward, I looked not a little amazed while this Speech was uttering, for bleffed with all the little innocent enjoyments my heart could wifh, I could not conceive how Lord Ongly could add to T>r diminish my felicity
4C


44

44
But I was filent.
C4
At
a
period
(proceeded he) ten or twelve years “ diffant, I could wiSh you the huS-‘‘ band of this young Lady, but Lord Belford and I are Superior to forcing the inclinations of our
‘‘ children;
• A
1' '
cU I
(
/J f
6d
)
“ children; but of this when ydii
6C

C4
C4
CC
U
CC
CC
CC
CC
ii
CC
CC
CC
CC
CC
CC
CC
CC
are older quainted.
you
An
be
more ac-
alliance between
the families is my earneft defire and dying requelf ran eflate of5000 a
year
with
Amelia Belville
is yours, but on declining the match you forfeit this to her, and if my daughter refufes, the fortune is yours: her refufing will difadvan-tageoufly alter her cireumffances, as then I5000 would be all her fortune, which fum is in the hands of a gentleman already deputed guardian. At prefent, my dear Henry, (continued he) you do not well knoW'the meaning of all this; your father in future will repeat this to you; fufiice it to fay, Amelia
are intended for each
Ongly died foon,
and
you
“ other.” Lord and in five years after my wdfe-eiect and myfelf were fent to travel. She with her governante, I with my tutor, and each a proper appointment, fet off at the fame time, tho*
we piirfued different routes. Four
/
years
1 •; :
I: (
i > • I I I
■ [ (
. I
i:
1
;'fu
A'
ifh

(
IS
IM
«;
t ■
. t.
‘-i.
Oi
1 . i
1 ’ J I I;
:• t
I ?
• i
t ,
( 36 )
\
years were pasted in this manner, and I was at Spa in Germany when I attained my one and twentieth year; nine now had elafped stnce I beheld my Amelia, Sor one of the preliminary articles in the contra<ff was that we were not to fee each other until the time of our union approached : this appears strange, perhaps like old Hardy he imagined her charms would-have a greater estedi; nor was I acquainted where She was.—What numerous furmifes had I formed concerning her! I was told She was very much altered, and indeed it was to be fuppofed from eight years old to Seventeen a girl must be very much changed, and I had almost forgot even her childijh face. I pasted my time in the most delightful man-

ner.
3/ pleafi
yet now and then the recoHection of my engagement was a damp on my future profpeCls. I hated restraint, and fancied were Amelia an Angel I could not love her, merely becaufe I ought. How perverfe are the difpo-
Skions
Cl ;
i' I
M ■ !i
( 37 )
fit ions of man. Spa was exceedingly well adapted to my taffe from the variety of amufements, and I could not bring myfelf to think of leaving of it. One night at a private ball I was very much struck with the beauty of a young Lady who entered the room: her form difplayed a mofl enchanting dignity : fhe was tall and very vrell made, with an exquifite grace, yet on the whole in her air and manner a degree of fuperiodty: whether it was her real fentiments or not, I do not pretend to determine, but certain it is, Sir Edward, fhe looked as if flie thought herfelf in .every thing above thofe around her, and at the fame moment her attractions were fuch, our fex mufl be of her opinion. I never beheld a more regular fet of features—uncommonly fine, penetrating, expreflive, and Sweetly enlivened. Her complexion was high and flri-kingly beautiful j nature had formed her perfect: fuch piercing dazzling eyes, fuch a neck, all lovelinefs, fhe feemed formed folely for admiration.
But
. I
* i
(
; * •
' » .
1 I
; I
.	' I
1 •
h'l

■ J
i I
o •;
1.
' I :
N ■	!
■ i!''
f ‘
.	'	>
J ;	h	.
’ I,	■	•	.	•'
!	I	'	*	■
.J
I
38
)
But notwithffanding, there was a diS-pleafing haughtinefs mixed with ma-jeffy in her air, a foiirnefs of . afpedl that proclaimed continual difpleafure. You have now, Edward, her piCIure before you, almoff as plain as if drawn by a Reynolds. While her uncommon beauty demanded every praife—-while fhe had alb my admiration, fhe was by no means formed to deal my afFec-
tions.
afked
fented, and to the envy of every foul in the room I led her to the fet—when we had finhlied I placed myfelf by her, and though very anxious to know who fhe was, would not leave her for a moment to gratify my curiofity ; had I been able to liften to any thing but herfelf, probably I fhould have heard her name whifpered through the room : from as much converfation as a ball room would permit, vered her underffanding to be
I difco-fine
her fenfibility equal, added to a fweet foftnefs in her manner, of which if a woman be deftitute, fhe wants one of
*	i
the highest perfections in the fex.
When
:; \
lyiil
( 39 )
er
V/hen we broke up I handed h to her carriage and returned home, where I found letters from England had been left for me in my abfence; their purport was, that my father was ill and defired my return home acv cprdingly the very next morning I let out, refolving to come back by France ; but w^hen I had arrived at Bruffels had the happinefs of hearin he was reeovered and that I might pur-fue my travels. The peculiar circum-ftances of my being obliged to leave Spa the day after the ball, prevented my hearing who the Ldy was, and not-withflanding She had attradions to en-flave half mankind, my taffe being very peculiar, fhe did not fufficiently inte-reft me to write to any of my friends in Germany to dilcover who She was. I had the utrnoll delight in travelling, and a fecond time vifited Paris ; the hours I fancied Hew in that delightful fpot, and a varied fucceflion of amufe-ments made -pleaftrire feem the bufinefs of one’s life. Of Mafquerades when well conducted, you know I am extremely

; h •
• I 11
: t i
: Inti
I ’ *
i
■ li'
i ■' C ■
: iv-
:; IL ^ A •
ti’i-
cC
St
li-’-'-
f ‘
r
. f

I!; i
:	‘ I »
■
ii
■P\
U f
rit u i.
-: <
•■ul
i| T ; -
•■S' *:

■ ■ •
U I
■ L.\ .
! I r 1 ‘ •
•. :ir ?
• o. *
tic
.	• I.	•
..'' I
I •;
• I
‘ i . ;
I '	>
t • ■
'	' ' I .
< I H
• ■' w
i /■ id.
' i ,
( 40 )
tremely fond, and of courfe in a conn-try where I conclude they were firff invented they mufl be in perfection I never miffed one j the lafl I was ever at was the mofl fuperb : I reprefented young Norval,. was dreffed in the prp-per manner, and delighted with fo beautiful a character, exhilirated with the enchanting feene, no night I thought had ever been fopleafant j I led out a very pretty fortune-teller to dance an allcmande j fhe performed with a kind of country awkwardnefs, which however evidently appeared de-figned, every ffep was out of time, and fhe was perfedtly diveiled of grace; from the inelegance of her manner I was very glad when we had finifhed, on which leading me a little out of the crow'd, “ Monfieur, (faid fhe) I will tell you your fortune —at the fame in-flant the gypley pulled off my glove and looked at my hand, and after a few moments contemplation—“ you are in a fitiiation (faid fhe^ looking up at me) perhaps not the mofl pleafing
My heart fluttered
ii
a
f (
to
a
'
i-
i ;! c
( 41	)
1
a little at thefe words—how much more was my agitation encreaSed when fhe proceeded—“ you are engaged to “ marry a lady whom you have not “ Seen fince your childhood ”-and
at the very inflant a torrent of people rufhing between us as the rooms were filling, Separated us as if by magic. I looked every way, but fhe was invifi-ble. “ Heavens (Said I to my Self) how “ can all this be—who is the fortune-
teller
how can fhe know my fitu-“ ation !’* Whilfl I flood in the Spot fhe had left me, a peafant girl came up and infifled on my dancing with her; I was very ill qualified to comply, being almost motionlefs with furprife, but the ruflic infifled, and leading me to the Sets, we danced: when it was over, I fat down in a Saloon and gaVe way to my reflections—thougl haps a maSquerade was the place in the world to reflect. I had for Some minutes been in a reverie, when Something catching hold of my plaid, made me turn about, when I beheld a figure the most angelic, a female of
the
1 per-oddest
1
J j . ;
. f
ri.
\
( 42 )
the iitmpft grace and beauty, wrapped in the lighted drefs calculated to fet ofF her form, which like Maria was of the firfl order, and the refplendent fun of precious flones on her head and another on her breast proclaimed her charadfer to- be a daughter of the fuit, “ Come,’" faid the (in a feigned voice) “ and let us join the cotillons, readily complied, and never faw any being move with Such elegance
fueh animated grace:

I
fuch lightnefs there was fomething refplendent, delicate, enchanting and aerial in her whole appearance beyond conception; even in a mafquerade She was attended to, crowds every where opened when fhe.advanced, every eye gazed at her with delight: need I tell you Haviland, Lthought I trod myfelf in air; in the room in which we were, every one azed at us, and fomething like filence prevailed. When the cotillon was ended, my lovely partner and myfelf fat down. “ It is intolerably warm, [faid the] and I had need of calling the fanning Zephyrus to my aid.”
From


1
1
( 43 )
‘‘ From our reprefen rations on earth, “ replied I, Zephyrus is one of the “ moil beautiful of the deities—perhaps he is a lover of	fuch delicacy,
lightnefs, and aerial beings are only
I 1	.	1 r	1	.1	j> t- T> .L


“ calculated for each other.
((
4C
44
44
44
44
44
44
44
But
would it not amaze you then [faid Ihe] if a daughter of the, fun Should have earthly lovers.’’—“ Not if they defcended as this aufpicious
night.
55
44
To convince you [an-
swered She] of an earthly lover, I “ will fhew you his picture j I will
“ not anfwer that he is himfelf a
. /
“ lover^ but is fettled by his family to “ be fuch.”—“ Family and connexions
“ [replied I] are the low cares of the “ ffill lower inhabitants of this fub-“ lunary world, how then can a being flown from the celefliai Shades, defcend as well in idea as “ in action—but let me fee the pic-
ture.
55
She took a cafe from her
pocket, and taking a miniature out, prefented it to me—but, good God, Haviland, what were my
v/hen I beheld a perfect and beautifully
O i .
; >
I ■ .
'«
• I ' 1
I i .

I;
»
‘ 1 '
11'
. t
I.
Ill
( 44 )
fully dra wn likenefs of my Self-
romance, my friend, can Scarce furniSh
a more interefling or uncommon ad-
venture—after looking at the picture
for Some minutes, which the furpriSe
of Seeing had thrown me into a lethar-
gy of thought, I turned to Speak to
my companion honor, Edward,
She was gone—upon
I thought—cannot
tell what—there was Something So
inexplicable in an unknown fortune-
teller telling me my hiffory, and ano-
ther perSon Shewing me my picture and claiming me as a lover, the whole
was So affoniShing as to leave room
to believe it was a vifion-
-I
Searched (lightly through the rooms
Ifl
I
Should See her again] but could not
of the J
at length we went to Supper, when to
m	^
my infinite amazement, I found her and discovered her to be the
lady I
had met at the ball at Spa^ the mo-
ment they unmaflced, her beautiful
face I remembered—I dew to her, and
to fhorten my letter, will not give you
the

( 45 .)
the paiticnlars of our eonverfation, but juft the difcovery. It.wasL^^/y Amelia Belville j it was her I had met in Germany j at the mafquerade fhe immediately knew me as I did not dif-guife my voice; it was fhe reprefented the fortune-teller, and afterwards changed her habit; fhe knew who I was at the ball where we fir ft met. “ But how did you get the pidure faid I.] “ Another time Mr. Belford, replied fhe, putting a card with her addrefs in Paris in my hand] I will acquaint you.”—It is unnecefTary to fay I was delighted.—But I am quite tired writing, another time you fhall Tear the reft. I think for this long ’letter J deferve the hiftory of Cecilia and you. Yours as ufual.
H. Belford.
Letter
j:
4:

T
. - i i
T'i
I
•: I ■
lit
• ' i
«i . ■

i •-
r ;•


r
' u>:

-i V(> V V
Ci'-'
H-' " ^ ’


.-V- b
i ■: ;ii : V.
i:
hM i: \ ■
mi''
¥lt I
w'
r}
i

• I
oh'4 -
- i '.' "1
■; c',,. i;. :-L ■■ ',.'«
t?n i:
' u - - ■
■> •} 1 t
■--t'
-■ '•
:--h .
1:
( 46 )
LETTER IX.
THE SAME TO THE SAME.
No
V.
to leave you in the fufpended
fituation you me, Edward, I take
up my pen again before the pofl goes
out.
Mafquerade
home and retired to bed, but not you
A	__ -	_
may fuppofe to fleep—impolfible
filled with reflection on the paft, and
eclairciffe
About ten I arofe, breakfafted and
drefied, and at two was fetting off to
vifit Lady Amelia, when on examina-
tion I found I had loft the. card with
her addrefs. Did you ever, Haviland,
know any thing fo provoking; the
crowd prefiing, had, I conclude, made
it in an inadvertent moment drop from my hand. A fevere cold caught at
the entertainment, confined me for a
fortnight; when I recovered I made
enquiries amongft all my friends there
for Amelia, who told me, during my
illnefs She had quitted Paris. I had made
a perfed
( 47 )
/
a perSeil tour of Italy, but having to vifit fome friends in Turin, fet out and again croffed the Alps, though in a very fevere feafbn, and paffing; thro* the duchy of Savoy, the badnefs of a night obliged me to lodge in a little inn and not reach the intended Ifage : the maffer of it told me, a lady travelling had alfo taken refuge there from the dreadful inclemency of the weather, though he had no proper accommodations for either of us, or our retinue. There was but one fitting room in which I found the lady was, and by the landlord was fhewn up to it ♦, two fmall bed-chambers or rather clofets were adjoining the apartment, and to the one appropriated for the lady I found her retiring, but ere fhe had time to entirely retreat, I made my conge, which fhe politely turning to return, I found it was Lady Amelia. She w^as amazed—I was delighted and the pleafanteft fcene imaginable enfued. I explained to her why I had not made a vifit to her in France, and fhe in turn related to me every thing
I wifhed.
!
48 )

AS
ri-A
i t
‘C }
n ”1
I
iii
si'
i -;«■■
A'-'': t
I'S-f
5 *«j I { f ^ill I
OO:' 1
, h
! ‘ (t't :'
; L«
jl!
s'A? t il'F i
'.;AS;
A-M !■

A:*n
■ iV'i. !■'
■': !• Si'S" » lilt'. !■
-■I\ 1
isSib ■
..Si-
hi-' ■ ■; 11
. ■ !■• .
• V : ^ ■. ■•
'. ' !'.' !■ ■,.
[UAT ;
i ? i ’ L'i •’■
-1 i
C'
■. I
., * I .'• f •'
•ifl.i A
S'cf
J
m;'
Hi d
iT-
'll
u.i
'he
's
' ■ *
■i.ri''''.
I ' /
• t
I wiflied. When I had been before i
in
Italy, a travelling painter in Tufeany had requefted permillion to draw my picture; he executed the miniature admirably, and , when completed, I prefented him with a confiderable pre-fent, but refufed to take it from him, as feveral pictures had been done of me in that land of painting which I would bring to England, and this one I left with him to Shew amongft his little collection. Lady Amelia Belville happened to meet this man in Spain, who when ihewing his drawings prefented this. “ Tis the image of an “ Englifh gentleman Mr. Belford, for “ whom it was drawn,” faid the artift, Excited by a very natural wifh, fhe owned fhe had purchafed the picture, and knowing'me at'the Mafquerade, refolved to have a little amufement. And now, Haviland, you have the whole affair unravelled, you will let me take a walk in the lawn with Caroline,
•h
\ . m
u/r. i n'"'
I	.	?
r L ^
Is -
n':i '
■: ii
h
iiiT i
iiiiii:
i.M-|.i!r ;
IN
( 49 )
IN CONTINUATION.
I confidered ruyfelf particularly happy in meeting my —I do not like that word—Amelia, for befides a natural curiofity for the perfed; explanation, her pride was a little hurt at my not having waited on her at Paris, which v/as cleared by our unexpeded rencontre. We fpent fome hours, and dined at the little inn during a dreadful fform, and wifhing to reach our refpedive ffages before night, fet out on a difagreeable evening as it was knowing very fall, and every thing wore a gloomy and horrible appearance. A perfon might naturally conclude that from the behaviour of Lady Amelia at the Mafquerade, and my warm defeription of her attractions, that we were both prepoffefied in each other’s favour, yet this fufpicion would be erroneous; on my fide I can au-fwer for it; if I have any penetration, on hers, a kind of dejedion hung over her without the leafi: pleafure; nay, I fancied, a little pain at beholding-me.
C
Our

f

j!
(t
I: i
hr.
IT: liTi
ilf!
i
}
1 I
; ' V :
h !|
M ,1
rt
i*l
.m
ijifi
' H
»u
li
, i
j 1 ;
I if
'h
ir
i: ! h i
!!.'
ij:i
t •'
0.;
fi’h ' ilil i
‘Uf
f.;
iii
1 ■ t
i;!i
1 lo ih
I
ih
T-
Vij
J
!!
.U
ill
ii •; ;!!' iii-i;i-'
;''i
:i
li
i f
The moment
( s° ) ■
Our Situation was So critical and deli-
%
cate, that each of us laboured under a natural embarraSTment, but as our reparation drev/ near, v/e grew . a little more frank, and mutually refolved, as my father, her late one and her pre-fent guardians did not wifh us-'to meet until a period appointed by themfelves, that we Should conceal the interviews we had abroad, and rcaution the attendants who knew it. of our parting drew near; I thought then, Haviland, She appeared a little aiFedfed ; but it muff have been fancy, for I perceived the Slighteff hint at our future connexion pained her. As 1 handed her to her carriage I faid, ‘‘ the time will come, my Amelia, when we Shall not meet accidentally as in Germany, France and Italy—when w^eShall meet in our native England, to part no more —her colour, went and came—her hand trembled. Col. Lovell who you know travelled with me always, flopped with me into our ehaife, and both the carriages drove
off. I talked the whole evenins; to
him
c;
u
cc
c;
cc
C 51 )
9
r
him of the cruelty of reffraint. Were “ She a goddefs, (faid I) to be obliged “ to marry is death.”—Beautiful as file is, I do not love her.—There is a tout enjetnble and a pride in Lady Amelia Belville, quite difagreeable to your friend.
Your’s as ufual,
Henry Belford.

y
C2
Letter
'i 0
;
*)
!l!
( »
• 1
■ :l
- 'Oj
, I I

: t
!h
, \
■' I
; i
Ti

-II
' v:
. : I . I
’b
■•i'i
:ij
f • 1
1 ■ • ■. (
' i
t I
i; '
■i-i
lit
‘ 11

\' I . ‘ 1
•cM
!
f r * » I
i| <: J
fii T’ I
■
■i‘i
It!
li*;
I ? : *
in
if :
I
i ’
II
:	.. I
■‘L 1
u i ‘
•F

t ;
( )
LETTER X.
SIR EDWRAD HAVILAND TO CAPT.
BELFORD.
Morton Houfe,
N
our unguarded moments when
the heart is foftened by a kind of ten-
der alflidion, we are whiling to divulge all its fecrets:—-that weak period past,
a felf-prefenting recolledtion Shews the
impropriety of difcovering fome events
even to our deareff, our trueff friends.
This was the cafe with me—I awa-
kened your curioSity by leading you to a fcene the moft romantic and
amazing the reft.
and now I wifti to conceal
Muft I, Belford, difplay my
own charadier in fuch a light—but is
it not to you who will judge whth the
kind partiality of friendship.—How I
talk—can the adfion admit of pallia-
tion—reflection
it is death—it
is
worfe than a thoufand deaths—I muft
fly to London and chafe it from my
pillow—there perhaps in fcenes of
diflipation
11
: &
( 53 )
dlllipation I fliall get rid of the fiend. But now to explain the myffery.
You are not ignorant, Henry, that from my one and twentieth year which put me in poSSeffion of a noble fortune, I lived, what I then-confidered, what I {fill think, a life of pleafure, though perhaps you wmiild term it one of infamy, or to place it in politer terms, I purfued vicious courfes with a kind of bafe glory.—You fee how I am obliged to lay my errors before you, and by painting them in their true colours, to paint them in a light moft horrid. In this manner I revelled on for fome years, and made irreparable devafiations in my health and fortune: I confefs I was not loff to a fenfe of my improprieties, yet ffill a kind of fecret irnpulfe led me on, without giving w^ay to the admonitions of relations, [Such indeed were defpifed] ; but the more powerful flings of con— fcience were equally rejedfed and con^ tinually fuppreffed. I hadiiliver been at the manfion houfe of my family, W'-hich was on the largeff of the estates;
C3
and

in
I
< I
« I
{' '
I j
; I

ii»
' : (

. ' • I
i •
' I I 1 »
U\n
' L I
i .
A -.
;‘l:;
I :
hi
I <
l< i
1. >
I ;
I.: , I .
--1 -. f ' *
: f
(	54
and one fummer being tired of Bath and every other watering place, re-folved to villt it. It was a delire which did not refult from wiShing to fee the place where rny anceftry had fpent their fortunes in, in a manner which did honor to their characters and their country, where for unnumbered years, hofpitality, magnificence and univerfal benevolence had marked the featj—it was in me a reftlefs wiSh for change of fcene. A number of my companions accompanied me as I was bent on fhewing the country V/h—as we term it. We rivalled the Squires in drinking, and at the fame inffant (hewed them the more elegant vices, if they can bear the appellation, which we praCtifed. V/e alfo charmed their wives and daughters, as the former thought us delightful flirts, the latter’s ambition was excited by our titles and fortunes. Iti this manner the time pafl'ed on, when the gentle--men whon /ere on a vifit to me, having gone forty miles one morning to
be at an affembly in the town of-------
at
. ♦
"i ■
■VP]
<1
i!
i ;
{ .
? -1
III
: '
(	55 )
at night, I declined going, but in lire; dufk of the evening went out to take
L
's.r
might make fome of
a walk. The landScape of a pleafan fporting country, diverliiied with wood and water and the prettied feats imaginable, pleafed’ me extremely from the novelty of - the feene. I rambled through fome Sweet parts of the de-mefne, meditatins: that the next throw of the dice bo
my ffately groves the property of another. About two miles - from home came to a very pretty cottage, laid out in a ffile thatffruck my attention:
the little
Chinefe pailing admiring the abode, I obferved a fwTet girl fitting on a little feat raifed under a fliady tree in a fheep-walk before the door. I
while I flood leaning over
fome minutes gazing on her in Silence; file did not perceive me, her attention being folely engroffed by a book She was reading : fl'ie wept, Belford—and how amiable—how fatally amiable for herfelf did She at that moment appear ! The tears which trickled down her cheeks—oh! Henry, what would I
C 4
have
'I 1:
OK
i !
^ I •
II!
C ’
h
( i
I
If:
(i!
I
. I,
!i
N • 1 1
ir Ji
>
, *
, r :
ilM

• f
1)
11.
Ti
I '■
II"
,o } •
: t
Ini it:
uh
(M '{ ‘
i ■ :
.ill . r
is
' :i
It'
ill-.
'! !■
lili,,
< * . ■iL. I ' '
1 ■ : ■
u
Vri ■T ‘
T. ■
•	■ t '
:.,-l
:
t ■
''ni-
■T ! .0
’b ■ . !::! :
• ; r ; .
•	I »
•	1 t
^ • I»
T-'
11 ’
liiTli
:!i :
11 ■ •
:L ;

*< i T ' .
,si
:C- i !!■!
PL
mv
M
jo. i ■
»*■ ‘
i*r >
M Ip UUt’:
H I ■
. I
db
'[lidC Mu'i
i'Ms;
!L-
»J - » 'V ■ ' ' f
:uj ..
( 56
have given to have kifTcd them av/ay, I wished to know the book, as from that her fentiments would bedifcover-ed, from the kind of writing which aflecfed her. She at laid arofe and went into a little Shrubbery off the meadow, and I bent rny steps homewards. Though neatnefs and beauty grew round the cottage, and fhe had the appearance of elegance instead of gentility, yet I imagined her sttuation in lif
e CO’
old not be very high: I regretted I had not in this fuppoiition introduced myfelf. to her, fince it would have been in a moment when her fenfibility was astested, her heart alive to the tenderest imprestlons, her fon for a moment overpowered, her own sttuation for the instant forgot in that of thofe objects stie has read of. I refolved not to acquaint my companions with the diScovery of
re"’
u
this cottage and its
fweet inhabitant.
When I arrived at Woburn Hall again, I fent for my steward and enquired of him who owned that houfc, deferib-ing it, for I did not know the name of
any
J 5 .T*
dst ;
' (L
!
!C'
! V: .: I- L ;■ ■.
1!
( 57 )
any of my lands, being by much too
fafhionable for
vulgar informa-
tion. The fteward told me that part of my effate was taken by a Captain
“ He is a fine old veteran,
Harl
ey
CC
iC,
CC

(C
(C
(faid Kingfley) and with what little, and ’tis very little, heaven has given him, does more good and is more beloved than any gentleman in the country; it is not long fince he came to refide here, fo his family and connexions are but little known, “ as he lives in the riioff retired manner, declining vifiting or being vi-fited by any of the gentry. He has a daughter, Sir Edward ^—the two are the pride of the county : heaven who has given her father fuch dif-pofitions, will no doubt rew”ard his “ aXions.” Mr. Kingfley’s information fatisficd me I had been miffaken as to the rank of the cottagers; I fuf-fered the next day to pafs without returning to the place. You know I have generally in trifling matters a command of myfelf which I do not pofTefs in the more effential cafes
when
CC
CC
(C
CC
CC
CC
Cs

m:" : ::
( 58 )
i i,
il;

li
• I	’
■'in
L .' iil:
n
*'i'' M'

n
■I :
ct-;
:iil!
>i . i . .
ii':!:
liSi: •
!ihi: ‘

• ! 1
■ -1 I
si'
• 1 .
-
! ' 1j • )	■ ■ «
,T ■ ii!;
i
11:
'b M;
i!C
;iii i ■
1|!;:
* I
I »
i t
\,
I I
■
I;.: , •
:i' >
i 1
, I
Li
'	< I
•*,: i .
: t
where it is required. The evening of that enfuing day my companions returned, and were amazed at Some little alteration which they already perceived in me. I was very fiient at fupper, and though I liffened to their account of the affembly, did not bear a part in the converfation ; they rallied me on my filence, and faid the country w^as devouring me with the vapours. As foon as the cloth was removed, I wilh-ed them good night and retired, being more difpofed for refleOion than foci-ety, and when arrived at my chamber, threw myfelf into a chair, w^here I gaveunredrained force to ray thoughts. It was a feafon which made London . difagreeable : I was tired of the watering places, had already made a tour
where. I
was happy enough firff to meet my
the country then was my only refource, but I found I wanted arnufement—it was on the Harley’s I built for arnufement—it was them filled rny imagination, I had felt an
through France and Italy,
unufual
ion in favor of the
daughter:
w
( 5
)
daughter : though they were genteeli by my lleward’s account no one knew their family j they were evidently rather in an inferior fphere.. An officer’s child could have little or no provifion, asKingfleyhad hinted—was an object in diftrefs—I hoped to touch her heart— my perfon agreeable—my Situation in
life----Belford, the Sons of
affume—you fee the whole—you fee the bafe defigns of your friend—planning a thoufand Schemes worthy my intentions, and as often rejecting them, and fettling the whole artillery of ffratagem; the hours of a Short Summer night quickly paffed away, and whilft buried in reflection, I thought not of going to reft: the fun in all its glory rofe, and the firft tints of Aurora opening day preSfed through the crim-fon curtains. I went over to the glafs, which hurt my vanity, for a Sleeplefs. night had made me look languid, pale and worn out, my eyes dead and half Sliut, I recollected it was Sunday and that Mifs Harley and the Captain would be at church : I refolved to go^
s nd

\

( : ! >
!l
M
i. I '
I..
’i
; !
i . .
I
i : ii)
1 i
!
n ■ I
if •
I
i <	'
1 ■' I
I 1
I i,
S' s
I . I
.« :
. 1 ’i
Li •
\ \ i'
II !iii
( 6o )
and in a few hours the enlivening arts of my drefs, not a little changed my looks: when finished, I came down
to the breakfaft parlour where the
gentlemen were afSembled ^ they de-
clined going to church, which pleafed
me not a little, anxious that Mifs
Harley might be attradfed by me
alone. I went, and faw her there.
When fervice was over, as we were
coming out, I went up and addrefTed
Capt. Harley in a manner which could
not fail to pleafe an inferior in fortune;
and as a gentleman whofe family had
lefided in the country, and who hoped
to fpend fome part of my own life in
it, requefted the honor of his acquain-
tance : Mr. Harley, whofe appearance
ajmoff put my intentions to the flight,
from an air of faShion, confequence,
yet humility, fweetnefs and a counte-
nance the index of his mind, returned
my folicitations in a manner which
evidenced the company he had been
ufed to, to be amongfl; the firfl:; he
politely aflented to my requefl. I re-
turned home pleafed with my fitua-
tion,
( 6i )
tion, and confidering affairs en train; went the next day to the cottage to pay him a vifit he introduced me to his daughter, his lovely Cecilia. She was juft fixteen, but poSfeffcd of an underftanding, accomplishments and an elegant je ne je quoi fuperior to all girls of that age; She had a fine dif-tinguiftting tafte, a fenftbility and a pleafing kind of knowledge •, that blufhing timidity, that unfufpedfing
reliance on others, and that frefhnefs of beauty which was attendant on her age: thefe were not expelled by a folidity far fuperior. She w^as not a beauty, Cecilia was fomething un-fpeakably above it ^ fhe was intereft-ing, pleafing, refiftibly the middle
touching—Belford, ir-
touching.
She was about
laflres long,
fize, with an elegantly proportioned feminine perfon j her eyes were inexprefiibly fine, her eye-
all her features delicate and extremely pale, which gave a languor to her whole appearance.
You may fuppofe my vifits at the cottage were very frequent, and had
Cecilia
( 62 )
Cecilia been out of the queffion, they would have been nearly the fame to her father Mr. Harley, the moff amiable—the beff of men. Tho’ diflipated to a violent excefs, I was not yet loft to a reverence and even an admiration for goodnefs: his inftruCtions, or rather his remarks, (for I behaved with too much art to feem to reauire the
^ i
former) were tempered with a gentle-nefs, a faint-like meeknefs, and whilft he ftrove to banilh vice, he treated it with a delicacy, not with a feverity, yet painted the paths of virtue in a light that muft attract—muft be adored. A military profelTion had made him acquainted with men in general and the cuftoms of the world, but this knowledge had only kept himfelf
from error : Harley was above all illi-
•*
beral opinions, which made him a delightful companion j' Jornething like diftrefs made his virtues known but
to the few who furrounded him, but
/ ^
none ever heard him repine—ever heard (myfelf excepted) him ftiy that he was unhappy. His filver locks,
hia
( 6s )
his furrowed cheeks Ihewed a fine old age, which the chearfulneSs, piety and divine relicnation of his look, feemed
have reached
joyfully
o
to
maturity.
Often when unobferved to himfeif, have I gazed with delight at him, and as often drove to withftand inclination.
“ How can I [Said 1] feduce the “ daughter of fuch a man—and Juch
“ a daughter as Cecilia Harley.” No apology, Harry, had I to make, except that of not having got an education which would have me furmount my pafiions [without a command of which we mufi; ever a6t improperly ;] for a man at twenty-feven has all his fen-timents opened, his ideas of right and wrong eftablilhed, and in one com-prehenlive fentenee is or ought, if ever.^ to be capable of condudting him-felf with propriety through life. I played off the attack with the true addrefs of a man of the w'orld and a man of defign—whilft I was ffriving to deal her heart I appeared an un-. concerned vifitor without paying her any particular attention, and as it
gradually
^*!i
' I r
f
\

i'f ^
( i
!
n
.]
-Ih
ii
i I •
ir ;i
lh^‘
ir'iii-
•L t

1
! Ill:
:i
. I

1
\
ilv
M
..nci
t.:-
i -
( . ^ .. t


ii
ill*
t «
1 ;
:u ‘
1
' f ■
I:
1
1 Ci; (i ■
f ■ ‘d
t ■ 11 .u
1-hl' C
i»
L'Ujl' :
! :‘Sh
A\m.
^ » i ,11 . f ■ i‘ L • ;
lOii
iUins: :
iSs‘^

I'
tiUOii .
'i ^ ■
i f I
rf •*
T . ' r i
ijiisl 5-
: »•»! V
! ih ■ L
*'. i}; I,,, I
fi
M J
hiiS li 1 iuib r


■l‘ ^
C
• * ’ • •
. '» i i
rSh;
!ll|
IBi
C 64' )
-I	^	.	*
gradually ifacreafed, concealed it from
her father. I often had him at Wo
burn Hall, but declined inviting the
daughter, as there was no lady to re-
ceive her.
- **v
attention to ceremo-
ny and propriety with her, deceived
the two.
-Oh 1 Belford, wliat have
I to aniwer for I
Letter

(	65	)
LETTER
XL
THE SAME TO THE SAME.
%
Mr . Harley lived in a manner So fe-
queftered as to prevent his hearing my charactery and a well Supported diffi-mulation made him think me one of the worthieft inflead of one of the worft of men. I pafTed nine months
in the country, and his regard daily
increased for me, until it arrived at almoft a parental one : I was flattered with the confidence he repoSed in me, and it at laft amounted to giving me his hiftory.—In a delicate manner J one day hinted a wonder at his continual retirement, and Secluding from the world one of its Sweeteff ornamen ts.
his Cecilia.
May

CC
cc

cc
cc
nerable man) when She is acquainted with it, meet with the fate her gentle virtues deServe, and not thoSe rigorous ftrokes of fortune her aged father has experienced. I am descended (continued he) from an
“ illustrious
I ' * f •
ir'
I > .
: i • = T .) ^
■ll'i'!
"b' ■
I'
I • ^
J ’

■: ili.i

I I
r
;,	1 'I
iM! .1
I ■
1 ■-* 1 , '
• . t	; •
‘ •	' !

t ■. t
; ; M ;


T'ii
' i ■!!
cc
€C
44
44
44
(4
44

44
44
i;
44
44
44
44
44
44
44
44
C4
44
44
44
44
44
(4
( 66 )
illuftrions family j but being ^
younger fon of. one of the younger
branches of it, my fortune was
fmall, about ^500 a year;
feveral brothers of
there
were
us, and
fome of them .by inevitable misfor-
tunes in the prc)fe.ffions they had
choSen, were reduced to the utmoll
diftrefs : the el deft fon
tQ.
a

them j on me therefore fell
\
that talk, the ties of blood,—of com-
mon humanity, called^ on me,
could-1 be deaf to their intrealies.
I mortgaged my eftate to relieve
them, and left myfelf only^20oa
year
I
after became ae
quainted with a young lady with
whom I> became enamoured. MiS
5
Meadows, (that was her name
was the daughter of a Baronet, but a family pique had long prejudiced
the Harleys againft them, which
was reciprocally returned by the
father Sir William Meadows, who
was enraged at hearing of our attach
ment, as She was his only child,
and to inherit a very large fortune:
“ A
<	'	1'
'i'
-.i :


U 0
-11
I.
^iit
(	67 )
A love the moff ardent was howeVei? “ deaf to the interpofition of family “ or the want of fortune, and we married privately. This ftep entirely
C4
tc
difobliged all our relations, who im-‘‘ mediately caff us off.—And tired of “ a world where we had not a fufflci-
to live in the manner we
CC



cc
Cc
C(
cc
a

cc
u
C4
cc
4C
CC
cc
cc
cc
were ufed, and fhunned by our families, we retired to the country, where we experienced the utmofl felicity: the Succeeding year my Maria bleffed me with the little Ceciiia.—^Soon after, one evening leaning over a little hedge at the foot of our garden a road ran out-fide, a chaife and four which w^as driven up overturned; our^ whole family immediately ran to their
afliffance, but what was our amaze-
' ;
“ ment to'behold .Sir William Mea-, dows in the carriage; it was fo very late, added to the fright, the darknefs prevented his knowing us; he was brought into the houfe, and we infiffed he fliould ffay the night with us; he * complied, and we did
not
i
• >
if
Hi
iC
c;
4C
a
a
a
a
44
44
44
44
44
44
44
44
44
44

44
44
44
4C
44
44
( 68 ]
not let him fee us any more that
night.
The next morning I pre
fented myfelf to him, and had the
happinefs to find him- at laff moved
in our favour.—I brought in Maria
and the little Cecilia, he embraced
them, and a happy reconciliation en-
“ fued. Sir William foon after left us
“ but not until he had fettled on
us
an eft ate of fix hundred a year
which gratifying all our little wants
made
us
the
of human
beings.—But how tranfient is feli
city here ! In a few months he died
and left his fortune to a nephew.
who on examining the eftate found
the part fettled on- us had been a
purchafe, and the gentleman from
whom Sir William had got it,
in
reality had no right to fell it : young
Meadows made this public, and the
immediate confequences were, the
family of the gentleman deceafed
who had fold, commencing a fuit,
on which I expended fome part of
my own little property, and at length was caft. This was a fevere
mortifica-
'( 6o )
C4
U
mortification to my Maria and me, Avho had juft tafted uninterrupted happinefs in the fweets of an “ income which enabled us to live in “ the manner w^e were ufed to.—But ah! Sir Edward, what is the lofs of “ fortune to the lofs of thofe we love.
CC
“ —My amiable Maria was foon after “ feized with a fever which in a few
“ days carried her off.—I will not “ affed you—I will not dwell on “ the forrow with which this event overpowered me. When it was fomewhat abated, I wrote to feveral of my own, and many of her relations to beg a reconciliation might enSue, as my once adored Maria had left a daughter, and nothwithftand-ing Sir William Meadows (who
from
46
4C
46
44
44
44
44
44
44
44
44
44
44
44
44
perfon
as
was the principal him only we had expedations) had fet the example, yet as he was no longer ab.ve, they were obftinate in maintaining a family prejudice on both fides, which but for too many years had been fupported, and the
prcfent were refolved not to break
“ through;

ii
11
ill 1 :
I-
It
■ .
Ii
ii
ti

c:
6C
cc
u

cc
C4
CC
CC
4C
CC
CC
CC
CC
CC
CC
CC
CC
CC
CC
CC
CC
CC
( 7° )
through :• even my Maria’s relations refuSed to fee,—refnfed to connte-
“ nance her child.—I forgot
time to tell you, Sir,
Mr. Harley) that from a very early age I had chofen and had adored a military life; I had fold out when I married, but about a year and a
“ half after
my wife’s death, my country calling for the fervice of her fons, 1 entered into another regiment, and placed my daughters at a boarding fchool. I have faid the profeilion of arms had ever been my delight j 14 years did I pafs in difficult fituations,—the perils—the dangers of wars were recompenfed by their glories,—it was left at laft “• for me to think fo, as I never rofe “ higher than the rank of Lieutenant?:
o	*
my family who were noble, had they not been biafl'ed againfl me, by their intereft would certainly have promoted me ^ but I repine not, Sir Edward,—think not I re-, pinej to be of ufe to my countryj is enough.—I laid down my arms—
“ grown
( )
u

(C
cc
ti
u

u
C4
c;
grown old in the Service, and fatlgu-■ ed with it, my health injured rby foreign garrifons, I returned to England, impatient to behold my Cecilia.—I found her all a fond parent’s expectations had amounted to of perfection.—In contemplating with delight her virtues and ac-complifhments, the dangers of battle, the toils of war were forgot.—But ‘‘ ffill fickened of a world where fo “ narrow a fortune as ours met with contempt, and difearded by thofe to whom we were related by the tender ties of blood, we refolved to leave it, and made -a tour through the neighbouring counties to choofc' an agreeable refidence; this part of your effate was Suited to our taffe, and wx became your tenants ; the little remainder of my income and my half-pay being all we have to live on, I declined vifiting any perfon in the country, and even met at firff your advances with regret, a regret however long fince changed for pleafure, from a knowledge
(C


cc
cc
4C
iC
c;
cc
(C

cc
Cc
cc
cc
cc
!!|!| t I'
11 ^
11
ui,
! 1 I • J .
" r
i 11 I
' I
SM
:-'i
.('•
1
Tr
iSi'
t i
ic
ic
( 72 )
ledge of your goodnefs; and now you know my hiffory, you do not “ wonder I am fure at our retire-“ ment.” Thus ended Harley’s relation.—I will not, Belford, keep you in fuSpence. I fawfrom the fituation of affairs my defigri was hard to accomplish and required time. Some I particular circumstances obliged mein| autumn to go up to London, where I had not been many weeks when Ij heard Mr. Harley had died.—Vice for* a moment repelled by a knowledge ofj virtue in another. I at first regretted | his death, but that fbon wore off on!
^	i;
the recollection my fchemes on the! daughter would eastly be effected from j her peculiar fituation. I fuffered thej next winter and enfuing fpring to pafs, | and in the latter end of the fummer! [as it was then about a year after' Harley’s death] vistted Woburn Hall, I
1. •.	'

:«
i,	•
• I'
•ijf. j
nor had I been
long
there until I

t' ■
/
hi',
•tj «:
■iC
hastened to the cottage. A friend I found had come to live with- MiSs Harley, a Mrs. Walstngham, and this woman I feared would be a Spy on
my
I
If ^
liih
; i!
( 73 )
my behaviour. In private, therefore, was all my addreffes to Cecilia paid.
I Saw evidently I had touched her heart,—then was the time. I told her what was really the cafe, that ffom an uncle I had very great .expe(ffations, but if this uncle heard I married a young lady in private life, unknown to her family and the world, I wpuld forfeit all preteniions to his favour. On, this account I alledged the necef-fity of a private union, though not without fome difficulty, from her own notions of honour and propriety j ffic
-----How, Belford, Shall I
con fen ted.
One of
tell you my owm bafenefs!------
my Servants perfonated a clergyman. Cecilia, the amiable,— the innocent Cecilia, thought herfelf the wife of your Haviland.
D
L E1' r
'ER
( 74 )
LETTER
XII
: I
I • t

irhj:
ilib * •

rb
!l
I J '
l!
iii' i
■ r} ■
I • •
' b
^ lib i • !’ I !
I:
•V. ;
L 'U'; ^ : ,(<«
11'
THE SAME TO THE SAME^
Cecilia loved her deftroyer, be caufe fhe knew him not to be Such j loved me with that delicate ardour confiftent with fhe fenfibility which marked her chara6ier. Mrs. Walfing-ham, naturally pofTefTed of a middling underffanding, with little curiofity and not a nice obferver, did not difcover our attachment, much lefs its confe-quences, and this lady often for a week at a time left Mifs Harley, to pay vilits in the neighbourhood, and very likely made one of thofe excur-lions about the time of our fuppbfed marriage. Thus between Woburn Hall and the cottage three months pasted, at the end of which time being quite tired of the country’ and of Cecilia, I refolved to quit both at once. —But this step was not quite fo eafy even to a man of my cast.—To diS-
cover the whole to her,------1 could
not

V
N.
» . i .
\
( 75 )
not do it, Belford j and to let her remain in the fuppofition that She v/as legally married, was an impofition
which muff fome time or another have
>
an end.—Yet ffill, Harry, I was unable to divulge it let what would enfue.-I told her my uncle who w^as in Florence wished to fee me. I fettled an annuity, and requeued the income of it She would uSe for pin money : I took my leave of the country, giving her diredfions to different routes for her letters, and a thoufand promifes of eternal affedfion, enjoining hei* to keep our union fecret, and when the period arrived of my uncle’s diffolution, a promiSe of making our marriage public, and introducing her to all my
With
affurances like tlreSe, the innocent Cecilia refled contented. I bade her adieu,—never,—never, Belford, with the intention of feeing her more. On my return to the capital, ray ufual gay life I again commenced, though the ffings of confcience often upbraided me. I wrote not—heard not from
family as Lady Haviland.
D 2
he
ill ii ^
i ■
I .

!: I
I ^ l
.1
• ijH
‘!
( 76 )
her,—her letters by my artful contrivance all going to Florence. In reality, my friend, I knew my uncle would not give ear to .this match, and my own pride would never fufFer me to introduce her to the world as my wife. Thank heaven then (he. is not.—But why, you will fay, did I deceive her.? four years have paffed fince, and all
my relations urged me
to think of
I
*
.. f!
10
Mifs Seymour; this propofed alliance brought me to Morton-houfe, but fhe has refufed, and I am not forry, fen-fible I could not make her happy.
In Cecilia Harley there was fomething fweetly intereffing and engaging, but Emily has a vivacity and a degree of pride of birth ; the former though her exalted foul would fpurn the idea, is juft the enchanting miftrefs, and the latter the proper wife;—whilft I make the remark, I muft confefs, the idea is infolent, my ‘‘ Sweet ruftic maid’s” family being fully equal to Mifs Seymour’s ; but that the marriage of her parents difobliging them, they have caft her off, and her fortune Setting
her
/
f!-
( 77 )
her below them -, I intended had I married Emily, by a letter (for I never could perfonally,) to acquaint the gentle Cecilia with her fituation, and fettle on* her a fortune which would enable her in fome foreign country to live in an elegant flyle,. her circumstances unknown.—You know, Harry, France, Italy and Spa, produce many of thefe fafhionable exiles. After I
r
had quitted the manflon, I made Robert (the fervant who had perfo-nated the clergyman, and who from that bafe adtion, I was obliged to make confidante in the whole affair) stay at Woburn to be a fpy on the aistions of Cecilia and pay her the appointed annuity; he informed me by letter that when fhe received the falary She inquired earnestly about me, but Robert was cautioned always to fay he was ignorant where I was, but certain it was out of England.—Thus you fee, my friend, with an art the most extreme, this fedudion of one of the fweetest, finest girls in the world has been conducted : when the affair
D
3
IS
I ■	,	,
I I	L	I
( 78 )
as unravelled I know fhe will not up-
braid,-—She will pine I fear in fecret.
Inflrufted by a father the moSf perfed
of m
^n

is, the beautiful re-
■ I
femblance of her angelic parent, His notions of honour the moff ele-
vated, and her fenlibility fo fine, I fear
the effect my behaviour may have.
Robert from family difference left my
Service, but with a vov/ the moff
Solemn never to divulge to any perfon
the ffeps I had made him take. Kingf-
ley the ffeward Vv^as next appointed to
pay the annuity without letting him
know the connection, alledging Mifs
Harley had taken the trouble to diffri-
bute it in my name to the poor. After
the flev/ard had paid a few gales he
informed me the cottage was fhut up,
Cecilia and Mrs. Walfingham gone, and nobody knew where, from the
flrange manner in wdiich they had
conducted their decampment. This,
unexpected event grieved me extreme-i
lyj the idea of her being diffreffed,
Belford, it was infupportable.—Since
i’JL;:
that tim.e I heard nothing of her until
11 ii <
that
. o
. (
-i'll
t' .•
I




‘ t *
■fiiinh
( 79 )
that walk I took with Emily which prefented her to me; while we were Handing by her whilif .fhe was in the faint, a maid fervant ran out ante
carried her in, on which we came
and the next morning Mils-without knowing who fhe
ho m e',
Seymour
was, Sent politely to inquire after her health; the meSSage returned was, She was better. Now how to adt, my dear Harry I am very much at a loSs, an interview is out of the queffiori, for both are unable to Support it; yet I want her to be happy, and to receive the annuity : what motive could She have had for leaving her former refi-dence, except it was to avoid getting the income.—I will write to her, Bel-ford, but fhall I or Shall I not draw afide the veiLand Shew the black proposal to the poor Cecilia —So much ingrosted in my letters I have been with my own affairs, I did not mention yours; your maSquerade adventure was delightful,—and for not admiring, I am not clear that you
D 4
deServe
I
.. . 1
I'
I'
L ( i| I I
ml
"!l h|;r
Itp i
! I .
«::i :
' i’i ' 8i? 1
U I I
■! . I
ni
i! J
;;!!!!! iiliinS
iR^!
•‘U
inmH
’ d 1
1
i	’
.ilij tj I
- Ill -H j
)!i;-::!j \ :	i ‘
I..
fC
' i ♦
'' I;
.il 5
* f
, » '
... I
ir-hjj :
iit !
iH i ■•hr* -M '
u
•ii'h'.it! i
.1 • .'!!
;n:	•‘ i ■
lllbc:. ^
11
t:	; *
t: T »
'.il: I
1	. d !
i“•t 1 •	•	i
is "	•'	'
• »»w •
liiii'-i,:
:'iii I
i n. . i i ■
>. -i-' iit> ' ).0 :
j ■'
iliiiiyiM
i ■
^ j
1
T
( 8o )
deferve the divine lady Amelia Bel-ville.—Be cautious in time, and quit the Abbey, is the ad vice of vour
aifedfionate
Edward Haviland,
Letter

• ill.
III! ! '
. . I
! ^ ' jiiiiijiji ■ i: ; hli;:
-u\
(iUi S
I'H'i 1
iiii 'i- 5
'Mm i
piliHfSl!!
• :■?! ' I i
.<1 *
MM!
iiliiliilii!
( 8i )

LETTER
XIII
MISS SEYMOUR. TO MISS SEDLEY,
Morton Houfe.
o H, Caroline 1 who do you think is here?—Woodley—Charles Woodley your little friend’s head is turned with joy, I feem as if I breathed a purer air and had made a higher afcenlion iri) a Balloon—absolutely thefe male creatures muSt not know their power, they really fluDuate one’s Spirits like a thermometer, and my my complexion from a Dauphin blulh has riSen three decrees to a Carmine clow.—1 am
quite wild whth Spirits, Cleveland apropos to Spirits, women who have them are certainly a thouSand times more delightful than your grave ones or pieces of flili life whofe features are always on the Simper,but never amount to a Smile—a very favourable argument in favor of you and me and.: Caroline, So the text of my Sermon
IS
r
“ tve are both the fine ft-girls, in
D- c	“ th#
in;
I'. !
in
li
} 1 i
. ; {
• I ■
i N
Sil!:
' M . • *
• -1,1
' j
, \
I <i>,
I

I
I C I
■ I;
'hi; 1 ; ;
I
I i
1	' i
> !
': -
|i! ■
in
; I
ii
i } '
l ;
) .

. W t
I	-ih ■
ti;	•iij :
•-S ni 1
•it,
:|. -.lii 1
h n’l i'-	1
,1*1
)ii !'
!
1: ‘
'I -'', I ,
n!
; o
!b
■ ■ ■ 'I'	•
ijij ■
’C‘ S‘l !
■I. ;

■ I .
n' ' < . >
r'lLj'i; 1 ,1.1^
.	•.;l;l !
'I ‘'i'M ;

C 82 )
the world.” Capt. Belford muH be a very pretty fellow by your de-fcription, and you are in a dangerous fituation j his correfpondent (I know him to be Such, but am fure two men of fuch oppofite eharaders can never have formed a friendfhip) is here ftil! My lafl letter * gave you an account of our adventure at- the cottage; I pity the poor girl with a^ll my fouf tho’ ignorant of her circumstances; his eafy however to- conjecture men are fo very defigning (you feel am beginning to rail like amold maid) and women fo very weak,. So fond of placing what they call a generous triijl\ which in reality is no more than, romantic folly, that there are but too many deluded, and I fear the lady at the little paradife amongst the rest by the artiiAb'le Sir Edward.—-A bouquet is juft throv/n at me as l am- writing with a window up which .looks into
gardens, Woodley fitting in the has levelled it fqr a fignal
to
11,
I i :
'' !i
-.111

'•i;i
)i * d
I. i
I.	•	‘
1',
i-i :
.. 1 i ( I
(
S
)
am m a
very
to come—I sty—as I flirting-mood^ which will kill time in the Grotto. Now for a compliment as I advance I will look through my fingers like Letitia Hardy—Really, Woodley, fays 1, you have a very fine. efli'eLt lolling on that rustic feat and looking at me on the river-fidci, you may fancy I am just going to step in and am a Venus bathing whilst you may think yourfelf PariF on Mount--
ida.
Adieu.
I am returned, Caroline,/after an hour’s trifling ; Mr. Woodley faysH am-the divinest girl on earth, and I am very much inclined to be of his--opinion ; but certainly a little abfence. is .of great nfe to the menr^fuel to-the stame my dear; with this defign. I propofe: paying you all a vifit " Mountford Abbey next week- if you--write to me before that time, direcst-to L-----as I Shall pafs that town i ri-
my way thither, and will then get theJetter, Adieu-—I die to fee you.
b
at
BmILY 'S.EYMOrR
>
i i’

.TTjl'
«l
» •
m :
—1 *■
I
-;r; *

i
• 1

l|!S
I. i	i
'C- i
Hi
!it 1
liM i
li!l
; 1.
Hi I
: 1 T • . ■ t

1C. ., I n

L 1 ■
, I '
i:;:	•
ili: 1
•	: t
•I 'U
C!ii| !
1
iiM'
M,- . i »
i 1
0'!^ '
I
t i


SSMUi
II *
n
IL-UU
' 'Li
t
I
■ I '
i'f ' !
'•i I
111 I

‘ i
' r
1
i
:■! •. 5
csi
Li!.:'’I !
i'iq! I
* I .
: ‘te-
i I
: • !!|i- 1
( 84 )
LETTER
XIV.
MISS SEDLEV TO MI.SS SEYMOUR,
Mountford Abbey,
You are very right, Emily- viva
city in girls like us is much more na-
tural/than gravity: where forae in-
deed are naturally folemn,. it is not
to be condemned, but when others
put it on artificially to give an air of
fenfe it is infuFerable, nor was I ever
fond of your dye-away languid pieces.
In our refiedling moments I flatter
myfelf few at nineteen or twenty
were ever more ferious, but w.e vrere
certainly Emily formed to enjoy the
world from a certain
tout
enjetnhle, a life, a fpirit, See.
Ever happy, in the happineSs of my
I rejoice in the return,of Mr
Woodley, and in your having refufed
Sir Edward. You were right in faying
(
he was not the friend of captain Belford j I have often heard him de-
clare the reverfe: Lord Mountford is
fuch

/ .
( 85 ) ,
Such,, though he often writes to the Baronet. I long impatiently for to fee Belford, and give me your opinion of him : his mind—his perfon every hour feems to improve on me, the former in fome new grace, the latter-in fome noble fehtiment. We are delighted here with your intentions of coming; the countefs, the lady Mount-, fords and your Caroline expect yow with impatience arid delight.
L E T T E R
I ‘
ilj
ji:5 . J
■111
•L A i
’Sstteii' t ’ '
Lliu ; Ai)' '
isn h
i!i
j.i-L'* ■
I
ilii
^■•! I
1 >
1 r ,■ <

■ i
I 4 «4
IL i t
I 1
‘ f
V'\
sj'lji-t
’ -M
'''	I
h:i:!n
m
h i* H

ri
'; : • o: I
r'iS!
, st j
i'iiPl

!: ‘I
ili!
btrJ
.hi
iO
. “b; i
j
«.
'■li-i
:’!li:
•	‘ t t
bih

V i:
h *
' 1 I . T ..■ »“• 0 S;'li * 1
ilibl •
m i
L,ii»;.; , iHiiljlj ;
l.fHtI t ’ ■ . ijf, v> ^
; ' i ■ t ‘ j 1.
bih' :
j
liii
•iL
J .
|!lii
in Mi
;t1 S
" * * i ‘ L
mri i
bi
■ "'Tiroi' 1-
ui i;
1
L' J sv ;■
hi'Id f
!| i: 1
d.m E
'bh.j
b!d'c-
•1 ‘TV
•' '• It.; ,
•	■ ‘	. I •
■ yL' • •
’. ur
ii
’'*!JH
vdid'^ r
ii ‘
I'.b" ► ; H I
n
ri: !i
‘ H
- il
I- i
4
1
( S6 )
LETT E R X V;
MISS SEDLEV TO MRS. OSBORNE
Mountford Abbey.-
A^HY my dear madam were yo® the firfl to break up our little happy coterie ; I mifs and regret every hour the abfence of my beloved patroneSs: his fortunate my friend^ my earlieft friend, my Emily is here to conSole me; fince yoirleft us, there has been
a theatre ereDed, our plays, are. very
well performed and afford us a great
deal of
amufement.
The
countefs is in tranfports, as Mr. Mountford is Shortly to be here : Capt. Belford is ffill'with us, tho’ hourly; ex-peDed in the North at his father’s. Is he not, my dear Mrs. Ofborne, alll told you ? fo animated, So fenfible, Ib delightful, I look forward with regret to his leaving the Abbeydo you not think we Shall fuffain in the want of his company an irreparable lofs^—and now the winter approaches, particularly,
■!'b. .i . bistit I 'll' ;
i'i f ii
I
(
)
\
larly, a winter in the country appears formidable'to a perfon unufed to it as I am j I believe however I fhall quit Mountford after Chriffmas,
Adieu
my dearest madam, and believe me your ever affedionate and obliged
C A R	IK. E S E D L E
J
Letter
i1
1 ,
*
4 «
|i
iin*:
U1
illlUL
■ ji' T !
1
! i’!T
• % ,
I'u::;	'
ia;i' ; 1 llaiji i
LHHi
!:yf'
;

Ml
n ,	!»
liTlo^ i
1:1
;1 ;;l“l;
M ])» .
{‘•ii (
HIM
.••.♦' I ■
J.lHil:
•i.oi-1
f ■■ U1 s - *
li'hJM M
■’•TOin
'! i i i 111

'i‘ i
,1 iiU‘: MIL
‘Mil
:■ i'ltli ' ‘ ' ■:!!! .LiliiJ; ;
i
.: i ' t
il' iil'li ,
i
■il’ H;l I MtlA
. .i'iif’; j
■ C iL|
‘»li ill: !
m! ! 1
ilir CL I
,	■ , 'i ’ .
I!
) !'
i' i
r L i' ^
r* • . ; T ; • » i I
in:- ’
!-M
ht‘-- ;

ii’ hi'i
,!' ; •
111’ ;i
jIm •
1C 1(1
h ■ :'i
Mi tl'
! r* »
V ' i

1 :
I i *'i
i-Ml-l
Ml '
..I
iM- ;iU'C
I P
'CI)
til' ;i
; I •
■•‘(IM I
i;	H
il'	!i
'li ; *
I • •	i
t;
• V
L,-. 1
I b
li - S
ii ! <
i ;rbl ii, !m iiii'-
'iil ; il'i: 1
IcC i
■Mr
' b 'li
■IIMhI
• i:;hl

1
■ iiiil
I'liii:
11
i •!I' .
Ui
''!
Mil
I'	I
(I *;
r.'f'A Tl
it
iMM I
. ’ I I
'.V
1.
‘V! i

iMb'fiM'
( 88 )
LETTER XVI
MISS OSBORNE TO MISS SEDLEV.
Richmond.

ROM an afSectioH for
Caroline the moft
my
exalted, and
dear
a
thoufand wifhes for her happinefsan
every fituation, added to having the
care of her education, I take the
liberty of being her advifer you are
very young, Mifs Sedley, and very
fufceptibie—and that fufceptibility
though requifite in a perfeD female
character, and ever to be admired,
is but too often a fource of mifery to
the pofTcfTors ; from hxteen to twenty
are the years of trial. Now do not
be angry,—but. you fpeak of Mr.
Belford with a degree of warmth of
admiration
makes me uneafy.
From all on a Short
I could be
able to judge, he is highly amiable in
mind and perfon, but ftill, my dear
girl, it were better you w^ere not pre-
pofleSTed in his favour, tho’ were I to
guide
(	§9 )
i
guide the world I Should think and many others think you deferving of the moft elevated rank, yet this gentleman might be already engaged or prepofTefTed in favour of another, and heir to a title and a noble fortune, might think of a different connexion : and now forgive me my dear for faying all this, I only mean to put you on your guard. I fend you by the bearer of this letter a ffory, which from the turn of your difpofition I know you will likej Mr. Ofborne found it in a clofet among fome other manufcripts left him by a relation, and a letter of preface at the beginning which it is unnecefTary to fend you^ it mentioned the events to have lately happened, the perfons concerned to be conneDed with our relations, but for family reafons the names inferted are feigned This hiftory fhewing in the flrongefl light the fatality of an attachment where there is not a probability of return, or the fi'tuation of the perfons not anfwering, it was a cuffom with Mr. Ofborne to read it to many young
people

I
111;
• . M
i ' I I
I
. > >
• (
, [ ' I
(
f • • ■
— i I j i
:; ‘»i
in I! itui
'»*»f
1

"H
iiii -1
ill
ftpi
ihil i
: r ■
¥
.. ‘MR
niii!
hi;;;. I
‘ t II
li.
li
rnii!
t
I
li'
hi"
hiHi
‘ ; +
ithti •::•
11‘U ; ( .
lii.Ki
I , . . I 1 i I I • ~t i * * ♦
liCijia
'i'li'
i	lul l-
=h 'i ■
ii	: -ill
V‘j :
'' I i^r H 2 i
V-
ii!‘'l::!i| i
: tit» if).
• , ••bn-.1" bi-j
AUil.F
i -t';;:

‘•Uiillll
l»« *
I*!
1.

l-i!! lill
m
..linn-; ^
::	-i
feiii
.Hifiiinh
: .111; I «	-
1
1i'“ nj:|
Ijliiiif'st
!.'Ii - I I
' t tit i I
‘ I
* * I • t • r
.iiiml !
III
f: MM
■	‘ ,	. 4 ,
^ yk\V\
- ,1
- HI ;
iiii
jIi! I i !
U
( 9®
people to guard them prepoITeffion. Prefent

ments to th
ffly deareff Caroline,
and
early
my corapli-
believe me.
Yours,
JvLiA OsilORN.ih
/ •
( )
Ithe Jiory mentioned hy Mrs. Ofiorne^
and Jeni by her to Caroline.
Hi/loryofEMihiA. and Louisa.
N a European city lived Emilia and LouiSa, who in their fifteenth'year were ornaments to the world, their forms were faultlefs, their educations uncommonly elegant, and nature had endowed with genius and underffand-ings of the most fuperior order. They were gentle, and filled vrith a fenfibility which while it excited the admiration of others, was destructive to their own peace of mind; yet they were alfo very lively, witty, and pof-fefifed of all that vivacity fo adapted to their age. Emilia and Louifa were in an equal and an elevated rank of life, the former had early lost her parents, the latter’s were still alive.. It was at this fweet age of fifteen, when their beauties dawned forth in all the lustre of opening lovelinefs, like a lilly at returning day or after
a Summer fhower, that Louifa in a
private
\i
1
i •
I.
1.11i I
nil ft
'tij
i
1 ! R
rt i
iC
"g il!
11
R(

( 92 )
private party firff, was ffruck withth namelefs graces of Harry Fondville— ere fire had beheld him, fhe had fel-dom from her youth obServed , men with attention, but the beauty of his perfon, his winning addrefs and thofe numerous perfedlions which our hero fo eminently pofTeffed, filled her wil emotions different from any fhe had hitherto experienced—^the innocent Louifa wondered at feeling: an inward
O
glow of pleafure if he addrelled her; as be was diftindly connected w;ith her family, they Soon became acquainted, and every place to her was deferted if
Fondviile was not there.
Some
months after, as Louifa and E'miria were walking in a public circle of dilfipation, Harry pafTed and fainted the former—Emilia never before beheld him-, and her tafte being Similar to her friend’s, her imagination lively and her. heart fufceptible of quick impreiiions, fhe was struck inffantlf with the beauty of his perfon—Fondviile was the Second Son of a reputable family, and was animated, delightful
afid
93 )
and perfectly irrefiffible—in Short, no man either in internal or external perfections ever feemed v/orthy of being the hufband of Lonifa or Emilia but hirnfelf j but where were two Harry Fondville’s to be found.? I will not tire the reader of thefe Sheets with particularities : our heroines foon had no eyes for any but himfelf j and convinced each other faw it, unufed in-
*
deed to conceal their feelines, confef-fed mutually their attachment. They often reflected if fuch a thing Should happen as his paying his addreSTes and making propofals for either of them, what the other Should do. But now a blow awaited them of the fevereft nature—his regiment was ordered to Emilia’s health being in a declining Slate, She was obliged to remove into the country—If thou haft known, reader, the pangs of Separation, judge what our amiable heroines now muft have felt—the fame period tore them from the mutual object of their affections and from the confiding boSoms
of
a foreign garriSon, and
; U
/■H i
17	'	'
jii . i
I . ; J i
Ific.D’ i h':»<|. ■

. 11
i. f
. I: ’
I ■.
J V
II
^:
■ :!;>• il i
I
i I tv
1
,bt-M
jlFi , ) .
'j.i	j
r i!»'5 I
lit iili
iii' 'r
> il !
. I .
'f?. Lit? ■.
¥■ HS- ■:
lP*H
idn-' U
-tfiv'
I will* I i
LifOiL [
irilit j
kMi''
'■
■-7|H'l 'I
' :v/C“ I
’ yi'jf i;
'f,/' 'r 1	, L
I'if fV’: J
ry .
il'iht :j , i "in'I-,!)
^k\YV^}
^UtnV'.'
pu.
rr.^^ 'V|
0*11 I 'tC
.Mli'j J
'ilt 17,'
" .C.
1, c:
, ■■■.i	• *• ■(•..	1
■ '■
I'Si’v'-';
■77l;-^s
' '1 th"‘

I'iiiT-’ _:i ‘
■
I
,,PV
-•i i
I !.
1 '
I	, I . • f 1 .' ■ .	<
II	■! *V'-''
1 .•■:•; . '
i T,- .■■• f-l."
• ri' i ' i : ' '••
TXrP^ 1
■ '^•.	. t. I
' V'»-i jiCiT;* I
i'
-.'hi; hire i
■ •M! J *t ! I- i*
.:4"h!7
* * t'u "
...■■; i’l t
•i^h
f
jilitrlt
N“;‘
Vm .
"TTid, J lidlit \
0':!^
''iiHil'i'
iil'.l’i :
( 9+ ]
oT each other. By a correspondence
however which they maintairred, they in Some meafure fapplied the lofs of each other’s Society, and after a fix months Separation Louifa'^ acquainted her friend in a letter, that their dear Harry Was returned, and then on a viSt to them at their country houfe. Every letter now' was filled with him;
and Emilia felt a little envy, of which
there was but a very
compofi-
tion in her nature, at the felicity her friend was tailing, not that Ihe wifh-ed her lefs happy, but only regretted that Ihe alfo did not enjoy the Society of an obieD So dearly elfimated,
A conliderable time now' elapSed, xvith-
out her receiving any intelligence from her friend i this Ifranffe lilence filled Emilia with furraifes and anxiety ; at one moment She dreaded that Fondville was paying his addref-fes—that his intreaties had balanced her friendIliip, and that embarrafl'ed and confufed at her conduD, Louifa knew not how to write. The cruelty of Sufpenfe, yet alfo the dread that
intelligence
( 95 )
intelligence would be only a confirmation of her fufpicion, kept her mind in a Slate of unfpeakable anxiety. The following letter Shewed how juflly her opinions had been grounded.	^



Ill
‘ i. I
i * ' r I
( 96 )
I
J.i
I : (
. r I
I 1; :
' ■' i

I	if
I !
l
;l : Ol-
• •	• I..	» -

v-i '"‘i
■'i'l h'.
f . • ;
iHPi'
:Cl • b:i I'!
I -
, t
Ci:’
Ca'i

, i • I- .I j ;
■Phi
!l ,! Ti
w!b‘'b
M*
\* * ’
C ( O ’
! 1;L
. i i
I IL
1 : • (
I.
; 1 • ?
N i
i
I	g t
i1':h '
’; 1 ■ N
1 i M ,
. ■ <
11
r* r
u .

.V'Hi =
■ -M ' , .1
‘ill' .
. I I
I: t • i • L ■
‘'flili ;
f:I I.
■■ill’
t; :
■,' ''. •: m! <1
:ir
libi!
• , t
h;i'
■i: I
t ,
1 *
To EMILIA.
Too well, too fatally, am I convinced of the light I muft appear in to my Emilia.—^My filence has made you think I have forgotten you, that your image is torn from my heart and Fondville’s folely planted there—no, you wrong me if thus you conjedfure: the fevered confliD; has tortured my bofom, and I know not how to write to you. Why did either of us ever fee Henry—or why at fo early a period in life were we deifined to fo cruel a trial ! I mull now confeSs to you that his affedions which I prize
above
mine.
empires, above worlds, are We are convinced that my
father and mother never w'ould Suffer this union—I fee at that word the riling tear in my Emilia’s eye, and her hand will tremble wFile die holds the
paper
But to continue. To avoid
a refufal (of which we are well convinced) he urges with that ffrenuous warmth which from him has but too
m u ch
r
, I
( 97 )
much power, a private marriage, Certainly the duty I owe to too much revered parents forbid the idea—yet the relinquishing my own happinefs a facrifice—oh, oh, Emilia ! with what have I to combat, fenfible as I am of obedience and friendship—your affection for Fondvilie is equal with my own—you have not had the fame advantages of conquering as I have, by feldom being in his company : I pity you—I feel for you, my injured friend I alfo am to be pitied. I cannot bear a longer reparation : in a week at fartheff I fhall expect you—haffen haffeh to the arms of
Louisa.
Emilia knew not the trial which was prepared for her, and therefore came in a week as expected to her friend. She happened to arrive very late at night, when She concluded all the family were retired to reft. A fervant informed her at the gate that Emilia was up and waited in her chamber to receive herj but as She
E
was

All}
jS'
Shi'
S-t..
■Ihh-
lihdid;.
;-jli .j;:'.,'JC I :
r'* I : jli I ;
■,h^ 1 ■ M >
‘‘aliS-'C
Aid-Am* '
^k>A\)
fOF Ad'' 1
I ,	;
iCh
stljjT J
iH
If*;
A
]\A
i
i
I If ': 4
^ I
!? If l4
I ^ f ^
■ '' : * I *
hi
&;s'bi
iV'
I
■iH
,j.
nm\ \
1 'flic TliMf i
'l-tb r :
iiHSh, SlHCb
‘i'-r ' :
I lb!
■niS
lirl-b f if
IhstCi’bi i S.(!VC1' '■
iff ^ ^
5- |h''iT> ’ 1
h1if
’■'■■ i
ifil! !|S *:
[“ I 1 Ir I' - . il„: hi I L S • '-ii r. 1 t ' j i S L 1
<-r u‘ij
A, * '* 1 < I
‘'.r»;,!'»!•''
' bi: ; :;u: ;f
rtf
y	. 1 .
,b -
^ jr. r
W-‘-1. - ‘
i-l h' f
' -
biT
Ml, ‘ '
i ;^c --
kh> u
ifTl.iite »;!!! : r
ffiii-
!K L;:
hjaiC.D
14 I
;i i !{]
.it
*ii
: ; * • ■, I
i.<
tiM

ri mV' pi iff;
11^11^'
"L.'i i k
ilNhicij
|h,;:i';''^'''| ■
hi -j L.VK;'t i.
bi'l'iC'1^ ■■'
lii
i|bi
Tlisr'ii' -f'-l 1} “ > ;
Us' b' ■»' ••':.] M '
)< 'I.'!'; - •
‘ t*hi ’
-i" -'L
b r-i ■■-..
•it
f'\

*4f*lt-rf \
F-VAUri'.
1h|t
iiliHf'O- ■
■' ■;-iS‘.'-S:VS
'.f! I	^
Mbh'l
Afr i
TCi ■
i} ■’ :
\.'Ti ■■■
='ii
bPr-
f'
1!'
( 98 )
was palling through the great' what was not her emotions when her beloved Fondville fhe beheld!—the .agitation of meeting, and the idea of doling him.for ever, rufhed fo forcibly on her mind, that fpite of all the resolution whichThis amiable unfortunate had been fummoning during her journey, her fenfations overpowered her, and fainting fhe had nearly funk to
the
ground
had not he raifed and
clafped her in his arms : when Ihe opened .her eyes they met hisj—her face was “ like colours o’er the morning fkies, fwift mantling to the view” covered with blufhes : Henry preff-ed her to his bofom, and felt the throbbing heart of Emilia beating with •the moff violent pulfation. In faul-tering accents fhe affured him (with a confufion, the Sure attendant of innocence unufed to evafion) that the fatigue of the journey had quite overcame her.—“ I will condud you [Said “ he] to your friend’s apartment and taking the trembling hand of Emilia in his, led her up the flair-
cafe:
!f^
( 99 )
cafe: fhe wondered as along at his conducing her, for the hour was fo late, fhe concluded her friend was retiring to reff. Louifa met them at the door, they all enter- ‘ ed her room, where a fcene of joy at meeting, a little aiieviated on one fide and mixed with anguifhson the part of the vifitor, paffed. “ Emilia” Louifa”—was all they could articu-
late^--
other’s arms.
4;
they
were
44
44
44
clafped in What a picture of friendfliip and how great are the joys of meeting,” faid Fondvilie, whilff with a look of approbation and delight he gazed on the lovely girls. The heart of Henry glowed with generous warmth—he bore a part in the feelincs of his fellow-creatures. We
have not particularly delineated his character; a very few words comprifed it.. His foul was filled with heroic virtue, every tender fentiment for the diftrefs of others, with a magnanimity added that defied the ftrokes of fortune, and when to this was added a form adorned with every grace, fay
E 2
could
, t

■'!}
’I'l
I:; f
I C'
!if
I
i'l:
I . ^;
‘ I I . I : ' . ' ; tI
. * 1;l .
;lji!
i ' ‘•
:N’1 h' :i
I •
ul
1.'
I
(
I
;ib
; : I
I !
* ! ;
fi i:
ih:
i:l ! ■ ■:!!i
: It'
hi-
ij h
i •
;r
I : j
4
. I : ' •

i>! . 1 •.
, !•; , , ,i * I
ll \ \ .
•' i : 11
|!' l :	'
'b! M •
bil'h ‘hr!';
i •
•ill i
LIT i:
11
; •'
■' !' . '
I*.
it ‘ ' f
IP-.,	.	. f
L!': '■ ! ilT L
lUl I
i 1
t!,f 1 r'--;: I
IjLjl » ■ ■
lijTi
! ' ;• ■ I'
I' J i * .
IIMi
[ilTi i 1” !<; b; ■ /:
.4 ■
•1 .
M '
'l'	. ,
'll ■ •
■ ■ 11 ll

':i in
ili!
. i;! f 11; • ■.

;l|!l
'I :
b.|
I I •
h'S-
! fl-
': /■
■ )
1
1, '
} *
' ^ ' r :
‘	\ t I
■c 111 ^ h*'
!' •
(• .
I ■
i
f • : •
I : ■
i n
lii"
’4i i
) •
I f
11
* ■
T «
i I •
b'
( )

could our heroines be blamed^—with Such fufceptibility as theirs for loving him to a degree of enthufiafm. Henry conceived that they might wilh to be left together, and when their firll tranfports were over,; retired. Emilia now had leifure to obferve that her friend, far from being in a loofe diSha-bille or thinking of going to reft, was fmartly equipped in a riding-habit, and her fille de chambre buftly em-
in ' packing up jewels and cloaths in Small bundles. She gazed about with a look of aftonifhment, which, Louifa perceiving and perfedtiy underftanding, cautioufly fhut the door, and {Sealing acrofs the room left {he {hould be heard, deftred her friend to follow, and both entering her cloSet She Shut the door, and began as follows :-----“ You wonder, no doubt,
my Emilia, at the fttuation you fee “ me in at this time of night; how
ployed

“ {hall I acquaint my friend that in “ another hour I {hall be the wife of “ Fondville”—[fhe took her hand Emilia had burst into tears—it was
an
h|'
Cm
1 <
(
lOI
)
an effort of nature not to be repelled.]
Say, my deareft,” proceeded the can you blame me—afk your
other,
■	relinquish him.'’---
■	could demonftrate how I Should act,” replied the other.—“ But forgive me,
heart could you in the fame fituation
-----‘‘ Trial alone
my dearefi Louifa
how fcljifh
‘ how defpicable m\x^ I appear in your
‘ eyes^from this weaknefs-------yoii
^ will think I do not rejoice in youf ‘ happinefs.'—Ah, how does a mif-‘ placed pafiion—not mifplaced but ‘ unhappy—make us fink in every ‘ other character!—but pardon me, ‘ my Louifa—affure yourfelf when ‘ the firfl flruggles are over and calm ‘ reflection refumes her feat, that ‘ next to my own I glory in your ‘ felicity:—But why [continued She ‘ in a haughtier tone] was I afked to ‘ be a witnefs to fuch a fcene Louifa balanced this objection by reminding her of a promife they had early made of being prefent at each other’s weddings, and telling her at the fame time She thought it would
E3
have
)

n IT
j' f' I, 1 : *
i!:u '!>■
iil
; \ )t;, (
i:	I ■
t
; ‘'	' I
t
■ I
! • 1
' . I I i •
; b;:
!l
!l • L '
. ;*•
• b !
j j . t
I};:
, \

‘ ! .
: M'
■ < I
i|.'
I c*


4!
li;
r
■? i
t. r
i 1
; Ht
LI
L;i
‘ I.;

I
■ I' i
: n
,!'t;,
■ ’ . < 1 . r I .!	<
i'll I' ■!
i'li : •'!
; ' 1 * •
Ik!
i.'.i i r i . ' * ‘ 1	>
I -I
biS
‘^5!: ‘
n ; I ‘ ' I : Mil'!

1,;.; i-MC
S-Su.ctr


' : ' *1 1 ■ {'* r!-t
:i i t
1b
b!i
bi
•I ••
n ;:

rii
in.
i'S'
ii
T
VihM
hbf
)b'
1 U'.’ , ; ,’b’
I.
t, ‘

■Li1<
l:L
i!
:i!i
■■ <i
I'i
'I,	'
*!'■
l; ■

i: s;.
JI|:
ul .
‘.It
•t!
4 ' .
J •
( 102 )
have appeared ungenerous to conduifl
it without her prefence; fhe likewiSe
informed her that the had overcome
her filial fcruples, as the found her
parents intended her for an objed to
her very difagreeable. The ceremony
was to be performed in a wood, a re-
tired country road ran at the back of
it, bn which a chaife waited to condudi
Harry and his too happy Louifa j and
Emilia refolving to ffay no longer than
to fee the ceremony performed, quit-
ted the clofet and went down flairs to
defire her Chaife to be brought round
to the fame road, determined to fet
off the moment they did, but purfue
a different route. The genuineneSs
of my tale needs not the romantic
force of friendship. In fuch improba-
bilities Emilia would be reprefented
enjoying her friend’s happinefs with-
out the fhadpw of envy in order to
•exalt her character more. But fuch as
her difpofitions were, I Shall lay them
before the reader with proper reality.
From her infancy fire had a Strong af-
feCtion for Louifa, and placed in her an
unlimited
(	i'°3 )
milimited confidence, which the other had reciprocally returned j but her affedion for Harry v/as of a more ex--alted nature: above all women in the world She wiSIied Louifa blefSed, but wifhed her bleffed with any other ob-
But to returnAfter having given diredions to her attendants fhe inftindively entered a parlour off the hall: fhe threw herfelf on a fofa, and loft in thought, perceived not that Henry entered the room and feated himfelf by her-; he took her hand in his. He had heard her ordering the
chair—“ Emilia, (faid he) why will you leave me at fo critical and So happy a jundure ?” At thefe words Eondville fixed the moft dazzling and moft penetrating eyes in the world on hers—he feemed to read the foul of Emilia, and this to her appeared the moft awful moment of her life—the earneftnefs with which he gazed at her, with a fenfibility that feemed to know her feelings, caft a momentary gleam of happinefs on her mind—a thrilling delight at feeing him again
E 4.
was
>i s
-; 1 I
I
Jli’v,
iiii'l 0
; 1 i ' ' ■ [ ! !(ih l1i
I >. I'	*	•«
11 I ■ C
: 1; •: N
J .. ;:'i
• I
: I, I. (i . ' 0' 1 •
:l! !!'T
ii ji ' U
. I i <,. .
; 1 / " . i I
M 'I '1'!
f'hv;

: : I •
Hi!!-:
: 1 L
I !
I lb.
I ,‘-
I
;r'-‘
it 1 ^’,1
U.:
• i
’1 i: ■ ! I ;.1
H
i . i .
,:i' M


>
I'
1',
• t. .1'
; j
t'i
i ,'
r
j.
I ■.
I .'b
'll' !
:;i:- ■
111
111 t
Lb O
‘ t ; '
: .t,
ll
t *
ll
i1' ‘I)
u.
;
t '
ill I,
li-
fc t
I 11
. 11 : I -
! ‘ ‘•'ll
‘ U • ■
i i‘ ;
■ ! J I . t
hi ;
:(li L
iT;i' ' *
L' :
» (
Hi
ill
til
ii' ! •;
hi
let
I
IM
1 J !
' t : MAjt • f

• i • >1
ii!
ll i
i: ► ll'

■| h 1
I-.	. i
A-'i
,. r 1
t f c i ’»' I

ii

ill::
I 'Ii;:'
illll.
' II:;'
m
!R !■ ■lili I’
111; I
I ii:i'
ii'i i; iiri !
ii'ii'l'
I f
il
: i|V!
iii-' hi: ■
'll’:*
it ' ;

Ii :
M I
iSj
Hii’

ill;
( )
was as instantaneoufly checked by the
idea of loling him for ever : her fcni-
pulous delicacy reprefented the im-.
propriety of thinking a moment of the
irian who was to be the hufband of
her friend : thefe ideas operated So
powerfully, die half arofe from her
feat. “ Where are you going Said he with an expreflive look. The crydal tear ffoie down the pale cheek pf Emilia—Fhndville gazed at her with the earneffnefs of refirained cn-
riofity;:-^ihe wiped off the pearly drop

She ftruggled nobly with a concern
fb improper to be Shewn
fhe rofe
and went over to the window : he
faw ihe Vsiilhed to be left alone, and
retired. A picture of Henry [a minia-
ture for the bread] lay on the table,
and had been defigned by him for his
Louifa—her wretched friend faw the
precious refemblance—every feature bore the ftrongefl likenefs—it was not to be withftood. Emilia kiffed the
precious treafure, and tying it round
her neck fo as not to be feen, placed
the fmiling face next her heart, re-
folving
( 105 )
Solving at the moment [a view to which fhe ever adhered] never to move it from that Spot. LofI in a lethargy of contemplation, fhe thought not of leaving the parlour until a Summons from her friend rouSed her to recolledfion—they were ready for their flight—a fearch for the pidlure was made—it was not to be found no wonder—fhe ftooped to artifice. How are we humbled by prepofSefiion I fhe pretended not to have Seen it. Harry led out Louifa by a back door which conveyed them into a garden ; Emilia followed; a faithful domeftic attended with their luggage. When they had got to the end of the garden, a little wicker gate opened into the wood : Louifa flopped—“ I could wifh


[Said fhe
pardon my delay—I
CC
cc
wifh [whilft a tear flarted from her eye] to look back on the place of my nativity.” She turned about and leaned between Harry and her friend : the moon fhone remarkably bright, every flar glittered in the firmament, and the pale beams cast the
E 5	most

i' . I :
<
hi ;i
!
} I
J . I
: U
hilT-!’
^ ■
' 0 ' ;

:r I
■iii:
t i;
i
\ ] i i
I :
:iii

. .. j
i to. 1
iT/
hlli .1
I
ib
1
i ,
I ■■
}
I r
I

M

;
I
I

i
ill,'
jt,-
•5 •
' u
•hi. '.1
: I 1
■ ii
• i 1 ‘I
I t •
■' ■ ii
lili
i • < I
:il
I :
I;
I; i
M
I
■|b
I!
!|i
;h
n


ts
-
I ili;
j M
mu'
tiii
fi r


llhli:
! ^
i!n:
In:;
it!.-
!:i'
I li
id!
HI
1 .
i i i i
i!iS
ni!r
i :

jp.
Ill
IS I
f!S
hr -
1 i I
i:| • !:;
( io6 )
Riofl beautiful refle£fion on the honfe:

it was fmall and white, furrounded
with trees, a flower garden before the
door, at the foot of which a river
murmured, W'hich forming broken
cafcadcs and winding through the
wood, had a fweet romantic effed.
Louifa for Some time gazed in filence
and then turned to her friend. “ See,

[faid fhe] Emilia, how beautiful it
iC
looks—there I firft drew my breath
■U
how little in our own breafls can
we bear the confcioufnefs of error!


tho’ unfeen but by you, I blufli to look at it—when I think
per-

haps I may never more behold it
hi
the folemnity of the fcene and hour
fills me with awe—^I conceit the

very trembling of the poplars
in
U
the wood as upbraidings.—My pa

rents in the arms of fleep know not
that their child
oh! Fondville,
“ Fondville, must not fuch a step
eyes ?”

lesten
me even m
thy

Never, my Louifa, [replied he]
but dwell not on this fcene—hasten
I befeech you lest w^e Should
U
( i°7 )
miSTed in the houfe.” He led tli® reludfant yet happy Louifa into the wood; Emilia followed, who had by this time exerted a noble refolution. She did not indeed put on the artificial air of happinefs—fhe rofe fuperior to fuch a condudl, but appeared calm, tranquil and refigned. When they had reached the middle of the wood,, they flopped, a clergyman waited and the ceremony was performed. The interwining branches of the trees formed a kind of arbour where they fioodj'the moon peeping through, a witnefs to the happy union. When the ceremony was over, a band of wind-inftruments ftruck up in the wood. Louifa loved mufic, and Harry had- placed him there. The groves being thick and of prodigious extent, , they w^ere at too great a diflance frorn the houfe [or any other] and the found of the inftrumcnts [being few] fo very foft, that they did not from this in the leafl fear a detection. They haftened forward, until they reached the gate that led to the road ; there.
the
n
HiiMil
"i'S
'liili'! 11! !
1
i;

iii
IhI!
11:T
!|hl

jj.D.D ■ Sf:
! ' f •
• I 5
1 i
t .:
i' I ■ il

1;1L i

”•] I \ '
hT’M- .
!!bii
»»■ I
in
* IK •
m
i
i
,1
!i
: I
f >
il
ii


I-
}[
; I
\ 1
1
I!
: 1

u;

itUi
i
2
f
fl
t
♦ « I
t
I (
I
! i
n

■
:■
11-
* 1
.. »n
If I
U'i-:
:.fM
Si ' :
i (‘
*L ' 1
I	.
l|>; 11
'|i|
Mr
I lb; :
I ’i!: ■, ' I »I •
i:


•. •. I ■
>s:-i.
'if
l;!
hit ■'! i!: '■
. I ;. ; 'll'

liliS
•r|} , !
( io8 )
the two chaifes and all their Servants
Waited : here LouiSa and Henry re-
urged their Suit, that Emilia would
them
fhe would not
accompany
however comply, and wifhing her
every happinefs, or rather the conti-
nuance of So Sweet a proSpect, took
leave of her earlieft friend : Fondville
took her hand to put her into the
carriage—fhe was buried in refledion, and from her inattention her foot
flipped from the ffep; fhe fell awk-
wardly from that on the ground, fpite
of Harry’s efforts to Save her, and
the force loofening the picture which
had not in her confufion been tied
Sufficiently faff round her neck, it fell
from her bofom to the earth :—thofc
only who have fenfibility like her, can
know what fhe at that moment felt
and whilfl a train of the moft excru-
ciating and confufing ideas rufhed on her mind, fhe Snatched it from the
ground and hurried into the chaife
Harry bid her adieu—fhe waved her
hand, unable to turn her crimfon face
bedewed with tears to Tis. By the
time
rs
:i!S
( r°9 )

time the Servant had fhut the door, he had handed LouiSa into the other chaife and flepped in him Self, So that at the fame inifant they both Set off, though they purfued very different routes.
Alone and at liberty to indulge her grief, what luxury of anguifh did the unfortunate Emilia now give loofe to! A flight view of her fituation to Some might appear not So miferable, and thelpfing the objedl of her affections, far from unprecedented, an event but too often'the cafe with her Sex. But in her fitu'^tion there was Something uncommonly affecting, her friend conceiving an attachment for the Same perSon and becoming his wife—add to which, her gentle boSom was tortured with remorSe : She regretted her want of command of herSelf in not appearing chearful on the happiefl moment of her Lou ifa’s life ; nor could fhe bear to look back on letting Fondville fee her weakneSs by her fainting in
the great hall---her tears—the fixed
dejection of her countenance—and
above
!‘.-0
111. 3l|i
• 'j:
i
' ■ f
■ 1
‘b*
iijV j i
::l!
(.
J'.;; ‘
1 *.' i
'is
il'i;:-
ilTi': ,
■ ■ * . I
>1
' ,: • I ■
■	• I .
> i i,
L -l-b
L’ !
lU’U:
Ub hf .
I,	!	• I'
'. >:
O ! i
I
ill
llM
?..n
the
■ tibi -ij.?
'tvN ’
ibC ■ ii 'C ^
jj,	■	•
j's'.
T:	r
, T d
iliiibb hi -
I ■	‘
11 it
>.ii'
'It I
i fir!
If!
it*
■4f
I
ii:
It) '.}• li !
M '
n:
t
ih
. I (;
;rli:
I •' b-1
»L 11 f *;•;)•
I'i
11
b
ii
iii
!i|
Hi
) ■ i
Wl
b
1 i
■ ’h
i |li
t‘. ; , (
*( ^ .1 .i
^ :
'i i
jii ii :
*•l/''
ibi-
ii
H
r .• . f. !
11
'iil'i
U
l!
iii
rii! -! f,;:
iiiil i
: t;,
!!il|i !
lb L .
if*r
h,[i ■
t" .
Iil'i i

li Lp P\L>
ihi
tl' J i
ii’!: HI
w ■ ■
psi;
fliiin i ’ MS: i >11 ;
p::
!•• ■ fA> .
\'V ■ t
.11
iH
r.,:. 1'! ‘!
SbS'
:ibib
’4. •
Ci"‘' ■- ■
li ■
»: . .
i
M b •■
iiir ‘ '
M'
I
( I IQ X
I
Vw
above all, the piiSfurei-—when it dropped as She fell frorn the ffep, it unfortunately lay with the, painting up-permofl; he w’as drawn in regimentals which could not eafily be mistaken, and all by the moon-light Shone
therefore She could not flatter herfelf with the idea of its remain-
e
ing by him unfeen, “ Notwithffand-ing the precipitation with: which I recovered it (faid She to herfelf) FondvilleTii^^/ have feen it—1 faw
(4
46
44
44
his
dart to the
penetrating eyes
ground; and oh! in what a contemptuous light muff that woman appear, who conceives, a regard for a man, without his having a reciprocal one—what mujl he think! “ to take his dear refemblance in the
44
44
4 4
44
44
44
very hour which cut off all hope of ever being his.—Wretched, wretched Emilia I what will Louifa—what will Henry think of thee!—thy friend muff conceive thee ungene-rous and romantic, her hufband the “ weakeft of thy fex.”-_Such were her refledfions.—Stoics, philofophers, may
reafon
44
44
44
44
l::i. ?
( III
I
reafon—but a frame of mind like Emilia’s was truly pitiable—who looked back with anguilh and regret, viewed the prefent as the critical moment of her life, and had not a gleam of joy to enliven the dreary future. Thus for a while Ihall I leave one of our heroines, and now proceed to the other,—the happy other. Yet tofhew that human felicity cannot be perfeD, that it muff have its alloys, LouiSa’s was embittered by having left her father and mother: notwithffandin they had refolved to force her into an other union, fhe could not reconcile her own conduD ^ the friend of her youth file had rendered wretched; not that fhe could entirely blame herfelf there, for as fhe often told Emilia, had fhe relinquifhed him he might not have thought of her, and then the fa-crifice would have been ufelefs. As for the fwTet Harry, his penetration faw into Emilia’s foul j he inffantly knew the picture when it dropped; it filled him with a thou Sand new and strange ideas; but he hoped in all he
conjedured
i ’ i
1
3i:
i'liT
Tb
■T'li
rsiii
li :lii
; ji! i i.;: I .lii- 'i:i
,1
1,1-
h! *: ■; : ‘si:;	: ^
1 •	i ,
1' i
V
\ri
, I :. .
li ■'!.
i I ' I
,niii ...b . i
III
I
•. I
i: 1
. .1 M* ; M
ii
L ■ i
M
'' 0 h :
:i i
■ 1 I
i if t * 1' :i • b‘ii
|i I'll
I
t; •	, I ,
lob !■ : 11 • I I
> I
'tb '
i!'	;■
(I .
». M
I '!
\ .,
(Ub
!4
i ;
(li
lil I
( i' i
'
■{•; ■! .
■lii.: ^
il'ihl"
'll li: ■ * i • 1
3s''-
!ii I:
;ii«i
!H • *
: I
* • n
: il
1
I'd
11 1 i
; > I
i
I 1'
I;
• -1
NT,
i; ;i 1 iiL ■
biii'b
lUlt: •.,• !« I
:ir'^
:» *1 ;
hi'
•!:i'
liii’
Lii:
'■;!h :
; b'i. •
; h-;. ■■
ilbi ■
■' j t ■.
■
H'Ll! '1 L'-b'
b ;i'-S ■ .
Iji!: ‘
j;;'p'
..licAfC-:
•]-bb? b iliii iili ‘
ilT
iib
i'l;'
^i!|i WM ^
I
■' II
‘'ll
||i|P ‘
i!
Itli m; )b.
I


isi
m
I
H.i
'•'i Ir li !j
I ‘ i' H
:!i! ( hi!
'll
' ' .M
1 -li m ■ ■' -
U!
tlii
#'.1
'i ’■
L::-:
' 1
b»;'j. - I I
•l i !
li’li
1 ’■ ’bb 1
ililiili
( )
/
conjedured he might be mistaken, and was fo ingroffed by his beloved Louifa and recent union, that he banifhed the recollection of her friend from his mind. About funrife they arrived at his Father’s, where they were received
most affectionate manner, was their favourite Son, his choice must therefore be admired, and how were they struck with admiration and .delight on fight of the beautiful Louifa.
Emilia (for we must return to her) arrived at home still more melancholy than fhe had left it:—After pasting a week in meditation, fhe finally re-folved to pafs the remainder of her days in a convent. She then wrote a long letter to Louifa, in which fhe gave all her reafons for this determination.
She penned this epistle with refolu-
took an affecting and as fhe thought an eternal leave of her friend.
Louifa was deeply touched on peru-fing this letter, but in order to raife the other’s fpirits, judicioufly returned a cheerful anfwer, in which fhe
earnestly
tion
♦4-
( 113 )
earnestly intreated She would give over her delign,—represented (though in. the mean it was not her opinion) that there were other men every way as amiable as Henry, and told her he had a brother who She had heard was the image of himfelf, and equally deferv-ing, the eldest fon of the family, and that this young gentleman was on his travels: She Gonel'uded with re-
questing that fhe would at least delay the execution af her purpofe until his return : he was expected in stx months; it could make no great difference with Emilia, and stie refolved to postpone entering the cloyster.
We have not in our history Said much of Harry Fondville’s fentiments all this time;,—before he went abroad with his regiment, he had Seldom been in company (though acquainted with Emilia:) he always admired her, She was quite the kind of beauty that pleaSed his taste, and he was Senstble of her refinement. Sentiment and elegance : her family and fortune claimed an exalted connexion; but hurried from
one
I;!. : 111
lii‘
,!Tl b
•hi
.Mil :'
!' il >•

Ml
. t
* » •
!
i
I •	<1
t '
lii
:li! i
lb I
1.1 I [
(
i r I
I
)\i	^
!’■ ’i
'll I
ii: \r
;! '1 i
•. • • ' ■ I '	.! ■
\ \
‘ !l
. -1
15;
I ; t
H

I '
■i'l •!
i!F b
i: M 4
'll! Ll
'Ilf *
■! I-
':K
r. . : '1 ; ‘
..	t' M ‘
I . t	‘ ■ I
L'.


;i,:b
•i
-.n

I
hi
h:
iiS
m:
!• '• .
. fi'l • • •
b’ilb'
J 'I »(i	•, i
Cb •' ■
I I ■-!i ii:
ib in
' itb'L
I i'l'M
t.'i.
:i;!‘
Ih'
'{ 'M
'!r . i
t
'b''■■
; I :
»' M !!
II i!' ••. • ■
i b



ih; l l1
Im’* •!;
j';- !,4

iiyli

( 1)
one Scene to another^ , ?4.nd then order-
ed abroad j when he' returned, hearing fhe was removed to the country, all fatally contributed for her, and he Seldom Suffered himSelf to think of
her: then- being: afked to LouiSa’s-
father, left an. opportunity not- to be
LouiSa was a beautiful, a
charming girl; her vivacity delighted
him. She always conquered at a blow,
whilft her friend won on you by de-
grees. But at the.wedding, the Scenes
that paSfed reSpecting the picture and the interview in the parlour, left a
dangerous impreffion on the mind of
our hero; he flrove to banifh the
idea, and for Several months after his
marriage,. Succeeded tolerably well. The parents of, LouiSa would never See her or forgive the ffep fhe had.
taken, and her regret at this may be
eafily conceived. Old Mr. and Mrs.
Fondville treated her indeed as their
own child, and made her Some amends.
After pafSing Some- time with them.
Harry propoSed taking a houSe in the
capital of the kingdom, for naturally
m
%
( *'5 )
gay, lively, and fond of plcafure, he was tired of redding in the country. But inffead of time effacing, it hourly brought back to his mind the recollection of Emilia and her conduct. When fufpicion is awakened, a thoufand concurring incidents add to the great point—that Louifa loved him he was perfectly convinced, but her friend’s affection was, he fancied, greater.



“ Louifa indeed married me without the
approbation of her friends,
but


cc
4;
Emilia no doubt would have done the fame : her taking the picture at fo critical a period;—her tears, her anguish, her fweet confuSion, Shews her affection to be fuch,”—Thefe were his opinions, and communicated in thofe words in a letter to a friend; it lay open in his room by accident: his Louifa feeing the name of Emilia often difperfed through the letter, gratified a fatal curiofity by perufing —“ And are fuch thy Sentiments, Fondville,” (faid fire to herfelf) when She had finished it. Louifa had all that command fo proper for a wife
in
It.
44
n
1. •
;i‘
i
nil!
i' 1
'i'i

■III
.
t t
M ;
M
I ■
■ i
;. t • • ,» : •
I’ ii ■
Vt . H 1
■ i=i?l'
U\r
‘ rii
I	.
, S j'li-fH
TH' ■
■ .r ■ •
i‘i-! 1 !:•
1 p';

I M !
. »
i? Mt:

I:il> :'! :
' 1.
i‘te
' t	4
•	:i. ■ ,
•1 r ‘■ i'! i; '!
*	"	[
H	i,	. ■■■	i I	:
• ••	1r	•
;j ' h •!'' ■'

!
:ii -
J C i -
tV 'V.
‘i i c; !!'■
S;
!j1;
ibSi



!'i;
i t ■	( »	.
' ■!:: I
ta.'i:.:
1 »	1 d
;ili ■
' 1 p
l‘i ,1
it I
n .
i!;i L ,lL ilj!.:.
I'l Mil ■li' m! *H;
i» * <<L,l	'
I
Uh* • *j ' (liv* :
■l .1*1
i.D‘
h.ic
l;Lii ;p •
! W : :
IP	'
■: /• i
»,t ■
iv
Tl-r. . h'-'te' ■
I :i‘
'i.-
* ]. ’ *' I
;p i : ,, I •
■itl^iii I
4 '
t , f
lii,;; 3!
• !'!ip1 ;:i
( ii6 )
/
in her fituation ;—She refolved' by jcaloufy if poffible to touch his heart, or at leaft to recall thofe afledions fhe flattered herfelf She once pofTeffed, With this defign, Louifa in all the I’uflre of her charmsj hardly yet Six. teen, commenced a life very different from any fhe had yet-experienced.’-. She was to be feen in every public place,—and flew from refledion as the Daemon- that haunted her j her mind was never fuffered to dwell, it was hurried from one feene to another.
The mafque of chearfulnefs concealed that her fenfibility was deeply touched, and in the whirl of dillipa-tion Mrs. Fondville was the gayeft, the moft animated : She was confidered as one the mofl: beautiful women in town, and of courfe the objedf of attention to the men.—If fhe only ffep-ped to her carriage, a beau at each fide was ready to hand her in,—in public Ihe was perpetually attended with them,—fhe had naturally a little of the coquette in her difpofition,—a point in view like hers required the exertion of
every
,! I ■'■A
( 117 )
every talent, and this alfo was called forth: her vivacity, genius, under-.flanding and education .made her appear in every character as in her natural one. Tut neither the jealoufy nor Surprise of Harry was excited at his
charmed
wife’s conduct, with
her being to which She
had
enjoyments been unufed, (owing to her youth) he confidered as the natural effect on a lively imagination : her fetting her-felf out for admiration though married, and allowing herfelf the privilege of jiirting.^ was not fo much to be wondered at in a wife of fixteen, and a hufband of two and twenty could Scarce be very rigid: hut Louifa and Fondville were in every thing almoll exceptions to general rules, for their jenje and feniirnent made them at that age more capable of conducting them-felves through life with propriety, than many at double the period: Henry had a penetration that Saw into every thing, and therefore reded affured of being the firft in Louifa’s heart j jealoufy was of courfe a stranger
to
I ':
I i
' I; .. f
,i;i ■	1
II , )
L i 'M •
i '
I:
« 1 i,
!i
' i1 :
1 t
t •
. I ■
i .
■ I
• 1 ; , I ;
' I
' I'' I
r‘
I h .
! •' ' ' ■; I
1 *• •
’ ( ; 1
. 1
i ; '
I ;
i ■
i.!- ■; 1’ : :
I. -j
r- :
1. ’
!
L| '	•
il-'L
'A -i ■
I	.	• ;	•
f‘
.	I	■■	■
I	•	•
r
r'
r
I.
I
t *
r,:«
. I
i.', ' :
I I .
Li :
::ii
!i'-|	>
i! i
'If .
I!!:
Arr ‘
' ^ i i i'V‘
iTf
;ri'. :
hi;: ::!
M..
filih ' lii'I
^‘,r -
( 118 ]
to her breaSf, for the attention flie received from other gentlemen, her being conffantly admired, indeed the general objeCt of adoration, he con-lidered only as the tribute due to her charms, and rofe fuperior (from her ay behaviour) to mean fufpicion of the honour of a -woman whofe mind was the receptacle of virtue in every fenfe of the word.—Thus a year paffed away, about the clofe of which Mrs. Fondville was delivered of a daughter; it was placed at nurfe very near where Emilia refided, of whom we have been for fome time filent
the unfortunate Emilia, from her exquifite fenfibility, her weaknefs, call it which you will,—dill languilhed in a hopelefs paffion, rejeDing the numerous offers fhe received, and waiting impatiently to fee the brother of our hero.—Six months more paffed on, at the expiration of which period the expected youth vifited his native country, but accompanied by an Italian lady to whom he had united himfelf.—
Emilia, tired of the world, refolvedto
be
vsi'
'iL.i
f'A'-
I ’ if:?
/
/9
(	”9 )
be in a great meafure fecluded rmor
vit, by inftantly "entering the cloyffer ; the year and a half that had elapfed fince her friend’s marriage She confider->ed as fo many precious hours of her ■life loft.— A perfonal farewell of Louifa was a ceremony She knew herfelf incapable of performing, but
wrote to her as follows :
0 «
Again I take up my pen to bid a

“ Iafl adieu to my earlieft friend.
fate, my Louifa has doomed me for “ a convent.—Mr.Tondvilleis return-“ ed, but returned already married. “ —Adieu then deareft Louifa, may you—may your Henry be happy,— will be the prayer every returning fun of thy Rmilia.”
Conftantia (that was the name of Louifa’s infant) was fituated we have faid near Emilia ; She often vifited it, it bore a ftrong likenefs of its beauteous father, and this w^as enough for
4C
iC
4C
this fair infatuated.—She formed a delign equally ftrange and romantic —to ftcal the child.—Difficulties are nothing when we have a ftratagem on
which
•'IIT'-
’ f{i-
I	I
I
I I

:::U
. ' , ’ rf‘ •
1 L
l:|:
j.
' r
t
• •• I .1_.
■'c| ;ii-
- I
1 ,	.
!.ii-
•ii	i
IV, ..
1 ;i -
* , ' f
, ,1
shi ■■ S •» 1 .' ■
i'Hh. ’ ■ ‘i-.J	.
;ij- n -	-
mC‘ .
( 120 )
we are determined. All her Servants were diSmifTed, -owing to the life fhe was about to lead, except two, one her own maid, the other fhe re-folved fhouid anfwer as a nurSe to the child ^ oh the fidelity of thefe two do-meffics file knew file could depend, and contrived when the infant’s real nurfe happened to be a few moments abSent and the refl of the family out, one of her maids ftole in, whipped out the little treafure, and covering it up haffened with it to Emilia, who that very day Set off.—The cloyffer fhe arrived at was in a different kingdom, which prevented any vifits from the Fondville’s, and the whole affair was So conduced, that Spite of advertisements, rewards offered and ffrid Searches by the parents, they never could discover what became of it.
I
Emilia felt for their diffrefs, but conceived fo young'a couple would have many more children, and that therefore the lofs of one daughter w^ould not be fo great. Emilia was too ra^ tional to be capable of receiving any
delight
:> , '
/'
I
L ' • •*!
( 121 )
delight Srom an infant; it was to future days fhe looked forward for receiving pleafure from the child of the two people on earth fhe had loved beff. The child and her nurfe were placed as near the convent as poiiible ; it Vv’as pafTed as her niece, and vifited her evefy day at the grate. She entered immediately on her noviciate, and when the year was expired took the vows—in the bloom of life, not yet eighteen, Emilia was theloveliefl nun that ever wore the Veil. We will now
return to the Fondville’s
they
re-
gretted at firfl the lofs of Conftantia, but her remembrance every day faded
on their minds.------A woman knows
not, when fhe enters into the fpirit of a character which fhe fancies fhe can, like a mafqne, throw off at pleafure, that perhaps that is the fphere nature had formed her, I mean her difpofi-tions for,—and this was the cafe with Louifa: the pretended wmman of fafhion Soon funk into the real one: thus we deceive ourfelves ! how eafily are we entangled in a Scheme, and
F
how
;ll!i
iL ;•
M J ►
d
•I , * : • I • ■
-. I
II I
■ j‘.
■1..; ^
■ I ■
I
■;l

I . 1 i
I <1

; I
i
• ;
If ' •
. I
I ;
5 .
il iV ■':
' ’I ■ *
:|i !
;!' ,1 ^ ^
11. ■
;• L '
1 ' ^
M :
I f
C,n
'
('l‘i ■
''M » ’ ' c';
‘hi
I tel '
• < i
' • 1 ■, «' !T:k- ■
I'if'd
<■ '	■ r
■1 -
•iS I
n !.
I	I
h..: ^11. '


I
M‘I'1 "1 -h '
lor
p;!l bl.; :

('122 )
how very hard do we find it to efcape!
meanwhile the purpofe of the plot turned out unpropitious; it neither awakened the afSeDions nor roufedthe jealoufy of Harry, who was like the amiable hufband in appearance and the man of pleafure j he treated Louifa with affectionate regard, partly that kind of regard which, as Doricourt fays in the play, “ his own honour fecur-

I* *1
V. ,J-
“ ed her.”——But as days Succeeded days he. grew tired of the dilfipated life fhe led.—“ Louifa (Said he to “ himfelf) cannot love me with that “ fervent, that fweet conflancy of affection, which I once flattered myfelf fhe would,—elfe by a whirl of fashionable pleafures fhe would not entirely Seclude herfelf from my Society.”—Fondville himSelf, gay, thoughtleSs and wild, had generoSity enough to allow for others—to allow for a wife’s leading the Same life as her hufband, nor was it his wifh that fhe fhould not make a figure in the world, but he was only mortified at her total neglect of him and familiarity *	with
H
cc
u
a
J. j, U! -':
n‘ L- ir. -
I	.	I.
‘1 I' “	•
,1 ; .li'
ij ■!vi''o
; vShs;. It S if*’- :
ISSS -
', h } f;I••
te’or'-: . ji'd 'r h
V.J I.
' ll‘> ■f!!l
if l.!i
. ^
( 123 )
with every impertinent coxcomb of her acquaintance,—he faw there was little proSpect of leading her out of a fcene which appeared fo captivating to her j fhe was drawji in female coteries with ladies of the firfl fafhion, and engaged by them in a perpetual round of diverfions; Harry himfelf was fituate nearly in the fame manner, but that men can more eafily withdraw when pofTeffed of a difcernment to fee their errors,—he was engaged at clubs, no public place was hallowed from his feet, which generally con-duded him as the laft fcene to the hazard table :—here however he was
feldom unfuccefsful; he had a great, though gentleman-like knowledge of gaming •, no real paffion for the de-Ifrudive amufement, and a command of himfelf that prevented his ever exceeding the bounds of his fortune. Louifa faw too late that her project had no effect,—and was convinced that Emilia had the affections of her Fondville,—the befl method therefore file conceived of diverting her own
F 2	chagrin

il
;
li,
y -■
(	1-24 )
chagrin was by diflipatlon,—^^and . not conceive it hurt him ; her flirtation (though a (dangerous and improper ffep, which feldom fucceeds in an end propofed like hers) was ftill kept up to awaken in him the tender feelings he had for her before She was
his wif
One
night
as they were both dreffed for a bail, he gently re-monffrated on the gay life fhe led.— My dear Fondville (faid fhe, turning to the glafs and adjuffing her feathers) did not you lead me to the ffage by bringing me to the capital? had you not, I Should have remained tranquil and happy in a country



U
cc

a
way at your Fathers.”—He
was
filent, and could not but allow the
-----Thus
juffnefs of the charge.--------
another year rolled on, during which th^fe was no alteration on fhe be-halviour of either parties,—her continuation of gaiety and the unabated attentions of elegant young men, roufed at laft the jealoufy of Harry; fuch an adherence in her conduD was not to be excufed, but inffead of
awakening
/
If
k-
12 5: ;
awaliening thofe aiFections with which the innocent’ Louifa flattered herfelf, called forth* in his bofom contempt in
room
indifference.
One evening
Louifa told him fhe was going to a party, and left him with fome gentlemen in the dining parlour, but they from, different engagements taking leave of Henry, he foon after drolled into the garden, they then loved being in the fummer feafon at a little dif-
I
tance from the capital. , It was moonlight, and he drolled to the end of the walk; another garden more extendve than that joined it, he entered it alfo, refolving to go to a mofs-houfe which was placed at one corner to indulge him-felf there in contemplation; from the winding alleys he took he happened to come at the back of the mofs-houfe; and dood a few moments dill to admire the beauty of the fcene; it was fliaded round with poplars that trembled v/ith the evening breeze, and open only at the front to fhew a fountain that played in the oppodte part of the garden and the enamelled banks of
F 3	dowers
' lift
; Ti
1
‘1
:t
i.''
4>!
. it
■11
i
!!ii
ti
4i
11'
I
lio^i '
ii'ih; •: ! ; 1 ■' ' i p '; * 1
•bifL-
'•NT
■I
D ■ •
I 1
ij'iwS
■'T
•- 1|^ j
U; ! .. ;i! ,
!:H'! ‘ :h !
'Si
I; h i
:i .1' ’ <;> II
‘h f
!ii
:»' !i
' ii
N; St
ildy.i
iNh^ ']PV
liiJ
iis: *1 [1 ;•
j!b:i
n
!)
. bii illLl
It 'Ll
!cUi • i
i-'h I' 1 hi;Tl
Sbliu,,
,■ I'll
liilfet,!
i:V ^
:'t’
1! I r. » I ;
iiNirte
iSfiL-r-i Ui)
; s ' ,1	’' I
ii Si Si ^
y
!i
ili
•R
lit
Hif
ill
!i
ii
S'iii;
b-i'' '
ii|U
S|l
ih
t':; p >
ki
Hllj
bl
iliilii I ii I^Hjl
rlji! N! H l!^
-u
Iji
)Ul I'
SNlil
( )
flowers between. He was loft in admiration of the fcene for fome minutes, until his fenfes were roufed by broken fobs and accents that feemed to iflue from the mofs-houfe; he hurried liiroiigh the whldernefs behind, and coming to the front, what w^as not his furprife to fee Louifa fitting bathed in tears, and an officer kneel-ing by her, his head reclined in her lap, fo that his face could not be dif-cerned.—Fondville could not with-
\ f
iland the violence of his emotions,— he may—he will be blamed by philofo-phers, but he could not command himfelf, and before his rival or the to all appearance guilty Louifa faw Henry, he drew his fword and ran it through the fide as he imagined of his rival.— Louifa fhrieked and exclaimed, “ Fondville, you have killed my
“ brother,
but fty—fly [proceed-
“ ed fhe] thy life is ftill dear to thy
“ injured wife.’^—The wounded officer
fell groaning on the floor,—while
Henry flood petrifiecl with aflonifh-
ment, Louifa fainted and funk befide
him
(	127	)
%
him-—he did not raiSe her,—a thou fand ideas ruShed confufedly on his brain; he was frantic.—Great Heaven, faid he, is this a pretence of Louifa in palling this man for her brother, or is it really fo, and have I affaffinated him !—He came over and raifed the youth, who though pale, bloody, and almoff lifelefs, he difeovered by the moonlight was the brother of his wife. Of this gentleman we have hitherto been filent in our hiffory; he was indeed the brother of Louifa, but Some years older; his name was Hortenfius, and the uncommonly vicious life he had led made him juftly defpifed by his family: for Some unparalleled ffeps he had taken, his father and mother refufed to fee him, and fettling on him a fmall patrimony, refolved to have no further connexions with him; then determining as their fortune was in their power, to make Louifa foie heirefs of their pofTeffions, but (he disobliging them in her private^alliance, a new will was made in which every thing but a little addition to the fotes

F 4
annuity
umiiO'i
-I'
i ■ I
' i , .
1..:
i ‘
* •	:.i
L'
, • I
■•iL : ;i.
1; i !■! .h'h
■	'*« i	1
■1 1,
I. .• i ' *•
{
#
\
128 )
ni
^4r
nnuity was bequeathed to the charitable inftitutions and hofpitals of the kingdom : thus were they at war with their children.
Hortenfius’s demands for money being much more than his little allowance fupplied, which was not indeed much more than fupplied the necef-faries of life, often reduced him to the mofl painful exigencies,—a fevere fit of ficknefs not a little contributed to this, and nearly brought him to a death-bed repentance,—fenfible of his pafi mifconduct, and laying out him-feif for amendment, whilff almoff destitute of fupport on his recovery, he wrote to his liffer,^(a Sister who fpite
of his irregularities, dearly loved him and had often interceded for him,) to beg She would once more be a mediator, aSibre his parents of his return to virtue, and befeech them to relieve his prefent .distrefs,—almost entirely estranged from his family, he knew not of her union, and was furpriSed to fee her anSwer stgned by a new' name: the purport of it was,—“ That
“ the
• *	•	''' I
' * •' ■' 1
I '.
11 ■ ' *

I

(	129 ]
the time had now ceafed when Ihe “ could plead for him,—they would not countenance her either for “ having married a perfon they did “ not approve, but if he would come “ to her fhe would be a kind fiffer,
“ and in the hope of his amendment,
“ contribute to his relief.”—He came, but Louifa knew that her Fondville had ever expreffed a diflike to this young gentleman ffdm his paft mif-condudl, and conceived his reformation only pretended, and treated him in his own opinion as a worthlefs im-poffor, defiring his wife to give him a fmall fum, but on no account to fee him, as it would encourage eternal applications.—This would have been the right method of a£fing and faved the fatal cataffrophe that enfuedj but a woman’s weaknefs, a fiffer’s fond-nefs, overbalanced ’ the Scale,— Ihe reSolved, in the fuppofition of her hufband’s not finding it out and the real innocence of the adlion, to fee her ~ brother.—But a woman can never depend on her hufband’s ignorance of '
F. 5	her i
:l!l
MMUl
l!'b
Msfl:--: !
•L|Uf' ■ .U'
Lb;-'-:
■‘■L li.!'
;iCi!S
I •
A.
'! - i! II I
.M
■( ■ 1
i i i 'IiSn
L'b

.1 ■' > ■ I •
-."0 :i!: .
M .
•!J i
ti ■
L:
='biis:
.IK
1^*1
• L
■ b«
:i i
' • 1 ■. , •' I
•n
I •'

I I
c
' ! I
; I
I.' l|

h; h

..:S
( 130 )
her conduct,—no more than a man
can of a wife’s obedience to his will
who marries contrary to her friends,
approbation j fhe that deviates in one
duty cannot be fuppofed to be very
ffedfaff in another, fo far I mean as
gratifying herfelf in every thing coin
fiffent with her honour.—But
ceed : fhe a t
to pro-the earnefl folicitation
of Hortenfius confented to meet him
that night in the mofs-houfe, fhe was
there before him, and having a key
for each garden herfelf let him in, they
had juft met, a repentant brother had
but juft kneeled to aflure a lifter of
his amendment,— wdien Fondville
Tufhed upon them; we now go back
to that actionHarry brought Louifa
to her feat, and gave her a little water
from the fountain,—when fhe opened-
her eyes again and faw her hufband,
fhe befeeched him to fly—but he was
deaf to her intreaties,-—his own honor
fecured him.
Hortenfius and his-
fifter were carried into the houfcj
whilft poor Fondville followed ftupi-
£ed. with aftonifhment,—The next
dav

• (i't. i lU.
iii
(
131
)
day the affair became public, and he got bail.—The beff Surgeons were brought to Hortenlius, who pronounced his life in a very doubtful ffate. Louifa’s confiitution though naturally good, had been confiderably impaired by her irregular hours; her inward disappointment in the affeDions of her hufband, for "Whom fhe had forfeited
f
her parents’ love; all added to the great Shock of nearly murdering her brother, was too much for her to bear,, a nervous fever was the conSequence..
It is hardly poffible through Such a Scene to deScribe the mind of Fond-* ville, a mind at all times replete with; Senfibility. “ Should Hortenfius die, [Said he to himtelf] an ignominous “ death awaits me—Should he recover, I only live to continual repentance, to be a Subject of public obServa-
—LouiSa’s fever was flow and had Several relapSes*. Hortenfius was> at laft out of danger, and'fhortly after the trial came on—Fondville was acquitted;—but could a tribunal acquit him.of- the angnifh.of his own mind!
c;
a
cc
iC
tion.

a- mo*

pif
I i
i [ iS?
'CTi :
ijlui;
W !
illliii '1 !■**!,S i
im


n
■ 1
• J ■ ': •
:'0
ri
• t ;

cic:
!}
:| I i ‘
Vm I
T-i 'hiy
;:'n '*"lu
hTjijll
iib't pSl
• ff ? u.
hlb:
Si [MH ;
l$‘l
j’iii''
bill i
■rh

ikil
•: ;i’5 . ^
m i
’ b
!; ‘ i',
'll
ill
? ) *
( 132
a moment’s rafhneS^ had laid up a ffore of repentance, had for ever blafted his domeffic happinefs.— Louifa’s fever the phyficians pronounced at laff at a crifis—an awful one.—She requefted to fee her father and mother before her laff moments approached—they came to her,-—I wifh I could draw a veil to conceal fo affecting a fcene.—LouiSa in, the bloom of life, a candidate for death—pale, emaciated, worn out with a lingering diforder, which promifed a Speedy diffolution; Supported in her bed to take—to bid—-a lafl adieu to all her deareft relations,—what muft have been the emotions of the wretched parents !—they had not Seen her fince her.marriage. They now behold
The
her on the verge of the grave.--
gay, the animated, the once charming Harry Fondville kneeled at the foot of lier bed.—Hortenfius was in one corner of the room—flruck with her altered countenance, her parents at approaching towards her, exelaimed “ Is this our daughter?”-—“ Yes [repli-
** ed She] thy long estranged child,—
“ let
« /

. j
}
(	»33 )
“ let me receive your forgivenefs”— [after they had fat down by her, file proceeded thus] ‘‘ you fee a child be-
a
CC
fore
you
adlion difobliged
who never but in one
that was
£C


(C
you;-
the leading ffep to my future life and the happinefs I enjoyed I could never fay was perfedfi niy deviation from duty was an obffacle to felicity, “ and fome other circumifances re-“ latiiig to a friend which for her “ fake I do not willi to mention.
I befeech it of you. to look once mot;e on Hortenfius as your fon, and “ to let not the recolleCHon of
U
iC
a
daughter ever embitter your days She made a motion for Henry to advance—he did.—“ Fondville, [faid “ fire] be aSfured of my forgivenefs, and even unto death of a love the moft ardent: my dilTipation, my follies led you into a train of re-“ fledions on my conduct which naturally awakened fufpicion ;—I difobliged, I faw my brother contrary to your wilhes, and that oc-cafioned the unhappy event—were
it
(C
(C

C(
a
u
(C

h j.-iL
' 1:
I (	■	; i
I
I
I I ■( ’ I /
( I
-?*
I a
*4"!
i I
'.a

■ »-
■l'.i i,	f !■,
mM ^
'"IVV:
Mi,
LR; ii ■ Iv'Pi'

i'T-h L--.Ji
- ' I
i ■ ., '' ‘ ^ ’ 1 *'
i ;, ’	'*''i 1
^ b ::
Vi' i':
! '‘I-.. !:-ri.: : 'US i;c!f-
i!
M .'I ■‘	•n I i
iililbii!!!!
t; k
s;:
u;:
I
■ h i


Hill -b;;'. ';?iM I
iiiiilisiiilH!! ■
W'd.V ■
ii s : 1:
;b/-rS*
b;Mt siii";: ii

'! ■ ■
/i,
'tT
[',Li
I
iifj
11 !■
!, '■ f-
!!!!
it
rju:
libbLiilir
• i iI	t
SiibiilT
Vii;l •

: ■ , M ,;
ItAri Lb;


bihStt LllwH' :
1 •'f'.L ‘'Ik•*

'jiL ■
f I L i»ai i| ■ If •	«
' , I
ijiii
\
(	'3+ )
u
it not still Sor your Sake, I have no
“ wilh for life. My friend, my beft
ii
beloved Emilia, is fecliided fro
in
a
the world-—my little Constantia
lost------can I have a with for life!”
Louifa embraced her weeping Fond-
ville, and again, befought her parents’
forpivenefs; took leave of Hortenii
o	^
US
>
and in a few hours after expired in
Henry’s arms.
Thus lived, thus died the amiable,
the beautiful Louifa I I will not at-
tempt to defcribe the mind of our he-
ro
be
to
the original. Emilia [for we will now
go back to her] was inconceivably
grieved at hearing of Louifa’s death
and reproached herfelf more than once
for having stolen the child, lest that
fhould have preyed on her friend’s
fpiritSj meanwhile Constantia was her
only delight, and promifed to be eve-
ry thing the fond wisties of Emilia
foretold.
The parents of Louifa took Horten-
stus again to favour; and Fondville,
tired of the world,, knew not where
to:
( 135 /
to turn him : he had loft that inward peace, which only can make us happy;, he accufed him Self entirely for the death of his wife, and reSolved to Seclude himfelf almoft entirely from
with this, view he took a Small houfe in a feqiieftered fituatioii near that convent, that very convent where Emilia had placed herfelf. He was ignorant however of that circum-ftance, and chofe his retirement merely accidentally. He law little or no company, and palled the prime of his life in Solitude and repentance. Fond-ville tore himfelf from a world which nature had formed him to ornament he tore himfelf at leaft-from-the Society of it.. Emilia in the exercife of her devotions and ip- the care of her treasure, palTed her i|ays. in tolerable tranquillity. Thus years elapfed until Conftantia attainea her lixteenth year, and joined every perfahal attra<ftion to every inward, perfedion and accomplishment.. Emilia called her by a different name from her real one, and
believed herfelf to be the
niece
AM • <?•
H
r I ;
it

si
Utt.:
(
136
)
danger
niece of her patroneSs. Conifantia
was feldom permitted to flray out of the convent gardens, in her walks, by the defire of Emilia, but one day Ihe exceeded thofe bounds : curiofity led her into a domain not far from the cloyffer, and file rambled through wild fiirubberies, plantations and little woods, unmindful of the file ran j at lafi: file came to a canal, and flood on the banks viewing her own image refledted on its glaffy Surface, when her bouquet happening to fall into the water, floated on the Surface ; it was compoSed of beautiful and uncommon flow’ers : She ftooped to lift it, and the bank being flippery, file fell into the water. Confiantia Screamed—it was very deep, and file felt her danger, when a gentleman ran out from a Temple near her, and plunging into the canal, with difficulty faved her life. When he placed her on the bank again, She thanked her deliverer in the warmeSf terms, and hafiened back to the monaflry, where She acquainted her fuppofed
aunt

(	137 )
aunt with her adventure: a dreadful
fever Soon after broke out in the con-
vent, Emilia was feized with it, and
in a few days after found her laff mo-
ments approaching. She called Con-
flantia to her bed fide, and addreffed
her thus: “ You fee before you,, my
((
dear, a perfon whom you confider

as an aunt, but now I muff inform

you I am no relation. You are the
“ child of a man who I loved dearer

than exiffence, and a woman [fince
a
deceafedl who was my earlieft
“ ffiend. Mr. Fondville [that was
U
(C
his name] preferring your mother to
me, made me take the veiland as
((
one only comfort, added to
“ likenefs to him, I ffole you
your
Con-
“ ffantia, and was able to elude the
U
vigilance of fearch.” After this
fne laid down plans of future life for
her, ^ave jier letters to fend relations
and affert her birth after her death,
and laftly of all prefented the picture
of Harry; Conffantia fcreamed on
beholdinc it-
O
“ .Dis he, [faid She]
“ who faved my life.” “ 1 was ffruck

with
f.." j
ill
>. '!
' . 1
't I I
!:v
li ;i
i: i:.
i.

A
ly
'» ;
!l.
a;
I
I f'
H ii'
,• y
I ■!
iii’isb*'' 1

■ Li

•,i	1
U \ .

•I L
-■'Si'' I
!! V
• ;i '
.:i	!. . '
: I ;'
• O'
‘ a-

I'i ,,i:|ii i'
.•>r c
I
i • ' 1
ObS- i
•! 'Kr
/M
r.
r I ) .
■' ':Ui :
•;i-h •
C- \
'H'- }
, t'
■ ll
;r|l
. ‘ • r
1 ■
{
.
■ iii'^
-if;
'i: . i
*:c
J:
I . t
.	> L
. (
h •*‘^11^
M •	-
' M >
'I
■ ! I
i »' I !
iR i I: •
'L: ! ;il 1
•J .	. >•;•
' i * ;‘ •
1 • '


i; 1 O. -• .. 1| I . I'L
V L' ;l' L
-■ I L	i| S	■
(
■1 ivi-i':;':; i

"f:'

■ I !

SSbibb
M S.- Hi*0l ■
h!-
I
1;;;;; biilii'
• ■ I S' V V ' N
:>!. : '• . r • I ■ • • I
S- b ‘
.1 • ' :'1 ■ ;

■I..
• V
’ I \
i ! .1	•
IriVA
:,	, I,	, ,	■,	■
' * . V ’ t • ’ *' N ‘ ‘
’ Sj'hb
'1 hJi.'

i:
i ■ ‘"'1 <


r'. ‘ In
•	; !U
. , ik ' V ,1 k .
* ih
■■ : . . 1.
iAiF s:
•* L ‘i ' • L .
'i'tiS' i
L;-,•
N’lii: ■ l!
;	: iji' rj
, • •■(;»( 'Hi ■ ‘
( 138 )
✓
with a reverential awe the moment
“ I beheld him,” proceeded fhe
((
tis
“ himfelf—age has firice that was
“ done worn out thofe animated traits
((
iC
but {fill that face,—that benign
look is the fame.” Loft in wonder
at thefe words, Emilia’s tongue refuf-
ed utterance for Some moments, and
in the interval a nun entered the room
and told her that a gentleman at the
grate wilhed to fee her. Emilia who had always kept the Secret of what
convent fhe had retired to inviolable
could not imagine who this vifitor was
but unable to rife herfelf. Sent down
Conftantia, who entering the parlour
Screamed at beholding her preferver,
—her newly discovered father at the
grate. She ran up again to her bene-fadrefs—“ Oh, Madam, Madam, this
“ is Mr. Fondville.
yy
Emilia often
fainted at this intelligence, and her
attendants feared fhe would go off in
one of the fits : when fhe was reco-
afked
him, and was told he ftill waited. She
inlifted on being taken up
c;
/
the
((
hand
(	139 )
e;
hand of death [Said file] is already “ ffretched outj—before lam fnatch-

ed let me again be blefied with a
U
fight of him, let me reffore a long-
“ loff child, and implore his pardon.

My fenfes Heaven has pleafed to
a
fpare me for this laft trial.

She
infilled on being raifed, and was car-
ried down to the grate
Her
once
beauteous face was too well engraved
on the heart, of our hero not to make
him remember her, tho’ age had faded
and ficknefs had expelled thofe charms:
I will not recite the particulars of their
converfation—they acquainted each
other without
palliation
or difguife
with every thing that happened dur-
ing a Separation of fixteen years ; he told her that tho’ he lived fo near, he
knew not that fhe lived in that con-
vent, until accidentally by means of
a relation of hers he difcovered it that
very day : amongft the misfortunes of
his life which he recited to her, he
mentioned the lofs of his daughter.
U
Stay for a few moments,” faid file,
and going into an adjoining room, led
out
'4




tt
L
• t
l-ti

I,
I

1i
, IlI
■ *^1
; i;


fS'
'M'
i il'

f


li;.

I -I.
•M.
Si
r
I'
I
•fi’r
►'T

m .
.Ji


; '.1
r-i!!

unm
|Bii 111
isi!!!; I
' ■
t^Sil !
h.
m \
hi
hm
S;
if! I

;.,L
II
^ I
in
05
I' (r
; .*
Liif li!;
M ■
iibi

Ill'll niii i
i
'■.Uiiu 1

i
ill
*?1
m
lli‘ i-
in
in
lib
;i' 1
!Hl !
fi
li:
i
m
H !
irilii
blit;
i«!^
m
t! fl ; 'li ^
li!
liil!! i
>!in '
mm\

SiSi id ' mm \
li ii ’.
Mni
ij

IrJ?!
•f C'te

1
I
(.• : i; O'i t'
M
• '' I. il ,
•l::i:
.'I.'.
•vli !
,. I .
1 I

t
r. '.i‘
‘ j i.
M ;m'
■'iL-i
■' M
1 II'
.iiM h''

;,n,.	,
.0'
■iL' ■
”;il:

: il
II;
(	140- )
eut Conflantia by the hand :
4C
her
P
44
Fondville, [faid She] is that dangli-
c;
ter whofe lofs you lament, forgive
(C
me for having ffolen her; this let-
4(
ter [putting one through the grate
44
into his hand] will acquaint you
44
€4
with my intentions regarding her,
fhe fhall now be inffantly reffored
44
to you i I never meant fhe Should
(4
take the veil, but only placed her
44
as a boarder in the cloyffer; Fare-
44
44
well, the period is at hand which
divides us—Fondville, once more
44
farewell.” Emilia fainted j talking
had overpowered her, and fhe
was
convevcv*
A
j
Out
ui
the parlour. Coti-
ffantia fhe refolved fhould not be
affedled by beholding in her the ftrug-
gles of death, and therefore embracing
the dear girl for the laft time, fent her
to her father.' Emilia Shut herfelf up
with the prieft in her confeflional, and
was afterwards carried to her bed and
fhortly after expired.
Harry and his daughter went home,
but fent repeated mefTages to the
cloyfter, and when informed fhe was
no
f .
141
no more, gave np to unreffrained
rief j he opened the letter which fhe
had given him, [and had long had it
wrote by her that it might at her dif-
Solution be fent him :] his picSIure was
iiicloSed, and fince death would have*
cloSed her eyes by the time he read it
fhe there in the moft delicate manner
r
afSured h'lrh of the affedfion fhe had
entertairfed for him, which made her
take thd veil. Her fortune which was
large, before fhe had retired from the world fire had fettled the
principal
part of on Conffantia, and the remainder on the convent. She allured him
alSo of her intention of refforing the
child to the family at her death or
when the young lady became of age.
Fondville and his daughter regretted
her death beyond meafure, and the
amiable Conftantia ever retained the
moff lively gratitude for the education
file had bellowed on her and thofe
precepts which fhe had early given her. f his young Lady in her mother and in her patronefs had an example of the impropriety of indulging an early attachment.
■ i-

, <)
t'
,:1
HI'
■ : I
I
.1,1
.11
'•I.,'-
|i
Sii
Hi
i-r: !•'
■ t ' ' iV 1
i\
■»
11.
• t'
L :
\^ \ d t < ■. 11'
L : ■
. (
: I I
.* I
t'l
I,	' '
; »
1 • »

■ i	1
U	■
■*i ;i' ‘ , r 11 •
!P 10
h ‘h;

;i I' ■

. • .. ,L •!. •
L I. i'	‘
V
« I ,
. * ! * *
• ••
’ i'M Li Li
•: * I I

1 ' • t ! ' i : ■ I c ■ •
t
ijhi'.f i
CiCi,
'	.	; I •
.’'iiiiS .
',b
' I'
■! •: i f'


I'l .-
li '■

I,;
.1
•I
•I
'. t
‘ii
•• H ,
i L
L ■ •
'll

.1,
1 .
T .. . ::*• • ‘‘
^;i!: ;L
( H2 )
tachment. Had Emilia or LouiSa been
pofTefTed of lefs fenfibility, or had
they ffrove to furmoimt their palfion
each might have met with men who
would have made them happy, tho’
not perhaps in that romantic degree to which their ideas foared. The one
by her marriage, the other by her re-
tirement equally difobliged their fami-
lies, and each died at an early age,
disappointed in their expedfations of
felicity. Louifa was ever tenderly
regretted, and her memory held dear
by all who knew her, and every nun
in the convent lamented Eniilia: her
amiable difpofitions, her pious zeal,
that unafFeded devotion which fhe
had ever fhew^ed, and a cheerful per-
formance of her duty, a circumftance
not always the cafe with So young a
religious, made her univerfally ador-
ed, and it was always their wifh that
her bright example might guide their
ffeps through life.
END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
I'ji ■

'■'k i-
’ 1 fii*
ii»n

N

i
t • ■
‘ i*
>n
IS:
■fc'
m

iU
1*
\

/
li

f
s
;
A R
F"
JLIJ 9
O R, THE
II I S T O R Y G F
V
X •
V O I

IT.
LETTER
TI-IE HON-. CAPT. BELFORD TO SIR
EDWARD IIAVILAND. BART.
Poor mms Haric>
Mountford Abbey.
Ed-
ward you were very much to blame if cfleemed in too low
a
fphere for a
wife, why was fire not left in pofTef-
lion of that innocence, which was her
pride, her glory ?—there are but too
G
manv
'
11 IP
!r

{

!
■I if
d'!!
ih
li
KW,
• I hi
I

L'
I '
ill

i.
!^:i
li'
Mi
r!i
r,!-;
j at
dill

1^5
tii!!'
i p ” a:i;

i
1
iriliii
L. ?l: !
h’Jh!'
I * 11 “
J-



jiil'li
il'f!':;
bit -I
hC
li;S
, ti
ti fi;

111
IfE,..
■f.

i'll
'“I {lii
11
II
M (li
pi |!i
i|i i'
s::; :; ii.ll
'» hi'
I
7.:*;
blii
ii'ti'
m
;:i5

1

! •( Pi!
Lit
fi
is
ill
$
i*'
IlS
i

ihi
di

■in
!


, • h'
h!3 hi
ill
■ 11! ■ h }.
ills
'Tl
1
■1*1:
* i
t, ^
■hi
v:
:i!
'i!
I!
r
II
Hi

I
!i:
!<il:
■'i' "11:
iilClil «
< iiipi
‘iliii !
*' »
. I

ihlif! . i;iUH
'll .(Tl
f M. !) .
|!i« '
jJU.
'U'i»
; :i
j ii'Ufi:
i!!;:'
! (
:h
ol'i
it
M
•t
ll
I i
^!iiU
b-Ui
-if
u
!!i
!‘L
‘!!
.il'l
hi
lii
hi
ill
■h(i
>i;l
ll i!

ll S
ih
:
rli!
:!i
VV\. M-1 ‘
Jib h
•; i I I M 1
!
(
I!
Jb “
1

I!
!i I !'i ti; ^
Mil
Ml';
i !l '
I ' T •
T
ill’ i
Mb !
' : lU
r; 1 .
I
11
{flC :
h I
!! 0
' t (
ii;
y.i ‘
i.; '
: r it
u
U .
lit
Mil-
L
4 i
«iC'
«!{c
if:!-
.}H
f
i'
ilH
Vftf
( 146 >)
✓
niariy daily rurroUnding us, who are
fallen from virtue,—let them fufiice,
(fmee lexdties we all muff have:
but feeiudion is a crime of- an unpar
donable nature, for bcfides the error
in itfelf, the confequences which
enfue are generally dreadful
A good
education, by which I mean good prin-
ciples, being early inculcated, is
an
almoff never-failing method of making
us afl with propriety, an-d when ar-
rived at maturity, the fociety of
amiable women, they lead us from a
taffe for the vicious : from‘an elegance
delicacy and refinement peculiar to the
effimable of the fex, from a palTionate
love of their fociety, Tfind inySelf
daily weaned from thofe foibles, and
though I have been .diflipated, I have
not been loff—there arc a
^ufand
reafons to b
Ok
alledged
acainfl vices of
this kind 5 by them w^e accuffom oiir-
felves either to look lightly on mar-
\
riage, or conceive it dreadful, from the idea of being tied dowm, and the heart long fince worn out, we enter
the ffate with a cruel indifference,
filled
i
( H7 )
f ' i
\
filled with fufpicions and a thoufand disgraceful opinions, from a too great knowledge of the unworthy, unable
•me IS
to allow juftice to the worthy.---------------
Their fociety as I have faid before, to
delightful : the innocence^ fweetnefs uf a deferving woman is enehanting ^ their fluency of ideas, pleafing knowledge, replete with foft-nefs and refinement, awake to the tendereft, mofl delicate pafilons—by nature fo gentle and fo conlfant.
“ There is in you all we believe of heaven,
“ amazing brightnels, purity, and truth,
“ eternal joy and everlufting love.”
V
N
All thefe, Haviland, are in Caroline.; now that we are intimate, I am everv hour more tranfported with her. My father is amazed at my not returning home: lady Amelia, he wwites mie word, will Shortly be in England.— 1 cannot, Haviland, though I ouaht.
Wo
tear myfelf from the Abbey, have feveral vifitors here now, and
/	J
your Mifs Seymour amongft the reft, who is the dear, the earl left friend of Mifs Sedley—this vouns: ladv feem
this young lady
G 2
s
vcrv
ifiTlc ». |.
'* «10 [[
!!
itU •
Wgiiu
iSi] ;1 ilt'-
ul
liitid
11;
■
I
’ V, 1	■
♦
'1L--	;
-{ S ',
1 • ■ ■
I	1!
t ' i
I. ‘p.'t
;t- ■
jC' ! ■ j-c:'
*■ : '
i:., • ' ;
I	• I
; t
'1	■ • I .
► I' .
I I '
• t r
1 • t
, I ■
I
I
. h
^ ' /
■1 .'T ^
sM'-: ;■ 'I'V :
'ji:v
h;
i
r •
I
M :
I ’ t • f
, L
!■'
i':;
1 : +i 1
M I M
Lf

(	148
J
very deServing of it, -and I do wonder that you admiredher: She is
i	0	^
really very handfomcj finer bkek eyes I think I never beheld. She is to leave us to-morrow, and the day after young Mountford. is-expected : 1 have not feen hiSn fincehe was a child ythe Countefs is in .tranfports at his return.
I have.beenlitting with Caroline on the new made hay in the lawn, enjoying the fineff autumn evening, the fetting fun casting a crimfon redeOion round us, and the lawn almoft encircled by the fineff woods imaginable.
Vour Emily is gone—^liow has her
departure the coach
Caroline!
when
drove off and tore her
a Shower of
from her longing eyes, tears fell from them—I led her into the houSe, gazed on the lovely girl and kiSied her hand wdiilSt thinking of her friend j She did not perceive
inc. Adieu.
\
lU
riri
"v,Tr t 1 w * m:
I
L'l.'hTr
h-.*:	•

l^T
Iditif »■
A
-t*
fil'


L E T T E R
>
V
I49' )
LETTER XVIIf.
THE SAME TO THE SAME.
M OUNTFORD
]s come—we arc
all difappoiiitcd—all, did I fay ; v/hat
is it to any one but his family
icno-
O
rant, ordinary, unmeaning, unaccom-r
plifhed, is . the youth—coneeited of
having travelled too—it is eafy to fee
he has a filly look, and is
altogether
an odd compound—yet the animal is
not quite deditiite of tafle^ and I there-
fore dread Caroline may touch his-
heart—well, and Surely it is nothing
to me—oh, Haviland !—nothing tov
me—Caroline, the mod angelic of her
fex, is all and every thing to Telford>
G
L E T T E K.
/
:
A,

i,(
ii;
I •' « ''
{
I '
I
■;!!

'*•

ii!
J.
ili

:iiC’
1»1
I *
, ♦
:i:ii
If;!’
■i
' u.

ai'
r;;, .Lit-

i;#:

• tr
!' I '
I ,■
t
A
i : i
I
ry. I
hi 1
; ii: i
■I it! '
• 'i! »tl;



h I'lii ■
ihi''

• ^ I
I;


'E'
I '<
lit. 1"
It
•»r

M-
. CL •
; I
I
■Si^^ ■ I
i!
ifi'ii;
If
IS

lilKi

P‘r. ;
%;|i.
h;|;k
IfldiM
ItiTM
I
Mt'ub ,
LC.U- :1 I* U' ; •
M'i.Ml, \[ !: f
rl>
h!
' ■A ■’
C:or
;i‘
)

I* J
hi'
'*1'



(l! 1; 'll:' t
a' '•
■’if
I
11
'1.1
ll
:h1
ri?
, M- !|ij : j
l!
\ i
'■IjhlT''
•	' O
■ fl
•i ♦
. ■
•’■ i .fn i
\ T-.D’
f ,’C,i .
) 1 'i 1
■■■■ Liiii-i
n
if •
I f ■
A
5 «t •! •
;' 1. • ‘ • It, ‘
• n . . 1.
rtj-
Si
b-if

‘1 - !
. >i .	.
■ ‘ ■ i *
’ I'l;
I •
f ..
\

1.	.'i
■ -| i\
i i
■ ii
. -:}•

:i ■
fc-
• I
\	^ D
r.. ^ Q,
)
. f.
LETTER XIX
MISS. SEDLEY TO MISS SEYMOUR.
A M hurt, my dear Emily, you were obliged to leave me fo foon : Mrs. Morton is liowever recovered. I hope you read, when with me, my dear Mrs. Ofborne’s letter and the ffory fhe font me j is not the latter beautiful? but I am diffradied to know what Is become of Conftantia, daughter to
one of the unfortunate heroines. I
«
wrote to my beloved patronefs, but fhe did not know
young lady.
any thing of that Mrs. Ofluorne’s hint at my partiality for Mr. Belford, pained me not a little—though to my Emily I own it, I did not wifh her to think it: from all I have heard, from all I have feen, he is amiable, beyond mea-fure amiable—fb very handibrne, fuch an air of the world. So very entertain-
You know I am immenfely
ing too. fond of really an irrefilfible charm.
men
being agreeable,
it IS
-Mr.
Mountford
/




n
<>■


I-; I
Mountford is returned from his tra
vels, inf
deffitute
unaccompliflied, and
that is elegant; he
Seems a foil for Beiford. Our number
of vifitors are^alfo added to, by a Mifs
Villars; die is a fweet, delicate, fenti
mental girl, full as handfome, but not
half as agreeable as ns : ’tis the pret
tied quiet little thing in the world, and
as lady Ann Wilmot fays, equally
under fze for grace or a goddefs,
little Wilmot too, did I tell you of
him—the petit race are the faShion at
Mountford—Wilmot,
young officer of
dear, is a
s regiment,
and a diffant relation of the countefs ;
/	y
MiSs Villars is a friend
of the
lady
Mouritfords, She and our new beau
would be a good match I think. I
have not feen him yet, but juft ftep;-
ping from the carriage he came in
for
in that action he fprained his
ancle violently, was carried to his
room, and
pain making him quite leveriifh, he has not thefe three davs
heen.able to come down.
G 4
Letter
'll
*'U‘
U' I
id'
i;! I'r ■(
!ih|
ir.


l!


.'1 ' ill
i.ii
I.
i
J..4
1 <
id'
lii
II
HI:
io
I I l‘


• In.11.
if. llMl
|1‘-:';1 I I '...
‘'i'
1
' VA . / ;

f.
b-'
.1-; ill f!li=b iii
hue
■lido iH
iTC If
bcl. 4

/
. 1 (
P ■ [i;
i'V-'
l.Jl.H
ml!' '
hh'i "
I ]■' ■

y,;. k'!
•a
if
H:
lui
rc-
[' V: If I'b':. l;S f • ■ !■;,
» .1 :■ I.:


ic
ns-i
iMi, •
o » i
IT ' o
f'F* '• ‘M f-hV- a '
hb ■ i)l
V

r
i
'' O'
r
! ’’h' >1
li
D'li


iL’i-:!
iidi!:
'hi:'
1- ' II %fil ■
I
.fi:: I

: I-
m. K : ll'dibh ■
• » ’«
■ : f
rfS.I
li'-ril
ii !':M
t' ii;! I
'I iiC
T
!f
It;
• ' «,
• S ^
' b 1
Lb.
Ot; '
I
l|ii
;i.!v
M i .
•!,t
• t
h*i
I • .	' • !
:b:l> I?:.: !
'.,.1 . Iv.lI' '!■
• :i.. 1 : .	.
•! :,rl;
ibl]) ■ ||i I j
. I 1
L*' ■	11 i ■;
l':|- I!'	:
(I » •	*
; 1 -
Us
id.
-•U.l,: ...	.}i ••
:! r
■id
’ t
t
! ( ,!•
N ! • i ’ i ■-. I ‘ 'I-. ''
■; t'
•ti'.
■i
■•hi, • 1
; I • • 1
4;-.
:ii i:.
rii
•>, . 1
■ d-' ‘i ML
lip
U -M
* ■ ' j
(L .	: i »
•	> .. I
if: V
I .
1
(L. . , Jt. . .
■-bi:
SLiMLtL i
'•' b' !'• 1
ii '■ hi :
:
* I •	•


•c
t


'U i;
•l.L.
J'
I. I . • • t

fh
ft
, 1
i.h - ' -j tHu h ’	*
L11 M,,
s.Ji.s'S :• ^
•-U. '	: I
iU •
.u-JSi
wi V.! P -t '
thri'N ■' *
1:''
' 1
:!S^; ip
r-
d\d : ■niC

, (
n'tib
’. -Mi
1-1 ,, : ■ ,«i
,;i (I
„m;

• i' '
I '
I
\ *
Mi
i]C,'
r s
. ■! 1 1,
-|, , 1 ' I .
Hd!;
(• .V
ir.i.
10
icr
• ■ 1 ' ■ J
( i
I' ,'i
I
Iv'-
il :
»j.
fi ’'il !
!): MUH
(
T r r>
^ 3
- LETTER XX.
SIR EDWxiRD IIAVILAND TO TH£
HOxNJ. CAPT. BELFORD.
You
Bath
are evidently BelSord in love
with Caroline, why do you not afSume
courage and quit the Abbey, fenSible
as you are of an engagement that can
not be broke through. As you per-
ceive by the date I have bid adieu to
Morton houfe and to Emily, ther

was no bearing it, Harry j Woodley
and file for ever flirting and your
friend totally neglected ; he made pro-
pofals—received—and all is going on
in the nuptial train, whilft your friend
is killing time at Bath.
young Soft as
is a pretty, gentle man, handfome as a Zylplh
Mr. Woodley
the Zephyrus—wants afSu-
rance, though—I wonder
a girl or
fpirit could think of him.
I have wrote to Cecilia— and dis-
covered the whole —mad
e
promises of a continual
Rvr n
■I
ill!
iji
( 153 )

ii. 1
i t
ii' !f
I -
r i •
a continual friendfhip, and to beg her acceptance of a very large yearly income ; intreated She would write to
•1 •* t
i
I
ii-
L
I
me and fettle a method of receiving
^ •
this : as yet no anfwer is returned
dear unhappy Mifs Harley—ah ! that
1 had never feen thee. Adieu.
RdWARD HxAVILAND,
G

5
4
Letter
\
»•
t ;
i ,
1:
t|
L , r .
n:
I
11:1
H'-
it:
ii 'r;
1-- (.
■ I *.
hi
‘M
i| ii •• 1

m
iifi. ‘
iii : •
ri It
‘ .1 ' • 1.
' :i: ji
:	‘■■'■i: ill
•	■•r-'i -..I
'	. !l
r.- ' «
;	• ; T
■
1
^	' ' <r
'i '- ■ 5 lit;-': ^
.1 • •

J * r
■ -f
lOnhi
Ii
l!
i|S
■ i.'
'i-	>
r -	•
ill! Ill
t'
B Di>


SP,
t
t
If
.i»:
f ♦
I't'
i
■lU

15
C'
L 1
If
I

111
('{
i": ‘
f‘ <
I
i?i!
bfi
1
; I
iiL'li' rc
rY-'y:'	:

h*:
}\
>■ -i
Licte :■
h
|t'l ".L’ ;
'!i	•(	■

'?i: >')
y'lM , ■■
•hi i -! . •. .
> . I I
'i
r ;
I /
•h'lj. -
.;i i' ‘
in:
t : I •« I
M
, . . • ,

, t I
, 1
.	. ■	I
. <	> I
Cb d sb ^ :;i 'bb .C
■V
M.
■} :
I I; 1 '1 ■ L '1 , 1 !
■b I
'ii'C'...
b‘ : n;
. t
; { I
•‘.D 1
p; ,	'•
i,ii '
i'bi ; V
M-h ■	•
.Dll
I!
M I .
;' I •

. r ■j,
.■| •.
I’;-
■1.
('i t
• I
\ I

<. \
n"
■ T ■
Ml
. }•'
I < :
.1 . • i
i; ■ '•‘ S'
!•*' hte ‘ i!|:' bi, 1
, 'L
'.1 '■.

( 15+
)
LETTER XXL
MISS SEDTEY TO MISS SEYMOUR.
w ILMOT has made his appear-
ance
m
handfome
the drawing room,
and
very
—very agreeable, but
intolerably impudent, a very amuSing little animal however. Mifs Villars
Ifill the fame—Soft, mild, and dejeded.
Mr. Mountford quite difagreeable,
the hore of the family. You blame
me for having been filent thefe three
weeks j I was developing the charac-
ters of our vifitors, from which topic
permit me to depart, to felicitate ray
Emily on her approaching union.
You are highly to be commended for
your difference:
choice. How
from
very all I have
reat the
heard,
between Sir Edw’ard and Mr. Woodley,
your propriety will I hope be rewarded
by uninterrupted years of happinefs,
and now I will return, to our party.
We really fpend our time in a very
pleafant manner j Wilmot flirts with
us
/
Li I
' 'I
!i ■
u:i
(
55 )
\

US
f
all. But I feel more rapturous
pleafure at a look—a word from Mr. Belford, than the attentions-of my raids
dan gerous—^fent i men ts—m y
s
belide
Emily;—were I to liften to hope,—' I might believe myfelf the happy ob-jed of a rather peculiar attention from this mofl amiable of men;—but let me not ■ deceive myfelf,^
ling,
---tis more
than probable I am wrong, Emily,-no more in him then common-place trifling.—There is a kind of chagrin, an unaccountable fomething in his air and manner to me, and a reffraint, yet a degree of pleafure in his fpark-
brilliant. eyes, inexplicable—be-caufe he Idfes all this, when he ad-drefies the Lady Mountfords, or Mifs-Villars, . then difplaying an- enchanting animation, a fire,- yet a fweetnefs, and tho’ an elegantly polite general attention, a degree of unconcern.—Mr., Mountford is beginning toaddrefs n^e with a filly, ridiculous particularity that is already growing difagreeable.
Is?


)•
,• j I.'
it
lit
I i
MS-!: i »•
if-
;k
:ii.
;■!!
t i,
ill
1-
S; ii,
'■ 'j !i
1. i
t
I.
ii'-r
irr
i'iCl
I
b‘-;'
biii
idb: is
11-:: ■} iii,!: ;!:
iii'L !■!
: ii
i!!'
bS ii
khi;.
jU; 'I
ilk’;
:: ii. '1ST,: (:•
i-b Sl.
ii'' ■ I
iliS;


: •. .
II
. 1
‘ ■ C.i
■I..
ill;.; bi- iii ''h ' il A' ii!
iipdl:
ill
y;i|;
r;:‘i i i)!d :
I!:
i!;.
K,'
3:31!;
'.-i-V 'i.'-
.ji j ! •!/
,1 ' • bb-
-i.
' l> .
U;
mri'
ii i ■l::i
iii	A •. i
11 * 1	iii *. 1
If	; 1 I'l 1 •
« \ li'i	i . >:
• i| i'll	1 (! 1
i	n '
ill	1
. »'
;f : C' •
■ ; 1'	. I
hft : L !
I, ‘
il
r

f ’'ll
1“ ll..
i'illli
.:iii t

IS
i' I
'ili;
bli : : i:i

^ !	,‘r'>	. •
I <
■»p /..
;• li: :"T

: I, ,
-	■ c
• .f
; . ’ 1
s f.
if •; i
■: . I
' I
,1 :■’
S '1
• ■i
. :i'
. I p	'
I • •' ' .
i "iiiilb
J < 1 I.
:i M '!
I • • L ' '
•' i. ,! (



( I i
• iii i»
I ; d.\
SU'!-;[
‘T ..
"'fM'i!;
l!
II
.1
• 'I
p'b :
: . ii . •!.!
ihi
:i^h
iii;
r I;' < i
I
I'' '
I •;'
I'VOi
‘li
. iL
i:
{ . i
i’
•b
• ,f
; ■ :'M
l.i
!| .r.’Mi
lie
I • p I
. i i
Hr
,, I,	I
,".. i;

'b:
4. ■
iii •'
•lih
•Id.
Tid!
•: ' i w;
• I I'
^ ,di;
-.1 |L lii
-hi!
.S' • .bi
«>•
, " ^ O’.
^Tii
. A . ~r 1


iibiii!
>
( .56
'1
y
In Con tin u a tio n
We were at a delightful Ball lalt night at Lord Rufport’s—really a kil-
ling group of us dalhed into the rooms.
The Ball was a fancy one, and we
were (to ufe Mrs. Sullen’s phrafe,)
<<
a
DrefTed elegant as youth and imagination could reprefent.”
Lady Catherine and Lady Eliza
Mountford went in a coach v/ith Bel-
I	•
ford and Mr. Mountford, and Sophy
Villiars, Wilmot and your friend in
another. Some little difference Belford
conceived at my accidentally accepting Wilmot’s requeff of going in the carriage he did, and being handed in by him; not but I muff teil you Emily,
he is not eaflly offended or liable from
the trifling occurrences in life to pique,
or I lliould hate him
—no, my dear Eelford is all that is charming;—this little circumffance altered the Situation
of affairs, tho’ neither our fpirits nor the good humour of the party;—he a&ed Mifs Villars to dance, and
Wiiraot
h'D-q;
fW'd:
15
/
Wilmot dear little foul, elated at my
condefcenfion, prefumed further upon
it by afking me j the night palled ofl
exceifively well, notwhthllanding the
general flnpidity of a fancy Bail
I
would rather have been Mr. Belford’s
partner I confefs, and w’ere I to flatter
mySelf from his looks he would have
preferred me, but by our behaviour
v/e made others happy. Capt. Wil
mot I can anfwxr for it, and the to
all appearance cold Sophia, feemed to
have got a touch of the promethean
•fire; Ihe and Wilmot both danced di
N
vinely, and tho’ they are wery little
iheir forms are proportioned with a
delicate fymmetry. I need not fay
Belford alfo excels in this : the beauty
of his perfon, his air and grace fhews
he can never be imperfedl in th

accompliIliment. Before four in the
morning wm came away, and returned
in the carriages appointed as w^e went: it w'as fine moonlight. Wilmot and
Sophia fell aflcep in the coach,
but the beauteous afpedl of the stcy
engaged my attention fo much, I did
not
< ' 1
its;
!e
i|!
‘	i;
I	S.
} ■ *
t:
S
I I * I
r*

• I-
I >1
I i!

i{
■si;. It
:'!!■ Ir

u
':i I!
.1-
li';, ;l
|i;i i
:. I
It’
S'
'' ‘ I
■; l:l;
' ■	; t ui
. "1

III
; k«1 I ( . •
I i’. I'.
to
'■ • .
b,. ■ 'll .1 ‘
■i . O'
k’li!
’• :| ir
I.:
Sil IS
» 1 I I .	■ ■	»


'» I.	, *
I
S' i:
C
lit
‘u l I
i'iC '
I ii * 1

-IMI I:
Ni.i'
( 1 : 1 S.
I • ;
.,1 ;•
» • •
tyh
liHib'
•:< ,M It:;.'
.'C = L'-
fi -.-i r
I-	'
U'‘'b' 'it •
I ••	.. t ■ I ■»■
;	■	' I

t ‘'i.;: ;T
I' 1: ''lii
I'll. ; ■.'!
! b bb
nic ct'bl
" ': lb,'A
b	. ,1

t	.
■.!'i hi!ii chi ::a
j ; t ; ,
; i Su--.ll
•	l!
:.-V- 'li
IS ; ■-.]
■ • •• •' ‘
* ! i
b Cl:
1 :b! ‘•|i
. I L J. ♦
c:i, ■ - ‘ r l!i: ’A
'' iib: ,:'h
L'i'ii
1 ‘4b; 'Hjl
•il'b.iUt
. .li.i iU
isrii'lbj
n' <	' i
■ r'
"i-
ic : i H:;
'h •	■
■’ •} i 'li;
• • U • • I ' ‘
C ^ SI:D
■'Si!'
i "i iii
i
* ■ , 11 -
i ' :
II
■	1 I
■	i;
• I .
i'.i.,:!;
so ill
r •
i ■ ■■ ■■
I ''
: -l.jl
j 'V;	{:’•
I
I : I' •!
' lb •
it';' ! . j
j i!
i'':-: liii
i:b--0; i
,i: I ii 'ill
S'
'S bit
i'l '‘il'-
=.'i 'b
s;:: •' I
: i ‘. L t '

Ij,
I. .
r' ‘
’ it
<11 u
, ;
Ji-i'Li ic- ■
II
. ' 4
41
t‘ i
i -viiH
lib- .h.il
1-1	Hi! I
V’d. LI
t’' ■;	= f
■; •	.• *
. ;	'll'
C iliC


* i- ■' Li)
St
.l;i S; :
0	*«. M
.r.bi
Cl' •!: ‘b
Sbi'lj: iV bj!|
f ' "ii!!
.. ! ! - • ' ■ !
L|P
■ T
Ss:-1.^ :4s:i! liiciNli/
Ilf
is
ii'vljr' ii
^4 c:-<
T-iiii it) ■■iii''i
(	^58 ).
t	•
not giye way- to the influence of Morpiieus, alike in her Sleep as when
awake, Mifs Villars was .in a calm gentle {lumber, whilfl the animated Wilmot frequently {farted, and more than once pronounced my .name aloud, which made your Caroline “ bluSh in “ the dark.” When we had arrived at the Abbey [from which Lord RuS-port’s is ten miles, which made us come away fo foon,] I caught hold of MiSs' Villars’s hand to fee if {he was eafily awakened.^ Is it you Belford,” [Said {lie, gently flarting] and Sighing heavily
as lire awoke.---Adieu.
Letter
1 )
( i$9
LETTER XXII.
MISS SEYMOUR TO MISS SEDLEY
\
Morton Houfe*

Jp RO M the conclufiori of your let-
ter I am inclined to believe Mifs
Villars is captivated with this all
conquering Belford—but She is. nothing
to me j his only for you I am con-
cerned.—A fenfibility the moft trem-
blingly alive, and a taffe the moft ex-
qnifite in my friend, has diredled her
admiration to Henry—he may Rirt and
flatter, but ah ! my Caroline, he may
not love;—I wish you weire in an equal-
ly happy fituation with your Emily
blefl—fupremely bleff in the affec-
tions of her Woodley. We have a
Set of agreeable vifitors here, and the
coterie at Morton vie with thofe at
Mountford. My fwain and I walk
by moonlight in the improvements
5
which are very beautiful: Our groves
and waterfalls are uncommonly ro-
mantic, and the dufk of the evening;
particularly
n
It :i

i ‘
; I
ll’i 1
C 1
>1 ' i
L !
;l:| I
I I I
1
I
: ■ l‘
I I'
i’; il

r (.
ih
I’
i>^
1!
i: '■
; I
• t''
r*
• I "
'1 ;■
1
i,i 1 d.' -
' I ‘
IL i;l.:
:;! ii;'
‘I 'i .J .
Il i
i.,'
I • ; L
’ I■
'.i;


*
: ii; 'll
«s.
i:. i

i:
Iff
ii .1'
So
1
f I I o
L f I' ♦
:;'s c

ISI .:t

I'i. .
!,L, • I
, 4
.IS 1- ■ i I



: ' 1 bd
:.r* i'
'll;'
I I
; i!
■. <
■f ■ '
I'.. ■
';'
I.'. I


hi
•1^
■S4
• '( ■ ul!
!
\
! ici ::hl-r
I-

ill iiiiii
r i; i': S !'!'; m.

' .1 i-.'ii iiiiiii'
'S •b:;:-i’-b
f
» ii’.f
'i rs'lr
hi,;
■| •' 1
Itli:

, L •	1
lir r‘
!• » o
J '
:fb
i:)
i' i-l 1 *. 1;^
t.
. Lli
;» ,ii
r ■'

;ii
i|
ii li''
H I
.w > •
M iH
I I •
ill
■•li
:u
I
L'll'iSi
U
il! 1
f* .
»: Ml i
'i ilih'iii
1:^:1111::
vClSis
Ml
ilil'lij'l
(■in
L V'if
. .. |1 : -.1

n t
D'
! . i •
I. .
I ^
iS:.ii:i!i
‘	III:
»; ■ i

!, I
15	M
i!i Cii
1«
. ; i.'.*
hit!:;
If
ISS.'-I ■ •
i! I'i'hi ,
1,1 li* i»i

«bnb Ii''!!.'..-'
‘ii'Tte-'; l!i| iil'H
’.-iL
'Lii.!' i!‘ . .,1 I
Ii -	*	. "I
ihH'• ; *
lli vi|:: iVhlii
I
I
iC:	;
’f-..
irV'bhi
1 • ^
Tl-..
-I
I* rt ••	.
:i- •
'•‘iS;:
ii
|5|
l!,r
fhi
n:
I'iliV. j!
■ r
iib

llfb'l J l!t'(
{ ' }. b
! |i|:
‘II
i'lri
I. t It
;iih
I
111
'"A
iT!!>
' ll;0
iflM
!|i.i
;!ii!
!;• '*
It'
Li,.
ill ib

!
:l'h’

I it;
V.it
,!S
'■.ii
ii
ibr.
I
( i6o )
particularly pleafes U5 : the landScape
fading to the eye, the awful itillnefs
fills us with a kind of the moil pleaf-ing dcjediion, and the gloom around:
Deepens the niurmer of the falling floods, And breathes a browner horror on the woods.”
The ruffling of the leaves trembling with the fanning breeze, and the
moon afterwards rifin
what Scenes
Sedley, to ffray by v/ith my Stre
phon,
“ At Such an hour and Such place as this.”
I am not certain I Should truff my-
felf with Belford,—but Charles is So
gentle,—their difpofitions and theif
perfons are certainly alike, yet there
is a difference the higheff in their
manner.
The important day I teized to death to name
am
do
yon
know I am growing prodigioufly Serious my dear. Did 1 tell you I have
heard my aunt Melbourne is very ill.
I am c]uite of temper to day, Caroline,
and will therefore conclude,—conclude
—for perhaps the laft
name of Emily Seymour.
time byj th
s
Letter

(
I ;
««»
LETTER XXIII.
M1S3 SEDLEY TO MISS SEYMOUR.
F'
EW men are without
Wilmot is a complete coxcomb. We
have had an elegant ball at the Abbey :
the rooms wTre decorated with all that
imagination, falhion and tafle could
exhibit, Sestoons of flowers fupported
branches of coloured lights: Nay,
a Venus in one of the apartments
condescended to hold them (to a bril-
liant party of cotilions) when inter-
mixed with a wreath which carelefsly
hung from her hand of blowing rofes
Wilmot, after pafling about five
hours at his toilette, made his appear-
ance. Wilmot, juft a Jeflamy, a Lord
Foridville, with all the conceit of fuch
charaders advanced through
tlie
rooms--he advanced, my Emily, glow
iiig with delight and certain of the ad-
miration he infpired, imagining him-
felf completely conquering, and that
no little execution he committed on
the Ladies, “ And little hearts to
flu tter
ii
V.
ji
I
hi
it]

tf’ I I
i
.V.
mi 1
i’
K.

• 1
viq
■
I
■n

i'i
ll.
;fb

Ml
!h:
•' M ♦ M !
ll;! M'' htf :! t


Si- pT’ Mi: h
•t;,
M Hi:
1
•t.



j.
id T
lid! 1-!!
i.ll ’ 1
U'j

CL
iiiP

Mt

! n
t t.
I i-
• '
I ,
i I
‘ It
•I I
i!i
1SL
i.ll
T
W
i'i
iii
II
to '
:.l
i i; 11*
U; I I
5-
{• ih V rl'
Ih I’s
^1.

II
■;-r 1 !i-Ite : N iictc

’«r

Vfl::
V
I'i
ilii,, liii '
1|:'

ilfti

(M
[i
it«’t
i{
liUJ
f .
Ij
i!h;
ll‘ I
HL I
i‘i: h:
ili-T

I:

tyi
if
n'i:
Hi!
it !
\
■ • 'U--IJ’t
ill If ll
• 'Mil
W- ;.li
:j(l «|*
ili!
Sr i: i
'IHini].
■"O’
. i • ^
'■ r.
mf-'A {
ir'
•t;
'H
I ^	t-':
.. 1
.2-
-^;»1 ;
ni V J!
}
Ri1
^'i ^ a F'
a? 1
- :} ■ ::i
:-i:i r
-■	-. d
1!!
' * i

n

^ ' "ii'
• : p-n»H ’
wtl ;::;!i;
Si.-rif-«* *	.1
■i ih ■•;
dc;:"!
•.n.. , 0

U,.

S C :
.... - 1
.r--h:bn: ’ ;-;m
MifPi
i
ii' .f. ■;

i
H-
ifiN'f
p'
J
li }
is hHd
' Tl'c : !• ih
L liiSj .
LOis!
lJVS
' i . • ■ ; O
iiil
iirfi;!
ili’
!*
I
■uii|
SpPI
iOpO-
Pif^' iliillLt
litTJf
ij'b'L

'	V	1	.
i'i
”‘,0.
iiO'bv t
iijS
iiiii'i
■ii'r f
: Plifip \ ' iii^^
PW
ili
’HSrSS':.
\^d^\
hjikupl!
is-=
{f ^
ifftij
liHli
\
• s
when
(	162 )
^‘Tluttcr at a Beau.” compared to many char.iDers in the ■world is a very innocent one ; it’s a obaraDer in which no virtues of our own are polluted and no vices con-
firmed': the pallion of drefs and the
exultation of con
engrofs. the
mind: thus though itv mighf beinfi-nitely better employed,'. it* might on -the other hand;be much more dange-roufly: a man of really brilliant understanding never fuffered himSelf to dwindle into the character: he has a contempt forTuch beings, but notwithstanding, libertine courfes of dif-stpation he will think juSfifiable. The moSf delightful criticism on the ftage, in w^hich many comedy’s have Strikingly Set forth a coxcomb, for years has laShed in vain ; the charader by a few will'ever be kept up. I will
Emily give an example of its merit when compared to others^ by the history of two Ladies and" two Gentlemen I knew. In the north of England lived a family of the Dor-mcrSj- who. had,..tW0i daughters,' Eudo-
fa
( 1^3
Sa an’d Belinda ; they were both beau-
tiful, but had no fortunes: an old
gentleman a Mr. Severn propofed for Eudofia, the elder, tho’ Ihe had
not
then attained her feventeenth yea
JL «
his fortune being confiderable, fhe was
forced by her family to confent, and
in a Short time they were united, foon
after which thcv retired to their feat
m
a neighbouring county j Belinda
lived with them, and three years in
retirement flowly elapfed.—They were
both extremely volatile, Belinda par
ticularly, who regretted want of for-
tune
fince it prevented her
figuring in London.—The kind ffars
of Mifs Dormer were propitious,—and
the return of a brother from the West
Indies, or rather his generofity in
presenting her a noble fortune, enabled
her to gratify her wifhes. Mr. Severn
was prevailed on to let his wife ac-
company Belinda, who promifed to
pay all their expences, and he being old and infirm, staid in the country
whilft Mrs. Severn and the exulting
Belinda, stew tranfported to the me
tropolis.
'1
ji m\
i ¥\
r
H'.
ill
. I

1
f l! ^
■IP f:
II
If
I.’
hh
VC
1).^
*•1
it
i::
Ilf
i:
'jX
di
. k.
V
Lr
rl

III H
i!; 1! Ij
tir
r;i
r-

Ki.
If
1
I*’
\r-
PI
i)i
\i\

ft
1:-
iii
(h
Lf
la
l!;.
i\.:

Sil
i ^
ia. U '
m ^
li
1 *
tI.
m.
::
!■
} 5
id
H
hi:
d!;
iili
r*.
lih
f
up
i.}<



P
Wiii!
^ Cl
!;li!
iin
liiiF":
.ill
h|L'
fill!
if!!!
bii
III!
wjljlp
it I 'I
Mil
P •
Hi
fll'
ti
III
I-
UP S,>i
h'H
ilifl
T'

1 ill
■1*1
m
a;
iir
II
h


m
lih


il

!i!
•r:
' «	- »l ■
ih C:it ‘
■j • '
•• ■»
i Wr C.
I.;-:
n:-.- o»
T I-!'?*
! *. t !‘:r
I'.	■•’ »i
nit
ir
fa f -;iv ;
1!;^ T‘^
lb -dfT

T en
J * i •
• *	• I *
KthS'.'^ '
ir 5i
j. .
•* .B ^
'!■ ■ fv'‘ :

■- 1 ’ - V
R!
' ’ II :il
mri
:* ■ H
r-'i.
"I
•1
: }

,, k
: .ri
'vTv'^r
■ :HH
T 0 . •( '
“ . u
i ’, ‘f1'
'■= . “-.'J H, .'
!;l l
■	H hii
■	j —
.....
: :
.*■ : .t*L ,'
'■ :
■ 1-, :.

• f:.	• *	'
•	►‘M'h
*»
^ He.
.	'■. P
' •' ♦
'fI It* [)>• '
it:i;

i' ,1 ■

C'C".
I .
■	.	' it


• ■' A r b!-
Si. • 1 !
•-li ‘ r
ir
i dri
f . 1 •
S ‘‘:J f .
I 64
t'ropolis. They took an5 elegant fur-
iiilhed houSe for the winter^ were in-
troduced to people of the firff diftlnc-
tion, and fbon made'their appearance
in public.'—Eudofia had delicate feel-
ings, and' looked .reServed tho’ gay in
her behaviour,.while the moff exquiSite
life and Spirit anim.ated the beauties of
Mifs Dormer, but notwithflanding he Sparkling Scenes in which our rural
i
nymphs fluttered, notwithflanding the
beaus- that hourly Surrounded them,
their* hearts were invulnerable for a
time. On the birth night
went to St. James’s, and that
aufpicious night attraded univerfal
attention from their native beauty and
flfnplicity. They were afked to dance
by two gentlemen, Mrs. Severn’s part-
ner was a Mr. Townly, and Belinda’s,
Mr, Audley.—We will leave them in
the Sets and give a charader of the
partners
Jerry Townly and Tom Audley
were two of the firfl rakes of fafhion
in town. Tom was the younger Son
of a country Baronet-, and at eighteen
Shewed
(	i65
h
J
lliewecl his taffe in drefs.
m was
at fir ft the bnck of the country, and
after funk or roSe which
Soon
you
pleafe, to the beauj his firft appearance
in tliis charncler wts corning to the
country church with two watches,
coloured ftockings, breathing all arabia.
The Baronet had great difficulty to fit
out the fervice, and wdien they return-
ed home, feverely chaftiied him for his foppery, Tom however was inex-
orable, and at the eledbon ball made
So dazzling an .appearance that the old
gentleman locked him up on his return
home. Andley w^as a lad of fpirit.
he could not bear the infult, and re-
folved to be reven2:ed; wlien the
family w^ere in bed he broke a window
in the clofet he w’as placed in, and from thence being
light and alert,
jumped into an orchard, from which
he got out, went to the next town
where he pafied that night, and before
day Set out for London. Intowhat a fi-
tuation now had he thrown himfelf! he
w^as utterly unknown, and depending for an uncertain period omfifty pounds
which



I j-*
[i	I :■
i;	i i
tt <
}i
•{,
'• I
i‘ I'C
It I -’r
id 1 > '

Hi
i !
!C'
ii r
u • •
I . i 1
II'' I
• I
. I.
O'
b 1'
Id
♦' f Ui
ii< i
' T. 1 '■ . I
i !i-- {I
II '
,, 1,' >.
b A •' i:
hr:
If
i
< i ’
!ii;
•V .
:C' o ’:r 'O'. ■S'
•;L .'i

U*'" Hr,
•' t.:
t ■, t ,
:i, LC ■> !'?■ ‘ j'!3 kc:

Pll : li ■;>'
I;1
if
k! b;'h h Uhl Cl-


Si
hi !h • 'c;
liioii'itt
i'i
H* iryrt,
t
' b; :i|
i: I;-.
'I '!.i t ■; r |,.^l
r.i ' rC'Lr'
iifdco.l:
Isiijifi;
I ii i f ; pt o O-dJi' tL
hit- !
i: i !f
•s b
IC .
b
)!■
■;!l

I
JJ O' I
ill* !
fir;

flip'
}L
r1:.
' { H '

'i li
: . ‘ ■' 'll I;
, • I; <.
c ii::
I :i
-i''
t • •
•; ;i ^ . 1 ‘
• > •
I ■	t • :
•i“. b;M
•,
!•
It:
}■
ibfillli'
i i!
■ Vi
,i r ■ i'i
’'jil
I i 'f,i-
1 ’ ‘.'Mi
I* ■
,»'
' t i '■'! I ••
: Vi'-
: L’'

, *
' < ■ > I'll.'
! V'.
{ ' 'S’-'
i'Vh
. ■ i'
V b
! !bi ii ■
}
' - Tj; '
1!
11 !
t..
'll.

.M
'■I.
f . I
Vi V
iiiir
f i. ■

L;
)r'
liC
ii !
P',:
His
• , t c I'L:’ I i.'h •
tr ■ I
»• ! i'< '
:SH'
-ii;
»■
/ .!■ ! siHs
■ .,.j
■'.I ■ 1
it
. iL
I > * M
* I*' ■ ’
( 166 )
\
which he had brought with him, Tore WT'iit, to a hotel, and then, and not until then, began to refleD, tho’ by no means to regret his condndt. Tom formed a reSolutiori worthy of him-
m
feif and promiiing his future genius^ he had heard his father mention many relations and acquaintances in London,
places where they lived, all w^hlch he perfeOly remembered.; he ruhig the bell, and ordering
togetner wi
O
1 n k
pen, Anthony’s
feigned Sir admirably, and forged letters of introdudtion for him-felf, fei^eral of which were to different people of diffindfion; and as foon as he was dreffed, vrent with them him-fclf, and was not only politely but by fome affecHonately received, had conftant invitations to their hoiiSes, and foon found' the fuccefs of his
A very few weeks however had not elapfed before he was reduced to the utnrofl: difIreSs, had launched into expences, and was committed to the Fleet prifon: it was while here that his acc|uaintance with Jerry TowTily had commenced.—Jerry
Strata gem.
was
-• i:
: i’i
I
: I .
I d'»»»
; i
>r-
I •! i •
til !
.ij

was
(	^^7 )
a profefTcd rake,— a
fighter,—a profefTed gamefler and a profeffed > devil; he
v/as
old
m
the
fervice, and Tom became a difciple j in a little time Townl}^ and he VTre delighted with ..each other, and while thus employed, we fliall leave them. The Baronet never conceived, but that his Son was concealed in The country, yet was fo afSeCfed at ,his elopement, that it preyed on his health, and he expired .while Tom was in the Fleet.; his title and fortune devolved on the eldeft brother who was on the continent, and notwithffanding his difobe-dience, five hundred a year and five
i
thouSand pounds w'ere left to Tom. He now immediately difeharged his debts, and bidding adieu to the prifon walls, launched into the gay wmrld again: he had juft fettled his affairs when a general enlarr^cment fet Mr. Tcwnly alfo free, and completed the happineSs of his friend. They took a houSe and refolved to live together. Audley’s fortune was in the hands of a guardian, who rcfufiog fome of his
unreafbnabie
) • I .
e;
h; I ^
i- ri
I . I •
:iii
L ‘ (
1 !

f 1"-’.
< I
i!'i 1
I »■
" i' ll: C
li:
i ‘
< I >
I ; 1;
I >
1-J
i- (i
11
^ 1
!t:-
, I

ii'
n 1' I
! k' I
'.' If
'! i'ii • 1 ■
I L

l-i' .
iS';
:
! ill ' ■
I ill' I
, i i'
1 •

•' I
I.'	.
!• '
m
fd
n

: I
Vi\
iHf
1S ihlji
W
•H'il
i V
11
IU7 - i
11
li
If
III
I
(’	168	)
r	»
unreaS' nable demands, he iTiarried a
ciu
aDreSs . to vex the family. Jerry was turned of forty, and if ill the fame; in breaking lamps, beating watchmen andrcai ng a gentleman out for a trife, paying his play debts with honour and playing alw-ays, no man was more expert than Jerry Townly^ he was for a courSe of years on the world,— an inmate of every bagnio by turns, and well known at all the public places j he is jufUy the dread of every waiter, fince the plural number of thefe unfortunate foot balls (kicked
only by the rudely vicious) he has Sent )
either to the other world or the incu-
rables.
which Audley
liad married, had charmed the world
by her abilities; She wms firif his mif-
trefs, and in a fit of love-revenge on
the family and intoxication, married
her: But die not being very conffant,
as might beTaturally fuppofed, figured
in tlie tete a iete of a inaarazine: in a very few months, a Suit for crim. con, was accordingly tried, and a divorce
procured at Dodfors Commons. The
Lady
ii t
( 169- )
Lady returned to the ffage, and Tom felicitated himfelf on being again a Single man.—Having now delineated their charadlers, w-e return to St. James’s.----—
—— Eudofia and Belinda were too attracting not to infpire their partners with love, if we fuppofe debafed minds capable of a refined pallion.—Townly and Aiidley became visitors at their houfe, and all parties were prepofTefied. Jerry, though not young, was {fill handfome and delightfully agreeable, and Mrs. Severn tho’ conScious of her error, found hcrfelf hourly more and more attached to him. Belinda’s affeCtion was juftifia-ble; Audley was in the full tide of youth and beauty, and both the Ladies were ignorant of their characters.: their real innocence and ignorance of the world made them fufSer themfelves to he always with Jerry and Tom in public, and whiSpers began to be circulated to the prejudice of 'Mrs. Severn. While matters thus'went on the received intelligence her hufband was ill, and immediately fet off for the North, but
H	before
%
:l .‘s


t ii
it i
lit L!?F
I !•
( )

i’jlli hit 1
lii| iM-!{
y.i ,M.|
I' 1
ij .
ill! jii!
h M
h[ii
bi i
"m

i:
i!
ii!S'!; =
t-

4
4
i r
before her arrival he had breathed his lafl;—She now propofed palling the time of her mourning in the country, a period which appeared ages to Belinda. It was imooffible not to re-
was
member Audley, whofe name
fcored and feared on every tree in the -country.
<
“ Of all^iSimions taught a lover yet,
’Tis lure the hardeft fcience to forget-;
‘ Ere fuch a foul regains its peaceful ftate,
“ How often mull: it love, how often hate,
“ How often hope, defpair, refent, regret,
“ Conceal, diflain, do all things—but forget.

The wifhed-for period arrived of their return to the capital, and immediately on being feen in public and Seen with Townly the calumny of the public revived, or had twelve moons expiration (to ufe a phraSe of Norvars) made them at all forget her, The lovely relict too late difeovered
e character of her lover, and to avoid the cenfures'of a prying w’orld,,gladly gave him her hand.—Mifs Dormer, fpite of the admonitions of her friends, Shut her eyes to the unworthinefs of
(	I?' )
Andicy, and eloped with him from
Raiielagh. Jerry figured away for fornc
time and then went to live in
a.
country part of France he faid to fave
moneys—this was a pretencej he left the deceived Eudofia there and -re-
turned to England, where he fold her
jointure to gratify the vrants of vice.
Mrs. Towrily whofe too great love
for him had been her only fault, nov/
is obliged to feek fubfiilence by being
Tutorefs in an Englifli
Diepp
at
e in Normandy; file bears her
fate with angelic fortitude-, and bleSTes
Heaven for a pious education which
enables her to do fo, and an elegant
one, fince it is the means of procuring her a livelihood, though a trying and
precarious one
Mrs. Audley being one night at the
play-houfe, was ravifiied with the
performance of an adirefs Ihe
never before feen; the charaDer was
the Fair Penitent, and highly fupport--
ed.—Belinda entered into converfation
with a Lady that fat next her, who
was well acquainted with all
H o
t h c
fcandalo
1 WJ
U3

if
!f i!'
i hif
ih‘
K!:-
.iC-
HI
■> till
i: b
i t
i i
b.
1
;!i =

'it
.. I
1-;

L *
Ij
i' I
i i
, r
I i
'I J,„.
!l!
' 1 ’ ■ ill t, 11 I-11 o.
1
! I
; U''!
" ‘ I *
Sif ^
i vj; ..
• i.
ii
■ t • I
i: ■
i!‘.

i 1 :
; I > ■
iL
1	1 h-, ; I
1 1C'
I’ ll
tj '1	.
; ■ 1 '■ ‘
h d'-'I I
ill
' I
t;l ..
|1,
.. i
' i
I,
ii;'
:*
.*
.1 ■'
’O .
i’;
•L I ! I ll.l «■
ll . > I
I :
t.f'
•
li'
Ii!
N;
I' <
■» I
< ,

't 1' •.
ii'idi'i


n. 1



i
I *
‘Al'i;'
ii I
• \r

: i >
i:
I < . ■. 11
iC
il
f!'
■ Ui;


IB
( 172 ) ,
Scandalous anecdotes of the town, and -pretending' not to know Mrs. Audley, informed her the adfrefs was divorced from Tom Audley :—This intelligence afSedfed her extremely, hut a happy chearfulnefs of difpofition, triumphed over fenlibility, and She is
lefs miserable than her fifter.—Audley and Belinda flutter away like butterflies baflcing in Sunfhine, and Townly having expended the widow’s fortune, is partly to his friend, and partly to the gaming table indebted for fubfift-ence.
You will perhaps ray dear Emily think this flory has not Sufficient ap-pofitenefs to the Subject at the beginning of my letter, the Townly’s particularly none^ but had Tom been indulged in his juvenile days, foppery might have Saved him from an abandoned life. Adieu.

Letter
(	173 )
LETTER
XXIV.
THE HON. CAPT. BELFORD TO SIR
BDV/ARD HAVILAND, BART.
/
Mountford Abbey.
DAMANTiN E chainsSeemtorivctHie
liere.^—Poll after poff bring letters from
my father j and my wife-eleLt (detefted
ioLind, but I muff name it as Doricourt
fays) is hourly'expeded in England.
Varied are the affedfions I have felt
nay, many women I have loved ; but
none with that ffrenuous warmth, that
dear erithufiaftic ardour which for
Carol!
me
I feel.—I have in mv owm
mind been layingout the future,—how
■very dreary the profpect. An engage-
ment as you fay not to be broke thro’,
allies me to Lady Amelia without the
fniallefl knowledge of her cfifpofitions,
and not a fentiment higher in her
avour than admiration.^—IVIy heart
another’s, I become a hufband with
indifference and regret.
You know little Wilmot who is in
our regiment, he has been here for
H 3
forae



Si

M;
r 1* *t*
1) t. J.
‘Lli.
fir
lb'
w
ifiii-
•' •<

■i.


r:

: LL
• Sr
4
,S
>•*'
• (
1 n
•t ‘
1 f

■
I O
1 -d
id
I \\
! i!! :
11 1


■ ;* 4
ill
a
... ■%
' ’I I
ii 'I
hr

i. .r
■ . •
;
I il
r I;
I
* ,
!» •
t i
. i..
' I*
I ' ! '
. t . .
I l.
.:;p
t. ’
O'
't
m
•. Sb
*. •?!, 1 ,< • lH'
: I*
!» '
'r ".H:!
j;i *l!ir ‘i
i ! : : J

", . h j
ii; .lii 1
•' idh !
i:

C rb I
i' 6'
... J
: !-A ’
I 1- ,i :
!h M'' d
■r i'b A
• 1 u
>1	r|->
i! 'Tj
T 'TC*
v:	i
!; mii
";l!i
1
ii
it..
I
t’ J
M 1

ir
i!'
ini
itisi*
it
ic;
.r-r
C|:"-
'tev: i,
.; 5h I
f
Li n
Kl.l. I V. I
LirL''i
ill
i ..'ib
ilil
■'tLi
til , I
I
‘ 1'. * ’ b!
'Li'i
•iib
in.[
r i
I .
¥
i
'll
1 •
Ifl

( 174 )
Some time, and is the devoted Have of
Mifs Sedley: he thinks however he
cannot afpire to her, andfighs in fecret
to me only, and as he was ignorant
of mine, confefled his paffion.—I wifh
he would transfer it to Mifs Villars,
another of our vifitants, afweet gentle
girl. Adieu,' Haviland
Yours
Hbnry Belforb.
(	>75 )
LETTER
XXV
MISS SEYMOUR TO MISS SEDLEY.^
How transient
is felicity here.
and how Hill falfer our expedfions of it
Caroline!—oh my friend, 1 am indeed
the moH unhappy of human beings.

Woodley !—-—yes, my dear, Woodley
is for ever torn from your wretched,
wretched Emily.
I have been
ftriving to compofe my mind for a
moment to acquaint my friend with my fituation—I fear I cannot do it;
why is not my Sedley here to confole me!—When I wrote lafi: I boaffed of
my happinefs and compared our Situa-
tions : I told you my aunt Mel-
bourne was ill,—that very night She
died: my entire expedfations of fortune
and of a very large one, were built
you know on her, wdth a great deal of
juftice, as She always faid I Should be
her heir: Slie had not made a will, and
conceiving her indifpoSition Slight, did
not then make one as She was always
alarmed
H 4
!i
t?
iitji
‘flrii:
!
i;
Am

An
U.-i
. :lOi !
iC;h'!
iMijio
iMrl
ilitei
I 1' ir
Ilf:-.’
- t
■ C ‘• V n
If
(is
11
i
. >
, f
I
i I
iSi" i
t
■it

i' U-.
n T
t •
lii’i'
h -it:-
i.:
.;»

* I
te. I •
<■;. ■ ! ■

I 'V;i i "L
r: M
i - ;i
H I iil
’ 4
; 1
) L
. I
; ■ K '
^5 i ’•!{
. j .
■ 1 . (
; > <
' 4;
: ;l
i 1 Si
:■ Mi r ; m;.m'
i I’fMi"
. I j'p ■!
• - M'.'ll

MV.
1? '
p!	;. 1
:•	I •
ii
• :	-	4
: 4 :i, I
ill, ''
!' I! 1 I •
110 . • » • •
pM l' ;
I !.v	.
; I n

i |i.

11
b ■ ' Mm ■
Ti-h
v!!:'
I	.'.	1	1
'	•	I	.	;	'
ilM !i
I
’	' ! •
I	' !i,’
i ■ ;•!
I < ii
I! ' a
! !‘i iM !
i.k
I t
i-l'j
, 'll
I I
h-:
=■
. N
! ::: I;
I ■ ’
1 I r ;•
i . I
b ■ B
I I
, ,(
•t '
" i
■'i

'1. .-'iV::
• I
A' i
■ i i \


II ,
-••L •' \
K'* :
■ bShfi
' 'll -t i'
i.lb,!: f
!- iii-1 r-

f
V
176 .)
■*14

alramed at the idea of death and con-
/
ceived' any thing preparatory to it Ihocking. In an hour when She lead expeded it, She breathed her laft, and by not making a will, her fortune which was twenty thou Sand pounds, with equipages, houfes, furniture, &c. all devolves on a nearer relation—a brother, and one who very rich did not require this addition. Tho’ I forgot to date my lafl letter I believe I was then on a vifit at Tunbridge j immediately on hearing of my aunt’s, diffolution I haffened back to Morton houfe,, and when the carriage flopped t the gate, I was amazed that old Mr. Woodley nor Charles did not come out to meet me j and Mrs. Morton received me rather with concern than pleafure, her eyes gliffened with the tear of fympathy as She folded me in her arms and afterwards led me into a parlour: I had been above a fortnight away, and v^heri I left home preparations were making for the wedding; every thing methought feemed now altered, a iform of v/ind and continual
a
ram
(	'77 )
rain poured from the heavens and
added to the gloomy appearance everv
thing wore: pavillions, temples, and
ruffic feats had been raifed in the gar-
dens and improvements, as entertain
ments were to have been given there.
From the windows of the parlou
AC
I fiw the tempeff had blov/n Several
of them down, every thing looked
changed, and from the fmiles of joy all wore the frowns of horror. I afked
Mrs. Morton where the Woodley's
were? She replied they had left that
place, and to Several quelfions I afked
concerning them, returned evafive

CL
n-
fwers, contriving alSo to be out of
the room except when at dinner or
tea. Mr. Morton fhe faid v/as out, but
expecled in the evenings the evening
however paffed on without his arriv-
ing, and your Emily was in the mofl
cruel date imaginable of forejeett
diflrefs, and uncertaintv. I drove to
^	j
■'amuSe myfelf with my harpfichord',
my library, drawing,—all w^ould hot
do,—a mind like mine, torn with fuf-
penfcj was incapable of enjoying its
H
r
■ufual

: 1

<;•
1:'
i. ;
» •
’ •
,1" T
i LS
I
: tii. I
• I
f '
.	. 1
I • I
i n i iiij
1 • cn
O'
! ! Mi
1 '}]
n
;{li
b’

!1 ■
'p: .O '.
. f
'L ■i''
;-sJ i!it - fl! i! ■
i ii
■ . L ■■
: i li?- !;■
' hi;i -
dshte..
i't
i
I,111
bii
r::
t. ..
• d'-'
I ' n
1 M
• i. ■
Ih:;:
i:Sii
r 1
5- j ' .
Mhi.
j-
I, -
I ■
i :
• I • . •
'i.C b
:-r . 1 • 1 . »
i i--- !'
i t <
lihl;
' "il< ); J
!' I • t , • i {'• ‘ ■'
■ li-l ’	'
i b ;
C J. 1 i :•! j
\Vi
•: i
'' . V i
!'■ 1 * *
J' .
't;:: :
ii ■:
: i! ;! ;
:ii;: !■!

!l|1lU i

•1 i 1
f ■til
: ^4 i
'•l-uPi if

rO

t Hi :'i;i Hj !
ililiCh!:

hl-ii ;b :
‘•ii’,'
Hi!!
Oili
fid’

Lii
' • I
III
;!-:i
i|L l;

« !}' !bsi 1'
‘'ll H •
• ; pi ;• •’
■ ’ hl
fmi
II:
!i:r-
hb;
Cl!::
'or
rth
ii:
• t.
U'
, IL I
'i-j •*
r '!■ I.in,
•L rv
iii
i
f;
I ’
h
I.
1 l-i
■: i-
I:
.1
r
f
- s
Is
i
r: I d. jb-
•*; I
bl'
M'ji
'b'
• ' L
'il
• I •1 .
I ,
J
L
-li
i' h
br
I' D'
Iribr
Nlf
Mf
ibb;
fV
•
■ L: i;!i:i
r'':'
t
■i: ’
:i J
t ‘
;.:f
r 'L
•kh
I :•
• C
'I “
i,;!
:!L'1
Ii
'i: •'
>■. « I;
'■ Cl'
i ■' I ■;
ni;-:-
i-
Oi.'i
c':';
•I *',
III
,i!‘
ID'S.
si:' hi I,
I	•> ; ■
ill,
i! 9
; I*
S
II	)' thjJ
( 178 ;
ufual avocations y at Supper my aunt grew extremely uneafy at my uncle’s not returning j at lafl however, before the cloth was removed he came, fe emingly fatigued and diftreffed : as Soon as the Servants were diSmifSed he
*	i
addreffed me thus.
C (
You
c;
(.i




are no
doubt amazed at the fitnation of things in appearance,—^you muff. Summon refolution my dear niece and confider every thing for the beft, but your propoSed match Mifs mily is all over.”------According
E
to my uncle’s ufual method, I make no doubt Caroline, but he confidered the affair divulged in the moft cautious manner, and looked indeed with the
conceit
of having
Spoke with care nolwithflanQing as he is the firff Sportf-man in the country, I am convincecS he confidered the loSs of a /over not to be compared with that of a heagle.
However, tho’ he had broke the ice as he called it, and in the best manner as he fancied, a general chilneSs feized me. and I funk fainting in Mrs. Mor-.
ton’s arms j—S was partly recovered
I m;.
:‘iC
l!h
.u;
Mi
IF
•TC
:n i
t
(	'79 )
by a Sort of Flilloah—from my uncle
exclaiming he thought the girl had

mre Jp 'ir 'td. “ My dear,’'—Said the
patient Mrs. Morton,—“ our Emily
4;
is deeply aSTeded.”—She is a fool.
44
Lucy, (returned he) had She married
4C
Sir Edward all this had been Spared.

-As Soon as I was enough recovered.
lo be able to bear it, I requeficd to
know the wdiole.
44
I understand Said my uncle, old
U
Mr. Woodley, tho’ fenlible of your
merit,
44
was chiefly plea fed at the
alliance on acconnt of your fortune
44
as Soon as Mifs Melbourne died,
44
and that he learned by her not
44
making a will, it was not to "be
44
yours, he told me he muft infifl on-
<4
his declining the match, and prc ci-
44
pitately “ Charles
th
e
along
hou fc,
taking
him without
“ letting him knov/ any thing of the
4
affair : your aunt and nie were ex-
44
tremely diSlreSI'ed at the affair, as
44.
wc knew^ how your aSFedtions ilood,
44
3.
nd w^ere inclined to believe young
Mr. Woodley was entirely forced by
4 4
hi

1 *
* f
,t
lb:
tI
<•


'!' li
■’‘Ml
jjf*
I ! '
bi !
• 'i;
; 'I

I
: Ik 111


j •'!
h M
i !
. C.
t
* 1 I
k, '
i; i:
1; :r;
Hi:
(’ j I' r

, ''
.	. J
J
dil

I	I
I	•
{
i,' II :
I :
i; ;
I,
,	..J
I	«	'
i!' '■ i!
a ; I, ■ I : 1
II I
i; :i
I f.
’S‘h h I •
U-i .11 ‘ I
'll S; f
■) Cj
• < i.
O 'p: ! M;!i
M3
I!!

Hii'LriiiiH
'Toteklb}-
- n-- I rl
j.
hk il'l*
l * il V * w


; t.:
IjM. -
■ ‘ i*' It "
. . 1 . ■ I !(
• 1 : h’U ■
lii
ilfNi
A .hiiLi ff
m
V
\'J


f.
I.L a j:!h
ii
;i<
Si

:h
I
f
fl*
I;
I,
Hr
:r
4'
'ii
>
iv 11 I *
k
Ii
i!,.
l5
It ‘ *

'. i’

I
‘i!
lijjr il'Li!'
iiSii'r
;■ • t'J. •

Lb
A
li
I I'bi if- >.
k:.„
iui t n.
I
fe*'
1.1! w-
Sr
ipi'
m
d‘ 1
n-L'T





4(

cc

(C
% m

t;


u
<(4
4;
i4
4C
44
i£
4(
C4
\
(	18o )
his father. While you eontifiued at Tunbridge we were in unfpeakable
and learning that the Woodleys were within 20 miles of
I went to the inn where they were j the old fquire feemed rather difpleaSed and furpriSed at feeing
I immediately however acquainted him with the motive of my vilit; I told him as matters had
thi
me
gone
fo far I
w’as unwilling the
alliance fhould be broke off, as I had a refpedf and efteem for his family j that indeed Mifs Melbourne’s fudden death had^confiderably altered my niece’s circumftances, as two thoufand pounds was all die could' now call her own, but I was re-folved to make it five, and came to make that propofal to him.—^Mr. Woodley fiill however declined and I was beyond meafure enraged and flew out of the room, declaring his conduct was both mean and difhonorable.—I came by miffake (proceeded my uncle) down a dif-ferent stair-cafe from the one I had

come
( i8i )
“ come np, which led me to fome
U
other rooms, and was fo engrofSed by
CC
U
U
(C
U
U
U
U
u
u
u
u
u

if
u

u
CC
ic
CC
CC
CC
^c
^c
the bulinefs which had brought me
to the inn, I did not perceive my
error, and was walking along the
paffage when I heard a window
thrown up, and
name
foftly
pronounced ^
my
the windows of the
gallery I w^as pafiing through were
open, and the fudden guff of wind in the area between blew out the
candles in the branches and left me
quite confounded.—Mr. Morton
was again foftly pronounced, and I
recolleded Charles’s voice.—I am
beyond meafure unhappy. Sir, (faid
he) at this fatal change of affairs.
I hope you will not think me® to
blame, as I affure you I am not—we
are cruelly feparated, but my heart
will ever be Emily’s j my father con-
veyed me from your houfe under
the pretence of paying a vifit, and
when we had arrived here ac-
quainted me with my fate : unable
to fnbmit tamely to this ffroke of
fortune, I ordered my horfes and had
fet

did
w\

:
4 .
■ I
In*
Is .
' I '
:)	t-.

I C 1 >1
'i !!'

II. • .
t i
i'si
lik: ;|:
u\
'll
I
. . I I *1 1 •- '

d ;i
!
; t ■
‘ :u
III
I
. j ' •'' I ['1
V .
It. :i .
ii'
i‘>;	't
’L ■!
'■M
t
r
i •

•N
• I ; I
iCi:!'
» :
• , I,
I'd 1
. .1‘: d
. ;r !•
’i' i- i
> I'i
<L }
t:
1 (i'	. 1.1
I'h -
Ilk b )'
h' ; i
C ;! :
iik' '! 1
1; ' ' ‘d
«	• • I
• I .	; ' ^
I jL ; 1
1.1' 1
ii!i:
!■!':
?; 1 I ' t' .
I I :
I'i:: c
' L ,■ lb'
M .

I ;
i ' I
^ : i
J
1( 'i'll:
' 1 1
' V' r.' ■
I'd'h •'
'm ' '.I i'!
'ik I: ::
i!-'i i ,
: v- r;.
.1' !,
! '^1::

I: ci.
r) .
:li
■ ■. t
;:i.
h;:'
hi:
li > I

fj
iti: ■ ;

tj'» S hi
iir:'! i!i! i I ij ;j'p.
'?|Sf
t i;

; t
! IT
■:T{.b
' i
,' I
'ii
r. I.



<• I
J
if'l

dr
I
•J.<!
■ fC
l:
;iii.
i:• ■ /. ,. I.:
i’f'
ii
' -‘ii
i'il
•vi
i «
;i
fi
;i
lil
:l;
M.l

.•i
■ fc‘
b!
I
iS
'S
!Cm‘
:h
• I' .
■ I
!• I
, J
' r
A\
hiv.
L‘hr
‘ y- *
iiffj i
J
m
I
‘A ’
I.
I >
* ' \ L‘{
.t^'1
;i‘i

■“. K
\ • : t
Si
L.J

ii I ’; * i: '
■i)
I i
•;■ i
.1 : u-:
•i.-;

iil'!
lU;. '
-h*. »
■ 1 iS;
;i!i ;
V-V
1.1 ! r
■ri lii'-* ■.
il ; h' Ij,-' 7
r* * 1	1.
;:m >.
cc

iC
(C
iC
cc
cc
cc
cc
cc
cc
cc
cc
cc
Cc
cc
c;
cc
Cc
cc
cc
cc
cc
cc
ic
( )
Set off for Tunbridge, refolving to
unite my Self (if She confented) to ray Emily privately there, but couriers were polled after me and I was brought back and confined here; my father has the key of my a-partment, which is only opened to
‘‘ fend me neceffaries of life
ih
e
windows are ilrongly iron barred and ,your friend Charles is here a ffa.te prifoner: in a few days we are to leave this and make a tour thro’
from the
Franc

nd Holland
cafement I knew you.in the oppofile gallery and opened it: the wind has blov/n out both our candles, and, what I have to requeft of yon is
to deliver a letter for me to
my
Emily, which I have wrote with a pencil in a leaf of my pocket book.”
Charles
—To this (Said my uncle). I ob-jeOed and pofitively refuted, as my countenancing’ the attachment would be highly improper, urged—-(even on his knees as he told me, for all was in the dark,) “ that I would be the bearer of the
‘‘ letter.
i:
<; 1 ■'*1 fsh
It-1
; h li’fi
'lb;!
:	• j.
[	183
« letter—-he
he could throw It
“ acrofs, the fpace between us being
“ not more than three yards, and
“ when he found I peril fled in a re-
“ fufal he befeeched me to afTure you

you were dearer to him than ever
“ and that if ever he pofilbly could
“ prevail on his father or regain his

liberty he would fly to his adored

Emily;—with thefe, words young
Woodley
the window
U
Searing further eonverfation might
“ occalion a detection,, as fome one

might come into the yard below,
“ and not:, being able to find a bell.
4(
down flairs.”
I groped my way Mr. and Mrs. Morton, in the moft
r
affectionate manner fpent a great part
of the night in confoling me ; about three I
went up to my own room.,
where I had liberty to indulge my
grief: when I thought all the family
were retired to refl, I walked into the gallery and opened the doors of a ball-room and a dreffing room wdiich had been laid out in a beautiful ffyle
oh!
for the nuptials of your Emily,
Caroline
ifl
! ’» * ‘ 1
ii.
• • : I
‘ t»
■ col h
ili‘:
ili b
1	,-v 1 -
]: t	'; 1
■ r ■ 1 L >	' 1 ,ii : .
• L :	i .. .. Li
	1 * ■ V
? i-	■, i
i 1 :• h	. ! \ s > ] !■
! i	1 , t ' 1 ? ,
cldi;:


te .|P
^ f ...e*
'’iV
1 :•
j'
. (L,	(,
[i bl-:
I i- bib ■
idi
.1
I
,, , .III,I


■ L .
1
I 'I
^0 ■■ ik K*
i» ■
r.
I. !'
U ' '» •
11 r
i!
• . ■ '' I
! ; •. t
rid I,
- .	* j '	•
I I
n
t « I
• i'
. ^	■ J
, ip
:u!
I :b.O
I, M '• II
'k d' i'i i
is ^
V ij ■
liiH'
ill]:
?: -I. :t
■	. I »
i.r • !
o \< '• • ' <
lii'ii'ir ■it;
i
‘ •
i’!' : (
I '
< 0
il I''


rh •:
IS
ictlii.
Ill]'
;n
t;
f •
n‘: in
Ad if (,
(T .1-
III
I-. b| !
:t ■ f(; |: 1. 4i • U ■ •» t
ili.CC;
:!i b
n ' I,
hi i!

rt-


1<
!f;
i<fl
: .1

i
h'!
:\h
t
ir
iW

i


i :
u
*,
iy
;il«

u

i
, /
i:

i
S'
0!
aS
M
ill
• f. >
i!i!
'5-
u
ik
d
(:
11
■K
:|
li


iii!;
ill:
iiil
S
:*.1i
•I J
>• r 1
N'
h'l i'-
I 4
3.
ii '
S'
liar
!i'
hi
B'
ici:
?;S


\i:

i
I
f.DL
( 184 )
Caroline, wi^h what anguifli did I now
behold them !—in the latter of theSe
apartments was a full length portrait
of Mr. Woodley, a benign fmile Sat
in my Charles’s features j—>1 wept,—I
foftly pronounced his name and heard
the echo along the walls.—-My uncle’s
account of his being confined touched
me to the foul, and his continua-
tion of affedion afforded me un-
fpeakable pleafure,—yet why Should
it, his father will wean him from it
and he will never fuffer him to be the
hufband of your poor Emily. Adieu
Adieu my Caroline
L E TT £ a
( 'i85 )
LETTER
XXVI.
MISS SEDLEY TO MISS SEYMOUR.
Mountford Abbey.
OU arc indeed my Emily to be
pitied.—I wet your letter witn my
oh! my friend, to be torn as-
letter with
tears
you fay from the amiable Charles,
but do not I befeech you give up to
unreffrained grief; his father may yet
relent,—fome unforefeen change ia
affairs may happen.—'-The great dif-
poSer of all events afBiCts us for a
while, and thefeare necellary trials my
Emily.—Virtuous aCfions, and refolu-
,tion and fortitude in our aflliDions,
will either here or hereafter meet the
deServed recompenfe.
You were right in your conjehxure
of Mifs Villars’s partiality for Capt.
Belford—She indeed my Emily loves,
methinks Sophia gives diftinDion to
herSelf by her admiration for this moft
angelic of men.—As She appears the
moft lilent and referved little creature
m
n '\rb
ii' ir;
b j-,.
if he.

’ M
h|»y-
I ' I
:ii
‘b
ili i'l.
! '
r' ‘
p
V .
! >1 i,

L '• i';; 11

j ! !di
> 1 .S;'-r,

ct:!;
1

ir


V. >.
Ir
I i‘
■m
■ 11=
Hf.
0 w

•Chi
•II
P -ilii I"
Cl' '“i



'pel

I
te
hb S15
Up
KirvPl
kwf\
Hi:

if'll-
ib'r '•
-N-
■ I V.1
-iif

ibiiU
vu
IT -1 .T
■m
irifeb
•» \--o
1*. .J. t ■

tti
.1. i* O -.,
‘ I. •< ] t <

' '' •
•s • *	■ •: •
t . =ri
'•J.b
.1 • ‘'I 's
hi ■■

II,hi
f'f :•
f,M- 1
4. JO

m
sit'
a

ii
'"t

ml {iS 1
'Id ’’P
!*fc|
t* *
te
Is
lU'Pk
-e'^! ;

. --U 1i'3l
h :

r-Ti4

ih
li
hi
'i
:.
i;
h'i
II’
lb i!
if
I
r-
i
(K:
r^'[ .1
^ R
u
■
I
0
;S
r t
J>.
3>
t
i;
u
'iii
■l.i
i
I
i
I
;i-i


'■Ti'' I c't
I
:,}H
( 186 }
inthe world, chance and penetration like your Caroline’s alone could have discovered her fentiments- my fuSpi-' cion was firif awakened by her more than pleafure of dancing with him at Lord Rufport’s ;—yefferday evening I was in the garden, and the walk I happened to enter wms divided from another by a tall laurel hedge; the ruffling behind convinced me there was fomebody infide, and by their voices I foon difcovered it to be Lady Catherine Mountford and Mifs Viilars. I Ihould have haffened away from liffening to any particular conversation, had' not the name of Bel ford' raifed in me a curiolity not to be repelled tho’ unjuffihablc K tty is her deareff friend and confidant, and not a Secret of the little heart of Sophia is kept from her.
“ As.he pays no particular attention, to me (Said She) I am very filly in being fo much prepofTefTed in his favor, yet oh Kitty”--here a turning in the walk prevented my hearing the rest :—when they came round
again
U
(C
I
5

a *
ii
(	i8? )
agaiir—you know MountSord (Said She) Belford honored me (So he


did Emily) with the appellation of
U
Sifter; this familiar manner of treat-


ing me excited naturally a lively eftcem,
U
And love approached me under friendjhip’s
“ name.’^
Here my dear, Mr. Wilmot came
up, who leading me into another garden
prevented my hearing any more of the. conversation. Wilmot is growing
prodigioufly fond of me, and he is So
very agreeable, that next Belford f
like his Society: they are both very
handSome and in a different ffyle;
Henry is a little above the middle fize
Wilmot confiderably below it
yet, ftill he is So elegantly formed, in-
deed there is a zylph-like lightneSs in
his whole deportment, added to an air
of fafhion, and an air of the world.
v^ith a killing face—renders him quite
irreliftbile in the eyes of thoSe who
are not already prepofTeffed ;
and
‘ \
ah why, is . your Caroline pre
Mr
Moqntford
'Nil
' I',
: I'
t'
5 :h-. '
, id
I
I
;
I
,i l: ■!' ,
L!.	*> ;
ibi.S;
i • I ■ • I, ;
■Ji-
1
t
• i:
I ■,
Li : 11
j;
> L 1 ..
• :M(.
t
. ! < I I • »
' I • ’ '
. • iS'
lU
fi-
• • t; : >»i I
! I !
. i‘h'
I (
.d
'I'
II I)
c'ili
Kr
, I' c
i; :C:i
i;-d]
U if .
1 1
'r !•'
t. .
' ■' :' I

■' •! ■

;. IS ;' 1

I'
I	>
II li
I
I <
M I'
li:
■III-
O'
■is 1
i. i: !■ h t‘i L
'I. ,(
IS
•' i!, -
■ T

'iS •
I'.ii
hh
I '. I

;i.'i I
J
'i. I
ii
• •.‘1 :
I >	»•
! i-
• I
!• ■ t :
I



N

* « [•
1
I'
II
IV
.
f*-*
■'!

' I
:' ’V ; h
(i!
.i'
i!'
I!
:: i
i
I
< . I
,^i!lli
Mr i t*
''!i
|i
i
11
:i'
Ui l'<
iLS'
!ii
ii!
1.^'
i
lil
i'

::i
Ifi
It::
■d;:}
S'!' •
il w
I
■ .,n !
ll'li
A
ii i'll
'»,r: ,>,
' !'• > ^’1
!ilv;
I
ti
'iilr vS
|i}
ii
i
I
'irt
i
■F-
i;i"
'■"i
ail
3
lii
'■'t!
mf
!' iTf
% 'h
h'. •:
iUi
( 1^8 )
Monntford made me an offer of his hand and heart, and begged leave to make formal propofals to rny father, to this I pOiitively refufed, as he is really to me quite difagreeable, fodull, fo ignorant is Mountford.—Oh my Emily! who concealed by providence to blest the^
is the happy woman
c;
gay
angelic Belford.

the generous, the
IN CONTINUATION.
Some days has elafped fince I wrote the above, for knowing your preSent unhappy frame of mind, I wilhed my Emily to be a little more compofed before fhe was acquainted how her friends at the Abbey are going on. Mist Villars this day left us,—a fweet girl, yet She is a little fool like your
—I caught her in tears in the wildernefs,—fhe looked confufed,— blufhed—. trembled, and flammered
friend.
out, that parting affedled her. She propriety in
leaving
O
with Kitty had has aded with ys, as time
and
( )
and abSence will I hope
efSedual cures to her paffion j
prove her re-
solution in my own mind I highly
commended: had She known how fin-
cerely I Sympathized with her, She
would not have helitated to open her
heart
Sophia is an heirefs, which
added to her . perSonal attradions
makes a figure of Some importance in
the world, and She is Surrounded with
adorers—neslected all for a man who
is perfedly indifferent about her.
Tho’ equally fufceptible and equally
attached to Capt. Belford, I am not
equally to blame with MiSs Villars : he
certainly, Seymour, pays me a degree
of flattering attention, a degree of
preference of delight at my approach,
of
pain
Solicitude
at my abSence, a delicate
yet my friend an ambigu-
oufneSs, a ffrange reffraint, and of late
all this encreaSes, joined to an abSence
at one time, a melancholy at another.
Letters are juft brought in to rqe,
I muft lay aSide
my pen
Oh
my
Emily! ’tis now your Caroline’s day
of trial,—my father is extremely ill
and
, I H I
i;l
Lli..
' '1
: ■
I • • ;
l» •
I >•, ,


n ■

, Tm
;i t
;a.

, ’«
i I ■
! 'iV'.jS ■ic Iq
''ll!; !
! -•liiSi

;:.l;
f 11
;!H:'
1 di'
L
t..
J
‘■ii i. I'.i:
. 'A
; '.iiiCi
; t I :
' - i f:
i.:h

' < 1
•h. Ij
. I;’'.
J' )
; ' '
■t'
, ■ t
I i.
• i '
1 C!
, .1. j j

M

.. n

!i ll
I'j, ■
f '
! { • i- t ,
■
1 -r |i!
u- ■.
}■•!• Ir
'l
'll'
» i
i ! r
I
.I !■;

! *■'

"'if!
ci ;
l; h
M
i! i-
1
• i,
. n
i


•C.
* • j
f;
K
5’
'I
■I
■i:
1.
t
t r
i:
1:
%
, t‘
1S
V'
t.
‘a
!?
5ii
ii
:i
r;
vh
•'tj
.((
n.
'•I.
I
i!
f
y
3i
I
I
1'^
i
I
i
hj
v'ri
I'S
I
S'
ji

(	^9^
and defires my immediate return home, to-morrow morning I fet- -out-—I caa write no more—-my heart dies within me, I bodings.
have a thoufand ffrange fore-
I 2
at night.
I have parted with Mr. Belford— perhaps I may never never more behold him—
excruciating
idea oh my Emily! I had acquainted the family at dinner wdth my intention of leaving the Abbey; for the remainder of the day we Were the mod filent party imaginable. Harry left the room, Mountford was in a date of ffupefadfion, the filent tear dole down the amiable Countefs’s cheek, Kitty and Eliza were quite dif-mayed, and little Wilmot declared himfelf wretched if our Coterie was broke up. As I propofe leaving this very early in the morning I took leave of them all after dipper, except Belford who was not in the room. Her LadyShip retired, but as it was a fine
moonlight
nio^ht,
O ^
V/ilmot
the
girls propofed a vralk : w'e went into the improvements, and in a little
hazel


L ;
t I ■	'
i..i. . •
., -I
< 191 )
ha-zci
copic
I Some way rnifTed my
party, 1 took a wrong path in ffriving
to find them, when to my great furprife
met Belford,—we walked on together,
in a State of filent grief: Henry looked
all he would have faid he feemed
to reftrain himfelf,—his lips quivered
my Emily,—we were both unable to
Speak and proceeded through the grove
in a Slate of Silent unutterable agony,
when we had reached the houfe we
Spoke : I told him I Should fet oSFTo
-very early I would not have the
pieafure of
feeing
him
he
took my hand,

a d i e u
again, adieu—then
M
was all he could articulate, his brilliant
eyes which hav'e the greateft archnefs
were fixed on me, my hand was Hill
I
in his when our party came up, hurried with them into the houfe and
went up to my own room, the moon
was fo bright by it I could diHindlly
from the window, fee Belford walking
in the lawn.
Moil
o
of men [faid I to
myfelf
T
V
vhilSl I viewed him] may
u

,	I ■	'» • »
:	1	•
,	>	J .	i
I	't	■
1 M
• r .
• 1; V. I
d
Li I

' {.■

.1 ; e ••

if!
.*i*V '
b:::
‘ j
I!',
• thi '
•Mil :

1 ■
'■ ‘K 1
;• S.
lii 1:
' I ■
iitii-

. * c 1 : lU ' ;
: -i!

'• M


. Li
t A ' r .
: , n ' ^
■ir ;! ■:
< 1 5 ,
, ' hi ‘A
... • I i
Ch;. ii
I ' n L < ''
‘m I!
,1
ilr
li’.b i'l
!i: H:''
•■b
, I
h
11: - '
' !■ !:c.
f ;;
; i •

' fd ; II hii
!l ' :
1 (
i T
I . r >
: 1 C:. t • h L' ■.
hid;

IM
li;
Ip
{f:
.1
■j.
' ‘ i • M
!li ‘ :

' •:
■ )
1 !' 11 * i
1-
ik
; ♦ ■
) ]
! i
(*
. r .m: I

1!
J'. I ^
■'.] i
if'
ill


‘I.	.1'
’M I
.'1 * M
: !h
,1 T,


n
J'r
,1: .
4
I'l
ji’
4l
iS*
.IT;
.fr
I
»:
II
CC
a
u

CC
CC
( 192' )
thy years of felicity be unnumbered, may all thy wilhes be ahfwered and thy expedations be gratified, and may the blell woman of thy choice love thee with an equal afFedion with which thou art loved by
5
Caroline Sedley,

Letter
I
)
LET T E R XXVIl.
IHE HON. CAPT. B EL FORD TO SIR
EDWARD HAVILAND, BART.
Moutitford Abbej.
Caroline is gone
all my happinefs is fiown.—I knew
■Ihe was dear to -me, but did -not know
I adored her until now.—Heavens!
Sir Edward, what a life of unhappi-
neSs muff I lead ! Mifs Sedley, I love
to madnefs love, and never can I make
her mine.—l am diffradfed, Haviland.
The confcioufnefs of having adfed
right is certainly, however, a happy
Tefledion to ourfelves, a bled one, and

tis the reward of all gracious provi*
dence. I have riever left the fmailefl
opening which could lead her to a
fuSpicion of my regard—cold
e-^

preffion,—unbounded love the mod
faithful—mod delicate of padions.
bo not imagine it vanity, but I am
inclined to believe I was not indiderent
I
to
1 -li ■'
■’I'i' j ■ :
1. 1 !k:
'.1 ■' I -
■ » -Is
1	> ’
I	•.. I
<: i- , ;

■'fi-ri
I ,
, _.,1 I,'
.ir-
I M; .
,>l
L.
’ 11 Si.
Mil :
I s ■
1 ! 1
i I •
bii
t
1*1 • I '
\
•	i
' . L
•	; •

■' 'I
,	■ I
i i'
s :
1 i
'I r:
1 .
t . I
1=
4•	1 '
i I i:r

-S !
-I •!'‘l
' »
,	4
1 ; '


p I !'. '1
I h
. t.
, (
I
I ;
' 1
: 1
■■ \
fi
16
L i
>1 1
Si
^ t
: i i ■
to h
r,-
r
![■
: »'•
■ ) .
r I
I .
I I
( 194 ) ■
Honor taught me r^ither to fupprefs than encourage this, I reffrain-ed myfelf though with violent pain, a thoufand times the efFuIions of ten-dernefs have vibrated on my lips,—I
placed before
was ever on
my guard,
Lady Amelia Be
ever
s image
ii.
j.
•<
4 I •
L!
■; I
iny eyes.----
her father,
m
The illnefs of Mr. Sedley was her motive for
leaving the Abbey,—-however painful, perhaps it was better for us both. Upon my honor, while the flaid I believe I never Should have had refolution to
iii
li;.:
. *• I B *
' ^
V
L;
2;o,
She is now a week gone.
I have

not been able to v/rite until to day. I ffaid only out of ceremony, as to leave the houfe immediately on her doing it, would be highly improper, and Ihew her
hi
1.1'
>'V»
»L;
• 0
li
ji-‘
ih
.. i
had been my only motive for flaying. I have therefore facrificed a w*eek to politenefs, and
to-morrow
propofe fetting
out for
Belford—alrnofl time indeed j my father is quite out of patience.
I went through all the Shades where I had {frayed with the' lovely Sedley, the woods, the lawns, they all reminded me more forcibly of her.
Mr.
(	195 )
Mr. Mountford made formal de-
clarations of his pafiion—She refufed :
little,—elegant, animated Wilmot ffill
fighed in filence. Mifs Villars is gone,
fhe left us abruptly,—to-morrow my
friend I go—Sweet fhades of Pvlount-
ford, how many happy days have I
pafTed in you,—Mr. Wilmot Sets out
along with me, we travel together as
far
as
i he there joins the regiment.
and I have after that a very long
journey to the north. Thus are our
Sweet Coterie^ broke up entirely, and
no one left at the Abbey but Lady
Mountford with her Son and daughters.
Adieu Edward.
Henry Bel ford.
1 t
L E T T E R
	
;!	if
I!	;il
	jf*
1 • )	? i
S 'f h::
mk:

L. *r« **
T-Mrj*;
•»Ls . . ■ JL
it|i i' h
’iff'iC-
C l'
.1-
•‘f I'L-
: fft ; *''n:
b' 1 «.» I
I

, fijn
lute .j! !*1L r ’
* i I •' < ‘ 1 a ibi.:-). r
ii! iS:,

> #• \.
dli; ■ K
firs
m-Mi:
■lli: -• i
•'Mtrvi h
‘PT'fn
S: ' i
' i-
'0
» 1 Lm
hi
■; ]■
t ‘
I
■I!:
1*'l*
■N- ■: h
■‘T»f t
ilii !’-i<
r ■
1 •


!;■ •> 1;'
■ av-
: I
U!
;! iiS
Hill
• :?■* j;

V
! / '/
• n
■ i
■ { L I »./ '
i
>
• i V
f!
^i!
? ji
s*
U
fj.
i •
f
f.,
t;
(‘i
' I

J- ' ■X
;i : ■
: i.
II
liir
-4
SO
' ■' L
:{'L
t:
:• r
■■' j
: 1 »
Ci,
i ' «,
, : -1
■' - I »*
. s.(
• I
V:’
•
i* ri.
'Hi
I 1
:
V f!
i!
'< l
..I
't' *
- r.. ■ I
I
i-1
C 196 ■)
LETTER XXVIll
MISS SEDLEY TO MISS SEYMOUR.
Hanover-fquare, London.
. \
A M now fat down to acquaint my
that has —1 went
friend with every thing happened fince I wrote lafl; to bed when I had finished that letter,
blit
“ kind nature’s fweet reftorer “ balmy Sleep,” had indeed flown from my pillov/j in a tew hours I arofe, and at opening day fet out on my journey to London.—How I wept, my Emily, when the chaife tore me from all view of the Sweet Shades of Mount-
ford,
I recolledled with the moft

tender regret the happy hours I had fpent there, our little parties, our balls, the gentle Sophia, the Spirited Wilmot, the truly amiable counteSs and her daughters, and I recollected Belford all thefe charming Scenes and perSons were left for uncertainty and Sorrow; an amiable parent ill-dreadful idea,— thus my dear, between recollection of
the
i ’
. I
:V' d ‘
1
■j
t
h
fi .
rs-
^3
197
the past, impatience and fear -of the future, I was exceedingly unhappy
during a very long journey, in which
1 was only accorapanied by my maid. When we arrived at the metropolis it was very late and your friend weak and fatigued, I flew with impatience to my father’s chamber, he was Supported by attendants in bed, he clafped me to his heart and called me his dear, dear Caroline •,—he told me he was
very
and anxious to fee me. I
begged to fit up with him, he would not fufler it, and ufed to obey his every mandate, I confented, and retired to my own apartment. I lay awake the whole night, and about Seven in the morning had juft fallen into a little flumber, and was dreaming confufedly of Belford, when a knocking at the door awoke me j I arofe and opened it; it was a nurfe-tender of my father’s, and file acquainted me he wanted to Speak to me;—I haftily half drefled mySelf, and went w^ith the utmoft expedition, dreading he was worSe; I found however that was not the cafe.
I
3
cl
nd
li'i'!
.■‘r;
iS'
: • 1
I
T' i
. I i i. < .
rt: ‘
. V •
.r‘
i’i!.
> i!
*i
• I
; t.
i
'. I I,
I
t' ■ 1
I.
/
i! •
lii
) I'
'i;
i:!i
' ' I . • (
'N 1
t i
I ;
I f
i '
Jl'
: i!
3f
1:98	)
and when I was feated by him he Spoke as follows, “ I would not my dear girl have diilurbed you, but that I have a great deal to fay, and am generally better able to Speak in the morning. “ I am ill—very ill ray daughter, and “ I am ruined, my affairs are now in the mofl; deSperate flate,—ryou have reaSon indeed my dear to hate me your father has undone him Self and
iC
ii

u

“ his child..—A fatal propenfity for gaming has been ray deffrudfion, my fortune unfortunately all in my

a
<6:
power and not a Shilling of it now is left, even from this honfe I muff im-mediately remove, ’tis the property “ of another—-that other,”—^-he here looked up at me Emily, with a look of anguiih,—it was Succeeded by one of more wild defpair, and in a frantic manner he caught hold of both my hands—“ ’Tis in your power Caroline, “ (Said he) to restore your father to “ life and to happinefs; thefe pof-“ festions may again be his own—oh
it

my
pov/er
child, every thing is in your !”—‘‘name—name but the
method,

iii:
r,‘
. 'C‘ ' ' 1 . »
'•»» .
I ;r '•
( 199
■ • 1 llC
I « I ;
• r :
method, Sir,” returned I.

Ah
13
cc
(faid he) can I hope for your con fen t,
4(
yet oh!
--Tlie sentlcman to
“ whom I have loft the moft confi
c;
44
derable part of my fortune is a Mr. Falkland; he—he has feen—and is
“ charmed with you. I naturally re-
U
gretted my Ioffes, and he propofed
44
if you would confent to marry him
U
to refund every thing to me.

•I
turned from my father to conceal the
starting tear, I grew pale as death, and
felt the most: dreadful fenfations of
grief and furprife,—“ An aged father
44
(faid he, holding up his hands)
“ befecches of his child to restore him
C4
to life and to happinefs.,—oh my
“ Caroline! I entreat, I fupplicate
C<
yon, not to let your parent die and
44
expofc yourfelf to mifery and ruin.”
What my Emily, could I fay,^—I
was stlent, and fat miotionlefs wnth
agony and furprife. “ Falkland, (faid
44
44
he) is a man of fafhion, family, and
had a very noble fortune,—it is still
“ a noble one indeed, his perfon and
44
manners are more than agreeable ;
14
44
if
n •
’' r
: • • t :
I
I' - . ; •U ; I •f-. '

: ■ 1
a
. ;i I
' ‘i
.1,:
, I i
II;

I I-:
» t	‘
' f.
d . :
i ■:
r. '

':VI I .
.j'i
i; ‘ I
i
• r

l! ■
I , > ' [ . > i
r ;
. i C i
A'' : 5
C , • f
• : . i
. I ; j
' i .
■ I

te : i
• i • I
J • '
I •.
* «	t.
te :'h
j.,	.
r . I : I
:U
» i
. •» i
■ r

i
nil
• • ’ K I
I 1 !a .1
k:
r;
li: A
ah.; • a-'
i I' Ji;
«	I
MU'- • 1:
‘ ' • / • (a;.
■ h • !l
' l!
• u
■ H

L (•
. ,1
^ !; ■ It
1. .•
■'k
h-J , .
I
fij r;:.
I'i a'


u.
,1
id

tit
il
tr'
r,'
}>.
hi-
f
• n
i!
! r
!> I-

U
1^;!'
l!

! L
L 3
.. I.i
.1
•v'S^
t 1

■l!
:d
: ► £
;; ^ iU.i
' V! • t-c .. i'-.
I'M I
•■ 'ffi *
dil
'MU
T h"
.	; <j
i; il
■!! |i*

• iM -*y
■111" m!'	■
r
f
'i
Ml liiif:
DC-
Sib 1:
It •' * rf'
y-i
i'i ri
ill'M:!'
i; !l ■ / *j1
a K- ■■
L'l'l-lh
. V, f.
M b I r
lyl
4\

t
' ^
• i> I
■i * i
CllT

200 )
U
if not already attached—it is no

facrilice
h i m.



to accept of
But Sir, [interupted I] if he iramefter,
o	^
fatal—
JJ
he
connexion
IS a muff be
be affured, want and diffrefs
U
will, fucceed this boaffed fortune.”
‘‘ Do not b
/3k
It
fo felfilh, [returned my father] I am certain: when he
IS
At
married however, he will quit the
a
dangerous pra6tice.
ti
Be noble my
child,—'be truly great my Caroline,
<(
in relinquifhing fomething to
father : diffrefs of mind the
a moff
i;
poignant has brought on my illnefs,
“ the load removed^ I Should foon re-
CC
cover,—but if you are inflexible,
iC
if you are deftitute of feeling—oh !
iC

this one ffruggle—would you,
I was indeed
fave your parent.
?>
my Emily neither deffi'tute of parental
love nor unfeeling, I was quite over-
come,., and funk in the arms of my
feeble fapplicating father, I was a little
relieved by weeping unreffrained.
An hour I believe elapfed before either
of us was able to fpeak,—I fitff broke
by faying. I had never. Seen
Mti.
/
.
C 201 )
4
Mr. Falkland, “ no, [Said he] It was
44
44
44
44
C4
44
44
in public he faw you, but tho’ he did not then ffrike your attention, Lam fure you will like him,—con-fen t my Caroline j ere it is too late
confent, — wnen you fee breathlefs corpfe,—then
me a
will
you
regret.”—^-Enough, enough, returned I,—\ coftfent : he folded me to his heart; called me a thoufand tender names—his niore than human Caroline. —I was hupiiied with griefs and feemed as if I had pronounced my eternal doom. Do yovrnot grieve for your friend,
yet can you blame her,-my Emily.— Oh Belford! Belford ! with what an-guifh do' 1“ now recollect you,^—yeC my dear, notwithftanding his attention, he nevergave me room to think
'	O
I was beloved by him, he feemed always reSfrained.—So fudden, fo un-expedled the change, I think all that has. paffed a dream,—oh Emily !—and have I indeed confented to marry a perfon I have never feen,—
I
a nr
aim oft
m a
ftate
r
or
inftipportable there is fomething fo bargain-
I 5	ing
Mi
i
m
Fcii
1.1.1 nr
1*

11 I *. • »
1
• I If
■ ‘*i-
>' I
I >
! I db
ii. •
■ h
-4'
! 1
r
A
■ t
Ii
! ♦ ‘ »
( 202 )
ing in this afSair my dear; my Sentiments and ideas of every thing, are exalted to a romantic degree, my afFedions another’s, how can I marry this Mr. Falkland, a gamelfer—the name is a bond for ruin.—A
true
gamelfer, as he is fallen from virtue, So generally is an adept in every other vice, he is loH to the Softer pafiion-s and incapable of aCting in any of the duties of life with exact propriety 5 he regards a wife only for her fortune, or tranfiently like your friend,, for her charms'; his temper is continually capricious, his morals ruined, he efieems religion as unneceflary, holds marriage as a form and relfraint, \vhilll the unjuftifiable affections he terms love. Thus his Sentiments debaSed, his ideas bewildered, a gamefter, is entirely abSorbed, and his whole pleaSures wrapped up in his employment,—the faff hour of his mifpent life approaches-—then, and perhaps not
till then, is he convinced of his errors,
%
convinced that a gaming table is
always
!:.!i
Mk
t :■ !.
I • . i '
(
! Til
CO
o
» » * i
, •	> .r
r I
: «

: . I •
always prejudicial and but too often
the ruin of thofe who frequent them.
I
r ■ <
and yet a gamester is to be the hufband
of your
-Caroline Sedley.

4iid
• J

t :
I
llin
Letter
i :
! 1
1.1,
■
T
<
.1
i
1'
,:r
l' «•
r
k
I
I
l.
k ■ '
i;
f '■
V '
1:
y
, )
hi
(	2Q4
LETTER
c
IR E D W, A a D- H A VI L A N D T O T HR
HON. CAPT. BELFORD.
' *
Bathe
«i*
3o, MiSs Sedley and you have bid: adieu to Mountford Abey—poor Bel-ford, how far gone in. the hopelefs, pallion.—-Believe me my friend, the
relinquishing your own, happinefs is
too great a facrifice to ceremonious delicacy, or the firft. woman on earth; do not than, marry lady. Amelia Bel-ville.----
——You tell, me youThink you are not indifferent tO; the former, and you-alfo believe the latter ianot pre-poffelled in your favour. I know you to be the mod generous of men j the relinquifliing five thoufaind a year, you will think trifling in comparifoix of the pofleflion of the lovely Sedley, efpecially when at Lord Belford’s death, fo noble a fortune is yours.
Well.Darry, but I have feen another of your vifitants here, MiSs Villars
the
IH
' iV:i
([ 205- )
• • n
the beauty in minature, as I call her:
One night laft week
She made her
appearance, for the firft time in the
rooms, fire is very graceful j. our friendi
with a number of bucks of the critic
club^ (the name of our new. fociety)
levelled our glaffes and declared her.
to he'verj.Prettyi hxit fo d-—--d little
as-her fortune however is large enough
9
as Acres fays> to.pay the. national debt
9
we alhagreed.,fhe was very well for a
wife^ixnd.. fame cf. us may condefeend
to take the
fbuh.. SeriouflyT:
am inclined to believe you have made
fome impreffion on her heartj I will
tell you how Ldifeovered.this j- at the:
rooms ! was introduced to her, and a
few evenings after^ we met in the fouth
parade; a.large party of us.happened
among other converfation on fine arts; to mention painting, you know I am
exceffively fond.of: it, and have a little
profile of you in a ring which k drew
myfelf; as it is reckoned fine, I
it off and fhewed it to the gentleman
next me, who handed it to the next.
and fd on until it reached, the hand
\
. I
»
, \
yll
1 r
t' ■. [■-•i '
>. < it ' •
,
,, »
• 1 'j
■T
L ‘ 1' ;*
h ’•
. t *
f.ii
i.l ;U
. t
I
I
. I

: <1
' : * • ( ! 1
■; I
i

* *
: ^
1
► * I
I ■
\n
lit

. I ' i:
■.ih'b
fi !; • ‘i
I. « •
■h:
■ (;v 'L
I ''
r ■ 1
i S';
-•'i ' 1:
ll ■
Sol
(	2o6	)
N
-n

x>£ Sophia,^—“ Oh, it is juft himfelf!
(faid fhe, her eyes fparkling with delight) “ it is Capt. Belford indeed.” Her colour went and came alternately, her bofom heaved, and I affure you. Harry, fhe was not a little agitated at beholding this little refemblanee of you ; you are really a dangerous man,
half the women dying for you.-------1
muff now tell you, that receiving no
I v/rote Mifs
anfwer to the Harley, I Sent Kingfley from Woburn
Hall to
Shire with diredions to the
cottage I had difcovered her in near Morton-hoiife i he found it out, but it was Shut up and no one there— thus Henry fhe flies me j I am fure however in fbme wood or labyrinth I Shall yet find her, fince feclufion is evidently Cecilia’s tafle,—tafle, ah ! Belford I am the caufe ! fhe Shuns the world—becaufe She cannot appear in it as fhe ought.
“ By Solitude and deep Surrounding fliades, but 5‘ more by bafhful modefty concealed.”
Thompfon*
Well
Uf
■tl
41

(	207	)

ih^-
teLlI’D-
if
W\
n
Well, a truce with the pretty rust*
Ml
tic, r (font like to recoiled her. You
have heard to be Sure, my old flame.
if
u.
I i.
::lh ’ H
ill
I
nV'
rii
I..U
!il
Emily’s match with young Woodley
ii;
' t'' •li V
■t i
iii:
. i'
ij
ill,HI!
is all over.---Adieu Belford
Mk
* 4U
iii:
11
. Slh!!
E. HaVILAND
Ip
Ml!
’ll! -
l!!;! I'
1'i: . 1‘
•LiLl I '
'I *,• IP
•‘hi, •
5 ;
I'l*!'
• . ! 1
'•Ubf-

'h!
iili i'
L
I . 1:
i
‘■ill
‘ I


f *
Letter
-I
iil^
d;
il-;
tr-
• ., U':'
(. 208 )
LETT B R
MISS SEDLEV TO MISS: SEYaMOUR,.

London,
HAVE feen- Falkland^ mj Emily At our firff interview,, I am fure I, appeared very awkward,—he could not wonder at it, my fituation was fuffi-ciently embarralling to apologize for any thing, I was. ffiff, formal and not all. Tnyjelfi—you know I have-'pride-my
dear
5
It
was humbled.
Y ou t-
Caroline vras mortified at being thus fold, She might fay.—Mr. Falkland is. about five and twenty, and has a large-manly perfon, and a face without being; regularly handfome, extremely agreeable, his nofe aquiline and his teeth fine; he is pale and looks worn out with diffipation, but his air difplays the utmoft dignity and elegance, a dignity partly the refult of exceffive haughtinefs; his manners areinfinuat-ing, and from what I have been able to judge, the deepen art conceals his
Sentiments,
ii
209' )
Sentiments: on the whole my dear
tho* pleafing enough, and he is what
all the world calls a very fine fellow,
he is by no means the man I Should ehoofe for a hufband;—oh my Emily!,
how all men fink on a comparifon
with Belford.—There are many objec
tions I have to this Mr. Falkland,-
tho* he profefTes himfelf highly delight-
ed at my acquiefcence, yet I am- Sure
he is incapable of real permanent
affe(Stion : a fhort lived
may
exiff,—that £ame extinguifhed, I have
every thing to dread; his hauteur is
infufFerable, and in taking your Caro-
line he feems rather to confer, than
receive an obligation, and in this Ihews
SA>
a want of delicacy,, of love, and of ref-
pe6t; he Seems very deep read for his
age in the world-, and has if I may be
allowed theexprefrion,run the gauntlet
of fafhionable vices; he is a gamefler
a jockey, ridiculoufly extravagant in
his drefs, equipage and appointments j
he is every thing that has a chance
of ruining himfelf; while unmindful
of this, Srom an indolence, thoughtlefT-

'f
'
« ,
t '
I,
It
I
• hi
4 :
I , ■ f
n '

h’i

::i I
. 1
I»'	<
' i
■ '1
1 ■
I! '
' * ) I'
i f
i
r I
( 21)
nefs and inconfideration, he is a perScSI pupil of pleaSiire.—Thus Seymour, I have made a great progrefs in the diScovery of his charaDer, which only
to
my
anguifh
at the idea of
becoming his v/ife ;----you may fup-
pofe I feem in a new v/orld here, never
you
know*
ng
been in London
berore, for more than a few days with Mrs. Ofborne in my annual vifits to "Tnv father.
The confulion, buftle and noife, diffracts my head, I have not yet been out, but fhail immediately, as my parent is now quite recovered. What change will eafe of mind produce! his indifpofition inftantaneoufly fled on gaining my con fen t,—whatever I may fuffer, I am happy in the refkctiQn of affording him felicity.
cl
/
Letter
211 )
P t,.
‘ ■ 1 t ,
1 .
i !
y i
LETTER
IrON. CAPT. BELFORD TO Slk EDWRAD HAVILAND, BART.
Eelfordl.
I A M here, Edward—and here truly
unhappy, the lovely Sedley’s image, ever prefent to my thoughts, but torn
from
fay
is not abfence
my eyes, ‘
“ death to thofe who love.’’
My father and all the family arc amazed at the alteration in your friend, their gay animated, Harry Belford, once wild with fpirits, is* now filent.
referved, and thoughtful.
This day
is Lady Amelia Belville expedled. I am really out of temper with myfelf with all the w^orld, and never lefs difpofed to fee her; I wifh adverfc winds had detained her.,
You amaze me by wTat you fay of Mifs Vi liars, I never was. in the leafl particular to her, and convinced fhc was equally indifferent to me.
Heavens, from my window I fee a
carnage
O-
»,
i
! li
, f
if
A
.. }

• It
; t•
!f ,
t 1. 1
Ill ' ■
i''r

! : !‘l.	<
i i
’ I
•l I'
lid*
t
• r f’
i' i:
I
(	2P2	)
carriage driving up the lawn, Amelia I am convinced, two are elapSed fince we have met! diffrefSed, agitated:—and muft afide my pen.
it 18
IN CONTINUATION
Well, I am returned to mv letter and'
my
I went down when I
off, and opened the drawing room; door with as heavy a heart as a difTatisfied
, inffead of an impatient lover. Lady Amelia looked dazzlingly beautiful, as ever, yet has not in my eyes
half the attradfions of Carolin

fhe
is too regularly beautiful too,—but I
fhe was extremely
am very hard' to agitated—confufed, cmbar.raffed at feeing me,—to what to attribute this I am totally at a loSs^ it is not the fweet confufion of alK powerful lovC)—our fituation to be re, to this only can^ I impute her delicate diftrefs.—I drove tO' lead her into converfation and made a thoul^nd vain, efforts, She was difpofed to be
,	filent,
T 2T3
■•V
filent,
•I gratified her,
and for the
remainder of the evening fat looking
at her with as much cool indifference.
fhe
IS
as I would at a carnation or other vegetable beauty ^— certainly changed, Haviland; at our firff Interview there was an elegant
Uift
conyerfation, which is dropped entirely
BOW—I will not judge haflily how-
.ever—rihe is fatigued perhaps. Adieu
Letter,

< U;.
! Sc
N’t;


;
II
n
' ti •' jn • •
I,'
ILi!'
1 -L*
' • I:'
■ i..i
i i
I :
»•; Oi
li?
ii
<*
i
J fi . U 1
ll'
^	< i '
. :!>:

cTl
i. ■
I. L
• ! II'
ins
I JS
■ ll:
■o

■ t
» t • )
t •
Mi!:
; -
»L-
::hi;
. I. I-
-:.;n
• I •
* I
::il
i‘:
Hi
ijii
, I,
ii!

r-;
t»; I
’T'l * i
• H ■
:^i!
_• u
\ •!
* 1
ill
::il
-.1
1 I I r
iUi
hi
in

i‘ I
i<< I
i
i
L
(	214- }
\
LETTER
MISS SEDLEV TO MISS SEYMOUR.
London,

i H E tovv^n is very ShII, and 1 have
heen at all the theatres, the Pantheon, and at every place of amnfement : were not my litnation fo cruelly diffreiTing -as it is, I {hould be highly delighted at the brilliant, and to meania^zing Scenes into which I am now introduced; I am quite bewildered, Emily—^to theSe haunts of the falhionable, Mr. Falk-
land

ttendant he
IS
IS my conitant a certainly very agreeable, but amidft the affiduities of a lover, it requires a fund of difcernment, and that even in the end may be deceived, to know what kind of hnfband he will make. Ah! my friend, had I been Belford’s •choice—-but oh ! the rccollediion of him avaunt. Falkland has taken a houfe in St. James’s-fqnare ^ our furniture is Splendid, elegant equipages
are
okcj in fliort cverv prepara-
tion
h.i
{ 215 )
don is making, and the day of facru
fee—(for facrifice it is my dear when
I do not love him,) is appointed
for an acquaintance,—for a chaperon, for every thing my Emily but a
hufband, 1 would felect him from the
-but oh, my dear!—tears
deface the lines I have penned. Have
you heard any thing of Woodley, if
polhble baniSli his idea from your
breaft, but you will fay ft is eafy to
ribe for others. I am my Emily,
Your faithful
C A R	J N S S£ D L E T,

Letter

1 ih
M
111
i i
t ;
1 _
• , I
' ' \
' 1
. - A
iS|
l!d
11 !
; 11 '
iii,
11,
dl.
)'.
'm'
icj
1 ■ I
M,; ■
'i'
i 1
I. •
"1
•• «' i
V te
• I.
-!li
ir '
c.;
.4 '
Vl f X
1 •
; I
■ lii

A ' I
■' ii'r

■ !!i
" ■ i
♦ . .
(( 216 5
TETTER XXXm
MRS. FALKLAND TO M-ISS SEYMOUt
London.
AM married my Emily,
)i
—^ this
aufpicious day gave your Caroline to Mr. Falkland—oh, my friend, what a cruel change has a fhort time introduced—I look back on a few weeks w^hen Lw^as at Mountford Abbey. The
happieft of beings—and now------our
W'cdding was private, and I have ffolen thiis opportunity to my only happinefs, that of laying my heart before my Emily—a heart, I am covered with blufhes whilft I write it; a heart too much devoted to Belford; ’tis late at night, my Spirits are exceedingly de-■preSTed—^^I could weep my Emily. The filence of every thing at this hour, adds to the gloomy horror of my mind, a horror the effect of a prefentiment of the future fate of your friend.
4C
“ Night fable goddefs from her ebon throne, nov/ flretches forth
her
I ■: I •'
u
u
u
u
f 7 )
V
her leaden Scepter o’er the faiftiher-ieg world.——Nor eye, nor liffening ear an objeD; finds, ileeps-«~
creation
^’tis as the general pulfe o£
life flood flill and nature made a “ panSe—a-n awful paufe prophetic of “ her end.”
Alone and at liberty to vent my grief, I here at this awful hour indulge its luxuriance.—I would my Emily, be the moff enviable of wonren were
I this day the wife of Belfo'rd,^-but
why think of him.*—I dare fay half the belle's of my acquaintance are hurt at my getting Falkland j he is indeed a very fine fellow,—but then he is not calculated to fieal my afi'ec- ' tions. I cannot I find bring myfelf to place a friendship in him, it is not to be wondered at j your Caroline reared in the utmofl retirement, her firfi; emergency from this her vifit to the Countefs of Mountford, where tho*
I faw more of the World than I had hitherto done, I faw the moff delightful objedls, accuifomed to aflbciate with the amiable, and my own mind
L
' ‘ 1
K
£b
( , f
I
T'
( ar8 5
%
So replete with propriety, how can I indeed place a confidence in a man whole fentiments I fear are diredly oppofite, his charader that of a firlf rate libertine, the moft difiipatcd of men. As to reclaiming him, I do not build on it, he is too wild, too far gone in the vortex of vice, and too young ; nor am I at the age of nineteen'at all difpofed to enter on the arduous talk
of a reformer.
Adieu.
/
LETtER
(	2-^9 )
N
LETT E R
HON. Mr. belford to sir edwari>
HAVILAND, BART.
Belford.
DON’T know, upon my foul, what
to make of this Lady Amelia,—referv-
ed, confnfed, and diflrefiingly ambi-
guous is She now—If I but touch her
hand flic trembles : heaven and earth
what is the matter with her! tho’ She
hourly fees preparations
making for
t)ur, marriage, yet the fiighteft hint at
it from me, the leaft tender expreffion
throws her into a hate of unfpeakable
embarraffment, She is agitated, a tear
heals from her fparkling eye
s
and
She turns away diffatisfied.
Vv^hat
a fate therefore is mine!—Amelia cer-
tainly loves another, for her have I
relinquished Caroline, — relinquished
happinefs. Adieu,
H. Belford;
K

I
BETTER.

I •
I • 1
i t
I i

i ■ t
4

1;
c!
j
I ‘ I
i
t .
1 •
I
'i'J i h; }

I'
IL



!
' ■ \ I i
< '
V ♦
t ■ <
iS
\\i
( 220 )
LETTER XXXV.
THE SAKE TO THE SAME.
HE senigma is Solved,—would you believe it Sir Edward, Amelia is already married,—what ffrange viflicitudes!
I muff Summon recoliedlion and acquaint you wdth every thing.—Since I wrote last there was not the least variation in her behaviour, which hourly diSpleaSed me more: yesterday evening I was walking in the wilderneSs and perceived her through the trees, stie strove to avoid me, but I took a croSs path and SurpriSed her in tears.— It gives me infinite concern [Said I] to See your ladylhip indulge this melancholywhere is that delight-“ ful Spirit and vivacity ?—thoSe Smiles “ of joy which you bestowed on other
‘‘ countries is denied in England.”-
Belford,” Said fhe!---and
weptafresti. lied her into a moSs houSe near us and Sat down by her.^— “ My
y Suspicions,
4;
U
44
Mr

( 221 )
u
fufpicions, Amelia, [Said I] at yon
“ ccnduD: are various, the mofi: pre
“ dominant is, I muff think myfelf
it
diSa2;reeable to you.”-—Oh Harry
[replied ihe, turning away her blufli-
ing face bedewed with tears] I never-
never can be
another’s.
yours
-You
I am already
aftonifhment—I
may flood indeed
guefs
my almofl
petrified,—bnt not in the leafl dif-
pleafed.-'— “ You know [Said fhe]
U
Col. Lovell travelled with you, I
. . \ t	i
U
admired him exceedingly, which oc-
“ cafioned Some little embarraffment
(C
you might have perceived in me “ when we met in Savoy; that admi-“ ration I Soon discovered was recipro-
; he parted with you at Turin “ and flew after me to Bologna; he “ confefSed his paflion and I broke
U
u
cal
> • .
I,,	'
cc
my engagements to you by marry-

ing the Colonel,—you muff my dear
((
Harry, pardon the anxiety inexplicable behaviour has
my
given
<C
you : Lovell and I parted in Italy,
“ and it was agreed between us as
■ t ■

Soon as I conSefSed our union he
K
3

fhould
I !
I <
’. 1 f I ■
M 1

v»' : M
( 222
come over.—When I arrived' at Belforid, I perceived every one fo charmed at the idea of our union, that however blanieable my conduct, I could not bring myfelf immediately to damp, their joy by ov/ning my fituation :•—unufed to concealment (proceeded file) I. bore it very badly, a continual dejection preyed on my fpirits, I dreaded the juft difpleafure of my guardians,, the refentment of Lord Belford, and “ could not fummom refolution to, break the affair to any of them : I know you to be generous and in^. dulgent, and you v/ill therefore

H
a
tc



iC
pardon my union and not come to an eelairciffement Sooner, w^hich would have enabled you to make a happier choice.'’
Here the lovely Belvilie ended, and. left me the most amazed and at the fame time the happiest of men:.fhe is an enchanting woman, now at least that 1 am not obliged to eonstder her as
Such, I think her truly charming, her
Sweet constdenee delighted me j love is
;^2J )

friendihip of a'
nent
common,
woman whofe perSon has attractions to" excite that paliion iii others, to me is infinitely

ftill however friendfhip anfwers


tween perfons ©f the fame fex, every
Sentiment of the heart can then bf

more freely declared, the reliance on
each other is^ sreatef, and the wliole
attachment is of a ftill more delicate
and refined' nature, it is unftained,
and a true friend is amonyft the firft
and the moft ineftimable of bleffings ;
but pardon the digreliion 1 have made.
I muff return to my Subject
This diScovOry—this releaSe from
bondage I may call it, really threw
me into a delirium of joy: I afiiired
her from a thorough knowledge of
Mr. Lovell, I was convinced he was
perfectly deferving of her, and that
my interefl Should be joined to theirs
to effect a reconciliation with all the
family—I’ led lady Amelia into the
houSe and to lady Belford’s library,
where the affair was again discovered,
and my amiable father tho’ evidently
K 4
disappointed
>. 1
/
hi
- 1
rit
224 )
disappointed, Said her ladyUilp was the bed'ju^^S^ who could make her happy.
and
he
only
regretted
aaolher had
been prefered to his Harry.
Thus am I at liberty,—Surely this change in affairs was the moft unex* pe(5tedly blest that could have been*.
/v
Lett e r
( 225 )
LETTER
XXXVI
THE. SAME TO THE SAME
Belford.
What viciffitudes!—indeed Havi-
land, I think all that has pafTed a dream.—Amelia and your friend have both wrote to Lovell and will impatiently expect him in England ; her guardians are reconciled, and the five thoufand a year devolves on me. Lord Belford is. not near as much mortified as I feared he would from his attachment to the Belville’s : he is the mofl indulgent of parents; I have confefTed to him my partiality for MiTs Sedley, and this dear man lias confented to let me pay my addreffes. to her : as h( has a great deal of pride, I feared he would have wiShed me to think of a more exalted connexion in point of
but he faid
: «
.'Ok
title and fortune, affections of the
the
fons fhould the carriage is at this moment at the door to convey
K
not be biaffed by him ^
5
me
>'
; i
(
)
me from Belford to. Lonclen,r-'What rapture to think I fhall again behold Caroline-—call her mj Caroline and make her minfe, with what impatient ardour will 1 count the hours until 1 arrive in the metrp^ polls.	-	- '
t ,
Gh ’tis well the joys of meeting “ Pay the pangs of abfence,
Elfe who could bear it.

^ t
1T T E R
( 227 )
/ I
^ 'A
LETTER XXXVII.
MRS. FALKLAND TO-MISS SLYMOUR.
London.
j
Spending a few days with my fatherr we have removed to our
Ja
It
is very beautiful, but the exrpences into which Horatio (that is Mr. Falkland’s name) is- launching, is. I think too great for his fortune, a fortune which though large is not as much as Mr. Sedley represented; it has been greatly Shattered, the incumbrances are vast, and inftead of being paid off, they are hourly-, increafcd by; a fucceliion of unneceffary extravagancies.. I. have been introduced to his family, and a fet of people of the fir ft diftindtion with whom by my hufband’s deftre I am to keep up a ftrict intimacy and to make my appearance; at' all their parties, at every falhionable public place and to give Splendid entertain--ments; this is the courSe of life he has
laid,
i 228' )
out for your Caroline. I mull throw ande. my pen and repair to dreSs, as in the evening I am to be at a ball.
I have been greatly agitated Emily, I can fcarce find words to tell you how,—When I left off I went to my toilette, about ten o’clock I fetoirt for Mrs. L—’s, I fat down, and about an hour after I came in was teized to death by a conceited converfation. and indeed volley of impertinence of a party behind me; I liflened to the whole converfation, and at laft. one of
he is
them faid pretty loudly, “
^ much the handfomeft man
•
m the
“ room',”-~I thought this compliment was paid' to Falkland who had juft then entered, and looked uncommonry elegant, but found I was miftaken, -by the addition of the offficer.y—this fpeech made,me turn about to look at the
party
I had not hitherto done;
I found the perfon who had made it, was a young lady about feventeen, with a rather hand Some ex preflive face whofe features were Set off by a little
rouge,
( 229 )
rouge, and her black eyebrows feemed
like velvet of that colour for diamonds.
formed to fet off her large eyes which
fhe fixed on me, and had in them fuch
a bright fiery look that I could not bear them, and turned mine to the
officer She ha.d been praifing,—it was
Harry Belford,—he was dreffed in
looked
ing than everj being flopped by a
party of gentlemen at the foot of the
room he did not perceive me; my heart
beat violently, I felt myfelf grow
faintiffi and was dreadfully agitated.
Mr
land came up. to me and taking me by
the hand prefented me to the young
Mifs
Vinhurfl, a relation of his: as foon
as this falutation was over I ffepped
out of the room, happily unobferved
by Belford.,—I came home and pafied
a night of the moflrefflefs difquietude.
Harry’s too charming image was prefent
to my thoughts,—why did I fee him,
why did feeing him bring back with
fuch doubled—fuch reiterated force
the
; i
; ; i i i':

C 230 )
the remembrance of all' our happy fcenes at Mountford,—L am highly culpable in fufTering my mind a moment to dwell on; him, yet ah my Emily, we cannot always command. QUr thoughts.
Adieu,my dean.
TER
( 231- )
LETTER XXXVIll.
THE IION. CAPT. BELFORD, TO SIR:
RHWARX) HAVILAND, BART.
London. .
H
!, r am the moff un
happy of men—Caroline is-
already
married
mine
!
What a eruel deftiny was
Spain
l am really frantic, with de-
Had I never gone to Mount-had I never feen her—-Oh, Ed-
ward, language cannot paint* my an-
guifh and regret.
I flew to London
on the wings of impatient, love
it
was.about eleven at night when I ar-
rived there and went to oun houfe in
Piccadilly. Mrs.L
IS
you know next door,
my aunt, and bv the
crowd.of carriages I perceived fhe re-.
ceived company. It was too late to
think of going to Mr. Sedley’s, which
!
; ■ I
: i
I purpofed deferring until morning ;
but not being fatigued or at all difpof-
ed to deep, fronr the ardour of my
mind, I dreffed and went to Mrs.
I
’s Balk Soon after I came in
I <
»
Falkland


( 232 )
F-
Falkland, who you and I knew at Bath, came up to me : he told me he
was married
Said I: “
(C
Who
: “ Mifs Sedley,” replied he, with a carelefs air. Heavens,; what was not the excruciating anguifh that moment gave me !—my Caroline married, and married to Horatio- Falkland he is unworthy of her, tho^ certainly a handfome, agreeable, fine fellow ; but I thought there was a peculiar refinement in her that would not have tempted her to unite herSelf
1
iOUS.
thrift
rake., fopand fpendr-As old Sedley, however, is a profefTed gamefter, he has probably fiicrificed her. I never, Edward, can pardon Lady Amelia—She robbed me of happinefs. and of Caro-
concealment of her
line
her
long
marriage defiroyed us all, for my Beloved might not have been, united unr til my arrival. I v/ell know Falkland he will make her the v/orfi; of huf-bands. My anguiSh at lofing her is redoubled by the objedl fhe has got. Oh, Haviland, I am for ever torn from felicity I
Letter
( 233 )
LETTER
MRS. FALKLAND TO- MISS SEYMOUR.
H
ORATIO this
brought
morning
Mifs Vinhurfl to fee me: fhe was fo filent and fo referved, which was.yi unnatural from a girl of feventeen to a woman of nineteen, that I was not much pleafed with her. She is a dif-tant relation of his, and he feems to pay her great attention. Harriet is the only daughter of a Country Clergyman, and a fortune of four thousand pounds being lately left her, fhe was fent to a London boarding-fchool to finish her education. You cannot, my dear Emily, imagine any thing more fafhionable than the life we lead a whirl of amufements Succeed each other, and perpetually engage us. At breakfaft we Settle how we Shall diS-pofe Qurfelves for the morning, a principal part of which I am obliged to Sacrifice'to drefling, and Mr. Falkland to riding or driving, and if the day is
had,
C 234 )
bad, the cofTee-houfes and a party at billiards.' At four I am ufually ready to go out and pay vifits. At dinner
Al
we always have company nigfht in the weel
and' one

IS
ap-
propriated. for parties, the remainder is difpofed of in a
various
places. If Horatio and I meet in public, it is merely by accident j and often at the Theatres I fee him reel into
quite inebriated, and le leaf!; notice of me;
an oppoiite box, without taking tl
My very
often keep me out and. at three or four in the
morning Falkland	returns from
the gaming table.
We met with a difagreeable adventure a few days ago. I was in his phaeton (which is very high), and driving fmartly up Oxford road, one of the hind wheels at his fide came
ofT; we
four
and’ they
plunged excefrively ^ he jumped out
fame, when I
and I was doin fhould infallibly
come to the
ground and been greatly hurt, had not
a gcntieman who was riding near us-
with;
(	235 )
with amazing quicknefs jumped ost* his horfe, send before Falkland’ could get round to my fide, caught me precipitately in his arms and prevented the fall; he held me in them until, our chariot which followed came up^ and placed me in it. I afked Horatio who my alert preferver was, and he told me a Mr. Mordaunt. morning he fent a polite card of enquiry after my health, and being one of P2d.V\2iXx^?, faJ}iionahle compattions., he is introduced, as, a vifitor here: he is agreeable and elegant, and pays me no little attention..
Adieu my dear,
'	T
C*. Falk BAN,!?
next

L S T T E a
23^	)
LETTER
XL
THE SA-ME TO THE SAM*.
T
IT is fame time fince I wrote laft
pardon me, my dear, and afTure your-felf no engagements will ever prevent my correfpondence with my beloved Seymour. I have got a vifitor in the houfe, and one I would really excuSe, Mifs Vinhurff. Falkland made the
y
propofal of her coming to me j he faid her fa ther wifhed to take her from the boarding-fehool, and X.\\q poor girl vv^as grieved at going to the country, and flaying a whnter with us would be very agreeable to her. It is certain that a female companion is defirable, as the bell hufbands mufl often be abfent; but though a neglected wife., did not feel fo much, as am feldom at home; befides, this young Lady is
by no means fuited to my tafleShe has a fund of confidence, affurance, and various imperfections, with a flight knowledge of mufic and drawing, and
a few
at
2 3'7 ]
a few words of French and Italian. She is fet up as accomplifhed j the ignorance of the country is blinded with an art unbecoming it, and indeed fhc has more knowledge of the world than many reared in the bufieft fcenes double her age. Mordaunt is now a conffant vifitor here, his attention is difagreeable to me, as it grows particular, and feems • to be obferved by others. If I come into a room and he afterwards follows, looks are immediately exchanged by fome or other of the company, and he fiimlelf is too officious, for ever of my party in public, for ever feated by ,me^ .and yet as his converfation is coldly polite, fo I cannot bring myfelf to inflft on his not being with me, which would appear as if I conceived myfelf admired by him.—A woman in Such a cafe has a nice part to act.
Adieu my Emily,

■Caroline.
Letter
( 238 )
LETTER
XLI.
THE HON. CAPT. BEL FORD TO SIR EDWARD HAVILAND, BART.
Left London Soon after I coneludcd
lafl: letter, and returned back to Belford with very different fenfations from thofe with v/hich I had left it,
I returned for ever debarred from feli^-city. A few days aftcTj to our great furprize and joy, Col. Lovell arrived-; he had fet out long before our letters had been wrote, unable to bear a longer Separation from his wife. I had the pleafure of again prefenting Arne-
li
a s
to
They long
him, and with ft the eflate of f '^000 a year, refufed it, but I perfiffed, and they are now one of the nappieff eonples in
I never am fo delip;hted as
O
when infirumental to the gratification of others, and felt more real pleafure at the relinqu'ifiling this fortune, than I could pollibly have done at being
England.
given one of treble its valu
I hm
now
■V.
i
2
39 )
now at quarters with the regiment; I believe we fhall be ordered abroad, id which l am not Sorry.—Torn from nil that is dear to me in my native country, ’tis of Httle importance where I pafs the remainder of my life.
I am, Haviland, &c.
H. Belford.
( 2+0 )
LETTER
XLII.
MRS. FA1.K1.AND TO MJSS SEYMOUR
London,
mar-
hi HOUGH but three months tied, you cannot imagine what havock is already making in our fortune.— Falkland and me are feldom at home or alone, but we are, I find—as I fore-Saw, all love extinguiflied j he is fu-percilious, his temper various as the winds. As in public I am totally neglected by him, So of courfe as I am young and agreeable in my perfon, am furrounded with all the pretty feU lows of our acquaintance : Tho’ you know me too well, to fuppofe I give them any more encouragement than what fituation or politenefs calls for, yet laSTureyon Emily, I am always an object of (/c me painful) attention.— Mr. Mordaunt is amongfl the firfl in my train ; his particularity is very dif-agreeable. At this mode of life I am greatly difpleafed, and amazed.—A
married
I ! I
(	243 )
married woman in London is, I find,
quite the fafhion, and if handfome,
and lives in a fafhionable ffyle, a fub-
jeOi for abmiration. My natural mo
deffy is taken by Mifs Vinhurft and
a few like her, for art and afieClation,
and by thofe who judge more kindly,
for the blulhing timidity of a country
girl.
I had a letter yefferday from
Lady Eliza Mountford : fhe informed
me her fiffer and her had been on a
vifit to Mifs Villars, whofe affeClion
for Belford receives new poignancy from time. She is fettled in the coun-^
try, and tho’ but of age, refolved ne-
ver to marry. She has been lately at
Bath, at which gay place fhe took leave
of the brilliant feenes of the world, and
is fixed in continual retirement.
Horatio I find knows Belford, and I
heard mention that he has joined his
regiment.
Adieu.
Caroline Falkland
L
Letter

I i
•t
t
( 2+4
LETTER XLIII.
MRS. FALKLAND TO MISS SEYMOUR
My
London.
dear Emily must have been
amazed at my long filence—a filence, my friend, the refult of niy mind being tortured by Surprize and anxiety, I can hardly think all that is pasted a
reality.
Mr. Sedley is dead; and
would you believe it, Emily,—I am
not his daughter.
I have made a
ufelefs Sacrifice, and never knew true milery until now :—But let me collest my Scattered ideas and acquaint you
with the whole.-------Some days after
the conclufion of my last, I heard he v/as ill, and he Sent a hasty Summons to me. I went to him and found his last moments nearly approaching. I cannot tell you, my dear, how deeply I was affeded
My Caroline (faid “ he) I am unworthy your affecHon— “ You may look on me as the bafest ‘‘ of ir.ea—I have a great deal to dif-
“ dost
64
(	2+5
/
l'
cloSe—may that difcovery eafe my
“ tortured mind.

Gracious Hea-
ven! what 'was mv amazement at tbeSe words !——
——^After fome preludes wTich it is unnecelTary to infert, he began as followsOut of a very large family none were dillipated men but a brother of mine and my-felf.' We fpent our fortunes and then became fafhionable exiles, by leaving our country abruptly and “ fettling on the borders of the Lake of Geneva. My brother had been married; his wife w^as long fince
CC
u

iC
C6
IC
cc
iC


(C
cc
cc
cc
cc
cc
cc
cc
cc
11
dead, but he had a fon, whom we “ educated^ in our retirement between us, and when arrived at years of maturity, George Sedley promifed to be a mueh better man than his father or his uncle. We were ail exceedingly fond of the country we
II
*
were m, and at laff my died. He had little or nothing to leave his fon, who however foon after captivated a Genevefe lady who had a fortune of 10,000, and gave him her hand. In a year after
brother

L z
CC
She

I
i1
( 246 )
ic
She had a daughter;

(C
cc
c;
C(
((

cc
4C
that daughter “ was Caroline. As Soon as She had given birth to you, fhe died herfclf. Language is inadequate to expreSs the fufSerings of young Sedley at the lofs of his wife; it preyed on his health and in a few months he followed her, conjuring me on his death to be the foie guardian and proteDor of his child. Your fortune [which was that your mother brought] was in my hands, quite “ uncontrouled, as our relations in England knew nothing of George Sedley’s connexion, and the relations of the Genevefe lady were fo highly difpleafed that they never took the leafl notice of you. As death had made fuch ravages in our little family, I felt myfelf quite
country, and made a re Solution of returning to my native kingdom. It was on my journey thither, that I formed the defign of pafiing you as my daughter ; there was no obffacle to the action, as owing to our flrattered
“ circumstances,
IQ

4C



4;
4 4
44
CC
4C
iC
4C
4C
deferted in a.foreign
CC
cc
u
u
/
cc
f;

(C

cx
cc
cc
cc
cc
cc
cc
cc
cc
cc
cc
cc
a
cc
cc
cc
cc
( 247 )■
I
drcumSlances, my brother and had lived in the utmoft Solitude 1
my nephew’s match had been private, all eonfpired to favour my
defign, and I pretended on my ar-
rival that I had married at Geneva,
my wife was no more, and Caroline,
not yet two years old, was the oft-
fpring of our union. My motive
for this bafe concealment was your
fortune : I Spent it all, except what
was expended on your education,
and a run of luck at the gaming-
table Supported me in elegant afflu-
ence, during your flay with Mrs*
Ofborne: that luck changed, and
every thing of mine became the
property of Mr. Falkland; it was
then I Sent for you from Mountford
Abbey, Can you ever pardon my
bafenefs My illnefs was feigned
to make you marry him : had you
known me to be only an uncle, you
would never have confented : but
duty Surmounted every thing. I
knew your exalted notions of obe-
dience and Sacrificed you to Horatio,
L 3
CC
though
! I
I
• ■ (
! I
i;>
(	248	)
(C
cc



cc

iC
<c
givenefs.----Warn
though fenlible of his unworthinefs: for iny pretended illnefs, it pleafed Heaven to vifit me with real indiS-pofition—I felt that the laft hour of a mif-fpent life was arrived, and fent for you to acquaint you with the whole and to receive your for-
Falkland, moil amiable Caroline—may he not, like me, ere it is too late, repent.’
At thoSe lafl words his voice began to
faulter, and he waved his hand for
✓
me to leave the room j I did fo, but not until I affured him of my forgive-nefs. I came away in a state more eafily to be conceived by my Emily than for me to rfelate,—fo furprized and fo Shocked—your Caroline a Genevefe, and only niece to Mr. Sed-ley. To refrelh my dejedled fpirits, I went to take an airing in Hyde Park* I had not proceeded far, when feeing fome figures through the trees in a retired part, I watched more atten^ tively and faw Falkland walking with two noted ladies of the town. I drew in my head hastily and was happily
unobserved.
( ^^-49 )
sr
tmobserved, and returned home filled with a thouSand fenfations. The dif-covery of my birth, my ufelefs facri-^ fice, [for never would I have made it but for a deferving father in diflrefs] and the evident proofs that Horatio was the moff abandoned of hufbands ; all co-operated powerfully on me I Spent the day alone, and in the evening heard that Mr. Sedley had breathed his lail.
L 4
Letter
( 25° )
LETTER XLIV.
THE SAME TO THE SAME.
Mord aunt’s attention to me,
and Falkland’s to Mifs Vinburfl, hourly increafes. The former is certainly a man of the deepeft defign. I told you, as his converfation was coldly polite, I fuffered him to be my constant attendant, and now that he has engaged himfelf in the intimacy of a brother or a friend, that mafk is thrown off, and the lover in every look and word is feen. From this knowledge of his art he has not even my esteem, and I purpofe contriving Lome means to drop his acquaintance. Horatio feems to take no notice of him or any other of my chaperons, which to me is the most painful neglect. Mr. Sedley’s dying words of warning him, were not forgot by me j but he is fo very distant that I was more perplexed how to enter on the
tonic of affairs to him, than I would
to
( 2S.I )
to the utmost stranger: yesterday wc happened to be a few moments alone, and were fitting by each other on the fopha, when he mentioned that he had
deal the night before at ‘ My dear Falkland [Said
lost a great Brookes’s.
(4


4C
I] I fear your pailion for gaming will utterly destroy our fortune; believe me we are hourly launching into unjustifiable expenfes.” He looked at me with the utmost cutting indifference in the world, and replied, he was the best judge how it fhould be difpofed of. His particularity to Mifs Harriet is evident. One evening lately I was going out,, and afked her to accompany me; fhe refufed, and when I came home at night I afked my maid while undrefflng, had Mifs Vinhurst been alone the whole evening ? “ Oh no, Madam, [replied fhe] “ Mr. Falkland cams home foon af-
cc
ter you went out

You know.
Emily, I am the least jealous of any/ human being j but this was undoubt-' edly fettled, as he never but when we-have company is at home in the even—
£Ug
Adieu.
L 5
( 252 )
t
J
LETTER XLV.
THE SAME TO THE SAME.
London,
To what trials, my Emily, have
been accuftomed
Mi'fs Vinhurft
I
You were no doubt amazed at my being a month lilent: I was unable to write, from the disquietude of my mind.—They decamped when I was out, and have
embarked at Dover.
thy Harriet
{fill
Bafe, unwor-
Falkland
more unw^orthy To what dangers have
they left me expofed 1---Our houfe
is already Surrounded with creditors. DiSfrefs—ruin, awaits your
Caroline..

/
Lettik
( 253 )
LETTER XLVI.
MISS SEYMOUR TO MRS. FALKLAND
Morton Houfc.
My letters* have informed you how
lincerely I am grieved at your fitua-tion : From experience am I a judge of afHidions, and now, my dear, of the mo,ft exquifitc joys. Prepare, my Caroline, to hear of the unexpected happinefs of your Emily.
You know what a length of time, to me ages, has elapfed fince I heard any thing of Woodley. Several other gentlemetes addrefSes I rejected 5 and lately Mr. Morton informed me that a Nobleman had made propofals to him for your friend, a Lord Euftace. The circumftance of his having firft addrefled my guardian, prepofTefled me fo much againff him, that I would not confent to fee him. My uncle for a long time in vain Solicited, and yefterday evening affured me he would
be
^ Several of her letter* are omitted a* UBseceffary,
( 254 )
be very happy if I would confent only once to fee him. I had with difficulty
pronounced

confent to this
Mr. Morton
Into an adjoining room and brought in Lord Eufface, my charming Charles Woodley. What furprize, what ex-tatic rapture that moment gave me! --Your Emily fainted with exceflive joy.w-—This unexpe<Sled interview, would have been a fine Subject for a painter certainly. And now, Caroline, as you are no doubt on the rack of curiofity,, I will not delay to gratify
it.
few
uncle’s vifit
at the inn, old Mr. Woodley was feized with a Severe fit of ficknefs, and Soon after died Shortly after, the deceafe of a relation left the title of Eufface and a large effate to Charles, who refolved not to return to your Emily uritil a proper time after his father’s death fhould be elapfed, which he pasted in fettling his affairs, and refolved when he came to act the part
he did, concerted between him and
Mr.
( 255 )
Mr. Morton, to have the pleafurc of
lurprifing me.
Cruel creature!—I
with I had had command of myfelf.
and appeared with, a	Jang froid
but the ardent afFedlioa, of which
he is now convinced I have for him.
will certaiment ruin this dear difguifed
lover—this ambiguous Lord Euflace.
Your three lafi letters are just
brought me; by fome mistake they
were detained in the office.—Good
Heaven ! how I am amazed at the
difeovery of your father;—and how
ffiocked that Falkland has left you!
Ah, dear Caroline, how has the nev/s
of your circumstances damped my every joy!

Vi"	»

Letter
•< -r'l
\ .V



/
( 256 )
LETTER XLVII.
MRS. FALKLAND TO MISS SEYMOUR.
O
Richmond*
I
H, my Emily,—what danger have efcaped !—Would you believe it,
But let me
Mordaunt carried me off. acquaint you methodically with the Vv^hole. I had but juft fealed my laft letter, when a carriage drove up to the door, with the livery, &c. of a lady of my acquaintance, and a card from her, requefting I would fpend the day with her. Your unfufpicious friend, after appointing a perfon to fettle ' fome way with the creditors, ftepped into the chariot. But how was I fhocked and furprized to find it driving out of town as faft as poftible: no efforts of mine in calling tfe the fervants were effeCtual; they went on, and at laft when we reached a fmall houfe at Richmond, flopped. The firft perfon I faw was Mr. Mordaunt, who immediately on the door
being
257 )
being opened, catched me in his arms and carried me in. I fainted repeatedly, and only recovered to be fenfible of the terror of my fituation. I kneeled to Mordaunt—I weptf but prayers and tears were vain. “ The lovelieft
“ of women (faid he) is abandoned “ by the worft of hufbands—why will “ fhe not tlien liffen to the affections fhe has infpired from me : I had every reafon to believe myfelf dear to you—rhy affiduities and almoft continual prefence you did not ob-
iC
cc
(4
44
44
ject to.
yy
“ Bafeff of men [inter-
44 ^
(4
rupted I] know that your being my preferver, and politenefs, were alone “ my motives.’* I burfl again into tears, on which he got up and left the room, the door of which he locked.— In what a fituation now was I left!
the windows, every place I found was faff fecurcd: different fervants came to me who brought in dinner, tea, and fiippecj I did not taffe any thing ; and at the latter of thefe meals a maid fervant came in, and from the
innocence of her countenance I ventured
( 2<8 1
tured to Speak to. her.. “Your master’s reward for your care now [Said
Ci
i4
I] believe me will be trifling.”
I
fliewed her a large purSe of gold and offered it for my liberty; after Some deliberation fhe conSented, and promised the next morning to. effect it. I need not telS you what a night of impatience I paSSed : I had candles burning,, and traverfed up and down the room moff of the night: my fears, my anguifh were repaid' by the plea=. Sure I felt at the fight of returning day and with it the faithful domeffic unlocking the door of my priSon. We came out through the garden, and from that on the road. I recollected my dear Mrs. Ofborne’s new houSe was near that; to it I made the maid direct me, and never was more rejoiced than when T found my Self Safely lodged within its walls. I have not ventured out fince I came, for fear of Mordaunt, who is no doubt enraged at my elopement.—No news yet from Falkland.-—I requeft my dear. Emily will pardon my not having congratulated
( 259
1
lated her. To-morrow I believe I Shall venture to town, and as Soon as your marriage is celebrated,, I request you will come to your unhappy
Caroline Falkland.
• *
*
Letter
( z6o
LETTER
XL VIII
JbADY EUSTACE TO LADY ELIZA
MOUNTFORD.

St. James*8-Square, London.
IH E diflrefs and agitation of my mind, at the fituation of the earlieft and mofl beloved of friends, prevented my anfwering the letters of congratulation from my dear girls at the Abbey. I am indeed the happieft of women in an unexpedled union with the objedt of my affections almoft from childhood ; that felicity is not a little allayed by the unhappinefs of Caroline. You are acquainted with her affection for Capt. Belford, her duteous facrifice, the difcovery of her birth, and laffly, the bafenefs of the worfl of hufbands in leaving her, which expofed her to the flratagems of Mr. Mordaunt. After her happy efcape from him, fhe fpent fome days with Mrs. Ofborne, and then return-
..'
my
( 261	)
■*	X
ccl to London, where the fame day Lord Eufface and me arrived j—our joy at meeting was exquifite. My Caroline is greatly altered for the worfe ; her vivid bloom is gone, her eyes have loff their fire j anxiety and the life She w^as obliged to lead, has wrought this change in her.
In Continuation.
4
Gracious Heaven, Eliza!*---------
% ^
hand trembles,—I cannot write.-Falkland,—yes, Falkland is returned. The intelligerice of his wife’s being carried off, notwithffanding the fup-pofed fecrefy with which it was contrived, tranfpired j it reached his ears at Calais, and he flew back: he is gone to Richmond, to call Mordaunt out. I muff fly to my friend; what confolation fhe requires in trials like thofe!—Oh, Sedley, Sedley, never can I forgive thy iniquity in pafTing thyfelf as a father: I think I am much more enraged at him, (tho’ no more) than the dear fufferer is herfelf.
Falkland
(	2.6z )
Falkland is returned unhurt: he has wounded Mordaunt Severely,, tho*" not mortally. Horatio is. So loft to all Senfe of propriety, that he was not in the leaft embarrafTed at feeing his injured wife} he beheld her with the unconcern oLconfirmed vice. The duel was merely a point ofi honor^ and by no means the reSult of affection for Caroline; he is indeed the moft depraved" of his fex.
Some days have elapfed, and Falkland is very ill; a violent fever has Seized him, I believe the effect of hurry and anxiety. The bafe Harriet, we have learned, finding he did not return, confoled herfelf for his lofs,. with a new lover, with whom Ihe is now at Fontainbleau. The moft a-naiable of wuves cannot be prevailed on to leave Horatio; fiae is conftantly with him, at which, we are diffracted.
I am fummoned^—he is worfe.
The lofs of Falkland will not indeed
be great.
Adieu.
Emilt Eustace.
Letter
(	253	)
\
LETTER XLIX.
THE HON. CAPT. BELFORD, TO SIR EDWARD HAVILAND, BART.
» V

Quarters.
Again has your Harry an adjacent
view of the land of happvinefs.--------I
have this moment heard that Falkland is dead. The vicious courfes he pur-fued, have, I fnppofe, put a period to his life fo early. Caroline will yet
enchanting thought!
be
mine
I
had nothing worth mentioning, which prevented my writing to you of late. My only pleafure was in the fociety of Lovell and Amelia; they are fettled near Belford, and enjoy uninterrupted happinefs : they adore each other, are charming in their perfons, and fo amiable in their diSpoiltions, that they every where infpire efleem and admiration, verifying that beautiful line of Thompfon,
u
And good—the grace of ail the country round.

I am
( 264 )
vl am just Setting off for London, impatient to behold my Caroline. I am again in extacies,—again the happiest of mankind.----Surely Heaven
will at last Smile propitious—*no new obstacle will arife, and unbounded joys await your friend.
- r s, .


\
( 26 s
LETTER XLII.
SIR EDWARD HAVILAND, BART. TO
THE HON. HENRY BELTORD.
May
London.
you indeed be happy, Belford,
will be the ardent wifh of your Havi-
land.—Falkland is dead. Though in
London, I know nothing more, as the
fatal turn in my own affairs ingroffed
my attention entirely. A few weeks ago I
came hither.
left Bath and
One morning about fe-
ven o’clock, when I was coming from
fome Scene of diffipation, and the
beauty of the morning had induced me to walk home, I was proceeding
Howly up a retired ffreet, when the
hall door of a houSe being open, a
child of about three years old ran out,
and fell at my feet on the
flags.
I
took it up and perceived that it was
extremely beautiful. A maid Servant
came for it, and from its being fo very
handfome, I was led to aflc whofe child
Jt
N

(
66 )
it was : She replied, fhe did not know; that it lived with a Mifs Harley in that hoiife, who was dying.—You can better conceive than I reprefent my
fenfations----1 Said I knew the young
lady and begged to be fhewed in; accordingly the girl conducted me into a parlour, where I believe I pafTed half an hour in hlent furprife and grief. At la^ I took out my pocket-book and wrote on a flip of paper,
“ It is with anguish and regret I learn that you are ill—can you for a while forget your injuries, and recollect Shat you once adored the writer of fhefe lines—Confent my ‘‘ beloved Cbcilia to fee him.”
Thetnadd carried this up, and Some time after She font down for me—I went—Oh, .Delford, Belford !—could years —could ages efface the painful recollection of that hour !—I beheld the lovely Cecilia at the cloSing period of life—her matchlefs form altered with grief and ficknefs—I kneeled by her in a ffate of unutterable agony. When She had Somewhat recovered
ii

CC
4(
tll3
( 26? )
the agitation my prefence had oeca« lioned, fhe raifed herfelf in the bed to fpeak. “ I will not reproach—I will not dwell, Sir Edward, [Said fhe] on the arts yon praCHced to gain my affections as the firfl ftep to a “ feduCtion. The death of the beft “ of men and of fathers, left me a ffill

cc
iC
ii
tc
cc
cc
iC

a




cc


cc
iC
u
more eafy prey to yonr defigns :— We were married you know, after which you left me j whifpers began to be circulated to my prejudice in the country, fpite of my retirement^ “ and unable either to confefs our union or to bear the calumny of the world, I quitted Mrs. Walfingham
and went to that cottage in --fhire.
I there became a mother, and fpent three years, at the end of which period we met one evening : immediately after that, I grew fo very ill that I was obliged to come to London for the advice of the phyficians there 5 on my journey I happened to meet Robert, who was your valet at Woburn Hall j he was dying at an inn where I happened to ffop^
M


and

ii

iC
44
44
44
44
44
44
44
44
44
44
44
44
44
44
44
44
44
44
44
44
( 2.6S )
i
and his approach to eternity I conclude made him defirous of his con-
“ fcience
being clear:
he informed
“ me that your defign was, that he Should perfonate a par Ion, and have
a feigned licenfe j
but his regard
for me being greater, he brought a real clergyman and proper licenfe, who legally united us. I cannot exprefs my furprize and horror at finding Tvhat your intentions had been; but the anguifh yet w^as fpared me of your Succeeding. I knew not where to write to you, and was convinced that in the fup-pofition of your defigns being effected you meant to abandon me for ever. Grief at your treatment will Ihortly deprive me of exiftence; but in my laft hour, the laft with of my life have I accomplished j—it was to fee you and implore a father’s protection for the little Edward. I doubt not [faid She, with a benign fmile] but repentance will expiate your errors—May that glorious hope ever be before your eyes!
May
26q )

a
ments
—May your treatment of our child Shew your tender remembrance of “ a woman who ftill in her laff mo-^
loves you !—and may he Sometimes, Sir Edward, bring back “ to your recolledion the image of Cecilia!”
Thefe were the lafi words my Cecilia ever Spoke. In iilence file embraced her child repeatedly, and in about an hour after breathed her laft in my arms.—Oh ! Harry,—may her fate and mine be a warning to others;
may it make the one Sex more cau--tious of Seduction and the- other o
r
1.
truffing!
Was it pofllble for any human ing to feel more deSpair and i than I did while I gazed wildly on the breathleSs corpSe of my Cecilia.
I was pleaSed hovrever that we had been really married. Since even in her
lafl moments it afforded her Sitisfac-tion.
But I v.dll not, my dear Bciford, dwell on this Scene to affect you.
The remains of my beloved were con-
M 2	veyed
t
( ) ,
veyed to the church at Woburn, and the moff elegant monument ereded to her memory. I had enquiries made for Robert, who had not died as he feared : I made him prove the marriage, and the child will be heir to my title and fortune.
This day I propofe fetting out for the country, where in rcmorfe and gdef I Shall pafs the remainder of my, life at Woburn Hall,—my only care the education of my child. The affections his m.other pofTefled Shall now be transferred to him ; and may he not, like his father, be the deftroyer of his own happinefs!
Senfible that in the retirement I have laid out for the future, I Shall have nothing to relate, I here clofe my
correspondence.—-----With a thoufand
wishes that your fate may be very different from that of

E. Havjland

T
(	271	)
LETTER
LI.
(LADY EUSTACE TO LADY ELIZA
MOUNT FORD. .
London,
Al L, Eliza, that our imagination
could have formed of grief, is realized. Falkland expired, Soon after the con-dufion of my laff, and Caroline, in confequence of her attendance on him,
has taken the fever----Oh ! fave us
Heaven from this laff trial-may fhe
yet be Spared !
it has raged with
violence for Some days j fhe is now in a gentle flumber,—the Jleep of death I fear.
I thought from a knowledge of his unworthinefs I would not have been at all affeded at Horatio’s diffolution,
but found myfelf midaken.-------Oh
Death, how awful are. thy approaches!
In
' \
272	)
V.
In Continuation.
Oh, my friend,—to what a fcenc have I been v/itneSs !—the recolledion of it will be ever prefent to my
thoughts-----Belford is come-,-—he had
heard of Falkland’s death and came to fee his beloved, intending at a proper time to make his propofals.—He was frantic when he heard the fitua^ tion ihe was in 5—he kneeled to me to conduct him to her apartment—I could only weep in filence, and Belford
ilew to it himfelf-----Harry gazed at
her with fpeechlefs agony,—but his addrelTes came too late to afford her pleafure—•—fhe Saw him—heard him
not-----the icy kaPxd of death was
Stretched for the lovelieft of wumen.
Oh, Eliza—Eliza !—what a change v/as this!—Belford Hill led on to ex-
t
pect felicity, and in the end to meet with a fate like this.—Her eyes were no longer fixed on him with delight her heart no longer fluttered at his
approach
I am unable to write.
Caroline
(	273 )
/
Caroline is no more !—does Emily
live to write it---1 am ifnpified with
grief; and the once gay, once charming Harry Eelford is frantic —his is
indeed the phrenzF of love---he hands
immoveable by her cold remains—hill calls on her name in foft impalTioned
accents
-What a fcene is this!
your Emily at the other, is weeping , deluges of tears to her remembrance to the remembrance of her untimely fate,—fnatched when on the eve of happinefs, ^nd in the bloom of life. Belford’s expedations were raifed to the higheft degree j—his foul was v/rapped in her ; and the future years of his life will only be paffed in regretting the former, and counting with a degree of hill more refined affection, the hours until he Shall meet his Caroline, and in another wnrld enjoy that happinefs,—which it was the will of Heaven to deny them in this.
FINIS.
.V,
v-i df
o
%

■«
f '
: ' ' A.

-I




-f
i"^
d ?

C

• ^ ' • . > ^ :* : ^r.r;- ;
'* V,**'. •	•
♦
f:/.
' i <»'	/ '. ■
/
i i
4	•
l‘ «
-.r	‘
r <	»'
/
«(

r
V ./



*;
/*:

•'V

*>

/*	. .	*	' V*'	_

T'
i^‘

A.:
•V '.•*•*	0


«-
tn\

Vw- .;.•	<*.-•2. U,.;
-:	.v{ • /'■» •'
A • ^>.J




<*

i st
a .	> trd‘ *
, "-fw	xj.
^'iL' •'NC-Cr: *:J
■d. •-
■;r AFM
■ A:	-f

5. ■»' r
. #

• WWl •*»



................... -'nAi^rFAr'' rird



<Sl r \ J
W
V
-’■M



I^C.i --C
-•Vi J;^
■	/tC ;:.■
■	■^ .t:'
-

■fe'-W-'
.y -’tr
I' ■■:
«k« -..
•V	.•	-	;	^


X
.v‘	,	' -•- j-	f -'iV W^'‘^‘
A - -	*,	a..; .-.,
''' "'' '
- -'.	•-‘v -.-





.'ft


•ii.
^'»-
•s'





!?•>>•>.
<v*^:
‘.•nr-.'. vi»
f>.V?

.W'

»
J5.


-o.

y-K -d.
■ KV •
A“^

<.. .J\ I
Tfi'
< -i


AVA




;■' ■ h	^ " • -‘r^. ^

»• nTu.
r•'*.*>> '■ ri . ri
f»i-’V-.‘
■* ^ :r- -
i3'j%
* ■', V-


r.-'*'


►r.»'
:>V *:.'.. i ■ :
! ^	. t-
;#te ■.xS;=^,if’,^:5-i;;.:f fr 4.
' ■ Arir^&f^' K ■■^Adr :A
.....*•■•1 -.Iy^AA-rr-'A-'fri-,


•h
^.

**'

.#•




Kif
/ . rT’	r.g
‘r^ ' l ^	. - ■

L» V

*A.,

'V . •
*' > •

15,';.' ,-A . *•
?7Ci- »••
v-.?7v:

/.»'.
r	,;5‘^l-



d.l^hV . .	-.
-. •	• 1-
N-
:'
V*

•S'

.4:

J. ■fT
t i




i
.^■'

tt^

‘r* .-•£1
lVA; >


'1 V


V'r.

.t!^'
./••V

•trw
^/: .0


'' to*

*•. ••






■!*^-’ 'i
rr
.'I ‘ ^
u
i'-


■vir
• ~r:Ar'


ah

V :*
V


..■■J..UT-’ ,L


'SiL’.


-v>;
W«ft'


.'•• ■». ■
A I


. j

rMf!?.

'P#	rt
^ LrVfS
l1C»



■r>?



/'45
fev yi'i r. ’". •,*• j
• •:	.:-t':.

^3
► >
o '••
K>-
..‘"T

> ;/•
’^i-
'V:

■/I.

-.•<v-'
r?^i
f. -'•*•;
>N?C-
/V
.yt»'






VjA'.?
S3>'

’<
.C'V.T.
*
’v:'
Vil
fjii:-

-.S^l
1^1=5

•Pi^-
•*•■' *•	’.' 1'<‘.'	.	ts.;^
IV'' x' .^. . ..	-	r*. -	!*•>. \!j

5^
.«•
r.*. '

i-.:
■-VH





•ii-i
5^7

••W-.
•>• •. * ,tc


I

w

'J>4;


.P'* \v

»-;l»


- • ■ iv
r^LL'vfB
•■A'

•'X
•* *!•

’ <*- *'
PH.
W'



r^v	AivC- ..Jr '	■	'D'
•' ■	-	. S1& ► . * ■••aw®
■->' V

FV.v
ivy


T):'-.'
•.»»

' V .■»
r.^
'7^ '-•
■£^.-^.\K-
______L ,'	.
* tSjB^. '—t-	-	■'-.*-

.v-c
i •	.. riDX J
-.tAi
OA’!
y¥-AF
Ssif ,


:m



■>Xv


Mi:
.. - *c<
rAi’-*.
mi



lii?



4 ;
l^v
r^'
■-:T:-



•v.r<«-





C-Vrd - ::f^b-
■TfevCT-'-C- ^:^-A


i'l

^V-

i^'
« '	♦ ,'TW, .-
•■> *<' *.*■ •


.y*--
T-^b^r


r <V I? I
fi.: * r* »


L*>V<
■ v:*v^N


I'.-J.
-^'W;


X.«

■Tf • i>S^
:.&K.
0^;Nh,- c-i:
vfcr; ■>:•. ' ;vi
--'A
bxr -S'. V. •




inches
5

D50 llluminant, 2 degree observer
Density
0.04
0.09
0.15
0.22
0.36
1	2	3 '	4	5	6		8	9	10	11 (A)	12	13	14	15
39.12	65.43	49.87	44.26	55.56	70.82	63.51	39.92	52.24	97.06	92.02	87.34	82.14	72.06	62.15
13.24	18.11	-4.34	-13.80	9.82	-33.43	34.26	11.81	48.55	-0.40	-0.60	-0.75	-1.06	-1.19	-1.07
15.07	18.72	-22.29	22.85	-24.49	-0.35	59.60	-46.07	18.51	1.13	0.23	0.21	0.43	0.28	0.19
0.51
lOI I I
500	200
§1 SI |i Si
«et» p*r lnc^ («««c«i)	0QQ
S'

Si Si
700
300
Tkt^adl
centimeters
I I I te I I I I I I I I l2i * > M > > I I31 > > M > I I |4 I I I I I I I I I51 I I I I I I I I51 I I I I I I I l/i I I I I I I I |gi I I I I I I I I91 I I I I I I I Ho
16 (M)	17	18(B)	19	20	21	22	23	24	25	26	27	28	29	30	
49.25	38.62	28.86	16.19	8.29	3.44	31.41	72.46	72.95	29.37	54.91	43.96	82.74	52.79	50.87	L
-0.16	-0.18	0.54	-0.05	-0.81	-0.23	20.98	-24.45	16.83	13.06	-38.91	52.00	3.45	50.88	-27.17	a
0.01	-0.04	0.60	0.73	0.19	0.49	-19.43	. 55.93	68.80	-49.49	30.77	30.01	81.29	-12.72	-29.46	b
0.75
0.98
1.24
1.67
2.04
2.42
SN: OL0007
Colors by Munsell Color Services Lab ^