- H •iv'- • •■ *'* •' * 4 ’ r',	j '' v,» . / - ' /•; .?r
	
C . ''i	1 •'■'¥• ^ if ' '
> V -	V A.*. - ■* '
“'4	• ' i . •■'■,'»*■■’'
	Fd.'
*- •* *	


Fr-> O •jT’V
-V.	•	'•
-.'.•	.	-	^	^ -	' %-r,.	»-' . -.	-.*’	*-
■ ■ "■ - ■■■:. ' ■
-r - .
-N.
'' s''if .'i-n'■■"	•>-TiS
\	■ sV--.\

>--

3 ^
'I
•V'

•'-V
vf
-



V *,
'K
fr ..
/^V. IM ),
I

?•+ ^ •
THE
GODFREY F. SINGER
MEMORIAL
PRESENTED BY
MR. AND MRS. JACOB SINGER


?<-•
■i '',	-'A, - t, . '.JI^
v\
Wi( •.


>
V
'W*
%

■K
--C ■

r FA A-r
• 4	^

•
N.

/
THE
/
CAUTIOUS LOVER.
VOL.
I



4.^,
1
Y ..-
■i

. t^.
v'

.-: : .:yi


.'-A
■ -**•«• - *•■'.' - •■'-'

•r?>^	-
:Ar.< rg»-.

'-VV

- \
. f
: r
V-— -:* -

K-.veA-
■' - ;vA- ’
.^-1^
■I'
.■A
-X


.'Tj f*

i^,	-	,1
I .*
. r
#«.
'-f • iv*. ^ _•'


Sc-' v>
i .	.	^
■ i '
ii *■
*v

s-'.--^-:-'.-	■'-'	-- -V
V '	■
Sf:F: riA--•'>^ , ..-‘r	','■'
■^*-
L.'
'tii-
*' • /. ■ -
^ri.A Vm, s
N-Vh' : >
f. V v Vx	N • 1 r» «
-t '-■ ' - - -:^'j‘-:'V-£* * ♦' * — • * •*	j’
	• ^
	• ^ 4
	S' •.
.' •	\
'r ' -:v	y.' S
	* V* >. y.
f -
		f r- •**.'
■	•%.	1 *k r
/ ■	%->	
	. -SO' -i--	-< ' *. '* ^ -,A^ *3C
.-•'A.

		r		• X* ••-f.i'^	.» . C:"	T- V ^
	i» ' -	>•		* * ft	<	
H-	i ', - <	i ' ■ a- 1 • t - C .X. J»	1 -•Tx-		=i' V ^	C V
• ^
, C-
irE'A
-- .-'.V
«?>
■ft
\
%



/
<r't
N..
'U. -»>r-'
^4^
.r%	/-•>;
• ?
r »
>*•

/.' «•
>■:*«. * ■
i.-'
f \
r
'«
.'xs - A'
s*	•	^
% y
^ t
O'

•<.*
A
\ •"
•	» .4
; U ^ .N
•i 'N * -
yS|	'
^ O /AV 5f V r
^' :■ ' K ^ : ^;- " A V* -•


u


/
'-^ Lrif§


O
\

rhM
A
;r: Ci W-,
udf -.-
'^r	.^::.
THE
CAUTIOUS LOVER;
OR, T H I
H
S T O
O F
LORD WOBURN
By a Young Gentleman of Oxford,
IN TWO VOLUMES.’
,V O L. I.
DUBLIN?
Printed for J A M E S W I L L IA M S, at
No, 5. in Skinner-Row.
.....mmmmmmmrn
MDCCLXXHI.
V‘-
■

' - C'T '^rrA^/Z'S^
■ - .VS" ‘ :.• '!‘P^'-
. - ;.. -V.-. ..--	•-•*.-■‘s
.	- • ./. •.	-T. 5:' “ •.■iC. A
■•■' -	’•'/vV-^'-^‘L.' ■•:-•>•,<*■
•*':.•-•.';-y*'•: ‘ '“/‘*' '•■"'' 'L'hi
■': - ' I ■'V • ' - *■	'*■’■• -4


\
; i

r> *
•. S- <: i:

'VK*'-.
•	’ , ID ' s .. :	* .*'.. * -•:
•	-V^z - ‘	
JL	\ -"ri	- ,_^
	•‘v"' -Jt.A .it n~^-y , • •	♦ 0 ’ ^ ^ • ■V- _
.	1	
')
■ \ *'5-*ci.
Vi-

fe
jt •

V.
' I *
^ %* •
✓



- -- r i	r y	•».
	i - ^	4'
\ -
,-^ V
Cv /
s

A-*'-	'
V-'- .


V
" f 1/ ■■’-T T
c Vi g Q
V
■; • - >
r ■»* .
V-
f
V
^ •*

4.
1^'*

»
S
i,
^4 W
'. -tf -
;T'-- - . ■■
J':**
-4 ■

- .VV;^
I
• Ly-
.-	*•; i -
’. T. • -


.f-' V ^ 7'

>	.C- ..	-•	S	^	**	•'*' K * ►
K i. 4.: .... < , » JV
...	J .. '.v-*t - *• •.	*.*.» .A*»
» A
*«?»


4»
n
m
1 a

^ If
\J
(t,

V •
H «	T 1 > ** V / ^ ^ ^ /.s X	9 ^ i • V *	T	. y V /	r> V A	^T r A /, y s . L i. y . X 1 /•. \.
	•	\ > . 1/		r • •'	V \f	■> s • •■'i r •' *^5 * *
		J /X • i-i	. .J.		.J	
•>
lot
- ‘
V! 4

7.	.	.>	• I	•'
*<!■- V i < L‘ b X
X <*■••%•*.	>.-■.*>» », ^ .. «	. *.^rw
• J,
' . >
U. of Pa.
If)'
CO —	^
CO(«*rX
CDtJ .


wm
THE
CAUTIOUS LOVER,

L**
LETTER
I.

>
4 '
V

<
xappy
Lord W o BURN to Mr. Wi t, m o t.
w
ND fo you tell me that I am by far too nice, and of too refined a way of thinking to be My expedations, you fay, are extravagant: pernaps they are ; but till I fee a probability of having thofe expedations anfwered, 1 Ihall not .add another fool to the herd of miferable hufhands—Let them talk till their tongues are weary about heirs j 1 can adopt whenever I pleafe j I can difpofe of my fortune extremely well without having any matrimo~ mat conne6tions with that deceiver from the beginning, a woman. It is true, I cannot leave my title to my adopted fon, nor infure him all my ettate, but I can leave him enough to fatisfy a reafonable man ; befides, what care I for pofterity ? I am quite of the old lady’s mind, who, when prefled to think about the people who were to come after her, faid, “ Pr’ythee be quiet 51 wonder when we ihall fee pofterity do any thing for us.”—The lady was probably an Hibernian, but her reply was not altogether a bad one.—I have not the lead averfion to the
A
»v. V
Sex 5
0253S2

HISTORY OF
fex ; no man loves them better, from confUtution or from tafte. We were, undoubtedly, defigned by Nature to encreafe each other’s pleafures, but we certainly, by our political connedions, contrive to multiply each other’s cares.—>Now, perhaps, you ex-ped me to run on with a heap of invedives againft the marriage-ftate ; ifyou exped any feverities from me againft it, you will be miftaken.—The marriage ftate is, I am very willing to own with you, a heaven Tipon earth, when thofe who enter into it are fuita-ble to each other in every refped ; but the infernal matches which one fees in the world fo much outnumber the celeJHal ones, that the encouragements -to an indiffoluble union are fewer and fev/-er every day—The women are become fb intolerably corrupt, that a man muft be abfolutely mad who encumbers himfelf with a wife.—I have not yet, in--deed even ventured upon a miftreft, being almoft certain that a miftrefs “ labouring in her vocation,” will endeavour to impofe upon me.--You know how much I hate to be duped-, you will not w'onder at my appre fjenfons which naturally throw me upon my guard.
“ By thefe apprehenfions you punifti yourfelf cruelly, for the moft exquilite joys in life are only to be found,in ,the arms of a fine woman.” Not fo faft, my friend j I enjoy, I alTure you, all the raptures which the fineft woman in the univerfe can beftow— with her perfonal charms ; but as to the tranfports arifing fr@m congenial fouls, from the delicious fatisfadions of mutual friendfhip, fatisfadions fupe-rior to all other fenfations, 1 give them up, firmly believing that I fhall never find a female capable of fuch an exalted attachment.
There are a thoufand women, you will tell me, who, in point of underftanding, are little inferior to men of the brighteft intelleds,and whofe minds have been cultivated in the poiiteft ftyle—who, by the oftnefs of their manners, the gentlenefs of their dif-pofitions, and the charming vivacity of their conver-
Iktion are tharoughly qualified' to be the moft defi-
rabk
LORD WOBURN:
■$
Table coirpanions:—Granted—I chiefly, therefor, converfe with fuch women.—Men are too apt to degenerate into brutes when left to their own mirth, mutually excited by coarfe jokes, indelicate allufions,
and noify impudence.-^^They are alfo inclined to
be ill-humoured, and inhumane when they aflbeiate only among themfelves.—I therefore, always chufe a mixed company : the two fexes ever appear to most advantage when they meet together.—But muft I tye myfelf to a woman for life, becaufe I like her conver-fation ?—No—certainly.—You will not, perhaps, be lo violent an advocate for matrimony when you have been half a year united to your favourite Maria,
Adieu.
P, S. I am going to fpend a week or two with Sir Francis Eufton, at Eufton-Caftle.—Let your next letter be directed to that place.—There will be a large party of us, I believe.
r ••.. >•• •••. \	•••. V. V / ••. V-	\ •	.•* \	t‘ V •
LETTER II.
From the fame to the fame.
Thank you for fo boldly taking up your pen in do'.-fence of women.—lamas much obliged to you for your panegyrics upon them, as they wmuld be on hearing them becaufe they give me an opportunity to vent my heterodox principles with the greater freedom. But I iliall not be contented merely to oppofe my fentimentsto yours; I fliall lllullrate the affertions I have thrown out by living examples—yet liow idly ilialli employ myfelf by dragging private delinquents from their retirements, and making a public expo-fure them, y/hen there are fo many glaring proofs of the falfehood and incontinence of v/omen exhibited every day before ,the world’s broad eye, of
women fguring in the higheft ranks of life.----
By the way, I have often obferved a striking fimila-
A 2	• _	rity
4
HISTORY OF
St
rity hetween the highest and the lowest stations that limilarity may be, perhaps, eahly accounted for— the quantum of reputation in both is fo extremely Small, that it is not worthy of their attention. People in the middle walks of life are only studious to keep up their charafters.—How many dutchestes, couniestes, &c. :&c. ,/could I name, who, instead of being destrous of concealing their amouri—-fame too rather plebAan^—appear to glory in their difregard of —decorum.-.—Go to a.country fair,or to a horfe race, all the girls are common } as handfome as girls of the first fafhion, though not fo high bred, full as falfe, £is fickle, and as voluptuous.—The grand aim of them all, in Short, is to get as many men into their power as they can, and to change them as often as a capricious king changes his favourites..—Vet, after all. Jack, girls we muji hare, but no wife ; no mistrefs for me. I am for no tye upon earth ; I live at large, and change my women as often as my cloaths.-—And, to fay truth, here are very handfome ones in this part of the country.-—Don’t mistake me i I do not mean millers wives and farmers daughters, but women of distinflion, women who have fome of the best blood in the kingdom dancing in their veins,—I never was fond of your fine healthy frefh-coloured blufhing country girls-; they are as kno'V. ing as the most accom-plilhed women of quality can polhbly be, but are de-•llitute of that elegance oimanner which is to me the irrefijiihle charm.
We have a strong party here ; Sir Francis loves company, literally ; he loves to have a croud about him ; and xay lady who chufes to live like other people ^ invites every body stie knows.-—I was, at first, loth to comply with their repeated invitations, but on their affuring me that I sticuld not be teazed with people, and that I ilrould live quite as I liked, I became flexible.
You afk me whether I rank lady Euston among the number of bad women in my black catalogue, (lily infinuating that I think no woman good.—Out again; here are, undoubtedly, fome lefs vicious than others;
Tome
LORD WOBURN.

foitse are more weak than wicked : mod earneftly, you may be afSured, do I avoid the latter^ and I cer-^ tainly dehre to have no connections v/lth the former.

No, Wilmot, the woman •whom-1 love mud be ele gantly handfome her mind mud be dill more beauri-fui, ir poffible, than her perfon.—^She mud be good. but fbe mud aifo be fenfibie, and politely accomplifh-ed ; die mud be gentle, rnoded, tender, nay, amo* rous; yet, at the fame time, as chade as a vedal ; die mud be faithful, generous, ilncere, and capable of the mod refined frien'dfhip for me.—-In diort, I diould not, 1 believe, think a woman truly loved m unlefs die would go as far as Prior’s EmiUa j and yet there may be exceptions even againd that character,
.—But probably you will be of lady Spilfbury’s mind about me : yederday, after I had refufed a didi of tea from her coarfe hand, die told me, that I did not know what I would have.
You bid me fay foniething to divert you in the-ab-*' fence ofyour Maria.--We have got a pretty widow here', young, handfome, in appearancedifcreet, andfeems inclined to attach herfelf to me more than to the red of the men.—She was married young, by her father, to an old man who ufed her mod horribly—-No doubt die gave him fufficient provocation—^but this among our-felves.—She has the fined pair of languidiing black eyes you ever beheld die has a pretty little mouth, and can look as demure as a quaker.—our apartments happen to lie contiguous—Strong temptation ! — Heaven defend my virtue ! —-Should my little widow be importunate, ! lhall be a lod creature—as 1 have heard the women fay.—But here is a celebrated toa/l expected here to morrow, who has not been much feen in public, lady Charlotte Morden, daughter to the late earl of G——Oh the death of the countefs* her mother die went into the North with her guardian and his wife, Mr. and Mrs. Elliot (the former is her mother’s brother) and from thence to Spa.—She returned to England, and was prefented while I was at
A 3	Paris™
€
HISTORY OF


Paris, fo that I do not remember ever to have feea her.—They tell me that (he is as aecompliilied and as good as die is beautiful —I fmiled at the monofyl-lablc, and replied, “ All ladies are undoubtedly — “ I am Sure you don’t think fo, you wretch, cried lady Spilfbury, tapping my flioulder—“ but you will be puniflred one time or other for—”
“For what ” anfwered I, “ for thinking in fo favourable a manner of the mod lovely part of the creation ?”
“Oh ! devil, devil ! ’’ faid Mils Freely, knovf that I know you think quite otherwife.”
When once a woman comes to confeSs herfelf fb very knowing. Jack, I have done with her.—But I did not tell her fo abruptly ;—I am not ill-natured, as the women tell me j I am, indeed, vain, infolent, indifferent fometimes j—nay, 1 ha've been called infen-fihle—I wilh they were fo j—however, I won’t abufe them—they are, after all, neceffary evils j and fo I will go and take a walk with my widow in the wil-derncfs.
Adieu.
LETTER IIL
From the fame to the fame.
This lady Charlotte is come.—She is very hand-
fome, but her pride is infupportable.—She is —faith, I can’t tell how to defcribe her j yet I have been looking at her above an hour, on purpofe to give you her portrait exadtly.-sShe is mod infufferably haughty’—Why Ihould a woman be fo curfed proud becaufe die happens to be particularly handfome ?~ And yet I think her features would have a great deal of foftnefs and fenfibility in them, if die would depart a little from the unnecedary dignity of her appearance.
—By keeping up a majedick air stte intends, doubtlefs,
to
L OR D WOBURN
^ % T
to render herfelf more attraftlve ; btit a woman with thefineft face In the world is not h'vely in my eyes, in her beauty is not accompanied with affability and good-nature--Lady Charlotte, indeed, is not either ill-bred or ill-humoured; file has a tranfparent complec-tion; the glow of health in her cheeks outbiooms all the rouge of Paris ; but there is a delicacy difcoverable in her whole frame, which fliews that it would be injured with the leaft rough treatment.--Her eyes—no—1 had better let them alone, for I cannot, poflibly, do them any fort of juftice ; nor, inded, can I inform you of what colour they are, but their glances fometimes dart into your very foul.—-Tis ftrange that flie muft be fo' haughty becaufe flie is fo handfome and yeti don’t know whether fhe abfolutely deferves that epithet nei-thet jfor there is fuch a dimple on each fide of her roly lips whenever fhe fmiles, that it makes her appear like Euphrofyne herfelf But then fhe drefSes her hair in a manner calculated to give her a towering afpedl.— Her hair is uncommonly thick and glofly ; her eye-la flies are aifo beautiful beyond dHcription, and fhe" has got a trick of throwing down her eyes on purpofe I imagine, to exhibit their fringes to greater advantage.—She is, aUually, monftrous haildfome—yet this confounded pride.—I always had a mortal aver-fion to a haughty woman.—-My pretty widow, Mrs, Mead, though not above halffo tall as lady Charlotte, and not a quarter fo high, is the more defirahle woman of the two: inperfon, to be fure, flie carries ail before her, but I am always, you knew, fcrutinizing into the hearts of the fair fexi,
A ^
LET
I
HISTORY OF
LETTER IV. From the fame to the fame.
«
4
OW one may be miftaken in people ? I had taken a foollih fancy into my head that lady Charlotte was capricious, infenfib'e, nay cruel,—I cannot tell why, for fire is quite another creature — Mifs F reely lady Eufton^’s hller correftedtTny> thismorn-ing with fuch violence for fome mifdemeanour which the little animal had committed--by the way a lady’s dog has almoft as bad a time as her lover---that lady Charlotte interpofed, afked her how fhe could be fo inhuman as to beat the poor wretch for faults he could not help, fnatched the puppy from her, and began to make much of him by giving it fom-e cream in her own faucer. — Now v/as not that a good-natured adtion ?— You cannot imagine how fnowy-whitc her hand and arms locked, in oppolition to the little brute’s black back, as he lay in her lap.—Yet I do not like to fee women fond of dogs, monkeys &c. &c, there is folly, there is indelicacy in fuch attachments.
Poflibly lady Charlotte exercifed her humanity juft at that time, and in that manner to be taken notice of.—Hov/ever, Trip was extremely obliged to her.— Bift why do I write lo much about one thing ?
When did you hear from Maria ? You tell me that fhe has a large addition to her fortune by the death of her uncle : I hope fuch an acquifition will make no change in her to your difadvantage j though certainly woman is a very mutableheing.
Mrs. Mead and I are not on fuch good terms as v/ewere j—(Ire took it into her head to be jealous of me, as if I mtift not look at or fpeak to any woman except herfelf.—I told her, that if I was lels particular to her in public, my behaviour was governed by the regard I had for her reputation. Reputation !: cried Ihe, ftrongly pronouncing the word—then turned upon |ier bsel, and left me.

LORD WOBURN.
9
With all my heart.-—Thank heaven ! there is no Scarcity of w^omen ; there are enough always ready 5 So, my dear widow, I (hall make myfelf altogether eafy.—’Tis a pretty tender animal ; but Ihe who will yield to one man, will net be very coy to another^ ilie will be at the Service of the whole Sex ; there can be no dependance on Such a coming dear creature ; the woman who does not refpeU herfelf, cannot be refpedtable in our eyes. They may talk as they pleafe of our being irrefiftible, in the language of romance, but give me the girl who while Ihe is Ian-guinring with delires, warm as my own, has discretion enough to keep her inclination within bounds, and to conquer herpaffion when it is juft ready to hurry her-into the gulf of perdition.—But where h fuch a rara avis to be found, you will Say ? —The queftion if not ealily to be anfwered } yet, indeed, Wilmot, if there were more women who knew how to value themfelves, who would not make themfelves cheap, both Sexes would be much better, and cbnlequently much happier.—are rogues becaufe	fools^
and So we both drive away to the devil together.-Lady Charlotte—I had not, indeed, intended to mention her name again.—--Lady Charlotte has given me fuch a look of exquilite difdain—and foc‘ what ? only for taking hold of, her hand, that Soft hat\d which I had lo much admired.—Oh !' how I defpifed her—I let it drop immediately—Ihe put her-Self iijto a very unnecelTary hurry.—1 hate a prude —a prude is the raoft contemptible character in the universe, becaufe Hie is a hypocrite.—How much preferable to her is the flirt, who fairly lets you know at ohee what Hie would be at, So that you may leave her or take her as you pleafe:—A woman who pretends to more virtue than Ihe can come up to, is to me quite deteftable.—1 thought my fine lady looked as if Ihe w'as forty that Hie had been fo precipitate, for I turned and kilTed my widow’s little finger, p if I meaot astually to devour it j- Lady Charlotte*
biulhiog
A- 5
P ’
At
JO
HISTORY OF
Bltilhlng like an opening rofe, left the room,—Blufli-ing is of infinite fervice to fome women, it makes them all look handfome ; yet, in my life, I never faw fo improving a blufh as that which overfpread lady Charlotte’s face and neck, it gave her abfolutely a Very angelic appearance.
Yours’s, as ufual.
w.
P, S, Here is a Mr. Evelyn, who feems to look upon lady Charlotte as upon a divinity indeed.
LETTER V.
Lady Charlotte Morden
Mrs, Blomer.
to
Eufton Caflle.
HAVE a thoufand times repented coming hither j had I not been apprehenfive of affronting Sir Francis and lady Eufton by a refufal, I lliould not have complied with their invitation.—Why will people perfiftin quarrelling with you, becaufe you don’t happen to think as they do .?—Surely ftich people are the moft unreafonable beings imaginable.—We can no more make our thoughts than our faces alike ;—I will fay nothing about the latter, but T will freely tell you that I fhould be forry to have my fentiments cor-refpond with thofe of many of my companions here, though forae of them are reckoned as fenfible as they are polite.
Lord Woburn Is here. You have heard of him ; he is, undoubtedly, one of the fineft figures you ever beheld, but there I.s fomething in his tout enfemhle that gveatly detrads fsom the beauty of his perfon. He
is
LORD WOBURN:
n
is reckoned proud ; he is certainly capricious to a prodigious degree.—Mrs. Mead, the widow of old Mead of Derbylhire, a pretty woman, but rendered frequently lefs fo by a dejeftion which hangs about her, feems to be his favourite.—She is evidently attached to him., but I don’t think he treats her with the conlideration which fhe delerves ; he takes too many liberties with her, efpecially in public.—I am forry to cenfure her conduct, but furely the freedoms which are taken with her, are in confequence of the encouragement fhe gives.—No man will prefume> to behave to a woman with an improper familiarity, un- ■ lets her previous behaviour has authorized his pre-fumption,—Lord W«burn has rather too high an o- ■ pinion of his own charms he really looks as if he thought every woman muft admire him ; he does not even— conceitedly confcious of his attradlions-try to inlinuatC' himfelf into your favour—he tyrannically demands it—without once fuppofing. that any woman can. come within the reach of his eyes, and keep her heart quiet at the fame time.—Now, you mull; know by that fort of carriage, he appears to me in a very disadvantageous light. He has unqueftionably a great deal of merit ; be would have much more if he conducted himfelf in a different manner.—Few men have-ftronger intellects ; the minds of few men have beers, more politely cultivated ; he can be exceedingly entertaining in converfation, but I think he rather loves to trijle, efpecially with women, as if he difdained to converfe with them upon an equal footing—He has certainly kept company chiefly with the loofe part of our fex, or with thole carelefs creatures who, by not keeping up their importance, are treated (lightly by every body.
Mifs Freely, lady Euflon’s lifter,Is here. She is apparently, one of thele injignijicants ; lady Spillbury is another : thefe women fpend moll of their hours in making themfelves noticed by lord Woburn, who, did they not perpetually throw themfelves in his way,
would

History of
would never, I believe, trouble himSelf about them —Yet, fettingalidethefe errors of judgment—errors which are often attended with fatal confequences— they are fenfible women.—Mifs Freely is pretty; lady Spillbury is what you call a fine fhewy woman ; yet they do not, either ot them, fult me for intimates —nor is lady Eidlon, you know, a woman with whom one can fafely contradl a friendfhip—She is a well-bred woman—according to the faihionable meaning
of that compound word.---- “ When you have faid
that,” to borrow an expreffion from Sir Courtly Nice, you have faid all.”—As ilre is my father’s relation, I don’t chufe to affront her j for a limilar reafon I am civil to her filler.—My lady is by much the belief the two.
Since I have been deprived of your valuable con-verfation, I have had a ^void in my heart w’hich wants to be filled up, but here are none about me iikejou. —How unluckily for me did you return to Mr. Elliot’s juft when 1 had left them.—Write, however, to me at this place ; and pray read this to your brother and filler ; it v/ill, I think, fufficiently convince them how much I wish to revive my interview's with them.
LET.
1. ORD WOBURN.


Letter
VI.
Lord W o B 0 R M to Mr. W i l m o T.
I WAS right.—This Evelyn is-fallen- downright in love with lady Charlotte.—-He is certainly feri» ous ; he follows her like her fiiadow. But I pity him, poor fellow ; lire will, undoubtedly, ufe him like * dop' ; for thou?h he is handfome, fenhbie, and well-
O ^	O	.
bred, he cannot-pretend to her : he has but a trilling fortune, about feven hundred a year ; new, to be fure, fhe expetls a man with tv/rce as many thoufands.—If women were really what they appear to be, their expediaiions, though extravagant,, might be pardonable.
Lady Charlotte is, take her altogether, the most beautiful figure I ever faw ; She is extremely con-verfible too, when (Ire happens to be In humour j and has a voice like a cherubim.—‘Poor Evelyn !—• She is, really, exceedingly condefeending to him, and treats him more like a brother or fome relation than a cafiial acquaintance, while he looks and lif-tens as if his exiftence depended upon her fmiles. She has a partiality for him, I believe j—yet I think' her pride will hinder her from marrying, for fhe may marry a title.—Well—he may be the favourite notwithstanding ; fuch events are not extraordinary in the fastiionable world -—He is certainly a pretty
fellow—all the women here are pleafed v,dth him___
they like him next to me he does not feein to be fusticiently fenfible of his powers, or he might make his own terms but lady Charlotte engrostes his thoughts and his time—he has no leifiare, no inclination for any other woman j he feems to be formed
by nature for a constant animal ; he will ihake an incomparable dupe.—Such a fellow now,-if he had but any thing of a fortune, would do well enough for a hulbaud, that is, he is a good, healthy, hand-
Some, convenient tool, and would do vastly v.'ell
v/heii
14
HISTORY O F
when nobody elfe was in the way ; yet he does not want fenie, he is only too eafy and complying : an artful woman may do what flie will with fuch a tradtable mortal. Charlotte can look him into any thing ; fhe certainly, has the riiofi: bewitching pair of, eyes I ever faw In my life—^but I hate them, becaufe they are fometimes direUed favourably tov/ards Evelyn—I fancy fo at leaft—not that I trouble my head .about her eyes, yet I can’t bear to fee men fo fooled.—No woman fliould have fuch an advantage over me, though I were dying for her.
I have lately had feveral opportunities of converf-ing with lady Charlotte, upon various fubjefts ; I never met with a woman who acquitted herfelf fo v/ell ; die Is polTefled of a delicate fenfibility, and would make a glorious miftrefs—but her pride, I fuppofe, would bring her off, diould her paffions be violent enough to occadon a conflldt in her bofom between love and honour.—After all, a woman with ftrong paffions is in a ticklidi fituatlon, and may, ’tis highly probable, run away with your footman, If he happens to be a Iiandfom.er fellow than, you are, though, 1 affure you, I have known an ug-ly dog more fuccefsful with his lady, than the moil delicate Adonis that ever breathed.—Evelyn, indeed, is a very fine fellovr ; few men are better made, few men have more infinuating manners fome people, however, without taking any pains at all, do their bufinefs completely.
I have juft been talking with lady Charlotte about her admirer. We were all three, yefterday, fitting in a temple in the garden, with Harriot Facely ; lady Charlotte had a large nofegay in her bofom—die is a mighty lover of flowers—Hooping to look down the walk at a tree which flood at the bottom of It I had purpofely directed her fine eyes that way, to prevent their committing murder upon poor Evelyn —'the flowers fell out of her bofom.—“ You have, dropped your nofegay,” faid I, without flirring from my feat.
¥
Evelyn
LORD W O B U R N.

u
u
Evelyn immediately flew to gather her another, picking up the fallen flowers for himfelf, becaufe had worn them.-------
He foon returned, and fhe received hiswith |fo many fmiles and acknowledgments, that, I dare fay, he w'as the happier all the day for them.
Evelyn and Facely foon left us, the latter being fummoned by a. meffage from lady Eufton, the former by a letter from London..------When they had
both left us, though they left us, I thought, reluU-antly, I faid to lady Charlotte, taking her hand, “ I did not imagine you had fo much cruelty in your dif-polition”r.f
What do you mean, my lord Why, are you not exceflively cruel to make a man who is defperately in love with you, believe that you like him when you do not ?”
“ I don’t underfland you,” replied*lhe, blufhing, and withdrawing her hand.
“ Did you not give the utmofi: encouragement,” faid I, feizing her hand again, “ to the poor fellow for his endeavours to pleal’e you, by the flattering fmiles which you beftowed upon him ?”
“ And why Ihould you fuppofe that he did not pleafe me ? His civility, his readinefs to oblige me, demanded a return of politenefs j I meant nothing more, nor had he any other meaning, I believe if you, if any other perfon had fetched me the flowers, I fhould have behaved in the fame manner.”
“ I am too lazy to take fo much pains,” replied I, “ but if I had been fo ci^it, and if you had thanked me as much as you thanked him, I fhould not have been fo much affedted by your flattering carriage, becaufe I fhould have ftrongly fufpedted the fincerity of it.”
“ Blefs me,” cried fhe, “ is fo much fincerity ne-ceflTary when we are thanking a man for giving us a few flowers } When any body endeavours to pleafe me, I think it is highly incumbent pa me to appear at least pleafed,’’
“ Evelynji

«6
H I S TORY O F
“ Evelyn, then, has aftuaiily made a conqueft of your heart by the excefs' of his Solicitude ? Upon my word, it is cheaply gained.”
“ Indeed, lord Woburn, yoir are very capricious to-day ; but (ince my behaviour does not happen to be agreeable to you', Twill leave you to yourfelf.”—■ Riling to go.
“ Stay,” fald I,, ftill holding,her hand, “ if yotrre-ally did not difcover fo much fati faction at Evelyn’s affiduity wnth a view to make him ftiil more firmly attached to you, but were only politely acknowledging his civilities, you are not fo much to blame.— But are you iure, la'ly Charlotte, that you do not take a pleafure in giving encouragement to this-poor fellow’s paflion for you -You cannot help feeing that he is extremely in love with you.
“ 1 don’t fee any fuch thing,” anfwered Hre, blulh-ing, ftill more deeply, “ and I think a woman cannot make herfelf more ridiculous, than by fuppofing that every man who treats her with a little gallantry is in love with her.-Men are of different tempers j feme are naturally inclined to be more attentive to women than others, without having any particular defigns ; and while fuch men keep- within proper bounds, while they make themfelves both agreeable and ufeful by their fervices, they are, I think, entitled to politenefs j a different condudl would, certainly, induce thqm to imagine that a woman looked upon their, affyiuities in, a ferious light, contrary to their intention's.”
What a fenfible reply, Wllmot ? How I admired her for it 1 With what unaffected modefty was it delivered I
“ You have entirely convinced me,” faid I, “ that you meant nothing particular yourfelf to Evelyn ; but you cannot make me believe you do not fee that hq,is ready to hang himfelf for you.”
“ I fhall not dif]>ute with you, my lord,” replied fhe, throwing down her lovely eyes, “ upon a fiib-jeCt about which 1 am totally ignorant.—Let me go
I
lord WOBURN
i'7
I want to fpeak with Mils Facdy.”
“ You mutt not go till you have anfweredtwo or
three queries.---In what degree of efteem does
Evelyn ftand with you ?”
“ Pooh,” faid fhe, frailing, anr’ ftrivmg to difen-gage her hands from me, “ I have never once giveii myfelf leifure to think about him.”
“ Nay, now, that’s aft'eftation all over, lady Charlotte—a (ingle fpark of which I never obferved in you bei^'ore.”
“ Indeed you wrong me,” replied (lie, with an abafhed air, as I never intended to look upon Mr. Evelyn in the light you hint at, I never thought feri-
oufly al?out him—but----”
“ Aye—come—tell me every fecret in that charming bofbm relating to him, and I will let you go.”
“ Well, then—I believe he is reckoned hand-fome.”
“ You mean,^o« think him fo.”
“ Yes, I do ;—but bis beauty is not of the kind which pleafes me.—He is alfo very good humoured, I fancy.—He may have a very good underftanding,. perhaps, but there feems to be nothing extraordinary in it. In fhort, though he may be efteemed a very a-greeable man, he does not particularly ftrike msF
“ If he had a larger eftate----■”
“ No, my lord, fortune will never influence me fo far as to prefer a man merely for his money. Mr. Evelyn will never be any thing to meand yet as I think him deflrous of pleattng, and perfeUlj inolfen-five— (inoffenfive people are not always to be met with) I chuie to behave to him with good manners.”' “ I dare fay he lives in hopes of bringing that good manners to fomething more interefting, bye and bye.”
She was going to reply, but Sir Francis Eutton-joining us, put a flop to a eonverlation, which has convinced me that (he is not fo much prepolfelfed ia favour of Evelyn, as I had imagined her to be—•
She
I§
HISTORY OF
She is a lovely creature.—If women were but as good as they are beautiful !—I don’t know fuch another.
Mrs. Mead can’t bear to fee me take notice of lady Charlotte ;—'jealous.—Can fhe expert me to fpeak to no woman but herfelf ? Ridiculous;—I love to divert myfelf with the whole fex ; but there is an inexpreluble fomething in lady Charlotte, which di(-tinguiflies her from all the women with whom I have hitherto converfed—fo much fenle, (b much Ipirit ;—yet v/ith all her vivacity how winningly mo-deft ! I have, certainly, a prodigious high idea of her at prefent, but (lie will, doubtlefs, defcend from her dignity in a little while, and prove herfelf to be one
of Eve’s own daughters.----What artful devils,
Wilmot, are the majority of women ! They'difguife themfelves in fo many ihapes, and appear in fuch very deceitful colours, that there is no venturing to have any thing to do with them for above a night at a time ;—I, therefore, never think of engaging with any woman who has not a charadfef to keep up ;—« a woman of this ftamp is as- glad to get rid of me, as I am ready to run from her.~Such has been my fitu-ation with Mrs. Mead ; when we were firft acquainted, fire was afraid I fliould fpeak to her, or even look at her in public ; but fince lady Charlotte’s arrival, ihe has almoft difcovered herfelf from her jealoufy my. account —not that I am more particular a-bout lady Charlotte than any body elle, fhe happens to have more beauty and more retenue, at prefent, than the reft of her fex, and fo I take more notice of her.—But even fhe has. no doubt, fome fecret foible—when once that is detefled—your fervant, my lady ;—then my widow v/ill be in a fuft about fomebody elfe.—However, if lady Charlotte happens to be as much attached to me as Mrs. Mead is,lfhall with pleafure feize—But take notice, Jack, 1 never attempt to feduce women.—No—no—they are all had enough | they want none of my inJiru5tions to
impro’v.e
L O R D WO B U R N
1*9
irnprovt XFQm. f am willing to take them as they are, but I do not chufe to leave them ^orfe than I
found them.-------If I proceed ! £hali grow quite faty-
rical..
^ ^ ^^^
LETTER, vm
From the: fame to the fame.’
NDEED, indeed, Wilmot, you will make me half angry.—What! in the name of common fenfe, have I committed to paper to make you imagine me guilty of fo enormous a vveaknefs—In love.?—No—No my friend^—you will never catch me in a fighing condition.—I know the lex too well—I have not been fo
many years upon the town for nothing.---1 chufe
to converfe with a fenlible woman who, thanks to Nature—Is alfo handfome----true—muft I, there-
fore, be enamoured with her .? What execrable logic is this?. Politively, Jack, you know nothing of the matter.—^Youare an amorous puppy, and fly at every cap which comes in your way 5 ergo you fet me down for a puppy like yourfelfI am extremely obliged to you for your ablurd compliment.—Serioufly, I have not the fmalleft idea of loving lady Charlotte—And yet I would gladly make her in love with me ;—not for the fake of gratifying my own inclination, but from mere charity, as lliemay fall into worfe hands.—Sure lam, that if I have ever any connexion with her, I will try to make her wifer.—There are women, Wil-mot, who have improved furprizingly under my hands?
but
25
HISTORY OF
I
But then they were neither handfome, haughty, no'Jf felf-fuffiGient.—Yet I wrong this charming woman ; Ilie is not in the leaft conceited—(he appears lefs and lets proud, and is as beautiful as an angel. I think I am more in her favour than I was j ihe will truft lierfelf with me, alone, ling to me, read with me, and jhe has taken feveral hints with her pencil which I recommended to her.—There has been lately an affability in her carriage to me, which renders her infinitely more pleahng. I love to fee women behave to xts with an eafy freedom ; by fo doing they feem, at leaft, to have no dellgns,——» But there is no enjoying a tete-a tete at this place ; one is always interrupted.—The women are all ready to jump over my back j—I cannot ftir for them $ they all envy lady Charlotte j they ftudy and ftrive to equal her, but in vain.—How many anxious hours has Ihe occafioned among them !—It would make you laugh heartily to fee how they flounce and fidget,, and trick themfelves out to eellpfe her : but ihe outlines them ; they are mere blanks before her, and
have no admirers when fhe is prefent.-------------Lady
Charlotte never looks follcitous about admiration, but fhe is, nevcrthelefs, fure of it.—She is always neatj—you know what charms neatnefs has for me> and is
“ When unadorned adorned the moft.”
as your favourite Milton fays.-—There is an elegant fimplicity in her whole appearance which is in-expreflibly alluring, and which a flavifli compliance with the fajhicn would utterly deftroy.—How many women do we fee in the falhionable world, converting themfelves into frightful figures, by barbaroufiy drefilng away the beauties which Nature in a liberal fit beftowed upon thein!—Were they more attentive to the becoming., in every refpedt, they would, take
aiy word for it, be a thoufand times more fuccefsful.
■Lady
LORD WOBURN.
4M
t
—Lady Charlotte neverdefiles her lovely auburn locks with powder—that villainous compound;—while fome are combed up to fhew the gloffy fhine upon them, ■others curl in ringlets upon her fnowy neck;—a fmail cap on the top of her head has the prettieft effedl imaginable.--By dreffing in this manner die appears to the greateft advantage. In my eyes ; but the eyes of the women here are not conftrudted like mine ; they are much pained by what gives me confiderable
pleafure._____They were fo provoked the other day,
that they all took upon them to condemn her tafte ; they were aftonilhed at her not wearing grey pow-■der, as nobody was fit to be feen without.
“ Nature has given me tolerable good hair,” faid
ITie, “ and I think it would be a pity to difguife
• •> % it.-’
They buril: into a forced laugh at this rational rc"» ply, told her die was ridiculoufly lingular, and that they had rather be out of the world than like nobody in it. Even Mrs. Mead was filly enough to join with them againft her, though die does not uSe powder herfelf—but her motives are obvious ; die is under the dominion of envy.
It diverts me to fee the mondrous folly of theSe women ; and their contemptible prejudices, which they can’t poifibly keep to themfelves, make me take more notice of lady Charlotte than I diould, perhans otherv.'lfedo.-—Nay, I publickly take her part againhb them all fometimes on purpofe to put them upon the fret —The different diapes in which they difcover their jealoufy and refentment are abfolutely laughable.
Harriot Facely, decorated from head to foot like a fagoda, declared yefterday, that die abominated drels and called it an intolerable fatigue of fadiion is above it,” added die.
every woman
“ No woman,” replied lady Spilfbury, interrupting her, “ let her rank be what it will, is above looking handfome, nor indeed ought die to be”—(throwing
herfeif
2i2
HISTORY OF
fald st
herlelf affetledly into the moft languilhing attitude) “ as beauty gives one fo much power over the male creatures.”
“ Let me then a^ITure you, lady SpiUbury,”
“ that no man worth a pinch of fnuff was ever won. by a lady’s drapery or diamonds. Nature ever does moil execution when her operations are not impeded by the impertinent officioufnefs of art.”
“ Odious Nature,” replied fhe——“ charming
Art!-----r-Hov/ you talk, my lordl”
“ How you aft, my lady, in direft oppofition to what can alone render you irreiiilible!”
“ Oh 1 you raonfter”--tapping me upon the cheek, —“ but you fay this only to try us; I know you think quite otherwife.—You handfome fellows love dearly to throv/ out bold aifertions purely to be confuted.-----”
“ That is, you mean, to give you an opportunity of fliCwing your wit by anfwering ;—but take care, lady Spilibury, many a woman in attempting to be a wit, has proved herfelf a downright fool.”
“ Now, that is fo like him,” faid Mils Facely,
“ fee what one gets by encouraging fellows”--------
darting a farcailicai glance at Mrs. Mead, v/ho mo-deftly looked on the floor, and took out her handkerchief to hide her blullies.—Why had not that woman ftrength to refill me ?—-She was amiable enough before I knew lady Charlotte j—but a woman who has Surrendered to me, at difcretion, I mull defpife ■—’Tis ungenerous to defpife her for a v/eaknefs to which I, myfelf, v/as inllrumental, but -I mull not think about it.—Why will women fo of--ten give us reafon to lock upon them wifh contempt? Why will they not be all angels .?—Life would be, indeed, a poor affair without them ; but, certainly, if they were all virtuous, we might be brought to be content with one woman.—I, event I, fhould have no ohjeftion to matrimony, were I fure that my wife would be never inconflant—-Muth a fenfible, faith-
. fob.
LORD W O B U R N.

fu!, amiable friend, who v/ould Biare ali my joys, and alleviate all my cares, I ilioiLd be far.remdy bled ; to fuch a woman, Jack, willingly would I be married to-morrow ;—but while I every day fee crouds of ie-niales round me enfiaved by the follies of the world, and deeply taintedby its vices how can I hope to find a woman anfwerable to my expedations ?—A fool I
hate, and my blood rifes at a w---e. I like to ccn-
verfe with a woman of fenfe—t' ue'—but- pry’thee do not therefore imagine that I am in love with her Ridiculous!

LETTER VIII.
Lady Charlotte Morde n to Mrs. BiLOME r,
IDO not love to difpleafe thofe who feemingly wilh.
to give me pleafure—or I would leave this place immediately. ' I am furrounded with people who are by no means fuitable to me. Lord Woburn is the moft fenfibie peifon among us, but then he is capri« cious beyond exprefiion—He will have it that Evelyn is in love with me—I fliould not, I confefs, have fuf-peded him of a particular inclination, but my lord has pointed out feveral little attentions in his behaviour, which very much induce me to be of his lord-jfliip’s opinion.—This difcovery has not pleafed me i I do not want people to be in love with me, unlefs I am inclined to be in love with them in return.—1 did not, indeed, at firft believe Lord Woburn was feii-ous •, I thought he was only in a rallying humour i but I begin to find he whs both ferious, and right in his conjedures. Yet I can never love Evelyn, and therefore I wilh he would not be particular to me After this difcovery I endeavoured to difcourage him
as
$4
HISTORY OF
as much as I could.—My behaviour made him To un-eafy, that he, at laft, complained of it.
“ I have no right,” faid he, the other day, to fiXpeiSt a return to my paffion from you, yet may I not hope, from the gentlenefs of your difpofition, that you will not drive me to abfolute defpair .? fuf-fer me but to admire you, lady Charlotte, and I will never ceafe to be the mod: rerpeftful of your admirers —You cannot, however, treat me as you will, hinder me from adoring you. The paffion which I feel for you will not be deftroyed but with my exiflence.”
V/hat can one fay to fuch a man, who really, I J)elieve, fpeaks from his heart.—There are a thou-fand men to whom, if they fpeak in ever fo ferious a manner, lean give no fort of credit ; but Evelyn’s whole carriage proves his fincerity—if I ought to fay fo j—and I (Iiall not be able, therefore, to bring inyfelf to treat him with fcorn, or to affume coquet-lifh airs before him.—Coquetry is agalnft my nature; it is alfo contrary to my natural difpofition to behave ill to any body who wiflies to fee me, or make me, happy.—Now, as I can never marry Evelyn, I certainly flrould not feed him with hopes.—There will be required fome delicacy in my condudt upon this oc-caf on,—I think it would be more prudent to leave the Caftle, as Evelyn iliewsno inclination to decamp —But v.ffiy muft I be obliged to quit a family who have been very polite to me, and who endeavour to entertain me as much as they can ?—I have done no-hing to render flight neceflary.—I will ftay'—and, for the direUion of my future conduU, learn how to behave properly to a man whom I fliall, however, on no account encourage in the way he defires to be diftinguiflied by me.——
Lord Woburn, who is the moft vigilant man I ever knew, rallies me upon my great coinpaffion for Evelyn and tells me, that next to him whom I chufe to favour, the happieft man is he whom I have not totally rejected.—I'herc is no contenting him, do what I
will I
L
lord WOBURN,

will 5 therefore, I won’t trouble myfelf about him any longer,—^The women here have all given him
rcafon to believe that ihey admire him; they fpoil him; he expefts the fame admiration from every body. Prcfuming upon the incenfe which he receives,, he is too apt to take improper liberties, and to imagine that fuch liberties will be permitted—The men are, undoubtedly, too free, but I am afraid that the women, by conducing themfelves indifcreetly, make
them fo.—Were you to fee the encouragement
which every v/oman at this place gives to lord Woburn, in particular, you would be more ready to condemn them than him. They not only launch out in praife of his perfon,in terms which wo^uld put a man of the leaft modefty to the blufh, and indulge him in ^11 the freedoms which their commendations naturally provoke, hut aflually begin firft to take the mofl: unwarrantable liberties with him, when he does not appear to be thinking about them—So that a man muft be deftitute of fenfibility not to take notice of them ; yet, to do lord Woburn juftice, he behaves with more circumfpedlioh than moft men would in fuch a fituation ; though he feems to be not at all indifferent to v/omen—quite otherwife. Perhaps he, like many other people, thinks he may be difgufted at what is fo freely offered him, and defpife thofe favours which may be obtained without difficulty from our fex. There lam entirely of/i/y opinion : were la 3uan, I ihould think in that refpeCt exadlly in the fame manner—All the women here are indelicately forward—Mrs. Mead appeared indeed upon better terms with him, but they rather differ and dif-pute now. The reft of the company rally her to fuch a degree that fire can hardly bear it—I caught her in tears t’other night in the garden .* He W'^as, I thought, endeavouring to footh her, though the /otver was not difcermble either in his looks or carriage—However fhe has, I fancy, reckoned upon him in that light, and would be glad to do fo ftill.
----Turning out of the walk that I might notj feam
VoL. I.	B	to

6
HISTORY OF
to obferve them, my lord Seized my hand, and -Begged me to honour him with my company for a few minutes.*—Mrs. Mead turned away, after having ca(t a glance of the, ftrongeft refentment at
him----1 took no notice ; he mentioned her Several
times in the courle of the conversation, yet laid nothing w'hich discovered the terms they were upon.
1 had a fair opening to enquire about them, without being either .unpolite or impertinent, but
I did not.---^Why fliould I wifh to dive into an-
tJther’s Secrets ? If Mrs. Mead is either faulty or unfortunate. She will be very much hurt at being «xpofed —Curiofity may indeed Sometimes prompt the heft fort of .pjeople among us, to pry into the hearts of.thoSe whofc characters are fuSpeCted, but Surely their indiscretions as well as their misfortunes ought to excite compaffion ,in our bofoms j none of us are exempt from the former or from the latterj
pity, therefore, Should plead for both.---1 always
jnoft Sincerely wirti to relieve every woman who is unhappy—-unhappy, I fear, muft every woman be who fuffersherfelf to be improperly in the power of any of the other S
PV
L E T-
LORD WOBURN. LETTER IX.

Lord Woburn to Mr. Wi l m o t.
This lady Charlotte is a charming creature.
She is, actually, beyond expreffion, amiable.—She appears to be fo ; but I know there mufl: be fome confounded drawback to turn the fcale a-gainft her excellent qualities.—I hope, at lead, that there are fome fliades in her character, for I
would not be in love with her for millions---If I
difcover nothing atrocious belonging to her, I Shall
become a mere driveller----1 iliall doat on her, a-
dore her.----You cannot conceive how lovely Ihe
is.—Never did I fee fo much beauty with fo little confcioufnefs.—There is a mildnefs, a delicacy in
her whole behaviour, v/hich is ravifhing.---Pray
heaven hie may have a thoufand defeCts----1 have
difcerned none yet.----If I do not find out fome
capital blemiihes foon, I lliall be undone.—Her
indifference, her infenfibility will bring me off.------
I can never love a woman whofe pallions are not as
tenderly alive as my own ;-----------yet Ihe is affeCted
by every thin'g------by every thing but what relates
to me.
I faw her weep t’other day at a moving tale ; Ihe
abfolutely melted my heart with tears ;-------------Yet
v/hen fire faw Mrs Mead leave me afflicted at my coolnefs, ilie had not the llightefl: curiofity to know
the grounds of our divifion.---------1 gave her feveral
openings ; dumb. She exprefled not the leaf!; defire to enter upon the caufe of our depit amoureux.
But why do I find fault with her ? Perhaps flie is to be revered for her behaviour j perhaps flie had curiofity, and only denied herfelf the gratlficatioa of it, through pity to Mrs. Mead.—She is, indeed, an angel, if her behaviour was regulated by com-paffion.-'*—But I will not fuppofe her to be fo much
B a	laperio.s
%
S8
H IS TORY OF
fupcrior to her buSy, inquifitive, cenforious fex, who generally look out pretty Iliarp to catch a frail lifter tripping, and then hunt her down moft unmercifully.-----Were fhe full of imperfedtions, my
heart u'^ould never be in the leaft difturbed by her ; but I am afraid her excellencies will enOave me.—-No—her total difregard of me will fave me from a fatal love-fit; befides, 1 fhall never be able to love a woman, who has the ftighteft partiality for a-
Bother.-:---She will not, I firmly believe, marry
n : but Ihe certainly has no averfion to him.
5>
-----Her behaviour to him is fo gentle, fo conde-
fcending, fo very confiderate, that I fometimes don’t know what to think ; yet flae gave me the preference t’other nighf, when we had a ball here.-----
The men were to chufe partners ; Evelyn alked the favour of lady Charlotte’s hand. She direUly replied, that fhe fhould not dance.-.-A little while
afterwards, I aftced the fame queftion ; flie fmiled, held out her hand negligently, and faid, “ You will have but an idle partner.
Charmed with her compliance, I replied---------
'You will fuit me to a hair, for I am the laziefl: of mortals.—---We, conlequently, chatted more than we danced.'—I am nobody in a ball room : I was never fond of fluttering about tn the air like a
for the diverfion of the women..——She feemed frequently weary, I thought.—I, therefore,
frequently alked her to fit down-----^flie willingly
•aflented.—I enjoyed a luxurious evening in the fen-
timental way ;----but we ftirred up fo much envy
andjealouly among the left of the company, that I don’t know whether feme aukward conrequences
A.
may not enfue.----Evelyn, in particular, was quite
unhappy ; the poor fellow looked ready to burft with vexation.—Inftead of triumphing over him, I actually pitied him, becaufe I faw that my lovely
partner felt nothing hut compaffion for him,——She
had
monkey
L O R D W O B U R N;
29
had even the good nature to make a little fort of apology to him, telling him, that v/hen he alked her, ilie had determined not to dance.	You
know, Evelyn,” added die, with a heavenly fmile, “thatwe women are changeable creatures ; but, indeed I had no defign to alfront you, particularly,
by a refufal.”---‘The poor fellow trembled while
fhe fpoke, and appeared aftually alboniflied at fuch uncommon condefcenfion ; a ccndeicenhon v/hich raifed her in my eyes, but which drew malicious -remarks upon her from almoft all the wo.men in the room.—^—“ Flirt, coquettiih air, affedtation,” were the words applied to the onlj woman in the room who had not deferved them. I, too, was baited molt cruelly for my idlenels, for my lirigularity, and for' being fo extremely regardlefs of all that was uttered, and of much more that was only looked. I paid my court with the molt fuccestful affiduity, feeming-ly, to lady Charlotte, and was honoured with her fmiles for the remainder of the time we fpent toge-•
ther-------1 fhall abfolutely go too far, if I don’t^
take care.----It muft not be—after all I have faid
againft the deluding fex, to be feduced at laft,--
What have I not to expeft ?—But it is not come to that yet——No, no, Jack—whatever you may think, I am not in love.
n
3
f i
Id E Tk

30
HISTORY OF
LETTER X.
From the fame to the fame.
ND fo your Maria, your friend, your faithful
Marla has aftiiaUy given you up ?-------^Now,
were I not afraid of raakingr vou anery, I would
11	•	O./	O/'’
laugh at you rnofl: immoderately.-----As for you—I
fuppofe you are half ready to hang yourfelf.---------
But why flip out of the world ia fo fneaking a manner, Jack, when there are So many women to be had as handfoirie as Maria, and upon terms.a thoufand times more reafonable ?—I fufpected, indeed, that Bie v/ould leave you in the lurch, as Soon as I heard that fhe was become miftrefs of So large a fortune, by the liidden death of a mart who, from his continual good ftate of health and great temperance, might have lived thefe twenty years ;—ay, as long as his fair and fickle relation.-----What could in-
duce this girl to make herfelf fo fcandaloufly ridiculous .? Did fhe think fiie had not enough before ? Are you altered becaufe her uncle chofe to leave her twenty -thoufand pounds ?-—^However, you are well oil;—a woman with fuch a mind, would, with, all her beauty, have rendered you completely mifera-
ble.-----Look upon this event, therefore, as a blef-
fing.——d here is no woman worth all the fufs one
makes about her.-----—Come hither, and fee if I am
too hafty with my cenfures againft the fex.-----Yet,
ftay.—Let me exclude lady Charlotte-------She would
juft now, while the love-fit is ftrong upon you, encourage you to believe that you wmuld lofe nothing
by fubflit’uting her in the room of Marla.-------But
take care, I fay-----a man who has been once deceived, has reafon to be cautious.--------1 have, his
true, at this moment, a high opinion of this Char-
loiie,
LORD WOBURN.
SI
lotte, and think her Saperior to three parts of her fex ; yet I v»^ould, on no account, bc> aniwerable e-veh for her.
My little widov/ begisn to be cCnfourided trou-blefome : If I do not take care, fhe will expofe us
both----both, did I fay ?—What have I to fear ?
The confequence of a man, in the eyes of tit
A	A	m

fair fex, always increafes in proportion to the number of women whom he has Seduced ; the more 'Con -quefxs he ha.s made, the more charming he appears.
’ widow, therefore, is biov/n, her re-
If
thi
ation will be tarniibed, but mine will be rather more brilliant than it is'at prefCnt.
The more in-
conftant, the mere vile I am, I Hrail be the more
courted, the more followed.-------—-Now, fufpend'
your concern for a moment'. Jack, and tell me if
A	—	A
Such creatures as' thefe, ought to give one the leaft: uneafinefs about them ?—Can you polfibly love the wmman whom you cannot efteem .? And is it not abfolutely impoffible to efteem Such charadters as I' have described ?'
“ But are all women fo undeferving ?”
Too many.— The majority of the lex are weak .—I believe l am not much too bold in my alTer-tion ; and weaknefs naturally leads a wmman into’ wickednefs.
“ Is the divine Charlotte one of thefe Failh ! I am afraid flie is, only I have not yet founci ’ Her out.—She is at prefent, to all appearance, as pure' as an angel, but flie may be an arrant hypocrite. If I make any difeoveries to her difad vantage, I lhall not think there is one woman of virtue in the univerfe.
You have been pleafed to infinuate, that I am in love with this Charlotte ; but I'am able, at this= moment, to prove the abfurdity of your infinuation. Did you ever in your life know a man in love with' a woman, without being jealous on her paying particular civilities to his rival}—I am this very man.—
B 4	Can
32
HISTORY OF
Can I, therefore, be enamoured ?—No, Wlhnot you may as well be violently attached to a woman whom you never faw.—But I will explain myfelf y
-----poor Evelyn has been fo niiferable, ever fince
the day on which lady Charlotte, by refufing to dance with him, gave the preference to me, that out of mere compafiion, fhe has, from that time, behaved to him in a manner fogularly obliging ; and yet not in a manner to make him in agine Ihe would ever lock upon him in the light
he wiihed-------How confiderate ? How engaging ?
How commendable is fuch a conduct ? How few women are capable of behaving with fo much propriety ? How few can properly diftingui-fh between the love and the lover ?*~-But you fee I cannot pof-iibly be attached to her, in the way you fuppofe ; were I fo attached, I ihould certainly be jealous : the flighted attention to my rival would alarm me
extremely.—-------Were! in love, I lliould be filled
with a thoufand apprehenfions left fhe fhould not aUually be the amiable creature fhe apparently is. —'—am not fo far gone, as you imagine I am. Talk to me, therefore, no more of love.—I defy the little urchin.—I have had a narrow efcape, however, for, to confefs the truth, I never met with a woman fo entirely formed to pleafe, to charm.—She cannot furely be fo perfe£l a creature.—She muft certainly have Some horrible failings, though fhe has art enough to conceal them. I have been in imminent danger,—But while I thus write about Charlotte, I forget you, who are grieving for the lofs of your Maria,—Take my advice at once—think no ;pore of her.—If Ihe has not put you out of conceit w'ith the whole fex, take the firft fine girl who falls in your way, only for a night or two, and, my life to yours, yoti will foon be in ftatu quo again. On the faith of an honeft man, I declare to you, that I never retired with a woman in an evening, whom I
did
i: o R D ‘ V/ O B U R n:
33 '
did not wlfh to get rid of before morning j and, I think I am at lead as amorous as yourfelf.
LETTER- XI. ■
Lady Ch arlotte Mordew to Mrs. Blomer'.'
M'Y fufpicions are • confirmed relating to Mrs.
. Adead ; I am really concerned about her, as I found her the mod agreeable perfon, in every re-fpfefl, here.—There was a not unpleafing melancholy at times hanging over her features, which made me relidi her company better than the foclety of lady Spihbury and Mifs Facely, whofe mirth is by far too boiderous for me.—-They deprefs my fpi-rits, indead of contributing to enliven them, and I become weary of lidening to the fame kind of noKy nonfenfe. I never was one of thofe happy people, who can laugh at every thing, though I am very ready to acknowdedge, that they are as much wITer as they are happier, becaufe they are fo much more eafily pleafed.-—‘‘But v/hat is this to Mrs. Mead ?’” —great deal, my dear friend, becaufe die great- ’ ly attraUed my attention by the gentlenefs of her manners, and I drove to make myfelf agreeable to ' her, though die never, I think, appeared to like me. —Lately die feemed not a littledifpleafed with me 5 but as I concluded that her difpleafure arofe from ■ the difcovery of fome defedt in me, I dudioufly endeavoured to dived myfelf of feveral little foibles, and flattered'myfelf, that die would be more defirous of my frlenddiip, when I was become more deferv--ing of it.
Lad night, having jud efcaped from lady Spilfbu-' ry, who had almod talked me to death, while I was enjoying one of the fined Summer evenings I ever
B-s	beheld
34
HISTORY OF
beheld, in a particularly pleafant walk in the garden, I faw Mrs. Mead crofs the bottom of it. She was met by lord Woburn, who would have palTed her, but fire ilopped him, and began to talk earneit-ly to him, holding him by the arm.—On his trying to break from her, flie flipped a piece of paper into his hand, and left him.—juft cafting his eyes over it he tore if, and fcattered the fragments in the walk.
----Thefe proceedings having made me entertain
fentiments very unfavourable to them both, I intended to avoid them as much as poffible.---When
we all came in to fupper, I farv plainly that Mrs. Mead had been in tears ; to make feme apology for the lufpicious appearance of her eyes, fire complained of a cruel head-ach, which had tormented her all day.
Lord Woburn fmlled contempt, while her looks v/ere expreflive of grief, and of a fmothered refent-ment.—He muft be a man very unworthy of the good opinion I had of him, • by uHng a woman, fo apparently amiable as Mrs. Mead is, in the manner he does ; he difeevers a bad heart.—Such a man ought to meet with all poffible difeouragement.— None of the people here feem to fee the neceffity of keeping lord Woburn at a proper diftance ;—I will, therefore, lead the way.—Yet, I cannot help faying, that I am both difappointed and concerned to find a man, whom I had reafon, I thought, to efteem, fo little defervlng of my partiality in his favour.—But where fliall we find a perfeU charaUer ? I confefs, that being taken in by the fpecicufnefs of his behaviour, I treated him with more- confide-ration than I did any other man, becaufe he feemed defirous of being dlftinguifhed by me j and really flood a chance to be preferred, by me, to his whole fex, by the deference and refpedt with which he ever behaved to me.—-Sometimes, indeed, I own, he attempted freedoms, which I thought impertinent
and
LORD WOBURN.
35
and improper ; yet, as they were conduced with extreme delicacy, I could not, reafonably be offended at them, without affeUing the prude^ a charaUer I have always detefted —I can never, furely, merit the imputation of prudery, by fhunning a man fo very unfit to be trufted as lord Woburn certainly is—Yet,
let me confider.----Have I not been too Iiafly .? May
there not be an engagement of the tendered; kind, between Mrs. Mead and lord Woburn which they wiili to conceal, for reafons with which I have nothing to d > ? And may they not have had, like lovers, a little quarrel, which has occalioned the
contemptuous glances of the one, and the looks full of refentraent of the other ?—It will,! think, be moil; charitable to conclude, that a fracas has produced the carriage on both fides, which gave birth
to the above oblervations.----Still, however, I ought
to be very referved in my behaviour to my lord j for it is highly probable, that his little affiduities were calculated to excite jcaloufy in Mrs. Mead, in order to bend her to his purpofe.—I will, therefore, make a total change in my carriage ; I will double my attention to Mrs. Mead I will be quite inattentive to lord Woburn.-—If I cannot forward a reconciliation, I will not widen the breach, between them.
•*. s'
LET

HISTORY OF

letter XII.
Lord Woburn to Mr. W11 m o t ,
YOU were but too much in the right, whenyoa aflerted that I was In love with this charming Charlotte : 1 fear I am fo, indeed ; and yet if I was abfolutely certain of being in love with her, I Hiould be half ready to hang myfelf.—Sure I am, that die has made a total alteration in her behaviour to me. —I am diftraCied.—I am wild to know the reafon
of it.------Now this looks devililh bad on my
fide ;—nothing can be more fufpicious.—But then again, if Ihe is totally indifferent to me, why does lire think it worth while to alter a carriage which was not in the leaf!: cenfurable ? Why does die think at all about me ? I cannot account for the proceeding. I only know, that we were upon this mod agreeable intimate footing Imaginable, before this fame alteration.—She would walk with me, chat with me, read with me, nay, dance with me, even after ihe had refufed other people, and fit down v/ith me when die had done.-—She would differ me to prefs her fnowy hand in mine, to touch her lovely hair, and to take a thoufand other liberties, which gave me, infinite delight and could not pofiibly do her any harm, though they might not give her the pleafure which I was fo eager to communicate.—'—She now dudioudy diuns me every W'here, and avoids every opportunity of fpeaking to me alone ; die pulls away her hand, in a hurry, whenever T offer to take hold of it, and darts from my touch, as if It v/as-contagious. I cannot, for my foul, find out the meaning of all this.—I have fometimes thought—make a little allov/ance for vanity—that die is jealous of Mrs. Mead, who has
So indiscreetly discovered a foaduefs for we, even be-
X fore
LOkD WOBURN.
37
fore a third perfon, and whom ! know^ not how to
Ihake off.--------Butlmtift be egregioufly mifta-
Ijen.____In the firft place, Ihe cannot be jealous,
without being in love ; Secondly, Slie is become more attached to this very Mrs. Mead, than to any other woman, who, by the way, is grown So very filly with Ber Suspicions, and So extremely indelicate with her favours,, that (lie is by no means a proper companion for lady Charlotte.—Coxcomb as I am ! I thoueht lady Charlotte was purity itfelf ; a charaUer of the angeiick kind.—----Never more will I reck-
on upon the mofl; favourable expreflion in the fair-gfl-face____The whole Sex are deceitful-—Howe-
ver, if lafBy Charlotte had behaved to me with her ufual consideration, my doubts v/ith regard to female conflancy would have been entirely removed ; I
ihould have tried her, you may be affured------ay.
Severely tried her before I——;----But what am I
faying ?------My anKiety, my diftraUion at this cru-
el change in her carriage, forces me to difeover what-I woulddefire to hide, not only frorayou^ from myfelf
.—1^0 love her----There-------now the murder’s-
out.----Iwifhlmay not repent of my paffion for
her as long as I breathe.-Were I in my iaft ago-
nies, the near approach of death would not give half fo much difturbance to my mind, as the thoughts of being cozened by a woman.—No—fhe fiiali never know her power over me.—Don’t laugh at me Jack;
could I have kept this diabolical Secret from you, you Should never have been acquainted v.dth it.— I am to the laft degree, ailiamed of myfelf ; and, yet at the fame time, I could give up my life for a return of that felicity which | enjoyed in her Society
before thiscurfed coolnefs ia her behaviour to me.,
LET-
38
HISTORY OF
• 4 •



^	t Gv"
letter XIII.
From the fame to the fame.
T Is not to be endured. I must fpeak or die ; no-^
__thing can fave me.—This enchanting witch still-
continues in the fame referved style of behaviour.—-Yet, what can I fay? I have no right to demand a reafon for carriage, without accounting for my
ov/n ;—and I am determined not to explain the meaning of my deportment, even to lady Charlotte. I
must, therefore, be filent, be blind. --Would to
heaven I were deaf, dumb, any thing rather than what I am.—*But why all this distrefs, you will fay— is file lost, is She gone, has stie given herfelf to another -----No—there I take breath again —She
has not yet doomed me to abfdlute defpair, by any fuch decifive proceeding against me : Slic has not even increafed her civility to Evelyn ; flie behaves equally to us both, angel as She is ;—and, yet, I am miferable, becaufe She has deprived me of all the fweet indulgencies I enjoyed before ;—indulgencies, which if they were ever allowable, might, certainly, be now admitted, as I never, knowingly or defigned-ly, abufed them —T am mad to come at thecaufe of this strange alteration in her.—I	fpeak—^ tc///
afs her to explain her motives.-----1 have made
tv^ o or three attempts to gratify my prestingcuriofity, but have always been interrupted, either by the breaking in of company upon us, or by her chilling coldnefr She takes uncommon pains to avoid me ;
stie is continually with Adrs. Mead-------What a
grange, what an unnatural connexion! Surely thev/i-dow^ cannot have prefumed to breathe a thought a-
gainst

LORD WOBURN.
39
-If I had any fufpicions of
galnft me to her.-----
that nature, I would make her retraft, or blow her to the devil. 1 muft, therefore, come to an eclair-ciffement.—The fooner the better.--------An intru-
der prevents me from going on.
LETTER
XIV.
Lady Charlotte Morden to Mrs.
Bl OM E R.
HAVE acted juft as I told you I would ; my be-
__haviour has had a good cffedt upon lord Woburn;
he looks fufficiently corredted ; but as to poor Mrs. Mead, I cannot make any thing of her. I am afraid, from her ftiynefs, that die has fomething at heart
not quite fit to be communicated------------Be af-
fured, my dear Mrs. Blomer, I would not encourage fufpicions injurious to her, were I not almoft certain, that die has put it into his lorddiip’s power to
treat her impertinently.---------The fault, then,
you will naturally fay, is chiedy on his fide.—---
It is fo, I own; but what a miferable temper ? Wliat a bad heart muft he pcdefs, who can ufe a w.onian ill, merely, perhaps, for being too indulgent to him ?
—----1 have made feveral offers of my frienddiip to
her, by mentioning lord Woburn in a favourable manner, looking, at the fame time, as if 1 thought I
iliould make her happy by fo mentioning him-------
After having produced only bluOies, fighs, and tears, by my well-meant officioufnefs, I ventured to alk her the other day, if lord Woburn, who really appeared aiqiable, could have pofiibly given occafion to fo much concern ?-—She replied, but with an increafed con-
fufion.
40
HISTORY OF
fullon, “ That lord Woburn -was nothing to her.”' She then left me immediately, and haslhuned me ever (ince, as much as poflible, without being particular——He purfues me-every where, and by redoubling his folicitude and attentions, endeavours to recommend himfelf—but to very little purpofe, as I have had the good fortune, hitherto to prevent a tete-a-tete, without appearing to the-reft of the company to think about it.—I feem to be quite indifferent, quite eafy about lord Wx)burn ; but I am not
fo.-----—Will you’not condemn me, when I tell you
that I am very much mortified at not being , able to learn from Adrs-. Mead, the caufe of her quarrel with
my lord------if they really have had a quarrel.-^------
I wifh to develbpe their conduct, with regard to each otherj but as I can give not one good reafon for my eagernefs to be informed ofwhatisno way interefting to'me, I muft, of courfe, be prompted by an idle curiofity.—■—I wiflh myfelf a thoufand times a day with you in YorklKire ; and, in fpite of all lady Eufton can fay to the- contrary,’.Brail certainly think of fetting out from hence, unlels Mrs. Elliot fhould accomplifh her defign of coming to London a month Sooner than ustial.
L E .D
LORD WOBURN.
41

LETTER
XV.
Lord' WOB u K N, to Mr, Wi l m o t

At lad, with the greateft difficulty, I have Seized" a moment to Speak to lady Charlotte. She
was reading alone, in> the parlour.--------------She
rdSe, in order to leave the room, as Soon as' I entered it.----1 caught her by the gown for lire haftiiy
drew back her hand) and afited bet; what I had done to make her So extremely dry of me ?
“ You are quite out of the queftion, my lord ; I have juft finiilred my book, and am going up to my own apartment.”
She turned away her face, purpolely, th at her" features might not confirm the falsehoods which her tongue had uttered;
Suppofing what you have Said' to be true, madam, replied', L the fingularity of your behaviour, obvious-to every body, during this laft fortnight, by ftudiouS-ly avoiding me, induces me to imagine that you are either offended at Something v/hich I have inadvertently Said or done, that you discovered fomethirg; in me very diSagreeable to you, or that you are yourSelfa little capricious.
“ You may chufe which you will of thefe rea-
fons,” Said She, bluftiing, and Smiling----------“ T
am not obliged to declare which of them is the true one;—perhaps you have notyetgueffed the true onej perhaps all you haz>e mentioned do honour to youR penetration.”
Did you ever hear Such an anSwer ? Had Hie not looked So exquifitely handfome, I will not Say what I i;pight have retorted j but I bridled my anger.
‘‘ If you leave me at liberty to chuSe, madam, I
ihalL.
4-a
HISTORY OP
Iliall, in order to exculpate myfelf from any mifde-raeaDour, impute your prefent cold' and reftrved behaviour, to the ficklenefs of your own difpohtlon, which has hurt me not a little, becaufe I v/as a fraid I'had adlually, though involuntarily, offended you.
--------However, I cannot abfolutely condemn it, as
you have been led to make fo charming an apology
for it.—--------We. are, therefore friends again,”
continued st going to prefs herlovely hand to my lips.
Hold, my lord,” replied fhe, drawing back her-“ as we have had no difference, no escufes-
are neceflitry on either fide.------You are miftaken
if you imagine that I intende.d to make any, nor did. I expeCt or defire any from your lordfhip.”
“ So vefy indifferent,” faid I—piqued to deaths at her coolnefs. “ And, pray, why did your lady-Ihip favour me with the lea-ft degree of intimacy, if you were determined to put a Hop to it without any reafon at all ?”
Band
“ I am not obliged, lord Woburn, to give any reafons to any body for my conduU ; I am fatisfied
with it myfelf.---But to prevent your importuning,
me again upon this fubjedf, kno'vo^ that if I did enter into what you call an intimacy with you, l adted-inadvertently; a little refledfion foon convinced me of the impropriety of my behaviour, and the alteration in it naturally followed.
“ But, pray, madam, what impropriety can there be in your chatting, walking, or dancing with me.” “ There will be not the leaft, my lord, w'henyour behaviour to women ceafes to be exceptionable.”
“ And who has charged me with any impropriety
in my behaviour to women .?-----But, 1 believe, I am
acquainted with the perfon who has endeavoured to let you againft me, and fire flrall Severely repent of her malicious accufation”
a
LORD W O B U R, N.
43
Stay, my lord,” faid die, interrupting me, “ you ire upon a fubje^t which is of no importance to me.
----Not a creature has fpoken of you to me in the
manner you apprehend.----------—What I have faid
arofe entirely from my own obfervation.”
“ Is this aflually the truth, dear lady Charlotte i --replied I, pleafed to find'that my widow had'not been tattling—------“ and has Mrs. Mead faid no-

ur
Mrs. Mead never
thing againft me ?—”
“ No, upon my Hono
nuMuioned you to me.-----------But your faftiicions,
v^’ith regard to her, muft have refulted from your confcioufiiefs of having given her room to complain
of you.---------^Come, my lord, fince we are fo far
engaged upon this topic-----1 have, indeed, no buii-
refs with it, but on her account, who is I believe,
very unhappy ;------let me perfuade you to look upon
her in a better light, and to treat her with more con-fideration, as die is, I amperfuaded, very fenfibly touched by your neglefti”
“ And can you, madam, after wliat you have juft faid to me, widi me to renew my intimacy with Mrs. Mead ? you muft certainly be ignorant of the nature of it j for I.cannot fuppofe that die has prevailed on you to approve of the coimedtion between us.”
“ Indeed, my lord,” anfwered die, b'ludiing like fcarlet, “ I am quite ignorant of your attachment to Mrs. Mead, but finding her extremely amiable and obferving—every body, indeed, makes the fame remarks—that die is very unhappy on jour account ; I thought, I confeis, that you behaved to her with an unbecoming negligence, rather bordering upon contempt ; and, I will alfo own, that, fuppofing die could not have merited that negligence, I had a very bad opinion of you.—In confequence of that opinion, I deemed it highly neceflary to diun a man capable of behaving in fo cruel a manner to any woman.
44-
HISTORY OF
man, eSpeciaily to a woman (b very plealing, both in her perfon and temper, as Mrs. Mead certainly is.” Charming creature ! Did you ever, Wilmot, hear one woman plead fo powertutly for another ?—The only one, too, who had any pretenhons to be a rival to her ? Her candour, her good nature, half reconcile me to the fex.—Yet there muft be a confounded defeft’fomewhere, to counter- ;alance thefe rare virtues.—Women, in general, are inveterate foes to each other -armed with calumny, they are always carrying.on hofti'lities ; and the wounds, which* they mutally inflift, are the more painful, as they
are given in the dark,--------But foreturn to the
enchanting Charlotte.—Adoring her for having discovered fo excellent a difpofition, I thought it incu.m-bent on me to make a full confeffion of my folly with regard to Mrs. Mead, whom I could not be faid to expofe, by relating the exaU: footing.we were upon to lady Charlotte, becaufe Ihe had declared' herfelf filled with feniiments in her favour, and interested in her happinefs—Befides, I wanted to open my heart to the lovely Charlotte upon this fubjefl j I was determined indeed, not to own that I loved-her, but I was refolved to convince her, if ppflible, that I loved no other woman;
After having intreated her to hear me patiently,. I, with all the faccinftnefs in my power, and with" all the delicacy which the (ubjedl required told her the whole affair, and made her fenlible, at last, that-Mrs Mead had, in effedi, made overtures of the ten-derest nature to me ; and that her anger and refent--ment were kindled against me, becaufe l' had chofea to break off a connexion to which I had no inclination ; and, by the continuance of which, her honour would have been confiderably injured.
The frankneis of this confeflion, with the reflections I made upon it, concerning the general corruption among the fair feXj and compliments obliquely-
direUed
L G R D W O B U R N.
4S
diTe^led to her, made my peace.—^Yet had you Seen how fweetly Hie blufhed, and averted her lovely eyes while I fpoke to her of her favourite’s frailty —you would have owned that there never was a
more heavenly creature-----1 did not however,efcape
a chiding, for having expofed the weaknefs of a woman, who had only adted with indifcretion from her too great partiality for me. In reply, I told her that I had not mentioned the affair to any body except herfelf, and that I would keep it an inviolable Secret; adding, indeed, that I could not bear to fee her cultivate an intimacy with a woman fo little deferring of her efteem.-------Sh.e was filent, and foon after-
wards turned the converfation upon lefs perfbnal topics.—We parted friends.—She now no longer flie.? •from me; yet there is a delicate kind of referve hanging about her, which gives an additional luflre to the charms of v/hich fhe is already pofTefTed.—What pleafes me moft, is her behaviour to Mrs. Mead; no creature would in the lead imagine fhe had heard any thing towards the impeachment of her
character.---------She never feeks her company, ’tis
true .; but when they are together accidentally, fhe treats her with a gentlenefs, and a confideration, which while they throw a veil over her failings, prevent the luftre of her own merit from being too cp-preffive.—Never did I fee fo amiable a carriage.— She muft have as I have faid before, Some capital ble-mifhes.—I cannot yet detedt them.—Beauties alone do I at prefent difeover —I feel my heart lighter on
being reflored to her favour.-------She behaves
almoft as freely as fhe ufed to do ; though fire fome-times appears to be checked by her apprehenfions with regard to me,—I will endeavour to remove all apprebenfiens by an increafing refpect, naturally resulting from an increafmg eheem.
Ycur’s as uSaal,
W.
L E
4^
HISTORY OP

LETTER
XVI.
Lady Gh a rl ox t e Mo rde n, to Mrs. Bl om e r,
HAVE been So aftoiiinied, by a difcovery which lord Woburn has made, in relation to Mrs. Mead, that I am hardly yet in a condition to write to you. That Ilae is culpable, is certain; but fliould lord
Woburn have expofed her ?---------Let me confider.—
He declared his triumph over her, purely on viy account, that I might not be too intimate with a per-fon, w'hofe reputation would not ftand a ftridl fcru-tiny ; will not fuch a proceeding, on his fide, plead Brongly in his favour } He is more refpeftful, more aiTidnous to gain my good opinion than ever ; is he
not, therefore, entitled to my pardon ?-------Yet you
■cannot conceive how much I feel for this poor Mrs. Mead ■; fhe looks like the piUure of defpair ; I can fee, hoveever, that though llie dlfcovers nothing but de'iedtion in public, iliecloes not want fpirit when llie is in private with lord Woburn; her anger, then, gets
the better of her love ; fo it ovight to do.----1 only
wifi that fhe would lliew her refentment, rather by a conternDtuous than a furious behaviour ;
i.	'	'
lor rage
muft only lend to make her lest stelirable in his eyes, and lefs refpedtable in her o^n. In fhort, I think, file has nothing to do but to quit the Caflle immediately, and to endeavour, by her future difcretion,
to retrieve her character.-----Lady Splllbury and Mlfs
Facely, who either do not look upon her in the light I behold her, or do not imagine her behaviour to lord Woburn as criminal as it is, affedl to treat her with a mortifying kind of pity to her face, and behind her back, fneer at her molt intoierably, throwing out,
at
LORD WOBURN.

at the fame time, broad hints on the extreme Impropriety of henconducl.—Their cenfuresare fevere,and their mirth iminoderate, whenever (he is mentioned. I wonder lord Woburn does not perfuade her to go
away.-----What a pity.it is, that women fliould give
men fuch advantages over them!—--------He may fay
what he will, but he certainly was the firft aggreffor, by taking particular notice of this lady, who was weak enough to imagine that he was in love with her ; admire her he did,, undoubtedly; for die is ex-ceedingly.pretty ;'but there is a wide difference between love and admiration, efpecially that fort of love which is founded on efteem ; and, without which, no woman fliould furrender her heart. Lord Woburn Is rathei, in my opinion, a dangerous man. He lays all the blame, indeed, upon the fhocking forwardnefs of our fex ; but I cannot entirely exculpate him. I think it highly neceffary to be upon my guard ; yet I do not approve of being quite iliy and referved neither ; by fuch an appearance, I fliould give him room to fuppofe that I fufpefted him of having a defign upon me.—-He declares he cannot put up v/ith fcorn in any woman ; if I am, therefore, too fcornful, I may provoke his lefeiit-ment, and in a fit of refentment, he may meditat
s
revenue.
I Aiall foon return to town, but .cannot well leave this place till my houfe is ready to receive me.—Sorry am I, indeed, that you cannot, without breaking with your fifter Scot, be my firft gueft, as you are my firft friend.—However, prefent or abfent, you will ever be entitled to, and may be ever affured of my fincereft efteem.
/
•I am your’s, unchangeably,
•Charlotte Mordeh,
LET
4'S
HISTORY OF

LETTER XVII.
Lord Woburn to Mr. Wi l m o t.
R S. Mead has., at laft, taken herfeif away ; but what of her —Lady Charlotte is going to leave us alfo, I fear : llie has not yet lived in a
houfe by herfeif, but always with Mrs. Elliot.---
Now fhe is of age, they have taken a houfe for her in St, James’s Square, and are fettling her houfe-hold.—I intend to be a conftant vifitor, if die will admit me, as a friend only, not as a lover ; you un-derftand me.—Before I appear—if I ever appear— in that charafter, I mull find out her hidden imoerr fedlions—for irnperfedlions fire, undoubtedly, has ; and, as I am fure I lliail not be able to difcover them without a-long, and pollibly a very intimate acquaintance, I rauft endeavour to procure leave for admittance I I niuft, however condudt myfelf in fuch a manner, as not to be in the lead: fufpedled—Evelyn too as he admires her as much as ever, will I fuppofe take fome fteps towards keeping up an acquaintance,
which has given him both pleafure and pain :-----
I v/ould, therefore, advife him to drop it ; but lovers are not the people in the world moft inclined to attend to the voice of admonition, indeed, have hopes—perhaps he may have encouragements to indulge them —I am not able to write
He may,
a
long letter to day ; my fpirits are bad, and I have a violent head-ach.---—I mufi; lay down my pen for the prefent.
r
E T-
/
LORD WOBURN.
49

LETTER
XVIII
Lady Charlotte Mordeh to Mr*.
Blomer.
■vyOU hid me take care of lord Woburn, my ^ dear friend ^ I thank you for yourcaution.--.-Were st indeed, to believe all that I have heard about him lately, I Ihould ftand much in need of it ; but I have been very flow in believing ill reports concerning any body.—You fhall, however, judge yourfelf how far I have been right here.
Mrs. Mead left the Cajile two days ago ; (he left Lord Woburn,! could fee plainly, with great reluctance.--She could not indeed-publicly bid him adieu, without betraying a concern faflicient to fharpen the eye of fufpicion againfl: her.-The weaknefs of her mind was too evident, by the whole turn of her behaviour, which had fuch an effe«Stupon lady Spilf-
s
bury and Mifs Facely, that they laughed aloud.—A to Sir Francis and lady Eufton, they are people who never take notice of any thing, unlefs it is pointed
out to them---^Their infenflbility, almoft border-
ing upon ftupidity, benumbs their faculties fo, that their powers of comprehenfion are extremely feeble; they are, how^ever, not only mighty happy in them-
felves, but very convenient to others.—-—They
receive their friends and acquaintance with as little ceremony as if they kept an inn, and as if it was incumbent on them to aecommodate every traveller who came by their doors: they welcome you with a hearty civility, entertain you with hofpitality, and
fee you depart-—-----—-v/ith as little emotion
as if they really had never feen you before, as if they never fhould behold you again.————Then
C	are
50
HISTORY OF
are many fnch people, I believe, in the world. What is a lady, receiving her company on a rout^ or an affembly nighty but the miftreSs of a public-houfe ? Her guefts croud her rooms, in order to amuSe them-felves with each other, while fhe has the toil and the trouble to make the amufements of the evening agreeable to them all.----^With thefs fentiments you may
imagine that I have an averfion to routs': I have, indeed, no relirh for them.—The perfon whole houfe is filled with company, who cannot live without cards, appears in the fame light to me as the proprietor of an aflembly-room.-------In many houfes the
company grouped together more than defray the expences of the night by their depofits under the can-dlefticks, if th^ owner of them has a good correspondence with heV Servants.—Severe animadverlions could I make upon the abufes of Society in general, and of the ill-confequences attending public card-playing in particular.—But to return to Mrs. Mead. As Soon as fhe was out of the houfe, lady Spilfbury and Mils Facely began loudly to rally lord Woburn about his 'wido‘Wy as they ftiled her, and made ufeof So many malicious farcafms, which Sarcafms were accompanied with the grofSeft allufions, 1 bluihed for them.—My lord, to do him juftice, behaved in a very proper manner upon the occafion j for partly by indifference, and partly by contempt, he threw them quite out of their play : he even had the grace So far to vindicate Mrs. Mead, as to fpeak with the higheft commendation of the great decency of her manners, and the difcretion, which fhe difcovered, by not taking notice, improperly, of thofe indelicacies and in-difcretions in her friends, which flie could not have
overlooked.-----This defence of her did him, in my
opinion, a great deal of honour.
“ Decency and difcretion,” Said lady Spilfbury, while Mifs Facely approved of what fhe uttered with her eyes, ” are qualifications So little regarded now,
that
LORD W O B URN.
51
t%atthofe who have any pretenfion to theira, receive
no kind of advantage from th-em----and the boaft:7
ing of them is certainly ridiculous—adding, with a ftrong fneer, “ the widow’s very decent and dif-creet appearance has been of very fmall fervice t® her.”
My lord replied, rather warmly, that Mrs. Mead was iuperior to moft; of her lex.”
“ Upon my word,” faid lady Spillbury, half irritated, “you pay us all, even lady Charlotte too, a high compliment, by stippofing that Mrs. Mead caa have any fuperiority over us.”
“ Mrs. Mead,” replied my lord, “ has good qualities, with which you feem to be unacquainted 5 but admitting flie has no good ones, you only lelTea
yourfelf by endeavouring to expofe her.---—Lady
Charlotte [bowing refpeUfully to has too much fenfe, and too much good-nature to join in calumniating any of her fex.”
With thefe words he left the room, and left me to hear fuch fevere inveUives againfl; himfelf and Mrs. Mead, that had I not made it a rule never to believe a quarter of the fcandal addrelTed to my ears, I llaould have entertained fentiments very unfavourable indeed to them both. However, not chuling to vindicate people of whofe merits and demerits I was fo incompetent a judge (v/ho can always an-fwer, in every refpeil:, even for themfelves ?) nor caring to hear the fame converfation continued, I quitted them abruptly, leaving them to make what comments they pleafed on my filence, forw'hich I fhall probably be loaded with afperfions fimllar to thofe they fo liberally bellowed upon the above-
mentioned gentleman and lady.----V/ere it not ne-
ceffary for me, on many accounts, to be very cir-cumfpeCl, and upon my guard, though I am perfuad-cd that my behaviour, after all my precaution, v.dll be grofsly milreprefented, the propenfities of lady
C z	Spillbury

HISTORY OF
SpiKbuiy s.nd Mifs Facely to fatire, would Sufficiently Spur me to be watchful over my conduft.
Mr. Evelyn’s aunt, lady Jennour, is very ill.—He, was Sent for in a great hurry, yefterday.—As cur phrty is leffiened, I am a good deal expofed to interviews with lord Woburn.—The ladies about whom I have written So much, not being able to make him
attached to them, begin to let him alone.-As I am
not fond of being particular in any thing, and as my lord treats me with rather more than lefs refpeft, I return his civilities, but without diftinguilhing them from thofe which I receive from Sir Francis Eufton, oi from any accidental viliter at the CafUe.
9
letter XIX.
LordWoBU&N toMr. WiLMOT.
HAT infernal devils are women, when they have a mind to difplay their diabolical ac-compllibments !—In my laft I left off becaufe I was not well ; my diforder was but a trifling one, yet it was too Gainful to be concealed.—In fa£t, I did not pretend to be in perfea health, when I was very much indifpofed ; and that heavenly lady Charlotte, merely from her innate goodnels of heart, dilcover-ed fo much pity for my Sufferings, that I began to feel myfelf more bleft than I had ever been, without the liighteft indifpofition.—Her charming looks, her voice, her words, indeed, difcovered nothing but compafiicn for -me j but thofe infamous wretches,
Spillbury
LORD WO B U R N
3
Spiliburj and Facely, told me, that file was deeply
in Icve, and a^iialiy dying for me.-The bare idea
of her being in love with me was fo tranfporting, that I was almofl; cut of my fenfes j but, on a little isfledion, I was convinced that my informers had uttered a curfed Us, on purpcfe to fet us at variance with each other.-—Never was I fo Supremely happy as to fee tile fmalleil: iigr.s of love in her looks, or her behaviour to me.——There is good humour, there Is couipjaifance in her carriage, but no ten-dernefs, no follcitude 5 ndehre to relieve my mind, by innocs.ntly amitfeg it, is frequently perceptible 5 but there is no warmth In her manner, though I am inflamed by her most frigid efforts to give me pleasure,---1 cannot therefore, deferibe the indignation
I felt at this intelligence : poffibly, between ourfelves, F was the more irritated against the intelligencers, as I was aiTured of its wanting authenticity.—
"	S./	J
I was, however, diScreet enough only to request them not to trouble themfelves about lady Charlotte and me, as w'e fhould never afford the entertainment for them which they Seemed to wiih for and errpedt.—I would not have lady Charlotte hear what thefe malicious toads have faid about her for the world j for I dread any new alteration in that behaviour, which is at prefent the most enchanting imaginable.-—I would not fee her more cool, more
referved for the univerfe.--1 dread- her hurrying
away before I have gained’ leave to viflt her in town.-^—Have not I reafon to curfe the whole fer:, except this one unoffending angel	—But you wdil
take no warning I find.---You are determined to
engage again,—-V/hat amazing temerity 1---------1
Scarce know whether I ought to wiili you fuccefs or not.—A man who has been So abominably deceived, hardly deferves to be SucceSsful in a new adventure.
C 3,1
BET
54
HISTORY OF
LETTER XX.,
Lady CiTARLOTTE Morden to Mrs. Blomer.
HAVE been excedively alarmed ; fhocked, indeed, to the greateft degree.—The danger, thank heaven, is not fo great as I at firft apprehend-dcd ; yet I am fo convinced of the difFtcuIty of paffing through life with an unblemiilied reputation, that I am almoft ready to fequefter myfelf entirely from the world.—’Tis impoffible, I find, to efcape the afper-fions of Scandal’s viperous tongue, though one really does nothing to deferve them'.
I don’t remember whether I told you, that lord Woburn has not been very well for feveral days. As he really appeared dejedted, and diftrelled by his diforder, though it did not feem violent enough to confine him to his apartment—I employed myfelf, perhaps unnecellarily, (but I was prompted by a defire to divert him from attending to the violent head-ach of which he complained) to amufe him by reading, finging, drawing, and playing at crib-bage with him.—Lady Spilfbury and Mils Facely thought proper to mifreprefent my motives molt impertinently.—I happened, luckily, to. overhear a converfation between them and my lord, in which I v/as traduced in the friendUeJtx.Qxms imaginable. I was in the Ihrubbery at the fame time, but concealed from them. I cannot defcribe what I felt at the calumnies thrown out againft rne, ncr can I do ^uftice to lord Woburn’s very proper replies to them, which were delivered in a manner ftrongly expref-five of his contempt, indignation, and diibelief, but not ofhis refentment.—Refentment, indeed, would only have rendered them more furious ; would have ,	induced
/•
LORD V/OBURN.
55
V*
induced them to circulate (till more atrocious falfe-hoods about me.
After what I have written, you will, I dare fay,
think it high time for me to leave the Caftle.-Yet
1 will not quit it abruptly, becaufe I would not have them believe that they, or any other people, are able to make me uneafy.—By a precipitate departure I (liould only give encouragement to their fuf-
picions.--1 am pleafed to fee that lord Woburn,
with all his faults, is not coxcomb enough to behave impertinently to me, upon a hint v/hich w’ould hav made many men behave fo, who have, in general, ■better charaUers, v/iih regard to their carriage to v/omen, than hislcrdiBip.—As foonas my houfe is ready, it will be quite neceffary for me to return to town.
V'V'V'V'V'V'N’-'V'V’
LET T E R XXI.
♦
0
Lord Woburn to Mr. Wi i, m o t .
HAVE been in a moft difagreeable fituationf Evelyn returned a few days ago in deep mourning for a lady who has left him all her fortune ; a fortune large enough to juftify his pretenlions to lady Charlotte.—He fpoke, and was refufed.—I leave you to imagine, for I cannot defcribe the agitation I felt before he made his overtures, and the joy which his departure from the Caftle gave me, in confequenc
of his being repulfed as a lover,--However, lady
Charlotte and I have not yet mentioned fo important an event to each other, though we are upon the moft friendly terms-.—S.he goes to London in a few days.—I feized a moment, when her Setting olFwas
■with lomething like regret, ifilie is

mentioned
capable of feeling any —by lady Eufton^ to a(k her
C 4	permiftion
HISTORY OF
■5
permiiiion to fee her, when her doors were open fO her other friends.—She bluflaed, a favourable reply j but the words v/hich accompanied her blaflies were hardly intelligible. —Her behaviour to Evelyn has made me very happy j—but I am pained to think of her quitting the Caftle.—How many delightful hcura have I Spent with her I————.. Such
jlouxs, pertiaps, 1 itiall never ertjoy a^ain.-*——I cannot, incked, et;pei5l to ba Weft with (uch hours in London, unlefs v/@ are upon another footing.
I could have whiled away my days forever as her Sriend,her admirer’—her lover too, but not her de-dared one,—! muh know a great deal more of her before I make a declaration of love —Nay, I don’t think I (Iiall have courage to venture, should there be nothing discoverable to deter me, after what I have feen of the fex, and after what our friend Cafey has fufferedby them,^—But then I should have been happier if I had never met with this lady Charlotte. <—I find new beamie.$ in her every day—yet, what are they to me ? They will aever fall to my share i fame unfeeling fellow, recommended to her by her guardian as a proper man in point of rank and fortune } a fellow, perhaps, who has a fet of old mufty principle.s, jufb ftrong enough to keep him frorn committing any enormities in the eye of the world, may have her in his-power, without being able to enjoy her charms.—To think of Such a heavenly creature’s lying by the frozen fide of infenfibility ! Racks and tortures 1—She writes too.—I would give the world to fee her letters to Mrs. Blomer, Mrs. Elliot’shfier, who is gone over to Ireland to be with another filler, Mrs. Scot, a widow alfo.—I wonder whether they are like my widow.—I fuppofe not, as lady Charlotte is fo fond of them.-—Yet she feemed to have a partiality for Mrs. Mead, who had not, i fancy, art enough to deceive her.
IrJ
\
ll ORB W O’stD R'T<
Jf
7
In CONTINUATION.
Juft come from a little Tomping-bout iii the' Wood, lady Spillbury and Harriot not being able to make any thing more of me, were determined to come in for a few kiffes at leaft, before I left the Caftle ; for they may reafonably fuppofe, from the appearance of things, that-1 lhall not ftay long after Charlotte.—I had, indeed, been peeping about all the- morning, expecting to find a lucky moment to take- my leave of her without witnefies.—I was purfued by thofe two furies, and hunted up into a clofe corner ;--^one of them fnaiched my hat, the other feized my book —this was lofted to the right, that whirled to the left, and fo I w^as obliged to,lay hold on them both out of fclf-defence.—In the very height of our play—if play it could be called Charlotte appeared—Never was her fuperior loveli- ' nefs fo. conipicucufly ftnking.~i—She was advancing, but feeing me half undreft by thefc wild women, my waiftcoat unbuttoned, the lace partly torn off the ■ bofem of my ftiirt, my hair pulled all about my ears, ■ while they both held me faft—feeing me in this condition, fhe ftepped back, fcandalized at fuch.rio-tous proceedings.—^-Breaking immediately from theft wmnton devils, I ran up to her, and told her the caufe of my favage appearance, imploring her af-fiftance, in order to conquer my tormenting adversaries.—Sweetly fmiling, and v/alking on, flie replied, “You muft excufe me from interfering between you and the ladies, as I am quite ignorant of your difputes.”
“ There has been no Gifpute,” cried Harriot, only he will fit ftupidly poring over his bock, and w^edonY chute to let him, as we want him to chat with us.”
“ Nay, then, ” faid I, “lilence you I muft and will.”<—Then throwing them down inrhe'Lay-graft,
I kilTed
C 5
0
8
HISTORY OF
I kifled them till I was abfolutely weary, though they feemed to have no notion of being fatigued with the diverfion,—As lady Charlotte inftantly difappeared, I hurried after her, and throwing
my arm round her waift—“ now,” faid I, tetry her =—“’tis your turn.”
“ Hold, my lord !” cried flie, (Iruggling, and glowing with raodefty and refentment at my familiarity—-you, know 1 told you at firft that fhe was
■	monftroufly proud.
“ Come, come, my lady,” replied I, “a fingie modeft kifs, permitted by you, is worth a thoufand
foliicited by thefe loofe ones.—^You cannot----fhall
not—muft not refufe me. —You fee I do not attempt to treat you like them ; but I fwear I wall have one kils.”—i perfevered, and I fucceed’ed.—Never, Jack,
in my whole life, did I prels fuch delicious lips.-
She is, indeed, a glorious girl.—Her blufhes, her confufion, her timidity, and her pretty ftarts of anger at my freedom, made me long to repeat my offence—a thoufand times over.-—I dared not, however, to make a fecond attempt upon her lovely lips. —Bye and bye, perhaps, w'e may be upon better terms.---She will not bear hurrying, I find ; I muft, therefore, ftrike to her now, that fhe may be induced to furrender to me hereafter.----impetuous as I naturally am, I can be a Fahius, wTien I have a point of confequence in view.---But file going from hence.—No more of thefe enchanting opportunities to melt her to my wifhes—Why cannot we remain
together here another month Dowm, down im~
■	f alienee.
LET-
LORD WOBURN

L R T T E R XMl:
From the fame to the fame;
SHE has made a downright quarrel of it---------—s-
that is, a dumb one, for fire will not fpeak to
me.--------This muft be all affedlation, for- I am fure
fixe was pieafed.------1 faw her fatisfaUiOn in her
anguilhing eyes, I tafted it upon her balmy lips, fUt it in her trembling hands. However I mult let her have her own way a little, I fwear to you this coying it is of infinite lervice to me ; it keeps up a man’s appetite furprifingly.—The women v/ho aU: in a contrary manner, don’t know their own intereft. --How fulfoluely fond are Spilfoury and Facely! Nay, indeed, my little wlaov/ was a coming one. It is aftonilliing to me, that, they don’t fee, that by keeping us off, they only bring us on the faflter; but, in truth, the fexin general are fo intolerably forward
that they difguft me.-----
I don’t at all like lady Charlotte’s parting dllfalis-fled with me.—-I die for an opportunity to make iny peace with juft the fellow kifs to that which fired my foul.—But there are no hopes.—She pretends that file has received a letter, which will oblige her to fet out for Yorklhire diredtly.—If this is not art., my fine lady, Thave done v.'ith you ; that is, you have cut oft all thofe hopes I had began to encour-
age of your being fo ranch better than any other wo
O
man.
Whether flie is as virtuous and fincere as fhe feems to be, I Will not pre-fume to fay—I have iftrong doubts j but I am fure ihe is lovely,-------:---
and .will make, as I told yen before, a delicious mil irefs. Iv'lad, hewever, as I am to poiTefs her, charm
ed
6o
HISTORY OF
ed with her perfon, and her manners, the one uncommonly beautiful, the other uncommonly bewitching, I fliall take no great trouble to gain her,—I fhall only behave to her in fuch a manner, as to let her fee that fhe is thoroughly to my tafte, and that Ihe may make a conqueft of me whenever Ihe pleafes.— As to availing myfelf of the cuftomary arts of feduc-tion— I hold them in the utmoft deteftation ; they are beneath a man of honour, or a man of fenfe ;— they fink him lower than the lowefi of his fpecies.— we ufiially call a fellow who degrades himfelf a brute; but too haftily—A brute who adls only agreeable to his nature, is a nobler animal than the man who abu-feshis intelle«Sts, by enaploying them^to delude the fair-eft, though the weakeft part of the creation, out of their virtue.—No, Wilmot, if you think that I willi to take any improper advantages of any woman, you do me the greateft injuftice.—So far from making them worie, 1 wifh to fee them better than they are; if, indeed theyN//, without my {iffiftanccy I don’t tell you that I will not receive them with open arms.—■ Into my heart would I receive this, adorable Charlotte, could I be afiured—-------but fhe is going,
and fcarce deigns to favour me with a fingle look.— Now this in lioy humble opinion, is carrying things too far.
L E .D
LORD W O B -U R N.
6i

li E T T E R
/•
Lady
Charlotte Mor as n
Mrs. B L O M E R.
HAVE jud received a letter from Mr. Elliot, to inform-me-that Mrs. Elliot is extremely ill. Imagine my trouble at this unwelcome news ; I fhall fet out immediately for Elliot-PIace.—How is-my concern doiibied when I think of your not being
there! Yet, upon fecond thoughts, if our dear friend-
is indeed fo ill, you will not be dreadfully pained at
the fight of her in the midft of her fafrerings.____
My eagernefsto be in Yorkfhire, prevents me from taking time to write a longer letter at prefent.____
You fhall hear from me as foon as I am arrived.
-----^^In the mean while believe me to be, as ufual
that is,
Your Uncerefl: friend
C HA R L O T T E M O R D E N »
LET-
HISTORY OP

LETTER XXIV.
Lord Woburn to Mr. W i l m o t .
H E is gone, the dear creature is gone ; nor would flie fufFer me to bid her adieu, in the manner I wiflied.—-Yet I luckily feized a- moment of privacy to folicit my pardon, which was granted, indeed ; but (lie behaved, at the fame time, with a cool'nefs, with an indift'erence, as if fire thought me not of confequence enough to engage her attention. I again intreated her permillion to villt her on her return to London, but ihe neither rejefted nor complied uuth my requeil j you may be affured, therefore, that I iliall go.

<(
She half confents who filently denies.

I have a ftrong fuSpIdon that I am not in the' leaft difagreeable to her ; but fhe cannot bring her-felf to acknowledge her partiality for me.—Pride !
-----pride !—I have, Indeed, hitherto only alksd the
queftion with my eyesj-—by her extreme cautioufnefs about looking at me, I fancy fhe is afraid of making
a reply too favourable to me-------Time will ihew.
But We may be feparated a great while, and
a rival may be fuccefsful.----------I will hcpe for
the beft.-----1 fliall not, however, continue here,
though fhe correfponds with lady Eufton.——I am weary of the female part of the family, who, to make themfelves hill more odious, begin to teaze
me about lady Charlotte.--------Whatever I think,
I lliall not make them my confidantes.—------------
i will accept of Sir George’s and my hfter’s invitation to fpend a month with them at Huxley-Park,
-----By that time, pofTibly, lady Charlotte may be
in town.
' ■ ■	'	LET-
lord WOBURN.
^3

letter XXV.
Lady Csarlotte Morden to Mrs.
BiiOMER, at Dublin.
I W AS happy enough, my dear friend, to find our dear Mrs. Elliot better when I arrived j but being delighted with my kind expedition, flie has wearied herfelf with contriving amufements for me, in order to reward me, flie fays, for giving myfelf the trouble of coming down on her account.——'. The pleafure I felt in feeing her fo much better on my arrival than I expedted, from Mr. Elliot’s letter, is inexprelTiblc.
Mrs. Elliot not only procures a variety of entertainments for me, but has alfo found out a lover.— Not being juft at this time quite fo well pleafed with him as he Seems to be with me, I have, very formally, declared my diflike to his addreftes.—There is no getting rid of feme people.--——The man I believe has a good charafter, a‘s well as a large eftate ; yet, I confefs, my dear Mrs. Blomer, I muft fee a mixture of the agreeable with \.\\q good^ in the perfon who profelTes himfelf my lover, before I can. confent to pafs the remainder of my life with him. -----^You will, perhaps look very ferious at this declaration, and remind me of the old ad'age,-rr“ mar-“ ry firft, and love will come afterwards but farely there is not an abfolute neceffity for my being tied to a man for ever and ever—^and I, certainly, ihall not marry till I can love the man to whom I give my hand.
k- >	^


Mr;
64
HISTORY OF
Mr. Bojnton fighs at this refolution j and probably, you will chide me for it : but I 'really wiOi he would give up all thoughts of me.—>—I find myfelf too much difpofed to laugh v/henever he grows fe-riou^.—-i-I fometimes think I iliall never be mar--
V
ried, becaufe I am unreafonable in my expectations; becaufe I want an impoffibility—^perfedlion. I can- -not think' of giving encoirragement to a man of bad ' principles j -neither can I encourage the alllduities
of a ■ man who has none at all.-------Boynton, is fo
flavifh'a fycophant, fo abjedl a flatterer, that he echoes my words, and never makes the flighteft oppofition tomy'fentiments, except when I throw out
expreffions calculated to deftroy his hopes.----Yet
I do not look upon myfelf as inclined to give pain to thofe who difeover a particular regard for me.— Why now, only to mention Evelyn	—-there was'
fomething fo foft, fo gentle, fo pleafing in his manners, that I could not poflibly allow myfelf to be either harfli or ill-natured to him ; T find nothing but contempt tifing in my mind for Boynton, which
Tdo not, however, think he entirely ^merits.-----He
never excites my anger, for he is beneath it ; and as I never feel myfelf dilpofed to be angry with him when he follows me, fo neither do I ever treat him with rriore than a fmile at the civileft things addref-fed to my perfon, &c-. &c.—^Tho.fe Speeches, indeed, are truly diverting, becaufe they are inrinenfe-ly extravagant : you would laugh to fee me run to my glafs, w'^hen he had delivered a high-flown panygeric, and to hear me very gratefully thank Heaven for not having formed me deferving of them.
------How difgufting is the grols adulation which
fome coxcombs lavilh upon the women, whom they pretend to admire ! I have been always ready to believe, that their imaginationswere more fired than
their hearts.----There is frequently more meaning
in a glance, a touch of the hand, a Angle word, than
in
LORD WOBURN.
65
in the moft elaborate fpeeches. fenfe generally go together.
Nolle and non-, when a
man utters So many fine things before marriage, what will he have to fay afterwards ? If Boynton continues to be fo profxrfe of his eloquent exprefHons, I mull endeavour to teach him \d\zceconomy of <vcords. Excufe me, my dear, if my fentiments lliould not thoroughly correfpond with yours ; but as I- never Biould think of marrying, vdihotit a viev/ of rendering mylelf even happier than I am-at preSent j fo you may be affured that I fhall never unite my-felf to a man who will not, according to all appearances, be more worthy of ray affefHon and’efteem
the longer I live vmh him....... Boynton is not, I
am certain, capable of making an improving huf-band.-—‘-Our ideas are fb totally different, that there cannot be an alliance between them.
Pray, believe me, my dear, to be
Your ever-affeQionate. Gharlotte MoRDErr.
S. I' fliall inclofe this in Mrs. Elliot’s letter to lord Siindon, wdro will forwatid it in his packet'
'	A <
to

LETTER
XXVL
Lord-Wob urn to Mr. WiLMor.
Huxley-Park
' A M here, in the oddefl frame of mind to be conceived.-------was pretty much out of hu-
mour on my arrival ; and an incident, (ince my arrival, has made me still more out of humour with
ray feist
66
HISTORY OF
I wifli Ib ardently to fee lady Charlotte
myfelf.---
in town, that my impatience is almoft ungovernable.
Lord Sundon is, you know, Sir George Huxley’s friend and neighbour. We all fpent Adonday evening with him-------The poftraan brought a packet
of letters from York. There was one among them from Airs. Elliot, and one inclofed to Airs. Blomer.
.----1 kn ewthe hand, the feal, and the addrefs.----
■Lady Charlotte M^as diilinguifliable in them all ; -her letter was to be fent to Ireland, by lord SundOn,
■to the care of his brother there.---Never till that
moment, had I the flighted deflre to open people’s letters ; but I was then feized with fuch tormenting curioflty, that I could not conquer it.---Lord Sun-
don, having cafl: his eye over his own letter, bade the fervant lay the others upon the table in his library.-----A thought inflantly darted into my head.
■------1 pretended that the fight of the letters in
his lordiliip’s packet had reminded me of fome dif-patches which I had to fend off Immediately to London ; accordingly, I took the liberty of defiring my lord to give me leave to write a few lines on his table, adding, “ if you cannot conveniently accommodate me, I muft return diredtly to the Park.”
“ By no means,” replied my lord, conducting me into the very vviflied for room.
As foon as he had Ibut me in I firfl: devoured v/ith my eyes the letter which had ftimulated my curiofity, then opened it, and read It with an avidity not to defcribed. It contained a pretty full account of lady Charlotte’s fentiments, with regard to love and marriage, which fquared fo exactly with my own,
that I quite adored her.-----There was alfo a def-
crlption of a new lover, drawn up with fome' humour, whom you may fuppofe, fire has refufed.— The letter pleafed me extremely, as a compofition, but I fliould have been more pleafed with it had flis
dif-


LORD WOBURN.
67
dlfcovered her opinion about me in it;--------nay, had
ilie abufed me.^----Not to mention me at all-----------
That’s a deviiifla bad fign j—------yet I think, I ans
the very man hinted at in k, for I, certainly, lik

o
^9
her better and better every hour ; but whether fh will ever feel, in her gentle bofdm, fenfations ftmikr to mine, I cannot determine.-------There was a no-
ble franknefs and fpirit in her letter r there was' alfo a vein of pleafantry in it, which charmed m though I was at the fame time, provoked at her
fo foon forgetting me.—-------Yet, am I not rightly
ferved for my unwarrantable curiohty }---------Was
I not prompted by a criminal de&e when I wilhed to dive into her private fentiments, which ought to have remained unviolated under the leal which was employed to guard them from the eye of impertinence—Love muft be my apologift ?—inftigated
by love I forgot the diftates of honour.-------How
contemptible have I rendered myfelf, to myfelf, by fo fcandalous a proceeding !-----After Such a proceeding, can I ever deferve Charlotte ?—-------How
would Ihe juftly defpile me---------- defpife me, if
fhe knew of this lilly, ungenteel, unjullifiable aUion 1
I muft conceal my folly from her 'with the utmoft care ; but I cannot conceal it from myfelf.
-----The ftings of lelf-accufatlon !----Faith ! Wil-
---My confufion is
mot, I feel horribly alhamed. the only promifing fymptom about me at prefent. Should fhe really be, after all, every thing I have fo long wifhed to find in woman-1 fhall not deferve her-----am afraid ;-------though I will make
the utmoft efforts in my power to merit her efteem, — —'I will, pofitively fay no more about her now^ —I fhall write myfelf Into a fever if I go on.—To
change the fubjeU, therefore-------------- here is a
pretty girl juft ccrae from the fartheft part of the North.—She is going to fee London,.—that is, to he fieri.—Have you not been ufed to couple ignorance
and
63
HISTORY OP
and innocence together, when you heard of a coufT-
try girl ?------No fiKh creature now exifts, my
friend, as a covmtry girl artkf) and unknowing.
1-,^

.1
11
The various avenues to the metropolis, from al parts of England, have been rendered fo convenient and fo pleafant by bridges and turnpikes,
that you Ihall hardly find a girl, in the remoteft cor ner of the kingdom, who is not as finiiliecl a flirr,

>fe
by nature and education, as if flie had frecfuented the politeft aifenjblies in London.——•DreS is tbek firft palBon, admiration their fccond united, give birth to a train of vices and follies, in the exhibition of which they frequently put girls bred up even in the purlieus of St. James’s out of countenance, and out of humour.
Bell Forbes b, in fa^f, the wildeft little devil
you ever met witb,^---Tis impoBIble I believe, ah'”
folutely impoOible to tame her,—~Sh fond of pleafure,--She was brought up in the far-
e IS
theft part of-Cumberland, where her arnufements. were few and trifling ; but now Ihe can’t exift a moment without flying about in fearch of fomething new : I, wmuld as Soon attach myfelf to a whirligig.
■—LordSundon is much taken with her j fhe has undoubtedly, a very fine face, and is agood figure, taken all together ; but he feems to think there- never was a woman fo handfome as fhe is.—^Yet, with all her beauty, lire is more filly, more trifling than a/’ child.—Not that fhe wanrs fenfe—thc girl has parts but ihe foolifhly expeCcs to have the whole world a-dore her.—InfuiFerable vanity !—Lord Sundon is verr liberal of his flowery and flattering Ipeeches to her, but I let her alone.—My ftegiePt hurts her pride.— Befides, to tell you the truth, I believe five likes me beft, Hierely becaufe flie wants to draw mein to play the fool with her as much as he does —If flie goes on at this rate Ihie will be undone in a fortnight She is, indeed, in my opinion, ruined to all intents
9
and
\
LORD WOBURN.
6q

nd purpofes alreadj'; for I look upon a corrupt mind to be ftill worfe than a contaminated per-
fon."”...... Many men would, I dare fay, think
Bella perfedi: angel; but I fancy, Ihe will prove a fAlen one ere long.-— ----------How widely diffe-
rent is file from lady Charlotte ! With what fenfe and fteadinefs does lady Charlotte condudt herfelf in. every fituation ! With what heavenly dignity does Bie command refpedl ! With what charming gen-tlenefs does fhe ft-eal away your foul!—Were I not fo knowing, with regard to women, as I am j—-were I not pretty well afluied, that they are not what they feem, I would go and offer myfdf to her diredlly.
/

L E T T E R XXVII.
Trom the fame to the fame.
U N D O N is fooliflily fallen in love with this Bell : the little faucy gipfy fees her power, and
s determined to .make ufe of it-to his coft—if he
can be ferious. He is abfolutely a noble fpirited fellow, and I fliould be forry to fee him throw hirafelfaway thus.—His paffion for the girl has made me hate herj becaufe.it has drawn her out in her true colours.—She can make nothing of me, and fhe is accordingly very much provoked.—You cannot imagine to what arts the little flut has recourfe to win me to her purpofe.—Sundon and I were with her in the garden yeftej day ; he all raptures, lavifh
of

HISTORYOF
cif his compliments on her beauty, and wilhlng with an ecilatic figh that he v/as deftined to be the pof-felTor of her charms.
“ Ay, my lord,” cried the giddy head, “ but I can’t tell any thing about that ; for as I am juft come out of the country, I fball not like to take
J ^
the firft offer ;-1 am willing to fee more of the
world, before I fix—though—let me confider,” added llie, with a languiflnng look at me, which was followed by an arch one at Sundon, “ you are both very handfome : yet I fuppofe, there are a thoufand as fine fellows in London, whom 1 have not feen.” “ You give a very pretty reafon,” faid I “ for the natural ficklenefs of your temper ;—and as there will be a conftant fucceffion of fine fellows in London, you wall probably never think of fixing,, while you have a new man to admire every day,”
Delightful !” replied die, with her eyes fparkling V/ith pleafijre, “ There is nothing upon earth I fhonld like better.”
What a happy creature will the man be,” an-fwered T, “ who has the honour to call you his wife — I mean only to call yon fo, child ; for, I dare fwear, you will not, with that rage for variety, belong to any one perfon.”
“ Nay, now you are too hard upon her,” faid
Sundon—-------who was weak enough to take all this
for nothing but raillery.
“ Not in the leaft” replied die bri(ky, pufhing him away on his going to Seize her hand.—“ If I am the objeU of general observation, ic will be but generous in me to return the plealure they give me, by admiring them.”
Sundon being, at that moment, fent for by a gentleman, who was come to dine with him, Beil fat dowm by me—( I was carelefsly reclined on a garden-feat )—and told me, “ die never knew two Such idle wretches in her life j-r-adding, that dTe
believed
LORD WOBURN.
7*
believed I would not rife from my (eat to look at the handfomeft women in the world.”
I replied, “ that I certainly (liould not give my-felf any trouble about women, as they were all ready enough to court me.”
“ Indeed, my lord,” faid (lie, “ you would be ’faftly more agreeable, if you had le(s vanity.”
“ There I agree with you.-----But have you not
precifely the fame failing ?—When you mend, I fliall begin to reform.—Now, I am ftrongly inclined to think, that if my reformation depends upon your's I (hall enjoy my vanity with great comfort to the end of my days. Befides, I love mylelf too well to have any attachments.
“ Ay, you may talk, but people as (lout as you have been conquered ; and, I declare, the getting the better of your obftinacy would increafe the con(equen^:e of the woman fo much, who made the attempt, that I have a violent defire to be that woman myfelf,”
“ You had better let me alone ; for you will return from the field wdthout a vidtory, perhaps without honour.”
“ No—the more difficulty the more glory, my lord ; and, therefore, from this moment, be upon your guard; for I will certainly leave nothing undone to obtain fo important a conqueft.”
“ And fo be ruined by it—as Semele v/as in the rms of Jupiter.—No, no, child, think better, and let me alone—I give you fair warning.”
A violent ftruggle enfued, for the cunning toad had contrived, wi-hile (lie fat by me, to pick my pocket of my handkerchief.—This was a challenge not to be refufed, at lead by any man not as cold as a Carmelite.—^^She ran—1 purfued'—feigning her-felf to be out of breath (he -fiiffered herfelf to be caught, indeed, and flung herfelf into my arms. Affedting to be quite infeiiflble, (he pallively permitted
2
72
HISTORY OF
full ^ virtue
ted all the fredoms which I was provoked to take, and only was careful to— recover in the prettied: confufion imaginable ; and with a “ fye ! my lord, how can you do fo^ Pofitivciy you Ihall let me go now”—at the fame time, fliewing not the lead defire to be releafed from her confinement: fhe rather by her languifliing eyes, and fliort fighs, wifhed to remain in the fituatlon into which fire had forced herfelf.—Few men, Wi^mot, I believe, would have neglefted fuch an opportunity.—I don’t pretend to be a ftoiek, when a fine girl comes in my way, and does all flie can to put my blood into a gallop.—However, xonfideration—I won’t fay flopped me jufl when I was on the point of gratifying the paffion which Bell had kindled in my bofom.—I let her go.—Yet, hang me, if I don’t think we were both forry afterwards—She looked inoft confoundedly baulked, and I curfed myfelf for an idiot—for fuppofing that a girl, who could fink fo quietly into my arms, could pofiihly have any thing
of the veflal about her.-----1 adlually wonder how
I came to be fo ftrangely, fo unaccountably difcreet.
—Perhaps Charlotte came athxvart my mind.------------
Had it not been for her—I could not have refifted. —Heavens ! how that idea -fires me, ^nd at the fame time makes me firudder ! fliould fire be as
fielding as the girl.-----’There’s madnefs in the
thought !—Wild and wanton as this girl is, who would have fufpeUed her of going fuch lengths }— Is there no chaftity in women ? Faith 1 lam a-fraid not,'—I muft, however, give lord Sundon a friendly hint, left he fhould be ferloufly taken in ; —and yet he may, probably, thank me for my friendfliip with the point of his fword.—Well then let him take his chance.—I want not courage ;— but a -man who will run the riik of killing his friend, or of being killed by him, about a girl who is of fo combuftible a conflitution, that her virtue is e-
very
J
LORD WOBURN.
n
«
very moment In a dangerous way, mult be extremely ridiculous, and almoft deftitute of common fenfc. •—^Now, tell me. Jack, am I not in the right In being cautious"?—As I meet with fuch frail, fuch forward cteatures every day, who can blame me for entertaining unfavourable fufpicions againft the whole fex ?-—If they are all alike—farewell lady Charlotte—Yet I will not give her up till I have tried
her-----By the way, I hear that Ihe Is expedled in
town at the beginning of the week.——I Ihall then
leave this place for Grofvenor-Scjuare.
. ^ ^
LETTER XXVIII.
From the fame to the fame.
WI L M O T, my dear Wllmot, I have feen
her } I have had her in my arms.—Delightful burthen !—How different from the laft female who filled them ! I don’t know, however, whether Ilae loves me or not.—Then whll be the trial.—A woman, not naturally loofe, may eafily refill; the man to whom flie is indifferent ; but to refufe him whom.file fondly loves—flie mufl be purity itfelf. Now to my tale.
The firft morning after I came to town, I met this charming woman airing in Hyde-Park, attended only by her fervant.--Diana, when purfued
by Aftseon, made not fo charming a figure as flie did on horfcback.—How gracefully did fhe fit 1
With what an eafy negligence did flie turn her love-
D
H I S T G P. Y O F
iy neck to Speak to me ! How beautifully waved her auburn locks over her Snowy forehead, as the wind blew them backwards and forwards ! And. let me add, the unexpected fight of me, Wilmot, Iiad given an uncommon frefhnefs to her cheeks,
heightening her natural rofy bloom.------Her little
black hat, ornamented only with a feather of the fame hue, Set off her fine compledUon ; and while it modettly iliaded her face, it increafed the charms of it.—Our inodern huntreifes are too apt, from a propenfity to look very Smart about their heads, to appear with unbecoming fiercenefs, and to put one out of countenance for them, by their unfeminine looks. I hate to fee a woman’s hat turned up before; a woman may have a bolder appearance, by dreffing her front in that manner, but I never admired your
brazen beauties,-—However, to proceed.----Riding
on, without thinking, I believe, of the time or of the track we where in, we got into the lane v/hich leads to Brompton.——A dog leaping over a hedge, in that lane, frighted lady Charlotte’s horfe, who ran .away with her. I fiew after the fkittifli beaft, and juft as he had thrown her off his back, received her
in my p.rms.----She was a little terrified, but Soon
recovered, and, with a charming blufii thanked me
for my afiftance.----She then attempted to walk,
though I had infifted upon her accepting of my coach (which I had ordered, like a lazy dog, to
follow me when I Sat out) to carry her home.-----
She found herSelf, in a very little time, obliged to coinply vdth my requeft, for having endeavoured to keep her feat, when the horfe firft galloped away, ihe.had twifted her foot in the ftirrup and Sprained jt.—I lifted her into the coach. Seated myfelf by her and offered every kind of Service in my power : remembering what file had Said with regard to Eve-» that the attentions of Such men ought to he ac-liitywledged.—I conduced her intp her own houfe,
and
LORD WOBURN.

atid intreated her to let a Surgeon be immediately
Sent for to bleed her.----She at firft oppofed that
propofal, but yielded to my repeated importunities.
------I held her Snowy arm while the operation was
performed ; and then, after having received more thanks, accompanied with more bluOies, returned
home, fully intending to renew my vifits.-----1 was
SufRcientl)’^ authorized to repeat them ; I could not, indeed, have, decently, (laid away.


LETTER XXIX.
From the fame to the fame.
WENT next day to lady Charlotte.~=—-I go every day, and am always received with Smiles and good humour. She has a moft refined under-Handing, and is the moft entertaining creature I ever met with.—I make very long vifits, without
Seeming to weary her with my company.-----She
has, iiideed, afked me to ftay, and to return again.
You may be Sure I was always compliant,—— I may as well confeft the truth, I Sliould have gone
to See her, if flie had not afked me j—-■! am
afraid, if llie had forbidden me---It is incon-
ceivable the impreflion which ilie has made upon
me-----an impreftion at which I am prodigioufiy
Surprised—I abfolutely love her to dotage ; and yet I cannot reconcile myfelf to the new emotions which I feel, whenever I am near her ;—ilie perceives them no doubt—probably, every body perceives them ;—She does not, however, appear diS-pleafed with them, for Hie treats me with the grea-teft confideration—but with a delicacy and a mo-defty charming in the higheft degree.*—If Ihe Should
D 2	be

56
HISTORY OF
be quite free from thole vices and follies fo com» jnon to the fex, what happinels will Ihe be capable ©f beftowing ?—Yet fuppoung her to be as perfeei as I willi her to be, am I lure that I Ihall meet with a return of that tendernefs, which I feel rufh-ing into my foul whenever I look upon her, or liften to her, and which I conceal from her with the utmoft difficulty.-*——But have I not faid, that her carriage is modeftly encouraging.
So I thought her behaviour to Evelyn, I remember; yet I was mjftaken, for flie would not marry him.*-. How amazingly powerful ate women in the arts of deceiving! They fafcinate us with their looks, they fteal away ourfenfes, and, in fhort, do with us juft what they pleafe.-——After all I have experienced, though, I muft certainly be very weak, indeed, to be impofed upon by any woman breathf ing. However, I am fo intoxicated with lady Char* lotte, that, dreading to be awaked from my dream ©f felicity, I dare not proceed even to try her.-—•
I am become quite ridiculous to myfelf.-:-----If you
ihould laugh at me, therefore, I Ihall neither be aftonifhed-—nor angry.
Your’s as uliial.
W,
P. S. I am alfo become acquainted with Mr
and Mrs. Elliot.—--They are very converfi-.
ble people, and appear to be extremely attached to lady Charlotte——as relations and as friends.
LET*
LORD WOBURN.
77

L L t T L R
Lady Charlotte Morden to Mrs, Slbm£iki
I N C E riiy doming to town I have renewed my aCquiitltance vvith lord Wobilrn^We met by acdident in Hyde-Park.-*-*! had a fall from my horfe, which gave him an opportunity to alllfl: me. •——"Happily my foot was only Sprained a littie.—* This event has occafioned a behaviour in lord Wo-
—How
burn, which begins to grow rather puzzling.— fincerely do I widr you was with me, that you might from your penetration, inform me what I ought to think of his particular alRduities.—"I was, yoU know, Very much concerned to find it neceffary to leave Mr. Elliot’s, and lliould not have fo readily Confented to a feparatlon from my good friends# had I not flattered myfelf at the time, that I Ihould be favoured with a great deal of your amiable fo-
clety.-----1 did not then know that poor Mrs. Scot
would have had fo melancholy a realon to defilre you to come to her.-——You could not, I am fenfible# refufe to comply with her earneft requeft, as a lifter and as a friend j but your compliance with that requeft, has exceedingly diftrelTed me,-—-Your prefence, your advice would be, at this jundlure, pf infinite Service to me.——It is neither agreeable to me, nor Safe for me, I think, to live alone ; and yet "the danger of meeting with an improper companion terrifies me.-—I always abhorred thofe peo pie, who are called Humble Friends, and who ge nerally behave with an abjedl Servility, difguftin_ beyond expreffion.—^—-Befides, I chufe to converfe with perfons more upon an equality in every ref*
D 3	pe^t s


I
’78
HISTORY OF
pe£t ;-----blit where fliall I find Such, who wSi
care to live with me, or whom I fhould wiili to admit tipon a very intimate footing ? I have found, indeed, few capable of being real friends ; and fituated as I am, I think mylUf too much expo-fed to the vifits of lord Woburn, which are conduced with too much propriety to be prohibited,
but which not a little preplex me.---------His con-
Terfation leads to nothing decifive ; and, yet, from the uncommon and exceiiive concern which he dif-Covered for my accident, and from his continued
attentions ever fince.---Do not, my dear Mrs. Blo-
raer, entertain an opinion of me, which I deferve
not.-----1 think, I hope I am not indelicate in my
txpedations—-------but that is not a proper word.
Why fhould I exped P-------And yet, my dear friend,
were I to fee a man fo conftantly affiduous about any of my acquaintance, I fhould, certainly, be apt to imagine that he bad a particular defigu. If lord Woburn has a particular delign in his behaviour to me, w^hy fhould he not inform me of it ? But v/hy fliould I fuppofe he has any de-fign at all }—May not a man vifit a w’^oman often, merely to amufe himfelf ?—Still—dill a man who is perpetually with you at home, and who always follows you abroad, aCs in a very lingular manner.—He muft furely be much pleafed with your company.'—Well-—granted—I will fuppofe he iHces to converfe with me, better than with any other woman, at lead on thefe days I fee him. But he comes every day ; he days all the day and difcovers fuch an extreme defire to pleafe me, and to attraC my attention, and is fo infinua-ting with his manners, that I don’t know what
to make of him.------—Perhaps he is only diverting
himfelf all this time, with obferving the perplexity into which his behaviour frequently throw's me. I drive to conceal my embanalTments as much as I
can.
LORD WOBURN.
n
can but they certamly cannot efcape the eye of a difcernlng man, always rive-ted on me. I could fend you a thoufand particulars relating to his carriage to me, by v/hich you would be enabled to form a clear judginent concerning them; but I thinki Should employ myfelf fooliShly, by committing to paper occurences which ought not to be remem-" bered by me,—Mr. and Mrs. Elliot have met lord Woburn feveral times here.—They give him fre-^‘ ^iient Invitations to their houfe, and make him of our parties ; yet they fay nothing more of him to
me, than that he Is an amiable man.-

Poffibly
they may be more explicit in their letters to you. ■I wifih you was v/ith me.




L E T T E B. XXXI.
From the fame to the fame.
9
AS I cannot have fo immediate an anfwer asC wifli from my dear Mrs. Blooriier, I contintie-to talk on, and upon the fame fubjeU.
We were at the opera t’other night.—Mrs. Elliot and I went by ourfelves!——It was a fudden thought of her’s .• I had intended to ftay at home that evening ; lord Woburn, therefore, was ignorant of our’
motions. ----He ftaid with me till!' went to drels
before dinner ; Mrs. Elliot did not ftart her opera-fcheme till after his departure.
Scarce v/ere we feated, when Sir William Afhtoa' came In.—Mrs. Elliot, v/ho thinks better of him,-, you know, than of many young men of fafliion,
made room for him between us.----------1 cooild not
fee the propriety of fuch a ftep ; but ss I had not,,
D 4.	myfelfj.
to
HISTORY OF
inyfelf, invited him to come So near me, I had no right to drive him from her j however I faid nothing to induce him to fuppofe, that I was pleafed with his company.
Turning my head, on a Sudden, I faw lord Wo-hurn clofe behind us, daring earnedly at me, and
too intent with his eyes to (peak.—-----1 believe I
looked a little foolifh, on being thus flirpriled,—-I felt my face glow j but to prevent his thinking me particular, I fpoke to him immediately, with
my ufual freedom------He feemed to recover hini-
felf, and afked me, though, very gravely, if I had defigned to be at the opera, when he left me in the
morning.-----1 anfwered in the negative ; adding,
that Mrs. Elliot fent to me foon after his departure } ■'and that, not being engaged, I readily attended her.
Smiles brightened up his countenance immediately — He fat down by me, and we entered into as much converfation as we could, without rendering our tafte disputable, by not lidening to Zaphanini.—Sir William took no Small pains to come in for his Share of chat, but my lord feemed defirous, I thought, to exclude him.—When the coach was drawn up the former offered his hand to me—My lord inftantly Seizing it before I knew well what to do, conduced me to the carriage; then afking Mrs. Elliot if fhe had room, and would fet him down, ftepped in after us.—Our two houfes you know, are not far diftant from each other.
When Mrs. Elliot went into her houSe, he fa'd to me, “ will you indulge me, lady Charlotte, for one half hour ?” And will you believe me when I tell you, my friend, that 1 did not know what to
fay—I actually hefitated a moment.------“ Is it too
great a favour to afk,” continued my lord, with a
more impatient tone ;-----“ will you only tell me,
then, how iono- vou have known Sir William Aih-
“ I have
LORD W 0 g tl R M.-

fi
i have known bini a great as the friend oSMr. Elliot.”
“ Is he nothing more?” faidhe, with a kind cS forced fnisle j—if and Mfs. Elliot are friends they, no dotibf, recommend him ftrongly.”
“ I Confefs/^ replied I, fmiling again,-tieVef think of their recommending him to me Slj William has given me nO reafon to believe, that fuels t proceeding woRld be agreeable to him,”
“ If Such a proceeding was agreeable to him then,” anfwered he, eagerly, “ it vvotild be fo you ?”
“ I do not fay fo, my lord.”-^
No, madam,” replied he, clapping his hand up-» nn his forehead, and walking haftily from me, yott don’t, indeed, fay fo^but dear lady Charlotte,’^ added he, litting down again, and taking my hand, excUfe me——I am afraid I am impertinently CU-« fioUs ; but, if you remember, you Was fo oblig-« Ing as to tell me, in what efteem you held poor Evelyn, before I—■(helitating)~befofe I had beeii fo long favoured with your corthdenCe.-—May J not hope, then, that you will juft give me yoUf opinion of Sir William
“ Since you fo earneftly defire my opinion of Sir William, my lord, 1 will tell yoU, that, from the favourable fentlments which Mr. and Mrs, Elliot have long entertained about Him, and from his ge-* fieral good chara£ier, I fuppofe him Worthy of ge-* fteral approbation j-.—-but as I had rteVer expeCled to be queftioned concerning him, 1 never gave myfelf ieifure to refieCl ferioufly about him.”
“ He h as not then touched yoUr heart
“ No, indeed, my lord,” faid I, laughing,
I am ferry you fuppofe my heart fo eafily affeCled with every man who comes In my way.”
“ You are then not eafily to be f Lafed,” re be, with a very ferious air,
I> 5	“ I don’t
** »• ' \ ^

82
HISTORY OF
I don’t knoW'—But, indeed, I have not con-fidered fubjedts of this kind with attention enough, to give Such particular anfwers as you feera to require.”—(I ooking at my watch.)
He took the hint, but rofe with reladtance.-----
Still holding my hand, “ Shall you be alone tomorrow about twelve faid he,
“ I believe I IBall.”
He prelTed my hand to his boSoru, and left me. -----Before he reached the do'^r he came back.—

‘ Can you, lady Charlotte, forgive all this imper- ’ tinence ?”
“ I can,” replied I,, Hill (miling.-----He bowed, i
and quitted the room.
He came the next day before the appointed hour. •I was drawing.—He fat down by me ; leaned over me, praifed my performance in general, but, very judicioufly, pointed out two or three faults, which I mended immediately.------------He faid
Ibmething Softly to himfelf, while he looked on me, •Then thanking me aloud for doing him the honour to fubferibe fo readily to his opinion j he alk-«d me, if I had Seen Sir William ?
What! lince laft night,” faid I, with an accent of Surprize, “ how could you think fo ?”
<<




Conhdering, however, that all difguifes are mean, I added immediately, “ but he called here about a quarter of an hour ago.
And you did not fee him '?”
No—I don’t let in people when I am engaged.—Didn’t you delire I v/ould be alone ?”
I did,” faid he, with his eyes fparkling with pleafure, while he catched my hand, and prefled ■jt to his lips, “ I did, and I am charmed with your coniideration for me.
I withdrew my hand in much confufion, thinking that I had faid femething very improper ;— and my confulion was increafed, v/hen, on looking
up,

LORD WOBURN.
S3
tip, I Saw his eyes fixed upon my face, in a manner I cannot defcribe.——He perceived my embar-raffment immediately, and gave me time to recover.---I again applied to my drawing.—-We en-
tered into fomething like a converfation upon general fabjefts	yet he'appeared, frequently,’ abfent. ■
and confufed I rofe from his feat, fat down, and feemed to be' in great agitation one lAinute ; the next he folded his arms, fighed and looked the picture of defpair.---—He often opened his mouth to ' fpeak, and as often clofcd it again.—At laft a vio-r" lent rap at the door roufed him.'—^He ftarted from ’ his chair, and left me abruptly.—^—Now, my dear ’ Mrs. Blometi is not this behaviour rather particu-" lar ? Or do^ I only fancy fo ?—^Sometimes I diftruffe -xnyfelf.—Pray fend me your opinion.r
VVVVV''v-'VVV’VV'V\'-*NrV''>/V'VVV
\	\ A-. A.y \ /••.. A. A*. A.. A-. A. Arf' \ A» A.-%.
L E TCf E R ■ XXXIi; ■
Lord WO B URN to Mr. Wi l m 0 ri ■
S H A L L certainly betray myfelf j—cannot
poffibly hold it much longer.------She grows
upon me every hour.-——-Never was there a creature io perfectly amiablc.-i-i-I fhall difcover my fen-timents, in fpite of all my endeavours to conceal them, and be routed horfe and foot.—You cannot imagine how curfed " ridiculous I have made myfelf.——I have been jealous alfo, jealous of a man whom I never faw with her but once, and then by mere accident.—‘How’charmingly has Ihe condufted herfelst with what propriety, with what
condefcenfion did Ihe treat me )---Surely fhe muft
have found out my weaknefs, and, from mere pity,
behaves
34
H I S T O R V or
Behaves to fiic with a gentlenefs, not far remo*vecf from tendernefs.—I am really fometimes ready to perfuade myfelf that fhe loves me —that Ihe prefers me to every other man, at prefent, is certain } but how long her partiality for me may hold, is a-jiother point.—Were I thoroughly alFured of being beloved by her, I would try her immediately.—— If Ihe comes off with honour how exquilite will be my felicity !
I have been juft interrupted by a meftage from my
brother Ned.------He was not expected home this
half year ; but love has, alfo, made a revolution in his mind.—It feems be met with the earl and countefs of D—-—-------- at Aix, and was fo charm-
ed with lady Louifa, the eldeft daughter, that a ’ marriage was foon concluded. —I am going. dire^» ly to welcome him and my new lifter,
# # # ^
I am returned home, after havm
ed with all that warmth of friend to him.—I found the bride, indeed, a beauty ;—features more regularly handfome, a complexion more finely animated, I never, I think, beheld.—She is tall, and has more of what the French exprels by the word embonpointthan one commonly fees in a modern fine lady, v/ith her laced-up
waift-----Such w’aifts are, to me, horrible and de-
•teftable.-----Yet with all this luxuriarice of beau-
ty, there is fomething in her look and behaviour which difpleafes me ———I would have a woman allure you, infenfibly ; I would not have her openly invite you.—I hope I have miftakenthe expref-iions in lady Louifa’s eyes—doubly hope fo for Ned’s fake, who is one of the fincereft honeft fellows in Great Britain, and who loves her pafiionately enough to content a woman of the leaft delicacy.— But what have I to do with their affairs ? Let me mind my own.—Lady Charlotte is made of different
materials^
been recefr-
ip, fo naturai
lord WOBURN.
ffiaterlals, or there b fio faith at all to be placed k the cotinteftance of a wonian—I do not, however, depend Upon her looks alone j———the modefty, the propriety of her whole Carriage, and the manner in which Ihe fpends her time, affure me, that ih@ Cannot refemble lady Louifa,
LETTER XXXm.
Lady ChARLort E MoRDEii, to Mr§. Blomei,
OU haiie opened my eyes, my dear
_	^	^	^	>•	"1	t

^ I bltilh, though alone, to Shink how I may have expofed myfeif-^throUgh riiere ‘	'
— - • ----J	^	^
Yet you are a teaming creature to tell me, that be-* caufe I wifh to have lord Woburn partiGUlar, I really
-	^ -r	jm-	ir-dy m	^	^
fancy he isfo.—Now, my dear Mrs. Biomer, lay your hand upon your heart, and anfwer ftie Sncerely, is he hot particular } or am 1 a downright vidoriary If I thought I could polTlbly be mitUken about tbs' particularity of his carriage to me, I would thank
you for undeceiving me.-------I arh honeft enough to
inform you, that his fancied partiality for me, gives me a fatisfaUion which ! never felt before, from: the behaviour of any of his fex.——He told me yefter**
day, of the arrival of his brother and (ifter from Aix"
“ My brother is married to lady Louifa, and

j	-----
fhe is a very fine woman, but v/ants lady Cnar lotte’s delicacy and retinue Aarn afraid I looked exceedingly fatisfied with this compliment, for he caught my hand and killed it.-—I blullied, and drevir it from: him.—He changed Countenance immediately J looked piqued, difappointedy and out of hu-
86
H r S T G R Y 0 F
mour.
e
I Smiled, and Said, “ Nay, now, mj lord, you are capricious ; were you not juft now commending me for my discretion ? And w'as not jour commendation Sufficient of itfelf to induce me to keep it up?”
“ Charming Greature I” replied he, Seizing my hand again.
Mrs. Elliot, at that moment, came in, and alkcd-me to go with her to make Some morning vifits,
I conSented immediately.—“ Had you been only going to take an airing in Hyde-Park,” Said my lord,
I would have affied to be of your party, merely for the fake of your conversation ; Sot' though th Park is pleafant for a place So near town, I alv/ays love to be farther out of the Smoke of Condon and have no idea jof either capering or rolling along one Short road Smothered with duft in dry-weather, and in danger of being every minute dismounted by the crowds v/hich perpetually pals backwards andfor--wards ; certainly one has very little air or- exerciSe in thoSe excurfions.”
Mrs. Elliot laughed, and told him,' “ he was very Severe.----When we were in the coa#|t by our--
felves. She delired to know v>ith the utmoft ffiendli-nefs, my Serious thoughts about lord Woburn i-.and to be informed, whether he had given me reafon to believe that he had any defign in his frequent vifitSi I thanked her for giving me an opportunity of fpeak-ing upon a SubjeQ; which began to grow, I freely confefSed interefting to me, and upon which l very much wilhed to have her opinion.-/'
“ My opinion is,” replied Ibe, “ that if you actually SuIpeCt him of having an inclination to fpend-the remainder of his life with you ; and if you like no man So well, you had better accept of him.”
“ Before he offers himfelf ?” Said I, interrupting her.
“ Ah I
LORD WOBURN,
87
Ah ! my good friend,” anfwered flie haftily, ** that reply is a fufficient explanation of your Senti-“ raents.”
I felt my face glow—She faw myconfufibn, and kindly relieved me.—“ Don’t be uneafy,” added fke, “ I believe lord Woburn has a very .good chara6ter that is, I never heard him accufed of keeping a mif-trefs, or of running into the fafhronable. follies to which but too many young men of rankare ftrong-ly addidled.—Abfohite perfeftion, my dear lady Charlotte, is not to be looked for.—Lord Woburn is a man of fenfe ; he is. a man of diumanity ; he, therefore, v/ill not, I may venturb to aver, ufe the woman ill who is intimately connected with him, while fhe behaves with difcretion.—Such a vroman he will, undoubtedly, find in you,”
I thanked your-dear filter, my amiable friend,, for her favourable opinion of rae.“I believe, I may honeftly confefs that I thanked her alfo in my heart, for fpeaking fo warmly in lord Woburn’s behalf.
Flattered as I was by what fiie had faid of him,. I had courage to remind her of his affair with Mrs. Mead—an affair which he, had, indeed, reprefented to me to hit own advantage; but how far that repre— fentation isto be credited—-Well—I will think of it in the moft charitable light.
“ You cannot but be fenfible,” replied’ fhe, of the extreme folly of women in general;—^you cannot but know, that they are more openly diffolute, than they were in former days ; and I am afraid there are few men, either able- or willing to refill:
the advances which are made to them,--As to lord
Woburn, I am inclined to think, from what you, have related about the ladies at the Caftle; that he has thoroughly repented of his behaviour, during^^
his ftay at it.---However no man is without
failings, as I faid before ; one has, therefore, nothing to do, but to chufe him who has the feweft.”
Now
m	HlSTORYOf
Now I muft tvsk p^tbistly (if I ean ) tifl fef
A Celebrated author, foinewhere,
a	m	m ^	^	^	^	^ m. ^ m ^	^	^ m.	^ ^
t	,	^	, y .P
‘ that a lover of delicacy will nOt make his addref* fes to a lady till he is fare that Ihe wifheiS for a de-* claration/^-““I approve of theferehiied (eriffflients sft a lover j but yet I think I fhould be Sorry to difco« ver in liiyfelst any eagefnefs to be addrefib'd ;--«l should certainly be ftsll more hurt, to have that gernefs detected by lord Woburn.- Atiisosaa^’ We mud therefore, take things as they happen to fall out.
I know I feel mod: exceedingly aukward about thi<? affair at preSent.-^I wish I may not betray myfelC
L E 'i

LORD WOBURN.
89

LETTER
XXXIV.
Lord Woburn to Mr, Wilmot,
Ned has engaged me upon So many parties v/kli
him and his wife fince his arrival, that I have not had leifure to Spend So much time as I could have wifhed with my charming Charlotte.—She improves upon me, I think, every hour.—A kind of blufhing timidity now Seizes her whenever I approach her, which renders her infinitely lovely. What a contrail is Ihe to lady LouiSa, a vain, wanton Hoyden ? I am Surpriied that Ned did not See her character, and deteft it.—Yet fhe might have perhaps, concealed her natural difpofition before marriage, and has thrown oIF the malk now it is too late for him to retreat.-— ■ Poor fellow ! he has certainly been taken in ; and will, 1 fear, repent or his matrimonial connexion ere long.—But as I have mentioned the word Hoyden, let me tell you that the Saucy flirt Bell Forbes, Is gone oflf with colonel Tamper, who though he has been married theSe ten years, has ruined more girls than I can at preSent, reckon up yet in my bumble opinion, he has him-felf been ruined by luch little devils as thefe.—Tamper is not naturally vicious j he is good-natured, and might have lived with his wife upon as good terms as men generally do, If he could have kept the women at a tolerable dittance ; but with his attradtions how could he prevent their approaches ?—Nay, I have Seen the douceurs of an old ugly fellow, blafted with infamy, and battered with his debaucheries, encouraged.—Fie ! fie ! upon it—let me think no more of Such Scandalous proceeding, left I fliold, in the hurry of refentment, rank my Charlotte among
the
90
HISTORY OF
age.
my way Mrs. Dawfon
urends es for
the forward and flraraelest females of the My Charlotte !—Yes, I id call her my Charlotte, Jack, till T fee reafon to ret rad that appellation.— However, if fhe is chafte, Ihe is,-1 believe, almoft the only young and handfome woman who is fo.
I have no opinion at ail of her attendant.—-How came you to know her, you will fay ?—As I have been lo much at the houfe lately, (lie has had many opportunities to throw herfelf into my way,
and has not overlooked them.--------
is not a difagreeable figure j Ihe has a demu in her appearance, which lady Charlotte tak real fandity.—I. hope fhe is deceived ; and yet if fhe is, I pity her, for to lie at the mercy of a canl-ing hypocrite is the devil.—It is adualiy very dangerous for a fine young creature, like Charlotte, to
he in the p>ower of fuch ^ pious fycophant,--------
She may fell her, tor aught I know, to the high-
eft bidder.------WhyThen may not 1 put in for the
purchafe ?-----No—I love her too fincerely to deceive her .----1 ihould not gratify my paffion for
her, were I to pofleft her by fuch unwarrantable
meafures.-----Never did I yet, I fwear- by all that’s
dear to me, never did I feduce an innocent heart— never did I take an advantage of a woman’s weaknefs -----1 fliould, therefore, find no joy in Charlotte’s
arms, unlefs fhe chearfully admitted me to them j
and then------O 1 how cordially fhould I defpife and
hate her for yielding !----Sometimes I think that I
will tell ladv Charlotte, that Dawfon is a good for nothing huftey.-----How came you to know her demerits .?----1 weighed her, and found her wanting.
-----“ But why need you have troubled yourfelf a-
bout her .? Poffibly if you had not tempted her, fire
might have been virtuous.”-------1 will not fay any
thing more about her, but make the bell of my way wkh —the idol of my heart.
L. E T-
LORD WOBURN.


LETTER

Lady
Chablotte Mo r ben to Mrs. Blomer.
M
Y dear, dear friend, yon muft not be in fuch 3
_ hurry.'----------You fay, that you fhall not be fa-
tisfied till lord Woburn .makes a regular declaration ; and I can alTare you, that you will not Jhave
that fatisfafllon a great while.------1 fee no figns of
fuch a declaration ; yet he is as affiduous as ever, nay, more fo.------He was abfent for a few days, af-
ter Mr. Woburn’s arrival in England but he has
fince fcarce ever left me-----he omits nothing whiefi
will, he thinks, give me any pleafure.-------He has, I
find, fomehow ingratiated himfelf with Dawfon.-----—
She was rather impertinently free both with her encomiums upon him, and her remarks, t’other day j I filenced her prelently, for I never chufe to make
my fervants my confidants------1 was forry Dawfoii
obliged me to reprimand her fo Iharply, as I have a regard for her, and believe her to be faithful 5 fhe has certainly more fenfe than many women, in her ftation, are poflefTed of; yet while, lord Woburn keeps me in fufpence, it- b not necelfary for me I think to be explicit with her upon fuch a fub-
je£l.----But how can I talk thus }-----Mydifappro-
bation of Dawfon’s behaviour has furely turned my
head a little.---Why fliou^ld I imagine that my lord
ever entertained fuch a defigh.---He is almoft con-
tinually with me, ’tis true, and not only follows me
every
92
HISTORY OF
every where abroad, but diftingui/lies me from cVe-* Ty other woman ; and I am foolifli enough to be pleafed with, a partiality which may, perhaps, in the end occalion a great deal of fcandal.
Mr. and Mrs. Elliot begin to be difpleafed with lord Woburn j their difpleafure gives me a great deal of pain.-——Mr. Elliot hiiited fomething t’^othef day, about a categorical anfwer j and your good-lifter advifed me to flirt a little with Sir William Afliton, or any other man, by way of forcing hisf lordftiip to declare himfelf.
Forgive me, my^ dear Mrs, Blonier, for faying, that I detefted from my heart fuch advice, though it came from your own After.—I cannot defcend Co very low, as to angle for a hulband in that shabby manner.—I have alfo intreated Mr. Elliot not to take the lead: notice of me to my lord. If they will not liften to me, I muft quit them, him, and ail the world.—I cannot be brought to fubfcribe to fuch indelicate management.—What an opinion muft a nun, have of the woman, who can have recourfe to fo poor an artifice, for the accomplishment of her wishes .?—No—my dear Mrs. Blomer, never will I do any thing to render mylelf unworthy of lord Woburn’s efteem.—Whether I am in his favour or not, I will endeavour to merit his approbation.—He is, I am afraid—I may venture to fay fo to you—the only man whom I delire to pleale ; though I would wish to have the whole world approve of my con-
du£l if poffible.--My lord is coming up—I muft
conceal thisjetter>---There Is no reafon that he
lliould fee he is preferred to every body, till he makes it necelTary for me to acknowledge my fentiments
concerning him.-----He knows them already, 1 fear,
but too v. ell, from a thoufand little inadvertencies, which, in Ipite of all my circumfpedlon, frequently eXcape me.
LORD WOBURN.
93
In C O N T J N U a T to N.
I took up drawing when he came in. How Swift-, ly the moments flew I——^Two whole hours pafled unperceived away, in the tnoft delightful conyerfati-on.'.—I might have, perhaps, fat talking with him till now, had not Dawfon appeared, and alked me if I chofe to drefs before dinner.-.—I blylhed, and looked at my wat.ch. My lord frowned,and fhe inftantly disappeared. I rofc however-«-He caught my handj “ You muft not leave me,” cried he, “ beauty, iikeyour’s, wants no addition,”
“ No flattery, my lord,” faid I—in a little con-
fullon.
#
“ I .cannot flatter you, my lady ; but if truth offends your modefty, my tongue fhall be filent^—yet my eyes will Speak, and my heart’s language will be
reSponfive to theirs.”—putting my hand to it.--------
I ftryggled to draw it back, telling him, at the fame time, that I muft wiih him a good morning.
“ Will nothing that I can fay,” replied he, with a look inexprefljbly engaging, “ prevail on you to
give me leave to ftay Jand dine with you to-day------.
or will you not, at leaft permit me to return hither immediately, after I have taken my Solitary meal?” Shall I tell you, my dear, that I knew not whatan-fwer to make to his requeft.—Hislooks, his voice, and his attitude were fo tenderly Supplicating that I—hefl-tated—Recolleding, atlaft, that he might perhaps, be on the point of aflcing the queftion, the fo long de--layed—the folongexpedled queftion by you and your friends, I opened my mouth—I confented to his intreaty, and inftantly clofed it again, fearful of having been guilty of an indifcretion.
He
94
H I S T O R Y OF
He faw my embarraflment and gently clapping
his hand upon my mouth-------------•“ Hold,” cried
he, with an enchanting fmile, “ you Ihall fay nothing to me that you do not thoroughly approve of. —Be filent ; though nobody ever fpoke fo well— and fulFer me to be found here when you return from
m
your drefllng room.”
I did as he defired ; I hurried from him ; but I did not, you may imagine, fray long at my toilette j though I thought Dawfon moft intolerably tedious,
and uncommonly aukward about me.----------She aUu-
ally deemed to be in as gieat an agitation of fpirits a$
I, myfelf, was j------poffibly, how^ever, my own
emotions made me believe fo to apologize for them.
-----1 w'illied to look to the utmoil advantage
yet I certainly did not allow myfelf time to put on my things in an advantageous m.anner.—By good luck however, they did as well as if I.had more llu-died the arrangement of them —^—The flattering Woburn flew to meet me at my return to the drawing room------“ Before you left me,” faid he, “ I
thought you could not by any art wdiatever, make an alteration in your drefs tor the better ; but you certainly appear to me, at this moment, with new attraUions.”
I fmiled, like a flmpleton, as if I was pleafed ; yet told him, that fewer compliments, and more conver-fation, would be agreeable to me.
“ I ftand corre£led, lady Charlotte” faid he, “ It is but juft that I fliculd exert all my powers to entertain you in return, for the exquifite fatisfac-tion you have given me to day.”
We fat down to dinner.------1 was far from being
at eale ; I, therefore, did the honours of my table rather aukwardly. He perceived my confufion, and aflifted me, with a gallantry fo refined, fo highly pleafing, that I was almoft brought by it into
humour with myfelf.-----^One part of his carriage
however,
LORD WOBURN
95
fiowever, did not meet with my approbation.---------
He prelTed me exceedingly, to drink more wine than I chcfe.—You well know that I never go beyond tv.’O glaffes.--1 obferved, that he drank but lit-
tle himfelf. He might have no particular meaning in this behaviour ; he Seemed I thought, much
pleafed when I relided his importunities ;-----not
So well Satisfied with me, did he appear when I three or Sour times withdrew Srom his arms, upon his preffing me to his boSom, aSter Some lively panegyric on my perSon, dreSs, or conversation.—Sometimes, indeed, I fancied, that by doing So, I had prevented him from delivering himfelf upon the expected SubjeCl ; but after having long waited for ihe moment of declaration, I began to See that I had been extremely to blame for having Suifered mySelf to be treated with So much freedom, by a man v;ho never entertained a Serious thought about me. -—And, I will conSefs to you, my friend, that I was
greatly hurt at my difappointraent.-----Still more
was I pained, at being So deceived.——'—However, though I had pofiibly gone too far, it was, by. no means, too late to retreat.---1, therefore, collect-
ed all my Scattered Spirits, and very gravely told him, I had an engagement with a lady that even-iiig, which I could not put by.—Before he was prepared to oppoSe me, I touched my bell, and ordered my chair.
He ftarted, looked dilconcerted, and afleed me, “ if I could not, poffibly, break my appointment.” Finding me inflexible, he fighed, killed my hand in Spite of ail my oppofition, and left me.
Thus you fee, my good Mrs. Blomer, ail our expectations are vanilhed.—Lord Woburn has been Sufficiently tried ; he has had fair opportunities, and i am now certain, he never had anydefigii but to
T,rLl,	—J
amule ImnSelf wfith me. not like to be trifled with ,
I have,
therefore,
ilriCtiy
96
HISTORY OF
ftrlctlv charged my people to deny me, if he comes again.—^—Molt probably he will not give himlelf the trouble to make me another vifit.-
How fortunately did I prevail on Mr. and Mrs. Elliot, not to proceed in the very hafty manner they had intended!—T hey would have been only thought ridiculous, but I mull; have been laughed at every where.—For once let me applaud my own difereti-on—I have little, very little elfe to value myfelf upon at prefent.
Your lincereft friend, Charlotte Morden.
V*	V'Vfc'V'V/
LETTER XXXVI.
Lord Woburn to Mr. W i l m 0 t
I AM quite intoxicated with love and joy."-This dear creature is every thing the heart of man can wiih.—She will"—fhe Iliall be mine— for ever. I am fure I have made a progrels in her gentle bofom.-—Hear, and judge.—	t
I went a few mornings ago, and found her, as have lately found her, drawing landfcapes, which ilie executes in a fine tafte ;—a good quiet employment to keep her out of mifchief.—We are all Jack, both men and women, apt to feel the devil Birring within us now and then j and we can only
drive him out by Some kind of bufmefs.—The
ruin
LORD WOBURN.
97
mm of half the women in England may be juftly imputed to idlenefs.—-When they can neither amufe nor employ themfelves, they are always ready to run.
into mifchief.-^---Belides, when the female mind is
quite inaSive, it generally receives^ wrong impref-
fions.----How many idle girls have I feen throwing;
themfelves into a great chair, while fuch expreflions
as thele came languidly from their lips, “ L-----d ! I
don’t know what in the, world, to do with mylelf.” -Such girls hurry from place,to place, merely ta kill time, and put wicked thoughts out of their heads, as they will tell you j but I may venture to affirm, that they render themfelves the moil: contemptible creatures in the univerfe by fo doing.——. Not in fo ridiculous a. manner does my lovely Charlotte aft ; never did I fee her idle ; her books, her drawing, her mufic, her needle, by turns employ her, and keep her from yielding too much to a charming tendernefs of heart, of which fine is, I perceive, with tranfport, pofleiTed.
She received me with a,n unufual fostnefs in her behaviour, and with a fort of confufion, which discovered more fenlihiiity, than I had ever obServed
in her before.-----We Soon, however, entered into a
conversation, in Vv^hich fire, bore her part with a delicacy and Spirit which charmed me, while 1 hung over her, like Milton’s Adam, enamoured !—While I was fo engaged^ the bufy Dawfon, impertinently, alked her, if fire chofe to drels.^—I could not bear to part with her—I detained her hand, while my eyes and my tongue told her a thoufand tender truths—-. which fire, however, with the fv/eeteft confufion, colled flattering ones.—I would fain have kept her —ihe would not flay—I begged her to let me dine with her—-fire appeared quite furprifed at my re-
quefl-----She paufed------fire blufhed, and looked fo
delightfully difconcerted, that I, fearful of being denied the blefiing I implored, ventured to put my hand
E	upon
98
HISTORY OF
upon her delicious Ups ; telling her, that Ilje Iliould find me where fhe left me, at her return from her toilette.—She was not long abfent——I hate a woman who fpends the time which fliould be devoted to her lover in tiffing herfelf out before the glafs What a trifling pleafure !—A woman of this Ramp, ■ plainly fhews that fhe loves her own dear perfon better than him.
When lady Charlotte retired, I told her that I did not believe’fhe, could make any addition to her beauty
• drefs-—I was miftaken-------She came to me
with only a flight alteration in her drapery ; but that alteration had fo happy an effedl, and made her appear in a fo much more advant^-gcous light, that I
could have devoured her.-----Heremotions increafcd
■fhe endeavoured to acquit herfelf with her ufual eafe ; but fhe failed, from an over-anxioufnefs to excel.----1 pitied her, and did every thing in n>y
3
power to relieve her, to aflifl: her, to entertain her a jnuch as fhe had entertained ,me.rr——To double my
fatisfaUfon, flie is temperate beyond niy expeUati-ons.——I could not, with all my rhetoric, make her
take a third glafs.—----What a chaim is there in the
fobriety and chaflity of a fine woman !—----------How
often have I been amazed, at men being able to en-dure,,the leafl: tendency towards a paffion for flrong
liquors in their miftreffes----A v/oman in a ftate of
intoxication, is to me a naufeous and loathfome fight.—T—The very breath of fuch a woman is al-inoft peftilential, and not to be endured j-—yet hew frequently do the finefl: .women in the kingdom render themleives difgufling by their advances to ebrie-ty ! I do not always, indeed, wonder to fee women trying to plunge themfelves into.oblivion, by their bacchanalian proceedings j but I am extremely afloniflied, whenever I fee men encouraging them to purfue pleafiires, which mufl: not only very foon fpoil
their
LORD w o B U R N.
9f
their beauty, but break their conflitutions, and d5« prive them of their moft alluring charms, their mo-defty and their delicacy ; charms which can alone render them attradlive, in the eyes of a man of the
lead tafte and refinement.--------^Nor is a paffion for
flrong liquors confined to the proftituted part of the fair fex ; women who have been very regularly and foberly educated, have indulged themfelves in drinking to an unpardonable excefs.--------1 was once ex-
tremely well acquainted with a young and very fine woman, of great dillindtion, married to a man v/ho
adored her.------1 have heard this w'oman, v/hen at
table with her, fay to tire butler, in a v/hifper, “whenever I call for wine and water, be fure to give me ail wine.’’ As herorder w as punctually com-pilied wiih, fire commonly fwallowed a bottle of ftrong old Mountain or Aiadcira before the cloth was removed, her ufual beverage being filled out in
•half pint glaffes.---Another lady Tknow, not lefs
young and pretty—but unmarried, and like to remain fo, who is exceedingly careful to have her brandy and water made ol a comfortable ftrength, for the benefit of her poor tmi <ves, which, however, grew weaker and W'eaker, in fpite of all her endeavours to brace them.—But to return to lady Charlotte.
Her dinner, and the fmall quantity of wine which fhe fwalicw''ed, decently exhilarated herj—ihe became lets lurid, and entered more chearfully into converfation with me, than fhe had ever done j a converfation, which fo much increafed the charms of her perfon and behaviour, that d was inlenfibly led to be more free than ufual: I therefore gradually threw off a great part of the -reflraint 1 had been under in her company, and began to give a loole to the tranfporte which her beauty had iufpired.—1 laid a thoufand v.'himfical things, all tending to the fame point. I hung over her, full of admiraiion, and cncc
E 3	ventured
■st.A..
200
H I S T O R Y O F
ventured to touch her fnowy neck behind with my
lips.----She ftarted from me—------- I purfued her,
and obtained my pardon.—I then caught her in my arms, to thank her——New offences produced new apologies, which were, after fome demurring, accepted.------1 grew at laft too prefuming------1 was
tempted to -prefs her to my bofom—“ Nay, now, my lord, you are r-ude,” cried the blufhing, ftruggling angel.—I turned from her, fuppofing her to be affectedly angry, and fwore that nobody but the moft confummate prude in nature could take offence at fuch innocent freedoms, adding, that I could not have believed lady Charlotte had fo weak an under-ilandlng.
This Speech touched her.-—She was Serious j fhe was forry for having been obliged to chide me. She again lifted up her charming eyes, and fmlled a reconciliation.-—Transported v/ith the tendernefs which languifhedin them, I Seized her once more, and printed a thoufand ardent kiffes on her lovely face.—She now became abfolutely incenfed, but in-cenfed in fo bewitching a manner, that I adored her.-—Inftead of flying into a fury (by fo doing. She would have thrown the finefl: fet of features in the world into a horrid diforder) lire. Suddenly, appeared collected within herfelf, and with great coolneSs and gravity, faying, fhe had an engagement that evening, rofe and pulled her bell, before 1 was in the leaft aware'of herintentions.j—Ideated on her, however, for her discretion ; it has fixed me, immutably, her’s ; though I cenfefs I was fo much furprifed at fo unexpected a change, for fhe had but juft Seemed to reprove me reluctantly, that I Suffered her to order her chair, with only making afingle remonftrance againft it.; that remonftrance pn ved ineffectual, and I actually believe I appeared a dupe of my own defigtis.—Yet charmed to And her all that my eager
heart
E O R D W d B URN.
SOI
heart defired, I returned> again the next morning ; to my aftonifliment, I was difmilTed from the door ! —In plain Englifh, (lie was denied ; —half a crown flipped into the porter’s hand, drew the truth out of his mouth.—Pleafed and angry, at the fame time, at this prohibition, I followed her in public, only to fliew my indifference ; my indifference hurt her.—A few nights ago flie turned as pale as death at the play, on my coming into the next box to her, without taking notice of her.—Her anxiety, ftrongly painted in her countenance, delighted me, and made me uneafy.—By that anxiety, I was thoroughly af-fured of her love, and yet I was forry to fee her Suffer on my account.—My refentment fublided in a moment —I haffened to the box in which fhe fat ;
I came in behind her, and while 1 alked her, in a: whifper, if ilie was not well, tenderly pjelled her fnowy white hand.
She ftarted—bluflred, andShaflily drew her hand ' back—but made no reply.
I was not at all difpleafed with this appearance refentment, in confequence' of a' freedo^m ought not, indeed, to have been taken, fltuated as we were --'As I never had made an honourable pro-pofal, She might, very juftly, have concluded, tha I never intended it.——However,! had feme reafon, I think, to believe, after what had paffed, that if fhe really loved me, fhe would have forgiven me.—No —not all my attentions about her, my Solicitude to give her pleafure, could prevail-on her to enter i.nt3 conversation with me.
She kept up this referve all the evening ; andfl when I offered my hand to conduU her to her coach, gave it to another gentlenaan, who happened to be near her.—I affedted to take no notice of her altered behaviour—for I really thought that fire locked as if ihe- behaved-in that manner, more-out of pru-
E -T:	denes

■t'-'



II I S T O R Y OF
dence than inclination ;—I, therefore, hononred her for her cool deportment j yetit will be abfolute-Ij neceffary for me, to lure her back to love and,
tendernels —I have not yet half done with her.----------
V/hen once a woman truly loves—a trifling difler-ence v/ilinot cure her of her pafiicn.
Your’s as ufual



LETTER
XXXVII.
Lady Charlotte Morden, to Mrs. Blomer;
YOU complain of nay long (Hence, my good friend, and indeed I have fo little to fay, that you will find the opening of my letter fcarce worth the trouble.-I have only one thing to tell you, which can be at all interefting to you—that is, I believe if they will not let me live in quiet here, I (liall come and fettle with you in Ireland——Mr. and Mr^s Elliot are fo difappointed in lord Woburn, and So eager to fee me married, that they are every day, I may add, every hour, propoling Somebody to me.
Nobody propofed by them, hitherto, has pleafed me. Ought I not to be aihamed of preferring lord Woburn in my heart ? But though I like the man, 1 cannot approve of his-behaviour ; andfincel have been fo much deceived in him, why mayJ not be permitted to entertain a flight opinion of the reft of his fex ? Why may I not live free from any connections with man } Since the good and the agreeable are not eafily to be met with—I wdll remain as I am.'—After all, I cannot help thinking, but that
lord
r I

' I


LORD WOBU R N.
103
/
lord Woburn is better than he appears to be -yet, as appearances are very much againft him, there is no venturing.—He feenis to me, now to wilh to bo ,
t	‘	i	1	^
reconciled, thoQgh too proud to make any conceffi-ons j—and perhaps, were I to pardon him, I ihould only give him an opportunity to offend again.— So let things remain as they are.- -I will keep up my., indifference to all men } and if my vexations grow iiifapportabls, 1 will come, my dear Mrs. Blomer, to you,

^ r:^ > .
Vour fmcere friend,
Charlotte MoroswJ
IS''
4
I. E T-
4	*
J40.
HISTORY OF
I. E T T E R
XXXVIII.
Lord Woburn to Mr, Wilmot.
Lady charlotte has not been well.—I hope the dear creature v;ill not, by ftifling her paliion for me, throw herfelf into a fever.—Jelling apart, though I was ferioufly anxious about her, and began to think of a way to make it up with her, I could rot meet her at any public place, after the night mentioned in my laft letter.---1 have called feveral times at her door, without being able to gain admittance.—The laft time, I alked to fpeak with Mrs. Dawfon.-—She came down, and with a ro-guifh twinkling in her eyes, told me, that her lady was indifpofed, and could not fee company.
“ She fees every body but me, Mrs. Dav/fon,’* Said I.
“ No gentleman, my lord, but Mr. Elliot.”
“ Tell her,” replied I, “ that I am exceedingly unhappy to hear of her indifpofition.”
I was going, but recollected myfelf.-r-“ Can you inform me,” added I, “ when fhe will be at Mr, Elliot’s, for I know ftie goes abroad?”
Dawfon fmiled, but feemed doubtful whether flie
fhould give me the defired information or not--1
took out my purfe, and removed her fcruples in a moment.—After a fmall hefitation, fhe curtfied, and faid, “I will certainly let your lordfhip know.” The next day a line from Mrs. Dawfon informed me that her lady was to dine and (pend the evening, at Mr. Elliot’s.
I drefl’ed—and went thither about feven.
The porter appeared in a puzzle, as if he knew BOt whether I was to be admitted.
While
LORD WOB0R.D:
10'^:
W'hile he was ballancing about this important affair, Sir William A(hton entered—-He pafled me, and v/ent up ftairs.—I followed him, faying to the porter,'T fee your family are at home.”
I found only Mr. and Mrs. Elliot, lady Charlotte, and a beautiful girl about fourteen or fifteen, who was, I foon found, a niece of Mrs. Elliot’s.
Lady Charlotte’s face glov/ed at my entrance, with pleafure I thought, but fhe foon checked fuch a prefumptUGUs fancy, by affiiming her late referved behaviour.—The Elliots alfo looked exceeding ftiff in their carriage to me, though quite eafy with Afhton ;—So that it would have been a more formal meeting, if Kitty Downton, the fine girt I mentioned, had not, by the agreeable nai’vete of her behaviour, thrown us, infenfibly, into Some kind of familiarity.—My charming Charlotte, at laft mixed with us, though the words which fhe addrefled to me, were delivered with the utmoft caution j all
picked, ail chofen cnes, I afiure you—--At firft I
appeared cold and indifferent about her, but was foon converted into the tendered, the moft fubmiffive of lovers.—This movement did the bufinefs, Jack. —I faw her dear eyes, which were heavy and languid before, filled with a kind of fluttering joy ;— her hands trembled, if I accidentally touched them ; her completion became animated, and' fhe grew more lovely, more modeftly condefcending than ever.
•---Afhton hovered a little about her at fifft, but
finding he: flood no chance near me, foon left us. You may be fure Itook particular care to keep clear of thofe liberties, by which I had provoked her refentmenx.—T am not yet, indeed, authorized to take fuch liberties ; but when I am admitted as an honourable lover, I fliall expedl to have no innocent freedoms denied me -and yet, were fhe to grant me the laji favour, I would fooner perifh that moment than marry her.—You tell me I am
nice.———Remember Carey—remember
E 5	Carey,
: ^c6
HISTORY OF
Carey, I fay ; and take heed left you engage with women fimilar to thofe by whom he has been undone.
This pretty little Kitty is, I find, to go home with lady Charlotte ; ftie has been bred up hitherto very difcreetly.—I hope, I may venture to fay, that her new friend will not-fpoil her.—Yet women and girls feldom do each other any good—frequently a great deal of harm.
hi CONTINUATION.
I had, pofitively, determined to throw myfelf at\ iady Charlotte’s feet at my next vlfit to her, and to make an honourable offer of my perfon and my for-ume ; but I am yet fearful ; I know not how far I may truft a woman.
Lady Louifa, my brother’s wife—curfe on the
word----is become fo ridiculoully attached to me,
that I cannot tell how to get rid of her.-1 have
taken every method, in my power, to fhake her off; ihe ftiil purfues me, even into my very inmoft retirement. Would you believe it, die came t’other morning before I was up, and infifted upon being faffered to make her way into my bed-chamber, pretending ihe had particular bufinefs ; and indeed I believe ihe had fome bufinefs of a very particular nature.—Upon my foul, if the women are allowed to go on at this rate, we ilrall hear every day of
rapes committed upon men, and not by them.--I
was abfolutely quite oirt of countenance at her behaviour.—I aftually don’t know which is greateft, her beauty or her folly.—And then the diffolutenefs of her carriage is infupportable.-No—if all wo-
men are of this ftamp, l ean never bring myfelf to marry.
“ Why, in the name of fortune, don’t you enjoy things as t’ney fall in ycur way ?’’
Were
LORD W O B URN.
107
Were I one of thole fenfualifts, who can relifli on^y the perfonal charms of the fex, I fliould, probably, aft in that manner j but though there never was a more amorous mortal than myfelst I feel my-felf incapable of being fully Satisfied, with the momentary gratification of a vagrant pailion.—But this indelicate filler of mine——what can be done with her ? How I pity poor Ned !—What an unfortunate ftep has he taken, by ma;rrymg ? A Hep of which he will, I am afraid, repent as long as he lives.
I alked him a few days ago, if lady Lduifa was as much in love with him, as he was with her,' before they came together He ■ replied, - that he had' never troubled himfelf about her love.—“ Charmed with her perfon, I upon a very fhort' acquaintance, made propofals, which were accepted by her family ; and as fire, herfelf, offered-no objeftions, not' difcovered any kind’of repugnance to the match, I thought myfelf the happiefl of men ; and I find my-felf fo, as Ihe has not difcovered the leaft coolnefs to me, the leaft difiike from- the moment I firft ad-dreffed her.”—Poor Ned !—• ■
“ No coolnefs-Said I.——i-“Surely you did not dare to attempt any thing before the ceremony was performed, inconfiftent with that decency and ref-peft, with which every man of honour " Ihbuld behave to the woman whom he intends to marry ?”
“ I don’t know what you mean,” replied be, ■ “I never had any improper defign upon her ; but' when love preffes, and opportunity invites, who- can an-, fwer for what may happen ?”—i—This, you know; was as much as to fay
“ And fo—what!—and could you think of marrying her afterwards ?”
He looked totally difconcerted but yet Somewhat haftily anfwered, “ I hope I ihall always aft like a man of honour, my lord.”
‘‘ Really !'
io8
HISTORY OF
Rsally !—-And Ib, my good brother, becaufe a woman happens to part with her virtue, you muft give up your fenfes ! If you had imagined her unable to Hand the trial, you fhould not have attacked her;
•but when lire had fallen, you certainly aUed like a madman by marrying her.-—She who will yield to one man, will to a hundred.
“ I cannot be of your opinion,” replied Ned.—A woman who is exceedingly fond of her lover, who is expofed to all his infinualing arts, and who believes that in a very little time, he would be authorized to take the laft liberties with her, cannot be fo highly culpable, if in a moment, when they are mutually enamoured. Hie is, bj her excefs of love, deprived of any refifting power.”
“ I find we are not likely to be of a fimilar way of thinking on this fubjedt,” faid I, “ for I am morally fure, that the woman who has not ftrength to re-fufe one man, will be as paffive when another makes amorous approaches towards her. Such a woman is like a china cup ; perpetually in danger of being broken, if not ufed with the utmofl: diferetion ; and when once flawed, never to be reflored to her original value.”
He did not, I thought, leem pleafed with me but I was pleafed with myfelf, for having given him fome friendly hints, with regard to his wife, and in-diredtly urged the neceffity there was, for his taking care of her—But who can take care of a woman who has no regard for herfelf who, on the contrary, throws herfelf continually into dangerous
fituations ?—--------After all, who, indeed, can
anfwer for the condudl of any woman ? Is there not every thing faid, is there not every thing done to corrupt the fex ? Are not the difiipations, the luxuries, the pleafures of the age, fufficient to debauch the mind of a veftal .? Scarce half a moment in the
female world is fpent in a rational manner.-----Lady
Charlotte, it is true, employs herfelf like a v/oman
of
LORD WOBURN.
309
of Senfe ; but I have known very fenfible women, accomplilhed, ingenious women, extremely regard-lefs of the moral duties—of thofe duties efpecialiy W'hich no wmman of fpirit—to fay nothing of principle—ought to difregard.--------1 muft therefore
move with caution ; I muft not make overtures with
-And yet I don’t think lady Char



precipitation.—----
lotte will admit me much longer, if I remain thus
filent from circumfpedtion.----She will not think it
decent to give me free admiffion to her, unlefs I
come to the point.-------Two people cannot vifit
each other, merely upon the footing of friendlliip j
they muft be immediately pronounced lovers.----------
How ridiculous, on many occalions, are the decifi-ons of the world I Surely a man may be in love with a woman, and like to converfe with twenty others.
Well, but you are always at lady Charlotte’s.
I am, becaufe I am no where elie So agreeably entertained.
Aye—didn’t I tell you that you were in love with her ?”—Now if people don’t foon find that the marriage-articles are really drawing up, they will
fay that lady Charlotte is-------no better than ftis
ihould be, and that you are—a very happy man.”
I cannot bear to have lady Charlotte fuljjedled 5 I muft, therefore, make this horrid declaration.— When it is once out, I lhall be eafier.—Befides, without it I can do nothing ; for though I cannot fay how long her virttie will hold out, I muft, as I hope it is impregnable, proceed exafllyasifl believed it to be fo i by proceeding in this manner, I lhall be authorifed to take a thoufand freedoms which wilst doubtiefs, let me fully into her humour, and make me thoroughly acquainted v/ith her conftitution : this is a kind of knowledge which every man, who has any thoughts of being that ufeful animal a.
hulband, Ihould endeavour to come at.—Yet I Ihud-
de r
no
HISTORY OF
der at the hare idea of putting myfelf entirely Into her power.—But hold—will fhe not be more in rny power, till the indiffoluble knot is tied ?—Should ihe, from an inability to refift my prefling folieitati-ons—fhould ssie prove frail—-I fliall have an excufe a vile one, indeed, I grant—to be AS.---Courago Til venture.

L E T T E R
Lady
Charlotte Morden to Mrs.
Blome r.
DON’T know, my dear friend, whether you will approve of my conduct or not ; but lord W^oburn has, by a very difcreet change in his behaviour, brought me to admit him again to vilit me.
---------1 am afraid you will think me too eafy.
However, that he may have no opportunity to re-nev/ thofe freedoms, which excited my difappro-bation, I have delired Mrs. Elliot to let me have my little favourite Kitty Downton, v/ith me for
a week or two.-----She is come to ftay with her
aunt, while her mother goes to Paris to fee her brother, "who is thought to be dangeroufly out of order there.—Mrs. Downton does not chufe to take her daughter with her, becaufe Ihe has too great a regard for her morals, to give her a French
education.------1 confefs I have always thought
that young women may more fately know too little than too much of the world.—mean, that thofe
LORD W'O B U R N.
111
fpeak the French langua?
girls who are introduced early into all forts of company, and thrown into a life of diffipatibn, are frequently difqualified for being ■ good' wives, and good mothers.'—Mrs, Downton made a mod; exemplary wife to Miy young friend’s father while he lived j and I believe ■ you will think with me, that (he is not a lefs excellent mother for fuppoling that her own inttruftions, joined to the leffons of the bed: madera,-given under her own eye, may render her Kit-^ ty as accomplidred, as if (he had been bred up in the polited: convent in France.—I never had that padion for French cloaths, French fervants, and a French education, as many people have ; and I am acquainted with feveral amiable women, who never fet their- feet out of England, nay, who cannot
ge-, which is now looked upon fo eflential to heighten the luftre of a fa-iltionable lady’s converfation.—To fpeak 'and read French and Italian too, with eafe and propriety, is certainly both agreeable and ufeful ; but an Engliflh 'W'oman may, I imagine, learn them very advanta-geoudy in her native country, without galloping either to Paris or Rome ; for in thofe cities many ac-quifitions may probably be made by my travelling country women, produUive of unhappinedes fudici-
ent to embitter the remainder of their lives.---1
fpeak from experience ■; and'fyou have not, I dare fay, forgot how much we were aihamed in our tour of feme tran/elled ladies of our acquaintance ; frenched not only out of X.hSiv complebHons, but their characters.
My fweet Kitty will, I hope, be a check upon lord Woburn, till I fee whether it will be necelfary to break with him entirely or not.—But tell me, my dear Mrs. Blomer, and tell me dneerely, am I not too partial } Ought I to admit a man who takes liberties.------1 willr I may not be wrong ; and yet,
if I can trull my own judgment] at all, he is----
m



HISTO RY OF
in every other refpe£l----mod deferving of my e-
fteem,—However, I mud be doubly on my guard
*----and if I fee any more reafon to be dilTatisfied
with his behaviour, difmifs him for ever.—rKicty has taken a great fancy to him ; he dldlnguiflied her the night he fird faw her at Mr. Elliot’s and young people are always flattered by being taken notice of, by thofe older than themfelves. He has fince been rather particular to her, treating her like a child indeed, but like a child one was fond of j
to be fure lire is an amiable girl.----------------
After having been romping with her yederday, very decently, to do him judice, he Sent her up to fetch a tranflation of Pajior Fido, about which he had been alking her fome quedions. As foon as fhe was gone out of the room, he faid, “ die has
an exceeding fine face------has fhe had the fmall-
pox } It would be better for her to be lefs hand-fome.”
“ Why fo ? replied I, is beauty then of no value ?”
“ If it is not accompanied with difcretion, it is rather a calamity than an advantage.”
“ And pray how long has lord Woburn been fo very difcreet ?”
“ Ever fince he has found lady Charlotte to be poffelTed of every requifite, in v/oinan to fix the mod volatile heart.”
Having uttered the(e words, he Seized my hand, and looked fo earnedly at me, that he threw me into confufion.—Indead of withdrawing my hand, I Suffered him to hold it: I was indeed, hardly able
to breathe.-----He faw my embarraffment, and he
pitied it ; he let go my hand, and begged me to
pardon the abruptnels of a declaration, which he had long •wiflied to make.——“ Long have 1 wifli-ed to make It,” added he, but I always felt myfelf incapable of executing my delign agreable to my
wiilies I
LORD WOBURN.

w
wlfhes ; if, however, yon will only condefcend to refleft upon the lituation of a man really enamoured, and unable to explain, by language, the feelings of his foul; you will, I am fure, as your good-nature is equal to your good-fenfe, be inclined to pity, to excufe his inability to make himfelf acceptable, juft: at. the moft interrefting moment, and to permit him to endeavour, by a thoufand animated attentions, to convince you of his extreme ten-
dernels.”-----He concluded with faying, “ It is’in
your power alone, to make me the happieft, or the mod: wretched of men.—My perfon, my fortune, and my heart are all at your difpofal.”
I will not be fure, my dear friend, that I have done my lover judice, by the repetition of his ad-drefs tome; fori was fo fluttered during the delivery of it, that I fcarce knev/ what 1 heard, or how to believe it.—I hung my head in filence, and certainly looked more foolifli than I ever did in my
life.
Kitty came luckily to my relief.—Flying to him, ihe faid, “ There, my lord, is my book ; but indeed I am fo afhamed of my writing, that I don't like you fliould lee it.”
“ That you may not be afliamed again, then you muft: write better ; but come, let us bear how you pronounce the Italian.”
Throwing his arm round her, while Are flood at his knee, he fixed his eyes upon me, with fo mnch expreflion in them, that I was more abalhed than Kitty, who perceiving him to be inattentive to her, looked up in his face, then on me, and read on.------My lord foon releafed her with fome compliments upon her pronunciation.-----------She then fat
down to her tambour.
My lord finding Kitty not in the least inclined to leave us by ourfelves, rofe and alked me, if I would permit him to lee me again in the evening ?”
I replied.
114
HISTORY OF
I replied,‘‘ I {lefi'gned to make Some
vifits.but that I would put them ofF.”
He made a polite acknowledgement for my con-defeenfion, and went away feemingly contented.
As foon as he v/as gone, Kitty, turning to me faid, “ My lord has very fine eves, madam j but I think they neTer' lock fo handfome, as'when they are fixed upon yotir ladyfliip.-’
I could not help blufliing at the* girl’s remark ; and I am afraid I am but too much of-her opinion.-----Why diould I with to conceal the feelings'
of my heart from mybef!:, my faithfuUefi: friend ?
I will not conceal them my dear Mrs, Bloraer.—• Gn the contraryv I will freely own that this con-fellion' of lord Woburn’s has given me the higheft fatisfadlion,—^But as my letter is already of an immoderate length, I muft poftpone what I have farther to fay till another opportunity,

LET T E-R XL.
Lord WOB XTK N to Mr. Wi l m ot.
\
HAVE, at laft, conquered all my Scruples, and#
in fpite of the wickfedhers of women, am going to be married to one of the moft lovely, I hope too the moll virtuous of fex,—Going to be married, did Tfay? No—no—that’s a miilake-—not yet
But I am in a way towards matrimony.---The
dear creature has thought proper to accept of me and if nothing happens to prevent our union, I fliall' be the happieil of men.—Yes, Wilmot, I fhail cei tain-ly be- the happiefl: fellow in the univerfe, if lire is really the angel Ihe-appears to be —the coufufion with
which

LORD- WOBURN.
115
which ihe received my declaration is not to- be‘ de-
Icribed---------nor can I defcribe the corrc<Sled joy
which file afterwards difcovered at my‘ acknowledged attachment to her,—Thus far l am tran-
fported----1 would be loved, nay, doated on.----------
But then can a woman polllbly feel a ftrong pallion for a man, and yet be capable of refuhng his every requeft?— -----She muft be fo, ilie ought to be fo,
or (lie- is no wife for me.---------------It is too
early for me to expedt many familiarities.-------Be-
fides, lam fo diftratSledly fond of her, at prefent, that I cannot bear to tempt her too much, led fhe Biould yield ; left I iTiould be obliged to give her up before I have at all enjoyed my new (ituation.—,A.nd then this Kitty is always by her (ide.-———— The little.chit is pretty, and as innocent as fuch a girl can be, yet foe is devilifo forewd.— I don’t think foe would diflike my making love to her myfelf,
though foe is hardly out of her white frock.-----But
I was never fond, of your green fruit: 1 hate mere raw girls—Give me the companion and the friend, as well as the miftrels—lady Charlotte is this woman.
----1 fpent.almoft all my hours, all my happy hours^
with her, and never was fo fenfible of the flight of time, as in her company------She is moft kindly indul-
gent ; foe fees few people, except Mr. and Mrs. Elliot, and their particular friends, on my account.
We were at Almack’s t’other nihht.i:-----1 had the
o
fatisfadtion to be preferred by her to Sir Charles
Conyers, juft returned from Italy.-------------He is
one of the fineft fellows I ever faw, and extremely elegant in his addrefs.—He imraediatelyidiftinguifo-ed Charlotte, and being known to; Mr. Elliot, begged to be introduced to her.—Elliot told him, that he came too late, I fuppofe; for i fawfoim fix his eyes
upon me, with a degree-of envy.--------—Charlotte-
indeed appeared in the moft lovely light ; my atten-* lions about, her, added to the. melting mufic, gave
fo.
110
HISTORY OF
fo charming a languor to her eyes, that my admiration became quite enthuliaftic.-—To heighten that admiration, Ilie feemed to look, to move, to think,
to breathe only for me.—-----—I never knew what
love was, till I became acquainted with her.

LETTER XLI,
Lady Charlotte Morden to Mrs,
Blomer.
I AM juft efcaped from lord Woburn, to thank my kind friend for her caution j though I hope I have too great a regard for the man, who is now, I may venture to fay, on the point of being my huf -band, not to refpe^l myfelf.-———Ought I not to be particularly careful, at this juncture, to conquer every foible, and to corredl every error, left inftead of rendering m yfelf more amiable, and more defer-ving of his efteem than I am at prefent, I Ihould be lefs v/orthy of it.—I tremble to think of the frailty of human nature.—Many women, too, too many as vir-tuoufly Inclined as I at this moment feel myfelf, have fallen vidtims to thofe men, who madd them believe by the moft infinuating arts, that they could not’ give them fufficient proofs of their affedtion., without
putting themfelves, imprudently, in their power.--
May heaven defend me from being guilty of fo capital a weaknefs ! Lord Woburn’s behaviour to me’
I
at prefent, is not in the leaft cenfurable : he is eager
LORD WOBURN.
07
to oblige me, ftudies to prevent the declaration of my wilhes, and makes no requeft v/hich I may not •decently comply with. But, as you rightly oblerve, he before difcovered a propenlity to take rather unwarrantable liberties.'—I cannot be too much upon my guard ; I cannot too vigilantly watch ove r ray own condudl.—Men are certainly very often blamea-ble for their ungenerous, their cruel exultation over our fex ; yet thofe worpen whom they attack, too frequently bring themfelvOs into fcandalous (itua-tions, by gradually encourageing improper freedoms.----------However, there have been, I doubt
not, women of very virtuous difpofitions, overpower-
ed, from a conllitutional tendernefs, by the fedu-cing carriage of the men who made their treacherous addrelTes to them.—The deliquents of this clafs are to be pitied j the fallen females of the other are culpable in the higheft degree.'--------1 would fain
believe, that lord Woburn has not cruelly triumph-ed over any woman’s virtue ; Lwould willingly believe, that he has never availed himfelf of an unguarded moment to render a weak innocent creature miferable for ever.—He alTures me folemnly, he never has feduced any woman ; he affures me, that Mrs. Mead adtually folliclted him, or he never fliould have thought about her.—When women go fitch lengths, who can blame the men for expofing them, in order to deter others from being guilty of the fame unpardonable indifcretions ?
Lord Woburn is juft returned, I am, therefore, obliged to dlfpatch this without any farther additions.—Were not Mr. Elliot kind enough to inclofe my letters in his packet, I lliould be afhamed of fending you fo many. Pray accept of this apology for the poornefs of my invention at pre(ent, and, in return, continue your very prudent advice to one who loves the moft amiable man in the M'’orld, as much as lire is beloved by him.
LET-
H I S T 0 R Y O T

■L E T T E -R XLII.
■Lord >W 0 E U'R -N to Mr. W11 m o t
HAVE juft brought my Charlotte to^-confelsy that I am the only man who ever touched her heart, and that it is abfoluLely impoffible for hei ever to love another.------I'hefe acknowledgiiienis, in
tnith, came very feafona-biy for Sir .Charles Conyers, though he has been.toid again and again that ihe is engaged, perstSb in foilowing her about, vdth as much alliduity .as? df he had any hopes of Supplanting me-———Tormented'with iufpicions, racked with anxiety, 1 teaSed the dear -creature for Some striking rroofs cf her affeftion, though She
.O I	'	O
had repeatedly declared, I had nothing to appre-
hend from


However, as he ap
peared to me a very formidable rival, I could not be fatisfied ill 1 had obtained a full confellion of her tender and ftron? attachment to me.-----—But it was
o
no eafy matter for me to gain the wifired-for fatis-faction, as die was always attended by her little
fairy.----^At iaft chance Rood my friend.-----—Kitty
----1 found my dear
was lent for to Mr. .Elliot’s.—
Charlotte by herfelf, drelEd.
“ Where are you going fald I., “ and whereas Kitty ?”
“ She is not at home,” replied die “ d hank heaven ! I have the pleafure of steing. you v'iihout that eternal fpyaipcn your locks, words, and addons.”
tti
“If
LORD WOBURN.
149
4 4
“ If thev are as they ought to be,” fald die, “ they will not be afraid of the fevered; fcrutiny.” “ True—and therefore I am glad we are by our-felves,” anfvvered I, throwing my arm round her, “ that you may tell me, whether Iain really fo dear to you as I am willing to hope I am.”
“ Why fhould you doubt me, my lord ?” faid the dear girl, blufhing, and calling down her charming eyes-----
“ I do not doubt you,” .replied I, killing her eagerly in fpite of her llruggling., “ but as I am delighted with every opportunity to convince you of the ardour of my affection, I cannot help earneft-ly wifliing to hear from your fweet lips that your affedtion for me is as warm and as lincere as mine is foryou.”
Hold, my lord—(breaking from me) I can ea fily give you the fatisfadlion of which you leem to be fodcfirous 5 but thefe violent proceedings will not procure it.”
My poor Charlotte,” faid I, laughing at her, while file appeared a tlioufand times more beaini-ful, by the high glow in her cheeks, increafed by her embarralfment, began to adjufl her tippet, wmich I had tumbled a little, “ luppofe I can.not be fatished without them, what v/ill you fay,.?
Nothing, my lord------(riling gravely, and going
to the other end of the room) I lliall leave you till you are in a more agreeable humour.”
“ Let me die, if I think it poffible for me to be
mere agreeable than I am at this very inilant.-----
I am fure I never loved you fo much in my life j—■
lay afide, therefore, this refer.ved air--return to
my arms, and make me the happiefl of mortals.”
A look of inconceivable clifdain was immediately darted at me ; and die v/alked towards the door, “ Hold, madam,” faid I, “ for your own advan-tagje condefeend to hear a few words, before you
throw



IZQ
HISTORY OF
throw yourfelf away In a pet.------Be affured, that
hovv'^ever lovely I think you, however tenderly I efteem you, I fliali not dangle after you merely to gaze ou you like a China doll upon the Chimney piece, Avhile you are full as cold and as inlenfible.” “ I am neither the one nor the other, my lord,” replied file, almoft melting into tears, “ but I could not have imagined you would have found fault with the propriety of my conduft : I rather flattered my-, felf, I ccntefi, that it would have raifed me in your efteem.”
“ Efteem, mere efteem, will never do, my dear Charlotte,” faid I, advancing to make up our little difference, tranfported at the fame time, to find her fo difereet j “ but if you can, with truth, alTure me, that I am the only objeft of your tendernefsj and that you feel an increafing tendernefs for me, i am ready to a(k your pardon, for refent-ing a behaviour, which I thought, 1 own, circura-ftaiiced as we are, too forbidding.”
“ 1 am alfo ready to tell you,” replied fiie “ that I never have loved, that I never can love any man
but^’OM.----Noiv will you not be fatisfied ?” added
file, fmiling in my face,—She then turned away her own, to hide her blullies.
i caught her in my arms.—How far I might have been tempted, I cannot fay.—A violent rap at the
door ioftantly altered our fituations.'--She went
out to make vlfits with Gadely, who came to call her.
And now------fo far, fo well----five has behaved
hitherto like an angel—but—fixe was not properly
melted to my purpofe.--------^^-A woman who is not
a downright wanton, is not always in humour.-----1
muff firft wind up her paflion for me as high as it will go 5 and then urge her, by every infinuating art
in my power, to the gratification of it.—----If fiie
has ftrength to refift my attacks--1 fliali adore her
_____If fi^e yields--1 fliali doat on her ;---but,
mark me, I do not fay that I will marry her.
LET-
LORD WOBURN.
121

LETTER XLIII.
%
Lord Wo B u R i>f to Mr. Wi l m o t .
INCE my lad attack, the enemy has been fo well guarded, that I have not found a finglc moment to play off my grand battery againft her.
Yet has Ihe been abfolutely enchanting, and lest fevere in her manners, on purpofe, as I imagine, to
keep me from making any farther attempts. ■ -----
However, 1 may be deceived.—Her Smiling looks, perhaps, only declare the pleafure which She feels Irom my endearments.—She loves me, I am affured,
and I could devour her-.--cannot hold out long
in this manner---to be tantaliz,ed thus !—intolera-
ble !—She has, indeed, given up her hand entirely to my discretion, and a charming one it is ; but by fo doing, die has made me more eager to come at the reft of her.
Both (lie and the Elliots, I believe, think that I am in a monftrous hurry to be married—but there they are quite out.—I am well watched, however.
----Befides Kitty Downton, we have got a Mrs.
Staples, one of your good pretty kind of women.
She is tall and dim j She has a pale compledlion black eyes, but no chin.—She Smiles and Simpers a

u
-I am amazed that a
every thing that is Said.----
woman of Charlotte’s underftanding can like Such a non-entity to be always near her ; as I know die is above all that meannefs of carrying a foil about
with her j----ihe has indeed no fort of occafign for
‘ one, her beauty wants nothing to Set it off.
1 afeed her, t’other day, who that lady was.
F
((
The
iti
HISTORY OF,

ff
The daughter of a particular friend of my mother’s,” replied (he, “ who was married unfortunately.
“ She Is a widow, then ?”
« Nc—■	—but Mr. Staples, Is abroad.
If I was Mr. Staples, I Ihouid make no haste to
come home to fuch a wife, thought I......r'tC' itYou
often reprove me for railing against women.^fC-Take notice, J ack, I do allow that Some few may be virtuous, but thole few must be, like Mrs. Staples, un^ able to raife envy in womanj or defire in man.—-I dare affirm, that Mrs. Staples is a strong antidote to love.—I heartily wilh Ihe was, a thoufand miles off
at prefent------My Charlotte’s eyes would look the
tenderest things, were but this long, tall maw kin out of the way.——-As to little‘Kitty, I have toyed and trifled with her, till the child is as innocently fond of me as of her dog or her fquirrel, and is no more afraid of me than of either of thofe animals.-----In-
t	'	.	"	■
nocence alone makes fecur'ity.——^<^ery. Whether lady Charlotte is the cherub Ihe appears to be ?— If fhe is apprehenfive of no danger, why is Ihe more coy, more my of me, than the playful Kitty is ? Ay —but I have alarmed her with my freedoms.—— Well—and I have kilTed Kitty twenty and twenty times, yet fhe runs to me with open arms: Charlotte, on the contrary, who really looks as if fhe could fly into them with as much rapture as I would receive her, starts away and appears to be afraid of trusting herfelf near me.—Admirable, however, is this behaviour.—She affures me Sufficiently by it, that fhe is deeply wounded.—When once a woman who is cxcefTively enamoured with her lover, can arm herfelf against his most vigorous folicitations, fhe is— every thing he can wifh for j every thing he ought to wifh for.
End of the First Volume.
THE
CAUTIOUS LOVER

OR, THE
H
T
o r
LORD WOBURN.
By a Young Gentleman of Oxforp,
SN TWO VOLUMES.
V O L. II.
D U B L I Ni
Printed for J A M E S W I L LI A M S, aJ
No, 5. in Skinner-Row.
MDCCLXXIII,
\
-4
1
» *
#
#
#



#4



§>
#
#
■j
T H i:
CAUTIOUS LOVER
:A>
.*


E E T TER
XLIV.
Charlotte Moroen to Mrs*
i
Blome r.
VERY hour, my dear friend, fince you left me, have I regretted your departure j—but I am particularly affeUed by your ablence at prefent. Your apprehenllons on my account, my good Mrs. Blomer, were not ill founded.—-Lord Woburn is but too amiable.—Yet do not miftake me—i—a man fo uncommonly agreeable; a man who has fome reafon to demand a return of affeUion, is rather to be feared, elpecially when he is, I lee, too apt to be offended at my refufing liberties which, though allowable in a degree, mull at this juncture,
F 3	be
J26
HISTORY OF
be reckoned both indelicate and indifcreet,—To a-■void, therefore, any difpute or difference wnth a man whom I cannot difpleafe, without feeling very painful fenfations, I would feldom receive him alone; I %vould never, atleaft be alone with him a great while >~-Happy, then, would your company make me at this time, as the awe which your appearance always infpires, would be of conliderable fervice to me.
I have invited Mrs. Staples to come and day with me ; not only to be a check upon my lord, but upon myfelf—Mifs Downton being looked upon by him as of little confequence.—They are, indeed, upon fo familiar a footing, that fhe comes and goes at his bidding, and takes as much pains to pleafe him, as if fhe was in love with him ;—and in truth, J believe Ilie feels all that her young heart is capable of feeling for him —After having left me, alone v/ith him, t’other day, I told her, when he was ^one, that I was afraid lord Woburn had made her ceafe to be my friend ; and that 1 was a little jealous of the preference fhe gave him.
She threw her arms round my neck, and Said
No, indeed, my lady, I love you as well as ever, but my lord is fo entertaining, and looks fo hand-fome, that I cannot refufe him.”—She is a fweet infinuating girl but too young to be talked with upon this fubjetSl ; though I know not how foon fuch a converfation may be neceffary, as the men
begin to take a great deal of notice of her----Sir
Charles pays much court to her, though fire is fo young a girl—Mrs. Elliot tells me, he is fo attentive to her, becaufe he knows fire is my favourite.
But to what purpofe can he behave in this manner, as I am engaged.—He is, I think, rather too particular to me ; but as he is reckoned amiable, and as his charafter is unexceptionable, I fhall be glad to fee an alliance bye and bye, between him and Mifs Downton.—She has an excellent difpofiti-
on
t
9
LORD WOBURN.
127
on; and if nothing happens to alter her teihper, iliewiil, undoubtedly, make any man happy, whom Hie can love —^^—=—But, as I was telling you— I have defired Mrs. Staples to fpend a few weeks v/ith me.
She is not an eligible companion, I mull confest, though, 1 believe, a very fafe one.—Lord Woburn has taken a ftrange diillke to her—and dees not e-ven conceal his dlfpleafure, at having fo much of
her company,------------Why, then, will he oblige
me to have recourfe to fuch difagreeable expedients to keep him at' a proper drllance ?—^-And yet I cannet' find fault with him.—T fhould not be pleafed to fee him cold and infenfible neither—fo he called me
I
t’other day.-----1 would be tenderly loved, but I
viould alfo be loved with diferetion.—Perhaps a man of lord Woburn’s fufeeptibility, cannot love
and be difereet at the fame time.-----—It is better,
therefore, for Us both to be watchful over ourfelves 1 and he ought no longer to fret about Mrs. Staples.

LETTER XLV.
Lord Woburn to Mr. Wi lm 0t
IT is adtually come to an open rupture betweea us, and I am the mod fatisfied man in the world, with regard to her virtue j but I have feme doubts about her tendernefs.—Can any woman love as fhe ought, and be fo intolerably prudent ?—You Ihall
hear.---1 waited for that confounded Mrs Staples s
abfence for Several weeks, and heartily curstd her during that time.—Mrs. Elliot happening to he not very well, Sent for her, to my great joy, one even*
F 4.	ing.
128	HISTORY O F
ing-----Kitty, at my indigation, though lady Char-
lotte by no means approved of her removal, took that opportunity to go into her own apartment,
to write a letter to her mother.--1 then feized the
critical minute, and amply revenged rnyfelf on this lovely v/oman, for keeping me at fo cruel a distance -----She received my firfl: carelles paffively e-
nongh, and appeared to be not a little affefted by the tendernels I laviHied upon her, but upon my repeating them with redoubled warmth and ardour, Ihe darted from my arras, pufhed me from her with a quicknefs and agility, for which I was not prepared, and told me, that as (he could not have believed, I would have offered to infult her in that manner, flie fliould infill upon my leaving her, till I knew how to behave with more decency and relpeU,
Firing at the haughtinefs with which this reproof was delivered, and half mad with my disappointment, I told her that I had for fome time fiifpe£led her of having more pride than paffion ; and that I would fooner perifli, than marry a woman diveiled of every tender fenfation.
I was even Severe enough, to impute the repulle.
I had met with to an affefted modelly -----adding,
that I faw plainly, flie had no averfion to the freedoms fire complained of, though five chofe to deny herfelf any pleafure, rather than make me happy, by the mefl trifling gratification.
Here I flopped the Sharp effufions which my ungovernable refentment had occafioned, and was thinking of fome fubmifiions for the Illiberal language She had forced from me.—At that inllant, She very calmly defired me to leave her to herfelf, as fire had for fome time wlflied to be alone.
I was juft ready to curfe her provoking coolnefs, though I ftrove to flifle my anger in hopes of bringing about a reconciliation.—She rofc, and, pafllng
bV
LORD WOBURN:
12,
Tby me haftily, without fpeaklng a Syllable, walked up ftairs.
I flood looking after her for Some moments, hard-ly alTured whether I was awake or In a dream, yet, expeding every moment to fee her return.—-No-~. her return would have been too great a condefcen-lion.—I, therefore after having waited till I v/as weary, went home.
I went home, but could not clofe my eyes all night.—^Deeply did I ruminate on Charlotte’s Spirited behaviour, her highly proper behaviour, and loved her the more for her refiftance to the vigorous efforts which I purpofely made, to put her difcretion to h e trial.
Yet I thought She had dlfcovered too much pride, too much disdain, with her prudence.—Had there been more foftnefs, mixed with her laudable op-pofitlon, T fliould have deemed no fubmiflions too great, for the recovery of her favour.—But She
does not, I am Sure She cannot, love me.---And
lhall I go and fling myfelf away upon a woman who feels no tendernefs for me, who is abfolutely unmoved by my paflion for her ? Shall I, who have been fo extremely beloved—“by all womeny I may
fay-—fhall I—No !—I will periSh firft.-—However,
I humbled myfelf So far, as to call at her door the
next morning.—Would you believe It-----the info-
lent creature was denied--yes, fire was denied-
I Sent again in the evening, to know if fhe was at home, for I would not lay myfelf open to another infult, in perfon, from her Servants.
My fellow brought me word, that fhe was gone, out of town.
“ Out of town ?” cried I, storming 'at him—I could have pistoled him for his d------d infor-
mation-—whither ?”
He fneakingly replied, “ that he did not know.
D-—I—n you, then, faid I, go and alk,”
■	~	F 5	And
130
HISTORY or
And now. Jack, I am abfolutely alhamed of my paffionate behaviour before my own Servant,—How have I demeaned myfelf!—Yet I will not write to
this proud beauty., nor will I run after her.-If
fhe really loves me, my negleft will (ling her to the quick ; and llie will ftrike upon Some expedient to
lure me back again.—I will be courted now.----
What, am I to be made a woman’s fool, bejraufe fhe happens to be more chafte than her neighbours?
I fwear I begin to think her innocence may be difputed.—There is no great merit in refuting a difh which is not agreeable to your palate,—And yet I deteft, I abhor myfelf for having carried matters fo far.—What a precipitate dog have I been ?—But lince I have plunged myfelf into this curled fituation, I will die before I will tamely yield to her infurmo untable pride.—Yield!—No ilie fhall be humbled in her turn.

LETTER XLVI.
Lady Charlotte Morden to Mrs. Blomer,’
IH A V E often faid, my dear Mrs. Blomer, that I was too particular in my choice, ever to be happily married ; and I find no reafon to retradt my frequent alTertions.—I am exceedingly difappoin-ted with regard to lord Woburn.—I all along feared, indeed, that he was inclined to be too free with women j but though I had feen fome pretty ftrong proofs of his free difpofition, I could not have thought he would have prefumed to take unbecoming liberties with me, who never gave him the leaft ncouragement to imagine, that they would be endured.
€
LORD WOBURN.
<31
diired.—Nor could I have thought, that he would have discovered So little inclination to make a proper apology for his unwarrantable behaviour.
But nnce it is So, I will ftifle every fenlation in his favour.—Whatever pain I may Suffer in giving up a man, who in other refpeCls, is really very amiable —and determine to fee him no more.—I have not Spirits at this time, my dear friend, to enter into a detail of the new difference between us.—I have, however related it very fuccindtly to Mrs. Elliot, who will write to you by this poll, and who has been kind enough to go down with me to a houfe I have taken at Windfor for a few weeks, till I am better reconciled to this unexpected change in ifty fituation.—I am not able to fay any more.—I can only add, that I am, that I ever fliall be, my dear Mrs, Biomer’s
Most affectionate,
I
C. M.

'.A /	\.F\	•'»/ •'»
LETTER XL VII.
Lord Woburn to Mr. Wilmot.
I A M half distracted.—I could curfe myfelf, and
all the world.---How could I be fuch an idiot,
as to carry my fufpicions fo far ?—Having never met with any thing like virtue in a female form, before I hastily fuppofed that the loveliest, the most amiable of women, was no better than thofe with, whom I had converfed.-—Yet I am, certainly, quite mistaken.-----She is every thing that’s good, and fhe
loved me—beyond expreilion.—Fool! fool! to lofe
the
'•V'J
L


1.D
HISTORY OF
the only woman with whom I could have been happy I To lofe her by my own ridiculous nonfenfe !—-Have I not often tried her ! Have I not always found heraverfe to my unjuftifiable familiarities? Her delicacy was grofly affronted, and fhe has totally given me up.---She has alienated her affedi-
ons from me, and will blefs fomebody with the pof-feffion of that heart, that valuable heart, which once owned me for its mafter.
Sir Charles is, I hear, gone down after her to Windfor, to jsvhich place fhe has chofen to retire from my impertinent perfecutlons.—I faid I would not write, but I could not forbear,—Hearing upon farther enquiry, that fhe did not intend to return, I wrote a few incoherent lines. In order to
apologize for my ftrange condud.--------1 cannot
repeat them ; they were not fit to be tranfmitted to her ; but I was not capable of exprefling myfelf in a better manner.—Had I, however, written with the pen of an angel, flie would have rejeded my letter as fhe has rejeded me.—I Sent Salway with it.—The reply was, that lady Charlotte was ill.—Any thing
Served for an excufe not to make It up.----Yet if
She ever did love me, fhe could not have been fo violently inflamed againfl me, for discovering a high relifh for her overpowering beauties —No fhe referves herfelf for Conyers—but he fhall not triumph over me.—Readily will I hazard my life for fuch a charming creature.—But am I furethat by the death of my adverSary, I fhall make her mine?—No—but If I fall fhe may perhaps, drop a tear to my memony.
LET-
LORD WOBURN.
*33
fhe wanted to avoid •I was miftaken-----
LETTER XLVIII.
From the fame to the fame.
SH E is lick—(lie is dying, for aught I know.
I stall run mad.—I had believed that her ill-nefs was only counterfeited the fight of me, I imagined.
Would I were not miftaken !—I would give up any thing, every thing, to have her reftored to me j but I fear I muft not expedl her recovery.—I fend continually to know how ste does, but ste is too bad to hear of my enquiries —To what a ridiculous — to what a horrid fituation, indeed,have I brought
myfelf -----And yet how could I venture to fpend
my life with any woman—as women go—till I had
tried her .?--Could I have imagined that this trial
would have coft lady Charlotte her life ?——Heaven forbid ! I concluded, that the liberties I had taken would occafion a flight refentment at the time ; that refentment, I thought, would foon be over, and give way to returning friendfliip.-How am I dis-
appointed 1 How wretched am I! If llie finks under her prefent illnefs, I will leave the kingdom, and never think of women again, as long as I breathe.
LET-
*34
HISTORY OF
letter XLIX.
From the fame to the fame.
SH E lives—^Ihe is better.~Delightful information ! No melTage, however, has yet been
delivered to her from me.----Yet I am fo fatisfied,
fo tranfported with her being quite out of danger,
that I hardly think of myfelf at all.--Let her but
live, and I will truft to her excellent difpofition, to reftore me to the place I once had in her cfteera. —In the mean time I have a thoufand fears, left Ihe fliould not recover.—She cannot I thi k, continue to be angry with me for loving her j yet fhe may deem it necelfary to keep up an appearance of anger in order to fave her credit.
In fhort, I am alinoft lick myfelf, with dwelling
upon this foolilh bufinels ;-and yet, for the foul
of me. I cannot repent of a conduct which has difcovered her to be the moft amiable creature ia the world,
LET-
f
LORD WOBURN.
*35
LETTER
L.
From the fame to the fame.
IW A S diftrafted a few days with the terrors of lofing her by death, and now 1 am as unhappy by the certainty of lofing her, from her prepof-feflions againft me.—You may tell me, that I am loo delicate in my fentiments, that I am capricious, and do not know what I would have | —but you are out : every man Ihould wifh to marry a woman of virtue, or how can his honour be fa!e ? How can he be lure that his children are his own ? And as women are more corrupt, and more loole in their manners than ever, who can be fecure but by chufing a woman of real virtue ? and how the devil will you know whether fhe is chafte till you have tried her ?—You tell me, I muft have long feen by lady Charlotte’s behaviour, that fhe was of a mild modeft temper ; and afk me, what I would have more .? She is, indeed, modeft and mild, or I
fliould not have thought of her at all.------You tell
me, alfo, that as I found her very averfe to the improper freedoms I took, I fhould have proceeded no farther.—I fubferibe to your firft pofirion, my friend, but not to your fecond.—If I had only confined my-felf to the liberties allowable in every man who is an accepted lover, how fhould I have been certain of her being able to refift unwarrantable ones ?—— I am now well affured that fhe is thoroughly dif-pleafed with my too great familiarities, though fire loved me at the fame time.—But though I firmly be'ieve fhe did love me, I do not imagine fhe
ever loved me with a paflion adequate to my own,
with
150
HISTORY OF
with that exceffive ardor, v/hich can alone render me Supremely happy.
I don’t think Hie loves me at all at prefent.—By refufingmy vifits, flie gives fufficierit encouragement to this difheartening conjecture.—Had Ilie been as fondly attached to fme, as I .hoped fhe was^ flie could not hav-e totally repelled my endearments.— However, whether fhe is fo attached to me or not, fhe is a veftal, as women run ; and, therefore, I fliall be extremely ready to take her as fhe is.—^Yet I own I am ferioufly piqued at her behaviour to me.—I have not been accuftomed to re-fufals.—^Befides, to be repulfed when things were in fucha forwardnefs !—How ridiculous a man looks, fo fituated .?■—My pride never received a feverer blow.—If fhe perfifts in keeping up this humour, and will not be reconciled, I cannot fay to What I may be driven j “ perplexed in the extreme,” I may do fome aCtion.-----------
I fhall v/rite to her once more j if that make.s no impreffion, I muft conclude that fhe avails her-felf of this pretence to break with me, in order to be at liberty to give her hand to Sir Charles Conyers, who, from the progrefs he has made in the Elliot family, gets admittance to her. —He, he is admitted.—I—1 only, am denied.
L E T-
LORD V/ O B URN.
*37

Lady
LETTER LI.
Charlotte Mordek
Mrs. B L o M E R.
to
Y
'^7’OU prefs me to write to you, my dear friend, but I have neither health nor fpivits ; I am not fatisfied with myfelf, nor with any body elfe. Even you, my dear Mrs. Blomer, feem to have changed your (entlinents about me, and urge me to accept of Sir Charles Conyers. You tell me, that you are well acquainted with him, and know him
to be a man of the niceft honour.-----You may be
right—I have nothing to fay to the contrary ; and yet I find in myfelf not the fllghtefl inclination for him ; and I will marry no man, in whole favour I
am not very flrongly prepoflefled indeed.----1 was
never verydefirous of altering my fituation in life. The difappointment which I have met with, will probably prevent me from making any alteration in it.
I agree with you, that Sir Charles is very foHcit-ous to pleafe me ; but if I am not to be pleafed, I cannot help it.—You tell me that I muft go more into company, and ftrive to conquer my melancholy. —I may fee a thoufand people without being made in the leafl chearfuller by them.—However, I have confented to oblige Mr. and Mrs. Elliot, and to return to London, though I had much rather continue here, provided Sir Charles would vifit me lest frequently.—-Mr. and Mrs. Elliot chufe to fee him,
I cannot, therefore, avoid him, without confining myfelf to my own apartment.-—To fuch a confinement my friends are excedingly averfe.—I fhould have no. diflike to Sir Charles, as a common acqua'i^,
tanC^
138
HISTORY OF
tance ; but his afliduities—I had almoft added his impertinences------------
Kitty is here at prefent.-—As I cannot have your company, (lie is my moft defirable cpmpanion.—— With her, with my books', with my drawings, and now and then a vifit from Mr. and Mrs. Elliot, I
could be content,------But it muft not be ; they will
force me among- people, in fpke of all my willies to the contrary.

LETTER
i I J!''
Cord Woburn to Mr. Wilmot*
I HAD juft refolved upon writing again to ladjr Charlotte, when a thought flew into my head, which has done the buflnefs ntluch better.
Having taken care to inform myfelf of all her motions fince our difference, I heard that, though (he was recovered from her illneft, (he was in a deep melancholy, which feemed to be Immoveable j—— that (he was, with the greateft difficulty, perfuaded to mix with her acquaintance, as (he ufed to do, and that (lie never went to any place of public diverfion. —This Information was not calculated, indeed, to give me thorough fatisfadtion, becaufe I could not hope to meet with her ; yet I refolved not to give up the point.—At length I was informed that (he was to be at Mrs Fiflier’s rout.—I dreffed, got there
before her, and was luckily Seized by Mifs Batley---
for the firft time I found a woman’s forwardnefs
Serviceable
LORDWOBURN.
i’39
ferviceable to me.---When ladj Charlotte entered
the room, Mifs Batlev had laid her hand upon my fhoulder, and was talking to me with all the fluency and affeUed importance of a woman who thinks herfelf handfome.—She certainly mufl; be allowed to be a good figure.
Lady CharTotte entered, pale, and negligently drefled j but infinitely more lovely from the affeUing languor which overfpread her fine features.—A faint blulh tinged her cheeks when Ihe call her eyes on me.
I left Batley immediately, to make my very ref-peflful compliments to her ladyIhip.—They were returned with a frigid politenefs.
I took no notice of the extreme coldnefs of her carriage, but turning upon my heel, fnatched Bat-ley’s hand, and kept her in a whifper for a full half hour, at the end of which, both of us burfl: into a loud laugh —I led her to a chair juft oppofite to lady Charlotte, who had declined play, and having feated myfelf by her,, began to aO; the fuccefsful lover, though my words were the raoft infignificant ones imaginable, and had no kind of conneflion v/Ith my looks and geftures.
ofter having feveral times ftole a glance at my real gnddefs, 1 faw her fink down in. a fainting fit.
No words can defcribe my agitation.------1 broke
abruptly from Mifs Batley, who bawled out, ” Look, look, my lord, what can be the matter with lady Charlotte ?” and flew to the dear creature.
I raifed her in my arms, and, regardlefs of every bodv prefent, poured out a volley of the moft pathetic exclamations all of which came from the
heart.----1 was really in an agony. Jack.--------1
had fuffered, it is true, not a little, from her late illnefs.buti did not imagine I had loved her half So well.
It

HO
HISTORY OF
It was a conliderabfe time before Ihe opened her eyes.~—I became almoft diftrafted ; held all kinds of falts and eflences to her nofe, which the ladies offered me, prelTed her hands, alternately, in mine, and was juft going to affift Mrs. Elliot in loofening her gown, &c. when fhe recovered.—With a deep* figh, with a glowing blufh, Ihe railed her head from my bofom, and attempted to make Some apology
for the fituation flie had been in.----Tran^orted
to fee her once more reflored to me, I entreated her to be compofcd, and, by way of helping her to recover from her confufion into which Ihe had been thrown, laidthe blame upon the exceflive heat of So crouded a room.
With a look full of gratitrde, (he eagerly catched at this excufe, and diredlly availed herfelf of it, in order to go home.
“ Not for the world, ” continued I, “ on no account would I have you go into the air fo foon ; your Sudden departure, may occalion a relapfe.—— Give me leave to aflift you, my lady, in walking into the next room till you are more recovered.”
She did not refufe ; Ihe rofe, and even accepted of my arm. I conducted her to a parlour, to which'
only Mrs. Elliot and Mrs. Fifher followed---*the;
latter withdrew as foon as fhe had propofed Several kinds of refrefliment to lady Charlotte, who was,
however, too much agitated to receive any.—--—I
attended her with a lolicitude and anxiety fufficient to convince her, how exceedingly dear fhe was to my heart, how abfolutely necefihry to my happi-nefs ; though I confidered time and place fo far, as to avoid every thing, that could increafe the confufion flill vifible in her countenance.———When fhe went home, after having returned to the company, foon afterwards, I did not follow her.-1 only pref-
fed. her hand rapturoufly, when I put her into her
chair.
LORD WOBURN.

ehair, and begged leave to enquire after her health the next day.—She neither granted nor denied my
lequeft, but her behaviour was encouraging.----1
went back immediately to the card-room, to let them fee that I had not retired with her, but made a Ihort ftay.-------
I fcarce clofed my eyes all night, fo eagerly did I long to know if my fcheme had Succeeded. As Soon as I thought Ihe was ready to admit me, I haftenei to her door.
The Servants condudled me to her.
The timid and difconcerted air with which ihc received me, gave me the ftrongeft alTurance, that 1 {till held a place in her dear heart.——In con-fequence of the great fatisfaftlon I felt upon the oc-cafion, I intreated her, even before I enquired after her health, in the moft earneft terms, to pardon a behaviour, which had given her fo much difplea-fure declaring Solemnly, that the violence of my love alone had occalioned my mifdemeanours, and as Solemnly alTuring her, that her admirable conduft having raifed her fb much higher than ever in my efteem, I could never think of being happy without her.
The energetic manner with which I fpofce touched her, and fo far threw her off her guard, that fhe replied, though evidently confufed, “ What then, my lord, am I to think of your behaviour to Mifs Batley ?”
“ Think of it as it was, only a little ftratagem, to difcover if your charming bofom ftill felt any emotions in my favour ; and may I not flatter myfelf that it has been fuccefsful ? Though I confess I never was fo much alarmed, left it had occalioned emotions too painful in your tender breaft.”
Don’t pronounce me a coxcomb, Wilmot---------1
Ihould not have made fo home an address to her,
had I not Seen that the dear creature continued in a
strange
112
HISTORY OF
strange flutter about me.—She, however, did every thing in her power to conceal her fatisfaftion j Ihe cast down her Sweetly embarrafled eyes, and averted her hlufhing face.—Urged now by pity, as weU as love, I ventured to preSs her fondly to my bofora, but in So refpedlful a manner, that it was Sufficient to banifli all her apprehenfions.--------She with-
drew herSelf from my arms, but with a Sort of reluctance, which affeUed me beyond expreflion, and looked as if flie faid, “ How blest could I be in that fituation, were I not afraid of you ! ”
J was not mistaken, Ihe repeatedly importuned me to leave her, and I at last refolved to comply with her request, though never lefs inclined to go from her.----Only Say that you forgive me, lady Char-
lotte, and will See me again in the afternoon.”—— “ Well, well,” anSwered flie, with the most delicious fmile, leave me now —^—-and I will conlider ©fit.”
I returned between Seven and eight, and found the Elliots and pretty little Kitty, who appeared to be rejoiced to See me.———To my great comfort, the diSgusting Mrs. Staples is quite removed ; but we lhall, I fuppofe, have Some other Argus to Supply
her place j though Charlotte may now trust me.----
No man can have a higher opinion of a womaa lhan I have, at this moment, of Charlotte.
LET
LORD WOBURN.
H3
;L E T T E R List.
Lady Charlotte Morden to
Mrs, Blomer.
I DON’T know whether my condu£I will merit your approbation, but I will honeftly confefs the truth,—I Was not proof against loi:d Woburn’s pretended addrestes to another woman,—I could give him up, I am Sure I could, if he behaved unworthily j but I fear I could not, undisturbed, fee him attached to any other perfon.—I have expofed myfelf indeed, but if I am really in the full poITeflion of his heart, it will, I hope, make me ample amends for what I have endured on his account.
Yet I have a thoufand apprehenfions, a thouSand terrors.—Should he again take advantage of my ea-finest, I must give up all thoughts of him for ever consequently all thoughts of marriage’
I have, for Some time, looked upon my lord Woburn as my dearest friend, my future companion, the man to be one day my hulband, and have fet myfelf to dwell on, and to admire all his amiable qualities, throwing a veil over his imperfections— ' Can I, therefore, fuddenly difcard from my heart.,the man whom 1 have preferred to all others, and whom, to fay truth, I still think, in Ipite of that behaviour which kindled my refentment, very amiable.—When he Solicited my forgivenefs in the most humiliating
terms, could I be inexorable ,?--However, I had
fortitude enough to let him fee that his conduCt highly offended me ; and that he might have no opportunity to repeat his offence, I ordered myfelf to be denied,—Accidentally, on my part, we meL at a rout.
As
M4
H I S T O Pv Y OF
As I thought a card-room no place for the adjuft-ment of a difference like ours, I difcovered no figns of any alteration in mj fentiments.—In a flrort time the particularity of his behaviour to another lady, made me fear that I had gone too far—-and that he was quite loft to me.—This Was a difappointment, for which I was in no fhape prepared, and I could hardly fupport it : indeed I turned pale, felt myfelf extremely out of order, and was loon deprived of my fenfes.
The firft objeft I beheld, on recovering, was lord Woburn, who held me in his arms, and gave fuch affefling proofs of his anxious care and tendernefs, that I believe thofe proofs were more efficacious, than all the remedies applied towards my relief.
I cannot defcribe the emotions by which he feem-ed to be agitated, while I was indifpofed, nor his apparent apprehenfions left my indifpofition fhould return j—yet was his refpcdl; equal to his affiduity { and the manner in which he apologized for his carriage the next day, fufficiently made amends for ail his former improprieties.
I felt myfelf more touched by the delicacy with which he treated me on that fincfle occafion, than
•	O	^	'
ever I had been with all the tender things he ever had faid to rne before ; and I could not help earneft-ly wifliing, that he might never again give me rea-fon to change the opinion I then entertained of him.
I was, however, at that moment fo exceedingly fearful left he fhould, by relapfing into his former indifcreet freedoms, oblige me again to difmifs him, with frefti marks of my difpleafure, that I hurried him away, thinking it better to defer a longer inter-T/iew with him, till we were both more compofed.
Yet, notv/ithftanding this reconciliation, fo unexpected by us, I muft acknowledge Mr. and Mrs.
Elliot’s care of me, in providing another lover.-----
■They
L O R D W O B U R N.
*45
—-They meant well, though their defigns were un-fuccefslul every impartial perfon indeed, muft allow Sir Charles Ccnyers to be an agreeable man.
Kitty "Downton, I fancy, will confole him.------Not
that I believe flie thinks about him, but it appears
pretty plain to me, that he thinks of her.—-----She
is, at prefent, too young to be ferious upon thefe fubieUs.—She is, you know, naturally lively to excels ;—befides, to confefs the truth, lord Woburn is, I apprehend, her favourite : a ihouiand inadvertencies on her hde, are conclufive confirmations of my
conjeflures.----He muft have alfo, undoubtedly,
perceived her prcpcfTeilions in his favour, as he has
a large fhare of penetration.---However, he treats
her with all the cast, good-natured freedom of a brother.
But I mufl; lay dowm my pen, or I/hall grow a very tirefome correlpondent.—We cannot alw'ays help dwelling too long on topices which are particularly pleafing to us ; but we ought, whenever we enter upon fuch topics, in the epiflolary way, to watch the motions of cur pens, that w'e may not gratify ourfelves at the expence of the patience of our friends.
Chaklottm MoRDEar.’
\
©
LET-
t4-S
HISTORY OF


L E T T E R
LIV.
LoriiWoBUPvN to Mr. Wilmot.
INGE I have been aiTured that lady Charlotte ' is the dear delicate creature I always hoped
to 'find her, I am become as light as air.--1 really
never,was compiefely happy, till I was S'enfible of this charming woman’s ten,demefs, and that her
affection for me was as pure as it was ardent.-----
‘Thoroughly convinced of the purity of her love, as w.Dll as the ardour of it, my min d is no Ion ger dil-turbed with doubts, and tortured with fuipicions. I
• . . #	« *r	* • ^ . . ..	• -	. *
therefore behave to her quite 'in another manner ; wdiich will, I ho.pe, remove all her apprehenfions feoncerning me, and indpce her to place loine const-ce ill ' me.—SShe is already much i.Dqre eafythan
ilie was in my company, and more inclined to allow me ail reafonable freedoms, as fire finds that I do not abuie them.
[. Tilings are, thrcngh my care atid aftivity, in great forwardnefs towards the complet'io'n of my happinefs,
—The fettlements, &c &c. are preparing.---------------
I'offer carte blanche—fire modeftly framed objeftions to fucha proceeding ; Mr. Elliot, as her gurdian and friend to ns both, ccmpromifed matters between us. —Yet the dear creature tells me, l am toodilintereft-ed ; but I fay not.—I would never marry the woman wdiOHi J could not tiuft with ail my fortune.
-------Do I not put a far greater confidence in lady
Charlotte ?-----Is not her own honour, as well as
mine, of more confequcnce, infinitely of more con-fequence, than a few paltry thoufands ?—Without her, all the money in. the univerfe would not give me a memento joy ; with her, and a fufiiciency for
her
lord wobUR>^-
147
Vr
her convenience, I Hiall be amply provided for.
Poor Ned abfolutely (Iraitens himfelf to find fup~ plies adequate to lady Louifa’s v/an.s ; it is a mod
extravagant, voluptuous little toad.-----As I was
obliged to be cool to her, I have lately been out of her favour-----but I could not refufe Ned’s impor-
tunities, who doats upon this idol, to fee her dance the ether day ; he made a kind of a ball, and as h and his wife have been to vifit lady Charlotte, with, niyfifter and Sir George, he Sent cards to lady Charlotte and her friends for this entertainment ; Hie honoured him with her prefence, and Kitty Down-ton was our party.
Lady Charlotte, who knows that I am not a great cancer, excufed herfelf, by faying, that flie was fcarcely recovered from her late illnefs,—LadyLouifa danced an allemand with colonel Striker ; had lire been my wife, lire ilrould have had her feet cut oft'.
----Never were there mcie charming and inviting
attitudes, confequently very improper ones for married women.-----No woman, indeed in my opinion,
but a profeffed ftage-dancer, Ilrould attempt to excel
in an allemand,-----She wdro has a defign to make
her fortune, and v-i^ho imagines lire fliall carry her point, by llrewing her perfon in an alluring light, is certainly in tire right to ftudy this dance writh the nicefl: attention, for no dance is better calculated to promote the tender pr.ffion betw'een the fexes ; but a woman who has been modeftly educated, and who thinks as fhe ought, will never wiflr to be admired in public, for attitudes which can feive only to excite the loofell ideas.—It would difguft me in the bigheft degree, to fee my lifter or daughter clafp a nian in her arms, to whom lire was an utter ftran-
ger, and be clafped by him in return.----But if my
“iw/r Ilrould attempt to take fuch monftrous liberties, or to admit of them, I believe I Ilrould go dif-
trafled.---Lady Charlotte has not difeovered the
G 2	lealt

48
II 1ST O R Y OF
• least propenfity that way ; but Kitty Dovrnton^ after we got home, gave a lively, and not an ungraceful jump, and faid Ihe fancied Ihe could foon learn the attitudes which (lie hadTeen.
“ Fie, Kitty !” replied my dear Charlotte.
, “ Were I your father or guardian,” faid I, “ thofc ^rms stiould be pinioned down, and thofe legs tied together, to prevent your expofing yourfelf in that preposterous manner.”
The poor girlcoloured,-T—-----?I really b^deve (lie
meant no harm, but fpoke merely from the livelinefs of her temper. After having clapped her hands to her face for a few moments, flie ran to me, and, with a plealing naivete, cried, “ Pray, my lord, don’t think amifs of me-rr------------------Indeed I did not
intend to fay any thing improper j but 1 always loved exercife, and I have heard you declare a hundred times, .that dancing was very proper for young peo-ple.”
“ Aye, child,” replied I, laughing at her fimpli-city, “ under prudent regulations it may be very .wholefome, for aught I know' ; but I cannot approve of all kinds of dances, nor do I think that dancing after .marriage, is at all neceflary for any wo-

man.
“ I may dance then in a prudent manner a long v,'hile, for I am fure I Ilran’t be married ?
“ Why fo ?” replied lady Charlotte.
You have not made a vestal vow. Surely, Kitty ?” added I.
“ No, my lord,” anfwered fhe blufhlng, “ but I Shall be very nice in my man ; and if it is not proper for me to dance an aliemand, I iliould not chufe, methinks, a man-who would dance one with any body elfe.”
“ Sir Charles Conyers, my dear Kitty,” replied I, “ will endeavour to make himfelf agreeable to you in every refpedt.”
“Plliawl
f
I *1
I
'C
L O R D W O B U R N.
49
“Phaw I [turning away her faCe] how you love to rally i»e> my lord,—But you will fee, that with all' yout fenfe and penetration, you may be miftakeii. . ~Sir\ Charles is my fuperior, indeed, in point of fortunh, but I would not marry a king if I did not love him.
Noble Sentiments, Jack, in a girl of fifteen !--
Is ilie not worthy of my Charlotte’s friendOiip ----
You fee the eifefts of good education—-What an amiable innocent this girl is ! ’ She may be made an
excellent woman.-----^But it is a thoufand to one if
Hie is not Spoilt fiflt,--«^Under my Charlotte’s.
tuition, it is true flie u^culd, certainly improve, yet I iliould not chiife to have her live witn us : ihe would draw a train of fellows after her.—^—Befides, a man and his wife do better bythemfelves how many famous dilferences have I known to a-rife, merely from the interpofition of a third perfcn !
No Such perfon fhculd I chufe in my family
T niuti lock illafp'-aster Mrs: Dawfon ; there is Something in that woman very particular •, ilie casts glances at me with a meaning in them, which I am in no humour to comprehend at prefent -7^—^^Poflibly, \vhen 1 have been married a' little while, J may begin to grow lefs rigid ; yeti dare believe, that if my Charlotte continues to be the amiable woman iLe is, •
I Shall not bestow a thought on any other ------a
Woman true to'her hulhand is fo rare a creature, that though Hie barely does her' duty, flie is infinitely fuperior to the majority of her neighbours ; and he must be an unreasonable man, indeed who complains ’ of his lot with Such a companion.^
Kitty, Downton, may, I firmly believe, be mad a good wife, for She is ani exceeding good girl at
he v/as fo hurt by what I faid to her about the allemand, that She came running to me the fast uine I happened to_ be alone, and begged me '
3	not

prelent.


150
HISTORY OF
\

not to imagine /lie had the leaPc defire to learn that
O
dance, nor any other which I did not approve of.
I, child ! You know I have nothing to do with your education ; your mother and Mrs. Elliot must take care of that.^^
Well, but I am fure that neither of them will defire itie to learn what does not .Dieet with your approbation, as they are both fenfible, how great a judge you are of the propriety of behaviour in women ; therefore, mv lord, I Should be exceeding-ivcohiiged to you, if you would give them a hint xipon this fubjedl.^^
Flattering little hustey !-Itookher inmyarms;
and just as I was conficlering whether I Sliould kifs her for her compliment or not, Sir Charles Conyers came in.-------
Here, Sir Charles,’^ faid I refigning her to him,

is the best and most amiable of girls ^ take her upon mv recommendation, and ufe her as kindly as She deferves.’’
Sir Charles caught her, fand went to prefs her to his bofom ; but flie broke hastily from him, and with a reproachful glance at me, yet looking at the fame time, as if She was loth to be angry, cried, ‘‘ FL w^couid you dost), my lord
Why Should you be angry with lord Woburn, my cliarniing Kitty,’’ faid Sir Charles, ‘‘ he could not have given you to a man who Vvstli love you better than I Shall.”
lam never angry with lord Woburn,” replied
the pretty gipfey, bridling with refentment at him, ‘‘ it is you who are to blame, for taking feriouOy


what he meant only in jeft.
Lord Woburn is happy, Mifs Dov/nton, in being fo highly in your favour.”
Lady Charlotte at tliat moment came in—I fiew to her, and leh them to make up their little quarrel by themfelves.
LET-
h
;b>
LORD WOBURN,
I <
rl
###§#§h
§ •#


letter lv
From the fa:me to the fame.
"E are in the greatest confufion.—Poor Ned!
His lady Louiia, his wife----What a devH"!
has been caiLrht in bed with her halr-drelfer ! —
eis me, my
How I feel for my brother, who had not the leafl; fulpiclon of fuch, an iaHraous proceeding ! He v/as ever indeed a doating fool.	.
■ While I was inaki,ig fome fevere flriftures a^alnd
O	O'
uxorioufnefs, even in the prefence of my future., t’other day, Mis. Elliot exclaimed, “ Biel lord, can a man love his wife too v/ell
“ Undoubtedly, madam ; if he i; fo far blinded by his pallion for her, as to fuiier her to injure his honour and her own by her' indifcreet conduct, he certainly loves her too^ well—^periiaps I- ilioald.rather fay too much.”—Bux to my fubry.
This wanton toad, it feeiiis, had behaved in fuch a manner,before her fervants,. that they fufpedted her for fome time tlieV were all attached to nw brother^ who was one ofthebeO; ofmaltef's ; and S.nith who waits upon him, having ah afiedtion for Mrs. MalTora, my lady’s woman, was infofmed by her how things went.——He, therefore, immediately acquainted Ned with the difagreeable, intelligence, adding, “ St. Perle, fir, is at this very inftant with Lady Louifa.”
My brother' was at firfi mcredulous ; he was f> unwilling to believe the information he had received, that, inftead of going to furprife the rafeal, he began to fwear at Smith, for daring to mention his lady in fo injurious a way, threatening to turn him into the ftreet,
G 4	Smith,
3 5'2
HISTORY O r
Smith, knowing how much he idolized her, walt-v ed patiently, till his fury was abated, and then told him, “ that he had lived too long with him, and had been too well latisfied with his (ituation, to think of
making him uneafy for nothing.--------My lady, fir,”
added he, “ has given the firongeft proofs of her infidelity j and I fhould not deferve to live with fo good a ina-fter, if I concealed what I have heard and feen,”
Struck v/ith the Heady tone in which he fpoke the lafi: words, poor Ned could no longer refufc credit to what had been communicated.--------“ Fol-
low me,” faid he, trembling, “ follow me to my W'ifes apartment.”'
Sir.i-h followed at a didance;.
Poor Ned, petrified with horror and furpriSe, called aloud for help;
Smith hurried into the room to the afiltlance of his mafter, but found' him only funk down upon
the bed, wdthout fenfe or motion.------The faithful
fellow placed him in a chair, and gave him fome of my lady’s cordial, which always Hood upon the
dreffing-table.----It was a good while before he
came to himfelf.-'—On his recovery, he charged Smith not to fay" a word about the aifair, but to fend for me..
I hadened to him.—T found him pale, confider-ably agitated, and exceedingly out of order.
He made a fign wdth his hand for me to fit down.
With fome difficulty he brought out, “ My wife, my l-ouifa, on wdiom I fo fondly doated, is gone; file has left me for as vile a fellov/ as crawls upon, the face of the earth j the lowed of all rafcals the villain who drefies her hair.—I have jud caught
them together.-----^While I dood, confounded with
amazement, he jumped out of the window,, and fhe ran out of the room.”
can'
LORD WOBURN.

I can hardly tell you what reply I made to the
poor fellow.----1 could not without deviating from
truth, fay that I was furprifed at the very difagreea-ble difcovery, as I never, you know, liked lady Lou-ifa’s manners ; but I was' aiftually both Ihocked and grieved at finding my brother duped by a defigning devil.——I endeavoured to comfort' him, by faying, “ I thought* he*Was happy in having So fair an opportunity to get rid of her.”
“ You talk,” replied he,-fhaking his head, “ as if you had never loved.”
“ Hafd I loved tomadnefs,” anfweted I, “ Such behaviout would certainly have cured me.”
A deep figh wakthe only reply he v/as capable of
But I hope he v/illget over this difap-
pointment, when time has a little inured him to it
In C O N T I N U a T I O N.
My whole timeds taken up between Ned and lady Charlotte.—-My poor brother is almoft diftradted.—• he talks of nothing but his Louifa, and of the ten-dernefs fhe had always expreffed for him-^—-i-which convinced hini fo thotoughly of her firm attachment to him ;—ihe fays', that he took little or no notice of her conduct, indulging her in all her mofl extravagant defires —His indulgence v/as carried to a very imprudent height y for it made her quit e wanton with her uriiimited power over him, and drove her
to the mod: ungrateful return imaginable for it.^--
Ned, however is better in health, and time may do W’onders.
♦
My Charlotte has behaved with a delicacy and tenderness to me upon' this occafion,' which have prodigioufiy endeared me'to her.—How very, very ditfere.nt is fhe from the greateft part of her fex, who love to exult over a fallen fider, as if their own virtue wasftrengthened by the weaknefTes of ano-
G 5	ther
I
C4
HISTORY OF
ther !
How erroneous a way of thinking I How
much more amiable are thofe, who, charitably allowing for the frailties of human nature—frailties
from which no human creature is exempt-----------are
more rea(dy to pity, than Infuk the unhappy wanderers from the paths of difcretion and virtue.
Little Kitty is wonderfully infinuating upon thk occafion.—She fees me uneaSy and dejedted.—I must feel for Ned.—BeSides,a dlfappointment of fuch^a nature, is enough to fet any man thinking, who is going to enter into the most folemii engagements with any woman.—I have no doubts, indeed, with regard to Charlotte—neither had Ned any concerning Louifa
—^-----but then he was foollllily in love
poSIibly fo am I.-----When a man is pastiorr-
ately fond of a woman, he fcarce knows what he is al30ut.—Love abfolutely deprives us of our fenfes.
-—After all my preciutions, Wilmot, I fear that I am no wifer than other men.
LETTER LVI.
Lady Charlotte Morde n, to Mrs. Blomer.
HAVE been exceedingly di^refled upon lord __ Woburn’s account, my dear friend ; he has fufFered fo much for his brother, that I have pitied him extremely.
Mr. V/oburn has had a fever.—His mind has been greatly diilurbed by forac domelfic affairs, which have hurt his health, and required all the confolation his friends could admi'niiler to him.— Yovt cannot think how much lord Woburn’s anxiety about his brother, rind concern for him, has raifed him in my efteem.—By that concern, and that anxiety
LORD WO B U RN.

xlety, he difcovers an excellent heart, and induces me to believe, that I fliall run no fort of rifle by venturing rny^ happinefs in his hands.—;I always imav'ined that a good fon, a good’ brother, and a good friend, would mod ' probably make a good bufband. to the woman of his- choice, and I dare fay I fliall not bemiftaken.-—^Never did lojd Woburn appear fo amiable ill my 'eyes ; never did my heart feel fo fincere an affeUion for him.—The ivoman who could deceive him mud be abandoned indeed.
Kitty Downton h, in my opinion, a fweet girl ! —She certainly loves him.—She looks on him with fo much compaflion, and fetches fuch fighs, that I fome-times fear he will read what palTes in her little heart. A few days ago we were all three fitting together. I was trying to divert my lord, that he might not refiedt too deeply upon what would only increafe his difquiet.—hie was leaning on'the back of rily chair li,fishing to me.—Pqor Kitty’s eyes, after having rambled froth one to t’other, at laid fixed on him —A heavy stall biirSt from her, whifch fouzfed
. •/ ‘ O	-	,	^
my lord.—threw hirnfelf forward, locked fin^her face, and cried, What’s th6 matter, Kitty ■ '
“ I can’t tell,” replied llie;' not aditfle Confufed, “ but I am fo low fpirited to day, that I am fit for nothing.”
“ I aih forty to hear you fhy fo,’^ anfwered my lord,.“ but you mud not indulge your vaponriih-humour, child.—Get up quickly, and goto ycur needle, your book, or your harpfichord.’ *
“ Indeed I would, replied fiie, in a plaintive tone, “ but I am incapable of ehher playing, dr working, as I fiiiould do ; and 1 have taken up niy book and thrown it down again twenty times, to-day.” Poor girl,” cried my lord, fmiling, .catching a racket that lay on the table.—“ You are idle 1 am afraid; come, a'little exercife will do you go.od.”
■	■	'A'way
> (
556
H I S T O R Y O P
cried' my the gen-i
Away flew the fliuttle-cock and Kitty’s vapours together.
Sir Charles Conyers, who certainly comes after her, foon afterwards entered the room.—Taking up another racket, he,propofed to^ me to make a party.
Before I could get out a refufal, lord Woburir haftily fitting down by me, faid, “ No, Sir Charles, if you are inclined to divert yourfelf, I refign Mifs Downton.”
Kitty, offended at this Ipeech, turned’ away her face, and burft into tears.
“ Heyday !: what’s the matter now,” lord, while Sir Charles" endeavoured, in tleft terras to foot he her ;—but his efforts were un fuccefsful. She retired to her own apartment,
“ Surely,” faid lord Woburn- to me, “ I have jiot mentioned any thing to make her uneafy ? Pur-pofely, I am certain, I have not.—She is a good na-tured, amiable girl, and f fliould- be lorry to have her stippofe T had any intention to difconcert her.”
Sir Charles looked exceedingly ferious.---1 want-
ed to bring Kitty to herfelst but had no mind to leave the two gentlemen together; however as I could not fuppofe that they had the lead: reafon to be offended- with each other, I ventured up flairs, and gave a hint to poor Kitty, whom I found ftill weeping, that a conflruftion might be put upon her behaviour,, different from what flie liad thought of, if fhe did not appear with her ufual chearfulnefs ; adding, to gi ve a turn to herferrow, that lord Woburn had exprefled fome concern, left: he fliould have faid any thing to offend her,
“ Has he ?” replied llie, will go then and af-fnre him to the contrary ; “ I would not have him difpl eafed with me for the world.”
“ Well,” anfwered, I, “ and are you not equally follicitous about Sir Charles’s good opinion ? He is a very pretty gentleman.”
Ah ]
L O R r>“ W O B U R N
157
\ •
‘‘ Ah ! my; lady,” Said Ihe, with an arch look, and
a half frni'le, “ would you change the one for the other ? No, no—you know better;
I made no anfwer, but leading her into the parlour, faid, “ Here, gentlemen, I have brought this lady to’ receive your acknowledgments • for what you did to difpleafe her.”
“ Tam afraid,” replied Sir Charles,'“ that I am frequently So unhappy as to give offence, when T really wilh to be particularly pTeafing but if any thing I can fay,” added he, approaching Kitty with a refpedtful tendernefsj which feemed to aftonifh her beyond exprellion, “ wall procure my pardon. Mist Bownton, l am readyto make the bell attempt In my pOW:er for the obtaining of it.”
Kitty looked quite abaflied——To relieve her,! fhid, “ Come, my dear, Sir Charles’s apology b fufficient.”
“ It isallover, now,” cried fhe„holding out her-and to lord- Woburn, who had not indeed uttered a lyllable to her.--—^Hc- took her hand, but immediately prefenting it to Sir Charles.-——Sir Charles kilfedit with tranfpDrt.—^—^Sho* drew it back, and fixed her eyes upon my lord.-—What’s the matter.
faid he, advancing, wsth a fmile, “ Are wc not friends ?”
“ I hope fo,” replied (lie, lighing, “ bbt
moBM
hut
“ But what anfwered my lord,' haHily, taking her hand with a look full of pity, drawing .her neareir to him at the fame time, and giving her a modeft kils,—“ there now, are you fatisfied w ith me ?”
“ Nay,” interrupted Sir Charles, “ if nothing lest will enfure the lady’s pardon to you,^my lord, may not I hope for the fame indulgence ?” following my lord’s example. *
Poor Kitty’s face glowed.—She went to the other end of the room, and fat down.
Sir

158
HISTORY OF
Sir Charles foon went after her, and fo affiduouny' trie(i torenider himfelf agreeable, that Hie began, I thought, to look on him wish more chearrUinefs.— There is really ibmetliing winning in his manner ; t wish he may Succeed.------donct know a young
perfon who has a better heart than.JVhfs Downton, 01 who is more capable of making a good wife ; and I Sincerely hope that Slie will not be fpoilt, when She becomes more- acquainted with the world, no
advanta,^eous Senocl for handrorne girls.-I have been
praifiag Kitty highly, to my lord ; and he. In return, has laviilied So many fine panegyrics on me, that, to tell you the truth, I begin to fear he has a better ooinion of me than I .deferve.------1 wiia, Indeed,
to be the very creature he defcrlbes, my dear friQnda
---—If he ihould, after all,, be difappointed, what
will, become of me ?—^—My love for him is, I feel,
much stronger than I imagined it was.
Yoiir’s unchangeably.
C H A R L O T T £ M O R D E N
^ ^	m j-r %

LETTER LVII.
Lord Woburn to Mr. Wilmot,
<
OW diftradled is my fituaUon ! —I take up n-w pen to tell you my feelings but I knew not how to deferibe them.-—i-Mowever., as you are the
only friend I have in the world, I will try to inform you of an event, which has made me fupremely wretched.
You. well know to what a degree of dotage I loved lady Charlotte.—I could not exift without feeing,
hearing, touching her.-1 cannot at this prefe-nt
mouient, though I , am - banlibed—“iV*by
baniilied from her
11 gut
O- *
tor .Dyer .-
Jt
A.
IS


i
L O R D W O B U R.N.
1$^
rs Impoffible to go on.—That refledtion unmans me.
.—Oh ! Wilmot, Wihnot, never was I fo happy as yefterday.—I had been witb her from the morning : many little matters were to be adjuiled preparatory to the happy day—A day I flaall now never fee.—
Yet I will not give her up---^No—I have her pro-
mife, and die Jhall bQ mine.—But where was I?—
I recolledt.----How bleftwas I from-the morning
to the evening ! How delicately tender was her behaviour tome! Never had die looked fo very lovely, never had die been fo indulgent.-—Yet I had a tor-
o
menting Iiead-ach, which every now an(.l then cruelly damped the fatisfacHon I felt in her company. Sometimes, from excefs of pain, I looked leriouSj and, I fuppofe, ill, for the dear creature afked me fo many questions, exprefied fo much tender concern, when I acquainted her with my complaint, and offered fo many remedies-----when we were by
ourfelves after dinner, flie permitted me to rest m.y weary head upon her fliouider), that I grew giddy vsith delight, and recovered my health, purely, I believe, from the flow of fpirits which her kindnefs
Yet I never once offered to take
/
any improper advantage of her pity—her love, let
me fay.-------—Sure of h^r heart, and convinced
that Slie would undoubtedly refent ai y indifcreet freedoms, I contented myfelt with thole alone, which her modesty allowed me.—While 1 was thus happy in her dear fociety, a note was brought to me from your brother, informing me of his a,rrlval in England
----He defired to fee me immediately.—Glad to
hear he was come I fent word that I would be with him in an hour.—The hour arrived—but I could not
gave me
tear myfelf from my Charlotte—though She now and then repulfed me in the midst of my endearments, with a charming fmile, crying, You have forgot your friend, my lord.’’
I had, indeed, forgot him, and you, and all
the world.----1, therefore, fpent die ume, in which
I had
i6o
H I S T G B: Y O Y
I had pfomifed td meet Harry with my miilrels, my' friend, my all.
At (upper I was not yet recovered enough to eat --but fat by; her while (he fupped, arid had the high felicity of being tempted by her to tafte every
thing which (lie thought particularly exce’lent----
At laft (lie ur ged me fo earneftly to go to my frend, that I rdfe, beiievin’gy(lie wifhed td retire, pr:fled her foft hand to my lips, and left her—relufta'ntly.'
I met your brother at the Star and Garter,—He ' rallied me’ for being only three hours after my time.
-I apologized ■ for’having been fo> tardy,' by telling hirii fairly the truth j and having' my' heart arid head full of love, talked av/ay till-Harry was, I plainly faw, almoft tifed of me'.—I then propofed to feparate for the night.—^It was between one and two.—We walked together to his' lodgings, which were juft by.
Juft at that inftant I was feized v/ith an unac- ' countable properifity to ftep Into St. James’s Square, ■ though I had but'fo lately left it;—I could not hin- ' der my feet from carrying me 'to the' very fpot which iriciofed all that my eyes delighted to gaze on, all- ' my foul'held dear.—^'vVhile I flood with folded arms, looking up at her window, I put'up an ardent prayer' for her protection and fafety.—-Juft as I was, with uriwiHing, lingering fteps, turning homeward.
I heard lady Charlotte’s door unlock, and faw a woman’s head out at the window.—She appeared to be’ Dawfon, arid inftantly a man who, by the light of the lamps,'feemed genteel and weli-drefled, came up, and went in.—^-^The door v/as going to be clofed after him—^I then, rouzed by jealoufy, and agitated with a thoufand ideas, ruflied in after him.—Daw-fon, confounded with guilt and aftonifliment, was
ftruck dumb.------The man dared at me—I flared
at him. -----Impatient to know t”e meaning of this
ftrange affair, I alked ''I' bufinefs there.-Dawfon
full of corifttflon, lliook with apprehenflon, and faid,
“ He
LOR D W O B U R N;
i6i
He is my brother, my lord, whom I have not feen a great while.—Do,” continued die to him, with a
befeeching tone, do leave me nowd’—-----------He
made no reply, but with a Surly air flung out of the houfe.
As Soon as I had got rid of my gentleman—for a gentleman he realiy was—>—^fliocked-to death at this woman’s proceedings, which were certainly infamous---—(you may remember I always fufpeUed
her, and detefted the impudent fleer on her face.)
I alked her how long (he had made a praftice oflet-ting in fellows, after her lady was retired to rest, and turning the houfe into a brothel;—“ but I am happy in having found you out, Mrs, Dkwfon; added I, and you may be aflured, I fliall fet this aifalr in a right light to lady Charlotte,”-—She stood a moment with her eyes on the ground Sas if revolving what had just pasted ; then looking up to me, as if (he had an affair of the utmost confequence to commuhicate.
“ Why then,” replied (he, “ it must cut ; and indeed it will be but acting an honest part by your Ibrdih’p, though I am forty to (peak amist of my
lady, but—----
“ How !’ what !” interrupted I-------(hamefully
taken in by her artful' behaviour—“What do you mean ?”
I fay, my lord,” continued (lie, malicious nend, “ that l am not to blame ; if niy lady v.'illfee gentlemen in private, I dare not difobey her orders,” What orders!” exclaimed 1- full of astonifli-
ment'and horror,----“VV hat men ! does lady Char-
ibtte admit men privately of a night ! By h---1
’tis a lie, an infamous lie.” ’
To be fure, my lord,” replied the artful devi!, (he. will not own it to your lordlhip ; and I hope you won’t think of mentioning it to her ; I (hall be ruined and undon®-, lofe my place, my charadter
yy
it

ic
u
9
€'Veif"
iSz
HISTORY O

everything, If you do, pretending to fqueeze cut a few tears.
‘‘ Your chara6ler must be infamous, and your place to the last degree fcandalous, if what you
memion Is true------But I canst believe you----You
have certainly inventecf an abomiilalrle lie to excuf yourfclf, and iliall be expofed to your lady to-morrow.—She is too good to be thus deceived ; and her reputation may be injuied by this vile behaviour of yours.
‘‘ It is very well, my lord,” replied The, you may tliink as you pleafe ^ my ruin is certain, be it which way it will ;—but you will find, when too late, that had my lady been as innocent as I am, you would be too happy ”
’Sdeath ! woman,” cried I, tortured with mad=-nefs, mention not your lady again, as you value your fafety—knov/ Slie Is chaste.”
You may then believe me fo too, for we are both the Same ; and I beg your lordlliip will go, and take no notice of what ha'^ pasted.”
Not take any notice !’’ cried I, do yOu Imagine that I Sliall be filent upon fuch a tranfaftlon as this }—No believe me, I will come to the truth of it, or periHi.”
“ You will never know any more tlran what you do already faid fbe, ‘‘ can you fuppofe that my lady will confefs to your lordstip, that die prefers another man to you—fire knows better—No, my lord, Slie wist lay the blame on me, and I stiall be turned out—and you will make it up with her lady in ip.”
I v.stll go to the devil first,” cried I, tranfported with fury, but where is your lady
In her bed, my lord-—^-----Where drould stie
be
Shew me to her immediately,” cried I, with anunpaiience which dlfcovered how little capable I
was
1'-.-
LORD WOBURN.
I S3
was of making ufe of my reafoii.—Shew me to her —If stie a(iauts other men, SStc may as well receive
me.

She hefitated a moment ; flie looked terrified and full of perplexity, while I continued raving like a lunatic,—“ Shew me to her this Intlant. ’
“ On one condition, my lord ; fwear to me,
that you will not name me In this aSfair.------I know
your lordihip's honour, and may depend upon it.^’ Honour !’’ replied I, Is there any honour in
keeping a promlfe v/ith fuch wretches as you----------
Conduct me to her, or by all that’s facred (laying my hand upon my fwcrd) I will not anrwer for the Gonfequences.”
She made no reply, but went up stairs.—I followed.-------You may guefs in what an agitation of
fpints.—But I cannot write any more at prefent. My head turns round, my—my pen drops from my hand.’’
I.D CONTINUATION.
I followed this curfed devil up stairs —She took a key cut of her pocket, opened a door which led to her lady’s dreSUng room—a room I well knew ;
and putting a candle into my hand instantly dlf-appearsd.
With hasty tremTling steps I piirfued my way to another door, which led, I naturally imagined, to
her bed-chamber.---1 was not mistaken---But,
good h---n ! how stiall I defcribvO what I felt at
the fight of her.—She was the very Image of purity. Her whole appearance was perfeftly elegant—
and delicate.--However to proceed—if I can.—•
"T he lovelv creature was half raifed in her bed, and wiih a look, which declared both aftor.ilhment and. fear, cried, “ Who’s there. ?”

Perceiving
1^4
History o f'
Perceiving plainly that I was the intruder, by ihe' light in my hand, as well as by a lamp in the chimney, Ihe coloured, and exclaimed------“ Lord Wo-
burn, heaven defend me !”—Then, in foSer accents What’s the matter ? how came you here ?”
No matter how I came here,” replied I, fetting down the candle Upon the table, advancing to the bedfide, and going to clafp her in my arms, “ here I‘am, my charming Charlotte, and 1 will give you^ no reafon to repent of your dlfappointment ”
“ Gracious d 1” cried the dear innocent creature^ ilarting from my arms' all trembling with terror, “ what is the reafon of this ? O leave me, leave me ! or I will alarm the houfe, and call foy thofe who will oblige you to go,”
“ As to that, my fweet creature,” (aid I, gating on her charming neck and bolbm uncovered, while (lie was beautifully difordered, “ Nobody will hear you-: compofe yourfelf, therefore, a little, for I am come to talk with you;”
“ Is this a time and place to talk with me ?’* cried (lie, frightened even to tears, which flood trembling in her= Idvely- eyes j “ How could lord--Woburn, who (Irould he my friend- and protedlbr, the guardian of my perfon'and charadler, think of endangering both, by breaking into my apartment at this hour of the night ?—-Oh ! leave me, leave me, I conjure you”’ added (lie, pulhing away my hands, which had feized her’s, “ I will not talk to -you, I will not liften to you now-; you cannot expect I fliould.”’
replied I,' fitting down in a chair by her ' bed-fide,I do Infift upon your hearing me now. Dawfon, your woman is an infamous devil j—but -fhe has not only her own Incontinence to anfwer for, ilie has accufed you of receiving men into your chamber at night. One of them I juft now faw let -in by her- who came-to either her -or you.”
And-’i
Yes
3?
LORD WOBURN.
a 65
: » ^
'** And can you give.credit totS) fcandalous and So Talfe a .charge, luy lord !” replied the dear angel, ftill in a violent terror, “ but be that as it will-^ leave me now.-^—I will,vindicate myfelt’ lufficiently to-morrow.—-O what a dreadful, what -a groundlefe cufation is this !” continued Ihe, rllin ., up, trembling, and looking about for the tafiel of her bell, which I had, upon ray firR letting ;go her hand, twilled in fuch a manner abo rt the back of
the chair, that fhe copld hardly reach it.-------
I am now fenlible how wrong my behaviour was, —I deferve to be puniflied 5—yet not quite fo rigo-
roufly, I think, VVilmot.r----Why did fire look fo
beautifully tempting ?—I caught her again fall in my arms, and ravilhed a thoufand melfing kifles.
.—This was going too far I confefs —but I became too much ;into?:lcated to be checked by reflcdlion. —She then fereamed vvith fuch violence, that one -of the men-fervants very foon came hurrying down flairs, and called at th.e door to know what was
the matter %
Oh ! John-—open the door—break open the door,
'—Call Dawfon, Martha, Sufan.’'
“ Heavens ! madam,” cried I, half reftored to my reaSon, “ be filent, or you vyill expofe us both.”
“ I will raife the dead, before I will fuffer liich infolence.”
I was (Iruck with thefe words ;.-----1 could not
determine what to fay or do y full of embaraffraent, and uncertain who was in the right, fhe or her woman.------1 concluded, indeed, the latter mufl be a
jade ; yet was hurt by what I had feen, and ftill more pained by my own impetuous behaviour, of which I inftantly repented..—I was alfo horribly a-■fliamed of being thus expofed to the fervants, who, undoubtedly believed, that I was on the point of committing a rape upon their millrefs.—But by her
dear felf I fwear, 1 never harboured fo vile a defign
Diftradted,
166
HISTORY
O F
Diflrafiecj, ahaflied, embarralTed to the greateft degree—I hung my head, and began to Hammer cut fomething about Dawfr n, by v/ay of apology', while the feryants ftocd ftarin? at me, and as much
O	'
Surprised, I believe, at the fight of me, as I was diSpleaSed at their appearance.—My angel continued to inSift upon my leaving the houSe.
Thoroughly convirced of her unSullicd virtue, by her every look, woid, and aCtion, I threw mySelf on my knees by the Side of the bed, related all that had paSTed between me and DawSon, and called heaven and earth to witnefs, that I had no finister intentions whatever.
She feemed to listen to me eagerly, yet with a vlfible inmatlerce to have me leave her.
j
Juft v/hen I was going to finiSli my relation, Well, Sir,” faid die, interrupting me “ and after my woman had de.Hvered thefe faiiehocds about me, what inducement could you pcSIibly have to break
into my apartment ------If ycu thought me guilty,
you could not imagine me in the least to be v/cnhy of voiir notice ; and, if innocent, you adted cruelly to alarm me in this boifterous manner.’^
No fatlsfadfory reply could I make to this addreSs to me, while die was furrcunded by her people. Yetiftill defended the purity of my intentions, adding, I wdil no longer disturb you madam but I v/111 write every particular of an event which has given me the diarpeft anxiety I ever knew, for your perufab-—^—An event which will render me wretched for life, unlefs you W'ill ccndefcend to pardon me.—I have been fliamefully indifcreet, I have been hardly in my lenSes.”
She returned no anfwer, but Seemed anxioudy de-firous to have me remove mySelf from the light of thoSe )^:ieauties, which had So much enflamed me.
I \tent home, and wrote a more particular account than I could verbally communicate of my rencontre
LORD W O B U R N.
167
centre with Dawfon, fridely owrSlng that the fuf-piclons which She h^d iniufeid into my mind, made me eager to fee with my ov/n eyes, whether there was a fuSHcient foundation for them.—I concluded with asturing her, in the ftrongeft terms, that I very fincerely repented the rafji behaviour, which the most violent and iimSh unreafonable lealoufy had occafioned ; and that -I never lliould be able to exifl: without her.
I cannot go on.
I am far from being well.
O
Harry is kind enough to come and fit with me often -—But wdiat is fbeie-y ? What are friends ? I have madly deprived rnySelf of the friendSliip of---O ! Wilmot, pity me.
# # # § § § # # #	4 # § # § '# # § #
L E T T E -R LVni.
From the fame to the fame.
r
PvECEIVED no anfwer to my letter, nor to many others which Idifpalched to the fame pur-pofe.
I waited on Mr. and Mrs. Elliot, and told thenh all that I had written to lady Charlotte ; I intreat-them alfo, in the most preSfing terms, to intercede for me.—They received me civilly ; but informed that my behaviour could not pofiibly be defended.—I could mot expedt much to be Said in my behalf, yet I perfistedin begging them to perfuade their amiable friend, to try me once more ; and as I could not think of giving up all my hopesmf fp^ud-ing my life with the most valuable woman I know topardon~to receive me.
me
They
r6S
HIS TORY OF
They gave me no encouragement.-:—“ Dawfon,” faid Mrs. Elliot, “ though culpable, has confelTed 'her own guilt.—She has declared that the man whom you followed into the houfe, was a lover of her’s, whom fhe has let in every night for fome time ; but that being certain you would inform her lady of what you had difcovered, fhe had, in her firft fright and confufion, thought of accufing her lady to fave herfelf; adding, that as I]ie believed a breach would moft probably be made bemeen you by complying with your requeft, to be conduced to her lady’s chamber, Ilie delivered up the key of the palfage which led to her dreffing-roora, through which die always went into her chamber in a morniiig—Her chamber door opening on the flair-cafe, fhe every night faflened herfelf,”
Thus have I rendered myfelf compleately mifera-■ble by my own folly ; and yet, Wilmot, 1 do think that any man circumftanced as I was and -and as thoroughly acquainted with the wlckednefs of women a.s I have been, would have felt a ftrong defire to Satisfy his curiofity in the manner I did.-—I have a thoufand arguments to urge in favour of a conduct to which I was irrefillibly impelled.—But I Sincerely tvldi that I had behaved in a very different way up-on the occafion.-—I find myfelf much indlfpofed.—• I have a violent pain in my head.—I fancy I am going to be extremely ilk—No matter if I die,—Life without Charlotte is riot in the leafl defirabie.
LET-
LORD WOBURN.
169

LETTER LIX.
►
Lady Charlotte Morden
Mrs, Blomer.
to
O U have received, my dear friend, from Mrs.' Elliot, a particular account of the ftrange and ihocking behaviour of lord Wobtirn.-—-I was not capable of writing at that time.-—1 have been, indeed, difordered ever fince,—No wonder—I am rather fur-prifed that I have been able to get over it fo well but my .aftonifliment and Indignation prevented me from finking into my former tendernefs for this unworthy man.—My thorough detellation of fuch behaviour, fo unjulfifiable a behaviour, has hitherto fa-ved me, and I hope w'ill ftill fave me.—It is a thou-fand pities that a man fo valuable in every other ref-pe£t,flTiould behave fo improperly to wmmen !
Poor Kitty Downton cries, and fays that Dawfon, and nobody but Dawfon, is to blame.—-One cannot, however, enter into a converfation upon this fubjecl with fuch a girl.—Dawfon is, undoubtedly higldy culpable, and I immediately difmiffed her. I alfo carefully examined all the other fervants ; and having great reafon to fulpedt one of the houfe-maids of being in the fecret, turned her away.—> How miferably has Dawfon aQed for herfelf ! How very much, hew irreparably, perhaps,, has Ihe Injured me I-------And yet, I ought, it may be, rather to
rejoice at my fituation., Than lament it.—A man of lord Woburn’s principles could never make me happy ;—have I not, therefore, had a narrow efcape from him ?
H
1 havd
170
HISTORY OF
I have nothing to do now, but to fit down for the remainder of my life out, of the reach of man,- if
poffible.—As this fhocking adventure is public-
and there was no concealing it—I iliall certainly be fufficiently tormented with propofals ; hut were I not abfolutely determined to liften to no overtures whatever,,lord Wr>burn cannot foon be forgotten.
-----He will be remembered—but remembered he
muft be only with—regret.—Why, why was fuch a maij, my dear Mrs. -Blomer, - fo loft to ' honour—• but.-I mull; try to forget: him.—Will you not be ready after the perufal of this to^pity yOur unfortunate friend ?—I, am'indeed, at this' moment, truly unhappy.	•	'	•
>
Charlotte Morden.

•. 1, *
L S. I have.not returned anfwers to any of the ..letters which I have received from lord Wo-. burn.—They only Contain apologies, with very-little variation, repeated.—He has been with Mr. and Mrs, Elliot, to prevail on me to pardon him ; at leaft to fee him,, to hear him—■
but I believe you know me too well.----They
faid nothing to bias me one way or the other.
^There is no talking, indeed^ upon Such a



1
^ I	C -
' .A J
/ • I *4

* f
L E 1-
LORD WOBURN.
ijt

L E T T E R LX.
From the fame to the fame.
A M very much diifatlsfied, even with your (Ider, my dear JVIrs. Blomer ; fhe will fancy that I am melancholy,-and teazes me fo much to go into company, by way of amulement, that fhe diftrelTes me. -------1 can receive no pleafure from being the object of general obfervation,—Mr, and Mrs. Elliot, indeed, both tell me, that the more I appear in public, the lels will any fcandalous tales, circulated by the bafenefs of Dawfon about me, be credited.
But am I not fecure in my own innocence }------
Befides, is not my lord’s earneftnels to be forgiven, to be received upon the former footing, an indifpu-table proof of my innocence —Had my conduCl been criminal, w'ould he have continued fo reftlefs to be reconciled ? So eager to fulfil his engagements ? His eagernefs to fulfil them, has afteCted him to fuch a degree, that he is at this time very ill of a fever ; not fo bad, however, as to be hindered from writing.
He wrote yefterday to Mrs, Elliot, to defire her to perfuade me only to pardon him, as his recovery was uncertain.—I hope he will not die, my friend •, he has not fo deeply offended me, as to wifir for his death ; the amendment of his conduCl will fufficiently atone for the affront which I have received from him,—Let him live, but let him ever live at a diftance from me.
My hand trembles fo, that I fear this will not be legible.—It has never been fteady, I think, 'fince my fright i nor, in truth, do I ever go tp bed abfolute-
H a	ly
172
HISTORY OF
I7 free from apprehenfions, though I lock and bolt both my chamber doors —I hope I have now only honeft people about me ; but indeed I always thought Dawfon fo ; flie had, however, the art to impofe upon me..^How very cautious ought people to be whom they truft, and what fervants they take, fince the very beft are fo little to be depended upon ! We Iliould at lead never put ourfelves too much in their power.-—Yet how uncomfortable is exiftence, if we muft be always flaves to fufpicion I-—To have nobody near us whom we can truft, nobody on whom we can rely—What a miferable ftate ! I declare to you, my dear friend, that I look upon the difpofition and corruption among our domeftics, to be ferious evils, and greatly detrimental to fociety.
—-------We muft all, in fome fhape, depend upon
each other, for the comforts and conveniences of life ; nor can the higheft enjoy themfelves—--— they cannot indeed fubftftr—without the labour and attendance of the loweft.^—For .ray part, I don’t know any thlng wbich could have affeUed me more (the lofs of my neareft relations and intimate friends excepted) than this difcovery of Dawfon’s treacherous behaviour, as fire was one of vdiom I had e-ver a very high opinion ; but I luppofe ihe, like many of her thoughtlefs fex in much Superior fitua-tions, wms.weak enough to liften to the tales,of a man who, in order to gratify his own licentious iur clinations, -made her believe that he was violently in love with her..---Poor creature ! lam afraid ftre
will buffer extremely for her credulity.--r------Yet,
as much as ftre has injured me, I cannot fee her rendered more unhappy, than ftre muft necefla-rily be, from the nature of h^ offence.—1 can never reccmmend her, indeed, to another family, becaufe I cannot anfwer for her integrity ; but I will take care that ftre ftrall not periflr through ab-
.folute want.-----1 wift relieve her before it comes
to
LORD WOBURN.
173
pi
Wr
to that, though Hie iliall not be acquainted v/ith th hand which raifes her from Infamy and indigence, to competence and peace.—^I have employed a per-fon to older her a retreat in the country, far from the temptations which fixe is every day liable to meet with in town.—-iThis is all I can do to fave her from inifery who has deilroyed mj happinefs for ever.



letter lxi
Lord Woburn to Mr. Wixmot.
HAVE juft got ftrength to hold my pen ;—thanks
to this divine Charlotte, who will, neverthelefs, doom me to endlefs mifery j but I muft explain my-felf—if I can.
Scarce had I finilhed my laid letter to you, when I was obliged to be put to bed, as I was in a high, fever.—In a very few days I was judged to be in imminent danger,------1 retained my fenfes all thetirae,
and cannot fay that I felt much difquietude at the fentence pronounced by my phyliclans very ferioufly, though they imagined I did not hear it, to my brother and lifter.---1 had, indeed, no concern about
my health, but for them who grieved for me immoderately.—Their complaints pierced my heart, yet I was happy to have it in my power to feize that opportunity to make ray peace with lady Charlotte.—• Your brother, Harry, faw me every day, and acted the part of a real friend.—Him, therefore, I commi-
H 3	fiioned
*74
HISTORY OF
Ilioned to wait upon her, and to tell her, that as I had, poffibly, but a few hours to live, her pardon would be the greateft, the only fatisfaftion I was capable of receiving in this life.—Harry moft readily undertook this bulinefs, and related his fuccefs in the following words.—But neither my hand nor my heart is
Heady enough to go on—mufi: refume my pen bye and bye.
In CONTINUATION.
1 am a little recovered, fo will proceed.
“ When I arrived in St, James’s Square,” fald Harry, “ I refufed to fend in my name, though the fervant alked me more than once, that he might tell his lady who wanted to Ipeak with her.—-Let her know,” replied I, “ that a gentleman wiflies to fee her upon particular bufinefs, but has not the honour to be acquainted with her.— From her extreme caution, I was afraid that I flrould not get at the light of
her.----At laft, however, fire came down into the
parlour, accompanied by one of the fineft girls I ever
beheld.----Lady Charlotte, with a mingled dignity,
and fweetneis of afpedt, defired to know my bulinefs.
1 replied, rather too abruptly, I believe, (though it was only with a view to ferve you, my lord) that I came from a dying friend, lord Woburn, who waited only for her pardon to quit the world, which, ‘from the lols of her efteem, was grown odious to him, in peace.-----When I began to fpeak, Ihe was advanc-
ing towards a chair,’ after having delired me to be
feated.----But me Hopped fliort, while I wasfpeak-
ing, changed colour, and faid, “ Sir ?” I faw that what I had faid operated-----^---1, therefore doub-
led the dofe.—“ I fay, madam,” continued I,
“ that
LORD W O B U R N.
*75



ic
a

<u
!>
that my dear friend, lord Woburn, however culpable he may have appeared, or reaily dsdn hi conduct, now lies at the point of death-^poffibly he may not live to hear your determination about him ;• he may not live to hear whether you will or will not pardon a behaviour of which nothing but' his ardent love for you could have made him guilty .”^1 was going on in the pathetic ftrainl The blood inflantly forfook her lovely face ; (lie trembled all over, and.funk to the floor.—-I flew to raife her, to fupport her, affifled by that charming girl, v/ho continued weping from the iroment I imparted my mournful intelligence.—-She called^ aloud
for help.—The fervants entered.-----1 carried lady
Charlotte to a fopha.-------After numberlefs ap-
I then made a great
plications, fine recovered.—
many excufes for having fo abruptly declared, what I might have imagined v/ould affeCl her greatly.
She made no reply.—‘■In a few moments; riling from the fopha, fine took her young friend by the arm, and walked up flairs, without faying a Angle fylla-ble, though I made more than one effort to obtain an anfwer.—I fent up to know if fhe grew better,
before I would leave the houfe.-----No reply came
fromherfelf ; yet I am fure fhe was half killed v/ith
the news of your danger.------She is, indeed, a mofi;
lovely creature.”
Here Harry finifhed his narrative, and I was convinced, from his defcription of her diforder, that I was flill dear to her.—I therefore began to conceive
hopes—confequently to breathe more freely.-r----By
the way, I could not have been in the danger declared by the doCtors.—Harry, indeed, never thought me fo.—What raifed ruy fpirits ftill more, was an. tnquiry from the dear angel in about half an hour j
a cordial
H A

History of
a cordial fuperior to all the medicines I had fwal-lowed.—-The fame enquiry was every half hour repeated, till I was able to quit my bed.—T have been up thefe two days, but am, neverthelefs, very indifferent.—Never Sliall I be well, I believe, if ffio
does not forgive what is past.-Since my growing
I etter, her enquiries have ceafed ; I fear She will not be reconciled, as She has refufed to fee Harry a-gain, wdio has called twice, at my request, to try to move hei in my favour.—I am fo weary that I must break off—^You cannot think how weak and fpirit-lels I am grown.—Lad)^ Huxley wants me to try the air of Huxley Park, but I cannot Bear the thoughts of quitting London, while this dear injured woman ftays in k.

LETTER
LXII.
X.ady Charlotte MoRDENto Mrs, Blomer,
OW excedlvely have I been furprifed, my dear friend !—But, indeed, though I am become accuftomed to fudden changes, I do not bear them well.—My fainting away on being told that lord Woburn was dying, is a ftrong proof, I imagine, of this aflertion.—I cannot help being affefted, on his account at this moment, though they alfure me, that he has been out of danger for feme time.—I do not pretend to be infenfible, ncr can I forget the
liopes I once entertained of fpending the remainder
of
LORD WOBURN.
J77
of my life with a man——Yet, why Iliould I complain ? Why fhould I repine ? Ought I not rather to think heaven for faying me from the mifery of paf-fing my days with a man of principles fo oppofite to my own ?—Yet there is no reafon why I ihould be in any fliape acceffary to his death, becaufe our fenriments do not happen to be the fame.—I could not, I confefs, hear of his dangerous fituation, related by a friend, whom he Tent to me to folicit my forgivenefs, without fhuddering ; yet, tho’ I loft my fenfes, from furprize and concern, I was not, on my recovery, weak enough to enter into a converfation with Mr.. Wilmot (that I think was his name) upon a fubjefl that could not but be dlftreffing to me.
Poor Kitty was with me, and almoft wept out her eyes.—She never lets me reft a moment j (lie fays, perpetually fays, that flie is fure he did not defign to behave amifs, as he loved me too well to vex me.— Poor dear girl ! ftoe is ignorant, happily ignorant, of the arts of defigning men.—May llie never fuffer by their infinuating manners, and iniquitous proceedings !
I alfo thank heaven that lord Woburn is better.— I fliould never have enjoyed a moment’s eafe, if I had only fancied I had been any way inftrumental to his death.
I will, from this time, keep myfelf quite free from any connexions with men.—I never knew forrov/
till I knew lord Woburn -------and yet they teaze
me about Sir Charles Conyers.-------1 was in hopes
that he had been fixed upon for Kitty j but I find he only thought of her, on a fuppofition that I was engaged.—.However, he fliall not ferve my little friend fo.—I will never take him from her, though ihe discovers a remarkable diflike and ftiynefs.—l.ord Woburn was her favourite.—Poor gi.d !------Yet if he
iliould marry her, he will, I dare fay, behave well
H 5	to
17 S’
HISTORY OF
to So Sweet a young creature, about whom he cannot be fufpicious,-—But he is not likely to recover.
People, indeed, who have Seen him, tell me he is a mazingly altered.—I willa for his recovery, but I wifh alfo, never to remember what I have Suffered on his account.

LETTER LXIII
Lord WoB URN to Mr. Wilmot.
OW much am I indebted to your brother 1 Had
_____he not flood my friend, I mufl have funk ere
now, under the weight of a disappointment which will, I believe, make an end of me.—So much the better—My whole foul is wrapped up in lady Charlotte, and file cannot forgive me.—Perhaps {he may in time be prompted by her excellent difpofition to
pardon me-------but her delicacy will never, I fear,
permit her to receive me in the manner which can, alone, render me happy.—To happinefs, therefore, I muft for ever bid adieu.—And what is life without happinefs ?
I am Sorry to fee poor lady Huxley grieve
fo for me ;----------few fifters have So tender a
regard for heir brothers.— I was always her favourite, though I am Sure flie pities Ned, who has Seen nothing of his wife ;—but he has heard from feverai
people,
f
LOR D W O B U R N:
179
people, that Ilae is gone to France.—-I cannot, however, attend to his affairs at prefent j it vv’as the loofenefs of his wife, which confirmed the bad opinion I had long entertained of women ; and made me more defirous of trying my angel, who, confcious of her own innocence, muff, undoubtedly, behold me in the ittoft difadvantageous light.—Lady Hhxfey imagines thatihe ftill loves me.'—Poflibly, my fifter fays this only to feed me with hope, and to make me tolerably eafy.—She means well, but her confola-tion is ineffeftual.—She alfo advifes me, to take the fame method I purfued before, upon a little amorous quarrel, which I have related to you j that is, to follow her in public, to throw myfelfin her way, and to endeavour to move her pity, by my appearance and addrefs.—But I am really fo much afraid of alarming her, of giving her any new vexation, by appearing in her fight, that I have not courage enough to a£t agreeably to my lifter’s advice.—I would not give her a moment’s uneafinefs for the world : I would rather die, than difpleafe her again—defign-cdly.
Oh! Wilmot ! Wilmot ! how my heart doated on her ! How it ftill doats on her !—To think of loling her by my own folly.—It is too much, for me, to bear.
My good fifter tells me, that fhe will make her a vifit, and talk calmly with her, and perfuade her to pity, and accept of the man who is dying for i her. But I know her vifit will produce no confequences in my favour.—I had better, therefore, get out of the way, as faft as I can.—May the dear, lovelyChar-lotte,[meet with a man who loves her as well as I do !
—------May file alfo meet with a man who will never
venture, in any fhape, to incur her difpleafure.
Adieuy
W'
LET
i8o
HISTORY OF

LETTER LXIV.
Lady C h AR LOTTE MorOEN tO
Mrs, B L O M E R.
OW are you, my dear Mrs, Blomer ? Have you fucceeded } Have you made Mrs. Scot lefs uneaSy by your aftedionate confolations ? I have a longing defire to fee you, and have more than once Schemed a vifit to Dublin.—b-very thing here is dull or disagreeable. Sir Charles follows me very where, tho’Ihave alTured him, pofiiively, that I will not marry.—Sir William A/hton has intreated Mr. and Mrs. Elliot to fpeak for him, as I am at liberty, he fays.—I would not, upon any account, receive him. I will not, indeed, marry lord Woburn, yet v/Ill I never marry any body elfe.—I dare not venture to make any farther declaration towards the reftorati-on of his tranquility, of v/hich, they tell nre, 1 have for ever deprived him.—Gracious G—d ! did I do any thing to vex him, or to difturb him } On the contrary, was he not infinitely dear to me ? And had he given me no reafon to difapprove of his condudt, we might, at this moment, have been happy.—He, he alone, has occafioned all this diftrefs.—I am extremely y/retched.-—They fay he is declining very faft.—Kitty weeps from morning tonight.-T’he
—-Mr. Wil-
mbt, my lord’s friend, who follows me about in all places, tells her, that fire is more lovely in her tears, than the moft blooming beauty nature ever made.—■ To fay truth, I think Kitty Seems more inclined to
iiden to this gentleman, than to Sir Charles, but
that
poor girl diftraUsrae with her Sorrow.
LORD WOBURN.
i8i
that will never do.—Wilmot is only a younger brother, though, to all appearance, an agreeable man, —Sir Charles is full as agreeable, and has a large eflate,---1 am interrupted.
In CONTINUATION.
Lady Huxley is juft gone,—She has left nothing tinfaid to vindicate her brother, and to prevail on me to pardon him ; to pardon him, if I wdil not accept of him.—I begged to be excufed talking of, or liftening to a fubjebt which gives me but too much difturbance.
“ Only tell me that you forgive him, lady Charlotte,” faid fire, at laft,“ you need not be appre-henfive of his taking advantage of fuch a favour,” added (lie, fobbing while lire fpoke, “ my poor Charles will not live to offend you again.”
Will you condemn me, my dear Blomer, if I affure you that my tears flowed as faft as
her’s.----The man whom I loved with the greateft
lincerity, lies at the point of death, on my account
fo they would perfuade me to believe.------Can I be
unaffected at fuch horrid intelligence !
“ If that is the cafe, then, my lady,” replied I, “ any thing I can fay, will have no eftedt upon him.
—------Ceafe then in pity to me, to mention a man,
whofe deviation from the path of honour I muft ever lament.”
With thefe words I left her abruptly.----1 could
not, any longer, fupport a converfation, which tore
my heart in pieces.-----It has. made me completely
miferable.-----Sir Charles Conyers, and this Wilmot
too, exert themfelves, perpetually, to entertain, to amufe me at leaft, and to drive away the fadnest with which Tam overwhelmed.
Kitty, alfo, who moft tenderly fympathized with nie, now ventures to upbraid me for my cruelty, as ■	.	she
iSa
HISTORY OF
Bae calls it, to fuch a man ; but fhould Such a con-du£t as that, which I refented, be ever forgotten ? Befides, I am hot really the caufe of lord Woburn’s
prefent illnefs.----It was the fhame, the remorfe he
felt after having afted in a manner not to bejuftifi-ed by his own confcience, in the calm moments of recolle£tion, which.brought his fever on.him ;———— and yet they will impute his illnefs to my inflexibility.--------Pray examine both fides of this unfortu-
nate affair with attention.—You will then, I flatter snyfelf, be of my opinion.

L E T-
LORD WOBURN
i8|
LETTER
LXV.
Lord Woburn to Mr. Wi l m o t
THANK you for your folicitude about my reco-
__-very,-----My recovery is ftitl far off.'—-I believe,
indeed, that my (lay in this world will be fliort.— I can make no imprellion on the dear obftinate ; and am, therefore, very indifferent about myfelf.
Harry is indefatigable in my fervice ; he is in love, indeed, I believe, with my cruel Charlotte, and confequently finds double fatisfaUion in running after her.-----However, I don’t mention this to un-
dervalue his friendlliip.—Harry is really turned out a very artful fellow.—He is mafter of all her movements ; he has even made his way, fome how, into the Elliot family, and will, I doubt not, foon get a
footing at lady Charlotte’s.-------But heaven knows
whether he will be fuccefsful.—I can hope for no fuccefs.—He will certainly admire her ; but I have not the lead reafon to imagine, that he will endeavour to fupplant rae.-^---Neither can I fuppofe that
file will, immediately, liften to another lover.----1
have given her an antidote againft love, I think, for the prefent, at lead.—Yet, I am fometlmes inclined to hope, that fhe has not abfolutely lod all the ten-dernefs which Ihe once, undoubtedly, felt for me.—^ She has by no means recovered her former chearful-
nefs.----She looks pale j die fighs frequently : yet
Harry tells me, die never looked more beautiful.-The poor fellow is quite gone—deeply touched with a paffion which will only plunge him into unfpeaka-
184
HISTORY OF
ble diftrefs, as he tnuft neceflarily be in a hopeleis lituation.—Yet why fhould he be in Such a fituati-on ? He is young, he is well made, he has an elegant countenance, a foft infinuating manner, and a delicacy in his carriage, which is very attraUive. In fliort, there are few won;en, in my opinion,, unengaged, who could refifi: Harry’s advances to
them.-----1 told him fo t’other day.--He gravely
replied, that neither his prefent fortune, nor future expectations, would permit him to entertain any thoughts of marriage, efpecially with the objeU to which his inclination led him-----that is with la-
dy Charlotte, unqueftionably.—But has not the dear creature a fortune fufficient to raife the man, whom her affection prompts her to diftinguifh, and a heart, and a perfon to elevate him almoft above mortality !---Well-----if it muft be fo---may flie be
happy.-----1 iliall in a little while be no more.-
Yet I will write to her once again, and make her acquainted with all the motives by which I was adtuated, when I behaved to her in fo ftrange a manner. I am the more determined, from what
Are let drop to Wilmot, a few days ago.----Harry,.
in truth, is a very honeft fellow, and a lincere friend ;---- whenever I am foolifli enough to har-
bour any fafpicions about him, I do not do him juftice.
I am not at all right----Where was I ?------He
told me, t’other day, that he had found a moment to attempt the vindication of my condudl once more, and that the dear creature replied, “ Your friend, lord Woburn, fir, had no reafon to imagine, that I fliould fuft'er the freedoms he was pleafed to take, becaufe he well knew I had always difcovered a particular diflike to them.”
I will open my heart to her upon paper.-----She
fhall fee my whole foul—though I can fay nothing,
to
LORD WOBURN,
185
to apologize for my going farther, than I at first
intended.------But I must take time-------neither my
head nor my hand will fuffer me to write in th manner I wiih.


LETTER LXVI.
Lord Wo B URN to Lady Charlotte MordenJ
After all that I have offered in my own defence to nopurpofe ; after all the fruitiest felicitations of my friends, why fhoitld I disturb you, lady Cliar-lotte, by putting you in mind of a man, who has rendered himfelf fo very exceptionable, and who will not exist long enough to give you much more trouble ? However, as your good opinion of me is abfolutely necelfary to my peace, I cannot readily give up all pretenfions to it.—I cannot help wilhing to recover that inestimable bleffing, which I lately ----1 fully believe, enjoyed.— -----Fool!—Madman I to forfeit it by a behaviour, for which there is fo poor an apology to be made.
You told Mr. Wilmot, the other day, madam “ that I could not pollibly have any inducement to behave in the manner I did, knowing that you would be offended with it.”—It is true I did, imagine, and fmcerely hope, inideed, that you would be angry with, me, as I had, till this last unfortunate event, no ap-prehenstons but about your too hastily yielding to my
wiilies ;-------not troni any obferved impropriety
in your coadudl, but from my having found all the
women
\
186
HISTORY OF
women with whom I ever had any GonneSions, and all thofe to whom my friends were attached, incapable of refilling the importunities of their lovers. And though I had tried you, and found you quite averfe to improper freedoms, I was Town ftaggered, when your fervant pofitively declared, that Ihe admitted men by your order.—Still you will fay, that after having had reafon to believe my fufpicions groundlefs I Ihould have left you in confequence of your repeated requells.----—To have barely fufpedied you was,
you will julily add, fufficiently provoking.—I confefs, I have been exceedingly in the wrong ; but where is the man who can, at all times, command his paffi-ons, especially when excited by an objedl fo temptingly beautiful ?—In fpite of all I have Suffered, in fpite of all I Hill Suffer, I am yet to thank you for being proof againfl my attempts ;—for had you fallen, I ilaould have been every way more wretched, if poffi-ble, than I am at prefent.—Abandoned as I appear to you lady Charlotte, I never Seduced any woman; and-could not, I am certain, have fupported the diftrels Ihe would, necelfarily, have felt in fuch a fituation, with any compofure, even though I had, at the fame time, defpifed her for her folly. A woman without Tirtue is, in my eyes, the moll pitiable as well as the molt contemptible, jcharaefer.—She is Scorned, Ihe is detelled by the whole world, and particularly by him who deluded her into a Hate of infamy.—-Such a woman is not only fo unfortunate as to. find nobody her friend. She finds every body her enemy ; Is not fuch a woman, therefore, highly deferving of compallion
—Thank heayen ! ladv Charlotte will never become
*/
fuch a charaUer.—But becaufe fhe Is fo eminently
excellent, mull I be uncommonly milerable ?-------
How peculiarly hard is my fate, madam, that what raifes you to a degree of angelic purity, Ihould render me the unhappieft of human beings ! I am, at this moment, moll cruelly Suffering for having, byth
temerity

LORD WOBURN.
187
temerity of my behaviour, made you appear in a (lill more iiluftricus light than you did before.—Confi-der, then, that you owe me Something for having discovered virtues which might for ever have lain dormant in your breaft.—^Intoxicated with love, love to an excels, I forced you to fliew yourfelf the moft exemplary, as well as the moll lovely of women.^—After what I have fald, you' cannot imagine it poffible for me to live without you.
I intended, when 1 began this, to give you the hif-tory of a friend of mine, who was made wretched by a woman, in appearance, almoU as amiable as yourfelf.—Struck with his unhappy condition, I dreaded the thoughts of meeting with a fair one, who would
plunge me, perhaps, into the fame.-----My ftrength
fails..—I am not equal to the talk at prefent which J
had impofed upon myfelf.---------1 mull, therefore,
wait till I am more able to write.—What I have already written, is fo very puerile, and falls fo Short of my firft intentions, that I could, with pleafare, tear it in pieces ; but my head is too confufed, to
permit me to explain myfelf better.------------Yet,
deprived of the only felicity in life, ariling from your dear Society, I mull, while life remains, employ it in thus con verfing with you; though, lam afraid, you will not indulge me Vvi-ith anfwers to my letters.—:—Perhaps you will not deign to read what
I fend to you.-----However, as you are abfolutely
millrefs of all which is left of me, to you I mull, while I can hold a pen, address every thoueht of my heart.
LET-
i88
HISTORY OF
/

LETTER XLVII.
From the fame to the fame.
S Mr. Wilmot, madam, has promiied me to ufe his moft earneft endeavours, to prevail on 70U to read whatyoa will not condefcend to hear from me, I will attempt to re'ate the misfortunes of my friend ; misfortunes which have made but too deep an impreffioii upon me for my peace, as they were, in a great meafure prodnftive of thofe infults from me, of v/hkh you fo juftly complain ; infults which have for ever deftroyed all my hopes of hap-pinefi.—
Mr. Care y was born to the Inheritance of a large fortune, and educated, in every refpeft., like a young man of fadiion j yet, though he kept very fpirited company in his rank and fphere of life,, he never gave a loole to any criminal paffions ; never diftinguifhed himfelf in an infamous light, never availed himfelf of his accomplifliments, natural and acquired, to feduce the innocent from the paths
©f virtue .--With a heart equally alive to tafte
and fentiment, he determined to look out for a companion poffelfed of the fame inclinations as himfelf, and found MiraBofwell, one of the moft beautiful girls in the world, the very girl he wanted.—Mira, as loon as file perceived herfelf Carey’s favourite, thought herfelf the happleft creature imaginable. Her birth and fortune were fuitable to his, her family approved of the alliance, and he was permitted to viiit her as a lover.-Mils Bofwell received
him with the higheft fatisfaUion.—For fome time things went on in the moft delirable manner •, and
the
LORD WOBURN.
189
f*
the preparations which were making for the approaching marriage, at proper intervals, filed up the hours which were not dedicated to tendernefs : hut when the cloaths^ houfe, equipage, &c, dec. were ready, and when poor Carey began to grow impatient to become pofTeft of his bride, the lawyers had not finlllted the writings, fo that a delay was occafioned, which was very difagreeable to him , «-r-it aifo pro;ved fatal.—As Mr. Carey had eondudled himfelf with great delicacy in ail his raoft private interviews with Mifs Bolwell, Are had no reafon ^to fufpedt his having any improper defgns upon her nor, indeed, had he, himfelf, felt the flighteft de-fire to deviate from the ftrift propriety of his carriage to her j neither was he in the lea ft encouraged to fuppofe, that an improper behaviour, on his fide, would be fuffered.—However, being young, ■naturally amorous, and exceedingly fond of his mif-trefs, he was one evening, when they were by themfelves, tempted, by a particular charm in her look and manner, to be more Tee of his carrefi’e.s -than ufual—The lady, too much affected by his ■tendernefs, received his endearments fo melting! y, that he was animated to be Hill more la-villi of them. —Carey, on finding himfelf but feebly refifted, began to think of pufliing his good fortune, as far as it would go.-—He proceeded with redoubled vigour, hut met with an oppofition which furprlfed him.
So unexpected a difappointment, juft u'hen he imagined he was arrived at the fummit of his wifties, wms not to be endured.—He became but of temper and fo.ured ; and difcove.red, from that time, fo much indifference, ib much difguft, indeed, that Mifs Bofwel, in whofe bofom his careffes had raifed very tender emotions, was difappointed in her turn. The negligence of her lover .chagrined her extremely ; but as Aie believed that his cold, unkind behaviour, was ocx.afioned by the oppofition Are had made
to
' I
I
90
HISTORY OF
to his defires, and fearing he Should quit her entirely in a pet. She strove to Soothe him, .by a thou-fand winning blandiSliments ;—thofe blandiSIiments fucceeded, as they brought back, with a return of love, all that enervating tendemefs which had, at first, occafioned the little difference between them. The lady, in Short, being apprehenlive of provoking her lover a Second time, fella Sacrifice to her own Soft fenfations, and to his preffing advances 3 advances to which he was more than ever stimulated by an ardent defire, not to be repulfed again.—Urged, violently, by paflion and by pride, his attacks were fuccefsful ; but no Sooner was the victory gained, than he had, as well as the lady, all the reafon in the world to repent of his impetuofity.
The anxiety and distreSs in which She appeared, and her repeated importunities to hasten their marriage, opened his eyes, and made him fee the very great impropriety of a condudt, on which he had not eiven himfelf time to refledt, till it was too late.
Then, and not tiil then, Carey began to think, that a woman who could fo eafily part with her virtue (though merely, as lire would have it believed, to gratify the man whom it was her interefh to oblige, as die was to pals the reft of her life with him) would be always ready to yield to any man.
Juft when every thing was ready for their marriage, Carey was halt diftrafted ; he knew not
Vv’hat to do.,----------Her perpetual upbraidings,
her intreaties, and her tears, equally diftrelfed him, and rendered him unable to come to a
determination---------Still he was in love with her
perfon, though her conduct had been fo exception'* able.—Finding that nothing die could fay could reconcile him to what was paft, and beginning to fear fome difagreeable confequences, from her having too eafily furrendered to him, Mifs Bofwell, at length, fretted herfelf lick, and was in a very fhort
tiaie,
•M
< 1
LORD WOBURN.
igf
time, thought to be in imminent danger.—This hurt him extremely, as he looked upon himfelf to be in a great meafure the caufe of her illne(s ; and as he was, from the nature of his engagement with her, permitted to fee her, he, in order to admini-fter confolation, alTured her, that though he could not bring himfelf to marry her, after what had palTed, he would, upon her recovery, if flie would confent to live with him, take her abroad, and be as ftridtly true to her, as if they were really married.--—Thefe alTurances, inftead of'hlleviating the
anguifli of her mind, threw her into a kind of frenzy j but time, youth, and a naturally good con-ftitution, all operating in her favour, her health was reftored, and with returning health, fire felt her mind much lefs difturbed. Carey, who had never found her in the lead cenfurable, but for her inability to repel his feducing approaches, renewed
his offer of carrying her to France.---^^She, at laft,
confented, for feveral reafons.—She had fllll a tender affection, which his ungenerous behaviour had not been able to extirpate ; 'but flie M'-as induced to comply with reiterated requefts, chiefly by her pregnancy.--------Not knowing how to extricate herfelf
from fo flrameful a fituation, without being expo-fed to her family, and the whole world, flie eloped with her lover, as foon as flie was in a condition to travel with him ; and they determined to fettle in the fouthof France.
There he treated her with all the affedlionate care which the bed of wives could have defired, and in no fliape did his behaviour to her differ from that of
the fonded, and mod indulgent hufbands.----------But
they had been there only a Ihort time, when her beauty made a deep impreflion on a young French nobleman, ' who fpared no pains to convince her of the power of her charms.-—For a while die held out againd his every artful expedient to win her to
his
HISTORY OF
At laft, however, upon his telling
291
his purpofe.-— her how fcandalouily Carej had deluded and deceived her (his valet had wormed out of Carey’s domef-tics, by his order, fecrets which iliould never have been divulged) and how much more worthy of her he hirafeif was who had never attempted to impofe upon her, by an offer of marriage ; Ilie began to ilden .to him ; from llftening to him, fiie found hero felf inclined to enter into converfation with him,— (when a woman comes to a parley, it is all over with her) In fliovt ihe Soon yielded, merely, as flie at firft believed, from refentment againft Carey, though, in fa(£t, fhe loved him, and him alone, at the very time flie threw herfelf into the arras of this Frenchman.
But I fliali fatigue you too much, lady Charlotte, in fending you fuch a long letter.------1 will there-
fore take another opportunity, to tranfrajt the remainder of Mr. Carey’s hitlory.—-I have only to wilh, that the pei ufal of it may prompt you to pardon a behaviour, which 1 do not prefume to defend, becaufe I well know that it is jndefenfible.—■ I can never forgive mylelf; how; then, can I expect to be pardoned by you ?
1. E 'r-
LORD WOBURN.
03
LETTER LXVIIL
From the fame to the fame.
I AM going to continue my narative, madam, and without any apology, becaufe you, I imagine, defire to read the continuation of it, without being interrupted by any impertinent preface to it.
My friend, Carey, foon found that Mifs Bofwell was as faithlefs, as (lie was fair j and that he had no reafon to expeO; fidelity from a woman who had not been faithful to herfelf.—In the firft tranf-ports of his anger, he turned her out of his houle, and bade her go to the man whom lire prcfered to him.
Shocked at having been difcovered, and flung to the foul at being fo cavalierly treated by the man fo whom fire had facrificed every thing—Hie left him, as fire believed, quite cured of the flightefl: regard for him ; as he had behaved to her in fo
---However, after a very fhort
refidence wdth her new lover, who was the moft volatile and fickle creature breathing, fire found that fire ftill loved Carey, and that her tendernels
for him w-as not to be extinguifiied.-Yet, being
too proud to make the fmalleft fubmifiions, andcon-fcious of having been grofly abufed, ilie remained for fome time, in a fiate of wretchednefs, not to be defcribed.
Her relations and friends in England had totally abandoned her, upon her firft going off in fo in dif. creet a manner ; and her father divided the fortune he was to have given with her, to Carey, between her two younger fifters, v/ho were, in con-
I	fcquence
infamous a manner.
if4
HISTORY OF
Sequence of that divifion, married.----------Without
that addition to the fortunes intended for them be?” fore, they might never have received any honourable overtures, for the indifcretion of one daughter in a family is frequently detrimental to her lifters.
As Mifs Bofwell was deferted thus, and negledled By thole to whom llie was moll; nearly related, with whom lire was moft intimately conneUed, Carey refledled with pleafure on his not having married a woman of fo loofe a difpolition, of fo infamous a eharaUer : Ire even began to think himfelf lefs culpable, for having attempted her to deviate from
virtue.-----Her incontinence, however, made the fex
in general, appear to him in fo unfavourable a light, that he chofe to avoid any connexions with them, for fear of meeting with a Second Mira Bofvvell.
-----After having Spent Some years in different parts
of France and Italy, during which I became intimate with him, as he Saved me more than once from being drawn into the greateft hazard of my life, by the licentious behaviour of the women in both thofe countries—he returned to England 5 and, from that time, wm continued on the moft friendly Footing.
One day palling by the houfe, in which he had Spent many, many happy hours with Mira, he ftar--ted, turned pale, and laying his hand on my llioul-der, cried, “ I am always affeXed at the light of a place once dear to me, but v;hich is now remembered with a kind of horror.”
At that inftant one of the prettieft little boys 1 had ever Seen, very plainly, but neatly drefled, puE led him by the coat, and begged him to give him a penny.
My friend, whofe head was turned from him, bade him begone, in an angry tone, without looking at him j called him a little rafcal; and told
him
LORD WOBURN.
195

cc
him it was a Iliame to fee fuch a young beggar a-bout.
Struck with the figure of the child, I put my hand in my pocket, and gave him fi^cpence. .
“ Thank ye, fir,” cried the boy, with his innocent eyes full of tears, “ I wilTcarry it to my poor mamma,,, who is dying,” ,
The child’s tendernels, added to his uncommon beauty, touched me in a lingular manner, and I could not help faying, “ Who is your mother, my dear ?”
Mira Bofwell,” replied the child.
Gracious G—d !” exclaimed Carey, llarting, and looking at. the boy, “ he has ,her features, her
completion, by h-------n ! Oh ! .Woburn,” added
he, fupporting hiinfelf upon tny ilioulder, “ this child, this boy mull be mine.”
For ray part, as I believed nothing at all of the matter, and looked upon his exclamation as the wild efiufion of a difoidered brain, I would have perfuaded him to go home ; but though 1 did not imagine, that the boy was his Ion, the little rogue alFeted me too much, to let me oif fo.—I therefore, alked him, where his mother lived ?
“ Herein the next ftreet,” anfwered he, “She is almoft ftarved to death with cold and hunger,”
“ Oh ! G—d ! my poor Mira !” cried Carey, catching up the little boy in his arms, and violently carelling him.
“ Pr’ythee, Carey,” faid I, “ don’t diftraU your-felf for nothing ; how can you fuppofe, that an unknown child, accidentally appearing to you in the ftreet, ftiould be either your’s or Mira’s
“ I know he is,” replied he, ftill holding the boy, “ I am fure he is mine.—Lead me, child, lead me to your mother.”
- <
I2
The
196
HISTORY OF
The poor little fellow obeyed, and led the way to Vine-Street, which was within a few yards of us.—In a Hiabby appartment, pale, fick, and emaciated, was the once beautiful, once blooming Mira, difcovered.
She raifed herfelfup in her bed, fcreamed at the fight of Carey,' though flae had been every day,
hoping to fee him (as we were afterward told)-----
and funk down again upon her pillow.'^—He
was
Scarce able to Support himfelf at the appearance of her, fo totally unexpefted.’—However he flew to her.—She opened her arms to receive him -^They could Only weep, they could only embr'ace for Some moments ; and the pretty little boy had his fbare of their endearments.
When they began to recover a little, for great were the emotions into which they had been thrown, by fo unlooked for an interview. Mils Bofwell, who was in the laft ftage of a confumption, brought upon her by irregularities, grief, and remorfe, in^ formed her lover, that as Are was certain fhe had a very fliort time to live. Are could not die iij peace, without feeing him, and alking his forgive-nefs for all Aie had done amifs, from the very be-, ginning of their acquaintance.-—She then reproached herfelf, in the ArongeA and fevereA terms, for having yielded to his folicitations j and alked him, at the fame time, in the moA pathetic accents why he had endeavoured to tempt her from her duty, “ Why, O! why,” added Aie, (tears Areaming from her eyes) “ did you urge me to part with all that could really make me valuable, with all that ought to have rendered me fo to you } Indeed, my Carey, you were too hard upon me.-r—Loving as I did, hew could I bear to fee you milera’ole, on my account.?' You Arould have conAdered my tender-nefs, my more than w'oman’s weaknefs.
Here
LORD W O B U R N.
197
Here, overjsowered by her emotions, fiie funk
down upon her pillow.-------——-My friend, who had
been exceffively Blocked and affected at the firft fight of her, believing that Bie was gone for ever, called aloud for help, and feemed, indeed, not in much better condition than his mltlrefs was.
I affitled her nurfe and fervant to recover them.—i Then, thinking that they might chufe to be by themfelves, I was gcihg'to quit the room.
“ Don’t-go, fir,” faid Mira, with a lov/, inward voice, I have nothing to fay but what Mr. Carey’s
friends may hear y-----‘my deviation from virtue v/as
made public by my elopement with him who had no right to convey me from' my relations and acquaintance.—My abandoned way of life has, a'fo, lince been but too publick 5 and, therefore, it is fit that niy penitence, too, too long delayed, fiiould be fo, —I am truly iliocked at the review of my paft life.— 1 have fuffered a great deal for my indifcretion.5 j would" to God that my contriuon—I have been
On her recovery, flie thu.s
very guilty, but I Slere fhe fainted.
proceeded May all &hofe, my Carey, whofe paflions are ungovernable, take warning from us. Our examples may, perhaps, be ferviceable to Some people of both fexes.——When I had fcandaloufly left you, my Carey,” continued llie,“ I was led, from neceffity and diftrefs, into a life of proftitution —that lifeTias brought me to the condition in v/hich you now fee me—to the brink of the grave —But I will not give you the pain of liftening to a detail of the miferies I have endured fince we Separated. You will, I dare believe, be melted by the recital of them.—Worn out at laft with my Sufferings, and deftitute of friends and money, to procure many of the neceffaries of life ; diftraUed at my paft con,
duUj.and ffill more----O 1 nature, nature—for the
fate
I 3
iq8
HISTORY OF
•»* u
fate of that poor dear boy (who, by all that’s fa-cred, I fwear, is your’s) and longing more than ever to make peace with heaven and you, for want of proper neceffaries, my lituation became too dreadful to bear.—I, therefore, employed people to make a ftriU enquiry after you : hearing that you were but lately come to England, and lived not far off, I made my fervant, with whom I have always kept up a correfpondence, and who knew you perfeU-ly, to take the child out every day into the ftreets, through which, I thought, you would pafs, and to fend him to you, as foon as fbe faw you—I ordered her to fend him to you, with a tale moft likely to attract your attention, to excite your pity, and to bring you hither, that I might once more blefs my eyes with a light of you, the firft objeCt which they loved ; that I might implore your pardon, recommend my poor innocent boy to your protection, and die— if pofUble—^in peace.”—
Here flue ceafed to fpeak—and funk down in her bed, almoft fenfelels.—Soon afterwards, grafping my friend’s hand,' fhe expired.
The agonies in which he beheld her, while fhe related her melancholy flory, and the natural fondnels of a father for his new-found child, had fo moved, lo melted his heart, that he wiflied to make her fome amends for the wretchednefs which fire had endured, though flie had, in a _great mea-
fure, brought that wretchednefs upon herfelf.-------
But fhe was not permitted to live, and to be benefited by thofe tender fenfation, which flie had raifed in his diftreffed bofom.
I removed my friend, immediately, from the mournful fpot—He was, indeed, entirely incapable of acting for hlmfelf.—I, therefore, conducted him to a chair which, in confequence of my order, had been called.------When he got home he was fo
ill,
L O R D W O B U RN,
ill, that it was abfolutely neceffary for him to be pul
to bed.-----He was put to bed^ and a phyiician wa^
fent for—I had imagined, that the fuddennefs of the interview, between my friend and his Mira, with the melancholy event to w'hich he had beeii unexpeUediy a witnefs, had only alFedled his fpirits for the prefent, and that time and reft would restore him.—Blit I was miftaken.—^—He was feized with a raging fever j he became delirious in a few hours, and in foul days afterwards’, died, without being able to make the leaft provifton for his child.
-----He feemed to be chiefly difturbed on his account ; day and night did he talk, in a rambling Way, of what he intended to do for him, but he was never in a condition to execute his intentions.
I lent for the child the moment he firft mentioned him, hoping that the fight of the little fellow, during an interval of reafon, however ftiort, might be fatisfadlory to him ; but he was always too w ild and irrational, to attend to arty thin^ which could be offered towards his recovery.
In this manner was one of the moft amiable men in the vimrld loft, merely from having perfuaded a woman, whom he*fondly loved, to facrifice every , thing to his paflion for her.—Had flie been able to refift him, they might have been both happy, — But with,a woman, who can be weak enough to yield, even to the man to whom flae expefls every day,to be legally united, no felicity can be rationally expected —Her weakness muft perpetually render her liable to be dangeroufly feduced, and, confequently, keep her hufband in a ftate of continual anxiety.—(5an I, then, madam, be deemed fo highly culpable for having wiflied to try the lady ' whom I intended to marry .? And muft I be doomed to eternal wretchedness, becaufe I found her fuperior in virtue and ■ goodness to all her fex }
•—Reflect
I 4
-
I
200
H I S T O RW O f
Reflect a moment, lady Charlotte, before you condemn to everlafting defpair, the man who placed all his happinefs in your fweet fociety ; and who difeovered you, on repeated trials, the very woman for whom his foul had long fighed.
I can add no more—my ill ftate of health will not permit me, at prefent, to give you any further
trouble.------1 am wafting very faft.------------My life
will foon come to a period ; yet fliall f, with my
lateft bieath, call down bleffings on you.----------And
I fhall leave the world fupremely fatisfied, in having found out the moft virtuous woman in it.
V VsfV’V"	V*' Vi V*' VJ VT%--' Va'V' \*J
LETTER LXIX,
Lady Charlotte Morden to Mrs.
Elomer.
At the repeated interceflion of Mr. Wilmot, I have read three aifedling letters (received from
his hands) from lord Woburn.--------1 have tranferib-
cd them for your perufal. ------The melancholy tale
related in two of them is a true one, as Mr. Wilmot aftiires me.---Mr. Carey, it leems, dying with-
out being capable of making a provifion for his fon, lord Woburn, from friendihip to the father, and companion to the child, immediately fettled five theufand pounds upon him, and put him to fchool j from which time he has treated him like his own fon.-----There is Something very great in this be-
haviour.
LORD AV O B U R N,
201
There
liavlour, fomething extremely humane.-------
always, indeed, appeared to me more greatnefs and goodnefs in lord Woburn, than in any man I
ever knew.------Yet, admitting, that he has a£ted
wrong, upon a right principle, how can I extenuate his late conduU, with regard to me ?—Had he not
fufficiently tried me before ?----There can be no
apology for his condufl:.—He declared, indeed,'in thefe letters which he Sent immediately to me, after his (Irange behaviour, that his jealouly, rouzed by Dawfon’s information, and his paffion, increafed by feeing me alone, and undrefled, had rendered him no longer matter of himfelf.—He did, it is true, behave in a manner entirely inconttftent with the regard he owed a woman who was fo foon to place her whole happinefs in his power.—No apology^ therefore, as I faid before, can be made for his conduU.—It is impottlble , to advance any thing in his favour, without fuppottng him to have been, divefted of reafon, when he aUed fo much in op-polition to difcretion ;—and who would put herfelf into the hands of a madman ?
However, I beg you will read over the inclofed letters carefully, and give me your opinion.—In the mean time, I will be honett enough to confefs, that I have been, and am now, exceedingly alfeUed by
lord Woburn’s complaints and illnefs.-----1 lincerely
wills that I had never been acquainted with him. Connexions with men are, I fee, both difagreeabl
and dangerous.------1 will not, therefore, enter into
an,y for the future.
Mr. Wilmot, this friend of my lord’s, is mott: attiduous about me ; but he has, hitherto, conduX-ed himfelf with a refpeXfulnefs, and deference, almoft beyond conception.—His looks and his manner convey more meaning than I chufe to under-ftand j and the fine things he fays of me, to my
friends,
I S

202
HISTORY OF
friends, are more than I can pofllbly merit,------Yet
all this fubmilTipn and admiration, added to the agreeablenefs of his perfon, cannot make me behold him in the light I have regarded lord Woburn,-----Kitty, now deprived of the fight of the
latter, thinks the former a very charming man ; —.1 fancy fo, from my remarks on her behaviour j for fhe has not declared her partiality in his behalf.

LETTER
LXX.
Lord Woburn to Mr. W i l m o t
HAVE fent, as I told you I would, the hiftory of poor Carey, at different times,to lady Charlotte. Wilmot kindly undertook to prevail on her to read it ; and I have had the fatisfaUion to know, that it
affeUed her extremely.-----Yet is fire immoveable
with regard to me.—When Wilmot prelfed her to pity and to pardon me, as my behaviour to her, which had been fo highly refented, had not arifen from want of refpeft to her, or fufpicion of her virtue, but from a fudden fit of jealoufy, furious and uncontroulable.—She replied, “ No, no, Mr. Wilmot, you are miftaken ; had my lord Woburn found me deftitute of honour, he would foon have given me up, as I filiould have well deferved his de-fertlon.”
“ And fo,” anfwered Wilmot, “ becaufe you believe that he would have aUed with the greateft
propriety
LORD WOBURN.
ao3
propriety and prudence, you will punifli him with the utmoft feverity ; and even injure yourfelf, by declining a connexion with the only man in the world, capable of making you happy.”
She blufhed, he laid, and hung her head, as if fhe felt the truth of his alfertion, though llie would not,
verbally, fubfcribe to it.----He tells me, that he is
fure fire loves me ; but he tells me fo with ten thou-fand fighs.—“You are happy,” fays he, “ happy in being ftill dear to the moil amiable of women.”— But to what purpofe am I dear to her, if lire perfifts, conftantly, in refufing to fee me,- or to hear me ? She has condefcended, indeed, to read my letters j but to what purpofe has fhe read them, as they have not in the leafl Softened her heart in my favour ? I cannot long Support myfelf under this torturing certainty of her inflexibility.——I have more thanonce told Harry, that when I die, I will leave her as a legacy to him ; and fince he is happy in never having, even in thought, offended her, I dare affirm that ilie will not rejedt him.—They are, undoubtedly,, formed for each other’s happinefs.—-I fliall foon be no more.'—I grow, hourly, weaker and weaker.— I neither eat nor flee-p.—My mind is perpetually dif-quieted ; I am tortured by a thoufand corroding
paffions,.—I am worn to a mere fliadow.—-------Your
brother perfuades me to throw myfelf in her way, and thinks fire cannot withftand the flriking change in my perfon.'—But I don’t imagine I fliould fucceed
by following his advice.—^---However, I cannot be
■ Worfe than I am.—That’s impoffible.
I 6
L E T-
io4
HISTORY OF

/
LETTER
LXXI.
Lady Charlotte MoRDEN, to Mrs. Blomer.
I THANK you for your opinion, and am glad that we think alike, with regard to lord Woburn ; but I cannot agree with you, that it is quite necef-fary for me, to accept of the firft man who offers himfelf.—Befides, neither Sir William Afliton, nor Sir Charles Conyers have, I am perfuaded, the lead affeftion for me.—They, undoubtedly, have no di-
flike to my fortune and connedlions.----How very
different is their behaviour from that of lord Woburn, when he was firft accepted ? How different, indeed, are they in their manners, from Mr. Wil-mpt, whofe whole attention to pleafe is extreme.
He has, entirely by making himfelf agreeable, induced Mr. and Mrs. Elliot to treat him with particular politenefs j their behaviour to him is, I think, the more extraordinary, as they cannot, I am fure, entertain any thoughts of him either for me or :—In fhort, we are rather a little at crofs pur-pofes, if I may be permitted to fay fo ; for Mr. Wilmot, though be treats every body with the moft becoming propriety, evidently diftingulflaes me.
I do not fpeak out of vanity ; believe me. I cannot be miftaken.—Indeed, l am not the only perfon who
has taken notice of his folicitude about me ;--he
feeras, however, to endeavour to conceal his feelings in my favour.—He frequently flies to aflift me, to entertain me, to pleafe me, but often draws back, as if he checked himfelf for his forwardnefs to o-blige me.—When a man difcovers a ftrong defire to make himfelf agreeable, and behaves, at the fame
time.
LORD WOBURN.
205
time, WMth an uncommon modefty, ought he not to be diftlnguinied PYet, do not fancy, ray dear Mrs, Blomer, that I can ever look upon Mr. Wilmot in
the light I beheld lord Woburn.---I look upon him
only as my lord’s friend.—Poor Kitty is not lo indifferent.—While he fits with his eyes now and then lifted up, and now and then call down, with half fuppreffed fighs, fhe fighs too, and fays Some good,-natured thing to divert his thoughts, and to turn them into another channel.—I really think thefe a-greeable people may figh themfelves into a pafllon for each other in a little while ; that is, I am fiire fhe likes him, and, I imagine, that the difcovery of her inclination by him, may produce fimilar emotions in his breatt.—Sir Charles Conyers fludluates between Kitty and me ; but were I to give him encouragement, he would not, lam certain, think
about her, becaufe my fortune is the largeft.----
Would you advife me, my dear friend, to marry fuch a man ?
«
Your’s, fincerely,
Charlotte MordenJ
LET
2 o6
HISTORY OF

LETTER
LXXII
From the fame to the fame-.
_ _ ^ *
OON after I difpatched my laft letter to you,'T-'
had a long converfation with Mr. Wilmot
He pleaded with fuch earneftnefs for his friend, and '
difcovered fo much fenfibility, that I could hardly
bear it.———I, therefore, delired him not to mentioa
lord Woburn again, if he had the leaft regard for '
me, “ As I have long taken my final refolution upon
the fubjeU,” added I, “let me intreat you, fir, to
fpare my liftening to arguments, which only fill me
with concern, on his lordflrip’s account.—I cannot
but be concerned, I own, to think of his having put
it entirely out of my power to grant his requeft.—--•
Has he not already induced me, by Mr. Carey’s
ftory, to believe, that two people cannot expedt to
be happily connedted, when they have proceeded,
on both fides, to improper freedoms ?”
“ You do not ttate the cafe fairly, I apprehend,
madam,” replied he ; “ Mr. Carey was rendered'
miferable, from the want of difcretion in his mif—
trefs ; and would you make lord Woburn fingular--,
ly unhappy, by having found fo much ?”
, “ I am fure, ” faid I, “ it will be difcreet in me
to put an end to this converfation ; and fo I llaail
le^ve you to Mils Downton.”
I then went up ftairs.
Kitty foon came to tell me, that fire had been endeavouring toconfole Mr. Wilmot for my cruelty, ,but that fire had fpent her time in vain, as he was
not
LORD WOBURN.
207
not to be comforted : adding, “ he has told me in confidence, that lord Woburn is in a very declining (late ; and, that he firmly believes, nothing but a change In you can fave his life,”
I heard all this, but made no anfwer ; imagining that Wilmot had only talked in this drain to Kitty, to move me to companion.—That my lord is concerned at our reparation, I can eafily conceive ; and I fuppofe he is not thoroughly recovered- from his fever, which has been, probably, increafed by his reproaching refleUions.—He may now, perhaps, be aibamed of his imprudent conduct, and forry for having a£ted with fuch glaring Impropriety ; but his . lliame and his forrow will wear off by degrees, and he will, pofilbly, forget all his pad mifderneanors.
1 lincerely widi him well.—I can fay no more.
LETTER
LXXIII.
Lord Woburn to Mr. Wilmot.
I SHALL foon be obliged, my friend, by the ir-refidible hand of fate, to put an end to a corref-pondence which has been fo long and fo amicably carried on between us—I wilh only to live to enjoy your friendfliip, and to hear of lady Charlotte’s for-
givenefs.----Of the former I am Sure, but not all
the eloquence of our dear Harry can procure me
the latter.---1 mud fubmit.
I am, through weaknefs, or I know not\ what, o-bliged to lay down my pen.—-------1 fliall foon lay it
down, never to take it up again.
I have
2o8
HISTORY OF
I have made my will ; but have left lady Charlotte nothing, ■ becaufe I believed it would pain her extremely, to receive any thing that had been mine While I had hopes of pardon, I looked above every thing ; but as I now find, that her pardon is not to be obtained, I moft readily give up all I held dear.
----------HadI, indeed, the leaft intereft with her, I
would recommend Harry to her ; but my recommendation, as matters are circumftanced might,
perhaps, deprive him of her delightful fociety.-------
I think he would make her happy ; he loves her with a kind of idolatry, and has a£ted with the nobleft, the moft difinterefted friendllilp towards me. —It is time for me to be out of the world, as I only difturb or difguft every body whom I love and ef-teem in it.
Lady Huxley has juft been here.—Her concern affeUs me ; yet I cannot yield to her intreaties to try the fouth of France, which the impertinent
doUors declare abfolutely neceflary for me.----------
But fuppofing I was willing to leave England, what relief could a different climate give to a wounded mind } Nothing but the dear caufe of my diforder can effectually cure it ; and as flie fears to put her-felf into my power, why llrould I torment her .? It is better for me to die, than for us both to be mife-
rable.----------Let me only add, that women in
general might, by behaving in a different manner, fave themfelves, and many an honeft fellow, from that kind of diftraCtion under which I now labour.
•The majority of both fexes, indeed. Suffer by discovering each other’s infamous proceedings ; but I am now haftening to my laft moments, for having found lady Charlotte poffeffed of more virtues than could have exifted, I believed, in a female form.—-Great, I confeik, has been my folly, and while I
am enduring inexpreflible anguilh for it, I can
Scarce
LORD WOBURN.
20'9
Scarce blame the dear creature for keeping up a ' proper fpirk, and refenting an infult which deferved the fevereft chaftiferaent.—^She has feverely chafLifed me, and I kiSs her corrediing hand.
I have left Carey’s boy, who promifes-to be as a-miable as his father.—May he, by alfociating only with women of real virtue, efcape his father’s fate ! —I have left him ten thoufand pounds, and appointed
you and your brother his truftees.------You and he
will, I doubt not, take care to fee him well educated,
'—I owe him this mark of my regard, in return for all the proofs I received of his father’s frienddiip,
—-------i-^Bring him up with a thorough deteftatioa
of every kind of vice.-—Be particularly careful to Warn him againft the fedudtion of women.—They are bad enough of therafelves-—they want no provocatives to mifchief,
I.et his father’s fate be frequently difplayed to him in the mofb lively colours, that he may be deterred from availing himfelfof the tend'ernels of the v/oman whom he intends to make his wife ; and let my jea-loufy and relentment, caiifelefs jealoufv and rafli refcntment, - be (Irongly pointed out to him, that he may not be hurried to fufpedt the woman whom he honourably addreffes, without the moft a-
larming reafons.------Above all, let him be taught
never to deviate fo far from the refpeU due to virtue, as to offer to take any improper freedoms.
How fincerely do I now condemn myfelf for hav-ing,. with fo ridiculous a precipitation, attempted to try lady Charlotte’s diferetion !—How nobly did llie repel all my attacks And how cruelly—may I not fay cruelly !—does fhe for ever reject a man, who cannot but find his tendernels increafe for a woman, whom he has difeovered to be fo exemplary a character ?—Freely do I acknowledge, that I was highly culpable in going fuch unjuffifiable lengths, when I had all the reafon in the world to believe that my fufpicions were groundlefsj—but yet my contrition^
niy
210
HISTORY OF
my remorfe, and even the principles which led me to believe, that no woman could make me happy except herfelf, whom I dlftinguIlBed for the purity of her Sentiments, and her excellent manners, ought, I think, to have Some weight with her.-—“A- man who is fearful of meeting with women of a loofe difpofition, and defirous of allbciating only with the mod virtuous of the fex, muft be totally different from the libertine in his governing Sentiments, that a woman of the niceft honour need not to be afraid of his behaving, improperly to her, when 1L« has confented to take him for her hufband.-^But my rafli behaviour, for which I can, it feems, make no atonement; has Heeled lady Charlotte’s heart againfl; me.
I am too ill to write any more at prelent.—-—* I have but one card more to play-——-then farewell for ever.
Adieu

W

M E r-

LORD WOBURN.
21 I
LETTER LXXIV.
From the fame to the fame.
HAVE done as I faid I would. -an interview.—Such an interview !
—have had
Oh ! Wil-
mot, I am beloved to an extravagance of tendernels,
-----Yet will the dear, dear creature, be ftill per-
verfe ; ftill obftinately refufe to make me complete-
ly happy.
• Harry had long perfuaded me to let her fee me, but I could not think of any place in which I could exhibit myfelf in a manner the moll likely to touch her ; at leaft in which fuch an interview could be unobferved by any perfons but thofe who were in-terefted. in it.-Her own houle feemed to be the
propereft place.—And though lire had declared to
f
Harry feveral times, that fhe never would receive a vifit from me, I was not, by any means fure that her fervants had orders to deny her to me j I, therefore, threw myfelf into my chair, after having given Hind his inftruUions..
At an hour of the day when I thought Are would moft probably be at home, and by herfelf, I fet out.—I bore the motion of the chair with difficulty.—I could hardly fupport myfelf, till I reached the room in which fhe fat.
The porter gave me admittance, without the flighteft hefitation, but one of her fellows was flying up ftairs to inform his lady who was- coming.------1
caught him by the arm, and clapping a couple of guineas into his hand, told I fliould want his affif-tance.—The fellow feemed better bred than many of hb fraternity ; and, by filent refpeCtful figns, dif-
covered
2>i2;
H 1 S T O B Y OF
a|
covered the compaffion which he felt at the fight of me, So totally chahged in my .perfon fince he laft faw me.
When we arrived at the door of the dreffing-room, I bade him leave me.—I had juft ftrength to crawl to her feet.—I then funk down, unable to fp’eak or
move.----^I can only remember that flie ftarted at
the fight of me, and exclaimed, “ Lord Woburn !”
Her agitation increafed mine—^I was overcome-----
When I firft opened my eyes, I felt fenfations which I cannot, polfibly, defcribe.——I found myfdf on‘ the floor.——My head refted on the lap of this dear woman, who was on the ground by me. Tears ftreamed from her eyes, her voice faultered, and Bie, fobbing, afked me, why I would come and terrify her with the fiaht’ of me, in fo dreadful a condition }
At firft I had not Sufficiently recovered my fenfes to comprehend her.-—Before I could make a reply, your brother Harry entered the room, lifting up his
hands and eyes at the Scene prefented to him.-----
“ Come, Mr. Wilmot, come,” cried the weeping angel, “ and affift me in raifing your friend, and then call for proper people to condufl him home.”
“ Never will I go home,” faid I to her, “ never will I leave you, till you promife to be lefs Severe, , till you promife to pardon me, and to fee me while I linger in this world of mifery.
Do not talk of dying,” replied Ihe, w^ringing
her hands, “ I cannot'—cannot bear it.------Raife
him, Mr. Wilmot, and place him on this fopha.
He has almoft deprived me of my fenfes by his fudden appearance ;—by Such an appearance too —Merciful G—d 1 what have I done that I muft fee him die ?”
Here a freflr fliower of tears put a flop to her utterance ; while I, exceedingly loth to leave fo Soft, fo fweet a place of reft, ralfedt my Ian-
55
C6
LORD W O B U R N.
213
guid head frorri her lap, feized one of her dear hands, and alTured her, that if (lie would be con-defcending enough to pardon what w-as patt, and give me but the flighteft hopes of being ever reftor-ed to her former favour, 1 might 1 believe reco-
ver
She returned no anfwer.
She only looked at
Wilmot, who aflifted'me to get to the fopha ; with fome difhculty I was conducted to it.—Soon, however, I attempted to rife from it, in order to plead my caufe.—-She made a fign with her band for me to fit ftilh—Wiimot, who feemed aUually to tremble for her, led her to a chair.
She fat a little while, then rofe, and walked, with -agitation, towards the door.
I folio vsed her as fast as my feeble limbs would :,carry ine„ and catching her by her gown, fella fecond time at her feet, crying, Oh! stay and ■hear me..—I cannot let you go^—by h—! 1 can*-not.”
e
Turning her head toward me, and fetching a deep figh, five replied, .Save me, Mr. Wilmot Then broke from me, and left thei.Doni.
I became half frantic at this behaviaur, and called after her, but to no purpofe.-——I curfed Hac-ry, myfelf, and all the world ; and when my amiable friend offered to astist me, in getting to my chair^ in a threatening tone charged him with having fup-planted m
‘‘ How unjust is your accufation !’" fajd he, with
his ustral mild and gentle manner.—-—Have I ever • ^
•received fucli proofs of her tendernefs as you have ? Have I ever been fiipported on her knees, like' you ? Has stie ever thrown herfelf on the floor In an a^o-
O
:uy of grief, on my account }—And yet I love her as well as you do, my lord:—Recover your reafon, therefore, and let me conduft you home.”
“ I will not ftir,” faid I, “ till I have fucceeded ; till I have bent this ftubborn heart to compafiion.”
At

HISTORY OF
At length, however, after a number of perfuafi-ons, and partly, indeed by eompulfion, Harry got me out of the houfe, though I quarrelled with him till he faw me iliut up in ray chair.—He walked by the fide of it.	’
When I got home I was fo fatigued, fo fpent, that they could hardly -keep life in me.—Your brother ordered them to put me to bed, and made ufe of fo many arguments to convince me, that lady Charlotte loved me no lefs than I loved her, that 1 began to be pacified.—I even intreated him to return to lier, and to tell her, that I had been too much fliocked by the last cruel proof of her unforgiving difpofition to expeft a recovery.
He fmiled, and left me, after having strongly recommended patience to me.
In about two hours, which I tliought almost two
years, die came back------I was fo eager with my
enquiries, that I hardly gave him time to fpeak.---
At last, he Informed me, that lady Charlotte had received him pale, trembling, and Scarce recovered from tSie fiirprize and terror into which I had thrown her.—She gently reprimanded mef’ continued be, for fuffering you to endanger your life, by coming out in fuch a state.^—I told her, that as you had very often declared you must die, if deprived of the fight of her, I had, indeed, perfuaded you to make an attempt to fee her once more.—I alfo told her, that I knew not of vour having let out in order to vifit her in fo abrupt a manner ; but that, on calling at your houfe, and hearing whither you was gone, I haftened to give you all the affillance which could, I knew, be necefTary.—I concluded v/ith
J
letting her know, that I believed you never would appear abroad again, fo deeply had her coldnefs affected you.”—“ My coldneis !—Gracious G—d !” exclaimed flie, while tears trickled down her fweet face, “ can he complain of mv ^coldnefs, alter he
had
LORD WOBURN.

had almoft deprived me of my life, by the condition.in which Tbeheld him ? Did I not do every
thing in my power to reftore his fenfes ?-^-----------
He knows not—he knows not how much 1 fufFered


by the fight of him in fo deplorable a fituation.
“ You can this moment, then, my lady,” replied I, “ reftore him at once to health and peace, by confenting to his wiilres.—It is in your power, and in your’s alone, to raife him from mifery to happi-neft, from death to life.”—She was filent a few moments, feemed to be very much agitated, and then fald, “ If nothing but a behaviour on my fide,, dire£tly oppofite to my opinion, can rave lord Woburn, what am I to do ?”-—“ Change that opinion, madam, and yield a little, to have your kind condefcenfion repaid by the reftored health, by the fincere and perpetual gratitude, and by the moft ardent tendernefs of a man who truly deferves whatever you can poftibly feel in his favour, though he unfortunately, for a few moments, forgot the refpedt he owed you dazzled by that beauty, which would have tempted any man in his fitualion to have been off h s guard ; many -men, I believe, fo fituated, would have been far
more indifcreet.”----Here her lovely face was in
the moft beautiful glow I ever beheld, and die appeared a radient object to my enchanted eyes.—-----
Riling haftily, die faid, “ Excufe me now, Mr. Wil-mot, I muft retire ; I cannot talk any more upon this fubjeCf.”'—Thinking it cruel to dlfturb her any longer, and to drive her from the apartment we were in, 1 bowed and left her.------
Thu-s ends your brother’s narrative—■—and now, jack, what am I to think of all this }—Are there any hopes, or not .?—But luy conftitution is fo mi-ferably diatered by this affair, that I don’t much think I diall ever recover the diock it has received.
You know not at how many different time, I have written this letter.—My ftrength is quite exliaufted.
All
2i6
HISTORY OF
All I have to willi for now is, that if I muft die, I may expire on her dear lap, on which I felt tli& moft ejcftatic joy I was ever yet fenfible of.
\
Yowr’s as iifual.
W
P. S. Lady Huxley continues to teaze me about going to Montpelier j but I cannot think of it. -—No—1 would not, on any account, die at a diftance from lady Charlotte.~-To be only within a few yards offer, in my laft agonies, would give me even in thofe agonies, no fmali faiijfaClion.
Adieu,
J . E T-
LORD WOBURN.

V\.-*'V'V''rv'V'V'\rv'V'V'V'V'V*'V'VN'*N‘'\.-'’v''
/\ r \ •••• •••. • /’	y\ A.	\ \ \	y\ ,-*v.
LETTER
LXXV.
Lady Charlotte Morden to Mrs.
Blomer.
IH A V E been almoft deprived of my fenfes by the light of lord Woburn, expiring, as I believed, at my feet : I have lince been almoft reafoned
out of them by his inlinuating friend.----1 cannot
relate the particulars.----1 wilir, indeed, to forget
them.—I only know, that while I was fitting in my drelling-room, lord Woburn entered, but fo pale and emaciated, fo entirely changed in his perfon, that had not his image been deeply—too deeply —engraven on my memory, I lliould hardly have
recollected him. ----He approached me, however,
weak as he was.—I was fo lliocked, and fo frightened, that I could not get away from him.—He fell at my feet—I knew not then what I did—I became almoft frantic.—I called—I ftamped—nobody came
near me--------Perhaps I had not ftrength to make
myfelf fufficiently heard.----1 felt my heart die
within me, at the light of him lifelefs on the floor,
I threw myfelf down by him.-----1 heard him groan,
at leaft I thought fo.-—I was ready to expire by his fide.—All the loft, the tender fenfations, which had, alternately, given me fo much pleafure, and fo much pain, returned with double violence.-
I
I was moved in a manner not to be defcribed.-
fliould have been ftruck with horror, I llrould have been melted with compaflion, if I had feen any man
dying at my feet ; but to fee lord Woburn die.--
Oh ! Mrs. Blomer, it was too much to bear.——— Trembling with terror, and Scarce knowing what
K	I was
2i8
HISTORY OF
I was about, my heart ftrongly prompted me to adM the man whom I could have Saved, with the lofs of my own life.—Surely, my dear friend, thereds nothing indelicate, nothing criminal, in giving af-fiftance to a fellow-creature finking in the arms of death.—I ralfed his poor languid head upon my lap, and applied a bottle of eaude luce, to his nofe ; though my hand fliook fo, I could hardly hold it.
At that inftant, happily for me, Mr. Wilmot came in.
I called to him, immediately, to afllfl; me.—I cannot proceed.—I can only fay, that I am extremely mlferable.—Why, why would lord Woburn behave in fuch a manner as to render me abfolutely incapable of adling agreeably to the dictates of my heart }
Say fornething, my good friend, by way of con-
folalion, if you can.------1 can fay nothing for niy-
felf.—I am agitated—I am tortured beyond expreffi-
on.------Love, honour, and difcretion, ftir upja tem-
pell in my breaft, and the violent oppofition made by thofe paflions to each other, almoil; deprive me
of my reafon.------1 am really not able to determine
what is right, what is wrong.
This man, during this date of racking uncertainty, is dying.—What will become of me .?—My fears, my apprehenfions, unfpeakably alarming, wdll drive me to dlftraCtion..^——I will fly to you as foon as I can perfuade Mr. and Mrs. Elliot not to make re-fiftance to my wiflies.
Kitty is nearly as wretched as myfelf.—She cerr-tainly loves W ilmot.------Sir Charles Conyers, ha-
ving no hopes of me attaches himfelf to her, but to very little purpofe.
Earneftly
I. O R D WOBURN.
210.
Earneftly wifhing to hear from you foon, for your
letters are ever motl welcome to me,---------1 remain
your very fmcere, but very unhappy friend,
Charlotte MoRDE-iiy,'

L E T T E R LXXVI.
From the fame to the fame.
C
Y clear, dear friend, why don’t you write td
me ? —I cannot hold out much longer.----^
Lady Huxley, has been with me again—She fell on her knees, and with dreaming eyes conjured me to fpare her brother ; but I was not fliaken by her arguments, nor foftened by her perfuadons.—Yet I
was conquered. You diail hear.-------
She affured me over and over, that lord V/oburn’s entrance into my chamber, v/as not in confequence of his having intended to take any improper freedoms, but of his feeing a man let into my houfe, in a manner fulF.cient to create fufpicions.—She allowed, however, that he ought not by any means, to have aUedas he did.—“ Yet, my dear lady Charlotte,” added this artful advocate, “ only confider a little ;—put yourfelf in my brother’s place for a moment—confider how ardently he loves you—confider how much reafon he had to believe, that
he was on the point of being your hufoand ------
and then confider your own beauty.—It was irrefift-ible.---He could not help fnatching thofe endear-
ments which were, perhaps, the more alarming to you, as you was, at that time, furprifed and terrified to a great degree,—And is the man, whofe cha-
K 2	rafter
220
HISTORY OF
raUer you approved of, and which is, Indeed, un-exceptiojiable, whofe perfon and manners fufficient-ly induced you to admit him, as the man whom you defigned to marry ; is he tp be difcarded—nay, •to be adlually murdered ? For you, byyouroblli-nate and obdurate carriage, doom him as ejfedlualiy to deftruCtion, as if you were to plunge a dagger iii
Ills heart,^-----You would, indeed, difcover lest
cruelty, by dilpatching him with a (ingle blow, than by fuffering him to linger in torments inexprest
Iible.----RefleU, therefore, a little more ferioufly
than you have yet done, upon lord Woburn’s dif-^ Trestful and mofl; pitiable (Ituation ;—and do not— do not ungeneroufly-^I would not willingly add in-humanly^fteel your bread againd the man whom you once loved well enough to chufe him, from all his fex, for your hufband ; and whofe death you will,
I am certain, pathetically, though with -unavailing forrow lament.—;------”
My tears confirmed the concluding words of her
well-meant, and earnestly delivered fpeech.--------
Her voice, her perfon, her manner, brought her brother fo strongly to my view, that I began to be very much affeUed, by what (lie had faid to me.— 'How'ever, I begged her to excufe me talking upon a fubjeU, at that time, for which I v/as wholly unprepared.—Yet I could not entirely (Hence her.—■ She would enter into a minute detail of lord Wo-
I	'
burn’s illnest ; (he would tell me how much his fpirits were deprefled, how much he.was weakened, how much he was wasted; adding, “ that nothing was fo likely to restore him, as the air of Montpelier ; but that all the w'orld could not prevail on him to let out, before he had obtained my promife to pardon him, and to be .united to him at his return.

After having been .much worried In this manner, at last replied, “ Nobody more fincerely wistres
lord
LORD WO B U R N.
221
#
lord Woburn health than myfelf, and if my pardon will make him confent to take proper fteps for the reftoration of it, I beg your iadyfhip to tell him, that I forgive him, and dehre him to fet out immediately j for as he is at prefent fituated, no time lliould be loft.”
She left me, after having forced this declaration from me Land I returned to my dreffing-room; endeavouring to compofe my mind, which had been very much difturbedindeed.
Soon afterwards they Informed me, that Mrs Downton was coming'up.—^Kitty had been carried to meet her mother the very day my lord furprifed me.—They now entered the room together.
When our firft compliments were exchanged, Mrs. Downton alked me, very particularly, after Sir Charles Conyens j throwing out a hint, at the fame time with regard to his attachment to her daughter,
Kitty coloured, while I fpoke of Sir Charles in
terms which I thought he merited.---------She then,
kneeling to her mother, and killing her hands, in-treated her, with tears in her eyes, not to Sacrifice her to a man whom-llie could not love;
“ My dear girl,” replied her mother, methinks It is too'early for you to be in love j if Sir Charles is a man of a good underftanding, as lady Charlotte almres me he is, and is good-tempered ; if he has a fufficient fortune, and is not difagreeable in his per-fon, I would not defire to fee you better married j fuch a man muft, necellarlly, engage your affections -----therefore, get up, nty dear j you know,
Kitty, you have always been brought up to efteem every amiable charadler of either fex ; you muft, consequently, love Sir Charles, when you are married to him, as much as you ought to’do for the attainment ofhappinefs withhim/^
Poor
K 3
'22Z
HISTORY OF
Poor Kitty coloured again, looked extremely diS-concerted, and foon afterwards left the room, to give vent, I fuppofe, to herdifquiet.
I feized that moment to perfuade Mrs Downton not to be too hard upon her daughter.—“ We cannot love or hate juft as our friends pleafe to direct us,” faid I, “ Kitty is of a moft amiable difpolition, and I fincerely wifh fhe was married to the man fhe
could like.”
“ And why fliould not fire like Sir Charles, lady Charlotte ? He has an agreeable perfon, and many good qualities.”
“True ;----------but it is impoffible for us to help
preferring one man to another fometimes, though the man we chufe may not be approved of by our
relations.
“ How !—Has Kitty encouraged any particular perfon, lady Charlotte ?”
“ I don’t know that flie has j—but I am flire if Mr. Vv’ilinot was to attach himfelf to her, and if his fortune was equal to Sir Charles's, he would be the man ;—or lord Woburn, were he alfo difpofed to prefer her
“ Lord Woburn and Mr. Vfilmot .L V/hy, they are both in love with your ladyihip.—What can the girl mean by thinking of them ?”
“ I am not acquainted with her Intentions, madam ; but as my lord and Mr. Wiluiot are, both of them, generally allowed to be agreeable men j and as die never fees them, but when they are endeavouring to fet thcmfelvcs off to the greatefi: advantage, I am not at all iurpiifed at her prepolTef-Ilons in their favour.”
“ And has not Sir Charles Conyers been in the very fame fituation ; may we not, therefore, reafo-nably fuppofefher to be as w^ell pleafed wkh him ?”
“ I do not think fo ; for he teazes her for proofs of h?r approbation, while they Heal into her heart,
by
u
L OR D WOBURN.
2.23
By Ifnperceptible advances.--------—You will allow,
I imagine, that we are always more ready to beftow our charity upon people who do not folicit us, than on thofe by whom we are prellingly importuned.”
“ It may be fo.—^And you, lady Charlotte, ar& of an age, and at liberty to a£t as you pleafe, with regard to thefe things ; but, certainly, fach a girl as Kitty is not capable of knowing what is for her future benefit.—^——She has given me fufficient reafon to caliber judgment in q'ueftion, by preferring two gentlemen, whole-inclinations are already engaged, to a man who is, by what I can learn, every way' equal to them in point of merit, though flie is filly
enough to make exceptions to hitU.-----------—-—She
rnufi, therefore, be cured of this folly.------------
Nay, it is, in my opinion, highly indelicate in her, to think ferioufly of a man, who does not pretend to any inclination for her.——i----It is the folly and
V
the forwardnefs of women, my dear lady Charlotte, which makes fo many bad men.^’
“ Blels me !” replied I, “ you talk like lord Woburn.—”
“ You will not like me the worfe for that,” an-fwered Ihe, frailing ; but, indeed, I cannot help attributing the ruin of the generality of young women,' intirely to their romantic notions ; they fill their heads with a thouland idle fancies about love,
which they ought never to encourage.--------Let them
but take care to marry men of fenfe and charadter, and they need not be afraid of proper treatment. ——If a woman is not happy with a man who is
worthy of her efteem, fhe deferves not to be fo.-----
T© fall in love with a man, merely becaufe he has a pretty fet of features, and drelfes w'ell, and fays
a great many fine things------Ridiculous {luff! Take
my word for It, lady Charlotte, a pafiion kindled by. fuch trifling attractions, will be of a very fliort
K 4	duration.
224
HISTORY OF
duration.-—Half the girls of this reading age, abfo-' lutely turn their beads by reading a pack of improbable (lories, calculated only to croud the mind with wrong ideas, and to make the heart flutter with pernicious emotions.—By reading fuch books, they work themfelves up to a belief, that they are in love with every man they fee ; and, indeed, that every man whom they meet with, is in love with
them.—-------- I never fuffered Kitty to fpend her
time in this manner ; her acquaintance have been chiefly people who are inftruftive, as well as entertaining, and her books have been altogether of the
moral kind, though written in an amufing way.--------
Young folks will not bear perpetual reproofs ; they are too often rendered defperate by them : they ilrould, therefore, be lured from vice and folly by examples of felf-denial, chaftity, gratitude, genero-
flty, filial affeUIon, and delicacy of (entiment.----
Examples not to be often found in the living world, as one would wifti, I own ; but thofe examples in books may be of no fmall fervice to the young readers, if properly attended to.----------Books full of
fuch examples, and profeflfedly written on the fide of virtue, I take care to put into Kitty’s hands, and no other.”
Don’t you admire Mrs, Downton’s juft fentiments, with regard to the education of a daughter, my dear Mrs. Blomdr ?---------Much has Kitty been benefit-
ed by the tuition of fuch a mother ; feldom do v/e meet with a young perfon of her birth and connections, with fuch an excellent heart, with manners
fo amiable from the fimplicity of them ;---------and
yet, my dear friend, has not this charming naivete^ this purity of heart rendered the lovely girl too keenly affeeied with the extreme fenfibility of two of the moft infinuating, pleafing men in the world ?—But
let
LORD W<3BURN.
225
let me stop here.—While I thus plead for Kitty, am I not, at the fame time, endeavouring to exculpate myfelf ?
Write to me immediately, or you will be puniui-ei—v/ith a ftill longer letter
\	4
From your affectionate
Charlotte MordenJ
LETTER LXXVII
Lord Wo B u R N to Mr. Wi LM o T,
/	•	j
WILMOT, my dear Wilmot, I am as happy as
a man can poflibly be in my condition ; and if Hive, I Hiall, I hope, be exquifitely fo but it is now a moot point, whether the extravagance of my joy will not kill me.
Yefterday, my excellent lifter, lady Huxley, came, with all the eagernefs of fincere affeUion, to tell me, that file had procured my pardon from lady Charlotte, who wiftied me to take all neceffary fteps towards my recovery j and was particularly delirous to have me go, in confequence of the advice of my phyficians, to the fouth of France.
I made Caroline tell me minutely what had pafied between them.-----The dear creature’s behaviour
K 5
was
•
-■V?
. I
S , •
; I
i
.2.26
H I S T . O R Y- O F -
w'as charming ; but I have no lelfure to acquainS jou with it now.—I mull: haften to a (till more important event.
Having thanked my fifter for her affeUionate carriage—I told her, that I mufb delire her to give me, one more proof of her friendiliip, by meeting me at lady Charlotte’s, as I was determined to be carried to her houfe that afternoon y adding that Iwiflied Ihe would go firft to Mr. and Mrs. Elliot, fecure
them in my intereft, and bring them with her.--------1
made that addition to my requeft, becaufe I imagined that the Elliots, who had never difcovered any dillike to me, but in compliance with their charming niece’s humour, would readily make their appearance in my favour.
Lady Huxley left me, as foon as I had communicated my wlllaes to her.—I fent ter Harry immediately, told him my intentions, and folicited his concurrence with them.—He chearfully confented, on condition that I left the execution of fome part of my defign to him.—We, accordingly, fet out for St. James’s Square, in the fame 'iimnner we had left it a few days ago.	^ .
When my chair was opened in the hjall, I fat In it a little while, to recover my breath and fpirits, while Harry went up and told kdy Charlotte, who had only Kitty with her, that I was come to thank her for my pardon, and fee her before I fet cut for France.
“ Is he then going !,” cried the dear creature, ftarting with furprife, while concern fiullied her dovely cheek.—“ But I cannot fee him, lir,” qon-finued Ihe, “ pray tell him, that I wifh him well,” (rifing with emotion).
“ You will not refufe to fee him, I am fitre,”
laid Harry ; “ perhaps------moft probably, you will
never fee him again ; itisimpoflible for him to out-
c ;	live
L O R D W O B U R N.
227

live the fatigue of Such a journey, weak, dying, as he is.-—”
“ Good h—n !” exclaimed die, trembling, and red and pale by turns, “ Why will he go then ?
“ He goes in obedience to your ladydiip’s com--mands, madam.”
“ My commands, Mr. Wilmot !------------have no
right to command him, fir ; lady Huxley told me, that my lord^s phyficians advifed fuch a tour, as highly neceflary^ for the re-eftablilliment of his health.—I have no commands,” added die, burft-ing into tears, and covering her face with her handkerchief.—
“ Condefcend to fee him, then; my lady ; to admit him up (lairs, and to honour him with your fentiments.”
“ I—I—.” Here die faulrered, and appeared to be violently agitated.—“ I have nothing to fay, fir.—I cannot talk.”—(Rlfing).
“ You (hall not be defired to talk, madam,” faid Harry, taking her hand and re-feating her (hall only hear —”
“ Do, my dear, dear lady Charlotte,” added the
weeping Kitty, “ do but hear him----------hear him
but this once.”
“ Do not difcrefs me thus, Kitty ;—why this Importunity .?------1 have done what my lord, what
lady Huxley defired.—^----—I mull leave you, Mr.
Wilmot.-^ -
At that moment I was led into the room by Sir George Huxley and Mr. Elliot (the two ladies fol lowing) who condudled me to the feet of my angel.
She lifted up her hands and eyes, but faid no
thing.
“ Now, my fweet lady Charlotte,” faid lady Huxley, fearing herfelf on one fide of her, while
Mrs
n
you

■228
HIST O R Y O F
Mrs, Elliot took the other, “ look upon this poor dying creature ; and let pity, for once, fupply the
place of a fofter paffion.-.Remember that mercy
is the darling attribute of heaven.”—“ Come, lady Charlotte,” added Mrs. Elliot, taking her hand, rd Woburn has fuffered enough for his foibles ; let my petitions, joined to lady Huxley’s, prevail on you to pardon him.—”
“ I have—I have pardoned him,” replied flie, haftily, turning away her charming face.
“ Complete, then, my felicity, my adored Charlotte,” cried I, “ by giving me this dear hand.” (gently feizing It).
“ Well—well,” anfwered fhe, "‘I will—---when
you return.
I fhall never return alive,” fald I,“ I cannot, indeed, go, without my Charlotte’s confent to be mine, now every thing is ready ; and then. If I Biould die, you will not have my death to anfwer for.”----
* Oh ! do not talk fo,” cried llie, “ do not tear my heart in pieces, (laying her head upon Mrs. Elliot’s fhoulder.)—What a diftrefs is this ?”-—
“ You may eafily remove it, my dear lady Charlotte,” faid Mrs. Elliot, “ lord Woburn’s friends, and your friends, think it high time for you to dif-ccver lefs feverity in your behaviour, to a man who has been brought by it to the very brink of the grave.—--------Nothing but your immediate con-
tent can now lave hi n.—Poffibly your confent may come too late.”—“ Yet, when you have done all you can,” added lady Huxley, “ his death will not be charged to your account.”
“ Is my exiftence, then, fo little to be defired ? faid I.—
“ Cruel !” replied She, quite overcome.^—Then,
looking at the Elliots, “ Do with me,” continued
jlie, “ what you pleafe.”
.	Every
LORD WOBURN.
229
Every thing had been provided for our marriage.
■—A fpecial licence was ready, and Dr. Dolby attended.
Poor Harry (I felt for him) affifted Sir George in fupporting me—a moll eligible bridegroom to be fare, while Mr. Elliot gave me his niece’s invaluable
hand.-----She was juft on the point of fainting.-
I pitied her from my foul; yet I was uAable to relieve her, almoft fainting rnyfelf—fo ecllatic were my fenfatlons.—After having clafped her, v/ith all the ftrength I had left, to my throbbing heart, we fat down.
• Mrs. Elliot, feeing how incapable my angel was of giving orders, took care of every thing.—Coffee, tea, jellies, &c. were brought up.----Soon after-
wards all out company left us, except Mrs. Elliot and Kitty.—I then became fo exceedingly ill, from the fudden alteration of my affairs, and from the weaknels of my condition, that I could no longer
fupport rnyfelf.---My dear Charlotte faw and felt
my unealinefs.—Sitting down by me, fire took my hand, and preffed it in the tendereft manner imaginable.—------“ You will not fend me from you ?”
faid I to her—“Never, replied fhe.”—I could not proceed-------They carried me to that very apart-
ment, in which I had fo heavily offended—no other bed being prepared.—
When the Servants retired, my dear Charlotte approached me, and with accents heavenly fweet, while her lovely face was crimfoned with bluflres, faid, “ I have ordered a bed to be brought into my dreffing-room, that I may be ready to give you any thing you want in the night,”
“ No, my love,” replied I, preffing her hand to my lips, “ I cannot bear this.”—But I was not able to divert her from her purpofe.—Her woman, whom fire has taken in the room of Dawfon, and who is older and fitter for the bufinefs, fat up with me, and
...	gave
30
H I S T O R Y O T
gave me Something warm whenever ! wanted ahy refreSliment. — In the morning mj wife, delightful
word!-----breakfafted by my bed-lide.—lam ftill-
weak and languid, but feel an eafe in my mind, which prognofticates the relloration of my health.'
My angel has begged me not to fit too long at my writing-table.—"Vou may imagine that I have writ- ■ ten this at different times.—I ihall be ever moft wil- ■ ling to obey her who has Saved my life, for whoua *
only I wiiia to live.

L E T TER
LXXVIIL
Lady Wosurn to Mrs. Blomer.'
/
WHAT a Sudden ! what an itnexpefted change, my dear friend I I have not leifure to fend' you the particulars j but I am certainly married to lord Woburn.—if my union with him, if my perpetual Solicitude and tendernefs can Save him, I iliall be completely happy.—If I have afted indifcreetly in this affair, you muff not blame me \ —your brother and filler, Sir beorge, lady Huxley, Mr. Wil-mot, every creature of my acquaintance, for whom I have a value (excepting yourfelfl infifted upon my
compliance.----My dear loi'd, himfelf, was almofl
killed v/ith Tatigue, and with the fuddennefs of the
event; but I think he is better—1 hope fo.—All my
prayers
L O Pv D WOBURN.
231,
prayers are for his recovery ; all iny wiiues, all my cares are to promote it.—-May heaven reilore him ! Do not condemn me, my dear Mrs. Blomer ;
hear all firft, from Mrs. Elliot, and let me have your feniiments upon this unlocked for and furprifing revolution—a revolution artoniHaing, even to myfelf. I am, however, and ever Iliall be.
Your very affeUionate
Charlotte Woburn.


■A>
VC


LET T E R
LXXIX.
Lord Woburn to Mr Wilmot.
‘TTT’HA'I'a charmi.ng creature have I married t VV How undeferving am I of all her care and tendernefs ! I adtually wonder at ray afiurance, in daring to make only a nurfe, at prelent, of the finefl:
woman in the world.-------Yet fuch a nurfe, Wii-
mot, you never faw, nor heard of !—She has faved my life, and fire will make it a raoft blefled one to me, indeed.
We have been preparing to fet out for France ; but, I believe, a vilit to the Contnient will not be neceffary.—I recover (Irength hourly, and do not defire to hear of any thing likely to difturb the tranquility I at prefent enjoy, with my Charlotte ever by my fide.—I cannot think of being happier, or better in one place than auottier..
You can hardly imagine, by how many wdnning
ways
23i
HISTORY OF
ways IBe endeavours to amufe me, to entertain me, and to convince me of her lincere affe£lion for me.
----She is in hopes that a. journey to France will
prove beneficial to me, an.d is, therefore, eager to fet out.
“ Was you not goingto France, my dear lord ?” faid (Be, “ before we were married.”
“ Yes, my life,” replied I,—“they told me, there was a necefllty for trying the air of Montpelier ; and as I was determined never to go thither without you, I took thofe hafty fteps which you condemned at the time ;■ but as I am now happy by having taken them, and as you, alfo, are now happy, you will not, I hope, my dear Charlotte, difap-prove of them.”
“ I will not,” replied lire, v/ith an enchanting, fmile.—However, Ihe ftill urges me to adopt every prudent meafure to forward my recovery.
The do£lors have made a movement, which wdll? fix me in i'mgland.—They recommended the air of fome falutary fpot near town.—I mentioned Wind-for, becaufe I always liked that place j and becaufe W'e can have the very houfe to which my Charlotte retired, when I drove her, by my rallr behaviour, from her own.—I will go thither as foon as il is ready.—We lhall take Kitty and Harry with us, on whom we have a fmall defign—a very friendly one you may be fure ; I will not affront your un-fferftanding by naming it.
L E .D
LORD WOBURN.
233
LETTER 1./.
T7-
XX.
Lady Woburn to Mrs, Blomek.
Windfor.
OW happy am I, my good friend, in receiving your approbation ; how fupremely So, in being the wife of the mod amiable of men !
We are, agreeably to the advice of tJie phyhciarts, at Windfor, as my lord was unwilling to go to Franee, when the dotSlors informed him, that there was not an abfolute neceffity for his departure from England. —To tell you the truth, I believe the Montpelier Scheme was formed, in order to draw me in with the greater facility.-—I told my lord fo—he fmiled, and aflured me I was midaken j but added, that as he could not think bf going to France without me, he had fome Small hopes, that I would rather accompany hi m,. than let him die, by daying behind'.—I chid him for entertaining any doubts, concerning my behaviour, bpon lb intereding an occafion.—fie kilTed me, and' told me, he was extremely happy in finding that I loved him better than he imagined I did.
We have Mr. Wilmot and Mifs Downton with us } the former talks of going abroad, and, by fo talking, makes the, latter look rather melancholy's; and her ipirits are not at all yet mended, by her mother’s urging her to receive Sir Charles, as foon' as he returns from the North, whither he was obliged to go, to take pofTedion of an edate lately fallen to him. ----Mrs. Downton was not very willing, knowing our party, to let her daughter accompany
us
but as I pofitively declared, that I could not
do
*34
H I S T O R T OF
do ■wdthout her, Ihe could not well refufe mtf.
It was aukward to have no lady with me' 5 and I could not think of any, as you were at fuch a diftance, half fo an’reeable to my lord, who was the -perfon to be firff confidered, as Kitty.-—The dear girl’ was exceedingly rejoiced, to find that I fucceeded with her mother; and being fenfible how nice my lord is in his opinion about women, it w'as paying her a great compliment, to feled her from the reft of our acquaintance ; and flie exprefied a inodefl: acknowledgment for this preference, which (till rnore and
more recommended her to my lord------—Mr. Wilmot
behaves wi-.h the utmoft politenefs to her, and even feems defirous of amufing her; but Kitty, I believe, fees nothing of the lover in him.—As my lord chutes to be much with me alone, they alfo are frequently left by themfelves, yet does (he always return to us, with a ferioufnefs and anxiety in he/ countenance,
which induces me to fear, that fhe is dlffatisfied.—
♦
Were I quite fine that Wilmot was the caufe of her anxiety and ferioufnefs, I would fend her home, Time, abfence, and another lover might cure her,
•I femetimes mention our leaving this place ; but fhe never hears of our departure from hence, without weeping, becaufe Siie knows that her mother will not invite Mr Wilmot to her houfe ; nor woul(i
he go, I believe, if Slie did.---—Kitty, however,
notwithstanding her partiality for Wilmot, behaveB ' to him with a delicate referve, which is extremely ' proper.-—He must, certainly, have a'good opinion of her ; arid when a man esteems fuch a girl as her,
he may be loon brought to love her.-------But then"
he 1ms only a fma!! fortune.—How must we fettle ' that with Mrs. Dov/nton ? Hbw will he, indeed, who has she most generous and disinterested heart, be able to think of offering it to a lady, with nothing' more confiderable tacked to it, than his very moderate income ?	-
Lord
L O R D WOBURN.
^33
Lord Woburn, unknown to me, made a confide-rable addition to the jointure which had been before agreed upon between him and Mr. Elliot for me, with an additional five hundred a-year to my pin money ; which that gentleman thought unne-ceffary.
I afked my lord the other day, if he began to grov/' tired of me ?
Why that question, my dear Charlotte fald he, a little furprifed.
Becaufe you feem, by your generostty, to lay a greater ftrefs on money than love.—Now, as l am extremely happy in being’fo loved by you at prefent, 1 want the leSs to be enriched ; a much fmaller fum would be fully fusticient to enable me to appear with you ; and v/hile you are fo obliging as to give me your company, I fhall not run about from place to place, merely to Shew my deaths and my jewels.^’
He laughed : called me an excellent creature ; and faid, he had not made that fupplement to my income to bribe my fondnefs, but to diew that he placed the higheft confidence in me r being affured, that I had a heait not to be corrupted by money or the world.
I thanked him for fo ftriking a proof of his ef-teem, but told him, that as he had a larger fortune than he knew what to do with, I thought I could put him in a way to enjoy it in a luxuiious man-fier.
“ Speak, my life,” cried he, “ whatever propofe muft merit my approbation.”
I then ventured to hint, that if he could do any thing for Wilmot, fo as to make him acceptable to Mrs. Downton, her daughter would, I believed, be quite happy ; adding, however, th-at Kitty had not dropped a fyllable relative to her inclination for Wilmot, and that her prudent behaviour had very much increafed my eileem for herf
“I do
veu
236
HISTORY or
I do not think,” replied he, Smiling fignificailt-I7 at me, “ that Harry can So readily change the objedt of his affedlion ; but I will talk to him.”
Poor Kitty looked at me this morning, with her eyes full of tears, and told me, that 1 was the hap-* pieft woman in the world,
“ I freely confefs I am, my dear ; I hope you dotft envy me.”
“ No, indeed,” replied the bluihing girl, “ I think you deferve fuch a charming man as my lord ; but as you-can have aobody elfe, now, it is a pity that any man who knows you fliould be unhappy, becaufe he cannot be in my lord’s place.”
“ I am quite of your mind,” faid I Smiling, “ but' I cannot fuppofe that any man fliould be fo, becaufe he is not.”
“ All the men I ever knew,” replied She, “' prefer you, in their hearts, to all other women.”
“ How is this, Kitty !” faid my lord, who overheard her, while he was coming into the room, “ if that’s the cafe, I muft begin to be jealous ; a-mong fo many rivals, one. Surely, may ftand a chance of Succeeding in my Charlotte’s favour.”
“ Kitty, my lord, is, from the excefs of her friend-flrip, too partial to me ; llie, therefore, haftily imagines, that all men fee me with her eyes.”
They all fee you with the eyes of admiration, mo’ft certainly replied my lord, “ have I not then an intolerable flrare of vanity, to believe my (elf preferred by you, my love, to all other men ?”
I will not tell you what anfwer I made ; it would make you think, perhaps, that lam too ■ fond of him ; and yet, certainly, I cannot pofhbly be too fond of him, as he almoft adores me.——-He can fcarce bear me out of his fight a fingle moment ; he gratifies every wifli of my heart, and even watches to read'my very thoughts, that he may fiy to prevent my defires.
But
LOR D W O BURN.
237
But I will not add anymore, left I fliculd weary you, fo as to make you repent of your having en-.couraged a correfpcndence with
Your affeftionate friend,
Charlotte Wo burst.
I. E T T E R
LXXXI.
Lord Wo B U R N to Mr. W i l m o t .
Y health, my fpirlts, are in a great raeafkre
reftored ;---—my lovely Charlotte deferves to
be mentioned as the chief caufe of my recovery.
To her I am indebted for my prefent exiftence, and for every bleffing I enjoy. I cannot fay half enough in her praife—I never could have believed it pollible for any woman to be fo excellent'—She not only ftu-dioufly endeavours, with the utraoft folicitude, to make me happy, but to uonfer ail the felicity in her power upon my friends. In confequence of this moft laudable propenfity of her’s, I have formed a fcheme ■ to fettle our dear Harry, I hope, to his fatisfaUIon, You will laugh, I am fare to hear that I, after having fo long entertained a vile opinion of woman, fhould turn match-maker—I do not by any means like \ho.Qxharader ; but when I fee two people whom .1 think capable of making each other happy, if they were but fet in the right way, I cannot help -wifliing to allift them.—With this -delign I have attacked your brother about Kitty. —“ She is a lovely girl, Harry, faid I—but I fliall not expatiate upon her perfon, her difpofition is amiable, and fire
has
23?
HISTORY OF
?>
has a very good heart—how, indeed, can fiie have a bad one, as ilie has been from her infancy taught to love and revere my Charlotte }—Such a girl mud prove a good wife, and I now experience what I always believed to be an undoubted truth, that an honourable connection with a gentle, tender creature, who yet wants not strength of understanding to make her a ufeful companion, is worth a thou-
fand of your male friendllaips.’------I believe you,
my lord,’’ cried Karry ; but as your loistSliip has got the only woman in the world who can be fuch a companion, nobody elfe can venture to encou-^ rage any very flartering expectanons.
Kitty is the next best replied I, you lovc lady Woburn, I know.
Fie, my lord,’’ faid he, actually looking a-baHied, to find that I faw he had not conquered his paSIion.
-Kitty loves you, Harry though {lie mcdeitly does all fhe c an to coitceal it ;—and does not a man sta d infinitely a better chance to be happy with a v/o-^ inan who has an aifdClion for him, than by marrying a woman whom he himfelf loves, but who perhaps likes Somebody better.”
Well, I believe you may be right;” anfwered after a little hefitation, but I cannot pretend to Mifs DoWnton, my lord-----------my fortune is no-
< £
J


he,
n cr c (,
thi
If that is your only ohjeUion, lady Woburn and I can inftantly remove it —She njakes Kitty a prefent of ten thorjfand pounds, and Kitty wdll give herfelf with that fortune, to nobody but Harry Wilmot.”	t
“ Oh ! riiy lord, this muft not bc'—yon quite oppress me with fuch unmerited generofity—I cannot deferve it.”
“ You do deferveit—you fliall make lady Woburn
and me happy, by marrying Kitty.-------Pity the
poor
LORD WOBURN.
^■39
>9
•poor lighing girl, who Is as innocent as /lie islovely, and who, I may truly compare toShakefpear’s. TVoZ/ar, who, “ never told her love, but let concealment,, like a worm iii the bud, feed on her damafk cheek.’ Gan there be a more inviting image in nature ?” ’
He owned there could not—yet hung his head,, ^nd fighed
I left him (we were in the garden) and going in fearch of my own angel, met Kitty.
“ Haften, my dear girl to Harry,” faid I, “ who -is taken extremely ill.”
“ Oh ! where, where ?” cried fhe all in a flut--ter.
Away die flew, and I followed her j but jufi; before they met, I flipped behind a hedge, unobferved.
“ Blefs me, Mr. Wilmot,” exclaimed the tender girl, quite out of breath, “ what’s the matter My lord tells me, you are very ill; where is your pain ? added Ihe, looking up in his race withai’weet anxiety.
Poor Harry, who was walking with folded arms and down-call eyes, raifed the latter to look on the •iretty enquirer—reading in her eyes all that I told liin, and more, I fuppole, he took her hand, and faid, “ Where is your pain, my dear Mifs Downton, for you feem much difordered?”
“ Who, I r” replied flie, “ No indeed, I fliould have been very well if my lordhad not frightened me fo.”
“ With what ?” faid Harry.
“ With telling me you were fick, Mr. Wilmot.” ’ As foon as thefe words efcaped her, the poor girl was ready to expire v/ith Ihame,—A blufli like
fcarlet, covered her face and reck.-----She could
hardly fupport Iierfelf; her limbs trembled.^
He faw her cenfufion, and by his change of countenance, and behaviour was, I dare believe, more touched by it, than by any thing he had ever ob-
ferved
240
HISTORY OF
ferved in her.—-----------He caught her inftantly'
in his arms, clafped her to his bofom with real ten-dernels, and thanked her for her kind concern.
She broke haftily from him, and covering her
face, ran to my wife’s dreffing-room.-----There die
remained all day, telling Charlotte how improperly fhe had beha-ved, and that die was quite .adiamed to fee Mr. Wilmot.
My dear Charlotte, who was not lefs pleafed with her delicacy than myfelf, endeavoured to prevail on her to eontpjer her timidity upon the occadon--—-
but to no purpofe..---When Ihe appeared the next
day, die was much difconcerted, and in fuch a violent tremor, that die could hardly fpeak or look up.
This behaviour of her’s made more impredlon upon Harry, to his honour be it mentioned, than either her youth, beauty, fortune,, or connections.
d was pleafed wkli her becoming terrors, I was dill more fatisfied with the very proper manner in which Ihe conduQ;ed- herfelf.—He treated her with an uncommon refpeU, mixed with a kind of tender-whicii I had never, till then, perceived in him.
-----but the more he diflinguidied her, the more'
die avoided him ; and though die received his attentions about her with politenefs, and with equal politenefs returned them, die took care to thrown dignity into her carriage at the fame time, which fufnciently informed him, that die Mmuld not be thought too eafy and yielding.-—r:a£tually admired the difcretioii of a girl fo young, and fo very much in love—for I am fuie die is very much in love with Harry,.	^
After having complimented my Charlotte upon her young friend’s difcreet referve, I told Harry, that he might look round the w’.orld for a wife, and never find fuch another.
nefs
He
L Q R D W O B URN.
24r
He acqulefced, and now pays his court to Mils Downton:, with the mofl: reSpeUful afliduity, who, though her little heart is ready to burft with joy, has command enough over herfelf to hide hertranf-ports ; by fo dding flie has made Harry quite enamoured with her.-----But what is all this to my
Charlotte who improves upon me every hour ?------
A few days ago, ihe came running to me, and with a countenance, in which love and good-humour, in which every virtue, every grace were ftrongly painted, fald, “ My dear lord, among our friends, there is one we have forgot—r-your little charge, Mr.
Carey’s fon-----may I not fee him ?—You told me,
he was an amiable child'.--
How I loved her for this excellence of heart! I Ilrained her to my bofbm, and replied, “ You flaall be this moment gratified.”-—
I fent for the boy direftly.---He has been fo
careffed by my wife and Kitty, that I fuppofe there will be no parting them.—-—Many and many a time, will young Bofwell think of them, I dare lay, when he is at fchool.-^-He is a fine lad 5 and if the wo-
men don’t fpoil him—take notice. Jack, I don’t mean lady Woburn, he may do very well.-—Charlotte is, indeed, become fo fond of him, that I am fure ihe loves children, and will fhine no lels in the character of a mother than a wife. .
Tell me how you approve of Harry’s attachment, and of the profpe£t of a new lifter.---Our
next, bufmefs will be to reconcile Mrs. Downton to the match. ;	;
Your’s as uSual,

W.

L
LET
24^
H I S T O R Y : O F’
PM
V -•
f \
V •
L E T TiE R

* 1
t A
>
f 4
i } / ;
8 I t
i ’ *•
, Lady Woburn to Mrs.i Beomer.
1	•	;	r	'
Y iord has chid me for nothing, fince I have
been his, but my delaying to bring him acquainted with youj whohiihe calls, and juilly calls, my deareffifrie'nd,-.;.—I told him, that if you were notfcriown to him he was to yout- and had been a
longtime.------1 then took him to hiy cabinet, and
fpread ail your letters before him, with the particular palTages. relating to him, in thofe I had fent
you, which I chofe to trahfcribe.----^ 'He told me, I
had given him a high treat ; it alForded me, indeed, no fmall fatisfadtion to obfervethe variations in his face while he pemfed the papers, though I ranhhe rilk of being well nigh fmotnered with his carelTes.
You will make but a poor return,” faid I, to ilm, laughing, “ for all the love I have fo-long felt for you by taking away my breath.”'—He al-moli; fmothered me, notwithftanding all my remon-ftrances againfl; the impetuous proofs of his fondnels for me.—:He admires your ftile and fentiments, my dear Mk. Blomer, fo much, and is fo envious of my' regard, for you that he told me the other day, he fhould be very jealous, unlefs I permitted him to have a Ihare in the correspondence between us-.
Do you confent.pi—Indeed you muft--------for I have
fworn to obey, and niy inclinations are ftronger than my duty.
Kitty is, I hope. In a fair way to be as happy, as her little heart can wifh to be-—and as I may with truth add, (lie deferves to be j for flie has conduced herfelfwith a delicacy and propriety really aftonhlr-
LORD WOBURN.
M3
ing both to my lord and me.—In a tete-a-tete, yeS-terday, I told her how charmingly die had behaved. —“il hope,” continued I, “ that Mr Wilmot has behaved entirely to your fatisfadion, as I have ob-ferved an agreeable change in his manners.”
“ I have not a iingle fault to find with Mr, Wil-mot,” replied flje, with a figh, “ his behaviour is too flattering to fuch a girl as I am ; but my mother will never approve of any man except Sir Charles Conyers ; I cannot think as Ihe does, yet I love her too well to difoblige her.”
A fhower of tears followed theSe few words.--------
I begged her to be comforted ; and alTured her, that both my lord and myfelf would do every thing in
our power to forward Mr. Wilniot’s intereft.
•»
She thanked me, but I believe ilie has fmall hopes of fuccels —Poor girl! when J refled on what 1 have fuffered for my lord, I feel mod fenfibly for this moft amiable young creature.
My lord, at my defire, has let me have little Bof-well, Mr. Carey’s fon ; he is quite a little cherubim. -----1 have kifled him fo much, that my lord threatens to take him from me, and never to let me fee him again.
f am fent for to Mr. W’ilmot, who is Suddenly indifpofed—muft, therefore, conclude.————

L %
LET.!
-44
HISTORY OF
LETTER LXXXIII.
Lord Woburn to Mr. Wilmot.
DON’T be too much alarmed at the cxprels which I difpatched to you. Our Harry is better 5 but his illnefs has cofl: Kitty Downton Browers of tears j to her concern and attentions, his recovery may be, in a great meafure, I believe, attributed.—He told me, as foon as he became better, that he had been exceedingly fluttered about my dangerous fituation, fudden marriage, &c. &c. &c. (he might have added, his paflion for my wife, though he very prudently fupprefied that addition) but that the uncommon discretion of Mifs Downton, and the fweetnefs of her temper, together with the great efteem and anxiety flie had discovered for him, had quite gained his affe£tion ; that he was afraid, however, there would be fome difficulty in bringing her family to approve of a younger brother.
I bade him hope for every thing from my Charlotte’s friendly offices joined to mine.
He prelfed my hand, and thanked me.
Imagining that my wife had confined herfelf too much during Harry’s illnefs, becaufe Bie was willing to fee him properly attended, and becaufe Are was unwilling to leave Kitty by herfelf, I made them both get into the coach, as foon as he grew better,
to take the air.—---We went to Ciiefden.
When we were within a mile of that beautiful Spot, we paft a poft-chaife v/hich was overturned.—-There were two ladies in it who, by their out-cries, were certainly frightened, and, perhaps, hurt.
My.

LORD WOBURN.

45
My dear Charlotte, whofe ears are even qpen to founds of diftrefs, (lopped the coach, and deiired
that we might offer our affidance-----We both got
out direftly.
On my advancing to intreat the ladles, who were juft difengaged from their carriage by their fervantSj to accept of places in mine, I immediately recognized one of them"—and ftarted back.—“ It is Mrs. Mead, ” faid I, in a whifper to my Charlotte, “ (hall we return home, and only fend the fervants to take care of them ?”
“ By no means, replied (he, with a benevolent fniile which made her look mod angelically : “ Were I in fuch a (ituation, my lordj (liouldl not be pained to find Mrs. Mead' able, but unwilling to affift me ?”
“ Charming creature !” replied I, and then walk^ ed again to the ladies.—-My wife, in the mofl‘obliging manner, expreffed her concermfor them, and deiired to know if (he could accommodate them^ at lead till they had recovered their fright.
Mrs. Mead, more (liocked at the fight of us than at the overturning of the carriage, changed-colour, and thanked lady Wobutn, but was going to decline our oficr, when her companion inter^led, faying, that (he with pleafure recolle£led lady Woburn; having Spent feveral days with her at Eudon-Cadle, and that (he (hould be happy in having the honour of renewing her acquaintance with her.
My Charlotte remembered her, as (he had feen her at the Cadle the Summer before we met in ——— (hire.—I had,therefore an opportunity, after having made room for the ladies, and after having, found them more frightened than hurt, to alk about Sir Francis and lady Eudon, from whom I had not heard fince they mentioned their intended Bath journey.
“ They are there now,” returned the lady, whom I had never feen till then j “ I have this morning had a litter from lady Eudon.—She is in the greated dif-
trefi
m6
H I S T O R Y O F
1
4.
trefs at her filler Harriot’s being Juft married to a laif-pay officer, who has already had, it is imagined, two wives.—^—It is alfo faid that he was kept for fome time by lady Spilffiury ; but that, on his growing clamorous for a larger allowance out of her jointure, fhe threw him in the way of her intimate friend Mils Facely, who was married to him yefterday morning at the Abbey, without informing her family of her defign,”
You may imagine how we all looked at each other on this piece of intelligence ; it amufed us a little for a few hours, but as our intelligencer being rather of too communicative a difpofition for my wife to defire an intimacy with her, we fet her down with Mrs. Mead, at the houfe of the latter, who lived, we found, in a very elegant little houfe about two miles from Cliefden.—Mrs. Butler gave us feveral invitations to her dwelling near her friend’s, but Mrs. Mead modefbly and prudently was filent upon that head.—I hope, therefore, fhe is changed for the better.
At our return we found Harry walking about his chamber.—Mrs. Downton was in the parlour, come to fetch her daughter.---—The remainder in my
next.
LET-
LORD W O B URN
HI

LETTER LXXXIV.
» /
From the fame to the fame.
S Soon as I had welcomed Mrs. Downton, who is a very agreeable woman, I carried her up into your brother’s room with her daughter and my wife, telling, her that we had been Wt too long ab-fent from our patient.
Slarry received her with great' refpedl;.—Kitty trembled all over.—Soon afterwards, on her mother’s addreiling lady Woburn, and faying ihe was come to fetch her daughter, as Hie expeUed Sir Charles Conyers in town the next day, Kitty fainted away, unable to fuftain fo fevere a Ihock.
Harry,* forgetting his own indifpofition, flew to aflift the lovely girl, and, railing her tenderly in his arms, recalled her to life by a thoufand afteftionatc prefiures to his lond bofony.
Kitty, opening her eyes, looked fatisfaftion at the exceffive kindnels of his behaviour; but all at once, fhrinking from his arms, wdth a deep ligh, turned to Mrs. Dowhton, who had been; very much alarmed at her fainting,'and'exclaimed, “ My rhother!—I cannot bear to difpleafe ray dear mother, Mr, Wil-inot.”— /' :	.. h .	’
The diScovery of this modefl; tendernels for Harry, and her ftill greater aftedlion for Mrs. Downton, who had been an excellent mother, touched lady Charlotte and me inoft fenlibly, and we both endeavoured to prevail onTtfrs. Downton to receive your brother as her fon.
■J*	*
I cannot
2
48
II I S T O R Y


1 cannot defcribe Kitty’s joy.’^The fly girl, in or ' der to conceal it, made a frivolous excufe to go into Iier own apartment; but Harry found means to make her promife to return in a few minutes.^—Every -thing vvill, I'hope, be foon fettled to their and your
fatisfaUion.—---Mrs. Downton has generoufly re-
fufed my Charlotte’s prefent 4 but we are abfolute.
Thus you lee my angel, as a millrefs, friend, and wife. Urines fuperior to the greateft part of her fex 4 and I can moft fincerely add, that fire renders me
the happieft of men.-----If women, in general, would
copy fo exemplary a character, they would not find men fo unwilling to,enter into the marriage-ftate it is certainly very much in their power to make that state a state of wretchednefs or felicity :•—the exemplary wife,therefore, is a charadler which cannot be fafHciently admired4 it is justly to be revered.
f*
I
N
I
P»

U. of Pa. Ubpapy
/=t;c*.vv-T
■ d.r-’4-V'.
VtfifA rirA A


,N, "
N V
/•■ 'V
S
• 9



f
•n
\

1 .
. V".v' "^ * v
sCv'?r-v>
‘NWc,
'V,"
••♦Tar::. :_n , v

'■- A'



.	—: r '^ ' '‘
- Tiri' -	^	_
r . -C ■?	• .c.vys..v-s.r:	ir ■.*?. * .■*■«£.'^	r/. A.->'ir^./■
' Ox :
IS"
•N 'O' '-
'^•■ri	T-'
'^. -

/' ^

•.
r'.v
■' O
^ \
- -■ ^rr-
■: ■ V

•vr,
■ *
w
>% ‘ ■

.T
<.'•
■s', ?".'


I
f
■ ■
• 1

* ' • '
y.	--f -3:v
o
FfA'-po^,
'A
*-^ -


i

P t 4V


l>.f f /
1=

y /
/
/
f

• *v *v/-vy
it ■ • ..
kT-?S--
-V.
.>r-T'V;
.. • 4-'-* ■ '
'■-•''C:-^SN'S'V-	
' ' r. *. • :' 1- -•'^ ■ '■”,,	•
	•V. r ^X - r'
^'.'■-c.'''-''iiy ccN	
	. 1 "^*
'S-'V	. S•
\ ‘ \''	
b"	
	•, ■ .=;.' -•' ■
	^ i
	
	• '\^k. -'.
•	
4
• k
A
4'
m:

■,'S


'M\



A
S XT'"
y
I



» f
.-r
u
ii Pi
d

?;r.:H



‘fl
tr.rr..



^ N
I



*v
|r«^

. f^]

M
V


liH
inches
1



	1	2	3	4	5	6		8	9	10	11 (A)	12	13	14	15
L*	39.12	65.430	49.87	44.26	55.56	70.82	63.51	39.92	52.24	97.06	92.02	87.34	82.14	72.06	62.15
a*	13.24	18.11 ■	-4.34	-13.80	9.82	-33.43	34.26	11.81	48.55	-0.40	-0.60	-0.75	-1.06	-1.19	-1.07
b*	15.07	18.72	-22.29	22.85	-24.49	-0.35	59.60	-46.07	18.51	1.13	0.23	0.21	0.43	0.28	0.19
D50 Illuminant, 2 degree observer
Density
0.04
0.09
0.15
0.22
0.36
0.51
lO'
0{	Si
oi	o*
” dot* pt kteti (Ofe<«0
0| 0| I iaI
SI lAi
w>

§1 Si
500
600
700
300
1^00
fkt^ad
> r

centimeters
li|7iM|llll|2lli|lNl|3lil|llM|4lll|llll|5lii|iiii|6iii|iiii|7iii|iiii|giii|iiii|9iii|iiii|-/()

16 (M)
49.25
-0.16
0.01
17
38.62
-0.18
-0.04
18(B)
28.86
0.54
0.60
19
16.19
-0.05
0.73
20
8.29
-0.81
0.19
21
3.44
-0.23
0.49
22
31.41
20.98
-19.43
23
72.46
-24.45
55.93
24
72.95
16.83
68.80
25
29.37
13.06
-49.49
0.75
0.98
1.24
1.67
2.04
2.42
26
54.91
-38.91
30.77
27
43.96
52.00
30.01
28
82.74
3.45
81.29
	
	.1 • V
29	30
52.79	50.87
50.88	-27.17
-12.72	-29.46
Colors by Munsell Color Services Lab
A
A
•“•-j -A
ff A.