'f, -•*	1
T	-^^>-<15'1

'2“"l /
t
»'
■/
i.n

Cs's^s
THE
GODFREY F. SINGER
MEMORIAL
PRESENTED BY
MR. AND MRS. JAOOB SINGER


CS-'w-'S *'V-. -iw-
S'- w.
I V	o
..■k

■■ V


♦i-I .‘:rT
A
• r'.r
‘ ^

- V -■-.-'••w>V_-- -



• *
/


\
\
‘:	’:■.: -V'	•'■' / i J

\ J


GOXHEATH-CAMP ;
•i
A
N
O
V
E
L

IN A SERIES OF LETTERS
by a lad y.
/
. V
' c
I N
T W O
VOLUMES.
^ s'
V •	,	»•	^
.V ' '
A .
^ - -

can
#
rr-
y-A-LL
V O L.
I.

/'

DUBLIN
POINTED TOR Messrs. Price, Whitestone, Wilkins Williams, M'alker, E. Cross, Jenkin, Sleater^ Mon cr I effe,W, Wilson, Burnett, Porter^ Exshaw, Beatty^ Burton, Higley^
and B. Watson* M.2»oc.lxxix.




V

*- V	r. 1



>


* '' i
-k v<
/
(J. of Pa, ' Library
liT i
m ^ >
iUoij
T o
THE LADIES
?
BOTH NOBILITY AND COMMONERS,
WHO,
DURING THE LATE CAMPAIGN,
DISDAINED NOT TO SHARE, IN ORDER TO SOFTEN
THE INCONVENIENCIES OF THEIR HUSBANDS’ SITUATION,
THE FOLLOWING LITTLE
PERFORMANCE
IS MOST HUMBLY DEDICATED ;
NOT ON INTERESTED MOTIVES,
BUT MERELY AS A TOKEN OF THAT ADMIRATION EVERY BRITON MUST FEEL OF CONDUCT SO
TRULY COMPATIBLE WITH CONJUGAL FAITH AND CONJUGAL AFFECTION.
A CONDUCT,
A. ^
IN A MOST PARTICULAR MANNER
RESPECTED AND ADMIRED
B Y,
LADIES,
YOUR MOST OBEDIENT,
HUMBLE SERVANT,
THE AUTHOR
^4
X ^
t jrm 1 ^

.

(ty	-r
K - ,	>

I— *	..
•> V M
V*,. »

* • T'*r >	'tv-4
if
*' '
■' Jb'


\
T.

/
N

U. of Pa. Library

C O X H E A T H :
A
N
O
V
E
L.
LETTER I.

V
V r
CP
.Df
'.j;
* ■*
¥
'H
•4*

Mi LDM A Y-Ha LL,
Heaven fi’:il: taught Letters for fome Wretch’s Aid', Some baniih’d Lover, or fome captive Maid.
N D what a chafm, my dear madam, at certain periods would there be in the Annals of Friendship, iinaffisted by that divine, that de-
lightful invention ?
I, FOR example, who have long loved you as well as my Sister can do, and am more intimately acquainted with you in a fix days than she in a fix
months vifit,
must have languished to hear of
your welfare, your amufements, your every interesting, your every entertaining occurrence ; at the fame time that i had borne with impatience my own exclufion from the poshbility of communicating the changes and chances in a life, you have done me the honour to affure me will be ever more dear to you.
B
Dear

6
C O X HEATH:
Dear to you !—By what tie, what cement ? Merely the liberality of your heart, and the benevolence of your temper ?—Forbid it. Heaven ! Forbid it. Love ?—A little miracle as to the article of wealth will, I trust, foon be wrought in Ferdinand’s favour ;—ssnce wealth is univerfal-ly allowed to be the only requistte with-held from him, for making the marriage-state completely happy ;— and then, let the old-ones or the wife-ones fay what they may, you shall be my lister as well as my friend ; — and we will challenge the Globe to produce Such another blessed Trio.
I MUST, however, confefs, that to bend the will to the will of a parent, is a beautiful fample of mental excellence in a young woman.—The youthful fancy will have its wanderings, and too frequently, perhaps, draw the youthful affedfions into embarraffnients ; but it is headlong inclination alone that is found irrestrainable ; and, overturning both reafon and confcience in its courfe, pushes on the fairest individuals to the foulest deeds—to the wounding of nature, and the violation of delicacy.—You are, thank Providence, a being of a fuperlor'order to this fpecies of females;—and will either reconcile your duty and your love, or keep them in a state of honourable Separation.
Apropos of Letters!—I never can touch on the fubjedt without reviving my quarrel with my otherwife favourite Poet, for his prostitution of So invaluable a medium of focial and affedlionate intercourfe.
To waft a ssgh from Indus to the Pole may be innocently wished, and no lefs innocently effedt-ed ;—but that a young damfel can Spare her blushes by committing' to paper for her Lover’s perufal
what would be unfit for a young damfel to utter,
is
A N O V E L.
7
is a tenet of So extraordinary a complexion, that I wish the propagator had been pleafed to instrudb us what to do with our confcioufnefs; on the fuc' ceeding rencounter with a man who had thus received a likenefs of us from our own pencil., we must have blushed to prefent him with a tete-a-tete. But it is a piece of mafculine logic, equally unintelligible and repugnant to an elegant female mind ; for an elegant female mind is incapable of departing from the dignity of femini7iity on any occasion, and knows but one language, the language of Purity—vulgarly called Prudence.
How unlucky it is that the Counties of our residence should be at the extremities of the Kingdom ! — I have, however, as little to ssgh for iii Kent, except the pleafure of your company, as you in Somerfetshire. — Mildmay-hall is most agreeably Situated between Rochester and Maidstone, and in a genteel neighbourhood. It is.
moreover, distant from Coxheath, where it is reported an encampment will foon be formed, from its vicinity to the coast, only eight miles ; — a morning’s airing.—Who then will be better enabled to remit you the news, the bustlings of the fcene, than your humble fervant ? — Nay, provided you appear ferifible of the value of fuch a Correspondent, it is not improbable but I may dip my pen in Scandal for your entertainment; wade through all the envy, malice, and uncharitable-nefs, which is at once the origin and fuel of that fashionable device for pashng away the time, and filling up the paufes, as it were, of existence ; — a device grown into fo great repute with the prefent generation, that it constitutes the feaSon-ing, the high gout, not only of polite conversation, but polite literature : A certain proof, alas ! of the falfe taste and fatal degeneracy of man-
B a
£
CO X H E A T H :
j^ers which prevails in the land, to the extinQiort of all the illustrious virtues of our ancestors, and the dishonour of the British name.
I am, my beloved Girl,
/
Your affedtionate,
'	,	-	V
Eleanora, or,
[If you like it better,]
S	Ella Rivers.

• e
K '

LETTER II.
Mildmay-Hall.
^	t
OX HEATH, my dear madam, is a6lually marked dowii| for martial encampments, if not for martial prowefs ;—and Mrs. Mildmay laments the bufy fcenes that v/ill be opened upon this part of the country :—but I leave you, who are well acquainted with the vivacity of my temper, to judge how differently I am affedted by a confirmation of the glad tidings:—in a word, I consider it as the era of our animation.
A soldier, if he happens to be a pretty fellow, haSi a thoufand advantages over the rest of his fex. He is a gentleman, which is an infallible paffport for him into the best company. He is a hero ;—a hero who, perhaps, will foon be called upon to take the field in defence of the very circle he fo agreeably entertains with his chitchat :—he is therefore beheld with a mixture of approbation and gratitude by all his acquaintance.
A N O V E L.
9
arxe. Nay more : — Srom connefting the remembrance of his dangers with the dangerous Services he is about to engage in, he is pertedtly adored by the women, who tremble, yet exult in the idea, that the man who lo becomingly lays his heart at their feet, is ready to rush into all the perils of war for their prefervation ; and hence it is that Soldiers are in general lo fuccefs-ful, wherever they pay their devoirs.
Ah me ! — I am, neverthelefs, prohibited by the gentle, yet folemn becaufe dying, request of my Mother, to think of a Soldier.
Shl, poor woman 1 loved, and was beloved by a Military Character ; — and by sharing the ues, the distrelTes of his profeshon, could
pronounce decisively on itf incompatibility with human ‘ happinefs.
My father is, I will not fay the ruins, but, the remains of a very handfome fellow. The air of his Countenance is Grecian —- his hair auburn — his eyes the bright blue of the heavens—his mouth well-formed, and, in every fenfe of, the word, well-furnished ; — and fuch the expreshon of the tout enfemble., that I can anticipate, if not the very terms, the very fentiment he is going to utter before they fail from his lips ;—add to all which, he is tall, and looks the hero.
His only fortune, however, was a Subaltern!s Commishon in a Marching Regiment ; — and though your Lovers are above taking fo vulgar an article into their account of conjugal happi-riefs, it is unfortunately as necessary to our existence, both rnarried and Single, that we should eat, as that we should breathe.
My mother, at the age of fufcepSibility I have , attained, had a mind Soft as infant dreams, and as Nissiiterested and credulous as it was tender. Her ,.	.	B 3	Lover
to
C OX HE A T H
Lover, poor infatuated man ! gave the colourings of Arcadia to his delcriptions of the felicity Tefulting from mufual affeifion and an union of hearts. No wonder, then, that to live for and v/ith each other, was the objeSf that daxzled theif reafon, and gave them courage to launch on the ■wide ocean of the World, unapprehenssve of every worldly confequence.
The pride of my father’s family was wound* cd by his alliance with an amiable, though romantic young woman, who renounced the most Battering pecuniary profpefls for his fake, — the favour of an uncle, who, in order effeDually to punifh her, married, and has now a whole houSe full of brats to inherit his treafures : He has, however, a termagant wife—is miferable—-and I am contented.
Worldly want, my dear madam, when it cannot difSolve, embitters a tender attachment. Every inconvenience my father felt, was more tlvan doubled in my mother’s feelings. She wept his unrewarded virtue—hi
3
unavailing heroifm
y
and, accompanying him to America about nine years ago, bad adieu to what she Called an infen-Sible and ungrateful Land, becaufe fuch merit as her Hushand poffefTed was left expofed to the chilling blasts of Poverty, and fuffered to wither in obfcLirity.
Y ET, between ourfelves, though this honest pair could not command ail their hearts might wish, they had no fmall obligations to Providence, Mrs. Mildmay, the wife of a rich Planter, with whom my father had formed an intimacy ■when stationed in the days of his youth at Jamai-j ca, happened to be in England at my birth,, and intreated permission to be my god-mother. Ifi the articles of protection and provision, I have,
indeed.
A NOVEL.
II
indeed, Scarcely known another parent ; for she generoufly undertook the care of my education, &c. in like manner as your father had done of Ferdinand’s, on a Similar principle, three years before.
Tv:o children, out of three, thus amply provided for, gave them, no doubt, the highest fa-tisfa£Hon ; — whilst the fweet Fenferofo the third followed them all the world over ; and if dutiful affeftion, tender attention, in a word, every filial, every foft endowment could delight the parental heart, her parents had unfpeakable delight, in her attendance upon them.—At length she, was called upon to clofe my dear mother’s eyes,-who, as I have already mentioned, made it her dying request, that neither of her daughters should wed with Red-coats.
Here I can conceive was deep, was Substantial distrefs for the poor warrior ; —- He lost his friend, his Companion, his every thing that was worth preserving, except his child, who held him on the argument of lifey no lefs from gratitude than paternal fondnefs. She had become a voluntary exile to accompany him, and as voluntarily expofed herfelf to all the dangers of an untried climate, and the devastations of hostile Scenes.
He looked on his departed wife, then on his weeping girl ; and recollefiting how much she would have to fear from her fex, and unprotedl-ed condition, ,iS he was no more, piousty refolv-ed to shbmst himfelf to the will of Heaven in the double duties of resignation, and care of his offspring ;— a recolledtion to which I verily believe I am indebted for the prolonged existence of my only parent.
But, with all my Sister’s goodnefs, I cannot help fufpedting Some American fwain has got
B 4	her
4M
C O X H E A T I-I

her by the heart-strings, the memory of whom contributes tffentially to give thofe penfive traces to her cocrnteriance. — May the day not be far distant, that will render her as completely happy as fhe deferves to be 1—Can I blefs her more ?
• If thefe family-anecdotes, which I have in-fenfibly fallen upon, are familiar to you, pardon the repetition, — I lofe my vivacity ; — it is not therefore extraordinary I should lofe my remembrance, when they come acrofs me.—But I have a notion that my Sister’s nerves are too tenderly strung to trust herfelf on the fubjedi, and that my brother is still lefs inclined than her to entertain you with melancholy stories. — Be it as it may, however, I will wdnd up my account, if postible, for- ever, with adding, that on Mr. Mildmay’s death, and my father and mother’s embarkation for the Western World, I was removed from fchool, and have from that time to this had no other check on the wildnefs of my imagination than my gratitude to my dear, my bountiful Benefadlrefs, to whofe bestowing hand I ewe all I am, and from which I shall derive all I hope to be. And it is my pride and glory, that she has Seldom had occaSion to contradiD me ;— for I read her wishes in her looks, and most reli-giousty, to the utmost of m^y power, fulfil them.
But take notice, Mrs., Mildmay is no enemy to Red-coats, though abjured by miy poor m.o-ther in the concluSion of her days she does not therefore difeourage me from admiring the martial add.''efs, martial mien, or martial charadier : Yet, on casting up the pain of reparations though duly contrasted with the joy of re-uni-ens, the hazards of the field, lofs of an eye, an arm, the life of the man we love—I execrate mi-itiiry enthuSiafm ; deplore that the cockade and
regimentals.
/
A N O V E L.
13
regimentals, which give Such graces to the per-fon, can alone be purchafed at lo high a price ; and am refolved to Ihut the door of rny heart, if I feel m)felf inclined to admit only a Hero to postefs it; and the maternal injundtion shall prove its invincible barricade.
I HOPE to hear from you foon.
And am, &c.
,7
Ella Rivers;


L E T T E R III.
What’s life without paffion,, Sweet paffion of love !
A
S
CAMP, ray dear madam, like a mafque* -rade, levels all distinction : — General Officers' and Cadets, Ducheffes and Demoifelles, are alike expofedtothe shafts of beauty, are alike fufeeptible of the tender paffion..
We read it from the pen of Sterne, that the • whole city of Abdera was put into commotion by the reprefentatiOn of a piece which. declared Cupid to be the Prince of Gods and Men p— and , that wherefoever you met an Abderanj male or female, gentle or Simple,Cupid, Prince of Gods and Men,” was the stanza vibrating on their lips, at the fame time that their hearts bore testimony to the justice of the titlci .
What, the people of Abdera .experienced thsir day, the whole County of Kent now expe-
B' 5	riences
la

u
C O X H A T H
riences;—and Cupid, Prince of Gods and Men,’^ is as univerfally fung, though under another name ; —for to captivate and be captivated is the Secret purpofe, —the Secret deSire of every heart. To this end the Jeunejfes of each Sex shake out their feathers, call up their best looks, and read the public prints with avidity ; for in the public prints, the military reSolutions and military motions are announced ; and it is through that channel they will obtain the important information, when the Camp raree-show will commence : and Such is the force of example, that if the expefled beaux were not Soldiers, I mySelf should be for trying the strength of my artillery on their affections.
And So much at prefent for the Camp-injluenza.
Mrs. Mild MAY is now only five-and-thirty, though pretty far advanced in the"ninth year of her widowhood. — She cannot with propriety be stiled a Beauty, but is the first-rate of the Agree-ables, and mistrefs of a fine fortune. — Should she—But under all circumstances, and in all conditions, Mrs. Mildmay will be herfelf; — nor will I torture my imagination with bugbears. — Almost nine years, I repeat it, this most liberal-minded and engaging of women has been a widow, without distinguishing one male creature above another, except in the article of friendship ; where my poor father, I assure you, has the apparent, the envied preheminence.
What different Characters do we meet with in the Mafculine World J — Some men construe civilities into invitations, most men refolve friend-Snips into love.
My dear, modest father fees nothing but generous condefcenfion and generous amity in all Mrs. Mildmay’s conduCt towards him ;—yet, as lie knows Life and Mankind with a delicacy, I
A NOVEL.

bad almost laid, peculiar to himfelf, he declines her most pressing invitations to make her houSe his hom.e ; and whatever private Self-denial he may endure, viSits her cautioiisty, addresses her reverently, and'mentions her timidly, lest the bufy, tatling Multitude stiould wound So uncommon a friend and benefadirefs, by imputing the tendrejfe of an old acquaintance, and the effussons of gratitude, for benefits received in the perfon of his little girl, to love.
I MUCH fear, however, was I my father, I should be tempted just to Satisfy mylelf, whether it was wijloed I should move within fo stridl a line.— Our fex, my dear, are miferably circum-fcribed in this particular. — We must not break the ice ; and a man of nicety will not, where the disparity of fortune is So- glaring on his fide, that the most difinterested passion must be liable to misconception. How you and my brother managed this point, you and my brother best'know '—but I verily believe, So rigid is my father’s virtue, that be would refuSe the offer of this lady’s perfon, becauSe the immediate key to her wealth ; — and in order to preServe his honour; unfullied, Suppofing an union with him essential, to her happinefs, would wound his humanity,., by leaving her a prey to a hopeleSs passion.
But I should tell you, all this is the mere wan— tonnefs of my own imagination, and the con— SciouSneSs of my own infirmities ;■— for So absolutely am I under the dominion of Cupid,-., Pr ince of Gods and Men,” that I confider acr quaintance only as a first step tO' approbation approbation to friendship—and friendship to love — nay, admit the Succcffion to be natural, to be irreSistible, where there happens toshe no moral
impediments,,as in my father and Mis. Mild-
mav s
J
C O X H E A T.D :
i6
>
may s cafe ; though when I shall be called to Speak experimentally on the fubjedt, I am unable to conjefture.
You, my Sweet girl, I am not condemn either the lady’s conduct, if she was even weak the choice I have hinted at
perfuaded, would taste or the lady’s enough to make ; as my brother, when we have Said our best of him, is only Second to his father in perfon, and every gentlemanly accomplishment.— His youth,—his youth, madam, is a mere feather in the Scale, when it is remembered, men in general gain as much as women loSe, by getting on the wrong Side of thirty, in dignity of form, and gracefulneSs of
complexion ; as a proof of which I need but re-
* *
fer ' ou to the annals of Mythology,— where you will find UlylTes was admired by CalypSo and the other Nymphs of antiquity, as much as his Son could possibly be ; — or rather, that Telema-chus’s chief charms, in their eyes, ing reSemblance of their beloved then.
Do, I beSeech you, fince Dove is So near becoming the universal paffion, consequently the univerSai topic, endeavour to unlock my demure
lister’s lips.--Make her either confefs herfelf
human, or prove her claim to divinity. But I am much mistaken, if she does not hide an aching heart behind her Terenely-penSive countenance ; and, though not So frolickSome, has all the weaknessfes of your Ella’s compofition.
When Ferdinand afcends the pulpit for the first time, how shall I wish to be one of his auditors !—he should have been christened Lionel and you Clarissa, there is Such a Similitude in your circumstances and Situations; tho’
pardon
was his strik-hero, his fa-
A NOVEL.

pardon me if I fay, nothing but new-making Sir Ferdinand could render him a Sir John Flow-ERDA'LE, except in the articife of being blind to the tender attachment which fubSists between you.—Yet fafe as you may be in that quarter, beware, my dear girl, of a difcovery that must involve both your lover and yourfelf in unend-
ing distrefs. My father’s difcernment is accute,
and his relolution firm.
his notions delicate,
• »
Not the eye of the baliiilk would be more fatal to your life, than his penetrating eye to your passion. A thouland alarming confequences fur-round you ; therefore I once more conjure you be on your guard, and let not my warning voice be upraifed in vain.

I am.
With every friendly wish
for your happinefs, &c. Sec.
J
h
Ella RiyersT

LET-

tB
COXHEATH:
LETTER IV.
F
JL HE evil you apprehended is come to pafs, and I am roufed, most fatally roufed from my fairy dream of happinefs.— Your father. Sister, brother, have taken their final leave of Sommerfetshire. Their last adieus still vibrate on my ear, my heart. But my lofs will be your gain. To your Sister (from whom you will receive an early vifit) I, however, refer you for particulars.—I am unable to write you ; yet one thing I must myfelf tell you, for she cannot.
Your father, no leSs undefignedly than unex-pe0:edly, having walked into a parlour where your brother and I were talking over our hopes and our fears, instantly entered into the meaning of our tete-a-tete, and thus addressed us :
“ Ferdinand, have I a Son ?”—The poor fellow trembled, bowed, and was filent.—“ Retire then to my chamber, and there prepare yourfelf to receive my farther commands. “ Your mother’s death was the will of Heaven ; ** as Such, I furvived it: but if you love her memory or my life, beware how my honour dies by your hand.”—He withdrew without reply.
: “ You have no inconvenience, madam, to apprehend from this for-tunate difcovery. I will depart from your family without disturbing its repofe. The orders I have ‘'just received to join my regiment, enables me “ to remove myfelf plaufibly. But my removal of “ my fon will expofe me, I am well aware, to
f ‘ Sir Ferdinand’s difpleafure and the charge of
ingra-
((
((
€t
Then turning to me
A NOVEL.
19
ingratitude : I leave my fame, therefore, in ‘ your hands; with this request, that you will ‘ never restore its bright polish at the expence of ‘ your own peace, or, what I know to be equally ‘dear to you, your father’s. Let me be believed ‘ for a time, the charadter I abhor, an ungrate-‘ ful man; It will be foon enough to do me ‘ justice when you do justice to yourfelf, by ‘ making a choice more worthy your fine fenfe ‘ and high expeflations. I pity Ferdinand ; for ‘ I have not forgot how irreststible fo amiable an ‘ objedf must be to the youthful heart, and will ‘ be every thing a fond parent can be to him, to ‘ mitigate the pangs his fenstbility will Sustain ; ‘ but it is a glorious conflidt, and I trust he will ‘ be all the hero. Farewell! and remember I am ‘ cruel only to be kind. My life should be yours, ‘ but my honour is not mine to bestow ; nay, the ‘ forfeiture of it would difgrace you no lefs than ‘ myfelf, as a very little refleftion will convince ‘ you ; nor can you deny me your esteem, ‘ though I thus make a facrifice of the pleafure ‘ of your acquaintance.”—He left me, Ella, with a look of tender compaffion that rived my
foul,—and—But I can only add, that I am more than ever
Yours, &c. &c.

Caroline Fletcher."
h E T
20
C O X H E A T H-;
Letter v.
/

Rochester,
\
T is my destiny, madam, and I Submit without repining. The lofter fcenes of Life, I own, have peculiar, charms for me, and I am more than ever unfitted, by the fweet tranquillity I have for theS past fix months enjoyed under your roof, for my prelent fituation. But can I wisti to be excufed fulfilling the first and dearest of all duties—following, nay, I flatter myfelf, mitigating the fortune of a most beloved and indulgent father ? There is the balm for every wound my inclinations , may Sustain ; and I will be, what for his fake I ought to be, a little heroine, not a difcontented Campaigner.
Your observation, that it is now too late in the day for my father to take the field as a Subaltern, proceeds from the natural liberality of your Sentiments. The man, my good madam, who engages in a military life with nothing but his own merit to depend upon, has Small chance for promotion. The dangers of an enterprize he must participate, but the glory is placed to the commander’s acdount alone ; unlefs, indeed, he happes to postefs the happy talent of fawning and flattering, which are the only certain steps to favour in thofe public walks; where the report of the fupe-lior, made up of the reports of the fuperior’s friends^ is the criterion of worth, and the key to advancement,-—But this is a gloomy fubjedl, and I will purfue it no farther.
My brother, poor youth ! begins to be more
patient under his disappointments than 1 could
have
A NOVEL.
21
have hoped* I tell him being in love becomes him ; for, at every mention of your name, his cheek glows with a manl) , I would not choofe to fay a beautiful lint; and if there is truth in infpiration his martial manoeuvres will not difgrace his passion.
Yet though I deny it to him, I will confefs to you, it was pity to tear him from the pious election he had made and compel him to ferve his King.instead of his God. It was, neverthelefs, in chara6ler for a brave andhonest man tv a0; as my father has done. The daughter o-f his benefactor misht, unstnning, honour his child with the ten-derest partiality ; though it would have been cri-^ minal, alas ! for that child to make other return to fuch condefcehston—than flying—to prove himfelf not utterly unworthy of it.
You lament, I will be bold enough do fay unduly. Sir Ferdinand’s turn of temper. Any other man’s daughter and my brother, with all his imperfections on his head, would have been deemed by him not only an eligible, but a judi-' cious choice ; though his opinion would be t07 tally changed, if the cafe was his own. For who, let me afk you, bestows a darling child, exqui-Sitely accomplished, and mistrefs of a fplendid fortune, on a poor young fellow, let his other endowments be what they may ? or, indeed, on what motive could fuch romantic conduCt be expected, unlefs it was the fashion of the times to constder poverty as the only Security for moral rectitude, and that riches and goodnefs of heart could be proved incompatible things ? As a mark of his stncerity towards'us, was he not always giving us fame by bearing testimony to the wealth and good blood of our ancestors, and letting his friends an example of generous approbation, where our
OV/3


CGXHEATH:
own little merits were the question ? To have hoped for ' more at his hands, would have been the height of madnefs, ingratitude, and folly. From the above premifes I therefore, for my part; not only acquit—I justify his Sentiments, and, until Ferdinand attains to the dignity of a trunchon, shall never think him intitled'to afpire to the honour of his alliance.—And fo much for the tender paffion.
The farther from Jupiter, fays the proverb, the farther from the thunder : —I therefore congratulate myfelf that the humility of my circumstances will exclude me from all intercourfe with our great Commander. CondefceSion, madam, never fat on fuch a brow : his look is hostile —and his voice tremendous. No doubt, never-thelefs, but he can unbend in proper company ; and there may be virtue in keeping the lower ranks in awe.
My dear father stghed involuntarily at break fast this morning, and my eye fpoke my destre to know the caufe. A youth fit only to figure away on the Parade in St. Jame’s Park, or make a brilliant appearance at a Review, was appointed his immediate fuperior.—Oh how did every wound he has received in the Service of his Country, bleed afresh in my immagination at the tidings !—But I have learned to wonder in Silence at the wrongs I have not the power to redrefs; and it is not in this world, I am now more than ever convinced my revered relation will meet with his reward.
My Sister and the most benevolent of women have made us a vifit, and, it feems, flatter them-felves they shall be able to Soften the poor Lieutenant’s destiny by their attentions; but his nice fenSibility, I can perceive, is rather hurt than gratified by every increafed obligation Mrs. Mild-may confers upon him;—nor will he be perfuaded
to
A ISi O V E L.
^3
to extend on interview with her beyond the limits common complaifance demands. There is Some hidden caufe for this mode of behaviour, which I am unable to penetrate. Great minds have not difdained in numberlefs instances to owe benefits to great minds; and who will deny Mrs. Mild-may^s claim to that distindlion ? Moreover, in my humble opinion, her engaging vivacity and elegant familiarity are entitled to a far different return, unlefs refervecan be admitted as essential a quality in a Soldier as in a Philofopher.
Ella will write you all the news of our arrival at this fame city of Rochester, from whence we are to proceed to the- Heath.—It is her forte; and I should deprive her of a very particular pleasure, if I was to take the lead of her on that ground : I shall therefore only add, that Ferdinand intreats me to fay the most refpeQfuI things for him.—Your imagination, however, can alone do justice to his feelings,—to which I must refer you.
am
Dear Madam,
Your fnost obliged Hufnble Servant,
Lydia Rivers,’
✓
. \
^ •
over.

9.4
-V
y-
COXHEATM
LETTER VI.
;
• /
MiLDMAY-H ALL.
«
♦
Now we’re free to ling and play;
Over the hills and far away.
t
nr ■
JL HE gentle Lydia tells me the field is all open before me, for that not one deicription has fallen from her pen of the fcenes she is no\v cast in. Quelle trtjiejfe Kquelle infenjible f—But the truth is, from the constitutional difference in our tern-
r
pers, I contrive to gather all the rofes,, she all the thorns of existence.
Mrs. Mildmay and myfelf arrived early this morning at Rochester, and were much enter-entertained by the coming-in of the troops and age-waggons, until, on the stopping of one of them just under the window at which we stood,, we perceived a young and really elegant appearing woman in the last struggles of nature. We rang the bell, befought the people to give .her the best and most fpeedy help they could obtain, and promifed to anfwer every confequential expence.
She was taken down from the waggon in the gentlest manner pollible by a fellow whofe countenance befpoke his warm interest in her fafety, and who stated her in a chair in the open air. A Surgeon, whofe ready attendance did honour to his humanity, bled her ; whilst the young recruit, for a recruit we defcovered him to be by his cock-
ade, hung over with tender anxiety. Such a face at Such a' moment, would not have difgraced the
ratified b	pencil
-'i
A N O V E L.
^5
pencil of a Guido I—She opened her, I dare be-f iieve once fine, eyes—fixed them upon his— fighed—laboured at articulation—feebly pressed his hand—and—expired.—We paid her, all-humble as her Situation was, the tribute of a tear ; ordered her to be conveyed to a houfe, we bribed to admit her body till it could be put in the
and foothed the defponding youth, who accufed himfelf as the author of her untimely fate.—It was fatigue—it was want of proper lubfistence that had hastened her diffolution—it was her fears that he would be Sent abroad—in fine, it was love. We gave him a couple of guineas, and he retired in difconfolation, having first obtained leave to walk over from the Camp to fee her buried ; in which request he was unwillingly indulged, as it, was considered only a renewal of his forrow.—But he burst into tears at the hefitation—-laid he would bury all his forrows in the grave with her, and return to his duty like a man ;—then hiding his eyes with his hands, 'h^witlidrew to give vent to his apparently overcharged heart.—Tell me then, my fweet Caroline, is not Cupid the fovereign prince of at least this lower world ?
We had fcarc-ely got over this little incident, than an alarm was fpread, that a poor woman in another of the waggons was in labour, and unlefs removed must be lost.
Mrs. Mildmay, or the Goddefs of Benevo-lence under her form, (for you must know I often fufpedt she must be that Divinity) stew again to the window, and holding a purfe in her hand, was understood to wish every necessary should be done for the poor wretch’s accommodation, who, it feems, run all hazards rather than be left behind the man she loved. The bufineSs was foon
over,'

s.o
C O X H E A T H
y
\
over, the birth of a fine boy announced, and Mrs. Mildmay Sent word she would stand godmother, if a fubstitute could be provided ; So that I look upon it, it will prove a babe of grace, by being born under fuch'fortunate aufpices. — For have I not found her a parent from that tie alone ? Nor will she ever forfake the helpleSs, the innocent, or the friendlefs.
The town now began to fill with great rapidity. Every public-houfe had its share of company, according to its own rank, and the rank of its guests ; dinner was fet on every table ; and the fife and drum proclaimed the officers quarters—except, indeed, the highest of the high, who forbad this martial parade, and eat his Sullen meal in all the dignity oi.ftlence.
Our minds being by this time Somewhat har-monifed, we took a ride to the martial Spot, where the things were in much forwardnefs for the reception of the then arrived troops ; — the mountains, or rather furrows, were levelled, as was foretold, by the industry of the Soldiers ; and Such is the refort already to this beginning Camp, that a Small ale-houfe on the frontiers of the Heath, (which is, by the bye. Seven miles in circumference) was lifted into fo great confe-quence, that happy was the He or She who had Sufficient interest to procure a Seat, or other equally capital article of accommodation.
I should tell you, it is the ton iov the to take their morning - airings on the dressed in a kind of regimental jacket and petticoat, with a hat and feather, not forgetting a cockade. It is clear to me, this Amazonian appearancewas devifed by Some confident Beauty, who Secretly laughs at the folly of her Sister-females
But Ladies Heath,
A NOVEL.
27
males for being led by the nofe in an article of drefs which, though calculated perhaps to heighten the charms of a fine woman, most affuredly aggravates the defeats of a homely one.
The first who started en militaire in this part of the world, was a brace of Ducheffes, in a loy^ phaeton drawn by ponies; and I’ll assure yofi, they fmacked the Silken thong with the air def^ri-bed by the poet: nor could I forbear exclaiming, on beholding them, in the words of Dr. Young,
Sefostris-like, fuch Charioteers as theSe
I
Might drive fix harnefs’d Monarchs, if they pleaSe.
But as I take it for granted, my father will fet his face against my being equipped in this high stile of fashion, I have provided myfelf un habit neither red nor blue, nor lapelled nor belaced, but of the purest white, with a chapeau the fimplest imaginable and, in defpite of all example, shall wear my hair in a state of nature—-that is, without wool or powder, having a fufficient quantity to enable me to decline every artificial addition; though I shall be cautious how I confefs as much, lest the mark of low-breeding should be fet upon me. ,
I SUPPOSE I need not tell you, that the Regulars, as well as Militia, form'their feveral corps into streets, distinguished by their name, or county, in which the tents are arranged v/ith proper marks of fubordination, till they rife to the marquees, before the entrance of each of which, in proportion to the confequence of the owner, Chinefe railings are eredfed, together with many little strokes of ingenuity that improve the general appearance.
The
s3
COXHEATH:
/
The horSes are, moreover, tied in lines to pickets before the men’s tents, where they are littered down at nights, and have a kind of awning extended from their master’s covering, to defend them from the weather.' The tra.Q;ability of thefe creatures in all their mana'uvres is astonishing, when it is remembered what fire and fpi-rit they are fraught with, and difplay in the hour, of action.
The Ladies who follow the Camp, I mean the trampers, ^re not permitted to steep in the tents, but have huts provided for their accommo* datiori at fome distance : they appear, however* to me to be a most valuable martial appendages ; for it is to their labours the poor fellows owe all the conveniences of their Situation ; and the con-test Seems to be, which shall excel the others in fpruceing up their hero for exercife.
The children that accompany thefe itinerant helpmates are healthful and lovely ; — and many a cara fpoja is now on the point of tumbling into the straw, as the Coxheath phrafe is iax une accoucMe : but ail this is So much in the common praDice of the world, that it neither disturbs nor startles any one : .it is the dead and dying alone that calls the mind home, and awakens the most latent feelings of humanity.
My Sister, v^ho has Teen fuch fights as I hope my eyes will be ever more Spared—the ravages of war, and the carnage of a field of battle goes deeper into the affair : Tears steal filently down her cheeks, she shakes her head with unutterable companion, and fighs forth fome Soft and Secret regrets of her own. But we will brinF her to confestlon before it is long, nor fuf-
• I
fer her, cormorant-like, to devour all her griefs, without our participation.
On
A NOVEL.
49
On casting a look back on what I have written, I find this Letter cannot be called a bouquet; or, at best, the rofes I have this day gathered for yow are not without thorns ; but I am determined, in order to preferve my volatility, henceforth to fee this encampment in no other light than an exhibition of our national strength, and a rehearfal of feats of prowefs, to keep the hands of our fummer-heroes in.
Would to Heaven our magnus Apollo had been made of more penetrable fuff! But I pronounced decisively on his charadier, when I learned he was an enemy to harmony — martial harmony,—-the heart-stirring trumpet, and the heart-enlivening fife and drum ; and forbade their playing, according to the military custom, whilst he avas fet to dine. Shakefpeare has, however, put a mark on fuch men, which is no lefs infallible than indelible.
'	fl
Adieu,
My dear Madam,
And believe me to be,
Ella RiverJ.

f *^<0 A -
VoL. L
C
L E T*
50
G O X H E A T H :
/
LETTER VII.
RUEL Ella, and no lefs-cruel Lydia ! Is it possible your own fenSibility ssiould not instruct you, that however Camp defcriptions might a-mufe a mind at eafe, they can afford little pleasure to a heart like mine ?
My father is outrageous-in his refentment, and most unfortunately direfits it all against the innocent head. Your father might be capricious, unreasonable, tyrannical ; but Ferdinand—his own Ferdinand, that grew up on his knee, cherished in his bofoifi—to steal away-
infult his tendernefs I
and was —cast off -May he his cool-
his protefition-
, if he ever pardons him his bafe, blooded ingratitude.
LanGu AGE Such as this is my foie entertainment morning, noon, and evening. I dare not weep—I dare not plead the caufe of injured virtue —or difabufe the abufed : Yet,, when I feek confolation from your letters, instead of the anxi-oussy-defired intelligence—(I blush to write it yoa might have kindly Spared my blushes) of the poor, banished Ferdinand, “ He begins,” fays Lydia, to bear his disappointment with more patience than I could have hoped.”~Oh tell me ! How did he Support, endure, demonstrate his impatience ? If Lydia has loved, she has either forgot the passion, or she has furvived her humanity.—But you, Ella 1 what is become, of the congeniality of mind we boasted ? Could I—• do you, can you think I could have treated you thus ?
My
A NOVEL.

My father is So far just in the midst of his wrath that he allows me to correfpond with the unoffending girls, as he calls you and your Sister ; and adds, that, thank Heaven I children are not anfwerable for the pride, the infolence, or folly of their fathers. There is liberality in the distinction ; and I am pleafed it has not efcaped his feelings.	'
If Ferdinand, however, can be brought to forget, to renounce me, I shall not complain. My tender anxiety refpefting him, if there is faith or truth in woman, arifes from my idea of v/hat he fuffers for ray fake. That my fortune is fiiperior to his, is an accident : his merit will always entitle him, however, to look up as high, nay higher, than any thing I poISefs; and should he be ambition-struck—I abjured the thought, and defpife myfeif for wronging him even in imagination will live for him, and him alone :
For I, of all mankind, can love but one.
/
Pity and forgive my petulaiice, my dearest girl. My sttuation is a distressed one, my mind a weak one ; but my affedfion for you is undiminished; unshaken ;—our friendship shall be exemplary, though our relationship may be prohibited by the stern will of fate, as well as by the stem will of Fathers. Write to me immediately ; for your letters afford all the pleafurel now hope for, or can taste.
V
I am, &c.
C. Fletcher.
C a
LET
52
^ O X H E A T H
LETTER Vlir.
Of all 8.1111(51 ions tatight a Lover yet,
’Tisfure the hardeil Science toDrgt’/.
Why will you Seek the painful fatisfaSlion of
reading a truth your heart must be well alTured of, viz. that poor Ferdinand is one of the most constant. Sighing, pining lovers in the creation; that die walks abroad with arms folded, eyes rivetted ' on the ground, and his whole foul fo totally en-groffed by his tender reveries, that you may run bolt against him without his perceiving you, or call loud enough to wake the dead, before he is roufed to attention ! Are you content, or Shall I add, that all the Demoilelles reforting to this Spot, though Set off to the best advantage both in drefs and looks, are dowdies in his estimation; their voices difcord ; their conversation nonfenfe ; their Sentiments idle ; and their condudt abfurd, when compared with the Goddefs of his idolatry.—And thus do I wind up the bottom of my account ; for, believe me, the laws of the Medes and J^erSians were not lefs capable of changing, than his attachment of diminution.
Last night arrived at ih.tQzm'^ un bead.Cheva--l\gy—the new made Captain, my dear Madam, of my father’s Company, who is now three-and twentv, and about to enter on his firSt campaign ; Mr. Ri vers, his Lieutenant, being only twenty-three years his Senior, and what may justly be stiled a veteran Soldier. No matter : Captain Melvin is a very pretty fellow, and the mof} worthy
the rank he has attained, of any Officer within
the
:A N O V E L.
$3
the whole circle of my acquaintance, as you your-ielf Snail ] udge.
Mrs. Mild may had brouarht me to the Heath, and Lydia was pouring out our tea, when a diummeri preiented himlelS to announce the young Commander, who politely waited in my father’s watch box for leave-rio fpeak with him. ■
My father Sighed—Mrs. Mlidmay blushed a blush ot generous indignation—and Lydia and I felt, with the keenest fenfibiUtv, for the feelings oi oui revered relation.This is a favour I little expedtedj’h fai-d my father^ leading in^his blooming guest j “ it'was my part”——• “ I CAN hear no more,” replied Melvin.
All men, my good Sir, must fubmit, with the best postible grace, to their condition but I shall always be ashamed of the nominal luperi-ority I am placed in, to an Officer of your known merit and experience. If y ou can, however, behold me without refentment —feparat« “ the individul from the deed—I would folicit
€(
4f
it
it
it
a
the honour of your friendship ; on thefe only “ terms, that you found my ambition to form N rayfelf by your instrudlicn and example, as “ giving me fome little claims to fuch a condef-
“ cenSron.------You have , a Son, ! understand,
nearly m.y, age : Let us be your pupils ; teach us not to diigrace the profeffion we' have started in ; fave me from the contempt I must other-“ wife incur with good minds, by fuffering me to call you my guardian and preceptor ; and, above all, shew me you can be as gracious as you are good, by admitting me to an instant
equality, a ‘fdccial intercourfe with yoifand yours.”
iC
if
if
C 3
nr
HE
54
COX HEATH
€(
€C
The air, the manner accompanying thefe words w.as affedling, was irreSistible. My father and Mrs. Mildmay extended each a hand, in token of approbation, in token of amity: my brother. Softened by the Scene, embraced him with the affection of a brother ;—and Lydia and I made room for him to Sit between us.
He was delighted^. A dish of tea, intended for Ferdinand, stood near him: he helped him-felf with the eafe and confidence of intimacy ; andlooking round, “ I never felt myfelf at home,’* laid he, “ till now. Your children, Mr. Rivers, have been brought up in alLthe felicity of pa-ternal endearment. I have obligations of a different fort to my father. He ha*s liberally provided for me. If fortune could atone for the want of every tender,, every reverential, “ every exemplary relationship, I should have nothing to coirplain of; but I would shis moment exultingly exchange my poffestions for the treafuers your children can boast —A brother. Sister, a father!—Tell me, Sir, what can “ money purchafe to foothe, to Satisfy, to touch “ the heart like thofe endearing relations ?’*
You must know, this uncommon creature, tliis black fwan, is the natural fon of a Mr. St. Alban, an East Indian of immenfe wealth, and was born abroad.
His mother he never Saw, and has little or ho remembrance of his father, being Sent over to England for education at a very early age ; and had Scarcely attained his ninth year before Mr. St. Alban died, and left him five-and-twenty thousand pounds. At School he contradted a taste for the army, and is pushing forward lor a truncheon. -^Now will I give you right wholefome advice.
•Ferdinand is a poor fsUovj in every fenfe of the
word.




A NOVEL.
55
word, when compared with this phoenomenon:— make, therefore, a transfer of your -heart in Melvin’s favour, and let me alone for bringing matters to bear between you.
This mention of his birth was evidently designed to lift us into confequeiice with ourfelves, and facilitate the familiarity he afpired to. Mrs. MiJdmay is in raptures with him ; my father is infinitely pleafed with him, the young Cadet is happy with him ; and Lydia and I are become rival-Siiiers on his account. Here is ample fcope for adventure!
The Cadet and his new friend walked forth at length to reconnoitre, and Mrs. Mildmay took her leave. The ride was the fliortest we had ever known it ; for we reached Mildmay-hall, my dear, before we had half finished the account of our mutual furprize and mutual joy to find, at fo degenerate a period as our moral Writers represent the prefent, fo amiable a character as Melvin’s. On my conscience, I believe my Sweet benefadirefs forgets she is upwards of thirty, and means to become a candidate with your young friends: the contest will be a warm one,
'This is a dawn of fuch felicity as we could not have hoped for.—Ferdinand has now a most agreeable companion; my father, an indulgent, a refpedtful Superior ;—ouF little dinner and tea-parties will be enlivined ; Mrs. Mildmay can make Melvin fifty prefents for my’’ father’s participation, without wounding his delicacy we girls shall have a fwain who will think himSelf honoured, all-humble as our Situation is, by our notice ; and I shall be furnished with many a lively tale for the amufement of my friend, to which I must otherwife have been a stranger.—Oh ! it was a
C4	white
56
CO X H E A T H :
white hour, Madam, the hour of his arrival at Coxheath ! and for fuch have I marked it down
on my tablet.
Adieu ! for having finished
my fubjedi, I will finifii my epistle.
And am yours,, Stc.
Ella Rivers.

LETTER IX.
Knight-errant without a mistreSs, fays honest Sancho Pancha, is like a tree without leaves; in like manner a Soldier—the Knight-
errant of our modern times: no wonder, then,
*
Melvin should be in a hurry to complete his martial chara6;er by falling in love with—■—Lydia, Her features, I grant you, are not to be reSist-cd ; fo foft, fo penetrating is the fenSibility by which they are aiiimated: methinks, however, it is pity fo fine a fellow should obtain but half a heart in return for his first and unreferved attachment. It was tier definyi you know, to love tlie loveliest of his fex in the American World, and there .is no restoring the original tone to the once-engaged affeclions.
It,happens, my dear madam, on this occaSion, that you are mistaken,—Lydia is not the lady of Melvin’s wifiies.—Mrs. Mildmay’s—well-thrown conjedlure.—-—Mrs. Mildmay is every thing that is amiable in woman ;—an elegant perfon, an
accom-

A NOVEL
57
?iccompllfbed mind, a capital fortune.—I am Sorry she is a widow ; and that the idiipai ity of age should be fo mortifying on her Side, yet as I don’t fee he can do better. Heaven, I lay, fend them all imaginable happinefs !
Pro v'^OKiNG girl!—So you would not remember me?'—I am vounger even than I^vdia, and have more vivacity than even Mrs. Mildmay :•— why, therefore, should you take it in your head, that the demure damfel or the matron had all the chances in their fayour ?—It was malicious^—it was a studied piece of diiregard—it was envy—it was infult—it was—But why should I trouble my-Self to charadterife the aftion, when I have it in iny power to punish it by—telling you —1—yes, inadam, I, Ella Rivers, am the objedt of )he handfnme, the noble, the rich, the gay Capt. Melvin’s choice, admiration, and attachment.
He vmuld have declared himfelf-to me in form ;
. *
but I am fo apprehenSive of my father’s delicacy proving an impediment, that I will contrive to make him move within the friendly line till the breaking up ot the campaign, and that hfs friends are fetdown at their eale in winter quarters, when they may talk the buSinefs over at their leifure.—Be-Sides, my dear madam, he should endeavour to inform himfelf, whether the good humour he fo much admires in me is genuine or artificial— constitutional or local.—Perhaps I may be found a very dull companion in a chimney-corner, though fo tie a^be'in the field, where every thing confpires to keep one alive and merry—the fife, the drum, the ball, the focial circle, the frequent fips one takes of that fweet cordial flattery. But he makes a point of shewing me he is rash enough to try experiments, if not restrained by my wifdom and liberality.
C 5	Jealous
58
C O X H E A T H
/ .
Jealous eyes, they fay, fee double; hencelfup-fpofe it was that I could not perfuade myfelf Lydia was infenfible to Melvin’s merit;—I therefore, for her peace-fake, and my own honour, did not heSitate a moment what part to adf, when the Iweet fellow laid his heart at my feel. I repeated to her verbatim the converfation we had had together ; concluded with thanking God my approbation of him had not run away with my Sisterly affedtion, and that she had only to fpeak what she wished he should be to me.
** Ella,” replied this fentimental girl, as I have never yet told you the state of my heart, I accept the offer you now make with the liveliest gratitude. But Captain Melvin is all your own. I esteem, I revere his noble-mindednefs: •—he is the most perfeft of human beings ; and I congratulate you on your favourable profpecls.
—I would fay more--------—Pity my wakenefs ;
—and ssnce you have by this stroke of unreferv-“ ed confidence and kindnefs intitled vour-felf to





€C
€€
€C

a knowledge of all my concerns, you shall re-ceive it.—But my pen must fpeak for me : —I can write, though I cannot utter the melancholy----Our friend too, I am certain,
would be pleafed by a communication.—It will fave you a letter ;—you shall therefore inclofe what I will prefent you with to morrow morn-for her perufal.—Give Melvin every di-?
tt
ti
ti
ti
it
it
it
ing
a
stindfion his merit claims, and may my father’s confent fandlify your tender friendship I—You ** deferve to be, and, I trust, Ella, you will be happy !”
Poor thing I my heart bleeds for her-—I always fufpedted her of a fecret attachment, but am unable to devine what deep shades hang over
her
A NOVEL.
59
her destiny. Being already, however, apprifed of their hue, I will (with your good leave) dedicate the remainder of my paper toEuphrofyne.
Come, thou GoddeSs, fair and free.
In Heaven ycleped Euphrofyne !
And fo much by way of invocation.
Melvin had the addrefs to give the credit of an elegant ball to his brother-o,fficers, though the piece of gallantry was all his own.
Mrs. Mildmay, my father (but he declined), Ferdinand, and his sssters were invited.
But I Should first tell you, we had dined the day before en mlliiaire in that gentleman’s marquee. Our table was covered, at the founding of martial mufic; every toast was received with martial plaudits; and we constituted a very pretty fpedlacle for metropolitan curiofity ; whole troops of gapers pasting and repastlng the door, and envying us our festive interval, our momentary relaxtion from the toils of the field.
Here the ball was announced, and the invitation circulated ;—whilst Melvin whifpered in my ear, his prefumptuous hopes of being honoured with my hand. 1 turned my eyes'full upon him ; he looked down with fuch humility. Such fubmif-fion to my Sovereign will, that I could not refufe to^ make him happy.—Ferdinand—it is proper you should know it—tendered his Services to Mrs* Mildmay, who promifed, if She danced, he should be her man.—Lydia pleaded a head-ach, and would not be of the party, but staid to bear the Lieutenant company.
At the appointed hour, Mrs. Mildmay and myfelf arrived at the place of rendezvous, dressed
at


C O X H E A T H
at all points, and with hearts bent on conqest Ferdinand and Melvin behaved very galhcntly on the occaSion ; and I, your friend, had the eclat of opening the ball with the loid of the feast. Captain Melvin. He reSigned mesto an aequain-tance of his for my fecond minuet, with a compliment I do not fufficiently remember to do it justice on paper : I fhall, therefore, only tell you, it was very fenSible, very inSinuating, and sA\ that, A few cotillons were danced, but the general voice was for the old custom of Old England ; and I and my partner went thro’with great fpirit all the bufy bustling of Over the hills and far away,” and Kate of Aberdeen,” before we filed off to the bottom of the room to take breath.
I COULD perceive fome interesting matter hung on Melvin’s lips he was unable to get off ; and' as mufic, calculated to awaken the tender pafiions, I could not forbear, I fear, being a little encouraging in my behaviour ; for he at length made me fenfible, that he should thenceforth live only for me, and pressed me to fay my heart had no pre- . '^agement.—I anfwered like a heroine, my fathei was master of it.
He rep’ied, with the piety of iEneas, heafk-ed no fa\ )ur but as he might “ come recommended by Mr. Rivers.”
I SHUDDERED at the recolledlion of Mr. Rivers’s Cizic/zsh.v virtues, and how you was Smarting under the exertion of them ; and, as the last effort of Self-regard, intreated him to forbear every mention of his favourable ientiments of me while we remained in that quarter of the world.
He promifed implicit obedience on one condition.
I YIELD-
A N O V E I..
6i
staling the implied stemed to tread air
picked up a fourth off Ferdinand to a
whilst
I YIELDED of necessity, and fuffered him to
V ^
kifs my hand, as a kind of contra^ between ns, and he ail the enfuing evening.
Mrs.' Mildmay having perfon to their mind, drew quadrille-table-—what half-fouled beings 1 we footed it till midnight; when adjourning to Mildmay-Hall, we drank our coffee, and fepa-rated on our stveral callings—our beaux to their exercife, and us belles to steep, with a comfortable dost of which we indulged ourfelves, infomuch that it was mid-day before we arofe.
Our company conststed of twelve ladies and twelve gentlemen dancers, nine of whom, on my honour, were Captain Brazens, two Mr. Worth) s, and one Captain Plume.
The play of the Recruiting Officer entered my head, you must know, at Supper, when the rattling tongue of fancy eloquence began to strike hard on my ear; and here appeared to me fo happy a Similitude in fome refpedts of the Scenes I was engaged in, that, for distinclion-fake, I
Sparks Captain John, James, Ro-Richard, and Stephen Brazen, their names ; Melvin, Captain my brother * and another young
christened my bert, Charles, according to
_	C
Plume ; and
fellow, Ferdinand and Frank Worthy ; by which appellation I shall make free to mention them, as occaSion may require or authorize. I, moreover, refolved on the Spot to look about me in Camp for Serjeant Kite’s deluded bumpkins, and country girls forward to be undone by noble Captains; nor do I defpair {except in the perfon of Justice Balance) of filling up the whole groupe.—Take notice, I my Self am the Sylvia of the piece ;—■
Mrs.
62
CO X H E A T H.:
Mrs. Mildmay, Melinda ;—and as for the other ladies, they shall not have the honour of being introduced on the fame ground with females of my friendship and family.
We are to have a concert of vocal and instrumental muSic in my Cptain Plume’s marquee, in which I shall bear a part; but I am debating with myfelf, whether the penforofo or the allegro is most adapted to my voice ; and that I may Secure myfelf from all errors in judgment, shall take Lydia’s opinion before I determine.-—Sweet Lydia !—It checks my giddy vivacity to remember she is now, perhaps, weeping over past Scenes, and preparing to rob both you and me of Some Sympathetic tears.—Yet is it Sufficient to hold ourfelves-in readinefs to, share communicated Sorrows: we should be Suicides in happinefs, to wound our repofe by thofe which are ishagina-ry. I will instantly remit you her tale of woe, without preface or comment ; for, if I mistake not, it will be trebly acceptable, to any thing I could offer ;
Though I am
$0 fincerly and'affectionately your
Ella Rivers.
- r
LET-

A N O V E L.
^3
LETTER X.
OU have repeatedly, my dear Sister, thrown out hints, that'you believed my affedtions were not my own.—You have good reafon for your fufpicions; but you shall read the histgry of my heart.
About four years ago, when the American became the hostile fcene, my father being stationed with a little corps of obfervation in a village, my mother and I, for the pleafure of his compa-.ny, took up our restdence in the neighbourhood.
We three, a focial and happy circle, had just finished an ehrly fupper one evening, when a man who had run himfelf out of breath, and was covered with blood, rushed into the room.—My father started—my mother and I hastily demanded whence he came —
Most me
rciful fir I
17
cried he, disregarding us women,” fly and Save my master’s life I His ** houfe is now furrounded either by Indians or ** ruffians.—Surrounded did I fay ? They must “ by this time be got in, and are, perhaps, “ butchering all its inhabitants.”—This was enough 1 My father fnatched up his Sword ; gave the word for aflfembling his little forces ; preffed us—all-weeping as we were—in his arms; and followed the guidance of the poor fellow, who, it Seems, had by stratagem made his efcape, after receiving a flight wound on his head.
Think, my Ella, think what an interval we experienced.’—We knew my father’s humanity etjualled his courage, and that he would expofe himfelf far beyond the letter of his duty to defend the distressed.

C O X fl E A T H .
In lefs than an hour he returned—and returned unhurt—with a youth to all appearance dead, borne on a feather-bed by Some Toldiers, who, by my father’s orders, laid him down before us, nd retired.
n
Ci.

a
/
/
Here,” faid he, is exercife for your tendernefs, your goodnefs of heart! -— He has only fainted from lofs of blood, lost in a fa-ther’s caufe.—We must revive him.”
My mother understood thefe matters.—I lup-ported his head, whilst fhe applied things to his temples, the palms of his hands, and his feet ; and, to her great fatisfadtion, was fo far fuccefs-ful, that,he opened his eyes, and by degrees recovered himfelf fo as to be able to have his wounds dreffed—for he had received leveral—and was lodged with the utmost tendernefs under our roof.
It is fuppofed that rapine was the foie purpoSe of the attack, as the houfe was stripped of all its valuables ; but what is not fo clearly comprehensible is, that having overcome the fon (who threw himfelf before his father and the affastins), and, as they believed, finilhed him, they made a prisoner ^of the old gentleman, and had dragged him away before my father could arrive.—He, however, • prevented much carnage ; for they declared they would fcalp every individual, not even staring the youth’they had beheld a martyr to filial piety ; and then Set the place on fire.—They fted at the appearance of the troops.'
, Mr. Wilson, was deeply affeSled at his father’s fate, and feemed to conSider death as more eligible than bondage ; though he would often Say, I am proud. Sir, of being your prifon-ti gp	addrefs which never failed to involve
thefe two most generous of men in a warm alter-
/ cation-:
A NOVEL.
65
(C
€ C

€C
cation ;—my father inSisting upon it, he had a<st-ed as his deliverer only ;—WilSon affirming, he had made himfelf master of his liberty.
So foon as he was perfedtly recovered, he be-Sought my father to let him bear arms under him. ** I am ambitious,” he would fay, ‘‘ of one day rendering fome of my fpecies a Similar Service to that 1 have experienced. It is a glorious exertion of human courage to preferve a “ life, and check the devastations of Sivages I Your example shall be my leffon of instruction.”
My father gave hirp a fword, and leave to ufe it ; but forbade his confining himfelf to the military profestion. — We must not,” faid he, mistake the effufions of gratitude and benevo-“ lence for choice.—Befides, who knows how “ Soon the paternal authority may mark you out ** a new courfe 1”—At thefe words I perceived he would look tenderly on me.—I leave you to judge, Ella, what was my objeSi of contemplation, when I made that difeovery.	‘
Very many Ikirinishes happened with the Americans, in one of which my father received a ball in his fide.—This youth was his companion ; but though he evermore adted agreeably to his duty, it was apparent the Safety of his benefadlor was his greatest concern.—In pity to your family (he tvould fay) Spare youu^^lf, where you
ft

a
ic
4C
(C
(C
to dansfer.
can with propriety, and let me have the honour of fulfilling your wishes. I am enured;
—I shall not dishrace you bv shrink-mg—Bring me to the proof.”You know not what I can do in your Service.”
I'lis affectionate attention was Such to my mother, that she Seemed to forget he was not her own child j —and Such his brotherly regard for me,
that

66
COX HEATH
that I found I had lost the distindtion between my love of a stranger and of Ferdinand, in my heart. It was fo natural. So pleafurable, however to love, and know myfelf beloved, in a land of flaughter, that I had not the refolution to reSist i-tsinfinuations, until by Some incident poor Wil-Son came to the knowledge of my Sentiments ;
and we were confessedly the whole univerSe to each other.
My father was commanded to join in a dangerous enterpri2,e. — My mother drooped from that instant.—We were fo near the Seat of adlion, that we heard the guns, every one of which were fo many daggers to her fenSibility. Night came ©n I—No hufband blessed her eyes.—At three in the morning, a beating at the door roufed her from the only stumberfhe had fallen into.—It was a messenger—but not a messenger of glad tidings.
The King’s troops wete defeated—many officers flain, many taken prifoners—** Was not Mr. Ri-vers returned to his familv ?”
She fainted in my arms.—“ He is dead !” faid she, opening her eyes. .Dh how true were my “ forebodings ! and what will not be my poor girl’s distrefs, when she finds herfelf an or-** phan I” Again the door gave notice of Some one’s arrival—again my mother fainted.—It was Mr. W^ilfon—but Suddenly reviving, Kneel, faid she, and promiSe to protect my helpleSs ** child.—I cannot, I will not outlive my huf-** band !”
I,
Mr. Rivers, Madam,” cried Wilfon, “ is on his way hither—I will not fay unharmed, though harmed but flightly. — His impatience to relieve your Spirits, prevailed on him to let me precede him. — I would not for the world « deceive you, as you must be So Soon unde-'	ceived.
*€
<<
A NOVEL.
67
2-
** ceived.
1	•
—Assure yourfelfl am incapable of every fuch mistaken, fuch cruel kindnefs—he will “ be here in a few hours.”
** Hours ! Mark that, my lost girl !—V/hat must his condition be to move on fo ssow-ly ?—This, this delay is worfe to me than “ death !”
The good, the tender fellow exhausted his utmost eloquence in her Support: he begged her, even on his knees, to be compofed for all our fakes to be compofed—She endeavoured to oblige him ; but Smiled through her tears,' when she did Smile, and could not conceal the Smarthig anguish of her heart.
At length, a noiSe was heard.—She -was for flying to meet her hushand ; and fo great was her strength for the time, that we could Scarce restrain her.—He was brought into her room, pale and SpeechleSs ; when, contrary to our expectation, she made no effort to rife, but viewed him with a fixed, an agonising attentions Nature, in her whole tragic drama, never drew fuch a Scene.
V
Wilson pressed my hand — a flood of tears feemed to lighten my weight of affliflion.—A Surgeon attended.—My mother’s fever, he Said, had Seized her brain^ and my father’s wound was mortal.
We knew not howto divide ourSelves ;
j but
WilSon apprehending more terror for me from my mother’s delirium, when it should come to its height, than trom my father’s Silent Suffering, inSisted upon my being his nurfe, whilst he Superintended the nurfing of the woman he almost revered.
My father flept till morning, and was much refreshed. He ashed in a low voice for WilSdn— his wife.—The Surgeon luckily came in before I
could
6r
.C O X H E A T H
could anfwer ; and telling him his lafety depended on his being kept quiet, he conlented I alone should fit by him.
; My mother’s diforder took a very different . turn to what was expected. Instead of trenzy, she fell into st upefa£tion : the fpring of her nerves was broken by anxiety ; her heart-strings were rent by grief she languished without remedy for Several days, before my father was judged fit to bear the melancholy tidings.
Wilson approached the bed-fide Softly ; but my father was aware of him.—He held out his • hand—the hand that had Saved Ids young friend’s life.—He kiffed it—he fat down by him, and ! ■ retired. But, my dear Ella, 1 only exchanged one fick room for another ; though all my atten-. dance on our mother was deemed unnecessary by thofe about her, as she was altogether infenSible . of it.—But when nature came to its last struggle, _ what a change did it produce 1 She was coiledled, . compoled she bid me listen to the few words she had to fay to me—^her dying request, she added—her departing injundlion.
'* As you would shun a precipice,sheware of loving a Soldier. It will be the death-stroke of your peace !— My tender and lively affection for your father has as effebiually destroyed me, as a (word or a pistol could have, done. — Bear testimony of all you hear and lee to your filter.
Tell her she is included in my blessing, my prayers—and oh that i could but have taken a last farewel of your father I”
My father heard this exclamation, and would be instantly conveyed, tho’ at the hazard of his existence, into her apartment.—She claiped her hands together—she threw herlelf on his neck— she blessed him—and expired,—But he was Spared
the
((
((
tt
€(
tf
■f m
A NOVEL.
fi9
the most deadly portion of his Sorrow ; for to this hour he believes stie died of a fever.—She did die of a fever; but it was the fever,pf anguish and a broken heart.
Wilson took every office on hlmfelf reSpeO;-ing the funeral. He had fought as a Volunteer, or rather, voluntary attendant on my father, and as Such claimed his privilege of following his fortune.—He made haste to bury our dead oiit of our Sight.
Fits conversation, and the argurnents he ufed respecting the paternal duty, contributed in a great meaSure to preierve our father. He Saw we loved ;—he pitiedjj^ he excuSed us he enjoined us not to add affliction to afflidtion, by thinking of an union under Such auSpices as war and blood-shed, but wait patiently for better days.
This was all the indulgence we hoped for; and most religiousty did we make his will our law.
It was two months before my father could go abroad, and he was then only conveyed in a kind of litter. The ball had grazed his lungs, it was thought, by his Surgeons'; but its paffage was oblique, and by his perfect recovery, I must conclude they were mistaken.
In all theSe little excurstons WilSon was his garde du corps.—Our partings were frequent, and our re-unions uninterrupted, until one fatal morning—when can T write it ?—he was, misting in my father’s little train his Supporting arm np longer presented itSelf:—alone, unacompanied, at least by WilSon, he entered his dwelling, where Wil-fon, alas ! never entered more.
Watchings Stich as happy minds can form no image of, did I experience!—I heard him in every footstep, and tried to trace out his features in every approaching individual.—Had he been
cut
70
C O X H E A T H
cut off in battle—had he been the prey of wild beasts, or, what is yet worfe in my idea, the pfey of Savages, the certainty of his fate, the ending of his life would have been a blessed ending of my Sorrows.—But whether living or dead, he is still dear to me,—aud I still must weep his lofs.—*I alk of Heaven, Ella, in its utmost merey, only to permit me to difcover, that ——he is no more.
Need I now befpeak your pity or forbearance ?—Jests are stabs to the wounded mind. May you be ever, ever happy, prays your
N
Lydia Rivers !

LETTER XL
Since thou art deny’d to my heart. What blifs can hereafter be mine ?
He lives m
OOR Lydia,!—How you must blush, my dear madam, at your impatience under your light difappointments, when weighed against her deep, her trying asslidtion ! Your lover not only lives, but declaredly lives for you. the esteem of all his acquaintance—in health, in in peace (for ours is only a holiday-Camp), in Safety ; breathes the fame air with you, inhabits the fame kingdom, and almost every Succeeding post brings you tidings of him from mine or Lydia’s pen ;—yet have you wept, and lamented
his
A N O V E L.
n
hislofs, as if Seas, and Savages, and every formidable, every death-bearing calamity were the barriers between you.—Read, then, I befeech you, read my gentle and uncomplaining ssster’s account of what she had endured, and still endures, and learn ressgnation.
There is yet another of the Brazens that I must take leave to introduce to your acquaintance ; but he, my dear, is a Lord—So you will lefs wonder at his title. And that I may not confound him with the Captain James, the Captain Charles, or the other before-recited noble Captain Brazens, I will omit his military addition, and call him Lord Brazen only.
A COACH-FULL of London ladies arrived Somewhat unexpefledly, and Somewhat late last night at Mildmay-Hall. One of them was tolerably well-known to Mrs. Mildmay, the others entire strangers; but they were women of family and fortune, and the least agreeable of the whole party y/?rr to a Lord. —The Lord blefs them !—How little did that relationship avail her in our good opinion ; for it is the sterling, the intrInSic meritof the individual that is the only currency with us, the only passport to our approbation.
My Lord’s Sister not having had aii Earl or a Marquis for her father, was, how'ever, obliged io content herfelf with plain Mifs, in the fame manner as your humble friend—Mifs Brazen ;—for we will gracioussy give her the family-name, together with all its honours and hereditaments; for my Lord, her boasted brother, has all the pride, ail the ill-nature, all the stare, and all the strut of all the Brazens ; from which marks my Lord’s Sister fully proves her legitimacy and rightful claims to the blood of the Brazens^—I hope, by this time, you are Sufficiently mistrefs of their cha-
raders

COXHEATH
rasters and perfons to enter into their future concerns with pleaSure and feelingy il required.
The ladies were So impatient to viSit the Heath, that, notwithstanding the fatigue of their journe}^, they would, I verily believe, have fat up all night, rather than run the hazard of over-steeping themfelves, and lostng the morning-exer-cife. Mrs. Mildmay fettled the point, however, to their entire fatisfadlion, by astiiring them, that a Servant should be put on duty, for the purpofe of giving them timely notice of the fun’s up-rif-ing, before which it would be unnecessary tore-pair to the field.
The morning came, when Mrs. Mildmay and myfelf made a part of the attendant cavalcade ; and the ladies, to their unfpeakable mortification, discovered, that to have figured away to advantage, they ought alSo to have been ea che-vald but as they were wholly unprovided with hats and feathers in the Camp-stile, it was not in my benefadtrefs’s power to gratify their vanity, or horfes would have been at their Service.
Lord Brazen s’ corps was drawn forth.
Not Mars himSelf e’er looked fo fierce as he !
A Scream from the coach of “ Brother ! my “ Lord I” burst like a volley on his ear.—He rolled his eyes around ;—the beckoning hand of MiSs Brazen diredled his attention aright ; and the Salutes interchanged w'ere Such as I shall not give myfelf the trouble to defcribe : —they would fully my paper.
The equestrian figures then caught his notice. He had heard of Mildmay-Hall, the beauty of its fituation, the benevolence of its owner, but never till that happy monaent could fay he had obferved the lady with whole fame he was fo much enamoured.
‘‘ A RELATION 1”
novel.
73
“ A RELATION I” he presumed, bowing to
me.
the worthiest
€C
The daughter of a friend—
“ man living, and a Soldier !”
“ Had he the honour of knowing the gentleman ?”
“ Mr. Rivers !”
“ Yes, let me whifperit (Said Mrs. Mildmay, most agreeably) that I may not Scandalize my ** Sovereign—Lieutenant Rivers.’’
He covered a leer of impertinence with an ob-fequious bow, and invited us to refresh in his marquee.
To his marquee we went, where ,the air of the pretty fellow made us quite forget the Soldier. Every thing was lo fine and fo finikin, fo dainty and fo studied, fo bedecked and fo befringed, that there was no end to the marvellings and tire applaudings of the ladies; and we w^ere obliged to Sacrifice our truth on the altar of his vanity, and clofe in at every favourable paufe with “ Ve-ry pretty ! very pretty indeed !”
But with all this petit-maitrejhip ahomnim,
he was no degenerate fon of the Brazens. He ogled me with a confidence that startled me, and chattered away without fear or wit, though he had the honour of entertaining fo amiable and accomplished a woman as Mrs. Mildmay ; invited hirnfelf to the Hall, nothing doubting; and, as the coup ds grace of nis politenefs, would efcort us on horfeback through the Lines, and prefent us, en pajfant, to his General.
We I e mounted.--He divided him Self, as it were, between my protedrefs and me.—She was a lady of uncommon penetration, for she g,ave cre--dit for Superabundant prowefs ; and ‘‘ he doubted not the reproach of the Army would foon be
L	done

/
74
COXHEATH:
done away by Rivers’s advancement.—He was not apt to boast, but he believed he had fome little interest with the Higher Powers;—and the beauty of the daughter would prove a memento for the interest of the fatiier.” — I bowed, i fear Somewhat Scornfully ; but my heart Spoke, and I could not be on my guard.
The General was at his doUr, equipped like a General. Methought his brow would well become the laurel-wreath.—Lord Brazen advanced— announced the company.—His ssster was graci-ousty recognized—her friends politely faluted.— Mrs. Mildmay received a flight compliment, and I a cold movement of his hat:—but he had a lady v/aiting for him, to whom he was impatient to pay his devoirs — the queen of his wilhes—the Sovereign of his affedlions— the partner of his empire "—the Spirited female—the modern Eloife :
If there be yet another name more free,
More fond than Mistrefs, make me that to thee.
\
And we were Soon convinced, that however he kept up the dignity of the Commander on every ether occaSion, he was an	charmer in stlken
strings, to be led about, checked, &c. &c. at her high will.
Lord Brazen pointed me out to many of his acquaintance.'—“ I don’t like this man’s be-“ haviour,” Said Mrs. Mildmay : “ he is a libertine in principle, and a ruffian in temper.— Heaven avert, his malice ! for if I have any Ikill, he has malicious destgns against you now in his heart.”
Am I not your child, replied I ; and are you not both able andwillingto proteO; me ?”
<* I GRANT it, and I will be more explicit on
“ that
CC

A NOVEL.
75

€C
€i
that point,” added she, lest his narrow-mindedn^fs should mifread the nature of our connexion.”—She was as good as her word.
“ Ella, my Lord, is not merely my companion, my friend, my god-child, but my adopted daughter ; -and So precarious is life, and uncertain human intentions, that whether I marry or die, I have put it out of my own power to do her injustice. I brought her up from her infancy, educated her with the nicest care, gave her claims to an ample provisson, and it is my pride and glory, that I have proved myfelf, where thofe claims are the question; a woman of honour. She is too modest to tell a tale that is calculated to lift her even into due conlequence ; I am therefore happy youf Lordship’s very particular enquiries into the origin and meaning of my atfachment to he-r, has furnished me not only with a handfome, but a necessary opportunity of clearing up a point, which might be liable to raifconception or mifconstruQ;ion.”
Lord Brazen thanked her for the honour she had done him, with that Silly difconcertion wliich marks the features of the bold and bafe, when deteQed or prevented in their unworthy Schemes; and converted his familiarity into fome-thing like reSpeft, when he afterwards addressed me.
It has had its dessred effe6:,” Said this wonderful woman ; and 1 have only to inform you, that you will find every word I uttered a Sacred, an established truth ; and you will oblige me (in conformity to the dirty notions of the world) by holding up your head accordingly.”
Da	** This
(C
i€
€C
(C
€€
(C


iC
€C
CC

€4

4(
<4
44
44
44
76
C O X H E A T H
/
This, my dear madam, is no more than I ex-peQed ; but as neither my gratitude or my admiration is capable ol addition, I shall leave you to make your own rcfle<!dions—on the alSurancc she has given me that ! am ampjy provided for. We returned to Mildmay-Hall to dinner. Lord iBrazen accompanying us.
Mildmay-Hall, my dear madam, has the magnificence of an Eastern palace, without the pageantry ; decorum takes the place of parade.. The most fumptuous entertainment has there the air of a friendly repast ; — every fervant knows and performs their duty : and the mistrefs’s commands are no fooner received, than things difpole themfelves in proper order, as it were mechanically ; or, perhaps, to give you a clearer idea, as if fome good-natured Fairy, by the judicious exercife of her wand, produced Silently and in-stantaneousty every elegant arrangement.
Lord B RAZEN was struck dumb with fur-prize I—-He thought he-had feen the fplendid and the immenfe ; — but Mildmay-Hall Surpassed whatever his eye had beheld, and he no longer was at a lofs to account for itsuniverfal fame.
My apartment was'shewn, amongst the rest ; ray, I SufpeQ; was ostentatiousty shewn. It is next to Mrs. Mildmay’s; but far Superior in the richnefs of its furniture, and the high finish of its archite6ture. It was the unworthy idea of charity she fought to chafe from their imaginations ; — and during the whole day rebuked their most Secret mistakes of that complexion, by the most af-Se6;ionate attention to me on every occaSion.
“ I live but in her company,” Said she.; •— ** Mildmay-Hall would be a defert, if she was to forfaJce me. — She knovsrs the way to every re-cefs of my heart; can Soothe, delight, and re-
‘‘ gulate
A N O V E L.
77
C€
€<


(C
€i
(<



4<
4(
A
gubteit, as she pleai'es.—When Sick, she is my phySician ; — when forrowful, the cordial drop of my existence ; —and when in health, she heightens my every enjoyment by her friendly participation.—-You must pardon me. my dear Ella, for once Speaking of you when prefent, in the language I always ufe when abfent.—You know my stncerity, and what obligations I have to you;—The dear child, ladies, has left father, and mother, stster, and brother, for me ; nor shall she ever repent the tendernefs of her conduT.”
I’c o u LD perceive the ladies would gladly have difpenfed with this Sauce to their venifon ; —their fouls, madam, had no relish for Sentimental chat.
Another cauSe was, however, most politely called by the Lady of the feast, the moment she had fulfilled her defire of Setting me in a proper light;—and, except a glance of envy, which now and then efcaped them ;—as who should fay, “ I afifure you. Madam is in fine quarters !” Yes, yes, she knows how to chooSe and re-fuSe, it is plain to prefer living in alTthe delicacies imaginable to following the Camp with the poor Lieutenant her fathtr —except, I repeat, theSe glances, the evening pasted off to the general Satisfadfion.
The ladies would have taken their leave in the morning ; but Mrs. Mildmay preffed them with So Sweet a grace to favour her with their company a Second time to Camp, that they could not deny themfelves the pleafure of attending her ; and, as I had my immediate prefentiment^ my father’s marquee is to be the place of our entertainment.—-She is determined, my dear, to punish them with a fight of the whole family.
D 3	But,
€C
€C
€C
a
a
/
8
C O X H E A T H:
But, as the day’s adventures will be poor indeed, if not entitled to^Lfpecial letter, I shall conclude this with aSTuring you, that nothing is wanting to complete the happinefs of the Scene, but— what is impossible to be had—the felicity of a certain" lady’s prefence, who shall be namelefs for a variety of political and pious reafons, — far, far too tedious'and too tender to mention. — Heigh-ho !—and thus in Sober fadnefs I fubfcribe my Self,
Your
Ella Rivers,

LETTER XII.
They mind ao other thing But the Ladies and the King ; For every other care is aflavery.
oh I
Ye S, my .dear madam. Mars and Venus are
the only divinities a Soldier bows the knee to; and I have remarked it, in proportion to the valour of the man, is the warmth, the fincerity of the lover. Lord Brazen may counterfeit the cha-radler, but has no natural claims to it : he wants the grand essentials—liberality and fenssbi lity. •
I HORE the merit of my little quotations is not lost upon you. I think to borrow an expression of Corporal Trim’s, it makes a letter look better in the — The Scotch Sonnet is an old one,
from
A N O V E L.
i
9
from whence the lines which decorate this epistle are taken ; but it is not the lefs true or the lefs applicable ; and you may read it through, if it shall fo pleale you, in your colledtion of ballads.
Though commillions are dear,
1 will buy him one this year,
He shall ferve no longer a Cadet,
oh !
The wife, fays the French proverb, understand -half a word,
Never was fuch a contrast ! It had been Lord Brazen’s pride to entertain us in all the frippery of foppery;—it was Mrs. Mildmay’s ^ride my father should receive us in all the dignity of plain-nefs ; —and with fo much judgment were the cates feledled, that FJumility herfelf might have done the honours of the Lieutenant’s marquee with exultation ;—for she would there have appeared in all her native lovelincfs — the beauties of good fenfe, and the ornaments of Simplicity.
My Lord was all condefeenston. He shook my
A
father fey the band, clapped my brother on the shoulder, kissed the ladies, and vowed that Rivers w'as the only fellow in the Camp that knew how to live.
Melvin, on his return from exercife, dropped in upon us. He bowed carelesty, haughtily I thought, to Lord Brazen—complaifantly to the ladies—coloured up to the ears at every piece of right honourable gallantry paid me—and Seemed to look, “ If you dare to form any pretenstons ** there, I wear a fword.’’—A foolish hot-headed boy 1 Does he not know the difference between coqueting it, and the union of hearts ?
Mrs.Mildmay told the ladies, that if it was most agreeable to dine their last day in Gamp, she
D 4	believed
*
So
COXHEATH:

'-:♦ V .‘T r’'.:
T'r.v:''
believed she had interest enough with Mr. Rivers to get a ha-mper, waiting for fuch pennishon at the door of the marquee, admitted. The pro-poial was received with a general plaudit, except by Melvin. I bid him not be a fool, but treat me with indisterence, for reafons I would give him at a more convenient time. I could just lay fo much to him, to bring him into order, whilst the buf-tle of opening the hamper, and fetting forth the contents on my father’s camp-table, engaged the attention of the company.—But he is a dreadful dissembler, and made very-bungling work of his astumed charadfer.
A LARGE ham, three couple of fowls, a fvveet-bread pye, and a pigeon ditto, with cheefe, fruit, &c. &c. were the contents of the fecretly-con-veyed hamper, with a dozen bottles of excellent wine, fmuggled, I may call it, into the marquee ; for no leave was ashed or granted for their
introdudtion.— Lord Brazen fwore a martial oath,
<
which startled us women, that mussc was alone wanting to make it a feast worthy an emperor, and that deficiency he would take upon him to Supply. — The portico was instantly filled with hautboys, clarinets, and kettle-drums.— I wished for the fife, but did not let the vulgar wish ef-cape me ;—and “ God Save the King, “ Rul® “ Britannia,” and manifold other loyal fongs tranfpierced the air :
Oh, . ’twas a feast to hear, and fee 1
4
%
as Giles fays of his mlstrefs’s tinkling the keys of her harpSichord ; and we were the wonder and the envy of the whole army.
Melvin must be confcious of fome hidden im-perfedlion, he has fo mean an opinion of hirn-
felf.
A NOVEL.
8i
felf,—Lord Bra2.en pushed his stool in between Mrs. Mildmay and me, and very fairly left the other gentlemen to gallant the other ladies. —> Captain Melvin’s bead ached (1 fuppofe he intended I should fancy it was his heart) ; he could noteat—he could not Sing—he could not fay any thing to the purpofe but watching his eyes, I at length frowned him into better manners, and better temper ;—and he vouchfafed to give us that little doleful ballad of Prior’s,

ft
9 »
In vain you«tell your parting lover, &c.'
and it being in unifon with his i?igSf heout-did himfelf. He is a little Silly, I rant you ; but he' is, my dear m.dam, a very anv.able fellow in the main, .
My father Avished to have it understood that the muSic was a frolic of my Lord’s.—A General Officer p^isted by You are a happy man Mr. Rivers !”
“ I HAVE the honour. Sir,' of entertaining Lord Brazen, and a party of ladies his rela'-tions, to whom, I am confident, your>.company would be highly acceptable.”’
Lord Brazen lat clofe.: it was impoffible to improve the pr.efent circle ; every new-comer, of whatever rank, would therefore be deemed by him ah intruder. The General just stepped in (how powerful is curiofity !) drank a gl^fs of Mrs. Mildmay’s Champaign, as my father -ar»“ nounced it, “ at whofe houfe (he added) Lord Brazen’s friends were then on a vifit,” and retired ; perceiving, I imagine, his prefence'was a restraint on our-mirth, w:hich broke out with redoubled violence, if noife is mirth, from the little checlcit had met with.
D5	But
tc

e O X H E A T H :
€4
44
44
44
44
But how fhall I tell you the conclufion ? Lord Brazen, by his repeated toasts, which were cir^ culated with great Spirit, was So wound up, that he took my father assde, and in round plain terms offered himfelf for his Son-in-law.
My father was astonished !
** I KNEW I should Surprise you,” Said he;
but your daughter’s beauty will atone my folly, in the opinion of the world ; and you must not refufe me your fandlion.”
My father paufed.
I AM, my Lord, one of thoSe unfashionable parents who can refolve firain their children’s inclinations, humble, an unafpiring heart, and may not,
s, be properly fenstble of the honour you do her.”
Then I have your confent,” cried his Lordship exultingly, if lean win the lady ^ Pardon me the feeming vanity, my dear Sir ; but I think I am too well acquainted with life and human nature to defpair, unlefs I have a rival.”
My father Solemnly engaged for me, that was not the cafe.— He wrung his hand in extafy : Henceforth, then,” cried he, I am yours ** to command. You shall Soon find I understand the Sex.
to guidef not con-
EMa has an
ft
44
€4
44
44
44
44
Only oblige me So far as to give the hint to your daughter now on the Spot;—I mean the moment you can do it without being particular.”
Melvin’s fears pidlured to him the bufinefs of this tete-a-tete, and the eclat with which my Lord returned to the company, convinced him he was not mistaken. 1 own I was not free from my Secret forebodings, and obeyed my father’s
nod to attend him with uncommon palpitations,
from
A NOVEL.
S3

from conceiving it would prove a critical audience.
V
He took me kindly by the hand, and Seated me on his military trunk. “ My child,” faid he, it is necessary you should be informed what has pasted between me and Lord Brazen. He judges of your mind from the giddy part of the lex he has been accustomed to converfe with, and is poSitive you cannot refufe him. Mrs. Mildmay’s lessons must have left me nothing to fay on the fubj.edl. The goodneSs of her heart makes wealth appear destrable. She knov/s the true ufe, and the true value of it ; but, though I wish you to determine for your-feif on every offer you may meet v/ith, I must beg you will declare in. this nobleman’s favour or disfavour if declare in his disfavour, you must do it tenderly, politely, cautiousty. ^— I Seldom, Ella, wish to temporize ; but Lord Brazen is a haughty man of fashion, and will impatiently brook an affront from people of our stamp; and your poor brother has too much fire, to tolerate any man in infolence. This, 1 hope, will be a, Sufficient rule for youc cpnduQ:.—Yet a regard for your eafe, and my own honour, compels me to go deeper into the matter. I have astiired him your affections are wholly uningaged. Your behaviour, my dear, warrants that assurance. Can I fuppofe you would deal fo negiedlfully by me, as to engage them without my knowledge ?— But, should any falfe delicacy, or falfe fears, have Sealed your lips on that fubjeD, beware how a Secret of the kind tranfpires!—It may be fatal to the (however worthy) possessor of that preference in your favour, this proud foldier has stooped to Sue for. —» I trust my fame,
your
84
€(
a
C O X H E A T H r
•\
your brother’s, your lover’s fafety, if yoii have one, to your difcretion. Make no reply, but compofe yourfelf, and fpeedily rejoin your friends. — You may revolve what I have laid to you at your leifure.”

Such Helen was, and who could blame the boy. That in fo bright a dame confum’d his Troy ?

Here shall we have cutting of throats and pistol-ings on my account, unhappy beauty that I am I <—But little does my dear father fufpedf, that Lord Brazen is apprifed, from Mrs. Mildmay’s own mouth, of the fortune she intends bestowing upon me ; and that, instead of adoring my per-fcn, he is feeking only to fet up his bauble of a title to fale; or, in plain English, proclaiming, that if Mrs. Mildmay wilt make him master of her thoulauds, he will make me-a Baronefs. — I am therefore, in every fenfe of the word, his most obedient, most grateful, and most devoted humble fervant.—What a paltry 'fellow it is !
I HAD a fan in my pocket,, and, without knowing what I did, took it out, and fanning myfelf for fome moments, before i recolledled my father’s injunfition of following him as foon as pof-fible.
It is plain, Melvin’s fidgetrngs and prancings to oblige me, has not eicaped his obfervation : however, all is well fo far, it I can but keep him within tolerable bounds. There is but one wav, ma-dam ; and as we are atlowed, in a true Christian fpirit, of two evils to ehoofe the least ; why, I must even promife my quarrelling, huffing fwain, that if he will fmooth his brow, and behave him-feif handfomely, I will be his, and only hisj whea-
oppoft unity
A N O V E L.
^5
\ '
opportunity ferves^ as the innocent country girls fay, when they give theirconlent to be married.
When 1 could trust mylelf to obey my father’s orders, I came forth from the little lumber-tentj, as itmav properly be called ; and the first object my eyes fought for was Melvin — the drooping, the defponding, the down-cast Melvin.—No Such objedt, 1 assure you, was to be met with ; for my retiring having made a fort of derangement^ ire contrived with much dexterity to shuffle himfelf next to Mrs. Miidmav, in whole ear he had been whifperin^ certain things, with fuch encouragement, that his whole countenance was lighted up into fmiles and dimples;—I protest I did not know the man. — in a word, my fweet girl, perceiving clearly .wliat Braz,en was about, he tampered with my benefadtrels on the instant, and obtained an appointment for the purpofe ; not merely of further explanation, but to receive me as a deed of gift at hi-T hands,—on condition that he waited till she could fettle things with my father,—though at the distance of twelve tedious months. — Accordingly we had him over at Mildmay-tlail early i(ext morning, when the ceremony of bestowing me was performed, in a lerious, though uncano-nical manner ; and now we live as happily, together or afunder, as the d ivislong.
It was a justifiable manoeuvre, and has proved fuccelsful. He knew he had no chance with my father, fo relolved to shoot flying with re-fpedt to my protedfrefs ; and means to fet up her previoujly granted approbation to my Lord’s injidi-aujly folicited interest with Mr. Rivers, who, in fa(d, had long before conSigned his authority to that fair, gracious, and distinguishing lady.
Lord Brazen — for your Lords do as they . pleale all the world over — attended us to th
treimty
e
B6
COXHEATH:
tremlty of the Heath, roaring catches and glees ; when we feparated, and, with our Servants armed with blunderbusses, made all possible haste to the Hail.
The ladies professed themfelves infinitely obliged by the entertainment they had received, and invited and re-invited us to their houfes in London ; — not forgetting the Cadet,” Said Mifs Brazen, ^lom, it feems, she had beheld, with very favourable, not to fay admiring eyes. — A Lord’s ssster, madam I —It is enough to turn hi? little bead l—rThey departed—never more, I hope, to trouble us with their company.
. You fee, let who will meet, or who will bid adieu, the whole bussnefs of life is love. — Love at crofs-purpofes is, however, a dangerous game. —Heaven fend I may play my way well through, that I may never be reduced to the fad necessity of Subscribing my Self
Your Sorrowful
Ella Rivers!
LET
A N O V E L.
87
LETTER XIII.
w
E have had terrible confuSion i—Lord Brazen, to prove his great regard for cur family, Solicited and obtained a Pair of Colours for Ferdinand, in a regiment, ray dear madam, he well knew would be ordered abroad at the breaking-up of the campaign.
I WAS feized with a trembling fit r—Ferdinand’s face was flustied into a deep starlet —Mrs. Mildway entered her protest against his acceptance of it—and Lydia burst into tears. My father begged leave to fpeak a few words to my Lord in private, and they retired into the lumber-tent together.
Melvin was at the door of the marquee, receiving the parole from his ferjeant.— He now joined us. Mrs. Mildmay declared she would never forgive my father, if he confented to Sacrifice his fon before his time—that was her expreS-fion. “ If you are both obliged to go,” Said she, your friends must Submit; but I know this bufy Lord is laying a trap for the life of a man, who, who, his constious demerit tells him, must defpife him ; and though, in general instances, I am no abettor of difobedience, I will on this ground Spend half my fortune to Support Ferdinand in an oppoSition that is but another name for felf-prefervation.”
Melvin embraced his Ferdinand, as he called him, with the most cordial affeftion : — “ We “ are brothers,” Said he, and ought to have one common interest : you shall, therefore, either stay at home and share my pprSe, or I will go abroad, and share your dangers.—My
Ella would contemn me, if I could think of
happinefs.



ic
a

€C
€C
€C

€€
ii
88
COX HEATH
happlnefg, whilst her heart, and the hearts of ** all thole she loves, were tortured on your ac-“ count.”
‘‘ You are a noble fellow,” cried Mrs. Miljd-
may,
“ is.”
(C
and richly deferve my girl, good as she I reached out my hand, not constdering the impropriety, and let him kits it five leveral times in the face of the whole company—once for me, once for Mrs. Mildmay; once for Lvdia, and twice for your fair ftlf;—and he was prouder of that honour, than he would have been in obtaining a truncheon — But you ought not to laugh at him, as you know what it is to love.
My father and Lord Brazen joined us; the former looking a little embarrasted, the latter not at all piqued. He played with Mrs. Miidmay’s glove, hummed a tune, told me I was handiomer than an angel, invited himielf to dine at the Hall the next day, and bowing affedtedly, wished us a good morning.
Mrs. Mildmay, I could perceive, expedled mv faiher to communicate. My father had no fuch intention.—I was Sorry for it : he is,the clo-fest man alive, where intelligence would pain you ; the total reverfe, where it will give pleasure.
“ I THINK my Lord Brazen very prefuming,” Said Mrs. Mildmay. — “ Sure, you have “ friends of longer standing than he ?”
** He is a Lord,” Said I.
My father fmiled.
** My lex,” rejoined Mrs. Mildmay, are .a proverb for curiostty ; — will you then excufe “ me, it I contest an impertinent destre to know what has pasted between you and that great bufy-bod^
“ We
A N O V E L.
89
€€
€(
€(

€i
if
if
€C
iC
€f
We have been difputing, madam,” fald my father, on the etijquette of conferring and receiving favours ;—I inSisting upon it, the malicious world will fay, he bought my daughter’s affedtions by providing for her relations before-hand; and he affirming, that when ** once matrimony is en train, there can be no impropriety in a man’s difplaying his friendship, how, or in whatever he pleafes.”
A VAST adl of friendship,” faid Mrs. Mild-may, ‘‘ to want you to tranfport your fon for a Pair of Colours ; I would undertake to procure him much more than that in England, if it was not from the fear of wounding your independent Spirit.”
Or I,” faid Melvin.
^	■	,J
My father looked grave.
“ My dear Sir,” added he, you cannot charge me with even an attempt to affront you yet. I have been proud, and ever shall, to fubfcribe and feel myfelf the obliged party.
“ Alas ! my father,” faid the gentle Lydia, —Spare yourfelf and us as much as possible. IS we must be unhappy, let us Suffer together. We are now colledfed, as it were, under your wing. You bend Ferdinand’s mind at youf will :—not the oSier is more obedient.’*
My father was hurt.
If I am tenacious of his honour rather than his happinefs, it is becaufe I know his happi-nefs is alone dependent on his honour.”
Say, Ferdinand, by your tenderest hopes, did you ever wish they should experience a Separation ?”
Ly d IA wept.
“ I DID not mean,!” refumed my father, to strike hard on your too quick fenSibility : but,.
- my
tt
<€
tt
tt
if
€C
if
if
if
if
if
is

99
if

90
C O X H E A T H
‘ my love, I have nothing to preferve, but the ‘ honour of my children:—I had nothing elfe to
*	bestow upon them. It is a precious gift, and ‘ must be diligently watched over. An error,
*	an accident lofes it for ever. Thus far, I flaS-‘ ter myfelf, I have advanced in life unwounded ‘ in that iacred, that vital part; but I am unfor-
tunately drawn- into a lituation, that none but ‘ myfelf can fave me harmlefs in, or extricate ‘ me from.—W hen the lucky moment arrives—■ ^ I beg Mrs. Mildraay’s pardon for thisfeeming \ rebuke of her friendly interference; but I ‘ trust st^e will believe me, when I declare, I
* hope the time is not far distant, when I shall ‘ be able to give her fuch an eclairciffement as ‘ will incline her to approve the condudf she may ‘ now condemn; efpecially when I tell her, by S the way,'she can take no refolution for the
*	advantage or felicity of my children, I shall be ‘f dissatisfied with, provided she a£ts in. defiance
*	of, not in concert with, me : for I have bound
added he, fmiling, to enter into, none
f* ofcabals.”
This fetus all at eaSe with ourfelvesand each
other, nay, my dear benefadtrefs tossed up her head with unufual dignity; as whd should fay, ‘‘ I “ have now full power to do all the good I “ pleafe.”
Would to Heaven she was my father’s wife, as well as my mother, by every liberal, every af-fediionate tie!
Lord Brazen, I thank him, is at the bottom of all this. It is to him we are indebted for henceforth doing what is right in our own eyes : nay, it is in contemplation, to Ieem to have a family-war on his account; or, more properly, a
friendly one, as Mrs. Mildmay and my father
will
A NOVEL.
9*

will be the oppofing parties ; and being told Bra-!* zen was to come to tea, it was Settled we should begin to lay the foundation of our countermine.
My father adled fo far in concert with us, though unintentionally, that he shut himfelf up in the lumber-tent ; and Mrs. Mildmay obferved, he was much changed of late, he was not the fame man, nor could she think what was come to him.”
Brazen has an admirable fwallow, when the dofe is feafoned to his taste ; fo down it went. Melvin fat and pick’d his fingers : my brother bet the devil’s tat-too ; whilst Mrs. Mildmay, my Lord and I, were ail gaiety and conviviality.
The evening-gun was fired; Mrs. Mildmay called for her coach, left her compliments for Mr. Rivers, regretted the lofs of fo agreeable a companion as Brazen, and we talked over the whole of my father’s behaviour in our way to the Hall.
Mrs. Mildmay, to fecure our happinefs, was for making short work of it, and marrying Melvin and me diredily : that was the literal con-strudlion, she Said, of my father’s words. But I am obliged to her ; I do not choofe to vow to love, honour, and obey, one man, whilst I can be adored by twenty ; and, becoming a wife, make it my duty to be demure, constant, and the Lord knows what.—No, no ; it is time enough to run my neck into the matrimonial noofe at the end of the campaign.
Lydia is very bufy writing — I conjedlure to you — a full and true account, I fuppofe, of the tranfa(Elions' you are already acquainted with : she will, however, dip her pen in lefs lively colourings ; and conl'equently, will prefent you with a new profpedl of them in shades. — I can forefee, that a few touches of the pathetic may be gracefully
92
C O X H E A T H
*r
&
fully thrown in, though I must doubt of bein excelled. My style of writing is calculated to roufe, not stupify the feelings.; and as I would prefer a living to a dead companion, fo I would a merry to a difmal correfpondent, —You have my leave, how'ever, to make your preference ; but keep it to yourfelf, if you are wife :—for po-fitively, if I find my talents or my complaifance under-raUdf I will renounce my pen and ink for ever. Adieu, then, defcription I — Adieu the tender pastion !—Lydia has no genius for the one, and is too powerfully enchained by the other, to venture to mention it.—You will feldom find lei» Sure, ability, and inclination, united in the fame perfon j though it happens to be the precife cafe with
Your, &c.
Ella Rivers.

i».
It--.-'
PwAArr-A-A-.' ■	■
r".
~ ^	- - -	.	"ir.-
' frA -Kf.- ' . ■	'
'S'- ’

'' ff-- '
V'L'-'	. "co-
vC.,	i-
^ • :• ^ ;'N-
H.-A.A.	A.
c.—' - >'	-1-jp

L E T-

A-iV ';	'‘;V-•’
F ■ ' %
riAJL-.Af ^

✓
A NOVEL.
93
LETTER XIV.
• ‘.i
A dawn of hope my foul revives, And 'baniflies defpair;
If yet my deareft Damon lives,
Ye Gods, make him your care!

YD I A has received letters from America,
which inform her, That Wilfon the father made his efcape from the ruffians who had feixed him, and intended to fell him to the Cdnnibals, in afewhours after they had torn him from his hovjfe, &c. but that believing his fon dead, and his property on that part of the county gone from him and his heirs, until ait least a peace couKl be ef-fe<sted between the Colonists and the Englilh, he hired a guide, and threw himfelf into the arms of the Congrefs, and now holds a conssderable place under the Americans. That at length the news was brought him, his Son not only lived, but was fighting against the caufe he had efpoufed. His indignation was excited ; and taking it for granted, that his political principals must by that time be fixed and immoveable, he refolved to work by stratagem., rather than run the hazard of a refu-fal, by alking him to come to him, or having violence repelled by violence. That accordingly he had fellows for many days on the Scout, before, they could accomplish their undertaking ; —until an opportunity offering, they threw themfelves v/ithout noife between the litter in which my father was and him, and, as he was unprepared for defence, Soon made him their prishner, and bore him in triumph to their employer. — That young Wilfon Spurned at every offer made him by the
Congrefs^
^4
COXHEATH:
Congrefs, calling its members the abettors of rebellion, with many provoking, &rc. Nc.—which, as he wifhed, got him into clofe custody, and sheltered him fora time from his father’s fchemes.
That his father had had fufficient interest, however, with his friends to procure his enlargement, and placed him under his immediate eye, apprehending he meant to elope ; though, poor fellow ! where could he go ! He had no money, and was liable to be taken up and questioned, which ever way he advanced : but that having lost all patience at the treatment he received, he became So defperate at last, as to fly.”—and there the thread of this damfel’s intelligence is lost.
It was, however, enough.—He lived I — The fame Providence that had been, could still be his proteflor.—She was quite, quite happy.
She recollefted the whole feene of their first
meetinst ;—how lovely he looked even in death ! but that
When he opened the day-break of his beauteous eyes.
Heaven and Earth !—what expressions were capable of painting her Surprize, her wonder, or her love I
In a few hours she began to droop the head. Poor fellow ! what must his Sufferings have been, —'and she, alas I the fatal caufe. :—It was to re-
^	iA.'
join her he had quitted the roof of profperity.
She faw him fainting with fatigue, with hunger. He was now sticed in pieces by the Indians; now-thrown into a loathfome. dungeon by his countrymen.—Ah ! he was dead ! — and had died unknowing how much ihe loved.
It was not, it feems, to write to you. It was to read this precious packet her fair friend had
tranfmitted
A NOVEL.
95
reviving
In the evening, duced to no fatisfadtion at all
tranfmitted her, that she retired fo Secretly into the lumber-tent: but she now found out it was
all her forrows, without affording her the fmallest confolation to fend her fo broken, fo imperfedl an account ; — it was a piece of cruel kindnefs;—and thus did her weak imagination convert what she had confidered in the morning as a blessing, by noon into a Severe calamity.
After tea she changed again. There was infinite fatisfaO;ion in finding he had not lost his life by his affedtionate attendance 6n her father. —He had furvived whole months, even the hard ufage of being dragged away, of being Separated from her he loved.—It would not be a greater miracle, in her estimation, for him'to Survive all his misfortunes.
this infinite fatisfadlion was re-
i nay, it was rather a double aggravation of her mifery.— She was nowin England, far, far beyond his utmost reach ; could prove no assistance to him ; could not fo much as extend her hand with the necessary fufi-port to keep him from expiring by famine—by his wounds.—A flood of tears Somewhat relieved her, and she refolved, in pity to both me and herSelf, to forbear touching upon fo painful, fo melancholy a fubjedf. — I grieve to fee her the prey of generous and unavailing grief ; and you, I know, will give her a Sigh.
But you must alfo give me a hearty congratulation.—Lord Brazen is gone from the Heath.— A Majority was offered him in one of the regiments encamped on Warley Common, and he did not think it prudent to flight his good fortune : he therefore promifed my father to claim his inter-pofltion fo Soon as they went into winter-quarters,
and

C O X HEAT H
/
and bid us all adieu en militairie— to lofe the remembrance of Us in new feenes.
4
Finding curfelves at eafe, Melvin introduced
a country-girl to me, whom her mistiefs had Sent between two panniers of fruit to the Camp, and who had lost her way, and with great Simplicity belought hini to diredl her to the tent stie mentioned.
The poor pretty creature was So unfit for the place her inconSiderate mistrefs had fent her to, that she entered at the first word, though she did not know who might be within, or whether there was any one befides the Captain, who was fo fair-Spoken, she faid, she could trust|herfelf with him ony vjheres. It is astonishing to me that fear does not operate on thefe Simple, well-meaning, but uniformed minds, in the fame manner that difere-tion or delicacy w'ould on yours or mine.
Melvin purchafed her whole cargo, of fruit for feven-and-Sixpence, and I began to question her, how it came to pafs that she should be fent on fuch an errand.
“ An’ pleafe you, madam,” faid she, I am a a poor fatherlefs and motherlefs girl, and have nothing elfe to depend upon but doing as l am bidden for a livelihood. I lived with an honest old Dame till last week, who had me from a child, as one may fay, and then thought myfelf welloffto fall into the bread I ha’ done.I didna’ like, to be fure, in one lenfe to come to Camp, though I longed deadly much to fee it in another ; and fo, as all hands were aloft in the field at harvest-work, my Dame bid me take the old mare and bring the fruit; and I wou’dna’ fay her nay. I never harmed no one, thought I, and what good will it do any one to
harm me ?” (Melvin put his handkerchief to
his
(C
<(
€t
t(
t(
ft
ft
ft
ft
ft
tt
ft
ft
ff
A N O V E L.
97
his mouth, and pretended to cough) “and Sol “ shall go clear home again, without axing either this or that, now I had been So lucky to fell “ my fruit.”
This, my dear madam, is a mere rofe* **bud to Farquhar’s country girl.—She was all pertnefs: this, all innocence. It wrung my heart to lee her in fo perilous a Situation. Her drefs was homely to a degree ; but it was, nevertheless, discoverable that she was one of Nature’s most finished productions her complexion, lier eyes, her teeth—I gazed upon her with wonder, pity, and admiration.
dear child,” faid I, “ you know not your danger.”
“ Anof !” cried this daughter of fimplicity.
“ Fly the Camp, as you would a precipice S —Have you never heard of bad men ?”
“ False-hearted lovers—she faid—there was many and many a one in her neighbour-“ hood ; and it would melt one to hear how the
<(
(f

<(
poor girls bemoaned themSelves.”
*' .Had you nevera fweet-heart ?” faid I.
• She blushed, and looked at Melvin;—then casting her eyes down,—^CNever,” she faid, but one.
“ And is he,” demanded I, an honest fel-
low ?”
** Honest as day, but he was poor. They had been about to put up the banns twice ; but his mother each time fell Sick ; and fo the money he had Saved to pay the Parfon, had been Spent on the dolors.”
1
, She then got up, and wished herfelf at home;
“ May-hap Robin would think Some ill had befallen her, as he did not love the foUier men%
though, .in her mind, they were very proper, civil men,”
VoL. I.	E	Does
$8
e O H E A T H


ic
Does Robin know you are come to the Camp ?”
Oh no; she durst not tell him; for he ■would have lost a whole day’s work to have corned ■with her; and she would be off directly, for fear he should be uneafy at her stay.”
“ Well, my good girl,” Said I, fear no-** thing.—I have a friend, the best woman in the ** world. — But perhaps you have heard of Mrs. Mildmay ?”
Or she must have heard of nothing. Why, the very babes could lifp out madam Mildraay’s name ; for all their fathers and mothers, in turn had been indebted to her for bread.”
A	i
We ll, Mrs. Mildmay is the lady that shall carry you home fafe from a Spot the most un-fit, of all others, for So young and So well-dist pofed.agirl, to be cast upon;” fo I bid her once more fit down, and rest contented.
My lister talks of Savages, and the cruel outrages they commit on the peaceful inhabitants in America : but let me coolly alk you, my dear madam, what favage natures thofe men must post fefs, who could betray to fin and forrow fo amiable, fo unfufpeSling, fo defencelefs a creature as Peggy Winought ? the name of this fortunate fugitive. Gracious Providence! tiad she not come dire^ly in front of my father’s marquee ;
had she not happened to arrive just at the lucky moment when the officers are dressing, and the Soldiers cleaning their arms ; — had she enquired either to the right or left ;—or, in a word, of any other man than Melvin or Ferdinand (for I do believe they are incapable of violating the laws of humanity, however licentious they might prove in licentious Scenes) ;—she must have fallen a Sacrifice to the folly or the wickednefs of the woman
A N O V E L.
99
9
rnan who could expoSe fo fair a blossom to the rough blightings of vice. —But thrice happy was the minute of her introdudlion to me, and,! will never leave or forfake her, until she is Robin’i
wife.	-
Mrs. Mildmay did not call for me till it was fo late, that I trembled for poor Robin’s repofc. But when we arrived at a little farm houfe, at the top of the village where he lived, wq found her mistrefs had been too artful to publifli her indif-cretion : but had amufed the young man with a falfe account of the place she had Sent her to. Robin was, however, there at our arrival, waiting the return of his mistrefs ; and judge, if you can, his furprize, when he Saw her defcend from Mrs. Mildmay’s coach, accompanied by Madam herSelf ; and, to complete the matter, we followed her into the houfe.
The wretch, I thouglit, looked confeious ; for she began to make fome- lame npologies for fending Peg to the Camp ; as tliat, when it came to the upshot,/that either Peg or her must go, she was tempted to Save her old bones, and lay the burthen upon young shoulders,”
Mrs. Mildmay, however, gave her a lef-fon, which I fancy she will not forget in a hurry. Then ashing the young fellow h rw he hoped to maintain a wife ; heanfwered, “Thatthey must live as other poor volks don ; but for the matter of that, he would be bold to fay, where there Was love, there was every thing.”
What if you was destitute,” Said Mrs.
Mildmay, “ of bread ? — Why, man, there “ is no existing without bread.”
Aye, and bread he would get, he’d be bound for it; —he was not afraid of laying liis
CC
E 2
shoulder
to.f
loo
' C O X H E A T H r
tc
4C
4i
€f
shoulder to the plough ; and Providence was ail fafficient.”
Finding it to no purpofe to talk reafon toa young fellow, whole love made him hope for miraculous fupport, she cut the matter short, and came to buSuiefs.
is pity,” Said she, you should not be encouraged in your industry. If the young woman is willing, she shall go home with me till she is married. I will fpeak to my steward to take you into constant employment in whatever you are most ht for ; and when Peggy is your wife, she shall rear pigs for me, geefe, and perhaps have a cow under her care. — I have many fuch nurferies, for the benefit of my poor neighbours; nor shall she fail of her share in the distribution, if I find her kind to the animals, and faithful to her trust.—We ought, at least, to make the lives of the poor creatures happy, that are to die for our food.”
Robin could hear no more : ■— he Snatched his Peggy’s hand, and down they" dropped on their knees—in mute eloquence.—Their gratitude, my dear madam, was too big for utterance.
I c ou'^LD .not. help lamenting to Mrs. Mildmay, that there was no other way of making fuch a beautiful girl happy, than by giving her to luch a clown: —but sheaffured me, she could difcover, under all the difadvantages of hard labour, anxiety, and coarfe apparel, that nature, had been , nearly as liberal to him .as to her. —Their hearts, moreover,” faid she, ** are united ; and “ foul befal the man or woman that could at-tempt to rend them afunder !”'
Peggy’s eyes fwam in plekfure all the way to
and, as piety is the offspring of
uncOrrupted nature, gave praife to Heaven for
the
4^ <4 € C if if if €f if
Mildmay-Hall ,
A NOVEL.
lOI
the wonders it had ,wrought in her favour : c6n-cluding with telling us, that Robin had lurely died, if be bad never feen her more.
Mrs. Mildmay, my dear Mrs. Mildraay, shall I ever look on your like ?—Not I fear, on. ibis Side mortalitv.
So leaving Peggy and Robin to the corRempla-tion of their happy profpe<5ls, and my beneladlrefs to the confcious delight of well-doing and well-meriting, I will bring my letter to a conclusion ;
j
And only beg you to believe,
f	9	~
That I am, &c.
/

Ella Rivers
N
LETTER XV.
I A M not worthy your friendship,, your good opinion.-^Ferdinand, too, must renounce me; for, Ella, I have difcovered that mine is an illiberal, an envious heart ;—and that, instead of tender regret, I am angry with Providence, that you are not either detained on the barren fpot with rayfelf, or that I am not permitted to ramble all the world over with you.—I defpife myfelf, and have no hope but. Sooner or later, to be defpi-, fed by you.
Do not trouble yourSelf, niy good girl, to write me.pidtures of your happinefs;—to tell me that Ferdinand has the good fenfe, the piety, to
E 3	Submit
102
C O X H E A T H :
fubmit unrepining to the necessities of his Situatb
on ;—that lie still loves me.----1 merit not his
love ; for ; instead of rejoicing in his joy, 1 weep that he is not as miferable as myfelf ;—yet, con-
tradiSIion as I am, should die if I heard he was unhappy.
But my sttuation, Ella, is a melancholy one, My harpSichord has lost its fine tone ; nay, is
difcord to my ear.-----Ferdinand is no more the
objedtl exert my little talents to entertain.-—Your Tister, fcb^her forrows will have an end. The profpeD briglitens on every eye but mine.—rl wake without a hope beyond dragging thro’ the day I and pafs whole fleeplefs hours, when all be-Sides me\are at rest.—My father fees me the prey ofdifcontent, but fees it unpitying. When Ferdinand was here, did I droop the head ? Had I a taste for folitude ? This, thisis to be rich !—How wife was that woman, who, to rebuke her huf-band’s avarice, covered his table in a moment of hunger with gold.—Gold cannot ^urchafe content : it cannot purchafe friends : it cannot filence the whifperings of an evil confcience : it cannot buy health , or prolong our days: but it can embitter the enjoyment of them .—Heaven, in its wrath, as fome Poet tells us, furely revealed the shining mifchief.-^—It is the box of Pandora ; nay worfe ; for hope was retained in that.—Gold has jio hope for the wretched, but the hope of Tantalus. It promifes what it never can perform, and tortures us with unavailing expe6lation.
I KNOW not what I write !—Ferdinand has obeyed the command of a stern father. 1 know he commanded him leave me ; but if he has extorted ever fo Solemn a promife from him not to write to me, he has not locked him up from the
life of pen and ink.—The inclination, not the
power.
A N O V E L
10
$
4€
power, is wanting, or he would have Said,
I am Sorbid to correfpond with you ;—place my sslence, therefore, to a just account.—My ' ** heart is with you, though my perfon is con~ fined to this distant fpot.-—Live for me, as I “ will for you.” No, no; not a word.—But I am Satisfied ; yes, you may guefs how 1 am Satisfied, by my complaining.
Lydia!—her filial piety ran away with her. —A fine excufe for broken friendSnip !—And as for you—you must not'be Separated from your dear Mrs. Mildmay.—am chagrined, mortified, unhappy ; and was I to fill whole sheets of paper, it would be all to the Same doleful tune.—Think not fo hardly of me,, however, I conjure you, as I do of my Self. My reafon knows * every thing is right, though my petulance pronounces every
wrong. I long to fee you, converfe with you—Lydia or your brother—any one of you.— all of you.—Is this folly, frenzy ?——If fo, I fear it js what will stick by me, mark my charafter, and govern my pen to the end of my life.
f
I am.
With the tenderest remembrances.
Your, Ac.
tu

C. Fletcher.

\
i ,
E 4
LET-
loi.
C O X H E A T H
LETTER XVI.
Ah, cruel Heaven! that made no cure for love.
OUare troubled with the Spleen^ rny dear girl ; a lady like difeafe ; but I would ^dvife you to shak<* it off.—You fancy yourfelf an unamiabl obje6tyour next whim will be to fancy your Self an inanimate one
Ok
I’d humour yo'u, if you V/as fick j But not when you are fplenetfc.


would' be t6 febd; your distenhst^r, afid.he-<o ne accessory to the fufpenSioii of your fine un-dcf standing. Bestdes you stiould redolledt Ferdinand left you^ and he flatters himfelf he shall find you, a beautiful young damfel, Will;ypu then'let she' wrote in. your forehead—cbiirt a'premaiture old age—tinge every objedf ■ ihshhe fair-Creation with the gloom of your own mind—and, instead of eyes that Sparkle intelligence, and which he was wont to adore, prefent them to his view dimmed by tears, or jaundiced by fufpicion ?—Fye l fye onst !
I
f
Oh be but yourfelf,; and-hi.s homage'he’ll pay. And your empire is folid and Sure.
*
%
- .
Why, madam, we must bend with the occasion, if we would rife Superior to misfortune ; and work out our happinefs, as we are commanded to work out our falvation, with fear and trembling.
I COMMITTED your letter, the instant I read it, to the flanr.es there was no trusting to the
poffibillty
A N O V E 1..
to 5
pofTibility of keeping it to one’s felf. Had Ferdinand feen it, we had been all undone. Be thankful, then, it has fallen into prudent hands ; and when the fit returns, do any thing that’s lawful— but	Every word bearscontagipn withit. Even
I am not proof against its force ; and have been questioned three feveral times, on falling into reveries, what can be the caufe. I impute it to the Artillery, which have been firing their rounds today—to the heat—to every thing—but the fpleen of my friend, communicated to me by her pen. Read this, and Spare me—Lydia—Ferdinand—ail your friends, in future ; for I will keep no more-of your pernicious Secrets.
But you always write much in the fame strain ; from whence I pick out this mortification for my. vanity, viz. that you never fit down to write to me, but when you are in the dumps, or you don’t know	; or are over-run; as in the last in-r
stance of your kindnefs, with the vapours.
I WISH you was within hearing of the noife by which I am now nearly stunned.Your heart' bounds at the idea ! Your heart is, then, a foolish, fluttering thing, and does not know when it is well.—Lydia is in Camp ;—Lydia is furroundecS
by beaux ;----Lydia is within the found of every
kind of martial mufic that can roufe the Soul, or enchant the ear ;—yet Lydia weeps, laments,.
; and though she brings abroad a tolerable face of contentment, it the veriest croaker in ex."n istence :
flghs
For not of themfelves the gay beauties can pleafe.j.;;. We only can taste when the heart is at eafe.
My father, fince Lord Brazen’s departure, hag unbofomed hinifelf. His Lordship fufpedtedMei--
E 5	*	via
io6
C O X H E A T H
%
\in was the favourite, and pointed him out for Such. Mr. Rivers knew of no Such thing,, and therefore difavowed it ;—but the world, he tells us, is a malicious world, and he is well aware would impute an event of that kind to artifice and finesse;—a concerted Scheme between a needy man and a handfome girl, however the refult of chance or destiny,—the vulgar epithet for whatever is unaccountable. To have refufed a Lord, who condescended to honour him So far as to Soli-cit his alliance, would have been to draw the whole Nobility on his back, to punish his boldnefs and poverty of Spirit;—befidea involving a deServ-ing young fellow (Melvin, my dear) and a beloved Son in a fjuarrel; a thirsting for blood, which he thought unjustifiable, and incompatible with humanity.—To stand on our defence, either / against an open or a private enemy, was, he'eon-celved, a duty we ovved our God, our King, and ourfelves; but a fanguinary temper was as hateful as it was diabolical.
To obviate all thefe alarming probabilities, and Save the Camp from confufion, he had refplved on a conduct he Seldom stooped to, and was ill qualified to Support, though it was, in fa61, no-ihing more than honejl diffiTnidation y—and as a proof of the uprightness of that condu6f, it had preserved peace and good harmony, at the fame time that it had neither injured nor deceived any man ; and he hoped and trusted Lord Brazen, fi om his removal, would be led to form new connexions, and forget the poor Lieutenant’s daughter ; to v/hich we all audibly joinjgd our—-So be
it

\-
Mrs. Mildmay, imagining this to .be the
rood limey ventured to hint pretty plainly at Mel-
vin s
A NOVEL.
107
vin’s favourable Sentiments of Mils Ella.
tt
ft
iC
€C
€C
€<
4C
My father replied, ‘‘It was the too common confer quence of young people’s being much together to furprife him ; but if we meant he should believe his confent necessary to our happineSs, we must not precipitate events, but leave them to their natural, their rational courte. There was one avenue not ablolutely blocked up—an avenue of profpery for his children.—It pained him most fenSibly to givEpain, and austerity was the very reverfe of his chara^Ier; unieis when austerity was virtue, We were all young “ enough to wait a turn in our affairs, and not, by yielding to the didlates of a romantic imagination, wound a fond father in the tenderest: part—his honour ; and furnish. bad men with a pretext for calumniating.”
It was univerfaiy agreed and, confessed, that Ke had a right to difpofe of us; and that he had now offered glorious terms, which,.,on our duty, our refpe£t,, our gratitude, should be our rule of conduft.” ‘	/
I NEVER heard him fay fo much in my life. Poverty, ^ a Submission to the hard lines of poverty^,, has heretofore been his perpetual theme to feed on hard meats, rather than let go our inte--grity ;—and welcome every evil, provided dishonour was not in the catalogue.—--Now he bids us -wait;—one avenue of profperity is not abfolutely shut against us. Would to Heaven he had con- -defcendedto-be a little more explicit!—Profperity to his, family was the word-r—■
c<
tt
4€
4€


■Winds catch the Sound !
F*RDINANDi


C O X H E A T H :
Ferdinand, your Ferdinand, has to be lifted out of his prefent obfcurity property—to folicit your hand !
Oh for a Mullc of fire!
a chance to have
then would I paint the change of fcene in proper colourings.—Here is a fpecific for your Ladyship’s Spleen—vapours—every mental difeafe I—What have you more to afk ?—There is one poffible avenue to a re-union with your lover, your friends, on terms of that equality your heart has long given them ; when the bright polish, as my father most jussly calls it, of his fame shall be restored, and Sir Ferdinand bid adieu to every unfFiendly, every unfavourable opinion; when his affection for his godfon shall revive in its fullest force ; when he shall recolleft his infant endearments, his undiiTembled regard for him ; and taking the violence he has done his inclination into the account, in order to be uniformly faithful to the	trust
repofed in him, he will exult in his fon-in-law, and we shall all be happy.
I HUNG about my bcnefafirefs’s neck when my father left us—Melvin cut capers acrofs the mar-
quee—Ferdinand kissed off a falling tear from Lydia’s cheek—-Lydia, the only one, who must still defpair-—But there is, my dear madam, no fuch thing as perfeD biifs on earth : let us not, then, prepare difappointments for ourfelves, by expelling impossibilities at the hands of Providence; I mean impossible in the chain of human affairs, in the csconomy of human existence ; for, as Pope tells us,
Man never is, but always to be bleSs’d j
and
A
NOV E L.
IC9
and we must be content to drink of the mingled cup.—Lydia, however, rejoices in the joy of her friends; and go thou and do like’Wife.
I am, dec.
Ella Rivers.

LETTER XVII,
In folly’s cup still laughs the bubble joy i One profpeU lost, another still we gain. And not a Vanity is given in vain.
EVELLING on revelling!—Now, my dear madam, now am I going to give caufe for a new fit of the vapours, the Spleen, tze, &c. but not from the ignoble motives you imagine.—It is not our joy that excites your envy, as you call it, but your non-participation of it that awakens your grief. Your too faithful and too bufy memory connects the past with the prefent—a long, long line of bitter disappointments and crofs incidents. Lest one Single grievance should not Sufficiently touch your heart, you weep over all you have experienced, and thereby cherish cruel remembrances, the traces of which would otherwiSe wear out in your mind ; and you would, if not a happy, be a contented being.—And So much by way of di-
gression
Melvin
\
no
G O X H E A T H:
Melvin came to Mildmay-Hast yesterday morning with Ferdinand in his hand.—I could not divine what was in the wind; an East-Jndiaman just arrived at Chatham had a very particular friend of his on board, and notiiing would fatisfy the gentleman but we must do his friend the honour to dine with him.—It would be high entertainment he was certain to Mifs Rivers, who had frequently told him she had never Seen any larger vessel thair a Bristol trader.
I ASKED for Lvdia. father.—
She chofe to stay with her Poor, poor Lydia I—Mrs. Mildmay bid

me drefs, and kindly faid she liked the fcheme ex-^ ceffively. «
Ferdinand, being my brother,.could not, you knov/, gallant me ; So I fell to Melvin’s lot ; and the haildiome widow had her handforae fellow as well as Ij shad she not, madam ?—for Ferdinand was he.
We Soon arrived ; for I pafs over all the Smart things I faid on the way, not caring to. play the egotist^—and on iny honour !'was the wit of the company —So that not being difpofed to write dull things, I'omit thO mention cf whatever fell from thejips of my companions, including even my benefadtrefs. In my abfence she may shine ; but, pardon me, the brightest star lofes its lustre when
placed too near theyh??.
V/HAT.an irhmenfe fabric is anEast-India ship ! That drawing one up the fide in a chair is whim-Sical ; and I was obliged to shut my eyes, or I should have betrayed my cowardice: but when once Safe on board, ! was asheroine.
The Captain received us with great poirtenefs. He is a man of breeding, of understanding, of learning—r- (I thought a failor stuck to nayigati-on); but, take my word , for it, he is not a man
of
A N 'O V E L.
lit
0.
9
of taste.----Mrs. Mildway had all his devoirs, in-
fornuch that if Melvin had not been of the party, I should not have had a rmV, I do not mean a com-plaifant thing Said to me all the day ; and I shall always love him for keeping me fo opportunely in charity with myfelf.
The origin of ship-building was the Ark. Indeed, I wonder not So astonishing an invention should not be human. Uninstrudted by the Divinity, my dear, who could have thought'of failing on the bofom of the deep ?—I could be very moral, and very great on this fubjedt; but I check myfdf, and return to the buSmefs of the day.
The state-foom contained many curiostties in the painted glafs, Chinefe wood, and China wares and we were preSented with a regale of Sweetmeats, and Some of the finest wines I ever drank.
We vifited the store-rooms.—What a mine of treasures they are ! I can now account for the dif-treSs and the exultation of thofe that lofe, and thofe that win Such a prize at a period of national hostility.
Th e Captain paraded it from place to place, for his fweet widow’s amuSement ; and, on opening one little cloSet or cabin, I was struck in the most extraordinary manner by the penSive attitude, and elegant, though apparently negledled figure of a young man, who Suddenly withdrew, as not choof-ing to be an objedt of contemplation.
“ What office,” Said I, (as the inquifitive viSitor) “ may that young fellow hold under youa ** Captain F*
“ He is a passenger, madam.
N From the Indies ?” rejoined I,”
The fame, madam.”

He looks unhappy, Mrs. Mildmay
Did you obferve him
«(
Hi
112
G O X FI E A T H
€C
€C
C<
(C
€(
4

He is a /o'yrr perhaps !” faist Melvin. Cruelly feparaied from the woman of his heart !’■’ faid Ferdinand.
I PITY him Sincerely,’’ faid Mrs. Miidmav. let his misfprtunes be what they may.—-The traces of forrow are strong; in his face—a foft. a filent forrow and I always lament forms do not admit me, on inch occassons, to enquire if I could be Serviceable.”
“ That is So like you !” cried my brother-; but I should think Such benevolence as yours might fanftify every deed.
Here the conversation ended ; for the noble Captain had taken the opportunity to flip away ; and now rejoining us, condudled us to the balcony, where it was agreed we fliould pafs the intervening time to the dinner hour.
** I HAVE,” faid the Captain as we took our feats, “ been making interest with that young passenger to give us his company ; but he positively declines dining with us,—and I was glad “ to compound the matter by. my acceptance of ** his promife to join us at tea.”
We thanked him in very high terms for his polite attention to our little whims. — He replied, ** the whims (as I was pleafed to call them) of generous minds ought to be refpedled, and he had only done his duty.”
I LOOKED full at him, and, upon my word, the mist being cleared before my eyes, I found him a very pretty fellow.-—You must know, this was the first compliment in which I had been included.
We dined ; and if I was at a lofs for fubjedt-matter, what a field would that daily aD of our lives furnish me with !—The number and elegance of the dishes—their arrangement—the loyal
healths — choice of wines — fuper-excellent def-
fert
CC
Jv
iC
A N O V E L.
”3
♦
fert—^the delicacies — the perfumes of the East But I am reduced to no fuch extremities, and "therefore fhall hasten into the balcony, to inhale the foft western breezes which are now fanning that cjtiarter of^'the .Dip, drink rny coffee, and impatiently eXpC'dl; the stranger’s visst.
GrAGIOus, as gerifle stranger,' he is here !— Neatnefs irriprovCS his figure Beybnd all imagination.—Melvin—who would not love the fellow ? has feated him by me ; and I will So kindly chat to him, tha't all his cares shall at least be fuipend-ed,' if gratitude does not unlock; his heart.
‘ But I should tell you, the Captain was obliged to praQife adittle fineffe.to get liirn amongst liS. .DiS relations—only his relafioVis I — Would he nO't mix with the relafions of a mari h'e pro-‘‘'‘ feffed to esteem ?” "--^We therefore
RndW/rV each other, or exchahg’4 sh® plain Yes ‘and No during the whole remainder of the timS
4i *

staidon
. ,I W A,s in great hppes.we should have come to the ItridMeidge of who ste Was, and whence he came'"; for, as Yorick fays, I vrahted the traces, from his Seeming worthinefs, through. which my good wishes might reach him, if I never Saw hirn more :' bnt-he Was.D folded up.in. refe'rve, wherh his own history was the question, ‘that We parted, all unknowing, of each other, as we^ had mef, except the acquaintance of a few hours.'
Mrs. Mildmay, on our taking leave, faid, with the freedom of the relationship the Captain had given her, she should expedt to fee him and his young friend at her houfe, under the condudl of Mr Melvin. He only bowed, and the Captain shook his head, as much as to fay, “ That will be impossible !”
1 TOLD
114
C O X H E A T B.:
I TOLD Lydia all I had heard and Seen, at rrry return; and dearly repented my communicative* nefs.—“ Was I Sure it was an East —an Eaft-ln-
diaman p ‘‘ 'Would to God it had been from the
*
“ western world V’ — I had touched the string by which hung all her forrows, and her poor wounded • imagination was for converting shadows into Substances ; as if no youth could be unhappy, no youth could be accomplished, no youth could be amiable, but the youth she loved. — I brought Melvin, Mrs. Mildmay, my brother, to confirm the Impostibility it could be WilSon ; offered to go and alk him in fo many terms who he was; but she wept, and forbade me ever mentioning him more. I have, however, fettled it with Melvin, that he shall place the matter beyond all doubt, by taking an opportunity of politely accounting for his curioSity, to know whether he has any pretenfions to the name of Wilfon or not. And fo‘I clbfe my book on this fpbjcdl, for the
pfeSent,	.... ’ '	■
O u r fweet rofe-bu.d (for she shall < hot be called
Rofe, though'cast in ** Fdramatis per-fonee by the whimSicality of my imagination) was married this morning. — The following are beautiful and liberal fentiments of Gray’s Country Church-yard, in his elegy I
s in this neglefted Spot is laid	„
Some heart once pregnant with celeftiaTfire $ Hands that the rod of Empire might have Sway’d, ^ Or wak’d to extaSy the living Lyre ;
and agreeable, at the Same time, to the ceconomy ©f humanity.— Philofophers, I mean Such as are not borne away by the pride of letters, or their borrowed knowledge from their predecefibrs,con-
fefs

A N O V E L.
ns
feSs that the human capacity is nearly the fame in all ; and that education does not create, it only finishes the great work. The lustre is inherent, however rough the Surface. I check myfelf a Second time ; but the Specimen will give you to un- , derstand how I could, if I was diSpofed, burst forth on this Subject in a blaze of morality.
Peggy and Robin (which is the point I would prove to you) are beings of a Superior order. Her tendernefs for. him is pure as the love of angels, which I affirm to be innate delicacy ; his attachment to her the most liberal that ever warmed a lover’s heart; for her happinefs is evidently dearer to him than his own ; which I do not hefitate to pronounce the most refined and exalted principles of friendship. — To church he has led her, a pa-tern of neatnefs and fimplicity ; and may every happy aufpice await their nuptials!—A little cottage, that Sovereigns might envy, is provided for them ; and may each anniverfary' 'wedding-day they commemorate, find them as amiable and as good as they have shewn themfelves this day of days!
\
And the lads tell the lafles, in hopes to prevail^ They’re as constant as Colin that lives in the dale,'
And with their union I will conclude this my variegated epistle, consisting of joy and grief, hopes and fears, wifdom and folly, friendship, love, and matrimony,
\
Yours, frc.
¥



Rivers

1
n6
C O X H E A T H:
LETTER XVIII.
Can there be fuch, and have they peace of mind !
T
HE poor fellows ^of together, the Lord ws how I on this Heath, for the national pro-teflion, instead of Being put into full feedy as the Jockies phraSe it, that they might perform wonders on the day of battle, are left a prey to harpy Agents ; men who batten on the Ipoils of wretchednefs, and pais in the world for very clever fellows, from the fingle merit of knowing how to accumulate.
Get money, my, Son, honestly If you can j
But get money,
r
L
* \
is..their rhott®, —O let them be banished the haiiiits of men! Tygers and wolves are far lefs ra- ^ pacious than they. — Hunger is a Severe talk-mailer ; it even urges to deeds of felf-dcstruflion ; but your Government Contractors are of So Salvage a. nature; that they biiild themfelves estates,’ and buy themfelves names, by grinding the faces of sheir fpecies, and aggravating the hard lot of the lovver ranks ; on whofe shoulders they never-thelefs lay all their burthens; by whofe labours alone they are enabled to riot'in luxury ; and on vrhofe arm, in an hour of need, they must rest for • the protedion of their ill-gotten property, their liberty, their lives.-v-I feel myfelf warm with my Subject ; but my horror, my indignation at their conduct is too big for words. I cannot characterise them strong enough.—I cannot fufficientiy point the finger of Scorn against them; but
I herewith
A NOVEL.
try
in
I herewith Send you a Sample of the bread provided by them for the fubSistence of a fett of brave and honest fellows, the flower of our British youth the bulwark of British fafery ~ the shield of your, of mine, of every inhabitant of this kingdom’s defence.—And oh that, as a punishment in Some degree adequate to their crimes, it was but in my power to keep them to fuch hard meat for the enfuing three months!—How py would fuch power render me 1
But is it not astonishing. Government does not interfere ? An ample fum is iffued from our Treafury amply to provide food fit for men. Look on the bread the foldiery, now encamped to repel the inroads of the enemy, are required to eat, and tell me, would yow give it to your hogs ? —Mrs. Mildmay is, however, herfelf on this, as well as every other occafion ; and Melvin proves he is a man of humanity : —Heaven’s vicegerents here below ! — and Heaven will be their bright, their glorious reward.
Melvin and Mrs. Mildmay are acquainted with fome of the first perfonages in the Camp ; an honour my father and Lydia decline; but Dukes and Duchesses are amiable and agreeable perfonages with me, when their minds do not diS-grace their titles, or their fortunes permitted to rujl in their poffelTion.
I AM to dine this day in a ducal pavilion. — But wherefore 1, of all my family I you will perhaps afk.—Becaufe, mydearmadam, humility is their governing principle — faucinefs mine—and every one in their humour, the ton of the Camp.
I TOLD you there were Serjeant Kites enough in the field. — Making our polite tour the other morning (for you are Nobody, if you do not appear on horfeback in the field at morning-exercife),
I perceived
\

nS
G O X H E A T H

t
1 !
r »

, 4
I
i- '■ i;

€C
%C
1 perceived a great fellow, at the head of a little handful of new recruits, teaching them the ufe of their arms. We had fcarcely rode by, before a clamour of voices induced us to turn our heads, when we beheld a decent country-woman, about fifty years old, endeavouring to break from the hold of a countryman, her friend. — “ I will come at him ! — I will tear the fellow’s eyes out that trepanned him I	—Why, John At-
kins, John Atkins, have you“ no bowels to stand by and fee your mother ufed thus r” Serjeant Kite w^as too much accustomed to Such fights to be interrupted by them in his duty. He commanded Away, and the young lads obeyed; nor could I distinguish which, of all the little groupe, was the good woman’s Son.
Melvin, who was of our party, made the Serjeant understand he wished him to deSist exer-icifing: he accordingly, with all Suitable dignity, bid them ground their firelocks. The countrywoman was now no longer to be kept within ; bounds. She flew to her boy, bedew-^cd him with her tears, and all a mother’s anguish Seemed to rend her heart. I felt my Self much affedfed : nature finds the way to nature’s feelings- I advanced, and begged leave to aSk the poor woman a qiief-tion.
He was the kindest-fouled lad on earth, she Taid, fill the Devil, in a human shape, tempted him to stave his master and his mother to fight for the King. She wished the King was there, she would give him his own. A. parent was not Jefs a parent, for being poor ; and he had children enough to teach him to be foft-natured to his fuB-jedis.—But she would uphold it, he knew nought of the doings of thofe listing fellows, who bewitched young lads, and got them to buy a red
coat
I'i
tii
ii'
(M »■ ;
A K O V E L.
Uf
* . ^
ioat with the heart’s-blopd of their mothers, whereof they ought to be hung up as high as ever Hantian was.”
Melvin alked the Serjeant how the matter was.—“ Why,” Said Kite,‘' putting himfelf in attitude, “ an’ pleafe your Honour, the younglad has good gentleman^Uke blood in his veins, and wished to Serve the King ; whereupon I nailed him to his wish. Your Honour Sees how I
tt
it
it
a
am abuSed for So doing.”
The good woman was for flying at Kite, as she declared it, to tear his eyes out, for the mofi bafeji and mojl decei’vingejl fellow on earth. •— The youth was next called upon to Speak ; and it appeared, that, like Captain Shandy, his heart had always flown out at the beating of a drum, from an impulSe Heaven had implanted therein ; that he had offered himfelf, as Kite represented, for a Soldier ; and that if his mother would only be content, he should be quite happy.
‘ We rode back with her to my father’s marquee, and uSed every possible argument to reconcile her to her Son’s conduft; but without effefil; until I happened to let drop, that I believe there would be no war at last. She looked upon me for a Second ; then wiping her eyes Said, “ God’s will be done ! — It was, to be Sure, no great matter whether the boy was here, or whether he was there, provided there was no fighting : but to have him Smashed to pieces before the mouth of a cannon was grevious, and would as Surely be the death of her, as ever she was born.”
We gave her a glafs of generous wine, and an invitation to call upon us once a-week. So long as we were in Camp. Melvin put half a-crown in her hand, and diredled her to her Son’s tent, to convejSe with him without restraint; but told her,
she
t%0
C O X H E A T H:
* •
iho must be more of an EngUsh-woman than to try to make a coward of him. —She curtssed at every word ; blessed our ladyships a thoufand times for our goodnels to a poor body like she, that might have dropped down for want of refreshment before thou lands would have taken pity on. her, a» we had done ; and Sfelt, myfelf quite as well fa-tisfied as if I had received the benediftion of a Bishop. But though we thus contrived to chear this honest creature’s Spirits, and reconcile her to the abfence of her child, the Serjeant, I could perceive, was as ^rant a Kite as ever bore a halberd.-—W hen things come a crofs one in the manner this did, it is impoffibie to deny them a hearing ; otherwi|e lash no questions,ffpr conScience-fake, lest I should be drummed off the Heath, for % fomenter of difcontent in the troops.
J KNOW not hov/my Camp-adventures may amufe you, ■— but I can only write on what I am acquainted with •—As for the world ,and all its vanities, its bustlings, its contentions, we difdainto
think of it: our martial affairs and martial charac-
• ^
ters engrofs our whole attention ; and fo much do we feel our own confequence— we that have fathers, brothers, Ipyers in the fields—that we overlook what is called the civit part of Society, and deem them only fit for vegetation ; though our top-fails would be finely lowered, if the French durst attempt an invaSion.—I fly the thought, and hasten to fubfcribe myfelf
Yours, &c. - .
Ella Rivers.
L E T-
A NOV E h
rzt
LETTER XIX.
#•
V :
Rcafon thus with Life : If I do lofe thee,
Fd lofe a thing which none but fools,would keep.
I N short, my dear madam, you now iliave me almost as fplenetic as your fweet Self. The lights and shades of existence, when a tolerable balance is preferyed between them, have a fine and beautiful effedl ; but when dark shadows alone are visible, not a gilded cloud left tochear the imagination, our Spirits droop—we lofe our fast holds — we welcome difiblution.
Wilson is dead I —^^Poor Melvin was the mef-fenger of the melancholy tidings, in confequence of the enquiry I put him upon making with the stranger.
. His friend indeed, the Captain, was gone to London, before he had an opportunity of revifit-ing Chatham, and the ship had proceeded up the River, with the stranger on board: but bn men--tioning the affair to another friend of his who lately come over from the American continent, he^ was informed that foon after the poor unfortunate Wilfon’s elopement from his father, he was taken by a party of Indians in friendship with the Con-grefs, who, in hopes of reward, brought his Scalp (I shudder to write it) as an evidence of his being stain ; though they affirmed they would have taken him alive, if he had not refisted.'
N ow, then, all is at an end ! and iiihy Lydia' ceafe to weep. Since she must weep in vain I — Uncertainty tortured, this news has stabbed her heart ; but! hope the wound will not be mortal.
VOL. I.
F
Had
I
l2Z‘
C O X H E A r H
Had he been a hufband, the most tender and amiable of hulbands, fhe must have reSigned him, I am, my dear, for picking comfort even out of misfortune. She is no longer a widow bewitched ; and who’knows' what time may do tow bending her mind favourably,, where fome other man of merit is concerned ?
Death is, however, at prefent the dreary ob-je^ on-Which her thoughts are fixed,
I
To die is landing on Some peaceful stiore, >
Where never biilovi'^s beat, or tempests roar: t - E’er well we feel the friendly stroke—’tis o’er, j
Eafes the Lover, fets the Captive free,.
. And, though a tyrant, offers Liberty.
The heart, oh feme occafions, must be left to itfelf, and can best work out its own cure. To Soothe in the first paroxyfms of grief, is. to oppofe the difeharge of the weight under which we arc-Sinking; great judgment, therefore, as well as great tendernefs, is neceffary in the exercife of the condoling art; to take our Sorrows at their ebb, to Suit the constitutional humour of the patient, and know how to be Silent when the flood returns again., .....
You know not what a complete mistreSs I am of this art ; and my Lydia shall reap the benefit of it. She is now fitting in the lumber-tent, in all the luxury of folitude and tears. I will drop in upon her, as by accident; Seem ready to retire, if she does not wish me to stay ; follow her lead, on whatever fubjed she may start ; weep with her till 'she, for my Sake, defists weeping; shew her how much my health and happinefs is in her hands—a generous mind will go great lengths
to
•K ' N' O ^ V‘.D' t.

^23
amend ; shhs will I steal her froi^i
until she may be trusted with the fecret motives Or my conduflnotto tax her gratitude, but fncite K'eS tb finish tbe work I have begun, by shewing h%f‘shfer own power, if she will but ex-,ert it. ,	.	.	,	• ,
‘ Wh“at a' cHkin' there Is {n hurnkn events I To think that our goinsf on hoard an Incfiaman should lead' to thiis rrtipbrtafit diSc'overy ; that from the East we should learn (as it were) intelligence from the West 1—Poor Wilfoii ! his fate was aft untimely one. I — Yoiith, beauty, valour, virtue;, all levelled'at a stroke 1 —Death rnakes no distinc-lion ; will not fufpend his fatal dart,, be mepSead-
in^a aHbrcible as they may ;C ;.
i I
Or hears tlie liawK, when Pfiiloraela stng.s ;
• ♦
' • ♦ •
is the grand enemy of our nature ; and in .wh^t stage'of our existence is it' that we can ,call,oun-
Selves Secure frpfn his attacks V hurht)j£S||the pride of prorperity, and lays tste hopes,of ifie ,ai^^
id the dust.—Buf perhaps you willtell ifie that though this may be veryy«(?twritihg. It is hq^ thing elffe ; and that you wish me to stick to bufi^ iiefs, or history.
But Soft, if you pleafe, ,my dearest ma43:iTr I i—I am ho fabulist.—The age of chlyhlry andltSe reigh' of giants is at ari end. I ash a mere hiatterr ®f-fa6t woman: but if fi6tioh is your taste, you
0
nna rne a genius., - x ou rernind. rne ot.my
enga'geshent ata ducal sharquee — I ash your most
humble fervant, arid ash now fetting shyfelf in array to give you your defired SatisfaDion'. . ’ Yostk peoplV Or stuality;, as they areiaf’the fdji of t^ng ia dfeYs, 'iri fashionable knowr
fo Wheh tiiey happ^^ to be per-
F 2	Sons
124
C OX H E AT H

Sons of good-nature and good understandings excel all others in gdod-breeding ; lit least the douceurs of behaviour, which in them are fo many
condefcenSions, are fo engaging., fo winning, that
they may command the affedions pt all who know therii.	*
A YouiSiG Duchefs, \yhpfe rnotto is
to be,	‘	^
Youth’s the feafbn made for joy,	'
has a heart, nevertheless, formed for every focis! enjoyment. She no fooner understood who I was, than approaching me v/ith an air of long acquain' tance, she told me she conSidered me as the firll woman in the company .: — “ Not, fair lady,” continued she, “ frolrn any merit of your own -
for that ntiust be a future, consideration but from being the daughter of the most experi* enced Officer in the field; and did I poITefs any court-interest, I would foon Speak him
into the rank he is entitled to.’*
I WAS Softened.; it was a tender string.; butl was.at the Same time delighted. No flattery
toiild have been So irifinuatlng, no incenfe more
4€
a
ft
«<
»
and I own, 1 became ambitious for an
humble share in her good opinion.
, Some .time aster, having gazed on me a
fdw moments,. with the greatest good-humour in
her face,—“ I fiippofe,” faid she, you would
have us look upon your mode of dresting as
token of ybur humiUty; but-the deception will
not pafs ; it is Jiudied elegance, calculated to
put the labours of the toilette out ofeounten-
ance. What fay you, ray Lrord, (turning to
a ‘ of falhion vvho^ fat next her) to bring
a Biirinto your^H	Houfe, for all wo-
to follow ^x^nrirpie f iDon^t you think
the
4C
€t
4C
4€


<
u
■ T
\
A N O V L l:
' c r I 125
' ?
€<
the Fublic (the wifer part , of it I mean) would^ be vassly obliged to you?”
Melvin was in fuch raptures on the occasson,. thari expe6;ed hini to dance-a"hornpipe,	>,
.DU RiNG*pur dinner, whicli was Splendid, and,, for the honour of the donor be it mentioned, the? remnants of which were given to the poor men who happened to be on duty, we had the finest concert of rhartial' m'ujicl ever heard performed in my life ; the tunes were'So happily chofen, the va-. riafidns So ‘beautiful, and the whole fp ex«quifitlyj eixecuted : but it was winding’up the foul to the, litrhdst pitch' of rational dplight; it was touching, the highest ltey>-note Oif harmony ; it was — I verily believe, what 1 shall never taste again ; nor can I wonder
‘The World’s Victor stood Subdued by found,
d -	r ^	- .i ^	y	^	»
/	ft	•
SLit shpifarhous .Alexandrian feast ; a feast of im-mortal memory. ,,,, .	^	,
Toasts were then given ; amongst the num-» her of which, a fluttering little damfel gave Lord' Brazen ; fo that even lord Brazen, my dear, has his admirers. Who shall then be fo finfulastodef-
;	. r	■ '	" 1 »	•	•	'*	'A
pair ? ■	.	^	. •, , ■ .
Melvin’s mind was fo Sweetly attuned by the honpurs and distinctions paid to his fair mif-trefs, that he Sung like a nightiiigale, at the first word. To fay the truth, I never faw hirn fuch gbod cbmpahy ; and' it is far from a difagreeable circumstance to have a man improve bn acquaintance.
V	f
Mrs. Mildmay'gave thi whole groupe an invitation to her houfe, which was accepted* to an! individual : we have not, therefore, parted like men without hope of feeing each other more,
'	'	3	Melvin,
126
C p X a E -A X H:
• '	\ ^	<	V f ■	*
Melvin, a filly fellow ! will needs be his stall
too; fo that we have the profpe£l: of eating and drjnking frorn one end of tfie Camp to the other: but we have nothing effe to dp, and little elle to tstnk of,, blit passingTirpe as merrily off our hands' a's DoffibSe, and leave the eVents of futurity iii the,
■,"j\	•	Vi ; ;0 ’IfiO'O:'' .Ci Kit
r
- ‘ I *
rAx-
In mixed combanv, you and I have often ob-'
/•'	1 'I	V ‘ r \\	■ r ■ V ' '	■ 'i
lerved it, there occurs Imall matters ror the exer-
' t	•	;
father than
is
cite of;th'e finer feelings.—Art, Nature, taktes tbe-stad.“‘, ^The wit than polite Snip fnapi" dnH ’^fe whole d. medley ofHaffVohablB Tstst-c^ ;
’ ‘IF:	'	‘	• I'.•-V ' ,-ri^' off,. t ; •
9	• *■
little better
a /
/
and 1 have'
^	4 r •
» '.D	•’ 1 ‘ I
rea‘fon t'0 believe/ thd'higaef we 'go iij life, this
-t 'l i.v ^f-1 ■>:• • - .7coiintinl	i '>n
ihofe tfie dbfe'rvattbn’vyill hdld-gpbd.
Ma Nof
:•» r t
■ 'A
lonv
were ce
O	•i»	■	. n 7,r
rtdinly bii-6^
shed
preaiant
in the courfe of the day I am defcribin fion,'i gfant you ;) and f arii not fusticientiy dex-
l^I1ialSleave*^the I-low
ground I am born to shine upon — as you
/ r T; r-r	• \rvrr%o • < r	t1*l I / S
p£ertf and pyerFknovy you
dfid'the What to Vohf mwn'hWagipaTidh : only daiming an; ejceeption in my D,ucheis'’s favour, W'hofedvery'frn'ile'had meaning, had diiiinction' in it,.and every, word befpoke the .woman of breed-*
'•V I	A.>3-;rxri fr	D.nm ? I't! Vr ■ r *
ing and ienlshHity.	.	. ,	i .. .
’'‘TSa'Ke ndtitlj-' tb^s, is ope of my l^bPdre^^ ties.—> Simplicity is my fortefri-natuie: fny dadstg original ; do me the justice to, aUow rne,''at .lepss, to be a very tolerable copyist.
t'
, r- ■ <
1, am

v.> i
c*
: r. - f y . ■
7	'	» 5 i ' \ f
t \ A A r
’ I 9 : \ T

r'
C	S.
■ ^
Ella Rivers !
L E r-
A NOVEL.
r
j» ■
/
~~ t -
LETTER
Tate phyfic. Pomp j
Expofe thyfelf to feel what v/retches feel, That thou may’ll iliake the fuperflux to them. And ihew the Gods more juft.
N
UMBERS of the poor men are ill ! —-my dear, had you once feen the inSide of a military hofpital, as I have Seen it, how would you join with me in execrating the wretches who mul--tiply misfortune on misfortune by thest cruel rapine !	’
Hospitals, I gr^int you, are neceffary, are Ihappy receptacles for the stck ; and the stjrgeons riow in camp with us want neither (kill or huma-^lity ; but custom hardens (the heart, nurfes grow mercenary, the drooping head wants its Smoothed
, the parched lips refreshing moisture oft-ner, 'much oftener in hofpitals, than inuny earthly sstuation; beSides all wh'tch, there are fUch daings as	pupils, butcherlng-^i^iK^ntii vyhb
.can cut and hack their Species only to try experi-•ments ; and if there is one infernal punishment worfe than another, it will Surely fall on their heads.
4
Mrs. Mildmay has made them a prefent of a ventilator of a new construdlion, and we went
to See it worked. She, moreover, has got leave to put two women in at her own expence, who are Supplied with a certain quantity of broth each Succeeding day from the Hall, to be given indiscriminately to thoSe who can eat. But the hof-pital, dreadful as it now appears to me,, is.% So-
F 4	vereignty.
I
I 1
128
C O X H E A T H ':
> I
1 ■ t '
vcreignty, I am told, to what a change of feafon will render it ; when whole companies of poor fellows will be attacked with the ufual diforders of a camp—fevers, fore throats, agues, with many melancholy, &c. &c.
But furely, at the prefent critical time, when men are So hard to be got, the Governrneht will lake care of thofe already entered into their fer-vice, and Suffer the poor fellows to go into winter-quarters, before it becomes dangerous, not to .fay fatal, to steep in the open air as it were : for the damps penetrate every crevice of the tents ; and the cloth-awnings area poor defence againfl: difeafes, when the element is impregnated with Them, -and we inhale them with every breath we draw.	;
, f
‘ These arfe matters, however, that strike not 'Upon the-minds of the fpeflators, who look upori -a Camp as children do upon a raree-show-—-a itiofl 'pleafureable Scene ; and think it a hardship to stay at home in peace and plenty. — Such falfe judg^ ments do common minds form on most public occastons!
d News-papers are, moreover, calculated to •inflame the paffions, and feed the-errors of all ranks of people. All is mirth arid festivity I never once remembering, that the parade of Majesty ■Jtfelfoften covers an aching heart ; —-that the bustles of a Camp are a w/7 for its mifery, a$ iitia^tiaSifiufic is intended to shield the ear from piercing groans in the day of battle. This, all ^his is the chicane of existence ; and happy are they who live and die without detedling the cheat ! It is fatal, in fome cafes, to push our enquiries too far; though it is difficult to draw the line, except by thofe of stow feelings or constitutional
discretion---I hope I make my Self understood,
when
A NOVEL.
12,
when I reafon thus profoundly ; though, to con-fefs the truth, I frequently puzzle myfelf.
Mrs. Mildmay is one of thofe quick Spirits who cannot stop to develope the arcana of life. Things, with her, are either right or wrong j; and stle goes to the bottom of them at once. The oppressed must be relieved, the finking Supported, the hungry fed, and that on the instant : it' is ^ time enough afterwards, she infists upon it, to -enquire into their merits. The good are retained on her list, and, having once tasted her bounty, . are understood to have claims to her further con-.-fideration.
♦
The bad are made Senfible they have robbed ' a worthier being of the benefits they have obtained ; but that, as it is never too late to mend, they shall not want any proper assistance in the reformation of their manners, or adoption of industry. Hence it would be endlefs to tell you what an angcT of peace, of repentance, ofTav- -ing, and of rewarding, she is in Society;
Ferdinand has had another pair of Colours offered to him, but has again declined. He is re-folved to Serve his Majesty, this campaign, a vo-.
lunteer. He should rank too near a father he re-
' \
veres, and perhaps wound him by the partial destiny of a young man, who, in his first campaign, could rife next in command to him who had Spent two-thirds of his life in the field. — Generous Ferdinand !—-But we dare not tell my fa-tlier this, lest he should difapprove our eondudl. May it proved wholefome rebuke to thofe who. could neglect fuch a man as poor Lieutenant Rivers.
I EXPECT this piece of news should'be agreeable to you- A Soldier’s life is not', I can perceive, my brother’s choice ; but he must quit it
F 5	with
m
C o X H E A T H
^ \
with honour. A period of peace will enable hint, to start on what ground he pleaSes: he must not deSert the fervice in war, unlefs you wilh him to be mai;hed down for a poltroon.
I d o think Lydia begins to be more refigned ; but her father is now the whole world to her. She is his never-failing companion : let who will make parties, you leave her and find her at the paternaS fide, and she stems to have broke hands with the world.
f •• -
This is, however,, a good first step, a happy diverSion oS her . mind from its melancholy contemplations. Her father is a grave, not a dejeft-ed man ; his cpnverfation, though not laughable, is highly entertaining ; he has all the foftnefs of our fex, with all the manlinefs of his own ; and will infenfibly communicate leffons of fortitude and of resignation to her heart — blighted in her earliest bloom. Biit the difference, I fear, is, that her heaven is not upon earth, but in the bright manfipns of eternity, where Sorrow shall be no more, ,and patient fuffering receive its crown of glorious immortality.
If it were not for this alky, I cast forefee this headlong vivacity of mine \vopId betray me into a 'million of little inconVjenienpies; but when I feel any malicious or any giddy prppenfity stirring in, my bofom, I think of Lydia’s Sorrows, and am regulated in an instant.
Melvin has had a fine time of it, on her ac-
w	•	4	;	»	.	.
count ; for, do you know, madam, I am naturally a coquet ; that is, I love to put the liberality of the naafculine heart to the test. — He is no liiishand for me, who could doubt either my prudence or my fiocerity in a fingle j^nstance. jea-lonfy is the, marstof a mean, and a narrow fpul ; ,
■	.	•	and
% '

1 ' ri
A N O V E
and she who can be flattered, deferves to be en-flaved by it; deferves to be led about in its chains,, like Bajazet in his cage, and never fleeping or waking, be able to withdraw herfelf from the eye of (ufpicion.
The man who is capable of forming deflgns OiH a woman for treating shim like a friend, is a rep-iile, and should be fpurned accordingly. Frank-nefs and levity are as oppoSite and as distinguishr able as the elements ; and I pity — I recall that word — I defpife the ignorant, the uniniprmed foul, which does not know them at first fight on the fpot, and does not fquare his condudl; therebyi
Ferdinand is quite a miikfop ! — So many lures as have been thrown out to him —io g-iar-ingly, fo invitingly thrown out—he might furely be allowed toamufe himfelf with faying loft things at fuch a distance without offence, one woiuld imagine, to your imperial Majesty.—But no;: bo moves along as if every thought of his heart was naked and open before you, and that he must blush to be detefied in this, or defcend to equivo-cation to defend that, and preferve your good opi--nion. Hold him then for what he k, the ckoi'eesh of all choice fwains, a miracle of constancy, a.
But he is Ferdinand Rivers, and your most devoted Servant ; and, should the avenue my fathep hints at be once happily opened, with jthe pen oF a ready writer would he tell you as much; though he could not with more Sincerity than myfelf aF>-Sure you of his unaltered and unalterable affe,(5tiom';
^	. t i f i	if. •
Ella Rivers.

LET
ii
II
tl
13 a
4
/
COX HEATH
It

' ' ' \ -
letter XXI.
'	'	y
i
M Y father is grown quite gay ; lets off his
his bans motSf and appears to be the happiest man
in the creation. He put Mrs. Mildmay into her
coach last night with all the gallantry imaginable.
Was I general Officer, (Said he) madam, I
would tell you what pleafure your company
gives me ; though, believe me, not a Gene-
ralistimo could taste it more fenssbly than my-felf.”

ii
ii
ii
ii
her feelings
ti
<(
it
<(
It is the Camp air (faid Mrs. Mildmay,) that is beginning to operate, my good fir, on your Spirits. It always exhilirates mine, and “ 'that makes me your So frequent viSitant. I will not alk you, therefore, to let us fee you “ at Mildmay-Hall I”
The dear amiable woman could not conceal
-	-	'	‘ T
: it was, my Caroline, the only gallant thing he had ever faid to her stnce my mother’s death. “ You can have no notion, Ella,” faid she, as we went home, “ what an agreeable fellow your father was in the days of his youth ; and had he been eafy in his circumstances, I have often thought your mother would have been the most enviable woman upon earth.—But did you obferve the poor Thing’s stroke of vivacity ?”	. <
** I DID, madam, and was agreeably furprifed at it.”
“ H ow it became him ! —-—He looked for once. Ella, like himfelf ! —He was exceed-** ingly handfome before he received all his ugly
, ,	“ wounds.
ii
a
A NOVEL.
353
■ T	*
wounds, and had his heart broke down by distrefs and diiappointments.”
She Sighed, and pretended to fee fomewhat worth her notice at her window ; but she did not hide her fenSibility from me, dexterous as she fancied she was at finesse.— I wish, my father had her fortune. She should Soon be Mrs. Rivers, if my voice could make her fo.
Melvin was afked the next day, if his friend’i vivacity was lost upon him. — It was. — She bid me repeat it. — I begged to be excufed, as it was in much better hands. She blushed—heSitated— Honest Conkience, what blunders dost thou ber
* A	*	C	*	k	^
tray us into ? -— but got it out at last. -— Melvin vowed abruptly, they would niake the most amiable couple on earth. — I was frightened ; but it was too pieafurable a fubje^, to allow her to take exceptions at trifles. She laughed it off ex-? tremely well, for a first attempt; and the ice once broke, I shall never be fo abundantiy trou-* bled with my delicacies again, as I have been.
Lydia, Ferdinand, everyone was told of the poor Lieutenant’s gaiete de ceeurf and every one wished it might continue.
But what is to be done ? — Should I mention my fufpicions to my father, of the interest he holds in Mrs. Mildmay’s affedfions, he would instantly shrink back into his referye, and you know she cannot afk him. Well, let Nature do her own work, I fay ; and Destiny weave, the necessary web.—I repeat it, if it is their destiny, they will come together at last.	'
Next to my father, it is my opinion Melvin stands highest in her favour. — Melvin ! — I fur-prife you. — Why fo, my dear madam ? We do not all fee with the fame eyes. — She confesses Ferdinand is a very pretty fellow, but he wants
' animation :
: I

: t

I ,
I .
t
I ‘
11 I I
: I
I i
U4
C O X H £ A T H,:
animation ;—and she has not the Same reafon as yourfelf to be pstafed with him on that account.,
I ADVISED Melvin, on our first acquaintance, to carry his devoirs to my benelactrels; — but he was not ambitious, and chole to stop short at l^er humble friend. But I now find it would have been to no purpofe ; for Rivhrs is tiie man of men, in her estimation. — I, for my part, honour her for her taste ; for were I not his child, I would tell you, Ineverfaw his fuperior yet, and Seldom his equaS Ferdinand, you may remember, is very hiro- Apropos o,f Ferdinand ; he had the rnodesty,, the'other day, tp alk me to indulge him wttst a fight of youCletters' — They would amufe him, and he'would guardrhem as his dearest treafure. “ But, my dear Sir,” (Said I) ** will that be -adding the part of a friend—nay, of a woman of honour—to betray a confidential correfpon-“ dence So we fetsted it, that I should alk. your leave, and having no letters but dolorous ones in rny hands, I hereby conjure you to write me Such a one as is fit to shew a young fpldier and a lover, at the distance of d hundred miles from
^	r f
hismistrefs.
Though, by the bye, I don’t like the re-; and think I ought to acquaint my father with if, as it is an infringement of articles, an aft of indirect difobedience. Biit, as Mrs. Mildmay fays, it is the Camp air which affects., which Softens him ; and he languishes to read you, fince he must not hear from you. Take notice, I shall impatiently expedt your orders; for your orders shall be my rule of conduft. Adieu,
enfant,
,	Et croyez-tnoi toujours
I	Kotre ires cAere
Ella Rivers.
let*
A N O V E L.
let T E R XXII.
1 , • * ^
Adieu to grief, and jealous Sear,
Love aud Hamiohy dwell here ,!
GRAND exerciSe brought iis again to th^
Camp early yesterday morning. What ^ noble fight it was ! Nor am I clear which d^feryed rnpst applaufe, Tste Commanders or common men : stut to do justice to both, they appeared all peHeaiv, welstddciplined, aijcl no lefs ^ble than willing ti guard their Country from iriyafioa. ""	: '
We adjourned to my father’s tent, to breakr
our arrival; for £h§ would not be prevailed on to tak^ an airing,
though my benefaaref? offered to go hedolf in the* coach she had brought for her accommodation, and fend back our horfes. The gentlemen shon
r XJ
t •
joined us.
Mr. Rivs^rs was as gallant as on our parting an evening or two ago, proper notice of which you received in my last ; faid the Heath had done more towards the improvement of the ladies complexions, than all the imports from France in the last half century : he had not for many years be-steld fo many blooming cheeks. — “ Nor is your countenance, madam,” added he, addresting Mrs. Mildmay, “ lefs indebted than your neighbours to air and exercife”—Mrs. Mildmay was his very humble Servant.
But, Captain Melvin,” Said my father, turning kindly towards him, “ methinks we ‘f might have hoped for an iiivitatiqn to youj ** tent before this tirpe ?”
*	-..ti	t	^
“If
1!-36
C O X H E A T H
‘.f
i
€
€
€
€
4
“ If I could have flattered myfelf,” returned Melvin, that Mr. Rivers would have done me the honour—”
“ This is a droll way, my young friend, of paying court to the ladies.’^
“ My dear Sir,” cried Melvin, there could be no happinefs without you. We have but one mind in this friendly circle, one fentiment on that fubjeft.’^
** Command me then,” Said my father, I shall be pleafed to attend you.”
It is a fine thing,” faid Mrs. Mildmay, to be a favourite I I have invited my old acquaintance to Mildmay-Hall for Successive months; yet has he never once condefcended to take it in his route. We will not receive him how, Ella, if he would offer to come tomorrow.”
•	_ 4
*‘Tf I do not accept that challenge, madam, I am a Turk ; and my Lydia shall for once, be her father’s Second.” '
Thus humouroufly did he make an engagement that delighted us all, — and will be the firfl poor Lydia has entered into Since her arrival at Camp. We shall fetch them ourfelves in the rnorning.
I BEGGED Mrs. Mildmay, as we returned home, to ride in front of the huts occupied by the women and children ; — and we were infinitely entertained. A boy in petticoats —the lovlieft you can imagine, and clean as a filver penny—ran out, and told one of the fervants, (a young lad) fie would fight him, and tie one hand behind him. A e called him to us, and aiked him what he would be. ** A Corporal, he replied, as his .Daddy was. But stop a moment, fays he, and “ you shall fee me exercife.’*
Into
(
f
A
NO V E U

• •
/*
Into the hut he went, and returned onthein-llant with a Im.ill crab-stiek ; then with the most graceful air and martial deportment, he not only gave the word of command, but performed every manoeuvre of common exercife.
«<

4i
“ You ought,” laid Mrs. Mildmay, at lea^ to be a Captain.”
** Where is your mother ?” demanded I. • *t Within, with the babes.”
What ! young babes ?
** The old woman,” he fald, ** brought them to her \eflerday morning.”
We will alight,” faid my (and every body’s) benefa£lrefs,“ and look at them.”	>
There she was—as neat as hands could make her—stretched out on a straw-bed, but comfortably fortified with blankets, and two of thp Sweetest infants (boys) I ever beheld, in hef arms.
“ Have you no one to take care of you Said Mrs. Mildmay.	I
Her neighbours*
V And what have you to fubSist upon ?”	,
tt Water-gruel.”
She gave the little Soldier five shillings, and wtf departed.—** We will bring her feme better pro^« vifions, Ella, in the morning.”	:
As we passed on, a girl, about nineteen years old caught, and fixed our attention. She ha,d been led to the door of the hut, and was therp Seated for a little air. Sicknefs and Sorrow fat on
her cheek
t	V ■'
We afked her difofder.	,
“ She believed a confumptibn.”
** How long had she been in cariip ?”
** Nine weeks.”
** Was she in health at her* arrival there V*
Tkars
IS
Id

ii!
In
l*T
ft:
.1
ii
1-
;
ft
t
I

-1
1
ti

r»
t

if
i'.

II
■I:
a
H t
It :
(1 ^ {
f .
1 t
!it
138
COXHEATH
Tear§ started in her eyes.
health.’’
€€
€i

€(
€€
€(
4i
44
44
Let me not pain you,” Said Mrs. Mild-may, ** I only wisti to know how to be Service-f* able to you.”
. Sh e could, not contain herstlS, but wept bitterly.—	have not,” Said stie, **a friend on earth,
** n,or do I deferve one !—A father’s curSe hangt over my head 1 — But it was, in Some degree, his own faultthat I followed the poor fellow I am novy with ; for he turned me Out of doors, becaufe I would not promiSe not to think of birp> after an acquaintance of many months; and here I now am in the most forlorn of all
V	«	•	I
conditions..”
' V Is he kind to you ?”
** He was kindnefs.itfelS, she Said. But hco,uld.a poor yoiing fellow do ? —Her appetite fqr trbarfe rneats was gone, and he hail noCwherewith .to buy better.—If she was once dead, it would b'fe happy for him ; it broke his heart to lee her dying by inches.”	'
J^-RE you married Said Mrs. Mildmay. She' shooki^her head. — “ 'Not in the Sight of map,” she replied,- fo foop as she could fpeak ;
but in the fight of God ; and they neither of shem wished for stetter luck than to be able to have all thinsrs rierhr between them.
“ But you 'must get well,” Said Mrs. Mildmay, “ or it will be to little purpofe whether you are marrledor not as to this world.”
“ Ak, madam !” cried she, “ aU my distrefs is to know how our . not being, married will stand against me in the next.”
Mrs.,Mildmay told hery “God knew the
heart, and the upiightnefs of its intentions ; shat
it was certainly her duty to be married, if she

7>
lived
0
tl
d t
‘ I
A N .D V E L.
m
lived ; but if she died, earnestly in,tending it, she
need not feat cohdernnation with Heaven ; — for; Heaven always accepted the will to do good.”
' Ir she was Sure of that, it wouldshe : more than
half her cure ; but a Clergyrnan had tpid ster, she. Was a strumpet ; and thabstrumpets naust ,nshstop.e ,
to enter into the kingdom of heayeri*”	;
D Who was this rigid piece of divinity ?” .
** A DIGNIFIED gentlema^n, who had a iivT> irig in Kent, and took frequent airings to the.
The women laughed at her, indeed, for. niinding hirii ; but they were not dyin^, as sh<t:-Was. beSides, they shad learned notito care about^ either their words dr behaviour, and shocked her by th e ir talk, w h e n e ^is r t hey ca me n ear h e r.' ’
THJ.S is a fecond Annette,” wshi
; I wish I could fee her Lubin.”
^	.	i ' ’ : ^	■; f f ri T	i :
Th
r l > 9-^ • t C/, ‘	\	’ ' * ^	^	^ T'-T' I
the cdryfeduehce of'our visst. 1
b|Sng
Him, arid told, ‘Mrs. 'Bstijstshay,’ wlio'bld come in, WiihsthaSgraoiopVlqo	.
feiV every,sheart at oale, and .oncpurago^ tshd jatr. most droppings ofshistrested nat^ure.
.V He was nineteen alfo —,born and sttod -ip the

t *	»
but tradd
in
fame parish with Annette, (for So Mrs. will have her called) and,loved Her from his .era? dle.~He, Wasshy	a rfionmaker
beishig.^ very |east, shV .was tem,ptest to hopes he'shprilst haye'got shis Annette to marry him whilst his shpunty-mpney lasted,; for.mar^ riage Was a chargeable i.thiqg to the poor.—An-' nette was agreeable, and they put up the banns
accordingly ; r—when comes her fathor, ogged on*^ by her cruel step-motlier (who was afrash she . shshuld lofe Ishr drudge,) gnsh Sdsh^s rhem in the ■ sh oj' the' whole epngVeg^tipm. O'	,
H




4
■1
h-v
' I
I
ii
• t
b
l!
ii
ii
rt
i r
rl
• t
il
i t
!i
I
- !
! *
u
I
4 i
II
i t
■i
I :

f'
P i
,•	I
!	;
^	f
k !.
f I
f ‘
I i
f t 1
S40
COX H EA T Hr
r
It
c
m
i
i
c
• • ' *
“ He was at his wits end to l«ave Annette behind ; but it must furely have been the caSe, if So-be her father had not turned her out of doors,, in cine of his defperate paffions, for loving a foldier : ■ ^and he got her in the mind to come to Camp —and if she had not fell'lick, no one would Have., been,bappier than they.” ,
My poor young thing !” Said Mrs. Mildmay, look upon me, and believe rhe your friend..’ Annette wants nothing hiore than eafe,-of mind,^ and comfortable food to faife fier. ' I have a' woman in my parish who is a fehderyf good i nurfe : let her then corrie for,one. month, and^ I will be bound for it, you' shall receive her back lafe and found—arid yoiir lawful wife too; without.costing you a stngle farthing.” • r '“ Can you be fuch an angel of goodnefsi”" cried the voung-fellow, blubbering with doubtful joy.-r^“ Can you have pity on us ? -^"Vye are not wicked, we are*only poot^.—Aiinctte,' what fay you to her Ladyship ?—Can we evbr thaiik her; ** bountiful goodnefs enough ? — But she wants “ no thanks ; and God will reward her.”
Annette wiped her eyest — “ It was God’s Providence ; and she would go wherever the La- ' dy pleafed, and do whatever she bid hef, ; and Would never fortret the manifold favour.”
,	V •	'	;	’ *	'	‘	*
[ A LITTLE garden chair was fent over for her ,' in the afternoon ; she was put in instant poffestion of her new lodging; and I doubt not in a (ingle week will be restored to health, now her consuming forrow is no more.
But what will the World fay to all this ? — A . woman of honour, and purity, and charafter, ‘ and fortune, to interest herfelf in the affairs of a ^ confestbdly-jO//^rt girl; a girl living in the opeff‘ |iii6ticc of Sin j declaredly loving her feducer 5
nay.
<(
1
I i
I «
A N O V E L.

.:nay, charging herSelf with the; largestishare'pf th^ crime :	for Seeing she was turned out of doors^
.she was refolved (she faid) he should be her only friend, and fo went with him, after a little bog-
;gling.” ,	,
But Mrs. Mildmay knows no distin6lion but Shat of goodnels in the individual.. A Countefs . with a bad heart, is, in.her estimation, a bad, a .defpicable woman j and innocence in a cottager has all the merit of innocence; nay, every de-.^parture from the y?nW line, in . the uninformed, the unfufpedling, the otberwife well-intending young creature, has every -allowance the nature of the cafe demands-; though.she cannot find a ssngle excuSe for the gallaniryof the times, or allow a title or fortune to be a fppnge for vice in any'one member oT the community.
Annette, therefore, in her opinion, will be jmade a much honester woman, by being married <to her Lubin, than all-the Adis of Parliament xan render thofe who, under their fandfion, violate-the most Solemn of vows, and re-approach the altar of the Deity to enter into new ones.
But I need not labour this point: you, as well as myfelf, know how to pity the errors we are capable of falling into; and, instead of claiming credit for not being contemptibkf are amply Satisfied with the testimony of our own confciences. In Spite, however, of all the clamours of chastity, and the outcries of Superabundant nicety, Annette is now under our protedlion, and shall be continued under our protedlion, until the wars are all over, and her Lubin can return to his oe-
^ I
cupation of a shoemaker, when we will fet him up, employ him, and recommend him to all our acquaintance. I adopt the royal stile on all thefe occafions; but alas I the we must be refolved
into

i
i
C O X H E*ACT R f
►
info the; for it is Mrs: Mildmay’s purfe thitt
pay's lor all.'	' ■ '
Mrs. Mildmay defired a list might be made
ojut of Such women as had children in Camp, that she might occafionally fend a few gallons of milk amongst them; and a loaf, perhaps, or two or three shoulders of veal,‘ if they could- drefs them;'
Oi THEY could dreSs every thing I They had p'otsi kettles, and all convenifehcies, if jt
would pleafe the Lord to fend them Some fuch good vifluals-:”	and- wecame away amidst' the
huzzas of a little army of boys and girls from two to five yearS'Oldy who strained their innoceht throats, and' fprea'd but their haiids in thankful-* neSs, as far as they could See us^ — nor will she
fail to fulfil the-stridest'letter;^ hef.prorhife tb them.
J
am ev^r your
Ttla Rivyrs.
I ■ . I
1 •
I t t t
- I
T
L E'T-
-
: i i:
• I
t i
A N O V E L.
^45
LETTER XXIIL
O
UR guests are departed-~niy father, Lydia, Melvin, and Ferdinand — and never did I past a happier day S'— I knew-the good-natured motive by which the gaiety of a certain gentleman was called forth.
My Lydia will, I hope, Soon follow her father’s example,” Said he at dinner. — Her grief cannot be more Severe, her lost greater, “ than he has Sustained. I am now; however, “ convinced, there is no life but chearful lifei and can only lament I did not make the discovery earlier. No one should have been chear-fuller than me !— An accident revealed the Se-
<<
<<

4t
46
44
44
44
44
44
44
44
44
44
cret to me ; I have tasted its Sweets ; and you fee, madam, (to Mrs. Mildmay) what a change it has produced in me I How many years is it fince you heard me Chloe*s out of fajhionf-—But I recoiled the number too well to give you the trouble of telling me ; and, with your leave, will furpriSe my children by a repetition of it on this occa-
** lion.”
You have often, my dear madam, admired his voice in conversation ; judge then, if youCan, how agreeably it must strike on the ear, when mu-fically exerted. I don’t remember I was ever better entertained, the novelty of the thing was So truly charming.
IMelvin and Lydia (for I am not afraid of trusting him any where; or with any perfon) walked into the garden*
Thj^t
«44,
C O X H E A T H

** That poor, amiable girl,” Said my father, V affefts me unfpeakably !—The youth fhe ' laments was worthy her utmost esteem, her ' highest friendlhip ! — I loved him as if he had ' been my own child! — but he must learn to ' Submit our,will to the will of Providence 1 —.
' 1 have obligations, moreover, to her tender-' neis lean never forget. She has shared, Ihe ' has lightened every buithen Heaven has been pleaied to lay on my shoulders ;—can I there-' fore do lefs than strain a point for the mitiga-' tion of her Sorrows ?—You will all, I am per-' Suaded, Join me in fuch a eaufe. We will ■ raife her drooping Spirits, chear her into re-' fignaiion, and to Mrs. Mildmay’s benevolence ’ 1 shall be indebted no lefs for the Saving of thi*
' poor girl, than for the protection of Ella.”
, Thev returned before any reply could be made to this- addrefs, a little shower having obliged them to defer their intention ; and a new fubjedi was started, till we had finished our coffee, when w'e went to the billiard-room, 'und'play-for a couple of hours ; , a room that was never prophaned by gambling, but is facred to innocent relaxation alone.
I FIND my father could have married very ad-vantageousty in Jamaica, both when a batchelor, and fince he has been a widower : but Mrs. Mild-niay favs, “ he was too-proud to participate the fortune even of a woman he must be fenSible could not enjoy it without that participation. What became of his good-fenfe and generofity, on fuch occafions, she would not take upon her to fay.”
“ You altogether mistake my condudl, ma-“ dam,” replied ray father: “ I have none of that falfe pride in my compoSition. I have felt V’ how love exalts its objedl. Had I pofiested a
‘‘ diadem,

A NOV E h.
Hi
4€
ii


it


a
diadem, I should have thought it mifplaced on-everv head but my Lydia’s ; and believe she had the fame feelings for me therefore, fup-pofe of me as you pleafe, I should with exultation have confented to have been as much the obliged party in point of fortune, on my union with that dear woman, as I was in every other Superiority she bestowed upon me.”
Mrs. Mildmay had pushed thisfubjedl as Sar as it would go.
I WAS Seated at a window, which commanded a view of the front-gate ; about which 1 perceived Several perSons gathered.—It was prefently opened by the Porter, and I could distinguish, though at a considerable distance, a man borne by four others, as’ dying, or dead. It went to my heatt to break in upon the Sunshine we enjoyed ; but out of tendernefs to the whole company, I bid them not to be furprifed if they heard of an acci-
—Th«y allilewa
to the window.
dent to Some unfortunate stranger.
Stranger I” exclaimed my benefaB;refs it is the worthiest poor fellow on earth, I fee by the cloaths ! It is LiSimore, my stev/ard I —my family-regulator 1 —my humble friend ! I brought him with me from Jamaica ; nor could I have Sustained a greater lofs. Yet, wretch that I am ! what is the lofs I shall fuf-tain, to the distrefs a beloved wife and thrae Small children must be plunged into ! He was the best hushand and the best father living.’’ PIe was now brought to the houfe, and the gentlemen went to enquire into what could be done
for him, and the nature of the hurt he had. re-ceived. He had been thrown from his horfe, and his fcull w'as fradlured in two places. A Surgeon, knowing who he belonged to, had followed him.
VoL. I.	G	home ;
a
ft



€(

1'
r.
iaS
C O X H E A T H
in
«	r	• ■
home ; but declared trepanning would torture,, without being of the fraallest lervice to him, for hat he Could riot live above a few hours.
Mb-S. Mildmay belcught me to go to the Lodge, where the wife and children dwelt, as i a fecond paradife ; and in the most prepared manlier open the melancholy particulars to her.
You are, mv dear,” faid she, the only
Spare
me 1 — Oblige me, then, and prevent her hear-ing the difastrous tale from any other quar-
friend I could trust on this occaSion.
t(	I

ter.
„ >•
' You will do me tht* justice to believe, I com-plyed unheSitatingly with this, however diiagree-able*, request ; for it was a truly painful em-baffy.
Two little girls, beautiful as cherubs, ran to meet me, calling out, IVlamma, Mifs Rivers “ is come !—-won’t you be exceeding glad to fee
Mils Rivers V
I KISSED them both, and confefs to you, I could not foibear weeping, from the confciouf-nefs of their innocent error.
V
Mrs. Lisimo R E appeared, leading her voung-est child by the hand ; for he is, my dear madam, only fifteen months old ; and laid many pretty obliging things on the plealure every figtit of me gave her.
“ I MUST beg leave, madam, to be feated, be-. “ fore I rnake any return to yoifJ" politenefs.
I never faw Mrs. LiSimore before, but ** with pleafure,'and I really believe our fenti-** ments wereTtciprocal ; but now—
The bloom instantly forfook her cheeks, the objedl nearest her heart being the first objefi of her care.
,	** HEi-VEK,*
A N O V E L.
147
cc
€(
a
** Heaven,” cried she, ‘‘ avert every evil from the head of poor LiSiniore !”
I LOOKED down.
“ 1 READ all the meaning of the trouble yoa have taken — your goodnefs My poor huf-band!—my children !’’	,
“ FoRthofe dear, children’s fake, madam, let me bei'eech you to be comforted 1 —You are a woman of understanding, and know by how piecarious a tenure what we call happinefs is held in this life ! — Mr. Lilimore deiervedly poiTeired your tenderest affeSlions, but think how many hearts are rent at this time 1—Every loreign pacquet is fraught with death ; a death preceded by a thouland lad fatigues and difficulties.—What shall I fay to you, madam ?— The Power that gives, has a right to take away , and the great duty of a Christian is Christian reSi2:nation.”
“ He is then dead 1” faid she, wlthacompo-fure that shocked me.,	^
I SAW the furgeon walking fast over the lawn ; and it was fettled he should follow me, the nio-shent there was a change.
“ I FEAR I have no hopes to give you,” faid I ; “ but if you would prove to me you love Mis. Mildmay — that her repofe is of any confe-qucnce with you—or her future friendship de-
— Here is
n
((
t<
€C
(C
Ci
ce
<6

ic
«
Suable—you will conlent to be bled.
a gentleman who can perform the falutary operation.”
She wept bitterly — the tears of Silent anguish and fat down, unreSisting, to do as I deSired. I looked at the furgeon, who foon made me understand his patient was no more. — I pershaded her logo to bed, and offered to Sit by her.
G 2	“ Ex c u s 2
/
V
4 > fT
ii
I I • 4
. <■
•i 4 ^
C Q X H E A T Hi.
** Excuse me, dearest madam 1 I must be alone 1 —> It will be a relief to me.to be alone !
4
4C
a
I constrain mylelf now, becaufe you are pre-prefent.- Grief Irke- mine stiuns every eye — even the eye of goodnefs. Pity me—pareon me —and leave me !—ConSider, Mr. LiSimore left me but a few hours, ago in perfeCi health—he bade nie wait lupper for him : — our meals were all happy ones,—^his good-humour, his kindnels made them happy ones : — I now fee “ him no more ! —Oh ! there must be time al-“ lowed to reconcile the mind to fo cruel a change PV	'
The lervant was a Rood creature, and en*
SD	^
gaged to Sit, without her mistrefs’s knowledge, in the next room. So foori as I fent a perfon to tak care oj the chileren, Haw her into bed ; pr cd on her to drink a compostng draught the fur-geon happened to have in his pocket, and was carrying to a neighbouring .patient, when the accident happened, and we left her to the luxury of Sorrow.	h
My Father knew-j5oor LiSimore abroad, and was much affedled by his fudden departure ; ne-verthelels, for' the lake of thole he loved, he retained a generous portion of his chearfulnefs, and invited us to breakfast with him en Camp the next morning.
“ I HAVE never yet. Madam,” Said he to Mrs. Mildmay,“ done mylelf the honour to take an airing with you on the Heath. I accepted your challenge to dine at Mildmay-Hall ; let me fee, then, if you dare meet me on Cox-heath at Six o’clock to-morrow morninsr. A
o
“ corner of your coach will be a happy accoin-“ modation for aiinan who caqnot boast of • fo much as a mule to arable forth upon, Sancho
“ Pancha
ic
A N O V E L.
H9
“ Pancha like, to efcort the ladies the fashion-
4
“ able round. How many times, pray, may ** you have reviewed us thro’ all our defiles ?
and wdiat report will you make of us to our “ Sovereign ?”	-
“ A favourable one, I assure you. Sir,’” replied Mrs. Mildmay., “ You are a credit to “ the nation ; and fo much faith have I in the “ prowefs of you all, that were I to hear "of ari' invafion tp-morrow, I should fear only for the perfonal Tafety of thofe who engage to repel it, as the fucceSsfui contest is not without its
it
i
iC


dangers.”
Melvijs kissed Mrs-. Mildmay’s hand, like a well-bred cavalier ; and Ferdinand and my father followed his e:Sample. She was, you know, madam, the queen of the,company.—Would I could pay my devoirs to you in a fiistUax rnanjier, ia-
stead of'fubfcribipg mySelf
X

f . .
- 1 :•*-
s •	/
•	• •;* ^ i	*■
Ella Rivers.
3
X. E T
I
15.0
C O X H E A T H J
LETTER XXIV


f
h
OOR Lissmore is buried, and his wife and children are now on their way to Devonstiie, wdiere she has a Sister married and fettled. Every thing at Mildmay-Hall, she laid, "would renew her grief : even the tender condefcenston of fny benefaftrofs, the tender attentions I paid her, were fo'many daggers to her heart- She has left on‘e little girl urister out ‘care, which' we shall' bring up to be an bono-ur tp iier.fex, and a‘blef-' Sing to fociety	for wilLshie hot have wy instruc-
tions, and Mrs. Mildmay’s e'xarnple,' to iornf herfelf by .i*	•
We gave the/poor Lieutenant his airing,-'eat our breakfast with'him with much fprigh-tlinels, and have enter-changecf many i polite "vlstts with* Melvin’s acquaintance ; but all thefe viSits were fo much in the likenefs of what you have already received from me, that I shall only mention them in the grofs, having fubjedts in store that dcferve a new pen and a new epistle : fo that, if you pleafe, you may call this my shortest letter, as the only news it contains, is refpefting poor LiSi-more’s family ; for it is furely no news to tell you ^ that l ani most affedlionately
Your, &c.
Ella Rivers
i .
END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.

COXHE ATH-CAMP

♦s
A
/

o
V
E






’ -
'ehri7-A.-A'



'--.--'■^i=r;''A.'V


V O L,
”l
II
•- 9
■f'-A't ■ '	*'>

■ ij:^
>c..: ,
■V<-* -w -.^	•,	*	1
-• ^■-	i'"'' '	- .

‘j':;
t •	■ «/■>•


^•v-



O 4
• -:t .D


1/ -V'

’■-r.	■
PT ■'#>	"
/

,v
■
■ .	’ p
• r

:'F •-.■ '* • "V '•
-.	-' ■---•> ■ ‘i ■ ■' ^ : V.>Vv
	■ '• ^■;‘;-Sy - ..' •
• 1	. • ' *.
T	"- '-»rV.S*-1^-
T^V. - - V - :^;< "-N-. 0* • ‘ ^ V ' ^	
•'	
■x	j' . .
X	
■* ■	
	A> • 'C
	' • '* -' p
	~. t
. .r^ ■	
■'• . .	
	Ad.r ■ '•C’’-VA\ •
•	.-.T'TA-.V .•*'■'s
■'■ • d '■ •	•'■ V . nA- i
_ •*-	
■:^L-.	' ■■ ■ ■ - It ’■■. ■ --'t
"•. - w*.	■; v*^

A.-'-


/
S^L ■ ' KAiWrii^A
:£i	'it AAfi, ^ t'Ti'
, p - .L.	- z-l rAAAA-ti^
••■V'T'c^:	;•. ••'..-'v;. •	’ . :	• ^ -	.-_	.•' '' •'"''■*''‘?‘-^--^'5
*' -	•■ - .  --S'	-	. '» - »■%.■.•-'“*• _J” - • *	'.4'!l L^*^' l^U
V- --"A-'AC. -■ -■ -	:	-
■••N-	•- - .^---	..	^.-.,	^	-v-v'AA^CA

ttt-a-

i- -	' •■*<-!f
•J-;	V ?
•••V C '
- '* .-

' r • - - ^	5=" • w '
. Af *A •	' .*

X*'	'^ ^	*•**


'	’ 1 —c-*y A* '	:r^ '“ • * *.
-■yV .-'••• - SN ; ; A.;-
■ --. v^ ■..- . •■ V"l:- c^-tC
T TV ■. v:,
.-V L-nv:'. w--NC-rvr^b.	■';>N.-.:
p:<- 'i -?:m> -
, V- :-' •	";1'’
:-•. '	■' •T'.'L	•XX.*-' '
;V- i -^r: > hrV ;
•" -i. • f • i	S-TAc ^■		■/■ ' -	•.
Sirs	-WVN,,..			w •


/,	’vi..	.* . ________________________ - -^- _
A

-. ■ ,y • cr ;C;4^ N 5
S‘/ A ;. Vviyiv^
:c ■ /-■•A.-’,. . ---I'l ■' . . V.-. ■ ' '
ST ' .- -'T T	^ ^	' :T:
"-■-. —-'T-- Ai - : '	>'''
^ A Vhs-T:h:;vvT
:,. -i. ■ / yiiL ■;<" N,‘
	' •<■ —		.V - . ■ ■' -' : -A ‘ •
	T ■	' r-I.	■• --C ’V
•\ VI		: ^ ■:' -	
		x' 1^ i. - i^: ■	•>. - 'v if. '

-■ ■ r VVj V A" L-:^: V
'	? vVAiVVd.d.id.VA' -A-

cV ^-'

irx
- *
' c
v^.p

|. brS ,
' sc ■ v'CNv:- ■

pp .	^ V . <"
''■ *■

/
1' - 'V/-'Tv,' -J»- A >-*
v*- t.L
rJ--:.'':.
''■ ■ AiTf -rAiv^ A 'AVT ;
Cl-Tt^-irSr 41p- ••3* V . p', -»'=tfSfe '-y,	I . ' A* '	■■'• x-'C .'
A /r:
s •	.	^'.
‘: ^ ■ ■ • A
. nC\-xV-\ -
J... .pT."	•^'sV '.Kjpy.-T.V'.;*: .•■• ■3s*’v
^ : ' l
... ^


HPi i-.


,yt -L-t •'- '
ffi
L
t A-
'	'.V !' • *C . ■ c "•' ‘	"
-^'. p^ •'	■- -p"-	j-'' p^
^ ^	. tfv -i; >!■ /i Vp' i . V -	^

; <

':',jV
^ ■ -i,	»n -"^TS-V^pX ■	•-
- A .	" -

• -

■4#^
>
^e: ir -A-v- . :• >
^	^	fc ■	,	% «i .	. *	^	'*	^	*^*y.
'•	•	-	"	■	. '_■••■:	■	'.	•_••. .N. '>...'^r ••■-•-?■ -.'U	r'T-'st . p*
• -	.— '•'',	'•■:.■	-	' ~ '•-•	t'-«: ---'	■ ■*x>-*™'
v“y-*T^-o'

• ;LS!S'T: >■	■	1
i
■.^ L
s
■'-\r.x.eC^:
*	\ K H *
'->-1, ,J
• -1


'V -•
'	>* - T ■ '•■'
:
‘rr-
■’	>* >A ~. i- ■’
■A ■	;
r ^ - '-

•>p


-• .C-V-:
' /.
S' - ytt <- f '	-^-S r'A*"'*' '*--•.--te-'V- - ,	■ ■' .-
•TT- : ■’’'A-A-te.'-A'-h’VV'-VL
■/ '-. ’i	•'■-	' V:	.■> '.- ■ * :•. -■' ■'• / * = y.
* ’— c* r,
'•A'
f. '•jrf
.	\ V -• p: V :	y:.;i,p. -cx --
.	tV^.--	•	-. . .. -.-CC.	.• .cr. O -r-.A. A'-■--A.P	.-
• j - A-A- .	^ \. s .A' ^
'
“* ,ti"
* d:-'. .
•4 .' •

;'^v':.
-■ '
'< .tC ' •'
CVS^:V
-•~r->T ■'* V
•j»'
-ij
t .-
FF?
' y
^ At:.: >■
; :Ari^-A sT :;■. ■.'^.. -CT- ’ ■ T- •
r x'	^:
FV,
\-
...' -V'er^. ■ > . ' ■

-'5i';
'. <^‘ '• •--^-■’1
];/ .. 'r
./•
j. .	■.
' -A d J
^	*m.l.	’-	;

«5--'4 .
C::


■ .S'’ ^'-■ 'i''	S' • '•> V V A
• ’■•'—• A’:’ ■^ ‘	'
■ ^ ■ ...■' '.'■ f	• -,.
' * * "»■
' «
?n5
-	A
Ac;
sr-N'-c-'-^
‘A: AFFi
•	--.s,. -h •;>•■?.■
- •;' - • : <■- ■& -'- 7C .-••	■.^\‘>
''•A •'•■■■■•:c-.Va;'.:--
>
. V*'* **
.	-'.N'
•r ■ '. V ' V .;fc
• - ''
-c; A
>4 '
PAC>^ *"
, V-
n * —
f • <*
♦ • > •
..- -,-pI fA.
V'
',- ■'	. -'--c' ‘,- ,'c -' '■VL>-''i*
- ' '--■' “ -‘ ■	7. c- X vC r.x* -5'JU-s
■ ^^■■- c ■ AF'^yLf^
'a AI
•	’'T - ■	\
COXHEATH-CAMP s
A
N
O
V
E
L.
IN A SERIES OF LETTERS.
by a lady.
1 N
TWO
VOLUMES.
VOL. II.
DUBLIN:
Printed for Messrs. Price, Whitestone, Wilk Willi AMS, Walker, E. Cross, Jenkin, Sleater, MoNcRIeeeejW. Wilson, Bur nett, Porter, Exshaw, Beatty, Burton, Higley,
Rzio B. \Vatson»	D C C.LXXI X.
s
M'
h
ih ■ 1'
t ; : M <. i
M ♦ ; •
L‘
I.' ■
ii'i

M
li
i* ‘
:
'.' I
lii
C:
' i
r,' I
P
■ bi
0
0
J. *
:J|: •’{1 f i
•).
kh:
.‘•J!
> H • '
'iT




I ^.
. 3

*s-

•\
Q
if •
H .»
i|i|'
•T
/ I
}lKi
Ci
U-'il
r '•



iSb; •» . ' '
-!C
'i'i ■ ’■ 1st-
!st:
........ ...
w.. c -.

'1'
•»' h.*

tC'" ■■
« .«
> ...
1!; ■ t. I
V •
mst
list!
L'l' ■ •
til;.;
•i i >
ih '
f-
S
iv ■
st;
;S|
, (I, •
filst st; ii!|'
Jij
d!
vl
;:f
i'll :
i''
»i 1
I'
f: ^
,' i ■
< • I
H I
S'

!h
I
III

-A - J' \ a
/ - -V <	%
i .i. N-1
/. •
f
✓
<»: f
e
I.
r i
( v;
f •	^
.i
u

. >.
^	k
- V
i :	^
^ %
cox
E A T
H
A
N O V
L.
LETT E R I
Seeking the bubble Reputatioa e’en In ihe cannon’s
mouth.
E'S, my dearest'madam. Such is the fate .and folly oS file martial passion, that thofe who indulge it muss.either look danger boldly in the face, and meet their dilTblution undifmayed, or for/eit their honour and their life in the face of the whole world..
Ser
I' HAVE already told you we have many leant Kites on the Heath, who, by the dint of low ■fineffe and'an artful exercife of volubility, have : 'allured (wains from their Soft Arcadia into Scenes of warlike preparations ; and who,, to compleat the chara(ster of the Kites, have long fince dropped the Brother-Soldier, and affumed the ssern Commander; wliilss the toils of the field, together With 'the difappointment of their innocent Nol. il.	ambition
h;*,
rir.

ilii
S
W
r
.
i- ‘
r< ’
I?'
;L;
Li-• b
1.: S'
ii;
tS6
C O X HEATH:
ambition weighs dowhuhe Spirits of the young recruits, who vainly Sigh for the felicity they have ’ renounced, the pipe, the dance, the rural affem-blies, the May-day-feast, the fports of liberty, and the jbyVof peace.
One Such as I have defcribed, but of first-rate perfeSfion, , must, with your good leave, be the fad hero of this rny epistle. His age is Scarcely
nineteen ------as fmooth as Hebe’s his unraxor’d
cheek';—his figure (except where the high finisti of education is the question) striking, admirable ;
in a word, as my brother is distinguished throughout the Camp by the title of the hand-Xome Cadet, he is known in every quarter by that of the standfome Recruit.
But, alas I we are born with as different inclinations as extefibr distihdfions. Heroes are much the fame, fays the Poet:
fh'.Ti'
lit."
n» • 1
the point’s agreed.
• t
From Macedonia’s Madman to the Swede,
The Same shange purpofe of their lives to find, Oi' make an enemy of all mankind.
I,
»
In like manner poets, priests, mechanics, pbilo-fophers, rustics, bring their peculiar propenSity into the world with them, which not only grows with .th.eir growth, and strengthens with their strength, but has all,the confirmation that Cuf-torn. Education, ,and Example can	it ; and
however this feature of the foul may fometimes be mistaken, defaced, or mutilated, yet is it as impossible to rend it from the parent-stock without destroying the mind, as it would be to demolish an eye without fpoiling the face : — fo far does Nature triumph over Art, and defy all her works.
'	The
A NOVEL.
i<7
The .Dorilas I am Speaking of having never Seen a red coat until the noble Scajeant Kite Set his foot in the village of his nativity, was captivated by the tout enfemhle of his appearance : the glittering halbeid, the gay cockade, the fife, the drum —his eye, his ear was equally enchanted ; nor was it in the power of mortal youth to hear the harangue beginning with, “ All Gentlemen Volunteers*’’ So to the furrounding multitude, unmoved.
“ Gentlemen Volunteers,” was a gilded'bait, and the poor gudgeons could do no lefsthan bite ; and we all know that enlisting, like matrimony^ is not one of the Jlip-knots of Society.
Behold him then entered into his Majefly*ig Service ! The enSigns of his honourable estate in his hat, and his Royal Master’s pidlure in. his pocket, he is led in triumph through the village
to the houfe of rendezvous', where loyal bumpers are circulated, and every human eare laid asteep, until— the mornings — when, waking from the dead stumbers of unaccustomed inebriety, he finds he is no longer master of himferf. H is tender and aged mother rushes into the roorti his fweet-heart fwoons away in his arms !
“ Ah, unthinking and undone Dorilas I must we never See you more ? —You, that was the pride and the joy of your fond mother’s heart, the delight of the nymphs, the envy of the fwains, wherefore, wherefore have you pulled this death-stroke on our heads ? -—Must you b'e shot at like a dog ? — Must you —” But I drop the curtain on this fcene,-and proceed to introduce my Hero on the martial stage.
Af TER endlefs fatigues, behold him arrived at his Captain’s quarter’s ! — But his Captain, my dear madaih; was no Captain Piu-me ; n'Or-did the
cafe



C4
iC


158
C O^X H E A T H :
cafe require it —He was entrapped to his hands, and, instead of tlie winning behaviour he wa$ taught to expe6i, he looked the Commander in the first instance upon him, and compleated his repentance for the rafh step he had taken.
He is now drawn out to exercife. —-Tste Gen-tlemen-Soldier has his fufee, unfortunately on .the wrong shoulder —a volley of dire oaths affail his ears, and the big. hoarfe laugh of vulgar ridicule finks him into confufion. His toes are not
I
Tufficiently turned out ; they are kicked by Serjeant Kite into the proper pofition- — With what anguish does he reco.l!e6i the maternal roof, where he was deemed the master-piece of Nature ; and ,the rural green, where his feats were mentioned with fuch applaufe !—for,
■’Tis tile curfe of noble minds opprelTed,
To compare what they are, with what they ought . to be.
f	‘	-* ■	•	'
*
Ik a moment of his most tender regrets, he receives a letter His trembling hand can fcarcely break the feal. A thoufand cruel forebodings shake his foul. — His Daphne — has she furvived their parting ? Flis mother — is she not murdered by his conduSk ? — But Heayen is just, and will not fail to punish the fin of filial dilbbedience. At length he opens it -— weeps — endeavours to read the contents through his tears, but endeavours in vain.— He wipes them away—tries again— again —then learns thtjt his beloved mother has taken to her bed—hisDaphne fears her death bed, at the fide of which she attends day and pight, to give the confolation she herfelf, alas! stands fo much in need oh No hope .of re-union remains with them ; their adieus are all the adieus'of defpair—
•	...	X	A	-	- A	-
of
A
N O V E L.
But there is a World, where love like theirs shall be rewarded; where no Serjeant Kites will rend the foftest ties afunder ; where tears shall be no more ; and where alone they can ever meet again.
\V HAT Youth of nineteen, brought up in: rural Simplicity, is made of adamant ! — Our Do-rilas hastily commits the paper to his pocket herns thrice—and thrice^—can once more articulate.
He returns to his tent, and goes through the duties of the day wish unufual alacrity. The night’s watching fucceeds, when he ponders the fatal tidings. Every heartTeems light but his. —> Has no one then a mother but himSeif ? —-nor under'his motheT’s;cirdumstahG€s‘?;
The Countefs de Sevigne fays, our thoughts in the evening are a dufky grey; at midnight they are quite black ; for which reafon it is prefumable out' 'midnight resolutions wear d shmikr ^ com-plexion.	C.
* Hi s mother dies before his eyes.,—His fondafna-ginatipn gives unheard-of horrors to the Scene. The gentle, the faithful Daphne shrieks. — Her lamentations pierce his foul. — Not to fee them is death.—What then has he to fear from flying to their Support ?■—His prefence may do wonders. They will	difguife,	they	will	conceal	him,	and
stern lustiee	shall	all-unavailing demand	its Sacrifice,	.	.
I WILL not Sport with iyour fenfibility So far as to fend you this humble history incomplete ; but, humble as its forrows are, I must paufe before I give you the concluding passages. -	:■
The morning came, and found poor Dorilas' Unchanged in his re'folves ; — to which end he got eiriployed as:far distant as poffible from hb corpsi
He

K
i
M

■i
r

r
- ^
1
vr; •
K' L'-' .
.
it V.
USO C O X H E A T H:.
He performed little miracles';—-no burthen waj too heavy for his shoulders ^ no hillock tooftub-born for his fpade. It becani'e neeeffary to lend to the little ale-houfe at the extremity of the Heath for fomewhat that was wanting ; —: He folkited to be the melTenger, 'and did not iolicit in vain : but HO Sooner was he affured he had got out of his eomrades ken, than he fet forward with a beat* ing heart for the village of his Mother — of his Daphne—of all that was dear to him.
. Thb shadex of night returned ; ^—he neverthe-iefs continued his- march r — neither hedge nor ditch cotstd impede his paffage-* until, entering a town on the frontiers of shshative county, at day* breaks he heard the outcry of,. i“' Tha4 is he {— that must be him He cast his eyes around -i-the stricken deer began to weep :— no opening re-Itiained for his efcape. His youth, his beauty, his stmplieity, could not touch their callous hearts : ke was exultibgly feizcdy and thrown, into a fearful dungeon,
‘ Here she !dy=^, however,, bdt a few hours, before a light cart was brought for his more fpeedy reconveyance to the Gdmp. His hands were roughly tied behind him ; but his grief was now too big for tears: he bowed his head to his stern fortune, and unreststing, uncomplaining, amended the dire vehicle.
His eyes were fixed on vacancy durijrig she
whole period of bii fad journey : not an obje<^
did he distinguish, • of the many that prefented
themfelves. ■—He reached the Camp : — the Sight
of him excited varioiis fenfations, according to the
hard-nature or humanity of the beholders ; — he
Wasshut up in clofe durance.
: Tbe Court Martial assembled ; -i-------he wa»
brought forth -and by she following little shorfel .‘ of
A N O V E L.
tSi
€<
€C
rc

€i
€€
€€
of natural eloquence melted the hearts of every individual.
“ I AM a most unhappy youth ! — To Save a mother from death I fled from my duty. Would I could do as much by dying for that fault !—But she is broken-hearted, that is the “ fin I ought to be punished for ;—and I have no
wish to live^—no mercy to afk-----but that my
untimely fate may be kept from her knowledge, and the knowledge of-----
No doubt he meant his Daphne ; — but words failed him, and he \yept bitterly for more than a Second ; when recovering hirafelf he added :
“ ’Trs iTOt what I am about to Suffer that
wrings my heart thus ; — ’tis' their Suffering ; and I hope it will be believd, when I behave a man, that is the only caufe. ThoXe who have mothers, 1 know, will pity — thofe who ** hare not must ~if they can—defpiSe me.. I have done, and fubmit my Self to my Judges.’* -^The’ trial Was short, and he was fenienced to be shot.
. \
The day of execution Was a day offorrow to all ranks on the Heath. The story of his love was in every mouth -his merit-— his mother’s affection and illnefs — his motives for defertion — his ’ydufh—hi's figure — and‘ how he had wrote, with an however rude pencil, in Several parts of his dungeon, the lines of a fong made in the late Rebellion by an unfortunate youjtg many who, like hirnfelf, when tinder Condemnation, was more anxious about her he loved, than any thing relating to his own condition :
Come, Death ! oh come, thou friendly fleep!'
And WMth my forrews lay me low :
And Should the gentle vl giii weep,
Nor sharp nor lasting be her woe i
‘ ‘	Then
(<
! i i
. t

Ttiii-:
■pi!b
lliili?'
iiC
■
rii!
rxH> \
!i!F
i:i;i
i';;!
'll'
I


tC'Z
G O X.D E A T H
Then may Bie think, where-e’er ilie be,
- No more of my diftrefs nor me, &c.
which were So applicable, So pathetic. So touching — But the law demanded its atonement, and
the poor amiable youth must bleed.
T HE detachment^appointed to condudlhimto
‘she^fatalSpot are at his prifon door. — He advances—compofed, reSigned, manly. He falls into the procestlon. Not a dry eye can be encountered except his own ; he kneels down, claps his hands together in the fervor of stlent devotion : — his Daphne, his motherj his ,own falvation——-he fcarcely knows wliich is most dear to. him-’ ■— His executioners are duly arranged/^- he is whifpered to a£k if he is ready — he pulls his cap over his
drops his handkerchief—and—instead of the expected death— Heaven and Earth ! how beautiful is mercy. ! Well might the immortal Bard pronounce it twice blessed—^he has a pardon read to him— his Majesty’s most gracious pardon, in pity to his youth, on condition that he fhall enter into the African feiyice. The blood rustles into his (Cheeks— then 'Back with rapidity to his heart —^He is bled by an attending furgeon ; — but the recolledlion of his mother and his Daphne’s toy, at having him thus fnatched from the


grim tyrant’s gripe, is the cordial that restores him,—And restored he Shall be, in every fenfe of the woref! The hand' that was extended in the hour of his extremity, will not leave its work un-accompljstied* Instead of perpetual exile, he fhall be Constituted a monument of royal benevolence 5 and his gratitude to his Prince, and his filial pietyj shall be the first of moral lessons to the Sons and daughters by which the corner of his nativity is'in-
habited.
-	' ' There
k I-'"
A N O V E L.
1%
There is a tale of woe converted into glad tidings I — John Drew and,hU miilivefs were ini-mortalifed by the pen of Pope ;—-coiild I then forbear to weave the thread of this pity-moving story into my Camp Annals, of which, indeed, I fear
it wilt be considered the chief'ornament ? —- Be it
- (
fo, for the honour of Humanity. ;
But perhaps I should, or more properly perhaps I need not by this time inform you, that, next to the royal clemency, this youth is indebted for his prefent existence to my Mrs. MiidlTiay, the univerfal, the neveY-failing friend of her fpecies.
What luxury to a< mind, turned as her’s is for the enjoyment of every good, every liberal action, to have theipower of Saving a life~of ing between a worthy creature and all the horrors of a legal cutting'off ! — She is, however, the only woman I cannot envy the reward of her feelings. Her purfe—-the utmost exertion of her interest wereshut.barely fufficient on this' occafion to gain her deiired point ; it being judged necef^i fary this poor youth should die, m /errsrewt,‘for the general benefit-
And now having fpun out my Letter to fuch an inordinate length, I can only just aflc you how you do;—and affure you, that if my wishes can Nail \ou in any circumstance of human felicity,
none will poffeSsi a larger share than yourfelf. ---
iivety one here kisses your hands, ; :
> \
‘i.*
And am, ^c. &c.
/ r
; -
i-
- -. r
A t
Ella Rivers.

« *•
/ .1

t E X
fl'f
ff;
hi!
bii
i:if
:il!
Iff
‘1,:
I
iiii
ri
I
ill »'
n;
IHj 1l
i!
i.r
ililj
«a
I
T3r
||
tL
iff
L-tl L>»4 ' ■ » i f 111. .• : !L *
1 ..
ii
l6tL
C O X H E A T H :
LETTER II.
►-p
Jl he report of the day is, that his Majesty’s Marquee is packed up. in order to be pitched on thC; Heath, as the great preparatory for his reception.— l am elated at the news : for when his gracious felf shall walk from tent to tent, the charafters of loyalty and well-meriting, fo strongly traced out in my dear father’s countenance, must engage hint to ciirioSity, to liberality,; nay^l will be So bold as to write it, to j.ustice.
- The Queen too is expeiEled ! — What an enlivening of the female troops will her prefence prove !— To excel each other is now the emulation ;—and as the paffionis a narrow one, it gives birth to many ridiculous contests,i all which will ceafe when once the appearing well in the eyes of. Majesty becomes the ambitroni * What a model for the Kingdom does the good-fenfe of our royal Charlotte hold forth !—■ .Drefs, in her hands, fulfills all the duties of its institution ; — it adds to the native amlahlenefs of the perfpn, and, instead of dazzling the eye, conveys the most forcible irapreffion to the mind of the elegance and taste by which it is didlated.
Morality-too has. high obligations to this Queen of queens. — Conjugal felicity had begun to be deemed, by our Wits, conjugal folly ; and to love and obey, a certain token of a tame and abje6: fpirit when lo I the Royal Pair took the lead,—refeued the honourable estate of Matrimony from ridicule — and, by maintaining their ground for more than fixteen fucceeding years, must have cffe^ually rooted out every libertine
pique
A N O V E L.
t6i
• %
pique and lihertine-principle ; inSomuch that 1 trust the riting generation whll be found turtles, not only in the article of choiee, but constancy to their mates, and live and die honouring the highest point of friendship andfociai intercourfe in huma|i
existence. ^	-
. You v/ill judge by this eulogium on Marriage, that my fw'ain and I keep up our Soft understanding ; — nor are you mistaken : but nothing is more distant in.our profpedt or intentions than that (atafirophe. — I love him, I own it, for his behaviour to my father : and he loves me,. becaufe becaufe it is his destiny, ray dear ; — the common reafon for ail uncommon events, as hanging, drowning, wedding, &c. &c.
Happy is it for me, 'and right happy do I deetn it, that you was not born to follow a Camp. Had you been born to it, it would have been your fate ;
•—and if your fate, how could you have been to blame for it ? For thus would even m) fair friend have argued, if my brother and her, not having the fear of God or man before their eyes, rather than Submit to a temporary feparation, had made a runaway match of it: — and thus argue all the lively and rash damfels who figure away on the North road, when fmarting under the confequen-? ces of their ill condufl. But to return to mvfelf:
^—my happineis in your abfence arifes from the belief that this youth of ray approbation would have tripped up my brother’s heels in your favour,-at the fame time that you had ousted me from his heart. Ha ! ha ! ha I I must laugh aS the pickle you would have found yourfelf in
t	.	#
. Married in haste,
my word, you would have repented at IeiSure>".
for.
H-
ri'i
I
If)
(
4l

lii
•;j
I
i'
>» i
i\

P V
;|r
1st
i	t t"
ii
»• A
ill
ih
B!
ii
\V

lil
H
iU .>1--
1
ii;:
I
m
'Ur
illi
c>
•; • i
Oi
\' . i
r
a being 1,
•1; k
C 0:X H E A T B:
for, to be fure,.the fun never shone on fo perfe^
Why Ferdinand, madam, is a ioare'' crow to him !—rOh thou of little faith !
^	j '	t t.	■	■	.	■ J
Had I efcaped making an acquaintance with .the tender paffion, I should have concluded, from *l.ydia’s and your mode of bearing it, that it h.d steuu a faddening lort of trbuSineis, and thgt fighs, &c. were its natural and. only food. — So far from it, however, that the paffion is as lively and as amussng a paffion as can be felt, provided it is lighted up in a livelyffieart. That, I grant you. js an elstTitial ciicumftance ; for if it is not pro-phane to borrow the Scripture language on the occaSion, with the Sorrowful it will be lorrow-ftil, and with the gay it will be gay,” —- moft complaifantly taking the ten of the mind it inhabits.
Lydia, you know, h:»s a fine penferofo turn of countenance, and a cadence of expreffion that goes right to the heart : — Love, therefore, appears to infinite advantage in her perfon. — In my face which is honoured, like the Em.prefs Pop-pcoa’s, with a little cock-up nofe, the pla ful-nefs of this playful divinity, condefcends to be vi-fible.— A pidlure of our Several looks would produce, if not a pleaSing, a very whimSical con-.trast. — But enough, you will fay, of this trilling- .	.	. -
What string shall I then touch as a unifon to your feelings ?-—^The whole round ot possible fubr jedfs is open to my pen. In like manner with our first parents, but one prohibition, one restraint is impofed ; yet do I wish more anxionsty to indulge myfelf on the forbidden, than to enjoy all the given topics. Hence it is plain, that every child of mortality is an Eve. .
-	^	' Yo®
%
' f
a n O V e l.
f 'r
167
»	‘4	*'
You would have me remember, the penalty of my tranfgieflion will not admit a comparifon with what (he was to incur ; — but difobediencc, my young Lady, is diiobedieiice, let the quan--fity be what it may ; and you must excufe my fal-' ling into the commission of it only to gratify an, JStiehZ? inclination in us both—I to write, and you to read, things that ought not to be read ;o.r
written.
. Mrs. Mildmay wisties my st;ther could ob-" tain a garrifon appointment in return for his fer-vices, that he might retire no iels from the fatigues, than dangers of the field.—Five vvounds, (he obferves, he has received in five fucccssive'
m,
engagements, though Providence has gracioujiy (a word she utters mentally only) fpared his face ;' which is furely fufficient to entitle him to/uch a provision ;—and which, by the bye, I have fome notion she is now exerting her interest to obtain
for him.
It is, fays Belifarius, the misfortune of a Prince not to be able to revvard all blood fpilt in his fer-vice :—it is, however, certain, that George, our prefent King, carries a list of his Military as well as Naval Officers in his pocket, and reviews, if not directs, every promotion they pafs through.— Would one tl|en believe it possible for fuch a man as my father to stand fuccesslve years thereon unnoticed ? — From the campaign of the celebrated Wolfe to the year 1778, has he been a Lieutenant.—Now, methinks, it should strike vvlioever stops a moment upon this ground, that a foldier must be either very unworthy, or very much ne-gleUed, to hold one and the fame rank for fuch a length of time : —but this is one of the points that puz'/ies me, and which I am clear I shall never be able to develope.
You
11.
16^
/
C O X H E A T H
You are Scandalized, it Seems, at the idea of our prefent sttuation ; and tell me, that Srom all you can pick out of my descriptions, the stmilar confuSion of Characters prevails in a Camp, as of tongues at the building of Babel. But I must beg your pardon for that:—a line'is not only drawn, but drawn So nicely, that there is no more danger of mixing with Cadies of a certain cast, tstan if their
ions were wrote on their foreheads. You
are curious to know how this point can be managed.
I will tell you ;—All men, I hope, are born with a fenfe of shame ; fome men 1 know are born with a fenfe of honour ;—and, what is not a litde remarkable, the more libertine the principles are in general, the more formal you find them in particular instances. This, you will fay, is a paradox ; nor do I expect you should Solve it. Mark me, then, for i will condefcend to throw light on the hidden meaning.;
Such is the mafculine mind (no bad hint to us females in the regulation of our conduCt), that though they go about Seeking whom they may devour in the perfons of the wives, daughters, and Sisters of the Community, they are still fare to watch over their own relatives like the Hefperian dragon : nay, a fingle peep at a damfel fo pro-tedled, has often proved mortal.
A Camp is but a kind of larger houshold— United in a common caufe, she caufe ot their Country, they infenfi'oly fall into a domestic unity.—-In a word, as the men are all brothers, lo the women are confi.dered by them as fo many fisters, whofe fame they must defend, and whofe morals they ought to preferve froru contamination.— Hence, in all the intercoutTe between the fexes, friendship and polltenefs. mark the bounds;—and
believe me, nothing elfe could prevent its being a
fcene
A NOVEL.
i6^
fcene of HcentioufneSs and carndge.—As for the midnight-revels of thefe fons of Mars, no modest eye or ear has the remotest acquaintance with them —and though the drefpng^x\6. tht good-natured Ladies, as in the metropolis, come abroad un-blufhing, and compoie as it were a common multitude, at exercife, airings, &c. &c. they never attempt to tread the honourable ground we occupy.—Oh ye fairest of Nature’s works, why will you forfeit your claims to the honours which await the daughters of Chastity!—In this refpe£I;, Virtue bears its reward in its hands.—At their approach, the cloven foot of Vice is clapped behind its choicest votaries.—Can any homage exceed this?—The Bacchanalian roar is checked—the tongue of fenfelefs ribaldry is filenced—the manners are humanized—and fo pleafurable is this feeming constraint, that the occafion is voluntarily fought, and the period of experiencing it is distinguished by the most reverential epithets: it is .
%
The feast of reafon, and the flow of foul;
the foft, the Soothing, the focial, hour ;—the fountain-head of elegance ; the high poIiSn of the mafculine charan:er. The contrast has too much Ihadow for my pencil ; I therefore leave it to be pictured by a dark and Suitable imagination.
I AM become fo expert an horfewoman, that my toe no Sooner touches the gallant hand extended for my astistance, than I vault into my feat, and difmount with equal grace and agility ; and fo totally changed is thecourfe of natural events, that many a Beau and Belle who, before this encampment, would have Scorned to be vistble until noon, are now met a cheval on the Heath by four, or at latest by five, in the morning ; where they, un-
Vo l. II.	H	shrinking.

170
COXHEATH
shrinking, abide the dew ;—behold the glories of the riSing fun ;•—drink their chocolate, as the Jews cat their paffover, with their whips upheld, and the steed pawing with impatience to be gone;— them icamper away to fee Who and Who is toge* ther, and feast their eyes on military manoeuvres.
A CERTAIN Corps, which shall be namelefs, on their first arrival at the Heath, were fo awkward and unpromising in all their movements, that it was defpaired ever to bring them into any tolerable training. But, to shew you what induftry and pradticecan effedt, they are the most perfest in their evolutions of any Corps in the field ; and, instead of the toot- toot-tooting they ufed to keep up, fire with the fkill and harmony with which your masterly muficians strike the stursi that wind up a celebrated chorus.
My Brother-----—What a variety of fenfatlons
would that little heart of yours prove, if you could fee him at exercife !-—Flis uniform is distinguifh-cd by a fomewhat of ornament in its lapelle from the common Soldiers ; but his rank is cheek-byjowl with the lowest.
- Imagine him drawn out—the commanding officer (perhaps a corporal) in front:—** To the “ right—the left—the front—the rear—advance ** —retire—wheel—charge—prefent—fire.”-—-What a thoufand accidents might befal a lover under fuch circurnstances I—what infinite fatigues must he not endure !—A detachment moves off— it is his day of duty. Behold him stationed before the tejits, at due distances——his fufee on his shoulder. He traverfes the Spot of his limitation—he is weary—rests on his arms—walks again. A cloud gathers around—the wind blows—the lightning befpeaks a fearful storm at hand.—It arrivesthe
cloud bursts over your lover’s head;—he Seeks
shelter
A NOVEL.
I'jt
fhelter in his box, but, alas! it has no door to fcreen him Srom the tempest.—It is the hour of relieving the centinels :—A little body of men prelent themfelves for the purpofe.—The ufual fa-lutes are interchanged, in Spite of the raging elements ; but it is not to the guard-room he is to be conducted:—all wet as he is, he is only put on a new watch—and the pitilefs pelting of the Heavens will be over before his interval of repofe arrives.—You weep—Renounce then every idea of being the wife of a Soldier }*«= for he must either '
Have honour loving you,
or he must not love at all.—Would you difgrace the man of your heart—fix an indelible stain on his charadler—bow his head down with shame-point the finger of Scorn against his perfon, and all this to purchafe an inglorious Safety ?—No—* Surely no—strength of mind becomes our Sex.— As it is ours to reward. So we ought to inSpirit our favourite Hero.—The young Cadet shall perform wonders in your name.—It shall be his mif-treSs’s blow that fells his enemy at his foot: in hqr name shall he conquer; and her appIauSe shall be his brightest wreath, his triumphal crown.
Recover this—and you shall hear further from
Your, &c.
Ella Rivers.
5 *
Ha
L E T
172
C O X H E A T H
LETTER III.
C_^ RU EL Ella ! Why will you thus contlnu-.ally tear open, the wounds of my heart ? No .Sooner does reafon, filial duty, and neceffity be> gin to heal them, than your pen penetrates them to the quick,;—they bleed afrelh, their utmoft anguish is renewed, and their cure, alas 1 becomes a ten-fold labour.
Maternal tendernefs once concealed a Hero, Ella. A Hero, (as Homer tells us), did not difdain to wear a feminine habit for his diSguife.— No reflection is, however, cast on the Son’s or on the mother’s condudt: parental feelings Sanffified ,the deed.—Will you require the Softer paflion to do Violence on it Self, and betray to flaughter, from patriotic frenzy, the youth of its idolatry ?
I.LOVE the author of the tragedy of Mahomet, for one Sweet thought which he has given to his dying Palmira: When the heart is pure (faysflie), fmall is the difference, eafy is the change—a lover’s paffion for a Sister’s fondnefs.” May I Ihotthen, without the Smallest deviation from the female charadter, experience the cares, the fears of friendfliip, the Sacred friendship of maternity, where your brother is concerned ? Brought up as vye were together, may not his perfon, his Safety be dear to me, compatibly with the niceft fenfe of delicacy, and the ermine of modesty ? But you are no longer the Soft, the Sympathising Ella.—A Camp is the fit refidence only of Amazonian dames.—Cupid, inflead of repofing on his mother’s lap, there rests his head on the hard bo-*
Som

A NOVEL.
te3
was not born for Such Savage
But I forbear
I
fom of Mars.—The clangor of arms is familiar to his ear; his little heart feels not the dying groans; fiercenefs and ambition tip the darts he fcatters around ; fears, Ihattered limbs, are estimated beauties by his Camp-votaries ; and the pastion he infpires, is translerable at will. The living hero rivals the dead—'tranples on his eorpfe — in-fuits his manes.—Ferdinand, your Ferdinand —for (ueb is the custom of the Woild, I must not call him minet though as nearly allied to him by every affeUionate tie — feenes : his heart is gentle, may weep, Ella — the fong you quote upon rne allows it:Yes, I may weep, though he muji go.
My father often enquires after the	^/r/x.
That is hisdlstinfliion ; not choostng to mention a name offenfive to his ears : fo liable, in number* lefs instances, is the human mind to err,, and mif— take the best friends for the worst foes. .
I HAVE not the courage, I own, to make the. experiment; but., notwithstanding your opinion of Sir Ferdinand, I am more than half peiTuaded, if he knew all, he would relax his high claims foii* bis daughter, and Sit down content With giving her happinefs. '	.
On the rigid, principles of virtue, Mr. Rivers’s condudl may, perhaps, be virtuous: but what think you of your brother’s flexibility and rny resignation ? He has not only been broke in upon in his tender fcliemes, but forced out of the nro-festional track his nature and education So well fitted him to purfue :—he is not a man for blood-fhedding, but preaching the gofpel of peace.—As to my merit on the occafion, 1 leave it to your own justice to determine.,
Lydia, at the prelent period, is my most agreeable correfpondent.—Her pen, though she
H 3	labours
174
C O X H E A T H
labours apparently to confine it to chearful fub-jedls, will deviate into the pathetic, the fympa-thetic.—Yours is all levity or Satire. The firft, hurts me ; the Second alarms me ; for Satire is 3 mark, of felf-poffelfion ill-Suited to the circum* stances of your friend ; and the gentle, generous turn of Sentiment I always gave you credit for.
In the tale of your Recruit, for example, you should have Spared me. Softened as I am by my disappointments, and not have interested me even to the pointed pieces for his destrudlion. I had nearly lost the delightful Surprize your playful* neSs intended me, by my tear of tribute to the un* timely fate of one So worthy: but, luckily, a word caught my eye, which changed my mourning into rejoicing.
What a prize, my dear, have you drawn in the Lottery of Life ! — A youth of fortune, of accomplishments, of liberality, follows you like your shadow ; unchecked, unconstrained, even in that father’s prefence to whom I am indebted
for all my----But no matter—the goodnefs of his
heart Sandlifies the austerity of his proceedings in your fight; and poor / am deemed a peevifh, fretful girl, who cannot trust her lover’s constancy, or rely on hb truth, at the distance of two or threescore miles.
I SHALL write to your Sister next post ; and as I am not Sufficiently pleafed with you to put any commiffion into your hands, will not So much as feraember Ferdinand, but conclude my Self
Your, Sic.
Caroline Fletcher.
LET-
A
NOVEL.
1-75
LETTER IV

1 HE Royal Marquee adorns our plains. You have, no doubt, read the pompous defcription of it inferted in the news-papers. Fighting in foppery is a truly British idea; but believe me, the martial rather than the princely character has been the obje6l, in the construction of this celebrated Camp-Equipage ; and, though perfectly compleat, it is totally free from parade, tinfel, and folly.
The Londoners had been down to view the fpot marked out for its ereCtion ; they now pour in upon us in their one horfe chaifes, to feast their eyes after a still more delicious manner;—men, women, and children.—-Blessed Heaven ! that in fp fenSible a land Some statute is not instituted, as in cafes of lunacy, whereby the body, purfe, and reputation of the individual may be fecured on certain occassons. Though let me correCt my-stlf:—The Camp influenza Spares neither age npr fextherefore my fcheme for die benefit and honour of ray Country would be impracticable. ,
A Haberdasher, his lady, a young dam-fel his lady’s fister, and a little boy and girl his children, arrived at the defired haven about four © clock yesterday afternoon in a one-horfe chaife, stowed together, you may be fure as clofe as bale goods for an Eashindia voyage,
^ The Encampment is three miles in length. The poor beast stood panting and wagging his tail with fatigue, infomuch that it was thought,if they attempted to make it draw them the extent of the fccne they came to view, he would fall
H 4	down
H!
•'
}'■)
I
k
T
’li
b!
t
i.i!
}d
‘li
i
iii
..
^i'
Hi
:;l
hi
-:il
‘•i.


^
!■ ' /
I’. '
I
O, . (
' »
• >
ii:

|i||
i
liL
V 1 • »
>" *. r
:n(
pi
, f
: M
\.[\ I 5 5 f
-: • 1 ;o j :,•• i
b’j
i;‘ 1 Ti :!:i
(i i ’ S!i
'' I
<• • '
'\ > u.;
1 f
I? j
!i*
.It;
Iji
•» I
■ t
:fi. :\\ \ i
iii:
1/6
C O X H E A T H
down dead in their fervice : he was therefore led gently on to the little aleboule (already immorta--lized by my pen), in order to be refreshed, &c. and his conductor had orders to return with another horfe, (if another could be had for love or money) to convey them to Maidstone.
The company then adjourned to a houfe, or rather tent, of public refort on the Heath, to recover their fpirits after io long a journey, and adjust their head-drefs. But fuch was their impatience to enter in the amiufements of the place, that they (allied forth in let's than hast-an-hour to walk over the ground I have delcribed.
The woman was, it feems, far advanced in her pregnancy, and the children had never had the fmail-pox. The heat of the weather was excef-Stve, and the toils they had pasted through fevere : ——they neverthelefs advanced from tent to tent —that is, peeped in as they pasted by——and stopped a fecond or So at each Succeeding mar-<]uee.
Mrs. Haberdasher (for I'have forgot her name) began by this time to feel herfelf much in-difpofed. Her colour went and came, still her stushand took the alarm. But what was to be done ?
of ill field.
She must either dehy the charge health, or confent to quit the delightful She preferred the gratifying her curidSity to every other consideration, until she fainted away in her fist erst arms.
A Lieutenant, near whoSe marquee she was, humanely , permitted her to be conveyed there, little torefeeing the confequence—for lo ! she was foon announced in labour, and incapable of being removed. The Lieutenant was at his wits end ;—and on communicating his distrefs
to feme of his Brother-Officers, found the laugh ‘
So
A
N O V E L.
1.77
k	.	*	•	-	.	,	.	-	,
fo much against him, that he execrated himfelf no Ids than the trick his evil stars had played him.
Contrary, however, to all expectation, the grew io much better as to be put into a carriage, and reached a farm houfe, before (he made her hufband a prefent of another daughter.
The report this morning is, that fhe is quite as well as can be expeCted, but that the little boy and girl, dragged from London on this Camp ex? pedition, have Sickened, it is believed, tof the fmall-pox: and; to crown the whole, the man’s circumstances, on inquiry, prove to be fucb, as threaten him*with nJV/tereas by Christmas next.
Yet don’t be fevere, my lovely girl, on this inconSiderate and unhappy pair ; but remember the hundreds of equally abfurd and extravagant people the fun has shone upon, within thefe few months, in this quarter of the kingdom, and, in pity of their neceshties, draw a veil over their,? folly.
The few guineas to have been expended in • this moi^ pieafarable journey were, moreover, borrowed on ufurious terms; Mrs. Mildmay, even Mrs. Mildmay, shakes her head j but her heart will be open ; and perhaps what now appears their greatest misfortune, may turn out the groundwork of their future profperity :—! inSist’Upon it ; you have charity enough to join me in an Amen !, As I came from Mildmay-Hall, a few hours ago, what a fight for the honour of Britain did my eyes encounter !—Two fingle-horfe chaifes. having met iii their paffage to and frorn the.Camp, the pheatons yuouXA needs difpute the way with each other. T he gentleman and his family whofe'. horfes’s head was turncdijfrom the metropolis, claimed his privilege ;—the gentleman bound for London asserted his right.to beep the road, and
H 5	heroically .

178
CO X H E A T H
heroically declared, he would fit there till midnight rather than fubmit to break the way.
This cool infolence (for he bid fair to hold his resolution) fo wound up his opponent, that he gave him notice of the shock he was about to receive. He remained immoveable—until the jaded animal, making one great effort to fulfil the wishes of bis master, pulled the carriage, under the weight of which his shoulders groaned, fud-denly forward—and behold I they were both instantly overfet.
Their condition at our approach was no lefs
whimSical that difastrous. The ladies--------for
there was a brace in each chaife—
all
—were beyond cushions, curls,
defeription difeompofed black pins, overfpread the Spot of their humiliation ;—and she who had difplayed fine auburn locks before her fall, was covered with confuSion to find nothing left on her head but a few grey hairs.
, Moreover, a filk shoe tamboured in high taste, being torn from a fair damfel’s foot, betrayed thofe fraftures in the toes of her stocking, she had omitted to repair in her impatience to reach the Camp. Difgrace and expofure was, however, the only confequence of their mifeon-dudt; and as Mrs. Mildmay conceived they were too near the Heath alehoufe to incur any danger by the accident. Sue bid her coachman go on, and left them to refit themfelves at leifure, faying, ** we should always distinguish between the ridi-culous and the unfortunate ; and though we relieve the latter, rather promote than oppoie ** the just punishment of the former.’^
These are, neverthelefs, the daily incidents we meet with. Clouds of dust darken the air, and the clatter of carriages stun the ear j but the
true

A NOVEL.
179
true point of folly is, that none but thofe who can afford to stay Some time amongst us, can judge of our pleafure or our pains, or carry away with them the Simplest idea of
What a charming thing’s a battle !
I HAVE got a new lover I—nothing lefs, I ast fure you, than the Chaplain of my father’s regiment ;—a sty, steek, instnuating fellow, with a right honourable' patron at his back. This, my dear must be the high road to the poor Lieutenant’s promotion. Nor is it a random-shaft, but a mortal wound he has received ; and you must be prepared for the event, when you recollect the yieJdingtiefs of my nature. He quotes whole texts of Scripture in fupport of the wifdom, the purity of his passion ; at the fame time that, in the true Spirit of worldly-mindednefs, he hints at the eligibility of the offer.
We shall try how far it is my distiny to be the wife of a Priest—a thorough-bred Priest—who, I am^ fatisfied, could not withhold even his Cara Spofa from his patron, should the loan he requested—^^fo fuper-abundant is his gratitude I
No reply wba,tever will I make to the melancholy medly the last post brought me, but put up' a bill in the parish-church of Mildmay-Hall for the restoration of your good-humoury. the abfence of which is the only abatement I can make in your claims to perfeS:ion ; and may the prayers of the congregation prove fucceSsful!
I am, &c.-
\‘
EllA' Rivers*
LET
i8o
C O X H E A T H
I I
LETTER V.
I,
i:
li
u
I
1.
i-
r
f :
i.
\.
ii \ r *
i

, * •
; I .
I«
th
ii.
i!
iif
Hi
d;
!'■ i'
Ft ‘
|1
V '■
i
F \ t> I
Sii
-: «
i; I-! ' < • ri X ^
I * ‘ ;
ite lU '
ir <
> ‘ I
‘ I

I > I I k
I t
i
■‘I •
HI
<
i •
j .
■ t
i i 1 '
I
t ;
I T
Ui
The youth In the oart has the air of a Lord,
And we cry, There dies an Adonis !
Now if going to Tyburn can So improve a
young fellow’s figure, I beg leave to alk you, what effe6t falling in battle rnust have on the impassioned heart! It is worth a man’s while to get shot, to be fo tenderly lamented.
Shouldft thou, (but Heav’n avert it !) shouldss: thou
V	bleed.
To stop thy wounds my finess: lawn I’d tear, &c.
4.
Such is the language of Prior’s Ernma to her fup-pofed fugitive, to engage him to permit her to share all the rniferies, ,the dangers of his exile.—I will,, however, own to you, as proof that I am not quite callous, that even a sham-fight, of which 1 was a fpeftator, hasfo unhinged me by its comparative view with the horrors, the carnage of a real one, that I begin to wish I had not the ssn of difobedience to anfwer for, lest the death of my Soldier should be my punishn»ent. Well might my dear mother feek to fave her children’s fenSi-bility trom the stabs she must have experienced during the five racking periods my father was called forth to face the enemy ! I am chilled at the bare recollection, and befeech you to benefit by the hint.
How tenderly must I not then feel for our Lydia, and how earnestly must I not wish, peace restored to her bofom, by the however miraculous
rcstoratioA.- of the youth she deplores, given to
her
A MOVE L.
i8r
her again from death !—How it would endear a true lover !—-And thus, I inlist upon it, with few exceptions, is. the meafure of our happinefs proportioned to the degree of distrefs we have patiently Sustained. Patiently, madam, is my word.
But, however I may affea to’play the Stoic, I am at heart a mere, mere woman ; nof can I raife my imagination to an idea of distrefs beyond that of being Separated, for ever Separated, from the objedl ol our Softest attachment, our fublimest friendship.—An ugly tremor hangs upon my Spirits.—-I would, but cannot shake it off; therefore, with your good leave, this shall she (if my memcrysheceives me not) the shortest letter you ever yet received from,
\
Yours, 5fc

Ella Rivers
\
/

' t
/ f ^ ^ ^
h E T-
n

I
ii
ib
I • ■ 1
I
■a I:
*	.
i	.!
fi:
r ;
, j ;
'' ^ ' i

i
■ t
■ 1
1. *
‘ t
t .
J 1
ih
I »
ii!
t
ii
182
CO X H E A T H
LETTER
VI
Heaven, that makes Mankind Its care, Ouards the Brave, to Serve the Fair.
A M all in a flutter, my dear madam ! My pen tremjbles in my hand.! — But life is nothing more than one great Romance ; So you will, perhaps, be leSs furprifed than myfelf at what I am about to relate.
It was fettled that our round of viflts should run from Mildmay-Hall to my father’s tent ; from my father’s tent to Melvin’s, and from Melvin’s to Mildmay-Hall ; an etiquette highly-pleaSing to all parties. My father, I perceive, drew.Melvin in to throw the connexion wider in the eyes of the Camp, and leave it doubtful, whether Ferdinand, or Ferdinand’s young friend was the lord of the widow’s wishes, who, from her large fortune, is the lady of every unmarried man’s wishes on the Heath.
It was now Mrs. Mildmay’s turn to entertain, and the whole friendly circle was assembled at the
J
Hall.—The dinner-bell had runsr—the Servants
—The dinner-bell had rung— and covered the table according to the bill of fare —when Melvin was informed a gentleman enquired for him. The gentleman was dessred to walk^ in without ceremony, and partake of the family dinner.—It was Captain Davies, of the East Indiaman.
“ I HOPE, Ladies,” faid he, addreffing Mrs, Mildmay and me, “ I shall both furprife and oblige you, for here is your admired stranger
introducing

il
A NOVEL.
183
introducing the young fellow we had Seen on Ihip-board.
My father jumped over the table, I believe, and Lydia fwooned away in Ferdinand’s arms.
It was Wilfon—the Wilfon whofe death She had fo long and deeply deplored 1—the human nerves, madam, are not calculated to Sustain fuch strokes. —As for him, poor fellow 1 he stood motionlefs, in one of thofe fine attituds we of this generation must never hope to behold again. — Garrick him-felf would have acknowledged the likenefs ; and there was nothing more wanting to render it a first-rate theatrical Scene, than Wilfon’s crying out, “ Let me not breathe, lest I destroy this “ vifion.—Still, still ’tis here !—without me, as “ within me !—’Tis she I stis she !”—In a word, Lydia revived, and we were the happiest of
mortals.
He begged we would not afk him on that occasion, for the particulars of his story ; it was a melancholy one, and would interrupt the general fatisfaflion.
‘‘ Right I my own boy!’'* Said my father, shaking him again by the hand ; — ** we have you once more amongst us, and we will enjoy your restoration. It will be time enough tomorrow to tell ys by what miracle we obtained the bleshng.”
That celebrated thought of Gay’s is, my dear madam, tiiiTured by the gloom of his own disappointments ;	:
It
Friendship like Love, is but a name,
Unlefs to one we stint the flame,
fays he. ’Tis no fuch thing. Say I. — Friendship has its gradations, and Love is the achme; I mean
the

iC
IS4
C O X H E A T H
11
;i
= \
r}
!
\
'
U f i
the love that ends in matrimony : but never fup-pofe that the liberal mind may not extend its connexion ad infinitum^ without loling an atom of its force, its locia! fire. Such, however, is my creed ; and 1 find it stipported by the opinion of the greatest Writers, who can be a citizen of the world without this malleability of affections ; — for Friendship, as well as Seff-love, may be brought under that fine description of Pope’s .•
Friendship but Serves the virtuous mind to wake.
As the Small pebble stirs the peaceful lake j The center mov’d, a circle strait shcceeds.
And still another and another Spreads :
Friends, parents, neighbour, first it will embrace, , its country next, and next all human race.
. The love of a friend is but a more refined kind of Self-love. — A fecond felf is a common epithet with polite authors ; ^— the medicine of life, the great Solomon pronounces it ;—and may this Sublime Spark, this emanation of the Divinity be the fast extinguished, and the last extinguishable part of my existence I — This, if you think proper, may be called my rhapfody on friendship ; but I am lifted up to the clouds, and the highest human flight is all incapable of doing justice to my feelings.—Need I add, that we passed an eveningof glorious fatisfaCfion.
Wilson would/attend my father to Camp, and it was fettled he should steep with Ferdinand.
Captain Davies was obliged to go early in the morning to Chatham, and stay the day; we therefore invited ourfelves to breakfast with Mr. Rivers Senior, whofe marquee is fo commodiouf-
ly Situated, that we'can have every thing Sent in
from
A N O V EL.
185
from a coffee-houfe and tavern in the rear of his line, on the shortest notice.
I NOW mist, all our rough storms are blown over, and that my future epistles will be fraught with agreeable intelligence. Nothing my fweet girl is wanting but a golden shower, to enable Ferdinand to a& your hand with a good grace, and afk it fuccefsfully ; and shape out fome courfe fora pair of true lovers; 'whole poverty is almost equal to their virtues; and who cannot, like the Cameleon, feed on air—alias, the truest love.— As for Melvin, he feems to look as if he v/as Sure of me; but perhaps he may find himfelf mistaken, lie is a very pretty fellow, and has a very pretty fortune : An East-India Captain, is, however, at a twenty-thoufand-pounder ; and where the mind is difinterested, the odd five will never have fqfficient weight to turn the Scale, We shall foon fee how matters willgo with

K
/
Your most affe'Sionate
Ella Rivers
L E IV
lif
d 1
I8«i
cox HEATH
. I
: \ t >
•	T
LETTER VII.
U R breakfast this morning was a truly tra-gi-comic Scene. The beaux and belles were no Sooner assembled, than Mrs. Mildmay, with a SweetneSs that would unlock the clofest heart, afk-ed Wilfon if he intended toTeassume his military occupation.
• He replied, with a glow of countenance that was a Sufficient comment on his words, “ No, ** madam ; I will not Serve a Prince who can let ** Mr. Rivers rank at this time of day, and at ** home, under his immediate cogniz-ance, a **■ Lieutenant P*
How then, my generous cavalier, do you ** mean to difpoSe of yourfelf
He looked down, ssghed, and anfwered, ** he was at prefent wholly undetermined, except as to the article of being a Soldier I”
“ If you had been a married man,” Said Mrs. Mildmay, V I would have beSought you to accept, till Something better offered, of my land-stewardship. There is a Lodge quite as agreeably Situated,^ and quite as highly finished, as the Hall, only in miniature ; where an amiable couple, I must think, could fpend two or three hundred a year very pleafantly.—Don’t you think So, Mr. Melvin ?”
The happiest and most eligible fituation on earth !”
“ What pity,” replied Mrs. Mildmay, ‘‘it is,, then, Mr. Wilfon is but just arrived in England ! The World is So buSy, and at tho
'	“ Same
<<
it
it
it
it
it
it

€€
€C
€6
A N O V E L.
187
ff
u
u
iC
ii
fame time So good-natured, that was I to en-tain a batchelor in character of my homme d’affairesy they would instantly give him to me for a hufband. Had you been a longer time aniongst us, I should not have defpaired of fee-, ing you duly qualified for my great officer but thefe matrimonial unions,” looking styly at my father, require more patience and deliberation than accords with my convenience ; especially,” added she, humourousty viewing Lydia and her Swain, ** when the heart is wholly un-. ** touched, and has all its gradations to run through, of choicef acquaintanccy and nuptial “ preparation
You shall not my dear madam,” Said my father, “ always outgo me in kindnefs to my fa-< “ mily ; though I can perceive you have laid a
All that I could have

€i
ii
trap for my con Sent, alked of Heaven for a beloved and amiablq
therefere and
<<
it
ii
child, your goodneSs has, provided ; take her Wilfonl:My approving voice the paternal blessing, is all I have to bestow.’^
I WAS So little prepared for this denouement, that I burst into tears of joy, when Melvin (I Shall never forgive him the piece of wit, as I fup-poSe he called it) hastily Seizing Mr. Rivers’s hand, cried, “ And have you then no blessing for me ?—BleSs me, blefs me alSo, oh my father!” —which produced a laugh at ray expence : but he may, perhaps, repent his vivacity as long as he lives.
Upon my honour,” Said my father, you are all in a plot against me ; and this, I imagine, appears to you my unguarded mo» ment. But though you have my highest approbation, and are, I can perceive, perfedlly en train with all parties, yet you must excufe
me.
it
a
a
i€
ii
a
I
II
I!
i
ft 4.
i!
I
if
lUi
If.
:y!
iKij
!|H
P
U-:'
\\. > -Ul-
iff.
»i..
hb.
\ *
U ’

b •
iSS
e O X H E A T H
€(
me, if I let your matrimonial petition Hefome little time longer unanfwered on my table. The World has nothing to do with a young couple Mrs. Mildmay has provided for ; but Ihould you take Ella, the daughter of a poor Lieutenant^ during the campaign to wife, every mouth would be open againft me, and I fhould be faid to have fnapped at a young fel-low while his refolution was warm.-----You
i€
€C
€4
44
€4
44
€4
44
44

a
ought not,, my dear Melvin, to look diiap-pointed ; for my exprelTions haye painted my '‘ feelings ill, if they have not told you I fhall be happy, at a proper period, to be allied to you ; nor shall Ferdinand fail to find me a father, if ever I have the power of proving my-“ Self fuch.”
• Here was.another alluSion to the Secret avenue of our profperity ! —Why will this best of fathers behind only by halves ? Why nottell us, my dear shadam, the nature of his hopes, that we might hope with him ? — But he has a right to do as he pleafes, and I will be content.
' Mrs. Mildmay propofed having the wedding a private and a fpeedy one. — “ We need */ not,” Said she, “ give a history of the young gentleman’s pretenfions to the lady’s hand, or mention the era of their first tender attachment ; it is fufficient to announce them for man “ and wife to fuch as deferve fo mUch attention “ from us : and as I really am distressed for a “ perfon to Supply poor Lifimore’s place, and shall have my affairs in tevnhh derangement uh-lefs I am early fuited, I think next Monday (which is five days from this our confultation) ought to be the day.”
,My father fubmitted\the whole management to her wisdom and friendship; and thus we shall
' ' have
r ^
44
44
K
44
V-
44 4 4 44 44
A NOVEL.
189
€(
(C

€<



iC

have a Mrs. Wilfon next week in our family.------
I (hall expedl a letter of congratulation—a chear-ful, a rejoicing letter from you on the occaSion. , My father now enquired into the adventures Wilfon had met with Since their Separation, and received the following very extraordinary partir culars:
It was old Wilfon, as Lydia had an acr count from her friend, by whofe orders hisrer turn home with the litter was cut off, and his confequential treatment nearly fuch as was described. Finding his father’s temper grow more and more austere and inflexible ; Frank, the fon, began to meditate an efcape, and re-folved to take all the dangerous chances on his head. He accordingly watched an opportunity, and with three pistoles only in his pocket becarne a fugitive.
“ On reaching a little town, he was kindly entertained by an old man and his wife, for the first night of his journeying ; and early next morning let forward, to the best of his judgment, for the fpot of my Father’s reSidence» The day was intenfely hot, and he was obliged to climb a tree to shelter himle|f from the fcorching rays of the fun. In this sttuation, a fort of Banditti came riotousty along ; — and on perceiving him, in the wantonnefs of their hearts were for shooting at him, as a good mark. But changing their minds, he was commanded to defcend, and shew c'aufe why his life should be fpared.
What does valour avail a man under fuch circumstances as thefe ? The thought of his beloved Lydia gave a value to his existence beyond even the ties of nature, and he refolv-ed to comply with every possible injundion, to
Soften,
€C

a
a



a

€i



iC
iC


COXHEATH
c
c
c
c
i
€
€
(
C
C
c
i
€
i
C
<
c
c
i
c
c
c
c
c
>
cc
€C
I
Soften, to foothe, to engage them to mercy : he therefore hastened to prefent himfelf on his feet before them ; and replied to their interrogations, that he was a poor unfortunate young man, who had fled from a stern master, and was wandering to a place where he hoped he should get employment. They Surveyed him in much the fame manner as the Smithfield dealers do their purchafes ; allowed him to be a very decent fellow ; and that as his life would do them more good than his death, he should live ; So bid him be fatisfied. They then opened a wallet, and Spread what it contained of refreshment on a bank, and Suffered him to participate j after which they Set off, and he was compelled to accompany them.
Nine days did he herd with thefe favages ■; —favages by nature, however calling them-Selves civilized; — who fubststed by rapine, and Sanctified the most daring outrages with the name of retaliation.— The whole country, Said they, is a state of warfare—brother against brother. Son against father. We free-bopters then pay them only in their own coin ; and whether rebels or loyal fubjeCts, they deServe to Smart, to teach them to feel for the distref-fes of their neighbours.
“ In the courfeof their travels, they met with Some Spanish agents, who are employed to furnish the Brazils, and the other poffeffions of his Most Catholic Majesty, with staves, &c. to one of whotfi they fold him ; — and he was Soon put on board an Acapulco stoop, and conveyed to a remote part of the South Continent
" The per Son for whom he had been ptir-chafed was an old gentleman, who had made
** repeated
A NOV E L.
101

U
€(
if
a
repeated voyages to the East, and was fup-pofed to be immenfely rich ; but having outlived a wife and three beloved children, he had retired from all commerce, as it were, with the world, and was as abstemious and as pious as a Bramin.
“ Wilson, in the instant of his presentation, perceived a ray of benevolence in his master’s countenance; nay, fancied, allowing for the difference of their ages, that he was very like Colonel Rivers ; he therefore refolved to Serve him with all his heart, until he should come to a knowledge of his difpofition.
Don Jerome was pleafed with him but your Spaniards can ill brook a foreign favourite : he accordingly covered his growing approbation of the unfortunate youth under the dignity of referve, and thus Saved him from, a little million of dangerous enemies.
Here he dragged on fifteen months of his existence, till hope itfelf began to expire ; when one morning, as he worked, his ear cought certain founds that fixed him to the fpot he was on with Surprize and horror. . .It my dear madam, the confpiracy of five
tt
n
*e
a
a
a
iC
a
4i
ii
a
a
ic
a
a
ii
a
was
ii
a
ii
ii
ii
it
ii
ii
ii
ii
ii
ii
staves to murder and rob his master. The time when, place where, and means how, he learned from iheir indifcretlon; for it was not accident, but the profecution of his public taste, which had brought him So near them. The point was how they would behave, .if they discovered their error ; whether they would give him his life, or bury the Secret with their stillettos in his bofom ; they, however, happily departed without perceiving him, and he retired to ponder on the condudt he should purfue.
As

u
' I 1
11
tgz
^ O X HEATH:
I
B
I
n
ii
■*T
r
i
If
rii
'n
I
ifi
At
111
i;i
111 •»
it
»t 1 •
* t
T
iii
d ; > i i
* I
pi
p|
I!
€C
€C
ic
€C
t€
€C
€€
€C
(C

a
€C
ic
As he had quitted his labour without leave, he was forced to counterfeit Sudden indifpofi-tion. The old gentleman’s humanity wai touched ; he came himfelf to fee him, and ad-minister a cordial with his own hand : but they were not alone. Wilfon was fo much agitat-ed,, that he could''not bold the glafs to his jips:
the benevolent old man did not difdainsto affift
¥
him, when he pressed his assisting hand with Such earnestnefs, and looked fo meaningly up in his face, that he communicated a Somewhat of his alarms to his master’s bofom, who with great prefence of mind cried out. He is dying 1 Run and,call for help.	Am
** The lad who had fat with him being gone,he told the poor old gentleman in a few words his danger, who embraced him as his guardiap-angel, and wetted him with his tears.— I had a Son, who, had he lived, would now have been much about your age, cried he; and I might have expected my preservation from bis activity and tendernefs. —You have performed a child’s part by me, and, instead of my stave, shall henceforth be a child to me.— Several men coming into the room prevented his faying more, and Wilfon being pronounced better, was left to his repofe.
“ THE bloody and diabolical bussnefs was to be accomplished that very night. Fifteen per-fons formed his whole family, five of whom had already confpired against him ; and Heaven only knew how far the others might be tampered with. There was, however, no time to be lost.—He felefted three who stood higheft in his good opinion, and fent them to
fee how the poor youth went on, with orders
to



if
if
if
if
if
if
ff
ff
if
fC
if
if
ff
ff
ff
if
■' ji
■‘il
M.l.
IIJ
I
■i
i h
A NOVEL.
193
((
4C
iC
to call him, if they found him worfe. He was much worfe, and Don Jerome flew to his apartf, menl.
€6
4(
it
it
it
ti
it
tt
it
it
it
it
it
He pressed him in his arms; befought him to live for his fake (for defpair had adtually thrown him into the condition he at first conn-teffeited) ; and telling the three Servants the nature of his obligations to Wilfon, he alked them if they would stand by him in his hour of distrefs. They declared themfelves ready to die in fuch a caufe, and engaged to strengthen, their party before the evening. So as to be able “ to give the.,rListians a warm reception.—They were as good as their word. The five original confpirators were the only foes he had to fear. The next question was, to take them in their own toils, and difpatch them, to a man, without hefitatlon or mercy.
“ Night arrived.—The poor old gentleman fhut hirafelf up for half an hour, Wilfon apprehends, in.prayer. ! He then repeated his vi-Sit. My dear boy. Said he, be careful of you-r own Safety. A violent death, even to a man on the verge of the grave a« I am (for I am upwards of Seventy) has its terrors. Nature revolts at the idea, and bids reSistance : I however, would rather fall, than Survive my deliverer. It never struck me till this moment,
t
that it is possible Some fond parent may weep your lofs with the Same anguish I have done the death of my boy. Your education, 'your principles, befpeak you born to better fortune :—but I will enquire into every particular, if I See to-fmorrow’s dawn. As to mf wealth, the bait of murder, I will defend it to reward my friends the only value it can have with one whoshasnot an heir to enjoy it, Be-
VoL. II.	I	war®

tt
ft
tt
it
ft
it
«
it
it
it
it
it
a
it
it
r
kc
V

1;*
i'
l!i
1..
»t' 1
' 1
:»V
■r!
I
n
rfel
lU!
i
lii
■ '•.1 •i
■i‘l 11, >
;iO
;h
i
i!
fill
Ui •
b' I
lii
r?
?■ r
(b
; ?

^'1
m
!!|i
1!
»
; !t
ill

i i
hi
II
■ I
• I *
?l
hi
lil
J." I
u !
ibii
I
V
tt •: *
V
i’ I »
i-1*
n;
ib’f CM
a;
H
Hi
Mil
4.
1'. L ■
t\:
nii
il I!
H'i.
L
h
iifl<
fi!
■I!‘
I
i!ii
;!il

.11

ili
194
CO X H E A T H
if
4<
f f
ware then, of rushing , unnecessTarily into dan» ger. I must embrace you to-morrow morning, or I shall agonixe, not rejoce, at beholding the the light.—They parted, and the bloody Icenc came on. The poor old gentleman’s friends difpofed themfelves judiciousty, and effeded every dessred purpofe. The ruffians were cut off, and Wilfon efcaped unhurt.—But fuch was the shock Don Jerome’s nerves had received, that he Sickened on the morning of his deliverance, and went off in a few months in a deep decline.
When he found his dissolution approach, he called his attendants about him, conSisting of his faithful Servants alone, for he would .not think of adding to his family after the night of affastination ; and having a parcel of lots ready prepared in the crown of his hat, he bid them draw, and know their fortune. The first who put his hand in found himSelf mafter the houfe and gardens, with many valuable ei ceterasy So foon as Don Jerome should expire. The Second had a portion.of Silver, which gratified his utmost wish. Thus every lot gave fatisfadtion to the adventurer.—And now Wil-

Son was called upon to read his fate ! The paper he had drawn ihtitled him only to the waistcoat his master generally wore, and which appeared to him to ,be almost thread-bare. And if you love me. Said the dying Don, you will wear it for my fake. Let me put it ou for you, with my tenderest blessing. Here is, however,'my dear- boy, a purfe of Spanish gold to pay your passage to the European con-continent, and remember Providence will be your guide and protedlion, for your care tq cloSe my ey'^es in peace.—*He put on the waist-,
coat
((
i'j:
A N O V E L.
195
4(
4<

if
if
€i
if
ii
if
a
** coat to pleaSe him, and watched by him all the night.—At four in the morning he departed. , Don Jerome had conjured him to withdraw himfeh immediately on his deceafe, without even taking leave of his companions. He “ followed his body to the grave, wherein it was obliged to be depoSited a few hours after his departure, fhed a pious tear to^ his memory, and walked off from thence unobferved : and getting a tattered cloak at.the first village by way of difguife, he at length, by the dint pf perfeverance and fatigue, reached the fea-stiore, and was taken on board an Acapulco kind of packet bound for the .^Philippine Hands.
Having repofed himfelf a necelTary time, he enquired how he should proceed to Europe. There was no other way, at, that period, than by advancing farther to the East. In a word, he was forced to go to China ; and being at-** tacked by a fever, lost his passage for that feafon.
“ The year following he embarked, and cashe with a profperous gale for near half the voyage ;—when a tempest overtook them,' and reduced them to the extremity of trusting to the “ Ion£f-boat for fafetv. Their provifions ^wefe all exhausted, and having no profpedt of efcap-ing death, either by famine or drowning, dp-fpair fat on every face. What then must Be their joy on beholding a fail only a few leagues “ distant ! They strained every nerve to meet their good fortune,—and the ship bearing down in the fame latitude. Soon brought them with-_ “ in gun shot pf her.—She was a PortugueSe ** bound for Lishon.
I 2	At
if

ii
ii
a
ii
ii
ii
ii
a
ii
a
ill

COXHEATH

€C
€ €

At Lilbon they arrived, where he again toctk a fever ; and being kindly a'ttended by an |old nnan’s daughter in whole houfe he lodged, the Don conceived the highest refentment againll him j—-and, in order to be revenged on him for alienating his child’s affe6tions from him, as he called it, before he was perfectly recovered, decoyed him, under pretence of taking the air, on board a fmall Chinefe trader, then in the harbour.
“ It was in vain to remonstrate ! To China he went a Second time, and from thence to Bengal, where he was Set on shore, and meeting by accident with Captain Davies, formed an acquaintance with him, engaged a passage in his ship, and with a fmall venture purchafed at Pekin returned to England, where Providence had made him ample amends for alb his Suffer^ issgs by restoring him to love and friendship.” And thus ended this poor young man’s travels! But methinks his was a mean reward for the Saving of Don Jerome’s life — an old quilted fattin waistcoat.—He has promifed to shew it us, and allures us, there is no curiossty in it whatever.—Y et fee how gracious, neverthelefs. Heaven is in all its difpenfations ! Had he drawn the houfe or other local advantage, instead of hojv being in the arms of his friends, we should poffi-bly have never feen him more. He fays he reveres the old garment, not only for having clipped the departed Don’s body, but for having been the compamon of all his distresses.—I Snail tell you no other news till I write to tell you of Lydia’s nup-; fo believe me
Your, &c.
y
ELtA Rivers.
L E .D
A NOVEL.
1
91
letter vin.
a
<(
Now the happy knot is tied,
Lydia is a chamiing bride I
J ALONE, you must know, accompanied them to church, where Ferdinand waited to give his Sister away. I wish I could do as much for my dear Mrs. Mildmay ; but Mr. Rivers Senior, madam, is totally infenfibki however fufceptible you may have found Mr. Rivers junior, and I am quite out of patience with him.*}
Mrs. Mildmay called me into her clofet af-ter breakfast.—“ You must, my good girl,” Said (he, prefent this bank-note to your ssster, as out of your own pocket-money, otherwife it will be painfully accepted.” It was for two hundred pounds. — “ There is no going to houfe-“ keeping (added she) with an empty purfe.” — Lydia blushed, and thanked me ; but I believe (ufpeisted the fountain from whence my bounty flowed, and immediately, as she thought herSelf in duty bound, put it in herhushand’s care.— Nor will he abufe the trust*—Ah Don Jerome I Don Jerome I would my Mrs. Mildmay have rewarded me, if I had Saved her life, with nothing but an old quilted fattin petticoat! — I wonder the man, my dear, can rest in his grave. **
Mrs. Wilson returned to Gamp after breakfast, where we shall join her in the afternoon ; but her hushand was ib impatient to enter upon his office, that Mrs. Mildmay could not refufe him instant poITestion of poor LiSimore’s accounts, over which he is now poring, in order to render
13	her

C O X HEATH;
her right worthy Service, in return for the obligation she has conferred on him.
The Londoners are reiapfedinto their fashionable distemper, and nothing now is heard of but the Camp-influenza. Away they trot it in their one-hoi fe-chaife ; — grand-children, . grand-mp-thers, every relative, from the greatest to the least, rush in upon us. The- tavern-keepers have hardly room for them to take even a temporary repast ; and was you but to fee the conlumption of provisions,‘ you would conclude the animal creation bled for us alone. The royal stag waves gracefully with the wind, and never was fight fo fought after, or fo enjoyed fince the days of Adam.
$o Soon as the grand review is oyer, report fays we are to go into winter-quarters. 1 hope rny father’s station will be in the neighbourhood of Mildmay-Hall : if not, Lydia and 1 must change chai afters. I must attend him, and she must foot he Mrs: Mildmay in my abfence. You may Ishile, but I am Satisfied she would regret the Ibfsof my company.
You think, I fuppofe, Melvin has his share in mv martial re Solution. Think fo still, and be deceiv’d.— No, madam; it is for Melvin to follow my lead. I am not yet fo unfortunate a dam-fel as to be jostled on the wrong fide ©f the question. When I am the man’s wnfe, it is poshble I may become a part of his baggage ; but at present I am both his and your humble fervant —ata distance.
My father—-Y^ou would be delighted to fee
how happy Lydia’s marriage has made him. --------
Well; who shall pretend to read the page of Futurity ? If I had had millions to (port with, they would ail have gone on the lay of my being first
difpofed
A N O V E L.
199
dlfpofed of ; but the poverty of her Twain, in-ftead of proving, according to the customs .of the world, a bar to their union, \Vas the very circumstance that promoted it, Vet, to fee what differ-rent effects flow from the Sime caule ! Ferdinand’s being poor is his diiqualification. I hate riddles, and therefore leave this in the hands of Time ; only wishing the unravelling may be pro-^ pitious.
But where is the congratulatory letter I ex— pedied, I demanded ? Am I to fpm out my poof brains for your amuiement ? or, what is to the. full as laborious a talk, drefs up every little tale of woe or felicity into an abfolute history, and receive not even the reward of fair words ? Neither the plea of indolence, or of bustnefs, will on this occaSion be admitted : (o take up your pen, and do your duty like a good girl. CurioSity may, however, be a more powerful incentive with you -than the defire of obliging. Then mark me ! v This is the last epistle, either interesting or ghif historical or chit-chat, you shall have from me, unlefs you eondefcend to write me a longish, . handfomeish, pleafantish letter, as a general an- -fwer to, and general congratulation of.
• i
Ella Rivers.

• X

1
— j	•
4
I4

LET-
t

I
rft
aoo
C O X HEATH;
L E T T E R IX.
. I
St
'•I
iii
ill
‘ i .
I
I
. L ■
l\S-
• I
IH
11
IV
iltf
H
; t T
\P
! —
' • I it
:0
I
I
Pi
iPi
Jti*
w
RI T I N G, my dear Ella, is your talent, your delight; and a variety of fubje£ts court your pen. You choofe and refufe as humour diQ;ates,. and I receive with'gratitude whatever has the good-fortune to engage your attention. Bur is it in charaQier for my fair friend fo abundantly to' feel her fuperiority, and extort a letter from the' barren foil I inhabit, merely as a foil to her elegant performances ?—^Be it fo, then ; but as you know my heart, you can much better conceive’ than I can exprefs, the joy I feel on the change in Lydia’s fate. ■— Poor, fweet girl ! the ufelefs* tears she has shed ! But they are all done* away ;
and if your new briother is the yputlr you ste-feribe hirn,' she wiilbe^ one of the staypiest: Wivei in his Majesty’s dorhinions.
My father came home_ last nfght iii a penfive state of mind, difl'atisfafition. He feid, he hadheard"' Rivers “ was fuch a fool as to flight all the overtures Mrs. Mildmay made him. He was a Stoic.— fiich a fortune might have charms for him, if the woman had been a dowdy ; which was fo far, however, from being the cafe, that he did not believe there was a more perfedt creature on earth.”
I MADE no reply.
Do you think his principles of honour are fo rigid, as not to marry her merely becauie ** all the wealth is on her Side
IVERILT
I did not at first*distinguish it froni
He fold,
n
t(
t€
<(

f \
A NOVEL.
ao't
€C
( 6
j.
“ I VERILY believe it.”
“ Indeed P’
“ Indeed.”	'
He paui'ed again.
“ I CANNOT account for his behaviour that way, neither.” ,
** shR !” faid I, wishing to come at the knowledge of what was pasting in his mind.
The boy,” continued he, would have told tales, however fecrei the father. — No, no ; they have both treated me ill, and 1 will “ defpife them.”
“ Dear Sir,” faid I, ** if I might but fpeak
“ without offending you.”
“ Speak, and fear not.”
We were interruptedv Ella, in this very critical, this Seemingly moft propitious moment, by the arrival of the Parfon of the parish.
Th e Back-gammon tables were called for, and I was forced to retire.—Pity my weaknefs ; for I have wept my fuppofed disappointment for thefe two hours. All uncertain as it is, what might have been the conSequence of the explanation I’ was refolved to^ give him !
On revolving the whole matter I begin, however, to be of opinion, that a perSonal diScuflion' is, not So eligible as a literary one. He might frown me from my purpoSe ; or, what is worie, , terrify me into a misrepresentation of the interesting fa£fs I was about to relate. Oiv Some occasions the omishon, nay, the tranSpoSition, of a Single word is fatal. I should never have the courage to proceed, if he betrayed either diSpleafure;. or impatience.
15
i M US tE?-

202
C. O X H E A T H
Poor
I MUST condemn Mr. Rivers’s pun^ilios, let them relult from whatever honourable motives. Melvin has his conlent, though the ceremony is delayed. I have no doubt, be alTured, of your Iwain’s constancy ; but when once people are come to a proper understanding on certain fub-jeCts, and have no impediments in the way, I '.vould not retard the concluston, if I was the wife ones. — You are a fluttering girl! Let Melvin, however, look to it I — But fhould you play him a stippery trick, I fhould place your levity folely to Your father’s account, with his far-fetched de-corums ! — The Camp air, my dear, has not Joftened him !
Ferdinand deSires to fee my letters! — Ferdinand ! They would only difcredit me in your good opinion. — I have not let concealment, with Shakefpear’s beautifully delicate maiden, prey on •my damafk cheek. — I blufh, Ella, at the recollection of what I have written ; yet must flatter rpyfelf Ferdinand knows my turn of mind too well, to put a WMong construftion on my tenderest epithets. I have called him my brother, friend ! — And has he not been both to me ? the companion of my pleafant, the sharer of my ferious hours } To him I owe every mental accomplishment I pof-lefs ; mv taste for the lublime ; mv admiration of the Simplicity of Nature, and Nature’s production ; my acquaintance with moral, with entertaining, with liberal authors ; my common fenfe in all the articles of private conduCl.-— But I hasten to quit a fubjeCI on which I always lofe myfest, and shall only repeat, that my tenderest friendship and Sympathy await you all.— You cannot communicate a joy I shall not feel, or touch a-string of Sorrow .without wounding my SenSibility.
If
A N O V E L.
20,5
If Mrs. Wilfon should not deem writing to a young friend incompatible with the dignity of a wife, I shall be happy to receive a line from her fweet Self to make me new o’er, as Shakefpear phrafes it, what I am already, a Daughter of Felicity on her account. Her language is all-gentle, generous. Soft ; but yours variegated by the various fenfations that Rapidly Seize, and rapidly pafs over your mind. ■—You are, nevertheless, a very tolerable girl, and
tf
1 am.
\
With much affection, 6ec.
C. Fletcher,




r
Vi
9
» • ?
*
• V
L.X r*
C O X H E A ^ H
r* .
■f
\
L E T T E R X.
i (
So cold, fd chilling cold I
»■	fc
' * ■ ■ •
X OLE R A B L E !—A very pretty kind of a lukewarm phrafe that ! —Tolerable I quotha.—I wi Ih, however, my dear madam, 1 could return the compliment ; but the truth is, you are very /«tolerable ; and take notice, I-shall henceforth write much rather to pleafe myfelf, than an unthankful, peevish, fuper-refined damSel, who does not know what she'wotild be at'; istbo Squeamish to anfwer a plain question ; and, instead of Yes or-no No, leads the imagination a dance through all the mazes and meanders of falfe delicacy, leaving your own ingenuity to be your only clue to extricate you therefrom. You may make a very eligible and exemplary wife, with all this falalijl)-nefs about you ; but, take my word for it, you are a very dull correfpondent ; and to Mts. Wil-Son I refer you for every information in future. My clerical admirer fancies he gains ground in my affediions; and has fo fine a hard head of his own, or rather is fo intoxicated with Self-love, that he fufpedfs not he has a rival. He paces it on his little poney by my fide, or rolls languish-ingly in a corner of my benefaftrefs’s coach, when admitted to that honour ; fings a/ me ; flatters my foibles, my defeats ; for if you would believe him, I am the whole and Sole objedls of his thoughts, his wishes, and his cares. He was a laughable creature at first, but is become downright troablefome.
Lord

A N O V E L. .
, Lord'BraT-EN has done hinifelf the honour to •write to me. Hearts,: darts, and all the Tweet UngliDg of Tweet words is contained in his epif- -tie 1—He hears he has competitors.
■’Tis Heaven’s own fault that made me like the fun. The reafonable worssTtip of mankind.
All that he is prepared for : but woe be bn his head who wins the prize from him ! — Heaveii, earth. Teas and mountains shall be rbuTed inshis cauTe, to punish, to crush his arrogance. ^— Mr»
is, however, shtreated ixi JHken	tft
watch over his life, his love ;,-r— and thus"! Hope you will learn to TubScribe to my cbiifequence,
■ Wilson is a finb-Tpirited fellow. He wants my father to buy a Majority, and, patriarch-liHe, would pledge himfelf to Serve Seven years for the Rachel he has obtained^;—in plain English, would Hand debtor to Mrs,. Mildmay fpr the' money,.to be paid by instalments.— Will yOu, Sir, not give a young man Tome encouragement ? — I accepted my life at yovr hands unconditionally ; “'I afk you only fo oblige me, by ustng a few pounds of mine. Surely, if you can think the latter an obligation, you treble the weight you have laid ort my poor shoulders, excluuve of your last great gift, your Lydia. — Would you, could you. Sir, bestow her oh a young fellow you difdain to' receive an acknputledge-’ merit from, for all your kindnefs ?
My father inststs upon it, that it is shore honourable for him to clofe hismilitary life as a Tub-altern, than buy himfelf into dignity.—“ When, “ commistions,'’ faid he, “ are fet up to Tale*
“ the man who hkshiidlst tnojjey wili-ever be con-•	‘ ' '	SideVed


ii it
a
iC
it
a
it
%o6
C O X H E A T H :
a
4£
44
44
ssdered to have the most merit; let the guiltyy therefore, blujh—I will never receive promotion, but at the hands of my Sovereign, as a noon-day compenfation for the toils I have fuf-tained in his fervice.’*
Mrs. Mild mat applauds this reafoning : but to prove how very ready she is to trust the young steward with her property, she fays, he may command the loan of a thoufand guineas, whenever he can prevail oh Ferdinand topurchafe.—“ Fer-“ dinand shall not,” she fays, “ wait the stow ** reward of virtue, but conform to the custom of the times,	pur chafe his way to a gene-
** ralship.”
Hjere Ferdinand’s modesty puts in his caveat: ‘ He hopes to be Mrs. Mildmay’s Chaplain yet before he dies ; the Field has not the charms for him, it has for many young men ; and it would be his highest ambition to enjoy a comfortable Living.”
“God and Nature,” faid this dear woman, “ implants an ele6lion in cur hearts, that it is “ tyranny, it is impiety, to reSist ; and stnee he ** will not be a General, he shall be a Bishop.” My father replied in the language of Sancho Pancha, “ that he much feared, if Heaven was “ to rain mitres, whether any one of them would fit Ferdinand’s head.”
“ Then I beg,” faidi, “ I may recommend my clerical adorer to your patronage, madam ; for lawn steeves, I am perfuaded, are included “ in his Pater Noster, as well as they constitute a part of his Litany—his We hefeechihee, &c.” My father called me a mad girl, and bid me not be prophane.—“ It is fo difficult, my dear,’' faid he, “ to draw the line on fome fubjeSs, and
Separate X\itman from the teKif that we should ;	:	“be

it
<<
A N O V E L.
207
he cautious, lest, whilst we only mean to ridi-cule the one, we should Icandalize the other.” i Felt the justice of the rebuke, and mads
him an acknowledging bow.
So warm and boisterous a firing is kept up Since our expeClation of the Sovereign, that my poor ears cannot reconcile therafelves to foster founds thaii the roaring of guns, and the clashing of fwoids ; and I more than ever exclaim.
Oh what a charming thing’s a Battle f
For do but think, how glorious, how delightful it must be, to mow down whole files of brave fellows at a stroke ! —Limbs fcattering, brains flying I—Let me then repeat the above quoted line,
T	•	4
•	, r
Oh what a charming thing’s a Battle I
I
My father, it feems, on his first starting in life, formed a friendship of as glowing and illustrious a kind, as ever was recorded in any annals— no infult to the names of the Pylades’ and Orestes* who may have existed fince the Flood.
They both bore arms under the command of
"V
General Wolf, of immortal memory, and both made the cahapaign with him, in which that Hero fell. Heaven wipe the fubfequent dishonour from the British page I fay I, in the true fpirit of female patriotifm. •
In the heat of battle, every Commander, from the halbert to the truncheon, has bufinefs enough on his hands, if they have but judgment enough to execute it. The word was given for my father’s corps to advance. He did advance, and obeyed the martial in its utmost latitude.
2o8
C O X H E A T H
though he beheld his beloved friend fall, and a party push forward, who, he was fatisfied must trarhple him to death, if his wounds were not mortal,— He shuddered — the big tear stole down his manly°cheek : his own life he would have freely offered up in the attempt to fave his friend ; but he must have done more. — The very effort would have thrown his corps, if not the whole wdng he belonged to-, into contusson. All the brave fellows he beheld must perhaps have been lost—his honour too !—-He tore himfelf from the fpot, and left him, alas ! to perish in the general carnage.
Thz battle over, duty gave place to friendship. His wound in this engagement was a flight one. Having yielded to the pofitive injun^Iions of his captain, to have it dressed, he flew back to the field, to Seek out his friend amongst the many dead bodies. The uniform the fame made his Search a difficult one, until a ring with a picture in jt, familiar to his fight, pointed him out to htmS—-Ganl finish the drawing ? —He was wounded in three places, but had fuffered more by being trod under foot, than by the cafinon’s mouth. One of his fine eyes was perished ; the other languished in its Socket.—The well-known voice of Rivers gave his' foul a momentary fenfation of pleafure ; but he had come too late, except to let him have the felicity of expiring in his arms.—He died, madam, and my father returned to his tent in the Utmost difconfolation, having first committed the care of the body to a faithful dfummer, who pledged himfelf to defend it from outrage, and convey it to the first town for decent interment, at rny father’s expence.
This fad Scene, together with the cutting-off of his adored commander. Wolf, should, one would
have given my father a difrelish for the
martial
fuppofe
A: N O V r L.
26^
martial profession.—But no : he remembered the innumerable accidents that attend humanity. Had his friend been a fpotriftnattf his horfe might have have thrown him ; &n alderman^ his luxuries might have shortened his days ; a courtier, burnt champaign might have been his bane; a —-----But I
shall enumerate no more of his ressedtions ; only tell you, that he argued down his regrets into re-^-Signation, and refolved the chance of war into the common chance of existence: fo forming new friendships, prepared new wounds for his fenstbi-hty ; and from choice, as well as a nice regard for man’s opinion, has perSeyered in his first eledlion^ and will live and die, I verily believe a Soldier.
If I had a taste for melancholy stories, how rapidly could I let them fall from my pen 1 But melancholy stories are the bane of vivacity, and vivacity is the vital of my composition, and shall be cherished by me as fuch.
Sometimes, indeed, when Melvin’s features are beaming with benevolence, of which he pof* feffes a plentiful portion,- IfOWh-I cannoV confine the frightful wanderings of my imagination: yet be of good cheer; we shall have no bloody nofes this campaign ; and as a peace is the general objedt with France, America, and EngSaud? from their ebbing fina-nce/S, shattered trade, and endangered Sions, itia a strong article of my Christian that a-peace will- be- patched up before the return of the feafon for taking the field, admitting that the patch-work cannot .hold toge-Ferdinand will, neverthelefs, be enabled to make an honourable retreat ; and having refumed the clerical charadler, will have bid a-final adieU to every hostile manceuvre and hostile pretenSion.
I CONGRATULATE you on Vour agreeable
and particularly on the relaxation- oi
your

210
C O' X TI E A T H
your father’s wrath; towards my poor harmlefe family. May the fit of lenity, contrition, or by what other name you choole to distinguish it, in-creafe upon him until it attains a happy criSis!
- Ferdinand paid me a vifit at my toilette this morning, and looked fo much in the Abelard st)le, fo fweetly distressed, and fo tenderly pen^!* five, I could not forbear indulging him, unalked, with aSight of your last letter ; — the worst, by the bye, you ever wrote me : for it is flimfy, linfy-woolfey—-neither rhime nor reafon ; and yet a Somewhat of both. You can be nervous and pathetic, if you pleafe ; but this was not your hpurpf infpiration.
He neverthelefs behaved in fuch a manner, that had I been the next heir to a large fortune, I would have taken out a statute of lunacy against him:. He kissed the dear, dear name ; and hung on each tender word, fyllable by fyllable. It was jaU en'ehantrhent, infatuation, folly ; and I at length gazed upon him a few moments, then laughing from my free lungs roufed him into re? colleflion. He is my brother, madam, and I have aright to treat him with what familiarity I pleafe.—^As your lover, you may exalt him into a divinity, if you pleafe ; and then fall down and worship the molten calf you have fet up. But pardon me ; you must not hope to lead me astray in the paths of idolatry. I know him weak, frail, doating ; — he is, however, your own true lover^ and you will paint him in what colourings shall Seem best in your fight; and foul befal the woman that could attempt to obfcure the painted cloud that beautifies your days!
Wilson has already attained fuch a height in Mrs. Mildmay’s esteem, that I fear the poor fellow’s head should grow giddy. It is not every one
who.
A N 6 V E L.
211

who can look down from an eminence with a steady eye and a fure footing. He has, according to her account, the best understanding, and the best heart in the world ; is her Cicijbeo on all occafi-ons.—“ We shall hear what Mr. Wilfon lays to “ it.—SKt will appeal to a clearer judgment than
our own.-----Mr. Wilfon will be fo good as
to guide us.”—1, however, have none of this far-fetched humility, but take upon me to fet him right when I think him wrong, with a ** Pray, good fir, don’t fuppofe youiielf infallible 1 Mrs. Mildmay is as partial to you as she is to me ; therefore learn to make a proper ufe of her kindnefs. By telling you what yoii are notd she instrufits you what you ought, to be ; and your own confcience must be your mirror, as it is your fister’s to fet your mind by, and difcover to you your own -deficiencies.—To mean well, is a great step towards doing well :—but though it may be impossible for my weak fex to accomplish fo great a work as perfedlion of charafter, it would be a high reflection on you, a Lord of the creation, to to be found stopping short of lefs than perfeCt.’* ^He rallies me with much pjeafantry on thefe occafions ; begs me, like the crab’s daughter in the fable, to shew the way, and promifes to follow. ,
But wherefore do I dwell fo long on Such a trifling fubjeCl ?—He is very well, for a fister’s hushand ; and as fuch I confider him : but I must chooie a nobler theme for the exercife of my fine
talents, or I should ill deferve the name of
K
it
if
ft
if
ft
it
if
ft
ft
€<
4C
44

Your friend, &c.
Ella Rivers.

L E t
212
coxheatH
LETTER
XI.
-

1 ought to gfieve, but cannot what I ought
RS. MILDMAY has written a fweet, fenfi-ble, explanatory epistle to Lord Brazen ; Setting forth my reafons for loving the instnuating Melvin, together with her reafons for efpoufing his interest, and intreating him not to excite my father to an opposttion that would unavailingly interrupt the friendship and the filial peace at pre-feht Subsisting amongst us ; and wishing him a more fiuitable bride.
How it will work on his fine or hfs rough feelings, I know not ; but if I read him right, he will not fit down fo Avell Satisfied with what he may conceive an indignity^ as is necessary to our repofe : yet let him struggle as he may, it will only pull the knot- of his mortification tighter.—We incapable of being shaken in our refolves, and can distinguish the difference between a diamond and a Scotch pebble.—A lucky hit That!—for you must obferve, the Brazens are most of them of Scottish extra^ion.
*Thts steek Chaplain, my adorer, should my Lord take it in his head he is the man I have cho-
*	•	$	'	f t
Idn, may perhaps be brought to Smart for his pre-fomptipn.—Heaven pardon me !, but i will flirt it a little with him, in order to give fome colour to Such a fufpicion ; for I know Melvin to have a “ foul made of fire,” your Americans and Africans being almost equally Children of the Snn ; and I should tremble for the confequence, if he was to become the mark of Lord Brazen’s refent-
ment,
We
lii
u
I :
A
NOVEL,
213
We beauties have a Sad time of it, my dear! The men are naturally hot-headed, and given to . broils-; they will fight ; and as Addifon lays. So I believe there are few quarrels without a woman in them.—And for the very reafon he assigns too, —That nothing elfe is worth quarreling about. —^Should this fatal face of mine, however, draw any fellow of merit into a Scrape, I should be ferioufly punished for the innocent gaiety of my heart ; and it will be exadly the fame thing, whether I am a dowdy or an Helen, if your maf-culine wretches choofe to constitute me a bone of contention.—But 1 fly this fubje^, or I should loon be as dull as a pashng bell.
Well, and how does Sir Ferdinand find hhn-felf ?—Is his fit of compunction over, for thp
fins he has committed against my family ?---or
does he hold himfelf ready to beg pardon when opportunity shall offer.
I HAVE a question to afk you.—You cannot doubt my friendship, you must not doubt my resolution ; for am I not the daughter of a folaier ? -—Do you imagine it might not be a forwarding of the wish of your heart refpeCting Ferdinand, if 1 was to Smile on this Lord ?—Lady Brazen .t Would not fuch a found, think you, tickle the old Baronet’s ears ?-—If fo, you may command me. But there is no time to be lost : his offended dignity may be appeafed, but it must be appealed on the instant——Speak then to this point by the return of post, or—for ever after be filent.
I HAVE feen the old w^stcoat. On my word a notable legacy 1—It is green fattin lined with green Silk, and bequilted at a violent rate.—1 thought the hot countries would not admit of fuch heavy garments. Wilfon, indeed, affirms, that it is light as taffeta, and that the heavinefs is only
in
214
COXHEATH:

in the eye : but all he fays does not pafs with me for gofpel,—I hope you will have ocular demonstration of his abfurdity in this particular, in lefs
than feven years distance from the prefent period,
#
Frailty, thy name is Woman.
V
' Mrs. Lisimore has So effedtually buried one ^hufband, that she is already casting about for another. My benefaftrefs was petrefied at the news ; but as she lets every one be happy their own way, the lady w'ill receive her good leave to play the fool and marry. Since fuch is her heart’s 'defire. <
Isay not a word, however, in condemnation '"of Second marriages. We all have our private opinions in thefe matters. ■ The affections, Madam, cannot be locked up by an event that le-'stores them to freedom—as one may fay. There is no companionablenefs in the grave ; and fuch is the cenforious temper of the world, that you can enjoy the conversation of a male on no other terms than	unfcandalixed. I have it
in contemplation, therefore, to raife a report, by way of a quickener to the nuptials I am anxious should take place ; and by perfuading a worthy couple the Camp whifper. is, that they ought to be man and wife, render them fo in redity.
There is no living on martial ground without learning to aCt the engineer on occafion'—My mine shall be dexterousty planned, the. combustibles judiciousty difpofed, and I will have an efpe^
_ cial eye to my own Safety. Mildmay Hall is fo Sweet a place, that methinks, as Swift fays.
Twould found more clever. To himf (meaning my father) and to his
ever';
heirs for
meaning
A N O V :ECL.
215
meaning myfelf,' and Ferdinand, and Lvdia
and-------Fill up the Space to your own fancy^
you are heartily welcome, I can affure you, madam.
Your father hears tales of my father! I should be glad to know through what channel;—does the Public then join names together^ which Faiei perhaps will ever keep ajutider.— Rivers and Mildmay ?—’.Ds a conjunction, Igrant.you, de-: voutly to be wished ; but I fear they will be found retrograde planets, and by an invissble attraction, be ever more on the point of uniting, but still purfue a different courfe.
Gapt. James Brazen is, it Seems, a dif-(lant relation of my Lord’s ; and being the medium of his condescending remembrance of us, is crept into our acquaintance. The Parfon and he debate on law, on phySic, on divinity ; on each of which Subjects, like the fiddlers in Nero’s time, he Subscribes to his patron’s Superiority ; for every great man may become, if he is not already, a. patron ; and he is armed at all points in the caule of SeU-intereff.
I SOMETIMES think, that. Spaniel-like, he is only doing his master’s bidding, in the court he pays to your humble Servant; and that instead of an admirer, I shall find him a Spy on my conduct. I clearly recoiled, that our acquaintance' commenced immediately on Lord Brazen’s departure. If So, I shall be counterworked with a wit-' nefsinall my little Schemes.
How harmIcSs do we females decide pur con-troverfies! if Scolding fails, we only pull caps, or fall foul on each other’s reputations, untie the* budget of Secrets, and lay open the foibles of our late boSom-friends, to the knowledge, infpedion, and judgment of the whole circle of our intimate
the
c
ai6
COX HEATH:
/
the males force their opponents into fearful com^ bats, and, forgetful
What dangers do environ
The men who meddle with cold iron,
will accept of no fatisfaftion, but fueh as the fword can give. Hence'the offender often triumphs over the offended—the amiable, the good. -—But we will talk no more of it.
We dined yesterday at the Lodge with Mr. and Mrs. Wilfon. It was always a delightful fpot ; but Lydia has much improved it by her taste for. flowers, and her unexampled neatnefs. I thought her a good girl, but never fufpe€led her of thedo^ mestic talents she difplays. She loves and honours her hushand as a wife ought to love and honour him, but can remember that there are hours enough in the twenty-four to bedear him, without furfeit-ing the ears of her company with inch fugar-plum epithets. I do not, indeed, fay, there is any rule without an exception but in nineteen cafes out of twenty, you will find the assertion hold good,' that she who labours to exhibit her conjugal ten-dernefs, is either a hypocrite, or a shrew at heart, and makes the poor man pay in private for all the homage he receives in public. No very comfort-table coriipromife, in my fenfe of things! But I will adopt a quite oppofite condudl, and Melvin shall applaud my wiidom and my delicacy, or he is no hushand for me. I shall take care to have a Saving claufe, a mental refervation, when I make my matrimonial vow that shall be a falvo for my con Science, if 1 break it as to the article of reverence, on discovering I have been impofed upon. Melvin will lead me to church with all the Loves and
%
Graces in his train: he will profefs himfelf.ra-y
eternal
A
K O V E t.
ai7
eternal debtor ; that his life shall be a fucceffion of gratitude, of fubmishon to my fovereign will. Now I only a Ik you, if It would not be both just and reafonable, on his changing, for me to change alfo ; and as he grows into the hushand in rough-nefs, in tyranny, in dishumour, for me to dwindle into the wife in petulance, in opposstion, in careleffnefs ? Give your worst of thoughts, your worst of words on the fubjedt ; I herewith fend you the neceffiry difpenfafion: but I will deal fp far candidly with you as to tell you, that, my re-folves will remain the fame, let your Sentiments be for or against them—Find me fuch another open dealing damfel, if you can.
-■r
I am, as ufual.
4 ^
Your
i
Ef.la Rivers.' *
2 -
d '

f r
* y r
* 1

- VOL. II.
K
L E .D
%
18
OOX H E A T H;
LETTER Xli.

\
If she


'	I
IL S on So parades it about Mr.vRivers--r
is So dutiful, and fo refpeflful, and So attentive, that we, his natural offspring, appear as nothings in the comparifon.—Then, again,x Mr.-Rivers is To h4appy, and So blessed, and fo thankful, to-Provi-■ dence, for giving,him-Such a fon, that poor Ferdinand’s merits are lost, in the blaxe of his brother-in-law’s defervings.
Lydia fees all this with delighted eyes, loved him forfnerly for being a pretty fellow, she now loves him for. being a good one.—He has fo winning a why with him, there is no reSisting him ; and, except a preference we must re-joice in, has an equal affedlion for us all.” WELL faid, Lydia !'^—Sing forth your hushand’s praifes, if it shall fo pleafe you ; but allow me to dissent frona your fuper-refined notions. It is art, downright, dexterous, inSidious art, that carries hitti the lengths he goes in my father’s favour;^— and you are a tame animal of a wife to be fatisfied with only the fecond place in his heart : your father, child, evidently possesses the first. Yet let me do the fellow justice.: he has left forhe very decent compliments to be prefented by me to my fair friend, and hopes there is an hour in store, when he shall pay them perfonally. Credulous Simpleton!—But he has trod fairy ground ever Since he arrived amoitgst us; nor can I wish to have him difenchanted.
Annette and her Lubin are wedded. She \iSits, but [will no more take up her refidence
in
A KOVEL.
2 if
in Camp, but he looks after the dairy,—a kind of lodge in the midst of the park,—where all our treafures in the milk, cheefe and butter way are depossted, and is the most docile and most grateful of beings ; and, as I have told you, lo foon as the wars are over, Lubin is to get his difcharge, and either occupy his paceable trade of a shoemaker, or have forae rural appointment at the-
Hall.
With Such a companion to tend a few sheep.
V
would, I verily believe, be the height of Annette’s ambition.
What a contrasted life mine is !—At Mild-raay-Hall the primitive times Teemed revived 1 Bleating stocks and lowing herds increafe the beauty of the fcene ;—all is innocence and fweet fimplicity,—Mrs. Mildmay is the queen, the parent of the fcene.——She is beheld, she is considered, as the Second Providence of her attendants;
Their lav/ her eye, their oracle her tongue ;
and is the heart-felt joy of all her acquaintance.
• At the Camp all is bustle and eonfuston.—The Bobadils strut, the Drawcanfirs stare, and the Fribbles trip—Hoarfe founds of every kind assail the ear;—the thunder of the artiUry, the crackling of the carbines, the crowding of the fpeSators, with their marvelings, their wranglings, and dieir
—there is no possessing one’s own
ifgusts;
mind a moment, or astcing yourfelf one cool, one ferious question.
Apropos of Camp ! The little boy I mention* cd to you, whofe mother lay-in of twins, is no-w
iC a
220
C O X H E A T H :
fchool at Mrs. Miidmay’s expence. She has, moreover, belpoke a Christ’s Hoipit.d prelentaii-, on for him, fo loon as he attains the appointed age for admistion ; and I stiould not wonder, he. is lo promising in every relpedl, if he should become.a great man.
Old people and children are the favourite ob-jedls with Mrs. Mildinay ; the lielplelTne(s of the one, and the unprotedsted state of the other, pleading irreSistibly to fuch a mind as hers, for all that humanity and beneficence can do to foften the miferies, and obviate the dangers of thofe particular charadfers. ----h fancy the Author of a
book intitled KUllinriium-Hd.lf borrowed his best thou£;-hts from this best of wmmen, and concealed under his fictions the wonders of her gobdnefs. She is, my dear madam, wholly unostentatious, andfeeks neither fame or reward beyond her own confeiouSnefs of having, as she phrafes it, per?-formed her duty.—The man of Rofs, fo iweetly lung by Mr. Pope, is her counter-part; though she is angry if you tell her fo.
She hates Parfon Sleek as much as I do, from believing he hides the Voluptuary and the Libertine behind his facred fundtion ; and that though he honours the Deity with'his lips, his heart is far from him. She is a woman of penetration,
and cannot be deceived by appearances.--------The
postman is coming up the avenue--------A letter for
me I hope!—I defpair,—I hope again ; for I am requested by Mrs. Mildmay to attend her.
I AM shocked, I am alarmed beyond meafure I —Lord Brazon is, the very Lord Brazen I apprehended we should Bad him.*—He refents in the
most
A NOVEL.
22i
most approbrious terms (though addresting a lady)
the affront he has met with ;-------the injustice,
the Scorn, the ridicule and boldly adds, that a day oS chastifement will come tor thole who de-lerve it ; when they Ih tll be drawn from their covert into noon day contempt, and be Scourged for their ill-manners to a man of fashion, and every way their Superior.
L Mrs. Mildmay laments we did not temporize longer: but i rather wisti we had dealt ingenu-ouily by him in the tirst instance. The affair would have been over and past ; whereas it now wears a threatening afpeft.—^Melvin, Ferdinand, my father—I fear for each, for aU of them: they are my vulnerable part, and Fleaven preferve it from a wound I
But you shall read the right honourable morfel. **

** Madam,
I AM forry to find a lady of fortune and fashion capable of low cunning and bafe hypo-
crify.—--Wheri at Coxheath Camp, who
fuch a favourite with you as Lord Brazen? And you must pardon Lord Brazen, if he oblerves, your favour in that quarter was no dishonour to your taste, your understanding, or your charafter.
“ In the fullest confidence of your friendship and approbation. Lord Brazen changed his Situation.—His Majority drew him toWariey-Common ; but his heart remained at Mildmay-Hall. He toasted the lady of his wishes on all occafions, though the daughter'of a lubaltern ; and was wilfully blind to overtures of the most flattering Species, for her fake.,
K 3	All
22Z
COXHEATH
((
• i




€6
f i


((€


€(
4i
€6
ix
XX
XX
XX
XX
XX
XX
XX
XX
XX
XX
All his hopes are however, blasted! He has, it Seems, been (ported with: but by all that is gracious, the jest shall be keenly turned o.n his mean adverfaries. He can pull a little rafcal by the nofe without lofing his temper, and whip a fchool-boy into better manners, without falling from his own dignity.
Mrs. Mildmay may remember, that the West Indies is'more eminent for wealth, than high blood :—Planters and lords are not the growth of the fame foil.—Money, indeed, is an excellent fulleFs earthy but will not wash out a blotch in a family-efcutcheon, though it may confound distiniSion, in the opinion of the vulgar.-—By heaven. Lord Brazen will repay fcorn with Scorn ! The yellow clay is apparent in Mrs. Mildmay’s conduft, befpeaks her origin, and proves the parent-stock from whence she Sprung.—But perhaps there may be, as brave and as illustrious perfons in the world as her minion, her idol, her doating-piece —-It is eafy to fee by a little, what a great deal means.—She is welcome to bestow her perfon on whom she pleaSes i—but she will be prudent,enough to caution her boys not to behave ill to. their betters.
If Mr. Rivers had the Spirit of a moufe, he would alSume the reigns, and be master of his own family.—But, perhaps, his tamenefs is the key to Mrs. Mildmay’s treafury ; and it may be convenient for a needy man to have hundreds at command.—He shall be known, however, for what he is;—a male-content— a retailer of his fovereign—a bold, an afpiring, a haughty fellow, who looks with a jaundiced eye on every, advancement a perfon of merit rifes to.
As
XX
XX
XX
XX
X X
XX
XX
XX

A N O V E L.
2,^3
As for tli€ young; ladyj-ssie is a flirt—a paint’* ed doll-—a pert inssgnificant girl—lifted out of f‘ herfelfby she folly; of a gpd’mother, who will let her tumble into theshirt, to prove her tenr dernefs; and who might once, but never must hope for fuch a thing again, have made her a lady, (and the wife of an infulted, a generous, an enamoured man of fashion, who can only ** Subscribe hirafelf her astonished and fatisjied..
if
fi
it
ff
‘^ Humble Servant
9
s A’

** Brazen.'’*

TIIere’s a Lord for you ! This letter must, however, be cautiousty kept from Mr. Rivers* eye, or perhaps the^ tables would be. turned, and repentance be his Lordship’s portion.
What a noife the affair would make, if it was to get abroad !—And then thefe young heads would, I fear, be unable to contain themfelves I— My Qod ! how little did 1 foreSee my Camp expedition would end in duelling—in bloodshed! •r-But thefe vain-boasters are often miferable doers: There is the coward in every word that
has fallen from his pen.---The thought revives
me !—^^If he was on the fpot, he durst not, / dare anfwer for it, fo much as open his mouth.—I will drink deep of this cordial, and put my trust iu Providence, who guards the good, punishes the evil, and Sets up certain chradters for marks of divine difpleafure, of divine vengeance.
K 4	Oh
cox
E A T H
Oh hoW I could now Sigh for the happy shades cf Someiietshire ! the peaceful, the tranquil, thi retired Icene 1—But it will' liot be ; and 1 niuft for onefe fublcribe rnyfelf
Your unhappy
Ella Eivers.

L E T E R XIII.

YE, now, now I begin to fed !
with a face as pale as ashes, has been here to 1< for Mdvin——Melvin fpent the evening yefter-day at a tavern, ’and Captain Jafnes Brazreri WaS one of the party. ■	'
My Lord*s name was mentibned.~His relation extolled him to the shiesthe most generous of men, the best-bred, the best-rhade, the finest gentleman in the kingdom!—Melvin Smiled fal•caS■ ^ically.■■
“ Do you fmile at me. Sir ?” was the word.
“ Not I, Sir,” faid Melvin; “ but I fmile.
You stnile infolently. Sir!”
“ You lofe your temper, Sir,” faid Melvin ; ** and it itiust be pretty plain to the company,
** how-
A N O V E L.
2^5

<€
€6
€C
Ci
^‘ however well-bred your noble relationmay be, ** you are not his relation in that particular.
You shall anfwer this. Sir,” laid B razen.
At any time you pleafe,” repled Melvin, when we are alone. Our friends would pr-
»	I
courle interpofe, if we proceeded farther be--** fore them.”
“ A GOOD excufe 1”
I WISH to be excufed at this conjunSfure, for I cannot brook even the appearance of cowardice.”	-
V,
Cowardice!”
%
“ Yes, cowardice; fori wear not. my daggers in my mouth.^—Slave we clone, Sir ?” Give me the example; and if it is a difcreet one,” faid Captain Brazen, I will condefcend. to follow it.”	■
No more p..iTed in the tavern.—Early in the morning, Ferdinand, having received this ac-,. count, repaired to Melvin’s tent. — Ste was abroad at exercife—the fervant could not tell.
Slow was he dressed ?”
** In his recfimental frock.”

((
D
“ Did he ro out on foot or on horfebick ?
__	o
ii;

if

He had his horfe, and might poissibly be gone to Mildmay-Hall.”
O impossible !” faid my brother: he never left the Camp before without telling me “ the wherefore.”'—But recollecSting himfelf, he added, less the fellov/ should fpread the alarm, “ I fancy I shall be able to find him, though he has given me the shp.”
, To Mildmay-H.d! he came; and, as his mind' foretold, no Melvin was tliere. I faiily placed the blubbering girl ; imputed every evil couSe-tjuence to ray indiferetion ; and was fo unguardedj, that if Mrs. Miidmay bad not abfolutely stopped
K 5	niT
2'26
COXHEATH:
€€
S
c
my mouth, though it was the last thinsr I wifficd should reach jiis knowledge, I should haVe blabbed about the letter—Brazen’s letter.
: ** I protest/’ faid Mrs. Mrldmay, there never was fuch a coupk upon earth—riding forth to meet grievances, and feeding each other’s whims ! 1 beg I may hear no more of it. The young man has Some affair of gallantry, perhaps, upon his hands; and as matters stand, the brother is as unfit a confidant as the Sister. ‘ You will find him returning with that face of
*	jair feemtng he carries about with him, and So
*	will ^ive him credit for whatever tale he tells
*	you. But beware of counterfeits, fay I, as ‘‘ well as the good^-natured Quacks in our news-
*	papers.^’
Ferdinand shook his head, and! kissed hef
r	^	\	^
hand, to thank her for the goodnefs of her intention ; but my heart was too full to fpeak ; and my brother hurried away for better intelligence.
What will become of me ?—Should our con-jedtures prove well-founded!—Alas ! he may by this time be beyond our care—dead !—a facrifice to my faffe polities, my levity!—My good, gbod , never depart from the line you have hitherto purfued! Your own reproaches will be the bitterest torments you can incur !—No, let fate or fortune do its worst, fecure your own breast from th«. arrows of felf-condemnatioui.

Twelve o’clock.
No tidings either of Do you not pity nae
^ %
Melvin or my brother ! -1 attitbe; wreck of fuch '	happinefs
A
N O V E Lv
azy
kappinefs as few, mortals are permitted to taste ;
but It is in meFcy denied them.----»AU good and
evil, the wile ones tell lis, is from comparison ; Softened of aggravated, as the Icaie preponderates to This or That.—Then what a wretch must I "be,—tumbled from fuch an eminence 1—Ah.raejl
Resignation, as Sciolto fays of death,
» *
* *	*	*	f|
is not the Stoic’s Lesson learn’d by,rote.
tr	'	'	. i	■*	.	,	‘
'
Now is your turn to.trlum.ph !—Your monitor is lost—lost to every, dictate, of patience—of.en-durance~of—-
y. . -	.	'	■
But he is come l—I fee him riding up to the houie !—Don’t shew this letter to any one, I con* lure .you t—I will deny it a-ll.—Concern’d about Melvin !'—A likely story truly \—1 must, however, hear,what he has to fay, if it is only, for your information.—I come, I come f
They have met! they have fought l-i-l tremble whilst I write—but no mifehief has enfued Capiain Brazen’s eagernefs giving Melvin'shch^ advantage over.him, that he foon‘difarmed hirh gave,him his life • and bade him metid.it... He is' a-generous .conqueror ; but the rencounter will, 1. ■fear, neither do him, nor me, nor>rny poor ther, credit..—i would give millions it had never ,happened I	,
Mrs., Mi'l.dmay is convinced) from Melvin’s reprefentation, that a man of honour could not cLo other wife than he has done.
** company—-nay,
temper—he most chastife the.prefuming fparfc in his own defence. He vviU now be fecure *‘;'fr.om infolent attacks.r—It is necessary tcs ki it he understood a man has eouragey as he k ETien:,. fld then on}y<>
9
infuked in public infuhed for his command of
ec
iJl
a
above the hrsvings of
7 •
COW.1 tuice

. 'if

U

r-

%
4


228
COXHEATH
yy
“ cowardice.”—And thus did this good woman
endeavour to reconcile me to an adion I know
• ♦ . . .
her heart abhors; for I have heard her fay, on fonner occaSions, there was only a hair’s-breadth
diibndb'on between the daellift and the affaffin.
_ ♦
hlLLViN would not stay dinner, lest the affair should get air and reach my father’s knowledge", when he was not on the fpot to give him due ini-pieffions of his condudt. He was, moreover,, anxious to.relieve Ferdinand’s bofom from appre-henilons for his fafety ; he therefore left us, mC'!* thought, abrubtly—at best hastily.
Captain JamesBrazen wasfomewhat cha-rined, when he found Melvin would construe his taunts into a challenge.
You shall not have it in your power, hc,“ to fet me down for a dealer in excufes, though I can conform to the necessities, and nd obferve the proprieties of certain Situations; will you, therefore, attend me. Sir, beyond the boundaries of our encampment, where we can meet without witneffe.s, and fettle our difpute without interruption ?”
It would do no harm,” Captain James Said, to have a friend with them, in cafe of “ accidents.”
Very well, Sir,” replied Melvin ; ** if ** you have a friend you can wish to trouble oti fuch an occaSion, be it fo, on your part:—I have mv feafons for choostng to come alone.” Melvin repaired immediately to the destined place, and waited fo long for the Captain, that he began to conclude he had contrived to be put
under an arrest,-^---He was convinced he bad
wronged him ; for, lo ! he approached, but evi-demly approached reluflaiitly.
The
t 6
(i
a i • i €i
a
a
A NOVEL.
210
The ground was meafured .out, and the gentlemen (as .all gentlemen, ii leems, do, before they try to‘cut each other^s throats^ Ihook hands filed ofl' to the right and lett—and put them-lelves into attitude.
Mklvin prefently perceived what a weak ad-verfary he had to encounter with: he therefore stood only on his defence, to parry his injudicidtis thrusts; which he mistaking for laCk oh courage, iiitending to make adefperate pufb, first lost his footing, 'then his Sword, and found his life in th6 hands of a man he had grolsly provoked.
His features agonixed ; he even dtfcended to 'the raeanefs of begging quarter, before Melvin
tould tell him he had nothing to fear.—
now,” Said Melvin, restoring him his fWord,
I prefume we have no quarrel.”	*
Captain James Brazen, Scarcely know^ ing what he did, alked him ten thouland and ten-thoufand pardoris,—and each party went about his bufinefs.
I Will not trust myfelf'to reverfe the prof-*pe6t. He would have butchered poor Melvin, if it had been in Ifis power. It was a meeting on unequal terms—^a ruffian and a man of honour 1 You fee, my dear madam, 1 am as'tender yOur feelings, as I would be of my own ; and never conclude mv letters in the midst of a dif-trefsful story! more
• ‘	»
Melvin is fafe, and i am oncie
Your lively friend.
Rivers

L E T-
C O X H E A r H
fT
(9
* <
LETTER XIV.
J
’Tis not in mortals to command fucceSs,
But we’ll do more—wc will, my dear, deServe it.
PRETTY fort of a bufinefs this duelling has turned out I Melvin no fooner returned ta
I
Camp, than he was put under an arrest, and will be tried by a Court-Martial. — Broke, I hope I Pie. will not make the worfe country-gentleman, for not being thought vvorthy to Serve his Majesty. What a predicament the gentlemen of the army ftand in 1 If they accepts, challertge, they are fuperSeded ; if decline ox\t, they are difband-,cd.'—What, then, is a Soldier, of all men living,, required to be the tame individual — Shall he, if irnitteaon. one cheek, in the meek and lowly Spirit of Christianity turn the other alfo ? It is a contradiftion in terms I—A Soldier must be tenacious of his honour, his dignity ; he must feel, and feel warmly, every unworthy stroke, whe^ ther of Satire, of ridicule,, of contempt, of inr fult; and- if the condudl of a duellist can in any eharadfer be-defenSible, it is certainly in that of Soldier, who naturally defends himfclf,. as he would his Country, with his fword.
We intend to pay a charitable vistt to the poor prisoner this afternoon. Scandal may, perhaps, be bufy, and recolledl how Alexander had his Roxana and his Statira. We are prepared for alt fiiat ; and wrapping ourfelves up in our own integrity, shall defy the utmost shafts of malice,. lic. Sec. &c. I wish they may give him a difgust to a military life, by the feverity, the folly, oT
-..... iheis'
A N O ■ V
L
23,5

their military laws —and then will I Sing. O joyful !'
How this dear good woman interests herfelf ia oar caufe !—‘‘ She’ll astute me., Ihe does not know who they vvill arreli next; but an injudicious friend is always the worst ot enemies. She will not interfere, but leave his own merit to fettle the point to his entire i'atisfadlion.” Wilson,, whofe heart is made for friendship,’ drew his face to a most immoderate length,, ori bearing Melvin was in custody. “ Thank
veil, he had quitted the military walk I—-Mr,„ **■ Rivers’ treatment had cured him of his enthu-ssafm ; and he should rejoice to hear Melvist;; was become as zviL as himfelf.”
The gentle Lydia wept !•—Weeping is hef character,, and fits mighty well upon, her,— w^as a bad world,” she faid, “ and the Camp, she believed, the worst part of if. Could she but. get her dear friends detached from it, she would never behold it more !”—Poor Lvdia !—Yoil know her turn of mind !—Bat Cnee she is fo a*r live 00 stight oGcastons of iorrow, what deep wounds must not her fenssbility have fustained in
V
the fit nations she has been cast in !—Yet donst let me make you melancholy ; for her Sorrows are all done away, and she is now a most enviable being...
I WILL finish my letter when I return froisa Gamp.
(<


.. 1 ■m

Eight o’clock, P. M.
V	'	«	-
Melvin is stilt in clbfe custody ; yet you ar^5 Well 1—The evil may be a light one, if rightly
confident d
/
352
C O X HEATH:
with
cbnficlered ; but I am too interested a party to conSider it rightly ; and therefore you must bear with a recital of my difcontents.	■
A FINE fellow, an amiable fellow, and master of nve-and-twenty thoufand pounds to be held in' durance—reprimanded—threatened with a public trial I	.
Well,’’ fay you, and what of all that ?—• They can but deprive him of the feather in his << cap—his cockade—and how many pretty fellows’ are there in the world without that badge of bravery
<< Now will I play the Touchstone you !”*—All this is very true.—They cannot loofen the band of affedtion by which our hearts arc united ; they cannot touch his facred perfon ; they cannot wound his honest fame.—’Tis not for cowardicehe will be brought before a tribunal, but for a too nice fenfe of honour.
Then, my dear madam, we w'^ill both of us be of good cheer; for know, your Ferdinand, as well as my Melvin, is ali'o a prifoner.
Does your cheek turn pale ?—Does your heart revolt at the idea ?—What, tell me, is this Ferdinand more than Melvin, that he stiould efcape the legal gripe ?—They will be tried ; they may be condemned ; but we know the worst fentence that can be pasted upon them, vix. difqualifying them for being foidiers ; on which circumstr.nce, I take it, neither your happinefs or mine depends.
But what is Ferdinand’s crime ?—Fie is charged with abetting duelling ; of abfennng himfelf from his corps without leave ; of being Melvin’s friend, and the fon of poor Lieutenant Rivers. But criminal Soever as all this ma) render him in the eye of his judges, he, v/ili be- a white charadter
in
A’.'N O :V:: ^ L.
233
fo long as we botlj
in your “and my estimation.
Shall live,	.	1
j I OWN,, I was a Uttle furprized, on my arrival
at Camp, to find I had lost my bf other. ** My
«•« ‘ l	Tmnn-iTK1»» P^-*——. J
brother in hold ! Itapoffible —1 went to See him—there is a woman for you'!—even before I vistted poor Melvin.—He was not in luch good ‘V fpitits as I expedted ; begged “ I would write, and tenderly inform you of his Situation.—He had enemies, malicious enemies ; but he hoped the uprightnefs of his intentions would bear him through, and that he should once more be at
t(
ft
7)



€<
€C
€C
€C
€(
Melvin has lefs foftnefsin his composttion, fo bears his reverfe of fortune like a man. All the regret he feels, is for the lofs of my fweet company j,'«“but he 'wili make himfelf ample amends ;—for the moment of his enlargement, he will So befet Mr. Rivers for his confent, that he will, let him marry, his daughter in ordyr to get lid of tiifti.’’C^FoDr Melvin! khai-fairy-dreams are his !—But they keep up his courage, and distipate his uneastnefs ; and I cannot find ji, my heart to throw cold water upon,, any hope he now entertains.
MY-father lookscVery: grave, but is profoundly tllent.--^^Mr^; Mil-dmay watches his looks, and lays she can therein-read, that.thhis a much uglier bufineis than I am aware of. Fear makes us fed double ;-^and fo 1 account fbr her alarms. I
could, indeed, wish they were in the fame prifonj
becauie, you know, friendly chat beguiles forrow, and paffes time lightly off gut hands. -	'	. -
" WmAt, my dear rnadam^ shall I now-fay to y ou ?,— You have here a faithful state of the cafe; —I am no diffemblen-^If I had anguish in my bofom,' it would flow, like-the inkhrom my pen * but i am Sitisfied, however rancorous their will,
their
C 6 X H E A T H
their power is impotent; and that we shall foftii l^ave our Swains at large, and more in love witH us than ever, for die tender eoncerii we took ii their welfare :
Its which hope I conclude hiyfelfy &e.
Ella. Rtv£R^.
i *
4
LETTER XV.
They jeft at fears, who never felt'a woundt


not tell
1
X H E RE, Ella,, is quotation for youF;quota* tions i — How you came by your calloSity I can*
'y but eallous you are, and a most degenerate daughter of Mr, Rivers, who never wounded the peace of any one, without wounding hU pvvn.
You profane the name of Love, by professing to feel it.^—Melvyn,. with all his merit, shas never touched your heart. There is a frolickfomenefs in your style that is incompatible with friendship ^ for a friend in distrefs, leaves the Sympathising bo-fom to testify the truth of its attachment.
Ferdinand in custody, told me as a thing of
courfej— a > Gamp occurrence ! — and, what is
stranger
A N O V E L.
235
Granger still, I am expe£led to receive it as Such f —Ferdinand condemned to die, I Suppofe J must argue down my tender anguish, and remem-> her, that other young fellows have incurred a Similar fentence, who have been as dear to their mistresses, and in their estimation to the full as deferving as my fvjain; for So you can even now most wantonly call him.
Lydia weeps —her nature droops at Nature’'s Sufferings. She is a woman ; you are an Amazon ; and I renounce you, — break hands with you for ever.
Tour Melvin too is a prifoner !•—Ah, Ella ! Tour Melvin is a man of fortune, and the weight Will all fall on poor Ferdinand’s head !—Your father forefees the storm 1—Well may he then look grave I—But you have stabbed me to the heart, and Sir Ferdinand will foon difeover the strength of mind his child has hitherto preferved.
Was I on the Spot; could I know every half hour how things went on ; hear of his health ; fee a confirmation of it in his face ; then would I fubferibe as gracefully to his destiny as you do ; comfort myfelf with the assurance that they could not reach his life; and await the day his enlargement without murmuring.
But I am at many, many miles distance must abide the flow returns of the post ; bear all the tortures of a too lively imagination in the intermediate time ; and Scarcely indulge ray j.oy at the good news you fend, lest Some unfavourable gloom shoujd obfeure the fairest profpeQis.
This, this is the fruits of Superabundant honour!—Well may they fay, that virtue in exceSs becomes vice !—Was it not Sufficient for your father to advifc' us, without Separating us}
V/hat indiscretions could, he charge us with ?
I ^
a.

cox HEATH:
To love was our misfortune
and nothinsf but
/
OUT mifcondu6t could make it our fault. -We did not once forget how necessary a father’s voice waste fandtify our choice ; we refolved to wait a happy turn in our affairs.—We must have now been happy but for his cruel interference! Yet let me not be Severe. A noble mind may err ; but the errors of a noble mind are relpedfabie.
Heaven therefore foften the calamity 1 May the stroke fall light upon him !—and, oh ! may he never look back, lest repentance, lest the bit-tc^'n^s of repentance, fhould be his portion !
;Wherever I come, whatever 1 read, the Camp is the univerfal topic, the univerfal obje^. Blit thofe who can delight in the idea, or enjoy the view of it, have no Ferdinand, like me, in custody!
If yon .have the least Spark of humanity yet remaining in your composttion, write to me by every SuGceeding post, though it is only a repetition of what you have written before. 1 will Support myfelf as long as I can ; but you should remember 1 am no heroine in romance, therefore cannot be ,expe6led to pafs sseeplefs nights and anxious days with unimpaired health. Spare your-lelf, then, the reraorfe of having shortened the life of one that is most truly

Your, &c.
'Caroline Fletcher.
L E T-

A N O V E L.
L E T T .E R XVI.

Th L L A, my dear madam, intreats me to take up the pen, in order to assure you, that though our haughty chief ieems to fet his face against poor Ferdinand, he has not the power to hurt him.	'	'
An arrest, a martial arrest, however, harsh or alarming it may found in your, is a mere farce ; a difplay of power without confequencev Our Chief, madam, may indulge his gloomy’ and austere humour ;—he has authority sh to do.—He can make prifoners at will ; but there his authority ends. Every individual must be tried by a Court-Martial, and can have his femence only pro-„ portioned to his crime : and if innocent, as my brother must appear, his being brpught before the Court can be merely the prelude to his honourable difeharge.
You know the timidity of my nature ; you know my tender affeO:ion for Ferdinand ; if ,1 can behold his prefent sstuation without distrefs,
I think you will not find it difficult to perfuade yourfelf there is no caufe whatever for terror or •apprehenSion.
Scarce a day passes but Some one falls under • the Generalissimo’s difpleafure. A turn of the head, a word mifplaced, a foot too far advanced, or too far in the rear, are construed into dif-refpe6t, difobedience, or remissnefs of duty ■and as defpotifni loofes its force by being too def-potic, the frequency of thefe difgraces and thefe
punishments
C O X' H E A T H:
punishments render them a matter of laughter, of ridicule, of difregard : only it is hoped, that Some one will have Spirit enough, before the breaking-up of the campaign, to appeal to the Higher Powers, and espofe the mock tyrant to the cenfure he merits.
Have I faid fufEcienttoanfwer the defiredpur-pofe?—I will yet fay more;—^and affirm to you upon my honour, that was WilSon ui der the very predicament Ferdinand now stands, I should be perfe6lly compofed, and wait his enlargement without; a pang.
That lam, nevertheless, happy Mr. Wil Son' has bid adieu to a military life, is most undeniable. His temper is open, generous, credulous, but impatient of ill ufage. He cannot lick the foot that fpurns him, any more than my dear father could before him ; it is therefore pretty clear what chance he would have had, after years ©f liard Service, for promotion.
Providence has thrown him into the tm-ploymentand the fituation best Suited to his taste and talents : he is the instrument of benevolence, in the hands of the best of women. To point out a deServing objeft, is to give the highest fa-tisfadlion to Mrs. Mildmay ; and to relieve Such objefls,'— the highest gratification he can en~
•joy*
Was you not, my dear madam, equally delighted and astonished at the Sudden turn in my' affairs ? — Could you have SuppoSed that it was poffible in the nature of human events, to lift us. So instantaneousty, out of our poverty ? for that stroke was to the full as great, as bringing us once more together. I wish you could See him !—The most gracious Signatures of humanity are trace4 out in'.his.countenance '; and as his heart hasine-
ver
\
A N O V E L.
yer been warped from its original bias, they only bear testimony to the feelings within,—He is a first-^rate favourite with Mrs, Miidmay ! But “ no wonder,” you will perhaps fay, when ‘f she is the author and Source of all our feli-
•	t
city !”—^.But his behaviour to the poor Lieutenant, and the consequential esteem the Lieutenant entertains for him, shews he is as grateful for benefits received, as he can possibly be for thoSe he is receiving ; and that he is in no degree a time-ferver, a courtier, or a hyppocrite.
Ella is the most extraordinary mixture of vivacity and Sentiment I ever met with I—I often envy her ; for whatever Superior reputation'! may possfeSs for tenderneSs or attachment to my friends, nrifes from mistaking our charaDer : felf stealsin,-and every Second tear I shed is on my own account.—=Ella weeps only for them.; she lofes the fenfe of her own concern, in her acute fenfibility for their’s; and instead of being the helplefs and the uSeleSs creature my Soft constitution makes.me, is collected, firm, and alive to every occafion of Soothing, of obviating the forrows_~or oppressions of thofe.she loves.
V	■
She knows not that I do her this justice. —She bid me not tell you, that Ferdinand’s fafety and your repoSe are the objedts that engrofs her whole foul. She plays with even the gravest, the most interesting fubjedis, for your amufement; and you
place to the account of-levity, what is, in fadl, the most exalted proof of friendship and affe^i-on.
Mrs. Mildmay is much yours.—We drink your health twice everyday, as a tribute of love and duty ; talk over your accom_ whenever we have an opportunity- ; and allow^ no
fhe to be worthy, in comparison with your Sweet Self.
Wilson
ir'

40
c O X H E A T H
\yiLS ON admires your miniature fo much, thaf fie has given it to an ermnent master to copy on a erfcale ; fo that your portrait will Soon grace our little paradife : for So beautiful is the dwelling we occupy> that you would accufe me of romance in the extreme, if I was to attempt to give you a"
■ ■* ion of it.
______a y has made WilfoTT master of a
low phaeton, and an animal of the. Roan breed to straw it, in which I take my morning s airing round the park ; for when I go to Carrip, I go with Mrs. Mildmay ; and when once this cloud is brushed by us, 1 shall pronounce us the happiest
of human beings.	,	;	.
Ferdijiand’s fpirits do not fail him in the
least. Confeious of no blame, he has nothing to fear or blush for ; and the only accufation brought against him is, that he was Melvin s Second, though poor fellow 1 he did not fo much as Sufpe6t his defign of going out ; and fought him on his disappearance, with the inost friendly .diligence, to prevent, not to abet the rencounter.
Mr. Melvin declares, and I believe him, that his own confinement would fit quitd eafy upoiY him, if Ferdinand was but atliberty. However,, as it has been the General’s plealure to make Ferdinand a prifoner on his account, he will not accept his enlargement on other terras than’ clearing up that youth's condufit, and making him a c'ompenfation for the uiijustifiable violetice that
has been exercifed towards him. He is a brave fellow, madam, and will not falSify his word; 10 that whatever his fortune or connexions may do in his favour, Ferdinand will reap the advantage of, 4s if he aaually participated his claims to' const-
* -	‘	^	i	.	•	.	*	t •
■ ‘ ■ L ■' -What
lon.
A N O V E L.
441
\yHAT a world, what a bad' world it Is, madam! where the poor must languish for justice, whilst the rich are tolerated in injustice.—But I rest not my hopes on the flu6tuating humour,
or capricious condefcenhon of any man !---------
Heaven will protect the innocent, and put the
guilty toconfuSion;-----and in that confidence I
fubfcribe myfelf
>
Your most affeSIionate,
Lydia Wilson.
S
A
LETTER XVII

A M glad I have brought you down to the footstep of my throne to fue for pardon-— Lydia is not half iodrcum/ianfial a.s me, in her relations,;
a great difcovery That!—and you find, that you have mifconstrued my gaiete du caur, I aik no more .* you are not only pardoned your error in judgment, but received by owx gracious [elf once more into favour. The strong should fupport the weak, the humane should pity, and the generous forgive : let oblivion, therefore, accomplish the work of reconciliation between us,
Melvin is a fine fellow !—A message wasfent him this morning; that as the challenge was at-VoL. II.	L	tended
24
C O X H E A T H
tended ■with no ill confequences to any party, it would be overlooked by the Higher Powers ; but lest indulgence to him might be cruelty to others, it should be proclaimed that the next thing of the kind, which happened in the Camp, should be punished with the utmost Severity.
Melvin alkedi ** Where his friend was his innocent, his injured friend r”
They replied, ‘‘ still in custody.’*
“ Then, laid he, you may return with my declaration, that I will remain where I am, until he is lent to tell me he has received fatif-
<(
€i
((
fattion for the wrong he has fustained.’

tc
€C

iC
\
The messenger stew back with, the Chief of Chief’s compliments, and “ that it was not in his power to oblige him ; for that the young man he called his friend, had other charges lodged against him than merely fomenting broils, and must be brought to trial.”
“ Vehy well,” faid Melvin, “ we will come up together, a.nst hear what our enemies and our judges have to f^ to us.”
“ But my Lord N—— had wrote to enquire into the caufe of his confinement, and the Chief of all Chiefs had told him, his condudt should be excufed; and therefore he was defired to return peaceably to his marquee.’*
He wmuld not quit the fpot he was on till Ferdinand led him forth,” was the only anlwer they could obtain.
Thus, my dear madam, you perceive, when power is stretched beyond its due tone, it lofes its Spring, and degenerates into downright abje^-nefs of fpirit.
Melvin has great and potent friends, that will
not fuffer him to be mal-treated with impunity;
and the walls of Troy were oSiers to the refoluti-
on
<<
irc
ic


A NOVEL.
243
he is master of; for tv/enty times ten years, (if foch was the Ute of man) would be all incapable of shaking it; So that in the Camp language, I can assure you, all is well.
Besides, it is well known, that the prefent reign will Soon be interrupted by the arrival of our Monarch, who is a lover of clemency, of truth (when he can get at it), and will not take this matter on common report, but Sift it to- the bottom, aiid fettle it in a princely manner.
Melvin has already drawn up a memorial of the whole tranfadlion, wherein the malice and meannefs of the attack on my father’s charadler, his poverty, his family, is stated in Such manly. Such touching. Such fenssbie terms, that the Sovereign will discover the hard uSage Rivers has Sustained, uncomplainingly Sustained, during a long, long period, whilst he was shedding his blopd in his Service.
This Melvin will get preSented for the royal perufal, the hour of his arrival at Coxheath ; and the great merit of his performance is, that it is conciSe, and at the Same time So intelligent, that every word will paint out to his majesty’s view whatever can be wished he should be made acquainted with.
This is, however, a lecret between him and me; So that if Lydia had continued your darling correspondent, you would have been uninformed of an article of the first importance to your peace.
Wilson (the honest, good-natured WilSoa) has been with my father, to enquire whether money, the key to all things, would not be ufeful on this occaSion ; but he alSures him, his boy should not purchafe his liberty, if he was master of millions, but abide the decifion of a tribunal, an
honourabJe tribunal, whoSe/<?/ will not only Speak
Lja i	him
244
GOXHEATH
Y ET
him into his quondam Situation, but convert his dilgrace into a triumph ; and the poor fellow went away viSibly dllappointed.
though he is tor stying to pecuniary remedies on every dileaie, no money has he beyond what will anlwer the conveniencies of himfelf and family.-—He has credit, however, with a certain lady, who would be happy to leive Mr. Rivers in the (econd perion, in order to lighten the burthen of obligation nice minds incur, when their friends, to make themfelves happy, make them-felves ferviceable to thole they love.—My father faid, Willen wanted nothing but a fortune to be as great and as amiable as Mrs. Mildmay.” Th at is, however, a point which cannot be brought to proof ; and fo he must pardon my fe-cret doubtings, though I think very tolerably of the young man’s goodnels of heart.
My Clerical Admirer has received his difmifli-on.—His vifits, .madam., -were fo frpquent,; after the rencounter you are acquainted with., that he fajiiiy lived with us ; and I lulpediing him of foul play, afked my father’s leave to give him his audience de conge.—-He was piqued ; he muttered Somewhat and departed. - I felt mylelt relieved by the incident, and am now both in appearance and reality onlv Melvin’s.	1 .
Mrs. Mildmay viSits the youths every morning. Hofpitals, prilons, have no terrors for her, if fhe can rejoice the minds of their inhabitants I She rallies Melvin on his want of gallantry to his mistrefs, and tells him, it is plain, from his voluntary captivity, that friendship is the most lively Sentiment in bis boSom.
With Ferdinand she talks of you; propheSies the most flattering things refpe^ing you ; and I should not be furprifed to hear, if she Started as
mediator
V,
A N O V E L.
24
M
y
mediator and plenipotentiary between the Satni-hes; the corner Stone ot their reconciliation being the intermarriage oI their heir-apparents-.—Ferdinand will inherit all his father’s virtues, madam, (a goodly portion let me tell you !) as you your father’s trealures ; therefore do not look with difdain upon the comparison.
I HAD thoughts of waiting upon the grim Sovereign of thele martial domains, and, throwing my-felf at his feet, melt his hard nature into mercy , but 1 stud it as a received proverb, “That'flint shall become flummery, and steel a whipt Syllabub, , when a tear of humanity bedims his eye, ora Sigh
of benevolence agitates his heart.”--^You raay-
imagine I profited by the hint, ancHeft him undisturbed by my prefence.
It was hoped Goxheath would have been the first Spot of royal vifitation;—but, alas I it will be the last-; which is, indeed, the ground of the Brazen’s prfefumption.—His lordship, , you will find on the ecclaircifSement, is the grand hinge on * which my brother’s perfec.ution turns; and that it is in his perfon he is Seeking to wound us all : but you, as well as L -are too good a Christian not to defy the devil and all his works, workmen and worshippers—in which catalogue his Lordship and-his Lordship’s train are infallibly included.
My Service to Sir Ferdinand, and tell him, that my highest ambition in this world, is, to receive an invitation from him to pafs a few weeks of the recefs in Somersetshire ! No pilgrim ever made a voyage to Mecca with more heart-felt devotion than I should perform that journey !—I ara-not one of the offending parties ; .1 am nothing but a harrnlefs female, and his most obliged humble lervant..—See that you do my bidding.with a good
L 3	grace, .
246
G O OC H E A T H :
grace, and obtain me a gracious anfwer, \alue the esteem, the approbation, the onate attachment of your
as you affeUi-
Ella Rivers,
/
LETTER
XVIII.
P O R TIN G L Y as you concluded yoor last epistle, it has produced a most happy effe^ ! My father
the contrast, as your pen has been pleated to delineate him, of Sir Johk Flower dale—was touched by your remembrance of him.
Ci
€i


No, Heaven forbid,” faid he, I fnould Confound the innocent with the guilty, admitting both father and fon were guilty of the Sin of ingratitude in its highest turpitude ! Tell her, therefore,' I shall be delighted to fee her. — How are they all ?” faid he, after Some little paufe.—What an amiable family I once believed them to be 1—A little romantic the

€C

a

<C
ti

father and mother, indeed I for they difobliged their friends, to marry and become beggars. But I loved your mother well enough to have gone the fame lengths to have obtained her, and fo never faw that article of their condudt in
the
A N O V E L.
247
the likenefs of a fault, until they flew in my face,, fpurned at my long-continued friendship.
f*
((


€<

and renounced me and mine with a menacing
air.----Don’t you remember how he looked,
when i called after him, tame fool as I was! when he tore the children away from us ?
My dear Sir,” faid I, “ if I had only the courage to tell you his motives, instead of con* demning, you would love and honour him !”
“ How’s that?” faid he ; “show’s that I, YOUR-child, was the only only one to blame on that occaSjon !” -“ Pro VI!?me that,Sprove that .to me, and you ** shall find me as forward to re0:ify my mistake,.
** as I was to conrimit it---Let’s hear how and -
** about it.”
1 Blushed, 1-shppofe, Ella ; looked now in bis face, then on the ground ; it was fo aukward to proclaim my regard for a young fellow, beSides the uncertainty of the reception my confession * might meet vvith. However, necessity at length . made me valiant. I opened my whole foul to him ; not forgetting a little of your father’s ad-drefs to me at parting.	'
Ele was moved I-------“ Very well,” Said he, ,
“ very well, indeed ! The young fellow might * “ be liked without.dishonour to the fairest she'—■ “ But—you shall know my farther mind .on the “ fubjedt in a few days.”
I DURST not push the matter,, though the fuf-pence he left me in was a cruel one.—He indeed, , to convince me he was not angry with me, made me a prefent of the inclofed -note, kissed me, and told me “ I had been a good girl !—a noble girl ! ,
“ —and he was Satisfied.”
%
No W, if you fay. one word about the inclofed little loan (for you shall pay me, again, take no-
L.4	tice.
248
COXHEATH


tice, at feme future period) I will never forgive you. Let Mrs. Mlldmay have the credit of it, but errploy it fo as to promote the convenience of thofe we love.
Your Melvin shall henceforth be my Melvin, for his steady affeftion to the deferving Ferdinand ; nor do 1 require a stronger testiauony of Ibis fine taste, understanding, or principles, than his friendship for that young fellow. — Goodnefs io fiTOodnefs, Elia, is a natural attradiion.
How impatiently shall I wait the expiration of the few days my fa’iher mentioned !— “ And in a few days,” faid he, “ you shall know my farther mind on the fubje^ !” •— He has certainly Some Secret correspondent which informs him of all that pastes; and either from natural liberality, or the force of your brother and Mr. Rivers’s merits, makes favourable reports.
You are good, beyond all example good. In this last letter ; and I am confoled arid cheered, if not absolutely Satisfied: but I hope Ferdinand will not think of making a fecond campaign.—Preposterous 1------ On what motives ? — His King
knows not he has fucst a Servant, and the Royal Delegates are not capable of dilcovering his per-fediions: or, if- they could, would maliciousty trace therii to falfe cauSes; call his modesty, rnean-nefs of Spirit ; his fortitude, boldnefs ; nation, infolence ; and his honour, pride. It is only in the shade of life his virtues can shine forth in their native lustre ; unannoyed by the rough biightings of envy, untainted by the rude breath of calumny, and uninjured by the bafe misrepresentation of designing and wicked men, who Seek
to
his rtfiff-
A
N O V E L.
H9
to rist on the ruins of the worthy. —Write, write, on, my best girl, and believe me to be,
\ *
Y,ours, &c.,
C. Fletcher., ,
LETTER. XIX..
^-
T
( (
II E post'past by outdoor without calling!
I would not believe but there was a mistake in it ;• and ringing my bell, fent iome haif-dozcn messengers out to enquire what could occaSion it.
There were no letters for- me what«yer.”
Bid the postman come in, J must fpaaktahini rayfelf.”
•/ . *
“ Friend, pray oblige me fo far as to look-;
over your parcels again I You-must have miS-
placed it. I 'am confident my friends have -
written to me. Here is half a-.crown, for you? „
trouble; and if you find me,one, ,S will givo„,
you another.'^
It was in vain,the poordellow faid,r**"t» . lie ; for he had not one, if his life,.dependecl upon it,i with my direction. Bati if I pieafed Since I *was fb earnej^, 1 might fatisfy myfelf, fp rea d i itg. t h e m all out b efoce me.
All my neighbours, Ella, .were made- Lappy
L 5
it
it
it
4t
s(
it
7^
9^
/
55©
C O X H E A T H :
fny heart and only mine was wounded by difap-pointment ; I lent the fellow away in fomething like diShumour, though ienSible he was not to Vlahae ; and when alone, wept most bitterly.
It cannot be out of tendernefs you have omitted writing ! —^ The worst news had only made me miferable ; your Silence distradls me I—w'hat can have befallen all my friends! —All, all in custody ! — Alt dead or dying ! — I am bewildered in conjedlures, and give up the pofiibility of guesting with painful regret.
Nothing but fome fatal chance can have incited you to negledi me ! — Yet tell me I am deceived, and I will thank you for proving to me I am an idle, fearful girl ; and first make bugbears, then terrify myfelf by them.
M'y father too remains wrapped up in referves! He must read my anxiety in ihy countenance ; yet has the strmnels (not to Say the unkindneis) to read it unmoved. Did his peace of mind depend upon my voice, oh how fpeedily stiould he enjoy it! —I mean, if it was postible for us to change ebaradters : for you need not tell me (as the cate now stands,) it is my duty to be attentive to a fa-* therms repofe.
Why stiould you tempt the weak of heart } Many a damfel in my diStrefsful Situation would long Since have broke through every restraint, and vistted your Camp to enquire for him fhe loved.—Neither a regard for the world’sopinion, a father’s difpleafure, nay, what ought to be of the highest conlequence to her, the good opinion of the man fo dear to her, would have deterred her ; but She would have flown on the wings of indiferetion and impatience, to get at the deSired tidings.
I am.
^ Q-W- E L.
S51
lam, ’tis true, iucapatle of every Such defpe'* rate step.—What may feem feU-denial, I constder as necestity.— I will be worthy of Ferdinand’s attachment, whatever itcostshim ; and shew him the wife he may expedt, in the article of sharing his difficulties, by my refolution in my ssngle st^t^-~And I know my condudl will h^ave all its merit with him.—Wretch that I am, perhaps he is now no more ! -—Perhapsr—But I forbear to draw a piQure that would rend my foul I—O Ella, Ella! can you forgive your felf for thus trifling with the fenSibility of her who is most truly, &ic.
Your

\
L E T.
U
25?
COXHEATH:
LETTER XX.
LAMENT, my 'dear madam, as much as you can do, that a letter did not reach you, agreeably fto your expedlation ; and where to lay the blame, I know not. Mrs. Mildmay’s people could have no temptation to fupprefs it; Lord Brazen’s friends to intercept it. I wrote every incident, from the diipatching my former epistle down to the hour of staling and fending the last to the post : forne crols accident has intervened, and perhaps we must never hope to fee it more.
My poor dear father has drooped ever Snce Ferdinand’s confinement ; but it is his altered countenance alone that fpeaks his difcontent.— O what a sting is poverty to the noble mind 1 — Yet is there no extradfing it ; for he will not, postibly he cannot, return Mrs. Mildmay’s affedbon.
I T OLD you Lord Brazen was at the bottom of this bufinels! — Read the inclofed, and then tell me, if there is fuch a cold-blooded villain in existence.
To Mrs. Mildmay
“ Madam,	V
FAME informs me, that Rivers’s boy has ** got into hold for tattling too freely of his fupe-“ riors ; ,,of the number of which I have, the ho-nour to make one.
Now to prove to you that he has a gene-
rous adverstry to deal with, if you will put it
in
A N O V E L.
253
in my power to ftand forth in his behalf, I am ready.—You have the dilpofal of your for-
t i
Ci
ic
a
cc
C(
iS
a
€i
tc
fA
tune, and a certain Lady’s hand, entirely in yourTeif ; give me an instance of your com-plaifance, your liberality, and you >shall find me all you can wisti,; a V'*arm admirer of yourfelf, and a warm advocate for the unthinking boy you esteem.
** As to my last letter, it was wrote In the height of my difappointment at being refufed ; it therefore should be confidered as a proof of my love, in proportion as its contents may impeach my pojitenefs. —^To be unguarded oil Some occafions, is meritorious.
I
4
The leSs my Wit, the more my Love appears.
\
■ .	V
fays the fost Sappho, who perfe6tly understood the	of the tender paffion.
“ Shall I do myfelf the honour of writing'to the General, that I may make a point of obtaining Rivers the younger his liberty ? I think 1 may flatter myfelf I should not write in vain. — But your fair felf must fet me the example of mercy, of goodnefs, you would have me purfue.—You arc, then, in the stridlest fenSe of the word, the Arbitrefs of hrs fate ; and may command me, difpofe me as you pleafe..
I shall impatiently expeCt your anfwer,
:	And am. Madam, &c.
•,
t
Brazen.’*
i
■—And fo much for T^ord Brazen’s eloquence, his arts of perfiiafiort I—You would, I prefume, like to read Mrs. Mildniay’s auSwer.—/i bus then i
oblige you. -	» -
.. . . ^ 0
■ t
254
C O X H E A T H
To Lord Brazen.
fit
tc
V, •
€C
#
fC
c c c
i
< ( c
tc
€C
CC
tc
CC
CC
CC
CC
My Lord,
I HAVE received two of the most gallant epistles from your Lordship, that, 1 must conceive, were ever written.
“ For the first, I return you my most hearty thanks;—It let me at once into your charader, and 1 congratulated myfelf that my foul hadre-fufed acquaintance with you.
“ For the fecond, I shall only obferve, that the heart that could accept a bribe to do a good natured adion, is not the heart for my money. The West-Indian must write in the mercantile stile ; and your Lordship will not be shocked, becaufe you are prepared for every thing that is low bred from that quarter. Had you exerted any little interest you may possefs for Virtue’s fake, your condud would have had all it’s merit with me : but, to attempt to make a cat’s-paw of the brother’s distrefs to help you to the hand of the Sister, is fo poor. So paltry an adion, that I hasten to take my leave of you on paper, -as i have already done of all perfonal intercourfe with you, for ever ; and doubt not but Mr. Pnvers and his fon will find more able fupport from their ov/n unfulli-ed fame, than they could possibly do in the boasted friendship of Lord Brazen. I have the honour my Lord, to he an independent woman, and
“ E. MildmayS*
\
And let Lord Brazen (the dear woman fays) ** do his worst !—If Mr. Rivers would give her
CC
leave
A NOVEL

grit)
both ;
leave, she would foon shew whole interest was “ most powerful 1 But she wishes him to owe no “ obligations to any thing but hiscvvn merits and the merits of his Ton’s caufe, who is a cruelly-oppref-“ fed andwrongfully-imprifoned young tellow.’* When the matter will be brought to a happy iffue, 1 know not ; but Melvin holds fast his inte- ,
and demands a Court-Martial for them when his Majesty,” he Says, must know all ; and the greatest will be found the least ; the mighty must be crest-fallen.”
Did my father but bear up better, I should be fatisfied, and wait the event with Christian pad* ence ; but I can perceive it is the narrowneSs of his fortune, and the obfcurity of his fame, that wounds him thus. He cannot augment the one^ he cannot announce the other ; and Mrs. Mild-may is too tenderly connefted with us, not t© be fufpedted of partiality, when doing him barely
justice.
Writing, once my delight, is now become a talk.—I perform it, becaufe it is demanded of me ;—demanded by every tie of friendship and affedlion between us;—but I have lost all my fub-jetts.—Our viSiting parties are at an end; our fo-cial circle is broke up ; even the Camp incidents pafs unheeded by me, and rny whole thoughts are divided between , Melvin and Ferdinand, and my beloved father. Be alfured, whatever disappointments in the letter you may experience, do not originate from me ; for Swill fend you a line by every post, hill it is again in my power to Subscribe my feif
Your happy
>
as well as your affedllonate.

Ella Rivers;
LETTER
2<6
C O X H E A T H :
LETTER XXL
T
HAT great events often originate from trivial
incidents, is a trite, but my dear madam, a true oblervation ; and you will find it verified in the perfon of your friend.
My father’s penSivenefs increafed upon us until he confessed himfelf ill.—111 indeed ! for he
"was no longer able to go abroad, much lefs perform the duties of his'profeffion.
Mrs Mildmay retired'often to her clofet
we
to vreep, I was well informed by the redneis of her eyes; though she had taken, 1 doubt not, e-very precaution to conceal that teSdmony of her tendernefs.- ,
'A MESSEMGER. arrived from the Camp ? Mr. Ri vers Vas much worfe.
. EllX, my dear,” laid Mrs. Mildniay ** will make him an instant viSit.”
" She was profoundly filent during our Whole little journey, and I could perceive lome important matter Was revolving in her bolom.—We arrived, and were condudted to the bed-fide of the poor defponding Lieutenant.
He raifed his head.
“ Y o u R goodnefs, rhadam
“ Alas, Sir !” faid she i I am now come to
cc
forfeit your esteem, your good opinion for ever ; but Heaven can witnefs for me the purity of the friendship I bear you !—You must not interrupt mei—■—Had you been fuccefsful
in life,-The fecret I am now-going to difdofe
would

t
A
A NOVEL.
257
ii
\
** would have been buried in my breast, I should ‘ have fcen your countenance lighted up with ^ fiuiles of gladnefs, and should have rejoiced in
*	your joy. But I behold you the prey of filent ‘ anguish I You are dying. Sir, shefore my eyes, ‘ a martyr to paternal affedfion, and unrewarded
*	merit.—What avails the fortune God has given ‘ me, if I must furvive the friend of my heart ?
Oh pity the constidt I fustain 1 reconcile me to myfelf, by shewing me you do not defpife me; and at least entitle me to mix my tears with thofe of your beloved children :—in a word. Sir, condefcend to be my hushand.” Ella, my dear,” cried my father, am I ' delirious ? or is it Mrs. Mildmay that fpeaks ‘ to me thus I KNELLED down, and, taking his hand in mine, wept—but could not reply.
The fame messenger who informed us of my father’s increafed diforder, had' borne the intelligence to poor Wilfon, and he followed us with all expedition to Camp.
My Father was about to Speak.—-Never did I behold Wilfon before with dissatisfadlion ; but the moment was fo critical, I could not forgive his interruption.—The interruption was, indeed, extraoidinary ; for rushing in, Do I live to behold you thus ?” cried he thy deliverer, my father! and shall your enemies triumph over you ?—Then it is time L should make my last request to you.	/	'
Was it not your hand that raifed me from the ground—that called back my fleeting Spirit tliat healed my wounds—that fed, that pro-, tedted me, when wholly destitute of friends, of money, of habitation ?—Did I not receive all
/ .
a
€C
a
€C
a
a
€6
this, did I not enjoy it
$
without Sinking under
the

C O X H E A T H
the weight of the obligation ?—cMrs. Mildmay knows 1 was proud of your goodnefs; yet have feared to afk one little favour of you. It has hung on my lips nuraberlefs times ]—Your fon, might he not hope his father would ssiare his good, as he had shared his ill fortune!—Your Lydia, too, you have bestowed upon me t Then on my knees let me implore you to accept this waistcoat,” drawing it forth from his inSide coat-pocket, “ the legacy of my old master I He gave it me to make me happy; but your acceptance of it can alone induce me to call it valuable.”
On my honour, I thought his intelleS:s were impaired, and rofe hastily to give him way.—An old fattin waistcoat!—I looked first at that, then at him ; and most fincerely pitied him.
‘‘ My dear fellow,” faid my father, what ana I to understand from all this?—I know your noble-mindednefs, and thence alone hefitate to comply with your request.—When you mentioned the waistcoat as your prize, I expe6ted to have heard it contained hidden treafure. You forebore to hint at fuch a thing ; and for your fake I was forry to find myfelf difappoint-ed. But you now call my attention back :—I began to fufpedt I was right in my conjefiures; and I must therefore know the value of the gift, before I take it even from a fon.”
“ Is this like Mr. Rivers?—I will, however, anfwer ymu truly, on one condition.”
“ Name it,” faid my father.
Th at you confent to let it be divided equally amongst your children, after referving a father’s portion to yourfelf. If you deny my this, you are not my father.”
I HA© got the waistcoat by this time in my hands, not knowing what I did.
O.N
<(
<(
ft
(t
4'(
cc
(C
u
it
if
it
if
A NOVEL.
259
€€
Can you, continued he, “ refufe me a request, on which I folemnly declare my happi-nels is dependent?—Nay, Sir, your morality must engage you to it ; for I have bound my-felf, by a most facred vow, never to touch a farthing my old friend intended me, unlels with the general pariicipation of you and yours. Hitherto I have mostreligiousty kept my word ; nor will I break it, though your prefent circumstances has wrung the Secret ol my wealtk perhaps prematurely from me.” /
“ You deferve to be happy your own way;” Said my father ; “ I therefore yield the pointy and the waistcoat is mine. —Ella, Mrs. Mild-tnay, are witneffes of the gift, and now tell me what I am mafter of.’’
<€
4€

€C
if
if
if
if
if
if
if
a
if
if
if
if
if
if
if
if
ft
That is impostible. Sir,” foid Wilfon. Every one of thofe buttons inclofes a brilliant, —The good old man apprifed me*of his intention a moment or two before he carried it into execution, and pointed out to me the lot I should take, together with the nature, though not the extent of its value ; for he knew it not himfelf. It was for this reafon he conjured me to depart as Soon as he should expire.”
“ What a finished deceiver,” Said Mrs. Mildmay, ** have I taken into my Service! Hoiv could you pafs yourfelf off for a forlorn wretch, when you knew you was as rich as a Nabob! —I shall never forgive you.—Does Lydia—
** This, my dear madam, is the first time the confession has efcaped shy lips ; and though I am the hushand of a woman I most tenderly love, I never called myfelf completely blessed till now.^—Now, Sir, you are indeed
if
ft
if

if
if
ft
if
my fath
er

Then
z6o
C O X H E A T H :
€t
€C
f€
€C

Then hear , me,” laid the Lieutenant,” and, on your duty, oppofe not my refoiution,
T. he number of buttons is (even ; three of -which I infiist upon your receiving from me, as my gift ; the remaining four Ihall be divided between Ferdinand and Ella.”
“ Ah Sir ! and can you inSist upon being the alone unbenefited perfon by the treafure I have fo anxiousty preferved for your fake ?”
“ Yo u will forgive me,” faid my father, when I tell you, I am already provided for ; a brighter jewel than all you can boast, the good providence of Heaven has this day bestowed upon me !—That lady. Sir, is mine ! — mine ' by every tender, every affedlionate tie I —— My heart has been obedient to my head ; but the war was hardly Sustained.— My honour forbade, my admiration bade me pay my devoirs to her ; but there was no Separating her from her fortune, and thatfilenced me for ever on thefub-je6t—.W ill you, madam, v/ill you let my fon Wilfonhave the honour of joining our hands ?” WiLS ON overturned a camp-stool upon my toes, and threw an umbrella into ray face, by his eagernefs to perform the pleaSing talk ; and as it is agreed a Special mefSenger shall be dilpatched to the Commons for a Special licence, it is probable before this reaches you I shall have a mother, as well as a father.
Having Somewhat recovered ourSelves, I went off with Wilfon in Mrs. Mildmay’s to tell Ferdinand the wonderful works of Providence,” as my father called it ; Lydia, you must understand, previousty alighting from her phaeton, in purfuit of her runaway hushand
^he had perceived his mind uncommonly op-
opp
€C
a
€C
iC
€€
iC
•t
^ ^ ^ y E L.
261
. \
** prelTed, and could no longer contain herfelf “ lo we left the fond pair to" unfold the tale
of their and our felicity to her, at their lei-“ hire.”
Ferdinand forgotshis own sstuation, him-» Self, me, in his joy ; but, my dear madam, you was amply remembered.—He would write to Sir Ferdinand the instant he knew the value of Wil-I'on’s prefent ; he would no longer constrain him-felf from writing to you ;—He v.<ould work miracles ; — when, defcending from his high flight, he recolle8:ed the first necelSary step was unlocking his prifon-doors, restoring his fame, <^c. before he could, with any degree of propriety, (through the medium of your father’s confent,)-lay his heart at your feet.
Melvin was as boisterous in his tranfports as the Monster in the Tempest ; and, generous fellow as he is, felt more, much more on mv fa-ther’s account than his own.—The poor Lieu-“ tenant would now fo overlook his foes, and ‘‘ their little fouls would be fo difmayed!” However not a word of the diamonds is to be told abroad ; and we are to Seem to derive every thing from Mrs. Mildmay’s union, let the world fay what it will.
When I returned to my father’s tent, behold he was rifen. Seated in his eafy chair, and at breakfast ;—Lydia pouring out the Tea, and now Sweetening the stop-bafon instead of the cups, and now burning her fingers with the tea-pot.—There never was a happier breakfast (as Stern fays) fince the flood 1
\
Need I add aught to this epistle ?—to its len.gth,
its
Q,6z
C O X H E A T H :
its intelligence, or its shall only add, that
, I want a word, and f®
l am, &c.
Ella. Rivers,
Notet I mean to write a Novel, and call it—* Ti^e Wdjicoatf according to the taste of the times; and I think I may be bold to Say, that if ever there was'merit in a title, there would be in this, though not So high-founding as Some that have lately appeared in our prints.
r
Once more adieu !

Ella Rivers,

'..j
L E T-
A
N O V E Li

LETTER XXII.
Wh E N it was recolleded to be necessary to return to the Hall, that my father might have a little fleep, wc took our leave, (all except Lydia, who would attend upon him for the day,) in very unuhial fpirits ; my father in a most agreeable manner telling Mrs. Mildmay, she must be now fenSible he was not above being obliged by the friend of his heart.—You, and only you, “ my dear madam, shall be Rivers’s benefac-** trefs.”
We attacked Wilfon in the warmest terras on
• l
the deception he had pra^lifed upon us, his wife, and all mankind.
Pardon me there,” faid he, “ for I was under the necessity to let Davies into fomc part of ray Secret.—A little button at the collar of the waistcoat, which Mr. Rivers did not perceive wanting, was cut off by me in India, and depofited in his hands as a Security for Several Sums of money he accomodated me with> and the expences of my passage.—The truth is, he had So much generossty, as for a long time to refufe accenting the pledge, and was at last alone prevailed upon by my declaring I would be Served on no other conditions. — He has diSpoSed of it ssnce our arrival, and I am now master of a very decent Sum of money for an humble and a private fellow, as the jewel bore a tollerable price.”
** Bsttir
€<



cc
ic
€C
a64
COXHEATH

Better ” ((

€€
%
€<
4i^
<c

and« better I” Said Mrs. Ml Id-may."—“ So you find, Ella, we are every way
“ abufed
“ It will be in your power, rnadafn,' to punish him as he deterves, by proving a very mo-“ ther-indaw to his Lydia ;—the only way to come at him, and make him' fmart effec-“ tually.”
We now expressed our astonishment, that in the vicishtudes of life he had been expofed to, he could preferve his prize.—He anfwered, He wore it continually, night as well as day, by ** way of garment ; that the meannefs of its ap-pearance fecured it from all fufpicion ; and his old friend valued himfelf much on the device of covering the buttons with wrought leather, —at once a defence and a difguile for the brilliants they contained.”
We next turned our thoughts to poor Ferdinand ; and Mrs.' Mildmay, with ©ur concurrence, refolved To write to a Great Man, her particular friend, and enclofe Lord Brazen’s rw-o epistles for his perufal ; then stating the particulars and origin© of the hard treatment my brother had fustained, alk his Lordship (her friend I mean) if it did not clearly appear to relult from, that quarter, and how she should proceed ?-— The letter was accordingly difpatched fo foon as we reached Mildmay-Hall.
The evening brought a message from camp, . that my father was much better, but that Lydia would remain with him that one night ; and they • hoped to fee us early to breaktast the enluing morning.
This was fufficient; though, if we had not rallied Wilfon, he would have let off to fupport his car a fpofa in her filial watching.—We laughed
away
A
NOVEL.
265
away the hours till we had notice fupper was on the table, and then fat down, and eat like So many farmers.
Wilson’s heart was fo open, that he drank bumper after bumper to the renewed health, and approaching felicity of his noble and beloved father, and confuSion (Mrs. Mildnray laid refor-mation) to his enemies ; and io well fatislied were we with our fubje^ls, and with each other, that we did not break up our little party till midnight.	'
i AM more than ever impatient for the Royal Review, now that I shall figure away in my tno~ thefs coach-and-Six, and be known all over the Heath, for the daughter of the rich West-Indian, the amiable Mrs, Mildmay ; and for fuch I hope to be prefented to their Majesties, by a man of the first fashion, who is Mrs. Mildmay’s most obedient humble fervant; though not in a loverlike way ; for she lends him cash whenever ’ he stands in need of it, and, from approving his political principles, has efpoufed his interest in many parts of the kingdom at the laff Eledlion ; and it will be his own fault, if she forfakes him in that,, or any other point, in future.
So foon as Mrs, Mildmay is converted into Mrs. Rivers, their nuptia'ls' will be announced, —announced in terroreni throughout the Camp ;
the poor Lieutenant will have his fuite of fer-vants, his horfes, his carriages, to attend him ; and thus postested of wealth, of fame, and friends, — Heaven and Earth ! — what a blazing comet he will appear to his foes !	1 enjoy their gnash-
ing of teeth, by anticipation ; am lifted out of myfelf; and can barely recollect how much I
Your, &c.,	'
Ella Rivers. '
ought to be
VolII
M
L E T
266
C O X H E A T H
letter XXIll
Y
OUR family and friends, my dearest Ella, are a chemical compound of all the worst vices of the worst part of their fpecies, viz. distimulation, hypocrify, intrigue, deception^ ike. &c. &c.
My father feat for me down about half an hour ago; and on my entering the parlour received me with, “ Well, my good girl, we shall now fee whether Ferdinand deferves you. — Have you any letter from him ?”
I replied, “ 1 had not.”
“ Nay, for that matter,” returned he,/^ I believe I am fomewhat too hasty in my expectations ; for he can by this time fcarcely know
iC
€i
€C
his change of fortune.”
te
It waslucky I had not read your joyful tidings, for your diamonds had all been innocently fpread
out by me to my father’s view.
MAYlafk, Sir,” laid 1, with an agitation I could not conceal, “ what it is you mean ?”
A BOY of Six weeks old, the only bar to the Lieutenant’s inheritance of a fine estate, died last night of the Small Pox. They were fo wife as not to inoculate the babe, and fo have provided both for it and your friends. The father has been dead near three months, and w^as first-couSin to Rivers the elder, though too proud and too ill-natured to take notice of him “ after hismarriage into a low family.”
This, then, Ella, this is the avenue your father alluded to ! — How prudent it was of him to bring you up ^without the knowledge of what
might
46
I
4 6
16 4 6 46 46
•c

A
NOVEL.
^6^
might never have reached you ! More young minds are undone by fuch falSe politics, than by any other error of education whatever. Hope only railed to be difappointed, is the height of imprudence and cruelty !—Tour father, my dear, afled like himfelf.
Now here will hewed with Mrs. Mildmay in the charaDer of a poor man, when, lo! he is master of a very handfome, though, perhaps, not equal fortune with herfeU ! — And this you call honour, I fuppofe, and delicacy, and gene^-rolity, and all the fine names you can string together.	‘
My heart is relieved from all its cares, but for Ferdinand’s liberty ; for it is plain, he has only to make the overture, to obtain Sir Ferdinand’s allianc

— Here is another stroke of providential interference, that neither you or 1 could have preSumed toexpeQ;, any more than we could have forefeen it!—May our general re-union be not far distant !
I AM forry for Sir Ferdinand’s credit, that it cannot be denied he knew of your family-dependencies, from his first connexion with it ; that his refentment began to abate from the exadl period of the infant’s inoculation ; and that his revived friendship takes its date from that infant’s death.—There is merit neverthelefs, Ella, in the advance towards a reconciliation cominsc from him,
D
as he really was roughly dealt by at our fepara-tion, be the motives as laudable as they may.
If what I now tell you is intended to be kept a Secret by your father, I beg you will not be fo officious as to betray it. You know he is a very Quixote in delicacy, and, if you oppofe or deleat his Schemes, may jilt the fvveet widow at last ; for there are male as well as female coquets, my dear, in this good world.
M2	Y£T
26S
COX HEATH
Yet if the liext news I receive frcm Gamp is not your brother’s happy and honourable enlargement, I shall droop in the midst of all this good fortune.
N t
Your wretched
C. Fletcher.

. p


LET-
A N O V .D U
£69
LETTER XXIV,
O U are a cenforipus, nay, afcurrilous girl f ' father, madam, fcorns deception, and, if you was a man, would call you to fevere account for your unwarrantable attack on his charadler. —Let that pafs, however ; for I have more important iriatters on the tapis.
To breakfast, agreeable to the invitation-mentioned in the conduston of my last letter, did we go to Lieutenant Rivers’s marquee !-r-The Lieu-^naut was up, and ready to receive us. ^—He had fept the whole night thr(sugh. — D.ejedtion of heart, madam, was his difeafe, and returning happinefs, I trust, will be his cure.
Mrs. Mildmay blushed,' when she entered My father led her to a feat, lofs how to behave.
My kind and good friend,” Said my father, politely taking her hand, is it poiTible you should repent the honour you have done me ? And if you do not repent, what is become of the graceful and engaging familiarity with which you were wont to treat me ? I have told you all my weaknefs ; how painfully I constrained myfelf, to preferve what I believed to be tlie charader of an honest man : your condefcen-Sion has melted down all my refolves, and I prqfefs myfelf not only your most .devoted, but
M3	your
She was quite at a
4 4
44
T4
44
4 4
4 4
44
44
270
C O X H E A T H:

“ ycur most affectionate Rivers; profefs that rny fentiments of you for years have been iuch as merit like yours must infallibly infpire ; and that henceforth I shall live openly, as 1 have long done fecretly, only for you.^’
“ 1 WILL tell you then,” faid Mrs. Mildmay, with all the becoinirg modesty of her lex, “ on w'hat terms we will meet.’*
My father v.^as attentive.
4(
4 4
Mi
a
Mi
Mi
ii
a
^ •
MM
I
ii
»
i.i
a
ii
ii
w K will fuppofe, Sir, you have faid 'every thing that can be faid upon the tender fubjeft you allude to ;, and we will look forward, as per-fcns who perfectly understand each other, and have agreed to have but one houfe and one interest ; and with the friendship that does credit to our fenstbility, and the good fenle that ought to distinguish our time of life, at a convenient period obtain the fanCtion of the laws of our Country for Spending our days together ; obtain it as an aCl of moral nectstity, without any ot the parade or preparation, either verbal or otherwise, that is Suitable only to our Sons and daughters.^’
My father bowed in acquiefcence ; and when the licence arrives, they will be made man and wife.—tHow Sweetly did this Sweet woman cut the thread of love and Soft nonSenSe, and teach both males and females to reSpeCt, to revere her conduct ! —She could not, you know, live unmarried under the fame roof with a man, though w'ith the purity of an angel, uncenlurcd, ar.d to have married lels diScreetlv in the face of her Sons and Daughters, as she kindly called us, would not have proved her uniformly Mrs. Mildmay.— But I am mistaken, if she does not find an adoring fwain in the perfon of her hushand to the end of her existence, and have the finest things faid to
her
A
N O V E L.
271
her of any wife in the kingdom ; for it is my fa-ihtfsjorteXo be complaiiant without flattery, af-stdiious without bustle, and tender without folly.
—And fomuch for Mr. and Mrs. Rivers.------------We
brought our proviston with us, and fo dined en Camp.
In the afternoon, and not till the afternooii, came the Special melTenger with a letter to inform my father of the poor child’s death. He read it with a steady countenance ; then prefenting it to Mrs. Miidmay in the most agreeable manner. Be pleafed, madam,” Said he, “ to fee what has befallen us ! This is my first notice of the ** incident, for ,my little eoufin died only the-night before last.”	'
She returned it with a fmile, and a fignificant • shake of her head. — “ I rejoice. Sir,” laid she, , “ and ever shall rejoice in every addition to your happineSs, though I must think we had Suffici-^ cnt fortune before.”
• I BEG you will learn how to behave yowrfelf^i when advancing fomewards towards forty, —You may be inclined to take a fecond hushand ; more particularly, madam, as my brother will have the honour of being your first ; and at least Secure his memory from infult, though you should conceive it unnecestary to psrSevere in your widowhood beyond a decent perSod—a period of nint years, as is the cafe with Mrs. Miidmay.
Wilson did not come over till the evening, and presently whifpered Somewhat to my father.
** Very well,” replied he; and I thought no
more of it ; but it Seems the licence was arrived.
I CANNOT wait on you in the morning, madam,” Said my father at parting ; I there-Sore flauer myfelf, as rny Situation is fo criti-
M 4	cast
<
H A ^ -I jU
/
C O X H E A T H
ti
cal, you will favour me with your company at Camp.”
“ With pleafure Sir! No convenience to ** youilelf or family shall be impeded by idle ** punDilio.—I will attend you.”
shiouLD you take this for a matrinionial af-fignation ?—“ You should not.”-—And why fo, after what you have read on the fubjeft ? For .my part, I look upon it there were Sufficient words to the bargain.—Wilfon is to have the feli-city of giving her away.
But I shall not crowd my Mr§. Mildmay’s wedding into the fag-end of a letter ; therefore
fend this away with only telling you that
I am, &c.
Ella Eivers.

L E T-
A NOVEL
273
LETTER XXV
Fast Decency, celeftlal Maid !
Defcend from Heaven to Beauty’s aid ! Though Beauty may beget dehre,
’Tis thou muft fan the Lover’s fire :
For Beauty, like Supreme dominion,
Is beft fupported by opinion.
If Decency brings no fupplies,
Opinion falls, and beauty dies.
V
T

HERE is a mirror at which you may Set your
cap becomingly, if you are wife ! and for your fake alone did I take the trouble of quoting it. Fair Decency, madam, wanted no invoking here ; but in propria perfona attended, as my Sister-bride-maid.—Never did Mrs. Mildmay look So lovely 1 And when the priest departed, she pressed my hand—“ Now, Ella, I am authorized to shew “ my tendernefs for Mr. Rivers’ children; and they shall find me all the mother !”
My father ordered breakfast.
Lydia looked round for her good man, as who should fay, We are not a compleat fett without him but he was fled, to inform the poor prifoners, it is imagined, of the important buss-nefs he has been tranfafiling.
“We will not wait for him, I can affure you,’* Said my father.
“ By no means,” Said Mrs.—my mother I would fay j “ it would be very unreasonable,
“ indeed.
274
COXHEATH:
0€
€(
€i
4f
indeed, to punish us for his tranfgrefiions ! He is now, my good Sir, playing the Bu(y body “ at your and my expence.’’
His heart jvill overflow at his lips,” replied the Lieutenant, on foine occaSions : and, for my part, I can most readily excufe him on “ this, for the iake ot the temptation.”
Need 1 report their joy 1 — t shall call to receive their compliments to-morrow.
And now comes the most interesting part of my relation.—^Mr. and Mrs. Rivers, we their children dutifully assisting at the confultation, have determined to write to Sir Ferdinand immediately, to acquaint him at once with the young man’s imprifonment, change of fortune, and non mifdemeanour ; and asst permiffion for him, at the conclufion of this his first and last campaign, to vifit Somerfetshire, with hopes of obtaining your fair hand'—The King is daily expe6led, mv dear ;—and it is indeed become abfolutely ne-ISary for the poor troops to go into winter quarters ; tor, notwithstanding the finenenefs of the feafon, there are abundance of fick in the hofpi-tals.—But I forbear to touch So difeordant a key , when love and matrimony is my theme.
' My- father is of opinion, that when once k comes to be known he is married to a woman of Such confequence as Mrs. Mildmay, his fon will be restored to him of courfe ; but we have other strings to our bow, A Great Man, as I have already told you, is applied to ; and we shall expe(Sl: to hear of Some great operation in lets than eight and forty hours : I will therefore leave this letter open till I can add, what will be So highly acceptable a piece of news with you, that your lover is at liberty.
Well
A NOVEL.
275
Well may gold be called almighty, the key to favour, the Source of fame, the—But I have not time to purfue this catalogue farther, for hastening to tell you that Melvin and Melvin’s friend are both at large, and most obiequiousty yours.—The How and When were as follow :
The messenger dispatched by my father’s family, to inform him he was no longer the poor Lieu-tenantf happened to have a relation in Camp, to whom he very naturally communicated the purport of his embassy ; who as naturally imparted it to his acquaintances ; until, in the due courfe of circulation, it reached the ears, of the Subalterns, the Commanders of corps, the General Officers, &c. &c.
Captain James Brazen w'^as the first to feel tenderly for xis,. He waited on the Chief of all Chiefs and acknowledged he had been in an error ; that the young gentkman^s conduCl had been bafely miSrepreiented ; and that he wistied much to prove his ingenuoujnefsy by making an early and proper apology for what had past : in a word, he entreated that he himSclf m.ight restore him to his father.
Gracious and condefcendlnsr Chief !—He
_	5^	K
complied with Captain James Brazen’s request. Ferdinand was at the door of the marquee before ten in the morning ; and as Melvin’s Sullen fit was now over, he flew to embrace, to congratulate us, to participate our felicity.*^ O my dear madam ! it was^a truly joyful morning !
But maik me ! — As 1 am not afraid of lofing Melvin by a little delay, be assured your wedding-day shall be mine ; and So I conclude upon this fubjedl for cver^
The
276
LOXSIEATH
# 1
\
The Great Man’ s letter has been received, -and the little Man has offered Mr. Rivers a Company : but, however Angular it may be for a Lieutenant, after being in five engagements, aiid t^o thirds of his life in his Majcfty’s fervice, to ride a Kieute-tenant in his own coach and-fix, fo it is, and fo it will be ©n the dav of days now at hand.
Melvin and I have invitations to the places where the people of fashion will be to be met with, and we mean to accept them all, for manifold, strong, and striking reafons ; nor will Mrs. Rivers, I hope, difdain being of our party.
I WISH you could prevail on Sir Ferdinand to make an excutSion with you, his beloved daugh* ter, to Camp ! You can come to us, but we can-pot come to you for the prefent, any more than if we were cast on the plains of Jehofaphat, “ from whofe bourne no traveller returns I”— Thefe moral memento’s should always be thrown in., madam, efpecially under our elevated circumstances ; in like manner as King Somebody (for i have not leifure. to recolledf his name) had his daily monitor to attend him with the admonition of his being human :	Remember thou art a
“ man {” faid he.----Remember thou art mor-
tal, fay I ; and that however statterirrg the prof-peD, or heart-felt the delight you may taste on this or any future occaSion, the Kingdom of Saints is not of this world, or uninterrupted hap-pinefs.
Yet let who may think it right to dash their cup of felicity with fears of to-morrow, 1 will not follow their example;
Who. can hold a fire in his hand,
By dreaming of the freezing Caucafus }
Or wallow naked in December’s fnow,
By bare remembrance of the fuminer’s heat I
Hence,
A NOVEL.
277
Hence, as we cannot temper Sorrow by recolledted pleafure, I will not tinge delight by the,remotest ray of possible calamity. All that Heaven, I am perfuaded, requires of us is, to bear our mingled lot with becoming fortitude and becoming enjoyment ; and to be neither too much exalted by good, or depressed by what we call ill fortune.
I beg you will make yourfelf mistrefi of this useful lesson against our re-union ; which, if I hav^e any Ikill in divination, is not far distant.
I am, my dear madam.
Your happy, thrice-happy.
Ella Rivers.
\
\
LET-
278
C O X H E A T H:
letter XXVI.
See, fee the conquering Hero comes ! Sound the trumpet, beat the drums !

H E whole country is turned topfy-turve I
Country-bffes all h.-ribbonei, and ladies all bl-hah,ted, UA around (for you mud underlUnd his
wonM	my father wilhed we
!h	of horfes—Melvin, Wilfon
Mrs. Mildmay, and myfelf, riding forward to
mud cer.
tainiy be a delert!---They come ! they come »
and my pencil and paper are put with all exnedit t,on mto my pccket._I refel-you ,o l e Sic prints for the proceffion, i„ the manner follobn
or
of the gre-
A Serjeant, corporal, and tw’elve privates
nadier guards.
I	o
Foxir grooms In liverie.s.
Four footmen in full liveries.
Two riding equeries. "
An ofhcer of the life guards.
The SOVEREIGN,
Mounted on a fine roan horfe (richly ornamented with orange and blue ribbands) drelTed in his Royal regimentals. ^ On his right, Lord Amherft as Commander in Chief of the forces. On his left, the Marquis of Lothian.
In
A NOVEL.

In the rear, the Generals Keppel and Sloper, the Du kes of Grafton and Devonfliire^ General Carpenter, and Colonel St. John, with whom his Majefty
frequently converfed.
Two horSe grenadier guards.
Two grooms.
Two footmen.
A corporal and fix private grenadier guards.
The Marquis of Carmarthen in one of her Majefty^s
poft-chaifes drawn bj four horfes.
The ecu E E N,
In her chaife drawn by four horfes (in which was Lady Egremont) dreffed in her Royal regimentals.
A coach and fix with her Majefty’s attendants.
Inferior attendants in another.
Footmen, grooms, &c.
A Serjeant, corporal and twelve men of the grenadier
guards.
Fhirty thoufand affedionate and loyal Suhjeds.
Well, my dear madam, how do you find your-felf after this glorious fight ? Are their Majesties beloved or not by their fubjedis ? Does there appear a fpirit of bravery or dejedfion in the troops ? Can you fear invaders —Perish the thought ! Britain shall be herfelf again!—I could have wished the two eldest princes, indeeed, had been of the royal party, as they are now of an age for participating martial feenes; but it feems the court-etiquette is, according to the good old primitive times, to extend their period of infancy to the last postlble moment: and the lad Ifaacy we read, went dowHy &c. &c. when the/flc/, you must obferve, was at least thirty years old.—I congratulate the Court on the wifdom of their conduQ:, though I confefs its merit is above my coraprehenSion.
The
2i8o
C O X tl E A T H

\
The Review over, the officers were prefented individually to their Sovereign, and had the honour to kifs his hand.—Mr. Rivers’ turn, at length arrived !—A company was given him on the Spot, and knighthood offered him.-------The first he ac-
cepted, but declined the last. Saying it was his highest ambition to continue his majesty’s fervant.
I OWN I was not without ray fecret murmur-ings, that the other Camps should have the precedence ; but lam now convinced that though lajiy we were not leaft in love; and am as loyal a lub-je£l as any in his Majesty’s dominions.
Maidstone, Mildmay-PIali, Ac. Ac. were illuminated on the occaSion,—and every heart was dilated. It was; a carnival, a jubilee, a festive Scene beyond what I have language to paint! — Nor did Some certain friends of yours make a mean figure in the procession.—It was hinted to my father, that a pair of colours were at Ferdinand’s Service ; but he replied, his fon had only given him his attendance that one campaign, for family reafons, at the expiration of which he would refume the funDion which was his eleStion, and
J,r'
for which he had been educated—the Church • So that you fee, madam, Mr. Rivers, in every fenfe of the word, is a man of honour.
But though Ferdinand will renounce a military life, Melvin is determined to perfevere in it ; as alfo Mr. Rivers. Should then (as it is expe6ted)
a new encampment take place next Spring, I shall be equally (nay fuperiorly) capable of fending you ail the particulars: for as the denouement will most certainly be my becoming the wife of a Soldier, I must follow his fortune, where-ever it leads him even to the environs of the embattled field
of
and.
instead of pasting my time at Mildmay-Hall, dwell in the midst of martial manoeuvres.
^	Should
-A N O V E L.
281
/ Should you more particuUuiv wHh to trace Ushn imagination from ipot to Spot, I would re-'commend it to you to furnish vouridfwdth a very excellent PLAN of Cox heath Camp, published in your Westminster Magazine for the .month of August, when reading this additional .defeription, which 1 nevertheless preSurne you shave already read, and is a most correCf one.—■
By the force of fancy, you may (ee all I have Seen ; not forgetting to throw in the graceful appearance of Mr. Rivers’and Mrs. Rivers’young friends.
In this manner their Majesties pasted from the right to the left of the line, in front, the osttcers Saluting they pasted ; the troops with prefented arms ; the bant's ©f mufick'playing martial tunes. Pasting the left by the Royal Irish, his Majesty put on his hat (for hitherto he had been uncovered, and the Sateen repeatedly paying her compliments from the chaile window.) A gun. The w'hole went to the left-about, Their Majesties pasted the rear of the line, came on the front by the first battalion of Royal Scots, and pafFed the grenadier and light infantry companies, who had formed _a Separate line, (with which tiieir Majesties- feerned much pleafed) and came to the centre of the line, between the Suffolk afld Cheshire. Here her Majesty went with her Suite to the Royal marquee, which was .prepared for their reception. A gun. To acyaaint the army the Sovereign was in the centre. A gun. The whole army wheeled to the right by grand divifions, and paffed the Sovereign in quick morion, and wheeN ing to the left, formed again in battalions. Here the , artillery took their stations. Three Guns The manual excercife .was perfomied. The firings commenced hy platoons, fab and grand divihons. A gun. The whole .army formed in three columns, and marched in a very fmall compafs of ground. A guft. The v^^hole army formed in battalions, and performed the quick firing, whkh lafted near twenty minutes, aflilied by the ar-
tiller
N
V
> *
282
COXHEATH:
\
tlllery, to the aftoniflinient of the Sovereign and the mmeroH.s fpeftators. The firings went on by regiments, and brigades. A gun, T he right wing fired ; A gun ! The left wing fired Lnx)o guns. The whole line fired as one man ; the line then formed the match | the flanking companies began to harrafs the line ; detached parties were fent to difperfe them ; the various attempts • were made, alternately repulfing each other. The mode of fecuring the artillery and baggage on trie inarch was well exhibited.
The line now dividing from the Suffolk and Chef-fliire, feveral excellent manceuvres were pradtifed prior to a general engagement. When the adlion bcGam«e general, it exhibited the groateft refemblance of a field-fight the Sovereign had yet feen.
In this aftion the grenadiers and light-infantry con^-pompanies, under the Duke of Grafton, Colonels Williamfon and Gladwin, exhibited many grand ma-nosiivres, and gave great fatisfadlion to the King.
’Twas now half paft three o’clock, when his Majesty fignified his intention of quitting the field; the whole formed again In one line, and fired the feu at
The review was happily attended with but one accident, that of a firelock burfting in the hands of a foIdler of the 59^^> ^7 which his face was defpeiate-
ly cut.	^	EC js n
The corps of artillery was very much ouended at
not being introduced according to cuftom, before any other corps of the army the officers expreffed their difiatisfaftion, and went away. Mr. Keppel fent after the Lieutenvnt Colonel,, and appologized in the Kings name.

I am, &c.
Ella Rivrrs
Ki
L E T
A
N O V E L.
S
O
LETTER XXVII.

X IS very true, my dear madam, your last letter lies unanfwered on my table ; but could you have the confcience to expedl: I should attend to little domestic tales, when I had Such fubjedls as Reviews, &c. at command ?	- '	■
Ferdinand fets offto-morrow to pay bis devoirs.—I beg you will be ready to receive him itti all your best asts and graces.
. .	'	V	. *
None but the brave deServe the fair !
And if standing fire at exerciSe^, and bearing all the toils of a (holiday) Camp constitutes bravery, he is as brave a fellow as any in the kingdom : and take notice, it is the best you can fay of most of the Red-Coats now in England.
Ferdinand has shewn himfelf not a- littfe headstrong in the article of his journey; for< v/e shall all be down with you in lefs than a month. But he would wait no months, not he.—He has Sir Ferdinand^s licence in his pocket, and So flies •on the wings o/ Love to-morrow.—He might have added Gratitude ; for the Baronet has been a most unexampled friend to him.
The little month I mention will, I strppofe, however, be fufficient time for you to fay all the Soft things in, that is needful to fay before matrimony.—T just give you this hint, as it is whifper-cd, that on our joining you a double wedding will take place> and furnish fubjedt-matter for our
public
284
C O X H E A T H :
public prints. Then, alfo, will you See a pattern for all conjugal conduct in my dear amiable mother :

In every gefture, dignity and love !

nor will you wonder to hear my father pronounce himfeif the happiest of men.
.	ourfelves, Lydia and her Lord and
Master Seem a lesser order of beings, in every .refpedt, when placed near this pair ; though in a state of Separatioin, if I may fo call it, they have their advantage over two-thirds of the fpecies.
, I SHALL pafs through London ; therefore, if ,you have any commands en habilernent^ difpalch them Speedily, that, they may b§ executed,— When I am on the wing, nothing Shall retard my flight !-t-HDW€V€f, *SparO'n^ not- I shall think it no trouble, provided your requests are well timed. So wishing you all imaginable felicity with your Swain—a felicity which none but minds like ours can taste—the Sweet compound of friendship, of
of love—1 le:« ve you to add all rv mem-
brances yoii fee fit from the circle at Mildmay-; and, only alk. you, till we meet, to believe
me
Your most affectionate
\
Ella Rivers*
I* I N st S.
U. of Pa. Library

\
C. ‘	•

Vh' *-v
* • ’

/ %
^	. <	•, A
V -
=^'A	"
e*.
-r*


. ■ t
\
■' f-
'dm .
• r
	W » d '* ^
'r	' \=l
	*>■
* A
\
\

f
-''.rA
\
',	■•“V
■ \
\
V.
. V
I ..


' -4
D»
, >* -
/

• '%	* r
/ ^
'V .

t
.1.; .
/



t.
k.
S\
i ' - ... <-
■->.

' ■
•T

>,t
\ '
V
- t
I
5

• /
> ■

\
i'


V »%. , ty:
; f .
, ^ ;
.4.
•r

■i*"
J _^flV C '
^ n w	Ti*''	<


s
/
/

/

1 : «• *

>
i

(	■- *r- 'C*V s •

r'* '^ .
-T3P<^
•; 'J*.:
+■ '-r^
2>?
■ •*"
• -. )

i.
r .-
•V.
’ -V" .. •0^ H)
'-<❖9
-•_V»
■-'B
v^5;
■c.y^f-
• • f£j
V:%

t -. '.'it
■ -05

.•-.«oe
v-f.x-




v.v^-
*^-
yd.
r:i

t <	1


fi -I.
-Cl


=^0- • '^. ^i

A-fcr- ,


S&
_ 9	■*