V •
!n


O' Q) f” * * *
ro
o>
c» 00 cn

ro
ro Ca) bo bo Ko
C7I O O)
N> cn iu bo bi
CD hO 05
oo ^ 00
cn CO ro
N)
CO
cn

MM
C7>

cn CO 05 CO ^ CO
05 N5 cn O C75 -»•
05 CD
b bo CD
-k to
^ cn 00 C50 ro
cn cn ro cn 45^
CO
4^ o
O 05
I <o o o to
ro b b CO o ro
I 00 p p 7^
ro ^ CO cn ^
CO 05 4:^
ro o
00 CD 05
-X o ^ CD cn
- ■ ■■ r- T
00

• t>=-
W.
CD

ro
|AWASViVS*W%SSW*«W
<

kvw.w.vAWrt'.svS*
CO
^1)
cn

illilil
teiliiii

00 00
tS IS
tn
(l*»«de) (ptn jod «»op VI vt	S	^
Ig l§
IS
ro
-X 05
00 ro
ro
pop b cn b
O 4:^ 05
O O 05 ^ b kx CO cn CD
CD
O 00 b to
-X CD
O O CO
4^ N5 CD CO 4^
CD O
-ix b
CO 00
cn ro ^ cn 4^ ro
b ^
CO cn 05
05 *-sl
00 cn ro b b b
o CO cn
ro
CD CO CD
*4^ b b CD cn
CO CO O 00
2
CD CD
CO cn 4^ o ro CO
b b b
O 05
00 00 CO ro
fo isi. ^ CD cn ^
cn cn ro o lo
*-Ni b ^ to 00 CD
ro ro cn CD -o o ix lx b
05 -sj
at* _____
CD

CD
ro
Co
cn
t
I-
4=	^
I-:-

o>
1 *N
00
<o
iS-
Don l^iMams
Call/MSS #: Bib ID:
Collection

jscsing pr3991.a6 1316 1781
?.V.VA^V.•.•.V.V.•W^AW.WAV.•AW.VA■^VAWAVAW^W.V.W.^WWWWWAf.VWAVWAA^^^^MW^VWW^W/AV.•AWVW.fW^
‘AVl^

.VASV.WAVrt*A»AVAV.VAAAV.V.»AV.W,».'
158827




,^^^^^^^^^^^^^^V.V.^WW.^VW.^WA^^VAA.•AA.^V.OWXV.^V.M.VM..VX.A?.W.^•AA^AA•.•>..AWAVAAW>A^WA^WW«I.^^.A^.
1

Total # Images: # Foldouts: Pages To Dig:


J
VA*.*AVAS«.VA<n>;w.'^«.^«Xl.*ASS*A>.<VA%

•V»yASVAV.».*A*.*.V.*A*.V.*.*.W.*.*AVA*.'
Csv.%v.\%v.
^^V.V.•.VAV.^^W.•.W.^■.VA^V.•.VA^^^^S•AV.VA•.■.V.^^^V.W.^^WAVAWA•.*AVAW.VA^W.VA^•AVA^^W.WA^^^W.^^^Wvf ^.V.AVAV^AVAV/^..^^..A-.V/AVAAAVWAA-.VAAV.V.VAV//AArWA//AVA-/A^^.-A^^/AW^...AVAVWAWArWWA'/AV/AWA.A/^
•.^^.^•A•.•.W.•ASVAV.^VA■AVAW.^WAFAVAVAWA^^^.WAWA^^WWAVA?.WAA^W.^^%^WAVV^W.^AVW.WAVAV,•.VAWAV.•.WAl
Condition Notes:
j:av.vav.v.v.*.v.vav.vav.*av.w.vav.v.v.%w.sv.v.v.va...avav.wa-.vav.-.v.v.v.v.v,v.va*.v.va*.w/awavwav.va.v,va*avav.w.v.v
.'.•/.•AAV.WAA.'AlVAV/.V.WAV.VA^A^W/AA.'
1 volume
.VA'AV.VAA'AA/.^AW.V.VA'.WA.VAW/AAVAWA’A^
. .-.SS^r.V.V.-.V.-.S .•.S-.-...V. A-.-.V.^V^NV.V.V.V. A-.-.S-.W.W.V.-A>>W.V.V^W.V.W.W. .SW^V.%VAVAVA^SVA-.V0A-AVV.VAWAW.VVA>V^<VVA*.y<WVAVy^yAWAW
Notes/lnstructions:
J.^^^•A^....W.W.■.W.V.^■AW.-.•.•.VA•..A^W.^*A•A•.-.W..A•W.^SW..,.A..^^^WA■.•A^^..W.•AV.■..AV.•.■A•.■.^.AV.^•.VA■AV.^V.VA^W,..^V.^.J
|lmage name convention:
Ipr3991_a6j316_1781_body0001.tif
Xv.>-.-.v.va-.wa-..v.%..nw.sw.sw.v.v.%.v.v.%v.v.v.nv.v.-.v.sv.-.sw.-.vanwav.-.w.ssv-.%va-...-.-.w.vav.-av.v^a.w^av.vav.v.>vsvawasv


>:u-.
K-^.,-r- .r-	■■
-
:*»• •v’vc.-f ■	,•	*'
r —/.ai-^ * '
■»A .- V
tik:-
V' ■
'ig'.-. •.'u'v-.T-.«r_
'. :<' ‘r, ■ ■,'•'•

A-


CD.Sj>>V-


-,S.\

■■
•^- ■
-f. • .■
f
K7I / 'V»,	.
•^	’ j
V:Mri
■A'A
'■rw-f ^ -
‘"V
‘^;L-

?:*•.

_'b ; \
. i
\
f.
SVC-


•i-'u •
ri'

L--'V' .'•-
Vr C' ‘
v-S -‘•'-*N
«j.--	..* •
r: -
jpiv-v X- irh C
mffM::-
rir'. ,.:.\F ■ ^
;-^ 'N'- r -■
•...? '.'
• <r *?’<i - O^/-*^--' i'-*'
■ ■
V.-T
;■.
t, ' ' "V- T_ . ■	'^
n:-. oV	>' .	•
.*•- -	-	.- :	. t*
------ ~ , - . - ./. - .
-Ti
■v: ' • .
tii* •*«rv<'.
e^-v ,r-.
'.SN^T-•' C..*
..	V . C • •
• •	• i*^ *

V :
*'•'■ -S-
■ - *..^.
t0Ad
: ' ^TVr* ’


_ w •	>

VCi- • c



\
. •: .>:5;
^fSLVSL -■ ::
'v,---	.


<	J
s.
‘ 1
■ k,:C "

rr •-*#
y y-y.
THE
-As^.
D B N O U E M E N T
N
/
THE
DENOUEMENT
O R,
H
T O
Y
O F
Lady LOUISA WINGROVE
By a LADY
r
DUBLIN:
Printed by John Exshaw, No, 86, Dame-ftreef.
MDCCLXXXX,

\
/

• '	- V ,



X
R
A
E.
Y a Lady !—what again !—another pen in petticoats ?
Dear, haughty Sovereigns of your Sublunary deputation, let not your wrath be kindled ! mitigate the contempt of that angry lip, and Suffer this Same lady to deprecate your ire, to aflure your high mightinefles that She has no defign whatever of laying claim to any part of the Superior dignity of your Sex, nor any defire either of competition or conqiiefl—in the literary way; She is neither compelled by ne-cefiity to encroach upon your profits, nor incited by ambition to invade your fame.
CareleSs of criticiSm, Since Secure of concealment; of applauSe, which, if beftowed, will never be claimed ; and of curiofity, which if railed, will never be gratified ; She commits the following pages without the fmallefi: anxiety to the prefs; nor is She vain enough to fuppofe it of any importance to the public to be informed of the motive which induces her
to
PREFACE.
to Submit to their infpe^Iion a performance^ which it is candidly confefled mufl: be deficient in many fpecies of merit, fince it was writ* ten without an idea that it might one day become a Subje6: of public approbation or cen-fure. The mere produftion of leifure, plan* ned for amufement, difcovered by accident, and drawn forward by perfuafion, it can have no claim to that degree of excellence with which ftrong genius, experienced judgment, and a long ftudy of nature have fo often and fo eminently diftinguilhed even writings of this unimportant clafs; which have exalted trifles into the mod elegant Sources of entertainment, which have dignified the play of fancy with the powers of inflrudlion, and made even novels fubfervient to the caufc of morality, the improvement of manners, and the refinement of tafte.
The patriotic Spirit of the times is Such as may make it not amjfs to mention, that this
little performance is confided to the kingdom in which it was written.


^ /At. *

TT
11
T
O F
Lady LOUISA WINGROVE.
LETTER I.
Mifs Rochdale to Mifs Wyndham.
Woodvill.
A
Nointed Sovereign of fighs and groans, “ what a w'oe-begone epiftle;” and all for
what, I w^onder ? w^hy, the plunder of a heart;
/
an unintentional, an involuntary theft! for heaven’s fake child, of what ftrange materials are you formed? or why is it that the very fub-jedf of triumph to the major part of your fex, is to you only an cccafion of regret ?
\
B
After
[ * 1
After all, my dear, lean Scarce believe yuiif profefllons to be fincere ; or rather, I imagine, you have deceived yourfelf, what! all this af-fe&ionate frlendftiip, this tender pity for the unhappinefs of a man that you do not love; that you never can love ! well, we fliall fee what thefe platonics will come to! but if I was Sir William, I would not defpair.
*Twa:s but a kindred found to move, For pity melts the mind to love!
And companion, in a mind like yours, is rather fufpicious, upon an occafion like this, and where the objefit is really amiable ; a baronet too, with a fine fortune, deuce take this vile capricious little deity of crofs purpofes! He will pop in his impertinent head, mal-a-propos enough. Sometimes, and at others, where duty, prudence, reafon and efteem would concur with every fortunate circum-flance to unite two amiable hearts; he laughs at their various efforts, and delights by his abfence to prove them ineffedual.
But wherefore fly from the prefence of a lover, fo very refpeflful as Sir William ? he is not obtruSive, he is not ridiculous, he does
not
[ 3 ]
»ot torment you with his affidmties or coitn-plaints. I fuppofe he has by this time entirely loft that air of faucy, earelefs indifference^ which I remember has often piqued me, and which I really believe would have made me triumph in the conqueft.
There is Something vaftly provoking in the haughtinefs of thefe Secure, confident. Self-Sufficient dons, that bid defiance to our charms, and glory So much in their boafted Superiority and freedom ; and then, how flattering to bend Such a Spirit to our Sway ; to convert their high looks into languifliment; and their pride into petitioning humility. Befides, on thefe we are not bound to beftow even our pity, we referve this Soft fenfation for the gentle Swain that unheeding we have taken,” that acknowledges our power. Submits, eomme il faut) and wears his chains with a good grace.
Apropos to beaux,-^ihere is a dreadful fcar-<i city of them in this country. I am abfolutely weary -of it; the place to be Sure is well enough, but—always the country.—I w;ifh to
y
heaven papa would take a good humoured fit, I wilh me up to the metropolis for a few months j but I will not indulge an idea that
Ba
can
[43
can terminate only in disappointment. How is it that I hear no complaints of this kind
from you ?
Prefent my mofl affeflionate reSpeSs to your father, from his and your
H. Rochdale.
L E T-
[ 5 I
LETTER II

Mlfs Wyndham to Mifs Rochdale.
Fanfield.
w
H Y, my dear Henrietta, do you alk me the reafon of my folicitude to remove myfelf from Sir William ? Will not your own heart inform you ? You fay he is delicate, he is re-
4
fpeQful, therefore why fly him ? ’Tis true, he-is fo, and that is the principal caufe of my removal; were he otherwife, I ftiould have lefs anxiety for his happinefs 5 lefs regret for having wounded it.
, You laugh at the concern I exprefs on this fubje6t, and feem to make very light of what gives me a great deal of uneaSinefs; but is it then nothing to give pain to a heart that loves me!—To be conftrained to deprive myfelf of the pleafing Society of a man I efteem,, tOi avoid the reproaches that his prefence eaufes-me,—to have only the alternative of abfence, in oppofition to that of additional unhappinefs to him, and perpetual conftraint. to myfelf I
You
E e I
You deceive yourfelf, my Henrietta, in the idea that you would triumph in the uneafinefs of any human being, were you ever fo much provoked to inflidt it either by refentment to the objedt, or a defire of reflecting honour (by fuch a conqueft) on yourfelf. You are incapable of that cruelty, and I think you are above the vanity of Such a fentiment.
You wonder that I do not complain of the famenefs and infipldity of the country. There is a very good reafon why, for I do not find it tirefome or infipid; and to me it Is productive of an infinite variety. Let me rather wonder how it is poffible for a girl of my Henrietta's fine tafte and numerous accomplifhments to be weary of the moft delightful Scenes, merely becaufe they want the charm of novelty to recommend them; or to find that time hang heavy on her hands, or in her imagination, which thofe hands, and that genius might ren-
der fo entertaining.
Mufic, painting, poetry, the Italian and
French languages, hifiory, natural philofo-
phy, and other of the ftili fublimer ftudies,
that man arrogates to himfelf, and proudly
fences from the encroachments, as he calls
♦
C 7 ]
it, of our fex, are not thefe So many Sources of infinite enjoyment ? and in all thefe you excel.—Your obligations, in this particular, to the bell of mothers, can only be equalled by thofe which I owe to the tenderefl: of fathers. With what unabated care, what anxious attention have they watched over our infant ideas as they rofe; the minuteft aflion-, the moft trifling expreflion, was to them, a matter of importance and Speculation, as it ferved to invefiigate tlic difpofitions they were to cultivate, and the paflions they were to curb.
They taught us alfo to refpefl the domete tic duties ; and to know, that none can fo well, or fo gracefully perform them, as thofe whofe manners are polifhed, and whofe minds are improved.
The attributes of our Creator, the bounty of his dispensations, and the beauty of his works was above all the highefi Source of the fublimefl: Speculation, and the moil rapturous gratitude; ah my friend! do you remember when firft our little fouls received at once the wonderous information and convidlion of the mighty debt we owed him ? what emotions of
afionifii-
[33
atlonifiiment we felt, what tears of grateful tranfport we fhed at the idea of the amazing condefcenSion of a Being whom? though we considered as of power to crufh us into nothing, we yet were taught to look up to with an aflurance of that Power’s being difplayed in our protefUon, fo long as we continued to defire and endeavour to deferve it!
How rnany years are now pafled, finee the feafon of that delightful intercourfe, when our inftrudtions, and our enjoyments, our ftudies, and our fports were mutual j when I Scarce knew the want of a mother, in the attention and aflfeQion of my revered Mrs. Rochdale, fuch I am fure would have been my mother, if Ihe had lived, amiable in the higheft degree Ihe muil: have been. Since my father has not even yet ceafed to lament her lofs.
She died before I can remember to have feen her, but the grief of my father, and the uncommon degree of affe£Iion with which he feemed to have loved her, imprefled my mind very ftrongly with an idea of her excellence. "When entering on the years of fenfibility, I have often admired at his motives for frequently weeping over me, while I endeavoured to
enter-
[ 9 3
entertain him by a thoufand chlldifli pleafan=*-tries. He has Since told me that his emotion was occasioned by the ftriking refemblance that I had to my mother.
Ah, had fhe lived, how dearly, hovv tenderly I Should have loved her ! but ftill in the prefence of my father, I have Scarcely any thing to wifli for, any thing to regret; indeed, if it was otherwife, I fliould be raofl; ungrateful, for he is the fondell, the tendered; of parents, and much too partial to the few merits I poISefs ; his eyes are ftill turned towards me, like the flower that from morning till evening attends the motion of the fun, and in its abfence refufes either comfort, or Support.,
The date of my letter will inform you that’ we have not yet removed ; and I believe the fiile of it, will make it unneceffary to tell you, that my Spirits, are none of the beft. There is fomething fad in the idea of partingyor ever even with things inanimate, with plants, flowers, and fields, that cultivation and cuftom has-endeared ; how much more then in beholding, the tears, and.returning the adieus of a num^-ber of faithful and affedlionate creatures, by-whom I am beloved, and whom I love, even
B
d
ion
[ 10 3
for their wants, their dependance and iherr gratitude, and to whole ficknefs, and to whofe necefllties I have been accuftomed to admini-Her.
Sir William, too !—how fhall I part from him ? yet to-morrow mull be the day, and my next letter will be dated from Dove-brook, the name of our new habitation. My father tells me I will be charmed with the houfe and fitu-ation; he obferves the dejedlion of my Spirits, and does all in. his power to. raife them.
Farewell, my Henrietta, in a few days ex-fed again to hear from your
L. Wy.NDHAM.
L E T-
E n 1
LETTER III

The fame to the fame.
Dove-brook;
Ji HIS fo much dreaded parting is over at lafl:.—I will not defcribe, becaufe I wilh to
forget it. Si:
Tefpondence, but this,- for his fake, I refufed, with the greateft delicacy I could..
William
Our prefent fituation is dHlghtful, the houfe -itfelf is elegantly neat, and the gardens- and improvements feem to have been the joint production of the moft luxuriant fancy, and the moll correct and cultivated tafte.
This part of the country, I am told is rather thinly inhabited, and the few families who do refide in it are moflly perfons of fortune and diftinCtion. With fuch I Ihould not' wilh to cultivate much acquaintance, I am of
a lowly and unafpiring difpoSition, unambitious-of the regards or condefcenSon of the great. Indeed, our refpeCtive dwellings, are here, So
dill anti
[ 12 ]
diflant from each other, that our acquaintance may be alfo as diftant as we pleafe.
There is one family, however, within the reach of a friendly and intimate neighbourhood ; but, the mlftrefs of the manfion is a countefs, my dear, need I fay any thing more: we are much too humble to afpire, and Ihe, no doubt, too proud to defcend to any advances towards an acquaintance.
/
Adieu, for the prefent, my Henrietta! when any thing new or entertaining occurs, I will again take up the pen, but I am now rather too much fatigued to be able to write upon

Yours ever and ever.
L. Wyndham*
LET-
[ 15 ]
LETTER IV.
The fame to the fame.
W
Dove-brook;
OULD you believe it, my dear,~a vlfit from the Countefs, the young, the fair, the fortunate, the truly amiable Countefs of Jerfey ! paid in fuch a manner too
t
She walked acrofs the fields, attended only by a footman and her maid. She did not know perhaps how we were circumftanced^ and did not chufe to be attended on her firfi: vifit with the parade of an equipage. After all, who knows if any thing of this ever entered her head? but Somehow, I felt as if it did, and gave her credit for a piece of delicacy that perhaps the never thought of.
The fervant announced her entrance, which fhe made with an air and fmile of the molt engaging complacence. She behaved with an: elegant freedom, and befpoke our acquaint* ance as a favour: adding, that flie did not depend
[ U J
fend on her own abilities to make Such an intercourse agreeable to us, for that her brother would affifl: her in So pleafing a talk.
Who is this brother I. wonder ? Some difUi pated man of quality perhaps.
The Countefs enquired for Lady Eland, and told us, that fhe had' learned from her, our intentions of coming here. Some weeks before our arrival, fo you feej they are acquainted^ and correspond: and no doubt Ihe has heard of Sir William’s unhappy attachment. I hope, however, that if She does know, Ihe will conceal her knowledge of it, and that I Shall have
l
no idle raillery to endure on the Subject.
If it was not for this Same brother I Should prepare with pleaSure to return the Countefs’^ viSit. I dread the probability of h'Is knowing how I was circumftanced with Sir William ; if he gives but' the Smalleft’ hint’ of it, I fiiail deteft him.—Poor Sir William !■—what, my Henrietta, if I was to tell youj that it is- ftill pofllble you may have been right in your con* jedlures, and that the SentimentT-miftoO’k for pity was—I know not what it was.—I figh^
liam painfully SenSible.of his abSence j Lfome-
tinies
[ I
times wllh he had paid lefs ftri6l obedience to my requells, that he had followed——this is* foolifli, but it is true notwithftanding, and I mifs, extremely, the fenfible, the elegant, the improving conversation of Sir William, but above all I picture to myfelf the regret he feels in my abfence, the pain he has Suffered, the Silence he has impofed on himfelf, his attention, his tendernefs, his refpe£I.—I know not what all this tends to, or what it proceeds from ; but furely, the human heart is a riddle, that no human underffanding can fathom ; however, be that as it may, the attempt is made in vain by your
L. Wyndhamt
let:
[ i6 ]
LETTER V.
The fame to the fame.
Dove-brooh.
»
M O S T aftonilhlng this f—absolutely a
*
phenomenon ! only think 1—a man of quality a young man—extremely handSome-—an on'-ly fon, an immenfe fortune, a favourite with the ladies, educated in the beau-monde, juft returned from his tour, and—modeft!—true^ as you live, fenfible too,—unaffected, amiable,, in fliort, positively enchanting.
And who, pray, is this wonder I
Why the brother I fo much dreaded. Lord Mordaunt, only Son to the Earl of Granville,, and brother to the charming Countefs; for charming fhe is, tho’’ not a perfeSf beauty. She has that ftile of. face that not only ftrikes
at
col
at firfl: fight with an idea of united fweetnefs and good fenfe, but improves every hour upon acquaintance ; and the elegance of her manners, the variety of her accorapllfhments, and the goodnefs of her heart, afford a conftant fucceffion of Something new, to love, to admire, and to praife.
Her brother—I SuppoSe I mufi: defcribe him too ; but.how ?—why, the exaQ: proportion of his ftature, the colour of his hair, his nofe, eyes, lips, complexion, 8cc, no, that will never do, it never conveys an idea—how then 1 I will give you the tout enfemhle juft as it ftrikes me.
His figure is the moft perfeSly elegant that it is poffible to conceive, his air noble, a little lofty, but no more than juft what Suffices to inSpire reSpeO:, and to render his attentions
the more flattering. His eyes are dark, quick,
\
penetrating, Sparkling alternate with the fire of wit and genius, and the milder expreflions of Senfibility and affedtion. His countenance glows. Softens and changes with every emotion of his mind; and even if thoSe eyes, and that countenance were hid, his voice, his a£tion,
his
[ >8 I
his attllude, the very motion of his hand is exprellive of the minuteft of his feelings. His manners are fraught with the moft infinu-ating grace, and his fmile is animated with a fweetnefs that—but you will think I exaggerate, and I do not in the leaft I affure you.
After all how much is there ftill wanting to complete the pi£lure ? the mere exterior in either man or woman is very immaterial, but then I have faid, he was modeft, fenSible, and unafFeQed. He appears indeed to be fo j but I could draw no certain conclufions, as I have feen him but once, yet, and he Spoke fo little during our vifit, that I had not an opportunity of making any certain eftimate of his mental qualifications. This referve, however, is not ufual with him, for the Countefs, on obferving it, feemed uneafy and furprifed, and tenderly
enquired if ill health was the caufe. He pleaded the headach, but I believe not with truth, for the brilliancy of his eyes, and the glow of his complexion left no room for the fmall-efl: fufpicion of ficknefs. He had over-exer-cifed perhaps, or was—pflia !——no matter what.
Yefler
t Ip ]
Yefterday, on my return from Jerfey-Grove, I received a letter from Mifs Eland; fhe regrets my departure in the moll affedlionatc terms; flie Speaks of her brother, he is melancholy, abfent, lofes his health, declines fo fall, they are quite alarmed about him, and are projefUng an immediate departure to the South of France, to try what that exhilarating climate will do for the refloration of his health and Spirits.
Good God ! why am I made the inflrument of afflidlion to one I fo much efleem ?—Poor Sir William ! in my lafl, I remember, I mentioned Something, as if I more than efteemed him, but I deceived myfelf—it was only what ?—I know not, I know not my own heart, but this I know, that it was not love, would to heaven it was! I would wifh to love, wifh to return his tendernefs, and reward his unmerited conllancy. But indeed and indeed, my Henrietta, I am now more than ever af-fured that it is impolllble I ever can love Sir
William
my
compaflion Hill greater, but my repugnance to a tenderer union is, I know not how, more deeply rooted than before.
The
t 20 ]
The account that his filler had written me of his Situation, afFe£led me fo much, that I was all the night tormented in idea with his fuIFerings, heightened by the bufy demon of Keep, to that degree, that I avroke, fpiritlefs, dejected and imprefled with a kind of gloom that was difficult to (hake off. I enclofe you a few lines of poetry that were dictated by the occafion.
Ah, ceafe, tormenting vifion, ceafe!
Nor image flil! fad Damon’s woe,
Can I reftore his banilh’d peace ?
Will friendfhip give it back ?—ah, no !
Then change thy likenefs, gentle dream ^ , Reproach no more with Damon’s pain. No longer urge the love-lorn theme.
But let him Hill my friend remain.
Were he content to (hare fuch love . As a dear brother might receive. Then, all he wifh’d, with joy I’d prove.
But more than this I cannot give.
Then
( 21 )
k
Then once, fantalUc power, be kind !
For once a Suppliant’s prayer attend. Thus chang’d prefent him to my mind. And lofe the lover in friend!

\
LE.D .
r 24 1
LETTER VI.
Mifs Rochdale to Mifs Wyndham.
Woodvill.
P0 0 R Sir William ! ah Loulfa ! you arc now convinced you can never love him, your repugnance is now greater than ever. And
why now ? I will tell you,—but Softly, I mufl: firft afk you a queftion ; pray, my dear, have
you any faith in fated love ?—in JirJl-Jight im-prelhons ?
You were in a poetical vein from the be^ ginning to the end of your lafl: letter, and I think your proSe to the full as animated as your verfe; but who would not be animated with fuch a tout enfembkj who could give the description in colours lefs glowing ?
Pray was it Cupid, or Apollo that infpired ?
h E T-
L *3 I
LETTER VII.
Lord Mordaunt to Sir George Hastings, Bart,
Jerfey Grove.
H, George i your prophecy is fulfilled j behold me at length, what you have So often predifiled,—a lover ! my eyes opened on a new world of ftrange pleafures, ftrange pains, new feelings, and new exiftence !—but why do I repofe in you a confidence, that will only fubjefit me to your raillery? you believe that it is poffible to love, without ever having formed one juft idea of that paflion, without comprehending its nature, or knowing its extent,—do not therefore ridicule what you cannot underftand, till you firft have learned to feel it.
The fmall, but elegant feat of Sir Charles Wllfon, I have already told you, was pur-chafed by a Mr. Wyndham: we know not who he was, or from whence he came, till
a letter
[ H ]
a letter from Lady Eland informed us particularly concerning him.
Her ladyfhip had long correfponded with my lifter, and often deplored the hopelefs paflion that her fon entertained for an object, whom flie defcribed as the fum of perfection and beauty; but regretted her infenfibility to the love and the merits of Sir William : this obje£t, fo loved and fo praifed, we knew not to be the daughter of Mr, Wyndham, till a few days before his arrival at Dove-brook, when Lady Eland recommended her fo warmly to my Sifter’s acquaintance, that I expedited its commencement with the greateft impatience ; yet,—would you believe it! an unaccountable Something prevented me from accompanying my Sifter, on a viSit which flic made them.
She raillied me fmartly on her return, and laughed at the eagernefs that I Ihewed for Some account or description of this inexorable beauty, but none would flie give me; and “ take care of your heart, my lord !” was all the anfwer I could receive.
The
[	25	]
The next day, a carriage flopped at the
gate, I ftarted, I ran to the window,—my
^ *
filler laughed, I returned with precipitation^ vexed at having discovered my impatience, (he would have it that I biufhed.—“ What Harry I before you have Seen her	—nay re-
plied I, if you are So much afraid for my heart, I had better keep it out of danger, and will do So I promiSe you, if you go on
m
at this rate.
I thought I had Said enough, but flie only redoubled her mirth; I was almofl angry, the entrance of the vifitors reflrained me,>—Mr. Wyndham and his daughter were not of the number, and I felt, though I did not care to confefs myfelf disappointed.
They came however, at lafl, the counteSs introduced them,—Brother—MiSs Wyndham, I gazed in Silent wonder, I had Scarcely power to return her grateful Salute, a penetrating glance from my Sifter aroufed me, and I endeavoured to afTume a freedom of carriage, but I felt that it was conftrained, I felt all a confuSed tumult of emotions and ideas hitherto unknowm.
C
Yet
[ 26 1
Yet it was not a mere form, a Set of features and complexion, it was the animating foul, the fpark of kindred Sentiment that kinged at my heart.—It was,—but why fliould I attempt a description of what no pen can defcribe, no pencil can paint ? Her form and features I could exa6i;ly delineate, but how (hall I convey to your ideas the grace that accompanies her every motion, the gentle dignity of her air and manner^ the fafcination of her Smiles, and the bewitching fenlibility that opens in her countenance ?
\
It was in vain that the down-call eye, and heightened complexion of the fweet Louifa reproached the earnellnefs of my gaze’; I felt that I was guilty of rudenefs, I endeavoured to direct my eyes elfewhere, but they involuntarily returned, and fixed their regards upon her.
She talked too, to complete her conqueft,
and O George 1,'fuch language!-^—Such fenti-
* ^
ments! uttered too with fuch an accent, in a voice—it ftill vibrates in my ear!—So tuned, fo modulated. So fweetly harmonious !-unhappy Eland I
alas!
My
t «7 i
My filler Spoke of Lady Eland, and faid> that file had juft received a letter in which She ^informed her, that Sir Willialm had determined 'on a journey, to the South of France, to re-eftablifii his health, which declined very much. Louifa bluftied fcarlet deep, and turned away to hide a tear that ftarted to hor eye. - What
V
^ difpolition ! oh, how I loved her for the charming dlfcovery t
■ Mr. Wyndharii appears not much turned of forty, bis perfon is noble and graceful, his alir uncommonly penfive, and his countenance has a fweet but dejedted call, his manners have a polifii that muft have been acquired in a Situation very dilFerent from his prefent retirement. His circumftances feem to be eafy, but not affluent.; perhaps the lofs of fortune, or that of friends -may be the caufe of his alienation from the world, and the dejedlion that is fo vifible in his countenance.
But tell me, do you not think it firangc that the addrefles of Sir William Eland fiiould be rejedled ? brave, generous, handfome and accompliilhed. How could a tender and Sympathizing heart blaft the hopes, and the hap-
G 2	pinefs
[ *8 ]
pinefs of fa deferving, and fo adoring a loVer# unlefs that heart was preoccupied by another ? a difpofition like Louifa’s cannot be incapable of love, yet who can hope to Succeed, when Sir William Eland has failed ? I know not what to think, but I would IHll flatter myfelf that her aflTe^Hons are difengaged, and that they may be referved to return the pafllon, and complete the happinefs of your
H. Mordaunt.
LET-
I ]

LETTER VIII.
Mifa Wyndham to Mils Rochdale.
Dove-brook.
Y
/
OU aftonifh me, Henrietta ! /irji ftght i fure you would not infinuate—but what foundation ?—what have I Said to make you fuppofe that—pfha, ridiculous, you could not have fuppofed it 1 but if you did, I aflure you your penetration fees double, for, far as I am from loving Sir William, I know not that man upon earth? who could rival him in my regard. But no more of him I let me endeavour to forget the painful fubje£I. He is gone with his mother and lifters to France : O may he meet that repofe that he Seeks for, may peace return to his breaft, and fuccefsful love obliterate every painful idea of the paft.
I have already difmlfled one fubjeO:, and half a fheet of paper not yet filled up; what then fiiall I do for the reft ?—The country; no room for my defcriptive talents, nothing curious, or particular; groves, hedges, gardens.
I 3^ 1
dens, meadows, and corn fields,—nothing more,—well then, the amufements!—I have
Seen none,—the neighbourhood then!—-but one family that we are as yet acquainted with, and I mull: be filent in their particular, for*
So
fear of Some man of your fage conclufions, fare you well my dear. I am fure you expeSl-ed a long letter, but you may thank yourfclf for your difappointraent..
LET-
[ 3» I
LETTER IX.
Sir George Hastings, Bart, to Losd
Mordaunt.
Dondon.
O then, that little damned, rnlfchievous urchin, love, whim, caprice, or whatever you pleafe to call him, has at laft robbed me of my friend, has ** turned his wits the feamy lide without.”
Your fetter found me in the properefl raoodV to rally its contents, and convince you of their folly. Infpired by the jolly god, with a hearty contempt for your little puny deity, I have jufi broke from a circle of choice Spirits, tO' alk you whether you have not given the conge to your fenfes ?
Can it then in reality enter your head, that the Earl of Granville, with a fortune of twenty, thoufand pounds per annum, will Suffer an only and accomplifhed fon, the darling of his affe6tions, and the honour of hjs family, to
floog
N
C 32 ]
%
Sloop to the degrading alliance of an obfcure girl ? ridiculous my dear Harry! hope not, dream not of It; the overture would not fub-jeSl you to the mortification of a certain denial, and the weight of his heavy difplea-
\
fare.
This your pafiion may deem a misfortune for the prefent, but your delirium will foon end, and you will find it a benefit and a blefling.
I admit that this Loulfa may be beautiful, even to excefs, as you allege, and that you mufi' be wretched for a time, without her : but this is a matter very eafily obviated ; your manners are infinuatlng, your perfon formed to charm. Such a conqueft, with love, liberty, and a handfome fettlement for life, would make her the envy of four fifths of the la-dies in capital.
After all, my dear boy, I have a certain
fear about me, that the fanity of my counfels
may be thrown away upon you. I have often
remarked in you a peculiar fqueamifhnefs of
morals, that not only fubjeQ: you to a thou-
land inconveniencies, but in a manner Shuts
the
[ 33 ]
the door of Society againfl: you; do my dear Harry» abate of this fault, I befeech you, ’tis in the eye of the world, the moft unpardonable of which you can be guilty. Be more pliant, more conformable to the cuftorns of mankind, or you will fliortly be left to yourfelf,
N
as comfortlefs and lonely as the old Solitary tree on the commons of Banflead.
..if

Cs
LET
V
[ 34 I
LETTER X

Lord Mordaunt to Sir George Hast-
iNGs, Bart,
Jerfey Grove.
%
OW have I been miftaken! how have I been deceived! but the delufion is vanifti-^d ; and he who poflefled my eonfidence, and lhared my heart, avows hirafelf unworthy the name of friendfiiip.
To me then. Sir George! to me, would you propofe your fchemes of treachery and fedufitlon ? Me would you load with the guilt of corrupting female purity, of feducing innocence, and that too under the mafk of tender-nefs and affefiUon ;—heavens! how could I have been So long, and fo greatly deceived ?
/
But you were intoxicated when you wrote, fain would I endeavour to apologize for your Shocking propofal j yet I can hardly think
that
I 33 3
that the temporary privation of reafon, would admit of fuch horrid Sentiments, in a breafl; saturally honourable and humane.
Farewell, I wifti for your reformation,, but' Han no longer accept of your friendihip.


l . E T-
t 36 J
LETTER XI.
Mifs Rochdale to Mifs Wyndham
Woodvill
N A Y, now my dear, you are quite unreasonable, you punifh me too Severely for a little harmlefs raillery; however, I promife you, that you Shall no more have any reafon to complain of me, in this particular, provided that you no longer treat me with referve ; besides, if you are innocent of my charge, why any concealment ? the beft way to convince me that you are fo, is to write with your
ufual freedom ; and Since your fcene of acquaintance and amufement is confined to Jersey Grove, pray do not fhut me out from your circle any longei?.
As for me, I have nothing wherewith to entertain either you or myfelf; my life glides on in the prettieft; little innocent, Simple, in-fipid manner imaginable, and fidgeting about from one demure employment to another, forms
the whole contour of my Sprightly amufement
s.
Since
I 37 ]
Since you were fo firmly determined againft a union with Sir William, I am glad that he has left the kingdom ; his abfence will rid you of a painful remembrance, and may pofllbly cure himfelf of a difeafe that no other medi-. cine could remedy.
Th is love is a fad difmal piece of bufinefs: papa, too, feems fenSible that it is fo, and re-Solves to keep me out of harms way; however, I would venture the trial, fince I fhould he very certain that I had infpired, before I would Suffer myfelf to feel it.
N
Write, pray write, my dearefl Louifa; your letters are the principal pleafure of my life, do not then deprive your Henrietta of almofl
r-
her only enjoyment.
LET
[ ^8 1
LETTER XII.
Mifs Wyndham to Mifs Rochdale.
Dove-brook.
w
E L Ljr my dear,.cenforIous, blundering, girl, I find I muft forgive you this time j but remember the conditions you, yourfelf have agreed to.
We are now quite intimate at Jerfey-Grove^. and I aflure you, l am downright vain of the diftindlion with which the charming counters’ honours,me, yet it is not for her elevated rank, but her fuperior excellence, that I am foj There Seldom pafles a day,, that we are not
together, either here or at Jerfey Grove. We laugh, chat, fing,. walk, and work,, alteritate-ly, hut mufic fills up a principal portion ofi our time ; in this Lord Henry is a great aflift-ance; he is mailer of Several inftruments, and excelS' on the violin and german flute ; his voice too is moll exquifitely charming, and is Softened, with a cadence and expreffion. that it is impoflible to defcribe.-
Lord
[ 39 ]
Lord Egmont’s family, Colonel Wilville’s,^ and ours, are almoft the only frequent vifitors at Jerfey Grove. I was introduced to them all; they feem to have very little chara6ter, fo I will not attempt to defcribe them. In my mind, our little circle wants no addition ; Lord Henry too is of the fame opinion, and declares his difapprobation whenever the countefs talka of enlarging it. Pray be quiet, my dear Eliza, he cries, if you will think with me, we are perfedtly happy as we are. Why Ihould you and Mifs Wyndham Sacrifice your time for the hazard of other people’s improve-, ment ?,
But I have not yet told you of the terrible difafter that befel me, nor that I now write with my left eye bound up with a handkerchief, Rackets and his lordfhip had, I aflure you, like to have been fatal to it; however, I was not much hurt, even at the time, but the violence with which the ftiuttle-cock ftruck againft it flartled me a good deal. Lord Henr ry turned as pale as death; dalhed down the, racket, flew to me,—then to the bell,—rang it with violence,-—uttered a thoufand-incoherent Sentences, and ran about the room like one difiraded !~I flood looking at him for a
>	few
I 40 ]
few minutes> and then burft into an immoderate fit of laughter.
9
This reftored him to his fenfes, he took my hands, he trembled all over,—‘*How unfortunate !—but was I indeed not very much hurt ? —might he hope?—might he ?’^—I continued to laugh, he coloured like Scarlet.—Lady Jer-fey entered, he flew to her, and told her the dreadful ftory, one word of which file could not underftand; but guefled at the accident, from feeing the handkerchief to my eye. The pain was, by this time, almofl: gone, but as it ■was a little Swelled file thought It necefiary I fiiould keep it covered.
His apprehenfive lordfiilp is Scarcely yet recovered from the fiiock of this terrible event. Either at Dove-brook, or at his filler’s, he is perpetually at my fide. If I am filent, ’tis from excefs of pain, if I talk, ’tis only to quiet his fears, I muft not walk out for fear of too much air. Working, reading, or painting, •would be worfe j it would llrain my fight too much ; now I have but one eye, I laugh at his prescriptions, but I obferve them however; for he makes up by his company and his lifter’s for the lofs of my ufual amufements.
He
C 41 1
He lings, plays, arid reads for me by turns, but this, alas ! was the caufe of another unfortunate milhap.
A new Tragedy was announced, very beautiful, very interefting, and highly wrought. Lord Henry would read it. The countefs and I were all attention. The cataftrophe quite overcame him, his voice faultered, his tears
flowed, he clofed the book for a moment, and turned to us,—we were drowned in tears, and wept and fobbed mofl: violently.
He was alarmed,—away flew the tragedy, heavens! had he but thought, but reflected a moment! that curfed book !—why did he read it ?—he was mad to read it!—we (hould be ill!—we muft have drops 1—we mufl: have fomething!
My eye too, would be all inflamed !—what an unfortunate wretch!—he folded his arms round us,—dearefl Eliza !—dearefl; MifsWynd-ham !—will you, will you forgive me ! I believe he would hardly forgive me if he knew that I have laughed twenty times Since at the recolledion of his diflrefs.
I don^t
•N
I 4* J
_ »
I don’t know how it is, but I find myfelf more entertained in the company of the coun-tefs, and her brother, than, I am fure, I fhould be in any other Society in the world, that of my Henrietta excepted, and was the here there would be no addition wanted to the hap-pinefs of her
L. W.

■f-
L li .D
t 43 I
LET TER Xni.
Sir George Hastings to John Ret-
NOLDS, Efq.
London
W
H A T a pleafure it is, my dear Jack, to have a friend, to whom a man may open his whole heart, without apprehenflon or referve : our fouls are in a manner the fame, they quadrate like dice ; and anfwer like a pair of indentures to each other.
You have already feen and converfed with the young fentimental heir of the Granville family; fo I need not defcribe him to you.
My acquaintance with him commenced by an accident, when we were both on our tour, in Italy. He Saved my life (though a flran-ger) at the hazard of his own. I was grateful } I loved him j of confequence I fludied
his
r 44 j
his disposition, and conformed myfelf in a meafure to principles that were very oppofite to my own ; for in fpight of his romantic ab-furdity, he does not want for fenfe, and is be-fides uncommonly amiable, at leaft I then thought fo, and was induced in part to diffem-ble my real fentiments, rather than forfeit fo agreeable an acquaintance, and one to whom I was fo much obliged.
But all is now cancelled, all is forgot,^—Such
an infult as I have received 1—I enclofe you his impertinent letter,-^read, read, I beg of
you ;—I alfo enclofe you a former one, giving an account of his ridiculous attachment; together with a copy of my anfwer to it, as nearly as I can recoiled I was indeed warmed with wine, when I wrote it, or I Ihould not have told him fo openly my mind, but Surely it did not deferve fo infolent a retort.
I Ihall not exa6t a perfonal fatisfa6lion, I do not believe he would accept a challenge; and if he did, it would be only a common revenge. But to rob him of his Louifa, Jack! that, that would be glorious vengeance! and
fuch
[ 45 ]
fuch a Scheme have I laid, that it is Scarcely pofilble it can fail of fuccefs.
In the firll place, I have already written a penitential letter to his lordfhip.—Exceedingly concerned for having given him offence, by what was only meant as a jeft.—Should not have even rallied upon fuch a fubjedt, but wine, &c.—Acknowledge myfelf in the wrong, would not forfeit his friendfhip for the world.—Counterfeit a paflion for Mifs Walpole ; for whom I really have a little tendre her charms, and his good example have at length reformed me,—wifh of all things to fee him, and requeft his company in town.
• 4^
wnat follows:
he thinks me fin-
cere, and as he cannot leave his filler, will
probably invite me to Jerfey Grove.----------1
come, fee, and overcome, for I am not ufu-ally unfuccefsful in affairs of gallantry. But let that happen as it may, the breach between them is inevitable, for I have laid my plot fo deep, that my revenge is certain, though my Scheme of feduQiion fhould fail.
You
I 4« ]
You fliall hear from me again, when I receive Mordaunt’s anfwer, till when 1 re-
mam
Your
G. Hastings
I. E T-
[ 47 I
L E T T E R XIV.
Lord Mordaunt to Sir George Hast-
ings.
Jerfey Grove.
ET us exchange forgivenefs, George ; I accept of your apology, and very willingly alk pardon in return for any offence that I may have given you.
I the readier credit your profeflions of reformation, as you acknowledge yourCelf no longer a prpphaner of the gentle power, but an humble Suppliant at his fhrine. You have attached yourfelf to a woman of worth and honour, moft fincerely do I wifh you fuccefs ; but yet,—you will pardon me George,—I can •yet Scarcely perfuade myfelf that you are in love, you are too dillipated, too much under the dominion of paffion and caprice, I fea-r you iiave not yet learned to
t 48 ]
(Selfifti joy difdaining) Seek alone To blefs the dearer object of your flame.
True love, George, is enriched by bellow-
.1
ing ; its principal joy conSifts in the confciouf-nefs of imparting enjoyment; without this fond fenfation, a Venus, new rlfen from her native fea, were lefs ellimable to him than her marble to the Medici.
The former part of your letter I do not fo much wonder at, as it was a very natural conclusion you draw from my father’s loftinefs; I fear indeed it is but too juil, yet that is at prefent the leaft of my concern. A more important care hangs heavy at my heart : for could I once be fo bleffed as to gain an interefl: in the gentle bofom of my lovely Lourfa, I Should not defpair of my father’s confent; notwithftanding the difparity of our fortunes and lituation, I would hope every thing from his fondnefs, and the natural e;oodnefs of his heart. My mother too, may not her influence have feme effe6l ? She loves me with a wild-nefs, an enthuSiafm of maternal afftCiion I and I return it with a love-pafllng alt that (bn ever entertained for her from whom he drew his cxiftence and nourilhment.
Never
tl
'[ 49 ■]
'Never, Ihall I forget the aft'e(^ing fce-fte) 'when I was torn from her.'to accompany my ■tutor to Italy.
My child, faid this fond parent, do you, know that your mother’s life is bound up in hef Henry ? You are young, and inexperienced, *ny fon ; of a warm and precipitate temper 4 any caufe, if flightly coloured by friendlhip or generofity, is fufScient to engage you in the moft perilous undertakings. G heaven ! Ihe exclaimed, and burft into tears,—firft lay thefe locks in the duft, let my eyes clofe for ever
before they behold—^I -cannot fay—-Tdare not
«
■think—you tmderftand me, my Harry!
Too well, too well, madam, I, paffionately replied; you fhall make a coward of me, I will .grow careful of this inSignificant life, for the fake of a life that is infinitely dearer.
Will not this mother, think you, exert to the utmofl: her influence, in favour of n fon fo dear ? And can a fond father, and an adoring hulband, rejedl her foft felicitations ? But above all, one fight of my angel will banifh every bbjedfion, and inilant admiration muft fucceed. You will perhaps think this the colc,nring of
D
oaffion
C 5° 1
pairion> but every eye brightens at her approach, every heart gladdens at her prefence.
Think not, however, George, that the Seducing graces of beauty alone could ever have fixed my heart j think not either, but that I could love, entirely independent of them. Were age, were uglinefs itfelf informed with a foul like Louifa’s, that foul would flied a fafcinating charm around it, infinitely more attractive and endearing than any thing that beauty can boaft.
About four days ago as I was rambling about Mr. Wyndham’s improvements, I thought I faw Something like the form of Louifa, entering a hut, at a good difiance from me ; I inftantly flew towards it, the door was open,
I entered, but no one appeared ; the back paf-fage opened into a little garden, I pafled it, and through the branches of a hedge that was at hand, I discovered the lovely girl, like an angelic minifier of heaven difpenfing comforts and bleffings to all aroiind.

A widow, the proprietor of this lowly man-fion, fat beholding her from a bench of turf,
while fhe flood encircled by the five children
of
C 51 3
isf her penfioner. To one fhe 'Seemed to dio tate Some matter of inllrudlion, to a Second flie gave Sweetmeats, She dreffed the head of a third ; She took up a cherub looking little boy, and kifled it with tendernefs, and all Succeflively Shared in her bounty or endearments. They looked up to her delighted, they Seized, they clung about her. She broke from them, with a playful air, and they followed with a Shout
of joy.
At laSl She turned to the mother, and perceiving that the tears, drop by drop, rolled in Silence dovvn her cheeks. She kindly took her by the hand, and enquired why She wept. O my young lady. She replied, forgive my tear they do not flow from Sorrow, but from gratitude, from wonder at your condescending goodnefs. Louifa fmiled inexpreflible Sweef-nefs, and turning to the place where I had concealed mySelf, I was obliged to defert my poSl, as my unexpefled appearance at that time might have put her to Some confuSion.
The moment I got home, I Sat about contriving SDme Stratagem for aSTifting this favourite, in fuch a manner, as might hold it concealed from her benefadrefs, and even
D 2
from
t 52 3
from herfelf, what quarter it came from. I have Succeeded to my wilh, and am rejoiced at it, as from the appearance Mr. Wyndham makes, I do not imagine his fortune to be fuch as would anfwer every demand that fo benevolent a heart might make upon it.
I thank you for your invitation, but cannot accept of it at prefent; Lord Jerfey, as you know, has left my filler in my guardianfhip till his return from France. And as well on her account as that of L'oulfa, it is not in my power to attend you; but if you will favour us with your company at Jerfey Grove, I pro-mife you a hearty welcome. I wifh you could prevail on colonel Afliworth to accompany you. I have written to requefl: it, but fear that it will Scarcely be in his power. Lady Alh worth’s declining years, and health requires the tender attention of fuch a fon j and he pays it moil nobly.
Your’s ever
H. MoRDAUNT.
LET-
[ 53 ]
LETTER XV.
Mlfs Wyndham to MIfs Rochdale.
Dove-brook.
VERY day Some frelh inftance occurs of the virtues and benevolence of this amiable family.
f
Have I ever mentioned to you a Mrs. Chalmers, an unfortunate widow, who by the prodigality and death of her hufband, was re-duced to the utmoft indigence and diftrefs, and would have perifhed with her five children, had not Providence directed me to the mifera-ble cottage, where they had taken fhelter, and laid themfelves down to die ?.
I continued to • vifit this poor widow, and Supply her with the neceflaries of life, when
'	k	■	•	*'
a few days ago as I walked towards the cot-tage, fhe came running to meet me, her countenance exprefiive of a variety of emotions; (he funk on her knees before me, fhe
E 54 ]
i;Iflre<l my hands, and my gown, and wet them with her tears. O my dearefl: madam, Ihe at laft exclaimed 1 this is too, too much ! you overpower, you crulh us with the excefs of your goodnefs I his in vain that you would Shrink from acknowledgments, and drive to. avoid the overflowings of our gratitude ; it is, alasl the only tribute that is left us to pay.
I was aftonlftied ! I aflured her I was entire*-ly ignorant of her meanihg. She then produced a rouleau containing fifty guineas> which had been inclofed in a cover, dire6ted to her, with juft a few lines intimating the donorh defire, that file Ihould receive the money and apply it to her own ufe, but take no further notice, nor mention a word of it to any one.
i
t
I knew not what to think, but retained the cover, and promised I would endeavour to find out the hand. The countefs of JeiTey firft ftruck me, but I recolle^ed that neither fhe, nor her brother had ever heard me mention the name or eircumftances of this unfortunate woman. They both fpent the next day with us at Dove-brook, and an opportunity offered of discovering what I before ftfongly fuSpefit-ed.
After

t 55 i
After coftee>—I fat down to the harpfichoi dj tts ufual, and Lord Mordaunt accompanied me on the German flute. When we had performed Some pieces of the mofl: approved mafters, the countefs defired her brother to favour us> with the fong which he had compo fed, in imitation of the Scotch airs ; he played, and afterwards fung it, at my requeft, the 'words too were his own, and pleafed me fo much,^ that 1 begged a copy of them j he inflantly took the original from his pocket-book, and pre-fented it to me. Afudden thought ftruck me, I retired to the window, and taking out the
4
cover that had accompanied the donation to Mrs. Chalmers, I compared the writing with that of the verfes, and found it to be exafUy the fame..
I felt myfelT colour exceflively, and hafiily flipped the paper into my pocket.
Why did I blufh that time ? what caufe iiad I for it ?—but one is fometimes in a humour to blufli at every thing.
I requefl, my dear Henrietta, that you will never again rally me,, on my fuppofed affedlion
for Lord Mordaunt. Twice, or thrice that
/
da):.
C 55 3
(^ay, when my eyes met his, your letters came into my head, and I looked,—fomehow,—
foolifli, I am afraid.
—very
But indeed, from the
moment that I made the difcovery I told you of, I felt as if there were a hundred pulfes in my cheeks: and the glow of them continued through the whole evening. Ever fince, have I been endeavouring to find out the reafon of this, but all to no purpofe., Unlefs it was the fear of his having feen that I was acquainted
with what he wilhed to conceal.—Certainly, it. muft have been that,
LET^
/
t 57 i
LETTER XVI.
Mils Rochdale to Mifs Wyndham.
2?
Woodville.
REPARE for a Surprize, my LouISa prepare for a thoufand gratulations to your friend ! My brother, that mofl; beloved of brothers whom v/e have So long lamented as dead ; he lives, he is found, he returns to our arms!—but take his own account of his moll providential efcape..
4
At the battle of Fontenoy, fo fatal to our' brave troops, I a6led as aid de camp to his Highnefs the Duke of Cumberland ; in the heat of the engagement ray horfe was killed under me, and I fell, covered with blood, though but nightly wounded, among the dead and dying ; my right leg was fall: in the ftir-rup, and I was further incommoded by the weight of my horfe, for I had fallen under him ; fo that it was with difficulty and much ffiruggling that 1 at length difengaged myfelf.

I tl;en
r 58 ]
** I then fought for Some time on foot, and eager to diftinguilh myfelf, I had the good fortune to atchieve one of the enemy’s ftand-ards, and was returning with triumph. But my precipitation had hurried me beyond the hounds of prudence. I was Surrounded by a party of the enemy, and though I fought with desperation, determined to fell my life as dear as pollibie, I grew at lafl: faint with lofs of blood, and fatigue, and was juft finking to the ground, when their commanding officer rode up.
“ He ordered them inftantly to defill, and taking me kindly by the hand. Brave ftranger, Said he, in French, I grieve that you have Suffered fo much from the barbarity of thofe men whom I have the misfortune to command, but I will do my beft to repair the injuries you have Suffered, and to give you a more favourable impreflion of my country than you have yet had reafon to receive.
I had Scarcely ftrength left to thank him for his timely and generous afliftance, but fainted, covered with wounds, into his arms»
When
\
f 59 ]
When
bed in his tent, he was fitting beSide me, and held my hand in his; the moment I opened my eyes, I perceived that my preferver was interelled in my fate, and that he afterwards aji^peared rejoiced when the furgeon pronounced my wounds not mortal. I exprefled my furprize and gratitude for his generous concern ; why fir, replied he, fhould you wonder at an action that common humanity would dictate ? befides I am indebted to you for the emulation which your gallant behaviour inspired me with ; it caught my notice, and challenged my elleem, and from the beginning of the engagement rremarked and endeavoured to imitate it; My name is St. Alnais, be under no apprehenfions from confinement, I fhall detain you, but not as my prifoner; from the moment that your health permits it you. are free, fo faying he quitted me without' waiting a reply.
“ Though my wounds were not mortal, yet all the Ikill of the Surgeons could not prevent a long and very d ngerous fever, during which the Society and attention of my preferver contributed more than any thing to my cure. I languifhed for Several weeks frorn
the
t 6o ]
the crlfis of the diforder, before I was per-> fe6Uy recovered ; and St, Alnais was Scarcely ever from m.y fide. By this means we had each of us an opportunity of inveftigating the difpolitlon and Sentiments of the other, and we found them So perfectly corresponding, that a Sincere and tender friendihip enSued.
** I now began to refledl on the anxiety which you, my dear parents, mufl; feel from So total a Silence with regard to your Son ; and determined as Soon as my health would per>* rnit, to look out for Some method of conveying you certain intelligence concerning him; this I did, and wrote Several letters, but never. received any anSwer ;■ a length of time had now
, I was alarmed, I determine ed to retarn^i and imparted my intention- t©
'SF JhaiSi
“ Alas I my dear Rochdale, he repfied, your apprehenSions reSpeding your parents remind me, like Pharaoh^s butler, of my own Sauk's at this day.	• ■ ’
‘‘ My father IS dead, I have but one pa'-rent, but Surely, the dearell and tenderefl that ever- looked with bleliing on the face of a
child.
[ 6i 1
child. But what bounds can be Set to the iii-temperanccj and paffions of a boy ? I had heard of the high honours that were to be at-' chieved in war; and hurried on by an internal propenlity that I could not refill, I ungratefully and ungracioufly forfook thisi precious mother, and engaged a volunteer in mar-fhal Saxe’s regiment, where I was gradually promoted to the command of a troop. If you will accompany me on a vifit to my mother, and that a peace (which is now talked of) Ihould take place, I promife you to ufe my utmofl: interefi: for peritiifilon to return with you to England.
‘‘ I joyfully- embraced this propofal; we Soon reached the well known habitation, but alas ! this beloved mother was not to be founds nor any tidings had concerning her.
0
tlow fhall I tell you the diftra^lion of my friend ; w'e travelled great part of France in her Search, at length defpairing to find herj St. Alnais turned to me with a fondly dejedf-ed air—I have now, faid he, no parents, no^
, no connedlions with any one but-
upon earth ; a peace is concluded, I will fulfil my promife, and quit for' a time,
Scenes
I 62 ]
fcenes that Serve but to remind me of the ml-fery of my loSs.
We
your heart, my lifter; he is the lovelieft of the human Species.”
Thus far proceeds my brother’s letter ; do you not Smile at the conclusion This formidable friend, my dear, let him come ! ! Set him and his atlra^ions at defiance; he is a iioble fellow for all that, and I believe I ftiall love him—a little.
H. Rochdali:.
/

[ 63 J
LETTER XVII.
Sir George Hastings to John Rey-
nolds, Efo.
Jerfey Grove.
\
Promifed in my lafl: to give you a minute account of the progrefs I fhould make in the afFe£Uons of this little gypfey; and prefump-tuouily imagined I could not fail of fuccefs:
I	_
for to fay truth, in afiPaira of gallantry I have generally come off with an /<? triumpbe\ but here I have been moft Superlatively baffled, fhe will not allow me to come withiiji the length of any poffible capitulation.
\ %
What in the deviPs name can be the matter with her ? I never was ufed So in my life;
4
but thefe country damfels are fo confoundedly fkittifh,—yet no, let me not injure her, ihe has not the fmallefl: tinQure of rufficity in either her perfon or deportment, and I do
her
J
f ,
I ■ . i 1 i
I hi
her no more than juftice, when I allow that it is impoffible for any one but myfelf to take exception to any thing about her. To me indeed fhe ought to appear every thing that is ugly and deteftable, fince fhe feems- to regard me in no better a light.
She has been but once at Jerfey Grove fince I came, though we have often vlfited at her father’s: my eyes alone can convey to her the intelligence of my heart, and fhe feems difconcerted, and even offended at their language. The impertinent flare of curiofity is difgufling and offer five tp every one ; but the
fixed regard of admiration and paffipn is what
■ ^
' 1
moft fine women think due to their charmrS. But I know too wel|;how to account for this coldnefs j Harry (confound them both) is certainly . the Endymion of this. Cynthia’s contemplations. Her fine face is involuntarily animated with joy at his approach, and clouded with chagrin at his departure ; all her com-- placence, all her attention is. laviflied ppon him alone. Could I become a tame romantic,
>
virtuous fool like him, Tfhould perhaps obtain Some (hare of her approbation; but .in fpight of the cautious regularity of. my con-du^,,.my eyes I fear have betrayed me, and
the
[ 6s .]
the little prude more than guelTes at what Sie would call the depravity of my fentiments. Thus am I doomed like Satan on the tree of
*	9
life, to envy, and even hate^ that virtue which I have neither will nor ability to pra^life.
Yeflcrday, Harry and I walked together to Mr. Wyndham’s, where I again Saw his love-* ly daughter ; I fancy ihe Spied our approach
•4
from the window, for though her favourite
was with me, yet (he was called Several times before (he would deign to make her appear-
I
ance. But (he (hall dearly repent this rooted averfion to me; for though I doat on her to diftradtion, yet there is a Species of malignity in my pafHon. This hated pair (hall jointly (hare my vengeance, and the ftorm is now impending that (hall (hortly burft upon their
heads.,	,
*
Yours more than ray own,
G. Hasting si
L E
r 66 1
LETTER XVIII.
Mifs Rochdale to MIfs Wyndham.
Wooclville—eleven o’clock at night,
H
E is come 1 he is come, my dear Loulfa, and I fit down even at this late hour to communicate my happinefs to you; the compliment indeed is not much, as I have no manner of inclination to deep.
’Tis not many h?ours fince he arrived. Af-ter dinner I went out to the garden to pull a nofegay, when Frederic came to let me know that my father defired my company.
I inftantly obeyed——-when I entered the
parlour, the firfl: obje£Is that prefented them-
felves were two ftrange gentlemen at the head
of the room. Their backs were to the light,
fo that I was in doubt of ever having feen
them before, but fomething within me was
of intelligence, and whifpered that it was my
Edward; for I felt my heart throb,, and my
colowr
[ «7 ]
colour come and go,—my father Smiled.
As I approached I began to dlfcover the well-known features; and fpringing forward, I cri-
ed out, Oh ! my brother I

My filler! my
Henrietta! he exclaimed,, and caught me in his arms.*-—I heard no more, but inftantly
fainted away,
. ♦ * * •
- ^
When r opened ray eyes, I Saw ray dear and tender mother in tears, and kneeling be-fide me; and heard her fay to my father. Why my love would you Surprize her So, I knew her gentle Spirit could not bear it ? Gentle fiddleftick, returned he, (he will be well enough by and by.
My dear Edward held my hand in his, and wet it with his tears, which flowed in abundance down his manly cheeks ; how afFcfUng it is to fee a man w’eep, Louifa ? I obferved too, that the Ilranger had turned to the window, to conceal his emotion.
My brother is, I think, rather improved by his travels ; he has loft indeed the delicacy of his complexion when a boy, but has contra£l-ed in its ftead a martial air and manly deportment, which is much more becoming and
agree-
[ 0
agreeable -than beauty in a man, If attended with the leaft appearance of effeminacy.
4
. i :	‘	•
Would to heaven, Louifa, that you were here to complete my’happinefs.—The flranger but I will tell you of him in my next, for the prefent my hand is almoft giddy with the joy of this meeting, and 1 mull bid you a relud«
ant adieu.
H. Rochdals.

.»■ -
: 1
9	*'
•» . *


-X --
L E T
T 69 1

j» V
LETTER XIX.
i.. -
4
The fame ,^o the,fame
Woodville,
r.h'i
E jeune Fran9ois. 1 think I have pro-mifed to give you a defcription of him. I muft tell you in the firft place, that he bears a moll furprifing refemblance to you ; his features, tho’ mafculine, have exa6Uy the fame turn and expreffion; his flature is nearly the
feme as my Edward’s, but his limbs have an appearance of greater delicacy, without feem-ing to deduct either from ftrength or action.

if I was not certain that you never had a brother,—but that is foolifh,—and yet you are fo like ! you together put me in mind ef thofe lines of Milton.
For contemplation he, and valour form’d, For foftnefs ihe, and fweet attradlive grace.
I will
t 70 ]
I will tell you an odd incident though, that happened the day after his arrival.
I could not you know pretend to defcribe unlefs I obferved him with attention, and mj brother fmiled and looked arch, as who fhould fay. Ah Henrietta, Henrietta ! is that the me. thod you take to avail yourfelf of my caution: but I was refolved to difappoint him, and tah ing out your pidlure, I fhewed it to him, alked if he could not difeover in it a ftriking fefemblance to his friend ; he looked at, and dwelt upon it with furprize, and turning to St, Alnais, alked him with a fmile if he ever had a filler; being anfwered in the negative, k prefented him with the pidture, at the fame time leading him to the looking-glafs. H{ however continued gazing on the portrait; his colour changed, his head funk upon his bofom, and he burft into tears. '
We were alarmed; my brother took his hand with an affeSIionate anxiety, and enquired the'Caufe of his emotion: but inilead of anfwering his queftion, he alked me with an earnefl; Solicitude, if I was acquainted with the perfon for whom that pi6lure was drawn!
Yes, fir, replied I, Ihe is my intimate friend,
the
[ 71 1
the loveliefl of women, girls I fliould rather fay, for Ihe is not yet eighteen, and her name is Louifa Wyndhara.
Louifa, too! cried he, and Ilarted, but again Sighing he returned me the miniature, and afked pardon for the furprize and uneafi-nefs he had given us j but indeed, continued he, had you not named the original of that picture, I could almofl: have Sworn that my mother had fat for it, and every thing that brings that dear mother to my mind, awakens my re-morfe for the ungrateful return I made to her care and tendernefs.
Is not all this very extraordinary, my dear ? but I fuppofe we muft place the refemblance I mentioned among what philofophers call the Sports of nature.
Ever and aIFe6lionately your
H. Rochdale
LET-
w <
• r
.1
‘i : .• I
It
it ]
i .
f: I
:t
I
>« I
u *
0
i!
ii
•» ;
. (
■!
1	* '
k * ;
* I
; i
if
i , r
1 *
« i
t ■

I ■ i <
t .
i
k
I .
i' '«
I
]
«r‘
LETTER XX.
MIfs Wyndham to Mifs Rochdale.
f _ •
Dove-brook.
A H, my Henrietta! your predictions are
accompUihed, and your poor friend is undone. —A fatal accident has convinced me of my
/	s	' .
folly; but wherefore blame accident, fince it ■was not that which infpired, but only opened my eyes upon the wretchednefs of my Situation,
This evening I took a walk with my maid into the fields, but had not gone many yards from the houfe when we faw Lord Mordaunt mufing and alone, and moving flowly towards us. He Said he intended us a viSit, but turned and walked with me a piece on the path which I had taken.
h
1 ; i ;
73 ]
In a ihort time we perceived riding acrofs the field a young man, richly drefled, and intoxicated with liquor; on his approach, he threw himfelf from his horfe, and would have forced a kifs from me, whereupon my lord in-flantly kindled, and clofing his hand, gave him a Broke on the face, that obliged him to mea-fure his length on the ground.
All in a tremor, I walked on, rejoicing to have efcaped without infult to myfelf, or danger to my preferver ; but my triumph was premature ; the wretch quickly recovered and overtook us, and pouring forth a volley of blafphemous execrations, he drew a cutlafs, and made a pafs at Lord Henry ; I fcreamed, and fcarcely retained a part of my fenfes: but the firfl; thing I obferved was the horrid ruffian groaning in the duflr, while the blood flowed from hi« mouth and noftrils.
I turned to my lord, and with a voice feebly articulate, enquired if he was hurt. Ah! 1 continued without attending his reply, why mull: I be the caufe of precipitating yourfelf into danger ? w'hy fhould fuch a life be rifqued for my prefervation ? .1 would with tranfport
E
meet
I'
f'ii
• I
11
li
: I f:
I	•
II
/,' T ’
1 I
« 1
'O ■') f
iili
' j
I :
. I
1
♦ ;
0	• • »
■ l,
1	I
i '
i >
te
[ 74 ]
meet death Itfelf, interrupted he, to proteS you froih danger or infult.
What could he mean, Henrietta? alas! •what does it fignify ? the worft is, that I con-ftrued all So favourable to myfelf, that I muft have looked, and Spoke a thoufand indifcre-tions.
I trembled to Such a degree, that I was obliged to accept of his arm to Support me to the houfe ; and I thought that I felt him prefs
—Ah
the hand he held gently to his Heart.— that heart!—why was I ever made acquainted with its value ?
When we were Seated in the houfe, I oh' Served that his hand was wrapped in a cam> brick handkerchief: I inftantly took the alarni) and approaching nearer, I faw that it was bloo* dy; I caught hold of my father’s arm, lookl-fee then, I cried—fee what mifchief I have occasioned. He ftepped up and uncovered the hand. Do not be frightened, LouiSa, faid lie Smiling, the wound is not mortal; his, thanl heaven, no more than a flight cut; go fetcl
Some of your famous Salve, and that applied
br
[
^ c
/ 3
hy the healing' hands of a fair lady, vvll! foon Set matters to rights.
I obeyed, tottering as I Went, and foon re** tuyned with the drelling, but as I walhed the blood from his hand,, a tear, which I vainly endeavoured to reftrain, fell upon it; my cheeks glowed at the involuntary indifcretion: but how was my confufion increafcd, when with a look expreliive of the mofl: pathetic tender-Tiefs, he raifed the dear hand to his lips, and kifled off the tell-tale drop. I would have given the world to recall it; my heart throbbed, I funk into a chair and burfl; into tears.
Luckily my father had retired ; how greatly muft it have diftrefled him to have been wit-nefs to my folly I
Lord Henry Seated himfelf befide me, and folicitoufly enquired the reafon of my tears. I could not anfwer him.—He arofe, and taking both my hands, gazed with an inquifitive concern in my face, then Suddenly dropping them, he turned from me, and traverfed the room. By this time I was tolerably compofed, and
pleaded my fright as an apology for my weak-
0
nefs; but he is already (I make no doubt) ac-
E a	quainted
c
^6
/
3
quainted with the real caufe, though in pity he afFefits a total ignorance of the matter.
My father juft then entered, and I begged permiffion to retire. I ran up to my room,
and locking the door, I threw myfelf on the bed, and gave a loofe to my Sorrow. I afterwards ventured down to tea, but Lord Mor-daunt was gone; a frefh proof, that, of the goodnefs and delicacy of his heart, he would not increafe my confufion by his prefence.
Heavens! what will become of me ? his now too late to ftruggle in the toils; advife me, my Henrietta, pray for me, and pity your very unhappy friend
L. Wyndham.
s * \
LET
[ 77 1
LETTER XXI.
MIfs Rochdale to Mifs Wyndham,
Woodville.
9
A LAS! my poor friend! you are under-
ceived then at laft ; you find after all that you have Something mortal about you. Truly, a moft mortifying difcovery ! a woful cafe yours, to be Sure I you love and are beloved by the moft elegant, the moft amiable of mankind, and you cry, “ what will become of me ?
pity me, HenriettaI will not pity you^ Louifa,
Lord Mordaunt, I am pofitive, loves you, every circumftance confirms it; I am atfo confident that he is not yet aflured of your affection, and that he waits but for that difcovery, to make an avowal of his own.
fe
As
I ;
, i
f I
U
It
• 1
[ 78 ]
As for my brother’s favourite, whofe ap" proaches were announced as fo very formidable, I don’t know what to make of him ; he is beautiful to be Sure, beautiful as the Adonis, yearly lamented by the daughters of Sidon; but then his manners are utterly the reverfe of hisperfon; fo diftant, fo ceremonious, fo fen-timental, and all that,—and a male prude is what I diflike above any thing that is female. Yet this fellow has a heart, I alTure you ; aye, and a tender one too, as you Ihall hear, though, all the notice he takes of me feems to put me upon the venerable and refpe61able rank of his grandmother.
You know my fondnefs for birds, though I cannot confine them to cages ; 1 therefore contrived a method of attrafiling them to me by a voluntary attachment. I ufed to ftrew crumbs of bread on the window of the garden parlour, leave it open, and retire to fome dif-tance, till the fweet little fongfters had finilhed their meal. I approached nearer each time that I repeated my donation, till at laft they became fo tame as to bear me clofe befide them. There was one robin in particular, that would peck out of my hand, and perch
at times on my head and flioulders j I caught
it
i.
[ 79 1
/
it one day, and tied a bit of Silk round its leg, that I might know it from the reft> but here
My notes mull turn to tragic :
On a day, as I flood with my brother and his friend at a window, we obferved a kite hovering over a flock of fmall birds; St. Alnais caught up a fowling-piece, and ran out, we followed, he fired, and brought the felon to the ground; but Some of the harmlefs cho-riflers Ihared in the fame fate, and among them, alas I was my favourite robin.
I fcreamed out that my bird was dead. I reproached St. Alnais with my lofs, and he too joined in reproaching himfelf; he put it into his bofom to try to reinform it with warmth and life; he lamented its death in the tender-
eft accents; nay, he aOiually flied a tear upon
' »
it. Though fo many of mine had flowed on the occafion, I was yet aftonifhed and afFefil-ed at a degree of fenfibility fo uncommon in a man. His trefpafs, and my misfortune were
both, in that moment, forgot; and I blufli to acknowledge, that I juft then felt (for the firfl: time) an impreflion of tendernefs for a man, who has never fhewn the fmalleft partiality
for
'l\\
I!
[ 8o ]
0
for me: nay, I afllire you, he even ap Sorry for his momentary condefeenSion. Hb pride, no doubt, was hurt at the recolleftionj, that he had betrayed an intereft in Such a trifle, as the diftrefs of a female, or the death of her favourite; and he immediately withdrew himfdf to his former diftance, and even a pitch beyond his ufual flatel'inefs.- Proud wretch, but it does not now fignify, for the alteration in my fentiments was juft as fudden as that in his behaviour ; it is effectual too, for I no longer have the fame good opinion of him, as formerly: before this,. I had aimed perfuaded myfelf, that the diftance, the frigid polite,nefs of his air and manner, was perhaps owing to the little intercourfe he has had with our fex (as I hear he led quite a retired life before his entrance into the array). I can form a thoufand excufes for the timid fwain who fears to offend, by even the common attentions ■which cuftom and good manners mu ft didiate: but this is not the cafe with St. Alnais; he knows how to pay them with the moft elegant grace, but his pride difdains the condefeenfion, and reproaches him whenever he is guilty of it.—Let him, I care not! I am glad however
that he ' has difeovered himfelf in time,—in
time !—did I then acknowledge that I had al-
mod
mofl: my own
C 3
but no matter,—my heart Is again
1
Folly ! to thee, fantaflic queen,
I raife the grateful lay.
That yet one youth I have not Seen Unfetter’d by thy fway :
When
Had near forever flown.
Thy magic pow’r diflblv’d the charm ; And bade—that pow’r to own.
A noble form, a graceful mien. And animated air.
An eye where genius felf was feen With centlenefs to Share.
A polifli’d mind, a wit untir’d,,
In decent freedom bold.
All, all againU my peace confpir’d j And a loft heart foretold.
But when the trembler, on the wing, Juft bid a laft adieu.
When none could elfe alTiftance bring; To aid her, Folly flew.
Ej
To
M
^ . ii
{,
i i 11
[ 82 ]
To mar enfnaring Cupid’s plan.
The queen her pow’r addreft.
She dafh’d with pride the charming man 5 And freed my captive breaft.
O then let none that pow’r defpife.
Of vulnerable heart.
Since, while it blinds Love’s cruel eyes. It alfo blunts his dart.
ft
r
m
1

LET
[ 83 ]
LETTER XXII.
Lord Mordaunt to Colonel Ashworth>
at Bath.
Jerfey Grove.
HE loves me, Charles! my Louifa loves
%
me I—I am indebted to accident for the charming confeflion ; ftie has herfelf pronounced my happinefs.
This morning I went at Mr. Wyndham’s defire, to breakfaft with him at Dove-brook, but my impatience to fee bis lovely daughter, took me there of the earlieft, for he had not yet left his chamber, fo I ftrolled into the garden, and traverfed the front walk, when turning, I perceived, in a fummer-houfe oppofite, a woman Seated, with a book in her hand: it was Louifa, and never did I fee her appear fo exquifitely charming. Her drefs was negligent.
\
[ 84 ]
%
gent, but inexprelTibly elegant; fhe held in
.r
her hand, a recent and very affefling little
poem, entitled, Edwin and Emma ; and in the
other a handkerchief, that caught the precious
tears as they fell.
At lall Ihe appeared quite overcome, and
unable to proceed, the book dropped from her
hand, and Ihe fuddenly exclaimed,—Yes,^^ cruel
father! you muft be obeyed, and Emma’s
haplefs fate Iliall be that of the equally wretch-
ed Louifa !
She then rofe, but feeing me (landing jud
oppofite, (he gave a (hort Scream, and fank
down again, half fainting on the feat.
w
I threw myfelf at her feet, I entreated for
givenefs, and made a thoufand apologies for
my intrufion. She paid not the leaft attention
to what I was faying, but clafping her hands
in an agony, ’Tis paft, (he cried, and my in
discretion has betrayed the Secret, which I
would have died rather than voluntarily re-
veal. Rife, my lord, continued (he, with an
air of dignity, you are already apprized of
my weaknefs; you pity it too, (for fhe observed
C *5	]
Served my concern), and you ai^ too generous,, to repay with contempt, an acVidental con-feffion of my tendernefs for you.
For me !—for mel—I exclaimed!—gracious heaven 1 can it be pofllble ? do I indeed live to fuch happinefs, fuch rapture ?—She could not now retract the confellion fhe had already made, and my vows of gratitude, and never-ending love obtained a confirmation of it; for till Ihe again repeated the delightful aflurance, I could not bring myfelf to believe that my happinefs was real.
O Charles, had you Seen her at that tranf-porting moment, her tears, her blufhes, the delicate tendernefs that animated her whole frame!-----1 will fly to my father, my pray-
ers, my importunities fliall obtain his con-fent. But what would become of me, in'cafe. of a refufal	—yet why apply to you ? you
have never loved, and therefore knows not how to make allowance for the ardour, the impatience of a lover,—why are you not in love, Charles ?
You
’.i,
r:l..
[ 85 3
You know I have at my own difpofal, dear
6001. a year, the bequefl: of my late uncle
Stanemore; might we not—But alas !—a fa
!'' ' *'
ther’s difapproving frown—perhaps his curfe 1
•horrid I—I know not what to refolve on!
Your
H. Mordaunt.
L E T-
[ «7 ]
LETTER XXIII.
The fame to the fame.
Dove-brook,
O
Charles!—I am undone!
■wild with
grief! with defpair !—the beloved of my foul She is ill! dying I—and will not fee me! will not permit me to have the confolation of expiring befide her !■—^fometbing extraordinary muft be in the cafe, fome viMaln has traduced me!—let me but know ? let me but find him ? I will tear out his treacherous heart 1
Yet, O gracious heaven I whatever mufi be the fate of this unhappy wretch, fpare, fpare my Louifa 1^—fpare the deareft, the lovelieft^ the mofl: finilhed of your works!
What can be the meaning of her refufing me admittance ^ I am diftra6led with the va-
t
riety of my conjectures on the occafion ! Her father too is ignorant of the caufe of her ill-
nefs.
* 4
\ri
I .
li-
11-
ij-
S
[ 88 ]
nefs, and turns with deteflation from the offer of comfort!
t'
lU
if
1 ■
i- i
I
i!* ^
My filler too was here, and has Seen her, but file was then delirious, and as foon as fhe came to her fenfes, (he defired that none but her maid might be permitted to attend her, ihe will not even allow a phyfician to be called in.
I have never left Dove-brook, nqr tafted any kind' of nourifhment, fince the news of her illnefs reached me,—I am one moment ftiipified, and the next frantic with my for-rows! If fhe dies !-—Charles !—I will not,—^I cannot furvive her !—I can write no more, mj head fwims !■—my hand trembles!
Adieu,,.
H. Mordaunt
/ .
LET-
[ 8p ]
LETTER XXIV.
The fame to the fame.
Jerfey Grove
1 IS asT
fufpeSed,—flie has been de-
ceived into a belief that I was unworthy of her tendernefs, and her gentle heart funk under the Ihock,
The day after I wrote my lafl:, when I went to her antichamber, to learn feme tidings, I was told that flie'had juft then fallen into a fine refrelhing ft umber ; I beckoned her maid to approach, and putting a purfe into her hand, requefted fhe would let me have a fight of her miftrefs; fhe rejefled the money, but admitted me upon a promife of making no V. oi fe.
I kneeled


[	90 i
I kneeled down by the fide of the bed, and gazed a while upon the Beeping angel, the rofes were withdrawn from her cheeks, and an affefling languor Succeeded throughout her countenance j Ihe Seemed, though alleep, to be in great agitation, her. bofom heaved with fighs, and the tears Bole gently, from between their Silver covering, and moiBened all the pillow.
l!’

My heart was wrung with anguiSh, I laid my cheek clofe to hers, and mingled ours tears together.
I rofe at lafl ; and was going to retire, when I efpied a paper that had fallen from her hand on the floor, it lay open, and my name was fubferibed, I eagerly caught it up; the writ* ing might have been eafily miflaken for mine, but I inflantly knew it to be that of Sir George Haftings; it was direfted to Mifs Wyndhaw, and the contents were as follows.-— —
/
SHALL I conceal any thing from a perlbn who conflitutes a principal part of my exift
once ?—no, I will not conceal it I
Know
[ 91	1
Know then, my angel, that I once loved a young creature, to paflion, as I then thought, but my prefent feelings convince me, that my love for her, compared to that which attaches me to you, was but as a drop to the ocean, or an hour to eternity.
In brief—after reciprocal and repeated en^ gagements, (he jilted, and betrayed me; ex~ afperated to the height by fuch a proof of female perfidy, I made a vow, and confirmed it by many fearful execrations, that I never would marry. Ah, rath, and inconfiderate! I little thought what was then before me, and am now tempted, like Sampfpn, to break all thefe cords in funder; yet fure, all the civil or matrimonial inftitutions that ever were framed, cannot make me more firmly yours
4
than I am already; all that I am, all that I have is yours without referve.
- /
I am too much diftradled at this time to refolve upon any thing, and therefore befeech you to meet me at Seven this evening, at the far end of the Bird walk ; where, whatever you prqfcribe^ whatever you (hall be pleafed
[ 92	]
to dictate, (hall be as the laws of the Medej and Perfians to your
<
I'«
( , I
I •
lii
i \
• 1
t • t
I ;
1 {
H. Mordaunt, '
As Soon as I had perufed this infernal fcroll,' I left the chamber, and hurried out in fearch 1 of the villain who had forged it; nor know | I to what lengths my paffion might have car- ■ ried me, but God had happily taken my vengeance into his own hands.
Having fought him in vain through all the fields and gardens, I Spied a croud in a lawn that led to the next town, and thither I haft-cned to enquire after him.
The throng gave way to my approach, but judge of my amazement, when I beheld Sir George, pale, bloody, groaning, and ftretch-ed upon the earth, without power of fpeech or motion.
t:
: ■ t
i
» ! • J
r !
f.
f '
, f
1 vi » « •
, 1 .
■ • I
\''
1 ■ •
I •
! i
' f i
h
I *
:'
As I earnefily demanded how this came to pafs, a bold blunt looking man, with a budget at his back, came up and addrefled
me.
Why
I 93 3
Why, Lord Harry, fays he, I didn’t mean to anger you, becaufe as how, you’ve a good word in every poor body’s mouth j but had he made as free with a girl of your honour’s, as
he wanted to do with my pretty Gatty, me-
\
thinks you could have done little lefs vor him
than I did.
You mud know then, that about an hour agone, as my wife and I was walking the road,
that open to every honed Englifhman, with-
/
out eroding fence or dyle, I midfed a plate of pewter, and defired Gatty to hold onward, while I went back in Search. Before I could find ur howfomever, methought I heard Gatty give a fqueal, and then a louder, and again a louder; fo I hurried back at top Speed, and caught this here gem’man wredling a fall with my wife !—My poor Gatty indeed fought it fairly, and left the mark of every nail (he had in his face.
It was then, I confefs, I laid on him with might and main, and Spared neither head nor hide, till I left him, juft as you fee him.
My
hi
I
A
t 94 ]
My honeft friend. Said I, you have paid hifti Ills full wages, and he merited the whole; all
my concern is, that you have brought yourfelf
into trouble, and will be arraigned for his
murder, as I think he cannot Survive.
O never fear, mailer, cried the homelyjU
iy tinker, the devil will never die by the fide
of a ditch, as the faying is. Sbobs! if his j
majelly, heaven blefs him, would ufe rav
Gatty So, I would be tempted to fit himwiti
as good a trimming as the bell taylor at court
could meafure ox make up
A number of Lady JerSey’s Servants had
now joined the croud. So I ordered one to tale ’
a horfe and ride off immediately for a furgeoa,
and defired the reft to take up our errant and
mifadventurous knight, and convey him to the
next inn.
I then requefted the gallant tinker to intro'
duce me to his Gatty, which he did with a
proud pleaSure, when taking out my purfe, I
presented it to her, as an acknowledgment of.
her virtue, and a reward for her chaftity; and
returning inftantly to Dove-brook, I threw
myfell
t 95 ]
snyfelf at Mr. Wyndham’s feet, confefled paffion for his daughter, told him of the arts that had been pradlifed againft us, (hewed him
Sir George’s letter, informed him of his tragic adventure, and befought him to prevail on his Louifa to allow me a moment’s hearing.
The old gentleman embraced me with tears, and departed on his commiffion; after a while he returned, and offered to introduce me.
When I entered the chamber (he was fitting up in her bed. Supported by pillows, but very pale and languid, notwithftanding a fmile of chearfulnefs, which (he endeavoured to affume.
On my approach, (lie raiSed her hands in a Sweetly jocular, but petitioning attitude, and prayed me to pardon her for having believed it poffible that I Could a£l dhhonourably in any particular. But, continued (he, (blufhing) I now find myfelf So delightfully confoled by the detedlion of my error, that I no longer regret the fufferings it occafioned.
My
iiil! i
A-

i .

Tb
II' •
. 'I *
;... j
n:%i

;ii:
"S’-
p
■ ■' t
' i I
f
1. 4-
I
n •
' t •>
' i •	1
:* i'
-•iii
»‘IU
■' ,d
I.
V <
iiiHi
..'••I
** 't* *

•.it»
*.. • I
I!

•J !

H!
[ 96 ]
My father has acquainted me with the ca
taftrophe of Sir George. I heartily rejoice
that it was not your hand which adminiftered
the reward of his perfidy.
Then you fee, my dear Charles, that my
affairs once more begin to wear a Smiling af.
peQ:; and my Louifa is, if poffible, dearer
than ever to my heart; flie continues to mend
apace, and I hope foon to fubfcribe myfelf your
happy friend.
H. Mordaunt^
L E T
, t\ ‘
t S7 i
LETTER XXV.
Mifs Wyndham to Mifs R‘ochdale.
Dove-brook*
T'lafl:, my dear Henrietta, I am entirely recovered from my (hort but very Severe indif-pofition, with the particulars of which you aro
already acquainted, hut my prefeut happinefs, though incomplete and precarious, yet it compensates in a meafure for all my former Suffering. My Harry loves me, I am dear to his heart, to that of his filler, and my father has conditionally approved of our affedlion. But ah. Lord Granville! there,—there I am flill vulnerable—his fure, he never will, he never can confent; and it is alfo certain that though I were this moment cut off from every hope, I yet could never ceafe to love my amiable Harry!	•

O did
■Tii; ‘-
lT.-. j
;'fc M
; i.
:;ii. :
# -
1-1	.: -
•L ‘
ii
f.. •
Fh. ■
[N
I'i
I •	I

i .
I:
‘i-f ;
I: ■
r,^
■fi! i' ^
:; I ! i-
a
a ’ -
I
'i_:, ! f
I i .
I ••
f;
1 • -
/
t 98 ]
0	did you know !—were you like me ac» 'quainted with bis excellence!—you would pity, but could not blame me : his dirpoSition, his Sentiments, ah, my Harriet I—never, never Sure was Such a heart as his.
1	lately read (Said my father to him one <lay) a French author, who attempts to de-raonftrate that all our friendihips and afSedti-ons, and even the boafted virtues of generoli-
ty, and So forth, have their original growth, and expanfion in felf-love. Tell me, my dear friend ? I alk not your fage opinion, but your genuine and fweet feelings on this fubjed, where it is fo boldly affirmed, that there is no fuch thing in the love of another ?
That guilt, and every Species of vice, fliould have the foundation in felf-love^ I can evident* ly conceive ; and am convinced that neither fatan, nor Adam, nor any other creature would ever have lapfed, had It not come to pafs through fylf-love, and felf-weening, that the love of Self alfo can produce hatred to others, fuch as envy, difgufl:, malice, and all other malignant paffions ; it is the natural procefs and procedure of things. But that love to ourfelves fhould beget in us the love
of
[ 99 1
of another; that one and the fame caofe fhould produce confequences fo contrafled, fo adverfe. To irreconcilable as love and hatred, bounte-oufnefs and grudging, rancour and benignity, and the like oppoSite offspring of heaveiH and hell; I might be as rationally perfuaded that wolves may yean Iambs, that the vulture may bring forth the dove, or the branches of the crab-tree bend beneath the clufters of the grape.—But what do you think of this doc-^ trine ?
I apprehend, my dear Sir, replied Lord Mordaunt, that the matter in debate has nothing to do with argument. I fuppofe a man born blind, all the defcriptions, and definitions in the world will never fupply him with a fin-gle idea either of the beauty or benefit of light. Nay he will argue with you againfl: its exigence, and obftinately inSifl: that there is no ,fuch thing in nature; but fliall his blind ratiocinations have any weight with me againfl the exiftence of that light which guides my Heps, which illuminates my fight, whofe comforts I feel, and wdrofe bleflings I enjoy.
Now love is to the human foul, what light is to the body, it animates, pervades, chears.
F a
direfls
‘‘Ci
I . (
! 1-
ii , i-	»



I» -i ; t
i
Li
li
*1 .
• T
1!
b - i’
I ■
.t .
( ;

[ 100
1
%
dlreSs the ways of his fpirit, and carries him
forth in the benevolence of kindly offices to others,—when he cannot relieve, he grieves with the afflicted, he rejoices in the happi-nefs of all who are happy, and thereby par* ticipates in the bleffednefs of all the living.
Here then, it may be enquired, how love, which is the author, thebleffing and joy of the univerfe, fhould come to be a matter of affliction or pain ?—But the truth is, that love never was a caufe of difpleafure or. fuffering to any creature ; it cannot be too fond, it cannot be too intenfe, it is the heaven of God him-felf, and consequently of all his intelligent re-femblances. But in beings of a mixed nature, where fpirit and body are fo intimately united, each may have its diftindl intereft, and the body may attraft its more refined companion to the grofler Ihare of its own propensities, and thus the firfi: generous emotions of what we flatteringly entitled love, may be pervertedto a felfilh paffion, and consequently fubjedbed to all the jealouSies, ravings, and pangs of which ■lovers complain, and thus love and felfifhnefs may be blended together like two colours into one -mafs, and yet remain in their refpeflive
natures
[ 101 J
riatures eternally oppofite, and eternally dif-tinft.
Love in its own nature is of necefhty its own reward ; it as furely produces happineis as fire produces light ; and I perfuade myfelf that, when we are divefted oI thefe partial and impaflioned organs, that impel us fo forcibly from our blifs, to our bane, we fliall
V
find that love among the celeftials is merely an afition, and in no fenfe a palfion : an adli-on as it is in God of infinite energy, bearin its blifs within itfelf, and beaming without bounds in beneficence and benignity upon all
creatures.
What think you of this, aot thefe noble, ments ?
>u Kfi ima, ray Henrietta, are are; they not heavenly fenti-
I have been fince my recovery to vlfit my penfioner,. poor Mrs. Chalmers j her health is vifibly declining. I wifh flie was more communicative ; there is undoubtedly fomething in her hiftory with which fhe has not yet acquainted me, nay fomething I fancy which muft be very extraordinary.
When
b
: ; I
» . f
' I-
•'i;.
ll !'
iiS
4 • • r •
I
; 4
Ti!
fB
■ ‘t •I ‘ i
' i
, L <
■\ui
i'!
■ «
C!
i!'
I .
^ u > ^
.1 S’

Ihl
■ I i
' < M
f !
I M .
^ ; f h f
'Si ■,' {
' .K
:M
'H*
T*
M (
K> i
[ 102 ]
When I told my father of her ilfnefs, hg propofed going to fee her himfelf, and fpeak-ing Some matter of comfort to her. She had not feen him before> fo I thought it neceffa-ly to go firft, and prepare her for his coming. 1 told her who it was that waited for admit-tance> and what was the intention of his vilit; fhe joyfully acquiefced and fat up in her bed
t
to receive mm.
■ He entered,—but the moment fhe cad bet eyes on his face, Ihe uttered a loud, and hearh piercing Biriek, and fell back in violent con-vulfions.; my father retired immediately, and my affiftance with Some reftoratives, with difiiculty brought her to her fenfes: as foon as I Saw file was fufficiently recovered, I ventured to alk the reafon of her hidden and alarming fit.
' I 1
‘11
.i; )
‘. ■ *i
I»
t
(»
. t
. I
; t
t * 1
n
it
it
li
1I
li
* I ■
III
li
I
That gentleman —(he wildly replied, did you not fay he was your father ?—So he is, my dear Mrs. Chalmers.—^.No, no ! (he cried, in a flirill and frantic tone, it cannot, it muft not be, that would indeed be a refinement upon wretchednefs, upon the intenfenefs of my pu-nifiiment!—What! the man whom I have fo greatly, fo irreparably injured, and his daughter, his angel daughter, has preferved the lives
of
\
C t03 ]
cf myfelf and my little ones.—^-Great God ! there warifed but that to fill up the meafure of impending judgment!—but then mercy is Said to exalt itfelf on the tailed grovyth of
f
guilt, provided penitence lies weeping in the daft beneath its ftroke !
O the years! the year^ of anguilh that I
gracious
have pafled'l’L-^may they expiate! heaven!—may they have blotted out the re membra'nce of my criihes-1
A
Tears here carhe 'to her relief, they flowed' plenteoufly, and ftie appeared much eafier,. but I feared to increafe her diforder by any further queftions.
I alked my father if he had ever before Seen
or been acquainted with her ? but he tells me
not, and that he does not know of any female
living who could have done him the injury
(he mentions^ Mighty odd and myfterious all this !:
She has been (at her own defire) very mOch alone thefe two days paft. I don’t know how file has employed her time during that period ; but file now appears much more compofed
than
m'ii\
• i ‘ o(
•» *1
ii '
>;
I '
' 1
■ ,Ar
hf hi
fill,::
j:-l ffli
■ • • II '• S' -
* : r
ii:l ittf
ii?'*
: .:! :\\V
if
iii'N
i • : u ■
r
r
V
; * ■ ’ f
d'o-
aV
•i i
■h:t
f\A
V]
Si' 11' ■
-FAd
L'
-* ■ N ,
4 . f ' *: ^
hST'r
iO'-dv
sUiU
Sr-
Mr
ij:^v
V
T '
'» •
if
iii
*	I ^
^	. I
♦ *
• > T
[	J©4	1
than bcfore> and Seems to wait with tranquillity and a degree of pleafure, the awful event that lhall confign her to eternity.
>
She would hear of no phyfician but a mental one. 1 do not think She can live many days, but I have great reafon to hope that her latter end will be that of the righteous. O how fervently when our own time is at hand, fhall we all join in that important prayer. In the hour of death) and in the day of judgment) good Lord deliver us.
She is w'orfe, 1 am called upon
Adieu, your
L, Wyndham.

•	t i
i )
•	I '
ri . ■
■0
iif;
r - ■
\
, * • j
;!;>
; >
;
bi :
:
l;il
lu
t •
f I
,c
r;
‘ I i • r *
t
it
1!
L E T
‘f
[ 105 J
LETTER XXVI.
The fame to the fame.
Dove-brook.
A
LAS! my dear, {he is gone !—poor Mrs. Chalmers is no more I She fent this morning again, to requeft my prefence. I went, and as I approached the bed, fhe raifed her hands and eyes to heaven,—I faw her intention, and kneeled to receive her bleiling. She gave it in a mofl: awful, and affeding manner, I then rofe, and feated myfelf beSide her. My mif-
trefs, fhe cried, I have been faulty, dreadfully fo indeed ; wretchednefs too has been the in-feparable companion of my guilt ; but-my prayers, my tears have at length prevailed for pardon, and I look forward to my. dilTolution, as the mariner to his port; the wifhed for hour is at length arrived, all fpent and overwearied I have at length reached the goal, but blelTed is the length of mifery that clofes

i
10 Virtue.
FS
Here
i
‘ b:
; fi
• • < 1
rliS
J
C'
[ io6 ]
Here Ihe paufed, and deSired that her chib dren might be called,—they came;—Ihe em* braced and blelTed them by turns, and leaning
back in the bed, Ihe gave a deep figh and ex. pired.
If
Sit
'll •
t ;
I ' ,
» »j ,
■ i ( !
; I
I
M ' ♦ .
. i ■ I; !
, I i
■ i
); , I V
r
My father now entered, and hurried me away from this leene of diftrefs: he has taken upon himfelf the care of her interment,—and promises a provifion for the dear little orphans. Ihe has left behind.
I forgot to tell-you, that about an hour before her death, fhe took from her bofom a packet, and prefented it to me it was Sealed and dire^ed to the Earl of Jerfey; and fhe re* quelled that it might be delivered into his own hands, immediately on his return.. I wonder
what acquaintance fhe could- have contrasted with the Earl; but her whole conduSt for thefe few days paft has been to me an inex-plicable enigma.
\
L E 'I'..
C 107 1
LETTER XXVII.
Mifs Rochdale to Mifs Wyndham.
W oodville
ES, iny dear Loulfa, I do indeed admire him> and believe there is but one man in the world, who can challenge any fort of compa-rifon with him—Who Is that pray ? Edward ? no ; Edward is not So handfome, nothing near fo accomplifhed, and I am afraid, not altogether fo good, though better than nine-tenths of the more virtuous half of his fex. He bears about the fame proportion to Lord Mordaunt, that I do to you, my dear.—Who then can it be ?—you would never guefs. St. Alnais ?—im-poffible;—the proud, the infenSible, the—Softly, Softly child; I. once faid as much myfelf, to be Sure, but one may happen to be mistaken
11
>;: i i
i'ib
‘ ! I I ; 1 '
I i i •
L '
I ' ! '
L
! ■ • I

) ’ I
I '• t (
:;<c
• ‘ 1 : : A \


M
> .
' • •
I'i
i • • •
.' ■ 1 • ; \
i io8 ]
taken you know; and poor St. Alnais Is now acquitted of every thing, but a foolifti penchant, for a little giddy brained girl, who would rather think it was her want of vanity, than lack of difcernment, that made her fo long misinterpret his condu,6l.

You muft know, I have got a maid; the moft tender hearted in the world, fenSible of merit too I aflure you. She admired St. Alnais prodigioufly,—for certain the poor gentleman was in love, and love is a fad thing! It made her heart ache, fo it did, to fee how difmal he looked of late; then fixing her eyes, upon me,—file wondered ' in her heart, how any young lady could be fo cruel as to take no notice, and keep never minding, when fo fweet a gentleman was in fuch a piteous taking.
I.
. : I
t >
I ;
I i ,
I affeSled for Some time, to difregard her filly chat; but at laft, after a little.encourage-ment, file ventured to difclofe the important Secret, with which file had for Some time laboured. St. Alnais hao ftolen from her a lock of my hair, with which fiie was marking tny handkerchiefs, and flipped it (unfeen as he
tnought)
I ;
i ^
C icfp J
thought) into his bofom. She could have erred, fo (he could, to fee one fo pretty, fo truehearted; and efpecially when fhe faw him afterward kifling it in a corner, with the tears in his eyes, when he did not think that any one was looking, and Sure, when a poor dead lock of hair was fuch a comfort to him, he mud: be the moil virtuous and conftantelh of lovers.
This intelligence (though I did not entirely believe it) funk deeper in my mind than P chofe to discover to my informer. I appeared to take no notice, till an accident convinoed. me of the truth.
1
Edward obtained from my father, a promife of taking me this winter to London: and he and St. Alnais are gone to prepare a houfe, and every thing for our reception. The morning ,of their departure I rofe earlier than ufu-al, to make breakfaft for the travellers, and (entering the parlour, I faw S,t. Alnais, alone,-and {landing at the far end of the room, with his face turned to the window. He did not perceive my entrance, but feemed very intent ^upon fomething he held in his hand; I was
curious
7
! I
I . •
[ HO 3’
carious to Ituow what it could be, and Ileah Hig cautloufly forward, judge of my Surpirize, my cohfufion, and my joy, when I beheld that very lock^ he had ftolen from Barbara, twilled round his fingers, and alternately prefled it; to his lips and bis bofom.
i • : i
, L
I ,	;
t
My heart fluttered with a pleafihg emotion, I held in my breath for fear of interrupting him ; but never once confidered how foolilh-t fhould look, at- being caught in that fitua^ tion.

ili :
‘ ii
lid
'll :
Id
. V
‘,'i
I . s I. '
Ml
M t
; i
hi
r- i
. i
i ; > I i i
He returned it at lafl to its hiding places and raifing his head, and feeing me ftanding alraoft befide him, his face was inftantly covered with blufhes, he bowed with a diffi* dent and confufed refpedl; and hefitatingly llammered out the compliments of the morn-, ing.
I hope his own embarraffment prevented' his taking any notice of mine I could think of nothing to fay in ray excufe; I endeavour-edhot to appear confcioiis, yet could not acquire courage to pretend ignorance ; the more I attempted to extricate rayfelf, the more
my
[ in ]
jj^y prefeiicc of mind forfook me : and if I made any apology for my intruSion, or attempted to rally him on his Situation, I did it with fo bad a grace, that I am ready to beat myfelf every time I refled on the awkward figure I made.
#
I wifh you could aflifl: me at finding out the reafon of the Silence, the referve, and the extreme diftance of his behaviour; I will tell you to what I have myfelf at times afcribed it. St. Alnais’s fortune is Small, my father’s, as you know, is princely, may not-this consideration have prevented him from' avowing his paflion ?—Ah ! if I was alTured that it was fo !—I would be—I was almoft' going to fay, I would be tempted to fpeak firfl. But no,, fpight of the confidence my vivacity infpires, I fear there is no admiflTible: method for a maiden to fay, “ I love !”< -But then, this amiable man!—has he not a title to my gratitude, to my heart ? Has he not Saved the life of my brother ?—My mother efteems him for his virtues, and adores him as the preserver of her child. I need make no mention of my brother’s attachment; I have alreadly told you, they feem to live
but
1
\

lit
[h

iti

[ 112 3
I
but In and for each other. In future, howa«
ver, I may hope, that he will transfer a por-
tion of that attachment to
Your
I
M. Rochdalk.
LET-
t "3 1
\ * • < '
LETTER XXVm.

Mifs Wyndham to Mils Rochdale.
A
Dove-brook.
E S, you are indeed happy, my Henrietta j long, long may you continue So, whatever becomes of your wretched friend !
My heart has long foreboded that I was not
r
born to joy,—too faithfully has it prophefied; but I am now reSigried, I Submit without murmuring to ray fate.
1	y
A few nights ago, I had the mofl: extraordinary dream that you can imagine. I thought I was Sitting with Lord Mordaunt, when the Earl of Granville entered ; he was accompanied by Sir George Haftings, who juft pointed to us with a fmile of triumphant malice,
and
>:, I' \
u 11.
• pi ' t
. ' 1 ,
'C
t 114 ]
and retired ; the earl approached his Son with a menacing air; and with a voice Scarce ar* ticulate through fury, exclaimed, Wretch! what is this that you have done? but think not to eScape my juft refentment, your Syren too lhall dearly pay for her treachery and pre-fumptioii; then ftamping with his foot, a number of armed men entered ; here, continued he, take this Circe hence, and convey her where neither I nor my infatuated fon (hall ever more behold her.
. 't ■
. 1 '
■ ■ p I
ti;
,1 .
* * ' I
,r :
1; •: '

liT

I

I : i
■Si
.; i • 1
i.
;:hl
‘,L 1
■lid

!
ii' 1 ; •; •
'll
■;', I

! 1
■ h;; i
,i.!j'
III, :
I
! • I ‘
idlii
s:!n
i I > - 1
S'i
111 .i
iO
:i!
: I i ‘' i
i.
I fcreamed aloud at the dreadful Sentence; my Harry ftarted up, and caught me in his arms; but they approached, and were proceeding to tear us afunder, when Suddenly the air grew dark, the room Ihook, as with an earthquake, the rulFHans vaniftied, and the earl Stood trembling befide us; then looking up, I beheld the ceiling open, and my mother descend, all bright and beauteous, as I have often Seen her in former dreams.
She approached towards the earl, and whif* pered Something in his ear; then turning to me. She embraced me, and joining my hand lyith that of Lord Mordaunt, the raiSed her
eyes
' < *
:. J

‘ ;
[ II5 ]
eyes to heaven, and implored a bleffing on oiir heads ; and now, my child, continued She, ’tis BO longer an illufion that you behold, ’tis^ your own, your living mother, never more to be parted from the darling of her affections.
She then prefented us: to the earl. Here> fhe cried, you would have, divided two hearts that were formed by heaven for each other; you have even oppofed your own happinefs, your own deSires, but you are bleffed in fpight of yourfelf, for the fake of this amiable pair, you are bleffed j let it then be the future ftu-dy of your life to deferve, and be grateful for the mercies you have experienced.--—-This is all; my joy, my tranfport was fo great, that I awoke.
Gn this flrange dream was I ruminating, when Lord Henry fent in his name. As he entered, I was Ihocked and terrified at the im-preffion of grief and agitation that was vilible in his countenance, and ftiook his whole frame; he perceived my emotion, he took my hand, and looked with a mournful tendernefs in my face; he attempted to fpeak, but could
not.

t Ii6 ]
not, and taking a paper from his pocket, he prefented me with it, and turned afide to hide his tears.
It was a letter from Lord Granville j I pe-
rufed it trembling.----This inhuman father,
my Henrietta! he tells him he is informed of his Intrigue, that he is aware of its confe-quences, and therefore defires he may in-ftantly attend him; and think no more of the little artful gipfy> whofe allurements would betray him to a breach of duty.
11 '
. I
/
I ; , -t ,
i: ’ '
I I
. I ■ I ;
; I
. i
I .
Alas! how little is he acquainted with my heart! but I will convince him of the injuf-tice of his epithets! Am I then a traitrefs? have I attempted to feduce my Harry from his duty? O witnefs for me heaven, I would die rather than be the means of his adling in any refpe£t unworthy of him ; yet hard, very hard was the ftruggle j had you known how I was tempted, you would have trembled for me.
: I '
:i'
; 1 ‘
!
t •
t > , ' \ .
!
■} ; I • •
> I
; I
t .
I , •
1' :
I
ii ;
;! -
With an attitude, and accent of the moft endearing fupplication, he begged I would
copfent to become his wife, in the prefence
• o£
I II7 3
of my father, and the countefs of Jerfey. He told me he was pofleffed of 600 1. a year, independant of his father, and that with this provifion, we might be happy in each other’s Society and endearments.
f
He painted (ah ! in what feducing colours) the charms, the tranquil delights of a rural retirement, enlivened by the tranfports of connubial happinefs, when preceded and continued by a union of hearts. His eyes too!
ah Henrietta !—but mine Scarcely dared to meet their fafcinating glances. I Hill tremble to think how nearly his too perfuafive eloquence had overcome my refolution.
Alas! he little knows how much that refolution, of which he complains, has coll: me! but virtue at laft rofe Superior to frailty, if it is frailty to love the moft lovely of his fex.
I oppofed his arguments with all the firm-nefs of which I was miflrefs. What, Said I, Shall I then bring dow n a father’s curie, where I would die to accumulate every blelTing ? O never, never! that would indeed be a bafe-
nefs

[ ii8 ]
r»efs unworthy of my Harry’s Louifa. I call heaven to witnefs, continued T, kneeling, of the vows I here make ; though no arguments, no fophiftry (hall ever prevail with me to accept your hand, unaccompanied by the Sanction of your father’s confent; yet neither Shall any earthly consideration bribe or compel me to become the wife of another.
M . 1
l> .
.1
I
.	’ I
i 1 t I
, I I. •
. I	,: *
O' ' or '. i
..!• I •
I
-obv
r! ■
' b ti «
■! i' i
;:lbC
';' , 1 < f • .
;ir ' ‘
I '' i t
■1’ it. ■ , ■
I ’
1 i < • •
I ■ 1 I
'ill ‘‘
ii;,C
'Ll' , 1
I'll
II..
I ■ I 1
iL-
t •

I ■' 1 ’ 1:
•ir/1 '
:bh:
rL;;
i
;l ■ ; t '
r' :1:
•I
-i bi
ri T
* id
'.i:
I
He was greatly affected, he kneeled down befide me. I will ftrive, my angel, he cried, to imitate your fhining example; farewell then, my only, my ever loved !—At that heart breaking word, I could no longer flip-port the appearance of my heroifm ; but re-dining my head on his Shoulder, I burft into a violent fit of weeping. He too melted into
tears; and we continued Some time in that mourning attitude. At laft I arofe, and en* deavoured to compofe myfelf. Go then, my Harry, I cried. Since you mull depart, let it be while I have ftrength left to bid you adieu.
He obeyed, fighing deeply; his eyes turned back, till he was out of Sight.
X
Fare-
l;i
C M9 ]
Farewell, my beloved friend, will you not now acknowledge me an object of companion ? Ah, did you know how my heart is torn you would weep over the Sorrows of your unhappy
I
L. Wyndham.
A
L E T
II1

: . . i
i (
t I
; * I I
, I
} '
. ' ^
i ♦

sti

ill
rrt
SI
■ V.
r t •
S'
*; 2
' t.
'1
ei
>.
lii
• I
; t
a

I*
f 1
M
|i
it
■ I
■I
I
1i

!i
[ 120 ]
. ^
AT
LETTER XXIX.
The Countefs of Jersey to Mifs Wal-
V
POLE.
Jerfey Grove.
H
E is gone!—my brother, my friend, my
amiable companion, he has left me, my dear
Emily!
That wretch, Haftings, it is he that has
fomented all this mifchief!
As Soon as he was able to leave his bed, he
haftened to London, and calling on my father

informed him of the paflion that his fon en
tertained for our dear Louifa^ but painted it
as no other than a boyifh, and romantic at-
tachment, eafily to be overruled by the au-
thority of a parent, and its objedl a rudic of
mean birth, Some beauty, great art, but no
fortune.
In
If
f i
f-t
[ j
III the firft transports of his rage at this In* telligence, he wrote a reproachful, and menacing letter to his Son, with peremptory orders to prepare immediately to attend him, and never to think of this Louifa any more.
Ah Emily, hoiXr vain, and how heart-rending are the commands of parents, when it is not in the power of children to obey !
V
When he was about to attend his father’s pleafure, he waited on Louifa, he (hewed her the earl’s letter, he urged the impoflibility of ever obtaining his confent, and with all the pathetic rhetoric of an adored, kneeling, pleading, weeping lover. Solicited her acceptance of his hand and yearly independence; but he kneeled, wept, and pleaded in vain ; the generous maid, rejefled his Suit, with a
\	4
dignity of Sentiment peculiar to himfelf, and
I am interrupted,—a packet,—ah !
5 •
us
from my lord, my hulband,---------let me pe
rufe it.
He is coming, my Emily ! but not unaccompanied ; his return reftores to our arms
G
an
m
• '■>
: ! r
S' -i:
.;t{i : ■ 't ‘
'fs i;
Lii-O '. ' I
i) '

Sli
M 1 « '
bi
, i

u»» • . ff.
III!.
Mir
M.	-
i!; i
ill ‘
'iii!
ifM
N.	■
r r • I
M' -
fit ’
T‘
M:
7t*
ih ‘
' I » •
Hi • . -if-f
Hi u IV ir^
111
.
;;
!L
1 . *
IM
In
ii'
fj
■f -
, / I
t
if :
3-
■7
••
i .
1
I ■
i
. I
( : 1 f
[ I ]
an aunt, a-gem of women; I am at liberty to give you the particulars of her very flay, but to make them the more Intelligible to you, I mull begin with a (ketch of the life and character of the late earl of Jerfey.
He was .(though the father of my amiable -hufband) a man of bigh paffions, v/arm in his friendfhip, but equally implacable in his re* fentments. His lady died in the twenty-fifth ^year of her age, my dear lord was their onij furviving offspring, and poffelfed all the gen* 'tlenefs and fenfibility of his mother, unallayed
by the liaughty and vindictive Spirit of his fa*
1
• ther.
The earl had an only Siller younger than himfelf, finely accomplifhed, and of Singular beauty, with a heart a*s ellimable as her pe^ Son was lovely.
.	“	? t	''
The'young earl of Arundel Ta w, and loved her, and waited on her brother with an offer of his hand and fortune, but was rejected on account of a quarrel, that had long fubfilled between the families.
The
A
c
12
3 3
The lovers, though prevented from feeing each other, kept up a regular correfpondence by letter, but were at lafl: detedled by the earl, who was So incenfed at his Sifter’s aO:-
I
ing contrary to his injundions, that he deter-
f
rained to carry her to France, bury her in a

convent, and take Such farther precautions as (hould efFectually prevent their being ever united.
For this purpofe he acquainted her that his affairs called him immediately into Paris, and that flie muft prepare to accompany him ; fhe obeyed, unfufpicious of the cruel intention of his journey, and was conftrained to depart without ever bidding adieu to her lover.
He was quickly apprized of her departure, he fufpedled the deep defigning heart of her brother, he trembled for his miftrefs, and determined to refeue her or perifti in the attempt; and embarking for Calais, he arrived there the next day after the earl and his lifter had left it.
Mean while the unhappy unfufpecHng lady, had nearly reached the place of her deftina-
G 2
tion.


Hr
b'. iii
iiA-
t> ir!f.
h'lili;-
‘o '0I :
If Ui;
!fi?- ;■' )h'Lt;i
lU iiil
m
ibiil!
■ bits
C'ff

A:l
IPhI
IliL
irilla
fl’J '*
■. i' ’ »•
n ;*
Hi
'ImH;
i.f'H
iiib|
rjl'!
'‘dll
:;Si
■!hd
';b-i
•; i' 1
iSu 111 r T-r<
■ i * •; O ’ 1
; t
.D.i
•li!
r-
t’i
ri! ??. ;
( -» iftj
(hi
m
Hn
f: ;
hd
* r*
>h
I.
. • »•
>', 1
> I
/
I I2'4 ]
%ion. But In pafiing through a foreft, they .were attacked by a troop of banditti, their attendants, maflacred, and the earl himfelf left for dead ,on the field, while fix of the ruffians carried off the lady, fcreaming^for help, though defpairing to find it, when her lover, who had enquired the road through which they had travelled, came happily to her affiftance at this alarming criSis: he infiantly flew upon the villains, and feconded by his attendants, fooa laid them dead at 'his feet; but who can de* fcribe his tranfports, when he found that it was his Louifa herfelf, whom he had refcued from their fury. They embraced, he Seated her beSide him, and they rode together to the next inn, procured a .poll carriage, and pto-ceeded to Paris.
There they learned that the earl had been difcovered by Some peafants of the country.
and carried to the hotel de
when his
wounds were dreffed, and he was in a fair way of .recovery.
i
The lovers now’ dreaded being again purfued and feparated, .and the earl availed himfelfof;
• i
this plea to perfuade his beloved to an union, j
which i
t 125 3
which would put it part the power of her iirt* placable brother to fever them. Their hand;? were joined, and' they retired^ to the fouth of France; while the earl of Jerfey, weary of a?-fruitlefs fearch for his filler, returned to Eng-' land, after an abfence of three years;
His fon, though but then in his fourteenth" year, was immediately provided with a tutor, and fent abroad on his tour, and the earl was* conftrained to feek in the Society of ftrangers^ a confolation for the lofs of thofe connexions-
of which he had voluntarily deprived him-felf.
Still however he felt he was unhappy. His-rank and large fortune procured him refpeQ,-but his overbearing difpolition prevented him' from acquiring a lingle friend, and he lived for Several years in aHate of alternate diffipation< and gloomy reftlelTnefs.
Lord Granville was jull then returned frorty France, whither he had carried my mother for the recovery of her health, and I was takejs home from fchool on the occafion.
Though
Ili
I'
'I
■bit
fjili
'H?
A
if!!-
:!T
'i;.
li
i< *■
i
! -i i I
ii'i
f-i . . • C* ‘
I ,
• ; • « !
biM
liin
'li
!!■
h
l!T
T*r
ji-li
ll'i-
|:Ui
til
iirO
{f.:»
t :* i
Ui‘
i|i'
itii;
!t!l
M : ?:
H
I >
. I !
L* i i O
r _.
I! '
. • ■'
iifti
::‘‘i
:ifl|
•, I
'! ' i. I '
11 >
li!:
'it »
iili
ii::i
lie
i! ! i
■.» I
HI c •'ll
ah
t: •
lei
M '.
IJ >i
t> *1
iu
i’ti
. I
iitr
! ) 5 ■
i;;
** ■
»* b ,
rri \
L. '' ‘ I
ii,
[ 126 ]
Though I had not been yet introduced in!o public, I frequently accompanied my mother to the theatre. One night at the tragedy of Kdvyard and Elionora, I was So very much aflre6tedl, and fobbed fo violently, that my mother was obliged to take me away. Lord Jer*
t
f	•
fey had been feated in the next box, and ob-Served my emotion with pleafure j he requefl-
ed permiffion to take care of me home, and
^ . *
declared he Ihoiild have rnore pleafure in the artlefs effufions of fo young, and fo feeling a heart, than the poet however elegant or af-
w	■	'
feeling could bellow.
§
My mother, who was acquainted with his
- ,
name and quality, confented ; my father re* ceived him with politenefs and acknowledg* ment, and gave him a general invitation to his houfe. From that time forward their acquaintance improved into intimacy, and ripened into a kind of frjendfhip, but I the particular favourite, and he at lall propofed to my father a union between their families, by my marriage with bis Son.
was
I had
■d
[	127	]
Thad often heard the earl talk In raptures, of him, and I formed him to my fancy as, de-ferving his encomiums. I was not difappoim-
y
ed in my expedlations, but rather furprized at finding them exceeded, for he returned the raolT: amiable and accompUIhed of any of his. fex that ever I had feen ; and I had the plea-Sure to find that he received the commands of his father with a tranfport as great as it was novel on the.like occafion.
We were united, and lived for fix years In the greatefl: harmony, and loved with the great-eft tendernefs, when the earl, was feized with a.violent diforder in his flomach, fuppofed to be the gout, which baffled the {kill of the
4
moft eminent phyficians. He continued to
.* * '
Unguifli under it for upward.? of a year, and at laft finding his end approach, he acquainted his fon privately of all the particulars I have ■
^ *
already related refpe6ting his fifter, and theny proceeded.
About, four years after my return from. France, I was travelling through: a dreary part of the country, when in pafilng a cottage I thought I heard the found of voices in the
bittereft
I’iit
■;i h
'!i
pU
•lu
I
. »s • II
f; ■
:. I'
ilii

\U
|S
M-
- • p
L
I!
i
i'
ii!
[V
fi.
ID !♦ •
il
I
T
•1 .
s
{
*.
[ 128 ]
bkiered dlftrefs; I ordered the carriage to flop, I lillened with attention, I alighted, and entering this habitation of wretchednefs, I be^ held (ftretched on a bed of Ilraw) a woman, to all appearance, in the agonies of deatb, while thiee half-famifhed children furrounded their dying mother, and wrung my heart with their clamours.
I ordered one of my Servants to ride off for affiftance and feme matter of nourilhment, while I endeavoured to appeafe the children by promifes of fpeedy fubSiftence.
HTe Servant Soon returned, accompanied with a woman,.with Some cakes and cordials. We raifed our patient in the bed, and cauti-oufly adminiftered the reftoring draugl.t. In
a little time it brought her to herfelf, and flie
*1
thanked and blelTed me in terms that demon-flrated her having been acquainted with much better days ; the children too had Satisfied the cravings of hunger, and as the next town was not far off, I propofed bringing her thither; (he aflented, we lifted her gently into the carriage, I followed with the children, and
travelling
[ 129 3
travelling at an eafy rate, we Soon reached'^, the inn.
When I intimated a delire of being acquainted with thofe parts of her hidory which prudence did not oblige her to conceal; Alas I fir, fhe replied, there is nothing entertaining in my unhappy (lory, his nothing more than a narrative of the mod Blocking crimes, attended by the deeped contrition and re-morSe.-
l ama native of France, my mother died v.'hile 1 was an infant, and as foon as I became capable of indrudlion, my father placed me at a convent, and continued to vifit and fiippiy me with the conveniencies of life till I Sixteen, when I received an account of his death.
As he was an officer under the crown, all my means of fubfiftence ceafed with his life; I was an orphan, I was defolate, and the fu-perior conftrained me to depart with very little ceremony.
^ 5
Thus
• Lt
• 0' 1 .. ji:
i=r
[
130
]
J .
: >ii


fl.
It'
I
s
k i t
tij
I
ii
ii
rr
Thus was I thrown upon the mercy of a world, of which I had yet Scarcely formed an idea ; I difpofed of all my little ornaments that were merchantable, tied the reft in a handkerchief, and with tearful eyes, and a heavy heart. Set out without knowing whither to diredl my dreary fteps.
1 had the good fortune to be beloved by moft of the young ladies who boarded at the
convent. They followed me weeping, and wc
were juft taking our laft farewell, when over-
\
come by the violent agitation of my Spirits, I Swooned away in their arms.
■ *
When I recovered, I found myfelf Seated
on a bank, my companions in tears around me, and by my fide a young lady of exquifite beauty, who aftifted to Support me, and Seemed greatly afSedled by my Situation. She had been pafting in her carriage at the time of my fainting, and feeing me in diftrefs, ordered the coach to flop, came out, and enquired the cauSe of So much lamenting; one of the ladies, w'ho had been particularly attached to me, gave her a ftiort and pathetic account of my ftory. It was Sufficient to her that I was
innocent,
V 131 T
iiinoiceiit, and an object of compaffidn, to in,-/
/ ^
tereft her in my favour ; Ihe told me, if I ; pleafed, that ftie would take me along with
her, and that I fhould attend and be her com-
\
panion. Her goodnefs overpowered me, I
dropped on my knees, and Seizing her hands,
*
I prefled them;, to my . lips, -and burft' into >
•	.i	' ■
tears.
Her eyes gliftened, ihe raifed and embfacedii
me, and leading me to the.iCoach, Ihe made
^ %
me get into, it. Seated herSelf, befide, .me, and*; away we drove.
The carriage flopped* at-a magnlfiter't lace, a young and very „handfom,e gentleman approached with a;joyful impatience, and handed the lady out; he embraced, and ten-derly complained of. the length of her flay;,,, flie Smiled, and pointing to the carriage, where I fat trembling and unafTured, flie informed him in a few words of my flory.^
My wife! -my lovely wife! cried he, when;; Ihe had finifned, bleflfed be that power that,
9
informs your Sweet bofom with all his own di»;
I
vine propenfllies and feelings; he then hand- ;
ed.
■n*
I
iS
ii.,
hi: >

» ■
I ■
■ •
■.,1
;i!|
[ H2 1
I
cd me out, and his lady taking my arm, led me to the houfe, and. treated me with the moll: engaging fweetnefs and condefcenfion; J afterwards learned my miftrels was the filler of an Englifh nobleman, from whofe feverity, ihe had efcaped to her lover, and was now countefs of Arundel.

Think, my dear Son, what I mull have felt at hearing that name rhentioned—the concurrent circumftances left me not the fmallell doubt of its being that of the fon of my moll bated foe, and the hulbard of my once beloved lifter ; but I did not give the leaft interruption to fo intgrefting a ftory, and (he proceeded.
«:
♦ •
f i'
! !
i!:
C
■ \
I
The earl and countefs on the approach of winter, quitted their country feat, removed to Paris, and mixed in thofe brilliant circles where they were fo well qualified to fliine.
Among the crouds of noblefle that frequented their houfe, thofe w'ith whom they were moft intimately connefiled were Lord and Lady
Sedlcy, a very amiable pair ; Lady Sedley was
\
(my miftrefs excepted) the handfomeft woman
I ha ve
h /
'i .. * «
i
$ '
it
6 1
I i
i =
t '53 ]
I have ever feen, and her lord was i man of worth and honour.
The earl of Arundel bad two lovely children, a boy about three years old, and an infant daughter, who prohiifed to furpafs even her mother in beauty j Lord Sedley too had a fon, nearly the fame age as my mailer’s, and he took a particular pleaSure in planning a future union between the children^
But I will haden to that part of their dory with which mine is mod intimately con-nefied.
\
/
There was a young nobleman, to whom Lord Sedley was very much attached, and w'hom he recommended tp the acquaintance cf the earl and countefs, as a youth of the ftridteft honour, and the mod amiable diSpo-fition ; his name was Villars ; he was indeed-diftinguilhed for the engaging fweetnefs of his temper, the lovelinefs of his afpedl, and
the graceful elegance ©f his perfor* and ad-dre fs.
From
fM
; •’■I
■ l.r
Ci'
I,
■’!i'
i* ; C I*
•1,.
/
\
;ir
^ ■
■ t' • • t
:il|
Hi
t 134. I
•j *
From the firfi: moment I beheld him, my heart became fufceptible of love; had it been equally alive to virtue, it would have combated, Jt would have fuppreffed the prefumptuous
9
paflion, but I was young, I was handfome, my temper too was romantic, nay worfe, it
was proud, vindictive, and impetuous; I cor-
/ '
tinued to love the count de Villars, and to
$
flatter myfelf with a thoufand delufive hopes, when I learned that he had paid his addrefles to a young lady of great beauty and merit.
daughter to the marquis de
, and that a

day not very diflant, was fixed op - for their nuptials. .
41
\
• I

j I


This difcovery would- have been a fufficient crufh to the hopes of a genius lefs enterprifing than mine; I direCtly formed a defign of preventing their union. I found means to perfuade the count that his miftrefs was unfaithful, and fecretly encouraged the addrefles of another; in fhort, I managed the whole affair with fo much art, that he not only broke oft all connexion with her, but looked upon me as hir, guardian angel, that had kindly interpofed between him and ruin; in confequence of which, he gave me So many teflimonies and
a ffu ranees
11 ¥
i
:f
t 135 ]
afllirances of his gratitude, as encouraged me
to venture on an avowal of my paffion.
'it
■ His eyes were inftantly opened on my ar-tifice, and I was rejected with the moft mortifying difdain ; he inllantly flew to his mif-trefs with redoubled tendernefsj and obtained full pardon upon difcovering the plots that had been machinated againft_ them, and returning to the Countefs, he acquainted her with my treachery, upon which (he Severely reprimanded, and was going to difmifs me; but my tears, my entreaties, my profeflions of re-morfe, and repeated promiSes of amendment prevailed on her gentle nature, to receive me again to favour.
My paflion for the Count, was now converted into the mofl: inveterate hatred, indignation, despair, and all the rage of disappointed love took poffeffion of my whole Soul, and prompted me to a quick and deadly revenge on the objeQ: of my deteftation.
The GounteSs too, was dellined to Share in the malignity of my vengeance. I refleaed ■that Ihe was now clearly apprized of my wick-
edneSs,
4l
• I
•U
If
[ 136 ]
ednefs, and I hated her for the opinion which Ihe muft confequently entertain concerning me. I was confcious that Ihe ought to loath and defpife me, and I determcned to avenge myfel’f of the mifchiefs, which I could not but fuppofe Ihe Intended againll me ; horrid fenr timents! infernal fuggeftions !. yet not unnatural to wretches fo deeply depraved as I was at that juncture.
The Count’s valet had long loved me, but had been rejedled with a mixture of contempt and indignation; he continued, however, to teafe me with his paflion, and as. I thought he might be ufeful towards furthering ray revenge, I told him r had an affair of confe-quenoe to tranfadl:, in which I fhould have an occaSion for his alTiflance, and that provided he would bind himfelf by a Solemn oath to Secrecy,, and obedience to my commands, I would,'engage to become his wife ; he inflant-ly complied, and I. informed him of my hatred'as well to his mafler, as my ov/n miftrefs, and made up an artful' tale to juflify my re-fentment. -
1 told
t >57 ]
I told hltn, that If ever he hoped to gain iny affection, he muft aflifl: me to contrive fome method of retorting my injuries on them both.
His attachment to his mailer made him hc-fitate at firft, but finally, he engaged implicit compliance, and we mutually agreed to watch, and inform each other of every opportunity that fhould appear favourable to our hellilh defigns.
We had not waited long, when chance prefented us with one, the moll apt to our purpofe.
The Earl on his marriage with my mifirefs, had given her his miniature Set in diamonds, one of the brilliants fell out, as fhe danced at a ball, fhe perceived her lofs the riext morning, and happening to mention it before the Count, he requelled fhe would honour him with the care of it, and he would have it immediately repaired.
I mentioned this incident to my accomplice, without thinking that we could derive any advantage
I , • 4	'
' ,
i :
' >; ■ j
; j ^. '
0! ’ I
.11 hr
M:
IL
:i;i
h
:;i I
f i,
0
T 1
t ■
ll
;.! f
1.41 ; ii
:l- (
t;. 11
H J "! 1
r
.; i ■4 J
I. ,
I
> >
i; '
[ ijs ],
vantage from it, when he fuddenly exclaim* cd, with a horrid tranfport, that he now had the means of eflPeQing my vengeance to the utmoft. He told me, that his ma(Ier,had that day received a meffage from mademolfctle de
---, with a lock of her hair wrought, and
fet in the fhape of an heart, in return to which he had wrote an acknowledging billet, and. fent it by him, v/ith orders to deliver it into her own hands.
The Card fan thus
«,
t.
; ■ i I
1 ;
I *
J
'' i
I ’
\ I
'It t
I, : '>, I
c
i


11 )
My dearefl: love,
T am quite unhappy that, it is not in my power to attend and thank you in pejfon, for your enchanting prefent; a croud of imperti-nents are aflembled at my houfe, and without being abfolutely rude, I cannot make my efcape from thern. How mortifying?—and oh, how very dear is every inftance of youf afFedUon,. to the heart of your devoted^
I'i '
’»♦ 1 :r
iV
•i'i
.} I »* '
i»i 1
M' '
‘ I: i
■H <
;’i' i
VlLLARS.
As
* \
I r
I 139 1
As Soon as 1 had peruSed h, he acquainted; me with his plan, changed the cover, and
diredled it to the Gountefs of Arundel j he
• /
^ .
then ran to find the Earl, and throwing him-
%
felf on his knees before him, with the great-eft appearance of contrition, he informed him,. tha| his lady, and the Counp de Villars, had
long carried on a Secret, and criminal cqrref-
♦
pondence, that he had been the wicked in-ftrument of their amours, but that his con-
* u
Science ftrongly reproached him, for the part he had taken in their guilt, and he was deter-mined to conceal it no longer. He delivered the note, which tfie Earl opened and read
*	'•	•	•	*-	-	I
with violent agitation, and demanded of him what prefent it was which the Count received from his wife ? The fellow denied any know-
ledge of it, but advifed him to apply to me,
as I, he observed,.was queftionlefs a confident in the affair.
The Earl endeavoured to reftrain his pafli-
on, and Sent to have me inffantly, before him.
” <
I came ; he ftrifitly interrogated me refpefiling

every circumftance of the fuppofed amour. L at firft pretended a total ignorance of the mat-
^	^ .V -	'	-
ter, but, (as if intimidated by his threats) I at
length
vr

ii
. i
iC

- i t
lb
t HO ]
length confeffed, that my miHrefs had given his pidure to' the Count, as a proof of her afFeflion for him, and her contempt of her Lord.
It would be equally needlefs and Impoflible to defcribe the fury of the unhappy Earl ; he flew to his wife, and fternly demanded his pidlure; flie was terrified at the fiercenefs of his voice and afpe6t, and tremblingly confefT-ed to him the accident that it had met with^ and that fhe had given it to the Count to have it repaired.
Her anfwer confirmed his fufpicions; he fhewed her the Count’s letter, and reprokh* ed her with her bafenefs, in terms that mani* fefted at once his love, his rage, and his de-fpair: fhe did not hear him out, but dropped infenfible on the floor.
Half frantic, he caught her in his arms, and called aloud for aflifiance. I entered, he left her to my care, and rufhed out of tht room.
\
I wa-s
I HI ]
I was flruck with compafllon and remoTfe, when I beheld the lovely Countefs, pale and breathlefs before me ; but the mifchief was already done, and it was now too late to re-traD.
She continued fo long in a Hate of infenfibi-
llty, that I thought fhe would never recover, but at length, flie awoke to the mofl: poignant fenfations, yet Ilrove as much as poflible to reftrain the efFuSions of her anguilh. She enquired for her Lord, but he was not to be found, and Ihe retired to her chamber, leaving orders that none might attempt to disturb her.
The Earl did not return till late, he enter-
I
cd with a Sullen gloom on his brow, and Shut himfelf up in his ftudy, where he palTed the night in violent agitation, for we heard him
frequently groan, and throw himfelf on the
.1
ground, then rife, and traverfe the room at a furious pace.
He did not appear till the next day,'when with a countenance expreflive of a determined defpair, he enquired for his Countefs, and deft red
C 142 T
■Iired to fee her. I went to her anti-chamber,
and tapped Softly'at her door, no one anfwer-
s
ed, I opened it, but no one appeared. Icon-tinued my fearch through the whole houfe, but could neither difcover, nor learn any tidings concerning her.
1
^ 1 ran with this intelllgenee to the Earl ; he ■flarted, he flew to her apartment, and efpy-ing a paper which had efcaped my notice, folded and fealed, and lying on her toilet, he hallily tore it open, and ran- over the con-
^ •
tents.
. \

As he proceeded, I obferved that he trem-
•V	t
bled, and turned to a deadly palenefs, drops
^	'V'	•
of anguifh gathered on his brow, he uttered a deep and heart-rending groan, and fell to the ground.
I Screamed for help, all the domeftics enter-
ed, we raifed and laid him bn a bed, and ufed
*
our utmoft endeavours to recall him to life; at laft he opened his eyes, and daring wildly
around, he ftarted up and exclaimed,—-where, where is the villain that has deceived me, that has robbed me of my wife, my love?
fool
S N43 ]
fool that I was, to give ear to his infernal malice. She is, fhe mull: be innocent,—but yet j fuch accurfed, fuch inconteftable proofs,of
her guilt !—no, no,—it cannot be ;—it is im-
0
poITible, and that impo.ffibility excludes every hope of any alleviation of my wreCched-iiefs.
OK—that I could tear her for ever from 'my heart,'—but it will not be, 'l!he continues
to cling around it, and pull it after her with
> ^
an irreSiftible attra6lion.
* ' '■ * * *■ . ■ ►
Here he threw himfelf proftrate on the
* * *
floor, he groaned, he wept, and riling again, with a frantic eagernefs, he caught up fome
of his Lady’s ornaments that were Scattered
**
about the room, and prefling them repeatedly to his lips and his bofom, he watered them plenteoufly with his tears.
•» t
It was how for the firfl time, that my heart was w'rung with remorfe, my crime prefented itfelf in all its hideoufnefs to my fhuddering imagination; I turned inward an eye of ap-prehenSive terror ; but oh ! what a gloomy, what a tremendous profped! I Saw nothing
but
T
• V
b
I 144 3
hut horrors, I felt nothing but defpair, and I tore myfelf away from the prefence of my injured mailer, leU I Ihould be tempted in a fit of dofperation to betray myfelf to the juf-tice of his vengeance.
My wretched accompfice now claimed the promifed reward of his treachery ; my nature fhrunk from the propofal, but I alfo trembled at recolieO;ion of my own perfidy; I dreaded left a refufal Ihould tempt him to betray me, and villain as he was, I fought in him a refuge from the affrightments of confeious gilt. We were married, and to avoid any queftions that might lead to an explanation, we retired under a feigned name, to a private lodging, till the prefent ftorm Iliould be overblown.

The gencrofity of my mlftrefs had from time to time furnifhed me with many valuable prefents, which together w’ith the Savings of my falary, amounted to a considerable fum. I urged my hulband to Set up in Some reputable trade that might procure us a livelihood, but his thoughtlefs dilTipated temper made him deaf to all my remonftranees. Our ftock was
loon exhaufted, and our credit ftretched to the
utmoll,
/ »
/
r
L
H5 ]
utmoH:, my huSoand was daily threatened with
imprifonment, arid to avoid this laft calamity
we were obliged with our eldeH; boy, then an
infant, to quit the kingdom, and take Ilielter %
in England.

To add to our diftrelTes, the conftant agitation of my mind, tortured with the pangs of excruciating recolledlion, preyed upon my fpl-rits, and deftroyed my health ; a long and dangerous ilinefs was the confequence, and reduced us to the want of even the common rie-ceflaries of life. My hulband however, during my confinement, attended me with all the tendernefs of which his nature was capable, and as foon as I was tolerably recovered, he procured me a means of fubfifience in the houfe of a widow lady, where I was to adt in capacity of waiting maid, and he was hired as valet to her only fon, an officer in the army.
4	_	,
Here we lived till I was delivered of my twoyoungetl children, when our young mailer was called abroad to join his regiment, and tny hulband, at his requell accompanied him, and left me and my tl>ree little ones deoend-
H
mg
"!
■
I '
1. • t
‘1'
C ]'
ing on the bounty of my miftrefs, who pro-mifed to take care of them in the abfence of their father. But foon after his departure flie fickened and died; her effects were all feized by a kinfman, in order, as he faid, to Secure them againft the return of her fon; and I was once more thrown deftitute upon the world.

Though my mind was inured to mifery, my limbs were not formed for fatigue, they failed me, and I fainted by the way; and but for
V
your goodnefs, I and my children mould have perilhed in the cottage where your charity found us.
Here the unfortunate woman clofed her narrative; during which I was Scarcely able to conceal the various emotions of grief and joy, by which I was alternately agitated, grief for the Sufferings of a Sifter, for whom my once tender affeftion was now renewed and redoubled, and joy at finding her innocent of the cruel afperfions that had been thrown upon her charader.
I deemed
[ HI ]
1 deemed It prudent however, to conceal the mtercft I took in her ftory, though I determined to reward the relater for the pleafure It had procured me ; I prefcnted her with a purfe of twenty guineas, and alked her in what manner ihe intended to difpofe of it ?
After a profufion of thanks and bleflings,
and feme deliberation, fhe told me Ihe would
\
try to improve her flock by Setting up a little School, as (he thought herfelf tolerably qualified for the purpofe.
I approved of her Scheme, and told her that as I was the diftrefs of the unhappy earl and countefs of Arundel, I would wi(h, if poffi-ble, to be a means of reconciling them, if (lie could dire^ me where to find any of the parties concerned. But (he told me that all my fearch in this kingdom would be ineffedual, as (he herfelf had made diligent enquiry after them, and could not hear of any nobleman of the title of Sedley in England, and was further aflured that Lord Arundel was either dead or retired to feme diftant country, and could no where be found or heard of.
Hz
This
. ...
hi. :
I: -:i:
LI«	'	' ■ «»«
h - h
[?!* 'if
VIII
, i.-iL ;
I j * "
^"n':r
llUV
1
i. ' r ■
W‘
■ ..' .r.
in>

C 148 I
This was all the intelligence I could gfit; and leaving the poor woman to purfue her intentions, I returned home with a refolution of travelling to France in quell of my Sifter; but the ill ftate of my health prevented me from putting my plan into execution, and I make it my earneft and dying requeft fince Providence has not been plealhd to profper my endeavours towards making'her Some recompence for my former cruel treatment of her, that you my fon, who have youth, health, and ftrength fuf-ficient for the undertaking, will Spare no pains or coft to effect her reftoration and reunion, if not with the hulband, yet at leaft with a fa-mily, whofe tendernefs I truft, will in a manner confole her under her misfortunes.
I will continue my narrative in my next, for the prefent I am tired fcribbling, and mufi: conclude my Emily’s ever faithful
E. Jersey
I ^
L E T
C 149 3
LETTER XXX.
The fame to the fame.
Jerfey Grove.
Sit down> my dear Emily, to perform my
promife, and will begin without any further preface.
As foon after the earl’s interment as decen-cy would permit, my dear lord haftened to obey his laft commands. He left my brother for my guardian and companion till his return> and departed on his commiffion.
All the letters which I received from him during his abfence, the laft excepted, were filled with the accounts of his frultlefs enquiries.
■	[ 150 3
ries after his unhappy kinfwoman ; and hailing travelled^ moil part of France in her fearch, he v/as returning in defpair of ever finding
her> when Providence at a time, and in a
>
manner the moft unexpe£led, prefented him
with the pcrfon whom he had fo long been in quell of.
fl
The day, fays he, on which I was fo happy as to difcover the retreat of the dear patient fufferer, I was travelling through a beau, tiful though uncultivated part of the country, and as the weather was remarkably fine, I got out of my carriage, and deSired my fervant to drive (lowly onwards, as Ichofe to walk a while, that I might have the better view of the fur-rounding profpeSl.
As I frequently flood to admire the beauty of the country, the chaife had left me feme dif-tance behind, when in an inftant the (ky was overcafl, and 1 perceived a violent ftorm approaching ; I quickened my pace to overtake the carriage, and called aloud to the fervant to (lop, but before I could get up to them, the rain began, accompanied with thunder and
light-
V, V.
c '51 i
lightning, and I was compelled to take flielter in a Small but neat houfe that Hood a few yards diftant from the road.
The door was opened by an old domeftlc, who deSired 1 would walk in until the Ilorm fliould be blown over, and ulhered me into the parlour. A lady rofe at my entrance, and welcomed me with a grace and dignity of manner, which I was Surprized at finding in So
s
obScure an habitation. She. was tall, elegantly formed, and dreffed in mourning; .file Seemed about forty, yet her face was, I think one of the fineft I have ever Seen, and there was a delicacy, a touching expreffion of melancholy in her Sweet complacent countenance, that fiiewed her the beloved of Sorrow, and acquainted with an uncommon Share of the deepeft afflidlions.
My heart was Softened, was interefied in this amiable ftranger, I could not tell how to account for it.
I had not been long Seated, when my car riage drove up to the court; as It approached
he
I ]
V
\
31

her colour changod-To a death-like palentfs, She ftarted up—Good God ! it' is the name:—. the arms:—can it be poffible ?—Then turning to me with quicknefs,—Who, whence are you? ihe cried,—tell me, tell me inftantly? then Sinking into her chair, Ihe burll into tears, and raifing her hands and eyes to heaven, O my cruel, yet tenderly beloved brother! Ihe exclaimed, do you ftill live? do you Bill continue to hate your unhappy filler ?
O my aunt! I cried, with a Ihout of triumph,—my aunt! my long loft, my much lamented aunt!—I ftrained her to my bofom, but Ihe was infenfible to my carefles, Ihe had fainted quite away. I rung for afllftance, a maid entered, and adminiftered Some drops j in a Ihort time Ihe opened her languid eyes, and fixed them with a melancholy wildnefs on my face.—Ah ! do I dream ? Ihe faintly cried, ©r is it poffible that you can be—Your Richard, your nephew, my beloved aunt, interrupted I, who blefies God that has fo happily direfled his fearch, and thinks all his pains a thoufand
fold compenfated by the transport, the more
than
C 153 I
than filial tendernefs which he feels at this de
i
lightful interview.
She threw her dear arms round my neck^ and wept upon it. Ah, my child, fhe exclaimed, for, alas 1 I have now no other, is it then to Seek me out that you have travelled hither ? did you come to trace the forlorn one to the unfrequented fpot where fhe thought ihortly to have laid herfelf and her Sorrows in the dull ? but who dire6;ed you where' to find me ? who could have vindicated my character to you, or told you that I was an objeft worthy of your Search ?
In compliance to her defire I gave her a ihort but comprehenfive detail of the crimes, repentance, and confeflion of the unhappy wretch who had betrayed her.
I was obliged to paufe frequently in the courfe of my narrative, that Ihe might have time to recover in a meafure from the violent agitations it occafioned ; when I had finiflied,. and Ihe was a little compofed, fhe alked with a look of mournful curiofity, if I had heard
Hs
nothing
[	154 ]
BOthing of her lord; but no, (fhe conSiniied ■without waiting for my anfwer) he has doubt-lefs retired like myfelf to Some uninhabited wild, where his griefs for the imagined perfidy of his once beloved Louifa> has driven him; perhaps too, he is no more, that his Sorrows have put a period to his noble life,—and yet I have Survived, my God ! thy retraining grace, thy Suftaining hand has Supported me through anguifli inexpreffible, and my heart is not yet broke, nor has my hand ever once attempted to cloSe this wretched exigence.
iBut Suppofe that my beloved Bill lives, think you he would give credit to the ftory of my innocence, or that I could a Second time Support the Severity of that brow, the killing indignation of thofe eyes that were wont to melt over me with Such unutterable fondnefs ? O the days, the days of tranfport I have experienced, but they are long Since paft, and as I once was blelTed, So I now am wretched in the extreme.
But Soft! what have I been Saying ? ungrateful. wretch that I am, ought I not rather
to
r
L
155 1
to pour forth my thanks to the all-merciful Being, who has at length brought my innocence to light, and fent my Richard to alleviate my forrows; but, alas! the alienation of my huf-band’s affections, and the lofs of my children, are griefs, that like the rod of Mofes, fwallow ’up every other consideration, and Scarcely leave room in my heart for any other emotion of joy or Sorrow to enter.
At the mention of her children, I recolleCt-cd that the unhappy penitent in the ftory of her crimes, had Scarcely informed me of any thing concerning them, and I ventured to alk my aunt what was become of them.
She told me that at the time fhe parted from her hulband, her little daughter was an infant at nurfe, but the boy being two years older had been taken home, and was fo very en-gaging, and fo particularly attached to her, that fhe could not leave him with every other comfort behind her, but took him and an old faithful domellic as partners of her exile, together with a large quantity of her jewels, to
enable her to educate her child as fhe could
wifh.
[ >56 ]
wifii, that (he had left a letter behind, informing her lord of what Ihe had done, but not of the place of her retreat, and retired in difguife, and under a feigned name to a convent, where fhe lived with her little boy till he was of an age capable of inflrudion.
She then had a tutor provided, and mailers to inflruQ; him in whatever fciences or accom-plilhments might improve the natural goodnefs of his mind and graces of his perfon; fhe endeavoured for his fake to be as much refigned as poffible, and in return found in him a con-folation for every other affliolion ; but of him too file was bereft, and at a time when fire leaft cxpedled fuch a firoke.
He had frequently queflioned her concerning his father; fhe endeavoured to evade his enquiries, but the tears and the emotion which they occafioned, ^nd which fhe drove in vain to fupprefs, increafed his eagernefs to come at the truth; at lad he prevailed upon the do-meflic that accompanied their flight to inform
him, the confequence was no other than what the countefs expedled, hk young heart was agitated, it way filled with a thoufand emotions
[ 157 1
I
ons of grief, refentment, honour, and filial tendernefs; he had always a violent propen-fity to the army, and the difcovery he had lately made augmented ; it he would go, he would voluntarily ofFer himfelf to the ennobling fervice of his king and country (for he was taught to believe himfelf French, as he had not been informed of his mother’s real name, or her hiftory preceding her marriage with Lord Arundel) ; he would fignalize himfelf, he would acquire fame, honour, and wealth, and raife his mother to a rank Superior to what fhe had ever held, and that would exalt her merit to its deferts, and make her virtue as well as beauty confpicuous to the world, and to the hufband who had fo cruelly injured her.
In vain did the Countefs endeavour to moderate his ardour, he appeared to be convinced^ but finally forfook her. My unhappy aunt was deeply affefted at his lofs, but Supported jierfelf with the hopes that he might Soon return in Safety, perhaps with wealth and honours, but paint to yourfelf her diftra6Hon, when in a fhort time after his departure fhe
r
heard
C 158 ]
heard that he was killed at the battle of Foi?-tenoy.
She langiilflied for a length of time under a Severe and lingering illnefs, which the fhock of this dreadful intelligence occafioned, but hea-ven was pleafed to referve her for the enjoyment of many bleffings which I trull it has yet in Ilore for the fweeteft, meekeft, lovelieft, and moil exalted of its votaries; as I make no doubt but we Shall, by fome means or other, be able to difcover the retreat of lord Arundel, and restore the dear wanderer to his arms. But to proceed.
At the time the counteSs firSl took Shelter
at the convent de
, She got particularly
acquainted with, and attached to a widow lady
of Small fortune, and her daughter, who both
boarded there : thev were amiable, and from
^ •/
a Similarity of their difpofitions to her own, they became intimate and alFeftionate friends. Soon after her recovery, fome dilTenSions ari-Smg in the convent, made her continuance in it extremely difagrecable, and the daughter of her friend having jull: then been married to a
worthy
t H9 1
worthy young man, this amiable family etr-treated her to accompany them to a beautiful little eftate which they poflefled in this retired part of the country, and here they lived together for feveral years with the greatefl: harmony ; but nothing could roufe the unhappy countefs from the deep dejection of Spirit into which her manifold misfortunes had thrown her, and fhe could not be prevailed upon to accompany her friends on a vifit to a relation’s houfe in Paris, where they went about a month ago, and left her miftrefs of the manfion till their return, which file expected in a week at farthell; and then fhe confents to reviCt with me her native land.

Here ends the hiflory of the mod amiable, but mod unfortunate of her fex. Good God, my Emily 1 I once thought it irapolTible for humanity to Support fuch deep and repeated ftrokes of affliction, for mere humanity it certainly was j but 1 trufl: that the fweet faint will yet even in this world receive the reward of her piety and patience.
I expeCt her in lefs than a fortnight. I fhould be too happy byt for thevery great fhare which
my

I iCo I
ftiy affeftion conllrains me to take in the dlftrefs of my amiable brother and his lovely miftrefs
I wait with' anxiety the arrival of to-morrow,, for that will certainly bring me Some intelligence from him. God ,grant it may be favourable to his wiflies, and thofe of your
a
>
1
E. Jerset,
LET-

[ I6i ]
y
LETTER XXXI.
Mifs Rochdale to Mifs Wyndkam.
Woodvilk.
Ourage, my dear Loulfa, all may yet be well, I do not apprehend that matters are So bad as you may imagine ; be affured it is no more than I have this long time expected,
from my knowledge of Lord Granville’s dif-poSition; after all, his rejedtion of your Henry’s Suit may be but temporary, even fliould he at prefent be deaf to his pleading, but that is yet a doubt with me, he loves his fon al-moft to adoration, beSides he is generous, and has a heart all alive to the feelings of hu-* manity. This account of him I learned from Lady Wilmot, our near and very agreeable
neighbour, and next to yourfelf, my mofi: amiable
/
[ i62 ]
ble and intimate friend ; She correfponds with the countefs, and tells me (he is indeed a moft charming woman, lovely in her perfon, but fiill niore amiable in her difpofiiion and de« portment. I trufl: that her Soft authority, joined to the rhetoric of your Henry, will have a very happy influence in your favour.
My brother and St. Alnais arc not yet returned, but are expe6ted in a few days. What fhall I fay to you, my friend? fhall I own that I am not myfelf Since their departure ? nothing can employ, nothing can amufe me, I rattle over the keys of my harpfichord, but either that, or my fingers, or my heart, or Something is out of tune; I go to tranflate my Metaftafio, but ftudy makes my head ache; I draw,, but my pencil runs awry; I am tired of my work, of my book, and Hill more of Sauntering about the houfe; what can be the matter with me ? I wifh my brother was returned,—hufh I I hear a carriage,— ’tis he himfelf as I live, and with him,—blefs me ! how my heart flutters. I am called, what
will become of me ? I am all over in a tremor.
I
-

[ 1^3 ]
I muft go, farewell, pray heaven I acquit myfelf tolerably,—now for it
Oh, ruined and undone Louifa ! never was poor creature fo awkward, fo foolifli, fo mortified ; but I will tell you how like an idiot I have behaved.
I had not got half my way down, when I felt myfelf tremble, and my colour rife to fuch a degree, that I was obliged to flop awhile, and try at a little compofure ; but my unlucky brother ran up, and feeing me fiand hefitat-ing and confufed, he laughed in my face, and feizing my hand, pulled me down flairs.
St. Alnals was flanding in the hall. Edward, brought me forward with an air of ceremonious drollery, and prefented me to him, he bow'ed diflant and refpe61ful, I curtfied low, my brother laughed at us both,—What is the matter with you ? cried he : why one would imagine you had never feen each other before ? Harriet, my dear, this is MonSieur St. Alnais, my very good friend.—Sir, my fifler Harriet, a mighty lively, agreeable, Spirited girl.
St,
• ^	E 1^4 ]
*
St. Alnais Smiled and took my hand, l am Sure he muft have felt it tremble, for I was ready to fink with confuSion j he raifed his eyes to my face with a look of Surprize, and I thought of tenderneSs,—but it might have been a miftake.—I was mad.at mySelf for hav»
I
ing betrayed So much emotion, yet fince it was-
/
too evident to efcape his observation, he might have appeared happy at it, or grateful*, or Something,—nay I would not have had him preSume to be Saucy, or take airs on the oc-cafion neither; but,—but—in Short..—I was not half Satisfied with him, 'nor indeed with myfelf, and as for Edward I declare I aimed hate him. I had no idea of their returning So Suddenly, it was the Surprize that threw me So much off my guard,*—what have I Said? ofT my guard. Alas! that is now of no further conSequence, than to conceal as much as poflible the appearance of my affeftion, for
the poor bird is already flown, and I am yet doubtful of the reception it will meet with from its new pofleffor.
I
Deuce take this myfierious creature; if hs fiiould not love me now. after all,—how mortifying !

[	3
tifying!—and yet it is not impolfible—I don’t know what to think.
We
farewell, my Sweet Louifa. I hope I need not
>
remind you how anxious I Shall be till I hear from you again.
H. Rochdale,
LET-
[	i66 ]
LETTER XXXII.
X,
Lord Mordaunt to Mifs Wyndham.
Berkley Square.
w
HAT (hall I fay?--how fhall I write? my lovely, my beloved Louifa, my heart is almofl: broke.—I have kneeled, pleaded, and entreated in vain, my father continues inexorable, and your Henry is undone.
That villain Haftings!—may the curfes of his own malevolent heart be his punifliment! My father acknowledges that he was the infamous detrador, and now defpifes him for
his
[ x67 3
his perfidy. It was with difficulty that I could get him to lillen to me at all on the fubjefi of my paffion ; but I conceived great hopes from his being fo very much affected with that part of my narrative, in which I endeavoured to do juftice to the noblenefs of my lovely girl’s conduft, and the cruel ge-nerofity with which fhe rejefled my propofal ; ’twas to no purpofe that he ftruggled to fup-prcfs the riSing emotion, and he juft then put me in mind of Some beautiful lines in that very elegant old ballad of the Child of
EUe.
The Baron ftroked his dark brown hair, And turned his face afide.
To wipe away the ftarting tear He proudly ftrove to hide.
At laft he exclaimed. So then flie refuled
you, actually refufed you ; ha !—that was noble ! noble indeed 1 but proud though, very proud ! and yet I can hardly think flie re-jefled you, Harry. But it muft be fo, I know you would not deceive me ; flie is a generous girl, indeed; and were (he but your
equal
[	i68	]
equal in birth, I fhould cad afide every pecuniary, consideration, and would not wifh for a mate more worthy of my Harry. I am obliged to her too, as I think, more So than I am to you, honed friend, for your duteous projeft; but I forgive you, my child, becaufe I love you. I love her too, and would gladly contribute to her happinefs, but not at the expence of my honour; leave me for the pre-Sent. I fhall refume the fubjedt another time, but I positively command you to think as little of your Louifa as poffible, or at lead to redrain your fondnefs within the bounds of frienddiip ; in that I myfelf would willingly be your rival: you may edeem her as a friend, you may love her as a fider, in that light, but
in no other, can I ever look upon her as my
/
daughter.
I bowed, Sighed, and withdrew-
O that you had been lefs an angel, my Louifa ! but 1 diall offend ; forgive me my love, and I will ceafe, if poflible, to murmur at your too generous refolution.
Sxj J.V IV

i i69 }
My mother is juft returned, fiie was from home when I arrived, I fly to meet her. Fare-well) my heart’s beft beloved.
< i
Your own
IJ. Mordaunt.
T
LET
[ 170 ]
LETTER XXXIII.
Mifs Wyndham to Lord Mordaunt.
Dove-brook.
A
LL then, is over, my Harry, not the mod diflant fhadow of hope remains ; my own for-rows I could have borne, but you too are un-happy; yes I know, I feel that you are. I Ihould be guilty of the bafeft ingratitude, could I doubt for a moment of your afFeftionj— why, alas! did we ever meet; and O why was the confequence love ? gratitude, friend-fhip,—could not they have Sufficed ? amiable, tender, but feducing femblances, I thought that thefe alone had taken poffeflion of my heart and yielded it up with a pleafed precipi-tance^ to the dear yet fatal delufion.
Why
C HI ]
Why fhould we fhame to acknowledge a
virtuous pafilon ;—it is my pride, and glory to have infpired it in the breafl: of the moll amiable of men; and my Harry, I alfo know
*	t
the inellimable value of that heart, and return its aflFedlions with a tenderneSs that I blufh not to avow ; but, alas! to what purpofe do I love ? to what purpofe am I beloved, fince nothing but mifery can enfue, not only to my-felf butto one who is infinitely dearer.
Ceafe to importune your father, I befeech
you, I am aflTured he will never confent, and a too frequent repetition of your requefi, might provoke his refentment, perhaps his curfe.—Oh !—Spare me. Spare me the reality of Such horrors,—indeed, my Harry, I could not bear it, I Shudder at the very idea.
Fly, rather fly this fatal wretch, who involves in his own mifery the deareft objedl of her aflFeftions, perilh firfl unhappy I^oulfa! Indeed lever held myfelf unworthy of your love, it was too great a happinefs for me to afpire to; ceafe then to love me, my Harry,—ceafe to think of me,—hold my heart,—what have I Said? forget me, fly me, ceafe to love me;
I 2
could
C 02 3
could I bear that ? — yes,—yes; —I think I could,—I may be wretched in the extreme, but I will not be criminal.
.Adieu! may every blefling that Providence has in ftore for virtue, be fliower^d on the head and expanded in the heart of my Harry, whatever is the fate of his
Lou 18 A.
LET-
[ 173 3
LETTER XXXIV.
\
Lord Mordaunt to Mifs Wyndham.
Berkley Square.
W
H A T a cruel, what a heart-breaking
letter was yours!-----Shajl I then forget you ?
fhall I ceafe to love my Louifa ? heavens! what a quehion ? fhall exiftence ceafe to be enamoured of happinefs ? Every fpecies of calamity, of lofs, ficknefs, pain, torture and deaths the foul intrenched in her own fortitude can think of without emotion, but the lofs of you, my Louifa ! ed.
----it is not to be fathom-
I grow dizzy, I Sicken, I fhrink from
the precipice, the thought leaves creation empty.
Yon
[
‘ ./ 4
I
.	/—»
You tell me you have not a doubt of my afFeflion, and yet imagine it poffibte to be eradicated; you defire me to fly you, to forget you; you conclude that time, accident, and above all, the authority of a parent, will have power to chafe you from my bread,—never, never, my Louifa! my pafilon for you fills my whole foul, and leaves no room for any future attachment to any thing, fave yourfelf, upon earth ; age cannot obliterate, time cannot impair it; it is twined into, it is become one with my exiftence, and when I ceafe to love my Louifa, that moment I ceafe to be.
’Tis true, a father’s command is facred, and his perfon inexpreffibly dear to my heart; but were he to propofe an alienation of my affedlions from my beloved, and beftow upon me in return all that the world contains and efteems, of power to confer happinefs, and to fill up the expansion of every wifh that the human heart can form, they would in vain court my acceptance, when rivaled by an in-terefl; in the bofom of my Louifa. Let him put my obedience to the trial ; I am ready to facrifice wealth, honour, dignities, titles, even life itfelf with pleafure, if his Safety required
hi
t 175 ]
s
it; any thing, all things but my Loulfa, without whom exiftence would be infupportable.
4
The heart is free. It is voluntary, no force can compel it, no intereft can bribe it, it tramples upon treafure, it looks down upon ftation ; in nature, in humanity, in friendfhip, and in love, the heart is the fountain of Sentimental delights, the only Source of all enjoyments that are worthy of man ; were I pofleflor of the univerfe, were I even poflelTed of my Louifa, did I deem myfelf at the fame time an alien to her heart, the world and Loulfa would be no more to her Harry, than earth is to the cameleon who lives upon air; and all the wealth or honours that this world can bellow are of no fignification or importance to me, but as a means to attach the perfon of
my blelfing to the facred and diviner pofleillon. of her heart.
I do not yet defpair of accomplifhlng that blifsful union; a letter from my filler, filled with the praifes of my Louifa, joined to the intercefllon of his amiable countefs, has Softened my father’s heart in our favour ; his re-
wiflaes
what
[ 176 ]
what purpofe I aim Ignorant, but I hope every thing. He fays he would invite you hither, but that he fuppofes yoa are too proud to ac-cept of his invitation ; furely when he is thus interefted by the bare defcription of your excellence, at your appearance every obje6Iion imiil: vanilh. My Louifa,—might I dare to propofe,—you underftand me,—conSider, my angel, that the certain happinefs or mifery of my life depends on the refult of my father’s determination ; my mother herfelf, if you con-fent, will go down and attend you hither; I know you are capable of facrificing a great deal, where the happinefs of the perfon that you love is at flake; I feel alfo mofl fenfibly the many reafons which pundlilio, delicacy, and a confcioufnefs of worth would urge againft your compliance with a requefl which I hardly dare to make; but O, if indeed you love your Harry, let the tranfporting hope that the event may fucceed to our wifh, obliterate every other confideration.
On my knees I entreat you will ufe your
utmofl interefl with my honoured friend and
inflru6tor, to obtain if poflible his confent;
but there is the doubt, there is the dread,
left
[ i?7 I
left a fenfe of honour, and a pride that is but too well juftlfied fliould influence him toreje6t the only means that opens a profpe£t of hapr pinefs to your Harry. I Ihall wait your an-fwer with the moft anxious fufpenfe, I will not tell youj'becaufe it is impoflible to exprefs the efteem, the love, the warmth of paflion that glows in the heart of your
H. Mordaunt.
/
Is
L E T-
[ oS ]
1. E T T E R XXXV
Vifs Wyndham to Mifs Rochdalf.,
Dove-brook.
w
HAT a hand, trembling, and fcarcely able to hold the pen ! I Sit down to inform my Henrietta of rny prefent embarralTing Situation.
This morning I received a letter from Lord Mordaunt, expreflive of the warmefl efleem and the moft pafhonate regard ; he feems to think Lord Granville will yet eonfent to our. union ; he relents, he wilhes to fee me, but thinks me too proud to accept of his invitation, though his countefs would herfelf be the bearer of it, and accompany my father and myfelf to London. My Harry urges my com-pliance in the mofl delicate manner you can imagine; furely there is noilSmg which virtue would permit, that I would not facrifice wdth tranfport to his happinefs, and Lord Granville
\
K
\ -r
[ 179 I
vllle mud think me proud indeed, fhould I re-je£t a Solicitation that does me the highell ho4
noiir.
But I know not what to think of my father’^s conduct on this occaSion, nor can I account for his agitation and extraordinary expreffions.
I encloSe to you copies of Lord Mordaunt’s letters, which I put together this morning into my father’s hands. As he penifed the firfl: I observed his countenance change, and that he aSTumed a look of more haughtineSs than ever I had Seen him put on; he returned me the letters, frowned, bit his lip,, and traverSed the room, as if violently agitated with Some ftxange emotioni; at laSl he approached me with a hafty ftep, and Seizing my hand, They may be miftaken, my LouiSa, cried he, they may yet find you a mate for a princely con-fort, and that your alliance would ennoble in-
ftead of debafing them.” What could he
1
mean,. Henrietta ?—I was So- terrified,. So ft ruck with his air and manner, but above all with his-exprefllons, that I had not power to reply, but presented him with my Harry’slaft letter, which, he had not yet read.
He
I i8o ]
He appeared pleafed with the warmth of affection which every line of it conveyed, but when he came to that part which contains Lord Granville’s invitation, he ftarted. Seemed to ponder a while, as on Some important event, and Suddenly retired.
I have not Seen him Since, he has been upwards of an hour alone in his ftudy, and I immediately took up the pen to give you an account of his very myfterious conduct, a thousand ideas rufh upon my mind, I am perplexed, I am aftonifhed, I know not what to think.
But Bill remain my Henrietta’s moft alFec-
iionate
h. WyNDHAM.

L E T-
[ i8i ]
LETTER XXXVI.
The Countefs of Jersey to Mifs Wal
POLE.
jerfey Grove;
M Y Emily, they are arrived,—the tedious hours of abfence are at length elapfed, and my beloved Lord is reftored to the arras of his happy Eliza,
My aunt too, but how (hall I defcribe her to you ?—in what language (hall I paint the gentle refignation, the meek endurance of grief that is pourtrayed in her angel face ? which is (our fweet Louifa excepted) the loveliefl: I have ever Seen; nay, there is a re-femblance too, and that as ftriking as to fur-prize me; then her form Is harmony itfeff, and her voice tuned to a cadence that is even
affe^-
[ i82 1
afFe6Ungly Sweet; dear amiable Sufferer, my Emily—it Shall be the delightful ftudy of my life, to be the comfort and confolation of hers my attention, my affectionate alTiduity, Shall win her from the recolIeCtion of her griefs^ and Sooth her gentle bofom to peace, if, as I
very much fear, it Should never be fufceptible of happinefs.
I juft fnatch a few moments to inform you of their arrival, while my lord is per'ufing the packet that Mrs. Chalmers defined Should be given to him. I wonder what it can contain ? there was Something very myfterious in that woman, and I own myfelf not only curious but impatient to know the purport of her ma-nuScript.—Farewell for a moment, now. for the contents of this extraordinary packet.
I am tranfported,:—I Scarcely breathe, my head is almoft giddy with this excefs of hap-pineSs.—Gracious God, how juft, how wonderful are thy difpenfations !—our Louifa, She is no other than the daughter, and her father the much deceived, and long lamented
I
huSband of the countefs of Arundel.
Mrs.
[ 1^3 ]
Mrs. Chalmers, (O may her Sufferings and repentance be accepted as an atonement of her crimes,) She was the guilty but unfortunate wretch, who betrayed the beft of mi-f-treffes, the moft amiable of women ! I have already given you her hiftory, as related by the father of my lord, what remains of it from the time flie parted from him is totally uninterefting, Suffice it to fay, that by a Series of misfortunes fhe was again reduced to the Hate of mifery in which the Sweet compaffioa of our Louifa found her.
Thou gracious power, that has So wonderfully conduced thy lovely votary to happinefs,^ prepare her heart to receive, and endue her’ with ftrength to fuflain it. Indeed, my frienct, I know not how to a6t in this perplexing particular,—the Surprize, the joy, the Sudden transition from the depth of miSery to the higheSI transport [ Ihe will never, I fear, be able to Support it, but the diScovery muft be made, let the conSequence be what it wilh and I go to hazard the trial.--
I thank God, it Is over, and ffie ffill llvesj
lives to happineSs, to rapture.
By the gen-
tleft
I 184	3
/
#
tleft degrees I unfolded myfelf to her, and ventured to difclofe to her view the dazzling profpedl: of the blifs that awaited her. As I went on, her pulfe, her very breath was fuf-pended, while her ear drank in with eager tranfport every word that I uttered; at laft Ihe dropped on her knees, and doling her eyes, and raifing her trembling hands, Ihe attempted an ejaculation of thanks, but fainted quite away.
When her fenfts returned, Ihe threw her dear arms round my neck, and clafped me to her bofom, while tears of joy and gratitude deprived her of the power of utterance. She knows not yet how fmall a diftance divides her from the beloved of her heart; I have told her that her hulband and daughter Hill live, and are in this kingdom, but did not dare to venture any farther. It will require the nicell circumfpedlion to manage their interview in fuch a manner, as to prevent its being fatal to them both.
All my cares are now vanilhed. My brother and his Louifa will be happy, as every
obllacle to their union is removed ; but I will
not
[ I8S ]
not inform my father that it Is fo> as I have Some reafon to hope that he will confent to her becoming his daughter, even while he thinks her diverted of every advantage that he formerly deemed of eftimation.
Yours ever and rtnccrely
t.
E. J&RSS-Y,
L E T-
t
C 186 ]
LETTER XXXVII.
Mifs Wyndham to Mifs Rochdale,
Dove-brook.
O
My beloved Henrietta, rejoice with your
----1 have found a mo-
Louifa; my mother then, my friend, and oh!—fuchaone!—but you fhall hear.
Yefterday morning my father received a meflage from Lady Jerfey, informing him that the Earl was returned, and requelled to fee him immediately and alone, as he had Some matters to communicate that concerned him very nearly.
My
C >8? ]

My father inflantly obeyed the fummons, and did not return till evening; he entered with an air of triumph, he flew towards me, and caught me in his arms.. Weep no more, Iny Louifa, he exclaimed, be well, be hap-py; prepare your heart for a difcovery, that will fill, that will opprefs it with delight, prepare it for the reception of a mother, my child, the deareft, the tenderefl: of mothers, that lovely, that beloved wife, whom I have fo long lamented as loft, all gracious Providence has at length reftored her to us, and fhe waits with eager impatience to behold you.
Paint toyourfelf my emotions, I was almoft breathlefs with furprize and joy ; my father fiipported me trembling to the carriage, the horfes flew like lightning, and flopped in a few moments at Jerfey Grove.
He led me into the parlour, his countenance glowing with delight. I felt inyfelf all over agitated, in a manner that I know not how to defcribe, and did not dare to lift up my eyes, till I heard a voice exclaim in maternal rnuSic, Ah 1 it is flhe !—my heart tells
me
[ i8S ]
me it can be no other than my hcI\k ; I fainted in her arms, while they ftrained me to her bofom, but returning fenfe reftorcd me to
the dear delight of beholding her.
Oh, my Henrietta !------but I have not yet
told you all. I may look up without prefump-tion to my Harry. Lord Granville will no longer hefitate at giving his confent, that I lhall be bleffed in the power of imparting happinefs to my beloved. I enclofe you a packet, which contains my mother*s hiftory, and I will unfold to you a Series of mod afto-nlfhing events, by which you will find thaSmy father is no longer Mr. Wyndham, but Henry Earl of Arundel, with a fortune of at leaft 30,0001. per ann. O that my brother was
living to inherit it.-A Sudden thought has
juft now ftruck me; your St. Alnais, your lover, was not he Suppofed to have been killed at the battle of Fontenoy ? and did not he alfo tear himfelf away from the arms of an adoring parent ? of a mother too--------Gracious
powers!—if it Should be fo?—But now I re-colledl, the name which my mother aSTumed was not St. Alnais, but De Rouviere; yet
might
t 189 ]
might he not have altered his name for a thou-
Write
and refolve me.'
Yours ever
Louisa.
LET-
C ipo ]
LETTER XXXVIII.
The fame to the fame.
Dove-brook.
LESS me! my dear Henrietta! what can be the meaning of your Silence ? not a line have I had from you Since you left the country,—happy as I am at prefent, the bare idea of your being involved in any diftrefs, fills my heart with the moll dreadful apprehenfions, but yet I hope they are without foundation.
I (hall be with you Ihortly; the Earl and 'Countefs of Jerfey infill on our accompanying them te London, where they will introduce my father to Lord Granville, not as Earl of Arundel, but plain Mr. Wyndham. There is a circumftance, though in their plot, which diftrelTes me a good deal; my Harry, they fay, mull not be made acquainted with our happi-
nefs»
[ I9I 3
nefs. They will have it that his Surprize and joy will be the greater, if the difcovery is not made till he firft receives Lord Granville’s confent to his union, with plain. Simple Louifa, untitled, undiftinguiflied by any favours of fortune; thefe reafons are very infufficient to me, however I muft acquiefce.
I entreat you will write an immediate an-fwer to this, or I fhall not be here to receive it, asTve fet out for London in a very few days.
Your own
Louisa Wingrove.

LET-
[ >92 ]
LETTER XXXIX.
Mifs Rochdale to Lady Louisa Win-
grove.
O
MY Louifa, my lovely friend, blame not my Silence, impute it not to want of afSec-tion; alas! it is with grief, with agony of heart, that your entreaties at laft conftrain me to write, to dafh your cup of happinefs with the intelligence I mull: impart.
My St. Alnais—ah, my God 1^—he is dying)—the gentleft, the fweeteft, the nobleft, oh! my breaking heart!—and he loved me too,—loved me but too well,—how could I fuppofe that he did not ?—circumftanced as he was, how could he have aded otherwife than he did ?
This
[ 193 ]
This long time I have obferved an increasing languor and dejection on his Spirits, in-deed they always Seemed oppreffed by Some mental malady, but within theSe Sew weeks pall, his health has been vifibly declining; however he appeared to do his utmofl: to conceal it, and accompanied us to town with a chearfulneSs more conftrained than I had ever known it before.
The day after our arrival, my brother called me aSide, Tell me, Henrietta, Said he, what are your thoughts of my friend ? I believe I can guefs at them pretty nearly already, but it is now neceflary that I fnould be allured of your real Sentiments concerning him.—Forgive me, my fjfter, (for he observed by my colouring and confufion, that I was not prepared for the queftion,) I would not wifh to offend your delicacy, but I cannot bear to fee my friend unhappy ; he loves you with, an ardour as generous as it is tender : ^tis true he never made me the confident of his affection, but then is not his reServe in that particular, a convincing proof of his honour, when his look, his air, the involuntary glow of his cheek, and Softened tendernefs of his voice
K
and
[ 194 ]
t
and manner whenever he approaches or ad-drefles you, are undoubted indications of a paflion, which I fee he is determined to die rather than reveal, left its motive fhould be miftaken for a fordid bafenefs, of which he is incapable, or that he fhould hazard the re-pulfe which he deems due to his temerity.
Permit me then to make him a propofal, which I doubt not he will accept with the greateft tranfport. I will tell him that I have this long time obferved what he took fuch pains to conceal, and that I will take it upon myfelf to reconcile my father to your union, and leave it to him to Solicit your confent.
But, my deareft Edward, cried I, is it not poflible that you may be miftaken refpedling his regard for me, and then how mortifying to be rejedled ?—O fear not for that, my fifter, replied he, I am as confident of the ftrength of his affedion for you, as I am of my own exiftence. Here he haftily left me, though I called after him repeatedly to return.
I retired to my chamber in a frame of mind which it is impoflible to defcribe, and waited
the
I 195 1
the event w^ith the moft anxious impatience i evening came, but no news from Edward.
My father and mother were from home, and
%
upon the fummons to tea, I met him alone in the parlour, his countenance was clouded with chagrin, and I almofl: feared to alk him what was become of his friend. I ^underfland that queftion, my dear Henrietta, replied he ; I was not miilaken, he loves you with the moff paf-fionate fondnefs, yet he rejedls the only means by which he can ever hope to become yours. It was with the mofl: lively gratitude he heard, and with the deepefl: anguifli he Seemed eon-ftrained to refufe his acquiefcence in the pro-pofal I made him, yet palTion blinded me at the time to the lingular noblenefs of his con-du61, and I fearl refentedwith too much harlh-nefs my difappointment; he wept, he prelTed me in his arms, he acknowledged that he loved you from the firfl; moment he beheld you, that his paflion increafed with his knowledge of your difpofition, to an ardency that was by much too great for his peace, that it, had already made him miferable, but Iliould never make him bafe, and that you Ihould at leaf! have no reafon to defpife him for meanly taking advantage of a generoSity (w'hich perhaps
K z	might

C 196 ]
might draw upon me my father’s feverefl indignation) to fteal into an alliance of which he was unworthy.
1 was provoked, difappointed, my pride was hurt, and the firft wifh of my heart was frustrated. I replied with pique, What then ! you chufe to hold me under eternal obligations! and do not think I even merit' the pleafure of being grateful,—you reje£t my Sifter too,^ £he is it feems unworthy your acceptance; tell not me of your paflion, you never loved her, but it is very well, lir,—I do not defire that you Should at all conftrain your inclinations in this refpefl, for be alTured I am too confcious, and too proud of my Harriet’s perfections to force them upon the notice of any man. He Seized my arm, with a look of diftraClion, he would have Spoke, but I tore myfelf from him, and
s
flung haftily out of the room.
I have now confeffed to you, mydeareft After, the faultinefs of my conduCt, and muft have a promife of your forgivenefs, fince my affeQiion for you alone was the caufe of my havingaCt-ed amifs in this affair.
I could

[	197 1
I could anfwer him only vvith my tears, but
t
t
how; was my diftrefs augmented, when the Servant entering told us, he went to inform Monfieur St. Alnais that we waited tea, but
that no body anfvvering, tho’ he tapped repeatedly at the door, he opened it Softly, and Saw him ftretched on the bed, weeping, and
9
Seemingly in the greatefl: alHidion.
My brother ftarted from his chair, and turned as pale as death ; he flew to the chamber of his friend, and found him indeed as he fear-ed, in the utmofl: agony of diftrefs. He threw himSelf beSide him on the bed, and prefling him in his arms, entreated with tears his for-givenefs. In what have you, in what could you have oflFended me, replied the amiable, the generous St. Alnais ; no, alas! it is I my-Self, who am the only objedl of my own resentment; as long as my Edward, and his lovely Sifter were happy, I mourned but in Secret the Severity of my fate; orphaned, out-caft from the world, tortured with the pangs of hopelefs paflion,. one only eonfolation remained to Sweeten the bitter cup of anguifh, a friend, the deareft,, the beft beloved of
friends,,
r ips ]
friends, and he too calls me from him y he thinks me proud, infenfible, ungrateful ; he is grieved, he is offended at me, and that, however involuntary, on my part, however irapoffible to be avoided. I can never pardon my Self that.
Edward did all in his power to calm the agitation of his mind ; he affured him in the tendereft manner, that the fudden difappoint-ment of his firft and favourite wilh was alone the caufe of thofe harih expreffions, the re-colledlion of which now gave him^fo much pain, that he now faw and admired, though he could not but regret the extreme noble-nefs of his condudl ; that he was now become, if poffible, dearer to him than ever, and that he would ceafe to importune him upon a fub-je£l which occafioned him fo much diflrefs, but leave it to friendihip and bis own heart,
Sil
to determine him in what manner he would adl.
They embraced, and my brother feeing him exceflively agitated, left him to repofe, and came to inform me of what had paffed; my
tears
[	199 ]
tears flowed in abundance, they would not he reftrained, though I feared that he might consider them as a reproach, and perhaps be offended with me ; but my foreboding heart anticipated its prefent mifery, and its anguifh would have vent.
My father and mother did not return till late, and I haftened to bed that they might not perceive the deje^ion of my fpirits. Next morning, upon enquiring of lidward for his friend, he told me with an air of the deepeffc affliction, that he was then extremely ill, and in a very high fever; to you I need not fay how this intelligence fhocked me, till my fears were alarmed by the idea of lofing. I was ignorant of the flrength of my affeCtion for him, and that and my tears almoft deprived me of reafon.
I no longer ftudled to conceal the Secret of my heart; I called repeatedly on his name, I entreated permiffion to attend him ; my dear-eft mother ftrove in vain to hide from my father the excefs of my grief. He heard, he was enraged at it ; he entered my chamber
with
I 200 3
with a face and voice of furj, raved, curfed
his own ftupid folly, for being fo long blind

to my romantic paffion, and declared that if
3 did not give up all thoughts of this upftart
N
Soldier of fortune, (as he termed him,) he
would call me alike from his love as his prO'
tedlion.
Never, never, will I ceafe to love thee, my
beloved, I exclaimed with a defperate con-
rage. O my God (and I dropped on my knees)
preferve him, heal him, reftore him to my
aching heart, or join us in death together.
fince without him nothing in life can afford
me the fmallefl confolation ; my father looked
fternly at me, muttered a curfe, and flung out
of the room.
Would to heaven I was like you, my gentle.
my faint-like Louifa, that I could mingle a
little patience, a little refignation with my
griefs,—but yet,—the diftradling caufe.
He flill continues extremely ill, and raves
I am told inceffantly of his mother and me.
They will not let me even fee him j they are
all.
r 201 1
all, all againfl: me, even Edward himfelf denies me this Small comfort; poor Edward, he is wild, frantic with apprehenSion at the danger of his beloved friend; I do not think he would Survive his death, and what then, oh I what,would be the fate of your
H. Rochdale.
Ks
LET-
C 202 ]
LETTER XL.
Lord Mordaunt to Charles Ashworth,
Efqj at Bath.
Berkley Square.
Eyond my moft Sanguine, my moft extravagant hopes of happinefs am I blefied, my dear Charles. I wilhed, but Scarcely ventured to hope, that Mr. Wyndham would accept o£ my father’s, invitation. I was therefore Surprized and overjoyed at receiving a letter frorn my Sifter, informing me that her hufbandwas returned, and that my Louifa and her father intended to accompany them both to London. I would have flown to meet and eScort them hither, but my father was Something indiSpofed, and requefted I would wait their arrival.
They came.—I welcomed Mr. Wyndham, my Sifter, and her lord with a joyful, but hafty embrace, and took no notice at all of a
ftrange
[203']
flrange lady who came in their company, hot Seizing the hand of my Louifa, and prefling it to my heart, l ied her trembling to my father’s apartment.
He rofe at her entrance.—MiSs Wyndham,
my deareft father, faid I: he came forward,
?
he took both her hands, and regarded her with a mixture of admiration and refpe<5t, I never faw her look fo exquifitely lovely; a blufh of the fweeteft, the moil: delicate fenfibility, . alternately coloured and deferted her cheek, while her gentle timid eye was modeftly averted from his gaze. Charming girl! at lall he exclaimed with fervour; upon my foul, (he is a charming girl ! do not tremble my fweet one, I would not diftrefs or offend you for the world, and in fpight of that world I mufl: love and admire you. She raifed his hand to her lips; he was affedted, his eye filled. Sweet girl, he again repeated, and preffed her to his bofom. He then led her to a chair, Seated himfelf be-fide her, held her hand in his, and continued gazing in her blufhing face.
*
I left the room for a moment, and returned
Wyndham
rofe.
t .204 J
Tofe, and came forward. The father of my lovely Louifa, my deareft Sir, faid I,—They approached, they ^azed at each other, and both, as if agitated by the fame ;emotion, changed colour, and feemed deprived of the power of utterance; at laft my father exclaimed. What is it you fay?—Wyndham 1
^ __
Wyndham !—fiiould know that face.—It is
•	'	I	.	*
luy Arundel, my Henry,—they rulhed to each Other’s arms. My Sedley, my beloved friend, cried Mr. Wyndham, it is indeed your Arundel, your happy A’rUndel, who embraces you.
4
■ I will not attempt to defcribe their tran-
fports, my own were beyond the power of
;
■Cxpreflion. I fiew to my Louifa, who flood Trerrtblirig with aftonifhment and joy. I caught
.	1
her to my bofom with filent exftafy, and prefled her to my beating heart.
Meanwhile Mr. Wyndham, whom we mufl; now iVile Lord Arundel, went out, and quickly returned with a lady, (the fame who had ef-caped my notice,) and introduced her to my father as his wife: he embraced her as an old, and very dear acquaintance. This was all a
myflery to me. I returned to my Louifa with
aflonilh-
r 205 j
aftonilhmentj and alked her if fhe had Indeed a mother ? fhe replied in the affirmative, but that it was not tfiany days llnce ffie had found her, and that her father and Lady Jerfey had deSired that flie might not mention any thing of it to me, as the difcovery could, not be made without making me acquainted with their rank, and her father determined to keep that concealed till he fhould try if generoSity and affedHon alone would be fufficient to get the better of Lord Granville’s prejudice, and induce him to confent to our happinefs.
When we were all a little compofed. Lord Granville turned to me, and taking my hand and clofing it with that of my Louifa, and railing his eyes to heaven—Thou haft already paired thefe hearts, my God, he exclaimed, I joined their hands while infants, and prayed that they might live to this extatic period ; praifed be thy name, and thy indulgent Providence that has thus happily accomplifhed my wilh; I here join them a fecond time, and entreat thy bleffing upon them. How awful,i how tranfporting this benedifition ! I fliould be all rapture, if my Louifa’s dejefitlon did not damp my joy; ffie has a friend, an amiable
friend
[ 206 ]
friend who is In very great afflI6Uon, and fhe is gone to comfort the poor mourner j I juft fnatch a few moments to write while fhe U abfent.
With my firft leifure I will give you the biftory of her amiable parents, it is indeed a Series of moft interefting events. You will wonder perhaps that Lord Arundel fliould be Surprized at meeting an old and quondam friend in my father, when he knew that a perfon of that title refided in this kingdom; but when they laft parted, my father was only baron of Sedley, and he had no expe<£iation of the Granville title or eftate; he Succeeded however as next heir to both on his return from France, as the only Son of the late earl died of_a fall from his horfe, and his father did not long Survive him.
Adieu,—my angel is returned,—not a Syllable more (hould the wealth of the Indies purchafe from your
H. Mordaunt.
L E .D
[ 207 ]
LETTER XU.
Mils Rochdale to Lady Wilmot
O
My dear, dearefi; Lady Wilmot, Such
• • '
happinefs ! Such an unexpected difcovery ! my St. Alnais,—he has found a mother,—a father, a Sifter,—he recovers, he lives, and lives for his Henrietta. Lord Charles Wingrove, (for fucli is now his title,) the brother of my Lou-ifa, in fortune more than my equal, in rank fo much my fuperior, can have no doubt of my father’s approbation.
I was obliged to conclude my laft in a hurry, to receive my lovely friend and her mother, who arrived in town that day with Lord and Lady Jerfey. I flew to embrace her, and file prefented me to the Countefs of Arundel
her
N
[ 20§ ]
her mother, who faluted me with politenefs and alfe^lion ; Louifa told me fhe had hinted to her mother her fufpicions concerning St. Al-nais, and Ihe requefted, if poffible, that fhe might be permitted to fee him. I replied that he was then delirious and very ill, but that if fhe and the countefs would walk up flairs, I would try if it would be allowed us to comply with her defire. She eagerly affented, and followed with Louifa to his anti-chamber. I opened the door Softly, beckoned my brother to come out, and informed him of my errand. He bowed refpeQ;fuily to the countefs, Sighed deeply, and taking her hand, led her into the chamber.

Louifa and I flole after., St. Alnais was afleep, his face was half averted, and Lady Arundel ga?,ed in Silence on the bed, as if afraid to approach; at laft he uttered Some incoherent Sentences, Seemed difturbed by an uneaSy dream, and called repeatedly on his mother and me.
She ftarted at the Sound of his voice, and
flepping up with quickneSs, and bending over
him, fhe Suddenly clapped her hands together,
and
[ ao9 ]
and exclaimed, 0> my Son, my Son !—have I then found you, but to lofe you, my child; flie faid no more, her voice faltered, her limbs trembled, and (he would have fallen to the ground, had we not Supported, and placed her in a chair.
St. Alnais waked at the noife ; he turned and gaxed at her for a moment, and Springing up in the bed, he feebly articulated, Mymother ph I—and fainted away.
I know nothing of what followed, I was infenlible to every thing about me ; on opening my eyes, I found myfelf on my own bed, my mother, Edward, and Louifa befide me. I was alarmed, I Screamed out. Ah !. he is dead ! he is dead !—why elfe tbofe tears ? Not So, my deareft Henrietta, faid my bro^ ther, he is now fully apprized of his happineSs,' and I trull that the event will be Salutary; you will now be Suffered to attend him, and admi-nifter the only medicine he at' prefent Bands in need of, to fee, to hear you ; what was formerly the Source of his difquiet, whll now be of the greatefl efficacy in , contributing to his
cure.
Thui
t 210 I
*
Thus you find me, my dear Lady Wilmot, the happieft, at leafl: one of the happieft of ray fex. My Charles has already feen his father, and lovely filler, the interview was exceedingly affecting ; the Earl preffed me tenderly in his arms, called me generous girl, his daughter, his other Louifa. My poor Edward IS almofl: wild with joy. Lord and Lady Jerfey, and Lord Granville too have been here, what a numerous, what a happy family lhall we be !
" My Charles is now able to rife, and drefs ; he will not fulFer me a moment from his fide. I fit by him, and read, and work, and chat by turns j he lillens to me delighted, he holds my hand in his, he prefles it alternately to his lips and his bofom. I Sometimes fteal a look, and find him gazing on my face, with the tear of tendernefs, and tranfport trembles in his eye.
Lady Jerfey tells me Ihe has already informed you of every thing refpe£ting the Earl and Countefs of Arundel. How interefting, how aftonilhing their hillory ? hov/ intricate the mazy windings through which they have been
conducted
t 2II 3
I	•
conduQied to happinefs? Mylterious Providence ! never let the virtuous mind defpair of thy protedlion.
Farewell, my beloved friend. Shall I not fee you foon ? will you not honour a certain event with your prefence ? nothing would then be wanting to the enjoyment of
Your
H. Ro C HD ALE.
FINIS
\
c-
■fUF.^riiA ..	>- •
C-

iO:;
k
■d’*
■ '.
l
/

1 * s
A y
V>
C' >^1
^ I : i-i
i-
i
g-
't
%

•./
i
t
A./V*
V
■vU*-' ■


^ I-


>.v	:
!•'• •• ..•


► -N
vl> -	•
h>AV = - r

f.c;>.*	■■
*r ■-;.;	• • -
. -*


K*-	. •
I. ,	.

,*


4‘
-
s*
I

Ll;


S}J
"fee OS'.


S.Lte

• I
/■ ■
/
/..
«»
1^
/
N
>"'.D	r^'>	' ‘- -'*
K A« »#,'.. .^-..A	;. ■	•
v_


' ■ C “N.	' >
reNc::A-:- ‘
V -
\*
'>.*-- iT-V“<*
'“. 'V	>.^Icg
■ - - V ^^aTAIjj^P
I
«
'•p.
N;‘ r--rN
r5;>-
:	.r - ' ■-■ • V -• ■/. -	'^-’■-	'.'.,!.	^^is.■^
•/.^c .--!-■ cT	*.'aS-",--
..■:i^A^''	^r.-	'■•''.•■ S-.^V-
'■- '," -r ■ ■ .^- ■ ,.-x	.
- • •. . . - • • • ' •• t«;,.

^ ^	■ *. '	•"* • V !%•
,.	*p # ^	‘	•
A-;; ; ;-. r-:>4'
' .5?-^
♦ I
■-V >■
>.A r‘
/fi'3 /'/ ■i'/Aax/f^MAi
s
■■
C3
'-j-s3



V.'	>

i L
■ ’ '-■ .' V
•■!« r •:•)

A
Scc^'v^Vn'* - ■ .w- -,
■' ^	'^ • * Ti^ '	^ ' I	^ 'z.'S..-V
' A


*
^rtV?S
AVL^dPf : .. -• - , .; ■>.' • ;
9 .	*
V.

-«' L ^
y
r*' ■ 'M • fw



V i
t
V--VN.A.3.V
^vjt-.AV-A
\
S »C
As
-A

r

'IP-
'S
L* - ■ r'*.	-
’V'


..--	-: --r -r-^5Sirw^£
:\3.^-Vr-	^
- :^	%,-1^ iSi^ if->•;*	.' '• Av ,	'-v _7
'• •'	■‘•-'NAT-- ■	’-“C
■	'-V	VC .fV'\	ri 'F‘' A .
• r.'V-’.'^T v*7-hr -. '* '
;;Ct T.".r:^, ^'V ^:c

v.'/*


t
t
V.
^ .
*V'	.

' Iw 3


-V
.'V'-
• ■ ■	"V. M > rArFtyi
'**	■■ / •	*^	.■> • ,' ^ ^	*. “Ti	•
■- ■ ■■ Ol's
- . . ..'; '.i	■ 4’
■ ■>
t V
mV



‘ ^- Y
I ' V' ^ irN' '■ -’

■ ■
- .v,7 TV.'.-,*. *'^r^'^^C> ..,.


"■
• ^ - '
sV ■< iLi;' - i

1	2	3	4	5	6	7	™8™	9	10	11 (A)	12	13	14	15
39.12	65.43	49.87	44.26	55.56	70.82	63.51	39.92	52.24	97.06	92.02	87.34	82.14	72.06	62.15
13.24	18.11	-4.34	-13.80	9.82	-33.43	34.26	11.81	48.55	-0.40	-0.60	-0.75	-1.06	-1.19	-1.07
15.07	18.72	-22.29	22.85	-24.49	-0.35	59.60	-46.07	18.51	1.13	0.23	0.21	0.43	0.28	0.19
D50 llluminant, 2 degree observer
Density
0.04
0.09
0.15
0.22
0.36
0.51
U 1	1 1 1
500	200
600	300 U 1 1 ^400 1
700	
	L
800	
8M	5^1

centimeters
I I te I I I I I I i I |2i I I I I I I I I31 I I I I I I I |4 I I I I I I I I |5 I I I I I I I I |6i I I I N I I I71 I I I I I I I Is I II I I I I I |9 I I I I I I I I I -/o
16 (M)
49.25
-0.16
0.01
0.75
IZ.
38.62
-0.18
-0.04
0.98
♦ j
i.
18(B)
28.86
0.54
0.60
1.24
1 (' [ :	$	\
19	20	21
16.19	8.29	3.44
-0.05	-0.81	-0.23
0.73	0.19	0.49
Id. 31.41 20.98 -19.43
1.67
2.04
2.42
Id. 72.46 ■24.45 55.93

24
72.95
16.83
68.80
Id. 29.37 13.06 -49.49
Id. 54.91 -38.91 30.77
27
43.96
52.00
30.01
82.74
3.45
81.29
Id. 52.79 50.88 -12.72
50.87
-27.17
-29.46
SN: OL0007
L* ^
a* ^
K*
Colors by Munsell Color Services Lab ^

