rare book collectiom
LIBRARY
GNlVERSITYor
PENMSYLVANIA

»/
. \i ' ,1
V
V
(
\ .

/r
\ I
\
. \
I
f
/

s
V
\
/
\ ■
\
} •
; }
I
• s
.i ;
'	* I
/
r /
7
/

. {
i)
/
/
/ .
I .
V
r '

* i ^ '
;
1
'. * *
/
I


*■ • V

V. «• *' V ^ >i‘
Sf't rii Y'F'
'	;**..s' i; i .?7
’•N '. y'i.	y '
fri '1/


Si^

T H ;e
V j4i'
' I,

'V '•
Delicate
5^
.'.V
A
> \
i «
NOV EL.
# «
\-;:
IN LETTER S.
IN, TWO V O , L U M E S.
i? 'it	•
I; s	>
By F R A N C E S.
VOL. I.
L’amour ne pent jamais fubSister, fans peine,
dans une ame delicate, mais fes peine rnelnes>
font, quelquefois, la fource de fes plus' doux plaifirs.
/	Recueil Anonyme.
DUBLIN:
Printed for T. WALKER, in Dame-street
MDCCLXXV.
u. of Pj Library
TH E following work is fubmitted to the pe~ rufal of the public, with infinite timidity, and apprehenSion, as it is a fpecies of writing, which I had never attempted before, from a con-fcioufnefsof my deficiency, in the principal article of fuch compofitions, namely, invention.
The generality of Novel-readers may, therefore, probably, be difappointed in not meeting with any extraordinary adventure, or uncommon Situation, in the following pages ; while perfons of a more natural taste, will, I flatter mySelf, be rather pleafed at finding the stories and i” 'ents, here related, fuch as might, for I arrirm they did, and most of them to my own knowledge, certainly happen, in the various contingencies of real life.
But though I havener attempted to feign any fable, I acknowledge that 1 have endeavoured to conceal feme truth, by changing feenes, and altering' circumstances, in order to avoid loo marked an application, of the feveral stories and ehara<5lers, to the real perfons, f om whom I have taken my drama. We have no right over other perfons fecrets, come they to our knowledge through whatfoever medium of intelligence, they may.—Accident confers none, and confidence forbids it.
As there is no fictitious memoir here related, neither is there any factitious moral difplayed, to the incredulous reader, amongst all the vari-
A 3	ous
PREFACE.
yi
PREFACE.
cus Sentiments of this recital. I write not of puppets, but of men. 1 have endeavoured to deicribe the feelings, nay the foibles, of the human heart, fuch as we are naturally confcious of, in ourfelves ; but medidle not with the wires of the foicksf w'hich only render us machines, by
perform a part, of which we have
no fenfation.
I KNOW not w'hether novel, like the epopee, has any rules peculiar to itfelf—If it has, I may have innocently erred against them all, and drawn upon myfelf the envenom.ed rage of that tremendous body, the minor critics.'—But if I have Spread a table for them, they stall be welcome to the treat, and let them feed upon it, heartily.
•—SenSibility is, in my mind, as neceffary, as taste, to intitle us to judge of a work, like this ; and a cold criticism, formed upon rules for writ-mg, can, therefore, be of no manner of ufe but to enable the stupid to fpeah, with a Seeming intelligence, of what they neither feel nor understand.
L’abbe Troublet, in his essays, on literature and morals, fays, “ Si unou’vr age fans defaut Hoit
pojjible, il ne le feroit qid a un homme mediocre.'* And in another place, “ 11 dy a rien de plus dif-ferent, qu'n otivrage fans dejaut, id. un ouvrage parfait."
I SHALL only add, that I Sincerely wist the Subsequent pages had fewer faults to exerciSe the good, or ill nature, of my Several readers ; but I must, now, throw myfelf, and my book with all its imperfedUons on its head, upon the indulgence of the public, from whom I have received many favours, and to whom I am a truly grateful, and
Most obedient Servant,
FRANCES
THE
DELICATE DISTRESS
LETTER i:
WpODVILLE, to
Tell me, my dear philofophic, wife lister,
why thoie gloomy mortals, stiled iTkora-lists, take fo much pains to put us out of humour with our prefent state of existence, by declaring that happinefs is not the lot of man, &rc. See. Do they think thefe dogmas enhance the value of felicity, as unexpe&ed blessings are mostly prized ? or is it that themfelves, Toured by mortifications and difappointments, which their vanity or caprice have occafioned, they are unwilling to acknowledge that degree of perfection, in any state, of being, which they do not themfelves enjoy ? but why do I argue, where I can at once confute ? by declaring your Emily blessed to the utmost extent of her most rc-mantic wifhes ; and feeling, if possible, an addition to her felicity, by knowing that you share it.
A 4	Our
8 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
Our journey was delightful; .even the fun, which had not appeared for fome days,, stone forth on us, in its full lustre : creation fmiled; the gladnefs of my heart gilded every objedl ;
I thought the birds fung .hymeneals, and I was forry when even Mifs Weston’s fina voice interrupted their still fweeter notes. My lord was— himfelf. I cannot fay more, to exprefs all that is tender, elegant, and polite.
Lad Y Harriet, who, you know, is of the gentle kind, looked assent to our happinefs; yet frequent Sighs >efcaped her. Why stould ste ssgh ? I have heard people fay they do fo from habit, without fenSibility, or fenfation. Time and ufe may possibly work fuch an effedl, but this habit must certainly have its rife, either from Sicknefs, or forrpw. Perhaps lady Harriet may be in love. If unhappily fo, how truly to be pitied !
It is impostble I stould yet be able to give you any idea of this, ssne old feat, nor do I think I shall ever attempt it. I had much rather you stould fee, than read its beauties. I hate ssou-risting defcriptions.. Modern writers over-drefs nature, asill judging women do themfelves. They give her parterres for patches, hanging woods for lappets, and embroider her beautiful green gown, with all the colours of the rainbow. I flatter myfelf that your taste (for it is elegant) will approve whatever my lord has planned ; and I stall hot inSist much on your admiring the works of his ancestors. The clofet, in which I am now writing is charmingly Situated. It commands— but after what I have just faid,. let me command my pen.
My lord, ever kind and attentive to me, wrote to his Sister, Lady Lawfon, who lives eight miles off, to defer her visst, till this day, as it was probable I might have been fatigued with my
journey.
I
>
(A 0^
4T-
T O

HIS GRArE THE
DUKE OF BEDFORD.
S I R,
N
N-/ V

F a private Suffrage could add fame to a public character, I should be the foremost to exprefs my opinion of your Grace’s merits ;
“ they who Speak thy praife Secure “ their own.” But as a compliment is always intended, in an addrefs of this nature, I shall affume the foie honour of it to myfelf, by declaring
A a
to
f

[
IV
]
to the world, that I am one of the
many, who have reafon to fubfcribe myfelf,
With refpect and gratitude,
Your Grace’s,
very much obliged, and
most obedient Servant,
Frances.
* <
-j;
-e


V-' r-

\ «
y
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 9
journey. He fpeaks with Such extreme tender-nefs of this lady, that I begin to love her, already, by anticipation.
But hark, her carriage roils into the courtyard, and my heart steps forth to meet her ; but returns again to asturemy dear Fanny, that l am
her truly affedlionate Sister,
E. WOODVILLE.
w -ar tjr 'ottv

LETTER If.
TtrtK- ttr

Lady Straffon, to Lady WooDViLLE.
"|\ /TAY my dearest Emily ever continue an JlVA exception to thofe opinions, v/hich not-withllanding her prefent felicity, have too furely their foundation in this world’s experience. Tlie bitter ingredients of life, are, however, more fpa-ringly fcattered in the potions of Some, than others; and I believe there may be many who have pasted through life, without feeling one natural misfortune.—But then, thefe favourites of heaven, unworthy of its bounty, are apt to create afflidfions for themfelves, and mourn over ideal for want of real distrefs.
This is a failing lam not at all apprehenstve of your falling' into, at least for fome years to come ; but as I have ever adled as a mother to my dearest Emily, or at least, endeavoured, as far as it was poITible for me, to fupply that lofs to her infant years, let me now, with the fame maternal tendernefs, warn her against the contrary extreme, that of being too much elated with
her prefent joys, lest while she clafps she kills them.”
A j	And
lo THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
And now, my Emily, a truce with moralizing, which I confefs, would have been improper at this sera, but that you brought it on yourfelf; and I only appear in the charadter of the stave, who attended the triumphs of the Roman conquerors, merely to inform them they were mortal. Gracious heaven ! that fuch an information stiould be necessary, to any of thy frail creatures ! But I find myfelf relapstng, and will learn from you to command my pen.
Poor lady Harriet! I am forry she should have caufe to Sigh; for I agree with you, that stghing may be incidental^ but not accidental. I hope the gay fcene of receiving and returning viSits, &c. in which she will be engaged with you, may help to dissipate the cloud of her chagrin. I rejoice in the acquisition of your new lister; she must be amiable if lord Woodville loves her. What a compliment to my Emily! but let it rather make her grateful than vain.
I FEAR I shall not have an opportunity of approving my taste, by admiring lord Woodville’s improvements, for fome time. Sir John, who is not a little jealous of your not having mentioned him, purpofes going, for a couple of months, to Paris. Do not grow jealous, in your turn. I do not intend to accompany him, to that, gay fcene, which would have fewer charms for me, than the rational, and rural pleafures, of Woodfort. But I deSign to inoculate my little Edward and Emily, during his abfence. I shall not acquaint him with my intention, till it is over, I know he wishes it done ; and I would fpare him the anxiety of a fond father, upon fuch an occaston. I know too he will be vastly obliged to me, for laying hold of this opportunity ; for it is an invariable maxim, that all men hate trouble of every kind, and ehoofe to be out of the
way.
THE DELICATE DISTRESS, it
way, when there is any difagreeable operation to be performed.
My Sister Straffon, who you know is to be married to Sir James Miller, has determined to take her chance with my children. She fays she could not anfwer it to her confcience, to marry Sir James, who feems to be enamoured of her face, till she has put her features beyond the common danger of an alteration. I went with her last night, to Ranelagh—as she faid, to take leave of it: I hope but for a short time.
The attention of the whole assembly, was taken up with a beautiful foreigner, the marchi-onefs de St. Aumont. I think I never beheld fo much vivacity and fweetnefs joined, before, in the fame countenance. I have just looked up at your pidture, and thought it tacitly reproached me, for having fo foon forgot my Emily’s face. I’ll look again. Her eyes have more vivacity, I must confefs, but yours a greater fweetnefs. tiers are black, yours blue. The advantage which each of you have, over the other, in this particular, may be more owing to colour, than,ex-preffion.
The marchionefs has been a widow, about a year, and does not appear to be above twenty. I am certain that if I were a man, I should be in love with her. I am glad she has left Paris, before my Straffon goes thither—you may read Strephm if you pleafe. I shall take care to keep him out of danger, while he stays in London; or perhaps, she might keep him ssghing at home, and fo mar both his fcheme and mine. The very best of thefe men, my dear Emily, have hearts nearly refembling tinder, though they would have us think they are made of a sterner stuff—a fparkling eye fets them all in a blaze.
Lady
i-
12 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
Lady Sandford, who doats upon foreigners, has already engrossed her ; perhaps, ihe may engage her to go with her into the country. If fo, you will, probably, meet her, at York races ; and if that ssiould happen, it will be abfoiutely necessary for lord V/oodville to arm himfelf, cap-a-pie, with constancy, and for you allb, to rivet the joints of that armour,, with unassedted complacency, chearfulnefs and love.
Lucy and Sir James Miller are in the drawing-room. I fancy fhe is tired of a tete-a-tete,, as the fondest lovers fometimes are; for (he has just fent your little name-fake, to request my company. I must, therefore, quit you, to attend her fummons. I fhall expedt a particular account of all occurrences, at Woodfort, as th^ most minute matter,, that relates to you, muss ever be of confequence to your affedlionate
Frances Straffon.
P. S. As I have yet time enough to fend my letter, I fhall acquaint you with the occaSion of my being called from it. Lucy had just informed Sir James that fhe intended to be inoculated. He oppofecl it, with the utmost vehe-' mence, and told many stories, upon that fubjedl, to intimidate her. In vain ; fhe continued firm to her purpofe.
He then entreated that they might be married’ before the operation, and he would give his con-fent to her undergoing It, in ten days after. This she abfoiutely refufed ; and, I think, with good reafon. The altercation grew warm, on botli Sides; I was chofen umpire ; and gave my opinion, in favour of Lucy’s arguments. Sir James faid I was a partial judge, and quitted us, fbon after, with fome little warmth.
I WAS
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 13
I WAS forry to perceive a starling tear, in Lucy’s lovely eye,, and rallied her, on beings low-fpirited. She confessed she felt a kind of foreboding, that the union between Sir Jismes and her, would never be accomplished and yet faid, she had not the least apprehenSion that her death would prevent it. I told her that I fore-faw nothing- elfe that could, as her beauty was even lefs in danger from this experiment than her life.
She replied, that they were both of them but transtent blessings, and she had, happily, brought her mind to fuch a state of restgnation, as to be fully prepared for the lofs of either^ But she owned that she had not yet accustomed herfelf to the thought of restgning Sir James t however, if she was to lofe his assedlion, she could better fustain that astlidlion, before marrL ■age, than after.
Here her eyes streamed again, and while I was endeavouring to dissipate thefe gloomy va-pours. Sir John luckily came in, to the relief of us both, as it put an end to the fubje6t of inoculation, which I told, you before, he is not to receive the least hint about, for the prefent. Both Lucy and he are asse6tionately yours, and rejoice with me in your happinefs.
Once more, adieu, and good night.
F.-Straffon..
LET-
14 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
LETTER III.
I
Z/^zJy WoODVILLE, to Lady Straffon. My dear Fanny,
I Did not instst upon the permanence of human felicity. I laid only, that there was luch a thing as perfect happinefs, and, I hope, with a truly grateful heart, acknowledged myfelf in pofleflion of that rare treafure. However, your letter has given a little alloy to it, and rendered it lefs pure and unmixed.
I FEEL for you on your children’s account, and for Lucy on her own. She has long determined on inoculation : flie mentioned it to lady Harriet, before I was married, and made her will, the day after she became of age. I admire her fortitude, but fear I should not be able to imitate it.
Yo UR defcription of the marchionefs, is really alarming, and has already made me jealous, not of lord Woodville, but of lady Straffon. If you should ever become acquainted with her, she will certainly rival every body, but Sir John, and the dear little ones. Perhaps Lucy’s heroifm may still preferve her feme place in your heart, but the poor abfent Emily will be totally forgotten, when you already begin to stand in need of her pidture to remind you of her.
My lord, and lady Harriet, both knew her in Paris, and both agree that the charms of her per-fon, are inferior to thofe of her mind ; and that she was still more admired, as un bel efprit, than as une belle dame. Won’t you give me credit for the utmost generoSity, in furnishing you with this account of my rival that is to be ?
I HOPE
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 15
I HOPE she may come to York races, that I may have an opportunity of examining this phoenix, with a critic’s eye; but it shall not be like the modern ones, who are, generally, fo intent on fpying defeds, that they are apt to overlook the most striking beauties. This, however, may fometimes proceed rather from a want of taste, than a Spirit of malevolence, and I am always inclined to pity thofe unhappy people, who never Seem to be pleafed.
Charming lady Lawfon I What an engaging countenance, what a quick fenfibility in her looks, what an irreSistible fmile! I am not under a neceshty of looking at my bracelet, to remind me that this portrait refembles lady Straffon : but lady Lawfon is taller, thinner, and more of the brunette. She is two years younger than my lord, and has been married fix years, to Sir William Lawfon, who Seems to be what they call a jolly, good-humoured man. He hates London, loves fox-hunting, and has, they fay, no exception to a chearful glafs, or a pretty lafs< I fear poor lady Lawfon was thrown away; though Sir William is generally esteemed what they call a good hushand. He behaves outwardly well to his wife, merely becaufe she is fo, and would have treated her chambermaid, in the fame manner, if he had happened to marry her. What a mortifying Situation, to a woman of delicacy I
The meeting between her and my lord,, was truly affedionate, and tender. She had not feen him Since his return from making the grand tour. She thanked him, in the most graceful manner, for increasing her happinefs, by enfuring his own, and she alfo hoped, that of fo amiable a perfon, she was pleafed to add, as lady Woodville. My lord replied, that if any thing could add to his felicity, it must be her approbation of his choice,
which.
i6 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
which he was certain would encreafe with her knowledge of his dear Emily. He then joined our hands, bowed, and withdrew. How kind in him to befpeak her favour for me ! But I fhall endeavour to deferve, what she feems fo ready to bestow.
Lady Harriet’s dove-like eyes glistened with pleafure at her coufin’s politenefs. She faid there was a nearer relation between lady Lawfon and me, than what my lord had given us, for we had kindred fouls.
Here the arrival of a great deal of company, put an end to all converfation. Is it not Surprizing, Sister, that where there are most words, there is generally the least fenfe? And yet, it is always the cafe for I never remember to have met with any thing like rational difcourfe, in a company that exceeded five or fix.
Lord and Lady Withers, their two daughters, the eldest a fine woman, and once intended as a wife for lord Woodville. The point had been fettled between their fathers, but the death of old lord Woodville, happily for me, left the fon at liberty to chufe for himfelf. She appeared to be in fome confufion, when he Saluted her,, and I felt my Self a good deal distreffed on her account.
Women are not fuch wretches-, as men mif-reprefent them. Conquest, I own, is pleafant, but I detest a- triumph. It finks one, methinks, below the vanquished. Her Sister is pretty,-young, and modest. I think the whole family amiable, and agreeable.
Sir Harry Ransford, and his lady.—Whata pair ! He old, gouty, and peevish—she young, handfome, and vulgar. His fon, by a former wife, polite, and fenfible,. with a well-made, genteel perfon. My lord and-he were intimate-
abroad.
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 17
abroad. I wish he would fall in love with our dear lady Harriet. Nay, he certainly will do So. I can’t poshbly fee how lie can well avoid it.
Mr. Watfon, Mr. Young, Mr, Haywood, Kc. What a croud I You would have pitied me, Fanny. Though I have been four months married, I was fo be-brided, and wished joy, that it made me downright fad. Lady Lawfon was very ufeful to me, in assisting to entertain the company. She has, in her manners and ad-drefs, a great deal of that graceful, and courtly eafe, which I always admire in others, without having ever been able to obtain, in myfelf. But all farther endeavours after this perfedlion, are, henceforward, at an end with me, and I hope now to.be able to preferve my mau’vaife hontCf during life ; for after twenty, it is rarely to be overcome, without paying too dearx for the con-ouest.
n
O
In the afternoon,, the younger part of my lord’ tenants appeared in the avenue, neatly dressed, and adorned with all the honours of the fpring, and forming a long dance together. My lord propofed. our going out to fee them ; I found this had been dessgned, as there was a large carpet
Spread on the lawn, and feats already prepared for us.
When we were Seated, they passed by, in couples, chanting a rustic hymn, in praife of Hymen, and strewing stowers before me. At length, they prefented me with a beautiful, and fragrant wreath, which I immediately placed on lord Woodville’s brow, while the villagers retreated Singing, and forming themfelves into a rural dance, infinitely more agreeable to me, than any of the grands balets, at the opera, or
theatres.
i8 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
theatres. We left them at their fport, and returned into the houfe.
Af TER tea, my lord propofed our following the example of his merry peafants. This was readily assented to, by every one, but Sir Harry Ransford, who told us he never lay within ten miles of his own houfe, after the twenty fifth of March ; and infisted upon lady Ransford’s going away with him, that instant, as he Said they should hardly be able to reach home, by his ufual time of going to bed, at nine o’clock, Summer and winter.
We all intreated that he would permit lady Ransford to stay, which he peremptorily refufed, faying, it would be Setting an ill example to the bridegroom, to let women have their way. She Said every thing in her power to prevail#, but when she found it in vain, and that he would force her away, she was provoked, at last to call him methodical monjler. He replied, that it was better to be ow, by his own methody than hers, and hobbled into his coach. She followed, with the face of a fury. What a delightful tete-d-tete must theirs be !
Mr. Ransford staid, and danced with me. I think him the best dancer I ever Saw. Our little ball got the better of all difagreeable referve ; and, at Supper, we appeared like old acquaintance, perfe^ly at eafe, and quite chearful. My lord was in remarkable good Spirits, and even lady Harriet Seemed gay. The Withers’~s,are a charming family ; both (he young ladies plav on the harpfichord, and Sing finely.
We had an agreeable concert the ne:^t day; they staid till late in the evening. Sir William and lady Lawfon went home this morrring. We are to return their vifit to-morroyr.'^ Mr. Ransford is still with us. He is a great lover of mu-
fic;
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 19
Sic ; I fancy there is not much harmony in his father’s houfe, and where the instruments of a matrimonial concert do not found in unifonj the discord is most grating.
I SHALL long, impatiently, for every post, till I hear that all your patients are out of danger. Lucy’s prefages with regard to Sir James, are only the effe6t of low Spirits. I never faw any man, I think, more in love, than he appears to be. I cannot, however bear the thoughts of his confenting to her being inoculated in ten days after their marriage. Selfish wretch! don’t let lAicy fee this paragraph.
I HAVE now shewn my obedience to my dear motherly Sister’s commands, by entering into a minute detail of every thing that has pasted at Woodfort. I am difappointed at not having the pleafure of feeing her here; yeti highly applaud
the difpofition of that time she promifed to bestow on
her affedlionate,
E. WoODVILLE.
P S. Sir John has no reafon to be jealous, while I can, with truth, declare I love but one man in the world, better than him.
LETTER IV.
AFFON, to Ladv Wo
AM much obliged to my dear Emily, for the entertaining detail of her araufements in the country. I am charmed with your account of lady Lawfon, and am not, like my dear Spoiled child, the least inclined to be jealous. I thank you for the flattering likenefs you have drawn of
me
»
20 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
me; may there be a still stronger refemblanee between us, in our love and esteem for lady Woodviile!
I THINK you extremely happy in meeting with Such an amiable friend, in ib agreeable a neighbour. She will, I doubt not, be kind enough to inform you of the Carte du paif, where you are Situated : and what is of infinitely more confequence to your happinefs, fhe may acquaint you with the particularities of her brother’s temper ; for be affured,. all charming as he is, that he has forae, the knowing, and treating of which propserly, may be the Surest basts of your future felicity.
Sir John fet out for Paris, last Monday, and'; in an hour after, Mr. Ranby inoculated Lucy and my dear children. Though I have the firmest reliance on the goodnefs of Providence, and the fullest convidtion of the general fuccefs of this operation, the mother could not stand it. I Vv’as forced to retire to my elofet, I repented my not having acquainted Sir John, with my defign, and thought, that if any misfortune stiould happen to either of the children, even his grief would Seem a constant reproach to me.
In this Situation of mind, I poured forth my foul in fervent prayer, before the throne of mercy. My apprehenSions vanished, the redlitude of my intentions confirmed my refolutions, and I feltmyfelf perfectly calm, and refigned. Amazing efficacy of true devotion I But indeed, my dear Emily, there is no other refource for the afflidled. No other balm to heal the wounded foul. By this, and this alone, we are enabled to triumph over pain, Sicknefs, distrefs, Sorrow, even death itfelf.
Th e children are in a fine way, and have received the infection. Lucy, it is thought, has
not.
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 2r
not. She infifts upon being inoculated again, tomorrow. Sir James Supped with us, on Sunday night; and told us with a grave face, that hd should not fee us again, till this affair was quite over; for if he vifited here, he could go no where dfe. I laughed, and bid him stay away, if he could.
Though I did not think him Serious, he has hitherto kept his word, but Sends a formal card, every day, to inquire of our healths. I fee that his behaviour hurts Lucy, though she affedls not to take notice of it. I hear he Spends all his time with MiSs Nelfon. She is artful, and agreeable. I begin to Sear poor Lucy’s prefage may be verified.
Adieu, my dearest Emily, I shall not write to you again, till I can congratulate you on the perfedl recovery of our invalids. Till then, and ever, I am,
most affeOiionately, yours,
F. S T R A F F O N.
L E T T E R V.
Sir Ja. Thornton, To Lord Wood'vtlle.
I	V '	i. '	.	.
TH E devil’s in it, if the honeymoon is not
over yet, and you near half a year married. This is carrying on the farce too far, and looks as if you wanted to make us infidels believe, that pleafure was to be found in the Sober and virtuous Scheme of matrimony.
I ALLOW your wife to be handfome. I will fuppoSeher lively, and agreeable too; but then, have you not had time enough to be tired of all thefe perfedlions? and whenever that happened,
the
22 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
the more merit a woman has, the greater out diflike.
I SHOULD never forgive a wife that did not Supply me with a reafon for hating, when I grew weary of her. But I fancy I need not be in any manner of pain on that account; for the precious creatures have, generally, a quantum fufficit, of foible and caprice, to anfwer that end ; at least, all thofe I have ever converfed with, appeared to be compounded of nothing elfe, after one month’s intimate acquaintance.
You will, perhaps, tell me, that lady Wobd-ville is a very different kind of woman, from thofe I hint at. It may be fo; and I will admit it. But prithee, Harry, is stie not your wife ? And in that comprehenstve term, are not restraint, care, limitation of pleafures, and Squalling brats, included? But love her, if you will, and as long as you can : but, believe me, the only way to keep fuch a fickly flame alive, is by the fuel of ab-fance.
Therefore, order your horfes dire6Uy, and leave her, where she should ever rernain, fixed to the freehold; while you shine forth, once more, among your old friends, at the Shakef-pear. 1 write this, by order of the Society, from which you will be excluded, if you do not appear, upon this Summons, from
Yours, &c.
J. T.
LET-
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 2j
LETTER VI.
From Lord W o o d v i l l e to Sir James
Thornton. ,
Dear Thornton,
I RECEIVED your lively letter; but wish you had chofen a fitter fubjeft to difplay your wit upon, than the old common-place topic of matrimony. Were I not perfe^ly acquainted with your writing, as well as your humour, I should have thought your letter a counterfeit. You arc no libertine, Thornton, and yet feem to take pleafure in adopting their grofs, and contemptible Sentiments-
Their general abufe of women is truly ridiculous: they pretend to know them, without having ever converfed with any, but that unhappy Species of them, whole minds and manners are a difgracenot only to their fex, but to human nature itfelfo Profligates first betray to infamy all the women they can deceive; and then, by a double injustice, judge of the fex, from the examples they have made.
But come, my young friend, and convince yourfelf, that happinefs is to be found in a virtuous connefikion with an amiable, and agreeable woman. Order your horfes, diredly, I fay; and leave your grofs errors where they should ever remain, in Covent Garden.
I NEVER was a member of any Society at the Shakefpear, though I have Spent Some evenings there, both plealantly and innocently. I love chearfulnefs, wit, and humour, wherever to be met with; and when Sir James Thornton shall be added to our Society at Woodfort, I shall not
-liave occaSion to go in purfuit of any of them,
clfe-
24 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
elsewhere. As a farther inducement, we shall go to York races. I know you have horfes to run there. Hasten then, to Your’s fincerely,
WOODVILLE.
L E T T E R VII.
Seymour, to Lord Woodville.
A-ly Dear Lord,
I ARRIVED in London, the day after you left it : how unfortunate to have miffed the friend of ixiy heart! to whom I have a thoufand things to communicate, that will not bear the cold, stow forms, of narrative letter writing.
But one fad truth I must pour into your bo-fom, from mine, that almost bursts while I repeat it. The lovely, the angelic Charlotte Beaumont, has sted from thefe fond arms, and taken refuge in a convent! I beheld her renounce the pomps, and vanities, of that world, which she was born to adorn. None but her kindred angels ever appeared fo beautiful as she, when led like a blooming facrifice to the altar.
As she advanced up the iste, she caught my eyes', she stopt, and Sigh’d; but quickly recollefting herfelf, turned heAs to heaven—then with a ray of that ineffable tendernefs, with which we may fuppofe angelic beings look on mortal woes, she
turned them full on me----but ah! too Soon re-
called them, and paffed along, with all the dignity of confeious virtue!
How I got out of the convent, I know not: my fenfes vanished with her—I was fifteen days delirious; and but for the officious kindnefs of Wilfon, should not now feel thofe poignant agonies.
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 2=5

nies, that rend my heart. O Woodville, to lo Such a woman, by my own folly ! that fatal duel, in what mifery has it involved me! When I am calm enough, if that should ever be, I will copy her hjl letter, and fend it to you ; I would not part with the original for worlds, though it has destroyed my peace in this.
Will you forgive your wretched friend for breaking in one moment on your prefent felicity? I hear' you are completely bleffed——This is the only ray of joy, that ever can, or shall pervade the gloom, in which my fate is involved. Happy Woodville! to triumph over an unhappy paf-Sion, and now to feel the transports of fuccefsful love!
But let me intreat you-, as you value your future peace not to fee the marchionefs.Your wounds are not long healed, and may all bleed again. She is a true Calypfo I therefore, my friend, shun her enfnaring wiles I and remember you are accountable for the happinefs of an amiable, and innocent young woman what a breach of honour, even to hazard it!
This Single conssderation will, I am certain, be a more powerful preservative to your generous heart, than all the philofophic reafonings in the world ; which too well I know, were never yet proof against strong passion.
Ad lEU, my friend: that you may continue to
deferve and poffefs, every happinefs this world
can give, is now the warmest wish of your un-happy
Seymour.
B
LET
r
I
26 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
LETTER VIII.
WooDviL-LE, to Lorrf Seymour.
My dear, unhappy Friend,
I A M truly Sorry that I had left London be
fore your arrival.- ■ -Had
the least hint of
you given me
your intentions to return, I should certainly have staid to meet you : and I would, at this moment, fly to pour the balm of friendship into your wounded bofom, but that Sir James Thornton, whom I have invited to Spend Some time with me at Woodfort, and go with me to York races, came here last night.
He is quite a stranger to lady Woodville, and all this family, and would certainly conSider it as' the highest breach of hofpitality, if I were to leave him in the hands of a parcel of ’virtuous women, which are a race of beings, that he is totally unacquainted with. He is young, has a very large fortune, and many amiable qualities; but his education has been So shamefully negledled, that he is in imminent danger of becoming a prey t© sharpers and prostitutes.
Even you must have Smiled, to have Seen this young man, who is made up of frolic, and vivacity, look as frighted and abashed, before lady Woodville, who is gentlenefs itfelf, as a young country lady, who has never been out of the family manflon, when first prefented at St. James’s. But I hope this timid aukwardnefs will w'ear off in a few days: and as I know nothing that can refine the fentiments, or polish the manners fo much, as the convcrfation’of elegant women, Ij
wish to keep Sir James, for Some time, amongft
us.
My
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 27
I
My couSin, lady Harriet Hanbury, is here ; and a very lively girl, Mifs Weston, a near relation of my Emily! Your old friend Ransford, Spends much of his time with us alfo. What would I not give to tempt you hither ! You shall retire when you pleafe; read, walk, and mufe alone; and when you are difpoSed, my Emily shall play to you, fome of the Sweetest, Softest airs, the very food of lov®, accompanied with the Sweetest, Softest voice, you ever heard. Harriet, who is of the melancholy cast, and, I fear, unhappily in love, shall Sigh, in concert with you ; and Thornton, and Mifs Weston, shall Sometimes make you Smile.
I CONFESS to you, my dear Seymour, that ! was both shocked and Sorry, when I heard that the marchioneSs was in England. Lady Wood-ville was the first perSon who informed me of it: but, utterly ignorant of there having ever been any connexion between us, she did not perceive my emotion at her name.
Cruel woman I does she wish again to disturb the peace of a heart, which she had well nigh broken! but I defy her power.—In lady Wcod-ville I have found all that is amiable in the most lovely Sex; Senfible, beautiful, gentle, kind, and unaffedtedly good.
True, she is not mistreSs of thofe lively Sallies of wit, thatdaxzle the understanding, and captivate the heart. Her form, though lovely, has not the striking elegance, the namelefs, nuni-berlefs graces, that wait on every motion of the • marchioneSs!
But why do I Suffer myfelf to dwell upon her charms? or make a comparison injurious to the amiable woman, who deferves my love ? why can I not fay, who pofTeffes it! Ah, Seymour 1 it is impostible to regulate the motic ns of
B 2	the
£8 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
the human heart, by the cold rules of reafon. Not all the charms of the whole fex combined
can ever render mine fufceptible of thofe agonizing tranfports it has already known. Yet let me boast, that it is as impossible for her, who first occasioned, to revive, as for any other woman, to infpire them.
If this was not the cafe, I fhould have made a
worthless prefent to my Emily, when I gave her both my hand and heart: and though I allow the latter not to be an adequate return for hers, file shall never be able to difcover its deficiency, by any word, or aQiion of my life. This I can fafely promife.
I HAVE purpofely avoided mentioning your lost, your lovely Charlotte! When you are more at eafe, I know you will acquaint me with the .particulars of your distrefs. Why may not that happy sera be hastened, by a reliance on all the tender cares of friendship, which you may certainly depend on, from
Your ever affefilionate
WOODVILLE.
P. S. You have a houfe, within a mile of York; where we have Spent many happy days —Days of eafe, and nights of pleafure.” Who knows but we may there recover our juvenile tastes and passions ! impoiSible I As well when advanced in life, might we hope to recover our youth, in thofe fields where we once were young.—But is that houfe untenanted ? Will you be our host ? Or have you lett, or lent it?
LET
the DELICATE DISTRESS. 2*
LETTER IX.
Lord Seymour, to Lori Woodville
1
fc
My dear Woodville,
“^T^OUR letter has added to the affliction I am already involved in. I think I am fated never to poISefs any of thofe blessings, withou which life is a burthen. The objeCl of my fondest, tenderest wisties, already torn from my bleeding heart; there remained yet one confolation ; a generous, and affectionate friend ; and he, inhuman fuicide, is going to rob me of himfelf! what an hard lot is mine! all that I ever loved, devote themfelves; and by their mifery, I am twice undone I
But stop, my friend! and let my warning' voice prevent your rushing down the precipice ! you must hot, shall not, fee the marchionefs. I will go to Woodfort,. though heaven knows hovy unfit to mingle in fociety, merely te pScv'cnt:
your going to York races.----The Syren will be
there.-----
I WENT, last night, to pay a vifit to my Sister, lady Sandford, and there I met your lovely enemy. She ashed many questions about you, but many more about lady Woodville, and wanted me to drav/ her picture. I told her that I had not Seen her, for fome years; that she was then extremely young, but had, I thought, a very near refemblance to her ladyship, which was pronouncing her a perfeCt beauty.
I said this, to prevent her finding fault, which she certainly would have done, had S attempted a particular defcription. She faw through my defign, but would not let me triumph in the fuccefs of it, then finding faid, ‘‘ Like
B 3	me!
30
iC
ic
THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
me ! perhaps that was the reafon be chofe her, —Constant creature! this is a compliment, for which I think myfelf more indebted to him, than for all the fine things, he ever faid, or wrote to me.”
I HOPE,, madam, his lordship had other motives. “ O fye, lord Seymour, how you love to mortify ? but' pray let me indulge my vanity a little. As the man is married, and to a perfecl beauty too, there can be no danger in avowing my fenSibility of his regards. This, you know, 1 never did, while he was fingle, and I might have hopes. But women have strange caprices.
“ However, I can affure you I have not the least defign upon his heart. It would be the height of vanity, indeed, to attempt rl-v-iWing this perfedi beauty .’^ It would be the lieight of cruelty, madam, but to wish it. ‘‘ I “ declare I cannot fee it in that light, my lord; ** for fuch a woman can never want adorers.”
^6
€C
cc
iC
<c
\





cc

<6
CC

Our married ladies, madam, feek for that cha-ra6ter, only in their htishands. “ Nay now, my lord, you want to impofe on me, as i am a stranger ; but you cannot deceive me, for I know numbeiiefs instances to contradidt your alfertion, and not one to prove it. And I re.ally think that London is as much the feat of gallantry, as Paris.”—
The arriyal of other company gave the con-verfation a general turn ; but what I have repeated, is, I think, fufficient to make you fly from a woman, who audacioufly owns her defigns against your peace. As she talked of going to York, my lister, who is to accompany her, requested I would let her have my houfe, which I readily assented to; but were it unemployed, I would refufe it to my dear Woodville.
Yotr
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 31
You fee the Snare is laid, and will you felf-devoted rush into it; I know you, Woodville, you cannot live with lofs of honour, and it is impoITible to preferve your’s,. if in your prefent fituation, you can be again drawn in, to doat upon this—But I will not abufe her. I shall Set out for Woodfort to-morrow,, and there enforce every argument I have ufed to preferve you from yourfelf.
Till then, adieu.
Seymour,

TsrttrwwwTJfrwTilfTjrw
LETTER X.
Wo
to Lady Straffon.
CANNOT tell my dearest Fanny how much her last letter affedled me; nor can I Sufficiently exprefs my admiration of that happy turn of mind, that enables you to'triumph over every difficulty and distrefs, and to rife So far Superior to what any one might reafonably expedf, from the gentlenefs of your nature, on every trial.
How happy is it for your poor weak Emily, that she has had nothing to struggle with ! she would have funk beneath the {lightest weight, and give a loofe to tears, and to complainings. But let the eroodnefs of that all-wife Providenc
^ 9
who proportions our trials to our strength, fill my heart with the warmest gratitude, and let me “ ever blefs, and praife his name.”
I HAVE no fort of doubt but you are eafed of all a mother’s fears, by this time, and that the dear little ones are prattling round you, with their ulual chearfulnefs; while you feel, even an ad-
B 4	ditional
32 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
ditional tendernefs from recoiled!ion of the danger they have past.
I HAVE very uneaSy apprehenfions for poor Lucy: I almofr wish she may not receive the in-fedlion.—There have been numberlefs instances of perfons who never had the fmall pox ; and I think it is like forcing nature to make a fecond effort.
I DETEST Sir James Miller; and hope, with all my heart he may never be married to Lucy, as I am very fure he never will deferye h er.
Our family party has received fome very agreeable additions Since I wrote last. There is a most delightful contrast between our viSitors. Sir James Thornton,' lively, boyish, with a good natural understanding, totally unimproved, without the least idea of good breeding;-and yet,
that want is amply Supplied, by what I call natural pclitenefs. But if good breeding is the blossom of good fenfe,” we ought to find out fome other term, for that Species of form, which is only to-be acquired in courts. There was fuch an aukward referve about poor Thornton, for the first three days he Spent at Woodfort, that I looked upon him as a Hottentot ; but that rough cast is now worn off, and he is really agreeable, and entertaining.
Lord Seymour, our latest guest, is, really, an accomplished gentleman ; an elegant form, and affable countenance, befpeak your favour, at first Sight, and his every word and adlion infenfibly engage your regard. Yet, lavish as nature has been to him, there feems to be Something wanting to his happineSs. There is a tender air of melancholy diffuSed over his whole form, with fuch a foftnefs in his voice and manner, as is rarely natural to the gay Sons of prosperity. His
fortune
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 33
fortune is ample, and his birth high ; it must then be that fource of the most poignant forrow, ill-fated love, that has disturbed his peace. Yet*
I think, he could not love in vain, unlefs there was a prior prepoffeflion. I long to know his story: I feel myfelf interested, as for a brother.
He acquainted my lord with his intentions to viSit us, the night before he came. We were all engaged to dine at Sir Harry Ransford’s, the next day ; and her ladyfhip had got the old knight to confent to her having a ball. My lord remained at Woodfort to receive his guest. I accompanied the young folks to Sir Harry’s.'—• After tea, I intreated lady Ransford to excufe my leaving her, without taking any notice of it to the company. She was So obliging as to con--lent, and I drove home direftly.
My lord feemed furprized, and pleafed, at feeing me ; and, as he handed me from the coach, faid, with an air of the utmost tendernefs, I am much obliged to you for your attention to my friend ; and can with truth assure you, that your company is the only agreeable addition that could be made to our prefent Society. My little heart exulted at the kindnefs of this compliment; as to pleafe, or oblige him, is, and ever will be, its highest ambition. Notwithstanding this, I thought ray company was a restraint on them, and therefore retired Soon after Supper.
It was four o’clock, when my lord came up stairs. I was miSerably apprehenfive he was ill, as he stghed often, and was uncommonly rest-lefs. But my fears are now fled, like a morning dream.—He feemed perfeQ;ly well at breakfast. Lord Seymour and he are gone into the gardens.
The coach is just returned with the boys and girls; and Thornton is, this moment, come
B 5	into
34 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
into my drelTing-room, to tell me all about it^ as he expreffes himfelf: but he is too civil to fpeak, till 1 leave off writing. I must, therefore, im-pofe Silence on myfelf, to relieve him from it; and So bid my dear stster.
Adieu.
E. W.
LETTER XI.
/
Straffon, io Lady Woodville.
W A S vastly pleafed with my dear Emily’s letter.—There is infinitely more merit in looking up to the Almighty, in our profperity, than adverSiLy. Praife is furely the noblest, and, of courfe, the most acceptable facrifice that a human creature can offer to the great author of good. Mr. Addifon very justly obferves, that “a mind, which has the least turn to religion, “ naturally flies to it in afflidlion.” We then feel our own infufiiciency; we are, humbled by Sorrow, and perhaps only then deduce real fatis-fadlion from a thorough conviction, that there is a fuperior Being, whofe aid is gracioiifly promised to thofe who fincerely Seek it. Bui, fur-roundedhy the delights of life, youth, fortune, gaiety, and dilTipation, we too frequently become forgetful of the Source, from whence our blessings flow ; and while we are indulging all our appetites in the delicious stream of happinefs, it becomes impregnated with the qualities of Lethe, and renders us unmindful of its fountain.
But let me be truly thankful, that the Sister of my love, the child of my care, is not only
bleffed
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 35
blessed with the inSignia of happinefs, but with a heart capable of the first virtue, gratitude; which, I hope, will enfure to her the long, and full poffession of all earthly good.
I NOW can tell my dear prophetefs, her hopes are accomplished;—The mother’s fears are lost in the happy certainty of my children’s perfect recovery.—But the friend still fuffers:—poor Lucy continues extremely ill, though, thank God, this day pronounced out of danger. The fmall-pox was as favourable to her, as possible; but the emotions of her mind, on account of that wretch. Sir James Miller, has thrown her into a violent fever.
EIe is,, this day, to be married, to Mifs Nel-fon 1' This she is yet ignorant of: but on the first day that she fat up, she received a kind of leave-taking letter from him, excufing his perfidy, by her want of complaifance to his request. Said, he had reafon to apprehend, that a lady, who “ fcemed fo little inclined to oblige him before marriage, would not, make a very complying “ wife;—that he was glad to hear her beauty ** out of danger, as there was no doubt, but it would procure her a better hushand than him ; “ and that he should endeavour to look out for a wife, who was lefs- anxious about her fea-“ tures.” Was there ever any thing fo provoking 1 This isaddinginfolence to bafenefs! :
If Sir John was here I, am Sure a duel would enfue.—I know not how to adt in this affair.—-I cannot bear the thoughts of his triumphing in his villainy; nor yet can I think of hazarding Sir John’s life, to punish Such a fcoundrel. Swift fays, ihe occajions 2a& few, that can in--duce a man of fenle, and virtue to draw his" fword.” I am certain, were he living, he
would allow this to be a justifiable cw.
But
J
36 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
But as a wife and mother, I most Sincerely hope. Sir John may never hear of his infamous behaviour : but what excufe to invent, for breaking off the match, I know not. Sir John is jealous of his honour, and will inquire minutely into the affair. I will refer it all to Lucy’s prudence : stie loves her brother, and is a Christian.
You are an admirable painter. I should have known Lord Seymour’s picture, if you had not fet the name to it; all but that shade of melancholy, which you had thrown over it. He was extremely lively when I knew him ; but I have not feen him. Since his return to England.
You have made me perfectly acquainted with Sir James Thornton: I Saw his precipitate stride into your dressing room, and his short stop on finding you were writing. It reminded me of the Snapping of a watch-fpring. Have you ever had one break in your hand? Lucy has just awoke from a refreshing steep, and, on being told I was writing, she dessres to fee me immediately. I will return to you, again.
What an affe€ting interview ! That odious idiot. Sir James Miller, has, “ like the bafe In-“ dian, thrown a pearl away, richer than all his tribe.” When I went into Lucy’s chamber, she dessred every one to withdraw ; then taking my hand, and pressing it to her lips, what infinite trouble must I have given to the compassionate heart of my dear lady Straffon ! but I hope you do not defpife me : it was the weak state of my body, that overpowered my mind. But now, that I have recovered my fenfes, I am amazed how I could be affe6ted, by the lofs of fuch a
man.------Did I fay lofs ? then 1 fear, I rave
again. But I grieved for an ideal charafter; and am much obliged to Sir James, for removing the mist from before hiy eyes, and shewing him-
felf
THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
'’7
Self in his native colours. How happy the delu-ston vanished So foon ! Had it continued but a little longer, I should have been a wretch indeed ! What a mifery, to defpife the man, whom it is our duty to love and honour ! Yet Such might have been my fate ! should I have been unpardonably criminal, my dearest Sister ?
I INTREATED her, not to think upon the fubjeSt, but to calm her fpirits ; and that I would converfe with her on any other topic, that she pleafed.—She begged my attention for a few minutes ; faid she had wandered from her purpofe, and afked my pardon for detaining me. You are writing, lady Straffon ; perhaps to my brother. Then raiSing herfelf on her knees, in fpite of my efforts to hinder her, let me, in this humble posture, intreat you, my dearest ssster, not to mention what has pasted, to Sir John. I know his natural bravery, joined to his love for an only Sister, would tempt him to call Sir James
Miller to an account.-------Good God I what
might be the confequence! He has done me no wrong ; and should any misfortune happen to my brother from this event, I could not anfwer for my fenfes. And were even the aggrestbr, for fuch indeed he is, to fall, I never should know peace again.
Here she was quite overcome by weaknefs, and funk down in a stood of tears. I faid every thing in my power, to affuage her grief ; and gave her the strongest affurances, that I neither did, or would mention a fyllable of the affair to Sir John. She told me then I had restored her tranquility; and she should foon be well, and able to contrive fome plauSible pretence to her brother, for breaking off the match : and as this would be the first falshood she had ever told him, she hoped it might be confidered as a fious fraud only.	After
♦
38 TH'E DELICATE DISTRESS.
After this converfation Ihe grew perfeffly compofed ; I left her retired to rest : but, I fear,. Sne has disturbed mine,, for this night. What an amiable heart is hers? While yet fmarting with undeferved wounds, she would preferve the cniel wretch who inflidled them ! I will religi-©usty keep my promife to her yet cannot help ssncerely wishing, that his crime may be his punishment ; and, I think, he bids fair for being overpaid in kind.
Miss Nelfon, now lady Miller, is- at least twenty-nine, and has been a remarkable coquette thefe ten years ; yet never could catch a poor unguarded fly in her net, till Sir James rushed in.
She was perfectly acquainted with his attachment to Lucy ; had requested to be her bride-maid ; yet could think of Separating, them for ever 1 May they be mutual avengers of each other’s perfidy!
I FEEL myfelf in an unchristian mood; I cannot help it ; I pity folly, but detest vice! Alas I my Emily, I am too Severe ; . for they are, in general, fynonimous terms. I will, in charity, wifli you good night; for, if I write on, I shall rail more therefore. Adieu.
F. S.
LETTER XIL
LadyLKO OD VILLE, to	Str affon
My dear Fanny,
1' A M So violently provoked at the infolent bafenefs of that abominable Miller, that I cannot find words to exprefs my refentment. I do not think you Seem Sufficiently rejoiced at
Lucy’s

THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 39
Lucy’s efcape from fuch a monster: for my part, I am delighted at the thoughts of his being married to fuch a woman as Mifs Nelfon.—May she render him just as miferable as he deferves to be I —His greatest enemy could not wish him worfe.
But there are more wretches in the world, than he ; and Lucy is not without companions in affliOiion. The willow grows on purpofe for our Sex ; and were it to be watered, only by the tears drawn from beauteous eyes, by the perfidy of men, it would need no other moisture. Poor lady Harriet! an accident has difcovered the caufe of her too frequent Sighs.
Y ESTERDAY morning after breakfast, when the gentlemen had retired to their feparate amufe-ments, lady Harriet, mifs Weston, and I, were in my dresting-room. Lady Harriet took up Prior’s Poems, and was reading Henry and Emma, to Fanny and me, who were at work ; when in rushed lady Ransford, in a riding drefs, and begged I would permit her to introduce a gentleman, an acquaintance of her’s, whom she accidentally met on the road, as she was coming to fpend the day with me. She concluded, he was a particular friend, whom she had not feen for a long time. I immediately confented ; and faid I was forry my lord was not at home, to receive the gentleman.
She ran out direfUy, and led in Captain Barnard.—While she was prefenting him to me, the book fell from Lady Harriet’s hand, and she funk motionlefs upon the couch. As fpon as the captain cast his eyes on her, he appeared almost in the fame condition : the colour forfook his lips, and he could hardly breathe. Lady Ransford looked with a Spiteful kind of astonishment, and cried out. What can all this mean ! is she Subject to fits ? Fanny, and I, were engaged in
trying
40 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
trying to recover lady Harriet, I began to fear in vain—Life feemed, for fome minutes, abfo-lutely fled.—The wretched captain looked the pidlure of defpair.—The moment Ihe opened her eyes, he bowed, left the room, mounted his horfe, and rode off.
We conveyed lady Harriet to her chamber, and laid her on the bed ; when a plentiful fhower of tears feemed to have relieved her. I left Fanny Weston with her, and returned to lady Rans-ford. She feemed in a violent passion, that the captain was gone.—What has he to do with lady Harriet’s faintings ? She was very fure it was only an air she gave herfelf. She thanked God, she was not fubje£t to fuch tricks. She never fainted in her life, and was quite certain she never should, &"C. &c.
1 congratulated her on the goodnefs of her constitution ; faid lady Harriet’s was extremely delicate, and that she had not been well for fome time. This did not fatisfy her and she continued out of humour at the captain’s defer-tion, the whole day; Several time* repeating, I do not fuppofe he ever faw her before ; of what' confequence was her fainting to him ? and I encouraged her in this opinion, though far from believing it.
I SAID, his retiring was a mark of politeneSs,. as the prefence of a stranger must increafe the confufion we were in. Nothing that I faid could pacify her. 1 therefore Suffered her to mutter out her diffatisfaflion without replying, for the remainder of the time she staid, which was not long after dinner.—She faid she should be afraid to ride with only one Servant, after it was dulk.
I NEVER was better pleafed with the departure of a guest. 1 longed to fee poor Harriet,
who
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 41
who had not left her room, and flew to her the moment lady Ransford was gone. She looked abafhed, and held down her lovely eyes, which were yet bathed in tears, when I approached her ;—but the tender nefs with which I inquired concerning her health, Teemed to re-aflure her.
You are too good to me, my dear lady Wood-ville j fuch weaknefs as mine fcarcely deferves your compafilon : and I can only prefume to hope for it, by the most unbounded confidence, which I should lorg Since have repofed in your friendly bofom, but that I thought it cruel, even for a moment, to interrupt that happinefs which you fo well deferve. But as the accident which happened this day, must convince you, that there is a fecret Sorrow which preys upon my heart, I will readily acquaint you with the caufe of it, lest the tendernefs of your nature should make you imagine me more wretched than I really am.
You must fuppofe, my dear, faidi, that your Situation, this morning, alarmed me extremely ; but I have long thought there was fome fecret Source for that foft melancholy, which you vainly endeavour to reprefent as constitutional; But do not let this remark make you think yourfelf under a neceshty of difcloSing your fecrets to me. I am far from defiring to pry into them : but should rejoice at having it in my power to do any thing, which might alleviate your distrefs. And if my participation of your Sorrow can footh it, but for a moment, it will more than repay me, for what I feel, in knowing that you are unhappy.
She Said, she was not then capable of making the least return to my kindnefs, though perfefitly ienSibleof it ; but that, as foon as she was able, she would write out her short story for me, and lady Straffon. She Said, Lucy knew Something of it, but not the whole; and defired she might
fee
42 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
fee it, as a kind of confolation under her prefentj circumstances.
As foon as I receive, I will fend it to you. Pray prefent my love to Lucy, and tell her, I intreat her company at Woodfort, whenever Ihe is able to travels Change of air, and objects, will forward her recovery. Why cannot you, and the little ones, accompany her, and complete the wisties of
Your affediionate,
E WOODVILLE?

Mil

LETTER XIII.
Wo ODviLLE,. to Lady St raft on. My dear Sister,
IT H I s morning, received the inclofed, which has engaged my atiention ever Since ; I have but just time to fend it to you, without the-fmall-est comment, but, as it may remain longer in your hands* I stiall expect it to be returned with notes 'variorum'i
I HAVE abfented myfelf, from our family party’ ( which is indeed a charming-one) except during dinner,. this whole day ; I stiall return to it, with a double gust, from a certainty, that amiable as they who compofe it are, in their manners, and perfons, their hearts are;still more valuable.. Haste then, my dearest Fanny, and Lucy, to partake, and perfect the most delightful foeiety, in the world,
stncerely prays your
E. Wo OD VILLE.
The

THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 43
The Memoir of Lady Harriet Hanbury.
As the strongest mark of my stncerity and gra^ titude, to my dear lady Woodvile, for all her kindnefs to me, I Sit down to fulfil the voluntary promife I made, of acquainting her with the fev/ events of a short life, whole duration has only been marked, by forrow ; and as, “ to mention, is to fuffer pain,” I chofe to fave her gentle heart the uneafinefs, of feeing the distrefs, which the recolledlion of unhappy circumstances, must ever revive, where the fufferer is the re-later. I must now, like all biographers, step a little back, to give you feme account of the authors of my being, and then proceed with a plain narrative, fubmitting my weaknesses, and follies, without the least referve, to your friendly eye.
My father, was eldest fon to the Earl of G----. During my grandfather^s life, he be-
came passionately in love with my mother, who was a daughter of colonel Stanley’s, and reputed one of the greatest beauties of that time. My father well knew it would be in vain to hope for the earl’s confent to his marrying, without a large fortune, let the merits of the lady be ever fo great ; as his estate was extremely involved, and that he had four children, by a fecond wife, unprovided for.
%Iy mother’s portion was only four thoufand pounds, but her father, who confidered her birth, beauty, and accomplishments, as full equivalents to any fortune, when he found the earl was not acquainted with my father’s courtship, forbade his daughter ever to fee her lover more, as his pride would not fuffer him to have matched her With a prince, clandestinely.
..	The
V
44 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
The lovers reduced to this unhappy Situation,! after much fruitiest forrow, had recourfe to the ufual alternative, and married, without confent, on either Side. The astair was not long kept Secret, and the earl, whofe rage was without' bounds, accufed the colonel of being privy to the marriage, and of drawing in his fon—he alfo lavifhed every kind of abtife upon my mother, and stopt the allowance he had for feme years given to my father-
The colonel, though highly offended with his daughter, refented the cruelty and injustice of the earl’s behaviour, and fent him-a challenge— The duel was prevented by my father’s addrefs,, but the most implacable hatred ever remained, between the old gentlemen ; which communicated itfelf to ^very branch of the families, except my father and mother, who were the moll perfedt patterns of conjugal tendernefs.
Notwithstanding my father’s increaf-ing fond nest for his lovely wife, the unhappy feuds, which she thought herfelf the occaSion of, preyed on her tender mind, and fo much weakened her delicate frame, that, giving me life, she lost her own ;—fatal exchange for her unhappy orphan ! My father was quite distradted at her lofs, and the colonel, who had been reconciled to them both, for feme time, was obliged to ref-train his own astlidtion, to endeavour to confole my father, and engage him to preferve his life, by frequently prefenting me before him. t “Yes, he would then fay, I will live for the
w
** protection of that only tranfeript of my angel “ Harriet. Twill watch over her ristngvirtues, and endeavour to restore to the world, fome part of that perfeQiion, my cruel father has de-“ prived it of.” For four years, his fondnefs
for

THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 45
for me <was unabated, and I appeared to be the foie objefit of his attention and regard.
About that sera, the earl wrote to him, and a reconciliation foon enfued ; the terms of which were, that as my father had gratified himfelf by his first marriage, he should oblige the earl, and Serve his family, by a Second. My father, whofe nature was gentle, was Soon induced to comply, and, as I believe his real fondnefs for my mother, shad rendered all women indifferent to him, the choice of his future lady was entirely left to the earl, who, you may fuppofe, would rate her value, only by her fortune. My father paid his ad-dreffes in form, and even without the least degree of liking on either fide the match was concluded.
The perpetual Scenes of difcord which Succeeded to this ill-fuited marriage, are but too public, and I have great reafon to apprehend, that, to this constant Source of domestic mifery, I owe the lofs of my unhappy father. The first caufe of difgust, my step-mother gave him was her absolutely refufing to let me be brought into the houSe, politely adding, that she would not Suffer a beggar's brat, to be brought up with her children, who were at least intitled to a fortune, by their mother’s fide; and, that thofe who had nothing but their blood to boast of, should be bred humble to lower their pride. This one Specimen is, I think, Sufficient to give you a perfedl idea of my poor father’s unhappinefs, and I shall fay nothing more, of one, who has the honour to bear his name, and title.
I REMAINED at my grandfather’s, and was his principal favourite. My father continued to fee me frequently, and, notwithstanding his family was increased, by the birth of a Son, and two daughters, his fondnefs for me appeared undimi-
nished----but neither his lady, nor the earl, ever
took
46 the DELICATE DISTRESS'.
---my father’s Sifter,
took the least notice of me--
lady Woodville, was extremely kind to me, and even preffed my grandfather to let me live with her, but herefufed to part with the only joy he had on earth, and she died before him.
When I was about fourteen, I was deprived of my affectionate, and tender parent, the good old colonel.—Before he died, he recommended me, in the most affeCting terms, to my father, who promifed every thing in my favour, that he could deSire ; but feemed offended that the colonel should think it neceffary to plead for his dearest, best beloved child, the child of his affeCtion, the child of his ever adored, and lamented Harriet. Fully fatisfied with thefe assurances, the good old man refigned his foul in peace, leaving me all his perfonal fortune, which amounted to about Six thoufand pounds; his paternal estate being entailed on a male heir.
Lady Anne Westrop, who was a distant relation of my mother’s, invited me to live with her, and in the fociety of this agreeable woman, I began to recover my natural chearfulnefs, which had been totally abforbed by the grief I felt for my grandfather’s ill health and death.—During a year, that we passed intirely at her Seat in the country, I knew not one moment’s uneaSincfs ■—my mind was like a peaceful ocean, whole every motion was uniformly gentle, without one ruffling breeze to disturb, or deform it; yet Sufficiently aQ;uated to prevent languor or diSgust, the stagnation of the Soul.
How often have I looked back, with regret, upon this pleassng calm I which was, alas! too Soon Succeeded by impetuous storms, where all my peace was shipwrecked. About the end of this happy sera, captain Barnard came to pay a
viSit to his Sister, lady Anne ; he is youngest Son
to
TH E D.E LIC AT E D I S T'te E S S. 4.7
W--------- -He was deSigned for
the navy, and his father was, at that time folli-citing a ship, which he Soon obtained for him. I shall not take up your ladyship’s time, by giving you an account of our childish courtship, but tell you, at once, that,
A mutual flame was quickly caught.
Was quickly too reveal’d,
For neither bofora lodg’d a wish.
Which virtue keeps conceal’d.
*
What happy hours of heart-felt blifs, •
Did love on both bestow !
But blifs too mighty long to last.
Where fortune proves a foe.
In the midst of thefe truly Arcadian pleafures, •the earl my grandfather, died; which I can by -jio means fay disturbed my happinefs ; but, alas! it was to be interrupted by a Severer shock ; for my father Survived him but eleven days ; the Six thoufand pounds, which colonel Stanley, had bequeathed to me, were in my father’s hands, his estate was all fettled upon the iffue of his Second marriage, and his debts amounted to rather more than his perSonal fortune ; So that there remained not a shilling for me, even of my grandfather’s legacy, without going to law with the countefs, my step-mother, who had posteffed her-felf of every thing my father left.
I GRIEVED only for his loSs, that of my fortune appearing, then, of no conSecjuence; my lover Seemed to redouble his tenderneSs for me, but thought, circumstanced as I then was, it would be prudent to conceal our pafSion, as it was highly probable his friends might oppoSe our union. I acquiefced in his opinion, and rested all my-
hopes
48 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
hopes of happinefs on him, of that facred trust !
unworthy guardian
When the time for his leaving West-hill arrived, I then difcovered that I had never known Sorrow before ; it was impostible to conceal ray anguish, and lady Ann Westrop, who had taken great pains to comfort me for the death of my father, and imagined, not without reafon, that my grief had fubstded into a calm, and gentle melancholy, feemed astonished at the violence of my afflidion ; but I might have anfwered her with the words of Helena, “ I think not on my “ father, and thefe great tears do grace his me-mory more than thofe I shed for him.” However, I thought it very lucky, that my late misfortune appeared a fufficient caufe for my prefent melancholy, which I indulged to fuch an excels, as foon affedled my constitution, andl was ordered by my phySician to Bristol. Lady Anne, ever kind, and affedlionate towards me, accompanied me thither, and Mr. Westrop went to London, to conshlt lawyers about the recovery of my fortune.
The frequency and tendernefs of captain Barnard’s letters contributed much more to the restoration of niy health, than all the waters of thofe Salubrious Springs; and lady Anne expressed fuch Sincere joy at my recovery, that I, romantic as I was, thought myfelf bound in honour, to acquaint her with the real caufe of it. I thought concealing any thing from fuch a friend, was adUng a //V, and in the fulnefs of my gratitude I poured forth all the'Secrets of my heart.
She heard me with that fort of coldnefs with which one listens to a twice told tale, yet, at the fame time, assitred me, she had never fufpe<£ted any attachment between her brother and me; faid she wished, for both our fakes, we could
conquer
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 49
conquer our passion, for she was certain; it could only be produfitive of mifery to both.
IwAS equally piqued at her^manner and expression, and replied with feme warmth, that, as I considered myfelf under very great obligations to her I would not entail mifery on any part of her family, let my own fate be what it would. She applauded my relolution, with the famefangfroid^ with which she had heard my story, and I retired from her apartment,, to my own, more humbled and mortified than I had ever been in my life.
I PASSED a most restlefs, miferable night, fometimes refolving on the highest generofity to break with captain Barnard,-—the next moment repeating tows of everlasting love—-but at all events I determined to quit lady Anne, yet whither should I go ? where fly to ? a wretched orphan, without friends or fortune !
The agitation of my mind at length Subfided,-and towards morning I fell into a profound stum-ber. As I ssept much longer than ufual, I found lady Anne’s woman by my bed fide, when I awoke, who faid she came from her lady, to inquire my health, and to request that I would go to her immediately.
I OBEYED the Summons instantly, and while I was hurrying on my deaths, flattered myfeif that she had relented of her unkindnefs, and, wished again to restore me to that Sisterly af-fedion, which she Seemed So long to have felt for me, and yet to have lost in one moment; possested with this imagination, I ran, or rather flew, to her apartment; but on opening the door,
was Surprized to fee Lord N---, who appeared
very earnast in conversation with her ladyship.
This gentleman had been very particular to me, ever Since our reSidence at Bristol; he was
C	young*
50 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
young, polite, and master of a large indepen* dent fortune ; but thefe advantages had made me rather declino, than encourage his acquaintance, lest the bufy tongues of men, or rather women, might havepronounced him a lover—an epithet, which is of all others most hateful to a delicate, pre-engaged heart.
On my entrance, the converfation -became general. Lady Anne astefted to treat me with her ufual tendernefs, but I too plainly Saw, that 4he only affefled it. After Some little time (he withdrew abruptly, and left me alone with lord
.N-----. A thoufand difagreeable things ruflied
into my mind at once, but above all, I feared a declaration of love from his lordship, which, though I was determined to refufe, must have distressed me extremely, as I could not to the iWorld, assign any justifiable caufe for my refufal,
I ROSE from my feat with trepidation, and rang the bell for breakfast. I hoped this would be a hint for his lordship to retire—-on the contrary, he faid, it was very fortunate for him that I had called for tea, as he had not touched any thing but a glafs of water, that day, ahd should have abfolutely forgot that eating was necessary, if I had not reminded him of it; but fince I had, he hoped I would allow him the ho-Bour of breakfasting with me.
I COOLLY bowed .assent, and the moment the tea table was removed, faid I must retire, to put on my Tiding drefs, as I shad promifed to meet a lady on the Downs, and feared I should
keep her waiting. Lord N------- faw my confu-
fion, pitied and believed it, by faying he would not trelpafs farther on my leifure, but hoped I would permit him the honour of paying me a vifit in the afternoon : he did not wait for
feply, and I .thought my Self infinitely obliged to
hiiDi
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. $i
him, for even postponing ’the embarastment, in which I knew I should be too Soon involved.
As foon as lady Anne and I were alone, after dinner she congratulated me, with a Serious air, on the important conquest I had made, enumerated the great advantages of Such a match, and Said she was rejoiced to find, by the eafe and propriety of my behaviour, that the filly pre-poffeflion I had talked of the night before, had not rendered me fo romantically abfurd, as to re-
je6t happinefs, and lord N-----, or to perfist in
embracing mifery, and captain Barnard.
Though I had in Some meafure prepared myfelf to hear her fpeak on this fubje^, yet I could not avoid feeling the utmost Surprize, at her want of delicacy, in mentioning the man whom I professed to love, at the fame instant that she approved my accepting of another.
As foon as I recovered myfelf, I told her that I was neither intitled to her congratulation, or approbation, as lord N-----had never faid any-
thing upon fuch a fubjeQ: to me, and that I hoped he never would, as I should be very forry to give him the mortification of a denial; but at the fame timcj that I fled from whatJhe called happinefs, I hoped I should find what I thought fo in the confcioufnefs of having afted right ; for though I never could divest myfelf of the tenderest attachment to captain Barnard, yet I could facrifice my hopes of any future connexion with him to his advantage, and her defire.
Lady Anne took me at my word, praifed my generofity, and intreated I would take time to
confider, before I refufed lord N--. I assured
her, that delay was unnecessary ; and as I had a very high esteem for his lordship, and was fin-cerely grateful, for the honour he intended me, I could not think of trifling with his peace, or
W	-A	m	^
C 2	meanly

52 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
meanly accepting a heart, becaufe Set in gold, when it was abfolutely impossible for me to make the only return which stich a valuable prefent deferved. She called me dear, romantic, generous girl ; faid she had no doubt but time and reafon would conquer my childish paffion, and that she should rejoice to fee me happy with fome worthy man ; but still intreated me, not to a£l; precipitately, with regard to lord N—, as she feared I might never have fuch another offer.
This kind of converfation lasted till lord
N....- came to vifit us, and I now wished for
his making that declaration I fo much dreaded in the morning. I was determined, on the con-du6l I should purfue towards him, and fecretly triumphed in the facrifice I should make to my truly distnterested love for captain Barnard. However, her ladyship took care that we should not fo immediately come to an explanation, for she never left us the whole evening. Lord N—• appeared to be chagrined; and I was alfo extremely mortified that the affair was not brought to a conclufion.
The next day I received a letter from Mr. Westrop, informing me that my step-mother had confented to give me four thoufand pounds, rather than stand alaw-fuit, for the fix which my grand-father left me. In consideration of this Sum, I was to relinquish all farther claim to my father’s fortune, and to receive it as a prefent from her bounty. Thefe terms I thought extremely hard; but to attempt carrying on an cxpenSive fuit, without money appeared impracticable. It is true, Mr. Westrop in the most friendly manner, offered to advance any fum I might have occaSion for ; but I already felt the •weight of my obligation to lady Anne, and determined not to increafe the load. I therefore
complied

THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 53
complied with thefe fevere conditions: but as I was not of age, Mr. Westrop became Security for my part of the contradt, and the interest of this Splendid Sum was allotted for my mainte-' nance.
On this occaSion lady Anne behaved with the utmost kindneSs towarsh me ; begged I would conssder her as my Sister, and never think of quitting her houfe, till I went to one of my own. She made me Several valuable prefents, which I received with the utmost reluctance ; yet could not refufe, as her manner of bestowing them was peculiarly polite and tender. In short, she did every thing in her power, to conciliate that true esteem, and affection, which her conduCt, with regard to captain Barnard, had for a while restrained.
Lord N-------foon found an opportunity to
difclofe his pastion for me ; and I as quickly put an end to all his hopes. He thanked me for th
V
generous frankneSs of my conduCt, and earnestly intreated to fee me as a friend, though I had de* nied him as a lover. I readily confented to his request, and have ever found him a most amiable and worthy man.
I HAD not received a letter from captain Barnard for near a month.—He was stationed in the Mediterranean : and though determined, as foon as he returned to England, to take an everlasting leave of him, I grew impatient at his Silence, ■and longed to return to Westhill, to retrace thofe paths we had trod together, and woo fv/eet echo to repeat his name. I knew lady Anne received foreign letters frequently, fome of which I fup-pofed were from captain Barnard ; but as she was stlent on the fubjeD of them, I did not think it proper|to appear inquisttive ; and fome weeks elapled, without fuffering that name to pafs my
C 3	lips.
54 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
lips, which was but too deeply engraved on my heart.
At length, the time for our departure came, and we arrived at Westhill.—The morning after, ,I rofe very early, in order to indulge the fond idea of revifiting thofe woods and lawns, where I had Spent So many happy hours. I did not imagine any of the family were stirring, and went foftly Into lady Anne’s dressing room, where all the English poets lay, to take a book with me into the gardens. I started at finding her there. Her furprize at feeing me, equalled mine : but quickly recovering herfelf, she talked of. the finenefs of the morning, which she laid had tempted her to leave her bed fo foon ; but that finding the dew was not off the grafs, she had fat down to write letters.
A PROPOS, faid she ; I have had one in my possession for you thefe ten days ; but as I did not know whether the contents might be perfedly agreeable to you, I chofe to defer delivering it, till we were quite free from obfervers. I flatter myfelf, madam, faid I, that your precaution was unnecessary, if, as I apprehend, the letter comes from captain Barnard. Lady Anne replied, do not be too Sanguine, my dear ; we feel our difappointments, in proportion to our expectations. True, madam, I returned ; but as the height of mine at prefent, extends only to knowing that your brother is well and happy, do not protraff on that account, but be fo good to let me have my letter.
She then prefented it to me. Saying, I believe you had belter retire to your own apartment, before you read it. I willingly obeyed: but though all this preparation was fufficient to alarm me, yet at the fight of thofe dear, well known charaders, I forgot all that lady Anne had faid,
and
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 55
and broke the feal with the highest tranSport. But before I had read half the following lines, I in reality fuffered the transformationy which Ovid feigned for Niobe : my limbs were petrified; nor was the least Sign of life or raotionj remaining in me, but my flowing tears.
%o Lady Harriet Han bu ry

t
** Mad AM,-
“ THE ingratitude aud unkindnefs of your
*	behaviour towards me, deferve Such reproaches as l am incapable of making to a perfon I once truly loved. I ought to be thankful for your
^^^having cured me oSthat folly but the manner of your doing it, takes away the merit of the ‘ obligation.
“Unworthy Harriet! you might have
*	ceafed to love, without betraying, and expo-
*	fing the wretch who doated on you. Lord
*	N----’s fuperior rank, and fortune were
temptations, I fcarce could hope you should withstand. But why, ingrate! should you defpife, and ridicule the fondnefs of that heart, where, though you have planted daggers, there still remain the warmest wishes for your future happinefs.
** It is now above two months Since I have heard from you. This, cruel, this alarming Silence, filled my fond bofom with the tender-est Sorrow. I had a thoufand fears for my loved Harriet. I feared Some fatal accident might have befallen her. I feared every thing that could befall, except her breach of vows I
The fidelity of my own heart prevented that fufpicion.
“ But I have done for ever on this “ nor will I longer interrupt your felicity," than
C 4	“

THE DELICATE DISTRE SS.
“ to intreat, as my last request, if you havt “ thought my letters worth preferving, that you ** will immediately deliver them to my Sister. ** If ever I return to England and you deSire it, I will restore your’s, dear as they once were to my faithful heart, which wants not memento’s of the faithlefs Harriet.
I Have got another ship, and shall ufe al| my interest to prevent my return to England, Amidst all the perils, to which my sttuation ** daily expofes me, I wished to preferve my life for your fake only ; but your perfidy has now rendered it of as little value to me, as it «« ever was to you : and to die nobly in the fer-“ vice of my country, is at prefent, the moll ** earnest wish of,
“ The unfortunate
** Wm. Barnard.”;
I HAD remained for Some hours in the Situation I have already defcribed, when lady;
Anne Sent her woman, to call me to breakfast;
^	I
On finding my eyes fixed, and my whole framei immoveable, Mrs. Atkins Screamed fo loud, that lady Anne and Mr. Westrop ran into my dreff-ing-room. I was immediately put into bed^ and; every care was taken for my recovery. A stow fever enfued, which I daily hoped would terminate my life and mifery ; but it pleafed Provi-: dence that I should be referved for greater woes.
I
As foon as I was capable of reafoning, I found captain Barnard had been impofed upon, and felt; •even more for his Sufferings than my own—But who could have deceived him ? it must he lady Anne, But as I vras not in a Situation to refent fuch cruelty, I thought it most prudent to acqui-eSce in Silence, and wait till time, the great expounder
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 57
pounder of mysteries, fhould clear my innocence. She frequently obierved, that as I was determined to break with him, it would be better to let him remain in his error, than to come to an explanation, that could anfwer no end, as we were to part for ever. To this I could, by no means, a-
But, alas! it was not in my power to op-
gree
I neither knew the name of
((
((

pofe her pleafure. his ship, nor the place of his destination ; and I continued, for near twelve months, a prey to the most cruel fufpenfe.
At this time lady Anne and Mr. Westrop pur-pofed making the petit tour, and inSisted on my accompanying them.—I gladly accepted the offer ; for I might truly fay, “ I had fuch perpe-“ tual fource of difquiet, in my own breast, that rest was grown painful to me, and a state of agitation, only could afford rrie eafe, by ref-cuing me, as it were, from rhyfelf.”
Though we Spent a month in London, to wait for the concluSion of the peace, I knew not where to make any enquiry after captain Barnard ; nor had I a friend to whom I could venture to repeat his name ; and I fet out for Paris, much more inclined to enter into the most gloomy folitude than to partake of the pleafures of that gay city.
There I became acquainted with lordWood-ville, and there I alfo met Mrs. Bolton, who was nearly related to me, by my mother.—We had been acquainted from our infancy, and had a real friendship for each other; but her living in Ireland, where her hushand .had a very large fortune, had prevented our meeting for three years before. She was in a very declining state of health, and was going to Montpelier on that account, when Mr. Bolton was obliged to fet out for Ireland, on the death of a near relation.
C 5	As
5S THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
As lady Anne was constantly engaged in the grande mondc, I Spent much of my time with Mrs. Bolton, and with real Sorrow Saw that amiable woman growing worSe every day.—-Her phySicians, at length, had her removed to Fon-tainbleau.—Just then lady Anne grew weary of Paris, and rcSolved to purfue her route. Aor Mrs. Bolton shed a flood of tears, when I talked of quilting Paris, and intreated me not to leave her, “ a helplefs stranger in a foreign land.” Even her own maid had married one of the gem d’armeSf and left her. So that he had not a crea-tore about her, that had the least regard or ten* dernefs for her. She Said, a few days would put an end to the arduous talk she required from my friendship, that of dossng her dying eyes ; but that if Mr. Bolton should return before that happened, her carriage and Servants should convey me to lady Anne, or wherever I defired.
There was no refisting her importunities; and lady Anne, though distatisfied at my stay, applauded the noblehefs of my friendship, and took a very affectionate leave of me. I Saw her get into a carriage with fincere regret. I confi«-dered myfelf as-torn from one who had been the friend, and protedrefs of my youth. Her cruelty was forgot; and every aCt of kindnefs she had ever shewn me, returned with double force into my memory ; and my heart and eyes overflowed with grateful tendernefs.
r WAS waiting in this Situation of mind, for Mrs. Bolton’s chariot to carry me to Fontain-hleau, when captain Barnard entered the room ! I will not pretend to deferibe the emotions of my heart; in short they were too strong for my rea-fon, and Suspended all its powers.—‘Never Sure was fuch a meeting! The extremes of love, fur-prize, refentraent, joy, all operated on me.
He
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. s%
He was all penitence, and love; kneeled at my feet, and bathed my hand with tears; plead-ed the violence of his distraQiedij love, in excuSe for the cruel letter he had wrote, when he believed me falfe; and uttered the most folemn vows, that if I would again receive his heart, which never had strayed one moment from me, no power on earth should ever part us more: but if I refufed to accept his love, he would instantly give up the command of his ship, and retire to Some part of the world, where he should never be heard of.
I WILL frankly confefs, that all my tendernefs for this unworthy man returned and I even thought I loved him better than I had ever done before. He was then of age, and master of him-felf ; there remained, therefore, nothing to op-pofe our wishes, for I own them mutual, but the obligations I was under, and the voluntary pro-mife 1 bad made to lady Anne. This obje^ion he treated as romantic ; but faid, he would gra^* tify my delkacy in this particular ; and engaged-to obtain her free confent.
He attended me to Fontainbleau, and vifited me there, every day, during two months, that my amiable friend continued to languish.—At the end of that time, Ihe was releafed, and left me in stneere affliction. Mr. Bolton returned a few days before her death ; and, fome time after, made me a prefent of part of her jewels, to the amount of two thoufand pounds.—I would have declined fo valuable a gift; but it was my dear Mrs. Bolton’s dying request, that I should have them.
At captain Barnard’^s earnest intreaty, I returned to Paris, where he still continued to folli-cit our marriage, and I to refufe, till he had fulfilled bis promifc; with regard to lady Anne.
At
V
I

6o THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
At length, he extorted one from me, that even her oppossng it fhould not prevent our union and, in an oblique manner, confessed, that (he! had been the caufe of that letter which had given! me fo much pain, by her mifreprefentation of my conduQ: at Bristol. He that can pleafe is certain to perfuade ; and I, at last, acquiefced in his request.
He would not hear of my returning into Eng-' land till we were married. I had no parent’s confent to afe, and he had wrote to the chaplain' of h is (hip to come and marry us. Seemingly; possess with the tenderest passion that ever warm-; cd a human heart, he fet out for Aix la Cha-pelle, where we fuppofed lady Anne to be ; but,; unluckily, fhe had left it two days before captain; Barnard arrived, and was then returning to Eng-1 land. 'Thither the captain followed. I was extremely concerned at this difappointment ; but it was only on account of the additional trouble and fatigue he was to undergo.
He wrote to me the very post : nay, I was Sometimes fo happy, as to receive two or three letters wrote at different times of the fame day, filled with the language of love, with fond complaints of abfencc, and vows never to leave me more.
However, blinded as I was by my own paf-lion, I could not help perceiving, that when he had been fome time in England the stile of his letters began to change, though he still continued to complain of the cruel necessity that detained him ; but not in that charming plaintive stile, which ufed, at once, to foften and delight my
heart.
Three months passed away, in this manner, during which time, I received a cold, but civil letter, from lady Anne, congratulating me on
the
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 6i
the constancy of my lover, and thanking me for the needlefs compliment I had paid her, as she was perfedtly convinced we were too much in love, to follow any perfons advice but our own. -—Notwithstanding this, she very Sincerely wished my happinefs, whether I should, or should not become her Sister.
As I found captain Barnard’s return was still protrafted by his father’s ill health, and many other reafons, that did not appear to me fuffici-ent, I began to be uneafy at my sttuation.—A stngle woman, without friends, or relations, in fuch a place as Paris, was, by no means, in an
eligible state.-1 had fome acquaintance, and
thpfe of distin6lion, who received me on lady Anne’s account, without inquiring into the motives of my stay ; but I felt a confcioufnefs, that their civilities were more the effe£l of politenefs, than esteem, which rendered me unhappy ; and I wrote to captain Barnard, requesting his per-mistion to return to England, if he did not intend to come to Paris immediately.
My letter lay staled, and directed, on my dref-Sing-table, when lord N- came to make me a viSit; and casting his eyes on the letter,' Said, I might fpare mystlf the trouble of fending it to the post-office, as he had that moment, met captain Barnard, in a very fine equipage. My heart funk in me, at this news.—Yet I still flattered
that lord N-----
mystlf.
might mistake fome
other perfon for him, and was earnest in perfua-ding his lordship, that he was deceived, when the captain’s Servant brought me the following card.
(t
((
If lady Harriet H
--- will be at home,
and alone this evening, captain Barnard will, if agreeable, do himstlf the honour of waiting on her, at fix o’clock.’^
The
r-
I »
. I
i I
I I
C2 THE DELICATjE DISTRESS.
y'
The Surprize I had been in before was augmented by this extraordinary message. I, however, Sent word I should be glad to fee him; and pasted the intermediate hours in endeavouring to prepare mySelf for that fatal change, which was already but too vissble, but which I was utterly unable to account for.
At the appointed time, he came, and endeavoured to astume a fort of formal tendernefs, accompanied with an air of gravity, and mystery, I could not long endure Such a cruel state of Suf-penfe, and prested to know what it was that affedled him ? he told me, he was the most miserable man breathing, that all his Schemes of hap-pinefs were blasted, but that he never could have resolution to tell me, how they were So—called me, dear. Suffering angel! kisted my hand, and wept.-—
I cannot describe the emotion of my heart;
I longed, yet feared, to know what all this
meant; and, at length, told him, that if he did
not wish to make me extremely unhappy he
would explain this enigma. He Said, he had great
reafon to fear, that Satisfying my inquiries, would
render me yet more wretched, even than doubt
could do ; and if the Secret could be kept for
ever from me, he would die rather than reveal
it. But I must know it, and he who was a / ^
sharer in the misfortune, would tell it with most tendernefs.
He then conjured me, to Summon all the love 1 ever had for him, that it might incline me to pity, and pardon a wretch, that had undone him-felf! in short he told me, that his friends had prevailed on him, to marry Mils S—, whom he unfortunately met at Aix la Chapelle, and accompanied to London—that at the moment he received her hand, the icy one of death would
have
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 6^
have been more welcome; that his heart did, and ever should adore me, and only me.
He had knelt by my fide, while he told this fatal story, and when he finished it wept ex.-tremely. To his amazement not one figh or tear efcaped me. I rofe immediately, and wished him joy, then rung the bell to order my chariot; he remained immoveable, I begged he would rife, before the fervant entered-—he obeyed ; but implored me not to leave him ; laid it was impoffi-ble that 1 could really be fo indifferent as I appeared ; that he was prepared to meet ray anger, or my Sorrow, but could not bear contempt.
I TOLD him that was at prefent, my predominant Sentiment, and the Sooner he retired from it, and put an end to this interview, the better, and which I would take care should be our last. He vowed he would never leave the Spot, where he again prostrated himfelf, till I pronounced his pardon. I told him this was adding infult to injury, but fince he would not quit my apartment, I should.
I THREW my Self into my carriage, and fuf-fered myfelf to be carried to the marchionefs de St. Aumont’s—there I met lord Woodville, and
lord N-----; who both remarked that I looked
extremely ill, and advifed me to leave the assembly, and return home. And I Soon found myfelf fo really fo, that I was obliged to follow their advice.
I WENT immediately to bed, without Speaking, a Syllable, even to my maid, who obferving fo fudden a change in my manners and appearance, fat up in my dressing-room. The heroifm of my conduct, towards captain Barnard had flattered my pride, and kept up my Spirits, while he was prefent; but I was no fooner alone, than I felt all the weight of my misfortunes; and the
agitation
: j
64 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
agitation and distradlion of my mind threw mein" to convulsions. My maid had immediate helP for me, but all the art of the best phystcians Paris, could not restore my fenfes, for fiftee*’ days-—happy interval! delightful recefs from ago" niz-ing forrow.
• At length, their cruel kindnefs triumphed fo far, as to restore my reafon—but, good God, in what a stiattered plight did it return 1 and to what a poor, defaced, and wretched habitation ? my: diforder was generally believed to be a malignant |
fever, but dodtor L---, who understood the'
maladies of the mind, as well as body, and was I acquainted with my attachment to captain Bar-, Hard, contributed to the recovery of the latter, I by administring confolation to the former, much ' more, than all the art of medicine could have done. I foon difcharged all my phystcians, but him, wholonly knew the Source of my complaint; and to his (kill and tendernefs, am I indebted, for the prefervation of this wretched being.
D URiNG my illnefs, lord Woodville, and
lord N----, behaved like brothers to me—they
both vistted me daily, and endeavoured, but in vain, and unknowing of the caufe, to dissipate that melancholy, which will for ever prey upon my heart. My mind was fo much weakened, that I determined to go into a convent, and flattered myfelf, that in that calm retirement, I fhould find peace and rest. I fancied I might there retain the tenets of my own religion, only conforming externally to theirs.
I COMMUNICATED my projeQ: to do6l:or
L—, who foon convinced me, that peace dwells not in a cloister, but that even thofe holy retreats are filled with vain wishes, and tumultuous pai-
Sions 5 and that it would be making a mockery
of
i
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 65
of all religion, to pretend to embrace theirs, un-lefs I could do it ssncerely.
While I remained in a very weak and languishing condition, a gentleman called frequently to inquire my health ; but as he refufed to leave his name, I guested it was fome perfon fent by captain Barnard, and was therefore not the least inquisitive about him. At length he defired to be admitted to fee me, faying, he had fomething of importance to communicate.
I CONSENTED ; and after the common civilities were over, he took a pacquet out of his pocket, and prefenting it to me, faid he hoped that would be an acceptable prefent. It was di-redled in an unknown hand; but as I hesstated about receiving it, he faid I had nothing to fear from the contents, and he would call for my an-fwer the next day; and instantly left the room.
The pacquet contained a long letter from captain Barnard, filled with vain excufes for'hls falsehood, and paflionate intreaties that I would again fuffer him to plead his pardon at my feet he exprested the most poignant forrow for my illnefs, and begged I would at least permit him to repair the injuries he had done me, as far as it was postible, by accepting an unlimited power over that fortune, to which he had facrificed his love, honour, and happinefs ; and as a proof of my forgivenefs, requested I would receive an en-clofed bill for five hundred pounds; but if my pride should still rejedl his penitence, he defired I would return his letters, by the gentleman that was the bearer of that.
This fresh infult roufed all my refentment against him, and I pasted a restlefs night counting the clock, and with impatience waiting for the hour when I should restore his infolent prefent, with the fcorn it merited.
At
I i
I • • >
I I
. I i !
! !
il
{ !
I ) ; i 1 I
€6 THE DELICATE DISTREaS.
. ■ I
At length, his ambaffador arrived, and either I was, or Seemed to be Surprized, when I acquaint* ■ ed him with the purport of the letter he had brought me ; and made many apologies for hav*; ing unwittingly offended—•Said the affair between; captain Barnard and me had been represented in : a very different light to him; that he understood ; there had been a flight quarrel between us, and that the letter he brought, was to be the meant i ©f a reconcilement.	I
Cruel Barnard, mercileSs man! was it not; enough to make me wretched I why should he i endeavour to make me infamous alfo 1 I returned the note and put the letter which had encloScd it, into the fire.. As to thoSe I had formerly received from captain Barnard,. I told his friend I would readily part with them, when he should have restored mine ; but as I had no reafon to have the least reliance on his word, Iwould not give them out of my poffestion, on any other terms. He applauded my resolution and retired.
I LONGED impatiently to leave Paris, and fancied I should recover my peace, by quitting the Scene of my unhappinefs.—I was obliged to part with Some of the jewels, which Mrs. Bolton had left me, to defray the expences of my illneSs and journey ; and in a state of the lowest v/caknefs both ©f mind and body, I returned to London.
On my arrival, I found that a maiden aunt of my father’s, who had never taken the least notice of me, during her life, had bequeathed me her whole forimie, ten thouSand pounds; merely be-caufe I was her namefake, and unprovided for by my father. This was a very happy addition to my confined circumstances; but I was incapable of joy, and continued to live like a reclufe, till
lord
1
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 67
lord Woodville’s return to England.—He Soon Sound me out, and did me the honour to prefent me to lady Straffon,, and his lovely Emily.
In this charming fociety, I began to recover my tranquillity, and flattered myfelf that it was well nigh established, till the unlucky accident, which brought captain Barnard to my Sight, convinced me, that there is no cure for ill-fated love ; fince neither the cruelty I have experienced, nor time itfelf, have yet been able to conquer it.
I WILL not now, my dear lady Woodville, take up more of your time, by apologizing for the weaknefs of my conduct through this unhappy affair; for
** With thee, I Scorn the low constraint of art, ** And boast the graceful weaknefs of my heart.”
LETTER XIV.
Lady StrAFFON, to Lady WoGDVILLE.
I HAVE a thoufand thanks to give my dear Emily, for the pleassng though melancholy entertainment, which lady Harriet’s history has afforded me.—When I was very young, ? ufed to be Surprized that fo many tragedies and novels, were founded on the perfidy of men : but I have, for Some years past, been perfedlly convinced, that most of the miferies in this life owe their being to that fatal Source. And were there but a window in every fair boforn in the cities of London and Westminster, we should difcover numberlefs hidden traces of the barbarous triumphs, of thofe doughty Heroes, famous and
“ renowned
I ,
: t
. I *
I; , 11 • ' ’ «
: i
11
' t
i;
M ’
I I !
‘ 1
68 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
/
“ renowned for wronging innocence, and break-ing vowsand among this detestable corps,
I think captain Barnard might lead the van, and Sir Jajiies Miller bring up the rear.
You may fee, by this difpofition, that] think worfe of the captain than the baronet, asl| think lady Harriet much more unhappy than Lucy. However, I Sincerely hope they may both furmount their affiidlions: for time and reafon can do more, in thefe cafes, than the Sufferers are willing to allow. They are patients that do not with to be cured ; and find a degree of pleafure in indulging their maladyi
I AM of opinion, that when difappointed love fubfides into a calm and gentle melancholy, its fenfations may not only be pleafing to the perfons that feel it, but render them more amiable, than they would otherwife be, by giving a'peculiar! Softnefs, both to their form and manners. I think I should be more apt to fall in love with a perfon fo circumstanced, than with one who had never felt la belle fajpon.
I HAVE great pleafure in telling you, that Lucy daily gains strength, both of mind and body j and I by no rheans defpair of a perfedt cure. The most favourable fymptom is, her not having mentioned Sir James thefe two days; yet have I not once restrained heron the fubjedf, as she has lately fpoke of him with great calmnefs. I have not yet shown her lady Harriet’s memoir.—Ten-dernefs like forrow is contagious; and the Similitude of their Situations, might call forth tears, which, though Set down to the account of friendship, would certainly flow from her own Sympathy.
It is utterly impofllble for me to have the pleafure of viSiting Woodfort this Summer.—lexpedt Sir John in a very few days.—As Soon as he arrives,
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 69
fives, we shall go into Essex.—I do not think Lucy fufficiently recovered to quit her nurfe, as she calls me.—My little Emily and Edward are quite well, and furprizingly grown ssnce their ill-jiefs.
I LONG to know what became of captain Barnard, the day he left you ; and what connexion he could have with lady Ransford; who, from your account, feems not to be one of thofe, who were born to weep over the willow.
I SUPPOSE you will foon fet out for York. T^f6 lovely marchionefs is to be there.—Is lady Lawfon to be of your party ? I could wish she were ; as 1 fear my dear Emily may not be fufficiently attentive to her prefent fituation.—Let me entreat you not to ride, and to dance but little. My true love attends your lord ; and, with good wishes to all your party, I am, a§^e6Iionately,
Your’s,
F. Straffon.
LETTER XV.
Wo
to Lady Straffon.
AM not half fatisfied with my dear Fanny’s no comment on lady Harriet’s affedting story. —By making the cafe general, you feem inclined to lessen the calamity.—But a plague is a plague, though ten thoufand, or only one thoufand, die of it; and, by extending its dominion you en-creafc the fatality, without abating our compaf-Sion for particular fufferers.
Ag AIN, and again, I fay, what a blessed, happy creature is your Emily ! Had my dear lord after gaining, trifled with my heart, his triumph
would
i
% »
! !
I ;
70 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
t
would Soon have been complete; for I reallji think the first wound must have Subdued it. But* he, who has penetration enough to fee the fob nefs of my nature, has alfo generofity Sufficient to prevent my very wishes; and feems to havt no fear, but want of power to gratify them, This is a theme, on which my grateful heart could dwell for ever; but, not to tire you I fhall change the fubjedf.
I FIND lord Seymour vastly averfe to outgoing to York.—He has taken fo much pains to distuade me from it, that if I had not promifed Fanny Weston, and Sir James Thornton, whofo hearts are fet on going, I should find great pleasure in Sacrificing my own inclination to his lord-ship.-—Yet he gives no Solid reafon, for our declining his party.——I perceive that my lord looks grave, when the Subject is mentioned; of courfe, it is immediately dropped: and 1 find
the boys and girls will be conquerors.---Even
the grave lady Harriet, and Mr^ Ransford, Seemed to be alarmed while the matter appeared doubtful.
I THINK I have as little curofity, as any of my fex, yet I confeis myfelf anxious to know lord Seymour’s motive.—He is a man of fucli excellent understanding, and true politenefj, that I am astonished at his thinking differently, even upon this trifling fubjeft, from my lordl But avaunt I thou first female vice, curiofity ! I will not fuffer thee to harbour one moment longer in my breast, thou inhofpitable tenant! disturber of the peaceful manfion that receives thee !
Lady Lawfon will not accompany us to York: she has been confined to her chamber for Some days, with a fever on her Spirits. A young lady whom she took into her houfe a dif-treffed orphan five years ago, and treated with
the
THE D ELICATE DISTRESS. 71
the utmost tendernefs, has just left her. This is unlucky, as she is ill, and alone. Sir William Set out for London yesterday, without calling upon us.
The moment I have quitted one dear fister, I (hall fly to the other, and fpend as much time as I pollibly can with her. Should she continue ill, it will prevent my going to York. I shall be only Sorry for the occafion, for I have lost all relish for the party.
I KNOW not what became of captain Barnard, the day he left us; but I hear he is a constant vifitor- at Ransford-hall.—The old knight is laid up in the gout ; and her ladyship adlsinthc double capacity of master and mistrefs of the family.
1 HOPE Sir John is by this time, returned to you full of love, and joy and admiration, at your amazing prowefs with regard to his children; and that you are all as happy as you deferve, and I
Amen, and adieu.
E. WOODVILLE.
I
A thoufand loves to Lucy.
LET
72 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
LETTER XVI.
Wo
to Lady Straff ON
My dear Fann y,
AS I have been uSed, from my infancy, to your tender participation of all my pains, and pleafures, I could not reSist my inclination of fending you the inclofed, which afforded me the most charming melange of both, that I have ever met with, I am proud, and pleafed, that the writer was a woman ; but cannot help lamenting that fuch noble Sentiments, fuch an elegant turn of mind, and above all fuch tender fenfibility, should be buried in a cloister.
No w for the means by which I obtained this
treasure.-----Yesterday evening, after the tea,
the conversation turned on the fubjeft of letterwriting. Lord Seymour advanced, arfd was fe-conded by my lord, that ladies in general, wrote
better in the epistolary stile than men.----As I
looked upon Such a declaration, rather as a compliment paid to the prefent company, than their real Sentiments, I took up the argument : and though they mentioned Several instances of charming female Scribes, all of whom I admire, as much as they, yet would I not allow the merit general : — for thoSe very perfons, whom they quoted, are or ought to be, as much distinguished from the rest of their Sex, for their
Superior talents, as lady C----, or the dutchefs
of H——, for their uncommon beauty.
Lord Seymour politely called me an heretic, against Self convidlion ; Said he hadobServed my frequent ,uSe of the pen, and was perSuaded that, no perSon, with half my understanding, was
ever
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 73
ever fond of writing, who was not confeious of writing well. I told his lordship if the conver-fation became particular, there must be an end of the general argument. He bowed, and went on with repeating Some passages from female letters, which did honour to his taste, and with which we were all charmed.
#
He then told us, that he had a letter in his pocket, which he looked upon to be the chef d* cemre of female eloquence ; that he had found it as he was one morning taking a Solitary walk in the Tuilleries; that he would permit me to read it, provided I would candidly give him my opinion, whether I thought any man living could didlate fuch a letter. On my promistng to be fin-cere, he took it out of his pock'^book, presented it to me, wish a trembling hand, and left the room.
When we met at Supper, I was lavish in its praife, ancl declared, that I doubted whether even Rousseau could have wrote more tenderly. He Seemed delighted at my conversation, and immediately complied with my request, to Suffer me to take a copy of it, for you, and you only.
I IMPATIENTLY long to know Something
more of the lady’s history.-1 cannot be per-
fuaded that it was mere accident which put it into lord Seymour’s hands.——But I will not detain you from the perufal of it by my vague
conjeflures----1 shall, however. Satisfy your
curiofity in a more material point, by letting you know lady Lawfon is better.—I am to dine with her, tete-a-tete, to-morrow.
I SHALL claim great merit for this volunteer. I hope Lucy continues well. I earnestly wish to know what apology you have made for that
worthlefs idiot, Sir James Miller to Sir John.
D	Pray


sc
44
4C
4€
44
4C
:74 THE DELICATE DISTRESS. ^
Pray write very foon, a very long letter to
Your’s very Sincerely,
E. WOODVILU.
T H E L E T T E R.
AFTER a confli6l of four months, tli« mildest moment of which fad time, was b finitely more painful, than that which fhall Separate this feeble frame from its perturbed Spirit, I fit down to bid an everlasting adieu to him, who v far dearer than the firft, and long maintained the Scale in equal balance with the latter. Did I fay was P alas ! he ia, and ever will be, dearer than my life 1 which I would Sacrifice, a thoufand times, rather than wound his heart, as I now must.
“ Unhappy Henry 1 what pangs, what an-“ guish will now rend thy bofom, when thou “ (halt be convinced, thou never hadst a rival “ in thy Charlotte’s love I Even heaven itfelf yielded its claim to thee; and my fond heart adored the Maker in his most perfefl work, thy charming Self! Such, in thy Charlotte’s eyes, didst thou appear, till thy relentlefs jea-loufy pur Sued, and would have robbed of life —no rival, Henry ! but thy Charlotte’s bro* ther!
Hew will amazement strike thee! My fad heart bleeds for thine. Involved in mystery, and misery from my birth, this truth could not have reached you fooner ; nor could I postlbly reveal - the Secret, and brand with cruelty and guilt, the authors of my wretched being.
“ Recall the fatal evening to your mind, when that accurfed jealoufy infufed its venom first into you* bofom*'—-what pains did I not
“ tak(
«
C(
4C
44
44
44
€4
44
44
44
44
(
44
<4
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 75
take to counteract the poifon 1 how was the innocent young man astonistied at your behaviour ! remember the last words I ever uttered
<c
fC
to you
My dear eft Henry y let net appear-
** ances difturb your mlndy I cany and‘willy account for every aflion of my life to you----------let your
(t
*(
<c
fervant attend at the gratcy to-morrovjy for a letter from mey and you Jhall be fully fatisfied.** “ Ah ! Henry, how could you doubt her truthj who never yet deceived you ! by what you now must feel, judge what I felt, when word was brought me, you had killed my brother I that he Survives, for your fake, and my own, I bow my heart to heaven. Ah f what uncommon mifery were mine, were I compelled to hate you I No, Henry, I am not fo wretched ; I may love you still, without a crime; most truly love you ; and every prayer that I addrefs to Heaven, may waft petitions for your true felicity I “ To-morrow, I renounce the world; ** vain ceremony! Alas! I have renounced my Henry, before.-------------This is my last adieu.
<<
4C

4C
May every faint and angel, blefs, proteCl: and guide you, to that heaven, where we may, once more, hope to meet!-^—Till then, farewel, for ever.-”
LET T E R XVII.
Lady Straffon to Lady Woodville.
AM vastly obliged to my dear Emily, for her two last letters—her vrdunteer was delightful ■—that angelic nun has almost broke my heart—^ It is impostible she can be happy in a cloister,
D 2	and
y6 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
and I very m«ch doubt, whether thofe fine feelings, which she feems to have, would not have rendered her rather more miserable, had she remained in the world. May she foon arrive at that place, where the highest fenSibility must be productive of the highest happinefs!
You will, perhaps, think me cruel, for wishing her death ; but indeed, my dear Sister, there is Scarce a man living, who could deferve fuch a heart as hers; not even lord Seymour, to whom J believe it devoted. If I read aright, I am truly forry for his misfortune; he has Sustained an irreparable lofs>
I DARE fay your lord is acquainted with the whole story ; and as I am perfuaded that lord Seymour is incapable of a bafe, or mean aCtion he may, perhaps, be prevailed on, to Satisfy your curiofity—but if he once declines it, prefs him no farther. As you value his peace, and your own, never lay him under the painful ne-ceflity of refussng any thing to the woman he loves; nor let him ever fee you have a wish ungratified. Believe me, Emily, more women lofe their hushands hearts, by what they call carrying their point, and teizinga good=^natured man into compliance, than any other way.
The first part of this letter, like the Gazette, has been devoted to foreign affairs ; now for domestic.—Sir John returned last week in perfest health and Spirits, from Paris. I did not Suffer the children to appear, till I acquainted him with
-at first he looked fur-

my bold undertaking-prized and terrified ; but immediately recoiled-ing himfelf. Said, that from his Fanny’s countenance, he was certain our Joint treafure must be fafe. At that instant, the little animals flew into his arms ; I cannot deferibe the charming Scene,
but
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 77
but it was, as you fay, all “ love, and joy, and “ admiration.”
Lucy came next; she had fummbned all her Spirits, to meet her brother, but in fpite of all her resolution, a wayward tear stole down her lovely cheek. To our mutual Surprize Sir John took not the least notice of her Soft confufion, nor a&ed a fingle question about Sir James Miller. Lucy was vastly happy at his Seeming inattention ; but it alarmed me much more, than if vhe had Spoken upon the Subjedl.
A LITTLE time after., he withdrew into his
cloSct, and wrote a letter-^his Servant returned
as we were Sitting down to dinner, and told him the gentleman was not at home. During our meal, I felt the utmost anxiety, but durst not Speak. Lucy was the exa£t refemblance of Shakefpear’s patience on a monument, Smiling at grief.” Sir John appeared to be perfedlly as eaSe, chearful, and lively.
I OBSERVED to him, that he stalked much, and eat little. He pressed my hand with unaffected tendernefs, and Said the joy he felt at Seeing us all, had quite abforbed any thought of himfelf, but that nature would Soon return to its old bent, and bid me beware of my beef and mutton to-morrow.
I KNEW the lofs of appetite to be a common effect of joy, and therefore endeavoured to per-fuade mySelf, that all was well. When we aroSe from table, he Said he had Some bussneSs to tran-SaCt for a gentleman in Paris, but that he should return to tea, and dessred Lucy to have her voice and harpfichord, in tune, to Sing him Some new
Songs he then put on his Sword, and walked brilkly out of the houfe.
Lucy and I remained for Some moments petrified ; we could neither Speak, nor look at each
D 3	other

r,-
78 THE DELICATE DISTRESS
at length flie arofe, and with a flow
other-----
pace, and down-caft looks advanced to where! Sat, then fell upon her knees before me, and bathed my hand with her fast-falling tears. I could not bid her rife, but funk down by her, and joined in fervent prayer, for my hulband, and her brother’s Safety.
A THOUSAND times the dear unhappy girl implored my pardon, as though She ,were the guilty caufe, of what I did, or might hereafter juffer. Her anguish Seemed unutterable; and alarmed and distressed as I then was, I found it absolutely necessary to conceal my own fears, and Speak peace to her distradled tortured mind.
In lefs than an hour. Sir John relieved
from this shocking state ------ at the transporting
found of his voice, we endeavoured to compofe
ourfelves—----Lucy flew to open the door of the
parlour, where we had remained during his ah’* fence; she rushed into his arras, and fainted there. The strong tranSition overpowered her every faculty, and it was a considerable time before (he shewed any stgns of life. I do not blush to tell you that Sir John wept over his beloved; stster.
As Soon as she had power of articulation, (he gazed intently on her brother, and exclaimed, Where is the unhappy man? and do 1 fee mj dearest brother fafe, and unstained with blood?
My dear Lucy, Sir John replied, calm your. Spirits—r-you need have no apprehenfions, either for Sir James Miller or for me—be is fallen below my reSentment; and you might have been assured from the first, that any man who dared to treat a woman ill, muSt be a coward in his heart.
But did you meet ? cried Lucy. No, Said Sir John, and I will anSwer for it, we never shall,
if
THE DELICATE DISTRESS; 79
if he can avoid it ; and 1 promiSe you, I shall not feek the wretch.
But pray, Sir John, Said I, how came you acquainted with his ungenerous behaviour ? As vice and folly are generally connefted, replied Sir John, he was weak enough to inform against himfelf by a letterwhich he wrote to me at Paris, fome time after his marriage ; and concluded ifc with prefmiting lady Miller’s compliments, and hoping that notwithstanding what had pasted,> we might still be friends, and live upon good-terrhs.
In my anfwer, I told him that though fighting: had formerly been my profeshon,,! was neither a bully nor a bravo, and if he could acquit himfelf with honour, of a breach of faith to a woman of unquestioned merit, I was ready to accord him the' friendship he defired ; but as I looked upon that to be impossible, I hoped he would at least be ready to afford me the only, fatisfadtion that remained in his power to offer or mine to receive. That I shoulMeave Paris in a fev/ days,, and call upon him, as fcon as I arrived in London.
I SAW his fervant near this houfe, when I a-lighted, and Shave reafon to think he was placed there, to watch my coming ; as Sir James and his lady fet out in a few minutes after for Paris, And I think there now remains nothing, but to wish my dear Lucy joy of her efcape, from fuch a contemptible animal.
I AM, indeed, my dear brother, faid Lucy,
truly joyful---what a wretch should I have
been, if any misfortune had befallen you, on my account ! how could I ever have looked upon my more than lister, or her littl Sir John and I endeavoured to change the fub-yeSl, but Lucy frequently recurred to it.
Ah, Emily ! her wounds are not yet? healed.
D 4	We
O
angel babes ?
8o THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
We Spent the evening in a kind of pleafing melancholy—though our hearts were at peace, our Spirits were too much agitated to be chearfui. I proposed our Setting out for Straffon . Hill, next day, but Sir John Seemed inclined to stay fora few days longer. As I have now no apprehensions from Sir James Miller, I can have no ob-jeftion, though I confefs I long for pure air, and peace; two charming things, which are never to be found in a great city.
I CONGRATULATE you on lady Lawfon’s recovery. How does poor lady Harriet ? Have you civilized Sir James Thornton ? I mean, hai he yet fallen in love ? What is Fanny Weston doing ? I shall think her much to blame, if stie
does not make a conquest-the country is the
place to infpire Sentiment—in London, we think of nothing but outward shew—happinefs is inti rely out of the question. May/V long continue to restde at Woodfort, Sincerely wishes
Your
F. Straffon.
P. S. What an amazing long letter ! but I am never tired of converfing with you—Sir John, and my Lucy, and rhy babes, all lend you their loves.
LETTER XVIII.
WooDviLLE to Straffon. My dear Fanny,
YOU very aptly compare your last letter to a news-paper, which records fadts indiscriminately—-	'—how could you possibly think of
the
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 8i
he charming nun, however engaging or affedt-ing her Situation, and thence proceed to a fober ledture on matrimony, before you mentioned events fo interesting, as thofe which related to Sir John, Lucy, and yourfelf ? You are certainly a perfed stoic, and I begin to fear you will foon be above “ life’s weaknefs, and its comforts too.” You fee how gladly I lay hold of the first opportunity, I ever had, to criticife on you. I have no doubt but you will explain away all my objedions, by next post ; but in the mean time, I Ihall fully enjoy that felf-given confequence, and Superiority, which vve all assume, when we take the liberty of condemning another perfon’s con dud.
But to be Serious, both my lord and I are charmed with Sir John—his tendernefs for his amiable Sister Sets his bravery in the strongest light—and you really did not bliisti to-record it t my dear Fanny must have a great deal of effrontery, notwithstanding her modest countenance, and her meek air. I am in Such high Spirits, at the happy condufion of this difagreeable affair, that I cannot command my pen to write one rational line.
Yes, it shall tell you, that all this family congratulate our dear Lucy, and you, but more particularly her, on her lucky efcape from that contemptible wretch Sir James Miller; and though we all hope, and believe ourfelves to be very good Christians, there is notone of iis would lament his untimely end', if he should be deteded in picking pockets in Paris, and make his exit at the Grew.
And fo my dear 'wife Sister very prudently warned me against teazing my lord—it was a proper caution, and I shall ufe it—am not I very obedient ? but she left me at full liberty, to tor-
D 5	raent
, i \ ‘
82 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
ment any one elfe—I stiall ufe this latitude alfo-To begin : I must inform you that I am in full poffelTion of the hilloiy of our lovely nun, and unrestrained from communicating it to you ; yet stall I not gratify your curiostty, which I am certain is as great as mine, until you are Brought to confefs it; and provoked to fay, Psta, Emily, how can you be fo teixing
I MUST now hasten to your queries, as we are going to dine at lord Withers’s, four miles off. I have prevailed on lady Lawfon to be of the party ; Sir William is not returned from London yet. I do believe Sir James Thornton is in love, though we cannot guefs with whom. He is lately become thoughtful, and referved ; we rally him on his gravity, and tell him he is “ proud, “ melancholy, and gentleman-like though he has lost his chearfulnels, his good humour is invincible, and he strives to laugh, whenever he thinks we wist he stould.
I MUCH fear that Cupid has played at crofs-bow, amongst our young folks, and dealt out left-handed arrows. 1 fear poor Fanny Weston is a stricken deer, and am apprehenlive, that the hand which gave will never heal the wound. She fits whole evenings alone, in her chamber, listening to an iEolian harp, and fometimes looks as if ste had been in tears. She fays ste will go to London, from York; but I fancy ste may as well return to Woodfort, as all our male inmates will have left us.
Lord Seympur talks of going to the hot wells, at Bristol, in a few days; and Sir James Thornton goes from York, to his own feat in the West. Lady Harriet continues pretty much the fame, except when captain Barnard is mentioned ; which happens too frequently, as he still viSits at lady Ransford’^s.
Adieu
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 85
AdiLU, dear Fanny, the coach is ready, and Sir Tames Thornton waiting in the anti-chamber of the dreflinsf-room, to hand me to it. I can-not help laughing at the idea of her grave face. A thoufand loves attend Sir John, Lucy, and the babes.
Gnce more, adieu.
E. WOODVILLE.
LETTER XIX,
Lady Straff ON, to WoodVille. '
Straffon-Hill.
T is a remark, much to the honour of human nature, that happinefs creates benevolence, lam, therefore pi eafed with illustratinght, by telling you, that the c?alm and rational delight I receive, from my prefent happy fituation, has rendered my mind fo placid, and ferene, as to prevent my relenting your ladyship’s farcastical comment on my last letter. Au contraire^ Lam pleafed at your becoming a critic; as I think you want a little of thaty^y^/wn confequence, which is Sometimes necessary, to give us weight with others.
But now to prove to you that l am not stoic enough to be indifferent about your good opinion, I must inform you, that the first part of my last letter was wrote a few minutes before Sir John’s arrival, the remainder the day after. And as I know my dear Emily’s weak Spirits are too apr to be alarmed, I chofe to proceed in continuation, in hopes, that by Seeming to treat the matter lightly, I might prevent her apprehenSions: and this remarkable instance of my delicacy, has her
*
I •
84 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
pretty little ladyssiip construed into a total want of feeling. But you love faire la guerre ; and now, look to yourfelf.
I NEVER pretended to be devoid of curioSity; it is a passion inherent to our natures, and, properly condu6ted, may be productive of every gootl.-—It is tste fource of knowledge ; and in niy mind, the strongest mark of distin^ion between the rational and brute creation.—It is our birth-right, defcended to us from our first mother.—You will, perhaps, fay, it is an inheritance we might have difpenfed with, as it has certainly cost us too dear ; yet as I have already faid, if well cultivated, it is a fruitful foil; but, in the hands of the weak, or idle, it can bring forth nothing but weeds, or thorns.
Against this kind of produce, I warned my Emily, and still warn her, lest they, at any time, fhould wound her tender heart. I frankly confefs myfelf interested in the fate of your lovely nun ; but instead of faying, as you would have me, Plha, Emily, how can you be fo teizingl I stiall fay Pray, Emily, do not be teizing, but write me a full and true account of every circumstance you know, relating to the charming vestal ; and of every thing elfe, that you think can afford any entertainment, to
Your afSe^ionate Sister,
F. Straffon.
L E T-
I ;
THE DELICATE DISTRESS
85
LETTER XX.
Lady "WooDV 11.1.% to Straffon.
w
HAT a triumph Sor Such a little infigni-ficant animal as me, to be able to ruffle the calm dignity of a female philofopher ! 1 shall begin to think myfelf of fome confequence ; rather of more weight, than the fly upon the chariot •wheel. For, indeed my dear Fanny, notwithstanding your efforts to difguife it, you were a little chagrined at the fmall attempt towards pertnefs, which I ventured to make, in my last letter ; and, in truth, you wife ones, when once thrown off your guard, make as foolish a figure as any of us Simpletons.
I HAVE heard it Said, that a perfon who never learnt to fence, shall be able to difconcert the greatest master of that noble fcience ; nay more, may postibly kill him by a random pafs, while he stands in the best posture of defence, and is aiming at his antagonist, in all the profundity of quarte or tierce. Just fuch a fcrambling combatant have you to deal with, who, without the least {kill in the art of logic, prefumes to enter the lists with your wife ladyship.
And fo, Fanny, curiofity is now become a virtue, “ productive of every good, the Source ** of knowledge, the distinguishing mark of rati-onality, an inheritance defcended to us,” &c. And yet poor Emily is not to be allowed the ufe of this treafure, but to be deprived of her birthright, and treated as an abfolute alien to our grandmother Eve. Is not this a little hard ?
But now what fays my phthfophyi to this Severe treatment ? I think I fee you laugh, at that exprestion. But pray, madam, is not the great
ufe
/
86 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
ufe and end of that exalted study, to render ua^ happy, by perfectly acquiefcing in our own lot, and wifely contemning all thofe advantages that are denied us? Grant me but this, and I will immediately prove myfelf a philofopher, by {hewing you how differently we think, in regard to this fame treafure, called curiofity, which I am not permitted to have any share of.-
And first, I> abfolutely deny, that it ever was,
or can be, produQiive of good. Au contrairey I have Scripture on my fide, to prove that it was the original caufe of every phyfical, and moral ill, that has happened in this world, for I know not how many thoufand years. You fay, “ it “ is inherent to our natures.” Fie, Fanny! Could the Author of good then have punished dame Eve, and all her descendants, merely for following the bent of that nature, he had him-felf endued her with ?—Impoffible I
Isay, it was the devil, who first introduced it into paradiSe, and infedted poor Eve ; for it* certainly is contagious, and never to be eradicated. From her then, it has defcended to all her offspring, not as an inheritance though, but rather as an uncancellable mortgage upon their natural patrimony.
You fay, “ it is the Source of knowledge.”' There again, my dear, you are unluckily mistaken.—Pride is, undoubtedly, the first motive for not to be wifei but to be thought ivifetf than our neighbours, is the great reward. A distinguishing mark of rationality. You are really no philofopher, lady Straffon.—Have you-never Seen a dog, or cat, raife up their ears, and listen with all the avidity with which an old maid hearkens to a Scandalous report of Some blooming beauty of eighteen? Indeed,, my dear, you must have observed this frequently > and I am
firmly
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 87
firmly perfuaded, thatthofe animals I have mentioned, are juft as inftindlively curious, as any duchefs in Chriftendom.
I THINK I have now fairly demoliftied all your arguments in favour of this precious commodity; but as you boufi the posteffion of it, which I believe no woman ever did but yourfelf, I will shew myfelf the paragon of good nature, and gratify the weaknefs I condemn, by telling you the history of our amiable nun.
How unlucky now, for your poor dear curio-fity ! Lady Ransford has this moment alighted.
----1 muft fly to receive her, and bid you
Adieu.
E. WOODVILLE.
LETTER XXL
Lady Straffon to Lady Woodville.
And fo, my pretty little Bizarre, you are really delighted, at having ruffled a female phiiofopher ; and from thence are determined to derive felf-confequence : HelaSf ma pauvreenfantt How grieved am I to mortify, by undeceiving you ? for I cannot help informing you (though I know it to be cruel) that I have never been fo much pleafed, with any of your letters, as your two laft.
Br OUGHT up, from your early infancy, with a high deference for my opinions, which for fome years paft I have wished you to shake off, left it should prevent the freeufe of your own undeiftanding, and occafion your receiving notions upon truft, without giving yourfelf the trouble of examining them, I am delighted to
find
88 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
find that ray dear Emily will, though in pure badinage, exert her reafon and argue, if not logically, at least ingeniousty.
Go on, my lively opponent, and push the mock war between us as far as it will go ; though indeed you have left rae little to fay, on the fub-je6l of corioSity, except that it was certainly the original Source of knowledge, however unmeri-torious, as it first induced Eve’s trefpafs, in tasting the forbidden fruit : but I think, we have fairly exhausted this theSis, and now ioF quelque chok de-nouveau.
Si r John has received a letter from Sir James Miller, wherein “ he intreats that Sir John will
not banish him his native land, by keeping up “ any refentment against him. He implores “ Lucy’s pardon ; and is mean enough to give “ hints, that his crime has been his punishment.” Poorabjeft wretch ! Sir John has assured him that he never can feel refentment for a perfon he defpifes ; fo that he may return to England in perfedl fafety.
This last contemptible manceuvre of Sir James, has I think completed Lucy’s cure. Her faded charms begin to recover their former lustre ; and I had the pleafure of over-hearing her Singing a very lively air, as she walked just now under my window. Are not thefe good Symptoms, my fair philofopher ?
No friendly viSitant has broke in upon me, to interrupt the tedioufnefs of this epistle ; but the clock hasjust reminded me of an appointment I made with my Edward and Emily, to take them to our park. Exaft punfluality should ever be preferved, in promifes made to thofe who are not capable of judging of the rcafons,
which

S.'--
Hi. *'
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 89
which might be given for a breach of it—I therefore must fly to them, and bid my dear Emily
Adieu.
F. Straffon.
#•
LETTER XXII.
\
WoODVILLE to Lady Straffon.
My dear Fan NY,
I A M heartily glad that the mock war, as you call it, between us, is at an end, as I should at prefent, be totally unable to Support my share in the combat, and, of courfe, must fall before the conqueror. I have been unufually difpirited, and languid, for thefe two days.—I feel, as if I had caufe to be melancholy, and yet endeavour to perfuade myfelf that I have none. This is a state not to be defcribed: and to you, who, I dare fay, have never experienced it, may appear ridiculous; and yet, believe me, it is a painful
sttuation--But I flatter myfelf, I have rather
caught, than bred this malady.
Lord Seymour left us this morning ; and for Some days before he Set out, he feemed to have acquired an additional degree of melancholy foft-nefs. Love he can never feel more.—Befides, my lord Seems infected with the fame diforder; looks grave, and Sighs. Tell me then, Fanny, is it possible that male friendship is fo much more delicate and tender, than ours, that their mutual fadnefs could arife from a Separation, for a few weeks, or perhaps, months. If this should be the real caufe, I shall blush for my own want of
fenfibility.
I SHOULD

9© THE DELICATE DISTRESS:
I SHOULD think lord Seymour in Such a ftatjl of mind, that no flight or trivial misfortune could polTibly affedt him ; for they who have! once felt real anguifh,. may bid defiance to future! ills. The arrows of adverfity nfay glance againft,| but cannot wound a heart already broken. From Sympathy alone, fuch minds can fuiSer.—But, Gh I far, far, be the thought> from Emily’s fond bofom,, that lord Woodville’s Sufferings should cauSe lord Seymour’s Sorrow ! It is im-poflible! I am Sorry I have expressed Such a thought, even to you, my fisser. I would blot it from the paper, if I could erafe it from my mind.
We had,, last night, a concert, in a temple dedicated to Apollo, in the garden.—My lord, whoSe voice is harmony itfelf, was Singing one of Shenstone’s elegies. I accompanied him on the harpfichord, and lord Seymour on the violoncello. At thefe words.
\ t
!l i
‘ I
■ . I
' i 1 i
1 M !
‘A
•M ’
! • )
'A 'A 1 r' t l:i: I
N't ' • r • i • I
; ■ ; -I
1 :1 i
iiM I
I !
** She was fair, and I could not but love,
“ She is faithleSs, and I am undone,”
I Saw lord Seymour fix his eyes on lord Wood-ville’s face, which, in a moment, became fuffufed with crimSon ; his voice faultered So much, that he could fcarce finish the Song.
The moment it was epded, he quitted the te;’’:ple. I felt myfelf alarmed ; I feared he was taken ill, and went immediately towards the houfe. As I crossed the parterre, I Saw him walking brifldy, in a path that leads to the wood t this quieted my apprehenfions for his health, but left my mind in a state incapable of tLlnking.— I retired to my chamber, and continued to mufe,. till Summoned to Supper.
There
i'l i
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 91
There was no notice taken of what had passed—we parted earlier than ufual, all but lord Seymour, and my lord, who continued together, till near four o’clock. I could not sseep, and wifhed to have rifen, and either walked, or read ; but was unwilling to difcover my restless^ nefs to him who caufed it. When we met, at breakfast, Mr. Ransford, who was just arrived from London, afked my lord in a low voice, if I had been ill, as he obferved that I looked mucli. paler than ufual.
What a flutter am I in! Just as I had wrote the last word, my dear lord opened the door, and faid he came to request the pleafure of my company, to fee a new improvement ho-is making ; and, with the most engaging affability, added, that he feared he had disturbed my rest, by fitting up fo late, but thought an airing would do us both good.
His behaviour has made all the forgoing part ©f my letter appear a vifibn to me. Do not reply to it, my Fanny, till you hear from me again ; and I hope, by next post, to have forgot I ever wrote it.
Adieu, adieu, that I may fly indeed, to the most amiable of men.
E. WoODVILLE.
P. S. You shall have the little history of the nun, with my next.--1 rejoice at Lucy's re-
covery.——Happy, happy, may you.all be!
L E T-
92 THE DELICATE DISTRESS^.
LETTER XXIII.
Ladv WoODViLLE to Ladv Straffon.
i (

' '
; ;
’• t
I
i I
' i }
- I
' t
I .
I . I
I

I t
My dearest Fanny,
The cloud that hung over my mind, is totally difperfed, and my happinefs restored with my reafon. What a vistonary must you think me! but do not chide me, my loved Sister, lest, by endeavouring at a justification, I should fancy 1 had found reafons to Support my folly.
I NEVER Spent So delightful a day, as the lad on which I wrote to you. During our airing, which was about fix miles, my lord appeared, ii possible, more amiable to me than ever. There was a peculiar air of tendernefs diffufed through his voice and manner ; perhaps the parting from his friend, had Softened his already gentle nature. Perhaps—but why pry into his bofom, in Search of a caufe, which might render the effect led pleafing?
In Icfs than an hour, we arrived at the neateft and most elegant cottage, I ever beheld.. It was Seated on the declivity of a hill, and defended from the North winds by a Small wood, fo beautifully variegated, that even in this leafy feafon, fummer, autumn, and winter, Seemed- to vye in the luxuriancy of the different shades, which their Several periods produce.
Before the houSe a pendant lawn, covered with sheep and lambs, reached to the river, which winded in the most beautiful mazes round the hill. Over the broadest part of it, was a Gothic bridge of one arch, with a watch tower in the center ; and on the other fide of the houSe, stood a Small nurSery and shrubbery—I was never more
agreeably
lii
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 93
agreeably furprized, than with this lovely Scene, t really think if I was to meet with any Severe affliffion, that I ftiould like to retire to this delightful Solitude, and paSs my days in it.
I frequently Saw my lord’s eyes Sparkle with pleaSure, at that which I expressed. As I neither Saw or heard a human creature but our-Selves, I begged to know who were the happy owners of this lovely Spot ? Said I wished to See and congratulate them, on their taste and felicity.—^Pe Said he would immediately comply with my request, and by So dcdng, increaSe the happineSs of its possessors.
He then led me to the houfe, which was as Simply elegant within, as without—I think I never Saw perfeft neatnefs before—and preSented me to his nurSe an extreme good looking woman, about fifty—she knew not in what manner to receive me—humility and joy Seemed to struggle in her countenance—I stepped forward, and embraced her—my lord Seemed delighted at what he was pleaSed to call my condeScenfion.
The good woman has been a widow for twelve years; her hushand was first gardener to my lord’s father and her Son in-law is now in the fame station with us. Her daughter is a very pretty woman about two and twenty ; and ready to lyc in of a Second child. I never beheld Such a cherubim as the first. My lord Said archly, he hoped his foster fister and I should be better acquainted, and that she would undertake the Same
good office for me, that her mother had done for his.
The poor girl blushed, and curtSyed ; I felt my cheeks glow ; and walked to the window—I confeSs I was charmed with his attention to fuch a point, which the foolish lords of the creation generally think below them. He then inquired
for
11 c
I I
is
»
• t,
T
I' ;
b. 11
t I
• i
. I
-1'
94 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
for the nurfe’s mother, and the finest old woman I ever Saw, came into the room—Saluted her alfo—her hair was perfedtly Silver, and her Ikin like down—she blested and embraced my lord, while tears of joy and gratitude ran down her fair unfurrowed cheek.
My lord was affe^Ied, and faw me So ; and in order to change the fubjedl, told the good woman of the houfe, he was come to dine with her.—She looked amazed, and fo should I, hadl then thought him Serious—But I found he wai fo, when he told her she could certainly give us good bread, butter, rashers and eggs, and a fal-lad ; and that he would take care of the rest.
SMILED assent ; but Said, we should fend home, to prevent the company waiting. He faid there was no neceffity for it, as he was quite Satisfied that our friends at Woodfort would fit down to dinner at the fame instant that we did, without hearing from us. I then fuppofed he had left orders that they should not wait, and was pleafed with the idea of our fimple rustic meal. But I was to be still more Surprized; for in about ten minutes the coach arrived with lady Harriet, Fanny Weston, Sir James Thornton, and Mr. Ransford. A Sumpter car followed with wine and cold provifions.
The beauty of the Scene, the finenefs of the day, the unpremeditatednefs of the Scheme, all confpired to render us more chearful, than we should have been perhaps in any other place on earth ; and we all returned home delighted with our little expedition, and full of gratitude to my lord, for the pleafure it had afforded us.
This is an enormous long letter, but you taught me to rife early; I can therefore Spare time to my abfent friends, as well as thofe about me ; and I can never think that time better employed,
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 9S
^ployed, than in proving to my dearest Fanny, -that lam
Her truly affedlionate lister,
E. WoODVILLE.
P. S. I fear ! have delayed the history I now Tend you, too long ; perhaps your curiossty may be as much palled as one’s appetite fometimes is by waiting for a Second courfe ; which though elegant in itSelf cannot repair the damage done by the delay. But if you are a true epicure, and like the feast, you will feed heartily, though the tedioufnefs of the cook be ever fo teizing to you.
Ti5^HxsTORY of Mifs Charlotte Beaumont.
AS the chief circumstances which relate to this lady, refer more to others than herfelf, we must look back to thefirst caufes of thofe effects, which Seem to have marked her fate. Unhappy in the very article of her birth, though defended from a noble family, it will be necessary to give Some account of the authors of her berng.
Her father the prefent general Beaumont, was the youngest fon of one of the most antient, and illustrious houfes in France : but as is generally the cafe with the Superfluous branches of great farnilies of that nation, he was possessed of no other patrimony than his high birth, a graceful perfon, and his fword.
The church and the army are the only provi-ssons which feem to be dessgned for the cadets of the noblesse. To the latter our young Soldier of fortune applied himfelf, and foon obtained a genteel post there. In this fituation the then du-cbefs dowager of H faw, and was captivated with our young hero.—Though her age more
than
■' \
/

l!
96 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
than doubled his, her perfon was still pleafing, and her fortune So infinitely Superior to his moft Sanguine hopes, that he did not long hefitate to accept Such a Splendid establishment.
They pasted Some years together, with that polite indifference, which distinguishes the married couples of high rank, in that gay nation. At length, the duchefs began to grow weary, of treading the Same dull circle, for So many years, and proposed to the general they should vifit one of her estates in Languedoc, and pafs a Summer there. Though he was by no means tired of the grande tnonde, nor could poffiblyform^any very delightful idea of retirement, with Such a companion as her grace, he politely astented to her request.
When they had been Some time in the country, the duchefs hinted a defire of fending for a young lady, who was a distant relation of her first hushand’s, and whom she had formerly placed in a convent. This propofal was perfest-ly agreeable to the general. The most defirable fetes a fetes. Sometimes grow languid: but the intervention of a third perfon in fuch a Situation as theirs, was most devoutly to be wished for.
Her grace Set out the next morning, for the
convent de  -----, which was about five leagues
from her feat, and returned in the evening, accompanied by the too lovely Charlotte D’Etree.
The general, though well accustomed to the power of beauty, became Suddenly captivated.— Never had he beheld fuch a face and form before —fuch Simple elegance, fuch unaffected grace, the beauties of Venus, with Dian’s modesty.
While the lovely Charlotte felt at least as much Surprize at the fight of him. We have already faid his perfon was remarkably graceful, his air at once engaging and commanding; nor
was
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 97
glcfled
put off fuch a form to the best advantage.--— What an amazing effe6t must fuch a ssgure have, upon a girl not yet Seventeen ! who had been bred in a cloister, and had never feen, or at least converfed, with any man who did not wear a
cowl.	,
The duchefs attempted to appologize for Charlotte’s astonishment. By obferving that the poor girl had been brought up in an abfolute ignorance ; but hoped when she had been Some time with her, that her aukward amazement would wear off She might have talked for ever without interruption. The general had neither fpeech nor hearing ; his faculties feemed all absorbed in one; and through his eyes alone, his heart was for the first time taught to feel a real paffion.
The little wanton God, too much the general’s friend. Soon infpired the innocent and fair D’Etree, with the fame Sentiments. Never did the tyrant reign more abfolute, than in the hearts of thefe his willing staves. Whole months pasting away in all the delights of mutual fond-nefs, feemed to the lovers but a day ; and when at the end of autumn, the duchefs talked of returning to Paris, it appeared to them liked being: doomed to banishment.
Charlotte was to accompany the duchefs thither ; but the.general knew their interviews must be lefs frequent, and more liable to interruption, than in the charming Solitude of belle •veue. After every excufe was obviated, and every postible contrivance of delay exhausted, they were forced to Submit ; and the once gay and lively Charles Beaumont, Set out for the metropolis, with infinitely more regret than he had quitted it. The duchefs was happily not of
E	a j«alou$
I-
. 1 ; 1
I \
!»:
V,
I • <
.1*
. \
ii('
i .
i;

i 1:
1 '

It.
>
il
98 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
a jealous nature ; and the , enamoured pair behaved with So 'much circumfpe6tion, that Ihe never Seemed to have the least Suspicion oS their mutual attachment to the last hour of her life.
The natural confequences of their guilty love, now began to make Charlotte taste the bitter ingredients of that intoxicating cup, of which she had drank So deeply. Infamy stared her in the face ; and, though a criminal pastlon had triumphed over chastity; her modesty was not yet extinguished. SleepleSs nights, and days of anguish, now became her portion. She detested herSelf and all the world ; all, but the guilty author of her miSery. How often did she wisti, she never had quitted the cloister ; but there, like the defart rofe, have bloomed and died un-feen, in innocence and peace !
The general, whofe fondnefs if postible was cncreafed by her sstuation. Said’ every thing in his power to confole her, by promifing to Secure her fame. Many were the expedients he thought of, but none of them Seemed fufstcient to Satisfy the delicate apprehenssdns of the unhappy Charlotte. At length she recolledied that there was a young woman in the convent where she had been ‘ bred, whofe father and mother were dead, and had left therin Such low circumstances that stie could neither afford to live in the world, or pay her penSion where she re'mained ; and was therefore under the painful necestity of taking the veil, contrary to her inclinations, or of going into the world as a dependent.
This perfon then she fixed upon as a confi-darate, and immediately wrote to her to come to Paris, with ample promifes of taking care of her future fortune. MademoifelleLaval wasover-joyedat Such a Summons, and instantly obeyed it. In the mean time, the general hired a very neat
furnished

\ i
THE Delicate DISTRESS. 9,
neat furnilhed houfe for her reception, and appointed fervants and every thing proper for her arrival.—She was informed that stie was to per-fonate a lady whofe hulband was just dead, and who was come from a distant part of Normandy, to profecute a law-fuit and lye-in at Paris.
The unhappy sstuation of this young woman’s circumstances, made her readily acquiefce in every thing that Charlotte required ; and fh$ entered her houfe, with all the melancholy Solemnity of an afflidled reliQ:. In a few days after her arrival, the real mourner, the poor wretched Charlotte, went to viSit her ; and after fhed-ding a flood of tears upon her bofom, acquainted her with her unhappy Situation and implored her alTistance.
Mademoiselle Laval, naturally good na-tured, and Softened by the unhappy condition of her friend, promifed every thing she could de-fire ;—endeavoured to Soothe and comfort her affliction ; and at last, fettled matters in fuch « way, that the moment Charlotte found herfelf taken ill, she was to go there ; that every necef-fary preparation should be made, and every tender care taken of her and her oflFspring.
Every thing happened to their utmost wishes; she was taken ill as she was drelSing to go to a ball at the English ambassador’s. The duchefs was luckily prevented from going by a flight cold ; and Charlotte, when she got into the carriage, had no one to oppoSe her being fet down where she pleafed.—She went direCUy to her friend’s houfe, and was there happily delivered of a Son and daughter, who were Immediately bapti«,ed, by the names of Charles and Charlotte.
In as short a time as was possible after this event, the general and one of his particular
E 2	friend
s
.1:
M''
iU :
M '
^ I
if
1 ,
! ’

iii
ib
If'
‘m:
s
!;i
!.ii

i:i
,{ I , ' I ; •
':' i
i!’:
iT
!i '
, i
■ I ;1 .
l!d
hi.
iib
[fb

i;h
I !
t
i •'
|i
> :
I'
lb
:i:
> i‘
ifi
i*

100 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
i
friends carried Charlotte home in. a Sedan chair. She Said she had been taken ill at the ball, and .went diredly to bed, where she continued for Some days ; and to carry cm the deceit, mademoiselle Laval confined herSelf to her bed and went through all the forms of a real accouchement.
ThICgreat event So well over, the general thought himSelf the happiest man living.-He
doated on his children, and perfedfly adored their lovely mother.-------But she continued to
appear gloomy, anddejeOied; and at last declared, she should never know peace, while the living witneffes of her shame, continued in the fame kingdom with her. She Seldom Saw them, and when she did, expreffed abhorrence, rather than tendernefs, towards them. She behaved
with the utmost coldneSs to the general, and af-fedted to be infinitely more miserable, than flie had ever been before.
The general was almost distradled at her con-dudl, and at length confented to the removal of the children. It was agreed that Lav^l should go over to England, take upon her the name of Beaumont, and educate them as her own, till the ducheSs died-------as Soon as that should hap-
i
pen, he promiSed to marry Charlotte, and receive them as the orphans of a near relation.
In the mean time he fettled a very handSome income on Laval, and the little innocents Set out for London, with their fidlitious mother, who felt, however, infinitely more tendernefs for them than their real one Seemed to have done.’ No THING remarkable happened, during their infancy. Mademoifelle Laval, by the general’s recommendation, became acquainted
with, many families of distinction, and though
quite
jR-
'1! i ;•

THE DELICATE DISTRESS. loi
quite unacquainted with the world, behaved her-fell fo properly, that she was as much esteemed, as known, and her lovely children univerfally admired.
When they were about feven years old, the duchefs died, and in as short a fpacc as decency would admit of, the general fulfilled his promife, to his still adored, and beautiful Charlotte. On this occaSion, mademoifelle Laval, who really doated on her amiable charge, felt the tenderest
concern at the thoughts of parting with it--
but she might have fpared her Sorrow, for ma-dame de Beaumont was, by no means, inclined to rob her of it. On the contrary, when the general propofed the children’s return, she grew outrageous, and declared she would never fee him more, if he attempted to bring them into any part of France. She was born to rule hjs fate, and he Submitted, though reludtantly, to her inhuman, and unnatural commands.
In about ten months after their marriage, she brought him a Son, which, in Some meafure, confoled him for the lofs of his other children ; and, in another year, prefented him with a daughter. In a little time, his fondneSs was wholly transferred to the obje£ls of her adoration.——— nev«r was fo fond a mother; ant| jnadame de Beaumont was looked upon as the pattern of maternal alSe6tion, while she not only abandoned, but detested her former offspring.
The general’s letters to Laval became lefs frequent ; and though he punQually, remitted her income, he Seldom riientiGned thofe, for whofe ufe it was deSigned. In vain poor Laval endeavoured to awaken the tender feelings of a father in his heart, "by boasting the amazing beauty of his Char otte, or mentioning the fine parts, and
accomplishments of his amiable Charles. JSla-
E 3	ture
102 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
ture Seemed dead in him, as much as in thcli cruel mother.
At length, worn by the perpetual remonstrances of the humane and generous Laval, he obtained a commission for his fon, who was then about stxteen, in a regiment that was to ernbarl from Dunkirk, for America; but Sent stridorders that he Should not go to Paris, and conjured Laval to keep him still ignorant of his birth.
Poor Charlotte almost died away, at the thoughts of being Separated from her brother It was the first caufe fhe had ever known for for* row, and nature Seemed inclined to make them both amends for the lofs of parental affedion, by bestowing a double portion of fraternal love, on each.
Our young Soldier, whofe ardor for glory was extreme, was all gratitude to his fuppofed mother for Suffering him to follow the bent of his inclination ; and, at the appointed time, he quitted London, with a heart filled at once with bra* very, and tendernefs.
In order to divert the melancholy which af-feded Charlotte for her brother’s abfence, lady Sandford invited the feigned mademoifelle de Beaumont, and her fuppofed daughter, to pafs .Some time at her feat in the country. The invitation was readily accepted, and there Charlotte, now in her Seventeenth year, first faw lord Seymour.
Her beauty was then only in its dawn, but even then, like Aurora breaking through the clouds, it gave a promife of the brightest day. The tender regret (he felt for her brother’s ah fence, gave an additional foftnefs to her voice, and manners ; and the expressive fenfibility of her large hazel eyes. Seemed encreafed by her gentle distrefs.
Such
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 103
Such an amiable object could not fail of in-fpiring palTion, in a heart lefs fufceptible than lord Seymour’s,' or indeed, any heart, that was not guarded by a prepoffeflion. He foon felt the moll; ardent, and ssncere affedlion for her, nor was he the only perfon who was fenSible of the power of her charms. The young duke of
B----faw her at a ball at Northampton, and
became instantly enamoured-----He waited on
lady Sandford in a few days after, and with all the precipitancy of youth, high rank, and fortune, propofed himfelf to mademoifelle de Beaumont, for her daughter.
Whether Charlotte’s delicacy was really hurt by fuch a proceeding, or whether Ihe then felt a preference for lord Seymour, she instantly rejested the duke’s propofal, with an air offierte, unknown to her before. Mademoifelle de Beaumont, who tenderly loved her, acquiefced in her determination, and refolved not to acquaint her real parents, that fuch a match had been propofed.
Charlotte was tranfported at her feigned mother’s kind condefcenSion, and promifed the most implicit obedience, which indeed she had ever shewn, to all her commands. She began now to recover her fpirits, was all chearfulnefs, and vivacity : and from this pleaSing tranSition, she acquired, if poshble new charms; and each, and every day, lord Seymour became more and more enamoured.
The two happiest months of Charlotte’s life were now pasted, and mademoifelle de Beaumont talked of returning to London. Before they fet out, lord Seymour found an opportunity of difcloSing his pastion to Charlotte. She received his declaration with that franknefs, and candour, that ever dwell with generous minds;
E 4	but
104 the DELICATE DISTRESS.
but at the fame time, told him, that she confi-dered herfelf under fuch obligations to her mother, for her condu6t towards her, in regard to
the duke of B------, that she would never lillei
to any perfon’s addresses, who had not the fane-tion of her approbation.
The enamoured Seymour, whofe passion wai
as truly delicate, as the fair obje6t that infpirej
it, was now at the fummit of felicity-------ho
threw himfelf at Charlotte’s feet, and poured forth his foul, in the warmest expressions of gratitude, for her generous and unaffe6ted behaviour ; and at the fame time, obtained her leave to apply to mademoifelle de Beaumont for her confent, as foon as they should return to Lon* don.
He was permitted the happinefs of attending them thither, and the day after their arrival wait* fid on mademoifelle de Beaumont, to intreat her leave to pay his addresses to her lovely daughter, True love is ever timid, and confeious
Seymour was, that the advantage of birth'and
fortune wciv. wn ms Tide, he felt perhaps more apprehenfions on this occasson than a young enfign would at addressing a lady of the higheft rank.
All that he knew of Charlotte’s circumssan* ces or condition, was, that her mother passed for the widow of a general officer, that her fortune was fmail, but fufficient to fupport her little family genteelly, with oecenomy; and that she had maintained an unblemished reputation in London for near feventeen years.
But how were the generous and dissnteressed Seymour’s fears increafed, when mademoifelle de BeaUiViOnt told him she was h:g hly fenfible ol the honour he intended her dauehter, but that
she thought her yet too young to marry,
io '1 '■ ji: 1'. :
and
that
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 105
that Ihe had laid herfelf under an engagement* never to difpofe of Charlotte, without first cpn-fulting her father’s family and friends ! she conjured him as a man of honour, not to mention his palTion to Charlotte, as by inspiring her with a mutual one, he might perhaps render them both miserable.
Lord Seymour instantly told her it was out of his power to obey her injunction, as it was by Charlotte’s permiflion he had then the honour of intreating her confent, and that he neither could nor w'ould defist from endeavouring to gain a heart, on which all his happinefs in this Iif« depended. Mademoifelle de Beaumont was moved, even to tears, at the unhappy fituation of the lovers. She too plainly Saw the obstacles that must prevent their union, but generoufly promifed and refolved to do every thing in her power for their rhutual happinefs.
Lord Seymour ventured to remonstrate to
her, that with regard to the duke of B---’s
propofal, she had aCted as Sole parent and guardian of her daughter, and he could not fee the necelTity of farther confultation for accepting, than refuSing a lover. She owned her tendernefs for Charlotte had in that cafe triumphed over her promife, but she had even then, only assumed a negative power, which was more in right of her daughter, than herfelf, for she never could think it just, that either parents or friends should even perfuade a perfon to marry contrary to their own inclinations. She told him she would write immediately to France, and reprefent his lord-fhip’s birth, fortune and perfon, in the advantageous light in which she beheld them.
Exalted as his ideas were of the objeCb of his passion, he had great reafon to flatter himfelf, that his alliance would riot be contemned by any
E 5	family
io6 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
family in France ; and when he confidered that the exquiSite perfections of his charming Charlotte must be unknown to thofe perfons, who were to be confulted in the difpofal of them hij fears would fometimes vanish, and his fond heart beat, with all the tranfporting hopes of fuccefsfu! love,
Charlotte who had never heard made-moifelle de Beaumont talk of her father’s family till now, considered the difficulties that were started in another light, and fancied she only meant them to protraCl the marriage, till fhe should be eighteen, which she had often heard her fay, was full early for a young lady to marry, However, without enquiring she perfeCUy ac-quiefeed in her fuppofed mother’s conduCl, and while she had the happinefs of feeing and hearing the tenderest of lovers' and most charming of men, she knew not a wish ungratified. Made-moifelle de Beaumont fulfilled her promife, by writing immediately to the’ general, and mentioning lord Seymour in the justest and of courfe most pleafing light.
It happened that the general and his lady were at that time at Aix la Chapelle, where he had been feized with a violent fever ; and though the letter was forwarded to him, as the characters of the fuperfeription were known by his lady, it lay for Some time unopened.	x.
During this interval the fictitious mademoi-felle de Beaumont was attacked by the fmall pox, which appeared of fo malignant a fort, that her fate was quickly pronounced by her phyficians. As foon as she was acquainted with her diforder, she forbad Charlotte to come near her, as fhe had never had it; but in vain she commanded, or lord Seymour entreated her to abfent herfelf a
moment from her bedSide, She faid it was her
first.
:.i '
After embracing and im-
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 107
first, and should be her last a6t of difobedience; and for that reafon, she hoped her dear and tender parent would pardon it.
Overcome by her filial piety, they Suffered her to undergo fuch constant and violent Ctigue, as at any other time, would have destroyed her delicate and beauteous frame. But she fupported it with fuch a tender alacrity and attention, as amazed and affedled every one who faw her: even lord Seymour’s love was encrcafed by his admiration of her virtues, and rofe almost to adoration.
When mademoifelle de Beaumont was informed o£ her danger, which was but a few hours before her death, she defired to be lest alone with Charlotte.— ploring bleffings on her, she told her that neither her time nor strength, would permit her revealing a fecret that was of the utmost confequence to her. But as she had ever endeavoured to be prepared for the tremendous event that was now come to pafs, she had kept a journal of her life, from the time she quitted the convent de —^—, to the moment of her illnefs; that in thofe papers she would find her own history included, and that of her real parents.
Charlotte, though drowned in tears, was alSattention, till thofe astonishing words, her real
parents ! fmote her ear.---She then, cried out^
ah, madam! will you not only abandon, but deny me ? Alas ! what has your Charlotte done !, Be comforted, my more than daughter, she replied ; I was not worthy of Such a blesting.-
Yet still,. I hope, more worthy than they who poS-fefs fo rich a treafure, regardlefs of its value. But if their hearts, fo long hardened to your blooming virtues, at length relent, and give you;
to the worthy Seymour, yon will have no caufe
to
io8 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
to regret their past negle6t, or court their future proteftion. May you be happy ! This key (tak* irg one from her bolom) will explain whatlcan^ not. And now adieu, for ever !
The fudden cffedfs of furprife joined to thole of grief, quite overcame the affiidied Charlotte.
—Slie fainted, and was conveyed fenfelefs to her own apartment. Mademoifelle de Beau-n ont continued to breathe, till ste heard Charlotte was restored to life ; then yielded up her own.
The next daWCharlotte was feized with con-v-ulSions; and immediately after the fmall-pox appeared, but of a fafe and gentle kind—-the malignity of the difcrder had Spent its force upon mademoifelle de Beaumont; and the low state both of Charlotte’s mind and body, rendered its operations lefs powerful. Lord Seymour never quitted her apartment, though not permitted to enter her chamber; nor could he be prevailed on, even to rest himfelf on a couch, till the phyfi-cians pronounced her out of danger.
As'foon as it was possible stie faw him: he appeared more altered than herfclf. Never was Such an interview between two lovers. Their prefent lofs of beauty Seemed to augment their fbndnefs; and each felt more real tendernefs for the other, than at any former instant of their lives. Lord Seymour, though he lamented the death of mademoifelle de Beaumont, very Sincerely, now thought that every bar to his bap-pinefs was removed ; and as Charlotte appeared to be the mistrefs of her own fate, he had no apprehenfions that his could be unhappy.
She had laughed at madame de Beaumont’s Superstitious attachment to distant relations, whom she had not feen for many years, he therefore
could not SuSpe^ her being infe£fed with the
Same
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 109
fame caprice. The mother Said, she was bound by folemn engagements to the family of Beaumont; the daughter could have entered into none, as she left Paris when an infant. He had therefore, no reafon to imagine that any power on earth could oppofe his felicity ; and indulged his fond imagination with refpeSlive views of fancied blifs, which he was fated never to enjoy !
The fmall-pox had been fo favourable to Charlotte, that she had not been affe£Ied with the least mark or alteration of feature ; and the natural whitenefs of her fnowy Ikin, foon triumphed over the tranfitory redncfs, which is the common effect- of that always difagreeable, and fomtimes fatal, diforder.
But though her beauty had returned, her chearfulnefs fcenrjed buried in mademoifelle de Beaumont’s tomb. Her affli6tion for her as a parent, would perhaps have fubstded into a calm and gentle melancholy ; but her last words had railed a tumult in her bofom, which she had not refolution fufficient to conquer. She frequently-endeavoured to perfuade herfclf, that her dear mother had raved in her last moments; but the strength of her exprestion, and calmnefs of her manner, oppofed that fond belief.
After her recovery, whole weeks elapfed without her having courage to open the cabinet, where the mystery of her fate lay concealed. She feared to meet^with new obstacles to that happinefs, which she had promifed herSelf, by being united to lord Seymour;
His delicacy had yet prevented him from ex-presting his ardent wishes for their union, as tht caufe of her amiable distrefs was yet too recent; and many months might poffibly have pasted a-in the fame irrefolution, if the receipt of
the
no THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
the following letter, had not precipitated this point, to a more immediate crisss.
LQ Mademoifelle de BeaumoNT.
Aix la Chapelle. ** NEVER was amazement equal, to mine, at peruSing your last letter I What, you 1 wretch as you are, railed by my hand, and fopported “ by my bounty,, preiume to diiiate to me in “ the diipofal of my child! And who is this “ lord Seymour ? is he not an neretic ? if fo that is Sufficient objection, were he a
((
it
ft
ti
((
it
if
' i
> ;
t .
t \ 1
V I
1 1
1
;; ' •1
t' t a >
ii;
prince.
“ But Surely, madam, ssnce you take upon you to inform us of intended marriages, and act as plenipotentiary, between our daughter, and ourftlves, you Should have informed us of the duke of B—’s propofal, and no more “ have dared to refufe, than accept, a lover, for Charlotte Beaumont.
“ The young duke, himfelf, has informed me of his Simple attachment to the Silly girl, and of the infolence with which his propofal was rejected. He inquired, whether fhe was “ of our family ? I did as I ever shall, difdaim “ her.
“ The general, who has been ill of a fever, “ by me commands you on receipt of this, to ** Set out with Charlotte Beaumont,.instantly “ for Paris. He has devoted her to heaven, and “ found out a fit retreat for that purpofe, in the “ convent of St. Anthony. Be it your bufinefs as it is your duty, to teach her an implicit “ obedience, to his will.
“ She is now of age, to be trusted with the Secret of her birth j but let her alfo know,
that
.: I 1 !
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. lU
** that when she relinquishes you, as a mother she is not to expeft to find one, in
“ Charlotte Beaumont.
tc
P. S. The general, and I, shall return to
“ Paris, in a few days, where we expeQ; not to “ fee, but hear from you and Charlotte.
The moment you arrive at the hotel An-gloife, you are commanded to fend to the general ; but on no account attempt to come “ near our houfe.”
((
«
The Situation of the unhappy Charlotte’s mind, upon reading this letter, is not to be def-cribed. Who is this cruel woman, she exclaimed, that thus difclaims an unoffending child ? Oh! I will throw myfelf beneath her feet, and foften that obdurate heart with tears. My father too ; I have a father then ! Sure he will raife me up in his parental arms, and blefs me! They will relent; and when they fee my Seymour, and know his wondrous worth, his wondrous love, they will be charmed, as their fond daughter is and give me to his wishes.
Full of thefe warm, and natural apprehen-fions, the half-distra6fed Charlotte flew to the cabinet, which like Pandora’s box, contained a thoufand ills, and with a trembling hand, unlocked it. The first objeSls that prefented them-felves to her view, were miniature portraits of
her father and mother.------She gazed with joy
and wonder. Never had she beheld fuch strik-
ing beauty, of both kinds ; mild.
the manly and the
She kiffed, embraced, wept over them nay, lenelt to them, implored their pity and proteffi-on, and, in one moment, was infpired with
more refped and tendernefs for thofe inanimate
figures
' I
il"
ii2 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
figures, than flie had ever felt for her fuppofed mother; though gratitude and esteem had an-Swered all the purpofes of filial affedlion in her gentle nature.
She now fat down to fearch the book of fate, thofe fatal Sybils leaves that told her doom ; and while she read, felt every passion that the human heart is capable of.-- -Yet still her love and reverence for her parents remained predominant; and she determined to Sacrifice herfelf to their unnatural commands and pafs her days in a cloister, if she could not prevail on them.to change their cruel purpofe.
She quickly faw how improper it would have been to acquaint lord Seymour with her real Situation, as he would, doubtlefs, oppofe her returning to France, with all the eloquence of love.
•Yet to quit him without making any ex-cufe, or to deScend to invent a falfe one, were equally repu^ant to her tender and generous nature.	j
She had been bred in the Roman Catholic faith, but had never converfed with bigots, nor once thought that marrying the man she loved could be. deemed a crime against any religion. The idea first shocked her, on her mother’s pronouncing him a heretic; and she refolved to make the difference of opinions a pretext for postponing their marriage, till she could prevail upon her parents to give their confent; which she vainly hoped she should be able to obtain, from their tendernefs, and his uncommon merits.
They know the power of love. Said she, and will not, like vulgar, and unfeeling minds, attempt to oppofe his uncontroulable decrees.—— They will regard lord Seymour, for their Charlotte’s fake; and his tendernefs for me shall appear
i. ■■
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 115
pear by that love and duty that he shews to them.
Thus did the unhappy vissonary fair one amufe herfelf, till lord Seymour came to pay his daily viSit. He had been ufed, for Some time past to fee her melancholy, and, at times, disturbed ; but as foon as he then Saw her, he perceived that her whole frame had been uncommon-
ly agitated. And when he tenderly intreated to know the caufe, she anfwered only with a flood of tears ; and begged he would not prefs her on the fubjedt.
Though his fond heart was alarmed by a thoufand different fears, he chofe rather to bear that cruel state of fufpenfe, than distrefs the ob-jeft he adored ; and immediately deststed from any further inquiries. When he left her that evening, he felt an unufual degree of anxiety, and was Several times tempted to return, and beg to know the Source of her distrefs ; but he feared iG	by difobeyingr her commands; and
hoped, at their ttfeXt Meeting, her chagrin might
be dispelled.
Lord Seymour v/as to go out of town tor a few days, to the nuptials of a near relation; and his loved Charlotte had bid him adieu, with a niore than uSual tenderneSs. Charlotte refolved to lay hold on the opportunity of lord Seymour’s absence, to Set out for France. She had found in the late madame de Beaumont’s cabinet about two hundred pounds, in bills and money ; out of this Sum she discharged all her Servants except her own maid, whom she determined to take with her. She ordered one of thoSe she parted with to remain in the houSe, till lord Seymour’s return, in order to deliver him a letter, which she should leave for him.
She
I
U\
1 J
I I
was
114 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
She had now, Ihe thought, fettkd mattersij Such a way, that nothing remained to obftruft her purposed journey.——-But, alas! the mote difficult part of her arduous talk, was yet to
come.----She was now to bid adieu to the man
her foul adored. She knew not what paflion
till the Severity of her fate compelled her to wilh to conquer it. A thoufand times fte attempted to write to him, who was now dearer than ever to her, but could not find words that were capable of expressing her complicated feelings.—Two sseeplefs nights, and miferable days, thus pasted. She dreaded lord Seymour’s return; and, on the third, while thechaife waited to carry her off, fhe wrote the following lines.
To Lord Seymour.
“ WITH a heart and eyes overflowing with the Sincereft tendernefs, at the fad thought of being Separated from the only man I ever did, or ever ssiall love, I find myfclf incapable of taking even a tranSient leave of him. Oh! may it prove So !
My flight must appear extraordinary to Why am I not at liberty to explain my
'it '
;. I ,
i''
iii;
b \ <1 -
h
I i»
i

I’.;
you.
motives ? But be astured, they are fuch as your honour and virtue would approve, though your fondnefs might oppofe the effedt. I fly then, my dear lord Seymour, to render my-felf worthy of you ; to eafe my heart of Some Scruples which, only, can prevent its being ' wholly yours.
“ If heaven Smiles upon my purpofe, yoii ' shall hear quickly from me; and Surely inno-' cence and love. So pure as mine, may claim ' its care. But should it, for wife purpofes,
unknown to me, blast all my flattering hopes
“ of
• »< ’ I' I
' • I
' I
u
€4
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 115
of happineSs, and doom me to the lowest wretchednefs, thy image still stiall dwell within my heart, and shield it from dishonour.
“I WOULD fay more, but cannot; the
chaife waits to carry me---from whom!
“ from thee! What agonies are in that thought! “ Nought but the hope of meeting Soon again, could now enable me to fay.

Adieu,
“ Charlotte Beaumont.’’
%
As Soon as she had Sealed her letter, she flung herfelf into the chaife and purfued her journey ; which she performed without meeting with any uncommon accident.
In a few hours after she fet out, her brother, who had been near two years abfent, returned to London. His bravery had raifed him to the rank of captain ; and, as the war was then over, he had obtained leave to vilit his friends in England.
He had not heard of mademoifelle de Beaumont’s death till he came to her houfe, and was at once informed of that and Charlotte’s abrubt departure. The amiable young man was ex-trerriely shocked and grieved; and in the midst of his tears for mademoifelle de Beaumont, lamented the uncertainty of his loved stster’s fate ; and determined, as foon as it was poflible, to purfue her steps to Paris.
Just as he was quitting the houfe, his eyes fwoln with tears, and his afpefit impressed with the deepest Sorrow, lord Seymour came to the
door.----'Young Beaumont issued out, regardlefs
of a man he stad never feen before; and lord Seymour,
. I'
i ^
I {
1
! ;
i '
I \ . I
I
;i
■ O
I'
4’
> * I
' ' I I >
.; i ‘
;!h
'j'C
ibi
\ i
i*‘ 1
I < 11 1
K-'i
L' ;
»b:;
*'i. ■
V.f
’i'!'
hit.'
11
tel ‘;h('
:i' n ;
A'
li'S-
^“,11
d!C
iVnl
i't'i
I .•
ii
i; V.i'
rill,
il.'ii
II'* I
ililii
'
\\A •
i'/“
11'
,:lL
.1?; ' ■ILi
:bM
;i!,i
'! •. i i !
', 'I
;ir I
i;': i!
i:S;i
bi'!'
..njU
l'!’Ui
ri6 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
rnour, though at first furprized at his appearanct, upon receiving Charlotte’s letter, thought of him no more.
Indeed all traces of recolle6fion Seemed to have been instantly erafcd from his rnemory, and he remained like a man fuddenly transfixei by lightning. It was Some time before he had power to alk when she fet outi* or whither Iht was gone ? And when the fervant replied to his queries, he continued to repeat them, without receiving the information he lo earnestly defirei
He read her letter a thoufand times, yet would neither credit that nor the Servant’s affirmation, that she had left the houfci—He ran distradtedly through every room, calling on his dear Charlotte’s name ; and crying out. It is impoflible! she must be here ! O do not kill me for thy Sport,' my love 1 But when he found his Search was in vain, he retired to shis houSe, in a state very little Short of dishaffion.
The moment cur fair ttigitive landed at Calais, she wrote a letter to each of her parents, filled with exprestions of the humblest duty, and tenderest affedlion. She accpiainted them with the death of her SuppoSed mother, and mentioned her obligations to her with the highest gratitude and esteem. She implored their permistion to throw herfelf at their feet, and that they would allow her a happinefs Sne bad been So long been deprived, that of receiving a parent’s blessing.
In vain was her tender and virtuous mind, enriched with every noble and generous fenti-ment, that could do honour to humanity ; her cruel parents were literally, in the state of the dead.adder : they shut their ears and eyes to her
perfections ; and refuSed to receive the highdl
pleasure.
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 117
pleafure that human nature is capable of, that of beholding an amiable and accomplifhed child.
As foon as Ihe arrived at the hotel Angloife, (he found a fervant waiting with a letter for her, which contained thefe words.
Charlotte Beaumont,
« YOU are commanded to accompany the
*	bearer of this, who will condu6t you to an ‘ apartment that is provided for your reception ‘ this night. To-morrow a carriage Ihall at-‘ tend, to convey you to the convent of St. An-‘ thony.—The general is too much indifpofed ‘ to fee you at prefent ;—when he is able he
*	will call upon you there.
An implicit obedience to our orders, which ‘ particularly enjoin the stri£left fecrecy, in re-‘ paid to your connection with us, can only ‘ prove the truth of thofe profeffions of duty ‘ which you have made.
“You are still to appear in the state of an ‘ orphan, which can be no great difficulty to ‘ one who has fo lately known that Ihe has pa-
*	rents. If you have brought a fervant, stie must ‘ be difmiffed to-morrow, and Sent back to Eng-‘ land. If you have occafion for money, the ‘ bearer will Supply you.
“ Adieu.
“ C. DE Beaumont.”
Upon reading this letter, all the tender ideas of filial affection, which had thronged about poor Charlotte’s heart, feemed to vanish, and the poignant anguish she had felt, at tearing herfelf from her fond and generous lover, returned with double force.
She
ii8 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
She, however, determined not to halt at beginning the race ; and turning to her condustor, with the utmost mildnefs and ressgnation, faidlhe was ready to attend him ; and hoped when (he was lodged- for the night, he wonld do her the favour to wait till Ihe should write a few lines to madame de Beaumont.
He told her he was ordered not to bring back any letter or meffage, and hoped she would not take his refufal ill, as he durst not venture to difobey.-—The tears now forced their way into Charlotte’s eyes. She told the Servant she would not be the caufe of his difobedience on any account ; and that she was ready to follow him.
He put her and her maid into a chariot, and dire6;ed the coachman where he was to go. When they alighted they were shewn into a very elegant apartment; and her conductor, after inquiring whether she wanted money, or any farther afSistance from him, being anfweredin the negative, bowed and withdrew.
As foon as he was gone, the now miserable Charlotte gave vent to all her Sorrows ; she threw herSelf upon the ground, and washed it with her tears. Her affedtionate Servant, who had lived with her from her infancy, without knowing the caufe of her distrefs, vainly endeavoured to confole her ; intreated her to return to England; and talked of lord Seymour’s love and constancy.
Her every word struck daggers to the unhappy Charlotte’s heart.—As Soon as she was able to fpeak, she told her maid she must part with her the next day ; that she determined to go into a convent for feme time ; and adviSed her to fet out immediately for London. The poor girl, who truly loved her, was almost distradled, at feeing and hearing her mistreSs look and fpeak fo: and positively declared she would never leave
. her,
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 119
her, let her determination in life be what it would.
Charlotte peremptorily inSisted on discharging her from her Service ; but told her fhe would Support her in Paris, while her money lasted, and that stie might Sometimes fee her at the convent. This, in Some meaSure, quieted the poor Servant’s anxiety ; but Charlotte’s un-happinefs increafed very hour.—She went not to bed, and the pearly drops remained on her fair cheek, when the fun had exhaled thofe of the dew.
She wrote a few lines to let lord Seymour know that she was going into the convent of St. Anthony; and, in her distradlion, gave the letter to her maid to deliver, without refledling that the faithful Nannette had reSolved not to quit Paris, till her mistrefs’s fate was determined.
In the morning she dressed herfelf, and endeavoured to assume an air of compofure and tranquility, with a breaking heart. About ten o’clock, the fame perfon who had attended her the night before, came in a coach, accompanied by ma-dame de Beaumont’s woman, who prefented her with the following letter;
“ Charlotte,
“ BOTH the general and I, are much pleafed with the accounts we have received of your “ behaviour. Any remonstrance against our commands would be at once preSumptuous and “ vain. Continue, therefore, to deferve our “ favour, by a Silent and unlimited obedience. “You are already informed, that the genc-
“ ral has devoted you to heaven.-Let not his
** will, who has an abfolute power over you, “ appear Severe. A convent is the only place
where
ill
111

Cb
ill.
lb
ii I

‘liiiii
■M .
r I;
i.f|,
liif
rib
!ih
'i!*:
'!
:«•
'} r<
I • M '
Sli

I ,
v:r
ite
• ii
1
»#
\ I ‘
li*-.;
11';
I 'll
i ■.
I . : •!. I

I • 1.1' •
‘•'hr
!U‘i'
oi:
1 4 '
Ll
• ' 1 ■
Lie
, ■*
' .-.i
..
li' :
,:'.l i
lL
L;
i.-ii

* . 'i '
-:’i!
I '
i.'’r h’b; l.l !• 'U '■
, I
Si!^
'!m:l


. • M C J
•Ibb
bl: ;
..Ml*
h'lb

M, ,
ii'ii’
■I'd. •
iii i'
-Hi'; !|0> -
•;b‘:
HIT
I'
. I ' f
i'i*>.'
I M, |.
lie-
iL-. ■
d' h; r ,
Ml I '
h:;-;
•ir' 1
\MI I
H‘i ' iite:!
ViH
'I
Mill
ii;

120 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.

where true happinefs is to be found.--That
“ you may meet it there, ssncerely wishes
C. DE Beaumont.
pe6:ed
noviciate immediately.”
Charlotte received this cruel fentencj with amazing fortitude. To her perturbed and wretched state of mind, the quieter afylum of a cloister, appeared not undelightful; and had not her pashon for Lord Seymour revolted againll the Severity of her doom, she might have been led like a iamb to the Sacrifice, without a figh
or groan.
Madame de Beaumont’s last letter feeraed lefs farouche^ than her former one; and this encouraged Charlotte to hope that time and her obedience might poffibly awaken the tender feelings of maternal love, in her hitherto obdurate breast. She inquired whether she might be permitted to return her thanks for madame de Beau-
mont’s favour in writing ? and was again anfwer-cd in the negative.
She took a most affeflionate leave of her
difconfolate maid, who followed the coach at a distance, and faw her enter thoSe gates through which she was never to pafs again.
When they had arrived at the convent, nia-dame de Beaumont’s woman prefented Charlotte to the abbefs, as a willing victim. She was, therefore, received with every outward mark of esteem ; and the groffest flattery was lavished by the whole fisterhood, on thofe charms, which they vainly imagined an acceptable facrifice to the great creator of them.
Deludip


THE 1>ELICATE DISTRESS. 121
Deluded mortals!
-the heart alone is all
that he requires! nor do the tender charities oS life, the love of parents, hulband, brethren* children, pollute the oblation, but render it more pleassng in his fight, who first ordained, then fanflified thefe natural ties.
Chalotte shewed not the least relufliance at entering on her probation.—She knew that a year must elapfe, before she could be compelled to take the veil ; and still flattered herfelf that fate would difpofe of her in another way, before that time should expire. She imagined, that by a feeming acquiefcence, she might be able to lef-fen, if not entirely remove, any restraint they might other wife" have been impofed upon her.
She made no doubt, that lord Seymour’s paf-fion would prompt him to purfue her ; and she fully determined to acquaint him with every cir* cumstance of her life, if she should ever have an opportunity. For this purpofe, she employed every leifure moment she was mistrefs of, in framing a little history, from the papers she had found in the cabinet, with the additional circumstances that had happened from the time of her leaving London.
As she Scarce ever appeared in the parlour, or at the grate, the fisterhood beheld her as the paragon of fanftity ; and her edifying example was quoted as a pattern for all the young ladies in the convent. The little talk she had impofed on herfelf, by ainufing her mind, kept up her Spirits, fo that she Seemed to have acquired a constant habit of chearfulnefs.
But when her work was finished, and two months had elapfed, without hearing from her father, rnother, or what was still more interesting, her lover, she fell into a lownefs of Spirits, which terminated in a flow fever. She now
F	looked
%
., I ,
ii2 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
r
looked upon herfelf as abandoned by all th| world ; and the cruel fufpicion of lord Seymour’s inconstancy, perfeQily reconciled her to the gloomy profpeQ; of perpetual feclufion.
Her faithful fervant continued to fee her frc-l quently, and as often mingled her tears wii| thofe of her unhappy mistrefs. As (he was oii!| day muSing on the uncommon miferiei of hi| fate, her maid approached her with unufu| chearfulnest, and cried out, O, Madam! he iii
V
come.
A T RANSITORY joy now fparkled in Chai-lotte’s eyes, and the foft bloom that had forfak 'her cheek, returned-with added blushes. Wheid is he ? she replied ; and ah I how could he llaj fo long! Didst thou fee him, Nannette, andhiij he mourned my abfence ?	|
At that instant, one of the lay fisters cam to inform Charlotte, that a gentleman defred to fee her. She flew to the grate, but how was her furprize encreafed when instead of lord Seymour she beheld her brother ?
•If any thing could have abated her joy at feeing him, it must have heen the difappointmeil she felt, at not meeting lord Seymour. Bui though-her expedlation had been highly raifi with the pleafing hope of fuch an interview, llii was stneerely rejoiced at the unexpedied fight cl her much beloved brother.
He immediately began to expostulate witl[ her, on her quitting England ; and earneftly ml treated her to leave the convent, and put herfd under his proteQ:ion. She told him that was noli at prefent in her power, as she was then in tel noviciate, but promifed not to take the veil); without his approbation, which she was certain would follow every action of her life, whenk was acquainted with the motives; and, in
l(i
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 123
to explain both her sstuation and his own, she would fend him Some papers to perufe which were of the utmost confequence to them both.
Captain Beaumont was astonished at the mysterious manner which accompanied his lister’s words ; but as he had the highest opinion of her honour and understanding, he, for the prefent, fuppreffed his curiofity about the Secrets she hinted at, and retired to his lodgings, to wait till Nannette should bring an explanation of the mystery, in which he found his innocent and unhappy Sister involved.
Captain Beaumont had left London, the day after his stster, and eastly traced her through the progrefs of her journey ; but when he arrived at Paris, as he had no clue to guide him, he wandered near three months in purfuit of her, and but for the accidental meeting of Nannette in the street, he might have Spent as many years in the fame fruitlefs inquiry.
Lord Seymour, whofe ardour and impatience to recover his lost fair one, was even more Sanguine than a brother’s could be, was not fo early in his purfuit. The agitation of his mind, upon receiving Charlotte’s letter, had thrown him into a violent fever, and it was above three weeks before he was able to follow his fair fugitive.
When he came to Paris, he was much at a lofs to dire<5l his inquiries as her brother had been—he had heard of her along the road, and alfo of captain Beaumont’s following her ; and from the description he received of him, had no doubt of his being the fame perfon he had Seen at her houfe, the day she left it.
Love and jealoufy are twins, and it is impof-fible to defend the heart from one, if you admit the other. It was apparent to him that this per-
F a	’ Son
124 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
fon and Charlotte were conne^ed ; and his ne* ver having Seen or heard of him, increafed his apprehenSions of his being, a favourite lover. Yet why, if that were the cafe, should Charlotte continue to deceive him ? why write fuch a tender and affe^ionate adieu ? he knew not, un-lefs it were to lull his fears to steep, and prevent his endangering her lover’s Safety. Thus did the unhappy Seymour increafe his own calamities, and drag about a wretched lifelefs form, to every public place in Paris, in the fond hope of meeting thofe tranfeendant charms that were now buried in a cloister.
The Sight of her brother had raifed poor Charlotte’s Spirits, by reviving her hopes of getting out of the convent. Yet of what ufe would she exclaim, is liberty, without love? Seymour abandons me, and the world itfelf is now become a Solitude to me, more gloomy even than this cell. But grant his love and constancy should still Substst, and that he is this moment as wretched as mySelf, could he receive into his family the natural and rejedied daughter of fuch cruel parents! no, there is no refource for me on earth ; thefe walls for ever must confine this hapleSs frame ; my heart alone is free, and sties of courSe to him!
As Soon as she had leiSure she incloSed mademoiselle de Beaumont’s papers, her father and mother’s piflures, with a letter from herfelf to her brother, acquainting him with every thing that had pasted. Since her arrival in France, and intreating him not to mention the affinity between them at the convent, lest it should give offence to their parents, and occaSion their being restrained from feeing each other for the future. She earnestly implored his protection and allift*
ance, toward releaSing her from the state she wa$
\h
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 125
in, and promifed to be guided by him, in every adion of her life.
Notwithstanding the inhuman treatment that Charlotte had met with on peruling the papers, captain Beaumont was transported at finding himfelf So nearly related to the general—the pride of blood is inherent ; and the Sanguine hope of preferment, from Such a high deScent, dazzled his reafon. He flew directly to his lister, and told her with the precipitancy natural to a young man, that he was rejoiced at the discovery, and would go and throw himSelf at his father’s feet, without having the least doubt of a favourable reception.
In vain Charlotte remonstrated against Such an unadvised proceeding, and mentioned the humility of her own conduct, and the Severity of her parents, notwithstanding ; in order to deter him from making the experiment. She feared that his approaching the general without any introduction, would be construed into want of reSpeCb, and that Ihe should be condemned for informing him that he had a right to do So--
but he was not to be restrained.
/
•'She pasted the night under the most gloomy apprehenfion, yet would often Say to herfelf, what have I to fear ? can I be made more wretched ? let me then receive the only confolation that remains for mifery like mine, the knowing that any change must be for the better. Haplefs maid! a change will come, that shall render your preSent state by Sad comparison, a Scene of Soft tranquility and eaSe.
The next evening, on being informed that captain Beaumont was in the parlour, she flew to receive him ; and after ashing a thouSand questions with her eyes and tongue, she laid her dieek cloSe to the grate to listen to his anSwers.
F 3	At
I':
I’:
I, t

I I i • , t
• I
. I »
I

i,.. ■
I •
• I t
N
i
f
; I •
126 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
At that instant she beheld lord Seymour enter®
the room. The agitation of her mind was now
encreafed almost to distraction : she knew not what she Said or did ; and was utterly incapatlt of expressing the joy she felt at feeing the deai idol of her foul. Her brother appeared dejeSeJ and unhappy ; and the mistaken Seymour attributed her confufion and his melancholy, to motives which their fouls were strangers to.
We have already hinted that jealcufy hadiii-feCted his noble nature ; but feeing the objeQ of it, with the woman he adored, added a thoufanl stings ; and he now felt, in the fupremeft dt* gree, its poignant anguish. His behaviour I5 Charlotte was constrained and cold. He toli her he was indebted to that gentleman, pointing to her brother, for the happinefs of feeing her; as he could not eaSily forget his having met him at her houfe, the morning she left London, k naturally fuppofed he could inform him whert she was ; and having accidentally feen him, then enter the convent, he had taken the libertj to inquire for her, and hoped she would pardoi his intruSion. He added, that he should lea« Paris in a few days, and deSired to know if llis had any commands to England.
Though Charlotte w'as astonished athisbe-haviour, she had however penetration enough to difcover the caufe, and faid she hoped shelhoiilii bs able to prevail on him to prolong his stay she flattered herfelf with the thoughts of returning to England in a few months, and should wift to have him her conductor.
He bowed, and replied he should think himft happy to be of any fervice to her, provided nfl did not interfere with another perfon’s right; bnt as he believed that gentleman was her chief uio-live for viSiting France, he was doubtlefs entidcfl
. THE DELICATE DISTRE SS. 127
to the honour of atttending her to England, or wherever elfe she pleafed.
Charlotte was rendered miferable, by lord Seymour’s fufpicions; yet as there was other company in the parlour, she knew not how to obviate them, as she was yet ignorant, whether she might dare to own captain Beaumont for her brother. The latter was much Surprized at lord Seymour’s manner.—He knew not of any connedlion between Charlotte and him, and thought her too condescending.
The rest of the time they staid, was pasted in a constrained and difficult sstuation. However, Charlotte found, and Seized an opportunity of Speaking the words which are quoted in her letter to lord Seymour, already related, before the gentleman withdrew.
* My dearest Henry, let not appearances dlS-
*	turb your mind ; I can, and I will, account for ‘ every action of my life to you.—Let your Ser-
*	vant attend at the grate to-morrow, for a let-‘ ter from me, and you shall be Sully Satisfied.*
Though Charlotte’s mind was perplexed with a thouSand doubts and Sears, both for her brother and herfelf, the tranSport of having Seen lord Seymour, triumphed over them all ; and she once again enjoyed a tranSient gleam of happineSs. She knew it was in her power to remove all his Suspicions: she neither doubted his love nor honour ; and was certain he would aS-Sist her in getting out of the convent, should they attempt to compel her to take the veil.
After wwiting a few lines to lord Seymour, and making up her pacquet for him, she lay down to rest, with a heart more at eaSe, than she had ever felt. Since the death of mademoiSelle
F 4	de
11 i
|i:
I;:
1
t ;
1.:. ' Id
I ■.
1 •
>
I L
i ' 1	)
128 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
de Beaumont. But the bell had no Sooner rung for mattins, than she was prefented with the following note;
' I ■
. . i.
*; ■
< I	i
1,
I	i
( '
1 '
c;;',
i, 1 ■
-N.
;■ I . ■ j
HI
. b
/ t I
ii i i
i/iil
'! i
A
Li;
1 . t '
; ■ \ Db.C
1 ■'''

“ My dearest Charlotte,
I DIE by lord Seymour’s hand;—fomefatal mistake has caufed this tragedy. If he is your friend, let him fly to preferve the only one you have now left. My cruel parents will rejoice at my fate, and I only lament it for yoiir fake.
Adieu, I fear for ever.
'	Charles Beaumont.”
■
Nothing, but the immediate lofs of her fenfes, could have preServed her life.—She funk motionlefs upon the ground; and nature by being totally over-powered, afforded fome little ref-pite to her distrafbed mind. She remained in this sstuation, till the nuns, alarmed at her abfence from the chapel, came to Seek her in her cell. But when their cruel care had brought her fo far back, as to shew fome figns of life, she could neither fpeak, nor weep. She appeared like grief perfonified. She neither beat her bofoni) rent her hair, or committed any adt of outrage, but continued almost immoveable, till a letter was brought her from madame de Beaumont which contained thefe words;
I

.1 I
■n ,
• '
■. I ‘ ■ ‘
I ’
:C-
I '‘I , \ <
,' •) >t:i;
■: ii
S!'
'll


I
(
L
\'W
1
' I !
ii'
“ Accursed be the hour that gave ibec birth, and doubly curfed the moment when thy pretended filial piety brought thee back to France, to ruin and destroy the peace of them, whohad been blessed, if thou hadst never been born! Why, parricide, and fratricide in one, didst thou inform the unhappy wretch, who is now fallena victim to thy vices, of his affinity to us ? Thy father never will furmoun^ the shock which he
received
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 129
received from feeing him,, and with his latest breath, will curfe thee for being the caufe of his, and thy brother’s dfeath.
** But thou, I doubt not, triumphest in thy wickednefs, and fondly hopefl to wed the murderer of thy brother. But here thy crimes shall end.—Thou shall immediately be conveyed to La Salpetriere, and made fenstble of the unmerited kindnefs thou hast hitherto received, by the fcverities thou shall hereafter experience.
C. BP
We might fuppofe that when the unhappy Charlotte had read her brother’s note, her mife-* ries could Scarce admit addition; but her inhuman mother’s letter convinced her that the cup of Sorrow, though Seemingly brimfull, is always capable of increafe.
She was Seized with inexpressible terrors at the thoughts of being Sent to La Salpetrigre. She was fenSible the abbefs and nuns where she then was, treated her with the utmost kindnefs; for as they looked upon her as a voluntary viftim, she had never experienced the least restraint, but what the common rules of the houfe prescribed:. She had been accustomed to the [tenderest treatment all her life; and her prefent melancholy Situation demanded it more than ever.
After perussng the cruel anathema, that doomed her to still greater miferies, she flew into the abbefs’s apartment, and prostrating herfelf before her, with a stood of tears implored her pity, and prote6kion. The good woman was moved at her distreSs; and raissng her from the ground, assured her that no authority except the exprefs order of the king, should force her from that houfe; and that if her enemies should attempt to procure a mandate, by any falfe repre-
F 5	fentation.

I ;
1
1,
I ,
h '
i,‘ i
‘ I
. I •
: i
1
:i '
ii.
;i
'1;
■i
!
1 ’
1''
1.
130 TSIE.DELICATE DISTRESS.
lentation, Ihe w^iuld exert her utmoft abilities to protedt her.
Charlotte now constdered the abfolute impoflibilky of any future connexion with lord Seymour, and therefore looked upon her continuance in the convent of St. Anthony, as an afy-him most devoutly to be wistied for. She thanked the abbels on her knees; and would at that instant have taken the veil, without repining, if they could have abridged the time of her probation.
She liad now no longer any terms to keep with madame de Beaumont; and therefore mentioned the misfortunes'her brother had met with, and entreated the abbefs’s permistion, to fend Vourly to inquire his health. Her request was granted ; andstie retired to her cell in fome degree lefs wretched than stie had left it.
But when her tortured imagination reprefent-cd her still dear lord Seymour, as the executioner of her brother, her grief was without bounds. Ye®, Ihe would fay, lam, indeed, accurfed! well does my mother stile me fo.—Yet are they crue words, to pafs maternal lips! Oh! hadfhe but lonce blessed me, I could not be the wretch I am.
It is impossible to deferibe the various emotions of h er distradted mind ; yet still love re-mained triumphant; and fhe strove in vain, to purfue what stie thought the didlates of her duty, the hating of lord Seymour.
ICaptain Beaumont continued to languifh, w thout hopes, for near three months; during which time, she received the following letter from Lord Seymour.
)!t •
:U
)
•i'
I'l
I •.
ill
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 131
V
To Mademoifelle de Beaumont.
‘‘ CONVINCED as I am, that I have given
you caufe to detest the name of him, wlto-now prefumes to addrefs you, I would not, madam, intrude upon your forrows, but to offer you the only atonement, w’hich you can receive from fuch a wretch as me.
I MEAN to inform you, madam, that I do not intend to fly from justice; I knew the Severity of the laws, when I incurred their cenfure: and the moment that precious life is ended, which I have robbed you of, I mean to offer up my own, worthiest as it is, in order to expiate as far as is now possible, the crime of having rendered you unhappy.
But Oh, my dearest Charlotte! may I not hope, that when my blood has washed away my stains, exhausted as the fountains of thy beauteous eyes may be, with grief for my too happy rival, thou then mayst fpare one tear, to the fad memory of the lost,
Seymour.”
There wanted but this last stroke, to render Charlotte the veriest wretch on earth. She had flattered herfelf, that lord Seymour had quitted FraneCi immediately after the duel, and that his life at least was Safe; and that, at fome time or
other, she should be able, to convince him of his
^ * _ '
error, and her innocence; But now she beheld him wilfully devoting .himfelf to the rack, and fuffering torture, greater than even that can in-flidl, from his mistaken opinion of her inconstancy.
It was impossible that her delicate frame could longer fupport the complicated agonies that af-
Sailed
P i ^ 1. ll <
I . '
I I
t ■ ,. •
132 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.

failed her mind. She fell
into a^:agtng fever; during her delirium, she raved incessantly of raci^s, and gibbets, of fnatching Seymour from them, and fuffering in his place. At length, however, the natural goodnefs of her conftituti-and her blooming youth Surmounted this
on
dreadful diforder, and her reafon and wretched-nefs returned together.
The first gleam of peace that broke through the horrots of her fate, were Some Small hopes cf her brother’s recovery ; and in confequence of thofe hopes, she by a Solemn vow devoted herfelf to heaven, if it should be pleafedto Spare his life. But not all her religion and virtue could prevent her as firmly reSolving not to outlive lord Sej-meur. should he Suffer.
As Soon as captain Beaumont was able to fit up in his bed, he wrote to his loved Sister, congratulating her on his deliverance from death, exculpating lord Seymour as far as possible, by condemning himfelf for not avowing the relation between him and Charlotte, before their engagement ; but from a falfe pun6tilio, he had thought it beneath an officer to ufe any argument in his defence, except his Sword ; and therefore by his manner had rather confirmed lord Seymour in his
w
error, of SuppoSing him his rival, than undeceived him; for which he begged both his lordship’s and his Sister’s pardon.
He then gave her an account of the interview he bad with his father, and of the difgust and fur-prize, which the general expreffed at feeing him; and that he had peremptbrily commanded him to quit Paris, ^nd join his regiment immediately; and farther informed him, that if he attempted
to difobey, he would have him broke with infamy.
He
It-1 •
ill:'
1THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 133
He laid, he had however, reafon to hope that the misfortunes he had met with, had Softened his father’s heart, as he had been attended during his illnefs, by the first furgeons in Paris, who came to his afllstance unfcnt for, and unpaid by him ; and that if his fufferings had made his father relent, he should for ever blefs the hand that had inflicted them.
The pleafinghope of her brother’s recovery, was the most healing balm that could have been administered to Charlotte’s wounded heart. She no longer trembled for his life, or what was dearer still, lord Seymour’s ; and she began in Some meafure, to be reconciled to her fate, merely by reflefling, that it might have been more wretched.
Notwithstanding all her efforts to conquer it, her paffion for lord Seymour remained undiminished, and she would have given worlds, had she been mistrefs of them, to undeceive him. But though her faithful Nannette had made the most diligent Search for him, from the time that captain Beaumont was pronounced out of danger, she could not difeover his retreat.
The time now approached for Charlotte’s fulfilling the vow she had made to heaven, by taking the veil. The cniel madame de Beaumont had made Several fruitlefs efforts to prevail on the abbefs to Suffer her removal to another convent; but as she feared to appear publickly in Soliciting it, lest the affinity between them should be revealed, she at last contented herSelf with endeavouring to enforce the utmost stridtnefs and Severity, which their rules would admit of; with which the poor innocent Sacrifice Unreludlantly complied.
As Soon as captain Beaumont was tolerably recovered, he wrote again to his Sister, to inform
her.
I!'	!
1,: ^
i‘ •
!'!
11
\
: i
i'l


'i:	!
i,
I 1
; I;
•', i
'! 1
I
i''
I,,
i
. > li:
M
1.. ! . , ■ •
K .
1!.
134 THE DELICATE EHITRESS.
her, that he had received an order Srom his colonel to join his regiment immediately; and at the fame time, a posttive commaiid from his father to leave Paris without feeing her. He conjured her in the strongest terms to renounce the veil, and to fly to lord Seymour for protedlion; and told her he was certain, that his lordstiip was still in Paris, as he had just then difcovered that he was the perfon, who appointed and paid the Surgeons for their attendance on him..
The fair difconfolate was now fo enured to afflidlion, that fhe bore this fresh mark of her parents inhumanity, with gentlenefs and refignati-on; but alas I there was a woe Superior far to all they could inflidl, and which like Aaron’s rod, had fwallowed up the rest. Lord Seymout thought her guilty still!
She had preferved the pacquet she had made up for him, on the evening of their last interview ; and on the day preceding that, on which she was to make her vows, she received the following lines from him.
L0 Mademoifelle de Beaumont.
THOUGH I approach you now with lefs terror, madam, than when I last prefumed to ad-drefs you, still does my beating heart, and trembling hand, avow your power, and amply revenge your fuflrerings on the wretch who dared to offend you. But Since it has pleafed heaven to repair the cruel injury I did you, by restoring ray rival to your prayers and wishes, will not the gentle Charlotte condefcend to pardon, and pity, the unhappy man, who once thought (fatal delusson!) himfelf honoured with her love?
I m
I -; !
I ' ;
'S'
ib.
.r ' >
l!i
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 135
“ I FLY from Paris, madam, from the fad fcene of all my forrows; but they, alas! will be companions of my flight. Yet let me take one blessing with me, a last, if not a kind adieu, from you.
“ As you talked of returning to England, I never will reviSit it—the Sight of the detested Seymour no more shall shock your eyes, or damp your joys—but let me wander where I will, the warmest effufions of this still doating heart, shall to its latest throb be poured forth, in blessings on. Ah I I had like to have faid my angel Charlotte ! My hand refufes longer to obey its wretched maf-ter, and I can hardly fay.
Adieu.
Seymour.®
was
Afflicted as the tender heart of Charlotte at her loved Seymour’s deep distrefs, she felt a momentary joy at the thought of being able to recover his esteem, by proving herfelf worthy of his love. She instantly fat down, and with inexpressible anguish, wrote the letter, which has been already related, and inclofed it with the narrative she had before written of her life, to lord Seymour.
This dreadshl confli6l: past, she felt a dawn of peace beam on her mind, and immediately gave orders, that no letter or message should be brought to her. She passed the night in fervent prayer, and at the break of day fummoned her young companions in the convent, to adorn her for the facrifice with all the dignified com-
pofure, with which a queen puts on her regal robes.
Her
136 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
Her conduD during the awful ceremony, has been already ddciibed by lord Seymour; and fure a heart more truly virtuous, or a form more exquisitely fair, were never offered up at any shrine! And may that gracious power, to whom they are devoted blefs all her future days, with that ‘‘ fweet peace, which goodnefs bofoms “ ever.”
LETTER XXIV.
Lady Straffon to Lady Woodville.


TH at my dear Emily may not again reproach me, for attending equally to foreign and domejlic affairs, I shall anfwer her two laft letters, before I fpeak my Sentiments of the truly amiable and unhappy Charlotte Beaumont. And first, of the first—Though you have deSired me not to reply to it, I find the fubjefit So very interesting and alarming, that I cannot in justice to you or myfelf, comply with your request— You certainly must have lived Some days upon essence of tea, and reduced your nerves to the lowest state imaginable, before your mind could be affected by the circumstances you mention. Not that I would infinuate that lord
Woodville’s hidden confufion was not the effest
\
1
'r-.
of a quick recolle6lion, or conScioufnefs of Some former Scene, which he perhaps might wish to have forgot. In all probability it arofe from the remembrance of Some disastrous love adventure, which obtruded itfelf involuntarily upon his mind.
. 0 '•
This point which you have barely hinted at,
I shall take for granted; and then endeavour to
shew
.. L
;rb
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 137
(hew yotfi the-abfurdity of being alarmed on fuch an occafion. Lord Wocdville is now in his
I
eight-and-twentieth year, and has lived both in foreign courts, and at home, as much in the gay world, as any man in England.—And can my dear Emily really fuppofe that she was the first objeft of his love ?—Imposhble ! It is jmuch more reafonable to imagine that he had felt that paflion half a dozen times, at least, before she was out of her hanging steeves.
But all girls flatter themfelves with the intire pofleflion of an hushand’s heart; which if he happens as in your cafe, to be Seven or eight years older than her, is no more in his power to bestow, than youth or beauty. But if he gene-roufly grants you all that remains at that time in his gift, you have not the least right to complain ; and this, I firmly believe lord Woodville has stone. Beware then, my Emily, of appearing ungrateful for this prefent; nor let him ever fee that you do not confider, even the remnant of his heart, as a full equivalent for all your own. This I must confefs to be a very unequal lot of afSeQiions; but the conditions of life should be acquiefced in, without too much refining—
There never was an higher instance of delicacy, than lord Woodville’s behaviour to you, in confequence of the temple adventure; but do not give him too frequent opportunities of exerting his gallantry:—you are a mufical lady; and know that a string may be strained, till it breaks. I am perfedtly acquainted with the tendernefs and fenSibility of your nature ; but you are not to judge of others, by your own fine feelings ; or think your hushand deficient in affedlion, if he is not fo minutely attentive to trifling circumstances.
I
''' 1
(
11
I;
i’i i
i
.; s ■
’ 1 ;i i
. k'
;i I
'5-r:
. i <
t
, I''
I •' I K
I ;
i ;
138 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
stances, as your delicacy may prompt you to ex* pedl.
- LES petits foins belong; most properly to female life; the great cares of fehe world are load fuffi. cient for the ablest man. I have now done chiding I hope for ever, as I never can Be angry with my Emily, but when she wounds herfelf..
The description of your rural entertainment,
pleafed me much.-----Whenever I go to Wood-
fort, you shall take me to fee your pocket Arcadk —No, upon Second thoughts, the Scene would be incomplete without a Twain ; I therefore de-stre you will prefent my compliments to Sir James Thornton, and tell him, that I appoint him my Ceeijbeo for that party, if we should ever happen to meet at your houfe.
I AM not at all forry that lord Seymour has left you.—The constant anguish which he muft ever feel, was fusticient to infedl you all. This naturally leads me to the charming nun.—I cannot forgive your want of ingenuoufnefs, in not mentioning the million of tears,, her story mui have cost you—there never was any thing more afSedfing—Lucy and I read and wept by turns—-When one of us began to faulter, the other endeavoured to relieve her ; but there were many passages that neither of us could repeat aloud, and only gazed Silently on through the dim medium of our tears.
It really requires a perfedl certainty of the fa£ls, to fuppofe there ever were Such monfters in nature as the general, and madame de Beaumont. But Charlotte’s unhappy fate is but too strong a voucher of their inhumanity. Yet mi-ferable as the lovely vestal is, I think lord Seymour much more wretched—Tirre, devotion, and a thorough confeioufnefs of the redlitude of
all her adtions, may calm her forrovys; whilft
his
i ' •. .
'rdii

THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 139
his must for ever be aggravated, by knowing that he has rendered her unhappy. I think him truly to be pitied. Adieu, my Emily—Loves and good wifhes from all here, accompany this to Wood-fort.
F. Straffon.
LETTER XXV.
Lady WoODViLLE to Lady Straffon.
I HAVE at prefent, a houfe full of company ;
and therefore must content myfelf with barely acknowledging the receipt of my dear Fanny’s friendly admonitions, which I frankly admit to be just, though I feel they are Severe. Call me no more a Spoiled child, when I So readily embrace the rod.
Lady Lawfon has been here thefe three days. There have been odd reports about Sir William, and the young lady I formerly mentioned to you, who v/ent to London, a few days before him. But I am pcrfuaded they are falfe; for on Sir William’s return last night, lady Lawfon received him with the most genuine and unaffected delight, that could be expressed in looks or words; and I hear that miSs Fanning (that is the lady’s name) is to return to Lawfon-Hall in a few days. The knight appeared a little embarrassed; but that might be owing to the meeting his lady in So much company: we were all assembled at tea, and knew nothing of his return.
You must not expeCt me to be a constant correspondent from York : the fatigue of dressing twice, nay perhaps thrice a day, will afford me but little time for more rational entertainment.
There
Iio THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
U \
There are no moments which I think fo lost , as thofe fpent at the toilette ; but the cuf-toms of whatever place we are in, must be complied with. Your Emily has not refolution fuf-ficient to stem a torrent, and must therefore always be carried away with the stream. I will however, keep a fort of journal of the occurrences of each day, and you must accept of that, in lieu of my letters.
My reafon for not avowing how much I wa$ affedfed, by the story of the nun, was to avoid taking off that furprize, which gives strength to every emotion.—When we are told that a tragedy is extremely tragical, we Summon our refolution to oppofe the feelings of our hearts; and frequently Suffer our pride to conquer its moll graceful weakneSs: whereas, when we are taken by Surprize, we give nature fair play, and do not attempt to combat with our humanity.
Adieu, my dear Fanny I Woodfort fincerely repays all the loves and good wishes of Straffon
Hill.
E. WOODVILLE.
LETTER XXVI. rRAFFON to. Ladv Woo:

I OUGHT, perhaps to be more thankful to my dear Emily,' for her last short letter, than for any other she has written to me. There is certainly the highest degree of merit, in giving pleaSure to others, when the effort is attended with trouble or difficulty to ourSelves. The bestowing a quarter of an hour upon an abfent
friend, while we are Surrounded with the chcar-
fu!
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 141
fill gaiety of prefent ones, should always be con-fidered as an high compliment.
You may fee by this remark, that I Set a proper value upon your kind attention ; but I am still more charmed with your condefcenfion, in admitting the justnefs of my arguments. Believe me, my dear, if we wish to be happy, we must make it a constant rule to turn away our eyes, even from the minutest failings of thofe we love; the fostering our thoughts to dwell long upon them, must infenSibly lesten our aste€lion, and of courfe our felicity.
There cannot in my mind be a more pitiable object, than a virtuous woman, who ceafes to love her hushand.—What a dreadful vacuity must she feel in her heart! How coldly and infipidly must her life pafs away, who is merely actuated by duty, unanimated by love !
Where there never has been paffion, there may for aught I know, be a kind of mixed fen-fation compounded of esteem, and mutual interest that fopplies the place of aste6tion, to the infenfible part of mankind.—If this were not the cafe, the generality of married people could not live fo well together as they do.—But this wretched Substitute, will never anfwer to a man or woman, who has once truly loved.
I WOULD therefore most earnestly recommend it to all thofe, who are fo happy as to be united to the objefts of their choice, to fet the merits and attraftions of each other, in the fairest point of view to themSelves, and never, even for a moment, to cast their eyes on the wrong Jide of the tape fry.
Your account of the kindnefs, with which lady Lawfon received her wandering fwain, very . fully proves that she is an excellent wife; but is by no means, a refutation of the reports relative
to

i! h

142 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
to him and mils Fanning. Your ignorance o( the world and its ways, make fuch fcenes appear extraordinary to you.—But alas! they are too frequent, to be wondered at, in fuch times as thefe.
I SHALL not, my dear Emily, infill: upon your writing from York, if it is inconvenient to you ; but as Fanny Weston tells Lucy, that you do not Set out from Woodfort this fortnight, every day of which I dare fay, stie thinks a year; I may flatter myfelf with the hopes of hearing from you, perhaps more than once before you go.
That Surprize increaSesour emotions, I readily admit; but, as you had no reafon to doubt the tendernefs of Lucy’s nature, or mine, you might have communicated your own fenfations, without fear of abating ours.
Sir John is gone to London, for a short time; and Lucy and I are to fpend the days of his ab-fence, not in retirement, as you might polTibly fuppofe, but in difcharging a heavy debt of vifits, which we owe to all the neighbourhood for five miles round. I think there are few Small evils that torture us So much, as what is generally called a good neighbourhood in the country.
Adieu, my dear Emily. I feel myfelf peevish, at the idea of Squandering my time, with perfons that I have not the least wish to converfe with, and ashing Ample questions without the Smallest defire to be informed. But as the world is constituted, we must compound for Spending Some part of our lives difagreeably, and endeavour to make ourfelves what amends we can, by ojoying that portion of it which is left to our A.n difpoSal.
Health,
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 143
Health, and her fair handmaid chearfulnefs, attend my dear Emily.
F. Straffon.
LETTER XXVn.
Lady WooDViLLE to Lady StraffoN.
M
Y dear Fanny is extremely kind, in feem-
_ ___ ing to fet fo high a value upon my Small,
-or rather no merit, in writing to her ; for indeed I can never claim any, for what is to me the highest Self indulgence.—So a truce with your compliments, my too civil Sister.
Do not be angry, Fanny ; but I really cannot think with you, that true affedlion should be founded on illuston, which must be the cafe, if we are to be totally blind to the failings of thofe we love.—On the contrary, I have always conss-dered the raiSmg our ideas, of the perfons we are to be united to, too romantically high, as one great Source of matrimonial unhappinefs. By that means we become enamoured of a being, which exists not in nature, and feel ourfelves mortified and difpleafed as at a real disappointment, when we discover that our imagination has exceeded the bounds of postibility.
But if abfolute perfection were to be found on earth, it would wound our Self love; and whatever injures that, can never be long dear to us. In the imperfections of our most amiable friends, we find a confolation for our own, which forbids defpair, and places the generality of mankind pretty nearly upon a level. This equally creates confidence, and that naturally produces esteem and love.
Aq

144THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
As thefe are my real Sentiments, I think I may venture to tell you, that I am very Sorry I have never yet been able to diScover one failing in my ford. I declare, Fanny, this is a humiliatiffi fituation, to a creature So conScious of a thou-land weaknesses as I am ; instead of restraining me from Searching for his faults, I delire you will immediately provide me with a magnifying glafs to assist me in the discovering them.
What an horrid idea have you conjured up of a woman who ceafes to love her hussband! There can be but two caufes in nature that are capable of producing Such an effeft—for I talk not of thoSe animals who never felt passion—The first of thefe must be a constant Series of ill treat* ment, which 1 fuppofe may at length conquer the tenderest affeflion ; and the unhappy Sufferer who continues to a£I up to her duty, under Such circumstances, deferves, in my mind, t much higher fame than any Greek or Roman, that ever yet existed.
The other caufe must be owing to a lhameful and vicious depravity of heart, commonly called inconstancy ; which to the honour of our Sex, 1 think I may fay, is not frequent amongst us, But when this happens to be the cafe, there is generally Some new objeft in view ; for that despicable wretch, a woman of gallantry never
changes her first love, till she is engaged in a ** Second.”
I THANK heaven for my Ignorance of the world, and its ways, as I hope and believe, I fhall never have any trial, that may render a knowledge of them necessary. I know not what to i hink, with regard to lady Lawfon ; but for my
vj wn ea'fe I will hope the best, as it is iropofliblt
that
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 145
that I should be indifferent to any thing that dif-treffes her.
Sir James Thornton has had an ugly fall from his horfe, and strained his right arm, but has not received any dangerous hurt, though he is confined to his chamber. Lady Harriet, and Fanny Weston are indefatigable in their attendance on him. I just now received a message from him, to inquire my health ; which feems a kind of tacit reproach, for not having been to visst him.— My lister Lawfon and I fpent all this morning in defigning plans for a wood houfe ;—but as we are neither of us partial to our own inventions, we have laid them by, and determined to be rather good copyists than bad originals. We have both agreed, that it was impoffible to de-vife any thing more truly ‘elegant than that on the terrace at Taplowt which is to be our model. I have barely time to finish this, to drefs, and look in upon Thornton before dinner. Adieu, my dear Fanny! I may hear from you again, before we fet out for York.
Your’s ever.
E. WoODVILLE,

W ttr WW W W W WT1T w

LETTER XXVIII.
Lady St RAFF ON to Lady Woodville.
My dear Emily,
A SI aqa perfedlly convinced that in the ac-^ coui^ of our correfpondence I am much your debtor, on the article of entertainment, I am pleafed at having a little adventure to' relate to you, though I cannot hope, that the
G	recital
V i i
1
• t
/
146 THE DELICATE DISTRESS. I
recital will afford you as much pleafure as tie aftion gave me ; but you mull make the fame allowance as you do for a play in your clofet, ami furnish out all the fcenery, decorations, kt from the store-houfe of your own imagination,
My tale runs Simply thus—As Lucy and 1 were returning home last night, from lad? Vaughan’s about eight o’clock, ihe llcy quite dark and rainy, one of the hind wheels of our carriage flew off ; but as we were travelling at a very flow pace, in a miry road, we received no hurt from the accident.—We were about three miles from Straffon Hill, which was rather too far for us to walk, as we were by no means ac« coutred for Peripatetics ; and just as ill qualified for an equestrian expedition ; we therefore fent off the postilion on one. of the horfes, to bring the coach to us-——
We faw no friendly cottage near ; but at the distance of a quarter of a mile in the fields, which feemed to us bright “ as the Arcadian star, or ** Tyrian Cynofure.” One of theTervants dif-covered a path, that feemed to lead to the mansion, from whence thefe charming beams had iffued.
We took him with us, and fetting forward, foon reached the fmall but hofpitable dwelling, When we knocked at, the door, a little neat country girl appeared, and after, conducing us into a fmall parlour, faid she would acquaint her young lady, that there w^ere strangers there, but that her mistrefs was at her devotions. We announced ourfelvesto the girl, and she retired.
I WAS furprifed at this young creature’s mode
of expreffion ; she feemed greatly amazed at
our appearance, but her astonishment could onlj
be difeovered by her looks. In , a few minutes
an elegant young woman about eighteen, entered
the
*
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 147
the room, and after Saluting us very gracefully, inquired to what happy accident she was indebted for the honour of our visst ?
The courtlinefs of her addrefs, and the eafe of her manners, were all new fubje6ls of wonder, both to Lucy and me ; which we could not help expressing, after we had informed her of the accident we had met with. She very politely offered us tea or coffee—we declined both—but there was a much higher treat in her power, namely the gratification of our curiofity, which we could not however venture to propofe.
When we had fat about a quarter of an hour, the little Servant came in, and faid her lady was come out of the chapel, and would be glad to fee us—we were immediately shewn into a room, the neatnefs and elegance of which it is imposh-ble to defcribe ; at the upper end of it, on a fmall Sofa, fat a woman with the finest form, though pale and emaciated, that can be imagined.
She rofe to receive us, with Such an affable dignity, as at once attradled our refpe6l: and love ; she was drefied in black, and appeared to be
about five and thirty----though she Spoke per-
fe£t good English, there was just So much of the foreign accent in her utterance, as must prevent your taking her for a native of this country.
Over the chimney of the chamber we fat in, was a pifiture of a very handfome young man, and at the other end of the room, there hung one of the lady before us, in all the bloom of beauty, with her daughter, then about four years old by her fide, and a boy that looked like a cherubim, Seated in her lap.
As I gazed on every objefit round me, with looks of admiration, which the lady of the houfe could not help observing, she turned to me with an engaging Smile, and faid, the Surprize which
G a /	your
:!'U
1
• 1. iv
i t »
I V
I . . 1‘. ?
148 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
your ladyfhip is too polite to exprefs in words, is fo perfectly viSible in your countenancp, that it would appear like affe6tation to Seem infen-fible of it; and as there is no part, either of my past or prefent life, that fhould caufe a blulli to glow upon my cheek, I am ready to gratify that curioSity, which the extraordinarinefs of my fitu-ation, feems tohave raifed.
It will probably be near an hour, continued she, before your carriage can arrive, and a much lefs time will Serve to relate the few, though uncommon events, that have placed me in the circumstances you now fee me. Both Lucy and I expressed our gratitude for fuch an obliging offer, in the warmest terms, and entreated sh^ would proceed—without more ceremony she began.
I AM a native of Italy, and defcended from one of the most ancient families, of the republic of Genoa—About twenty years ago, I became acquainted with a young English nobleman, called lord Somerville, whofe pidfure you fee there (pointing her beautiful hand towards the chimney; he was then upon his travels, and under age.—He became passionately in love with me, and Soon infpired me with more than gratitude ; with honest heart-felt love.
With my permission, he applied to my father, for his confent to our marriage ; well knowing that he could have no exception to his birth or fortune. We had not the least appre-henSion of my father’s refufal—but we had both forgot that my lover w'as an heretic. This was deemed by him fo material an objedfion to our union, that he declared he would confine me to a convent for life, rather than hazard my Salvation by fuch a marriage.—My lover was forbidden to repeat his viSits, and I was Sent about twenty leagues off, into the country.
’	Lord
1
Cl
.r f

THE DELICATE DISTRESS.

Lord Somervillefoon difcovered my r^tf and got accefs to me, by the treachery or^’^ealT'^ vw of a fervant, who was intrufted with the.care«iQf me. My father was informed of our interviews/ and determined to fend me diredUy to a convent at Naples, where an aunt of my mother’s was, lady abbefs. A particular accident let me into the fecret of my intended doom, and I no longer heSitated to prefer love and liberty, to cruelty and confinement. After lord Somerville had given me the most folemn alTurances, that I iliould preferve my religion inviolate, we were married, and fet out privately in a felucca, hired for the purpofe, which conveyed us both to Marfeilles.
When we came to Lyons, we were obliged to wait there for remittances from England, before we could proceed farther^ After having;
• long expedied them in vain, my lord received a very Severe and angry letter from his father, accufing him with having stolen the daughter of an Italian nobleman, and commanding him to restore me to my parents, and return immediately to England.
The distrefs of my hufband’s mind, upon, this occaSion, was not to be concealed ; bu^»-iL was a long time before he acquainted me with the real motives of his concern. Fcncllv and pamonately as I loved him, I would have torn inyfelf from his arms, and gone into a convent till his father’s refentment might have been appealed, if my condition would have permitted it.
But I was then far eone with child, of that young lady before you, and he in the tenderest manner, alTured me that not even the commands of a father, stiould have power to force him from me, till he had the happinefs of being
G 3	himstif

{r
> 1
i 1
-fi
. I '
. i
> 1 f i
.11
.1 i .i
<.
., < ‘ I
; i
»
• • i
ISO THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
himfelf a parent, and of feeing me in a Situation to Support his abfence, or able to travel with him, Wii had lived in the utmost retirement, and privacy from the time of our arrival at Lyons, My lord had taken the name of Fortefcue, and no creature, except his banker, knew who k was—We were fo perfectly happy in each other, that we wistied for no other Society—my lord amufed himSelf with teaching me Englilh with Such a tutor, I Soon became a considerable proficient ; and at the time that my Laura was born, I could read and perfedlly understand the most difficult Englisti authors.
As Soon as I was quite recovered, we Set out for Paris, where my lord purpofed leaving me, while he went over to England to pay his duty to his father, and to endeavour to reconcile him to our marriage. I will not take up your time, with attempting to deferibe our mutual Sufferings at our Separation; Such forms as yours, mull have feeling hearts, and you can judge better than I deferibe what we endured.
My lord remained above a year in England, making repeated but fruitlefs efforts, to conquer his father’s refentment, against a perSon who had never in thought offended him; l;)ut, alas! my being a catholic, was as unpardonable a crime to him, as my dear husband’s being a protestant was to my father. Strange I that the worShippers of one God, and Saviour, whofe doctrine was peace, and good-will to men, should feel fuch enmity and hatred to each other I
At rny lord’s return to France, I could not help perceiving a vifible change, both in his health and Spirits, Though his fondnefs for me was undiminished ; or if possible. Seemed to be increaf-ed, by his tenderneSs for his daughter, who was
then near two years old. As my lord concealed
great
» 1 . 1
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 151
great part of his father’s unreasonable averfion to me, I was not without hopes that time would conquer his prejudices; which indeed I only wished upon my lord’s account; for while I enjoyed the real happinefs of his company, there waff not a deSire of my heart ungratified.
In lefs than a year, that infant whole portrait you fee there, was born.—From the time of his birth my lord’s health and Spirits Seemed to revive, and I then certainly reached the xenith of-human felicity; alas! how quickly did the wheel turn round, to lay me in the lowest state of mifery ? With what rapture have I feen him catch the infant in his arms, and fay, this this boy, my love, will plead our caufe with i^y obdurate father,- and foften his hard heart ? Would he were three years old !—but that bleffed time will come, and we shall all be happy.-
While lady Somerville repeated the foregoing words, her countenance became more animated, than it is poffible to defcribe ; but a fudden gush of tears foon dimmed the brilliant lustre of her eyes, and quenched the glowing crimfon on her cheek. She rofe, and opening a Small folding door, retired into the chapel.
The young lady Sympathized most Sincerely, with her mother’s Sorrow ; and Lucy, and I who were extremely astedled, were Scared pable of making proper apologies, for having been the innocent caufe of renewing both the ladles afflidtions. Mifs Somerville Said every thing that politeneSs could cliState, to mak eafy ; and in a few minutes, lady Somerville returned with Such an air of calmnefs and reSgna-tion as amazed me.
I TOOK the liberty of entreating that she would not proceed farther in her story, for the preSent. But as I could not avoid, beings extreme-
G 4	ly
y ca~
V
US

'I
i I
.1-
. 1
: i it
I
i r'.
hi
I n
CJ ‘
•} ■-

: 1! r
I ? .*
>5
i \
•l!
:;U

, t
' .\'A
ri4 . 1

!‘’rl
ibi!
bl
'■l>


shi!
si
1 i

iff
;i-d
r"
;*'I ;
• .L
' * \
'!h>
*s;
if!
uri
\u
i1
iM-
iiS;
iLt

152 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
ly anxious about every circumstance relativeto fo amiable a perfon, I requested flie would perniii me to wait upon her, the next day, or whenevsi it v/as most agreeable to her inclination.
Sh e told me stie was very fenstble of the delicacy and propriety of my request, which flit readily astented to, as it promifed her thehappi-nefs of another interview with perfons, for whoft fenfibility and politenefs, fhe had conceived llit highest refpecl: : faid fhe was a little afhamei, that lier long acquaintance with grief, had rot vet rendered her fo familiar with it, as (lit
might naturally be fuppofed to be; but hoped we v/ould excufe the fudden emotion, which had fora few minutes tranfported her.,. She then intreated our company to drink tea, the next evening, and faid she would, if poffible, be mote compofed.
In about a quarter of an hour the coach ar< rived, and we took leave of this charming ur-fortunate, with the most earnest destre to renew our viSit, and the warmest hopes of beingfer-viceable to her and her daughter.
I AM really fatigued with this long letter; but I would not fuffer oblivious steep to steal anj part of this extraordinary adventure from nij memory, till I had communicated it to my dear Emily. By next post, you shall have the remainder of ihe story ; till then and ever.
I am affedljonately your’s
F. Straffon.
LET
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 15

LETTER XXIX.
Lady Straffon to Lady Woodville
Ct
Lucy and I fet out immediately after dinner yesterday, and reached lady Somerville’s elegant cottage belore five o’clock. As we approached it by day-light, we difcovered many beauties that had been hidden from us by the dun (hades of night ; particularly feveral Small clumps of trees, that were encircled with woodbines, orange and lemon gourds, and intermixed with a great variety of flowering shrubs:—a fmall, but neat garden, at the bottom of which ran a rivulet So clear, and Sparkling, as to appear like liquid diamonds.
As we drove by the pales of the garden, we perceived a building in it, that Seemed to be fitted up for a gardener’s houSe ; and to our great astonishment, beheld a man of a very refpedia-b!e appearance, about Sixty years of age. Seated in an arbour, with a book in his hand. We were received by both the ladies, with the Same polite-nefs and affability, as the day before. The folding doors which led to the chapel stood open: and indeed, Emily, there is no describing the elegance, with which the altar is adorned.
I AM an enemy to all devotional parade: yet I could not help confidering the decorations of this Sacred Spot, rather as the offerings of the heart to heaven, than a Sacrifice to vanity, as a I the ornaments that are placed there, were the work of lady Somerville’s and her daughter’s hands.
As Soon as tea and coffee were removed, lady Somerville, without waiting to be intreated? proceeded in her narrative, thus—When I mention ^
G 5	ed
t I
: ti
I ;
;f : I .

Is
3,
1 ;
C*
'm I
'■'I 1
■ii^: I :K'
,11;
iM;
|.f: '
M
t
I if'
;;l!!
h:'*' ‘ ;i:j: i
iSiii I
ib-fi
. < ?i»
,ii)i ■
:.i I
•ni
t ' .
I . •
) »

t i

154 THE DELICATE DISTRESS'.
cd my having reached ihe pinnacle of human felicity, I forgot to inform you, that rny father had been reconciled to me, for fome time ; and on the birth of my /on, had prefented me witli his pidfure fet with diamonds, and defired the portrait of my lord, and thofe of my children.
But before this request could be complied with, I had the misfortune to lofe my only parent. —His death was fudden, and he died withouta v/ill. This was the first real astlidtion I had ever known ; and my lord, in order to divert my melancholy, propofed our going to the fouthof S'rance.
I acquiesced in his deSire on his account, more than my own ; for as his constitution was -become extremely delicate, I hoped the change of air, might be of fervice to him. We lived at Mantauban for near two years, during which time I had the constant anguish of beholding my dear hushand’s health decline daily.
As he was perfectly fenfible of his own Situation, he determined to take his little family to England, and prefent his fon to his unkind father. Every thing was fixed for our departure, when Providence, to whofe all-wife decrees I bow my-felf beneath the dust, thought proper to recall the freafure he had lent us, and took my little cherubim, to join the heavenly choir !
No words can exprefs the afflifilion of my loved lord, nor defcribe the wretched state, both of his mind and body. Whole days he hung enamoured over the pale beauteous clay that was his child, nor w'ould he be prevailed upon tore-fign it to corruption, till weaknefs left him not the power of oppoSition.
From that time he funk into a state, nearly
approaching to infcnSibility, towards every thing
except
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 155
xcept myfelF; but to his latest moment his endernefs for me was undiminifhed. Why stiould I dwell longer upon a Scene, which but to think of, now strains every nerve, and makes
w	m	^
the blood run backward to its Source ! My miSery was completed by his death, in lefs than Six weeks after that of my lovely boy!
“ But I will stay my Sorrows! will forbid “ My eyes to dream before thee, and my heart,
“ Thus full of anguilh,will from fighs restrain I “ For why stiould thy humanity be grieved “ With my distrefs, and learn from me to mourn
“ The lot of nature doomed to care and pain !”
<
You may fuppofe that lady Somerville was for Some time deprived of Speech ; nor was there one of us capable of interrupting the melancholy Silence, but by our Sighs. She however Soon dried
her tears, and refumed her diScourSe.----1 shall
relate the rest of my story. Said she, thbugh totally uninteresting to myfclf, as it will account for my preSent Situation.
,I WAS about four months gone with child, at the time of my lord’s illneSs ; and his last request to me was, that I would if postible, lye-iii iii England, and acquaint his father with niy pregnancy, as Soon as I arrived there. He told me that if the child I carried should be a Son, it would inherit the fortune and honours of his family; but if not, that there was no prbvifion made for me; or any daughters I might have, as he was under age, at the time he married; arid that the estate was intailed’ upon a very distant relation. He' implored me to preServe my list, for the fake of the poor Laura; and to throw myfelf and her into his father’s protection.
As
!H
1.;
''
i

H li'
:U-i:

lil'
: y
:i

>h
it:
• ' **'

■'s'
:i:
i

b
;.!
, ■ .* *
bi
;; I
*
h’ i
■I :i’. .4
:=ili
mS sh.
iS.l
:Si
»
h I 1

Sd
MO
ih
il'i
Ml
Jli

T‘i.
Vb
ibi
I
II
M',
lii
156 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
As it is utterly impoffible that I Ihould give you an adequate idea of my Situation, at that time, I will not attempt it; but endeavour to call fl veil over that fcene of diiirefs, which no pen, no pencil, can ever be able to defcribe.
I SET out from Montauban, with my maid, my chaplain, and my child, and arrived fafe in London. I obeyed my dear lord’s requeft, and wrote immediately to bis father. His lordfliip w'as then in the country. He anfwered my letter with £?reat civility, mixed with an affedlation of
iA	J
kindnefs: faid he (hould be in town Ihortly, that he would then fee me, and deSired I would take
>
care of myfelf for the fake of the unborn babe, which he hoped would prove a fon and heir.
In a few days after I had received tliis letter, I V as informed that there wTre perfons appointed to attend me, till I was brought t© bed, left I fhould impofe a furreptitious child upon the family. I knew not that fuch proceedings were ufual in my cafe, and I wrote a letter to mj father-in-law, complaining of fuch treatment to which he never deigned a reply.
But all their apprehenSions on my account, were foon over: I was delivered, in the feventlr
month, of a dead fon; and from that time I
*
heard nothing farther from my lord’s father, or any of his family, for above Six months. The little money I had brought with me into England, was now quite exhausted ; and I was obliged to apply, heaven knows how unwillingly! to this inhuman parent, for fome means of Support, for liis fon’s widow, and grandchild.
' In his reply to my letter, he told me what I knew before, that neither my daughter nor I were intitled to any thing by law ; that therefort he advifed me to go back to my own country, and he would furnish me with m.oney to carry
Bie
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 157
me there, provided I would leave Laura in England, to his care. That if I Ihould refufe thefe terms, I must even provide for myfelf, as it was not his purpofe to offer me any others.
When the mind has been once totally fubdu-ed by forrow, we flatter ourfelves, that we are incapable of being wounded by any new distrefs : but the idea of being torn from the dear remains of my loved lord, my only child, convinced me that there were still fome arrows in the quiver of adverSity, that had not yet been pointed at my peace.
. I DID not hefltate one momentt, to determine that no consideration fhould make me confent to a reparation, from all that was now dear to me on earth. I must, indeed, have been abfolutely void of humanity as himfelf, if I could have resigned my child into the hands of a man, who had never even deSired to fee her before.
I WROTE immediately to my brothers at Genoa, and acquainted them with iny distrefs. They very kindly assured me, that they would receive me and my daughter, with open arms at our return ; but i^ it fhould be my choice to remain in England, they would take care that I fhould not want a fupport there. They immediately remitted me bills for a thoufand/>/^^^’rj-, and agreed to fettle the fame Sum annually upon me, or more if I fhould have occaston for it..
At this instance of generoSjty and affedfion, my heart once more became expanded with gratitude to the Almighty, and with true Sisterly tendernefs to my benefadfors. I now began to make the first efforts towards fubduing the violence of my grief, and to be fenfible that I might have been rendered still more wretched than I was, by the deprivation of my child., or our being reduced to stavery for bread..
I SOON
il .1

;is‘
* [ I
ill
■•t
:ih
i'
‘1 1
■1. •
:■! i
• :*
ill
. *
'1.' ' \ I
V .
i-
•1 . r,
is.
i V .
I 1	‘

l:ji
■’ ''ii ► ..
' 'i:
I
i U-
' i*
r':!: ! ». I'
A-
. t
a : ,1’ ■ .1 I
I I
I;
• iti;
■ nil'
■sh'


■.i!!
: t;
S'
• ’hi
0
158 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
I SOON fixed upon the plan of life which 1 meant to purfue, and lent out my worthy chaplain, and my faithful maid, in fearch of a retirement, fuch as you now fee. In this fpot I have lived about eigiit years, in which .time I have had no manner of converfe with any human creature but my own family ; which now confifts of ray daughter, my chaplain and myfelf; my gardener, his wife and the little maid, their daughter, whom your ladyship has feen.
The only additional misfortune! have known in this place was the lofs of my faithful Maria; she died about two years fince; and as my daughter was then of age not to need her attendance, I have never attempted to Supply her place.
Rusticated fo long as we have been, you will not I hope, ladies, be Surprized at the lira-plicity of mine or my daughter’s manners.—Our Situation is certainly a very extraordinary one, and must naturally have raifed your curioSity, which 1 have endeavoured to gratify by a plain and artleSs narrative.
I WISH for your fakes, as well as my own, that my story had been leSs affedling ; but I lhall not make any apology for having drawn forth the lovely drop of Sympathetic Sorrow, which glowed with brighter lustre on your cheeks than the most costly brilliant.
Both Lucy and I poured forth our thanks, for her kindneSs and condeScenSion in relating her story; admired the constancy of her refolution in remaining fo long in retirement, but Seemed to hope that she might change her purpofe. I faw she was diSpleafed at Such a hint; but with great politeneSs, Said it was the only Subje6l; shedidnot wish to hear us talk upon, as it would always
give her pain to distent from our opinion; which
(he
il
k t
!)•
the DELICATE DISTRESS. 159
fhe must ever do, both in word and deed, upon
that fubjeft.
I THEN ventured to afk her if she wished that mifs Somerville should past her life in fuch a state of fecluston ? She faid, by no means ;—fo far from it, that she fent forth a thoufand fruitiest wishes, that fome lucky accident might happen to introduce her to perfons of fenie and virtue, and of a proper rank, to lead her gently into life ;—that she had heard the characters of all the perfons of fashion in that neighbourhood, from her chaplain, who frequently mixed with the world in order to tranfaCl her affairs;—that as she was above flattery, she was alfo fuperior to difguife, and frankly owned that her utmost wish in this world would be gratified, if lady Straffon would promife her protection to her dear orphan.
I SCARCE Suffered her to finish the latter part of her Speech before I flew to and embraced her, and with great truth assured her, that my inclinations met hers, more than half way. I begged that from that moment she would do me the honour to confider me as her Sister, and that the lovely Laura might be henceforth deemed my niece.
Every thing that delicate gratitude could dictate, was uttered upon this occafion ; and we all appeared to be infinitely happier than we could have fuppofed it possible for us to be in fo short a time, after having been fo very much afflicted.
Lady Somerville concluded with informing me, that her father-in-law had been dead about four years, and had left mifs Somerville fix thoufand pounds. We agreed that Lucy should bring Laura to Straffon-Hill to-morrow ; and I promised
•C
1,1
J1

•l I
t; i

te'l!
M
I lio
: I

K "
' i
I d!.
' !l‘ i'i •1 '



r I fi-
: '..rj

If
• ’ii
iii'F'
th !
hf-
«:l
hi :'i
ili

d
r

' ■:
i
■, >
I
i
Mhi!
■iil
S
i\
i;
'. -
';i
M t
'll ‘
1
't!


i6o THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
ed to convey her back to her ladylhip whenever (he required her attendance.
You-cannot, my dear Emily, yes you can conceive, the fincere pleafure I feel at havingit in my power to oblige the an iable and unfonu-nate lady Somerv ille. It must certainly be an in-fin ite relief to her mind to know that her daugb ter has a friend and proteQ;or, in cafe Providence fhouH be pleafed to put a period to her woes and take ner to his mercy. But Ihe must neceflarily fuffer a great deal in being Separated from her till ust fhall have made it eafy.
Laura is but just Seventeen, thoughflie look rather older from the gravity and dignify of her appearance. I flatter myfelf you will receive Some entertainment from this narrative, which I have been as exa6t in as my memory would permit ; and indeed it has for the time So intirely engrosted my attention, that I am pretty Sure I have not omitted a circumstance of any confe-quence.
I EXPRCT Sir John will return from London the beginning of next week.-----1 hope he will
be charmed with our young viSitor; and that lady Somerville will fuffer him Sometimes to Spend an hour with her.
Adieu, my ejear Emily,
I am, as uSual,
affectionately your’s,
F. Straffgn.
LET
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. i6i
LETTER
Lady Woodville to Lady St raff ON.
I
I Most Sincerely congratulate my dear Fanny upon the acquisition Ihe has made to her hap-pinefs, by her acquaintance with lady Somerville. There was fomething extremely romantic in the opening of your adventure, and I almost began to imagine that you had taken a trip to Fairy land ; but everycircumstance, though furpristng at first, is very naturally accounted for in the courfe of your narrative. I truly compaffionate the unhappy lady’s Situation ; and again felicitate you on having it in your power to remove a very material part of her distrefs, by affording your friend-Ihip and protedUon to her daughter.
Lady Somerville’s misfortunes are of the hopelefs kind; it is not in the power of fate to restore her hulband, or her fon; and flight ob-fervers would for thefe reafons, pronounce her much more wretched than thofe who are led on by a faint glimpfe of hope to wander through the tliorny paths of life in fearch of .f^me imaginary blifs, which still eludes their grafp. But I think otherwife. When the grave clofes on our joys, our profpedts of this world must all end there; we can no more deceive ourfelves, 'or be deceived. We fink, it is true, and fall with the dear prop which fate has torn away. Then reafon and religion come to our aid ; and when the first wild starts of grief are over, an humble acquiescence in the divine will fooths our fad fouls to peace ; our hopes Spring forward to another goal, and pierce beyond the stars.
But while vain doubts and fears torment the heart, while passion has poffeflion of the foul, and
still
)
■ !
1’ '
I*'
■ I I
: t I 0 I
ii :
1}
'I
1.
f; t i
ivl
I! !', !‘ 1 •
h'i
iO • I
'I .
M !
t M 1
»
1 i
i. /
:» i 'I <

I
l;.i
iHi
!k. . 'I
j- ' 'I i L-
■ *> i
:i :\\
it I (•
il; ' '
:;r ^
.' ■'!
1'
Vbi
* f
j
I
'!' : *•
m
liil •
.r ^ u
t
hr
h'
'’b.
id
>' ‘..1 h’
. (;•
J '
1: .
i-ic

•A\.
r : i;;, ♦<! ■ '/ »'
’	; i I • • I
i‘: ;t|' h
■■ ,r!'d‘
' .te-:
: ill ■■ ;To
I
r\M. ■■■ l! ■'
I ‘ 1

!. !
i 'k'
162 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
still impels us forward through a maze, where our bewildered reafon finds no clue, where peace is lost and keen difquiet fills its vacant place; where our defires are raifed but to be mocked,
and cruelty repaid for artlefs love!------Sure,
iure, this state is worfe, far worfe than lady Somerville’s! She feels the stroke of death; but lady Harriet feels a living torture! inflicted too by whom her foul adored.
I HAVE been led into this refleflion by obferv-ing that lady Harriet’s health and fpirits have declined viSibly, ever Since her unlucky interview with captain Barnard ; and I am certain that his almost perpetual reSidence at Ransford-Hall, in-creafes her difquiet. In his first a£t of inconstancy, fhe might with great reafon imagine that fortune only had turned the Scale in favour of her rival, and she had still the melancholy confolati-on of fuppofing herfelf beloved, though by a worthiest man.
His prefent attachment can arife only from choice or gallantry : aqd it is certainly much more difficult to bear contempt, than injury. Had he died at that time he left her in Paris, her grief for his lost would by this time have been Softened into a gentle melancholy, which though it might for ever have barred her pretenSions to happinefs, would not have rendered her half fo wretched as she is at this moment, and I fear will ever be.
Let not what I have faid upon this fubjed make my dear Fanny think that I am not extremely affedfed with lady Somerville’s diftrefs.
•---1 acknowledge that her fufferings have been
great, but they certainly came to a period when her hushand died ; and time has, 1 doubt not,
infenfibly lessened her afflifilion. I alfo hope that
there
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 163
there is yet in reServe for her, the felicity of feeing her daughter amiable and happy.
Adieu, my dear Fanny ; my lord, and all this family falute you and yours most affedlion-ately. I defire you will prefent my refpefis to lady Somerville and her daughter, both of whom I hope to have the pleafureof feeing when next I am fo happy as to vifit Straffon-Hill.
Your’sever,
E. WoODVILLE.
LETTER XXXI.
From Lady Straffon to Lady Woodville. My dear Emily,
IA M fo fincerely charmed at the hope of your prophecy in favour of lady Somerville being immediately accomplished, that I can neither think, fpeak or write upon any other fubje6t. ——Sir John returned from London in two days after Laura had become our guest ; she and I were just come back from paying an evening vifit to lady Somerville, when he entered the drawing room, and introduced a young Italian nobleman, who had been recommended to him, by one of his most intimate friends at Paris.
I NEVER beheld a handfomer youth ; tall, graceful and finely made, with the strongest ex-preflion of fenfe and fweetnefs in his countenance—as he cannot fpeak English our converfa-tion was intirely Italian, in which, though Lucy and I are tolerable proficients, we were greatly excelled by mils Somerville, who has had the advantage of converfing with her mother, in that charming language from her earliest infancy. The first two or three days that our young
foreigner

i
K> I
164 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
i
foreigner Spent with us, we imagined that devoting the largest (hare of his time and conversation to Laura was owing to the eaSy fluency with which She Spoke his native language ; but his motives remained not long doubtful ; he became very particular in his inquiries about her to Sir John, who gave him the fullest information of her birth and Situation in life. He I'etmeJ charmed at the account of both, and from that time his aflSiduity towards her appeared lefs embarrassed.
Nor is the gentle heart of Laura infenfible to his attentions: her blulhes when he is mentioned, and down-cast looks when he addresses her, plainly discover the state of her artlefs mind She is really a very fine creature, Eimily, and I am truly anxious for her happineSs. Shehasa fenfibility, a frankneSs, a delicate ingenuoufnefa of, nature, not to be found in thoSe who have had much commerce with the world, which (he owes to her Sequestered education with a parent, whoSe natural SoftneSs has been increafed by a long acquaintance with affii61:ion.
But to the purpose^-—Last night the enamoured Lodovico explained his Sentiments to Sir John, and intreated him to prevail on me to introduce
him
though he
confeffed
to lady Somerville ; that he found Laura extremely averSe to a pro-poSal which must for ever divide her from the tenderest of mothers; but as Ihe Seemed to have no other objection, he flattered himfelf that this might be Surmounted.
shR John’s friend, lord Mount Willis, who recommended Lodovico to him, informed him that he is deScended from one of the first families at Genoa, that he is an only Sen, intitled to a very large fortune, and still possest of a much higher treaSure—an unexceptionable character.
I needed
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 165
I NEEDED not much perfuaSion, to enter upon fuch a pleassng embasty.—I waited on lady Somerville this morning ; (he feemed a little alarmed at Laura’s not being with me. I quickly removed her apprehenfions, by explaining the caufe of my viSit. She heard me with the utmost attention, but could not help dropping fome tears when I mentioned Laura’s obje^ion to quitting her.
Lady Straffon, Said she, when I had finished my difcourfe, though my girl’s affe6lion awakens all my tendernefs for her, I will not fuffer her to facrifice her welfare to my Selfish fatisfadfion.
----The world contains but one objedt for me ;
let her be happy, and contribute to the happinefs of a deferving hushand, and I shall taste the only joy my heart is capable of. And should that long abfent guejl ever deign to vifit me again, it is to you the blelSed minister of Providence, to whom I am indebted for its prefence.
I endeavoured to restrain the grateful effufions of her generous heart, by assuring her that I felt almost as much pleafure as even she could be fenfible of from the profpedl of Laura’s future happinefs.—We then agreed that I should bring Laura and Lodovico to wait upon her in the afternoon.--The instant I return I will ac-
quaint you with the refult of our vifit ; till then.
Adieu.
F.St RAFFON.
LET
. t;
1i!
:!d
I
L f
lO

i i'
•'i-b ;

ii
11>
t;
. Hi
• : -i
! hi
I j
i 1
h.'-
1)1
1;

I -sr
rI
m
■ci:i
'■h-.
h: .
i 14
■fli'b ■
•1 u •
"I
I;
pb
, 'i 1' ' ‘ rl ‘
''(.►Li '
"rii;
■b
fS'l” 1
m
IfliH
O'' I
ilPi
'• ■) ‘
I.. 1
!:
H.
1’
b,:;'
li. . !

\\\(
^ f '
.fill!
fi.
U.: • w
Hi'!«;.
U !'■
S
'li’r
■ V
II:
f M It
!
lb
Pil!
lilil
i66 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
LETTER XXXII.
Lady Straffon, to Lady Woodville.
(In continuation).
JOIN with me, my dearest Emily, in rejoicing at the happinefs which opens to tb view of our amiable friends. But I will not detain you from the events which create their present joy. I carried my two young guests, Laura and Lodovico, this afternoon to lady Somerville’s cottage ; she received us with her ufual grace and elegance : but when I prefented Sgnior Lodovico to her, I fancied I perceived a change of countenance, which I knew not how to account for.
However she prefently recovered herfelf, and continued to entertain us with the greatest politenefs.
After tea, I took Laura into the garden, under pretence of admiring a little grotto flie had lately finished, in order to give the young gentleman an opportunity of explaining his fenti-raents to her mother. We had not been ten mi-
nutes abfent, when the little country maid came running to us, and defired we would return immediately,
, We were not a little Surprized at thisfum-mens; but judge how our wonder was increafed on finding lady Somerville with her eyes dreaming, and Lodovico Seated by her, with an air that Spoke him a sharer in her emotions ! The moment we entered the room, she started up, and taking her daughter’s hand. Come, fa id (he, come and embrace your coufin, the fon of that friend, that more than brother, to whom we have been indebted for the means of life fo many
years
Pooh
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 167
Poor Laura was unable to fpeak ; but her ■eyes fully expreffed the tender and grateful fenti-ments of her heart. The enraptured Lodovico feemed totally abforbed in the pleafure of gazing on her.—After Some time lady Somerville turning to me, faid, You fee before you, my dear lady Straffon, the only fon of count Melefpini.— The instant I faw him, I was struck with the
refemblance of that much-loved brother.-----
but how could I flatter myfelf with the happinefs of beholding his fon !
And now, my dear children, continued she, though my confent awaits ye, be assured, that without the count’s concurrence, this union never can take place ; write to him therefore, Lodovico, and let both him and you rest fatisfied, that his will shall in this affair determine mine.
In the mean time, I hope, faid she, your ladyship will difpenfe with Laura’s attendance at Straffon-Hill. iPerhaps my brother may have other views for his fon ; if fo, it is best not to indulge an affedlion too far, which may be produdlive of unhappy confequences: for, be assured, that however deferving the obje£t, however virtuous the attachment, no marriage can be truly blest, that pains a parent’s heart.—A too energic figh accompanied thefe words: but, added she, when lady Straffon honours me with her company, I hope my nephew will attend her.
It was very viSib'e that Lodovico complied reiudfantly with thefe conditions ; and perhaps Laura, for the first time, found obedience difficult.— But as her ladyship feemed deterrriined, a bow of assent was the only reply that was made. Signior Lodovico and I returned home, foon after this conversation.
By the way he accounted to me for not knowing
T'
1
J n:
i!ld'
dilh
• ; t. ■
ym-
'H' C
' ;Uj|
’• I ’
■»; .
i
li
.m
■d:
>l!'
;iiii
VI. !
Id
Id
-d
‘r;![ :r
js'r-j
U' d!
■i,' '
t
K:
Ui
•! 1 d
iii-i
d i j I
i-i
fi
'iv.
M'fd
'H;:!
i
I'd
<»
Hv !< I'il
J'd'-
bS
1 'hi
'■■i’l
I
i
.‘o;
!*n’
I'di
;J'i' • >1 r I
^iiil
;t::i
iO
,(
!
i!
II
i68 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
ing that lady Somerville or Laura were related to him, as he had always heard them called State* villa, which is their name in Italian. I find he intends making as much ufe as poffible of the pri* vilege of attending me to lady Somerville’s; (o that I expe6; to pafs much of my time at the cottage.
He is now retired to acquaint his father with the happy difcovery he has made of his relations, and his fentiments towards his fair coufin, 1 shall be truly impatient for the count’s anfwer.-I hope it will be favourable ; if it should not, 1 fear all lady Somerville’s precaution will be infuffi* cient to prevent the attachments of the young people, though I believe it would be impoffible to draw Laura from her obedience.
I HAVE been lb much engaged in the affairs of the Somerville family for thefe two days, that I have fcarce had leifure to think of my own.-You must therefore excufe my not entering upon the critical distinctions you have made on the various modes of mifery in your last letter. I heartily wish you would take the oppofite extreme for your fubjeCf, and defcant on your own happinefs; which I believe to be asperfestas this frail state will admit of. May it long continue fo. Sincerely wishes.
Your affectionate
'	F. Straffon.
let-
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. i6^ LETTER XXXIII.
Lady WoODViLLE to Lady StrAFFON*
IDO indeed, my dear Fanny, fincerely rejoice at the pleafing profpedts which Seem to open to your new friends; I alfo congratulate you on being in So high a degree instrumental to their happinefs.—I think I may almost Say, that Providence Seems to interest itSelf in the Suture fate bf the amiable Laura.
There is Something very particular in your becoming accidentally acquainted with lady Somerville So critically.—Had your meeting with this charming woman been deferred but a month longer, the connedlion between ye might, in all probability, have been only produ6:iv,e of unavailing good wishes, and mutual esteem;—but the lucky arrival of fignior Lodovico, has made you a principal performer in the great drama of Laura’s life.
Though not an absolute predestinarian, I am apt to believe that there is a fort of fate in marriage ; and as one absurdity creates another, I find I must lean a little to the Manichean doctrine to establish my theSis; by fuppoSing that there is a good and an evil genius, which prefides occafionally at that great crifis, on which all the colour of our future lives depend. I fincerely hope that Laura’s union with the young Melef-pini, will be completed under the happiest auf-pices.—I do not feel one doubt ariSe in my mind, with regard to his father’s confent.—The only cloud which I forefee to intercept the brightest Sunshine, will ariSe from the Separation of lady Somerville and Laura—but that like a cloud alSo will pafs awayfor though the tenderest affec-
H	tion
I'lf
i'll

lb- i
^1!
ill
!!ii'
r :
: »

;(•
.'i
:'}l

; • I
I
\ A
I
n
, 1
\ .

V'\-.
Lii
j
•.n.
il!‘
\ t
I'i.
ii<h
li
L , I
!Li
170 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
tion for a hulband does not oppofe the natural claims of parents or relations, on our hearts, it in Some meafure lessens their force.—Our hopes and fears are direOred to another object; andfeK-love strengthens our attachment to that perfonoii whom we find our happinefs depends.
You fee I have a passion for philofophizb upon every fubjefl;—where incidents do not abound it would be impossible to keep up even a monthly correfpondence, without thefe little aids; I will not call them arts, for I detest the mean idea which is conveyed by that expression.
I SHALL be glad to have my expestations gratified, by hearing of the count’s immediate concurrence with his Son’s inclinations.~In tlie
mean time, I beg you to prefent my compliments to lady Somerville, and her fair daughter, and to assfure them that I regret my not having the pleafure of being known to them.—Fanny Wef-ton is quite transported at the happy meeting of Lodovico and Laura ; but fays, stie can fcarce believe it true, becaufe it is likely to end So fortunately.*
I CAN perceive that lady Harriet has doubts with regard to the event; but as she finds me Sanguine on the fubjedt she SupprelTes them.-Sir James Thornton, with a Sigh exclaimed, what an happy man is Lodovico, to find theob-je£l of his pashon difengaged 1 This has left us more in the dark than ever, with regard to bis attachment, for I am pretty fure lady Harrietts not his obje£l:.
I CANNOT help remarking upon this occafion,
how much the particularities of our own Situati-affe6l our judgments with regard to others;
on
and how much more than we are willing to allow, our opinions are warped and blasted by it, even
in matters that appear indifferent to us
Adieuj

THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 171
Adieu, my Fanny!—True love from *me and mine, to you and yours.
E. WoODVILLE.
LETTER XXXIV.
Lady St RAFF to Lady Wo ODVlLLF.
My dear Emily shall from henceforth be our
augur.—Be her predidlions fortunate, and be they ever verified !
The .wished for pacquet is at length arrived ; —it contained a letter for Lodovico, and one for lady Somerville.—The moment he had read his, which was fraught with congratulations from all his friends, and the most plenary indulgence from his fond father, to his ardent wishes, he intreated me to go with him, instantly to the cottage.
We almost flew there; and Lodovico in the highest rapture, acquainted lady S»merville and his loved Laura with the glad tidings.
Lady Somerville received the news with tears of joy: confl’Ccing paflions warred in Laura^s face; gladnefs and grief took turns. The bright fuffufion of her cheeks, the brilliant animation of her eyes, expressed her heart-felt joy: but when she turned thofe eyes upon her mother, their radiance was obfcured by starting tears; the tranSient rofes fled from her fair cheeks, and left the lily mistrefs of the field.
Lady Somerville was affefted by thefe fudden emotions, and retired to perufe her brother’s let^ ter.—-She returned foon, and giving it into my hands, faid with a figh, by this you may ju*,ge if I flattered my brother by calling him the most
Alas! why must I
generous of men.
H 2
appear unworthy
ih
li:
;
I i
L: '
LH
!ii
iri
ii
■'d-
i-’-
SI
''ll (• f.
:’|i
i*-
i •• t
I	,1
II
16
he

h:
■sslll
wVd.'
.M ! •
Me
!;d;
‘Ui. ■

1
;il
m
172 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
unworthy of his kindnefs by declining it? but when he knows my reafons for fo doing, I hope he will acquiefee in them and pardon me.
Upon reading the count’s letter I found, that after testifying his joy at his Son’s attachment to Laura, he added, that it was from the mother’s hand he hoped to receive the daughter; and conjured her, by the friendssiip that had ever fub-Sisted between them, to return to her native country with her children, to hold the firft place in his houfe, and to contribute by her prefence, to restore that happinefs which had been deeply wounded by the lofs of an amiable wife.
When I had finistied the letter, which Lead aloud, I feel myfelf unhappy, Said lady Somerville, in not being able to comply with my kind brother’s request.—It is long, much longer than I thought it would be. Since I devoted the remnant of my wretched days to Solitude.^—Here I have lived, and here will pafs that portion of my life which heaven may yet allot me.
As she fpoke, I thought I faw her exprelTive eyes fixed on her lord’s picture, as if addrelTing her vows to him. But she had Scarcely finilhed, when Laura, Springing from her feat, fell at her mother’s feet, and catching her hand, cried out, hdy rnore than parent! is it postlble your love for me should have fo little power ? and could you part fo eafily with her, whom I have often heard you call the living tranfeript of your dear dead lord ? But Laura must not, cannot quit her mother I all pleafing prefpeds vanish at that thought; which makes the world appear even more a foli-tude than ever I found this cottage.
The parent’s heart was touched.--------No, my
beloved child, Said she, I will not bar your happinefs.—Since you defire it, I will again behold
the fatal place which gave me birth, and even
strive
14
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 173
ftrive to lofe the Sad remembrance of my griefs, in your felicity.—I owe this Sacrifice to Laura’s filial tenderneSs.—What would my child have more ?
f
Tears and embraces Supplied the place of language, or rather SuperSeded it for Some time ; but when their emotions had fubfided, the young pair expressed their joy and gratitude at lady Somerville’s condeScenfion tn the' most proper terms; and the evening was fpent in Such a manner as could only be pleafing to thofe who are bless with feeling hearts.
The count has accompanied his letter with a very noble prefent, to enable his fisser and niece to appear as the widow and daughter of lord Somerville.—There is Something above pride in that thought.
As Lodovico and I returned home, he entreated me to uSe my interest with lady Somerville, to confent to his being privately married by her ladylhip’s chaplain, before they Set out for Genoa.—I think ssie can have no objeSlion to this request.
I HOPE I shall be able in a few days to fend my Emily an account, that this affair is happily concluded.
Till then, adieu.
• I
.h

F. Straffon
H3
L E T-
•'ll
!• I
:i|
rv
(i!,
174 the delicate DISTRESS.
LETTER XXXV.
Lady Straffon to Lady Woodville.
WHEN the fubjefts are pleaSing I find
narrative writing not fo dull as I once thought—I begin to fear I shall make but a poor figure in the epistolary way, when I have concluded my little novel ; for I honestly confefs that my dear Emily beats me all to nothing in
the moralizing strain.--Sorry am I, on this
account only, that I must now proceed to the denouement of my Simple yet interesting story.
Lady Somerville deSired two days to confider of Lodovico’s propofal ; at the end of that time she expressed her confent in a most elegant letter to me,—She faid, that as she had on every oc-casson concurred witli my requests, she hoped I would not think her too prefuming to make one to me ; which was, that I would accept of her cottage with every thing which it contained, except her lord’s pidture, and that with my per-mishon she would fill its vacant place with Laura’s portrait.
1 WAS both pleafed and distrested at her post tenefs and generofity.—I accepted her prefent. —In that charming fejour, I shall fpend many hours in thinking of its amiable owner, and in refledfing on the infcrutable ways of Providence,, vvho after fo many trials has been pleafed to rel-tore this valuable woman to her country and friends.
Such characters as hers, were never meant to droop in obfeurity ; she owes herfelf to foci-ety, and will I hope recover fome degree of
that happinefs she thinks totally lost, in the ex-
creife
\
It
I

i.-
I
i
I
e
k

[

THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 175.
ercife of thofe virtues which in her retired state Ihe could never be called on to exert.
Slight as the preparations were for a wedding, which it was determined should be private, they took up every moment of our time till yesterday morning ; when Lodovlco, Lucy, Sir John, my little Emily and I fet out together for the cottage before breakfast.—We were received by lady Somerville and the charming bride, with that graceful eafe and politenefs which is the refult of good fenfe, and operates equally upon all occaSions. After breakfast Sir John led Laura into the chapel. Lady Somerville prefented her hand to Lodovico ; the priest and altar were prepared ; Sir John had the honour of perfonating L.aura’s father, and had the plea-fure of compleating Lodovico’s wishes, by bef-towing her hand where she had already given her heart. The fervour of lady Somerville’s devotion was truly edifying ; when the ceremony was over, she endeavoured in vain to fupprefs her tears; but they were tears of joy.
Sir John prefented the bride with a pair of ear-rings, and a crofs of diamonds, and I had the pleafure of placing my piQ:ure in a bracelet upon lady Somerville’s arm. From the elegance of our dinner and fupper at the cottage, I apprehend that lady Somerville is one of thofe extraordinary chara6lers who do not think that the most refined understanding or the most exalted
fehtiments, place a woman above the little duties of life.
The new married couple are to dine with me this day. Sir John is gone to try if he can prevail upon lady Somerville to accompany them. Next week they fet out for Genoa ; they are to occupy our houfe in town, while they stay in London. May their voyage thither and through
H 4	life
!h !
!Sii
176 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
life be attended with profperous gales I Amen, and adieu.
My dear Sister,
F. St
RAFFON,
LETTER XXXVI.
WoODVILLE, Xo Lady Straffon.
Sincerely congratulate my dear Fanny on the fortunate denoiiement of her pleafinganj interesting narrative, and join in her good wilhes for the happinefs of lady Somerville and the new married pair.—As you feem inclined to rally me on my turn for moralizing I Ihall not exert it at prefent, though I think lady Somerville’s story a very proper fubjedi for it.
But to deal ingenuousty, I have a reafon for declining to expatiate on it than what I have mentioned, which is my being stinted in time, as I am going to dine at lord Withers’s, where we fhall stay this night. On Thurfday we are to dine at Sir William Lawfon’s, and Friday is fixed for our fetting out for York.
This fhort letter will probably be the lall you will receive from me till my return from thence. If I were fuperstitious I would not go to York, as I cannot help feeling a kind of prefentiment against it. Why did lord Seymour attempt to infpire me with thisdifgust? I will not reafon farther npon the fubjedt. “ Obedimt is better than sacrifice ; but pray is not that fornetimes the greatest we can make.? -
Affec-
;
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 177
Affectionate regards andfincerecongratu-lations wait on the hosts and guests at Straffon-Hill, from all this houfe, and from
Your’s most truly.
E. WOODVILLE.

End of the FIRST VOLUME.
H
t
13 5
• /
THE
Delicate DistreSs
r
A
NOVEL
IN LETTERS.
IN TWO VOLUMES
By FRANCES
VOL. II.
L’amour ne peut jamais SubSister, fans peine, dans une ame delicate, mais fes peine memes, font, quelquefois, la fource de fes plus doux plaiSirs.
Recueil Anonyme,
r
DUBLIN:
Printed for T. WALKER, in Dame-street.
MDCCLXXV.


THE
DELICATE DISTRESS
9
s.
f • '
f"
4

V
i.
t.
LETTER XXXVII.
DrJ WooDviLLE to Lord Seymour.
i
IN justice to thofe friendly apprehenssons which you feem to Suffer on my account, I think I ought to inform you, that the fo-much dreaded event, of an interview with the mar-chionefs, is over without my being fenssble of the least ill confequence from it. All lovely ! all engaging, as she is I I had armed my iieart with the remembrance of her former treatment ; and though the little rebel did flutter at her fight, I think its emotions were rather the effect of re-fentmcnt than a foster paffion.
The worst Symptom I difcovered in myfelf (I will be perfectly Sincere) was my being piqued, at the compofure of her air and deportment, when she first Saluted me. Is it poffible, Seymour, she can be really indifferent ? or is it only
the artifice of her fex, that makes her appear
fo ?
As
ff:


j

ICL
sil
111: f. .
I:'
'U.
I
lie.
ib'i
.... I
»	‘ i
I !>
Ii ■


C’l ii'.:
! Ti t
i ‘


•1'.

ic
:i' ••
1
' i i
.1 I
i’/ ' *1
•lii
•t
:.'i ■
ffh ■ !«,' ■ 'IM'
tF'

■lii 1:

i* , t
.’re
IN \»
4 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
As the room was very full, and fhe flood at Some distance from me, before I could approach her, she was taken out to dance by lord Belling, ham.—When her first minuet was over, flic de-
fired I should be called out ; and though I felt the utmost reluctance to accept the compliment, it was impoffible to refufe. I am certain I never acquitted my Self fo ill in my life. You have Seen her dance, and therefore know that the eyes of the whole company, were engaged by her, and my confuSion pasted unnoticed.
As I led her to her feat, she wished me m and ashed if the fair caufe of it was in the room!
I anfwered yes.—She then intreatedi would pre-fent her to lady Woodville, whom she longed to fee more than any perfon in England ; as lord Seymour had told her that she v/as a perfeft beauty.
I MADE no reply, but led her to the place where lady Woodville fat, who received her with the utmost eafe and politenefs. I fwear to yoB my dear Seymour, that Emily never appeared half fo lovely, in my eyes, as at that moment. The innocence and gaiety of her heart, lighted up her charms ; and I flattered myfelf that the mar-chionefs’s brow feemed overcast with the pale hue of envy.
Lady Harriet and she renewed their acquaintance ; they all, foon after, joined your filter Sandford, and continued in the fame party, for the remainder of the evening. I danced country dances with one of the mifs Broughtons, and returned home, triumphing in the just preference which my heart accorded to lady Woodville, on
the comparifon I had drawn, in the ball rooiB) between her and the marchionefs.
Fear
THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
5
Fu AR for me no longer, my too timid friend ; but congratulate me on the most arduous of all vidiories, having conquered myfelf.
Your’s, ever,
WoODVILLE.
LETTER XXXVIII.
Lord Seymour to Lord Woodville.
Hot-Wells, Bristol.
Dear Woodville,
I Thank you for the attention you have shewn to thofe apprehenSions, which you feem to think groundiefs. I did not expedt to hear from you, during your stay at York. The constant hurry and dissipation of the fcene, would have been a fufficient excufe for your Silence, both to me and yourfelf, if you had not fancied you had not good news to communicate.
I KNOW you incapable of the Smallest deceit, and am certain that you think your last a faithful transtript of your heart. But alas, my friend! you impofe upon yourfelf, if you imagine your paffion for the marchionefs extindt; or that it is possible for you to give a preference, however justly deferved, to any other woman breathing. Therefore, for the truly amiable ladyWoodville’s fake, I conjure you to avoid all future compari-fons, as I think it will be highly injurious to her merits, to put her on a level with that objedf, which your partiality has made you look upon as the standard of perfedtion.
After the confession of my own weakneSs, I condemn myfelf, for reafoning with you, upon
this
\

Hi
« (
ll.:l
m
iGf
6 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
this fubje6l.—I know it is preaching to the winds, Our palTions make our fate; and we ought to Suffer, without repining, thofc calamities we bring upon ourfelves : but what philofophy Ihould enable us to bear the heart-rending agonies, of having involved the innocent in our punilhment, and rendered the amiable, and deferving unhappy I Who can Speak peace to my fad heart, when I refle61: upon the >miSeries, in which! have plunged the ever-dear Charlotte Beaumont.
I KNOW this horrid image will Shock your nature, and, for a time, you will Shudder at yourfelf. But quickly fay, thefe are the gloomy vifions of Seymour’s disturbed brain. I would not make my Emily unhappy for the world-then fly diredlly to the marchionefs to banilh the
fad thought.-----But I have done, for ever, on
the theme ; for if this picture does not Speak to your heart, I cannot paint more strongly.
My wishes for your happinefs but without
hope, except in flight, shall still attend uponyou; and my highest esteem shall ever wait upon the lovely lady Woodville.
Seymour.
LETTER XXXIX.
Z/crif Woodville to Lord Seymour.
My dear Seymour,
IConfefs your last letter shocked me extremely, but not from the motives you may poffibly imagine. I am truly grieved to find your mind So overclouded, or ingrained, with the dark tints of melancholy, as not to allow your reafon fair play. Anfwer me, were you not just then re
turned
I.
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. *i
turned from the methodist’s chapel, when you fat down to write ? When I expefted congratulations, Songs of triumph, and the laurel wreath, how could you cruelly pop an old fashioned prophecy upon me, of what never was, nor is, nor ever shall be!
thou
But away with thy difmal prefages.
Have I not told thee,^ infidel as
Pfeudo-Magus! thou art, that no action of my life, should ever difcover the real state of my heart to lady Wood-ville, or make her think it was not all her own ? Have I not been married above eight months, and am I not, now, just as tender, and obliging, as the first day we were united ?
Had ST thou real pity, or compastlon, thou wouldst advife me to deSist from my purfuit of the marchionefs, on her account, rather than lady Woodville’s. O Seymour I what a triumph would it be, if I could humble this proud beauty, and pay her Scorn for Scorn ! again reduce her to that foft trembling voice, with which she first uttered thoSe dear founds, 1 love!
Recal her image to your view, on the first night we met her at the Bois do Boulogne.
What perfe61: beauty, amazing grace, and native modesty, beamed round her angel form!—There is a pi(£ture for you : and I hope much more to the life, than your Tistphone.
I HAVE often thought of ashing you, by what talifman or fpell, your heart was preferved, from becoming her instant vidtim ? ^you did not know your Charlotte then. Perhaps you felt the mar-chionefs’s power, and loved like me; but in pity to your friend, endeavoured to fupprefs your paffion. I should adore you, if I thought it were fo.

I do not think her half fo beautiful, as she was then, though her perfon is much more improved



1
8 THE DELICATE DISTRESS,
proved.~She can be gazed at, now, without a blufh ; and wears a rouge, I fuppofe, in order to heighten the finest complexion in the whole
world.
We met this day on the race-ground. She has engaged me to hold a Pharo-bank for her, at night; and engaged me to prevail on lady Wood-
ville to be of the party.---She feemed vallly
charmed with her ; but whenever fhe mentions
her, assumes a peculiar air of fenSibility.--
I think I heard her Sigh, when she pronounced the name.
What an odd mortal was I, to fit down to write, when I have fcarce time to breathe ? Sir James Thornton’s mare was distanced : he has lost above five hundred pounds; but what is much wmrfe, I think he has lost himfelf.—1 never faw fuch an alteration in any creature; I am almost forry I brought him to Woodfort.
The ladies fancy he is in love, but I cannot get the Secret out of the fimpleton. Lady Wood-ville and her nymphs are much yours. I intreat you will drink half a dozen bumpers of Burgundy before you fit down to write again, to
Your’s fincerely,
WOODVILLE.
LETTER XL.
SI
tHi
W
Ah, Seymour I what a tale have I to unfold to you ! I am undone, for ever lost to virtue, relapfed again, to all my former follies.— I doat, I die for love I Do not defpife me, Seymour, but once again stretch forth thy friendly
hand)
• y.»
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 9
hand, and strive to fave a finking wretch. Alas> it is in vain! fate overwhelms me, and I must yield to the impetuous torrent. But hear my Ilory, first, before you pronounce stern fentence on me, and guilty as I am, perhaps you will pity me.
For Some days past, the marchionefs contrived to throw herfelf perpetually in my way, and strove to engage me in the most interesting converfations, by hinting at particular fcenes, in which we had formerly been adtors. Fool that I was, the recolledtion charmed me, and my weak heart expanded with delight, at the repetition of its former follies.
Last night your Sister, lady Sandford not being well, declined going to the ball. The marchionefs fent to lady Woodville, to defire she might attend her to the rooms. Emily politely aflented, and they went together—she returned and fupped with us.
After Supper, she Said she hated being cooped up in a carriage, at the courfe, and alked if I could lend her a horfe, for the next day. The ladies informed her that no woman of fashion, ever appeared on horfeback, at a race. She replied, she had no idea of a faiique law, impofed by jockies; that she defpifed all vulgar prejudices, and would be the first to break through this arbitrary rule, if she could engage any lady to accompany her.
She Soon prevailed on mifs Weston, who rides remarkably well to be of her party, and again applied to me for a horfe. I told her I had not one, that had been ufed to carry a lady, but if stie would venture on that which I ufually rode, it should be at her Service.
She accepted my offer, and after dinner the next day, Fanny Weston, Ransford, and I, attempted

!• ||; ; I'
•i s ij h:
'I u

r ,
i| :i;
"■ili
r !'i
ll'i ;i
•|i
'C ‘I '; >'
, .1 i!"
: "1
u’ ,
■'! I

i ' I

I
H M.
1 . I i' !
1 ::i
n-.t
i !•
i
V
; >
1

"	' M
'te
iMi'i
!ir:^
I’.'l ■
[\. '
lT;ii'
•r -I

f;	'• .
.D ■ I •
ilS' , !!|I	.
il>W ^ .
if'
1;! :i
t ,
‘liil L i',i'
;ii;.
lib O''
ill
' SO''
■ MTm
IV-

ttel;
fisr.
lo THE DELICATE DISTRES'S.
tended her at lady Sandford’s; and Sure there never was fo lovely a figure as Ihe made, on horle-back I
ii
H
Diana huntrefs, miftrefs of thegioves!
The charming Ifabel, fpeaks, looks, and moves.

When we came to the race-grovnd, all the company thronged round her, and though the horfes were then running, she feemed to be the foie objedl of every one's attention. She affected to be difpleafed at the general gaze, and laid if there was room in lady Wcodville’s carriage, she would get into it. We rode up immediately to it, but on perceiving that Emily was in the chariot, and lady Harriet with her, she would not fuffer me to mention her deSign, left it might be inconvenient to my wife, v/hofe prefent condition is now very apparent.
Thornton was by the fide of the chariot, to the ladies who were in it. He imme-
retired to make way for us to come dole. A Croud had followed us, and feme one of their horfes ftruck that on which the marchionefs rode;
it immediately made an effort to difengageit-felf from the throng, and in fpite of all flie could do, ran away with her, with fuch ama-z-ing fwiftnefs, that it feemed to outgo all the racers.
I FOLLOWED inftantly—OSeymour judged my emotions, when I faw' her fall to the ground! when I came up to her, she was fenfelefs, her eyes clofed, and her face covered with blood and dull. I raifed her in my arms, and held her to my breaft ; but unable long to fuftain her weight, in thati pofture, I funk down gently, held her on my knees, and gazed inftupidfi-lence.
At
THE DELICATE DISTRESS, ii
At that instant, numbers came up to us; a-mong the rest, Thornton and lady Woodville, who on perceiving blood upon my cheek, fainted. —She might have fallen to the earth, for me.—
I was infenstble to all the world! Thornton luckily caught her in his arms, and conveyed her to her chariot.
Notwithstanding all the applications that were ufed, the marchionefs feemed irrecoverable, and my defpair is not to be expressed. A gentleman that was prefent, opened a vein in her arm. She then lifted up her languid eyes, and looking round her, clofed them quick again, and whifpered, as she lay upon my bofom, “ I die, “ my lord ; but'ought not to repine, ssnce I ex-“ pire within your arms.”
A CRIMSON blush fucceeded to her palenefs, and a vast shower of tears foon followed. I know not what reply I made, but I have reafon to fuppofe it must have been expressive of the complicated passions which affefled me. I carried her in my arms, to lady Winterton’s coach, and conveyed her in that manner to your Sister’s.
We had all the assistance this place could afford. My fpirits are fo extremely harrassed, that I can-net write more, than just to give you the fatis-fastion to know that she is not in danger—would i I could fay as much.
Adieu, till next post.
Woodville.

lA
L E T.
ti.-

I I!
'I
! i ii ? if
CL .
‘ i'r ’
S i' • (• . * »
t ►H
l-^C
;:|l
S ill
i'S ■
r .
K r • ’
< C ' . •: !
■’!r' »
I
• j. •
'i '
) t ’
*,l I •
r'U.
■' ti
,1
fe •
r .
12 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
, *
LETTER XLI.
Lord WooDViLLE to Lord Seymour,
AS Soon as the fair invalid was laid ontli!
bed, and the medical tribe who wercfum* moned from all quarters had performed their ufual evolutions, of pulfe-feeling, profound looks, and long prefcriptions, I knelt by her bed-fide, and tenderly inquired her health ? She told me, that though much hurt, she did believe, the o incurable wound she had received, was given herfelf, in the weak confession she had made, when she thought her sstuation had placed her beyond the neceffity of longer difguiSing the tender Sentiments, she felt for me. She would give worlds, to rccal what she had faid ; but, as Ihe knew that was imposslble,beggedI would notdef-pile her, or meanly think her capable of adelign, to rival lady Woodville ; and that the moment she was fufficiently recovered, she should fly me, and England for ever.
Think of my sstuation, Seymour I and forgive my weaknefs, while I tell you I pouredfortli all the fondnefs long concealed, even from my-felf, within my labouring bofom, andfwore, with too much truth, I never had, one moment ceafed to love her. She ssghed and wept; 1 kissed her lilly hand, and bathed it with her tears.
How much longer we should have continued in this sstuation, I know not, had I not been roufed by a message from lady Woodville, to inquire the marchionefs’s health, and an excufefor not making the inquiry in perfon, on account of her own indifposstion. I started, Seymour—and recollected, that I had a wife.
I FLEtf
the DELICATE DISTRESS. 15
I FLEW home instantly; found Emily had been blooded, and put to bed-—I rejoiced at being able to avoid the Sight of that amiable woman ; faid I would not disturb her, by going into her chamber, and ordered another bed to be got ready for me, against night.
Conscious guilt will make a coward of the bravest man. I could not bear my own thoughts. —I dreaded being alone. I went to the coffee-houfe, to drown refledtion in noife and nonfenfe. The converfation turned intirely on the accident that had befallen the marchionefs, and I replied with the utmost complacency, to every trifling <}ueflion that was alked, becaufe it related to her.
I SOON grew weary of this Scene. I walked out, and found my steps infenstbly straying towards the marchionefs.—By chance I met Thornton, who with more livelinefs in his looks than I have Seen for a long time, told me lady Wood-ville was much better, and would be glad to fee me; that stie had expressed Some uneastnefs, at their not fussering me to go into her chamber, when I called at home, though She was then afleep.
I WENT dlre£l:ly back with him, and faw my Emily; Ihe looked pale, and difpirited, questioned me with great tendernefs about the marchionefs, and faid the fright Ihe had Suffered, on her account, joined to her apprehenSion of my having received Some hurt, had quite overpowered her; but fhe would endeavour to become a- stouter foldier. Sweet gentlenefs! how thy foft looks upbraid me!
I DETERMINED not to go to the marchionefs, that night, but Sent to know hew she did, and fat down to write my last letter to you. In that, and this, arc contained only the tranfadlions of
one
i l;ih ■: In •
' * S *1
^ •i .
i-'!'
» ■.' > ■I ;•
• u
I ,
14 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
one fatal day.—Where my narrative will end,
I know not! but the only relief that is, atpre-Sent left me, is the pouring out my heart to yon, —I again implore you to pity its weaknefs, and pardon its follies.
Your’s ever.
Woo Dvim,
0 ’
I
r •' i >

LETTER XLII.
Lord WooDviLLE to Lord Seymour.
TOO cruel Seymour ! how am I to interpret
fuch an obstinate Silence ? am I fo far funk in your esteem, that you difdain even to converfe, or correfpondence with me ? Now was the time, to have exerted all your friendlhip, and stopped me on the very verge of ruin.—But you difciaim the painful office of counfelling an incorrigible, felf-willed man; and I now triurapli in your cold negledl. Left to myfelf in fuch a critical jundture, I have a higher pride, in being able, from my own condudt, to claim your friendship and esteem, than I could have felt, hadl a€led conformably to your prudent advice, and declined the meeting of my most dangerous foe.
The morning after the date of my last, I was Surprized to find lady Woodville in the diningroom, dressed, and waiting breakfast for me, when I came down stairs, between feven and
----1 thought she looked paler,
and more delicate, than I had ever feen her,
eight o’clock.
1
I,.
. Si
with an air of refignation impressed upon her countenance, which, added to its natural fweet-nefs, had rendered her one of the most interefting
objeQs, I had ever beheld. Tlie tendernefs with
which
THE DELICATE DISTRESS is
which I en<^uired her health. Seemed to animate s her languid frame, and her eyes quickly recovered their Balive lustre.
Atter breakfast, .ihe propofed accompanying me to fee the marchionefs, I was embarrassed beyond meafure ; but knew not how to prevent her doing, what appeared to beSo proper. Just then, Thornton luckily came into the room, whieh afforded me a moment to recoiled: myfelf. I told her I thought it would be better to Send first, to inquire how the marchionefs had rested, and whether fhe was yet able to receive our vifits ? Emily Seemed to blush at her want of confide-ration, and readily assented to my propofal.
Williams was difpatched with a card, and foon returned with a verbal anfwer, that the marchionefs was much better, and would be glad to fee us. I hoped she would have had addrefs enough, to have Saved me from the embarrassment, which Such an interview must give me. But there was now no retreating; and Emily and I got into the chariot together.
When we were shewn into the marchionefs^s apartment, she was lying on a couch, in the most elegant dishabille.—What a fubje6; for an Apelles, Seymour! It was with difficulty I could re-llrain myfelf from expressing the tranfports that I felt. She rofe to receive lady Woodville, with fuch an^air of graceful dignity, as queens might gladly learn. I faw that Emily blushed, and looked confufed, at her amazing fuperiority:, but was relieved by the entrance of your Sister, lacLy Sandford.
The marchionefs’s behaviour towards me, was remarkably cold, and distant; and I thought (he overaffed her part So much, that auy other woman in the world, but Emily must have perceived Something extraordinary, in the change
I	of
1 : i.
!-'l
' I i
It
itiil!

ii'i '
* • t ■
h.r
' ■■
■^r
Sli!|
U!' ■
li'i
'h'ii: i
i.M :
ti '
lie
I!
Os • l!| .
i|n
-ii-
:ii;!
'' i I
ic :
: V .
■jll: I
:lS: ,
, ^ i ' '
'I ‘' ;.Li •
i : • *
::::i
( i •
' 1 *'.
i'. •
A ■• I i ‘ • ‘ I
be
I' !
\ :
I ,' t
d'd
■; [ .
i;j
t
»'
. P.	*
; (	•
f
. i
i *	^	'
1

•- i
h
e!r
i.o,
* I
^ i,.
. U\ ■ . • 1'
, *
It 1 '
ii:
ij'iib ll'i:

'hi'. ■ jC;)'
i'* ■
i!;
f
t pt
O'
|5 ■ ibi;
i6 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
of her manner ; but happily, lady Woodville'n a stranger to fufpicion.
y o u may fuppofe our vistt was not a verj long one, yet it appeared to me infufferably tedious; and I thought myfelf more obliged to Emily, when she roie to go away, than ever I had been to any one in my life. J had tk happinefs to hear that the marchionefs had received no hurt from her fall, that could be of aiiv ill confequence ; the blood that appeared, n from.a flight contusion in her nofe.
Ransford came to wait on her, 'whilewe were there ; and as he handed my wife to het carriage, and I was quitting the room, the mar-chionefs, with the utmost fierii^ though in alow voice. Said, lord Woodville, return instantly, never 1
Th;£ -manner with which she pronounced thefe words, astonished and confounded me. 1 then faw.that her behaviour towards me was tie effe£t of refentment, not art;—yet how had 1 offended,, how forfeited rhat tendernefs which die expressed for me the day before ? Inexplicable creature! mysterious woman! of all riddles, the hardest to be expounded by the boasted wiP domof thy vassal, man 1
I BOWED, and withdrew, in the utmofta maxement at her .condudi:; and by vainly endeavouring to account for it, I fell into fucha profound reverie, that 1 did not eveji perceive
the motion of the carriage till it stopped at out lodgings.
I then felt myfelf ashamed at not having taken the least notice of Emily during our little journey ; and by way of Saying Something, told her I had been constdering whether we might not Set out for London the next day, if it was agreeable to her. She, shilling. Said my will was
hersj
D E MCA
17
hers; and though quite unprepared for fuch an expedition, as she did not know I purpofed going fo foon, she would be ready at what hour I pleafed.
I KNEW not what I laid, when I talked of London, and had not the least intention of carrying her there ; but my blunder was lucky, as it gave me an opportunity of paying a well-de-ferved compliment to her conTplacency, and con-defcenSion, and alfo of paving the way to my going without her, if the fovereign arbitrefs of my fate, should command me to attend her. I iikewife appeared to have the merit of Sacrificing my own inclination to hers, by readily confenting to her returning to Woodfort.
Upon thefe terms we parted, and I Set out, with a flow pace, and a disturbed mind, to mea-fure back the ground I had just paflTed. During my walk, I refle6:ed upon the difagreeable necel-fity I had laid myfelf under, of a£ling the hypocrite, with a woman v/hofe amiable qualities compelled me to esteem her, and whole perfonal charms fully intitled her to the fondest, affe^ion of an unengaged heart. Deceit cannot dwell long with honour ; aud I determined either to facrifice my paflion to my virtue, or at once to triumph over charaQier, honour, and every other consideration in life, and the villain boldly.
AcMost distradted with the struggles of my mind, 1 eiitered the marchionefs’s apartment. I found her lying on a couch, with a handkerchief clofe to her eyes, which she removed, upon ,my entrance, and showed her lovely face, all bathed ifl tears. I advanced with precipitation, and would have kiffed her hand, but flie withdrew it from me, with fuch an air of coldnefs .difdain, as almost petrified me: bristly, faid, is your wife with you ?
I 2	I GRAVELY

hi:
pi!j
;i!i
then
and
lifin
ir
'A'
L;,
I '
:1fi
i >
' t .
. (
I''
\S-
,h ' '
‘i :
i
:!h
S’
i?
S’
;;i
» .

I
Sf-
t <,
A.
->1
n
•It;-
i
S;:'
I
■3/
tvc
ii
'1
M
O'
i8 THE DEUCA.DE DISTRESS.
I G«.AV£LY ia.nSw€red, no. She then burft i®to a violent paffion of tears> and exdaifnisd, Ah, Woodville I after what had pasted between us but a few short hours ago, how could you ufeme thus I How did you dare to rnfuk me with the prefetice of that obje^, whofe hgal claim te your affe6:ion, renckrs/mine crirainal ?
I WAS So much ailarmed and canfounded, at the vehemence of her voice, and manner, thatl knew not what anfwer to make, teut told her it was lady Woodville who had propOfed our com* ing together, and that l knew not how to avoid attending her, without running the hazard of giving her offence.
What, then you fear as weM as‘love her, and
you avow it to my face l-^---1 wotild not willing-
iv, madam, inflid unne'cestary wounds, upon the
1 have facrificed to you, nor add brutalttj to perfidy.-----Her colour rofe-to crimfon.
So then, my lord, you vainly hope to keep a flame alive in two fuch hearts as mine and lady Woodville’s! to love ■en Lurk, and play our pa( Stons off, against each other, for your fport!-Amaxing vanity ! But know it will not do, my ‘lord ; her foft, infipid nature might perhaps fubmit to be the loved Sultana of the day, then yield her place to me, or any other, and meanly take it back again, from your caprice ; but 1 will reign alone, or elfe defpife that tranfitory , the empire of your heart.
Yo u may remember, madam, there was a time, when more than you now alk, or I can give, my hand and heart were offered at year •feet; you then difdairied to accept them; they are no longer free. For doating on you, as I do, with all the fervor of distrafted pastioii, I cai|-»ot be i'nSenSible to the merits of unoffending
innocence.
THE DELICATE DISTRESS, ip
innocence, and love ; nor ceafe on« hour, feel the anguish of remorfe, for having injured lady Woodville.
If the franknefs of this confeffio'n, madam, fhould exclude me for ever from your love, I have the confolation to knovi^ that it must infure me your esteem.—-Without feme elaim to the latter, I should be unworthy of the former. But if under thefe unhappy circumstances, you-still can condefeend to feel that passion, which you have profess, let me upon my knees, conjure you to tell me how I may preferve my honour, .without forfeiting what is as dear to me, your love.
I HAD knelt at her feet, during the latter part of this difeourfe.—Her eyes had streamed.— I do not blush to own that mine w'ere not quite dry. She remained stlent for fome minutes, and when I pressed her to fpeak, she replied with a determined voice and manner: There is no al-
ternative, my lord; you must fly with me, or never fee me more.
I HAD dreaded fuch a propofal, yet could farce believe she would make it, and with the utmost agitation cried out. Impossible! But before I could utter another fyllable she laid her hand upon my lips, and faid, I command you filence.—You must not, shall not anfvver me. I know you are to quit this place immediately ; would I had never feen it. But as you are now to determine the fate of one, whofe love for you has made her leap the bounds preferibed to her weak fexj .Ddo not reply rashly ! but take the lafl: moment that can be allowed, before you pronounce the doom of a fond wretch, who has placed more than her life—her happinefs or mi-fery—in your power.
I ROSE and bowed, totally unable to fpeak
13	or
'L
\l
' Li
Li 1 i.i I
' I
r:;.

•Si! l -■:if ! I
M ! ■
ii!i : r I
iiiii i
,;;i ; •
::b' '
L
hii;
to ,
'; ■ ■ : U i ' ''1 I
:■;! !
i
. 'I- '
• L '
is.,-i ■
: iiit i
(» '
• ,
\
r.i
I ■; ;
. I ; ;
. I '
s .
*i' f-
I
'' ' I
r".:
20 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
or even to think, froni the confufion of my ideas, She took advantage of my Silence to tell me Hit would not receive any letter upon this fuhjeQ, from me, but that fhe expeffed to fee me at twelve o’clock next day ; and Smiling added, lest you Should forget, I will prefent you with a little monitor, which will remind you of your abfent friend.
She then gave me her pi£fure, which lhad a thoufand times in our first acquaintance folicited in vain. I kissed it with trainfport. See here, Said she, and drew a miniature of me, which! had formerly given her, out of her pocket; and, now take care that you preferve my image, as carefully as I have done yours.
Then looking at her watch, you must leave ,me; it is near lady Sandford’s dining hour, and I must drefs. How stowly will the miferable moments creep, till we tv.'o meet again! But 1 shall defy time, after that, as it can neither add to, or diminish from the felicity or anguilh, which must then irrevocably be my portion.
I IN TREAT ED her to fpare me on that fub* jefl, as she would not permit me to reply. You must withdraw, then, immediately, my lord, for I can neither think, or Speak, on any other theme. She permitted me to kifs her hand be* fore I left her ; and Seemed to have conquered all thofe violent passions, which posseffed her at my approach. I confefs I quitted her, with infinite reluctance; and fo I now must you.
WoODVIUE.
i *
sti;
■I
i" •, hC* ’I
i . . 1 !
•|, ; V ;
. •'ll ! '* *
h • *
. ■ i
• i
LET
the DELICATE .DISTRESS. 21
LETTER XLII.
Lord Wood viLLE to’ SEYMOu-Ri
PARTED from the marehionefs in a’ more I irrefolute anstconfufed state of mind» thari I-had ever before experienced,. L well-' knew that all the colour ef my future fate,- depended on' the refolution I was compelled to make within a few fliort hours. I found it abfolytely impostible to determine on any thing, from a confcioufncfs of the importance of’my final determination.-
Never, fure, had reafon and pafilon a Severer lliife.. One moment, I refolved to facrifice every thing to love tO fly with my adored Ifa~ bella, into Some distant country, “ and live in “ (hades with her, and love alone.” The next inftant, the image of the gentle Emily obtruded itfelf upon my imagination, in her prefent fitu-' ationpale, and dying. Methonght I beard her last foft Sigh exprefs my name ; I felt myfelS a murderer, and started at my shadow.
In tills distracted state. I had wandered a
fields,
and
fav/ nis
ht
eDtifiderable way in the
coming on apace, without power or inclinaticn to think of returning to York, when I heard the found of a horfe, galloping towards me.
The man who rode him called to me, to direSf: him the nearest way to the town,- and alfo if E could inform him where lord Woodville lived. The found of my own name Surprized me, ancllinquired his bufinefs.—-The fellow quickly knew me; he instantly alighted, and told me he uas a fervant of Sir Harry Ransford’s, and had been Sent exprefs, to let his young master kno\y that lady Ransford had eloped, two days before, with captain Barnard ; and that it v/as
14	fuppofed

‘‘'i'V t Li. I ■;

liiLi '
ti'li '
M *
■ ( V ■■
: i
\ e''r
i: ii
»
iff!
i^h
\ F-A
l!'K
1 ,.•
I.! '
::,i :
,
S

'I
|i r)
ii: i
‘ K
?
/ ’ k
t i’
1
■l!:
' ' . ,
. ( . ■■
'	l
.1 '*
r . I, J ■
/r, I
,oi|‘ !
i
ITT.
b- !
, •' I '
\
• /’SI ’
L ij; '
' III'.,I'

‘"f :t
iOlH
• t: 0
V .TO
ill lli! ibfV.i
Tl 'V
In:
i
lb
ii
!i!
•ii
1 i'i •;hr!l ^
■i’lS
1 I .V ‘
22 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
SuppoSed they were gone either to Francem Ireland. He added that the poor old knightwji almost distradied, for the lofs of his lady, wanted his Son to porfire the ravisher.
The fervant prelSed me to mount his horft, arid expressed his umple astonishment at ray bek by myfelf in fuch a lonefome place at that hour, I refufed his offer, and we walked on togetki, It Was near eight o’clock when I got home ; anil as it was the last night of the races, I did fuppofe Emily was gone to the ball—“—but I found kr alone.
I THOUGHT she looked as if she had been in tears, though her eyes fparkled when Ihe faw me. This little circumstance had its full weight; and the unaffected joy she shewed at my return, without feeming to be alarmed at my abfence, when contrasted with the violence of temper, w hich the marchiottefs had difcovered in the morning, fo far turned the Scale, as to determine me to remain a stave to the obligations I owe to
and the world ; and though I am per* fuaded that I shall never be able to extrast tie arrow frorri my wounded heart, I will fufferit to rankle there in Silence, and endeavour to de-fortitude fufficient to bear the anguiih,
my Wife,
nv
ia
from the noble consideration of having facrificed
my pleafure my duty.
I
must not stile it happinefs—to What would my friend have more ?
My mind grew much calmer, after thefe re* ssedlions.— in order to prevent my relapfing, 1 locked up the marchionefs’s pidlure in ray writing box, and threw the key into the fire, that it might not be in my power to gaze away my reafon, for that night at least.
Emily was much furprized, at the account of lady Ransford, and captain Barnard—her
©w'li innocence keeps her a child.—She begged
I would
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 2j
I would not mention the story before lady Harriet.—I knew there had been an attachment between the captain and her, but thought it long Since over—yet why fhould I imagine that time could conquer love ? O! ne ver, never, Seymour !
Lady Woodville and I Supped, tete i tete ; the young folks, as stie calls them, though they are all older than herfelf, staid late at the ball.
I was impatient for Ransford’s return, and had lent to the affenobly room, to look for him, but he was not there.—I ordered every thing to be in readinefs for his Setting out immediately on his filial errand.
When the ladies and Thornton came in, I retired to my chamber to wait for .Ransford. By frequently revolving my unhappy Situation in my mind, I began to constder it in a new light; which at once encreafed my mifery, and confirmed me in the justnefs of the refolution, I had before taken, of bearing it in Silence, Upon stri6t examination, I found I was the only-culpable perfon of the three ; and therefore: ought to be the only Sufferer.-
Wretch that I was, I had deceived myfelf ; and in confequence of that error, had impofed upon another!. How vain to imagine that the marchionefs’s cruel treatment of my love, her preferring age, and infirmity to me, on account of Superior rank and riches, had Supplied m© with arms fufficient to vindicate my freedom, and break her tyrannic chains. O Seymour I they are twined about my heart, and nought, I fear, but death, can loofe them!
It was near three o’clock, when Ransford came in ; he feerned in very high Spirits—when I told him of lady Ransford’s ill condu£l, he laid he was not in the least Surprized ; he had
I 5	long
• i !*•	'
!
. 1 • ;i
j
stei' * * »’
:« .
;i:Ti! i
:rlf
t.
:;i;
.1 ■ il
.‘»1
.(•

;• .^ijl
‘•I hi

I '
ft ■
ll.l
i i
ir
I
■ i)
'T I
I
i . ’ M ' . I
1
-.1
■^;i|
^ ’ f
■ jii
24 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
known that his stepdame only waited for aga[. lant, who had fpirit enough to engage in fuclu frolic with her ; and he thought his father hast fair riddance.
I WAS Surprized to hear him treat the affair fo lightly, as 1 know him to be a man of nice honour. I then alked him, whether he intended going immediately to his father ? he anfwered no ; Said he was engaged in a purfuit of theut-most confequence, which he could not quit, and that he did not believe he should fee Ransford Hall for Some time.
I TOLD him I thought his father would have reafon to refent his negledt, and preffed him to wait upon him, though but for one day. He perSisted in bis refolution, and we parted. 1 think it odd, that Ransford did not communicate his motives for adiing in this manner, tome;-but what have I to do with other people’s affairs? my poor tortured mind is Sufficiently encumbered with its own.
I THINK I need not tell you that I paffeda steeplefs night.—At breakfast, I told Emily that I should be ready to Set out with her for Wood-fort, after dinner if she pleafed.. She Seemed delighted, and the carriage was ordered,, at half an hour after four.—lintreated Sir James Thornton to return with us, for a few days he made a thoufand excufes ; but at length complied, at lady Woodville’s request,
I WAS now to enter upon the most arduouj taste of my whole life ; that of taking an everlasting leave of the woman whom I doated on —and in this highest aft of felf-denial, I mull appear to her, a volunteer! I am grieved that Brutus should have faid “ virtue was but a
name.” O let me bend before her,awful lhrine>
and
the DELICATE DISTRESS. 25
and pay my grateful vows, for the kind aid she
lent me, in that hour of trial I
I ENDEAVOURED to affume an air of calm*-
nefs on my entering the marchionefs’s apartment. She fixed her eyes, her piercing eyes, in stead-faft gaze upon me, as if to read my foul. A minute pasted in Silence. I found she would not [peak, and hardly feemed to breathe. You fee before you, madam, an unhappy man, who dares not purehafe tranfport with remorfe; and therefore, turns felf-banishedi from her fight, whom most his foul adores!
She quick exclaimed, is it postible! and am I then defpifed, neglefted—for a wife ! Cold,
t A.
Why did you ever feign a pafiion for me? Why strive to make me think it still fubSisted in your frozen heart ? You cannot bear remorfe ! Ungrateful man ! should not Shave shared it with you ? Is then my fame lefsdear than yours ? and did I heSitateorte moment to facrifice that, and myfelf both, to you ? Gbfcurity and infamy were not bars to me, whilst you, infirm of mind, defert the woman you pretend to love, for fear your wife should cry.
True, madam, I replied,, I would not give her caufcto weep, for worlds—nay what is more,
■ for you! 'You have acknowledged too, that
the ftep your kindnels prompted you to take, must be attended with fevere regret alfo, on your own part. What should T feel then, from rendering you unhappy I Shave not fortitude to brave fach two fold agony.
0! you have half that guilt to anfwer for already.—But my pride revolt at my own mean-nefs. Leave me, ,Sir-i—leave me, for ever, Wood-ville! I shall obey you, madam, but before we part, for ever, foster me, at least, to fatisfy your ’ , by declaring that no man ever loved,
with
1?
11.
|i|
^ A.

ii h*\
y\ 1 iiili i .11;
‘I-!
, *h 1 ;i
ii
i,
iii
}iS:
Ijii
I >
1 r
iJ,
Kli
iA
W
■
oil! ' L'i
» . • 4
;i f
i!?-l

:;:s!
i'fi!
T.'
. ^ M vJ
hr '
r-!i
;s-
;-shj
’.hi
-V '
r ■. I
'• ;i .
S 1
t
i-..
' <
I .r
S'! :
r;-‘
hi ■
\ •
I
I
I
, )i I
i ii i i
' I I
■ti
■j.'l'

■111
'.ri
;' 'I
;bi
''R

, 1II '
f Si
,i;»S
ii I
M.:
,.H
•'i»

hi

,. t
:l\) ; uv

;i I
■Mil
!I0h
, Ji;
C
' »5
^■'ii
' U
•'R
> I
L
1--
i
26 THE DELICATE DISTRESS,
with fonder passion than I now feel for you—hoi far time and abfence may be able to conquer it, I know not; but fhould they fail of their ufari effects, it is impossible that I ssiould bear it long; and now, my Ifabella, one last embrace—niaj angels guard you!
I RUSHED out of the houfe, likea diftraded man, but had not walked a quarter of a mile, before the re6Utude of my condu6; towards this too lovely woman, began by flattering my pride, to qualify my passion; and I returned home, in a more rational state of mind than I have known for fome time.
Rejoice with me, my friend ; the conflict’s past I and be just enough to acknowledge my triumph .more compleat, than the much boaftedoGe of Scipio. He only reSigned an alienAedheart--while 1 forego a felf-demted vidiim !
I AM, this moment, going to step into the coach for Woodfort, where I shall impatientlj Tong to fee you. But, O write Soon, to strengthen, and applaud, my growing virtue.
Your’s,
WOODVIUE.
LETTER XLIV.
Lord Seymour to Lord Woodville.
Hot-Wells.
ELIEVE me, Woodville, there is not ano-^ ther event within the power of fortune, ^ich could now give me half the joy that I received from your last letter. I do congratulate rny noble friend, myfelf, and all the world, on
that heroic virtue, which has enabled y'ou topafs
the
the DELICATE DISTRESS. 2,7
the ordeal fircj unfullied and unhurt. Rather let me lay, that like the Amianthus *, you have gained new whitenefs, from the flames, and fhine with brighter lustre, than even unblemistied in-ijocence can boast.
I FIND my stile, perhaps, too much elevated, by my fentiments, but fudden tranfitions must have strong effects. I had fcarce a hope of your efcaping the fnare that was laid for you, and mourned your fall from honour, with infinitely more regret, than I should have done your death. Had the latter happened, my grief would have been felfish ; but in the other cafe, I felt for thofe pangs which you must have inevitably fuf-fered; and for the miferies, which your crimes must have inflicted, upon your amiable, and innocent wife.
But I do not wish again to recal this gloomy profpeSt to your view ; you may now, and ought to look forward, to a long train of happinefs; for furely, if Such a thing is to be found on earth, it must arife from a confcioufnefs, of having acted rightly. Who then can be better intitled to it than yourfelf ?
As I have found fome little benefit from thefe waters, I propofe staying here, fome time longer —I shall then have fome affairs of confequence to my fortune, which I have too long neglected, to fettle in London. So that I cannot hope to fee you, at Woodfort, in lefs than two months.
I IN treat to hear from you, often, but must infist upon your not mentioning the fubjedl of our late correfpondence; forget it, Woodville, and be happy.
I our s, ever,
Seymour.
* The Afbejlos or, Salamanders veooj.

Note,
■ r
III!
4 I
li!
I >
;r
M
■i ;i!
\ !
i I
i::ii '
pi
V M 1
i'iiif
i'
‘ i!:h
1'-:
I ',
!l '
'! !
‘'•.S

clli
I t k • ■ i
' te; !•
M i. '

i '>
s'il
iJ
' I I,
iV'i'
.1
>:
I
Pi:'n * ' *t
' I ’
I' •.I •,

li:
ill: :C
1 V-.
'■ 'it--
i ii:
iiiV .
In' h !■' <1 1
-V'Vi
-'4l ‘
J
t I
* ';ll.
• .. li'.
1 ' '1 •)
i;lr ‘..
. ...I' 'st.ili:
I ► . .1
'S
t- . ■
■' 1.0 ■
*.•' )[ I'i ' .1

m
iv”:!. |.
. D -.ll . >1.:
il|i
XltVi
28 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
Note, The journal, promifed by lady Wood-ville to lady Straffon, is purpofely omitted, as it contains nothing more, than an account oi Some of thofe particulars, that have been already mentioned, which, happened durin gthe week they staid at York races.
The Editor.
■^r ■ns'11^ -rtr "vp ■m-ctr rp'11^ rtr
LETTER XLV.
Lady Straffon to Lady Woodville.
I FLATTER myfelf that this letter will reach Woodfort Soon after your arrival there, and that it will find my dear Emily rejoicing in the calm delights of domestic happinefs, after the fcene of hurry and diflipation she has fa lately gone through.
1 GIVE you credit for the lovely pifiure yon have drawn of the marchionefs, and alfo for the tender concern you exprefs for the accident that befel her—but I am forry your nerves were fo weak as to occaSion your fainting.
I allow much for your prefent fituation, but do not let that, or any thing, elfe, my dear lister,. Suffer you to indulge,, in an habitual low-nefs of Spirits. There is an air of languid diS content,- runs through the latter part of the little journal, you were So good to fend me, that alarms me much—yet F am certain you endear voured to conceal your Sentiments,.even from me ; and I approve your caution, as I am per-fuaded, that by Speaking, or writing on any fub-je£l that affe6fs us, we strengthen our own feelings of it ; and half the Simple girls, who are
now pining for love by murmuring rivulets, or
in
the DELICATE DISTRESS. 29
in (hady groves, would forget the dear objedis of their pafllon, if they had not a female confidante as Silly as themfelves, to whom they daily recount the fancied charms of their Adonis, and utter vows of everlasting constancy.
But do not now, ray dear Emily, So per-verfely misunderstand me, as to SuppoSe that I would wish you to conceal any thing that diS- , trelTes you from me, or that I should defire you to let Sorrow prey in filence on your hearty merely to Save mine the pain of Suffering with you. No, I conjure you to Speak freely to me, and if I cannot cure, I will at least Sooth your anxiety, if real, and endeavour to laugh you cut of it, if imaginary.,
We have had a very agreeable vifitor for theSe
ten days past at Straffon-Hill----lord Mount
Willis.—He lived abroad, chiefly in Italy theSc ten years; yet is not infedled with foreign foppe-
ries, and can relish both the food and manners of his native country. Sir John met him last, at Paris, from whence he is but just returned.
He tells us, that Sir James Miller, and his ma fpofui are univerfally ridiculous. Her lady» Ihip affedls all the lively gallantry, d’unedame Fraii9oiSe, but is unfortunately encumbered with ail the clumfy aukwarknefs of a vulgar Englishwoman. Sir James plays deep, and has lost considerably. Lucy feems hurt at the latter part of this account. The goodnefs of her heart is inexhaustible.
The approach of a certain defirable event, with that of winter, will, I hope, Soon afford me the pleaSure of embracing my dear Emily and her lord. We shall return to London in
ten or twelve days. Have you made any discovery, in the terra incognita of Sir James Thornton’s heart? Does Fanny Weston Sigh in concert
with

h;
I k • *
iliU
'i'
‘ : (
30 the DELICATE DISTRESS.
with the ^olian lyre ? or have the eqmnoaial blasts fo chilled her flame, that she prefers a warm room and chearful company, to lonely me-
ditation and foft founds ?	^	.i* r !•
How does lady Harriet bear this fccondin. stance of captain Barnard’s perfidy f and how does the poor old gouty knight Support the vul-^arly called lojs of his detestable wife ? fin
,nly notafk more questions in one letter than you maybe inclined to anfwer in two, Khali
for the prefent, bid you ad.eu.
!:i ’
i 1| • ' I- :
.t'L ■
it!'
S -u-
1;^
■wf ■
'•b
,1
I
rt'
"ill
L
-S'
' L
i •
d *
LETTER XLVI.
Lady Woodville to Lady Straffok.
Ye S, my dear Fanny, I am now, than!
heaven. Safely ajrived at Woodfort—would 1 had never lest it! I think even the place, and every thing in it, is altered, during a short absence of twelve Cays. The trees have lost their veidure, and the birds ceafe to fing. But though the autumnal feafon may have produced thefe :effe£ls, I begin to fear there is a greater change in me^than in any of the obje6ts thar Surround me.
Yet am I in the Spring of life, not ripened even to Summer ; while like a blasted flower I shrink and fade. Say, Fanny, why is this? The animal and vegetable world bloom in their
proper SeaSon, youth--while amongst thofe
whom we call rational, grief steals the rofes from the_ downy cheek, and flowing tears oft dim
the brilliant eye. Lord Sevmcur is
bornton.
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 31
Thornton Sighs; and my loved lord, feemS wretched,—need I go on, and dole the climax, with my breaking heart.
Chide me, or chide me not, the fecret’s out; lam undone, my ssfter! in vain lord Woodville drives, beneath the mafque of tendernefs, toad: a part, which he no longer feels; the piercing eyes of love deted his coldnefs—his kind attention is all loft on me, his ftifled fighs belie his face and tongue, • and whiSper what he Suffers when he Smiles.
0, Fanny I tell me how I have offended him! how loft that heart, which formed myut-moftblifs! let me blot out that passage, with my tears; it cannot it muft not be.—I will not live, if I have loft his love. Why are you not here, ^to flatter me—to tell me that my fears are ground-lefs, and that he Sighs from habit, or from chance ?
Ah, no! fince he whom I adore, has failed to blind me, I cannot, if I would be now deceived. Yet if I have erred, why does he not Speak out, and tell me I have done wrong ? Believe me, Fanny, I have tried my heart, examined every hidden thought that’s there, and cannot find out one that should offend him.
Are all men thus inconstant ? I was too young to mark Sir John’s behaviour, when you were married first. A Sudden ray-of hope, now dawns upon me; perhaps the great exertion of my lord’s Spirits, while we remained at York, may have occasioned a proportionate degree of languor—perhaps he may again recover his natural chearfulnefs, and your poor Emily may again be
happy----perhaps——I will strive to hope the
bell.
I HAVE no thoughts of going to London—I always purpofed lying in at Woodfort—I had
flattered
IS
!i

b
; I

.lii
If!
h;
•■'I.'
Mi:
i-
iO.t
f)l
i.:i!
il!
0
1 ri
ill;
' 11.
V!
C:l
! ' u


•i: r

m
■m

.i:L‘


til-
I;
ii
'< .
9 '
I* ■;
lii
• I
Vi
I ■
V ‘■st It'. M-i'
,1'te
,y 1
it k ,!N:
I I ••
I
I
!• 1,; jib . L'-
■ \u
;i.'
■i ;
■
.: iii

ii'
h I f
'1:1
b(i
O'
■■I’ ' *,
32 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
flattered myfelf,, you would be with me, at tht hour of trial; but I do not now exped it-I know Sir John would not confent to your running the hazard of travelling, /in yourprefem Situation, as it has formerly been of ill confe-quence to you, I therefore releafe my dear Fanny, and deSire fhe may not fuffer the leaft anxiety on my account.
I FIND myfelf much mere at eafe,, than when I began this letter, and I must affirm,, though in contradidlion to your.opinion, that pouring forth our distrelTes, in the bofom of a friend, affords, at least, a temporary relief to the afflidled. lara not able to write more at prefent, but willan-
fwer all your queries by next post-
Till then,
adieu,
-	E. WOODVILLE,,
LETTER XLVII.
'!t
lb
V.>
I
f!i
' \
' ■ 1
1
ilC.
I'i''
1; r.‘
<• b
■ I..
T: I- .
VI1
k
;
•illil;'
■iip
■S
1S
U'

Lir/y WooDViLLE to Lady Straffon. My dear Fanny,
There never Sure was fuch a man as lord
Woodville—he is not only determined to
preferve my affeftion, but to rob me of the poor confolation, of complaining that I no longer ppffefs his. In fpite of all the pains I have taken to conceal the anguifh of my heart, he has certainly perceived it, and by the most tender and interesting coriverfation, had well nigh led me into a confeffion, of my being unhappy.
Thank heaven,. I stopped just stiort of that '—had I avowed it, he doubtlefs would have
afked the caufe, and artfully have drawn me in,
'	at
THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
33
O ne-
at leall, tacitly to reproach his condu6I.' ver! never, Fanny, can I be capable of that in*
difcretion.
But were I weak, or mean enough, to do it, lhave now no reafon for complaint—his tender-nefs, politenefs, and attention, are unabated. Noether perfon, but myfelf could possibly perceive the fmallest alteration in his conduQ;; and 1 begin to hope, that my apprehenfions have had no other foundation, than an extremity of delicacy, bordering upon weaknefs in my* fell. A thoufand, nay ten thoufand women, might, and would be happy, with fuch an arria-hle and tender hulband, nor has your Emily a wiih ungratified, but that of feeing her dear lord quite happy.
I AM forry to tell you that Sir James Thornton leaves us to-morrow ; he is to fet out immedi-
ately on the grand tour. My Lord has in vain endeavoured to find out the Source of his melan-
choly ; we can difeover nothing but that he is unhappy, which I am finccrely forry for, as he really is the most agreeable accompliflied young man, I ever was acquainted with.
Lady Harriet affe6;s to appear shankful for her efcape from captain Bernard; but finds his elopement a caufe for Sorrow, on his lady’s account. Sir Harry is So much enraged, at his
fon’s neglefl of him, that he begins to be reconciled to his wife’s conduft, and fpeaks of him,
with more acrimony, than of her. Indeed, I think Mr. Ransford highly to blame, for refufing to attend his father, upon fuch an occalion.
Fanny Weston is a la morty at Sir James Thornton’s quitting us. That love is the caufe of her mourning, I well know, but I begin now to apprehend that Sir James, and not lord Seymour, is the obje£I of her passion. She has a
much
t »\
Of
I
: • -,f\

n;
, i
I'' .
i ,
• t ■ 1 ! •
^4 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
% >
much better chance in this cafe, than the othi, for I am perfuaded if Thornton knew of heral-fe£tion for him he would endeavour to make ha happy.
Alas! if he loves another, how impoffible!
I fancy he is enamoured of one of the mifs Wi. thers’s.—His fortune and family are fuch, thatl do not believe he would be rejedled ; yet I coiili
not wish him fuccefs for poor Fanny Wefton’i fake.
Men more eaSily triumph over an unhappv passion, than women. Dissipation, change ol place, and obje^tsj all contribute to their cure; while perhaps the poor ssghing fair one is abfo' lutely confined to the fame fpot, where Ihe firfl beheld her charmer, and where every objed reminds her, that here he fat, walked, or talked,
I AM perfuaded there is a great deal more in thefe local memento’s than lovers are willing to allow. I therefore shall not oppofe Fanny We[-ton’s going to London, if she should again pro-pofe it.
Sir William and lady Lawfon are to dinewitli us this day.—I wnll try to muster all my fpint! to receive her. I would not, for the world, make her unhappy, by giving her the least room to fufpeSt that I am fo.
Adieu, my dearest Fanny; to you, and you only, I can, without blushing, difcover ail the weaknefs of a heart, that truly, and fincerelj loves you.
E. WOODVILLE.
P. S. I have, this moment, received a meffage from my lord, to let merknow that he shall fpfud three or four days, in hunting, with Sir William Atkinfon. I am glad of any thing that can amufe him.
LET-

THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 35
LETTER XLVIII.
Lady StrafFon to Lady WoodvilCe.
I CANNOT exprefs how much my dear Emily’s last letters have affedted and distreffed me.-rYour being unhappy is certainly fufficient to render me So ; and what adds to my concern, is, my being abfolutely incapable of affording jou the .least con fol at ion, as I am utterly ignorant the real eaufe of your affiidtion. I fome-times think, that it is only a phantom, conjured ap by your too delicate apprchenfions; and is, ofcourfe, merely imaginary.---hi other times.
the natural inconstancy of men alarms me with an idea of lord Woodville’s having met, at York, orelfewhere, forne o' jedi, that may, for a time, divide his heart with you.
Observe, my dearest Emily, that this Is mere conjesture ;—but we must take certain poSitions for granted before we can reafon upon any thing. Now do not start, when I tell you, I had much rather your uneaSinejs should arife from the latter fource, than the former ;—though i should con-fider, even a tranSitory alienation of his affeCfion, as a misfortune.
I
■L

i
> ■
Let us now fuppofe this to be the cafe, and then fee how far you have reafon to'be distreffed byfuch an incident. The paffions of the human mind, are, -I fear, as little under our command, as the motions of our pulfe:—you have therefore just as much reafon to refent your huf-band’s becoming enamoured of another perfon, as you would have to be offended at his having a fever.
But if, in confequence of that delirium, he Ihould facrifice your peace to the gratification of
his
!!'■
■h

.1 .
I. • r
■ >

!!■ , u
\ I.
! r
• J-
‘J
T!
l!
H
'{ L.
‘ »*:
Hit


‘U
'fV
t' ,

.. >
1 >•
36 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
his passions, by an open and avowed purfuitof the beloved objeQ:; or otherwise render youM< happy, by unkindnefs, or negledl, you miglit then have Some caufe to complhin ; but if hebe unfortunate enough to feci an unwarrantable pa[-lion, and keeps that feeling all his own, his me. rlt rifes above humamty, and he ought to become almost an objedt of adoration to you.
H AS he not fled from this alluring charmerl Has he not hid his passion from the world, nor wounded even your pride ? Is not his tendernefs and kind attention still unremitted towards you! Indeed, my Emily, allowing thefe to be matters of fadt, you owe him more than you can ever pay. Conflder what his regard to you muft be, that can prevail on him to facrifice his paffion, to your peace ?
Then do not, I implore you, my dear child, by even the least appearance of distrefs, aggravate his, but be assfured, that from a heart, where honour is the ruling principle, you have every thing to hope, and that the tranSitory gloom which now affedts him, will be Succeeded hjik brightest triumph ; and that his reafon and bis virtue will both join in Securing bis affedlionto you, upon a more folid, and permanent foundation, than it could ever have been, if this accident had not happened.
I HAVE gladly laid hold on what you will think the greatest evil, lord Woodville’s having conceived an involuntary passion. But formidable as that may appear to you, believe me, Emily, it is of little confequence, compared to both what he and you must fuffer, should there be found no real caufe for your distrefs. A mind fo unhappily turned, as yours would then appear to be, must be incapable of receiving or adm-
niftering
'*1 ■ ♦
!,i
]
the DELICATE DISTRESS. 37
I am shocked at the horrid
niftering content.
idea, and will not dwell upon it longer.
As I kept your letters in a particular drawer of my deflt, in looking for your last but one, chance prefented 'me with your first letter from Wood-fort, where you Set out a 'strenuous advocate for the existence of terrestrial felicity. Fallacious as the .opinion may be, F am truly Sorry you have had any reafon to alter your fentiments ; but let it, at least, confole you, that if you are not an example of your own argument, there is no-fuch ithing as an exception to the general rule, that happinefs is not, nor ever will be, the lot of human nature, till perfe€lion becomes inherent to
It.
The fuhje6Is of this letter, have funk my fpirits To much, that 1 fear I shall rather increafe, than.lesten your depression, if I purfue them farther. S will, therefore, change to one that ought to give me pleafure, and will, I hope, afford you •fome.
Lord Mount Willis, thoroughly apprized of our dear-Lucy’s former attachment to Sir James Miller, has declared a passion for her, in the most polite and elegant terms, that can be imagined. Senfibility, he fays, is, with him, the highest mark of virtue; and a heart, that could feel what hers has fuffered, for an unworthy objedl, muft be capable of the highest tendernefs for one who can, at least, boast the merit of being fen-fible of her charms.
A LITTLE falfe delicacy has, as yet, prevented lucy from declaring her Sentiments, in favour of this charming man. for fuch, indeed, he is ; though I can fee she likes him full as well, and muft neceffarily approve him much more, than
file ever did Sir James Miller.
But
j
;s
. 1
0;
. (
1,
1.1
'll!
•'i,
1
-s
) A
r
<
r.
I
r
38 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
But Lucy declared she would never marry, and that she would leave her fortune to my Emily.—I know this dwells on her mind, though it never did on mine ; for I have as little faith, in the vows of difappointed love, as in the promifej of fuccefsful ones. However, I both hope, and believe, that lord Mount Willis will triumph over her Scruples; and that I shall have the pleafureof feeing her the happy wife, of that very amiable znan.
I AM Sorry you are to lofe Sir James Thornton } but perhaps the want of his company, may induce lord Woodville to come to London; and I should rejoice at any caufe that could produce that effeQ:, for I cannot bear the thought of your lying-in in the country.
Fanny Weston is not of a temper to break her heart for love; but I would, by all means, have her come to town. Her aunt, lady Wefton, talks of going to Bath, next month, and if Fanny chufes to accompany her, I will anfwerforit, that that gay Scene of dissipation will foon conquer an hopelefs passion, whether lord Seymour, or Sir Jarnes Thornton be the obje£t.
We arrived in Hill-street last Thurfday; to-morrowj Sir John is to place my little Edward, at Eton. The fimple mamma will feel the lofsof her dear play-fellow, but the prudent mother will blefs the memory of Henry the Sixth, who instituted that noble foundation.
The accounts we have received of Sir James Miller, are shocking.—He has been obliged to quit Paris, on account of his debts, and is retired into Some of the provinces.—His lady remains in the capital, living away upon credit, without character. I begin to pity the unhappy man.
Yo»
hi
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 39
You will eaSily perceive that this letter has been written at-different periods. The world breaks in upon me. I am embarked in the stream, and must be hurried away by the current, with (licks, straws, and a thoufand other infignificant things.	,	' ^	*
Adieu, my dear Emily: I hope. Soon, very (oon, to fee you---for, if the mountains will not
am to Mahometf ^c.
F. Straffoi?.
ntr nf tir war
W W Tir TSf TST
LETTER XLIX.
WoonviLLE to Lady Straffon.
*
1AM stncerely Sorry for having given pain to my dear Fanny’s gentle heart, as I cannot that her particip^ation has alleviated my dif-trefs. For giving tV.e fullest Scope to the arguments you have advanced, what do they prove, jut that your Emi.ly is unhappy ; and that she bewtoo well before ! You Set lord Woodviile’s merits in the fairest light, cruel Fanny I Why touldyou not'stnd out Some fault in him, to make me love him lefs ? But it is impoffible ; he is, Whout difp’jte, the most amiable of mankind.
I told you, in my last, that Sir James Thornton was to leave Woodfort the day folding, v/hich was Tuefday. On Monday night he took a very polite leave of us all,'and I tooughy appeared more chearful than he had ten for fonrie. time past. When we were at teairfaft on Tuefday, we were told Sir James ^Cet out at Six o’clock ; and immediately after, ®y lord’s fervant prefented him with a letter—he fpeared to shevv fpme emotion while he read it,
K	and

; (•
L
I'!’
: I
SI
b’.
(
if
. {
IL



bis l
■ t
1
1 f ■
.'Ti -
i’.U
b' i'
m
1!:
I j!'
I	•
dl!
\ri-r.
All'.
-'V'l
tel!'
ill

>' .n

.!■ ii;:
k
• s!'.'
tiiif
I '
C I I I I >
! . ;

. „ ♦
i
! .
I »
I-
I i-
40 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
and Soon withdrew to his clofet. In lefs than half an hour, I received the following billet, witli the aforcfaid letter, inclofed.
To Lady Wo o d v ille .
“ 1 s H o u 1.D be .unjust to my unhappy frienil, should I conceal she noble and generous fentimeiits he expresses jfor the most lovely and defervi® of her fex ; and I should still more highly injure the unbounded -confidence of my dear Emily, should I prevent her receiving the tribute due to that merit, which could infpire fo truly delicate and fincere a passion. I feel 1 know not wliat kind of a mixed fenfation, for poor Thorntoni I both admire and pity him.
I would have delivered the inclofed with my own hand, but feared my prefence might diftrefs my Emily, or, perhaps restrain the pity-flowiig tear, which, I .confefs, I think his fufferirigi merit.
Adieu, my dearest Emily.
WOODVILU.
Sir Ja. Thornton to Lord Woodviiii.
“Indebted as lam for many obligations to your lordship, and fenfibly awake to thewarraei fenfations of gratitude, I could not think of quitting Woodfort, and England, for ever, without gratifying that friendly curiofity, which has fo often fought the caufe of the too vifible change in my manners and appearance. Vou willpw haps be startled when I tell you, that this alteration is owing to yourfelf.
** Ignorant of every refinement, and elegance of life, dissipated in my temper, and unattachd
to any particular d)je6I, by your lordlhip'
fricndl

THEDELICATE DIS"SRE,SS. 43
friendly invitation, I arrived at Wood fort.
Heavens! what a Scene opened to ray astonished fenfel The Sudden effect of colours,to aperfonjuft reftored to fight, could not be felt more strongly. Every obje£l I beheld, was new, was amiable! yet in this charming groupe, my lord, there ^ere degrees of merit, and my then vacant heart dared to afpire at the most perfe6l of her fex. Need I now tell you, that lady Woodville was its choice 1 Yes, I avow it 1 Pastion is involuntary ; nor would I, if I could, be cured of mine.
“ Yet witnefs for me.
heaven, that fenfual and abandoned, as my past life has been, nogroSs idea ever mixed with hers, nor did her beauteous form ever raife one thought, that even she need blush to hear.
“Ido not my lord, affedl to place this purity of fentiment to the account of my own honour, or even my friendship for yoii. No, I con-fefs my Self indebted for it to her charming image, which ever appeared to my delighted fenfe, accompanied by that uncommon delicacy that graces every word and adtion of her fpot-
lefs life..--That, like a facred talifman, has
charmed the unruly pastions of my mind.
and made me only feel the pangs of hopelefs
love.
“ Such a confession, as I have now made, my lord, will, I flatter myfelf, intitle me both
to your regard and pity. I go felf-banished from all that I esteem, and love ; from you and lady Woodville.—It would be the height of impiety to doubt of her happinefs: and a long continuance of the blellingc you now enjoy, is the iindeft wish that I can make for you. Felicity lihe yours, admits of no addition.
Ka	When
\ '

I	f
II
■ t ; ,
t ‘	,
1 .
'' d.
N
, I •
!1-

fi*
i|f
42 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
‘‘ When you have read this, my lord, bum and forget it, but let not the unhappy writer be totally banished from your remembrance. Conceal my prefumption, from the too lovely ladv Woodville, lest her refentment should be added to the miferies of,
“ Your unhappy friend, “James Thornton,”
OFanny, I am distreffed beyond meafure, by thefe two letters I Why did this weak young man place his affedlions upon me ? Why not bestow them, where they were likely, if not certain, to meet with a return ? It isfaid, that love is involuntarily; but I believe it is only fo in very young or enervated minds.—If we will not struggle with our'passions, they will furdj overcome us; but they may certainly be weeded out, before they have taken too deep root.
I AM doubly distreffed, by this unldcky attachment.—Poor Fanny Westoni her' paffion, for Sir James Thornton is but too vifible ;—Would it not be cruel to attempt her cure, by letting her into this Secret ? I know not how to a6t.~ Why did my lord reveal his foolish letter? or why did he not Sigh, in fecret, and conceal his ill-placed love ? O thefe audacious men! they dare do any thing.
There is however, a degree of modefty, in his keeping the fccret, while he was here. I am convinced, if he had given the stighteft hint of it, I should have had detested him: even as it is, I feel myfelf offended, and in a very auk-ward Situation. I,shall certainly blush when I fee my lord; and yet, why should I be humbled by another perfon’s folly ? What hufband but mine, would have put fuch a letter into the
hands of a wife ? Such a mark of confidence
ought
the DELICATE DISTRESS. 43
ought to raife me, in my own opinion, as it is an undoubted proof, that I stand high in his. PleaSing refledlion ! dwell upon my mind, and banilh every gloomy thought, that has obtruded there.
As Lucy’s happinefs is of infinite confequencc to mine, I hope loon to hear, that stie is lady Mount Willis.
Your’s, as ufual
E. WOODVILLE.
L E T T E R L.
Lady Straffon to Lady Woodville.
I Cannot fee why my dear Emily should be hurt or offended at Sir James Thornton’s innocent paffion ? had he dared to avow it, to you, it would have lost that title, and should have been confidered as an infult; but let the poor youth figh in peace, for a few months, and I will venture to promife, that he will get the bet ter of his folly.—Dying for love is a diforder, that comes not within our bills of mortal'ty Not hut I believe that a long and 'ubitual fondnefs founded on reafonable hoq>es, wili, when deftroyed, destroy life, with it.
O the foft commerce! O the tender ties!
“ Clofe tv/isted with the fibres or the heart, “Which broken break t, and drain off the foul
“ Of human joy, and make it pain to live.”
But thefe are not the fort of feelings, with which masters and irsiffes, who fancy themfelves
K 3	in
44 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
in love, are commonly affeded; for thougli youth is the feafon, wtien we are most capable of receiving irnprestions, it is alfo the feafon, when they are most eaSily erafed. I think I might venture to pronounce, that there, are pot five hundred couples in the cities of London and Westminster, who are married to their first love,
and yet I,firmly believe there are, at least, ten times thar number of happy pairs j if fo, what becomes of the first pastion ?
To be fure we now and then met with a foolish obstinate heart, that cherishes its own mife-ry, and preferves the image of fome worthlefs objedi, to the last moment of its existence. Among this fimple clafs, I fear I shall be neceffi-tated to rank rny Sister Lucy ; for though (he does not pretend to have the fmallest objestion to lord Mount Willis, yet can she not be prevailed upon, to give a final yes.
His behaviour, on this occafion is truly noble; for though I believe that never man was more in • love, he has made it a point, both with Sir John and me, not to prefs Lucy, for her confent. I fear Sir John will grow angry, at last, and perhaps hurry her into a denial, which she will have reafon to repent, all the days of her life.
However, she will now have fome time to recolledt herfelf, as Sir John has this day, received a fummons to attend his aunt lady Aston, who is dying, and will probably leave Lucy a large legacy.—That poor idiot. Sir James Miller has mortgaged the last foot of his estate ; but then he has got rid of his wife,—She died of a fever at Paris, twelve days ago. Upon the whole, I think fortune has been kinder to him than he de-ferved.
I AM much pleafed with lord Woodvilie’s behaviour in regard to the letter; but indeed, my
dear,
the DELICATE DISTRESS. 4.5
dear, you treat thefe trifling matters much too ferioufly and Test I should myfelf grow grave upon the fubje£t, L shall bid you
Adieu.
F. St RAFF or:
a''
LETTER LI.
Lack. W o o D VIL L E to Lady S T r a f F o K .
Dear Fanny,'
I HAVE not been well; theSfe three or four
days.—Lady Lawfon,. who is So good as to flay with me and all the fage femmes about me, think that a certain event is nearer than I’ apprehended. My lord’s foster Aster,, who has been bronght to bed about five weeksy; is now in the houfe, and every thingis prepared for my accou\
diment.

My Iprd’s- tendernefs feems doubled on this ccafion.-^He fcarce ever leaves my apartment ; he reads to me with his eyes oftner fixed on my countenance, than the book, and feems to watch every change in my looks.—What a wretch I have been, Fanny ! to fufpedl this amiable man of want of love ? Would it not b,e finning-against him, yet more highly, to let him know my crime, by ashing his forgivenefs, for my unjust, fufpicions?
No, I- will blush in filence, and humble myfelf before heaven, ana you who alone are con-feious of my foliy.^—Pardon t.hou great first author of my happinefs ! and thou dear parentt
filler, guardian of ray youth, excufe my weak-aefs, that had well nigh dashed the cup of
K 4	blefling

r
. i
: J.
; i.'
i1c
.! .1,
■ S,' .1-1
L 1 : :\r.
I ✓
i
)
\-
0
V" i •' V
ii:
•il
ssl.
irr
r-
II j

'

t
I :
ii
c

■s
A I
' ^ 46 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
forivfrf'””	‘‘	>>“'«
I HEAR my dear lord’s tuneful voice inquiring for his Emily ? I come, my love ;
Adieu, my dear Sister,

Leri Wood viLLE to Lady Straffon.
[iWith the foregoing letter.]
JOY to my dear lady Straffon, to Sir Job, to miSs Straffon, and to all who love my Emily! I have the tranfport to inform you, that fhehas made me the happy father of a lovely boy ! and herfelf as well as her, sttuation ean admit. My lister Lawfon, lady Harriet, and mifs Wefton, join in congratulations, and compliments to you, with your affectionate
WOODVILIE.”
V.
Note, The letters from lady Straffon, that immediately follow this, contain only congratulation!, and minute inquiries about her filler’s and nephew’! health j and as they are by no means interefting, the editor thinl^s it better to omit them, and return to the corr ndence between lord Seymour and lord Wood efp^
LET-
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 47
letter LIE
I
Lord WooDVTLLE to Lord Seymour.
My dear Seymour,
IH A V E been at home now above a week, yet have purpofely avoided writing to you, as your laft interdi^ed me from mentioning the only fubjedt of which I am capable of thinking. 0 Seymour I it is in vain to difguife it; my head and heart, are filled with her alone I Upon the exertion of any painful a6t of virtue, we flatter ourfelves that we have abfolutely conquered its oppoSite vice, or weaknefs ; our vanity triumphs, and like the French, we frequently chant out Le Dewrit without having gained a vistory.
Too much I feel that this has been my cafe. I begin to fear that I fhall not even be capable of difguifing my unhappinefs ; and of pratlifing this dilTimulation, which in my fingular Situation fhould be deemed a virtue.
I HAVE difcovered that lady Woodville Iia« lately wept much ; I once Surprized her alone, in a flood of tears. I could not bear them : they reproached me, Seymour I but it was with Silent anguifii. I pressed to know the caufe of her diftrefs : had she revealed it, and but once upbraided me, though in the gentlest terms, I fear I fhould have thrown away the mafk, avowed my pastion, and quitted her for ever..
But her Soft nature knew not how to chide, and feemed alarmed for fear she had offended. Her Suffering gentleneSs unmanned me quite, or rather on the instant, it restored all that is worthy of the name of man, ray reafon, and my virtue ; and I dare hope, that from that time,
K 5	she
rc
•i
is
I
iiS‘
j;';!
&
I'i I c
I
h',
>*! I t I
' i. '

I . I
i'
I
i L
1 'I < 1 • -
i . .
• 1’ t
• - r
i
[ ,
r 'i’
11 • ;
; t
t' • < '
1 »; ' 0
48 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
ihe has been well deceived, and that I only am the victim of my own weaknefs.
I SHALL addrefs this letter to London;! think it is more likely that it Ihould meetyoa there at prefent, than at the hot wells. I intreat you will wait upon the marchionefs, and tell her, Seymour, what my heart endures; let me at least have fome merit, from the facrificel have made, and not be deemed ungrateful, or infenSible by her.
If you hear any thing of Ransford, let me
know.'-----His father is outrageous at hiscon*
du^, and even I think he is to blame.
Adieu, my valued friend,
Woo dville,

■J"
' . i
‘s
if
'L-,
!»
• t
. i'
LETTER LIII.
Lord Seymour to Lord Woodville.
Dear Woo DVILLE,
I AM Sincerely forty for your relapstng into a state of weaknefs, which must be always a state of mifery. I confefs I thought you in the Surest train for happinefs, as the having con> quered ourfelves, is the only fubjedl I know for real exultation. But as your condudt has been truly noble, and that no perfon has Suffered from what I now confider as your own misfortune, no one can have a right to reproach you ; and it is for your own fake alone, that I now intreat you to struggle with your too partial attachment to an unworthy woman.
You deSire me to acquaint her with the (late
of your heart; can you fuppofe me So weak
as to comply with your request, were it wiihiti
m
,J 1
i:
the DELICATE DISTRESS. 49
my power ? But I must travel fome miles to-afford the fugitive conqueror the triumph you dcr* figned.
She fet ou t from London, five days ago, with your friend Ransford. I hear they intend makr-ng the tour of Italy together.. Profperous galesi, and calm feas, attend them 1 You. fee when a lady is bent upon travelling (he can eallly Supply herfelf with a Cicifbeo ; and I fancy that Ransford will be a much more agreeable companion, upon this party, than your lordihip poflibly could have been-i-—He carries not the stings of remorfe about him, the bane of joy, or peace! negle6t of his father may fometimes possibly cloud his gaiety, but one glance from the briglit, eyes of the marchionefs will quickly difpel the gloom.
Will you forgive me for owning that I am tranfported at. their union ? Would to heaven that you could receive joy from it alfo I Had she fallen lower than she has done, it might have mortified your pride; but if you can divest yourfelf of felf-love, you must allow that Ransford is more calculated for a lover than you^e.
I think he bows with* a better grace, fings charmingly, dances Superlatively well, is more droit 'm his perSon, is above an inch taller, and has ten times your vivacity.
I ROTH^ hope, and believe, that married ; and as Ransford does not want pene tration, he may possibly have difcovered- your attachment to her-;; he will therefore probably prevent her returning' to England, for fome years. Let her but keep out of your way, and L care not what becomes of her.
Do, my dear Woodville, let me congratulate your efcape from that Circe ! and rejoice wish youi in the amiable charadler of her, whom
Providence
are
\
, >
1., 1

a
!

i ‘
• !
i,
i •
!l
50 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
Providence has destgned to blefs your future days !
I HAVE buSinefs that will detain me in London, for this month to come ; the moment that is finished I will fly to Woodfort, and hope to find you, and every one there, as happy asthej ought to be ; to wish for more is vain.
Seymour,
LETTER LIV.
WoodviLLE to Seymour.
I
O W could my cruel friend attempt to jell with mifery like mine I It is impoflible!
■—It must not, cannot be ! the marchionefs gone off with Ransford ! by heaven it is falfe, though thoH, my dearest, truest friend, aver it! You thought to cure my paffion by this legend; but you have blown the steeping embers to a flame; and honest indignation for the injury she fuftains, adds fuel to the fire.
Ransford ! why Ransford knew her notlix weeks ago.—Their first meeting was at York.— He must have feen her pashon.—She could not
; nay, I know she would not—She is above difguife.
Why, Seymour, should you treat me like a
child, and strive to impost impoffibilities upon
me ? how can a heart, that has felt what yours
has done, fport with a lover’s anguish ? lam
impatient till I fend off this, that by the meffen-
ger you may restore her peace, and clear ray
honour. OI you have stt my bofora all on fire!
be quick, and quench the blaze, lest it confume
the
difguife it
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 51
the innocent caufe of all my wretchednefs, along with your distra8;ed friend.
WoODVILLE.
P. S. The Servant who carries this, must neither steep or eat, till he brings back your anfwer. Khali do neither till I receive it. For pity fake, my friend, trifle no farther, but at once relieve, and excufe the distradion you have caufed.
LETTER LV.
Lord Seymour to Lord Woodville
"in^^ELL mayest thou call thyfelf distraded
Woodville I and I asfuch, can pity and forgive thee.—Yet must I not become infeded by thy folly, and treat thee like a wayward child indeed.	'
As I would not have defcended to a falfehood, even to have cured you of your weaknefs, for I cannot call it passion, fo neither shall I footh you now, by contradiding the truth that I have already afSerted; and however imposhble it may appear to you, that the marchionefs should fo quickly enter into any engagements with Rans-ford, it is most certain, that they left London, in the fame post-chaife, on Monday fe’nnight, and that she declared her intention of vistting Italy to my Sister Sandford, who was extremely Vandalized at her behaviour, with regard to Mr. Ransford,
town, stnce they returned from York.
Be assured that I am ssncerely affeded by the niiferable condition of your mind.——I cannot
help
during the short time she staid in

I *
• I
4t
i!
M'
I ;i
•:i
t ‘
• 'i
’It
fd:
! ’ ' • 4[.
J
, ■' 1;
i '


it;;'
ii:!'
Kst:
liiv
• LI
i il"
li
Ml!.:


bir,
. t,
;, (
♦
1-1 1
"•hi
: 1:
C ‘.
i:!S.
fShi:
ilI,. • M .
1 dC
. , I;
< ,;it

•:i:
I

ife
ii



I
\\i


I


ii
i
kH
I
•3'

V
•A?.


'1
52 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
help considering you as in a state of fafcination* for if your reafon could operate at all, you could not postibly be astonished, that a woman, who had jilted you four years ago, and preferred age and difeafe to you, when she professed to love you, and when it was In your power to marry her, should abandon you now, that she cannot be your wife, for a lively, agreeable man, who is, probably, as much enamoured of her, though not quite fO' romantic as your lordship.
As you are not, at prefent,. in a Situation to receive any benefit from the admonitions of friendship, I shall referve my fentiments for a fitter occafion, and not detain your fervant longer, than while I fubfcribe myfelf
Still yours.
Seymour.
tir-w virw T*ri*f w w w Tif T*r Ttr TtT'w
L E T T E R LVI.
I
Lord WoodviLLE to Lord Seymour.
Yes,, Seymour, I will own I have been mad;
I wake as from a dream: yet why, my kind, my cruel friend, have y«ru recovered me from that delirium, which, like an opiate, while it weakened, foothed my enfeebled fenfe, and left me fcarce a wish to struggle with my malady ? Yes, she is gone! my friend repeats it, and it must be true!
ft
Married to Ransford ! Can I yet believe it? O may the furies light their nuptial torch!” Dissembling, cruel woman ! she favv the anguilh of my breaking heart, when honour triumphed over my felf-love, and prevented my accepting the facrifice she offered, to her destrufilion.
PeRHAPSj

/ • \

THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
'53
Perhaps, that stung her pride, perhaps, she loves me still, but could not bear to be rejected by me.—Perhaps, I have undone her peace, as Ihe has mine.—O no 1 a younger, gayer, newer lover, abforbs all thoughts of me I I am forgotten, and I will forget
notifabella! my life, my foul, my love!
Do not detest me, Seymour; I would, but cannot conquer this difeafe.
The moment 1 had Sent off Williams, with my last to you, I ordered my horfes, and rode off thirty miles, towards London, not only to be fo much nearer the return of my exprefs, but to prevent lady Woodville from observing my diftradlion.
When I had got about five miles from Wood-fort, I fent back my Servant, to let her know, that I should Spend three or four days, in hunting with Sir William Atkinfon, whom I just; then met, going up to London.
I HAD fettled my plan with Williams, who returned, even quicker, than I thought it postlble, 1 have now Spent three days at a wretched inn, where, were it in my choice, I would remain for ever. Here I can curfe, and I can weep— but the innocent lady Woodville may be rendered unhappy, by my stay.—She loves me, as I loved the-----Let me not name her.
Sir Tames Thornton leaves us in a few days. I naust return to Woodfort.—O write Soon ! and once more fav, you pity and forgive,
Your’s, ever,
Woodville.
\
«>-
• ♦ .*

LET

54 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
LETTER LVII.
Lord Seymour to Lord Woodville. Dear Woodville,
I WRITE to you, merely becaufe you defire it; for I am well convinced, that nothing which I, or the greatest philofopher that ever existed, could fay to you, would have any effed upon your mind, in its prefent state; and ray own is, at this instant, fo extremely agitated, that I am fcarce capable of writing at all.
I HAVE, this day, received a letter, from Captain Beaumont.—The contents will amaze you. About Six weeks ago, the acknowledged ion of madame de Beaumont, was taken ill of the fmaU pox ; and as her daughter had never had it, the general and she thought proper to fend her to a friend’s houfe, lest her beauty should be endangered by the infection.
This young lady, now about fifteen, who had never been out of her mother’s fight before, happened, in the family she was placed in; to become acquainted with a young mufqueteer,: handfome, and accomplished, but without rank or fortune. They quickly became enamoured of each other; and, at the end of a fortnight, eloped together, and got Safe into Holland. They might, poffibly, have been overtaken, and prevented from marrying, if the lady, to whofe care Maria Beaumont was entrusted, had not dreaded the violence of madame de Beaumont’s temper, fo much that she did not dare to inform her of the misfortune, till it was past re-
t
mcdy.
In the mean time, the young, and by all accounts amiable, heir of the family, expired in
his
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 55
his father’s arms. The violent agitation of ma*-dame de Beaumont’s mind threw her into a raging fever.—During her delirium, she raved in-cclTantly, on the ingratitude and bafenefs of Maria, and her own inhumanity to the unhappy Charlotte.
The general, who now confidered himfelf as childlefs, gladly laid hold on the opportunity of endeavouring to recover thofe, he had formerly, mt lojlf but thrown away—he therefore prevailed on madame de Beaumont to fee Charlotte. He went himfelf to the convent, and having declared his hitherto concealed affinity to Charlotte, he obtained leave from the abbefs, to let her vilit her dying mother.
But no tongue or pen can exprefs the various emotions of Surprize, grief, and joy, which were occasioned by the fight of his lovely daughter, when she cast herfelf at his feet, to receive his benedidion.—Like poor old Lear he would have knelt to her, and begged forgivenefs.
But when she prefented herfelf on her knees, by the bedfide of madame de Beaumont, the unhappy woman, unable to Sustain the fight of fo much injured beauty, fainted quite away ; but the moment she was recovered to her rea-fon, she called for Charlotte, and never let her quit her fight, or ceafed to pour forth blef-lings on her, and implore her pardon, till she expired.
Before she died, she intreated Charlotte to quit the convent, and remain with her unhappy father while he lived. She defired that a dif-penfation from her vows might be immediately folicited from the Pope, and that captain Beaumont, and lord Seymour might be Sent for, in order to obtain their forgivenefs. But only one of her wishes was accomplished.—captain Beau-
mo n
• ■
' 'i
j ( . •
I
• •
S • S
56 THE.DELICATE DISTRESS.
mont arrived, about two hours before her deatli*^ she faw, and bieffed him.
He writc-s^ me word, that neither his father
^	a	^
Borshimfelf, can prevail on Charlote, to think of returning into the world again ; but that Ihe has confented to go into the country with them, for a couple of months, merely in hopes of reconciling the general to his youngest daughter. He defires me toKy to Bellevue, that I may at leaf! fee his Sister, before she is again Secluded from the world for ever.
O WooDviLLE 1. I want but wings, to obey him I But hark, my chariot wheels rattle, and my impatient heart,, much more than beats ref-ponfive to the horfes feet.
Adieu, adieu, my friend.
Seymour.
ocoo

LETTER LVIII.
Lord Woodville to Lord Seymour.
I KNOW not whether to congratulate or condole with my dear Seymour, on the very exr traordinary events that have happened in the Beaumont family. His- feelings, I know, mull arife froni t-hofe of his beloved Charlotte; and! am, at prefent, doubtful, whether she will ever again recover in the fame degree, that peaceful refignation, which we may fuppofe she had acquired, and was in fuU poffeffion of, a few weeks ago.	.
All the pastions of that gentle nature muft now be roufed to tumult; the fight of her dear Seymour, must give her joy, tranfportingjoy f
which is as much an enemy to peace, as the moll
poignant
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 57
poignant miSery. And yet, again, must she be torn from all the focial ties of human life; again be buried in that quick Sepulchre, a convent!
Do not, my friend, indulge a Single thought of her returning hack,- into the world.—It cannot be: Charlotte Beaumont will not be prevailed upon, even by the man she loves, to break her vows to heaven: for though I believe her pof-feffed of the most exalted virtue, she cannot, post fibiy, be free from Superstition,, as she is both a woman and a catholic.
You will, perhaps, be Surprized at my writing to you in this strain ; but I would wish you to guard your heart against its greatest foe, against felSdeluston, Seymour I that sty, stow, under-miner of our reafoh, and our peace I that, lying, whifpered to my weak prefumption, I might behold the marchionefs, unmoved! Fatal, fatal error! it has undone me,. Seymour! But I will think, I mean Speak, of her no more.
I HAVE an anecdote to tell you, which convinces me, that Adam’s curfe is intailed on all his offspring.
“ For either.
He never shall find out fit mate, but fuch As fome misfortune brings him, or mistake ; Or whom he wishes most, shall Seldom gain. Through her perverfenefs; but shall fee her gained.
By a far worfe ; or, if she loves, withheld By parents; or, his happiest choice, too late Shall meet, already linked and wedlock-bound. To a fell adverfary, his hate, or shame; Which infinite calamity shall caufe To human life, and houshold peace confound,”
Thornton
V
58 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
Tho RNTON quitted Woodfort, three days
ago.----The morning he went off, he left a
letter for me, which contained an abfolute deda-ration of the most ardent passion for lady Wood-ville! You may perhaps,, think he was a little out in the choice of a confidant—by no means, I assure you. linclofed his letter immediately to my wife, and felt myfelf really concerned for his misfortune. Emily is certainly capable of infpi-ring the most delicate passion ; Thornton was a Second Cymon, when he first faw her; and! may with great truth fay, that with all the beau* ties of an Iphigene, she is possessed of every ami* able virtue that can infpire esteem and refped, —I would give millions to change passions with him.
I CAN Scarce to hope to hear from you, while the charming delirium of your happinefslafts; but when you return again to reafon and mifery, I shall then be a proper companion for your afflio tion. But in every sstuation of life I shall remain unalterably,
Your’s,
WOODVILLE.
LETTER LIX.
RAFFON to Ladv Wool
As my dear Emily may yet be conSidered as an invalid, I think myfelf bound to write every day, and every thing that can possibly contribute to her amufement, without exped-ing or waiting for any acknowledgment of my letters.
Sir

THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 5s>
Sir John returned last night, from paying his lafl: duty to his aunt lady Aston, and very well (he has paid him for his attendance. She has bequeathed to him the pkafant manor of Ashfield, which is worth between eight and nine hundred pounds a year ; apd made him her ressduary legatee, v/hen he has paid her bequests, of twelve thoufand pounds to Lucy, a thoufand pounds a-piece, to ray children, and fome few legacies to dd fervants.
As foon as Sir John had acquainted us with this agreeable news, he alked Lucy, if she was yet determined, with regard to lord Mount Willis? when, to my great pleafure and furprize, Ihe anfwered. Yes, I think I shall be ready to ;ive him my hand before this day fe’nnight; tho’ cannot posstively fix the day, as lawyers are dilatory folks.
Sir John then began to rally her, on what he Imagined to be her attention to fettlements, &c. and told her that rny lord and he would take care of all thofe matters without her assistance. She anfwered with a very stedfast countenance and determined air. You will pardon me, brother ; for once, and only once in my life, I am refol-ved to a6l for myfelf.—Now hear my refoluiir n, which I deSire you will communicate to lord Mount Willis to-morrow morning.
When his lordship did me the honour to ad-drefs me, I had then but five thoufand pounds, a fortune much too Small to be an objeffc of confi-deration, to him ; but neither he nor you knew
that time, that I had but a ufe, even in that fniall fum for life.
Sir John attempted to interupt her, by inquiring what she meant ? she begged that he would fuifer her to proceed without intcruption, and went on.—The Severe treatment I met with at the
fame
I
6o THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
fame time, from Sir James Miller, made me at that time, refolve that I would never marry.-We little know our hearts in many particulars of
life ; but least of all in this.
But the extreme kindnefsl met with, at the fame time, from lady Straffon, laid me under fuch indelible obligations, as no time nor circumstance can ever efface.
I then determined, nay declared, that I would bequeath my fortune to my niece Emily ; and no power on earth (hall make me alter my refolution.
From my aunt’s unmeritted goodness tome, it is now in my power to fulfil my intentions before my death, and to give a proof of that gratitude, which I owe to my more than fitter. Again both Sir John and 1 would have broken in on her difeourfe, but she beckoned for fi-lence.
When this, the first wish of my heart, is accomplished, I shall still have a much better fortune than lord Mount Willis first expested with me.—But it must not be all his. Sir James Miller has been in fome degree conducive to that happinefs, which I expefil and hope for from an union with his lordship. Sir James is poor and wretched ; justly punished for his crimes, but not rewarded, for the benefits he has conferred on me.—Some Small provifion must be made for him, without his ever knowing from whom he receives it. I formerly looked upon him with horror and averfion ; I now confider him as my benefafilor ; and the Saving him from the mife-ries of extreme poverty, will relieve my mind from a fort of mental debt.
Sir John could forbear no longer, butclafping her in his arms faid. Providence had made him rich indeed, when it had bestowed fuch treafures
on him, as his wife and Sister. Both he and I
faid
\ .
tee DE^LICATE DISTRESS. Bi
lid every thing to diSTuade her, from her intended gift to Emily, but in vain.
Sir John feemed to hint as if he thought it TOuld be better that her generous intentions towards Sir James Miller, ssiould be executed by lord Mount Willis., rather than herfelf. By no means, brother, replied Lucy ; were there a remain of tenderneSs for him, in my heart, the world Ihoiild not bribe me to marry its foie lord. CeneroSity should flow from principle, not paf-fion; and, as I can truly boast that this adlion, with regard to Sir Janies Miller, arifes from the first fource, nothing must change the current of it. My condudl on this occafion is, I think the high-eft eompliment that I can pay to lord Mount Willis, andl have not a doubt-of his confidering
it, in that high light.
We both acquiefeed in her opinipn, and Sir John waited on lord Mountwillis this morning, to inform him of Lucy’s intentions. He fays he never faw any perfon So transported as his lord-Ihip; he faid he had ever looked upon Lucy as
the most amiable of women,- but that her gene-rofity to Sir James Miller made him now look tip to her, as to a fuperior being; and that if (he gave thoufands he ought to give ten thou-fands, to the unhappy man, who had been in any degree instrumental to his felicity.
TiHis will be a whimfleal contest, I think, Emily, but I do hot fancy that Lucy will confent to ray lord’s interfering with her deSigns. At preferit, she intends to lay out four thoufand pounds, in an annuity for Sir James; which if he continues to live abroad, may fupport him decently.
I HAVE been this day to befpeakapair of diamond buckles, and a very fine egrette, which
Sir John and I mean to prefent her with. I know
lord
62 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
lord Mount Willis’s family jewels are veryricli, but i^y dear Lucy’s virtues will outihine them
all!-----Indeed she is an honour, not only to her
Sex, but to human nature.
She joins with me in intreating yours, and lord Woodville’s company at her wedding. Surely my Emily will not refufe' us both! you can have no doubts but that your little boy will be taken every possible care of, and even a little month’s abfence, from that dear face, on which y our jdotage hangs, will make an amazing change
for the better in it----He will be as handfotne
again by the time of your return to Woodfort.
Lu c Y writes this night to lady Harriet and Fanny Weston, to attend her nuptials.—All girls will fly to a wedding, fo that you will be left totally alone, if you are fo ill-natured as to deny our request.
Who knows what a good example may do ? —-The penstve lady Harriet may perhaps be prevailed upon to Sigh no more for her perjured fwain, but may possibly be inclined to make fome. worthy man happy. As to Fanny Wefton I am perfuaded that the festivity of a wedding will intirely conquer her hopelefs passion for the wandering Thornton. She is no Penelope, believe me; and I fancy Mr. Willis, my lord’s brother, will be able to banish the errant knight quite out of her mind.
Adieu, my dear Emily. I hope you will make me happy in your next, by telling me that I shall foon have the pleafure of feeing you. Indeed I want nothing elfe at prefent to compleal my felicity.
F. Straffon.
LET
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. %
S
s
L k T T E R LX.
Lt/yWopDVILLE to Lady Straffon.
My dear Fanny,
I AM extremely charmed, but not Surprized at Lucy’s condu^.—There is every thing to beexpeded {vomfenjibility delicacy joined; but indeed I have Scarce ever known them Separated in a female heart. Refined manners are the naturaHonSequences of fine feelings, which will even in an untutored mind form a Species both of virtue and good breeding, higher than any thing that is to be acquired, either in courts orfchools ; but when thefe two qualities receive every addition that education and example can beftow,
“ When youth makes Such bright objeds stiH more bright,
“ And fortune Sets them in the strongest light ;
“ ’Tis all of Heaven that we below may view,
“ And all but adoration is their due.”
Thus do I think of our dear Lucy ; yet I must fay that stie has been uncommonly fortunate in having Such an opportunity of exerting the noble qualities of her heart, and proving how much fuperior Ihe is to the detestable meannefs of malice or revenge. Charming girl! may Ihe be as happy as IhedeServes !
She, as well as you, has intreated me to partake happinefs.—Alas, Fanny 1 though grief is contagious, we cannot always Sympathize with
joy*-strange perverSeneSs of our natures that
accepts the evil, and rejeds the good I Do not
L	from'
Ill
s
r
i,
1*1
K:
r
•«, ’
i ■
«
S:
I
h
d:
(i
■'I
64 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
from this, fufpe£t me of malevolence, or fun. pofe that I do not truly rejoice in Lucy ’s felicity, But there is, I know not why, a kind of weight that hangs upon my mind, which I find it irnpoflible to remove. Perhaps change of place may help to stake it off.-—Be that as it may, I stall certainly comply with your’s and Lucy’s request.
Mt lord has kindly promifed to accompany roe, and our Sweet little babe is to be left at lady Lawfon’s. Indeed, Fanny, you fcarce can think what a facrifice I make to quit him fora day; but he will be under the prote^£Uon of the beft of women.
I FEAR there is a fcene preparing that will trouble her repofe. That bad mifs Fanning! what a heart must hers be ? how void of gratitude J and where that virtue is wanting, there can fubSist no other.—Neither precept nor example can operate on bafe minds.
Is it not strange that nature stould varyfo much in the human genius as to create a Lucy Straffon, and a Mary Farming I fo nearly of the fame age too ; both defcended from good families ; and both well educated. The animal creation do not differ thus from their own fpecies. There are no furious steep, nor wild tigers.— Nature is uniform in all her works, but man.— Haplefs variety ! fad fource of mifery J the tiger and the iamb are not lefs ssmilar than the betrayer, and betrayed—yet both wear the fame form, and only by experience is the difference found. •—Nay, fometimes we have feen the faireft face concqal the vilest heart; as lurks the ferpent underneath the rofe.—This is a mortifyingfub-je6l ; I will no more of it.
Fanny Weston, as you guested, is in high
Spirits, at the idea of Lucy’s wedding.---She
talk*
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 65
talks of nothing but drefs, equipage, and jewels, tver Since it has been mentioned—but a new fobjed: is of infinite ufe in the country ; and I do not know whether a great funeral had not entertained her quite as much.—Nodding plumes and painted efcutcheons will amuSe the imagination, when gilt coaches and gay liveries do not £ome in the way.—
Happy trifler! how I envy her...-yet I am
fore (he loves Lucy, and fancies that she is really enamoured of Sir James Thornton too.—I am certain that lady Harriet would gladly be excufed from going to London, but I will not feem to fee which way her inclinations tend.
“ The filent heart, which grief affails,
“ Treads foft and lonefome, o'er the vales. “ Sees daifies open, rivers run,
“And feeks, as I have vainly done,
Amufing thought; but learns to know,. “That folitude’*s the nurfe of woe.’*
((
And a foft, and tender nurfe it is—but dissipation may perhaps be good for us all, and lady Harriet shall try the recipe as well as

Your affe£fionate, &c.
1:1
i
)• .
) ;
JE. WOODVILLB
:h'
\\}
/)
V

11
'll

' 1;
H '
» . • : ' t • i.
iilf
:Si
liL'

.t!
L 2'
LET.
b;'?f
'S'
!' -. d' ; c'!
• ;r
.h • 1
|ji
s
K-
:v
' ♦.
Si
Si
l!.|
!v!
r;
VP
V: r
s;:
• ■ «
•. ! t '
h,-K ;;
• . ^ *
vv
t . •
L'b
.ei ;
I ' ,
•H
•f
66 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
LETTER LXI.
Lady Straffon to Lady Woodville.
(
I THINK myfelf extremely obliged to my dear Emily, for her compliance with her friend’s request.—You cannot conceive what delightful cffe6ts the hopes of feeing you have produced in Hill-street.—Sir John talks of nothing elfebut the fparkler; you know he ufed to call you fo. —Lucy is all gratitude for your kindriefs, and my little Emily holds up her head most amazingly, that her aunt may obferve what a fine carriage she has, and how much she is grown Since Ihe Saw her.—The Servants are all transported with double joy for Lucy’s wedding, and your arrival, In short, every one wears a Smiling face, and I shall not pardon it, if there should appear the Smallest trace of gloom on yours.
I AM very Sorry for what you hint at, with regard to Lady Lawfon—but be affured, that a vwoman should be thoroughly convinced, not only of her hushand’s attachment, but of his morails alfo, before she introduces a female inmate, younger, though perhaps not fairer than her Self.
The caution should be equally attended to, with regard to male intimates.—I have feldom Lnown an habitual friendship, that did not kindle, into what is called love, where there have been youth, beauty, and unceaSing opportunity to fan the flame.
I THINK, if I were in Lady Lawfon’s cafe, 1
should not feel much—for the heart of a man
who is capable of Seducing a young creature,
that is immediately under his protefiion, can
never be worth regretting. I have always heard
that
THE DELICATE DISTRESS.- 67
that Sir William is a very debauched man ; and a truly delicate woman cannot preferve her aS-fedion, for fuch a one, long.—Contempt must follow vice ; and where we once defpife, we foon rauft ceafe to love.
Nor do I look upon mifs Fanning as an obje£l of piiy—bred up, as she has been, with So ex-, cellent a woman, one should fuppofe her heart replete with every virtue;—but she cannot, pof-ftbly, be poffeffed even of the common merits, which we expert from a chambermaid, wheri ihe can defcend to prostitution, without temptation.
Had she been led astray by an agreeable young man, I could have pitied, nay, perhaps, have loved, and even esteemed her; for I am not fuch an Amazon in ethics, as to conssder a breach of challity, as the highest crime that a woman can be guilty of; though it is certainly the most unpardonable folly ; and I believe there are many women who have erred in that point, who may have more real virtue, aye, and delicacy too, than half the fainted dames who value themfelves on the prefervation of their chastity ; which, in all probability, has never been assailed. She alone who has withstood the iolicitations of a man she fondly loves, may boast her virtue; and 1 will venture to fay, that fuch an heroine wilt be more inclined to pity, than defpife the unhappy viStims of their own weaknefs.
I HAVE Iported my opinion upon this fubjedl: very freely ; you must therefore allow me to explain myfelf more clearly. I know your delicacy vill be hurt if I do not; and I may expect to be feverely attacked by my dear little prude.
FIRST then I confine my fair penitents to their first choice ; a fecond error of this fort is itever to be pardoned.—Passion is the only excufe
L 3	that
« I

I .
i‘-L
>; 1
I!
,. I ’ '.
68 THE DELICATE DISTRESS
that can poISibly be made for fuch a tranfgreiS-on i and a woman who has made fuch a facrifice to love a'lone may be perfectly fatisfied, that (he can never be fubjeQ: to that passion in the fame degree again. F'or there never is above human creature that we can love better than m> fehes.
The woman who receives two gallants, Isin my mind, quite upon a footing with the mod venal beauties; whofe capacious hearts [corn to be limited to any number. All married ladies 1 absolutely exclude from my order of amiable unfortunates—they cannot even pretend to be deceived ;—whereas a stmple girl, however mean her condition, may flatter herfelf, that her lover’s intentions are honourable. Old legends tell of king Cophetua, and the beggar maid; and your Pamelas, and your Mariannes, encourage hope in young untutored minds, which perhaps the artful destroyer takes the utmost pains toen-creafe; “ ’till they can trust, and he betray no more.”
This is I confefs a nice fubjedt for a woman to treat upon ; but I promife you I will endeavour to make my girl distinguifli between vie; and weaknefs; and I hope while fhe detefts tli; one, she will be always ready to pity, and if in
her power to proteO; the other.-...-There is no
charadier I fo heartily abominate as that of the Qutrageoufly virtuous. I have feen a lady render herfelf hateful to a large company by repeating, perhaps a forged tale of fome unhappy frail one, with fuch a degree of rancour and malevolence, a is totally inconsistent with the calm dignity of r«al virtue.
Have you ever read a fable, which is bound up with Mr. Moore’s, but was written by Mr. Brooke, called the Female Seducers? I think it
the
the delicate DISTRESS. 69
the prettiest thing, that ever was written' upon this fubjeft.—To that I refer you for my fenti-ments at large.
Your remark upon the diverfity of natures, amongst the human Species, is pretty and ingenious;—but when we conSider the amazing variety there is in the animal creation; and how many of them are noxious, we cannot wonder that there stiould be Some difference in human kind. Had we been all formed with equal virtues, thofe very virtues would have been rendered uSeleSs;—an inSipid tamenefs would have prevented emulation, and'.list would have become a perfect Sinecure.
On the other hand, v/ere we all vicious, disorder and conSuSion must take place, and this world be quickly reduced to its primitive chaos. Without temptation, there could be no virtue ; and without virtue, this world could not Subfissr, —We Should not be So much pleafed with the gentleneSs of the lamb, if there was no animal more fierce, nor should we feel the fweetnefs of the woodlark’s note, fo fenlibly as we do, if we had never heard-the Screech-owl’s voice, or the croaking of the raven. It is by comparison alone, that we are capable of estiinafing good and evil, both in the moral and natural lenfe.
I COULD illustrate my argument, as fully amongst our own fpecies, as in the brute creation; but I have drawn this letter to fuch an immoderate length, that I must at least defer the remainder of my difcourfe, parfon-like, to another opportunity.
Ev ERY thing is fettled to Lucy’s mind; and lord Mount Willis’s happy day b fixed for Sa-
L 4	turday
*
»
%*•
THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
tiirday fortnight. I hope you will come to town next week; till then.
Adieu,
my ever dear Emily.
F. Straffon,
LETTER LXII.
Iady WooDviLLE to Lady Straffon. Dear Fanny,
SHOULD have anfwered your letter by lail post, but was prevented, by having company. 'J'he two mifs Withers’s Spent three days with us.
I told you before, they were charming women; but agreeable as I first thought them I now think them ten times more fo.
The eldest is extremely fenfible, and perfestly accompliflied, but of a grave turn; the youngeft has every merit of her fister, with the moft en* gaging vivacity imaginable. She is Soon to be
married to an Iristi nobleman.-Happy man,
who is to be blessed with Such a companion!
She feems to feel Some regret at the thoughts of quitting her friends and England ; but fays fhe is Sure that her lord will be fo good to let her vifit them Sometimes; and she would by no means, wish to detach him from his native country, or prevent his Spending that fortune in it, which he derives from it.
Miss Withers is gone to Ir’tland, with her Sister. I am almost Sorry thaC I ever was acquainted with thefe fweet girls. Since I am tolofe the pleaSure of their Society fo Soon. They told me a piece of news, which though it Surprized, did not difplcafe me.—Mr. Ransford is married
to
%
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 71
the marchionefs of St. Aumont, and thev a
e
w ^	•	V
now in France together.
JW 111 X	.
Is it not odd, that my lord never mentioned this particular, as it is no fecret in the country } and he must certainly know it, as he has been once or twice to fee Sir Harry Ransford. But I think you deSired me never to pry into his motives for any thing ; and I obey.
Izb lUl <Uij illiug y aiiva X	•
Indeed, Fanny, you appear to me to affecst the ftoic too much, from what you fay about lady Lawfon; but we can all bear the misfortunes of others with great fortitude.
“ When they are lash’d we kifs the rod, Refigning to the will of God.

In my mind, ladyLawfon’s trial is a very fiery one.—She is, she must be doubly distressed. As to the flight infidelities of hushands, I think the wife must be contemptible who refents them ; but every woman, that truly loves her hushand, wifhes to preferve his heart; and a confeioufnefs of his attachment to another objeQ:, must be pro-dustive of the most poignant anguish. Happy, happy Sister! that have never felt that ‘Hydra of calamity.’
I GRANT that Sir William Lawfon has ever
been a debauched man, but always had, except in this instance, fo much regard to his lady, to decency and humanity as to conceal his vices from her : He therefore, had not forfeited her efteem though she had lost his love.—O lofs beyond repair ! Then her affe^Iion for that wretch mifs Fanning, must add to her distrefs. Not having been blessed with children, she looked upon this worthiest girl as her own daughter—■ can she in a moment forget the tendernest
Ls	she
1 i
t' 1
f I
1;! • ;
.
•' 1
« \
i!d
I I-!
‘ f
« I'
i'l; '. ■'
1 :■
: n
’ I; <,
•• ;i
I *
li:
t, . •
■* Lli.
•	'I
1. ■ ,i
ii
I n •!
b,
■ • I.
': 1 '
b! •
IIP ,
Li
UilL -
, , I /
• r I:

* ‘ I.
. ;; i. .
; '1 L'^
ilif:
•I! II
i!i
1
11 •
72 THE DELICATE DISTRESl
she has indulged fo long, and detest the wicked couple, as she ought ?----impostible!
I AM really angry at your philoiophic infen-Sibility upon this occasson,—for my part I can Scarcely behave with common civility, either to Sir William or mils Fanning. But lady-Lawfon, who is a faint, behaves with her ufual kindnefs to them both, nor has ever feemed to havedlf-covered or hinted the least fufpicion, of what is already too viSible to the whole country.—Yet her lovely face is emaciated and pale ; and fome-times, involuntary fighs and tears efcape her.
I KNOW my lord is extremely distreffed, on this occaSion, he loves Kis Sister tenderly; but fears his interpoSing might possibly make Sir Williamday aSide all restraint, and perhaps, occasson a feparation from his wife, I am glad, for this reafon, that we are leaving the country, as i imagine mifs Fanning’s Situation will make her removal necessary, before we return to Woodfort.
Yq u need not have apprehended my diffent* ing from your generous fentiments with regard to the unhappy victims of love.-—Nay I carry my humanity further, and feel for thofe who, without strong passion, fall a facrissce to the vile arts of their feducer, and their own weaknefs, That iinfufpediting confidence, which is too frequently the caufe of womens ruin, must certainly arifefrom a generous difposstion ; andlfhould look upon a young innocent girl, who was armed at all points like a Moor of Moor-hall, to be an unnatural character.
At the fame time I detest a vicious woman, more than any thing in the creation ; and for this reafon, my compassion does not extend to married ladies, in general any more than yours.-
They have always a proteflor to fly to; who
upon
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 73
upon that occasson, if upon no other,will with open arms receive them—for though every man may not love his wife, every man is certainly jealous of his honour ; and the falfe notions of the world are, at prefent fo constituted, that the failure of a woman brings infamy upon her hulband ; while in a much more pitiable cafe, it rests fole-ly upon the injured unfortunate.
However, Fanny, I agree with you, this is too nice a fubje6t for a female pen; though one isinfenSibly led into refleflions that are humiliating to an honest mind. But when he who knew the frailty of our natures, adjudged the convidt criminal, his fentence was not Severe ; for well he knew it was impostible there could be found a wretch fo lost to humanity as to throw a stone.
Let not the young, the gay, the rich, the fortunate, whofe sttuations in life have prevented their being liable to temptation, like an herd of deer, turn their armed brows against their wounded friend, and give her to the hunters!
Miss Withers and I were last night talking upon this fubje6t, and she repeated a little poem, that lord Digby,. her lister’s lover, had shewn her. It was written upon a particular occasson, at a water-drinking place in Ireland called Mallow, fome years ago.—The unfortunate fubjeft of it had been a much admired character in that place, a few feafons before, and dignified by the title of Sappho.
The lines are extremely pretty; turn over>, »nd you will find them in^the next page.
VERGES
74 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
VERSES
VT R I T T E K AT THE
Fountain at Mallow, in the County of Cork,
' in Ireland.
Thou azure fount, whofe chrystal stream,
Was once a nobler poet’s theme.
While to infpire the tuneful strain,
Sappho was called, nor called in vain.
Ah let the good forgive ! if here,
I pay the tribute of a tear.
In tender grief for Sappho’s fate,
The wonder of thy banks fo late.
So many virtues were thy stiare.
Thou most accomplished, ruined fair !
One error fure may be forgiven.
And pardon find from Earth and Heaven That fovereign power made us all.
Suffered the fons of light to fall !
And oft to mortify our pride.
From virtue lets the wifeststide.
Ye fair, no more her faults proclaim ;
For your own fakes, conceal her shame ;
Since if a nymph fo wife could fail,
We well may think Ye all are frail!
A TRUCE for the prefent with this, and every other fubjeff, but the pleafing thought of our meeting, which I hope will be on Tuefday
evening next.
Till then,
adieu.
E. WOOUVILLE.
P. S.
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 75
P. S. We have got a furnilhed houfe, in St. James’s-street; and I am strongly tempted to bring my fweet little Harry with me.—Cruel Fanny, never to mention my little cherub ! but /’// be revengedj and love hiM better for it.
LETTER LXIII.
Lady WooDviLLE to Lady Lawson.
London, Jan. 18.
A THOUSAND thanks to my dear lady
Lawfon, for the pleaSing account Ihe has given me, of herfelf, and my dear little boy. You will perhaps, think me ill-natured, for rejoicing that you have no other companion at pre-fcnt; but I am not fo felfilh as you imagine, upon this occaston : for I well know that the most
agreeable company in the world could not abate your affedtionate attention to him.
But there are certain Situations in life, when our dearest friends become irkfome to us from an
apprehenSion that they may possibly difeover what we wish to hide.—There needs no other illustra-
tion of my opinion, than a fair confession, that I have fometimes. Seen you under thefe very circumstances, with your brother and myfelf.— But I hope and believe you will never again experience them. I may now fpCak freely upon a fubjedt, which though your virtue and goodnefs, concealed, Sir William has thought proper to mention to my lord with every eulogium on your condudl, which noble as it has been, it could deferve.
i.
Miss Fanning fet out for Yorkshire this
truly fenSible of your goodnefs, and
he
morning
I >
I'
ir

76 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
her own unworthinefs. Sir William fays he Is
certain, that it is not in your nature to deteil
her as much as she does herfelf. He told ray lord that this affair was by no means fo unfortU' nate an event, with regard to you two as it might at first have appeared to be ; as your behaviour had not only made him esteem and admire, but love you alfo, a thoufand degrees more than he ever had done before.
He declared that he felt the impatience of a lover, to throw himfelf at your feet, and faid he never should forgive himfelf for having rendered you unhappy by his infamous condud, Joy, joy, to my dear fister! will you forgive my faying, that I envy your sstuation ?
I WOULD give you an account of lady Mount Willis’s wedding, drefs, equipage, &c. kc. did I not know that your full heart can have no room to entertain fuch trifling ideas. But I am certain it will give you pleafure to hear that lord Mount Willis is as amiable and accomplilhed as his charming bride, and that I think they have the fairest profpedl of a long uninterrupted eourfc of happinefs.
As the houfe of lord’s are now fitting, your brother purpofes staying in town, till March; but I may whifper to you what I would not have him hear, that I cannot help regretting fo long an abfence from Woodfort, from my child, and from yourfelst
Lady Harriet, my fister Straffon, and Fanny Weston, prefent their more than compliraents, and my lord joins in love and fincere congratulations, with your
Truly affedfionate,
E. WoODVILLE.
LET-

THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 7 7
LETTER LXIV.
Lord WooDyILL'S, to Seymour.
IS it poITible that my dear Seymour can be So totally abforbed in his own felicity as to make him entirely forget his abfent, his unhappy^friend?
I have been above two months in London, without hearing from you I Mifs Straffon’s marriage with lord Mount Willis brought lady Woodville and me to town.
IcoNFESS I flattered myfelf that a change of objedls and a fcene of dilTipation, would have affifted me, in conquering the gloomy difeafe that hangs upon my mind. Far from it, I think it has rather increafed my malady, by laying me under greater restraints than I experienced at Woodfort; as all humours both of the mind and body, acquire additional force if they are denied a vent.
As my ill fortune would have it, we are lodged in the fame houfe the marchionefs lived in ; and to add to my distrefs, there is a pidlure of hers, which was not finillied when she went a-way, that is hung up in my dreshng-room. As lady Woodville was coming to fpeak to me yef-terday morning, she overheard me in earnest diS-courfe with the fair shadow ; she immediately retired, fuppossng there was fome company with me.
When we met at dinner, she Smiling alked me who the lady was that came to vifit me, in the morning. I could not for fome time, conceive the meaning of her question ; but when from the naivete of her difcourfe, I understood it, I was all confusson, and your Sister lady Sandford, who was at table with us, gave me a look, that
perfedlly
V
78 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
perfe<£tly convinced me she was acquainted with my folly.
The inhuman marchionefs must have revealed my vveaknefs to her.—-Seymour could not betray his friend ! Yet may I not from hence deduce a kind of tacit compliment to myfelf, by fuppoSing she must have been vain of her conquest, when she proclaimed it ? weak confolati-on ! like a drowning wretch, I catch at rulhes!
Why, why can I not tear her fatal image from my breaking heart! have you feen her Seymour ? It is a thoufancl years Since I beheld her—Have age and uglinefs yet overtaken her, or is she lovely still ? Excufe my raving—fuch I know, it will appear to you.
I KNOW not whether I told you that lady Woodville had prefented me with a fon, before we left the country, and appears, if postible, ftill more amiable in the chara^er of a mother, than before she was one.—I rejoice to think that her being a parent has added to her happinefs, as well as her merit. Our virtue and our felicity are both increafed, by the diffuSion of our affeftions. —What a wretch am I then, Seymour, who feel all mine concentered in one objedf, where they must rest for ever ?
This refledkion on myfelf is too fevere, nay most unjust ! for I declare, that I am fenfible of the utmost tendernefs, for the lovely, the unofj fending lady Woodville ; and I would die rather than render her unhappy—At the fame inftant I adore the cruel, infolent, ungrateful marchionefs. What tortures must arife, from fuch a state of contradidkion !
I AM truly impatient to know whether you have prevailed with your fair vesta I, to renounce her vows, and enter once again into this world of
cares ? Be assured I am Sincerely interested in
every
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 79
every thing that relates to you; and this, the moft momentous point of your life, is of the utmost confequence
To your ever affe^fionate
WOODVILLE.
LETTER LXV.
Lord Seymour to Lord Woodville.
YE S, Woodville, I confefs it, I have been abforbed, entranced in the most delightful delufion that ever lull’d the restlefs heart of man I I have pasted three months in paradife ! I thought
not of the world, nor of its cares ^-1 even
grudged the hours which nature claimed for rest, they robbed me of my Charlotte’s tuneful voice, though her loved form oft vissted my flumbers. —But the gay visson is now flown, and I indeed awake as from a dream !
You may fuppofe I reached Belleveue in as
Ihort a Space of time as it was postible.-My
Charlotte was prepared to meet me. At our first interview, through all the agonizing joy I felt, I perceived a steady calmnefs in her manner, that fpoke the tender the indulgent friend, not the fond mistrefs : the gravity of her drefs added dignity to her deportment, and awed even my tumultuous wishes into Silence. I looked up to her, as to a Superior being ; and felt myfelf grow little in her Sight. She took advantage of my first imprestions, and fpoke to me in the following manner.
You fee before you, fir, the happiest of her fex, now first permitted to indulge thofe fond
feiifalions, which nature plants in every human
heart.
8o THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
heart, filial, and Sisterly affection.—I will con* fefs myfelf still farther gratified by feeing you, the only objeft of a pastlon, which took its rife in youth and innocence, but which has long Since matured into the firmest friendstiip, and rendered you—pardon me, my father ! the firft, the constant objedt of my prayers.
But let not the fond wifhes of a father, or your owm defires, tempt you to think that aught on earth can move me to exchange the state of tranquil happinefs, I now enjoy for any other lefs pure, and more precarious. My vows were heard in heaven ; they pasted not forth from feigning or forced lips ; for in the very moment I pronounced the words, my heart assented to the pious founds, nor would I then have chan* ged my fituation, even to be lord Seymour’s wife.
Nor do I now repent the choice I made, though fully fatisfied both of your worth and love. Providence feemed to have planted infu* perable bars between us, at the fad hour when I fixed my purpofe to renounce the world ; and my then torn heart found its foie peace in my hum.ble acquiefcence to his will.
Now mark me, Henry, this is the last time that I fhallever Speak upon the fubjedl, and itii in order to Save your heart the pain of fruitlefs Solicitation, thatl explain my refolution. Should his holinefs be prevailed upon, by my father’s entreaties, to grant me the indulgence he has requested, thus far I will, on my part, comply with the general’s defire.—I will fpend one, two or three months, with him in this houfe, whenever he fhall command me ; but my place of refi-dence must be the convent.'—There I have fworn to live, and there I mean to die.
There
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 8i
There was Something So commanding and determined in Charlotte’s voice and manner, even while she denounced a Sentence So Severe, that neither her brother who was preSent, nor I, attempted once to interrupt her. When she had finished, I Sound my heart Subdued, and ready to Sacrifice its very wish to whatever Seemed nioft conducive to her happineSs. I was, alas j the Satal cauSe oS the vows she had made, how then should I dare to Solicit the breach of them !
Truth, Woodville, flashes convidtion, even upon our paffions, as Swift as light obtrudes upon the eyes. I instantly felt the delicate im-poffibility of her being happy in the world, and as quickly refolved never to importune her to be wretched. It was not however without the fin** cerest regret, that I beheld my most Sanguine hopes of happineSs vanish once more into air.
She received my acquiescence with her deter** mination, as the highest mark of my affection, and told me that she now confidered me in a light, where the tenderest regard for my welfare was compatible with her duty ; and that henceforward she could know no difference in her affedlion for captain Beaumont and lord Seymour.
From that time, Woodville, our days have been Spent in the most delightful intercourse, and have stolen away almost unperceived by me. Charlotte’s voice, which was ever charming, is now So highly improved, that no melody on earth can equal it. The good old general, who absolutely adores her, is frequently melted into tears while she fings ; and upon all occafions gazes on her with a look of repentant Sorrow and delight, as if conScious of the injury he has done to the world, by robbing it of Such an ornament :
S2 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
narnent; while her charming countenance is lighted up with the animated looks of filial love.
She has prevailed on the general, to be recon* tiled to his youngest daughter and her hufband. He has obtained the youpg man’s releafe, andk to purchafe him a eommistlon immediately. As Soon as that can beeffe£ted they will come here, and Charlotte will again retire into the convent, how do I dread the fatal hour of reparation ! ari blush to think that even Charlotte’s mind fhould be fo far Superior to my own !
Within thefe few days she has frequently mentioned her going to Paris, with a look and manner almost expressive of impatience, yet chastened by the pain she fees it gives her father, brother and the unhappy Seymour. Must flie again be torn from my fond eyes! Plaveinct Sacrificed my wishes to'her will, and vvilHherob me of the last Sole delight of Sometimes gaxing ©n her ?
Her brother tried to prevail on her to let m« viSit her at the convent, but she peremptorily refufed ; nor will she even confent to fee him, except on particular buSinefs. Her father is the only perfon she will admit within* thofe walls.— This is a felf-impofed restraint, for the abbefs is perfedfly inclined to grant her every indulgence she can afk.
I KNOW nothing of the marchionefs, Rans-ford, nor any other perfon at Paris. I ssiall certainly accompany Charlotte thither; and when there, shall acquaint you with every thing I hear about them. I am truly concerned that your infatuation for that worthiest woman should still continue—O Woodville! had you lost fuch a treafure, as I have, and by your own fault
r.oo, what would your fituation have been! I
will
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 83
will think of my miferies no more—but endeavour to enjoy the fmall portion of happinefs that yet remains for me.
I CONGRATULATE you on being a father -—may that tender tie awaken every pleaSing fenfation in your mind, and restore your heart to the amiable lady Woodville, who only can deferve it!
Direft your next lo the hotel de Paris i and till I arrive there
Adieu.
at
Seymour.
LETTER LXVI
Wo
ONCE more returned to Woodfort’s peaceful shades, efcaped from crouds and noife, to gentle converfe, and the fweet muSic of my vocal woods ; yet can I not enjoy the plcaSing fcene l have fo much longed for—the caufe of my coming hither embitters the fatisfadtion I hoped to find in being here. My Emily is in a bad state of health, occassoned as her phystcians think, by the foggy air and hurry of London.
But, O Seymour! to you I will confefs the fecret woundings of my troubled foul. 1 fear that forrow preys upon her tender heart; for from the tinie of our being at York, I have frequently imagined her mind was distressed ; blit whenever she feemed to perceive that idea riSing injmy thought, she has instantly banished it, fey assuming an air of chearfulnefs and vivacity; and the transition was made with fuch amz-ing eafe,
that
§4 the delicate distress.
that I thought it impoflible she should be infin-cere, and that the gloomy medium of my own refledlions, and not hers, had tinftured her appearance with an air of forrow. Can it be pof-fible, Seymour, that a creature fo young and innocent as lady Woodville, can be capable of difguifing her Sentiments, and hiding her grief in Smiles!
I BEGIN to Sear that women are our Superiors in every thing. If she has perceived my palTion for the marchioneSs, and concealed the anguifli, which Such a diScovery must occafion to a heart like hers, for well I know she fondly loves me, the story of the Spartan boy would no longer be repeated; but lady Woodville be henceforth considered as the first example of human fortitude— In what a light then must her lord appear! I cannot bear the thought.
When the phyficians first attended her, they adviSed her Setting out immediately for the South of France, but she refuSed to go, with a more determined air and manner, than I had ever Seen her affume before. I imagined her diflike arofc from the thought of being Separated from her Son, and immediately assured her that he should go with us. She thanked me for my condeScenSion, but Said it had only removed one of her objeo tions, and that not the strongest.
Then, with a tear just starting from her eye, she intreated that I would not prefs her farther, 1 kissed away the pearly fugitive, as it stole down her cheeks, which was instantly lighted up, by the Soft glow of joy and modesty.—She told me, then, she wished to return to Woodfort, and, if I pleafed, she would go to Bristol when the Sea-fon came on.
I acquiesced in every thing she defjred; and would at that instant, as I would at this,
have
the DELICATE DISTRESS. 85
have laid down my life to procure her health and happinefs. We fet out immediately for this place.—For the first three or four days I thought her better; Since that I too plainly perceive that ihe declines.	, ^ „ ri
If stie should die, Seymour, I shall confider myfelf as her murderer. Surely you would then v allow me the painful pre-eminence of wretched-nefs, and acknowledge your Situation, when compared to mine, to be like beds of rofes to the rack. 0 no I it must not te—she shall pot die.
I NEVER was fo impatient for any ®ra, as for ihe month of June.—I have great hopes from the Hot-wells, my Emily’s youth, and naturally good tonstitution.
I HAD not the least expeffation that your Charlotte would have been prevailed on to quit the convent; indeed I Scarcely hoped that she would have condefcended as far as she has done, by consenting to Spend a portion of every year at Bellevetie. Happy Seymour! to have fuch a fubjedt for expedtation before you.—It is Surely one of the highest degrees of human felicity to look forward with hope.
You will pardon me if I think there is Some faint trait of the coquette in her refuSing to fee you at the convent. She certainly wishes to keep your flame alive ; and as she does not mean to feed it with any thing more Substantial than her conversation, she wifely thinks, that that, like all other enjoyments, might poffibly pall upon the taste if too often repeated.
She has therefore enjoined you a long fast, in order to heighten vour relish for the “ feast of leafon.” You, I dare fay, as a still pashonate lover, may probably think this little rufe d.amour unnecelfary; but I am firmly perfuaded, that
at ffmence
86 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
abstinence will enhance the value of our mental, as well as corporeal pleafures.
A SERVANT has just informed me that lady
Woodville is ready to ride out.—I attend heron horfeback every day.
Adieu, my friend,
Woodville.
P. S. I hope this will be a letter of credit for me in your books, as I have not once drawn ufv-on your patience, by mentioning the marchionefs, Be generous then, my dear Seymour, and re« ward my felf-denying virtue.
LETTER LXVII.
Lord Seymour to Lord Woodville.
My dear Woodville,
I HAVE made an exchange directly oppoSite to yours, having just quitted the fweet fcenes of Belleveiie, and my Charlotte’s delightful con-verfe, for the irkfome crouds and noife of this great city.
The young mufqueteer and his lady arrived at general Beaumont’s, -about a fortnight ago. Charlotte had fixed the time of her return to the convent, for the tenth day after they came, but her fister, madame de Carignon, being taken violently ill, made her postpone her journey, and made me hasten mine-
From the time that Maria complained, Charlotte never quitted her apartment.—Belleveiie became a defart to me, and I fancied I stiould fee lefs regret, at being Separated from her by dif. -tance than accident.—But the effedls are the fame
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 87
icthecaufe what it may ; for there is no place or fituation that can afford me happineSs in her ab-
fence.
You treat Charlotte very Severely, nay un-jiiftly, by charging the highest proof of her delicate affection to the account of coquetry. She is too fenSible not to perceive that my passion for ier renders me unhappy, and (he, though vainly, fetters herfelf, that time and abfence may effed icure.
This she in confidence declared
to captain receive my would not yet I wilt
Beaumont, when pressed by him to lifits.—Alas! she little knows I tliange my malady for health ; and fflnform to her prescription, and drink the bitter draught without a murhiur. O Woodvilie ! when we truly love, it is our highest tranSpert to obey I
I Am truly concerned for the account you give of lady Woodvilie, but find a Secret confolation (or her Sufferings in your fenfibility, as I am al-moft certain that your tendernefs properly exerted towards her, will restore both her health and feppineSs.—^I dare not trust mySelf with a doubt of your condufit upon this occaSion.
I THINK nothing can be plainer than her bowledge of your attachment to the marchionefs. -Her pofitive refuSal of going to France marks t too strongly. Woodvilie, I fear—but I will lot reproach you—your own generous heart must ling you too Severely.
I HAVE this moment received a letter from aptain Beaumont.—Madame de Carignon’s differ appears to be the Small pox; and as she is iretty far advanced in her pregnancy, they think ler life in danger. What has been gained by oaking her sty from that difeaSe a few months
go!
VoL. II,	M	But

88 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
But I have not tinie now to moralize. I shall fend off a physscian immediately, andlhall follow him myfelf in a few hours; my Charlotte must want confolation, and is at the fame time, the only perfon capable of administering it to her unhappy father.
Yours ever,
Seymour.
f
P. S. I should give you credit for not mentioning the marchionefs in your letter, if I had not heard that ladies and lovers generally poftponed their most material bufinefs to their postfcripts. Be that as it may, I can only tell you, the marchionefs and her Caro Spojo are in this town ; but where I know not. Captain Barnard and lady Ransford are alfo here.
w Tir Ttr w TK-Tir otf w w T»j Ttr w
LETTER LXVIII.
LorJ WooDviLLE to Seymour. Dear Seymour,
Lady Woodville is much better—Sir John and lady Straffon, lord and lady Mount Willis, have been here^this fortnight.*—The polite chearfulnefs of their fociety, has I believe been of infinite fervice to Emily ; but I still flatter myfelf that my attention and tendernefs have contributed more to her recovery than any thing elfe.
I have now the real happinefs to think, that e ■■ > ehenfion ot he mind is entirely removed ; I can therefo re. Scarcely doubt but that
health and peace will return together; for Dm
but

So unassuming
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 89
iHit too dearly convinced, that the privation of the latter, occassoned the lofs of the former.
There certainly never was a more amiable creature, than lady Wood villein her manners, fo fearful of giving pain, that Ihe would if possible, conceal her complaints, even from her domestics who all adore her.
Is it not amaz-ing, Seymour, that perfedly fenfible as I am, of her uncommon merits, there Ihouldbe found a being upon earth, who holds a higher place in my affedion ? How falfely do they flatter our understandings, who fay that elleem is the basts of love! if that were true, I lould be the happiest of men, should think no more of the ungrateful Ifabella, should no longer feel the reproaches of a wayward heart, which would then be entirely devoted to the charming Emily.
But though I may never be able, intitely to' eradicate this fatal difeafe from my mind, I have great pleafure in perceiving, that the constant exertion of my tendernefs towards Emily, is attended with the stneerest delight to myfelf; as it fulfils a duty and flatters my humanity with the idea of conferring happinefsupon an amiable and deferving objed.
The pradice of any virtue is not fo difficult iss we are apt to imagine—There requires nothing more than refolution to commence.—Habit will foon make it eafy, if not pleafant, to us.—Yet Hill must I envy thofe, who have no need to ilruggle ; and when I behold the ingenuous fond-uefs of lord Mount Willis and Sir John Straffon,. to their wives, I cuffe mv fate, and defpife my own weaknefs, for having' reduced me to the contemptible necessity of feigning what they are bppy enough to feel.
Ma	We
90 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
We are to return the vissts of our prefent
guests, in our way to Bristol.---------Lord Mount
Willis has a very fine feat in Somerfetlhire.
He is a very agreeable accomplistied man. His wife before her marriage, loved Sir James Mil-
ler-----passionately loved him-------and yet (he has
withdrawn her ill-placed fondnefs and doats upon her lord. Shall I be weaker, weaker than a puny girl ? and shall the voice of reafon always plead in vain ?—I dare not reply to thefe mortifying queries.
I MOST fincerely pity the unhappy general de Beaumont; his misfortunes have been multiplied on him, at a time when he is least able to encounter them. There is a fpring in youth, which makes us capable of refisting almost any prelTure; but when a body, which has been nurfed in the foft lap of profperity becomes enfeebled by years, the mind alfo partakes of its enervation ; and we have still lefs reafon to ex-pe£l a vigorous exertion of the mental powers, than of mufcular strength at threefcore.
Th e wifdom therefore, that is in general attributed to age, arifes more from a privation of paffion, than from experience or any othercaufe. As tfie nerves grow rigid, the heart is infenfibly rendered callous. The exquifite fenfations both of pain and pleafure, after a certain time of life are imperceptibly blunted, by each returning day; and we at last become folely indebted to memory for informing us, that we were ever capable of feeling the extremes of joy or forrow.
The only passion, which nature feeras to de-fign should remain in its full force in our dedining age, is paternal affeflion ; and as the others fubfide, I should imagine that gains strength—-there is a mixture too of felf-love in it, which general-
The
ly makes its existence equal with our own.
objests
THE DELICATE DISTRESS, gt
objefls of this affection are gradually maturing, under our fostering care; each day they make feme advances towards our idea of perfeflions, alikenefs to ourfelves ; with anxious hopes we watch the tender bud,, look with delight upon !he opening blossom, and gaze enraptured on the blooming fruit—It is our own we planted, and we reared it I In this most tender point, then the poor old general is now wounded his armour and his breast-plateuhrown assde, the barbed arrow Sinks into his heart.
Should madame de Carignon die, which I hope stie will not, there are abundance of good ihristians, who would immediately conclude her death to be a judgment on him, for his inhuman treatment of Charlotte. But I, who confefs my-felf a ssnner, have not a doubt of his having already atoned his passive guilt, towards her by his contrition.?—You are the fingle perfon^.. who appear to be injured by it,—-for I'am fusty fatis-Sed, that Charlotte is no longer unhappy.
I HAVE philofophized and moralized upon this fubjeQ;, to the extent of my time and paper, perhaps to prevent my entering again upon another on which I am neither philofopher, nor moralist.—F stiall therefore, sty from it by bid-ding'you.
Adieu.
WOCDVILLE.
Ms
LET-
02 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
LETTER LXIX.
Lord Seymour to Lord Woodville.
. \
Dear Woodville,
ADAME de Carignon is recovered, if IVl it can be called a recovery, for a fine young woman to furvive her beauty.—Thatia indeed, abfolutely destroyed ; but, as her huf> band’s fondnefs feems unabated by thelofs, her homclinefs may possibly become an advantage, rather than a misfortune.—Few, very few women, or men either have strength of mind fuffi-cient to bear umverfal admiration; and when that is derived from beauty alone, there is fcarce a young perfon who thinks it necessary to attain any other qualification or accomplilhment, that does not tend to the embellistimient of their-charms.
I HAVE obferved through life, that wefeldora meet with an agreeable man or woman, who have been remarkably handfome. But perhaps, this may be philofophically accounted for—As evidence adts by the Simplest means, and beauty is alone fufficient to procure the love and admiration of mankind, great qualities would be necef-lary to the purpofe, and perhaps mar the original defign; for we should be more apt to fear than \ovt a htmian b^ing, that we conSidered as abfolutely perfedt.
I THEREFORE think with Milton, that where there ‘ is bestowed too much of ornament, in ‘outward shew elaborate, the inward’s lefs exadt which may be a kind of confolation to thofe, whom nature has dealt her perfonal favours to, with a Scanty hand.
In
Pi
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 93
In the country where I am at prefent, neither youth or beauty are of much value. The grandmother and grand-daughter are pretty much upon the fame footing.--What little difference
there may be is generally in the dowager’s favour; as file jmay probably be poffeffed of more knowledge and experience and a better fortune.—No woman is ever young or old at Paris; for the fame paint that fills up the furrows of the aged cheek, hides the foft down upon the youthful one.
You fee that a word to the wife is enough, and that I have followed your plan of philolo-phizing, upon indifferent fubjedls, to avoid recurring to painful ones.-1 muff however ac-
quaint you, that I am to attend Charlotte to Paris, in three days. She has infiffed on my returning to England, ,as foon as she enters the cloiffer ; and I have confented, on her promifing to meet me here next fpring, provided the general be then living.
The poor old man has infiffed on captain Beaumont’s quitting the army, and taking pof-feflion of his fortune, except a fmall annuity, which he referves for charitable ufes. He has behaved nobly to monSieur and madame de Ca-rignon, and prefented twenty thoufand crowns to the convent of St. Anthony, as a reward for their kindnesses to his beloved Charlotte. You would pity him fincerely, if you were to behold his diffrefs at the idea of parting with his favourite child ; but
“ What are, alas! his woes compared to mine P,
M 4
Adieu,
94 the DELICATE DISTRESS.
Adieu, my friend ; if I were capable of ioy I should feel it for lady Woodville’s recovery! I shall write to you from Paris ; and am
Ever your’s,
Seymour,
oooo
LETTER LXX. ;ymour to Lord Wool
Paris.
HAVE once more bid adieu to my dear Charlotte.—But painful as the hour of fepara« tion was, the recollefifion of what I had former-ly endured, from her entrance into the convent, with the fond hope of our re-meeting in a few months, have abated its anguish ; and fome very extraordinary accidents, which have happened within thefe few hours, have taken up my whole attention, and carried me, as it were, out of rny« ■Self.
The count de Clerembauf, for whom you know I have a Sincere friendship, came to fee me yesterday morning.—He told me he was juft come from the tennis-court, where there had been a very warm D«^/7/^r/V between two Englilh gentlemen. One of their names, he faid, was Ransford, who quitted the field to his antagonift but with a look and manner, that i'eemcd to fay he was determined to meet him ellewhere.
1 WAS alarmed at this account, and immediately ordered my chariot, and drove to the marchi-
onefs’s. Ransford was not at home.----------1 came
back to my hotel, and wrote to him ; expatiated on the ill confequences of fighting a duel in Pa-tis ; begged him to defer his refentnrents, till hi*
opponent,
i
I
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 95
* V
opponent, whom I understood to be an Englisti-man, and he fhould meet in their own country ; but if he should be So circumstanced, as to be under a neceffity of reje£ling my advice, I hoped he would at least accept of my fervice to attend him to the field, or command me in whatever way he thought proper.
In about three hours I received the following
anfwer.
La Dr^/SEYMOUR.
** A/Ey dear Lord,
I AM. truly thankful for your kind attention to me ; but I am at prefent too far embarked to recede ; and even your admonition must therefore come too late. Let the confequence be what it will, I cannot think of heightening nay distrefs, by involving you in it. But I have a much more material aft of friendship to implore from you.—The marchionefs will stand in need of your proteftion.—I need Say no more—hasten to her ; the affair will be over> before-'you receive this. I have the fatisfaftion to think tha*^ captain Barnard deferves his fate if 4ie should fall by my hand, as be has this day added fresh infult to former injury.
Adieu, perhaps for ever,
William Ransford.’^
I INSTANTLY. ran,,orrather flew to the mar-chionefs, whom i found waiting dinner for Mr, Ransford—She feemed furprized at my entrance, as- she had heard that I had been there in the morning.—The anxiety of my countenance became contagious ; and she enquired with the greatest earnestnefs, if I knew any thing about Mr. Ransford ? before I could frame a reply, the lieutenant de Police was on the stairs, and I
Ms
9h THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
rufhed out of the room to prevent his cotnino into it. He paffed me by and entered.—She did not appear to be alarmed.
It ieems there is a law-fuit between her and her late hufbandb heir, for part of her jointure; and ste, 1 fuppofe, concluded that he came to execute feme order of court relative to that affair. But long before he could fully explain the real motives of his coming, flie ceafed lo hear, and had funk motionlefs upon the fofa where Ihe fat.
The lieutenant and his myrmidons took pof-fcffion of every thing au mm du roi^ and allured us that diligent fearch would be made for the murderer. I intreated him to leave the unhappy lady’s apartment to herfelf, and that I would be anfwerable for every thing in it. He retired with infinite politenefs, which is the bell fubfti-tute to humanity; and in this country, which abounds with shew and deluSion is frequently miS taken for it.
As the marchionefs is five months gone with child, it was thought proper to have her blooded. —Every pofFible care has been and shall be taken of her. She is diftreffingly grateful for my fnialt attentions towards her. But a mind fub-dued by afHidtion is apt to over-rate every little mark of kindnefs.
This unhappy affair wnll detain me here for
fome time longer.----1 will not quit the poll of
guardian to the alRidtest fair, till I refign her into Ransferd’s hands. You shall daily hear from me.	Adieu.
Seymour.
LET-
.** *
■
THE DELICATE DISTRESS 97
LETTER LXXI
DrJ Seymour to Lord Woodville.
Yesterday passed away b forming melancholy conjectures on the recent caufe of quarrel between captain Barnard and Mr. Ranf-ford ; in intermediate ideas, whither he would bend his courfe, and in listening to various reports which were variousty repeated by the friends, acquaintance, and fervants of the unhappy combatants.
We had however the Satisfaction to difcover, that Ransford had made fome proviSion for his efcape, as he had converted above three hundred pounds into post bills the morning of the duel, and had ordered a Swifs Servant who has lived with him for five years, and is remarkably attached to him, to attend at a particular place with a couple of the fleetest horfes he could hire, or purchafe. From hence I conclude he will ttavel to Switzerland, and take up his abode at Berne, till he can return with honour and Safety into England.
You will perhaps fay why at that particular place more than any other ? I grant the idea is formed upon a vague conjeCture ; but Andre was born at Berne, and the Swifs are of all nations, the Scotch not excepted, the most Smitten with the love of their country. Ransford’s mind must be unhinged by this fad accident, torn frorh its props, and ready to recline itSelf on the first friendly stay that will Support it. The honest Swifs looks back with tranfport * on thofe barren hills where first his mind found joy, his body strength ; and leads his master there to
share
9^ THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
stare the gifts which he received from nature, and the foit. I fay he will not stop till he arrives at Berne.
1'he marchionefs does not agree with ray opi-ste thinks BrulTels, Holland, Italy, nay
ntcn
2 I :A o
England, more agreeable. That is, ste could to fix her reSidence, in any of thofe places, rather than at Berne.—They are all equal to me, except England, where I am pretty fure he will not go.
1 HERE were too Sealed letters found in captain Barnard’s pocket, the one addressed to lady Ransford, the other to the man who killed him. I will wait upon her ladystip to-morrow to obtain the latter ; it must certainly throw forae extraordinary light upon the affair.
I HAD written lb far when I received a fum-mons from the marchionefs to attend instantly. A thoufand apprehenSions crouded on my mind; I feared Ransford might not have efcaped, and I knew the vindiSlive fpirit of his step-mether too well to hope that ste would not profecute. I Sound the naarchionefs in a state little stiort of madnefs—her expressions, were fuch as made me rather feaV tha„n feel—hpi' eyes darted fire, and ste tracer fed the circumference of her dressing room, with the air and pace of distradtion: ft? Seemed to be unSexed.
Where is he, madam? Said I. Let m.e lly to him and try what gold can do, to pucchafe his enlargement. This must be our only reSource: let them lake it all. Said ste, but let me go--a letirs de cachet I no monarch, nor no minister d.are ssgn it—I will sty to Verfailles—it is granted, and you See me a prifoiier at this rac ment—dare you refeue me ?
Amazement took away the power of Speech; I did not understand her, it was impossible I
sslOUld

THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 99
fhould.—At that instant, a perfon of a very gentleman-like and engaging appearance, entered the chamber.—He Seemed to be astonistied at her beauty, and perturbation, and gazed, for an in-ftant, first at her, and then at me—at last. Seeming to recoilect himSelf, he addreffed me in the following words.
I AM Sorry your indiScretion has permitted our meeting, Sir.—It is true I have received no particular information against you; you are, therefore, at liberty to depart; which I beg you will do instantly, as you cannot be Safe in this houSe a Single moment.
I IMMEDIATELY pcrccived he had mistaken me for Mr. Ransford, and readily accepting all the good will he had shewn to my friend’s unhappy Situation, returned him thanks for his intended humanity, and assured him of my gratitude, for a favour, which I did not stand in need of. He blushed at his mistake, and Said that he had been twelve years in office, and had never exceeded his commission, but in that way. Strange, that a man should blush, that had been twelve years in Such an office?
He then explained his buSineSs.—-He had ft lettre de cachet against madame, which the marquis de St. Aumont, her hushand’s nephew, had obtained, to prevent her quitting the kingdom^ till the Suit between them should be determined.
Her rage is not to he deScribed ; she accufed the laws of injustice, and its officers of inSolence, and cruelty. Afked to what priSon a peerefs should be led, and whether she was to be handcuffed like a malefactor ? to all this intemperate language, the officer replied v/ith great calmnefs, that her ladyship might put an end to her distreSs, by giving Security to the court for her stay in Paris. She told him she would not stay for all
the
lOoTHE DELICATE DISTRESS.
the courts in Europe. He then faid fomething in a low voice, about her being confined.
She had fent for her lawyer, who arrived critically, and prevailed on her, at last, to pafs her word jointly with us, that Ihe would not quit Paris, without leave of the court, which he laid he would apply for the next day.
The agitation of her fpirits now fubfiding, she fell into violent passions of tears; bewailed her fate, and faid she was the most wretched of human beings. I fear she has more reafon to think fo than she is yet acquainted with. For after she withdrew to her chamber, her lawyer, at my request, explained the nature of the pro-cefs against her, and assured me that the late marquis de St. Aumont, had no power over thofe lands, which he fettled on her for a jointure; that he was, therefore, very glad to find Ihe was married to an English gentleman of fortune, as he had great reafon to believe the caufe would go against her.—That he feared she was extremely in debt, and that all her perfonalities were already forfeited to the crown, as being the fuppofed property of Mr. Ransford. What a Scene of distrefs, Woodville! and what will become of this unhappy pair?
Before I left the houfe, the marchionefs fent for her lawyer into her chamber.—I took that opportunity of retiring to write to you, and shall now clofe this melancholy narrative with wishing you good night.	Seymour.
LETTER LXXII.
Lord Seymour to Lord Wo odville. Dear Woodville,
O T H my mind and body are fo extremely
harrassed, that I am Scarce able to give you
an
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. loi
an account of the distrefles in which I am involved.
Just as I had staled my last letter to you? I received a billet from captain Beaumont, to inform me, that the general and he were that moment arrived at Paris, and that their coming was occasioned by a very alarming account they had received of my ever-dear Charlotte’s being extremely indifpostd.
I FLEW diredUy to the general’s houst, and found the poor oldman finking under the double weight of years and forrow. He (hewed me the abbefs’s letter to him, which faid, “ that from ‘ the time of Charlotte’s return into the convent, ‘ a fever had preyed upon her Spirits; that (he ‘ had concealed her illnefs for fevcral days, and ‘ even made light of it when it was too vifible;
‘ that she was now reduced to fuch a state of ‘ weaknefs, that the phyficians had declared me-‘ dicine could be of no ust to her, and that an ‘ immediate change of air was the only chance ‘ she had for life ”
No words can exprefs what I felt on reading this fad letter ; yet will I candidly confefs, that her father’s anguish feemed to furpafs even mine. He called himstlf her murderer! and faid if she should die, he never could have hopes of mercy or Salvation.—Alas I am I not guilty as himstlf I My fatal rashnefs made her take thost vows, which her fond love for me, in any other cafe, would have rej edited !
The general determined to remove Charlotte out of the convent the next day, and convey her as far out of Paris as her strength would permit. He intreated me to accompany them, in their melancholy and (low progrefs to Belleveiie. Judge of my distrefs, at being obliged to refufe ! But my honour was pafSed to a wretch who has none
the
102 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
the marchionefs —Captain Beaumont promifed toL bring me a faithful account of his Sifter’s Situation in the morning, and I retired home—not to reft.
Captain Beaumont was punctual to his word; he came to me before eight o’clock, and told me that hie father and he had feen Charlotte, and found her in a very weak state ; that (he had confented to fet out with them for Belleveiie, but that he did not believe they Should be able to carry her farther than three or four leagues that day, and intreated me to go with them. I readily consented, and determined thatl would return to Paris that night, as Soon as ever Charlotte should retire to bed.
The captain and I agreed to meet, at the general’s houfe, at eleven o’clock, to follow our fair fugitive, who was to fet out with her father from the convent. He told me that Charlotte had made a thoufand tender inquiries, about my health ; that she rejoiced at my being still in Paris, and Seemed delighted at the thought of feeing me that day. I needed not thefe new proofs of her regard to increafe my ardour for her; my foul was on the wing to meet her, yet still the claims of friendship were not unheard.
I RESOLVED to go immediately to lady Ranf-ford, for the letter that was addressed to her step-fon, and found in Barnard’s pocket. Then to wait on the marchionefs^ and make my ex-cufe for absenting myfelf from her the remainder of that day : but though Jhe had left Paris, it was fated, that I should not quit it for feme time.
As 1 was coming out of my apartment, I was met by the lieutenant de police, who arrested me ■sis an accomplice with the marchionefs, in having
defrauded
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 103
I
defrauded his majesty, by conveying away her most valuable effects, which were confifcated to his ufe, and having fled herfelf, though under an arret.—Never was astonishment greater than mine.
In vain I pleaded my ignorance of the fa6l, or the innocence of my intentions, or offered to give ample Security for thofe effects, which had been fecrcted by that mean, that worthiest woman ! The officer told me he was not quite fuch an ideot, as the perfon who had taken my word before, and that no argument I could urge, would have the least weight with him.
As the last and most prevailing rhetoric I offered him my purfe, if ste would gp with me to general Beaumont’s, and take his bail for my appearance the next day ; but he withstood my gold, and even refufed to let me return into my apartment, to write an apology for not attenshng my beloved Charlotte.
This was the first time, I had ever felt
the infolence of office.”—I Submitted to it, though reluftantly, and was immediately conveyed to the Chatelet.—I Sent off a Servant to captain Beaumont, to defire him to come to me; but as foon as I was lodged in prifon, I was informed that no perfon would be admitted to fee me, as they corffidered me as a delinquent of state.
I THEN demanded to be confronted with my accufers, and brought before a judge. They fmiled at my ignorance, and told me, that as I was not in England, I must Submit to their laws, which were not quite So expeditious as ours, and that patience would be my best refource for the prefent.,
Though shy temper is naturally gentle, and my paffions have been, long fubdued by afliidtion.
104 the delicate DISTRESS.
IP	_	• —*
It was with difficulty I could command my rage —yet on whom fliould I vent it ? on wretches brazed by cuftom to the wild ravings of refent-ment, or the foft plaints bf Sorrow !
"As Soon as I was capable of reafoning with
myfelf, I conSidered that a confcioufnefs of my own integrity ought to Support me under the disagreeable circumstances I was involved in by another’s fault; and am certain it v^ould have done So, had I not been disappointed of the painful pleasure of feeing the lovely, languid Charlotte ! I lamented the uneafineSs which Ihe must feel from hearing of my confinement, un* knowing of the cauSe ; and the apprehenSion of her thinking me guilty of Some criminal adion, and her fufSering from that thought, almost dif-tradled me. I curSed the marchionefs a thoufand times.——Yes, Woodville, from my heart I curfed her. Bane of your happineSs! disturber now of mine!
When I grew a little calm, I defired to fee the keeper of the priSon, as I wanted to know whether I was at liberty to write to the Englisti ambassador, who I knew was then at Verfailles and to the rest of my friends. The governor du Chatelet, was immediately announced, and on his entering, my eye was struck with the most graceful figure and engaging countenance, I had ever Seen. He Seemed to be turned of fifty, but had Such a SoftneSs of features and complexion, as is rarely to be met with but in extreme youth. His appearance filled me with Surprize; I was amazed that Such a man Should be capable of Such an office, which I SuppoSed could only be Suited to the most infenfible, or brutal natures.
His conversation was as pleafing as his-per-fon; he readily assented to my request, and laid he would take care that my letters should be delivered.
TH£ DELICATE DISTRESS. 105
livered. He then gave orders that my own Servants should be permitted to attend rne, and that any perfon whom I dessred to fee, should be immediately admitted. I thanked him for his humanity, in removing every unnecelSary restraint, and assured him I should make no other ufe of his indulgence, than that of endeavouring to procure my liberty, by the most legal means.
He encreafed my astonishment, by replying to me, in English, that he could not have any doubts of lord Seymour’s honour; and that he hoped I would do him and his family the favour to dine with them, and allow them as much of my company as was convenient to me, while I remained in the Chatelet.
Mv curioSity to know foraething more of his. family, made me accept his invitation ; though heaven knows how little inclined to mix with ftrangers, or enter into any plan of dishpation,
I have written to the ambassador and to my dear Charlotte. By removing her anxiety I have lessened my own.
I AM not apprehenssve that my confinement can last many hours; I will therefore endeavour to keep up my Spirits, with the fond hopes of flying to my Charlotte, the moment I am releafed. In the mean time, I attend the governor’s Summons to dinner, and for the prefent bid my dear Woodville
Adieu,
Your’s.
"	Seymour.
P. S. What is the reafon that I do not hear from you ? whilst at liberty, I regretted, but in my confinement shall lament your filence. My affedfionate compliments to lady Woodville.
LET-
l!
:
■ I , ' ! I
' 11

il:
I
I t
ll'
106 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
LETTER LXXin.
Lord Seymour to Lord Woodville.
“ Hope travels thro’, nor quits us till we die.”
And without that charming companion, I
think I fhould not now furvive to tell my
dear Woodville, that I am just releafed from a
confinement of fifteen tedious days. But let me
be methodical in my relation.--No, it is im-
pofllble ! my charriot waits to carry me to Bel-leveiie, to my adored Charlotte ! She is better, I am happy, and most fincerely Your’s.
Seymour.
LETTER LXXIV.
%
Tori/Seymour to Lord Woodvilli.
4
Belleveste.
CHARLOTTE recovers daily; my fears for her precious life are abated. Your Silence now alarms me.—Why, must I never be free from apprehenSions, for thofe I truly love ? But I will, for the prefent, indulge your impatience, and restrain my own.
On the first day of my confinement, I was Shewn into the governor’s appartment, which was elegantly furnifhed, and received him and his lady, with the utmost politenefs. She was Surrounded by five beautiful children the eldest a girl about fixteen. I will confefs it, Woodville ! my eyes were inferrfibly rivetted to this
young creature’s lovely form ; and for the first
time
• V.-
^	< X
-X ’	'	■
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 107
lime of my life, my heart received a delight, from gazing on the charms of another woman, befides Charlotte!
I DID not long indulge the dangerous plea-fure, without calling the wanderer to account, and Toon perceived that the fair Maria’s chief attraOiion was owing to her remarkable likenefs to my Charlotte. This obfervation quieted my fcruples, and left me the innocent fatisfa<9;ion of admiring her beauty, with a brother’s eye. Yet Hill my curiofity was increafed by the refera-blance; and as foon as I was left alone with the governor, I took the liberty of alking him if he was related to general Beaumont ?
He anfwered no; but Said his wife was lister to the late madame de Beaumont, though much unlike her both in mind and perfon ; that he could well allow madame D’Angueville inferior in reSpe6l of beauty, but that her understanding and heart were fraught with every charm and virtue, that could adorn a woman.
I ASKED him had he never Seen his niece Charlotte Beaumont ? he anfwered with an honest warmth, yes Sir, when it was too late to Inake her happy, or reward your merit—would to heaven I had known her Sooner! I bowed and
thanked him, even for fruitlefs wilhes, and for a time forgot my being a prifo* ner, from the delight I felt at being with one who knew and loved my Charlotte.
w
We became totally unreferved ; and the governor informed me, that he was^of the N----
family, defeended from one of thofe infatuated men, who had Sacrificed their fortunes, and renounced their country to Serve a weak and worthlcfs prince, who had neither inclination or power to reward their attachment.
He
V
io8 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
He told me that his father had died of a broken heart, while he was but a child ; that his friends had with difficulty obtained him a com-miffion in the Irish brigade, where he had ferved above twenty years without arriving to the rank of captain ; and that he might still have remained in that Situation, but that general Beaumont, by his interest, had procured him the post he then enjoyed, when he and his family had been reduced to the greatest distrefs.
That he hoped he had acquitted himfelf in his office, with humanity and compastlon; and by many circumstances which he related convinced me, that none but a perfon of a noble and generous nature, was fit to prefide over the number of unfortunates, that guilt or accident impels to that gloomy manSion. Sad refledUonI that thofe who are fittest for the charge, are most averSe to accept, and least thought of for the office.
About Seven o’clock in. the evening, captain Beaumont inquired for me, and was immediately admitted. His uncle, monfieurD’Angueville, had never feen him before.—They were mutually charmed with each other. The captain told me, that as Soon as my Servant acquainted him with my Situation, he wrote a line to the general, to inform him of it, and fet out on the instant for Verfailles: that he had feen the Englilh ambassador, who promifed to wait on monSieur
le due de N-------, the premier minister, next
morning, and obtain my releafe as foon as pofli-ble.
I THANKED my gencrous friend for his kind attention to my interests, and pasted the evening with tolerable cbearfulnefs. The next day, about noon, I received a vifit from Mr. S Secretary to our ambastador. He told me that his excellency had been with the minister, and
deSired
^ ASA
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 109
deSired that I might be fet at liberty immediately.
That the due de N---had informed him it was
impoflible to comply with his request, as there was a criminal procefs instituted against me for aiding and abetting the marchionefs de St. Au-mont, in open violation of the laws; and the only favour that could be indulged me, was the allowing me counfel, and bringing the affair to atrial with the utmost expedition.
I ENDEAVOURED to make a virtue of necef-fity, and affedfed to appear contented with the very fmall favour that his excellency had obtained for me. But not to make the repetition of my confinement as tedious to you as the time was to me, the day of trial came, and by the joint testimony of the marchionefs’s lawyer, her Servants, and my own, I was acquitted of being concerned in her efcape, but obliged to give bail for four thoufand pounds, which is the value fet upon the jewels, plate, &c. which she either carried off, or Secreted.
Thus have I been injured, in my honour, perfon, and property, by my humane attention to that most worthleSs of humankind. But no matter; and if the meannefs of her conduct towards me. Sets her in the light, in which I wish you to behold her, I shall think mySelf overpaid, for every injury I have Sustained on her account.
The moment I recovered my liberty I waited on the ambassador, who had come to Paris, on purpose to know if he could be any way Serviceable to me. I made my acknowledgements to him, and fet out that evening with my dear and indefatigable friend, captain Beaumont, for the loved place where my heart’s treafure by. I have already told you that I had the hapj ine!s
; and the joy which
she
of finding her much better
no THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
she felt at feeing her brother and me, has, I flatter myfelf, contributed to her recovery.
The marchionefs’s lawyer told me he had re* ceived a letter from her, dated at Bruffels, wherein she exulted at her own clcvernefs, in getting out of the power of the laws, and gave fome dark hints, of her not being married to Ransford. Heaven grant that this may be true I The fuit with her hushand’s nephew will go against her ; and for her contempt of the arret she will be outlawed, and her whole fortune confifcated ;—fo that if, as I hope, she is not Ransford’s wife, she may possibly be reduced to her original poverty, and meet the contempt due to her vices from all mankind.
This is the fifth letter I have written to you without receiving a line from you. I have certainly reafon to apprehend that fome fatal accident has occastoned your stlence, for I can never doubt the stncerity of your attachment to yours
Most truly,
Seymour.
LETTER LXXV.
WoODVILLE \o Lady Straffon.
PITY me! pray for me, my dearest Sister!
for heaven but mocks my prayers! had they been heard, lord W oodville’s life had never been in danger. I arn distraSied, Fanny ! I would that I were. Though anguish fnch as mine strains every fenfe, and racks my tortured brain, it will not crack 1 no, I am still awake to all the miferies a wretch can feel, who doats and who defpair's!
On
THE DELICATE DISTRESS, in
On Tuefday fe’nnight, fatal day I my lord received a letter from lord Seymour while I was prefent. I obferved that he was strongly agitated while he read it, even to a change of countenance and colour. I thought there must be fome extraordinary caufe for his emotion, which perhaps he wished to conceal from me ; I therefore rofe foftly from my feat and attempted to retire.
0	Fanny! can I ever forget the look of Sorrow which he wore when taking me by the hand he faid, you must not leave me, Emily ! but (hare a painful office with your lord.-^—You must endeavour to confole poor lady Harriet for Barnard’s death ; Ransford has killed him, and is led from Paris.
He then turned quick away, as if to hide his grief. It could not be for Bernard that he wept ; and Ransford, he as well as I, believed was fafe.—O there is another caufe! let me not think of it, lest it divide my tears, which should all :iow for him, and not for my worthiest felf.
He told me he would go directly to Sir Harry Ransford, to acqaint him with his fon’s misfortune, and as he could not do it abruptly, faid it was possible he might stay to dinner there, and begged I would take the most immediate opportunity of informing lady Harriet of this unhappy afeir. His horles were immediately ordered, and he rode off.
1	SENT for Fannv Weston to assist me in the painful talk I had undertaken. But why do I wafle a moment in thinking of any objeO: upon earth but one .? About two hours after my lord left Woodfort, one of the fervants who had attended him galloped into the court yard, ordered the chariot to be got ready instantly, and bid
VoL. II.	N	mV
m THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
my woman tell me that my lord had fallen from his horfe and much hurt.
I W AS Sitting in lady Harriet’s dreffing room when the Sound of the chariot passing hastily under th6 window alarmed me.—I rang to know the caufe, when a Servant pale as death, told me that my lord had met with a Sad accident. I cried where is he ? and rushed out of the room. I was met by my woman on the stairs. Lady Harriet, Fanny Weston, and she, prevented my running into the high-way ; they poured drops and water down my throat, they did or faid to me.
An exprefs was Sent off for a Surgeon, who arrived in lefs than half an hour after my lord was brought home fenfelefs. They would not Suffer me to fee him till he had been bled and his wounds drelled.— beheld him,!
-Alas! I
I knew not what
But gracious-heaven, when I
Let me try to banish the fad idea.-fear it will never be effaced ? never, my fister, never, unlefs I live to fee his natural form restored to my fond wishes, and my ardent prayers!
-----Oh, join with me, my Fanny ! in earnest
Supplication for his precious life I
The humane, the tender-hearted Surgeon, faid every thing that could amufe, but not difpel my fears. That his wounds, though dangerous in his poor judgment, were not mortal; but that he wished for better help than his own.
An exprefs was difpatched for Middleton or Ranby.
I CANNOT, but I would uot if I could def-cribe the night I paff'd—my lord remained quite
Senfelefs ; enviable state 1 yet now and then his languid eyes fixed on me. About five in the morning he fell into a kind of a dofe, and remained in that fituation till near Seven, when he
awoke
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 113
awoke in the most violent delirium—he raved incelTantly—hut not of me.
In this most melancholy state has he continu-
td eleven days---** a burning fever, and a
koken heart I” O Fanny, it is too much! but liould he recover it I never shall.
Mr. Ranby and the furgeon who first attended my dear lord, have /both afliired me that the liurt which he received from his fall, could not danger his life. But neither they nor the phy-Icians who vifit him daily, can pre-tend to fay i/hat turn his fever will take. Strong opiates kve been given, and at length, have taken ef-fest ; he steeps, my Fanny ! while I who have never clofed my eyes fince the fad accident, indulge them now in their once pleafing talk of writing to my friend, my more than Sister f frief weighs my eye-lids down, but not with the foftpressure of an healthful stumber.
Adieu, adieu, my dear Fanny!
E. WOODVILLE.
LETTER LXXVI.
StRAFFON to WoODVILLE,
Let not my dearest Emily condemn her fincerely affectionate and affliCled Fanny, for not having instantly replied in perSon to her most affeClIng letter.
0, my Emily ! my child! my fister! how loes my heart bleed for you I tears dim my light, and yet perhaps your eyes are dry! the earning balls fixed on your dying lord ! would fou could weep as I do.
As my Spirits have been rather weak ,and iafi*
N a	guid
St-v
• / %


H4 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
guid Since my lying in, even while I was at Woodfort, lady Mount Willis, whole attention and tendernefs to me is without bounds, prevailed upon Sir John and me to pafs a few weeks with her, at a houfe which my lord has hired near ‘Windfor, while his family feat is repairing. The old topics of change of air and moderate exercife were exhausted, both by Sir John and her, before I would confent.
At length I most reluctantly complied. I knew not then why I should feel reluClanee; but I now begin to think with you, that our prefages should be listened to,—Would I had hearkened then to mine ! I should now be with my dearest Emily, and by sharing her anguish and fatigue, perhaps, in fome degree, might lessen both—-but we now must feel the fad addition to our prefent miferies, of knowing that each other is unhappy.
About two hours before the post brought your letter to Windfor, lord Mount Willis and Sir Johnfet out for his lordship’s in Oxfordshire; and while Lucy and I were fitting at breakfast after they were gone, we heard a violent fcrcum.
1 knew the voice to be my little Emily’s—I ran up stairs to her chamber, without recolled-ing that she had been fome time dressed, and playing with the houfe-keeper’s daughter, a child of her own age, in the garden.
Lady Mount Willis followed the found, and found my poor little angel lying on the ground with her leg broken, the only words she fpoke were “ Do not let my mama be frighted,” and fainted quite away.
In this condition she was brought into the
Loufe ; I will not attempt to deferibe mine.
Your fituation is by far more dreadful, yet fure
it was a feene of deep distrefs. Suffice it now
to fay that the moment she is out of danger, I
will
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 115
will Hy to share or alleviate my dearest Emily’s afflidlion. The fond, the tender claims of child and Sister, now divide my heart—it almost breaks that I must fay	Adieu,
F. Strafron.
r n| ^ 1
LETTER LXXVII.
Lady WooDViLLE to Lady STRAFFOif.
My dearest Fanny,
CI^HIS is the one and twentieth day of my lord’s illnefs; and on this day, be it for ever blest by me! the phySicians have obferved a change in his diforder, attended with many favourable Symptoms that gave hopes of lite. He lay for many days in a state of infenSibility, had ceafed to rave, and hardly moved his limbs.
At eleven o’clock this morning he Sighed extremely ; O Fanny! thofe fad ssghs too long have pierced my heart!’ then feemed to wake as from a trance. The first object he took notice cf was me, and with a languid voice he Said, my Emily, have you fat up all night ? O go to bed, my love. Then cloSed his eyes and fell into a little stumber.
I COULD not anfwer him, tears eame to my relief and drowned my utterance. .Yes, Fanny, I have wept most bitterly, and my poor heart k much relieved. Do6lor Fenton infists on bleeding me immediately. I know he thinks that I have caught the fever from my lord ; blessed contagion ; may it not, Fanny, lighten his dist eafe ? would I not die to lessen or remove his heart-felt pains! but I much fear that even my death would not now heal stis ..griefs She is another’s ; and never can be his.
N
o
:>
I fear
n6 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
I fear I rave, my thoughts are wild ; I do not wissi that you should comprehend them.
Your poor, dear Elmily ! I hope she will recover.—A broken limb is dreadful ! but a broken heart worfe ! They fnatch away the pen. Well! well! I will be blooded. Aye, and I will go to bed j my limbs no longer can fupport my weight.
Farewel, my Fanny.
E. W.
LETTER LXXVIll.
Weston to Straffon.
My dear Lady Straffon,
KNOW not how to acquaint you with the additional misfortune that is fallen upon us all. Our dear lady Woodyille lie^ dangeroufly ill of a fever. TVIy heart almost breaks while I tell you, that the phySicians have but little hopes of her life. During the first one-and-twenty days of her lord’s illnefs, she never left his chamber, nor could even be prevailed upon to rest herfelf, except for a few minutes, when quite exhaufted on a couch.
What furprized lady Harriet and me most w^as, that she never shed a tear, til! lord Wood-ville first recovered his reafon and fpoke to her, T he Servants who attended in his chamber have told me, that while he remained infenfible, fhe ufed frequently to lay her cheek upon the pillow, and kifs his poor parched lips, as if she wished to catch the fever from him. O, madam ! why were you not here to fave her precious life ?
Lady Harriet and I have been So much ufed to look up to her with refpedt, as well as love
(and

THE DEDICATE DISTRESS, iiy
(and fure no hurhan being ever deferved them more) that we could not attempt to oppofe her refolution, farther than by fruitiest intreaties, though we knew it most be hurtful to herfelf. Lady Lawfon was unfortunately gope upon a viSit, into Lincolnihire, two days before my lord Woodville’s accident, flie returned yesterday and is almost distracted at lady Woodville’s illnefs. But what is her’s, or any other perfoiSs grief tt) what my lord endures? no words can defcribe his forrow ; and I am convinced, if (he should die, he never will recover.
Hl inSisted upon being taken oat of bed this day, and carried to her chamber. DoClor Fenton finding him peremptory, contented though reluctantly. Good God I what a pale and emaciated figure! Lady Woodville at first did not know him : but when he fpoke to her, she started up,. claSped her- arms round his neck and cried out with unnatural strength ! My dearest lord ! this, this is kind I she shall not part us now ! yes, we will go together ; indeed I will
not stay for any thing on earth ; no not for Utth
t
H'Lr fpirits became quite exhausted at thefe words, and she funk down in a flood of tears. We thought lord Woodville would have expired on the instant. He fainted and was carried back to his chamber in that Situation. This was the first time that lady Woodville had mentioned child fince my lord’s illners.
The DoCtor thinks it a good fymptom, and would have the little cherubim brought into her fight—but who can anfwer for the confequence if he should catch the fever from her. Ht this moment, she steeps, and lady Lawfon is determined to make the experiment, as foon as she awakes.—God grant it may Succeed.
N 4	I HOPE
ii8 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
I HOPE my little coufin has got the better of tier fad accident, and that I shall not hear from, but fee you as Soon as poflible, I fend this by a fpecial messenger, and shall write every day till you come, I am dear lady Straffon,
Your affli^ed and affedlionate,
F. Weston,
t
LETTER LXXIX.
s
Lady Straffon to AS//} Weston.
OF A NN Y ! humbled in the dust by the
Almighty’s chastening hand, I strive in vain, to bow my heart to his all-wife decrees, and blefs the arrow that insti6ts the wound !
Ho w have I vainly vaunted my own fortitude, and thought it proof against the feverest trials 1 Perhaps it is to shew me my own weak-nefs, that my loved Sister and my child are doomed to fuffer.—I fear there is impiety in that thought. Gracious heaven, look down on my distra^iion 1 The first the tenderest objeQ: of my youthful fondnefs, my Emily ! my lister I given to my care by a much honoured and a dying
parent----for her I felt a mother’s tendernefs, a
lister’s love! Why were the ties thus doubly twined around my fad heart, if they must thus be broken ! My daughter too, child of my wedded love! dear to me for her father’s fake, as
for my own--------Both! both, myEmilysat
once ! Sure I may dare to fay,- the inflidiion is Severe I
Nothing can be more alarming than your account of my dear lister’s fituation ; I would fly to her this moment, but that my poor little
gid
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 119
girl is alfo in a fever—my heart is torn to pieces for the two dear Sufferers; nor does lord Wood-ville want his share of my compassion..—I wil ftill look op to the throne of mercy, and hope for the recovery of thefe dear, dear friends ! Write to me, Fanny, every hour if possible: and, O I may your next bring comfort to
The truly affli£ted|
F. Straffon.
P. S. Sir John returned here this morning, and is almost distra<Sted.

LETTER LXXX.
M/y} Weston to Lady Straffon.
a
Dear Madam,
RAY of confolation beams upon us: lady Woodville’s fever is abated; she raves no more. The diforder feems now to haye fallen upon her nerves; and her extreme weaknefs is, at prefent the principal Source of our appresten.-lions for her. When she awoke out of the Humber she was in, during my last letter, her recolledfion returned ; she knew lady Lawfon, and every perfon near her ; but Seemed particu-" larly anxious to remember, what she had faid to her lord ; and expressed great uneassnefs at doctor Fenton’s having Suffered him to run the hazard of leaving his chamber.
Lady Lawfon never quits her bed-ssde ; and lady Harriet, who feems to have forgotten all her own distresses, hardly ever leaves my lord —I am a fort of courier between both ; and by
flattering each in my accounts of the other, hope
Ns	to
120 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
t-o forward both their recoveries. My lord expresses the strongest impatienceto fee lady Wood-ville: do6Ior Fenton will not confent to their nieeting for fome days, nor even fnffer my lord’s letters to be, delivered to him. I am called to receive a viSitdr4-who can i^ be at this improper time ?
What a flutter am I in ? You would never guefs who this guest was—Sir James Thornton! but fo altered as I never faw any creature! I began to fear he was married; though what is it to me if he were ? He has been poring his eves out at Geneva ever ssnce he left us ; and looks as grave and as wife as an old profeffor of philosophy.
Do not be angry with me for trifling a little, my dear lady Straffon. I confefs I was very glad to fee him, and as lord and lady Woodville have had each of them a tolerable night, I think I may be allowed this fmall indulgence. I have a prefcntiment too, that my coussn Emily is better.
■—In short, every thing feems to wear a more chearshl afpeft than it did yesterday.
Poor Thornton was fo much afledled at his friend’s illnefs that the tears stood in his eves,
J ^
and he offered up an ejaculation for their recovery, with almost as much devotion as your ladyship could, though he is just come from a place where they fay religion is not much in fashion : hut he is the best-natured creature breathing, and I am fure he prayed from his heart.
He told me that a vexatious law-fuit had brought him to England, and that he meant to have returned to Geneva without feeing lord Woodville or any of his ^ friends; but being informed of the Situation of this family, he had come from London on purpofe to make the most
Biir.nte enquiries
Hfi
THE DELICATE DISTRESS, izi
He begged I Would not let lord or lady Wood-ville know that he had been here ; laid he would flay a couple of days at Sir William Lawfon’s, in hopes of hearing they were out of danger, then return to town to purSue his law-fuit, and as foon as that was over he would go back to Geneva—but I shall ufe my best crow-quill, to try to perfuade him to viSit Woodfort once morcj before he crosses the fea again ; and if I Succeed in that, I may perhaps try a little farther.
This is the last exprefs that I.shall fend, as I hope by next post, to be able to give you a stilS more fatisfadlory account of our dear, dear friends. Lady Woodville is very anxious about her niece.—I tell her, I hope with truth, that, the Sweet little Emily is much better. I intreat you to confirm my assertion in your next; and to believe me,.
your s
F. Weston.

L E T T E R LXXXI.
Lady Straffon to Mifs Weston. -
4
Dear Fanny,
TH E manner more than the matter of your last letter, has been a cordial to my heart. You could not furely write in fuch a chearful
strain, if our dear lady Woodville was in danger; and yet your account is by no means Satisfactory; except where you fay that her reafon is returned, and that she had a good night—your thoughts were diverted to another objeCt, and your letter
is confufed. Pray be more explicit in your
%
next.
I AM
122 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
I AM very happy to be able to confirm your assertion, in favour of my child.—She is I thank God much better, though still in a dangerous state, as the bone of her leg knits stow’ly, and Ihe fuffers much, but though I may not be able to learn fortitude from her example, I have at least acquired humility, from feeing that a natural mildnefs of difpofition can better enable us to fupport the accidental miferies of this life than all our boasted leafon and philofophy.
I AM ashamed of the intemperate lamentations I made ufe of in my last letter ; and I intreat you to burn it, if you have not already done fo.
I SHALL continue to offer up my fervent prayers and wishes for the recovery of my dear Sister and her lord ; and am, dear Fanny,
Sincerely your’s,
F. Straffon.
I
•J
I
•I
■i
LETTER LXXXII.
Miff Weston lo Lady Straffon.
UPON my word, my dear lady Straffon, if I
had not very good news to fend you, and wais not very good natured, I do not think I should write to you—how you huff one, for being glad to fee an old acquaintance. If I did not know that your ladyship is married, I should have thought your last letter had been written by an old maid : but I am fo overjoyed, at being able to tell you that lady Woodville is infinitely better, that "It cannot keep up my refentment against you any longer.
Yes, I am fincerely glad too, that the little Emily has verified my predidion, and recovers
daily.
the DELICATE DISTRESS. 123
daily." —Now, do not expeSi; me to be methodical, Sor I will never be So ; no, nor will I burn the letter you delire, for I really do not think there is any thing in it, that you need be ashamed of.
Our affedfions are not given us intirely for our amufement; they were certainly deSigned to make us feel our mutual dependence upon each other, and the total anfufficiency of individuals to create their own happinefs. They are the links which form fociety; and though, by being flretched or broken they may give us pain, I am certain that we could have no pleafure without them.
I THINK I have got off of this fubjedl very well, considering that this is my first coup dbeIfaiy in the moralizing strain.—Now for particulars— Lady Woodville fat up two hours this day—She looks weak and languid, but is, I really think, more beautiful than ever.
My lord wrote her a few lines, which I had the honour of prefenting to her; she feemed transported with them, but, churl as she is, she did not let any body fee them. The dodtor would not permit her anfwering them till tomorrow.—If she fends her letter by me, I shall be mightily tempted to peep—but I will not—for I should not like to be Served So myfelf; and I think that is the best way of determining all doubtful matters.
I s AW Sir JamesThornton again, last night You fee I mention him last, that you may not fay he has diverted my thoughts from more interesting fubjedts. He perSists in not having his viSits announced to lord or lady Woodville. I have promised to keep his Secret, and write to him every post, till they are quite recovered.
I shall
124 the delicate distress.
I (hall begin my correfpondence this night: therefore,
, Adieu, my dear lady Straffon.
F. Weston..
LETTER LXXXIII.
k
Mifs Weston to Lady Straffon.
Encore, my dear lady Straffon ! do not you really think me very good-natured? but this is now the houfe of joy ; and we, poor things, who have no character of our own, ca-melion like, catch the hue of our next neighbour. —No letter from you by last post—but no matter. I have a little familiar, who tells me that Emily is better—thank you, good Spirit, for the pleafing news—and now let me tell you, that lady Wocdville is fo much recovered, thatdodor Fenton is to leave us to-morrow.
I THINK I shall be forry when he goes ; he is a pure chatty man, and I have Some reafon to imagine, that he likes me vastly. Whenever I happen to be Sick, I will certainly fend for him.
Well ! matrimony is a fine thing, to be Sure! and it is very hard, that I, who am fo well inclined to enter into that holy state, cannot find an help-mate, meet for me. Though I have my doubts, whether there be many fueh hushands as lord Woodville. I declare he appears to be infinitely more in love with his wife, than he ever was. Such tender attention, fuch unaffe^ed fondnefs, I never beheld.—He is never out of her chamber, but when he is obliged to leave her
4^
b!
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. i2S
to her repofe, which Seems now, to be perfeftly
uninterrupted.
Sir James Thornton is a better correspondent than your ladyfhip.—I received a letter Srom him, in anSwer to mine, with Some very pretty compliments interSperScd through it, upon my eafy manner oS wtiting. Travelling, I find, has improved him ; for I do not recolleft that he ever Said a civil thing to me before he went abroad. Better lute than never ^ is a good proverb. Poor lady Harriet! her Spirits are very low, though (he has behaved furprizingly well on Barnard’s death; but I fear her calmnefs, on that occafion, was owing to the alarming fituation of lord and lady Woodville ; and that her grief will return with their health. I wiSh she would think of marrying, a good hushaiid would make her forget Barnard. Dear, good Thornton I ano-ther letter from him, and more flattery! quelle douceur ! quel charme ! Adieu, my dear lady Straf-fon, I must indulge my vanity, this very moment, by shewing his epistle to lord and lady Woodville. Your’s, ever.
F. Weston.
LETTER LXXXIV.
Lady Straff ON to Mifs Weston.
Thank you, my good Fanny, for your
two lively letters—they have been of infinite uSe to my poor* weak Spirits ; and though I may not be able to compliment as agreeably as Sir James Thornton, I will venture to Say that I am as well pleaSed as he, with the eaSe and chear-fulneSs of your writing. I hope my heart is
truly
I26THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
truly grateful to the Almighty, for the recovery of my dear Siler, and her lord, as well as for the restoration of my little Emily, whom we now tiiink past danger-
You fay, very justly, that “ our affedfions
were not given us for amufement.” No, Fanny ! they were meant to humble the proud heart: to shew us our own weaknefs and fallibilitv, by our frequently bestowing them on unworthy or impropl'r objedts; and even when diredted by nature, and reafon, into their right courfe, to all the tender charities of life, they should remind us of our intire dependence, on the great Author of our being, by making us fenSible that the most delightful attachments, which can be formed, by love or friendship, ferve but to enlarge our vulnerary part, and encreafe our capacity of feeling pain.
Y ou, perhaps, may think this moral too fe-vere; but it is not meant to restrain us from the indulgence of thofe fond fenfations, which are natural to every good heart, but to raife our gratitude, to the great Giver of all our bleflings, and to remind us, that we hold them, by grant, from his bounty, and not from any right, or merit of our own.
As my Emily gains strength every day, we purpofe going into Essex, in a short time ; and as Soon as Sir John can fettle feme necessary affairs there; we shall all Set out for Bristol in hopes of meeting lord and lady Woodville there.—What a joyful meeting will it be to me! my eyes run over at the delightful idea. .
Though lady Mount Willis took every precaution to conceal her generossty to Sir James Miller from himfelf, the unhappy man has dif-covered that he is indebted to her for his fubstst-
ence, and has written her a most affedlng letter,
acknowledging
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 127
acknowledging his own unworthineSs, and intreating her to withdraw her bounty, as he declares he could better Support the most abjeft poverty, than the receiving of favours from one, whom he had fo highly injured and offended. There is Something in this Sentiment that inclines me to forgive, even his former bafenefs, and to pity hi? prefent mifery. Sure there can be nothing fo truly humiliating as receiving obligations from thofe we have wronged.
I SINCERELY wish that your epistolary correspondence with Sir James Thornton may an-fwer all your expedtation.—But, remember, Fanny, that flattery costs men nothing; and that women are apt to over-rate it, and frequently bestow their love and esteem in exchange for what has no intrinflc worth. I grant that in the general commerce of the world, the perSon whoSe politeneSs and attention are most marked to us, deservedly obtains a preference in our regard ; vanity is in Some degree inherent to all human kind, and the being rated above our fellows, is a Species of flattery, which the most delicate creature in the world is never offended at. But in a particular intercourse between man and woman, we should take great care, that our own Self-love does not impofe upon us, and magnify the common forms or expreflions of politeneSs into a particular addrefs.—Do not be angry at this hint, Fanny, as it is only meant to Save your vanity, for I hope your heart is not yet
concerned, from the mortification of a disappointment.
, Tell my dear lady Woodville, that I most impatiently long for a line from her, and that I mutually congratulate her lord, and her on their recovery.I am, dear Fanny, your’s Sincerely.
F. Straffon.
L E T-
128 THE DELICATE DISTRESS

LETTER LXXXVI.
#
Lady WooDviLLE to Lady Straffon.
WHERE, Fanny,, I shall find words
to exprefs my gratitude to the Almighty^ for the blessings I have received from hftn i the fmallest of which is my own recovery from the grave ! Words are inadequate to what I feel, but he can read my heart! Life is a common blessing giverrto all ; and lure there was a time, liow long past, when I would most willingly have yielded mine, into his hands that gave it, —but happinefs,. my ssster 1 Such blifs as mine is but the lot of few. O how shall I deferve itl teach me, Fanny ; teach me every honest art to keep thb treafure I have fo lately found—lord Woodville’s heart.
How little, alas! are we capable of judging for ourfelves ? my lord’s late illnefs, which I considered as the feverest inssi6lion of Providence, has been the blessed means of all my prefent and I hope future happinefs ! his generous nature, struck with the fufferings I endured, by one rich gift has overpaid them all—but Lmust, dare not enter into the charming detail of my felicity— my Spirits will not bear it, but you shall know it all. For the prefent let it Suffice to tell you I have not now a wish ungratissed, but that of being able to render rviyfelf worthy of the happinefs I enjoy.
My lord, lady Harriet, who is a mirror of ressgnation, and Fanny Weston, all join with me in ssncere congratulations to you and Sir John, on Emily’s recovery. How truly thank-
%. fui
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 129
ful ought I to be for the dear child’s prefervation ! for indeed I could not have been happy had you been otherwife.
Adieu, my Fanny, I am as ever,
Your’s,
E. WoODVILLE.
LETTER LXXXVI.
Mifs Weston, to Lady Straffon.
[Inclofed in the foregoing.]
I HOPE your ladyship will believe me perfectly Sincere, when I tell you t^t I rejoice at lady Woodville’s being able to releafe me from the office of her Secretary by anfwering for her Self. For though I am highly fenfible of the great honour which your ladyship confers on fuch a mad-cap as me, by condefeending to write to me, I must beg leave to obferve que la rofe a fa picque—for indeed your ladyship’s kind and friendly admonitions upon the fubjeft of Sir James Thornton’s politenefs, and. my vanity are rather humiliating. But in order to make your mind, as well as my own eafy upon this fubjeCt, I will venture to assure you that I shall require stronger proofs of Sir James Thornton’s regard than a little stimfy flattery, before I Suffer my felf-love to perfuade me that the baronet is enamoured of your ladyship’s most humble Servant,
F.Weston.
P. S. Pray, my dear lady Straffon, do not fancy I am in a huff, for I never was in greater harmony of Spirits than at prefent; having this
moment
130 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
moment received a letter from Sir James Thornton, in anfwer to an invitation which lord and lady Woodville commissioned me to make, and which he will accept in a few days. It is lucky that flattery cosss men nothing, for the poor dear baronet would certainly be a bankrupt if he were to purchafe all that he bestows upon
Your ever affectionate
F. W.

w Ttr wr •or
LETTER LXXXVII.
Lady St raff on to Lady Woodvillb*.
Like the rich gales from the Arabian coast my Emily’s last letter came fraught with health and joy.—^What an high cordial must it have been to a fond Sister’s heart, who long has mourned, without affeCting to perceive thofe Secret Sorrows which she could not heal, to hear that they at length are vanished ?
I KNOW not which of us is at prefent happiest ; but were the charming contest to be determined by the merit of the competitors,, the precious palm would be adjudged to you. Long may my Emily enjoy the triumph she fo well deferves!
I WILL not, cannot wait for a detail of your fe iCity ; I will behold and share it.—It is possible to be circumstantial under thefeverest affliClion ; but happinefs is by much too volatile for narrative—like a fine and fubtle ellence, it evaporates through the aClivity of its own Spirit ; we cannot paint the expressive looks which are lighted up by a glad heart; the eye alone can catch the brilliant beam, which brightens by reflection.—
Therefore
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 131
Therefore expert to meet mine in lefs than four and twenty hours after you receive this. Sir John and my girl will accompany me.
I HAVE had a very pleassng letter from lady Somerville,—Lodovico, Laura, and she arrived I'afely at Genoa ; her friends received them all with open heart and arms.—The young people have been intirely taken up with feasts, balls, and mafquerades. To avoid giving offence by refuSing to partake in thefe amufements, lady Somerville has retired to the very houfe which (he quitted upon her marriage, which is twenty leagues from Genoa.—She there continues to indulge that melancholy which time has been only able to foften, not fubdue—amiable relifit !
Tell Fanny Weston that the prefent harmony of my Spirits prevents my anfwering her letter as I ought ; but she must not flatter her-felf that I do not mean to take any farther notice of it; for the moment I become acquainted with Sir James Thornton, I will inssst upon his devistng a proper punishment for her pertnefs, and he shall be at once the judge and the execur tioner.
. Adieu, my dear Emily : I quit you pleafure, at this moment, to hasten to that of our meeting.
with
LETTER LXXXVIII.
Lord WooDViLLE to Lord Seymour.
The apprehenffons which my dear Seymour expresses on account of my Silence have
been but too well founded----1 have been upon
the verge of “ that undifcovered country from
whofe
132 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
whole bourn no traveller returns” But how do I now rejoice at not having pasted the irremediable bounds in a state of infenstbility to the virtues of my now truly dear, and 1 hope happy wife I fhe is an angel, Seymour I
I KNOW what true delight thefe words will give you; they are fincere, my friend—they flow from my full heart. Blinded as I have been to her perfedlions, you will furely pardon the transports of a man, who waking from a dream of
mifery, finds himfelf in ElySium---fuch is my
prefent state ; what was my former one, you, and you only, know too well.
You are, doubtlefs impatient to hear what has wrought this happy change; with pleafure will I dwell on every circumstance, that must endear my Emily to my heart, and render her still more amiable in my friend’s eyes.
It is now above two months fince I received your first account of Ransford’s duel, and the marchionefs’s distrefs. No words can paint the strong emotions of my mind—a thoufand various Schemes to fuccour her, rushed instantly through my disturbed imagination. My wife was prefent while I vead your letter, and Saw the agitation of my mind. Her delicacy prompted her to retire ; I prevented her, and told her, I know not how of Barnard’s death, and begged her to inform lady Harriet of it in the tenderest manner—needlefs caution.
I THEN told her I would go and acquaint Sir Harry Ransford with the affair ; and ordered my horfes to be got ready immediately.
I SET out direfUy on that purpofe----but be-
fore 1 had rode a quarter of a mile, a fudden im-pulfe Seized me, a certain foreign and irreSillable force, that impelled me to fly to the instant relief of the marchionefs.
The
r
/
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 133
The bafenefs and naadnefs of fuch a refolve, fprang forward to my view at the fame moment, but the palTions triumphed, a$ they always must do, at the first onfet over the feebler reafon.
I CONSIDERED, that Ransford might probably call me to account for interfering in his affairs; and felt a gloomy Satisfaction in thinking that-the lofs.of life might be deemed an atonement, for the cruelty of my condu8: towards Emily.
I THEN traverfed the road in order to return home through my park., and got into my clofet unperceived by any of my family.
I THERE took out the marchionefs's picture and hung it round my neck, as a kind of talif-man, against that remorfe which I must certainly feel, for abandoning my wife. I then fat down and wrote a letter to my Emily; and though at that time under the infiuence of the strongest delirium, I am pleafed and proud to own, that my tears flowed faster than my ink, while I reflected on the pain which she must Suffer when fhe read thofe lines.—I refolved to travel night and day, and not put my letter in the post-office till I came to Canterbury.
As I was stepping out of my library, which you know looks into the parterre, I faw my little boy at play, clofe by the window with his maid. The fight of my fon, startled me.————
The order of nature feemed reverfed.
The
child admonishing the parent. I felt all this, but felt myfelf at the fame time like one in a dream labouring under an imprefllon of the imagination, without reafon to correCl, or freewill to controul it. I could not pafs into the park without being Seen by them ;—-the private manner of my return would have alarmed the family. I was ashamed to be detected by my
Servant,
134 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
Servant, and Spent above an hour, wMch appeared a Summer’s day to me, in a state of the most restlefs impatience. I have Since thought, that this little accident Seemed as if kindly deiigned
by Providence to give me time for reflexion. But alas I the delay quickened the vehemence of my purpoSe to purSue my Scheme.
The moment I was at liberty, I flew back to the park, bid my Servants follow me, and Setoff with all the Speed my horfe could make.—But I had not got three miles from my demeSne, when by Some fortunate accident my horSe made a falSe step, which he was incapable of recovering, and threw me fenSelefs to the ground.
How long I continued there, or what pasted, during an interval of one and-twenty days, has left no trace upon my memory ; at the end of that period I awaked, as frorn unquiet rest.—— Gracious heaven I how shall I ever be able to xprefs my astonishment at beholding lady Woodville Seated by my bed-Side, the statue of despair ; pale, w'an, and faded was her youthful cheek, her eyes were raifed to heaven, as if in fervent though in hopeleSs prayer ! O, Seymour! what a train of horrid images broke in at once upon rhy burning brain; my unfettled reaSon fluttered on the v^ing, and Seemed as if it would depart again for ever.
The striking objedl that appeared before me, impreffed my fenSes with a kind of awe; yet I had power to Speak to her! she could not an-fwer—A flood of tears, but they were tears of joy. Suppressed the power of Speech. She was carried out of the room by doftor Fenton’s orders, and I then feigned a Slumber, in hopes that recolledfion would afford Some clue to lead me through the labyrinth of my Situation.
The
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 15S
The first circumstance that prefented itfelf to my memory, was, my having quitted Woodfort with a defign of abandoning that amiable creature, whom I now beheld reduced to the state I have already defcribed, by her tendernefs for methe next thing that occurred to me, was my having had the marchionefs’s pifture round my neck, which I now fearched for in vain.—I instantly ordered every perfon to leave the room except Williams, and demanded from him an account of my prefent fituation, and what was become of the pi6lure which I had placed next my heart ? I could have no doubt of his faith or Sincerity—he has lived with ms ever Since I was a child, and loved me as if I had been his.
He fell upon his knees by my bedfide, and begged me not to hurry or exhaust my Spirits, which he was fure must be extremely weak, as this was the first moment the fever had left me, for one-and-twenty days; during which time he told me lady Woodville had never quitted my apartment for a fingle hour, nor cloSed her lovely eyes.
That on the night I was brought home, the furgeon had me stripped, in order to know if I had received any wound or bruife in my body ; that he had taken off the picture, and given it to my wife, fuppofing it to be hers ; and at that time she took no notice of it; but that he had often fince Seen her gaze upon it most intently, and figh as if her heart would break.
He Said that Thomas had alfo brought her the papers which were found in my pockets; and she gave them all to him, to lock up; but that Mrs. Winter, her woman, who was prefent, told her ladyship there was a letter Sealed and di-redbed for her, which she took, and left the room.
VoL. II.	O	That
136 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
That she returned in a Sew minutes as pale as death, but never difcloSed the contents; though Mrs. Winter took as much pains as she dared to find them out, as she could not conceive what I could have to fay to lady Woodville, when I had but juft left her.
He told me, .Seymour, that Emily has knelt by my bed-fide for hours in fpeechlefs agony ; has.kiffed my feverish lips, and bathed my burning hands with her moft precious tears; and yet she knew I had inhumanly determined to forfake her I to leave Such worth as hers a prey to pining grief and difcontent! For whom ? You have too justly named her the most unworthy of her fex.
You may foppoSe that duringWilliams’s recital, my reafon tottered in its feeble feat; but I bad still enough left to roufe my stumbering vir-, and to refolve that if I should recover, my future life should be devoted to love, to gratitude, to Emily. This bear me witnefs, heaven! I had determined.before I knew, or even thought it poshble I ever should defpife the marchio-nefs.
As foon as I heard all that WHlHams had to fay, I begged to fee my wife. Dodlor Fenton abfolutely refufed my request. I acquiefced upon his telling me she had lain down to rest.
The next day I repeated my intreaties without fuccefs.—On the third I became fo impatient,^ that Williams thought it moft prudent to let me know the fad truth, which every one elfe concealed from me, which was, that lady Wccdville lay dangerousty ill of the fever she had caught from me.
I v/AS no longer fenfible of my own weak
state.”--The tumult of my passions gave me
a momentary strength.----1 rushed out of bed
upon
41
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 137
upon the injlant; never, Seymour, did I experience fuch another I All lady Woodville’s merits, which I had before but coldly admired, appeared to me now in the warmest colours, and rofe even to perfection. But when contrasted with my ingratitude towards her, they overcame me. —I funk into my fervant’s arms, and shed a flood of tears.
In Spite of all oppofition I would be carried into my wife’s apartment.—I had refolved to implore her pity and forgivenefs for my past follies, and to assure her of my future conduCt, which I could no longer entertain a doubt of ; as the Sincere and tender affeCtion I then felt for her, would, I hoped, enSure her happineSs, and that I should date mine from her recovery.
Think of my sstuation, Seymour, when I
approached her bedSide----she was delirious! yet
the dear angel knew me though she raved, and in Such terms, that her words struck daggers to my heart.—My strength forSook me; I fainted, and was carried back to my own chamber, the unhappiest wretch that breathed upon the earth.
In pity to you, I will draw a veil over the wild ravings of my tortured mind, and make you happy by telling you that I am truly fo, by knowing that my dearest Emily is out of danger.
This letter has been the work of two day?;
to-morrow I am to fee my wife.-----1 count the
moments, Seymour, and think them hours till then!	.
I HAVE heard that perfons who have been once mad, never recover the perfeCl ufe of their reafon ; or at least are liable to Some returns of infanity. This tliought shocks me! for if I could fuppofe it pofuole 1 should ever again link into that shameful, that now detested delirium, which
O z	fo
1^8 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
So long ipoffeOed me, I would not wilh to live another hour-—but it is impossible.—My Emily’s virtues have Subdued my heart,, and time instead of lessfening, must increafe their power.
It is high time that I should condole with you, -on the Sufferings you have endured from your generous friendship towards the marchionest.. The meannefs of her behaviour to you, makes me rejoice in the hope of her not being Ransford’s
wife.---Yet contemptible as her conduU has
made her appear even in my once partial eyes, she must not know distrefs, I mean with regard to her circumstances: and while Sir Harry Rans-Sord lives, it will not he in his Son’s power to Support her in the rank which she has held for Some years past.—Let rae therefore intreat you to inform me of the event of her law-fuit with
the marquis of St. Aumont.
Be not alarmed at this request, Seymour. It is not passion, but compassion, that makes me wish to Serve her; for I here Solemnly declare, that if I were not certain of having intirely conquered the phrenfy, which had So long poffeffed my enfeebled reafon, I have still virtue enough left to restrain myfelf from ever mentioning her name. But the real lustre mv Emily’s virtues, have triumphed over the falfe glare of Ifabqlla’s charms, that fatal ignis fatuus, which fo long dazzled and missed my henighted fenfes.
I SINCERELY rejoice in your fair vestal’s recovery ;—-may she live to make you happy, as your uncopimonSituation wdll admit!
I AM truly concerned for Rapsford, and earnestly wish to know what courSe he has purfued. —-I think with you, that he is now in Switzerland ; and fuppoSe he has written to you before
this time. What is become of lady Ransferd ?
But
THE DELieATE DISTRESS. 139
But r forget that you were prevented from feeing her, before you left Paris.
Adieu, my friend;—let me onee more congratulate yeu upon my Emily’s recavery, and my own restoration, to more than life !
I* am,,- most truly
Your’s.
WOODVILLE.
LETTER LXXXIX,
LorJ WoodviLLE to Lord Seymour.
TH E wistied-for, the charming interview is over ! but where, Seymour, fhall I find words to exprefs the delicacy of my Emily’s con-duQ; ? when I would have fallen at her feet, and implored her to forgive my having made her rai-fferable, she caught me in her arms, with that modest fenfibility, which accompanies her every adlion, and faid that all the mifery she had ever fuffered, arofe from confidering herfelf as the fatal, though innocent caufe of my unhappi-nefs.
THJtiT she should ever be truly grateful for the pains I had taken to prevent her being wretched, by endeavouring to conceal a paffion which she was fare it w'as as impoffible for me to conquer, as it had been to difguife.
That she had long known of my attachment to the marchionefs, and that her utmost wish for many months past, was to be confidered as my first friend ; that she should never make an improper ufe of my confidence, but that her utmost tsndernefs should be exerted to footh the forrows.
O

which
140 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
which (he could not heal.
A flood of tears
oppofed her farther utterance.
I TOOK that opportunity .of assuring her, that it was in her power, and hers alone, to render me the happiest of men.
She wiped away her tears, and gazed on me, with looks of joy and doubt. Let not your kind-nefs, faid fhe, tempt you to deceive me. I feel too well, the impoITibily of conquering a fond, a real passion! but I will strive, my lord.
I CAUGHT her trembling hand, and pressTed it to my lips. O no I I cried, my Emily I my love I indulge your virtuous fondnefs, and deeply as my heart appears to be indebted to you, like a poor bankrupt, it shall give its all, though it can never pay you what it owes—She quickly exclaimed, Ol am overpaid in this blelTed moment, for years of mifery I your heart I but can you give it ? is it yours, my lord ?—No, JEmily ! unworthy as it is, it is already yours, and shall be ever So.
Tears and embraces clofed this charming Scene ; and now with truth, my Seymour, can I boast I never knew w nat heart-felt rapture was before that hour.
The conferring happinefs, on any creatjure, is certainly the highest enjoyment, of any human mind; but the paying it to an amiable,and deferv--ng objedi, must heighten the Sentiment, even to
ranfport.
Sir James Thornton has been obliged to return to England, on account of a law-Suit. He purpoSed keeping himSelf concealed, but upon hearing of mine, or rather my Emily’s illnefs, he posted down from London, to Sir William Lawfon’s, and remained there till she was pronounced out of danger. Since that time he had frequent accounts of our recovery, from Fanny
Weston,
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 141
Weston, with whom he corresponds in a very gallant stile.
I KNOW fie likes the young baronet, and as I flatter my Self he is cured of his hopelefs paf-Sion for lady Woodville, or at least, am well affured that he will never prefume to purfue it,
I have prevailed upon my wife, to conSent to his making us a viSit; but neither his being at Woodfort, nor any thing elfe, fhall prevent our g^ing to Bristol in a few days; for though my lovely invalid is furprizingly recovered from her late illnefs, the shock which her constitution has received, has rendered it almost as delicate, as her charming mind. I will watch over them both, and hope to restore them to their natural state, which is almost perfedlion.
I HAVE shewn Emily all your letters, and told her the story of my connection with tlie marchionefs, without concealing a Single circumstance which pasted, either at Paris or York. During my narrative, ‘‘I often did beguile her of her tears,” they flowed Sincerely, when I informed her of the struggles, of my then tortured mind.
I WELL, knew that the confeflion of my past weaknefs, must give her pain ; but I was certain she would receive it as the strongest mark of my prefcnt Sincerity. The tendernefs and delicacy of her exprestions, upon this trying fubjeCt, have, if poffible, raifed her in my esteem, by convincing me that her understandingis as excellent, as her heart; and that her mind and perlon constitute a treafure almost too great for the most worthy man. SenSible as I am of my own demerits, can I ever be fufficiently grately for fuch ablesting? but I will endeavour to deferve it, Seymour, by devoting every hour of my future life to her happinefs.
O4	Since
for
142 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
Since the recovery of my reafon, I have received inssRite pleafure from playing with my little boy. How could I be infenlible to the natural and innocent endearments of fuch a lovely creature ? but I find happinefs and pleafure crouding in upon me, through a ihoufand avenues, that my delirium had rendered impervious to their foft attacks ; and I begin to think that I have been new-formed^ as well as reformed. fince my redemption.
Lady Woodville, who is fincerely grateful your kind attachment to her, entreats you will at your return to Paris, endeavour to find out Sir James Miller, and purchafe for him either a commiflion, employment, or annuity, which may be fufficient for his Support, as the unhappy man has abfolutely refilled to accept lady Mount Willis’s bounty, from the moment he discovered that it was to her he owed it. There is Something like greatnefs of mind in this circumstance, which renders him an interesting objeft. What mixtures are we compoijiided of I You may guefs your pay-mistrefs/wro^.
I IMPATIENTLY long fpr the pleafure of hearing from you, and am with the warmest af-fedion of friendihip.
Ever yours,
WCCDVILLE.
letter xc.
Z-cr^ Seymour to Lord Woodville.
4
My dear Woodville,
HI S letter will probably reach England but a few days before the writer of it ; but I
would
THL DELICATE DISTRESS. 143
would not for a moment delay pouring forth my acknowledgements, for the Sincere pleafure I have received from your two last letters; and my warmest congratulations oh the charming fubje6l of them.
Yiis, thank heaven, my friend is restored to life, to reafon, and to happinefs 1 can Seymour Cgh while he repeats that found ? O Woodville ! my cup has been feverely dastied with forrow, nor has there ever yet one joy stnmixed e’er reached my heart. Yet let me not complain ; my own imprudence formed the fatal v/eb, that has enfnared my peace ; the unhappy duel that I fought with captain Beaumont Sealed its ruin I
But why should I diftrefs you by tracing my misfortunes to their Source j it is too much for you to know, that I am wrotched^—no matter for what caufe;
The length oS time that has elapfed fince my last letter to you, has been fertile of fad events ; which I shall relate to you in as fuccinft a manner as I can.
When I had been about a week at Bellevue the good old general was attacked with a diforder in his stomach, which had most alarming Symptoms. He was. fenSible of his Situation, but Seemed to wish to- conceal it from his children, who vied with each other in their tender-nefs and astli6lion for him. It is impossible to do justice to their, merits,, or; deScribe the-affe£ting^ Scene.
At the end of-twelve days-he expired, and left the most difconfolate family I ever, beheld t hut Charlotte^s grief furpaffed even credibility. Neither her brother, fister, nor> I, could prevail upon her to leave the chamber where the body lay, till the moment it was to be interred. She faffed the nights and days, in prayers and tears^
05
144 the DELICATE DISTRESS.
Judge what I fuffered from my apprehenSions for her.
As foon as the funeral was over, she requested that we would indulge her with the liberty of pasting a few days without interruption in her chamber. We bad no right to treistafs on her grief ; but yet our fears for her too delicate constitution, made us reludtantly comply with her destre.
O N the fourth evening of her retirement she Sent for madarne de Carignan, who flew to obey her fummons, but returning in a few minutes to captain Beaumont and me, with an air of dif-tradtion, cried out, our miferies are but begun, O hasten quickly, or her angelic fpirit will be fled ! And can I paint the fad, the folemn fcene ! no, Woodville, no ! it will live for ever, graved upon my heart—but words would wrong my feelings.
Charlotte ! my once beloved, my now adored and fainted maid I Sighed out her foul to heaven.
Grief will not kill us, Woodville, or I should not furvivetotell her death-1 can no more.
Adieu, my friend.
Seymour.
LETTER XCI.
Lord Seymour to Lord Woodville.
My dear Wood vIlle, T was impoflible for me another word to my last
to have added
1 ' ' ‘
letter. I have
but a very few more to fay with regard to the
Beaumont family, and then the dear, the fatal
name
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 145
name Ihall no more past my lips, btit remain treafured up in my fad heart, a precious hoard for everlasting grief to brood upon.
I TOLD you in fome of my former letter’sy that captain Beaumont vistted me every day, during my confinement in the Chatelet. He there beheld and became enamoured of the fair Maria D’Angueville. When he had been about ten days at Bellevste, he acquainted me with his palSion, and intreated me to fpeak toihis father upon the fubjedt. Accident prevented my having an opportunity of obeying him, till the general^ illnest rendered’it improper—and the real affliction which he has fince felt. Seemed to have quenched the new enkindled flame.
But a few days after our return to Paris, he again re-affumed the fubjedt, and begged me to apply to his fair eoufin and his uncle, for leave to pay his addreffes to he . I told him truly that the Situation of my mind rendered me totally unfit to be the ambalTador of love or joy; but that I was determined before I should leave Chatelet,. to return thanks for the humane and generous treatment I had met with from the governor and his family, and to intreat Maria’s acceptance of the legacy general had bequeathed me Hvres.
which her uncle the of twenty thoufand^
^ I THOUGHT that captain Beaumont appeared
difpleafed at my intention; as he coolly replied,
that he did not want a fortune with his wife, and thought I had better -bestow the legacy 1 did not ehufe to accept, upon fomeyif the younger children of the family, who might possibly stand in need of my bounty. I told him that Maria’s likenefs to his beloved Sister, had made her the
principal-object oS my prefent attention, and
146 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
that I would put it in her power to difpofe of the Sum in question, as Ihe thought proper.
Soon after this converfation the captain withdrew, and I remained for feveral days fu entirely abforbed in my grief, that I refledted not upon the unkindnefsof my friend’s condudl, who neither canae nor Sent to me for near a fortnight.
At length he entered my chamber one morning without being announced, and found me gazing fo intently upon Charlotte’s pidture, that 1 faw him not till he exclaimed with a voice of diftradtion, What unmerited afflidtion and diflrefs has the unhappy Seymour brought on all the Beaumont race ?
Though the Severity of this reproach might have rouzed my refentment at another time, I was fo much foftened by the objedt then before me, my angel Charlotte’s face ! that bursting into tears, I anfwered—O Beaumont! cannot grief like this atone for my involuntary crimes ? and does my friend upbraid my mifery ?
At ihefe words he rufhed into my arms and cried, forgive nre, Seymour. Then started wildly from me and went on—but wherefore flow thefe tears upon a fenfelefs objedf, loSt and forgotten in the grave, when there is now a fairer and a kinder maid ready to heal your forrows.
I COULD not avoid expreiSing my astonisti-ment at this unintelligible difeourfe, and it was a long time before he explained himfelf, by telling me that the lovely and innocent D’angueville had conceived a paflion for me during the time I remained a prifoner in'the Chatelet ; and that upon being preffed by her father and mother to receive her'coussn’s hand, she hast declared that she would rather pafs her days in a cloister than with any other man but lord Seymour. I was .extremely affestted with this intelligence, as it
concerned
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 147
concerned my friend, the unhapjTy girl, and my own honour.
I ASSURED captain Beaumont, that I never had fpoken to her upon the fubje£k of love, or made the least attempt to gain her affections ; and that I was ready to do every thing in my power to assist in conquering Maria’s weak partiality to me, that might not injure her delicacy or my own character.
The franknefs and ssncerity of my manner, foon got the better of his ill-grounded fufpicions ; he alked my pardon a thoufand times, for having entertained a doubt of my affeCtion to his dear dead Sister; but hoped, as I had been myfelf a lover, I would forgive his raShnefs.
It was at last agreed upon between us, that I should write to Maria diredlly, and acquaint her with the real state of my heart, which must be for ever incapable of love for any earthly objeCl; that I should not fee her before I left Paris; and at my felting out, should take an everlasting leave of her by letter. That neither her father, nor any other perfon should prefs her to marry, till time and reafon might enable her to triumph ever a passion which oppoSition would certainly increafe. That captain Beaumont would continue his assiduities, without mentioning his love.
■—That she should not know of the prefent I <k-ssgned her, till a year was elapfed ; but if at that time, she refufed to marry captain Beaumont, I should be at liberty to put her in possession of the twenty thoufand livres, and that she should be allowed to difpofe of them as she pleafed.
This affair thus fettled, my friend took his leave with a thoufand acknowledgments for what he called a facrifice, and I fat down to fulfil my promise of writing to Maria—-when Wilfon announced
148 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
nounced a very iinexpefled vifitor; it was ma-dame de St. Far, the marchionefs’s mother, whom I had never feen or heard of Since the time that you first became acquainted whth her daughter.
She was then, you may recolle£l, an agreeable figure, rather comely than handforne, and plumper than the generality of her country-women. She is new emaciated to a fkeleton, and I could not help feeling fome apprehenfions, that she would expire before she left my apartment,, as she was frequently much agitated during the, time she staid.
She told me, that her daughter had Suffered her to want even the common neceffaries of life, and had absolutely refufed to fee her from the moment she became a widow. Though I detest the marchionefs, I could not avoid obferving to ma-dame deSt. Far, that 1 imagined the-first part of her accufatioij, must be unjust, as she had formerly appeared in the world, as a woman of fortune; and therefore must certainly be able to Support her Self independent of her daughter’s bounty.
She told me I was much deceived, and as she had no longer any terms to keep with the ungrateful marchionefs, she would reveaS her real fituation.—She then informed me, that she had lived for Several years with a monfieur de Ver-ville at Dijon, by whom she had Ifabella ; that at length by the perfuafion of his friends, mon-Sieur de Verville determined to marry, and parted, with her and her daughter; but allowed them a, decent Support, and took every proper care of his child’s education.
That as she grew up extremely handfome, madame de St. Far determined to bring her to Paris, in hopes of making her fortune; and for
that
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 149
that purpofe affumed the name Ihe now ufed, and endeavoured to appear like a perfon of dif* tindlion. That the marchionefs was perfe6lly acquainted with their circumstances, and readily entered into the fcheme; but in order to carry it on, stie was obliged to run constderably in debt, though they were not above Six months in Paris, before the marchionefs had the good fortune to charm both you and the marquis de St. Aumont.
She added, that the only reafon her daughter ever gave for preferring the marquis to you, was the probability of becoming her own mistrefs by his death, for that (he knew her own difpoSition So perfeftly, that fhe was certain she could not confine her affedlions to any one perfon long.
O Woodville ! what an happy efcape have you had from this vile woman ! but to make an end of this tedious tale. She told me, that monfieur de Verville died without a will, foon after the marchionefs’s marriage ; and that she was by that means deprived even of the fmall income which he had allowed her. She implored me' to affist her in getting into fome convent where she might pafs the remainder of her days without hearing of her undutiful and unnatural daughter. Shave deSu ed her to fix upon a proper place for her re-* tirement, and I will readily pay the fum necef-faryto her admistion. I prefented her with my purfe, and defired to hear from her as foon as
postible.
This affair, and lady Woodville’s commands to find out Sir James Miller'will detain me a few days longer in Paris. How earnestly do d long to quit it! yet are not all places alike to the unhappy ? no, there is one afylum, and but one,
for wretchednefs like mine——the peaceful
\
grave
Forgive
ISO THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
Forgive me, Woodville, for talking in thi melancholy strain, to my now happy friend may you be long fo is the warmest wisti of
Seymour.
P. S. I know not whether I told you that I have fought lady Ransford in vain ever stnce my return to Paris. She quitted her hotel in a few days after Barnard*s death, and has left no trace behind her.
T#riirT*rTtr 'arwww'qr Tjrww'or w
LETTER XCIL
Lord Woodville to Lord Seymovr-
My dear Seymour,
Your remark, that neither happinefs nor pleafure come to us unmixed, is but too aptly verified in me ; for the real and tender, concern which your lituation gives me, is a strong alloy to that tranquil happinefs 1 fhould at prcfent enjoy, if the friend of my heart were not wretched.—There is fomething fo uncommonly distrefsful in your circumstances, that to attempt to lessen your affliftion would be an in-fuk to humanity ;—for who that has a heart to feel another’s lofs, would wisti to stop the graceful tears that flow ** where reafon, and where ** virtue o’er the tomb, are fellow mourners.”
I AM Sorry for captain Beaumont’s disappointment i» love, but I have infinitely more pity for'
the
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 151
the young and innocent Maria. You and I both know how difficult it is to struggle with the first fond impreffions of the heart ; and women in general, from a principle of delicacy are much more inclined than men, to cherish their first pastion, even when hope is fled.
I HAVE a melancholy proof of this truth too near me—poor lady Harriet Hanbury I She still laments the ; unworthy Barnard, and I fear will foon follow him to an untimely grave,—while Sir James Thornton feems to have transferred the passion he felt for lady Woodville to Mifs Weston, who kindly receives his vows, and will, I hope, foon crown his wishes.
I CANNOT help being extremely shocked at the infamous conduct of the marchionefs towards her mother.—Why need we become volunteers in vice ? Our passions but too strongly and frequently impel us to break the bounds prefcribed by virtue ; but then thofe passions may, I humbly hope, in fome degree alleviate our tranfgressions; but her unnatural behaviour to tlie unhappy woj man who gave her birth, admits of no extenuation. This could not have proceeded from any passion, and must therefore be a double vice.
I AM however much better pleafed to owe my cure to Emily's virtues than to Ifabella’s vices; as the knowledge of the former are a perpetual fourceof happinefs to me, while the difcovery of the latter must for ever refledl on my own weaknefs, in being fo grofsly deceived.
Madame de St. Far’s establishment in the convent, must nof be at your expence. My Emily ! my lovely generous girl I infists on paying her penfion. She must not be refufed whatever she defires, by Woodvilst, or his friend.
I MO ST
2 •
152 THE DELICATE DISTRES^S.
I MOST impatiently long, for your return to England; I wish you would meet us at Bristol, where we purpofe going in a few days: for though my Emily is fo much recovered, that neither her phystcian nor herfelf think she has occaston to drink the waters, I will not be fatis-fied, unlefs she does; as I flatter myfelf they may ashst in confirming that health, which her prefent happinefs feeras to have perfe6lly restored.
Sir John, lady Straffon and their daughter, are now at Woodfort; they and my Sister Law-Son, are to accompany us to the Hot-wells. Lady Mount Willis has lain in at her hoiife in Somersetshire—we are to pay her a vifit enpajfant—she has got a Son, and is as happy as she is amiable. We are all anxious to know what is become of Ransford, of his step-mother and Sir James Miller : but I am much more fo to embrace my ever valued friend, and if I cannot heal, to Sooth his Sorrows—may that at least be in the power of Seymour’s most affectionate
WcODVILLE,
oooo
eco*
LETTER XCII.
Seymour to Woodville.
Yes, Woodville, I will take your counfel,
and hasten to lay hold on the poffeffion of the only good that is now left me, your generous friendship I I will meet you at the hot-wells in a short time ; but I will not live in the Same houfe with you, nor return from thence to Woodfort. I know the value of your regards too well, to Suffer it to be productive of miSery to you, or your deservedly happy wife.—No ! Seymour’s
Sorrows-
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 153
Sorrows shall not cast a shade on the bright Sunshine of your future days I nor Subjeft you to the unavailing pain of endeavouring to erafe the dark engrained tints of melancholy, which must form the colour of my life to come. Yet I will frequently behold my friend, and with stncere delight, contemplate his felicity.
I HAVE at last had a letter from Ransford.
•v
Sure there is faScination in the marchionefs’s
S'
charms I He rave§ ind is distra6ted at her having disowned him a&^ a hushand> which she has formally done by her Solicitor, in order to recover the remainder of thofe effedls which were con-
t
fiScated on account of his duel with captain Barnard. She carried her point; they were restored to the marchioneSs de St. Aumont, but her creditors have Seized on every thi^g she left. Her hushand’s nephew has carried his Suit against her, but has allowed her an annuity of four thou Sand livres, while she remains unmarried, in ref-pe6t to his uncle’s memory.—I think this income is quite Sufficient for her wants, and infinitely beyond her merits. I therefore intreat you to referve your generofity for Some more worthy objedl.
The now happy St. Far is fettled in a convent at Dijon ; where she propofes leading an exemplary life. Lady Woodville’s exp'ence, for she must be obeyed, will not amount to more than forty pounds a year.
About ten days ago, a monk came to my apartments, and deSired to Speak with me. He told me there was a lady in the Carmelites convent, -who begged to See me upon an affair of the utmost importance to one of my friends, I enquired very particularly who the lady was : he Said he knew nothing more of her than that she was an Englishwoman, and, was called JefferSon.
He
154 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
He added, that at her request he had been often’ to feek for me, whilo I was abfent from Paris;, that he had given up all hopes of meeting me but rejoiced at his being more fortunate than he expeSIed, and intreated me to obey the lady's Summons.
This affair would have been matter of Speculation to me, if my mind had been fufficientiy at east, to think about itbut without refledling at all upon the fubjedt, S entered the Carmelite’s convent at ten o’clock the next morning, and enquired for Mrs. Jefferfon.—I did not wait long in the parlour, when a lady dressed in deep mour--ning approached the grate.—I fixed my eyes intently upon her, and knew her to be lady Rans-
ford.---—A crimfon glow over Spread her cheek
when stie Saluted rae,. and at that moment she appeared a most interesting objedl.
To fave her the trouble of apologizing for fending for me, I told her how much I had been disappointed at not being able to difcover her retreat, at my return to Paris, and begged to know if I could be any way Serviceable to her; and, at the Same time, intreated she would inform me,, of every thing she knew, in relation to the unhappy affair, between captain Barnard and my friend.
Her tears flowed fast and filent, while I Spoke. When she perceived that I'waited for her re'* ply, she took out her pocket book, and presenting it to me. Said, your lordship will there find two letters, which will render any conversation
with me upon this painful fubjeft, needlefs.--
I commit them to your care, in order that every poffible uSe may be made of them, for Mr. Rans-ford’s advantage. I bear no enmity to his father, nor do I wifli to make him an exile from that
country to which I never more will return.
I ASKE©-
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 155
I ASKED her with as much delicacy as I poS-Tibly could, what fcheme of life she intended to ?purfue, and again repeated the offer of my Service to her. She thanked me, and faid that •captain Barnard’s death had made her think dif--ferently, from what she had ever done before; •that she was too confcious of the enormity of her condudl, to think'of returning into the world; 'that she therefore determined to pafs her days in a convent, but would always have it in her powder to quit it, as she did not mean to make any vows.
I REALLY admired the rationality of her ‘Sentiments, and of courfe-approved them ; but was ignorant by what means she could be Supported, even in a convent; till she assured me, that -at her marriage to Sir Harry Ransford, he had •Signed an article allowing her in caSe of Separation, a power of three thouSand pounds, or an annuity of a hundred and fifty pounds a year, during "his life; and a jointure of four hundred
a year at his death. She faid the annuity would be Sufficient for her maintenance; that she deSired no favour from a perSon she was Suppofed to have injured, though the fatal con-nedlion, between Sir Harry and her, had been the Source of all her miferies.
She begged me to forward Barnard’s letter to Ransford, and to fend copies of it to the captain’s friends in England, in order to pave the way for Ransford’s return. I promised to obey her, and took my leave ; as I now must of you,
in order to hasten my Setting out.-You will
probably hear from me once more, before you See your unhappy, but
Truly affedlionate,
Seymour.
LET-
,56 THE DELICATE DISTRESS.
LETTER XCIV,
Lord Seymour to Lori/Woodville.
Amiens.
I HAVE at length taken an everlasting leave of Paris, and have got fo far on my way to my native land, but without being fenstble of that charming enthustafrn, which is stiled the Amor Patriae, and which I believe has been oftner de-fcribed than felt by voluntary exiles, for I confefs that I have very little idea of local attachments; perfons, and not places, have engrossed all the affections of which my heart is capable; and though the fight of Albion’s chalky cliffs, may not infpire me with much delight, I shall certainly feel true pleafure, when I behold my dear Woodville and his amiable wife.
I SHOULD not stop on my journey to tell you this, becaufe I am fure you must know it untold, but my worthy, my faithful Wilfon, whom I have long confidered as my friend, though he still a£ls as my Servant, left Paris with a flight fever on him : travelling has, perhaps, increafed his malady, and I purpofe halting here till he is quite recovered.
I GAVE you an account of my interview with lady Ransford, in my last, and will now inform you, of the purport of thofe letters, which were found in captain Barnard’s pocket, after the duel. That which was addressed to her ladyship, was filled with tender adieus, and Soft contrition for having involved her in distrefs, and leaving her probably expofed to mifery in a foreign land ; with the most Solemn intreaties not to profecute
Mr.
THE DELICATE DISTRESS. 157
Mr. Ransford in cafe he should Survive, as he there acknowledged, that he had drawn the duel on himfelf.
That which he wrote to Ransford was short, yet contained the fullest declaration, of his having Sought the quarrel, and its confequences, from a wearinefs of life, which he Said must be for ever embittered, by ressefting on the bafenefs of his behaviour towards lady Harriet Hanbury, as well as on the unworthy part he had a6fed, in Seducing lady Ransford from her duty. He implored his forgivenefs for >the injury he commit-■ted against the honodr qfhis family, and for having eogaged him to hazard his life, from a too earnest defire -of getting rid of his own.
How inconssstent is the conduft of this unfortunate man I his attention to the preservation of his antagonist’s life, is certainly noble; but what an a£l of inhumamty was it to lay Ransford under the fatal neceSTity of becoming his executioner ? or bow are we to reconcile the Spirit of this last a£Uon, with the unworthy tenor of his former life ?
I AM convinced there is no human creature So intirely lost to virtue, as not to be poffested of one good quality at least, which if known, and properly cultivated, might in Some meafure counterbalance its owner’s vices to Society ; but we are all too apt to reprobate a faulty charafiter ; too indolent to Search out the latent virtues of another’s heart; and find it more for our eafe, to take it for granted, that a vicious perfon must be vicious throughout, than to Seek for a grain of wheat in a bushel of chaff.
After many fruitlefs inquiries, I aminformed that Sir James Miller has obtained a commiffion in the Hungarian Service, by Some of his friends here, and that he left Paris about three weeks
ago.
158 iSHE DELICATE DISTRESS.
ago, in order to join his regiment, Ransford is at Brussels, but the marchionefs and he do not live together. I have forwarded Barnard’s letter to him, and flatter raySelf we fhall foon Sec him in England.
My parting with the dear remains of the Beaumont family was truly affeiEfing, madam de Carignan came to Paris, .on purpofie to bid me adieu. Captain Beaumont prefented me with his and his father’s piftures; he had before given me Charlotte’s portrait.—Alas! it was an ufelefs gift, as her dear image is too strongly graved on my fad heart !
I WILL not dwell upon this fubjeQ: longer; but it is impossible that I should turn my thoughts to any'other now,—I can therefore only fay.
Farewell.
Seymour
t t
FINIS.

c
JJ, ^of r'a,
LiL;‘ir.rr
3
& tl “f h
'\
\

7

I ■.
7
I',	:

A
/
/
I.
: t

■I
/
r.
(' '
J
r.
r
/ i
' f •-
\ •
»
«
\ '
i
t

' i
f-
i.
V
/
/ ' f :
\
M
»
! .
\
s
\
/
'	I
■■ I
- > /
■ I
c 'fy
«
/
1'
> ,r
-K
t •
I
X
\
\
i\
k >
j
V
\

\
V
•s\
t.*
u
/
: (■
t	V -

\
■ I
7.
f.
\:
/ • f t
% .
%
t
/
\

: ;
,* » »

' V-
\
\ ;/
y / V
/
>: /
tt:

;N


i/
I
N
/
/V
. t
•'/
/•t
\
\'
/
}
: /
A
\
' \


.1
• f

. v>ra^
VI

/I

"''v iT ' L •	■	;
A
\\

t
/}
\
\
\
*s

>0::^
Jr^'
^5
\ ./

D
• *.f •
i
I
h
m
4.,
\
/
1-
N
r>5^
j
'i\
-•vm*

/
,* f
w
V
N


/
/ •' / •
JA
\
t
■ //\ ■	--4 :i
I
X '
/
/: •
! ..
/
■ •»
/

h
I
■\
■'V-.
i :V.
\
\
A V*
L


Vi	?	•Tl
		i
f (		✓
c . _		■ -a
• *	r	'2
i	L--	■ 4
>	f\:	*
* ».
v/; i •
//
♦
\'.
\:
\.


/
C..4
/.
/*, ■
\
r
V \
\
r1


bX: ' •• i ■'
■ ■ ' ' ' * {
/
/	• V
4 \
y
t
I . ;
V
/.


/;
\
f ^
.» i*
;
f I

\

•, /
'■ \ .
t
I
i
A
, I
/
4
/
/ -
I I
/ /
/
■ /

\
'i *\
/
, ^

> t
1. r
* ’r
'i.:
\ '
/

i '
' <(
\
.	1 r	^ t
	/ /	i • ^ • \
	•	/ V

f > •
; / •V t
T . •
■/ . •>
\

1' \
/
/


■i
* / \i



-J /
•V /
T
Ft

I
. \
I
i
' /
s
' - I
A
«
\'
I :';
■ t
C ■ ' i *	'** i* i i -bb • * ' . ' '	. 'i	C b’ . ; ■' C' .;. ■ ■
4?*ti.HT*TArtt»,rttit2,rj	rt • J-:-
•	ri>»'


	1	2	3	4	5	6	7' ■	■ '8	9	10	11 (A)	12	13	14	15
L*	39.12	65.43	49.87	44.26	55.56	70.82	63.51	39.92	52.24	97.06	92.02	87.34	82.14	72.06	62.15
a*	13.24	18.11	-4.34	-13.80	9.82	-33.43	34.26	11.81	48.55	-0.40	-0.60	-0.75	-1.06	-1.19	-1.07
b*	15.07	18.72	-22.29	22.85	-24.49	-0.35	59.60	-46.07	18.51	1.13	0.23	0.21	0.43	0.28	0.19
D50 llluminanst 2 degree observer
Density
0.04
0.09
0.15
0.22
0.36
0.51

centimeters
ii|yiil|iiii|2iiiM>ii|3iii|iiii|4iii|iiii|5iii|iiii|6iii|iiiij7iii|iiii|giii|iiii|diii|iiii|-/o
L
16 (M)
17
18(B)
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
30
49.25
-0.16
0.01
38.62
-0.18
-0.04
28.86
0.54
0.60
16.19
-0.05
0.73
8.29
•0.81
0.19
3.44
■0.23
0.49
31.41
20.98
-19.43
72.46
■24.45
55.93
72.95
16.83
68.80
29.37
13.06
-49.49
54.91
-38.91
30.77
43.96
52.00
30.01
82.74
3.45
81.29
52.79
50.88
-12.72
50.87
-27.17
-29.46
0.75
0.98
1.24
1.67
2.04
2.42
SN: OL0007

Colors by Munsell Color Services Lab ^

