g RARE BOOK COLLECTION
LIBRARY
:'i LIMIVERSITYo/-
l Pennsylvania

\\
JEttTvrcc-	* Tnce-Jcu/p.
itfieJ
'~y -
M'Dun can Campbell
RET
MEMOIRS
Of the late
Mr. Duncan Campbel\
The Famous
Deaf and Dumb Gentleman.
WRITTEN
By H imself, who ordered they Ihould be publifti’d after his Deceafe.
To which is added,
An APPENDIX, by Way of Vindication ofMr. Duncan Campbel, again!! that groundlefs Afperfion call upon him, That he hut pretended to he Deaf and Dumb.
’The Lucky have whole Days, which fill they chufe, Tb* Unlucky have hut Hours, and thofe they lofe.
Dryden.
LONDON:
Printed For J. Mill an, at the Green Door, the Corner of Buckingbam-Court •, and J. Chricliley, at the London-Gazette, Gharing-Cirojs. m.dcc.xxxii.

/
THE
NAMES
OF THE
SUBSCRIBERS
A
HIS Grace the Duke of Argyle
John Aiflabie, Efqy B
Earl of Buchan Alexander Brodie, of Brodie, Lord Lyon Sir William Billers John Banks, Efqy Thomas Beuois, EJqy George Beale, Efqy Countefs <?/Berkfhire Mrs. Urfula Baker Mrs Bowes C
Sir James Campbell Bar. Sir Nath. Curzon, Bart. Sir Robert Salifbury Cotton, Bart. William Crow, Efqy Peter Cary, Efqy Daniel Campbell, Efqy
Thomas Clark, Efqy William Conolly, Efqy 2 Books.
John Campbell, Efqy Colonel Carpenter Dr. Campbell Lady Frances Clifton Lady Coningfby Mrs. M. Campbell Mrs. Cooper D
Sir J. Dalrimple, Bart. Right Honourable George Doddington, Efq: Stephen D’Aubus, Efqy
-----Dumer, Efqy
Mr. Dalzel Lady Dudley E
Sir Richard Ellys, Bart. Rich. Edgcombe, Efqy Mr. Eadnell Mrs. Edwards
F Flenry
The Subscribers Names.
F
Henry Furnefs, Efq-, Mrs. Folkingham G
Earl of Gainfborough jLord Gower Sir Arch. Grant, Bart. •Sir R. Grofvenor, Bart. Rob. Grofvenor, Efq\ Barn. Goldfworthy, Efq-, General Gledhil Captain Gumeldon Mr. Gafhry H
James Hall, Efq-, Aaron Hill, Efq-,
John Hilton, Efq, William Harbert,A/^i Lady Jane Holt | Mrs. Hart
L
Sir Thomas Lowther Thomas Lunn, Efq M
Earl of Marchmont Lord Vijcount Mickle-thwait
Lord Mufkerry John Manby, Efq-,
Mr. Thomas Manlove Lady Doddington Montague
Mrs. Sarah Mellis
Mrs. Kath. Matthews N
Earl ^Northampton Sir Michael Newton O
Her Grace the Hut chefs of Ormonde John Opie, Efq-, 2 Books. P
Herbert Perrot Pack-ington, Bart.
Walter Plumer, Efq-, John Peacock, Efq%
R
John Raper, Efq-, William Raper, Efq;
S
Earl of Stair Sir John Shaw, Bart. Colonel James Scot Ehe Rev. John Sandford* Curate tf/'Hornfey. Mrs. Frances Skelton Mrs. Scot
T
Earl <yThanet Jacob Trible, Efq**
V
Gerard Vanneck, Efq$ Jolhua Vanneck, Efq', W
Mrs. Webfter Mrs. Ann Ward
THE

XHE	r-«’f
8SW\	ft iwH [II JX.L
% -f^WA
,n&WL
■ ■ TP CM
v «*• S?f.I
vs\. ,1V ,ia,J
HStt
'BE tymduBm w,.,r/' ,, l*aiK? _ Chap, 't Of Formne-ieUing in General 5 Chap. II. 0'n my Enemiesu\.<\ ,
Chap. III. Some. cmtpwcing Proofs’ that rflMfa%r preferred	, Interjfkiofwj^ Cmfultm to my Qwu
■ 2°
Chap. IV. On Witchcraft	' f , V. 37
Chap. V. Ontbemmys Dsceptms endemtmredfio he put on Me " r .	~ '	.ff. '	’ •	' 47
Chap. VI. On Qmens ; ffihicfy are to he fdepended on,	?i0/. '	’ ’ ’	' '60
Chap, VII. On Predflimtiw- „ n	. 77
Chap. VIII. '0» ig£ 'Sympathy ' f §4 .£hap. IX. On ihc Difference betwem Natural and jOiaboticdi Magic ’ ~~	" '	'	97
Chap. X. QnKj§pmitiontq , ,.^s 7r - ' ^ios Chap.	' '	418
Chap. XII. -On.the SeconlrSjgbt	129
Chap. XIII. Q« tbs!ffirtm.fftbs, Loaiflqn^. and jome other choice Curiofities in Nature	133
Chap. XIV. Containing fome Examples of the Un~ reafonable Brings frequently required of ms	142
Chap. XV. A Remarkable Inflame of Ingratitude
158
fhe Friendly Demon i or, the Generous Apparition
166
Original
CONTENTS.
Original Letters fent to Mr. Campbil by his Confulters.
Let. I. From a Per Jon under great Misfortunes 196 Let. II. From a Gentleman in the Country 198 Let. III. From a Lady, who, from the Depth of Mifery, was fuddenly raijed to Happinefs	200
Let.; IV. [From an old Correfpondent.	201
Let. V. From a Jew reft ding at Conftantinople 204 Let. VI. From a Lady of DiflinFlion	205
Let. VII. From the fame	207
Let. VIII. From a young Lady very much in Love
I 208
Let. IX. From a Politician	209
Let. X. From a young Nobleman	211
Let. XI. From a Gentleman 'to whom Mr. Camp-bel had lent the Book of his Life, and Spy on the Conjurer	212
Let. XII. From a new-married Lady	213
Let. XIII. From an Adept	215
Let. XIV. From a young Gentleman at Camb dge
P 17
Let. X V. From a Gentleman of the Fown 218 Let. XVI. From, a Gentleman at Bombay 220 Let. XVII. From an old Lady man'ied'to a young Man	.221
Let. XVIII. From d Perfdn of polity " ' f 222 An Appendix, by IVay Of Vindication of Mr. Duncan Cam pbel, againji that groundlefs Afperfon . caft upon him, that he but pretended to be Deaf and Dumb	,	227
THE
C i 1
T H E
INTRODUCTION.
S no Perfori who has made any Noife in the World, either for good or bad Qualifications, can die without exciting a Curiofity in the Publick to know fomething more after his Death, than could pofhbly be learned while he lived, I doubt not, but as foon as I fhall ceafs to £<?, feveral Pens will be employed in relating what 1 have been ; and therefore think it more proper to write my own Life (with which I am certainly beft acquainted) than to leave it to the Mercy of fome Hackney Scribler or other, who, perhaps, is altogether ignorant of every Thing concerning me but my Name and Profeifion; yet will pretend to know more of me than ever God Almighty did.
B
To
E 2, J
T 6 comply with the Tafte of the Times then, I fhall leave lomething to Pofterit), tho* not to pleafe the Rabble, nor the Learned, if ill-natured: I only aim to gratify fuch after my Death, as were pleafed with me when living-Perhaps the World will call ’em Fools, but every one knows what Anfwer thofe People de-feirve who go with the Million : I fhall only fay, Had only the Illiterate been fatisfied with my Pfe~ diHions, 1 fhould long fince have fallen into the. Fate of common Fortune-tellers, made a Flafh at fir ft like lighted Gunpowder, then loft all my Force in Smoak, and have been no more remembered ; whereas for thirty eight Tears I have flood my Ground in Defiance of all my Adverfaries, though / have had many and powerful ones« Nor was it thofe of the fair Sex alone who gave Credit to my Art; the mofl Wife, Grave and Judicious of the other have thought it worthy their Regard : Some even of the Royal Cabinet have proved the Dumb Mav no Impofture, and after eonfulting me, would have pay’d me greater Adorations than became a Mortal to receive^
I know there is nothing more generally exploded by thofe who would be thought wife Men, than the whole Myftery of foretelling Events ; but as I doubt not, but this little Trea-tife will fall into the Hands of Numbers who have profited by my Skill, I fhall leave it to them to fpeak in its Vindication, and I appeal to all
who,
[ 3 1
who, on my Subject, have confulted me, and not only to them, but to that fuperior Power, that Being of Beings, before whom we muft all be judged, and to whom I fhali anfwer, before ever this lees the Light, if I ever gave Advice to the Detriment of any Perfon, or did not, to the litmoft of my Power, endeavour to prevent the Mifchiefs I forefaw would threaten them : But his enough for People of Bender Capacities to exclaim againft what they cannot comprehend. Not that I fay all are Weak who reject my Predictions •, no, I know many great, and truly wife Men in otherThings, who will not Buffer them-felves to give Credit to any thing I fhould fay, merely becaufe they would not feem to give into that Foible of being Superfluous ; but I would fain afk thdfe Gentlemen, if, on ftrlct Examination of themfelves, they have not feme darling Failing of, perhaps, wOrfe COnfequence to indulge: There is no Perfection on this fide Heaven, and ■ I folemnly aver, that I never found greater Follies in the mbit ftupid and ignorant of illy ConfaIters, than I have in feme of thdfe who were regarded by the World as Prodigies of Wit and Learning. But this is not my Bufmefs; all that I pretend to by this little Account of my-felfis, to'prevent thofe I have a Value for from being impofed on by a fpurious Relation, and to give fomfe Reafons in Defence of my Art after my Death, which would not fo readily obtain Credit while I live: *Tis a known Truth, that whatever Vices Youth, Inadvertency, Temptation, and
B 2	the
C 4 1
the Cuftom of the Times may have led me into, I was never abandoned in my Principles, but had always a juft Senfe of Right and Wrong, accompanied with a Hope of future Happinefs, and Terror for its Punifhments; none therefore can be fo Barbarous as to imagine I would wifh to quit the World with a Fallacy, as I muft do if I wrote any Thing here in Injury to Truth, becaufe, though at this Time I am in a tollerable State of Health, whenever I fhall be called hence, this is my laft Will and Teftament to the Pub-lick, and ought to be depended on as much as the laft Words of a dying Man.
M E-
MEMOIRS
Of the late Famous
Mr. Duncan Campbel.
CHAP. I.
Of Fortunetelling in General.
H E Particulars of my Birth and Parentage, with my firft Infpiration of feeing Things to come, having been fufficiently treated on, in a Book entitled,. The Life of Mr. Duncan Campbel, would be needlefs for me to repeat what is there fo fully related. I fhall therefore begin with my coming to London: And, I hope, none will ac-cufe me of Profanenefs, when I compare myfelf in this Point to Jofeph, who, by a Dream, was conducted to Egypt, fince it was the fame God, who, by his miniftring Angel, took the fame Means to fend me to this great City, where I have acquired both a Livelihood and Reputation, as B 3	much
r 6 i
much beyond my Hope or Expectation as his were.
I very well know, that from my Birth I have had the conftant Attendance of both a good and bad Angel : I am confident of it, and have fuch undeniable Proofs, that the Being of a Sun, Moon, or Stars is not more certain to me, nor do I afcribe any thing extraordinary to myfelf in this: It is my Opinion, that great Numbers, of People, efpecially in the firft Ages of the World, have been thus attended, and even in thefe latter Times, many are hindred only by their own Unbelief, from receiving Marks as evident and demonftrative as I have done of this peculiar Proof, how greatly we Mortals are the Care of Providence. If I underfland the Story of Balaam and his Afs right, he was one of thofe I have been {peaking of. Hiftory abounds with Examples of Men who have feen and converfed with thefe fupernatural Intelligencies, and, I be^ heve it no lefs true, that many of the Jews enjoy that Privilege to this Day. I have been honoured with the Acquaintance of feme of their Rabbles, and could not avoid feeling for them a fecret Veneration, which not all my Deteftation of the Enemies of Cbrijlianity could extinguish : Nay, I could not avoid, in Ipite of their prefent Unbelief, alluring myfelf, that fome among them were highly favoured by Heaven. ’Tis certain, I knew one who poffeffed Secrets which raifed him to the utmoft Pitch of Knowledge
Hu-
C 7 1
Humanity can arrive tq : He obliged me with one by which I have got Tome hundred Pounds, and which there are People would have made ‘Tboujands of, and is, indeed, of an ineftimable Value ; this is the Art of making TaliJ'mans. As the Planets have undoubtedly an Influence.over all Things in this lower World, fo they themfelves are alfo governed by Numbers ; and Numbers, if rightly underftood, have a Power in them beyond \yhat Humanity is capable of conceiving. The true Ufe of them is certainly the Tree of Knowledge \ it is in them the whole Art of Magick confifts, and by them a Mortal might not only be enabled to judge of all Things in Nature, but alfo of what is truly Good or truly Evil, and to excel in the moft fublime and fupernatural Acts of either, even to. the bringing Angels down to converfe with him on Earth, or railing the Infernal Spirits to the Light of the Sun, Talifmans, therefore, being entirely directed by Numbers and Proportion, 4nd made at a Time when the beneficent Planets have Influence, ought not to be condemned by Perfons the moft averfe to Superftition ; and It would be as ftupid to deny their Force, as it would be to refufe the Sun the Honour of warming us, or the Moon her Influence over the Tides. Reafon then teaches us to value fo noble a Science, nor does Piety in the leaft oppofe it. The ancient Patriarchs,who undoubtedly,did every Thing by Infpiration, were the firft Inventors of them , and Mofes afterwards wore a Tilifman, to B 4	which
C 8 ]
which, as to a fecond Caufe under Heaven, we are to afcribe the Wonders he performed. Since him the moft eminent in all Ages made Ufe of them, and the wife Men among the Per-fians and Chaldeans had them in the extreameft Veneration •, and if it were put to the Teft, I' believe it might be proved, that fome late great Generals and Statefmen undertook no important Affair without having a !Talijman about them.
I t is but to few of my Confulters I have imparted this Secret, knowing it in the Power of my own Art, to anfwer (except fome very extraordinary Accident intervened) the feveral Queries they demanded *, not but \ have now by me a good Number of thofe wonderful Parchments, and hope to make more, but I fhall defer the general Ufe of them till after my Death, not doubting but they will be a Legacy of Value to my Family when I am gone, if I fhould, by long Sicknefs, or other Misfortunes, be deprived of leaving any thing befide, God only knows the Time and Pains they coft me in making, and how many Hours 1 have borrowed from my Sleep to watch the happy Conftellation, under which alone they can be rendered ufeful. The Knowledge, how excellent in numberlefs Cafes thefe Talifmans are, affaires me I fhall live many Ages hence in their myfterious Virtues, and that whoever wears them, will acknowledge Duncan Campbel no lefs Studious for the Good of the
World
[ 9 3
World at his going out of it, than he always proved himfelf while he lived in it.
Here I cannot omit reminding all fuch who depended on my Judgment, that there is nothing in what bears the Name of Palmiftry :
I have had a thoufind fine Hands held out to me in my Time, with the moft earned: Entreaty, that I would examine the Lines ; and if I could have entertained the leafc Thought of abufing thofe who put Confidence in me, I might eafily have done it, by pretending to this Art but I fhould have been afhamed to have been guilty of fuch an Impofition, nor could I have anfwered it to my Confcience j and I am far-prized to find fo many, and fome of them Men of Learning too, could have fpent their Time fa ill, as to write fuch great Treatifes of what has nothing of Reality in it: The Elands and Feet, though full of Lines, and fo different, that, perhaps, there are not two in the World alike, and very few that have the leaft Refemblance of each other, have yet nothing in them prognofticating either Good or Evil. Phijiognomy, alfo, according to the common Rules fet down for it, is as delu-five: Features are not the Marks of Fate; a Man may be full as Unfortunate with a high Forehead and finooth Brow, as he that has a very low one and full of Wrincles ; nor is the Largenefs of the Noftrijs, or Smaflnefs of the Ears, always an Argument of Wit and Ingenuity: Much, indeed, is to be gathered from the Face, and
r to i
Neck, and much more from the Air and Mein ; but then there are no Directions to be given for the Attainment of this Knowledge, nor is it to be learned, but mud come by that Inftinct, Infpi-ration, or Divination, vulgarly called Second Sight..
I know I fhalt-be curs’d in my Grave by all the Calculators of Nativities, and Refolvers of Hororary Quedions, when I acquaint the World, that it cannot fuffer a greater Impofition than what is made Ufe of by the Pretenders to this Science: I fay the Pretenders, becaule I have the tit moll Edeem for thofe Gentlemen who are really Proficients in Aftrology. Nothing is more certain, than that the Planets have an Influence not only on the Difpofitions and Humours of the Perfons born under them, but likewife over the Events that fhall befal them ; but if thole Perfons who come to conlult fuch as commonly make a Practice of this Art, would confider how vaftly difficult it is to be attained, they would never imagine it could be comprehended by fuch illiterate Wretches ; fome of whom are fcarcely acquainted with their Mother Tongue. I was never in a greater Pafiion in my Life, than when one Day a Lady came to me, and having; wrote her Bufincfs, added at the Bottom of the Paper, That I had calculated her Mothers Nativity. At fird I thought flie had midook me for fome other, but on recollecting myfelf, perceived how fire had fallen into this Error. To
oblige
L ii 3
oblige feveral of my fair Confulters, I have frequently made up Paper in the Form of a Book, and alotting to each Leaf a Year, fet down thofe remarkable Events which come within the Compafs of my Art to difcover. On one perhaps there might be the Figure of a Coffins denoting the Death of fame Friend or Relation ; on another a Coronet, fignifying Affairs with fome of the Nobility ; and various others Hie-rogliphicks, betokening the different Incidents in her Life: Thefe the young Lady, doubtlefs, took either for Planets, or the Signs of the Zo-diack, and me for an Aftrologer ; but I foon undeceived her, and told her, My Talent lay another IVay, and that I never ypr&SHJcd that Science, nor indeed had Jujficient Under(landing in it to calculate a Nativity. I wifh all who are applied to as fuch, and know as little, or probably lefs than I do of it, would deal with the fame Ingenuity, and not deceive their Clients by a few hard Words picked out of the Almanack, and irregular Scratches with the Pen, which they pafs on the Credulous and Ignorant for the Twelve Houfes, and Degrees of Conftellation. As for the new-fafhion’d Way of difcovering future Events by Tea or Coffee-Grounds, I think it would be loft Time to make any Difertation *, they are Amufements which I have often laughed at myfelf, and to divert the Company have thrown a Cup in my Turn; but I v/ould not judge fo ill of the World, as to imagine any body comes to confult thefe People with a feri-
ous
[ ii 3
ous Inclination to believe a Word they lay. If there be any fuch, I pity them, bu,t look on them as Perfons too far gone in Folly, for any thing either I, or a wifer Man can argue to reclaim.
CHAP. II.
On my E n e m i e s.
ADI met with any Portion of that Candour and Sincertiy from my Confulters and Acquaintance as I always treated them with, I had not lived to the Age of Fifty, without being poffefTed of fome little Fortune «> comfort my Decline ; and, whenever I fhal'l be removed to a better World, where all Cares ceafe, to have left for my Family's Support. I was once in a fair Way of being a great Court Favourite, and would not have given a Shilling to any Man to have infured me a handfome Penfion. Her late Majefty Queen Anne was no Stranger to my Scrawls, and teftified the Satisfaction I had given her, in a molt beneficent Manner, by Mr. Geeky, her Majefty’s Occulift at that Time. One Thing in particular that I wrote, Die put among her Rarities, and told the Ladle
abou
C 13 3
about her, That it very well deferved that Place. But juft in this Crifis, my ill Angel got the Better of my good One, and deprived me of any further Marks of Royal Favour : My Lady
F------— having taken a fudden Picque againft
me, reprefented me to her Majefty as a Man of ill Principles and dangerous: Her AfTertion was
afterwards backed by my Lady M----------, who
added, That Jhe had feen jeveral very ill-looked. Men in my Hcufe ; but I take God to be my Witnefs, her Ladyfhip never entered my Doors but twice, and that what fne alledged was fo far from the Truth, that not a living Soul, either of thofe Times, was under my Roof, but her Ladyfhip, my Wife, two Children, and a Servant Maid. Thefe Ladies, only becaufe I could not do what is beyond the Power of all Human Art, became my inveterate Enemies, and fcrupled not to fay all that the moft witty Malice could invent againft me ; and fo prevalent is Ill-Nature, in the greateft Part of the World, that I have known twenty or thirty beat out of their Reafon by the Difappointment of one, and fometimes a pretended one too. Some who never faw my Face have been my greateft Afperfors, out of the moft unaccountable Principle that can be imagined ; it being jmpofTible I could difoblige, in any Refpect, Perfons whom I did not fo much as know by Character : But I was once in fuch a Vogue, that not to have been with me, was to have been out of the Fafhion ; and it was then as ftrange a
Thing
[ i4 3
Thing not to have confulted the Deaf and Dumb Conjurer, as it is now not to have feen the Beggars Opera half a dozen Times, or to admire Polly Peachum. The Mode will {till prevail v and new Things, of what Kind foever, will pleafe for a while. But I fwerve from my Purpofe : I %i was Once fo celebrated a Perfon, that thofe People, who wanted either Time or Money to confult me, were alhamed tOown their Omitfion, and would be talking of me to convince their Acquaintance they were as much in theFafnionas themfelves ; fo that I impure great Part of the ridiculous Stories raifed on me, to be owing rather to Vanity than Malice; Bullies would lay, They had heat me Whores, That I had attempted their Virtue *, and Numbers to teftify the great Opinion I had of their Sagacity and Wifdom, would {wear, I talked to them, and made ufe of converfwg with my Pen, only in Juch Company as could not keep a Secret. ’Tis certain,; that becaufe I have fometimes difcovered the Means of retrieving loft Goods ; every Servant Maid that had miffed a Silver Spoon, would come immediately to me for Directions where to find it, and if I refufed to oblige her, go away fpitting her Spite againft me to as many as fhe met. But in fuch Things I fhare the Fate of the greateft of Men in the Kingdom : The Trea-fury of the Nation would be but a Mite to fup-ply the Wants of all who are ready to become Petitioners ; yet, tho’ they fhould receive Ninety nine out of the Hundred, they would exclaim
I 15 3
againft the Avarice and Corruption of the Difpenforfc The Ingratitude of the World is fuch, that even between Friend and Friend, though the one Sacrifices three Parts of his Fortune to the other, yet fhall he not be fitisfied, and on Denial of the Fourth, repay all former Obligations with Calumny and Detraction. How often this has been my Cafe, God and my poor Family knows; but I have learnt to forgive, and hope the Injuries done to me and mine, will never rife againft the Authors. I confefs I have been too much a Libertine, and have thought Drinking, Fighting, running away with Men’s ; Wives and Daughters, Gentlemen-like Qualifications, but thefe Exploits were in my younger Years, and greatly owing to the Company I then kept.
Of late, hard Study, and a conftant Application to my Bufinefs, has brought Fits upon ine, which fome barbarous Wretches have given out were counterfeited : I would fain know for what Reafon I fhould counterfeit a Condition fo truly deplorable ? I flood not at the Corner of a Street to move Companion, and excite the Charity of thole that puffed; I was no Gainer, but a great Lofer by this Misfortune: Few knew7 me without knowing I have been at more Expence than I was well able to fuftain in Hope of Cure, and have frequently been obliged to turn away my belt Cuflomers. When I have been, to all Appearance,in the bell Stare of Health that Ladies
could
L 16 ]
could be wifhed, and have had thfee of four fine Ladies with me, a Flirt of a Fan has made me fuddenly drop down in the moil terrible Convul-fions, and rendered me wholly incapable of afl-fwering ally Queftions that Day. Would any Man chufe to diftort his Face, and decay his Spirits with a forced Agony were he to lofe nothing by it ? But I am not only a Sufferer in my Conftitution, by thefe cruel Enemies of Nature, but likewife in my Livelihood. As I have fel-dom any Warning of their coming upon me, it is the more frightful to myfelfj and every-body in the Room. At my Recovery, it adds to my Confufion to reflect how trifling a Thing has fometimes occaiioned my Diforder, fuch as a Nurfe dancing an Infant too quick in her Arms, my own Children running haftily crofs the Room, the Sight of a Moufe, or, as I faid before, the Flirt of a Fan: I have made ufe of my utmoft Efforts to overcome this Humour I cannot but look on it as a Womanifh, or at bed, a Pedan-tick one, but all I can do has hitherto been ineffectual on the contrary, it encreafes on me, and every Thing that moves up and down with any fwift Motion before my Eyes, throws me into the Condition I fo much dread. I have had the Advice of the belt and mod learned Phyficians, who all agree, That it proceeds front having fo many Years accuftomed myfelf to a Steadfaftnefs of Sights for the Sake of my Con-falters.
T HOSE
r tj :
Those who know the Fatigue I undergo from the Moment I rife out of my Bed, till I go into it again, will own, that I have enough to diffract the ftrongeft Head in the World: I am. not only obliged to tell all forts of People their Names, Conditions, and future Events, but thofe of others whom they had any Bufinefs With. In fpite of my Regard for the fair Sex, I muff do Juffide to Truth, and own, they were infinitely the molt troublefome i they muff be told, whether Maids, Wives, Widows, or Crack’d-Pipkins, the Names of their Fathers, Mothers, Hufbands, Lovers, or Keepers •, nay, I muff be pofitive to the very Days of firft, fecond, fome-times third Marriages, and frequently the Name and Difpofition of a Friend by the bye: If any one of thefe Articles are left unanfwered, my Con-fulter grouls like a Cat over a Piece of Lights, lays, She has given her Money for nothing, and plagues my Wife with fuch a Heap of Noife and Nonfenfe, that Deafnefs is a Blefling to me* Scarce has one of thefe left the Houfe, but, probably, in comes a Cook-maid* fays, Her fiver Spoon is not come home yet; that I help’d fuch a one, and fuch a one to their loft Goods, and that I life her very ill: Then enters two or three more, one has quarrelled with her Sweetheart laft Night, and I muff find another for her *, a Second is jealous of her Hufband, I muff tell her what Whore he keeps Company with, that fhe may go and tear her Eyes out * in fhort, I am obliged to bear C	ten
I i8 3
ten thoufand Family Quarrels on my Shoulders.* as if I were in the Fault of every Thing. Sometimes I have had thirteen or fourteen at a Time in my Houfe, every one complaining of Hafte, and preffmg to be firft anfwered, ft is therefore more ftrange that I was able to fatisfy any one of them, than that fuch a Multiplicity of different Affairs did not Very much confound me; yet if I have failed in a Letter of a Name, or a Day in the Month, all the reft was nothing. I have frequently been plagued with People, who, after being refolved all the Queftions in the Com-pafs of my Art, were fo Silly and Wicked as to expect to know Secrets, which the Divine Wifdom conceals from all Humane Penetration. Nay, fome have defired I would have Recourfe to Diabolical Arts, and force the Internals to declare, what abfent Perfons were doing. I remember a Woman that wanted to have her Lover fetched from Jamaica through the Air. If I attempted to diffuade them from any Thoughts of fuch Practices, by Arguments drawn from Religion, they upbraided me with Hypocrify, and told me, 'They knew I dealt with the Devil, though I would not raife him for them * If I affured them, that fuch Things were not in the Power of a Mortal, they called me Impoft or, faid, I knew nothing of my Bufinefs, and they would go to thofe who had more Skill< I leave it to the Judgment of any unprejudiced Reader, Jvhat a Flurry of Spirit this mu ft put me in, and whether all this is not enough to occafion
the
c 19 3
the Diforder I complain of, and which my' Enemies fo cruelly infinuate is but feigned. I fhall hereafter give fome Inltances of the Uf-age I have met with on this Score, in the very Words I received it, not being afhamed to confefs the Affronts given me, when with the fame Impartiality and Truth, I alfo difco-Ver the Occafions of them.
But to return: I believe no Man ever had more Enemies, nor did lefs to create them. I have little Defence but my own Innocence; hot but that I have Friends too, and among the nobleft and moft learned, but they think it Prudence to yield to Cuftom, and generally chufe rather to hear me traduced, than fuffer themfelves to be ridiculed, for offering any thing in my Vindication, by thofe would-be Wits, who pretend to be above giving Credit to any thing. Befides, it often happens that a Wife fhall have experienced the Truth of my Predictions, yet dares not take my Part againft her unbelieving Hufbandj left he fhould take it ill fhe came to	confult me.	It	is the fame
Cafe fometimes on	the	Hufband’s	Side, who,
though he does nothing without my Advice, dreads the Cenfure of his talkative Spoufe, and therefore permits her to fail againft me uninterrupted : Peace muft be preferved in Families, whatever becomes of the poor Conjurer : But it would	be	endlefs	to	recount the
various Particulars	by	which	my	Reputation
C	2.	fufes,
I 10 1
fliffers, fo I (hall only fay, That while 1 live my chief Study muft he Patience, having nothing to confole me under fo many unjufi Afperfions, but the Afurance, that when ever I dye, the Scandal thrown on me will die too, and my Memory obtain that which I defpair of while in this Worlds a Publick Veneration and Love;
CHAP. III.
Some convincing Proofs that I always preferred the Inlerefl of my Consulters to my Own.
| O T H I N G has brought the Art P of foretelling Events into more Con-% tempt, than the exorbitant Defire '* of Gain, that moll of the Profeffors of it teftify. If they get but Money, they do not care how grofly foever they impofe on thofe who rely on them ; and a Perfon who fets up for a Fortune-teller, has little more to do, than to dive into the Humour and Inclination of his Confulters, which, once known, Vis eafy to flatter them with the Hope of Succefs in their Defires. It is in this I have chiefly diftin-guifhed myfelf from the common Herd. I could not fee a Perfon, who afked my Advice, entering into any Affair, which would terminate
in
I II 1
in his or her Undoing, without endeavouring to put a Stop to it; Things, in reality, the molt deftructive, often wear the moft pleafing Shape, and when I attempted to fet them in their true Colours, have generally gained nothing by it but ill Will ; whereas, had I flattered the Wilhes of my Confulter, I might have had my own Price ; but I defy the whole World to charge me with a Deception of that Nature. When I forefaw Ills that were unavoidable by Precaution, I have, indeed-, forbore to fliock fuch Per-fons with theKnowledge of them, remembering the old Proverb, that, Sufficient for the Day is the Evil thereof \ but when Warnings were likely to be of any Effect, I never failed to give them in the plaineft Manner I was able. And here I muft take Notice, that the Planets which, under God, have the Direction of Human Incidents, do not always render infallible the Mischief threatened by a malevolent Aipect. Timely. Care has fometimes given the Lye to the moft terrible Portents, as in the Cafe of the Merchant, mentioned in the Book of my Life, who had determined to lay violent Hands on himfelf, yet, through the Grace of God, and my Perfuafions, was preferred ; various Inftances of this kind are alfo related at full, in a Book intitled, The Spy on the Conjurer, which makes it needlefs to repeat them here. There are many living Wit-neflfes, and, I believe, will be when I am laid in the Earth, of my Tendernefs, in revealing an inevitable fad Fate. I had feveral People ofDi-C 3	function
L zz. 1
ftinction with me, when a Lady, whom I had never feen before, came to make Tryal of my Art, fhe was beautiful as an Angel, not exceeding eighteen Years of Age, and to all Appearance, in a State of perfect Health and Vigour; 'fhe was about being married to a Gentleman who had courted her two Years, the Articles were drawn, and the Wedding-day fixed ; her Queftions were, If he would he a good Hujband, and how many Children fhe fhould have ; I was very merry over a Bowl of Punch with my Friends, when this fair Lady arrived ; but I had no fooner call my Eye on her, than I fell into Agonies which no Tongue can reveal, nor Heart conceive, but thofe, who, like me, are prefented with fuch Objects, as the Gift of Second Sight affords, at the Prefence of a Per-fon fated to a violent Death. She laid down her Guinea with her Queftions, but I returned them both, and figned to my Wife to tell hers float I was not in a Condition of doing any Bufi-nefs that Day. She went away very much dif-fatisfied, but left me more fo. When fhe was gone, I was afked by fome of the Company, What had caufed me to refufe fo fair a Lady’s Money, and were not a little merry on the Oc-cafion, till I told them, float if they had Jeert what I did, they would he all fad : In fine, I acquainted them for nothing.,' with what I would hot have revealed to her for more Guineas than floe offered Shillings, which was, fhat fhe would not. live a Fortnight; that by fome Accident Jhe
would
LifJ
would be thrown off a Horfe, her Brains dajhed out% and her beautiful Body mangled and disfigured : This Prediction made them all Ihudder with Horror, and put an End to our Mirth for that Day. About the Time I mentioned, the News-Papers gave an Account of the Accident in the Manner I had foretold, which encreafed the Regard of thofe who were Witnefles of my Behaviour in this Point, and convinced them, that I was an Enemy either to flattering or Blocking my Confulters, as well as to deceiving them.
Another remarkable Inftance of the fame Kind happened on my being invited to a Marriage-Entertainment, where many of my good Friends being prefent, Mirth and the chearfu] Glafs went round in great Abundance, till about Eight of the Clock at Night, two Gentlemen, who were invited Guefts, but had been detained by fome Affairs, came into the Room ; one of them was middle-aged, but the other appeared not to. exceed Nineteen or Twenty *, I think my Eyes never beheld a more lovely Youth, nor one that had more the Air of a Man of Quality, as, indeed, he was, being the honourable Mr. Hamilton, Son of the Earl of Abercorne, of the Kingdom of Ireland ; but fcarce had I Time to contemplate his Beauties, when I faw him ftruggling amidfl: the tempeftuous Waves, which feexxfd to, tofs him to and fro, and at laft came entirely over him, and hid him from any farther View * While this terrible Object prefented itielf before C 4	me*
[ M 3
me, the young Gentleman was making his Compliments to the Company *, I-would have taken that Opportunity to have left the Room, but could not do it fo timely but that I was feen? and prevented : My Diforder being taken No-tice of, every-body defired to know the Reafon* which I evaded by telling them on my Fingers, *That I was taken ill, and would go into the Air, but if I found myfelf better, would return ; tho’, I muft confefs, I was far from intending to perform my Promife, my Concern for the poor young Gentleman not differing me to do any thing that Night but lament his ill Fate, The next Morning I was vifited by Mrs. Hill, who was one of the Company I mention’d, and a Lady extremely witty and facetious, but of the moil inquifitive Difpofition in the World ; Ihe imagined I had left the Company becaufe of fome private Pique I might have to one of the. Gentlemen, and would not be brought from that Opinion till I told her the whole Truth ; on which, lire went immediately to one who was intimate with Mr. Hamilton, and acquainted him with what I faid. He came to me in a few Days, and begged I would write down my Prediction, which he would drew him, in order to make him change his Defign of embarking with Lord Bellbaven, and offered me a very great Confederation for fo doing ; but I knowing the Doom irrevocable, and that if he thought to efcape it by putting off his intended Voyage, yet it would fall on him by fome other Means, would not
be
[ 1$ 1
be perfuaded either to write any thing to him, or * fee him : In a fhort Time after he embarked, and, with a great many other noble and brave Men, was funk in the Abyfs of Waters.
I c o u l d give many more Proofs that I have refufed Money, when by taking it I muft be obliged to antedate Misfortunes, or deceive thole that were fated to fuffer them, by vain Hopes ; but thefe two are fufficient to atteft the Truth of my Principle, and I lhall now proceed to fome few Narrations for the Teftification of the finJ cere and difinterefted Tendernefs I had for all thole who applied to me in Diftrefs.
I was, one Day, accofted by two Gentlewomen, forfuch the moft ordinary Eye might dil-cover them to be, by their Air and Mien, tho’ very much out of Repair as to Habit j the younger of them feemed prelfed with a deep Me-lancholly, and laying down a Crown-Piece on the Table, wrote to me, That it was all jhe could Spare at that Time, but begged I would not be a Niggard of my Study for her, tho* I might think by the Meannefs of her PreJ'ent, jhe was fo of her Purfe. I alfured her I would not, and letting the Money lie where it did , in a few Minutes wrote down the future Events which I faw would befal her : If I lhould repeat what they were, few of my Readers but would know the Lady by the Extremes of her Fortune, which, being improper, 1 fhall only fay, That fee was, at that
Time*
E 2 6 ]
ffate, in the mofi abject Condition, and 1 prOmiJed her a Furn of Fate fo greats and fo unexpected, that I perceived the Credit Jhe appeared to give to it, was rather Complaifance than Reality. As fhe was preparing to take Leave, I put the Crown into, her Hand, and fpoke to my Wife on my Fingers, to bid her go Home and redeem the Word of God, which fhe had no fooner faid, than the poor Gentlewoman looked on her Friend with the utmoft Amazement j but as foon as fhe had recovered herfelf, ingenuofly confeffed, That having nothing elfe wherewith to procure Money, Jhe had borrowed the Crown Jhe had given me, on her, Bible, and added, That Jhe would do as / defined and whenever the good Fortune I had foretold, Jhouli happen (which now Jhe did not in the leaf doubt, fince I had the Power of difcovering what fhe had intrufed no Mortal with) Jhe would make every Shilling I had fo generoufy returned, five Guineas. But here I had an Inftance of the Forgetfiilnefs and Ingratitude of the World ; for in the Space of two Years afterwards, I faw this very Lady bowling in her Coach and Six by my Door every Day, but had never the Favour of a Vifit, or any Token of Remembrance from her.
Would I have entered into Meafures to beguile my Confulters, I have had frequent Opportunities by the Means of Mr. B----------d, a Man
of a good Family, the more the Pity he fhould fo far degenerate, he pretends to great Learning, but that I am not a Judge of $ I know among
C 2.7 1
ignorant People he is liftened to as an Oracle, but, in in7 Opinion, that is chiefly owing to his Pretenflons to Honour and good Nature, tho* never Man had lefs of either, in Reality ; for he looks on all Mankind as his Property, deceives the Men for Intereft, and abufes the Women for Diverfion ; I never knew him do a generous ■ Thing by the one Sex, nor give any of the other a good Word, excepting one, who by the moft vile Actions has drawn on her the Contempt of every-body befides. He never was intimate anywhere, that he did. not make it his firft Bufinefs to fet the Hufband and Wife at Variance, and if ever his fplenetick, I may fay devilifh, Humour can tafte of Happinefs, ’tis when he fees thofe moft nearly ally’d, contriving each other’s De-ftruction : I am no great Friend to Poetry, but I remember to have read fomewhere, tho’ I can neither quote the Book nor Author, this Line :
* He, Devil-like, the Woes of Men enjoys.
But whoever wrote it, I am apt to fancy he was acquainted with Mr. B ■■ d, who never fmiles but when he makes others weep. He ef-fayed all his Arts to fet me againft my Wife, and even while he was at Bed and Board with us, receiving all the Civilities we could treat him with, was ftill difcontented, becaufe he found it more difficult than ordinary to break that perfect Harmony between us: Failing in that, he infinuated himfelf into my Son’s good Graces,
and
[ xS 1
and made him guilty of a Behaviour towards me, which required my utmoft Indulgence to forgive. Yet this Man, this Hypocrite, takes the Name of the Great God a thoufand Times a Day in his Mouth •, to witnefs, That he would rather rake the Kennels, than aEl againjl his Confci-ence ; he tells you, He might have keen employed ly the Minijlry, but would fiarve fooner than enter into any Meafures contradictory to his Principles. I muft, indeed, acknowledge him a Lover of Juf-tice, but ’tis in fuch a Way, as few would chufe to exert themfelves in, which is this: He frequently goes out late at Night, efpecially in rainy Weather, and calls a Coach, always chu-fing tire moft jaded Horfes he can find, then is drove to the longeft Fare, tho* he has no manner of Bufinefs, but to try if the Coachman will demand more than the Act of Parliament allows, that he may have an Opportunity of complaining to the Comm i (lionets : Nothing pleafes him better than to fee the poor Wives and Children &f thofe Fellows come a-begging to him to be moderate, and if they fell their Beds to pay their Forfeit, the more exquifite his Delight. If he catches a Chair in the Path-way, he is fure to break the Glafies j or a Porter with a Burthen, to throw him down, knowing neither dare re-fent it, becaufe he has the Law on his Side ; but this he calls Honour, and a ftrict Reverence to the Statutes, Heaven forgive the Cruelty of his Nature, but fure Earth cannot parallel it fince the Days of Nero , but why fhouid I fay Nero ?
he
[ ip 3
he burnt but one City, this Wretch would fet the whole World into a Flame, if he had the Power. Never was a greater Crocadlle, for with Humane Voice he drew the Ears of the Company , to liften to his Perfuafions, which are never made but Vo undo.
I have been fo particular in his Character, to Ihew how ealy it would have been for me, if leagued with fuch a Man, to have made my own Fortune, and ruined Thoufands.
Among the many whom he would feign have tempted me to join with him in the Undoing, Were two Cuftom-Houfe Officers, the Name of the one was R. Loggins, he was of a very advanced Age, and had enjoyed his Poll above thirty Years; the other, who was called J. Rotherham, was much younger, but had been a confiderable Time in the Bufmefs. He found they had laved a little Money, and were of projecting Difpofi-tions, though of mean Capacities to manage any great Affair. He had told them, 'Twas eafy for them to prove the King was wronged in his Revenue of the Cujloms, and fet them to Work to calculate what their Whimffes improved by his own might amount to, which, I think, they brought in upwards of 30,000/. a Year : He made them believe they Ihould have ten thouland Pounds a-Piece for the Difcovery, and would have prevailed on me to tell them, I forejawy by my Arty that they would have great Rewards. I did
not
[ 30 1
nbt abfolutely deny what he' defired, and bad him bring them to me, though not with any Delignto aid his Purpofe, but to fave,- if it were in my Power, the poor Fellows from Ruin-When they came, I told them, I had but little Skill m Schemes of that Nature, but knew the World too well to promife the?n SucceJ's *, *tis like flopping the 'Tide at Gravefend with your Thumbs faid I to Loggins j though, by the way, this was none of my own Wit, but a Comparifon made on a certain Occafion, by a Peer in Parliament. Rotherham, blown up with the Hopes B-----d had
given him, wrote with a pert Air, What do you think of me ? I anfwered him, ’That he would flarve in a Prijon, if he purfued his prefent De-fign •, that the Perfons he would be obliged to Accufe were too powerful for a thoufand fuch Enemies as he, or his Friend. To this he replied with an Oath, That he would write to the King himfelf and pre-fently took Paper, and began to do as he had fworn, in, as near as I can remember, thcie Words.
c 31 3
To the KING.
SIR,
JT/E have no Juft ice from your Miniftry : / * ' beg to /peak to your Majefty myjelft that E may inform you, by Word of Mouth, what cheating Knaves you have got in your Cuftom-Houfe.
I am,
Your Majesty’s
Subject and humble Servant,
J. Rotherham*
T 6 this fine Epiftle he added a Poftcript> where the King (hould direct to him ; I forgot the Name of the Alley, but it was fomewhere behind St. Paul's Church. To this extravagant Pitch had Mr. 5——d’s Insinuations wound up the Expectations of thefe unfortunate Men, and all I could do to warn them of their Folly, was to no more Purpofe, than to throw Water againfl the Wind. I foon after heard the younger Hero was put into New-Prijon, fome-body having fworn Treafon againft him ; and poor Log-gins, after having fpent all his own Money, and a hundred Pounds borrowed, I faw begging with his Grey Flairs at a Door, to my great Concern, on the Account of his Age*
Nor
r 3% i
Nor was I lefs troubled at the Misfortunes to which Mr. Rogers, a Baker, was reduced by the Artifices of this general Deceiver, who fo far intoxicated him, by telling him, He was a Wit, and Jhould join with hi?n in writing a Weekly P'npery that he neglected his Bufinefs, fpeht all his Time &nd Money among Printers, Publifhers, and Paper Merchants, put his Wife into Bedlam, for having Prudence enough to diflike Mr. B»— and the Meafures he made him take, and was afterwards turned out of Doors by his Landlord, all his Goods feized on, and he glad to be a Journeyman, and a Slave for Life, who before lived in good Repute. From the Time he began to fink, Mr. B — d ufed him as the Devil does the Witch, never came near him, but made a Jell of his Calamities. I have many Witneffes of the Warnings I gave this Man, but to as little Purpofe as thofe I beftowed on the Cujlom-Houje Officers: He comes fometimes to my Ploufe to this Day, and laments the little Regard he pay’d to my Advice, and curfes B-------d in the utmoft Bitternefs of hiS Souk
5Tis certain, that no Rank nor Degree, but was liable to be enfnared by him. Mr. Hughs, a Non-juring Clergyman, and exceeded by few, in good Senfe and Learning, could not defend himfelf from giving into a Project hepropo-fed to him j in which having fpent all lie had, and reduced himfelf to great Miferies, in the End broke his Heart.
I
f 33 3
I fear I have been already too tedious in thofe melancholly Accounts *, but I am oblig’d, in the Vindication of my Character, to relate them, that the Reader may be convinced, how little I regarded my rnterefb, when it depended on doing a Prejudice to thofe who confulted me, fince by loothing any of thofe Perfons I have named, and Numbers of others not mention'd, whom Mr.
A-----■—-d brought to me, I might have been
one of the greateft Gainers by their Lofs.
But though I fhould publifh thefe, and ten thoufand more Inftances of this Nature, fo prejudiced are fome People, that it would all pafs for nothing ^ and to the reft of my Accufations, I doubt not, (Mentation would be added j for which Reafon, among others, I refolve to let no Perfon in the World perufe this Manufcript, till I am beyond the Reach of Envy or of Malice. I cannot, however, in Juft ice to thofe worthy Perfons, who have not difdained appearing in Behalf of the Dumb Conjurer, omit making mention of fome Inftances that I had Friends as well as Enemies *, among the Number of them was my good Lady AJhfield, who was not only famous for her Beauty, Riches, and Honour, but had alfo all the rare Qualities that can be found in Woman. I foretold fome extraordinary Events, to a lovely Daughter of hers, which happened exactly according to my Predictions, tho* nothing: at that Time feem’d more unlikely.
D	She
c 34 1
She ufed to lend frequently for me, and take me Abroad with her to all Places where fhe was free. Another Inftance, that all Mankind were notfet againft me, I met with at the Playhoufe in Drury Lane, one Night, when that excellent Comedy, The Provoked Wife, was acting. My Wife would needs have me accompany her, as imagining, perhaps, that no-body had fo much Reafon to be provoked as herfelf. About the Middle of the Third Act, three Sparks, whom I had feen at my Lady JJhfield’s, and who had rally’d her Ladyfhip, on the Confidence fhe put in me, came into the Pit, and immediately attacked both me and my Wife: I was very bufy on my Finger-Difcourfe with Mr. Befion and Claudy Philips, two famous Hands on the Violin, and did not regard the Behaviour of thefe Fops, till one of them damning us all, and what we were about: I perceived Claudy made fome Anfwer to him, on which another of them faid, as I was afterwards informed, That if I did not go out of the Houfe, he would have me kick’d out. By Heaven! replyed Befion, You had better be quiet, lefi you meet with the fame Fate, for he is not a Man who will bear an Infult if he knows of it. Claudy, at whofe Mother’s Houfe I lodged, and loved me as his Life, made known to me, on his Fingers, all this Flero faid *, on which I turned about, and finding the other two Sparks, his Companions, bufy about my Wife : I had no longer Patience, but knock’d the firft Beaux off his Seat i, they all three immediately drew, and fo,
indeed,
C 33
indeed, did half the Pit; Mr. Booth, who knew me very well, and faw the Danger I w.as in, tho’ he was in the Middle of his Part, leap’d off the Stage, and put his Arms about my Neck, and in that Pofture, afilfted by fome other of the Actors, carried me behind the Scenes, where, getting a Pen and Ink, I wrote a Challenge, having learned his Name, to him, who feemed the Chief of this Heroick Band. My Lord Hay Came in to me while I was writing, would needs be the Bearer of it himfelf, and protefted he would be my Second *, doing me the Honour to lay, That Duncan Campbel was his Relation, and as good a Gentle?nan as any there. I was carried that Night to St. Amanfs Coffee-Houfe, in St. Mar tins-Lane, where was a Club of Gentlemen of the Army : On their being informed of the Story, a Confultation was held, in what Manner to chaftife the Spark, in Cafe he did not anfwer my Apointment; one was for having him Pojied in all puhlick Places for a Coward; a Second, for having him well Baflinadoed \ but a Third, more moderate, faid, That, as he was a Beaux, a Utile Switch to heat the Powder out of his Wig, would anfwer the End as well as knocking his Brains cut• While I was thus diverting myfelf with good Company and Arrack Punch, my Advcrfary was employ’d with Lawyers to indict me in the Crown Office, on the Statute againft Gy plies, Fortunetellers, Witches, &c.—--of which I had ear-
ly Notice next Morning, by Mrs. Storys of Nor-folk-Street\ I, who knew nothing what the D 2	Crown-
C 3 6 3
Crown-Office meant* fhewed her a Paper I was refolved to ftick up in all the Coffee-Houfes about Town, the Gentleman not having met me; but fhe begg’d 1 would defer it till Three o* Clock, when fhe would bring the Lawyer to me, that it might be made up. I could not refufe a fair Lady ; and Providence, who had preferred me in many Dangers, was here particularly careful of me ; for my old Friend, Juftice Botelaroi tVeft-minjier, came to dine with me that Day, and tarrying till the Lawyer came, heard him infill? ‘That I Jhould ajk Pardon, on my Knees, of the Gentleman : But he no fooner heard his Name, than he ftarted up, and lhaking his Cane, Go, tell the Rogue, faid he, that he is my Nephew ; that I faved him hut the other Day from Newgate, and if I ever hear he meddles with my Friend, Campbel, Pll j'end him thither. The Lawyer on this departed, and I had no farther Trouble about the Bufmefs.
C H A p;
c 37 3
CHAP. IV.
On Witchcraft,
O T HI N G is more furprifing to me, than that Perfons of Senfe, efpecially a Religious one, fhould run on with that Vehemence , as fome do, againft all Accounts of Witchcraft: The Holy Scripture, both in the Old and New Teftament, affords Variety of Texts to prove it; but left they would not be thought to disbelieve any Tart of what is there contained, they have found out this Salvo ; to wit, That there was fuch Things in ^Jewifh Times, but they were all abolifhed. by the Sufferings of our Bleffed Saviour : I know not what Reafon they give for it, beftdes their own Imagination, for I never read that he has told us fo.
I f there has been none who have practifed Witchcraft of late Years, how highly, muft thofe Judges be blamed, who have fentenced fo many to the Stake, as were burned both in Scotland, and the North of England, in the Years 1627^ and 1629. Since then many have fuffered for D 3	the
C 38 3
the fame Crime, though not in fuch great Numbers ; and that there ftill are Perfons guilty of it, may be proved b y thofe unfortunate Creatures who feel the Effects of it, in a Manner, which no Diftemper, to which Humane Nature is incident, can inflict on them *, though to have made a Contract with the Devil, and receive from him the Power of doing Hurt, is now looked on as fuch an old Wife’s Tale, that if any Perfon is apprehended for it, a Juftice of the Peace is afraid to fign a Commitment, tho’ on the moll plain Proofs, for Fear of being laugh’d at by thofe, Wife in their own .Conceit, Gentlemen, who will have it no more than Imagination.
But if there be no fuch Thing as Witchcraft, what is that terrible Condition to which many People have been, and are, reduced to ? Why does it puzzle the Art of the whole College of Phyfi-cians ? Why is it never in the Power of Phyfick to make a Cure, or even give the leaft Eafe to the Perfons afflicted ? What is it gives that fuper-natural Strength to the unhappy Wretch, that, tho’ a Child of not above feven or eight Years of Age, a Dozen Men fhall not be able to hold him ? Every-body knows that, in ordinary Dif-eafes, the fick Perfon becomes Weak: What conveys into the Stomach Pins, Needles, Bundles of Hair, Sticks, Straws, and other Things, which I have feen vomited up ? What is it that makes them fpeak inVoices not their own, and laik learnedly on Things they know nothing of?
There
C 39 3
There is no accounting for it but by diabolical Practices, what, in old Times, bore the Name of Inchantment, and is now vulgarly called Witchcraft. I had a Man brought to me about twelve Years fincc, whofe Plead was turned directly behind him, all his Limbs editor ted, and the faded: Spectacle to behold, that Imagination can pof-fibly form *, he had ruined himfelf by following the Prefcriptions of divers Phyficians before he came to me ; but his Cafe will bed: be deferibed by his own Affidavit, made before the Lord Chief Judice Raymond, which I here incert for that Purpofe.
fhe Affidavit of Richard Coates?
Vintner.
Richard coates, late of Fen-
church-Street, Vintner, and Citizen of London, maketh Oath, That he, this Deponent, was for above four Tears, ajflidled with a violent Diftem-per, which was by moft People judged to be the Effedl of Witchcraft; his Head and all his Limbs being diftorted, and drawn into very ftrange and unnatural Poftures: Whereupon this Deponent applied himfelf to fevetal eminent Phyficians for their Afftftance therein, and in particidar to the late Dr• Ratcliffe and Dr. Cade, who, after this Deponent had been under their Hands for upwards of four Tears, fent him to the Bath for a Cure, but without any Effedl *, which, and his long languijhing under the /aid Diftemper, coft him upwards of Five D 4	Hun-
c 4° 3
Hundred Pounds, befides the Ruin of his Trade in bis Calling of an iVholefale Tobacconist; no twit h-fla'nding all which, he found no Relief, but grew fill worfe : upon which, this Deponent, hearing of one Mr. Duncan Campbel, and being made fen-fible of many furprizing Cures which he had performed, as fet forth in the Hiftory of the faid Campbel’} Life ; he, this Deponent, applied him-felf to the faid Duncan Campbel, for his Advice and. Affiftance in the faid Difiemper; who, in a few Mimths, by God’s Bleffing, perfectly cured this Deponent thereof infomuch that this Deponent hath ever fince (being about ten Tears) been bleffed with a very good State of Health, and been totally freed from the faid Dijlemper,	‘
Richard Coates,
Jurat 8. Jan. 1725. a pud
Serjeants-Inn, in Chan-cery-Lanc, coram me
R. Raymond.
This is a Teftimonial which no-body will dare to doubt the Truth of •, and feveral of the like Nature were made before Thomas Botelar, Efq; one of his Majefty’s Juftices of the Peace for Wefiminfter. What I did in thefe Cafes were efteemed Miracles. I became fo famous for the many Cures I did, that People, who had the leaft Reafon to imagine themfelves under an ill Tongue, would entreat me to lay my Hands on them, if I did no more *, believing there was .	Virtue
C 41 1
Virtue enough, even in a Touch of mine, to remove whatever Malignity they laboured under.
There was one Patient I had, which I cannot forbear making Mention of •, fhe was the Daughter of a Farmer, and feized in a ftrange Manner as fhe was going to Rumford Market, her Limbs diftorted, and the Ufe of her Senfes taken away: Her Parents were greatly afflicted, and fent her to London for the Phyficians Advice. The Houfe fhe was at, belonged to a Relation of her Mother, and was a Potter in Tioly-Street, Southwark ; fhe remained there fome Time, and no Money was fpared in order to recover her: Doctors, Surgeons, and Apothecaries were confulted,. but none of them knew what to make of her Diftemper. I was her laft Re-fource, and had no fooner caft my Eye on her, than 1 knew the Caufe by which fhe was aggrieved, and told the Company, that fhe was bewitched ; on which, one of them prefently cried out, "That Jhe believed it was fo, for fhe had heard the Girl often Jay, fhe could not be quiet for an old Woman, and that fhe would 'point to a Corner of the Room, and fay fhe food there, and feemed very angry no-body elfe could fee her. . They begged me to ufe my utmoft Endeavours for her, which I promifed, and at the fame Time allured them, that I did not doubt, with God’s Affiflance, making a perfect Cure in a fhort Time. Accordingly I ufed Means to bring the Witch to London and when I knew what I had done would
prove
C 4* 3
prove effectual, I went to the Houfe where (lie was, and told the People, I would not depart till I had left their Coufin as well as ever fhe was in her Life. They looked on me with Aftonifhment, as not being able to believe it poffible for me to make good my Words, fhe being (till as bad as when I firft faw her : I bad them have Patience, and mark the End, but faid, It would he Midnight before any thing could he done, As I had told them, the Clock had not ftruck Twelve many Minutes, before they heard fomebody knock at the Door i they would have opened it, but I forbad them, till after the third Knock, which being given, I made the Girl herfelf, and all the Family, go down with me, who were Witneffes, that as foon as I had opened the Door, an ill-favour*d old Woman, who ftood before it, fell down on her Knees to me, and begged I would give her Leave to return. The young Woman immediately fhriek*d, and laid, That was the Woman who- haunted her Bay and Night, and tonnenied her. On which, the vile Wretch redoubled her Prayers, that I would releafe her : I knew my Work was done, and unloofed the Spell that had compelled her to come thither, by giving her a imall Blow with my Cane. After this, we went into the Houle again, and my Patient was perfectly recovered, and could now tell us, That as fhe was going to Market, fhe rnet this Woman, who, on her-refufmg to give her a Couple of Eggs that fhe hegged 'of her, told her, it floould he worfe for her ; then went away muttering fomething which jhe did not
under-
C 43 3
underfland,	w&f that Minute fteixed in the Man-
ner before defcribed. The Relations of this Girl have often call’d upon me when they came on this Side the Water, and informed me, That Jhehas never relapfed, and is fince married, and has Jeveral Children, This Cure I performed about fifteen Years agoi
I should be too tedious in attempting to relate the twentieth Part of the Number of Children to whom I have been ferviceable, even tho* they were reduced fb low by the Force of an ill Tongue, as to be looked upon as Changelings *, I fhall, therefore, trouble my Reader only with one which has fomething fo aftonifhing in its Circumftances, as, I flatter myfelf, will excite no lefs Pleafure than Surprize.
It was the only Daughter of Mr. Thefton, a Gentleman of a competent Eftate in Berkfhire *, fhe was about three Years old, and a peculiar Favourite, not only for being one of the moil beautiful Infants in the World, but becaufe fhe was the laft Pledge of a moft dear and tenderly beloved and loving Wife, who died in bringing her into the World. This Child was, one Day, at Play before the Door with her Nurfe, when an old Woman afked her for a Piece of Cake fhe had in her Hand, which fhe not readily giving, the Witch gave three Strokes on the Ground with a Stick fhe leaned on, and cried out as loud as fhe could, Meeli! Mali! Meeli! for feveral
Times
t 44 1
Times together, and then run away as fwiftly as a Girl of Fifteen •, tho' the Nurfe, who gave this Account, faid, She appeared to he near a Hundred, and feemed fo decrepid before, as tho* jhe could Jcarce creep along. The Moment fhe was out of Sight, the Child began to cry, and prefently after, the Noife flie made could be compared to nothing but the Mewing of a Cat; in fliort, from that Time the Ufe of Speech was taken away *, her pretty innocent Prattle, and the many little Actions which fo much endear thofe of her Age to Parents, was now changed into a Behaviour far different * fire crawl’d upon all Four *, flie fpit upon every-body that offered.to touch her, and on the Nurfe’s dreffmg or undreffing her, fell into fuch Pafftons, that floe even foamed at the Mouth. Never Trouble exceeded that of poor Mr. Tiverton ; after having had Recourfe to all the Help . the Country afforded, he brought her to Town, but with as little Succefs, tho', as he told me himfelf, it had cofl him more than three hundred Pounds. Mrs. Majon, my good Friend, at lafl advifed him to me •, he came, and brought the Child, the Caufe of whole Misfortune I prefently perceived, and defcribed in a Bit of Paper the very Picture of the Wretch who had laid the curfed Spell upon her, as the Nurfe, who Fill attended her, confeffed. As the Accident happened in Berkjhire, I found it very difficult to work a Cure here •, for this pernicious Agent of Hell had made Ufe of other Means, I found5 than the Witch who had afflicted the Rumford
Maid,
r 4 5i
Maid, and it was not in my Power to bring her to London, as I had done the other ; nor would Mr. Tiverton's Circumftances allow him to make a Gratification for going to Berkjhire, proportionable to the Lois it would have been to my Family, that I fhould be fo long abfent from London. I gave him, however, a Paper fealed up, which I ordered fhould be half ftuck in the Ground, and the other half out, juft in the Place, as near as the Nurfe could remember, where the Witch had ftood at the Time of her fpeaking to the Child : This I ftrictly charged fhould not be moved by any Perfon belonging to him *, and to prevent a Stranger, who might accidentally pafs that Way, from plucking it out, I defined he would place a Servant, Night and Day, to watch it: My Advice Was punctually 'followed, and he wrote to me to inform me, that the third Night an old Woman was feen to hanker about the Place, but the Vigilance of the Servants preventing her from touching the Paper, fhe came the next Day, and begg’d fhe might fee the Child, which fhe being, according to my Orders, permitted, fhe uttered, in a low Voice, fome unintelligible Words, and went out of the Houfe with the utmoft Speed : From that Moment the poor Babe recovered her former Accents and Behaviour, to the Surprize of the whole Country, and the inexpreflible Joy of her Father, who did not fail to fend me an immediate Account of the Succefs of my Prefcription, and the Reward agreed for between us, if it had
the
r 46 ]
the defired Effect *, which, I confefs, I did not greatly depend on myfelf, unlefs I could have been there in Perfon, fo flrong was the diabolical Influence over her. Yet, thro* the merciful Af-fiftance of gracious Providence, the Myfteries of Hell were unravelled, and my little Patient perfectly reftored, and remained fo to her Death, which happened fome Years afterwards, of the Small-Pox.
Numberless are the Teftimonials may be given, that there are ftill Wretches on Earth fo abandon’d as to fell their Eternal Happinefs hereafter, for the vile Satisfaction they take in doing Mifchief *, and I fincerely wifh, that thofe Perfon s who are of a different Opinion, may never be convinced by wofully experiencing the Effects on themfelves of what they give fo little Credit to oh others*
C H A P.
t 47 I
CHAP. V.
On the Various Deceptions endeavoured to he pul on Me.
Tip Y telling Names at firft Sight, ap~ m pears fo prodigious a Thing to all the World, that it is not furprifing i many who have not been allured of it themfelves, fhould doubt the Truth of it, when told it by others. Nor do I blame the Caution of thole Perfons who refufe their Faith to every Thing (excepting the Divine Myfteries) that is not to be accounted for by Reafon. The Second Sight is an Infpiration wholly Supernatural, and none but thofe really poffeil of it, can form any Idea what it is: therefore the Wonders wrought by it," may well feem Fabulous to thofe who prove *em not. Thofe who were too much prejudiced to make the Tryal, have rendered what I pretend to this Way, a Handle to afperfe me with the Title of an Impojiure : Others, of a more candid Difpofition, have thought fit to prove before they judged ; and after having done fo, have thought nothing too much to do for me, to attone for their paft Diffidence: Of this Number was
the.
I 48 ]
the late Dutchefs of Wharton, who, on the 28th of May, 1723, when all the World were paying^ their Compliments at St. James's, took that Opportunity to divert herfelf with the pretended Conjurer, (as Ihe thought) or at leaft to fatisfy herfelf, whether I was fuch or not.
Accordingly fhe came with herNurfeand Woman, but more meanly habited than either of them : I was gone to take my Morning Walk in the Park, when this Vifit was made ; but my Wife telling them that I would return foon, they confented to ftay, though not without fome Difficulty. They told her, That they were all Servants in one Family, and Jhould get Anger if mijjed. The Nurfe paffed for the Houfekeeper, the Dutchefs for Chambermaid, and her Woman for Cook.
As I happened to ftay that Morning fome-what longer than ordinary, my Wife met me upon the Stair-Cafe, and told me on her Fingers, The Devil was in me to run about fo and neglect my Bufinefs; that there was three. Servants had waited for me an Hour and a Half, and fhe had much ad» to perfuade them to ftay. I made her no Anfwer, but threw off my Great-Coat, and went into the Room. They had all wrote their feveral Quef-tions ready for me.
The
t 49 3
- The Dutchefs’s was as follows.
SIR, I have a very good Place, tho* my Lady is Jomewhat p'eevifh, and my Lord’s Gentleman is Very much my Enemy, and has made a thoufand Lies on me, fo that I am threatened to he turned away every Hour. 1 defire to know if he will get his Ends or not. Pray he fipeedy, for if my Lady, who is now Abroad, fhould come Home, and I out of the Way, I mufi not exp ell to lie another Night in the Houfe.
The Nurfe wrote in this Manner.
S JR, I have a Son at Sea, a wild Touth, hut very Ingenious : I would know if he will come Home Jafe, and what Lime I may expect him, and if he will make a good Voyage.
The Woman wrote no more than thefe Words*
S IR, I have no particular Queftion, hut dsfire to know, in general, if I am defigned to a good or had Fate.
I read their Papers, and then made a Sign, that Ihe who would be firft anfwered fhould go up ; on which there was a great Difpute, who fhould have the Preheminence *, but at length yielded to the feeming Houfekeeper, both on the Account of her Age, and being upper Servant: But this Conteft giving me an Opportunity of looking more ftedfaftly on them, than I ufually do, till they go up, and I have placed myfelfina fit E	Pofition
P 5*0 1
Pofition, I faw enough to know they were putting a Trick upon me; and, therefore, taking the Dutchefs by the Hand, I, in a Manner, compelled her to take the Precedence. I was not many Minutes above with her, before i anfwered her Queftion in thefe Terms.
TO U ferve no Lady, but a Lord, who, thd the moft accomplijhed and wittiejl Man of the Age, has Humours which take away all the Happinefs of Grandeur : Thofe Women below are your Attendants, but tafte more Felicity than your Grace, be-caufe they have only the Pleajure of the beft of Women to confult', you have that of the moft capricious of Men.
The Dutchefs had no fooner read this than Ihe turned as pale as Death, trembled, and had all the Symptoms of an approaching Swoon. I knew it was occafioned only by her Surprize, and that Ihe would foon recover; but thinking it might be a Prejudice to her, ihe being young with Child, I ftamped for my Wife, who run for a Bottle of Spirits, and fome fair Water ; the Women below, hearing the Noife, followed her, and by their Afliduities about the Indif-pofed, made my Wife know Ihe was more than their Equal.
When Ihe came to herfelf, ihe lhewed the Paper I had wrote, and ingenuoufly confefskb She. came to try my SkillK mt believing it poffible 1
could
C 5*1 ]
conld do the 'Things I pretended to ; hut floe was now convinced that I was more than even my befi Friends coidd reprefent me. The Women were in the utmofi Ajionijhment, and looked on me as a kind of Pro-digy.
After this, fhe proceeded to afk me feveral Queftions, not only concerning herfelf and the Duke, but alio of Matters relating to the State, to which I returned fuch Anfwers, as more af-fured her I was enabled to do it by no Intelligence, but an intellectual One.
I had the Honour of her Grace’s Company almoft the whole Day, my Lord Duke being at that Time out of Town; and I have been fince informed, that ihe fhewed him feveral of my Papers, and that the frequent Vifits fhe made me afterwards, were as much by his Defire as her own ; and, I believe, I may fay, without Vanity, that the Alteration in his Conduct towards her, fo much for the better, was owing to what 1 wrote.
Just fuch another Artifice, immediately after this, was practifed on me by a young Lady,who, tho* not yet arrived to a Title, will not long be without one, and may be faid to merit thenobleft, if Virtue, Wit, good Humour, and the moft perfect Beauty Nature ever made, can do it,
I P 3
She came to me in a plain Stuff Gown, a coarfe Houfewife’s Apron, and a round-ear’d Cap •, the Perfon who accompanied her, was habited in much the fame Manner, but neither fo Young nor fo Handfome by many Degrees *, (he feemed, however, to an ordinary Eye, to be the Superior of the two, and accordingly prefent-ed her Queflion firft ; but I prefently faw thro* the Deception, and pufhing her away, took the young Beauty and placed her in an Eafy-Chair, and pointed to the other to ftand behind it, taking, at the fame Time, a Whip in my Hand, which always hangs by the Chimney in my Dining-Room, in order to keep the Dogs in Subjection, and fmacked it feveral Times. The Aftonifhment they were both in is not to be ex-preffed ; but I took my Pen, and wrote in this Manner.
9<T IS not the Hahit can deceive me ; I fee the Perfon as it is, and regard not the outward Orna-' menls. You, young Charmer, are at prefent dif-tinguifhed by the JVorld only for your Beauty and good Qualities, but in a little Time will loje the
Name of fine Mrs. ————, for my Lady----------
You, who wanted to know your Fortune fir ft, have already made it, by being Servant to fo good a Mi ft refs, and marrying the Coachman, who is a very honeft Man, and by whom you are now with Child of a Girl.
If
t S 3 1
If they were amazed before, they were now much more fo ; and finding it in vain to continue their Difguife, frankly owned it, anyl a Iked my Pardon. I told them, I was far fr^n condemning Jo innocent a Fraud ; nay, on the contrary, wifhed that all who had the leajl Diffidence in me, would take the fame Meafures to be convinced. I then related to them many Endeavours of the like kind to deceive and pofe me, with my Dif-coveries of them, which very much diverted the young Lady, who fent for a Bottle - of French Wine, and a Piece of Salmon, and was heartily merry for three or four Hours.
Did I not fear it might draw Reflections on fome of my fair Confulters, I could recount a Number who made ufe of thofe Stratagems, particularly, a certain Countefs, who, being a Brunetta, and of the largefl Size for her Sex, thought to deceive me, by coming in the Habit of the other *, the Wife of a Baronet, who coloured her Face, and Neck, and wore a Jacket and Petticoat, in order to pafs on me for a Mo-lotta Slave *, but I chufe rather to lofe the Honour of being able to difcover the true Perfon from the Counterfeit, than make any Mention of thofe Perfons real Names, to whom it would be a Prejudice, and to give them feigned ones, would make this, which is in every Particular a true Hiftory, favour of Romance.
E 3	But
t 54 3
But I think it not fo ftrange, that Women, to whom Curiofity is inherent, Ihould take this extraordinary Pains, as I do at that of the Men : If they believe me an Impoftor, or an ignorant Pretender, let them enjoy their Opinion, I never did, nor never will, give myfelf any Trouble to confute it; his enough for me to pleafe thofe who confide in me: In that my Ambition is fa-tisfied, and I would chufe rather to be Eafy than Great. But I have very good Reafons to be allured, that thofe Gentlemen who have endeavoured to find me out, as they call it, took not that Pains meerly to expofe me, as they pretended, and to undeceive the World, but to confult me themfelves, In cafe I fhould be found not deficient. So much is the Defire of being informed of future Events grafted in the Soul, that none, of whatever Sex, but would prefer that Knowledge to any other.
Every-bqdy who has been with me, knows that when I have any very difficult Queftions put to me, I go into the Air, leaving my Confulter alone for fometimes half an Hour, more or lefs, according as the Infpiration comes upon me, and enables me to give a Solution. I was one Day going on one of thefe little Progreffes, when I was faluted at my Door by three Gentlemen, whole Habit and Deportment befpoke them to be Perfons of Diftinction. As they underftood not the Finger Talk, I whittled for my Wife
to
t 55 1
to come down and know their Commands, to whom one of them faid, He was my Countryman, and that the others were of the Court of France, and juft arrived here, hut that the Fame of the wonder-ful Things I had done had reached their Ears, and, they believed, were not unknown to all the polite Courts of Europe : That this Vifit was only intended to pay a Compliment to a Man fo juftly efteemtd. My Wife then told them, That Ladies being in the Houfe, who were averfe to feeing any of their Sex, except him they came to confult, it was impojjible for me to receive the Honour they did me, but in an Hour or two I Jhould be free from other Company, and woidd then devote myfelf to them entirely. All this being in an ill Light, my Door Handing under an Arch, I could not diftinguifh the Phy-liognomy of any of thofe that fpoke ; but they were not gone half a Minute, before my good Genius informed me, this was no friendly Yifita-tion, and bad me Hand upon my Guard when they fhould return, as they promifed to do at the Time prefixed by my Wife. As fhe had promifed, however, that I would give them my Company, I would not avoid feeing them, and accordingly difpatched my Ladies with all the Speed I could, that I might be ready to receive them. They failed not to come, and after a Cup or two of Punch, began to put feveral Queftions to me in a ludicrous Way, to all which I gave this general Anfwer.
E 4
Gen-
[ $6 1
Gentlemen, for fuch I know you are, not lj your Habit, but my own innate Intelligence, if you come with a real Defire of being inform'd of any thing within the Compafs of my Art, I fhall do my Reft to fatisfy you *, or if you aim only at being diverted, I am as ready to promote Mirth as your-felves : But would beg you to remember I am a Gentleman aijo, and as I never offend againft the Rules of good Manners, expect the fame Decorum to be ufed towards me.
Having delivered this to them with a ferious Air, I obferved them to look on one another with fome Confufion, and, at length, freely own’d, That they came with no other Defign than to banter me, but my Behaviour convincing them I was not the Perfon I had been reprejented, they acknowledged their Error, and Jhould be glad of a farther Acquaintance. I then gave them to underftand I knew they were all Engfifbmen ; and, without a Fee, wrote feveral Hints to each of them, which let them fee I was no Impoftor, and had it in my Power to reveal what molt they defired fhoulcf be kept fecret. The Converfation was, however, maintained with the utmoft good Humour, and innocent Pleaiantry, amongft us, for the whole Evening ; after v/hich, they took Leave, alluring; me, They would hear nothing fpoken to my Difad_ vantage for the future, by any Perfon in their Company. I have had, fmce, good Reafon to believe what they laid, having received many fignal Favours
c 57 1
yours from all three, but efpecially from one, who, I mull own, has been the belt and fmcerefi Friend I ever met with.
Inexpressibly difficult have been the Tasks I have had put upon me, and had I fail’d in anyone of them, as I mull have done if my good Angel had not been extremely watchful ci thole Occafions, it would have patted current in die World, that I was an Impoftor. For inftance, a Gentleman of great Worth and Honour, and my very good Friend and Champion, happened one Day into fome Company, where I was made the Subject of the utmoft Ridicule ; one feemed more inveterate than the reft, and faid, He knew I could not tell any Per Jon's Name, without being firjl informed of it by fome Spy or other; adding, That he knew I kept a Pack of Vagabond Fellows on purpofe to watch Home thoje who came to confult me. My Friend, who was entirely fatisfied of the contrary, offered to lay a Wager of twenty Guineas on my Head, that I would tell the Name of any Perfon he fhould bring to me ; the other readily took him up, but on this Condition, that it fhould be one who was a Stranger to all the Company. My Defender agreed, and to make the Matter more fure, they all adjourn’d that Afternoon to an adjacent Tavern, whence my Friend, by Content of them all, wrote me a Line, defiring to fpeak with me that Moment, on extraordinary Bufinefs, but made no Mention of what Nature : I was a little indifpofed when
the
I	C *8 ]
the Porter brought this Letter to me, but having a great Regard for the Gentleman that fent it, drefs’d myfelf, and complied immediately with his Summons. I was not a little furprized to find fo great a Number of fine Ladies and Gentlemen with him, there being thirteen in Number. I had not been long fat down, before my Friend told me, I was to tell the Nam.e of a Perfon I fhould fee in a little white : On which, I began to excufe myfelf on Account of my In-difpofition, for, indeed, I was not in a Humour for Bufinefs at that Time. I had no foonerfeem’d to evade it, but I perceived a malicious Smile fit on the Faces of all the Company, except my Friend, who appeared as much difpleafed, and wrote again, That he had laid a Wager on my ■ Head, and if I did not 'perforin now, as ufual, he jhould have Reafon to take it ill: On which, X return’d, That to oblige him, and vindicate my oven Honour, I would do much. I then defired to know* Which of thofe Strangers, for they were all fuch to me, I was to try my Art upon : But they would not confent it fhould be any that was known to my Friend, left by fome private Token he might inform me. It was, at laft, agreed, that two of the Gentlemen fhould ftand at the Door, and defire the firft Perfon that came by, and feem’d to have Senfe enough not to be difpleafed at the Jeft, to come in. This was accordingly done, and they brought in a Man of about fifty Years of Age. I muft confefs, I was much longer before I fatisfied the Curiofity of thefe People, than
ordinary,
L 59 1
ordinary, the Compulfion, as it were, that was put on me, the Wjtticifms I perceived were made by my Adversaries, and the Impatience of my Friend, involved me in Thoughts not at all to the Furtherance of what I was to do. Iaccomplilh’d it, however, tho’ this Perfon had three Names, and very uncommon ones, viz. Azariah Tomlin-Ion Blackenthorpr, which I wrote down in the fame Manner, not miffing one Letter, as he himfelf confeffed, as he fpelled them : He, moreover, told the Company, That he was an American born> and was never in England more than a Month at a Time in three or four Tears j fo that it was im-poffible Chance JJsould ever have made us acquainted.
My Friend now triumph’d, and the others look’d as much confufed as they had been gay before ; they did not fail, however, to treat me with the utmoft Civility, and I had, afterwards, V ifits from them all ; the very Perfon who laid the Wager againft me, doing nothing, from that Time, without my Advice.
I had another Tryal, of much the fame Nature with this, put upon me : It was to tell the Name of a Boy, who £ame a hundred Miles Diftance, to ferve in a Coffee-Houfc, and was arrived but the Moment they fent for me, nor had told his Name to any Perfon but his Matter : This Affair terminated to my Advantage and Honour, a great many Gentlemen of the beft
Falhion,
t 6q 1
Fafhion, as well as others, being prefen £ when l fulfilled the Requeft made to me.
Many more of thefe Examples could I give my Reader, but I chufe to confine myfelf to a few which have happened of late Years, and yet frefh in the Memory of my Friends ; and are Efficient to ,prove my Art is not to be deceived by any Stratagems whatfoever.
CHAP. VI.
On Omens: Which are to he depended on, and which not.
OTHING is more contrary to |J good Senfe, than imagining every b thing we lee and hear is a Prognof-6 tick either of Good or Evil, except it be the Belief that nothing is fo. I have known People who have been put into fuch terrible Ap-prehenfions of Death by the fqueaking of a Wea-zel, as have been very near bringing on them the Fate they dreaded. Others have thought them-felves fecure of receiving Money, if their Hands itched, or, by chance, a little Spider fell upon their Cloaths ; Some will defer going Abroad?
tha*
r 61 :
tho9 called by Bufinels of the greateft Confe-quence, if, happening to look out of the Window, they fee a Angle Crow j or going out, are met by a Perfon who has the Misfortune to fquint; either of thefe turns ’em immediately back, and, perhaps, by delaying till another Time what requires an immediate Difpacth, the Affair goes wrong, and the Omen is, indeed, fulfill’d, which, but for the Superftition of the Obferver, would have been of no Effect.
How many People have I feen in the mod terrible Palpitations, for Months together, expecting, every Hour, the Approach of fome Calamity, only by a little Worm which breeds in old Wainfcot, and endeavouring to eat its Way out, makes a Noife like the Movement of a Watch. Others again, by having caught Cold, feel a certain Noife in their Heads, which feems to them like the Sound of diftant Bells, fancy themfelves warned of fome great Misfortune.
The Fire alfo affords a kind of Divination to thefe Omen-mongers •, they fee Swords, Guns, Caftles, Churches, Prifons, Coffins, Wedding-Rings, Bags of Money, Men and Women, or whatever ehey either fear or wiih, plainly decy-phered in the glowing Coals.
There are others who, from the Clouds, calculate the Incidents that are to befal them, and fee Men on Horfeback, Mountains, Ships,
Forefts,
C 61 J
Forefts, and a thoufand other fine Things In the Air j but to fee a New Moon the firlt Time after her Change, on the Right-hand, or directly before you, betokens the utmoll good Fortune that Month ; as to have her on your Left j or behind you, fo that in turning your Head back you happen to fee her, forefhews the worft j as alfo, they fay, to be without Gold in your Pocket at that Time* is of very bad Confer qiience.
I have feen People, who, after writing a Letter, have prognofticated to themfelves the ill Succefs of it, if, by any Accident, it happened to fall on the Ground : Others have feem’d as impatient, and exclaiming againft their own Want of Thought, if, thro’ Halle or Forgetfulnefs, they have chanced to hold it before the Fire to dry : But the Miftake of a Word in it, is a Hire Omen that whatever Requell it carries, fhall be refufed. Who was the firlt Inventor of thefe Forebodings, I know not, but they are now fo much the Falhion, efpecially among the fair Sex, that it is a kind of Rarity to find one free from it.
There are, indeed, fecret Warnings given, I believe, to all Men, by their better Angels, which ought no more to be neglected, than the Abfurdities I have made Mention of, fhould pafs for any thing but what they are, the mere Effects of Chance.
Few
C 63 1
Few Men in thefe latter and more corrupted Ages of the World, have Sanctity of Manners, and Piety of Mind, fufficient to entitle them to the Converfation of blelfed Spirits, Face to Face, as did the Patriarchs of old ; and almoft as few who, without that Purity of Soul, have the Gift of Second Sight, as it is vulgarly called, but which is no other, in Reality, than the Power of difeern-ing incorporeal Beings: How, therefore, fhould thofe miniftring Spirits, which the Divine Good-nefs fets over us as Guardians, communicate their Inftructions, excite us to good Actiops, deter us from bad ones, or give Notice of the extraordinary Events that fhall befal us, but by intellectual Remonftrances : Something which rifes in the Mind on the fudden, and according to the Will of the fupreme Director of all Things, either dwells in it for a long Time, or fleets away like a Flafh of Lightning, which we neither know whence derived, nor whither fled, but once gone, is no more to be recovered. How often do People fay, Such a "Thing run in their Head ? and tho’, according to worldly judging, there was, at that Time, no vifible Reafon for their acting in fuch or fuch a Manner, yet being fway’d by this Impulfe, they could not avoid doing it: Others, again, have cried, I had once a Thought to go on this or that Expedition, but it went out of my Head. Thefe are, certainly, the Conferences which the Soul holds, unknown to the Body, with the invifible World, and, I believe, none,
except
C 6 4 ]
except Ideots or Lunaticks, but have experienc’d, more or lefs, of thefe Tranfitions of the Mind.
But as the evil Angels are alfo fometimes permitted to infufe their pernicious Inftincts, it requires both Religion and Penetration to know the one from the other *, becaufe thefe Minifters of Darknefs are too fubtil to bid a Man who is not a profeffed Enemy of Virtue, do an Action directly contrary to it ; no, they difguife the Poifon they endeavour to inftil, under the Name of a Cordial •, they do not directly perfuade to an ill Action, but to fomething which has the Shew of Good, but muft infallibly draw on the contrary. Nor do our Guardian Angels always infpire what is moll pleafing, our Senfes come in for their Part, and will not fuffer the Soul to operate as fhe would do : Hence we liften to fuch Injunctions with Reluctance, and too frequently repel them entirely.
So weak is human Nature, and fo little, while clogg’d with earthly Views, and ever-craving Pa (lions, are we able to judge rightly of thefe intellectual Admonitions •, happy are they who are fo highly favoured, to make a wife Choice ; and, I think, there is nothing for which we fhould fo conftantly and earneftly intreat of Heaven, as the Capacity of knowing which of thofe various Suggeftions which we call, and have no other Name for, than our own Thoughts, fhould be complied with, and which rejected.
The
[ 6S 1
The mod plain arid remarkable Way, however, by which thefe Monitors convey their In-ftructions to us are in Dreams •, and tho* home who would be thought very wife, laugh at all who give any Regard to them, yet, I believe, his eafy to prove, not only from common Gb-fervation, but from Authorities which no-body, who owns the Being of a God, will dare to dif-pute, that in all Ages of the World, thole Meri have been looked on as the moil Learned and Sagacious, who have known beft how to interpret them.
I n Sleep the Soul acts apart from the Body ’■> fhe is relealed from all thofe Impediments which confine her Knowledge $ and could we, waking, remember, all we have feen inthofe Interval, I am apt to believe, Futurity would not be fo ftrange to us *, but at our Return to Senfe, all that is paffed dwells but confufedly in the Mind •, we can relate but Part, and that too appears fo dark, fb wrapt up in Clauds, and mingled with other Ideas, that it gives a very faint Refemblance of all thofe Things which the Soul, I do not doubt, has feen clearly, and without Deception.
Are not the Holy Scriptures full of Examples, how God himfelf was pleafed to reveal himfelf h/Dreams ; and I know not, if Mofes plucking off his Shoes to fpeak to God in the Bulh, was not meant parabolically •, for as all
F	Things
C 66 3
Things are not to be unclerftood litterally, efpe-cialJy in that Time when Hierogliphicks were fo much ufed ; I fee no Reafon why, by the plucking off’ his Shoes, might not be meant, that, in Sleep, he threw off all the Paffions of the Senfes, and had his Soul at Liberty to entertain, and liften to his great Creator,
Nay, even in the New 'Teftdment, who can judge of St. Paul's being taken into the Third Heaven, any otherwife, than that in a Beatifick Vifion, his Soul was prefented with a View of that glorious Place.
9T i s, therefore, methinks, as profane, as it is abfurd, to make a Jeff, or defpife the Ad* monitions given us in Sleep ; but, even here, as well as in our waking Thoughts, the fallen Angels have Power to tempt and to delude the imagination: As for Example, if a covetous, and fordidly avaritious Man dream, that he is fhewed the Way to a Rich Man’s Coffers, and, at his Will, plunders them : Or, if a Man, given up to unlawful Pleafures, in Sleep, fatiates his luff ful Appetite in the Embraces of his Neighbour’s Wife or Daughter, either of thefemay very well judge fuch Phantoms arife only by the Subtilty of the Devil, who tempts him with an imaginary Poffeffion of what he wifhes, in order to heighten his Defires, and render him capable of flicking at nothing, be it never fo wicked, in order to compafs his Intent,
Ha vs
I 67 ]
Have not even, in latter Days, many wonderful Difcoveries been made by Dreams ; would not many an Heir, who now lives in the molt plenteous Manner, have been driven to feck his Bread from Charity, or lome fervile Employment, had not his Birthright been render’d to him by a Dream? Would not many a Murtherer, who, for bathing his Elands in the Heart’s Blood of his Fellow-Creature, his Neighbour, his Friend, his Brother, or, perhaps, his Wife, juftly yielded up his Life to the Gallows, be now alive, and triumph in his Crime, believing he had been too fecret in it, even for the Eye of Heaven, had not the deteftable Fact been revealed in a Dream ?
And yet, for all that can be urged, either from Sacred or Profane Hiftory, to give Credit to Dreams, is looked on, as a fit Subject for Ridicule, tho* I do not remember any one Per-fon, whether Male or Female, in the whole Courfe of my long and nume’ ous Acquaintance, who has not confeffed, on being ferioufly afked, That jometime or other, in their Lives, they have had, extraordinary Warnings in Dreams, if they 'would have taken Notice of them.
One, in particular, who, in Publick, feerned to defpife all Regard of Dreams, as favouring too much of Superftition, acknowledged to me, in Private, That being in great Danger of Ruin, F 2	-for
t 68 3
for the Sum of 'Two hundred Pounds, he had Thoughts of borrowing it of a Relation, who, tho* Zy many ReafonS,	Obligation of ferving him, he
knew to be of a Difpoftion which would not fuffer him very readily to comply with his Requeft : This Humour made the Borrower, who was of a pretty high Spirit, in Debate with himfelf, as ho lay in Bed, if he £hould chufe Ruin, or an Obligation from fo churlifh a Perfon •, and he went to Sleep half refolved to run the Hazzard of the former : But his good Angel was kinder to him in this Exigence, than his Unbelief deferved j and he dreamed, that being with his Coufm, he had afked him for the Money, who anfwered, That he had not fo much at Command, at that Time, but that, he believed, Mr. fuch a One, naming a Perfon he knew very well\ would lend it him, if he would confent to pay a trifling Inter eft. As little as he regarded any Admonitions of this Kind, the Dream made fo great an Imprelfion on him, that it changed the Intention he had formed before he Hept, and early in the Morning, went to feek his Coufm, who repeated to him the very Words he had imagined he heard him fpeak in his Dream ; accordingly, he applied to the Perfon mentioned, ot whom, otherwile, he laid, hefhould not have had the lead: Thought, and had the Money he defired.
Is it then not ftrangely ungrateful to the Power which has fo far condefcended to give us Directions, how to proceed, not to acknowledge the
Favours
r 69 ^
Favours we receive ? Yet are there People, who, after repeated Inftances of the Goodnefs of a directing Providence, have not only denied, but profanely afcribed that to their own Prudence, which could not be forefeen without the immediate Interpofition of a Being infinitely fu-perior.
1 Knew a Sea-Surgeon, who having been a long Time out of Bufinefs, and by that Means reduced to very unhappy Circumfiances, was glad, at laft, to engage himfelf, as Surgeon’s Mate? with a Mafter of one of thofe Ships which go |o Greenland, on the Whale-Fifhery, and, accordingly, had put his Cheft of Inftruments, Bed, and Cloaths, on Board, and lay, himfelf, at Gravejend, waiting the filling down -of the Vef-fel: Some few Nights before he expected to fail, a venerable Old Man appeared to him in his Sleep, and bad him, Give over all Thoughts of his Voyage, for the Ship would certainly he loft. The. Dream a little troubled him, but the Remembrance of it foon paffed over, till, the fecond Night, he faw the fame Vifion again, and the Injunction repeated. This made him begin to think there was fomething more than ordinary in it, and he could not forbear communicating it to the Head-Surgeon, who lay in the fame Houfe with him *, but this Man, being too wife, in his own Conceit, to regard Dreams, laughed at his Superftition, and began to repeat feveral of his own, which feemed remarkable, but no-
C 70 1
thing, as he faid, of Moment happened after them This kind of Difcourfe again embolden’d him, and, he refolved, in Spite of Omens, to profecute his Voyage. Well, the third Night, as he lay in Bed, he imagined himfelf on Board, encompafled with all the Terrors of the Deep, when the Winds and Waves feem to threaten not only thofe that tempt their Fury, but even thofe who endeavour to be moft fecure on Land : He thought the Ship ftruck, with the utmoft Violence, on a Rock, and was ftaved in a thoufand Pieces ; that he faw the Matter clinging to a Plank, and floating for a Moment, then funk down beneath a mountainous Billow, which came ruffling over him on a fudden : At the fame Time Fancy prefented him with various dreadful Images of others of the Ship’s Crew, perifh-ing in the Storm : The Terror of this Object made him awake with a loud Cry, which was heard by feveral in theHoufe, who, believing fome-thing extraordinary was the Matter, ran haftily into his Chamber, where they found him on his Knees, thanking God he was on Shoar, and fo-lemniy vowing, not to truft himfelf in a Vefiel, which he was now allured would never come Home fife. Nor could all the Perluafions, or Ridicule of thofe who talked to him on this Plead, nor his own Misfortunes, which threatened him with almoft ftarving, prevail with him to undertake this Voyage j but the Wind being fair in. a few Hours, he fetched his Things
from
C 71 1
from the Ship, and fuffered it to depart without him.
The fame God who had warned him of the threatened Evil, foon after remedied his Diftref-fes, by raifing him a Friend, who recommended him to an Eajl-India Captain, with whom he went, and made a fife and profitable Voyage j but, at his Return, enquiring after the Gree nlanH Veffel heard it was funk, and all the Men loft, as he had feen in his Dream, or rather Vifion.
To what, then, can we afcribe thefe Warnings, but to a good Angel ; who, while the Faculties of the Body are dead to every Thing, converfes with the Soul, and reveals to it as much as the Divine Wifdom thinks fit to permit ? Thofe who are above taking Notice of thefe intellectual and fpiritual Counfels, may imagine themfelves Perfons of Sagacity, and pafs in the World for fuch, but, doubtlefs, fometime or other, will repent their Unbelief, and when the Mifchief they are bid to avoid, falls on therrq will wifh, too late, in Bitternefs of Heart, that they had been lefs wife, or, at leaft, had lef^ affected to be fo.
This was the Cafe of a young Man, who, being of a roving Difpofition, would needs quit his Father, whofe Darling he was, and go A-broad to fee the World, as he called it: He feveral Times hinted his Inclination, but the old F 4	'	Man
C 72, 1
Man would, by no Means, be brought to con-lent to it, telling him, That he was of great Years, and had now no Comfort of Life, hut in his Prefence ; befides,	Azh	Pcrfon to manage
his Affairs,	•zcwj', himfelf incapable of doing it,
/;fi Abfencc would be of the ntmofi Detriment. Perceiving, therefore, there was no Hope of parting by Confent, the undutiful Wretch refolved to go away privately, which wicked Defign he ac-compliihed, taking away as much Money and Plate as he thought would be fufficient to fupport him for a confiderable Time. The Night after his Elopement, he dreamed, that he was lying in a fine Field, the Element above him, the molt ferene and beautiful that could be, but, as he was contemplating, he perceived fomething dark over his Head, which turning to examine, he found it proceeded from a Pair of huge Scales that hung, poifed by an invifible Hand, in the Air, but lo low, that he feared their falling on him, and crufhing him with their Weight \ a little farther, he beheld, but much higher, a Sword, that with its Keennefs feemed to cut the Clouds which encompaffed it, and at the Point hung Drops of clotted Blood: Turning his Eyes from fo terrible a Profpect, he caft them to the other Side of the Hemiiphere, which prefen ted itfelf to him full of innumerable Circles that were cut crofs and crofs by other Lines, and from the Middle of each, long Darts fliot forth, with all their Points levelled at him : He told me, That m a frojly Plight the Sky is not more fpangled with
Stars,
c 73 1
Stars, than in his Bream it appeared with Circles. He awoke much terrified, but, as many others do, thought it childifh, or foolifh, to regard any Occurrences which fhould befal in
In fhort, he went on his intended Progrefs, but had not proceeded far, before he met with Robbers, who took from him all the Money and Bills he had about him, and being obliged to beg his Way to the Place where he expected a Recruit, having left the Plate he took from his Father, in the Hands of a wild Companion of his, who was to difpofe of it, and remit the Money by the Poll *, but having waited a considerable Time, and no Letter arriving, he wrote to an Acquaintance, to enquire after this unfaithful Steward, who fent him the melancholly Account, That he was gone to the Indies. Having lived on Credit, and now without Means to dif-charge the Obligations he had contracted, he was thrown into Prifon, whence he had no Hope of being relieved, but by the Goodnefs of a forgiving Father, to whom he, therefore, wrote, acknowledging his Fault, like the Prodigal in Scripture, and begging to be again received ; But his Penitence, if real, came too late ; the old Man had paid the Debt of Nature, declaring, with his laft Words, That the Bifohedience and Wickednefs of his Son had broke his Heart. Nobody who had any Regard to the Heir being jprefent, his Effects were, in a Manner, caff Lots
for,
r 74 3
far, every one getting a Part, but him who had the foie Right to the Whole.
The poor Prifoner, therefore, remained fo, without Relief, without Hope, without Sufferance, but what he received from the Hands of common Charity *, and to thefe Calamities, a greater ftill added, which was the Reflection that all this had fallen on him, entirely thro’ his own Obftinacy.
Having lingered many Months in this mi-lerable Condition, he was, at length, fet at Liberty, thro’ the Companion of his Creditors, on his Promife, That, if ever able, he would pay. He then came to London, almoft naked and famifhed; he entreated fome fmall Succour from thofe who poflefied what he ought to have been Mafter of, but was refufed it with opprobrious Language, well-knowing it was not in his Power to compel them to do him Juftice. Having been well educated, he, in time, found Means to write for Lawyers, and thereby fuf-tained a Life full of Hardfhips, but fuch ill Fate ftill attended him, that whatever he got, he was always defrauded of. He fet up a little School, and taught Boys to read, write, and underftand the Grammar, by which he might have lived tolerably handfome, had he not been compelled to leave it, on a Baftard Child being laid to him: In fine, he was no fooner fettled In any Bufinefs he took in Hand, but, by fome
Accident
c 7i ]
Accident or other, lie was obliged to quit it, Twenty Years had palled over with him in this Manner, (till ftruggling againft the Stream, always labouring, but always difappointed, and evermore miferable, and in Debt: When I firfh happened into his Acquaintance, he feemed pleafed with me, and, after relating to me the various Misfortunes he had gone thro’, told me al fo his Dream, as I have before- recited it. On which I told him, Thai, without being guilty of Flattery, I could not promife he would ever fee a, good Day in this World ; for the Scales hanging over his Head, plainly betokened his Fate was that Moment in the Balance \ that he had done what merited the fevereft Punifhment, and the Sword of Juftice, which he faw behind him, was unfheathed to execute it: Fhofe Circles, with their Darts pointed to him, as far as he could fee in the Element, were the Tears he Jhould number in Life, which Jhould all come armed with Calamities and Heart-diftraiding Grief.
He affined me, That nothing was more certain than the Interpretation I had given ; that he had already proved the Truth of it : and expelled, indeed, no End of his Vexations till Death.
I have not feen him fome Years, but, if he be living, I dare anfwer, he is Hill in the fame Condition as when he made this Complaint.
I COULD
/
176 i
I could bring many Examples to prove that Dreams are not merely the Effect of a difturbed Imagination, but real Warnings or Excitements, fometimes of a good, fometimes of a bad Angel ; but thefe will be fufficient to an underffanding Reader,
These I have named may very juftfy be called OjncnSy and are, indeed, the only ones that can be depended on : Not but I have fome little Faith in the Howling of a Dog, when it does not proceed from Hunger, Blows or Confinement. As odd and unaccountable a$ it may feem, thofe Animals fc.ent Death, even before it feizes a Perfon. An intimate Friend of mnie, for fome Days before he was taken with his laft Sicknefs, could never fit down in the Park, or in a Field, without having a Dog throw up the Earth, and make a Hole clofe by him, in the Form of a Grave. A ftrange Dog was heard to howl very terribly, without any vifihle Caufe, for leveral Nights- together, proceeding that in which a Neighbour of mine departed this Life: Nor is the Croaking of a Raven, or the Chirping of a Cricket, to be wholly difregarded, as little as they are con-fonant to Reafon, tho9, as I faid before, I would not have any-body look on them as infallible Prognofticks,
C H A iP ,
CHAP. VII.
On Predestination;
np§jj H E R E are two Things to which* 'mM we may depend on, we are pre-or* dained before we ever fee Light, ■MSa which is the Time and Manner of our Death, and Marriage, if fated ever to enter into that State : The Firft it is certain that we mnft all come to, but the Latter many People avoid. As to other Incidents, they are greatly left to our own Choice *, and nothing can be more abfurd, than for People, after having drawn on themfelves, by their own Imprudence, feme very great Misfortune, cry, ’Tzvas their Fate, and they could not withfiand it. It feems to me, that thofe Perfons, be they of what Religion they will, who fupport the Doctrine of Predeftination in all Events, are no better than Blafphemers of the Divine Goodnefs; Is it agreeable to Infinite Juftice and Mercy to pre-ordain* which is only another Word for compelling a Per-fon to Vices, for which he merits eternal Punifh-ments ? For what is Reafon, the diitinguifhing Power, given us, but to purfue Good, and fly from Evil ? If, in fpite of that Knowledge, we
are
[ 1
are obliged to make Choice of that which is abhorred by Heaven, and muff bring Diffraction on ourfelves ? I know, very well, that what St .Paul fays, in the viith, viiith, and ixth Chapters of his Epiftle to the Romans, is the Ground-Work on which the Afferters of Predeftifiation have built their Scheme, but they feem, methinks, to forget, that St. Paul, who was a very learned Man, did not write to every Capacity ; and as they, with fo much Earneftnefs, quote thofe particular Verfes, which they imagine favour the Tenets they think fit to hold, they ought not to leave neglected this Sentence of the fame Author, Shall we make God the Author of 'Evil then ? No, God forbid. Nothing can be more plain, than that he is fo, ifhe lays us under an abfolute Neceflity of Sinning : but to leave thefe Things to the Divines, it is equally as unhappy to be under the Direction of a Supreme Power, who creates us for no other Purpofe than to be wretched : I am certain, therefore, it is much more confonant to Religion, and the Idea we have of God, to acknowledge the Calamities we fuftain, wholly owing to ourfelves, either by a too violent Purfuit in the Gratification of out Pafiions, or our Inadvertency, and Carelefnefs in the Purfuit of our Advantage : And, I would fain have any one of thofe Millions, who daily exclaim on their ill Fortune, ferioufly examine their own Conduct, and then give their impartial Judgment ; I dare anfwer, that there is none but will confefs, they might have avoided their
Misfortunes,
t 79 3
Misfortunes, if they had confidered as well before, as afterwards.
As to the Period of Time we are to flay in this World, as I faid before, it certainly is fixed, nor can all our Endeavours retard it, even for a Moment : And, as to that of Marriage, I am much of the fame Mind ; becaufe I have known Men who have lived Batchelors till their Decline, and, at laft, contrary to the Opinion of all the World, and even of themfelves, havf married. You’ll fay, perhaps, It was becaufe they never before met with a Woman whom they could like, or, was an agreeable Match : No, I have been acquainted with Perfons who have loved, been beloved, nothing wanting but the Ceremony, yet have broke off by Accidents the mold unaccountable in the World, and without any Falfhood an either Side, yet have both Parties, afterwards, married others on the fudden ; and where, oftentimes, there has been as little Profpect of Felicity, as there was of a great deal, had they been united in Youth to thofe where Affection and Merit at firft engaged them,
These, therefore, I am pofitive, have their certain Times allotted, and it is not in our Power, either to anticipate, or delay them, a Moment j but, as for other Events, they depend entirely on ourfelves, and according as Reafon is flrong or weak in us, we act either for our good or ill Fort a ie. How happens it then, may fome alledge,
I 80 3
ledge, that wri frequently fee the beft concerted Schemes fail of their Defign, while the Meafures taken by others, fucceed, even beyond Expectation ? To which I anfwer, That the fame Meafures, ptofecuted in the fame Manner, and at the fame Time, would certainly produce the fame Effect with one Mari as with another : But here it is that the Planets may juftly be faid to have a great Share in the Incidents of humane Life : One Man fliall happen to undertake his Enterprize in an Hour when the benificent Planets fired their Influence *, another fliall go about it when the Malignant ones are in Force: and to this, in great Meafure, we may impute the Difference of their Siiccefs: For the Benefit of my Readers, I will, therefore, give them a Detail of the lucky and unlucky Hours.
The Profperous are thole under the Direction of .
The Sun Jupiter	X;
Venus	$,
Mercury 5 5
The Malevolent ones are thofe under,
Saturn h,
Mars 6.
In fdme Affairs the Hour of the Moon may be Favourable, bur it is only when your Bufinefs is with People of a low Rank j fhe otherwife
promifes
C Si ]
pro miles you little, but deceitful 1 lopes: You ought, however, to be extremely careful in ob-ferving her Degrees, for fo great is her Influence, that tho’ you fhould attempt any thing under the moft fortunate Afpect, her Decline will blaft it all. But having faid thus much, it is in every one’s Power to chufe a lucky Hour, only by regarding heedfully Parker9s Ephemms.
Those invifible Warnings which we receive from our good Angel, as mentioned in the foregoing Chapter, concerning Omens, ought alfo to be obferved with the utmoft Care. It is, but with great Pains and Labour, We Mortals find out the Method of chufing a propitious Moment; but thefe Spirits, who, at once, comprehend whatever is done in the World, and fee into the moft hidden Caufes, fail not to give Notice to the Souls committed to their Charge* when it is we ought, or ought not, to venture on any great Enterprize.
I t is very much to this, many People, whole good Fortune amazes us, are indebted, for not being as Unhappy as they are Prosperous.
There are alfo other fuperior Means by which feme have raifed to themfelves great Fortunes, the Cheif of which is Magic, vulgarly-called the Black Art ; which, indeed, is no other than the Knowledge of certain Spells, by which you may attain a kind of Authority over one of O	the
t 82 3
the invifible World, and compel a Spirit fo rais’d, to reveal whatever you are defirous of knowing : Nor is this to be done by Witchcraft, or making a Contract with the Devil, as fome are fo filly to imagine, but by the underftanding fome Cabaliftical Words, Characters, and Figures, made TJfe of in a proper Time and Place : The next are thole ‘Talifmans of which I have already treated. The wearing of a Loadftone may very well come in for a third Place in the My-ftic Roll of fecret Recipes, to procure Eafe for all the Calamities to which Life is incident. But, as the Virtues of this admirable Stone deferve a particular Defcription, I fhall treat of it hereafter, in a Chapter by itfelf, and return to my firft Defign in this.
Predestination, therefore, whatever fome great Men may have faid in the Defence of it, was, at firft, no more than an Invention found out to lay the Blame of our own ill Conduct on the Compulfion of an inevitable Fate : Believe me, who, tho’ I pretend not to any Share of Learning, have, from my Childhood, not only been blefled with a perfect Knowledge of Nature, but likewife of Things and Beings fuper-natural, that we cannot put a more grofs Deception on ourfelves, than to liften to the Doctrine of it.
Besides, it feems to me not only a falfe, but an impolitick Suppofition alfo j it is, in the firft
Place*
r 83 ]
Place, an Enemy to Religion ; for, if regarded in Matters of Salvation, what Occafion have we to offer up Sacrifice and Prayer ? What Need of good Works, or what Danger of ill Ones, if Predeftination cuts off all Reward for the one, or Punifhment for the other ? How can the Maintainers of this Tenet anfwer their manifeft Contradiction of the Text, Every Man Jhall be judged according to his Works, if,, before we are capable of any Works, we are doomed to everlasting Happinefs, or Mifery ? Muff it not make the beft Chriftian very faint and languid in his Devotions, when he confiders that he ftands no better a Chance to be an Inheritor of the Kins-
O
dom of Heaven, than the molt Profligate of his Neighbours ? And, muff it not make the Libertine more bold in Wickednefs, to be allured, his Sins will not add to his Damnation ?
Then, if confidered, in Regard of our being happy in this Life, nothing can be more oppo-fite : It is the utter Deflruction of all the Social Virtues •, to what End do we aim at Learning, endeavour to be well-bred, accomplifhed, and good-natur’d, but to be agreeable to thofe we are to pafs our Time with ? If predefined to the Fate of being beloved, admired, applauded, we may be as churlifh as we pleafe, and five our-felves a vaft Expence of Pains and Money too. There would be none of that laudable Emulation which excites to vye with our Neighbours in all that is Praife-worthy : No Man would give him-G 2	felf
E 84 3
fdf the Trouble of correcting the Faults in his Nature, or endeavour to improve the Beauties of it, but all would be wild and favage, and we fhould differ from the Brute-Creation in nothing but in Form.
But, as it is needlefs to urge any thing againft fo pernicious a Doctrine* to thofe who condemn it, fo it will be altogether as vain to preach to .thofe who have their own Reafons to lupport it; but if I may be allowed to fpeak my Mind, I believe few do it who have any Regard to any tping, either here or hereafter.
CHAP. VIII.
On the Pow Sympathy.
O’ I know this is a Subject which as been already frequently treated n by Fens infinitely more capable f doing Juftice to it, than mine can pretend to, yet, becaufe thefe Tracts are, moil of them, too voluminous, as well as too ab-ftrufe for the Perufal of the Generality of my fair Readers, I fhall oblige them with fome Hints, which, perhaps, may be of Service to them.
The
[ 8y ]
The Word Sympathy means no other than a certain Bent, or inclining of one Thing to a-nother; and that there is fuch an Inclination, Nature declares vifible in all her Works, as well inanimate as animate: Nothing can be more wonderful than that Sympathy of the Palm Trees* which, being planted at fome Diftance from each other, fhoot forth their Branches, all on one Side, till they meet, and mingle : It has, alfo, been obferved of thefe Trees, that if one be cut down, the other bows its Head, and foon withers away.
T h e Steel and Loadftone are known and plain Truths of Sympathy •, and tho* there are People who ftrenuoufly deny fome of the Effects imputed to it, yet all agree to acknowledge this.
The Sympathy between the different Sexes of animated Beings, even in the Brute Creation, may, every Day, be feen long before the lead; Defire of Copulation warms the Blood : A Male and Female Kitten will agree together much better than two of the fame Kind j young Pidgeons will do the fame, and, in fine, every Thing that has Life finds a Tendency in itfelf ; which is no other Way to be accounted for, than by the Power of Sympathy.
G 3	The
[	86 j
These Things, therefore, being paft Diftpute*
I fhall leave them, and proceed to others which have furnifhed the learned World with fo much Matter for Argument.
The Sympathetic Powder, fo much talked of for the wondrous Cures it has performed, by being applied to. the Weapon which gave the Wound, has occafioned great Debates, but, I perceive, the mold learned of our PhylicianS have given their Opinion in Favour of it, and that, in general, it is more believed than prac* tifed.
Wh v, therefore, fhould it feem fo ft range, that the wearing certain Amulets, or Charms, fhould excite the Paffion of Love in a Perfon whofe Name is thereon written, or engraved ? Nothing is more true, than that this is Fact j but, becaufe all the Arguments in the World fill fhort of Proof, I will demonftrate it in a little Fliftory which, not only myfelf, but all my Family, can aver.
A young Woman, of a good Family, and well educated, but without any Fortune, or the Hope of any, being maintained by her Godmother, the All of whofe Subftance confifted in Annuities, and, confequently, would have nothing to bequeath at her Deceafe, happened to tall, accidentally, in Company with a Gentleman
of
E 87 1
of' a moft accomplifhed Perfon, and great E-flate : His Merits had an Effect on her, common in a youthful Heart, and now fhe began to lament that Poverty which could not buffer her to entertain any Expectation of being as agreeable in his Eyes, as he had been in hers. She frequently law him at the Houfe of an Acquaintance, where they both vifited, and every Time became more enamoured, and more melanchoHy, than before. An old Woman, with whom fhe was very- intimate, obferved a Change in her Countenance and Behaviour, and never left off importuning her, till fhe was Miff refs of the Secret ; which, as foon as fhe was, fhe perfuaded her to divulge, and that fhe would go with her to a Perfon, whofe Skill in Affairs of that Nature, fhe affured her, fhe had formerly experienced, bidding her be of good Eleart; for, if the Gentleman were not already married, fhe would warrant this Philofopher would contrive it fo, that fhe fhould be his Bride. People in Love are ready enough to flatter themfelves with the leaft Shadow that feems to promife them Succefs, and half her Griefs were difflpated before fhe came to the Houfe of the Perfon who was to prefcribe the Means of her Cure.
Having related her Cafe, and given the ac-cuftomed Fee, which, I think, fhe told me was Two Guineas, with, a promifary Note of Fifty Pounds when fhe fhould be the Wife of fucha Gentleman ; he made her. be let Blood before him, in the Foot, and faving, carefully, the Q 4	Blood,
i §8 ]
Blood, bid her come to him on the third Day \ it is not to be boubted but fhe v/as punctual, and he then delivered to her a fmall Cake, but made extreamly rich with Sweatmeats in one Part of it, on which he made a Mark *, he told her, ‘There was fornething that jhould render the Perfon that Jhould eat it, incapable of being eafy out of her Company : As for the reft, he laid ,Jhe might give it to whom fhe pleajed, for there was nothing in it, either of Good or Harm : But feveral Times repeated his Charge, That Jhe would take Care nobody Jhould tajle of the other, bnt the Gentleman fhe defined to engage.
When (lie gave me this Account, fhe told me, hie was in the utmoft Perplexity to get this Injunction fulfilled, having gone feveral Times to the Houfe of her Acquaintance, without finding the Gentleman, but fhe hill kept the Cake in het Pocket, wrapped in a Piece of clean Paper, and, at laft, being fo lucky to meet him, took it out, and calling for a Knife, told them, fhe would let them tafle a Rarity ; having divided it into fmall Slices, fhe took Care to ferve cvery-body before him, that he might not chule the wrong Piece ; in fine, hie had the Satisfaction to fee him fwallow it all, and foon after took her Leave, having been ordered by the Sage fo to do, and went to him for further Advice how to proceed : On which, he gave her fornething fewed up in green Silk, which he bid her wear con tinually in her Bolbm, next her Flefh,
and
[ 89 1
and take the utmoft Care not to lofe it, or fuffer it to be opened, either by herfelf, or any other Perfon. This, he a Allred her, would not only o-blige the Man defired to marry her, but alfo to be the molt fond Hufband in the World, as long as he lived.
But, not to fpin out my Narration, Hie foon found the Effects of what had been done •, the Gentleman became infinitely in Love with her, courted, and in a few Weeks, was married to her, nor did Enjoyment, in the leaf!:, damp the Fervour of his Paffion ; for four Years it feemed rather, every Day, to increafe ; infomuch, that he ftudied nothing but how to prove his Affection ; he did nothing without confulting her ; her Will was his Law in every thing *, all for whom fhe had a Kindnefs, were fure of his E-fteem ; and whoever flic difliked, were looked upon as his Enemies. Never was a happier Woman, while fne obeyed the Directions above-mentioned ; but, being one Day alone, and contemplating the good Fortune to which fhe was arrived, and the Means of it, the Curiofity of her Sex tempted her to peep into the green Silk Bag, fo that unripping one Corner of it j file law a fmall Quantity of a whitifh Subftance, but more like Smoak than Powder, iffue from it? and fly away, beyond all PolIIbility of catching it again ; fhe was a little frighted to find any of it gone, but comforted herfelf with the Belief, that fhe was too well eftablifhed in her Hufband’s
Af-
[ 90 3
Affections, to lofe it, after fo long a Time, and that, if it fhould be fo, fhe could go again to the Phitofopher, to recruit her Bag.
But ladly did fhe find herfelf deceived, when her Hufband coming Home, accofted her not as he was accuftomed to do, with open Arms, and all the fond Expreffions that the violent Paffion could fuggeft, but with a fullen and dejected Air, that, inftead of flying to her Bofom, and warming it with a thoufand Sighs of Ten-dernefs, he returned not the Salute fhe gave him, but flung from her, as from a Creature he either hated, or defpifed, and whofe Touch was loath-fome.
Shk now perceived the Misfortune fhe had brought upon herfelf, but endeavoured to bring him into Humour, and intreated he would let her know what fhe had done to offend him ? to which he refufed making any Anfwer, for a long Time, but being prefled by her Importunities^ he, at laft, told her, That he had been confidering the Injury he had done his Family, by marrying a Woman without- a Fortune, and, that if it was to do again, he would as foon be damnedthat he wondered what he had feen in her to bewitch him, for, that there were a thoufand finer Women, with good Portions, he might have had his Choice, and that he could not forgive himfelf nor Jhould ever be eafy ■more. Thefe, and many more Speeches of the like rude and unkind Nature, were her Enter,
tain-
f 9* 3
tainment all that Night ; but, thinking to retrieve all yet, fhe arofe early in the Morning, and went in Search of him who had given her the Charm, and, to her great Mortification, was told, he had been dead a Month. She now looked on her Mifery as irremediable, and grew as difconfolate as her Hufband ill-natured. They lived in the moil; difcontented Manner imaginable, but her Condition was infinitely the word, becaufe, now refuming the Care of his own Purfe, he found Means to indulge himfelf Abroad, with thofe Pleafures he could no longer find at Home j while fhe, the moil abandoned, and molt wretched Creature in the World, had no more Allowance from him, than was juft Efficient to fuftain Nature.
In this unhappy Situation fhe had Recourfe to me, having heard I had performed fome very exr traordinary Things that Way; fhe related to me the whole Hiftory of the Affair, from the Beginning to the End, concluding with telling me, That tho* her Hufband’s Parfimony at prefen ^ gave her not the Power of making me any Prefent yet, if I could be able, once more, to recover his Affection for- her, fhe Jhould then have enough to give. But I would not deceive her : I told her, it was not in Nature, or in Art, to recal a Paffion which owed its Original to Compulfion *, I confefs’d, that a Defire which arofe by Nature, if grown cool, might be revigorated by Art, but as his to her, had been only the Effects of An, and was a
Force
L 92 ]
Force on his Faculties, all fecond Endeavours would be ineffectual to bring it back.
She found my Words but too true, and tho’, as I afterwards heard, die had Recourfe to others, who dealt with lefs Sincerity than I had done, yet did all the Expectations they had raifed in her, prove abortive, and fhe lived and died a mi-ferable, and, by all who heard what fhe had done,, as, at laft, fhe was foolifh enough to reveal it, a moft unpitied and defpifed Woman.
The French and Italians, have many Secrets to excite Love, or rather Defire; for, I think, a PafFion which owes not its Being to Nature, un-a {lifted by Art of any Kind, cannot, juftly, be termed Love ; but I would have all, to whom I wifh well, be careful how they make Ufe of any fuch Prefcriptions, left, ignorant of what they do, they prejudice the Perfon they aim to engage. I knew a Woman, who being defirous a certain Gentleman of my Acquaintance fhould make his Addreffes to her? applied to one of tliele Dealers in the Trade of forcing Inclination, ■who ordered her to put a Paper of Powder, which he gave her, into fome kind of Liquor that the Gentleman fhould drink: Accordingly fire put it into Punch, of which, when he had drank plentifully, he found himfelf feized with Defires more violent than he had ever before experienced, he was even mad ; and, tho’ the leaft Thought of Love had never entered into
his
c 95 1
his Head for this Woman, yet was he now fo overborn with a wild Inclination for the Enjoyment of her, th at being alone with her, it was as much as fhe could do, to hinder him from committing a Rape j but, as Marriage was the Thing fhe aimed at, floe propofed it to him, telling him, That fince he had fo great a Pafjion for her, fhe was ready to confent on lawful Terms : But this failing, not but that he would have done any thing in thofe diffracted Moments, to have pof-feffed her ; but it being too late in the Night to procure a Clergyman, fhe was obliged to call the People of the Houfe to her Afliftance, and, by their Means, put him into a Chair, and fent him Blome : Seeing the Powder had wrought this Effect, fhe doubted not, in the leaf, but he would be at her Lodgings early in the Morning, and accomplifh what fhe intended by giving him this Dofe •, but fie was infinitely miftaken, the Powder, which had fo much inflamed him, being no other than Cantharides, threw out its Venom in a violent Rafh, all over his Body, and left his Heart cool as before he had taken it 5 but remembering the Vehemence of his Defires the Night before, it appeared extremely ftrange to him, and relating the whole Affair, both to myfelf, and an eminent Phyfician, I prefently gave my Opinion, that fomething had been given him to caufe thofe extraordinary Emotions, on which, the Doctor faid, it was Cantharides. The Gentleman was fo much enraged to find he had been practifed on in fuch a Manner, that he re-
folved,
c 94 .1
fo]ved, whatever it coft him, to know the Truth, and, in fine, partly by Perfuafions, and partly by Bribes, he difcovered where fhe had been that Day ; which he had no fooncr done, than he threatened the old Fellow who had given her the Powder* in fo terrible a Manner, that he fell on his Knees, and related the whole Affair, on Promife of Forgivenefs.
The Sequel of this Bufinefs was, that the Gentleman who had before a good Regard, as far as Friendfhip, for that Woman, now became her implacable Enemy, and could not think on her, without the utmoft Loathing and Detefta-tion.
These Things are both dangerous and pernicious, and, in my Opinion, will not be made Ufe on, but by People abandoned in their Principles and Characters *, but as to the wearing Sigils, or Amulets, which are only to create a general good Will and Efteem, I fee no Reafon, either in Religion or Morality, to difapprove them.
Those People who molt defpife the Ufe of them, cannot, without being very unjuft, alledge, that there is any Hurt in having them about you, either to yourfelf, or any other Per-fon : The Characters of the one being made on confecrated Parchment, and the Compofition of the other, fuch Things as are frequently taken
in-
c 9$ 3
inwardly to comfort and corroborate the Vital Faculties, fuch as Corral, Ambergreafe-, &V. and not the leaft Mixture of any thing that is diabolical, either in the Ingredients, or Words* tho’ wrote in Figures unintelligible to all but thofe of the Cabal .
But in fpite of all that has, or.can be faid to the contrary, I pofitively maintain, from a long Experience, both in myfelf, and thofe that have given them, that they not only attract the Goodwill of others, but excite alfo in the Perfon who wears them, a Propenfity to do thofe Actions which merit Praife and Love.
I n fine, they are an inferior Sort of Talifmans, working, in a meaner Degree, the ft me Effects ; and tho’ they cannot be faid to change Fate, rendering one who is very wretched, happy in an Inftant, yet they ferve to foften the Severity of it *, and* tho’ a Perfon may be miferable, with one of them about him, yet would he be much more fo, fhould he leave them off, as has been tried by fome, into whofe Hands, it is poffible, this Book may fall, and have, afterwards, con-fefied to me how dearly they have repented the Experiment.
I t is certain, i have known People, who, on fir ft putting them on, have fancied to themfelves Things which I never promifed, nor are in the Power of Art to perform ; tho’ working in
a Gar-
I 96 1
a Garret, or a Cellar, they have expected no lefs than keeping a Coach and Six, forgetting, thdt no Perfon is reafonably to depend on more than being fortunate in the Bufinefs to which he has been allotted, either by the Choice of his Parents, or his own Inclination ; and, I think, if thefe Sigils, ox Amulets, are of Force to make him fo, he ought to be very well content.
Yet, fo much does Ambition fwell the meaneft Soul, that not one but would be glad to fill the Poft of the firft Minifter of State ; nay, and imagine themfelves fit for it too : I have known a Cobler, in his Stall, pretend to regulate the whole Affairs of Europe, and give Laws to all the Monarehs in the World.
Hence it follows, that, not only Sigils, and Amulets, but even Tallymans, fometimes, fail of their Effect ; for, not being able to work Miracles, the real good Fortune they bring, is flighted, and they are plucked out, and, perhaps, thrown away, before they have fulfilled half, what a little more, even, fometimes, the fmalleft Point of Time, would have brought to Perfection.
But, as it is only the Ignorant that can be guilty of fuch Follies, I leave them to the Correction of their own Impatience and Stupidity, which will not fail doing it in a feverer Manner than I wifh. Thofe of the wifer Sort, who either
C 97 1
ther have bought of me, or fhall hereafter buy of my Wife, any of thefe prevailing Charms, whether Talifman, Sigil, or Amulet, will, I doubt not, be latisfied with the Purchafe, and reap all the Benefits which can be expected from it.
CHAP. IX,
On the Difference between Natural and Diabolical Magic.
A VIN G in fome former Chapters had Occafion to mention this Art in its two Branches, I think it highly neceffary to explain what it is I mean by this Diftinction,
I know the Vulgar are apt to look on every thing which they cannot comprehend, as brought about by the Afliftance of the Devil, and this they call the Black-Art, but is known, among the learned World, by the Name of Necromancy: How far this Study, or the Practice of it, is, or is not, con-demnable, I will not pretend to determine, all that I fhall concern myfelf about it, fhall be, to fet forth how vaftly diftant it is from Magic Simple, and Natural: The one teaches how to raife Infernal Spirits by the Help of certain Words and H	Spells^
198 ]
Spells, the other, only how to make a proper Ufe of thofe Things which are common to us, and for which we need ranfack no other World than this we are born and live in } and, that the Knowledge of this is fo far from being criminal, that it is not only laudable, but highly neceffary alfo, for all fuch as take upon them to give In-ftructions for the Conduct of others, in the Affairs of Life : Neither ought Phyficians, or Surgeons, to be ignorant of it, as has been already proved in the foregoing Difcourfe on the Power of Sympathy.
Great is the Power of certain Herbs, if gathered under the Influence of proper Planets, and greater yet is that of Minerals, provided the Afpect for digging, and applying them, be rightly underflood : What Bufinefs has the Devil or his Agents with this ? Is it a Fault to know the Virtues of Things created for our Ufe ; or can that Science be guilty, which informs us when, and in what Manner, to prepare them fo as to be beneficial to Mankind.
It cannot, indeed, be denied, but that there are Plants and Minerals which may be made Ufe of to the Prejudice of our Neighbours, and that the fame Science teaches the Means of both a good and an evil Application ; but what of that ? muft we, becaufe we know how to do a Mifchief, be guilty of it ? Mull we needs try Practices upon our Fellow-Creatures ? No certainly :
[ 99 1
tainly: And we might as well forbid a Student in Phyfiek to confider the Effects of Poifon, for fear, knowing how to give it, he fhould ad-minifter it inftead of a wholefome Recipe. Can any thing be more abfurd than this Way of arguing ? Yet fome, who are accounted great Men* make Ufe of it.
Chymistry, if truly underftood, comes the neared: to Natural Magic of any Science in the World *, yet the Study of it is fo far from being blameable, that thofe who have attained to any Degree of Perfection therein, have always been looked on as extraordinary Perfons: What can be more wonderful, than the Power it gives to tranfmute Metals, and change the very Nature of Things, rendering the mod; hard and rocky Subftances foft and maleable, and converting the fpungy into indiflfoluble ?
Astronomy alfo bears a Part with Chytniftry, in an Affinity with Natural Magic, and whoever is perfectly verfed in thofe two Sciences, wants but a very little of comprehending the whole Myftery of the other: Neither of them alone, indeed, can do any great Matter towards it, but when both are joined, efpecially if affifted by that Part of the Mathematicks which teaches Number and Proportion, that Knowledge may, effect mod: of thofe Wonders which are commonly attributed to Magica
Hz	N a-
I IOo 1
Natural Magic, therefore, is, in reality, no more than the Perfection of Philofophy, which, certainly, no Man in his right Wits, but would be proud to have the Capacity of attaining.
I t is certain, that the little Skill I have in this Science, has drawn Afperfions on me of different Kinds ; the Ignorant perceiving what was in my Power to bring about, have cried out, I dealed with the Devil; and the more learned Have faid, I was an Impoftor : The former not being able to comprehend how the Effects I wrought Could proceed from Caufes merely Natural ; and the latter, fenfible of the Difficulties which attend an Inquifition into thofe occult Studies, could not believe, a Perlbn who never was bleffed with the Ufe of Speech, or Hearing, and, therefore, denied many Advantages, which muff neceffarily arife from thofe two Senfes, ffiould acquire an Underftanding in fuch dark and ab-ftrufe Myfteries, which very few of the i$oft deeply learned could fathom,
Thus have I fuffered on the one Hand, for being fufpected to know too much, and, on the other, as a Man who pretended to know more than he did ; but, as I take Heaven to witnefs, that I never, in my whole Life, had Recourfe to diabolic Means, fo I, alfo, never deceived thofe who confulted me, by endeavouring to pals, on them for a greater Man than I am.
I SHALL
C idi 1
I shall not be fo vain, td fay, the Secrets I aril Mailer of , have been the Acquifition of my own Labour ; no, I have neither Learning, nor Reading enough, by the thoufandth Part, for it, but I have been favoured with them by Perfons who have fpent the greatefl Part of their Lives in this Study. I never can fuffici-ently make known the Obligations I have to a Hebrew Rabbi, before-mentioned, on the Account of the !Tollmans ; yet am I {till infinitely more indebted to a Chinefe, who, having gone thro* all the Learning his native Country could afford, ranged three Parts of the Globe in Search of more, and about fome nine Years fince, paf-fed thro’ this Iiland in his Tour.
Another very venerable Man, from whom I learned many curious Things, was an Afjyrian^ of the Grecian Church: He loved me with a kind of Paternal Affection, and told me, If I would accompany him to his Country, he would make me be looked upon, among them, as a Perfon fent from Heaven to do Good. The Ingratitude I have fince met with, has made me frequently, when I have reflected on it, regret that I followed not his Advice ; but, as I am fatisfied it is the Will of the fupreme Difpofer of all Things, I endure it, refigned, and, as much as the Paffions of frail, ^iumane Nature will permit, contented alfo,
H 3	But
L 101 1
But, fay thofe who are Enemies to Magic of all Kinds, It teaches the Means of converfing with Spirits, and that is unlawful and unwarrantable among Chrijiians. Before an Anfwer be made to fuch an Objection, they ought to bring fome Proof from Holy Writ why it is unwarrantable, which, I believe, they would be greatly at a Lofs to do. But, however, for the Satisfaction of my Readers, I will confefs all they can alledge as to this Matter of Fact *, ’tis true, there are Means, and very innocent ones too, of rendering vifible fome Beings which none but thofe of the Cabal have any Notion of; but, if thefc Beings are fo far from being ill, that they are infinitely purer than the mod: elevated Sort, while cafed in Flefti, can pretend to be, it cannot be denied, but our Converfation with them will be far from a Difadvantage to us *, and, I think, it muft be alfo owned , that the Knowledge of fuch a Secret can do us no Harm, tho* we fhould refrain making Ufe of it in this Branch, viz. Holding Intelligence with Aerial Spirits.
All that I attempt to prove, is, that Natural Magic has nothing in it repugnant to the Laws of God ; and, as for Man, it would certainly be the better for the World if there were many who ftudied it.
The Vanity of latter Times, makes Men imagine they are w'ifer, and more learned,
than
C io3 ]
than their Fore-fathers, and that every Age adds fome new Improvement in the Sciences s whereas, on the contrary, we grow darker and darker, and, like Martha in the New Tefta-ment, bufy ourfelves about Trifles, and leave the moil effential Study, which, next to Religion, I ftill fay is natural Magic, wholly neglected and uncultivated.
CHAP. X.
On App a ri t ions.
KNOW nothing more feared, and at the fame Time, lefs believed than Apparitions : Thofe who argue the molt ftrenuoufly againft them, and affect moll to ridicule all Accounts given of them, are frequently, on finding themfelves in the Dark, as much terrified, meerly by the Strength of their own Imagination, as the Per-fons who give the greateft Credit to them.
A merry Inftance of this kind happened about twenty Years ago: Some Gentlemen being drinking at the Bell Tavern in JVeJlminJler, the Converfation fell accidentally on Apparitions; as they were of different Opinions, the Difpute H 4	grew
C 104 1
grew high ; but one among them, being willing to be thought more Courageous than the reft* and to teftify how little he believed any fuch Stories, offered to go alone into the Abbey at Twelve o’ Clock at Night, and down into the Royal Vault within King Henry the Seventh’s Chapel, which happened then to be open on account of fome Perfon of Quality who was to be buried there the next Day. Thofe who were of the other Party, laid twenty Guineas he durft not perform his Promife *, but he accepted the Wager, and Mr. Weft the Verger was fent for, to whom they gave a Crown for his T rouble of opening the Doors. The Hour appointed being arrived, all the Company conducted the bold Adventurer to the Church-yard, and one of them afking him, How they Jhould know he went fo far as he pretended, he made Anfwer, ‘That he would ftick his Penknife into the Earth within the Vaults which, after his Return, they might go into, accompanied by the Verger, with a Light, and find there. Every Thing being thus agreed, the Gate was opened, and he admitted, the Gentlemen tarrying with Mr. JVeJl till he fhould come out; but he ftaying confiderably longer than was expected, they all (efpecially thofe of them who believed Spirits) imagined fomething had happened to punifh his Temerity; on which it was concluded to enter in Search of him. The venerable Look of that ancient Pile, the hollow Murmurs the Wind made through the Arches of the adjacent Cloyfters, and the
Eccho
f to; ]
Eccho which, in the Stilnefs of the Night, re-peated every Foot-ftep, together with the Reflection of the Number of Dead they paffed over, gave the whole Company fuch Ideas, as made the moft Courageous amongft them to confefs, he would not be there alone, and in the Dark, for a much greater Wager than had been flak’d* At length they arrived at the Vault, where, a foon as they defcended the firfl Stair, they beheld their Companion lying Motionlefs at the Bottom. On endeavouring to raife him, they perceived he had ftUck his Penknife through the right Skirt of his Coat. It was With great Difficulty they recovered him from his Swoon ; and when he was fo, could get little from him, till after they re-conducted him to the Tavern when being a little refrejfhed, they defired he would tell them what had, happened to occafion the Diforder they found him in: On which he broke into the utmoft Exclamations againft all thofe who disbelieved Spirits, andfaid, That he had been guilty of the utmofl Prefmption, and that he was now convinced of his Error : But they repeat-. ing their former Requeft, he confefs’d, That the Door was no fooner clofed upon him, than he was feized with Apprehenfons which made him repent his Boldnefs, and more than once prompted him to go back ; but the Fear of being laughed at overcame his other Terrors* infomuch, that he proceeded tQ the Vault) where every ‘Thing that was /hocking to Nature ensreajed on hi?n, yet fill the Pride of performing what he had fo confidently pretended toy
remaining*
[ 10 6 ]
remaining., he went down the Stairs, and when he came to the lafi, fiooped to flick his Penknife in the Earthy thinking it fujflcient for the winning of the Wager that he left it within the Faulty it not being Jpecified in the Agreement, how far he Ihould go into it: but, faid he, as I was in this Action, Ifelt fomething pluck me by the Coat, which prevented my rifing, and with the infant Horror threw me into the Condition you faw. He had no fooner concluded his little Account, than the whole Company let up a loud Laugh, which ftrangely furprifing him, they fiiewed him the Penknife, which was dill hanging in the Skirt of his Coat, and convinced him, that in the Hurry of Stooping, he had ftuck it thro, which Detainment, weak as it was, with the Confufion of his Thoughts, had made him imagine fomething Supernatural.
Though this Gentleman neither faw, heard, or felt any Thing in reality, yet the unufual Dread he had on him at this Juncture, may prove that there is an innate Apprehenfion, even in the bolded Minds, on the Score of Apparitions. The Shadows which frequently the Moon makes with the moving of a Bough, has given the flouted Man more Terror than an Army of Enemies, or a Piftol cock’d at his Bread : If there were no fuch Things as Spirits, then whence arifes thofe dreadful Ideas ? They cannot always be owing to the Prejudice of Education, nor would the bugbear Stories, told us in our Infancy by an old Nurfe, have any Effect
C 107 1
in Maturity. No, no, that Spirits are fome-times permitted to render themfelves vilible to humane Sight is certain, as that we have immortal Souls, and whoever disbelieves the one, mull moft certainly be dubious of the other.
I a m far from wilhing any Fellow-Creature fhould be put to Tryals they are unable to bear; yet I cannot forbear being pleafed, when I hear a Perfon fo arrogantly prefuming, and depending on his Judgment, as in the Cafe above-recited, meets with fomething to humble his Self-fuffi-ciency.
For my Part, I can impute the Arguments raifed againftApparitions to nothing but an Affectation of Particularity, fmce there is no found Reafon to be given for this Opinion to be drawn from Religion, Morality or Nature ; but on the contrary, they all concur to allure us there are no fuch Things, without the Teftimony of occular Demonftration. I am fare Holy Writ, both in the Old and New TcJlamenU gives us innumerable Proofs of it i few Hiftories are without fome remarkable Examples of it, and the fecret Indications we feel within ourielves, are perpetually confirming it.
I belie v e there are few real Alheijls in the World, tho’ too many, cut of Orientation of fignalizing themfelves, make fo vile a UTe of that Share of Underftanding allowed :T;;n by
L 10B 3
God, as to reafon againft him °, and I dare fay, the Number of thole who difbelieve the Appearance of Spirits, lo far as never to have the leaft Terror on that Account, would but little exceed the other more pernicious Tribe.
Some there are who argue againft this Truth, merely becaufe they would not be thought to have any Tincture about them of what they Imbibed in their Childhood ; but, methinks, this is ftrangely ridiculous } are not the firft Rudiments of all thofe Tenets we are moft juftly proud of, given us in our Childhood ? We lhould, according to that Way of Reafoning, not begin to learn any thing till we are arrived at Maturity ; and if the believing Spirits be a Notion which ought to be exploded, ’tis certainly an infinite Error to mention them at all in OUr Youth. The reading of Glamnlle, Burton, Clarendon, and, indeed, the Works of almoft all the Great Men that ever wrote, muft be entirely forbid, and a new Set of Books be found out to make the Furniture of our Libraries agreeable to the modern Way of Thinking.
I know the main Objections againft the Vifl-bility of Spirits are thefe : Firft, The Impoftibi-lity there is in defining of what Nature they are. And Secondly, That fuppofing them to be Souls of the Deceafed, How), fays the Objetcor, is it confonant to Religion, that the Blefjed Jhall for-fake Heaven, where all Fears are wiped from the
L 109 3
Eyes, to concern themjelves with the Affairs below ? Or, if doomed to Mifery, Jhall their Tortures be intermitted,	they have Liberty to return to the
Place where they have committed their Crimes? But yet even this Argument, formidable as it may feem, methinks, ’tis eafy to confute, without denying one Word concerning the unceafing Joys which the Virtuous enjoy, or the Pains of the Vicious, after their Departure from this Life.
A s to the Firft, 1 grant it impoffible for humane Underftanding to comprehend of what Nature they are, but we are told, that there are infinite Degrees and Orders of Angels ; may it riot then be more than probable, as may be proved by Lot, and feveral qf the Patriarchs, that the Bufinefs of fome of them may be to vifit this lower World, for Reafons only known to the Supream Director; And as for thofe dreadful Apparitions, which we cannot imagine to be any that is Good, does it not bear fome Likelihood of Truth, that the fallen Angels, who, till the Day of final Judgment, are not locked up in their Adamantine Caverns, may be permitted to wander here, and fometimes render themfelves vifible for the Punifhment or Admonition of thofe to whom they fhall appear; but as the Certainty of this is what the molt Learned cannot arrive at, what ferves for an Objection, may as juftly be made Ufe of in Defence.
L lio 1
Nor does die Suppofition, that they are really the Souls of the Deceafed, include any Thing of Profane or Irreligious in it. Even thofe Spirits, for any thing we know, may be allotted to the Bufinefs above-mentioned, fince all agree that Happinefs or Mifery is not compleated till the laft Day, ’tis enough if either to know it will be fo, which Knowledge all Souls, doubtlefs, are poffeffed of, immediately after leaving the Body, and, therefore, they may, with great Probability, be commiffioned to bring about Matters here, which require an extraordinary Meffenger.
I am not for fetting this down as a Thing to be depended on, ’tis what none can be allured of while in a State of Mortality : But I hope I may be allowed to fay there is nothing in fuch an Opinion abfurd, nor contrary to the Notions we ought to have of Things beyond our Com-prehenfion.
That Spirits have the Power of making themfelves vifible, I am certain, and, that they are either commiffioned, or permitted to be fo by the mold High, none, who acknowledges a Deity will deny : It is not therefore our Bufinefs to enquire into their Nature, nor to difpute their Being, becaufe we cannot comprehend it. Man, while in Fleffi, is, doubtlefs, the moll Inferior of rational Creation, and he ought to believe
humbly
C III 1
humbly what is revealed to him, and not pre~ fumptuoufly dive into, much lefs pretend to know, Secrets to which he can never arrive, till he has fhot the Gulph of Death.
And, lure, nothing more teflifies the Wifdom of the Divine Being, than continuing us in this Uncertainty ! Were we to be informed, directly, what either the Joys of Heaven, or the Pains of Hell were, it would naturally deftroy great Part of our Dependance on him : It is by Faith we are to be faved, and after Conviction, where is there need of Faith ? Befides, fhould the Spirit of a vicious Perfon, who, after being guilty of innumerable TranfgrefTions, at laft find Mercy, thro’ Repentance, inform us he were in a State of Happinefs, might it not encourage the Sinner to go on in his Offences ? Or, v/ere a Perfon, feemingly Virtuous, tho’, perhaps, guilty of fome fecret, great and unrepented Crime, appear to us in all the Horrors of Damnation, would it not ftagger the Hope of the moft Pious ? It is, therefore, highly neceffary thofe Things fhould be concealed from u% unlefs we could, alfo, fee into the Reafons of the Almighty’s Decree, to keep us from the two dangerous Extremes of Prefumption and Defpair.
But, to return to my Purpofe : ITow many private Murders have been revealed by the Apparition of the murdered Perfon ? I remember,
Beaumont makes Mention of a Man, who being
appre-
r m ]
apprehended on Sufpicion, was about being cleared, when the Spirit, or Ghoft, of the Deceafed appeared, circled in Fire, before the Eyes of the Prifoner, knd terrified him into an immediate Confeflion of the Fact, with all its Circumftan-ces, of which, before, there was not the Jeaft Proof. I have, aifo, read in another Author, tho’ his Name has now flipped my Memory, of a Woman, who being left a Widow, with one. Son of about two Years old, fcon after married a Kinfman cf her late Hufband’s, and the next Heir to the Eftate, (which was a very large one) in Cafe he had died without Iffue ; but not long furviving thefe fecond Nuptials, the Widower took it in his Head to become Mafter of the E-ftate *, to which End, he fent the Child into a remote Country, and gave out, he was dead: Every thing was contrived in fp artful a Manner, that no-body fufpected the Deceit, and he enjoyed the Eftate, by which he obtained a Lady of a confiderable Fortune, with whom he was much enamoured, for his Wife : In a few Years he had feveral fine Children by her, and nothing feemed wanting to compleat his Happinefs, yet did he grow fo exceffively melancholly, that e-very-body was furprized at his Behaviour j lie even hated the Sight of his Wife, his Children, and every thing which it might be expected he fhould love. Ft is not to be doubted but that he was very much intreated to reveal the Caufe of this fo fudden Change in his Behaviour, yet nothing would prevail on him, till his Diftemper
encreafing
r 113 3
encreafmg in fuch Sort, as made every-body believe he could not long flirvive under it; at laft? in a more than ordinary Confufioh, he called for his Wife and Family about him, haying, before, fent for two Clergymen of his Acquaintance, and in. the Prefence of them all, declared the Injury he had done his firft Wife’s Child, adding, That for a Twelvemonth foe had continued to appear to him, and that Day had threatened him in a mojl terrible Manner, if he perfifted in his In-juft ice. He then told them where he had dif-pofed of the Child, who was then about twelve Fears of Age, with a poor Woman in Wales, whom he allowed no more than five Pounds a Tear for the maintaining him *, confelTmg alfo, That his Intent was to have put him out to fonie mean Trade, and never to have let him known his Name, or of what Family defended. Every-body, but his Wife, applauded his Repentance ; but Ihe took the Impofition he had put on her, fo ill, that ihe protefted never to live with him more, and that Moment left his Houfe : The young Heirs however, was immediately fent for to London, and Care taken of his Education, b'efiting his Birth and Fortune.
What became of the Gentleman, I do not remember, nor is it to my Purpofe, which is only to prove, that Heaven fometimes makes Ufe‘ of fupernatural Means to bring about extraordinary Events; and, as little as fome People affect to believe this Truth, let them beware I'	How
£ i r 4 ^
how they defraud the Innocent, or any way forfeit their Prom he to the Dead, left they fhould be convinced, to their Coft, that the Things I have related are not itnpofiible.
But it would be the utmoft Prefumption in me, to expect any Arguments from my unlearned Pen, fhould prevail on Perfons deaf to thofe elaborate and elegant ones, which have wrote fo many large Volumes in the Defence of giving Credit to Apparitions : Nay, when the very Bible, which abounds in Examples of them, is not looked on as a fufficient Authority in this Point. Nothing can convince thofe who take a Pride in being obftinate, but occular Demonftra-tion ; to that, therefore, I leave them, and if fuch Conviction ever happens, let them thank themfelves, if they fuffer worfe by it than the more Timid, who are, at prefent, fo much the Subject of their Ridicule,
I n Defiance of all may be faid in Oppofition, 1 do aver, that there are Apparitions ; fome of the moft glorious, fome of the moft dreadful Kind, that all my Senfes have been Witnefs of their Force, and that, not only in Vifions in my Bed, but waking, and in the open Fields ; and that many great and wonderful Things have, from my Childhood, been revealed to me by them : Nor do I conceal this from the World out of Fear of any thing they can fay againft me for it, but becaufe it is vain for me to hope my
Words
I IIS 1
Words will have that Weight while i am living, as, I am certain, they will obtain when I am paft the Cenfure, the Praife, or the Concern of any thing below.
Here I will beg Leave to incert a merry Adventure which happened in my more juvinile Years, and may, perhaps, be diverting to my Readers after this grave and tedious Difcourfe.
About Twenty five Years ago, there was a famous blind Man, of whom I had heard wonderful Stories, efpecially concerning his being able to diftinguifh Colours, and playing at all Games on the Cards •, and I exprefhng a great Defire to fee him, a Gentleman of my Acquaim tance undertook to bring us together : Accordingly a Day was fixed, and he was to play three Games at All-Fours with me for a Guinea to be fpent, and I was to have my own Cards. The appointed Day being arrived, both of us were punctual, neither of us failed, and each had his ^Squire to fupply the Deficiency of our feveral Talents. A great deal of Company were there, and it occafioned abundance of Laughter among them to fee our Salutation* After a Half-Pint of Brandy round, I pulled out my Cards, and was very watchful, as I thought, yet, for all that, I was deceived : Before we went to Play, he would needs fhew fome Tricks •, and it was a moft furprizing Thing to me, to fee him go directly to any Card I called for *, he was very I 2	arch
C II6 ]
arch about Kings, Knaves, Politicks * and State-' Affairs •, but while he was amufing me this Way, his ’Squire marked all the Cards with a fmall Pin, fo as not to be perceived by the Eye, but eafily diftinguifhed by the Touch, by a Per-fon who depended wholly on feeling, as he, him-felf, fhewed me afterwards.
At laft, to Play we went, and he let me win the firft Game, by way of Compliment, but he Won the fecond and third ; and as I began to find myfelf the forlorn Hope, I conveyed three of the Knaves into my Bofom, thinking, by them, to retrieve all *, but I prefently faw him laugh, and he told my Friend, That I had three Knaves, and might take the fourth if I pleajed-, he would he at me for all that ; on which I threw up my Cards, owned the Wager loft, and contented myfelf with being the Game of the Company, as they called it.
My blind Man. wondered how it could be poflible to talk by Fingers, and faid, He would freely fpend his Guinea to mine, to learn : A Friend of mine foon took him up, and engaged to make Us able to converfe together that Way in half an Hour. Some of the Company believed this a Thing impoffible, and feveral Wagers were laid upon it, but thole who were of a contrary Opinion, were foon convinced, for the Gentleman made him immediately comprehend the Twenty-four Letters, which done, it was eafy
fot
r ii7 3
for him to put them into what Words he pleaf-ed j when he directed his Difcourfe to me, and when I fpoke to him, I had no more to do, than to touch his Fingers inftead of my own : In fine, no two Perions in Company could be more con-verfible with each other, than we were within the Time prefixed ; on which, faid the blind Man, I fee by Feeling, and you hear by your Eyes. Fie afterwards furprized eveiy-body, by his being able to diftinguifh Colours only by rubbing the Cloath between his Fingers: A brifk Spark afking him, If he would not gladly change all for his Eyefight ? he anfwered him, That he would not •, and added, That he believed, /, who Jaw fo much, would readily change Talents with him : On which, I told the Company, That I would not lofe the Sight of the Sun, and a fine Woman, to be Emperor of the whole Globe ; and, that I would be deprived of Legs and Arms, nay, endure Caftra-tion itfelf rather than quit fo valuable a Bleffng as that of Sight.
I 3	C H A R
I 118 ]
On the G e n i i.
H A T every Man, from his Birth, is under the Direction of both a good and bad Genius, is as certain, as that by Air the Breath of Life is prefer-ved ; and according as either of thefe prevails, we are addicted to Virtue or to Vice, to Things which tend to our Happinefs or Mifery in this World alfo, as well as in the next; but of what Degree or Order thefe miniftring Spirits are, is a Query to which the moft learned can give no pofitive Solution.
That God has given his bleffed Angels Charge over us, as we are more than once informed in Holy Writ ; and that the fallen ones have Power to tempt, feduce, and prompt us to Mifchief, the fame undeniable Authority af-fures us; but whether they may properly be called the Genii, is a knotty Point, or whether there are not yet another Degree of inftigating Spirits who prefide over our Actions : if it be fo, we
may
C 119 1
may be faid to be influenced by three fecond Caufes under Heaven to Happinefs, viz. The Beneficient Planet which reigned at the Moment of our Nativity, the G uardian Angel, and the good Genius: As alfo by the Malevolent Afpect at our Birth, the Devil, and the ill Genius. If I may be allowed to give my Opinion, I think this Way of Reafoning rather confounds than clears the Difpute ; for if we are under the Direction of a Guardian Angel, as few make any Difficulty of believing, I fee no Neceffity of a Genius, or rather they are both the fame, and Genius is but another Name for Angel: As for any other intellectual Advifers, I look on them to be only pur own Actions, which, according as they are, infligate and prompt us to Good or Evil.
The wifefi of us all, however, can no more than guefs ; While we remain in this Life, we fee, as St. Paul fays, through a Glafs dimly, hut when once we are arrived at Immortality, we [hall difiin-guijh clearly all thofe ’Things which at prefent feem fo dark. How vain is it, therefore, to fpend our Time in the Search of what is impojjible to he found, or if it could, would probably avail us nothing !
But to return to the Deftgn of this Chapter. Though all Men are under the Guidance of thefe intellectual Intelligences, yet to very few have they made themlelves vifible, and when they have, it has been frequently in fuch Shapes as might rather create Averfion or Contempt, than I 4	Love
t no d
Love or Veneration. I knew a Perfon who. never attempted to commit an ill Action, but fomething in the Form of a Bear appeared to him, and flared him in the Face ; and whenever he went out of his Koufe on any laudable Defign* he was fure of feeing the fame Shape go before him Step by Step, never turning, urdefs it was to warn him to go back, which, whenever it did, he knew there was fomething of Misfortune or Danger in the Way. This he had in many Things experienced ; but one Time above the reft deferved his particular Regard, and is not unworthy a Place in this Treatife. As hs was on the Road travelling towards Dunftable, where he went every Year, having a fmall Eftate in that Part, his Conductor, on a fudden, turned fhort upon him, and flood Crofs-way •, this very much amazed him, but being unwilling not to purfue his Journey, he quitted the Road and took the Field *, but before he had proceeded many Paces, the Bear was before him, not peaceably marching on as his Guide or Harbinger, but as a Beaft of Prey in act to tear him to Pieces and devour him ■, this fo much frighted him, that he turned his Horfe, and made what Hafte he could back to a little Houfe, where he had a little before called to drink at: There he alighted, which he had no fooner done, than he faw the Bear He down quietly at the Door. He now perceived he had been but menaced into Safety, and filled with an imaginary Danger, to preferve him from a real one, though of what
Nature
i III ]
Nature he could not guefs, till having tarried where he was home Hours, a Gentleman was brought in, who had been robbed and mortally wounded by three Highwaymen, on that very Spot where the Bear had obliged him to turn back, and, according to the belt Calculation of Time, not above two Minutes after he had left it.
Another Perlon, from whofe own Mouth I alfo had the following Account, being one Night in Bed, was llrangely difturbed by fome-thing which feemed to pull the Corner of the Sheet; he was a little furprized at firft, but being naturally Courageous, he drew the Curtain, and by a Candle, which he had always burning in the Chimney, he faw a huge Rat, which ran feveral Times round the Bed, and in its Race Hill catched hold on the Sheet, and plucked it with uncommon Eagernefs. The Gentleman taking it for a real material Rat, and having a kind of Averhon to thofe Vermin, jumped out of Bed, and drew his Sword, defigning to kill it, but the Creature evaded the Blows, and though he thought feveral Times the Point was through the Body, yet did he' Bill fee it running about : After having disappointed him in this Manner, it made to the Door, and, as he thought, efcaped under it ; on which he turned the Spring, thinking to deftroy this Interrupter of his Repofe in the Stair-cafe, but he was prefently inlpired with other Thoughts, for on opening the Door,
fuch
C 121 ]
fuch a terrible Smoak burft in upon him, as affixed him the Houfe was on Fire, and left him nothing to reflect on, but how to efcape the Danger he was going to run down Stairs, but had not gone half way, before he perceived the Flames had already feized all the lower Part? on which he had Prefence enough of Mind to run back into his Chamber, which looking into the Garden, he threw himfelf out of the Window, and got over the Wall time enough to alarm the Neighbours, and by that Means pre-ferved himfelf and many others, who elfe doubt-lefs would have perifhed ; none being loft but the carelefs Wretch who had occafioned this Conflagration, by fetting a Scuttle-Bafket of hot Cynders under a Drefler in the Kitchen, which prefently taking Fire, confumed all that was near it ; the Wench lying in a Settle-Bed juft by, was, no doubt, immediately fuf-located.
A Story, no lefs furprifing than either of thefe, I can aver the Truth of, being intimately acquainted with the Perfon principally concerned in it. This Gentleman having experienced the Frailties of the fair Sex, Was an utter Enemy to Marriage and, I am fure, I do not wrong him when I fay, that till the Age of three or four and thirty, no Man was ever a greater Rake, He was, indeed, one of thofe whofe Example made me wicked ; we have fenced together, drank together, whored together, fcowered the Watch
together,
t 113 1
together, and, in fine, done every Thing together which diftinguifhes the Rattle from the Men of Confideration. But. as thefe were only the Extravagancies of Youth, when he arrived at the Years I mentioned, he began to grow a-lhamed of his former Behaviour, and would often fay, That j'uch a CondvM was not only an Offence to Heaven, hut alfo to the Dignity of humane Reafon \ in a Word, he threw off all his former Follies, difcarded all his unreformed CompanL ons, and became a perfect fober Man: Being fuch, and of a good Family, and a plentiful Eftate, he had a great many Matches propofed to him ; but though the V ices of his own Humour were entirely converted into Virtues, yet did his Averfion to Marriage ftill continue, Dot out of any Diflike of that State in itfelf, but having been guilty of wronging the Bed of many a deferving Man' himfelf, he feared it would come home to him •, and Cuckoldom being an Injury he knew himfelf unable to endure, without committing fome defperate Act, he thought it beft not to put it to a Venture. This made him refufe all the Offers that were made to him, and it was the Opinion of everybody, as well as of himfelf, that courting any Woman for a Wife, would be the laft Thing he would do. But at length he began to find, that though he had thrown off all his loofe Behaviour, he could not do the fame by his amorous Inclinations, and the Fires of Youth not being extinguished in him, he continually wifhed l	.,	;	.	there-
t 124 J
there were a Poffibility of his being affured of a Woman’s Virtue, but there was none, for the Timidity of his Humour, in this Point, made him look on the moft innocent Freedoms of that Sex as Criminal ; and though he was acquainted with many Ladies of undoubted Chaftity, he could not find in his Heart to place fo great a Dependance on .any one of them, as to truft his Honour and Peace of Mind in her Keeping, till one Summer, being at the Country Houfe of a Relation of his, he faw a Farmer’s Daughter who lived in the Neighbourhood *, the Girl was very beautiful, and not exceeding fixteen Years of Age, and feemed poffeffed of fuch an innate Modefty, that fine could not reftrain her Blufhes if even fpoke to by a Man j but a Kifs3 or the leaft Touch of her Hand threw her into a Trembling. This Behaviour was fufficient to charm my Friend 5 he was now certain he had found a Virgin, and he thought he might depend on his own Watchfulnefs over her topre-ferve her uncorrupted after fhe became his Wife. As he was entirely the Mafter of himfelf and Fortune, he afked no Advice if he fhould marry her ; and it is not to be doubted but fuch a Propofal was acceptable to her Parents, feeing the great Affection he had for her j they, however, took fo much Advantage of it as to demand a Settlement for her, in Cafe he fhould die without Children, to which he readily complied, and the Day being fixed for drawing the Writings, he brought a Lawyer to the Farmer’s
[ I2-S- 1
mer’s Houfe ; when every Thing was ready for him to fign, the Window being open, a Raven flew in, and with her Beak fnatched the Pen out of his Hand, as he was that Moment putting it to the Parchment. So odd an Accident fur-prized the whole Company, but moft the intended Bridegroom i however, loath to fhew himfelf fuperftitious, he took another Pen, on which the Raven returned, and, fluttering over the Table, croaked feveral Times, and with her Wings and Claws threw down the Writings, and made, as it were, a kind of an Effort to tear them. It is impoflible to exprefs the Confter-nation every-body now felt, but the Gentleman was lb much Ihocked, that he became exceeding fick, infomuch, that he was unable, if ye^ he had an Inclination, to fet his Eland at this Time. It was alfo the Opinion of everyone, that it fhould be deferred, though, perhaps, none could tell the Meaning of fo particular an Omen, yet all agreed it was not a good one.
My Friend was fo much dilbrdered, that they perfuaded him to tarry all Night, telling him, they hoped the next Day would recover him, and alio bring Promifes of a better Fate: He was eaflly perfuaded, and they put him to Bed, but his difcontented Thoughts quitted him not there ; he could not reflect on what had happened, without believing there was fomething miraculous in it *, and tho’ he was infinitely in
Love
C 1*6 ]
Love with the Girl, not all his good Opinion was fufficient to make him flatter himfelf with the Hope of Happinefs with her. Finding it impoffible to deep, arid it being a fine Moonlight Night, he put on his Cloaths, and relolved to pafs the Remainder of it in the Garden ; but, as he was puffing thro’ the Yard which led thither, he heard Voices in a Barn, clofe to which he was obliged to go ; Curiofity made him fland to liften what had brought any-body there, at an Hour in which he imagined, none awake but himfelf, and eafily perceived, that one of thofe who fpoke, was his Miftrefs, and the Perfon who accompanied her, a Rival more beloved than himfelf j he heard the Words, My Dear,— my Love, and my Life, feveral Times repeated, before he offered to interrupt the Converfation, but his Patience being, at length, put to the Rack, and reflecting, that whatever he fhould iay of this the next Day, would be denied, and his Accufation taken as Malice, or Inconftancy* he burft fuddenly into the Barn, and found this feeming innocent Maid with her Partner, who was no other than one of her Father’s Plowmen, in a Pofiure the mold provoking to a Lover ; in fine, in one not fitting to defcribe, but convincing to him that faw it, how grofsly he had been cheated, if he had married her. They both fell on their Knees, and begged he would be fecret; but he was then too much exafpe-rated to promife any thing, and flinging from them, returned to his Bed, acknowledging, the
Raven
C 127 j
Raven had been his Guardian-Angel When he came, after, to reflect coolly on it, his Rage was fucceeded by Contempt *, but, as he had loved her, forbore expoling her, and only telling her Father, Thai, for fome private Reafons, he could not marry, took his everlafting Leave of the whole Family.
I have known feveral of thefe, who, like Sir Solomon Single, in the Comedy, are fure of having a Virgin for their Wife, provided they make Choice of one that is very young, and very Ally, and have found themfelves deceived on the Proof, tho’ I know of npne, but this Gentleman, whole Good Angel fo immediately interpofed, or, to fpeak more juflly, none who were fo ready to obey its Admonitions.
I could prefent my Reader with innumerable Inflances of Perfons who have feen and converfed with their good Genii* but have neither heard, nor read of many, to whom an ill one has been fo familiar ; and concerning the Reafon of this,
I once met with a very learned Dilpute between two, who were both great Philofophers, and Divines of the Church of England : The one maintained, that it was owing to the great Good-nefs of Providence to us Mortals, that the ill Genii had not the Power of being viflble, be-caufe they would, doubtlefs; appear in fuch a Form, as muft drive the Perfon who beheld them, to Diffraction, The other, tho* far from
taking
c 12,8:
taking from the Mercy of the Supreme Being? would not allow it laid any fuch Reftriction, but that the Evil Spirits themfelves chofe rather to infule their pernicious Doctrines into the Ears of the Mind, than any way render themfelves perceptible by the Organs of the Body : To prove this, he added, That according to the Notion of the rnoft learned Men on thefe fupernatural Beings, it is permitted them to affume what Shape they pleafe, and they might, therefore, appear in the moft perftiafive and agreeable, as fcafily as in the moft dreadful one.
I will not pretend to enter into Secrets of this Kind, nor to determine which of thefe Gentlemen was really in the Right, tho% according to all humane Probability, the latter had the beft of the Argument : But fhall conclude this Chapter with two Aflertibns, which are all I dare be pofitive in ; firft, That every Man, from his Birth, is divided between the Influences of a good and bad Genius, under whatfoever ' Names or Orders they may be diftinguifhed ; and that, tho’ few have cbnverfed with them any otherwife than intellectually, and, in a manner, altogether imperceptible to the Senfe's, yet, in the Moment of departing this Life, they ar^ vifible, and either mitigate the Agonies of Death, or add new Horrors to it, according to the Power either of them has had over the Actions of the dying Perfon. Of this I could give many
Examples from the Sacred Text, and the Judgment
... ' ■)
F 12,9 ]
ment of the moft learned, as well Chriftian as prophane Authors ; but whoever carefully ob-ferves the Emotions of a Perfon’s Face juft in that Crifis, will difcern enough not to Hand in Need of any other Teftimonial.
CHAP. XII.
On the S e g o n d Sight.
T will, doubtlefs, be expected that I, who have the Gift of Second Sights fhould fay fomething by way of de-. fining it but, tho’ to do that is utterly impoffible, yet, to gratify the Curiofity of my Readers, I fhall make no Secret of any thing concerning it, that is in my Power to reveal.
Firfi, Then, it cannot be denied, that the Second Sight is a palpable and immediate fnfpira-tion from the fupreme Source of all Knowledge : The Perfon poffefTed of it, has no Warning of its coming on, or quitting him j he fees, and comprehends Millions of Things at once, which other Mortals are incapable even of conceiving » and which he himfelf, Who difeerning them
K	clearly
C 150 1
clearly with his bodily Eyes, has not the Power of defcribing.
Secondly, It is not to be learned, n6r acquired, by the molt ftrenuous Application ; it laughs at all the Efforts of Wifdom, and puts to Shame all humane Knowledge •, it is equally powerful in Childhood as in Maturity, nor abates of its Force in enervating Old Age ; the Infirmities of the Body have no Effect on it, but, on the contrary, it renders ftrong, for the Time, thofe Organs of the Senfes thro’ which it operates.
!Thirdly, It brings the moft diftant Objects to Hand, Mountains, Rivers, Seas, are no Impe. « diment to its Difcernment, nor can what is acted in the moft dark Recefs, efcape its Penetration . It even looks beyond this World, and defcries thofe Beings who owe their Origin to fomething above Nature ; the perpetual Combats between the good and bad Genii *, the Revolution of Orbs too diftant for the Telefcope’s Difcovery ; the Fates of whole Kingdoms, as well as of particular Perfons, are its ordinary Entertainments; in fine, there is nothing fhut from the Second Sight, but the Divine Myfteries of that Heaven of Heavens, where fits enthroned the awful and unutterable Majefty of Him who made thefe Wonders.
To be pofteffed, at all Times, of this Infpira-tign, this furprizing, this unlpeakable Emanation
of
[ 131 1
of the Divine Prefcience, what would it be but to arrive at Immortality before our Time ? But, alas ! it comes upon us but by Starts, it is with us, it is gone, and, like a fudden Thought, is loft in Clouds, nor can our utmoft Art recal it, till all at once, and e’er we are aware, it returns, and with the lame Velocity vanilhes again.
Many of my Confulters have told me^ they extremely envied me this Gift j that they would give all they were worth in the World, to be poffefted of it in the fame Degree I am *, and that they thought it a Bleffing infinitely fuperior to any thing Humanity could receive *, but, tho’ I fhould think it profane in me to repdne at the Will of Heaven, and have profited as much by this Gift, as, perhaps, any that ever had it, yet, I cannot but confefs, it has frequently prefented me with Objects fo very aftonifhing and terrible, as have made me wifh, within myfelf, it would .depart from me for ever.
Sometimes, when furrounded by my Friends, fueh as Anthony Hammond, Efq; Mr. Philip Hor-
neck, Mr. Phillips, Mr.  --—., Mrs. Centhrone,
Mrs. Fowh Mrs. Eliza Haywood* and other celebrated Wits, of which my Houfe, for fome Years, has been the general Rendezvous, a good Bowl of Punch before me, and the Glafs going round in a conftant Circle of Mirth and good .Humour, I have, in a Moment, beheld Sights K 2 ,	which
t 13a 1
which has froze my very Blood, and put me into Agonies that difordered the whole Company.
Even in my Bed, where, after the Fatigues of the Day were over, I hoped Repofe, my Chamber has been filled with Company, the moft Blocking to humane Nature. In the Fields my Solitude has been, in the fame Manner, disturbed ; in the Park, when moft crouded with the gay World, 1 have feen among the Belles and Beaux, fuch Objects, as, could they have difcerned as well as I, it would have converted their Pride into Confufion, and their Sprightlinefs into An-guifh.
Not that the Second Sight affords only OcCa-fiobs of Dread ; all that the moft raptured Ima* gination can form of Delight, falls fliort of thofe Heavenly Yifions which have, fometimes, danced before my Eyes ; and, were it not for the exqui-ftte Happinefs of the latter, the former would be impoflible to be fuftained with Life.
This is all the Defcription I am able to give of Second Sight ; nor do I believe it in the Power of any-body to do it more fully. As I have been poffeffed ©f it from my Childhood, the various Objects it prefents, are much more familiar to me, and confequently lefs aftonifhing, than to a Perfon who but lately received the Inlpiration i U therefore, may be allowed to fay, that what I am unable to reveal concerning it, none elfe
can
C iJ3 1
can pretend to do, without being guilty of an Impofition on thofe they fnall endeavour to gain Credit from.
CHAP. XIII.
On the Virtues 0/ /^Loadstone, and
fome dther choice Curiofities in Nature.
AVIN G in a former Chapter made Mention of the mod terrible Fits, which, for feveral Years together, perplexed me, and fometimes for whole Days took from me the Power of doing any thing for the Service of thofe who came to confult me at that Time, and being now greatly relieved from them, I think it my Duty to let the World know by what Means I received fo peculiar a Mercy. After having edayed all that Phyfick could do, and finding not the lead Benefit, I gave myfelf over as incurable ; till one Night my good Genius, in the Shape in which he ordinarily appeared to me, came to my Bed-Side, and informed me, that by wearing a Load-jlone I fhould have Eafe. I then fet myfelf fe-rioufly to confiderits Virtues, and wondered how I could have been fo long Stupid, as not to make the Tryal of what, in nuipberlefs Cafes, I had K 3	expe-
[ iJ4 3
experienced the good Effects of on others, "though in Relation to different Difeafes and Ca-fualties.
The Loadjtone, of all Things under Heaven, has this peculiar Quality, to attract and draw off at the fame Time. The Perfon who wears it, is not only defended from the Infection of any 111 from Abroad, but is alfo certain of the Love and Efteem of his Fellow-Creatures. Of all Magnetics in Nature, without the Affiftance of Art, it is certainly the moil effectual, and there is fcarce any Contingency of Life, wherein it is not of excellent Ufe.
I n Maladies it chiefly is of Force on thofe which relate to the Head and Eyes, fuch as Epileptic or convulfive Fits, and Dimnefs of Sight, occafioned either by too dry or too moift a Brain.
I t is admirably ferviceable to thole who labour under the Malignity of an Evil Tongue, and even (by God’s BIdling) repels the Efforts of Witchcraft in great Meafure.
A s to its Virtues, they are numberlefs, and I might fill a Volume, and not recount half of them ; it Khali therefore fuffi.ee to fay, ‘that 'whoever wears it, if defined to good Fortune, he Jhall find his Happinefs encreafe by the PoJJeJJion of it j and if i'll, an Abatement of his Woes. This
[ ij? 3
has been experienced by Hundreds, and I doubt not, but when this comes to be in Print,' a great many of them will readily avouch it.
I a m fenfible, however, that feveral Perfons have carried a Loadjlone about them, without finding the leaft good Effect proceed from it ; but this does not at all leflen the Virtues of this admirable Magnetic, as I will make appear very plainly.
jFirjl, Among the many Impofitions practifed in this great City, there is none more grofs than that on the Account of the Loadjlone. I knew a Man who got an Eftate by felling a compound Matter of his own Compofing for it. how then could any Virtue proceed from it ? nothing being more difficult in reality to come by than a ^ure Loadjlone.
Secondly, There is a great deal owing to the Setting and Arming the Loadjlone, when a true one, fo as to render it capable of operating in its full Force and Vigour •, and to do this, with Skill, requires Inftruction from fomething more than a Mechanick. There is but one Man in England who is poffeffed of this Art, and was taught it by myfelf, under an Obligation to work in that Manner for no other Perfon but me, or thofe to whom I ffiould bequeath my Secrets after pay Deceafe.
C 1361
The,^Egyptian Loadjloncs are infinitely the bed;, for which Reafon, I purchafed a good Number of them, of a Merchant to whom I communicated their Virtues, and engaged him to procure them for me j but as they coft more than twice the Price of thofe which are ordinarily made Ufe of by Mariners, it has given a Handle to my Enemies, to make thofe, who judge but by Appearances, believe I impofed on my Cuftomers, by taking from them, what they call an extravagant Rate: But I have this Confolation, as in many other Things, that the Perfons themfelves who pay’d the Money are of another Opinion, and value the Favour I did them, as it indeed deferves.
As I have always made it my Study to oblige my Clients, I have had it in my Power to do them many more Services than could be expected from the Second Sight alone, by con-verfing with all the Virtnofi I heared of in any Part of the World, and obtaining from them many choice and valuable Secrets. I have cor-refponded to Adgypt, China, Turky, and even from the Indies have learned Things, which many who, I doubt not, will read this Book, have experienced the Benefit of; but I would not be thought too partial to my own Country, when X avow, that my moft curious Difcoveries were made me by a Gentleman born in Scotland, and never out of it in hjs Life. But to give ml
Reader
E 137 3
Reader a clearer Infight into the Obligations I have to him, I fhall tiymfcribe a Letter I received from him in his own Words, being an Anfwer to one I had fent him.
S I R,
TfXCUS E S for the Non ■performance of a Pro-^ mife, have more the Air of Coniplaifance than Friendjhip. Therefore, as it was- not in my Power to procure the Rarities you dejired, in Jo Jhort a Time as I imagined, I chofe rather to deprive my-felf of the PleaJ'ure, which a Correfpondence with you affords, than raife your Expectations with the Sight of a Letter from me, which, when open'd, would have given you fo fevere a Difappointment: But the hearty Zeal I have to ferve you, and through you to do Good to my Fellow-Creatures, having at laft furmounted all Difficulties, I Jhall now, with an inexpreffble Satisfaction, return to that Happi-nefs, the Reafons above-mentioned, have for Jo long an Interval debarred me from purjuing.---
I HAVE fent you a pretty large Quantity of the finefi Coraline the Jfe of Sky affords. Tou know the other Virtues of it fo well, that I need not trouble you with a Repetition of them •, but the moft eminent Phyfician and Virtuofo of thcfe Parts, has lately difcovered a new and wonderful EJfidt which it is capable of performing, to which, I believe, you are yet a Stranger: In the Box which contains it, you will find the Recipe, and proper Directions for the
Manage-
C I38 1
Management of it, for a certain Malady therein mentioned. .......
WITH incejfdnt Labour and Application, I have alfo procured fome of the miraculous Black Bean *, an Amulet, which thofe who profefs ihem-felves the great eft Enemies to what we call Superfti-tion, are fond of keeping by them, and far from being afbamed of doing fo. Tour fair Clients will doubtlefs, rejoice (when they [hall know the prodigious E feds that a little of the Powder of one of tbeje Beans will produce) to have it in their Power to compafs their Defines fo eaftly.
WITH the reft of the Cargoe, there is alft twelve Phials of the Cleft-Rock Water, by King-horn, which, I am certain, will be of infinite Service to you in your wonderful Experiments. -—- .
THE Ship is ready to fet Sail, and one of the Men impatiently attends to be difpatched, which prevents my enlarging at this Time, and I muft beg leave to conclude, with ajfuring dear Mr. Camp-bel, that
I am,
His very fincere Friend,
and humble Servant,
A. L, V. S.
C 139 1
/
P. S. I have fent you a Box of Eagle Stones by Mr. Gordon Whitchet, fo famous to prevent MiJcarriages. I thought them too valuable to trufi to the Mercy of the Seas, as, indeed, all the other Things are, but had no Opportunity to fend any more by Land. Once more Adieu. Write to me on the Receipt of this.
I t never was my Nature to deny the Favours I receive, nor do I think it any Diminition of my own Merit, to acknowledge, that many of the wonderful Things I have done, have been owing to the curious Inquifitions of my learned Friends-, nor will I pretend to appropriate any more to myfelf, than the Power of foretelling Events, and giving Advice in what Manner it is belt to behave in them.
A s for the admirable Virtues of the Black Bean, they would feem incredible, even to my felf, had I not fo frequently heheld the Proof. A certain Lady, whofe Name I fhall forbear to mention, has Reafon to blefs my Acquaintance with the Gentleman above ; for (after being forsaken, flighted, nay, aim oft defpifed, for the Space of feveral Years, by a Perfon who had beguiled her of her Innocence and Reputation) fhe had not worn this Amulet full one and twenty Days, before her Lover returned full of Penitence for his paft Offences, and more enamoured
than
n 1401
than ever : In fine, he put an End to her Shame and Sorrow, by publickly making her his Wife.
The Coraline, duly prepared, is no lefs wonderful •, it renders fertile the fteril Womb, and brings back the Vigour of Youth in aim oft old Age.
I should not omit the miraculous Things have been brought about by the Cleft-Rock Water, but that it being now impoflible to be attained, I will not give my Readers that Regret; the Knowledge of its Virtues would of confe-quence raife in their Minds, for the Lofs of fo ex-, cellent a Spring, which, for thefe two Years, has been dried, or, at leaft, flopped up in luch a Manner, as leaves no Elope of ever being able to explore it any more.
The good Effects of the Eagle Stone on pregnant Women are too commonly known to lay me under any Neceffity of repeating them : But as the right ones are very hard to be got, I would have all, who ftand in Need of them, be careful in the Purchafe, becaufe it is not only lofing the Benefit which might acrue from the Ufeof them, but the Stone which, I am very certain, has been impofed on fome People for an Eagle Stone, tho* it exactly refembles it in Form and Colour, being carried about a Woman, produces an Effect quite contrary to what is expected from it; and is as certain in its Operation a pernicious
Way,
t 141 1
Way, as the other is in a beneficial one. This I think is my Duty to inform the Publick, it being a rare Secret, and known but to very few.
I f it fhall pleafe the Almighty to continue me a few Years longer in this World, I fhall make it my Care to procure a fufficient Store of thefe valuable Commodities, not only to furnifh. my good Confulters with during my natural Life, but alfo to leave fome behind me with my Wife, in Cafe they fhould be inquired after, as I doubt not but they will, by many after my De-ceafe ; efpecially the Loadficnes, becaufe it has been evidently proved. The effectual Sort are to be had no where but of me ; nor will I fail, by God’s Leave, to prepare a confiderable Quantity of my Sympathetic Powder, which, tho’1 I do not pretend to cure Wounds at Diftance with, yet has been often found of Service for the Cure, or, at leaft, the Eafe of Pains in the Mind : It being, to ufe the Words of a certain Lady who experienced it, the heft Balfam Nature ever produced to heal a bleeding Heart \ Nor, indeed, could I dye entirely at Peace with myfelf, if I fhould neglect fo fovereign a Remedy as I know this to be.
CHAP.
I ls\Z 1
CHAP. XIV.
Containing fome Examples of the Unreason able Things frequently required cf me.
fticli a Height does the Curiofity, Wjm the Ambition, of the Malice of JR People tranfpoft them, that, as they often fay, They would, indeed, go to the Devil to obtain their Ends *, and fo filly are they, withal, as to imagine they need but ask and have, thof in my Opinion, the Devil is leaft bufy about thofe who fo much defire to be acquainted with him : But Raillery apart; I had Once a Confulter on ah Occafion fo very extraordinary, that, I think, it well deferves a Place in thefe Remarks, to the End, that unprejudiced Perfons may fee how little I have been inclinable to deceive thofe who put Confidence in me, and how ftrangely I have, fometimes, been put to it, to bring People to a right Notion of themfelves, or what they ought to do 5 I fhall, therefore, as I have all the Papers that pafled between us, by me,- fet down the Conversation, in the very Words it happened,
After
C 14$ 1
After, then, the accuftomed Fee was paid me, and I had wrote her Name, (for that is a Proof of my Art, which is expected from me by all Degrees of People) Ihe began in this Manner.
Woman. 1am now convinced you know as much as I was informed you did, and, therefore, I fhall not trouble you with aiking any other Questions, for you mult underftand, my Affair with you is of another Nature ; but you muft be Secret*
D. C* It is not my Way to betray the Secrets intrufted to me i I am the fame as a Con-felfor in that.
Woman. I have heard fo, and that makes me confide in you j but you muft, alfo, promife to do what I defire.
D. C. You may depend on that, if in the Compafs of my Art.
Woman. Yes, yes, I know it is in your Power, or I would not have come to you.
D. C. If you think fo, make no more Delays, I am ready to Serve you.
Woman. You muft know, a Relation of mine died about three Years ago, and- left me a hand-fome Legacy, but the Rogues of Executors put off the Payment from Time to Time, with frivolous Excufes, knowing I cannot hold out a Law-Suit with them ; I having been lick, and out of Bufmefs for a great while, and driven to
great
C 144 1
great Straits: In fhort, I am not able to fcrabble any longer, and am refolved to fell myfelf to the Devil for a certain Time, if he will give me Money to recover my Legacy, and to do fome other Things.
D. C. Explain what you mean by that Word felling yourfelf for a Time, and I will give you my Anfwer.
tVomcin. I wonder you fhould be fo dull of Ap~ prehenfion •, why, it muft be to the lower Regions, I do not defire to (lay a great while here, and am afraid of nothing : I am fully refolved to do it, if fuch a Thing can be done, which I am perfuaded it may, and that you can put me in a Way how to do it: I earneftly beg, therefore, that you will, and that with all Speed, for every Moment is a Lofs to me.
D. C. You ftrangely amaze me, but I hope you are not in earned:;
Woman. Ido not know why you fhould think fo, I allure you I am ; but I fuppofe you are fo fcrupulous becaufe I have not offered you a competent Fee*, but, believe me, I have tried all the Means I could to raife five Pounds for you, tho* I could no Ways do it; but you may depend on me, that as foon as the Bargain is made, and I have received the Money, you fhall have fifty Pounds ; therefore, pray difpatch it, that I may be at Eafe,
D. C. And have you confidered how terrible a Thing it is to fell your Soul to everlafting Perdition, for a little tranfitory Pleafure ?
Woman•
r 145* 1
Woman. Nothing in it, I value not myfelf; 1 muft and will do it.—I have no other Way,—when I have done that, I fhall have Money to pay you and other People, and to live handfomely ; —-fo pray make no more Scruples, I fhall always efteem you, and be grateful, only be as fpeedy as you can, for it will be worfe by this Day Week, if it be not done.
D. C. What do you mean by worfe ?
Woman. To be plain, I am not able to endure the Mifery I am in any longer, and if I do not remedy it, as I can no otherwife than by this Means, I am refolved to hang myfelf.
D. C. Truly, as you lay, that would be giving yourfelf to the Devil for nothing.
Woman. Therefore, if ever you did, or ever will do ’any thing as long as you live, I beg you will do this for me, and you fhall have fifty Pounds.
D. C. I thought, fince the Days of Francis Spin a, and Doctor Faujlus, no fuch Wickednefs had ever entered into the Heart of Man, much lefs of Woman, whofe Sex, for the molt Part, renders her more foft and timid : Go Home * and pray *, for the Devil has already taken too great Pofiyfiion of you, without giving Money for it, and it muft be only the molt fincere Penitence can unlole his Hold.
Woman. I wonder you fhould talk fo ; I ne« ver was inclined to any Sort of Wickednefs in my Life •, it is mere Meceffity drives me to do this, and if Heaven had thought fit to give me L	what
C 146 3
what I want, I fhould never have thought of having Recourfe to Hell.
D. C, Thus Mortals profanely tax the Bounty of their Creator, as if infinite Wifdom could be fathomed by humane Penetration : The Misfortunes you are under, are of your own feeking* they proceed from want of Faith, and Refigna-tion *, endeavour to reform your Heart, read the Holy Bible , and pray againft the Temptations of the Devil, and, I will anfwer, you will either have better Fortune, or bear what you have with more Content.
Woman. If I thought there was a Poflibility of living eafy in the World, I would try what I could do.
D. C. De pen dance on the Will of Heaven will make every thing eafy to you •, but, I would have you have Recourfe to fome able Divine, I am certain it would give you great Relief: As for what you defire of me, I would not have a Hand in it for all the Riches in the World.
Woman. Well, Sir, I will take your Advice *, but if I fhould find no Benefit by the Means you propofe, I fhall certainly make my-felf away.
D. C. There is no Danger of it, if you are fincere in your Converfion, and willing to improve the Benefit you will receive from fuch a Behaviour.
Woman. I will tiy ; for, I confefs, I am a little fhock’d that you, who muff certainly deal with the Devil, by the Things youforetef, fhould
think
C 147 ]
think it fb lad a Thing to have any Bufinefs with hirri.
' D. C. As for that Miftake, it may be rectified another Time •, but, if you obferve my Directions, you will be ready to confefs, they proceeded not from the Devil, or ahy of his Agents: Therefore delay not, but be as zealous and iifr patient in this good Work, as you were, lately, in the Purfuit of the moft horrid and deteftable one.
Woman. I shall, and, whatever Progrefs l make, you fhall know : I Will wait on you again in a few Days.
Here fhe took her Leave, and according to her Promile, came to me again in about a Fortnight, intirely altered in her Way of thinkings and told me, She owed not only her Satisfaction of Mind in this Life, but the Hope- of her eternal Salvation alfo, in the next, in a great Meafufe to what I had faid to her.
Another Day I was accofted by one of the moft lovely young Women I had ever feen in ifiy Life, but looked extremely penfive and melan-cholly. I eafily fead, at firft View, the Misfortune which had occafioned it, but had not the leaft Guefs of the Requeft fhe had to make me for the Relief of it, which I fhall fet down, alfo in in the Terms fhe expreffed it: After I had let her know I was fenfible fhe had refigned her Honour to the deluding Artifices of a certain great L 2	Man,
[ 148 3
Man, whofe Name, with her own, I alio, according to Cuftom, was obliged to write at full Length.
Young Lady. I had not buffered my Virtue to become a Prey to his enchanting Tongue many Days, before I heard, by Accident, that he kept a Miff refs, by whom he had feveral Children, and was fa extremely fond of, that there was not any Poffibility of his quitting her : This News made me almoft diffracted ; the firft Time I faw him, after it, I burft into Tears, and upbraided him with the Deceit he had been guilty of to me : He feemed a little fhocked, but, in the End, confeffed, there was a Lady whom he had had a long Intimacy with, but Iwore a thou-fand Oaths, that his Paflion for her was now degenerated into a cold Efteem, or, at belt, a mere 'Friendfhip ; and that all his warmer Inclinations were intirely devoted to my Charms. Yet, notwithftanding this, he is fcarce one Day without feeing her, and I have not a V ifit from him above once a Week, and fometimes not fo often *, and I was told by one that knows him very well, and, I am fure, would not be guilty of uttering an Untruth, that he declares to all his Friends, That if ever he marries, JJoe Jhall.be the Woman. Now, Sir, I would fain have your Opinion, whether there be any Pohibility of getting the Better of this Rival, and I will then tell you what I would have done.
D. C. She
C 149 1
D. C, She feems to have got faft hold of his Heart *, the Children he has by her, endear her to him, and fhe is a Woman of Prudence and Difcretion.
X. Lady, Why then does he not keep con-ftant to her ? Why did he take fo much Pains to betray me ?
D. C. He is a Man of Wit and Pleafure, and they are for all the fine Ladies, tho* they may be more particularly attached to one.
T- Lady. Then all the Men of Wit and Pleafure are no better than Villains, ■""■■■■« but I have thought of a Way to triumph over her, if you will be fo good to afford me your Affiftance.
D. C. As how, fair Lady ?
T. Lady. I would have you fet fome Spell upon her, that fhould make her grow ugly : I have been told, that there are Things to be done, which will make a Perfon lofe their Complexion, Hair, and Teeth s I would have her as deformed as poffible, and if once her Beauty was gone, his Honour would never prevail above his Inclination.
D. C. I will not flatter you ; though fhe is handfome, Stis not the Charms of her Perfon, fo much as of her Mind, that have bound her to him ; in fine, fhe has preferved him by her good Conduct, as you have loft him by the contrary; and though I fhould agree to do as you would have me, I am certain you would not be a Jot the better beloved for it,
I 3	T. Lady.
i i$o i
T Lady. Ido not know what you mean ; pray what have I done to leffen his Affections ? I am lure Move him to Diffraction.
D. C. You do jfo ; but that is not the Cafe: More Women lofe their Lovers by loving them too much than too little ; not that Love deftroys Love, unlefs bellowed on a vile Object indeed. But where there is a great deal ofPaffion, and little Conduct, it makes a Woman guilty of Indecorums, which mull infallibly leffen the E-fteem of a Man of Senfe ; and I would not give one Farthing for that Sort of Affection which is without Efteem.
T. Lady. You argue very juflly ; but he pretended fuch an Infinity of Tendernefs to me, that all I could do was no more than a Return.
D. C. I speak not of your Behaviour to him when you were alone together ; I do not think a Woman can be too fond when there are no Eyes but thofe of her Lover to be Witnefs of it. But I mean, you have been too open to other People. Your Paffion for him, made you talk perpetually on him ; you have watched at the Door and Window for his paffing by in his Coach, and have called your Companions to look at him; in fine, you have taken a Pride in revealing what it would have been greater Difcretipn not to have given any Reafon to fufpect: And when a Woman lofes all Regard for her own Honour, a Man i| apt to efteem her Affection as little.
To Lady.
i i$i 3
Y. Lady. If that be the Fault, flic, whom he is much enamoured with, is guilty of the fame •, for, I a.m fure, all the Town is fenfible of his Intrigue with her.
D. C. The Circumftance is quite different: They were intimate for a long Time before it was known, and it was from himfelf that it was firft difeovered: befides, where there are Children, it is morally impoffible to maintain a perpetual Secrefy. I only fay, it leffens a Woman’s Character in the Opinion of her Lover, when flie begins to feem carelefs what the World fays of her.
T. Lady. Well, if I could but draw off his Affection from her, I would not care for any thing : I beg, therefore, that you will contrive fome Way to do it, and I will make you all the Satisfaction you can defire.
D.C. The only Way to dq it, is, by increa-fing his Affection to yourfejf, and the Means I have already preferibed, if you think fit to follow them.
T. Lady. I t is now too late to pretend there is nothing between us; all my Acquaintance know it *, even my Father is no Stranger to it j poor Man, it has half broke his Heart.
' D. €. I know it, and, methinks, you fhould be forry you have been fo publick in it.
T. Lady. Mv Sorrow now would avail nothing. But tell me •, is there no Way to plague this hap-, py Rival ?
L 4
I l$ll
D. C. I will not deceive you *, it is out of your Power.
T, Lady. N o, I can do it, and without your AfHftance : I will tell all that has happened to a Perfon, who I know will carry the News immediately to her. That will certainly make her mad Hie muft tremble at the Thoughts of his having a new Miftrefs, and, I dare believe, by what I have heard, fornething more agreeable.
D. C. 1 have already told you, it is not her Perfon fibe depends upon, but upon thole Em-bellifhments of the Mind, which only can maintain a falling Paflion : You will but expofe your-felf, and become lefs valuable in his Eyes.
T. Lady. Ido not care, fo I but give her Pain.
D. C. It will be a very tranfient one. You are not the firft he has fometimes diverted himfelf with, yet has his Heart, after llraying, returned lo its Elome in her Bofoin with redoubled Fond-nefs : This fiie is fo fenfible of, that it would be altogether in vain to think to give her any Affliction that way : In fhort, he is a Man more jultly deleaving the Character of Great from his admirable Underllanding, than Birth, Eltate, or Employments, though all of them are above the common Level of Mankind; and there is no Way to make your Rival unhappy, but behaving in fucli a Manner, as lhall make him judge you merit his Affection bell.
T, Lady. Well, I will endeavour to follow your Advice,
This
C 1*3 1
This was the Sum of what palled at our firft: Converfation ; but my Counfel had not the fame good Effect on her, as in the preceeding Exam-* pie. She had but little befides Beauty to recommend her, and that foon loft its Relifti with a Man of her Lover’s fine Senfe. I was frequently plagued with her Importunities, but had it not in my Power to ferve her, fhe having neither the Capacity, nor Difpofition, to do any thing which might have contributed to my Endeavours, and fhe foon fell into that moft wretched Circum-ftance of an abandoned Miftrefs, while the other Lady glories in having eftabliflaed a lafting and unalterable Affection in the Heart of one of the fineft Gentlemen of the prefent Age : So prevalent is Truth, Tendemefs, good Humour, and good Senfe, over thofe happy enough to diftjn-guifh and value fuch Virtues according to their Due.
But I had one Adventure, which I never remember without Aftonifhment at the mingled Wickednefs and Folly of fome People *, it was with the Wife of a Holland Trader: This Woman loved her Hulband with fo troublefome a Pafiion, that whenever he was out of her Sight* Ihe imagined he was with another Woman, and would be guilty of fo many Extravagancies, as Would feem incredible to any who were not Wit-ruffes of them,
This
C IJ4 3
This Woman came to me, in one of her Agitations, and having been fatisfied in my Skill, as to telling her Name, and the Name of her Hufband, with the Time of her Marriage, fhe wrote to me in the following Manner.
Woman. Sir, I defire you will fhew me, in a Glafs, what my Hufband is doing now, for I have Reafon to believe he is with fome Slut or other.
D. C. What Advantage wpuld that be to you, if you knew it ?
Woman. You muft tell me alfo, where he is, that I may go and tear her Eyes out.
D. C. And would not that provoke him to life you ill ?
Woman. Hi; dares not fay a Word ^ for he knows I would go to the Devil for my Revenge But it is in your Power to do me a greater Service than all this.
D. C. What is it ? I will ferve you in anything that is lawful.
Woman. This is nothing but what is lawful and juft *, I would have you fright my Hufband from going to any of thefe wicked Creatures any more.
D. C. If you fend him to me, I will let him fee the Folly of it, if he be really guilty.
Woman. He will not regard any thing that is laid to him on that Score, nor will own any of his Tricks •, but I would have you raife a Spirit
to
c ijy 1
to haunt him whenever he goes out of the floufe, and then he would be glad to keep at Home.
D. C. But have you any Proof that he is falfe to your Bed .
Woman. No, I want you to give me that.
D. C. But why do you fufpect him ?
Woman. Because he often flays abroad a full half-Hour longer than Bufinefs detains him, and pretends he met fome Friend by the Way : Sometimes he comes Home very much out of Humour, and does not fo much as kifs me ; and when I complain of his Unkjndnefs, he makes an Excufe, forfooth, that his Affairs go wrong. In fhort, I have taken Notice, that he fighs very much of late, and, I am fure, it is far fome Whore or another : Therefore, I beg you will raife a Spirit that fhall appear to him in a very frightful Shape, and make him glad to come, as fall as he can, to his honeft Home.
D. C. And you think this a juft and laudable Undertaking ?
Woman. It cannot be otherwife, fince it is only to keep him honeft.
D. C. So you would fend the Devil to your Hufband, to prevent his going to a Whore, and all this for a bare Supposition only, for I cannot fee you have any Ground to believe him falfe; and, if I may be allowed to know any thing of the Matter, there never was a better-natured, and more honeft Man in the World ; you are happy, if you know when you are fo ; there-" fore, inftead of tormenting him, leave off your
jSaloufy,
t i$6 1
Jealouly, and ill Humour, and be affable and obliging, as it is the Duty of a W ife to be, and, I will engage, you will have no Caufe of Complaint from him.
Woman. You tell me this only to fave your-felf the Trouble of conjuring up a Spirit, but if you will not do it, I fhall go to thofe who will; 1 know there are them that will oblige me, and I ihould not be ungrateful.
D. C. If fuch a Thing were to be done, I had much rather it Ihould be effected by any-body than my felf; but, take my Word, whoever pretends to it, will but deceive you;— I tell you once again, your Hufband is innocent, and you harbour a Fiend in your own Bread:, worfe than any you will ever procure to torment him : Jea-Joufy is. the word: of Devils, and where it is caufelefs, brings its own Punifhment along with it*
Woman, And are you certain no Woman has any Share in his Affections but myfelf ?
D. C. I dare anfwer for it.
Woman. I see, now, you are no better than an Impoftor ; for I will fwear he faid, my Next-Door Neighbour’s Wife , who is counted no better than Ihe 'ffiould be, was a very comely, agreeable Woman ; I know he has a Defign upon her, and if you will not do as I have dedred,
I will go to all the Conjurers in England, but I will find one that lhajl.
I USED
[ IS7 3
I used all the Arguments I was Mailer of, to perfuade this wicked Wretch to better Thoughts, but it was throwing Pearls before Swine ; the more I urged, the more outrageous ihe grew, and, at laft, told me, She believed I knew the Rogue her Hufband, and was his Confederate in dbujing her. In ihort, I was forced to take her by the Shoulder, and put her out of the Houfe, that her Noife might not difturb fome Ladies of Condition I had above.
It would be endlefs to recount the Numbers that, thro* me, defired the Afllflance of the Devil to compais their Defires ; but as fome are too grofs for Repetition, and others too trifling, I fhall content myfelf with having given a Sample to what a Degree of Degeneracy humane Nature may fink, if not kept up by Religion, and good Senfe; for Wickednefs and Folly commonly go Hand in Hand.
CHAP.
t ijS 1
CHAP. XV.
A Remarkable Infi'ance /"Ingratitude;
H O5 I have already made Mention of my fincere Intentions of being fer-viceable to thofe who confulted me
SLElSS on any honeft or legal Score, and the unkind Returns l foinetimes have met with ; yet I cannot refoive to lay down my Pen without relating one little Hiftory of an Affair tranfacted between me and a Perfon, who, I dare fay, will count over many happy Yeats when I am Dull cliid Afnes. The Adventure is this.
Having made an Appointment with fbme Friends to meet at a Tavern, at a certain Hour, neither the Perfuafions of my Wife, nor the Impatience of feveral Clients, who happened at that Time to be in the Houfe, could prevent my keeping my Word, and, as I was breaking from them all, and had juft fet my Foot on the Stairs* I was faluted by a grave, old Gentleman in a plain Habit ; the Sight of him had more Effect upon me, than all that had been alledged for my flaying at Home, and I was compelled, as it were, by an inward Impulfe to turn back, and
know
[ 159 ]
know his Bufmefs. 1 followed him into the Dining-Room, and prefenting him a Pen and Ink, he immediately wrote in this Manner.
SIR, I have heard great Talk of you—----My
Life was once in great Danger ; let me know in what kind. I defire no other Proof of your Skill.
PIe gave me his Gold with his Queftion, and feojned impatient for my Anfwer, which I Was not long before I obliged him with in tliefe T erms.
S I R, You are a Gentleman who have not Jem your native Land for thirty Years or upwards, and having keen Witnefs of all the Rarities of the Globe, are curious of knowing whether you may reckon the Dumb Man among the Number. As to the Danger of your Life, you had the Misfortune of being Poifon-ed by the Bite of a Viper, and was cured by a Wizard- - - You have no mortal Wounds, but
wear Scars preferr able to a Star and Garter —--
I look on you as the Wonder of Mankind, the Glory of your illufrious Family in particular, and the Honour of your Country in general —-—-You have fought both by Sea and Land, met with Storms, Tern-pejls, and unequal Forces, yet never knew what it was to fear.
The Gentleman had no fooner read this, than he pulled a green Purfe out of his Pocket,' in
which
I 160 1
which was a large Gold Medal fet round with Diamonds, and having fliewn it me, wrote,
LET this convince you of the Truth of your Skill, as well as of my Honour, what you fay is Fact ; I was hit hy a Viper, which mujl have keen my Death according to all humane Probability, for in five Minutes my Leg was [welled bigger than my Body, hut hy the Advice of fome Friends, Ifent for a famous Wizard, who^ hy uttering fome myftical Words, immediately cured me.
After this we had a Bottle of Wine, and while we were drinking it, I had Leifure to examine the Lines of his Face more particularly, and feeing fomething which promifed great Things, I wrote to him in thefe Terms.
I LOOK on you with Pleafure : You have no-thing of the Rudenefs which one might expefl from ci Perfon who has -paft fo much Time among Infidels— You have acquired all their Knowledge, hut left their Barbarij'm behind you-------Toil have a good An-
gel which conftantly attends you——preferves you amid ft the moft imminent Dangers—but yet you mu ft permit me to reproach you with Cowardice in one
Thing-----you have Twenty thou find Pounds your
Due from-Jome great Powers, yet you have not Courage to demand it —-------- Me thinks <, all that can
threaten fuch an Attempt is a Trifle to what you have
undergone-----Yen have a very good Chance forget-*
ting it, hut were there a theufand to one agajnft you,
C 161 1
i>/ Honour you ought not to relinquiffj tamely what is
Jo much your Right—------If my Advice may prevail,
he bold in the Affair------ You will, I know, meet
with fome Repulfes, hut I dare affure you of Succe/s in the End.
I observed he paufed, and Teemed divided Within himfelf when he read this, but gave me ho direct Anfwer, and the Converfation between hs took a different Turn. He came, however, almoft every Day to vifit me, and took an infinite Pleafure in being a Witnefs of the various Humours of my Confulters; and by what he Taw me do in little Things, grew more com vinced of my Abilities in great Ones ^ and when Xve had been acquainted about a Month, he wrote to me in the following Manner.
I am enough affured it is in your Rower to effect every Thing that is in the Power of a Mortal, and would have you make your own Fortune, as well as that of other People.
T o which I anfwered, That I never had it in
my Power to do myfelf much Service - -..........- 1
had no fooner wrote this than he immediately refumed *
BUT\ Mr. Campbel, you are affiuled with Sicknefs, and ailing in fopuhlick a Manner as you. do, muft needs have drawn on you many Ene-mies«'—~*»m I am no Stranger to the Struggles you M	have
C i '6% 3
have to defend yourfelf againft the Barbarity of fame People, and that it is not getting Five hundred Pounds per Ann. can preferve you from Ruin, while the Power and Malice of thofe who labour for your Undoing continue in the fame Vigour. I have been thinking on the Twenty thoufand Pounds you talked of; it is undoubtedly my Due, and if you will come t° an Agreement with me, I will give you one Shil~ 'ling in the Pound for as many Pound's as I 'fhall recover'.
I presently told him, I would enter into any Meajures which fhould be for his Good and my own *, and he purfued his Difcourfe in this Manner i
IN the firft Place, you mu ft gyve me your Advice how to proceed and next, you mu ft take a Trip to Holland: For this laft Article I will make you a Prefent of Two bundled Pounds, whether I get any Thing or not \ but if I receive the Money, either the whole Sum, or Part, you fhall be paid in Proportion •, that is, according to what I offered before, one Shilling in the Pound.
I made a little Demur at going to Holland^ becaufe I knew that I fhould lofe more by quitting my Bufinefs for fo long a Time, befides the Vexation it would give my Clients. But on his telling me, he would delire my Company but fix Weeks, I at laft agreed, and a Lawyer being fent for, the Writings were drawn, One
hundred
[ 16} 1
hundred Pounds was to be paid me down, and the other I was to receive as foon as I fet Foot
in Holland.
Every Thing being thus fettled, I began to provide myfelf with traveling Garments, but all on a fudden I found my Friend grow cold ; he told me, 'That he could not lay down any Money till our Arrival in Plolland, and that he would have me embark before him, and go directly to Rotterdam {where he would follow me in a few Days. This a little vexed me*, but though I was dif-fuaded by feveral of my Friends from proceeding in this Expedition, yet* as my Honour was engaged, I refolved to go through with it, and accordingly did, with a few Guineas in my Pocket, which he had given me for Earned;, and a Bill on a Dealer in Rotterdam.
What I endured in this Voyage would be too tedious to recite, fo I lhall only fay, that I had my Labour for my Pains, or, according to a filly Cuftom in Fafhion among the Vulgar, was made an April-Fool of, the Perfon who had engaged me to take this Pains never meeting me, but, inftead of keeping his Appointment, went fbrait to Amjlerdam, and, according to the Advice I had given him, follicited his Affair, and got Ten thoufand Pounds paid in a fhorc Time, out of which I never received one Farthing, nor have feen or heard from him fince ; but an Acquaintance of mine, who happened to M 2	be
t 164 3
be his alfo, having fome Bufinefs in Holland met him by Chance, and afked him, How he couldbe Jo ungenerous as to Jend me to Rotterdam, when he went to Amfterdam ; to which he gave this malicious Anfwer, That Mr. Campbell Genius could have informed him where the Perfon was he came to meet, much better than any Direction. I believe there is no-body but what will think this Evafion highly bafe ; nor can it be fuppofed, but that I, who had been able to tell him fuch particular Things, which he owned were known to no Perfon in England, and had directed him by what Means he fhould recover his Money, could eafily have foretold, that I fhould be deceived by the very Perfon I took fo much Pains to ferve, had I endeavoured it ; but I was too much taken up with other Studies to lay out any Part of my Time on an Adair in which I had no Sufpicion* and only thought of ferving him, while I fhould have thought how he intended to ferve me. Be-fides, my Agreement and Orders were to go to Rotterdam : I performed my Promife, and it was his Bufinefsto meet me, not mine to go in Search of him. But let his own Rod lafh him ; the Ungrateful, fooner or later, may find one more ungrateful than themfelves, and are punifhed by the very Crime they have been guilty of—For my Part, tho’ I ftill have the Articles of Agreement by me, and could prefently put them in Force, yet I fcorn to do it, leaving him to thofe fecret Stings which he cannot fail to feel, whenever Reflection lets what I have done for him before his Eyes.
The
C 16s 1
The CONCLUSION.
IF there be any thing in this little T reatife which will oblige the Reader, and particularly my fair Confulters, the Glory of it will perpetuate my Memory : I allure them, none has had, and will to the laft Moment of my Life continue to have, their Intereft more at Heart ; and, as I was always an Enemy to Flattery, cannot be fufpected to be guilty of it in a Work which is not to fee the Light till after my De-ceafe ; what is contained in it, will, doubtlefs, gain Belief, and, for that Reafon, I am as certain, will be for the Advantage of thofe whole Good I lhaU never ceafe to wifh living and dying.
There having been formerly publifhed a little Pamphlet, entitled, The Friendly Dmmon, but, I believe, is now very fcarce *, I have ordered it to be re-printed with this, becaufe, in the Chapter of the Lo^dfione, I have omitted fome Things which are contained in that, as alfo fome genuine Letters from my Correfpondents.
I have no other Apology to make for the foregoing Pages, but that they are well meant,, for which Reafon I flatter myfelf they will be well taken, efpecially by my fair Confulters, this being the laft Legacy from him they have been pleafed to call their Dumb Oracle.
M 3
T FI E
E 166 J
THE
Friendly Damon:
o R T H E
Generous Apparition.
To my anonymous worthy Friend, Phyfician, Philofopher, whoje Name, for certain Reafons, 1 forbear to mention.
SIR,
CANNOT, without great Ingratitude, forget the friendly Vifits, and kind Advice, I frequently received from you, during, not only a dangerous but tedious Indifpofition, %vhich furprizingly feized me in the Year 1717, and, notwithftanding your extraordinary Care, as well as unqueftionable Judgment, continued on me till the latter-End of the Year —25 ; in
which
C i6y ]
Which long Interval of Time, the Attendance you gave, and the Trouble you gave yourfelf, abftracted from all Intereft, made you truly fen-Able of my unhappy Condition, and myfelf e-qually apprehensive of the great Obligations I (hall ever be under to fo fincere a Friend.
The firft Occafion of my Illnefs, as I have good Reafon to imagine, was a very blocking Surprize, given me by certain Perfons, who pretended to be my Friends in a confiderable Affair then depending, wherein their Treachery threatened me with fucceeding Ruin, had not Providence interpofed, and delivered the Oppreffed from the cruel Hands of fuch deceitful Enemies : Upon whofe hard Ufage, and the News of my Difappointment, I was (truck, at firft, with & kind of Epilepfy, and deprived of all my Sen-fes in an Inftant, dropped down in the publick Coffee-Houfe, under violent Agitations, which, it feems, are generally concomitant with this mi-ferable Diftemper •, but being luckily abided, • and kindly fupported by fome Gentlemen, prefent, I happened to efcape thofe ill Confe-quences that might, otherwife, have attended me, during the Extremity of my Convulfions, which were reported, by thofe that held me, to be fo ftrong, as to be almoft infupportable, till the Pa-roxifm declined, which terminated in a cold Sweat, Trembling, and Weeping, and this was the firft Attack that ever this terrible Affailant made upon me j tho’, afterwards, he forced him-
M 4	felf
[ 168 3
leif into a further Familiarity with rqe (much againft my Will) nor could your kind Endeavours, by the Art of Phyfick, backed with my own Strength of Conftitution, fright away this evil Companion from me, till my good Genius, by the Direction of Providence, communicated a particular Secret to me, which, with God’s Blelfing, has lately proved my Deliverance, in what Manner, before I conclude, I fhall very freely acquaint you, in Hopes you will favour me with your candid Opinion in Anfwer thereunto.
Near eight Years was a long Time to continue under the frequent Returns, and uncomfortable Dread of fuch a fhocking Affliction* which, upon every little Diforder of Mind, or Difappointment in Bufinefs, never failed to vifit me; til), by convulfive, or other involuntary Motions in my Head, and other Parts of my Body, my Eyes were buried in their Sockets * my other Features contracted ; my Bowels fometimes wrack’d with intolerable Pains, and all the Faculties of my Mind fo greatly weakened and impaired, that 1, who, for many Years before, had been adeemed as an Oracle by the mod; polite and curious Part of both Sexes, was now, for want of Strength of Mind, and Ability of Body to imploy my Talent, and exercile my Art, as ufual, treated like an old Soldier, who had loft his Limbs in the Service of his Country, and thought only worthy, by way of
Requital 5
L 169 1
Requital, to be made a hobbling Penfioner in borne ftarving Hofpital ; but, I thank my Stars, it proved not quite fo bad with me, for tho* fome Ladies were too hafty and importunate to bear with the leaft Difappointment, or admit of any Delay, without fhewing their Refent-ment, or refufing to truft their Money till my Convulfions afforded me a rational Interval, wherein I might be able to give them ample Satisfaction : Yet, others, of a more con (tolerate, eafy and compaflionate Temper, were fo highly concerned for my too apparent Indifpofition, that, in order to drive out this tormenting Daemon that poffeffed me, they brought me all the old Recipes they could mufter up among their crazy Aunts and Grandmothers, practifed upon all Occafions in their feveral Families, perhaps ever fince the Time of Galen and Hippocrates *, but, having been long under the Care and Friend*' fhip of fo able a Phyfician as yourfelf, tho* to little or no Purpofe, I could not put Faith e~ nough in old Women’s Medicines to receive Benefit thereby fo, under a kind of Defpondency of every thing but Providence, I buffered my Dif-temper to take its own Courfe, till my Fits increased upon me to at leaft twenty in a Day, and by their frequent Reiterations, brought, at length, fuch a Dimnefs upon my Sight, fuch a Weakness in my Joints, and Tremor upon my Nerves, that rendered me incapable of all manner of Buftnefs, efpecially that which I had fo long profeffed, and fuccefsfulJy performed, to
the
[ n o ]
the full Satisfaction and great Aftonifhment of Thoulands ; but being now unable to write, and, for want of Speech, having no other Way of communicating my Anfwers to the Demands of the Ladies and Gentlemen that applied them-felves to me, except by Digiration, which they underftood not, I was forced, fometimes, when much difordered by my Convulfions, to fend them away diffatisfied, which, if it were any Mortification to them, proved a much greater to tnyfelf, becaufe, upon my ready Performances in the Myftery I am Mailer of, depends the Welfare of my whole Family.
Under thefe unhappy Circumftances I laboured till the Month of QElober, in the Year --24, confined, by my Diftemper, to my owe Habitation, not daring to go Abroad, for Fear of falling in the Streets, having been furprized by my Fits in St. James's Park, and. feveral o-ther Places i but, about this Time, being pof-feffed with a ftrong Inclination to the Cold-Bath, near Sir John Oldcajile's, and the great Defire I had to experience the fame, being highly encouraged by your Advice and Approbation, I fum-moned all the Strength I had to my Affiftance, and, purfuant to the Dictates of my own reftlefs Mind, had Recourfe thither accordingly, attended by a proper Perfon to take due Care of me, for fear of the worfl.
I HAD
[ I7I ]
1 had not repeated this cold Expedient above twice or thrice, but I was fenfible of the Benefits I received thereby, for my Diftenyper began to treat me with lefs Severity than ufual, and my Fits were fucceeded with a greater Defluxion of Tears than what was common before I applied myfelf to the Bath ; fo that, after my Weeping was over, I found myfelf much re-frefhed., and all my Faculties abundantly more alert, than at any Time they had been flnce my firft Illnels, infomuch, that, from a timely Continuance of this external Application, I entertained great Hopes of a perfect Recovery j but, notwithstanding my diligent Profecution of this fharp and Shivering Method, I was, to my great Sorrow, unhappily difipppointed ; for my Con-vulfions were as frequent, tho’ not fo violent, as formerly, and I was-now again divefted of all Hopes of Relief, except by the Eland of Providence, having nothing to truft to, but that infallible Phyfician who can cure all Things in an Inflant.
The Defpondency I was now under of any Affiftance from humane Art, and the (lender Opinion you feemed to entertain of my Recovery, made my Intervals as melancholly as my Fits were troublefome ; opprefled with thefe hard Circumftances, I fupported a burthenfome Life, and dragg’d on the tedious Hours till the latter-end of the Year -25, about which Time, as I was {lumbering one Morning in my Bed,
after
t 171 3
after a refilefs Night, my good Genius, or Gua?-dian-Angel, cloathed in a white Surplice, like a Singing-Boy, appeared before me, holding a Scrowl, or Label, in his Right-Hand, whereon the following Words were wrote in large Capitals.
READ, BELIEVE, AND PRACTISE; THE LOADSTONE SHALL BE TOUR CURE, WITH AN ADDITION OF THE POWDER HERE PRESCRIBED TOU •, BUT KEEP THE LAST AS A SECRET, FOR WITH THAT AND THE MAGNET YOU SHALL RELIEVE NUMBERS IN DISTRESS, AND LIVE TO DO GREATER WONDERS THAN TOU HAVE HITHERTO PERFORMED; THEREFORE BE OF GOOD CHEAR,
TOU HAVE A FRIEND UNKNOWN, WHO% IN THE TIME GF TROUBLE, /F/ZZ JVE-VER FAIL TOU.
This comfortable News, tho* delivered to me after fo furprizing a Manner, yet was it very welcome to a languifhing Perfon,under a Complication of Misfortunes, notwithstanding, I had a great Struggle with my natural Reafon, before I could convince myfelf of what I was yet confident my very Eyes had feen, or, at leaft, had been reprefented to me after an extraordinary Manner, for betwixt really feeing a Vifion, or verily believing we do fee it, there is but a (lender Difference ; however, the intire Confi dence I had put in Providence, and the great Defne I had to
be
C i73 3
be relieved, were to me convincing Arguments, beyond all Objection, that my Guardian-Angel had actually appeared, and communicated to my Eyes the very Scrowl that I had read, the Words of which, left my Memory fhould have proved treacherous, I entered in my Pocket-Book, as they are before recited, the Recipe only excepted;
H aving thus fubjected my Reafon to my Senfes, or, at leaft, my Faith, for I either faw, or believed I law, what I have here reported, I had nothing elfe to do, but to put in Practice the Receipt which my good Genius had imparted to me, tho’ how to come at a Loadjione, feemed to me as difficult as to find out the Philofopher’s Stone, having but a {lender Knowledge of the Thing itfelf, and much lefs of its Virtues ; however, upon Enquiry, I foon found out a certain Virtuofo, near Moor fields, who is an eminent Dealer in fuch fort of Curiofities, and, by his Affiftance, I prefently furniffied myfelf with what I wanted, and fending for fome fat Amber, and a certain Preparation of Steel, which I privately difpenfed in a very particular Manner, according to the Recipe communicated by my Genius j then applying both as directed, was miraculoufly delivered, in a great meafure, from thofe wracking Convulfions which had fo long afflicted me* and, in lefs than a Month’s Time, my whole Mi. crocofm was reftored to fuch a happy State of Health, Strength and Vivacity, that, Heaven be praifed, I could do any Thing as ufual, but,
if
[ 174 3
if I leave cff my Loadflofie for two or three Days, which I have fometimes done, meerly out of Ca-riofity, my Fits, as yet, will remind me of my foolifh Prefumption* and force me to have Re-courfe to my wonderful Prefervative, which has not only proved fo great a Friend to myfelf, but has relieved others in the like Diftrefs, and, as I have found by three or four late Experiments, is as effectual in fuppreffmg Vapours, and removing or preventing Hyfterick Fits in Women, as it is in Epilepfies and Convillfions in our own Sek, either Men or Children.
Now, Doctor, fmce I have happily conquer’d fo ftubborn an Enemy, by fuch miraculous Means as do not fail to affift others as well as myfelf, I defire you will vouchfafe me your real Sentiments of this uncommon Way of Cure, your Notions of the Genii* and the wonderful Manner of commutating the Recipe *, your Thoughts of the Loadftone and the V irtues thereof ; your Opinion of Sympathy , and the Cures performed thereby, for I know you are a Philofopher Efficient, as wrell as Phyli-cian, to give a very good Light into all thefe Myfteries, in which I own I am to feek ; therefore hope you will condefcend fo far as to fpend a leifure Flour upon the foregoing Particulars, and you will infinitely oblige, S IR,
Tour ajjured Friend, and humble Servant^
D UNCAN CamPBEL
C 17? 3
Ho wy Deaf and Dumb Friend, .Mr. Dukca n Campbel, ir Anfwer to his Letter to an •anonymous worthy Friend, Phyfician and Philo-fopher.
SIR,
I Received your Letter, and read the fame with no lefs Surprize than Satisfaction j for, as I am greatly pleafed at your miraculous Recovery, fo I am equally aftonifhed at the wonderful Means by which it was obtained: I confefs, I have been too great a Student in Phy-fick and Natural Philofophy, to entertain any extraordinary Opinion of Miracles, no ways accountable to humane Reafon, except thole that concern Religion, which are brought down to our Knowledge well attefted, and recommended to our Faith by unexceptionable Authorities ; not but that I am ready to admit, Hhat the Power of Healing is in the Hand of Providence, and that Jome Patients, when their Diftetnpers, through the Frailty of humane Judgment, derive their Efface from f cbfcure an Original that even puzzles the Phyfician .-Then, I fay, I am fo free to acknowledge, whe the Blefhng of God accompanies the Adtniniftration, Fhat the rnofi trifling Application*-
in
t 176 1
in the Eyes of Art, may recover fuch Perjons from the moji dangerous Infirmities. This I look upon to be your extraordinary Cafe, and therefore think not the M eans to which you afcribe your Cure, or the Manner of the Recipe*s being communicated to you, a proper Subject for a Physical Enquiry, unlefs you had fent me the Prefcrip-tion of your Genius, which I uriderftand by your Letter, you are obliged to conceal, and then, perhaps, I Should have been able to have judged, in fome Meafure, which of the Applications are molt eflentia], the Powder or the JjoadJlone, alfo, how far your Guardian Angel is a Regular Proficient in the modern Practice of Phyfick.
However, as you defire my Opinion of the Genii, the Loadftone, the Powder of Sympathy; and the like ; I Shall not be only willing to give you my own Thoughts, but the Sentiments of others, before I take my Leave, who have made the foregoing Particulars their principal Studies.; and are therefore better acquainted with the Nature of Spirits, than I pretend to be.
A s for the Genii or familiar Spirits, good and bad, believed and reported* by the moil Wife and Learned of the Ancients, to attend Mankind) and the varioiis Operations they have had upon humane Minds as well as Bodies, I cannot but confefs, feetn very wonderful to my defective Understanding •, yet, when wTe obferve what innumerable Inftances have been handed to us by"
the
l 177 1
the moft reputable Authors, both Ancient and Modern, attefted from Time to Time by un-queftionable Audiorities, who, that, before he dived into thefe Myfteries, looked upon the fame to be Whimfy, can forbear daggering in his O-pinion ?
The moft celebrated Inftance of a Genius among the Ancients, is that of Socrates, one of the wifeft of the Philofophers in the Age he lived in, and that he had fuch a familiar Spirit to attend him, which the Greeks called Damon, and the Latins, Genius, is fufficiently teftified by three of his Cotemporaries, viz. Plato, Xenophon, and Antijlhenes \ alfo further confirmed by Laertius, Plutarch, Maximus lyrius, Dion, Chry-fojlomus, Cicero, Apuleius, and Facinas \ befides others more Modern, as, Lertullian, Origen, Clemens Alexandrinus, &c. but that which is of greater Authority than all the Vouchers aforementioned, is what Socrates fays of himfelf, in Plato’s The age, viz. By fome divine Lot, I have a certain Daemon, which has followed me from my Childhood, as an Oracle *, and this Voice, fays he, for fo he terms it, whenever it fpeaks to me, dif-fuades me from engaging in what I am about to put in Aft ion, but never prompts me to attempt any thing. This, I prefume, might be the chief Reafon why Socrates purfued not his own Inclinations, which were naturally Vicious, as himfelf confe fled to the Phyfiognomift, but was always accompanied with a divine Spirit that re-
N	drained
F 178 1
drained him from it *, for, in fpeaking to Alcibu ades, a vicious Nobleman of Athens, but reclaimed by Socrates, fays he, My Tutor (meaning the Spirit that attended him) is wifer and better than you. And to fhew further* that what he called his Damon was fomething more than a fecret Impulfe of the Mind, or Dictates of a good Confcience, Theocritus affirms in Plutarch, That a Vifipn attended Socrates from his Childhood, going before him, and guiding him in all the Allions of his Life, being a confimt Light to him in fuch Affairs as lay not within the Reach of human Underfunding» and that the Spirit often fpoke to him, divinely governing and inf iring his Intentions. A thoufand Inftances of the like Nature, I could collect from the Ancients, to prove, that what you have reported to me, in your Letter, may be no Delu-fion, but real Fact, with all its furpriling Cir-cumftances, could the Talk be comprifed within the Compafs of a Letter, but, a Treatife of this Nature, being much fitter for a Volume, I lhall only proceed to a few familiar Inftances of a more modern Date, that your wonderful Cure may gain Credit with the Publick, becaule I know your Sincerity.
FRO IS S ARD reports, That in the Time, of Edward III. there was a certain Knight in France, called Coraffe, who could tell every Thing tranfacted throughout the whole World, in a Day or two at the moft, were the Diftance never fo remote 5 and this he did by an invifible
In-
£ 579 3
Intelligencer or familiar Spirit, which he called Orthone, who was always at his Command, and brought him News continually for many Years, till, at laft, he loft the Benefit of fo ufeful a Companion* through a vain Defire of gratifying his Curiofity after the following Manner, viz* The Knight, having hitherto only heard the Voice of his fpiritual Emiffary, was now infatuated with an earneft Inclination to behold his Shape, which Favour he requefted of Orthone ; accordingly, whofe Anfwer was, That thefirft Thing he (hould fee on the Morrow Morning., after he was rifen from his Bed, Jhoidd he the Object he defired, or Words to that Effect. The Knight, the next Morning, purfuant to the Direction of the Spirit, arofe from his Bed, looked about him, but could not difcover any Thing worthy of Remark ; upon which Difappointment, he upbraided Orthone with being worfe than his Word *, who replied, He had kept his Prcmife^ defiring the Knight to remind himfelf of what he had firft obferved after his Rifing \ the Knight, upon Recollection, replied, That hefaw nothing uncommon^ hut a Couple of Straws tumbling upon the, Ground, and for ting one with another j as if agitated by the Wind ; That was I, faith the Spirit* and therefore I kept my Word. Then the Knight defired to fee him once more, in fuch a Shape as might induce him, the next Time, to take more No-tied of him *, to which the Spirit confented, faying, The firft Thing you fee on the morrow Mornings after your up-riftng, Jhall be me again : Accordingly,
N 2	when
[ 180 ]
when the Time appointed was come, and the Knight riferi from his Bed, looking out of his Chamber-Window, the firft Object he efpied, was a lean, ill-favour’d Sow, fo deformed and ugly, that he was not able to abide the Sight of her ; and not expecting Orthone to appear to him in fo homely a Manner, he fet his Dogs upon the Sow to drive her away, who being highly affronted at fuch an unfriendly Ufage, immediately vanifhed, to the Knight’s great Surprize » and his old Acquaintance Orthone never came near him after. This Relation Froijfard afferts he had from the Knight’s own Mouth, with whom he was very intimate.
From hence I conclude, that the fame Sort of Spirit that attended Corajfe, has been always a Friend to you, not only of late, in your miraculous Recovery, but has at all Times afiifted you in writing the Name of Strangers, difcovering the moft fecret Intrigues, and foretelling future Events, for which you have been Famous. As for a further Proof of the Exiflence of Spirits, and that* at fome other Times, as well as in’ ypur Cafe, they have prefcribed Phyhck to their living Friends, I fhall quote an Inftance out of Mr. GlanviTs Reports, attefted by the Lord Orrery, the Famous Mr. Greatrix, and many others, living in the Reign of King Charles the Second,	;
A
t 181 1
A Gentleman in Ireland, near to the Earl of Orrery's Houle, fending his Butler one Afternoon to a neighbouring Village to buy Cards'* as he paffed a Field, efpied a Company in the Middle thereof, fitting round a Table, with fe-veral Difhes of good Cheer before them, and moving towards them, they all rofe and faluted him, defiring him to fit down and take Part with them ; but one of them whifpered thefe Words in his Ear, viz. Do nothing this Company invites you to : Whereupon, he refufing to except of their Kindnefs, the Table, and all the Dainties it was furnilhed with, immediately vanilhed, but the Company fell to Dancing and playing upon divers mufical Inftruments : The Butler was a fecond Time follicited to partake of their Diver-fions, but would not be prevailed upon to engage himfelf with them ; upon which, they left off their Merry-making and fell to Work, ftill prefiing the Butler to make one among them, but to no Purpofe •, fo that, upon his third Re-fufal, they all vanifhed and left the Butler alone, who, in a great Confternation, returned Home without the Cards, fell into a Fit as he entered the Houfe, but foon recovering his Scnfes, related to his Mafter all that had paffed.
The following Night, one of the Ghoftly Company came to his Bed-Side, and told him, <That if he offered to ftir out the next Day, he would he carried away j upon whofe Advice, he kept
N 3	within
C i$z 1
within till towards the Evening, and having Oc-calion to make Water, ventured to fet one Foot over the Threfhold of the Door, in order to eafe himfelf, which he had no fooner done, but a Rope was caft about his Middle, in the Sight of feveral Standers-by, and the poor Man was hurried from the Porch with unaccountable Swift-nefs, followed by many Perfons, but they were not nimble enough to overtake him, till a Horfe-,man, well mounted, happening to meet him upon the Road, and feeing many Followers in pur-fuit of a Man hurried along in a Rope, without any-body to force him, catched hold of the Cord and Hopped him in his Career, but received, for his Pains, fuch a Strap upon his Back with one End of the Rope, as almolt felled him from his Horfe ; however, being a good Chriitian, he was too ftrong for the Devil, and recovered the Butler out of the Spirits Clutches, and brought him back to his Friends.
The Lord Orrery, hearing of thefe ftrange Pafiages, for his further Satisfaction of the Truth thereof, fent for the Butler, with Leave of his Matter, to come and continue fome Days and Nights at his Houfe, which, in Obedience to his Lordlhip, the Servant did accordingly, who, after his firft Night’s Bedding there, reported to the Earl in the Morning, That his Spedlre had again been with him, and ajfured him, that on that very Day he Jhould be fpirited away, in Spight of all the Mcafures that could pojjibly be taken to prevent
'	■ , it.
C *83 3
it. Upon which he was conducted into a large Room, with a confiderable Number of holy iPerfons to defend him from the Aftaults of Satan •, among whom was the famous Stroker of betwitched Perfon, Mr. Grcatrix, who lived in the Neighbourhood, and knew, as may be prefumed, how to deal with the Devil as well as any-body ; befides feveral eminent Quality were prefent in the Houfe, among the reft, two Bi-jfhops, all waiting the wonderful Evept of this unaccountable Prodigy.
Till part of the Afternoon was Ipent, the Time Aid away in nothing but Peace and Quiet-nefs, but, at length, the enchanted Patient was perceived to rife from the Floor without any vi-fible Afliftance, whereupon Mr. Greatrix, and another lufty Man, clapt their Arms over his Shoulders, and endeavoured to weigh him dowia with their utmoft Strength, but to no Purpofe, for the Devil proved too powerful, and, after a hard Struggle on both Sides, made them quit their Hold, and fnatching the Butler from them, carried him over their Heads and tofted him in the Air, to and fro, like a Dog in a Blanket; feveral of the Company running under the poor Wretch to fa,ve him from the Ground, by which Means, when the Spirits Frolick was over, they could not find that in all this Hurry-feurry, the frighted Butler had received the leaft Damage, but was left in Statu quo, upon the fame Premifes, to prove the Devil, a Liar.
N 4	The
t 184 ]
The Goblins, for this Bout, having given over their Paftime, and left their May-game to take a little Repofe, that he might in fome Measure be refrelhed againft their next Sally, my Lord ordered, the fame Night, two of his Servants to lie with him, for fear fome Devil or o-ther fhould come and catch him napping, not-withftanding which, the Butler told his Lordfhip the next Morning, That the Spirit had again been with him in the Likenefs of a Quack Dodlor, and held in his Right-Hand a wooden Difhfull of grey Liquor, like a Mef of Porridge, at the Sight of which he endeavoured to awake his Bedfellows, but the Speblre told him, his Attempts were fruitlefs, for that his Companions were enchanted into a deep Sleep, advif-ing him not to be frighted, for he came as a Friend, and was the Jame Spirit that cautioned him in the Field againji complying with the Company he there met, when he was going for the Cards ; adding, That if he had not refufed to come into their Mea-fires, he had been for ever miferable ; alfo wondered he had ejcaped the Day before, becaufe he knew there was jo powerful a Combination againft him ; that for the future there would be no more Attempts of the like Nature; further telling the poor trembling Butler, That he knew he was fadly troubled with two Sorts of Fits, and, therefore, as a Friends he had brought him a Medicine that wo uld cure him of both, befeeching him to take it ; but the poor Pa-tient, who had been fcurvily ufed bythefeSort of Doctors, and fearing the Devil might be at
the
r 185 ]
the Bottom of the Cup, would not be prevailed upon to fwallow the Dofe, which made the Spi-; rit angry; who told him, however, He had a
Kindnefs for him, and that if he would hruife the Roots of Plantane without the Leaves, and drink the Juice thereof ', it fhould certainly cure him of one Sort of his Fits, hut as a PuniJhment for his Obfli-nacy in refufing the Liquor, he fhould carry thg other with him to his Grave i then the fpiritual Doctor afked his Patient if he knew him; the Butler anfwered, No I am, fays he, the wandering Ghoft of your old Acquaintance John Hobby, who has been dead and buried thefe jeven Tears ; and ever fince, for the Wickednefs of my Life, have been lified into the Company of thofe evil Sprits you beheld in the Fields, an1 hurried up and down in this reftlefs Condition, and doomed to continue in thg fame wretched State till the Day of Judgment. Adding, That had you ferved your Creator in the Days of your Touth, and offered up your Prayers that Morning before you were Jent for the Cards, you had not been treated by the Spirits that tormented you, with fo much Rigour and Severity.
After the Butler had reported thefe marvellous Paflages to my Lord and his Family, the two Bilhops, that were prefent, among other Quality, were thereupon confulted, whether or no it was proper for the Butler to follow the Spirit's Advice, in taking the Plantane Juice for the Cure of his Fits, and whether he had done well or ill, in refufing the liquid Dofe which the Spedlre
would
L 186 1
would have given him: The Queftion, at firff feeined to be a kind of moot Point, but,'after forpe Struggle in the Debate, their Refolution was, "That the Butler had a died, thro* the whole Affair, like a good Chriflian, /or it was highly finful to follow the Devil’s Advice in any Thing, and that no Man floould do Evil that Good ?night come of it ; fo that, in fhort, the poor Butler, after his Fatigue, had no Amends for his Trouble, but was denied, by the Bifhops, the feeming Benefit that the Spirit intended him.
I do not introduce this old furprifing Story to amufe you, but to let you know, that it is no new Thing for Spectres to turn Doctors to ailing Perfons as they retain a Refpect for, and that your Genius was not the firft Spirit that ever practifed Phyfick ; therefore, if this Narrative, reported by Glanvil, Beaumont, and others, may obtain Credit, upon the Authorities of my Lord Orrery, Mr. Greatriif, and divers Perfons, who were in a great Meafure Eye-witnefles of the Matter, I fee no Reafon I have to doubt the Truth of your Letter, fince I know your Integrity j befides, has always been allowed by Rich Daemonologers as have publifhed their Thoughts upon the Vifibility of Spirits, that Scotland is never without fuch a Sort of People as they call Second-fghted, who have not only the Power of difcerning Apparitions, but, by their frequent Converiation with Spirits, foretel future Events, to the great i\.ftonifhment of all Perfons that ’ •	con-
C 187 1
confult them : That there are filch a Sort of Diviners in the World, efpecially in Scotland, I am throughly convinced ; of which Number I take yourfelf to be one, but how to account for your myfterious Performances, I readily confefs, I know not, and therefore (hall fubmit that Talk to fuch as are qualified with a more fubtil Penetration.
I doubt I have tired your Patience with too much Prolixity upon familiar Spirits, therefore, to make you amends, I will be but fhort in my Diflertation upon the Loadstone; which, in the firft Place, is a very ponderous Fojfile, found in different Climates, and feems in its Nature and Qualities to be nearly related to Iron Oar, from whence it is endowed with a peculiar Property of drawing to itfelfby the Power of Sympathy, or the natural Difpofition it has to embrace that particular Metal. In ./Egypt there are large Mines of it, fome few Magnets have been found in Ethiopia, which have attracted Iron very forcibly ; but two Sorts are dug up at the Foot of the Sardinian Mountains, of fuch different Natures, that as one draws Iron, the other will repel it, *, as you will find it reported by Johannes Jon (tonus, in his Hiftory of Nature; alfo by Pliny, in h;s Second Book, who, for the aforefaid Reafon, calls. this Stone Fheamedes : As to the fingular Virtues hitherto difcovered in the common Loadstone, the moll admirable of all are the ftrict Correfpondence it maintains with ' • -	the
[ i88 1
the two Poles, and the wonderful Property it communicates by a Touch to the Needle, for the Benefit of Mariners. The Power of its Attraction is thought by fome Virtuofos to be owing to a clammy bituminous Subftance, by which the Contexture of the more folid Parts are clofe-]y femented and confirmed *, to prove this, work a Loadstone in the Fire and it fhall caft forth a bluifh Flame, like that of lighted Brimftone, and fo continue till it fpends its Life, and lofes the Power of Attraction. There is a great dea^ of Sulphur in Iron as well as in the Loadjione, which is the principal Caufe of their Sympathi-fing with each other, and if you deftroy the Firft in either, the laft will fail in courfe, which is the Reafon why the Loadjione will not attract the Ruji of Iron, tho’ it will the Filings, becaufe in the former the bituminous Matter is quite lpent, and nothing left but a kind of Caput mortuum. The Loadfime hath alfo two Poles, which anfwer thole in the Heavens ; if you touch the Needle with the North Pole of the Stone, it will point to thz Artick, if with the South Part thereof, as it flood pofited in the Mine, it will point to the Antartick, but not with the utmofl Exactnefs, except it ftands in the Meridian : But to be further fatisfied in thefe Myfleries, have Reeourfe to Libavious, Card anus, Pliny, Bodin, Portae our own Philofophical Lranfa Elions, and fuch Authors as have treated more largely upon this Subject : For, I fuppofe, all that you want to know of me is, if ever I have heard from others, or dif-
covered
£ 189 1
covered by my own Experience, any fuch Phv-fical Virtue in the Loadftone, as may tend to the Cure of any Chronical or other Difeafe incident to human Bodies, that may ftrengthen the Opinion you feem to entertain of it in fuch Cafes, from the Benefit yourfelf has lately received in fo extraordinary a Manner.
In anfwer to this, I confefs, I have heard affirmed (but not by a Phyfician) "That the Loadftone hath withdrawn the Inflamation, and given Eafe in the Gout, and by changing the Application of it from one Side to the other, has at length chafed it away, to the perfect Recovery of the Patient , but in any other Cafe, excepting your own, I never heard of a Cure fo much as facilitated or attempted to be performed thereby ; therefore, as the Ufeofit in any Difeafe is quite Foreign to the common Practice of Phyfick, if others, as welf as yourfelf, have received Benefit by this new Difcovery, I think not myfelf obliged to account for it, till it becomes practical among my own Fraternity, and then it will be time enough for any Phyfician to give his Thoughts thereon ; befides, I am a Stranger to the Preparation pre-fcribed to you by your Genius, and without the Knowledge of that material Secret, it is impoffi-for any Phyfician, in your Cafe, to make a clear Judgment, or to know which of the two your Cure is chiefly owing to, the Powder or the Loadftone , for how far the latter may operate upon a. Body prepared by Pulvis Manis or other Chalybeates, I fliall not pretend to determine,
tho’
C r^o 1
tho’; for ought I know, wonderful Cures may be performed in that Way, but upon what Rea-fon in Nature, fuch a new Syftem can be founded, feems very remote from my prefent Under-ftanding ; but, fince you are become foie Mafter of fo wonderful a Secret, my Advice is, That you keep the Recipe to yourfelf\ in Obedience to your Genius, and tho* you ajjifi others, never do it without Fee or Reward, for all ufeful Dijcoveries ought ■to be rendered Profitable.
In anfwer to the laft Article of your Requeft, I fhall now proceed to fay fomething of Sympathy, and the Cures reported to have been done thereby. The Sytnpathetick Powder, fo highly efteem-ed about a hundred Years fince, by Men of Art in this Kingdom, was firft bfought into Europe by a religious Carmelite, who, in his Travels thro’ India^ Perfia, and China, had made him-felf Mafter of this Secret, and from fome of thofe Eajlern Countries, came over into Tufcany, where he perform’d many confiderable Cures ■' by this occult Method, to the great Aftonifhment of the moft eminent Phyficians and Surgeons in thofe Parts *, infomuch that the Duke of Tufcany him-felf was very defirous of becoming Mafter of this ftirprizing Arcanum, but the honeft Fryar, by many handfome Excufes brought himfelf off, and would not be prevailed upon to com muni-,:cate his Nofrum to his Highncfs^
Some
£ *9* 3
Some few Months after this, our famous Eng-lijh Virtuofo, Sir Kenelm Digby, happening* in his Travels, to be at the Grand Duke’s Court, an Opportunity fell accidentally in the Knight’s way to do the Fryar a Service, which the good old Man took fo kindly at his Hands, that he recom-penced the Curtefy with a Difcovery of his Secret ; and foon after returning into Pcrfia, left no Man in Europe Mailer of the fame but Sir Ke-nelm, who was the firft Perfon that brought the Recipe into England, and that here wrought Cures by it himfelf, and recommended it to the Prao tice of others; fo that, in a little Time, every Mother-Midwife and Country Fleabeard, became topping Surgeons, efpecially for the Cure of Green Wounds ; for it is ngt to be trufted to it? other Cafes,
This Sympathetick Powder, by which many Miracle^ have been performed at great Diftances, is nothing more than the Simple Powder of Ro~ man Vitriol, either chymically prepared, or imperfectly calcined in the Beams of the Sun ; from whence, ’tis faid, it derives a very balfamick Vir„ tue: A little of this applied to any Inftrument that has done Mifchief, or to a Pag diped into, or ftained with the Blood of a Wound, never fails of curing the Patient at the wideft Diftance, provided the Wound be curable,
'Sir
I 3
Sir Kenelm Digby, to advance the Credit of this furprifing Medicine, fpeaks very largely in Commendation thereof, in a little Treatife of his, written firft in French, upon the fame Subject *, wherein he boafts of a remarkable Cure performed by himfelf, in a moil wonderful Manner, with only the Ufe of this aftonifhing Powder *, and, therefore, as in religious Cafes, Example goes beyond Precept, fo, to convince you of the Miracles performed by Sympathy, Inftances, perhaps, may prove more effectual than Arguments •, for which Reafon, I fhall proceed to furnifh you with a notable Experiment of this Magical Powder, and fo conclude.
Mr. James Howel, a trufty Servant to King James I. famous in thofe Days for compiling a Frea-tife, entitled Dendrologia, and afterwards for his Legacy to the World, called, Epiflolae Ho-Elianae, happened, when he was a young Gentleman. to accidentally come by, when two of his dearep Friends were fiercely engaged in a very dangerous Duel, and to prevent further Mi/,chief very likely to enfue, too rafhly catched hold, with his naked Hand, of his Sword whofe Pajfion prompted him to be the moft def-perate \ in which Attempt, the Weapon being drawn through Mr. Howelb Palm, cut the Nerves and Mufcles thereof to the very Bone, and, as they were thus Scuffling, holding up the Jame Hand to defend one of his Friends from a Blow upon his Head, received another Cut upon the Back of bis Hand, crofs
all
C 193 3
all the Veins and Tendons, more terrible than the former, which, his Friends perceivings put a Judden Stop to their inebrious Fury, run both to embrace him, and exprefs their Sorrow for the unhappy Accident, lending him their Affifiance to bind up his Wounds with his own Garters, and Jo conduced him to his Lodgings, where they fent directly for a Surgeon, who found the Cafe defperate, for he bled abundantly.
Mr. Howel being a Gentleman much reffected by the Quality, the News of his Misfortune foon reached the Court; and his Majefty having a great Regard for him, fent one of his own Surgeons to attend hi?n9 who found the Caje to be fo very bad that he feemed doubtful of a Cure, without cutting off his Hand, which occafioned Mr. Howel, about five Hays after the Hurt was received, to apply himfelf to his good Friend and Neighbour, Sir Kenelm Digby, who, at that time was famous for the Sympathetic^ Powder, begging his Ajfiftance in that painful Extremity, telling him, That his Surgeons were ap.-prehenfive of a Gangrene.
Sir Kenelm, opening the Wounds, found a ter-rible Cafe of it, and a dangerous Inflamation upon the Part, which, Mr. Howel acknowledged, gave him fuch intolerable Pain as was fcarce fiupportable : The Knight afked him, If he had any Bandage with the Blood upon it; Mr. Howel anjwered, Yes * accordingly fent his Servant for the bloody Garter which had firfi bound up his Wounds, and delivered it to Sir Kenelm, who, calling for a Bafon pfWa-
O-	ter
C 194 ]
ter, went into his Clojet for a Handful of his Powder, which he infufed therein, and then foaked the Garter in the fame Liquor *, whilfl Mr. Howel was talking with another Gentleman, at the further End of the Room, not knowing in the leaf what Sir Ke-nelm was doings who, after he had bathed the Gar-ter in the Bafon about a Minute, called to his Pa-tient, and ajked him, How he found himfelf, who anfwered, So wonderful eafy that the Inflamation feems to be totally extinguiihed, the Pain quite gone off, and my Hand I find as cool and as much refrefhed as if it was wrapped up in a wet Napkin. Then, replied the Knight, fling off your Draftings, meddle no more with Plaifters, only keep your Wounds clean and from the Air, and 1 doubt not, but in a few Days Time, I fhall effectually cure you, without putting you to any further Trouble. Much comforted with this Ajfu-rance, Mr. Howel took a thankful Leave of Sir Ke-nelrn, and Jo departed.
Mr. Howel had not been gone above a Quarter of an Hour, before the Knight took the Garter out of the Liquor, to dry it before the Fire, and carelefy hanging it a little too near, the extraordinary Heat, by the Concatination of Effluvia’s, had juch an Effedl upon the Patient, that he made as many wry Faces as a Cook that had burnt his Fingers : upon which he dfpatched his Servant, with all imaginable Expedition, to let his Doffer know what a Condition he was telapfed into*
Sir
f *9S .7
SirKenelm, whoprefently eonjeffiured the Cdufe of this Dijafter, finding at the Mefjage the Servant had delivered, and Jhatching the Garter from the Fire, told hims, That his Mafter fhould be very eafy by the Time he could return to him, which the Footman, by the Acknowledgment of his Majier, found to be true accordingly •, Sir Kenelm doing nothing more to work this Change, than cooling the wreaking Garter by a fpeedy Repetition of his former Application *, fo that, without any further Accident inierpofing, the Patient was thoroughly cured, in five or fix Days Timeby this extraordinary Me-thod, to the inexprejfible Admiration of all his Ma-jeftfs Surgeons.
SIR, This is all, at prefent, I am at leifurets fay in Anfwer to your Letter, and, I doubt, you will think it enough too, except more to the Putpofe : What extraordinary Cures you happen to perform by your new Method, I de~ fire you will communicate to me as foon as you can conveniently, for to hear of your Succeis, will be no little Satisfaction to,
SIR,
Tour ajfured Friend, and humble Servant,
O 2
OR L
C 190 1
Original LETTERS
SENT TO
Mr. Campbel by his Confulters.
LETTER I.
From a Perfon under great Misfortunes, SIR,
A M much concerned at the Account you give me of your Indif-pofition, and with Health and Wealth may join to make you eafy: As for myfelf, though I endeavour all I am able to follow your Prefcriptions in Patience, and Refignation to the Will of Heaven, yet, I confefs, the Tide of Misfortunes has almoft overwhelmed me, and it mull now be a ftrong and fudden Gale of good Fortune that can preferve me from finking in the Sea of Grief and Confufion,
i 197 i
I have, dear Sir, neither fo little Fortitude, nor fo much Self-Love, as not to bear the utmoft my cruel Stars, or the more cruel World, can inflict on me, were the Deftruction wholly mine; but when I teflect that with my Ruin, that of fo
dear a Friend as C -...n is blended ; all that
We can fummon in fuch Tryals, is too weak to fupport me, and I am ready to call in Queftion that fupreme Juftice, which, as you pioufly re-monftrate, is above all humane Comprehenfion.
I must own, there is fomething in the Con-fcioufnefs of what has rendered that worthy Man unhappy by my ill Conduct and Inadvertency, that is more Ihocking than all the T ortures in*? vented for corporeal Punilhment, and I would rather chufe to go out of the World'with my Hears broke with Sorrows, than to continue in it, and fee him fuffer for my fake.
But you allure me all will be well hi Time, and that I lhall yet tafte of Happinels 2 You feem certain alfo, that the good Fortune yourfelf has long expected, is now near at Hand; I pray Heaven it may be fo; I wilh yours may fhew mine the Way; and that nothing hereafter may ruffle a Mind in itfelf fo full of Harmony, and lo inclinable to heal the Wounds of others, and particularly of,
SIR,
Tour very fmcere and devoted Servant.
O 3	LET
[ 198 3
LETTER II.
From a Gentleman in the Country.
SIR,
O U may remember when 1 was laft in
Town, our Difcourfe turned chiefly on the
Intelligence of the invifible World, and that I then afked your Opinion concerning an Inter-courfe between the embodied Spirits of feparated Friends, to which you anfwered in the Negative, unlefs in Dreams or Vifions •, I did not, at that Time, give you my Reafons for this Queftion, but being now confirmed in what I before conjectured, I will relate the whole Affair, and doubt not but it will afford you Matter of Speculation.
The whole Time I continued in London, which I think was three Weeks and two Days, whatever Company I was in, or however employed, I could not put it out of my Head, that my Friend here had entertained a Chimera of my having left Walton for ever", I thought it highly unreafonable fhe fhould imagine fo, becaufe the Affair which firft brought me to this Part of the Country, being in the fame Situation it was, I ihould have little Regard for mylelf to leave it, and was expoftulating with her in my Mind on fo ground lefs a Sufpicion : But I had no fooner arrived, than a few Minutes Conference gave me
tl^e
[ *99 1
the A durance of every Particular my Fancy had reprefented tQ me.
I must confels, this is a convincing Proof to me, that the Souls of abfent Perfons meet and inform each other of their refpective Circum-ftances, Defires, and Pafiions *, for to be free? though I never owned fo much to any one before, I had an Inclination rather to make up my Affair at any Rate, than return to that mountainous Wild, where 1 live a lavage Life, without any Thing of my own Specie to converfe with, for f look pn the Inhabitants of this Place as but a fuperior Pegree of Brutes, and, indeed, what elfe can they be juftly termed, whofe Minds are neither cultivated by Learning or good Manners.
A s it was therefore Neceflity that drove me down, and I had fo carefully concealed the Secret in my own Breaft, what, but my tell-tale Spirit could betray it to her ? Or what but her’s reveal her Sufpicion of it to me ? I Ihould be glad you would beftow a few Moments in Reflection of this abftrufe Point, and communicate your deliberate Judgment on it to him, who muft, in fpight of himfelf, be for fome Time longer a Waltonlan, but always with his belt "Wifhes*
Mr. Campbell
Very humble Servant,
i
O 4	LET
LETTER III,
prom a Lad), who, from the Depth of Mifery was Juddenly raijed to Happinefs.
Dear S lit,
I Should be utterly unworthy the good For* tune which, next to Heaven, is entirely owing to the admirable Lalijman I received from you, if I did not acknowledge it in a Manner fuitable to the Obligation^ The pureft Sacrafice fprings from the Heart, and you that have fore-feen fo much of me, as to give me Directions for Happinefs, will, doubtlefs, fee mine glows with the moft perfect Gratitude^
It is now fix Weeks fince I have been married* and every Thing has happened in the very Manner you foretold, MrSi	, once my tri-
umphant Rival, is now the Jeft of the whole Country ; difpifed by every-body; pitied by hone ; and thy Spoufe is fo far from having the leaft Remains of Tendernefs for her, that he even hates to hear her Name: As to my Law-Suit, it being tried in Town, I doubt not but yoii have already heard my good Succefs, but left you fhould not* give me Leave to acquaint you* that 1 have recovered the Whole of what I filed for with Damages. We have fenttoTownto befpeak a fine Chariot and Equipage* which*
when
I 101 J
when finifhed, we fhall be there ourfelves ; and you may depend on feeing me as frequently now 1 have no farther to follicite of you, as when my whole Hope lay on your Care and Skill.
But as Providence fometimes is pleafed to difappoint our beft Intentions, I beg, as an Earned: of my future Gratitude, you will accept of Fifty Pounds, which I have ordered Mn //»-—— to pay you on the Sight of this; and believe, that while I have Life, nay, after, if what you lay be true, that the Dead are allowed to hold Com” munication with the Living, I Fhall be ever,
Fnm an old Correfpondent.
Worthy SIR,
H O* I do nothing with greater Pleafure
than writing to you, yet my Pen flows now with double Readinefs, becaufe it has an Opportunity of obliging you, and, at the fame Time, a Friend, for whom we both have a very great Efteem*
Dear SIR,
Tour moft obliged
and fincere Friend.
LETTER IV.
Either
I 3
Either fbme thing very extraordinary has been the Occafion, or Mrs. S*——— has gained the unexpected Character of being Rich ; for on Monday Night laft, when all the Family were in Bed, I was furprifed with a Noife of a Pick-axe under my Window ; I liftened fome time, and being convinced it was more than Imagination rofe, and called James, who was the only Man befides myfelf at that Time in the Houfe *, on fearcl|jng, we found there was a Hole broke in the Wall, almoft big enough for a Man to enter: Being lo fmall a Poffy, we judged it not fafe to venture out, and therefore removed the belt of the Goods into the inner Rooms, which we bar-ricadoed as well as we could, then putting out the Candles, fet ourfelves to watch in my Chamber. Nothing happened till the Clock had ftruck Three, when we faw the Glimmering of a Lant-horn at the Breach I mentioned; on which I threw open the Window, and examined with a loaded Mufquet, but unhappily miffed the Per-fon.
She has been ever fince in very great Agitations, imagining this Attempt was not made by a Theif, but by her difcarded Suiter Mr. D —- , who, by his Threats and Deporture, gives, indeed, fbme Caufe for this Sufpicion. She has, however, removed her belt Effects to the Houle of Mr. L——, who ftill Continues his Addreffes to her, but does not come directly to the Point;
She
C 403 ]
She therefore begs you would compofe a Philtef3 if it may be done, to keep his Paflion towards her up to the fame Degree of Warmth in Ab-fence, as it feems to be when fhe is prefent j and alfo, that you will confult your Genius for a certain Intelligence, whether the Perfon who attempted to break into the Houfe, came with an Intent of robbing, or of murdering her, which latter fhe is allured of if it were really Zh-—— ; we join in our Entreaties, that you will be as fpeedy and poffttive as pofhble in your Reply* and that you will let us know if we have any farther Attacks to dread from the lame Hand.
As you are fo good to look more on the Intention than on the meer Value of an Offering, fhe fends you, with her beft Refpects, a couple of Turkeys, a Ham of her own Drying, and one Guinea, which is all her Ability allows at this Time. Asformyfelf, you are fo well convinced of what I would do, had I the Power, that it is utterly needlefs to add any more than that I am, as ever,
« - .	Tour faithful Friend,
and humble Servant.
LET-
r
L
2,04 3
LETTER V,
Frm a Jew refiding at Conftantinople.
SIR,
GRATITUDE is ever the Token of a noble Soul, and among the many on whom? I blefs God, it has been in my Power to confer Obligations, I have found few fo ready to acknowledge them as yourfelf It was, indeed* this Opinion of you, which made me firft conceive fo great an Efteem for you, and th e Confirmation binds me eternally to your Service. But that I may not be found guilty of a Want of that in myfelf, which I am applauding in you, accept of my very hearty Thanks for your kind Prefent of the admirable InvifiMe Ink. I allure you, it is of the utmoft Service to me among thefe Barbarians, as you will perceive when, by a fitter Opportunity, I write with it fome Adventures which have lately befallen me here. The moft perplexing of them I here give you a Hint on, for a Word to the Wife is enough. You may remember you bid me beware of Beauty, efpecially in the Forty-fecond Year of my Age ; your own Familiar will inform yon the reft, but if he fhould be employed on more material Affairs, you fhall know it from myfelf in a fhort Time, with all the News of this City, that I think worthy your Attention 5 till then keep rne
t io? 1
in your Memory, and may the God of Juda be your Guide in all Things. I am, without Deceit,
Tour 7noff affectionate Friend.
LETTER VI.
From a Lady of DiftinClion.
Mr. Campeel,
IW A S fome Years ago with you, when you told me of a Misfortune I had juft then paf-fed over, aud predicted one I was in Danger of falling into about this Time *, you did not mention of what Kind, but it being now arrived will inform you, and intreat your Advice in what Manner I fhall proceed.
The firft Effect of my ill Stars was, tofuffer me to fall under theTemptation of a certain Man of Quality, by whom I had a Son, but the Honour of my Lover, and my own Prudence, fcreen_ ed the Matter fo well that it was never talked of, nor did my Hufband, whom I married foon after, ever fufpect any Thing had happened, j have fince had many Children, the Eldeft of whom is a Girl of uncommon Beauty, being now fifteen Years of Age. Who fhould the Malice of my Fate make fenfible of her Charms but my own Son, who, unknowing he is fo, addref-fes her for Marriage ? She is no lefs pleafed with
him
r 2,0 6 j
hiyn$ and my Hufband wholly fatisfied with the Character and Fortune of the young Gentleman (his Father being dead, and having left him Twenty thoufand Founds) refolves it Jfhall be a Match: All that I can fay againft it avails no" thing, becaufe I can afTign no Reafon which appears juft. Flelp me, dear Dumb Oracle, in this Extremity •, I tremble at the Thought oflnceft, yet cannot refolve to unravel the Miftery. L you can any way find a Clue to guide me through this Labyrinth, the five Guineas I now fend you lhall be made an hundred.
It is gone fo far, that the Marriage-Articles are ordered to be drawn up, and a Week’s Time eompleats my Mifery * if you have not Skill, or good Nature enough to prevent it, fet your Genius to work then, I befeech you, and let the have an immediate Anfwer, if you have any Regard for the everlafting Repofe of your WelL wiflier, or would make a faft Friend of,
Tour humble Servant.
F. S. Fold your Letter in the Manner I have done this, that nothing of what you write maybe difcovered by the Meflenger.
LET-
[ :*®7 1
LETTER VII.
From the fame.
Mr. Campbel,
I HAVE taken your Advice, and revealed the whole Matter to my Son, but with what Con-fufion on my Side, and Surprize on his, is eafy to imagine: He, notwithftanding, behaved as he ought to do in the Affair, paid me the Duty owing to her that gave him Birth, and promifed eternal Secrecy. Soon after he had taken Leave, a Letter came from him to my Spoufe, excufing himfelf for not being able to accomplifh his Contract, being, he faid, obliged to leave England for many Years, if not for Life ; and, I am told, he is now preparing, in reality to Travel.
Thus am I eafed of my moll tormenting Dread, but am Hill in the utmoft Sorrow ; my poor Girl takes the imaginary Falfhood of her Lover fo much to Heart, that I queftion if Ihe will be able to overcome it: I beg a little of your Affiftance in this Alfair alfo, and I lhall never think I can enough repay your Goodnefs. I have heard fomething of your Talifmans, if you imagine the wearing one of them will be of any Service to her, I defire you will enclofe one in your Anfwer to this, or whatever elfe is in your Power for the Recovery of her Peace lhall be
pur-
[ 208 ]
purchafed at any Price, though I experienced the Generofity of your Temper too much to fufpect you will exact, or, indeed, alk a fuffici-ent Price from thofe you honour with your Friendfhip: leave the Payment therefore to my-felf, for I would act by Mr. Campbel, as he has done by mecontinue only your Diligence and Secrecy, and depend on every Thing to ferve you in the Power of,
Tour infinitely obliged Friendl
LETTER VIII.
From a young Lady very much in Love.
SIR,
SO many of my Acquaintance having experienced your Skill in telling their Names at firft Sight, I think italtogether needlefs to give you that Trouble, and would much rather you Ihould employ your Genius in doing fomething more really to my Advantage than fatisfying a foolilh Curiofity ; and as what I require, [ believe may be done as well without feeing me, as if I were prefent. I fend this to inform you, I have for thefe three Months been paffionately in Love with a certain Gentleman, who never made any Ad-drefies of that Kind to me : I have made it my Bufinefs to dive into the Defign of his Vifits every where, and by all I can hear, judge he has a Heart wholly unengaged. I fancy, therefore, it
would
C 209 1	l
Would be no difficult Thing for you to prepare fomethin'g for me to give him, that might in-fpire him with Inclinations conformable to mine : If you can do this, I affure you of twenty Gui-neas the Moment I perceive the lead: Alteration, to my Advantage, in his Behaviour.
The Bearer will give you two Guineas by way of Earned:, and you may communicate your Thoughts as freely to her, as to myfelf. I defire you will not trifle With me, but let me know at once what is to be dohe, for be aflured, fuch a Conduct will oblige me to be as much your Friend, as the contrary would make me your Enemy, and that dial! make me capable of being either, as you dial! deferve from,
Tour unknown humble Servant.
LETTER IX.
From a Politician;
SIR,
Notwithstanding theciviiitie swith
which you treated me, and which demand my particular Acknowledgments ; I cannot forbear letting you know how much I regret that too great Caution in your Behaviour to me. You4 who fee fo much into the Difpofitions oi Mankind, could riot be ignorant that whatever you
P	had
[ 116 J
had communicated to me would have been kep£ fecret. It would be ridiculous, in one of my Character, to become a Blab *, and whatever Ufe | had made of your Inftructions, the World fhouid never have been fenfible they came from you.
If, therefore, by your Gift of Second Sight? or any other Intelligence, you foreknow any thing concerning the Fate of Europe, which the Knowledge of would be an Advantage to thofe entrufted with the Management of publi'ck Affairs ; I cannot find any Reafon for concealing it.
I grant what you fay is Truth, 'That Things of this Nature are not proper to be fpoken of-, but this is in Regard only of the Vulgar, who, wanting Senfe to comprehend the Myfteries of true Policy, judge every Thing according as it appears to their fhallow Capacities: Among fuch* indeed, you cannot be too circumfpect, but with a Perfon, who is perfectly acquainted with the Interefts of moft Courts of Europe, methinks you fhouid have no Referve.
In fine, to convince me you have in reality that Efteem for me you profefs, you muft be more free at our next Meeting, which, if you can get loofe from that Circle of fair Vifitants, with whom I know your Houfe is almoft perpetually filled, I fhouid be glad that it be deferred no longer than To-morrow, about Seven
in
f iit 3
in the Evening, at the Kings-Arms Tavern, Pall-Mall. Let me know if I may expect this Favour* by my Servant, and conclude me.
Tour real Friend,
LETTER X.
From a young Nobleman.
Dear CampbeI,
I Write to you now without any Fear of being difcovered: I may now pafs an Evening ■with you, whenever you have Leifure or Inclination, without being condemned to theNeceftlty of a lying Excufe that I have been fomewhere elfe : In a Word, the whole Secret is oul My Father fufpecting there was fomething in my Cabinet I would conceal from his Knowledge, broke it open this Morning, and took out all your Letters and Papers that paffed between us in Converfation: They contain, it feems, fome Secrets in the Family, to which he knew even myfelf muft be a Stranger *, and this has given him fo great, and, indeed, fo juft an Opinion* both of your Skill and Candour, that he refolves very foon to confult you himfelf on a material Affair. He told me, He was Jo far from con-demning an Intimacy with you, that he was glad I had contrailed one with a Perfon Jo very extraordinary, and who was capable of giving me fuch good Advice*
P 2
Whax
L tii 3
Wh at you wrote concerning Lady R .i—j a little fhocked him, and he ordered me to enquire more particularly into that Bufinels, and to know of you, whether there was any PofTibility of changing her Refolution or not. I defire, therefore, that you will confult your Familiar about it, and be as punctual as you can in it. I hope the Pleafure of feeing you fome time this Week, when I expect you will have an Anfwer ready forme, who am,
Unfeignedly yours.
LETTER XI.
From a Gentleman to whom Mr. Campbel had lent the Book of his Life, and Spy on the Conjurer.
Bear S IR,
1 RETURN your Books with Thanks: I af-fnre you the Perufal of them has afforded all this Family a great deal of Pleafure *, but I muff beg Pardon both of Juttitia and the Writer of your Life, when I fay, that tho* there are many furprifing Narratives contained in both* they are infinitely fhort of what Experience affures me is in your Power. And I am confident, if my Affair, and its Event, which is entirely owing to your Art, had reached the InfpectiOn of thefe Authors, it would have occafioned a larger and
more
I *13 3
more learned Treatife, concerning the Foflibility of fuch Difcernment in a humane'Mind.
But I dare believe thefe will not be the laft Volumes publifhed on the Tranfictipns of a Perfon who has fo defervedly the Efteem and Admiration of the World when I hear of any fuch Thing on Foot, I fhall not fcruple relating how greatly I am in the Number of the Obliged ; till then, I beg you will accept the more private Acknowledgments of,
SIR,
Tour very humble and devoted Servant.
LETTER XII.
From a new-married Lady.
SIR,,
AS I confented to marry the Gentleman who is now my Hufband, meerly on your advi-fing me to do fo, and the Warning you gave me of Mr. G—, I think ft my Duty to inform you, that my Prefervation from the worft Calamity that can befal a Woman, is wholly owing to your fo generoufly exerting your Art in my Favour. I have this Moment heard from unquestionable Evidence, that that perfidious Wretch has been, not only as you faid, under a ftrict Engagement, but alfo the lawful Hufband of *	P 3	another
I £14 1
another for more than two Years : But you were cautious not to ftretch the Truth, and that happy Caution faved me *, for had you- fuggefted any Thing beyond my Belief, to his Prejudice, I fhould have looked on all the reft as Malice. It would have been difficult to have given Credit to his being actually married, becaufe our Families have been fo Jong acquainted, and not the leaft Sufpicion of any fuch Thing in either of them ; but without one could fee into the Heart, like you, 3tis impofiible to be afiured who a Perfon loves, or has addrefled, provided the Parties themfelves keep it private.
I confess, he was once very dear to me, and it was not without the extreameft Reluctance I tore myfelf from him ; nothing but your Menaces could have made me do it: But I am now happy, and flatter myfelf, from your Predictions, that I fhall continue fo. May all, to whom your Advice has been of equaMBenefit, be always ready to acknowledge the Obligation, and you will then have many aflured Friends. I fhall rejoice to hear of your Health, and fhall take it as no inconftderable Addition to your former Favours* that you continue a Correfpondence with,
5 I R,
Tour mojl obliged Servant»
- "i. •	:	;	\	■
LET-
I *15 3
LETTER XIII.
From ar* Adept-
SIR,
AS I told you, I could do nothing without the Confent of my Brethren, I no fooner left you than I difpatched Letters to every one of them, and have their Copfent to admit you, as foonas the Death of any one among us lhall make Room for fo extraordinary a Perfon. I have already told you our Number was limitted to Twelve, and therefore this is all that can be granted.
I can never fufficiently admire your great Proficiency in this the moft abtrufe and occult Science under Heaven, to have attained, without the Affiftance of any Learning, thofe Secrets of Nature, which fb many Thoufands have cracked their Brains, and expended their whole Eftates in Search of, more teftifies you to hold Intelligence with the invifible World, than all the wonderful Things you have foretold; yet, at the fame Time fhews, that both you and them are under a certain Limitation ; otherwife it would be as eafy for you to have obtained the Whole as Part. I am fatisfied, if ever you are among the Number of the Adepts it will feem furprifing to you> P 4	that
i %l$ ]
that it was neceffary you lhould be perfect in this grand Secret.
There needed no more to allure me how near you were to the Matter, than your juft Ridicule of thofe Perfons who pretend to be Mafters of the Philofopher's Stone, yet, at the lame Time, confefs themfelves ignorant of the Quinte(fence, whereas one cannot be had without the other ; but this is a Truth which thefe Smatterers are entirely ignorant of, and I never found acknowledged by any Students in this Art but yourfelf.
The Tranfmutation of Metals is lo trifling a Thing, that I am amazed any wife Man can value himfelf for it; yet this is what paffes on the Vulgar for the Philofopher’s Stone, and by this has many a wealthy Perfon reduced himfelf to Beggary ; and what is to be more lamented, the pernicious Effects of ftudying, and pretending to this Science, have brought into Contempt, what the real Attainment of, renders Men a kind o( Gods on Earth.
I fhall trouble you no farther at this Time ; but wilhing our three reigning Influences, Sol, Mars and Mercury, may befriend your Inquifi-tions, and conclude myfelf,
Tour very faithful, Sec,
¥ . .
LET:
L 217 J
LETTER XIV.
From a young Gentleman at Cambridge,
$ !%,
J^JACHIAVELL tells us, That to be Merciful :* '' to our Enemies, is being Cruel to ourfelves j but I have diflented from that great Politician, to follow a Maxim of a latter Date, and,' inftead of revealing the monftrous Impofition put on my Mother by her unjuft Steward, have endeavoured to footh his rugged Nature by Flattery and Sub- , millions. I imagine this has done me confidera-ble Service ; for my Mother, who acts nothing but by my Directions, has wrote much kinder to me than Ihe was accuftomed, while I declared myfelf averfe to this Favourit, and has added Fifty Pounds a Year to my Allowance,
I am told, however, by fome whole Years intitle them to a greater Share of Penetration than myfelf, that this Reconciliation is but a Feint, to have the better Opportunity of ruining me at once; which makes me entreat the Favour of you, Sir, to confult that never-failing Genius ©f yours in tl]is Point; and alfo, whether my Mother will always continue to be fo infatuated with his Artifices, to the Prejudice, not only of her Children, but her own Reputation alfo. I
wifti
[ aiS 1
wiffi to Heaven there were a Poffibility of bring-* Ing her to your Houfe I am certain you would have the Power of convincing her of her Error » but as there is not, we muft be content to work by fuch Means as are allowed us.
It is needlefs to make any Apologies to you, who read the Mind, for troubling you fo often, and fo feldom giving any Proof of my Gratitude : You know my Hands are tied, and, alfo, that whenever I get them loofe, I have the Will to Jhew, in fomething more than bare Acknowledgements, the jult Senfe I have of your repeated Fa^-vours a and that I am,
Tour infinitely obliged,
and bumble Servant
P. S. I beg an Anfwer with ah poffible Expe^ ditjon, and directed as ufual.
LETTER XV.
From a Gentleman of the Town,
SIR,
1AM told, you glory very much in the good Offices you do, in making up Breaches in Families, and reconciling Perfons at Variance: I now defire a Proof of this Sweetnefs of Dilpo-fition, and, if I find it, ffiall return the Obligation.
I 119 3
My Wife, who is of a Temper inclined to Jealoufy, has been told of fome private Vifits I made to a certain Lady, and refolves to confult you on the Truth of it. I confefs myfelf guilty not only of this Charge, but many others of the like Nature, which, I have that Opinion of your Skill as to believe you can inform her of. My Requeft is, that you will be as filent with your Pen on this Head, as you are on all others with your Tongue : To confirm her Sufpicions, much more to let her into Secrets which yet fhe has no Notion of, would caufe an endlefs Quarrel between us, and ferve to make her more unhappy ; for tho* I refolve within myfelf never to wrong her in this Point again, yet I fhall, fhould fhe get fo much the upper Hand of me, as to be reduced to afk her Pardon, and put it in her Power,whenever fhe has the Vapours, to reproach me with Injuflice. As you are a married Man yourfelfj and know how neceffary it is to keep Women in that Subjection they were created for, I flatter myfelf, you will take this into Confideration, and prevent from being expofed, and made uneafy for Life,
Tour real, the? unknown, Admirer.
NET-
t 120 2
LETTER XVI.
From a Gentleman at Bombay,
SIR,
THIS brings you an Account that I have unfortunately loft that excellent Talifman, to which, under Heaven, I certainly owed my Relief from all thofe Calamities I laboured under at my firft Acquaintance with you, and to entreat you will prepare another, and fend it by the firft Ship, for I look for nothing but Ill-luck while I am without one,
I also beg your Advice concerning my Son John, who is very defirous of going to Sea, and tells me, He has been promifed ftrange Things in a Dream, and that he is fure of being a great Man if he follows that Employment. I own I am very averfe to parting with him, but if his Defire be really thelm-pulfe of a good Angel, I would not oppofe it: I depend on you, dear Sir, to fet me right in this Matter, and as you have fo wonderfully railed the Father out of his Troubles, vouchfafe alfo to direct t|ie Son. Capt. Tho. E —— , who brings this, will pay three Guineas for the Talifman,\ which I once more conjure you may be fent with all pofiible Speed. My Wife gives her belt Re-fpects to you and yours i which, with both our Wilhes for your Health and Profperity, is all that offers at this Time, from, SIR,
Tour mofl humble Servant.
LET-
I 2,11 3
LETTER XVII.
From an old Lady married to a young Man* SIR,
I A M alhamed to approach you after having run headlong into the Ruin your friendly Caution would have faved me from ; yet have no other Hope or Dependance in this World but in your Advice ; if you will be fo good to give it after the Neglect my ill Stars compelled me to ufe it with.
But not to keep you in Sufpence, in fpite of
all you told me, I was married to Mr. J-,
the Twelfth of lad Month; I wilh to God it had rather been the lad of my Life, that I might not have had Caufe to curfe my inconfiderate Folly: In fhort, he is not worth a Groat; but, on the contrary, Debts are every Day coming upon him-Great Part of my Subdance is already gone, and I doubt not but theWhole will be exhauded in the Payment of them if fome Care be not immediately taken to prevent it. But notwithstanding all this, he ufes me in the molt barbarous Manner that can be imagined : The fevered: Reflections on my Age are the lead of his Brutality ; the lead Anfwer I make to his Reproaches provokes him to Blows, and, I make no doubt, but he would murther me, if not redrained by the Law.
I
[ 222 ]
1 am fatisfied it is in your Power to help me? if you ftill can think me worthy of the Favour* Exert your good Nature, and forget what is paft, nothing fhall more readily obey your Injunctions for the future, nor return them with more Gratitude. Accept of five Guineas from Judith, and write by her your Mind at full to,
Tour impatient, and mojl unfortunate, Servant«
LETTER XVIIL
From a Perfon of Quality.
SIP,
AS none are fo wife blit they may be fbme-times in an Error, fo none ought to think themfelves too great to acknowledge it: The firft Step towards Amendment, is to confefs we have done.amifs, and the Readinefs with which I now a Ik Pardon for my Behaviour, will, 1 doubt not, convince you that I am fatisfied it was a Fault, and fhall no more repeat it.
The Things you told mefeemcdfo incredible, or if true, fo impoffible to be known by a third Perfon, that I am in hope my Excufe was partly made in your Breaft ; but however you may have condemned me, my Crime has been more my Punifhment than, I am confident, the Sweetneis of your Temper would fuffer you to wifh.
I N
[ 4*3 1
In fine* I have found, to my Cofl, every Tittle of your Predictions were not without Foundation^ and, if having doubted your Skill, has not forfeited all Claim to the Benefit of it, entreat you Would exert yourfelf once more in advifing how to behave in thefe Emergencies,
Tour real Convert*
P. S. I shall be at the Place you firft faW me at, this Evening, if more material Affairs will permit me the Pleafure of your Company j but let me know by the Bearer*
1
A N
APPENDI X,
By Way of
V I N D I CAT I O N
O F
Mr. Duncan
against
That groundlefs Afperfion caft upon him, That he hut pretended to be Deaf and ‘Dumb,
By a Friend of the Deceafed.
LONDON:
Printed in the Year M. DCC. XXXII.
[ **7 1
A N
APPENDIX
By Way of
VI ND I CATION
O F
Mr. D UNCAN CampBEL.
F it be juftly accounted diflio-nourable to fpeak more of Peo ple than we know they deferve, it is like wife fo, in feme Meaiure, not to correct thofe that do. Many a Falfity has paffed for current Truth, meerly for the Want of Contradiction ; and to keep Silence at an ill Report, which we are convinced is without Foundation, is to become Partner in the Author's Guilt, and an Affiftant !n his Slander.
This,
0^2
L zz 1
This Confideration has roufed me up to lay ibmething in Defence of my old Friend Mr. Campbell in Anfwer to a fcandalous Affertion which was of fome Prejudice to his Intereft while living, and fince his Death, has been revived again in Malice to his Remains *, I mean concerning his being naturally Deaf and Dumb, a Misfortune which has been cruelly and falfly reprefented as anlmpoiition on the Publick.
But before we proceed to give any Proofs on how little Foundation this idle Story is built, let us confult our own Reafon, what Probability there is that a Man fhould Counterfeit the Want of two fuch ufeful andpleafmg Faculties as Speaking and Hearing; and what Advantage could poflibly accrue to Mr. Ca?npbel from fuch a Pretence.
Every-body knows that his Gift of Divination, or foretelling Events, was the Confequence of Second Sight, which Faculty, Numbers befides him have been poffeffed of without being Deaf and Dumb, as there are many whofe Misfortune it is to be the latter,, without being Mailer in any Degree of th f firmer: As Second Sight therefore has not the lead Relation to being Deaf and Dumb, how Could it, in the lead, advance either the Profit or Reputation of Mr. Campbel to be accounted fo ? for on the contrary, 5tis eafy to demondrate that he, being deprived of Speech and Hearing,was . },	of
C zz$ 3
of Prejudice to both; to his Intered, by preventing thofe People who could not write, and were on -willing to communicate their Affairs to a third Perfon from coming to confult him ; and to his Reputation, by taking from him the Power of difplaying thofe fine Talents he was Mafter of to Advantage, and alfo by drawing on him many Affronts, and rendering him liable to the Ridicule of the unthinking Vulgar.
It was alfo a confiderable Expence to him, as he was never able to go Abroad either on Bufi-nefs, or a Party on Pleafure, without taking a Perfon with him who underftood Finger-Converfition, and ferved him in the Nature of an Interpreter, and was paid for it accordingly.
All this is, I think, fufffcient to convince any reafonable Man, that there was little Probability Mr. Ca?npbel fhould counterfeit being Deaf and Dumb ; let us now reflect on the Pajfbility of his doing fo, for fo long a Space of Time, if in Cafe it had really been as much to his Advantage as we have fhewn it to have been the contrary.
In the firft Place, to be a Proficient in Hypo-crify requires a Length of Time, and great Ex> perience : Now there are feveral Perfons ftill living who remember, and knew Mr. Campbel at fourteen Years of Age, and that he was then Deaf and Dumb : Can it be fuppofed that in thofe tender Years he could have acquired Artifice
3	enough
[ H° 3
enough to carry on a Deception of that Nature ? No, he was then, doubtlefs, as all Youth are, little capable of keeping a Secret, much lefs inventing and fupporting a Contrivance in fuch a Manner as fhould deceive the molt penetrating Judgment. Befides, he was not only at that Time, but even to the Day of his Death, one of the moft open and undefigning Men on Earth v but as we are now talking only of what is poffi-ble to be done, whenever thofe who fo poffi-tively affirm Mr. Campbel was an Impoftor in this Point, can produce an Inftance of any one Man, who for the Space of five and thirty Years (for fo long has the Qbje6t of our prefent Dif. courfe been known in this Kingdom) who has carried on the like Deception, in all Humours^ and in all Circumfcances, and we will then allow that ’tis poffible Mr. Campbel might have been guilty of the Crime laid to his Charge. How natural is it for us in any Surprize of Grief, or Joy, or any other Paffion, to betray the fudden Emotion of our Souls by burfting into fome Exclamation ? Who can be always on their Guard on fuch Occafions ? and how much more difficult would it be, when the Brain is over-charged with the Vapours arifing from ftrong Liquor, when Difcretion is lulled afleep, and even Remembrance is no more, to continue in a Conftraint, fuch as avoiding the Ufe of Speech muft neceffa-rily be ? Every one who had the leaft Acquaintance with ~Nir.Campbell?, very fenfible that there were fewT Men more addicted to Paffion, or that
more
r 131 3
more indulged themfelves in the Pieafures of the Bottle •, yet, whenever he was overcome by the Excefs of either, was he ever heard to utter the lead articulate Sound ? No, none that ever knew him will aver it; and if under fuch Circumftances he could dill retain that Command over himfelf, it muft be looked upon as a much greater Pi odigy than his being able to tell the Name of any Perfon at firft Sight, writing the rnoft private Affairs of thofe he never faw, curing of Witchcraft, or any of thofe Wonders of Art which rendered him fo juftly famous while living, and will preferve his Memory while the Curiofity of knowing future Events has any Exift-ence in the Minds of Men.
Oh 1 but they fay he did not obferve this perpetual Silence : That whenever he was alone he ufed to throw off all Confer aint, and indulge himfelf in the Pleajure of hearing his own Accents. And moreover, That he has been heard by Paffengers, whom he imagined neither knew nor obferved him, frequently talking in the Street, and Park, to his little Girl, a Child of about fevenor eight Tears old. The firft of thefe fine Stories, methinks, carries a manifeft Deteftion of itfelf, for if he accuftomed himfelf to fpeak at all, the lefs able would he have been to forbear it, whenever any of the Circumftances we have mentioned provoked him to it, or to render him forgetful of himfelf 3 and could he have been guilty of the latter, it Vpuld have im-Q.4	plied
C xj* 1
plied him Fool, as well as Knave, which as yet I never heard any-body fufpeil him for*
Some too, not content with giving him the Character of an Impofior, add alfo that of Coward* by pretending, Float they had made him find the life of his longue by the Help of a Cudgel \ but this is a Reflection too palpably grofs to merit any Anfwer, and has been detected by a thoufand In-fiances in the Behaviour of Mr. Campbel, which are too well known not to render the Repetition fuperfluous.
Were it poflible to trace thefe abfurd Inventions to their Origin, I am apt to believe we fhould either find the Authors would re trail what they have laid, or their Characters in the World to be fuch as none would be willing to depend on the Veracity ofj fo far as to report what they had alledged.
But what, or whoever they were, the Mat^ ter is not much to our prefent Purpofe *, for I think it paft all doubt, that none can impartially confider the Reafons laid down in this Defence without being ready to agree, that there was not even a PoJJibility, much lefs a Probability, that Mr. Campbel either could, or would have impo-fed on the World in the Manner his Enemies have fuggefted.
L 233 j
It is certainly true, that on a firft Acquaintance with Mr. Campbell there was fome Things to be obferved in him which might puzzle ah ordinary Capacity, and render him liable to Suf-picion without any Mixture of Prejudice or Malice : I mean the prodigious Guefs he frequently had at the Purport of any Converfa-tion which paffed in his Prefence ; his tuning a Violin, and playing on it with great Exa&nefs ; and many Inftances of the like Nature, in which one would imagine the Ear was the only Agent of Information ; but when we confider how ufual it is for the Almighty Difpofer of Nature to make up in one Senfe, what he thinks fit to deprive us of in another, nothing of this will appear ftrange ; What Mr. Campbel wanted in the Organs of Speech and Hearing, was abundantly com pen! a ted for in thofe of his Sight and Touch by thefirft, joined with an uncommon Quicknefs of Appre-henlion, he certainly had a wonderful Compre-henfion of what was faid, if he fixed his Eyes on the Perfon who fpoke, and obferved the Motion of their Lips ; and by the other he could diftinguifh Sounds, as was evident by putting the Neck of the Violin between his Teeth, and holding it there till he fcrewed the Pegs to what Pitch he thought fit: The fame Method he like-wife took to know when his Watch was down. There are Reafons both Chirurgicaland Philojophical for the feeling of Sounds, as may be feen at large in feveral learned Treatifes; and common Experi -
cnce
L i)4 1
ence may inform us, that a deaf Perfon, when he fees an Inftrument ofMufick touched, will immediately clap the Drum of his Ear to one End of a Stick, and hold the other againft a hollow Board* and this will enable him to beat Time with as juft a Cadence, as if he had the Senfe of Hearing in the utmoft Perfection.
This was the Method Mr. Campbel took to bear his Part in the Tunes play’d between the A6ts at the Playhoufe, as moft of the ACtors at both Houfes, to whom he was perfectly known, can teftify *, yet does not this in the leaft imply that he was not Deaf for take away the Affift-ance of his Stick and Board, and he would have been wholly unmoved at the moft exquifite Per-formance.
For Proof of this Afiertion I fhall give, out of the innumerable ones I could produce, but two Inftances, which feveral Gentlemen of undoubted Credit, and now living, were Witnefies of, and are ready to atteft.
The firft happened about fome five and twenty Years ago, at which Time, as well as before, Mr. Cample! was a great Frequenter of Mr. Meets’§ Fencing-School, as were feveral other Gentlemen, fome of his Scholars then, and others who had learned before, but came to improve themfelves under the InftruCiions of fo excellent a Mafter in that Art. Thefe Gentlemen formed themfelves
into
I *3 S ]
into a Society, and had a Meeting once every Week, laying themfelves, in Cafe of Failure, under the Forfeiture of fo much Money, which being conftantly colle&ed, made an annual Feaft, all the Members wereprefent. It was at one of thofe little Merry-makings that Mr. Stephen Barnes, a Gentleman of a plentiful Eftate, and has now a confiderable Place in the Curfitor’s-Of-fice, refolved to make an Experiment on Mr. Campbel*, and accordingly put a Piftol in his Pocket, which, when he law him bufily engaged in Finger-Converfation with lomeofthe Company that underftood that kind of Dialed!:, he ftep’d behind him and let off juft at his Ear. I would now afk any one of thofe zealous Affertors of Mr. Campbell Hearing, whether they think it poftible for him to have refrained Starting, or by fome Emotion of Body or Countenance have betrayed his Surprize at fo unexpected a Sound ? I believe they would arffwer in the Negative, and if fo, muft allow this to be a fufficient Demon -ftration of his being Deaf, for the Accident made n6t the leaft Alteration in him, and he went on with his Difcourfe totally unconcerned and infenfi-ble of it.
The Second is .much of the fame Kind ^ Mr. Charles Manners, a Gentleman nearly related to the illuftrious Family of the Dukes of Rutland, lent for him to a Tavern, and under the Pretence of afking his Advice, propofed a Queftion to him in Writing, on the moft difficult and intricate
t 23 6 3
tricate Matter he tould invent, and in the midff of Mr. Campbell deepeft Specula tion for the Ex-planation of it, gave the Signal to a Set of Drums, whom he had placed at the Door for that Purpofe, to beat a March all at once *, himfelf keeping his Eyes intently fixed on Mr. CdmpbeVs Face, who kill continued writing as he was before, quite unmoved at what, could he have heard, muft have occafioned fome Alteration in his Countenance, even tho’ he had been never fo accuftomed to it.
Whatever Opinion tnefe Gentlemen had before, concerning the Reality of Mr. Campbel’s being Deaf and Dumb, they were now perfe&ly convinced of it, as were feveral others who made Experiments of the like Nature.
But if there might pofiibly be fome Excufe for thofe who did not weigh the Unreafonablenefs of it, for believing him guilty of this Impofition? while he lived,but his Death has taken away all the Shadow of it *, and it would be taking from the King of Terrors, all that is fo juftly aferibed to him, to imagine his Approach would not have put a Period to a Deception of this Kind.
I f Mr. Campbel had been fnatched fuddenly away, it might indeed have left a more plaufible Ground for Sufpicion, but when he laboured under a Complication of Diftempers, and thofe
which are accounted the fevereft Racks that Hu-
man
[ 137 3
man Nature can fuftain, for many Days, 1 may fay Weeks, and had his whole Frame diftorted with Agonies, fuch as were expe&ed would die vide the Body from the Soul, long before that Separation happened, were thofe Moments to be employed in DifBmuiation ? Would not thole Pangs have forced from him the long-hid Secret, which if it had been of Ufe to him, could now be fo no more? To complain is as much the Confequence of any violent Pain, as breathing is of Life, and the greateft Heroes that the World ever produced, have not been able to reftrain their Cries in the Tortures of a Fit of the Stone or Stranguary, or Gout, or many other Calamities to which our frail Mortality is incedent. Was Mr. Campbel more than Man? Could he at once repel thofe dreadful Ideas which the near Profpeft of dark Futurity brings with it, and all Sen-fibility of the moft confummate bodily Mifery, be unmoved at all he now endured, and the Ap-prehenfions of what he might endure ? Let us drefs him in all the Virtues or Vices, of the very beft, or word; of Men, and we fhall find fuch a Belief is equally inconfiftent with Reafon and Experience : The Saints and Martyrs have not paf-led their . fiery Tryal without teftifying lome Senfe ofprefent Pain ; nor have the moft harden’d Sinners, when ftandingon the Brink of Eternity, been able to difguile their Horrors of the Future.
That Mr. Campbel, in his Long-Sicknefs. was -never heard to fpeak, there might be many Tef-
tiinonial3
t *38 3
timonials given, were it a Caufe that required it, both by thofe who attended and watched him, and thofe who made him frequent Vifits, either out of Friendfhip or Curiofity, being, perhaps, not quite Satisfied before, and naturally concluding that now was the Time to be convinced.
It is not, therefore, to thofe who were per-fonally acquainted with him, that I offer thefe Confiderations in his Vindication, not doubting but every unprejudiced Perfon, who had the fame Opportunity, has made the fame Ufe of it as I have done, to be allured that there was not the leaft Foundation for believing him not Deaf and Diwib in Reality. But it is thofe who only know him by Report, and confequently were liable to be fwayed by the Opinion of fuch as pretended to give a Character of him, that I would entreat to weigh well the Reafons I have given both for the Improbability and Impojfibility of his having impofed on the World in this Point; and if either they, or thofe who have infpired them with this Belief, can produce better for the Proof of their Affertion than I have done againft it, I fhall readily fubmit; but if otherwife, expect mine may take Place : Or if (which indeed is but a vain Suppofition) our Arguments fhould feem of equal Force, aud the impartial Examiner be divided in his Opinion, I would only recommend one Thing to his Confi-deration, which is, that both Chriftian and Moral Dodtrine teaches us, that in a dubious Cafe we are to give our Judgment in the moll; favourable
Man-
c 13 9 ^
Manner. Befides, Generofity and Humanity oblige us to treat the Abfent and the Dead with the utmoft Tendernefs : Mr. Camfbel is now no more, and it would be the moft unnatural Cruelty to brand his Memory with an Imputation of what, while he lived, was, at the belt, only an ill-natured Sufpicion, and which his long Sick-nefs and Death confirmed to be entirely grounds
Having heard that the foregoing Mei
were about to be printed, I could not forbear afking Leave to fubjoin my Sentiments on this Head, being excited thereto meerly by that Love of Truth which every honeft Man, and Chriflian ought to make the Standard of his Actions ; and if in fo doing, I have confuted the malicious and falacious Reafonings of thofe who were caufelelly his Enemies, or fet right the Opinions of thofe who gave Credit to fuch Informations, meerly thro* neglecting the Confiderations I have now laid before them, my End will be entirely an-fwered, and I fhall think the little Time I have fpent in thefe Pages, coi|Id not have been better employed.
Jefs.
which I know to have been wrote by himfeli,
FINIS.


\
V





SINGER-MEN I E »ALL COLLECTION
FC 9.
| 15;H f # 51 !s) 15 ft