
*V'
~7'-r--' /'■•■A:- , j? ,
rh'V :. ,	''^ "b	'"’C''^*'^5'	.7 i!v'^ .'^*' •
r^J
is?:-.
c
‘•;j
:
bt-T

,•*« ’ t-
..V ■•-»•;

1 \

> - 4
V3v ' .

■J: ^ '-

cvy
•i ;.••
.V ■	*
L^y’ .

•V . -■

CiT
V
<.-®»..i'.*
r‘,_
■'■. 'i ';»■’’-.4-
.•»
F: h-
:-r5--a
f.-:-'"- ■-* > ’S. ■	)
1'^ -1. . . ‘ ■'tf ,<^- I
Yl *?• /'•’ '• 5
■t>^
t

.1
V.'

f
Ul ‘A

■ ■ N ■ C\T-r- .■
A'dri-A,, ' '■
-V
■-»* "’L
.>- i. C

AT
i* •.■>'•





««r
I*-.
x«» , ..•



/r . r“ "
r r ^
--'-Jv.
T"
i^L*
ff

!:£ ^ ■' '- •>' ■^-
''■-rv'S, - ■ •-!i,X!:
-Ait''-‘" ''i	rr;-r
T^?:A-a ■^';nc :
7 V-
...._.^- d N	■.
■•-'^ ^c*»t . --■• '■": -C
c'"T5T^sS .'-!*^tv.‘
' '.it.-' '-rt\ry^ •

’> ri


\grfi-.-^-/4;;«, ...
^ C
•^•'^'	•*T' ^.- \
'fj
C'n"- - t
V. •	^ i
.N. .
■ A %r /.- ,	•

.^. • I

•f •--' .-N


.LT2V'

C.^qqP'>-i,
V. \
r
t.
v*’’
THE
GODFREY F. SINGER MEMORIAL PRESENTED BY
MR. AND MRS. JAOOB SINGER
/
...c
•jC i	•V'.
VA^^V '■ :




. • rr '^-

-«.>.

■' . ■>'
H.
V'i' • ■ ■ -J




/
\ ‘
9
' \

. <	.’ *c
• !V -V •-< .V .--.i': -
y	*	'	•	' •d'^ ^ lia ^ » ..	. . ,
- VjC»i- ■	'. ■'■.■	•* . .

♦A' '
A--,
■'•* ■ *t „	j;\„ . ' v/c"
-• =^\ - ' ..'• -.D ‘ v.Ar.	-

V

" ■	.•*-* • - '*i '
'X r\ . ' .'

■JIK'
■ .y~

■C'
'■-w'
i'
\
'SO../ -/■•■’ .
.7;
♦ ■'* ■



'■.'Li'/'. L '.


V >

,\-



Pra*>il

\
.. JVV. N^‘-



«•

JS-
" c ■ -. '.

\ifz.

■» F
c S:

'VC- ■•/-
, • r, rA-fMiL

• -
-i
'C
.	»•
, <	vW.L'	•
-t/l'-'i	i’^. ,
/. VS%i»- -1 .-^J
/
' /'• . '■.


\r:^.	. •. -r- ^	-
■»>•-. • .'i- ‘- ■ • “ ~a
WA.

^.J..S''^ »<*

Vi^
d.A' ■■ ’ :■ ‘■

cXC*?'W
Y*.	• . -
• *

-ic
’^Ws' . *- ’ ~\
>1'

■’. Af'Af
-A^j . -



Ci.xV'
■• TLi;;---.-
t- -T-—'*
*• -
-: -;j;>‘-i^r >_r- ■

•--T-


% ' *-
"'rKA-A

' ■ F

' cite?


-— >
A*’ -- '	..



'••I,'
• 1 ’ •"'■

t#'-
t *
■v

€
z'
r
• /
A-
>•
**. .^. ■' A • -.

y. t. ._■ ; ■„ A: j
t' ,

>• ‘ -

> • ‘ c.
■■' '} '
■--■ ■ :tc: -
n*
.	- 't
CSBl’ '
i -	• '
|•.^• •.■'L '.	C^-'^c”.
:M.f



^ *
FROM
FELICIA

T O
t ■,
V
CHARLOTTE

r :
',- >.
COkTAII^ING
O :/ j'v
' »
s:
IE'
A Series of the moft interefting Events, interfperfed with Moral Refleftions; chiefly tending to prove that the Seeds of Virtue are implanted in the Mind of EtERY Reasonable Beingi
> r
^h£ FouRtst Edition.
GoIirected and Improved,
IN TWO VOLUMES^
VOL. I.
LONDON:
/
l^'rinted for J. Rivington, T. Caslon, j. Johnson, T Payne, and W. Goldsmith',
MDCCLXXIIIi
. vi
i
\
c
» «
U, of
Library
6
tP

F
C I A
T O
CHARLOTTE.

z'
0
O
>
3
' A !
li>
0
o
3
I—****
3

,, c»
•• z»
<
?>
il^’
0"
LETTER i.
V
u
Dear Madam,
F T E R a long journey that took up four days, I arrived last week at my aunt’s, where, I Suppofe, I am to stay a considerable time j in which I afliire you my chief uneaSineSs will conSist in being Separated from you; and that, you--may depend upon it, will be great enough o’confci-VoL. I.	B	ence.

N
Felicia to Charlotte.
cnce. However, to paSs away Some of my hours, which I foreSee will lie pretty heavy upon my hands, I will fend you an account of all that happens worth your'notice: but you must not be offended if I tell you, I write as much to amufe myfclf as to pleafe you ; Since this employment will not only be a recreation to me, but will flatter and footh my friendship, and, in Some meafure, compenfatc for the want of your company, I shall always, while I am writing, think I am talking to you; and am even now delighted with the idea of that pleaSing intercourse of minds we shall probably enjoy at this distance. How agreea-'ble is the* thought; that as often as you hear from me, you will learn every thing that paste in the foul of your friend, whilst I in return shall meet with the fame proof of an open undifguiled friendship from you ! For my part, I intend to diScover all the Secret folds of my heart, and to unbofom myfelf to you without the least referve, as I am perfuaded I shall never have any fecrets which you have not a
V,
right to be acquainted with, and which I shall not be very ready to communicate. Pray do you follow my example; write with the Same unreferved freedom, and never difguife thoSe
little affair? in which your heart is concerned;
for
/
Felicia to Charlotte.
3
for theSe things, I think, my friendship gives me a peculiar right to know.
I AM now I don’t know how many miles
distant from deaf London, the feat of your joys; and must not expert for a long time to
See again the Mall, the play houfe, or the drawing-room; but I begin to fancy, that in a month or two I shall be reconciled to gloomy shades, tall trees, murmuring brooks, and all the Sylvan fcenes which Surround me; and even ceaSe to regret rny distance from the genteel diversions of the gay and polite vforld j for if plain and Simple nature can ever appear agreeable, it must be here, where she shews herfelf in all her beauties. What a change have I already undergone! I rife at least three or four hours Sooner than I ever did in my life before; and even go to bed long before mid-
Instead of the rattling of coaches, I
ni2
ht.
now hear only the rustling of leaves, or the warbling of birds; and, instead of rich perfumes, my fenfes are regaled with the milder fragrance of nature.
Nay, prithee, my dear, don’t laugh at me: I am yet neither poet, nor lover, nor do I find that I am in the least danger of being either of them. Ypu, I know, cannot perceive any charms in Such a rude retreat, fit to engage the
B 2	attention
4
Felicia to Charlotte,
/
attention of a fine lady. Here are no powdered beaux, or gilt equipages, none of -the Splendid allurements, with which ladies of your vivacity are apt to be captivated : but for my part, a natural tin<sture of gravity may poffibly make me more eafily Support the abfence of what your gayer difpofiiion may induce you to consider as the very essence of happinefs.
My aunt, I find, is a lady of plain good Senfe, and of a moss fiee, cafy and engaging behaviour ; but as to her perfon, it is far from being agreeable; her face is of an immoderate length; her eye-brows large and very dark; and her nofe of a more than ordinary Size: but notwithstanding this, she has an air of affability and good-nature Spread over her countenance, which, at the first view, infpires every one that fees her with a pleaSing confidence. Her eafy condescending goodnefs, her fweet-nefs, affability and complaifant freedom, dif-fufe over the minds of the meanest obje<st$ fuch a felf-xomplacency. Such an unreferved franknefs of heart, as renders it impossible for them in her company to be stiffened by an oneafy restraint. The lowest being that bears the stamp of the human.nature is an objedl of her regard. She puts herfelf upon a level with them in her converfation, and even ufes a
language
F E LICIA
Charlotte.
B
language different from her own, in order to fiiit her dileourfe to their ideas, and to make them understand her advice, the confolation* she offers them, and the friendly eonecrn she fe«ls for their happinefs. As to her stature, it is Something above the ordinary height, though? she is a little awry; and, indeed^, she has nothing about her that Speaks the aGcomplished^ lady, though every body that fees her muft immediately think <(1, should rather Say feelV
4	_ _	,_
her a very good dnfer- In short, she is a wo--man of great prudence, and a perfetst co:ono-
misti, and therefore her thoughts Seem-equally divided between the management of her own -family, and a generous care for the welfare of ChoSe who apply to her for assistance. The' education of her children makes up. a great part of her felicity; it is a delightful eftiploy-'
ment which she knows how to render as
%
agreeable to them as to herfelf. The young; ladies have been accustomedlrom their infancy to share with her in the delicate pleafure of Communicating-^ happineSs, and have learnt from her, and an English Seneca, which they have almost by hearty the most engaging way of doing good. They have a Snaall Salary at their own diSpoSal; and their good mother tells^ me, she often feels her heart glow with a fecret
^ 3
pleafure.
/
6
Felicia to Charlotte,
pleafure at Seeing them' dry up the tears of the diftreficd, with that money with which they had iatended to purchafe Some fafhionabic piece of vanity, or Some ornamental trifle. The old gentleman, my uncle, who died about Seven years ago, lest her with four children, and a large estate, but very much incumbered with mortgages, which, by her prudent management, (he has lately paid olF. And fhe would now be very happy, had Ihe not a Son, whofe brutal extravagance and debaucheries render her extremely anxious for his welfare. This young man is about eighteen, of a robust constitution, pretty fat, and with a countenance perfcistly expreflivc of the dullnefs and stupidity of his mind, which has been too rough to be polished by a most free and liberal education; but as he is going to make the tour of Europe, I shall probably never have occa-Sion to mention him again. The eldest daughter I have not Seen yet, she being lately married to a gentleman at a constderable distance from hence. Amelia, her Aster, is a Jady agreeable in her perfon, and happy in the poflelTion of a calm, yet Sedate mind; her paflions feem to be regular, her thoughts just, her language unaffedled. Soft, and flowing.
After this short ebarader, you cannot wonder
•	.	that.
Felicia to Charlotte.
7
that I no Sooner knew her, than I conceived
a friendship for her, which I am perfuadcd i?
now become reciprocal* Polly, the youngest
daughter, is not quite ten years old ; she is a
lovely little creature, of a most promising genius,
and has Such an earnest thirst after knowledge,
that her pretty questions frequently give me a very high fatisfacstion.
With thefe two young ladies, and Some
other agreeable companions, I Spend great
part of my time. The fun is no Sooner riSen,
than we take a walk, and taste the freshneSs
of the morning air, in Some of thofe rural Scenes which Surround our houSe, while the
innocent gaiety of ray new friends gives an alacrity to my Spirits, which is greatly heightened by the foftnefs of thefe early breezes, and the various Scenes of natural beauty, which every way prefent themSelves to our view.
But it is time to conclude, stnce I have written enough for my first letter, and therefore shall only add, what your affedtion will,, I am fure, make you most Solicitous to know ; that is, that I am perfedlly well, and have no
other uneaSinefs than what arifes from my distance from you. I am,
Dear Charlotte,
Yam's mojt affe£iionatelyai

B 4
F E L I C I A
LET
\
§
Felicia to Charlotte.
LETTER II.
HE pleaSure, dear Madam, you cxpreSs at hearing from me, is Such a proof of your affeifiion, that I cannot help taking notice of it. The endearments of a friend have Something So extremely charming in them, that it is impossible we should be inSenSible of their value. If flattery eassly infinuates iifelf into ©ur hearts, it is chiefly becaufe it Soothes our dessre of pleafing j but how much Sweeter are the carefles of a perfon on whofe esteem we found our happineSs, and whole fatisfadfion rebounds back, and gives us vrho confer it, a kind of Self-approbation. So much for preface, wo or three days after I Sent you my let-y couSm Amelia propofed our taking an in the coach the next morning, as Soon as it was light, which was accordingly put in praffice: but we had not gone far, before the stillnefs of the air, and the novelty of the proSpe<fi to me, induced us to walk. A Sandy rock, out of which was cut huge caverns that Seemed ready to falst was on our left, and by a delightful contrast. Set off the Spacious meadows and fields, which, on the right, extended to an inconceivable distance, where our fight
was
7
LTC1 A' TO ChAR LOTT E.
9'
was only bounded by a clear Iky, that Seemed to meet the ground, and in Some places by hills, which could hardly be diftinguilhed from ^
the gilded clouds in which they wrapped them- -felves. Our eye at one view took in abund'^ ance of little-villages^ wbieh ariSing from a--midft the trees at a great distance, agreeably ' diverstfied this delightful landfeape.^"
Whilst- we walked on, difeourSing on' feveral agreeable Subjedts, I obferved that the-' Scene prefcntly changed, and thefe precipices terminated in a high and steep hill. So full of -tall trees and shrubs', that it formed a most delighful grove. I'he grafs here was mixed with beds of violets and primrofds,* which diffused a charming fragrance through-the air. Here we fat down to refresh ourSelves;-on the banks of- a Small fountain,' which with a gentle murmur ran from a cavity under the hill; and -after having, drank Some of the water out of a-’ bafon which was chained to the Side of it, we struck into a narrow winding path, and began ^ to mount the eminence to take in a larger'
■ * Lest this defcriptlon Slibnld be' thought romamlca -the editor thinks himfelf obliged to inform the public, that this and the rest of the landfcrapes are actually fitu- ^ ated near Nottingham: and that thefe ladies, he fiippo** fes, refidcd in a village not far distant from that town.
B 5,	■ - view*-'
io
Felicia to Charlotte.
view of the vernal beauties of this delightfut Scene ; when I obferved a fine river f, which with Serpentine meanders added to the beauty of the whole. But while we were listening to tire diferent warblings of a number of birds of various kinds, and observing the rabbits Scudding along, and Ikipping at our approach into their burrows, we were interrupted from our-contemplations of theSe trifling amufements, by a voice that at once Seized and fixed our attention ; for we were near enough to hear di-
4
stifKstly every word; though when we looked around us, we could diScover no human objedb
near. The unknown perfon Seemed engaged
%
in a contemplation, of the harmony of nature^, and with a Soft, yet manly voice. Spoke tho following rhapfody.
“ O Nature ! how beautiful, howdovely ‘‘ are all thy works ! with what pleaSure do-£ ^ gaze around, and view the vast profufion “ of wisdom, and. infinite fkill that Surrounds “ me ! --------- Blested- retreat 1 where every
objedl leads me to. .explore the bounteous “ author of all goodnefs, who thus distributes-“ his favours to man, and thus teaches us to' “ concur with him. in promoting the univerfai^ “ gpod^ While heaven, all communicativ©
Tlis rivet Trent
“ heaven;
Felicia to Charlotte.
If
heaven, thus profufely showers down its ** blessings, and imparts to us all that can-“ charm our Senfes, or ravish our grateful minds with innocent delight, shall we with “ contracted- arts confine our pleaSure to the “ narrow limits' of Selfish passions, and not “ rather exert our utmost ab^ities, in order to “ difperfe a flood of joy, and render the beau-teous, the harmonious Scene compIeat?--But ah ! how Small a share can I contribute tO’ “ the great defign ? Lost in a manner amidst;
o	o
the immenSity of nature, like a Single flower amidst the numberlefs number which enamel “ this verdant carpet,, or a. fraall plant in this “ vernal landscape,, too minute fingly to gain-“ the attention, and which could not be missed “ out of the blooming Scene !’—But why do I-“ complain ? Am I not Sufficiently happyj if,^ “ amidst the-works of, my Creator,, I can like “ them, by fulfilling the duties of my narrow Iphere, promote the general Splendor and' harmony of the whole. If the inanimate' creation can give Such pleaSures to a rational mind, how much nobler must be the Satis-faCkion with which fi^erior beings view the' “ beauteous order of the more noble, the inteS-ledual world, when the passions and inclina-
tions of the mind compoSe an harmonious;
B 6.	fcene.,v
/
12
Felicia to Charlotte.
Scene, infinitely more lovely than the finest “ and most elegant difpofitions of matter ?
Here the voice stopped: perhaps we were discovered through the trees, and the unknown
perfon was diSpleaSed in being interrupted in his private revery. However, curiofity made us proceed j for I was very deSirous of knowing the stranger, whoSe Sentiments and language had prejudiced me very much in his favour.
I do not know, my dear, what you will think of our adventure; but for my part I
formed a most amiable idea of the perfon of
/
this stranger, though I had never Seen him; and his words made Such an impreflion upon my heart, that I believe I have repeated every lyilable; but the graceful manner, and the inufic of his voice, are what I can never give you the least idea of; for upon my word they were quite inexpreffible.
Amelia endeavoured now to perfuade me to return, but I was too much charmed with what I had heard, to conferit to do it immediately. Prompted by a little female curiofity, I reSolved, if possible, to steal, at least, one view of shis stranger, which I did not doubt but I might eafily do without beirig perceived. She laughed at my motive; but, however, at my
entreaties, conSented to follow me, I then
struck
V
Fslicia to Charlotte.

struck into one of the winding patlis which lay on the Side from whence I heard the voice, but had not /gone far, when looking back, I miffed my companion. This at once alarmed me, and made me very uileafy, both on her account and my own.—^I stood still———. I
listened------ I returned back, stopping every
moment to look around me j but just as I regained the place from whence 1 engaged her to accompany me in this foolish expedition, I heard a rufsling of the leaves at a fmall distance, when my heart Suddenly leaped with joy at the thought of having found again my friend: but was quite mistaken; for, instead “of her, a young man appeared from amidst the boughs. He came to me with an air of reSpe(st.
But I shall forbear giving a description of his perfon, till I can give you that of his mind, and that must not be till I know him better j which I hope will not be long. However, I must tell you, that I believe it was the Same, who had a few minutes before So agreeably engaged my attention. He no Sooner canie up to me, than he obServed the diforder of my countenance, which in a moment was imprinted upon his, when making me a low bow. May I preSume to afk. Madam, Said he, with a trembling voice, and a most expreffive look,
what
14
Fflicia to Charlottr,’
\
what it is that difcompoSes you.? Are yoa alone ? Yes, Sir, returned I, 1 have lost my companion, a young lady, who, I imagine, is in equal pain to find me. Well, Madam, replied he, with an ingenuous look, might I hope that you would put yourfelf under the protection of a stranger, I would gladly offer my Service to wait upon you, till you rejoin the lady. Here he glanced his eyes upon me as if to anticipate my anfwer; but immediately , cast them down to the ground, and I think a figh efcaped him.
Though I was under no apprehenfion as to the behaviour of this young gentleman, yet I could not help hefitating a little to confides what anfwer I should make him, I was appre-henfive, that should my coufin find me in his company, she might thinlc I avoided her with deSign; and this might postibly not only difguft her, but give her Some thoughts to my prejudice. BeSides, in the opinion of the world, it might not be thought decent for me to be found-So early, in Such a. retired place, with a man whom I had never Seen before, and to
f
whoSe charaifier I must confeSs mvfelf an utter
stranger. But thefe refledfions wopld doubtleSs-
%
have given way to my inclinations, had not the young gentleman, perceiving that I continued
Sd
Felicia to Charlotte.
15
filent, reSumed : I See, Madam, you are afraid of trusting yourfclf with me; I cannot blame your caution, and will therefore leave you, in order to Seek the lady whofe abfence Seems to give you Some pain; and shall think myfelf very happy, if my endeavours should restore your quiet. This is a very obliging propofal. Sir, returned I; and I gladly take you at your word ; mean while I will wait here to learn your fuccefs ; but I am ashamed to give you this trouble. I have no other trouble, Madam, returned he, than in Separating myfelf from you. But I ought not to complain, Since it is to ferve you.
Here he retired; but had not been gone long before I faw him return with precipitation, when he told me that he Saw a lady walking down the hill, on which I permitted him to cond u(st me out of the wood, took my leave ©f him, and prefently rejoined her.
Amelia was too angry wish me to forbear reproaching me for the uneafinefs I had given^ her, though she expressed her refentment in she most obliging terms ; but was Soon pacified when she found it was done without deSign, and I had been equally troubled on her account. And indeed my uneafinefs had been a fiifficient
funishment fbf my indiscretion.---------But f
hav e

16
Felicia to Charlotte.
have troubled you too long with things of no’ conSequence, and will only add that we made haste to our coach, and were driven home to -breakfast.
Pray give my reSpests were due, and dome the justice to think me.
Dear Charlotte
Lhe fmcergji and
tnoji: affeSlionate of your friends ^
FELICIAi
LETT E R- III.
ELL, well, my dear, yoa-may be as merry as you will with my romantic adventure, as you are pleafed to call it.—I do not wonder at your laughing at me; for I-had penetration enough to foreSee it; however, that could not prevent my giving you a faithful account of this extraordinary ramble ; for I
had rather you should be a little merry at my expence, than I be fuch a rebel to friendship, , as to conceal any of my pleafures or pains from you. But if what t related in my last may appear too trifling to deferve your notice, I do
not
Felicia TO Charlotte.
I)
not doubt but I shall attone for the trouble I have given you in reading it, by defcribing Scenes more interesting.
The perSon you are pleaSed, in the gaiety of your heart,, to call fome Sylvan deity, who
you fuppofe inhabits the inchanting groves, the Arcadian Scenes you Say I have deScribed, is a mere earthly being, as very a mortal as you or I j and the native beauties of this rural retreat, notwithstanding what your are pleafed to insinuate to the contrary, are So' far from being
•	V
heightened by my description, that were you with me, you would hardly think I had done them justice. But while you are attra£led by the charms of your young admirer’s drest and
Iplendid equipage, and dazzled with the glitter of a court, no wonder you think theSe humbler Scenes, thefe innocent and limple charnls which
pleafe me, are almost wholly fidlitious, and little elSe but the invention of a luxuriant
fancy
m
m
a Sort of fairy land that exists no
where but in my own imagination,
I Saw the amiable youth I am now to deScfibe to you at church last Sunday. The
moment I cast my eyes upon him, I obferved his fixed upon me; and to make an ingenuous confession, I felt my heart instantly flutter with a very agreeable emotion. I had for Several
days
i8
Felicia to Charlotte."
t
days longed to fee him and could not now help feeling a Secret joy, at finding my wishes granted. But I obferved at the fame time that he was in no danger of appearing lingular by the regards he cast upon me; for as I was the gayest lady in the whole affembly, every body, as foon as I arofe up, incessantly gazed at me. When the Service was over, I grew impatient to know if he would Speak to me j I fancied he would j at least I wished it. I Sawshim
wait at the door
— I Saw it with pleafure,
and went out with my aunt and coussns, filled with a formidable idea of his perfedlions. But
how was I mortified, when after having ad-drested himfelf to my aunt and her daughters, and paid them Some civil compliments, he took his leave, only making me a low bow, even without opening his lips to me.
Could any thing, Madam, be more provoking than this behaviour ? Not that I was
in love with him ; at least I was reSolvcd not
----but to fee him So infenfible
to think I was----
of my attrastions ?---intolerable—not to fay
4
one civil thing to me !—what stupidity !—if I had been ever fo ugly, he could have done no more.—But however aukward this fit of refent-ment may appear in me, efpecially while I declare that I have my heart in my own possef-
fioa
Felicia to Charlotte.
19
Sion, yet I had really Some reafon for it. There is certainly a pleafure in thinking ourfclves beloved by a man of fenfe; and if I was not adluaily in love, I had a very great ambition to make him So. He would have been a most agreeable conquest, and I should doubtlefs have thought his addresses a greater honoujf than thoSe of a thoufand coxcombs.
The next day, however, I had the pleafure of feeing him at my aunt’s, and could not help flattering myfelf that I was the caufe of his vifit. We had just dined, and Amelia, having taken up one of the volumes of the Spedlator, was reading the affedling story of Incle and Yarico, when he entered the parlour, and paying us Some compliments. Seated himfelf near the door, defiring, at the fame time, that heirnight not interrupt our entertainment. As my couSin had been ufed to treat him with all imaginable freedom, she concluded her story, and we entered upon a conversation on the nature of ingratitude j a fubjedf that afforded the young gentleman a happy opportunity of discovering the delicacy of his Sentiments. He Said a thoufand things equally entertaining and instructive, and enlivened his difcourSe witji abundance of tender, generous, and manly thoughti: but , at last my aunt being called
out
20
Felicia to Charlotte.
out of the room, her daughters Soon followed her. I was now in the most deSirable sttuation, and began to prepare myfelf for hearing a con-verfation infinitely more interesting. But how great, how inconceivable was my Surprize ta find the perfon who a minute before entertained us with Such elegance of thought and expref-fion, instantly became fpeechlefs 1 After fix-ing his eyes upon me for Some time, he aroSe, and with an air that cxpreffed a tender diffidence changed his feat, and Sat near me but still continued Silent. His eyes, which* had a remarkable languor, and a pleafing Soft-nefs, were still fixed upon me ; but I no Sooner met his glances, than with a disordered look he cast them to the floor. I endeavoured in vain to refume the con-verfatkm ; he replied with Such a tender diffidence as would not fuster him to proceed. His words faltered on his lips, and were uttered with fo much confufion, that it was not difficult to obferve the struggle he had with his heart, and the pleafing fource of his embarastment.
Ah I Madam, could I defire a more agree-able triumph? You perhaps, had you been in my place, would have laughed heartily at feeing him look filly ; would have ridiculed
this foftnefs of foul, and with ycFur ufoal
fprightlinefs.
r
Felicia to Charlotte.
21
fprightlinels have diverted yourfelf, at beholding a man So over-awed by your charms, as to give Such proofs of his weaknefs before you. And indeed can any thing more agreeably flatter our vanity, or give us a higher opinion of our own attradiions, than to fee them make a fool of good fenSe, and strike eloquence itfelf flumb ? But alas! I found mySelf little difpoSed to affume any Such airs of barbarous gaiety.
I was not much lefs weak than he, and could not help pitying as well as blaming that modest diffidence that gave him fuchpain ; but this was a pity that was attended with a most ex-quistte pleafure; nor could I indeed have felt a greater at Seeing him at my feet, had he even alTumed the bu&in, and entertained me with all the lofty and melting language of a hero in tragedy. Not all the paffionate rants of a lover, who would perfuade me to the folly of believing he was dying at my feet, and that his fate depended upon my Smiles or frowns, could have given me half the proofs of a fln-cere paffion that I now received.
As I promised to give you Some idea of his perfections, I will endeavour to do it now;
his Silence left me at full liberty to examine his perSon, and I made ufe of this opportunity of doing it with the utmost freedom ; and therefore.
/


22
Felicia to Charlotte;
fore, without she least flattery, I shall give you his portrait as follows:
You mast know then, that he is about twenty ; and as to his stature, not much taller than I am : which, by the way, is much too short for the hero of a romance, who ought at least to be Six feet high. His complexion is'lively; his eyes blue and Sparkling, and So very exprestive, that they Seem to difeover in the strongest manner, all the fenSations of his heart. A heart that I believe would be a great lofer, had it not So true an interpreter to render all its emotions viSible; fince in his open countenance is painted an ingenuous honesty ; the most lively traces of all that is humane, friendly, and benevolent, mixed with an en-gaging modesty and stmplicity of manners. His hair is of a dark brunette, and hangs in natural curls, which just touch his shoulders. As to his thoughts, they Seem bent on the improvement of his mind; and the love of truth and virtue (antiquated perfediions!) are So deeply impressed there, that he Seems to have; very little idea of thofe fancied charms, thofe fashionable accomplishments, which are necef-fary to form the charaster of the fine gentleman. Nay, theaukward creature does not appear to have the least notion of the art of
handling
%
Felicia to Charlotte.
23

handling a Snuff-box with a grace; does not even know how to murder the reputation of thofe who are abSent, or flatter thofe that are prefent And though he Seems very affiduous to pleaSe me, he has not, I can tell you, had the complaisance to let me know that he thinks I have more charms than his grandmother.
You have now, my dear Charlotte, a right to form what judgment you pleaSe upon the piffure I have drawn. The modest rusticity of my fpark. So very different from the confident addrcffes of the town beaux, must make him Seem a very odd fort of a creature to you, who are So ufed to hear yourfelf praifed in lofty strains, that you will perhaps be Surprized that there should be any other way of touching the heart. But, for my part, however ridiculous his shehaviour may appear to you, I cannot help telling you, that I found myfelf exceedingly moved with that tender diffidence, and melting confuSion, which, in Spite of himSelf, discovered what I am perfuaded he would very gladly have concealed. His Silence itfelf, added to the Several tender emotions I obferved in his countenance, made Some strange advances in
my heart 3 and to be Sincere, I do not know
what
24
Felicia to Charlotte.
what may be the efFe<st of two or three more
Such tender interviews.
. After this frank confeflion, I know you are more inclined to laugh at me, than at him.
. ..Do So if you pleaSe —— I shall find an opportunity of laughing at you in my turn.
But to proceed;
my aunt at last
rejoined us after half an hour’s abfence, in which time I had not one gallant thing Said to me, not a Syllable that could tell he was my
lover: every declaration of this kind was perfectly involuntary; nor do I know when he will have resolution enough to unburthen his heart to me. But however merry you may make yourfelf at this letter, I dare fay you will be pleaSed with the confidence I repoSe in you, and with the fresh auurances I make you of being.
Dear Madam,
Your mojl Jincerey
And aff'eVtonaie frund.
$
Felicia.
LE.D
Felicia to Charlotte.
25
LETTER IV.
Dear Charlotte,
DON’T think there is any occahon to make an apology for Sending you this So Soon after my last, though I have not yet received an anfwer to it. 1 know you are always glad to hear from me, and therefore without ceremony I follow the didlates of my heart, which lead me to communicate every thing to you, that I have reafon to flatter my-felf will be an agreeable amufemcnt.
A FEW days ago, my aunt having engaged to Spend a day or two with an elderly gentleman, who lives at a village a few miles distant from our houfc, they made me one of the party, and we accordingly fet out in the coach. The old gentleman, who expciSted us, met us with his pipe in his mouth, and in an agreeable friendly manner, paid us the compliments of his houfe before we arrived at it j and then condu6ted us home, fmoaking all the way at the coach door. As Soon as we
entered his houfe, his unreferved behaviour
/
rendered his company very diverting. He enlivened the converfation with abundance of
VoL. I,
C
merry
26
Felicia to Charlotte.'
merry stories, which his humorous and pleaSant manner rendered vastly diverting. But the worst part of our entertainment con-fisted in our being obliged to bear with the impertinence of an old maiden lady, the gentleman’s Sister, who out of an affedlation of extraordinary piety and prudence, joined to
an aukward air of over-strained modesty, af-
/
fumed an authority that made her perfe^Sly ridiculous. You never, in all your life, I dare fay, beheld So complete a prude. She would jnfinuate that there was a double meaning in the most innocent exprestions, and would frequently Set us upon Searching for an indecent
thought, where, I dare Say, none but herSelf ever had any. This was the cenfor of the
from whom our facetious friend
company, often met with a sharp reprimand.
Fie, fie,
would she frequently cry, interrupting him, tossing up her head, and giving him a look of Supercilious dildain, I protest you make me blush. Really you will oblige me to leave the room. But the best of it was, that this gentleman’s obfcenity was like Some people’s wit, with this difference only, that as no-body can fee that but themfelves, fo none of the company could find him guilty of a want of decency, but this experienced maid, Befides, her comments
Felicia to Charlotte.
27
ments were an hundred times worSe than the text. She must certainly have a most fruitful invention, as well as a very unchaste cast of mind; or elfe, I think it hardly possible that she should be So very intelligent in things, which it is the greatest glory of ladies in our circumstances not to understand. Modesty is the distinguishing virtue of our Sex ;
nor can a gentleman violate it in our prefence, without being guilty of an unpardonable rude-nefs; but this virtue will never teach us to torture words and fyllables to make them Speak a fenfe of which the Speaker had not the least idea. Thi* would be to a£t entirely incon-fistent with that love of decency to which we make pretenssons.
But to return to our prude. You would have laughed to hear her (while with an air of the most ridiculous affedlation she drew up her mouth) exprefs her averSxon for the nasty filthy creatures, the men. She is furprifed that our Sex can be So impudent as to marry. And though she has had the greatest and most advantageous offers (w'hich, by the way, her final) remains of beauty and fenfe would not tempt one to believe) she could never be pre* vailed upon fo much as to think with patience on the nasty odious things.
C 2	Severe
/
28
Felicia to Charlotte
Severe as this lady was upon the old gentleman, he was not much behind her in his replies, in which he rallied her So agreeably, that I could almost forgive her impertinence on account ©f the pleafant remarks it occasioned.
As Soon as dinner was over, she began with a Severe cenfure upon the weakneSs and depravity of human nature, which opened the way for abundance of devout Scandal and pious defamation. And as this gave her a happy oe-
caSion of mentioning, by way of illustration,
\ ^
the real or imaginary vices of her neighbourhood, she feemed to talk on this fubjedl with an unuSual Satisfa6fion. Her immaculate foul triumphed over the crimes of the multitude, and made her look down upon them with a facred indignation. Every foible was represented in the most glaring light, and a rea-Son given for all the accidents which had happened within her notice. Elated with the most pompous ideas of her own Spotlefs virtue, she pretended to know, why one was thrown from his horfe, why another was robbed, or another dangerqufly ill of a fever, and pointed out the refpe£tive crimes which were the cauSe of each difaster; while her misfortunes, on the
contrary, were only the trials of an indulgent
providence.


ELieiA TO Charlotte.
fwovidence. What an admirable artifice ta •extinguilh the generous impressions of huma^ nity, and to render the heart infenfibJe to pity ! to blot out all the traces of the Deity, an.d stamp the brute on the reafonable foul! But what, if ^possible, added to.the cruelty and inhumanity of her ssanders was, her indire<fi infinuations, artfully mixed with a pretended air of friendship, which were a greater infuk on tlioSe she afperfed, than her more open inveftives. Alas! cried she, with a figh, who would think that-my dear friend————•I won’t mention her name———my regard for her will not fuster me to do that———but she does not live
-r—I fay, who would
many doors from us think that So fine a lady, with fuch a modest and artleSs look, was not as perfeist in her virtue, as she is in the Symmetry of her per-Son. But I am glad she has kept her folly to herfelf ,; and indeed am too much her friend ever to divulge it. I have heard, in-
!— ----^^but no matter
deed, a little whifper what they fay of her: I hope it only proceeds from malice and ill-nature.— ——O fie ! how can people flander one another at
this rate; to be fure it is very wicked of
ilhem,
C j	¥ BS.,

30
Felicia to Charlotte.
Y E s, doubtleSs, Madam, replied the old
gentleman, interrupting her with a fneer j we know you are very fenstble of the malignity of this crime. Here he winked at my aunt, shrugged up his shoulders, and she proceeded.
Yes, heaven knows flander is my averSion, reSumed she, and I would not, for the world, be guilty of it. What if she is not So llender as she ufed to be; she may be troubled with
the droply, you know.
I love to put the
best conftrudlion upon every thing.
Slender ! Madam, replied our old friend. Smiling with an air of indignation; I Saw that lady yesterday, and upon my word I never beheld a finer shape, or a more eafy air I could not help taking particular notice of her. How! Sir, cried she, with a look that expressed her disappointment and confusson, I am perfuaded you don’t know who I meam Yes, Madam, I do, returned he; and between you and I, however you conceal names, you are always Sure to point your invedlives in Such a manner, that nobody can mistake the perfon they are levelled at. This shew of friendship is only a pretence, a Specious artifice to wound the deeper. Don’t you think, ladies, continued he turning to us, that my Sister with her white unfullied virtue must appear to great advantage.
Felicia to Charlotte.
31
tage, while she is Surrounded by Such a black neighbourhood. How beautiful must a Swan look in the midst of a flock of ravens!
She was now as red as fire, and was doubt-leSs going to make a Severe reply, when to my no Small fatisfa£lion, the conversation was diverted by a gentleman’s entering the room, with a young lady of genteel appearance, and a perfon formed to prepostefs every one in her favour. Our good-natur’d prude Seemed a little confounded at their prefence; but foon recovering herfelf, ran to embrace the lady, with Such an appearance of Sincerity, that I began to think her more capable of friendship^ than I had before imagined j but while she was lavishing upon this stranger the most ardent carcstes, and with an cxceSs of complaisance, thanking her for her vifit, my aunt told me, shat this was the lady she had a minute before fo cruelly afperfed under the cha-ra£Ier of a friend.
All this while I had not taken notice of she gentleman who was brother to this injured lady ; but when he was come up to us, I was Seized with a Sudden flow of joy at feeing him the amiable youth I defcribed to you in my last. But you can’t imagine what an effecst this discovery had upon me : the moment I
C 4
cast
32
Felicia to Charlotte.
cast my eyes upon his lifter, and conSidered
her as a lady vilely flandered by the perSon who was now embracing her, I could not, at first, forbear taking her part against the prude, and being highly offended at her hypocriSy ; but now when I confidcred her as the Sister of this engaging youth, for whom I felt Some of the most tender Sentiments, I could not help regarding the prude as a monster, and entering into the injured lady’s fufferings, with a very different kind of indignation. The affront was become much nearer and more fenfible than it was before. And indeed, nothing but my regard for peace could have prevented my cautioning her, whom I now confidered as my friend, against one who could stab with a Smile, and sting the perfon stie hugged to her bofom. Lucius, for that is the young gentleman’s name. Saluted my aunt and coufins with an air the most free and engaging; but when he came to me, methought a timorous confuSion rendered his compliments hardly intelligible. However, he took a chair, when the old ’Squire, with his ufiial freedom, cried out, at the fame time taking him by the hand. Well, my young philosopher, I am heartily glad to See you. Here is a lady in company has been degradin
human nature most unmercifully; and has
even
\
.Fslicia to Charlotte.

seven asserted that we have all a natural pro* penSity to commit the blaclcest crimes. Ods tny life, if I had been able to have managed an argument against her on Such a difficult Sub* jedl, I should have thought myfelf obliged to vindicate the honour of my own Species ; Ibut now you are here, you must e’en do it for me. I am not willing to think myfelf a villain, nor would I maintain Such an ill opi-
nion of my friends
But have you refo

lution enough, my boy, to vindicate your 43wn Sentiments when they oppoSe thofe of the ladies ?
Yes, Sir, returned he, frailing, when their shonour is to be Supported ; but 1 hope there .are none here, that have really Such unworthy ithoughts of themfelves and us. For my part,
■ continued he, with an air perfe6lly graceful; 3 think there can’t be a greater ressedfion on ishe Author of Nature, on his wiSdom .and •goodnefs, on his fpotlefs purity, than this opinion, vvhich at once rendeir man an objedl ‘of detestation and abhorrence, and his Creator ♦unworthy the title of she Father of his rati iial •creation ; a title which resse£is a glory upon ♦our Ipecies, and which Springs from the most ;-refpIendent as well as endearing attribute of '.the .Deity,
C 5
■If
{
34"
Felicia to Charlotte*
If we impartially Survey the first impreS-Sions of nature, and the origin of our passions, we fhall find that thofe propensities which are not acquired, are on the fide of virtue. The mind of the infant no, Sooner begins to open and expand, than he feels the dawn of reafon: the bright radient stream of heavenly light pours into his Soul, and he fees at once the na-* tural deformity of Some actions, and the native charms and intrinSic lovlinels of others. But even before reafon can take place, and while this refplendent ray of theDeity is too glimmer* ing to direct him in the paths of truth and virtue, he feels within him an internal and moral Senfe, which distinguiflies between virtue and vice, beauty and deformity, harmony and diS-cord. He is delighted with striking colours ; he is charmed with the melting waibling of a well-touched instrunhent; he is terrified with the braying of an aSs, a fhriek, or a clap of thunder. But whence can ariSe thefe various Senfations of pleaSure, or of pain ? W hence can Ipring thefe early ideas of harmony, proportion, and beauty, if they are not founded in the constitution of nature, if there is not an internal Senfe, a. natural taste by which they are qualified to difeern them ? Virtue is the
mufic of the foul, the harmony of the passions;
it
Felicia to Charlotte.
35
But why does it experience
it is the order, the Symmetry, the interior beauty of the mind ; the Source of the truest pleasures, the fountain of the fublimest and most perfedlhappineSs, But let us have recourfe to nature, and fee if this be not the cafe. How early does the little creature feel fentimenis of gratitude in return for the tender care of its nurfe ! How early is it intendered by the Social affedlions of pity and compalEon! And how pleaSingly does every natural gussi of Soft af-fetstion Swell its breast, and pour from it’s
pretty eyes!----
thefe tender feelings of the foul ? For what reafon does the untaught mind start back from fpetfiacles of violence and horror ? Why is it moved with pity ? Why is it shocked and wounded ? Why does it bleed at mileries in which itfelf has no immediate concern ? Is it not becaufe it is naturally virtuous, naturally compaffionate and Sympathising ?
What a delightful representation, cried Amelia, with an expressive Smile, have you given us of human nature ! How very different from thofe gloomy difcourles we daily hear of -the wretchednefs and deformity of all the race of Adam ! Too many of our clergy feem to take a peculiar pleafure in degrading mankind, as if they thought there was no. other way of
C6
exalting
Felicia to Charlotte.
exalting the Deity, than by defeaSing his off»> Spring: and this they do by reprefenting us as born in guilt, and naturally incapable of performing the least atfiion either virtuous in it-Self, or acceptable to our Maker. It is very true, replied my aunt; but, in my opinion, nothing can be more injurious to the cauSe of virtue, than Such falfe representations. For my part, as I have carefully attended to the adlions and behaviour of children, in their most early infancy, I can fay from experience, that I have never beheld the least traces of this na-tural turpitude, w'hich is the fubje^l of So many pompous harangues ; but as I can’t be fuppo-fcd to have carried my refle£fions of this kind So far as Lucius, who, I find, has made this fubjeS; his study, I shall defire him to run thro’ the most particular of thofe vices, which are Suppofed to lurk in our hearts, in order to she w that they have no real existence in the consti-
r
tution of our nature. But what you have faid, Sir, added she, addressing herfelf to Lucius, brings to my mind a circumstance, which may farther illustrate your opimonof the moral fenfe, and prove by afamiliar instance, that it is really founded in nature, and not merely a plaufible representation of what we wish to be true. But not to keep you any longer in fupenfe r
Some
Felicia to Charlotte.
37
fome years ag© as I was at work in my parlour next the hall, I was alarmed at hearing Some body fall down stairs, and my daughter Polly giving a shriek at the fame time, I ran in a terrible fright to astist my child. But with what furprize was I feized to See, instead of her, a young man whom I had entertained the day before lying upon the floor, who aroSe the moment I entered the hall-. The dear little creature, who had been the instant before at play, stood Speech!efs; she was struck with compaffion ; her lips were pale, her cheeks -were wet with tears, her joints trembled. I preffed her to tell me what was the matter,
but could obtain no other anfwer than. The
»
man! the man / In short, her whole foul was in fuch an agony, that it was fome time before I brought her to herielf. This story I alTurp you is fa£l, and I would destre this lady, if she can, to account for this tender flow of bene-urolence and compaflion in a child of three years old: an age in' which she herfelf must: allow, that reafon could have no share in the
emotions of her heart.
Really, Madam, replied the religious
prude, in a peevisti tone, I am astoniflied to
hear you. I thought you had been more orthodox than to aSiert Such strange opinions.
3^
Felicia to Charlotte,
I am Sorry to See that your fondneSs for your child has Such an unhappy effedi, as to shut your ejes against the truths of our religion. I will warrant you now you don’t believe
original stn.--------Don’t we See every where
the perverfenefs of children ? But to be fure
■you don’t know that
you won’t fee it-----
they are given to lying, pride, and every vice they are capable of committing. One would think that experience alone would be fufficient to let us fee that they are naturally wicked. Alas ! continued she with a ridiculous whine, and at the fame time shaking her head, thefe are proud thoughts j it is but too true, that our nature is fadly depraved, and that we are naturally inclined to all manner of crimes.
You must permit me. Madam, to distent from your opinion,replied the engaging Lucius with a fmile, and I think I am able to prove that nature, who has fo early prejudiced the foul on the Side of virtue, has not thrown in amongst her favours any of thofe baleful ingredients you mention. We receive nothing from the hands of the Supreme Being that is
not like himfelf, perfedlly good---I'^othing
that he might notcommunicate confistent with
1	t
his infinite benevolence : and therefore all I
can grant is, that this moral fenfe, like the light
of
Felicia to Charlotte.'
39
of reafon, is not in every one equally strong, refined and delicate, though it is in all capable of dire6ling to the purfuit of what is amiable and praife-worthy. As to the perverSenefs of children, their lying, pride, and whatever elSe you are pleafed to lay to their charge, they are eafily accounted for. They have not only ill examples, but are taught to be vicious. Pains are taken to make them So; and the fond mother without deSign, adts as if Ihe laboured to erafe out of its mind the pure imprefiions of nature*. But I shall leave this fubje6l, and
*The judicious Mr. Locke considers this fubjectt in a very particular manner.	If we look Into the common
management of children, fays he, we fliall have reafon to wonder, that there are any foot steps of virtue left in the world. What vice can benamed which parents do not fea-fon them with, and drop into them the feeds of, as foon as they are capable to receive them ? I don’t mean by the examples they give, which is encouragement enough ; but that which I would take notice of here. Is the downright teaching them vice. Give me a blow and I will heat him^ is a leSTon which most children hear every day;” this naturally fixes in their minds principles of revengt.—
They are taught to be proud of their cloaths long before they put them on,” and to treat with contempt and infolence all who are not fo well dreSTed as they ; by
which they render their hearts obdurate, and root out their natural Sentiments of pity. ‘‘ Lying and equivocations are put Into the mouths of young people, and commended in children, whilst they are for their parent’s
endeavour
40
Felicia to Charlotte.

endeavour to prove that the Several vices laid to our charge have not their Source from nature.
Avarice, with all its black attendants, is confessedly a crime of old age, and Seldom ar*-rives at maturity ’till accompanied u'ith grey stairs. Nor can it have the least foundation in the constitution of our frame, ssnce it can only becompletei by time, and a constant war with
advantage.” Their minds are enervated by flattery,
and luxury of every kind, ‘‘ Is my young master a little
■out of order, the queSHon is, Whativill my dear eat? What
«
Jhall I get for thee ? Every body’s invention- is fet on work to find out Something luScious and delicate enough to prevail over the want of appetite, which nature has ^wifeIy ordered in the beginning of distempers to prevent
their increafe.-------He had the will of his maid before
lie could Speak or go*; he had the mastery of his parents
j
ever fince he could prattle; and why now he is grown up, and is stronger and wiSer than he v^as then, must he *bc restrained and curbed ?——-If his defircs carry him to wine and women, fhey are objects as Suitable to the longing of one of more years, as what he cried for \yhen little, were to the inciinations of a child.’* See Locke qri Education^ page 34—.--45. /But innumerable arc the methods of instilling vice into the fl.’xible mind of the in-fatit. Their rewards'render them incorrigibly obstinate, their puniflim.Dts make Impreffions never to he eraSed. The hohgollin is ever after a Subject of terror, and the fpoor unhappy wretch^ who was to take them auuayAvhen they ivere naughty^ has fixed deeply a contempt and averfion Icr objects of miSery and distrefe. Ahc &tor.
ourfelveso
Fflicia to Chartotte.
41
ourfelves. Every ohje£l; of real niilery, every instance of virtue in distrefs, demands our relief with Such a forcible eloquence, that we at e obliged to struggle with ourfelves in order to fupprefs our riSing compaffion. The natural feelings of the heart, which on thefe occaSions prompt every man to pity, can’t be erafed without a degree of felf-denial; a violence to reafon; a violence to all the remains gf humanity.
As to lewdneSs, nature must utterly difclaim it,——What man that has the least remains of generoSity, the least fenfe of pity,, would not stiudder at the thought of betraying the lovely innocent to guilt, and shame, and infamy ? What man, that has not loft all the Senfe and understanding of a man, all the Soft and noble impressions of humanity, and who was one step above a brute, would heSitate for a moment whether he should bridle or indulse
o
an inclination, when the dreadful conSequence
lies So plainly before him
where mifery.
inevitable miSery, must attend the partner of his pleasures ?
But this is not all; we have not only a
moral lenfe, but a passion adapted to restrain
\
our defires, and reduce them within proper
bounds : a passion Suited to Soften and reform
our
42
Felicia to Charlottes
our minds, by inSpiring the tenderest, most noble and delicate Sentiments; Here, giving me a look, he coloured, and at the Same time Suffered a Sigh to eScape him; but immediately endeavouring to recover himfelf from his confuSion, which he strove in vain to conceal, he refumed-------but the force of love almost
every one has experienced.
Ay,
ay, cried
the old gentleman, laughing; and I don’t question but every one here has felt its power. For my part, when I was a young man, I was a perfeist enamorato. Was you So ? cried the old maid ; therefore, becaufe you were fuch a fool, you must think, to be Sure, that I have been Ib too. No, Sir, I assure you I was never guilty of that weaknefs. If love. Madam, is a weaknefs, replied Lucius with fome warmth, it is at least the noblest weaknefs we are liable to. Love refines and humanizes the mind, gives a delicacy to our conceptions, and renders us incapable of injuring, even in thought, the dear objetfi: of our Soft affections. And, in fine, is a noble counterpoise to thofe deSires which providence has wifely given us, as it is direCtly calculated to prevent their carrying us beyond the bounds of reafon and virtue. So the pleafing ties of friendstiip, mutual af-feCUon, and public-fpiritednefs, whofe charms
are

Felicia to Charlotte^
43
are almost univerSally felt, are an additional guard against our degenerating into bafe, mercenary, and felfish animals.
But as we have all thefe strong'incitements to virtue, it may be alked. Why there is Such a great degree of vice in the world ? I anfwer,
that it is owing to education ; the continual temptation of preSent and fenSible objects, and the powerful force of example. Thefe fuf-pend the generous and kindly impressions of humanity, petrify the tender heart, and make us shut our eyes and ears to pity.
Here our old friend, who for Some time Seemed lost in the pleafure this conversation had given him, finding Lucius had done, a-rofe up in a kind of extaff, when holding his pipe in his hand, he cried out in a theatrical tone:
/
We are by nature virtuous^ by nature foft and humane.^
<
^27// felfijh pajjions chill our young affebiions^
Andfreexe the tender heart to icy hardnefs;
No more dijlrejj'ed Virtue fwells our breajis j No more tue melt at others wants, and feel Fhofe foreign cares with painful friendly fmart And foft compaffion. The inwardJiruggle der, ■ The conqueji gained by the dire fury. Vice,
With
44-
Felicia to Charlotte.
With Meduccean power we’re changed to JiDnCt 10 Hfeleft^ fenfelefs Jione.«....
Here, in the height of his rhapfody, he struck his pipe against the table, with a violence that made it sty into twenty pieces. The odd-nefs of this vvhimstcal behaviour made us immediately burst out a laughing, and in a moment difperSed that thoughtful air that our long
%
attention to this grave dUcourfe had fpread o-ver our faces.
I don’t know, my dear Charlotte, what idea this conversation will give you of this a-miable youth ; nor can I tell how you will like his fentiments; but this I am Sure of, that you are very much obliged to me for being at all this pains in tranfcribing, what perhaps only my esteem for the Speaker made me fancy Something curious: tho’ you perhaps may think it hardly worth your notice. You imagine nov/ that I have got a very extraordinary memory ; but to be Sincere, I have done little more than tranfcribe what my aunt prevailed upon Lucius to give her afterwards in writing upon the fubje<Sl:; which he might eafily recol-iedb as he was the chief Speaker, and the fentiments entirely his own.
Bu T all this while I had np opportunity of
Felicia to Charlotte.
45
a moment’s Separate conversation with this engaging young gentleman : my heart longed to be entertained with a more interesting Subject; a Subject that would have been infinitely moie delightful to me, than the most refined Speculations, though accompanied with ^ all the charms of eloquence, all the striking graces
which attended his manner of expressing him-
>
Self. And I freely confefs that I could not help thinking him a little tedious, though my reafon assented to every thing he Said. But when he had done the approbation he received from almost all the company. So agreeably flattered my esteem, or if you infist upon it, I will Say my love.^ that 1 never experienced half the delight, when in my vainest moments I have listened to the flattering praifes of my
admirers But it is time to conclude this long letter, and therefore 1 shallonly add, that I am,
Toufs, &c.
Felicia.
/
L E T T E R V.
My dear Charlotte,
TTQW inimitably pretty is your way of raillery! I could not read your letter witn-
Oilt
4^
Felicia to Charlotte.'
out breaking off at least half a dozen times to laugh at your whimfical conceits. But however, you are never likely to fee my Spark in lawn fleeves, though you Say there needs little more than for him to mount the rostrum to
obtain them.--------What a grotefque figure
have you drawn of a gaping congregation listening to his voice, while the foul of mufic dwells upon his tongue, and all the ladies, charmed with his striking accents. Surrender up their hearts, as I do, to the inchanting force of pleafing founds and graceful action. Was that the cafe, I am of your mind, that amidst Such a number of competitors, I might strive in vain to charm him; and therefore was there any danger of his entering into holy orders, I should certainly uSe all the influence I have over him to prevent a step that you fay would be So dreadfully fatal to my own repofe. But rallery apart, I will now return to my story.
Jn the evening we left our merry hoSpitable friend, and returned home without Lucius’s
having an opportunity of faying one tender thing to me ; but his eyes, however, were lefs referved, and methought entertained me with a language that I could eafily understand. Ah! how much I love, cried they, with a foft timidity ; at least I fancied So : whilst an artleSs,
Sparkling
Felicia to Charlotte.
47
Sparkling glance of mine, in Spite of myfelf, replied, how much ami pleafed thatyou fhould do So. I know you can’t keep your countenance at this mute kind of difcourfe but really I am perfuaded that it was very intelligible to us both, though it was So precipitate that nobody in the roonr could take notice of it. Why should we difguife our hearts, and teach our looks a refervc that we are far from feel-iag ? TheSe little arts should never be uSed to a man of fenfe, and merit; as for the rest, we ought to have no care about them. Nor indeed need 1 blush to own, that this Silent intercourse of fouls gave me more pleafure than I ever received from any of my conquests. There is Something noble in charming a youth of Such exalted perfediions; and however in-fenSible we may be when attacked by the impertinence of a fop, or a coxcomb, it would prove a want of the most laudable ambition not to be elated here, where fine fenfe, virtue, and an agreeable prefon, are fo charmingly united.
As Soon as we were Seated in the coach, my aunt and coufins began to be very merry with the ridiculous character of the prude ; when, at last, observing that I forebore joining in their converfation, Amelia tapped me hastily on the shoulder j What is the matter ? cried she,
with
4-8
Felicia to Charlotte.
with a pretty innocent giggle, at Seeing me start; one would be almost tempted to think you in love. Come, roufe yourSelf put of this revery, and let us enjoy the benefit of ypur company. How do you like Lucius ? Like him ! replied 1 with a blush; why, I don’t know ; pretty well. She is thinking, perhaps, of her friends in town, cried my ;atint; or is it really this gentleman that employs your
thoughts ? added she, addrestlng herfelf to me; Lucius is a very deferving man ; and had he an estate any v/ay equal to his merit, I could not wish you a greater happineSs than to have him for a hushand. I was not thinking of a hushand. Madam, replied I, with as unconcerned an air as postible; but has he only a Small fortune then ? Pray what is his fainily ? I fuppofe you can give me a particular account of it ? This was fpoke with an aching heart oppressed with fears; for I could not help being alarmed at tste very thought of a difparity of circumstances j for tho’ we may have ever So little ambition ourfelves, our friends have
«
always a great deal for us, and perhaps are apt
to carry it a little too far. They do not think as we do, and are almost always blind to merit, when unattended with riches : for as they
Sincerely wish us every blessing, they cannot
bear
Felicia to Charlotte.
4^
bear to think of our wanting So essential a one, as that on which depends, in a great meafurc, the reputation, the eafe, the honours of life the most confpicuous and dazling advantages.
My aunt, without any helitation, replied. My dear, you are in the right; I have been perfeftly acquainted with Lucius’s family for many years, and am very able to give you their history. His father was born to a Small estate; but what made this a real misfortune was, that the very means which reduced bis patrimony, gave him difposstions which rendered it the more difficult to Support himfelf in the narrow bounds that were allotted him. He was educated amidst a round of pleafure, and Saw nothing but luxury and extravagance from his most early infancy. He imbibed the fame deSires which had almost been the ruin
of his father, and which has Since had the
» ^
fame efFe61: with refpe£l; to his own family. When he was between twenty and thirty, he paid his addresses to a young lady, who, be-ssdes a considerable fortune, and much beauty, had a fweetnefs of foul, which gave a lustre to every other perfctfiion. This was fpread over her countenance, and appeared perfectly con-Ipicuous in every look and every a(stion. In Ihort, be Soon gained her affedions, and, with
D
the
C.0
Felicia to Charlotte

the confent of her friends, married her. Poor
woman ! how much do I pity her ! He no
fooner got her fortune in his own hands ; but.
in Spite of his good fenfc (for this must be al
lowed him) he reSumed thofe cxpenstvc diver
lions which he had before been obliged to lay

fide,for want of the means of Supportingthem,
The pleafures of the bottle, horSe-races, gam
ing, have ever Since taken up all his time;
while his poor lady is treated with a barbarous contempt and infolcnce j a cruel reward for
her generofity in giving up her estate to him without referve. But his Son and daughter,
far from follov/inghis example, shun the con
tagion of his vices as they would a pestilence.
and for their fakes, as well as their mother’s
I shall forbear giving a particular account of his debauches and irregularities. Alas! how
unhappy, how doubly unhappy must Such a pa


nt be, who meets with the keenest reproach
even from the virtues of his children ! how mi
ferable must that man be, if he has the least
fenfe of ingenuity, to find himfelf the difgrace
of thofe wshom nature hath rendered dear to
him ! an objedt of shame and pity to his own
offspring ! They love the man, tho’ they de lest his vices; and give him their affedllon

tho’ thev are constrained to withhold from him
their


9
Felicia to Charlotte

r.i
-fir tsteem. But dear Madam, cry’d I, with f.ie tears standing in my eyes, which t :
nefs of the evening, howevr c r
✓
\
o A ^'t'
pr,
•	\ ' X i
'■bfervation, how does t: i adniifuhle lady C; port this complicated distr^fs C?n ' ^ ; any tenderncSs for fuch a LA :
One

aild undoubt
would think acondudl like this ediy extirpate all the foster paffions from her breast, and leave no room for anv thin'?’ but hatred and contempt. What other return can be made to ingratitude and^cru -’^y ?
■ Hoj my dear, replied my	you have
much too mean an opinion of this lady’s good-nest'. There are very few in her circumstances indeed who would notHy out int: the createst cKTavagancies, and keep no raeafures with a man, \vho behaved vvith To Httle regard ;o the happinefs of his family. They wouia make
or, at least
s

the houfe, whenever was prefent, an a!--most perpetual feene of n roar; would take all opportunities of pubiifhing hi vices and follies. But she, on the contrary, led by the fweetnefs of her temper, has en deavoured to make him fenfible of the baSey nefs of his conduct, bv constantly shewino-
t*
herfelf worthy of his esteem. She loves him still, in fpite of his cruelty; and, T dare fay, would think herfelf very happy if the lofs of her
D %	estate
52
Felicia to Charlotte*
estate would recover his heart; even if to obtain this blessing they were reduced to a state of meannefs and poverty. She has too much good»fenfe not to fee that quarreling, and ill humour, from her, would greatly increafe his averSion, and not only widen the breach between them, but be attended with the most unhappy estedls with reSpeist to their children ; stnce it would infallibly weaken their natural authority over them, make them divided, and become partners in their unhappy difcords ; and, especially while they were young, might withdraw their aste6lion from the man she loved more dearly than herfelf, and who, notwithstanding his ill condudi, had a right to their dutiful obedience. Had this been the cafe, it is cafy to fee the fatal conSequences that would undoubtedly have followed, not the least of which would have been a want of education, a disregard of all instruction, and their being deprived of thofe just principles of virtue and honour, which raife the man above the brute, and render him worthy of the character of a rational and Social being : for they would probably have difregarded the advice of thofe whofe quarrels gave them perpetual un-eafinefs. But this amiable lady’s prudence is vifible in nothing more than in concealing the
follies
Felicia to Charlotte.
53
ies of her hulband, which she does with as much care as if they were more immediately her own. She endeavours to hide even his least foibles, not only from her children, but from all the world. And I think I may Safely affirm, that no one ever heard her Say an unkind or difrepe<fiful word'of him.
What an admirable chara6ler. Madam, replied I, have you given us of this charming lady ! How happy w'ould most women find rhemfelves, if they were as tender of their huf-band’s reputations I With what pain have I beard a lady, otherwise of good fenfe, expatiate for an hour together on the little trifling domestic quarrels, which have happened between herfelf and her confoi 11 How frequently do we hear married women dwell with a malicious Satisfaction upon thoSe vices, which prudence alone, without the least degree of love, ought to teach them to conceal 1 For a woman always stands in Some degree in the fame light with her hushand, and she cannot certainly make hirii appear infamou', without throwing a load of difgrace upon herfelf, for people will always be ready to imagine, that she herfelf must be guilty of Some imprudence, which she dare not difeover, that gave rife to
^3
she
• «.	^
..... J	•


54
Felicia to Charlotte
9
the vices and injuries fhe So warmly exclaims gainst.
You are much in the right, my dear, re-turned my aunt; and I am very glad to hear you have fuch just fentiments, stnce I hope they will influence your own condudi, if ever you should be in circumstances to require it.
This conversation, which was drawn out to a considerable length, took up our time till we arrived at my aunt’s. But I must net omit

■one particular, which indeed is too agreeabl for me to conceal; which was, that Lucius and his Sister had each oS them a fortune of jocol. lest them by a relation, who died a fev?
months ago.
You fee, Madam, with what confidence I lay open the disadvantageous circumstances of a family, in whofe happinefs I interest rnySelf; and can I give you a more convincing proof of the Sinceiity of my friendship; My father, notwithstanding his natural generoSity, and tendernefs for me, will never, I am afraid, confent to my entering into an alliance fo extremely beneath what my fortune may feem to require. I tremble at the thought of dif-oblliiing him, and am refolved, whatever it
cost me,To conform mystlf to his will. However. I may be mistaken. Is it poflible that
a
Felicia to Charlotte
SB
a profpecst of my happinefs may outweigh all consideration of meaner interests and advantages.
Forgive me now, if you can, for troubling you with thefe melancholy thought's
which I endeavour in vain to fuppre-Ss. While this is the cafe, you must not v/oncler at my dulneSs, which, in my opinion, is JeSs pardonable than impertinence. Since the onenray poS-stbly make you fnaile at IcaSr, while the other can have no better effeci than to give you the vapours, whicli if you can efcape, after reading this heavy cpiftle, I {ball not de{[)air of Seeing you in my condition ; that is, fre • quently amufing yourSdf with a dull walk, a-midst dull tree:, dull fields, and talking to your duller felf; but heaven preStrve you from Such a change. And may you ever think me, as I really am, in Spite of love, vapours, and melancholy,
Tour fuicere friend.
The moment I had written the first letter of that dear exprelTive word friend., by which I would always have you understand, whenever I make ufe of it, a thoufand namelefs ideas of affeclion, Sympathy, and Whatever you can imao;ine elSe most agreeable and endearing;: I fay, at the very instant as I was concluding rny
\

D4
letter

5^
Felicia to Charlotte.
letter, I heard Amelia enter my room, when, turning my head, stj« told me, with a Smile, that the amiable Marilla was juft come to pay us a viftt; then immediately forgetting what I was about, I aroSe with a heart full of joy, threw down my pen, and ran to embrace the lifter of my dear--..no, that is too fond; a-
greeable, I should fay ;
well then, of my
agreeable Lucius. We had a great deal of chat upon abundance of entertaining topics, while my delire of engaging the friendship of this lady, made me difcover an unufual gaiety ; or rather, the friendship I had already conceived for her, threw off all my restraint, and made me treat her with the fame open fa-tisfadiion, as if I had been convinced that she had already entertained the fame friendship for me ; fo that in a little time we grew as intimate, as if our actjuaintance had been of long
No referve, no diffidence, no restraint fubfffted between us : all our behaviour was franknefs, vivacity, and the utmost extent of Sprightly freedom. You yourfelf, my dear Charlotte, (forgive me faying lb) had you unexpedlediy con\e to fee me, could hardly have made a greater change in the Situation of my mind. How fwift a progrefs does friend-make, Mien a .peiSoo begins with liich
d ilboiitioijs ?
standing.
Reiicia to Charlotte.
57
dispositions! A deSire ©f being agreeable is the Teadieft way of making ourfelves So.
M y aunt had not only invited this lady to See •us, at our last viSit, but hearing me expreSs an extreme destre of enjoying that fatisfaftion at our return. Sent the next day a letter toher mamma, unknown to me, to deSire her to permit her to stay a day or two at our houfe. A favour that I could not help being highly fenfible of ; and from which you may judge of the plains she takes to make my stay in the country agreeable to me.
M y new companion and I, not contented
with engroffing almost all the conversation to
^ourSelves, reSolved to take a little turn in the
^clds, to Indulge our young friendship with
-diScourstng on Some fubjedls not proper for a
mixed companyand therefore finding an op-
,portunity of leaving our companions, we flipped
into the garden, and from thence went into a
f retired walk, where we might lay open our ' hearts without the least restraint. A gentle
breeze that whisper’d among the trees, the
fragrance of the air, and the awful filence of
the evening, contributed to Soften my mind.
and charm my SenSes-, The
Had nn her file,
Twilight grey


/
5^
Felicia to Charlotte. ■
/
While the moon
«*
Fi/ing in clouded majejiy—------
Apparent queen^ unveifd her pcerlefs Ughi,
And o'er the dark her fiver tnantle threw.
t0
MiLTONv,
»
♦
We walked ssowly on, at first difcourfing rjpon indifferent Subjedis, till the amiable Ma-rilla mentioned her brother, and told me he deSired her to prcfent his humble refpedis to rae. This gave me an opportunity of afking how he did, and happily introduced a conversation more interesting than can well be con-* ceived. I fancy, Mifs, Said J, you must be very happy in the friendship and tendernefs of shis gentleman; he Seems poffeffed of extraordinary merit. Ah, Madam, returned she,
J	J	Af	J
I am more happy than can be imagined. He has an extreme affedlion for me, and
there Tubfisti Such a harmony betw''een us,, as is very rarely Seen in Such near relations. It is his chief study to improve my mind ; and he has taken inconceivable pains in giving me thofe just principles of virtue, which, I hope, will always instuence mycondudl. I find ia him not only a brother, but a Sincere and af-fedstonate friend. We have but one common
interest. He trusts nie y/ith the Secrets of his
heart i
Fslicia to ChArlotti-
Vi4
heart; and in short, we are So clofely united, that were I unlrappy, he woul5 feel as much for me, as perhaps I should for myfelf. We!], my dear, replied I (endeavouring still tod’.fcovcr whether fiic was acquainted with his passion)
I could almost envy you the pleafure of en-= joying thefe dear Social de'jghts. I never knew what it was to have a brother; and if I had, I might have been a stranger to your happi-
nefs
There arc very few Such brothers an<l Sisters as you. Here I prested her hand with much affcdtion, charmed with the engaging idea fne had 2,iven me of her ov/n felicity. Sire
%-J	J
was fome minutes before she replied, and perhaps was at a lofs for an anfwer; however, at last, recovering herSelf, Dear Mifs, faid she,
I assure you it is an addition to my bappinefs, to ssnd that )mu entertain fuch favourable fer»-timents of us. Lucius would be tranfported wth joy, if he could have heard from your lips that he has any share in your esteem. It js'tiue, he has fome merit, a great deal more than I can boast of, Since I owe great part cf mine to him; yet you arc pleafcd to honour me with your friendship, wshile he here appeared pretty mucli confufed, and, as if at a lofs hov/ to proceed, stopped and stood filent: but at last, Iceming to recolle^l herfelst
She
D 6
in ste ad
€o
I’Eit'CtA toTharlotti
instead going on, she reSumed, Had he % fortune equal to yours, he would peihaps be better able to tell you himfelf thoSe tender fcnfiments which SweH his heart. Has Lucius then, replied I with an innofcent tone, and an air of astonistiment, any Sentiments which he is afraid to diicgver to me ? I can Scarcely believe ft, though you yourSelf are pleaSed to sell me So. However, 1 haveib juft an opinion of his virtue and fine Senfe, that I hardly think him capable of Saying any thing diSagreeable. And may I tell him this f replied Manila in a kind of extaSy. Why not ? returned it would be a great misfortune, if we were never to be honoured with any company but Such as were upon a level with us, with reSpedl to
A pride oS this kind would be the
greateft curfe, fince there arc innumerable bleffings in KSe, infinitely more valuable than all the advantages that can procure us. The charms oS a virtuous and upright mind arc intCTnal; they constitute a real merit, and rested a glory upexn the poffestbn A glory an comparifon of which all other advantages
are Superficial and trifling.
We were here interrupted hy Amelia, who few us go into the garden, and perceiving us -foiae distance, came runninet o rejoin us 5
/

Felicia to Charlotte.

with her we prefently returned home. And Marilla leaving us the next day, I have no-ithing farther to add, than that 1 am,
Dear Madam,
moji affeSiioneitel^
Felicia.
/
LETTER VI.
s
Dear Charlotte,
Notwithstanding she stiendiy
congratulations you give me upon the late acquisition of fortune I received by she death of my uncle, I can assure you with the utmost ssncerity, shat it gives me little or no pleafure. This I believe will furpfife you, stnce, as you justly obferve, I cannot be fuppofed to grieve for the lofs of a gentleman I have never Seen, and who consequently can’t have endear’d himfelf to me by any of thofe proofs of affeflion we may receive from perfons we frequently con-verfe with. Nor would I have you believe that I am fuch a perfedl Stoic, as to be absolutely infenSible of the grandeur, the riches and honours of life. Thefe, it must be confessed, have ifcducifig charms, and are apt to intoxicate our
minda
\.
\
6i
Felicia to Charlotte
«
5
3
iTiinds with the most pleafing profpetsts of future blhs. They naturally Swell the imagination with high-wrought Scenes of delight; nor carr one of my age receive them without feeling Some engaging ideas of that homage, that refpedlful awe, which So agreeably flatters our vanity, that darling foible of youth! Gold v/hoSe Sovereign charms are univerSally felt attracts every heart; all are delighted v/ith the advantages it procures. T'he grave philofopher too often Sacrifices at this shrine ; and the more devout priest, who with Such eloquence liarangucs on Sundays upon the contempt of riches,.and with Such force of expreflion, exhorts us to contemn the tranSitory enjoyments of life, thofe vanities, thofe baubles, thofe unsatisfying and pestilential goods, in Spite of all his opprobrious epithets, is still captivated by this magic, and perhaps there are few among them that w’ould look with stich infenfibility on the acquisition of ten thoufand pounds as I do.
After this long preamble, you pofllbly bevin to wonder what I would be at, and are
o	^
ready perhaps to imagine that I am either very vain, or elfe, that pleafcd.too much vvlth the Solitude of a country life, I am become a fort
of

as
Fflicia to Charlotte.
* of female hermit. But neither of theie i s the cafe.
I HAVE not yet excluded all thoughts of
J	V_/
making a gay appearance in life; nor do I find any charms in fuch a retirement, would deprive me of an opportunityof being Serviceable to my fellow-creatures, and enjoying thoSe Social pleafures, which are Some of the greatest fwcetners of life. But to be Sincere,j this long piece of stander, which may
at first fight appear So injurious to the honour of philofphers and priests (I beg the clergy’s pardon, priests and philoSophers I should fay. Since the Sacred chara6ier of the gown-men demands that I should give them the preference)
Shis piece of standee I fay, was only introduced to raife your curiofity.
Ah ! my Lucius, can I taste the Sweets of a fortune, which will doubtleSs be a bar to my happinefs, and render it impostible for me to be thine ! This is a resteflion whicli damps all my joy. Alas ! how v/eak is ambition, when compared to love !
T H E day after Marilla left me, I had the pleafure of feeing her brother. He had an air ol unufual fatisfadlion in his look; and perhaps encouraged by the repetition she had doubtlefs made him of that converfadon I related in my
last.
64
Felicia to Charlotte.
last, in which I So freely confessed my regard for him, he Spoke methought with leSs diffidence ; •his behaviour was more polite; his manner lefs constrained ; while a thouSand tender
^namelefs graces, which I bad never discovered ♦before, rendered him still dearer to my heart. I now felt myfelf infenfibly awed by his iprefence, and in proportion as he became more
I grew more thoughtful.
I
unconstrained, would gladly have refumed my ufual gaiety, but it was impossible ; the company of my aunt and coussns became burthenfome, and I began to fear their discovering in my eyes that stow of tender friendship, that dear transporting ■extafy, which Swelled my breast. To recover myfelf from this fweet diforder, I hastily aroSe and retired into the garden, where I gave •a loofc to restedlion wishout fear of being observed ; I then began to revolve in my •mind, the danger of indulging a passion , which
would probably prove fatal to my repofe, stnee I could not have the least profpedl of its ever beingcountenanced bj-my father’s approbation. I therefore blamed myfell^ and after a long debate, refolved to ufe all my endeavours to conquer my growing weaknefs: but I had hardly formed this refolution when I Saw Lucius
center the garden, I was then Sitting in an
•arbour
V
Felicia to Charlotte.
65
arbour covered with woodbines, whoSe flowers embalmed the whispering breezes with a plca-fing 'fragrance. He Saw me, and immediately approaching with an air of refpeist, afked me if his company would not be a difagreeable interrupting of my Solitude. I replied, that as my thoughts were only engaged on trifles, it would be no pain to me to place them upon more agreeable fubjeists. But, why, Sir, added I Smiling, have you left the ladies ? I ant obliged to return home, faid he, and your aunt having this minute received a letter, I took the opportunity while she was reading it, of coming to Uke leave of you.
I HAD now entirely forgotten the refolution
I had juft taken to arm my heart with in-
fenflbility, and filled with a foft and pleafing
Surprize at the unexpeisted company of ray
lover, even a letter from London could not
awaken the least curiofity, thoMdid not doulw:
its coming from my father. Lucius now Sat
■down by me upon a bank of camomile
which almost Surrounded the arbour, when I
cxpeisted every moment to hear him enter
upon tlie most delightful fubjedl, love; but
though he was more aflured, than ever I had
ifeen him, the restraints of a modest diffidence
«
still tied his toague, and made him for feme
time

Felicia to Charlotte

. time preServe a Silence which i did not care to
interrupt. He opened his lips Several times but quivering with fear, they instantly clofed without uttering a Syllable 5 but at last Seemin to colledl all his fortitude. Forgive me, Mifs
Said he, giving me a look inexpreffibly tender
%
forgive a behaviour, which doubtlefs makes
me appear extremely ridiculous; but it is
Here he cast dov>fn his
impossible to
eyes, with a stgh, while a stood of Soft and
melting ideas Seemed to choak up his vmice; but at length, finding I waited to hear him conclude, he lifted up his head, when I Saw
his face covered with a deep blufh, while every
feature was expressive of the most violent
emotions,, How impossible is it, dear Madam
refumed he, with a faltering voice, to give utterance to a passion too tender to be defcribed
and too
too prefumptuous to
be forgiven, added he, with a look and tone
that fpoke the deepest defpair
0
During this fpeech, which, short as
It
was, took up a confisterable time
I felt all the throbbings of his heart
W
methought . I feemed
confcious of all that dread, that love, and all
thoSe terrible apprehenfions, which bewildered
and
his thoughts in a maze of confuSion,
made him tremble at a difcovery, which, tho'
he
Felicia TO Charlotte
67
he reSolved to make, he dreaded the effects
[ it might 'produce

But notwithstanding this
fympathetic'penetradon, and all the disturbance it had a natural tendency to create, the very caufe of my pain was the Source of the ten-derest and most exquiSite pleafure ; the Softest and most Soothing delight. As Soon as he concluded, he waited Sor my reply in a kind of agonizing SuSpence; but tho’ I was a moment at a ioSs how to return an anSwer, I Suffered my eyes to expreSs a pity and compassion capable of diSperSing his most alarming fears, had he dared to have lifted up his to obServe them. But when 1 Spoke, a glance immediately met mine, which instantly brightening. Seemed to diScover my meaning before I could give it utterance. I affure you, bir, Said I in a mild tone, that I am not at all diSpoSed to
increaSe your confufion by ridiculing the pain-■ Sul disorder w'hich has accompanied this too
tender declaration, I am Senfible of your merit, and don’t think you capable of an attempt
to deceive me. Believe me, Sir, I look upon you as my friend, and therefore entreat you to refleist a little upon the obstacles that will inevitably oppoSe your wistes. However, I freely confeSs, if that will give you any SatiS-fadiion, that were I at my own diSpofal, you
would

€B
Felicia to Charlotte.
would perhaps havo no reafon to complain of my Severity.
You can’t conceive, my dear Charlotte, what a Sudden change this obliging reply made upon the countenance and behaviour of my
lover.-------You are now ready to imagine
that I shall deferibe him throwing himSclf at my feet, while with a flow of rapture, he admires my Superlative goodnefs, blending his praifes with two or three hundred adorables, tranfeendent excellencies, infinite perfe<5lions, incomparablecreatures,and abundance of other
fine things of the fame strain.--------But if
thefe are your thoughts, you are extremely mistaken; for 1 did not hear him utter the least lyllable of this Sublime nonfenSe. He is too good a Christian to deify his mistrefs, and has too good an opinion of me to think I should be pleaSed with Such fenfeleSs homage. In short, in Spite of his humility, his love was incapable of blinding him So far as to make him forget that I was a very woman still, a being of the (ame Species with himfelf, and therefore he neither debafed himfelf, nor attempted to pleafe me with flattering praifes.
After all, I am terribly afraid that I shall be unable to give you any tolerable idea
iof the jcondufion of this affefUng feene. The
dreadful
*«
f
. ..
-j .
/ • ?


Felicia to Charlotte. 6^
dreadful agitations, which werebeford So viSible in every feature of his face, were now instantly changed to thofe of joy; a thick cloud that covered his eyes, in a moment difperSed; they Sparkled with unuSual brightnefs, while gratitude and love, furprize and extafy, appeared in fwift Succession on his countenance, and painted there all the emotions of his heart. As defpair had before kept him filent, the contrary passion had now the fame effedl:; but as Soon as he recovered his voice, giving me a look of tender furprize and delight, O my Fe-! cried he, in a most moving tone; and then after a paufe of half a minute, O my dear Felicia; have I not offended you? Am I So happy. So exquiSitely happy, as to have obtained your esteem ? Yes, Sir, returned I, (with an affected fprightlinefs, and endeavouring at the fame time to conceal the tenderneSs of my looks by holding down my head) I have
a very great esteem for you; but not a greater than I am pcrfuaded you will always deferve. But come, (added I with a figh, which for my life I could not conceal) let us go to my aunt j this conversation grows too tender. Here I arofe without waiting for an an-
f
Swer, while he followed me, at the fame time begging my pardon, and faying he had forgot
to
ro
Felicia to Charlotte
A
to tell me, that my aunt, feeing him go into the garden, deSired him to let me know that she had Something to Say to me, which she fancied would not be disagreeable. This news put me in mind of the letter he had mentioned, and therefore fearing she might think me long, and perhaps from Some fufpicion at Seeing us together, I defired him to make hade before, and tell her I was coming; but 1 had no Sooner made this request, than I stumbled at the handle of a roller wshich reached to the border of the path, when feizing my hand to help me, (tho’ I was in no danger of a fall) he fqueezed it with an air of tendernefs, and without feem-ing to know what he did. Suddenly pressed it to his bofom ; giving me a look at the Same time So inexpressibly foft and moving, that I could not help being extremely affeCfed by it; and indeed my cheeks were immediately covered with a blush, nor could I foibear giving a Sigh,
tho’ I endeavoured all along to conceal theSe proofs of my fenSibility. But the moment he took my hand from his breast, confounded at this fuddeii impuife of passion, which 1 believe would not permit him to think of what he did, he gave me a look which Teemed to alk for-
s
givenefs, and trembling held my fingers with a fearful eafy timidity; but finding I feemed not
to
FsLICIA to CriARtOTTE
71
to observe him, and that 1 tlifcovered no marks of refentment, joy again appeared in his looks,
and'he condudled me in the Same manner to
/
the houfe, w;th an air of extafy and delight. Nor, indeed, was I lefs happy than he; I eafily comprehended the Source of every pleaSmg im»-pulfe, and could with the fame fatisfadlion have preiTed his hand too, had not the laws of prudence and modeft referve forbid it.'
It is well the prude I mentioned to you in one of my former letters, is not to fee this ; for thefe laft lines would have made her lofe all her patience: but Surely it can be no crime to acfi: frc'rn nature, when virtue is our rule ; and I am Sure it is none frankly to confefs the innocent transports of our hearts to a friend. But if thefe natural fenfations v/ere indeed criminal, they foon Suffered a shock that gave me no little pain.
We entered the houfe with our minds Silied with all the Soothing ideas that could flow from a concourfe of the most delightful thousz;hts» when he let go rny hand, and walked in before me ; but my aunt no Sooner faw’ n.e, than she cried out wish an air that ducovered her own fatisfadlion, and, at the fame time, let me fee that she was pleafed at thinking it in her
p©wer to contribute to mine; come, my dear,
faid
72
Felicia to Charlotte.
Said she, I wish you joy. Here 'Amelia and Polly paid me the Same compliment, and, at the Same instant, came running, in a friendly transport, to embrace me; when, at last, putting an end to their caresses, filled with an eager curioljty. Why do you wish me joy. Madam ? cried I, to my aunt; pray'explain your-felf; have you a letter from London ? Yes, child, returned she, in an extafy, and your father tells me, that your uncle in the East-Indies has left you no lefs a fum than io,oooI. How ! added she, are you not pleafed with the news ! are there no charms in being a rich heirefs! what an extravagant fortune are you like to have !—I now put on a forced fmile, to prevent my giving her the mortification of
4
feeing how coldly I received what she with reafon imagined fuch a fubje^l of joy. And indeed I could not have behaved otherwise without betraying the dearest Secrets of my heart. At the mention of io,oool. I had been unable to difguife that thoughtfulnefs, which was fuddenly fpread over my face.—A painful thoughtfulnefs that was caufed by the refledli-on, had it but been Lucius that he had bestowed it upon, O then I might have had a better profpe6t of being happy! Can I receive any
fatisfa^ion from a.circumstance that widens
still
Felicia to Charlotte.
n
still faither the distance between him and nae h Here casting my eyes upon him, I found still greater reaSon to be filled ;«vith diflike at this painful Iplendid acquifitioi^ ; he stood w'ich his face towards me, leaning upon the back of a chair; his eyes were cast down with a dejedl-ed confufion, then lifting them up to the del* ing with an air of defpjiir, I perceived his face pale, a tear rolling down his cheeks, which he endeavoured to conceal, by hastily pulling out his hankerchief, and walking to the door ; when, having staid there a minute to recover himfelf, he Suddenly took leave to return home.
What various, what strong, what cruel
A
emotions was I now obliged to conceal ? But this was not all, I was constrained to assume a gay appearance. Torturing deceit! I never felt a more painful fituation, nor ever Sure was an innocent difguife accompanied with Such
I made thefe observations on Lucius’s behaviour, while I Seemed to be reading the letter which mv aunt had given me, and tho’ I began it again as Soon as he left us, I read it over without knowing a word it contained, except my being assured that what my aunt had told was but too true.
You now fee, ray dear, what reafoii I have to be dissatisfied with what you have esteemed
Vol. I.	E	a
cruel angmlh.

)
74
Felicia to Charlotte.
a Subje£l of joy. Vain are all the proSpe<sts'
of advantage wc fondly flatter ourfelves with
from the acquisition of wealth, the alluring
profpefts of gay magnificence, the Splendid
appearances of ostentatious grandeur, while
a thoufand thwarting and controuling acci-
dents can damp our highest and most railed
expectations, and change the very objeCts of our delight into the most painful difquiets, the bitterest Sources of difcontent and trouble.
But I find I am running on in a reflection.
which, if I was to indulge it, might carry me
to a tedious length; I shall therefore break off

in time, and conclude with defiring you. Ma-
dam, to form an idea, if you can, of that af-
fedion with which I Subscribe mvSelf,
Tour JincereJi friend^
Felicia.
LET T E R VIL
Dear Madam,
T
'HE interest you take in the unhappy
Situation of Lucius’s affairs, and your
obliging concern for the oppofition you fear
illy father will make to my happineSs, are Such
endearing


Felicia to Charlotte.
75
endearing proofs of your friendship, that I could not read your last letter without feeling my breast glow with the most charming mixture of delight and affedlion; and indeed what higher fatisfa£lion can we feel than that which naturally Springs from the approbation of a friend in an affair So tender, and So peculiarly interesting as that on which we fancy all our happinefs is founded. Tlie very passion you approve, is obliged to return the obligation; and it does fo in the most effedlual manner, by transferring Some of its tender feelings to the perSon who thus Sympathizes in its dearest fcnfations.
In Spite of the improbability of my father^s-ever being brought to approve our mutual af-feffion, I could not think of lostng Lucius, and banishing all thoughts of our future felicity, without a very painful astlidlion. I was willing to fee him still, tho’ I ought rather to have avoided his fight as much as possible, fince his company could be of no other Service, than to strengthen a passion, too deeply rooted in my heart. The admonitions of reafon were of little effedi; I was not difpofed to listen to them; a more prevailing impulfe made me long to fee him ; and not hearing’ from him for four tedious days, I wished with the
E 2	greatest
76
Felicia to Charlotte;
greatest ardor for an opportunity of letting him know, that the new addition to my fortune had not made me lefs worthy of his esteem. This I fancied I ought to do in justice to my* Self, and form’d abundance of plauSible reafons, which made it appear abfolutely necessary that I should thus Set my own charadter in a true light. After the hopes I have already given
him. Said I to myfelf, can I Suffer him to continue in an error So injurious to my tendernefs, and even to my reputation too, as to think me of a foul fo fordid, as to be puffed up with the advantages of fupei ior wealth; to think I can retradi the encouragement I have given him,
f ^
and to believe, that elated with pride, I can liow regard him with an air of Superiority and
i
.contempt ? Nq, I can’t bear that my dear Lucius should entertain an opinion of me which I fo little deferve ; he shall know that if we must be Separated, it is not my choice but a cruel force shat renders it necessary. He shall know that I am still the fame, shat l am still as fenSible of his merit as ever, and that were I at my own difpofal, not all the .riches of the univerfe could bribe me to entertain a thought fatal to his peace and bappinefs. But 1 how, faid I, recolledling myfelf, shall I hav9
ian opportunity of .undeceiving shim ? Poes
sh^

_y**:^*'
FitlCTA TO Charlotts.
77
my own, him. What
he not deprive me of the power of doing my-felfjuflice ? His fears prevent my giving hint the faiisfa£lion of making him thofe assurances, which, if I may judge of his tendernefs by
would be highly agreeable to then shall I do ? Shall I write ?—No ; I can never conSent to that; ifc would be too forward, and difcover too great a fondnefs, for me to make the first advances. Suppofe I write to Marilla, and let her know the struggle of contending passions, which fill my mind with fuch a multitude of various fo-licitudes, and tender perplexities. Would not that be the fame as writing to him, Since she would doubtlefs shew him her letter ? But fup-pofel defire her to keep it a fecret, what then will he be the better for it ? he will still be as ignorant of my thoughts as ever; well then, it will be to no purpofe to write at all., Here I fixed, and refolvest to leave him ignorant of all that I defired he should know, till a favourable opportunity ostered, that would permit me to difcover my Sentiments in a lefs exceptionable manner ; and I did not doubt but my aunt’s friendship for him would foon. lay before me an occafion of doing it, fince she was' too much pleafcd with his company and Ma-rilla’s, to difpenfe with their frequently giving
E3
her

Felicia to Charlotte.'
her the Satisfaction of enjoying their conversation.
These reflections I made in my chamber, when having at lall reSolved to arm myfelf with patience, I went down, and converfed widi'Anielia for fume minutes; but finding a tender melancholy grew upon my Spirits, I fought for an opportunity of indulging it. And indeed when we are in this diSpoSition, the company of the most agreeable friends be-.comes burthenfome: I therefore gave her the ,ilip, and retired into the fields to indulge at ;largc the Soothing SoftneSs of my own ideas.
You fmile, my dear Charlotte, at feeing me become Such an unfociable creature, as ter 'f)refer my own company to that of a friend. What a strange thing is love 1 but tho’ I am grown infinitely fond of talking to myfelf, and Wallcing under the shady covert of oaks and dms, yet I am not fo perfect a lover as to hold a difeourfe with thefe inanimate beings; nor have I ever had the least inclination to carve the name of Lucius upon their barks. I am not yet arrived to that degree of mad-nefs ; nor indeed have I obferved, in any of iny rambles, any fuch lasting marks of my lover’s extravagance.
o
I HAD not long enjoyed my retirement,
when
Felicia to Charlotte.^

when I Saw a man crossing the neighbouring fields with precipitation; he at last came up* to me, and with abundance of aukward Scrapes, after having aflced my name, gave me a letter, and immediately retired. As foon as he was gone, I cast my eyes around to See if any body observed me; and full of a curiofity, which would not Suffer me to stay till I got to my chamber. Seated my Self upon a bank of turf at the foot of a shady tree, which Sufficiently concealed me, when hastily breaking open the letter, I had the Satisfaction of feeing that it came fropi my dear Lucius : how tender and generous were his Sentiments ! how affectionate !—-but the confidence which Subfists between us, gives you a right to See the letter it-felf. I will therefore transcribe it; and l am. Sure if you have the least idea of my af-feCtion for this amiable youth, you wist not be Surprised, if I declare that I was charm’d with it. But without any farther preamble, I found it as follows;
Madam,
“ TT is with the utmost confufion that! re-
“ jL sseCI upon your being a witneSs of the
“ disorder I discovered at your aunt’s, at what
“ ©uaht rather to be a fubjeCl of joy. My
E 4	hand
\
to
Felicia to Charlotte.

C(
“ hand trembles while I attempt to apologize
“ for mv behaviour. What words can I make
*
uSe of to difcover the fincerity, the ardour, the tender delicacy of my passion, when 1 have “ given you Such reafon to believe that it is the bafest, the most mean, and felfifh ? “ When I have given you Such caufe to think, “ that I have lost in myfelf, in the mean con-“ ssderation of my own happinefs, the tender regard which 1 ought to have for yours ? But, O conssder the towering hopes to which “ you had railed me I ConSider the charming, ** the extatic flood of joy, which in a full tide “ of transporting rapture railed me above my^ “ felf, and Seemed to promiSe a felicity vastly “ beyond what rtiy vainest thoughts could have aSpired to. Think but of the delight “that .must Swell my heart, at being raiSed “ from the most gloomy deSpair of timorous ** love, to the unexpedled extafy of Seeing my fears vanish : of experiencing all the raptur-“ ous Sweets of the most charming passion: ** all the joy that could flow from the most “ exquiSite goodneSs, the most endearing con-“ deScenSion: and then if it be possible, do but “ think of what I must feel, at finding, in “one moment, nry high'wrought felicity
“ overturned,
Felicia to Charlottr
Sr
overturned, and myfelf thrown down from. “ the eminence of my afpiring joys.,
“ Forgive, dear Madam, my endeavour-ing thus to extenuate a behaviour, v/hicb ^‘•has difeovered too great a regard for my “ happincSs, too, little for your’s. If it has appeared ungenerous and mercenary, nothing, “ but Surprize can excufe it, and nothing but “ furprife could make me in this cafe guilty of a conduct that makes it necefla'y for me to «be g pardon. I have now Conquered myfelf,, and Sincerely congratulate you with the rest of your friends, while, with a heart over-“ flowing with your felicity, I forget my own' miseries. But why do I mention mifery f I shall have none while you arc blelTed your happinefs shall be mine too. All mjp fatisfaffion and delight shall Spring from the*
pleaSing contemplation of yours. What a-delightful Source of the noblest joy ! I lofe*
the too prefumptuous title of your lover inw
that of your friend, and may I in that cha-
“ racier have the Sweet, the dear fatisfa<stion<
“ of feeing yoiv as lastingly happy, as my?
“ fondest wishes would make you. May your
virtue, with aU thofe numberlefs,. thofe-
namelefs graces, which make even that and-; religion appear with diviner eha^rms, giv-e-
E 5	^ yoiii
(C
C(

(C


Felicia to Charlotte,
‘ you all thoSe pure and noble delights, which ‘ it is not in the power of wealth to bestow, ‘ and may both together render you the hap-‘ piest of mortals.
“ But whither would my tender imagina-‘ tion carry me ? I could dwell for ever on this delightful fubjetst. My heart, warm’d with your dear idea, would endeavour to make you fenstble of what it feels for you. But how vast a disproportion is there be-‘ tween the fwell of melting thought, and the flatnefs of words j they were formed to convey mere vulgar conceptions, or at most emotions lefs strong and affecting j I therefore want a thoufand nameleSs epithets to exprefs the force of my friendship, the delightful impulfes of my foul. But think not, dear Madam, that I have only gained a victory over a weak and feeble passion. Did you know with what a vast excels I have loved, you might perhaps form Some idea of that painful struggle it has cost me to conquer the most ardent affe<stion, and reduce it to the disinterested standard, of that more Sober one, which becomes a friend. But I beg pardon for my impertinence, which I am afraid has bosh tired and
olSehded
Felicia to Charlotte. 8^
“ offended you, and therefore beg leave to
Subscribe myfelf,
Madam,
Tour fmcereji.,
and moji devoted friend,
Lucius.
As Soon as I had run over the above letter, a Sudden impulfe of tendernefs made me preSs it to my lips with a most pleaSing extafy ; Nay, you may laugh as much as you pleaSe; I kifs’d, I fay, the dear charaffer with a transport of delight; kifs’d the fenfelefs paper ; and
having pressed it to my heart, and Secured it,
«
in that Situation I aroSe and hasted to my chaai-
r
her, in order to perufe it more at my leafure. I there read it over Several times, but could not help restedling how much pleafure I lost by that painful awe, which prevented his uttering the melting SoftneSs of his heart when in my prefence. With what extaSy should I have heard Such tender things from his lips, especially when assisted with the moving tone ©f his voice, and the more elegant language of his expressive countenance. I should then have been all rupture. However, I at last refolved to write an anfwer, when after having blotted and Scrawled over about half a dozen
E6
sheets
u
Felicia to Charlotte.
sheets of paper without being able to pleafe mySelf, I was obliged to lay aSide my deSign.
I COULD not divest myfelf of that foftnefs which his epistle had infpired me with ; all my efforts to this purpofe proved ineffedlual. A pleaSing languor, which hung upon rriy Spirits, gavemefuch afweetlethargyof thought,asren- ; dered it impostible for me to exprefs any other Sentiments than thofe of my heart; and they were indeed too tender to be communicated, especially to a lover who wanted my father’s approbation to give a fandlion to his passion. The next morning however I was more com-pofed, and therefore wrote the following letter,
which I have not yet had an opportunity oi fending to him.
« Poor Luciu,?,
ERE I difpoSed to triumph over the weaknefs of a lover, who in humble strains of Soft complaint, lays him Self at my mercy, I should perhaps find fubjedl enough in your epistle to rally your passion, as well as your pretended victory over it. But I have at prefent no inclination to iridulge Such a favage gaiety, Since it would probably give you pain. The flow of tender fentiraerits, the delicacy of passion, which
“ makes
C
W
Felicia to Charlotte.
85

cc

“ makes you deSire that I stiould still preferve “ my esteem for youy and your disinterested “ and warm concern for my happinefs, are “ fo many proofs of your generoSity and in-“ trinfic merit, that I can’t help feeling a very fenfible pleafure every time I restecst “ upon them. Your confuSion at my good “ fortune, which I confefs I took, particular “ notice of, was too natural for me to be very much offended at it; and indeed I have rather pitied than blamed your distrefs. “ The advantages we receive from wealth, “ are as Superficial, I believe, as any we enjoy ; and while they deprive us of that Sincerity and unreferved freedom, that open-nefs of behaviour, which perfons in infe-“ rior circumstances receive from their friends, “ they strip us of the most engaging Sweets “ of life ; bleflings, which not all the luxury of incumbering magnificence and studied fplendor, not all the homage of empty ce-“ remony, and Servile Submistion, can atone “ for the want of. You fee, Sir, 1 can mo-
“ ralize like any philofopher, and you may “ postlbly flatter youffelf, that you have “ taught me this do<firine. Do fo if you pleaSe. I bwn my regard for you j and “ however romantic the Platonic friendlhip
“ you
(C

CC
S6
pEticiA TO Charlotte.
C(
cc
you propoSe may appear, I readily accept of it. Since that is all that either you or I ought to hope • for. With my Sincere re-“ Ipe<3; to my good friend, your stster, I am,
Sir,
Pours. &c.
Felicia.
How many tender and affecting Sentiments
was I here obliged to fupprels ! I was afraid
of discovering the Secrets of my heart, though
he would doubtlefs be transported to find that
I was as capable of love as himfelf, and that
he had inSpired me with all that foftneSs that
could flow from the most paflionate afFe£lion.
But to you I have discovered all my weak-
nefs, and depend upon your friendship and
good-nature to keep it an inviolabe Secret,
especially from my father, whoSe goodnefi I %
am reSolved never to abufe by the least a£l of disobedience. I am, dear Charlotte, in Spite of love, or any other rival passion,
Moji ftneerely Tour’s^
Felicia,
LET-
Fflicia to Charlotte.
87
LETTER VIII.
Madam,
TH E Satisfa£Uon you dlfcCvered, at the
little conversation* piece I gave you Some account of, in one of my former letters, makes me glad of an opportunity to vary my fubjedl, and leave the tender tale of love for a theme which even one of your gay difposs-tion, will, I am Sure, think equally entertaining and instructive.
The day after I Sent you my last, we had the pleafure of receiving a viSit from Mr. Stevens, the facetious old gentleman, whole character you are pretty well acquainted with. The afternoon was Spent very agreeably; but before he took leave, my aunt, who still takes all imaginable pains to contribute to tny Satisfaction, by diverstfying my amufements, pro-pofed our making a stiort excurston the next day to a nobleman’s feat, at no great distance from us. I have obferved. Said she. Smiling, that my niece appears very much delighted with this part of the country ; she feems fond of agreeable landfcapes, and my destre of retaining her here as long as possible, makes me willing to gratify this taste, by shewing her
Such
58
Felicia to Charlotte,
Such as I don’t doubt but she will think both Surprizing and agreeable. Will you, Sir, contribute to her fatisfa£Hon and ours, by giving us your company to-morrow. We
j	*
are apt to be weary in the company of thoSe we daily converfe with ; but a friend of your facetious turn will enliven our converfation, and find us confiaat matter for. exercifinaj our
o
wit, and rendering us even more agreeable to ourfelves, Mr. Stevens' replied to this compliment in a very handfome manner ; and at the fame time added greatly to the pleafure f had in profoeci, by faying, that if it would not be disagreeable, he would increafe our number by bringing Lucius, and another
friend wdth him, whofe company he fancied
*
would make our fatisfacstion complete. When my aunt replied for us all, that we gladly accepted his offer, and that she was Sure the gentleman’s being his friend, would he a fuf-ficient recommendation to us.
The next day before dinner w'e had the pleafure of Seeing our old friend return, accompanied by a young clergyman his relation, who had just finished his studies at Cambridge, and the engaging Lucius. Our repast was short, and that being over, we fet out in two-coaches, Mr. Stevens’s, and my aunt’s—But
i
Felicia to Charlotte.

T shall not attempt to give a particular description of all the new and uncommon proS-pe<sts which difcover themSelves in this delightful part of the country, where nature with a liberal hand pours out her favours, and with a profusion of frolic bounty. Spreads a wildneSs equally extravagant and pleaSing. I paSs over the beautiful landscapes we drove thro’ in this agreeable tour, for no other rea-Son than becauSe the view I had of them was too Sudden to render me capable of deferibing them j befides, were it poshble for me to do
it to advantage, their being So perfe<511y extraordinary might refledl a little upon my veracity, and make you imagine that my descriptions were too uncommon to have any real existence in nature.
Are you not Surprised now, my dear Charlotte, that I can all this while forbear Speaking of my dear Lucius, Since there is certainly a very exquiSite pleafure in talking of the man we love : but the reaSon of my not mentioning him was, that as he went in the other •coach he could only give me mow and then a glance, which Seemed to expreSs a trouble-Some kind of diffidence and fuSpence, which I fancied aroSe from his longing to know what reception I gave his letter, and a fear lest he
had
go
Felicia to Charlotte.'
had inferred any thing in it that had offended me; At last, however, arriving at the park of my Lord M***, we by common confent agreed to walk to the houfe. As Soon as I stepped out of the coach, I could not help being extremely delighted with the agreeable Scene which lay before us, and which I can’t, for my life, help giving you Some defcription of. Here the intermixture of dufky groves, and lightSome plains; of woods impervious to the rays of the Sun, which now Spread his cheating beams around us, and the agreeable openings which discovered the bounding deer flying to the covert of the shady thicket, presented a landscape the most pleaSingly rural, and worthy the attention of the most curious observer; while we found ourfelves at the entrance of a grand walk, which extending to a prodigious length, grew infenfibly narrower, till cloSing in perfpediive, the visto Seemed lost in the grove, out of which arofe, as if by enchantment, Several lofty stone turrets, which I afterwards found were part of a magnifi-eent Gothic edifice, built in a most extraordinary taste. In short, the whole Scene, notwithstanding its being very delightful, had Such a romantic appearance, that for fome
minutes I could think of nothing but castles
and
Felicia to Charlotte.
91
and embowering shades, ariSing Spontaneoufly to the charms of muSic; of the work of fairies, and the power of necromancy.
The company was no Sooner joined, than after Some compliments from the gentlemen in the other coach, and their deSiring to know my opinion of the tour we had taken, we fell infenSibly into moralizing on the various beauties of nature, and comparing the natural conne6Iion there is between the exterior arrangeme;its of bodies, wh'ch are formed to delight odr fenfes, and the proportions of internal beauty: the propriety of afition, and the native amiablenefs of an honest, generous, and upright mind. That as nature had carefully formed the various fenfes with different powers, adapted to convey delight to the foul, from the multitude of outward beings which Surround us; fo she had been no lefs careful in forming the mind with tastes and paffions for dire<fiing its purfuit to objecls capable of railing it to the fublimest pleasures ; while thoSe pleaSures not only refult from its purity, but are the very means of exalting it to still higher degrees of perfedlion and happinefs. What a delightful fenfation does this azure dome give the eye ! Said Lucius, with an air extremely graceful; could
the
92
Felicia to CharlotteT
/
the earth be covered with a more beautiful ceiling, or a finer canopy ? what a pleaSing verdure clothes the ground, while it meets the limits of the high arch of heaven with intermingling shades ? a beautiful carpet for man and beast ! But all lovely as this Scene appears, how much does it fall short of the nobler landfcape of the mind ! The honest man, whenever he pleaSes to review his actions, and contemplate the fituation of his heart, perceives a pleaSing extafy arifing from every instance of his integrity. He fees a Symmetry even more tranfporSingly beautiful than this of nature. A proportion and arrangement of pastions incomparably more pleafing than all the various difpoSitions of light and shade, of woods and pasture, of murmuring Springs and falling torrents. HoiV vast the difference between the most lovely fcenes, which can arife from the modifications of matter in its most complete perfecstion; between the tones of the most melting and harmonious accents, and the nicer and more
■V
delicate fenfations of an approving confcience !’ An engaging instance of the divine-wifdom and benevolence, in constituting the very means of advancing the happinefs of others, the means of procuring the fublimest plea-
fures
FsticiA TO Charlotte.'
9$
fares to ourfelves! Very true, rejoined the clergyman with a Smile; but if we compare the divine congratulations of reafon, the tranquil fweetnefs, and internal Satisfaffion of the benevolent man, the patriot, the friend of mankind, with the fordid pleafure of the Successfully ambitious, the tricking knave, the abandoned debauchee, how vast, how im-menSe a disproportion shall we find in the nature of their enjoyments ! enjoyments as ■widely distant as the high-wrought pleafures of a God, and the low gratifications of the .most groveling animal. Well, but gentlemen, replied my aunt, laughing and pulling the clergyman by the .steeve, methinks you .might be So polite, notwithstanding the rapture which Seems to carry you out of your-.felves, to allow us a Small share in the conversation. 1 am of the fame opinion with you, that as reafon alone raifes the man above ;the brute. So the pleafures arifing in the mind from a reafonable.conduct, must be infinitely rfuperior to thofe-of a mere fenfualist. But ihow shall we be able to perfuade thefe degenerate mortals to believe fo ? Tho’ they have no notion of the pure enjoyments of the foul; Jtho’ they are as loft to reafon, as, the herd jthat ranges in the field, or wallows in the
stye;

94
Felicia to Charlotte.
stye; and in short, tho’ Some of them have hardly any thing of the man, but the outward shape; yet they still assert the dignity of their nature, and would think it an affront to be put upon a level with their brethren of the grinning tribe, tho’ their views, their de-Sires, their gratifications appear to be the Same, Your obfervation is very just, Madam, returned the clergyman ; for it is not the external form, which . constitutes the man j brutes differ in shape, and were there any particular fpecies of them found out with features, proportions and complexions exa<stly refembling ours, we should without hefitation conSider them only as mere animals, while they wanted thofe noble qualifications of the mind, reafon and judgment. Man (the lowest order of rational beings) is only raifed above them by his intelledlual faculties; by a light capable of diredling his purfuit, and railing him to the fublimest elevation of paf-fion and Sentiment. Strip him of this, or which is much the fame to him, let it lie clouded and obfcured, what is he but a groveling animal, without any of the real and distinguishing perfedfions of human nature. There is indeed this difference in the cafe, that man is a brute by choice, they by necessity :
\
Felicia to Charlotte,’’
95
ceffity: he voluntarily prostitutes the noble powers of the foul, stnks below the dignity of his being, and prefers the pleafures of a mere animal, to the manly entertainments of rea-fon, the Sublime raptures of an angel. How shocked are we at the birth of a monster, especially if it has a likenefs in any of its features to one of thofe creatures, whom we ustly regard as fo much below us. We can’t here bear the least refemblance of the brute. Even the most bloody, the most hardened villain is struck with horror at this external depravity in one of his own off-Spring, and Sickens at the Sight; yet at the Same time he can Support the more monstrous disproportion of his own corrupt and disordered appetites. Really, replied Amelia, v:ith a Sprightly air, I think the irrational world are but little obliged to you for your comparifons: were they able to Speak for themfelves, they might very justly tell you, that they have no thoughts of luxury, pride, ambition, avarice, and the long train of enormities pradifed by mankind. The most Savage and voracious animal never kills to encreaSe his wealth, or to open a way’to grandeur. He stays to fa-stisfy his hunger, or in a natural defence of
his
96
Felicia to Charlotte.’
his own life, or of thofe whom he is prompted by instindl to preferve.
Lucius, perhaps influenced by an Impulfe of benevolence, which would not fufFer him to hear this strong reprefentation of the vices of mankind, without feeling Some uneaflnefs, preferved all this while a profound Silence; but finding they had done, he was going to
make a reply, when I prevented him, by fay-jug, You were pleaSed, Sir, Some time ago to vindicate mankind, from the charge of a natural depravity and propen Sion to vice ; and I must confefs, that I was charmed with your reafoning, thovigh what I have now heard, makes me a little fufpecst it. You know, you endeavoured to prove from experience, that fo far from having any natural impulfe to lead us on to vice, we had a moral fenSe implanted in the mind, diredlly calculated to Spur us on to the most amiable heights of virtue j but how is this confistent with the picture that has been just given, in which, perhaps, the far greatest part of mankind is included ? I freely confefs, that your fentiments of the moral fenfe made fuch an impreflion upon my mind, that I have confidered it as a very favourite opinion, and therefore have
waited
Fflicia to Charlotte.
97
waited all this while in expectation of its being brought into the Subject, with which it Seems to have Some conne6lion; but instead of that, reafon alone has been mentioned; though I imagined, that thofc inward impulfes to virtuous a£lions fuperSeded the ufe of it. But both I find are insufficient for the happineSs of mankind, Since there is undoubtedly more vice than virtue in the world. It must be acknowledged, MiSs, Said Lucius, that there is too much reaSon for the diSagreeable representation that has been made of a general depravity. The most Sacred engagements are daily vio., lated ; friendstiip and love, the most endearing bonds of Society, are made a cloak to perpetrate the most execrable villanies, the ruin of innocence, the destrudtion of the unSuSpebling and honest man. The traitor to his country ast’umes the honourable name of the patriot, and pretends to be struggling for liberty, while he is only paving the way to greatneSs, in order to riot in the Spoils of his injured fellow-fubje<5ts. In short, whole orders and degrees of men Seem infedled with the dreadful contagion of vice, and a more than brutal diffo-luteneSs of manners. A dreadful Spetstacle indeed! a shocking depravity that must fill
F	every


9*
Felicia to Charlotte
every generous mind with an affedlionate pity and concern! But let us leave this gloomy, this disagreeable fubjedl, and with hearts warmed with a love of truth and virtue, impartially enquire if vice is really fo prevalent, as upon a Superficial view it appears to be; by which means, I hope you will be convinced, that virtue reigns more univerfally than vice, and that by the constitution of nature, mankind have, even in this imperfe(st state, more real, more exquiSite happinefs than mi-fery. An estimate of the utmost confequence both to the honour of human nature, and to demonstrate the wifdom and benevolence of that moral being, who is the father of the human foul, and the invariable, inexhaustible Source of the most perfetst and complete good-
neSs.
In order then to form a right judgment of mankind, not the band of ruffians, not the public or private stews, not the gloomy dungeon filled with guilty wretchednefs ; but mankind in general must be the fubjeist of our examination. We must extend our views, and glance upon the virtues and vices of all the known world; and here we shall find the
greatest reafon for an univerSal benevolence;
we
Felicia to Charlotte.
99
we shall fee with pleaSure a noble fimplicify of manners, and an integrity of heart, delightfully confpicuous amidit the barbarifm of ignorance, the Superstition of wild uncultivated nations. We shall fee the fame love of their country, the fame tender fenSibilities of friendship, the fame natural affedlion, the Same reciprocal endearing offices of Social life, among the far distant unpolished Savages, as among the polite and learned Europeans. Nature even here works strongly; virtue and vice have names in all languages, and fo deeply is the image of the Deity impressed upon universal nature, that every rational being has, in general the fame fenfe of an obligation, the fame delightful fenfations arissng from the consideration of the native and intrinSic excellence of a£fions benesscient, disinterested and generous.
Let us next conssder if the ufual manner of forming a judgment of private adlions be con-ssstent with truth and equity. While the mind, like the eye, can only glance on the Surface of things, we can have but a very narrow view of the Springs and motives which actuate even our dearest friends, and most inti-
matf acquaintance. How incapablethenarewe
F 2	to
100
Felicia to Charlotte
to form a juft opinion of the adlions of thofe whofe passions, whofe inclinations and peculiar turn of mind, we are entirely unacquainted with ? We are free in our cenfures; we precipitately blame the condudl of others; yet, however certain we may think the j udgment is,which we pafs upon their condudi, a little time often convinces us, that our concluSion was formed jiierely upon fallacious appearances; and that we judged of the motive, not from the adlion it was really formed to produce, but from the falfe and deceitful light it appeared in to us. A consideration that ftiould kill at once all difpo-Sition to calumny and cenforioufnefs,the black-eft and most ignominious of all vices. Thus it frequently happens, that thofe a£lions which,
3t first view, feem vicious, upon a more ftridl examination, appear to be firidily virtuous; and from this experience of the erroneoufnefs of our judgments, and that the truth of the cafe, when difcovered, generally leans to th Side of virtue, it will not hire be thought un-reafonable to conclude that it is generally So in other instances ; and that if the real fpring and motive to adtion was confidered, virtue would preponderate, and her votaries be even more numerous than the votaries of vice.
The
C%
Felicia to Charlotte.’
lOI
The moral fenSe, Madam, is a taste for what is amiable ; that distinguishing faculty of
the mind which makes us feef
SenSibly
and strongly feef—the harmony and difeord of a£lions. It is the touchy the ear of the foul ; while reafon is the eye to regulate the exertions of this Sympathetic faculty. The moral fenSe feels instantaneoufly without waiting for the stow delibetadon of the rational powers, to know if it ought to do fo : while reafon is given us to reign Supreme, to examine the fitnefs of the objc6l by which we are intendered, and to regulate in what manner we must exert our benevolent offices, fo as best to render our endeavours Subservient to the general good and happineSs. Thus reafon, like a mild and gracious prince, is to dire£l the will, and give jaws to the passions and appetites, in Such a manner as not only to promote the general interest and felicity of the mind it inhabits; but to diffuSe its friendly and benign influences to all its fellow minds: and when this is the cafe, we act in conformity to the most perfeist virtue. On the contrary, vice is nothing elSe but a misapplication, and abufe of Some right and laudable affections; fo evident is it, with> out arguing from the perfections of the Deity,
F 3	that
102
Felicia to Charlotte.
I
that he has not formed any of his creatures with a vicious biaSs and propenfity.
Here the clergyman Seeing Lucius make a paufe, rejoined : The in ention ought always to be the rule of our judgment on the condudl of oihers ; for in this state of imperfection and disticulty, we are Sometimes unable to reduce our wills, however regular, into proper aCIion ; and indeed the event does but felddih correspond with our difpoSitions. We ought not therefore to determine a character vicious from one or two bad aClions; nor from the comparatively few abandoned wretches, to pronounce human nature in general abandoned. But by what means are we able to judge of the intention, or to fearch into the Secret Springs of ac-
t
tion ? We can’t take in half thofe minute cir-cum stances that attend them, the least of which might possibly be SufEcient to alter our opinion: So far from this, we judge, not according to the temper andfituation of theperSon cenfured, but from our own particular fenSe of things. Thus, to a generous open mind, a little parst-mony may appear as a mark of a narrow con-traded fpirit i but upon examination into the perfon’s circumstances it will be found, perhaps, to be nothing more than a prudent con-
cirn
Felicia to Charlotte.'
103
cern for the welfare and Support of his family, and fofar from being ablemifh on his virtuous chaiadler, that it maybe an cffe<st of that virtue which it Seems to contradiist. But farther to illustrate this engaging truth, which feemt absolutely necessary to the peace and fatisfa£H-onof every benevolent andcompassionate mind, let us conssder that in this state of imperfedfi-on, we are no more capable of arriving at a perfe<fiion in vice, than we are of virtue. The most abandoned of our Species, have Some a-miable qualities which it is impossible for them to erafe; virtue has still Some engaging charms; nor is it possible for any man of common fenSc not to feel the force of its attraSlive beauties ; therefore if deceived by falfe appearances and delussve profpe£ls of prefent pleafure, they rebel in one instance, there are others in which they venerate her Sacred laws.
Be Sincere now, my dear Charlotte, and %
confefs that I have wearied you with the repetition of this grave conversation. A variety of other remarks were made upon the fame fubjests, which entertained us till we arrived at the houfe ; but in pity to you and myfelf, I fhall make haste to conclude, and only Say, that we were entertained with much politeneSs
F4
by
104
Felicia to Charlotte,
by my Lord; when having drank tea, we drove home, highly delighted with our agreeable excursion; but there is one particular that I ought not to forget to mention, and that is, that before I took leave of Lucius I found an opportunity to give him my letter. He received it with an air of astonishment and con-fuSion, imagining, I believe, that it was his own I returned j but a Sudden glance of his eye, in a moment difeovered his mistake, when his countenance changed from a troubled pale-ilefs to a glowing red. He had not then an opportunity of Speaking to me ; but giving me a look Sparkling with joy and Surprize, he retired in Such a manner as discovered his impatience to know the contents. I am now heartily weary; and begging you would pardon the impertinence of your friend, Subscribe my-
I'elst
Madam,
Tour mojl obliged.^
affiWionatt Friend,
Felicia,
LETTER
Felicia to Charlotte.
i©5
LETTER IX.
My dear engaging Friend,
OULD I poffibly imagine, that with a
temper So eaSy, gay and Sprightly, I fliould be able to make Such a change in your diSposstion, as I find my illneSs has occafioned ! How endearing is that tender concern, that pleaSing warmth of affe<fiion with which you interest yourSelf in my diSorder, and endeavour to Support my Spirits by Soothing Sympathies, the reviving conSolations of friendlhio !
W	A
I T is now two months Since I was Seized with a fever; and I have yet hardly strength to write to you ; but I can’t forbear making an attempt to remove your fears; by telling you as Soon as postible, that I am at last out of danger I have lately had a near profpe£t of death; but while 1 stood upon the verge of that awft/l state, that undiscovered country, “ from vi'hofe bourn no traveller returns,” I felt my mind calm and Serene, as if charm’d with the infpiring harmony of Some angelic choir ; all before me was extafy, the most transporting extafy ! raptures unutterable, delights bouiidlefs and eternal ! But my inter-
F5
valj
• -
jo6
Felicia to Charlotte.'
vals of Senfe were short, and disturb’d with pain j I was almost continually delirious; and in thefe distra6lions of mind incestantly repeated the beloved name of my dear Lucius. I gave him the tenderest epithets ; and wrapt in a fond deluston of thought, fancied he walked with me through the most delicious Scenes imagination could paint, uttering the Sofest, the most melting words; to which I replied in terms full of the Same passionate tenderneSs. The whole family were witnefles of thefe wild rovings of fancy, which can’t fail of railing Some Suspicions of what I have endeavoured to conceal with the utmost care ; tho’ none but Amelia has taken notice of it to me. But how Lucius behaved I am yet altogether unacquainted j nor durst I enquire.
I FIND, my dear Charlotte, that T must break off; a painful languor depresses my foul; my Spirits ssnk, and I am too much fatigued to proceed. If what 1 write is either unintelligible, or more than commonly incoherent, a
trembling hand and giddy head are my -excuSe;
but

, s

Felicia.TO Charlotte.
107
but however indifpoSed I am, nothing shall ex-
cuSe me from being.
Dear Madam,
Sincerely Toufs^
Felicia,
LETTER X.
Madam,
AM now able to write you a longer letter than my last ; a circumstance that gives me the highest pleafure ; So glad am I, of refuming my literary conversation with you.
As ioon as I was able to leave my room and receive company, I had a viSit from the maiden lady, Mr, Stevens’s lister, whom I shall diSguiSe under the name of Prudilla ; and indeed I had no reaSon to be offended at feeing her, stnce I might well bear with her imperti-«ence for the fake of the perfon she brought with her. Lucius, impatient for an opportunity of feeing me, which he durst not even attempt alone, for fear of giving my aunt Some
fufpicion of the interest he had in my recovery, had offered his Service to wait upon her, which
F 6	flif
io8
Felicia to Charlotte.
she accepting, gave us both the means of indulging by our mutual glances, the tender Sentiments which Swelled our boSoms. The moment he entered the room I could read in his looks, that he had a thoufand things to fay to me, only proper to be uttered in private. His countenance discovered a joy, which glow’d in every feature; but when he congratulated me upon my returning health, a Sear of faying too much, made him fay too little ; but however few his words, the air and moving tone in which he uttered them. Sufficiently expressed how much they came from his heart. Need I tell you. Madam faid he, (turning his back to my aunt, doubtlefs to prevent her read-ing his looks) that I Sympathize with the reft of your friends in their joy for your recovery ? While a ssarting tear and a glance the moft charmingly tender, made me at once interpret his meaning, and fancy that he would have faid, O my dear ! with what tranfport do I fee you again I how vastly does my ex-taly at your recovery, exceed the cold joy of thefe other friends !
Our first compliments being over, and a-bundance of questions alked concerning the
nature and progrefs pf my illneSs, Prudilla intro-
Felicia to Charlotte, 109
troduced a piece of piivate hiftory, which gave her a charming opportunity of indulging (or a few minutes her prevailing inclinations for de-tra<fiion. Have you heard the news. Ladies ? Said she, assuming an air of starch’d modesty ; really, it is fo exiraordinai v that it makes one ashamed of one’s fex. 1 o what a preposterous height of wickednefs is the world growii! Positively one is furprized to think of the imprudence of Some people. WQuld you think it ? Mifs Lucy was (I blush for the creature) Pray, Madam, faid, my aunt, explain yourfelf; what of Mifs Lucy ? Really, rejoined Prudilla, the affair is So indecent, that it is a shock to modesty but to mention it. Well Madam, Said I, rather than offend your delicacy, we
will let Mils Lucy alone, and change the fub-jedS. That is kind, my dear, returned she Smiling; she was brought to bed last night; I am Sure 1 am all of a flame now, added she,
— O Madam, cried Lucius,
and the creature---
with a dessgn to make her change the fubjedS, that modest blush becomes you incomparably. Here all the company fmiled; for Prudilla’s cheeks discovered not the least tindlure of her pretended confuSion; however, his artifice had no effedt. Really, reSumed she, bridling back
her
110
Felicia to Charlotte.
her head, and drawing up her lips, a blush does Sometimes become one mightily; which is fome recompence for the pain it gives one ; but as I was laying, the thing has the impuS
deuce to excufe herfelf by pretending---------At
this moment my phylician entered the room, and gave her the mortification of being again interrupted by his afking me Several questions;
but at last takino; a chair, she refumed a third
r O	^
time: As 1 was a faying. Madam,—Pray ladies, cry’d the phyfician, interrupting her again; may I know the fubje6l of your converfation. Yes, Sir, replied Amelia, our friend here was mentioning a circumstance relating to an unhappy lady that has been deluded, and was brought to bed last night. Very good replied he. Not So good neither, cry’d the prude in a peevish tone. The impudent stut would
excufe heifelf, by faying—---------O she would
pcrfuadc us to believe, I fuppofe, cry’d the dodtor, with a sheer, that the young gentleman, after promiSing her marriage, and Swearing a thoufand oaths to convince her of his fidelity, finding at last all his arguments prove unfuccefsful, in a fit of defpair drew his fword ; when pointing it to his bofom, he pretended
that Since she was So cruel as to distrust
%
his
Felicia to Charlotte.
Hi
his Sincerity, he would give her the last proof of the violence of his passion. Here terrified at this dreadful fight, and melting with pity, she flies upon him, stops his hand, tells him that she is convinced of his fincerity, and will give him every proof of it he can reasonably defire. He now eagerly Seizes the tender moment, presses her clofe, till she at last conSents to purchafe his life with the lofs of what ought to be infinitely dearer to her than her own. While he in the mean time laughs to find her become the dupe of his artifice ; ridicules her foolish fondnefs, that could make her think him in earnest j and in short, glories in the mbit vidory he has gained over her honour. This to be Sure was the cafe, continued he ; at least we should be charitable enough to think fo, in vindication of the poor lady.
WE all Smiled at this piece of raillery, while Prudilla discovered by her unfettled looks, that she was at a lofs to know whether she ought to difapprove or commend thi^ instance of the phySician’s vivacity; fince she could not guefs
whether it was intended to ridicule all the ex-
1
cufes that could be made in her favour, or to apologize for her condudi. But the moment he had done Speaking, Lucius rejoined with a
modest
/
II2
Felicia to Charlotte^
modest unaffcisted air : We outiht not to won-'
i- V
de/, if an artful villain can Sometimes triumph over a mind, who knowing itlelf i icapable of
-	M-"*
deceit, can hardly be brought to Iufpe61; another, especially the man she loves, of a guilt the most black and shocking to nature ; but that an honest man should be So hurried away by the favour of impetuous destie, is indeed a cafe very extraordinary, and not eafily accounted tor. Can a virtuous man be So void of reafon, fo lost to prudence and the tender delicacies of an innocent passion, as to hazard for a moment the honour and reputation of her he loves ? Will he not even distrust him-felf? Nay, fuppoSing him ever fo certain of the integrity of his own heart, are there not a variety of circumstances which may render it impostible for him to fulfil his engagements ? And must not the bare postibility of this damp even the very first idea of a too precipitate pleafure which may be So dearly bought ? The least apprehenfion of ruining she objedt of his tenderest affedlions, must Surely give him the most dreadful alarms, and fill his mind with the most dreadful fears, the most terrible con-flidls.
turn’d my aunt, that a modest lady can hear a
propofal
And is it^ot equally furpriSing, re-
Fslicia to Charlotte.
U3
propofal of this kind, without being shock’d!
without looking into the gulf of mifeiy and
ruin which lies before her 1 without trembling at the dangers which Surround her! without
imploring the divine affiftance, and refolving
to lofe her life, rather than taint her virtue, or
Surrender her honour upon the fairest pro-
mises ! but alas ! we frequently fee people acst
without thought, and unintimidated by the mi-
fery of thofe, who have fallen into the fame Snare, precipitately rush upon their own de-
strudtion. A promife of marriage is the ufual
bate ; but this unhappy lady’s story ought to convince every one, that even in the nearest profpedl of that union; it is the highest degree
of folly and madnefs, to drop the guard of in-
nocence, and allow her intended hushand liber-
ties inconststent with decency, and the reServe
of a modest prudence.
It is a great misfortune, rejoin’d Lucius
with an air of candor, that in this cafe, a falfe
step (which may possibly proceed from no-
thing more than imprudence, or a too eafy confidence) should be attended with fuch
dreadful confequences with refpe6b to the ladies : and one a£Iion throw an indeliable
stain on the fairest charaeffer ; while another
perfon of an infinitely worfe difpolition.
may
. ►
\ >
114
Felicia to Charlotte;
may indulge the rancour of her heart in Sporting with the honour and reputation of thoufands. MifsLucy is a lady poflefied of So many virtues, that if the cafe required it, every one, 1 think, would be glad of feeing reafon to believe her lefs criminal than she may appear at first view; but if I am not miSmlormed, there is no need of wishing for reafons to excuSe her condudl. A variety of extraordinary circumstances are in her favour : her modesty and virtue have stood the Severest shock; and if it be thought that she has here lost all pretenfions to them, it ought to be confidered too, that the day she forfeited them, appeared to her, and to all her friends, the last of her freedom. The next day was to have given him that right to her perfon which love, a reciprocal love, had constituted long before. She was his by obligations the
obligations that can only be confirmed and rendered legal, by the assistance of the magistrate or priest. They thought themfelves Secure in each others fidelity j they fancied nothing could prevent the happy ceremony from being folemniaed ; but, alas I life itfelf is precarious; that very night he was Seized with a malignant fever, which tho’ it carried him off in a few days, in all his
intervals
most facred and binding
Felicia to Charlotte.’
115
intervals of fenie he acknowledg’d his engagements, and even in his last moments he called her his wife, and confirmed the right he had given her in his will, to pofiefs his eflate, by frequently expressing'hi« defire of having it faithfully executed. How ! cried Prudilla, in a lofty tone of authority, do you pretend to vindicate the creature ? If Ihe has loft her reputation, it is no more than ste deferves. I would have no mercy on Such impudent confident things. Can any punishment be great enough for the fluts who are fuch a difgrace to the modefty of our fex ? They should be all burnt alive, or hang’d at leaft.———Hold, Madam, replied my aunt, haftily interrupting her, indeed you are too Severe. It muft be confefs’d indeed, that both she and her lover were much too blame : they were certainly guilty of the higheft degree of imprudence and folly ; but you ought to conSider too, that virtue does not comift in the lofs of humanity and good manners. I was prefent when the young gentleman expired, and was witnefs of a Scene that I shall never forget a.s long as I live. The very remembrance brings tears to my eyes. A few minutes before he breathed his last, his Senfes, which had been long disturbed.
ii6
Felicia to Charlotte^'
turbed, returned, when calling for his dear wife, Lucy, who Sat near the bed drown’d in grief, and fatigued with her constant watching, started from her Silent fadnefs, while her impatience to know what he had to fay, fufpend-ed for a moment the falling tear. He pressed her in his weak and trembling arms, and endeavour'd in the most endearins: manner to

Enable her to Support his lofs; Said the kindest, the most astedting things; till at last his countenance brightening into a placid ferenity, he listed up his eyes to heaven, and still pref-stng her hand. Seemed to make her the fubjedt of Some ardent petition ; but he had no Sooner ssnithed his Silent ejaculations, than fixing a most tender look upon her, he cried. Adieu, my Lucy, my wife; when {hutting his eyes,
he funk upon the pillow and expired,--------But
what words can expreSs the unhappy Lucy’s defpair ? She fainted away upon his lifeleSs body ; her check lay upon his, and equalled the mortal palenefs of that it preffed. I assisted in carrying her out of the room, and recovering her fenfes ; but they no Sooner returned, than (fad essedi of themost violent grief!) her tears, her incessant tears were stopped; and
file gave way to a Silent Sober melancholy,
infinitely'
Felicia to Charlotte.
I IT
infinitely more terrible than the strongest impulses of raging defpair. Alas ! cried Lucius (in a tone that plainly expressed the compassionate diSpofition of his heart) how much is this poor lady to be: pitied ! but would not her dif-trefs, her shame, her infamy have been greater, if her grief had Sprung from his infidelity rather than his death ? She nowjuftly laments a man eyery way worthy of her esteem and affedlion ; his memory is still dear to her ; his yirtues are a pleaSing fubjedl of melancholy delight, and Soothing pain. But with what agonies of rage, vexation, and madnefs, would she have Sustained the shock of finding the man falSe on whofe fidelity she had repofed her honour I with what mortifying inquietudes would she find herfelf contemned by him she loved ! yet the guilt would in fact be his; the folly and imprudence hers. Confeious of the purity of an innocent heart, her Severest reproaches must fall upon the guilty villain, the barbarous betrayer of her peace and happi-nefs, and not immediately on herfelf. Yet how vastly different must be the refle6tions of a lady in thefe circumstances, from thoSe of the felf-deteited prostitute, the abandon’d wretch, who from avarice, ambition, or guilty
defire.
iiS
Felicia to Charlotte;
fire, covers herSelfwith eternal infamy and reproach ; with irreparable lofs of honour j with
the averSion of all the wife and good ; with the Silent, but infinitely more dreadful upbraid-
ings of a giiiity confcience ; the horrors of re-morfe, and that agonizing dread which accompanies a confcioufhefs of the divine dif-
pleafure, doubly terrible in all her views of futurity ! What Superlative wretchednefs !
Can imagination paint any diftreSs equal to that which thus ariSes from the racking perturbation of a mind ashamed of itfelf ? or can all the boarted advantages of wealth, pride, and fuccefsful ambition (the trifles for which the tranquil Sweets of innocence are forfeited) Support the Spirits finking under Such a flood of complicated miSery f
Here Lucius concluded, and Some ladies coming in at the fame time, the conversation
took a different turn. I leave you now, my dear Charlotte, to make what refledfions you pleaSe upon what I have here related; the company Soon broke up; but 1 could not See Lucius retire with the reft, without feeling an uneaSineSs that let rne know the excest of my paflion However, he had the addrefs in parting, to flip the following letter into my hand
unper-
Felicia to Charlotte. 119
unperceived ; he delivered it with an air of tenderneSs, faying with a low voice. Since I am not permitted. Madam, either to fend or Speak to you alone, forgive the abfurdity of my being my own messenger, I made no o-ther anfwer than wilhing him a good night, and as Soon as he was gone. Seized the first
opportunity of retiring to my chamber, when Securing the door, to prevent my being Surprised, I broke open the Seal, and read the following lines.:
“ Dear Madam,
F you knew with what an excefs of grief I have lamented your illneSs, while I considered you on the borders of the grave, ‘ you might perhaps form Some idea of that ‘ Sweet, that transporting joy, with which I ‘ find you returning to life, and all the fatif-‘ fadions of health and eaSe. I can’t help ‘ regarding your phySician as my dearest ‘ friend ; I could hug him to my boSom for ‘ contributing to your recovery, at the Same ‘ time that I bleSs the unSeen hand of provi-‘ dence, and pour out ray grateful heart to
** that moSc gracious being who has heaid my
prayers,
<
C

120
Felicia to Charlotte.
‘ prayers, who has beheld with compaflioti ‘ my incessant tears Amelia’s friendihip for ' my Sifter, and the concern they have both in ‘ all that relates to you, have procured me an ‘ opportunity of learning every day the state ‘ of your difoider, without my running the ‘ hazard of discovering my passion to your ‘ aunt, by a Sollicitude that would doubtleSs render me rufpeCded. Yet what a multi-‘ tude of hopes and fears has this correfpon-‘ dence given I in a Swift Succession they have ‘ raiSed my Soul to Sudden rapture, and then ‘ Sunk me down into the most dreadful de-‘ Spair ! Sad vicissitude ! All my happineSs ‘ Seemed to depend upon your life; and while ‘ that was at stake, a proSpe6l of inevitable ‘ miSery lay before me. All joy Seemed de> ‘ partings A Solitary SadneSs, a dreary gloom ‘ hung upon my Spirifs, and hovered round ‘ the various beauties of nature; they had no ‘ chaims for me. Not wealth nor titles, With ‘ all their Splendor, could have calm’d the ‘ anguifh occaSioned by your lofs. While I ‘ thought that the most lovely form, and the ‘ fairest mind were near being Separated, my “ heart-strings were ready to burst, as if the “ very Seat of life and vital heat was going to
“ be
Felicia to Charlotte.
12 t
be torn from my boSom. Religion only had power to moderate my grief, and by “ its reviving confolations difperfe the dark-“ ening clouds which hang about my Soul.
“ But how shall I be able to defcribe the “ Sudden extafy, the transporting rapture which fill’d my breast, when I heard that ** you were out of danger ? I ficken’d with “ a Sweet exceSs of delight.^—But alas ! to what purpofe are thefe involuntary tran-Sports ? Why do I place all my happinels “ in Seeing and hearing you, fince no Sacred ties will ever bind us together, and Secure the continuance of theSe innocent enjoy-merits ? Accept however of my warmest “ congratulations, and while my happinels depends entirely upon your’s, believe me to be the fincerest and most affectionate of your Servants,
/
Lucius,
VoL. I.
o
I COiJ-
122
Felicia to Charlotte.
I CONFESS, my dear friend, that I could not read this letter without tears, and indulging Some refle<SUons on the unhappinefs of my iituation; but as it is time to conclude my long epistle, I shall pals over theSe unquiet thoughts, and fubfcribe my Self,
Tour^ mojt hearty friend^
Felicia,
LETTER XL
ROM Amaranthine bowers, and embrowning shades; from .flowery lawns,, and all the stlent folemn Scenes of peaceful innocence and harmlefs love, thy friend Felicia greets her other Self, her dear, her much loved Charlotte.
D 0N*T you think now, my dear, by this beginning, that I am tolerably well read in lomance, and have drank deep of the Spirit of thofe extraordinary performances. At least I
think I .ought to have Some knowledge of them. Since I feem to be writing one myfelf. My plot now begins to thicken ; and I shall certainly, if ever thefe letters come to light,
be xonSi4ere4 in Some .future rime, ,as a little
heroine
Felicia to Charlotte.
123
heroine, while Lucius will have an undiSputed % ^
claim to the honour of being the hero of my story. He has now a very formidable obstacle to encounter with, before he can even hope to arrive at the height of his happineSs : but you need not be frighted, here are no fiery dragons to conquer, or inchanted castle to storm ; my pastoral adventure will furnilh no Such prodigies. I will therefore leave thefe marvellous events to the doughty wonder-working champions of ancient date, and content myfelf with sticking clofe to truth and nature ; and don’t doubt but that in the rustic Simplicity in which I Spend my time, I shall furnish a history at least as entertaining as theirs. And indeed whatever name is given to my story, whether of rural adventures, novel, or romance, I should be very well Satisfied, though all the world thought it fiffitious, might I at last (which I hardly dare hope for) have it concluded, like the most celebrated pieces of imaginary Scenes of love and gallantry, in a happy catastrophe.
As I am very fond of my coufin Polly, who is one of the prettiest little creatures you ever Saw, I frequently amufe myfelf, and divert her, with gathering flowers, making garlands, and fometimes placing them in her hair, oradorn-
G %
mg
H2±
Felicia to Charlotte*
ing her head with a wreath, as agreeable for its odours, as for the intermingled lustre of its glowing colours. You can’t imagine, Madam, bow charmingJy the dear child looks when thus adorned ; you would be apt to take her for fome little Sylvan deity, or one of the inhabitants of the Ikies. The wearher'being extremely fine, we went yesterday morning into the garden to divert ourfelves in this innocent manner, when having Spent fome time in our childish pastime, a defire to indulge at large my own reste£lions, made me leave mv young companion, and retire into a neighbouring field; there I Seated myfelf on a riSing bank, beneath which ran a stream that, flowing Swiftly with a gentle murmur, drew my attention, and fixed my eyes upon the various coloured pebbles which shone through the li-■<juid crystal. But sho’ thefe trifles engaged my looks, my heart was fixed upon an objedl infinitely more important; I was thiifking of my idear Lucius, and enumerating in idea not only his leveral perfedlions, but recollecting all the fine things I haa heard him fay : and could I be entertained in a manner more delightful ? But I had not long indulged thefe pleafing contehiplations, when I was interrupted by
itny Isttle prattler, who feeing nie ai a distance,
:	came
Fflicia tot Charlotte.
f
I25--
p
came running with her hands full of flowers. 1 was then So buried in thought, that I did-not fee her till file was almost come up to me, when calling: me to look at her treafure, and to obferve Some carnations stie herfelf had-been placing in her hair, I was fo vex’d at being disturb’d in my pleafing dreams, that 1
could not help anfwering her a little peevifhly,. and destring her to leave me. She was justly furprifed to fee my humour fo loon chang’d, and with a voice that Spoke her out'of breatff with running. Said, She wonder’d how she had* made me angry ; but that she would not leave' me till I had forgiven her. The tears now trickling down her roSy cheeks, made me in a moment ashash’d of my Sudden ill-nature. I' took her in my arms, and fondly kissing her, , told her I only destred to be. a few minutes a--lone, and begg’d she would tell me what she vranted. You told me, faid she, refuming her ufual fweetnefs,- that theSe flowers made me look very pretty j. won’t they. Madam, make you look pretty too ? I wanted to make you as fine as you made me. Won’t you let me drefs your head ? I could not help Smiling at this question; but upon her perststing in her request, I at last confented ; and fancying no-Jsbdy could polstbly fee me, refolved to do as
G.3
'N
126 Felicia to Charlotte.
she defined, and afterwards lead her through the garden, to divert my aunt and Amelia with her childish frolic. I therefore took a libbon out of my pocket, and enamelling it with the brightest colours I could feledl from thofe she brought me, bound it round |my head ; when an impulfe of curiofity made me hastily go nearer the brook to place it to advantage, and fee how well it became me. Here I stay’d fome time with my eyes fix’d on the watery mirror, holding the beauteous child by her band, and obferving the different effects thefe fantastic ornaments had in the countenances of our shadowy images. I was now .in a most gay and lively humour, and lifting up my eye? with a chearful Smile, was going to propofe our return home, when I was struck with the fight of a well dreffed gentleman, who stood gazing upon us from the op-pofite bank, and who had doubtlefs been a witneSs of all my fooleries. Innocent as my amufement had been, I could not at first recover from the confufion and diforder this fpefiator gave me. However, I turned hastily, and taking hold of'Mifs Polly’s hand, began to move towards the garden, at the fame time pulling off my various coloured tiara, threw it to the ground; when the stranger
having
Fslicia to Charlotte.
12
7
having stood still for a moment, Suddenly leaped from the oppolite bank, basted after me, and Seizing the hand that was at liberty,> after a deluge of compliments, which discovered at least his good breeding, conduced me home. My aunt immediately by her behaviour let me fee that she was far from being difpleafed with my companion ; she treated him with the utmost refpe£I:, yet endeavoured frequently to dive into his thoughts, by examining his countenance with a Scrupulous and steady infpeftion. She Seemed to penetrate his very Soul; not the least gesture could efcape her notice: yet she was So cautious in thefe
piercing regards, that it was impostible for hkn
(
to obferve them ; and indeed her looks all the while exprested a fatisfadfion that let me See that whatever discoveries she had made, they were far from being diSagreeable to her; for whenever my eyes met her’s, I could eaSily diScern an affedlionate kind of joy, which Seem’d to ariSe from the tender glow of a warm heart.
THE gentleman behaved all this while with the most perfect eaSe and freedom, and without appearing under the least constraint by the old lady’s prefence, entertained me with the confident freedom of an old lover, who thinks
%
G 4
h
C

228
Felicia to Charlotte.
he has a right to our tendernefs and reSpe£lr. Nay, he told my aunt, even in my preSence, the Situation in which he found me; the manner in which he faid I attracled his eyes and heart; informed her of the minutest circumstance relating to my behaviour; deferibed the flowers which adorned my head j drew a comparison between them, and (to ufe his own words) the more lovely and altraifiive beauties of my cheeks. Nor was my shape, my
V
air, forgotten ; he took me for Some goddefs j I could certainly be no lefs than one of the immortals. Here he discovered all the heathen mythology he had learnt at School; protested that he mistook me for Flora; and lest I should be too Simple to understand the honour that was done me by this comparison, told me that she was one of the most charming of all the goddefles ; and could be equalled in beauty by none upon earth but me. In short, he even cflered to go himSelf and fetch the flowery wreath that So much became me; affured us, that the first moment he faw me, was the last ©f his liberty; and asterted, that if I would conSent to be his, he should ever after our marriage oblige me to perpetuate the remembrance of that happy day, by wearing upon it a like blooming crown.
Thus
I
/
Felicia to Charlotte. i2,>
Thus he ran on for a quarter of an hour-together, without giving either my aunt or me an opportunity of fpeaking a Single fyllable j r he was all life and gaiety, and attempted to divert me at the fame time that he strove to find a way to my-heart. He thought it im-ppffible that I stiould be infenfible to the force of flattery, and therefore attack’d my vanity with inccflknt praifes. One moment he feem’d*^ melting in tenderneSs ; but then immediately^ recovering himSelf, as dreading ray-taking an
r
u...
advantage of his weaknefs to ufe him ilst laugh’d at his own paflion, and Seeming to triumph over it, turn’d it into ridicule, with a vivacity accompanied with abundance of wit^ and humour.^ In short, he is the most fpright- -ly unaffe£Ied creature you ever beheld ; for ■ even asteistation in him must loSe its name;,.. every thing is natural, genteel and eafy.
But I had not been long in his company.-when my aunt, fancying that she might pofli- -bly be a restraint to us bosh, took an opportunity to leave the room. However, his be- -haviourwas still the fame, he Smil’d and look’d, grave ; he Sigh’d and laugh’d ; he fang a Ian- -guishing strain, the next moment hum^d a ri--gadoon, and capered about the room ; but yet-it was not difficult to discover^ that though his-
• a
G 5
temper

/
120
Felicia to Charlotte.
temper naturally inclin’d him to be gay. It would have been now much more eafy to him, and doubtlefs more pleaSing too, to have aS-Sum’d a behaviour more ag-reeable to the litu-
o
ation of his heart. In Spite of all his efforts, love still had the mastery, and methought his stghs appeared much more genuine, than thoSe starts of airy fprightlinefs, under which he endeavoured to conceal them. He would have me constder him as a lover, though he was unwilling to appear with the languifhing ten-dernefs of one that felt the full power of that passion. Yet in his very attempts to shew his liberty, he rattled his chains. I am Sure you would have laugh’d as heartily at his behaviour as I did ; for indeed he is one of the most odd, fantastic, agreeable fellows, that ever affumed the tender name of a lover. But as I have given you Lucius’s pidlure, you may expert
that I should give you his loo; take it then as follows :
He is pretty tall, and of the just mean between too fat or too lean ; his shape is genteel and eafy ; his air, that of a fine gentleman who has feen the world ; his complexion fair, his forehead large, his eyes brilk and full of fire ; his nofe of a moderate fize; his mouth rather too wide, but render’d agreeable by a
constant

Felicia to Charlotte.

constant Smile which Sits on his lips, and dimples in his cheeks; and as to his chin, I assure you, it is not leSs regular than any other feature in his face. But I must not forget to mention his drefs, which in this rustic part of the country appears very Singular: every thing about him is of the newest fashion; nor does he want any ornament to Set off his perfom to advantage. This is an exa£l portrait of the gay, the janty, the confident Mellifont; and by the defcription I have already given you of him, you will readily imagine that poor Lucius has a very formidable rival.
After having diverted me for near two hours, with a thoufand agreeable extravagancies, he bid me adieu ; but before he left the boufe, had a private conversation of Some minutes with my aunt, who, as Ibon as he was gone, came to me; when Seating herfelf in a chair clofe to mine, she told me with a fmile, that the gentleman had been begging her leave
to continue his vifits ; that she knew him to be of a good family, and possessed of an estate of three thoufand a year; and added, that if he was agreeable to me and was really 'as much in love as he pretended, she thought I could not make a better choice. I reply’d with a good deal of truth, that however diverting his
G 6	company
\
1J2
B’elicia to Charlotte.
company had been, he had not yet made any impression upon my heart, and that agreeabl as his levity might render him to other women, I could not help thinking that a lasting happinefs must be built upon a more folid foundation, than the airy flights of Such a giddy volatile temper. I must confefs. Madam, Said I, that his perSon and behaviour would render his addreffes acceptable to the far greater part of our Sex, who are perhaps too eaSily pleafed with a gay appearance. His confidence might, in their opinion, appear heroic, and carry a.-long with it irrefistible charms; but I shall ne-think a man has any degree of tenderneSs for me, while I have not the power to Soften him too much, for him to difcover all his fpright-liaefs in my prefence. My aunt finiled at this reply, and only anSwer’d, That she would not advife me to any thing contrary to my inclinations ; and Amelia and Polly coming in at the fame time, we dropt the fubje^l.
I HAVE nothing further to add, than that
I am.
My dear Charlotte,
Tour moji obedient Servant^
FeliciaI
Felicia to CHA^RLOTts. 133
LETTER XIL
SHALL not pretend, my dear Charlotte; to decide whether the extraordinary assurance of Mellifont, or the diffidence of Lucius, is the most excufable quality ; they are both
certainly very great foibles when carried to excefs. But as confidence and folly are nearly allied. So modesty is a weakneSs, if it Suppreiles a man’s virtue, and hides it from the world ; if it fetters his mind, and restrains his adlions when he defires to exert himfelf. But if Lucius appears even upon a. Superficial view Superior to Mellifont, notwithstanding the thick shade,, which instead of shewing his merit to advantage, obfeures Some of his brightest excellencies, how much more amiable must he appear than that gentleman, if it be confidered that his good qualities are Set in the most glaring and striking light, and that his very follies are fome of his greatest perfe6lions I
I TOLD you in my last, that Amelia’s en* tring she room put an end to the conversation.
I had with my aunt upon the merit and fortune of Mellifont; but I forgot to add, that upon our telling my couSm of the vifit I had
received from my gay Spark, I perceived that
she
134
Felicia to Charlotte

✓
she chang’d colour, and immediately her countenance, which at first had all the marks of eaSe and good humour, discovered the evident lymptoms of a thoughtful disturbance; nor should I perhaps have called this circumstance to mind, which I then took but little notice of, had not her behaviour Since that time a-wakened my attention, and quickened my ap* prehenSion.
Tho’ her temper is naturally rather grave than Sprightly, yet I had always remark’d in her a most agreeable evennefs of difpofition, a flow of Serene and tranquil Spirits, which gave an engaging chearSulneSs to her behaviour, and rendered her equally acceptable to others, and happy in herSelf; this was an observation, shat her whole deportment had con-firm’d, ever lince I knew her; but now that placid Serenity, which Sweetned our conversation, and greatly enhanced the pleasures of our mutual friendship. Seem’d interrupted ; she
fought for opportunities of being alone, and discovered a reServe, which I really thought her incapable of I have had a vifit in form from Melhfont almost every day. Since the date of my last. He comes in his coach, with a pompous equipage, and drelTed with as much Splendor, as if he had prepared to appear in
she
Felicia to Charlotte.
135
the drawing-room on a birth-night, while every viSit Seems to increafe poor Amelia’s discontent, and coldneSs to me.
Two days ago as I w’as taking a turn in the garden, I found her Seated in a pcnfive posture in a painted alcove, at the end of an alley the
most obfcure and retired. She feemed lost in
!
thought, and leaning her head upon her hands, with both her elbows fixed upon the table, was doubtlefs indulging Some Serious reflections ; but whatever was the fubje6t of her contemplations, the rusting I made amongst the leaves of Some bows, which, for want of cutting, croffed the path, and which rebounded back as I forced my way through them, foon made her lift up het eyes ; when coming towards me. My dear, cry’d 1, you will think me, perhaps, guilty of ill manners, for being So rude as to intrude upon your Solitude; but no matter j my affedlion for you gives me Some right to your confidence; and therefore, in the name of friendstiip, I defire you will either make me as grave as yourSelf, or permit me the pleafure of forcing you to partake of my gaiety. Come, let me know the caufe of this change.—Some doleful ditty ! tale of love!
Some tender
Come, come, out with it. Here taking hold of her hand, I began to lead
her
15^
Felicia to-Charlotte
her back to the alcove, when turning her head away, with an air of unaffeisted coldneSs, Ihe gave a deep Sigh, and then begged that I would be fo kind as to let her go, stnce she was in an ill humour, and was very unwilling to in-* fe(st me. Nay, Amelia, Said I, 1 have no right to detain you against your inclinations; I thought Tmight be So happy as to divert you. I hope you will not think an unSeaSonable attempt of this kind unpardonable. No, my dear. Said she; you are extremely obliging but as I shall be but a difagreeable compamon, I chufe to retire : At this she left me, when standing still for a moment, to think whither I should ramble, 1 Saw her returning. She begged pardon for her ill manners, and mak-^ jng Some apologies, alk’d at last,. How I lik’d Mellifont, and what I thought of his addresses? I laugh’d at her question j and readily replied, that I thought him a much' more agreeable companion than a lover. Nay, my dear Fe** licia, Said she, with jealoufy in her eyes, donst
dissemble ; are not you charm’d with his-company ? Not as a lover, I assure you. Said I; he is indeed one of the most agreeable imper-
tinents I ever beheld'; bat. Why this question ? Have you any private interest it), view, that
you afk it ? Come^ be frank now, and if dt
will
Felicia to Charlctte.
^'3.7
will be any Satisfadion to you, I here reSign all pretenSions to his heart. I should be very glad of being excufed from the trouble of receiving his viSits ; though I can’t deny, but
there is a pleaSure attends the homage of a
« '
man of his humour and appearance ; they Sooth our vanity, give us an air of importance, and flatter our prevailing deSire of making captives. But this is a very ill-natured pleafure, rc' plied Amelia, with Some warmth; and I thought you had too much good fcnfe, as well as humanity, to indulge it at the expence of the eafe and happinefs of a worthy gentleman : beSides it is dangerous Sporting with the teni-derneSs of a man of Such merit; for while you hover round the flame, you may poffibly burn your wings.. No, never fear it, returned I j
I am in no danger, I assure you ; but if he will pay his addresses to me, how can I prevent it ? Am I anfwerable for his folly ? I have ufed no arts to retain him ; and indeed have been So far from indulging my pride at the expence of his peace, that I have endeavoured as much as poflTible to make him lofe all hope of obtaining my affeffiion. Amelia’s countenance now clear’d up, a riling joy Sparkled in, her eyes, and gave an agreeable flush to her cheeks ; and in shoit, she had all
that
138
Felicia to Charlotte.
that air of eaSe and SatIsfa£fion which our looks commonly exprefs, when we feel our hearts eafed of a burthen which distorts its tender fibres, and gives us the most racking pain; but presently assuming an air of foftneSs, she confessed with a low voice, (as if dreading, even in that retired place, a witnefs of her melting passion) that we loved the dear en-gaging Mellifont; but she had no Sooner eas’d her boSom of this important Secret, than a ruS-tic blush, with all the marks of a confusson which Springs from innocence and artleSs Simplicity, overspread her face, and made her hang down her head ; but at last recovering herSelf, she told me she had feen Mellifont a few days before he paid me my first viSit; that she was charmed with his perSon, but did not perceive that he had made any extraordinary impression on her heart, till she found that he paid his addresses to me; when love, jealouSy, and defpair, contributed all their force to render her unhappy. She then assc’d me with a Smile, that demanded my confidence. If I was leSs fenSible of the merit of Lucius, than she of Mellifont ? and told me. That SuSpe<fiing it while I was Sick, from the tender things I Said of him, she Sent to let Marilla
know, that if her brother had a real affedlion
for
Felicia to Charlotte.
139
for me, it would be then imprudent to continue his vifits j and that having learnt from her friend the violence of his pafiion, she had ufed all her art to prevent giving him the un-eafinefs he might feel at finding me in the company of his rival. SenSible of the advantages I received from her prudent precaution, and reflecting that my aunt would probably without her afliflance tp keep it Secret, have been by this time fully convinced of my ten-dernefs for Lucius, I returned her my Smcerest thanks. We then talked of his perfections, delightful fubjeCV! in which she Seemed to strive to outdo me, in giving him the praifes due to his merit; while the referve, which for Several days had fubfifled between us, now ending in a mutual open confidence, bound us cloSer to each other, by shewing her the folly of her groundless distrust, and strengthening and enlarging my esteem for her, who, in the midst of her jealous fears, took care of my happinefs, and provided against the difeovery of a Secret, on the concealment of which all my future felicity depended. We embraced with the utmost asteCtion, and made reciprocal promifes of treating each other for the future without diSguife j the very appearance of which was now below the dignity of our friendship.
/

140
Felicia to Charlotte.
Ship. Our hearts were to lie open, and not the least circumstance relating to the happinefs of each other concealed. What a pleaSmg in<r tercourfe of tender passion I All jealoufy being now removed, she strove to increafe the ardor of my love for Lucius, by relating a thoufand circumstances in his favour ; while her praifes-gave me a delight infinitely Superior to any flattery bestow’d upon myfelf. Wrapt up in the Soft fatisfadlion she gave me, I gratefully return’d the obligation, by mentioning all the agreeable things that could justly be Said of Mellifont, to which she listncd with equal eagerneSs, and the fame excels of Soothing, pleafure.
> •
We now walk an hour every day to talk ©n the Same fubjerst; and I don’t believe we cither of us find our delight grow lest by the repetition. Love is an inexhaustible theme;, it furnishes our converfation with the most delicate, refined, and exquiSite ideas ; it raiSes us above ourfelves, and not only inSpires an elevation of fentiment, but gives us a very noble and shblime manner of expressing what it dictates ; sh that were you to bear us on this melting fubjedt, you would fmile at our die? tion, and the tender cadence of our periods ; and be much more ready to take us for a
ccupjec
Pelicia to Charlotte.,
141
icouple of theatrical heroines, rehearfing the ^arts of two languishing princesses, than for rural nymphs unaccustomed to high flights and lofty strains, whofe only perfe<stion con-
sssts in being pastoral lovers. Sometimes we
%
walk for two minutes together in eloquent ss-lence ; then, after a ssgh or two, still more eloquent, we burst into Some moving complaint on the Severity of fortune, in making her love a perfon in wealth her Superior, and me a youth unblest with the advantages I enjoy.
Thus I employ the time of Lucius’s absence in a way most agreeable to that esteem and affedlion I shall always have for him; while abfence, instead of removing the tender Softnefs of my heart, renders every thought of him still dearer to me, and preSents him to my mind in every new charm which fancy or love iCan invent.
I
But I woiild not have you imagine. Madam, that we Spend all our time in theSe ufe-lefs lamentations; we have read novels, ^ro-
I.	•	■	*
rtiances, and plays, and have therefore Some notion of plots and stratagems; but I believe we were neither of us formed for Intrigue, fince with all our industry cannot yet invent any method to procure me the coinpany
of iny lover, that will not render us liable to
Suspicion
142
Felicia to Charlotte.
Suspicion from my aunt. BeSides, Mellifont is a constant interruption to my happineSs by
N
his perpetual viSits; for I can’t reSolve to fee Lucius at a time when we Should be fo liable to be disturbed by that intruder’s prefence. His company on this account grows distaste., ful to me ; and it is with the utmost disticuky that I keep within the bounds of good manners. But I am afraid of difobliging him, lejt he Should acquaint my father with his passion, which he would doubtlefs approve, and lest my refustng to gratify him in this
, should offend him fo much as to make him crofs me in the dearest interests of liiy heart. 1 am.
Madam,
TouFSf &c.
Felicia,
LETTER XIII.
Madam,
N

O T the cooling shade of Some friendly bower, the fanning breeze of Zephyrs, orthe agreeable freshnefs of lome limpid stream, cbuldgive greaterdelight to the laborious hind. Scorched with ,the meredian fun’s too ardent beams, than I received from the news of your
being
Felicia to Charlotte.
*43
being already joined by the most Sacred bonds to the gay, the tender Philario, May all your days be propitious ! May blooming joys, ever opening with new delight, perpetuate your felicity ! May his lordship’s affedion, instead of decreasing with time, ripen into that Soft esteem, that tender complacency, which are the natuial attendants of love and merit, and the highest Summit of all Sublunary happinefs ! In short, may you be bound to him with all that dignity of pastion which is necessary to render him ever as dear to you as now ; while love shall have the energy of religion ; and inclination the force of every Sacred dictate !
You See, Madam, what an aukward creature I would have you. To dare to be happy is a thing So unfashionable, that it may poshbly require Some degree of refolution to withstand the shock of being thought that dull thing (Called z. fond wife ; but however unpolite it is to have any degree of affedlion Subssst between thoSe who ought to halve the greatest, you have too much good fenfe to be ashamed of what must now not only be the essence of your happinefs, but your highest glory. How strange is it, that a name, a mere Sound, and a found too tO' which we have no fettled meaning,
should have Such an influence upon mankind.
as
144
Felicia to Charlotte^
as to make them cancel all the en?ag:ements
o o
of duty, affection, and happineSs; and even forfeit all their hopes of a blifsful futurity! what bewitching charm! what dire Spell t what strange enchantment is contained in the word polite.^ that it should controul our very paffions,
and malce us Suffer greater pangs of Self-denial to become vicious, than would be Sufficient to raiSe us to the highest attainments of heroic virtue! to be thought polite^ how many ladies are contented to be fashionably miserable ? To be thought polite, an old fop, decripid with years, will keep a mistrefs, and have the infolence to boast of a thousand vices, which his years, one would think, exempted him from. To be thought polite, a man will contemn the too condefcend-ing affedlion of the stupid fool his wife, de-fpife her eafy virtue, and at the fame time a-dore an impudent prostitute, who tyrannizes over him, and infults him with impunity. While a lady for the fame reafon (out oiJ>o-Utenefs) will abhor the naufeous fond wretch Ter hushand. Thus a confured notion of honour (another word of the Same kind, the letters of which 1 Suppofe are a kind of talif-man) will make a coward go trembling to de-strudion, and rush with horror into a dreaded
eternity
You
Felicia to Charlotte.
^ 45
You will think this a very odd kind of a 'preamble to be addressed to a bride in ail the blooming pride of youth and beauty ; but if you conSider that we ought to lay down Some principles to Secure the continuance of true felicity, you will not think it an inexcufable piece of impertinence in me, to put you in mind, that if w’e would enjoy any folid happi-nefs, we must be contented to distent from the maxims of the greatest part of mankind ; it is certain that we are govern’d more by found than we are generally willing to imagine.—— But I might have conSidered too, that your good Senfe had undoubtedly diredied you to make the fame obfervation. But let that be as it will, I know I am fecure of your pardon ; for you are now in too happy a fituation to be offended at any thing I can fay, however common and trifling my thoughts.
To put an end to tliefe grave remarks, I come to mine own affairs: and first I ihal! tell you that I have lately had an interview vdth Lucius, in which I gave him an opportunity
of indulging all the tendernefs of his heart; a fatisfadston that was procured me by the kind assistance of Amelia. Upon hearing a few days fince of the necessities of an honest but indigent family, about a mile distant from VoL. I.	H	my

14-6
Felicia to Charlotte.
y'
my aunt’s, -! refolved to pay theni a viStt, to indulge fome of that Sublime pleafurc which it is the greatest advantage of a large fortune to procure us. Amelia only was acquainted with this viSit; nor did I tell her of it till I was ready to Set out, when I deSired her to accompany me, to which she instantly confented. We found the unhappy manSion fituated at the foot of a hill. Surrounded with Several inclo-fures of orchards, pasture grounds, and corn fields: at the entrance leading to the door, was a short walk between two elder hedges, which inclofed a Small kitchen garden, with fome stacks of hay, and near the main building, fome stables and barns. But every thing was in profound filence; for no human object was near, and nothing to be heard, but the warbling Songs of the airy choristers, who fluttered amongst the hedges, or fat making their refponfes from the distant thorny brakes. Xhe Solitary stillnefs of the place, added to the refle£tion of the bustnefs in which I was employ’d, contributed to render me thoughtful, and I could not help giving Some moments to the consideration of the various unavoidable
miseries which attend human nature; niife-
#
Ties which neither virtue nor prudence can al-
ways guard a
With a mind thus dipped
m
/
%
Felicia to Charlotte.
147
in pity, I could not help heSitating a little when; we came to the door ; but at last rapping Softly, we entered the room, where defpair and forrow were painted in the strongest colours, and in every face Such an undiflembled fad-
nefs, as struck me to the very foul: for notwithstanding the relief I intended to give them,
I could not forbear sharing in the general
\
grief; and, indeed, it was with Some pain that I assumed an air of eafe and chearfulnefs, in order to comfort a pretty boy who stood with his eyes fixed upon his mother, and pulling her by the apron, cry’d at feeing her weep, Two other children, too young to take the fame notice, were playing about the room : but where-ever I turned my eyes, every thing was in diforder; nor was it eafy to crofs the room, or take a chair, for the confufed heap of litter which was every way strewed about. Alas! the poor woman-was in too deep afHic-tion to attend to the management of her family; her mind too much difcompofed to at-tend to order and decorum ; for a violent dif-trefs almost always renders us inadlive ; it'finks and depresses the Spirits, and when no vifible assistance is in view, even makes the unhappy incapable of thinking or ufing their natural
>H 2	abilities.
14^
Felicia to Charlotte,
abilities, in order to extricate themfdves from the prelihre of their difficulties.
These observations. Madam, I have learnt from my aunt, and have always found them agreeable to truth. At one of the windows fat a young man, with defpair in his eyes, and a look that difcovered he was grown stupid with grief: a book of devotion lay open before him, on which his regards were fixed ; but fixed in fuch a steady manner, as shewed that he was incapable of reading : he pored on the fame place, and neither his eyes nor his head moved to take in the compafs of a line. As foon as we entered the room, the good woman arofe from her chair, and appeared fur-prifed at the fight of strangers of our appearance, afk’d our bufinefs ; when taking the little boy into my arms, I wiped aw'ay his tears, and kiffing his pretty rofy cheeks, told him I wou’d wipe away his mother’s too if i was able ; at this he fmil’d., when emptying Some lumber out of a chair, while the mother made one ready for Amelia, we both fat down At a lofs how to introduce the caufe of our vifit, and - willing to oblige them in a way as little painful as poffible, I feem’d mighty fond of the little creatures that were flaying around me :
then turning to she mother, defir’d that she
would
«v«> w.
Felicia to Charlotte.
t
would look upon us as her Sincereft friends, and that we Ihould think it a pleafure to Serve-her; but Ihe thank’d me in a manner that shewed that her hopes were at a low ebb, and too far Sunk to be rais’d by glimmering proS* pedis, and airy vilions. However, she called her hushand ; but before he came Amelia a-rofe, and leaving me to comfort the distressed as my humanity diredled, elated with the a-greeable furprife she hoped to give me, went oiit with the ruhic youth, and privately dif-patched him to Maiilla, to let her know where we were, and that her company with her brother’s would be acceptable to us bosh. Mean while the master of the houfe, with more firmneSs in his countenance, but wish eyes drooping with care, came to us from a back room, and related the caufe of his misfortunes,, with that honest f.anknefs and Simplicity, which always affedls the mind, tho’ uttered in the most plain and homely language. He told me; That by the excessive rains, which-had enriched the farmers of the neighbouring hills with feveral fuccessive years of plenty, he w'as reduced from a state of assluence to-jienury and indigence ; that he should-be o-blig’d to fell the plentiful crop shat covered his Ihnds to a vast difadvantage to falisfy his land-
id.	lord’sji

150 Felicia to Charlotte.
lord’s demands; and that he had no other profpecfi than to loSe the fruit of his labours, to be turn’d out of all his poffeffions, and perhaps, be glad to glean the fields he himfelf; had fown ; and all this for want of a Small Sumj which his landlord had now a particular occafion for-,—Willing to shorten his uneafi-nefs, 1 here interrupted him to know what Sum would remove his prefent anxiety, and as Soon as he had inform’d me, I told him wdth a fmile, that I thought myfelf very happy at having it in my power to give joy to an honest family, and at the Same time emptied my purSe upon the table. I now felt my heart overflow with a lympathetic extafy, arifing from the tranfports I myfelf had occaSion’d. Thus,
with a little gold that has long laid ufelefs in my chest, and for which I have here no ufe, I have procured the happlnefs of a whole family, and given myfelf a delight more ex« quifite than I ever experienced from the like occafion; Since the advantage they have received from it (as they told me) may probably redound to their childrens children. What uSe could I possibly make of this hoarded pelf to procure me equal fatisfadlion ? Or what is the pleafure we receive from pride, the gratification of a luxurious appetite, or the indulgence
Felicia TO Charlotte.
155
gence of the highest animal delight, compared to this luxury of the mind, the more natural rapture which refults from the gratifications of our humanity ? But while the good people were loading me with their bleffings', I had the agreeable furprife of feeing Amelia enter the room, accompanied by Lucius and his fif' ter; for as they lived but a Small distance' from the farmer’s, she chofe to walk Softly after the young man in order to meet them, and to let them know that I was an entire stranger to the-vifit she requested from them. Seized with a Sudden emotion, my heart fluttered with a painful joy, and throbbed with a fweet yet tumultuous extafy. I hastily arofe, hardly having the power to stay to deSire my
old friends to take no notice of what had pasted, and running to the door, in an eager transport embraced Marilla, at the fame time shooting a glance at her dear brother. We
We talk’d
like friends who had not Seen each other for a long time, full of Spirit, full of affeiflion ; till at last, after having taken two or three turns, Amelia and Marilla told me with a lauah that they would leave me for a few minutes,* and instantly striking off to the most distant part oS the orchard, Seated themfelves und
went into the orchard together.
^	\ o
er a
H 4
152
Felicia to Charlotte.
tree, and by their abfence left room for a more delightful converfation ; but tho’ Lucius was row very fenfible that he was dear to me, he could not enter upon the tender fubjt£l: without confuSion ; he at first enquir’d after my health; complain'd that he was deny’d the pleafure of feeing me, and then with a figh, let me know how much he thought himfelf oblig’d to Amelia for procuring him a fatiS-faffion he had fo long languisti’d for. But why. Sir, faid I, (willing to draw him to an explanaticn) do vou complain of your being deprived of my company; is that Such a terrible misfortune? Yes, my dear Felicia, rcply’d he, trembling and casting down his eyes, it is an infupportable misfortune. Did you but know. Madam, wdth what anguisti I fupport your abfence; wdth what cruel inquietudes I count the tedious minutes; while my heart, (herehe paufed, unable to proceed, while every joint quivered with fear, but at last refuming) while my heart struggles to be near you ; vt^ere you fenfible of that tumult of pafiion, and all thofe namelefs dear fenfations which fill my breast, O Felicia ! your wonder would ceafe, and you wmuld rather be furptifed, that any consideration could prevent my flying to you ? His embarraSiment now Seem’d to increafe,
while

Felicia to Charlotte.

&
while he waited for my anfwer, and indeed I was going to endeavour to rally him on his pretended Platonic friendfliip: to endeavour I Say, for I am Sadly afraid, I should have made but an odd appearance with my affe61;ed gaiety ; for my heart was too much Soften’d to permit me to laugh at him ; however one touching glance chang’d my refolution, and oblig’d me to behave more naturally; that is, to thank him for what was So perfe£lly agreeable to me. I am obliged to you, Sir, Said I, for that deep concern you expreis for me ; but were I more Senfible that I deferved it, I might give greater creditto what you tell me; however I can do no leSs than thank you for your complaisance. Ah ! Madam, returned he with more refolution, (while a darting joy-flushed in his cheek, and in a moment mingled’
an air of delight amidst the tender languish
inent of his countenance) your merit Sufficiently authorises the ardour of my passion. I feel the force of vour charms; they run tliro’ my heart, and captivate every thought; but chiefly that anhiable virtue, that fan£lity of manners, and all thofe dear unutterable graces, which perpetually bloflbm with fresh beauties and undecaying charms, fill my ravish’d foul, and infpire a tender admiration and .distant
»we.
H S
?54
Felsgi-a to Charlotte
/
A.

■>
D-'
You Ses, Madam, that iheSe fllent lovers^ fwho struck dumb with a gufli of passion too Soft and powerful to be expressed) have their tongues no Sooner unlock’d, than they burst into heroics, and talk as differently from the polite gentlemen of the more stubborn mould, who have language at command, as if they were another fpecies of beings. Here the heart fays every thing, and dictates not only the words, but the minutest glance, arid the
V
least motion : every feature has a voice, and the whole man proclaims the power of love. For my part I freely, confefs that flattery never appeared half Ib charming as it did now. A Sweet enthuSrafm possessed all my foul, and I could not help thinking how much better this
dear man deferved a compliment of this kind
%
than my Self. But the next thought gave a bitter dasti to this exultation of heart, and made me ripply in a mild tone : You are much to blame to entertain fuch romantic fenti* ments of me, which, I assure you, I have not vanity enough to think I deferve; but however^ were I ever fo worthy of your esteem, and tenderest affedlion, yet the thought that I am not at my own difpofal,' and the difHculty you
may expe<st to meet with from my father, who has an undoubted right to difpoSe of me, should
'	make
\
FsiiciA TO Charlotte,
i5o
make you endeavour to forget me, and conquer a passion which I fear will prove fatal to your repoSe. This anfwer gave an immediate damp to his transport, and Seem’d to throw hinti intq a fresh conSuIion; however, fixing his eyes upon me, with a languid yet piercing air, O my dear P'elicia, cried he, do you indeed blame the unconquerable tendernefs of my heart? Would you perSuade me to erafe your lovely image from my foul ? Alas 11 am
too Senfibie that I have no reaSon to 'ssatter
. »
myfelf, that your father will ever favour my aSpiring wishes, yet, whatever is the confe-quence, f must love you ssill-^-*'d must ever Jove you. Nor can I, tho’ Surrounded with difSculties that oppofe my happineSs, even wish thaf: I loyed you leSs. But ah I Madaip, if you defire that I should forget |you, I am wretched indeed!
With what irrefistib.le SoStfleSs were theSo last words uttered ! his eyes Swelled with' a
starting tear, which with conScious dignity and shame he endeavoured to call hack, as a mar^ qf a too effeminate weafcnefs. Every Speaking feature defcfibed the strong emotions which agitated his foul with all the torturing agonies that can ariSe frorn the tenderest deSpastj while pity aad love, and dear compassion shot shrough
N
j
>55
Felicia to Charlotte
tny heart, and filled all my mind v:ith a vlf* tuous and decent foftneSs. I look’d upon him; but what did this look tell him ? Certainly all that I felt; for my eyes were then incapable of Speaking a fallhood. O Lucius I Said I, need I tell you, that I am far from wishing it in your power to forget me ? yet, methinks if that was necessary to your happinefs, I could fusser a great deal to procure it; and perhaps a conquest of this kind would not cost me lefs than it would you. Could you but procure my father’s confent, we might both be happy—but that I fear you will never obtain. No ; neither you nor I ought to hope for it. And I here protest that I will never be your’s without his approbation.'—Not even your merit, great as it is, shall ever make me forget that I have a father—-a kind and indulgent father,—Never shall any conssderation prevail with me to forfeit my duty to God, or to him. This resolution you will not——you cannot condemn. No, my dear Felicia, return’d he,
with his eyes Sparkling with a languid joy ; my love is too pure to Suffer me either to involve you in your father’s diSpleaSure, or to tempt you to offend heaven : So far from laying Snares for your virtue and honour, I would die
m their defence, and faciistce all that is dear
to
Felicia to Charlotte.
iSf
to me, to preferve them inviolate. Diit O What tranfporting goodnefs 1 Do you indeed love me ?—Is it possible?—Help me to Support the rapture of this extatic thought—or rather teach me how to merit your father’s favour.—-What means would 1 not employ to obtain it.—Sure if he is Such a tender father as you deScribe him, he must have Some regard to .your inclinaiioas in an affair of Such infinite confequence to your happineSc But oh this disproportion of fortune ?—that is the obstacle.—And can there be a greater in the opinion of a'tender parent ?—Yes, fure, to a wife and tender parent there may.
But, Madam, I must not forget to mention one circumstance that I am fure will make you Smile. In the height of his rapture he Seized my hand, and Squeezing it with a strong and Sudden grafp, hurt mr fingers So that I could hardly forbear crying out; I am Sure if
he had obferved my looks, he would have
\
found that I made most frightful faces: he then pressed it to his lips, and taking it from thence, graSp’d my poor fingers again with the fame convulfic n of passion, still stackening the tender pressure as his thoughts return’d to my father, he at last held my hand So looSe that my numm’d fingers could Scarcely feel
that
Felicia to Charlotte
that he held them at all. But a shame on niy extreme infenSibility, that gave occaSion to theSe intolerable extaSies ! What tender words had I uttered ! dear Madam, let no prudes or coquettes ever read my letters^, for I shall certainly never be able to stand the cenfure of she one, or the raillery of the other. But to proceed:
Melting with the high wrought rapture/ which feemed to Sublime our fouls, while it raifed us to a degree of felicity almost too ex-quiSite to be lupported, we mutually open’d our hearts, and with a confidence of being beloved, reciprocally confessed she tender fenfai-tions that fweU’d our bofonas. All my foul was delight! A delight pure as the rapture of aesherial Spirits ? his, transporting extafy !
’Tis not the coarfer tie of human laws,
** Unnatural oft, and foreign tp the ntind.
That binds our peace, but hartpony itf?lf»
Attuning all our pallions into love.;
Where friendfhip full exerts his fofteft power;
i "
PerfeQ: efteem and I'ympathy of foul.
Thought meeting thought, and will preventing
will,
With boundlefsconfidence j for nought but; love
Can anfwer love, and render blifs fegure.
Thompson,
•	i
But lost in this charming intercourse of
, we forgot shat it WRS time to depart,
till
\
V «*-
-	•••f
Fflicia to Charlotte.
till my couSin with an unwelcome intruSion, and more unwelcome meiSage, came to put us in mind that the Sun was Setting, and that it was time to return home ; when with reluctant hearts, after bidding a tender adieu, and embracing Marilla, I tore myfelf from them, and hasted back with Amelia to my aunt.
You, I hope, Madam, will excufe the weakneSs I So freely confefs to you ; Softened by the fcene of distrefs I had just been a wit-nefs of, the unexpe^ed prelence of my dear Lucius had probably a much greater effeCl
than it would have had, if my mind had not been thus previouHy intendered. However, nothing can enoble the foul like a virtuous passion. It infpires a tboufand delicacies, a thoufand virtues, which, without it, we should
inly have no idea of,
I AM, Madam, with my Sincerest refpeCls to his lordship, and my most ardent prayers for the continuance of your mutual hap-pineSs,
Your Ladyship’s
(tbedieni Servantj
Felicia,
i6o
Felicia to Charlotte
LETTER
Madam,
5T-*
1
H O’ your impatience to hear from me is very obliging, yet it lays me under a necessity of entertaining you with abundance of impertinences; but if trifles can entertainj you have no reaSon to be dilTatisfled. Wrapt up in obfeurity, I hear nothing of the fate of princes, or the fall of contending nations. I have now no ambition to enquire after fuch important events : an humble fwain engroITes all my attention, tho’ I hardly ever fee hitiii 1 converfe with few beSides the people of the groves, -who fpretty warblers !) are my constant companions; yet you would have me inceffantly writing. Upon my word, Madam, you are quite unreafonabie. I can hardly' think it poffible that a month’s Silence can give you all this impatience. But your friendstiip' is an exGufe that 1 must admit. I therefore leave the rooks and daws, which with theic harsh difcoidant pipes, aid the concert of the warbling linnet, the thrush, the wood-lark, who prodigal of harmony, run through their wilfl variety of notes. Nor shall the rofy-breasted robin, emblem of innocence ! the
mellow
Felicia to Charlotte.
i6'i
mellow bull-finch, or the dying cadence of the high-foaring Songster of the Iky, nor all the w'ing’d choristers, who chant their loves, and in “ stuttering courtihip pour out their ‘^ little fi)uls in mellistuous numbers,’’ prevent my being impertinent when you command it.
My mind is nowin an unaccountable fitua-tion, strangely divided betw'een hope and fear, and tossed with avariety of contending passions. Still teazed with the addresses of Mellifont, his company becomes every day more inSup-
portabl

his vanity grows infufferable, and
the very means he employs to irfinuate himSelf into my esteem, heightens my averfion. Not that he is really a difagreeable companion; but while he is a perpetual obstacle to my feeing Lucius, it is no wonder if his gayest flights, humorous and diverting as they may appear to others, only Serve to increafe my fisteen and heighten my difgust. I'he consideration that his unwelcome intrufion deprives me of that dear and Softening pleafure I should otherwise enjoy from the cordial glances, and all the pleaSing intercourses of lo ve that might pafs between Lucius and me, poifons the fatisfa<fiion I should otherwife receive from his Sprightly airs r airs that have not
the
i62
Felicia to Charlotte.
/
the least conformity with the tenderly penSive difpoSition of my mind.
One day last week being disturb’d with abundance of gloomy reflevSlions, all turning upon the abSence of my lover, and the opposition I expeist to meet with from my father, Mellifont glided into the room with a dancing step and his ufual affurance, and an affedlation of all that eafe and negligence, of behaviour, that can only, Spring from a mind entirely Satisfied with itfelf. He fung Rofy-BowerSy bumm’d an Italian air, and every minute di-grested from the Song, either to make an application to me, or to utter Some tender thing, which intruded upon his thoughts; but every, thing was exprested with Such a mixture of the Soft and the ridiculous, as would have forced a Smile from any one that had lefs reafon to be melancholy. But I was too perverfe to be moved by his fantastic behaviour, to shew even by my looks the least mark of approbation.
Deaf to the mufic of his vpice, which is really very harmonious, and untouched by all his arts to charm me, he infenfibly became, more grave, when laying aSide his frolic airs. Will nothing Satisfy you, my charmer. Said he, unlefs you fee me Sighing at your feet Wpuld you have me in dull languishment admire

Felicia to Charlotte. 163
mire your beauties, and with a heavy fobbing heart tell you all my pain? Well, Madam, I confefs myfelf your flave j but at the Same time beg, that, cruel as you are, you will not triumph in your conquest, and inlult over the
victim of your charms.
Here he threw himfelf upon his knee, and taking: one of my hands, which he tenderly pressed in his. See, my dear, fa id he, as great a conquest as ever love has made. In vain I have struggled to regain rny liberty. All my' wishes center in you; I love you with all the passionate fofnefs that can fill a human breast : as tenderly as—as—Nay, Madam, for heaven’s fake don’t laugh at me, continued he, feeing, me fmile ; but tell me Sincerely now, don’t I look very Silly. I ssgh like the fam’d knight-errants of old, and like them bending before the divine object of my fublimest wishes, beg, O thou adorable fair, that thou wilt mitigate the Severity of-my unhappy destiny, or fuster me to expire at thy feet. Here making a paufe, he gently funk his head upon my lap; when fnatching away my hand, and precipitately riSing, he could not prevent his falling upon the floor. Not all my melancholy could now prevent my laughing, had I not endeavour’d to hinder it in order to carry on
this
164
Felicia to Charlotte.
this comic fcenCc Lie there, cried I, thou unworthy knight, nor ever more appear before me, till thou b:ingest me the heads of thofe Savage monsters that infest the woods, the trophies of thy prowefs and renown. At this I Hung out of the room, as if in a mighty paffion, and stepping into the thickest part of the garden, indulged for a few minutes the burst of laughter, which I with difficulty restrain’d till I was out of his hearing
How dreadfully afraid is poor Mellifont of rny abuSing the power I have over him ! he was just distblving in foftnefs; but in the moment when he was giving way to his paffion, and throwing aSide his SprightlineSs, which was now become unnatural, a Smile recalled back his fears; his dread of my tyranny returned, and to prevent my taking advantage of his weaknefs, he was willing to turn all he. had Said into ridicule.
However, when I began to rested! a little, I could not help being afraid that I had affronted him by my ill-manners in leaving him foabruptly^ and therefore having now been near
an hour in the garden, and imagining he was gone, return’d to my aunt, in order to make-my excufes to her ; to whom I fancied he had complained, and who, probably, would'
blame
Felicia to Charlotte. 165
blame me for carrying the jest too far. But in my way stepping into the room where I had left him upon the floor, I found my doughty knight strutting about with an old rusty helmet on his head, and in his hand a pike, which Served for a Spear, upon which was fixed the head of a fox, which he had luckily run down the day before. When stamping with his foot, his trusty Tquire enter’d with the stuffed fkins of feveral badgers, and other beasts of prey, the fpoils of his hall, when Mellifont bending one knee, laid them at my feet, and resting upon his Spear, See, fair princefs, faid he, bowing low his head, a knight renowned for affs of chivalry, who lays at your divine feet ihe ravagers of the mountains and the val-
lies, but lower still he would lay his heart. Incomparable lady, you fee a stave whofemag..
nanimous arm has made thefe horrid monsters tremble ; yet his life depends on the radiance of your Smiles. Soften then with pity the beams of your eyes, lest their lightning, with too refugent glory, should burn his shrivelled heart to cindets.
This Set Speech, which he uttered with the utmost gravity and Solemnity, he had doubt-!efs studied before i entered the room, and which he concluded with bending low to kiSs
my
166
Felicia to Charlotte.
my feet; when struggling against a Smile, assum’d an air of inexorable sternnefs, and looking down upon him With a lofty Superiority and contempt. Avaunt, caitif vile, cried I, and think not to abufe my ears with thy audacious forgeries. Are theSe, wretch, the trophies of thy valour ! where are the distressed virgins that thou hast delivered from the poi-Sonous talons of fiery dragons, or the dreadful gripe of monstrous giants. Fly, coward, and attempt not to abufe my credulity with the carcasses of infects, or my weak arm shall chaf-tife thy temerity. Here I turn’d hastily from him, and walking with a majestic stateJinefs, Seated myfelf at the other end of the room, in an eafy chair, with as much dignity as if it had been a chair of state. But I had no Sooner turn’d my back, than throwing away his masking ornaments, he stepp’d up to me, finging “ Why do you sty, my dearest,” and immediately dropping his Song, Don’t you think. Madam, cried he, that we have adled our parts to perfection ? Upon my word, you do every thing with a grace. Your every air is charming. I only am defective; for I find I shall do no wonders in the character of a redoubted champion for love ; Since after all my endeavours, 1 have been shamefully degraded,
and
Felicia to Charlotte.
\
167
and cast from the dignity of my Sublime station. Yet, Madam, you are fenSible it was in diSguiSe that you made me a convert to love ? adorned like Flora with all the blooming graces of the Smiling year, and incircled with the u-
nited fragrance of every opening flovrer, you
%
captivated all my Senfes, and instantly made me that odd creature, called a whining. Sighing lover. Upon my word, Madam, you could not have made a stranger metamorphofis had you fix’d me a statue. Here he pauSed, but instantly recolledling himfelst O Madam, cried he. Smiling and rubbing his hands, I have a lucky thought; permit me to affume another diSguiSe ; as you first appeared to me agodstest, let me for once be dif^uiSed like a god j you shall receive me crown’d with ivy, and the glowing cluster of the Swelling vine. In shis appearance who knows what vvonders I may perform ! Befides, can any thing better ex-preSs the felicity that would, I am Sure, ariSe from oiir union, than an emblem of that para-dife, where the Soft beauties of the openiitg year shall be blended with the yellow fruits of .autumn, and all the charms of the luxuriatit
howl. In what exquifite happinefs should we Spend our days; you ever blooming;
I, like'Bicchus, ever frolic, gay arid Sprightly.
No,

i68
Felicia to Charlotte.
No, no. Sir, Said I, the Seafons may take their courSe for me ; nor will I have any thing to do with your drunken god-fliip. I therefore beg it as a favour that I may not be disturb’d with fuch fooleries, which are very disagreeable to me. I had hardly uttered theSe words when with the utmost furpriSe I faw Lucius and Marilla enter the room ; but it was a furprife accompanied with delight. I view’d his looks with confcious innocence, while no fufpedling fear dim’d his eyes, nor wan jealoufy difcolour’d his cheek. While I was embracing Marilla, Lucius and Mellifont met each other with the freedom of perfons who had been long acquainted, and turning to me, I have heard, (aid he, that you are to have a little diverfion, and if it is not over, would be glad to have a part in it Hail l noble knight, cry’d he, clapping Mellifont on the Ihoulder, what mighty feat of arms is to be done with your helmet and lance ? Melhfont feern’d here a little confufed, while 1 began to fear that my lover was acquainted with the palHon of his rival; but examining again his countenance, my uneafinefs vanished, for it had not the least tincSture of diforder. But finding that Mellifont made no reply, Come, my friend, no evafions, rejoin’d he, I met your
Servant
Felicia to Charlotte.
i6
9
\ 1
Servant an hour ago running home with all possible Speed, and in Such haste that he had hardly time to tell me the whimSical message you had given him, to strip your hall of its grim ornaments, and to bring them here with thole rusty pieces of ancient heroiSm your helmet and lance. And the lady of this houfe, doing my Sister and I the honour to destre our
4
company, I came filled with the hopes of feeing Some of your diverting extravagances.
Here Mellifont, assuming a chearful air, began the relation of the odd piece of Q^nxot-ifm which he had carried on with fuch humour, and my aunt and Amelia cominj in could not help joining with Lucius and Ma-rilla, in frequently interrupting him, by bursting into a general laugh; and indeed it was impoffible for any one in the company to forbear. For tho’ the story w'as comical enough of itfelf, yet the Severe manner in which he lashed himfelf, with the romantic leflediions he made upon his difgrace, rendered ir infinitely mote extravagant: Nor indeed is ii poS-fible to give you any idea of this part of our diverfion, except I could give you the varied tone of his voice, his looks, his air, and his nii-nutest gesture.
The evening was Spent with abundanc; of ;gaiety, while Lucius’s good fenSe, and Melli-VoL, I.	I	font’s
\
lyo
L£ L I CIA TO .DH AR LOTTE.
font’s agreeable vivacity, furnistied a great part of our entertainment. Nor were Some of thoSe Soft and refin’d pleaSures wanting, which I now find make up the'most exquifite part of human happinefs, ’Tis true, I could not enter into ,a particular conversation with my lover, much lefs indulge the innocent Satisfaffion of a private interview ; but yet I fat near him, and rethought my heart beat in that Situation, much more freely than when he was far distant. My foul itfelf was all harmony I and infpired by his prefence, every vein was harmony too. Strange I that the mind can be fenfible of Such delight from only a confciouS-neSs of a dear objedi’s being near! what magnetic influence, what attradlive power is in the perfon beloved, that from a circumstance So Small can infpire Such tender joys. Such delicate fenSibilities of happinefs ? His true, I law him with pleafure, I heard him with p’eafure too; but yet I had an additional delight, more constant and uniform, from my being eon Sc ious
that I was near him, which every feat farther
#
from him would have fenSibly decrcafed. You, Madam, can perhaps account for thele pleaf-ing emotions; and I deSire you would let me know if you think it unreasonable, that upon thefe occaSions there should be feme Secret
Sympathies,
Fflicia to Charlotte.

Sympathies, Some dear inexpressible ways, by which Souls expand themfelves towards the dear perSon, and-join in a Soft etherial embrace.
I know you will laugh at this whimfical conceit V but no matter. The evening, I fay, was Spent agreeably, tho’ we were obliged to be very cautious in our looks, to prevent Suspicion j and indeed I was quite Sparing in mine, for I Seldom indulged the pleaSure of examiriing his countenance. A precaution that was now absolutely necessary. However, might I frequently enjoy Lucius’s company in the fame manner, I should be more contented; but hadly ever to fee him, and at the lame time to have no profpeist of having the difficulties removed, which obstruil thishappineis, i freely confefs is more than I am well able to bear, I am afraid of having our mutual passion dif-covered, I tremble with the most dreadful ap-prehenSions for fear it should come to my fa-ther’s ears ; and yet without this should be the cafe, it will for ever continue imooffible for me to taste any true felicity.
O MY dear fiiend, if my happineSs is really dear to you, give me your advice, and teach me if possible to unite my duty to my father, with the tender Sentiments I feel for Lucius, and to make shem both fubServient o. the
I 2	highest;

5*72
Felicia to Charlotte."
liigheft pleaSure I can enjoy on earth. By v/hat means fhall I attack my father’s heart ? By what means shall Lucius procure his favour, and make him fenSible of his merit ? To effedl this will be a talk hard and difficult, and to have a share in promoting my happi* nefs, will be an employment worthy of your friendship, and the most endearing proof you can poffibly give me of your esteem and affection. With the fincerest and most tender re-Spe61,1 am
Your Ladyship’s
Moji obedient Ser vant,
Felicia.
LETTER XV.
S it possible. Madam, that you can really give me fuch advice ? W hat, to forger my dear father ! to steel my heart against the foft impressions of filial duty I to be infenSible of she strong and tender ties of nature, of the affectionate cares his heart has felt for me, and
all thofe numberlefs instances of paternal kindnefs which I have fo often received fiom him 1 Shall I throw a cloud over the flattering profpects he has raifed for me, and dilap-point all his fond views for my happinefs, by
casting
\
Fslicia to Charlotte.
17
cafting off that right w’hich nature, and the much more prevailing force of tendernefs and love, have given him over me ! No, Madam-, I ssiali never be guilty of Such ingratitude. I will never difpoie of myfelf without his consent; nor (hall all your arguments^ how plau--Sible foever, prevail with me to give him minute’s uneaSmefs.
P/\RDON the freedom with which I-rejecb your propofal ; you never knew what it was to have parents, and therefore can have but faint ideas of that foliicitude, that unwearied concern which employ their thoughts; much lefs can you be fenSible of the unfpeakable obligations I am under to mine, the heft of parents! and the beft of fathers !—But Sure I am mistaken ; you must have very strong ideas of paternal tendernefs, to fay, that however offended-he may be at first, affedlion will foori take place of refentment, and at last Swallow up all thought of difpleaftire; when his eyes will be open to the merits of Lucius, and he may postibly be brought even to approve of our union. A reconciliatioiv wdiich vou kind-
J
Jy promife to ufe your utmost endeavour to procure for us. But, ah 1 my dear friend 1 can I prefume on that affedlion which makes him dear to me ^ Can I offend him, from the
•<c -
I 3
thought
3 74
Felicia to Charlotte
thought that he is far from defervlng Such is* Sage from me ? And can I difdaim his authority and counfel, from the reflection that he deferves all my confidence, and my most grateful and affectionate regards ? No, my dear, you must excufe me, your friendihip blinds your judgment, and makes you give me advice that you would be far from taking your-felf, were you in my circumstances. You would then have confidered the vexation that must arife from a disappointment of the fondest hopes I the just provocation of feeing good-nefs abufed, and the painful mixture of anger and love, arifing in the mind of an indulgent father, as the greatest evils : nor could you, I am Sure, think of being the caufe of all theSe dreadful perturbations without starting back, and instantly recoiling into duty.
Your ladyship finds now, v.shat a trouble-Some perfecution your kindncfs brings upon you : instead of acknowledging your goodnefs, and thanking you for the obliging concern you exprefs for my happinefs, I have been haranguing for 1 don’t know how long on my duty to my ever-honoured papa, in order to let you fee what a good girl I am. But don’t be offended. Madam, I have only been anticipating your own thoughts on the rights of
parents,.
Felicia to Charlotte."
V75
parents. You will Soon be of my mind ; and a few months hence, I hope, will be able to write on this fubje£l with a much be'ter grace than I can pretend to do ; Since you will then, it is likely, find abundance of thofe tender cares, thofe dear undefcribable follicitudes a-riSmg in your heart, which I form but a dii-tant idea of, from the impressions I have received from the paternal affedlion of one of the best of fathers.
The generous pity you exprefs for Melli-font, proceeds undoubtedly from your humanity and natural goodnefs j but I find this pity does not deprive you of the pleaSure of diverting yourfelf with the oddnefs of his behaviour : and the ridiculous manner in which he pays me his addrelSes; but I am going tofurprife you by letting you fee that he is no longer to be pitied, fince he is in a fair way of regain-ing his liberty; or at least of falling into a more fupportable bondage.
If you remember, Madam, I gave you in-one of my letters an account of the concealed passion Amelia entertained for this gay fpark of mine ; but hopelefs as it then appeared, the engaging foftnefs of her behaviour, and the natural fweetnefs of her difpofition, added to that eafy, unafredled freedom, and artleSs innocence
I 4	which

Felicia to Charlotte',
which attends every thing she does. Seem at length to have made an impreffion on him.. But you could never guefs from whom I re-
ceived this news
from Lucius. Madam.
He made his rival his constJant. And here follows the letter I have juft received from him on this occafton.
<{

“ Lovely Felicia,
E L I G H T F U L as the refleaioti
of your goodnefs is, while I indulge “ the tranfporting remembrance of that charm-
“ ing air with which you frankly confelTed the
“ tender regard you should always have for
----you love ! you return my
“ my happinefs ;-----
“ paffion ! what an extatic thought! yet it can-“ not enable me to fupport the tedious delays “ the painful abfence, the torturing fufpcnfe, “ and the pleaSing yet dreadful mixture of hope “ and fear with which I w^ait to know that fen-“ tence from your father, which must confirm “ me blest beyond expression, or throw the
“ thickest gloom over all my joys.-------O my
“ dear ! with what ardor do 1 long to fee you !
I have a thoufand things to fay.
“ Yesterday my friend Mellifont came “ to fee me, v/ith an air more thoughtful than “ Seemed conSiftent with bis fprightly volatile ,	“ temper;

Or»
Felicia to Charlotte. Tyyf
temper; when our friendstiip, which begaa very early, and which upon his late return “ from the tour of Europe, has been revived with all its warmth, engaged me to prefs him “ to commumcate the caufe of his difcontent.
“ He told me, that w'as the deSign of his vifit*
“ and propoSing our going into my study, where “ we might be Secure from interruption, began
I
“ there a story v;hich filled my mind with every
“ wild ao;itation. It is with shame, faid h
that I confefs my'weaknefs,.I.Iove Felicia.
“ O what a stab did thefe words give me ! his
“ wealth, his form, his wit, his humour, with
every qualification capable of charming the “ fair, rushed upon my mind, and gave me ths «
“ first pangs of jealoufy; tormenting pastion •
“ but recolletsting that he was certainly ignc^
“ rant of my being his rival, I endeavoured to
“ arm myfelf wish patience: he then enumerated.. ,
your fevtral perfedfion?, and dwelt upon your
“ charms, while every commendation increas’d^
‘' my dilquict: O Madam, can you forgive my :
“ ujijust fears?---fears injurious to, your ho-“~
“ nour.-----but while I made the comparifon:
“ between him and myfelf, how was it poS>
“ fible to help being alarmed, fince I myfdf:
“ must have justified your choice in rejecting’
“ me for him. But thde fears ■ were short-
' I 5	"	“ lived:
ViP A,	^
d
r'

Felicia to Charlotte."
cc
Ci
lived and tranSient, they Icon gave way to ^ healing joy, which compoSed the impetuous “ tumult of my foul; and with the utmost de-light I heard him add, Yet you would ad-mire, Lucius, to fee how cold, how infenfible ‘t: she is of all my endeavours to pleafe her. “ I meet with nothing but perfe<st indifference. “ Her very looks fpeak her infenSibility.—Ah I:
“ had she but half the winning foftefs, the ten-“ der graces of Amelia !—but she is incapable “ of foftnefs—— but don’t you think Amelia* pretty near as beautiful as Felicia ?—It must “ be confessed, however, that this lady has “ a much more agreeable temper.—What a pleassng air! what a charming ssmplicity !
“ Don’t you think it would pique Felicia’s “ pride to fee me change the obje6l of my ho-“ mage» and pay thofe affiduous addresses ta her coussn, which she with fo much fcor» ** contemns ?—It is a pleafing thought, and I am refolved to punish this haughty beauty, “ by letting her fee, that it is now out of her “ power to render me that whining ridiculous “ fellow she endeavours to make me. Tell-me now, Lucius, am I not in the right ? “ They are both ladies of extraordinary me-** rk, replied I with the utmost calmnefs; but
y you ought not to impute Felicia’s dissike to
“ a want
Felicia to Charlotte.

r
** a want of natural goodnefs ; pray, Mellifont, “ is it Such a crime to be blind to your perfec-tions ? She would doubtlefs approve of you
“ as a friend, tho’ not as a lover; and I think
** I know her well enough to affirm, that So
“ far from being offended at your transferring
your affedions to her coufin, she will uSe
her endeavours to promote your mutual fe-
^ licity. Do you think So? returned he ; then
“ I am relblved to try the experiment, I have
“ found Something So engaging in Amelia’s
behaviour, while I paid my addresses to her “ coussn, that I have long looked upon he
with the highest esteem ; she pleafes without
‘* dessgn j and does the most trifling a£lions
with Such a grace, that they forcibly inss-
“ nuate themSestes into the heart. It is, I “ am Sure, in her power to make me happy.
I endeavoured to fix this reSolution, and af-
“ ter leveral other things being Said on the
“ fame fubjedl, he took leave, with a firm in-
“ tention of transferring all his tender Send*
“ ments to Amelia.
“ O my dear Felicia ! tell me what I must “ think of myfelf for this behaviour. What-“ judgment will you form of it ? Sure it can-“ not offend you I You are too artlefs to dif-Semble either with him or me. But how-
16

ever
i8o Felicia to Charlotte.'
ever, I beg to See you, and with the most '‘ affectionate ardor, intreat you to give me an opportunity of expressing my gratitude, and telling you how much I am.
Dearest Creature !
Your obliged and
affectionate Servant,
f

LUCIUS:
\
A £ Toon as I had read this letter, I left my~ chamber, and made haste to communicate it to Amelia, who I did not question would be highly pleafed with the contents ; but to my no fmall furprife, as well as Satisfaction, I' found her engaged in a clofe conversation with Mellifont; So returning to my apartment. Scrawl’d over the above in order to Send it a-way by this night’s posh I have hardly time now to thank you in form for your many favours, and’ therefore with my affectionate prayers for the uninterrupted continuance of your felicity, I, in haste. Subscribe mySelS,
Your Ladyship’s
Moji obliged Friendf
Felicia


Felicia to Charlotte.
18 I
LETTER XVI.
AST week, my dear friend, I informed you that ;the gay and janty Mellifont, finding himfelf unable with all his airs to ingratiate himfelf So far into my esteem, as to prevail with me to listen with pleaSure to his addresses, was So poor a hero as to change his mistrefs, and diredi his Smiles and stghs to A-melia, a thing which however common in real, life, is Seldom or never heard of in romance ; 3^et this instance of his prudence, So far from, alarming my pride, is a constant Source of fa-tisfavSlion and joy. And if you have yet read over my letter, you must .have obServed too, that I told you I left them together while t
V
wrote you an account of this change in my, affairs.
As foon as he was gone, Amelia came running to my chamber with her eyes Sparkling with joy, and an air of the utmost Satisfadion What do you think, my dear, cried stie, as foon as she enter’d the room ; the engaging Mellifont has been Saying Some of the most agreeable tender things to me.—O he is a charming man I He came, to-day as uSual, when shinking that it was to you we owed his,
viSit,
.
lS2
Felicia to Charlotte.
viSit, I told him I would let you know that he
was here, at the Same time turned in order to
go and Seek for you ; but he prevented me.
He took hold of my hand, and defiring me to stay. Said that his bufinefs was now with me,
I went with him into the parlour, when Seating himfelf by me with fuch a foft look as I have fometimes Seen him fix upon you, I know, Madam, faid he, you will be furprifed at what lam going to fay to you; Felicia^s rigour and
your charms have cured my passion for her. I have been unable to Support that lady’s constant indifference, and am not of a temper to indulge a foftnefs that can be of no fervice to me. 1 will never be the dupe of a girl’s vanity, nor whine in doleful ditty the difmal story of defpairing love. I arh refolved to be happy, and would have you obferve that it is out of the power of any of your fair Sex to make me miferable. This, Madam, continued Amelia, was to prevent my uSing him as you have done j for he immediately added fo many agreeable compliments, and Such strong protestations of the Sincerity of his love, that I could never be weary of hearing him.—O he is a charming man ! This change is happy for us both : Is it not, Madam ?—I dare fay,
he is perfedly Sincere,
Here
r
14
Felicia to Charlotte.
I §3
Here Amelia took time to breathe ; for her
extafy had-carried her on with Such rapidity.
that in the exultation of her heart, she hardly
knew how to give a inomenSs truce to her
Her whole foul overflowed with
tranfport.
joy, and it overflowed So fast, that her utte-
rance could hardly keep pace with the Swift courfe of her ideas. The most trifling word had the air of rapture, and every fentence the
dignity of triumph.
However, she no Sooner gave me leave to
Speak, than embracing her with much affe<5l;iGn,
Yes, my dear, cried I Smiling, this revolution
is happy for us both, and I fincerely congratu
late you on the conquest of a heart that has sh long been dear to you. Lucius has lost a rival
that he had reafon to fear, and I have no longer
the dread of difobliging my father by refustng
to marry a gentleman I cannot love; but I
have yet no profpe£l of his ever giving Lucius
his conlent; that is as far off as ever : while
you, who yesterday were ready to envy the
poor felicity I enjoyed, of having my almost
hopelefs paffion returned, have in a moment
obtained your wishes. My aunt will approve
your mutual tendernefs, and in a few days ce-

ment your happy union; how vastly is your
happineSs Superior to mine ! O my dear Fe-
licia,
I
Felicia to Charlott:e.
licia, returned she again; can’t you rejcnce with me, without thefe bitter reflexions ? Exr peX the Same delightful turn in your affairs, and depend upon my aflistance in procuring it. A father’s compliance is not Sure So hard to obtain, when the felicity of a dear and only child is at stake. Let us communicate every thing to Lucius. I will engage my mamma, as Soon as possible, to take us with her to pay his mother and Marilla a viSit, We shall find him at home. He shall know he has had a rival, and we will, tell him the reafon of its. being kept fo long a Secret.—He knows ast ready the state of our affairs, replied I, and had acquainted me with them, before you knew your own happineSs.—Here are a few lines that I received shorn hiin on this fubjeX, just after I rofe nom dinner.
At this she took the letter out of my hand with an eager SurpriSe, her face was covered with a modest blush, which discovered Some confuSion ; and her eyes were. in a moment glewed to the paper, which Seemed to renew her joy. She read it over Several times, and Seemed to dwell with extafy on that past which related the conversation between my lover and Mellifont; but at last reluming it. T his is a proof, cried she, with a fresh kindling fatisfacr '	tron
Felicia to Charlotte. i8-

/
tton in her looks, that he is Sincere in his pto-felTions. It is not a ralh hafty fit of dlfguft that makes him fly to me ! He has examined his heart; he conSults his friend; he loves me almost as well as I do him ! This authorises the delight I feel, and proves that I have not been miflaken in thinking him Sincere,— has fixed his choice, and J stiail be happy 1 .
These words were inSpired by a tranSport that made her exalt her voice much above her
*v
ufual manner of Speaking, fo that my aunt, who was entering the room at the Same time, heard her very diiunfUy. We both faw her in the fame moment, and both were under Some confufion at this uncxpedftd interruption. Since we could not guefs how much st.e had over-heard of what we were unwilling to inform her of. However this diSoister was very shorf; for she came forwards with a Smile, ac-
t
Companied with an air that had not the least mark of diSpleaSure. Heigh day! cried she, (with her eyes alternately fixed upon her daughter and me) what is the matter, pray ? What, all in raptures ? Mayn’t your mother, Amelia, partake of your Satisfadlion ? I am come to claim a share in your confidenco, and to defire you would let me know Mellifont’s buSineSs with yoU' to-day, and the Substance of that long
converSatioa
i86
Felicia to Charlotte,
Conversation you had together. Come, Be' free, mv dear, and tell me all.
Here I found that she was still ignorant of Lucius’s paffi jn, when obferving that Amelia cast down her eyes, and with a vifible diSorder hefitated how to reply, I inftamly removed her enibarraSment, O Madam, Said I, we have strange things to tell you. Mellifont finding my heart too flinty to be Softened by all his endeavours, has shook oflr my chains, and Seeks for happinefs from the more gentle difpofition of Amelia’s foul. While paying his addrefles to me, he discovered a thoufand charms in
her, and therefore wifely confulting his own-bappinefs, has changed the objecl of a hope--lefs paflion, for one who he has reaSon to flatter himfelf will prove more favourable. And I dare fay. Madam, Since you approved of his being your nephew, you will be not lefs willing he should be your Son. No, child, returned she. So far from having any objedlions to him, I freely confefs that 1 shall be proud of his alliance. But are you Sure that he is fincere in his pretenfions ? Inferior as Amelia’s fortune will be to his, I should highly refent my daughter’s being made a property of. This is perhaps only an artifice by which he hopes
to awaken your jealoufy. My jealoufy I Ma-.	dam.
Felicia to Charlotte.
187
dam, cried I with Some warmth ; no, he never could have the vanity to think it, I dare fay he is in earnest, and fo far from being offended at his preferring my couSin to me, I rejoice in his change, and look upon it wi'h a peculiar Satisfaction. Well, whatever is his deSign, rejoined my aunt, a little time will discover it. However, Felida, I would have you believe that I am not much lefs concerned for your happinefs than lam for Amelia’s j you are both very dear to me;^—but your affections are perhaps already engaged,—Here I blushed in my turn, which I fancy she took notice of; for after a short paufe, she only added. But it is not my bufineSs to examine you on this Subject; tho’ I should be very glad to have a share in your confidence. As for you, Amelia, I hope you won’t Scruple to difeover to me the fituation of your heart. You know I am too tender a mother not to confult your inclinations as well as my own, Thefe last
words were expressed in a most moving tone ; while my coufin, v>^ho had been hitherto Silent, could not conceal the rifing tear, which with mute eloquence expressed her gratitude, and thank’d her for her indulgent goodnefs ;,when starting up she Sprung into her arms, and gave her a feeling eaibrace, which the fond mother,
’	with
iS8
Felicia to Charlotte.'
with confcious happineSs in her looks, return’d with equal ardor.
You can’t conceive Madam, how much I was affected with the goodnefs of the parent, and the confidence which it immediately produced in the mind of the child. Amelia dif-folved in filial tendernefs, acknowledged her regard for Mellifont; while my aunt approved her passion ; approved it with an air of joy, tho* still doubting the Sincerity of his preten-Sions. When to remove her fcruples, my cou-Sin promiied to make her a judge, by giving her an account of his future behaviour.
I WAS all this while a stupid obferver, and was almost alhamed not to have a stare,in thefe pleafing caresses. Do I indulge a passion, faid I to myfelf, that I am afraid of acknowledging to a perfon fo well worthy of all my confidence ? Will a lady that has fo much consideration for her daughter, as to tell her that ste is too tender a parent not sto eonfult her child’s inclinations rather than her own ; a woman that is Such an excellent judge of real merit, be infenfible of the perfedlions of my dear Lucius, and difapprove of my passion for fo valuable, fo worthy a man ? One whom she treats wist fo much refpedi, and on whofe virtue, strong fenfe, and other valuable accom-
plistments.
Fbucia to Chaklottb.
i8o
pHIhments, I have heard her make So many encomiums. I canst believe it :—she will be pleaSed too with my confidence, approve my discernment, and give me her afliftance to work upon my father. Well then, I will boldly confefs my tender Sentiments for this engaging youth ; and unternfied at the Small* neSs of his estate, will plead the cauSe of virtue against that of wealth ; I will gain her over by my reSpeaSul confidence, work upon her pity, and engage her to give us her friendly affiS-tance, her compastionate and endearing advice.
1'his was my final resolution ; but though I had no reafon to prevent my putting it in execution, yet I no Sooner attempted to open my Hps upon this too interesting Subjed, than my courage failed, my heart with Soft and fluttering timidity rebelled against the dilates of iC- aSon ; a thouSand Scruples instantly aroSe ;
1 blush’d; conscious shame held fast my tongue; the first word died upon my lips ; my confidence vanished ; and I found the words, //o-yf-, fo hard to be uttered, that I was forc’d in Spite of myfelf to continue Silent, and leave unattempted the too Softening confession ; while all the advantages I fo reasonably expeded from her assistance were unable to Surmount the
weakneSs
IQO
Felicia to Charlotte.’
weaknefs I labour’d under. What a painful perplex’d fituation was this! and how hard is it for a virtuous mind, to prevent that shame which ought only to accompany vice, from attending the most laudable passions ! The mind, enfeebled by custom, is taught to regard that as a weaknefs which is its highest perfe<5lion j nor is it strange that the most honourable and decent love should be accompanied with a modest reludSant shame. Since we are taught to
^	o
blush, at being discovered in the practice of the noblest and most Sublime virtues,
M.y aunt did not stay long ; Softened by her own affe£Hon, and the tenderneis of her daughter, she left us with all that Satisfadlion in her looks, that could ariSe from the contemplation of the felicity of her child; when the percur-, baiion of my mind, occastoned by the struggle between my diffidence and reaSon, inSenstbly difperSed, and at last left me at leiSure calmly to Sympathise in the happineSs of my friends. Hope now gains the aScendant in my mind, and the indulgence of this good mother make? me flatter myfelf with the Same from a father, no leSs affeistionatdy concern’d for my interest.
With
Fsucia to Charlotte.
191
With
I am. Madam, with all poffible affe<fiioJi,
See.
Felicia.
LETTER XVII.
Madam,
T is not without the appearance of reafon that you are Surprifed at the unaccountable manner in which we difpoSe of our hearts ; but if we look around us, we shall find cauSe to vindicate the grave, the Sedate, and tranquil Amelia, for loving a perfon of a temper So widely different from her own It is not always a refemblance of ourfelves in temper, any more than in features, that constitute the strongest attradlive. On the contrary, the thoughtful mind, confeious of its own incapacity to render itfelf happy, is naturally charm’d with one whofe airy fprightlinefs is best adapted to give it relief, and vary its pleafures by inspiring the delightful relaxations of the more lively Social enjoyments; while she vivacious volatile temper expedls the lame fatisfadtion from the Sagacious, and more Sober refledlions of Solid shougbt,.and docent pr udence. Thus
we
rg2 ■ Felicia to Charlotte.’
r
r*
we trequemjy find that a contrast of this kind,
gives a variety, which adds a poignancy to
their joys, while/ thofe,«. whofe fouls nature
Seems to have formed in the fame mould, too / ^
often drag on a dull infipid life; or trifle it a-way with a mixture of alternate levity and Spleen Yet after all, it must be' confeflTed, that however various their tempers, it is absolutely necelTary there sh iuld be a conformity,
at h ast, of pastion and fentiment.
Me THINKS 1 write now with the gravity
of a
opher; and that in accounting for Amelia’s tendernefs for ‘VleHifont, I have very handSrmely apologized for that of your trifling friend/, for the g ave and learned Lucius.
Yesterday being the time we had appointed to pay Maiilla’s mother a vifir, my aunt, Amelia and I, fet out on foot, as foon as we had din’d, after having given orders for the coach to fetch us back in the evening. T ae day was exceeding fine ; and the air ren-deied cool and refrestiing by a gentle breeze, which just waved the yellow corn, that opening in a narrow path gave us an eafy and delightful paffage ; while the bearded ears hung their heavy heads stucharged with myriads of glittering pearls, the fruits of a hasty ihower, which before we had fet out, had refrelh’d the
earth,
Felicia to Charlotte.
19
0|
0
earth, and embalm’d the air with a fragrance, infinitely more pleafing than that which arifes from the powder’d toupee of an accomplish’d beau, or the odours which fcent your ladyship’s gloves. A thoufand clouds with intermingled gold and purple, of various lights and shades, adorn’d the wide, the blue expanfe, or dimra’d the too ardent rays of the dazzling fun; while the infatiate eye greedily Survey’d the wide-stretch’d plenty, or the diftant woods embrown’d by Autumn, or glowing with a lengthen’d verdure of various hues. Here friendly chat and innocent gaiety kept up our
Spirits, deluded away the time, and help’d to
{
increafe the tender joy. which glow’d in my bofom, at every thought of my Speedily Seeing Lucius. I Saw the farmer, to whom I had given fo feafonable a relief, wkh honest front giving orders to his Servants. My heart Sprung again with a bounding joy ; I found myfelf in the fields I had preferv’d in his polTefilon, and felt more charms in the great abundance that Surrounded me from the refledtion of its contributing to the advancement of an honest, though unfortunate family, than the most rapacious mifer in viewing his hoarded treafures.
He perceived me, when with an humble Scrape VoL, I,	K	and
Felicia to Charlotte.’
and grateful look, he Silently exprefled his acknowledgments.
At last we arrived at the end of our walk, when as Marilla had been privately acquainted the night before with our intended vifit, we were fure to find Lucius at home ; they both met us at the gate, accompanied by their mother, where they all with glowing extafy paid us their compliments, and condiusted us into a iUeat and Well furnish’d parlour. Here we took Some refreshment, which being over, Amelia Judging by her own heart, that I should be glad of an opportunity of a Separate conversation, afk’d me with a fmile, if I was not too weary with my walk, to take a turn with her in the garden, while Lucius and Marilla, with a Sparkling intelligent kind of fatisfa£tion in
their looks, ofiered their Service to,accompany
/
■us.
Her-e we had a most tender interview ; f explain’d the reaSon of my condudt, in concealing from him the addresses of Mdlifont, and thanked him for the assistance he had given me, in fparing me the trouble of being any longer teized by his importunities. We thee eonfulted how to procure my father’s confent; but had come to no, determination, wshen ,we
were interrupted by my aunt, whom we faw
coming
Felicia to Charlotte^
coming down the alley to meet us. However, she did not difcover much SurpriSe at Seeing us together without our companions, who wc^ immediately told her were gone to gather Some fruit, which indeed was the excufe they had made uSe of in leaving us; but we had hardly made this apology for their abSence, when we perceived them returning; and my aunt telling us that she was afraid we should fatigue Gurfelves too much, defired we should walk in; we confented and immediately followed her.
SoPHRONiA, Lucius’s moshcr, entertain’d
me with all that eafe and polite freedom, which
\
is natural to a well-bred woman ; and the part she bore in the conversation Sufficiently dilco-vered her good Senfe, and the delicacy and just-nefs of her Sentiments, while an air of Sweet-neSs gave a grace to every thing she Said. Wc were entertained with Several Subjedls, without the least connedlion, most of which were very trifling; but at last, the clergy being mentioned, and feveral shiart stories told of the jo-cofe manner in which the worthy vicar of a neighbouring parish conferred the greatest benefits, we infenfibly became interested in the Subject From the clergy we digrested to religion, an eafy transition ; when Some of the
K 2
errors
Jq'6
Felicia to Charlotte.'
errors of Christians, Sandlified by the venerable name of orthodoxy, were proved inconsistent .with reafon, with all our ideas of moral beauty and natural harmony; with all thoSe en-gaging portraits of the Deity ; with the Swell of humanity which expands our bofoms, refines our ideas, and makes us partake of the divine pleafures of beneficence and conScious
with the kindly imprestion we every
virtue ;
we acknowledge to be divine.
W’here receive from a view of Nature, equally lovely in all her works, and equally confpiring to an universal happineSs; and, in short, with the plainest diScoveries of that revelation which
Man, the noblest part of this lower creation. Said Lucius, is Sunk from the dignity of his being, and represented as naturally incapable of pleastng, by his best a£lions, his kind and benevolent maker. What a resteition on the divine artificer ! our very virtues are crimes, and the most perfedit uSe of all our powers, merit no other reward than eternal damnation ! what a preposterous opinion to think of pleafing the Creator by degrading his works ! So from having any moral fenSe, any in-wrought love of virtue, we are, fay they, form’d with a thouy fand propenfities to vice; and there is not a
.crime which ever was committed, but what
lurki
Felicia to Charlotte."
lurks in the breast of every man, as he is
form’d by nature, and to which he is particu-larlv inclin’d. If this be the cafe, a manly
affion and a villainous one are Synonymous
terms; and to fay a perfon behaves like a man,
is to Sav he is a Sodomite, a murderer, a par-
ricide ; and what, if possible, is a greater con
tradi(stio.n still, it is to Say, that he is to the
last degree penurious and extravagant; that he
destroys himSelf by debaucher)', and yet pines away for want. In stiort, that he aSts from
vicious principles So oppoSite, that they muss; ncceffarily destroy each other. Sentiments
that in ihemSelves are not more monstrous.
than inconsistent with experience, and every .dictate of rcaSon and common fenfe. But the
beneficent Father of the univerfe, whoSe inva-
riable 2;oodncSs is infinite and boundleSs, has
been So far from curfing his offspring by in-
spiring them with Such baleful invenom’d diS
pofitions, that he has strongly connedied, by
the very starae of our minds, vice and cruelty
with hate, ihame and horror: virtue, with a
thouSand charms, a thouSand lovely attradtives.
Supreme and unrival’d in glory, and glowing
with a confcious fenfe of his own matchlefs.
unfading felicity, he creates, to communicate
happinefs, and forms a wonderous Scale of be-
K 3
mgs,

iqS
FEtieiA to Charlotte

/
ings, widely to extend the glorious emanai-tions of his goodneSs, He makes it their duty to be happy, and the glory of each individual, like him, to diffufe happinefs around him. Ha places them in a state of trial, with every tender Social affection in their hearts, to struggle with each stlfish thought, and gives a ray of his wifdom to direist in what manner to exer-cife the particular exertions of theSe Intendering diSpoSitions. What a Subjeist for gratitude ;
for the most devout, the most humble and
#
elevated piety ! This is the religion of Nature ; the generous, the friendly religion of the Bible : that one invariable religion, which will ever be a law to every Species of moral and accountable beings, from men up to the highest order of eelestial Spirits.
Nor can there be a religion, I could not help interrupting, that gives us more exalted Sentiments of the Deity. What Surprifing Hiunilicence ! The noblest pleaSures that can-Swell our minds, are thofe which accompany i the pra£iice of virtue; and yet, exquiSite as thefe delights are, they are only a prelude to diviner raptures j they restne the foul, and fit us for that state of being, where our joys (hall be unmixed with care, and uninterrupted by the, struggle of contending palfions ? where
Felicia to Charlotte.'
99

friendlhip and gratitude stiall be refined into the purest extafies ! and every Social ast'effloti ■ attune the foul into the most perfe£I harmony ! delightful thought ! how lovely is the Deity,
r
and how worthy of our higliest esteem; and ' veneration!
You would have Smiled, my de‘ar friend, -had you Seen the delight Lucius expressed in' hia countenance at finding my fentiments So" agreeable to his own : his eyes',while T was^ Speaking,-kindled’with unufual brifkneSs j and " tempered the tender foftnefs of his glances with '
an air of the highest fatisladtion.’'
BuT thefe enthaSiasts', replied my aUnti'whb frorn an affedlation* of humility, have treated their ov/n Species with Such inSolent reproach,, 'have not had leSs regard to the most Sacred'
We can hear without afionish-
y
ment the charming ties oS virtue blaSphemed Ft the foundation of all public and private happi-neSs, treated with contempt ? Strange indeed,‘ that men should be So inSenfible of the strikin graces of a virtuous charader 1 that that fa cred law, to which the Deity himfelfpays obedience, should be loaded with the vilest re- " proach even from the pulpit! A good-natured
Iftfon must feel alSthe humanity of his bofom ^
K 4/	rife -
ab ligations
200
Felicia to Charlotte.
rife with indignation at the impious proSa-nation.
\
However Surprising this may appear, re-ply’d Sophronia, yet our wonder will in a great meafure vanilh, if we conSider that the fame perfons difcard the uSe of reafon from religion ; for wdiile this is the cafe, nothing can be too abfurd to be embraced ; nay, abfurdity itfelf, continued stc, has been made a mark of truth, and people have flretched their faith fo far as to give their assent to what they themfelves acknowledged to ,be impossible. What could the utmost barDarifm of ignorance do more ? The Deity, all lovely as he is, glowing with every vinue, and furrounded with the dazzling radiance of a heavenly Smile, is represented as stem and inexorable, weak and partial, as pleafed with idle compliments, empty praiSes, and little tricks of devotion ; as fupreme in fell levenffe, with relentlefs malevolence, consssn-mg irretrievably before the world began, ninety-nine of every hundred of his future offspring to eternal horrors, and the utmost extreme of au-emizing' torture: while’thev, the destined few", happy favourites! triumph in his mercy, and extol this fuperlative instance of his paternal goodneSs, and kind partiality. Horrid thought]
cry’d Lucius; v/hat a tyrant I what a monster !
Fflicia to Charlotte.
201
Her I what a devil !—Can we Sorm, an idea of a being more tremendoufly terrible ? A harpy or cerberian monster, with more envenom’d rancour? This is the height of daemonifm; but let the poor heathen howl and tremble before his pagod ; let the barbarian pollute with, human blood the altars of his idol; let the ignorant mandarin, the bigotted derviSe, or Ro-misti zealot, wound and torment thcmfelves to pleaSe a being who has no existence in na-
C
ture; or the lalsty reform’d Christian strive to outvie the pagan, in the frantic reveries of his enthuSiafni, virtue and harmony will still b

/
the fame ; and the Almighty, unpolluted by their praifes, will look with pity on the errors of his children ; they are all the objects of his impartial regard, and equally intitled to his favour; for as Vir. Hill justly obferves,
“ Briton and Ruffian differ hut in name;
“ In Natiirds fenfe all nations are the fame:-
Strange abfurdity ! Said T, that religion should be brought to overturn all the obiiga-
D	.	O
tions of religion ! for it is incredible that any revelation should be thought to be true, which fuppofes the author of it falfe, malevolent, and cruel. But while our priests declaim again!
u
^ s
moralsty
202
FELrClA TO CHARLOTTgr-
morality, it is no great wonder that it should? be defpiled by the laity; Such gloOmy repreSeU’' tations of religion, Such contemptible difco*urSes ©f virtue, must needs corrupt the minds of the; multitudej and fix. the strongest; prejudices a» gainst every thing Sacred ; make our duty looked upon as a burthen; and the most pleaS-ing exerciSes of grateful piety,, regarded^as an . irkfome drudgery.
Our conversation was here interrupted by a Servant, who entering with a letter delivered ! it to my aunt, at the Same time telling her, , that as it had been left for her just before our coachman Set out, he thought proper to bring-it with him,, She received it with an - air off joy, when breaking it open, and casting her. eyes at the bottom, she told me it came from ? my father, and a minute after added with a^ Smile, and a tone of Surprife, that he was preparing to take a journey to See me. What a t Sudden confuSion did this unexpe£led news give me ! 'The joy that I was ready to receive,, was Suspended by the shock of a riSing appre-henSion, that Something extraordinary was the-caufe of this journey. Sure, Said I to mySelf, . he cannoti be acquainted- with ours mutuaff n! What an alarm did this doubt give sne 1 my heart trembled with a .very painful ?
disorder
FeUCia to Charlotte.

202
disorder; and it now flutters in the fame unealy manner, while I acquaint you that I dread to fee him. But what have I done, that I should be afraid of feeino; my father’s faC€ ?“Oh my my dear Lucius !—»to be deprived of the hopes

to fee thee no more !
of living with th Oh ! I cannot bear to think of it.

It was then --
impollible to prevent my apprehenfions from, making fome alteration in my countenance.
I endeavoured to conceal them under a look of furprife ; but, in fpite *of myfelf, that fur-prife had fome traces of uncaSinefs,—I flrug^" gled with myfelf in vain—my aunt perceived it.—I faw she did ; and that increafed my disorder ; but she had too much goodifiature to increafe it still more, by feeming to -take notice of it.—Lucius too had his eyes fix’d upon
mine, while I perceiv’d that he every moment
chang’d colour; and appear’d not lefs alarm’d than mvfelst However it was now time to retire, and I was foon mistrefs enough of myfelf to take my leave of thefe dear friendsVvith
a tolerable good grace. -
What will be the fubje'^l: of my next letter 1 can’t guefs; my father’s prefence will undoubtedly make a confiderable alteration in my affairs, and I am now in the utmost fuf-penfe, yet dread to know the reafon of his
u


K>.6

204 Felicia to Charlotte,'
journey. Dear Madam, if you can inform me what I ought to think of it, let me hear from you by the next post.
With my ssncerest reipeffs to his lord’' ship, I am,
Madam,
Tours. &:c.
Felicia,
I. E T T E R XVIII
Oh Madam!
H A E strange things to tell you. My father arrived this morning, and has thrown me into Such confuSion that I am hardly abile to write to you. I was looking out of my windov/, bewilder’d with a mazy crowd of ufelefs refledions, and had stood for Some time without motion, when I was rouz’d from this stupid Situation of mind, by a coach and Six, which drove in a cloud of dust at a great rate towards our houSe, attended by Several Servants, I did not fee them till th^y were near. They alighted at the gate, and almost in the fame moment I heard my father’s voice. Forget-ful of my fears, every care was in an instant Swallow’d up by duty ; my heait glow’d wish
affection.
Felicia to Charlotte. 205
ion. It is my father! it is my father I I cry’d allow’d. He lifted up his eyes and Saw me, when starting from the window, I ran down stairs with the utmost eagerneSs to embrace him. I met him in the hall. I flew into his arms, when turning from me to avoid my embrace, he deSir’d me coldly to walk in ; but at the fame time gave a figh, and fixed upon me a look, which difcovered how much he Suffered by this restraint. Ah, Madam! you can’t conceive what a shock this beha^ viour gave me. I burst into tears, and went into the parlour, followed by Amelia.
Tell me, my dear couSin, faid I, as Soon as I could Speak, tell me what I shall do. How must I Support my father’s anger ? Do you think now, I deServe to be treated in this manner ?—I can’t bear to think of offending him. I know it is hard for him to ufe me unkindly.—But Sure he has no caufe to give me Such a cold reception.—He has heard of my loving Lucius; but is that Such a crime ? Alas! I must be unhappy, and Lucius must be So too !
I WAS interrupted in this bitter complaint, which was intei mingled with Sighs and tears, by hearing my father at the door, who enter’d the room just as Amelia was going to endeavour
20^
Felicia TO Charlotte;

vour to comfort me. She fat near me, with
her looks fixed upon mine ; he faw us both in
a moving fituation, and when we lifted up our
eyes to his, the mutual tears that for a moment almost stopped our fight, trickled down
our cheeks, and Seemed to make a strong im-
prelfion on his countenance. When turning
to my aunt, who stood behind him at the door,
told her, he defired to be a few riiinutes
alone with me. At this, Amelia arofe,. and
after preffing my hand with the utmost ten-
derneSs, retired with my aunt.
My father, as if he knew not how to be^* have, and perhaps wanting time to compofe his mind, in order to treat me with asternnels Suitable to the Subject of his complaint, and which, I dare fay, he had need of all his resolution to Support, took • a few turns about the room, with the appearance of the utmost disorder ; but at last growing more compofed, he fastened the door and Seated himfelf by me, giving me a fixed look, which had a mixture of anger and fenfibility, while I held do wn my^ head, drown’d in tears, and almost stifledwith my Sighs ; and indeed T was So intimidated by his prefence, that 1 hardly durst list up a glance, to obferve his countenance. , My heart ached in the most painful manner, and Seemed to
struggle

•»*

Feltcm to Charlotte;
e to vent its complaints. At last Seeming to recolle<st myfelf,.. Felicia, it is with fliame. Said he, in a grave tone, that I See you the difgrace of my fan>ily. Foolish girl! what could induce you to forfeit your honour ? My-fondnefs made
flatter myfelf with abun-f dance of pleaSing hopes. I have‘ tonSidered; you as my only child, as the pidure of^ your-dear mother, and you mult have been fenfible^ that my whole happinefs was bound up ia^
yours
What
>7
induce you to thrmv off my authority, and to Suffer yourfelf to be feduced by an artful designing villain. Alas I is this the fruits of that virtue, and good fenSe, in which I have prided' myfelf? Is this the effedts of that delicacy and; innocent wit, in which I weakly fancied that, you reSembled your dear mother ? This the reward of all my tender cares and pleaSing ? But you shall know that a father’s re-fentmept is to be feared. It is ftill in my
power to punish you.-------And I affure you,
the rafcal that has coir up,ted your innocence,
and made me an unhappy.parent, shall leel the cffedts of my rage.
How was it possible. Madam, for mC to Support Such reproaches from a father, whom I,shad never injured even in thought ? To hear-
Lucius,
2g8
Felicia to Ckarlott

Lucius, my dear Lucius, reproached in the coarfest epithets ! to hear him charged with Seducing me 1 to be thought ungrateful I to be regarded as a moniter, who had no Senfe of • honour and duty ! my heart roSe with indignation.—I could not bear theSe unjust reflections.—But in the fame moment observing the agitations of my father’s countenance, and reflecting upon what he now Suffered for me, I diffolved in affedtion, and with a precipitation, inspired by a Sudden impulfe of foul, threw my-felf at his feet. Hear me, Sir, hear me, cry’d I, (with a resolution infpired by my innocence, while my eagernefs to vindicate myfelf, filled me with an impatience that made me instantly lofe fight of all that diflidence and reftraint which had before kept rne filent) let me know
V
of what I am accufed—
(
forfeited my honour ?~
—Tell me, dear father.
In what reSpect I have •How have I offended
?
Can
you r— 1 eii me, aear ratner,—tell me in what instance I have abufed your goodneSs ?~ you alk me that question ? returned he in an
inexorable tone ?—Have I not fiiflicient rea-
fon to be offended ?<—There, read that, cry’d
_ •
he, and blush to think, that you dare preSume to impofe upon me by an air of innocence; I know the world too well to Suffer myfelf to be
deceived by theSe artifices. You will shere
find-
Felicia to Charlotte. 209
find, that however Secretly you have managed your intrigues, I have been but too well acquainted with them.
Here throwing me a letter, and aiiSing hassily, he walked to the door with an air that stew’d him not in the lead Softened at the Simplicity of my behaviour ; when flopping stort, as if blaming himfelf for leaving me on the floor, he return’d with equal fpeed to help me up. But I arofe before he came to me, when Snatching up the letter ! thought, Sir, cry’d I, in a refolute tone, that I should never be fo unhappy as to be refufed to be heard by my father; but however unkinily you are now
pleafed to treat me, it Shall never make me forget my duty. At this I opened the later,
and he went out of the room. In a few minutes I no longer wondered at his treatment; my whole refentmentwas levelled at the wicked author of thofe malicious lines; and I could not
help acquitting my father, and thinking his condudi highly reafonable, on a fuppoSition that he believed thofe vile afperSions. You yourfelf. Madam, fliall fee the letter, that you may judge how grofly I have been abufed, and 1 now tranferihe it with the utmofl examine fs.

Sir

T. 9.
210 Felicia to Charlotte.
CC
“Sir
« **1^ HO i am intyriy unnown to you my
“	^ regard for your onner makes me lay
“ before you an afare in wich you are parti-“ kularly confarnd tho i must confefs i have a “ uast deal of reluktans at communikatin the “ Secret intreges of miSs feliSia for vrom I haue “ a grate affecshon but you will no all Sooner “ or later i am uery forry to tell you that un-“ nown to her aunt Ihe kepes company with a yung gentleman of little fortin wen com-“ pard with hers but it wud give you too much “ confarn to fay that her uarty is intirely lost “ i hope it is not quite So bad yet howiuar he
“ has don her a still grater ingury by korruptin
her mynd god nos nothing but my regard for “ her cud make me fend you this afliktive neus “ euery word of wich I ashur you upon my “ onner is stridtly treu i wud aduiSe you to fend “ for her up to toun as priuatly as poSible her “ ant loves her as euery body dus that nos her “ and it wud be a fad astikshon to the gud lady “ to find that £he shud behave So badly while “ under her care and as this wud be a confarn “ that cud do her no gud it wud be better not “ to let her no it i have won more thing to ad
and .that is .that however gilty you find her

\

t
Felicia to Charlotte.
211
you wud treat her gently this my affekshon “ for her makes me beg of you remember she « is your child fo concluds
Tour and felijtas
fincere thd unnown friend.
“ P. S. the yung mans father is a doun “ rite lybertin and not wurth a grant.
I AM Sure, Madam, your generous concern for ray happinefs makes you now feel much the Same riSings of indignation at reading the vile inllnuations of this ridiculous letter that I did, and therefore I need not particularly de-fcribe the various pangs of working antipathy it occafioned in my bofom. What groSs, what infamous refledHons! But a heart filled with confoious innocence, is the best fupport against Sander. What little reaSon have we to boast ef the Superior advantages of education, when perSons of the meanest attainments can destroy our peace, and make Such bitter inroads on ®ur happinefs I The stupidity and ill- fpelling of the letter, I was fenlible could not give my father the least reafon to fufperst the fincerity of the writer. Since a perSon of the meanest fenfe and most illiberal education, is equally as good a judge of faffs, aa thoSe who are poS-
i!

Felicia to Charlotte
Seffed of the most rm'able accomplhhments. And indeed, fo fan stom this being an objection, it must appear to him as a circumstance that confirm’d the harefui uiSinuations it contained, fince he w?'uld naturally fuppofe, that
a perCn who appeared fo much beneath me, could have no very particular acquait>tance with me, and confecjuently could have no interest in view in attempting to deceive him, Thefe were Some of the first refledlions I made on this part of mv misfortunes. But who is the writer ? faid I to myfelf; this I am particularly interested to know. Since it is of the greatest importance towards clearing my injur'd innocence, and regaining ray father’s esteem. At this I fix’d my eyes again upon the letter, and fancied it was a woman’s band, while the falfe orthography convinced me that my conjedlure was well founded. But then who had 1 offended ? There are none, faid I, that I have feen here that I dare fix Such a bale fufpicion upon ; befides, could malice a-lone Seek to ruin me without Some deep-laid Scheme of rankling felfistinefs ? But whofe hap-pinefs do I oppofc ? I know nobody to whoSe felicity I would not contribute. What must I think ? How can I clear myfelf, without being able to find out the wicked author of this
heavy misfortune ?
Thus
Felicia to Charlotte.'
21 j
Thus, Madam, I reafon’d then, and thus I reaSon still, while every refledtion, instead of giving me the least light into this dark affair, wraps it in a still deeper obfcurity. But
alas ! had the whole been as great a falfehood as that part which charges the virtuous Lucius and me with guilt, I should have lefs to fear; My aunt is ignorant of our tender pastion j I have Seen him without her knowledge; encouraged his addresses without my father’s permission ; and still love that worthy Son of an unworthy father ; the amiable Son of an abandon’d libertine. How can I confefs this without making him fufpedl that the perfon to whom he owes this information, is too well acquainted with my weaknefs to be mistaken in the least particular. The truth of one circumstance will give credit to the rest, and give all too great an air of truth, while my father’s
opinion that Lucius is the author of my ruin,
* ^
will root So deep a prejudice against him, that he will be deaf to all that can be Said in his favour, and hardly ever be brought to hear him vindicated with patience.
All thefe resseClions passed thro’ my mind with the utmost precipitation; for impatient to find Something to fix upon, that might lead me out of this labyrinth, and teach me how to
calm
214
Felicia to Gharlotte.'
calm my father’s anger, I in an instant collected every Scattered thought, and fought all around me for Some pleastng friendly hope on which I might Support my Spirits, ready to fink under my father’s difpleastire : but my Soitl could glance its eye upon no comfort except •my innocence; and as often as that occurred to my mind, there beam’d through it a ray of peace, which preServed me from finking under this heavy load of difficulties. Amidst thefe various agitations, my thoughts frequently returned to my father, to the almost infinite instances I have received of his goodnefs. Intendering thoughts ! delightful ideas ! though now attended with bitternefs. ternefs that melted my foul, and filled my eyes again with fresh stowing tears. But here again, my innocence, Sweetest comfort of the distress ! returned again, and made me reste<st that I was still as worthy of his indulgent regards as ever. Happy, delightful thought 1 O virtue ! thou noblest Source of fortitude, thou Sweetest Support of the human mind, how unfpeakable is thy value, and how much more than wretched is the mind that wants thy aids !
Employ’d in this manner, I Spent a considerable time alone in the paddur, expecting
every moment my father’s return; for which,
however.
A Soothing bit-
r
FsLICIA to CHARLOTTE;.
215
however, I was not yet prepared; when at last a Servant came to tell, me that dinner was upon table, I had hitherto been too deeply engaged to think of dining, and was therefore unprovided with an excufe to prevent it, tho’ in the Situation I was in, it was natural to feel
s
a great deal of reludance against Sitting at the Same table with my father ; and beiides, the emotions I had Suffered had entirely taken a-way my appetite. My mind, yet too disturbed lor company, made me look upon follitude as a relief, I therefore Sent word that I was indif-pofed, and deSired to be excufed ; but the next .moment, considering that it would appear very iingular to the family, and perhaps fet the Servants upon Searching for the reafon of my behaviour, if I alone should be abSent from the table at my father’s coming; and that nothing could appear to them Sufficient to excuSe my refufal, I hastily wipM my eyes, and arming myfelf with .all the courage 1 could colledl, made haste into the dining-room, in order to overtake the Servant before he had delivered shis mestage.
;I TOOK my Seat with the rest, with an ait , as calm as poffible, tho’ it is not to be Sup-pofed, that my countenance could be entirely
Jr.
divested of every trace of uneaSincfs,
My father
2i6 Felicia to Charlotte.'
ther had his eyes continually fixed upon me with an earnestnefs that alternately expressed his anger and pity, while I endeavoured to Support his looks with an eafy humble confidence. Mv aunt and Amelia regarded us both with
J	O
a Silent kind of admiration ; and I dare fay, there never was an elegant entertainment paf-Sed over with fewer words. As Soon as the deSert was taken away, I drank my duty to my father : this was the first fyllable that I had fpoken ; and though I had not eat a mouthful, neither my aunt nor coufin had pressed me to it. They faw my diforder, and did not question my having caufe for uneafinefs. Since my father appeared no more at eafe than I. I drank, I fay, my duty to my father ; but my heart was too full to Suffer me to fpeak it plainly; thefe words trembled on my quivering lips; for my heart fo strongly felt the force of duty, that it would Speak it too : it struggled to Speak it, my fofrnefs would not be restrained, a gush of filial piety started into my eyes, and the moment I lifted up my hand,
hardly knowing what I did, the tears started and fell into the glafs. I then Set it down un-touch’d. At this circumstance my father Seem’d greatly affected. My aunt with tears in her eyes filled me another glafs, when looking
Felicia to Charlotte.
2 ly
ing at her, while the riSing fwell again almost intercepted my Sight, You wonder. Madam, cried I, at the manner in which I welcome my father—Here she interrupted me, by ordering the Servant that was in waiting to retire : and he being gone I continued ; And is it not a thing, to be wondered at ? I have not Seen my father before thefe Six months—that dear father, whofe tendernefs for me has been too great to be exprefs’d : but alas ! his mind is tainted with the foulest Suspicions. O help me to vindicate my honour, and to find out the monstrous author of thefe infamous lyes ! I am fure he will be glad to find me innocent 1 —----1 know he will !
t
Here I threw the letter upon the table, and unable to retain any longer the impetuous glut of Sorrow that now arofe too high to be
concealed, I drew out my handkerchief, and
/
hanging down my head, gave free Scope to my tears j my grief would not now admit of restraint, I therefore neither stifled my fighs, nor groans; I fobb’d aloud, and every one in the company bore a part in this melancholy entertainment; they all Sympathized with me, and wept without referve; even my father could not help joining with the rest ; I lifted up my eyes, Swimming In tears, and Saw Some VoL, I.	L	big
/
«i8
Felicia to Charlotte^

big drops roll down his awful face, when rifing hastily, as if he feared being Softened too much to be able to retain his rigour, or dreading that he should loSe his judgment in his af-fedlion, went out of the room with a countenance that exprels’d more tendernefs shan austerity.
As Soon as he was gone, my aunt, taking me by the hand, and laying down the letter j I have been much furprifed. Said she, wiping her eyes, at my brother’s behaviour, and have in vain endeavoured to find out the caufe of it.
t
He would give me no reafon for treating you as he has done ; but you have difeovered the mystery. He has been informed of your paf-fion for Lucius: and don’t you really love him ? J have for Some time Sulpe6led it. .Come, my dear, be stnccre; there is no crime in loving a man of his character. You need not tell me, that you are innocent of what is here laid jto your charge.—-I am Satisfied that you are fo, and have too good an opinion of you both, 10 entertain the least Suspicion injurious to his Jhonour or yours. You are both virtuous, and both worthy of my brother’s esteem. Ah! Madam, cried I, with a refolution infpired by my grief, will you forgive ,my injuring your gQQdaeSs by concealing it from you? this is
kind
/

Felicia to Charlotte*
2i*
kind indeed. I |do love him—tenderly love him-^love him even more than myfelf j but indeed. Madam, our mutual passion has been always regulated by the stristeft virtue;—it is an innocent passion; and I assure you, that he loves me too well to propofe any ssep that would diSoblige my father; nor would he, great as his love is, accept of my hand without his confent, who alone has a right to diS-pofe of me. This I know to be true ; he has told me To himfelf, while I have rejoiced in his virtue, and conSidered it as a moss convincing instance of the purity and Sublimity of his foul.
I don’t question it, my dear, returned ssie, pressing my hand ; but who is the author of this malicious letter ? I should be glad to be inform’d of that; but Lucius may possible be able to give us fome light; I will write to him to-night, and inclofe this in it; mean while I will take upon me to clear up your virtue, and to give my brother better Sentiments of this amiable young man.—But it is fit he should appear himfelf; let him be his own advocate, he will plead the caufe of his own heart with prevailing eloquence. Dear Madam, cried I, embracing her, is it possible that you can be So very good ? Do you indeed think we shall be
h 2	able?
■n 20
Felicia to Charxotte
f
able to remove the invidious impressions that have been made upon my father’s mind ? O how happy shall I think myfelf if I can but regain his affection ! for the uneafineSs he Suffers on my account is more painful to me than all the effetSls of his difpleafure. My aunt embraced me in her turn, and endeavoured to recover my Spirits by her caresses. And, in short, having called for a pen and ink, wrote in the following terms to my dear Lucius,
tt
Sir,
/

ic
Y my brother’s arrival this morrilng, I
find that you and Felicia have been much injured; but to remove the [pain this
news may give you, I offer my best endea-
“ vours to undeceive him; nor shall my ut-
most efforts be wanting to do you justice;
by convincing him that you have a mind “ that Scorns to be guilty of what is laid to “ your charge in the inclofed libel. Let it be your care to find out the wicked author.
and let us fee you as Soon as possible.
PourS) ,&c.
US’
' /

This

Ve'—	i*'
Felicia to Charlotte.
221
This note, I Say, was wrote in the wrapper, Sealed up, and Sent away by a Servant who bad orders to deliver it into his own hand. You See now. Madam, the Situation ot my af-Sairs; I am upon a criSis which must deter-
V
3
mine my Suture happineSs or miSery. ’Ti true, the SatisSa6iion I have received Srom my aunt’s goodaeSs is too great to he exprefTed ; fhe has given me hopes, which counter-bal-lance my Sears; and in the midst oS all my un~
3
eaSineSs, my gratitude and affedliomfor her ha Some charms. Some engasinff Sweets, which
engagmo- iweets,
o c? o	^
will make themSelves Sek. But yet, while my father is So offended, I must have a claim to
your pity: and thereSore, with the greatest propriety, SuhScribe mySelS,
Your Ladyship
’3
Moji unhappy Servanty
Felicia
LETTER XIX.
Y the last post. Madam, I gave you an account of my father’s arrival, and of the die adful turn his preSence made in my affairs ;
L3
and
\
222
Felicia to Charlotte.
and I imagine that, fill’d with a friendly impatience, you long to hear whether I have yet,
; To far vindicated my honour, as to recover his esteem, or whether I am still oppreSs’d with the Same uneaSmefs I then labour’d under ; I will therefore make haste to gratify your curioSity, and repeat my letters, without waiting the return of the post for an anfwer ; but did you but know how much I need your advice and confolation, you would be as expeditious in writing as I am.
My dear astli(5ied father, I told you, unable' to withstand his natural astediion, and refolv-ing to be guided only by the cool di£Iates of bisjud gment, was constrained, in order to keep a mastery over his passions, to retire for Some time, to colleff his fpirits ; while I took advantage of his abfence to write to you my last melancholy epistle, which took me up the whole afternoon; having transcrib’d the ridiculous' letter 1 Sent you a copy of, while my aunt was writing to jLucius,
In the evening, this good lady had the pre* caution to order the Servants not to enter the’ room, lest they fhould be a witnefs of any ex-pressions that might shock my delicacy for them to hear, A behaviour that shew’d at once her prudence, and regard for my reputation.
Even-
Felicia to Charlotte,
Even at Supper, a dumb'waiter fupply’d the place of an attendant, fo that we were entirely at liberty to enter, without restraint, upon the injustice of my father’s fufpicions; nor couldi my aunt let stip this first opportunity of affuring’. him, that, notwithstanding the malicious letter which had given him fo much uneafineSs, flie still retained the highest opinion of my virtue and difcrecioiT. But to clear Felicia’s imio-cence. Said she, it is necessary that we should-try to find out the wicked writer;- but as this will probaly require time, you must endeavour mean while to divest yourfelf of prejudices, which may prevent your difcovering the truth. It is not whether my neice has placed her af-feffions upon a perfon of a fortune fomething inferior to her’s, that we are now to enquire aster, but whether it is upon an unworthy ob-jeiss;; whether she has violated her regard for virtue; behaved, in any instance, inconsistent-with a decent modesty ; or had any thoughts of difpoSing of herfelf without vour conSent ? In short, it is your Felicia’s honour and duty we are to vindicate; and I don’t doubt but we shall be able to do it, to the fatisfaffion of any difinterested perfon. What then, returned he, would you inSmuate, that there is no crime in placing her affefstons upon a man beneath
E 4	iier I-
224
Felicia to Charlotte.

X
her ?—a very pretty story truly ! If she has no more regard for my authority than privately to favour the addresses of a worthlefs fellow, what ought I to think of her ? Is this any instance either of her duty, or modesty?—-No, no, I am not fit to be confulted—the old fool her father would be too Scrupulous; he would perhaps confult his daughter’s honour to the prejudice of her inclinations; and it would be time enough to Seek his confent, when it will be of no Service to him to refufe it. Severe as thefe words were, the manner of bis uttering them added a double sharpnefs : they touched me in a tender part, arid penetrated my very Soul. What could I do then but burst into tears ?-—into bitter tears, that arofe from an agony too painful to be endured. Thefe were all the anfwer that I could make him ; only as I rofe to go to bed, I fobb’d out; Indeed, Sir, your fufpicions go to my very heart; but^ it is my fatisfadlion that I don’t defervc them. Indeed I have never injured you, even
in thought.
You will readily believe that I was now too much indifpofed to taste the refreshing Sweets of steep. I was no Sooner laid dowm than I began to give way to a whole croud of painful restedlions. I considered mySelf as the most
unhappy

'«
Felicia to Charlotte;
2?5
m
unhappy creature upon earth ; and as worthy of the pity of the meanest peafant. My father, faid I to niyfelf, looks upon me with stiame ! my dear, my tender father hardens his heart against me ! I have lost his esteem—lost his affeffion—Had I Sacrific’d my palfion for Lucius to him, I might have made a merit of -my obedience, and the pleafure he would have received from the refledlion of my duty, would have been Some recompence for the violence I should have done myfelf. But I have now lost both my father and my lover. What a shock to nature? what a violence to love! Like a wretch the most defolate and forlorn,
I find myfelf deprived of every comfort—of every comfort except my innocence.—Whai a group of miferies has this day produced IJ when fill’d with joy at my father’s prefence,S while nature, struggling in my bofom, m me sty to his arms, longing to embrace hiir'f and eager to welcome him upon his arrival, turn away from me with difdain, to treat r |
as a guilty criminal, as the difgrace of hfe f mily!
Omy heart! how have I been able Sustain the shock I vshat would I not give find out the author of all my troubles ? O my dear Lucius !
•<
thou ■ but know ^gony, . the • distraclion of my foul at
» *
$
u

{
L 5
mome
Felicia to CuARLOttE-*
^moment, how nearly would thy defpair re* jfetable mine ! alas!—thou wilt know it too Soon—I stiall never be thine ! 1 must bid adieui, to all my pleaSmg proSpe^s of happinefs; they they are vanished, and I shall be miserable!
» - —Q my God ! pity my diftrefs, and vin*-dicate the caufe of my injur’d innocence f Thou art still my friend; and to thee I can appeal as a witnefs of the purity of my paffiom, of the stnceriiy of my duty, and the integrity^ of my heart—I must, I will confide in thy goodnefs.——
In refiedions like thefe I Spent the greatest part of the night, while steep Seem’d to sty from my heavy eye-lids, parch’d up and drain’d, ©f every tearnor was it till my uSual time of lifing, that, compos’d a little by fome pious^ thoughts; I fell into a stumber, in which I con* tinued ’till noon. I then aroSe, extremely in« difpoSed with a violent pain in my head ; when Amelia, thinking the air, which then blow’d; with a pleafing freshneSs, might give me Somc; relief, engag’d me to take a turn in the fields. But I shall omit the converfation which pafs’d; between us, which indeed was as gloomy as poffible. The thoughts of her own happi-nefs, fa fincere is her affedfion, could not prevent hei bearing an engaging part in my af*
stidions


Fslicia to Charlotte.
22T
Si(stions; and though the day is fix’d for her union with Mellifont, she Seem’d to lympa-thife in my griefs with as real a forrow as iS her heart likewife was devoid of all joy;
Upon my return I found myfelf much more diforder’d than when I went out, and? therefore, by my aunt’s advice, had a light dinner provided for me, and brought into my; chamber, where I din’dwith Amelia, and-that being over, was perSuaded to try if fleep WTuld give me any relief; - and -indeed, after an hour’s repofe, found the pain in my head-much abated; I then went down stairs, and enquiring for my-aunt, was told, that she was in the parlour with my father and Prudilla, who had just come to pay-us a vifit> I he-fitated at first to confider whether I should join them or not; but confidering that to a-void my father’s prefence w'ould-only enCreafe-his opinion of my guilt, I refolved, in fpite ©f my reluctance, to bear a part in the conversation; or at least to make one of the com*-pany.
As Soon as I enter’d the parlour, I could> Slot help taking notice of Frudilla’s extraordinary complaifance, which was the more remarkable as she had lately treated me, whenever I chanced to fee her,. with a referveff
L - 6-	cddnestT;,
%
\
22S
Felicia to Charlotte^
coldneSs, that made me fancy I had offended her; but now she oppressed me with her caresses; and Seem’d to strive to outdo herfelf by the exceSs of her complaifance. My dear. Said she, aster enquiring my health, l am extremely Sorry to See you So much out of order. Really you are more indifpoSed than you are willing to think yourfeff. I am afraid our country air don’t agree with you. Don’t you think fo too, my dear ? I think you feel a little feverish ; God forbid a relapfe ! You are not yet recovered of a fever, that had like to have prov’d mortal. I thank you. Madam;
for your concern for my health, returned
\
but indeed I have no apprehenSions of that kind. Mine is only a flight indifposstion. A pain in my head and lownefs of Spirits, which I hope will Soon be removed: I am pretty fub-jedl to theSe diforders. You have; I think, a very delicate constitution, she replied, but even that is a great mercy, when it has Such a happy estedi as I obferve it to- have in you. For a perfon fo young, to have a mind fix’d upon abetter world ! to give Such early proofs of your being one of the eledl!—Really, Sir^ continued she, you are a very happy rpan ia beina; blefs’d with a daughter who has So
much grace and piety
Every bod'r here are
charm’d.
h ..y
.. d
Felicia to Charlott^'
229
charm’d with her behaviour, and I don’t think there is a perSon living, that can give her a.n. ill word.
My father here shook his head, and gave a Sigh, and at the fame time fmil’d with an air that feem’d to thank her for her good opinion of me. My aunt fmil’d too, but with this dif-ferencej that her looks did not exprefs the ledst degree of gratitude; for the Smile which in my lather’s countenance discovered a Secret plear Sure, imprelTed only upon her’s a fatyrical cash She knew Prudilla j my father was entirely ignorant of her character; and tho’ she could not, as she afterwards told me, dive into her motive for giving me Such devout panegyrics, yet she could not help thinking there must be Something at the bottom of. all this that she ought to discover. She shrugg’d up her shoul-
I
ders with an air of distrust, her eyes ran over each of our faces, as if she fought to know, by the traces she found there, whether our thoughts were conformable to her own. Mean
while Amelia, who fat next me, jogg’d me with her elbow, and looking in my face, bit her lips, and feem’d. to fay : Obferve—what egregious flattery I
I AM glad, faid my father, after a moment’s keSitation, to hear So good an account of my
daughter ;
FiEUciA TO Charlotte
daughter; but the opinions of our friends are no^ always the most juft; they are blind to GUI foibles; and thofe few perfections we have, they are So complaifant as to magnify much above the truth. But did you never. Madam, continued he, hear the least reflection upon Felicia^s character? No, Sir, upon my word; not a Syllable, I aflure youj Said she, with the utmost: earneftnefs; there is not a perfon living that can give her an ill word. She is So much beloved, that if the consideration of her health, or any other reafon, should engage you to take her with you to town, every body that knows her would be extremely aflUiCted, But if her health makes it neceffary, it would be-an injury to hex to deflre her stay ; however, we should be extremely Sorry to Sole her a* greeable edifying company. I don’t doubt it return’d-my aunt, but do you talk of removing her from the fragrant breezes of the country to the Smoke of London, for the fake of her health ? the doClors are here all against you; in my opinion Felicia is much better where she is. Nay, rejoin’d my father, I have no objection to the place. This houfe stands in a very delightful Situation-} and the bloom upon Amelia’s countenance is to me a Sufficient proof of the purity of she air, I shall
mt

5




V
Felicia to Charlotte.

advantage she would re
not dispute the point with you, return’d Pru-dilla, all constitutions, you know, are not a-like; and for my part, I am fo much convinced that London would agree better wish
#
Mifs Felicia, that I could confent to lofe her-company, for the ceive from it, in recovering a more perfedt^ state of health. Don’t ^you think. Mils Felicia, faid she in a fawning tone, I should make a considerable lacrifice in foregoing the-pleafure of your converfation, purely for your advantage ? But my good friends here don’t feem to be of my opinion : whatdoyou think, of it ? you are the best judge j were you not stronger, more brifk and lively when you lived: in town than you have been Since ? I think I: heard you fay you were. No, Mad am ^ I never faid any fuch thing, replied !,, in a peevish-tone, (Surprised at what could be the reafon of her deSiring me to return to London.) Did not you ? I really thought you did, returned she again, I am glad to find I was mistaken ; for indeed^ I defire nothing more than to be bleSs’d; with the continuance of your improving converfation. I was faying t’other day, to a certain lady of my acquaintance, that it would, be a great misfortune to us all to lofe you; fox. pofitively, faid I, a young lady of fuch a
holy.
2 St
Felicia TO Charlotte*'
holy and virtuous life is 'very hard to be met*
with. She was of my opinion, and tho’I
% _____________________________________
don’t love to praife people to their faces, I
can’t help faying, that we talk’d I don’t know
#
how long on your piety.
But I weary both you, Madam, and my'-Self, with relating tattle of no confequence. Hitherto every thing went on fmoothly. Pru^ dilla had attempted to perSuade my father to take me with him to town ; but for what rea-fon I could not then imagine ; her arguments however, prov’d unfucceSsful ; \yhen feeing me difcover Some marks of uneaSmest, ssie tried again to cajole me with the most ridiculous kind of flattery, which was the leSs infup-portable, as it employed my father’s thoughts, and prevented him from entering upon a more painful fubjetst. All this w’hile every thing had the air of mystery; but her dark deSigns were Soon to be staid open, when the very praifes she So liberally bestowed upon me were to turn to her own confuSion. I .should have
told you that the Servant I mentioned in my
« * _
last, to have been Sent to Lucius, with orders to deliver the letter, which has been the caufe of all my fufferings, into his hand, returned without an anfwer, he not being at home;
he was therefore Sent again yesterday at noon,
and
Fflicia to Charlotte.
233
and returning about three hours after, Kiy aunt was call’d out to Speak to him, juft at the time when Prudilla was in the midft of her devoutly fulfome panegyrics, in which I let her proceed without interruption. My aunt’s stay was very short, for she returned in two minutes after she left us, with a countenance inflamed vyith anger; her eyes Sparkled with refent' ment, and every gefture exprefs’d a rage tco violent to be restrain’d ; when Sitting down for a few minutes, to recover herfelf, she perufed a letter flie had in her hand, while we all kept Silence, and, big with expedtation. Seem’d to wait for the difeovery of Some important Secret. For my part, 1 knew not what to think; I was unacquainted with the Servant’s being Sent this last: time to Lucius, for he was dif-patched to him, while I was in my chamber. H is true, as I had nothing to reproach my-fclf with, I had no reafon to fear my aunt’s reproaches; but yet, as I had already been greatly injured, I could not help dreading Some further practices against: me ; I therefore observed her behaviour, in order to anticipate a difeovery, in which I did not doubt my being concerned ; but I had not watched her a minute, before I guefs’d the w'hole, and thought
myfelf able to difeover the'eaufe of thofe strong
emotions
^34-
Felicia to Charlotte.'
emotions which agitated her generous Soul, She frown’d, she bit her lips, she cast a Scornful glance at Prudilla, that expressed both her anger and Surprize ; and then with a look of difguss, continued reading for half a minute
longer; when, as if unable to proceed, she re-‘ peated the Same marks of aversson and asso-nishment: at lass, laying the letter upon the table, and looking at Prudilla, Did you ever hear. Madam,faid she, the least refle<stion upon Felicia's charadter ? Did you ever hear her virtue, her prudence, or her reputation call’d in question ? N~-o, n—o. Madam, returned she, with Some confuSion j at the fame time changing colour, while my aunt rivettinghereyesto her’s. Seem’d to increaSe her diSorder ? But why do you alk me that question again ? added she, with a heSitationthat shew’d she was greatly alarm’d : you don’t fuSpedl me of--of——
injuring her So much as to Say the contrary.^ You then Sincerely believe^her to be perfedlly virtuous, reSumed my aunt? Yes, Madam,, indeed I do, faid she, upon my word, i do 5 as virtuous as myfelf. Here her face,, whicst a moment before was covered with a livid paleneSs, was now all of a ssamsi Yes, and a:, great deal more So, Madam, replied my aunt,, or I am much. mistak.en,--—--Whiat do yoit
mean>
am
Felicia to Charlotte. 235
mean. Madam ? cried Prudilla, riSmg, and casting a glance at the door, have you a mind to affront me ? A great deal more So ! I protest I don’t understand you.—A great deal more So I—A great deal more virtuous than I !—Is this the manner in which you treat your friends ?—Somebody has told you that I
have writ—they have told you that-a—I
have Said Something to Mifs Felicia’s prejudice and you are unwife enough to believe them; but it is a lye, Madam, continued stie, raiSing her voice, an arrant lye; as great a falfliood as ever was invented. I thought. Madam, you had too good an opinion of me to fufpe£l: my being guilty of Such a thing. But ladies, your Servant—your Servant, Sir. I shall know how to refent this treatment ! ha ! mighty pretty ! more virtuous than I!
Here she flew to the door in a violent rage; poffibly to avoid any farther explanations : while Amelia jogg’d me with her elbow, and whifper’d ; Did you ©bferve the word writ ? She had like to have confefs’d all at once ; she knows the contents of the letter; and that there is no name fubfcrib’d, as well as if she had read it this moment. O guilt, continued she, shaking her head, what a fool dost thou make of ws ! In reply, I only Smil’d, and shook
my
236 Felicia to Charlotte.'
my head too—In the mean time, Prudilla was
pulling the lock, while she found all her endeavours to open the door prove fruitleSs ; for my aunt in coming in, forefeeingthat it would be difficult to detain her* long enough to coii-vince my father of her guilt, had wifely turned the key, and put it in her pocket,
Prudilla was now enraged almost to a
degree of madnefs, and turning about, called
/
out aloud, Open the door. Madam. By what authority do you pretend' to detain me here ? Open the door, I fay, or I’ll break it open. She here thundered at it with her feet, while my aunt. Smiling, cried, in a Soft tone. Come,
—Softly—pray don’t expofe yourfelf to the deriSion of my fcr-vants. Pray, Madam, be advifed; this paffion don’t become you—Indeed it does not;'it would almost make one fufpedi you of fome-thing very bad. Dear Madam, be fo good'as to Sit down ; you must not leave us fo Soon ; upon my word we can’t part with you yet. My^ father all this while Seemed fill’d with the greatest astonishment; he appear’d neither to know how to a£t, norhvhat to fay; however,, reflecting at last, perhaps, that my aunt must have Some extraordinary reafon for this change
of behaviour to a perfon, whom a quarter of
an
come. Madam, Softly, Softly
fAicia TO Charlotte. 237
an hour before she treated with much polite-nefs, he arofe, and taking Prudilla by the
hand, led her to her chair; at the fame time intreating her to compofe herfelf- When, feeing it was to no purpofe to make any farther resistance, she peaceably refum’d her feat; and fixing her eyes upon the floor, waited with the utmost uneafinefs for what my aunt had further to add. Her looks were now de-jedled and melancholy, and it was eaSy to See the relu£lance she felt at being obliged, in Spite of herfelf, to hear the mortifying things Sne had reafon to expedf.
What is the matter ? cried my aunt, feeing her Seated ; you appear strangely difcom-pos’d ; but however, I must have Some farther difcourfe with you, , You have been faying abundance of agreeable things of my dear niece, for which she is undoubtedly extremely oblig’d to you; but is flie really fo virtuous, pious and difereet as you have reprefented her ? pray tell us all ^ou know of her, (and then putting on her fpeilacles, and taking the letter to my father out of her pocket, she proceeded in a flow, reading tone) and don’t shew Such vaji deal of relubtance at com-mu~
ni-eating the fe-cret in-trigues of Mifs don’t know y^hat you mean, Madam, replied
228
Felicia to Charlotte.
plied she. You treat me very unworthily: very unlike a gentlewoman. Why, is not this letter yours ? return’d my aunt. No, Madam, she replied : how should it be mine ? I Scorn to uSe any body ill, much leSs MiSs Felicia. ’Twas barbarous to SuSpedl me of a crime of this nature; but we are all liable to be llandered, MiSs Felicia, added she, wiping her eyes, why don’t you take my part ? I have often vindicated you on the like occasson, I could not bear to hear any body uSe you ill ; ’Tis cruel then in you to hear me treated So monflroufly on your account. I humbly thank you. Madam, returned I, tho’ I can’t fee that you could be put to much pains in vindicating my reputation, when you have never heard, as you fay, the least ill word of me. This produced a general fmile, only Amelia, delighted with the thought of Speedily feeing my innocence cleared up, in the prefence of my father, could not forbear indulging the ill-natured pleafure of encreastng Prudilla’s confufion, by a triuniphant laugh. When my aunt refum’d, with that Superiority in her air, which con-fcious virtue gives over the meannefs of de-tedled guilt. Come, come. Madam, thefe Subterfuges and low evaSions Serve only to Set your crimes in a more glaring light: Nor do I ex-
Felicia to Charlotte.
^39
peSi to hear any thing elSe but Such abSurd contradictions, while you endeavour to clear yourfelf of thoSe bafe and Scandalous aClions, which it is in my power to prove against you. This letter, this vile, this infamous and malicious letter, which equally shews the abandon’d character and ignorance of the writer, is yours; I know it is -nor will any thing you can fay perfuade me to believe the contrary.—.Dis your hand—and it exaCtly agrees with another I have here, that difcovers the motive of your aCtions, and lays open and naked the wickednefs and deformity of your -corrupted foul. Is it for this you affect to
appear virtuous, to praCtiSe the blackest vices with a better grace ? to give an innocent mind all the distrefs, and shame, and Sorrow, which .only a guilty one, like yours, ought to Suffer ? To etrange the affeCIions of an indulgent pa-.rent from an only child, the delight of his life, the object of his dearest hopes and fondest wishes ? To throw a damp over all his pro-SpeCls of joy, by representing her as guilty, as a difgrace and reproach to his name, whom he has justly admir’d and lov’d for her virtues. Blush, Madam, if you have any fenfe of shame, or the least degree of that extraordinary modesty, to which you make Such mighty pretences i
/
' A- .	..
240
Felicia to Charlotte.'
man
tences j blush, and look into yourfelf with horror. O my stars! for one of your years to attempt to delude a young man—a very young
and to attempt to frighten him to a compliance with your lewd defires, by threat-ning to deprive him of his mistrefs ! What impudence !—And to dare to attempt it too ! —to attempt it by fuch baSe methods !—But to finish your shame, and convince my brother, that what I have Said is but too true. I’ll read this vile letter.
Here, putting on her fpe6tacles, she began in the flow tone of a perfon reading a hand almost unintelligible.
Unkind Lucius,
IF I dejtred to meet you in the dark lajl night, it was only to fave my bluJhes.—Ho'w modest this was 1 interrupted Amelia, while my aunt proceeded, come to-night, and Fit refufe you no^ thing
Prudilla had fat all this while in a stupid kind of amazement, with a countenance on which was painted all the horror,and rage, and mortified deje6Uon, that guilt and unmalk’d hypocrify could give it. Her mouth was open, every feature distorted, and her whole frame
trembling and convulfed. She continued unable
Felicia to Charlotte.
24. r
able to Speak, unable to interrupt what gave
her fuch pain to hear. But now a Sudden im-
pulfe of shame made her start from her feat,
and Snatching part of the letter out of my aunt’s
hand, in a violent pastion, tore it to pieces: crying. This is too much. Madam ; nobody
could bear it:-----It is a forgery,-----a curled
forgery. While my aunt. Smiling with an air
of contempt, cast her eyes upon a Small piece
she held fast in her fingers, which prefenting
to my father, he read the following words,
which I have now before me,
fufe my requeji or tell
w to be reueng'd on your
acquaint her father with
Tour blujhin
You are ready now. Madam, to wonder how I could think of giving you this unintelligible fragment, under which was remaining the three first letters of her name, for I can’t now be Suppos’d to be in a difpofition to puzzle you with riddles; but however infignificant it may appear, it not only Serv’d to convince my father, that the hand was exadlly the Same as that in which the letter was written, that had given us So much uneaSineSs, hut assisted my aunt in recolledling the whole lines, of which thefe were a part j which she might ea-
V QL. I,	fily
242
Felicia to Charlotte,
Sily do, as it was hardly half an hour Since she had read the letter entire j and then indeed.
they appear’d of the greatest confequenee, stnce they explain’d the motive of this dark proceeding.
My father having compar’d this piece with the letter on the table, return’d it to my aunt, who looking at it with attention, after a moment’s consideration, told us, she remember’d the lines ran thus :
BUT if you refufe my fond requejl, or Ull any body what you know I would have a fecrety I know how to be revenfd on your idol, that you doat fo much upon, and w'nl pofuvely acquaint her father, with every thing you would hide from him: Your blujhing, &c.
These I affure you, continued my aunt, were exadtly her words. O monstrous I cried Prudilla, throwing away the paper, which she had tore into Small pieces, monstrous indeed ! what vile insinuations ! that I should be fuf-pedted of Such crimes ! but my piety and modesty are too well known for any body to believe it. I charg’d with thinking of a fellow ! an odious, nasty fellow ! But I’ll still be reveng’d : I will make him Smart for it. I that never had an indecent thought in my life !
I think of a filthy fellow ! No, no. Madam,
my
/
Felicia to Charlotte.
243
my reputation for chaftity is too well established for any body to imagine it. It is a lye j and for what I know, you, Madam, may have a hand in it: but I can fee through your plots. This, Sir, is a contrivance between Lucius and your wicked daughter, whom I never fufpe£led ’till this moment; they would be reveng’d becaufe I was enough your friend to oppofe her marrying fuch a villain, Such a debauch’d, lewd villain. And fo having my letter there, they must needs counterfeit my hand. Here she forced a ridiculous, affcdled laugh, and then proceeded. La ! Mifs, I did not think you had been fo cunning. But you shall know that my charadler is above cenfure.
It would be impossible. Madam, to defcribe ail the strange contortions, the convulssve gef-tures, and affcdicd airs, with which this fpeech was utter’d. She had at first the very look of a fury ; she grinn’d, she star’d, she stamp’d and walk’d about the room, stuttering her fan, while her countenance, as well as every action, exprefs’d the Swell of rage, the sting of confeious shame, and all the mortifying pangs that could distort and rack a corrupted heart, asham’d of being difeover’d, too proud inge-nuousty to confefs its guilt, and too much heated by paffion to attend the little decorums
M2	of
244
Felicia to Charlotte.
/
oI her charadler. But at last, thinking, \m the heat of her rage, she might throw all upon Lucius and me, and perhaps perSuade f»y father, at least, that she was ignorant of thofe crimes which touched her most to the quick, she chang’d her part, and Swallowed up by the thoughts of revenge, forgot 'shat by this con-tradidlory behaviour she took the most effectual way of destroying at once her charadler, and discovering the deformity of her black, a-bandon’d foul. But she was incapable of re-stedlion, and hurried away by a torrent ofpaS-Sion,catch’d at she first relief that offer’d; a relief shat made her forget her shame, and feel a shadowy dawn of triumph. Good God ? can there be worSe miferies than thofe which ariSe from guilt ? what destrudlion does it occasion, while its very reliefs plunge us into more aggravated wretchedneSs, into deeper horrors !
My father now unable to contain his indignation aroSe, and damping the triumphant Smile, which just began to quiver on her countenance, by a stern and contemptuous glance. Madam, cried he, don’t think it in your power to impofe upon me by thcSe low artifices; I can fee through all thefe doublings, the weak Subterfuges of an abandon’d' mind. If my
daughter
Fslicia to Charlotte.
245
daughter has no crimes but what Such a vile
vP
hypocrite as you can reproach her with,. I (hall do her the justice to think her innocent.: What a beam of joy, atthefe words, shot through my foul. My aunt now arofe, and opening the door, cried. Begone, Madam, for your brother’s fake 1 shall be more tender of your reputation than you deferve, but never prefume again to enter into my houfe. Go, and blush in fecret.-—I am forry that ever I knew you. Here Prudilla left us, hanging down her head, and muttering Something we could not perfedlly understand.
But I find I must break off. When I began this letter, I fancied it would be very short j bat I am got» before I am aware, to my ufual length. Sure I must be an excra-vasant lover of writing to fend you Such long epistles; the post is ready to fet out, andT have but just time to repeat my affurances that I am, and ever shall be.
Your Ladyship’s
Miojl affedlionaU Friend,
Felicia.
Ms
L E T-
V46 Felicia to Charlotte
LETTER XX.
• ^
/ . ■
t
S fc^n, Madam, as Prudilla was gone, i with the thouphts of what had
past’d, an^rcharm’d with the delightful proS-pe£f of a fpeedy reconciliation with my father, I was going to embrace this favourable moment of throwing rnyfelf at his feet, and begging to be restored to his esteem ; but I no Sooner rofc up in order to make thefe fub-mistions, than, stopp’d by the pride of virtue, I resteCtcd that I had already made too many attempts to Soften Kis unjust anger ; and that,
i‘^^ be was now convinc’d of my innocence, it did not become me to entreat, for what I had
Shall J, like a
criminal, laid I to myfelf. Supplicate for for^*
? —in what have I offended $—It is
a right to demand from him.
for goik to stoop So low, innocence has no need
At this thought i Ikt down a-

ain, attd my father and my aunt, ftdl warm with lefentment, being now feated too, could not help making Some refie^ions on the odious deformity of Prudilla*s mind*
What an abandoned hypocrite! cried my father, with a look still disturbM by pa£^on, what a vile incendiary I but how ridiculousty inconsistent was her condudl! I confeSs I am
not
Felicia to Charlotte.
247
fiot able to think it, in any instance, agreeable to common fenfe ; nor can I determine which is the most remarkable, her folly, or her wick-edneSs. What a heap of contradlffions 1 of abfurd, palpable contradictions ! Really, Sir, replied my aiint, I can’t think her So inconfif-'tent with herfelf as you do ; her artifices ap> pear to me all of a piece. Thinking Felicia an obstacle to her criminal delires, fhe endeavours to prevail with you to fend for her up to town ; you unexpectedly come to Search into the truth of what she had alledged against your daughter; when, dreading a difeovery that Miight prove fatal to her reputation, she comes
to clear herstlf of shipsdon, by comtra-
every thing fhe had laid in the letter ; and at the fame time colouring over her artifices the grostl'st flattery, endeavours to
perfuade us, that our air don*t agree with her
'i,
and thus, by a concern for her
ion of the strictest friend-

health, and an fhip, she flattered herfelf with carrying on her grand defign, which is still the removal of vour daughter. And, as to the rest of her condudf, contintied my aunt, it is eaSy to be accounted for, from the strong perturbations of a guilty mind, terrified at the thoughts of a difeovery, ;ind therefore in too great a ferment to attend
M 4
to
2A$
Felicia to Charlotte.
to the nice decorums which were ncceffarV to carry on Such a difEcult deSign, and too much perplexed to Secure herSelf by the Subtle aids of a ready imagination. She affedls to appear a lady of the stridlest piety, aird most unble-milli’d Sanctity of life; stie is the cenSor of the neighbouihood j and not the Smallest fault Can eScape her notice ; judge then, how hard it must be to carry on this difguile when fo
clofcly attack'd,, and how terrible the appre-henfion of being Seen in her true deformity.
Ri&ht, right, cried my father, she is more Subtle than I imagin’d, at least I ought to think S , added he, in a tender tone, in vindication of my too eafy credulity .—I have then injur’d my Felicia !-~r could hear no more—1 flew into his arms, while he, feeing my intention, aroSe and stepp’d forwards to receive me. What a delightful, painful moment!
O MY dear friend, you can’t conceive even a distant idea of half the fatisfadlion and joy I felt ?.t this instant. S(«3iething like the voice of nature hush’d my troubled foul into a peaceful tranfport, into a rapture lefs tumultuous, though not lefs pleafing than that of two meeting lovers. My life Seem’d to run up to its
fource, and to return back again in a Sweeter
and more tranquil stream.
I embraced my
fasher
Felicia to Charlotte. 249
father as if I had not Seen him till that moment, as if that was the happy instant of his arrival. Every care, every trouble was then forgot; my preSent joy took up all my thoughts, and all thoSe thoughts were extafy. My father, having tenderly embraced me, with the affe£Hon of a parent who had found a child more than doubly lost, while nature rifing in hrs eyes, fWell’d into a tear, and roll’d down his awful cheek's. Seated me in a chair that was next his own, and taking hold of my hand, M}'’ dear Felicia, Said he, while all the parent gusti’d in his e^'es,. I have dearly Suffer’d in too eaSiIy believing thee guilty ; but canst thou, forgive the difquiet I have given thee, and o-
verlook this weak credulity, that--^—Dear
Sir, cried I, interrupting him, unable to hold out any longer, and almost asham’d of his con-defcenSion, I can’t bear to hear you.. Is this the language of a father to. a daughter.? No, Sir, it shall never be.yours to me ;.you .opprefs me too much by this unmerited, goodnefs. The terrible difqi/iets we have bdtb felt,- must be plac’d to Prudilla’s account. But I hear-tily forgive her; she has been fufficbniiy morr listed: we wiU think of'her thieii no.more. My condu(st, my reSignation toyowr will, shall
fufficiently shew how little I delervc her flan-*
M. 5
ders<
250
Felicia to Charlotte.
ders. You shall know me to be dutiful; I
^ ■«
will obey you in every thing you can deSire.
Here he pressed my hand, and after a short Silence, turning to my aunt, alk’d who the perfon was, on whom I had plac’d my af-fedions. He is. Said she, (for here, Madam, I can’t help repeating her words, she talk’d So charmingly) he is a young gentleman, of a family not inferior to ours ; but this is a trifling circumstance, when compared with his personal virtues. He has a noble dignity of Sentiment, a generous and humane heart, a delicacy of foul that renders him equally beloved and admired. T'his, Sir, is the charatster I give of him - and I don’t question. Sir, but you’H find it stiiifily just. If you enquire a-broad you will hear too of temperance, afFa-bility, an engaging temper, and, in short, of
4
:f^all the virtues you would wish to fee in a Son-in-law. I am Sorry to hear it, returned my father; it will then be So much the harder for my daughter to comply with what I have to propoSe to her. I have engaged my word to follicit her confent to marry the Son of one of my most intimate friends ; and have alTur’d him, that she pays So striif an obedience to my will, that he need not doubt of my fuc-cefs. He has a fortune Superior to her’s, a
circumstance
Felicia to Charlotte.
2t^I
circumstance that I cannot overlook, nor does he want any qualification to entitle him to the chara^er of a worthy man, or a gentleman. Let me fee now, Felicia, added he, ad-drefiing himfelf to me, that you can obey my inclinations rather than yovr own; for I will not do you the injury to imagine, that you have So far engaged yourfelf without my consent, as to be unable to go back. Sir, replied I, with my eyes fix’d on the floor, I am all obedience. I never propofedj to marry without your approbation ; but let me at least beg that I may have time to conquer my heart, and Subdue my rebellious inclinations. I will study to obey you, and do all In my power to render myfelf worthy your esteem. This, my dear, returned he, is all I defire. [It would indeed be a shock to decency and virtue, as well as the greatest injury to the man thou wouldst endeavour to render happy, wert thou forced into his arms, while thy tenderest affedlions were placed upon another, ssut time, and the perfedions of the gentleman I have chofen for thee, will, I hope, make that deiirable change, which will be necessary to compleat the felicity of you both.
Could our happy reconciliation be concluded with a Subject more capable of civingi
. M 6
252
Felicia to Charlotte.
damp to my rifing joys, and to the exquifite fa-tisfa£Iions of filial affedlion ; My heart, tho* dissolved in duty, fdt the whole force of this lass demand, and at the fame instant that I gave up all power o\'er myfelf, and confented to foifake my dear Lucius, he appeared pre-fent to my mind, in all his charms, in all the radiant charms of virtue, drooping under his unhappy lot, while the tender languishment of his foul feem’d to reproach my too ealy compliance. But what could I do ? could I refufe any thing to a father, who had a right to demand every thing from me ? No ; that was impossible, I was then in a difpoSition to pay him the moss rigorous obedience. Nor iiideed could he have made any request that wot Id have given me equal pain to grant: for wealth and fplendour, and all the alluring gaieties of life appear but trifles, when compared with tlie more important interests of our hearts. Love, in the very instant whfcn I endeavoured to give up the foft, the tender passion, refumed its empire, and in fpite of all my refolutipn, flow’d in upon my foul, and embitter’d the generous efforts of my duty ; nor could T thus formally reSign the extatic thought of Spending my life with Lucius, without feeling Some of
ihe most cruel pangs. However, endeavouring
to
Felicia to Charlotte.
255
to colleft myfelf as much as possible, by recalling the pleaSing ideas of our reconciliation, I assiimM an air of eaSe and ressgnation; but as this was a fituation very difficult to Support long together, and as I found myfelf still disordered with the pain in my head, I feiz’d the first opportunity of retiring to my chamber;
where ray Supper being brought to me, I went to-bed.
I SHALL not. Madam, attempt to deferihe the oppoSite passions I had to struggle with, now I was retir’d from company, and was at liberty to indulge all the various refledhons that intruded themSelves upon my mind. It is Sufficient to Say, that I felt a confufed and disturbed mixture of plealure and pain. But whether the reliefs I found from the confide-ration of having regained the favour of an indulgent parent, together with the thoughts of the joy he felt at finding me still innocent, were more powerful than all the cauSe I had for uneafinefs j or whether my Spirits finking under the pleafing .flow of thoSe dutiful affections which I had indulged without restraint, made me more heavy |than uSiial, I Soon fell into a delightful flumber which lasted till morning, when I f und myfelf perfedlly recovered from every indiSpofition: but the moment
!
254
Felicia to Charlotte.
ment I open’d my eyes, the dear idea of my lover returned again upon my mind; while I recolIeSed his air, his words, his gestures, the; parity of his foul, and the Sublimity of his virtues, all had a thoufand winning graces; pleaf-ing in the review, yet painful in the idea of their being nothing to me. Since I must forget to admire, forget to love this dear engaging man, whom my heart represented as all lovely.
I WAS in this sttuation. Madam, when I wrote you my last letter, which I began as Soon as ? had flipped on my clothes, and which took me up great part of the day in writing; and indeed, though I then fill’d two sheets of paper with my Scribbling, I ought in stridl pro priety to have carried it thus far. But my adventures come in Such Swift fucceflion, that I can’t pretend to keep pace with them. I have a very interesting Scene to relate, and as I forefee it will take up too much time for me to give it you now entire, I chuSe to defer it till my next.
With my most humble refpedts to his Lordfliip, 1 am,
Touriy &c.
Felicia.
LET-
Felicia to Charlotte.
25.5
LETTER XXI.
Dear Madam,
HAD Such a variety of painful and a* greeable things remaining, when I concluded my last, that it was with the extremest relu£lance I found myfelf obliged, either to break off, or to give you Such a looSe general account of the changes in my affairs, as would be entirely unaffe£l:ing j or elfe, after having rais’d your curiofity, to break off, and give you the pain of waiting feveral days in a tedious Sufpenfe. But I have now an opportunity of continuing my story, without any of thofe inconveniences.
The day after that in which I was restored to my father’s favour, and lost to the pleafing joys of love, and all the flattering delights I had form’d an idea of, the Sweets of the most innocent Sympathies, and the uniform transports of a blifsful union of fouls ; the day after this impotent one, I fay, I Scarcely Saw my father ’till the evening : for having Soon after
I arofe in the morning, tenderly enquired into
%
the state of my health, he left us to Spend the day with Some neighbouring gentlemen. Upon his return we were all Surprized to find him
ruifled
35^
Felicia to Charlotte.
ruffled and disturb’d by, pafflon ; and naturally
enquiring what was the caufe of his uneaSinefs,
how great was my astonishment and concern
to hear him tell me, that he had received the
grossest infults from Lucius’s fasher 1 ’tis true.
Said he, he was disorder’d with wine j but it is alfo true too, that he has affronted me in
the presence of Several gentlemen, in.a manner that I can’t help refenting. As I had given-him no caufe of offence, every body took my part; and, as is ufual on Such occassons, freely gave me an account of the Several debaucheries of his life j he is guilty of every extravagance; and is, they tell'me, just upon the brink of' ruin. Can I think of being allied'to Such a' wretched family ! No, child; I must repeat-my request, that you would never more entertain the least thought of his unhappy Son;
Tho’ I had before hardly any hopes of ever obtaining Lucius, yet I could not hear this repeated injundion, without feeling a great addition of pain. My father was now confirm’d in his opposition to my defires, and had fdme reafon to be averfe to out union. Could I
' I
then entertain the least distant thought of a
•	• I
change in my affairs ? I durst not even think ' it possible. I had not the least glimmering * hope of ever being happy, uhlefs I could erafc j
from
Fslicia to Charlgtti.
257
from my heart, the tender impreflions I found there of my dear Lucius, and that Seem’d as great an impoffibility as that I should ever obtain him. I was So much struck with this thought, that I was hardly able to make an anfwer, and only replied, I am extremely Sorry for it. Sir; but rf you knew Lucius, you would be far from thinking him guilty of his father’s crimes, of which he is perfectly incapable ; but 1 shall fay no more, I will study to obey you.
My aunt, perhaps thinking this an improper time to vindicate my lover, as my father was not a little disturb’d with paffion. Seem’d to avoid entring into the fubjetst ; but Melli-font, who as he was upon the point of being united to Amelia, had been fully let into the state of our affairs, and who was now prefent, could not help vindicating his friend, with a warmth that greatly increafed my efleem for him ; and which I law, by Amelia’s eyes, was not much lefs pleaSing to her ; but all he could fay had but little effect on my father: his most forcible arguments could not perSuade him to believe, but that the vices of a parent must have Some este^l: on the minds of his children. *Tis true, he was not now in a difposttion to hear reafon, efpecially on a fub-J[e(st lb opppstte to the tumultuous state of his
own
258
Felicia to Charlotte.
own mind, which had fix’d prepofleflions almost unconquerable. But he was Soon in a better difpofition ; Lucius himSelf removed all his prejudices, and convinced him oS his innocence, and in a happy moment inSpired him With the highest estee«.
The next morning, as I lay longer than ufual I breakfasted in bed ; a thing very uncommon in this part of the world • where, as I have told you, it is not unufual for fine ladies to rife with the fun; but I had Scarcely drank my chocolate, when Amelia came running into my chamber, to inform me that Lucius was just come, and that he was now in in a clofe conversation with my aunt. Seiz’d with a Sudden flutter and perturbation of Spirits, I leap’d out of bed and fbp’d on my clothes, with as much Ipeed as possible; at the fame time afldng her abundance of questions all in a breath ; as whether he had Seen my father ? if he had informed him who he was ? what passed between them ? and Several other things I was deSirous of knowing : and So great was my impatience toshe informed of thefe particulars, that I could harldly stay for an anSwer. I would be informed of every thing at once, and was almost angry-at her making sine lofe the time of afking her. And was not
this
Fflicia to Charlotte.
255
this eagernefs very natural. Madam ? Indeed I could not help it; I adled meeely from in-stin£i:. It was my heart that wanted to be informed, and the strange emotion I felt there caufed fuch a fwift fuccestion of ideas, that every moment’s delay Seemed an age. Amelia talks with as much fluency as most people ever converfed with, yet I thought she dream’d out her Syllables to an unnatural length ; and though I was never drefs’d So quick in my life, I could not be perfuaded that I ever was half So
long about it. But I do not conSider, that
I am describing my ov/n impatience, I am still increafing yours. She told me that my father,
not kn®wing who he was, had behaved with the politenefs due to a stranger ; and upon my aunSs faying he was one of her best friends, had even gone fo far as to tell him, that he should be glad of the honour of his acquaintance, and that it would be a particular favour if now he was there, he would give him a few hours of his company.
What a happy omen ! cried I—Is it pof-fible ?—Are you Sure he faid Co ?—Well, and what clfe Come, quick, my dear—With what an extafy were thefe words uttered | Whatelfe, Madam, returned she, what should he fay dfe f—He faid nothing more I assure
you
200
Felicia to Charlotte.
you. You will eaSily imagine that Lucius accepted the propoSal. ^ Well, hut my dear Amelia, returned 1, with the Same rapidity, are you Sure you have told me all ?—Come, begin a-gam, and don’t forget the least particular. Here Amelia, with a Smile, did as I defired; only adding, that my father feem’d agreeably Surpriz’d at Lucius’s graceful manner of ex-pieffing himfelf. Did he ? cried I with a fresh tranfport ? how could you forget Such a charming circumstance ? But what then were Lucius’s Words ?
Thus I employ’d my time ’till I was ready to go down stairs, when reflefhng that what I had confidered as a Subject of joy, was but an airy viiion, a deluston of fancy ; Since the eale and politenefs of my father’s behaviour to Lucius proceeded only from his not knowing him. My fears now returned with double weight, while my heart ach’d and stutter’d with a painful palpitation, which encreafed at every step I took, as I drew nearer my father and my lover. In what a terrible stifpence thought I, is poor Lucius ! how will he be able to make the important difcovery ? important ?, thought I a-again, how is it important ? Since it will only
V
raife my father’s reSentment. And the next.
moment, 1 imagin’d I law him pale and trem-
Felicia to Charlotte. 261
$«
bling, at hearing my father’s stern command to forbear his addreffes.—But thefe torturing re-flections were in a great meafure put an end to by my entering the room, where Lucins, my father, and my aunt were in full conversation on Some indifferent fubjeils. Lucius, the moment he faw me, arofe with a bluff, and bowing low. Seated himfeif again, and continued the conversation. What a strange concourSe of wild and incoherent ideas now distradled my heart I my foul, filled with a confufed agony, was Scarcely able to attend to any distinct fen-fations. I was bewilder’d in a maze of thought. What a strange fituation of mind ! Is this the last time, Said I to myfelf, with a Sigh, as Soon as I was capable of giving the least order to my ideas, the last, the very last time of my feeing this dear man ? the last time that I ff all hear his voice 1 that voice that has fo often awak’d ail the powers of my Tout to harmony and love! that voice which I have fo often heard with rapture, while, as if all ear, have hung upon his lips, and listen’d to theTender, melodious accents of Ms tongue ! Oh ! how shall I Support his abfence ? how tear rnyfeif from this dear perSon for ever ! never more to converfe with my fellow mind’ never more to hear and fee his heart Speak to me. To forget
\
262 Felicia to Charlotte.
get him ! to forget the dear Sympathies of love !
to be ignorant of what passes in his breast 1 How hard the talk ! Oh duty ! how rigorous are thy demands!—But ’tis reSolved, and I will, I will obey.
Had I not been Seated in the darkest part of the room, and at the farthest distance from my father, it would have been impossible for him not to have taken notice of the diforder thefe cruel thoughts imprinted on my countenance. But I was Soon diverted from thefe gloomy images, by Lucius, who trembling, with a Soft and timorous air, chang-’d all at once the fubjevSl that had employ’d the attention of all in the company but me; and fixing his eyes steadily on my father. You have pro-fefs’d an esteem for me. Sir, laid he, which neither my merit, nor the fmall time I have been in your company, can justify, I am quite unknown to you ; you are ignorant that I have rais’d my ambitious hopes to the happineSs of being allied to you : but however you receive this confession, do me the justice to believe, that I have never prefum’d to harbour a thought of obtaining your daughter without your consent; I love her too tenderly to injure you, or to think of depriving her of your afferSHon, by perfuading her to forget her duty. You alone
have
Felicia to Charlotte.
263
have a right to difpoSe of her; and. Oh ! Sir, it is in your power to render me happy or miserable. With what pain did he utter thefe words ! and with what an earnest befeeching look were they concluded ! As for my father, the moment Lucius, foftening his voice, began to change the difcouife, he started, and viewing him with an earnestnefs mixed with furprize. Seemed to hear him with patience, and even let him conclude without once attempting to interrupt him ; while I, Swallow’d up in attention, felt for Some time a fufpenlion of all thought, of all fenfation and idea. My foul Seem’d a void, every passion was hush’d, and every power waited the next words to teach them how to a<st, and to Set all in motion again. When my father reply’d, I shall neither take upon me to enquire how far you have carried this regard for my authority, nor whether you are worthy of her affcdlion. She is very dear ?o me, and I have chofen a huS-band for her every way capable of making her happy. You will oblige me then, if you pro-mife never to fee her more. Well, Sir, I cannot complain, returned he, with a trembling
voice
this is no more than I ought to have
expected.—I must lofe the lovely Felicia then /or ever !—well, you shall be obey’d—whatever
264 Felicia to Charlotte.
ever it cost me you (hall jc—here he pauSed, as if unable to proceed, and then continued. No, I’ll never be an obstacle to her happinefs; (he shall never more be made uneaSy by my prefence, nor tempted to difobey you, by knowing my defpair.
was
port the effeists of Such generous, painful Sentiments ; a flood of tender Sorrow pour’d into my heart, my head grew giddy, a thick film in an instant overcast my eyes, and trembling, and fick, while every thing ran round, I Seem'd finking into death. My aunt perceiv’d me, while my head was yet Supported by the back of my chair, and my looks steadily fix’d on Lucius j w hen observing my palenefs, and crying out, Felicia is fainting ! she ran to Support me in her arms, just as I was ready to fall upon the floor. It was a considerable time, I believe, before I was brought to mySelfj but being still very fick and low Spirited, my aunt advis’d me to be laid upon my bed, when Amelia Supporting me by one arm, and one of the Servants by the other, I was convey’d into my chamber, where I remain’d for Some lime, in a state little better than that of an entire inSenSibiliiy, during which my aunt was So kind as to keep me company, fitting all the
while
/
Felicia to Charlotte.
2%
while by my bed-Side with a bottle of Salts iii her hand.
As Soon as I had perfedlly recovered my fcnSes, and began to look about me, the first question I afk’d was, if Lucius was gone ? but my aunt could not Satisfy me. I then deSir’d her to tell me how he behaved, and what im-prellion my diforder had upon him j but she . avoided anfwering my queflion, by faying, Phay, my 'dear, don’t make theSe ufeleSs enquiries.—As you must now endeavour to forget him, it would have but an unhappy effedl to store your mind with thoughts that would only increafe the dishculty of conquering your affedlion. But she had Scarcely made this prudent reply, when Amelia came running into my room, and embracing me with an extaSy of joy, Omy dear, cried she, with tears starting from her eyes, Lucius has conquer’d ; my uncle Submits, and gives you up to your lover ! ——. It is impostible ! cried I, fill’d with an amazement that almost deprived me again of my just recover’d fenSes. It is true !—it is true ! I aS-fure you it is true ! reSum’d she, with the Same transport. Here my aunt check’d her friendly^ ardor, which she fear’d might overpower my Spirits, and forcing me to take a glafsof wine and drops, to prepare me for what I had to, hear, deSired Amelia to relate every thing that VoL. I.	N	had
FE L I Cl A T O Gh A'RL OT TEi
iiad pafs’d; when, S^izin^ her hand, I treated her to make haste, but not to forget the least parfiGular, She fpil’d at rnjcea^er-;3ieSs, and with that fatisfa^ion io her looks, ,whieh always appears when a good ipind hag
it in its power to confer an extraordinary joy,
* * * !
without any further ceremony, began thus.: The moment mj mantma ran tp prevent your falling from your chair, Lucius cast hig eyes upon you too ; but he no Sooner beheld you, my dear, in. that frightful Situation, than iiC appeared in a difotder very little different from ypurs; but immediately recollected him* Self, he joined, with my uncle in uSing all hi« endeavours to recover you. He ran himfest to fetch water, and gave it tp your father, who fprinkled your face; he ran for more ; he flew into the dining-room fpr my mothers fmel~ ling bottle, then fpr Some drops. In short we ivad no need of any of the fervants, he himSelf was nipre aClive than they ail put together
could have been; and did a thoufand mean
■ ; ’ » *	^ *	' *
oiEces for you, if any thingean be called mean that is done for a perfon in fuch a Situation. His life, his happinefs, bis all Seem’d at stake. And though he could not have the least hopes ,pf obtaining you, his looks exprefs’d a tender-jiefs and Solicitude thaf I could not help think-Ing even exceeded your father’s. Though he,
idurst

Fflicia to Charlotte.
S
267
idurft not approach you with the Same freedoms as he did, yet he stood behind him, with his eyes fix’d on your faded cheeks, while the tears ran down his, that with his fright wanted little of being as pale as yours j but the instant your colour began a little to return, his came in proportion j and as his apprehenfions vanish’d, hts countenance entirely chang’d. You opened ypur eyes; we Said you would recover; he was in a fresh tranSport, and SeemM at that moment to have forgot that that was to be the last time of his feeing you. Ah ! my dear Felicia, continued she fmiling, do you think Mellifont, in the fame cafe, would have cxprefs’d an equal teiidernefs for me —l ean hardly believe it.
O I MV dear Lucius ! cried I (shedding Some
cxtatic tears) hut proceed. Well, reSumed
she, as Soon as I came from helping you up
stairs, having ash’d me how you did, he turn’d
to ray unde, and giving him a Supplicating
look, Since I must never more. Said he with a
Sigh, behold your dear Edicia, permit me. Sir,
to stay ’till she is come to herSelf. I don’t ash
to See her again, but—Enough, Sir, returned
my uncle, you may stay and welcome; and I
take this opportunity of thanking you, for the
Service we have received from you, in giving
us your astistance : it was generous, and what,
after the declaration I had made you, I had
N i,	not

ft
Felicia to Charlotte;
not the least reafon to expert; but instead of being reproached I was to be obliged. My filler has done you justice in faying you have a- mind very different frona your father’s, and therefore I believe you will not vindicate his extravagancies; and it is his character, more than any diSparity of circumstances; that makes me averfe to your having my daughter; but i| you are an honest man you will not justify him.
'The favage brute had--Who, Sir, what my
father ? cried Lucius; while I was Surpriz’d to hear the perfon who had hitherto fpoke with Such fubmistive refpe6l, now assume a tone So refolute and lofty. Yes, your father! return’d my uncle, as loud as he. He infulted me-—
vilely infulted me, in the preSence of Several gentlemen, who turned him out of the room. They gave me his charader, related many oS his outrages, and convinced me, that he is a . debauch’d, abandon’d fellow-—a villain^—My father a debauch’d abandon’d fellow ! refum’d Lucius, in the fame tone : my father a villain. Nothing but your near relation to Felicia could prevent my refenting the opprobrious epithets. Heavens !my father call’d a villain, and can I hear it with patience ? Oh ! Sir, continued he. Softening his voice. Spare my father! Why, is it not true ? returned my uncle—Is he not
my father ? cried Lucius interrupting him : -Oh
........	:Sir!
\
Felicia to Charlotte.'

Sir! can I have So little delicacy, fb little SenSe of duty, or honour, as not to reSent Such language ? Can I be a Son, and yet So void of filial affedlion, as not to feel my heart rife with indignation, and every paflion Twf^Il to justify
my father ? Then you justify your father, re'-plied again ray uncle. I beg, returned Lucius, -you would not’ prefs this fubjedl. You are Mifs Felicia’s father, and he is mine ; I would therefore preServe a refpedl for you both. Mine has, I confefs, his faults, but he has his virtues too. His faults r would d^nceal from all the world ; I would bury them in eternal oblivion ;
I would blot them' even from' my own remem- " brance; I would Wipe them from my thoughts, . to Save my Self the preposterous shame of blushing for apparent: But yet, whatever he may deferve, I am Sure I don't deferve to hear him treated for
Mv uncle here, continued Amelia, fat fix’d in admiration, while friendship and lurprize were mingled in his looks; he was filent; he Seem’d at a lofs for an anfwer, when at lash givingLucius his hand. Your fentim.ents are admirable. Sir, cried he, and I can’t help thinking him very happy, in having in fo generous a fon, fogood an advocate. I beg pat-£ don for my want of delicacy in shocking yoursi
N 3	Hero; ■


Felicia to Charlotte.
Here heSitating a moment, with a friendly dif» order in his countenance, that fliewM him
stopp’d by an affedling thought, which he waited to indulge, he refum’d. But if a father who has taken So little care of his family, can infpire in a Son Such tender duty, fuch noble friendlhip, how great would be that Son’s af-fedion, had he one who employ’d the whole bent of his foul in contributing to his felicity ? You can’t conceive, my dear Felicia, continu’d
^	i
Ihe, how feelingly thefe words were exprefs’d, Lucius himfelf, notwithstanding his disappointed hopes. Seem’d extremely moved with them, when with a colour as red as Scarlet, he hastily replied, ’Twas in you. Sir, that I hop’d to have found Such a father; but why did I hope it ? that is now impoffible, I shall See your dear, your charming Felicia no more. ’Tis true, my preSumption in daring to love her is inexcusable j but I will try whether ab-ience and philoSophy can teach me to conquer my paffion. If they cannot, I must be unhappy. Here he arofe with a vifible confuSion in his looks, and added with a Sigh, Pray Send to know how she does, for I must retire.
Lucius having taking a turn or two about she room, with a diSorder that I don’t know
how to exprefs, but which Seemed to arlfe from
his
TO
2ft'
Si? thi'hkiiig he had Said too much, by cohfeS-fuig the pleature he had felt in hoping for a fa-
t
of my uncle’s virtues ; (for thofe words Seemed to break rather from his heart than his
tongue) Lucius, I would Say, turn about the room, and
taken a
■ t > t
ing my


make no reply to His defire of knowing how' you did, opened the door; faying, Your Servant, Sir; I wifli Felicia'happy. I will fend my Self, to know if she is recovered. When feeing hihi going, your father arofe, defired him to stay a little lottger, and told him, he could not part with hiin So fuddenly . Upon this your loVer returned; arid they both being again Seated, after a short Silence (for your father, thy dear, contiriuedshe, appeared buried in thought) he feremed, I confefs. Sir, I admire your virtues, and am perfuaded We shall part upon much ' better terms ; pray let rne know the eifeutn-' stances of yoUr family, arid whether you have ' aiiy estate in your own hands. Here I took Upon me to reply,. and endeavoured to give him the characters of Sophronia and Marilla, tvhich I told my uncle I could do v/ith a much better grace than Lucius, as his modesty might be offended should he do justice to perfeins Wliofe inefit was fo nearly allied to his, that he could riot be Suppofed to praile them as
NU,

272
FEticiA TO Charlotte.
they deServ’d, without reflefling great part of the honour upon himSelf. But, mv dear Fc-
^ J
licia, this was not my real motive ; I could not Sit by and See Such a charming reconciliation Carried on, without defiring, at least, to have a Small share in it. 1 had waited a good while to put in a word that might be of Service to you, but could not find a better opportunity than that which now offered.
Well, thank you, my dear, replied I; but pray proceed. You might have told me that to-morrow. Come, make haste. Your father, Mils, continued she, appeared extremely delighted with what he heard ; nor was he much lefs pleas’d to hear Lucius tell him that he had an estate (which though much lefs than yours, might Serve to vindicate his giving him his daughter ;) and indeed he was no Sooner inform’d of thefe particulars, than taking Lucius’s hand, with an affedlionate Smile, he cried. Your virtue, Sir, has conquer’d. I admire your Sentiments, and approve Felicia^s choice. I give you my daughter, and wish you both all imaginable happineSs, With a rapidity as quick as thought, he now threw himSelf at my uncle’s feet. He was unable to fpeak j he graSp’d his hand, wetted it with tears, and I having waited for a minute for
Some
Felicia to Charlotte.

/ S'
fdme extatic rapture, and perceiving him still filent, flevi^ to be the first mestenger of this delightful news,
O ! cried I aSoud, Sure This is ali a dream am I—am I So‘ happy ! So very happy ? where-is my father ? where is'my Lucius-? I will run' and indulge‘my fohdnefs for' them>both Then, feeing my aunt laughing at my rapture, I stew into her arms, embraced her, and then Amelia.* Come; continuedi 1, let us go; I canst stay a moment.^ They 'humoured my

A ^
k ' *v
'i,


Or
\
impatience, and all of us ran together into th parlours My father was standing with his eyes affeftionately fix’d on Lucius, who stood by him holdinghis hand; and I fuppofe giving a loofe to all the rapture of a tranfported heart ;• when breaking from himy my 'father flew to receive me with open arms. Come, my child,-cried he, share in my'fatisfa<Slion.*—r approve-your choice. It shallnow be this gentleman’s study to render you*happy.- Here having em* braced me with a tender affe6tion, he took» hold of my handy‘ when alking Lucius for his,' hd laid mine upon it, and then grafping both: together, God bleSs you both, my children,' cried he, lifting'up his eyes while the tears stole down his cheeks; God bleSs you both
and render your happinefs eternal.
N .5 -
Do you,
2 74
Felicia to Charlotte.
my Son, remember^ added he (still holding ear hands, while he Suffer’d Lueius to cloSe his upon mine, with a tender preffure, which my father render’d yet more pleastng, by holding bosh ours between his) remember, that as by your virtues you now arrive at the height of your wishes, fi> only virtue will render your happineSs complete and durable. Then turning to me, he proceeded, and do you, my dear, remember, that now all your felicity in this life depends on your pleastng Lucius. He is your own choice, and I command you, as you expe£l to be happy, never to mention, or by the least action let him think, that you believe him obliged to you for the gf ^t addition that, by your means, is made to liis fortune.
blefs you both, my children ! To this my aunt aird Amelia gave a hearty Amen j when j giving us an affectionate shake, he let go our hands, and Lucius embraced me with transport, while my aunt and coustn drew near to congratulate us on this happy occaston. Their
f
eyes fparfcled wish joy, their faces glow’d with pleafure, and every word and every look fpoke she fympathy between their hearts and ours ; wherever we turned our eyes, the foul of hap-j)inefs fat beaming in every look, they beheld
us
FkcrcrA to Charlotte.
27^
' ^
us with the tranfport Mr. ThomSon deScribes when he fays.
»

9mr-
^Twai ffttndjhip heighte'ffd by the fniiitial WiJJj TP enchanting hope and fynipafheiic glow.,
** Struck from the charmful eye, 'J)evoting fadr T a kite. ——i—• -
While mV father ftdod lopkihg 6n, with a Su-
perior degree of confcious pleafure in his air Supremely happy iWdP dwakePd power ■'
THE evening WSs ■“
delight. SophroMa and Mkrilla were fehtSor and bore a part in oiir comrtion fatisfai^idn And nothing then feemeid wanting to
I
/ '»
com
hot all this' delight cohld prevent fny
you
news, nor craSe stoin my
thoughts the remembrance of how hauchdl im,
%
’t
Your LadYSHTP-s ■
Msf obliged Servant f
■ ’

2y6
Felicia to Charlotte.
LETTER XXII.
My DEAR Friend;
HIL E I was- reading yours, every-line of which, exprefs’d the most generous and tender Sympathy in my diftrefs, I could not help being extremely delighted with-the thought, that you were perhaps the fame
moment engag’^d in peruSing my last, where
\
you would learn, that you might freely banish all your fears, fince I must now appear greatly
above your pity. It was a pleastng refle<Stion,, Madam, and f assure you-, I could not enter-tain myfelf with the fatisfadlion you would receive on this occaSion, without feeling a great cncreafe of my own. Sure nothing can be more natural than to share in the joy we our-Selves occasson, whea Self-love and friendship both confpire to aid. the Sympathetic delight; and to ressedt back the pleafure another feels from our happinefs.
But what a strange Scheme I could any thing be more extravagant! to f^nd all my letters to my father, to open his eyes to the perfedUbns of my lover, and to convince him^ as you fay, from thofe unguarded overflowings
©f my heart, that our passion fias been hitherto
carried
,vc^- it
Felicia to Charlotte.'
277

carried on with the striisteft regard to virtue; and all the obligations of duty. Really it was an excellent artifice, to remove his prejudices ; and, for what I know, might have been ats* tended with fucceSs. I was prefent when my father received the parcel, and could not help being a witneSs of the Surprize he discover’d at feeing a large bundle of letters enclofed; when having given me that dire<Sled for me, and read yours to himfelf, he call’d my aunt afide, and Smiling, retired with her to read their contents, while I was under little or no apprehenfions of the conSequence of having thofe tender tram-fcripts of my heart discover’d; for tho’ I had entirely forgotten the contents of most of my litters, a conScioufnefs of the fincerity of my duty kept my mind at eafe, and would not Suffer me to fear that I had wrote any thing
that could possibly offend him. But I had no Sooner read yours, and indulg’d for a confidera-ble time. Some of thofe pleafing thoughts due to friendship and yoUj than a Sudden reffleft impulfe of curiofity made me long to know what effe^l of my letters had on thofe intereffedl perSons, my father and my aunt; I therefore a-rofe, in order to attempt a difcovery, which I had not patience to wait for, ’till they made ft
sheaiSelves, Hound them in my aunt’s clo-
fet,„
ayS Felicia to Charlotttb'S
fet, and the door not being lock’d, I gently plifli’d it a little o^eh, and Saw them bhth Seated» with their backs towards mcj with the eSeru-tbre, before which they were fitting, cover’d With papers. The good'lady was liftening tO ’
my father. Who continued reading with a low voice, while she look’d over him ; but I had not stood a minute in this fituation, whenturn-ing their heads So that I discovered half their* faces, on which were imprinted Some lively ‘ traces of fatisfa<3:ion, they gave each other a-* ■glance, my fasher crying out at the fame timef in a transport, O the dear girl ! Elated with ■' ithi^ tender exclamation, fl took a step farther^ ., and
tnat 1 was only a kino dr a ipy,-and ought therefore to be conceal’d, 1 push’d^ the door a little too rudely; which grating 3r gainst the stoor; shey both started, and turning : their eyes to the place from whence the noifb"
.proceeded, difcovered
I was now quite
difconcerted, and you may be fure had an air not a little ridiculous ; for my curiofity now" appeared worthy of shame j and therefore casting down my eyes, was at a lofs whether to ‘ go in, or retire ; , but before I Could determine,-my aunt put an end to my embarraffisient, by calling out, What, Felicia! is it you ? I could^
be almost angry with^ you# We were
ypup
Felicia”to Charlotte;
your Soul, it was talking to us ; and here yol^ like a little impertinent, must come and interrupt the entertainment you yourfelf was giving us. At this I boldly entered the room, when they both joining in their caresses, and mak* ing Some 'apologies, frankly confefs’d the mo« tive of my coming, and the effeist my father’s goodneSs had in making me unattentive to the essary precautions of being conceal’d. They laugh’d at my ingenuity; and having, at their request, brought sthem your letters, and plac’d them in the order I receiv’d them; I left thenr to their entertainment ; and going down stairs, took a walk with AmeHa In the garden; where we for Some time indulg’d the pleafure of dif-courfing on each other’s happinefs. We then made a comparifon betweeii love and friendship, talk’d of you, and in short, were very merry with your expedient for promoting my
O Mai>am I when our minds, after a dreadful storm that has threatened the wreck of all that is most dear and valuable, perceive themfelves entirely at eafe, and wafted by the ehearful gale of every pleassng passion, we find new charms in all around us; a thouSand open-ing joys, that would otherwife paSs unheeded, break in upon our Souls, and contribute to
\
Felicia TO CkarlotteV
heighten our’fatisfadllon; we have a quicker taste for every new acceffion of delight, and' fill’d with that complacency, which makes us-look upon every thing with a Smile, every ob« je61: in return feeras to Smile upon us. And'
while we are in this Situation, not only friendship and love wrap the mind in. the mostpure ethereal delights, but the glittering fun-beams, the balmy breeze, she verdant groves, and alF the lavilst bounty of nature give us a fenfual pleafure. O' how fweet are she. delights which* heaven has thus prepared for mortal sT but how much more exquifite are she charms of innocence and confcious virtue, which give a pleaf-irig relish to all thefe natural beauties I Affliction and distrefs, in-rankling .care, and all the paihful bitter gush of grief, the darkforae shades of providence I like she clouds and storms of nature, roaring round she high-rais’d mountain,, and echoing with a horrid yell through' all her distant caverns. Serve to beautify the variegated Scene, and heighten the glow of her returning Smiles : out tears, “that rain of “ eyes,” Swell she humane bloflom; she kindly shower cherishes the hidden feeds of virtue, opens the lovely foliage, and with she next returning fun the fresh budding graces stand
c©nfefs’d. But; to return; from this long di-
greffioiv

V. ♦	V- V

Felicia to Charlotte.
281
greffion, which I hope you will think not altogether impertinent.
At dinner I had the pleafure of Lucius’s company, a happineSs I now enjoy every day ; when I took notice that my father, who could not yet have read half my letters, behav’d with a peculiar complaifance, and treated him with a refpe6t I had never obferv’d before j and indeed if his esteem and affe<stion for Lucius in-creafes, as it has done stnce our grand reconciliation, he m'zy postibly be in greatei^ haste to compleat our union than I destre he should be ; for between you and I, I begin to grow a coward, and am a little afraid ol entering into the awful aukward state, from whence, you know,
' as from the regions of death, there is no return. However, your example, and that of Amelia’s,
4
I don’t doubt will give me the courage necef-fary to go through the Solemn ceremony with . a pretty good grace.—But I find my happinefs makes me grow lazy, and as Thave nothing ‘BOW very material to add, shall conclude.
TburSf &c.
Felicia.

LET-
LETTER

Dear Madam,
Y father’s affe^ion for l uclus is iibvv^ ariSen to Such a height, that I hardly^ know whether he or I have the greater share in his heartthey are become almost inseparable, and are united in a friendship that-appears very extraordinary in perfons between whom
there is fuch a wide diffiirence with reSpedl to.^ age. He is perpetually at our houfe, and the company of the lover is pretty equally shared: between the happy father and the still more-happy daughter. Methinks this indulgent parent is more lavish of his carestes to me than:
*	A •
ufual, he is continually approving my choice,.

and giving me instructions to regulate my eon-dud by fuch rules, as he fays will render my felicity complete. He has read to me feveral Spectators on this fubjed, to which he has fubjoined many obfervations that have fallen within his own notice. And I assure you, Madam, it shall she my care to put all his wife maxims in pradice. To study our own hap-pinefs, and that of thofe we love, is an affair ofthe utmost confequence, nor can we take too» much pains in, the noble employment, whichM
Felicia to Charlotte.
is at ence both our duty, our honour, and the Source of the most Solid diid lasting joys. My foul is too delicate, and my tenderneSs for the
amiable Lucius too Sublime, to Suffer me to
I
think without, pain, on thoSe little jars, thoSe
petty quarrels, which interrupt the felicity of
* # .
Some of the most happy pairs, and Sometimes make breaches dreadfully fatal to their future repofe. They are upon their guard as to things that feem of importance; but while their minds lie open tottriSes, thofe trifles Soon become affairs of the utmost confequence. To thefe little incidents we are continually ex-pofed, and therefore, as my father fays, they are much more to be feared than thofe, that at first view appear of the greatest moment. However the talk which he hath inculcated cannot be very difpleafing. Since all his rules are peffe<stly agreeable to my inclinations, and only confist of Such maxims as must, if observed, perpetuate our mutual felicity. O my
f	'
dear friend ! tell me (for you know) if there can be greater pleafure than that which re-
.4	• •
Suits from the refledliOn of pleafing a perfon
dearer, infinitely dearer to us, than ourfelves.
•• »	/
The grateful look, the kindling glance, the cxpreflxve glow of tender fondnefs. Silently shot
d	_	I
from the thankful eye —— O can there be a
greater
«
2Sa
Felicia to Charlotte
\
greater reward, to Soften the charming toil, if that can be rail’d a toil that will gladden the heart we love ? For this I will read and ftudy to enrich my mind, for this I will dreSs, for this I will plot new arts ,to pleafe, while virtue, innocence, and truth, shall lead the way, and mark my path to lasting bliSs» What delight the distant profpe£l beams upon my foul! my Lucius I my hushand ! my friend ! dear
—founds fwel-
O All Gfa-
epithets !—enchanting founds! ■ ling with every thrilling joy I-cious Being ! may my abilities be equal to the ardor of my foul! may the wife be loft in the friend ;
friend !
the Soft, the tender, the generous
These last thoughts arife in my mind whenever I entertain myfelf wish the grateful fub-
jeist of my father’s inft'ru£lions: but the pleasure I may be fuppofed to receive from thefe resolutions is extremely damp’d by abundance of intruding fears that dash my joy with a mixture of bitternefs; I tremble lest in the un-
k I ^	,
guarded moments of my life, I should drop she guard I refolve to keep over my temper; left
‘ t 4	\	4	^
I should forget to pleafe, or loSe the power of
doing it. Thoughts shat are always attended •with, pain.
Tslicia'to Charlotte;
28^
'You See what a fond unfashionable creature I am grown; but as your ladyship has given me Some reafon to believe that you are not lefs weak than mySelf, I boldly brave your Satire ; So that if you make'^merry v^th me on this occafion, I shall freely join i|r the laugh.
My iiappinefs is now fo^eat, that there Seems nothing wanting but the consideration of its being per^ualS to render it complete: Nor does Amelia’s appear lefs exquilite than mine; we are furroundeci with every laughing delight, every Social endearment. The congratulations 6f our friends, the caresses of our parents, the tendernefs of our lovers, and the pleaSing Sympathy in each other’s felicity, all contribute to heighten our joy; while rapture itfelf grows more pleassng, by fettling into a Serene and moss charming tranquility. Every thing is prepared for the ceremony that is to unite us for ever to the dearest perfons on earth; and next Thurfday Amelia arid I are to be hailed under the title of Brides, and initiated into the dignified state of venerable Matrons. And between you and I, Madam, we ' both heartily wish theSe Solemn doings over, for really they have Something terrible in them that frights at a distance.
Thus
« (

Felicia to Charlotte.
Tiiys far, Ma4?m» I had written y^er-day» at whlclli tiiq^ I had no other care that? h()W to render Lucitis and myfelf aa happy aa poiHble, except fonie little intruding thoughts of the aulcward appearance I should make at church, and shofe natural inquietudes which are apt to perplex the mind uppn the view of
t
an inaportant change iri our circumstances, all which were counterhalanced by abundance of most charming restedlions : but the Scene Soon chang’d. Alas I what is life, but a perpetual round of vexations and disappointments! a ra» pid fucceflion of intermingled pleaSures and ps^ins I thefe cares and thefe delightful thoughts Ibpn vanished, they gave place to other cares of a more bitter kind, unmix’d with the least thought that could alleviate their force, or stili the tumult of my troubled mind.
Yesterday we had Mellifont’s company as ufual. The tinie pafs’d away very agreeably ; and tho* I had not Seen Lucius all the preceding day, I felt little uneafineSs on account of his abfence. I knew if he was ill I should have heard from him, and therefore did not question but he was detained by fome extraordinary bufinefs, which would be no fopner finished than I should fee him again, with a fatisfa<stion that would be greatly increafed by
our
i-eiur being deprived for. a short time of each*
Thus, while anticipating *the eagernefs with which I fancied he would ‘fly to me, the pleafure I should obServ-e in his countenance, and the tender apologies he
would dpubtlels make on this occafion, I recompensed myfelffor the lofs of a preSent gratification, with the pleaflng thoughts of the future. Though Mellifpnt, Amelia, and even my aunt could not help cenSuring him a little Severely, while I took his part with a good deal of vivacity, and let them know that I did not think I had she least reaSon to be offended.
However, in the evening, I had the Satis-Taflion of feeing him enter the court; my heart bounded with joy, and a Sudden thrill of delight darted through every vein. He entered the room, he Saluted me, but it was with Such a kind of cold restraint, as at pncealarm’d--and piercM my foul; 1 knew not what to think, nor how to behave. I felt ajti; ernotion which I know not how to defcribe, a painful flutter of Spirits: when haying made a short apology, by faying be had been detained by Some affairs of the utmost confequence, he took his feat, and join’d in the conversation, with a distraffion that was too viSxble for rne
not to take patticular notice of it, while me-
thought
2H
Felicia to Charlotte."
thought he had an air of constraint that Seem’d quite unnatural to him. He avoided looking at me, and whenever his eyes chanced to meet mine, he Suddenly cast them down. O what could I think ? could I imagine that he was grown perfidious, and that I had lost my empire over his heart ? No, I could not believe it; I could not entertain a thought So injurious to the fair idea I had conceived of his trutli and goodnefs. However, all that engaging franknefs, which had hitherto appeared on his countenance, was vanished, and I was ignorant of the caufe. Some strange event, thought I, must have happened, in which I am greatly interested. 1 was ready to imagine any thing rather than that Lucius, my dear dear Lucius, could be falSe.
At last, Mellifont and Amelia leaving the room, my aunt Soon followed, and we were left together, without the interruption of company ; a Situation which I had long’d for ever fince I observ’d this restraint in his behaviour,, though his coldnefs would not Suffer me to take any meafures to obtain this fatisfatstion. His eyes now Softened, while drooping with fbme Secret care, every feature had an air of relu(stant languishment. His tendernefs had a mixture of fear, and compaflion, and me-
thought
1
••

I
Fflicia to Charlotte.
289
thought he even Seem’d to dread my reproaches. We both continued Silent, his eyes were steadily fix’d on mine. A figh, a tear efcap’d him. He held down his head to stifle his fighs, to hide his tears. O how nearly did they touch me ! what a violent emotion did .they raiSe in my breast ! my heart throbb’d a pang of grief and lost Surprize struck thro* my foul. I long’d to know the caufe of what I Saw, yet dreaded to alk it. When at last breaking Silence, O my dear Lucius, cried I, unable to restrain my tears, tell me, for heaven’s fake, tell me what is the matter—What is it that disturbs you ? I must know it. Have you a care that I have not a right to .share with you ? Let me know what dreadful mif-fortune it is that gives you this pain. Indeed if I can, I will remove it. and wip’d my eyes, while he, with his still fixed on the floor, echoed back my fighs, when, as if strugling to conquer, the glut of Sorrow which choak’d up his voice, O my Felicia ! my dear, my lovely Felicia ! laid he, let me perfuade you to forget me ; I will never involve you in the miferies of our unhappy family.—Whatdo you niean, cried I, hastily interrupting him, and fcarce able to believe my ears, I don’t understand you,—Alas, my dear,
V oL, li	O	rejoin’d
At this I Sigh’d
2^0
Felicia to Charlotte.'
rejoin’d he, in a Sorrowful tone, you can’t be
I don’t deferve—-How ! interrupted I
mine
again, stunn’d at his words; but immediately my pride helping me to recolle^l myfelf, I coldly rejoin’d. Well, Sir, just as you pleafe.
Here I was going to fling out of the room, when a Sudden glance, in a moment difpell’d my indignation, while Love, with all its humbling powers took entire pofleflion of my foiil. I Saw him with his eyes greedily fix’d on me ; they overflow’d with a melting foftneSs, arid at the fame time, Sparkling through the crystal Swell, with awful dignity. Seemed to exprefs Some great. Some hidden purpofe. Every degree of confuhon was vanished, not the least tindlure of shame remained. His countenance had an air of open franknefs, and no other traces were viSible there but thofe of perfect tendernefs and foft regret. What could I nov/ think ? or what could I fay ? 1 perceiv’d that there was Some extraordinary caufe that forc’d him to behave in this manner; I perceived (or at least I thought I did) that it was with re-lufiance he struggled against his love, and endeavoured to forget me; yet I flatter’d myfelf, that if I did but know the motive to this jpainful talk, I should be able to give him Some
relief, and perhaps let him fee, that there was
no
Felicia to Charlotte. 291
no occaston for Such a victory over his passion : yet, however glad I should have been to have heard his reafons, I had still too much pride to Suffer me to enquire into them ; the shame of meanly stooping to destre to be inform’d of thefe particulars shock’d me immediately; I Saw plainly, that this would appear too forward, and too evidently exprefs the difficulty I should have to overcome my tendernefs.
THESE reflections, which glanced through my mind in moment, kept me filent, and prevented my alking to be inform’d of what I impatiently long’d to hear; when finding me still continue fpeechlefs. You wonder, my dear. Said Lucius, and are at a loSs to find arguments to excufe my behaviour, but could I prefer my own happinefs to yours, I might 'still be as blest as I could wish; as blest as the most high wrought imagination can conceive: I might barbaroufly confult my own felicity to the prejudice of your happinefs and future peace of mind. But I love you more dearly than life, and therefore can never eonfent to involve you in my misfortunes. I will never be guilty of fuch bafenefs. Oh my dear Felicia ! call not this a want of affedlion ; rather think it the triumph of the most perfedl love, the strongest proof of the most generous, difin-
terestednefs,—But what will this cost me
O 2	In
Felicia to Char lotTEi.!
/
In loStng you, I abandon every earthly joy I bid adieu to the most pleaSing proSpefe, to the enchanting Sweets of the most pure and
virtuous———To fee you no more ! ■ .....
At this moment my aunt’s return put a stop to this moving diScourSe; when Lucius and I endeavouring to compoSe our countenances, he enquired if my father would return that evening (for he had been out all day) and being told he would, he promifed to come
the next morning early, to pay him his re-Istedls, and immediately left us.
In this fituation I am in at preSent. I form a thoufand conjedlures, each of which perhaps is groundlefe; and notwithstanding all my endeavours to penetrate the cauSe of this Sudden
9
change, am as much in the dark as ever. However, I must believe him fincere, and therefore can’t fufpe^i that he wants a pretence to break his engagements: No, I am Sure he tenderly loves me—It would be criminal to doubt it. But a few hours more will now discover the whole affair, till when at least I shall be.
Your Ladyship’s
Mojl unhappy friend,
FELICrA,
» t
P.S.
Felicia to Charlottr.
2^93
P. S. The uneafy torment of fufpence, not allowing me to Ileep, I could not think of any expedient to paSs away the tedious interval till Lucius’s return. So a-greeably as in opening my heart to you : 1 therefore arofe two hours before the rest of the family, and employ’d my time in writing you the above.
LETTER
My dear Friend,
NOW fend you two letters together, the
dates of which will tell vou in what order
• ^
they are to be read. In the first you find me plunged into frelh anxiety, into all the pains of disappointed love. In this you will fee the caufe of this mighty change, a great mind struggling between love and generofity.
About an hour after I had concluded the, other letter, a Servant came to tell me that breakfast was ready. I went down with a
mind extremely perplexed, when in Spite of all my endeavours to assume an air of eafe and gaiety, they perceived my diforder, but instead
I
of enquiring into the teaSon of it, as I expedl-edj only strove to divert my penSive thought-
O3
fulneSs,
294
Felicia to Charlotte,’
fulnefs, by turning it into ridicule. At last however Lucius appeared, and by his prefence ^put an end to their unfeafonable mirth, which began to grow extremely painful. Breakfast was now over, and the dear youth defiring my father and I to favour him with our company,
4
went with us into a room, where we had no reafon to fear being distuibed ; and having taken our feats, with eyes in which were intermingled an air of dignity, with the foft lan-guissiment of love, he cast a glance at rne, and then fixing them on my father, Sir, cried he, I am now come to thank you for your unmerited goodnefs, and by an ingenuous confelfion of my circumstances to let you fee, that I am unworthy of the happinefs of pofiesting your daughter. Nay, Sir, continued he, feeing him look astonished, I don’t wonder at your being startled at an addrefs of this nature, but Since I cannot now marry her with honour, I must do you and her the justice to decline it.
Struck dumb with furprize, my father at first Seem’d incapable of making a 'reply; he rivetted his eyes upon Lucius, who at the fame time cast liis to the floor ; his colour came and went, he knit his brows, while his. countenance exprefs’d a confus’d mixture of vexation, anger and disappointment; when, at last.
Seeming
Felicia to Charlotte.
295
Seeming to collect; his Scatter'd thoughts. What can this mean ? cried he, I deSire you would explain yourSelf. What disadvantage can there be in your circumstances that you ought not to have mentioned before r It w’as a bafe and ungenerous part to endeavour to engage my daughter’s affe<Slions, and thus to carry things to the last extremity, when you knew you could not marry her with honour; and I don’t doubt but she will reSent Such treatment as she ought. She will regard your conduff as an infult to humanitv, and as an affront that deServes only to be anfwer’d with contempt.
Tho’ this was expreSs’d with all the bitter-nefs of refentment, in his voice and air, yet it appear’d to make but little impreffion on Lucius ; only a modest, guiltlefs blush, flash’d in his cheek, which Seem’d to arife from the indignant pride of injur’d innocence ^ when finding that my father, by his Silence, waited for his anfwer, I am Sorry, Sir, faid he, in a bold and manly tone, to find you entertain So ill an opinion of me; but were I that ungrateful wretch you think me, T should deferve even, greater reproaches than thofe you are pleafed to load me with ; Felicia’s merit would then Justify this warmth in an indulgent father j but I beg you would do me the justice to hear
O 4
me
296 Felicia to Charlotte.'
me, and I don’t doubt but that, notwithstanding I may appear a more unequal match than ever, you will still think I deServe a place in your esteem. My misfortunes call for pity, and not refentment. I have chofen to be unhappy rather than'to See my father expofed to the miseries of a prifon. 1 have lost Felicia to Save my father!—Think, Sir, what a Son must feel at the very thought of feeing a perfon whom nature, whom ten thoufand obligations has bound him to love and revere, in a jail, in a dark unwholfome prifon, excluded from the chearful face of man, lingering out a wretched being in penury, while he enjoyed Oh ! it is too much ; affluence in Such a circumstance would be a curfe, while nature would extinguisti all the delight of love, and embitter its most pleastng Sweets,-^—’Tis true, I might have conceal’d my giving up my fortune to procure his liberty.—I might have done it—and had I been bafe enough to injure your goodnefs, I had done it. I might in this cafe, have confided in the generoSity of Felicia’s mind, who after our union might have excufed my deceiving her, and have kept it a Secret. But I could neither refolve to marry her in Such wretched circumstances, nor to impofe upon you. I had yesterday morning
five
/
r
ELICIA TO ChARLOT TE. 297
five thoufand pounds, I have novr but two, a
miserable pittance to Support the exigence of a family, born above the inconvenience of low life I Tor to this ule it must be applied : Alas, what inconveniences shall we labour under I but what are thefe inconveniences to the ten thoufand times more painful shock of the rich man’s Scorn, the indignant leer, the contemptuous taunts and shrugs of the wealthy fool, the dread of needy creditors! thefe, even at a distance, strike terror through the Soul,
and-damp the generous pride of upright virtue. But is a wretch like this a proper match for the lovely, the wealthy Felicia? No, you cannot, and I ought not to think it. Instead of ^n estate, shall I bring her the necellities of an unhappy family ? forbid it heaven I forbid it love ! Can I in thefe circumstances ungratefully impofe on that generostty that made you overlook the disparity of our fortune which was too great before ? No, no, Sir; you must no longer think of me as you fon, nor 1 of of her as the dear companion of my life. The confcioushefs of having' now done my duty, in refigning all my pretenfions, will help me to fupport her lofs—I already feel it wilh—Do you then teach her to forget me, Tho’ I shall fee her no more, she shall have my prayers,
nd
/
O5
a
• *
298
Felicia to Charlotte.
and all mv fondest wishes
Good God !
whatever I Suffer, may Felicia at least be
happy !
O I Madam, had you but Seen with what a flood of passion this Speech was utter’d, you would—•! am Sure you would have been extremely moved. He wept—-and Sure never did tears look So graceful on a manly cheek before I My father wept too, and I faster than them both, while he purSued without interruption the noble didlates of his generous heart, bursting into the incorent language of tender distrefs. But I must be more particular, with refpecl to my father, for Lucius had hardly began this apology when the rcTentment which reddened in his cheek, began infenSibly to vanish ; his features, before fwell’d with indignation, now funk imperceptibly, and left only the foft traces of pity, blended with a wonder that Seem’d to arife arnidS: thofe generous Sentiments, v;hich elevate the foul above itfelf. Jie appeared interested in every"word the dear engaging youth uttered ; nor did the broken
Sighs, which frequently disjoirteu them, the groan of his throbbing heart, the trenibling accent of his voice, or the -east change in his coun-tenance, feem to efcape his notice. T faw ic did not—with a Secret joy Flaw it; and rejoiced
in
Felicia to Charlotte.
299
in the humanity of his heart, which made him pity the noble diftrefs of my lover-—at this moment more dear than ever. Never did the high-wrought images of even a fictitious tale
prefent a Scene fo moving as this would have
/
been to an indifferent Spectator ; the most in-fenSible breast must Sure have melted into SoftneSs, the dryest eye have gufh’d into tears.
After Lucius had finish’d, there remain’d a Silence which lasted near a minute——an awful, tender Sstence, which was only interrupted by a few heaving Sighs; when at last my father Smiling, with an exprestive asteCtion in his look. Indeed, Sir, laid he, I have been too hasty; you deServe to be pitied : but what strange magic do you find to Soften me thus ? I profefs I have not shed fo many tears thefe eighteen years; never Since I lost Felicia’s mother, my dear Elmira.. .But I beg you would do me the favour, my friend, added he, to give me the particulars of ihw affcCling story.
Oh ! Sir, refumed my dear Lucius, you have a right to demand every thing from me : and tho’ no mercenary view can tempt me to-betiay Felicia into ruin, tho’ 1 have not the least distant hope of ever obtaining her by this
confeffion, which can have no other effeCi:
O 6	than
300
pELictA TO Charlotte.
/
than to convince you that heaven never design’d her for me, the reSpedl I owe you, and the deSire I have to appear still worthy of your friendship, will make me give you all the Satisfaction you can deSire, Two days ago, as I was preparing to'pay this lovely maid a viSit, a messenger from my father (who went out pretty early that morning) brought me a note, by which I was informed that he was tinder an arrest from one of his principal creditors, What could I do, but instantly fly to l^im ! I found him in the houfe of one of our dependants, with no other company than the ofssccrs who deprived him of his liberty. He received me with an air of dejeCIed fad-nefs, while his attendants stepping to the door, left me at liberty to indulgi the torturing anguish of my heart, by endeavouring to give him the comfort I wanted my feist Oh Lucius ! faid he, feeing me enter, you fee your father a prifoner 1 This-Was all he could fay, before I Sprung into his arms. I could not Speak to him; we. both Seated ourfelves on a bench near the table, when having cast his eyes upon me again, with an air of the deepest melancholy and distrefs, he gave me a particular account of the Situation of his affairs; an account that fill’d my mind with distraCHon,
yet
Felicia Ta Charlotte.
yet in a great m^aSure put a stop to that torturing hurry, that flutter of Spirits with which I had before cast about my thoughts, to give him relief; Since I was now fenSible that there was but one'way to Save him, and that at first view gave the most violent shock to my foul.
Oh ! Sir, how hard .....-how intolerably hard
it is to root out of the heart a passion like mine 1 You, Madam, continued h
A
looking
at me, appear’d in that moment more charming than ever—ten thoufand pleafing, distradl-ing ideas crowded upon my mind, and overwhelmed my fenfes in a mazy whirl of giddi-neSs. My reafon Seem’d departing, while my breast was torn between love and nature, between duty and the tender—too tender foft-neSs that melts, and charms, and Swallows up the foul. Good God ! what did 1 feel! the Sigh, the tear, the unkind reproach from my dear Felicia, and all the distradiion of her bo-fom was felt with a double emphaSis in mine ; but I Soon came to a resolution; the manner in which my father concluded the painful story of the Situation of his affairs, fix’d my wavering thoughts, call’d in my reafon, and pleaded in his look, his air, his words, So strongly for duty, that it was almost impossible to reSist its
impulses. Oh Lucius! Said he, in a most distressful
a
cis a
302 Felicia to Charlotte.'
trefsful tone. You fee I can have no proSped: of relief—No ; I have not the least hope— the least glimmering hope of ever procuring my liberty. Here pressing my hand, and giving me a look painfully asse6lionate, melancholy thought, contined he, the dreary horrors of a prifon are extremely shocking; they diSarm my resolutions, and make a coward of me ! But I have no body to reproach but myfelf.—To be buried alive, to be forever deprived of that wholefome air, which the meanest staves breathe at liberty—Nay,
don’t look So tenderly upon me ! continued he, pressing my hand again, and then looking at me, with the utmost excels of paternal affection, he added. Will you not come to fee me ?
I could bear no more: theSe last words
pierced through my foul. Don’t, pray don’t. Sir, distract me with thefe dreadful thoughts,
interrupted I, you shall not go to prifon-1
am refolv’d you shan’t. What do you mean ? return’d he, I must. I have no friend to af-Sist me. SVhat ami then ? cried I ; you shall not, if my life or fortune can prevent it. I will not—I cannot fee you So wretched I Mention it no more, returned he, I won’t hear of Such a propoSal. Your whole fortune would Scarcely be fufficient—No, no; you shan’t ruin
Felicia to Charlotte^
30 s
yourSelf for me. I will not purchafe my liberty at fo dear a price as your happinefs. Think what it is you propofe. Think of Felicia. Ah! that name will Surely call you back to reafon; ■ you need but conSuIt your own heart to find that it is she, not I, that must render you happy. Leave me then to the miseries I have brought upon myfelf. Death will Soon put an end to them all; but oh! how painful is this Situation, in which death, fo terrible to nature, is my only relief 1 —A relief do I call it ?—Would it be a relief to me ? No, I fear not, there is Something after death, more dreadful than death itfelf, more terrible than all I Suffer. O how happy is the virtuous man to whom the grim monster appears with an angel’s face—with the Smiles of immortal beauty I To me it is covered with dreary gloom that shoots terror through my foul! But when you are happy, Lucius, think
----my prifoh.
of me; vifit me in my grave-------
Oh my father, my dear dear father ! cried I, interrupting him again. Why will you not hear me ? why do you give way to Such cruel thoughts ? shall I not have the liberty of dif-poSmg of my own : I have already thought of what I lofe in forfaking the gentle Felicia. I know my felicity is interwoven with her’s. I
know
/
504
Felicia to Charlotte.
know that our marriage, on which the hap-pinefs of my life depends, will never be concluded, yet I have made my choice. There is Something So horrible in the apprehenSions of feeing you a priSoner, that I cannot bear to think of it. There are no circumstances, in which Such a misfortune to you would not render me wretched.
Of
Are you not my fath and Snail not nature plead for you ? Do you think me a Son, and yet believe me capable of struggling against my duty ?—my duty to my father?—~a father from wTom Shave received numberlefs obligations, that call for returns of gratitude and love. Think what my mother will feel, v/hen she hears of your dif-trefs, and tho’ I have not the power to shake your refolutions, by my entreaties to accept of what I offer you, let her tears, let her de-fpair touch your heart, Marilla too will be distracled v/ith grief, and I know her fo well, that were she of age she would gladly make you the fame offer that I do now. Indeed, Sir, we can none of us feel more mifery than in feeing you miferable—Good God ! cried my father, with uplifted hands, teach me how to a6l. Never did my condudf, in my calmest intervals of refle£Hon appear fo black as it does now. Oh I Lucius! I am asharn’d of
thinking
Felicia to Charlotte.
305
mgs
thinking how I have injur’d you. Your kind-neSs is more infupportable than all my Suffer-
-----How Severely does all this goodneSs
reproach me !-----^this undeferved goodnefs!
It touches me to the quick——it makes a monster of me !——^I beg pardon. Sir, replied I, if I have done any thing to occaston theSe cruel reflediions. In Serving you I only

do my duty.
But ah I it is a painful
duty, interrupted he, I know it is^ your fortune is your Smallest loSs. , If I accept of it, I
deprive you of Felicia’s fortune too---------and
what is infinitely worfe to a mind like your’s, I deprive you of Felicia ! I might have given you a Splendid estate, but instead of that to— Oh I how unlike a father, who, instead of a curSe, ought to be a blessing to his family ! My condudl has been an outrage against nature----——a violation of the dearest privileges
of a parent-------1 have forgot the obligations
of the hustand, the father, and the friend.
—— How rhiferable have
Thy mother too I-I made her I I have been the ruin of all who have loved me—n
and children - —
The ruin of my wife
the ruin of thee !
fad effedl of vice I how dearly do I pay for my folly and madnefs!
Here
3o6 Felicia to CharlottbV
Here he paufed, and I dare fay, it is not dlfficulf. Madam, for you to imagine the tender, the generous, the noble Sentiments, the relation of this affeffmg contest produced. Methought there was Something So heroic. So
dutiful, and fo distnterested in this part of his
_ /’
behaviour, that I could not help Secretly applauding him. But now my father let me fee that he was of the fame opinion as myfelf, by openly difcovering his fentiments: for Luciu# no Sooner gave him leave to Speak, by a paufe in v/hich he Seemed to recollect himfelf; than my father, as if eager to put him out of his pain, took hold of his hand, and giving it an affevfiionate shake. Generous youth, cried he, this was nobly done—You are more my Son than ever. 1 shall think myfelf happy in being allied to a perfon of Such worth. How
greatly do thefe tears become you ! this Soft adoption of another’s Sorrow, this exceSs of
humanity, which the Savage mind cannot (or at least will not) feel, is the truest mark to know the brave, the generous heart by. Actions like thefe give a perfest infight into cha-raisteis, and while they add a dignity to the highest stations, they Spread a lustre that can never be equall’d by all the pride of wealth, the pomp of titles, or the falSe glitter of Successful
Felicia to Charlotte.'
307
ceSsful ambition. Dear Lucius! how happy will my daughter be in So worthy a hufband !
XHIS was utter’d in that peculiar tone in which we always expreSs ourSelves, when the full heart, burthened under its joy, breaks forth into an unrestrained tranfport, into elevated Surprize and generous affe6lion. While he Ipoke the tears started afresh into his eyes, and added an endearing tendernefs to the Smile of gladnefs, which enlivened his countenance. His foul beam’d in his looks, and discovered a mind Softened, delighted, and raiSed above itfelf; while I dwelt upon each word he uttered, and with a most charming extaSy aS-fented to the justice of his praiSes. As to Lucius, he Seem’d all this while as if awaking from a troubleSome dream, while Surprize, gratitude, and a niodest joy, diSperSed the clouds of deSpair which hung on his brow. He look’d at my father, he look’d at me ; the Same pastions were viSible in both our faces, only I fancy mine had an air of greater Soft-nefs; he then turn’d his eyes again to my father, and preffing his hand, I am amaz’d. Sir, cried he. What can this goodneSs mean ? can you really propofe to marry Felicia to a per-fon without a fortune ? to one funk into indigence ? Sure it is impossible ! have you forgot
that
3o8
Felicia to CharSoTte."
\
that our family depends upon my Support, and can you reSoive that Felicia’s estate, instead of being augmented by Her marriage, should be applied to remove foreign cares, and foreign wants ?
Come, come, Lucius, returned my father Smiling, don’t exaggerate the difadvantages of your circumstances. This last instance of filial piety shews a greatnefs of foul, that not only fills me with furprize, but extremely endears you to me. The better I know you, the more I admire your virtue ; and to be as little behind you as possible, in point of gene-roSity, I promife not only to confultyour feli'* city, but the happinefs of all that are dear to you. But pray proceed ; for I long to know the conclusion of thefe affcdling incidents.
Dear Sir, cried the engaging youth, (with a Sparkling joy Swelling into rapture) dear Sir, teach me how to acknowledge your goodnefs; I would be grateful, but yet cannot exprefs my gratitude. My heart feels it all; feels it too Senfibly to be exprefs’d. O my dear, my lovely Felicia, cried he, ariSing hastily, running to me and giving me an eager affedficnate embrace, while my father could not forbear laughing at this natural tranfport, this Sudden impulse of affedlion, nor could I help being
extremely

■'1
/.
Felicia to Charlotte.
3®9
extremely delighted with it j with extaSy he preflfed riiy hand to his boSom, his eyes Spoke unutterable things. But having indulg’d for near a minute this Sudden transport of joy, he returned to his chair, and concluded the story of his father’s misfortunes; but he neither Sufficiently enter’d into the fubjedl, nor dwelt as before upon the most melting circumstances. His own past Sorrow and his father’s were Swallowed up by the joy of the preSent moment. He told us, that after many arguments, his father at last confented to his propofal, but not without the Severest reproaches upon the mad-neSs of his own cotidudl. His creditors were Sent for, when offering a handfome compo* fition, which was readily accepted, their affairs were concluded the next day; and in short, that his misfortune, with the tender-neSs of Sophronia and Marilla, had wrought the most happy change in his condudl; a circumstance which, as it gave Lucius the
^highest pleafure, he mentioned with peculiar Satisfaction.
As foon as he had done, my father renew’d the friendly proofs he had given him of his affection, and promiSed to ufe his endeavours to make us as happy as possible ; So that before dinner we were more firmly united than ever.



*	S*	. . V .
310
Felicia to Charlotte.’
What
%
two days more my circumstances and manner
of life will be changed. So that when I write
next, you will find me in a different clafs of
mortals; but in whatever state I may be, if
you do me justice, you will believe me to be
Unalterably yours.
Felicia.
4
;iE End of the Fir«t Volvms.
jU. o f :•

•	'.-X
' >. N-y' - '; .' -N-yr
*V', . •-

-'U

4
■ y V
•T^. V
'■*
\

' - ~A ■'■ rti ‘■~'d.A' '
♦ • * < 2 •
' *T ^ “ C* •■ -V *



\

X
. \
*-^5-- ''i



•- r'


^ i •*
•' ^A'. /r '»
-	■	'4-' >V
A
_ V* ,- .♦.

.'-* 'VASCi^
.1
rdm
:m

V
■- L-r-^A
- f '<ita>v '
■• <:• .V'--

. f3
.■CAVII

• -r-
' N' '.•
fAt
* t A *
h*. :•».>
.'. ♦: ’■*'


;v:
)
.* , -
V If
. -i
'. • •- i
■ j^jkCS.
• :
•3‘r


'■m



■ ■.

4	^ r
.'* •#
4. '♦ .*•
y
•	^ j
J*’^L

*vT.-9
. vft
'iStf
•..V •>■• /.
>•' ■>■■■. ■'■ SA.




r:^'

/ • 4
V ' #s

• -f
-y ' -
;/. -. ’--^i •.
>’ • '•
'
'•.I
r'-T «'
” • • V ,

*. ..
y. '

•r:
.-> .
' > ' cs
V •	. 7:^
. fw*- • -	-
• »r
-r N
-y

V

---. .■	,	• ;-,'.• < ZF • ' ■•■	‘.'i"
. \
• -'. >: •'.
\ /
<•
i .
< .♦#■1






.J- N

-

A


•..i

■ V	NS'
VS-'tv-'■■;-/■■■ ■''Nh ■-	■' ■' s .
*	•■ • - .V -N ■ : "■:
	
mmri	CA
»A-	- ■ -5>s: • J-w* . .•- •
	,'X ’ ’
■-V
■ *^Lv '-''*yFA^
..X'
'-■^i

t<s%'


‘ T.** '^» <5, ^?V
'■^.s	'
_ . »^ ‘
<

•*-

r



._ • . i




■ f.' -
',- 'r.
r-
. jk"
/	.fc
A^':C;:..C-

A''-

""■ .' -''hrir ■	■. ■■ V:?
N '^.Dg-'- "^v'- ■
!»t . ■ •	■■ :. ' ■■■
'•V •■
-■ ■ 'V .''' r -fe’ 4^-0- i ^ ^
' '• -.r"*	AT 5*'.' -^'-	•
A,	.D.	A
'	■	■'•	. v'.-. ■ •:-•••:■’ ■ -	. ll‘ V-‘V •,■•-■■.'•
■	h. ■
L r'-V^ -V ■■■■	" ' ' ■' ^ ' ■
.CO -A^A L - -'.i :
^ • ■ .* • ^ -
—-: . ,.-
,*-••■"■ C ■ V: - '■' FZ :	■ ■ - ■
1: ■■-' V
A-A- .. ■' ■\<V"Vr.' ■ ■' ADjsv-	I *'Vr^7'
’	-•‘Lfc-sS ■' ■	-.-X'-	C." ■ . i->3
'' i ■-	r^'""
v;
1
, V'

r>i
‘"’-■VAr'*'■'
•••..? • >:
L-A1

-	p
j/
“/ '

J AC'
\ I.-
•"■* *• , "*• 1,' . •
'	.; A V

,'i	.:'	-
•-c^'',: T-.
-i.
i-J

s.'*
.	' A^
' ’ C,
• ■
f- .
- X: . ►	"A ■
^	_*	*. i
■:D ■■■
Vli
>. -■. '1^ ^ —
t
>A

v'W-',

=V '•>£
tk '
■ .
-
A ^

■•■' '^c
.	• p^- '
«. .


>>7C7
■•[-
; cr.r-j..
' c
>2V* •

ij
V.
•'Si

' * - • ■v^:
■.'FA^'
V*


y
■; -t
CA
'	at
04 ( j

■A
f-.r^.-i-'^ A'*-'
Ji
C^O
• t-^*.
;*•. -T Cii


••.'• ’ -»	■^’^'A' • -■ >'-■ ' C' -

. r
I ■•
. ■ *
f- ,
i.-/
■I '
■i ( •
■I f.
1 •
", •• ^-‘ C I
AC

■< ■»
V	•
-•	.sv:;fi . A
'/• V ■	- v'.-.‘...,	• •.
■ ■ •
.' ''	'A'

- ■
* ‘ -ir'.	" _ *• ■



'C^ .''V-
•\	■•	■ •	•	'.	. -A, f'r'--	^ -Tv'
■	•=- •	'	■ .'•^. '*'?• ■'■•'ri4''.
■	A	^•^»'<	■ '•	■vr •
^ *
\V .
iC;.' '■
• V- •	.►
i.* .
,C-
'AA: ■ • ■• ;. . -•
...
-	'•■''‘^i^-'A.-.: ■;'■ ..- - ■	■■ -A-'--'
-	^ ‘ . i-'-h-.. C • ••	.--• - v
' V'f .'', '■
■ *■•■.'
,'-.'C V4-- '>

■. ' '
T V
c ‘ :
C.' ■ A. ■,.


V-.iS^ ■; ■■. V.-' i
-na'
A


ASh

. ■=''' 'hr.

------• • > -•■

I s



* M 11! -.D,

V>

■ V - v‘-
^ hd-C!” ................. .■b 'TTrnn
; ^ ^ „ --F >.	* .	'
• . % -. . *
■/ '
••.-.•*. T N »• M I' '•	... -


I - .	. ^	• >
il	t’’*»mTNCC / ‘ *:;	‘
S - . C *	' • ‘ *	: i. i .• ‘.^ ^ * ,rt T • * •	• -
I~-^^.fS77V.‘.— S. J
i' .......■
' i ! !	’	• ’ I .":
. • t . . I ■	,
;• . , . . „ —; .'■
I	"L.: -	< k 1 • \	r c
t	* * j ,	’V	*
J 1	’ ^		i
i' j	r- *• y	■ i, t	i. 1
i 9	»» '■■ r-	<L r >	1 fi'
•I .	.	.	*
- S-f ■
; .V • * ,
\ '	-	'	• rii*
V/='- •	- fe{:-
*	f T
T'—-	.
i' -■ I ■f''.£^~.’
'.vD-‘'	•
"‘■Ml,-,. ■-. .. -M ' :iT Mi f: . M '; luur * '■ ’ » . - a.‘*...' , ""—>-. 'v •
,-^v'.
Ml!»: ••
-	I"-
■
i '
• /
iv >■ .:


■iKZsri^^ * i
i]Ui^ !Uj . 7 ---;
'	* -’I'.'d.^ltLl* MO *
> ■ . A ' . ■ ^.
^	to
^	>«» «r*»	----------
' '	•• *U!!,JP’	• ■ . I . • . . ... \ .
'	«srsrr*^a9^..,
____	“	i>
:■ V
'^■
> '' •
< r- •.
I !


■ A *	-jV' '	^
! M f .	• . • .	• . .
■•k -*. w» - —	___t.
>r*’ . *■ ^ »
•1
* *%”J' *»
■•II • u o;*
.• ^*^«»var A*- •
•»■ • '	- -I W
• -'M	’ '.1-^ :
«a	9 «t
■ t:: J ■ ■•'	*	t 'K	' -%. i • i
			, -. ;
If .L-. ■ ’M T ’» 1 ^ * « ' • ,A 't • ' i '••^- -->	. V-« 1		« ; . / • T, - > ■ ’> f
{' ' W - •			

:-. >.

■ t-. '-1'
I .
t
1

iF
X •
i:
r
4\,
vr
•/-
V .
c. .
^. 'te'
fef-
V
k
LV,
T>:
«.

r

t-
rv-r •
# i
yIlr:-
•7^^'
i’
'AL^
\
IS
V’"T- ’'"r”	'' "-
,'. V
>..^-y
\ »
N:«


VN h	■	■. V
VC ;.	\
V - -T t
ir -'T^r
^ f . tT A '
»* '. .
^ "TT^
*.^. ■
: \
f-
C&qqr
V.-Zi
X
■ V- -	'	: ‘-S. •	- •
e *• Ti»
THE
GODFREY F. SINGER MEMORIAL PRESENTED BY
MR. AND MRS. JACOB SINGER
' ^
wVC
/ .

IB






\
i
*N
%	• r
FROM
FELICIA
/
T O
CHARL otte

COi^TAINING
A Series of the moll intereftihg Events, interfperfed with Moral Reflexions; chiefly tending to prove
that the Seeds of Virtue are implanted in the
, \
Mind of EVERY Reafonable Being*
The Fourth Edition

Corrected and Improved,
IN TWO VOLUMES.
VOL II.
L O N i) O N;
«
Printed for J. Rivington, T. Caslok, JOHNSQN; J. Payne, and W. Goldsmith*
i^!
M-DCCLXXni.
♦ r.«V
I

•# •-
f • *1.
\
/
' V
> »



I ^
-.. r
,:•!
; - f
«
- <
if
»
J

w/ -.	■ .- -£ V •• ■	-
_	.-jf—«•.»'■■.'-■ —

U. of pa
U-.
cr
iU
iu%
/•
E
I
C
I A
T O
/
CHART O T T E.
\ /\	^ V\^ V \/V* V" V’\‘‘''	V*
/‘\/\P\K \/	\d. \K \/	V'' \y' \y \

>
f
ja
fi
3'
r»
4
V
Ay
0
«ar
LETTER XXV.
O U wonder, Tvladani, at my Silence ; but the continual perfecution of a number of viSitors, has, for Some time past, deprived me of every opportunity of retirement: fo that, unlefs I could have found in my heart to have fent you a letter, with only Madarn^Ta. the top, I dmmarrlecf^ little lower, and your humble ftrvant.^ at the bottom, I was, f IndifpenSibly, obliged to defer writino;, till I
could find leifure to be more particular.
VoL.. II.

My

.2 Felicia to Charlotte.
My story, Madam, is now finish’d ; I have been married thefe three weeks; and, from the Serene tranquil state I am in at prefent, you hive no reafon to expecst any more romantic adventures. I have nothing now to do, with the astecsting Scenes of fond distrefs, the pangs of jealqufy, or the fearjs of incurring a father’s difpleafure. My life begins to move on in an even stream, my pastions are all bush’d into a fweet Serenity : regularity and order, peace and tranquility, have taken up their refidence in our happy dwelling, tpan J give you, my dear friend, a more perfect picture of the highest degree of conjugal felicity, or reprefent a happinefs moreintenfely charming ? ’Tis true, my hushand—the auk ward name !—has no right honourablertitfes t© grace my story, and give a dignity to my newly acquired station ; but this is an honour, that I can freely reSign to you, without the least degree of envy ; nor will your ladyship think me stupid, tho’ I tell you, that ! never, in my life, had an ambition of this kind. Thefe all-potent words, thefe ravishing founds of dignity* thefe pompous Syllables, fo full of name-lefs charms, after which fo many Sigh and languish in vain, appear of no moment: and I «.m as content, with the homely title of Mrs.
Manjy,
Felicia to Charlotte.’
5
Manly^ as any other perSon can be, with the more dilHnguilhed epithet of my Lady. But whither am I rambling ? Don’t you think matrimony has turned my brain ? I have been preaching So long upon my humility, that I had almost forgot I was to give you an account of my affairs. To return then, at last, to my story.
The day before I was united to my dear Lucius, by thofe indissoluble bonds, which render our happinefs as Secure as our lives, his father came to pay us a vifit. We received him with that deference which is due to So near a relation; while his reformation greatly heightened the refpe£l my father thought him-felf obliged to pay him. And indeed, whatever follies he had formerly been guilty of, he did not, at this time, want any qualification to recommend him to the esteem of a good man ; for his Sentiments now shewed that he deferved it. He is really a gentleman of fine fenfe, of an eafy agreeable add refs, and one that perfedtly knows the world j nor doe': he feem to have wanted any natural advantage, for making a shining figure in it. As all my father’s prejudices were now removed, they Soon grew intimate; and Mr, Manly exprefs’d
B 2	his
♦'4
4

FtLIGIA TO CHARXOTTEii
bis acknowledgments, for my father’s genero-
Sity to his fon, with all, the gratitude that could
be infpired by the tender overflowings of pa-
ternal affe<£lion ; while my father returned his
compliments, with an air of the utmoft com-
placence and fatisfadlion. How much does a
man of fine fenfe lofe by his vices I His abi-
lities, which raife him above his neighbours.
are either entirely fufpended, or render ' him
more ingenioufly infamous, more generally
hated and defpifed; but he is no Sooner re-
formed, than, if his reafon is not impaired
by brutal indulgence, and a continued de-
bauch, (which, alas ! is too often the cafe) his
new-recovered virtues, polished by repentance, blaze out with a double lustre, and receive un-
utterable graces, from the Sudden Sublimity of
his conceptions.
Mr. Manly’s acknowledgments were
however, too grave for the prelent Situation of
our affairs, and affected us, as well as himfelf.
too much, for us to fuffei him to proceed. We,
therefore, as Soon as possible, gave a turn to
this part of the conversation, and Lucius, Mel-lifont, and Amelia, entering the room imme-
diately after, prevented its being reSumed, and, at the fame time, recovered that chearfulnefs, .
which had been interrupted by this too tender
fubjedl.

Felicia TO.DHARLOTTEi
5
The countenances of all our friends had an air of i;aiety, which broke out into de-
cent mirth ; while Amelia and I were, by far, the dullest part of the company. They at last retired j when my good friend, attending me to my chamber, and feating herfelfby me.
How is it with you, Felicia ? Said flie Smiling ;
__ . '
I must confeSs myfelf a fad fool; for tho* no conversation could poffibly be more engaging, than that in which we have Spent the day, I have wilhed a thoufand times for an opportunity of being alone. Methought I wanted to indulge, at leifure, my own thoughts; though, I can assure you, they were none of the most
My Spirits have been strangely oppressed, and, notwithstanding my endeavouring to join in the diScourSe, I have been every moment at church repeating after the parfon, and thinking what a Silly aukward ssgure 1 shall make there to-morrow. BleSs me ! what a coward am I grown ! I shall certainly behave like a natural. O never mind it, replied I, with a malicious pleaSure, at finding her as weak as myfdf; depend upon it, I shall keep you in countenance. I am So terrified, at the Solemnity of the ceremony, that I heartily wish it was over. I dread it as Somethinfj-
J	O
-mighty formidable, and can hardly think of it
agreeable.
CD
' \
B 3
without
/
6
Felicia to Charlotte.
without trembling. But fuppoSe now, added I, we should take the pains to read it over
together.
Agreed, reply’d she, running into my clofet and returning immediately with my prayer-book ; come, let us begin, added she, will be more familiar to us to-mofrow.
It
Here we began, making our remarks as vve proceeded. In short, we read over the whole
ceremonial, with the utmost attention ; which
as we lengthened it out, with abundance of
comments, and little disputes upon Some par-
ticulars, which we did not understand, took
up a considerable time.
Having now gratified our curiofity, we
wiihed each other a good night, and Amelia
left me 3 but she was hardly out of my room.
vhen returning with a Smile on her counte-
nance, I am come. Said she, t*o afk your con-
fent to let me lie with you. I am perfuaded.
that we are neither of us in a difpoSition to
give way to fleep. The hours would pafs on,-
very heavily, w'ere we alone; let us then divert ourfelves as agreeably as we can. With
all my heart, my dear, Said I, extremely pleas’^d
with her propofal: we will indulge our re-
fledtions wdth the greatest freedom.
Upon this, we undrefs’d, and went to bed '
But I will not trouble your ladyship, with
the
Felicia to Charlott^T
1
ffie various topics of our difcourfe ; it is Sufficient to fay, that we talk’d till morning, wh{?n, shaking off the drowSmeSs, that then began inSenSibly to steal upon us,-we aroSe ; but had
hardly finished the agreeable tafie of dreffing each other, when fomebody, rapping Softly at the door, Amelia opened it, arid our two lovers appeared. They Saluted us, with an air of transport, telling us, that as they had Seen us at the window, they could not forbear' coming to wifli us joy, on the arrival of this happy morning.' This, my dear. Said Lucius, is the day from whence I shall date the com-pletion'of my happineSs; a day, that, I hope,
we shall neither of us ever think of v/ithout*
«
O my Felicia I how happy are you going to make me ! Here he gently prels’d my hand, and gave me a look So extremely tender, that I could not help banishing every impertinent thought, to share in his tranSport; I even returned- the charming preflure, and Squeez’d his hand, with a freedom I had never indulg’d before. Sure, faid I,, this must be a happy union, where beth fo ardently wifii to-promote each others felicity ! O my dear I cry’d he, in an extafy, how shall I merit this Sweet excefs of goodnefs!
delight.
B 4
Mellifont,
/
8 Felicia to Charlotts.
Mellifont, I SuppoSe, was entertaining Amelia in the Same passionate strain; but I was not at leifure to attend, either to their words or behaviour : however, I remember that they both look’d extremely pleaSed. We went down to breakfast, when Mr. Manly and my father join’d, with my aunt, in the
most affe<stionate wishes for the continuance
• •
of our happineSs; at the Same time, letting us know that a coach was ready to carry us, as Soon as we had drank our chocolate, to a fmall village, at a few miles distance, where a cler-.gyman waited to join our hands..
At the mention of the coach and clergyman, my uneaSinefs return’d. I trembled, as if afraid of the awful ceremony; while Mellifont, drawing the common prayer out of his pocket, which he had found in my room, and taken up unobferved, increafed my diforder, by shewing my father in what place he found it open upon the table. This was a. circumstance which created a deal of mirth amongst the old people; who, however, unanimousty agreed that we could, not have Spent our time
better, than in thus studying the nature of
✓
thofe engagements we were going to enter into; to which my aunt added. Indeed, I' think my neice, and my daughter, ought tp
be
Felicia to Charlotte.
9
be commended inftead of being laugh’d at ; for, as marriage is one of the most important steps We can take in life. Since our happinefs,
both in this, and a future state, in a great meafure, depends upon it; ithey could not, at this time, have employed their thoughts on a ■more interefting Subject, than the Solemn promises by which they are going to bind them-felves.
I
Several other things were faid upon the fame fubje6i:, which took up good part of the time v/e were at breakfali; and we were juft ready to step into the coach, when IVlellifont, to my no fmail fati^fa£lion, propofed our fending for the clergyman to perfo m the ceremony here. Lucius casting a glance at me, fto fee if I approved the motion, immediately Seconded his friend, and, tho’ my aunt disapproved of it, as a thing uncustomary in this (part of the enuntry, we had the happinefs to carry it against her, by my father’s joining on our fide. We, therefore, took our Seats again, and one of the coaches was Sent away for the reverend gentleman.
I shall not atremot, my dear friend, to repeat the chat shat filled up this interval. I was in a very odd fituation ; but in lefs than two hours lime, we were informed that the
B 5^
coach
10
Felicia to Charlotti.'
coach was returned, and, Soon after, few the divine enter the room, accompanied by So* phronia and Marilla, who had waited for t® at church. The glaSa [having gone once round, we arofe, and went into a back parlour facing the garden ; I, trembling with fear, held by my father’s arm, and Amelia by my aunt’s ; when cushions being brought in, the
Solemn Service began.
But it would be im»

pertinent for me, minutely, to deferibe my behaviour on this occaston, which however, was not altogether So ridiculous as I expedted^j only this I must fay, that 1 repeated the words, hmmr and as distin«fily as the reft: 'nor did Amelia, any more thanT, Scruple to pro^ nounee thofe formidable founds. My heart readily assented to every thing : my whole Soul was loft in devotion, and every faculty of k employed in the fervice,^
You find, Madam, I am now entered into
the venerable State of wedlock j.but, whatever change 1 have undergone in my manner of life, I do myfelf the honour to assure you, that I was never more, than I am at prefent.
Your Ladyship’s
fmcereji Friend.
Felicia Manly.
- ^
LET
Felicia to Charlotte.
II
LETTER XXVI
Bear Madam,
Your congratulations on our marriage* are So very obliging, that I can't defer my acknowledgments, without deferving the imputation of ingratitude, a crime that my foul most abhors ; and, therefore, as I am as fen-fible, as poliibk, of your goodncSs, .1 embrace this first opportunity of telling you fo. O friend ! what a Sweet addition do your praifes* give, to the Secret applauSe, with whicbT re--gard my happy choice I Lucius is, indeed,;^ worthy of all you have Said in his favour ; his-mind is truly noble, and all his Soul as much* the object of my admiration, as my love.
In my last,
abruptly, at the remonv, which
r
%
claSs of mortals
Madam, I broke off a- little' conclulion of that Solemn ce-initiated me into a different'
: buc, af 1 nave Several things to relate, which, I flatter mvTelf, mav Serve toa-mule and emertain you, I will nuw reiume the thread ot my story.
, When all - as over, my heart, which had hitherto b en extremely oppreff-d, began- to-beat more heelv. l.ociuv enr»raced me, and, with eyes tilled with a melting fostnefs, Cry’d,
B 6"	Now,
12
Felicia TO Charlotte.'
Now, my dear, I may be So happy as to call you my wife. Dear name I may you never think of it, without pleafure ! The rest of the company embraced us in their turn ; and paid us the grateful compliments, which burst from hearts, struggling under an excels of affection, and tender joy Nor did Lucius’s father, who had given away Amelia, appear lefs astedied with our common happinefs, than mine. In short, every face glow’d with fatkfadlion, while they strove to outdo each other, in their caresses and testimonies of regard.
We now adjourned to another room, where a Side-board was fet with wines and fruit, when my aunt inSisted upon my drinking a glaSs to raife my Spirits, which Amelia, after my example, complied with. The clergyman, who is one of the most facetious gentlemen upon earth, told us abundance of agreeable,stories, with So much humour, that he frequently fet the whole company in a laugh ; nor could Amelia and I forbear joining in the
general mirth
O
We
ourfelves, and, before dinner, were able to bear a part in the converlation. The reverend divine filled his pipe, had a tankard of old October to himSelf, and, by his wit and good
temper, let us See, that he did not think an in-
cent
Felicia to Gharlotted
23
nocent mirth, at all inconSiltent with the firiflelt piety. And it is worthy of observation, that, notwithstanding the extraordinary gaiety ot the gentlemen, not the least word cScaped them, on this occaston, that could offend the chastest ear. Lucius and Mellifont were in high Spirits ; but our fathers appeared transported above themSelvcs ; they had a pc-culi ar Satisfaction in their looks, while every gesture and every glance, expressed the glad heart of a fond parent But thefe are things
too delicate to be deScribed. Sophronik and mv aunt had much the fame elevated joy,
which, whenever they endeavoured to expref# it. Seemed too big for utterance. What a delightful circumstance, to think that our hap-pineSs is diffuSed in So charming a manner, to thoSe who are most dear to us f
Dinner being over, and the Servants ordered to withdraw, my father preSented Lucius with the writings belonging to the greater
\
part of his estate. As I have given you the perSon of my daughter, and intrusted her future felicity in your hands, faic he, with an air of open confidence, I make no Scruple of giving you the unlimited possession of what is lets dear to me. It would be an injury to you
my Son, ((or now I may have the pleaSure of
calling

Felicia t6 Charlotte;
calling you by this affeftionate name) and shew me too little moved by your noble and generous Sentiments, should I make you depend on my daughter for the enjoyment of any of the elegancies of life. I, therefore, with the greatest fatisfaffion, rely on your virtue and prudence to manage the estate, which,, as the hushand of my Felicia, you have a right to partake of, in Such a manner, as to promote your mutual happinefs. Dear Sir, faid Lucius, interrupting, him, you are pleafed to op-preSs me with your goodnefs j but, while I would'exprefs my grateful acknowledgments, I- must beg you not to streighten yourSelf, to
add----No, no, interrupted my father, in his
turn, you need not give yourSelf any pain on* my accounti I have referved to myfelf an> eaSy competence. Sufficient to Support the cha-ratsterl Have always borne in life, and to Supply all the exigencies, incident to the decline*
A parent, in my opinion, added he Smil--ing, should never be So profufe of h's vi'eakh, as to deprive himfelf of the rapacity of living : as he pleaSes without the aliistance of bis children ; and; indeed, none, that deferve this in--diligence, can be pleafed with feeing Such- a? preposterous, luch an unnatural dependence.-iconSider you both as my children, your inte--
of it.

%
Felicia to Charlotte.
ts
rests are now become inseparable j and, therefore, I have made no referve for my daughter: the convincing proofs I have received of the greatnefs of your mind, make all Such precautions unnecefiary. Nor will Felicia, I am perfuaded, be difpleafed that I have given all to you. Why So, Sir ? interpofed I: do you really think it no mortification to refufe me the pleafure of doing justice to Mr. Manly’s merit, by giving him So considerable a proof of my regard, as k would be, to make him a preSentofa fine jointure, as Soon as I had it in my poffestion ? How many agreeable things might I have heard him Say to me on this oc-cafion ! But, feriousty added I, I am altogether as well pleafed as it is; and I astlire you, you could not have given me greater pleafure than you have now done.
T HE unexpected vivacity of this reply cauSed a general fmile ; Lucius bowed' his head, and feemed particularly pleaSed with it; indeed he had reafon to be fo. His looks fliewed.that he was charmed with my father’s behaviour ; for, tho’ he had been fenfibie that he really gained nothing, by this instance of his confidence, in his integrity and affeCtion to me; yet, as it was an asreeable proof, of the great share he had of his esteem, it could not fail of
giving

16
_
Felicia to Charlotte."
i^giving him the highest fatisfa£tion. We How joined in the warmest expreffions of gratitude to this indulgent parent; whilst I, much lefs embarrassed on this occaston, than this dear man, endeavoured to find terms, capable of expressing , in Some meaiure, the fulnefs of his heart.	'
My father-put an end to our acknowledgments, by turning to my father-in-law, and making him a prefent, anSwei able to the good-
nefs of his own dirpoSition. It was a little estate of about two hundred a year, which is tO' return to us after his and Sophronia’s deceafe,
and which they did not receive, v;ithout thanking him, with tears of gratitude j but in the moment, when they feemed labouring-under a'Surpfize, Which struck them durhb, and rerr-dered them incapable of expressing themfelves, Meilifmt, who had Jeft us a few minutes before, return’d, and, deSiring to knowif we had' done with bulinefs, introduced a band of mufic; and, by this means, prevented thoSe affecting acknowledgments, which, however agreeable, are always attended with fome pain; The day was fpent in innocent gaity andi mirth, and with that peculiar fatisfa£l:ion,.
which the happy occaSion was adapted to in-
spire
Felicia to Charlotte^
r-
spire, amongst the most intimate and cordial
friends.
The next morning, while we were at breakfast, my aunt told us, that she expelled a vilit from Some of the neighbouring gentlemen and ladies, to congratulate us on this
\ 1
happy union. Some of them added she laughing, as they affedt to appear men of wit, will, I don’t doubt, be fond of difplaying it, in a manner that will not be very agreeable to the modesty^ of either my niece or daughter ; and, therefore, to Save their blushes for the prefent, SuppoSe they should take an airing till dinner. I was just going to make the fame propofal, faid my father, tho’ from a different reafon. The day is exceeding fine, and I should be glad of the pleafure of Mr. Manly’s company, W'ithout the fear of having our conversation interrupted. Lucius thankt'd him for the honour he did him. and the coach being Soon
o
ready, we stepped in, leaving Mellifont with Amelia, who promifed to follow us; we having before let them know the road wo pro-pofed to take, station, by the most tender expression of bis affection. My dear Felicia, faid he, how great is my joy to fee you fo happy ! You are married to a . man of Senfe and probity; to a
My father began the conver-
man
9

. >
Felicia to Charlotts,'
man, whom I shall love as a Son, and esteem-as a worthy frieud. I wish you could both know, how happy a father you have made me. Dear Sir, Said Lucius, 1 have not words to expreSs the least part of that gratitude I feel for your goodnefs. Your happinefs, as it arifes from ours, ought to increafe it too. I love you, as the tender father who gave me
You are more than a father, you give me happinefs. Here he took hold
being.
of my
hand, and then looking again at my father,
0	Sir, continued he, with a full heart, let me thank you for this, the dearest of all your gifts!
You are very welcome, reply’d my father,, with a fmile, I hope my daughter will prove herfelf worthy of Such a hushand. May God blefs you both. You are now entered into a new Scene of life, the very different cares, the different duties of which require the exercife of very different abilities. My dear Lucius,
1	approve your humanity, that benevolence which will naturally prompt you to pity and relieve the distrefs’d j but even this affection, amiable as it is, is one of the most dangerous of all that the mind of man is fenfible to. There are faults which arife even from good-nefs of heart, faults attended with worfe con-
SequenceS’
Felicia to Charlotte.

Sequences than thofe of cruelty and brutal ill-nature. Pity has ruined thoufands, men of the most refined fenfe, and of the greatest abilities • and, when thefe are ruined, the ignorant and the ill natured, proud of an opportunity of revenging the Superiority of their acquired endowments, are Sure to treat them with double contempt. And indeed, men of
great humanity, though of the best fcnfe, frequently err in the plainest cafes; even where one, but a degree above a natural, would not be deceiv’d. This appears strange, yet it is an observation confirmed by daily experience. Thefe are, frequently, not only the worst oeco-nomists, but they are drawn into the weakest and most childifh engagements, where inevitable ruin is almost the natural confequence. Yet the reafonof this is, perhaps, not hard to discover. Thofe perfons, whofe thoughts are taken up with refined Speculations, commonly know but little of the world ; they may be verfed, indeed, in prudential maxims, but there will always be a vast difference between thefe, and truths founded on experience. A man, of an open benevolent difpofition, while confcious of the integrity of his own heart, is lefs inclined to fufpicion, tnan others of more
contraded views: he loves to think well of
mankind.
29
Felicia to GHARLOTtEr
mankind, and frequently' thinks better of ifi^ dividuals than they deferve. But, when pity has taken pofleffion of the heart; pity, a pafliorr So nearly allied to love, that, like it, it banishes from the mind every injurious idea ; it is almost incapable of fufpicion ; it reflects not on pof-Sible confequences ; or, if thefe do arife in the mind, thev pafs away unregarded, and make too flight an impression to prove effectual. The man of humanity finds it much eafier to a<5t st'-m passion, than from reafnn; he is prefs’d forwards by the impulfe of a lively imagination, filled with the advantages that will attend? the distressed perfon on his compliance with his desstes ; and, therefore, when he is follicited from without, and, at the fame time, prompted from within, by the impulfes of a generous and and affected heart, there is no wonder if he finds a diffictilty in faying no. I'hete are circumstances, in which a young man will find it extremely hard to pronounce this little mcmofyl-lable ; and, in order to do it, when necessary, he will be obliged to pradtice a great deal of felf-denial; but it is a mortification Sometimes -absolutely necessary. We have a kind of proverb which advifes us, “ to think all men rogues, till we find them honest.”
Lucius
Felicia to CHARLOTTEi'
21
Lucius fate, all this while, with his eyes fixed on my father, in the utmost attention ; but, being now unabje to contain himfelf any longer, he cried out, I dare fay. Sir, the first pet Son, who made ufe of this proverb, was a distionest man himfelf. What a life of fufpicion , and distrust! Can he be a friend to mankind? Can he have any c mplacency in his.fellowr creatures, who looks upon them as. a nest of .vipers, as villains, who only wait for an opportunity to rob, or impoSc upon him ?——
No, cry’d my father, interrupting him in his turn; I did not mention this proverb, by way of approbation, as you would Soon have found, had you fuffer’d me to proceed. For, though it is a Sure way to prevent being impofed upon, yet it is unjust, and consequently, criminal,. It is a much more Christian difpofition, at least, . to believe every man honest, till we have rea-fon to think him a villain : but, nevertheless, if we know the world, we shall fee the ne-cestity of uSing every proper precaution to Secure ourSelves.
Your, benevolence, I allow, ought to fiiew itSelf in real a6ls of kindneSs, but it should be
t	•
in Such a6ts, as reaSon and prudence will warrant ; a beneficence, generous and diffufive,
1
and, at the fame time, confistent with prudence^
and
\
\
22
Felicia to Charlotte.
and the rules of juft ceconomy. Let me per* fuade you to be cautious of Signing your name : learn, boldly to refufe, what would be improper for you to grant; and having once refus’d, let no importunity prevail upon you to contrary to your judgment. Never let your steward’s accounts pafs unexamined, nor ever Suffer him to diftrefs a tenant, without feeing the poor man yourfelf.
Here my father paufed ; when Lucius, thanking him for his advice, and the other coach, with Mellifont and Amelia, driving up to the fide of ours, the converfation turned on indifferent fubjedls. It is now time to conclude this long letter, but I must first do my-felf the honour to affure your ladyfhip, that nothing but the pleafure of your company, can add to the felicity of
Tour moji affeStlonate frtendy
Felicia Manly.
I-
LET-

f^s£.iciA TO Charlotte.
2J
LETTER XXVII.
Dear Madam,
N my last, if I am not mistaken, I told you, that my aunt propofed our taking an airing before dinner, to avoid the impertinence of Some country gentlemen, whom, it Seems, she had reafon to expert j as they had, early in the morning. Sent her word, that they would do themfelves the honour of paying her a vistt, to congratulate Amelia and me on our hap-pinefs. Their perfons, tho’ not their cha-radlers, were unknown to me ; and tho’ Amelia and her mother had Seen them before, yet, as they had no acquaintance in the family, we all look’d upon this as an unwelcome intru-lion; which, on account of their birth and fortune, we were oblig’d to overlook: and they, doubtlefs, imagin’d us very much honour’d by a viSit, which we would very gladly have difpens’d with. For my part, the very idea of being obliged to bear with their impertinence, gave a damp to my Satisfaction ; and, upon my return, I could not help wishing, very heartily, that my aunt might be mistaken; a wish that I the more readily indulged, as 1 did not then know her reafon for
expecting
2d.
Felicia to Charlottei
expelling them. But this was both vain and fruitlefs: for, at Some distance, we could observe a number of fpruce Servants, in very rich liveries ; and, upon our entering the court, our ears were Saluted, or rather stunn’d, with a confuSed noife, which issued from the window of a room adjoining to the hall. One was Singing with a loud, harih, and difagreeable voice, while two or three others, all talking at the fame time, were engag’d in a warm dispute, each feeming deSirous to gain a vidlory, rather by the strength of his lungs than of his arguments, and to struggle to out-vie the rest, in noife What a jargon was here ! Had our cars been entertain’d with the difmal thrum of the bladder and string, or, had we been welcom’d home by a concert of catcalls, I could not have form’d an idea of a more difgusting entertainment, than I new expedled to receive from the company of thofe country ’Squires.
My father frown’d, and Lucius Seem’d heartily vex’d, but neither of them Spoke a word ; however, the coach ho Sooner drove up to the door, than the revel-rout ceas’d ; and the coach-door being open’d, Lucius leap’d out, and, presenting his hand, help’d me to alight, in Spite of half a dozen young rakes, who rudely endeavoured to push before him ; and
all
FfLICIA to CHAR4.0TTE.’
^5
all of whom Seem’d dellrous of doing me this honour. I was next obliged to Suffer a disagreeable Salute from each, which the last, being already half drunk, render’d, if possible, more distasteful, by belching in my face: but it was a ceremony I was forced to Submit to, and good manners made me difguife my reluctance j while my father, being entirely unknown, stood by, with I>ucius and my aunt, with the appearance of unconcern’d Spedla-tors.
This being perform’d, with as ill a grace a#
possible, and a wretched compliment bestow’d
upon me from each, they all ran, with, the
fame familiar air, to the other coach ; and Mellifont, having Set his foot on the ground,
to my no Small Surprize, was Surrounded by
two or three of the most forward, one of
which, shaking him by the hand, cried. Damn
ye, ye strong back’d dog, I wish you joy. Nor
were the compliments of thd others much
more polite j they wonder’d where the devil
he had been, but could never dream that he
had been poaching. Amelia having, after my
example, gone through the naufeous ceremo* nial, we all went in together ; but as we were passing through the hall, I obferved one of th.
most disagreeable wretches I ever beheld, a talL
,VoL« lit	leaA
/

FE LICIA TO ChA RLOTTS,.’
lean, raw, lank, ugly fellow, with a long face and hollow eyes, drefs’d in a green frock and lac’d waiftcoat, who, fwinging his arms, ran to Mellifont, and, giving him a lusty blow on the shoulder, and at the fame time Seizing fast hold of a button, cry’d, ‘‘ Is that grave fon of “ a bitch he .f” nodding at Lucius ; and then added he, Zoons ! I have a good mind to make him a cuckold.——Damn me if I have not. 'Though he Spoke pretty low, Lucius overheard him; and, letting go my hand, stept up
♦
to him, and immediately Seizing hold of his iiofe, which was none of the shortest, led hirn to me, and inSisted upon his ashing my pardon, which he did without neSitation ; whilst .1, trembling with fear, readily gave him abfo.-iution ; when, bestowing a hearty curfe upon Lucius, and writhing his face into Several ugly contortions, 1 SuppoSe to bring his nofe into due form, he turn’d, with a Silly grin, to his companions, and, with a sheepish air of af-fefted pleafantry, endeavoured to laugh it off as a joke ; tho’ he Said it was a .curSed queer joke, and he hardly knew whether it was sh
■jest or earnest.
You Ciin hardly conceive. Madam, the tetr ror 1 was in; for 1 immediately dieaded, that
she refenimem of ail his companions would
. ■''fall


Felicia to Charlotte.
27
fall upon Lucius, whom I, therefore, apprehended to be in danger : but I was in a moment relieved from my fears j for, to my no Small Surprize and fatisfadtion, they all Set up a loud laugh, and, clapping their hands, caper’d about the hall with an air of triumphant fatisfadlion; and my father, who had, at first, put his hand to his Sword, drew it back with a Smile.
Nothing now was heard but applauSes on Lucius, who was regarded as a hero, and the repetition of I—I—I—, from two or three running about, and mimicking the look, geS-ture, and Snuffle of their companion, while Lucius led him by the noSe j a kind of wit, which, as it was perfe<stly agreeable to their talents, Seem’d to give them the highest delight.
As Soon as they were conducsted to another room, we stepped into the parlour, which they had left upon our return home, th' floor of which was pretty well strew’d with broken glasses ; when my father obferv’d to Lucius, that, if thefe were his friend’- companions, he could not help forming a very bad opinion, both of his taste and morals Whether Lucius would have vindicated Mellifjn or not, I can’t tell; lor iiiy lather had no Sooner made
C 2
this

_
Felicia to Charlotte.
this remark, than he himfelf enter’d the room,, ind, advancing to Amelia, who had flay’d with us, ,I have left. Said he,,this flupid rabble of baronets and ’Squires to themfelves ; a parcel cS familiar puppies ! who,becaufe I had. Some time ago, the misfortune to blunder into their company, muft pretend to rank me in the number of their acquaintance, and, as Such, to pay me this vifit. Pray, who are they ? what are they ? cry’d my father, with a peevish liaflineSs, that strongly exprefs’d his diflike. They are, Sir, Said he, gentlemen of different difpofltions, united together, only, by a com-inon taste for a favourite diverston. Some of them are fond of the cockpit, others are fox-hunters, but all of them keep running horfesj and, pofitively, by the rusticity of their behaviour, one would imagine that they had their jpducationdn the stable; and, indeed, for aught 1 know, the groom may be the better gentlc)-jnan. But, as they have most of them very considerable estates, they imagine that they have a licence to trouble whom they pleafe with their impertinence. The ladies, I ex-
»f<'	■	*	*	‘
, will have a terrible entertainment at dinner. lam afraid fo, faid Amelia, and I heartily wish them gone. If we could but (hut our ears as eaSily as our eyes, cry’d I, J
Felicia to Charlotte^
2
1
iSiould esteem it now an happineSs. Gentlemen, ’Squires, baronets! Said my father, with a Sneer ; fools, blockheads, ignorant stupid raf-cals; they kn6w no higher Satiffadion than a horSe-laugh. Well, well, return’d MelliSont, very gravely, But you must not form bn idea of our country gentlemen from theSe ; many of whom would bd"aTstaiiTed of being Seen iri their company, as I assure you I am. There are amongst us men of fenfe, agreeable companions, and here and there is Scattered a man'of humanity.
Th is conversation Was interrupted, by ouf Being informed that dinner was ready; on which we went to the dining-room, and, after our making an apology for our abSence, took our feats at the table:
HoRses were the Subje^I v/e found them Upon, when we enter’d the room ; and this tbpic lasted all the time we were at dinner.
Nay, fo stridily did they adhere to it, that their very jests had a fmack of the groom, mingled with an indecency the most shocking and diS-tasteful, and too eoarfe and indelicate, even to deferve the name of a double entendre. A-melia and I were toasted under the name of pretty fillies, which no fooner went round, shan one drank health to the riders, and this
C 3
produced
3®
Felicia to Charlotte
#
{
produced a loud laugh of applaufe ; and, in the
courfe of going round, pick’^d up an additional
piece. of obfcenity from every one of thefe
gentlemen, who, emulous of exceeding in this
way, constantly produced a fresh laugh, and a
stare in our faces. Amelia and I were in a
sttuation worthy of pity; we blush’d, hung
down our heads, and, I Speak for myfelf, I
was ready to Sink with shame. At last Some-
%
body aSic’d Lucius if I v/as a good pacer.* Ay, damm’e, and needs neither whip nor Spur, cry’d another. All eyes w'ere again fix’d ort ime ; and thus the Suppos’d wit vvas bandied a-bout, collediing fresh mire from every kick. But whenever the man who had given us the affront in the hall began to fpeak, for he Seem’d very defirous of adding his quota, Mel-lifont stopp’d him short, by Snuffling out, I—I—Ij and giving him a hint, that if he had not vet enough, he would lead him ano-
j	O'
ther turn. This kept him Silent, and afforded us Some Small relief.
At last Something was Said, which I had the happineSs not to understand ; it was ad-dreSs’d to Mellifont, and was Something about jumping—no, leaping, was the word -; but, it Seems, it was very groSs; for Lucius, who had Several iin.ts before began to Speak, but was
interrupted
Felicia to Charlotte.'

below the dignity
interrupted and borne down by Tome'stupid
S
ribaldiy. Seem’d now refolv’d'to break through all opposition ; and, therefore, raiSing his voice
louder than common. Pray, gentlemen, Said
/
he, v/hat have theSe ladies done, that thev fhould be shocked vvith Such poor, wretched obfcenity ? Is there any merit in putting a lady to the blush ?—It is cowardly, mean, and Scandalous ; below the dignity of a gentleman.
A gentleman ! did I fay ? of a man —Cowardly ! cry’d one of the most forward, interrupting him v/ith a haughty air, and frowning steady look ? pray who do you call coward I Faith, I won’t be led by the nofe.-' - Yes, cowardly, cry’d Lucius, raiSing his voice still higher, and fpeaking v/ith equal sternnefs,—ay, cowardly.—‘Cov/ardly, echo’d my father and Mellifont, at the fame time. I repeat it again, continued Lucius, with a firm-ncfs and refolution that charm’d me, it is cowardly, an infult on decency; it is affronting the ladies in the tendcrest part; and, however . authorifed by brutal custom, on thefe occasions, it is an inSult on nature—the most barbarous inS.ilt, thus to difcolour the cheek of eonfcioUs innocence.-^ Pox ! crv’d a youth of
t	^	J
about eighteen, who Seem’d, by his ignorance and his dialedl, never to have been twenty
C 4	miles

^2
N
Felicia to CstARtOTTB^.
miles from home ; he weant let us be witty : I’ll be curst if ever I was So witty in aw my life. The women stiould no’ be shOamfac’st, it is time that was o’^er, or the devil’s in’t. I ha’ faid more behauf before my own mother at worn, and' fhu lolFd as thof fhu would ha^ be----Witty f cry’d my father, interrupting
him with a fneer; let us fee that you have common fenfe, young man, before you affe£t to be witty. Common fenfe ! faid Mellifont, with a fatyrical laugh : Common fenfe is a lai-d)' that very few here are acquainted with, I can tell' you that: why, common fenfe is no common woman ; and, therefore, (he is as much stiunn’d, by thefe, as a common woman by a man, who has any fenfe at all—And, as to my lady Decency, they don't even knovsr her when they See her; if they did', it might be possible to make them blusti. Mellifont had laid down his knife and fork at the beginning of this Speech, and now, leaning back in his chair, and holding up his hands in a Supplicating posture, he immediately added", with an arch look, that had a mixture of the Serious and comical :
Half Deancy ! celejiial maid!
« D efcendfrom heaFn to beauty's aidE
And hlaji the wretch that’s not afraid
Lo affront thee-.
The
VJ

Felicia to Charlotte.
33
/
The humourous manner of his introducing the two first lines from Swift, and his adding the last, without the least hefitation, gave us an agreeable furprife, had made my father and Lucius Smile, for the first time Since they had been at table, And, indeed, their obstinately refuSing to drink all the toasts propofed by thefe rakes, and their vindicating our refufal, had kept them im a constant Squabble, whilst Mellifont was Sure to regulate himfelf according to their motions. I hefe gentlemen, intimidated, affronted, or struck with Some fenSe of shame, continued pretty Silent for Some time ; and then, reSuming their favourite Sub-je<3: of race-horfes, toour no fmall fatisfa£lion drank to each other, and let us alone; ,
At last this hateful meal was over; and, I protest, I would not go through the fame mortifications,, for any confiderations. My mind was then in a very tender fituation, eaSdy shock’d, and extremely fufceptible of paim How barbarous, how cruel, how inhuman, then was it, thus to blast the joy of innocence ! rudely to tear the veil that hides thofe rites that modest decency would conceal, but which neither God, nor reafon, condemn ! with brutal infolence to trample on the Snowy robes of bashful chastity 1 How imoudent to stare us


Cs

54
Felicia to Charlotte.'
into confullon, and to add a triumph to the af-, front, by a ridiculous laugh ! I am shock’d at ^ the recolledtion of this Scene, and therefore inuft conclude, with alTuring you, that I an»
Your Ladyship’s
\
MoJ} Jincerey and affeSlionate Friend^
Felicia Manly,

LETTER XXVIII.
I •
\
F T E R So long a Silence, Madahi, you may juftly wonder, that I have the alTurance to confeSs that, I am still alive : but however ashamed I am of my negligence, I
have neither the complaifance, nor the reSolu-
\
tlon to leave the world out of a punctilio of ood-breeding, eSpecially as I am in perfect health, and So happy in my preSent Situation, that I can, without the least pain, think of deferring, for many years, a viSit to the heavenly regions. You tell me I have loft, in the wife, the affe£Hon I owe to the friend, and I will not deny your having, in appearance. Some jreafon lor this heavy charge ; but as I hat©
apologies.
Felicia to Charlotte.
Si
apologies, I will not take the trouble to justify Hiyfelf, tho’ I would have you think my negligence owing to the different turn of my affairs, to my indolence, stupidity, or whatever
tlfe you pleaSe, rather than to a want of that affcistion, which I shall ever feel for you.
. Three months ago, I gave you an account of our marriage j and I have now to add, that, in order to put an end to thofe ceremonious viSits, which at last began to grow extremely fatiguing, we found ourfelves under a necessity of leaving my aunt’s fooner than we had intended j Mr. Manly, therefore, bought an estate at Some miles distance, with a manston houfe, which, by his dire£lion, was repaired and furnished with all possible diligence. We removed hither, about two months after I fent you my last,, and, at the fame time, MelliTont carried his bride to his own estate. We fre-
quently fee each other, and enjoy all that Sa-tisfadiion from thefe viSits, which the most intimate friendshio can afford us. Not the least reServe fubSists between us; a perfect Sympathy, in each others happineSs, makes us Such stran-* gets to ceremony, that we have nothing to do but to confult our own inclinations, to render us agreeable to each other. Our houfe is a very neat building, yet fo plain a one, that it
C 6	would'
I 4

Felicia to Charlotte.’
would be trifling too much with your patience* to give a description of it. The Situation is indeed charming, being Surrounded with woods and groves, which on the one Side must, in! the Summer SeaSon, appear extremely delightful, as the other does So now, though in the midst of frost and Snow. There will be the triumph of natureis the boast of aitj there thzt uncultivated wildneSs, which pleaSes-without method, and without deSign, charming most where the eafy confuSion, and agreeable
disorder, render art Superfluous, and labour, vain j here all the ornaments that art, in de-
Ipight of nature, can bestow.
In the front is a tall and stately wood,.
compofed of oaks, venerable with age, with no
other opening but a large area, and. a visto,.
which carries the eye from the centre of the
building to a considerable distance. Here the
intermingled branches must, I fancy, in the
Summer Seafon, cast a shade, varied wish all
she degrees of light, from the bright Sun-beam,
glittering through the boughs, to the duSky
gloom of Sober twilight.
Behind the main building is a garden, of a considerable extent; which, even in this Seafon of she year, has its beautifes. To take
m notice, of she paterre, which lies next the^
houSe*
Felicia to Charlotte.
fioufe, the hedges, which are on each Side the
principal walks
formed of ever-greens.
/
reSembling walls, adurnest, at proper distances; with pilasters, which, with eternal Verdure,, branch into all the decorations of architedlure.. In the midst of each walk, along an opening,, on either hand, the eye is carried*through z< number of triumphal arches, compofed of the lame leafy maierial’s, and’ which, leading to* the extremity of the garden, are bounded by Several fine altoves, the paintings of whicl^, tho’ injured by time, have a very agreeable: effect. In Some of the Squares, compofed by thefe walks, are fish pond§, in others, groves of fruit trees, and in others, knots of flowers of various forms, which, in the feafon for thefe flagrant ornaments, must, I fancy, be; vastly delightful. lii the middle of the garden, where all the prihcipal avenues meet, upon, a pretty, high afcent, is a fiimmer-Houle,
the windows of which, as well as the walls,.
%
are So covered with ever-greens, that tfie faint
obstruisted light, Spreads a. gloom perfedlly
Soothing ; while the clusters of shining berries
half covered with Snow, hanging against the
glass, with frosted leaves.of intermingled fist ver and green, feem to give the lye to the fea»*
fbn, and to join in one view Christmas and;
Autumn*.

\
Felicia to Charlotte.
Autumn. At the entrance is a guard of giants, with their mash^ clubs refting on the ground ; harmlefs monsters ! that I can view without the least trembling. His true, they themSelves appear in Some diforder, for want of pruning,: their heads and bodies are covered with a number of luxuriant branches, and even their fingers are grown near half a yard beyond the just proportion that ought to be allowed them,
*
Autumn was far Spent, before Lucius and I, attended by my father, went to take a view of our new habitation. I fancied myfelf in fairy land, and cruld not help expressing my furprize, that while the winds, on one fide the houSe, Scattered in wavy curls the russet leaves, which, with every blast, fell from the half-naked groves ; on the other, they were cloath-ed with lively verdure, and still appeared fmiU ing in their gayest liveries.
His true, there is Something difagreeably formaUn the studied regularity that reigns here: statues, obelilks, and triumphal arches, are but aukwardly mimicked i>) box and yeugh: but still they find work for Ibme labouring hands, who might otherwise want the means of Sub-fistance ; and, for this reafcui, I-ucius may poS-
stbly continue them in their prelent Situation,
with
/
Felicia to Charlotte.
with only a few alterations, in order to render the whole more eaSy, free, and natural. Be-fides, as the houSe and gardens are in the midst of a wood, this Spot, even in the Summer Sea-fon, will agreeably Set off the wildneSs of the profpeft, and, by a pleaSing contrast, heighten the variegated Scene.
In this peaceful retirement. Madam, we enjoy a tranquillity unknown to courts. Our passions, which, before this union, were high-raifed, and too tenderly ardent to be unmixest with pain, now gently Soothed, fink into a delightful repofe. The diffidence, the flutter of heart is gone, and exchanged for the calmer ■ fweets of an endearing friendihip. We have
i
BOW the Satisfa6tion of passing our time in the proper employment of reafonable and immortal beings. No wayward humours interrupt our peace ; no little jars fret the tender cord of Sweet content and mutual complacency^
which, when once broken, is So difficult to join again.
Religion, which, to others, is a Source of the most gloomy refledions, is to us an inexhaustible Spring of rational and Su- Ime delight. We daily addreSs the iuprerne and So-ve cign good, as our father, our friend, and benefador; we admire the wifdpm, the won-
derous
/
40
Felicia to CharlotteV
j
derous fkill that shines in all his works : ws adore his goodnefs, and pour forth our gratitude in humble praife; what tranfport can equal that of gratitude ! what delight be comparable to that of a thankful heart!' If you call this enthuSiafm, it is, at least, an- enthu-Siafm, the most noble and refined, justified by the coolest dictates of reaSon, and necessary to render human happinefs complete.
Our minds have hitherto been calm and unruffled. My filler Marilla is my constant companion : 1 have prevailed with her to stay with us a fortnight, and we Spend a part of the day together, either in reading in the Summer houSe, which Lucius has furnished with the most valuable ornament, a fine colledlion of books ; or in paying or receiving vifits, among a few Seletst friends. Hither we Sometimes all three repair ; and with intermingled chat and reading, find fubje6ls ever new and entertaining. Great part of my time is taken up with the management of my family, or in working at my needle. Your ladyship fees what a do" mestic animal I am grown ; but while thefe amufements give an alacrity to my Spirits, by diversifying my fatisfacSlions, I shall have the greatest reafon- to be pleafed with them; for
though you. Smile at the raeanneSs of my taste,
IfindJ
Felicia to Charlotte.
41
I find a real happinefs ariSing, even from thefe low employments. Since they not only prefervfe peace and order in the family, but give a greater relish to the Superior pleaSures of which I am fenfible, when, unbending my mind, I enjoy the conversation of my friends. As to the vapours. Madam, it is fo long Since I have felt thofe modish diforders, that I Scarcely know what they mean •, fo that not the rofy milkmaid, happy in her humble obfeurity, that lings or laughs from morn till evening, can be lefs troubled with the Spleen than I.
I HAVE nothing more to add, but that
I am.
TourSf &c.
9^
Felicia Manly,

T
LETTER
Dear Madam,
HOUGH it is impossible I should receive an anfwer to my last, you having yet Scarcely read it, I write now to let you fee that I can commit, upon occaSion, an a6l of Supererogation. Add this to my former neg-
leist, and try if it won’t, in fpme meafure, make the balance even.
Two
42
Felicia to CHARtOTTEr

Two or three days after our arrival herC'
u
jny father returned to London. We were now pretty well fettled j for thofe workmen who had been employed in making the necessary repairs, being difcharged, every thing' was foon reduced into proper order. Melli'-* font, Amelia, and ray Sister Manila, were present, when my father, in the most tender man-' ner, took his leave. We had all refolved to accompany him Some miles on the road,, but' he positively refuSed to Suffer ity alledging that
this would only prolong the uneassnefs of parting : we were, therefore, obliged to Submit,, and being mounted on horfeback, (for he had’ before made us a prefent of his coach) attended by a Servant, was foon out of Sight. We returned into the hall, and stood for Some time, in a thoughtful posture, without Speaking a word ; when at last Mellifont, assuming an air of chearfulnefs, cry’d out, Come, come, what do we stand here for? We must divert this penSive humour j fuppofe we take a turn in the garden. This motion was immediately comply’d with, and the uneaSy gloom inSen-ssbly diSperSed ; but the weather being pretty sharp, 1 ordered a fire to be made in the Summer houSe, to which we retired. Having taken our places, Marilla Said with a Smile, 1 was
one
Felicia to Charlotte.
43
©ne day last week to vifit Mifs Powers, an elderly maiden lady of great prudence, and the daughter of a deceafed clergyman j.who, tho* she has but a Small fortune, finds the means, by the help of the greatest oeconomy, to make a pretty genteel appearance. When I knocked at the door, I was told she was not at home ; but, as she was expe<sted every moment, I was defired to walk in, and, indeed, I had hardly fat down when she entered the room, with her hands covered with dirt, and one of them stained with blood, i arofe, and, with a good deal of concern, enquired what was the matter. C) nothing cry’d she : I have fallen down, but I have only hurt my hand; it was
a mercy I did not daub my new gown. IjE
was impossible for me to forbear Smiling at
this anfwer; I defired she would explain her-
felf, and afked her, if she thought the Almighty could be fuppofed to concern himfelf
in an affair of fuch trifling moment as a few
yards of Silk, which, tho’ it had been foiled,
»
would still anfwer all the ends of drefs, tho*
not of vanity. She was very much difpleafed
at this anfwer, and, therefore, all the while
she was cleaning herfelf, and preparing a plaif-
ter for her hand, warmly^ustified the propriety
jof the expression ; alledging, that nothing was
too

44
Felicia to CharlottIe.’
too mean to fall under the infpedion of the* Supreme governor of the world.
This fhort story gave rife to a very long" conversation. Lueius began With obferving, that particular circumflances will make Some perfons look upon an inconfiiderable pain as a trifle, when compared t® the lost of what carr only Serve to flatter the imagination, and the more Soi in proportion to the ditHcuky of procuring thefe gratifications. This, faid he, is a common cafe; but if it be proper to call the preserving a gown unfullied a mercy, or a favour from heaven, it must be equally So to make this a petition in prayer.: yet, if a lady was to be overheard at her devotions, crying, Lord preferve my best gown and petticoat from stains and dirt, the abfurdity would be So glaring, that nobody could' avoid taking notice of it. One who has a competency, prays for wealth, another, that he may obtain the
honour for which he is Soliciting: but what is this, abstradied from the moral ufe of wealth-and honour, which few Seem to regard, more than praying for a new head-dreSs or a new gown ? Or what are the petitions for the continuance of thefe, when none but them Selves receive the least benefit from them, but praying that the gown, or petticoat, may remain
,	unfullied-^

'elicia to Charlotte.'
45
✓
junfullied ? A gentleman who has a coach and pair, is ambitious oS being drawn by Six horSes, and, only with this view. Soliicits for a place,
to enable him to accomplish it.; now, where
1
is the difference between praying that he may obtain this place, and praying, that, instead of a coach and two, he may ride in a coach and Six ? If a pretty milkmaid should pray for mo-,n^y to buy a new top-knot, would her peti* tion be more ridiculous ?
*4 .	»	• *
Men are carried away by falfe appearances, .and enamoured with the dazling shew of Some glittering trifle. Providence, they.flatter them-Selves, is employed on their behalf, and the .Dod of nature engaged in procuring the empty, the pernicious bauble. The mifer unjustly Seizes the last remains of an unfortunate help-Jefs family, expoSes them to want and beggary, .and adds the fruits of extortion to his ufeleSs store, and cries, with his hollow eyes lifted up to heaven, It is a mercy that he was not too late to Save his money ! Might not the Ids ,guilty debauchee go to the stews, and, with with equal propriety, fay. It is a mercy that ste found his favourite girl at home ! Yet what horrid profanation 1 Can any thing be more Superstitious, more shocking and abSurd ? Un-
.^onfcious of the final refult of things, while
heaven
4^
Felicia to Charlotte.
heaven is affronted, they are delighted with the gratification of their favourite vices: but how vain, how delufive the joy ! They mistook for happinefs, what was really the caufe of the sharpest anguiffi. The mifer, as he carries honie his gold, is robbed of all his dear recovered treafure ; while the debauchee is expiring with a loath fome difeafe.
But do you infer from this, brother. Said Marilla, that the Deity is entirely unconcerned about the temporal happinefs or milery of individuals ? For my part, I think this would be going a little too far.
Lucius paufed a moment, and then Said, he had hitherto only endeavoured to expofe a falSe notion of providence, and that kind of Superstition, which makes fome men, who deem themfelves the peculiar favourites of heaven, refolve events the most trivial, in comparifon with the important concerns of human life, into Signal blessings and deliverances, A man of this turn, knows that gratitude is a duty, and ^fFe£fs to diicharge it very minutely ; but never reflcCiing, that the Superintending care of providence is exercifed over a whole uni-verfe, and, with regard to him, only as a part
of shat whole ; his pratiuide, which should be
* <.
always warm and lively, lies dormant, till
Sohie
Felicia to Charlotte.
47
Some circumstance of his own life, no matter how trifling in itfelf, provided it powerfully strikes his paffions, calls it forth to exercife: he can then prove to you, how much above his neighbours he is the object of the divine favour, and how justly his pious ackliowledg-.ments render him So.
I'hey then entered more largely into the consideration of a particular providence ; and, as I have recited their obfervations hitherto, I think I may as well endeavour to give you the Substance of the rest ; but, dear Madam, you must excufe me if! fail in the performance. It is a talk Somewhat above my abilities, and, as I shall be forced to abridge a very long diS-,pute, which mer with various interruptions, I am SenSible it will want all thofe natural graces in the repetition which gave life and Spirit to ;the conversation.
MeLlifont observed; as the world is a
great machine, governed by fixed mechanical laws, it is most reaSonable to SuppoSe, that man, as .a free agent, is entirely left to the free .exerci e of his natural abilities, and to all the coni'eqlienees refulting from it; for it is ab-furd to imagine, that a being of infinite Saga-,city, should form a wt>ild in fo bunaling a
.manner} as to make any interpofition at all
jiecestary
/'
'4§
Felicia to Charlottej

necessary afterwards, much more to Suppofe it fo imperfedi, as to stand in need of continual botching and mending. A man makes a watch, by which I would illustrate my idea of this grand piece of meChaniSm; but this watch, tho’ it may be perfed in its kind, yet, as it wants frequent winding up, and efpecially as it calls for repeated repairs, is a piece of workmanship unworthy the Ikill of an almighty artificer.
Excuse me, Mellifont, reply’d Lucius, you are going on with a Suppofition that will never be granted: I readily allow, that the stupendous fabrick of this earth, and all the unnumbered worlds that fill the vast immenfity o€
Space,
in their fcyeral orbits, by the
most perfe<st laws; but, does it follow froiii hence, that the whole is only a grand piece of clockwork, which, being Set a going, will move Several thoufand years before it be run down ? Gravitation, by which all bodies have a tendency to each other, according to the firicstest enquiry, is one of thofe qualities which do not essentially ressdein matter, confequent-Jy, it can be no part of the machine : Your watch then, has not only lost its Spring, but the pivots are dropp’d from every wheel, and
the whole become a heap of confufion 5 nay,
/	, the
Felicia to Charlotte
49
/
the very wheels themSelves have loft their form, and the metal of which they are com«% pofed, is crumbled into infinite minute particles.
This gravitation, which evades the Search of the moft curious enquiries, can be refolved into nothing but the immediate hand of omnipotence, which locks together the infinitely fmall particles of Solids, impels and gives motion to the heavenly bodies, adds fresh fuel to the fun, and whirls round it this ponderous mafs of earth and fea, in a confiant rotation of days and feafons. Hence ariSes a general providence, which, prefiding over all nature, gives fertility to the foil, raifes the Sap in vegetable*, blollbms in the trees, and glows in every flower.
It is very apparent, that thunder and lightning, Sunshine and rain, and, in Some meafure, the various degrees of heat and cold, are not under the fame regulations, as the diurnal and annual changes; Since Some of them are So far from being periodical, that they have no relation to time and place, but are, with refpeft to us, absolutely uncertain and precarious; yet, on Some of theSe, depend the Subiiftence, the Support, and very being, of the whole animal and vegetable world,
VoL. II.	D	Mere
X
60
Felicia to Charlotte.^

Here Is another instance, and in this there is room for the exertion, both of a general and particular providence ; an instance, which you. Sir, would have found Some difficulty in reducing to a Scheme wholly mechanical. The earth is parched up with drought, the air is more and more ratified, and, confequently, by its tenuity, more unfit to raiSe to. a due height, and Support thofe mists from the Sea and rivers, which are necessary to form the refreshing rain. Who is it that directs the clouds to thicken in the heavens, to fall in cool refreshing showers, and, before it be too late, at once to rejoice the earth, and blefs mankind ? If this dry feafon lasted one month, why might it not have lassed two, Six, or twelve, till man and beast had been quite destroyed, and whole regions laid in ruins ? A-.gain, the rain falls, the moist and Spungy air still colle£ts, and still pours in a fettled stream,, and there is greater reafon to believe that it will rain to morrow, than there was yesterday that it will rain to day; and while it continues, the probability is still on the fide of its longer continuance. Did not the parent of mankind interpofe, the all-enlivening fun might for ever hide his chearing beams, and we might be curst with a cloudy fky, while joy would
be
Felicia TO Charlotte.
51
\
be for ever banished, and Seed-time and harvest be no more.
In thefe instances, we daily fee the most convincing proofs of the friendly care of the univerfal parent. Hence, he blestes one nation, and depresses another; and, even in the fame country, humbles and exalts whomsoever he pleafes.
But to be more particular, is there the least shadow of a probability, if we may judge from analogy, that is the stupendous being, who with Such infinite care and (kill, preServes the material, the vegetable, the animal world, should be entirely regardleSs of the intelledlual and moral ? That the being, 'who knows the most Secret Springs that move the human heart, should not, upon occaSion, influence thefe, and, by affedling an individual, give happinefs to millions ? That he should infpire with wif-dom, or perplex and confound. So as best to anfwer the wife defigns of his government ? That the God of truth should, by diffufing a little light over a dark benighted mind, promote the caufe of truth, and Spread the influence of pure religion, a free enquiry, and
liberty of confcience, through a whole nation ? That the most benevolent being in the uni-veiSe should grant the petitions of the man,
D 2	whoSc
52
Felicia to Charlo^te.
whoSe heart is prepared by humble prayer, receive the blessings he afks ? Thatithe friend of mankind, the most virtuous, th c most a-miablc being, should look with complacency, on virtue in diftrefs, and relieve the pious Supplicant who confides in his goodnefs ? That he should curb the pride of the fucceSsfuI villain, and shield the honest heart from the sty attacks of the fraudulent knave ? Is there any thing irrational in this ? any thing beneath a God ? If it be more noble to change the Swelling anguish of distreSs, into the gladfome raptures of gratitude and joy, than to form the most curious machine, this must be an employment more worthy of a God, than to create a world of lifeleSs matter, or all the glories of what Milton calls the “ golden pave-“ ment of heaven,or the bright Sea of jaSper, “ or of liquid pearl.”
Mellifont looked very grave, and, for Some time continued filent, as iflost in thought,
when Seeming to recoiled! himfelf. Well, well,
%
reply’d he, you may, for ought I know, be in the right. We giddy-headed fellows don’t think So deeply. But, after all, yours is an opinion that, now I think of it, we rnay re^-
wish t© he true. However, let us
fonabiy
change the fubjedl

Thus, Madam, with
indefadigable
Felicia to Charlotte.
53
Siidefatigable labour, have I blundered th ough this long converfati in, and am no a'' fo heartily tired, that I am aofolutely unable to add any thing more, than that J am,
Mofl affeSiionaiAy^ yours^
Felicia Manly.
P. S. When I had finiflied the above letter, instead of Sending it away immediately, as I at first intended, I refolved to shew it Lucius, and this delay retarded my Sending it till the end of the week. I have just now received an anSwer to my last; but with what SurpriSe do I find rnyfelf So unmercifully treated about one poor paragraph	which,,though you had
difliked, your good-nature might have made -you overlook! I am really half angry; but you throw away So much wit, and humour on 'iny pious fhlnt, as you are pleaSed to call it, that I aril almost afraid and ashamed to con-feSii it: however’, I canst help being perSuaded, that all this mirth is sht the expence of your ^ihore Sober judgfnent. But the bottom of my t^^aper puts me in mind that it is time to c®ii -
* Tetter XXVHI. page 39. We daily addrefs the Supreme, &c. from which paflage Charlotte takels occaiioa to ridicule prayer.
D 3	duJe
54
Felicia to Charlotte.
elude this long postscript, I, therefore, refer you to my next for an anfwer, and, for the prefent, throw down my pen.
Page 43, the last last line but five, after would, the reader is defired to iidd,—I thought this argument So conclufive, that I was quite at a lofs for a reply, and, therefore, introduced a diiferent Subject. But I have Since recollected an observation ®f yours, brother, that among fuperficial thinkers, it is no uncommon thing to find an injudicious application of the most important truths, when it is mads to Support their o^n w^eak prejudices, to cafes “in themfelves of no importance.

LETTER
Dear Madam,
SHALL take no notice of the ridiculous light in which you place my manner of life. You representing me as a reclufe, and the companion of the young druid Lucius, and your invocation to the rural gods and goddesses, on their receiving me to thefe fe-quester’d ever verdant ssiades, have fuch a mixture of pleafanlry and humour, that with all that folemn fanctity which you lay to my
, I could not help laughing very hear-
xharg'
tUj
Felicia to Charlotte.
55
tily : but the cafe is a little different with regard to what you call the puritanical Scheme, and the pious whim ; for your ridicule her^ has a levity, in my opinion, bordering a little upon the prophane. Yet, for all this, it Seems you muss know what method Lucius took to make me comply w'ith pt, and inSift upon my fending you the particulars. Can anything be more extraordinary ? However, to let yoii fee how much I am yours, I obey and proceed .
A FEW days after our marriaare, Lucius de-fired me to take a turn with him in the garden. I readily complied, and as I perceived an unufual thoughtfulnefs in his look, I endeavoured to divert him ; when, taking hold of my hand. My dear Felicia, Said he, I am going to make myfelf appear to you in a very ridiculous light, and to make a propofal that I fear will expofe me to be lauglied at; but, perhaps, I injure you—am perfuaded I do Custom makes us afhamed of our duty ; we are ashamed of uttering Solemn important truths, tho’ of the greatest moment: for how'-ever freely we talk of the Social duties, it is with reluffance we mention thofe to our maker.
D4
How

5^
Felicia t6 Charlotte.
How you raiSe my curioSity ! cry’d I; out
with it, dear Sir, I beSeech you, and don’t
keep me any longer in fuljpence.
You know, my dear, continued he, with
a tender warmth, the blessings I am loaded with, I imagine myfelf railed from almost
nothing; 1 fee my father relieved from thofe
dissrefies which weighed me down; and, while
Surrounded with plenty, I enjoy one blessing
more, dearer than all the affluence of life
Ah ! what is life compared to this ! Can I,
O can I, Smother the gratitude of my heart ?
Can I confine it within the narrow limits of
my own breast ? Will not you join with me,
in adoring the kind Sovereign of the world ?
Shall wc trot, with united hearts, 'at once ex-
prefs the full Sentiments of our fouls, and keep
alive the pious ardor that longs for utterance ?
Shall we not, by petitioning the continuance
of his mercy, implant and cherilh thofe difpo-
Sitions that will make us more worthy of that
merev ?
As I am equally interested in the blefflngs you mention, faid I, I ought, perhaps, to reproach myfelf with a want of that fdofibility, W'hich you exprefs with a warmth that, T must own, is very affedling. I have hearB prayer
ridiculed, and you must excufc me if I fay, I
am

Felicia to Charlotte.
51

am afraid I should look upon it, as a few minutes pasted in a very irkfome manner. There is Something So Solemn and gloomy, in the very idea of thefe Set devotions, that they almost fright me.
Let us banish. Said he, with a Smile, th gloom of Superstition, and religion will sheii appear all over amiable; her beauties will brish-ten upon the review, and the more we aie acquainted with her, the more we stiall be charmed wish her graces. Prayer is one of the first duties, diQated by natura’ religion, the elder lister of Christianity j a duty natUv rally ariSing from our obligations to, and de-pendance on, the univerfal parent, the friend of mankind, the patron of virtue, the most a-miable, the most kind, and benevolent being in the univerSe: a duty enjoined by Christianity, and enforced by the example of our great law-giver hiinfelf. Did we, my dear, addrefs a stern and rigorous tyrant, a gloomy terror and awful dread might justly hang upon our Spirits; but how great is the difference.
when infpired by gratitude, and prompted by the glow of filial love, we addrefs a being, whofe all-commanding goodnefs demands our utmost esteem, our highest complacency! Surely, it must then be accompanied with a most Sublime and rational delight!
D 5	I KNOW
5«
Felicia to Charlotte.
I KNOW it is objedled, that, as we can inform the deity of nothing but what he knew before, and can'alk him for nothing but what his original goodnefs will prompt him to grant without our petitioning for it, prayer must be, in its own nature, abfurd and impertinent.
It is true, that this duty makes no change in God ; k is true, he will grant, without our petitions, what it is fit for infinite benificence
to give, and us to receive: but, it is as true, that the exercife of this duty, by changing the difpofitions of the mind, changes that fitnefs ; as the humble Supplicant is an obje£l, more worthy of the divine blessing and prote6lion, than the man, whom no fenfe of duty can fix, and no obligations bind. Does it not exalt, refine, and elevate the mind, by leading it to the contemplation of the most fublime and important truths ? Does it not call away the heart Irom the purfuit of folly and madnefs ? Does it not raife the foultothe God of virtue, and, oonfequently, to virtue itfelff. Does it not check the growth of pride, Self-fussiciency, and malice ? Does it not keep awake the tender Sentiments of humanity, our gratitude to= ©ur maker, our asteClion to our friends ?
Enough, my dear Lucius, here I cry’d, enough. I own myfelf conquered; my re* iudance.is vanished,
' You
Felicia to Charlotte.
59
You must know. Madam, it v/as at the cloSe of the day when Lucius deSised meUo walk out, and, as the fun was then Setting, it began to grow dark; we, therefore, went into the thickest part of a tuft of trees, v*^here we might Safely remain unobferved, when, like the first happy pair, we prefented our evening oiifons, which, for the future, were Commonly performed in my chamber. When we came to remove, it was refolved, that this duty fhould be performed twice a day in th family, and, on this account, we chofe the most Sober young people we could find for our Servants. I dare Say, we have more order and decency obferved in our family, than in any other within ten miles round us. We Seldom omit going to church twice every Sunday ; not So much to gain any new acquisition of know-
/
c
;e, as to keep alive a fenSe of our duty^. and, at the Same time, to Set an example to the rest of the parish j the lower fort of which are greatly influenced by what they See us great folks, as they call us, do : for here, with rcfpest to example, one or two thoufand pounds a year, has a thoufand times more-efficacy, than all the advantages of fuperior Senfe and reafon.
0 6

6o
Felicia to Charlotte.
L
You have now two letters, Since I received your last, and if they don’t give your ladyship the vapours, I may be in hopes, that you will, in t'me, be good for Something elfe, beSides giving felicity to one man, pleafure to a few friends, and happinefs to a number of dependants : you may in that cafe, I fay, become ridiculous enough to exercife the wit, and ex-haufl: the. Spirits of your gay companions; but you will never have the honour, like me, to find a friend, who will, with Such Sparkling wit, and fine addreSs, endeavour to laugh you out of your religion.
I HAVE the honour to be
Y OUR Ladyship’s
Dry humble fervant^
A	•
Felicia Manlt.
LETTER XXXI.
i
N order to introduce this letter, Madam, it is necefiary for me to inform you, that my father, before he took his leave of us, had Several times hinted to Lucius, that it would be J19 disadvantageous employment for him,
to
■ vC^
ff
Fflicia to Charlotte.
6t
to learn the charafters and manners of his Itenants, and even of the poor reSiding on his estate ; that he ought, particularly, to enquire into their circumstances, and that, as his interest was cloSely connedled with theirs, to endeavour to Serve them to the utmost of his power. As Soon as my father was gone, Lucius refolved to pay them a vistt, and yesterday begun to put his deSign in execution, imagining that, as he was yet quite unknown, he might be the better able to inform himfelf to his fatisstistion. Last night, after his return, I learnt his SucceSs ; and as he happened upon Some adventures, in this expedition, worth relating, I shall give them to you, while they are yet fresh in my memory.
He fet out Soon after it was light, dreflH but meanly, and with only one Servant out of livery, and rode to a farm houfe, at about two miles distance j where, entering the yard, he dismounted, knocked at the door, and afked for the master, who came running from the stable, and, in a Surly manner, demanded what he wanted. Lucius destred to be informed, if he knew any body that could ^Supply him with a load of bay. This question at once civilized the farmer, who before feemed re-
Solved to behave in a very brutal manner;
but

Felicia to Charlotte.
but the bai gain being Soon made, Lucius went in to pay, and the farmer to receive his money, when a mug of ale being brought, the latter, after a good hearty draught, became, in an instant, one of the most Sociable fellows in the univerSe: he shook Lucius twenty times 'by the band, with a freedom, as great as if it had been authorifed by a long acquaintance. Having entertained him, for half an hour together, with the price of corn and cattle at the'market, Lucius, with the air of a stranger, enquired about his farm, and afk’d him, who was his landlord j when he shegan in the following manner:
Yo mun know, mester, shat I ha’ got a new lonlotd ; I doant know who he is, but they fay he has married one of your Lonon ladies, who, they fay, has a mort o’money; beSides, they Say, he is one o’thofe good-natured foo’s lot»k’e, that wull do ony mon a Service that axes him, thof he never fead him aw his born days; and beSides. I believe the grey mare is she better horfe, for he is meety fond of his lady, never stirs from whome, and never gets drunk. Now my dame fays, that fuch a lon-Jord as thlshi is fit to be impofed upon ; but I doant mind what sha fays, for I am mester ixi* my own houle, and weant be contradided by
the
J
FsLICIA to CHARtOTTE.
%
the best woman that wears a heead. No, no, let Tummus Clod aloan for that, before I’d' be like my lonlord. I’d horrg mySelf.
You are in the right, my friend, replied' Lucius laughing, always take care to be master in your own houfe. Ey, ey, rejoined the coit-raseous farmer, I am a wife mon, I can tell
O	*	^
ye that, and a fcollard too, fori can reead and write, and I was one whoale month in my ac-cidancy, and lam’d Something about parts of Speeach, and neauns and prunams, and I hardly know what my Self. I believe it, cry’d Lucius, you are a great man, andt may be as great a man as your landlord yet, for ought I know.
Odzookers, gi’me your bond again, cried the farmer, delighted with the compliment j yo’r an honest felley. I’ll be Sworn ; but here’s to ye heartily : but as 1 was Saying, my lon^* lord is a Sifti Sort of a mon, and So, as I owe hauf a year’s rent to my old lonlord, I have a mind my new lonlord fliould pey it, but yo' munno Say one thing of it. O no, replied Lucius, I won’t fay any thing of it, without you tell your new landlord of it yourSelf. No, no^ who would be foo’ then ? rejoin’d the farmer ; I only fell a few trees that were stonding ora the lond, time out o’mind, and which 1 fhould no’ do by reet, a cauSe they were mentioned
m
^4
Felicia to Charlotte.
in my leaSe. Well, but as to the honesty of the thing, friend Thomas, cried Lucius, how
do you reconcile that ? Honesty ! replied Clod,
%
why as to that, mester, you know we mun live. It is true I am pretty well to pafs j but a mon should take care o’ his family, and ye know what the eye does no’ See, the heart does no’ rue, as the proverb goes ; and a little out of a mickle is no’ mifs’d. But pray, faid Lucius, how much may the trees you have cut down be worth ? Why look’e, my lad, reply’d the farmer, a hundred pound; and fo I shall ha’ ten paund in my pocket, for my trouble ; trhat yo know is but fair. For your trouble ! cry’d Lucius, that is very extraordinary. Why yo know, rejoined the booby, a mon should be paid for his labour, and besides Such a hen-peck’d-------
Here his wife entered, who it Seems had overheard feme part of this fine difeourfe; and giving him a look of contempt. You are a wife felley, cried she, to tell aw ye’r affairs to a streanger ! Ah I ye aud foo’, if I had no more wst than yo, ye might have been bang’d before now. Nay daam, cried he, doent fcold, ye know that ye advis’d me to it. I had no’ fel’d the trees, if yc had no’ made me, I made ye, cried she, colouring, and coming
a step
N.
Felicia to Charlotte.
65
An ho*
a step or two nearer ; I made ye ! 1 made ye tell of it too, did I ? Anfwer me that, do, dunce do; this mon, for ouwt yo know, may tell ’fqulre Monly. No, no, cried he trembling, he looks like an honest felley. nest felley ! ye rafcal; an honest felley is a very proper perfon to tell that yo are a rogue, O that ever I should be yoaked to a foo’ I I am no more a foo’ than other folks, cried he, just lou enough to be heard. Than other folks, ye blockhead ! she rejoined, as loud as, she could haul, I fuppofe yo mean me.—I a fool, ye dog ! There, take that; and here she Seiz’d the mug, and throwing it at her huf-band, it flew over his head, whilst the liquor was pretty equally divided between all the thrde. She now burst into tears, fobbing out. Caw me a foo’ ye barbers mon yo ; I doant deferve to he treated a thisTi, 1 doan,t, ye wicked murlster yo.
Lucius here flipp’d out, and calling his Servant, hhe‘;(>i9«^	farmer followed him
to the dobr, ifcratdhing his head 5 but looking behind himy and feeing his wife feated in a
chair, at the other*end of the room, he whif-pered, It is well yoqwere here, meafter, or I
believe I shbuld ha’ murdered her* Lucius
made no anfwer ; but mounting and liding off,
told
66
Felicia to Charlotte.
told him he would Send a waggon for his hay; and immediately went to take awiew of the devastation made amongst his trees, when he found eighteen or twenty of the largest oaks lying ready to be carried away.
Agreeable as this difcovery might appear, Lucius was under Some perplexity, on thinking how he ought to proceed with the farmer. He now vistted Several of his other tenants, from whom he learnt nothing worth mentioning. They were in general honest plain men, blunt, and extremely ignorant: and afterwards paid a vifit to the minister of the parilb, with whom he dined. On his return home, he obferved, at a Small distance from the road, a farm-houSe belonging to the fame manor; hither he went, and entering without ceremony, thought he obferved a wildnefs in the looks of the people, that feerh’d to exprefs a good deal of fear and apprehenSion. At first, he fancied he might be known ; but he was Soon of a different opinion, for the woman arifing from her feat, with a trembling voice, afked what he wanted ; and, in the fame instant, the hushand flipp’d out at the back door. Lucius reply’d, that he was very forry, if his being there gave them any unea-Smefs; and fo far from doing them any hurt,
be
Felicia to Charlotte.
67
he would Serve them to the utmost of his power. The woman eyed him very attentively, and stood, for Some time. Silent, which only Served to inereafe his curiostty; at last she thanked him, and alked again what he wanted. Want! Said he, why you behave So odly, that I want to know what is the matter. You look like a good fort of a woman, added he, and I should be glad to drink a dish of tea with you; which I had rather have here than at a publick houfc. Lack-a-day, faid she, we never drink ta ; but yo shall be welcome, if yo’ll fend for it, and cook it yo’r felf; for I doant well know how to go about it. On th is Lucius gave her a guinea; the tea and Sugar were bought, and a tea-pot, and two earthen cups and Saucers borrow’d ; but when
the change was brought to Lucius, he gave it amongst the children. This entirely won the
good woman’s heart; she now lost all her fears, and, at his request, readily ran to call her hushand ; who was no Sooner Seated, than Lucius informed him, that he was a gentleman. who had a pretty estate in that part of the country ; but, as he was upon a frolic, he did not chufe to tell his name. He then urg’d the farmer, to let him know the caufe of that
disorder.
69
Feli CIA TO Char lotte.
disorder, which, on his entering the houSe, was viSible in all their countenances.
You c^'^at folks, cried the honest man, have no notion of the misfortunes and cares, that Sometimes fall upon us, who are forced to struggle hard to get an honest living. One bad feifon puts us back fo far, that Several ^ood ones can hardly repair our Ioffes. This, mester, is my cafe. About four years ago I. had a rot among my Iheep, w'hich kill'd above hauf, and thofe the best o’ my flock; and as my corn proved bad, I could no’ pay my rent; this put me behind bond ; vi'^hich my lonlord ciccuSed, and promifed not' to distreSs me: but as he is dead, and the lond fold to one Squire Monley, his executors, as they conno’ Seize my stock, threaten to throw me into jail, for the hauf year that is still due. This makes hie' o’'hibst' distra£l:'ed. ’ There is near a quar-Cer due to my new lonlord, and if they should let me alone, I know no’ \vhen I shMl be able
, But*, wbrriday, I ha’ no hopes
I
that they will forbear any longer. Tho’ my fears keep"*me awake, I every morning dread i^he leet; and when I rife, tremble to think
that.

,	6 ' , I
I '
'	.4	/
^ A word of

the_rame meaning as welt;
a-day.
Felicia to Charlotte.

that, perhaps, , the next neet I may lig in a priSon; and. when it grows dark, I am glad, that, once more, I shall fleep in mine own bed, and be Secure till morning. Supday is, indeed, a happy dey j I then enjoy my Security, but as the neet comes on, my fears return.—O meller, it breaks my heart to think what will become of my poor family, which you fee is none of the fmalleft ! I am a feard to go about my work. I tremble at the feet of a ftroanger. I hardly know what to do. In short, I am o’ most mad.
Lucius was So extremely affe<Sled at the moving expressive tone, and the artlefs Simplicity with which the poor man told his dif-trefs, that he could Scarcely refrain frCm tears } and it was with much difficulty that he concealed his concern.
'Well, but Suppofe you should tell your cafe to your new landlord, faid Lucius; if you An give him proof that you are an honeft man, he may, perhaps, take the debt u^on himfelf, and, rather than loSe a good tenant, give you time for payment. I know him, he is a good-natured man,,and 1 dare fay he will not be hard upon you.
No, no, replied the unhappy man; -Icou’d Sooner dee than do it, 1 cou’d never fpeeak
freely
yo
r^uciA TO Charlotte,
freely to Such a rich mon. I am not yfed to Such company. BeSides, it would Signify no-
milerable life to be all’as in
thing.
It is
a
fear.
Now I have Lucius, with a
/
thought of Something, cried forced fmile, that I am Sure will do. Have you not Some timber growing on your land ? Yes, returned the farmer; but what then ? Why I’ll tell you, reply’d Lucius, fuppofe you cut it down, and fell it, and pay your debt with the money ; Mr. Manly will never miSs it.
THE farmer here held up his hands, and his wife examined him more narrowly, and, if possible, with greater terror than before. At last, the honest man, starting up, as if affronted, shock’d, and infulted j cry’d. Get out o’ my houSe, ye villain ; do ye tak me for a rogue ? And, here he Seiz’d a large oak Sapling, that stood in the chimney corner. Lucius got up, and was beginning to fpeak in his own defence ; but he had hardly opened his lips, when he was interrupted. Yo a gentleman ! yo the devil ! Ay, cry’d the wife, it is the devil. Sure enough, for all he has hid his cloven foot. Here, gi’ me the money, cried she to the children ; there, tak yo’r curst money, added she, throwing it at him ; every gef-
ture
Felicia td Charlotte.'
71
ture expreffing the fright and agitation of her mind. Lucius endeavoured in vain to Speak; Get out was still repeated, and the hufband, holding up his faplin2:, advancing, cry’d, I’U See if he be the devil or no. On this, poor Lucius retreating backwards, tumbled over the threshold into the vard, and the door was immediately clapped to, and lock’d. He re^ ceived, however, not the least damage by the fall, except what his coat and wig Sustained ; for a heap of friendly dung, that had been kindly rais’d by fome cows and horfes, received the fallen, tho’ formidable Lucius. But, tho’ his bed was Soft, it was not a fit place to rest in ; he arofe, therefore, immediately, when he overheard the poor honest man cry out to himSelf: God forbid that I should be Such a villain, as this felley would ha me be. I’d go to a jail first. If I arn miferable, I am honest at least, and, after aw, that is Some comfort. Mean while the Servant, who was walking in the yard. Seeing Lucius in this diforder, ran to his astistance ; but, finding him already upon his legs, without Speaking a word, in a moment broke the door, which, it Seems, was a very flight one, to pieces. The woman was, unhappily, fainted away in a chair, and
the good man was affisting her: him he Seized
by
72
Felicia to Charlotte.'
by the collar, and, in an instant, threw up hb heels, and was preparing to revenge the abuSe done to his master, when Lucius put astde the blow, and, with difficulty, dragged him away,, for he quitted his hold with much reluctance. But they had hardly mounted their horSes, when the farmer's Son, and a Servant man and maid, who had heard the bustle, the two first from the stable, and the last from the dairy, came running to the field of battle. A Speedy retreat was absolutely necessary, for this was now an improper time to hold a parly; they, therefore, having gained the gate of the yard, let Spurs to their horfes, and were Soon out of fight.
Thus, Madam, I have given you the history of one day’s ramble, and, if nothing prevents, I shall, very Speedily, fend you the ffe-quel of the story of thefe two farmers, with
Such oppofite characters: Mean time I am
very much
Your Ladyship’s, kc»
Felicia Manly,

LET-
\
Felicia to Charlotte.
73
LETTER XXXII.
O U think it strangCj Madam, that tho* Lucius should relate the diScourSe of the farmers, in the diale<st of the county, I should have memory S.ifficient to retain the pronunciation ; and, from this remark, you infer, that
I have had more regard to your diverSion, than to the veracity of an historian. But here you are greatly mistaken; you ought to constder the difficulty of living in the country, without catching the peculiarities - of the language. This I have Sufficiently obtained; fo that I have nothing more to do, than to remember the words: the pronunciation I have already. I have a good deal of the country accent, in my ordinary conversation, and, whenever I am diSpoSed to it, can talk in the true diale<st,
almost; as fluently as the Sprightly milkmaid, or the wife of the plowman.
The day after she adventure of the two farmers, I was rto Sooner stirring, than I heard an unufual bustle below stairs, and Several per-fons talking very loud, with Some Sounds, which, though I could not perfedly understand, Seemed to exprefs great amazement. My woman C9uld give me no latisfarstion, I,
VoL. II.	E	shercfore^
\

74
Felicia to Charlotte..'
therefore, defired her to ring the bell; when st Servant entered the room, with as much terror in her looks, as if she had juft Seen a ghost. What is the matter, Mary? Said I ^ you look frighted. O law, Madam, cried she, wud * you think it ! Did you ever hear the like ? The devil has appeared to my f neam and my naunt Saunders, and teld them, that as how—as how—As how what ? returned I, Why as how, continued she, he wud ha him cut down aw she ’Squire’s trees, and he wud gi’ him a power o’ money for them ; and he gived them Some money, which was, I fup-poSe, for arneft-; but they wud no’ tak’ it. Indeed, Madam, it is true ; for, I verily believe, we shall ha’ the w’oll ftory in print. Pho, pho, is shat all ? .cried I j it is an idle tale,
take
* Teu, in this county, carries ,with it, fome-thing of the idea of a compliment, as exprefling more refpc6t than Ta} and, for this reafon, hui-bands and wives, in particular, who, on common occafi9nj,politely,a8 they think,make ufe of the word You, whenever they quarrel, conftantly contraA it into To. This is an obfervation particularly recorn-jnended to the confidcration of that ingenious gentleman, the compiler of the ■Englilh drfltionary, MOW in the preft.
f My neam, and my naunt j other counties fay . *iFer and gammer*
Fslicia to Charlotte.
75
talce my word for it. Pray, what fort of a de* vTl was it ? O ! he was a meety civil devil at first. Said she, and as like a honfome man as ever you feed ; but, at last, he vanished out o* the door, as one may fay, in a stash o’ fire ; and then they 0 made the idoor aster him, when an ugly devil came pop through the key hole, and wud fean ha’ murdered the good mon ; but the hondfome devil poo’d him away, and wud no’ let him ; but, as they went out, they had like to ha takken the fide o’ the houfe wi’ em; for the doore was broken aw to pieces, and to be Sure shere was a great fmell of brimstone. I mar’l whether the handfbme devil
had no* great Saucer een, when my neam was ' going to strike him ; for goody Simple fays, sha thinks sha heard fay as much. But the ugly devil had two great platter een, like balls of fire, and turned into the terriblest creature that ever was lieem There is nothing in it, Mary, faid I, I am fure of it. Nay, Madam, faid she, to be fure you know best, and I am a’most o’ your mind, for tho’ they fay, Old Nick can dizen himfelf like an angel of leet, yet yo know as how he can never go without his cloven foot; and Betty Saunders look’d
E 2	wi’
Shat thf door.
76
Felicia to Charlotte.'
i
wi’ aw the een in her head, but cou’d na fee it. But, methinks, it is a pitty Such a fine story shu’d no’ be true ; for, of aw things, I like to hear about ghosts, and haunted houstn, and fuch like. Our Robin, Madam, loff ’d at goody Simple, and faid shu was a lying awd witch, and talk’d as thof’ he would kick her out o’the houfe ; but we wud no let him; and then he stew into a passion, and faid his een were no more like platters, nor balls of fire, than hern, and if fhu faid it agen, he wud kick her a»—; breech, I mean. Saving your preSence. Here she dropped a courtefy. Bat, continued she, we cou’d no tell what to mak o’ that, for the Squire came in, and faid. Hush, not a word, Hobin; and then staid to Kear the woman himfelf, while she eat the
M
meat I giv’d her quietly, and made me fetch her a mug of ale.
Well, faid I, I have enough of this idle
stuff; tell John he must go and bring Mrs. Saunders to me. Here Lucius appeared, and added. And her hushand too, and bid him be Sure to tell him he must ^not be frighted ; for I have Some good news for him. And then coming to me, as Mary left the room, Well, ■yyy dear, faid he, you find I am mounted on the wings of fame j Mary, I fuppofc, has given
you

Felicia to Charlotts.'
77
you-a full account. O yes, laid I, they are refolved to make a devil of you ; they have already colleffed Some diabolical eircumftances, and I don’t doubt but before night they will have dreiSed up you, and your man, with all the terrors that the most v.?ild imagination can invent. No matter, faid Lucius, iho’ they paint me in the charatster of a devil, the portrait they give of me is fo unUke the oiiginal, that I (hall never be known by it. If poor Robin is already Such a monster, what must he be by to-morrow morning, when- the story will be Spread through the whole county, and every one has added Some dreadful eireum-ftance to the fidlion ? Horns and hoofs will be the least of his deformities. Had the old woman staid till then, before she brought us the news, poor Robin would have gaped, and stared, and wondered, with the rest. However, I am glad the honest farmer is Sent for. The poor man’s distrest'es have touched me very nearly, and Something must be done for him. I intended to fend to him this afternoon, but I am better pleafcd that I shall fee him this morning. Since he will now have a few hours taken from his anxiety, and added to his happinefs, A valuable consideration, faid
E 3	I, that
78
Felicia to Charlotte.
I, that ought not to be forgot, whenever we
intend to confer an obligation.
In about two hour’s time, the honest far-
4
mer made his appearance on horfeback, with
his wife behind nim, fresh shaved, and both
drefled out in their Sunday’s garb. All the
strvants, in an Jinstant, ran out to fee them,
except my woman and Robin, who was pur-pofely Sent out of the way, on a mcflage to Nottingham ; for they had been informed of their coming by John., who returned near an hour before. They difmountcd at the door.
when a volley of questions were, irt a mo-
ment, difcharged from every mouth, to which
it was impoffible for either of them to anfwer.
This Lucius and I obferved from the diningroom window. I immediately went down, and found that the men had now furrounded
the farmer, and the maids his wife, whom
they all viewed with looks of astonishment, all
defiious of being anfwercd first, as thinking
their own question of the most confequence.
I stood in the hall near a minute, to obferve
this ridiculous feene; but, whatever anfwer
they had received, I obferved a general air of
diflatisfadlion, almost as great as that which
appeared immediately after j when, in order
to draw the good couple from the clamour of
this




Felicia to Charlotte.
79

fills tormenting persecution, I ordered them to be conduced into a back parlour facing the garden, and I could hear distin<fiFy, as they (e* paratcd, one cry, No cen of fire ! another, No cloven foot! and, from different voices. No horns ! No tail! No nothing, I think ; It’s a pity ! Ah ! what a fine story is here ca,ne to nought!'
They had been in the pailour about two minutes when I went to- them : X found them standing; but taking a chair myfelf, inSisted upon their being fcated, which, after Some clumfey strapes from the one, and as auk-ward curtefies from the other, they, at last, complied wkh ; but fat together, dofc trp to
i
the walT, in the most distant corner of the room. As Soon as this ceremonial was over, which lasted Some time, for thefe country people certainly think good manners conSists in being troublefome, Mrs. Saunders, faid f, they tell very strange things of you. You have been dealing with the devil, it Seems ; at least, he has been paying you a vifit. Who, I deal with the devil} cry’d she good woman, in a fright; Lord help me, I hope 1 ha’ nothing to do wi’ him. I hope fo too, faid I ; but, pray what foundation is there for this strange story ? Here she related it, in much
L 4
the
io
Felicia to Charlotte.
the Same manner that Lucius had done, only omitting her hulband’s account of his misfortunes, and making ufe of the terms, handfome Jevil, and ugly devil, to make a distinction between them : but she mistook one circum-
y
stance ; which, indeed, had, as she understood it, a very diabolical appearance ; for she aS-Serted, that the last time Lucius and Robin entered the houfe, they came in through the key-hole, and broke the door to pieces, as they went out; but here the hushand inter-pofed, anst Set her right ; when she apologiz’d for her mistake, by Saying, that she Saw the door h'ck’d, before she fainted away, and when sh: came to herfelS, she found it broke to pieces; and as she was before pretty Sure it was the devil, she thought it most natural for him to come in at the key-hole, and to take the Side of the houfe, or the door, at least, a-way with him, w'hen he went out; for this she lemembered to have heard, when a child, was his custom. And she concluded, with af-furing me, that she would not tell a lye about it, I believe fo. Said I, and I am very well pleafed with your Sincerity; for, as I know the story better than you, you could not have deceived me. That is very strange, cry’d the honest man, with a look of amazement;
Know

Felicia to Charlotte.
8i
Know it better than we ! Why, Madam, you was no’ in my houSe too ! If it be strange, faid I, it is true ; but I heard a very different story this morning. Why as to the matter of that. Madam, cry’d the wife, folks tell fo many lyes about it, that I am asheamed to hear them : and wud you think it ? they are angry at me, a caufe I weant fey as they fey, and wall ha’ it their own wev, whether I wull or no.
Well, that is not your fault, faid I; but you stiould not have fo readily imagined it to be an evil Spirit. Nor strould you, Mr. Saunders, have been fo ready to conclude him a rogue. You ought, at least, to have heard what he had to fay in his own defence, for it
m
was not without reafon that he made the
propofal of your cutting down Mr. Wlanly’s
trees. You may take my word for it that you are both mistaken. 1 know every particular
of the story. You, Mr. Saunders, gave a very moving account of your misfortunes to a very worthy gentleman, the perfon you call the handfome devil. He heartily pitied you: he refolved to Serve you, and, I affure you, that you may now deep Securely, and awake without dread : for he h.ath pleaded your caufc fo effectually to Mr. Manly, that he has pro-
£5	mifed
<2
Felicia to Charlotte.'
/
railed to take the debt upon himfelf, and t<» wait till you can, conveniently, pay him. The farmer lifted up his eyes, and, in an extafy, cried out, God blefs ’in f and then Seemed endeavouring to Say more, but stopped, as if the struggle in his breast, between joy and gratitude, choaked up his voice : however. Some tears, at least, as expreIRve of words, stood ready to fail from his eyes, which, with once or twice turning aSide his head, he wip’d away with the back of his hand. Mean while, the good woman cried out, in a shrill key: A ho»d-fbme devil !< A hondfome angel! God reward him, and tive fquire to boot. But what made, the (elevation of her voice more remarkable; was the low trembling diffidence with w'hich file Spoke before. 1 here was now a Silence ©f, at least, half a fninute, which ended in the
/
©Id woman’s bursting out a crying, which she
did most heartily, repeating Several times, with
her hand on her hushanff's knee, and'her eyes
fixed very affedlionately on his. Well, I was
never fo glad in aw my life,.—No, never in aw-
fny life. At last the farmer cried,, lifting up
his eyes, and looking at me. An angel! ay,
an anirel indeed I or, after aw the ufage I ha’^
-----Well, God’s blessing leet upon
you aw 1; I thank you, Mr. Saunders, Said I,
i£
gi’n him
Felicia to Charlotte.
*3
if you reckon me among the number. But here comes either your landlord, or your
friend.
Lucius, who had been walking in the garden, in order to give me time to prepare them to fee him, was now coming up an avenue facing the door; but, at the mention of the word landlord, I obServed, that the poor man’s diffidence and referve, which began to wear off, immediately returned, and his features, in a moment, became contra<fied ; perhaps his joy was damped by the very idea of a perfon, whom he had before conSidered only as an objedi of fear. But, however this be, not the least alteration appeared in the wife, except a little femalie ambition, or rather, that regard for decency, and decorum of charaifter, which is as vifible in the Spruce dairy maid, as in the dutchefs. She, therefore, took her eyes from her hushand, and her hand from his knee, laid fmooth her clean, though coarfe white apron, pulled down, lower, a pair of old-fashioned ruffles, and stroak’d her hair under her cap : and this was done with the natural motion, and compofed look, which fometrmes makes all the distinction between thele ac-^ns, when performed by ?, country houfewife,
£6	and


J
84
F E LICIA TO C H A R LO T T E.

and the more affe<fied airs of Some lady dif-tincstion.
Lucius now opened rhe door, when I cried, O Sir, is it you ? I have prepared them to fee you, and you may Safely come in, without being taken for a devil. And then addressing myfelf to the farmer. Here is your friend. Said I, do you know him, now he has chang’d his drefs ? Lucius returned my compliment; and then running to the farmer, who was standing biting his hat, by the Side of his wife. My ho-inest friend. Said he, I am glad to See you. Well, are you difpofcd to knock me down now ? 7 he farmer (craped, the wife curtessed, and both begged his pardon. Well, replied he, you sshd 1 don’t refent your treatment of me. hut, Madam, won’t you favour me with a glafs of wine, to drink to my new friends ? added he, turning to me. To be Sure, faid I, and rung the bell, on which, a Servant coming, the w'ine was called for, and being brought, the man was ordered to retire. Lucius filled, and taking the farmer by the hand, wished him happier days ; and having, each of them, drank their glafs, he defired the honest man to take a turn or two with him in the garden ;
I
and, at the fame time, begged the favour of me to go with them, alledging, that I might
leave
Felicia to Charlotte.

leave my woman to keep Mrs. Saunders company.
As this story, of the appearance of the devil, had Spread, with wonderful fwiftneSs, thro’ the country, Lucius was unwilling it should be known, that he had any hand in it : and, indeed, he had not the least ambition of being distinguished, among the country gentlemen, by The name of the handfome devil; a title, which would be inevitably given him, was he known to be the principal a(stor. And, be-Sides, as he had more tenants to vlfit, he would not have it mentioned, that he had ever vi-Sited any of them; Since the rest might expedl to fee him, in the fame manner, and, beino-put upon their guard, might frustrate his de-fign, of penetrating into their charadlers, manners, and circumstances. Thefe motives were the rife of this preconcerted plot, of making him appear rather as the friend of Lucius, than as Lucius himfelf, before the farmer’s wife ; whom, tho’ a very good fort of a woman, he was unwilling to trust with a Secret of Such conSequence.
We were no Sooner In the garden, than the farmer, addressing himfelf to Lucius, faid. You mun excufe me,—I conno’ thank you as I wud. If you could read my thowts,
there
t6
_	j
Felicia to Charlotte,
there wud be no need of words to tell ycwr my joy, my Surprize, my gratitude. But yc munforgi* me, if I fay, I love you, for it is no’ my fault, 1 conno’ help it: and this lacfy mun forgive me too: our ladies are So proud they weant Speak to a poor mon:; but Shu is fb good,- So free, and the messenger of Such good news, that I conno’ Irelp loving her; and my heart will fay, in Ipight o* me, God blefs her, and my kind' freend : and e’en- let it ley fo and it wulJ: for, if I did no’ gi- my heart this vent, I verily believe it wud burst. I never preyd fo heartily in* aw my born days, and never faid prayers wi’ hauf the pleafure I fay thefe two or three word?. You have made a new mon o’ me; I verily believe, I couM' o’most pray for. you as well as a parfon ; ay, as well, as thof I read in a. book. Thank you, thank )ou, God blefs-you too, we both reply’d, at the fame time, with a-fatisfaflion, though lefs tumultuous, as delightful, at lead, as his:, and, indeed, the poor man appeared raifed above himSelf; the tranfports of his joy, by getting a vent in words. Seemed to become more exquiSite. He talked with a greater volubility of Speech, to which a half- pint glafs ©f wine, which he had lately drank, might, perhaps, contribute. His- eyes^ Sparkled with
affetstionate-
FELicrA xa Charlotte.
By
affe6Uonate gratitude, and a kind of delightful rapture Seemed hovering over every lineament of his countenance.
The good man was now filent, but, after
#
a short paufe, refumed. Is this the mon I turned out o’ my houfe ? Is this he, that I was yeasterday going to strikeWell, no matter, had I ufed him kindly, 1 shud no’ ha’ know’d him fo well. I wud ha’ done or^ honest thing for him, for Saving me from a
jeyl, I wud ha’ look’d upon him as my best steend.. It wud ha’ been a kind a<stk)n, and I shud ha’ remembered it as long as I lived; but, methinks, I shud no’ ha’ loved him fo weel as I do now. But, good Sir, are you fiire ’Squire Monfy weant be hard upon me ? Never fear it, replied I, I will anSwer for your landlord. He thanked me, and then looking at Lucius, cry’d. My generous friend; mun not I know' to whom I am- obliged ? Mun not I know your neame ? O yes, replied Lucius, this you shall foon know ; but I must deSirc you to keep it a Secret, and not to let, even your wife or Son, know that my name is Manly. What my lonlord himSelf! cried he.
in a rapture: then, indeed, I ha’ nothing fear ! My lonlord that I have abuSed !' M-y
lonlord

8B
Felicia to Charlotte.
lohlord that is So generous! I -can only won ^ der. What shall I do for you ? How mun I mak you amends ? Leave that to me, Lucius reply’d, here are forty guineas, that I have put in my pocket for. you, to pay the executors of your late landlord, which you must do this evening, before you go; you may give me a note for the money, and I will contrive a way for you to pay it again. I then took my turn, and telling him, that as he had been fo diftrelTed, he, and his family, might want fome of the common necessaries of life, to Supply which, I deSired his acceptance of five .guineas, which he received, bowing low, with a fubmiffive kind of joy and rapture. Lucius how gave him an account of his going to Thomas Clod’s, and of his telling him that he had cut down his trees; but, as he was yet undetermined how to proceed with him, de-fired him to keep a stri<Sl watch, that none of ithem were removed, and no more cut down, without giving him immediate notice ; adding, that he would pay him handfomsly for his trouble: and dinner being now ready, the farmer went in, and rejoined his wife. They both dined at our table, and, after Lucius had again privately enjoined the good man to fe-
crecy.
Felicia to Gharlotte.
89
crecy, they, with many warm, though homely testimonies of gratitude, took their leave.
I am. Madam,
Your Ladyship’s
moji affediionate friend,
Felicia Manly.
LETTER XXXIII.
Dear Madam,
U C lUS has been again among his tenants, and has now finished his ramble. The last time he was out upon this expedition, he observed a man with white locks, and a venerable afpe£l; but want and care, rather than extreme old age, Seemed to have Silvered his hair ; his eyes were hollow, his perSon tall and meagre, and he had a placid Serenity in his countenance, that beSpokea kind of joyfyl compoSure of mind. His coat was of broadcloth, and, though worn threadbare and well patched, was perfedlly clean. He was coming out of a houSe, with a bag in his hand, which he Seemed deSirous to conceal. The
i
oddneSs
oo
Felicia to Charlotte,"
oddnefs of his appearance, in a country villas^e, joined to an air, that Seemed to command re-fpe(st, engaged the attention of Lucius, who-became curious enough to fcrm a refolution to know, if possible, who he was, and what that could be which he endeavoured to con^ ceal: and, therefore, dismounting, he led his-horfe by the bridle, and followed, at Some' distance, till he Saw him enter a Small thatch’d houSe, and shut the door after him. Thither Lucius diredfed his steps, and, on his arrival, was going to knock at the door, when turning: his head to the window, he obServcd the fame perfon standing before a table, and, with his eyes lift up. to heaven, with a look, of thank-fuIneSs, utter a Seemingly devout ejaculation, and' then Sit down by the fide of an elderly
woman.
now
the but end of his whip, on which, as it happened" not to be latched, it immediately flew open, when, to his great astonishment, he Saw an earthen plate of grains, fttioaking on the table, which they endeavoured to conceal, by throwing the end of a ragged damalk napkiii, which ferved for a table-cloth, o>ver it; and iinmediately rofe up,
Lucius’s furpriSe was hardly to be ex-prestedi Is this> faid he, what occafioncd TuclS
marks^
Felicia to Charlotte.
91
\
marks of devotion. Such thankfulnefs and gratitude ? Was it this that you were So delirous to conceal ? Yes, replied the old man ; but, why fhould you rudely prefsto difcover, what I was unwilling to have known ? Why should you thus -mortify the little pride that is left me ? .1 beg pardon, faid Lucius, for an intrusion, which-I cannot justify: but Satisfy my curiostty, andffet me know by what terrible disaster you are drove to this dreadful extremity. Yet stay*—let me, first, prevail upon you to provide Some provifions more fit for human creatures. You must have a great mind to be able to Support Such want, and to rejoice over a meal, that would make others, of leSs piety, repine at providence. Though, in the midst of affluence, I could almost envy your resignation, that befpeaks you more than human. Accept of this. Sir, continued Lucius, throwing down five guineas upon the table, and provide Something more proper for your refreshment. The old man, first lifting up his eyes to heaven, took up the money, with an air of extreme thankfulnefs, accompanied with very polite expreffions of gratitude ; and immediately gave one of the pieces to his wife, who preSently returned with Some
heef-steaks, and a loaf i however, in this interval.
/
/

92
Fexicia to Charlotte.
terval, they took their Seats, and the old man began in the following manner :
I don’t wonder at your being furprifed at a meal, which, when I was of your age, would have given me equal aftonissiment; but want will make us relish the coarSeft fare, and hunger Sweeten the most diSagreeable morfel. I was born a gentleman, but Spent a good fortune in the lervice of an ungrateful family, and, as Tam now perfuaded, in a very bad caufe, I am a native of Scotland, and was educated in the national religion j but carried away by the heat of youth, and a Set of ridiculous principles, which I imbibed from Some of my companions, I Sold my estate, and went over into Ireland, and entered, as a volunteer, in king James’s army, where I fought in defence of a leligion, the most oppofite to my own. But, I must do myfelf the justice t<^ fey, that ambition was not my motive. I was preSent at the battle of the Boyne, and in almost every battle afterwards, in which my master distinguished himfelf by a Superior
cowardice.----But, I will not tire you with a
repetition of what every body knows already. At the battle of Aghrim, when our army was entirely routed, it was with difHculty I made
my efcape j and, as I lost all my baggage, my
for tune.

/
V
Felicia to Charlotte.'
n
fortune, which before was -almost exhausted, was, by this event, entirely ruined. I returned into Scotland, with a wife and two young children: and pleafed with the hopea of feeing my relations, particularly^ a tender father, and a brother, with whom I had been brought up from my infancy, T- arrived at Kirkaldy, the place of my birth, where I found that my father died at London Some time before. Here, I Soon experieiKed, that my wants, instead of entitling me to relief, only Served as a pretence for treating me with contempt. Nay, my nearest relations hardly knew me. It was with difficulty that I got accefs, even to my brother, though of the fame po'* litical principles with myJelf, I was Suffered to wait in the hall, like a common Servant. I was choaked with indignation, yet I Smother’d my reSentment: in short, after only lying a night or twb in his houSe, with a barbarity, unknown to Savages, I, with my wife and children, after many affronts, were civi/fy turn’d out of doors, and obliged to shift for ourSelves, Strange effect of immoderate Self love I Said Lucius; in its extremes, the most odious of all the passions, and the most fruitful of mif-chief! How strong must it be, when it can thus cancel the Sacred bond of nature, and diS-
folve
/
94
4
Felicia to Charlotte.'
Solve the holy tye of brotherhood ! Ay, ay, reply’d the old man, whoever is in want, let him apply to a stranger, and he will have no gall poured over the friendly morfel. If he is in distrefs, let him sty to his friend, and he will not be humbled with the contumely of a proud relation. I was now a stranger in the very town where I was born, and where 1 had Spent the greatest part of life. Stung to the quick with this indignity, and enraged beyond all postibility of bearing the place, my native country became hateful to me. I reSolved to Set out for England ; and had it not been for the humanity of Some perSons, with whom I
A
had a very flender acquaintance, and, particularly, a gentleman, a friend of my father's, who, with a chearful benevolence, that doubled the obligation. Supplied me with what was ne-cestary to bear the expence of my journey, I might, perhaps, have been driven to the extremity of begging my bread.
You fee. Sir, continue he, that, amidst the greatest misfortunes, the contempt of my relations still sticks nearest my heart; not that it now gives me any great uneastnefs, for my affe<stion for them is converted into a calm and Settled contempt. Yet, were our circumstances changed, I would still Serve them to the utmost
PMLFCIA TO ChARLOT'TIS
95
/
ifnpst of my power. I would not, indeed, give them my esteem: this 1 referve for the
deferving.
But I tire you with my refiec-
^tions.
We arrived in London, and, by the affist-ance of a friend, 1 entered into trade; but by ridiculoufly lending my note to an acquaintance, the most pernicious and destructive cuf-tom that ever was introduced.amongst tradesmen, I was reduced to very great extremities. However, thefe were, at last, Surmounted, and, wish a mixture of fwccefs and misfortune, I continued 4n .the fame station for upwards of twenty years : and, believe me. Sir, abjeCt as my condition now feems, it appears to me, even preferable,to the anxiety I then frequently felt, from the fear of duns, the dread of a jail, and the uneafy apprehenSion, lest Some honest man should loSe by my misfortunes : the last,,in particular, was a constant shock to my,humanity; and where the perfbn was in low circumstances, and had,a family that, by
my means, would be Sufferers, the thought stung me to the foul, and gave me the most pungent anguish. Add to this, the many mortifications I received from the purfe-proud tradefman, whoSe common maxim is, that, Mvfry wi«i* poy h rich }f ht will; and that
frequent
9^
Felicia to Charlotte.
frequent breach of veracity, with reSpe£l to times of payment^ which the necessity of my affairs Sometimes rendered unavoidable. This last, a love of justice, and a fix’d and steady
j	»	*1	♦	t	»	^
regard for truth, rendered most irkfome and painful: in one word, it wias a wound festering in my conscience.
At last, I Sold my stocky paid my debts, and retired to this place, with my W'ife and a boy of ten years old. I chearfully maintained my family by my labour while my strength lasted, and enjoyed a Serenity that I cannot remember to have tasted, in the midst of my early assluence. With a conscience undisturbed, and a mind free from care, I applied myfelf to reflection, and Softened the fatigue of labour, with large draughts of knowledge, with an improvement in piety, and the study of vif* tue and religion. I had before learnt the ways of men, I now took a review of my own. I had long Since imbibed the philofophy of the Schools: I now reduced it to praClice, and laying by my Seneca and EpiCtetus, applied myfelf to the study of the Scriptures, and to open my heart for the reception of thofe divine truths which lead the mind* to God, Wrapp’d up in a happy Solitude, I confider every thing, here below, only as it tends to
jny
Felicia to Charlotte.
97
my eternal welfare; and, while I grafp at an immortality of joy, find but little inconvenience from the coarfenefs, and indelicacy, of my poor repast. I have no other affistance but what I receive from my dear boy, who is now above twenty. With a filial aste<5l:ion he forces me to receive a good part of the fruits of his labour; but, alas! that is much too little to find him in cloaths, and us in the means
■»
of fubSistance; and I am loth to have my wants known, lest this should again fubjedl me to contempt, and more particularly, as it might prejudice his hopes ; for he is exceflive-* Jy fond of a farmer’s daughter, who, though, her father is a weak, and no very honest man, is very worthy of his affe<stion. We have lived, for Some time, on thoSe fallads which the fields afford, but they are not now to be" had: young nettle-tops, boiled, were next our daily food ; of thefe being tired, I, fome days ago, tasted fome fresh grains; I was hungry,
*	A	^
and found them palatable, for what will not hunger make fb ? And, as I frequently amufe myfelf with fishing, by which I, fometimes, gain a delicious repast, I am not fufpe<fied of wanting them for my own nourishment. This circumstance affords me no Small pleafure, for all temporal happineSs confists more in the
Voi. II.	F	opinipft

«s
Felicia to Charlotte.
opinion of others, than on what we eat anil
I HAVE juft nientioned my Son to you, be is a lad of probity and integrity, and, if I may judge, from the prefent you have just made mOf you are in circumstances that will allow
you to be of Service to him: let tne recomi”' mend him to your protection.
PiTV, Lucius Says, was she least of all the pallions wliich Seized him, upon hearing this story ; his compastion gave way to furprife and
admiration : and she graceful manner, wish which this -truly yenerable man exprested hira-felf, still heightened that esteem, which was justly .raided, by Such exasted piety. Such con* tentmem and resignation. Lneius, therefote* very frankly replied, shat he judged right as to his circumstance, bj^t shat he had not lets
4
inclination than ability to Serve them all. He defired his friendship. He took him by the hand, apd, with the strongest exprestions (It esteem, astured hUn, that he would do hips
e .	.	.	_
all the fervice in his power. The steaks now ready, and she good man afked him, if he would not do him she honour to partake of
t	*
a meal, which he himfelf had enabled them to
As Lucius had not dined, he, very
leadily, accepted she invitation? on condititm
shat
Felicia to Charlotte.
9^
that he and his fbn should dine with him the next day, when they would conSider what could be done for the young man. This was immediately agreed to, and, while they were at table, Lucius defired him to explain Several passages in his story, which he did not per-fe<stly understand, and, particularly, what he meant by lending of notes. This being done, the difcourfe again turned upon the hardships he Suffered, with rcfpe6: to his way of living j hardships, which Lucius faid, were unknown to the rest of mankind, and which he could not think without expreffng the most lively marks of astonishment. The good man Smiled. At first. Said he, this gave m© Some uneafy thoughts; but I Soon learnt to conquer them, and to be thankful for the coarfeft morfel. I reprefented to myfelf the excruciating tortures which rack numbers of mankind, and aiked mylelf, what comparifon could be made between exquifite pain, and a mouthful of unpalatable provifions: I ac-' fcnowledged the difference, and bleffed.the be* ing that made our cafe preferable to theirs. The hardships endured in fieges are much greater than ours, for, at the fiege of Derry, a plate of grains would have been delicious
F 2	fare.
lod Felicia to Charlotte*
fare. They would have looked upon this a« a blessing, and shall I repine at what would have filled them with joy ? BeSides, could I have made my cafe known, which my aver-fion to the contempt which always attends poverty, and my regard for my fon has prevented, we might have lived in a much better, manner .; for whey, and butter-milk, would not have been refuSed rae. My wife and I,are both Satisfied, and thoroughly convinced, that true happinefs does not confift in Such trifles as thefe : for, wherever there is inward complacency. humanity of heart, and devout thank-fulnefs, .there is .ccntept, there is the noblest
’Tis very strange, faid Lucius, but whoever calls for assistance, is Sure to meet with contempt.and Scorn from every ignorant blockhead : yet, there is a chain which runs through all nature, by which every Species of beings have a dependance upon each other: but, let ns view only man., that proud being, that, in ipite of all the clearest didlates of reafon, and nil the laws and impulfes of nature, would fain perSuade bimfelf that he stands alone, and tree from obligations; wraps himfelf up in felf-fusslciency, and refufes to confer on another,
'9Khat, he imagines, he does not want himfelf.
Th§
Felicia to Charlotte. Set
0
The infant no Sooner breathes, than, with a puling cry, he proelairris his wants, which the fond mother is, at first, but litde able to rC'.-lieve ; he is, therefore, committed to strangers,-and receives his first obligations from them : he grows up, and daily demands help from-his parents, and, as his years increafe, his depem-dance, and obligations, become more general, even for the means of life, the Support of his very being, and the cultivation of his mind ; till, at last, he becomes a debtor to thoufands. If he is afhamed of this dependance, for the
Same reafon he must be ashamed that he is a
%
man: but if, after this, he refufes his affif-tance, or contemns him that stands in need of it, he is no longer a man, but a monster.
Fine reafons I fine reafons ! cried the old man. Smiling ; but you will never be able to perSuade a mifer, that avarice is a greater crime than poverty ; or any body elfe, that to be poor is not to be contemptible. There is
no man fo stupid. Said Luejus, as to believe that poverty is really criminal, or even contemptible : it is, indeed, in their opinion, a thing to be dreaded, not that they think it in-fe<stious, but for fear they should be afked for what they cannot give, confistently with their notions of Self-love, nor refufe, without Some
F 3
inward

102
Felicia to Charlotte.
inward commotions, on the fide of humanity. And, for this reafon, thofe, who, from an immoderate and falfe Self-love, study to keep their humanity under, always take care, for their own fakes, to reprefent poverty to them-ielves, as Something ridiculous, mean, and contemptible. They are fenfible of the amiable-Jiefs of the friendly difpofitions ; and a fear of being fuSpetsted to want, either them, or the abilities necessary for the exerciSe of them, may, possibly, be the pritKipal realbns, why the rich are ashamed of their poor relations ; as it may be thought, that they themSelves are either not So wealthy as is imagined, and, therefore, that they cannot, or that they have nothing really amiable in them, and therefore %vi!l not, relieve them. A kind of pride, the most wicked in hfelf, and the most pernicious to Society.
Thus we may derive all the calumny that falls upon the unfortunate, from the fame Self-interested views ; a struggle against the strong impressions of nature, an endeavour to fup-prefs the more generous fentiments of humanity. From ray little experience, I have found, that, whenever a man fails, let his probity have been ever fo confpicuous, it then becomes necessary, that his conduft should be arraigned,
and
/
V*
FiLICIA to CSARtOTTS. IO3
end more particularly fo by his relations, and the fclf-interefted amongst his friends; for where no ast of humanity is expected, the man may still remain esteemed. His virtues,
m
fucH as industry, care, and application, are not
what they look for ; theSe, therefore, arc
thrown aSide as ufeleSs lumber: biit, if art a6l of humanity be found, though he was therj
in a capacity to be generous, it is immediately
thrown into the heap of follies; nor is there
an indiferetion in his whole life, that can be
thought of, but it is mentioned, to increafe the
load;^Ner wonder, then, that it becomes
enormous. Thus want of fuccefs, which no
f	,	^	'
mortal can fccure, is charged as guilt, and the unhappy honest man is treated with a hundred times more contempt and obloquy, than the fuccefsful villain. And felf-love, shifting the difgrace further from itfelf, the relations of a hushand throw the greatest load of blame on his wife, whilst thofe, on her Side, cast it back on her hushand.
Will she never have done? methinks. Madam, I hear you fay. Yes, I anfwer. But you ought to remember, that I have been
the history of » hero
■ \
giving you tne niitory or » nero in patience, and this should put your ladyship in Blind, that it does not become you to exprefs
F 4	much
/
104 FrLiciA TO Charlotte.
much uneaSinefs at Such a trifle, as the length of a letter; for I have nothing more to inform you, but that Lucius, having dined heartily, took his leave, and, with the hopes of feeing the good man and his fon, the next day, jogged home. And, therefore, I am at liberty to break off, and Subscribe myfelf.
Your Ladyship’s
moji Jincere friend.
Felicia ManLy.
LETTER XXXIV.
I *
£ L L, Madam, I have now leen this venerable old man, whofe history I 'gave you in my last j and, I can affure you, he perfeclly anfwers the description Lucius gave me of him. His fon is a well made a-greeable young fellow, and, though he finilhed his education in a country village, it Seems has a good share of learning ; but this is not at all furpnfuig, as his father was his tutor. His behaviour has too much of the gentleman, for him ever to make a good clown; and he has
too much bashfulnefs to pafs for a gentleman.
It

Felicia to Charlotte.
105
It was eafy to See that he had never been in Such company before; for he blushed whenever he was Spoke to, and, when he anfwered, it was with as much diffidence, and precaution in placing his words, as if he had been before a magistrate. In short, if his Serftiments are at all anfwerable fo the'ingenuity of his look, he, with his fair Daphne, or Amaryllis, might make a good figure in a pastoral 'eclogue.
After dinner, under the pretence of taking a walk in the garden, Lucius eondudled us to a neat houfe, just on the outfide of the back door, leading into the fields. He aSRed the good man how he liked it, and he, as he ex-peisted, admiring the Situation, Lucius, in very polite terms, defired his acceptance of it for life. Our venerable guest received this favour, with all imaginable testimonies of gratitude, while bis Son, by his Iook% leemed in a rapture of joy : and, indeed, as it has only four
rooms, that is, two on a floor, it is a mart-
/
fion proper enough for an anchorite. Be-fides, Lucius has promifed to furnish it, and I am to make him a prefent of as many books as he shall have occafion for; a catologue of Some of which, I have engaged our hermit jhimfelf to write out for me.
Fs
ig6 Felicia to Charlotte.
While they were taking a view of tfeifc foiall building, a Servant came to inform us> that the farmer, who had been here fome days before, deSired to Speak with his master. Lu* cius, immediately, gave orders that he should be admitted ; the honest man came, and step* ping afide with him, informed him, that the trees, which he had been ordered to watch^ were to be removed the next day. At this news, Lucius Sent for Glod, with orders that
he should come diredlly, and bring his coun* ter least. Lucius had, beforCj related the whole affair to Mellifont, and he again to a gentleman of the law, who has an estate in this part of the country ; he strenuoufly asserted, that he ought to undergo the penalty mentioned in his contra<fi, that is, to pay ofte hui> dred pounds, to forfeit his leaSe, and to make good the damage; and that lenity, in this cast, would be an ill precedent, with reSperst to the other tenants: whilst Lucius was of opinion, that as the whole affair had been told to him in confidence, his honour would not permit him to proceed to extremities ; and the good old man, to whom he now told the story, without mentioning the farmer’s name, was of the fame opinion ; but could not help Smiling at the filly fellow's talking of being i	paid
Felicia to Charlotte.
10?

paid for his trouble, in cutting down trees that; he had no right to meddle with. The conversation then turned on the young man, who was next to be provided for, and being found to be very well qualified for the post, he was chofe houfe steward, and an apartment aS-figned him in our houfe, conSisting of a bedchamber, a parlour, and a little room for ant oiHce.
The joy of the tender parent was now compleat, and tears of gratitude rolled down his venerable cheeks. He lifted up his Swimming eyes to heaven, and then casting them down upon us, blest'ed us with an ardour that Spoke the fulnefs of a heart, lost in devout thankfulneSs. O little did I think, cried he, of living to fee Such a day as this. My God, I thank thee I and, O blefs my benefadlors, as they have been the means of Westing me 1 Here he took hold of Lucius’s hand, and pressed it between his, then raistng it up to his lips, I thank you for my dear boy, cried he : I joyfully commit him to your care. May it be always his study to deServe your good-nefs.
Here the young man, finding his good father make a paufe, stepped forwards, and then
bowing, Excufe me, Sir, Said he, with a tone
/
F 6
that
io8 Felicta to Charlotte. ,
4
that Seemed to arife from a mixture of timb-roufnefs, and a joy too big for utterance, if I
want words—-to exprefs my thankfulnefs—
*
for a favour, greater—vastly greater than all my hopes—but—-a—my gratitude—-my care and my fidelity—stiall best thank you : but what return—Here, he made a long paufe, and feemed quite lost; when the old with a little confuSion in his look, cry’d, You (ee. Sir, the effe£ls of a want of genteel corn* pany, my Son has no illiberal education, nor does he want either lenfe or words to expreff
himfelf, wherr among people of a lower clafs, with whom our circumstances have hitherta permitted him only to converfe. Luciu» Smiled, and clapping the youth on the shoulder, with a free and familiar air, faid, he would take care to remedy that fault; and this freedom of behaviour feemed to have ait immediate effefl, for, in an instant, the young man’s confufion and diforder feemed to vanish, and being now pretty jwell astured, prompted by a little female curiofity, I defired him to give us the particulars of his amour with the farmer’s daughter. He blushed, and, after a short paufe, conlented, and, with more af-Surance, and lefs kefitation, though not with-'
out

Fslicia to Charlottes
out fear and trembling, gave us the following account.
When I was about eighteen, as I was riding back from watering my master’s horfes, they took fright; the horfe I rode on, ran a-way with me, and hastily turning short, thro* a gap in the hedge, threw me. I lay fenfe-lefs for Some time. When I came to myfelf, I hardly knew what had pafs’d; I endeavoured to recollect myfelf, and looking about to fe« where I was, immediately cast my eyes on a very agreeable girl, neatly dressed, v'ho was Sitting clofe by me; she lay half reclined. Supporting herfelf with one hand on the grafs,, while the other, which was stretched over my breast, held a .^bottle of Salts: but my eyes were hardly open when she arofe, and, taking a step or two backwards, with her looks still fixed on me, told me, with an air of great humanity, that she was glad to fee me alivci. and alked me how 1 did. I thanked her, and complained of a violent pain in my head; she
was forry for it, she Said, and wished me a
#
good night. I was then fitting up, and Seeing her about to go, defired her to stay a little, and accept of my company; but she, modestly, refufed me. She told me, she wished me well, and again bid me good night, and, without
/
no Felicia to Charlotte.
out turning her head, walked away as fast as she could. I still continued fitting in the fame posture, when a few drops of blood trickling down my face, I lifted up my hand to wipe
I
them away, and moving it towards the place where I felt the greatest pain, was futpriSed to find a handkerchief tied round my head, to stop the bleeding of a Small wound; for 1 was fo stunned with the fall, that I never perceived it before, I was pleafed with the pretty girl’s good nature, and the next Sunday, waiting for her coming out of church, having before got the handkerchief washed, returned it with many thanks. She Smiled, and told me I was very little obliged to her, fince she did no more for me than what she would have done for any other pi rfon, in the fame condition ; and very coldly, but civilly, faying, Your Servant, turned away to a young woman, and; taking hold ot her arm, prevented my faying
jany more.
Poor man I faid I, laughing, what a; dif-appointment was this ! I fuppofe you were a little mortified at it. No, Madam, reply'd he; indeed I was not. I had returned the handkerchief, and that was all the view I bad in fpeaking to her. I looked upon her as a
deferving girl: arid was pleafed, that though
1 had

Felicia to Charlotte.
f 11
I had not discharged the obligation, I had paid a debt of honour. Here, observing me Smilej ExcuSe me, Madam, added he, for making Mfe of a word, which, I am Sure, does not be^ Come the mouth of Such a one as me; but, even plowmen know what honour means^ and, though they do not make uSe of the word,
observe what is meant by it. Lucius Said he was in the right, and dcfired him to proceed, without minding my looks. On which he reSumed.
As I had, frequently, an opportunity of Iee»
ins her, this calm esteem made me Sometimes Single her out for conversation. I overtook her, by accident, in the fields, going a milking, I Walked her pace, and Sometimes, when She was returning back, carried her milk-pail i and, by this mean?, I, inSenfibly, learnt, from her mind, what I ought to feel in my own. The nibdest Simplicity of her adbions, thednnocency of her looks, and the goodneSs of her hearty which was Sure to be affected, whenever an objeft of compassion was near, were thofe charms, which I could not refist, and they would, indeed, have been too much for me, had her good fenfe been leSs remarkable. I was Soon convinced that what stie had done for me was purely the estetst of her good na*.
ture.
Ill Felicia TO Charlotte»
ture. For a long time Ihe strove to avoid me. So that it was by flow degrees I learn’d her value. She began to have an esteem for me. I thought I deferved no other charader than that of her friend j I told her So, and (he was not difpleafed. Innocent in all, she had no idea of love, nor was the name mentioned. At sheep-shearing, at the wakes, and at har-. vest-home, she was constantly invited by my master’s daughters, and I joined in. the jovial merriment. Our esteem for each other en-^ creafed, till, at last, it rip,ened into love. And, when this was known to ourfelves, we were, frighted at the difficulties which lay before us j she told me her story, and pershaded me never to fee her more,	^
I
Her mother, a woman of lenle, and very fond of books, took care of her infancy, and gave her too a taste for reading, and embellished her mind with many ufeful hints, on the excellency of a virtuous charader; but she Soon died, and left her to the management of a weak and hard-hearted father; who marrying a woman, muchyounger than him-felf, Suffered her to be treated with the greats eft inhumanity. But, I will not trouble you
with the Severities she told me she met with from a wretch of no principles, a cruel step*-
mother.
Fflicia to Charlotte.
“3
mother, whofe delight it was to give her un« eaSinefs, Her aunt was enraged to See her lifter's child treated So ill; she took her home, and it was at her boufe ftie lived, when I ufe'd to have the pleaSure of feeing her. An uncle «S hers, who relied in London, has lately left her a hundred pounds, which is all her fortune j for though her father is reckoned to be worth between three and four hundred pounds, she has no expectation from him, as he has now a child by his Second wife, who rules him as she pleafes.
1 HAVE not Seen her this month, except at church ; but with what reluCtance I have Submitted to this, no words can exprefs. I thought her above me. I feared to bring upon her the reproaches of her relations, who, to be Sure, would never confent to our happi-nefs: to her marrying fo poor, a man: one So
4
much beneath her. But your generofity, Sistj has removed this obftacle. I am in raptures when I think of it. How shall I exprefs my gratitude? How defcribe a joy, which no words can paint ? It is too much ! you are too good, and I am too happy !
Well, Madam, was I not in the right to represent this innocent youth as a perSon proper to make a shining figure in a pastoral ? But
you
II4
Felicia to Charlotte.

you See he is above the rank of the Hobbinol of Gay, and would better fuit the mote dignified charatster of Pope’s, or Phillips’s, gentle Swains, who, with a greater dignity of Sentiment, attune the warbling pipe to mote lofty, more graceful, and harmonious hers.
About an hour after this, the man returned with Clod ; Mr. Manly, without the least delign of alarming the farmer, had, inadvertently, Sent Robin for him; whom he no Sooner
/'
Set his eyes on, than he recollected that he had Seen him before: and being told that it was his master that went in to drink with him, after he had bought a load of bay, he was in a most terrible fright; he, therefore,came tremb-liilg, and entered the hall, where Mr. Manly had stated himfelf to receive him, with the air of a man going to receive fentence of death, and having made an awkward bow, as he came in. Slunk into a corner. He was defifed to come forwards, which he did very Slowly, looking downwards, and knitting his brows, and then stood before the awful little man, with a fear that made his lips quiver with a convulsive motion. When he was aSked how his wife did, and whether She Sfill continued
the fame Submissive creature he had repre-
stnted
\
Felicia to Charlotte*
”5
iented her; he looked very Silly, and. Scratching his head, anfwered, Yes. Then you are-your own master. Said he, again, you are a* hove being ruled by your wife, and, as you make her keep her distar^ce, she must not presume to advife or direcst you, in any thing that does not concern her. Yes, was anfwer’d again. Then, rejoined Lucius, you take the whole blame, and all the guilt, of this affair upon yourSelst 1 find I was mistaken; I thought you might have been teafcd into it> by the importunity of a wicked woman ; a critne that would have admitted of Some alleviation, and, then, though you would have
)
more weaknefs, yet you would have leSs guilt.
The man stared, and bit his lips, and, at last, stammering, cry’d. But—but—but shu did perSuade me to fell the trees, or I bad no done it. Shu does what shu pleaSes wi’ me, and I conno’ help it. I thowt no harm.—— Thought no harm ! cry’d Lucius, what is there no harm in robbing your landlord ? Ay, ay, cry’d the man, there is harm enough in that. But 1 mean, I thought no harm in telling you ftich woundy lees about my wife, for I am asheam’d, and wud no’ ha’ people think me Sucsh an old foo’; yet 1 love her for aw
that.
116
Felicia to Charlottev
that. I find, however, Said Lucius, with » magisterial air, your word is not to be taken j but produce your counter-leafe. He now pulled it out of his pocket, and, with a look, that Ihewed him ready to fink with fear, gave it to Lucius, who juft cast his eye on the pre* amble, and returning it, ordered him to read it himfelf: but that was impoffible ; for, after he had read two or three short words, and fpelt a long one, Lucius obferved, that his hand shook to Such a degree, that be would never be able to go through with it.
I WAS standing all this while in a gallery that, leading to Some chambers, crostes the hall j and, looking very attentively over the iron rails, was listening, and, at the fame time, costtemplating on my Sancho, Seated below' me, in his two-arm’d chair; that formidable appearance, which struck fuch terror into the Self-condemned farmer. Just at this time, the venerable old man, whofe name I might have told you before, is Trueinan (but fince I tell you So now, it is as well) entered with his'fbtt, and looking stedfastly at the farmer, stepped up to Lucius, 'and defired to Speak a word with him in private. He arofe from the feat of juflice, and walking afide they whif-
pered for half a minute, and then the old man,
in


Felicia to Charlotte, ijt
' /
an great haste, ran out of the hall. The judge Seemed pleafed, gave a nod, which stgnified a kind of assent, and, returning to his feat, took, the leafe, and giving it to young Truemanji deSired him to read it, which he had no Sooner done, than Lucius began. Here you find, that you have not only forfeited your leafe, but, befides, are to pay me one hundred pounds, over and above the value of the trees you have unlawfully cut down.
At this instant, the gentle Mrs. Clod, with a child in her arms, burst into the hall, and, without the least regard to any body prefent, dire<fied her diScourSe to her hufband. Ah ye foo’, ye blockhead, yo ! cried she as loud as she could haul: fee what you han browt us too. This is yo’r wife doings, ye oaf yo I Old Clod looked now rnore aghast than ever, and, with his eyes fixed on his wife, who stood behind him, defired her to hold her tonguei but she, lifting up her fist, replied, with great .fury. Hold my tongue, ye villain J hold my tongue! fee this poor baby: ye unnatural brute. Yo ha’ ruined us aw, ye have ! Clod observing her fist held up in a menacing posture, and hearing thefe ungrateful founds, with his head still turned behind him, fidled nearer and
jiearer to Lucius, as the leSs terrible obje6i of
she
tiS
Felicia to Charlotte,
/'
the two ; who, afluming a most haughty air, commanded her to be filent, at which, (he running forwards, and pushing between Lucius and her hushand, (when, in an instant, thofe eyes, which before shot lightening, now let fall a plenteous shower,) blubber’d very difmally, and begged him to pity her, and that poor, pretty, dear, Sweet, helplefs baby; and inSisted, that though it was no great matter what became of fuch a wicked man, Such a vile rogue, as her hushand, yet it would be the greatest cruelty to ruin her, and So fine a child. So Sweet a wench, a? that she held in her arms. But, alas 1 the judge was deaf to all she couW fay ; he order’d a fervant to turn her out of doors; but she fell on her knees, and, with great earnestneSs, endeavoured to perfuade him to Suffer her to stay,. This favour, at last, was granted, only upon condition of filence; which was no Sooner done, than Clod, Seeming to revive and recover Spirits, from his indignation, cry’d out, I could no* ha* thowt it: shu wud ha* me into jail: well. I’ll See who shall Suffer; I ha’ another dow-ter, and her mother wud na’ ha’ Serv’d me So, Lucius now represented the heinouSneSs of the crime, and infisted upon the penalty :
and (»dering young Trueman to fill up a
bond
Felicia TO Charlotte. 119
bond which he had before Sent for, the farmer Signed it with lefs reludlance than I could have Imagined, only repeating a curfe or two on bis wife, loud enough for her to hear, and crying, I’ll be her fob’ no longer, I ha’ another
rdowter.
The filling up of the bond took up Some time, for our young steward was not yet very .expert at his buSmeSs, and his father was not there to assist him : but the ceremony of Sigii>« ■ing and Sealing was hardly over, when the good odd man entered, introducing an elderly woman, and a very pretty young woman of about Seventeen, whom he led to Lucius* Our judge arofe, and bow’d, and, at the fame instant, farmer Clod cry’d out. My poor dow-ter! and young I'rueman dropp’d an ink standifh, which he was carrying into his of-ifice. Clod’s wife gave them all a curfe, and, grumbling, left the place, while he feiaed one of the girl’s hands, and throwing his other arm about her neck, gave her a hearty finack crying, I am o’most ruined j but no matter, I steferve it. Wull yo’ forgi’ me, wench ? Yo are my dowter, and yo stxall be my dowfier, in fpite of the devil. Young Trueman had, during this fpeech, feked her other hand, which Clod had neither power jKn refcdutioii

\
to
i2<5 Felicia to Charlotte.'
to prevent, and which, with an air of native innocence, she chearfully refigned to her lover. Her eyes were, in an instant, turned from her father, and fixed, with great foftnefs, on the young marl, who gaz’d on her, with a look of mingled tendernefs and rapture.
This, Madam, was a Scene, which, at first, I could not comprehend, and So strange a turn filled me at once with curiofity, and held me in an agreeable SufpenSe: but it was a cu-riofity too violent to Suffer me to continue, at a distance, an uninterested fpe<stator. I, therefore, ran down stairs, when old Trueman, with the elderly woman, having joined them-felves to Lucius, to whom they were talking, and accidentally fronting the other three, I could not help faying, with a laugh. Well, if after all you are difpofed for a country dance,
I hope I may be allowed to make one. They all Smiled, and, after the ufual ceremony, of a few bows and curtefies, and your humble Servant, and the like, Lucius addressed himSelf a-gain to Clod.
You have now performed, laid he, the conditions I demanded, nor shall I make any tesse<5lions on what is passed, ssnee this would expofe you before your relations. My thoughts
are now taken up with the general happineSs
of
Felicia to Charlotte. lit
of your whole family. If I inSisted So stre-nuoufly on your paying the fine. It was only with a view, to Secure Some part of the fortune of a daughter, whom you have negk£led ; and by giving the bond to this young rtian, whom you must now look upon as your Son, I return it again into the Same family j Since, as my steward, he does not need this to make him an advantageous match for your daughter.' Here Clod, without stirring a step, stretched out his neck, to stare at Trueman ; and feem^ ing, more and more, to recover himSelf, drew his daughter back a little, crying, A proper mon ; hay, wench. Gi’ me yo’r bond ; which Trueman doing, he gave it a hearty shake. Saying, God bleSs yo’ together. I wish it with aw my heart. Shu is a good wench ; I’ll fay that for her. And then, turning to Lucius, bowed So low, and gave Such a Scrape, that he had like to have fallen upon his face. The young woman blushed, and curteSied; and Lucius having, by this time, found the bond, which he pulled out of his pocket, presented it to Trueman, faying. Here take this,
/
and I wish you all imaginable happineSs; while he received it with a look of gratitude and joy. Lucius reSumed, I am SenSible that what you told me was in confidence: I, th®re-VoL.lI.	G	fore.
/

122
Felicia to Charlotte.
fore remit of the rigour of my first demand, I return you your counter-leafe, and stiall Sell the trees myfelf; I only defire you to Set the fame number of plants in their room. Ay, marry wull I (cried he, as he received it) and as many more to boot, and rot me if ever shu make me fuch a rogue again. Now nothing was heard but joy and congratulations. T'he young woman’s aunt (for that was the perfon that came in with her) as she loved her niece, was very liberal of her thanks and acknowledgments ; she kissed the young couple, and infissed on providing the wedding dinner, as Soon as they could be afked in due form at church. For, as she was ho friend to licenSes, she was refolved that the marriage should not be performed till after this ceremony was corn-pleated, which she thought necessary to render it valid. The happy couple were the least tumultuous in their joy, for that was principally expressed, on both Sides, by the eloquent language of the countenance, which. Sufficiently, told us all they could have uttered ; and, perhaps, they chofe that we should rather fee than hear the expressions of their mutual tendernefs : but it is more probable, that, wholly taken up with the prefence of each other, they never thought of us .at all, and ‘	while
Felicia to Charlotte.
12$
while they were Silent, did not fufpe<5i: that
any in the company could understand a language, which they, doubtleSs, imagined peculiar to hhemSelves. But it was not So with old Clod, who knew no other way of expreS-Sing his joy, than by capering about the hall, blessing the Squire and his good lady, kissing his daughter, and hugging young Trueman. In short, we adjourned into a parlour ; when wine, ale, and tea, were called for, which every one partook of as they pleafed. ' Nor was the cold Sir-loin forgot, which, by antient custom, is a joint devoted to hofpitality; for this was placed on a stde-board, near the farmer, whole uneafinefs having cost him a dinner, he wifely, upon the return of his fpirits and his stomach, [did not Suffer it to stand neglected. At last, they all took their leave, but not till our young steward had shewn his intended bride her future apartment, which Lucius, in the prefence of the aunt, promifed should be immediately furnished for their reception.
You See, Madam, that innocence and peace do.not always blefs the cottage: vice fojne-times finds an entrance under the lowest roof; and care and Sorrow can hover over the brow of humble virtue. With theSe Sage remarks,
G 2	which
124
Felicia to Charlotte.
which inform you have nothing but what you
knew before, I conclude my letter, having
no more to add, but that I am, and shall ever be.
\
Your Ladyship’s
mojl affeSfionate friend.
%
Felicia Manly,
P. S. Upon recolle^Hon, I think, I ought not to have informed you, that the wicked woman, who makes no inconSiderable cha-radler in the above letter, is a step-mother ; but Surely you will not do me the injury to fufpedt that, by inferting it, I would inSinuate a refledtion upon others, who, with the name, have quite different difpoSitions, A certain lady, whom you dearly love, and to whom your couSin owes ten thoufand obligations, is a glorious exception ;' and I know Some other ladies, beSides MiSs Biddy, who, from a mother-in-law, have received all the tender in-dulgendes, and all the obligations they could reasonably expedt from a real parent. If you shew your aunt this letter, as I find you have done Some others, don’t let her overlook this
postscript,
LET-

- AT
Felicia to Charlotte*
1^5
LETTER
Dear Madam,
0 U See what a variety of Impcrtinen-cies, your deSire of frequently hearing from me, has forced me to commit; but what elfe can be expe(fied from rural Scenes, which, though the haunt of lovers, are the
most unfruitful of intrigues: for where almost every one atsts from nature, nothing of the marvellous can be expecsted. Yet I shall now open a fcene of wonders, that will give you the greatest astonishment.
One day last week, to our no Small Surprise, we received a presting invitation to dine with Mr. Stevens, ^the Sprightly old gentleman, whoSe * charadler you were fb v/ell pleaSed with, and whom we had not Seen, Since the diSgrace of his Superlatively pious lister f Prudilla. acquaintance of fo agreeable a companion, made us readily comply with his request. Lucius, therefore, ordered the coach to be immediately got ready, and we fet out foon after.
Our destre of renewing the
G 3
Upon

See Letter IV. Letter VIII. f Letter XIX. j
%
126 Felicia to Charlotte.
Upon our arrival, vve were received by the entieman himSelf, with his ufual affability and freedom ; but with lefs of that humorous gaiety in his look, which indicates the friend, and chearful companion. After paying us fome handSome, tho’ late, compliments on ©ur nuptials, he informed us, that his Sister, who, he confessed, had injured us in his ef-teem, being now dangeroussy ill of a consumption, dessred to See us, that she might unburtben her mind, as much as possible, by confessing her guilt, and endeavouring to obtain Our pardon; and that, as she was now a-wakc, if we pleafed, he would introduce us hinsselss We immediately conSented, and followed him to her chamber. We found her ieated in aneafy chair, one arm hanging negligently down by the Side, which, by its thin-nefs, Seemed immoderately long. She was worn to a Skeleton ; her head leaning back, in a languid posture, discovered a thin, pale, and dejedted countenance, which, the moment she raiSed it, expressed all the ssgns of inward con-fufion, horror, and guilt, She fixed her eyes on us. Sighed, and waving her hand, deSired us, wdth a weak voice, to fit down by her, which we immediately did ; when Mr.
Stevens left us, and, before he shut the door,
affu re
■■

Felicia to Charlotte
127
4
alTured his Siller, that he would take care that
nobody should come to interrupt us.
What an obje£l was here ! How wretch-
edly depraved must that mind be, that could
triumph before an enemy So reduced, So hum-
ble, and So w^orthy of pity f Lucius could not:
his concern was extremely viiible, and, tbo’ I
never Saw him in a more Sprightly humour.
than he was in the whole morning, it was
now inftantly vanished ; and his countenance
had an air of Solemn gravity, and companion.
With a tone of great humanity, he alk'd how she did.
She, thanking him, anSwered, I am
T am ffo-
extremely ill. 0,^Sir, I am going
ing to that being, who will not be impoSed
upon by falSe appearances. Oh the horrors of a guilty mind! Oh confcience! ConScience !
I have plotted your ruin—I have endeavoured
to destroy your peace—your fortune happineSs here—^your foul hereafter.
your Then,
wiping her eyes. Oh, I afk your pardon,
Can you forgive me ? Can you ?—Will you ?
This w’as fpoke with fuch a befeeching look,
and uttered with So much carnestnefs, that it
4
would have been barbarous to have kept her any longer in SuSpenSe. Lucius, therefore.
immediately reply’d, in that tender tone, which
nature gives to the voice, when the heart is
G 4
128
Felicia to Charlotte.
N
deeply affected with compaflion, Yes, Madam, I heartily forgive you ; But why this eager-nefs ? Do you think me incapable of pity ? No, Sir, added she, I know you are not; but alas ! you know not what you fay 1—You don’t know how much I have been your enemy—but don’t—don’t withdraw your for-givenefs, continued she, looking stedfaftly in his face ; and then calling her eyes on the ground, added : It was I that caufed your father to be arrested : It was I—I that perfuad-cd his creditors to throw him in a jail, How ! cry’d Lucius, reddening; and then, after a moment’s reflexion, refumed with a Sigh; V/ell ! this is not a time for reproaches. Reproaches ! cry’d she; I deferve them all—I know I deferve them all, and am prepared to receive them. O Madam ! I loved Lucius, with a criminal paflion, and, under a veil of fandlity, thought to conceal myfelf from the eyes of the world ; but I could not do it from the all-piercing eye of heaven-—But my plots were difcovered, and you were a witnefs of the shameful, but just, treatment {I met with
when all my contrivances to
entle-
at your aunt s, break the match betwixt you and this
man were laid open. Your aunt’s reproaches sharpened the sting of my guilty confcience;
your

Felicia to Charlotte.
129
\
your and your coulin’s triumph over me, made my mind boil with rage and Ihame, and dil-appointed love. I returned home,—I contrived ways of revenge, and fought still to destroy your peace. At last, I thought of Mr.' Manly. I knew Some of his creditors, I stewr to them, and, under a pretence of viSiting their wives, indulged the malice of this wicked heart. This, at first, was all my view : but Soon, Madam, 1 recollefted that your hulband had a tender and generous mind : I hoped his duty, and his affe£lion to his father, would be
too strong for his pastion for you-------1 hoped
he would relieve him, and I was not deceived : I prepared to let your father know that he was an impostor, that he had greatly lestened his fortune: and, by this means, thpught my-felf again infallibly certain of breaking the match: but foon I learned thai thefe hopes were vain: Lucius had himfelf informed him of the whole affair.—he was foF2tven, and I plunged in fresh defpair.-—-O Lucius ! I durst not how fee your father,—Oh a guilty con-fcicnce ! a guilty confcience !—^ 'rime followed crime, till I finned beyond all hopes of mercy. * Sis an ingenuoirs conlestion however, cry’d Lucius, and I Leartily forgive you.
May God forgive you too. I’ll promife for
G 5
my

Felicia to Charlotte.
my father. I thank you. Said she, and flopp’d, ®nd then continuing Silent for Some time, she, at last, fixed her eyes on Lucius, and refumed. I have another affair, but I cannot mention it to you.—1 cannot Speak of it—but, as it is more neceffary to be discovered than any thing
Here
look at this paper
I have yet Said, I have wrote it down.
read my shame, and then let me Speak to you alone. You will know it time enough, Madam. 1 can Scarcely think of it before you, and must, therefore, beg of you to retire.
You won’t wonder. Madam, that I was very much Surprized at this propofal, which appeared the more extraordinary, by her manner of introducing it. What could I think ? It had an odd appearance. Lucius feemed thoroughly fenfible of this, and, therefore, endeavoured to detain me. This is very ftrange, cried he: What concern can I have of any Secret affiir of yours, which my Felicia may not be acquainted with ? Or what can that be, which is fit only for me, and not for her to know ? Dear Madam, dear Sir, oblige me, cried she, with anearneftneSs that pleaded more than her words: furely this requeft cannot be hard for you to grant! Lucius made
ao anfwer, but, receiving the paper, went to
the
\
Felicia to Charlotte. 13 r
the window to read it. As she Sat with her back to the light, he might do it as Safely here as in another room, without railing her blushes, by the diforder of his looks ; and, perhaps, her chair was Set in this manner on purpofe. Mean while I arofe, and walking out of the room, pulled the door after me, v/hich I had hardly done, when I heard Lucius stamp, and cry out, I a child by you. Madam, stis falfe. *Tis a notorious lye. And then, running to the door, defired me to come in, with a look that shewed him in a most violent passion. It stems, added he, that this important affair, fo improper for you to hear, is what you have an immediate concern in ; she has the impudence to fay here—but read it yourfelS What a vile Scandalous lye--1 a child by her !
As I was but just oiT the outSide of the
door when he called me, I immediately re-*
» *
turned 5 and, being much lefs disturbed than he, had the precaution to shut it, as I entered the room. I mult confefs that I was in a very queer sttuation of mind : I was far from be-ing eafy. But it is impossible for me to give YOU any idea of Lucius’s behaviour: he stamped, he stared, his colour changed from a deep starlet, to a livid palenefs ; and" then looking towards the chair, with rage and contempt
O &	strongly
i^2 Felicia to Charlotte,"
strongly painted in his countenance, Is this your repentance ? cried he, wicked and abandoned wretch !—In Such a condition too I— Your affectation of modesty !—my wife must
not know it-----you can’t fpeak of it before
tier I Why So warm, my dear ? replied I, with a Smile : if there is nothing in it, it can only Serve to encreafe our detestation of a wretch, that So near her death, could be guilty of So vile a stander.	cried he, with a Snappish
hastinefs: It is an abfolute lye—she is the last woman that I would be guilty of fuch an affair with—fuch an antidote to deSire !-—I should be as much ashamed of my taste as of the crime.
WE were now alarmed by an affair of a very different kind; for Prudilla, w'ho had heard every word, unable to Support the shock of being treated in fo Severe a manner, at this instant, fainted away, and fell out of her chair, and we beheld a pale, and almost
being, lie stretched out on the hearth, in a manner that called for immediate relief. To what ft ange revoluti' ns is the human mind fubjeCl: ? Not all our indignation, not all the fury of passion, could prevent our running immediately to her assistance, and giving her [that Succour that her cafe required, Lucius
railed
Felicia to Charlotte^
13s
railed her head from under the grate, where Ihe was in danger of being burnt, and, with niy allistance, lifted her into her chair, and there held her, whilst I ran to call her brother. He came; but it was near half an hour before we brought her to herfelf. At last, she opened her eyes, and her brother forced her to drink a glafs of wine and hartf-horn; but she no fooner recovered her Spirits, than she burst into tears; nor could she utter any thing but Sighs, for a considerable time, endeavouring all the while to conceal her blushes, by covering her face. At last, she deSired her brother to leave us, and, when he was gone, not a word was Spoke for near two minutes more. For she was So weak, that Lucius, dreading Some ill confequence might again attend his not being able to master his temper, refolved to let her begin first; and to wait, with patience, till he could hear what she had to fay, in vindication of this notorious iye, as he called it. This he let me know, as Soon as Mr. Stevens left the room; by writing his resolution on a piece of paper, which he eafily did, as there was a pen and ink upon the table, which stood clofe at his elbow. I began to be tired of this Sufpenfe, when she began, with a deep Sigh : Now you know my
shame;
m ^	*
jj4 Felicia to Charlotte,
ihame j but I did not think I Ihould be treated
in this manner.
Oh you are very cruel, you
Is
y
might have read the paper out.—-is it not falSe ? cry’d Lucius ; had you ever a child by me ?—Pray let me go on. Said she, you ought, indeed, to have read the paper out, before you
fell into Such a paffion.----Did not I read
one lye at the beginning? interrupted he again; to whatpurpoSe should I read on to find more ? Hear me, hear me, rejoin’d she, I take the shame and guilt upon myfelf, why should you not then hear me? You lay at our houSe, a-bout two years ago, twice you lay here j if you remember, it rained, and you could not go home. Oh ! how shall I tell the rest ? You was waked by a woman in your bed, Lucius blushed, and looked at me, and'iihme^ diately replied, I acknowledge it. Madam; but proceed. I left you while you were a-fleep.—I was gone before it was light, and the lirll time you lay here, you found our chambermaid’s handkerchief lying by tlie Side of the bed, which, the next morning, she owned; The, odioufnefs of my crime made me glad to conceal it; I blushed at my own wickednels,, and, to preferve my charader,. left the handL kerchief,
I own*
Felicia to Charlotte. 135
I OWN it all. Madam, cried Lucius ; and I fincerely beg your pardon. Indeed, I ought not to have been So warm: but I beg you would forgive a language, which, I acknowledge, did not become me. My SuSpicion fell where you intended it should; but how barbarous, how ungenerous, was it in you, to fully the character of an innocent creature, by laying your guilt to her charge ! If that be So great a fault, returned she, I have much to anfwer for: Oh I am a guilty creature ! but the shame I then felt for my faults, though it prompted me to do all I could to hide them, though it made me blush in private, and almost hate myfelf, was nothing to the horror I now feel. Pray, Madam, Said I, proceed with your story, I long to hear what is become of the child, Lucius, Madam, may remember, continued she, that I went to London, about four months after the last time he lay at our houfe; there, instead of vistting my friends, I lived very retired, and, pretending that my hushand was gone abroad, was well refpedled,
and, at last, brought to bed of a fine girl. Af-
*
ter my return home, I Sent for it into the country, and it is now at Clifton, where it pastes for the child of a poor woman, whom
I had taken a fancy to, and refolved to keep
out
' Felicia TO Charlotte.'
t
out of charity. In that paper is a dire£ston where to find it, and in that paper tooNyou will See that I have left this living witnefs of
niy shame Seven thoufand pounds, which is all my fortune ; and if she dies, it is to be equally divided between you and my brother : for you are the perSon I love dearest, and have most injured.' But my brother will shew you my will; he has confented to every thing, and, therefore, I have chofen him and you for my executors.—But 1 aim quite Spent.—-I hope I shall fee you after dinner.—‘This we promised, and retired.
I don’t know. Madam, whether I can vindicate to mySelst my thus lay ing open a Secret affair, that refie£ls fo much upon the character of my dear Lucius , How triumphantly you cry out, O the man of immaculate virtue, the modest, the Sober, the religious Lucius !—in bed with a Superannuated old maid— mighty pretty, who could have thought it ? But, however you exclaim, 1 know you w 11 be pleafed, to find him a little lower in your esteem ; or elfe v/hat is become of all your
pretty hints, “ that he was too good to be
%
“ married—that you should not like a huf-band fo extremely periedl----and that yo»
thought it necessary that a man, who was to
“ be
* <

V ,
^ Felicia to Charlotte. 137
•* be your companion for life, should have “ Some faults, that he might be better able to “ excufe yours.”—Think of this, and ceaSe your exclamations. As to Prudilla’s conduct, it is vaiily more inexcufeable : but I conSider her as an humble penitent, and, therefore, shall not expatiate on her crimes. I have been melted by her tears ; I have heartily forgiven her, and this has made me omit feveral Speeches, which had I inferted, though they might have kept up the enthuSiastic part of her character, would have weakened your pity, by making her appear ridiculous.
I HAVE the honour to be, Madam,
Your Ladyship’s
I
mofi Jtncere,
and moji affectionate Friend.,
Felicia Manly.
LETTER XXXVI.
Dear Madam,
W E had staid So long with Prudilla, that,
when we went down, we found the dinner almost Spoiled; for Mr. Stevens, imagining
138 Felicia to CHARLofTE*
gining that this might be the last time of our , feeing her alive, was not willing to interrupt us, being very fenSible that we had affairs upon our hands of much greater moment.
The cloth was no Sooner taken away, than Mr. Stevens, having lighted his pipe, addressed himSelf to Lucius, and told him, that his Sister had dessred him to shew him the will, before it was Sealed up. You know, already, I fup-pofe, Said he, that you and I are appointed her executors, and I don’t doubt but she has told you in what manner she has diSpofed of her fortune. Tell me now, honestly, don’t you think my Sister out of her Senfes ? Self-interest, perhaps, may biaSs me, but you are an unprejudiced perfon : therefore, let me know •what you think of her leaving Seven thouSand pounds to a stranger. Had she left it to a female friend, to you,- or any other man of merit, I should not have cared, I would not have troubled myfelf at its going out of the family ; but to leave it to a little brat, that can but just go alone—Pox! it’s enough to make one mad. Here he began to puff, as if he had a mind to fmother us, and, in an instant,..we were furrounded with acloudof fmoke. Lucius feemed extremely confounded ; when, to
give him time to think of a proper anfwer, I
replied.
Ffligia to Charlotte.
139
' replied. She has taken a fancy to the child, I fuppofc ; perhaps it may belong to Somebody very dear to her. A fancy. Madam, cried he, it is a very odd fancy, that she who never in her life could endure children, should, at theSe years, t&ke Such a fancy to one, as to leave it all she is worth. I, very bluntly, told her So, and, as I reSuSed to have any thing to do in this affair, without better reaSons than she was pleaSed to yield me, she referred me to you, to give me fatisfa£fion. That I can eaSily do, Said Lucius; you are her brother, and I have a right to know the whole affair, which I, though most concerned, was ignorant of, till this morning : SuppoSe the child should be her own. Why ay, cry’d the old man, after a short Silence, and then deliberately, pouring out a mighty cloud, which he had been colledling from the time Lucius began to Speak—there is Something in that, indeed : but how could she, who is So curSed modest, that she could not mention it to her own brother, tell it you ? Who should she tell it to, but to the child’s father. Said I ? The child’s father ! he rejoined, holding his pipe in his hand and staring, with a look of the utmost astonishment; what Lucius the child’s father ! he ! the modest Lucius! my young philosopher !
140 Felicia to Charlotte.'
pher! he make a whore of my Sifter! Do you know, young man, added he, what you de-Serve, for doing our family this honour ? Sup* pofe I should order my fellows to cool your courage in the horfe-pond, should not I Serve you right ? Hay, tell me that, you young dog ? Could you Sind no body, but my Sister, to make a whore of? A woman old enough to be your mother, ye little whelp 1 So you must come here preaching your damned nonfenfc, about virtue, and honour, and the devil knows what; and I, like an old fool, must Sit listening and hugging you to my boSom, while you forSooth, was only waiting for an opportunity to debauch my Sifter. Flere he started up, crying, the horfe-pond ! Ay, and it shall be the horfe-pond, if it cost me a thoufand pounds. By the lord Harry, I’ll make a Sous’d mackarel of him.
Lucius, who, at first, fat with a kind of puSillanimous shame, as perhaps, imagining, that as Mr. Stevens thought him the ag-
o	o
grestbr, he had an undoubted right to complain ; now started from his chair, and stepping between him and the door, locked it, and put the key in his pocket; then turning hastily round, and clapping his hand' to his
Sword, which he drew half out of the fcab-.	bard.

Felicia to Charlotte. 141
bard, he cried. Hold, Sir, I shall take upon me to Secure the door ; you must not go out without my leave ; how far I have injured either you or your Sister, she may, if she pleafes, inform you ; for I think it beneath me to palliate any fault of mine, by laying it upon her. This was Spoke in a refolute tone ; but the old man, not Seeming to mind what he Said, having his whole thoughts taken up with his poS-ture, cried out. There is a young philofopher ! a pretty fellow to make me a prifoner in my own houfe ; and then casting his eyes on the glittering steel. Well done, Don John ; There is a dog for you now I He has lain with the Sister, and now would murder the brother ! A fine philofopher !—But I won’t draw—I’ll ha’ none of your cold iron in my guts-~l’d
now
fee both you and lister at old Nick first— Then wheeling upon his heel, he added, You shall as foon roast as Spit me.
The moment Lucius ran to the door, I flew to the window, and throwing open the fash, call’d Robin and Johnbut hearing the old man declare his averfion to cold iron, 1 drew in my hand, and was going to shut the window, v/hen he came to me, and putting out his head first threw away his pipe, and
then called out Sam and Harry ; but we both
called
142 Felicia to CnARLOTTEi^
called in vain ; for, as we found afterwards, they were all drinking together in the cellar, with the butler. I was, all this while, fretting, trembling, and blaming myfelf, as the caufe of all this disturbance, by the imprudent manner in which I had difcovered the affair ; and was the more uneafy, as I thought Lu-
•C-if*:.'	_
cius had fufficient reafon to be offended : and this restedtion was fo painful, that stupid with vexation, for Some time I had not the power of contriving any probable means of fetting all right again. At last, I recolleded the paper which Prudilla had given to Lucius, and he to me j and, as the old man was still leaning on my shoulder, and calling for his fervants, I destred him to be pacified, and told'him that, on condition he would fit down and be ealy, I would convince him that Mr. Manly was much lefs to blame than he imagined. Mr. Stevens, finding that it was to no purpofe to cxpedl any astiltance from his fervants, readily complied; and, feating himfelf in the window, while Lucius took a chair next the door, I gave him the paper, faying. Here, Sir, is a short account of the whole affair, written by her own hand. He took it, and mumbling to himfelNiittered now and then an articulate found} rnaking his remarks to himfelf as he
went
/
'S
Fslicia to Charlotte.
HS
went on Blujhes—die with Jhame—and then raiSing his voice. Be furprifed to hear that you
have had a child by me----Be furpriSed to hear
it! cry’d he. What the duce I did he get her
with child in his fleep 1-remember—ajleep
Ay, it must be So.----Here he burst out a
laughing, crying. Well, this is very extraordinary !----Get a child in his steep !——.No,
that can’t be it neither; for she fays, he remem^ hefd it, Well, let’s fee, O I have it; a W0“ man came to bed to him in his Jleep~—hy, that may be j but she did not get him with child, I hope—Early in the morning—dark—The duoc ! What a rare modest Sister I have got I Well, it can’t be help’d. Why, now I ought, like an afs, to alk his pardon. Faith, I should not have wonder’d if he had Swore a rape against her
vil!
pretty a girl as any in the parish.
Here, tearing the paper, he went to Lucius, crying, at every step, I beg your pardon, I beg your pardon, with all my heart. Odfo, what a racket have I been making in vindication of the honour of my Sister, when her honour is not worth a button !
They now shook hands, and, in a few minutes, were as good friends as if nothing had
happened.
—Fhe handkerchief—‘O the sty de-
and fo he was to fufpe£t Jenny Law, as
\
V
144 Felicia TO Charlotte.^
happened, Prudilla had dined in her chamber, and afterwards laid down for about an hour; and then Sent to inform us, that she should be glad of our company. She now look’d much better than when we entered the room before; notwithstanding her having. Since that time. Suffer’d a very great expence ©f Spirits. This might be occaSioned by her having now no more painful Secrets to dif-cloSe. Her countenance was tolerably Serene; and, tho’ she could not look upon us without confuston, it was a confuston unmix’d with that ghastly horror which before gave an additional wannefs to her diScoloured cheeks and lips.
room ; and, as she took the fame feat, we took ours. After enquiring how she^did, and particularly, whether she had receive^ any hurt from her fall from the chair, which she af-Sured us she had not, she began :
I HAVE now discovered my shame to you both ; and, whatever you think of me, I delire you would not, when I am gone, expofe me amongst my friends. I have now little clfe to do, but to prepare for that other world, to which I am hastening. Death is a dreadful stroke, but I must go through it. It is guilt, it is guilt that makes it terrible.—I am
very
She was riling as we entered the
Felicia to Charlotte.
H5
very loth to die.—It will be your duty. Sir, to take care of this child.—I am very SenSible, that the dear infant has no right to any part of the fortune you obtained by your marriage with this lady, and therefore I give her
———»To Speak my mind freely, it is
mine.
Jt
with great uneaSinefs that I Support the thought of leaving her to Such an atheist as you. My religious principles are very difFerent from yours ; or, rather, I question whether you have any religion at all. However, you are a moral man; and if mere morality would Save you, you bid fairer than most others for hap-pinefs. The morality of the best is imper-feiSl:; and, therefore, not fit to justify us in the fight of God.—^^But, alas! why do I talk of morality ! I that build all my hopes on your doing justice to my child, in giving her, if not religious, at least, virtuous principles, drawn from this morality ! I, who have So heinousty •finned, that I hardly durst hope for mercy.
I, that have abufed all the good fenfe that
_ _	^
God has given me, and behaved like one that had never tasted of the SweetneSs of his grace ! Oh ! I feel the corruptnefs of my owm heart. I was Surely born in fin, and in iniquity did my mother conceive me. I am SenSible tli^t my own righteouSnefs is but as filthy rags. VoL, II,	; H	very

/■
146 F'EJ.iICiA TO GfrARLOTTlI.
4-
It wasjiow imposslbleSor me, Madai^ t# forbear Smiling. I .could not help .giving my assent to theSedaft words, and faying, to my-felfi that I .believed So too. Lucius kept his
Countenance pretty well: he heard himSelf loaded with abundance of religious abuSe, without the least difcompofure in his look: h^ shook his head, listened .still with pity in hia eyes, aqd never once attempted ;to interrupt her. After a good deal more to the fame pur-pofe, she let us know that she had had a pious education, and a very early experimental fenfe of religion. That, as she was converted betimes, as she thought then, though now she doubted it, she had always a great abhorrence, of vice; but grew proud of her religious attainments ; and this, added to a temper natU’-rally peevish, made her cenforious. At last she loved Lucius j she struggled against hgr weaknefs ; she reprefented to herfelf the difference of their age, and the little probability, that he would marry a woman twenty. years olddr than himfelf; however, she strove to al-
•j	^	^
lure him by her behaviour; but it was ail 19 vain : she then chang’d her condudf, her paf-fipn became criminal; and, after a struggle between that and her confcience, flatter'd her-
felf, that, as she had Such proof of
heii^
rkiiciA
»47
tf* • *
f
fK*
r -*
impossible she
■r ^ *t —t -*	••
i^ould ever 'be a caft-^away; and, confiding in this, she reSdlved to give way to ^feer passion : she then drank in iniquity like water; and going ©n, from one crime to another, finned beyond all hopes of mercy. Poor Lucius was the caufe of allr had she never known him, she might have still been virtuous -: but love made her commit what her conscience condemn’d.———She could not bear her owa
t
tefledlions; she, therefore, endeavour’d to conceal her aflions from the light, from her-Self, from him, from the world.
This, Madam, is the Substance of a very
dong difeourfe, of whkh I waf heartily weary nor should I trouble you with it, if it did not
' ■ t i ^	' ■'S '	^	^
Seem necessary to give you a portrait of her
-	'4 »
mindi'and to let you fee how far even religion, when rais’d upon falle principles, had aa
#
influence in corrupting her heart. It was a gloomy System, colleded from abstrufe paS* > in Scripture, in oppofition to the plaineltj \yith ahfurdity, contradi^ion, and blaf-phemy; contrary to ^^ry fentiment we caii of the Deity, asha^wife and good being, and to the plainest didlates of unprejudiced reafon.
fir«
r* %
14S
Felicia to Charlotte.
4
when
Lucius did not chuSe to tnake any anfwer to, this, fine harangue, which fhe -did not conclude without giving him Some exhortations fb repentance : and, indeed, fhe had drawn it out to Such a length, and her Spirits were fo exhausted,.that (he was obliged, immediately after, to lie down.: we therefore topk our leave, promistng to fee , her again in two or three days time. We drank tea with Mr. Stevens, who behaved in the most friendly , manner. The will was read, and he had now no ob-jerstion to being,his fister’s executor.
We had Scarcely drove from the door, I observed that Lucius appeared extremely thoughtful. We were now free from company, and perhaps he might dread lest I should take hold of this first opportunity, to make him Some reproaches : but I was re-Solved to disappoint him. ,He "watched my looks; he,eyed me very attentively frorn time to time, and feemed defirous of div ining rny thoughts, while, with a modest diffidence in his countenance, he feemed to wait till I began the disagreeable fubjedl. I believe we had been full five minutes.in the coach with-out Speaking a word to each other : at last, I
.	•	-j
began with afking him, what were his thoughts of Prudilja, 1 hardly know, (aid he, what t(>
think
^r f icTA TO Char LOTTE.
r^o
stink of her; flie has confeffed herfelf guilty 'of'very black crimes. Could I have eon-'lentcd to cdiiceal my father’s misfortunes, I * had been justly punished. 1 must have been ruined. What wouldVour father have thought of me ? It is very true, faid I, it was an infernal felleme ; the very idea of it makes me tremble. Ft was liappy for me, that your generous Sentiments, which Wduld not faster yoti to conceal it*, broke all her-meafures. But the child—''added I, fmiling ‘ why I am made a mother, at a time when I least thought of it. But did your fufpicions fall where she intended they' should ? Yes,' my dear; faid lie,. % * * -
giving me a rhost astersti’onate look, that Seem’d to thank me for treating him Co gently; I return’d the handkerchief, which the young woman received, Indeed, without a blush ; this I perfe£lly remember. I had never taken notice of her before'; and metnought she had, with a very agreeable perfon, an innocence and modesty in her behaviour, which I could not tell how to reconcile with the charadl'er ' of a lafcivious wanton*: I resteffed on what Ishad donC ; and reshshon brought a number " ■ of ideas to my mind, that were by no means
However, I had'yhe honest fatis-
' • '	faffion.
H 3
^5® Felicia to CHARtoTTr.
taaion or thininng that 1 was not her eoerttf^ ter ; and this thought blunted the iharpnds of jEelf-reproach. I looked upon her ruin as at* |.^ost irrepaiabk ; and painted to myfelf, in the strongest colours, the unhappy sttuation of a girl, abandoned to the indu^ence of disgraceful appetites, lost to all SenSe of real virtue and honour, and in the diredl road to infamy and
I pitied her, and relolved to endeavour, at least, to reclaim her. J found her f>ne day alone, and. Seizing the opportunity, I began a lecture on incontinency—O hideous I interrupted I-; a pretty gentleman to preach to a gill on that fubjedi: !■—the Suppofed part-
I	_
ner in her guilt too !---why, I wonder how you could have the confidence to open your mouth about it.—The most improper perSon 1 ———No, my dear, returned Lucius, with a Smile, I must differ from you ; for fuppofing her the perSon, I can’t help, even now, thinking myfelf the most proper man in the world. However, it was with much difficulty, that I brought myfelf to form the refolution, and with
more still, that I put^it in pra<5Hhe. I thought it my duty, in a peculiar manner, and encouraged myfelf with the pleafing profpeft of Saving a very agreeable girl from ruin. But,
Whe^n I had this opportunity, I knew not how
lo
c.-*.
Feeicta ta Charlotte.

to begin, I was ashamed of appearing more virtuous than her, and reproaching her for an a^Iioh, which she, I imagin’d, thought I ought rather to thank her for. Thefe last reflections held me for Some tinre Silent but, at last, I boldly began; wish- observing, that a-girl. So agreeable in her perfon, and, to outward appearance. So modest and prudent, feemed formed by nature for happinefs: and that it was a pity, that, with So many perfections, she should destroy ^ her hopes of etr-jbying she pleafures of an innocent love, all her profpe<sts of a happy marriage; • lofe the eternal rewards of heaven, and inconfiderately plunge herfelf in ruin and infamy. She interrupted me, by telling me, she was furprifed to hear me talk in this manner, and wonder’d what I would be at. I them began to tell her shat I was a partner in her guilt; and that, tho’ I had shot the resolution to withstand the temptation, yet my confcience reproached me for what I had done; and I fmCerely repented of my folly : let; me perSuade you, faid I She stared ;—she believed I was mad :—she
lew out of the room, and I fool.
■look’d like k
I BELIEVE Sby replied J, bursting into a
, Poor girl! I pity ster.

I only wish
Prudill%.
152
Felicia to Charlotti,'
Pfudilla had overheard you. But, I hope, the natural innocence of her behaviour cured this groundlefs fufpicion. In a great meafure it did, returned he : notwithstanding it was reasonable to SuppoSe that a girl, who took Such precaution as to come and go away in the dark, and who, all the time she was with me, never Spoke louder than a whifper, would
Itrenuoufly deny a Sadi, which she took Such
•	• • •
pains to conceal: I was not, therefore, per-
Scdtly Satisfied.
But I can’t help think-
r'	i
jug, now I know her innocent, in how ridiculous a light I must then appear to her, 'i'vvo or three months after I lay there again j 1 took the precaution to lock my door, but I had not been an hour in bed, when I met with the Same temptation, which, in Spite of all my previous reSolutions, again proved too strong for me. Thus, perfecily convinced of my own weaknefs, I refolved never to lie another night in the fame houSe. But whenever I went there, I took particular notice of the young woman’s complexion, as w^ell as of her shape : and in Six or eight month’s time,
observing no marks of her pregnancy, I grew
perfecily eafy wfith reSpedt to h.er, and began to blame myfelf for my unjust fufpicions; though I was still, at a lost where to fix them.
Indeed.
Felicia to Charlotte,
I
^ nd J
generous and humane Sentiment!
Indeed, my dear, continued he, 1 can’t help thinking Prudilla committed a greater crime,
, in thus endeavouring to ruin the reputation of a modest girl, by loading her with all tire infamy of her own guilt, than in the very actions that gave occalion to it. How depraved must have been her mind ! How lost to every
-----^^But
’fis happy for her, that she has bad a time to Goiredt the irregularities of her paffions. Gen-fori^^ufiiefs, inhumanity, and theCiddulgenee of eVefy Selfish passion, are the natural confe-qyences of her lentiments of religion ; a religion, which, lefpedling only God*, regards every duty tO' man as low and contemptible: but So deeply are the kind affedUons imprinted on the* heart; fo lovely does virtue, humanity, and generoSity appear to all mankind; that, -however the minds of individuals are warped by felfish views, they cannot help Secretly approving this temper in others ; and even thoSe of her Sentiments, however contemptibly they Speak of it; generally shew by their adlions, that they have the Same obligations to nature, the Same impulSes to goodnefs, with the rest of mankind ; So that, however pernicious their religious Sentiments may appear, .with leSpedt to- their tendency, it very rarely happens that
H 5
they,
/
FEitrcm TO C»ARtOTTt7.
they have really Such unhappy, Such hCirridi
fffe£ls,	'	.
But I will trouble you no longer. Madam,, with the rcpetion of a eonverfation,. whtGh-begins to grow but little interesting. YoU; will, I fancy, readily believe that I am now
weary; for this is as true as
✓
I
' i
Your Ladyship’s
son/lant. friend^
FEI^ICIA,MAHD1^
L E T T E R

O U find, Madam, by my two last
ters, that I am arrived at the ur^xpe<st> ed honour of being a step^-mother.: but whc«-
ther I shall behave in Such a.manner as to Support my nev? dignity, wish any degree of ap« plauSe to mySelf, is a eircumstance that 1 cannot yet be Sure of. However, of this I am; certain, that I was never in my life half fo angry as I am now at our writers^of plays, novels, and romances,, for continually drawing-a step-mother as a monster in nature; and fa, terrible a. creature, jjhat one would -be apt to-
J
conceive'
Felicia to CiiARLOtTE.
I
♦oiiGeive that she had not one feature, that, in the least, refembled any part of a human be~ ing. And, indeed, in all my reading, which, in this way, is pretty extenSiVe, I can hardly tecoIle(st above one or two instances, in which this inexorable tyrant had the least advantage above a tyger, a wolf, or a crocodile; That a bad woman should make a bad wife,
V
and a worSe step-mother, is not-to be wondered at; especially, if covetoufnefs, pride, ill-nature, and an extraordinary fondnefs for her own children, center in the fame breast ! But while there are Such perfons in the world as your ever honoured aunt, it^must be convinced, ;

that an empty name can never change the
n of the heart, and turn the most
mild, the tenderest and rhost ^generous minds into favage cruelty. By her example; Madam,< Idntend to regulate my condudl; and while I strive to imitate So fine a model, I must be a-wretched copiest, indeed, if I myfelf ’am not’ tolerably perfevSl,
Lucius feems extremely pleafed at my-manner of treatitig him, and a thou Sand times
4
has he already thanked me, by his looks, and the most engaging exprelBons ot* tendernefs. Two days after this day of wonders, we went
co pay another viSit to Prudilla. I was deli st -	fir (JUS'
15$
Felicia to Charlotte
Sirous of feeing the child, and eafily imagined,
that though Lucius was perfectly Silent on this
head, he could not avoid being much more
fo, though his fear of offending me might
make him conceal it. As Mr. Stevens had
torn the paper, which contained a detail of
his Sifter’s guilt, we had lost the diredfion
where to find the little creature, whom I now
began to confider as one of the family. I,
*
therefore, the evening before, propofed his fending a Servant, with a letter, to give them notice when we intended to fee them, and to defire that the infant might be brought to their houfe, Lucius readily embraced this propofal, and with a look, that Seemed to fpeak much more than he expressed. Seized hold of my hand, and thanked me for the care I took.
to anticipate his defires.
The next morning we Set out prettly early ; and, upon our arrival, Mr. Stevens, handing me out of the coach, condudted us in, when he must needs Salute me. under the cha?-radter of his fifter, not in law. Said he, but a-
s
gainst law ; however, you are my Sister, and you {hall be my Sister, I hope, atsded he, yoa have heartily forgiven the penitent above stairs ; if ydu have, you must let us See it, by taking care of her child ; and, by this means.

Felicia to Charlotte.' 157
you will greatly oblige, not only me, your brother, anjl the bantling’s uncle and guardian, but, our good friend, my young philosopher there, the baby’s papa, whom, let me tell you, it is your duty to oblige,
O, Sir, Said I, I will not diSpute with you about a name. If you can prove that you are any way related to me, I shall certainly esteem it an honour. As to the child, I can make no promises, I assure you : I can only Say, that I will do my endeavour, at least; and, though not from dull duty, I shall, from affedion, a much more engaging motive, strive to contribute to the fatisfacfiion of one, who is nearer than a brother.
You are very good. Madam, replied he. Smiling; but, as to the honour of being related to me, (in this manner I mean) I must confefs that it is but very little. The poor brat, it must be acknowledged, is bale-born; and, therefore, you are no more its mother-in-law, than I am your brother-in-law: I mean, by the law of the land. By the laws of nature and reafon, indeed, you are much more nearly related ; for, as this gentleman’s wife, you are as much the mother of this child, as if it had been born in marriage: for
CD ■
his marriage, with my Sister, would not shake
the
\

1.5^ ■'
th€ child imore his than it is; ati prefenti- and^' consequently, your d uty is,. in both cafes, the;
I AM quite of your: mindv Sir;.Said	but :
where is this little cr^iture? methinks I long.' to be acquainted with my new charge. We fliall have the young flut here by and by, replied he ; and then added gravely. But what' is the matter with Lucius ? See how thoughtful he looks—why, I profefs, he has fall the . fether in his face.It is vwritten on his fore- ] head. He has one child now, which, three days ago, I dare fay he never So much as-dreamed of and, if I guefs right, in three
Dr So he will have another. Is it not'
months or So he will have another, true, Madam? No wonder then that he has
the look of a. patriarch .-he has not loft his Speech !
But, I hope.

No, no, Sirj Said Lucius,. with a fmile j I ; have been liftening very attentively to you,. and, at the Same time, admiring the goodnels ■ of a . lady that derives fresh charms from my. guilt and folly. Nay, nay, cried he, there is-no wonder that you should not find an opportunity to put in a Single word, when a talka, tive old fellow, and a very fine lady, feem re-folved to have all the difcourSe to themfelves :; when this is the cafe, you are too wife not to-'
kno w>,
Know, that the rooft complailknt iMiig the hulband can do, is not to interrupt them But is she So very good ? why then, I Suppofe,. y<ou have not had So much as a curtain le^ure-on this affair ?. Far from it, I affure you, replied Lucius. Then she is a dear; Sweet; little angel, cried she old man; ay, and a god-deSs too; and—an—an-^I don^t know whatn to call her; I can’t think of a name half good enought I could almost findin my heart, to .
lavish a kifs from her for it: only I am afraid shat it will be a little unreasonable that both-should Suffer a rape from our family. Let: me tell you. Madam, that you are happy, in having an opportunity to shew a greatnefs of mind, that must for ever endear you to a mafl,. of fenfe* But whatever you are in reality,, you are not to appear to the world in the cha-
rader of a step-mother:; the infant must be. brought up as the child of a^deceafed friend,, relation or So ;:or, if Lucius will confent to it,, let her be put under the care of his mother and Marilla. This, Madam, will eale you of a confiderable part of she care of your office, and, at the Same time, you will have an opportunity of feeing her as often as you^ pleaSe,.
i5o FeliciA'-xp Chartotte.'
“ ^
/ Lucius readily approved of this motioir,. and I as readily agreeing to it,, it. was refolved, that Sophronia, Lucius’s mother, should be .informed, by Mr. §tevens, of the whole affair. This being immediately determined, lie reSumed, There are many advantages which will attend your concealing the truth from . the world; bestdes the ssngle consideration of the reputation of the two families. You would, in Some fenfe, be regarded by the world as a step-mother Land though they wouldj doubt-leSs, be ready to make Some allowance in eon--stderation of the Hut’s being bafe-born ; yet the very name itfelf is generally here, in the country, the caufe of difcontent, |and frequent un^-eaSinefs. It is an unthankful office. Every body takes pains to render her Sufpeded by the litde brats ; they, without thought, are induf-trious to weaken^ her-authority, by fowdng, in their unthinking minds, the Seeds of jealouff, distrust, and a Spirit of Gontradidtion. And let her be ever So good, let her have ever fuch an affection for the children, the stiuhtest cor-redtion, the most gentle reproof, is aggravated into the most inSupportable tyranny ; every old woman in the parish bemoans their hard fate, and let the urchins be guilty of ever So great a rcime, they can’t whimper, but the Simple,,
well meaning neighbours cry out, Ah, poor
fouls,.

Felicia to Charlotte.
1^1
fouls, if their own mother was alive, they
would not be ferv’d fo. The children eaSily
\
imbibe thefe bad influences, and are inadvertently taught to hate a perSon, who, perhaps, strives to love them ; a woman, who, from the
time of her marriage, filled with a juft fenfe of her duty, may' have refolved to do them all the juftice in her power, and to treat them with all
9
poflible lenity. Her cafe is very hard : all her endeavours to pleafe are fruitlefi : a bad con-strudlion is putupon her kindest atfiions: fhe strives in vain ; is unthanked j and, perhaps, repaid with ingratitude. And this, Madam, I have. Sometimes, known to be the cafe of by far the best woman in the neighbourhood.
Really, Sir, Said I, you give a very Shocking account of the uncomfortable state ol being a mother-in-jaw; enough to frighten any M'oman from the thoughts of marrying a'man vrho has children : but, however, if she has the goodncSs to perfevere in her kindnefs, she must Surely win them over at last; their prejudices must vanish ; and, if Mr. Prior’s remark be true, that
Malice vanquiJJdheightem virtue's praife, she will then have the Satisfa£l:ion of a glo-
rious revenge
having made this noWe con-
quest, she will force them to do justice to her
merit.

V
\
Felicia to Charlotte^
merit, and, in Spite of thenifelves, to give het their love, their esteem, and theit gratitude. What are all the Submistions in the world to this ? to fee their cheeks glow with afFe£lion,. ftt the Same time that they, with an honest blush, own their error : this is not only heaping coals of fire on their heads, but on theit hearts too.
Th IS is very true, Said Lucius, Smiling; giving me a look of approbation; but few tempers can hold out against ill treatment ^ ingratitude may Sometimes four, the best minds,;.

■t
ri
it too eafily prompts them to make a return in kind:, and when this is the cafe, both the lady and the children' are worthy of pity.
We now went up stairs, where we found Prudilla in, a much weaker condition than when we were here before: but we had hard* ly taken our Seats, when-we heard Mr. Stevens talking to. a woman at the chamber door,, and having defired her to .step down into the pantry to refreshherfelf, came in with axhil<|l his arms. Lucius and' b arofe our? eyes-


Vrere fixed: on the infant, which, finiling, held! out its little arms tome : but Mr. Stevens, nott ofaferving this, carried it to Prudilla, who, giving a deep figh, and looking upon it with eyes dimming with affedion,. defited to kifs it ::
V»;
Telicia to Charlott®. 1$^
but the child turned away, and, perhapSj» frighted at her ghastly appearance, still struggled to come at me ; which (he immediately did. the nK>ment she was Set down at her mam* ina’s knee.
THIS little incident, trifling as it was, gave me a good deal of pleaSure. I fat down, and placing her on my lap, gave her a kifs : she fondled me, and, with an innocent Smile, stroked my face, for half a minute, faying. Ah, poor! then gigled, and hid her pretty hand in my bofom, I could not help being fond of the dear creature. I killed her feve-ral times, without even knowing why I did it; it was giving way to an imptilfe, which I could not refist. I constdered her as a part df my dear Lucius: I endeavoured to trace hi her face fome of his well known features. I cast my eyes on him that I might be able txy form a more accurate judgment of the refent-blance; > when I cotild not help obferving, that, wish a look of peculiar pleafure, ha Seemed to watch all my a^lions, while, at the shme time, his countenance was overlpread with a foftnefs, that methought expre^d paternal affection Working in his heart. While. I was thus engaged in endeavburhig to trace ®uti and,t by the help of fancy> to prbve a

•r
164 Felicia TO Charlotte.
dikeneSs between.the lineaments of a face that'-’
*	>v	*	'	^
'was 'olaccd before rrie, and thofe irr miriiaturfe'
' • - > * -
'placed dear my bofoni, my glances frequently 'stiet• Ws- and the fatisfa£iion, and delight,
' that appeared in them, gave an additional ap^
plaufe to that which arofe from the indul-gence of fhefe fooleries. Lucius, notwith*-^standing this viSible fati&fadstO'n,' still continued
• r •	•	»	"t
ffilent, aiKstfeemcd at a dost how to behave ; .though lb many expreffibns of my tendernefs dmight well bd fuppofed to authorife him : and T was just going to chide him for it, when -’Frudilla, with a Sigh, cry’d, in a very peevistl ' and jealous tone; that fhe thought it'Very hard sthat she might not?havo the pleafure of kissing; -her own child ;: that she Saw plainly I should-
4
it; and that it was an odd way of sheiv-ing my' kindnest, to take her from* a perSon -that must be fuppofed to love her better than I or any bo^ elfe could do. Lucius coloured,.
. and, giving her a look of indignation, was ■goingSto fpeak, when Mr.; Stevens began ; rfor he being let into the important fecret, was ■ now-fuffered to continue m the room. What - do yOu mean, stster, laid he, in a hasty fevere t manner ; would you not have the lady love the child ? If you are fo jealous that no body i^must be fond of her> but yourfelf, e’en take'

■psUCIA TO GhA5.«.OTTE.
-C
flier with you. A good mother would think herfelf very happy, in leaving it to the,care of a perfon, who, is diSpoSed to, be fond of it. A good mother I returned (he:, crying : you are ,, always reproaching me with my guilt: why • must I be told of it ?—why must I be up- • braided with being a mother ? But yet it is .
too true—to my shame it is—would to,God
I had never been a mother !r—would to God 1 had never deferved to be a mother! See There now, cried Mr. Stevens, I profefs thete Js no Such thing as Speaking to her: Ireproach you !—Well,..but it’s ,no,m;atteE, and then addreffing himfelf to me. Dear Madam, faid he, excufe this treatment: my Sister’s illnels . makes her fo peevish, that she hardly knows what she fays: be So good as to Jet. me take ■ the child.
Lucius and I stared j and it was riot with-, out Some struggles, that I stifled my refentmen.t.
I was two or three times going to break , out, and to, interrupt thern; and had I followed the first dilates of my paflion. So much was I provoked at her manner of fpeakingj . that I should have .diSowned all my tendernefs to the child, though my heart would have • given the lye to my words; and have vented
Thuch. more bitter reproaches, than thofe she
received
/

/
feceived from her brother. And, pe m the heat of my refentment, I might have told her, that, to oHige her, I would re difclaim all relation to it. But a few mo-
ments refle£Uon, and the Sight of Luc
■ ' ' ‘
made me refolye to Speak in a different man-tier; and Mr. Stevens’s good natured apology, not to Speak at all. Could 1, Madam, have Said any thing that would have difpleafed Liir ciw more ? Gould I have behaved in a man-ner more contrary to the fettled difpofition of nay mind ?'Yet paffion would have done what my reafon- would for ever have difallowed, Mr Stevens took the child, who clung to me, and, giving me a beSeeching look; cry’d at parting *. He stepp’d with her to his Sister, and letting her on one of the arms of the chair,
\
Ihe had just str^gth enough to keep h^ from falling.	or three
y	--	I .
times; but had hardly had her a minute, whest

faying, that her crying diftraisted her head, flie defined that Somebody would take,the naughty girl stom her. Lucius Seized hpr in his arnas; and first ieeming to obSer.ve my looks, hugged her to his bofoma klffidsher with the affeftion of a tender, parent, and then brought her to me, and deSired her to kifs me, ^hich she readily did. He Smiled, and being
apprehenfivc
Fe VI Cl A T 0 Gh A R LOTTE i I
^pprebenSive that Prudilla’s ill temper mighj >again shew itSelf, wish’d her better, and *botst took our leave, Mr. Stevens calling for the nurfe to take the .child. While we werj^ at dinner, Mr. Steven?.renew^ his apologias, ^nd, at the farpe time, told ipe, that he ha^ •been So provoked, at feeing my gpodneSs, as 4ie called it, So ungratefully return’d, that, not?*, •withstanding his Sister’s illn/^s, he shad mupbi a4p to behave toward?, her with, any degree of* •decency. And, on,this Score^ top,, shnsius. vip^ .dicatedbis Silence, alledgiiig, shat if heshg|\ .-once begun to reproacst her., hi? heat, of tonj^ iper would, m all probability, have rngdeshimi. vtreat her, in Such amannei;, a? njiight havft sheen attended v?ish: very ill conSequences,.wishi reSpeist to her. I was not,, I confeSs, en tirelyf,
(Satisfied wish this reafon; I was inSnlted on
shis account, and had beeni shocked with re-
* * • . ’ . •
ipoaches, in the fp)dst of a glow tendernef^ and while I was giving a high testiniony shif finy affedion to him, and engaged in an employment, which my fronted pride mide t^ ralmost look upon as an aflt of fupererogatioii. {However, I Seemed to adniit of his ej^cufe, an4 '<aslmade.no .reply, but took pain? to curli; and coiKe^l she tetnains of my il] temper,
which


TO
LOTTE#
w^ich had now pretty well fubSided, he Seemed to think me perfe£Uy Satisfied with it.
You See, Madam, that I can be out of humour without cauSe. Lucius was certainly in the right: for how barbarous would it have been in him to have retaliated an affront, on a woman on the very verge of life, merely for a weaknels and peevish fretfulnefs, which her illnefs, added to her uneaSy reflections, might well excufe ! And had the confequences been what he had juft reaSon to dread, I am Sure he would never have forgiven himSelf.
Our conversation, Madam, for the reft of the day, was So little interefting, that I shall not trouble either you or myfelf with a repetition of it. And, indeed, I have already given you trifles enough to make you think this a moft trifling letter. My mind was, however, in a moft delightful Situation, all the afternoon, and particularly, when we took our leave ; and the engaging manner in which Lucius made his acknowledgments upon our return home in the coach, strengthened and confirmed every delightful SenSation. My dear Felicia, Said he, taking hold of my hand, and giving me a look exp restive of every thing that can be called tender and generous; how
45
Felicia to Charlotte. 169-
klnd, how obliging is your whole behaviour! how agreeable is my Surprize to find nothing but the dearest proofs of affedlion, where I ex-pefsted to meet with reproach ; and to See you generoully overlook, a crime, which would raife the indignation of almost every other woman ! To fee you carefs a child, which is
not your own ! A child that is------But I can’t
find words to exprefs half my meaning. Is all my tendernefs too little for you, that you must thus endeavour to encreafe it, with the most SenSible obligations, and to add to love the highest admiration and gratitude ? How much are you miftaken, cry’d I, laughing ! what will you fay if I tell you that I know many ladies, and, I believe. Seme of stridl virtue too, who have adopted it as a maxim, that “ a reformed rake makes the best hustand.” This is really a most ridiculous, as well as indecent assertion, and, whenever it is tried, a most dangerous experiment; but as vanity makes them alw'ays flatter thcmfelves, that their charms are capable of producing this wonderful reformation, they are hardly ever afraid of marrying, even the most abandoned libertine, though funk a thoufand degrees below
the dignity of a man. Pray what would thefe people fay to a fault, which must appear ex-VoL. II,	I	tremely^

170
Felicia to Charlotte.
N
treinely Small, when compared to years Spent in the diabolical employment of ruining innocence, and in all the cruel infernal arts of falshood, deceit, and treachery ? I am Surprized, my dear. Said Lucius, that ladies, who have adopted Such a pernicious opinion, should have So little prudence as to make it publick. Have they no SenSe of modesty ? Can shey ’be infenSible, that people will be apt to ^charge them with being influenced by destres, that prompt them only to approve a man, who has given before-hand convincing testimonies of his ability to gratify them; and that, for a certainty of this they will Sacrifice every other consideration, and prefer him who has proved himSelf a villain ? You know, my dear, it is not Such as theSe I meant. I would not do you the injury to mention your name with theirs, nor am I Solicitous about the diflike or approbation of Such as tbeSe : but that you should thus generoufly hide my faults: how can 1 Sufficiently thank you ! That you, who are modesty itfelf, a friend to every virtue, should, instead of upbraidings, lavish your ten-derneSs, and, with all the blandishments of
love, carefs an infant, that--Hold, hold, my
dear, cried 1, laughing, a truce to your flattery, I beSeech you. Pray how long have
we
Felicia to Charlotte, lyt
we been married ?
Above nine months I
believe : it’s high time Sure to have done with
compliments: why we ought to have had
twice as many quarrels ; and, to follow the
mode, we should, before this time, have begun heartily to hate each other :—but to be
Serious, added I, with a gravity much more
Suitable to the prefent difpoSition of my mind
than this flight, which, however lively, was
all affe^lation ; to what purpofe should I tor-
ture you, by reproaching you with a fault long
fince passed ? Can I give you pain without
feeling it myfelf? Since none of us are per-
fed, ought I not rather to rejoice that you
have fo few faults, and So many virtues to
counterbalance them ? I am very fenSible that
should a young woman, with the fame temp-
s
tation. So readily forfeit her honour, she would
be entirely inexcufable, and her crime would admit of but little alleviation. I am fenSible
too, that though she would fuffer the greatest
infamy, by becoming a mother, your crime.
in the eye of heaven, may be as great as hers;
yet the woild that would condemn her, will
excufe you : and shall I be more obdurate, and
lefs ready to forgive than a stranger ? 1, who
have improved by your example, and who
owe to you a vast acquisition in knovvledo-e,
1 2
and
N
172 Felicia TO Gharlotte.’
and in many Sublimely delicate fenfations. It was you, who first taught me to converSe with mySelf, to know the pleaSures of reflexion, and all the delight that accompanies heavenly gratitude and love. With all thefe obligations, have I reafon to complain, that you are a man and not an angel ? Though you have been frail, your mind is still untainted. 1 have not the least fear of your infidelity to me. It is my duty—it is my interest, to make you happy ; and, I hope, it will always be, as it is
now, my highest pleaSure. C) Lucius! where could I have found a hulband like you ? for, as Hamlet fays of his father, “ Take you for “ all in all, I ne’er shall look upon your like again.”	>
Lucius embraced me; but told me he might, with far greater jijistice, retort the charge of flattery upon mj^. He confessed, that he had many imperfeaions, and the most tender and obliging things were Said on both Sides; but 1 have now neither the leifure nor inclination to repeat them. May every refined delight be yours, and may your ladyship ever be as happy as is, at preSent,
Tour ftncertji friends
Felicia Manly,
LET-

Felicia to Charlotte.

LETTER XXXVIII.
Am very glad. Madam, to find that both you and your aunt approve my conduit: but if you make my letters So public, as to shew them your friends, you will oblige me, in Spite of my own inclinations, to write with, -more referve. The account of the difpute between her and you, on the propriety of Lucius’s reproving a young woman, whom h? thought a partner in his guilt, is very diverting : but I am more pleaSed to find that con-r fidence and unreferve, with which I have related certain events, and which I was not altogether Satisfied with, fufficiently justified, by her obfervations. It is with inexpressible delight I hear fay; “ that the ingenuity of mind,
“ which could prompt him to undertake fb “ irkfome a talk, and the modest diffidence
“ that accompanied his behaviour to me. So “ oppofite to the bold confidence of a man, who would rather glory in his guilt, place “ him in So fair a view, as to make him, in “ her opinion, more amiable than if he ^had “ wanted this shade to heighten the lights, “ which form the portrait I have given of his “ charader.”

I
3
After

174
Felicia to Charlotte.
After this compliment to Lucius, would not any one imagine that I was a toleiable painter ? She talks of lights and fhades mutually Setting off each other ; and what elfe is necessary to compleat the pidlure ? How unreasonable is it in her, to inSist upon your defiling me, to preSent her with a more finished piece, and to give the portrait of his mind in one view ! But you must be obeyed. And yet how difficult is the talk ! Where shall I begin ? He has all thoSe endearing impreffions of humanity, thoSe native traces of goodneSsi which the mind approves upon the first view. His virtue costs him little or no pains, it Springs freely from his foul; while the eaSy SweetneSs, with which it is accompanied, lets every one See that it is attended wssth all the pleaSuies of Self-gratification : It is the reSult of a refined taste, a corredi imagination, and a fettled judgment. From hence his beneficence derives its virtue, as well as its Source, and not from a consideration of the pleaSure that accompanies it. In short, he has a mind fo noble. So difinterestedly and freely virtuous, that a perSon, who would repreSent virtue at a continual war with ourSelves, would Scarcely allow him to have any virtue at all. Nay, if there be any foundation for the opinion of
thoSe
Felicia to Charlotte. 175
tho^e gentlemen , who place the perfection of a virtuous adtion, in the oppoSition it meets with from nature, he is absolutely incapable of performing one, either generous in itfelf, or acceptable to his God. If this commonly received opinion be true, it will prove that no one, who has not first been a eompleat villain, can poffibly attain to the Sublime charader of a good man; That he who stuctiuates between the rage of appetite ort the one hand, and his duty on the other, is the fairest character upon earth ; and that a man of regular deSires, a man of strict honour, a6ting from the most generous motives, is the most unhappy creature living; Since his virtues, becoming by practice in a manner constitutional, must loSe all their value, and, consequently, their reward. But let it be conSidered, that the Jlrengtk of every vicious propenfity, is only the weaknefs of the oppofite virtue; that a re-ludlance to an adt of humanity, can only proceed from the hardnefs of a heart, petrified by a criminal: fclfilhnefs; and that the very Sufpenfe between virtue and vice tarnishes the virtue, though it should become vixstorious. Can that be an imperfedlion in man, which is
the glory of all the higher orders of created beings, and even of the great Creator himfelf ?
14-	.	For,

(C

176 Felicia to Charlotte.
For, as a most ingenious author Says, “ If “ compulsion be the essence of virtue, the “ condu6l of even the Supreme Being has much lefs merit in it, than the most dissn-“ genuous of his creatures;—for to pra£tiSe virtue, the highejl degrees of virtue, without con/iraint^ to purfue it upon a principle of ‘ free choice, for the mere pleafure and ap-probation of the thing itfelf, as his glory, and his happinefs, is what constitutes our “ idea of the divine perfe£lion: and shall the fame thing, which gives Such a Superlative grace and lustre to the divine character, cast a shade upon the human ? So that, after all, “ constraint and Self-denial are So far from being neceVary to virtue, that it is mere weak-nefs.^ and want of virtue, that gives them “ either uSe or expediency^.”
Thus, Madam, I have been at the pains of embellishing my letter, and Setting off my own refle<£tions, with a long quotation, to - contradhSI a favourite opinion of your aunt’s j and to prove, that my dear Lucius may be a good man, without havinu; a violent inclina-




tion to be a bad one. T here are instances, it is true, in which virtue is attended with Some
degree
r
* See Philemon to Hydafpes, the Second coflver-fiition upon falfe religion, page loa, 103.
Felicia to Charlotte.
177

degree of felfidenial; and this would, doubt-lefs, have been the cafe of Lucius, had he had virtue to refufe the profered favours of the unknown Prudilla; but, however difficult the conquest is at first, a steady adherence removes every obstacle; the temptation, aristng from future attacks, becomes lefs and lefs, as the mind becomes more perfeft ; perfeverance treads down the briars, and makes the path plain, eafy, and delightful; unnumber’d beauties open to our view, and the rugged road becomes the lawn of pleafure ; the mind, is at leifure, calmly to contemplate the divine landscape that lies before it, to enjoy the fragrant breeze, to taste the charms of confcious innocence, budding with golden fruit; and, above all, with rapture to behold the Smiles of heaven, beaming celestial light, and divine complacency.
But whither am I rambling ? It is time to trace back my steps, and, like a good wife, to ■return to my hufband ; and, as I flatter my-felf, that I have done him juRice, I will proceed with his chara61er, which will be best illustrated by his condudl. His ufual employ-mem is, in giving joy to a number of grateful dependents; and fometimes Marilla and I have the faSisfadlion of joining with him, in
I 5	litiie
lyB Felicia to Charlotte^
little ^a<Sls of beneficence and compaffiorw When there are immediate objects of diftreSs before him, how readily does his fenfible heart catch their Sorrows ! how Speedily does he anticipate their wishes, and turn their grief into admiration and joy ! while his affability and condefcention give an irrefiftible grace to his benefits. But not contented with doing good, when forcibly touched by objc(SI:s of pity, he endeavours to prevent jthe least approach of unhappinefs and mifery, and provides against the poor’s alking for relief, by placing them above the want of it.
With regard to this his principal view; he has laid a plan for making considerable alterations in the garden. To Serve the poor; he has already * levelled giants with the ground, demolished inchanted castle?,.and will shortly, by an arrangement of more natural beauties, utterly banish thephanta/iical; which, like the Chinefe paintings, can only pleafe, by shewing a kind of refemblance of nature, in the most whimfical and natural proportions. The choicest flowers, instead of being depo-Sited in knots, are to be carelefly strewed a-mongst the short grafs j and, being mingled
with:

See Letter XXVIII. p. 3?»
Fflicia to Charlotte.
r;9
with every Species that adorn the fields, will, in the most beautiful manner, brocade the velvet carpet: while the tulip, auricula, and carnation, and all thofe, whole riSing stalks would render them liable to* be broken by the un-distinguistiing foot, or the roller, are to retir®
to the margin of our walks, and Ikulking clofe to feek protection from the nicely cut verdant walls, and obelilks, that are still to retain their form. We are to have, in one part, groves-
and vistos of ever-greens, while in another,
%
the vine, the honeyfuckle, and the ivy, are to entVine the barren trunks, and^ mingle with the branches, of a row of elms,, that extend acrofs the extremity of the garden, but which,, at every walk, leave an opening to let in a’ vievy of the neighbouring country. Thus, in-thofe feafons, when the rain, or the frost, withholds Subsistence from the families of our
N
poor tenants, we shall always find them employment, till they can return again to their ufual labours. By this means our most agreeable accommodations will become of cxtenSive benefit, and our very amufements, accompanied with thofe pleafing fenfations, which re-fuk from a calm, utidisturbed, benevolence.
The man, who has perfonal merit, may fiifely depend on being treated by Lucius with
1 6	'	the.

. i

*
i8o Felicia to Charlotte#
the utmost reSpedl, though his circumstances are ever So low: Sor his poverty, So far from being a reproach. Seems, in his opinion, to entitle him to a Superior kind of deference. He relieves him with an air, that shews he is only paying a debt due to humanity; and So cautious is he of giving a shock to his fenstbi-lity, that he has the look rather of a perfon obliged, tlian of one conferring an obligation. For the relief of distrelTed merit, he denies himfelf many of the elegancies of life, and, particularly, thofe of the table, from which every costly luxurious Superfluity is banished. The mcannefs of a man’s natural abilities never infpires him with contempt. If his heart be good, it is all that he requires ; though he cannot give him the esteem due to a friend, he is, in his opinion, a much more amiable chara6ier than the man that wants humanity, though pofl'efled of every other qualification that can entitle him to refpedl: and, indeed, without this, fine fenfe, the most brilliant wit, the most profound erudition, added to the gla;:e of v/ealth and high birth, can extort no more from him, than a stiff formal civility. He is, in one word, an enemy to nothing, but vice and affediation; but he can ridicule the latter, and yet give the perfon a share of
>	h^
Fjelicia to
V

his esteem. His conversation, indeed, wants that brilk gaiety, and SprightlineSs of fancy, and all the light and airy lallies of imagination, which,we comprehend under the term witi and as to repartee, he Seldom indulges it. He has but little taste for thefe Sparkling advantages in others, he regards them in too mean a light; and, therefore, is not fufHciently fen-fible how'much.thefe natural accomplistiments give a brilliancy to conversation. When he talks, his strong lenfe is enlivened by a happy turn, a natural elegance of exprestion, and his language, like his Sentiments, is not only just but Sublime, Yet gravity is not always agreeable, and there are moments when folly becomes pleafing, and we find a delight in being ridiculous: from hence wit derives its most pleafing charms; for with too much wifdom we are Sometimes apt to moap into dulneSs, But this is a cafe that rarely happens with him, though Sometimes it does with me. His Spirits flow with a Smooth and even stream, whilst I, having Sometimes airy flights, am Subje<£irto fink into a dulnefs, which folly and impertinence are best adapted to relieve.
You need not be told. Madam, that this is partly my cafe at prefent; the heavinefs of my
expreflions.
\
>82 Feli CIA TO Charlotte;
i
expreflions, towards the conclusson of what I have written. Sufficiently indicates that of my mind. I have loft myfelf in drawing a cha-ra6ter, every way fo dear to me, in defcribing a man, whofe foul is the foul of friendship j no wonder then that my Spirits flag I But, after all, your ladyship will, perhaps, think, that my affe£tion carries me too far ; and that while I am paintihg the hujband. I am only discovering the fondnefs of the wife. I will, therefore, in pity to you, as well as myfelf, finish thispleafing, though difficult fubjedl: ; and^ to
Secure myfelf from the double charge of dul-nefs and partiality, leave, at least, half his virtues untold. With my Smcereft compliments to your other felf,. and your very good aunt;,
I am
Your Ladyship’s
moji eledient
Felicia Manly;
L E T-
Felicia to Charlotte: 183
LETTER
Dear Madam,
Can now inform you, that Mr. Stevens hat been at Mr. Manly^s, where he had' an opportunity of an hour or two’s conversation with Sophronia and-Marilla.; when, to their no fmall furprife, under the Seal of Secrecy, he unfolded the whole affair, relating to the child; and they readily agreed to take the pretty infant into their care. After this he went to my aunt’s, where he found her Son, who arrived the day before from his travels, and who was juft returned from paying a vifit to MeN lifont, and his lifter Amelia. As he was juft Setting out to See us, Mr. Stevens altered his intention of ftaying there to dinner, and rear-dily agreed to accompany him. Accordingly, they arrived, attended by a very' Smart young gentleman, who had commenced an acquaint tance with my couSin, while they were abroad, from the Single consideration of their being countrymen: they, therefore, returned together, and, as his friends lived in Yorkshire, he made my aunt’s in his wav home, and, at my coufm’s request, conlented to stay with him
two.

1
EEhidrAi TO Charlotte/
two or three days, to reft and refresh himfelf on his journey.
Lucius received them all, with great re-lpc6t, though Mr. Stevens was, I believe, the moft welcome vifttor. The gentleman, who was an abSolute stranger to every body preSent, except my coufin, made an agreeable appear-aiice ; he had an eafy flow of words, and an animated expreflion; but his conversation was that of a professed libertine. He Swore very fluently, and endeavoured to divert us with a recapitulatiori of feveral of his adventures in France and Italy, My coufln had So much lefs of the gentleman in his behavior, as he had more affectation ; and, indeed, he had acquired nothing by his travels that I could discover, but a low kind of knowledge, that he had better have been without, a greater stock of vanity and folly, and a knack of impertinently introducing a little French : and that his conversation might want nothing to render it disagreeable, he Swore twice as much as his companion. For he had Scarcely Sat down, when taking a glaSs of wine, he cried, with a ridiculous affedied grin, ’Sblood, Madam, you fee that I have loft rien by my travels, and So, damme, a mtres Jervice.—Ha, ha, ha 1—Why
lookee, that is as much as to Say, My Service to ye,
We
Felicia to Charlotte..'
1S5
We had but once before the honour of entertaining Such company ; however, as this was the first time of our feeing my coufin after a long abfence, and, as the other was both his friend, and an abfulute strangei to us, good manners, or raiher the custom of the world, would not Suffer us to hazard the giving them an affront, by a reproof, which, however just in itfelf, would have been taken as a grofs in-fult. Dinner was but just over, when we were agreeably fuiprized with a vifit from a very worthy gentleman, the minister of the parish. But it was Some time before we received any relief from his company : and, indeed, though reproof was more Suitable to his character than ours, I Soon found that he alfo had too much -of the Same good breeding to interrupt them. The stranger ran on with his intrigues, referring every minute to my coufin, to whom he always gave the name of his pocket-book, to know either the preciSe time of an event, or
the name of the place where the important trifle was tranSacfed ; when the latter, to shew his exail punctuality, and to indulge, perhaps, a kind of vanity in displaying the Itrength of a memory, wholly taken up with trifles, was Sure to launch out into twenty particulars, foreign tp the question. He never forgot the
name
/'
i8‘6 Felicia to Charlotte.
name of the meanest village, and, if he was alked, what any town was called, where they had dined; he not only readily replied, but added, of his own accord, the Sign at the gate of the inn, what they had for dinner, whether the wine was good or bad, and Some little adventure of his own, and this by way of epi-Sodes; for when he had done,, he always put the other in mind'to go on again : But, damme-Jack ! —as you was a faying—allons’—allons, constantly concluded whatever my wife coufin had to fay. Thus they played into each other’s hands, while we had nothing elfe to do, but, like humble auditors, to listen to their impertinence.
The tea-table did not procure us any iir-termiffion j and finding the clergyman had no intention to interpofe, I stept aSide into the next room, deSiring him to follow me ; where I told him, that he would oblige me, if he would take upon himSelf the trouble of giving them a genteel reproof : for I could not bear to hear them Swear, with Such uncontrouled freedom. He promifed that he would, and we returned to our chairs. We had hardly lat down, when my coufin gave him a very favourable opportunity; for, accidentally fpil-Mng a little tea upon his legs, he began, to
curfe^
Fslicia to Charlotte;
187
curfe, and stamp, and Swear, like a madman ; but no damage being done, he was prefently eaSy, when the clergyman obServed, in a very handfome manner, that he could not help being So unpolite, as to think Swearing a very poor accomplistiment in a gentleman ; that it was a vice that wanted even the colour of temptation to excuSe it, having neither the allurements of pleaSure nor profit T he predominance of this profane pradlice, added he, frequently calls for the most earnest exhortations from the pulpit; and, 1 lately preached a fermon upon the fubj,e<st, which I wish you had had the benefit of hearing.
THIS reproof gave me a Secret fatisfa61io% and I was going to Second what he had Said, when the stranger replied : And pray, dodlor; be So good as to tell us, what fuccefs this performance of yours had ? I hope, in the Lord^ you made a pretty maoy converts; for, to be Sure, nobody could withstand the force of your eaSoning. The reverend gentleman, I must confeSs, looked a little filly and difconcerted. My coufin laughed, and jogging Lucius with his elbow, and, at the fame time, winking with one eye, cryed, just loud enough to be heard by all the company, Du di&ble ! did you mind him, hay—^oons, twig the parfon, Well^
weljj
1
i8S
Felicia to Charlotte,
well, cry’d Lucius, Smiling, I heard the Sermon the gentleman mentions; and, I assure you, it was a very good one. I take this opportunity, Sir, to thank you for it; but you must excufe me, if I am of a different opinion from you, in this particular. Swearing is certainly attended with both pleafure and profit; and was I to preach a fermon, it should be to prove it.
The stranger appeared quite at a lofs, and rubbing his forehead, I heard him mutter to himlelf, I will be damn’d if I can tell what to make of this! Pleafure and Profit! Old Sir Crape is in the right: but what the devil does the gentleman mean ? After all, it is a curfed foolish custom. My coufin, clapping Lucius on the back. Seemed mightily delighted, without knowing why. Mr. Stevens was in a deep fufpenfe, and looked at Lucius with extreme attention: while I was perfedlly astonished. I had been expecting Some grave and judicious remark, and did not doubt but that Lucius would advance Something new on the fubje£l, that might, for the prefent, at least,, put a stop to their profane impertinence ; when I was all at once mortified to find that I had Spoke to the reverend gentleman to little purpofe. Since he was refolved to take their part, and to countenance
Felicia to Charlotte.
189
tenance what I knew his heart must cundemm
Fie, fie, Sir, cried the clergyman, aster a lit-
✓
tie hesitation, and, with a tone and look that shewed him equally pleafed and dilTati&fiedj You joke—I am Sure you do. Make a Sermon in praife of Swearing ! God forbid—stis all a joke. Indeed, Said Lucius, I am in earnest. Don’t you think I should make Some converts ! It is a taking Subject—quite new, I believe. Sir. Phu, phu, converts! Perverts I cry’d the good gentleman, with Some warmth j ay, converts Sor Satan, indeed. Dear Sir, for heaven’s fake, don’t talk in this manner. My
coufin was now all life, he Seiz’d Lucius’s hand, crying. Ay, do, give us, do un fermon fur des fermens. Ha, ha, ha, yop See I am a wit. I’ll be curSed if I don^ listen to you; faith ! I will remember every word, begin, commence. No, no, cry’d
Gome,
Lucius*
why in Such haste ? I am not uied to preaching, and, therefore, as this will be my first
performance, a day or two’s time is little e-
nough to prepare myfelf. If you will all give
me the favour of your company, the day aster
to-morrow 1 will oblige you. Mean while, I must defire you, and this gentleman, your
friend, to conSider the matter Serioufiy, and
prepare yourfelves to anticipate what I shall
have
/
ipo
Felicia to Charlotte.
have to fay ; by this means, you will justify this practice to your own minds, and, when-
ever you are attacked' in this manner again, be ready, with my assistance, to vindicate your-lelves to the world, as well as your own consciences. I would have every body a6I from principle ; and, therefore, I must beg you to endeavour to fufpend the pra6lice, only, till you can recoiled! Some good arguments for its vindication; this cannot. Surely, be very long a quarter of an hour, perhaps, may furnish you with Sufficient motives; but if not, I
would not have you be difeouraged; there can be no great hurt in waiting till you hear my Icdlure, which, I dare promife you, will furnish the strongest and most convincing reasons for your continuing the laudable pradlice. But you must permit me, gentlemen, added he with a fmile, as your advocate and friend, to instst upon one condition, and that is, that I may be allowed to Swear the first oath, and give the first curfe. The stranger immediately gave his confent to this proposition, which he acknowledged to be reafonable e-nough; w’hile my coufin, with a look of plea-fure, precipitately reply’d, (at the fame time giving a stamp with his foot, and rubbing his
hands)
Felicia to Charlotte^ 191
hands) Damn it; ?nd So you shall, de tout mm cteur^ by —— Hold, hold, cry’d Lucius, I appeal to the company, if this be uSing me
well.
Though we were at a lofs to know what he was driving at, we all gave our. assent, and I propoSed that he should Suffer Some penalty. The poor youth was Self-condemned, and. Scratching his head, begged pardon, telling us, it was not done with dessgn : but Lucius was inexorable, he pulled out his watch, and proposed, that he should be obliged to be Silent for five minutes ; and this Sentence being approved, he added, to punish him further, that he himfelf would not Swear, till he could find an opportunity of introducing an oath, in Such a manner, as to give a grace to the Sentence.
THE tea-things had been taken away for Some time, Mr. Stevens had lighted his pipe, and the watch was placed on the table before Lucius, which my couSin, during the time of his Silence, continued to examine, with the clofeft attention : mean while, the clergyman
expressed his Surprize at Lucius’s behaviour, and let us know, that he would not only hear him, but would fit up all night to anfwer fb
wicked a Sermon; and he did not doubt but
he
"192 Felicia to Charlotte.
he should be able to overturn all his arguments ; and, therefore, invited the company
to hear him the Succeeding day at church: when be would let them fee, that a good cauSe could fuflfer nothing by being attached j adding, that as be had truth and religion on his fide, he did not doubt but he should be enabled, through divine affistance, to convince, if not to reform them. Lucius requested that he would hear him, before he jM*omiSed too'much: ahd told him, that he bimfelf, with all his zeal, might approve what he now condemned : however, he deSired him to wait with patience, and, if he was not convinced, he would certainly attend to hear his own arguments refuted. But the stranger was averSe to the propoSal of going to church, and my dumb coussn shewed his diflike to the motion, by figns, till he had liberty to Speak; and then he loudly exclaimed against it.
THE conversation was now more equally divided, and, at the fame time, it was rendered lefs shocking; for whatever were Lucius’s Secret intentions, which we were yet
»
unacquainted with, he had already, by Siding with them, produced a more happy effe£f, than would, probably, have attended all his remon-ilrances. Our two travellers Spoke flowly,
aiid

Felicia to Charlotte.

and with abundance of precaution : and while we were all watching them, my couSm wa$ watching Lucius, frequently interrupting him, to let him know, that in Such a place he might handsomely introduce an oath ; but Lucius bad the advantage of constantly proving, that it would flatten, or perplex, the fenfe of the Sentence: when waiting about half an hour to no purpoSe, my coufln, and his friend, perhaps tired of this restraint, took their leave,
and, in the most obliging manner, left us at
1
liberty, to indulge the pleaSure of a free and unreferved converfation.
The clergyman Saw, and confessed, the force of Lucius’s stratagem j but could com-prend nothing of the Sermon, or his reaSons for contradiiling an alTertion, that had all the force of a Self-evident truih : and, as he was now under lefs restraint, became very inquiss-five, in order to Search into the motives of this extraordinary corrdu(51:: but all the an-fwer he could obtain from Lucius was, that
9
he was really in earnest, and that he would give him no reaSon to be dissatisfied with his performance. So that he was obliged to wait, as well as the others, till the time appointed to gratify his curibflty took place.
VoL. II,	K	Lucius


A
194
Felicia to Charlotte.
liUCius had this day afl:cd in a manner quite oppoSite to his uSual condu£l, and I now Saw that the man, who had hitherto behaved with Such an artlefs fimplicity of manners, had regulated his general behaviour from princi*^ pile, and from choice; fince we found that he
was able, upon occafion, to assume a charac~ ter oppoSitc to his own: and if this, Madam> contradicts any thing I have faid of him in my last letter, pray impute it to my ignorance ©f his abilities. The reft of the afternoon was Spent very agreeably, and Mr. Stevens, before he took his leave, gave me a hint, that he Saw plainly that Lucius was only playing upon the two travellers ; and added, that he would not lofe the opportunity of viSiting us on Saturday for any consideration.
The next day, and part of Saturday, Lucius continued locked up in hii clofet, attended only by young I'n^eman, who ferved him as an amanuenSis. The company came at the time appointed, together with Mellifont, my aunt, and Amelia, who had received an im'* perfeCI account of the affair from her brother ;
fo that Lucius had a tolerable audience. As
/
Soon as they were Seated, he alked the two friends, whether they had ferioussy conssdered the affair, and if they had found out any important
Felicia to Charlotte.
*95
portant advantages attending the ufe of oaths, and curfes in conversation. The stranger in-genuoufly confess’d, that he had conSidered it pretty cloSely, and that, So far from feeing any advantage in it, he really began to be a* stiamed of the habit, and declared, that if he was to think much more about it, he should be
' *	‘ 5	•	•	•	'	.	.	^
obliged to leave it off; for the more he thought of it, the more indefenstble it appeared. Lucius then, deSiring that nobody prefent would take any exceptions to any thing he Said, roSe up and began : while all prefent, having their curiostty stretched to the utmost extent, feemed to listen with extreme eagernefs and attention. And, as I imagine that yours is attended wish little lefs impatience, I here fend you a copy, which Trueman has just traijicribed for your ufe.
A SER-
1-9^ Felicia to Charlotte
s
E
f'.
R
A
M
O
N

5
*
#
j •*
I N
PraiSe of S w e a r i n g in ConverSatiom
Devt. vi. 13. The lattet part ©fthe Ver(e.
And SHALL fwear by Ms name.
T H E R E is a Set of men in the world,
who need only be known in order to be deSpifed j men, who are a constant fubjedt for ridicule, and justly the deriSion of the gay and more refined part of the human Species men who are fo stupid, as to be more enamoured with the pleafure of a benevolent action, more charmed with giving joy to the helplefs and miferable, with drying up the tears of the distrested, or Soothing the agonies of the bursting heart, than with the lordly pride of wanton power, than in rendering the wretched more wretched, than v/ith fpurning at patient merit, or even the fatisfadfion of racking tenants, hoarding wealth, or all the high gratification of a debauch ; more delighted with the vifionary pleafure of indulging their
own
Felicia to Charlotte.
197
own refle<stIons, and the applauSe of a good confcience, than with the charms of a bottle, the transports afforded by the lafcivious wan* ton, or all the high-wrought indulgencies of a luxurious appetite. And, in one word, to Sum up their charaifier, more afraid of a falSe or even an unneceffary oath, than of the point of a fw'ord.
It is with thefe poor mean fpirited wretches, that I am now to combat, in order to stew n the great advantages that attend a (hist compliance with the injundxion in my text, And
A	t
thou Jbalt jwar hy his name. I stiad not here take up your time in examining the context, or even in-confide:ing what is meant by the command in my text,, which f me would confine to the neceffary oath.s, taken in a court of judicature ;but, like all found divines, and in compliance with the custom of all good commentators and difputants, confider the paf-fage before us, in that latitude, which is most adapted to anfwer my particular defign.
One man takes his text, and endeavours, with the most elaborate eloquence, to prove,
that the bible he preaches from is a work not
/
fitto be read ; that it never was defigned for the instruffion of Such blockheads as his audience, who, by looking into it, incur dam-
K 3
natioa-

IQ 8
Felicia to Charlotte.
nation. What concerns all to know, muft be read by none but the priest, or whom he shall appoint. How glorious that revelation, which, in the hands of the multitude, points the way to mifery, but, in thofe of the church, to eternal life I It is she aloiie, who can infallibly inform us, that love, and charity, and compaffion, and stenderneSs, So often mentioned in that old book, the bible, mean Spite, and.hatred, and inquiSition, and burning faggots .
Another, with pious Snuffle, and all the
ipovirig foice of Sighs arid groans, prove that the Cjod of truth is the God of
finding his fchemO contradidled, by thb language of Scripture, for Scripture nicely distinguishes betw een a revealed and a Secret Wilst both oppoSite, both contradidiory to each other. Scripture he proves to be a lye ; his opinion he proves to be tfiife from Scripture. He wiSe-ly turns out comtnon SenSe, to make room for grace. He degrades reafon as being in league with the devil, and, irt the pious ardour of his heart, Saves himSelf the trouble of thinking, and cries ont—I leTieve^ hecaufe it is ImpoJJlhle. Ye deists rejoice in there your friends ! Admit them into your Societies ! They, like you, can darken truth, they have assisted you in
Setting

Felicia to Charlotte.
letting fragment against fragrrtent; and, when the dazzling fun-beams Ibine too bright, can wifely ssiut their eyes. Let me too be permitted to rank myfelf on this fide, and, countenanced by fuch great authorities, to take a text that (hits my prefent purpofe, regardlefs of every other passage that may be fuppofed to contradi(st it: nay, regardlefs of the text itfelf, any further than as it may ferve for a plauSible introduction to what I have to offer.
f
It is Sufficient, therefore, that we hav^e her« a command to fwear by the name of God ; which I shall take, in the common and vulsar
O
fenfe of the word Swearing, to mean, not only all manner of oaths, but whatever goes under the denomination of Swearing in conversation, as oaths, curfes, and imprecations.
In treating this Subject 1 shall conSider,
I. The many advantages attending th
e tre-
quent ufe of oaths, curfes, and imprecations: in which will be fufficiently proved, the falfe-nefs of that assertion, that Swearing is attended with neither pleafure nor profit.
II. Answer Some objedlions. And,
HI. Make a Suitable application,
1. I am to confider the many advantages arising from a frequent ufe of oaths, curfes
and imprecations.
K 4
In
200 Felicia to Charlotte.
i
In the jirji place, this genteel accomplishment is a wonderful help to difcourfe; as it fupplies the want of good fenfe, learning, and eloquence. The illiterate and stupid, by the help of oaths, become orators ; and he whoSe wretched intelledls would not permit him to utter a coherent Sentence, by this eaSy practice, excites the laughter, and fixes the attention, of a brilliant and joyous circle. He begins a Story, he is lost in a vacuity of thought, and would instantly, to his eternal dishonour, Become Silent, did not a Series of oaths and imptecaiions give him time to gather up, or raiher Seek the thread of his difcourfe : he begins again, again he isi oft, but having complimented his friends, by calling fer eternal damnation on them all, he has thought what to Say next, and finds himSdf able to proceed with a Sentence or two more. Thus he ftill stalks on, while thought follows stowly after. Blest expedient ! by the ufe of which, polite converfation glides on uninterrupted, while Sound is happily Substituted in the place of fenfe : by this, mankind communicate familiar noifes to each other, with as little intellectual ability and labour, as a pack of welh match’d hounds; fo Soften the obje6l of their delight
and admiration ! O how preposterousty abfurd
then !
Felicia to Charlotte.'
201
/
then ! how falfe, and contrary to experience, is that ridiculous assertion, that Sweating is attended with neither fpleaSure nor profit! For what higher pleafure, what greater profit and advantage can a man enjoy, than to find, that, in fplte of nature^ who has dire^ei him to he ft-lent.^ he can hear himfelf talk—talk without stammering, or drawing out each heavy Sen~ tcnce, that lags behind to wait on thought. Ye ideots rgoice! ye coxcombs, whole costive brain ne’er didtated the flowing fentiment, be glad ! Ye, whom learning never fired, in stupid ignorance lost, exult! Blest with east and indolence, you talk, and thoSe, like you, admire ; while listening demons clap their wings, and -grin applauie.
Forgive me. Sirs, if, fired with my Sub-
jedl, I lofe my ufual moderation ; for who can help being warmed at the motion of fuch glo-rious advantages as thefe ? Advantages, which level the conVeffation of the mighty, and raife the oratory of the carman and pouer. Here the lowest frequently excel; the plowman wit h clouted Ihoon, outvies his competitors, and pradlifes the vices of the gentleman, wish more fuccefs than the lord of the manor ; or the fidtndid courtier, though adorned with
K 5	star
2-02 Felicia to Charl6Tti»
star and garter. Here no abilities, no learfl* ing, are necelTary, no studious hours are re* quired to attain perfe£Hon. Tropes and figures, all the fiowers of oratory, all the pedantry of the Schools, are vain and ufelefs trumpery, compared to thefe ornaments i they require pains and study, nor can be applied without judgment, and the toil of reading what arc foolishly called, the ingenious and polite authors : but Swearing is, as I have Said, learning to the ignorant, eloquence to the blockhead, vivacity to the stupid, and wit to the coxcomb.
SEcoNt)Ly, Oaths and curfes are a proof ©f a most heroic courage, at least in appearance, which anfwers the Same end. For who can doubt the valour, the intrepidity of him who braves the thunder of heaven, who affronts the most formidable being in the uni-verfe, arid treats, with contempt, that all-enlivening principle, which fustains and animates the whole creation ? To what a noble elation is the heart of the coward confcious, when he thus defies the Almighty, and imprecates the fires of hell ! Let the blustering -bully domineer, let him roar out his curfes, and threaten all who dare provoke the vengeance of his potent arm; let him terrify by
a Surly
FeT I CIA T O C H A R LOT T E.
203
a Surly frown, and intimidate when, with portly gait, he vents ten thouland oaths and curSes on the wretch, who impudently prefumes to oppoSe his mighty will—who dares doubt his courage ? Who can believe, that the cane, or the toe, when duly applied, have Such magic power, as to make him twist and writhe him-Self like a fei pent, till, with this exercife, his joints, and his mind, become fo Supple, that he canhend and cringe, and alk pardon ? Let the meek Soldier boast his deeds of war, and, with oaths and execrations lace the Self-flattering tale ; who can believe that So great a hero stiould have an antipathy to the Sight of steel ? Or that he, who challenges the blasting light--ning to fall on his head, would tremble, and turn pale, at the fla(h of a pistol ? No, this must never be imagined ; for can it be fup-^pofed that he has leSs bravery in the field chan •in the tavern? With theSe blustering expletives, then, the coward may strut and look hig, and every minute give frefh proofs of an invincible courage: he may bravely Sport with that Being, whofe frown would rhake the heavens and earth to tremble : he mav Seem to
J
4
Snatch the vengeance from his uplifted hand, and throw it on his-foe ; he may invoke the wrath of heaven; and who can imagine that
K 6	he
■ft04 F'ELSCtA TO CHARtOTTir
ht 1b afraid fef deathj wheri he b continually calling for all the horrors of hell ?
ThirdlV, he hereby not only gives a proof of his courage, but informs the world, that he is intirely divested of all the foolish prejudices of education, and has unlearnt
j!U thki th« mr/ii end all thprieji havi taught:
that he has not only shook off the shackles of enthuSiafm, but has banished from his mind,' that reverence of the deity, which is the foundation of every fystem of religion. He is not fufpetsted of being Such a fool as to want in-Strudlion, Since it cannot be imagined, that he has So dull a taste as to go to church, unleSs, if he be a gentleman, to ogle the ladies ; if a clown, to steep ; or, if a tradefman, in com-plaifance to the fober old women of both fexes, who happen to be his customers: and he has this additional advantage, that he will never he taken for a pious churchman, a preshyte-ti;an, a Quaker, or a methodist. And, in reality, he is fo far from being a bigot to any religious principles, that he belongs to no religious Society upon earth. That he is not, nor cannot he a Christian, is evident; for what is Christianity ? It is extenSive benevolence,
humanity,
U 1
y
/
Fslicia to Charlotte.
205

humanity, and virtue, to which he bids de- ] fiance with every curfe. He cannot be a Deist, becaufe they openly profefs the utmost reverence for the deity ; and, for the Same rea-fon, he can neither be a Jew, or a Mahometan, or a follower of Confucius. No, nor even an Atheist; Since we cannot conceive, that he would So often call upon God, if he was thoroughly convinced there was no Such being in the umverfe ; however, he every minute lets us See, that he does not fear him. How unlicensed is his freedom, how glorious and unconstrained ! Let the wretches, who meanly bend their wills, and regulate their actions, by the Sage dilates of reafon and conscience ; who stoop to follow the rules of religion, and call them facred; let theSe bridle their tongues, let thele confine themSelves within the narrow limits prefcribed by reafon and good fenfe; the Swearer knows better; fenfe, and reafon, and religion, are all fubfer-vient to his will; he diSdains their fetters, and rules thofe which rule all the world befide.
Fourthly, and lastly, another advantage which attends the vice of the gentleman, this noble accomplishment, is, that it fometimes raifes him to dignity and honour. Under this
head.

If
i\
ii
I
ib‘
’I'i
1,
l|
!! tt'r
ti M


':i
liiii
ihi
i I li
head, indeed, I take a greater latitude, and advert t© a remote conSequence of the praflice of Swearing: but, as there is Such a cloSe con-
tatenatioii in all our habits, and virtue and vice are progtellive in their very nature, I should not do compleat justice to my fubjeff, if I omitted the cortstderation of it in this particular view. When a man, Therefore, by a happy aflbdation of ideas, joins to the other advantages of this vice, ideas of wealth and grandeur; when he fees no argument, that appears of any weight, to bind him down to the unthrifty rules of honesty, and his regard for his own private advantage is too strong, to let him have any for the private property of his neighbour j what should hinder him, when a fair opportunity offers, from raising himfelf, by the ruin of his neighbour, his companion, or his dearest friend ? He has Swore to a thoufand lyes in company, without any view dfprivate advantage; what should prevent him then from taking one faife oath, when the advantage is fo confiderable ? Surely, neither confcience, nor reafon, nor religion, can do this; no, that isimpoISble; fori, who am as infallible as any dignified priest, that ever mounted a pulpit, have aflerted, that thefe
all fubfervient to his will.
Her e
\
!l I in i
f 1
i'i
1) 1 ’

Felicia to
20‘7
Here the Sweater, with an unbounded arh-bition, aSpires to Seize on wealth, ahd boldly to grafp at thofe riches, which fortune has foolishly given to a more deferving perfon j and this, in Spite of Justice andEc^uiTy, who are his professed eneniies. Thus he rifes above the multitude, and gains a lasting fame 4 not by blood and flaughter, but by cunning, deceit, and artifice ; by bursting through the most folenin engagements, breaking in funder the bonds of Society, and only violating What mil honest men hold Sacred . Suppbfe, that he fails inhis attempt, andthe property of theperfon he has attacked remains inviolate: he is conveyed to a castle, strong as that of a crown’d head j where no impertrnertt intruders dare appear to disturb his repofe: for in the day time, he has a porter to stand at his gate j in the night his faithful attendants lock and bar his doors.
Surrounded with guards, he pays a Solemn vifit at the Seat of Justice j he has the honour of being admitted to the royal bench ; he converses with that Sovereign perSonage herSelf, and, for a confiderable time, takes up the whole attention of her prime ministers, the lords of her court, who, assiduous bo pay
him
/

Felicia to Charlotte.
him all due refpedl:, wait his coming in their proper habiliments; and though it be ever So early in the day, he is never received with the difrefpedtful negligence of an undrest. The ceremony being over, he is recondu<sted by the fame guards who brought him thither, and who dare not prefume to leave him, till he is fafe within his palace. He now foon receives the reward of his baffled dexterity, the glorious fruit of his ambition. The day arrives, devoted to mirth and jollity, bufinels and care are laid alide, and every labouring hand has now a holy-day. He walks, or rides in his triumphal car, attended by a numerous throng of gazing fpe(fiators: he is mounted above their heads, and his neck, not his temples, adorned with a civic wreath, and his wrists with an embrazurc, compofed of a matter, fomething coarfer, indeed, than that of pearls and diamonds. This is no Sooner done, than gaping thoufands fend forth shouts of joy, and bending low, even to the ground, pay him homage ; then ristng up, with loud acclamations, preSent their tribute, striving who most shall pay, who oftenest bend. He is coveted, he is loaded, with their gifts, and
fenfibly touched with their bounty. The more he gains, she more unenvied here he stands,
while
\
I i
Felicia to Charlotte. 2O9
while all rejoice, and give the applaufe that is his due. But, let his modesty be ever So great, let his blushes be like the trickling drops of crimSon, painting' his bashful cheek, and prompting a willingneSs to retire from thefe honours; yet one hour, at least, he is restrained to stay, to receive the willing offerings of the multitude. Thrice happy man ! had conscience, or had reafon Sway’d, thou never hadst thus been blest; unknown thou mighteft have livedj unknown have died.
II. I COME now, in the Second place, to aniwer Some objedlions j but as theSe, after what has been Said, must appear extremely trifling, I shall be as conciSe as poflible, and hasten to a concluSion. It is Said,
4*
In the firji place, that the Swearer a£ls in diredt oppolkion to all the rules of right reafon.
But how can this be called an obje£lion a-gainst Swearing ? What have we to do with
right reafon?-------We leave.it to the dull
^ . _
wretches, the men of reflection : and yet there are Some of thefe, who attempt to mimic us : but if they a<st inconfistemly with their own
abilities.
•3

i >
ll ,
I 1
210 Felicia TO Charlotte.’
Abilities, let them look to that. An upright man is a downright fool, if he shears at all. Let thofe who can talk without it, extol their wonderous talents; they have no need of this
i	«
polite vice to recommend them to the world. The Squeamish wretch, who is afraid of a lye, has no need to shear to what he fays, for he is certain that his word will be readily taken. But away with thefe and nay wretches, men born to be pointed at; the sheepish, the Sober fools, who, regardlefs of the boundlefs liberty we enjoy, talk of rectitude of manners, religion, and confcience.
Secondly, and lastly, it is obje£led, that it is one of the most fenfelefs, unnatural, rude, and unmannerly vices, that ever» was invented.
THIS, it must be confessed, is paying a fine compliment to, at least, half the polite world. How can that be rude and unmannerly.^ which
r
gives fuch a grace to conversation ? His^ true, we exprefs ourfelves strongly, and ufe none pf thofe languid. Sneaking, epithets in our dif-
courfe, which your modest men, your men of
/
humanity make ufe of: but as we talk without Hieafling, nobody can fay that we mean
ill.
',
If. •
FtLiciA TO Charlotte*
an
ill. And, indeed, it is a very injurious ex-preffion, to Say that this is unnatural^ when So many of us have the honour of being universally deemed to be little hotter than na-turaU.
And now, Sirs, I have proVed, So effe£lu-ally, the great advantages,, attending the practice of this genteel and fafhionable vice, that there needs but one word by way of application.
Consider, O conSider, how inestimable are the advantages I have mentioned ! If there is any one here deSirous of obtaining thefe, and yet is troubled, and intimidated, with the impertinence of a restleSs conscience, flying in his face, and threatning to haunt him, like a ghost, let him but follow my advice, and conscience will fall afleep. Would he steel
his heart against compurtdlicn, let him advance by degrees ; if hfe is afraid of an oath, let him come as near it as he can, let him cry, Egad^ ramnaiion^ o'dram ye \ let him thus chip and carve a few comrrion«place expreS-Sions, to fit them to his cortfcience, and the bufinefs will be done. This pra£tice will render familiar, and the toward, who first:
trembled
/
2t2 Fl LICIA TO Ch All LOTT E i
/
t .
i:
• - y
:t t
i! •
•>
I ,
i'. 1
I c
i-»
.1.; i
!b’ i it :
1
r
S i
h
|!
W<<
i
trembled at the thought of hell, will Soon have-the courage to call for damnation.
V
«
And now, ye, v/ho have long indulged this^ vice, who have arrived at perfedlion in this great accomplilhment, and, by this means, have gained that applaufe, which nature would have denied you, which reafon refufed,. and-conscience condemned : you, I Say, who, by Ihe afliftance of this vice, have diliinguistied yourSelves, either as the orator, the pimp, or the bully : you who, with more distinguished glory, have graced thtr lofty pillory y and yod who, under Specious oaths of Speedy marriage; have violated virgin innocence, and rewarded the maid that loved you, with eternal infamy ; eonstder theSe noble advantages, applaud, com gratulate yourSelves, and rejoice: you have not stopped at the most flagrant impieties ; you have challenged, and defied, the blasting power of heaven to do its worst, and with a difin-terestedneSs,. peculiar to yourSelves, have ge-neroufly fold the reverfion of eternal, inexhaustible happinefs,.merely for the pleafure of affronting that great beneficent being, who has prepared it for you, your indulgent Creator, and Almighty Friend. How nobly ungrateful ! how unfelfish your condud ! Boast
your
r
Felicia to Charlotte.' 213
#
your bravery, and confider the wifdom of the exchange; for how blind must wu be to every Self-interested view, how deaf to the calls of Self-love, while infinite unbounded felicity has no charms, when standing in competition with the delight of affronting a benefadlor, with the
pleafure of a curfe, and the Satisfa<fi:ion of hearing your own impertinence I Stupidity, Ig*t NORANCE, and Folly, are on your fide: a£l, therefore, like men, who profefs to be their friends, and, like the true enemies of Reason, Religion, Virtue, and Common Sense, You have Seen your pradlice justified with advantages, which you have never before thought of: if theSe have any weight, if thefe have any charms, let them have all their influence. To Sum up all, let every man a£l; consistently with his real cha-rafler, and, by his indulgence of this pradlice, or his forbearance, let his abilities, or his follies,, stand confessed.’'
Yo:u have now, I fuppofe, read this extraordinary performance; but the striking action, the natural expression varied into different tones j the Sneering air in which he uttered Some Sentences, and the thundering pompous manner in which he pronounced thoSe
bordering
214
Felicia to Charlotte.
• I
5 *
I :


r'
V
L
■*
j f
ii
i '■.
1 ‘,
li
i;
iiii
H'
V
' r
bordering on the bombast, you can form nt idea of: theSe are still behind, and not to be expressed, even though I should endeavour to follow the example of that memorable preacher, who inSerted, in the margin of his printed Sermon, the proper places where to cough, and where to blow his nofe. Lucius had tarefully studied thefe particulars, which, how-^ever trifling they may appear, are essential parts of oratory. TheSe furpalTed all description, they gave life and energy to the dif-courfe, every Sentence was animated with a degree of fire, peculiar to itfelf, which, at once, warmed our minds, and Spread abroad the light of convidion.
Lucios had no Sooner concluded this long
harangue, than the stranger appeared most forward to thank him, and not only acknowledged the Satire just, but very Ihonestly confessed, that he felt the force of every word, that he was shocked at a pra£fice he had too much indulged, and refolved never more to be guilty of it. My coufin Said, he believed Lucius was run ijiad, and that he could not understand half of it.* The clergyman, though he liked it very well in the main, thought it bordered a little upon the profane; but Mr, Ste-
vens
i.'
Felicia to Charlotte. 215
vens was very warm in its defence, as was my aunt, Mellifpnt, and Amelia, though the latter objedled to the puns and play upon the words; which Lucius vindicated, as agreeable to the ridiculous charadler he was Sometimes obliged to assume, and as moftdikely to strike the attention of thofe perSons he had in view, who are commonly pleafed with mere founds, and but little influenced by arguments that require reflection.
I AM So uSed to write long letters to you that I hardly know how to fend you a short one. It is a week Since 1 began this; it ]s therefore time to conclude, and to assure you, that I am, very Sincerely,
Youit Lapyship’s
conjimi fnendy
Felicia Manly.
LETTER XL.
Dear Mapam,
H E N I concluded my last, I had Se^* veral things to add, which I think
worthy
1! f
I \ .
i; i
\' I
.( ! i' ‘
U ■
11 !
i; i
n ;
H I
0
{1 t
•J i
J ;
!
L ;
-i 1
.1 >
■ ' ;
:1
, I
14
'1 1 ,i!	:
‘d
■i

|:i
.. t ,*» A
VI
4 <
V' • ii

l'!
;i!i'
I'i.
!i|l!
i'll
I'i
bU:

i:
o.

t	>
i «
' i.
i i
2i6 Felicia to Charlotte.
worthy of notice, and, therefore, without any
further preface, I fliall continue the fu bje£l:.
The perfon, whom I have hitherto diftin-
guKhed, by the name of my couSin’s fellow
traveller, and whofe real name is Smith, now
expressed an extraordinary esteem for Lucius,
which did not fecm to fall very short of the most cordial friendship. His confidence and
assurance, which was before the Source of
great impertinence, was, at this time, (permit,
Madam, the expression) melted down by a
kind of deference and shame, arifing from a
fenfe of folly, and a confcioufnefs of Superior
worth, into a modest manly diffidence, which Serv’d to check the first impulfes to an idle

gaiety; and cured him, at least in our company, of that forward talkative temper, which
had before rendered his conversation very diS
gustful. His ingenuity in confessing his crime.
prepossessed us in his favour, and we foon found
him a fenfibje companion, in Spite of that
thoughtfulnefs that now threw a cloud over his
natural vivacity—a thoughtfulnefs that Seem’d to derive its Source from a fenfe of inward
guilt, and the Secret reproaches of his own mind. My aunt made him a very handfome compliment on that open franknefs of heart,
which
Felicia t<o Charlotte. 217
which had made him dare to confeSs that he had been in an error; but she could not do this without a Sigh, and giving an affcdlionate look at her fon, Lucius let us know, that she had Spoke his Sentiments, and he was now regarded as a perfon worthy of being admitted, to a nearer, and more intimate ac<jaaintance. Mr. Smith, tho’ very much taken up wdth his own thoughts. Seemed extremely assiduous to pleaSe and to render himSelf agreeable to every perSon in the company; but more eSpecialiy So to Lucius. He obServed the refpest, the friendship, the Sweet complacency, that Sub-Sissed between Mellifont, Mr. Stevens, and us ; he instantly regarded theSe two gentlemen as his friends, and addressed them in a manner, very different to his former behaviour-. He observed the regard we expr. fled for the worthy clergyman, he now, therefore, trca'ed him with refpev^. My coufm Seemed to have lost his friend, and having nobody to shiks out his feeble fpaiic of tiie, and to give him
y
an opportunity to difplay his talents, (at filcnr, with a most forlorn anil difconfolate countenance, his eyes fixed on Mr. Smith, and a vi-fiblc uneassnefs, at feeing him engrofs fo muck, of the conversation, and in Such a manner too, as rendered it impossible for him to have any
^ ol. II.	L	ssiaefii
Il \
■f
}
|i
'I
ji!
T. t i
ii I
I
!
n
I
! b
‘ if
* %■
«1 s
Felicia to Charlotte.
/■ ■ f
r . 1 ,
t
share in it. He was, therefore, out of his ele« ment: He was jealous of the Superior refpe(9: shewn to his friend : he was confounded, disappointed in all his high-raifed hopes of future pleafure, and yet knew not how to complain. In short, he appeared like the figure of moping melancholy, Seated on a tomb. What a Surprifing metamorphofisi
THE rest of the day was Spent with gre^ fatisfa(SIion j for though the Subjects of diS-courfe were extremely grave, yet our minds partook of that Sober, Solemn kind of entertainment, which, while we enjoy it, is attended with more delight, than the frolic laugh of mirth, and which has the power of accompanying, with a Serene Satisfadlion, the most distant reflediions;: and indeed. So exquiSitely Iweet were thefeoalmiy-pleaSing, and felf ap-proving fenfations, and So intent were they all on the fubjedts of .conversation, that they did not depart till late in the evening, and, even
then, it was with a viSible reludlancc.
%
They had all prepared to go, when Mr, Smith, taking Lucius and me aSide, Said, with an affectionate tone ot voice, I hope you will
both forgive my impertinent behaviour at my
fkst

I .
t'
1 ■
Fflicia to Charlotte.
tia
Hist vifit; and I am the more Sollicitous about this, as I have the ambition of being ranked -among the number of your friends. Can you. Sir, can you. Madam, excufe my folly ? I am thoroughly fenfible of it, in every particular, and am as heartily ashamed of it: I wish your coufin was fo too : as for me, I am going to lament in private. My boasted travels, the •fubje6I of my former vanity, have been the Source of a thoufand extravagancies; instead ■of improving, they have only Served to dc-hauch my mind: but thefe are no fooner stnished, than I meet with a perfon, who Sets them before me, in the truest light. The contrast between you and me, has been too 'glaring not te be obferved—what a wretch do I think mySelf l—but I must no fooner know, than leave you—I leave you with relucstance, and it is very probable, that I shall never fee you again. Lucius reply’d, by giving him the most frank and engaging assurances of his friendship, and, two days after, he fet forward on his journey. But it is time to return t® •ourfelves.
Prudilla, Madam, has now breathed her last, but, notwithstanding her former terror and agitation of mind, her last minutes wer«
L 2
A
M
la
!!
I
,1
' I
• I
J}
i i
i
!i!

■!i
rii
■a
n
ri.
*
‘1 '; • *
• d
I
■ ■ i I
1--
u
iii
n r ■
d I
■i
lil

b!
‘t
ri
I'i
i!l
Ji
■fi
iH
220 Felicia TO Charlotte.
perfectly compofed ; and as nature was quite Spent, (he left the world without thofe struggles, and convulsive agonies, which render that aweful moment fo terrible, with perfons of stronger Spirits.
We have been Several times to my father’s to fee the child, and both my mother, and my Sister Marilla, feem perfectly Sond of it. It is really an engaging little creature, and I think it impossible for me to help loving it. My duty, in this cafe, is extremely eafy. Since it is attended with aH the pleafurc of following my own inclinations, joined to the additional latisSaftiori it gives to Lucius.
l/-
■
An affair has just happened, which gives me great uneafmefs, the particulars of which I shall acquaint you with, in my next. I am
your over affedlionate
Felicia Manly.
%
LETTER XLI.
Dear Madam,
AM now to relate to you the caufe of that uneafmefs, 1 mentioned in my last; for as
you
\
•'5
I I
4	•
Felicia Ta Charlotte,
22 1
you have hitherto been the confident of all my little affairs, I have contradled Such a habit of laying my thoughts before you, that I really believe I should find no Small difficulty in concealing from you any circumflance irr which 1 have an immediate concern. How great is the force of custom ! no Sooner does any thing the least extraordinary happen, but I conSider it as contributing to your amufment ;■ and frcqtiently fit down to acquaint you with my affairs, even before I have Sufficiently re-fleisted, whether they are of importance enough to deferve your lotice : So that whether your are diverted with my story, or difgusted with my impertinence, depends entirely upoar •stance..
Some tirne ago, I took a Servant on the recommendation of a poor, though honest,
©Id woman in the neighbourhood ; but I need-
%
cd not the charaffer she gave me, to prepoS-Sefs me in her favour. The innocent and art-lefs modesty of her looks, and the eafy uncon-, strained freedom of her behaviour, were the first things that I took, notice of, and which r«ally infpired me with a favourable opinion of her virtue and diferetion; but this opinion was Soon heightened by the fweetnefs of her
L3
temper
)
‘1(1
•I : ■i 1
I
|i
‘ii
li
'i!
♦
I
■!ii
iHi
!
ii' h 1
I
I
ii
,1
Z2’2
Felicia to Cmarlottip.
temper, and a certain languor in her looks.
I hardly ever found her alone, but I obServed^
her in tears; from hence I began to pity her,
and, by degrees, this pity ar©Se to a kind of
friendSiiip. I, therefore, made her Service a*
eafy to her as poffible, and from being, at strii, my chamber-maid, railed her to be my v»^ornan-. As her conllitution was very deli-cate, this was a station that I thought fhe had< the greatest reafon to be Satisfied with. But,
though ihe exprested the highest fenfe of gratitude, yet I could discover- no alteration ini her difpofition. Being still defirous to contrite her SatisSadiion, I endeavoured,, by all the ways I eould^ think of, to difeover the caufe* of iier uneafinefs; but Ihe evaded all my etv-*]uiries with fomuch politenefs and good fenfe, that I refolved, at length, to put a stop to my curiofity, till time should wear off her reServe,. ©r fome accident, without her confent, inform^ me of her affairs.
e
-A
Your ladyship is, perhaps, ostended at my offering to enteitain you with the trifling affairs of my strvants, in. which you are ready to imagine, there can no nothing of importance enough to engage my concern: but have
,--^I don’t doubt but I shall Soon obtain
II
Felicia to Charlotte*
2’2 2
tain your approbation with regard to this particular ,
I HAD been called away in the middle of mf last letter .to you, and was returning to my ehamber to finish it. When recolledling, that I should want to uSe a stick of Sealing wax,-: which I had, the day before, giving to my fa-* vourite Dorothea, who, at her own requtst,i was gone to Nottingham, I stepped into her room to look for it. But how great was my Surprize I when I beheld, upon her table, a gold Snuff-box, finely chafed. Whatcould' I think! I called Lucius j. he came, and, at-first. Suggested every argument he could think of, to remove my Sui'picions: but comparing the pcffefiion of So valuable ashbx, with Dorothea’s circumstances, and the manner in which she was recommended to me, he was induced to confirm- the opinion 1 had conceived of her dishonesty* We both concluded-that I had carested an artful, abandoned, wretch ;, upon which, a number of circumstances presently rofe in our minds, that strengthened this heavy charge. Her box was instantly broke open, when, among other things, we found a crucifix Set with diamonds, and a-chaplet of pearls, and a maSs book in La-
Ls
tm
\
i
t
i'
H
fr
IS
r
>.
i-i.
IS
I
» ^
M
Mu’
d
1st V*'-. r ♦ *
yst
■I. ■
'vi


n I
n
^!1 • cl
'll
1C.
I ,
i|
;
hi
■ h'
■ii:
Uh
I
I
■ih
S!
■8||
'i

'’■i-
if
'll|
h
st
it
,t
■ a
':i\
:;l!
bif
:nl
224
Felicia to Charlotte
tta and English.v
Lucius was enraged, ancJ inSifled, that she ought to Suffer the penalty of the law, and that he could neither excufe it to himStlf, nor to his country, to Screen her Siom jussice : Since, in that cafe, he should be anSwerable for the next robbery she coinmit-'fced. We both bleffed the diScovery we had
made, and did not at all question but she
>
waited for an opportunity to let in a gang of thieves, in the night, to rob, and perhaps,, murder us in our steep : and what constmied this Sufpicion was, our preSently hearing from, the Servants, that she had Several times been (ten to give stiver to Some shabby, ill-looking kllows, who, under pretence of begging, fre-cijicntly came to the door Thus prejudice, ivJadam, when once raiSed, is a, medium that changes the colour of obje£ls, and shapes them to our fancy. Our fears being awaked, imagination is Set to work, to invent new Scenes of ideal horror. We then deal hi nothing but the gloomy and the difmal; we start at the rovings of our distempered minds; new dangers arife at every thought; we catch at every cfufe of diSeontem, and anxious to fwell the-inward perturbation, fearch only for fresh grounds of uneaSincfs. No wonder that the; objeSl, tbatraiSes thefe horrid fenSations, grows-
eve ry
Fl L I CM T O Ch A R LOT T E .
2-2'5;
every moment more deformed. While wc view only the shades of the direful’charadler, we conclude the whole to be dark and odious;, virtue becomes affetstion, beauty a malk, and; every perfedlion hypocrily, put on only to conceal Some deadly purpoSe. Thus, by a-kind of contraft,,dcformity itfelf becomes more-' deformed. From hence we precipitately concluded, that, as we had reafomto believe her a thief, she was a murderer too, and'regarded^ ourfelves as viefiims to be Sacrificed to her ava-rice. How frightful the thought I old Mr. Trueman was called'to give us Kis opinion;, when he advifed us to fend to the next justice’ for a warrant, to procure a cpnstable, and to* Search the poor woman’s houfe, who had recommended her,.
Tiie warrant was Soon procuredi when? Lucius and I, with the good old man, attended the constable, to fee if yve could find any thing there, belonging to us. The old woman was terrified to the last degree. She* was Surrounded with many conveniences,, which, a short time before, she was kncHvn to*
%	k
want, and Seemed raifedSinffome degrije, to at comfortable independance. From whence* could this ariSe 3. but from her being a necesta—
.	1
3
iii
f ‘
' ill lirl

c
J .
i,
tdi J -: j
ii -
liil
!'U
If
A
, I
i :
u
* 'll r ■
■■Ah.
it
}'
, }. Hi
■it
fif
m
’[i
• • ,
• ‘ I
I
,* I
■ r ■M
k
i
!ii
I
■!i:
ii
’!!
i!
iil
ii


226
Felicia t6 Charlottev
®y instrument in Dorothea’s crimes?
m
was the inference we drew from it. Mr.,
Trueman,, therefore. Secured her, and let her
\
know that she must not leave the houfe; but; she appeared more concerned' for her friend,., than herSelf: she would not hear of her beingi a thief: she ran on insher prailes. At last, a.
a-chest was found, and she readily acknowledged it was Dorothea’s, and that she had the-
It was, therefore, broke open, whem we found in it upwards of fifty guineas, fome broad pieces, feveral very fine rings, a gold-watch, wrapped up in. cottonj to prevent its being damaged: but what struck, me most,,, was a pair of diamond- ear-rings. TheSe Ii was perfuaded'I knew again ; I was convinced that they were the fame, which my father gave me, to keep in remembrance of ray dear mamma; and which .he had prefented to her before' their mariiage. What could 1 fay ?' I would not have lost them for ten,times their reaS value. HadT not reafon to-be enraged ? —-T'o rob me of what she knew I deemed inva-r
— of what I pris’d on ,my dear mother’s account—^me, who had given her my esteem,, and my friendship,—me, who had raifed her fiom nothing—who had caressed her; who had: loaded, her with oblia;auons, and advanced her
M
Felicia to Charlotti;. 227*
altnostto the character of my companion : how ungrateful! and yet this robbery was, in alb probabi lity, only a prelude to the miSchiefi flie was to bring upon us.;.
THESEj Madam, wete my refledtions, and thus I vented aloud my refentment, while the poor woman^ terrified almost to death, cry’d, and, with nRtany fighs and tears, lamented the luin of a girl, who had been So kind a bene-faistrefs; intermixing loud, and violent protestations of her own innocence..

After the Search was finished,' the constable was ordered to keep the woman a prisoner, in her own houfe, till Dorothea’s return,. when he was to take them to2:ether before the * ihagistrate, who had granted the warrant.. Mean while we went home, and I, with a for--
V	^	^
rowful aching heart, retired, with Lucius tb • talk over the affair, and to wait the return oii Dorothea.. Almost every (ervant in the houfe * shewed their envy, by putteng the most invi-d'ious construdiion upon her adfions, and had* I been diSpofed to listen to them, I verily believe they would never have ceafed their in--
i^clives; all the miSchief'that had been don
e
■ina
>

in
'i '
I '
» ’ « » i
* I
st. ■; i
I' t
a)
1' 1
!|!
4;
ti
I*
?: i:
I
;ii
I
.{ • »
n
11
11
li:
b ,
b
iii
228 Felicia to Charlotte^
in the houSe would have been, by Some onc: ©r other, laid at her door, and she was,.indeed,, charged with Saaks of which I knew her entirely innocent.
We ha<T waited' about an hour for her return, when my chambermaid, told me that shcr was conie home ; that they had- charged her wkh the faist, and that her very look, condeiim--. ed her. Lucius, gave immediate orders to. hav.e her-taken to the poor woman’s, and that, the constable should, carry them both before, the justice ;, adding, that he would follow-them immediately. This news was no-foonci^ carried down, than we heard an extraordinary-bustle, and;, upon, ringing the bell to know.-vdiat was the matter, a Servant came to inform, us, that she had the impudence to difpute-their master’s command, and refufed to go till, she had Seen me. I then gave orders that she. should be brought up.. But I had- hardly fpoke the word, when she bur st open the door,, and ran into the room, attended by the cook-maid, and another or two of the lower fer-vants, who stopp’d at the door. She came «|) to me as if for protedlion, and stood trembling, pale, and out of breath:., in short, she,
bad lost her cap j her hair was in the utmost
diSoidci:,,
I >

111
ll!
i,!
I
f
t*
!l
i
ftl

li!
I
Filicia to Charlotte;

./•
disorder, and her deaths almost torn from her. back. What an affedlng Sight! Lucius fecmi* ed shocked, and demanded what was the rea-fon of their treating her in this manner, with, a tone of voice that Sufficiently expreffed, hi*, disapprobation. They laid the fault on her,, who would not let them take her away civilly,; when Lucius observing that they had no right to ufe violence without his. leave, and ordered, them sternly to withdraw, our thoughts were, turned upon, the fingle objed, that, with a. look of terror, stood, panting before us. Indeed. Madam, my heart relented. Struck, with a. figure So moving, I could Scarcely refrain from, tears;, but the next moment, recolleding that she was a,thief, a vile hypocrite, who had abu-. fed my good nature, indignation again uSurped. the place of pity.
After a short filfence, Lucius, with a stera voice, began. Thou wicked unhappy wretch.
Said he, don’t attempt to excufe and. palliate
your crimes ; but, by an open confeffion, diff cover whom you have robbed, what were your intentions, and who are your accomplices.. This, I assure you, will be the only way to obtain mercy : for, upon theSe considerations, I jttow. promise, to make ufe of. all my inssuenco
Uk
ii!
M
P
iji
iijl
|l!l
!l
i
l!
ii!
df‘
m
II
iif
r 11
»
H
ii
r 1 iii:

!
I!
i

O Sir ! O I
f
ery’d
ifr your favour, fhe, iiiterrupting biin with an* alTured air > for
God’s felcc hear rne. Nou know-not who I atm'—If I do not convince you that I am injured
' N

xtremcly irrjured, let me Suffer all that the kw can inffiCt, Let me tell you, Sir, that I neither afkr, nor dcfire mercy.—The innocent have no need of mercy.—Take care,—take
care of what you fay, reply’d Lucius; I would
give a great deal to find you innocent; strong Circumstances! I wish with all my heart, , Said I, that you could prove your innocence,. but I am afraid that is impoflible j fuch con-vincina: proofs ? and my eati^rings too ! WhaV Car*rings. Madam ? returned she, without a blush : you will not Surely fay, that I have stole your ear-rings. Yes, faid Lucius, they were found in a tea-chest that belongs to you: and i I have them here to produce before the magistrate.
1 •
It was obfervable that the terror, which at sttst, had all the Symptoms of guilt, wore off . every moment; and, indeed, fear and affright imprefs upon the countenance of the moft in^ nocent, marks which may be eaSiIy mistaken ■ for indications of the conSdous wickednefs of an abandoned mind. Flow abfurd then is if, fpr people to pieteud to form a judgment, from >
Such.
|TeLICIA to Chari^tti.
sr^fi
Such equivocal appearances! she now, ver^ calmly, deSired to See the ear-rings, Lucius took them out of a piece of paper,- and gave them into her hand, when, instead of the con^ fufion, which I expelled to find in her countenance, she replied. So,. I find I am condemned for stealing what is my own. Yoiirs t' faid I, amaz’d; you wilt not furely fay that shefe ear lings are yours!; How could you, come by them? Befides, I dare fey they arcr mine. Why, girl, I could fwear it. Hold,, hold. Madam,., feid she, are yoats lost then? Are they not in yourdteffing-box ? 1 have not;. So much as looked, I replied j however to con* vince you, I will look now, though I am per-fuaded it will be to no purppfe. 1 know them^ too well to be mistaken. Here 1 went for my, drelfjng-box, and bringing it, with much difficulty, under my arm, opened it before her^, when, to my entire confufion, the first thing I. fee my eyes on, was the very eat-iings I had ; laid to her charge. 1 blush’d, and was sh, struck withjhe fight, thac I had not the power; to fpeak a word. Lucius, therefore, refumedi. Well, Dorothea, faid fie, your innocence, in . this particular, is fufficientiy recommended :, how glad should we be, if it was pollible for.
you to clear yourfelf ot the rest ;. but how you ,
could-
\
1;
i< .

r
^'1
■\ I 'i ;
•< t \
. I
I
11*
•j 1
1
I i
1
t, (
:!5 ^
i- i • »
. 4 '

I
r
V
Li;
^32: Felicia to Ch^rlotte^
could come by^themj I cannot imagine: I am^ afraid not honestly. I should rejpice to find, that we have injured you, and would, in that cafe, make you all possible fatisfa£fion. But
first put yourfelf in a little order, Dorethea
your cap
—your cap, but, admitting you
innocent, which I must tell you, I much doubt of, a glafs of wine may be necessary to raife your Spirits. She now looked in the glass,.
and blushing, began in a hurry, to stroak and^ tie up her long dishevelled locks, with all the eager concern of a mind that had no othcr-objeist in view, but a regard for decency.:
telling me, at the fame time, that the confcN oufnefs that she could clear herfelf, whenever she pleafed, was a better Support to her Spirits, than all the wine in the world. Her cap; which, being fastened to her hair, hung low down her back, was prefently put on, and by the confuSion in her looks, and the readineSs with which she dressed her head, pinned up the rents in her gown, and reduced herfelf into a mo’^e becoming figure, let us fee that nothing but fuch an extraordinary- perturbation of mind, as that she was in, when she ran into the room, could have made her So long inattentive to the decorums of her fex. When she had
finished,this talk, she began:
.. . . , . .. .
/ •
i!r


Fsli^ia to Charlotte.
ns
„ I AM now to appear in a very di-ffercnt charaffer from that, in which you have hitherto knowm me. I am obliged to throw off the difguife of a fervant, and to reveal a Secret, which I would have gladly kept within my own breast, at least, for Some time longer. Your fufpiclons, I perceive ariSe stem your finding a few things of value,, in the pofleffioii of a fervant, one whom you took into your houSe, under the appearance of indigence, and low birth. In order then to be reftored to your favour, I have nothing more to do, but to convince you that I am born of a very honourable family, and that I may reafonably expe6l a fortune. Sufficient to entitle me to wear tbeSe objects of your fufpicion. My father, who is now living, is a baronet, and enjoys a very plentiful estate in Lincolnshire ; he was married to a lady of the Romish religion; and a mutual agreement was made ta prevent any future uneafinefs, with regard to
/i	^
the education of their children, Accoiding to this agreement, my brother was educated a protestant, while I was brought up by my mo-ther in her own principles; but she dying about three years ago, I foon, too foon, felt the cf-fe£ls of her lofs. She was Icareely buried; when my religious liberties were invadM: niy
fiathec
1/
I

Felicia to Charlotte.
father confessor was forbid to come near me;

I was continually importuned with the follici
Cations of ministers, whom my religion made
it criminal for me to hear; my disregard of their instruffions was refented as the highest a<5i: of difobedience. And thus, by performing what rthought my duty, I incurred a father’s diSpleafure. If I stopped my ears to the arguments that were offered me, it was Said that I
I
reiolvtd to be dehf to the voice of trtistft They
bible*—"I
gave ms a noie—»t durst not read it j they would read It to me, but it was unlawful for
me to hear them, and, therefore, I would not Suffer them, to do It; this was construed intO'
©bstinaev. I durst not be fo vain as to confult
my own ssiallow reafon, when I did not know
but it might contradidl the infallible doditines of our holy church. I was now treated with:
extreme feverity ; but, at last, wearied out by
my father’s, and my brother's, importunities.
I refolved to appear more tra<5lable, and even
went fo far, as fometimes to fuffer myfelf tO
be eonduvSed to the parish church, and to pre
tend, at least, that I was almost convinced :
but this piece of hypocrify was foon punished ;
it reached rny diredlor’sears; when, prompted
by a zeal for my Salvation, he, in my father’s
abfcnce, got admission into the houfe, and gave
me
Felicia to Charlotte. 235
a a very Severe le<sture, on the inlincerity-ef my conducst; exhorted me to be stedSast, and confirmed me by abundance of pious arguments : but before he had done, my father, who had been Sent for by Somebody that Saw him in the houfe, and who had overheard' great part of his difcourfe, entered the room in a violent passion, threatened to Send the good man to jail, and actually kicked him’ down'stairs.
I WAS now treated with more Severity than ever, was locked up in my room, and never permitted to fee any company, but Such as. were most difagreebre. A gentleman wasi introduced to me, and I was forced to receive his addresses; he was a zealous churchman, and So assiduous to pleafe my father, that, in his prefence, he Seldom fpoke of any. thing but religion; and thus paying his court to him, instead ot me, made him not more his friend, than he made me bis enemy. A day was appointed, for my being married to the man in the world I had the greatest aversion to: what could I do ? my prayers and.
intreaties were all to no purpoSe. I was drove to the last extremity, and had no other relburce,, but flight. I, therefore, one moonlight
/
i*
•	' p

216 FiLiciA TO Charlotte* '
light night, when alt were in bed, dif*. guifed myfelf, and taking Some of my mother’s, and my own jewels, with the little-money I had, putting it all, except five guineas, in a tea-chest, made my cfcape out of the houle, by dropping out of the window, which was only one story high, and fled to the priest : but he not daring to conceal me, procured me a horSe, and the Same night I Set out, hardly knowing where I went, and, the-next day, reached this place before noon j when being very v/eary, I found a poor wo* man, to whom I told as much of my story at-I thought neceffary to raife her compaflTion; to her I gave the horfe, which I had before paid for; and, by her recommendation, I had the favour of being admitted into your houfe as a fervant.
Our ftrrprife, Madam, exceeded all dc-ffcription; we let her go on without inter-
ruption, merely for vvant of words proper form our excufes. For my part, a number of circumstances, as she proceeded; arofe in my mind, that confirmed every word she fpoke, with the force of the most convincing evidence ; the genteel air of her drefs, her police unconstrained behavio ur, on all occafigns.

Felicia to	Charlotte.	237
-f )	^	fh.
*	. •
joined to an extenSive knowledge of the works of many of the most polite authors,
I recollected that I had once heard her repeat a few lines from Tasso, and I had Some rea-Son to believe, that (he was a perfeCl mistreSs, both of the French and Italian languages. She is a papist.—Her cxcufes for not joining in the family devotion, the frivolous pretences with which she always avoided reading to me any piece of religion—It was certainly So—stie must be a papist—I thought both Lucius and myfelf perfeCl fools for not feeing thro’, and knowing her in this difguiSe, a dif-guife too thin to hide her character from the least difeerning eye. I looked at her perfon :
1 was struck at the diforder of herdreft—fright-
* '
ful diforder ! could I fee it without redoubled
I
.confufion ? I resteCled on the indignities she had Suffered—brutal indignities ! A lady of fortune and distinction—my Superior—what Savage treatment! how much she was injured 1 What a bustle had we been making a-bout nothing, only to shew our ignorance, .and hasty passion! Lucius was justly confounded, aiid hung down his head. She was still standing. Pray, Madam, be Seated, Said I. She obey’d, and took a chair, and while
we
I
2^3 Felicia to Charlotte^"
We were meditating an apology for our pr-e» posterous behaviour, she refumed.
A
I KNOW, Madam, that I pay my court t<» a Protestant, with a very ill grace, when i attempt to do it, by confessing mySelf a Catholic ; but I know, however, that you will vindicate me from a crime, which you have tinjustly laid to my charge. I can, in this cafe, give fuch additional testimonies of my innocence, as to strike malice itfelf dumb. Much more shall I convince you, of whole goodnefs, and humanity, I have received a number of fuch pleafing .instances as I never shall forget. Yet as I am a Roman, you will, probably, join with my father, and while you preach to me of perfecution and prgudice. Sufficiently shew, like him, that you are capable of both. But do not. Sir, O do not, Madam, abufe the confidence I have repofed in you. Don’t give me up to the refentment of my relations. No, Ma-<dam, cry’d Lucius, I will intermeddle in your affairs no farther than you are pleaSed
But what apology shall I make ?
You have
lo approve.—
How shall I excufe ou" condu£l ?
been ufed fo ill, that it is a kind of folly to ash your pardon. Indeed, I am ashamed, and ,

,v
Felicia to Charlotte.’ 239
perfedlly Sorry for my behaviour; and what
recompeiice is in our poiver to make you, freely demand it. I thank you, Sir, returned ihe, Smiling j there is really no reafon at all for thefe apologies, I cannot help faying, that appearances were against me, and while you
thought me what I Seemed, you ought to have done what you did.—-This is very generous.
Madam, faid I, and the only return we can make, is to interest ourfelves in your happi-nefs. I thank you both, faid she : but will you not then take part with my father ? Do you promife to leave me, whilst I stay wdth you, to the free enjoyment of the only true religion ? Yes, Madam, Lucius reply’d, I promise it to you very Sincerely. I am an enemy to persecution, and to every attempt to force the conscience, however miSmSormed. A true protestant, from principle, hates all religious tyranny. He is, by profeflion, the friend of liberty, and ought, therefore, to check every unjust fally, that would lead him to violate it on the meanest obje^:. We allow of no in-tjulfition. The man, who is a bigot, and yet difclaims infallibility, is a contradi<5lion to himfelf: a contradi6:ion! as great as any we can lay to your charge. We, believe me.
Madam, deal not in contradi^lion: ours is
\
the
24^
Felicia to Charlotte.
the religion of common fenfe; we alk not a
$
blind obedience : nor do we attempt, by (hutting the bible, and laying the understanding in fetters, to clofe the eyes, and the ears, to the voice of God. I, therefore, blame your father, and reSolve to make ufe of all my power, to restore you to a perfect liberty; to awaken his affedlion, and, conSequentlyi to give you a proper share in his fortune; and to do this only in concert with you. Mean while, make ufe of this houfe as your own. I Sincerely thank you. Said she, and shall readily embrace your offer. To be restored to my father’s affection, is, indeed, a blefllng e-qual to my highest ambition. To be restored to this, without wounding my constience !
I should have nothing more to wish for. O my heart! how it longs for the tender union ! But the flattering hope is vain, vain indeed ! hoW' shall I fee him ! with what indignation will he look upon his daughter, a fugitive, an alien, a wretch, in his opinion, dcferving his utmost hatred. Methinks, I fee him stand before me, and, with a stern and steady look, reproach and upbraid me, for the uneaSinefs I had given him. Ah ! Madam I added she, you have often found me in tears; you can
now no longer wonder at the caufe !—1 fear I
' mult

Felicia to
241
must still be happy—-perhaps not : however, 1 Will hope the best. Here flie eijdeavoured to compofe her looks, and wiping her eyes, which began to Swim! with tears, she reSumed,. Well, I will, indulge the pleastng refleffion of embracing him, who was once the tenderest, tjiost kind, and obliging parent. As to my
f
fortune, that is already Secure, by the marriage Settlement: as the daughters were to be educated in my mother’s principles, they were to , postefs her jointure ; and, as I am the only
daughter, it must all devolve to me, after my father’s dece'^e. How happy will your friendship be to me ! how richly shall I be repaid for the short uneaSinefs you have given me, if, by your means, I can live, with peace and plealure, in my father’s houfe !
N
I NOW thought it high time to let her Seej that I had the fame Sentiments as Lucius. I gave her veiy affeiiionate testimonies of my friendship, mingled with apologies for the Severity of my treatment. I inSisted that she should make ufe of niy deaths, and dr-efs more Suitably to her birth and fortune. Lucius took this opportui’iity to fend to the constable, and to deSire him to leave our old neighbour at liberty '; and," after making him
Vol. II,	M	a
242 Felicia to Charlotte.'
la Small prefent for his trouble, and the poor woman a constderable one, as a recompence for the uneaSineSs we had given her, they both Seemed perfectly Satisfied.
4	«
I
We presently found, that the Servants, who had .treated the young lady So ill, in a character more .upon a level with theirs, had a£Icd only from pride. They were all greatly offended at her not entering into their little cabals j at her not Seeming fond ..of their .company : they imagined that She thought herfelf above them, and, as (he was preferred before
*	‘‘A
them by me, they fuSpecsted that 1 encouraged her Self-conceit, and, on this account, she was hoth envied, and hated : they, therefore, rejoiced to'fee her pulled down, and contributed
r
all they could to preSs her still lower. But now she was placed in a more exalted view, and no proper fubjed for their envy, there was a total change in their diSpoSitions: her company, whenever it had been granted them, was an honour, that, in the refle<stion, tickled their vanity; she had conferred a fort of dignity on their station, and was the kindest, most obliging lady, and So humble, that she Seemed rather to be born a Servant like them, than a
baronet’s jdaughter.
What fine things are
birth

'Felicia to Charlotte. 24J
birth and fortune I happy accomplishments! that can thus change our anions, even in thofc minute circumstances, that are altogether indifferent!----But let me stop the current of
my reflections.
Twenty times, I believe, I have been obliged to break off, and as often have I resumed my fubjeCl:. I am now very much in-difpofed, and shall, therefore, take this opportunity to conclude, and to affure your ladyship, that I am, and ever shall be,
your faithful friend,
Felicia Manly,
LETTER XLII.
Can now. Madam, give you the condufi-on of Dorothea’s story. One morning, about a week after that day of uneafinefs and unjust Suspicions, which I deScribed in my last, the young lady came into my room, just at the time I was dressing, and inSisted, with a good deal of gaiety, on performing her uSual talk, which, however, I refuSed: but she staid till the Servant, who hast taken her office, was gone : “wheii,‘ fitting down by me, dear Ma-
M 2	.	dam.
M4-
Felicia to Charlotte.
dam, Said she, did not you obferve, that I a-voided coming before Mr. Smith, the gentleman who was your couSm’s companion in his travels ? I really knew him, at first fight. My father has a feat in Yorkshire, not far distant from his father’s. As the two old gentlemen are intimate friends, my brother and young Mr. Smith, whenever we chofe to refide in that part of the country, were constant companions. His father frequently brough t him to our houfe, So that, though his perfon is considerably altered, it was impostible for me not to know him; All my fear was lest
I
he should discover me, under the diSguifc I had astiimed. When he was here, I wished him a hundred times out of the houfe, and, while you were in the room with him, I was more than once, put to a terrible streight, by your fending for me, to bring in fomething you Vvfanted. I dreaded to fee him, almost as much as.I should have done rny father. And, indeed, it appeared to me the fame thing ; for if he discovered me, he would certainly have made no Secret of the place and fituation in which he found me. He was never here, but 1 was in the greatest uneafinefs; and all the while he staid, I felt the most terrible palpitation of heart.
Now
Felicia to Charlotte.
245
Now I recolie<st the circumstance, K^adam, Said I, I could not help talcing notice or the many excuSes you made, to avoid coming into the room; and I thought there was Some mystery in your behaviour, which I could
not comprehend. But I cannot help ohferv-
%
ina:, that had 1 been fo unfortunate as to have thought of this yesterday, I should have construed it greatly to your diSadvantag^: and foolishly imagined, that it proceeded from a
eonScious guilt, and, perhaps, a fear of be-
»
ing discovered by a perfon of the very family you had robbed of Such valuable effects. How blind are we ! how eafily hurried away by appearances ! and how careful ought we to be-in forming a judgment of others ! I am no'w
glad—heartily glad, that I did not, by recol-
\
ledfing this circumstance, encreafe ray own uneaSinefs, and' your ill treatment. I never was fo thoroughly convinced, ar I am at pre-fent, that even forgetfulnefs, amongst our o-ther im,perfe6tions,.has its advantages. May I learn from this, to be ever cautious of cen-Sure, and afraid of judging the arstions of another !—But pray, Madam, proceed.
When Mr. Smith first came in w^ith your couSin, continued she, T was fo happy as not
t®
/
M 3
24^ Felicia to Charlotte.
to be obferved ; therefore, the moment I Saw him, and heard his voice, I hurried out of the room, and afterwards took all imaginable precaution to avoid his Seeing me. The last time be was here, I heard him in the hall. He was taking his leave, you were with him, and called me—I trembled, but. Soon recovering myfelf, flipped out of the back-door un-iioti(j|Kl: when having taken a turn or two in the garden, I refolved to go into the wood, imagining that I might there, without danger of discovery, watch the moment of his departure : but the trees prevented me. I then attempted to crofs the avenue, at Some diftance from the houfe ; and Setting off very Swiftly, ran againlt him with all my force. I staggered backwards, and recovered myfelf, just as he turned about, and looked full in my face.
1 was struck with confuflon—Mifs Dorothea !
#
he cry’d ; and, in a moment, as if rccolledl-ing himfelf, I heard him add, as I flew before him to the other fide, I- must be deceived ! it can never be Dorothea! I could hear no more. I fancied he followed me.—Methought i heard the leaves rustle behind me. I did jiot stop till I was out of breath. My mind was agitated with my fears. The method I had taken to prevent a difcovery, proved the
very
Felicia to Charlotte.
24;
very means of making mySelf known. I stood ftill—I listened. All was quiet. I reflected on what had pasted, when changing my pur-pofe, I refolved to step back, to call him a* stde from your coufin, and by an ingenuous confestion of the whole affair, to prevail upon him to keep my retreat a Secret from my father : but in this flutter of Spirits, So long was 1 in forming my refolution, and So many thoughts occurred both for and againft my put-ting it in pra<stice, that when I returned to the place, Mr. Smith and your couSm were al-
Strange caprice of the
mind ! notwithstanding the affright and eager haste with which I ran from him ; stowly as I had moved to find him, and in fpite of alt
the reluctance I felt in forcing myfelf to take
/
this step,: I now looked upon his being gone; as the greatest misfortune. I burst into tearsj and .......—
most out of fight.

She was here interrupted by Lucius, who, coming into the room, told me that Mr. Smith was already returned, in company with an elderly gentlemanj to pay us the vifit he had promised' at parting, and defiring that I would* make hafte to receive them, retired.
M4
Poor
N
/
» ’
/
I
\
9
3?
’A
A
/

248
FEtreiA TO Charlotte.
Poor Dorothea, who had revived every uneafy thought, by the confidence she had been placing in me, while thus unburtbening her mind, was liow, to all appearance, in a very unhappy fituation. Her eyes were moistened with tears, when Lucius appeared, and gave a shock to her mind, by letting her know that this formidable Mr. Smith was returned, with a gentleman, whom she immediately concluded to he her father, the perfon she dreaded most to fee. Lucius was no Sooner gone, than I beheld her Sunk back in her chair: her eyes were half-clofed, and her countenance expressive of the most lively diS-trefs. Struck with furprixe I ran to her relief,
and endeavoured to roufe her from this fitua-
✓
tion, by assuring her, that if she pleafed, she should hot fee-Mr. Smith ; but she interrupted me, by crying, O my father !—my faher is in the houfe I I tried every method to com* fort her, hnd, at last, after giving her the strongest assurances that I would ufe every argument to excufe and justify her, she began to moderate her uneaSmefs,
I THEN left her, full of the thoughts of vindicating her to the utmost of my power; when, as I went through the passage, I found
that
I
/
Fflicia to Charlotte.
249
that she was not mistaken in her conje<stures, for, before I entered the room, I heard a voice cry. Believe me. Sir, I know enough of them, and their priests too : and damn her, if she had as much regard for her ©wn falva-
tion as I have for her------Here T opened the
door, and, by the entrance, cut short this fine expreffion of his pious concern for the future welfare of his daughter. T hey rofe up, and after the ufual compliments, refumed their Seats, when Mr. Smith, giving me much the fame account of his meeting with Dorothea, that she herfelf had just before done, let us know, that the improbability of its being real-ly that lady, in Such a drefs, and So far frorr^ home, made him imagine that he must have been mistaken; but the circumstance was fo remarkable, that, when he arrived at his father’s, he could no more help mentioning it: to him, that he could the pleafure he had re-teived from the converfation of a gentleman, that I was very well acquainted with, and whom he was proud to call his fi lend, Lucius, and I, fmiled at this eomplinient, but as neither of us interrupted hinf), he proceeded to inform us, that his father, after ashing him abundance of questions about her, to which he could give no fatisfastory anSwer, at last:
5	told
\
/

250 Felicia to Charlotte.
told him, that she had left her father’s houSe, and had been miffing near fix months, and that he could do no Icfs, than coihmunicate what he heard to the perSon moffconcerned to know the place of her retirement. A letter accordingly fent to Dorothea’s father, who came to learn the particulars from the young gentleman himfelf; aud he being de-firous to fee Mr. Manly again, propoSed to condufl him to us. He concluded, with letting us know, that he was very glad she had been So wife, as to chufe So honourable a retreat.
While we were at breakfast, the stranger gave us an account of his marriage with Dorothea’s mother, related many family broils, that happened on the Icore of religion, and politics; complained of the disturbance he had met with from priests j that they had fpoiled the best woman in the world, and'rob-bed him of his daughter, by perfuading the Saucy baggage to run away from him. From thence, he digrested to popish tyranny, to maf-Sacrer, and the tortures of inquifitions : talked in favour of charity, with the rage of a bigot ; reproached the papists for the want of it; and with all the intemperate heat, and
enthuSiaSm of party. Swore that, if he had
the
t
V
Felicia to Char lotte. 251
the power, he would not leave one of the bloody-minded monsters alive .
I was both Surprized and shocked, and' coul d not help replying, with a Sneer, that he must certainly be a very great enemy to persecution; Since he should take Such a generous method of shewing his love to mankind. To this he was going to reply, when Mr. Smith very refpedlfully put him in mind of his daughter, and Several- of his late wife’s relations.
He immediately took the hint, and acknowledged, that he had gone too far. Said, that he loved his daughter better than she deferved : and having given her abundance of foul names, and nearly as many tender ones, as his refentment, or his affedlion, had the predominancy, stre-nuoufly destred to fee the Saucy obstinate vagabond.
I don’t know, Madashj what idea you will form of the character of this gentleman, A man of distblute morals, standing up for the caufe of religion and truth. He Swore and preached in a breath, and uttered his Sentiments with the poSitive assurance of a jeSuit.-His words-were.di<fi.a,ted by his passions, which'
M 6	hurried

Filicia to Charlotte.
V -
/
hiirned him away with too much violence t» Suffer him to be guided by the calmer di^latea of reaibn. And, indeed. So difficult was it to judge of his real charadler, that it was Some time before 1 knew whether I ought to rank him a.mongst men of fenSe, or perfedi brutes ; though 1 was rather inclined to place him a-monff the latter. But I was mistaken : he was really poffelTed of many amiable qualities, joined to a tolerable share of fenfe, which lay in a manner dormant till the heat of his paffi-©n had fubSided.
As foon as he was Silent, I let him know that be should Speedily fee his daughter j but that I thought it necessary to piepare both him and her for she interview. I then, without ceremony, began her history from the time I first knew her, related every circumstance of her behaviour, that could contribute to Set her charaffer in a fair light; deScribed the Severe treatment she had met with, and concluded, with relating w hat had passed that morning, and the condition in which 1 had left her. I called her my friend, I reproached him, for endeavf u' ing to enssave her confeience, and mingled thefe reproaches with more bitter «aes on myfelf, for my unjust fufpicions.
When

Filicja TO Charlotti.'

When I began to Speak, I reSolved to plead her cauSe, with all the art I was miftreSs of: but carried away by the importance oF the occafi-on, I Soon loft Sight of art, I Spoke with the fervour of stienpship, and while I was describing the Scene of her diftreSs, which our rash
folly had involved her in, agush of involuntary tearSj which feenied to flow from my repentance, and his infenSibility, railed the father in him to Such a degrees, as Seemed to render it difficult for him to contain himfelf.
* - • ^ ' He could not now be kept from Dorothea.
He confessed, that he had been more to blame than he had ever imagined: he would fee his poor girl immediately. He loved her better than ever he did. And did she, cryed he, behave So piudently ? did she lay, she felt fuch tendernefs for me	—Did she not rather
tell you, f am a passionate ©Id fool ? Well, she is good girl: and I am glad I have found her. Let her fee me. Madam, let me fee her, added he. I will fee my poor dear daughter inftantly.
He was now in a fituation shat gave iiib the higheft joy, I inftantly arofe, and ran up stairs, She was fitting in a melancholy,
thoughtful
/
254 Felicia to Charlotte.'^
thoughtful posture, and, as Soon as I entered the room, gave me a look that, at once, ex-prested her fear and impatience ; but her countenance began to brighten into chearful-nefs, even before I had time to Speak. She ran towards me, to embrace me, while I had * only time to cry, Vidory ! my dear Dorothea; vi^ory I' I have conquered. I fee it. Madam, faid she, but how ? by what means ?
I have now no time to anfwer you, cry’d I, your father waits for you: he is Subdued, he is Softened, he longs to fee you. Here, I took hold of her hand, and led her down, her colour changing at every step. When we entered the room, her father ran to her, claSp*? cd her in his arms, and lavished upon her the most endearing expressions of kindneSs. It was purely the joy of a father, who had recovered a dearly beloved child, after it had been; by Some accident, lost, without the least mixture of reproach, or bitternefs. Dorothea was stlent for Some time, and only expressed her joy by her tears: but, at last, pressing his hand, Do you; do you, dear Sir,
me. ? cried she. He gave her. the
\
warmest assurances that he did, embraced her
again, took his chair, and'made her Sit by himi
It.
FEticiA TO Charlotte.
^55
It is eafy to conceive. Madam, that Lucius, and I, must have great delight in observing the happineSs, to which we had So greatly contributed. For my part, I received many very engaging compliments from both father and daughter, with which Lucius Seemed more
pleafed, than if they had been, paid to himSelfi.
/•
/
Mr. Smith, I had obferved', was extremely’ attentive to the praiSes I had bestowed on Dorothea; he was greatly affe<9:ed with her story;, and, for the rest of the diay,. Seemed to bear an uncommon share in the happy reconciliation. He obferved all her motions, and me-thought there was Something in hiis air, that expressed as much of she lover as the friend. For her part, she viewed" him without terror: he was no longer the formidable man, that
had filled her with Such dreadful apprehenfi-
• \
ons and So far from having any inclination to run away,,she converSed with him, with all the freedom of an old acquaintance.
I AM strangely addidled to the writing of letters, which, I am afiaid, tire you;, and for the future, I believe, 1 must be lest communicative, in <^»^der to belrfstroub[«-iome.
r
Be pleafed to prefcnt my compliments, ro his
lordship,

. V
/ *
25^ Felicia to Charlotte.
lordship, and be assured, that, whether my letters are long or short, I shall always be, as I am at prefent,
your Sincere,
and most asteistionate friend,

Felicia Manly*

LETTER XLIIL
Dear Madam,
Your rallying. So agreably, an aiTer» tion in one of my former letters, that rural Scenes are she most unfruitful of adventures, has So much the air of a compliment, that, ht)wever undeserved, I think I ought to thank you for it You may confi-der Dorothea’s story In what light you pleafe ; she Intel eft you are pleafed to take in her good
'	X
cr bad fortune, ought to induce me to fend you-the particulars, which are still behind. With' out any further preamble, therefore, 1 pro* ceed.
» •
, Believe me, Madam, there is as great a shffcrence ftetween Dorothea’s father, when angry, and when pieafed, as between any two
per So ns
Felicia to Charlotte.
perSons upon earth ; you would not even take him to be the fame man ; were is poflible for you to have been an hour or two in, his company, after his reconciliation, even you mull have thought my last letter a vile flander on his character. So much do thefe furious paf-Sions distort the mind !

-^SThe rest of the day was fpent very agreeably, and, at the fame time, nothing was omitted that could contribute to confirm the hap-pinefs of the amiable Dorothea. Lucius artfully introduced the fubjest of religious liberty, which he proved to the birthright of every reafonable being. He made ufe of the most convincing^ arguments. He quoted the incomparable Mr. Locke’s piece on this fub-je£l; a work, which he afTured us, was of more value than a Peruvian mine. A high price i must confefs, Mr. Smith joined with Lucius to anfwer fome obje<Slions. He then reprefented perfecution as arraigning the i nite fagacity of the fovereign creator of all things, who, to make room for heaven-borft charity, had wifely given fuch a variety of tastes, degrees of capacity and understanding, to the mind of man, from whence refult the

* Letter on Toleratien.
2c8
Felicia to Charlotte.
love of truth', and the test of every kind and benevolent affedlion. Uniformity of Sentiment, Madam, is, I find, in his opinion, na more defirable, than the dull uniform pro-^e^ of a Smooth, and wide-ftretehed, plain j or rather a large tradl of barren Sand, where no interrupting (hades, none of the blooming beauties, that ariSe from the varied tints of trees, of (hrubs, of turfs, of flowers; diversify the enlivening proSpe^ : whilst charity, amidst the greatest variety of tempers, educations, and capacities, like the invigorating power of the fiin, prefents the most lovely Scene, and gives life, and Spirit, and beauty, to all/around: mutual complacency, and benevolence, breathe an eternal Ipring, and, at once, blolTom, bear fruit, and yield a friendly shade..
V
. V
Methinks* I hear him still, and'still fee the blaze of humanity darting from his eyes; when he added. With this view, do I look upon my native country, the feat of liberty, and her fistcr*« earthly throne. In this view let us regard the whole world. The honest Turk shall be my friend; the Sober faithful ChineSe, that lays the divine Confucius to his heart, and the Indian of either world, blest
with-
Fslicia to CharlottS.
with fimple innocence, and native truth, shall be my brothers. Wherever I find a marl who loves his God, and loves mankind, I will hug him to my breast.
Here Lucius pauSed a while, and then. Smiling, afked Dorothea, what she thought of this rant. Am I hot, Madam, Said he, in the right; is not this a very defirable difpofition of mind ? She gave her approbation, on which he replied. Then what must you think of Po'^ pery, with her Smooth uniformity of barren Sands, which, blown with the baleful wind of persecution, arife in curling torrents, and Spread ruin, and deftru6tion, over all the wide creation. Nor can the storm be laid, till showers of blood, pouring from honest hearts, beat down the dull, and, for a time, hush the wild uproar to a calm.

c
Forgive me, Madam, added Lucius, Seeing her bite her lips, I do but just touch on a fubjetst, which, if dressed in plainer lan> guage, would, I am Sure, wound your tender heart. Persecution, whether in Papist or Protestant, is a tempest railed by the breath of hell. And, believe me, if there can be a
Christian
\

260
Felicia to Charlotte,
Christian without humanity and yil may be a Saint.
aDc
Mr, Smith, who appeared not a little delighted with Lucius’s flights, and who, doubt-lefs, comprehended hts motive for introducing this jubjedh, took care to keep it up for Some time longer. He entered upon the eauSe of liberty as connedled with a free enquiry, and shewed the neceflity of making ufe of reafon, in order to difcover truth from error. He wais fcconded by Dorothea’s father, and Lucius do-fed their observations, by giving a flight glance at the principal fyflems of religion, throughout the world. The various pretences to in-
fellibility
confldered and expoSed in all :
the folly of fuATering the confcience to be en-staved, by the Dervife, or the Christian priest, proved equally ridiculous; and the impoffibi-lity of difcovering truth fiom error, where no> enquiry, was made, as great in the zealot of R ome and London, as in that of Turkey, or Siam.
These fufejedls, Madam, were managed
with Such delicacy, that it was impoflvble, for
even Dorothea, to be offended. She Seemed
to listen with pleaSure : and, when it was done.
Said,
Felicia to Charlotte^
s 61
Said, with a Smile, that they bad inSpired her with a love of truth, and that, though flie waa very Sure she should be a Catholic as long as she lived, yet, for the future, she would be one upon rational principles, and boldly venture to study the truth of her religion, and to read even thofe pieces, with care, that had been wrote against it.
Mr. Smith received this declaration with as great an appearance of pleaSure, as even her father himfelf:—and nothing was omitted that could confirm this agreeable difpoSition.
You perceive, ! dare (ay, the tedious dulnefs into which I am Sinking, My fpirits, indeed, begin to flag. I will, therefore, hasten to a conclusion, lest a more interesting fubjedl should intervene, and demand my pen.
N
The rest of our converfation was little more than chit chat. Dorothea had many <^uestions to afk, concerning her friends in the •country, fome of whom were dead, and fome were married; and theSe, though they furnished not the least kind of amuSemeni to us, as sheir very names were unknown, engaged almost
*• * _
Felicia to Charlotte.
most her whole attention f«r the little time ihe had to stay.
THE next morning, I had the mortification of taking leave of Dorothea, whofe father would not be prevailed upon to stay any longer. We parted with many reciprocal expref-Sions of affe£lion. But, to the no Small fur-prize of Lucius, Mr. Smith, who, at their first meeting, of his own aCcord., had propoSed to stay with us, at least, a week, reSolved to accompany them, nor could we, by all the arguments in our power, induce him to keep his word.
I HAVE only one word more to add: yeS-terday it was a month fince they left us, and we have, this minute, received a letter from Mr. Smith, in which he informs us, that what Severity and restraint could not do, mildnefs and freedom have accomplished; that the amiable Dorothea is already a Protestant, and that he hopes for the happineSs of Speedily pof-Seffing the lovely convert.

V
\
Felicia to Charlotti* 2^3
It is with great difficulty that I have been able to write thus far; I am really very ill,
but as much as ever
*
Your Ladyship’s
aifetstionate
\
Felicia Manlt,
LETTER XLIV.
HAVE now, Madam, the pleafure of informing you, that we have another per-fon added to the family j you, I am Sure, will be glad to find that I am able to tell you fo. I am now a mother, in the flrideft fenfe, and was happily brought ito bed three weeks ago,
O mV friend ! how delightfully does the’ mind glow with gratitude, thus rifing from' the struggle of convulSive pangs, from the languor of expiring life! The dear helplcft infant too, the Subje<st of our future care, and future joy ! With what new, what tender fen-Sations, do we view the little gift of nature, entrusted to our proteilion ! Methought a beam of heavenly comfort shot thro’ my foul! «afe, joy—transporting joy, and mingled fond-
nefs:
/
264 Felicia to Charlotte.
'	•	K	■
nefs: all delight, extaSy, and love! My heart overflowed at once with gratitude,, and the Softest maternal affe^lior^. ;
%
' .* ^
Before the first week was over, I began to be alarmed, lest my fondnefs for my affection for my girl; I told my fears to Marilla, who was constantly with me, and defired that 1 might have her brought to me every day: and while I endeavour to divide my heart be-twe^en them both, the pretty creature, by twenty winning ways, stems to strive to hold fast my affedfions.——-My fears. Madam, were groundless, I must love her : and I am really glad that my affedlions So eafily correspond with my duty.
Afrer this rambling incoherent letter, you will not wonder, if I tell you that, though I am as well as can be expedled, my head is still very weak : indeed my eyes fail me, and l am forced to conclude. May every bleifing attend ypu.
I am, ^
Yours, &c.
Felicia Manlv.
LET-
Felicia to Charlotte. 265
LETTER XLW
Dear Madam,
T was with extreme concern that I read your last letter. Indeed, I fineerely Sympathize in your affliilion. I don’t wonder that the Sudden death of a perfon. So dear to you as his lordship was, should damp all your Spirits, and make the most Sprightly pen that ever
Wfcte, deal in the most Solemn and awful truths. Sicknefs, pain, and death, have, indeed, a natural tendency to check the Sallies of a gay diSpoSition ; to call back the thoughts from the pleaSurable amufements, the vain per-Suits of life, and, for a while, to confine them to the more importont review of our ov/n coii-du(st: they are bitter medicines, but Such as have the most healing virtues—virtues adapted to strengthen, improve, and exalt the mind. To be forced to take a final leave of that form we love; to bid a long adieu to the Spirit, with whom we have daily converfed with pleaSmg intercourse-—is very hard; the SenSible heartstrings must feel the dreadful rent, the diS-
Biit, O The
trefsful mind is torn with anguish. Madam, why do you fay for ever ?
feparation is not furely for ever
Vol. II.	N
Soon you will
fee
t2.66 Felicia to Charlotte.
fee him in a more lovely form. Soon the wdl known mind, cloathed with heavenly radiance, will congratulate your arrival on the blifsful fhore.—Why,do you complain that “ he is now a fenfeleSs: lump of clay ?” Mistake not the obje61: of your affedlion, he is all
life, and a£live Spirit, li^hofe shining virtues
/
that, while yotu enumerate them, feem to add - to your grief, and which, you tell me, will ever renew your Sorrow^ ought to be the pleaSing Source of:joy. Though,you lament his lofs, lament not his exaltation, nor derive your tears from the yery fubjed of his felicity. He is in the land oS-virtue j its native clime. How often
do you repeat the words poor dear man and
/
, dwell on founds expreffive only-of pity ! Pity, Madam.,is not for angris. It is you alone .who is the Sufferer. O could you but be fenSibie ,of his happinefs, extaty and trapSporting rapture would dry up your tears. ■‘Would you wish him back? Would .you have him, to plcaSe you, leave the feats of blifs, and ex-.change the regions,of unfading felicity, for ^a world of.lln, tranfient happinefs, intermingled with pain and trouble? No; this you cannot wish. ‘^But he was happy too foon”—Too foon his pain and Sorrow, and dangerous state ,©f trial, were at an . end. Yqu would have
,pns-
Felicia to Charlotte.
prolonged his miSery. If this be love, what is hatred ? -
O MY dear friend ! recollefl your Self, and, JUl’d with a generous and refined devotion, re-poSe your mind on God; endeavour to loSe the fenSe of your own private apparent lofs, in the delightful contemplation of his tranfeen-dent goodnefs. Repofe yourfelf on his Sovereign will, whole determinations are always Safest, wiSest, best. Let every dewy tear be wiped away, by the happincSs of him you love. Love him still, but be disinterested in your af-fe<stion ; imitate and rejoice in his virtues; and while you dwell with pleafure on his felicity.
• •
anticipate yoyr own
\
Death's but a path that muji be trod. If man would ever pafs to God ’,
A port of calms, a flats of eafe.
From the rough rage of fvoelling feas. Nor can the parted body know.
Nor wants the foul t heje forms of woe. As men who long in prijon dwell.
With lamps that glitter round the cell, Whene'r their faffing years are run. Spring forth to greet the glitfring fun ;
N 2
Such
/
-2^8 Felicia to GHARLCWg;
Such JoySj though Jar trFnfcendlngJenfi^ Have pious fouls at parting hence.
On earthy and in the body plac’d,
A few and evil years they wajle-:
But whi n their chains are cajl aftde.
See the gay fcene unfolding wide.
Clap the glad wing, and idw’r away.
And ^mingle with,the blaze of day.
FARNELt.
With the most tender fympathy and com* iniScration, believe me to be,
(dear Madam,
Your Ladyshjp’s most affedlionate friend,
Feljcia Manly.
. , I III I.	!>y
L E T T E R XLVJ.
Dear Madam,
O W great is the nower of friei
1
With one dash of your pen you involve me in grief, and oblige me, by an irrcSiftible force, to taste the bitternefs of y^ur Sorrovy : with the, next you inSpire me with ten thou-farid fenfations, all of them agreeable, all ^de-
N^thing in ,the world, Madam,
xould
lightful.

LTciA TO Charlotte.
26^
/
% ^ c^uld gstfe’Lucius and me greater pleafure,
than your propofal to honour us with your
company^—^Honour do I fay ? my friendflTip
is offended at the compliment, and would let
you know th^t vanity has no share in our fa>
tisfaistion. We' heartily embrace your offer,
and nothing shall be wanting, on oun part,
to make your reSidence with-us perfe6ily shap-'
py-
But have" yuu, indeed, the refolution fo leave the delights of the gay circle, the glitter* ing Splendor of confpicuous greatnels ? Can you really have the courage to hid adieu to pomp, and all the parade of ostentation and vanity, the dear deligHr of a thoufand fine ladies, and, in their opinion, the Summit of all human happinefs ? Can you forfake the residence of polite flattery and compliment, to dwell with ffmpletruth, and Sincere friendship ? and the important Irurry of aiten^g on the rrlodes and^forras of greatnefs, for perfeef li-Serty, and a life gliding-on in the clear fmootk stream of fural peace ?'
O Madam ! how m’any dclrghtful ideas rush upon my mindi^ upon the profpedt of Such an addition-to ouf little friendly circle ? Your
N 3
enlivening
£70 Felicia to Charlotte.
enlivening wit, tempered with Sober conter?i-plation^ will heighten all the other bleffings I enjoy. Ever Since I have received ycur letter—the most welcome letter l ever received—my imagination has been filled with the most pleafing images, nor can I divert it from
the fiattering Subje(st. with
I have already rambled
you, in idea, along my most favourite walks, and have Sallied out with you to taste
—But whi-
1 beg
the fragrant breath of the morning.— ther does my roving fancy carry me ? pardon, Madam, for thus amufing you with idle viSions; but friendstiip would have it So, and i only obeyed its didlates.
We had, yesterday, a piece of news that struck us with an uncommon furprife. My father, Mr. Manly I mean, received a letter from Holland, which informed him, that his brother, who had parted from him in difgust about twenty vears a2;o, and who had never
j j	O ^
Seen him Since, was dead, and had left him, in money' and efieCts, to the value of forty thousand pounds.
Lucius and 1 happened to be prefent at the receipt of this letter, which immediately opened a very affecting Scene, It was read by
my
lTcia'TO Charlotte. 271
rfVTathCr, with a compoSure of countenance, which* "voulci not even fuffer u? ro guefs at the ctinfents: He had no Sooner run it over, than giving Sophronia-'a' most affe£iionate look, My dear,-Said he, you have b%en a witneSs of rhy extravagance and folly, and it is now in m/ power to let you See that rny repentance is re, and that no change of fortune can
make me relapfe into the wild purSuits of vice. It isonlv Since mv distresses that I have known
J	J
what it is to live: ssnce that time my hap-pineSs has been centered in you, and my family : to make you happy forms the most plea-fing-part of nry lifcj and it will ever do ft>.“ This alone dSferves the name of life. O my dear, your virtues have fixed me yours for ever: j here find that my brother is deadi I thought he had been-long dead. He died a bachelor, and has left me all his effects. Had this happened Some years ago, I had been still, what I now blush to think that X ever v. Here thb' tears stood in

eyes; Ke was ^landing, and my mother was Seated before
hiflj. His looks and' expressions, joinc‘d''lo
her Surprize, had hitherto ke-pt her motion-
lefs ; but she Was now unable to contain her-
/elf and longer ; she Suddenly arofe, snd
«
threw her arms about his neck. 'He erabrac-
N4
ed
272
Felicia to Charlotte.
cd her—he pressed her to his heart,crying, N©, my Sophronia, my vices (hall never more dif-turb the quiet of this dear breaft. She begged him not to mention the name of vice : told him that his affection was- all that was necef-fary to make her happy ; and that was wealth cjiough, and of more importance to her, than all the riches in the world: and that with fuch a hufband, and fuch children, (he had, for a good while past, thought herSelf thg happiest woman in England.
\
At the word children., she cast an affe6fi-onate look at Lucius, Marilla, and me. At lead my heart was willing to rank me among the number of thofe, from whole tendernefs
Ihe derived So much of her fat is faction. But
/
the mcrnent she obferved me, she withdrew her arms, and Seeming to struggle with her tender-neSs, stepped back, and again Seated her Self in her chair.
JV'Iy father, at the Same time, turned to Lu-<:fu.s and Marilla, called them his dear,, his viituous children, and Lucius, in particular, his benefadior and his friend, and added Somc-thiig about gratitude, which Lucius could not fuffet. Dear Sir, Said he, forbear thcSe moving
Felicia to Charlotte.
^73
ing expressions of your goodnefs. For heaven’s fake talk not of gratitude to me. What must I be, if I could hear, with patience, fuch Ian * guage from a father—a tender, and affedlion-ate father. I know you love me; then why do you make ufe of words that shock my love to you, and which both nature and duty forbid my hearing ?
My father made no reply, but Saluted Ma-
riila and me ; and, after giving me Some paiti-cular expressions of affe£Hon, vve all took ciur feats, when giving the letter to Lucius, he de-Sired him to read it, which he had no Sooner done, than the conversation turned upon the particulars.
One who resse£l;S - on the misfortunes of this family, would be apt to conceive, that Such a Sudden and unexpedied change in their Situation, must have occastoned the most extravagant transports of joy; and, it he had only a fuperficial knowledge of human^ natare, that my father’s behaviour; was extremely natural. Marista’s eyes, indeed, fprarkledl with a peculiar pleafure: and i cociu not Iieip expressing a lively fiitisfacirion, from comio"; -ins that Lucius would nov; caln from nif ta-
Ns
thcr
274 Felicia to Charlotte. ,
ther an equivalent to what he had acquired from mine : and thus, being placed more upon a level, as to circumftances, approve my father’s condu6f, to the most avaricious of his friends. The day was Spent with rather more gravity than ufual. But the want of mirth was Supplied by the Sweet complacency of friendly hearts, exulting with exquiSite joy in thehap-pinefs of each other; while the compofure and equanimity of mind, which appeared in thofe most concerned, ftill heightened the opinion I had conceived of their charadlers.
I OUGHT, Madam, to have told you, that the occafion of our viSit at my father’s, was to fee our daughter; the dear fweet creature is very much indiSpoSed, and the dodtor informs us, that her diSorder will ^nd in the Small-pox.
Let me fpeedily know, kow long it will
be, before I shall have the pleaSure of telling you, in perSon, how much I am
your affectionate friend,
Felicia Manly,
%
».
L E T-
‘"S
,L-
♦
Felicia to'Charlotte. 275
/
V E T T E -R - XLVIIv
Dear Madam,'
O W are the Sweets of life interming« Jed with bitterneSs ! My poor dear girl has now left the world, and gone to the regt -one of Spotlefs innocence and peace.* 1 had almost Said, that innocence itfelf is dead, and fled to its native fkies—my little Son'occurs to my thoughts, and I retra^l the expression,' Tloat opening mind, which every day received new ideas, now Seels the full blaze of truth, and, perhaps, would look, with contempt, on the boasted knowledge of mortals. Her pretty laugh, the innocent liSp of her half-form’d Sentences, when, with little Sportive arts, (h« strove to court my Smiles, are ever lost to
Oh, why did I let her take Such hold of my heart ! How vain were my fears^ Itst I stiould not love her as 1 aught ! Cut yet, me-, had I loved her lest—I cannot think

/
of that neither—I would not love her lefs. But she is happy, pretty lovely cherub ! she isshappy ; for ever free from vice, stem care, and pain, and Sorrow.
N6'
27^
Felicia to Charlotti.
She was Seized with the Small pox, as th« phySician had foretold; a painful, and a loath-fome difeafe ! My affe£Hon, and the fenfe of my duty, compelled me to fee her—I Saw her every day. But, O Madam I how was the fenfe of her lofs Swallowed up, by my follici-tude for my Son, who was Seized with the Same diftempcr about twenty-four hours before she died. O my heart I what did I feel! I blamed my rafhnefs—and, as if my duty and affection had been a crime, reproached rayfelf for what deferved no reproach. With a noble fortitude, Lucius endeavoured to cheasf my Spirits, and to raiSe my hopes. He talked of resignation, and of providence; and felt himfeif the reSignation he would inSpire. At firft the talk was hard, but Soon the healing balm ran through my Soul—he ended, and ast within was peace. Every favourable Symptom foon appeared, and with them Soothing hope. In short, he grew past danger—he recovered, and my grief was lost in joy.
I
In my streSent Situation, while I confider together the lofs of a child, that 1 loved almost as much as if nature had bid me love, and the recovery of another, whom maternal affedion had intwined about my heart, my mind enjoys
all
Fflicia to Charlotte
27^
all the united force of Serenity, resignation, and thankfulncfs. I confider my dear infant, as left below for future ufefulnefs, to be the delight of his family, and a blessing to mankind ; Spared, that he may rife to high attainments in virtue, to perpetuate bis name, and th® benevolence that glows in his father’s breast, when his father,, and your Felicia, fhall be here no more; and, in short, as Spared to give him room to obtain thofe more glorious, mor« exquiSite, more refined delights, in the world of blifs, to which the negative goodnefs o£ helplefs infancy can hardly be fuppofed to be entitled.
You fee,. Madam, thati in-this plain, I have left titles, grandeur, and shining posts of honour, to be struggled for by the bufy world. May virtue be the glory of my Son, I am anxious for no other dignities; may the doing good be his employment, his post ©f honour. O call not this humility, it is a pride of the noblest kind. Thefe are the flattering hopes that Swell a mother’s breast, and may they be the prefage of blessings, stretched out to the farthest limits of time; while a Manly, with
all the virtues of my Lucius, shall in fucceflion arife in every age, with calm benevolence
to
27 S

FBLICli^ TO ChaWOTTE.
to meditate on happineSs, and diffuSe its influence all around. O how my heart beats with the great idea I—My child is this moment brought to me: with what elevated tendernefs do I look upon him ! I give him the breast he
longs for, I preSs him to my bofom, and write again.
May theSe lips, that now draw thy Sufle.* nance from me, be ever the fountain of truth, ever pure in their expreflions, and strangers to the wanton’s'kifs : may the joys of innocence, and as much peace as mortals can know, always dwell within this little heart: and when this' heart Ihall melt with foftneSs for Some lovely maid, may fhe return, with purity, thy flame,
and render all thy happineSs compleat! -	'
me ! what nonfenfe I am writing, with my child in my lap! But I attempt, in vain, to lofe Sight of the jubjeil:, and, I hope, the candour of friendlhip will bear with the workino-s
O
of maternal astedlion.
Lucius is now engaged in an employment, that you will doabtlefs imagine to be extremely viSionary. He is studying the history of man, from his most early infancy. And as his Son
is much too young to exprefs his ideas in any
other
Blest
Felicia to Charlotte.
279
ether way, but by the traces of his countenance, and by inarticulate founds, he examines thefe with a particular attention, in or*
i
der to difcover the strength of his perceptions, and the progrefs of his ideas. This employment is extremely Suitable to his philoSophic turn of mind. T hough I must confefs, that it Sometimes makes me laugh, to fee the assiduous care with which he endeavours to trace the impressions made on the little features of a face, which nature has fcarcely finished, but which, however, fussiciently defcribe wonder, pleafure, and pain. From this study Lucius propofes to derive the greatest advantages: he will have an early knowledge of a heart, in the happinefs of which he is most nearly concerned ; and by this difcover the degrees and bent of the passions, the strength of the moral taste, and determine, with the greatest evidence, this important truth, whether there are any feeds of vice implanted in the heart*. A docstrine contended for by many learned and
good men, with as much heat and zeal, as if
vice
* The reader may find a ooncife and excellent liiltory of the underftanding, and the passions, in the Preceptor, Vol. If. Book i. Sc(5t. r. A performance that the editor fears to commend, left he feouU injure u byjtiu praife.
2.So
Felicia to Charlotte;
vice was the highest gloryy and-perfedioii^or human nature.
So affiduous is he already in this talk, that he has even interfered in my choiee of a nur-Sery-maid, and prevailed upon me to make this office worth the attendance of a perfon of Solidity and understanding, one of a tolerable education, and- of a Sober reputable family. And this was the-more necessary, as she is o-bliged to deviate from the common pravSlice, and to regulate her actions by his, or my di* reflions, in the minutest particulars. He is Such a friend to nature, that he will not fuster her to be constrained j the body must not be bound up with rollers, nor Smothered with the heat of flannel, be uScd with a mistaken ddicacy, and too clofely preServed from the rnency of the weather. But I must not to particulars. Only this I shall lay, he is So unfeshionably polite, as to conSider the mother’s Stickling her own child, as one of the ihdifpenSible obligations of nature ; as a duty that can never be transferred to another, except in a cafe of the utmost necessity : and, indeed, had I been as averfe to con-viftion upon this head, as the gay fine lady at court, I must have either reaouiKtd all prg-
tenSicns
in'dr:
in

Felicia to Charlotte. 28r
tenfions to reafon, or Suffered myfelf to owre the force of his arguments.
j
t
But his first study is to cultivate the understanding, or, as^Mr. Thompfon expresses it,
4
T* teach the young idea how to Jhooty
the noblest employment that can excrcife the
attention of a reafonable being ! an employment that, however, must, at preSent, be confined within a narrow compaSs j Since, for fome time, it can only conSist in preserving the confufed undistinguishing capacity of infancy from receiving bad impressions : and here the care ought, in his opinion, to begin with life itfelf. The tender brain must not be disturbed, nor the mind, in its first exertions, be started by loud or Su,'den noiSes, This care
increafcs in proportion as the mind enlarges; ajid as it still continues capable ofSrepeiving impressions from objedts of terror, iheffe must still be industrioussy excluded. About a month ago, when we were at my father’s, Lucius was very much rustled at finding his daughter afraid of the dark. He was certain that, pardon the impropriety of the expression ! an 6bje<st that had So frequently occurred, and which must
have


28.

TICIA TO ChARBOTTE.
■fiiii to the child, could never
n ac!
!U !j
ot its mind been taught'
o
iie unnatural and terrify-
have be excite Su^: to connedl
ing Ideas- Thhi was, in the esteem of Lucius,
an affair of'great importance : he Searched into the cauSe, and found that one of the Servants had frightened the pretty creature, with * threats of Tom Datk, and other words, which ? to children are of direful Sound, Would you believe it. Madam ? for this cauSe alone, he ' prevailed on his mother to turn away the poor ' girl. I confeSs that I was So struck with this, that I could not forbear telling hlm> that thought he behaved in a-very arbitrary and * cruel manner: when, in justification of his • condudl, he ran to his lister’s cloSet, fetched a -
volume of ihc	and Tead, -before all-
the Servants, a performance on that very fub-jedl, that struck me dumb; However, he had-> no objedtion to my providing for the girl, till *' I could get her another place: and,' in return * for this civility, she has had the ingratitude, and the impudence,to raife a report,that Lucius had this child by me, before our marriage. But, in the country, no vice is indulg’d ‘ with shell a keen relish as Hander.
US-
. ri. . t
Felicia to Charlotte.
28^2
Lucius has been very careful in his remarks on the Several ways, by which the mind of infancy is industrioufly impreffed with the most hateful extremes of all the paffions'% felfiihnefs, pride, revenge, infolence, avarice, cruelty, and in (hort all the vices which Spring up in after life; when the mind is ruined, without deSign, and the heart in Sport taught to be vicious before the tongue can Speak, and all the tender fenfibilities of humanity are utterly perverted. Against thefe methods of corruption he propofes to be ever on his guard,
f
becaufe traces So early made are Seldom perfectly erafed : and, indeed, this kind of treatment ought more to be avoided, as it is infinitely more fatal in its confequences, than all the distempers that can affeCl the bodily health.
This, Madam, though of prodigious importance, is only a negative kind of education.
But, to implant a love of truth, and a thirst after knowledge, to teach the young understanding to exert its powers; to refine, to elevate,
to *
* See fome hints of thefe methods of corruption in the note to p. 40 and 41, Vol. I. which the reader may eafily enlarge, from his own oblervations en the conduct of parents, nurfes, &c»
284 Felicia to CharlottSo
^ ■> .
to enlarge the' ideas, and to lead the eager
^	i * ' ''
admiring	by the fweet allurements of'
*4	^	^
pleasure, tOi^ste highest attainments in virtue, to rc^Htude of rriannersj to rejoice early in his immortality, and to anticipate the divine delights of heaven, by a disinterested love for' mankind j a love widely extended, and ever prompting to atsts of beneficence and diffufive goodneSs: this is an employment as noble, as the attainment is godlike^ and to this does Lucius already raife his ideas j this he ccn-fidcrs as the previous study, .the earlist exercife of childhood. He propoSes to dteSs up morality, and the fublimest truths of natural religion,-in the eafy language.of infancy, and by degrees to pour in more and more light as the"
understanding enlarges, and the mind grows-more and more capacious; and by encouraging the restlefs curiofity natural to children,-. give incestant employment for the rational faculties. He considers Englisti,^. as the most important of all the languages to an- Englifh-man. His child, he fays, shall- study all its ^ beauties, learn to read with a grace, and if ' ^ollible to write with - elegance, to adapt his-
lan-'-
* Something-of’ this* kind is already attempteif' {in-the Chriftmas Box,,two fmall volumes printed: for the ttfe ofchildrca, --


'Fbltcia t,o Charlotte.' 2^85
language to his Sentiments, and to expreSs his thoughts with eaSe and fluency ; to form his style, and to fettle his judgment, dsy a care-fulattention to the works of the most celebrated Englifli authors j be taught to point out their beauties, to comment on the noble Sentiment, to relish, even to rapture, the tender beauties of Spencer, the lightning of Shakelpeare, .and the shining glory of'Milton.
The languages he confiders only as the key to further knowledge, and not knowledge it-felf: thefe, even in the midst of study, he would render fubfervient to his grand dcfign, and make the dry talk of words delightful, by a continual acquisition of agreeable fenfations, and improved ideas. He would pleafe himfelf with hearing the v#ke oSunprejudiced nature, a mind unbiassed with the forms of thinking which prevail amongst mankind, decide in what confists the merit of Such and Such an a£lion; he would hear the tongue of innocence explain the glory or infamy of an Alexander, a Trajan, eraDomitian; he would cherish.and fix the just Sentiment, would improve the random thought, and, where she judgment failed, would Set it right. How de*
SightCulmust shis exercife of she faculties be to
a
Felicia to Charlotte.'
a child ! To be led by its own refle<stioiis to a constant Series of new ideas—how manly, how rational the entertainment! It must infpire the mind with a continual Spring of Self-complacency, and make the most rugged steps to learning pleaSaht. Lucjus would endeavour to
obtain the affistance of Some decay’d gentleman, adorned, at once, with piety, good nature, learning, a knowledge of mankind, and ^ free and genteel addrefs, A perSon of this ch^ra^ler must he the tutor of his Son, and share with him in the important talk; he must live in the family, and in all refpedls be treated like a gentleman and a friend. Learning will thus be made a high entertainment, especially as it will be varied, at proper intervals, by the history and constitution of our own country. Under their condiKst, the af-piring youth must improve in knowledge and understanding, must be introduced early into life, emboldened, encouraged to Speak, and to "bear a part in the most polite conversation, at an age when learning generally conSists in mere Sounds, and pleaSure in vanity and folly: and, while a youth, we shall have the rational delight of feeing our child a man, a friend, a companion.
I AM
.DFLIbTA TO CHARtOTTE.'
* • ‘ '
I AM prepared to hear you laugh at me, and
(€xpreS^ your furprife, that, not
' the great unce. taintyof life, I can thus launch iinto futurity j talk of embelishing a mind yet .incapable of fixed ideas, and from an infant of two months old, by the strength of imagina-t tion, draw a line paiallel to that of time, and r reckon our duration by that of the Sun and ,moon. But blame me as much as you pleafe, I Some of the Sweetest comforts of life depend on expe^lation; and was it not for hope, which recreates the ,mir^ with distant prof-, pe£ls of pleafure, our very enjoyments would be apt to Batten, and life itfelf grow dull, and infipid. But itis not only a remedv, for the vapours, and the most effectual cure for the rest-Icfs mind; it is a cordial comfort to the dif-
treffed, and'joy to. the. miserable.
#
Education, Madam, is a daily topic of diScourfe, a Subje<st to us the most interesting.; can my friend then think it impertinent ? But jf it appear fo now, as you will Soon be a mother, you will Soon be convinced of its importance. Lucius is now fo fond of it, that he talks of little elfe; he is continually quoting
;to me the best authors on the fubje^, and from theSe I. have colktsted my ideas, which.

>
t-
SiS
28S Felicia to Charlotte.'
»
as they are ever prefent to my mind, I should have found Some difficulty to fupprefs.
-Hasten, dear Mndara, by your prefence, 4he happinefs of
your affe<stionate
Felicia Manly.

LETTER XLVIir.
tTOW tedious is time, when his wings 1- are loaded with expedlation ? My last, 1 Imagined, would have concluded our epistolary correspondence, at least for fomc years. 1 propoied to throw astde my pen, to hid an eternal adieu to tedious narrations, high st^hts, rapturous nonSenfe, and long letters; but the very morning in which we were preparing to fet out to meet you, with an alacrity infpired by our joy, to be disappointed with a fortnight’s delay, what a damp did it give to my Spirits ! I could hardly meet with a greater disappointment. Let me have no more of your letters, Madam., I befeech you. A Sort-ight! fifteen days!—indeed it Is quite into-
Wf
lerable*
Felicia
Charlotte.
289
We have had a very diverting account from my lifter Marilla, of a most Singular courtftiip. My wife couSin, it Seems, has had the misfortune to fall defperately in love with that engaging lady. The mighty wound was given at our houfe; but he had not there the power to make it known : he waited.Dr a more favourable opportunity, which he had the penetration to forefee might Soon arri\'e: and, therefore, recommending himfelf as the beft coachman in the yniverfe, he earneftly begged, that she would do him the honour, to luffer him to drive her home in her chaife. She readily consented to the propoSal, and he, perhaps, drawing a favourable concluSion from her eaSy compliance, was all life and thank-fulneSs.
They accordingly mounted, and had drove
but a Small distance from the houTe, when
%
his natural felf conceit proving too strong for his bashfulnefs, he could not refift.the prefent moment, and, accordingly, began with praif-ing himfelf; a method of courtSnip, though a little uncominon, not altogether irrational: for as a perfon, dcSirous to exchange a fony piec of goods for a better, should prudently coniine all his oratory to one Side, fo he imagined,
Vol. H.	O	that
e
g^o Felicia to Charlotte.
that be ought to give her a high opinion of his own merit, and not, by encreaSing her vanity, by a misapplied flattery, make the disproportion greater than it really was. In conSequence of this refined Sophistry, and with the aflift-ance of the phrafe, though Ifay it that Jhould not 'fay it^ which he introduced, at proper intervals, to (hew his modesty, he began a long detail of his ufeful travels; and very gallantly concluded with telling her, that though he had conversed with, and even had the honour to enjoy the good graces of the finest ladies in France and Italy, he was never made a captive to the little divinity till now.
Marilla, who had been held a good while in fufpcnfc, could not help being Surprized at this declaration, which, however, (he was So cruel as to turn into ridicule. The
i
gaity of her reply difconcerted him for Some moments: but recovering himSelf he aiiSwercd very gravely, that he loved, and would for ever love her ; and that, as it was not in her power t® prevent it, she ought to think of Some way of making him happy. Since that would
be the ready way to make herfelf So. And that she could never have a better hushand ; fince he would d® all in his power to Serve her.
His
Felicia TO Charlotte. 291
His thoughts were So taken up with this an-fwer, that, quite forgetful of his office, he drove against a tree, which unluckily grew by the fide of the road, when the wheel breaking, poor Marilla was thrown in the dirt, while the Squire, giving a Spring, flounced into an adjacent ditch, which happened to be full of water. Marilla, who had not received the least hurt, was prcfently on her feet, extending her hand to the relief of the poor dripping fquire, which by his touch was as defiled as
his own. She found him shaking his ears, and, with a most distrefsful countenance, attempting to clamber up the bank. His hat and wig floated on the stream, his face was as much befmeared as his cloaths, and his whole figure fuch as would have excited laughter in
O	U
any other perfon but herfelf j but to her it was only an objedl of pity.
}
The Servants, who were riding at Some dif-tance, no Sooner beheld his miferablc plight, than they made up to his affistance, and presently Set him on dry land. Having recovered his hat and wig, he began, with great confu-Sion, to make his apology, which she interrupted, by defiring him only to mind his own health, to take one of the horSes, and to ride
O 2	wi th

2^2 Felicia to Charlotte.
with all the haste he could to her father’s, which was then not above half a mile distant, and, ordering her Servants to bring home the chaife, promifcd to follow him on foot. My couSin readily obeyed, and Marilla, who walks much better than most ladies about St. James’s, was not very long after him. She entered the houfe unperceived, and having washed herfelf, and changed her cloaths, went down to the parlour, where she found her lover Sitting, with my father, by a good fire : he had been accommodated with a large dram, as a preservative from the effects of the cold, and care being taken to See him cleaned, and with fresh apparel put in a more comfortable plight, he w'as now in a proper Situation to receive her.
W AS it postible for my poor coufin to begin his amour, under more unlucky auSpices! to be thus fouSed, and, falling from his afpir-ing hope, to become an objedl worthy of de-lifion, rather than pity. What a painful hd-miliation ! But, though I lament his fate, he had still comforts, which the dissident and tender lover could never, on the like occafion, have experienced ; a hidden reSeive of vanity
now
FrLiciA TO Charlotte.
^93
now stood his friend, and enabled him to bear up manfully under his difgrace.
'l' A
Marilla had no Sooner opened the door than rny coufin, who, having recolle£Ied, as he himfelf has stnce confeffed, the obliging manner with which She had endeavoured to
r
help him out of the ditch, the little care she took of herfelf, and her great concern foi him, had not the least doubt but that she was per-fe£tly in love with him, flew to her with open arms, gave her a rude kifs, and, Seizing hold of her hand, pulled her towards my father, who, as well as Marilla, was all amazement. My couSin defired his fair one not to be So enj adding, that as he loved her, and she loved him, their parents conSent was all tint was necestary to their marriage ; and then addreS-fmg himfelf to my father, cried, with the fame vivacity, Egad, Sir, you know my fortune, lookee, and fo forth, and I hope you have no objeilion to my having the honour of being votre pdit-fls. The honour of being my grandfon ! cry’d my father, laughing; how is that ? One language at a time, Sir, I btfeech
you. I don’t understand--------He was here
interrupted by Marilla, who, recovereing the jufe of her tongue, cry’d out. What do you
mean,
O3
m j.'
294 Felicia to Charlotte.
mean. Sir, let go my hand—I can’t comprehend what you would be at. I love you ! You I----What infoJence ! And now, exert-
ing all her strength, {he gained her liberty, and instantly flung out of the room.
As Soon as she was gone, my father told him, very frankly, that he could not poffibly account for this rude behaviour; and that, when he came to his houfe in Such a deplorable condition, he did not think it was with deSign to affront his daughter, which, whatever were his motives, he would not Suffer. My couSin affured him, with many oaths, that he was in earnest, and that he only Intended to 2ssc his confent to marry his daughter, for that he had convincing proofs that she loved him. My father anfwered, that he could never believe it; but that, if it was true, he had no objecst on to his family and fortune ; and therefore, infilled upon knowing, what reafon he had to believe that she had an af-fcffion for him. My coufln replied, with a confident laugh, that he knew well enough how to judge; and that a lady might tell she loved, without making ufe of words ; that if my father knew all, he would be of his mind; and that after what had pasted, she ought not
to
Felicia to Ci#tRL©TTE. 295
to have given herSelf Such airs j but it was all one, he could be as indifferent as her. Manila now returned, and interrupted a conversation that was growing very warm on my father’s Side.
*v
As she entered the room her young Spark, reSolving to humble her, put on a look of in-fenfibility, and walked by her with a careleft, affedted, and Self-Satisfied air ; but Seeming not to observe it, she Seated herSelf cloSe by her father, and in a calm and complaiSant manner
defired him to fit down. He obey’d with a
#
Smile, when the old gentleman repeated his command to explain, before his daughter, what he meant by his infinuations. But he
did not chooSe to hear him j and leaning his
elbow on his knee, and staring up in Marilla’s face, he ashed her which of thoSc pretty hands it was that he had the misfortune to daub, when she was fo kind as to strive to help him out of the ditch. He then propofed that she should hold it out to him, that he might kiSs it; called her a dear Sweet fo»d fool. Swore she could not help it; she was frighted for him, and off her guard, or elSe it would have been imprudent to yield fo foon ; that feme men would like her the worfe for it, but that he
O4
thou ght
\
Felicia to Charlotte.
thought it a certain fign that she would make a good wife, Since, though he was in fault, she took'more care of him than herSelf.
Marilla, guessing the grounds of his behaviour, heard this ariogant Speech, without once attempting to interrupt him : but he had BO Sooner concluded, than giving him a contemptuous look, I am Sorry, Sir, Said she, that you should put Such a falSe conftrudlion upon iny humanity. I thought your life, or, at least, your health in danger; Ifollowedthe first dictates of pitv, and, instead of diverting myfelf with your misfortunes, endeavoured all I was able to remove them, and hurried you hither, wii-re ] knew you could be Supplied with ne-teii.'iriei. idi you received them from home, but Such i> the return that the least of kindneSa ateets with, from narrow and Selfish minds. Yet, 1 aSSarc you. Sir, I am n«t Sorry for the little 1 have done, with an intent to
ferve you ; it Spreads no blush on my cheek, it Rives a ) uaeauneSs to m, heart. 1 here is
not a creature living, that I would not have Served with equal tendernefs. But how could your vanity Suggest Such a motive for my endeavouring, Without any hurt to myfelf, to Serve the broth;r of Amelia, and a near re-
Jatiuss
Felicia to Charlotte.
lation to my Sifter Felicia ? What a wretched heart mult you have, while you can form no idea of generoSity, humanity, or compaffion, without the allay of a particular afledtion ! I wilh you well, I confeSs, and more fo, as the iiappinefs of a worthy family is, in fome degree, connected with yours ; but, at the fame time, I must be So plain as to fell you that I neither do, nor ever can love you. Your vices ar^ an unfurmountable obftacle. Your travels, which miiiht have been of fervice to a man of
o
fenfe and virtue, only Serve to difgrace you, and difplay your ignorance and folly. Forgive me Sir, I mean not to reflect on any involuntary imperfeistion ; were you as kind to yourfelf as nature has been, you would be much more tolerable. But your debauchery^ your boasted lew'dnefs, and that impious customfof Swearing,
the unmannerly vice of a bully,'must for ever
exclude you from she
Ion of ashy woman.
who has fenfe, virtue, or true delicacy. Indeed, Sir, if you would be happy here, you
nyist endeavour, at least, to copy your coufin Manly, and, like him, afpire to be happy hereafter. He, I dare fay, enjoys more true delight from .the restedtions of his own mind,
O	^
/ in one day, than you, with your boasted ■Swing of pleafurc, in the compafs of a year
O 5	Ay ,

298
Felicia to Charlotte.

Ay, then in the compafs of an eternity, cried my father, with an eagernefs which could arife from nothing but a convidlion founded on experience: I know it, Sir, 1 feel it every day.
I BELIEVE, Madam, you will think Ma» rilla’s reproof much milder than my coufm’s infoience deferved : (he had, indeed, a favourable opportunity to humble his pride, and, by opening his eyes to his own follies, to lay an obligation on his whole family: to this point then she generoufly diredled her views. Indeed, had she not treated him with fuch forcible Severity, all she could fay would have been ufrlefs. His mind is fo extremely callous, that fine raillery, though ever fo sharp, would not have hurt him.
t
The youth, struck with the eafe of a conquest which he fancied he had too foon obtained, began already to think of my Sister with indifference. His elbow was still on his knee, and his eyes, with the utmost confidence, fixed on hers : but she had hardly uttered three or four fentences, when farprife, vexation, and disappointment, appeared by turns on the
his unmeaning face, that was
not
s
i
Felicia to Charlotte
2g,
not at all formed to exprefs his ideas; and yet theSe were wrought up in So strong a manner, as to give deformity to every feature; and at last, as if blasted by the indignant look of virtue, he fighed, hung down his head, and fat abashed and confounded.
I
THE bare idea of lofing, for ever, what he, just before, was ready to detpife, made him, almost distra^td. H is humility was now no lefs extravagant then his vanity before ; it funk even into meannefs, and the most abjedl: fub-miffions; he rofe, walked about the room, fat down again, wept, began to fwear, and stopped short before the execration was finished, and, at last, after the Solemnest protestations, that he never loved her a hundredth part fo well, as he did that moment, told her that he wished from the bottom of his heart, that she had not a farthing in the world, or (to ufc his own elegant plirafe) a fmock t@ her badk, that he might let her fee his finccrity.
Marilla fays, that it was impossible for
her to avoid fmiling, and instantly thanking him
for his good wishes. As to my father, he burst
into laughter: a fine fpeech truly ! faid he j a
most generous lover ! fo you would have her
0 6	be

300 Felicia to Charlotte.
be a beggar, that you might, force her to "be siiiferasle your own way. We are all greatly obliged to you. My couSm endeavoured to vindlGate himfelf, and after faying and unfaying, affirming and retra£ting, at last, with tnuch heSituation ?nd stammering, he made
Shift to declare, that he only meant to fay, that lie Ihoul'd be glad of an opportunity to convince tier how very much he loved her.
But, Madam, Itryyonr patience too much, well as tire myfelf, in thus dwelling on circumstances that you may think beneath your aiotice. I stvall only fay, therefore, that by the time his Servant had returned, with linen and other cloaths from my aunt’s, he began to be inore reconcil :d to his fate, and, after having dressed himfelf afr-esti, took his leave, with a tolerable grace-. Not all the reafoning in the world, could have made him fo fenfible ef his Solly, as this difappointment has done. Love Seems to have refined his mind, and to have tven a large fcopc to his understanding. He shuns his old companions, and, for the prcfefit, •St least, has thrown off his favourite vices. It “has taught him the ufe of refledlion; and in short, if this reformation continues, we may
laavc 'the happinefs to See him have a just claim
Felicia to Charlotte
to that refpeist and complacency, which is ever due to the charaffer of an -honest man : a title the most Significant, it carries in itfelfthe idea of intrinSic worth and excellence.
After all, a union between my coustn and Marilla would be extreamly agreeable to me, could I be but once convinced of the stneerity of hts reformation j stnee it would not only^ive
a clofer cement to the two families, but might
• •
happily confirm that virtue, which has yet
Scarcely taken root.-—But why do I mention this ? it is a thing altogether impradticable: life will not fuffer me to (peak of it: his want of fenfe is alone in her esteem an unfurmount-able obstacle. The deficiency, Ihe fays, is on the wrong fide ; and she could never have a , iincerc esteem for a hushand, who was acknowledged by all her acquaintance to be greatly her inferior. And, indeed, I must confefs that 1 think her in the right.
Lucius and I propoSe to meet you at Lei-^cester. I Sincerely wish you a Safe and agree-
.dsle journey, and am, as you will ever find
tne.


302 Felicia to Charlotte.
,jne, when our friendship will be Supported by 9 nearer intercourse.
Your Ladyship’s
faithful friend. Feljcia Manly,
D
LETTER XLIX. and laft.
From Charlotte to Lady Harriot**^. Dear Madam,
ID not I tell )iou, that I would not write till I could fend you word how I liked ray fituation ? Why then should you complain that I have kept my word ? I am in a new wodd', and three months is Surely time little enough to form a judgment, where every thing I- fee, and every thing I hear is as great a novelty, as if I had been transported to Some unknown region. Conceive, if you can, how Surprising it naust be to me, who never beheld any thing but the Splendors, or, as I now chufe to call them, the tedious ceremonies of
^ court, to meet with artleS$ Simplicity and
plain

Fblicia to Chahlotte.
303
plain drelTed truth, instead of polite flattery and high strained compliment; and, in the room of every gaudy folly, to behold pure nature and white-robed innocence, and felicity ariling from a striist conformity to their dictates.—But, I believe, Madam, a particular accoitnt of my reception, and manner of life, will not be difagreeable. To begin then.
As I intended to furprife them, by arriving an hour or two Sooner than they expe<stcd, I was not above five miles from the end of my journey, when I was met by Mr. Manly and my friend. We had like to have pasted by each other, but Felicia happily obferving the coronets on my chariot, called me by my name. I gave them a look: their door stew open, and both Lucius and she were at mine, before any of our fellows had timeVo diSmount. I was Surprised, I confefs, at this piece of indecorum: O the dear hoyden! cry’d I to myfelf, and the Servants stared as if they were ashamed of their infignificany. T he eyes of both my friends Sparkled with pleaSure, their rapidity and ea-gernefs. Soothed my friendship, while my heart stuttered and Said, To follow nature is the height of good breeding. One of my Servants prefemly opened the door of the chariot, when
I
304 Feligia TO Charlotte,
I could>do no lefs than step out to embrace them. But I shall take no notice of the endearing compliments that pasted between us, Felicia’s cheeks were moistened with a tender testimony of her joy j I was compelled, by friendship, to leave my woman to ride alone, and to give them my company in their own coach, in which, in a kind of triumph, they
carried me to the end of our journey.
■ ' \ ^ '
.	*	I
We Soon^arrived at thehouSe, a large plain edifice. Situated in the midst of an earthly pa-radiSe, where I found an entertainment rather hoSpitable and friendly, than profufe and magnificent. 1 was welcomed with the most obli-ging testimonies of joy, and as they concluded, that I must be weary with my journey, I was early conducted to my apartment, the most Sumptuous of any in the whole building, and though there is nothing like grandeur in the furniture, there is a neatneSs and elegance that at first engaged my attention : every thing is like the owner’s mind, plain and beautiful. Such was the idea Felicia had given of me to her few fele£t friends, that, from the first mo-ment, wherever I appeared I Seemed to infpire joy.; their hearts were as open as their houses to receive me, and all of them adually
jstr i ve
Felicia to Charlotte 305
strive who most Ihall contribute to make my
reSidence in this delightful place as agreeable as
possible. But after all, you can’t imagine.
Madam, what a rustic creature this Felicia is
grown; why, she^ is Such a walker, I can’t
keep pace with her half the length of a fmali
field. I laugh at her activity, and mimic her
country stride ; while she, with the greatest
good humour, ridicules my mincing step, and
endeavours to put me out of conceit with Some
little peculiarities, which she calls affe6latIon.
Mr. Manly has, indeed, every perfection that
my lovely friend has attributed to him : believe
me, he has nothing of the fwain, but fimplici-
ty, and an ardefs heart; nothing of the courtier, but the unaffCted eafe and freedom of his
t
behaviour : and Such an esteem I have already entertained for him, shat I had ratheT hear him talk, than listen to the compliments of the finest beau in Christendom. Nay more, I love him ; love him as I should my guardian angel, were I permitted to fee his perfon, and hear his heavenly admonitions. If it should pleafe the director of all events to fufferme to be Safely delivered of a boy, where shall i find a tutor like him ? I would not, for the world, deny him the happineSs of being brought up with Mi Son. Should I livp to See the image of my
dear
2o6 Felicia to Chak.lotts.
f	*
X
dear deceaSed lord, groVing up under his ^ what % Sweet addhion would ic give to mv' reveries ? with what plcafmg Sympathy should Felicia and I behold the two prattling infants, daddling before us, through the garden, or the fields, while we, with hearts filled to the brim with maternal love, and Social friendship, walk flowly after, talking of refined delights, and raifing our fouls on the wings of heavenly affection and gratitude. The little cherubim, when lying on Felicia’s lap, puts me in mind of the Venus and infant Cupid, I have fo often admired in ray uncle’s clofet,
I need not tell you that he is a lovely boy, when I make ufe of this comparison; a comparr-
fon that would wrong him, if I did not add, that
it only holds good while he* fleeps; for when
awake his bright blue eyes destroy the refem-
blance.
The first vifit I paid was to Marilla, who is the lame engaging creature that Felicia has always defcribed her: she has a good deal of learning, a great deal of fine fenfe, and a vast deal of that tender humanity, that unlimited goodnefs of heart, which, uncircumferibed by the ties of blood, or the diftinffions of religion, grafps at the happinefs of every human
creature. In this she rcfembles Lucius, to
whom
V
I

Felicia to Charlotte. 307
whom she is nearer allied by a kindred of foul than by all the ties of nature. He confiders man as man, and himfelf as a citizen of the world I and they both regard the whole urii-verSe, however varied by the complexion of different regions, however distinguished by religions, customs, and manners, as having a reciprocal claim to benevolence, and the kindest a£ls of humanity. In this vistt to Mr. Manly’s, I was entertained with the fame af-fe<stion as if I too had been married into the family: Marilla received me with open arms, and the good lady, her mamma, expressed almost as much tenderneis for me, as for Felicia, or her own daughter j while my friend. Smiling at their caresses. Seemed to Set a higher value on them, than on thoSe bestowed on hcrfelst What a difference is there, Madam, between this frank behaviour, this unreferved feeedom of mind, and all the low a£ls of diSguife, the empty formalities, the modes and forms of greatnefs! The openneSs of their countenances made it impossible for me to be under the least: restraint. In an hour’s time, I was as free and intimate with every one of them as Felicia hcrfclf; I told them I knew all their affairs, and enquired of Marilla, whether she was yet inclined to admit the addresses of Felicia’s
coussn.
/
s
3o8 Filicia to Charlotts.
coussn. She reddened a iittie; but imniedi" ^tely replied, that was it possible for her to be in love with a vicious man, let his perfon and behaviour be ever So engaging, S:ie would never admit his addresses; Since this would be to hazard both prefent and eternal happiness; that, in this caSe, it would be her duty to do violence to her heart, and, by a glorious effort, endeavour-to conquer herfelf: how then could she ever think of being So nearly united to a man, whom, though she would not defpife, she could never love!
But, Said Mr. Manly with a fmile, my daughter has another motive to refufe hinoi,
which, notwithstanding the extraordinary
\
frankneSs of her temper, she has had the art to conceal. A young clergyman, nearly related to Mr, Stevens, is lately returned into this part of the country, where he has obtained a Small living : but, though his circumssan-Oes are but very indifferent, he has every other qualification that can recommend him to my daughter. He was last week accidentally in her company; and I am informed that she has made a conquest, which she cannot but approve ; I had this information from Felicia’s
merit
covery,
A
Felicia t-o Ch'ARlo’tt'e
9
^	^ - s*
i	■	‘ - V .
covcry, and Says, that though the clergyman deSpairs of ever obtaining her, and has declared that he shall never have the preSumptioh’ to attempt it, yetv in his opinion, I ought to watch her clofe, left she should be prevailed upon to throw hcrfelf away.	f
i
During this Speech, Marilla had a con-ftraint and aukwardnefs in her air, which shewed her at a loSs how to behave ; but she was Soon relieved by Felicia, who, after ex-preffing Some indignation againft her couSin, afked if the gentleman was not educated at Cambridge. Mr. Manly anSwered, that he heard So. On which she told him, that she had once the honour of his company with Mr, Stevens, Lucius, her aunt, and Amelia, in a vifit they paid at my f Lord M***^’s ; that
4
she was greatly pleafed with his conversation, and believed him to be a gentleman of uncommon merit. It was east to See, that Marilla did not hear this encomium with indifference, though she had the preSence of mind instantly t€ change the fubjedl.
Marilla,
t See Letter viii.
/
310 Felicia to CHARLOTTfiC
Marilla, who had yet, as (he told us afterwards, no more than a high opinion of the merit of this reverend gentleman, an esteem, which rather encreaSed than disturbed the tran» quility of her mind, had Soon a very favourable opportunity to fee if it was worthily placed. She had no difficulties to encounter with ; her father, and every one of the family were devoted to her happincSs. Mr. Manly, difgusted with the follies of life, rejoiced at the profpe^ of difpostng of his daughter, to a perfon of in-trinstc worth ; he only wanted to know, if his information was well founded, and this he ea-fily accomplistied. He invited Mr. Stevens and the clergyman to dine with him, and blot-ing out the name of the young cfquire, shewed them the letter as a mean attempt to injure them in his esteem. The modest clergyman, struck with confuston, blushed, trembled, and confessed the truth ; at the fame time assuring him, with many protestations, that, though it W'as true he loved Marilla, he never had the prefumption to aSpire to the least hope; and that, whatever had been the confequerice, he had refolved never to mention it to her. But Mr. Manly interrupted him ; by letting him know that he was not difpleafed, that he had a
very great esteem for him, and though his
daughter’s
Eeltcia to ■Charlotte. 31 x
daughter’s fortune would be now very considerable, the disproportion could not be great, fince he did not doubt, if virtue, piety, and good fenfe would do, but that in time he would wear thg mitre, ancHhat, if he could gain his daughter’s affe^ion, he would be no obstacle to their union.
You must not expe£t. Madam, that I should heie describe his rapture; or tell the wiSe and filly things he Said, and did. He was, in a moment, railed from dcSpair, almost to the poffeffion of his highest wishes: if then he did not behave at this instant like a madman, or a fool, I should have no opinion either of his love, or his wiSdom. However, he was introduced to Marillaj who received him with the deference due to his merit: he faw her every day, and she every day becoming more fenSible of his value, in about fix weeks time they were married.	,
THE young fquire, though he had no great reafon to hope; could not bear to lofe the pof-fibility of obtaining her, much leSs to fee her in the postelfion of another; and, therefore, as if his reformation had been only a pretence, threw it afide, as being now of no Service to
him.
312 Felicia to Charlotte;
. ♦	i	’ 4 *	*
• * *
/*
him. He curfed her and himSelf, stormed like 4 madman, Swore to ab andon himfelf to every vice, went out, and got So drunk, that he was obliged to be carried home, and the next day was Seized with a fever, from which he recovered with difficuitv. The idea of the immediate approach of death, filled his mind with horrors hot to be exprested. Dreadful, indeed, were the conflifls of his defpair, but theSe were at last removed, by prayer and penitential tears : and, indeed, this ficknefs Seems to have produced a real reformation. He is blit-just recovered, and may now live, and yet be no difgrace to his family ; he may have a just claim to the complacency of his friends, and may arife as high as his capacity will Suffer him, to the degree of an honest hufband, perhaps, a plodding country ’Squire, and a well- -
meaning justice of the quorum.
. . • ^
c
My V'hole attention is to contribute, by an eaSy chearfulneSs and good humour, to the fatisfarstion of a narrow circle of friends, and to furnish fresh matter for their amufemenc.
It is their talk to improve, mine only to divert. Marilla, who has not yet retired to her new habitation, graces our little (ociety more frequently than before her marriage^ and with her
comes
Felicia to Charlotte* 31J
comes the agreeable youth, who has the honour of her nearest friendship. I want words to exprefs the height of their felicity; hej.as well as Lucius and Felicia, is cohfidered by Mr. and Mrs. Manly, as the pride of their little family ; as their happinefs and glory. I hardly ever knew a man of finer fenfe, or more generous fentiments; I could not have imagined, that a perfbu could be found, Sq nearlyTefemblihg Luciusi . .;	v :
It is now. Madam, that I begin to live,
♦ ■	*
to know myfelf, and to know the human mind, which in this place, appears stripped
of every difguife. True felicity dwells here; here is peace and joy. I taste the delight of the most Sprightly and improving conversation, I read, 1 give a full Scope to my re-Jle£fions ; andsthefe employriiente alternately fill up my time, I Sometimes venture tQ walk out alone, and, wrapt in Sober contemplation, trace the hidden recestes of my own heart.	^ ’
Would you believe it r I am grown a very enthufiast. I faij. In raptures at the lov-ly face of nature. Andl^ere you to fee me, when I walk in the garden, or in the adjacent fields j or when> to enlarge the land-
Vpl, IL	P	S«hape,
• S.
3H
ReLICIA to CHARtOTTE

fcape, I view from the turret, the wide pro*^ fpe<st stretching in a long level, till it mingles with the clouds ; were you, in theSe mo*, iliehts, to hear my raphfodies,,and be a wit-li^fs of my extravagancies, even you, with a!l your partiality for me, would be tempted
me mad,—But, perhaps, you are'
ik)t far from thinking me fo at prefent: how-cfver, it is best to conclude while I have room to assure you, that I have the honour to be

YOUR
most Sincere friend
CKAftiOTTfi^
N U

kc
#
m
* A
\


•	• 'i
^-1
V W f r *
LsL!r.ry
r- A'^i^MV f^k^riArA ■ ■■' r'r::~«^.................................................^
Wmrimri0'^:M. 'Arid' ■'■ " ■ ' ■ *Vr A-^fA^AAf	. v:: m:”
’ T-■’aV'.*,/•. ;Vs. ^'* ^ :JSKS*M .	/. ' >,'	• ••	. ,	•	/ h	’ . ' .	, •	.	.,	•‘';=S‘.''.	■;^- ,:^>'*‘/»>*''r>!Cj‘ftA;-.**:'^--.1,-
...r, •■ ..':, .'^.n':'v,‘ ■'' ■	•. -', :;■ " .
’	.' '..’’V'i ‘	' ■' '.'•	' •	'	' .*’ •' I

■ '
^'fr.
■^.>a

K , *
. .-k^
hd'- 'f ■ ■ ;-•» . * f V'.	‘	' -
• 'h .V. Ikhvv '■.	.,. V. ^	■ .:;. ■
^ ■»
N
V®.* Lf
'. ' y >P
:•'	' f •
- o
>■	:L";
■ ■ ■■'■i'.'". v'C' c

:V
- ■ ■
": -‘'Ai/vsc
'■'.' J« .'.N V ’
■ ..% N "
.'t

f,
‘A

< O'

‘ “-pX ^ •■ ■••<
Sl^X.	.
V,' ^’jN^XTirTTTTS :, ; I i*V*ATB/i*k'
' N ■'	■''^f: ■	D-S'
'«U

i.
r> •'’
rtt ^
• r
■ .' .■' '«\	’ iv^' "
•’ . s-«-Ayih • •
/	V-'l^
• 1


% -
■ n
: 'i 1.9* ^/K’-, ■,'('7 .f ••' •'	• til
-C/'*'	'u/d;>v
rT- • ..s,..^,.	•■
’L't'M -.'"r
.*r *■

K
-
I'-ril

T»'r»j
r-T*; i—rs.'--A?^. .'.Kf	'
.. •VC-"

' ''■ / ^ »
A
..;.	. ‘tev
V C‘ i^-,‘^ d. ',*. '. ■ ..CA, ■ -••'••■ ■'•'•■
■ ’'^.'d*.	■, .'. -V. .
I	-	• k - '.'.s -1. i

->.■. fi
•V
.'_'. • ■■.'« • • ,S/#W


, .<
• / .•
t
/ ^
j; I'lmk-riV--
k I•
i^'h'i'ji

■‘ /lV .
• \
♦
'■'.. i ■'\- .
z<
, i »
'•' ^.4
1
■V-V

-•>.
t	/
V
.. \7
(■'.C'
-V '
V"'i
I
t
Cvv-'".'
\ .
■ ' A ' -■ feC'V'L • ,
wV- ■


N
• ■'i?'
•?»l'
..:l

'!V
/
^ ■
C.H' '
'-.N.

•* .'^ \	1 r-w '	-''•.•	-t •■■,• '.'•
»'	. ■	.' . '■•;	.,' • IC	A,
’ ' • VtJ ",»^’
'*•' ■ ,	' .'.'V'
' • . / d' • ;'W' ;/
n: ^dV-

. '■
S. I
\\ '
Ft. iV■/
<*
N. '

■ ‘ 'r. 1 *	'"fvj:v’	- ■^'\.
	'I,':;'n'.	S' N

Vr-
. 'M
.■'	, .-	', •• .r-v r'ffYfri^Siy ‘ ri ■ •■
:;!N	^	• V ■ .L,A' '	h-.'
I A ■ ^ ■< ■ ■■ A ‘ ■ ■ . ■•
1: ■•■
%■- i
i.-i .. •
'.' “ ®*-. •
'r .'v

/ .
•■'tV ' ; ■. - •
Nh'h , -;i ■ •
L‘ ■
I
N- •,;'	.
■¥ *. / iVi? ; J, <|uu i' ' % • X
d^x<< - TWim:
tii.
HS



V
i- i*
',¥t
■>' •' ", L.SyAr^ , ■	*.< ’-f-rtCSr*	T
ISi
.r
?■
<»«'
u .
	-■ 4- .^.'-,
, ;.	
V »:..	’ r - • ^
	.V
	'Visa*
•*	
• •	■ Ay,AAyxV
	r ■ J, . t . L ’ i..

..V.-i
• . *
i; .
,.<v».
/

. f.
•'=. .
Tf-‘	'■

•»
■■ 'M '.
. *’ ■'	'• 'Vt» •	’	.. yV*^te ■ •'
■• '	>	•■'.. ■	te-k-.	-	- •'•
- ■ JL# '	. -	■	.	_	.	«	, .	,	,	• '
; ■ ■/' ..
' /, '.* I » • K *
'/ , . *
4 1 • •• ' ' V '• f ^'\FA:r% '•
^.
V
1^'-.	: ■ •
V "•
: ■■>
''VA
.. •
■/vr'.'^.'.’.v..'.
■. r-. '/•■'■'. ''.-
<F-'
i'.Tr-.'L- t ,
•■	’ /.'I'
! ‘ < . /' -\ t
,' ,, t
^'-.V
<'y
^ t.
( .
>■ .•
'X-'" '.■
/ ’
rl

'.,	. N ; '., c
■ ■ "V^-	■
..	r. r '	■ -W

,> •





ftSV'.'.
f.’*.

.A
. -V, ■
v-SV' •	,.
'■FW'

ri
i..'" ■■'/i



\
# -
\ ,*
i '•
»■* ■. - d X‘h -&X(
-■■ •	■ :v;.,
y.'. •’•	.-•••■'■••v'.
h ■/ ' vw
■ ''^:'/^"v	■ .('-'w. ‘ ''S' y-'^VLV%
f'-MM
■;. ^ v.^v
'	:,' 'V VvT.'Oav-
V.. :» /' ,'• 'ij;
.»' ^l’*..
i 4

w.
J'

>
■-	(•' . 7 ■
•'JH	\ r,
. '• I- ••.


•i ■
m
■	, -V '	M
••.	; *>f4 ...I •
i	•''■-o V -
S* : '.■ .'
/

.S-SL
^ i
■ -'Xi^ ■' ■
i i
u'
-. •',U. !<.''
.■•t',	■;
r? •' ■■

\.*' :»	' i-v/ W
Af.N
‘ iw
'''•''kVtif
i*->
'fcV

^ViVr-:

• ' . rf.
f .'

/.»>
' . i • .	» -•
Ct-yVf>i.yS.-' .'
■;•/. :•*». '•' i ',K
■ >xT r-t*
■cA;, ■'■	J<
Kal'v^
5’
l '
■f.
"S
-
KnA b
>V d;-
^ ^.'.;4. 'M-'S'CimmPH . ’2-''
f*	’	■■■ .,	.. ' •■.''■ ■..IjKS .'A
C .	'
■,.'T	''N'S'	■■' '
-	• ^	vr ' A


•. ,<
■'D-
/i h-.
.vVa

-v'V
iy"
'MK \

i >. •	.	. • J ‘
Atri'F
m.
'nfr.


;r''^V	. ,♦	■ / ' F drimiSqriX^A-' ■. .
ML'^y ■; ■ frW	„.....;
s L. ')'f rV(‘\^r'n *^	'■' ■	o^''- '■
-4 V, s, st' ' V V,', •	■ <v	. -.. .

- 9^ -

•
\\
\

t


....
T>
>
•V # .
*. ^
iC
<.0
>.*v-





vr
«'
^ A V
c -


t
i-
4.

J-
f
■’•. - ' t ^

/
/
/

r'	' /• ■' ./■ ■		. «F«»
V iir			
A;-i^ :■


• ^	_>C’
.'•- ’il-i ’A


i




C‘j • V' _-■
•'‘i^iuiii4!,..^‘r7:..
■ uiMtllf lM:,./. 'S
Nr.iJ
*(»••
V
■TA
j. f
f'"j ;. T, ■-,!
, J", i. - 5,^	V •
•	i
**■' ■'	- - >*TTJ kl Ut: ’ I * ■ t i 11 ? .	'

^ IL
--• -•	r—
^	*	: V ■	‘
L:	,- iiii-V, -

- c--?^> * ^ :A • n
* ‘ *)*h’' I >'»I M 11	1^ C I-C	* ,,
-. ,-■	‘‘J^* . il* :i<tfl»*'
X \
\ X .• dr^ H
*• ;	-	^ -94	i*. - ,'
■=>■ "<	>	♦ > :■ ’If* *
- -_^	^ • ‘ ilS * > *	•

I	'
f -* " — 1 s
■- ."■ I
§ ^-v
•■ •	^ L „:cr.

V-
ii. -‘•^-
•V A
' Oliifu'
' :!mMi
'■•>* V

I • t M' III;
C’C:ov .,• - . • •
~ sj^ —-■ - L^' |f nr
//.D ■ _ ^
A Vc-^'
? /J " .
.'♦s,	•*: -‘
'*: I ^ '"X
--5. S -^.,
. r If* :i ->. V'’i-. ..V’ '
IblS u ■' ij T
, ip:
•JW
*v./.	'■
-V.
■«* • ^
• «• -r«rt	««'
'	^	‘^'"•'a)i '■••	• •'
■f^.
}-»	•■r	- r' '	,	•
-Nc •'>:■•	■"'. .
*n;i :i.
" * w**..
■' v- «rcj
- f. .r- -tJf
■- !^t'^ '
: .^. -i -i/-'"'■
Jr'
■"'•• s