Love-Letters ,
FROM
King H ENRY VIII.
TO
Anne Bolejn^ &c.
( Price One Shilling, )
FROM
ing HEN RVYlll.
TO
4NNE BOLETN:
me in French^ and Some in Engltjh.
To which are added,
TRANSLATIONS of Thofe Written in French,
WITH AN
APPENDIX,
CONTAINING
VO Letters from Anne BoUyUy To Cardinal Wolfey^
ith Her Last to H E NR Tthe Vlllth.
jaglum faBamque fidem non crlmina pofco. Ovid.
LONDON: nted for J. C H u R c H i L L, at the Black-^wan in Bater-Nojier-Kow, MDCCXIV.
£J
iT-
THE
PREFACE.
OKigmaV Letters from King r I^enry the Vlllth to Anne Boleyn
Vatican Library., where wt£FA<^^ they are Jhewft to all Strangers* About Thirty Tears ago. Dr. Fall late Tree editor of York, took a Copy of them, which he Collated very carefully with the Original, as he ajfu-Ted the Bifbop of Salisbury, to whom he made a Prefent of it. The, Bifhop thought the Letters had fame Exprejfions which made them un-ft for a Place in Us ColleBion at the End of hL Third Vdime of the History of the Refor-inatipn, therefore fent them to the Printer to, he Publijhed apaft, in juf if cation of the Oh-
Jervdtions he has^ *made upon them in that Book. ■	'	‘
Th^ are Printed exaBly from Dr. FallV
^py\- 'tpitbout correBing fo, much as the Falfe
^ Z	SiMU nfF
U The PREFACE.
Spelling either in French or English, that the King s , true manner of Writing might appear even in the mimitefl Particulars ^ for which Reafon alfo his Cyphers and Devices are imita--ted. The French Letters are Tranflated to fa~ tisfy the CuKiofity of the English Reader., with as little Variation from tloe Literal Meaning of the Words, as the different Phrafe of the Languages would allow.
It was thought like wife that fome Intro du-Sion would be necejfary to ?nake the Letters generally underflood arid therefore fince the Biflop would not give himfelf any further trouble about them.^ the Fublifier was advifed to employ fome Friend to give a fhort View of the remarkable TranfaSions which preceeded them^ and gave occaflon to them. This, with a] few RefleSions on the Letters themfelves, may give ait ordinary Reader fome Notion of the Grounds of King Henryh Divorce, and may arm him againfl the Calumnies of the Pa-piffs on that SubjeS. This is only intended for the Ufe of thofe, who have not Leifure or 'Opportunities to fee that Matter fully explained in the BijhopA History of the ReSormation.
. To follow then the Order of TimeIt may firfl he ohferved, that in K. Hen-_ Hist. Refor.	Vllthh time, his Eldefl
*	Son Prince Arthur, being pafl
N0v.r4.1501. Fifteen Tears of Age, was .Married to the Frincefs Catharine of Spain, who
The P R E F A C E. iii
•was Elder than himfelI:^ that they lived toge^ ther as Man and Wife for feveral Months^ and then Prince Arthur dying., it was refolved for Reafons of State that Prince Henry flozdd Marry his Brothers Widow. This was oppofed by Warham Arch^ bifiop h/Canterbury as ahfohtely milawfid.^ hut advifed by Fox Bijhop of Winchester, who thought all Difficulties would he rettioved by a Difpetifation from Rorne ^ accordingly a Bidlwas obtained to that EffeEl., and they were Married, the Prince being yet under Age. But Warham had fo pof fefsA the King with Scruples again ft this Mar-Plage, that the Day on which the Prince was of Age, he by his Fathers Order protffied agahift it as Null and 22.1505.
Vtid ^ and Henry the Vllth, with his Dyintr Breath perffted in charging his Son to break if off entirely. However, when Henry the VIHth oame to the Crown, it was refolved in Council that he jhoidd rettew his Marriage, which was done PubUckly, 1“”^ 5* 1509. and he had feveral Children by the ^fueen, who all dyed young, except the Lady Mary.
After tms there appeared no farther Difqui-et in the KingL Mind, nor any Sign of an intended Divorce, till the Tear 1524, when Car-WolSey by his Legantine Mandate, Publijhed a Bull of the P ope* s again ft thofe that tontrabted Marriage within thA forbidden DA-
iv The PREFACE.
grees» This Mandate is yet extant in the Re-gifler of Fisher Eifiop n/'Rochester. What followed., makes this ftfly fufpeBed to have been done on the Kings Account, To confAtn which Sufpicion., there is a concurring Circitm-jlance in a Letter from Simon Gtinetis to Bu-
cer, Dated Sept, i o. 1531, where
Part?*	King had declared
to him that he had abllaitied from Queen Catherine/or Seven Tears.^ upon Scruples of Confcience.
However., thd* the King had Scruples at that time, yet he concealed thetn carefullj from the World for fome Tears * and the immediate Occafwn of their breaking out, feems to have
been given by the French Ambaf March 2.1 $27.	who came England to
treat of feveral Matters, and particularly of a Marriage between the Frincefs Mary and the French Ki?ig, d>r the Duke of Orleans lois Second Son. This Alternative was April3o.i527.	agreed, tho* it remained
fome time in fufpetice, Becaufe Hall.	(c	Prefident of the Parlia-
ment of Faris doubted. Whether the Mar-“ riage between the King and her Mother, be-ing his Brother’s Wife, were good or no.
The Bifljop of Tarbe made the Herbert. fame ObjeBion, and renewed it to
the Km£s Ambajfadors in France, as appears by King Henryh Speech to the Mayor and Citi-
The P R E F A C E. ^
zens of London concerning his Scruples^ where he fays., “ When our Ambastade was last in Fraitce, and Motion was made, That the”
“ Duke of	should Marry our fayd
Daugter, one of the Chief Councaylores to “ the Frejich King fayd, It were well done “ to know, whether she be the King of Eng-“ land*s lawfull Daughter, or not ^ for w3l “ known it is, that he begat her on his Bro-‘‘ thers Wife, which is diredly contrary to “ God’s Law, and his Precept ”. That this Coimcellor was the Bijhop of Tarbe, is affirm'd by the J^iJJwp of Bayonne,	^
. in the Account he gives of this iii.
Speech to the Court ^ France, in a Letter dated the 2jth of Nov. 1528 *, yet -this very Bijhop,of Tarbe was afterwards advanced to be a Cardinal, and was fo far from retraBing his Opinioti, that when he was Cardinal of Gmndtxnont, in a Letter dated the ajth of March, 1530, he writes to the French Court, “ That he had Served ^ the l.jOxd Rochford, (Anne Boleyn's Father ) all he could, and that the Pope had three fe-“ veral times faid to him in Secret, that he ‘‘ wished the Marriage had been already made “ in England, either by the Legate’s Difpenfa-tion,or otherwise ^ provided it was not done “ by him,nor in Diminution of his Authority,
“ under Pretence of the Laws of God’k
This ConduB jhews. That it was not Religiotjt,
h	" but
vi The PREFACE.
hut Political Views., that turnA the Court of Rome againji the KingLCaufe, 'Ouhichthey at 'frji plainly favoured.	,	•
And now after this Jhort Account of the Cir-oumjiances that gave the Beginning to theKitig's Scruplesy it will be proper to confider the Arguments by which he fortified hitnfelf Sft	them. LThefe, as he himfelf
* * : owVdy were, that he found by the Law of MoSes, If a Man took his Brother’s Wife, they shoufd die Childlefs this made Mm reflea on the Death of his Children, which he now looked on as a Curfe from God, for that unlawful Marriage.. He found Thomas . Aquinas (whom he chiefly valued of all the Cafuifis,) of Opinion, That the Laws n/ Leviticus, about the forbidden Degrees of Mar^ riage, were Moral arid Eternal, fuch as obliged all Chrifiians and that the Pope could only difpenfe with the Laws of Hoe Church, but not with the Laws of God-.^ for this Reafon,That no Daws can be difpenced with by any. Authority, but that which is Equal to the Authority that EnaBed it : It may be obferved. That as thefe Arguments were of Force in themfelves^ fo they were yet Jlronger to a True Roimn-Ca-tholick thaii to another 'Man *, for when the Validity of the Marriage came afterwards to he thoroughly canvajfed, it appeared that the whole Tradition of the Church, andtheOpini-pns of its DoBors were a^ainfi the Mdrridgey
and
The PREFACE, vij
and the Arguments for its Validity were taken from private Explications of Scripture^ and Reafonings from thetn,
♦
In the Tear 1527, before Cardinal WolSeyV Journey to France, which he began on the ^d of July, The King's Scruples were become PubUck, as Two Writers tefify almof in the fame JVirds : “ This Sea-“ Son,Hall, began a Fame in London^ “ that the King’s Confeffor the Bishop of L/n-“ coin, called Dr. Langland, and divers other “ great Clerks, had ‘ told the King, that the “ Marriage between him and the Lady Kathe-rine, late Wife to his Brother Prince Ar-“ thur, was not Good,but Damnable ^ and the “ King thereupon should Marry the Dutchefs “ Alatifon at the Town of Calais this Sum« “ mer ^ and the Vifcounfei^nr^/nrf had brought “ with him the Pidure of the Said Lady, and “ that at his return out of France.^ the Car-“ dinal should pafs the Sea to go into France “ to fetch her.
This Sufpicion of the Cardi-nai s going to promote a Second V Idatch in France is confirm'd by a Letter of his., Bated Feversham, July the $th., 15.27, where he fays, Archbijhop Warham had warned
b 2	him
viij The PREFACE.
him of the great Jealouftes which Queen Cathe-_ fiee had of his Journey. And Parc 1.^^ by another Letter Dated AuguH
the 1st, 1527, where belabours to fatisfy the King, That the Popes Difpenfa^ Lion was in its Vf Null and Void. All thefe Particulars will he the ftronger Proofs of the Cardinal s Intention, when it fall be proved that the Cardinal could then have no'Thoughts of Anne Boleyn. JVhat he did in this Negotiation was kept fecret'.^ Put it feems it was very agreeable to the French, for they fent great Acknowledgments the next Tear for the Honour
of his Emhajfy, by Ambajfadors of the Firjt Rank, who came to fee the King of England fwear to the League with their Majler , upon which Occafon Hall writes, “ The common People Said, What needs all this Swearing, The French King. “ was once Sworn, and all his Nobility *, yea, “ and all his good Towns but yet they brake
“ with us, and So will they “ again when they fee an Ad-vantage. But to return from this Digrejfion, to the Hijiory of Miflrefs Boleyn. It muft be obferved, that in the end May 1527, the Lord Rochford her Father came over to En-H R R f	gland from France with the Dut-
Pani.^	chefs of AlanfonV PiBure to few
it to King Henry, and it was
then
The PREFACE, ix
then in all probability that Anne Boleyn came ever with hirn.^ for tho fie had been in England in 1522, yet fie did not Jiay longy but returned into the Service of Claude Queen of Fpnce, where fie coutinued till that Queen dyed., which was in 1524, and then went into the Dutchefs of AlanSon*^ Service., which fie left probably at this time. Soon after her coming into England fie was taken into Queen CatharineV Courtwhere the Lord Peircy courted her., and was upon the Point of Marrying her, had not Cardinal VIoKcy, by the Kin^s Order prevented it *, and as the fame Author affures us, it was not till after the Cardinal*s return from France, which was on the laf Day of September 1527, that the King opened his AffeHion for Anne Boleyn to him.
From this fiort View of the TranfaEiions that preceded the Kht£s AffeBion to Anne Boleyn, it appears how unjufl a Calumny of tJ^ Papifs it is to fay ^ That the King would never have had Thoughts of a Divorce, or Scruples againfl his firfl Marriage, had, not his unlawful Pajfion for Mi-frefs Boleyn prompted Mm to them. So far is this from true, that it is plainly proved, that the Kings Scruples were
infufed
X The PREFACE.
itifitfed in him from his Infattcy.^ on the jiiflejl Grounds -.^ that they uuere revived in 1524. himyears before they were Publick^ and that they were commonly talPd of and a Ne'ii^ Match contrived for him to the Dutchefs of AlanSon, before Anne Boleyn appear d at Court. The Letters will fet this Matter yet in a clearer Light. •
But before I make atiy Remarks on thefe.^ I wujl firfi give a Jhort Account of the Kings Negotiations at Komt.,without which Hist. Ref. jQjjrig qJ' thetn cannot be under flood,
* I7i the End of 1527, The King foUL Hil. Ref. cited the Rope for a CommiJJion to Parc III. judge the Validity of his Marriage Rymer '^^dh Queen Catherine, which after Tom XIV. fome time was obtained in a Bull^ dated the loKh of April, 1528, enF powering Cardinal WolSey , with the ArchbK fhop^ or any other English Bijhop, to judge the Marriage, But this was 7iot made Ufe of perhaps becaufe it was thought, that a Stranger ought to be employed.^ that the R^-ceedhig 7night be more impartial. Herbert. So a New Commiffon was deftred.^ and obtained.^ bearing Date the 6th of June, in which the Cardinals WolSey Campegio (tin ItalianJ were appointed joynt Legates to judge the Marriage, Andeto^make
thid
The PREFACE. xj
•
this the furer, there was a Pollicitation Cor Arojmfe) procured on the 'i^d of1528 That the Tope would never inhibit or revoke this Commijfwn to judge the Marriage • and a Decretal Bull, which''cotitamA an'^Jbl folute Decifon of the Caufe, which was otily fiewn to the King, and Cardinal Wolfe/ .Gampegio ^ but all thefe Precautions •which were admitted of, when the Pope was in a dijlrefs d Conditioti, did not refrain his Ho linefs from fending one Campana before the End of the Tear, to fee the Decretal Bull fecretly Burnt • and from recaJImg the Legate's Commijfion , and avocating the CauCe to Rome the next Tear, •tphen his Jfairs were more flourifiing , _ and the Emperor S who was Qpueen Catherine^’ KephFw \ had graiited all his Demands, j fhorter in this Relation of the Pope's Profeedintrs than the Confequence it had may feem to have re^ qmred : But it is not my Defgn m this ^eface to give a Compleat Hiftory of the Divorce, but only to mention fuch ThinFs as ■mil fway with the Englifh Reader „ the Amg^s JuJhficatmi ; and I hope to fwh a one the Good or Bad Succefskof the Ca«fe at the Court of Koras , will not figntfy much to frove Its Jufice or Injvflice.
And
xij The PREFACE.
And now to make fame Obfervations on the Letters themfelves. It may be prejumed rea-fonahly., that if there had been any Thiftg in ’them that had refleBed on the Kings Ho-nour y nr Anne Boleyn’r, they would certainly have been PubliJJj'd by the Papifts at that very Time *, for they were in their Hands foon after they were JVritten., as appears from this Pajfage in Lord Herbert^ Hi-pry.
When Cardinal Campegio came to take
Ship, the Searchers, upon Pretence he “ carried either Money or Letters from Eng-“ land to Rome ^ ranSackd all his Coffers, ' “ Bags, and Papers, not without Hope, cer-“ tainly, to recover that Decretal Bull out “ King So much long’d for. I find alSo (by “ Some Relation ) that divers Love-Lett$rs “ betwixt our King and MiftreSs Boleyn , “ being convey’d out of the King’s Cabinet, “ were fought for, though in vain *, they ha-“ ving been formerly fent to Rome ” . To explain this Account, if muji be fitppofed, that upon Anne Boleyn’return to Courts the King perfwad§d her^ to let him lay up thefe Letters in his Cabinet, as the furejl Place to keep them from, being ftole ‘.^ Jince it would have done them both great Prejudice^ ij they had come Abroad at the time of the TryaL
But
w
The PREFACE, xtij
But this SiippbfiUon does not feem fo nd^ tural as anothei\ which D, that they werb takeUy not out of the Kings, but out of Anne Bolevnh: Cabinet : This is the more
.i	‘
probable.^ becaufe in FaB they are all Letters from the King to her ^ whereas.^ if his Cabinet had been rifled^ her An fivers to him would ha^e been wore likely to be found there. It were to he wijLed, that thefe Anfwers could be difcovered ^ for there is juf reafon to expeB in them, accom* pliJPd ■ Fieces bot}) for Thought and Ex-* prefftoti. To which the Reader will eafly a-gree.^ when he looks into the jew that are Extant of htr Writing., which ate fubjoin--ed in an APPENDIX;, the laft of thenf indeed.^ is by far the mof to be admired ; for as the Occafon of'' it required the utmofl Effort of her Mindfo nothing could be Penned m a more exalted Straini
The Kings Letters to Atine Bdleyn were written., in all probability., immediately after her Lifmiffwn from the Courts which Was done to filence Herberc<i the Clamours of the People on her Account but fhe was fent away in fo Abrupt a manner, that fe determined to abfetit her felf altogether which made the King foon Repent of his Severity , and
c	preff
xiv The P R E F A C E.
prefs her to come back , but this was not obtained for a long timenor without great Difficulty *, as appears by fame of the foL lowing Letters. The Time of her Difmiffion was not till May, 1528, for Bib. Harl. there is a Letter extant from 3^. B. 4. Fox to Gardiner at Rome,
London, May the tt^th^ 1528, where he writes.^ Of his landing at Sandwich, May the 2d,-----------His coming that
Night to Greenwich, where the King lay, — His being commanded to go to Mi-ftreSs Anne^s Chamber in the Tilt-Tard---' . And declaring to her their Expedition in the King’s CauSe, and their hastening the coming of the LegateTo her great
Rejoycing and Comfort---------Then came the
King, to whom he delivered his Letters,
•----And opened his Negotiations -------------
Then he went to the Cardinal, &c.
Soon after the Date of this Letter fie was difmifsA ^ for in the First of the Letters that follow , the King makes- Excufes for the Keceffiity of their being a funder ^ and in the Second complains of her Un-willingnefs to return to Court. In neither of thfe is there a Word of the Sweating Sicknefs , which raged violently in June ^ a?id of which he fpeaks in his Third Let-
ter.
The P R E F A C E. xv
ter as of a Thing that had lajled fome Time^ and of which he had form’d many Ohfer~ vations from Experience, Between this LeU ter., which feems to have been writ in July, and the Sixth, which mentioning the Legates arrival at Paris, muji have been written in the End of September, there are Two Letters., which by the Earnefnefs of the Bufi-nefs were plainly written within a few Days of one another. Probably foon after the latter of thefe was fent by the King, where he expreffed how much he was pleafed with her An-fwer to his earnejl Defire in the jyjjJf former, in the Heat of his Gratitude , he paid a Vifit to his Mifrefs, in which Time they wrote a joynt Letter to Cardinal WolSey, which is added in the APPENDIX, where the Ki?ig exprejfes his Wonder, that he has not yet heard of the Legate, CampegioV Arrival at Paris ^ which makes it probable Ahis happened in September. The King flayed not long with her after this j for when fie had received the Car dinar s Anfwer, fie writes a fecond Letter, without mentioning the Kings being there ^ and again /hews Impatience to hear of the Legate’s coming, of which the King gave her the firfl Pews foon after,
C 2	'But
xvj The P R E F ACE.
. But to return to the Fourth Letter.^ which from all thefe Particulars may be fuppofea to have been written in August it it the mojl Important in all the CoUeBion.^ for it f.xes the Time when his AffeBion to Anne Boleyn began,. He complains in it^ That he had beent above a whole Year struch with the Dart of Love, and not yet Sure whether he shall fail, or find a Place ir . her Heart and Affestion. *
Now by the Nature of his Complaint, it is vijible^ that he pleads all the Merit that a long Attendance ■ could give him ^ ana therefore if in (lead of a Tear., he could have cAUd it a Tear and a Half or Two Tears, he would certainly have done it., to make Ibis Argument the fronger. It may like wife be probably concluded from the fame Words, that he had not then known her much a-hove Half a Tear ^ for it would have beet an il} Compliment, in to let her under-ft and that he had feen her fame time, before he was at all in' Love wit}, her.
A
Thefe Remarks confirm the Account al-teady' given, of her coming froin France with her fatherj and by that means fervt
ti
The PREFACE, xvij
to Eftahlifh the King's Vindication from the Scandal thrown on Mm hy the Tapi (is. that he had no Scruples ^ about his Marriage till he faw Anne ^oleynIThe manner o f the whole feemsto have been this'.^theFrench AmbaffadorsobjeBed to the King'sMarKiAge in March 152 jIThis gave him Thoughts of a Divorce upon which the Lord Rochford going to France in the begin-ning i?/May, was employed to get the Dutchefs of AlanSonh PiBure., which he brought over accordingly in the End of that ^
Month. The Cardinal who was ^ ’ fent to France in the beginning of July, was infruBed to promote this Match ^ for which end he writes from France to the King.^ to con-firm him in his Scruples. But while the Car^ dinal was thus employed., Mifirefs Boleyn who had come over with her Father my Lord Rochford, had fijewn her felf at Courts and made fuch hfiprefiions on the King's Thoughts^ that the Match iij France was order'd to be dropp'd \ and the Cardinal when he came ever in the End of September, knew the Reafon of it from the Kin^s own Mouth, probably before Mrs. Boleyn her felf knew of the King's AfeBion for it was after this that her Correfpondence with the Lord Piercy, was broke by the Cardinal at the King's Qrdeu But now that the King thought it
would
xvhj The PREFACE.
would he a weans to perfwade her to love him the better., he in this Letter tells her., that long before fie fufpeSed it, from his firji feeing her he felt a Pajfwn for her. In this ^prefenta-tion I have repeated many Things faid before in the Series of Matters as they happened, but I thought it hefl to lay them thus together once more in one View,
It may be here quefioned, how the time of any particular Letter can be knozvn, fmce they have no Pate, and therefore may have keen put out of their Order. But thofe that will read them with any Attention, will find a Chain of Circumftances referred to, that plainly fiew thej were laid together by one that hiezv the Order in which they were Written, very likely hy Anm Boieyn her felf'., and whoever ftole them, as he took them all together, fo zvould be eareful no doubt to keep them in the Order he found them in, that the Pifcoveries to be made from them wight be the more compleat,
it will'not be doubted by any that, read thefe Letters, that the King*s AffeSton to Anile Boieyn zvas ■ altogether upon honourable Terms, There appears no Fretenfion to any Fazmm\ but when the Legates fiad have paved the Way .There is fo frequent mention of this, that Infiances of U zvoijld fwdi a Preface too much. There is
but
The PREFACE. xix
hut one Offence that can he taken at thefe Letters, which is, that there are indecent Exprejff--ons in them. But this is to he imputed to the Simplicity and Unpolitenefs of that Age, which allowed too great Liberties of that Sort y and it muff: he ownd by his Enemies,that there are hut Three or Four of thefe Sallies in all the Code-Bion, and that there are Letters which make much more for the Kings Fiety and Virtue^ than thofe Irregularities can fully his Chara-Ber,
In the Fifth Letter he tells her, God can do it if he pleaSes *, to whom I pray once a Day for that end, and hope that at length my Prayers will be heard,
/
In the Sixth, I trust shortly to enjoy, what I have So long longed for, to God’s PleaSure, and our both Comforts.
In the Ninth, Praying God, that (and it be his PleaSure) to fend us shortly togydder. Surely thefe Religious ExpreJJions would have been very improper, to make an unlawful Faff on fucceed.
In the Thirteenth, fpeaking of the III Chara-Ber of one that was propofed to be made Abbefs of Wilton, he writes, I would not for all the
Gold .
XX The PREFACE,
Gold in the World, clog your ConScience rioS mine, to make her Ruler of a HouSe, which is of So ungodly Demeanour ^ nor I trust you Would not, that neither for Brother nor Sister I should fo destain mine Honour or Confbi-cnce.i The whole Letter is of an excellent StraiUy and would have been a very improper Exhortation to one a^ainjt whofe Vertue he had a Pefgn.
The Lajl of the Letters mentions the Legates Illnefs^ as a Reafon why he had not yet enterA upon his Office 5, which Jhews^ that the Corre-fpondence etided at leaf in May 1529, when the Procefs began,
V
There is bttt one Thing after the Letters fhat it feems very material to add here in the Kings Defence .^and that is the Approbation of his Caufe by the Learned Men of Europe., •
During the Tryaly Warham and Fisher,, who were Advocates for the Queeiiy declared^
That they having been lately con-Rymer. Tom. Suited by the King, &c. had an-
fwered, that the King’s Conscience was disturbed and fliaken, not without the weightiest and strongest ReaSons.
After
The PREFACE, xxj
After the Legates had trifled flotfie Months^ and at lafl, Campegio, under a Pretence of'the Rules of the Court of Rome, had adjourned the Court for Three Motiths ^ during tt>hicb time he obtained an Avocation from the Pope the King was advifed by Cranmer, not to depend lotiger on the Dedflons of the See of Rome, but to cotfult the feveral Univerflties of Europe, as well as his own., about the ValL dity of his Marriage.
One Crook employed in this Negotia-^ tion., and he obtained the Opinion of almoft all the Univerflties whither he went, for the "Nullity of the Marriage :
Vet he complains in his Letters that he was in great Straits from the fmall Allowance he had. And in an Original Bill of his Accounts it appears., that he never gave above a few Crowns to any that wr'it on the Kings Side ^ whereas, the Emperor gave a Benefice of 500 Ducats to one, and of 60O Crowns to another, that writ for the Qiteen. Vet, though on the one Side Men were poorly paid for their Trouble, and on the other richly rewarded, yet the mo[i eminent Men were uni^ verfally for the King. It may lyere be added, that EraSmus, whofe Name was in the p^reatefl. Efleetn at that time^, thoitgh he could" not be
d	Prevailed
xxij The PREFACE.
prevailed with to write for the King., for fear 'of the Pope, and the Emperor., in whofe DomK nions he lived ^ yet he went fo far as to give great Encomiums of the Worth and Vertues of Sir Thomas Boleyn, then Earl of Wiltshire, in Us Book De preparatione ad Mortem, which he dedicates to him *, and this was all the Approbation that his Circumf antes made it convenient for him to few of the Kings Canfe,
On this general Confent of the Learned in his Favour., the King 't’oas told he might proceed to a Second Marriage., the Eirfi being of p r	fii'f Kull and Void'., and ac-
cordingly he Marryed Anne Bo-Jeyn on the 2 5?/:? ^?/January,! 535.
This fort Reprefentation oftheTranfaBions relating to the Kings Canfe., with the Letters femfelves that follow, may ferve to convince Boe Reader, with how little reafon the Papifs infult us upon that SubjeB. The Writer of this Preface has been a Witnefs of one Infiance of this Raillery., which is., their Jltem-mg thefe Letters 'at Rome to the English, as the fimmeful Beginning of our Reformation, put there is a frefoer one, where their Malice and Impudence appears to the Height, which they intended probably to carry on fome Schemes
that
The PREFACE,	xxiij
that have lately proved Abortive , and that is a large Poem in Quarto., by Thomas Ward, Printed at Hamborough, 1710, where the. Hiflory of England, from the Beginning of Henry the Vlllth, to Oates’j- Plot is giveuy and the whole Progrefs of the Reformationy fcurriloufly ridiculedin Burlefque Verfe, But, All thefe Impotent Attacks need no other An^
fwer., than a juji Account of the	them--
Celves.	i -	: - ^
L E T.
[ ■ ]
LETTERS
Written by
K. nrV/JFthe Vlllth
T O
Anne Bolejn.
s
L E T T R E I.
Maitrejfe et Amie., moy d’- mon
coeuY s^en remettent en vos mains 9^ M	n ^ 1-	1
vous juppliant les avoir pourrecom-
mander a votre bonne grace., dF.
que par abfence votre affeBion ne lew foit dL
minue. Car pur augmenter leur peine ce feroit
■grande pitie.^ car Vahjence leur fait ajfez, et
plus que jamais je neuffe penfe, en nous faL
F An..-
tel, Tant plus lohig que les Mores font., tant plus eloigne eft le foleil^ et non obftant plus fer-vent.^ aujji fait UdIe notre amour., par ah fence nous fonmes eloignez, ^ nednmoins ilgarde fa ferveur au moins de notre cofte. Ay ant en efpoit la pareille du mtre, vous affeurant que de ma part V ennuye'de /’ ahfence deja m*eft troj grande, Et quand je penfe a P augmentation diceluy que par force faut que je foufre , ii 7fC eft prefque intoller able, sU n eftoit la fermt Efpoir que j*ayF de votre indiffoluble affeBior vers ?noy ^ et pur le vous rementevoir ahum fois cela, et voyant que perfonellement je m puis efire en votre prejence, chofe la plus appro-chante a cela qui ni eft pojfible au prefent jt vous envoye, ceft a dire ma piBure., wife et hrajfeletths a toute la devife que deja Jcavez mefouhaittant en lew place quant il vous plat-Toit, P eft de la main de
Votre ferviteur et amy
Tranflation of	L
Y Miftrefs and Fstend, I and my Heari put our Selves in your Hands, beggins
[ 3 ]
ot to let Absence lessSen your AfFestion to us For it Were great pity to increaSe our Pain, which Absence alone does Sufficiently,and more than I could ever have thought ^ bringing to my Mind a Point of Astronomy, which is. That the farther the .Mores are from us, the farther too is the Sun, and yet his Heat is the more Scorching ^ fo it is with our Love, we are at a distance from one another, and yet it keeps its Fervency, at least on my Side. I hope the like on your Part, affuring you that the uneafineSs of Abfence is already too Severe for me, and when I think of the continuance of that which I must of neceffity Suffer, it would Seem intolerable to me, were it not for the firm hope I have of your unchangeable Affe-dion for me ^ and now to put you Sometimes in mind of it, and Seeing I cannot be preSent in PerSon with you, I Send you the nearest thing to that poffible, [that is, my Pidure Set in Bracelets, with the whole Device, which you ' know already, wishing my Self in their Place, when it shall pleaSe you. This from the Hand of
^' Your Servant and Friend,
H. Rex.
^ This is a literal TrotJlation of this Sentence^ but the mean»
[4]
Wm¥'Wmmm‘WmmWWWSW0WmWWmmmm
L E T T R E II.
A HI a Maitreffe,
P OUR ce qui ftit, femhle le temps eftre Men ^ long depms avoir ouy de votre bonne fan-te.j de vous. La grande affetlion que fay vers vous.^ m a perfuadh de vous envoyer ce por-teur pour efre mieux ajfertene de votre fante volojith.^dF pour ce que depms mon partement de avec vous., on tri a averty que V opinion en quoy je vous Idijfoye eft de tout afeure change., <dF que vous voidie^ venir en cour ni avec Madame votre mere ny autrement auffi, Lequel ra-port ejlant yray, je ne fauroy ajfez emerveillier veux quF depuis je rP ajfiire de vous Eavoir jamais faite faute, il me femble hien petite retribution pour le grand Amour que je vous por-te de m.e eloigner CV la perfotme le perfo-91 age de la femme du monde que plus f efli-me^ (IF fi., vous nI ayme& de ft bonne affeEH-on comme f efpere\ Je fuis fure que la eloigne-ment de notre deux Perfonnes' vous feroit un peu ennuyeufe, toute fois qtLil n appartient pas tant a la Maitreffe comme au ferviteur, penfez bien ma Meflrejfe que /* ahfence de vous fort me grief efperant qiLil tie ft pas votre vo-lontf qiw amjtce foit., mats Ji je entendoy pur
\	^ ^ /r # ^ e /\ /	y%	^ ^ m ^ 1 ma J ^ mm m ^ ^	^
[ 5 ]
non puis md.is faire ft non pld.mdre nidi tnau^ vaife fortune en rehaUAnt peu a peu ma grande foUe., & ainfi faulte de temps fay fin de ma rude Lettre^ fupplyant de donner foy a ce por-teur a de quil vous dir a de ma part, Efcrit de la jtdain du tout votre ferviteur,
I
Tranfiation n/ L E T T E R II.
4
To my Mijfrefi.,
*D E C A U S E the Time Seems to me very ^ long, fince I have heard Srom you, or concerning your Health ^ the great Affedion I have Sor you has obliged me to Send this Bearer to be better informed both of .your Health and Pleafure, particularly becaufe fince my last parting with you, I have been told, that you-have entirely changed the Opinion in which I left you, and that you would neither come to Court with your Mother, nor any other way *, which report if true, I cannot enough wonder at, being perfwaded in my own Mind that I have never committed any , Offence against you ^ and it feems a very fmall return for the great love I bear to you, to be kept at a distance from the Perfon and Prefence of the Woman in the World that I value the most •, and if you love me with as much Affedion as 1 hope you do, I am Sure the distance of our Two PcrSons would be a
[6]
little uneaSy to you. Tho’ this does not belong So much to the MistreSs as the Servant. Confider well, my MiftreSs, how greatly your Absence grieves me j I hope it is not your Will that it should be So j but if I heard for certain, that you your Self defired it, I could do no other than complain of my ill Fortune, and by Degrees abate my great Folly, and So for want of time I make an end of my rude Letter, defiring you to give credit to this Bearer in all he will tell you from me. Written by the Hand of your entire Servant.
iiitttttiittiitititttttti
L E T T R E III.
J ’ entluye que j^avois dii doubte de votre fan-^ th me troubla <& egarra beaiicoup^ et Eeuffe efe gere quiete fans avoir fue la certainth., mats piiifque iiancors 71 avez rien fentu.^ f efpe-re qiIil eft aomme de nous. Car nous eft ant a JValtan., deux vuftyres, deux verles de Vham-hre., votre frere mefter Treforere ont tombe malades.^ (IF font d* afture de tout fains^ ^ depuis nous fious fommes reboutes envotre me-fons de Hondfon, la on 7ious ?ious fommes bie?i trouves., fans aucun malade pour fteure.^ dieu foit hue., et je petife que ft vous vous voulez re-tirer du lieu du Surye, comme 7ious fmes, vous le pafferez Cans datwer. aufifi unp. rmtvp.
C 7 3
chofe vous pent comforter., car a la verite com me il vift., pen ou nuJIe fame out efte fnalade et que encore plus efl nul de mfre Cort CIF peu aiUeurs en meimt., par quoy je vous fupplie ma entiere aymee de non avoir point de peure., nz de noflre ahfence vous trap ennuyere. Car ou que je foye, votre fuis, non ohfant il faut alcune fois a telles fortunes oheyer. Car qui contre fortune veut luter en tel endroit eji bien fouvent tatit plus eloigne, par quoy recomfortes vous et foyez, hardy., et vuidez> le mol tant que vous pourrez, Et f efpere bientot de vous faire chanter le renvoye non plus pour afeure de fau--tFdu temps., ft tioti que je vous fouhaitte entre mes bras., pour vous ofer ung peu de vos dere-fonable penfes. Efcrite de la main de iceluy^ 'qui eJi et toujours fera votre
aimable.
I
. ■- #■ — _ _---------
Trmfation of LETTER III.
uneafinefs my Doubts about your ,	* Health gave me disturb’d and frightned
me extreamly, and I should not have had any quiet without hearing a certain Account. But now fince you have yet Selt nothing, I hope it is with you as with us, for when we were
at TValtan. tWoITshpr? t-xxrn t7}/jlatf
[ 8 ]
and your Brother Master TreaSurer fell ill, and are now quite well and lince we are returned to your HouSe at Hondfon.,''wt have been perfedly well, God be praiSed, and have not at preSent one fick PerSon in the Family 5 and I think if you would retire Srom the Surry fide, as we did, you would eScape all Danger. I'here is another thing that may comfort you, which is, that in truth in this Distemper few or no Women have been taken ill, and befides, no PerSon of our Court, and few elSewhere have dyed of it. For which -Reafons I beg you, my entirely beloved, not to frighten your Self, nor to be too uneaSy at our Absence. For where-ever I am, I am yours, and yet we must Sometimes Submit to our MiS-fortunes, for whoever will struggle against Fate, is generally but So much the farther from gaining his end , wherefore comfort your Self, and take Courag;e, and make this Misfortune as eafy to you as you can, and I hope shortly -to make you fing for joy of your recall. No more at prefent for lack of time, but that I wish you in my Arms, that I might a little diSpell your unreasonable Ishoughts. Written by the Hand of him who is, and always will be yours
my H. Rex^ Lovely*
[ 9 ] ^
^	O	O ni a	^ o •«> ^’y	-^r? ^
§§0W0W^Sttmi^^wWmmW¥Wm^WW^
L E T T R E IV.
jC A dehatmit de par moy le conteniie de vos Lettres.^ me fuis mis en grande agonte nort fchachard. comment les entendre ou a mon defa-V ant age cotHme en des aiicunds autre s je les entendrej vous fuppliant de Men bon coeur me vouloir certifiere apprefent votre intention enth ere touchant V amour entre nous deux. Car necefjttc me contraint de pourchaffier cette re-ponce.^ ayant efle plus qvtung annee atteinte du dard d^ amour non eft ant afiltre de faliere oil tmouver place en votre coeur dh- affeBioru Cer-. tain le quel dernier point in en a garde depuis peu temps en ^a de vous point nommer ma Mai-trejfie avec ce qiie ft voiis ne m aymes P autre fortj que d' amour commune yn.Lis fdl vous plait de fair /’ office d’ ime vraye loyalle Me-fires dh' Anye.^ dF de vous dormer Corps d* Coeur a moy qui veus eftre d^ a efte votre tres-loyal ferviteur (ft par riguer ne me de fend os') je vous promes que non feulement le nom vous fera deu.^ mais auffi vous prendray pour met Mefrejfe en rebutt ant tres t antes autres aupres devous hors de penfe dv d' affeBion.,S" de vous feulement fervire Vous fuppliant me faire en^ tiere refponfe a cette ma rude lettre^ a quoy dF €n Quoy me piiis -Her. & ffl ne vous plait de trie
[
faire refponfe par efcrite^ affeure nioi quelque lieu la ouje la pourroy avoir de bouche., dF js my trouveray de bieti bon coeur. Non plus de peur de vous enuyer, Efcrite de la main de ce~ luy.^ qm volontiers de meureroit votre
/
Tranjlatioti n/' L E T T E R IV.
T? Y turning over in my Thoughts the Con-tents of your last Letters, I have put my Self into a great Agony, not knowing how to understand them, whether to my Disadvantage, as I understood Some others, or not ^ I beSeech you now, with the greatest earnest-neSs, to let me know your whole Intention as to the Love between us two. For I must of neceffity obtain this Anfwer of You, having .been above a whole Year struck with the Dart of Love, and not y et Sure whether I shall fail, or find a Place in your Heart and AfFedion. This Uncertainty has hindered me of late from naming you my MistreSs, fince you only love me with an ordinary AfFedion but if you pleaSe to do the Duty of a True and Loyal MistreSs, and to give up your Self, Body and 'Heart to me, who will be, as I have been vour most T ,ovnl .Servant _ Sif
[ n ]
your Rigour does not forbid me) I promife you that not only the Name shall be given you, but alSo that I will take you for my MistreSs, casting off all others that are in competition with you, out oS my Thoughts and Affestion, and Serving you only^ I beg you to give an entire xVnSwer to this my rude Letter, that I may know on what and how Sar I may depend. But iS it does not pleaSe you to an-Swer in Writing,let me know Some Place, where I may have it by Word of Mouth, and I will go thither with all my Heart. No more for fear of tiring you. Written by the Hand of him who would willingly remain Yours,
II, Rex^
L E T T R E V.
E V etrene ft belle que nen plus (not ant le tout) je vous remercy tres cordialement^ n07t feulemej^ pour le beau Diamatide CV na--Eire en quoy la feulette Damoifelle ef tourment^^ man principalement pour la belle interpretation., df trop humble fubmijfon, par votre benignite en cette cafe ufe, bien penfant, que meriter ce-la per occafion me feroit fort ciifcile.^ ft me rt eftoit en ayde votre grande humanite dF faveur
i»S I yv t rtl 1 ri	y* 1a aIa y. A 1a rtMM A 1a .■%	A 1a a am a 1a a
^ay par toutes bontes a moy pofjibles dy demeu--fer en quelle monefpoir a nils fon ininmahle intention qui dit., aut illic aut nuilibi.L^r demon-Jlrances de votre affeBion font telles., les belles mots de lettre ft cordiallement couches qui m obligent a tout janmis vrayement de vous honor er., aymer CF fervir, vous fuppliant le voii-lotr continuer en ce mefme ferine confant proposyjous affeurant que de nia part je /’ aug-menteray plufot que la faire reciproque.^ ft loy-auth du coeur le peut avancer.Vous pKiant auffi que ft aiicunement je vous ay per cy devant off'eijce que vous me donnez la mefme abfoluti-on que vous demandes., vous affeurant que r/’ orAnavdnt a votes feule mon coeur fern dedie.^ defrant fort que le corps ayif pouvoit.^ dmt le peut faire f luy plaita qui je fupplie ririe fois le ]our pour ce faire. Lfperant que a la long ma .. priere fera ouye ^ defyrant le temps bref., penfant le long jufques au reveiie d" entre nous deux, Efcrite de la main du Secretere qui en ifoeur.^
• Corps dF Volonte ef
Votre loyal plus affure ferviteur,
stitre	cherche
Co]
ft
♦
0/LETTER V.
P O R a PreSent So valuable that nothing ^ could be more (confidering the Whole of it) I return you my most hearty Thanks, not only on account of the costly Diamond, and the Ship in which the Solitary Damfel is toS-fed about but chiefly for the fine Interpretation , and too humble Submifiion which your GoodneSs hath made to me. For I think it would be very difficult for me to find an Occafion to deferve it, if I was not astisted by your great Humanity and Favour, which I have fought, do Seek, and will always Seek to preServe by all the Services in-my Power j and this is my firm Intention and Hope, according to the Motto, Aut illic aut nullihl^ (either here or no where). The Demonstrations of your Affestion are Such, the fine Thoughts of your Letter fo cordially expref-fed, that they Oblige me for ever to Honour, Love, and Serve you fincerely, befeeching you to continue in the fame firm and constant PurpoSe I) and affiuring you, that on my Part, I will not only make you a Suitable Return, but out-do you in Loyalty of Heart, if it bo poffible. I defire you aSSo, that if at any time before this I have in any fort Offended voQ. von would vive me the fame Abfolution
[ H]
which you ask, affuring you, That hereafter my Heart shall be Dedicated to you alone, I wish my Body were So too,' God can do it if he pleafes *, to whom I pray once a Day for that endi ^ hoping that at length my* Prayers will be heard.^ I wish the Time m^y be short, but I shall think it long, till we shall See one another. Written by the Hand of the Secretary, who in Heart, Body and Will, is.
Tour Loyal.y and mojl AJfured Servant.,
H. no other feeks Rex.
*
LETTER VI. OAinal.
o
T'HE Reafonable Request of your last Let-ter, with the Pleafure I alSo take to . know them, cauSes me to Send you now this Newes. The L.egat, which we most defire, arrived at Paris on Sunday or Monday last past 5 So that I trust, by the next Monday^ to hear of his Arrival at Calais : And then I trust, within a while after, to enjoy that which I have So long longed for, to God’s Pleafure, and our both Comforts. No more to
C 15 ]
lake df Time but that I would you were in myrie Arms, or I in yoursfor I think it long fince I kyft you. Writne after the Killing of an Hart, at xi of the Clock : Minding with God’s Grace to-morrow, mightily tymely to kill another, by the Hand of him, which I trust shortly shall be yours,
#######
L E T T E R VII. OriginaL
TPjArling, tho’ I have fkant Leafure, yet re-membring my Promife, I thought it convenient to certifie you breeyly, in what Cafe our Affaires stand. As touching a Lodging for you, we have gotten wone by my Lord Cardinal’s Means, the like whereof could not have been fond hereabouts for all Caufes, as this Bearer shall more shew yow. As touching our other Affairs, I enfure you there can be no more done, nor more Diligence ufed, nor all manner of Dangers better both foreseen and provided for, So that I trust it shall be hereafter to both our Comforts, the Speci-aliities whereof were both too long to be Writne, and hardly by Meste user to be de-
[•6]
dared. Wlierefor till you repaire hydder, 1 keep Sorriething in Store, trusting it Shall not be long to. For I have cauSed my Lord your Father to make his Provifions with Speed. And thus for lake of Tyme, Darling, I make an end of my Letter, writeing with the Hand of him which I would were yours
, A iri
L E T T R E VIII. T
^Eanmoins qVl Papanlene pas a tmg GenttU ^ ^ homme pour prendre fa Dame ait lieu de Servante toute fois en fuivant vos defirs vo-iontiers le vous dutroyeray fit per, cela vous puf-ftes trouver moms ingrate en la place per dous choyfie, quiave^ efie dn la place par moy AoiF men vous merciant treficordiallement fit wus plete ancore avoir quelque fiouvenance de moy 6. N.R.J, De. R. 0. M. V C. Z.
ISent^ ^
\
[ A ]
Tranjlation n/ L E T T E R VIII.
H O’ it does not belong to a Gentleman to take his Lady in the Place of a Servant, however in following your Defires I willingly grant it, that So you may be more agreeably in the Place that you your felf have chofen, than you have been in that which I gave you. I shall be heartily obliged to you, if you pleafe to have Some remembrance of me. 6. N. R. I. de. R.O.M.V.E.Z.,
Henry, Rex,
L E T T E R IX. Original.
\
HE Caufe of my Writeing at this time ^ (good Sweatheart) is wonly to understand off your good Health and Prosperity, whereof to know i would be as glad as in manner myne awne, praying God (that and it be his PleaSure) to fend us shortly togy-der, for I promiSe you I long for it, howbe-it, trust it shall not be long to, and feeing my Darling is abfent, I can no lefs do, than to fend her fome Fleshe reprefenting my Name,
[ i8]
which is Harts Flcshe for Henry^ prognosticating, that hereafter God willing you must enjoy Some of mine, which if he pleafed I wolde were now. As touching your Sisters Matter I have cauSed Water Welche to write to my Lord mine Minde therein, whereby I trust that Eve shall not have Power to deceave Adam. For furely whatfoever is faid it cannot fo stand with his Honour, but that he must needs take her his natural Daughter now in her extreame Neceshty. No more to you at this tyme mine awne Darling, but that with a Wishe I wolde we were togyder one Evening with the Hand of your
L E T T R E X.
fois ma Mejires qii*l jie voits fleu de fouvenir de la PromeJJe que voits 7tie fites quant je eftoy dernierement vers vous.^Peft a dire de fcavoire de vos bonnes noiwelles ^ de fcavoire refponce de ma derniere Lettre, ne-anamoins tl me femhle qml app*artienne an vraye ferviteur ( voyant que autrement zl ne pent rien Sc avoir) d’ envoyer fcavoire la falute de fa
n rr rt	7-	♦	> ts nr>	7
[-9]
Serviteur.^ je vous envoye cette Lettre, vous Suppliant de me avertir de voire Frofperith, la quelle je prie a Vbieu qu il foit aujji long comme je voudroy la mienne\ dh' pur vous faire en Corps plus fouvent fouvenir de moy, je vous en~ voye par ce porture ung boucke tue hier foir bien tarde de ma main: Efperant que quand vous en niangerez, il vous fouvimdra du chajffeur ainji a faute d^efpace je feray fin a ma Lettre, EfcritB de la main de votre fer^ viteur qui bien fouvent vous fouhaitte au lieu de votre frere,
Tranflation t^LETTER X.
A Lthough , My MistreSs, you have not ^ been pleaSed to remember the PromiSc which you made me when I was last with you, which was. That I should hear News of you, and have an Anfwer to my last Letter • yet I think it belongs to a true Servant ( fince otherwise he can know nothing ) to fend to enquire of his Miftreffes Healthy, and for to acquit my felf of the Ostice of a True Servant, I fend you this Letter, begging you
O O	tr\
to give nie an account of the State you are in, which I pray God may continue as long in Prosperity, as I wish my own •, and that you may the oftner Remember me^ I Send you, by this Bearer, a Buck killed late last Night by my Hand, hoping when you eat of it, you will think on the Hunter^ and thus for want of more Room I will hnake an end of my Letter. Written Jby the Hand of your Servant, who often wishes you in yiaur Brother’s Room.
H, Rex,
-■ *
L E T T R E XL
^Vprochant du temps qin m'd. fi longement dure me rejoyd. tante qiCil me femdle pref-que deja venu, Neamnoins Ventier accomplif-. fetHedif tie fe perfera tatit que les deux perfon-nes fe fjfemblent,. laquelle Affemhle ejl plus deftre eh. hum endroit qm nulle chofe monddine., far que rejoyement peut efre fi grand en ce mbnde comme d* avoire la compagnie de celle qui‘ ef la plus chere amye, fachant aujji qidelle fait la paretlle de fan cote, la hanfe du
7	• -	7	. J ^	•	1	^
C
fern le perfonage Vahfence du quel ma fait plus grand mal au coeur que ni langue ni d-criture peuvent exprtmer., que jamais autre chofe excepte cela peut remedier.^ vous fupplK ant ma Mefitiejfe de dire a Monfieur voire pere de ma part que je luj prie d'avancer de deux jours le temps affine.^ qu'il peut ejire en Court devant le vieille terme, ou au moins fur le jour prefifche., car autremenL je penferay qvCil ne feroyt point Le tour des amoureus qiiil du foit^ ni accordant a mon expeSation. Non plus dIafleure de faulte de temps. Efperant bien-tote que de bouche vous diray be refle des peines par moy en votre abfence foufenues, Efcrite de la main du fecretere qui fe fouhaite d*afeure privement apres de vousqui ejl qu\ a jamais fera
Votre Loyal & plus - asture Serviteur
autre IIS cherche
‘ .0^:^. ■ '. \ ,/.■ ■ -Tranflatidn L E T T E R XT.
TflE	of the Time which J have
So long Wpeded, rejoyces me So much,
the entire Accomplishment cannot be till the two Perfons meet, which Meeting is more de-fired by me than any Thing in this World ^ for what Joy can be greater upon Earth, than to have the Company of her who is my dear-eft Friend ? knowing likewiSe that she does the fame on her Part, the thinking on which gives great Pleafure. You may judge what an Efed the PreSence of that PerSon must have on me, whofe Abfence has made a greater Wound in my Heart than either Words or Writing can expreSs, and which nothing can Cure but her Return : I beg you, dear Mi-ftrefs, to tell your Father from me. That I defire him to hasten the Appointment by two Days, that he may be in Court before the Old Term, or at farthest on the Day prefixt *, for otherwise I shall think, he will not do the Lover’s Turn, as he Said he would, nor An-fwer my Expectation. No more at preSent for want of Time •, hoping shortly that by Word of Mouth I shall tell you the rest of my Sufferings from your Abfence. Written by the Hand of the Secretary, who wishes himfelf at prefent Privately with you, and who is, and always will be.
Tour Loyal.y and moji
AJfured Servant
H. no other
[ ^3 1
L E T T R E XII.
^Oiwelles me font en mil foudonement ve~
** ^ nues les plus deplefantes qui me pour-roient avenir. Car pour trots Caufes touchant icelle faut il que je laments : la premiere pour entendre la Maladie de ma Meftreffe., laquelle je ejlime plus que tout le monde.^ la fante de quelle je dejtre aiitant comme la mienne^ ^ ' voulo/s volotvtiers porter la moitie du votre pour vous avoir guery. La feconde pour la crainte que j'ay d* ejlre ettcore plus longuement prejfe de mon ennuyeux abferts qiii jufques icy nta fait toute Ventime a lui pojftble., quand encore puis juger dh' deliberer de pys fairs., pri-ant Lieu qu il men defajfe de ft importune re-belle. La troifmne pour ce que le medecin en qui plus me fie efl abfens afieure quant il me pour-roit plus grand plaifir.	Car j*efpereroy par luy
& fes moyens de obtenir une de mes pKmcipales joyes en ce mondecefi a dire, ma Meftrejfe guerie, Neanmoins en faute de luy je vous envoy e le feconde & le tout, priant dieu que bu entot il vous peut rendre faine, et adunques je VAymeray plus que jamais, vous priant etre gouverne par fes avis touchant votre Maladie, en quoy faifant j’ efpere bientot vous revoire
mill ^Jt>	j.__	?
. [ H ]
pierres pretieufes dumonde. Efcrite du fecre^ tere qm efiy	a f am As fera
Votre loyal plus
affure Serviteur,
TranflationofLETi:E.K XII.
HERE came to me in the Night the most affliding News poshble. For I have reaSon to grieve upon three Accounts, ift^ Becaufe I heard oS the SickneSs of my Mi-strefSjWhom 1 esteem more than all the World, whoSe Health I defire as much as my own, and the half of whoSe SickneSs I would willingly bear to have her cured. Alj;, Be-cauSe I fear I shall SufFer yet longer that tedious Absence which has hitherto given me all postible uneafineSs, and as far as I can judge, is like to give me more. I pray God he would deliver me from So troublefome a Tormentor. The third Reafon is, becaufe the Phyfician, in whom I trust most, is abSent at prefent, when he could do me the greatest pleaSure. For I should hope by him, and his Means, to obtain
nnP' n-f rmr nrinrinal Tmrc in flllQ Wnrlsl. tllTt*
1^5]
Js. my MiftreSs cured 3 however, in .Default of him, I fend you the .Second, and the only one left, praying God that he may Soon make you well, and then I shall Love him more than ever. I befeech you to be governed by his Advices with relation to your IllneSs^ by your doing which I hope shortly to fee you again, which will be to me a greater Cordial than all the precious Stones in the World. Written by the Secretary who is^ and always will be,
Tour Loyal^ and moji
Ajjured Servant ^
LETTER 'Kill. Original.
QIN C E your last Letters, myne avrn Dar-ling. Water Welche^ 'tAd.&QX Brown^ John CAre.^ Trion of Brearton^ John Cocke the Po« thecary, be fallen of the Swett in thisHouSe^ and thankyd be God all well recovered, So that as yet the Pleague is^ not fully ceafed here *, but I trust shortly it shall by the Mercy of God 5 the rest of us yet be well, and
1 trrifl'	nalTp it- prt-lipr nnt- tr\	if nr
[»6]
it the least as €afily as the rest have doii* As touching the Matter of Wylton^ My Lord Cardinal hath had the Nunys fedfore him, and examined them. Master mU being pre-fent, which hath certified me, that for a Truth, that She hath confested her Self (which ive would have had Abbelfe ) to have had Two Children by Two Sundry Priests ^ and furder, fince hath been keeped by a Servant of the Lord	that was, and that not
long ago. Wherefor I would not for all the Gold in the World clog your Confcience nor mine to make her Ruler of a Houfe which is of fo ungodly Demeanour ^ nor I trust you would not, that neither for Brother nor Si-^er^ I should fo dcftain mine Honour or Con-feehce : And asitCucbang the Pryorefie, or Dame Elleni^s Eldest Sister, tho’ there is not any evident Cafe proved against them, and that the PryorelTe is foOld , that of many Years she could not be as she was named ^ yet notwithstanding to do you PleaSure , I have don that neither of them shall have it, but that Some other good and well difpofed Woman shall have it: Whereby the Houfe shall be the better reformed (whereof I enfure you it had much need) and God much the better Served : As touching abode at He^ef^ do therein as best shall like you, for you know best what Aire doth best with you 5 but I wold it were come thereto ( if it plea-
li ^	^ J \	^ ^	1^     — I » •:   • ^ ^ J ^ w	^ W
C nl
that, fer I enfure yoirl think it long, Smhd.
falleii fiek- of the- Swett, and therefor: L fend yon this. Bearer,, becaufe 1 think youi‘ long to hea3| TydingS; ftoin ns ^ as we do io; hkewifofroin ypu, WrMng With the Hand,
De votve feul '.	■ : .D?
(of Yours only)
1	-.v-*!
LETTER XW. Ort^nat.
J^A RLIN G, thefe shall Be only to Ad-vertife you, that this Bearer, .and his Fellow, be dispatched With as many Things to compaffe dur Matter, and to hrihg it tp paste as dur Wits could imagine dr devife, which brought to paste,, as L trust by their Diligence it,, shall be, shortly you and 1 shall have our destred End, which should be mpre to my Hearts. EaSc, and more Qiiietneste iny fdinde, than any pther Thing in this World; as with Gods Grace shortly I trust, shall be; proved, but not So Toon as I would it were, yet I will enSure you there shall be pa iyme lost, that may he wone , and further cannot be done, Pox ultra poffe non 'hfl e(Te :
A 9%' \	^	I	^ 1^ V -V ft «ft	t Am Jy«i.4«V4^
[’8]
him for your Sake to make the more Speed, for
the Sooner we shall have Word from him the
fooner shall our Matter come to paste •, and
thus upon trust of yoU'r short repair to LotiIon,
I make an end of my Letter Mine aWne Sweete
heart. Writne with die Hand of him which
delyreth as much to -be yours ?Ss you do to
have him* l	'
... «'■
^	■	"if'	'*•	.	«
]L B r T E-R XV. Original.
.	' L N :L _	, ■;	- VQ ■:
A R LING, I heartily recommend me to ^ you,alSertaining you,that .1 am not a little perplexed with Such Things as your Brother shall on my part declare iinto you, to whom I pray you give ^fiiU Credence, for it were too long to write. In ndy last Letters I writ to you that I trusted shortly to fee yoii, which is better known 2.t London than with any that is ^bput me, whereof I not a little mervelle, but lake of defcreet handling must needs.be she CauSe thereof No mlire to yoii at this tyme;, but shat I trust shortly, our Meeting shall not depend upon other Mens liglit Handlings but
\'. f '' •i t	-	'.if	■	.	‘
. nnnfi-
C 29 3
u|on your awrie. Writne with the Hand of his that longeth to be Yours,
V 'v
%
*
I	.	.•	.	-	"i
LETTER XVI. Original.
*	• *
1^ Y N E awne Sweetheart, this shall be to adyertiSe you of the great ellingneSs that I find here finee your departing,Tor I enfiirc you, me thinketh the Tyine longer fince your departing now last then I was wont to do a whole Fortnight ^ I think your Kindnefs and my Fervence of Love cauSeth it, for other-wife I wolde not thought it poffible, that for 10 little a while it, should have grived me, but now that I am comeing toward you, me thinketh ; my Pains been half releaSed, and alSo 1 am right well comforted, infomuch that my Book maketh firbstantiaily for my Matter, in writing whereof I have Spent above ini ■ Hours this Day, which caufed me now write the shorter Letter to you at this tyme, becaufe of forac Payne in my Head, wishing my felf (Specially an Evening) in iny Sweet-hearts Armes whqfe pritty puckys I trust shortly to
I ]
lylTe. Writjig with the H^n4 of him that was, is, and shall be youys by his will, .
TETTER XVII, Original.
d - ,N	• ^	’	: ■ V .
O informe you what Joye it is to me to undctflandof your GonformabkneSs with Eeafone, and of the foppreffing of your inutile and vain Thoughts and Fantafies^ whh the Bridie of Reafonj I enfure you alt the good of this World could not counterpoise for my fa^ t|sfad:ion,the'Knowledge and Certainty thereof^ wherefore good Sweetheart, continue the fame not only: in this, but in all your Doings hereafter, for thereby shalS come both to you and me the greatest Quietnefle that may be tri this World. The Caufe why this Bearer , staly-e|h fo loogv is the Bufinesh that 1 have had to drelTe up Cker for yoUj- which I trust; ere long to fee you occupye, and then I trust to occupy yours : which Shall be recotDpence enough to me for all my'Pains and Labours. The unfayned Sicknefs of this Welhwilfihg Legate doth foinewhat retard his Accelfe. to ydstp Perfon, but I trust veryly, wshen God shaft
[u3
cond^encfe his Demurr^ Lof I know well where he hath Said (lamenting the Saying and brute that he lhall be thought Imperial) that it fhall be well known in this Matter, thath© isnot lmp^l. And this for lake of tyme farewelli Writne with the Hand which nine would be yours, and So is the Heart.
■w	.	.	•	,
APPEN-
t ,	"	'	,
X 'i.	* •	'
‘I ' ^
- ** - !
I f	i t* • • '
I ' *	‘	i ’
\ .-
■. !ii.n«i'! Ill.. i.^j»H»tU>ii"rmiP(iiiir n ii iii.ni ,i ,	, i -ii ^
f 0	■
'	[ u J
■ Vpp EiiDi xi
■	^ -V	; ■■ \ ■ ;	; :N .' . '-'c ^ . ... ’ t
--------—-^^-----------V :	^	^------■■
Two LETTERS
rN «->	f;.. .’T
^ • i' ^	'■ •	-■ V ^	_
c;,-;	FROM
Anne Bolejn ^
T d
Cardinal WOLSEV.
LETTER I.
TV/fY Lord, in my ihoft hum-Hist. Ref.	blest wife that my Heart can
Part I. p. 55. think, I defire you to Pardon me that I am So bold to Trouble you with my fimple and rude Writing, esteeming It to proceed from her, that is much defirous to know that your Grace does well, as I per-
hx/ fliic	that xmn An.	tirVnrli
[ n _]
I pray God long to continue, as I am most bound to pray ^ for I do know the great Pains and Troubles that you have taken for me both Day and Night, is never like to be recompenced on my Part, but alonely in loving you next unto the King’s Grace, above all Creatures living. And I do not doubt but the daily Proofs of my Deeds, shall manifestly declare and affirm my Writing to be true, and I do trust you do think the fame. My Lord, I do affure you I do long to- hear from you News of the Legate 5 for I do hope and they come from you they shall be very good, and lam Sure you defire it as much as I, and more, and it were pofiible, as I know it is not : And thus remaining in a stedfast hope, I make an end of my Letter written with the Hand of her that is most bound to be,
■■ " .............
■ -A .	.	,	■	. S	•>
• ••	- •	4*	• •	..	' '
Pojlfcrip hy K, HENRY.
‘ i	:	;	V
The Writer of this Letter would notceafe .
till she shad caufed me iikewife to fetito nay Hand defilring you,r though it be short to take it in good part. epshre you there ds neither of us, but that greasty defireth to fee you, and much more joyous fv hear that you shave Scaped .shis Plague sh well, trusting-the ; Fury thereo^f to be pattedi Tpeciaily with them
nrr^rvrl	oc. T	\mn rlo-.
Cul
not hearing of the Legate’s Arrival in France, caufeth us Somewhat to mufe , notwithstanding we trust by your Diligence and Vigilancy (with the Afiistance of Almighty God) shortly to be eafed out of that Trouble. No more to you at this time ^ but that I pray God fend you as good Health and Prosperity as the Writer would.
By Tour
Loving Sovereign and Friend Henry K,
Tour Humble Servant Anne Boleyn.
L E T T E R II.
Y Lord, In my most humble wife that my poor Heart can think, I do thank your Grace for your kind Letter, and for your rich and goodly Prefent, the which I shall never be able to deServe without your Help, of the which Shave hitherto had So great Plenty, that all the Days of my Life I am most bound
^ S? 11	-mr •	*
C 35 3
love and Serve your Grace , of the which I befeech you never to doubt, that ever I shall vary from this Thought as long as any Breath is in my Body. And as touching your Grace’s trouble with the Sweat, I thank our Lord, that them that I defired and prayed for are shaped, and that is the King and You •, not doubting but that God has preferved you both for great Caufes known alonely of his high Wisdom. And as for the coming of the Legate I defire that much •, and if it be God’s PleaSure, I pray him to fend this Matter shortly to a good End, and then I trust my Lord, to recompence part of your great pains. In the which I must require you in the mean time to accept my Good-Will in the stead of the Power, the which Inust proceed partly from you, as our Lord knoweth , to whom I be-leech to fend you long Life, with continuance in Honour. Written with the Hand of her that is most bound to be.
Tour Humble and Obedient Servant ',,
Anne Boleyn.
...	Quee^i
C 1
^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^
_	__ ____ s
^een Anne Boleynh Lafl Letter u
King Henry.
■ ( ' ■
SIR,	^
Y OUR Grace’s Difpleafure ,
Records of T gnd my Imprisonment, are.
‘ Things So strange unto me,as what to Write, or what to ExcuSe, I am altogether ignorant. Whereas you fend unto me (willing me to confeSs a Triith, and fo obtain your Favour) by Such an one whom you know to be mine antient profeffed Enemy •, I no Sooner received this Meffage by him, than I rightly conceived your Meaning *, and if, as you Say, confeffing a Truth indeed may procure my Safety, I shall with all Wil-lingnefs and Duty perform your Command.
But let not your Grace ever imagine that your poor Wife will ever be brought to acknowledge a Fault, where not fo much as a Thought thereof preceded. And to fpeak a Truth, never Prince had Wife more Loyal in all Duty, and in all true Affedion, than you have ever found in Anne Boleyn, with which Name and Place I could willingly have contented my felf, if God, and your Grace’s Pl.=^Qrnrp hppn fn	Nf="ither did I at
C 37 3
on, or received Queenshij), but that I always looked for Such an Alteration as now I find , for the ground of my Preferment being on no furer Foundation than your Grace’s Fangr, the least Alteration, I knew, was fit and Sufficient to draw that Fancy to feme other Subjed:. You have chofen me, from a low Estate, to be your Queen and Companion, far beyond my Defert or Defire. If then you found me worthy of Such Honour, Good your Grace let not any light Fancy, or bad Councei of mine Enemies, withdraw your Princely Favour from me j neither let that Stain, that unworthy Stain of a Difloyal Heart towards your good Grace, ever cast So foul a Blot on your most Dutiful Wife, and the Infant PrinceSs your Daughter: Try me good King, but let me have a Lawful Trial, and let not my fworn Enemies fit as my AccuSers and Judges yea, let me receive an open Trial, for my Truth shall fear no open shame ^ then shall you fee, either mine Innocency cleared, your Suspicion and Conscience Satisfied, the Ignominy and Slander of the World stopped, or my Guilt openly declared. So that whatfoever God or you may determine of me, your Grace maybe freed from an open Cenfure *, and mine Offence being fo lawfully proved, your Grace is at liberty, both before God and Man, not only to execute worthy Punishment on me as a^ unlawful Wife, but to follow your Astedioh
[ 3§ 3
already fettled on that Party, for whofe fake I am now asNl am, whofe Name I could fome good while fiince have pointed unto; Your Grace being not ignorant of my Sufpicion therein.
But if you have already determined of me, and that not only my Death, but an Infamous Slander must bring you the enjoying of your defired HappineSs ^ then I defire of God, that he will pardon your great Sin therein, and likewise mine Enemies, the Instruments thereof j and that he will not call you to a strid Account for your unprincely and cruel ufage of me, at his General Judgment-Seat, where both you' and my Self must shortly appear, and in whofe Judgment, I doubt not, (whatsoever the World may think of me) mine Innocence shall be openly known, and Sufficiently cleared.
My last and only Request shall be. That my Self may only bear the Burthen of your Grace’s DiSpleashre, and that it may not touch the Innocent Souls of thofe poor Gendemen, who (as I understand) are likewife in strait Imprisonment for my fake. If ever I have found favour in your Sight ^ if ever the Name of Anne Boleyn hath been pleafing in your Ears, then let me obtain this Request j and I will So leave to trouble your Grace any further, with mine earliest Prayers to the Tri-
nity
[39]
nity to have your Grace in his good keeping, and to direst you in all your Astions. From my doleful Brifon in the Tow£r this 5th of Inajt*
Tour mojl Loyal and ever \	Faithful Wifi^
AnnBoleyn.
FINIS.