RARE BOOK COLLECTION
LIBRARY
UNIVERSITY/'
PENNSYLVANIA
RARE BOOK COLLECTION ■
LIBRARY I UNIVERSITY/' I PENNSYLVANIA I
/'
;
/ i J ■'
■ .vc'T'TNC	\Ler	'.
T'v:'.
V
L ■•
■Ai>' *.5K -s ' ■	'"	; V
i'T	- r c ■
, .;:• , rA-^-5>.-	\ \^r'\AFA . ••.-■;’•••.
,'i 'i	---v ' :T ■■'.■.•:::
- fcy y ■ - ■	L	N
y '*A' / -■' -X - r .	)	\ J «
■ -.<■
, i
v:..
. \l‘. '
• /: . /
^»/. <
V .-
r
r ' lftyTi	- -
■ >:X.	■ A-

..,?•. *Vx-.
A. 'f-v vC -7'
■f	' ^-A - >>^, :jr; :V-''.	' :
.'•yV'-C/'^	.-vN‘ 7 • ’ ‘•'"d ■	•^*
'/	C:'-'■: *'^^. >.
. •'^■.	.^V '■•'•■■''':•.'••.■•• ■	' '-'v - •..	' ”	■	.
i .. .	^ ' *_^. * *5 •	/•• • T .
:^7.v iL	'	"C; c'Ci	.*

«,■ /,


• \

■r >.' . rft;. -.o :	^	.
--^ N V -

N
ii C::N1(
V'
- r rA -ri .

k '■ A -'A A'. ;'. “. ■•.
. {'
	^ y--'" '	i. i 1 • . - -		' V ' ■ '
	^ „.-• > ; .		1	
■' I	' V/• • } - / ’- •		)	';■A Ay :
R/* ;	• N'- V	- /r •		». ■■ I'd.-’ . ■ C
■ *k
■)
• 4
A K r^ '-riK .r
■ -j •, ,•■.*'
-■ '•': . r. vte- ' • > ■' : '■ * ^ • •• *'
. . c ;N ■ ." O ' -■>. .?-■-■ ■/ ;-v Av^'::-,-„. ../ CT'^---
' '	'	'->5'r...-•
' 'VLy ■

. t -.1
•I • ■
' • ;i ■
.\, />r-. v'
•r s- •'
I
X:t ■
y
• I
;V >C - :
< -L •
' - yd 'rd. - -J
cv ■ '■
A

.A.
V SAbO^'.K■-^V

-o.
i ■		'■ : T .	- dd-
** ^ *	\ • . -.S • •'**'. • N	- • * • *,	
	• / •. ; . • A	y. • **	
	' 1 ^ \ . '* * V ‘' . V *\ y-. •,. ^ >		
‘t		A 1'■	'S' '- - '
	. ,* .>j	d 44 . ^ ^	. *•• i r
	* *. .	'■' ■'; Ah' •,' • •	* ' ' «*
	' ' . y*" • -	• A ' Ate.y	r
	• . -y ^ ^ -	* f'.	' ' * V •' f
.. - •		•. ■ 1 • • .. , s ,' S' :'r • • - '.	
,; ■- 'v •	' • . A		
. f*.	r, ... V •:	■ -• ,*■■ * - ’ '	■ -r - AJ ~
		- - • • ' - ' . ''	
-V* ■ -A	. • A; ^ ' *.y yy	/AA-^yy'vCT-:'	
yy-.,'A s . 4 , - “•v . * ' *	' A •. y 1. ' v'* • . ^ , • 'yA .' ' V, ^ ’ . • N* * •'. '.-	y-," ■ -s • • .	■ ’ / ' . ‘ .'' '• '1 ' ' • .
	' *ky	* ."a., X y.	A .•'■/. ■
-'A		■ ‘ * i: A\':	• J' • *
'"• -»V .•	a.'A^aa- . A.AA‘;	. - ■ ‘ " f- ! -.	
♦ *«• ,♦		' - r2 . \ - -n ' • • •. - *	.* D' i .*
		VF ' - A 'N,.	-.-... k,' .•; —1 .'
	AciAA.: A-VAA '	A’'. - r..:..'A.	' 'Ab:*' •- ,,i '■

-■■ > -■ -

/•'-
-1 !•

■'n
L.
•'*'
' *■
••-> -'	. ^ . .V /'
-r ■.
. I •
%•
' . ,;: f.-N' 'N,:* •- .Cv'- -
• V .^ ■“ ■ "i • . . .	- ■ V .' . ■ I-	M.	-	‘
. .'• •l:*>	-	7	. '	■ '	“	#	-.	-	'
At.-.

• . . > •
I
>• ; -■ * '
:IV:0K Jri.\
L'V-L
■ C-.DTA'h T'.T;’:':ys>iv
■ C ■	, ..	V:	: ■ : t . /<:
•'V-h'‘	^ ''Nr: ••-;:•• ■»'•• 7'T''-C • •■.■•-. v-S' vy--. v:
'• •	■ *-'\A^d.>L . A ■	' ■ •‘►.''A';
,-V -i	' >	V'V-•'C-f*-:.-.
•	:■/ '	• 'y ' - '


f t •	. ^'
•’■ ■ ’	'*--T'.h ’*.’*''Sv‘'';;‘ Wf
:
■ -VS-
) r
. 1

• .'c .y ^	• »■ r
.tS \ \

•.•• v**- -•"•V
. • V,- >- .
7v> ^
' -	~ A. •	*
'7-,-
0 Sc-v
-y V
J - y
-	/,-Vv .	. V- ,. y	• - -'V..
•	.	.	: ■ , f : s	_	••■.♦!;
n

• '■ -.y* 'b -i . 'V, >	h’A.
' ■ ’■■ : Y	■ r -Y •'■ ' -V • - L i.‘ •
	■ *
	
- * •	' ^ 4“ - - * * • \ ^ .
1 ' • t*	
ys. A-J •■ ■ y -s ■.••-•; ' « , - r • r . •1 y ^ I	. ' - V. V •T' • ■
	. •^ .S V. ^ > , -ir.^ X . • V* 1 . •>. r-
, 1'	VL,
■.	. /
■ .	
?■ '■ ■-.-•N/.v ■’	‘■•'i '..A
AA -A .-<'K ihrd.ri---	■ i Y V -ivCA
•• R* I '.-'.r
\ _• -■
■A •'.
.f ' - - ■,
yy'v •
*
: >	. ‘*7^ -
^ -• »


T

s >
, I
%
V- . ;-V
7' h-
t ■-. •> :
<.	■'••. ..--J

•V-T-:	-
/V
i. • ■ - -	•'•'■'
Sko

• \i -t:
.-• <

i ■■ c‘-'

J .
■ VV 0
-.- r .
• s
• /-HT-- ^	.-V .-. "
f. V- ■ ■ r •■ \.	:-• :•;
, ^,
’ ■- - •, . ••
*i-.-
c’i- SIVS-iif,
\‘F> ~ > •
T/'A‘S-
r^iAAr'riiAF.
- • - ' r	V... - ;•.- ^ _ - ' '
^ .f .	•*
-X. ■V
■' ‘ . • :.A " . y.; -o;, '.c	-.
^•h-V. >
. . /
■. ,. .f
\‘S	' ■;	V> C:
\<u y	V ' ■.'
• r ■w/-.- .	■■..■::•• •.••'■ .'• - { •; , ,
■/ V	A-'J V*-.	. L ^	• ‘	I-

! ' .-'h '■
■ '.■ *\'i f T t \
' ■ •• r--: . ) •■-■ •' ■ . / .Ate. ■
. i
•	. . /, r	>.vj
c, -'■■■y.Dyte
' A. c ■■'	.. /• k
■:-'V'
i ..I ' .Tvc
.'T
•L-*
•}
• >

'A''

y,-^LO LV
'■ --.Vv, i.-:	■'
V. V -	t ' '■: ■'■

L,. •
vA
, t f i\	.
.1-..;-	' - I
v-	• ■*1
1-: t
/A :	- -.V' N'i. : . ■■"'■■.:■ SVV Tr -y / .-■ n.T 'A : ;
C N V-^-V''■■ ^'A-'A--'
■	■	.	>,.	, \-J	•.•■'- ■	^	y
C'-’C.’ ■	-. te\.	' .-rA' v; ';
'te •	- ■- A 1 .yv ; " :c;_	A'v,. ^ ■, c^.-''
Af- - A ' '''^y: *•''•■ •■	■■'•:■ '- T ,-■
A -	7 ■■A -A ', 'a V A':’’'	'

r%::: -....i:
. ‘,..;V.
A,
1
•	. t
a: ••'>
	
	•' ■/' A--'
* ' * * • y	
A -. *	
J
^ , r .,
.	-I •
A..
' b • '
f
-. t'
■ S
■V-hD.D-.
; ' \SSd.-ASA ■
A
•v-'O’	^	.
\ d


.•s	- 7.	-*
wfmS

;

• J
i V 1
■\ 's
). •
■■ ■■ "i.
'L.-.--	...
■ A .' - -i- '

•• • ■ 'A' \ '■ ■ 'A . A : .-■ .. .
• ••% V. ■	;	'•.,■■.'•:	F-,- ■	■' ‘r-
'-X.	:. T; y	:■
■ ■ A- y .	y/^.: ; : a y
..AC v..ycc;V:.y
-• ■ -'i •	::• •;

• V..
.	O'-

. .. . A
C t f
■£~- •-:
< -■- ^
I' •-
A- .
r c
. 4
“ V
Ayy
■ i " '■	■ V .	. -s
'dAA'F. f
■■A-y7c:-.,
\ -■''' • - - -;c'■•' ■■-. - ■ -
hy
i .
4'
r:A:A
■ f! ■ •' «<• •
■■

>
:	•'.'Si-*-..
t,
•' t
\ ■
4	_ . '>*
.1 v.'^t '■
	y. -ri.	'	,b - Nb- U'. - ■ •' > • »
A* ♦* ^	AyvyAy-;->s ■	. ••	* • • * AA^yy V
"A'.-v -:vc V	A^"‘"yyN" A'		
'-cN -A A • .. s '. ,v			
• S A’:-'”' ■•		.	■ • P f'A V
c -aa - v.y %-:.y
’’ As * '	^

: ,- •y ' *' .	*
-N-.-
"r .
■ V -■ •'
:<v . •
7	'-^vy.C:
' V r- .
•/^r. y I'y ;• X:v



-■KA'
■ > • » .	X’«^:
w >. V » ‘
/ w
X
^ **
■‘VA
r<.
,r
».\ - . r
lA
t1'£ . . ■
*. A ■ ‘V
>
•;	‘
s	!•'
>«
t * ' aT-S;- • t	f	■ T •	H E
TLX XT ■ i'	E #	R	■ M •k
V 1 C ' ^ ;		O F	^ -.L f > T HE
4 X t	R 4	O	■ c f >♦ ■ n* ‘t ■ ■ ; c
1 I • » «	> 1	V o	«. -. T 4t. L. I
I
T
K.
/
N

H
E


R
- ^ <
• V-
M
I
\
T
OF THE
A
R
O
C
K ;
H
I
OR THE
s
T
O
R
Y
OF THE
MARCHIONESS DE LAUSANNE
i
AND THE
/
COMTE DE LUZY.
^ .J, .J, .J. .f .J. .J, 4. 4. 4, 4. .J. .J. ^ .J, .J, .J. .J, .J. ^ .J, ^ ij, .J, .J, .J, .J. .J, .J. .J. X .J, .J, .J, .J. .J. .f .J.
TRAKSLA.TED FROM A FRENCH MANUSCRIPT.
*•••
IN THREE VOLUMES.

V o L. I.

B U st L I N:
Printed for Mestrs. Price, R. Cross, Williams, Walk:eR> E. Cross, Jenkin, Moncrieffe, Burnett, Gilbert, Higley, F.xshaw, Beatty,
Burton, B. Watson, and
J. Parker* 1779.
V
* • V


N
/
/

U. of
C Ubrar^
?/ ^


TO THE HON CruR ABLE
Lady PR IS GILL A BERTIE
r'
f
r
}
)
<
f*
t
*i
V
f
u
I
N addressing to Lady Prilciila Bertie the tranffa-tion of a moral fentimental novel, I fecure it a kind reception from the. world. That woild which almost adores her, wi)l, without conSidering the merits or demerits of the piece, read it with e'a-gernefs, if the name of Prifcilla Bertie adorns the Dedication.
This, however. Madam, is not my motive for infcribing it to you—it is not the mere felfissi hope of this piece meeting with favour from the fan^i-on of your name, that induces me to ufe it on this occaSion. No—I have a far fuperior reafon. I admire your virtues-^I am charmed with your good fenfe—I fee no young woman of fashion more estimable in any refpeQ:, than the Duchefs of Ancaster’s daughter. She is not only the greatest beauty of our court—but, like her mother, she is already famed for the amiablenefs of her condudt.
I ambition that this work should be honoured by a dedication of it to her, and I flatter myfelf she'will not dildain to become its Patronefs.
In a convent in Paris where I was educated^—a friend of mine determined to try her talent in this fpecies of writing—neveir intending that it should be made public.—When it was finished, she presented it to me—and 1 find myfelf now, by the most unfortunate of events, at liberty to publish it without giving offence to the amiable and beloved writer of it.

As
In

vi
D E D I C A T I O N.
In the courfe of the history, a few quotations were introduced by its writer from fome French poets; but as they must have lost much of their beauty by a transtation, I thought it best to fub-stitute in their room fuch as were equally applicable from Englifa poets: a choice, I hope, your Ladyship’s judgment will not condemn.
However this work may have fuffered in the transtation, there is a moral in it which may yet be found unhurt—and which is all, perhaps, that Can entitle it to your Ladyship’s favour. Such as it is—I lay it at your feet, and beg leave to fub-fcribe myfelf
Your Ladyship’s
most obedient.

and very Sincere admirer

The translator.
THE
THE
H
E
R
M
I
T
OF THE
R
O
C
K.
Victoria to Maria
T is done, my Maria—my word is irrevocably given—1 have yielded to the commands of my father—to the too eloquent tears of my mother— and, on this day week, I am to be made the wife of Laufanne. — Luzy ! — most amiable — most charming Luzy !—Heaven can witnefs with what fentiments of truth and love I confent to give you up for ever 1—You will think I have wronged you —you will complain, with feeming justice on your fide ; yet Vidforia denies the accufation—her heart declares for my Luzy—but her duty undoes us both.
My God! would he not pity me, could he behold me a trembling vidtim, led an offering to the altar of avarice ?—Could he be a fpedtator of thofe tears—thofe agonies that must accompany me on
A 4	the
8
THE HERMIT
the day which yields me to the arms of Laufanne, ah, my Maria ! —Luxy would no longer reproach me as the author of his wretchednefs; he would let fall fome drops of pity, and lament with me the austerity of fate.
You will chide me, Maria, when you read thofe impassioned lines—you will remind me of the rights that the Marquis will claim over me—you will tell me that I have affented to become his wife and that Luzy must be thought of no more. Alas ! you are right!—-it will be a, crirhe to think —to Speak of him, when once I have given my hand to another. B'utiah ! allow me time to tear him from my idea—Suffer me, my Marla, to mention him before the fatal hour arrives, that is to place between us that cruel barrier, which will Separate us for ever. Deny me not the confolation of repealing his loved name, while yet I can do it with innocence.—Be-UQt too rigorous—I still prize rhy* virtue beyond my 16ve.
Do you remember when first I Saw Luzy ? Do you remember the emotions which at that instant took possession of my bofom ?—1 knew not at the time what they meant—I had never experienced them before—and ah, my Maria I I have never felt them fince:—how can I defcribe them?
^ *
they were too violent to be delightful — they were-too exquiSite to be imagined.
Surprize—confufion—joy—thofe were the most definable fenfations—the rest must remain untold —my pen cannot do justice to them. Love for the first time prefented itfelf before me—it rushed at once into my bofom: its approaches were violent, but it Soon wore a milder and more pleaSing afpe^. This charming appearance captivated my reaSon; and bidding adieu to thofe tumults which had at the beginning affedled me, I loved with pleaSure, with gaity with compofure. He looked
at
OF THE ROCK.
at me—he viewed me with attention—my fearful eye funk under the piercing looks of Laufanne, and blulhes overfpread my face.
It was on a feast wBich my father annually gives his tenants, and which the young villagers call their rural ball.—Ah, I can never forget it! It was then I faw him—he was on a visst to Madame Du Parte-—he came with her to join with us the happy throng. We were all habited like nymphs of Arcadia, and our dresses, my Maria, were emblems of our Simplicity. He approached me—he alked me to dance—I confented willingly—his manner was the tenderest—'the most flattering—his eyes fpoke a language I did not then understand—but which even at that time was delightful, and from that night Luzy became anobjedl of my regard fliall I fay too much if I own, of my most ardent affediionp The charadler of the Comte was that of an amiable fenSible man—his fpirit was generous ; his foul was as noble as his birth ; and his heart was extolled for its excellence.
Luzy was introduced my father by Madamo Du Parte, as a young nobleman in whom the graces and virtues combined—as an objedl who had created not only the admiration, but the esteem oP courts; and my father ever found.him a ssncere friend and most agreeable companion. I need not repeat more, my Maria—you know Luzy—you alfo know with what pains- he undertook to make himfelf the conqueror of Vifloria’s heart—ah, were not thofe pains rewarded ! He stghed for me alone—he feemed to regard me as the only being in the univerfe, who could give hstn happinelL My father—my mother beheld and. heard his paf-Sion for me and they encouraged him with every hope of fuccefs. The old Comte D.e Luzy reSides in Italy, and the time drew near when his fon’s prefence there would be necessary.—At length'the
A 5:	’
9
la
THE HERMIT

day was fixed for his leaving us—it came too fooit —he was about to bid us farewell—ah, what anguish tore my fond bofom at the idea of parting with him! He fell at my feet — he once more painted to me the fincerity—the fervency of his love.—I liftenened—I wept—I wrung my hands.
“ Ah I” cried he, “ why all this grief ?—why thefe contending tumults ?”
It is past,,” returned I, thofe hours of delight are past, my Lu:a.y—and we shall behold them no more.’^
My prophetic foul—yes, Maria,, my pTophetic Soul whiipered too truly the miferies I now feel. He bade me be of comfort—he fwore to be faithful to me alone, and assured me his return should be as foon as possible. On my part—I vowed to love no other man—I vowed no other should ever possefs my hand; we called down heaven as a fo-lemn witnefs of all we uttered.—That heaven now beholds me on the verge of breaking through thofe engagements which in its awful prefence I had made. Ah, my father I—ah, my mother ! w aff this-tyranny ? Yon faw my affedlion for Euzy —you encouraged it—and yet you have doomed? me to felf reproach—to mifery—to Laufanne !'
How shall I impart the fatal tidings to Luzy ? ‘—Should' I not justify myfelf to him ?—Will he not hear it until he arrives in France ?—My God, what will he think ©f me I—What will he not fup-pofe I—Maria.—my dear Maria—can there be a fate more wretched than mine Why was I not born the happy daug^hter of fome artlefs, fome tm-aSpiring villager !—then should I have married the man of my choice — then would the glare of futper-inous wealth have been difregarded by my parents, and the honest worth ©f my shepherd have been: the chief eonfideration.—But whither does my pen carry me j! — ah^. duty I—to thee I facrifice—to
thee

OF THE ROCK.
11
let
thee I yield up every gleam of bappinefs! — me not therefore dare to murmur against thofe parents to whom I have been fo much obliged—but rather reflect, that by rebelling against their commands, I should render myfelf unworthy of Subscribing, that I am the friend of my Maria.
Victoria De Clarengs.
V
A
ORIA
I2
THE HERMIT
Victoria to Maria.
Y
”\/’OUR letter, my Maria, afforded me Some
comfort; and the tears I shed upon it eafed my fad heart. — One thing in it, I will own I thought fevere. When you tell me that I mujt learn to command thofe feelings^ 'which have hitherto rendered me too fenfble of pleafuve and misfortune ; you furely forget that I poffefs not your judgment —your firmnfefs—your philofophy: ah, my friend 1 teach me to fubdue this weak—this repining nature ^point out to me thofe paths in which your virtues have led you ; and lend me your fupporting hand to conduct me through them. Teach me to forget the amiable—the feducing Luzy—teach me to renounce thofe fond ideas which have hitherto formed the basts of my felicity—and ah ! teach me how to honour—how to love the Marquis De Laufanne ! Good God>, my Maria ! — I feel that she taste is too difficult. To-morrow— oh, t^-morrow I—my wretched destiny will be for ever staled I—No repentance— no appeal can then lave me—the irrevocable ceremony once passed— l am lost beyond redemption—father !—mother! to thy tendernefs \—Alas, my Maria I—the voice of nature pleads not for me—and Vitoria is facri-stced without one stgh !
The Marquis is here—I am momently persecuted by him to indulge him in an hour’s conversation alone. I evade it — I know, not how to re-fust a request which, if I loved him, I would with fure grant,—nor how to grant it—stnee I love
him
pie

OF THR ROCIC
IS
him not. Spare your chiding, Maria—to you only do I complain.	•	.
He is here — he taps at my door— ah, I must obey 1—Miiji ! —Is this the language for a man, whom to-morrow’s fun will fee me wedded to ?— That thought—but he entreats—he pleads his impatience.— Once more do I reSign my pen.
This man, my Maria, has endeavoured to daz^-zle ray eyes with the fplendor of ornaments, which I equally detest and delpife. He prefented me with his pi6lure—and offered to tie it round my jieck. I started at the propofal, and threw him from me with difdain.—The Marquis looked offended—he hemmed off a reproach—his cheeks glowed with refentrnent which he strove to conceal, by kissing my hand.—I flung myfelf into a chair—^the tears fell plentifully from my eyeswjhat a Scene I my father came in—he darted at me a Look of anger. I arofe—I trembled.
V Peryerfe girl,” exclaimed he in a terrySying tone, fuffer the Marquis to tie his portraitround yqur neck ; and wear it next your heart!”
J tried to approach Laufanne—my knees shook under me—he Saved me the trouble by flying towards me, and falling at my feet, “ Charming cruel Vi6loria ! behold prostrate before you an ardent lover beholda man who will confecrate ta your happinefs his life—his perfon—fortune—every good he claims on earth—give me but your love I alk no other recompence.”
My Lord,” cried I in a voice almost stifled' with grief, I have often told you, I have no heart to give—my duty will carry me to the altar wsth you—and my virtue will prevent me from breaking thofe engagements I shall make you there. —But oh 1—would to heaven that fome other wo-man, more deferving than myfelf, poffeffed thofe affedions you lavish on me!—I am unworthy my
Lord-----”	'
ti
u
14
T HE HERMIT
ic
Beg'one to your apartment, girl I” cried mf enraged father, “ is it thus you your duty I retired—and am here Seated to lament—to com' plain of my miferable Sate to the only friend I have left.
The hurry—the perturbation—the joy that fills every countenance — fhoek me beyond description.—I view myfelf as an innocent vidbim they are preparing to lead to the temple of Some favourite deity, on a day devoted to festivity — I am to be decked with every gaudy flower of nature to make my bondage appear the more confpicuous I am to be led in golden bands to ruin—and made magnificently wretched. Ah, my Maria I—tomorrow—let to-morrow be marked down as the blackest day or fate!—it will be then — that Victoria shaU refign Luzy—and give her hand to his proud — his happy rival!' — it will be then—that with the name of Clarence—she shall part with happinefs for ever!—I am fummoned to attend my mother.
It is now past one o’clock—yet steep denies to vifit my difconfolate couch—I will relate to yoit the occurrences that have happened fince I was interrupted fome hours ago : I must write to prevent my dwelling too minutely on the gloomy profpe6;s which await your Vi6;oria—the fubjc^ — no matter what—but that v/hich concerns me nearly, will, I am Sure, interest you more than* any other, i shall begin tlien from my appearing in mv mother’s antichamber according to the orders she was pleafed to fend me for that purpofe.
On my entrance she kindly threw her arms a-round me, and enquired anxiousty about my health then with a frniling countenance afked, whether I bad chofen the ornaments best fuited to my complexion, from thofe that fas had ordered to be
feat from Paris I 1 threw my Self on-ray knees before
OF THE ROCK.
*5
fore her—and begged her to inform me whether! could hope for no mitigation of my fentence—and whether I was to be married to the man I detested ? “ Ah, Madam !’* continued her unlrappy child, “ What do- thofe ornaments you fpeak of avail?—they can administer no cure fora wounded mind — they cannot bring peace to this wretched heart. Pardon me,, my dear mother — but my thoughts have been fardifferently employed Mchofe no Bowers—I would not look at the finery my v/o-raan prefented me with from Paris—they have no charms for me—1 care not what deaths I wear on the most miferable day of my life.”
My mother wept; she fpoke of the Marquis’s birth—his riches—his magnificence: she concluded by faying, that it was a match on which her fond heart was let, and which the interruption oL would break into a thoufand pieces. The very idea of my oecaSioning her fo much anguish shocked me to the foul — my blood Seemed to congeal w'ithin my veins—I couldanfwer nothing-^but my tears exprefSed the horror of my mind. My dear mother raifed me from the ground and Seating: me by her, pressed me to her bofom. She talked much of the favour I should confer upon her and my father; she assured me that I should be happier than mv fearful heart prefaged. She allowed the Marquis to have Some youthful follies, but was well affured that time, and my prudent conduct, would estrange him from them. My mother then painted the joy she should feel on feeing me give my hand to a man of fo much worth and taste ; and the idea of rendering her fatisfied, conquered every Selfish Sentiment. '
It is done. Madam !•” cried I, I yield up liberty—happinefs—content, fince my doing, fo, can give you felicity : ah, my dear mother ! I am> ready to prefent my hand t© the marquis—my life
shall
i6
THE HERMIT

shall be devoted to your pleafure — buf hasten,. Madam, the marriage ceremony, and let me not refledt on what I have confented to.’*
My mother looked delighted and rang her bell ; she ordered an attendant to deSire the Duke De Clarence and the Marquis De Laufanne to enter : they obeyed the Summons, and on my mother’s telling my lather that I tvas once again their child^ he caught me in his arms, and poured forth a thoufand thanks for niy having done what duty required of me. As for the Marquis—his raptures are not to be defcribed ; he Said many gallant things, and endeavoured to convince me by his eyes, that his heart felt more than his tongue could utter. I strove to appear Satisfied—nay pleafed with thefe expreiUons—but, ah, my God I—What were the pangs my foul endured at the time !—I perceived, my dear Maria, that my fate was determined—I therefore put a constraint upon thofe regrets which very often had nearly efcapedSne. I shall become the wife of Laufanne—that is inevitable:—my duty will foon oblige me to receive him with chearfulnefs, and a look of pleafure. That thought occurred to me frequently during the evening—I therefore tried to appear complaisant to him from voluntary motives, before he should rested! that the marriage ceremony alone entitled him to fuch behaviour—what it cost me, 1 will not fay—but I listened to his love—I received his prefents—and! Suffered him to tie around my neck his pidture. — Oh, Luzy — Luzy !—thy charming image !—but I will be myfelf—I will be boldly wretched—I will allow him to fufpedt me of inconstancy—of having betrayed him to his rival of having preferred an additional few thoufands, to a competency with him.—Ah, he will renounce me for ^ever 1—he will abhor my very idea—all this for duty I
1 threw
OF THE ROCK.
17
I threw myfelPfei my bed Sor a few moments I endeavoured to compofe my mind—it would not do—and I have again alTumed my pen. Tell me, Maria—of what nature Laufanne’s heart must be formed, to receive the hand of a woman whofe affections he knows have been long engaged to another ?—How can he condefcend to be obliged to her duty, when he is convinced it is that alone that can, influence her kindnefs towards him ?—If I mistake not, Laufanne is imperious —indelicate — and his libertine principles are not the only bad ohesl stiall have to contend with. Oh, friend,— what a man have Host—how wfretched is my destiny 1—but of that no more—I have promifed to meet the hour from whence my miSery will take its date—with calmnefs. Heaven grant, Maria, I may have fortitude Sufficient to keep that promife !
My mind is exceedingly disturbed—I hear strange noifes!—I thought the groans of a dying perfon fouride'dMS^er m wipdow—the weaknefs of my fpirits expofe me to alarms.-—I will fay my prayers—I will beg of God to calm this tumult in his fervant’s'bofom.
—what—whom have Ifeen I
My Maria !-still before me
he is
why I am
—ah, it was but a dream ! do I trerhble thus ? yet I fpoke to. him ! fure I fpoke to him !—good heavens why this terror!—was it not Luzy I faw—and would Luxy hurt his Victoria ? Ah, never 1 Maria—I left thee to pray—I had no fooner finished my orifons, than an inclination, to steep came over my fwoln eyes. —I indulged it—and for thatpurpofe threw myfelf upon my, bed: I fell asteep—but, oh,, my God I what a form prefentcd itfelf to my fancy !—I beheld Luzy pale as death standing at my bedSide^ with a poinard in his hand:—he opened wide the curtains—^he looked wistfully at me, and pointed towards heaven. I called to him, in she agony of
/
knees knock toa;ethsi
iS THE HERMIT
my Soul—I strove to Seize his robe—he avoided my grafp—he bade rrie to repent—/ had ruined him. “ Your perfidy,” continued he, “ has de-piived me of happineSs — and thus I avenge my-felf.” He held the weapon over me as if about to strike—1 iereamed to him,, to Spare his Vidlo-ria, and in pushing his hand violently from me—I plunged the poinard in his heart.—Ah, my God ! —I faw him tall — I heard him groan ! I leaped from my bed, and fell be fide him—but he t urned his dying eyes from me—and calling me the destroyer of liis peace and life—he fetched a deep figh, and expired in toiture—What a cruel phantom !— lam agitated beyond defcripiion — my
my fingers reshfe to guide
my pen.
Ah, my friend, the horrid day appears that is to beheld me the wife of Laufanne !—it darts upon my paper—and tlie clouds are making way for the appearance of the fun.—^^Shat fun !-i—ah, how loon will it fee me, “ the wretched objedl of my own averfion!” How foon will it fee me, dragged to thofe marriage rites, which I once hoped to Solemnize only with Luzy !—that is all over now ;
'—this day yields me up to the Marquis—and from this day, I must endeavour to banish even from my imagination the figure of Luzy. —Too cruel >—too difficult taste !
Why are you not with me ?—Ah, why am I not allowed the confolation of pouring my griefs into thy Sympathizing bofom ?—I want a confoler 1 require the prefence of a friend to Support me in the most calamitous moment of my life.—Maria, when you give your hand to Lindor, remember not the wedding day of Victoria. Marriages are happy where hearts are united—mine rebels against the master my parents have chofen for it, ■and it is therefore—that this day, will be a day
of
OF THE ROCK.

of woe to your frieud.—Ihearmy mother’s voice: what, up lb Soon ?—I must attend her. Adieu •perhaps I shall never fubfcribe mySelf again.
Victoria De Clarence.

Victoria to Maria.
“ Nor Hymen,, nor the Graces here prelide,
“ Nor Juno to befriend the blooming bride,
“ But fiends with funhal bands the procefs led, “ And furies waited at the genial bed.”
OW, my Maria, it is all over I yesterday I became the wife of Laufanne—-and instead of feeling thofe loft, thofe tender emotions, which would have posteffed me had I loved the Marquis my bofom was a chaos of horror,, confuSioh, and
defpair..
At ten o’clock in the morning I was dressed by the hands of my mother and my women for my appearance at chapel, where the ceremony of making me miferable was lo be performed. I did not shed one tear during the buSinefs of the toilette but I was extremely ill—I could hardly stand 1 could with infinite difficulty keep my head from
falling
20
THE HERMIT
was bursting.
falling on my bofom.—I felt as if the whole world had abandoned rne to destruftion, and that my fond mother was the first to condemn her child to ruin. They adorned my hair with flowers-^— they braided it with strings of pearl : they put upon me an artois robe of fattin.—My mother clafped it with her own hands—my women praiied my figure—my mother told me Lnever looked So hand-fome. I was filent—I was very fad—my heart
When I was almost dressed, my mother looked at her watch ;—a portrait of her friend Luzy, which he had prefented her with, and which she always wore on its chain, struck my wretched eyes.—My foul Seemed to die within me, my limbs denied their Support, and I fainted in the arms of Nannette.—1 will be. lefs prolix, my Maria
After Some pains I was brought again to life : the hour was arrived which was to carry us to chapel. The carriages were in readineSs—the Marquis came up to advertife us of his being all impatience, and that they waited to convey us to the facred temple. As Soon aa he beheld me, he knelt and preffed my hand to his lips—I made him a reSpeftful—but a distant curtefy—he threw his arms round my waist; and whifperingly reproached me with my coldnefs.—I? anSwered not I hardly regarded what he had Said — my
and, alas!
Maria!
where my As Soon
thoughts were fixed on a far different —a far distant obje6f. — Pardon me,
I will endeavour to check that idea.
We were conducted to the faloon, father and. all the company were Seated, as I appeared, my father approached me with a joyful countenance, and a lively step he opened his arms to receive nae, I threw myfelf into them, and Sunk upon his shoulder in a flood of tears: he kissed my cheek with fondnefs—he called me by a
thou Sand
O F
T HE ROC K.
zt
thoufand tender names—then preSenting •m®*' to each of my relations and thole of Laufanne’s who wereprefent, he put my hand into the Marquis’s, and blessed us audibly. Laufanne I believe appeared handfome and graceful to every eye but mine— his raptures were delicate and lively—and had my heart acknowledged him with plealure I might in thofe moments have thought him charming. We foon after repaired to the chapel—my good father Francis pronounced the nuptial bene-diftion—he feemed to regard me with an eye of tearful compassion—(for. the humane and pious man knows full well the Situation of his penitent’s heart) he uttered each prayer pertaining to the Sacred duties of matrimony, in a clear articulate voice, and with the most Solemn devotion. The Marquis appeared gay, gallant, and happy.: my father and mother looked chearful and fatisfied. As for my part—on standing up before the altar, my terrors are not to be delcribed ;—a faintnefs feized my heart—my eyes grew dim—and I was obliged to lean on ray mother’s arm to Support me from falling during the ceremony. When it was finished —I voluntarily clafped my hands with fervour, and, looking up towards heaven I exclaimed, “ Ah, blessed .Dod I—it is indeed now done beyond redemption !” I was not myfelf at the instant, my dear Maria; my brain feemed to turn round —I was fenfible of nothing but my mifery, and forgot where 1 was, or who were prefent. To prevent me from faying more, the Marquis embraced me, and thanked heaven in a gay manner that it was indeed over^ and that I was irrevocably his. This brought me to myfelf—I blushed for my imprudence, and fighed inwardly for my in-fenfibility. The day was Spent in festivity by all but me—I strove to conceal my melancholy—but, alas! 1 Succeeded not—and, ah! that I could draw
the



THE HERMIT
the dark veil of oblivion over that day for ever!
I can tell you no more, my Maria—only this that I am at prefent unhappy—but I will endeavour to make up my mind to be as contented as I can, by acting through life with duty and obedience: my confcience at least will never add a sting to thofe painful reflediions, which must at times obtrude ; and if I am destined to be always mife-rable, the remembrance of my having conformed to the wishes of my parents, will in lome measure fustain me from finking under calamity.
Adieu, my Maria! I hope to have better accounts of the health of your mother: tell her, her child Vidloria kiffes, in idea, thofe loved hands, which have So often Supported her in her infancy. To the Comteffe De Villeneauf, do I owe many of the happiest hours of my life^ and for this valuable relation, and adopled.parent, do I profefs the most entire refpedl and affedlion. Tell her fo, my Maria—and do you be affured, my more than Sister, my ever kind and dearest friend, that, in all Situations, I shall never ceafe to be.
Most fincerely yours.
Victoria De Lau s anne.'
Vit
OF THE ROCK.
2S
TShe JdariFits De LA'U SAN,ne, to MonJteuT
De Montville.
H
SHE is mine Montville;—the finest woman in France is mine! -Long have J loved—but now, how long ! may love her, is the question.—Yet, hang it—she has beauty and accomplishments fuf-ficient to make her ever new—ever interesting but, ah, Montville!—she returns not my passion with the ardour Laufanne has a right to expert. She is gloomy—^fad—Submiffive~and gentleneSs itfelf—but thoSe Smiles^—thofe laughing graces which once adorned her lips, are fled—they fled yes, my friend, they fled with the handfomc blooming—^Seducing Luzy! ah, I was determined he should not bear away the prize!' The Duke the Clarence’s daughter with So much beauty—So much wit—and Such a fortune, was a match fit only for Laufanne—and he has got her. What right had that proud rival to contend for her divine perfon ?—for Victoria De Clarencd !—His family, you will Say, is as good as mine; his figure perhaps—Something better—his addrefs excellent—his accomplishments—well, well !—we will not talk of his accomplishments—but his fortune, that’s the thing—his fortune is not equal to Laufanne’s; no, he could never adorn my ViQ:o-ria with the magnificence that will appear to her in all my prefents. I long to shew her at Paris— at Verfailles as the Marchionefs Dt LmSanne: how shall I be envied !—Ah, Montville I I talk like an enraptured lover.; Colombe’s voice has at prefent no charms for me—nor has Du Thd’s
grace or figure. 1 verily believe 1 could both
"	hear
24
TvH E
H E R MIT
shear and beheld them without ^emotion ; —yet I own—I cannot stay hiuch longer in the country— Paris is more agreeable 1—^shelides—I want to try 'whether the amuSements—-the admiration—the flattjery my. wife will receive there—may not in* Spife lier with a little gaiety. Faith she isat prefent a charming creature I—but rather too rnuch in the penferofo style for me. How -does the pretty Madame La Bert do ?—that woman, with a little of Vitoria’s gravity, would be tonchante—and Vidloria with a tolerable share of her vivacity' would be irrefistible. Farewell! expedtme foonin town, and believe me to be in the meairwhile.
Yours,
De Lausanne

■< ... • Victoria do Maria.
H, my Maria! I have left the castle De Clarence—1 have bid adieu to its woods—its dear romantic groves—where I have wandered fo often with—ah, excufe my weaknefs—I will mention him no more.
The Marquis talked Some time of taking me to his hotel in Paris; but my father and mother’s entreaties induced him to remain until this last week; at Clarened. Three days ago he Seemed impati-| ent to begone, and he dessred me to prepare to!
accompany him to Paris. I obeyed with a heavyi
heart;
OF THE ROCK.
25
heart—^I took a pathetic leave of every objeQ: that inhabited a fpot So dear to me, as is Clarence'. 1 embraced my mother, my father, in a fit of anguish, and threw myfeif into the carriage that waited to convey me from them. Lau-
fanne
we drove from the
gates'
hour-
stepped in after me
-a deep Silence enfued for a quarter of an -I then began to recolledt whole prefence I was in, and turning to the Marquis, I ashed him Some questions concerning the roads of Italy which he had lately travelled. I was not anfwered, Maria—I ventured to look up in his face^—my God !—I never faw fo deformed a countenance-— his cheeks glowed with the fuppreshon of his re-fentment—his eyes were fuUenly half clofed—he bit his lips—and every feature appeared con-vulfed. I was shocked—I will own to you I was terrified; I knew not what ailed him—«and fearing that he was not well, I put my hand upon his arm, and enquired where was his pain ?—Would you believe that this obfequious lover—threw from him with violence my hand, and anfwered, that I was his painf—Ah, can I tell you wliat I endured at that minute—no, it is impoffible ! This was the first time I had been ufed harshly by anv one but my Sather—and as T loved my father, I could more eaSily reconcile myfeif to his will:—But here !—-yet 1 must forbear to declare my hatred to a man, wshom it is my duty to refpeQ:. I will proceed : *You, Maria, who know the timid nature of my temper, will fuppofe, that I burst into a flood of tears on receiving fo unkind a repulfe —but there you will mistake ; my foul was tortured it,is true but my pride prevented my testifying it by tears;—I Sighed indeed from the inmost recesses of my heart, though I uttered not a lyllable—not one reproach. The Marquis turned his eyes towards me Some minutes after—he beheld me an image of patience—of humility—he was touch-
VOL. I.
B
ed
26
T H E II E E MIT
ed with remorfe—he Sighed—he attempted Soon to Seize that hand, he had fo lately cast off with diS-dain'—but it was now my turn to convinciT him that I had feeling; and I coldly endeavoured to difengage it from him. He threw his arms round me as 1 fat. “ You are offended my Sweet love !
■—I entreat your pardon but—your tears at leaving your father’s houfe (or rather at coming with me) fhocked and grieved me—I refented it too harshly—but come !—you will confefs I had rea-Son.” My anfw'er was very full, and very, cool. I hinted that my marriage vow of obedience would, r believe, be often tried by him : that as long as I could oblige him I would do it; but that if he fuppofed I could appear indifferent at ■ meeting with, or parting from my parent^ merely to gratify a caprice of his,. I would not-«• nay-^I could not promife him obedience there. ' I added, that my SenSibility had ever been my greatest misfortune, but I hoped it was fo diredfed, as- never to become to me a reproach. The Marquis looked fneeringly at me, and pronounced haiSarticulately—half not, the^name of Luzy. 51 pretended to take no notice of this infult—and she has been very civil—very distant Since. ' Shall I confefs that I am not Sorry for this change in his manner towards me—^the ca-reffes of one whom-we behold with difgust—but w'here does my pen carry me I—oh, rub out that Sentence from- your memory ?—I would now doit from the paper—but you have charged me to let the flips of my heart appear to you, as they are' made.—Well then it shall go-^but you must in-struQ; me how to command my . feelings, even when I am Speaking to a friend.
I am going this evening to the Italian comedy. My good friend Madame De Sanfcerre is now in Paris, and is to be -one of the party. Adieu,
my Maria!
Victoria LAUSAKtiE.
OF- THE R O C IC.
27
Victoria to Maria.

My life Isatprefent a continual round of dif-
Sipation; and without enjoying any of the plealures which my huSband gives into with avidity, I am obliged t-o go through them all at the expence of health——rest—and peace. V/hat a misfortune it is, my dear Maria, to be necestitated to live witii a perfon whole turn of mind—whole temper^—wholie delights are fo widely different! Our honfe is crouded with the very best company in Paris it is true; but to have it always crouded, is terrible! The,Duke De Maurice is my shadow he haunts me eternally. I am thought, it feems, a.beauty^ and on that account 1 hear nothing but flattery. Can they fuppofe, my Maria, that a pretty face—that an elegant perfon, can only belong to a fool ?—If fo, 1 am treated as I ought.to be:—but if‘otherwifey why am I not Spoken to in a style, that my education would in-ftrudl me to enjoy ? 1 am heartily Sick of Paris, and all Shave Seen in it. Would I could bury my-Self in Some remote corner of France, ting and forgotten !”
There is a Madame La Bert here, who is hand-fome, witty, and much admired. She has nothing that can recommend her in my-eyes. Her wit is too grofs for a delicate ear, and her vivacity borders on assurance. The Marquis is quite her cecisheo, and she Seems to enjoy his assiduities. To be plain with you, my dear Maria, £ should be uneafy about their intimacy did Hove Laufanne. As it is--I can confole myfelf but too ea-Sily.—I fay	becaufe, what I feel for hirn, is
not the affedlion I should feel for a hiishand.
The other night at a ball given by the Duke De Maurice, after having danced Some English dan-
B Z	cer.
“ Forget-
28
THE HER M I T
ces, I found the room in which I was, too warm ; and taking Madame De Sanicerre by the arm, we walked into an apartment which appeared cooler than the rest, from having, as we thought, no perfons in it. We had not advanced many Heps when I heard a female voice fay, “ Ah, Marquis!—should you ever give me reafon to doubt your fidelity!’'—Fear nothing,” returned a man in well known accents, “ you have charms Sufficient to attach me to you for ever.”
We proceeded quite into the room Soon after this Speech, and I beheld the Marquis De Lau-Sanne, Seated by the handSorne La Bert; with one of her hands prelfed to his lips, whilst his arm en-.circled her waist as she Sat. I started on perceiving really that thefe lovers were two I had reafon to know So well, but we retreated from the Scene, faster than we had approached it; their confufion was manifest, and 1 left them to recover of it, in whatever way they thought proper. Madame De Sanfcerre Seemed more shocked than myfelst My Victoria,” cried she, presting my hand, that woman will be the ruin of your hushand, if reafon comes not to his aid.” I anfwered not.
4	_
Ah!” added my good friend, the Duke De Clarence has thrown away a pearl of inestimable wprth.” Madame De Sanfcerre applied her hand to her eyes. As for my part, my afflidtion was more intolerable when I gave him my hand, and found him an enraptured lover. I lamented now. the badnefs of his morals—but indeed, my dear Maria, Madame' La Bert I forgave with all my heart.
A greater mortification than this I endured Soon after. The Duke De Maurice, Comte De Parte, the Chevalier De Mondonoir, Monfieur De Montville, Madame De Sanfcerre, two other ladies and niyfelf, were standing up to dance,
'	when
((


OF THE ROCK.
2,

_ #
v/hen a buz about the room of ** how handfome he if! how elegant ! what a man! reached our ears--and cuiioSity fufpended for a while our deSire to begin the dance : it was howeve; ungratisted fill we finissied ; when I law' the Marquis de Pal-rnene, introduce to the Duke De Maurice, the handfome Comte De Solignac ; whom you may remember to have been l^uzy’s bofom friend. He had just left Italy, and parted with this friend. He arrived in Paris that morning, and the Maf-quis De Palmene brought him with him to this ball given by the most magnificent and elegant man in Paris. I stood near the Duke as he advanced. Ah, my God!—when I beheld him—what did I not feel I shame—confuSion—-horror !—he looked at me—our eyes' met—I threw mine down as confcious of guilt: he shortly after came up to une. ** Well, charming Vitoria I” cried he, ** I congratulate you on your nuptials-—^I heard of them but this morning—the news had not arrived in Italy when I left it: alas! — I wish it had — I have an unfortunate friend there, madame, who will stand in need of fome confolation when he hears it.*’ During this Speech I had not courage to look at Solignac—my eyes were fixed on the ground, and tears fell from them in abundance. The Comte Seemed almost as much affected as my Self. He took my hand—he drew me apart from the rest of the company. ** How comes it, fair Vifloi ia, that thofe vows which you made Luzy, and which were registered in heaven, have been broken through by you with contempt—and Scattered to the winds? Ah, woman, woman!” added the gentle Solignac, “ who can fathom the depth of thy distimulation—of thy profound art! who could fuppofe that, in this too beauteous form, a falfe—nay I—a cruel heart was depofi-ted ! I am perhaps too warm 1—but when I rested
B 3	upon

30
THE HERMIT
wpon the worth—the injured worth of my Luzy I cannot prpmife to fpeak to you in the language of foftnefs.”' “ My Lord,” cried I, hurt at what he had laid, and covered with confufion, “ blame me not too rashlvr—to morrow you shall receive a letter from me—my unhappy fate shall there be toldshall be explained too justly! Retire my Lord'—my emotion is obferved —think better of me—and ah, remember,-,—I have a father whofe commands are ,abfolute.” This, my Maria, I thought I owed to the re^itude of my own heart —to my long and fincere friendship for Solignac ! I knew him when I had never feen Luzy—-and Luzy’s intimacy with him did not abate the ardour of my esteem for Solignac.—Oh! when I look
back-----pardon me !—I will not forget that I am
the wife of Laufanne,
After fpeaking to the Comte, I retired from the ball. My agitations were violent ; my foul feem-ed oppressed with a weight of woe—I threw my-Self into my carriage, and was brought home more dead than alive. Nannette, as she undressed me, often wiped away the torrents of tears that fell from my eyes, and the poor creature could fcarcely restrain her fobs: at that time I was almost in-lenSible of my sstuation—but reflexion has Since painted it to me in its true colours. What could Nannette have fuppofed !—but no matter—Nannette, I fear, guesses too truly the caufe of all my griefs.
jKs foon as I had difmissed my woman, I retired to my clofet ; and there penned the following billet tq the Comte.
To the Comte De Solignac.
WHAT can I fay, my lord, in extenuation of % fubjedl, that has been the caufe of all my for-
rowB,
0 F T H E It O C K.
'’I
.rows, without a6ling inconSiftently with that doty, to which I liave fo largely, Sacrificed ?—my father my hulband—how will they appear to the amia-able Solignac, if the daughter—the wife accufes them of cruelty and indelicacy ?—ah, my Lord !
'—that heaven which bore Solemn witneis to the vows 1 made Luz-y, can justify me Irom the chargeof falSenefs OF distimulation—thoSe vows are still inviolated by my heart— but my filial — my trembling obedience Submitted to the harsh com-inands of a parent—and I was dragged an unwilling ■viflim to the altar with L'auSanne. What remains more for me to Say ?—notbing-r-but to astfure yon that though my poor heart rebels against this tyranny— my duty to the Marquis— the virtue of my foul will forbid me to behold again a man whom I know to be too amiable—too eloquent for the repofe of that peace, which my innocence alone can now enSure me. To God—and to you my friend, I hope I shall stand acquitted for my marriage with the Marquis.—and my determinati on never to See Luzy more—Alas, poor Luzy ! my heart bleeds for the pangs, thou .wilt endure, when thou hearest that Yi6Io''i^ has betrayed, thee to thy rival !—Ah, my Lord,, could I add thofe pangs to the Sufferings that already corrode my bo-fom—Luzy should not even figh at my remembrance ! Adieu, amiable, generous SoUgnac! be ever affured of my friendship.
After I had Sealed iti became more compofed— I had indeed owned to him, that the Marquis was not the obje£t of shy choice ; but I had Sworn to reSpefit him as my hushand—to preServe towards him my fidelity ; that thought gave me comfort, and I went to bed with more content than I had done for many nights. The next morning I diS-paiched Nannette with it to the Comte, and she brought me t>ack theSe lines;
B4	“TOO
•’a
THE HERMIT
TOO amiable—too unfortunate Vifloria'^ I feel your fufferingS, I applaud your virtue ! So-lignac weeps over your afBi6Hon, and in that one word, comprehends the everlasting defpair of his friend. I will leave Paris—it is become odious to me. I can hear of nothing but the name of Lau-fanne, instead of that of Clarence. You are the admiration—the envy of this city. Beware of the Duke de Maurice!
' De Solignac.’*
Beware of the Duke de Maurice !” repeated I to myfelf—yes, my good friend, I will beware of his art—of his flattery. At that moment, the Marquis entered my dressing room : I blulhed at his appearance, fori still held Solig-nac’s letter in my hand. The Marquis is a polite man, and a fashionable hushand—^he enquired gallantly about my health, and hoped all the fcilietdoux I received were di£fated with alPthat elegancy my beauty had a right to cemmand. I jput the letter in my pocket, and affured him, I neither received, or wished to receive a billetdoux. He fmiled, and, tapping my cheek, exclaimed, V/hat I—not from the Duke ? I burst into tears —the mention of his name now alarmed me. “ Ah, my Lord !” cried I, ‘‘ I do not like the Duke — I detest Paris— fuffer me to retire for a little while to your feat at Laufanne.” The Marquis hummed a tune^—paufed—then looking at me kriousty, he exclaimed, “ Why, madam, you are at liberty to go where you pleafe — Ido not find it convenient myfelf to leave Paris—but that i am fuie v/ill be no objedlion to your doing fo. Adieu, my timid—pretty—prudent Marchionefs take care that the Sight of a billetdoux does not throw you into an irrecoverable fit 1”
The Marquis left me in a state of mind—in a difpoSition of foul my pen would not, if it could,
deferibe.
O F T II E K G.D K.
S3
V
defcribe. Farewell, I am fummoned to receive the company who are to celebrate in a ball here, this night, the birth day of the hufhand of your friend. Ah unhappy day I what did it not portend to the destiny of your
Victoria !
Lhe Comte D e L u z y, to the Comte D E
SOLIGNAC.
I H AVE little to fay to you. my friend—I
have nothing more to do with the world. ViQoria De Clarence' is married—my father last night breathed his last—there is no other circumstance that can affeft me I
I shall call on you at Paris to take of you an ^mt-brace, that shall never more be repeated; I am unfit for fociety—my foul is torn with a thoufand conflidfing pastions—I am wilder than madnefs it-felf—I am fiercer than a favage 1 grief harmonizes not my mind—it is all tumult, difcord, and defpair! Oh Vifitoria! my foft, my gentle mistrefs!—but I forget my injuries.— Solignac I am coming — meet me at Palmene’s. I shall enter Paris without attendants—without parade. One day—one night will I give to friendship—and then forget that fuch a wretch exists as
L u z y.
z'
Victoria to Maria.
I	$
Y name is the general topic of Paris, and with it is joined that of the Duke De Maurice. My hushand fees his attention—his ashduity to me—he encourages them by telling the
B 5	Duke
34
THE SI E R M I T
Duke in a half laughing strain, that perfeverance alone can conquer my heart: he infults me after in a whifper, by prophefying his fuccefs. Can a man be io lost to all fentiment—nay,— can he be fo re-gardleSs of his own honor, as to Suffer clofe stege to be made to his wife’s virtue? his horrible! £ treat the duke with a degree of coldnefs and reserve, which awes him into refpedl—and the Marquis with an air of contempt which his folly and his immoral; charadier inipire. Ah, my Maria, can 1 help it ?—It is in vain that I have fhewn Lhufannne proofs of my obedience—it is in vain my having feemed to regard him as my Lord and hufb.and I Laufanne is weak—is conceited—is wicked: the affedtion of a virtuous woman has no charms for him.; 1 am negledted whole weeks for a fet of wretches, whofe very names carry with them an idea of infamy. His health—his fortune are yielded up to them, and he never returns to me,, but to enjoy, at the expence of ray peace, a constant round of company and disti-pation at his own houfe.
At a fuperb Supper given last night by Madame de Sanfcerre, the Duke De Maurice placed him-felf on one fide of me ; and the elegant Marquis DePalmene on the other. The Duke endeavoured to gain my attention by the most refined gallantry. The Marquis indeed poffeffed it, becaufe I knew his flattery was merely assumed to prevent the dangerous Maurice from having opportunities of forwarding his Suit. The Duke looked chagrined at my preference of the Comte—Palmene regarded it not, but feemed to encreafe in politenefs, in wit, and pleafure.
You are a happy man. Marquis!” cried the
jealous Maurice, on feeing him fasten the bracelet which had flipped. And I am not infenfible to my happineis,” replied the gallant Palmene, and
carried
OF THE ROCK
35
€C

carried my hand to his lips. The Duke arofe he was violently agitated—he walked from me to conceal his refentment—but returned foon with a more placid countenance. He propofed vingt-un, I confented to make one, in order to engage him at cards, and to prevent his tormenting me v/ith a converfation in itfelf too particular, andtoogai-lant for a virtuous married woman -to attend to, without an infringement on that line of delicacy which I have laid down as a rule for my conduD. We played — the party was large—1 won at the beginning, but I got up a very considerable lofer. I lost to two Englifh gentlemen in particular (strangers to me, whom I had never before feen) fifty Louis—I had not lo much about me. The Duke offered his purfe—-I would not accept of it. My Lord,” faid I to one of thole gentlemen, you do not leave Paris before to-morrow morning I hope!” He aJIured me that he jhould not; but were he to do fo^ it would be of no confequence' when he returned, he would remember that the Mar-cFionefs De Laujanne was his debtor, and he would do himfelf the honour to remind her oj it in perfon. I thanked him, but feeing at that moment the Marquis De Palmene, who approached and offered me the fum, I accepted it, and difcharged thefe debts of honour. The Duke was nowabfo-lutely in a rage—he looked sternly at the Marquis —he viewed me with an air of indignation : Ive drew near, and whifpered, You have fuffered madam, in my esteem—you are lost in my opinion. If you prefer thajt odious figure, have delicacy fufficient to keep your tastelefs amour a Secret from the world. A lover’s purfe you can ufe freely—That of a friend’s you difcard.”'
He paufed for want of breath—his pastion deprived him of it. I affumed an air of chilling liaughtinefs—I arofe from my feat—I turned full
ui ©n

THE HERMIT
upon him—and with a look of mingled indignation and contempt exclaimed, “ Fray, my Lord, how long is it Since your grace has taken into your hands the reigns of my government ?—I like no man as a lover but my hulband—you least of all. I turned av/ay.—My air—my manner froze him. He was Struck into Silence.—He threw himfelf on a fopha that was near—while I flipped .out of the room, and stepping into my carriage, I got home without enduring more either from his officious gallantry, or from his infulting jealoufy. He has been twice here this morning—I have excufed myfelf from feeing him. He is of all men the most dangerous elfe why Solignac’s caution ! It has given me an averSion to the duke that is perhaps unjust—yet it is fafe, and I do not argue against it.
The Comte de Solignac, I find, has not left Paris—he came hither just now with Madame De Sanfcerre, who has pressed me to go with her tomorrow to her Chateau, which is fifteen miles from this city. I am to fpend with her three days that are, flie fays, to be dedicated to friendihip alone. ** From the bustle of Paris, my dear,” Said fhe, pressing my hand, you will have leisure to recover thofe charming looks, which care and faSigue have cast a cloud over.” Madame De Sanfcerre viewed meat that moment with eyes of compassion. My hufband’s libertine life is well known, and fhe pities me Sincerely. I promifed to go with her. Solignac is to be with us.
The Marquis Le Laufanne left Paris Some days ago with Madame La Bert, and many others they are gone on a party of pleafure. Poor Madame La Bert!—if fhe depends upon the fidelity of her lover, fhe will be too credulous; every pretty opera finger in the metropolis can claim a title to his heart, by putting on a few of thofe artful blandishments, which have often taken in unwary
OF THE ROCK.
37
wary youth. Laufanne is how-ever old enough to fee the fallacy of fuch allurements—but his folly —or his love of the most unworthy of our fex (which you pleafe) is too powerful to fuffer any motive whatever to withdraw him from them. He will not return I hope before my viSit to Madame De Sanfcerre has been paid. If he should, I shall be upbraided for being out of the way when hiscompany ought to be received. I am unhappy, my dear Maria—Indeed I am 1 and where is the balm that can relieve xny distempered foul ?—Ah, Luzy, Luzy !—had fate permitted
You may perceive I give into amufements you may alfo perceive I fuffer the most trifling fub-jedts to engrofs my pen.—I stng—I talk—I dance —it is all in vain, believe me. The image of Luzy is ever prefent to my view, is ever prefentdn my heart.—After fpending nights of the utmost inquietude— after wandering with him in terrific dreams, amidst fcenes of blood and horror—arife 1 hasten on a dishabille
I prof-I en*
I fly to chapel
trate myfelf at the foot of the facred altar treat for patience, refignation and fortitude to o-
that became ■ criminal when I
vercome a paffion married his rival. God abandon me ?
Ah, my Maria ! —does my elfe, why when I rife from my knees does my heart still warmly beat—still heave feme Sighs of regret for the amiable—the lost Luzy ?—My loved Luzy—if I may yet dare to call thee fo —think not too harshly of me.— iRemember that you have often told me, “ One adf of filial obedience, was worth more in the fight of heaven, than almost any Sacrifice whatever.” Behold then—in this one adt—^I Sacrificed that to duty, which was dearer to me than life itfelf— confented to reSign Luzy for ever |
I will write no more ’till I arrive at Madame
De Sanfeerre’s; my fpirits are fluttered'
•my fears bode

THE HERMIT
bode tea thoiifand evils. The Duke De Maurice perlecutes me — The Chevalier De Mondonoir fends every hour a billetdoux to my door. I regret that I am handfome—'I bewail over my beauty it has been produdive of the greatest misfortunes of my life.
Ah, my Maria !—I have a strange fceneto unfold—my hand is unsteady—my heart is bursting. —write from Madame De Sanfcerre’s.
To what purpofe are we given thefe refined feelings — thefe delicate organs, but to make us unhappy !—My Maria, why did I not behold him, whom my foul loveth, without agitation—without Such exquifite emotions as deprived me of utterance ?—Oh, I gave myfelf up to them !—I for fame moments permitted rny heart to forget that Laufanne poffeffed a fatal marriage vow, w'hich was most folemnly ratified in heaven — and that, that vaw was made to him by me.—^But I will explain the matter—you are tortured by fufpence.
Madame De Sanfcerre and Solignac called for me yesterday morning before feven o’clock in her post-coach, and we fet off immediately for this elegant and beautiful fpot, which Madame De Sanfcerre adorns with every charm of nature. Our journey was fwift, gay, and happy. Wear-rived about nine o’clock at the end of it, and the remainder of the day was fpent in a manner the most agreeable that could be devifed. We read ——we walked —we played on the foftest instruments, and our voices aided the harmony of thofe founds, which we drew from our lutes. Solignac was quite himfelf, and Madame De Sanfcerre lost not, for one moment, her charming and delicate vivacity. Towards the dulk of the evening, she propofed that we should, vifit her temple confe-crated to Dianna. It was fituated in the thickest part of a delightful wood, about a mile from the
.	houfe.
OF THE ROCK.
39
houfe. Its struDure without wras magnificent, and it was fitted up with every charm of elegant Simplicity. Upon the top glittered a refplendant crelcent, and upon the door were thefe words in-fcribed :
** Traveller, enter without fear.
Innocence, Chastity and Virtue,
Here reSide.”
We entered—refreshments were prepared—but we faw not a foul—every thing tranfporting—and feemed to have been executed by fome invifible, fome magical hand. Solignac took a German flute that lay near—Madame De Sanfeerre accompanied it with her voice. The moon now began to af-fume its empire over the night, and with its clear and foft refulgency darted its rays upon the Temple. I was affedied — my bofom beat with the most delightful fenfations. The beauty of the night—the tranquility that reigned throughout— but most of all, the harmony of the founds which Sanfeerre and Solignac filled the room with, occasioned I know not what in my foul, and I burst into a flood of tears —Solignac arofe, and took hold of my hand.
Charming Vidioria,” cried he with emotion, your gentle breast acknowledges the power of virtuous lenfibility. 1 have one favour to- afk of you, which if I thought it were incompatible with your delicacy, your honour, I would not make.’^ Madame De Sanfeerre, at that instant, wiped away fome. drops that fell from her eyes, and bade me be affured of her prudence—of her regard for my reputation.
I was alarmed at this ferious introdudfion—-I I begged of them to fpeak ; and earnestly enquired what they would have me do ?
My

40
THE
HERMIT

My friend Luzy,” replied Solignac (I trembled at the name) “ my friend Luzy is about to leave France for ever—he is nowhere—he wifhes to bid you an eternal adieu. He has lost his father ; he has lost his Victoria ; what then has the world in store which he can prize !—^Dejedled defpairing—miferable—he entreats you lo admit once more him to your prefence—to fuffer him at your feet to pour out a prayer for your repofe. Yet—if you confent not-—if you can doubt of the purity of thofe fentiments which you have known So long — if you can fufpe6i: his'honour ~ he will never feek this last, this poor atonement—he will quit France—he will leave Madame De Sanfcerre’s houfe, without daring to intrude into your prefence. Luzy, without one Single comfort — will bury himfelf for ever in Some obfcure corner of the
far remote from the Society of all he holds
globe dear.”
He paufed: Solignac applied his handkerchief to his eyes—he was much agitated. Madame De Sanfcerre took my hand.
Would r, do you think my Victoria,” Said flie, “ make any request to you, that could be derogatory to your virtue ?—God forbid !—I have ever been your friend — nor would I have made you this entreaty, but that I have beheld the altered unhappy objedt of rny pity. He leaves France to-morrow — he embarks for Martinico— we shall nevermore behold him. Refufe him not the only gleam of confolation yet remaining — a last figh breathed before you --a last look towards the centre of his happjnefs.”
Madame De Sanfcerre wept bitterly—T continued motionlefs—^l was in the most dreadful perplexity.
“ Ah, my friends !” I at length exclaimed,
let riot your pity for Luzy involve me in the
'	fad
OF THE R O C K.
41
will not feme regrets
I charge thee
fad refleftion of having a£led inconSillently with thofe delicate fentiments which Laufanne has a right to claim from me.—If I behold Luzy—w ill not fome rebellious wifhes take pofleflion of me ? Ah ! added I, at the fame time throwing myfelf into the arms of Madame De Sanfeerre, ‘‘ Save me from deviating, even in idea> from the duty of my marriage vow.’^
A voice—a well known voice, at that moment, ilTued from a distant part of the Temple, and pronounced thefe words : “ Solignac prefs her no farther ;—perhaps she is right 1 tell her, Luzy will blefs her to the latest minute of his life.”
I started from the arms of my friend—I clafped iny hands together with fervor, and fell fenfelefs on my knees — what became of me for a short while I know not—but when I recovered, I found ■myfelf on a fopha near the window, and my two friends leaning anxioufly over me.
“ Fear nothingj^ Madam," cried Solignac, ** you shall not be longer perfecuted.—*The poOf wretch was detained by me till this night, in hopes of feeing you. Forgive therefore his prefumption. Since 1 alone was the caufe of it, and forget him for ever, who has hopelefsly afpired to your friendship. Come, t^harming Vidforia, pofl'eSs yourlelf; think no mdre-of this interruption ©f our happinefs—Luzy will leave—nay, is perhaps gone by this time, and your delicate virtue will no longer be endangered.”
“ Cruel Solignac ! exclaimed I with heartrending forrow. “ Cruel Solignac!” and my tears told all.
“ Grieve no more, Madame De Sanfeerre
my
dear Vi6loria,” faid If you choofc to bid
Luzy adieu, he shall be fummoned instantly—If
you
-|2
THE HERMIT
you doinot*-—think no more of this unlucky fcheme, and perplex yourfelf no further.”
■ I paufed a few-moments—I arofe from the fo-pha—I walked up and down the room in fome coa-fuSion—at length the refledtion of the wrongs I had done him, rushed at once into my mind, and the cruelty of prohibiting him this trifling recom-pence shocked me.—I endeavoured to prepare my foul to receive him—I refolved to behold him as my friend, and to banish the idea of lover.
“ There is nothing more to be conSidered,^ cried I; “ the conflidl is over. Tell your friend, my Lord, that* I am willing to. feeshim—that I deSire to exculpate that part of my condudl towards him, which he may fuppoSe to have been injurious. . Confclous of my own innocence in alTeming to this interview^ 1 will venture for once to a61 coHtrary to.my opinion.” ’
Solignac staid only to kifs my hand—he was out of the room the instant after.
And now, my Maria, ,you will remember thofe refokitionsl had made.—Fhoferefolutions .r—weak, weak fupports! — They deferred me at the time in which I most stood in need of their ashstance.
Soon after Solignac’s departure from the apartment where we were, a fort of fcene drew back, and difcovered a well illuminated faldon. We walked into it, and it do fed again behind us—I was fadly fluttered —I appeared as if I had gone into Some enchanted castle — the genius of it I knew to be virtue—and with her I could not fear ;
■however, my fpirits funk, and I threw rayfelf breathlefs into a chair. At length the door opened-—Solignac entered — and after him-'------- ah,
my God, it was Luzy indeed I —I arofe at their entrance—I involuntarily clafped my hands together-—my knees trembled — I was ready to faint. Li'izy approached me with refpedl—he bowed in
stlence
OF THE ROCK.
43
Silence before me, and big tears ran down his manly face. Madame De Sanfeerre’s fobs were audible—and she quitted the room toconquer them. The Comte De Solignac retired to a window with his back turned towards us. We stood up, my Maria — our eyes fixed on each other —tears were all the eloquence we ufed — and furely they told more than all the language in the world could have expressed ! After fome minutes I endeavoured to fpeak.
“ My Lord —my Lord,”—cried I---------—I
eould go no farther—^^the found died upon my lips. He threw himfelf at my feet. In that one minute, my Maria, I forgot my vows at the altar—1 beheld Luzy as the object of my most ardent love — as the Lord .of all my wishes—I funk upon his bofom in a flood of grief —■ he clafped me in his arms our Sighs—our fobs—our tears were intermingled. At last I began to refleCt (though in the embrace of Luzy) that I owed to the Marquis De Lau-fanne a far different condu£t—that my duty, my delicacy-should forbid me to indulge L.uzy in fych proofs of tendernefs. That notion fufficed— I difengaged myfelf from his arms, and strove to assume a more compofed, a more determined air. Luzy forgot not, for an instant, the refpedl due to my charafiter—due to my virtue—he fuffered me to quit his embrace—and kissed my hand as a proof of his obedience.
‘‘ My Lord,” cried I with a voice almost Inarticulate, “ you fee before you an unhappy weak woman.—After what has passed, I need not fay, that you are, and ever will be the obje^ of my af-
fefliion.—A father’s sterncommands—a hushand’s
rights, have rendered this passion no longer innocent — I must endeavour to fubdue it — I must refolve to behold you no more. Farewell, too amiable Luzy 1” assded I, almost stifled with
my
A
44
THE hermit
7T
if
my Sorrow, “ forget, renounce me for ever! Luzy once more threw his arms arouiid me.
Renounce you !” exclaimed he, “ ah, teach me ho w ! and he pressed me to his bolom. “ Forget you I”* After Some moments paufe, “ May that hour be my last !—No, most adored Vidto-ria, I will only promife that which I know I can perform—I confent to banisti myielf for ever from your Sight — will that Satisfy your .cruelty ?—will that content your inexorable virtue?” — I wept—> he went on.—“ Every moment tliat I stay is bliSs but that dreadful one must arrive at last, which will for ever Separate us!—I promiSed only a few fleeting minutes to trouble you—I will keep to my word—I will tear myfelf from thee.”—He pressed me faster in his arms.—Vidforia,” cried he, ** Adieu !”—yet still he motioned not to depart. —One last kifs I” added he—and he took a thoufand.—It was now, my dear Maria, that I felt the imprudence of my behaviour—I told Luzy that I did feel it, and that his abfence was now absolutely necessary. — He arofe —he begged me to pardon him—-he kneeled again, and implored from heaven its choicest blessings on me.
“ Well, Madam,” cried he with a tremulous and Sorrowful accent, “ you now behold me about to take of you an everlasting adieu.—To-morrow I embark for Martinico—to-morrow, dear Vi6to-ria”—and he pressed my hand to his heart,——tomorrow will be the last day which will fee me in France I”
“ Luzy,” replied I, in an agony of grief, ** our cruel fate commands of us this Separation. I will not dissuade you from your purpofe, but will endeavour to imitate your virtue. Adieu, my best, my dearest friend!” and I threw myfelf into his arms: “ adieu for ever; Viftoria’s heart may
break
OF THE R O C K.
45
her virtue forbid that she
after a torrent of tears -we tore ourfelves from
break—but her duty-should consplain.”
After many embraces and a tempest of Sighs
each other—Solignac conducted his friend from my Sight—and Madame De Sanfeerre hastened to relieve my anguish. When I beheld her, I wrung my hands in Silence — I wept upon her bofom —-Madame De Sanfeerre talked me into compofure —and reafoned — and fympathi2ed with me by turns. Soon after Solignac came back with tearful eyes, and informed us that the Marquis De Pal-mene and Luzy had fet off for Bourdeaux that moment, from whence Luzy was to embark on the stormy ocean Ah, Heaven,—ah, blessed God be his protedfion! —-what will become of me, if through my unhappy fate he should be lost ? ah, horrid idea !—cruel fuggestion I
And now, my dear Maria, what will you think of me ?—what will you fay to all this ?—you will call my behaviour weak—you may perhaps think me wanting in delicacy—do not fuppofe the latter —I could not bear that you should hold me deficient in the greatest charm of woman.—Put your-fdf into my Situation, imagine that you behold Lindor, a defpairing lover, undone by your cruel-Your fenlible heart would reach to him a
— furely that
would not be incompatible with innocence!—if it is-—how lost is yoiir Vidtoria 1 I am still at Madame De Sanfeerre’s, though every hour I stay but encreafes my afflidtion. I walk towards that fatal Ternple, and behold him, in idea, whom my foul loveth.—I hear his voice in every wind—I hear his step in the rustling of every leaf—this place nourishes this destru^ive poifon — I must sty from it — yet whither shall I fly?—ah, my God, isittothe houfeof Laufanne?
1 am
ty
hand
of pity
a gleam of comfort
45
r H E H E R M I T
I am determined to Set off this night for Paris I have told Madame De Sanfcerre of my inten^ tion, she and Solignac will accompany me—they are all goodnefs, and kindly bear with my unhappy caprices.	.	.	'
Adieu, my Maria.~I have written thee a volume. Do not chide me in your next.-—I am not well—I am not proof against thefe ills of fortune— against thy difpleafure least of all.
Victoria De Lausann®,
i
j
r
i
■ i

V^ICTORIA
O F T II E ROC K.
47
Victoria to Maria.
IINDOR prefentcd me with your letter yester-A day, my dear Maria. ‘All that I can Say in anfwer to it is, that your friendship is my greatest bleffing, and that your part of a cenfor, takes not from you that of indulgence and humanity. At the moment you point out a folly, you foften it' by your pity ; and shew, by your judgment, how to redbfy it. I rejoice that I poflefs Such a’ friend as my Maria, and while heaven -will Spare her to me, I cannot be totally unhappy.
When Lindor was prefented to 'me, I was im-merSed in a crowd—our houSe-was full of company. He approached me ■ with all that grace and elegance So natural't6 him but what was above all, with a look of fenSibility in which I read his pity for your friend. My affedlion for Lindor, was al-ways'great—but I thought I never loved him morethan at that instant. The Marquis De L.’ V.
‘attended him to me, and told me in a whiSper that his friend Lindor, he perceived, was too much affedled to fpeak, but that in the courSe of the evening, he hoped I would give him an opportunity of faying a few words to me. I was distressed myfelf—but with a nod of approbation I ssgnified an assent to do fo. I took care to do as he w'ished, and, in about an hour after his entrance. I walked with him into another apartment, which I thought more private than it proved to be. As foon as we were alone, the amiable Lindor embraced me, and without uttering a Syllable, burst into tears; mine flowed plentifully upon his shoulder, and Sighs of distrefs, broke from my oppressed heart. After a paufe of Some moments, he told me, in an almost inarticulate voice, that he had left my Maria well, that he had a letterSor
me,
;
4S
THE HERMIT
\
me, which he would not delay to give me—but that he was too much overpowered with a thousand conflifling ideas at that time, to render his stay with me either delightful or proper; and presenting me with your letter, he bowed, and was about to depart, when I called after him to appoint a time for my feeing him without interruption. — He propofed the following etening at ray own houfc—Sagreed to it, and he took his leave.
As foonas Lindor was gone, I threw my fell into a chair, and without breaking the feal of your packet, I kiffed it with fervor.
“ Dear loved hand!” cried I, as I held it to my lips—“ thou wilt tell me all—thou wilt Speak wifdom to my heart—thou only canst lead me to the path of happinefs—thy unerring didlates will I follow—thy courageous precepts learn and prac-
tice.
7?
At thefe words I was about to break the feal, when I beheld the Duke De Maurice before me. He viewed me with an eye of levity and contempt; his attitude was familiar, and the words he dared to pronounoe were still more fo.
“ Ah, charming Marchionefs!—I congratulate you on your change of difpofition.—There was a time when mountain Snows were not more cold or chaste— when that fair bofom was impregnant to love—and thofe too beauteous lips announced thy cruelties alone. Now it is far otherwife—every pretty fellow can claim from thee a languifhing Smile, a tender look—but one more hapyy than the rest, can prefs thee in his arms—can drink thy falling tears—can fix an hour to meet thee in Secret—and can prefent you with an amorous bil-letdoux, to contemplate during the tedious minutes of his abfence.—Ah, happy man !” added Maurice, and he fell on one knee before me. “ Ah, happy man I” he attempted to kifs my hands. I started from my feat.
My
<(
O F THE ROC K.
49
My Lord,” cried I, almost choaked with indignation, how dare you intrude thus upon my folitude !—I am not the guilty wretch thy poifon-ous breath would taint me with the name of. That man is a near relation — that man is a friend whom I esteem.—This letter is from a female—it comes from the daughter of Madame De Ville-neauf. “ Begone,” continued I, looking at him with a degree of haughtinefs I did not think my-felf polfeffed of, “ begone, my Lord, and'never fee me more!” I was about to fly the apartment but the infolent wretch caught hold of my hand. ConSider, fair Marchionefs,” cried he, “ that you are now in my power : I have proofs that would for ever blast your fame.—You carry on the matter bravely.—You are pleafed to call my breath a poifonous one : — take care, lovely Vidioria, that you do not find it fo 1—take care that this breath taints not your fair name\—ah, rather let it utter the foftest accents of love ! rather let it infufe into thy foul a degree of pity for
him, who lives but to adore you------who exists
but in the hope, that you v/ill not for ever defpife his pafllon—his unshaken constancy!”
During the latter end of this fpeech, the Duke threw into his eyes all the foftneis of that pafllon, for which he pleaded ; his fine teeth and well turned mouth, were shewn to the highest advantage, His elegant form was fupported by a large Corinthian pillar well lighted, and though he held me, and that by force, his figure appeared eafy, tender, and befeeching. At that time I was rea liy • fo much enraged, that he feemed to me a hideous monster, fent into the world only to heighten my torments. RefleDion, however, in a cooler moment, has fliewn him to me, fuch as he really would have been thought by most other women, a graceful and Seducing lover.
VoL. I.	G	Mv

50
T H E -H E R M I T
My Lord,” replied I in as cool a manner ai I could affunie, “ the infults I endure from you., are really intolerable, and become more frecjuent every day. If, however, you dare to mention to rne again a fubje€l which my duty forbids me to listen to, I will, at all rifks, complain of it to the Marq uis De Laufanne.”
By heavens,” returned he, “ you may publish it to the whole woild ! Laufanne’s is not the only Sword 1 would engage with, for fuch apprize. —No, Madam, if every hand was armed to pro-tedf you from me, my love-should find you out, and offer itfelf a panting victim at your feet.”
1 was now provoked beyond all patience—I beheld the Duke De Maurice in a -light too odious to defcribe. I perceived his fcheme was to terrify me, with the lofs of charadler, if I did hot a£fu-ally cbnfent to deferve that it'should be blasted by listening to his addresses. My pride—my virtue refented flich vile treatrnent, and, breaking from him with -infinite anger and difdain, I bade him to beware of infulting the daughter of the Duke De Clarence—of infulting the wife of the Marquis De Laufanne—but most of all to beware of ex-pOfing his own vanity to a declaration from me, ivhich would at once convince him, that I faw through his artifices, and defpifed his charadter. Saying this, I quitted the room with perturbation iind difquiet.
I Soon after joined the company who were at cards in the faloOn, and as I leaned over the chair of Madame De Sanfcerre, obferving her play, the Duke De Maurice approached my ear.
‘‘ You are licenfed. Madam, to treat me as you think proper—-from your Ups I can bear e very thing they choofe to instidf—but let me caution you against beholding more that minion of your favours,—he may enter your houSe alive, but by heaven he shall never leave it in fafety 1”
To
O F
T HE ROCK.
5*
To this infolence of the Duke, I made no reply, and affe8;ed to have given it no attention ; I how* ever difpatched an excufe this morning to Lindor, for not feeing him as 1 had promifed, but begged of him to meet me at chapel, to-morrow morning at eight o’clock; where I must frame feme apology to him, for not receiving him at my houfe during his short stay at Paris. Unhappy fate how can I extricate myfelf from the difficulties that furround me ?
This affair has really fo difeompofed me, that I have not had leifure to refledi; on my other misfortunes. Ah, Luz.y ! in whatever dangers thou art immerfed — by what perils furrounded—thy Vi6;oria---thy tender, thy constant ViUoria will vifit thee in idea—will share thy forrows—will wish them all her own 1
Adieu, my Maria—■you must plead for me to Lindor when you fee him—let him not know the truth—but, ah 1 — let him not think that I can love him lefs—that 1 can ever negledt the friend of my earliest days—bid him be assured of my most unchangeable affedlion.
Victoria De Lausanke.

where-ever thou goest
-	Sjf
Victoria to Maria.
The veil of politenefs which the Marquis De
Laufanne once alSumed, has of late been entirely throv/n off, and he is now either fullen •and abrupt, or harsh and petulant. His pleafures (alas, my friend ! should that name be given to libertinism ?) abforb him wholly, and I have drawn
C 2	on
St
r H E H E M I T
/
on me the most violent indignation for-daring to
D	C?
remonstrate with him on his manner of living.
I urged the prefervation of his health, if he dif-regarded every other consideration ; but 1 was fooii made stnSible ihar weak minds are always the most offended by advice. That remark I have often heard }ou make—the truthof it, however, Ihave learned by experience.
Madame La Bert postefTes him entirely ; Ihe is too abandoned by every moral principle, to regard the cenlures that are hourly thrown upon her. They are become the topic of Paris, and their names are never mentioned but with fatire and
contempt. As for my part, my dear.Maria, his politenefs was alii deSired—was all that was necessary towards making me not quite miferable and even that l am now deprived of.
Laufartne plays—plays high—and as his (kill is not equal to his love of gaming, he lofes incredible Sums, Madame La Bert has drawn him into this new vice—he liked it not, till he became her stave. 1 certainly was not totally unfortunate while he neither troubled me with ISis caresses, nor shocked me by reproach.—It is now far otherwife—he never fees me, but he affumes a countenance almost
%
terrific—nor ever fpeaks but to distrefs my fenSibi-lity. I beggedleave, yesterday, to retire to Lau-fanne ; but I was peremptorily refufed—he deSired me to like the place which contained him ; and if I did not know how, he would advife me to learn ; for I should not go without him ; and he did not intend to leave Paris for fome time. I will make
no comments upon this fpeech-—you are more at liberty on this occaSion, and you can judge of what I felt, better than my pen can defcribe.
The Duke De Maurice follows me like my shadow—I treat him almost ill—I never fpeakto him, but when the strii^cst rules of politenefs oblige n e
to
OF THE ROCK.
33
to it. Notwithstanding which, he is a constant attendant at mv parties—he is an eternal fpy upon my aStions. The other day I met him at the Marchioneis De Sauverre’s, _ I had just returned from the Bois de Bologne, w'here I had attended the court on a hunting party, and was still in' my riding drefs when I called upon the Marchionefs. The Duke in a whifper congratulated me on the favour 1 enjoyed'at Veriadles, talked much in the praife of the king’s judgment, and concluded by afking,.. whether 1 remembered the story of La Va-liere ?■ My having admired the king’s perfon, and acknowledged that I did, together with my attendance about the Comfeste De Artois, brought on me this farcafm of the Duke’s, to which you may fuppole 1 made no reply,, but by look ex-preflive of my contempt.
I fee the Comte De Solignac frequently—I fear not to unbofom mylelf to him — he counfels — he directs me in the paths 1 should walk, in order to shun the wiles of the Duke De Maurice, but, believe me, I fay nothing of the treatment I receive from Laufanne. Weak as my conduct might have appeared to you in my last Scene with Luzy, I am cautious of mentioning his name to any one but you, and my refpedt towards my hushand feems to encreafe in the eye of every bye-stander. Solignac appears to imagine that I love him.—Solignac cannot really think fo : but he is all delicacy. As for Madame De Sanfeerre, she is with me constantly, and fees more of the Marquis’s behaviour than I could wish should be expbied even to her. I often furprize her in tears, after any thing has happened that manifests either his folly or ill humour. She is a valuable friend, and I love her Sincerely Adieu, my Maria !
^3
Victoria
54
THE HERMIT
Victoria to Maria.
HAVE just received a Summons to attend my dear mother who is very ill. The Marquis is not in Paris—he is with Madame La Bert in Flanders. — I shall go, however, though his anger should be the confequence. The carriages are getting ready to convey us to Clarence. Madame De Sanfeerre accompanies me. I will finish my
letter when I arrive at my father’s.
1
C L A R E N C E.
A H, my God, Marla !—what will become of me !—my mother—my dear mother is dangerousty ill indeed! shehardly knows her Victoria, although I have wept over, and kissed her just lifelefs hands. She looked stedfastly at me for Some minutes, but turned from me after, without emotion. I cannot proceed—I am too much affeSled—t will deferibe my arrival feme other time.
As foon as I came within view of Clarence, my I'.eart feemed to die within me—anxious rs I had been for reviSiting this Scene of my happiest days, the miferies I had latterly experienced liere, obliterated all remembrance of former pieafures, and I beheld it as the monument of my infidelity to l-<uzy, A fatal prefenfion too, feixed my foul.— The hope of rushing into my parents arms would have been lome fatisfafiion but, alas! my mind foreboded that I should find my father only fenfi-ble of my approach. At this idea, my tears flowed
in
O F THE ROC K.
5-5
in abundance, and I fhed them in the bofom of Madame Pe Sanfcerre, As 1 entered the gates, I perceived the dofneftics who waited at theni mournful and penSive : they however, as I pasted, hailed my arrival with feme faint demonstrations of joy. When I stepped out of the carriage, all the fervants blested me with tears, and called me the comfort of their future days. As I stood a* mongst them, my father graciousty came out to meet me ; his step was folemn,—his countenance fevere and melancholy. Lhrew myfelf at his feet, , and clafped his knees. He raifed me with fome tendernefs, and fupported me to his study.—When we got there, I enquired immediately for my moth
er.
Sit down, girl,” cried my father, { will tell you prefently.” Madame De Sanfcerre and I stated ourstlves ; and my father, after wiping off fome tears that fell from his eyes, thus proceeded : “ You will find your mother in that trying fitu-ation which calls for fortitude to fuppprt—She is liastening to a better life, and will Sooner reach the goal t han will your father.—Victoria,” added he with a stern vpice, ** ViQioria,”-—and the found died avvay upon his lips.—I arost to take his hand, —but he pointed once more to the feat, which I had quittest
“ Stay,” cried he, ** I will fpeak prefently.” —and my father leaned his face upon his arm to hide his grief.—As foon as he had a little recovered, he went on.
Victoria, there is but one a6l;ion of your mother”s life of which She repents—and that is— her having been accestary to your marrying a man you did not love”—here his voice faultered a^aln
I	^
“ but you are happy ! —are you not happv,
child?”	^ O
Ca
56
THE HERMIT
My father railed ah, why thefe
4i
My father anxioufly waited for my reply. Something arole in my bofom that prevented articulation—-1 could not fpeak.—I again quitted my feat, and threw myfelf on my knees before him.
Are you not happy ?” repeated my father. ** Oh ! yes, yes, Sir,” anfwered I, “ happy if my being fo, can make my mother live—can make my father eafy,” and a violent gush of woe hindered my faying more, me to his arms.
“ Thefe tears, ViO^oria I tears ?—your friend, too 1-^ah, Madame,” cried he, taking the hand of Madame De Sanfcerre, explain why thefe tears should be fuch rea dy comers, if her hushand treats her as my fond wishes hope?” '
Madame De Sanfcerre replied not but by a shrug cf her shoulders, and an averted face. My father quitted his feat abruptly. ^
“ By heaven,” exclaimed he, “ she Is miserable!—and that by my cruelty!”—At thefe words, he left the room in an agony of paffion.
Some minutes after, my mother’s woman came
^	4.'
to tell me that she was awake, and had inquired if I was come—This was Sufficient—and I hastened to her chamber. As Soon as I entered, I perceived her Sitting up in her bed, assisted by pillows •—her dear revered face—ah, my Maria, how altered !—it was pale and melancholy. Her head was Supported by one hand, and her eyes fixed upon a pifture of the blessed Virgin, which lhe held in the other. When I beheld her reverend form, I flew to the bed-Side, and threw myfelf on my knees before her in a flood of anguish. My mother turned her eyes from the picture, and placed them on me: my tears fell upon the hand I had, Seized, and I called upon her by the names of mother
OF THE ROCK.
57
then—friend-—and comforter.—My mother an-iwered not—stie did not know me ! My God,
f
Maria !-^can I defcribe to you my fenfations in thofe moments!—impossible. My mother foon after funk her head upon her pillow, and dropt asseep. My agitations obliged me to leave the apartment, lest my fobs fhould have disturbed her repofe. It was in that interval 1 writ the hrSr few lines dated from hence. When I laid down my pen, I stole foftly into my mother’s room, anti took my feat at the foot of her bed. She did not awake for fome hours, nor could I be prevailed on to leave her. When she stirred, I advanced towards her, and alked her if she knew me ?—Sue looked at me stedfastly.
Yes, yes,”—she cried, “ it is the well known form of my injured child ! if th'ou art really her,” added she, in a feeble tone, “ ah foiv give me for the only a£l of unkindnefs I ever forced on you!—If thou art but her shade—reproach, me not with her wrongs—for my Victoria’s lelf would treat me with greater lenity. Ah, my God!” continued she clafping her hands together. “ Ah, my God I what a facristce did stie make to duty—did duty exact from her? Victoria-—Victoria 1” she exclaimed, and' again funk on her pilloW—-I threw myfelf . on the bed and wept aloud.
“ Ah, my mother!—you never injured me you were always gdod to your ViCtoria—you have made her happy—-and she comes to blefs you for it.—Think no more of the facrifice you mentioned—it was only a momentary struggle~it is now over, and I regret it no further.”
My mother once more railed herfelf in her bed, she listened to me with the most cautious attention her features brightened as I fpoke, glow overfpread her dying face.
C5
ti
gentle
Blessed
THE HERMIT

Blessed Virgin,” cried my mother with uplifted hands and eyes; ** dear and fpotlcfs lady, in your intercelTion 1 have confided—receive the warmest thanks my poor heart can give—to thy protedtion 1 commend my child—offer her to-my crucified Lord—and beg of him to defend her from the perils of a worldly life.—Ah, had I before reflected on the modest merit of Luzy ! alas!—poor Luzy!” and she rested her weary head upon my bofom.—Now, my friend, look on thy fuffering Victoria, -and pity her poignant fen-Sshility.
My dear mother from that moment, my Maria, has been herfelf no longer: a fatal stupor, which befpeakes the approach of death, hath fastened on her, and she is at once regardlefs of huf-band, child, and friend, I have quitted her chamber for a few minutes to conquer the extreme force of my affliction, which feems to dif-turb my father’s Silent and awful forrow. I must now, however, beg leave to return to her pillow, where 1 will endeavour to stifle my fobs, my heartrending Sighs.—Ah, my mother—my ever dear my tender, fympathizing parent I
Madame De Sanscerre to Maria.
TO you, my dear Villeneauf, I will make no apologies for beginning a correfpondence with the fadest tidings a pen can relate.—fufficc it to fay, I write of thy beautiful, thy fuffering Victoria ; and to her misfortunes thy ear and heart are ever open.
The

OF THE ROCK.
59
The D.utchefs D.e Clarence lived bg.t a few' hours after the conclufion of the Marehionefs De
C	•	t	,	s	.	:	,	.	A	•	I	.
l^aulanne’slast p^iragraph. $l\e how.ever regained her ienfes an hour before her death, and ern-ployed that titne in receiving the last rites of the church—in taking leave of her hufband—and in the tenderest adieus to her injured child. She embraced Madame De Eaufanne with much af-feftion—stie held before her, the pidlures of the Comte P.e Luzy, and that of our immaculate
Lady.
** Here, rpy daughter,'” cried she, at the moment I offer you the portrait of a lover, 1 pr,e-fent you with that of chastity itielst Let your friendship ftlone be given to the first—but let your whole heart be devoted to the other.—Thefe,” continued she, “ are faint refemblances of what we love—of what we revere—but they Serve to remind us—that Luzy was the most amiable,of all ’ lovers—that the Virgin Mary was the most pure of .all women.”
She then prayed fervently for she happinefs, for the preferyation of lier daughter’s virtue; and throwing herfelf into her arms, leaned her head upon her bofom, and breathed her last Sigh, without a groan—without one struggle.
It is now a difficult talk to fay more—to deferibe to you the warmth— the fenstble forrow of a tender and dutiful child for the lofs of a parent ever admirable as a wife—ever amiable as a mother. She w^as abforhed in afstiStion, yet she endeavoured to conquer it, in order to fpeak confolation to her wretched,father—whofe agonies norongue lib pen can ever delineate.
1 am Sorry to be obliged to add that the Duke was that night feized with very alarmiDgSymptoms.
He grew worfe for.three days fucceshvely, and he now lies fo ill as to be defpaired of ,by all his
phySicians.
6o
THE HERMIT
phySicians. The Marchionefs is at times almost Srantic with defpair—she kneels and bedews the corfe of her fond mother with her tearsi^—f^e invokes her to pray for the prefervation of the only comfort she has left—then with a face of affedted compofure, she returns to her place behind her father’s pillow.
The poor man, infenSible to every thing but the injury he has done her, and the horror of death ; lofes, in afKing her pardon, thofe moments in which, by an upright reSignation to the will of heaven, he could alTist her ycath by offering her the fupporting advice of a dying parent. The Duke De Clarence is, I fear, drawing very near his end, and in that minute of distrefs, she will in fa£f lofe the only friend of whom the Marquis De Laufanne stands in awe. He will then prove more openly his love of libertinifm—and his lovely wife will feel, too feverdy, the facrifice she made to filial duty in favour of the most abandoned of his fex.
The Marchionefs has Sent to defire my attendance in the Duke’s apartment—my fears prophecy a thoufand horrible incidents.
*
*
#
F’w-el^je ^clock at night.
IT is all over with the Duke, my dear Maria he died in the tender arms of his daughter, who foothed, in tliofe dreadful moments, the pangs and terrors of the grim tyrant.— She is, at prefent, in a Situation that beggars even eloquence. She will not confent to leave Clarence until the funeral is over. The Duke and Dutchels are to be interred in the family vault on the fame day. •
I will
OF THE ROCK.
6i
»
I will make no apology for quitting this fubject So abruptly.—1 must fly to our dear ViUoria, who stands in need of all my friendship—of all my confolation.'
Yours ever, my dear Villeneauf,
Julia De Sanscerre.
•'t'

Victoria to Maria.
AM but just recovered from a fevere illnefs which has confined me fix weeks. Death has been very bufy about me for feme time past—he has at length (pared the only objedt that I could have wished him to have taken, and instead of her life, has robbed her of the comfort—of the fandlion of beloved parents. My dear Maria !— what pangs have 1 not endured Since I writ to thee last!
The cruel Marquis would not let me stay at Clarence till the funeral obfequies were performed. He came down to chide me for ha ving, as he called it, jfo ftlly an intention^ and defired me to go with him back to Paris.
You have always told me, my Maria, that we could oftner command our feelings, than we were willing to endeavour for., in the bitte.mefs of that moment I thought of you.—Overwhelmed as I was with forrow at the idea of parting for ever from the objeQ:s in the world, I held most dear, though ■cold and inanimate—to go with a man whom I neither loved or refpe8;ed—a man from whom I could expedt no confolation for .the heart-breaking
calamity
6z
THE HERMIT
calamity that had befallen me—nay, on the contrary, one whofe infenSibility, or whole adamantine foul would either caufe him to deride or inliilt
'	• V	*■
my forrovv:—tormented, I fay, as i was with thefe cruel ideas—I appeared to acquiefce with rie-Signation to bis will—-and I confented wdthout expossulation to accompany him whitherfoever he plea fed.
The Marquis feemed furjirifed at my condefcen-Sion—he looked ?.t the fame time as if he was not contented with his haying given me, to all appearance, fo little diffatisfadiion. He bit his lips he leemed to panic for a few moments; at length, preteudiqg to recoUe'dt an engagement upon bussnefs for the next morning in Pans—he laid, ke mvd.t ahLbdely Jet put that mitnde.
It was now .my dear Maria, ten o’clock at night. —il was really exlrausted by grief and fatigue, and wholly unable to take-fiich a journey.—1 therefore steSought hirn to let me reft that night—promiSing to follow him the enfuing day-—tie flew into a
- V	' J	' ^
most violent ryt^e.-r-Curfed delicacy—ciirfeK affebU-(fn—his life was etnhitisred by my iv-hinifes —by my caprice—he would fet off that infant—and I might either follow him i pr fay for enter from Mm—juf as kef fuited my inclination.
At thefe words I hid my face ip the bofom of Madame De Sanlcerre—-and in fpite of my resolution, I burft into an agony qf tears.
The coach was at the dqor in a rpoment.—I arofe—^I was haftening to take one fare,wel embrace of my dear father and mother-—to breath out one ardent prayer for their repofe, at the feet of their coffins ; when the inhuman man laid hold of my arm, and exclaimed, dp you intend. Madam, to accompany me or not ?”
1 affured him I would attend him after having taken an eternaSadieu of my beloved oarents.
By

OF THE ROCK.
63
By the great God,” cried he, almost hoarfe with pastion, “ you (hall not stir—the carriage is peady—step into it, or I staall go without you — and if fo—never will I behold you more.’’
“ My Lord,” replied 1, when I tel! you that to take a last view of my tender mother—of my dear father—will be to me in fome meafure a •confolation—rurely your goodnefs will fufSer me to indulge myfelf in it!—^your humanity cannot refufe me fuch a trifling comfort !”
“ No,” returned he,—“ you shall not overcome me thus by argument—the cafe is clearly this—^if you choofe to oblige me^—give me your hand directly to convey you to the carriage—^if not—remain here for ever.”
Tire Marquis turned from me in a phrenKy-I paufed—'the affair, however, required no con** fideration—it was evident that to Support the charadter of a good wife—to fulfil the vow of obedience I made at the altar—-my will must ever be fubiervient to his caprices :—therefore, with a Sigh, entreated him to be calm, affured him of my being ready to go with him wshen ever he thought fit, and stepping to the door, ordered my woman to prepare to attend us immediately to town : this done, I went into the great halt, where the Marquis and Sancerre were afSemblest, and we waited there fome minutes before every thing was ready.
I will not omit to mention to you one circum-'ftance that affected me much ; it was an odd one—the remembrance of it makes me weep.
As we were detained there for Nannette and the little parcel with my night cloaths, which she had orders to bring with her, my father’s old favourite Spaniel crawled towards me, and laying himfelf at my feet, gave a deep groan.—I stooped down to carefs him—1 called him by his name
he heard me not—that groan was his last.
Poor
6a
THE HERMIT
“ Poor Zephyr !” cried the old butler, with tears .falling from his eyes, “ you and E have looked on happy days—they are all passed now and you have died in good time 1
1 could have given way to fome bursts of grief but I thought of your remark—and fuppresting my (enSibility, I hurried into the coach—where, under the darknefs of the night, I fucceeded in concealing the real poigi>ancy of my forrow.
Tell me, my Maria, if you do not think I have had fome trials to contend with ?
A
After travelling about twenty miles, I found myfelf incapable of proceeding further—an uni-verfal faintnefs overfpread my frame ; I funk upon the shoulder of my friend fianfcerre.—the Marquis, I believe, was terrified : he ordered his lervants to stop at the next village, where I lay the remainder of the night in an uneafy bed, and a room fofmall and cold, as to afford me but very little rest. I was awakened early in the morning to proceed on my journey, which I undertook with no pleafure—-but with a vifibly increafing indifpoSition. When we arrived at Paris, I was taken extremely ill—and I am at prefent fo weak and languid from all I have endured, as to be Scarcely able to hold rny pen.
Madame De Sinfcerre has never left me. The Comte De Solignac has often called to make the most friendly enquiries after my health. I have Sent to beg his company in my dressing room this evening.—I will own to you, I defire to fpeak to him on a fubjedl which I once firmly intended never to mention to him more ; but my dear mother, in her dying moments, prefented me with the portrait of the Comte De Luxy—I wish not to keep it—my mother knew not how d ^ar h;s image was shill to my bofom—she offered it to me as a remembrancer of an inestimable friend, whom she
had
y-
OF THE R O C K.
^5
had ever prized as Such—and to whom I owed fome esteem. I have, however, confulted my ^religion—my reafon upon it; they both condemn my keeping in postestion the pifiure of a man, who must ever appear to me ,in the light of a dangerous insinuating lover.—My heart rebels against the feverity of this determination—but my poor heart must conquer all its weaknesses—or break in the attempt. I listen not to it—I pay no regard to its foft complainings—I conSider it as a treacherous friend—as a dangerous pleader—the image of Luzy is fufficiently imprested upon it it need not deSire more. Ah, it is not an inanimate portrait that is there painted ?—he breathes —he lives—he fpeaks himfelf 1
I have feen Solignac—he received from me the picture with Sighs and reluCtance. He bade me keep it—for he believed it was all that remained ol his friend.—1 started—he feemed forry for what had efcaped him—he took it however—■ but would explain himfelf no farther. What could he mean, my Maria ?—-perhaps it was an artifice to induce me not to part with the charming portrait I
The Marquis has entirely forfaken Madame La Bert ; who has, it feems, fuffered So cruelly by hisnegleCt, that forgetting all her other Suitors, she has retired to a convent where she propofes to end her days in Sorrow and repentance. Poor Madame La Bert! 1 will not at prefent intrude on her retirement, lest she should impute it to a far different caufe from that which must infpire me to viSit her. Sorne weeks hence I will go to her convent—I will encourage her repentance—I will weep over her misfortune, and endeavour to confole her for it.
Adieu, my Maria !
forget not that I am
Most Yours.
Victoria
THE HERMIT
Victoria to Maria.
I TOLD you in my lass pf my intention to viSit Madame La Bert; I went tp her convent yef-terday, and will give you/the particulars of our eonverfation.
I would nol tell my name, but deSifed one of the Sisters to fay, “ a fiiend of hers would be glad to fpeak with her.” 1 did not wait long— Madame La Bert appeared—fhe is, at prefent, only a penSioner in the houfe—I therefore faw her without restraint. As fpon as she entered, I could perceive that the Sight of me affefifed her highly —she blushed—“she trembled^—she heSitated. I appeared not to obferve her cpnfuston-r-but ad“ vanced towards her, and Saluted her with much freedom and friendship. The poor woman recovered herstlf, in Some degree, from the unaffecl::-ed eafe of my deportment: she wiped the tears ftoyn her eyes—and paid me in return Some polite and agreeably compliments. She condoled with me ypon the fable drefs 1 wore, and heaved many Sighs on feeing me astedled at the fad oc-cafion of rny affuming it.
“ Ah, Madam,” she at length exclaimed, happy had it been for me had my parents lived to inSpe^ and watch oyer my education !—their child would not now be the prey of cruel re-rrorfe^the only objedt in the world, who could injure amiablenefs like yours!—That I have injured you—is too true—that I do repent Sincerely of it—is alfo a truth. I do not merit the honour of a viSit from you. You may be a stranger to
my
OF T H E R O C K.

sny guilt—but I can never confent to abufe you further by fuffering you to remain in an error So fatal to my peace—fo prejudicial to your honour. You must not repeat this favour. Madam continued she in a flood of tears, my charadler is no longer an innocent one—the world will talk, should you renew your intimacy with me—and the chastity of your fame would be blackened by your friendship for me.” Ah my God !” continued Madame La Bert, ** what pu-nishment do I not deferve !—yet I will not merit rnore, by pretending innocence, and fuffering you most beautiful, most excellent lady, to continue your esteem for me.-—Enter not thefe walls again, until I prove myfelf a penitent magdalen indeed until I can invite you to behold me about to re-ssgn the world, and all its allurements—until, worn by fasting, prayer, and hardship, I shall in Some meafure have expiated the enormity of thoSe crimes for which I deferve to fuffer.”
At thfife ’ Dfds, Madame La Bert covered her face with her nand, and the tears trickled in large drops through her fair and stender fingers. As for my part I wept with her-—I endeavoured to comfort her—I bade her not to defpond ; to conSidef that God w'as very merciful, and never rejeisted
-the tears of a contrite heart. I bewailSvj with her the unhappy credulity of our fex — I inveighed against the too cruel arts ©f the other, which were ever practifed with impunity agair^ our weaknefs. I affured her she should always > 'mand	friendship—that I ne-
ver offered it to .^eishefore—beeauit she stood in need of confolation till now—:-but as it
J hoped I
the figh of a nenitent
now—
was incapable of
no
was no-w required withholding it fiom her.
Madame La Bert viewed me with eyes of astonishment—she could not expiefs her feelings—she
feized

6S
THE HERMIT
—she carried it with-wlldnefs to
the barba-
of
Seized riiy hand-
her lips.
“ Ah,” she exclaimed, the cruel ■rous Marquis!—he has robbed^ me not only virtue — but of peace for ever !”
“ My dear madam,” cried I, “ are thefe net fynonymous terms ? be perfuaded there is but one way of regaining the latter—and that can only be by living up to thofe fentiments of piety and religion, which heavfen has now been pleafed to in-fpire your heart with.”'
I will not repeat the effuSions of her gratitude, in return for a mere nothin"', a mere charitable viSit, which gave me more pleafure than it could have conferred on her,, fince it afforded me an opportunity of beholding the most edifying example in the world and of being convinced that the heart of this unfortunate woman was Sincerely touched with a just fenfe of her dangerdus way of life. People, I believe, thought her more abandoned than she really was, she had great vivacity^—was a free talker—and had a degree of coquetry in her difpofition which rendered her the obje6t of every man’s attention. She is very pretty too ;—a circumstance I never before Ob’-Served until I beheld her in the amiable light she appeared yesterday. I will own to you her former carriage was too allured -too indelicate to allow me to fee her with unprejudiced eyes—she was, however,, always talked of as a great beau?* ty.
You will perhaps fuppofe that the Marquis having got rid of this engagement is more at home; and is become domestic:—but thefe yout will fidly mistake : he now pays his devoirs to the celebrated Le Blanc, who is the handfomest—the most extravagant—and the most elegant Courte-faa in all Paris.
,	Yesterday
o F THE ROC K.
■69
Yesterday as I was returning from the convent which immures the unhappy La Bert, my carriage wasdriven violently against by another—and in luch a manner as to prevent either from pro--ceeding. I was terrified, and looked out—when I perceived the Marquis and this unfortunate creature in the chariot, which impeded my way : at that moment I heard a general cry in the streht, that it was the Marchionefs De haufanncy veho was in the moji imminent danger ; and the Duke De Henrie, with many other young noblemen, who were standing at the door of an hotel which pasted, ran round and perfuaded me to alight until the carriages should be difengaged. I immediately gave my hand to the Duke, and was by him condufl;ed into the houfe of a Bourgeoife, where the gentlemen clustered about me., to veil from my fight the difagreeable view of my huf-band leading forth Mademoifelle. I confefs it gave me fome pleafure to obferve, -upon re-entering my carriage, hers lying entirely negledted by every one but her own attendants ; whilst all feemed anxiousty to place mine in its former fecu-rity. A wheel which had been torn off from hers; still lay upon the ground—mine, that had fiistered in the fame manner, was entirely Set to rights, and that almost instantaneousty.
1 astedted not to know whofe chariot it was, nor who were in it ; I therefore begged the Duke., if he was acquainted with the perfons to whom the carelestnefs of my coachman had caufed Such an injury, to asture them I was forry for it, ard hoped they would accept of my compliments. He fmiled, and bowing upon my hand, entreated ms to believef he would abl on the occafion like one who ceulidered my politenejs as his own.—I ordered my people to distribute money amongst the obliging croud, and returned home through loud acclamations

THE HERMIT
tions of applaufe. The worst—on, if you will, the best of it was, that I Saw Madamoifelle L« Blanc in a houfe just oppoSite to Where my carriage stood when I entered it—fo that she and her Suivante had she mortification to behold rne an ob-•je£l of ‘Concern to the multitude, whilst they both experienced their contempt and neglect.-—So certain it is, that the appearance of a w^oman of virtue, will always command refpe£.l and astistahce in distrefs, before one famous for nothing but beauty and profligacy, even from thofe who are libertines in their general condudl. I met the Marquis at night at a Supper given by the Comttffe De Grig-non.—He could hardly restrain the impetuoSity of his fury at my approach^fe-I beheld it in his eyes; and left Madame De Grignon’s as foon as I could retire with any tolerable decency. He is, however, determined to mortify me for the accident, though I am fure nobody could be more blamelefs on the occafion. He told me this morning that he intends to fell his feat at Clarence which my father left him. I anfwered that I had no right to fay a •word against it, if it W'as his will to do fo. ever, I think it is tod charming a place for 'him to give up eafily, and I make no doubt he will be proud to keep it, in fpite of this vain boast. Poor man ! he has more of my pity than aversion.
I have not feen the Duke De Maurice Since my return to town.—He has lately lost his mother, which it is believed fincerely grieves him. I am forry for the circumstance, but happy that his absence from Paris frees me from the trouble of lif-tening to a fubjedt in which he appears fo obstinately interested. He is thought to be a dangerous man—but how can a heart like mine be SenSible of -thofe charms, which is steeled by duty, and has already loved one fo much Superior to him in all that can engage the tendernefs of woman ?
Madame
O T
T U E R O C K.
V
71
Madame Siiiifcerre is gdne to h^’r Villa hear Paris.—Ah, that Villa !—what a fcene !—but I will stay rhy impetuous pUn.—Dear Maria, need I repeat that, whilst I have life, I itiust be devo* ted to you ?
VicToiUA Dl Lausai^me*
mo

Victoria to Maria.
The Duke De Maurice is returned to Paris,
and the strong marks of grief which were Said to be expressed on his countenance, and in his behaviour, have Sled like clouds before the
appearanceof the fun.
He is gay, assured, and gallant—he Speaks of love, like one'certain of fuccefs—and paints tome his passion in every look and word to be short., he is troubleforne and highly difagreeable.
d was yesterday in waiting on Madame D’ A****s at court, when the Comte D’ K****s and the Duke De Maurice made their appearance. I was in conversation with fome of the ladies.—The Gomte and the Duke, who had shewn themfelves in the circle, retired from it and joined us.
You
V

THE HERMIT
“ You are too charming this morning, Madame De -Laufanne!” cried the Comte with a polite air, and a tender look; ** you outihine in beauty,” added he in a whifper, “ every other woman, the Queen not excepted.”—Icurlfied.—-** By my faith,” continued he, Madame D’ A****s does not a6I prudently in keeping fo near her perfon the loveliest woman in France : — (he must be vain to fuppofe, that she will claim adoration on thofe days that you afe in waiting.”
The Comte played with my fan—and in taking iit from my hand, he contrived to prefs my fingers.
■—I faid little—I received his flattery with a polite indifference—he perceived it—and leaning on the Duke’s arm. Said in a voice just loud enough for me to hear, this Madame De Laufanne is, I find, one of thofe cruel beauties who can behold the agonies they caufe, without feeling even cem-paflion.—There is a fomething in her eyes, which awes me into Silence.—Tell her, however, my dear Maurice, that a Prince loves her, who will only value that title, as he can confer glory and power on her.
The Comte, after this fpeech, retired to fome distance, and the Duke approached me. He fmiled in my face.
“ Madam, you have heard the commiffioni am charged with from the Comte ?”
Yes, my Lord,” cried I, I have. The Comte is excufable in giving you fuch a one, to a woman of whofe principles hd knows nothing : you, however, have not she like apology in the acceptance of it to make;—but if you areto learii it now, be affured yourfelf, and tell your prince, that I am not the creature you and he take me for: that I owe too much love and duty to my hushand ever to receive with pleafure fuch declarations
'	from

O F
THE ROC K.
7 ^
t.>
I Slid this with an air of
from any other man.” anger and referve, and walking frOm him placed myfelf too near Madame D’	to luster Such
impertinence again during my stay in the drawing-room.
The Comte D’ A****s is very handfome — is very witty—and could my heart be endangered by the converiation of any other man but Luzy, the Comte D’ A***'*s would be the most likely perfon to Set me on mv euard—but he is as much inferior to Luzy, as he is Superior to every other.—Do you not deSpHe ihe Duke De Maurice ?
The Marquis, I perceive, is ruining himfelf ■with play, and his extravagant generoSiiy to Ma-.demoifelle Le Blanc.—It is at her houfe he games
W
So highly—and if 1 am not misinformed he is always a considerable loler. His estate of Belfont has been fold to defray a debt of honour to the Chevalier D’Eibeu, who is a" man notorious- for living by the ruin of others. The Marquis looked a little Serious upon it for an hour or two—but a note from his Sultana Soon difpellcd every cloud, and he hastendd to receive confelation from her— or rather-—to be induced to fell a few more of his estates, in order that stie and her followers should gain by bis folly. She has., I am told, a new e-quipage for almost every day in the year—-that her deaths are fump^tuous, and that her jywels are as fine as mine. She lives in a style hardly to be equalled—and her houfe is the refort of all the' libertine youth of fashion. The Marquis De Lau-Sanne is, however, above fufpicion — he cannot Suppofe it possible, that a woman who.m he has .once addressed, should ever prove herfelf unwiprthy ■of that honour—It never enters the poor Marquis’’s head., that, amongst the profufion of his gifts, there .may be a certain void in the heart of a courtezan which he never, with all his merit, canfup-
; VoL. I.	D	plv.-
74
T HE HERMIT
ply. He does not dreairi that this void m-uft be stlled by variety—by the most assiduous ai>d stavilh attention—by new .conquests-^—and, in fine, by the indulgence of every caprice. Had the Marquis Icfs money—w'as he not reputed and known to he one of the richest noblemen in France—Mademoi-fel’.e Le Blanc would Since have defected him for a fuperior fortune ; but as that is not eafy to be found, die contents herlelf with paying homage to him, until the poor man stiall have paid too dear a debt to her charms and avarice—until he really ruins himfelf for eve-r in. fortune and in health.
I often viSit Madame La Bert, who really appears a Sincere penitent. She wept the other,day in fpeaking of the Marquis, and fwelled with indignation when She informed me, that he had quitted her for Mademoifelle Le Blanc. I will own to you I wondered bow £he could mention him— and still more how her delicacy could start fuch a fubjedl to me,—her anger to, when fhe mentioned Maderroiftlle Le Blanc I—but, thank heaven, I was not cenlorious in my conjedfures! and had reafon foon after to believe bv her behaviour that that refentment was only the last struggle of an expiring flame which she was gaining virtue fuffif
cient.to abhor.	j
Madame De Sanfcerrc is really a true and af-fedlionate friend —she fcldom leaves me but o|i occafions which demand her prefence at home—i* she rallies the Marquis charrningly—and very often makes him look Sillier thfn .is a-bfolutely natu* ral to himhe, however, takes her pleafantry withgood humour, though he dares not return it. She ashed him, the other day, ,in her lively manner, whether he did not tliink his wife the moll beautiiul woman inthe univerfe ?—he fmiled—sha
ran and took .my hand, and led me to him. ** Here
■	• ■	■	_	ii
OF THE ROCK.
75
a face !—a hand and arm ! man!'—do but view her with
Snail
i‘s a fhape 1—an air !
•—heaven and earth, attention.”
The Marquis, who was fitting down, looked up at me, and fmiled again.
.	‘‘ Come, come,” cried she with impatience,
anlwerme!
The Marquis pulled me on his knee.
“,Why, Madam,” replied he, you have my opinion.—My wife is certainly the most perfedl both in form and face of any woman I ever Saw ;—but I cannot be contented with that alone. —She is witty too, I believe—-very well.—This I take upon trust—fori never Saw her chearful.— She is warm, fenSible and loving— at least 1 have heard that she once loved with ardour.—All that is very well too.—Herhushand never experiences from her thefe proofs of fenSibility.—'I'hus, Madam,” added he, I may be faid to have the most charming woman in the world in my poffeS-fion—when in truth—I find her only a very beautiful st.itue.—Such a behaviour I cannot brook-in short if she loved me—she would a<St differently —and perhaps if I was not her hushand—I should like her better.”	;
This, my dear Maria, was a very heavy charge against me—notwithstanding [defended myfelf very tolerably.—I protested that he could be no judge of my affedion for him, for that he never gave me the pleafure of his company at home, but in a large circle.—I turned his weapons at last fo effectually upon himfelf, that be was brought to acknowledge he might have made a better kushand.—In fine, I invited him to fup with me the next night, and promifed him amufement.—We parted very good friends that evening; but I perceived he attended his ufual appointment with Le Blane after all this converfation.
D 2	The
V_
76
UV.KU11
.	f
The next nisrlil came—.1 dressed with an east elegance v/hich really became my statures, anil wliichl had fucceeded in that day better tha'n ever: hYy’’compauy was formed of ihe moss agreeable women of falhion, and ol men not issstrior to them ssn wit and brilliancy. Alter the dishes were removed, an extiemeshne band of mussc which I .-had ordered to be prepared in the next room ssfuck up, and after they had played fome time, every lady gave an Italian air accompanied.by a.Piano forte.^and a German flute'-—then a,French one—■ then an. Engiissi one, out of the opera of Artax-erxes. Their voices were all fine—their accoin-panyments admirable!-—wit—mirth—and the moss delicate pleafure feeemed too possess every heart, shut that of the Marquis, who endeavoured, 'through politeness, to.conceal his resslesshefs—but .1 could plainly perceive that his Situation was un-eafy to him, and that decency prevented his leaving, it. I do alTure you, my 'dear Maria, I ssudied to
to charm—toinfpire him with I even forgot Luzy for the -night—or at ieass, I strove to banish his idea from my bofom. ‘__I considered, that if,' through any coldness >or negledt in my behaviour towards him, my hushand gave himfelf up to libertinifm—I muss-^and condemned before the tribunal of God and man. The thought-shoclced me—and I called forth all’my graces—-made ufe of every insinuation, every becom-^ jng artifice to make him fuppofe iiimfelf-beloved, and to draw him moss powerfully to me alone. I confented ,to fing at his request:—I exerted my voice, and filled the room with thcrfostess founds I was mistress of. Solignac took up theshute—he accompanied me in a touching and masterly man-^ her. I fang of love—!.I expreffed it not only by my lips—I fixed my eyes on Laiifanne—I made them fpOTik mere tenderly. The Marquis was struck—
he
give him delight
O'	-
love;
O F T H E R O C K.
7'7
he viewed me vvith .an air of exultation and aflo-niflirnent—he returned every thing I had lu-ffered" myfelf to b.y, in a language no lels Strong no lefs inidligent,—It grewdate—-the company was dif-'perfing—a billet was given- to the Marquis — he retired to read it—his carriage was ordered—I faw no more of him that night. 'J'he n'ext day he writ me a gallant letter—he thanked me for the delightful evening he had passed—was forry he could not come to make his adieus in perfon—prayed me to accept them then—for he was just fetting out on a little tour to Flanders, ■ from whence he should not return for fome weeks.—Shall I tell ycna that I-was forry ?—oh, no !—ray heart will not allow me to ivrite a falfeshood—but this I wdll ass'u.''e you that I lamented his infatuation—that I pitied the depravity of his morals. *—After that I need. not add—Le Blanc was of his partyw
Some weeks have elapfed Srnce 1 laid down my pen.—The Marquis returned a few days ago. He has Since endeavoured to be polite—nay fometimes exerted himfelf to appear tender—my manner w^as uniformly fo to him—but Le Blanc—in fine,.De Blanc is his mistrefs—I unfortunately ids charming, becaufe I am his wife.
We are to have an elegant ball in Paris this evening, given by the officerc of the Be****k’s regiment— the Duke De F,***’^* always elegant,. will, I fuppofe, outshine himfelf on this occaSion. -- Fle is very handfome — and as witty as he is charming. Madame De Sanfeerre fays he shall .be her cecisheo for the evening—he is a gallant man—well received by the ladies, and is h general favourite amongst them. I shall goto oblige Sanfeerre, but am determined neither to dance or to stay there long. — Farewell my Mariai—continue to leve me.
D3	Victoria
7
8
THE HER MIT
Victoria to Maria.
REJOICE to hear that Madame De Villeneauf is able to be removed to Belvoir—her estate of that name is a little Paradife—and the air will, I trust, prove falutary to her. You fay she mentions me with affection, and deSires me to hope for a better change when it shall pleafe heaven to appoint. ^'ell my dear and revered Monitrefs that I endeavour to astume courage, and to gain by distipation a thoughtlestnefs of mind which alone can preferve me from defpair. — Remembrance will, however, obtrude its bufy felf even in thofe hours of noife and folly, and embitter every feene. Tell her, however, I am not wanting in my efforts to conquer it—religion i'nstrufts me to do fo how 1 fucceed, heaven, who witnesses my bitter tears, can tell.—-1 will turn to another fubjest, my dear Maria.— I left you in my lass to prepare for a ball.
I called upon Madame De Sanfeerre at the appointed hour, and we went thither together. The Gomte D’A****’s carriage had just driven off before mine drew up—he did us the honour of staying to hand us from it—he whifpered as he led me in—that he intended to attach himfelf to me for that night. ** I shall,continued he, beat your elbow constantly.—Do you dance?”—I told him no—he entreated—I pleaded indifpoSition — he declared then, that he would not be prevailed on either, to partake of that amufement and he kept his word. The Duke De F**** met us at the door of the ball room—he was elegantly dref-
fed
OF T PI E ROC K.

^ .
79
j
*
fed—and with many of the other officers condudl-ed us to feats. The affembly was very brilliant— but was too public—the Duke De Maurice was there malked—he followed me about all night as a fpy—he liftened to every thing the Comte D*
faid to me—and in fatl he heard feveral tender things on his part. I behaved with my iifual referve, and with as much indifference as I really-fek. He had taken my fan from my hand — bU't by fome accident it fell from his, and the outward stick was a little damaged. — He put it in his bofom, and vowed I should never have it more. I was takinsj fome refreshments which Jhe Duke De F**** had prefented me with, —I pulled off my glove, and believe me, it was stolen immedi-, ately by I know not whom. My fpy (the mafk) .was very near me at that time—fo were the Comte D’ A****Sy the Duke De F**** and the Chevalier De Mondonsoir..-they all denied it— the Comte D’ A****s’s-countenance which made me fufpe£I him.—In short, during ray stay at the ball, he was never one moment from my fide and my stay was longer than I had intended it
should be. There were a number of malks there—
>
amongst the rest was one who entertained the company highly.—Some fufpected it to be the Marquis De Palmene — others MonSieur De Louvoi—but 1 perceived—or at least thought I perceived too much of a female voice to believe it to be either. I remarked' it to the Comte D’ A****s—he was struck with the conceit, for the mafk wore the habit of a friar—and was really witty, Satirical and polite. The IMarquis De LauSanne came in with a lady mafked — he wore none himfelf, but appeared in the most becoming drefs and style I had
The friar on feeing
The theft was amongst them, but I perceived a fmiie froni
ever obferved him to assume, him and his lady and priestly air.
approached them with a grave
D 4

Child,

\
So
T i-I E HERMIT
((
Child,” laid he to Mademoifelle Le Blanc, I am concerned to fee 'thee fo free with the MarqiiisDe Laufanne for turn reafons.”
V.'hat are they father?” cried Le Blanc.
First,” replied the friar, becaufe to be arm in arm with him implies a fcandal to your character —for no. woman of virtue was ever feen lo Lmi-liar with him'—not even his wife.”
Here I blushed — the Comte D’ A****s prested my hand.
“ Secondly, becaufe if you really are not lost to fentiment—and should happen to entertain an unfeigned tendernefs for him—he will foon give you reafon to repent your fondnefs by difmisting you with ignominy—^^and forgetting your ever having conferred a favour on him. ~ Such is the character of him, whom you feem to regard as your lever.”
The Marquis looked offended. And who are you,” exclaimed he in a rage, ‘‘ that dares
vnder the veil of.”---—-
Hold, hold!” replied the friar, all is fair under a mafk ;—if you think not-'—be Silent now but avenge thefe wrongs another time ; however, you had better not be angry at all, fori have fome advice to give you in your turn.
** I want none of it,” cried the Marquis.
Ah, my Lord,” faid the good father, ** where is your politenefs ?—hear me out at least.
The Marquis lullenly complied.
** Now,” refumed the friar, ** here is a lady whom I have often feen with thee my fon—I have Sometimes met her with thee in a blazing chariot —at other times I have beheld her reclined on your shoulder, or Supported by your arm—now, my fon, the world fays you have married the hand-fomest woman in France :—-the world is cenforious though for my part, to judge the best—I fup-
poie

OF THE ROCK.
8r
gleet e
pofe this lady to be your wnle—and that poor ne-£ied creature who beholds you with anxiety and tendernefs—^^whom every one talks fo highly ol—-whom 1 have never feen with you, is a miSerefs/^ Here the room refounded with applaufe-—but as I pitied the Marquis — and really felt a good deal for my own Situation—I gave my hand to Solignac, who conveyed me to my carriage unperceived by the rest, who were fo much engrossed by the friar as not to be fcnSible for fome moments of my departure. Madame De Sanfeerre,. however, who staid until the dawn of day, listening to the gallant compliments of her handfome partner, concluded for me the converfation of the friar. The Marquis whifpered him, that he ex-
pedied to fee him the next day in another habit'—-a habit which would entitle him to treat him as he de-ferved,
** This fanciified drefs, Sir,” rontinued he, though but assumed in jest—has fomething in • ifwhich checks my rage.-—^-To-morrow 1 willalk for vengeance.”
’ You shall have it, child replied; the friar,
“ you shall strip from this head its reverend ton-
fure—you shall buffet one cheek and I v/i!l turn,
*
the other—vet—^if the man should at length over-
J
come in me that fpiritual lenfe ofmeeknefs wjrich I hope ever to preferve—if, how'ever, I Snould from the frailty of human nature be tempted to return your refentment—my first blows will be dealt—,not for myfelf—they shall bear wiHi them, the injuries of Madame De Laufanne—my fecond shall be given for the unfortunate—unpitied—^forgotten La Bert—and the third shall remind you, that a reptile once trod on can turn in hopes of

to V •
vengeanc
The Marquis turned from him in indignation and the Comte D’ A'****'s iollovved the priest,
•	D 5	Y ovt
82
THE HERMIT
You arc but a young piece of divinity I be lieve,” laid the Comte to him, as he got him into a corner of the room, deferted by all but Madame De Sanfcerre and Solignac ; “ you are, however, father, the most agreeable qf your or-derl ever converfed with.”
turn off-Ihionable friar can girl of Patmos
Ah, fon,” replied the friar, “ People fee at court very differently from thofe in the world ; were you to behold me in my convent, you would
and leave my fober lessons for a lefs fa-hearer—but at a mafquerade I find a be more attended to, than a blooming -and that by a prince, who is well known to be a man of gallantry.”
Here the Comte laughed out.
“ Father, faid he, “ Suffer me to crave your blessing, and prayers for the reformation of Ver-faill es—but first allow me to kifs that holy hand.’* The wary priest would not confent to this Salutation, which was only meant to try by the foft-jiefs and delicate form of the hand, whether it was a man or a woman who perfonated the cha-radler. The refufal, however, convinced the Comte of its being a female, and he told her in a low voice of his conje^ure—and if she did not lliew him her face in private there—he would take an opportunity of making her unmafk Somewhere elfe. This Seemed to alarm the fidlitious friar, v/ho disappeared very Soon after in Spite of the Comte D’ A****’s vigilance.—So much for the ecclefiastic—whom every body Speaks of—but no one is certain who, or what he is.
The next morning I received, from the Comte /^****Sj a very polite billet, to enquire after my health, and at the fame time the most beautiful fan I ever Saw, which he begged my acceptance of in exchange for the one he had taken from
me the ni2:ht before.
There is a motto of diamond?
OF THE ROCK.
83
fnonds on the sticks in thefe few exprestive words, “ Je vous aimeE The prefent is very magnificent, and worthy of the donor.
The Marquis De Laufanne looked difpleafed as I fhewed him the fan and the billet : he afked me
f	"
what they were to him ? and throwing them on my toilette, he quitted the room. Poor man !—-I could not help the friar’s Speaking plain truth !
It is now, my dear Maria, fix months fince the Comte De Lu'zy embarked for Martinico—and no tidings have reached Solignac of his arrival.—I do hot Suffer myfelf to think the worst—oh, no !
1 will fuppofe him lazy—indifferent—conquered perhaps by the beauties of Some young—ah my God I—I will ev«n imagine that in preference to his being lost for ever! Adieu, my dear. Maria.


84
THE HERMIT
I
Lhe Marquis De Lausanne, to Monfteur
De Montville.
HAVE lost a considerable Sum once more, dear Montville, to the Chevalier D’ Elbeu. All my ready money is exhausted, and my estate at Belfont has been fold to pay a former honourable demand.— Poor Le Blanc is inconfolable—for the losses have happened at her houfe. I will not leave her, lest fhe should fufpefl my being obliged to part with another estate, which would shock her tendernefs. 1 therefore offer you the feat of Clarence, which you wish to oossefs, on thofe terms I formerly mentioned to you, and to which you agreed. It will affefl: Madame De Laufanne, perhaps, to part with a place to which she has been attached from her infancy—but I cannot think df felling either of the estates which my fatherless me—until I cannot help myfelf—— they are valuable to me, more from their being admired by my charming mistress, than for any other reafon—and I cannot think of distressing her to indulge a caprice of my wife’s. Adieu, dear Montville—I am at prefent a little low fpirited—-a better run of luck to-night will, however, fct all to rights again -—and one look—-one fmile from Le, Blanc will make me forget every difagreeable fenfation.—I
write from her chateau ten miles from Paris.—If
/
you vvish to fpeak to me on the fubjedi of Clarence, my carriage shall attend you hither—for I cannot think of going to town for fome days at least.
Yours ever,
De Lausanne.
Monfieur
O F T H E ROC K.
8
Monftenr De Montville /aMarqjjIS De
Lausanne.
TH E film that you want, you fr\ay command
of me, dear Marquis, • without giving up the. noble feat of Clarened. Had I known that Madame De Laufanne was tenderly attached to it, I Ihoiild never have fpoken to you on the fub-je6t of felling it. Do methe favour to make me your banker on this occaSion—you have unlimited credit'.	-
\	9
You cannot doubt my friendship for you—fuffer me therefore, dear Laufanne, to caution you a-gainst the arts of Le Blanc. She knows perhaps that D’ Elbeu will allways win—and that your generous temper w'ill never fufpe.dS how he should do fo—I however, who am not blinded by infatuation, can eaSily fee into her forrow —and can doubt the Chevalier’s honour. Madame De Laufanne— ah, my God, Marquis, what a woman, to be expofed to a pang when a little prudence and an exertion of common fenfe on your part, could fave her from ever feeling one I . Farewell, do not be offended—if I did not love you, Le Blanc and D’ Elbeu might ruin you without my offering to interfere—and I might poffefs Clarencd. 1 am .
\
Much Yours, /
Henry De Montville.

85
THE HERMIT
To Monfteur De Mont vjlle.
Your friendship is too apprehenstve fir — your offer too generous!
If you chufe to have Clarenc^, let me have your anSwer — if not—I cannot want for it a ptir-chafer. I am, fir,
«
Your Obedient,
<•
1
Humble Servant,
^	V *
De Lausanne,
TodMarquisLausanne.
NO, my dear Marquis, I cannot confent to
poffefs Clarened at the expence of Madame De Laufanne’s tears.—I am a coward where a virtuous woman’s fighs are weapons against me-—but I can be brave where thofe of a courtezan are practifed to deceive.
Adieu! I wish you would accept of my firft offer.
Yours ever.
Montville.
Vic-
O F T H E ROC K.
S7
Vi c T 0 RIATa Maria.
Y dear friend, I am very miferable.—My amiable Maria, who can confole me !—the Marquis is, I fear, almost ruined — his estate of Clar.encd is fold—Monsteur De Montville I heard was to be the purchafer—‘but he has, I am told, declined it, and the Marquis offered it in my prefence to the Comte De Sablau- — Solignac, who was by, hardly gave the Comte time to anfwer, before he declared himfelf ready to pay down the money for it. Laufanne clofed with the propofal,' and Solignac this day completed the purchafe. Ic is fome comfort to me that my friend Solignac is in poffestion of it—fince Clarence is no longer mine—1 am glad it is his.—What a folly, ray Maria !—but alas! I grieve in fpite of my reafon.— Ah, Luzy I — every grove — every tree — every flowering shrub there, was endeard to me, by your having wandered through all their fweets they all can vvitnefs to thy vows of love and fidelity.—It was the place too of my birth—of the birth of my dear father—the favourite refidence of my tender mother—rthe place which was confecrated to friendship by my Maria and her Victoria.—Do you remember the little rustic temple at the bottom of the avenue of poplars ?—and that alfoem-bofomed in the orange grove ? •— how often have we listened in them to the warblings of the thrush —the complaints of the nightingale—and to the still fweeter voices of Lindor and Luzy!—alas, poor Clarence !—** cruel remembrance—how shall I appeafe thee I-—I cannot write—I am unfit for any thing.—The Marquis too looks ill—he frets
ah.
88
THE HERMIT

ah, why does he not aft consistently with rea-fon !—he has quarrelled it stems with his friend MonSieur de Mo'ntville—that grieves him, I believe.—Madame De Sanfcerre fays, De Montville complained to her of his negleft—he talks with affeftion of him—and affufes her the man is in himstlf naturally good—^but fpoiled by the imprudence of his late parents indulgence—and by Some fatal prejudices which he has imbibed. I honour this Monsteur De Montville—his character is unexceptionably good—lam forry any difference has happened between them, for I was fome-what eafy as long as Laufanne confulted his friend-IKip,—The poor Marquis!—-although he treats me unkindly, I am forry for him.
Madame De Sanfcerre has just been w^ith me— she intreats me to go with her to a malked ball, which is to be given this night in^Paris. She remarks that it will appear to Laufanne as if I was not difpleastd or concerned at his difpofal of Clarence—she reafons me into the propriety of being Seen there by him. She fays fuch constant resignation to his will, must at length open his eyes, and incline him to adopt a different mode of behaviour.—I comply with'a heavy heart. Ah, how dreadful is it to affumc an appearance fo fo-
I will not fea!
this until my returr\—but will endeavour to aihufeyou by a relation of what pastes there.
Madame De Sanfeerrre chost the habit of a
t
I affumed the neat and (imple one of a s—I preferred it lor two reafons-—the
reign to the real feelings of it !
anne
shepherd
first was, becaiife of its being a charafter that did not require much wit or vivacity——the fecond for its being eafiiy put on without an exertion of taste, magnificence, or study. Solignac, who engaged Madame De Sanleerre’s hand for the night, equipped himstlf as a gardener—and carried
O F T H E ROCK.
89

< (
rled with him his implements, and a baiket of natural and artiScial flowers. ’ Our party was large, and we went in about eight o’clock. I was accosted on my entrance by a malk who wore a plain white domino—he told me my name, and in a voice 1 hardly knew.—I pasted by him without returning him an anfwer.—As foorr as I was]heated a devil approached and took me by the hand.
Come, fair Arcadian,” faid he, “ you and. I must dance a minuet.”
“ Excufe me,” cried I, ** I have been warned against temptatioh-c-i-and your very appearance forbids me to go with you.”
Ah 1” replied he, I am become harmleSs 1 forfook the lower regions to night in order to steal a glance at innocence—and behold—I am fallen in love with it;”
Saying this, he again tendered me his hand, which I accepted, after whifpering him ** that to-the Comte D’ A****s I would e’en venture to en-
f	¥	•
tfust myfest.” He anfwered only by a preffure of my fingers.
grace but in the form or Luzy. l”y—I am not mistaken^—^this is indeed the Comte D’ A****s. After we had finished, the applaufes of the aflTembly Niade me blush though I was under a mafk—and the graceful devh kneeled and kissed my hand in prefence of them all.
Where did you steal thofe charming steps that air of elegance, pretty maid ?” cried an old fat monk as I paffed.
Not from your convent father,” -replied the devil.	,	.
No—nor from hell, neither, returned the offended priest,
“ From heaven only could they be,” exclaimed the v/hite domino who had accosted me before ;
“ from
We began
never did I fee fuch
Ah ! thought

fC

90
((
T tl E HER M I r


from heaven only,” and he kissed the hem my garment.
The pretty air of this gallantry struck me, and taking a flower from my nofegay, and prefenting it to him—-I thanked him for his compliment.— He pressed the flower to his lips, and hid it in his bofom.
I am jealous,” faid the devil to me in alow voice.
“ Oh fie .” anfwered I, ** when you left hell, you should have forfworn all unamiablenefs.”
** Ah, “ returned he, but at the fame time I should have made a vow not to have fallen in love with every virtue—and alas ! Since I have feen you, there is no room in my heart for any thing elfe, excepting fear and jealoufy, which are the infeparable handmaids of that passion with which you have infpired me.”
I was about to anfwer when a nun pulled me by the sseeve.
“ Rash girl,” exclaimed she, ** whence comes thy boldnefs ?—who could conceiye that, young and innocent as you appear, you should be traOied by vice—and that in its ourn rude shape!
The devil to conquer generally assumes the form of Maurice-—but Maurice, to captivate., need only, I find, appear as the devil.”
** Ah, gentle Sister !” cried I—and I took her arm, “ is this indeed the D-uke De Maurice ?”
r
“ It is—it is,” anfwered she, “ none but the Duke De Maurice could fo well perfonate the cha-rafler he hasaffumed.”
The devil laughed.
, “ Ha, my pretty vestal!” cried he,. “ her hand, you feem to know the Duke De Maurice better than the datie-s which that habit should impost on you.—You can tell, I find, how dangerous he is—though the virtues of charity and
fiknce
stizing
OF THE HOCK.
9i

€ C
Silence shpuld rebel against So public a declaration.”
I know no more of thee,” replied she, than what Some of my frail Sex have told me.” I begin to SuSpefil my innocent nun,” whif-(>ered he, “ that you know as much as the Duke De Maurice as any frail one of them ail.—Come, come, who art thou ?” and he took her familiarly under the arm.
The witty nun threw him off with an air of Satirical coynefs, protesting, tbui fo frange a con--nediion could never take place as that betvjeen virtue and vicCf not evert for a moment. ^ What think you father ?” demanded she of the fat monk who was at that moment by her elbow. ** Why, daughter,” returned he, ** my opinion is, that the devil who now stands before us—is but a poor harmleSs one.—I protest to you, I believe there is more danger in his appearance than in himfelS, for I obServe this fair shepherdefs listens to him with attention—-a circumstance which could not happen, were he preaching up to her the maxims of iniquity.** Weil Said, father !” cried the devil i now, Sister, what fay you to that ?”
Why,” anfwered she, that the devil has M length got hold of the priest*—and that I must fly for it,”—she immediately mixed in the croud, and put an end to their dialogue.
I began now to perceive that it was to a man I hated above all others, I had hitherto been fo po* Site and obliging—the hint was enough—and I avoided him as much as poflible for the rest of the evening—^his art inaffedting the Comte D’ A****s Voice, had entirely misted me—he certainly did it admirably. The white domino, on obServing, that I Wished to get rid of the accomplished devil, hinted to him, that he had better endeavour to find out the face of the lively nun, adding,
** If
9
0,2
THE HER M I T
((
\
** If I mitiake not it is the fame who perfonated a friar feme time ago.” TJiis fucceeded, and he joined amongst the throng, in order to go in iearch of her. When he left us, this agreeable maff took hold of my hand.
“ If I mistake not,” faid he, ** thou art Madame De Laufanne.”
** Ah,” anfwered T, “ I am Sorry you cart' think fo—for it is to that fuppoSition alone ! owe all the fine things you have faid to me this even-ing.”
Why, replied he, it is very true that I. have taken you for the prettiest woman l ever favv-—but I cannot prefume to fay she is the moll-beautiful I may yet fee—therefore if you are not her—in pity to my wishes, flip aSide for one moment your mafk—and if your face correfponds with the charms of your perfon—I shall at least have it in my power to declare that I have beheld Madame De Laufanne’s equal—until then—I must Own that I never have.”
“ After that,” cried I, “ it is impossible for me to grant your request—am not handfome— my figure is the best of me—<ny face would destroy the favourable impression it has made on you, were I to indulge your curiofity. But pray, who are you ? I never before heard your voice— and will acknowdedge I can form of your face no idea.—You are not the Chevalier De Mondo-ndir ?”
Do you wish me to fay yes?” demanded he. ** I do not care about it,” returned I.
“ Well then,” refumed the malk, ** I give you my honour I am not even acquainted, fo as to converfe with the Chevalier.—I am a stranger to you I believe—however, if you wish to fee my face I v/ill indulge you—could I but obtain luch a promife from you.”
. ** Since
O ,F THE ROC K.
93

'' Since you are fo polite, you shall have it,’^ replied I, “ come with me to that Side board yonder, and I will Slip aSvde my maik in order to take feme orgeat.”
As I fpoke this, I took Madame De Sanfeerre by the arm, and as we approached the table, told her of my intention to shew myfeif—^and my curiossty to know who he was. She was anxious as to that particular herfelf—for she had heard many wonder who it .could be. The malk leem-ed tranfported at my condefcenSion,'and hurried ius throusch the .croud in order to ariive at the
o
wished for corner. When we got there, he filled two glasses of orgeat for-Madame De Sanfeerre and myfeif. We took out our handkenchei.fs to to apply them to oor faces, instead of the masses, which for the conveniency of drinking v/e were about to remove ; before.I untied mine I afked if il might depend upon his latisfying my curiofity after I had gratified his:?
“ To doubt iti” replied the Domino, were to fufpedt my honour!—butto convin.ee you that my intention is not to deceive, I will shew myfeif shefore-I can even have an opportunity to repent of doing fo—for to confefs the truth, did I not think ■you were/teally the Marchionefs.De Laufanne, I ^should not, 1 believe, have made you Such a pro-mi fe,
So faying he took off with inimitable grace the ■ vizor that had'Concealed ;his fine .couHtenance--<-.and who do you imagine stood before me, no other than the Comte D’ Artois himfelf.—iJ was now exceedingly embarrassed—and was almost ashamed, after the fine things I had heard him fay of me, to part with my mafk—-however it would have been acting ungenerousty to have-done other-w'ife : that idea determined me.
-with a treikbling hand—rand -with the other I with-
'drew
I took the orgeat
94
THE HERMIT
drew the piece of Silk which covered my face. He feized my hand and pressing it to his bofoin exclaimed, “ charming creature I was it polTible to have mistaken for one moment that ssiape'-that.air!”
I will now own to you my weaknefs, my dear Maria, and acknowledge that I was chagrined at finding it to be any other than the Marquis De Palmenc; who has difappeared Since the departure of his friend Luz,y. Some fay he is gone to Italy—others declare they have lately met him in Paris, though they did not fpeak to him. Solig-iiac, who should best know,' tells me he is not in France—that his condufl has of late been myssc-rious to him—that he reSides, he believes chiefly in Italy—that he has never learned fo however from himfelf—for in his letters he only fays he has abjured France till Luxy’s return to it—if that should ever happen, he will fee it again with tranfport—until then, he shall be bound to no place in particular—but will conssder himfelf as a citizen of the world. All this I knew^—yet I mull confefs a delussve hope had charmed my breaft— and every word the Comte D’ Artois uttered, I thought refcmbled the Marquis’s peculiar elegant method of expression.—The idea of converfing with one who had Seen Luzy, even on board the vessel which carried him from France—the hope of hearing that his last words were ** Adieu Victoria !”—his last fighs were lent forth towards her yes, my friend, I will own my weaknefs—and that I merited the -difappointment I had met with.
The Comte D’ Artois had managed the difeove-
ry fo well, that no body was the wifer but the
parties themfelvcs refpe6ting any thing that had
passed—and we joined our feat again, without
their having the least fufpicion of our real errand
to the ssde board. The Comte was more than
ever charmed with me—he never quitted me for
the
OF THE ROCK.
9S
the night—he made love to me—but it was not with an air of infolent confidence—the exprelli-cns he choie, were delicate and timid—and what would pafs as mere gallantry.—You may be fure I affected to receive them as fuch, though in every Syllable that fell from his lips, I could perceive the agitations of a wounded heart.
Our attention was now drawn to a corner of the room, from whence we heard loud peals of laughter, and beheld an immenfe crowd gathered—we drew near to them, and by lingular good fortune got into the very thickest of the throng, where we learned without inquiry the caufe of this partial assemblage. The nun was in a clofe converfation with the devil; the fpirit of which, had attra6fed numbers: amongst the rest, a graceful Turk, and an elegant Sultana, came thither to obferve what was going on—we had taken our stands just before they appeared; and heard the nun fay. Well, MonSieur le Diable, you have left hell for very little purpofe if your intention was to carry me back with you !—What may be my fate fome time hence indeed, I know rtot—but this I am certain of—I will mortify more than ever in e>rder to avoid you in the next world.”
Why,” cried he, taking her hand, you have not hitherto been very deaf to my perfua-fions—It was by my instigation you put on this veil—it was by my advice you affumed this be-
habit—and it is now by my command that you shew the beauties of your face.”— So laying he caught her in his arms, and was 'going to throw back her veil, when the Comte D’ Artois interpofed.
Never, by heaven !” exclaimed he. Avaunt thou evil projedtor I—this lady claims .a fuperior power, which will protedl her from your infolence.” The Turk, who had beard
with

a
comine’

THE HERMIT


with pleafure the devil’s intention to difcdver the jiu», stepped forth to anfwer the Comte.
And pray,” faidhe haughtily., “ why stiould .any power prevent a lady’s being admired ?—devil '.execute your work—da2,zle the room with the brightnefs of thofe ey.es, which that envious veil conceals .from our admiration.” The nun went vup to the grand Signior.
.Lord of .the east, faid she, most mighty .'Soliman—before whofe throne all nations bow— .and at whole frown the magnanimous tremble! ’•thy stave, kisting the dust of thy feet,, owns her-Self an atom v.'hen compared to thee.—Is it, be-^caufe thou-deSirest to make me a foil to thy bright Sultana, who in fairneis exceeds the children of the east-—and whofe beauties are richer than the jewels of thy crown !—ah,-rnighty Sultan 1” ad-ed she with inimitable humour, “ faster thy stave to be .covered in thy ,prefen.ce—^^for whofe charms can equal thofe of rhe virtuous Le Blanc’s ?”—'here the astemhly shouted w.ith mirth •—and the haughty Suitan appeared—as if he ■wished bimfelf a thoufand leagues off.
Or fuppofe,” cried .she briskly, afterapaiife of fome moments;, fappofc I (forgetting for one night only my religious habit) should perfoliate Delia the Singer !—I will call for a theorbo and drown your fenfes in a stood of harmony-then poor Elmira.,” faid she, addresting-herfelf to the furnptuous Sultana, then will you be forgotten;!—and after that to make my conquest more fure—.1 will astume |with Roxalana’s wit all her C-iprices—all her pride.; then,” turning again to the shstering favourite ** then, poor Elmira, yoa will be lost'indeed 1” the Sultan took her hand and kisting it, you are already” faid he, ** a Roxala-na—^you have humbled my eastern pride—Sorget forgive'! your veil shall be worn,as you plcafe—■.
and 1 pr.omife never-to offend again.”
■** Ha !”
O F T H E R O e K.
97
** Ha!” cried she, “ and is that all yoirpro-mife ?—Come, come—I must have a little con-verfation with you in private—I know you very well—perhaps I afpire to be loved by you !— were you not indeed a married man, I might be tempted to break through the walls of a cloister, and find a shelter under your majestic wing.—But as that can never be, you need not fear to trust yourfelf for a few moments with me alone.” He alSured her that she had only to name her place and hour, and that he would be pun6lual to both. She whifpered him—he bowed.
“ And now,” exclaimed she, good folks, it is time for me to abfent myfelf from a fcene of dif-fipation which nothing but the hope of making converts could have allured me to—If I have fuc-ceeded even with one, I shall be recompenfed for my pious labour—if I can change one heart, I am Satisfied.”—As this was evidently meant- as a flattering compliment to the Sultan, it was received with applaufe.—“ As for this poor devil,” cried she, “ even let him efcape to thofe regions where he learned his first precepts—and where he is only fit to live—let him, however, carry with him this moral truth as a fentiment whicli he may give the ton to amongst his companions ; that, to a woman of virtue, nothing is more infupporta-ble than the perfeverance of addresses which cannot end with honour—and to even a woman of gallantry, mirth is always unpleafing unlefs checked by decency and humanity.—It is to this gentleman, added she, curtfeying gracefully to the Comte D’Artois that I am indebted for not being known to the whole assembly—a circumstance that must have pained a female not totally lost to modesty and feeling.”—As she finished, she rushed amongst the croud—and it was owing to an ac-
E	cident
98
THE tl E E M I T
we looked through a curtain which,fc-
cident that I faw her again before I left the rooms.
Madame De Sanfeerre and I stepped into a rC' tired one to take off our rnalks, and to refrefh ourfelves with the cool air that came in at the window. We had not been there long, when we heard fome voiccsin the next apartmentro us— and as I thought! was acquainted with the female ones,
parated the two rooms, and there beheld the nun and the Turk together, in deep conference."—>And who, my dear Maria, do you think their bare faces difeovered them to be ? no others than the Marquis De Laufanne and Madame La Bert ?— Madame La Bert !—I was all amazement—yet lo it>really was. They feemed to be makijig up old differences—stie wept and lamccnted her weaknefs —bat love—-all conquering love ! prostituted word 1
** V/e have the luck of it !” Said Madame De Sanfeerre, retiring v/ith rage from the curtain.
• We hav.e indeed I” replied I calmly—and thfevy myfelf into a chair.
We discovered their intrigue in the fame manner.,” continued She.
“ And we will forgive them at this moment, my dear Sanfeerre,” cried I—and I.rested my aching head on her fhoulder.
■ I will tell you no more, my dear Maria of cur nights adventures, for there are no.more incidents worth relating—only this—that Solignac difeovered in the drefs of a gardener a pastlon for a fair
whom he politely faid was always too much his fuperior until that evening, to fuffer him to reveal it before—but she looked fo rustic—fo Simple —fo condescending in this humble garb, that she infpired him with courage to lay open to,
"	her
OF THE ROCK.
$9
ti-er, the precious Secret. Adieu, my Maria! I am more yours than I can exprels.
t ^

Victoria De Lausakne.
Madame La Bert to the Marquis Dx Lausanne.

night,
declaration you made me last Marcpjis, has given new charms to the world has added additional horrors to a convent. In burying myfelf in Solitude I affumed an air of penitence—1 bewailed to all whofe charity brought them to vifit me, my former indifcretions—1 wept over past errors—“but owned to no one except your wife, the criminality of ray connedlion with you: her piercing e}’cs v/ere not to be deceived—her religion—her piety induced her .from that instant to compastionate and befriend me. It is from her countenance I hope to retrieve my character—It is from her unSuSpediing nature I mean to enjoy thoSe pleaSures, which the cruel breath of Scandal deprived me of for a while. I have written to her—I have told her of my intention to appear again in the world. I have attributed to the innocent gaiety of my heart, a distike to the unSocial confinement of a convent. I have prayed her to believe me not lefs Senfible of my former unhappv weaknefs—but determined, with the afiistance of
E 2	he,'
lOO
THE HERMIT
her friendship, to partake of the charms of a virtuous and harm.lefs iociety. I have taken a houfe in the place royale, and have abated nothing in its taste of my former magnificence. I shall fup at home to-morrow night, Marquis.—Come to me—I promife to mention nothing of Le Blanc— the fubje6t gives you pain—fear nothing of it from me~you have a capacious foul—give me at least a share in it—if I steal more be furprifed— but regret not the foft power with which 1 shall cnstave you.
La BERt.
To Madame La Bert.
The invitation of a Venus has charms—but when the wit of Minerva pens it what man can fefist its eloquence?—I come. Madam—I ©bey your fummons—prepare for me a wreath of love —at your feet shall you encircle me with it.
De Lausanne.
Victoria
OF THE ROCK.
Victoria to Maria.
The Marquis propofed our making a party to
go to his feat of Trois Riviere—I immediately assented to it, and invited with him almost all the gay and elegant people of fashion in Paris to accompany us. The castle is large, and its sttua-tion is most romantically beautiful. A pavilioa has been erefled in the centre of a thick wood, under which we have had the most rural and de-
A. rotunda in the manner
Laufanne often
lightful entertainments, of English Ranelagh (which talks of with rapture) has been built on a ristng hill at a fmall distance from the cadle, .at the foot of which is an enamelled plain of a vast extent. This rotunda is elegantly fitted up,, and we have concerts and balls alternately there. Every perfon feems happy—every perfon is really fo, but your poor difcontented Vidloria. She with her friend Sanfcerre frequently steal a lo-litary walk, during which I indulge thofe tears which flow from the very centre of a forrowing
heart.
The Comte D’Artois has honoured us with his prefence—his wit enlivens all—-but his particular, gallantries distrefs me. The Duke De Maurice has not been invited—he was not in Paris when we left it—elfe the Marquis would certainly have remembered him in the general invitation.
Would you< believe that Madame La Bert has written ms an hypocritical penitential letter, de-
E 3,	■ ploring.
102
T H
A.J
H E R M I T
ploring her past faults — declaring a naturaTantb pathy to a conv-entual Hie—and praying my pro-te6iion and countenance in her fecond appearance in the world ? my anfwer was Short and civil, af-furing her I was grieved for her past mifcondu^t and hoping a reformation of her manners—that my friendship could now be no longer Serviceable to her, and that her own prudence would be her best guide and protedUon.—The Marquis is very polite towards me—but that is all. He often goes to Paris, as he fays, on particular buSinefs—during which time he leaves Solignac Maitre de Logh, As It is our plan that no ceremony Ihould be tiled, and that all should purfue their different inclinations, his going from his guefts is not constdered as a breach of politenefs., but as an example of the - freedom every other perfon should ule:
befidi


he calls himfelf only a viSitor of mine— and affures his company that he v/as invited by me with the rest of the gentlemen whom 1 favoured with a Summons, to be of this rural party. Unfortunate man !—he will, no doubt, fee hisabfur*
dities when it is too late to amend them—-he will
« . '
repent of his credulity when he can believe no lon-
I weep over his errors, and pray for his cCnverston.
Madame De SanScerre and Solignac are happy lovers. Pier former hushand’s ill-treatment has not difgusted her from wearing the matrimonial chain. They are both lively—they are both handfome—and they are at once the delight and envy of the world. They dance, they Sing together—a Similarity of difpoSition renders them always agreeable to each other—and the fmall share of coquetry that runs through her composition, keeps at the fame time his fears and love alive. I vvould fay they were formed for each other, had I not often pronounced the fame of a
mifcrablc
OF T H E ' R O C K,
103
when a finilmsf father and an indul2;ent rno-
o	o
mlferable pair, who feemed to be as near happi^ nefs—but cruel fate divided them for ever. Ah, my Maria when in the woods of Clarence, I listened to thofe pure and deligJitful lentiments, which flowed from the lips of Luz,y—when my own bofom felt and approved all that they uttered—
ther looked with complacency on our mutual paf-•fion—did 1- not then fay Luzy was born for his Victoria alone ?—Ah did not my hard destiny foon t-ear me from his arms—and condemn me to Lau-fanne’s!—Remembrance, remembrance—thou ar4: too painful I
I was weeping over a string.of pearl which Lu-zy had prefented me with in happier da's—-i had recalled the graces to my imagination which played around his perfon, when he with a g-iHant and tender air, tied it on my arm^^—I piftured to my-felf his fmile—I beheld him drop on one knee before me—I there heard him pour forth a renenew-al of the fondest—the most faithful vows—my heart caught the flame which fancy had kindled and forgetful of my huSband, 1 dared to prefs the fenfelefs beads to my lips. I was in a iummer-houfe alone, and did not fuppofe any mortal was witnefs to my tears and weaknefs. “ Ah !” exclaimed I, “ where art thou my best beloved? where dost thou wander a prey to anxiety and de-fpair ?—too unfortunate Victoria—her fate has involved thee in wretchednefs. ”
Here 1 paufed to raife again the bracelet to my lips—but refledling on the cruel ceremony which had bound me to the Marquis—I flung it from me, and it fell before me on the ground.
What am I about ?” cried I almost difpoS-feflTed of reafon. Oh Laufanne—oh, virtue pardon me!’’
E 4 .	At
i04
THE HERMIT
At that moment I heard a rustling, and quicker than thought the Comte D’ Artois stood in my preience—I was (hocked—I was confufed—I was frightened almost to fainting. He beheld my a-gctnies and fell at my feet.
Lovely Madame De Laufanne,” cried he in a tremulous tone, fear nothing—It is true I am not your confident—yet I profefs myfelf your friend. It is true I am not a favoured lover—but if he that is fo happy as to poffefs your heart, is now a wanderer in France—my proteQ;ion (hall Save him from deferving that appelation in future I will have him placed about my perfon in favour and magnificence. Tell me his name, I be-
r w	/	^
feech you. Madam, and let his abfence cost you no more tears.”
Ah, my Lord,” replied I, you widely mistake—I weep not his abfence but my own weaknefs—I am married to another-*-! ought not
on him with pleafure—but, alas ! I accustomed to regard him from my -and he has many virtues. He has left France—I -shall never fee him more—and I wish not to fee him—-all I defire is to blot from my remembrance his image.”
Here 1 wept upon the Comte’s shoulder, who had thrown a fupporting arm around me, and was mingling fears with mine. He begged to hear the story—1 declined relating it—1 had no inclination to expofe my hushand—on the contrary I blamed my own ingratitude in weeping at the idea ,of a former lover, when fo amiable a man as the Marquis deferved all my affefliion. The Comte shook his head—I pretended to take no notice of his incredulity. I prayed him to keep the fecret which fchance and my folly had difeovered ; and diieii-gaging myfelf from him, I left the fummer-houfe with precipitation. When I got to my apartment,
I found
fo refle£f have been childhood-
O F THE' R O C K.
105
I'found Madame De Sanfc«rre in it—I threw my-felf into a chair, and in an agony of tears, I told her what had happened
** It would have been ridiculous, ’’cried I, ** to have denied it after all he had heard—the only way I had left was to make him my friend.” Madame De Sanfcerre was very angry with me -—•she faid that I behaved like a child-—that the Comte had gained from me a very precious fecret, which fo far from destroying his hopes as a lover, would rather infpire new and more daring ones.
Ah, my God !” exclaimed I, “ how wretched am 11—what will become of me at last 1”
-she fpoke —she made
<(
My friend then began to confole me-reafon in its most perfuaSive language-me confeSs that I was both weak and culpable in^ Suffering Luzy to become once more an objeQ; of rhy meditations. I blushed—I acknowledged, her. justice—Luxy was again to be banished from my idea—-but that talk, to you, I must confefs, I never can accomplish. After this she left me to go and make her toilette..
t
As I'ooii as I.was alone,,I recolle61:ed my string, ef pearls—more valuable from its being a gift of. Luzy’s, . than from its own costly worth. I destr-cd Nannette to gb to the fummer-houfe and look, for my bracelet—she flew—and returned with an affurance that it was not there. I.was almost dif-tra^ed. “ Ah,” thought I, ‘‘ it was the only token I ever kept of his love—that Smile—that air with which it was prefented !—ah, ,my heedieSs folly !-—how could I abandon this innocent pledge of the most precious affection 1”
I wept, riamented myfelf in vain.
The hour approached when I was obliged to join my company in the faloon, and I endeavoured to affume a more compofed countenance than the
Teal Situatioo of. my heart could well allow of.
.D5-	As
io6
THE HERMIT
As I entered the room where every one was af-fembled but the Comte D’Artois, the Chevalier De Mondonoir approached and led me to a feat, then hanging over my chair, laid to me in a low voice, ** Why, Madam, do you appear pen-five ?—Something has happened to give you uneafi-nefs !—could 1—ah, charming Marchionefs !■—■ could Mondonoir be of of any Service to you— tax freely my poor power-—1 live but in the hope of making my Self one tim'e or other worthy of your esteem.’
The Chevalier, I believe, imagined, that I w’as unhappy about a new run of ill luck, which has pui Sued LauSanne : he lost to an English nobleman yesterday in Paris, five thouSand pounds; and went thither again this day to discharge the debt of honour.—-1 will not stay my pen to animadvert upon So disagreeable a Subjeft—alas! it is to nopurpcSe !—So I will proceed in my story.
1 anSwered the Chevalier in a tone of Sprightli-neSs which amazed him, and at once delivered me from being fuSpedted of melancholy on any account.
We went to dinner—the Comte D’Artois did not appear—he was not to be found—at the concert he was still abSent—at Supper he was notpre-ent, and every body concluded that he had left Trois Riviere. When we were parting for the night, I ^took Madame De Sanicerre by the arm, and as the f moon shone very bright, I propoSed to her a walk in the wood—she liked the thought, and we Sallied forth. We had not advanced far into it before I perceived Some one dart through a different part of it, as if to shun our Society—the circumstance Surprized—nay, alarmed us, and we paufed fora few moments—however wc could not prevail on ourSelves to proceed further, and were turned to the
castle where I took leave of Madame De Sanf-
cerrc ;
OF THE ROCK.
107
ccrre ; and walked for Some time up and down a gallery which is covered on the top, but is open at the (ides, and goes half round the houfe. £ had not been there long, when I heard Some steps founding in the gallery——I could not difcover whole they were, for I was q.,uite at the other end of it, and they feemed approaching, but at fome distance. From the foftnels of the tread, I giieir-ed the per Ton to be Sanfcerre, who perhaps had looked into my chamber, and' was uneafy at not finding me there. Prepossessed with this idea, I waited the coming of my friend, but what was my amazement, when instead of her, I beheld the Comte D’Artois 1 it was the way to his apartment—=»that gallery conduced him into a fuite of rooms, at the end of which was fituated his bedchamber—it was there he meant to retire, when he was struck with my unexpected appearance.
Good God, Madam !” cried he, do I dream—-or is it really the figure of Madame De Laufanne that I now behold
1 was in fome confuSion at his finding me fa strangely alone at fuch an. hour, and in fuch a place, but anfwered him with compofure and a degree of gravity, which ferved to check that air of vivacity and joy, which appeared in his manner on first addressing me. I took my leave almost direCtly~but not without alking him for the string of pearls, which I had left by accident i# the fummer-houfe, and which I flattered myfelf he had found. He took my hand:—fighed upon it ■and exclaimed, “ Ah, Madam ! thofe pearls —that happy man!—Madame De Laufanne lovely Vi<storia, name him to me 1^’
My Lord,” cried I-, ‘‘ this is unjenerous if I difeovered to you the weaknefs of my foul, you. may perhaps be ignorant, that I have virtue
fufficient
€i
io8
THE HERMIT
Sufficient to defpife that weakneSs. Name this fub-je6l no more, my Lord—I loved long before I knew the Marquis—I never. Since my marriage, allowed my imagination to dwell even on the virtues of this amiable man. ThoSe pearls which rny woman had accidentally placed oh my toilette, brought him once more to my idea-— I remembered him with too much esteem—but it was for the last time.—Never can I again be gwilty of fo much ingratitude to the excellent LauSanne—blot it for ever from your memory, good my Lord—and think justly of my virtues.
I immediately flew from^ him, and hurried to my chamber. This morning I received from him the following billet, which inelofed my bracelet.
To the Marchionefs De LausanNE.
YOUR last words were—“ think justly of my , virtue.” Too chaiming Viftoria I honour—I ef-teem that virtue which ever must be a barrier to tny hopes,—I have loved you—I here refign that tendernefs—your bofom is filled by another ob-jeO: more amiable—more worthy your regard the bracelet which I faw you honour with a fond embrace I now return—I have embraced it toO— I have shed Some fond—fome parting tears on eve ry bead — they had touched your lips! you must in thefe lines Suffer me to make my adieus —I can fly from your charms — but I cannot stay without adoring them. I beg leave to kifs your hands.”
I need not add that he has left Trois Riviere— and left it without alking to fee me. Madame De SanScerre rallies a good deal upon it; and
pretends
OF THE ROCK.
109
pretends to be very'angry that the most agreeable man of the party Should be frightened from us. Solignac looks grave upon this ; and enquires not into the caufe of his departure, though he is quite out of the Secret, and Sanfcerre favs this is to torment him.
Madame De Sanfcerre has purchafed a little estate near this place, whither ssie has invited all my company to pafs a few days.—I shall steal home alone this night however, in order to enjoy Some hours of peace and Solitude.—The Marquis I expert too from Paris—and he must not be lest alone. Adieu.
Yours ever.
Victoria De Lausajine.
f ♦
£ND OF VOLUME I.
\
. f
r
H
E
R
H
I
T	H E
R	M
0 F	THE
0	c
0 R	THE
s	T Q
0 F	THE
I
T
K :
R
Y
MARCHIONESS DE LAUSANNE
AND THE
COMTE DE LUZY.
TRANSLATED FROM A FRENCH MANUSCRIPT.

IN THREE VOLUMES.

VOL. II.

DUBLIN:
Printed for MefTrs* Price, R^Cross, Williams, Walke*^ E. Cro&s, Jenkin, Moncrieffe, Bijrnett, Gilbert, Higley, Exshaw, Beatty^
Biirton, B. Watson, and
J. Parker. 1779.
\ '

«i

THE

H
E
R
M
I
T
R
mmmm
OF THE
o
c
K.
y
Victoria to Maria.
I Was returning Some nights fmce SromMadanie De Sanfcerre’s, who hadgiven a rural mafked ball—^^and had left the company long before they thought of retiring,, when ray carriage was stopped—was immediately furrounded, a man with a crape over his face forced me out of it, and stopping my mouth with a handkerchief, feated me in a chaiie which was in readinefs near him.—sMy agitations are not to be defcribed——and in the vi»-lence of my defpair, at a lofs how to make my Situation known, I struck my hands against a fore glafs with fuch earnestnefs, that I shivered it to atoms. 1 cut my arras and fingers in a terrible manner, the blood which flowed from my wounds in great abundance, alarmed the wretch who had placed himfelf in the carriage by me, and letting VoL. II.	fail
114
THE HERMIT
fall the handkerchief which he hast heist to my mouth, I fnatched it from my lap and threw it out of the window. My voice being then at liberty,
I shrieked very loudly, whilst he endeavoured to staunch the blood which streamed plentifully from my arms and hands. At that moment two horfe-men appeared with their attendants—and I redoubled my cries—-I called for help—for mercy—for protection. They immediately rode up to us, and commanded the postilions to stop at their perils.—They obeyed, when the man that was with me leaped out of the chaife, and - drawing his fword, deSired the gentlemen to keep off as thej valued thielr lives-—for in the caufe in vjhiah he was embarked he could ajffail a hofi of Joes. I now began to fufpeCl that I had often heard and dreaded that voice—Iperceived it to be no other, than thcDuke De Mau rice’s, and entreating once more for protection I fell down fenfelefs in the carriage.—I remember nothing more that pasted until I found myfelf at Tfois Riviere in bed, with Madame De Sanfcerre kneeling by my fide in fpeechlefs agony. I‘ was willing to believe that 1 had just awakened from a frightful dream—but my muffled hands and bruifed limbs too foon convinced me of its being a Serious reality. I cannot paint her joy at finding me once more fenfible—and after Some inquiries on her part, refpeCling the commencement of this horrid affiair, she gave me the following particulars. When the gentlemen on horfeback difcovered that I had fainted; they dismounted, and going to each door of the chaiie, they raifed me again on the feat, from which I had fallen, whilst they Sent off Some of the attendants to the first village, to procure tor me theafllstanee of a Surgeon. In the hurry and perplexity of the Scene, the author of this accident fucurest himfelf by flight, fuppoSing (as they imagine) that I should expire with lols of
blood.
OF THE R O C K.
115
blood, before my wounds could be properly administered to. Soon- after a furgeen came who bound them up—and torches having been brought with him, they immediately perceived that I wa& the Marquis Pe Laufanne’s wife and I was con^ veyed hither as infenSible as if death had really feixed me. The Servants, upon my arrival appeared to be half distradled—and Some of them stew to Madame De Sanfcerre, who, instantly accompanied by the Marquis, fet off for Trois Riviere, where they found me in bed, and Nannette weeping ever and lamenting me as lost. The strangers who had refeued me, after delivering me up in Safety,, purfued their route, which they faid was to Paris, promistng to return in a day or two to make their inquiries concerning me in per-fon. Laufanne Seemed stiocked at-my Situation^— he once kneeled by me, and wept plentifully however he went to Paris the morning after, and did not return until the evening following, when, he faw me much recovered. The Servants who were with me at the time the affray happened, have never fince been heard of, excepting the postilion who came home early that morning, and protested his innocence of being accessary to it he fays that he was beaten Severely by one of the ruffians, and was fo difabled from proceeding faster with the carriage, that it was with difficulty he reached the castle when he did. Sbrifl inquiry
has been made after thefe wretches to little or no
%
effedi—a circumstance that gives me stneere plear Sure,
What can I think, my dear Maria—what am I to fuppofe } I could Swear that the Duke De Maurice alone was the author of fo vile a plot—yet th is I would not for the world divulge to any one but ’>ou.—Laufanne Seems-to believe that it was
Some
\
ii6
THE HERMIT
Some rohber, who aware of ray being richly dref-fed, wifhed to convey me to Some unfrequented place in order to strip me of my jewels and raoney, I Suffer him to think So—fully perSuaded at the fame time that this robber is no other than his bo-fom and darling friend.
Madame De SanScerre informs me that the obliging strangers told the particulars of this adventure to Nannette. They appeared by her description, to be the Chevalier De TreSac and MonSieur De CTfanville : two gentlemen who live not many miles from Trois Riviere, and whofe affability and worth, have claimed- the esteem and admiration of the whole country. My good friend knows them both—and will anSwer for it, that to them I am indebted.for my miraculous efcape.
Farewel, my Maria, my strength is not So far returned as to permit me to dedicate much time to. my pen.—This accident has diSperSed our company, aiad we mean to go in a-day or two to Paris,
Victoria De Lausanke.

M A R 1 A D B. V I L L B N E U T, to Madattii
D E L A U 8 A N N E.
’ HAVE promtfed.togive ray hand to Eindor—
A my mother who finds herfelf recovered, infills upon my fixing am early day. Lindor waits with all the impatience—-all the ardour, of a lover—and your Mariastifdains to trifle with a heart fo tender and So faithful. Come,.my Victoria,.and blefs with your prefence the awful day—-Come and Support me finder the conflicting paflions, of love and fear.—■
Ah, should, my bridal joys be damped with the
idea
OF THE ROCK.
117
idea of what may happen after ?—the inconstancy of man—the instability of thefex!—Ah, how can I endure the apprehensson of lofing Lindor for ever? — the thought is too painful — I must not yield to it.
I writ to you very fully feme days llnce : * I gave you the overflowing advice of a cautious and friendly heart.—What matters it that I should la-raent to you the mifery of your domestic sttua-tion ? -— No, my Victoria, we were all born to fuffer—and your Maria, who. is about to bestow her hand on the object of her love, is not exempt from thofe pangs which are inherent to human nature.—Be kind—be faithful to the Marquis—be cautious of the defigning Maurice, and fufpedt,
for Surety fake, the Seducing D’ A---s. The
applaufe \of our own hearts is the first of felicities that will confole, when temporary joys will flit away. Luzy has no longer a right to your Sighs —to your regrets—though Laufanne forgets what is due to you as your friend and protestor, you will not be lefs culpable for negleQing the .duty and virtues of your marriage vow. I allow you to hope for happier days—but at the fame time I prohibit your looking up to Luzy for them ah, no! — they must be rendered fo, by your drawing Laufanne with fweetnefs and prudence from his prefent youthful errors, and reclaiming ■him to the joys of virtuous love.
Adieu—tell Sanfcerre I am forry that she is fo far bound to Paris, as not to give me one hope of her leaving it to attend the nuptials of her friend—■ to-morrow fe’nnight—ah, my Victoria!—this is the last time 1 shall fubfcribe myfelf
Your Maria De Villeneue,
♦ This letter does not appear.
Madame
118
THE HERMIT
'Madame D e L A u s A N N E., to Madame
D E S A N s C E R R E.
I HAVE beheld the ceremony of making two faithful lovers happy—I was prefent when Maria bestowed her hand on Lindor —I heard her repeat thofe vows with delight, which cost me the bitterest tears to pronounce—I faw him embrace her with the raptures of love—I faw her receive his caresses with apleafure which (he took no pains to conceal. Ah, Sanfeerre, can marriage really wear fo delightful a form ?—I beheld it once before—-but with what different eyes!—def-pair and horror were my handmaids—and mifery preSided at the altar: the hours which are here dedicated to mirth and festivity—were then pasted in tears and fadnefs—and when Laufanne received
me to his arms—-the embraces of death would have
0
been more welcome !
Madame De Saviilon is the emblem of beauty. She is happy—her fmiles are adorned with a thousand graces—her form is unconstrained—her manners eafy. When (he Speaks to Lindor, her voice is harmony, and (he Seems to behold him as the most precious gift of heaven. _May you, my friend, in blessing our Solignac, experience all theSe extatic fenfations! may you many years after think of that day , as the sera of your most permanent felicity !—and may it never ceafe, until fate cuts, the thread of life—and an extreme old age leaves you nothing more to widh for !
My dearest Maria thinks of our Separation with anguish, Lindor too, at its mention, is distrested ■—they are all goodnefs—we have long been the
ssneerest friends^^—and this last interview wdiich we ■	■	have
O F THE R O C K.
lint
Tiave had, stems to have added if poffible to the vast degree of tendernefs which we ever poffeffed for each other.
Madame De VilTeneuf is altered for the worst fince Tiaw her—she looks pale and wasted—but her venerable -figure losts nothing of its dignity, though it fupports a burden of infirmities. She is happy in feeing her daughter fo, and views Lindor with the fond eyes of a parent.
I am called to join in a dance W'hich is given to the villa'gers: I remember that it was at fuch a rural afSembly, I fucked in a deadly poifon, which to this moment communicates its baleful influence ov€r my heart.—Ah, Sanfcerre ! —Madame Da Parte prefented it to me, in the-’form of Luzy.
*
*


V*
*
I have been dancing with the young Marquis n>e Villars-~-he is very amiable, and his perfon is an afiembkige of the Graces. He knew Luxy in, Italy—but what is that to the,purpofe? The Marquis De Villars -was attentive, 1 could perceive, to a pretty blooming damfel, whofe-innocent heart dreams not -of fedu6tion. I heard her tell him, that (he was not fuch .a fool as to believe the finerihings he faid—that jhe was a poor girl, and went with her Peep [as happy as they) to the mea-. dows where’ tk&y e^raze—that Jhe had never been in Paris in all her life, and though it was a fine placer-foe had no cur lofty to fee it.
What, no curiofity,” cried he, to fee how beautifully a frifeur would difpofe of thefe pretty ringlets !—Your eyes, my charming Sophia, are already too brilliant for my peace—but they w'ould receive additional luilre .from the mode ,of adorn-, ment which you could affume in Paris.’^
nr' 1
J r.e

120
THE HERMIT
ft
if
The poor girl curtfied—he took her hand.
My little Sophy will come with me to Pari* I am fure 1”
No, Sir,” replied she, I do not like to hear of it—poor Sophia is only fit to feed her flock at home^—and she deSires no better.”
. I could listen to no more at that time, but after a dance in which Sophia had performed with a degree of natural grace and eafe, she stated her-stlf with one of her female companions under a large poplar.—The Marquis De Vi liars approached her shortly, and taking his place near her, caught hold of her hand.
And fo you will have me die, cruel Sophia!” exclaimed he in a pathetic tone.
** Die, fir I—no, God forbid — I hope I am not fo wicked 1”
Why then, continued he, will you refufe me a request on which more than my life depends ?” “ blefs me fir!” cried Sophia, “ what would you have me do?”
“ Only,” replied he, to come with me to Paris—and to fuffer me to make you as fine as any there.”
** And what would become of my poor mother ?” anfwered she.
Why I will make her age comfortable—the parent of my love should never know a want.”
And what would you do for my sheep?” refumed she.
Oh, fome careful shepherd should be employed to look after them.”
‘‘ Ah, fir!” cried Sophia, I am Sorry to grieve fo fine a gentleman as you — but indeed, indeed I cannot leave my dear mother who is already finking under age and ficknefs—nobody knows how to feed her but my Self—-nobody can
mirst her like me—befides—my sheep know me,
and
OF THE ROCK.
I2I
and they would break their hearts if I should leave them. I turn them every morning into their paf-ture, and go back for them at night—my little brother watches them all day, while I do the bu-Sinefs of the houfe, and attend my mother. To be fure they would all die, if Sophia could go away from them to be a fine lady.”
During this artlefs fpeech, which was pronounced in the very voice of innocence, the Marquis viewed her with an emotion which I could not but oblerve.—Her virtue, had affe6ted him—and, be not furprifed if I tell you, the Marquis turned his head afide to wipe from his eyes fome starting stears.—He tried her farther.
“ But thefe hands, my pretty Sophy 1—theSc hands will be fpoiled by labour,”
No, no, fir,” anfwered she, “ the hands of a poor girl are made for labour—and my mother tells me, that as long as I continue to be good, I shall never be ashamed to own that I work for my bread. It would be more to my shame, fir, if I fpared my hands, and fuffered my dear mother, to w«nt their fervice.”
Why, have you not a father, my amiable

gir
1
Here Sophia took up her apron to hide her tears the Marquis was shqcked—he kiffed her hand, and alked her pardon.
“ No, fir, continued she, “ no offence’' still covering her eyes. “ I will tell you presently.”
The pretty creature, after Some moments paufe, addrelTed him thus;
My father was the best man in the world he was kind and faithful to my mother, and loved his children beyond every thing, except his honesty.—We were all happy whilst he was with us but, alas, fir j—we shall never lee him again.”
VoL. II.	F	Here
112
THE HERMIT
the Marquis was pc
Here {he fobbed bitterly retrated with forrow..
“ Your father is dead then, Sophy !” cried he.
“ Yes, Sir,” fald she, I arn afraid fo. He
had reared bv his labour feme cattle, and left us
•/ ^
one day, to'varry thera to market. We did not expedt him home for a week, but at the expiration of that time, we looked out impatiently for his return.—Ah, Sir!—a fortnight passed withoiu any tidings from him-—three weeks—a month elapfed in the fame way—smy poor mother was almoft raef-ed, and it wa& with difficulty! fupported her forrows, and oun little Billy’s cries, without difeovering to them my own grief. I endeavoured to chear them with a hope of his being still living —but, alas! I arn afraid it is a vain one,, for it is more than a year Since the fatal day of his leaving our cottage.”
“ You do right, my dear Sophy,” anfwered the Marquis, ** to hope the best—Who knows but God still fpareshim to his wife and children!” “ Ah, Sir, returned she “ were you to fee. how fadly ray mother bears his abfence !—It is that which has reduced her to Sicknefs and melancholy—her poor heart is almost broken.—^She has a chair placed on moon light nights outSide of the-
houfe, in which she leats herlelf, with her face ^ /
turned towards the path, which my father took, when he left us—there she weeps and calls upon him to return—I often hear her lamentations,, when 1 am bufy in giving Billy his fupper, and preparing fome for ourfelves—at Sitch times I am forced to hide my face from my brother, or he v/ould find out that my heart was; breaking too— and it is Ijy my cheaffulnels lie is convinced our, father will foon come back.” '	- ■
The-
O F
T H h: R O G K.
t2j
The amiable fhepherdcfs left him, to give a loofe to herteafs — ssie had walked fome paces from the Marquis, and had leaned against a tree, whifft-Sne uttered fobs and Sighs without interraptibn. When I iavv her a little compoled, I advanced towards her, and putting my arm through hers, t led hpr further from tlie company, Slie told me that her mother was then at the castle, tliat the marriage of their fwett \oupg lady, was ton jo yful . art event nert to inlpire even her with pleafure ; that she was with fome of the old villagers in a retired room, where reb'cshments of every fort were prepared for them,, and that she was p'afti-cularly induced to leave her cottage at this time in order that her children (Sophia andBiiiy) should partake of the mirth on the green.
Upon fpeaking to Maria on tliis fubjcD, she gave me a hundred affurances that die litile family should be sheltered from all. harm.—rmci LiRstoftia? promiled to fettle on them for life a comfortable annuity. The Marquis I^e Viilars beg.ged leave to-join in contributing fomething cofider.ible towards the fcttlement, and Sophia will receive a handfornfe prefent upon her marriage with any youth whom-her love shall elebf, and her mother approve ost {• have taken the care of the boy’s education on. myfelf; I will endeavour to have him brought u» in honesty and virtue, and if he lives- to attain xt mature age, I mean to prefent him-with a-vineyard, which he shall either, rent, or work in him-felf; in the intermediate time a shepherd’s; boy shall be hired to look after the sheep in the meadow, whilst Sophia is busted about the houstiolst affairs. This feheme has afforded.^ us rpuch pleafurd and- is an eternal topic of converfation wish m.
You may fuppofc I have written this, letter at many different times—.there is no poffbiljty q.£ fitting long to any thing here—pleafure invites a
F 3	thou fund
124
THE HERMIT
thoufand ways —and we hardly allow ourfelves to relilh one amufement Sufficiently, before another alTumes a more alluring shape, and prefents to us its tempting appearance.
Adieu, dear Sanfcerre ! assure Solignac of my friendship, and believe me to be
Your unalterably asse6Uonate
V
Victoria De Lausanne.

Victoria De Lausanne to Madame
De Savillon.
4
YOU are happy, my Maria, and my wishes are Satisfied.—I can eafily forget that I am myfelf wretched, when I reflet that Lindor and you are at length united ; my own woes, at that thought, remain unwept—and a fmile of joy dif-fufes itfelf over my countenance. You deSired me to write you all—you charged me to Suffer nothing to pafs untold — well then, my Maria, I muff, in obeying, cost you Some few tears—you will let them drop when you learn that the Marquis is really cruel to me, and that I know not how I have deferved Such treatment.
The night I arrived in Paris, after having bid you and my friends at Villeneuf castle adieu, I was met almoffin the court yard by Madame De San-Seerre : upon enquiring of her for my hushand, she told me, that he had been abfent two days from town, but was expeO:ed that evening to return. I will not tell you that this intelligence
rather
OF THE ROCK.
125
rather difpleafed me—you would be angry were I to fay fo—and I believe with reafon. We retired to my dressing room, where fhe amufed me with a thoufand anecdotes that happened in the Beau Monde Since my quitting it; and in my turn I gave an account of our pleafures at Villeneuf. We chatted and laughed away lome hours, until we were told that fupper was ferved—we expefled to be joined by Solignac then; and in passing to the eating room, we heard his carriage drive in, and Saw him enter foon after. Our mirth encreafed. upon this agreeable acquisition to our fociable party, and we enjoyed ourfelves with no lefs gaiety than innocence. When fupper was ended we prevailed on Madame De Sanlcerre to give us an Ita-. lian fong which she had studied in my abfence, and after her, Solignac and I obliged her with fome pretty airs in our turn. We were thus happy when the door opened—and the Marquis De Lau-fanne appeared. We arofe to receive him, and I approached to pay him my compliments, meaning at the fame time to embrace him—but I was stopped short by- a cold,, bow, and fome ridiculous fine fpeech; which when he had ended, nobody I believe could guefs the meaning oh In return I Said fomething of being happy to fee him look fo well,. and in prefenting Yiimivith the compliments of Ma-dame De Filleneuf, and thofe of the Comte and Madame De Savillon—again he bowed—and foon after with one more general, he quitted the apartment. Solignac upon this, took his leave, and Sanfeerre and I were left once more to ourfelves.
We had not been long alone, when a fervant came to inform me,, that the Marquis begged to-fee me in his study. I immediately went thither, and found him fullenly feated at a writing tabl He never arofe at my entrance—he affedSed, in-
F 3	deed.
P

T H E
HERMIT
deed, to take no notice of reiy being in the room. — I had fat sslently very near half an hour waiting his pleafure, when the fatigue of my journey induced me to wifh for rest, and in as cautious a tone as possible, kft I Ihould diiiurb his meditations, I begged to know whether he had any thing particular to communicate to me ? Pie stood up—he viewed me from head to foot with an air of difdain «nd coldnefs —he astced, vehtiher I was impatient to join again my merry Jet-^fo much joy as not to fpare him a Pw minutes of my company P He added, that it was not the frfi proof i had given him of my indifference, but by Heaven he would malde me dif-gwje thofe fentimemts of averfmi, or know a reafoti for the contrary.
1 was astonished—the man appeared to me, to be in a phreni&y. I told him, that he did me injustice—that I came to him with pleafure—but aa he took no notice of my prefence, I judged it ne-ceffary to inform him, that I was waiting to know his e^jimmands. I faid that he could not wonder at my not much relishing to stay, where I was not even fpoken to, but that I was then ready to listen to whatever he chofe to impart.
. ** Madam,-’ returned he, ** the admiration of princes, dukes, and comtes has disturbed that poor vain head of thine—you pretend to fatyriste me for not being fenSvble of your awful approach —you may now walk out of the room. Madam, --I want nothing of you—nor could I expedf any thing from you, but the degree of constdence I have found.”
1 immediately advanced towards the door— he caught hold of my arm with malice in his eyes.
** Hold, Madame De Laufanne 1-^—you are ex-peSed to-morrow to make your appearance at Verfailles—I destre you will lay that hope assde I am to be duped no longer—kings are pretty conquests
O F T H E R O C K.
£27
quests for a Udy to make — but Laufanne’s wife Ihall diicUin every other, but that which Ihe once could claim over her hushand's heart. — Begone from my Sight!”
This last fpeech was Spoken in an ironical tone until he came to that part, where I was commanded from his prefence—his voice then arofe to a key of pastionate difcord, and I flew from it faSter than I would have stone from the roaring of an angry lion.
When 1 gained my chamber, I found Sanfcerre in it, and undreffest—we dilmifSed our attendants —(he waited forme in the utmost expediation^I was ready to faint with fear and grief, and throwing myfelf intoa chair, she administered to me drops and volatiles until I was in fome meafure restored. Her friendly heart fent forth a shower of tears to her eyes, that fell in large drops on my hands, which, whilst I was incapable of articulation, she frequently, prested to her lips in anguish. At length, when I revived fufficiently to explain my Situation, I related to her all that had pasted—but then, alas I—we could do no more than weep, over, the wretchednefs of my fate.
The next morning Sanfcerre and Ishreakfasted. in my 'apartment, and upon Madame De Lau-trec’s calling on me to accompany me in my carriage to Verfailles as we had propofed, 1 fent her word by Nannette, that I was confined with a cold ■ and fever to my roonj, and was forty that it was not in my power to wait upon her. The Marquis it Seems heard this mestage, and called out loud enough for the elegant Marchionefs not to }ofe a fyllable of what he uttered.
“ It is falfe 1—she is very well. Let her not be ashafnest to own, that her hushanst has forbidden her journey to the court—he wdll never be duped—the world shall knovv he will not.”
F 4	Madam .
128
THE HERMIT
Madame De Lautrec, Nannette faid, shrugged her shoulders,—and deSiring her compliments to me, hurried out of the houle.
The Marquis Toon after lent me the foliowi*? billet.
“ I should be glad to know. Madam, who thofe two Cavaliers were, who attended you from Madame De Sanfcerre’s in the country, to Trois Kiviere, and were fo happily your champions as to fecure you against the violence of a third admirer?—You best can tell the name of that third invader of my honour—of your virtue—him, however, you did not favour with your preference— therefore, he is not worth my vengeance.—But 1 deSire you will unravel the mystery which hangs over the defcription of your deliverers. They merit my thanks for their fervices—and whilst I wear a fword, I-will not lay under an obligation to them. ! expeft your anfwer—I wait for it.
De LausjSiMke.
I copy my anfwer.
The fubje6l of your billet has furpriz,ed me,
my Lord, more than did your cruel behaviour of last night—the latter I perhaps merited by the too comphicent mode I have ever adopted towards you ; the former, I could not expedt but from injustice itfelf.
To be plain with you my Lord, I cannot bear up against repeated lufults—I already Sink under the fears—the terrors 1 endured last night. I am
forty
O F
THE ROC K.
120
Sorry for it on your account—I lament it on my own. I cannot Support your unkindnefs long — let that be your comfort—it is my confolation."—
I give you my facred honour, that I know not thofe kind protedfors whom you mention, nor can I, without being unjust, name him,, who had nearly robbed me of life. Suffice it to fay, that / forgive him, and must ever refped thofe friends unknown, who Saved both myfelf and huiband from diffionour.
I am, my Lord,
Your faithful and affectionate,
Victoria De Lausanne.
Soon after the receipt of my anfv/er, he left home—and though it is two days lince his ablence, we have neither heard from, orleen any thing of him.
Adieu, my Maria f—I do not think ! was ever more indifpofed.—Solignac is gone too into the country—and Sanfcerre, in Spite of her endeavours to conceal it, is chagrined at his abSence. Once more farewel!—let no chansfe in our fituatr-
/	^	^	I
ons ever efface the tenderneSs which you have always professed for your
Victoria De Lausanne

Vi'he Comte De Solignac to Madamr
De Sansgerre.
Ah, lovely Julia !—I tremble whilst I write-—
I am overv/helmed with afstiftion—and the idea of giving you pain adds-to it.—You tenderly
F 5	legai'd
/
130
/
THE HERMIT
regard the Marchionefs De Laufanne —who fo capable then, of breaking to her the most dreadful of all tidings?—Thy delicacy, thy fenSibility-,
^	A	«
thy generous friendship, talk !—Ah, my amiable best beloved friend—my
expofc thee to the cruel fair Julia 1—Luzy—-my
more than brother, has
bidden an eternal adieu to this world of woe !—It is now twelve months fince his embarkation for Martinicof—and the ships that have in the courfc of that time, returned from thence, never bore mention of his arrival.—I am now informed, that a vessel which failed about the time of his departure from France, faw the one, which he left us to go on board of, founder at Sea——no affistanca could be given—the winds and waves confpired against it—and Lazy perished, no doubt, amidft the general wreck.—Ah, God! — lean add no ynore—my defpair is not to be equalled, but by thofe pangs which must rend the fair bofom of the unhappy Victoria. I enclofe you the pidlure of him, which she refufedto keep—she may now think differently-—and her timid delicacy mud not be expofed to request it of me again : prefent it to her, lovely Julia, — and believe me to be, on all occaSions,
Your most devoted
De Solignac
Victoria.
OF T H E ROC K.

Victoria D E L A U S A N N E, to Madame De Savillon.
NO W ex6rt your eloquence — Speak philofo-phicaliy to me—tell me, with thofe vain boasters who have lefs fenSibility than frigid stoic-ifm, that Sorrow is all ideal—then, my Maria, will I enter into argument with you—then can I, in one Sentence only, refute every fyllable yon have uttered—then will I, my poor heart! bear witneSs to thy pangs—then will I preSent to you theSe words—Luzy is dead I
Great God !—Thou, who canst bid thy avenging thunder striker—Thou who hast made the wretched victim of thy reSentment tremble Thou, before whofe awful throiro, all Sifiners are but dust—judge if this one stroke has not atoned to thee for all my crimes I
Ah, my Maria !—-could language paint—could the pen of man defcribe my woes—then would’st thou weep the agonies of thy Vidloria I —^ then wouldst thou acknowledge, that the bofom of the earth is not encumbered with another obje£l: So miserable—*fo abandoned by the mercy of heaven.—Yet I am not to complain—how Should a creature like me, dare to murmur against the de-‘ trees of Providence I—how fnohld a guilty mortal like'mySelf, preSume to repine at punishments, too justly inflidled on me I
Luzy—when I restgned thee for ever—when I-confented to forget thole oaths——thofe vows—thofe protestations I made thee when before the Sacred altar, I Swore to love alone, a man whom oSail
the Sex I most deSpiSed—Luzy, it was then, that
'V	I Sea-

132
THE hermit
I Sentenced thee to perpetual banishment from thy friends and country—it was then I Sentenced thee to the cruelty of that fate which thou hast met with.
<<
Fathers have flinty hearts them :
no tears can melt
It
Nature pleads in vain wretched I”
and children must be
Ah, my poor father!—and shall your Vi^loria reproach thee ;—reverend shade forgive me! my Sen'es are unietiled—my heart is breaking.
My God ! can 1 ever forget the last time we met!—Can I ever forget his love—his grief—his defp'air! When in his fond —his dear encircling arms—1 bade a long, a last adieu ?—Luzy, Luzy if yet I am dear to thee—it yet thy gentle Spirit hovers near me—Forgive me—Maria, my poor head feels strangely.
*
I HAVE been very ill Since I writ last — I do not think I have been rightly in my fenSes—I am told I have not wandered from them—but I forget every thing—I forget every thing but that which alone can embitter remembrance. My Soul is torn in pieces-—I have no more to do with life—I have murdered him—I have murdered Luzy—and never, never more shall I behold him !
*

N. B. Here the MarchioneSs make^ a break.
Several letters from Madame De Sanfctrre to ■ Ma«a are ondtted, in which she gives an
account
OF THE ROCK.
H3
account of Luzy’s death, and the dangerous Situation of Madame De Laufanne, who at the time of her writing (which was in the courfe of feveral weeks) was delirious, and So ill, as to afford very little hope of her recovery. On her getting better she refumes the pen as follows:
TELL me, my Maria, where are now thofe gay profpedls which appeared to me, when together we rambled through the woods of Clarence, and had Luzy and Lindor perpetually by our Sides ? then did we wish for nothing more^^—theh did we look forward with pleafure, and every day was happier than the last. It was then, my Maria, I faw Luzy without fear—that I profeffed to love him without dread.—How little did I think I should have become the wife of Laufanne--and that Luzy would have found a watery grave !—My profpedls have indeed been blackened—have indeed been altered !—May yours, my Maria, ever retain their prefent brightnefs !—may nothing overshadow them !
Madame De Sanfcerre has given me the portrait of Luzy, which I fometime ago inSisted upon prefenting to the Comte De Solignac. — I write with it placed before me. — The pidlure Seems to fpeak—it appears to (mile—that fmile, my Maria—ah, what fweetnefs—what beauty is in that fmile!—yet the painter could not doit justice—my heart which bears a more faithful refemblance of him, gives to his charming countenance thofe graces which the cold pencil of a limner never could have touched.—Where now are thofe warm—^thofe animated beauties, which fpoke fo fenSibly the feelings of the noblest heart,
that
134
THE HERMIT
that ever beat ?-—they live no longer but in idea?
Cruel, cruel fate ! — unhappy, unfortunate Vidloria!
Adieu, my Marla!—I will not trouble thee longer with my fruitiest complaints.—Love me still—love me, if it is only through compaflion— Soon shall I ceafe to alk it for myfelf—foon will my memory alone lay claim to your regard !

Victoria De Lausanne.
Victoria De Lausanne, tn Madame De Savillon.
Good God, my dear friend, is it possible?
can it be true indeed that Luz.y is dead ?—. Luzy, whom I faw fo blooming ?—whom I be* held the most amiable of all lovers?—ah, could heaven have allotted him fo untimely a fate ? — Dear Maria I—what is thy Vidloria’s heart com-pofed of?—Luzy is dead—yet she still lives—she will never behold him more—yet that thought has not killed her !—Oh, my Marla, I am miferable —no words can tell my anguish—my heart is broken—it is incapable of bearing its burden of calamity. — Maria —■ my dear Maria, eafe my poor head I—my foul is finking—it faints beneath the Scourge of a just and angry God. When I broke through thofe Solemn vows, which in the facred prefence of the deity I pronounced—when I gave
my*
OF THE ROCK.
H5
ni)' hand to Laufanne, with a heart devoted to another—fuch facrileges—ah, they must be atoned for !—yet was it not to obey a parent ?—Alas, my much loved Luzy I—you have long forgotten thy injuries—you have dearly paid the forfeit of my infidelity !

*
*■
*
*
*
*
Madame De Sanscerre in continuation of the
above letter.
»
I KNOW not where to begin, my dear Marla —I am all horror, confufion and grief I—-our Victoria is quite delirious—she has adorned her head with flowers fet off in the most fanciful manner—— her bofom she has decorated in the fame Ample style—all to the difference of one string of pearl, which she has tied around her neck—in her hand she bears the portrait of Luzy, which she addref-fes in heart-rending accents.—The Marquis is happily from home—he has not returned Since he received her anfwer to his cruel letter. Heaven compofe her mind before he reviSits Paris!—Hark ! —I hear her voice—she is coming into my room.
*
*
*■
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
She advanced towards me, with a stow and mournful step—her eyes were rivetted to the floor—she came up quite clofe to me before she obferved me. I took her hand.
“ My Vidloria,” cried I, “ do you not fe4 your Sanfeerre ?—do you not know your friend ?’*
She
136
THE HERMIT
She started—she looked stedfastly at me eyes were fuffufed in a torrent of anguish heart was bursting.
my
my
The charming creature paf-Sed her hand over my face—^she found it wet with tears.

Ah,” faid she, you weep ?—why do you weep ? has any one caufe but me?—yet fee my eyes are dry.-—People tell me that I am married —nay, they accufe me of murdering Laufanne —but indeed, indeed they wrong me—I never murdered but one in my life—and him I behold now !”—looking wildly towards the oppoSite Side of the room.—‘‘ Ah, my Lord 1”—added the poor distracted Victoria, and she fell on her knees with clafped uplifted hands-—“ Ah, my Lord—forgive me—it was my father—it was my mother who commanded. l/uxy, I always loved thee—1 now love thee though in thy cold grave, better than all the world I”
I flew to her—I endeavoured to raife her from the ground. Her eyes were fixed—her ideas feem-cd abforbed in the contemplation of fome interest-r ing obje^—she continued firm in her poSitioB— ■or could all my strength avail in ashsting td remove her from it. Some minutes were thus fpent, wlien Sue fprang up fuddenly, and, throwing her arms around^ my neck, she hid her face in my bofom.
Ah, he is dying now!” exclaimed she; ** his groans — his cries!—oh, who will fereen me from them?—this hand ’—added she, shewing me her right hand, “ this hand struck him to the heart—I gave the blow.^—I gave it to Luz.y 1”
Here she fainted, and Nannettc and I conveyed her to her chamber, where she has been in a profound steep ever Since.
Nannette has just told me, that the Marquisas valet, whom he took with him out of town, i»
arrived.

OF THE R O C K.
137
arrived, and Says his lord will foon be in Paris— he is expe6led momently. Good God, my dear Savillon ! what will become of her, if in this cruel delirium, the sstuation of her foul should be expofed before her tyrannic hushand ?—A carriage drives into the court—it is him—Adieu.
I MET the Marquis as he entered thehoufe he Silently—and fomething fullenly, faluted me he passed me in order to go to his study—-I took the liberty of following him thither.
“ My Lord,” faid I, “ the Marchionefs is very ill—a violent fever has brought her almost to the brink of the grave—she is now out of her fenfes—and in all probability a very short time will put a final period to her fufferings.”
He turned pale—he was shocked-
** Why,. Madam,” faid he in a tremulous tone, “ Why was I not made acquainted with her indilpofition fooner?”
“ Becaufe, my Lord,” cried I, rather too warmly, “ 1 know not where Madame La Bert lives in the country.”
He started—he Seemed to take fire—but I keep his Spirit a little under—and without affeSfing to take notice of his refentment, I turned upon my heel, and left him to cool upon it alone.
It was not long before he entered her apartment—she was asteep—and I was bathing her dear hands with the teats of affe£fion, when he approached her bed. He viewed her in filence for Sometime—then in a whifper demanded the reafon of her head’s being So attired ? I faid it was her
wandering
138
T.D E HERMIT

Ah, would I had I cannot mistake ■and thou art now Strike, strike!”
wandering fancy which had chofen -to have it fo adorned—and that I thought it would be cruel to crofs So harmlefs a deSire. He turned aSide to wipe away his tears. She Soon after stirred—and in a few minutes opened her eyes—they unluckily took in at once the perfon of the Marquis who stood oppoSite to her, and direflly as she beheld him, she Screamed with violence.
‘‘ Ah!” cried he, “unhappy wretch I—^lam, indeed, unworthy to appear before the face of innocence.—Pardon, pardon me, Vi£tor4a !”—do you know me and he fell on his knees before her. She aroSe in the bed, and looking stedfastiy
at him^------
Know you” Said she, never known you I—Yes, yes thou, thou art his murderer-come to Seize thy other vi3im added she with fervour, ** God will receive rae to his boSom.”
The Marquis pressed her burning bands to Ids lips, and bedewed it with his tears.
She had now forgot that any one was preSent, and teetried to be muttering to herfclf.—She was pulling to pieces the flowers that adorned her bo-fom, and shattering them around her couch. She at length happened to feel the string of pearls she had tied about her neck—at the end of which, it Seems, she had, in my abfence, fastened the portrait of Luzy. The pi^ure hung low in her bofom, and had before eshaped my obfervation— but, alas ! 1 was made to fee it too foon.—When the Marchionefs perceived the pearls, she untied them, and took them from her neck, and in doing £0, she dishovered the miniature, which bears fo strong a refemblance to what her lover was. She looked with fixed attention at it for fonae minutes
she
O F T H E ROCK.
139
she pressed it to her heart—she carried it to her lips—she looked at it again—at length she repeated in a low voice, ** A great distance! — Along abfence!”—she paufed—** yet we shall meet at last \-—Ah we will never pari again !”— once more she kiffed it, and put it in her hofom,. The dear creature foon after laid her head upon the pillow, and fell afleep. The Marquis never interrupted her during her meditation of the picture. His countenance, however, wore the marks of astonishment and anxiety. When he believed her to be in a fast ssumber, he advanced to the bead of her bed with infinite caution, and putting his hand iipon the string of peark—he brought forth the portrait from her bofom—he put it into his own without once looking at it—and hurried with it to the other end of the room. I followed hirn at a distance—I faw him take it oat—I faw him start upon finding whofe it was—I heard him exclaim, Ha! damnable woman !” he put it into his pocket, and quitted the apartment. I anl terrified for her beyond meaSure—I know not what steps to purSue 1
*
*■
*
*
*
*
•K
*
SHE is better—pshe is come a little to herfelf-her eyes have a penfive, Ijut a compofed look The large and bitter tears she has shed, have eafed her labouring heart.—Tshe Marquis fends to know how she does frequently, but has never entered her chamber Since his taking possession of the picture, i dread to tell her the affair—my mind forebodes a thoufand misfortunes!
THE
Mo
THE HERMIT
THE Marchionefs has miffed the pi£ture— fhe did not, however, inSist upon its being brought to her—she only wept—and laid she believed that I thought her keeping it, was an infringement of her marriage duty.—When she gains a little more strength I had better acquaint her with the fate of this beloved refemblance.—Good God ! — what makes me shudder thus at the idea ?
*
A H, my dear Maria!—my fears have prophe-sted too truly I—I acquainted Victoria' with the unhappy incident yesterday—-and she bore it with amazing fortitude. She laid Jhe had no doubt of flearing her condubi to the Marquis—but if pt could not—Patef jhe hoped^ •would foon make hr amends for all her fufferings. This morning (he received a letter from the Marquis. She broke the feal with a degree or coolnefs I could not have commanded.—-Read the cruel letter—1 tranferibe it for you.
The Marquis D e L A u s a N N i, to the Marchfonsjs
De Lausanne.
I A M glad. Madam, to congratulate you on your recovery from a delirium which has occasioned your amour with the Comte De Luxy to be known. The Comte, it is reported, is lately
dead
OF THE ROCK.
Ill
dead—your heart-rending grief, at his lofs, is certainly deplorable—and the tears you must Ihed over this misfortune stiould be as private as were your loves.
Retire, Madam, from the houfe which contains me—retire for ever from France !—upon the confines of Italy 1 poffefs a castle, where you may linger out the remainder of your wretched life.—There think with remorfe upon your crimes •there weep with penitential fighs the injuries you have done a credulous fond man.—I will hear no artful expostulations—1 will not read one line that you fend, unlefs it is merely to fay you will obey this last command from
Your dishonoured hushand.
De Lausanne.
Lhe Marchionffs D e L a u s a n n e, /o the
Marquis De Lausanne.
I Go my Lord—I leave France for ever—I leave it without being allowed to justify myfelf in your eyes—but I leave it with the comforts of innocence. Suffer me to thank you, for the shelter which your humanity has provided forme—it is the first time I ever became a poor wanderer-—my father, when at Clarence, never taught me to
I should be one—however there is no refate—and mine has been a hard one !— my Lord! I have nothing to reproach
myfelf
expect
fisting
Adieu,
H2
THE hermit
itiyfelf with towards you—and on your part^—why fhould you repent of injustice,, done only to an Orphan —It is no fmall coniolation for me tore-fledl, that' you will never feel a pang for the inju* ries^ inflieLed CH»,
aithful,
* «
Victoria De Lausanne,
_	N
AFTER the Marquis had received heranfwer,
lye lent up Co. fay, might take Nujinette with
hery and that [he would find two fervants in the
c a file, who wercy with her fellow traveller, to, compofe tbte-whole of her houjJoold.—That as for a carriage—r-fhe muf endeavour to do without me—finccy he ftvppofedy fhe would never expeSl to feey or entertain, company. That a yearly fipeni oj three hundred pounds foould be paid, into the hands of Madame De Sanfcerre for her, which he imagined. would-contriv£ to fend herBut that he foould infjl upon her taking no one with her, excepting Nannette—elfe his bounty towards her would ceafe immediately.— He concluded by.commanding her to leave Paris in three duiys at farthefi'y by difmngy that his travelling cmeh fjould. attend Her to the place of her defUnation—but that it fould. be dif-patched' haek vdith all poLible fpded-. Hfe foon after stepped, irttck his ciraile, and' di ove oif from Paris
When thefe last direciiofns w^src given to the Ma*rchionefsi, she lifted up her hands and eyes-' and a few rears stale down- her cheeks.—I was startled at her^ compiofure, for I was almost fran^ tic, and* turningi to hef I ashed, whether Jhe did not-feel hkr ftmtionA “ Yes;” anfwered she, in
Conte, but great misfortunes fwab low up the lefs—they are in the comparifon
nothing
OF THE
ROCK.
H
I
nothing.”If I have outlived Luzy’s death-can fup.port every other calamity
Oh, iny dear Savillon, what will become of her!—what shall we do ?—She has-refufed peremptorily my offer to live with me—and' to partake my fortunesi—she vows to adhere to his directions in every poirtt—-and, affures me that she regrets only parting with you, Madame De Ville-neuf, Lindor, Solignac artd myfelf. Her uncles the Duke De Glareiice and Comte De Trevill'e, she has written to already, to make known to them, that at her repeated request, the Marquis has allowed her to retire to a Convent. She prays them not to write, or think more of her, for she has, though a penstoner only,' fworn to renounce the world for ever. All this she has done with a compofure, which at once terrifies and astonishes me.
Adieu, my dear Maria, I have ,a few montents now to fpare—alas! I must make the most of' thofe precious ones which are still left me to enjoy her fociety.—Perhaps we may never meet again !
Yours, ever.
Julia D-e Sanscerre,
' . >
A,
Victoria ,De Lausanne
Savillon.
to Madame Dfiji
SANSCERRE has told' niy Maria all—she has
grieved her friendly heart, with a relation of my woes.—banish them from thy idea, my Savillon
144
THE HERMIT
Ion, and be affured, that folitude can never be unwelcome to a mind like mine.
The carriage is at the door—every thing is rea* dyfor my departure—I can hardly prevail on my foolish pen to wTile the word Adieu.—My tears blot my paper—and the thought of never feeing thee more, rends my fond heart.— Sanfeerre stands weeping near my Side—my mother’s picture, which is now before me, appears to feel my grief •Nannette’s is the only chearful countenance * fee—and hers is only fo, becaufe she has leave to attend her unfortunate mistrefs.,—still am 1 delaying—yet it must be written.
Adieu, then, my best beloved—my dearell Maria !—Love me—think of me—and receive in idea a last embrace from thy
%
Victoria De Lausanne.
I will write to thee often when I arrive at my retreat.
Madame De Sanscerre to Madame De
✓
Savillon.
SHE is gone ! my dear Maria !—the charming Marchionefs has left Paris for ever !—my eyes Scarcely afford their proper office—I have wept them almost blind.
I now
OF THE ROCK.

we had her dref-
f
her pic-
I NOW write from mv own houfe, and will endeavour to defcribe our last farewell.—It was tender, melancholy and folemn. After having staled your letter, she gave me her hand, and we walked into her oratory.—There we kneeled—and offered to heaven the facristce of distrested and forrowful hearts. For my part, my tears fre-.quenily interrupted niy oraifons—whilst hers stera-ed to be pronounced with a compofed fervour, which raifed my admiration. When fpent Some time there, we adjourned to Sing room, where prestnting me with
ture, she embraced me with affedfion.--------——
“ Let me always postefs your regard, my Sanf-cerre,” cried she, but forget my misfortunes ! —In folitude 1 shall be once more happy.—I shall there indulge restedlion—and study to obtain true resignation to the will of God.”—I anfwered only with a stood of grief.—“ Fie, ste,” added she, where is thy fortitude ?—what do you fay to rrie, who have lost for ever the objedl in the world most dear to ray Soul ?—We may meet again —but him 1 never more shall look on !—yet behold—I weep not !”
The Marquis’s voice we heard at that Instant we thought he had left Paris—but it Seems his ab-stnce was only to avoid expostulation. She started at the found—she threw her arms around my neck—she made me a thoufamd adieus; then breaking from me, she hurried out of the apartment. I followed, however, and faw her fall on her knees to the Marquis and heard her bid him farewell.
Begone, begone.!^’ cried the wretch, “ no more of this.”
“ No, my Lord,” replied she, no more only to intreat you to do justice to my fame, and do not injuriousty blast it for ever.—I am inno-
Vol. ll,	G	cent,’^
{(
i4^
THE HER MlT
cent,” added she with fervor. By that facrcd Being, who now beholds me—my honour is invio* late !—1 have obeyed you even to the last extreme 1 have never deviated from my marriage vow.’^ She arofe.—Adieu, my:. Lord—I will pray for you—I will forgive you !”
She quitted the room with an air of dignified dtstrefs, and stepped? amidst a weeping multitude, into the ^carriage that was to convey her from Paris—from all her connexions for ever, Good.Dod—my forrow is?poignant!
*
THE Comte De Solignac has never been, in
town fince he received the news of Luzy’s death. How shocked will he be, to hear of the Mar-ehionefs’s fate !—it will ever be a fource of af-fliXion to us all. Farewell, my Maria !—I am concerned for thee—you have been long friends— you have loved with the tendernefs of listers—religion must bw our Support, as it is the fair Vic-
^	iS	Mm
tona s
Yours, lily.
Julia D» Sanscerre.
1

MaIami
OF T II E ROC K.
. HT
MadamehA Bert,/a //5^Duke
De Maurice.
YOU have bungled the affair terribly !—You never could have-had a finer opportunity of getting her into your power, than that which offered itfelf in her lonely journey from Madame De Sanfeerre’s—1 have wrought the Marquis up to jealoufy—have perfuaded him that the hand-fome Luz,y was a fuccefsful lover before his voyage to Martinico,, though I do not believe he has feeh her fince her marriage with the Marqub that however does not really figmfyy if it has anfwered ffwr.purpofe. To-be short, he has feet her to a lonely castle near the fea coast, in fome part of Italy. He has told her that it is on ^the Italic confines—^but it Seems he has there deceived her. -If you are willing to become a knight errand in good earnest, and free this fuffering damfel from the barbarity of her imprifonraent—I concert meafures with you at my houfe to-morrow evening, when Laufanne will be gone to Le Blanc’s. Come to me, therefore, and believe me tobc-
/
Sincerely your friend,
"" La Bert.
The concealment of your fweet perfom near Trois Riviere was no bad Scheme, Ha ha ha I poor Monfeigneur Le Due!
GZ
148
THE HERMIT
Lke Duke De Maurice, io
Madame La Bert.
THe proud beauty whom I still love, deferves
the humiliating faete she has met with. Yet charming La Bert I pity her. I know her to be virtuous—I know my paffion for her has rendered me odious in her eyes—-why should I therefore add cruelty to thofe too fuccefsful machinations you have pra£lifed against her ?—But do not fuppofe me to be quite penitent neither—no—I may think of thy delightful Scheme yet—at present, I have a kinder mistrefs, that employs my thoughts—The young Comteffe Le -  -------Smiles
upon me—and though she is not equal in beauty to the lovely Vifloria, still she has charms Sufficient, to make me delay a little longer, my deSigns upon her rival.—I will be with you tomorrow— you must promife, not to mention to me, the Marchionefs De Laufanne—I am determined to think nothing of her at prefent—and prithee Spare thy raillery, on the fruitiest attack I made upon her, in her journey to Trois Riviere. Adieu, dear La Bert. I am
ever thine.
De Maurice.
Victoria

O F THE R O ‘ C K.
149
VcTORiA De Lausanne to
\
MadameDi. Savillon.
N the ifland of Sardinia, is your Vi6loria arriv-ved, after a journey and a short voyage, wiiich,both fatigued and terrified hef.—I was not aware of being obliged to come fo far, or my shi-rits could not have fupported me with the firm-nefs they did on' my leaving France.~And yet, my dear Maria, what does it all Signify ?—where is the difference of existing in an obfcure retreat, or in living in fplendor, when the heart is infenfi-ble to enjoyment—is dead to pleafure ? If I had been destined, to take up my habitation in the coldest mountain of Savoy, I would have preferred it to the noife and glare of Paris.—Since one fatal day—fince the day on which 1 learned that Luxy was no more—I have shut , out from my mind even the appearance of delight.—If I can at lei^igth bring myfelf, to a state of calm indifference, all will be well—and 1 shall have no further wish to make.
The castle to which I have been Sent, is an ancient and magnificent building—its form is gothic —and its structure awefully grand. The furniture is old, and the iron grates to most of the windows cast a horrid gloom over every apartment. It is Situated near the fea shore, and the melancholy found of the foaming Surge infpires the most Solemn, yet the most pleaSing ideas.-—^To me,. they are pleafing, for they footh yet indulge my forrow.
We were met, at the entrance of its gites, by a venerable figure, who Saluted us with a degree of gravity and austerity befitting an inhabitant of
G 3	this
^S'o
THE HERMIT
t
this dreary Solitude. His locks were white, and his furrowed cheeks befpokc his long Sojournment in this wretched world.
When we alighted from the carriage, a female, no lefs ancient than the man I have juft deferibed, hailed me, asmiftrefsof the manfton. The poor creatures behaved well—they stretched to the ut-most of their power, their voluble abilities, in order to cheat our Spirits from their depressed Situa-ation. They took us over the castle that night— and I dismissed them, as Soon as decency would permit, in order to give a loofe to the distresses of my foul.
Nannette, whom I must ever love and refpest, bussed herfelf immediately, in direfiking and feeing to, the preparations of thofe refreshments which she judged would be the most proper, for me to take—-and she at once blended the ufeful Servant, yith the delicate fentiments of a fympathiz.ing friend.
_
When I had shut mySelf up im the apartment I had chofen-—my heart Seemed to burst, forthiin.an agony of grief—I remembered my mothers tendcr-ncls—I recalled my fathers love for his Vi Aoria—• I recollected thy friendship—I went back to thofe happy Scenes we Spent together at Clarencd.
Ah,” cried I in the bitternefs of my anguish. ** Ah, is it polssble that this beloved objeCl—this darling child—this still dear friend should be held unworthy of Society—and should be banished for ever from the world I—It is not the world that has charms, added I,” my wretched foul can bear witnefs to my love of retirement—-but it is the ignominy which must be cast upon my name, and purfue me even to this Solitary place that I lament.”
My dear Maria, I will not dwell upon the fad-ijcfsof my resteCtlons—Suffice it to fay, I went to
bed
it
OF T H.D ROCK.
iSi
1
bed early, at the importunity of Nannette, though steep denied to vistt So miferable a creature.
When I arofe the next morning, I repaired to the windows of my chamber, - and I perceived that they looked down upon the fea. The prost pe£l was a fine one,- for fome vessels that were pasting, in full fail, added a thoufand charms to the beauty of the morning—the castle is embo-fomed in a large thick wood—and from the front of it, you perceive nothing of that tremendous ocean, which the back part exhibits to the eye and ear. I will own that, at first, the fight stiocked me—-the fate of the unhappy Luzy, was strongly pi^ured-to my fenfes—and with clafped hands I shrieked out in defpair.—Pardon me, my Maria 1^—it was inded a folly—but alas my reafon is weakened by afHifkion.
I grow fonder of my fituation every hour—it fuits the gloomy horror of my Soul.—I itead—I ivotk—I write.—-I-forget the world in general—I remember with delight but few.—My dear Savil-Ion, what matters it, whether your Vi6loria be in Italy or in Paris?—She faw you but Seldom xvhen France was her place of refidence*—and, furely, -she will hear of and from you now, with no lefs pleafure than she did, before fo niany leagues divided
Adieu, my Maria!—be happy—and believe, that it is notin the power of any earthly being to make thee lefs dear to thy
Victoria
\
N. B. A letter to Madame De Sanfeerre from Madame De SavUlon is here omitted.
G4
Tul-fAi

152
THE HERMIT
Julia De Sanscerre to Madame De
Savillon.
»
YOU define me to inform you of all, coneem.
ing the Marquis: you defire me to be particular in every thing relating to him : you hope that time, and the rcfledlion of our Vidloria’s patience, will restore him to reafon and to virtue. Alas, my Maria, you are deceived !
As foon as a week had elapfed, after the Mar-chionefs’s abfence, Mademoifelle Le Blanc, took poilestion of his hotel, in the Rue de Condd where our friend had prefided, with fo much beauty and elegance.
Madame La Bert is not his favourite mistrefs— befides, fhe is thought to give rather too much ear too mi ch encouragement, to the Chevalier De Granville.—The Marqu is, however, -winks at that—for it is fuppofed, that he is indebted to her Some confiderable Sums.
I met him the other morning in the Luxembourg—he was walking with his mistrefs—he dar-«d to falute me—I returned not his falute.—Solig-nac foon after faw him—again he pulled off his hat with a grace—Solignac took no notice of it.—The poor man is heartily defpifed, and herds chiefly now with opera fingers—dancers —Le Blanc—and Madame La Bert.
The Comte D’ A--------s afked me a few days
ago what was become of my friend ?—I faid that fhe had prevailed on the Marquis to fuffer her to enjoy a conventual life.—He shook his head.
Ah, charming Sanfcerre, I want faith.”
“ I am forry for it,” was my reply.
1b this instance,” anfwered he.
^	S
“We will not difpute about that matter, my Lord,” cried I, “ but I do assure you, that she
has

€C
O F THE R O C K.
Hi
has left Paris with the best intentions in the world.”
‘‘ Yes,” exclaimed he, “ I believe, . with the intention of obeying the commands of an imperious hulband. Lovely Vifloria !”—and, after a paufe, it is a thoufand pities!—Madame de Sanf-cerre i will pay her a vifit. In what part of Italy , stiall I find her ?”
You may before I did not inform him, but this will ferve to convince you, that the affair has taken wind—from whom I know not, unlefs it be from the Marquis.
'The Duke De Maurice is constantly' in public : with the ComteffeDe———.He feems to have for-gotten thofe beauties in the Marchionefs which never have been equalled—and which he ufed to a-dore with fuch obfeqioufnefs. He has found. I t believe, a kinder mistrefs—and at the fame time-has taken much trouble from Vi6foria’s mind.-.
The entertainments that Le Blanc, gives, are, it is faid elegant beyond meafure. She lives in a -style that few can vie with.—She is abandoned to » profligacy, and will be the ruin of Laufanne,,
Vi^Ioria has written to entreat me to give my hand to Solignac—but things are not comeTo that yet.—After all I dread matrimony, and have no ' obje6iion to try his patience a little longer—^be-Sides, we are both at prefent in stiicere aflliSfion his love for Luzy tranfcended every thing I ever heard of—and mine for our Vi6loria shall not be outdone.
Adieu, dear Maria! believe me to.be much
yours.
.A
05
Julia De Sanscerre;
Victoria
154
the her m it
Victoria De Lausanne ro Madame"'Dt
Savillon.
The poor people whom I found here, have
been as miferable as ’myfelf; only that their Ioffes have been in fome meaSure Supplied to them—-whilst mine are beyond hope, anfflie hid in the bolora of the grave.—Who can restore to me a father—a tender mother ? who can blefs my eyes with the^ fight of that objeQ:, far dearer to me than life—or peace itfelf ?—Ah, irhpostible I I have Survived my parents—I have Survived Luzy what more does this world contain, that I can wisti to live for ?—nothing,- my Savillon—not even thee—for in the arms of Lindor thou canst not want my Iriendstiip.—Yet religion—divine and aweful religion has stayed my hand !-^The God who made has Suffered for me.—He bore his weight of Sorrow without complaint—Sustained it without a murmur. That idea, my Maria !— is not that idea'Sufficient to stop the rash hand of repining nature—yes—my God I I acknowledge thy justice—1 acknowledge my frailty—I will ceafe to cry out in distrefs—I will restrain the voice of my affliction.
^ ^ ^ ^ ^
Sfe ^ ' ^	^	^	^	^
0
I KNOW not where my ideas hurry me.
You must not fuppofe me to be So wretched, as my unsteady pen has Seemed to fay. Silo—I am iji,«?r€iat peace—i am more refigned than I ever
thought
OF THE ROCK.
thought I should be. A circumstance has happened to give me delight. — Nannette—>but the story shall fpeak for itSclf.
I had strolled into the wood yesterday, when I heard the voice of fadnefs at a distance.
steps, involuntarily, bent towards the fpot from whence it proceeded—and in a few minutes I discovered an elderly woman decerrtly attired, fitting under a clump of trees*—one hand Supported her head, whilst the other held an handkerchief, which she frequently applied to her eyes, to wipe away the tears that fell plentifully from them. I stopped to confiderthis unhappy objeQ; a little v/hile, when I heard her exclaim, “ Ah^ tuoe is me, ’Wretched mother I-’—-better had it been, if I haA died'before Ifaw the liffht of heaved
This shocked mfe, and I approached her.
** Who art thoii, miserable mortal,’^ cried I, ** that dares to arraign the'judgment of Providence ?’’
The poor creature started at the fight of me, and would have retired in haste from the plscc,_ bad I hot taken hold of her go wn.
“ Have courage,’^ refumed I, I will not hurt thee—I came to give thee comfort—and to teach thee^ that whatever heaven is pleaSed to ordain for as, we should Support with patience.”
The dlstreffed woman burst into a new flood of gricst
What is the matter ?” demanded I, greatly affefted; What is the matter?—TeU me— can I relieve thee ?’*
“ Ah, no!” anSwered she, you cannot relieve me—-God only can.”—-and she lifted her Sorrowing eyes to heaven.—I took her hand.
“ God then,” cried I, must be implored ;
And we both dropped on our knee
' Afte

r
i5«
THE HERMIT
After fome moments Spent in Silent devotion; she pointed her finger towards a cottage, which I perceived to be not many paces from us. I arofe, and following her, she led me into a neat thatched dwelling, where I beheld a young man Seemingly in the agonies of death, stretched upon a bed, and and a girl, not more than fifteen years old, pale and emaciated with Sicknefs, looking in Silent Sorrow at her brother, without being able to rife from a feat, in which she had been placed before a window for the benefit of air. The old man who belonged to the castle, was kneeling by his Side, and exhorting the youth to call upon God and my amiable Nannette was chaffing his temples, and endeavouring to, bring him to himfelf.
There,” cried the good woman, when we entered, there lies my Son, in the last extremity of a fever—and here is my poor daughter, who will Soon follow her young companion, and leave mechildlels and destitute of all comfort !”
Oh, my Maria, what a Scene !—-Be assured that my own misfortunes were forgotten.
There was no medical assistance to be had for many leagues off—-and if there was, we were at a lofs how to procure it—for neither Nannette dr 1 would have known the way, and the old people were not able to take the ssightest journey. Suffice it to fay, that, with heaven’s help, and our attention, the young people grew better, and they are now in a fair way of recovery. A cloud, however, still hung over the mother’s brow—.and I often faw her look at Nannette for fome minutes, and then turn afide to wipe away her tears.—I was interested, by her behaviour, to know the reafon of her afflidlion ; and ordering her family to be removed to the castle, I appointed one evening for ass'eijibling the old couple, their daughter,
her
OF THE. ROCK.
157
her children, and Nannette together, in my apartment, that I might learn the history of the good wonaan, whofe Sorrow touched me to the foul. I will endeavour to give it you in a few
words, and without farther digreffion.


•c
THE
1$^
THE HERMIT
THE
T
O
Y
OF THE
Wood-Cutter and his Family.
4€
M
woman
Y father and mother,’* Said the poor
, are now prefent,” bowing to the aged pair, and in order to introduce my life, I must give a Iketch of theirs.
“ My father was a wood-cutter in Savoy, he had married the daughter of a fhepherd, who had more honesty than wealth, and a very numerous family. My father was young and loved my mother, and they hoped by* industry to make.amends for the favours fortune had denied their parents. They had been united a year, when a fon encreafed their little houfhold, and cemented that fondnefs, which had hitherto been the pride of their hearts, and which they would have boasted to profefs for each other, though they had been even poorer than they were. In two years after, I was bora and was received with still more joy than they felt on my brother’s entrance into the world.— Heaven fmiled upon their labours, and their little store encreafed with their family. As I grew up, the gift of beauty was bestowed upon me-—?aul tste
woods of Savoy re-echoed with my praifes. The
young
OF THE ROGK.
15 9
young 'shepherds who fed their flocks upon the mountains, would often leave them to gaxe upon me, when I would accompany my father and brother to pickup the sticks they would fell for that purpofc. It was one of thefe eitcurSions that, fol-lov/ing my father late into the wood, I was accosted by a young man, more beautiful than any of the shepherds ! had feen—andrnore tender and timid in his manner than any of the youths in our village.- He called me charming Nannette, and begged to attend me to my father. I blushed-— yet refufed him not—and when we arrived at the ipot where my father was, he introduced himfelf as a stranger, who happening to pafs that way, was struck with my appearance, and wished to fee me fafe at the end of my journey. Trom that day, this lovely stranger was constantly at our cottage, and, I need not Say, got Soon poffestion of my
young
Here the good woman burst into a shower of tears.	■
** It was not long,” rfefomed she, ** before he obtained my confent to marry him, and my parents, who Saw my affe^ion for him,-inade n© obje8;ion to our union. Not long after my marriage, my hushand propofed our fettling in France where his parents were—and though the parting with miBe, cost me a thoufand-pangs, yet I would have endured still greater, to give him comfort.
we arrived at a village not far from Avignon, we were met by bis father and brothers, vwho behaved kindly to me at first, and allotted me a cottage, where Colin had lived before 1 married him. Here I fpent many happy days, and was blessed v/ith a boy and two girls, and should have lived there in felicity for ever, but that it pleafed heaven to visst me with afflVdlion.
had fent my eldest girl out into the mea-dew one day with her father’s breakfast, and ex-
\ peCted
\
i6o
THE HERMIT
pe6test every moment her re turn.—But alas!—It was to no purpofe—my child did not appearand, ah, Madam ! 1 have never feen her fince.— Upon her father’s coming back, I alked him for Bibby ?—He had not feen her. Oh, my God, can I ever forget what I endured at thofe words! I flew into the village half distra6fed—I called upon my poor babe—I called upodmy little Bibby to return—Ah, my child was out of her mother’s reach—was gone beyond redemption ! my huf-band Soon after, fickened and died—his heart had been fet upon our lost child—and he expired with grief at her abfence. His barbarous relations turned me and my two remaining infants, from our dwelling, and bade me go starve with them upon the mountains of Savoy.
I was now in defpair, and knew not what to do, to give them food. We wandered many rhiles quite fpent with thirst and hunger—when wearied out at length, I laid me down under a tree, and taking my little ones in my arms, we fell into a profound fleep. When we awoke, my daughter cried for fomething to eat—and begged me to put a bst of bread into her mouth.”
“ Alas, ssster !” faid Colin, “ our mother has nothing to give us: fee she is hungry hcrfelfl— -Don’t cry —God will fend us fomething prefently or if he don’t, we shall go to fleep as I did just now, and forget it again.”
This fpeech made my heart bleed—and embracing them both, I got up to go in fearch of a brook, in order to bring a little water to their parched lips. In my way, I met a countryman, whom I emplored relief from. The good man heard my story with attention, and following me to the place where my poor children lay, expest-ing me, he took the girl in his arms., and I followed
• him,
1
r
OF T H E R O C K.
j6i
f
%
him, leading my Son by the hand to his little dwelling, where we were made more welcome than I ever had been Since I left my father’s houfe. He was himfelf going into Savoy in a day or two afterwards, and promifed to conduct us fafe to my father’s habitation.
When we arrived there, I found thefe dear parents in deep afflidlion for the lofs of my brother who had died fome weeks before our departure from France. They, however, forgot not in their grief for him, their tendernefs for me.
** Here, Madam, we lived for the fpace of ten years, when my fon and daughter (who were our only fupports from the age and infirmities of my father) caught an ague and fever, and though they ufed to work in order to conceal their illneSs, it at length broke out too violently for restraint, and they were obliged to take to their beds. At this time, two young gentlemen stopped in their way through our village, and hearing our wretch* ed story, one of them writ to the Marquis De Laufanne’s steward, to beg the employment of keeper of the castle Au Bois in Sardinia for my father, which was immediately complied with, and he receives an annual fum of fifty pounds for his maintenance. The gentlemen furnifhed uS' with money and every thing necessary to defray the expences of our travelling hither with eafe to to my poor children, and they have allowed me for my life an annuity of five and twenty pounds, which is conveyed to me by the fame hand that pays my father his wages.
‘‘ Here, Madam, my narration ceafes.—But in what words can I exprefs my .gratitude towards you, and that excellent young worrian, for your humanity in faving my children, when the violence of their diforder had nearly robbed me of them for ever !—there is one circumstance which
I can-
i6z
THE H E R MI T
€l
r cannot but explain, fince you. Madam, haiit observed it; which is, my having been often af-Sedled at the fight of Nannette. The striking likenefs she bears to the infant I lost at Avignon, as well as to my hushand, frequently raifed in my mind fome flattering hopes—but I dare not pre-fume to think it poffible^her parents, no doubt,, are richer people.’*
Ah, no!” cried Nannette, falling on her knees before her ; I have no parent, unlefsyou are one—-1 never knew who was my mother — who was my father 1”	‘	^
The good woman embraced her tenderly.
Have you,” cried she, “ the raarki of a rofe-bud on your left shoulder?” ’
*‘Nh ! I am yours, X am yours!” exclaimed Nannette, “ I have found my rnother!” and she threw herfelf into her arms.
All that Nannette can remember is having been told, when the old Marchionefs De Montmorenci brought her to Paris, that she was a foundling, and had been taken up by their coachman in the streets of Avignon. ^
** Montmorenci!”.repeated the wood-cutter’s daughter, ** Good God 1 that coachman was no other than one of my hushand’s brothers, who in stealing you from me> meant to revenge an injury he once fancied that I had done him. — Accept my thanks, dh, gracious heaven! for having found
my child—my dear Bibby!”
This Sortunate difeovery, gives me almost as much pleafure, as it does Nannette. I have not experienced fo great fatisfaStion, for a length of time. You, who know her worth, will partici-' pate in our joy. She is very like her mother, with this diflPerence, that Nannette is not quite fo
woman
This
OF THE RGGK. 1^3
This story has taken up much of my paper—! (hall not however conclude my letter,, without
you, that I know not the names of the gentlemen who behaved fo generousty towards the amiable family I am with—nor can any of the perfons who compofe it,, inform me of them.
Adieu, my Savillon !—love me as tenderly asi-whenfo many miles did not Separate us.
/
oaiA Dfi Lavsakkk

/
‘Mademoifille L e
D u
B L AN e, to
C H A P U I S.
/
This man grows ^very day more infup-portable to me as his riches decreafe. He lost last night, to owr	D^Elbeu, an im-
menfe Sum. D’Elbeu wins it with fo carelefs and genteel an air, that the poor fool cannot fuppofe himfelf a vidim to chicanery.
I am going this evening, ’ to a mafquerade, where 1 shall hope to fee the Comte De Manille, who is
no
1^4
THE HERMIT
no lefsr ich than handfome. He fliall be my Have, I am determined; In the mean time, I Ihall part by degrees with the inSrgnisscant Marquis, who loves me, alas! too much for his peace. Indeed I am afraid of having but a troublefome affair of it, in getting him off my hands ;—however, if I can do it, without coming to open war, it will be a lucky circumstance.
Adieu, dearChapuis! come and try to rival me in his affections—he has money enough yet to content you ; though my ambition foars higher. Believe me to be
Your friend.
Le Blanc.
Marquis De Lausanne /
De Bayonne,
HAVE lost immenfe Sums, my good friend— I am almost ruined !—the Marchionefs has it in her power to assist me by giving up that part of her fortune which her father put, out of my reach to touch, and which he referyed folely for her own ufe. She fuppofes it is by my order that she IS poorly attended in Sardinia, and has no equipage, she therefore confines herfelf to the trifling remittance of three hundred a year, and confents to receive shat from me. To fay the
truth.
o F T H E R O C K.

truth, I am in doubt whether she knows of the difpoSition of her father’s will—if she does not, she thinks she is indebted to my bounty for the fcanty pittance I allow her^ whereas, she can, in fa£I, command more than I am worth. Dear Bayonne, how shall I get her to Sign an instrument of writing that will make over to me all her fortune?—to be fure it is rather unreafonable, after the treatment she has received, toexpeft iti —But did not her curfed love for that impudent Italian, justify meyet I am too generous!— will not be obliged to her.—To encreafe my mif-fortunes Le Blanc—my beautiful, tender mistrefs!
■ah, I will not tell thee!—befides it is only a fufpicion—she cannot, after all I have done for her—she cannot prove unfaithful—unfaithful let me blot it for ever from my idea.
If Madame De Laufanne can condefeend to live ■upon fo little as three hundred a year, why can she not confent' to—yet damn it. I—I will not alk her. ‘Oh, Bayonne, what a woman is there lost by my folly—my caprice—my licentioufnefs'l— curfe this pen !—how came it to run in this strain ! —No, no, Le Blanc has charms fufficient to fa-tisfy the most changeable heart—to her then will I fly—with her will I lofe all remembrance of— the injured Vi Gloria !—dear Bayonne come to me -I want thy counfel.
De Lausanne.
Madame
THE HERMIT
it
D E San s c e e r e, h Madam
D £ S A V 1 -L L o N.

1
«
I VHE face of the Marquis’s affairs begin to alter vissbly—*hc is no longer the most gay the most dissipated man in Paris.—He is Sullen gloomy—penstve. LeElanc is, though still at his houSe, Seldom Seen with him—and thelasttime
_ 4	_
I met her on the Thuilleries, the young Comte De Manille was her principal eScort. It is Said; -that she is drawing him into her Snares—for it is whiSpered, that the Marquis’s finances cannot long Support her extravagant method of living, and his own expences at play.—nay, Solignac was told by an intimate friend of his, that this unfortunate man was already beginning to feel the griping hand of poverty. You best know whether Victoria should be acquainted with -this circumstaiMe. I think the Marquis looks ill—he is pale—thin—emaciated. He appears an obje£J; of wretcHedneSs, and fis often with Madame La Bert, who loves him ^enough to adhere to him in distrefs. I believe he fuSpedts nothing of his favourite Le Blanc’s infidelity ; he has been attached to her to a degree of infatuation, and would ill brook Such apiece of ■information.
Madame De Villeneuf’s relapfe affords me a ishare of Sorrow, which friendship alone can be fuSceptible of. I would fly to»comfort you, and partake in your attendance on the reverend invalid, but that the most perplexing affairs confine me in Paris. Thefe laWrSuits are terrible things, and
mine must be Some time ere they are concluded,
for
OF THE ROCK.
1^7
for* they depend upon circumstances too tedious, and too difficult to fuffer me to hope for a rcleafa
from them foon. ^
Your determination of vistting Vidlorla when Madame Madame. De Villeneuf’s health will ad-adrait of your abfence, is, allow me to fay, a fcheme that Speaks more warmth of foul than rea-fon.—She would not wish it—and nothing but the most implicit obedience to his commands, and patience on her fide, -can ever world a reconciliation with her hushand. A reconciliation, which every friend of hers must wish to take place. Shoukl the Marquis fee at length his errors, and our fair Vidloria be difpofed to forgive his late un» kind treatment, a circle of happy years may yet await her. .Dis defire that she should have no companion with her in her folitude, was cruel hut his permitting the best ©f Servants to attend her was, at the fame time. Some Comfort to her and us. Nannette is as good as^e is faithful, and Hhall ever love her, for her attachment to she Marehionefs.
Farewel—I will write to you foon, should any
tking happen worth relating. I am, dear Maria>
YTour’s Sincerely,
Julia .D£ Sahscirjs/S*
Madams
T.D E HERMIT
Madame .De Sanscerre, to Madams
D E S A V I L L O N.
OOD God ! my amiable friend ! I tremble whilst I write—fuch a Scene!—^but take the particulars. I had gone last night to the Italian -opera, and expedled,, on my return, Madarne De Sentville and Solignac to Sup with me. They made it late before they came ; but upon their arrival we led immediately to fupper—the difhes •were Scarcely removed, when one of my Servants hurried in to tell me, a messengerSrom the Marquis De Laufanne begged leave to (peak with me, on an event that could not brook delay. My two friciids advifed me to Send for the man, and fee him in their prefence ; as I could perceive that Solignac did not much like my receiving him alone, I.ordered him to be shewn into the apartment, where we were assembled. I cannot defcribe to you my astonishment, upon finding that it was Seraut, who appeared in a fituation that no words can do justice to. He was in a tremor from head to foot—his eyes ran over with tears—-his face was paler than ashes, and his whole figure an emblem of horror and grief.
“ Ah, Madam!” cried he hardly able to articulate, “ my poor lord is at length become a vi6Hm to his irregularities, and the most aban-doSicd of women.”
“ What mean you ?^’ interrogated Solignac.
Give me your patience, my Lord,” replied he, and I will explain my Self. The Marquis was going home this night from Madame La ‘Bert’s, where he had lost considerably to the Chevalier D’Elbeu—he was going home difpirited and out of temper, when the first objeSls that struck his eyes on entering Mademoifelle Le
Blanc’s
O F
THE ROCK.
i6g
Blanc’s apartment, was the Comte De Manille at her feet, and this falle woman, encircling his neck with her fair arms as he kneeled. Such a Sight would have been fufficient, at any time, to have exafperated him—but in the diipoSition he was then, it roufed him to madnefs. He approached them in a fury—he curled her with all the emphasss of rage and difappointment. He turned upon his rival, and after loading him with the appellations of betrayer —villain — and bafe invader of his rights, bade him defend himfelst The Comte did not require (uch a charge to draw his fword—it was half out of the fcabbard when my Lord called him villain, and they fought like men whofeall was depending on Viistory. To be Ihort, my Lord Marquis received feveral wounds, and was covered with the blood of them, before he would give up the caufe. At length, after hurting the Comte in the Side, and in the fword arm, they both fell together. The Comte De Manille was fpeechlefs when I came away—but my Lord talks with reafon, with grief, with penitence.
“ Go, Seraut,” cried he, when I put him to bed, and a furgeon had examined his wounds. Go Seraut, and beg Madame De Sanfeerre to deign to visst the most wretched Sinner, that ever called on heaven for mercy.—Tell her, I conjure her, by that God v/hom her virtue adores, to come and listen to the last words of the dying Lau-fanne !”
Here the poor fellow burst into an agony of tears—I waa shocked—-I was terrified—I fuffered myfelf to weep with him—I forgot my refentment towards the most cruel of hushand’s. Madame De Sentville and the Comte De Solignac offered to accompany me to the Marquis, and I ordered my carriage to begot ready instantly.
VoL. II.	H '	When

lyo
T H E H E'-R M I T
When we arrived at the unfortunate Lau^ fanne’s, MonSieur De Montville met me at the gate, and conducted me into an apartment adjoining that where the Marquis lay., HeUold us that his friend was mortally wounded, that the Comte’s Sword hud done Sure, though flow execution-—that the furgeons and phySicians who had Seen him, agreed in pronouncing his recovery impoITibie; but they thouglit he might linger Some days. “ He had Scarcely fallen,” added MonSieur De Mont-viile, when he dcSired that 1 should be fent for, which I confefs Somewhat furprifed me, hs we have not been friends a considerable time. Nothing, indeed, but his prefent Situation, could have prevailed on me to fee him again, but at Such a feafon as this, refentment should give way to compassion.”
He had icarccly done Speaking, when a Servant entered, and Said, that his lord would bs glad to fee Flonfteur De ihdoniville. He left us in confe-o.uence of tliis message, but returned Soon again ' v/ith an entreaty, that I would accompany him to the Marquis’s chamber, who alked every moment to fee me. I gave Montville my hand, and he led me to the bed’s Side of the penitent Laufanne. As I appeared, he exerted himlelf to rife, in order to offer me his thanks with more energy: but 1 prevailed on him to be compofed, and affured him, that his life depended on his being So.
“ Ah, Madam !” cried he in a faint voice, I
wish not to exist—God can bear me witnefs that
1 do not. I am a wretch burdened, with iniquity,
and onb fit to Sink into my grave. I have wronged
the best—the most perfedf of women—I have ne-
gledted my God—I have dwelled only on thofe
destruUive pleafures which the most prr fligite qf
women could offer—and I have at length niet
with that fate which vice like mine deferves.”
((
OF T II E R O C K.
171
My Lord,” replied L, “ your'repentance is every thing—the God whom you bave offended, is . "Merciful as he is just. Raife your heart to .him, and reflect on the merits of his death.”
“ It can be to no purpofe,” cried he, “ I am too great an offender to be forgiven ! and he groaned in defpair.
He was Silent for fome moments—at last he afked me, ij I thought the Marehionefs tvould deign to viftt him once more^ whether foe would confent to come and pronounce to him her forgivenejs in his lafl agony { Ah!” added be, “ if fhe would con-defcend.to look at me again—if fhe would behold me immerfed in the terrors of death. She would at least perceive, that heaven has avenged her forrows.”
I affured him, that the MarchicneSs would sty to Paris on hearing that he wistied to fee her. I
O'
cheated him with the hope of receiving, from her own lips, his fulland free pardon. He bleffed me for the comfort I had given him, and I left him to take fome'repofe.
1 fent off immediately an exprefs to Madame De Laufanne, to inform her of the Situation of the Marquis. I told it in as delicate a m mner as pof-Sible, and entreated her to make what haste she could, in performing her journey. I remained all night with Madame De Sentville, at the Marquis’s houfe, from whence I now write. He is very ill, but entirely in his fenfes. He dwells on his past crimes—they haunt him continually. He is afraid to call upon God for pardon, and his foul is, a chaos of horror and defpair.
Madame Le Blanc, upon this duel flipped out of the houfe, amidst the confuSion, and it is Said that file and the Chevalier D’Elbeu, have left France together. What road they have taken is
H 2	not

THE HERMIT
not known, but proper officers of justice areia purluit of her. 1 hope fhe may be taken, and immured in a convent, appropriated for fuch abandoned creatures, for the rest of her days.
Madame La Bert came this morning to afk for the Marquis, and from a blunder of the fervants was shewn into the apartment where I was writing. —I postessVd myfelf on the occasson, which she, poor wretch ! did not do by any means. I enquired what her buSinefs was—and whom she w'anted	She stammered—fat down—drew out
her handkerchief—I once more repeated my quef-
tions.
“ You can be no stranger to my errand. Madam,” anfwered fhe; “ my bufinefs is with the unfortunate Marquis.”
“ Madam, cried I, the man whom you justly term unfortunate, is both unwilling and too ill to fee you.—The hour approaches that is to Summon him before the awful tribunal of the most high. He has therefore little time to fpend, now, with the debauched Companions of his own fex, or the profligate ones of mine.—He has a long account to fettle with his God—and must do it Speedily.”	'	*
I wish to fee him but for five minutes!” refumed fhe.
1
“ Do not, Madame La Bert,” cried I, ** endeavour to ruin his foul for ever. Suffer him-—
%
after having estranged his affediions from his wife ■—after having ruined his fortunes, and reduced him almost to defpair of the mercy of heaven fuffer him, after all this, to die in peace, if it is poflible.”	\
She burst into tears, and exclaimed, wicked wretch that I am-——”
“ No more hypocrify,” interrupted I, for God’s fake !—I am not to be duped by it, as was
the
O F THE R O G K. 173
the amiable Marchionefs.-—I know you too well not to defpife your arts, and hold you in the.con-tempt you deferve.”
I instantly quitted the room, and gave orders that (he fliould not be allowed to fee the Marquis.
f #
*

m #


#

# m #
THE Comte De Manille is much better, and-pronounced, by his phySician, to be out of danger. I am glad of it,, and hope itwill be a lesson to him for the future. He bears an amiable cha-rafter, expresses much contrition at what has happened, and affures Solignac he was drawn into Le Blanc’s Snares by the most powerful arts in the world,—-He is miferable, lest his antagonist should die by his hand, and declares he will yield.him-felf to justice, as foon as he is well enough to leave his apartment. A foolish intention which Solignac must dilfuadehim from. I will difpatch what I have written now, that you may be acquainted with this unexpefted change in the ill-fated De Laufanne. Y,ou shall hear from me when Vifto-ria arrives, or fooner, should the Marquis expire before she comes. Adieu, I am ever
Your assured friend.
1
Julia D«e Sanscerre.
Hj
Ma-
174
THE HERMIT
Madame
De Lausanne, to
D E S A V I L L O N.
Madame
AM Sent for exprefs to Paris.—The unhappy Marquis is very ill—I am shocked—1 am concerned. May his last moments be fpent in penitence and contrition ! nothing but his defiring to fee me, should draw me from this charming re-
^	W
treat. Should he recover, I shall hope that 1 may be permitted to return to it. If he dies, it is my determination to pafs the remainder of my life here. Farewel my Maria—this minute I fet out.
Yours most truly.
Victoria De Lausanne,

Madame
OF THE ROCK.
^75
Madame D e S a n s c E r r e to Madame
D E S A V I L L O N.
V
^ yiCTORIA arrived yesterday—she is altered
furpriSinglyi her charming eyes have a languor in them that alarms me greatly : she is grown thin, pale, and emaciated. Our joy at meeting, I will not attempt to defcribe, though I will own, she appeared not half fo delighted at it, as I was. She tells me nothing affefts her now—that she grows every moment more infcnstble, to the oc^ currences of life, every day more willing, to bid' adieu to the world. She nevermentions Luzy— but that her mind is abforbed in contemplation of what he was, is alas too certain !-—She lives only to bewail his lofs, and to remember his perfections.
As foon as the Marchionefs arrived, the houfe echoed with acclamations of joy, from the mouth of every domestic, and their Lord’s danger was forgotten, in the pleafure they felt on their lady’s return. Laufanne had fallen into a fweet steep, just before she came, and did not awake for forne hours after ; when he did, he called for me, and afked, with a degree of impatience, if his wife was not yet come ? I told him she was expedfed momently, for one of her attendants had been fent on, to inform me, that she was not far from Paris. This intelligence viSibly affected him—he was extremely fluttered—-he laid he would rife to receive her—then lostng all/recolledtion of what he had uttered—he demanded y it was really truethat
H 4	Jbe
il6
THE HERMIT
/
Jbe had travelled fo far to fee him P he called for Seraut to drefs his hair, and, inquired whether he jhould have time to go into the bath before her arr'f val? he grew in short quite incoherent, and was Several minutes ere he came to himfelf—when that happened however, he begged to fee Madame De Laufanne, as Soon as ever she came—and made me promife, that I would not let him fleep in the mean while. I afked why he would not ehufe to reft before he Saw her ?
Becaufe,” cried he, I am afraid of dying in my lleep, or you would-not perhaps awaken me time enough, ere the last struggle, to take thP leave of her I wish to do.’*
I then told him, that I thought I heard a carri-* Sge drive into the court—that I would go and en* quire whether it was Madame De Laufanne’s, and hasten back: to inform him, 1 went out, and returned foon after with an account of her arrival. He railed himfelf in his bed-^he clafped his hands - together, “ Great God,” cried he with fervor, how shall I behold the face of injured innocence !”
He pawfed Some minutes to recover of the agitations which Seemed to overwhelm him, and then
I	^	'
destred me to entreat her prefence.
I retired to Vii£loria’s apartment, and found her there bathed in tears. She gave me her hand, and I led her to the Marquis’s chamber.
As foon as she approached him, he exclaimed. Oh Madam, is it poftible that you should deign to visttan inhuman monster like me ?—Is itpofti-ble that you can ever, forget the cruel treatment, you have endured Since first your father compelled you to bestow your hand on the undeferving Laufanne ?-—Is it poftible——”
“ My


OF THE ROCK.
177
My Lord,” interrupted the Marchionefs, placing herfelf on the bed, ** you never were unkind to me,—Speak no more in this strain, but behold in me, an humble, an obedient wife, who comes to implore you to live for her fake.”
** Ah !” cried he, and with what strength he could, pressed her to his bofom, “ AlSl my Vidloria, it is too late !—and I justly merit that death Iny crimes fo long have called for.—Yoii know not half my guilt—it makes—oh my gentle fufferer !—it makes me, wretch as I am, tremble with horror at the bare reste6tion.
No more, no more,” exclaimed Vidoria, and stie raifed his hand which she held to her lips.
“ Yes,” anfwered the Marquis, ‘H must tell thee all—my foul will not depart in peace, until I make to thee a full confession, of the injuries you have fustained from the miferabi'e objedl before yes I will unfold the Secrets of my' heart
you
1 will after that trust
and shew you all its Spots, to your mercy to pity and forgive me.
<< When Luxy and I were together at college, we had one day a difference about Some boyish trifle, which is not worth the mention; his generous Spirit, howevever, foon pardoned my Side of the offence, and begged me to forget what he was faulty in. I pretended to be cordially reconciled on my part, and Spared no affurances to convince him that 1 was fo—y^et this was merely a Superficial appearance—I could not forgive fo readi-ly—heart chenfhed a bitternefs towards him my foul shrunk with hatred at his reproacn. S viewed him as the most hateful being of the whole, creation.
** We were much about the fame age, our learning should have been pretty equal ; but
II 5	1 Was
I'iS
THE HERMIT
€(
I Was fenSibly chagrihed to find, that his genius outioared mine—and that he was far advanced in every branch of literature ; whilst I, who had began my studies fomething before him, was infinitely behind-hand with him in all he had learned.
A day was appointed on which we were both to declaim. As in a higher clafs he began before me, and his fubjedt was philofophy,— I can never forget with what grace—-with what eloquence he fpoke-~his words feemed ' chofen from the flowers of oratory—and his voice was more harmonious than any I had ever heard. His declamation was received with shouts of applaufe, and every one confidered him as a youth of ihe highest abilities and most promifing accomplishments.
; ** I began Toon after ; my fubjefil was rhetoric but, ah, how differently was it handled, from that which Luzy had just added beauties to, by his eloquence!—my audience yawned —hemmed —coughed—I felt myfelf unequal to the powers of orntory—but was at the fame time too confcious of my rival’s merit. I defcendcd from the rostrum with marks of compofure, though my bofom contained the fiiarpest difappointment—and the most inveterate hatred to the young and fenSible Comte. As Toon as I came down, I met him with almost extended arms to embrace me. ** My friend,” cried he, fuffer me to congratulate you upon the excellency of your difcourfe—you declaim well!—your voice is mellifluous, and your rea-foning perfuafive.”
“ I imagined he meant this as an infult, and turned from him with an air ot contempt. The prii'ze was immediately adjudged to behis'—he received it with humility, and the most graceful addrefs. He affured fome of his intimate friends
t//A
OF THE ROCK.
179
that he vjas never more afionifhed than nvhen it war offered to him^ for he had heard me with a degree of admiration he could not exprefry and had hoped / fhould be rewarded fuitably to my merit. He appeared much hurt lest a lhare of partiality rather than his ov/n eloquence had engaged the auditors to vote him the prize. Dilregarding the air of difdain I had shewn him, he became ten thoufard times more complaifant to me—and never did I experience the least exultation Irom this amiable and accomplished youth. Notwithstanding I took an infurmountable averSion to him—and fwore within mylelf, to mortify him in every feheme he could propofe, and to crois his dearest purpoics iniife, if it could ever lie in my power to do lo.
I will endeavour to be lels prolix in this relation— fuffice it to fay, his constant iupen iority over me in every thing that was admirable, gave me many opportunities of testifying towards him my envy and djfgust—and when we left the (eminary where we had been educated—I rejoiced in the profpect of feeing him lefs often.
After he had made the tour of Europe, the world refounded with the beauties of his mind— the elegancy of his form and the charms of his addrefs.
“ I arrived myfelf in France about this time I perceived my envy of him encreafe in proportion to thejustnefs of his praifes—it v/as i umoured that the beautiful daughter of the DukcDe Clarence had engaged his love, and that after aStiing tiie confent of his father (whom he honoured as a fun should do a parent ;) he was to be united tn lier in thofe indiffoluble bands, which were to feal Iris happinefs for ever. Stung wstth jeaioufy at thefe tidings, I refolved that if riches and ambitionj^ could fway a father, the Duke De Clarenc^ fiiould never yield his daughter to the arms of Luzy ;
.	-	and
i8o
THE HERMIT
and without knowing any more of her than what 1 hast learned from report, I determined to marry her, were it only to give a, stab to the felicity of the Comte.
“ Elated with this fcheme, I got mystlf introduced to the Duke—I affe<fied to be enamoured of the blooming Victoria. I will own that I was much struck with your beauty-—but had I not entertained a hope of mortifying my rival, nothing at that time could have perluasted me to marry. I need not add a great deal more—you know, alas! too well what follows. I threw out lures for the
Duke’s ambition—I shewed him the rent roll of
«
my posteshons—they influenced his interested principles, and he confented to give up huzy in favour of a richer man.
Ah, my ViSloria I—-when I reflect upon the tears you shed—upon the Sghs it cost you to re-fjgn your lover, I tremble at the idea of all the 'mifery, my malicious enmity entailed upon your virtue.	'
As fooh as T was married, the end for which I had engaged you being obtained, your beauty could no longer attra^ me. Since it was not from love I poffested it—diffipation—^immorality enfu-jsd—and Madame La Bert’s retiring to a convent, and there making you her confident, were planned in order to draw from you the fecret of your attachment to Luz,y, and your hatred of your hushand—you were, however, too virtuous to r any avowal of either to efcape you to her; and she ^lad almost dearly paid for it, by the lofs of mV affection.

J

** In her abSence, I faw the infamous Le Blanc, and nothing but the fear of loSing me entirely, could have made La Bert relinquish her diaboli cal intention of compleating your ruin fo foon. Finding that you were too prudent to difeover to
her
OF THE
O C K.
i8i

her your thoughts, _ she left the convent, agreed to share with Le Blanc my love, and fortune. She knew your compassionate heart would feek to give her comfort, whilst she avowed her-felf a penitent—there she was right—but had she fucceeded as well in prevailing on you to declare your fentiments to her, your confinement in Italy, . would long fince have taken place. Her behaviour at the mafquerade where she appeared as a faiar was artful. 1 did not know of her being there—it was to fee whether I should be an attendant of Le Blancas to that place, and her attacking me in the fevere manner that she did, was to blind you, if ever she should be difeovered, and to make you fuppofe, that she interested herfelf in your caufe alone.
Your amiable deportment towards me, made an impression on my heart—-ajid I had very nearly given it up folely to you—most indubitably would it have been fo—^but for the destructive blandishments of thefe two women, who always hinted a fufpicion of your averSion to me, and at the fame time pretended to give me the most convincing proofs of their attachment.
Madame La Bert, at length, wrought me up to a belief, that you had fufSered Luzy, in his journey through Paris, to fee you, with all the hopes and warmth of a lover, and that you had conSign-ed to him that honour, which you had ever feem-cd to fet fo high a value on in your fex. Inflamed with jealoufy, the fight of his pidure inyour pof-feffion, urged me to banish you from my fight. That picture, however, Madame De Sanfeerre has explained the story of—and I can never enough, repent the cruelty of my ufage tov/ards you.
“ This,” added the Marquis, taking hold of the fnowy hand of his wife “ is my confession. Forgive me—ah, forgive me I most amiable and
most
i8a
THE H E R MI T
most injured of women, or I can never die in peace !”,
He burst into a violent flood of anguish—and the bed shook under him from the force of his affliction. The amiable and unfortunate ViCforia Said all that she could think of, to give him comfort—and after painting to him the foft charms of religion, and bidding him trust in the mercies of the Almighty, she left him fomewhat compofcd, and inclined to rest.
He has told her, that in the hands of Monficur Le Gripinarde, her fortune of forty thoufand pounds is lodged, and that it was fo contrived by the Duke De Clarence her father, that the Mar-quis^could not touch a Sixpence of it, uhthout having from her a gift of it, that he could never prevail on himfelfto make her any request relating to it, after the cruelties he had exerclfed on her—he wished that he had left the estate of Clarencd as
much out of his power late to repent of.
but that, alas 1 was too

*
*■
*
THE Marquis had received all the rites of the church —he is extreirielv ill.—I fear he cannot hold out many hours. Victoria fcarcely leaves his pillow one moment—he is not able to bear her ab-fence.—Poor man 1—he is indeed a penitent.-
* * * *
*
*
* *

NOT long ago Laufanne deSired the Marchio-nefs to fend for Monsseur De Montville and my-
Self to his apartment—we Surrounded his bed.
** I am
OF THE ROCK.
I
3
** I am dying,” cried he, taking the hand of Vidloria, 1 am about to enter on a world unknown !—Come, my friends, and behold the ef-feffs of a profligate life—come and behold the dangers of licentioufnefs—the horrors that attend the last moments of a debauchee.—Oh, Paris !—-thou theatre of vice—thou rock against which youth and innocence are dashed—how bitter are thy pleafures 1—how destru6t;ive thy allurements! give me your prayers, my injured wife—intercede for my lalvation.—The voice of virtue af-cends, even to the high heavens.—'Oh could my repentance reach to that bleffed fummit—my groans and forrow should pierce the heart of a merciful and pitying God 1”
He funk upon his pillow—we thought he had breathed his last—but it was only a fainting fit.
I am called.
*
*
*
*
*
*

*■


*
*
IT is now an hour, fince the poor Marquis expired in agonies. After he recovered from the fit 1 mentioned, he wandei ed very much from reafon, and did not postefs his fenfes perfedlly until about ten minutes before his death.
When I left off writing to you, I repaired with Monfieur De Montville to his chamber—he was talking in a confufed manner to Vi6toria.
“ Ah !” exclaimed he, “ Flell is open before me—I fee it 1—they are preparing to avenge the death of Luzy.—Idifpatched him like a coward
—La Bert
recommended that way as fafest—>I broke his heart —he.iought to fly from his enemy—but then the
tempest roared----the demons of hell were my
confederates
the law could take no cognizance of it.
184
THE
HERMIT
confederates — they made the thunder roll—the li<rhteiiingflash—the ocean open.—Hark—hark!’* °He jumped up in his bed—his attendants endeavoured to hold him down—and Vitoria upon her knees befought him to be compofed—he looked at her stedfastly—she was the very inlage one would wish toreprefcnt of beauty in distrefs—her dishevilled hair—her hands clafped—her affrighted and tearful eye, rendered her the most interest-ino- objedt I ever beheld. He, in fixed attention of her, Suffered his people to replace him in his bed___and after that he reached towards her his
hand.
You are,” cried he, ‘‘ the guardian angel of my (lumbers.—Tell me—am I condemned for
all eternity.”
“ God forbid!” anfwered our afflicted friend with fervour,
“ God!” replied he, ‘‘ God!—oh do not mention that name !—how much have 1 negledted my God !”—and then he reckoned upon his fingers,
and muttered to himfelf.
From the extreme agitation of his mind, his
wounds bled afresh, and in (o much, that before they could receive any aid, he fainted through weaknefs. Upon his recovering a Second time, he talked fenfibly—he strove to kifs Vidoria’s hand—she embraced him with affeCtion—he begged her to pray for him, and we all kneeled around his bed, and audibly joined in offering up oraifons for a dying perfon; in the midst of which, he lifted up his eyes and hands to heaven, and with Some Severe struggles yielded his Soul to eteinity.
I cannot exprefs to you the amiable and charm-
in^^ SenSibility of Vidoria. She weeps for him—
{hi laments his untimely end—but in her grief,
you
OF THE ROCK.
185
you behold nothing of that falfe rhapfody, which modern times exhibit on fuch occafions, when a widow thinks it neceffary to rend the air with her cries, at the departure of a man she could not love when living. The grief of the Marehionefs was much stronger^—was much more poignant on the lofsof a late beloved objedt-—alas, my Maria ! has she not been unfortunate ?
	*		*	*	*	*		
*	*	*						
VICTORIA is at prefent with me.—She Intends to fet off for her retirement in Sardinia, which the Marquis has left her. That, and his houfe in Paris, were all the poffeffions he had remaining— both of which by his will, now belong to the Marehionefs. The Marquis Le Laufanne has left no debts unpaid—he stripped himfelf of every thing in order to behave with honour towards his creditors : in that particular he ever behaved well—and even Madame La Bert acknowledges, he owed her nothing—a qualm of confei-ence, it is fuppofed, gives rife to this declaration, having no doubt poffeffed herfelf of many more considerable fums of his, than that which was imagined to be due to her from Laufanne—how fairly, God knows ?
I en-
i86
THE HERMIT
*
I endeavour to prevail ofn the charming and amiable Marchionefs to remain with me a little while
I
in Paris-~but she is dear to my entreaty. I would strain a point to accompany her as far as her melancholy castle, but she will not hear of my leaving my affairs in their unfettled Situation.—Be-•Sides, she I'linted fomething of your intending to meet her on the confines of Italy, whenever stie Spoke of returning thither. Do not change that resolution, my dear Savillon, for it will be both a comfort and a charity to Save her from the unhap-pinefs of her own ideas. Adieu,
Julia De Sanscerre.


OF THE ROCK.
187
Madame De Savillon, to the Marchion
De Lausanne.
■d
(”^OME, my Victoria—come to Belvoir castle, Ji and in the bofom of fympathizing friendship pour all thy forrows.—-My mother’s Situation will not allow of my attending you at prefent to Sardinia—but if you will pafs three months with us Cre you bid adieu to France. I promife to accompany you at the expiration of that time, to your beloved retirement. My dear parent joins with Lindor and myfelf, in intreating you not to refufe this request.—I know you love to confer happinefs—if mine then was ever dear to you, let me experience it by your ready acquiefcence to my wishes.
You will be pleafed to See our pretty Sophy grown a thoufand times more charming than when you were struck with her—and her brother improved in that learning your charity has given him an opportunity of applying to.—I would keep the fecret of their father’s return from you until you could be informed of it from their own grateful hearts—but that I know it will afford you pleafure to hear it as foon as postible.
He came home to his humble cottage fome time last week, after having met with a thoufand misfortunes to detain him from his family—the principal one was, his having confented to go on board a vefSel bound for St. Lucie, merely to obfervc the mechanifin of a ship, and meaning to return on shore as foon as his curiostty was indulged ; mark the confequence. A storm arofe, and
continued
188
THE HERMIT
continued all night So terribly, that he could not land, but was driven out of port inthevelSel. The next morning the captain perceived that he was a goood way from France, as every thing was entirely prepared for his voyage, and he only waited for a fair wind, instead of returning to put the poor man on shore, he continued his courfe to the West-Indies, in fpite of the tears and agony he beheld him immerfed ip. When he arrived at St. Lucie, the climate, and the fedendtary life he had led inhis voyage to it, brought|onhim a thoufand difeafes which confined him for many months. la short after a tedious fojournment in a strange land, a humane gentleman who heard his story, consented to bring hini with him to France, and he arrived not above a fortnight ago atBourdeaux.
So far have I found it not difficult to relate but were I to attempt the joy with which his family is infpired, I should find my pen inadequate to the talk.
I have written to beg Sanfcerre to interest hcr-felf in my behalf—and to pcrfuade you to favour us with your company at Belvoir castle.—-If you do not come—-I shall fancy myfelf lefs dear to you —an idea that I should find too difficult to Support. Farewel, my beloved ViQ:oria —never doubt of the unalterable affedion of
Your
Maria De Savillon

OF THE ROCK.
189
Sfh MarcKtonefsD^
0E Sanscerre.
to Madame
Bchoir cafUcm
AM arrived at Madame De NilleneuPs, mj ^ dear Sanfcerre, and have been received with all that tendernefs, which is fo peculiarly adapted to hearts like her’s, Maria’s, and Llndor’s. Our meeting was very pathetic—was very affedling— the reverend form of my friend’s mother, reminded me of my own, when she embraced her Victoria, after having unwillingly confented to her leaving Clarence with her hushand.-—Ah, can I ever forget her tears and Sighs in that moment ? —can 1 ever forget, with what a wildnefs of Sorrow she strained me to her heart ?—oh my San-feerre 1 feel it!—at this instant I feel that embrace. —What an idea !—alas 1 I perceive I have not yet conquered fenSibiUty. The Comte De Savillon and his admirable wife,t are emblems of conjugal fidelity and love. He has lost nothing of that anxious, yet delicate attention towards her which was fo amiable in him before the knot that Secured her his was tied; and on her part, she is the fame bewitching fenfible and tender mistrefs which the days of courtship Saw her. When you, my dear Julia, and Solignac are married, I shall have nothing more in this life to wish for.
Adieu. I am not now an entertaining correspondent—I am confeious that lam not — you must not therefore think me unkind, if I do not
write again, before I arrive at the castle Au Bois.
^	—I take
Ipo
THE HERMIT
•I take no longer a pleafure in writing—I am, in fa£t, no longer of ufe to my friends—to the world—or to myfelf—yet shall I ever love J:hec my Sanfeerre.
Victoria De Lausanne.
Madame De Sanscerre, to the Marchionefs
De Lausanne.
\
INCEvou left Paris I have had fome trouble with Madame La Bert'—she has taken ano-. ther religious turn—she has wearied me, with letters containing the words Pardon— Convent—~ Wretch—Penitence, idc. tdc. Cfr. She execrates her perfidy towards you—flie exclaims against her own immoralities—she confesses, having been in league against you with the Duke De Maurice —in short, she accufes herfelf without mercy. I writ her an anfwcr which I begged might ferve for all the letters she had ever taken the trouble to fend me, and thofe, that she may perhaps addrefs to me in future, Setting forth my iorrow for her crimes, and my joy at her penitence—my Sorrow, if she should be hypocritical—and my joy, should she really be Sincere. 1 then took the liberty of recommending to her, a houfe of poor Clares at Gravelines, where 1 hinted, she might fast and pray and work, almost in proportion, with thofe
monstrous
OF T HE ROCK.
191
monstrous iniquities, she had' made So entire a confestion of to me. I then wished her perl’eve-rcnoe In her undertaking, and hoped to be remembered in her pious prayers.
Now 1 know you will be angry at this strain of irony—but she still defervcs it;—she is at prefent ' in high flirtation with the Chevalier De Granville.
Le Blanc has not been taken—a circumstance you arc not lorry for, I dare lay—her Paramour has never returned to France.
Haw the Duke De Maurice yesterday—he took: my hand and Sighed upon it. “ Your fair friend. Madam—how does the too charming Marchi-onefs?”
I will not tell you what he faid after—you would be angry—yet a man of his constancy, must not be too readily blamed for rejoicing at the dilappearance of one obstacle to his hap^inefs.
He had the affurance, my dear ViUoria, to fay, he would hope to call you one day his. I anlwered with an air of difdain, and an emphatically pronounced “ Never.’^ He shrugged his fhoulders—stghed, and turned from me.
Poor Solignac frets at my obstinacy, as he terms it, in not conlenting to marry him, before my affairs are fettled—a thing I am poSitively determined on, Since I am not to be outdone in ge-rierofity. Farewel — thefe fix weeks of your ablence from me, have appeared fo many months and yet you talk of leciuding yourfelf for ever, in that odious castle !—Let pity for your friends couiuerafl lo frightful an intention.
Believe me to be
ever yours.
Julia De Sanscerre.
N. B.

THE HERMIT
N. B. Many letters passed between Madame De Savillon and Madame De Sanlcerre during Madame De Laufanne^s stay at Bclvoir castle, but as they contain n9thing new or interesting, the Transsator of this work has thought proper to fupprefs them.

end of volume II
/
	1	' H E	y*
E	R	' M	I T
	.1© p	THE	
R	0	c	K :
	0 R	\ THE	1 \ %
H I	s	T 0	R Y
;	0 F	T H E	
MARCHIONESS DE LAUSANNE
A K D THE
COMTE DE LUZY
^'.'•h 4* I* 4*	*1*	*1* *5* *1^4* *1* *f	L *1* 4**3* *5* ^ *I*'5’*J* *I‘'T L 4’*5'*f*'J'*1’'I* I* T
TRANSLATED FROM A FRENCH MANUSCRIPT.
/
I
••*<>•••• <>*'**<V* »••<>•• •*<>*•
IN T HR‘E E V 0;L U M ES.
V O L. HL
'4.j..j.'^,5..{v54’.j,.};4,.j,'.j,.j.4..f.j.4..f4.‘{..}.^^..{«^^^*j*^4«4-*r4«4*4«4«4*'r4-4*4‘4"4*4'4**b4‘4-T4*
DUBLIN:
printed for MefTis. Price, R. Cross, Williams, V/alker E, Cross, Jenkin, Moncuiefte, Burfjett, Gilbert, Higley, Exshaw, Beatty,
Burton, B. Watson and
J. Parker. 1779
\

r •

THE
H
E
R
M
I
1
OF THE
R
O
C
K.

Fhe Marchionefs D E Lausanne, to Madame
De Savillon.
Y
"\yOU look upon my sstuatlon as deplorable, my dear Maria, and from your extreme ast feftion forme, believe that it cannot but be prejudicial to my health, merely from my giving way to melancholy ; but that melancholy, fo far from being injurious to me, is the only confolation I enjoy. To remove thofe fears, hovvever, which you feel for your unhappy friend, in confequehce, of your tender affedtion for her, I can tell you that I met with an incident lately, which, for a fliort time prevented me from giving any attention to my own forrows, though it is not in the power of any human event to make me ceafe to lament the lofs of my ever beloved, and never-to-be forgotten Luzy.—After the hurry, indeed, which this incident occaSioned, was over, I was the more strongly reminded of my unhappy fate.
I 4	A few
195
T :tl E fl E R M I T
■ A few days ago we had here fo violent a ftorni of thunder, lightning, and rain, accompanied with a whirlwind which 611ed every breast with terror,: every bofom but mine, to that you know distrefs is familiar: I was therefore lefs fenSible of the danger; or rather lefs anxious of preferving a life which has for fomeuime been almost ready toSir^ under the weight of accumulated wretchednefs. Yet, though i am indifferent about my own fafe-ty, Maria, I could not behold from the windows of tlfe castle, a vessel which had long struggled to ride thro’ the storm, compelled at last to lubmit to its overpowering violence, and bulged upon the rock, from, which thofe on board had incffeclually endeavoured to steer it. The fcreams of the miserable crew, reaching my ears, filled my foul with horrors. \ felt lor the unfortunate viftims ;• I felt alfo for rnyfclf; terrified, at the idea that the mercilefs waves had fwallowed up the beloved of my heart, my grief was renewed, and I wept aloud.—My people now came to tell me, that the greatest part of the crew was drowned.—Me-thought I faw my Luzy finking a fecond time in the fathomlefs ocean.—They imagined that my tears flowed ior themy but they proceeded from an additional caufe, ever to be remembered with the most painful fenlations.—While I was giving a vent to the eff^ufions of my fe;Fifibility, Nannette, my faithful Nannette, came running into my a-partment.—Oh, madam!” exclaimed flie, almost breathlefs, Whatafeene of distrefs have I beheld ? In that velSel you fee broken to pieces by the storm, was a family who are all drowned, except one lady, whom the failors had lashed to a part of the ship : but the wind bursting the cords afunder, she was driven by it to the shore. She has been taken up more dead than alive by your
people.

O F T SI E ROCK.
1

\
people, who have made her bring up fome of the-fait water fhe had fvvallowed ; and they hope, if' they can get her to take any repofe, that file may recover. But as foon as Ihe came to the remem-'
d al! aiull;-'
e1 Wi i ^
brance of her unhappy state, ihc ance,. all comfort,, declaring, that as fhe had lost the only man in the world for whom stie wifhed' to live, Ihe did not destrc to preferve her existence.”—Such a renewal of my forrows makes my heart grow faint within me.—My head is too weak to hold a pen—I must, therefore, for a Iliort time,' bid adieu to my Maria—But when-my strength and fpirits will permit, you shall foon hear again from your affedlionate friend,-

VlCTORIAi
T*be Marc/iionefs D e L A u s a’N-n e,
in Continuation^
TAKE up my pen again, Maria, to continue my narration. I was before too much affedfed to proceed.
My people, at my deSire, brought the lady they had faved, though with great difficulty, to the castle.—She now wept, now raved, and called aloud upon her Meilcour : vowing, that as he was for ever lost, she would follow him, and partake of his watery grave ; struggling, alfo, as piuch as she could, from the failure of her strength, with thofe who held her, and begging to be re-Icafed that she might join her lover, her hushand.,:
I 3	,—How
I9§
THE HERMIT
^—How I pitied her, my dear Savillon ! How did her iofs bring to my memory, my own !-—My tears flowed afresh when I thought of my Luzy; and hy them I gained more upon her than if I had maddufe of a thoufand words.
She, at length, fubmitted to the being led to the apai,tment 1 had destined for her.—She then addressed me in the following pathetic manner. ** Your fyrinpathizing tears. Madam, have done more than the most earnest perfuaSions could have effected ; you feel, you cherish my Sorrows: others infult them by defiring me no longer to complain.—No longer to complain continued she, lifting up . her eyes, while her hands were clafped in an agony of defpair—** Not to lanient, when I have lost all I held dear on earth ?—Oh, Madam I you do not — cannot know — what a wretch you now behold—I would Speak—I wish to tell you—but my voice fails me—I cannot articulate my woes.’^-—Here she Sunk into a kind of fainting fit, and was conveyed toa-bed near which I Seated my Self. Wliile 1 was assisted sty Nan-nette, applying lavender-water to her temples, and volatiles to her nofe, I had an opportunity of taking a view of her perfon.---l found her young, lovely, and even delicate beyond expression, though the Splashing of the Sea, and the diSorder of her drefs had deprived her of thofe advantages which give graces to the finest figures. When she opened her eyes, and attempted to thank me for my care of her, there was an expreffion in them, and a melody in her plaintive accents, which filled me with admiration, and made me feel a double share of compassion for her fate, I endeavoured to perfuade her to take Some refreshment ; but all my eloquence could not for a long time# prevail.—“	cried she, with a figh,
which Seimed to rend her heart—“ No, madam,
I can-
OF THE ROC K.
199
I cannot confent to do any thing to prolong a life that must be fuperlatively wretched, without the man whom I loved beyond myfelf—Only put yourfelf in my place”—continued she,—Sup-pofe you had this moment lost the dear beloved of your foul, the most amiable of men to whom you had fworn to unite yourfelf by the most facred, the most binding ties.—To fuch a man 1 should ,have been united for ever, as foon as we had fet our feet on shore—but in one fad—-dreadful mo-' ment,- the pitilefs waves, as if envious of my approaching felicity, fnatched him from my fight tore him for ever from me—-Oh 1 Madam ! can ym who never fustained fuch a lofs—can you afk me to live ?—Can you expei3: me to receive con-Solation Here, my dear Mafia, was a fcene for me !—What a revival of my own ever-to-be remembered forrows ! what an addition to them 1 Would it not have instantly brought my Luxy before me, had it been poshble for me ever to forget him I—TheTudden recolledlion pains my heart to fuch a degree of accutenefs, that my pen drops from my feeble hand.-—When I have wiped aWay my tears, foothed, and indulged my forrows, I will endeavour to refume it.—Till then, bestow an additional share of pity on
Your distrtffcd
Victoria
F
I 4
me
200
THE HER MIT
Lhe Mardiionefs De Lausanne to Madams
De Savillon.
\
YOU will feel how I Sympathized with this poor fufferer, Maria; 1 not only kept pace with her ssghs and tears, but told her that she was, by no means, the only wretched of her fex ; adding, that I had, mjfelf, met with a dreadful calamity of the fame kind, by loSing the man whom I had ah the rcafon in the world, to love, honour, and revere. — Here she started up,.
. looked earnestly in ray face, and, preffing my hand with an inexpressible agitation, cried eagerly, But you did'not fee him die—you did not fee Kim float on the waves till he expired before your eyes—^Oh I that—that was too much to bear P’ liow was my heart rent by Such pathetic expressions ! They prevented me from offering her any immediate confolation. I could only reply,, in broken accents, “ Yes—but I was the caufe of his death.”—Ah!” replied she, with a mournful, compassionate air, “ that was killing indeed.
Yet you live, my dear madam : you have been gracioussy Spared to offer comfort to fuch a wretch as me.”—I hav.ef’’ anfwered I, collefling my^-Self, inconsequence of this Speech, (my heart funk within me, and I reproached myfelf for having been guilty of ingratitude to the Giver of All,) ** 1 have endeavoured to be reSigned to the Father of Mercy, but I cannot bring myfelf to the frame of mind I wish to be in. I cannot but lament the lofs of 1dm whom I fo dearly loved : yet I have not absolutely rej€6fedall comfort, I still preferve my life, at the request of my remaining friends,”
“ But
OF THE ROCK.
4
“ But / have no friends remaining,”
201
replied
Ihe; “ I have feen both my parents expire.—My dear mother, with her latest breath, gave me to my lost Meilcour—and wx were going to receive the last Sighs of an uncle of his at Naples, wheis tins dreadful viSitation came upon us.”—Here a fresti torrent of tears burst from her eyes, and put a total stop to her utterance, She continued to weep for a considerable time I willingly bore her company, and aSlually found relief by giving a vent to my full heart : my fympathetic behaviour feemed to touch her deeply—She dastied away her tears, for a “moment, and aSlced my pardon for having revived a forrow which I might have forgotten, had it not been renewed hy her. Her manner alfedled me exceedingly—I iaid and did every thing in my power to render her more com-pofed. At length I prevailed on her to fwallow a little light foup, and to try to take Some rest.
She complied with my strst request, but not till it had been feycral times repeated—telling me by way of return for my kindnefs—that I had convinced her it would be criminal in her to throw • away her ownlife ; and that we had never fo much ’ reafon to hope for relief from ourCrealor as when we fubmitted, without murmuring, to his wife decrees, Yet what relief,” added (he, with a -deep Sigh, “ can / expedl: ? Every thing which I ■ valued in this world is lost—all my hopes are buri- • ed in the pathlefs ocean. I have nothing iert to wifh for or destre, but to follow Meilcour—I wisti only to die.—We may furely wilh for a period to our existence, without appearing in a criminal light.—Indeed', indeed,”—continued fne,, clafping her hands, wmuld not do amifs for the univerfe.—But Hong to go to a better^place, for Fere- is nothing but forrow and distrefs.”
is
101
THE HERMIT
could not help Subfcribing, in my own mind, to the fentiments of this unfortunate straiiger, my dear Savillon ; I wifhed, however, to give a different turn to them.—The appearance of confori-mity is fometimes more effe6tual than oppojition ; 1 have found it fo, and my dear Maria has, by this method, more than once foothed the tortured mind
Of her affli£led
Victoria.
%hs MarcMonefs De Lausanne, to Madame
De Savillon.
p	%
Y poor unhappy guest, Maria, at length overcome with astliQ:ion and fatigue, con-iented to try to repofe herfelf.—I. then left the room, ordering Nannette to watch by her, and went out to breathe a little fresh air, in hopes that it would relieve my full heart, from which I strove to banish the unfortunate Luxy.—1 thought, indeed, I had fomewhat lefs reaibn to complain, by having found that 1 was not the only, woman is distreis : I thought too,. I might reckon myfelf lefs miferable than this mourning stranger, having still friends remaining who were most dear to me ; particularly you and my Sanfcerre, who fupplied the place of father,, mother, &c. I thought too, tliat as my good Nannette, though in an humble station. Wits a, treafure,. it cvas my duty to be g'r1!, iVI; for a n hone st
i aithful' f
i •	*
h'A'i



' f	i I r r’
j V > V ^ i'» c.
7^	V '
tTvanr,. not mien-
4
r>r-r i,-.
^ r j I .	‘	1 ); f) ,-yr
• ♦	•f-' ^
.v:rca$<;i|
OF ITHE ROCK.
203
we receive it with the greater
greatest comforts, as wc can before them freely unbofom ourfelves, and by venting our Sorrows frequently find the greatest relief: we are afraid to wound the heart of a near relation, or a valued friend by our compiaihts: there is alfo feme kind 6f restridtion before the dearest companions of our days, who are either our fuperiors or equals; but with domestics, there is no fuch delicacy required : we pay no regard to their phefence ; we give a vent to our forrows, as if we believed cur-felves unheard.—When fuch humble friends as my Nannette, pay us that attention which we fometimes require, fatisfadtion, as we can receive it without con-uraint; and are even at liberty to return a peevish, difebntented anfwer to their offered confolatlons, without caringwhether we pleafe or offend.— What coniforts are thefef” laid 1 to myfeif. On a fudden, casting my eyes on the beech, and beholding the foaming fea, I Sighed aloud, and alked, if the rolling waves would recall ray Luzy. —I walked, hastily, to and fro, quite abforbed in thefe contemplations for fome time.—-One of my fervants then came running towards me, telling me that they had taken up a man, who by his deaths appeared to be of fome fashion, and that they had hopes of recalling him to life.—I started at this intelligence—my fond, foolish heart deceived me—from the Similitude of circumstances^ and I forgot that my Luzy bad been long, long dead ; that his precious remains had been long food for fishes, and that had his body been difeovered, and taken up, it would have been fo changed as farcely to have been known.—I then, recollecting my wandering thoughts, inquired what fort of a peifonthis stranger was.—lasted, whom they had been fo fortunate as to fave.—The anfwer was, ««	handfeme man.” A pccket-book
a youitg
WuS.
2.04
THE HERMIT
Shall I be weak enough
was found in his coat with the name of Meilcour in it. I immediately remembered that Meilcour was the name wjiich my weeping inmate had mentioned. I flew to her with the intelligence, but my heart funk within me, when I conssdered that though her Meilcour was thus happily fnatched from deilru£tion, my Luzy was lost for ever. Think me not ungrateful, however, to Providence ; think me not too felfist, Maria; think not that I forgot to rejoice at the unespedted preservation of her lover.— to feel forrow,” faid I t&myfelf; “ stall I dare to be offended, becauSe heaven, in its mercy has judged fit to Spare one man, and to another ? WhatreaSon had I to expe6l Such a mi-i acle in my favour ? Or, Tuppofing I ha(f am I to murmur at my disappointment ? Can I pretend to know what is best, or argue with my Maker, concerning wright and wrong ?’’-—TheSe refledli-ons made me astamed of rnySelf: Ihung down my head, in stlent fubmiffion to the will of the Almighty I felt my heart full of gratitude for Ids merciful interpofition in favour of the unfortunate stranger, and hastened to charge my people not to lurprife her too Suddenly with this happy news, lest ste might not be, able to Support the stock of joy ; having been often told that fudden joy is as fatal, fometimes, as fudden griest-—Would to God I were worthy of being tried !-—Surely, I could ciie, with plea Sure for the-restoration of my Luzy.—But lam complaining again—Oh pardoD,^ snd while you pardon, pity
Your ever affectionate
9-
however astlidted.
VIC T 0 RIA
Or

OF THE ROCK.
205
T'he Marchionefs De Lausanne, to Madams
De Sayillon.
CONTINUE to write, my Maria„ concluding that you wilh to hear more of my fair guest,
1 am always pleafed while I am converSjig with my Savillon; in that light do 1 conSider the letters-which pafs betv/een us.—To proceed then—I hastened to MadcmoifelLe de Narbonne ; (for that is her name, as I was informed, by fome who estaped the wreck) she had been asteep, for a moment—she started, asfroma terryCyingdream t at first* she appeared all confufed.—“ Where ami?” faid she, wildly—Where am I, Meil-cour ? Are you near me, my love ? I feem faint.” She then, on a fudden, recolledling herfelf,, exclaimed—Oh ! now 1 know,—fatal remembrance” (continued she, wringing her hands) I am on shore—and than—Oh, my God—thou,— thou art drowned 1—^Upon this, I approached, and begging her to be corapofed, ashed her if she was, fure that he was lost ; if she actually faw him expire ; adding, that people in his alarming condition had often been miraculousty preferved, and fnatched from the waves which w^ere ready to o-vervvhelm them, and restored to their afflidfed friends.—“ Ah I” — replied she—as if a faint beam of hope had entered her mind—then. Suddenly recol!e6:Ing herfelf—she added—No—no. —he is dead—I faw him die—and in the most dreadful manner.”—You might think fo,’*^ an-fwered I, “ and yet you may have been mistaken..
There is a man wIk) pretends t© have feen him alive.”—Oh ! where is he ?—who is he ?^’ exclaimed she with great eagernefs—in an a
of expectation—yet apparently doubtful of the
truth-
2c6
THE HERMIT
It was with great
truth of what I had faid.—Is it poffible, my dear madam r—Let me fee him myfelf ”—continued file, raiSing herfelf up—“ Let me fly to him—I can revive him fooner than any one : my Mcit-cour would hear the voice of his Adelaide, though deaf to all the world beSide.”— difficulty that I could keep her from running out ot the room.—*At last, however, I prevailed on her to be more calm, telling her that I was fure he would come to	Aye,” Said she, fo
he would, were he able—I have no doubt of t/tal. He would fly through every danger to meet me -—I cannot bear this fufpenfe—’tis worfe, far worfe than death : let me go—let me go—I will believe in the goodncfs of the Almighty—I will hope my love is alive.”—With thefe words, fpringing from me—for I had hold of her hand she darted towards the door, to meet her Meil-cour, as she hoped.—There she was stopped by a mestenger who same to tell us, that the perfon whom they thought was Mr. Meilcour Was the captain of the vcffel, and that the body of the former could not be found.—-This intelligence Was too hastily delivered for the poor Adelaide. She instantly dropped, fenfelefs, on the floor.— You may imagine, Maria, how much I reproached myfelf with having assisted in cruelly deceiviing her.—But 1 must bid you adieu for the prefent. Salute for me your revered mother, remember ihe to our beloved Lindor, and believe me.
Ever yoiif
Victoria.

OF THE ROCK.
207
^he Marchionefs De Lausanne, to Madame
De Savillon.
m %
YOU fay that you interest your Self greatly in the bistory.of the unfortunate Adelaide, and entreat me to continue it.—Ah ? Maria I’ is not your Vidloria as unfortunate—more unfortunate, ten thoufand times I”—We railed Mademoifelle de Narbonne from the /floor, but we could not for a long time bring her to life: and when we fuccceded, she feemed to have quite lost her rea-fon. She raved, rent her deaths, and tore her hair, called upon her lover, and a&ed why he had left her~why he had left her twice—why om jlroke was not fufSeient to kill her ?—And, indeed, we could hardly—both of us—fupport the load of aifflidion with which we were oppressed. As for myfelf, I was utterly incapable of making any attempt to afford my poor Adelaide the Smallest relief. I thought, too much, how 1 should have felt, had I been tantalized with the hopes of feeing my Luxy again ; and if thofe hopes had been ail blasted—Oh! my Savillon, what anguish is there in that jdea ! Ifympathize So deeply with my poor. Adelaide, that I am unable to think—much iefs to write: I can only tell you, that it is very doubtful whether she ever recovers herfenfes: and that however mine may be affeded, I must always remain.
Your faithful
Victoria

20§
THE HERMIT
Kladante De Lausanne, Madame
De Savillon.
H 1 my Marla I my Sorrows are to have n® end ; I fuffer not only for my owm misfortunes, but for thofe of other people.—-The mif-fortunes of this poor Adelaide, indeed, reminds me fo much of my own, that I feel more accutely for her, than I should for any woman distrefled in any other manner.
The perfon whom I mentioned in ray last, was the captain of the vessel which had been wrecked. —I found him, on his being recovered from, the ex-extrerne fatigue he had undergone, an agreeable intelligent man.—After having thanked me for the relief and entertainment he had received at the castle, he added, “ I understand. Madam, that Mademoifelle de Narbonne was brought to this place before my arrival, and 1 doubt not but she has met with every kind of assistance and confolatron which her Situation required : I am apprehenSive, however, that she will never furvive her afflidlions. — f was conveying this unhappy young lady to an unde of Monfieur de Meilcour, when the late most violent storm
2,
rofe, which foalarmed her lover on account, that he talked of nothing but the means ofpre-fcrvingthe dearest part belonging to him ; his beloved Adelaide. We could not-think of any better method than that of lashing her to a piece of the timbers: this method he approved of, hoping she might stoat on it to shore : this motion, however, she very strenuoussy oppofed, declaring that no-ihing but death should feparate her from her
OF THE ROC K.
Meilcour.—-He then, in order to prevail on her, told her, that if fSe would confent to what we de-fired, her compliance would not only contribute to her own prefervation, but to y^/Valfo, as he should he, in confequence of it,, enabled to diredh the failing of her little bark while he fwam by her to fhore. This propofal,. though there was no gfeat probability of its fuccefs, had the wished-for ef-iest ; it induced her to try it, and indeed nothing, more could be done. She confented to a£l agreeable to his dessrc, but faid she would first take leave of him, as she r€.ally believed she should not’ live through the storm : adding, that she did not wish to live through it, without being affured of his fafety ; being determined never to be left behind alive.—-In vain did Meilcour urge that it was our duty to do fevery thing in our power to pre~ ferve the existence which was given us as a blef-fing, and that no change o-f fortune should ever make us throw it carelefsly aw'ay.—-All this time-he ashsted in fastening her to the raft, though the lea ran fo high that it was with the greatest difficulty vye could, any of us, compafs our defigns, and fears for her lover, which produced the most patlietic lamentations, retarded us confidera-bly id the execution of them. At last, however, we , finished our operations; we lashed her to the raft* Just as we were going to launch her on the tumultuous waves, and when Meilcour was preparing to follow her, and to endeavour to fwim to shore, she caught fast hold of him,‘and con?-jured him, by the love which he had always protested for her, never to abandon her—never to die without plunging her along with him into the bottornlefs deep.—“ Let us go together’^—exclaimed she—(in heart-piercing accents) let us gp together—no matter where we go—if we cannot live united, let us die fo—I am not afraid to die
with
210
THE HERMIT
with yoUf Meilcour—I should be grieved to leave you——ytt if we mtiji part—if we muji—Oh ! gracious heaven I let me be Singled out by deatbi! let me not have the'mifery of furviving all that I hold most dear in this world !”—He strove to en-
courage her \ ht strove to fupport himfelfhy her fide, and they had feme reafon to hope that they might, both of them, reach the point they had, most anxiousty, in view: but their hopes were blasted.-~At the very moment Meilcour was within a few firokes of the shore, a large wave rolled over him, and utterly deprived him of the power of struggling with his fate ; it deprived him of his breath—and he was doomed to die. We fawthe danger he was in, but we could not get near enough to him to be of the least fervice.—Adelaide aifo Saw the danger to which her lover was expofed ; we heard a loud feream, and imagined that it was her last, for we heard no more. We still, however, perceived her, for fome time time ■floating on the waves, which over-powered uS ail, and prevented us, indeed, from being able to give each other any alfistance.-—Yet, luckily, as I happened to be a better fwimmer than Meilcour, I at last gained the land, but I was fo fpent that I 'wonder how I could have fupported myfelf fo long.—Meilcour gave me his pocket-book before he threw himfelf into the fea, which I preferved in my jacket, as I could fwim very well in my cloaths, and I beg you will give it to Mademoiselle de Narbonne, accepting, yourfelf, my repeated acknowledgments for the care v.shich your people have taken of me.”
Here the captain finished his narrative, which affeQed me exceedingly, as it brought to my mind the death of my dear Luxy, who perished just in the fame manner as this Meilcour did.—Oh ' my
Maria 1
f
O F T H E R O C K.
2l I
Maria ! Oh 1 that I had died at the fame moment I—^Yet pray forgive me——I am fenSible of my irrational and immoral behaviour—But who would wish to furvive fuch a lover as Luzy was to
Your
Victoria De Lausanne.
Madame
De Lausanne, De Savill on.
I
to Madame
SHE is gone—my dear Maria : the poor Suffering Adelaide is no more—She could not Survive the shock she had Sustained by the lofs of her Meilcour.—Oh ! how could 1 furvive the lofs of niy Luzy ?—:And yet I am alive ; I live, and am in tolerable health, after an event which, as you might have imagined, would have inevitably destroyed me. But I shtdl never recover my Spirits: “-I shall never be releafed from the melancholy with which I am heavily--heavily opprcffed: that, however, is no obje<5t of my attention ; tis no matter how I am, ’tis no matter what I feel, fince Luzy is gone.—'But to purfue my narrative.—
When I returned^ to the wretched Adelaide, after the conversation with the captain, mentioned
m
THE HER MIT
mifrry.


2T2
in my laff letter, I found her just recovered from a fwoon; juft brought to heiielf by the strength oSthe cordials which had been administered to her: •“but as. foon as- (he opened her eyes,The elofcd them again, declaring, ffe would not live; and-aficcG ihofe who were bufy about her, why they had restored hi s to life ? As the prefervation of her eXili ' ; e was only the continuance of hei
ii vain did they urge the crime of fui-cidi, which was adtually committed, they faid. by ah perfons who perSisted in not taking care of the life which thc\x Maker had best'ov/ed on them' as a blelTing,—-“ Ido acknowledge,” replied stie,. “ that while Meilcour was mine, life was indeed,, a blesting, most invaluable —and though I fin-ccrely wifh, though I fervently pray to d/V”— added ste, with a Sigh, from the bottom of her heart—lam too fenSible of the daring crime of felstdestrudiion to be guilty of it defigncdly : but God,, who is all merciful,, in the midst of bis wrath, and who does'^not require more from his weak creatures than they are able to perform— God, will, I trust, in pity to the fufferings I have endured, hasten to releafe me. l am going, X hope——and believe—to join my Meilcour.’* '
Here (he made a long paufe-—
Then, putting her cold, feeble, dying hand inmine, she added—** Farewell, my dear madam may you be amply rewarded for all the kindnefs. which you have shewn to a poor, distreffed, unfortunate woman. — May you—Oh! never feel what Jhehz% fuffered !”
She then laid her face compofedly on her pi! lovv, and uttered not another fyliable.
may you
She
even went off without a groan.
Oh I that my last Sigh may be like hers i—Why—why have I not followed my Luzy ? I should then be at peace, , like, the poor Adelaide, whofe last fentiments
cannot.
OF THE ROCK.
Z’lZ
cannot, furely, be deemed blameable. She wished not to live ; but at the fame time, ssie was not afraid to die: life had no charms for her, when flie was robbed of the partner of her heart, robbed of the man v/hom she loved at once from duty and inclination :—Yet you fee she took ,no fteps to put a period to her existence.—She fuffer-ed with patience, and she was—happily, I may —refleSting'On. her most painful Situation— releafed.
I looked at her, just now, laid out upon her bed: looked at her with a kind of melancholy fatisfadion, which I am not able to defcribe.— correded myfelf, however, with this question “ Is she not at peace ?—Oh I my Maria ! would to heaven, I could fay that my Sorrows were at an end I But this unhappy event revives them.— Yet I will be refigned—>1 will not murmur^—fevere as my lot is, I will not complain—'I will fubmit. —Is not fiibmtstlon, is not ressgnation right> my Savillon? And am I not still
Your own
Victoria De'Lausanne,
Remember me In the kindest manner to Madam Villeneuf, and our good Lindor ; they will, I am fare, fympathize withyow, on my account; they have hearts which can feel	fufferings, and,
in confequence of what they feel, will, no doubt, join their wishes to yours for the removal of them. —But of that ! defpair.—Such felicity is too much for me to exped—Felicity !—I have long bade adieu to that,----
Madame
214
THE HERMIT
Madame De S a v i l l o n, to Madame
D E Lausanne.
HOW much have I felt for you, my dear
ViSoria I how exceedingly do I pity you ! Surely, nothing could have been more unlucky than the wreck you have fo pathetically defcribed just at a time when you must have been deeply affedled by it.—Yet still, if you give yourfelf leave to reflect a little, my Victoria, you will certainly allow that you> cannot be fo miferable now, as you was while you lived with a man whom you had fo much reafon to distike from his unkind treatment; and though you may lament the lofs of the amiable Luz-y, can you derive no confola-tion from your being at liberty to lament his lofs: From your being your own mistrefs? From your having it in your power to fay and do what you pleafe, without having an ill-natured, tyrannical hustand tocontradidi and controul you? Nor to reproach you for the fighs you vent, for the tears you shed, mourning for the fate of him who was the man of your choice ? During the life of M. De Laufanne, you could not without a degree of criminality Speak to—or think of—your Luzy : though it were almost impostlble for you to forbear thinking of him, and fpeaking to him. What a relief, therefore, to your over-charged heart was the death of this hushand, forced upon you by the defpotifm of a father, who estimated all men by the riches which they poffested, and who paid no regard—flinty-hearted himfelf—to the finer feelings of the foul. ConSider, alfo, my Vidloria,
that unjust and unkind as this father was, you
obeyed
OF THE ROCK.
2I<

obeyed him, and gave up love for duty: you have, confequently, no reafon to upbraid your-felf with regard to your Luzy ; whole lost you juftly lament^ but you ought not to fuppoSe your-felf the caufe of his being dead-—to you. By having aded, the part of a dutiful child, you will be greatly commended by thoufands for your prudential behaviour. You had not tlie most distant idea of injuring Luxy by your obedience to your parents: you only gave him a more exalted proof of your merit: for, admitting that you had been obftinate, and refufed Laufanne, you never could have, married Luzy, but in a clandestine manner ; and would you have deferved his love by fo un-dutiful a proceeding ? What opinion, must a man, do you. imagine, have of the woman, who on his account, difobeys her parents, and flies from her family with him P Can fuch a woman be, rationally expedled to be faithful ? Will a bad daughter ever make a good wife f Can a man depend upon her who has difcovered that she is capable of deceit ? Believe me, my dear Marchionefs, you would never have been happy with Luzy without the confent of the Duke of Clarence, and as that confent could not be obtained, you should be fatisfied with having obliged your father, though against your own inclination. On that account, the facrifice which you made, did you the greater honour. We are told, my dear Vi£loria, that there is no merit in the performance of what really gives us pleafure:: we are told that virtue arifes from felstdenial. Thefe dofirines have, I allow, a fevere appearance, and you will’probably, tell me, in return, that I should not have found obedience fo very eafy, if my choice had been like yours, oppofed : and that, as my excellent mother was as fond of Lindor, as I was my Self, every thing went on fragothly. ^Drawing this conclusion
< •
» •
2iS
THE HE R M I T
^clusson Srom thefe premifes, that I cannot forn? any judgment of the afflidlions which you have endured, which youy?i//endure.—All this, I grant is true, in Some degree ; and yetfelt, and AO feel for you, -my dearest friend : and it is my 'feeling fo a'ccutejy for your distrefs which makes me avail rny Self of every argument in my power, to render you more fatisfied with your own 'sstua-■lioit, even with the l-ofs of Euzy ; though we have not indeed received any certain intelligence -of his'-being dead, I am afraid to flatter	or
you, with his being alive. However, were I hire that he no longer existed, I cannot think that you were the caufe of his death : if he was really lost at Sea it was an accident; it might have happened to him had you never married De Laufanne : and fuppofing that in coufequence of that marriage, he had either -destroyed himfelf, or thrown himfelf '.purpofely in the way of danger, what a want of fortitude must he have difeovered ! How unworthy of being the hufband of my Viftoria, must that man appear who cannot Support a difap-’pointment.without flying in the face of his Creator I Surely, my amiable friend, hcrfelf must 'defpife Such a charadler: no longer, then, give way to an unavailing Sorrow, but rather be thankful, that if heaven decreed Luzy’sTife stiould not be preferved, you were not united to him. Vour Separation, in that cafe, would have been infinitely more painful. Reflect on what I have written, but do not reflect on it in the melancholy retirement you are^ come away diredlly to your Maria, and in her bofom bury your grief. My mother, my Savillon, both intreat you to fisten to my perfuaSions; they both infist upon your compliance.^—While you were with me, you was lefs afflidled—-you may remember—as I
did not fustier you to indulge yourfelf with foli-
tude.
OF THE ROCK.
217
^u^e.-_Return, therefore, to your friends my Vi<storia, to thofe friends who wish most earnestly to drive aw^ay all forrow, all fadnels fiom your mind, and to make you as chearful, as happy as themfelves: but if you cannot bring yourfelf to make fuch an addition to our felicity, be perfuad-ed, at least, to go to Paris, to go any where, rather than stay in a place which fo continually forces you to recolle<fi; your lofs. At Paris, you may amufe yourfelf with your Julia, and her difficulties, as they are not of a fufficient magnitude to be lamented, may employ your thoughts, and not only steel you from your attention to your own troubles, but put you in a way to affist her in the removal of thofe with which she is oppref-fed: you may alfo, at the fame time, Serve our common friend SoUgnac, who may be, perhaps, without our friendly interpoSition, not a little injured by her capricioufnefs. She loves him, I believe, yet I believe too that she will put his patience to a fevere trial.—Our Sanfeerre is certainly amiable, but is she not determined to make ufe of the power she has, evidently, over this poor man, in too defpotic a style ? Solignac, undoubtedly, loves her too much for his own repofe. I do not approve of trifling with a lover in this manner : a man whom we have encouraged. To let you fee that fuch a mode of behaviour may be attended with difagreeible confequences, I will tell you a little incident which happened near us a few days ago. The Baron de Chamois had after a tedious courtship, gained the promife of the Countefs de Vignolles, a young widows, who was liighly deferving of his admiration, but had been left by the Countin very indifferent circumstances, occafioned by his extravagance: yet neither the VoL. III.	K	ardent
\
2i8
T H E H E R M I T
ardent pafSion of Chamois, nor his conSiderable fortune, could prevent her endeavouring to exert all the power which, fhe believed, file had over him, nor hinder her from making him feel her caprice. She even took a plealure in feeing him miferable on her account, and in laughing at his complaints. Eor a while, he bore this treatment with uncommon patience; his patience, however, was at length quite exhausted.—Meeting with young Ma-demoifeile de Murci at a ruralball, he tookit into his head' to try if he could, by making his first mistrefs jealous of Angelica, hasten her to reward his love. But his experiment had an effect just ©ppoSite to that which he intended. Madame de . Vignoiles, instead of endeavouring to recall him by a condefeending carriage, played the fo Ciiuch to the life, that MonSieur Le Baron irna* gined that fhe never could have felt the stiglitest eisteem for him ; and that she had, indeed, a particular avcrSion to him. Mademoifelle de Murci, finding it both her interest and inclination to be kind to her new admirer, took him at his v/ord, In short, they were married in a hurry, and our widow is fo much chagrined by her folly, and difeompofed at her having lost fo deSirabie an establishment, that she is fallen fick, in conSequence of her lover’s defertion: and she may, perhaps, pay dear for her difappointment, by its proving injurious to her health. Communicate this little anecdote to our Sanfeerre, my dear Vi£foria, by way of caution ; it may do her good, and give a new turn to your ideas; you must not dwell any longer upon what cannot be remedied by all the ' thinking the world.-—Listen to me, my Lau-fanne ; let the efforts I have made with my pen to amufe you prove efficacious, and produce
'	the
O F .D H E ROC K.
the defired change in your mind. With wilhesof my mother, andmyLindor,
219
I am.
be assured.
your own
Maria de Savillon
The Marchionefs DeLausanne, to Madame D E
Savillon.
YOU are very kind, my conSiderate Maria, to endeavour to Soothe the Sorrows oS a heart which is for ever robbed of its peace. I am very willing to allow that what you Say is just and proper; butl.am aSraid I am too wayward to derive benefit from your arguments or your perfuafions. Shad, I must confeSs, Set my heart—perhaps, too fondly, upon Luzy; and can you blame me for my partiality in his favour? You, who are no stranger to his perfonal charms ?—Yet all lovely as he was in his perSon, that alone would not have So firmly attached me to him. His mind, Maria -r-I need not tell you that his mind was no lefs love-
Ka	ly
220
THE HERMIT
V
ly than his outward' form: and then the delicacy of his manners—his manners, Maria, were to the last degree (educing. Yet you would have rne think no more of this attradtive, this amiable man ! you would have me entirely forget him, and—if I will not return io you^ would have me reSide at Paris ; that place of noife, tumult, and impertinence, wiiere I have already endured fo much unhappinefs. No : it must not be—•! cannot think of making myfelf still more unhappy, by a public exhibition of my forrow ; it is fevere enough, I want no addition to its poignancy. No—1 cannot bear the thoughts of stich a proceeding—-I will live and die in folitude. As I cannot recall my Luzy, let me, at least, feel the Satisfaction of lamenting his lofs, which I cannot do in a crowd. With regard to our Sanfccrre, I am Sorry if (he indulges her capricious temper at the ex-pence of Solignac’s peace; but I can by no means think of going io dier in hopes of reclaiming her, or of returning to you : my whole foul is, at pre-fent, too full ^of the .idea of my Luz-y, to permit me to quit a retreat where I am at liberty to nourish thofe Sentiments which, however abiurd they may Seem to thofe who are happily not in my Si--tuation, are the only confqlations which I am capable of receiving; and fo much relief do they give to my disturbed mind, that I am not Sure whether they v/ill not contribute to the prefervaticn df my life ; alife which, I could,not, on any other tei ms, make an obje£t of my attention. However, by remaining here Lean give the rein to a thoufand wild,’ romantic fancies, which, thciigh they may appear ridiculous to others, afford eafe to my over-whelmed heart, and render my painful Situation lefs infupportable ; imagining, that in this part of the deep^ my treafure—my richest treafure was funk, I can fuppofe that I behold the very
foot
OF THE ROCK.
221
V.
fpot where my drowned lover lies : my plercing^ eyes reach him in his watery grave. I call aloud on him,, as if-1 believed that he heard me.—You think now,.,my Maria, That I give an extravagant indulgence to my melancholy: you imagine, no doubt, that I injure my constitution by it—but I am of a different opinion : it Sooths, it Softens my mind ; it gives me the only pleafure I am capable of.receiving. You Say that I have done ray ,duty : Lagree with youa—but if my adherence to that duty—however justifiable—has destroyed - the- most amiable of his Sex, sttould I not be unworthy of the love which he felt—generousty felt for me, if I diil not lament him to my latest breath ? Oh ! Maria—Maria 1^—Thank.heaven ! you never felt what / feel—may you ever be preferved from fuch a trial 1 you cannot feel what I have endured : you met with no impediments to your happy union with the man you loved.—Your exemplary mother had the highest esteem for him ; you was, consequently, blest beyond expression, in having ber free approbation to fandlify the choice of your heart. It is impossible, therefore, for you to form an adequate idea of Sufferings. Let me, then, my dear Savillon, let me Seek, unmolested, the only comfort 1 am able to receive, that is, the retreat from a world which cannot afford me* the least pleafure; which, in faff, only gives me pain : —By appearing in that world in a difagreea-ble light, I Ihall certainly difgust thoSe with whom 1 associate ; on the other hand, while I am in this peaceful retirement, I am interrupted, only by my own Sorrows, which were, indeed, greatly in-creafed by ' the late melancholy wreck. And though the dangers and distresses of that unhappy couple brought the loSs of my ever to be remembered Luzy more keenly to my mind; I will biei more rational, more reSigned.—-1 bend, moSt hum-
K 3	bly
122
the hermit
bly, to the will of the Most High; IfubrnitwitL out murmuring, without repining to his albwife decrees —Yk, I fee, I feel, I conlefs my failings, I must still lament my lofs. The pity that invo-luntarilv flows from me when I remember the fate of I uA> is furely a virtuous fenlation. In hopes, therefore, that my Maria will no longer wilh to remove me--at least, not at prefent—from a place which Yields me the only confolation I can taste, I bid her adieu, adding my best refpeas to Madame de Villeneuf and our Lindor, and intreat her
not to be offended at the oppoSition made to her most friendly Advice,
By her very unfortunate
Victoria de Lausanne.
A few days before the intended journey of the Marchionefs to Belvoir Castle, oft a viSit to her friends Maria, Madame de Villeneuf, and Lindor, the history of the unfortunate Meilcour and Ade-laid took place ; that being ended, the story of the Marchionefs is refumed, and carried on without farther interruption.
rh
O F T H E ROC K.
223
The Marchionefs De Laus anne /o Madame De
Sancerre.
in a fortnight at farthest.
I AM arrived at the Castle Au Bols, my dear Sanfcerre, after a long stay of five months with our admirable friends atBelvoir.—My excellent Maria accompanied me hither last week, but as Madame de Villeneuf’s ill health will not permit her making me happy by a long viSii, fhe will be obliged to leave me,
Lindor, who was our efcorte, pretends to'view this charming place as a horrid feciufion from the world—but I, who think differeritly from hitn, in refpe<st to that world he boasts of, may alfo be fuppofed to differ with him as to the Situation oF this filent retreat. He and Maria have made a vi-fit to Nannette’s mother, and the Comte has taken fuch a fancy to her brother,, from the good chara6;er he bears, that he has infisted noon his going to France with him, where he will fettle him in a comfortable farm, and, give him enough to begin the world with handfomely.—If his mother and Sister choofe to go to him aster he is fixed in his new habitation, Lindor will fend for them, and defray their expences thither. — Nannette, however, begs leave to remain with me for ever, unlefs her mother should require her fervices. Expedient Nannette—never can I forget thy tender-,nefs and fidelity I
We have walked on the fea coast—we have listened to the dreadful waves, that lash the founding shore—-we have beheld that terrible ocean, which (wallowed up the treafure of my fond heart. Lindor was affedted—Maria stole her handker-
K 4	chief

V
224
THE HE R M I T
chief to her eyes—i v/as the only one that re* mained unmoved. I curbed my Sighs—I withheld ihofe bursts of grief, which would have efcaped me had I been alone.—I pretended to have my ‘ ^ thoughts at Paris—-I talked of it—I fpoke of the lively pleafure that attended our Sanfcerre—I cheated their penetration—for had they feen roe weep*—they would have endeavoured to perluade me to leave this folitude—^and alas fuch fcenes as thefe are all that can give me comfort now! When Maria is at a distance, I will not fcryiple to tell her my thoughts as they arife—then when I reafon, she will not Suffer a felfish wish for my prefence to urge a motive for my quitting a place that yields me delight.— She will permit what I wTite to fink deep into her heart—and she w'iil, in idea, judge what Jhe should do, in fuch a Situation. '—Here it is far different—the folemnity of the Scene, together with my^ tears and fighs, would banish every notion of comfort’s being found alone
without listening to my arguments, she give me a thoufand reafons, why I should rejoin her ip the world.—Ah, I can never think of doing fo without horror !
Maria came into the room as I ended the above Sentence —-She is raiferable about leaving me in this dreary p!ace^ as Lindor will have it called.
I have endeavoured to convince her, that it is better for my own peace, that I should remain here—and I have given her a Solemn promife of leaving Sardinia, should I ever be able to think of Society with lefs relu£lance. This assurance has, in Some meafure, fatisfied her—and indeed it could cost me very little to give it, ssnce I am perfuaded, that nothing which now exists has charms fuffici-
■and would

ent to allure me from retirement.
Adieu
OF THE ROCK.
225
Adieu my dear Sanfcerre—remember me to So~ lignac, whole patience, good temper, and po-liteneSs, I admire—whofe constancy ) ou cruelly fport with. Believe me to be always
Yours,
Victoria De Lausanne.

I he Marchionefs De Lausanne /.j Madam t
De Savillon.
r
I AM rejoiced to hear of your Safe arrival at Be!-voir Castle, my dear Maria, and though our parting cost us both fome pangs—yet the necestity of our doing fo, must enable us to fupport Such a reparation.—You are not convinced you fay, that Such reparation is neceffary.—Yes, yes, my kind friend—one moment’s refledfion will foon make it very evident that it is fo. When ! alTure you, that this folitude has in its melancholy a thoufand charms that render it dear to me—will you not al-Tow, that I should be wrong to exchange it for a world, in which I have ever been unhappy ?—Society cannot be procured, without bringing back to my mind a fet of friends, whom it will be my fate to deplore for ever-^—and without which no company but yours can give me pleafure.—Within myfelf I converfe with thofe deaf departed—I Sit and meditate upon what they were—and anticipate the joy of meeting them in a happier country. The view of that ocean wshich infpired you with horror, fills mv foul with the foftest fenfati-ons of grief.—I reproach it, indeed, with having borne from me the objedt of my love—but the
K 5	tears
'226 THE hermit
•	I
tiears that this fubje^ calls forth from my fad eyes stilburden my heart of an infinite oppreffion.—Db jibt, my Maria,—do not feeh to croSs this purpofe of my foul.—If I am happier here than in a crowd •-—the end is attained—no matter how ! I will begin a longer letter in a day or two—at prefent, I have neither fpirits or fubje6: for one. Adieu, my iSavillon !—Salute for me rrty reverend friend—and embrace in my name our beloved'Lindor.

Mar chi onefs D E Lausanne to Madame D £
%
Savillon,
N my folitary walks, I have found out a delightful retreat upon the Sea shore. There is a vast rock, at the foot of which 1 fit—whilst its lop which juts over confiderably—forms a canopy for my head.— Here I contemplate that Cruel ocean which robbed me of what I held most dear, and
^	w
listen to the murmuring of/the waves which roll 'beneath my feet—^^It is about a little mile from the Castle, and at the back of this rock a thick wood adds a gloom to the natural awfulnefs of its Situation. 1 strolled there last night, and stated my-, Self at the bottom of the rock as ulual, with my face towards the Sea. The moon shone uncommonly bright, and reflected a thoufand beauties on the calm and unruffled waves. I was infpired with a melancholy which at once took pcstefflon of my -bolo.n.
<(
Ah

O F T H E ROCK.
ni
#
** Ah!” cried Hudibly, ‘‘Ah! inhuman element 1 perfidious—dangerous ocean 1—how many bitter moments hast thou cost me I how many bitter tears have I shed by thy cruelty ! Perhaps this wave that dares to intrude So no near me—was the very one, that bore Euzy from my fight for ever ! —“ Oh my Gx)d—my God 1” and I clafped my
hands in anguish, “ behold my wretchednefs—behold my agony li*—shrill I never again fee him ? shall I never mole lodk on that beloved objedl ?
—Ah, never, never—it is impostible I”—iHere I paufed for a few moments.—I cried—I fobbed— bathed my bofom with my tears. “ Ah,” added I, “ he is dead I—Luzy, Luzy, it was 1 that killed thee—it was by my infidelity you were lost I” The weaknefs of my fpirits, my dear Maria, conjured a phantom to my raifed imagination.—I thought I beheld him covered with wounds—and flitting on the bofom of the deep.—Again I faw him struggling with the waves, and endeavouring to gain the shore—then, as overpowered, he funk beneath themr—and was fwallowed in the tremen-dous gulph. My mifery now cannot be defcribed I fell upon my knees—I called him by the most tender epithets—the name of Luzy was echoed by the rocks—the woods—the lonely beach—^all feem-to fed my forrows—-and to invoke the lifelefs author of them to return. As I still kneeled, ab-forbed in expedation of feeing him again~I was fuddenly brought to my fenfes, by perceiving'my-felf raifed from my knees—and by hearing a voice, in the gentlest accents entreating me to be compo-fed.—1 turned about to behold the perfon who accosted me, and faw a venerable old man, whole
beard was white as fnow, endeavouring toSupport me.
“ Ah A
228
THE HERMIT
€C
Ah,*^ exclaimed I, who are you ? What do you do here ?—Begone—and leave me to my wretchednefs.”
** Madam,” anfwered the benevolent stranger and his voice faultered, I befeech thee, for the love of God, to call patience to thy aid-—and not to abandon thyfelf thus to defpair !”
His manner, and the tone in which he fpoke, interested me, and in Some meafure restored me to reafon.—I apologized for my riidenefs—and added, that the grief in which I was immerfcd, was of fo poignant and extraordinary a nature, that it ■ was impossible for any thing in this life to afford me confolation. I thanked him for the trouble he had given himfelf—and was about to take my leave when he prevented me with this reply.
“ If it be not too prefumptuous, - Madam, may I entreat you to unravel to me the caufe of fo fixed a forrow ?—This is the fourth time about this hour I have heard your accents of woe—and have been, until to night, cautious of breaking in upon your retirement. Tonight, however, your defpair appeared more violent than ever, and I could no longer command my fell from offering you my counfel and assistance—they are both, thou daughter of asslidllon, devoted to you.—If it can be in my power to relieve the least of thofe pangs which I have feen you endure—I shall praife that Being who endues me with the means-—and be but too happy, cost me what it may, in the accom« plishment of it.”
The earnest manner of the Hermit (for fuch he appeared to be) the ssncerity which feemed to hang on all he uttered—together with the reverence of his form, induced me to grant his request.
I told him that if the story of a miferable orphan could in any meafnre interest him, I would the next evening relate it to hina.
Orphan !”
OF THE ROC K.
229
** Orphan 1” repeated he—and he turned aSide to conceal his tears. -
1 thanked him for the part be Seemed to take in my misfortunes, and astured him, I would not fail to be at the rock the next night at the fame hour.
1 then bade him adieu, and returned to the castle.
It is now almost time for me to Set off in order to be true to my appointment—I shall take Nan-nette with me—though the appearance of the man forbids me to fear a deceit. You will, no doubt, blame me for this incautious behaviour—you may call it madneSs—or folly.—-Alas, my dear friend, I have nothing to fay in justification of it!—Yet the figure-—the voice—the tears of this good man Seem to encourage me to unbofom myfelf to him not that my doing fo can avail, or restore tome my peace—There is, however, a degree of comfort in complaining to a pitying ear—^^to a fympa-thixing heart.—If you do not know this—you have never felt an extremity of grief.
9
*	/	*	*	*	*		*	
*	*	*	*				*	
AH, my dear friend ! I can hardly hold the pen to tell thee—^^I will lay it down ’till I can give the particulars—my foul is in a tumult—my fen-fes are hardly fettled.	''

m #

#
# # # # # #
I WENT
23:0
THE H E R MIT
I WENT last night with Nannette to the rock we waited fome moments before we heard or Saw any mortal—at length we perceived the Hermit defcend from a cavity in the rock which time had w'orn.—We arofe to receive him—he approached—bowed—and taking my hand, he aflc-ed if I would honour his humble habitation with my prefence ?—I confented—but could not help obfervins; that the hermit’s hand trembled as he led me.—We climbed up by eafy steps, which nature’s chifel had worked irrto the rock from which we had feen him defcend—and entered into a fort of apartment which ! never could have formed an idea of, unlefsl had beheld it.—The roof is arched and high—and the fretted work- with .which it is covered, appears at iOnce to strengthen and adorn it.—On the ,groiund> were a few planks laid rudely down—rand in .one part of the room, ja fmall table .was fet, with two lights on it, and (ornc refrestimcnts—Such as cakes, fruit, lemonade, dec. Every thing .looked neat in fpite of the Singularity of the manSion; and after we were Seated, . the Hermit with stmplicity (and at the Same time a grace he could not divest himfelf of) did the honours of his table.- I then entered upon my melancholy relation, and told it most faithfully indeed—every pang I had fuffer.ed Seemed to recur with added poignancy to my remembrance, and in painting what I had endured, I astedled rhe Hermit beyond meafure—he
he wept—he even fobbed aloud.-—When I came to the concluSion, I clafped my hands with
and turning to the Hermit I exclaimed, father 1 Have pot my Sorrows been bitter Have not my youthful days—been days of Oh, my Luzy !-—God knows rny heart how I have loved thee—how my whole foul has dwdt upon.thee, eveawhen my hand was rudely
torn
fighed
fervor,
“ Ah,
ones ? woe ?
OF ITHE ROCK.
231
torn from thine !—It was hy my infidelity he died t He became a viftim to thofe vows which in the awful face of Heaven I made and broke S'
Here I wrung my bands in the agony of affliSU-on, and called wildly on the name of Luzy.—> Guefs my astonishment, my dear Maria, when I beheld the Hermit catch me in his arms, and felt him prefs me with the liveliest tranfport to his bo-foin.—I shrieked, and fo did Nannette.—He freed me from his embrace—and before I could open my lips to upbraid him—he had thrown off his Hermit’s drefs—and appeared—Luzy himfelf !—He fell at my feet.
“ Now,” cried he, “ will you throw me off And clafped me as he kneeled.—As Soon as 1 perceived it was really him, I funk into his arms we wept over ‘e^ch other’s bofom—he kissed off the tears that fell in large drops down my cheeks —he held me with rapture to his heart—he called on God to witnefs the accomplishment of his felicity.— I heard no more—-the too rapid—and too exquiSite emotions which by turns poffessed me, were too much for a frame fo ^weak as mine to fupport—I fainted—when I recovered, my amazement encreafed still farther, by the appearance of the Marquis de Palmene, who was chaffing my temples with lavender, and whofe tears flowed upon my hands which Luzy held locked in his.
I can deferibe no farther.—Suffice it to fay, that the objedt whom I loved next my God—whom my duty had induced me to reSign—whom fate I thought had torn from my longing eyes for ever, is at last restored—and all my past misfortunes are forgotten.

iff-
*
iff

*

NOW,
232
THE H E R M I T
NOW
a
, my Savlllon, participate in my felicity. ■Endoled, I fend you an account of what has befallen my Luzy Since we last met at Madame de Sancerre’s Chateau, and written by himfelst He would not talk on the fubjefl the night of his dif-covery—but promifed to write the whole story the next day—he did fo—I received it early in th morning—and you will have it just as I read it— . you must recolleO: the hand—Ihew it to Madanie de Villencuf—to our Lindor—you will kifs the ■ charming manufcript—you will weep over it— i then judge of my emotrons—^my raptures—my too exquiSite happinefs I
Adieu, my Maria—difpatch to Sanfeerre an account of thefc joyful tidings, and enclofe her Luzy’s packet when you have perufed it.— would write to her myfelf—but I am now as unfit for a correfpondent through excefs of happinefs, as . I once was from a contrary caule.—In all Situations be affured, I hold thee dearer to my heart, than the pen of mortal can deferibe.
Victoria D e L a u s a n ni.
rht
OF THE ROCK.
233
^he Comte De
De
L u z Y, to the Mafchionefs
n A U S A N N E,
now given me a difgust but one
WHEN I quitted your prefence, charming
Vidloria, at Madame de Sanfcerre’s, instead of embarking for Martinico as I told you, I accompanied, in difguife, my friend De Palmene to Italy.—I refolved to leave the world, as every thing in it had fair object whom 1 conSidered as lost to me for ever. Palmene could not perfuade me from the refolution I had taken.—-He determined to accompany me to whatever retreat my fancy led me to make choice of—and we foon after embarked for -Sardinia, first giving out, that I was on board a ship then under weigh for Martinico from the port of Bourdeaux.
When we arrived in this istand, Palmene brought me to a folitary part of it, where he had an antiquated, castle, inhabited only by an old attendant. Here I refided fonrie ihonths.—At length I difeo-wered that rock, where I was So bleffed as to behold you. I viSited it often, thinking it a place best calculated to indulge and cherish melancholy. I Soon after took up my habitation in it, and at the fame time alSumed the drefs of an anchorite.
Palmene often went privately to Paris in order to bring me an account of you. He there heard that the Marquis, your hushand, treated you cruelly—and complained to many of your behaviour and hatred towards him, afiigning that as
a prin-

THE HERMIT
a principal caufe for his abfenting himSelf from you', and his attachment to other women.
-	Unhappy at thefe constant reports, I agreed to accompany my friend in difguife the next time he went to France ; and learning that you were gone to fpend ibme ^veeks at Trois Riviere, we determined to follow you thither, and conceal our-felves in the neighbourhood of that enchanting place. There I had an opportunity of beholding you often when you wandered with your friend Madame de Sanfeerre in the parks and v/oods unattended. One night I had very nearly dif-covered myfelf to you as 1 was endeavouring to make my efcape without being obferved
—	the noife, however, which I made in attempting it, fo alarmed you both, as to occast-on your quitting the wood immediately.—I want words to deferibe to you the emotion which too^ poffeffion of my bofom on feeing you approach, and in being fo frequently near you—my heart was ever ready to betray me on fuch occaSions, and it was with difficulty I could prevent myfelf frpnji falling at your feet.
Another night I followed you, accompanied by Palmene, to Madame de Sanfeerre’s ; and during the courfe of the evening, as we were near the castle, we heard that you had quitted it to return to Trois Riviere. We diredlly mounted our hor-fes, and taking our two faithful domestics with us, purfued your carriage with as much fwiftnefs as poffible. We found you in a Situation that in-deed required our attention. A man Had forced you into his chaife—your shrieks and cries which we heard ct a distance, gave additional fpeed to our courfers. We were happy enough to refeue you from the barbarous violence of the Duke de Maurice ; and whilst we were engaged in recalling you to life, he made his efcape in the confuSion.
Ah,
OF THE ROCK.
23s
Ah, my God ! what were my agitations when I beheld you in my arms, breathlefs, and to all appearance on the very verge of the grave !—I,wept over your almost lifelefs form—I dared to imprint a thoufand kilTes on your lips—I implored you in the agony of my foul to revive—and 1 whifpered in your ear that it was Luxy who called you to life. I should certainly have made myfelf known, but that I feared the malice of your enemies would have styled that meeting an intentional one on your part—and I would rather have died, than have Suffered your Spotlefs fame to have been fo cruelly flandered ; therefore, when I beheld the furgeon approach, I muffled myfelf up, and after he had given you all the affistancein his power, I attended you with Palmene to Trois Riviere. Nannette was So engrossed by her grief that she icarcely looked at us.—“We were in a great meafure rejoiced at that circumstance, and took a hasty leave, af-Suring her, at the fame time, we would call again to know how you did. We again concealed our-felves in the neighbourhood, and we Soon after learned that you were perfe^ly recovered.
One day I beheld you weeping in a lonely grove, where with many tears andstghsyou called upon my name.—Madame de Sanfcerre, in a short time, joined you—‘and chid you for encouraging your ideas to dwell upon a man whom it was your.duty to think no more of.—Never shall I forget - the Silent woe with which you listened toiler ledlure !
(You wrung your lovely hands—you clafped them with a wildnefs of Sorrow which pierced my foul—you afterwards embraced her,, and entreated her not to defpife you. As for my part, I Could hardly refrain from shewing myfelf, and catching you in my arms.—Palmene, however, withheld my transports—and kept me within the bounds of moderation.
We
2t6
THE HERMIT
'A

We shortly after quitted France, and returned to Sardinia—I, with unfeigned grief, perceived that your faithful bofom nourished my idea—and I fuppofed that that circumstance prevented your behaving towards the Marquis with that degree of affedtion, which would perhaps have converted him to virtue and to you.
I therefore gave out, through the means of Palmene’s faithful attendant, that I had been lost in that very ship which had failed for Martinico about the time that I faw you at Madame Dc Sanfeerre’s—and he contrived to relate the story to Solignac himfelf, who had never feen him in the Marquis’s fervice, and who did not know him any further than as a coffee houfe frequenter, where he had industriousty fpread this report a-bout a quarter of an hour before he faw Solignac enter the hotel. The vessel I have already mentioned had aflually foundered at fea,. and-as my friend the Comte knew it was in that ship which I intended to embark, he gave me up as gone for ever. I imagined this news would at first* caufe you fome pangs, but that when they fubSided,
’ you would place your affe£fions on a worthier objedi, and make your hushand happy. In the mean while I abandoned myfelf to grief and dcfpair '—no remonstrances could induce me to re-viSit
i
any place again where I might chance to behold you. The torments I fuffered in feeing you at Trois Riviere, without ever daring to make you fenfible of my affli6tions, cost me fo dearly, that ' I could not form a wishsto repeat them—and un-iefs I could look on you as mine, I deSired never to behold you more.—The refledlion of your being in the poffeffion of a happier man, was fuffici-'cntly cruel in itfelf, and I needed not the farther mifery of becoming a fpeflator of his felicity—of '	frequently
OF THE ROCK.

237
frequently feeing .the iRestimable prize he gained, when I lost my Vidtoria—the comparifon between us was not to be borne !
I fpent my time from that period in the roeb my food was the Simplest in the world—my ufual drefs was just what you there beheld me in and my bed was many nights the bare earth. My friend Palmene participated in all my affli6;ions in all my austerities—and we lived like rnendif-gusted with the worlds and willing to fiide fhem-felves from the haunts of mortals.
The Castle au Bois we knew was not many' miles from our retreat—but no one inhabited it, excepting a poor family, whom in our journey hither we were fo happy as to have it in our power to relieve—and who could never have known us again, had they chanced to fee us in our new metamorphosts.
When I first heard your voice, lamenting my untimely fate—I -was buried in meditation within my cell.—I started.—:Palmene, who was with me, was as much amazed as myfdS.—We drew near the cavity in the rock, and listened to your heart-rending accents. We were undetermined whether to appear or not-—but my emotions were fo violent at that time—my ecstacies fo great, that I should ineyitJtbly have difeovered myfelf immediately.—You, however, staid only a short while—and we followed you, unperceived, lest any accident might have befallen you on the way.'
The Second-time I almost refolved to fpeak to you—but my doubts of your hushand’s death deterred me from st—and I was determined, were he living, not to niake myfelf known, hoping that time would wear pff the keen edge of your affliction, and infpire you,with an afSedion for Lau-fanne.
The
23^
THE HERMIT
The third vifit you paid the rock, produced ng other confequences than the two preceding ones had done—but the fourth time I could not command myfelf—your forrows Seemed to encreafe the poignancy of them was exquifite—I adopted the only method I could think of, to learn your prefent Situation, in beginning to hear your story —and no words—no pen can do justice to the felicity of my foul, when I learned that the bar was removed which alone obstructed the completion of our happinefs.
m
^ w
* *
# # # #

## #
# m #
Thus, my dearest Victoria, have I briefly ran over the events you deSired to be informed of I have neither expatiated upon my past forrows —or on my prefent blifs—they are much beyond the power of language to txpreis—-they exceeded the most poignant distrefs—they exceed the most cxquisste pleafures.
Oh, my Victoria!—Life of my foul 1-—what happy proSpeCts are now before us I—What hours of blifs await our fidelity !—Do not delay its re-reward.—Suffer your Luz.y to call you his—he has long been the most ardent of lovers^—allow
him to become the most tender of hulbands.
Palniene
V
OF THE ROCK.
239
Palmene and I mean to prefent ourfelves at your feet in a few hours; we will beg leave to invite ourfelves to dine with you.—I have iat up all night—extremity of joy is an enemy to steep—I ■will throw mylelf on my bed, though well convinced that the delightful fenlations I experience must prevent the clofure of thefe eyes which uled to pals most hours in weeping.
Permit me, thou best beloved of mortals, to
fubfcribe mylelf thy
J
Most faithful,	'
thy happy
L u z Y.

Madame De Sanscerre,. to Madame
De Lausanne.
I AM coming, my Victoria, to be a wltneSs of thy felicity.—I shall be at the Castle au Bois in a few days.—I should have been there long before, but that yourprohibition to the contrary was So determined—was So feverely pronounced.— You, who would not Suffer me to be a partaker of your fadnefs, will not, I find, deny me a share of your happinefs.—Generous Marchionefs!
I could almost quarrel with you for being Superior to most of your Sex.
Solignac’s
\
1240
THE HERMIT
Solignac’s erautions are not to be defined—his joy exceeded all bounds, when he was informed that Luzy still lived.—But, alas! how fenfibly did he feelthe want of confidence in him that Luzy testified, by not onbofoming his intentions to a man who was his friend from his infancy !—They were brought up together—they feemed to have but one foul.—He is chagrined — he is penSive—he mutters to himfelf.’’
“ Ah I” cried he the other morning, forgetting I was prefent, “ it was not friendly—it was not kind!-—what grief did he occaSion me!—hovr could I have merited this from him ?”
Solignac, however, intends to accompany me to Sardinia.—We shall fet out in a day or two.
I write from Belvoir castle.—Madame de Savil-Idn prefeBted her hushand with a lovely boy the night before last—she writ to you just before her illtlefs*. She now tells you that she is well, and 'embraces you cordially.-—Madame de Villeneuf, her mother, and the amiable Lindor, falute y^>u with the liveliest affe<5lion. Believe me to be
Ever yours
Julia De Sanscerre,
* This letter does not appear.


OF THE ROCK.
24t
I
Lhe Comte De Solignac, /o the
Comte De Luzy.
WERE I to appear before you, my lord—I
am hurt at the idea of-doing So !—You have thought me for Some time unworthy of your fTiendlhip-—that circumstance renders me odious in my own opinion.—Yet, let me do justice to my Sentiments:—stiould I offer you my hand—• you may venture to take it—it. belongs to a man of honour.—Never have 1 strayed Irom the principles of virtue which first united our Souls—-never have 1, even in thought, betrayed your confidence, or adled unworthily of the Comte De Lu-zy’s friend.—You best know the motive which induced you to withdraw from me your regard you, who I never imagined poffefSed the least tincture of caprice, have, I make no doubt, good reafons for what you have done.—-It is that notion
which disturbs me—-which renders me very un-
•/
willing to behold you.-—Yet be affured, if I ever have offended against our friendship, it was done involuntarily, and without the confent of Solignac.
I attend Madame De Sanfeerre in her excur-
I Shall at Some distance from
The Coiir-
and will
Sion to iSardinia.
the Castle au Boi-s await your reply, ier whom I difpatch with this is faithful hot discover the Spot where 1 shall reSide, until I judge whether it is proper for me to fee you or not.—I v/ill own that it depends on the reaSons you give me, for having So cruelly abuSed my affeCfion.—If they are fatisfadtory, I shall proceed
VoL. III.	L	with
242
THE HERMIT
I dial
t
with impatience to embrace you-—if not return to France, and shun every place where Euz}’’ can have an opportunity of meeting
The Injured,
S O L I G N A C.
M
0m
am
The C O M T E D E L U Z Y,
To ihe C-o MTE De SoLIGNAC.
my dear Solignac, never could I bear the stings of my own heart—the biiternels of your reproaches, had I injured you as you fufpect. —^My friendship for you is unimpaired—and the strongest proof I could have given of it, was that which has drawn on me your difpleafure.
You may remember that on quitting Clarence, after 1 had received my father’s fummons to attend him in Italy, I fwore that if any thing should happen to interrupt ray union with the mistrefs of my fond foul, I would bury rnyfelf in fome obfcurc retreat, and hide me for ever from the world. At first you laughed at my romantic refoliition— but finding me fixed in it—you, in as folemn a manner, fwore to be the companion of my con-, finement;—nay, you even vowed that though you should have enlisted under the banners of Cupid, you would leave the objefit of your love,, and dedicate your future hours to friendship only,
As
O T
T H E
R O C K..
243
we beheld the
As we travelled into Italy,
I	J J
charming Madame de Sanfcerre.; who had, attire •tender age of eighteen,, buried a .cruel huiband, after having experienced the most barbarous treatment from him. She was in her weeds
You
ad-
and appeared exquiSitely beautiful, mired her extremely—and fhortly owned that you loved her paflionately.—Your fricndfhip, however, still conquered your wiih of attaching your-felf to this amiable woman, and in fpite of all ! could urge to the contrary, you acco.mpanied me 4o Italy.
I will pafs over my misfortunes after that period, a>nd hasten to my return to France after the Marchionefs De Laufanne’s marriage.
1 met vou at Pa'lmene’s—told voir that i was
•/	•i
determined to -be abfent fome time from Italy and had alforefolved never again to fet ray foot in France. You instantly reminded me of your promife to go with me to whatever defart fpot my fancy pointed out—^and inSisted upon performing it. In order to prevent fo generous an intention., which vvould have been fatal to your own felicity, and that of the lovely Madame De Sanfcerre, I ast'ured you I had altered my fcheme—and declared 1 'should accept of an invitation given me by the Marquis De Louvoi, then general of Mar-tinico, to go over to him, and fpend fome'little while in a part of the w’orld which many think worth feeing, until time could have meliorated, in fome mealure, the keenefs of that afHiSlioii which was, at this period, fo poignant and dif-trefsful to me. Falmene, who had foriwornfrom a former difappointment, the tendernelsof unions with any of the fex, deSired, tlirough a froHck, as he termed it, before you, to accompany me to the West Indies.—agreed to his going with me to Bourdeaux—but not a step furtheT.—He
La	appeared
o
«c.
44
THE H E R M I T
appeared to acquiefce in this determination, but protested he would live in Italy ever after, unlefs I conquered my difgust to P'rance, and contented to return to it, in which cale he would (ee it again with plealure.
You tried to perfuade me to fuffer you to become my companion in my voyage to Martinico— but I dissuaded you from that propofal, as I plainly forefaw it would have been death to your repole as a lover, as alfo to that of Madame Dc Sanfcerre, who indeed, at that time, imagined Ihe faw you only as an amiable and accomplistied friend. I, however, knew better her fentiments ol you—for from the first moment of your meet-ing, I perceived that Cupid had not done his work by halves. I objciSted to your going with me to Bourdeaux, under a pretence of its only tending to protradl -the diStrefs of parting—but,. in reality, lest you should find out that my intention was not to go at all. Palmene, who had nothing to engage him in the world, and who loved me well enough toleave it with me (particularly as I chofe Italy for my place of refidence) obtained my consent to bear apart of my fufferings.
As to the uneafinefs the report of my death could have given you—I did not hope that you would have regretted it—but as you knew what it was to love with ardour, you must have thought death deSirable after fuch a difappointment as mine.
Thefe are the only reafons I have to alledge in my defence.—If I have adted wrong, impute it to an error in judgment, but do my friendship justice.
I conjure you, my dear Solignac, to let me fee you immediately.—If you still regard me, I daim this request as a token of it.—If you do not
■you
OF THE ROCK.
24^
you will gladly lay hold of any excufe to deprive
me of one of the greatest pleaiures of ray file.
Adieu I will no longer detain your courier,
and be convinced that it he is fuperior to betrav—
ing his lord your friend is far above an idea of
fampering with his fidelity. Suffer rae to eni-
biace jou toon, my dear Sohgnac, and think me always

V our faithful

/ ■
V .
st r,
D E L u z y.


Madame Di: Sanscerre, /»
De Savillon.
Madame
Nothing can equal our happinefs at the
Castle au Rois, my dear Maria—all our
Castle au nois, my past misfortunes are buried in oblivion.
Luzy—the enchanting Luzy is more charming than ever I -The lively—infenstble Palmene more
agreeable if poffible—and our Vidoria’s beauty
receives additional lustre from the ecstatick pleasures which have at length crowned her duty and
. Li I < i-	d
myv
Solignac received a letter of explanation'from his friend the Comte De Luzy, which restored to him his peace, and they met like long feparated friends, wliom time and abfence had "rather endeared than alienated from each other. They
L 3	have

246
THE HERMIT
\
have made an exchange of two noble feats in their poSTc-flion.. — Luzy ressgns one of his in Italy, which is ealled after Petrarch’s famed Vaueleufe, for'Clarence, which Solignac purchafed from.the Marquis De Laufanne with an intent of fecuring, it for the Marchionsfs in cafe of her hufband’s death, and which he inlisted upon doing very strenuousty by putting her at prefent in pofTtstioir ©f it—but neither She or Luzy would hear of it, uniefs he w.ould accept of an adequate return. Victoria’s eyes thank her adoring Luzy for this proof of tendernefs—he would esteem himfelf far over-paid for a much greater exertion of his power to oblige her, by only one of thofe fmiles with which she favours him.—He fecms to live but in the hope of making her happy.—-The most trivial'instances he eonfiders as matters of confe*-quence, delights in gratifying her in all his little preferences—in all her half-formed wishes.—Oh,. Such a man, my dear Maria, does not often appear ! And Surely heaven has formed for him the only woman in. the world, who could flatter her-Self with poffesting, unrivalled, fuch a heart.
Poor Solignac! methinks the air of Sardinia diaes hot agree with him—^he is not fo handfome— rror fo graceful as he w'as in Paris.—He is too lively at times—at others too dull!—He met me in the wood yesterday walking with Luzy.—He exclaimed against a converfation fo private, and Swore the Comte was become a downright monopolizer.—The charming creature laughed at his Sears of him, and appeared to rally.—He, however, without feeming to intend it, foon flipped away, and left Solignac to entertain me alone. When he was gone, Solignac kissed my hand,, and faid feme gallant thing or other about my looks.
Pshal”
247 and turn-

OF THE ROCK.
Psha !” cried I, , rather peevifhly ed aSide.
“ What is the matter, my amiable Julia ?” returned he, “ Are you not well ?—Or have I been fo unfortunate as to offend ?”
I anfwcred.-not—he proceeded.
“ Tell me, my beloved raissrefs—fuffer me to penetrate into thofe ideas which feern lo greatly disturbed—no common circumstance could have thus rustled your tranquility.”
Stupid 1” replied I.
“ Hal” exclaimed he.—I befeech your pardon, madam.-i—>Wheu you- are at leifure to hear me with-patience—-\yhen you are difpofed to away with my stupidity-i—-for the fake,-at least, of the ardour with which I contemplate your fu-periority—you will find, me ready to obey—and happy to attend your fummons.
He made me a pretty half stately graceful bow •—and walked off without being recalled.-
“ No w, Sanfeerre,” cried I to myfelf,.when Solignac was out of fight, thou -art,/indeed,-a strange, inconfistent, ridiculous mortal!— Here is a man—a very good fort of a man—-whom you loved the other day to a degree of enthuSiafm ' whom you have promifed to marry—and whofe fidelity you have made a cruel trial oh—Here now, I fay, becaufe he is not quite fo handfome as Luzv—becaufe he does not con^raand fo much
le
ady
«/
wit
nor fo elesjanr a stow of language
nor offer a nofegay with fo much grace—nor prefs a lady’s fingers with fo gentle, nor fo tender an air—-and fo becaufe he is not fo very perfect—you treat him ill-—you view him with diidain oblige him to quit your prefence.
I paufed'—I believe 1 bluSi.d—in truth I was astiamed of my behaviour, a-nd was determined
to

you
L 4

THE HERMIT
to advance tov/ards the castle in order to make peace with my forlorn fwain.—But will you believe that I found the gentleman in the dumps, after making a long complaint of me to Vidioria, who affumed upon my approach all the grave airs of a matron.—When I entered the faloon, where they were fitting in judgment on me, I was received by the Comte with all the distant refpe£t due to an entire stranger—and by the Marchio-nefs—as a giddy indiicreet creature, who was a-bout to trifle away her happinefs.—An air of pity and refentmenr, were by turns put on as I drew near her—she, however, uttered not a Syllable and I affe6ling not to obfervc the change which was vifible in both, drew a chair near Victoria, and fat down.
** A charming morning,” cried I, for walk-ing !•—1 have been rambling about the woods thefe two hours.”
Not a word from either.
** Have you amufed yourfelf in the fame way, niy dear faid I to my pretty prudent friend.
No, madam.”
"fC Whv, then, it is a thoufand pities!—Pur-sh'eams—shady groves—and fuch a lover as are certainly irrefistible objeCls — and be constant accompanyments to each Other.”', ",-	■
“ I arn^^eyeE^/j^y,” replied she, “ to fee Lu-2,y, whether1t;^e 'within or without the castle.—■ I confeis 1 astS hot romantic enough ho enjoy his conversation only when the Scene is rural—nor coquette Sufficient to treat him with difdain at any time, or in any pla^t
** You are a goc^girl,” anfwered I, and I am happy that yblj have profited of the many Icffon? I have given you on that fubjedt.”
She
OF THE R G G K.
M9
^ n
*w Ji 4
She endeavoured to restrain a laugh — the Comte dared to fmile contemptuouSiy.
But,” cried I, “ I declare I am a ihought-lefs being—you and your friend stem to have had a ferious	Perhaps I disturbed
you j—Nothing could be further fioin my U‘i tion.”
I arost—Vitoria held my hand.
“ 1 believe, Sanfcerre, you are a litlle jealous of my engrosting SoUgnac’s converfation,
I burst into an affedfed laugh of tiiumph.
“ Who, I jealous?—Oh, heaven!-and of the Comte too 1—Indeed, my dear, you are extremely pleafant this morning ! ~But I protest to you I am as much compoled as if I had met you flirting with my brother—Adieu.—Pardon me— but 1 cannot help Imiling at the conceit.
Vidoria would not let me leave them—stie told me, that I had been the fubjed of their conversation, and she was concerned to hear that 1 had-unkindly driven her friend from my prefence.
To cut the story short—I will tell you that Solig-nac apologi2.ed for daring to refent a little harmlest coquetry of mine—and I was brought to acknowledge myfelf wrong in having exercifed it. In fine, Luxy foon after appeared—and partly by perfuaston, and partly by grave ledures,. they made me promife, that on the day which gives^ Vidoria the title of Eu2/y, I am to astume that of Solignac. The creature has been arrogant upon it, 1 affure you, ever Since—and it is with difficulty that I keep him in any tolerabst degree oS
oi-(jer_I endeavoured, indeed, to humble him
Sometimes by a fly fort of flirtation with the elegant Palmene—but the- man is- inlenlibte to fuc-h. malice—and stems to fet it at defiance.—^I do not know but he has hit upon the only method of curing me of fuch folly.
250
THE
HERMIT
, Palmene, v/ho applied to the Marquis De Laui-anne in behalS of the good old people who re-Hided in this Castle, and who are now, by our Vi£loria,^’s bounty, very comfortably fettled in a-habitation of their own, has made a match between their youngest daughter and a Servant of his, one of the most worthy fellows in the uni-verfe.—the young folks like each other—and their Avedding has been* Solemnized with, the greatest festivity. They are to be fixed on one of the Marquis’^S estates, which is at no great distance, from the old couple’s dwelling.
We are Soon to be in Paris—we shall first, however, pay our reSpedis at Belvoir Castle.—Adieu^j, my dear Savillon,
Yours-most truly.
LiA. De Sansgerrk'.
MAante Db Savi-llon,.. to Madame Di
0
L A u S AJN N Ev
T TAKE up the pen to upbraid'you; my Vldld-X ria, with staying So long- in Sardinia, when) your friends in France are dying with impatience-
I have a little stranger to prefent
your reiurn
OF THE rock:.
2<
a I
he coniented togiv

to you on your arrival at Belvoir ; who, though he has not yet acquired all the gallantry of his father, will not, 1 am fure, be infenSible to your careiSes.
• The Duke De Maurice is married A young and artlefs country girl enssaved him ; and as she happened to prove virtuous-Iier the honours attending on Madarrse La Da* cheste.'—-He has reformed the most vicious of* lives.—He is very feldom in Paris—and gives up even the pleafures of ambition, to facrifrce to inestic felicity. Madame La BerPs -fate it is laid Ihocked him—the poor creature died of a putrid fi ver, in the delirium of v/hich tlte Duke faw hcL-She was. a striking'.inst'ance of vice breathing its-last in deipair. , She often called upon the narne oS Laufanne—fometimes in execration of it—at others
. f
in imploring pardon.—She died more fensthle of the horrors of eternity,, than of thofe^ offences* which occastoned that horror.-—She often started,, . and adced the perlons aro>und sher, ‘whether they-believed there was a Go'd indeed ^—At other times she exelaimed',; “ Aly life-—ah, how short doth it appear !—And yet, alas! I could not, during thefe few years, make one preparation for th life that must last for ever !” She expired in agonies—which the agitations of her mind contribut- • cd to render infupportable. A pious priest, who * was called in, frequently endeavoured to makeher * as fenSible of the mercies of the- God-whom she. feared, as oS his justice—but she v/ouid never lif-ten to his Toothing converfation. She told him., , Not all his rhetoric could perfuade'her that any mer- -cy for her could be found- ia a brieajh that was pur Uyi -itfelf When she was almost dying,,, he badesh.er . call upon God.—Ah,” cried she, 1 am redu~ c.ed to hope that, there is.no Gad.At ail 1”


2<t
THE HERMIT
Thus it is, my dear ViQoria, with all libertine ■They laugh at religion, which would put a restraint upon licentiousnefs—but w’hen that aweful moment' comes, which is to convey them they know not whither—ah, what doubts—what pangs —wliat horrors !—Though it stiould be granted that religion is a phantom, would it not be faferto be guided by it ?—It is at least a harmlefs one, and will lead us to no ill.—On the contray—it will fave us from committing actions which, in reafon-able moments, we would blush at having performed — not becaufe they infringe on virtue ■— for virtue can only be staunch where religion lives, but from a certain fear of the world which is natural to thofe who live in it.^—Ah, what con-folation on a dying bed to fay, “ I have hopes—I have been promifed falvation—I have endeavoured to obtain it !—-If there is a god (which it is my interest to believe) 1 am fecure of happinefs—if not, there is comfort in an unpolutedconfcience, which v/as my heaven on earth.—Poor La Bert—we will draw the curtain over her frailties—and only remember what they were, that we may endeavour to avoid them.
Tell Sanfcerre that I am glad she has been at length convinced of her mifcondudl in converting fuch a man as Solignac into a mere dangler.—I rejoice that a time is appointed for making him blef-' fed.—My mother inSists that the celebration of thefe two happy nuptials should be performed at Belvoir Castle. Ah, my dear Victoria, is it pof-stble that our Luzy is again restored—-and that we have fmiiing profpefts once more in view 1
Hasten to us, my beloved friends, and delay not to enter into a state, which I experience to be of all others the Ijappiest. Every thing here is ready to receive you*—every^ one will look forward to
'7
it
OF THE ROCK.
253
your arrival with an impatience which cannot be defcribed,—My Vidloria cannot refute this earneSs: entreaty to
Her,
Maria Dl Savillon
MAafne D E L A u s a N N E, Madam
De Savillon.

No, my dear Maria, I cannot refufe you--!
will no longer plead the mournipg of a widow—I have hitherto done my duty, and will now’ prepare to perform it once more in the character of a wife.
We (hall be at Belvoir Castle foon after the receipt of this.—We anticipate the happinefs that awaits us—we wifh for nothing more. I embrace you, my dear, Madame I^e Villeneuf, and Lin-dor, with tendernefs.—Believe me
Always yours
Victoria De Lausanne
^54
THE. Ti E R M I T
& Comte De Luzy, to this Marquis-
Palmeke..
E lament your abfense,; my dear Palmene.. We curie the unlucky accidents that detain you imParis.—You, however,. inSiii upon* our not waiting, your return to Belvoir before v/e-Solemnize our felicity.—In obedience to that com.-mand we have fixed upon to-mornov/ as the day which is to blefs your Luzy for ever.
Ah Palmene, when I reflect upon alL my past inquietudes—when I compare my prefent charming pr ofpedls with thofe hours of horror and jea-lomy which once So cruelly tormented me—I am in amaze—I can hardly perfuadc myfelf that 1 am, in my perfedt fenfes—and that it is my Victoria— my life—my mistrefs' whom I continually behold. —Good God, is it poflible, that after all my woes—after feeing her the wife of another—after deploring her as lost to my faithful boCom—flie should at length be freed from- that fatal- engagement which had robbed her of peace,, and- pearly of life—and that she Should be now upon the very e;ye. of fulfilling thofe vows which heaven had fo often heard her. make ih.. favour of Luzy !■—Rejoice with me,, my friend, that in returning to the world I have regained the only treafure in it, which could have fatisfied a heart as tender and as constant as mine.
Madame De Villeneuf is a little altered- fince I< faw her last—it cdn,. however, only be from thofe r.avages w;hieh. time is wont to make on an aged: form ; her mind was ever, amiable,, was ever exalted—and in that refpeSt Madame De Villeneuf has fuffered. no decay,. Her daughter my lovely
Maria
O F T H E ROCK.
Maria,, is still as charming as an angel~and her hufband, our accomplished Savillon, never shone more than in the chaiacier of a married man;..
We have had f®me laughable trouble with Ma dame D.e Sanfcerre Since her arrival-at Belvoir.
She affedls to repent of having confented fo readir ly to favour our friend Soliguac—and she pretend's-to declare feriousty,. that she will defer his happi-nefs to another opportunity.-—He shrugs his shoulders— he makes her bow au- difefpoir.—Lexr claim, “ Leave her then,- my friend-—if she can thus trifte with Sincerity like yours S’’ Madame De Sanfcerre immediately levels her wit at me Some shafts penetrate,» others recoil upon the fair archer., Sblignac is now in a high debate with her on the very fubjedl—he pleads her own proi-mife being pasted.—She contends for affing witlr-out restraint.—It is, however,	pour pajfer
le terns—her love for him being,, in truth,, no lefs violent than his is for her.
■ Madame De Savillon and Vidlorla are walking together in the garden—their converfation stems highly interesting—1 have a full view of them' from my window. — What beauty-—what innocence does each countenance difplay !—Oh, my V^icioria, what a shape I what an air!—Pardon my fond pen, Palmene—but 1 cannot behold-her unmoved.—Ah, how fuper-ior is she to all her fex—even to her fair friend—v/ho- is in the ab-fence of Vidtoria, a master-piece of perfedfion !' They draw near—-Vidloria looks up—she fmiles,, Heavens, what raptures dwell upon her lips ! They beckon my approach.—I fly to obey..

»•









■ i




256
T H E HE R M I T
Lhe ComteDe Luzy, (In continuation)
*
This is the day which has crowned me with
felicity, my Palmene.-C-I am all love—all tumult—all tranfport.—Let it be marked as the sera of permament bhfs to thy friend,^—She comes I hear her step—Not another fentence by heaven !
The CqwVS. De SaVILLON, (In continuation.)
I BEG leave to congratulate you, dear Marquis, upon the commencement ' cvf our friend’s per-', manent blifs.--^\ am just returned from church with him and his angelic bride, SoMgnac and his bewitching one.—Our company was large—our countenances very joyful—'Madame de Solignac takes from me the pea

r
Madam
OF THE ROCK.
257
MadamdX^'S. SoLiGNAC, (In continuation.)
\
My good Srlend, would you think it ?—They
have married me at last !—1, who fo long have contended for widowhood and freedom—have been abfolutely entangled by matrimony, without fo much intending to play fo foolish a part !—4 was told of promifes I could not have made in my fenles: I was threatened, if I did not comply, with the defertion of your whole fex :—I was alarmed—.In fine, I have given Solignac my hand—and I heartily wish that he may not repent of this condefcensson.

7*/5(f Comte De Solignac,' (In continuation.)
0
I^TO, mv dear Marquis, I can never repent my possessing fo charming a woman!—I shall always look back on the moment that made her mine, as the one in which my happinefs was fe-cured for ever.
Why are you rtot with us ?—We want only your prefence to complete the festivity of the fcene.—Madame De Luzy appears, and protests that she will add a few lines in this joint letter.—* Adieu—I reSign to her the pen.
Madame
25,^
THE HERMIT
i
4
Madame De Luzy, (In continuation.)
'm-
T is now, Marquis, that my felicity is complete, and I have nothing more lo wish for; Luzy is mine—the indissoluble band of marriage has at length crowned thofe vows which were made long Since by the mbSc constant and tender of heai;ts. Can this life afford, any thing more charming than fuch an union ?—No, my deaf friend, it is impossible;^—-Come, then,, and be a wiinefs to this truth.

Madame'D'E. LuZY, to Madame De. SoLiGNAC,
at Paris.
E hourly regret your abfence, my dear Julia, and think Belvoir is not Belvoir without you.—Our rural fports, are however continued—and we have been prefent at a rustic marriage, which has given new life to the happy people about us. The pretty Sophia was united to Nannette’s brother a week ago.—We danced on the green where the charms of the artlefs bride had fo often shone confpicuous—and in truth there never was a more lovely couple.—Luzy danced a good deal with-her—as did Savillon and the Marquis De, Villars.—She was the queen of the night —and became the honours that were paid her. A circumstance happened that I will not omit to relate, becaufe I know you will have the pleafure of
lausfhing
OF THE ROCK.

19
laughing at me about it.—In fa£l I deferve your ridicule—and will therefore give yoa an opportum-ty of exercistng it.
Among the viSitors who were that day invited, came a beautiful young married woman, who juft arrived from Italy.—her name De St. Clare, MonSieur De St. Clare faw her at Bologna—and after a courifhip of a very few months made her his, and brought her to his eftate near Belvoir. She is tall—^well shaped—has piercing black eyes and a beautiful languor in them which interests in her favour all who behold them.—She- has, however, a fpiee of of coquetry in her difpoSition that her looks do not give you reafon to fuppofe—but which I difcovered very foon>> as you shall judge.
Upon Luzy’s entrance into the Saloon, she feem-ed amazed—she arofe—she eonSidered him wdth attention—she evidently liked his perfon^—'and after fettling her	and adjusting her features, she
by the most refined art drew him towards her to admire a fnuff-box, which she bad produced as a curious piece of workmanship. Upon his approach, she put it in his hands with an air which was perfedlly charming—and began a converfati-on with him, fo pleafant and So witty in itfelf, as engaged him to draw a feat near hers, and keep it up with fpirit. Here, my dear Solignac, I felt an uneafy fenfation.^—He handed her to dinner— he fat himfelf by her fide—he helped her to the most; exquiiite delicacies—he played with her faa<' he ventured to draw out a role from her bouquet,. w'hich he fastened to his coat with an air of- grace-and gallantry, that to you I need not deferibe.—I biustied—my bofom throbbed—a tear had almost; started.—You must not fuppofe,- however, that I was, during this feene, ncgledbed. He fat oppo-fitc to me—his eyes would often meet mine, whera^ they would fpeak unutterable tMngsd^ If I
fpoke*
26o
THE HERMIT
Spoke, he was all attention—when I lang, he feemed to forget every body but Victoria.—Yet I was uneafy.——Madame de St. Clare I regarded as a dangerous rival.—Her rofy lips—her white and even teeth—the beauty of her hand and arm—all which she endeavoured to shew pff on this occ? on to the highest advantage—perplexed and confuf-ed me—I regretted already my fate—and tiiought Tread its unhapplnefs.
In the evening we assembled on a large lawn, and were entertained with lome beautiful fireworks which were played from the adjacent gar-, dens, and which formed a most enchanting fight from the delightful fpot where we fat to view them.— Madame De St. Clare, during this fcene, strove to attract Luxy who was standing near me, and making fome obfervations on the particular naagnifidence of a fun that was then letting off. She held in her hand an apple which she propofeti to throw—and in a wild and lively manner declared, ataianta like, she would run for it with any gentleman who would accept the challenge. All the men but Luzy avowed themfelves ready to engage with her in the race. The Marquis De Vil-lars, approached, and, in particular, entreated that he should a<st the part of Hippomenes on this occafion. She looked at Luzy.—He was polite—^ he gracefully offered his fervicesalfo—she accepted of them, anddifearded the Marquis. The apple was thrown—-they fet off—she outstripped the, winds—-and Luzy, through gallantry, determined that she should conquer.—She had very nearly obtained the victory, when in her eagernefs to fnatch at it—-she unluckily gave a painful turn to her foot, and fell.—Every perfon flew towards her—and I among the number. When we drew near, 1 perceived that Luzy had thrown himfelf by her, and had haff-raifed her from the ground. She, however.
•m >
OF THE ROCK.
a6i
ever, still fat on it, and her head rested on his bofom. Madame De St. Clare either was>—or pretended to be faint—volatiles, drops, &c &C; were administered, and stie was at length able to arife, though not without all the ajjlduity of the Comte.
When the dance on the green commenced, no one could prevail on her to join in it but Luzy.
In short, her behaviour v/as fo particular and ridiculous,'that it occastoned much mirth to every body excepting me.
After her departure, the Comte was rallied on the fubjedf of her partiality. He laughed heartily protested the lady did him too much honour and I heard him, in a whiiper to Lindor declare, that fuch Jlrong love brad never been made him bejore.
Men, my dear Julia, be they ever ib fenfible and amiable, are always vain of a lady’s favour. He confessed that he believed he enjoyed her’s and was one of the very first to ridicule her folly. This made me, in fome meafure eafy— but when we were alone, he expressed to me fuch a thorough difgust of her behaviour, contrasted v.'ith the delicate one (as he was pleafed to call it) of his too happy ViQ:oria’s, as made me feel absolutely ashamed of my unjust fears.—I told him of them, rallying at the fame time my own folly, and placing it in the most laughable point of yiew —he fnatched me to his bofom—he a (iked me, if bits love had been a comrncn one P He assumed me, Lhat fo Jar from being touched.by her cfarmSy he had tbiougbit they were thrown away upon a woman fo indelicatey and fo imprudent in her condudl.
Thus, my Julia, have I related a circumstance which wilSrior faist/IaiH-duTei of drawing on me your mirth—aud’which you must allow, considering my being aware of that, to be an unparalleled piece of her generoSity.
Nannette
^,6i
THE HERMIT
-Nannette refufes to marry a wealthy farmer oS this place, merely becaufe fhe will not part with xne. The Comte, however, inSists upon her making the man happy, promiSing that he will place him in affluence on a little eState which he means to purchafe for them near Clarence ; and that Nannette, in that cafe, will be always near me. She evidently likes the honest man, who ^ with gratitpde accepts of this propofal—and I hope to cornpromife the matter before we leave Belvoir.
I Snail expedl that you will go v/ith us to Clarence.——The whole party here, in one voice, has engaged to accompany us thither in a fortnight.
We fhall call on you in Parls~but not to stay
After paying our refpeQs at Verfailles, we mean to bid adieu for fome time to that feat of noife and .folly, and take up our reSidence in ♦the ever dear and charming fhades of my beloved Clarence. Adieu—embrace our Solignac tenderly Sor us .
long.
/
Victoria De Luzt.
A

O F T HE R O C K.
Madame D e L U z Y , to the Marquis
D E P -A L M E N

E expe^ your arrival at Clarence, dear Alarquis, with impatience. We look forward to it, as an event which will complete the Scenes of happinefs that we are engaged in. Madame De Villeneuf, Madame De Savillon, and Madame De Solignac, protest with me that your ^ company cannot be fpared on this occaSion. You have promifed to give it to us foon—and in return I gave you my word to tell you all that pastes in the mean while.,
When we arrived at Paris, we prepared for our appearance at Verfailles. The drawing-room was a very full one—but hia majesty did not pafs us flightly over.—^He congratulated me on my marriage, and paid me fome compliments, accompanied with that air of gracioufnefs fo peculiar to him, which ,gave them charms that I was not infenSibre to.
Our reception from the queen was very flattering. The Comte De Artois was by when we had the honour of killing her majesty’s hand. On our retiring from the circle, he joined us. He prefented me to Lu-zy, telling him, that he had once loved me——hut that my virtue and attachment to himy had Jo heeled my bofom againfl his perfuajions '—that he had quitted me in defpair.
If, my lord,” added l^e^, “ she was then proof against my love, how much more-invulnerable to it must she be when in the postestion of the man, whofe bare idea at that time, made her
'infenSible to every other individual of the fex !—I
must

64
THE HERMIT
must tell you,” puriued the Comte, with an air of gallantry, “ that in calling this amiable crea> ture yours—■! look upon you as the happiest.man in the univerle.”
You may luppofe our friend received thefe Speeches with no ie!s grace than they were fpoken. —In the vanity of my heart I must declare to you that tste whole court appeared charmed with his air and addrefs.-^The ladies, you know, ever distinguished him—he does not leem to shave lost one atom of their favour.
In fine, we shave bidden adieu to Vcrfailles for
one while,—We fet off with our friends the next.
#
day for Cla’rence, whole woods and rural beauties, are in high perfedtion.
Amidst this fccne of felicity, my good friend, we adore the beneficent author of our prefent joys, and remember, with penitence, thole hours we passed in bitterly complaining of our fate. We are become converts to this truth: that the af-flidlion which heaven fends, should always be borne with refignation—and our hopes of better profpedfs ought never to be given up—for that God who chastifes us, can give us comfort, and nothing is fo pleaSing in his fight as an entire confidence in his mercy.
Adieu.—We await your coming with impatience.	-
Victoria De Lvzih,

FINIS.
U, of Pa, ibnary
i
w

V
•' ■ yA
,-h
' .-vL)?'.'*
>V- -r-ri-: -
• >' A '"
A

>*..
vc-/h- -T :ycNN >N--s;. VC.	...NV- _-•••
■	'• V V.':■'■•■ V'^	t',..	■	';
i .r- '.	C-V'-' ' - -. N i h < . .I . -••	• • •'.	■*-'• L i. i •'.	,'FyF
C: /V'^vC:v::':;Wv:r- -
c i :- -sC i.AF
:: V ••. •■
-	-'V ■'..•=^V-

:'■ 'C'.> ;/i' ■; •:•;
;•	.	-V-


* • .
'■ ■' <7T.,:^A.-Ar'Si^
tF*' '..V .V :	— '
vL-v;-i
■ "df'fV■ XL -‘ Ay d.LF-. '’A:yy'A ; .•'• -
:V- -t
V’-y:;v- ,L
■■ ............ --■■ ''■■ ■
i: :	-v-
V - A. Cte.

t.
A/
r:
\
<
'V‘A.:
ft

c-.'i S'V • v.'*'. C- '
•	^	' . ' * C
' K-- KfM^LiVri


.A- . “'.i' T. . '• \ S "
V--. /
*l*^x	
	
xSS* S.r -S/ * . * ^ • . W-. ,	""Ly:
• V
. . i '
.	■'. . ■'> -■‘•.T.'. • ‘ C. *•	• •' • ; i' :
C\ A .::-::.h-n->.-• •________________________________ ^■■. ■•* -.■ >-
■	s'
■FA
. 5\A

* *4.''' 'd. .4 P.-. . ,	
V.-a:,;: y y. T'yCAyyryy. -A. y.	y'^vs■ ^S: 'y. X
- :v

cv;. .vL


-••\ .	•■■'-/'	C-/V-.C. ^	\-.'	--:^ -•'	C'N/' AC	te- • ' X. rh:-A _ -	,
■-:N' ■ ^ -S:;	, v-•	:f :r:FA -v ^
■vAv . ■	• ■	■	••/	' r- /- ■ •'•'■^'	’.^V a:-..-J5. .'•-• •	...	'- •	..	- . .
• c	^	' .- Sv A „ ■ V .	. ... .; A; _ ;a-. lc .
• 9 F .	*
. ’
--A
- -' ;• i -'■

■•V. ■•■.-•■ V.: •,
C
,	'.J	• -
•*c	.-. • '. *	• ;
^ V .• F
V .

• 1 • «
' ■' -r '•-■ h ••'AN
'■S'' ■'•'■•■'	■,;,	'./y.,'.;.- -■■,	A'.'.' -
.	,	>	■'■f.	’-	.'s ,\ .'.• .
•Cw '-r‘- -'.'	•^7'S‘-.V; • -..•O'-.-:	. .V- :
I .

t if

*
}
• / ^
\ ; .c . :
S- -a; -tyv.. : ;• ,. ^	' y	. A' S" .	/ -cv
yvyy---.A: y S AS'-S-:'A: N- SVv.A; '' L ■’NC --C	.A^ AN C ^	r- SS . ..C.iy i ...SS A;; ./.A
■•-■	^ :,A'AAj -	d... AA^r Vd. :--A S.-K V
•.-•>- A' .	NVr ••:	A---.T-- ...Ll t A . .C • • N ' : vC:'.\ ..
■ ■ - r	'A '''Wf VV-'.-: 'ASAA,....;As‘	v n.;. _ ^ y; -;■--A. A-
A'A''
^ lV ■ y'SA-^A>ASAAc'vAAAN.;C^	K'-VA.	ATs ■■-y; ■■ A	^A■■ ■
N-; Fr-^'/ 'i- -A"
. »' ’.' •« .. ■ '
' . •	•: •:> -r-N:-: .
.. V:.;VyyA Aj:|yy A^As/:'7 ’:.'s: V ■^y^. V ■S.A^VA-AAvA.S;-NyN ^AS---S--:''i.s:
;	-A.Ai^'yA-- lA--
■-N. •,
• - *-1 ..•-

f~-'f	•
r ' K-
;• L	; D-y a-.A-,-‘. .^ :	v
. :. ■ .	■ ■-■ ■ \i .-A-	J, ‘AV : ■'- At A	,y,..
>'■^•.0	A•s■' '• ‘^-	; *AA'-.- .-c. S:-.v

•V
:•• L; LL. ■	' ..-. :L .-
i ■r-

•i •	:	>.
V.
A-

.\
I
V . . •.
\A. v s
•	\* •	* . V*
4>	•, w
'-? -N -	-


- s .•;

.^r 4'- "-.

s ■ -. ' r
t 4 . .y-•■•'.r--c


>- '• c
'.	t-.--
i..

V '..'.‘''.i■■A■'A^AyvcA-AMAFLA VAd.
*	.	■' ■‘■i	•	*	••	; '	.- •■'■	- -V(.	•■“■!•.-.-:•■'ttr*r- •.'	*
^	"" *•■ t 1.	■•V ’ x'-.yv '•/ ' • • v'' '	'. ■'	--L
■'■	- A-'A.-..S;AAt:"'A"'-: ..yy'-'yA y- -.a-

. /
1 •
•■yy
-ycs ■,
V. V’ -i
V-:'A|ySA.A-vS	l
•■•.*-•-- h '	'•cAc-.-.y	- :V	... .L .	'■■d.d'---	'y- V - •••■' -.'•
-i:-■ ■ ■-, ...sn.,-,,' • V •'A'^: y -v	:y o'... y
'LNLT.Alt;/ ■AA r	;■	-v-v' T • .. ' . ■ . i :
C' •


r . .
■i.	■ ■'
\ A

./ - --L
.-X;
•t-
.' •.t> , V** - 'y . ^-L r ' V ’	' A: :'Vi. .’L,
■.*	• -•■ '.-L. ■:• ■ f':-	, , •
:K •/•:'--•>	•' ■•.- • V \	' •• '*■
;-v ■•■ ' -	•■/'O'f •	v.'	••.	. •
.	.	'	.	<	'	iN-': * .*•	*	*'••*.• ‘iw;	'*	A	..	A ^.1	’
' y^-Aan^C'-AA y^y-;.AL--vy-AAS-y,_ .--V .^A.-.;.	'./..A-'	...' •'A^A :S‘x ;
■A:.	Vi KriArf\	,.	V.,.
v..y.; 7^.N.;.D.c: ; A^	^	yy;. , y	y	.'vsjVyCyff" yvys A
s'.	''’A" VSSLVVV-VV't ^AsA/s.^-^AA^Ayy^Ay‘Ay A^
.:a;.V;. ,A.AA:.; A-a.'-'1Ta:AAAAA^^	''A: . ,cAA?ys^;^^^-AsA:.'A,A xy..'
'■	y-vyA ■■yA-.yy-.y;-'Ai;^A:y y-A.	- '	-	■ - -....

'■>. • '
. - -■
..» Ff .■

'• r
•	• ;V
•	r -/-	‘
^ ./a-.a, . •
. -yyv
.OS' >-
' S' ysS-'A.'AAA-V.Ay:.. -:. V N;	- , .
■ L.y y .; ':' yA:,-.vL,L,cys.yyAL :
y-:.'	■■ V SLNOy,i.:S-:y..::;.DS:y:y. ^
- -	--y /;•	A'* ’	. .■
<A
■-■ •>	V - •r* ■'
;.	-I ;	,
S '	‘i ; .• •''S'J:
■iri	-f ’*	.	'•.-?;	,..
VI :■
\ •
.•y s;..,:AyS A"'-Ay;-v-.,;- ‘• •s
-''A -sS ; 'A s-A

^ *

■•'•sv'.y yyAASv •• /:ArA*
; X'lSS - 'AAt	S>yS.,-:tr .. ■' ■■i -SS-. :N-:_ *y '
s:-X' y '■ .:' vy,-.,S'-.'X:	■y^.;-A..; S :- '■ y ' ^'
■ A .'• 'A :C A-.: .*; ■•' vy.'Syv	■vA-ASy v-;7:s.,- S'-Ay,:;,-A'- X-: • v-rvA:. y.-; ■ -
••.. •*. . X^.y yy ■ .	yy'S ■'A' N4 y . ■ ■':.••'-.
S't:
f' ■/-■'-
•* ^ r. y < A,
y Al-* A* s. t'. %
...A	•	',.. c. V '•	- y •••'y'.yvA.-.v'-y. .y •-A.'.s-s•'^--;*•■••••./'•. •:■-■ V - .a:-A»--. .4^.-y„y	-.:.
:i • . V ■ AA' ■	-1.	. - ■	;	■ iL ■ S'. :, -i i y ,'-.L	-'O-A:- .i.S'."S’ A' '--v*-	■" - i' :r A	yy ■' V-
AA AvyA.ysA-s . - - ' S;A: ^aA- ''Ay sy ■■/yAAVA’-AxA: .-a	/ ,,;A s:-;:->.:-i:V:r^..AAyS;cy.S''-S- y;.,:..
.'"V ■.	■* ■V-.v-A.'"'A V. .S"A-'	.l’ ■■• - • a >•-njs-. y. y; .	v--'■.	■<>•. AiA'A.:--lN-'S-•>	;•• •■
> .*’:<*’•	i-' S'	' •	'	. • . .	'•■' r' ’. ■	'1	••* .T . '	Lv' • ••* ■ -jf'-'-	'• • •	, * % X '••-.V	' ' V
S'
-
' A ' •
■ . 1-

S’’S -, A:: -A: yy'S-'-T -^SSsVXAAiAyy y-S'
*A'-	. y.-'A. y'.•-• y-y • f'-'A-' .cAS
-'XlL:,-V ''A ■; ■■ ^'S'-v-X-v
'. ■-	r,, L V--' ,■•.
■■-A- I :• ■ S.
-vx -s;v
•fc
■..v.Lf:
V V • ^ ..
\ .
'. t	'■ ' y»'Asty- vvLA-.y-.: s.y -. •' y.
. . y T ' ' y-.AS^yJ^s'^-4y--v.'-y .-..s'- y
'aav sy-'-y^l^
■•- •..	•' •'• L.
'.y .A.V

‘SyNvv
*.?.*.•
■:A A'"
‘ S L iT-A
V
• • '* 'Ft j “ .	* *'
	f •'
	■, ..-Vy
-yi^; iy .. •• '** ‘’r X-:. ;	> . .*.->• ■- '•■•'<'•' ’h 'Xy ;- ■. ' r
V : -y. • V- ■. :y.yy^ y.-x--.	'A - - ' -L-.C-.S-
AAAy": A	*■ "S'-Ar
, S' ^ "S'
- xV* .V - ‘I.
'	•.•? •	.J.4<
'■ L:. ..	A^v.. . -\'.S	^	:	■	■■ •	L	i.'
ri.'LL':.'‘AyyyS. V ■ L : .CL'S ' .■•	'LL--'LL L;
L '	. rV '
-■^VVJiVVVV ri VA AAV V6A<AAKVV '^
' i-VV ■ -Lv ''i-AL . -•-y
. • A 4 • . • V C , ’ ■ F d'-d *r '	. •.•■/'	' . -. •	•.	' .v'.' .' .'.. ■ • . ...' • .', • ' rdrd	A- '■ i/*- .X' •'-'
' ‘ ' v'--- S' ■ ‘ '.Sy'■'' "A., A '.y *'' ■-■•■ A aS y■ yS'SviS S'-'S y.J *' A 'SS' 'n‘ y ■. A; ■_ -* "x-S'-'x;; V- ■' -fA VVS	M'-y -S
t'j'S'-yi S'.'.A''A'-/■ - r■	'iv'- '.'S.-'X'-s--'s.v y.S'’.'AsN.	■ f AL-'c-A. I.A'-- ---. d	'-y, f-d-' ' ■■.■, y.--A-:...'> “‘.D.A'-'y.
. ^---.y.-^yv y •■•N'S-s'-yy- ■■•‘d.- A-'LVVJAV-V :.‘•-y-:>:yy-"...s,.. S; y.	•' y y^.A.--'A ••.•'.^s •	-
■-.y
VfFVmA-FA-.- . .-'-L-...,,.., ..... ....	.
\ A y \\I :ry ■ ... ■ ■ ■•	'•	-y	.J ’■.f'VAAf'y,,V. '.
A y ■/' ^ .y;S- •	- A'y;..-./::.:/ ; :;.y .	..	.X'A-ii-;-.Ny a; -y a y
- V	i
'v-T'-LL'vy-'-''XyA■y.:-''SC.^ySS :
y-c y,S'":.hA-■ '->y:..y-y ss yAA-:- .^va fy'y y;.. v' AS'A .-yy yy -	N:S y:.yy-b.„-y.,y "
T--. V A.y'-v:v;'-y ■•'-	•
' .- y' y ...; .V-	yVv ' ■ '■■■ ■' ■ •■

*. /* -*<^f**t *X' X
■ y I,. s„; ■ L.,' xiys-v-.:v' '''yLyySLXxy^	.'.yy. "	■ x VFriVr■ ri ihVfK^riyy.JV
-■-■• ■C ' -' r.	.vL-' ■	r	y l AK: '- -	.
:•.--	'y.'L A' -L.v L'LLV;-- x : '' y>‘:^	-'i:-.	vL.,;:l
C‘- y--S:' -'v'-••-y.-S.-i .•.•-'■■S ' • '	. 1 , ‘^'y ••i"- y.V:: ■' .-••■•.• .-
X •
y •. vv •,. « - •'
/--••■.,r
./ ■
SASLA

{
•••-'yV'-y	TV'i.y	•'•-AA .yt:V •..-.• *; .•■••	y*.
V . • .vN-Ay--. ..^;,v^Tt	•. ^••'--A.yV'iv Ar.riVAri
y '‘X: .:SA'■-■.^^;:^7SA-■,A-'hS'y...s.LSyS;C .y'v'C.y- .r A'-	yy-y-	y
■; " ^yAAV :■ .Lysssy - T ‘ llXS-. ^ v/ .?'■


','■■/ O',
'r'A-';-	-
t •
.p > - -
.. .' V
. r' ■ hVKSiA'V-'' ■Viyy; -	■ .y' S-S
-•S—'• ■ S ‘N S-X SA- S- -s.sS-/Sy'.;\.vT\ xaSn'CAAv s	_ ;.. .^
■' V. _	'--SSyS S ■SS‘S,sfyc y/s--.l.. i- , V ^
/'' .	.'. ■'"'■'■'L. "I.	- ... y. ^	''•■*	'.
;/-;V'S.y7,.AA.S'yAXA^vXy. y.x	■
V
. ‘X*; 'I*	' y
s \ -iV]	' • .f .-.y
• 1	
	y ' na
• s
<-r . ■ • .:
i.
SAh'S:' VAVV-A..
-"■ -Ft .. [ X -.X	■ >y "-X- A -■
Sx]-,N..y y-A...-:- - -■■
. > .	• . M
* . '
.'	•x**'
' "S'- A.‘ ,	- :A-yA'-y \'tevy-y
■“s:"^A'^y-'--vSvyy.'x-	-y^-v-
^■^AXSy::■;y.7,x.y-yA■:.,.v.:.; ;
■- ■■	A;'	-
-.•.. -V...-', -.. •••x.'X..	'^r. .y.--,.-V.
.'•X.S .	xyA'-,., ••;yX'vc.XS V'-.--v-y.	•'.■
AA ' ‘sy.'V''-T ''--'S' ••.	■ ■■• ' '	■ '■


- - -i
- * r >C-' “a ^ ^	^
A .
i s»
X* ~'^
V \
cC .
*'•	‘	.S"
• k .	•'	.	'	' '

SO'--V T-
s« '•
X
: - -*L^
V
: s;' •/■ :'' f.v	^^ hcN'iN-rc>:;
lAFFririA^AKtriA^fAM}^^^^	vvi.;	■■ .	.1	^■^riFd.AriA^Ar.
t CCV-,N:v ;-V >: -:, -'v‘;-V-V/A%^/rc;re:r^^	;.	.-■- : . l; V - '. : . ■-.'	/' .-.. ■ ■	■: .;. '.--N-
- -C" L ■■ > ■; ■ ■ :• - V i 'CVCU-i-'L-i	: ;,., ., :; ... . «. '. ., v-:_ ^	.-a •. >'C-; ■■ '.^ V-L. ' Vi '.''■ V
.- - .;■ -■'-;: V' _..‘ __	/;■ <-	, - - ; •■ -,:•	. ■'■-- i- . -' . ■■;.*-.■/:■ ..c.: -■ •■ ■ ■ _.n,	- j.,. - -V -:"- -
• >
■riri-rFAAmmAA:
; >• • ■
««• •
4^ .



-'* ■ V :iTTS^
'■-" ' - -. ,*<"’ ■* ■ '^^''■■■', '■'"'	^•'
.D ' - ' ■ ' V>•-■ S.v^5D><c,;'r
'***.•/•< t * >«
.,• -N»r^VN V N-. ■■

A/,S'VV:LLV^
? •-,-'.	. •- ,'	• - -f -i-*L*-V.	■■•''•■ C^*-' •	•'•'->•
' '	' * ' ' ' * . ’ • •*-’ ^ * ' . ^* b * '	* A	•► • •. .*. s ^	p ^ .	*
> .-c;;:NvC	-^v‘*c' -A.	- '
■'•.■, .-.''c- --nn;'-'c,--. -.b	C-	•	.
u:^d	"'••
tw-.v.--
,	- ' ,	■■ V. •	;S.. ■ *..
. * • , , >
. ■	-• •- T'--	■ A - A,'. V ‘- '
■^S--..o,i F
'\fd.	• ''*i- -• ' ' ^-''
•	- . ?•• tV Vf '	. '•• ix-.-C”	-.-'	' •■
.r ,'■ V -'•A > -.* ^ •-	.. ••- .. •■•
.*	•	-**' •	^ ^ ' T *
* ‘ ’ V	"	*>
^	^	V "> ■-


v'# -
'N'- *-•'■ V
ki
' b‘*	~	!r • *



•'. ■ T-
V '
'V. »• ■
■■'T; -* , *'
>' V'-A


V

*>' vA *•«*■ **-
AAC- ' A • • '.'

■ .'•■^. O'
•7^ *C " y ^ Jr F	^ V.-*	•• •*
•• • *>.-.' . , 0'’> **.-'.
N-


'V. ■-.
-	■ V • • '


j" • “	,	-.• ‘	.. '	‘y, *-v * •,
■v:sA;anAAvs
't. .'-

\
• r.

*• N
•- -. - -b y-*
"A-AA:

■ t v "■ • .■.-AvVNlAtCl'-SNO ’ ,.bv*b'V'-'t- ■ "v 0^: ACvAyN
■i'. V ■' ' -- :	ri'LdA- lX'A' LKtf.f^
■•■\-	.	- -•	• H' '.,>r-‘-*	, -X ' • N .	• f	s. '.,....-V...- w s*'w Vv
,-■ .• -'• : .•:- V ••' ■ '- ■	--V.'-v. ■ -
i.'v - i' : i) ■-. ,LK
ii- '.;':V.	I

'b'• N-.■.■%:• cr-' V''.•■■•■b •*^'-. •'"':.o-: ■->. '-•'A*--	t‘>AA-vtTC7-T-''-A,-.
A. i ''-A i bN.:, ■>;• N b-A	■ •b-.-Di bcCA-..v:A.y	-:.
' ••* AA	A-'/.O'CrtCAC-AN-v- --.A
t' L.S.-.DA. -A. ' ' ^	i
L'-fV	yb^A
> V
X •	-X ^
t :
/
; V , • , ^ *
I , *b
'f V
• ‘ *
7 '. ;■■ V,; ■■/'i -X.: 'LrLL': LrV.td.S-.-
L:bb'-N:. "vAAi-.-.' b - 0 b'. vvf AO .LVOtb :.-;.im^' t ;. ■	i-, A: bA
;■•-:^i^	/i-r-	_. - :
♦
• b p- ..
■::A-A'-.
.* . •'	-’.r.. ■•
S\}- AL-'-fI .•
;C ;.'A
: ?-'

■ A^ fI
•t
'..'V- - .•>
c
Ab't;-.
*

?b:b VibAr-A .
•-■•- • >'C*'	: •'	. •'■•• b V
■••'hJ .:
> .	-X. .

'WX ,
^Vi.«Vx; •* -..
•-'r T ,
* '• V ^ * 4 • ' .y - y - «• - .•--•'A'O.v' •-,-.AxTA	•AVyA'b. ■.".A :	
-..N .•• ;. V •-*, - ■•.'-.•■■ ,S ■ ;' X.		' *' .: /
- '"X -‘.A'll.-	.l-x.TT-'.' »■” ■’■' ^»' •' -	k. •
V.f. .v'-'i:	rci b'b : ''-’' a	' ' ' T ' • -1 -A


, i
f- ■ •
'V
A-'
v*‘a
•' ■•'■CT. ysTb'C bNb/-''>A" s
:'?CiNA:v'A‘ AA_r;V-, , -'No'A c OA . r-b 'A;	o c‘.
'T As ;'A- ■ • V tb; :•:,	'	.. '"b	- . .V.- . 'v .'.'-sT-b , :;-„■	:'■■
ArA,A:A::bV:A;.j:; ro ' •:N-.,..t o . N/' -b;/*. a' s, V-. -v b'OA -A^-'-yAdAT- >	/-■•-A-	- V. -f.V	\	■ ■
(■■;	. .- ,v■,^	'• ■•..
■A- .,•. vc;-^
i- "X
T.--i.	.-	'.	r--
’	C-'-b' , V- ?
b'-. -.A- -A-. . . N"bvVSh '. /’7s'-.-.A •■ .•	•. At- • ^.-•.
/ « • , -•' .. • • -' '■
/
i
O.
;Tv .V- -■ -; ■ ■... ■■	■■'■ ..■- V:;V ^ T:' Ai>iA\ftO
■b.-"''A -■ -. b '* A'"*-'''	‘ S^ .b-^-'^b''C'. - ■■'	.-ri
'• i Ay-	*•* A ' C. - ‘ ' X ■ ‘"b .	' '-ri	• t	-.'X '••* C' ’C' ».•,* • • / ■ • .'
T-.nF-Y. te-'oA.C^ry.-b : NA-C..-.,N; •CyAA	, . A- b
"i ilw- 't ■ '-A-■ ^ A 1A
-'•'Ax^ v';--- --..x.-.,. ' •■.> : •	.••.•' ‘"-A-; b-. -	v:.
• - • Ay- ”' x'-* •*	C. - ‘ 's' ''■	' ''d .''''. '^' ■■' ■	.-rX '••* C' '•,■ • • / ■ • “'y'.
'-'-..U	- . -'V	,..- •	-'.'T-	.*• i-..--.	■■■:	•-•	M.’-Tvl»_r- • .
r:.AAbLTA^-=^A;C=-AVN;i-.. Av,.-r i^.. b:.-A7tN'NAv b ; ^• -AAv’v A;;-, l .A AA-t: v-T A tAA -yvVV .VblvyO^AAryt
b.D ,:AA:br L'^-;AaA>	b;Ab A	.
AA—, A A-A..y;'-A--b;' bb : Acv'-'-'AfA bAb,; - y..-' 3A'A.L T-'i. bAt-ALv^L;l:;r-bb..‘ ■■ - ’■. .-.-•■'.b.- i v-' .-. -
•■•	•' A *.
■ y ,A
-.T
A

. I. j.	.
. <'
'■-S''..;. ,0 ■ y■-■'A. --V ~.Ab: ■'.'■‘‘A : ,/-b‘
-■- ,	‘	-".■ • .	•..--■'•xv- ■Jr-'"-	' ■' '	-'.'fO L‘'■--C
:	'b'-'.	i-^. '-A	'AA'o,'-	>
V.	■' b._- - y ^ \-.,t'	'. i.-'V’-."'r 'A -C •	, ^ A*7
• •	'. ’A- A- -Ob^v^''^i;.ytiiV-‘V
.A' 5,:'	--V ^
AfAfAfA
'L d- ■'..■'
'r A Nr : . V'<
.■r -
-'i\. ;
•\,x	••

.X y
. t



- -X •.	•
tC'ANC-A- ’ c.D	CA ^0'A ■'■*: A-' T -. '
; X. i
V ‘.' '■' t <"
. f. '................... -- - .‘■ 'X	- -t	. -. .-w-.^V_rc>'^35^'^xr'
VV --	•-	• - •	-	;••	.J-	; •'
. •. --	• -	»	-X • - '	- -	. .	*	.-	-'-•h. - >- .....f- '7-,	*-<x
.•	: >	■	■	•	•'	.	-	XX .	•.’	.	-.-.	•/,* -A
• 'S. ■	>•'	■?:	A-N: --A'•• A .• V S N-'‘v/i- .v

»
-L i ' / - ••
-■>x'/-->A , ■■'
’’t..-.' ■
'yc' . b/\
T A
'■'V--
,S.Ab''A-^b
SNNg^||;.;:A
eCvAbA^;C.;	C .' •'-	.’	• • rtA ' -NCl' .0	^
•-	--- • .’-x A	V' -	■	■	■	■	'	'■	■ •	•	..'
• T--

4
*

'•'. ' 'A.
V.-
T
•■	V...
> ...
.	. r •
/. . ' *

t
V •

bb_:
I

T >
(.

A •
’ f ■

>
pr4^ .
r.* - *	—*
/
' ■	.i-;\.- -.:.-', . vv vA' -VV;,V .:'-; A‘
.. S-AtbbjLA'-LVv i' AO,^
■■ .''	•'*" .V -X’A -' '''•^'■ri •'bv''".b•'■'•.’■•7' • ■' "*■ ;
:A7b
s - OA: '-■/ ■, ( •• b..
/ X • - .
'-A'" ■	'.''.-.'...A. ■-..■-*.0 •-■
yir^' ri. ^' r .. V'7b--.t>y. Ay ,'-.. -.r.' ./.A N-: V/y-'-A’-.-A	. .^A
a'-A"aavv.v- a;'b-A/-.--.bAVFLLff^s';^-	A Av
. .^;-,.- AA- b.v>S..	-AACA-.,'S--.A.A :^.C	'^ A-S
- -- - r-.- .-...LA-A	A-AL
‘	S'^*' f •
* . *■ * , * •
b : A ■'A	-''.V-	-S-Ad. Af^'
ACT'	--AxiA ■'
: •* : • ••

• •	•	'. >. -'• A *	'	’.A
r
i'A -
. ^ 4
A
*
.<■:
ANAA„;T
•-■•- A ..- V- -''F.
<. ■ 1- • A. ■-rL-'
AvVbyNk-bN-bO'A b. > ■"■'■-b.''.. r--n "'N-bA-J^'-.

*v

/ >'t

4^*
J

I


./
fl

r-c.71 .-»: TT*»	-v=
^:e_ <— *— 4..^	
^‘Ccrot89atrsacess9ta9««3e22ci
''•«r —y».F»	p
inches
1#^ —
S\m



■te
i ’	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10	11 (A)	12	13	14	15
39.12	65.43	49.87	44.26	55.56	70.82	63.51	39.92	52.24	97.06	92.02	87.34	82.14	72.06	62.15
13.24	18.11	-4.34	-13.80	9.82	-33.43	34.26	11.81	48.55	-0.40	-0.60	-0.75	-1.06	-1.19	-1.07
15.07	18.72	-22.29	22.85	-24.49	-0.35	59.60	-46.07	18.51	1.13	0.23	0.21	0.43	0.28	0.19
D50 llluminant, 2 degree observer
Density
0.04
0.09
0.15
0.22
0.36
0.51
0
lOI N 1 I
500	200
S' §■ I'
dot* ptr Inch (opOc«l)	gQQ
300
oi Si
oo CO
700
(e/f
inroad
9i ^

centimeters
I I teI I I I II I I|2> > > M > I II31I I I I I I I|4I I I I I I I I|5I I I I I I I I|6I I I I I I I I|7I I I I I I I I |g I I I I I I I I |9 I I I I I I I I I 70
16 (M)	17	18(B)	19	20	21	22	23	24	25	26	27	28	29	30
49.25	38.62	28.86	16.19	8.29	3.44	31.41	72.46	72.95	29.37	54.91	43.96	82.74	52.79	50.87
-0.16	-0.18	0.54	-0.05	-0.81	-0.23	20.98	-24.45	16.83	13.06	-38.91	52.00	3.45	50.88	-27.17
0.01	-0.04	0.60	0.73	0.19	0.49	-19.43	55.93	68.80	-49.49	30.77	30.01	81.29	-12.72	-29.46