•- • -TJ , - ^	. >^ *.'.•
■■-y ■ '	•>'
^ "-L -	• h-’. .
m.	.:•■
' • Jfii*'-*, ■' S-'	'
r . ^	'	r '
It	•
V "	.
■ 'Cvr-


- i- F ■«

orcty
>2-- ■
rf rw^ iT^' L'-J^8Ki^
X * JbTnlrffillSL^ 'L ■
r. 'rC * V •^'^wp*
'■	. w . -
!	‘^l^aT’* -•'cJ •
**■
Urj	‘	■■-	,*v*'/•‘"-‘^-C*	'- s - •
■ ■■■
iCC; •'■
'KJIZ



•i*»
■I
!l
:M'
H

•A ' ‘
I '• '
:1
[>' ./ ■ Irf
rv<
■:<i ')
■ ?
T,

rii’i
f/ • .V
11)'
II
li //
!•
)
i
S^'
' I
V
V-''
/ •
*- I
\ V
■\

I
\
I
i
/
'	t
• r
* • ' <• ,

V
9

- V A-.

V : t
i. i
I
■V'
5 ,

S'

‘ V—- - »«■
'i’ '■ :
/

'. •'-■t
•N
fi



■r t. '. ■»
-'^' r- 'V; ' . • .
' Kkjs ■
lA
.WEI'-,- - ’•.
-vV^' j.'. '


w , fc .	*.
'
h'.	\'.
j|5 S U - -‘ .
. «. •» -»v-	P --
-vS ■ ' ,< s ■


.i
i*»-
IV l."
■ t*..
■\X


>
B
T
»•


VI843
«	« m .

THE
GODFREY F. SINGER MEMORIAL PRESENTED BY
MR. AND MRS. JACOB SINGER
I
W f.Lt
'''A"-
s
r*-


- i

3	••
<
r
>'
k



V..

\ . %
i"
t
\
I
1
A
T;:
“ d
-1 V
I -'r V •
A
; i •'
i- r*
i C‘
H
So
rA



/
T.


.V


THE
:‘Ai
w
o
M
A
O F
TJ
tl
\
o
N
O
R.
In THREE VOLUMES.
VOLUME I.
Letters bring things more home, and repreSent them more to the life, than either Annals or Lives.
Bacon, Lord Verulam.
• ’1
DUBLIN:
N
Printed for James Williams, in Skinner~R$w
Mdcclxviii.


<


U, of P3U
j " Library
\
r fO -
>
^2
M
M
O
R
\

d
>5
0
j
rf
i
1?
' te
fS
O F A
WOMAN of HONOR.

■-’■O
• l» « ‘
0
letter I.
From Mr. Mellefont, to Mrs. Buckley.
LancaPlre.
HIS letter, dear aunt, will be delivered to you by that Sister of my wife’^s, of whom you have been fo good to protnife that you will take care and do her any good officer that may depend on you. But as in my last I only Summarily mentioned the circumstance of her going to London, it is now very fit to acquaint you more at large of the necessary particulars relating to her past and prefent circumstances : In favor of preferving the chain of which, you will readily excufe my mentioning certain fadls already abundantly knowm to you.
Her father, the learned Dr. Maynwaring, dying about eleven years after his marriage v/ith the daughter of a country gentleman, left her a
VoL. I.	iB	widow
/

2 Frovi Mr. Mellefont,
widow with two children, Efther, and Clara. The first, being the eldest by many years, on her coming into this part of the country, with Mrs, Alderton, a distant relation by the father’s fide, with whom she lived as a companion, I had the good fortune to See her, and foon, with the approbation of her friends, and efpecialiy of Mrs. Alderton, was made, by obtaining her hand, the happiest of men. Views of fortune in this match I could have none. Since I well knew that her father had died in rather streight circumstances, tho’ not long after I received the Small legacy which you know, on the death of Mrs. Alderton, as a mark of her friendship to my wife, and of her approbation of her choice.
Mrs. Maynwaring, her mother, who was, in every point of female worth, an excellent woman, had not failed to give her children the best education in her power. In her impatience to fee her daughter after her marriage with me, as it was not postible for me to be Spared from my refidence, she was So good as to take a long journey acrofs the country, purely to pay us a vifit; in which there was not wanting to the heartiest welcome, any circumstance but that of her not bringing Clara with her, of whom she was unwilling to rifque the fatigue, being but just recovered from the inoculation which The had undergone with the utmost fuccefs.
Unfortunately, Mrs. Maynwaring, not long after her return, was fuddenly carried off by bursting a vein, as she was on Some occafion straining beyond her strength to move a chest of drawers in her apartment, not having waited for a Servant to assist her. On this melancholy news, which I was obliged to conceal from my wife, then on the point of delivery, to whom it would, in all probability, have been fatal, and whom I
could
%

to Mrs. Buckley.
3
could invent no plaustble pretext for leaving, I immediately, however. Sent off a perSon to take care of poor Clara, who was left in a very un-defirable condition, and who, even in her tender age, not being full feven years old, was So little infenSible to her lofs, that it had nearly killed her. She was a?.ually fo ill upon it, that she could not immediately bear the removal I had direfted of her to our houfe. She remained then under the care of an old nurSe in the family, who, though very willing, was very ill qualified for that, or any office, being fo worn with years and infirmities, that she died foon after Clara’s leaving her.
Before this diftrefs of Clara’s fituation was well over, by the orders I had fent, and just after I had found means, by due degrees, to break this misfortune to my wife, we had received a con-folatory letter from Mr. Glaffrnore, a merchant of Some eminence in London, and brother to Mrs. Maynwaring, in which there was an offer, conceived in the most tender and affe6;ionate terms, of taking care of Clara, if we would fend her up to him. Senfible of the advantages to her from our acceptance of this offer, it was not, however, without Some struggle of prudence with inclination, that Esther, who paffionately loved her lister, confented to the preference, on this occafion, of her uncle over herfelf.
The point being fettled, and my wife being as yet too weak to bear any travelling fatigue, 1 contrived So as to go myfelf to Norfolk, where I found Clara Somewhat recovered, and in a way that I judged the journey, and change of ob-jeQ;s, would rather be of Service than not to her health. It is true she much wanted to go with me to her Sister, at least, before she went to London, and I was myfelf strongly inclined to
B 2	.	give
/
I
4 Fr.m Mr. M e l l e f o n t,
give her that Satisfa£lion; but as I found Mr* Glaffmore had Sent a perfon down to take care of bringing her to town as Soon as possible, I was afraid of his not taking well any retardment.
This gentleman was a widower, left without any issue, which, doubtlefs, had fome influence in his determination to take care of Clara, and even to leave her his fortune, if fhe should be found to deferve it.
I had never feen her, as I had not been before then in that part of the country. She v/as, I repeat it, about her feventh year, but for her age rather tall. I had been by my wife prepared for feeing an uncommonly pretty child, •jiot however without due allowance being made for dedudfions for Sisterly partiality. But for this injustice I had now at fight of her to make honorable amends, for in my life. I had never Seen, never imagined any thing comparable to lier for SweetneSs and beauty of features, delicacy of shape and air, and a bloom of complexion, in which the momentary prevalence of the fairest -white over the rofeate hue of her cheeks, from the remaining impressions of languor and afflidlion for the death of her mother, gave an inexpressible tendernefs to her looks, and increafed the natural Simpathy for the grief they expressed.
Not, however, to tire you unnecessarily with particulars, which Such an earlinefs of age would not fuffer to be very interesting, and which would unmercifully lengthen a letter, that from the introdudfory deSign of it must be a long one, I shall only obferve to you, that she arrived very fafely in London, where she was received by Mr. Glassrnore with the utmost tendernefs and affedtion. The lovelinefs of her figure would, at least, not lelTen fuch a difpoSition.
That
to Mrs. Buckley.
5
That no cultivation might be wanting to her natural perfefilions he placed her immediately under the care of Mrs. Mercier, the widow of a bookfeiler, who, by extradfion, was a French refugee. At his death, with the little fortune he had left her, she had fet up a boarding-School for young ladies at Chelfea, and, by her-perfonal management, had brought it into great and just reputation. Her method of education was admirable, for without negledling any one accomplishment that peculiarly contributes to grace the female fex, she had a Special regard to cultivating and improving the heart. It was by making virtue amiable, and by placing in its true point of view, of Superior dignity and pleasure in a confcioufnefs of innocence, that she inspired her Scholars with almost an enthuSiashi of love for their duty. Shame, that great engine of education, she employed with great fparing-nefs and attention not to stale its effedt, or wear
7'
out the Springs of it by too frequent an ufe.. Manual correction was entirely out of the question ; she looked on it not only as carrying an air of flavery with it, but even as contrary to-the end propofed; from its hardening that tender age in its faults, by endearing them to it for what it Suffers for them, and by only adding to it a neWguilt, the Spirit of concealment; which finds a kind of joy in deceiving parents and teachers. Befides that, if you ufe children to blows or to hard words, they are apt to contraCt an abjeCt fear,, and by dint of being debafed by others are in-fenfibly accustomed to debaSe themSelves. The-best masters are not Surely thoSe who prefer bringing their Scholars forward by Slavish corrections,, to the finding out a good method of instruction. But that costs too much trouble. The quickest way with them, and which does not require
B 3	much

6	From Mr. M E L L E F O N T,
much Ikill, is that of rating and striking. For that there needs nothing more but hastinefs and ill-nature. Whereas to bring them up by rea-Son, there must be a care, an attention to their tempers and capacities, a delicacy, in stiort, of ■which few teachers are capable. Mrs. Mercier’s plan was to make her pupils fear nothing So much as being in difgrace with themfelves, on having done any thing to incur a just reproach from her, which She never made to them, without, at the Same time, rendering them fenSible that it was a pain to herfelf, which it was mean and cruel in them to give her. Thus governing more by love than by fear, stie was always fure of the whole School on her Side, in the caSe of any animadverston for a fault; the offending party on incurring her difpleafure, lay under a, kind of civil excommunica- ' tion, from her companions and play-fellows, who shunned her, not without expreflions of a pity more mortifying than reproach, tilS on her show of penitence or atonement by a better condudf, she was restored to the favor of the Governefs, who had fucceeded in making herfelf constdered lefs as the austere mistreSs, than as the tender common mother of them all. Always averfe to the common arbitrary prafitice of enstaving children to the authority of prejudices, she was efpecially careful to put them into the train of an early exerciSe of their reafoning faculty, without the convidiion of which she precautioned them a-gainst receiving implicitly any opinion ; accustoming them to inquire into the caufes of their judgments of things, and leading them to the truth by the way of examination : Thus accustoming them to' think for themfelves, and not to let their reaSon lie idle, or carry it about them, as So many in a more advanced age, like a lame arm in a sting, as if it would hurt them to ufe it.
Among
to Mrs. Buckley.
7
Among many other improvements of their understanding, stie had by early instilling into them, a contempt for finery, done the real fer-vice to their beauty of defending it against the injuries it is Sure to receive from being overdressed. Every thing, efpecially with children, depends on the light in which it is prefented to them; the fimplicity of that age being fufcepti-ble of any impressions^ and 'from the instinfiive re6i:itude of nature, mostly So of good ones; they are as much and more to be inflamed by real great objects than by little ones. Among the punishments, by shame, which she had contrived for vanity or pride, was that of ordering the party under that charge to be dreffed in her best cloaths, with all the trinkets that the fond-nefs of parents or relations might have bestowed on her, and obliged to walk or fit, for a certain Space of time, alone, as being much too good for the company of her School-fellows, who, to humor the joke, kept ironically their distance ; or, if her offence was very flagrant indeed, they compelled her to fit on a stool, and danced round her, a milk maids before a May garland. But to turn this a<£t of derifion to the general improvement, independently of the example, Mrs. Mer-cier entreated her pupils, upon their own judgment, to which she fairly appealed, to Satisfy themfelves that dreSs, carried beyond an elegant neatnefs, could be of no fort of advantage in the eyes of perfons of true taste; and as to fuperficial judgts or to understandings no better than thofe of fops in one Sex or triflers in the other, the preferable point would be not to pleafe them. Without countenancing or allowing any malignant cri-ticifm or reflexion on the perfon of the party under this Sentence of finery, she made them every one, and even the delinquent thus expofed, fen-
B 4	fible
s
- I
8
From Mr. M e l l a f o n t.
)
Sible of the folly and efpecially of the falfity a reliance on the foreign ornaments of dreis, thofe treacherous auxiliaries, which, if a woman is pretty, divide the attention to her perfonal charms, and, in the eye of taste, are no more an improvement of them, than gilding to a fine statue. But if fhe is homely, the damage is still greater: fine cloaihs and jewels not only draw on thofe who are under that difinheritance from nature more attention, by making their misfortune more confpicuous, but robs them cf the compastion due to them for that injury, by the indignation which finery So murdered must excite. It is only for ideots not to abstradf the perfon from the trappings. With men of taste beauty will be beauty in a stuff gown and colored handkerchief, and uglinefs uglinef though caparifon-ed all over like the Mogul’s elephant, with rubies and diamonds. In short, the idea of a gorgeous drefs remained on the minds of the young ladies, as much affociated with that of shame and contempt, as the fear of a streight waistcoat with a dread of pain in the wounded imagination of thofe liable to it for infanity. And as the rage of over-dreshng is a kind of madnefs, a fine gown was reprefented to them as the streight waistcoat of it.
There was another particularity in Mrs. Mer-cler’s fchool which was of great fervice to the pupils. The back part of her houfe communicated with a very fpacious inclofure, which was partly a garden, partly a wildernefs, with a large room on one fide, to Serve for a shelter in bad weather; it was here that the amiable troop were regularly condudfed to their diverfion for two hours before dinner, and encouraged to ufe as much motion and exercife as their vivacity or inclination should Suggest to them. They were efpecially, and without any the least air of compulsion.
\
to Mrs. Buckley.
9
pulfion, imperceptibly guided to make their choice of thoSe kind of amufements that required the-greatcst aftivity. Rehearfals of the lessons of their dancing-masters, digging appropriate Spots in the garden, the country Sports of Twinging, and even of stinging coits, bowling, riding, no diver-ston, in fhort, was judged too violent that was consistent w th the modesty of the Sex. There were even prizes instituted for excellence in feats of dexterity : all which were controuled and managed with So much delicacy, that while they excluded every idea of too mafculine an air, they manifestly preServed the Shape from the coarfe-nefs of a corpulence contradfed by idlenefs and inadtion, they gave a glow of frestinefs to the' complexion, arid laid the Solid foundations of a healthy constitution. Nor was this end a little promoted by Mrs. Mercier’s taking care to keep their palate to that Simplicity of diet, a relilh. for' which is originally the precious gift of nature, too often destroyed by being infenstbly betrayed into an habitual taste for made-disties, and . for all thofe poifons of modern cookery, to whicst beauty, health, and life are fo often the facri-fice. Knowing human nature too well to give an inclination ■ to them by prohibitions, and being fen- -stble. that at the- tables of their relations they would be fure to meet with thefe pernicious ■ dainties under the recommendation of rarity and expenstvenefs, she imagined it best to. guard a-gainst their fedudlion by anticipation^ Her own table, then, was never without one or two of thofe articles, which were left to the discretion • of her pupils; but they appeared constantly under Such marks of reprobation and difgust, that . pone ol them were tempted to touch them; Some would, wher purpofely destred to make trial of them, Sputter at them like the Savages when
B. 5
they
J >
10 From Mr. Mellefont,
they first taste Salt; So that when they Saw the like at the tables of their friends, they were prepared and proof against any temptation from them. Add to all this precautionary management, that there was a note of shame, upon any appearance of a lickerishnefs, of which their understandings had been convinced of the danger even to their beauty.
It was in this School that Clara received her education, and by the readinefs of her proficiency in every branch of it, was the darling and pride of the governefs’s heart, to whom it did So much honor; while the natural fweetnefs of her temper was great enough to Subdue the envy of her fchool-fellows, and at length to make them forgive her Superiority even in points the least apt to be forgiven.
Do not imagine that any partiality of a relation could bias me to exagerate her merit, I but repeat Mrs. Mercier’s testimony of her, and in her own words.
1 shall only here state one incident that, will Serve to charafterixe at once Clara’s fentiments, and the difcretion of her governefs.
Among the ornaments with which her uncle Mr. GlalSmore’s fondnefs had enabled her- to distinguish her apartment, there was a Superb Chi-nefe temple of mother-of-pearl, of an uncommonly curious and costly workmanship, the present of a China-fupercargo. This was not only very much valued by Clara, on account of its beauty, but as she had defigned it for one of the marks of her gratitude to Mrs. Mercier, upon that worthy woman’s birth-day, of which the Scholars having obtained the Specification by discovering the register of it on a family bible, had constantly Since made a law among ihemfelves to celebrate it, out of pure afFedion to her, and
forced

to Mrs. Buckley.
11
forced her not only to confent to this compliment, but to accept any prefents they thought would be the most agreeable, and of which any re-fufal from her would have been a real mortification to them. This day was then near at hand, when Clara, upon Some occaSion happening to enter her apartment, found in it one of the half-board-ers, ail in tears, and in the utmost consternation for having rather carelefsiy, in moving a chair, thrown down the stand on which the Chinefe temple had been placed, and which now lay on the floor in a thoufand glittering fragments. As heartily chagrined as Clara was, eSpecially at the disappointment of her defign, which however she had never mentioned to any one, the unaffected concern and grief in which she Saw-the poor girl, who was the caufe of this accident, turned all her thoughts to comfort her, , and to relieve her from the distreSs of her fears,, not only from her refentment, but of Mrs. Mer-ciers.. After then taking fome pains to excufe the girl’s careleffnefs even to her own Self, she removed her apprehenfion of the governefs’s anger, by taking the accident upon herfelf. This for fome little time passed current. Mrs. Mercier condoled with her on her lofs, and the girl who had really broken the temple would have efcaped * fo much as fufpicion, but for her own impatience ' of the Secret in the fuIneSs of her gratitude. She could not help, under the Seal of Secrecy, communicating to one of the young ladies, the obligation she thought herfelf under to Clara for her procedure on this occafion. This young lady, rather edified by it than from any ill intention, , thought it a pity that Clara, who was univerSal-ly beloved, should lofe the merit of Such an aCb of good nature, and, in that Spirit, divulged it
% •	through
12
From Mr. Melle font,
through the School. By this means it came to Mrs. Mercier’s ears. There were not two opinions about it, except only that the governefs Saw caufe in it to, give a lefibri to all her pupils. On the first occa-lion, then, of their being all assembled, fhe fin-gled out Clara, and after preparing her to receive, without relufiance, her remonstrance, by a preliminary approbation of the good natured motive on which stie had a£ted, fhe obferved to her, that it was to that motive her error against truth was obliged for a pardon, which was enough to fatif-fy her that it was an error. Since if it were not one, what occafion could there be for forgivenefs; that truth was too great a faaiSice to make to almost any good ; that in this Single falfity fhe had not only been herfelf guilty, but the caufe of guilt ' in another, and that the mifchief had gone farther, by its being the occafion of a young lady’s betraying the fecret confided in her, though most probably with a good intention ; that, in stort, nobody could tell where the moral evil proceeding from a falfity would stop ; whereas truth was, at least, eternally, by its nature, defended from any fear of shame or reproach.
Clara, whoSe docility could only be equalled by her candor, and whofe detestation of falfity, had, on this occafion, only been momentarily blinded by an invincible emotion of compassion, touched to the heart at this representation from Mrs. Mer-cier, of the propriety of which she was intimately convinced, took hold of the hand which her governefs extended to her, as a fign of perfedt cordiality, and moistening it with' tears of gratitude, thanked her for her instruction, the Sincerity of her regard, for which, she Said, should be proved by an inviolable observance of it in future.
Mr. Glassrnore, on being informed of this lofs of Clara’s, and of her behaviour on ft, was So
charmed

I
it> Mrs. Buckley

charmed, that he immediately repaired the damage by the prefent of a magnificent fet of drelTing boxes, of the old Japan, for her toilet, accompanied with a large Silver coffee-pot, which Served Clara to acquit herfelf of the engagement Ihe had Secretly eontrafted with herfelf, to make Mrs. Mercier a prefent on the anniverfary commemoration I have
already mentioned.
I fhall pafs over the rest of her proceedings, at that School, except just one circumstance, of which, before the conclufion of this letter, you will fee the necestity.
Among other the Social virtues which Mrs. Mercier had studiousty inculcated to her pupils, as the great Sources of happinefs, she had not omitted that of friendship. She had obferved to them, that men, with very little pretention to the thing, had contented themfelves with the name, which in general, they prostituted, by giving it to a commerce of interest ; or to an affociation in follies or vices; but that as to the women, the other Sex, who laid claim to it as purely a manly virtue, honored them with a Supposition of their being absolutely incapable of it, and excluded them from it as formally as Mahomet is faicl to do from his Paradife. Female friendship was, according to them, a chimera, a non-entity, the men grudging them even the name, which is all that they theirfelves retain of it. It was not then as a point only of honor, but of happinefs, that she recommended the cultivation of that virtue ; she convinced their understanding of how great utility a well chofen friend might be, oa many occafions, and that there was not a Single good argument to be offered why fuch connexions were not as defirable, as worthy among women, as among men; nay, that the weaker the female fex was, the more expedient it was to multiply
its
14
From Mr. Mellefont,
its props, and that friendfhip was Surely not one of the least ; that, after all, a jest was not a reafon : and that if delicacy was one of the chief ingredients of that virtue, the women were incontestably, in that point, as much qualified as the men.
Reafons lefs powerful than thefe would have Sufficed to perfuade a heart So difpofed to every Sentiment of worth, as Clara’s naturally was. Befides then, the perfect harmony in which fhe lived with all her companions, she had met above half way the advances made to her by one of the young ladies of the School, a daughter of Earl Lovell, her name Lady Harriet, and about one year older than herfelf. A certain fimpathy of temper and con-•. formity of taste, in their favourite obje6i:s of improvement, in short, in every thing, had first begun their intimacy, which habit afterwards strengthened and lastingly cemented. Without any fuch affeOiation of the name of friends, as might be dist agreeable to the rest of that amiable Society, who were all competitors for Clara’s preference, they contented themfelves with the pleafure they found in the reality of the Sentiment, of which they omitted no opportunity of convincing one another.
In this tenor of life, in the bofom of improvement, and in all the fatisfaftion of innocent amufe-ments, Clara had attained to her fourteenth year, when her uncle, impatient of having fuch a ti ea^ Sure nearer shim, took her home, to the great grief of Mrs. Mercier and of the whole School, but especially of Lady Harriet, who not enduring to stay there after her, prevailed iikewiSe on her mother to take her away.
Mr. Glassrnore, who had long been fenfible of his niece’s Superior merit of perSon and accomplishments, not content with a piciuSion on her of every thing he imagined would pleaSe her. Set her at the head of his houSe, of which he confidered
her.
to Mrs. Buckley.

her, and not without reaSon, as the greatest ornament. In short, he idolized her to Such a degree, as was very capable of Spoiling one leSs fortified by nature and education.
And here it would be ingratitude for me to omit, that she had constantly given us thfe most tender rtiarks of her remembrance of us, not only in frequent letters to her fister, which breathed nothing but the Spirit of goodnefs and affe6tion, but by fending us on every occafion, prefents of fuch value, that we were obliged very Serioufiy to remonstrate to her against the excefs. Nor did she stop at this, but as her influence over her uncle grew to fuch a point, that he followed all the impressions she was pleafed to Suggest to him, he gave us proof, in many essentials, of his natural regard for Esther, being greatly increafed by her quality of fister to Clara. In short, it is but fair to confefs, that much of the prefent eafe of our circumstances we owe to her good offices with Mr. Glasshiore.
But alas! that fo good an intention, as that of this fond uncle, should be, by his straining it beyond the bounds of discretion, pernicious to him-Self. It was but just, but natural, for him to think, that the greater was his niece’s merit, perSonal and acquired, the leSs she would need a fortune, to which that merit was So rich a Supplement. But as nothing, in this world, is eaSier or more common, than to ruinoussy confound a true good with a falSe one, Mr. Glassrnore, who had never been covetous of money for himfelf, began to confider it as the Supreme good, in the passion of his heart, for the adding to thofe advantages of Nature and Art, of which Clara was already fo eminently possessed, that of a fortune equal to them. In this Spirit, he who had been before noted for rather a flow, cautious, circumfpedl dealer, Suddenly went over to the other extreme, and launched out into trade,
in
i6
From Mr. Mellefont.
in a manner that Surprized every one that knew him. Then it was that, for the ftrft time, he was Seen to prefer the chance of Sudden great gains, to the repetition of flow, moderate, and more Secure ones. Some Successes, at first. So elated and encouraged him to proceed, that, big with the hopes, they infpired, he ufed to talk of nothing lefs than giving.Clara fourfcore or a hundred thoufand pounds to her fortune ; and, in all probability, very fin-cerely meant as he Said. Unluckily, in the very year that he had taken her home, no lefs than four capital adventures, in which he had rilked by much the greatest part of his Substance, failed, fo that in aiming to raife her a fortune, he funk his. own. His constitution, originally never a very good one, i ad been for Some time fenfibly declining, the confcioufnefs of which had, perhaps,, contributed to that precipitancy with which he proceeded in his endeavours to accumulate the fortune he was projeQ:ing for. Clara.. This blow then^ going to his heart, in its disappointment of his darling Scheme, was,, no doubt, of fatal conSequence.-to his health, and the more So, for. that he could-not prevail on himfelf to procure the relief of un-boSoming himfelf to • the Sole objedt of his confidence, of his affection, oShis care. He could not,. indeed, quite conceal his melancholy from Clara,.^ though he endeavoured it as much as possible, which only made his grief prey the more fiercely, on him inwards, but the cauSe of it She could not even guefs,. having never heard. him mention a. word of his losses,., a reServe which very likely pro-^-ceeded from - his fear of giving her any uneaSmeSs. Not to dwell then diSagreeably to you on this Subjefit of affliction, and without particularizing the history of his illnefs, I hasten to the fatal conclufion of it. A few minutes before, his death, of the approaches
of-
to Mrs. Buckley.

of which he was fenSible, he intimated a defire to Speak to Clara alone, who was So weak with her constant attendance, and watching him, as well as with her fears and grief for his condition, that
file was Scarce more alive than himSelf. The at-
\
tendants being all withdrawn. She had just Spirits and SenSe enough to obferve, that he was in that fort of confuSion for uitering what he had to fay, which attends a repugnance to give vent to a Smothered Secret. He began twice or thrice to articulate a few Scarce intelligible words, that Seemed exprelTions of a tender concern and compassion, when he was stopped stiort by the force of his dif-eafe ; it is probable the inward conssidi he was enduring hastened his agony, for thence-forwards he remained SpeeclileSs Rill the last instant of his breath, which was about a quarter of an hour afterwards. Clara frightened, and streaming for help, was carried out of the room.
We were preSently apprifed of this catastrophe, and immediately fet outfortown,where our preSence was on many accounts indiSpenSably necestary. You being at that time in Cornwall with your late hustand, we could not have the benefit of your counlels.
Nothing could be more moving than the deep distrefs in which we found Clara ; pale, extenuated, and finking under her grief. I Sincerely believe that our arrival Saved her life, or at least retrieved her from the gates of death, which Seemed already opening for her. But the fight of her Sister, from whom she had been fo long abSent, and whom she had always expressed a passionate defire to See, Somewhat revived her, and gave her the first gleam of conSolation, Since the death of Mr. Glaffmore. She had from that time remained in Such a state of stupefafilion and unconcern for any thing, that she had never once thought of any point of interest, or of what she had to expedt
from
i8
F om Mr. Me l l e f o n t,
from the state of his affairs ; and the compassion with which stie had infpired all who faw her, had kept them from mentioning rt to her.
When his will was opened, it appeared to be of a very recent date, and conformable to his latter circumstances. He had left my wife two hundred pounds, with Some other bequeathments to fervants, and Clara refiduary legatee. But by a very fair calculation, from the very clear accounts he had kept to the last, it was prefently difcovered, that all due dedu(3:ions made, the whole of what was left would not exceed from beiween fifteen hundred to two thoufand pounds. This, with Mil-bury-farm in Somerfetstiire, which in his life-time he had irrevocably fecured to her, and may bring in Something above a hundred a year, constitute the whole of her fortune, instead of that princely one with which his fond assurances had often flattered her. Out of his constant liberal Supplies She had made Some little referve of money and jewels, which might have been much greater, but for own difpofition and generofity.
However, fuch was her unaffeTed difinterested-nefs, that on any mention to her of condolance, relative to her disappointment of fortune, Ihe could hardly conceive what they meant by it; fhe was So thoroughly Satisfied with the comparatively fmall matter that was left, and esteemed it a competency for any wants she could figure to herfelf, in her a6fual moderation of defires, and propofed Simplicity of life. Bot the memory of her uncle was only the dearer to her for the caufe of that diminution of her intended fortune which never gave her a moment’s uneafinefs.
As foon as she had paid her last fad duties to his
remains, her earnest intreaty to us was to take her
down for a while into the country with us, there,
in the bofom of our family, to restore her wounded
< « 4
Mrs
19
> « 4
b
ed Spirits. There was nothing she could have propofed more agreeable to our own wishes.
I oaght not to omit mentioning here, that no fooner had Clara been taken home by her uncle, whoSe declarations of his intentions to make her fo great a fortune, had been currently received and believed, that even in that tender age of her’s there had prefented themfelves a number of Suitors, Some of them in very opulent circumstances, but whom Mr. Glassrnore had not encouraged, in his idea of procuring one of the first matches in the kingdom for her. After his death, when it was difcovered that her fortune was nothing equal to what had been given out, there was not one of thofe who had propofed their pretenSions that deferted her. As ever fince her uncle’s demife she had shut herfelf up, and remained inaccestible to any vifitors, it was to my wife that all of them made their applications, and intreated her good offices. But as that was not the time to touch Such a string, there could be no anfwer returned to their propofals, but a civily elu-Sive one, referring them to herfelf, when her affliction should be moderated enough for an application of that kind to be more confistent with decency. Some of her Suitors acquiefced in the reafonable-nefs of this delay ; others, in letters (which were constantly with great politenefs returned to them,) in the genteelest manner they could imagine, covertly infinuated the merit of their perfeverance, even after the difcovery of the disparity of her fortune to theirs. At that time, Clara was too much engrossed by her afflictions to take notice of any thing of that kind, but when she became restored to a little more tranquillity of mind, she Said, on their being mentioned to her, that she could See but very little difference, in point of delicacy, between Such as should drop their Suit, on finding the inferiority of her fortune, and thofe who made
a me-

\ • V
20
Ffom Mr. Melle font.
-ia merit to her of their perfistance, notwithstanding the Superiority of theirs, the very mention of which betrayed their taking into the account a circumstance according to her ideas of things, of a nature very foreign to a passion of which fhe knew nothing, nor deSired to know, except that fhe believed it stood very little upon refpedfs of fortune, and was only the better for that contempt, however the world might be in general of another opinion.
Upon the whole, there appeared in Glara fo great an indifference, or rather aversson for this fubjedt, that we never ventured to renew the offence of it to her, /
All difposstipns being'made for returning to our parfonage-houfe,, Clara left a letter for Lady Harriet, who was then at the family feat, with her mother, at Moultray; and, after taking a most tender leave of Mrs. Mercier, who, in her viSits, had been of great Service in joining her confoiato-ry efforts to ours, we Set out for my parfonage houfe, where we arrived without any accident or inconvenience by the way.
Here it was that the gloom of Clara’s melan— choly first gave figns of dissipating, with the removal and change of objedis, wlSile her natural chearfulnefs began to regain its afcendant, and (hew itfelf in gleams of Smiles, which were drawn from her by the little caresses and playfulnefs of our children. But Surely nothing could be more engaging, nor more edifying, than ner behaviour. The country ladies round us, who had been prepared for all the inSoIence and affediation of a fine lady’s airs, were agreeably Surprized to find in their stead, fo fweet a fimpliciiy of manners, and an unassum-ingneSs, which was the refult of the most perfedf modesty in every fenfe of that word. Nothing was more eafy to fee, than that she had a great
deal
to Mrs. Buckley.
21
deal of true wit, and, at the fame time, that she did not herfelf fiifped it, by her neither affecting to show or to conceal it.
But even we, who had many reafons to anticipate every thing that was amiable, from what we had precedenlly experienced of Her condudl, or had reafon to infer from the Spirit of her letters, could not help being struck with the eafe and grace with which she entered into our domestic occupations, and stid into all the female fundfions of rural ' conomy.
Thefe exercifes, together with the country air, foon had their ufual effedl; she preSently recovered the florid bloom of her complexion, and stood restored in beauty. It is without any the least ex-ageration, I can aflure you, that few of our neighbouring Gentlemen have Seen her with impunity, or are proof against her numerous attradfions; many of them have already declared themfelves ; and even Mr. Collins, our fquire, who, in his life, was never heard to praife any thing but dogs and horfes, does her the honor of preferring her to them. But without any airs of infolent beauty, of prudery, or coquetry, Clara has hitherto eluded all their ad-reffes, by the art of keeping them at a distance, without offence. Her shunning them appears to proceed lefs from her diflike of them, than from her natural love of retirement.
She was extremel / pleafed with a very large clo-Set adjoining to her chamber, which I have added to the parfonage houfe Since you Saw it. Without any the least romantic turn of head, the melancholic mood in which she arrrived here was plea-stngly Soothed by the Situation of it. Sweetly shaded by the trees of a neighbouring grove, where the Silence of its Solitude is only broken by the warbling of birds, and by a rill of the clearest water, forming a natural caScade with almost a mustcal murmur.
Here,
2
From Mr. Mellefont,
Here, on a harpSichord of my wife’s, she fpent Some of her time, in the cultivation of her accomplishment in muSic, which she would difdain to poflefs in any degree inferior to that of a mistrefs of the art. Here, accompanying that instrument with a v^ry fine Soprano voice, and with thofe graces which are So great an addition to vocal execution, she would, on the least intimation of its affording us pleafure, and without any of the grimace to none So common as to the worst of players, without; their thinking themfelves So, give us one of the highest entertainments of which the human refinement of nature by art is fufceptible. You know my palTion for mufic.. and have often blamed me for the excefs of it; you will then think that this renders me partial ; but lady Proffer, who is univerfally allowed to be a great and real judge, loudly confirms my opinion of the Superiority of Clara’s both voice and performance. In neither did I ever hear any of the Italian fingers excel her, no, not even in the graces of Song, which the more natural they Seem, are but the more difficult to learn.
She has given us too an excellent miniature picture of her own painting, of Flora, our Second child, in an attitude of steeping, which is another proof of her determination never to remain contented with mediocrity in any improvement she attempts. In that Spirit she made herfelf perfeQ; mistrefs of the Italian, which she at first began only for its life in her study of mufic.
You will then eaSily guefs how happy the stay with us, of So accomplished, So amiable a fistcr, was likely to make us, while, from the return of her gaiety, and the fatisfaflion she expressed at her condition with us, we were in hopes that hap-pinefs would have been more lasting. An incident, none of us expedled, has, at least, interrupted it.
Clarn
to Mrs. Buckley.
23
Clara had often mentioned Lady Harriet to us, always with the utmost tendernefs, and latterly with Some little regret and' Surprize at not having heard from her. It was not full two days from her making this remark, that an exprefs came down from that young lady, and brought Clara a letter, of which, as it relates to the occaSton of this to you, I inclofeyou the copy.
U E T T E R.
4
From Lady Harriet Lovell to Mifs Clara
Maynwaring.
/.
XC
iC
a
xc
X(
xc
cc
cc
cc
iC
cc
cc
cc
cc
C(
London, Aiigujf,
“ My ever dear friend,
YOU cannot conceive how vexed I have been at my receiving fo late your letter, through the negligence of our porter, who kept it till I came last night to town. I should certainly have had him turned away, but that I am clear his fault proceeded rather from stupidity than ill-intention ; and as his innocent wife and children would be involved in his punishment, I am per-fuaded that I should not make my court to you by an a<Sl of Severity, whatever the justice of it might be. It is, then> to the implied intercef-Sion of ybur goodnefs that he owes his not lofing his place.
“ So far in just excufe for the delay of my an-fwer.
“ I do not mean to pester you with a condoleance of mere ceremony, and lefs yet with commonplace confoiation ; but 1 Sincerely ssmpathife with you; I know your fenSibility, and, will not, therefore, dwell upon a fubjeist fo fit to refresh the Smart of its wounds.
I fay
24
From Mr. M e l l E f o n t,
“ I Say nothing to you either of the new-difco-** vered inferiority of your fortune to the expedia-tion which had been railed of it: why ssiould I, ‘‘ knowing your way of thinking as I do, offer you any arguments to extenuate your lofs of an advantage which you would certainly defpife if you had it. You are but too rich in endowments, infinitely Superior to thofe of fortune : a head lefs good than yours would be turned with the high-ground on which you stand, fo much above the greateft part of our fex; in the points of excel-“ lence we most covet.
‘‘ How dare you, then,- talk to me of the difpa-“ rity of our conditions ? In what have I deServed “ this of you? I do you more justice. If it is the part of inferiority to afk favors; fee a confestion of it in the Suit I have to make-to you in this letter; and let me tell you, that it would be great injustice in you to deny it me, fince you are the “ caufe of my necestity for it; you, who have “ made almost the whole world indifferent to me
<(
((
€C
€C
CC




by comparison of it to you. [In that word almoji ‘‘ there lies a mistery, which when I fee you stiall ** ceafe to be one.] Yes, Clara, you alone have “ made me fenSible of the essential distinction ** between a recourfe to acquaintance from an im-patience of Solitude, and the joys of friendship founded on virtue and mutual irnprovement. Is it not to your example, to my emulation of your dignity of Sentiments and manners, that I am more indebted for the little I am worth, than to all Mrs. Mercier’s lessons ? All the company I See only reminds me of you, and nothing Supplies the place of you. Society at best appears to me a dreary defert, in which here and there, at great distances, in charadters like yours, one one meets with a few Spots of verdure^ that are “ of Some relief to the tired traveller. But now
to

<c




(C

i-
i
i
r

N
to Mrs. Buckley.
2S



iS
<{

ii

a
u
you are more neceffary to me than everfor fince I had the happinest of feeing you last an; ‘‘ occurrence, of the greatest importance to the-rest of my life, has taken place,, about which I need Such a friend as you, in whofe bofom I may depofite my fears, my anxieties, my alarms.
‘‘ If, then, your regard for me is not a vain profession, of which, however, far be it from me to fufpedf you ; if, in our tender years, our ssngling one another out, indistin6iion from the rest of the world, was not rather a childifh playing at friend-fhip, than laying a Solid foundation for the perfe-verance of fo noble,.fo delicious, So virtuous a Sentiment; come andblefs me with your company for as long as you can afford your abfence from your Sister, or the will Spare you. She will lay me under an immortal obligation, if fhe gives herconfent. Inclofed with this you will receive my mother’s ‘‘ invitation, which is as civil a one as She would write to any one under a Princefs. You know her idea, which, with all due refpe^ to her, is, I assure you, not mine, of rank, and how apt fhe is to proportion her stile : but, with regard to you, her fondnefs for me, makes you an exception.
“ I Should tell you, too, that I imagine a coun-try-recefs is of too Solitary a nature to anfwer the purpofe of compleating the dissipation of your melancholy, and that a little of the whirl of of amufements in a town life, may Serve to make a not unnecessary diversson to your grief: but that I w'isti your yielding to my pressing in^ “ stances for your accepting my invitation may be purely owing to your own goodneSs, to your own friendlhip for me.
Come, then, my Sweet girl, come as Soon aa you possibly can ; come and enliven me with your prefence; there is but one Sun, there is but
ti


(C
<(
(6



<C
it
CC
ic
u
ii
VoL. I.
c
a
one
25
From Mr. M E L L E f o N T,
CC

one Clara, and I (hall hail your appearance with more joy, than the long benighted Greenlander does the return of the folar orb to gild his hori-** z,on, after a Six months abfence.
Once more, in this requeft remember, that “ I am recommending to you one of the points “ I have the most at my heart: confult yours, and “ deny me if you dare or can.
ft
Yours, &-C.
Harriet Lovell.

\
The foregoing letter Clara dire6Uy put into our hands, and as the exprefs waited for the anfwer, we could not well avoid coming to an immediate determination.
It was with the most tender regard, with the gentlest fubmistivenefs to an authority we certairdy had not over her, any farther than her own choice gave it us, that (he left us to pronounce whether (he (hould or not accept this invitation. At the fame time fhe did not dissemble to us her own inclination to comply with it, though unfeignedly ready to facrifice her dessres to ours. She was fen-Sible, fhe faid, of the danger to one of her years and inexperience, in going into fo gay and mixed a Sphere of life, as that in which her companionfhip to Lady Harriet would introduce her ; and that none were more likely to fail in that career, than fuch as prefume the most on their own forces; but thaton one great principle (he durst venture to rely, which was, that fhe would always herfelf mean the best, though without any prefumption on her own infallibility ; that, on the contrary, fhe depended on nothing fo much as on the precautions fhe propofed to take against herfelf, judging that her greatest Safeguard against her being deceived by others, would be, to take particular care not to be deceived by herfelf j concluding with a repetition of fending
an


to Mrs. B u c K L E y.
7
an excufe to Lady Harriet, if we should disapprove of her giving her that mark of her friendship she fairly owned she wished to do.
Upon this representation, though we had many objeQions to oppofe to her going, independent of our own ardent deSire to have her longer with us, we not only cordially returned her the compliment of leaving the point entirely to her own deciSion, but I took upon me, dear aunt, to offer her, in you, a ssncere friend and ufeful council, Sure, at once, of your not protesting this draught upon a goodnefs, which, I am perfuaded, is inexhaustible, and of its being hardly poshble to find for you a more worthy opportunity for the exertion of it. Had not I been very clear,' then, that both you aud Clara w'ould do honour to my recommendation, I would not have taken the liberty to trouble you with it. Richmond being at fo eafy a distance from the town, will occasionally afford her a ready re-courfe to you : and Surely you would have been edified at the tranfports of gratitude with which she received our concurrence to her wishes, and this addrefs of her to you, of wdiom she has, with reafon, the highest opinion, from the justice I have done to your charafiter of untainted honor, and of perfect knowledge of the world, and all this yet more exalted by your great good-nature.
Agreeably, then, to this determination the ex-prefs was Sent off with a most refpeStful anfwer irom Clara to Lady Lovell, and a most tender one to Lady Hafriet, in which she excufed herfelf for her fuccindtnefs, on her unwillingnefs to detain the meffenger.
Just at this time, luckily for Clara’s defign, Lady Proffer v/as on the point of returning to London, from a vifit to her Sister; and, on hearing of this intention, offered Clara a place in her post-chaife, which she Said she would not afford her gratis, that
C 2	she
2§
Clara Maynwaring
she would not; for she would be paid with a fong. You know her oddity, which is very far from difa-greeable, Since there is always good-nature at the bottom of it: All we are in pain for is, lest the carriage should break down with her weight of corpulence, to the enormous preponderance of which, on one fide, Clara with her flimnefs of make, must he fo deficient a balance. However, as one may fay, the horfes are to, and go the journey she v>/iU, not without leaving many an aching heart behind her, ours included.
You will now naturally fay, that I have been writing you not a letter, but a history ; nay worfe than a history, a long panegyric : but this is im-polllble to avoid, while writing of Clara : Nor am I. at all afraid of doing her an ill office by over-raifing your expectation about her. I judged it necessary, becaufe refpeQ;ful to you, to give you Some idea of the perfon I was taking the liberty to put, in Some meafure, under your protection.
Yours, &c.
Edward Mellefont.
• ♦ ^
• ■ »
LETTER II.
f
Clara Maynwaring, to Mrj-. Esther
Mellefont.
Dear Sister,
London
AS you would doubtlefs take it ill that fuch as are fo admirably well united, I should attempt to feparate, by my writing apart to Mr. Mellefont, this then, and every future letter, is ever to be understood jointly and in common to
vou

io Mrs. Mellefont.
29
you both. So that is adjusted. I arrived very Safe, and not in the least fatigued, at Lady Proffer’s who, with a friendly violence, means to detain me two days at her houfe in the city, having Sent her coach immediately to Mrs. Buckley, with your letter and a note of apology from me, for my not delivering it with my own hands. But Lady Proffer tells me, Mrs. Buckley knows her too well to take any thing amifs from her, for stie will have her way. In my hurry to fee Lady Harriet, I could ill brook this retardment; but I do not know what it is to reSist the pressure of a good-natured civility which one may feel comes from the heart; 1 would at any time rather fuffer an inconveniency than give a pain.
A croud of vifitants coming in, to whom Mrs. Proffer, in continuance of that kind tyranny of her’s, infists I should imagine abfurdly enough, on my doing the honors of her houfe, giving for reafon that I am abfolutely the mistrefs of it, I find I can, at prefent, have no time to bestow on this letter the extenfion I could wish, for the effufions of my heart to you. No matter; I know your goodnefs, and that you will give me, implicitly, credit for wharf am thus hindered from faying ; and fure I am, all that I do not fay, could not contain all that I feel of affection, gratitude, and refpe£t for you. Embrace your little ones for me, and believe me ever,
Your obliged aud
tenderly loving Sister and Servant,
Clara Maynwaring.
C 3
L E T-
30
Mrs. Buckley


LETTER III.
Mrs. Buckley to the Reverend Mr. Mel
L E F O N T.
*
Dear Nephew^	Richmond.
1 Write myfelf; I think mySelf extremely bbli-A ged to you for procuring me the knowledge, of your excellent Sister ; by what I. can already difcern of her, I had rather be her acquaintance than only her relation, but hold it a greater hap-pinefs still to be both.
On the receipt of your letter with Clara’s note and Lady Proffer’s invitation to town, I immediately fet off, and own to you, that all that you had faid to me in your lister’s favor, I found, at fight of her, inferior to the reality. A more striking figure I never beheld, nor certainly a more graceful one. With all the charms of innocence and fweetnefs, you fee her heart breathing in her everygesture, every motion, every word. Her reception captivated me.
You may be fure I thanked Lady Proffer for the kind care fhe had taken of her in the journey, and for all her more than civilities. The groffnefs of that woman’s fat good-humor has to me ten ^.thoufand times the merit of the delicacy of fome of the quality’s meager politenefs.
I could not get away till the evening, when Clara Sent a card to Lady Harriet, to acquaint her of her arrival, and of her being .at Richmond with me, where I brought her to the apartment •which I have dedicated entirely to her ufe, and shall keep So, that it may occasionally afford her
4 .
a con

%
to Mr. Mellefont.
31
a convenient recefs ; and I may add, a pleafant one; as nothing can be imagined more agreeable than its Situation, commanding, from the top of Richmond-hill, fuch a profpedt as I fancy may vie with any that Greece or Italy can produce, the vales of Tempe and Arno not excluded. As there would be a kind of egotifm in dwelling to you on all the fatisfa6fion Clara ex-prefled at taking poffellion of the premisses, I stall lightly pafs over that circumstance, pleaSing as it was to me but still Surely lefs fo than that of finding, by the eafe and freedom of her behaviour to me, that ste had penetrated the dif-pofitions of my heart toward^' her, and repaid me with all the overture of hers, in the Spirit of congenial confidence and unreferve.
The next morning, we had not done breakfast, before Lady Harriet arrived in a' coach and fix, to fetch away Clara. T iicdr interview astorded a Scene of great, tendernefsj and mutual regard, w hile Lady Harriet overwhelmed her with thanks for her obliging compliance with her invitation. Not having fo much as staid to take her breakfast in town, ste fat down to it with us. As foon as it was over, confidering me as Clara’s aunt, ste begged it as the greatest favor, and with fo good a grace that I could' not well have refufed her, that I would go to town with them, not .only to fee Clara installed in the apartment ste had prepared for her, but to do her the honor of a commencement of acquaintance. In this particular, Clara’s prestngly joining her instances determined me, and accordingly we proceeded to town together.
But before I mention to you our reception, the concern you will naturally have to know the more effential particulars of the Lovell-family will give propriety to my prefixing fummerily
C 4	Some
3^	Mrs. B U C K L E Y
Some account of what may, perhaps, have efcapecT Clara’s knowledge.
I had n.0 acquaintance with the family; but Mrs, Villaret, a worthy neighbour of mine, and a very fenstble woman, is very intimate in it, and might have been more fo, if her ill state of health had not greatly broke off the intercourfe. vShe had often mentioned Lady Lovell to me, but never laid any strefs on her knowledge of her, till I lately drew what information I wanted from her,
Earl Lovell dying about fix years ago, left Lady Lovell with two children, a fon, now Earl lyovell, who is about five and twenty, and Lady Harriet, who is many years younger.
The father was not, that I could learn, ever eminent in any thing, but was contented with being one of thofe immemorables, or cyphers of high life, who, having no opinion of their own, go constantly with their party, right or wrong; whofe names you fee, indeed, in the list of the Peerage, but which are the difdain of history, and the negledl of their own times; 1 eing hardly ever known out of an obfcure narrow circle of menial fervants, dependents, or of the party in which they are listed, made tools of, and defpifed : upon the whole, perfonages rather negatively good tha.n pofitively bad, and irreproachable e-nough for any thing but infignificance, or no-thingnefs of charadfer.
The mother. Lady Lovell, is principally remarkable for two paffions, which stie carries to the greatest extremity, a pride of quality, an or-rogance of state, which dishonors her understanding, otherwife not a bad one; and a boundlefs Sondnefs for her children, whom she idolifes to shat degree, as to have brought herfelf at length to believe that they are of a Superior clay to the
rest

to Mr. Mellefont.
33
rest of mortals; mere earthen ware thefe, white her iffue are the porcelain.
As to the Son, Earl Lovell, whom by the by I have oGcastonally Seen, he is rather bandfome, not ill-natured, unlefs in his wit, but withal the most consummate coxcomb that ever existed, and, to the shame of our Sex, only the more dangerous to it for the being So. He is now actually in Ireland, fettling Some interests in his estate there, but is hourly expeCted.
Lady Harriet, as to her complexion, is to the full as fair as Clara; her features not quite fo regular, though, in their assemblage, extremely graceful and engaging : she has that fort of beauty that for its not making the violentest impref-fion at the first glance, furely revenges itfelf at the fecond, by producing a felf*reproach for the injustice done it, and, upon examination, growi:s forcibly upon you. There is an exquiSite fenfi-bility in her looks, which, joined to her great vivacity, tempts one to conclude that there is fqr her no' mediocrity of happinefs, or of distrels. She stems born for nothing but great pleafures, or great pains. As to her heart, there* is but one report about it, that it is an excellent one : nor furely is it a little prejudice in her favor, that all her mother’s indulgences and. blind fondnefs have not been able to Spoil her.. But the fecre.t alluded to in Harriet’s letter, is the stcret of the comedy, for nothing can be more public than her engagement with the Marquefs of Soberton, a
nobleman of great expeffation, and who has a very good charadler, [even though a nobleman; Notwithstanding this is a match entirely the refult of family-interest and connexions, in which little or - no courtship has passed. Lady Harriet adores him. His father being ill at the 'Spaw, he is gone over to him, and,
C . 5;. „	OE
.V
younj.
\
34
Mrs. B U C K L E Y
On his return, the marriage is to take effe6t. In the mean while, if I am not much mistaken, the company of Clara is, as Lady Harriet herfelf fays, a recourfe to which stie fiies from the ufual anxieties of a tender love. Seeking the relief of confidence in the bofom of friendship.
S ch is the a6tual fituation, as near as is necef-fary to be known, of the Lovell-family, from which I leave you to draw what inferences you pleafe, and come now to our arrival at Lady Lovell’s.
Prepared as I was by the knowledge of her charaQer, it was wdth much ado I Smothered a fmile at the statelinefs this Lady Dowager threw into her reception of us. There was Something So quaint. So formal, and fo bridling in her manner, that I really could not help pitying an otherwife good woman enough, for being fo excessive ridiculous. But Clara a Par-Son’s daughter, and I the widow of a Country-Attorney, did not appear characters in life, with which a Countefs was obliged to keep much meafures; accordingly stie treated us with a fine air of Supercilious civility, every now and then checking herfelf, as if stie had been afraid of letting down her dignity by too great a conde-fcenfion, and as if stie aimed at giving us to understand, that we ov/ed the Supreme honor stie was doing us, to her over-fondnefs in humoring her daughter’s fancies; much in the fame stile, • as that of letting her have a doll, or any plaything stie might cry for, in her infancy. And yet, amidst all the blindnefs of this abfurd astTum-ingnefs, I could not help thinking that our behaviour rather difconcerted her. On my fide there was a coldly polite referve, with which I received all stie Said, that could not but partake of my inward contempt. But as to Clara, independently of the striking impression of fo uncommon
a beauty
to Mr. Mellefont.

35
a beauty as her’s, she had withal fo truly noble an air, a countenance fo Sweetly awful, that I could obferve it was not, at length, without its effect on her. Lady Harriet, to her great joy, as she told me afterwards, remarked it too. Upon the whole, however, we had no great caufe to complain.
Our audience of introduction to the august Lady Lovell being over. Lady Harriet carried us first to her own apartment, which was extremely neat, and afterwards to that allotted for Clara, which she had Some reafon, to objeCl against, for being too magnificent for that Simplicity of friendship with which she wished to be treated.
After dining together, in family, when Lady Lovell- most graciousty vouchfafed to defcend a. little more from , her Sublime rank, I left Clara. with her-friend, and returned to my own houfe, at Richmondj where I instantly fat down to write, you, this, and to assure you of my being ever.
Dear nephew,
Vour affeCiionate aunt,
Lucy Buckley...
505 OOOOO 0 ooooo
LETTER IV.
Clara Maynwaring to. Mr/..Mellefont..
Dear Sijler^^	London^ Sept.
A FTER feeing Mrs. Buckley’s letter to you L\ r have very little material to add, except that I have all. the reafon in the world to be Satisfied with Lady Harriet’s noble and constant procedure towards me. Even Lady Lovell gives me all the marks I could reafonably defire, or expeCt, of her being pleafed . with her daughter’s.
choice.
N

3$
Clara Maynwaring
choice of a companion. There is, however, in me one great unsttneSs for Lady Harriet’s confidence ; Ihe is perpetually talking to me of her pafljon for Lord Sohejt.on, and is amazed to-find I do not enter int<j» it with the fpirit she wishes. But this .does not proceed from any objection I have to her taste, for I never faw the Mar-quefs, and have, from unprejudiced perlons, heard an excellent charafiter of him; but, from my total 'unacquaintance with the fubjeQ: of love, consulting roe upon it, is like talking to a blind man of colors. I have not any the least idea of that pastioa, nor defire to have it. It is not that I defpire it, that I brave it, or give myfelf airs of defiance to it, but I heartily wish fo preServe my freedom, becaufe I find it fush-cient to my happinefs. The a6iual good which I now enjoy, in a state of liberty, may be, for aught r know, incomparably lefs than that which there is a chance of finding in a state of love; but I should imagine a certainty of content rather ■ preferable to a contingency of happinefs:
, in the mean while, I have the fame aver-fion for any difeourfe of it being addrested to me, as upon any other fubjeft of which I am totally ignorant, and wish to remain So Lady Harriet, in her pitying me, reminds me of what I have read, in travels, of the inhabitants of the Alps, who look down with great contempt upon Such as have not their throats beautified with a wen. No matter; our cifputes upon this point anfwer her purpofe of diverting berfelf, as much, and perhaps more, than the monotony of my agreeing with her:’ They fer-ve to advance the clock, which she tediousty counts till the return of the Marquefs. There is, however, one point in which I am forced to be inSincere with her, land that; is, in fuppreshng a remark of Mrs.
Buckley’s

■M
I
V
I
..
i
i.’
i
}
f
to Mrs. Mellefont.
A
Buckley’s on his Lordihip’s letters; a remark which', I assure you, would have efcaped my inexperience, or rather ignorance of the matter. She fays, that in point of stile, wit, politenefs, they are admirably well written, but that there is not the stiadow of fenriment, nor a fpark of love in them. I heartily hope fhe refines too much; for, after all, why stiould not he love one of the most amiable women in the world, and by whom he is fo ardently beloved, that I really believe the bare fufpicion of its being unreturned would go near to kill her. There is nothing Surely I wilh lefs, than for her example to afford me a triumph in that caufe of liberty which I am defending against her. But, not to take up Sorrow at interest, let us wait events where nothing in our power can prevent them.
Yesterday Lady Harriet’s brother. Lord Lovell, of whom I had often hear her Speak with much affefition, arrived in town, from Ireland. Mrs, Buckley was with us at tea in Lady Harriet’s a-partment, when he came in, and staid a good while with us. He is, I hope, worthy of fo good a fister.
Mrs. Buckley fays she will write to you by this post, which encourages me to abridge this trouble to you
Yours, i&c.
I
Clara Maynwaring
L E T-
f
38
Mrs. Buckley
LETTER V.
Mrs. Buckley, to Mr. Mellefont.
Dear nepheiv^
Ktchmond.
Either my judgment plays me falfe, or the fcenes to which your recommendation of Clara has introduced me, threaten to grow e-very instant more interesting. The regard Lady Harriet has for Clara, has led her into the most unreferved confidence in me. She takes to me the more for that difpofition to fimpathife with her, which stie does not find in your Sister, who, n#t having feen the enemy, as I have done, can give her no account of his marches, and manner of procedure. I fhall with great pleafure give up all the honor of Sagacity of conjecture, if her. Lord Should prove as much in love as stie believes him, and is undoubtedly herfelf. I make-not the least doubt of his marrying her ; that if feems, is fixed; but to me every thing on his fide has more the air of one of your common interest matches, in which Love, either on one fide, or the other, but oftenest on both, takes his revenge for the not having been confulted, by. refufing his fandion to the ceremony. Thefe forebodings of mine, you may be fure, I keep from Lady Harriet. "Why stiould I, on doubts perhaps falfe and injurious, plant daggers in one of the worthiest hearts-that ever animated a human breast ? Let that then stand over.
Yesterday I was by chance witnefs to a not uncurious Scene. We were drinking tea at Lady Harriet’s, when one of the Servants came in and told us Lord Lovell was coming; his mother
happening
.1
to Mr. Mellefont.
39
happening to be out of the way on a visst at Ken-Sington. We expefited to fee him in travelling un-drefs, being but a few hours arrived in town from Holyhead. But no; he was full-dressed for an assembly that evening at Lady Evergreen’s, by an invitation that had met him twenty miles out of London. His Sister fprung round his neck to welcome him, and prefented him to Clara and me.. I dare ofwear he took me, by my appearance, for fome odd body, whom his ssster had picked up he could not conceive where, and put the full e-quivalent of that opinion into the looks with which he accompanied his compliment to me. No wonder. I heartily forgive him ; lor between you and me, in my figure and drefs, I had not amifs the fair of an old mantua maker Suing for custom, or of a candidate for the place of houSe-keeper to a city-alderman, on the recommendation of a new receipt for dressing turtle.
But when he cast his eyes on Clara, who did not, I assure you, cast her’s on him, but waited, with the utmost modesty and the ferenest unconcern, to receive his compliment, the cavalier manner in which he had finilhed his addrefs to me, and was beginning it to her, gave place to the hesitation of astonifhment, and to the refpe6Ifu1-nefs of admiration. Prefently he recovers himfelf, and, as if he had meant to make himfelf amends for the awe with which stie had infpired him, he threw himfelf into one of the arm-chairs with which the room was fet, and. Spreading himfelf out with the most eafy familiarity, began to play off fuch a battery of airs and graces, as, I dare Swear, he expefied would do great execution on the object, against which he directed them. Had you then Seen Clara, .you could not but have been edified with her behaviour. Instinctively guarded by her natural good
fenfe
40
Mrs. Buckley
fenSe against all the falSe brilliants of coxcombry, Ihe bauHced all his barbarous attempts at Ihining, with a most provoking and a most unaffeal ed inattention and negle6i;. Yet nothing could be more intelligibly at once expressed, than her profound refpea for the brother of Lady Harriet, and her perfed carelessnefs about the very fine gentlemau who was stuttering before her. A-t his first coming, he- had Spoken of his great hur^ ry to go to Lady Evergreen ; and yet he staid above three hours with us, without he himfelf I believe, obferving this inconsistency. Lady Harl riet, however. Seemed to enjoy it exultingly; though, in my opinion, there was one circumstance greatly apinst her brother: stie had often Spoken of -him to me, but always with infinitely more of assedion than of esteem. So much is certain, that Clara, during the whole time of his vifit, took fo little notice of him, that I .question much whether Ihe could have told the color of his cloaths, which were, to do him justice, very magnificent, and not absolutely without taste. When it fo fell in her way to Speak, that Silence would have appeared ill-breeding, or asseaation, (he acquitted herfelf of her part of the conversation with the utmost delicacy, and with fo much liberty of Spirit, that he had not any the least reafon to flatter himfelf with his having added her to the list of his captives at first fight.’ I Ihould be loth to rifle the wager .of his not being himfelf , without himfelf knowing it. At least there was Something So modest, fo difeoncerted, fo crest fallen in his air, at leaving us, that might authorise Such prefumption.
No fooner was he out of the room, than Lady
Harriet,
■V
■1:
r.
I

I
\ ■ i
1
to Mr. M e l l e f o n t.
41
Harriet, with great good-nature, and, I believe, great Sincerity, complimented Clara on a conquest the infallibility of which She had anticipated : to this Clara returned no anfwer but a vague eluSive one, full indeed of refpe6f, but withal So steeped in the cold of indifference, as if the objedf had been of no more account than catching a fly.
In Ihort, Clara appears to me fo much more likely to be the Scourge than the prey of a coxcomb, that I would, for a very Small premium, inSure her from the whole tribe of them.
Lady Lovel receives a great deal of company, and Some of them perSons of real worth. Lady Harriet, entirely taken up with the thoughts of her future Lord, Sees, not only without envy, but even with pleaSure, as a justification of her choice, the distinguished court paid to Clara, whom nothing but complaiSance for her could induce to accompany her to their drawing-room, being naturally averSe to mixed company, A multitude of lovers have offered themfelves upon the most honorable terms, but Clara, who makes no violent declaration against a married life, and who, whenever the topic is brought up in a way that she cannot avoid Saying Something, always Speaks reSpedtfully of love, though as of a foreign power, of which she never wishes to be the fubjedt; appears fo utterly averfe to any engagement, and throws fo repulSive a coldnefs into her air, as nips in the, bud any attempt at a propofal of that nature to her. Yet I do not think her infenfible. On the contrary, whenever she does love, I believe it will be with fuch a fervor of paflion, that the confcioufnefs of her being liable to that excefs, and her apprehenfions of her dangers from it, mak^ her keep fo Severe a guard over her heart.
It
c>-

42
Mrs. B U C K L E Y
It is with great difficulty we can get her public places, where Ihe never appears without drawing a croud after her. But this inconvenience ffie is too modest to give for a reafon ; nor do I believe it, even at bottom, the only one. She pleads a want of relifh for them, efpecially for their being staled to her by repetition ; the best, ffie fays, will hardly bear above once feeing, as there are few books that will bear above once reading. The feeing the company is no amufe-^ ment to her, and the being feen by it no temptation to a vanity which ffie has not. Plays ffie likes for the fake of their fenfe, and oparas for
the fake of their found, lieins; fond of mufic,
7	0	-r
As
both in quality of judge and performer. /\s to cards, the reafon ffie gives for not having learned to play any game, is, that ffie had no taste for them ; by which ffie did not in the least mean to impeach the taste of others, but that having never wanted for fomething in her idea, better to do or to fay, ffie had never, for a re-courfe against fuch a heavinefs of time hanging on the hands, as ffie had never experienced, been driven to a diverfion, which, abstradted from the taint of avarice in it, feemed to her only a refuge from idle dulnefs into bufy inSipidity. She leaves, then, cards very contentedly to thofe who like them, without blaming, and certainl' without envying them. And in thefe opinions ffie is fo far from giving herfelf a wife fententious air, that they come from her in the stile of an apology for her Angularity, and wiffi greatly the more effedt, for her fo clearly posteffiag the rare merit of a total exemption from affidfation, that tormentor of nature, that poifonerof beauty, that murther-er of the graces. Having formed both her taste and her heart upon the best models, ffie has nothing to do but to abandon her words and geff
turei
i
I
to Mr. M E L L E F O N T.	43
fares to the freedom of their courfe. Thence e-very thing fhe fays or does breathes the fweets of native ssmplicity, and strikes with all the pathos of fentimental energy. In fhort, the more 1 study Clara, the more I am convinced of her being herfelf a fortune, and fuperior to a title, though I am very clear of two points; first, that Lady Lovell would fooner fee her fon married to a witch of quality, than to an angel in her rank in life; and next that Earl Lovell is not capable of judging, or, at least of being captivated by her virtues. She may, and I do not doubt but fhe already has, railed his defires, but I much question his being fufceptible of love, a defect which will eternally defend Clara against any danger from him. I have entered into thefe particulars to fatisiy you of tire motives of my i'ecurity about lier ; for had I any the least ap-. prehenfions about her, I would immediately pre-
from Lady Lovell’s ; but it would be cruel to give a pain, efpecially as the proximity of the Marquefs of Soberton’s arrival will naturally bring' on a Separation, without any violence to either.	-
I am your’s, &c.
vail on her to remove without fuch a reafon, Lady Harriet fo great
LETTER M.
\
Lord Lovell to Henry Golding, E/g'^ at
Chester.
Fear Hal,	London.
Have not been above two or three days in town. But before I come to the point, which I have, at prefent, most at hearty let me difpatch two fools whom you laid in m-y way.
First,
*
mm


44
Lord Lovell
First, then, pray acquaint that mirror of knighthood, Sir .Marmaduke Wormly, of my having, according to promife, tried the market, as to his chance of Succeeding in his offer to the ministry, of fo great a bargain as himfelf; and that the refult of my inquiry, is that whether he is inclined to put himfelf up at public au6lion, or to fell himfelf by private contra^ he may find a purchafer to treat with him. But this cannot be fo well done without a little previous perfonal attendance at the ministerial levee, or Statute-hall kept for hiring Servants of all work ; when you may tell him for his comfort, that nothing more will be required of him, than his having no charafter, and being qualified for no Service.
By going a little out of the road, I managed fo as to call at your coufin Primrofe’s, who, I hope in the Lord, is only your relation. I had alighted at an inn in his neighbourhood, and Sent to know if he would receive my vifit; upon which, after making me wait Some little time, he came himfelf, drest at all points in form like Garter King at Arms, on a day of ceremony, and received me with Such convulfions of civility, that I could hardly keep from laughing out in his pretious face, that little yellow Shrivelled face of his, that looked like a dried mustiroon. To his houfe then he infisted I Should go, of which, in our way to it, he gave me as magnificent a description, as if it had been the palace of a Fairy Queen, with ten thoufand bed-chambers, fix thousand Saloons, three hundred and Sixty-five courtyards, befides garrets, cellars, clofets, and cupboards. I could not imagine where this stupendous fabric could have modestly withdrawn from view, for it never entered into my head, that he was Speaking of a huddle of Spit-over hovels,
clapped
1
T
K
r
to H ENRY Golding,
45
clapped together to form what he termed the Seat of his illustrious progenitors, which stood, or rather was falling just before ui. When I found my error, I bit my lips, to keep from laughing out, as I entered this manSion of the Primrofes. He carried me to his best room, where, in honor to his taste, hunsr half-a-dozen villainous
paintings, beneath the difplay of figns in Harp-alley, and which he currently fhewed me for (b many Raphael’s, Correggio’s, and Dominiehino’s. In stiort, I never faw a higher original except his old maiden Sister, who keeps his houfe. I do not know whether fhe had any tender destgns
but furely a more ridiculous- caricature and affectation was never exhibited
It was about
upon me, of uglinefs than this
Caliban in petticoats, breakfast time when I arrived, and after being made to wait a great while for one perishing of hunger, madam made her appearance in all her
of drefs; but what with that win-
After breakfast, he car-
powers
ter-piece, her head, hoary with age, and frosted with powder, her wainfcoat-face, and a white tabby gown with green steeves and breast-knots, she reminded me of an old fashioned hall stuck with Christmas. But the infantine airs she gave her-fcli, with a voice as hoarfe as a boat-fwain’s, coming from an enormous mouth, stuck with teeth, Set at distances, like mile-stones, almost took away my stomach, tied me to fee his damned cabbage-garden, with his fuperb menagery, in which, by way of exotic curioSities, there was a mangy Irish wolf-dog, a stinking pole-cat, a stck-monkey, a lame .mule, a dumb parrot, a Friezland hen dying of the pip, and two Mufcovy-ducks mudfucking in a dirty puddle, which he dignified with the name of a canal. You may eaSily guefs how thefe ab-furdities delighted me ; I verily think I should
have

4-6
Lord Lovell
have staid to enjoy them longer, if I had not been in Such a hurry to get to town. I came away, however, without doing your bustnefs; which, after all his assurances to you of getting it eaSily done, I foon found is no more in his power, than the crown of Poland is in mine.
1 had another little affair of my own to fettle at St. Alban’s, where I staid about four days, and received an invitation from that eternal hag. Lady Evergreen, to her assembly, with a fhrewd hint of Mrs. Marigold being to be there, the once fo much admired Mifs Ba^^in; who, in her lust for money, facrissced the charms of an angel to age, difeafes, and impotency. She is now looking out, it feems, for a fupplement to her dearee’s deficiencies; but I am not her man. To me fhe stinks of her hufband. As who the devil would not have his stomach turned, at the thought of making a meal of what lies cold and maimed on Such a fellow’s trencher? Yet I was determined to go, by the hopes of feeing that little flirt Jenny Perks there, to whom I had done the honor of having fome thoughts of her, before I was fuddenly called to Ireland, and fo was forced to leave the reduction of the place unfinifhed, though, I may venture to fay, there were broad figns of a capitulation, which, I believe, will now come to nothing ; for the reafon you lhall hear.
On coming to town, I immediately went to my ov/n houfe, to drefs for the aiSembly. I knew my mother was not at home, but I pro-pofed a vifit to my Singular Sister, who, you know, is fo far gone in the fentimental way : And whom do you think I found with her ? An old good looking fort of a decent Joan Douce, and a girl in mourning of about fifteen. Ay! that girl! Hal! that girl is, at this moment, the lady of my af-
cendant ;

/
t’-’
K'h-
r.
hit
V;
V
I.
•i" •
V.’ i -

(• >
S-,
/(? M E N R Y G O L "D I N 0, EL ;	47
vendant; in Ihori, I was planet flruck.. But, as inflammable as I befpeak your pronouncing me, let me, at the fame time remind you of a juf-tice due to me, that I am at least too nice of taste to be caught by a vulgar form. But this angelic creature it was impostible to fee without a tranfport of admiration. A complexion dazzling-'ly fair^ enlivened by the rofeate color of her cheeks. Then her eyes!—but I will not go on, I fhould lofe myfelf in a defcription that must faint under the reality; yet, let me add, that all the exqui-stte beauty of her features and stiape, were nothing to the air of delicacy and of dignity which animated the whole I gazed on her with fuch intenfe rapture, as must have put her to pain, had stie minded me, but I never could once catch her eyes on me, though I did and faid all I could to attrai£t her notice. As she kept, for fome time, an unbroken Silence, I was in good hopes she was dumb, or an ideot, that she might have fewer arms against me. But my precious Sister, with mifchief, I believe, in her heart, was determined not to leave me that refource, by directing difcGurfe to her, which could not but produce anfwers., and by turning thofe anfwers into matter of farther question, she fucceeded fo far to draw her out of covert, as made me very ■clear that she had a great share of wit and understanding ; nor a more melodious voice did I ever hear, than that which graced her utterance, and font every word to the heart In the mean while, in honor to truth, I must fay, that I did not, on this occaSion, make the most brilliant figure. By all 1 xould gather from her behaviour to me, she refhained rather more heart-whole than myfelf. I could obfervr in her nothing towards me but the rnost eafy unconcern, and the most chil-
lina indifference
Patience! My day of revenge
will
*
t.
i.
i
48>
Lord Lovell
will come. Have her I will, cost what it will. For, after all, what do you think this prodigy fhould be ? A poor parfon’s daughter, with a fortune, I fuppofe, of twenty pounds, from the feast, at St. Paul’s, for the children of the clergy. My Sister dear picked her up, I am told, at a boarding-fchool, and, I should imagine rather unadvifedly, keeps her for a companion : But this will be very commodious for me. Yes, yes, I fancy a shiall matter of courtship and a brace of thoufands will do the bussnefs.
However, one Sacrifice I immediately made, for on my leaving them, my propofed going to Lady Evergreen’s affembly was as much out of the question with me, as the throwing myfelf into the river, I came home diredlly, and Spent the remainder of the evening, and a good part of the night, in reflexions on the new conquest I was meditating, and in digesting my plan of operations against this fair enemy of my quiet. As to the istue, I do- not greatly defpair of it. Remember that I attack in a coronet, at the head of a good rent-roll, to fay nothing of my having the authority of more than one lady, to write myfelf 'a pretty fellow. Yet, hang it, I do not know how it is, but I cannot jest with So good a grace as I wish, on this matter : I feel I am more in earnest than ever I was in my life ; and, ’fdeath ! why not? I never Saw fo fine a creature before. By all the powers of Love and Fortune, she shall be mine.
Mean while, Hal, I am terribly at alofs for you. I have fifty acquaintances that are equivalent to the town trumpets, for joining with me to publish the fuccefs of an intrigue, but not one I can trust to for assisting me in the conduXing it, in its infancy. In fuch matters, you are my whole privy-council : and now you are unluckily out of the
way
r 4
to Henry Golding, EL;
49
way, .upon a wilcl-gooSe chafe after a damned law-fuir, which I am afraid will never come to good, for your lawyer here, that was, and whom you have left for one, who flatters >our inclination without regard to your interest, infists on it that you have not the (hadow of right on your fide.. You may not perhaps, indeed, defpair the more of your caufe for that.
My next will, I hope, bring you advice of my having made Some promifing advances. Since I cannot have the benefit of your aid in perfon, I find at least fome relief in this epistolar confidence bn a fubjedf which is at prefent the foie bufinefs of my life. Can I live without having her in my arms whom I have eternally in my head ?
Your’s, &c.
Lovell.
LETTER VII.
Lord Lovell to Henry Golding, EL;
London.
Your last, dear Hal, treats my prefent en-terprize with Such an air of compliment oil the facility of it, as I would willingly take for a good omen, if unhappily my own; experience, and, by this time, a better knowledge of the ene- . my, had not reduced the fanguinenefs of my hopes, to terms of greater moderation. Yet were you even here at hand to make your obfervations, I could forgive your being deceived by all the appearances of things in my favor, while I have an un-aufpicious prefentiment that the bottom is clearly and defperately against me.
VoL. I.	D	If
5©
Lord Lovell
It is now near a month Since I have had as free an admittance to Clara as her stay with my Sister may be Suppofed to admit: and, to my eternal stiame, I do not find myfelf one jot more advanced than at the first instant that my pastxon commenced. And yet, half this time, you well know, has heretofore Sufficed for me to bring down a coun-tefs, two baronets ladies, and the daughter of a country ’fquire. It would be pleafant enough if I Ihould lofe all the honors of my generalstiip before a place, which one would imagine, at the first view, very stightly fortified: no dragons of relations, no jealous guardians of a great fortune, to take* alarm at the approaches of an invader. Lady Harriet, who would not. So much I know -of her, for worlds, contribute to the promotion of any de-figns, which would not be stridlly agreeable to her principles of prudery, and who, I believe, rather entertains, with regard to Clara, the most abfurd and chimerical of all hopes, that of my having de-figns of a more Serious nature on her ; a thought for which Lady Lovell would not very readily forgive her, if stie but fufpefled it; Lady Harriet, I fay, provokes me horridly with that perfeft Security and infolent unconcern, with which fhe abandons her friend, as she calls her, to the worst of my defigns. But, what is yet more unaufpicious .for me, Clara’s conduct towards me justifies but too much this confidence. She does not feem to do me the honor of fearing me. She neither stiuns nie, nor throws herfelf in my way ; and without ever Seeking occafions to Speak to me, when Speak to me stie does, it is always with fuch an air of unconsttaint, fuch an intrepid affability, as difconcerts me a thoufand times more than Shi-nefs, or referve. In stiort, she leaves to the most frozen, and the most constant indifference, the care to tell me on what terms I stand with her.
It
to Henry Goldin g., Efg\
51
It is true, ssie fhews me abundance of refpedl:, if that would fatisfy me; but the vexation of it is, that this refpeSt is much of the nature of that which Ihe pays to Lady Lovell; that leads to no Other confequence, than if I was her grandmother. You may guefs how encouraging this is for me to enter on a declaration of love. I have tried often with her the old trick of taking circuits in conversation, to make it land at length on that fubjedl, with a view to fome overture of my paffion. But of this she has constantly difappointed me, without any affedlation of eluding my deSign, only by fuch a Silence as it might be fuppofed she would keep on a question of geometry or Algebra being started before her. She is at no pains to shift the difcourfe, for she takes no part in it; and lets it fall to the ground, without io much as a motion to take it up.
I happened one day, just as my lister was gone out of the room and she was following her, to defire her with a befeeching look, to stay, as if I had Something very extraordinary to communicate to her, which, by the way, was the cafe ; for I had really armed myfelf with refolution to break the ice. So far as a declaration may be called breaking it. On this intimation, she turned short upon me, with a look of emphatic Severity ; and, making a low curteSy, ajked me if I had any commands for her; and and without waiting for my anfwer, which she left sticking in my throat, went out abruptly after Harriet. Nothing in the world could be fo contrary to her ufual -politenefs, and therefore I have fome rea-Son to think she had penetrated my deSign, and, preventively of it, did herfelf'this violence.
Among my difpofitions to attack, it will be ea-fy for you to think that I did not omit the old and fo often Successful one, of prefents; but as I had reafon to think she would not accept any
Da	that
:r
k

52
Lord L o V E L L
that were crudely offered to herSelf, I contrived, without affedlation, an opportunity of prefenting Lady Harriet wnth Some very rich jewels; of C at the fame time, I made it rather a point of breeding, than of gallantry, to intreat of Clara her acceptance of duplicates of them, which I had prepared for that purpofe. But even that Scheme would not take; fhe refufed them w'ith the most, polite and the most cold thankfulnefs; and with no other excufe, than that wanting nothing, she w'oiild receive nothing. Lady Harriet only shook her head, and Said, “ Poor brother !” and very currently took her share of the intended prefents, but fent them back to me the next morning, with an ironical sheer, that she could not in confeiertee keep them, as my deSign in my gene-roSity had So lamentably mifearried. I made, however, fo feriousty a point of her receiving them a-gain, that, though with great reludfance, and for fear of an abfolute quarrel with me, she confented; hut, in revenge, she mifchievoufly thanked Clara for them, as it .was to her, she faid, she owed them.
Such an incident would, with most women, have at least done she no disservice, but Clara breaks all my rules of judgment of the fex. I could, lince that time, feel, in her behaviour to me, rather an increafe of- a coldnefs, which was, in all cohfciencc, great enough before.
You know the impetuossty of my temper, and that to me, who am accustomed to fummary proceedings, and to furrenders at the first fummons, even a delay must appear a denial of justice to me. My impatience then is put to a terrible trial, by fo new and unaccountable a fituation, that in all this time I have not been able to get fo far as the initial step of a delaration. At this rate, a man should have a patriarchal length of life to undertake
an

■j
to H E N R Y Golding, Efq:,
53
i
m amour. By the time it would take me to reduce the place, I ssiould be too old to enjoy my victory.
I fuppofe I might come to my point instantly, if I could but prevail on myreiS to make honorable propofals, but that I am liot yet So far gone as to think of doing, even if Lady Lovell would give her confeut, to which, I am very certain, no earthly consideration could bring her. As much as fhe doats on me, and as ready as She would be to Sacrifice any point of interest to me, fhe is So stark quality-mad, that my raarrying any woman not of-a titled family, would go near to kill her. In this,-her presumable oppoSition to my playing the fool, and marrying, forSooth, for love, turns upon a very different obje6fion from, mine. 1 am not the bubble of any Such nonSenSe. Between you and me, and not to let it go any farther, I would at any time prefer the four quarters of pure fleSh and blood, of the humblest cottager, if (he was but handSome, to the fixteen quarters of deScent of a PrinceSs that was not So. Even interest or fortune do not move me much. But the truth is, that with the utmost pa-ffion for the Sexy I have an invincible averSion against matrimony; not from any great dread of an abridgment of liberty-; for, I promise you, I should make the yoke fit as eafy on me as an old flipper. And,i ndeed, to do juf-tice to our times, the nuptial ceremony often Separates more than it unites many a woeful pair, by driving them more than ever into Society, as a refuge from one another.
To me the great plague of a wedded life is, that it Sets Such a damned sheep-mark upon a man, as is very unfavourable to my darling pashon for-variety!, Every woman almost to whom you make your addresses, from the fine lady to the pert chana-
D 3	bermaidj
•	V.
%
54
Lord L o V E L L
bermaid, fends you, with a Smart rebuff, back to your wife, or flaps you in the face with the w’rcng you are doing to your fweet lady, your good lady, fo that in pity to her they pique themfelves on being cruel to you. Not that there are not to be found fuch as will make no objeftion toycu on that account, but then they must be either downright mean mercenary creatures or feme frightful stale women of quality, with whom one would not wifh to avail onefelf of their noble Superiority to a vulgar prejudice.
The married men too, theirfelves, have in general, among the women, a fort of foolish, inst-pid air, as if confeious of having forfeited that title to the univerfal joy, which is currently allowed to fuch honest fellows as we that have grace enough to preferve our liberty. Even the women of honor receive us more cordially, and look with a better eye on us, the pandours and huflars of gallantry, than on the regulars of wedlock, to whom they fuppofe themfelves more indifferent than to us, who are known to be prowling about for plunder. For tho’ a woman may be determined enough against making a flip, she may nevertheless prefer thofe, as affording her the greater matter of merit, with whom she would be the freest; to make the flip.
In short, dear Hal, I cannot Surmount my antipathy for the connubial state ; but could I even be fo abandoned by my- better genius, as, in a rutting-fit to rush upon matrimony, like Lord PepperaU, reeking from the stews, I do not know one in the world with whom I could Sooner commit fuch a folly than with Clara.
Yet how to get her on my own terms, “ aye, that is the question Her uniform stmplicity of principles confounds all the turnings and windings of art; and the worst of it is, I fee no glimpfe of hope of her departure fropi that refolute evennefs,
that
to Henry Golding, EJqi,
55
that calm steddineSs, which one may plainly fee in her, has even more foundation in charafiler than in education.
With your noble way of thinking you will probably wonder that I have not recourfe to Some stratagem, or even violence, to get her perfon into my postestlon, and fo take the stiortest way with my fair distenter. But thofe Schemes of rapes, or running away with women, are, in the first place, what I have always detested and defpifed; be-Sides, they rarefy or ever anfwer the end, and in this country efpecially are next to imprafti-cable. But as to Clara, for many reafons that ! could give you, the probability of fucceeding in Such an attempt would hardly be lefs than that of a Sallee rover’s cruizing above bridge, and making a prize of a Thames-wherry carrying a company to Vauxhall.
I could, however, as foon* think of parting with life, as of giving over my purfuit: it is not even, in my power, stie fo engrosses my whole foul. She is the center of all my wisties. In fhort, I propofe to leave nothing unattempted that can give me a chance of fucceeding with, her (take me right) in-my own way.
There is a certain Mrs. Buckley, who appears to me a devilisti Shrewd, fenfible woman, and not in very affluent circumstances. She is a kind of aunt or relation, by marriage, to Clara, and pof-festes, as I have reafon to think, her confidence, without referve. Now it is not impossible but stie may be the weak fide of this apparently inexpugnable place ; at least, it is worth trying: When, if I do not carry my point with her, I have one grand battery in referve, that I think can hardly fail; but that is a thought I hoard up like old! gold, not to be brought out but as my last stake. In the mean while, I almost envy the happinefs of
D 4	thofe
6
Lord Lovell
5
thofe humdrums who are proof against the charms of variety: If they have fewer pleafures, they have alfo fewer pains. You fee how I am Served by my taste for it: After having dragged me from change to c’ ange, it has brought me, at length, to my prefent distradied state; between a violent jiastlon for enjoyment, and a refolution not to obtain it on the only terms I am afraid it is to be obtained, and which to encreafe my perplexity, I fee others ready to offer, whofe pretenstons to title and fortune are very little inferior to mine. Hitherto I have only this comfort, that to my rivals She keeps unalterably the fame tenor of coolnefs referve, and difcouragement, as to me. But then I tremble to think of the advantage their honorable destgns, forfooth! give them over me, especially v/ith a girl of fo moderate a fortune.
That pale, bloodlefs fribble, lord Phillimore, with a very good- estate, has not only to herfelf made propofals of marriage, with a jointure at her own discretion, but has got Lady Lovell to interest herSelf in his, behalf, who was furpriSed enough at the offer, but stood petrefied with asto-niSliment at Clara’s modest, but firm rejedlion of it. Nor is this the only'one, whom that matchleSs girl has treated fo, without giving them any cauSe of offence, in the. manner of her refufal, and especially without herSelf appearing the vainer.
Mean while all theSe distindlions stown to, Clara, begin to give Lady Lovell Some uneafinefs for-The, by lessening to her ideas that impoffibility she had always preSumed of my demeaning mySelf, as she v/ould certainly call it, in having any Serious thoughts of one So much below me, as a poor parfon’s daughter. This however is a folly which I forgive in my good lady-mother, in favor of the double ufe I may possibly make of it, towards accomplishing my ends on Clara, and mySelf at
th,2

to Henry Golding,
57.
the Same time efcaplng the horrors of the nuptial chains. Good luck to the fish who runs away with the. bait, without being itfelf caught by the hook!
Adieu.l dear Hal; v/ish me death or Speedy, vidtory.
Yours, &c.
L'ovelLo
L E T T E R VIIL
Mrs. Buckley to Mr. Mellefont.'
Dear Nephew
Krih monel
Your letters* gave me great pleafure in the Satisfaffion they exprefs at Clara’s condu<9:, and at the constant eye I have to every thing that concerns her. I Saw the last letter she wrote you, as indeed she has no referves for me, and could not help remarking that she defrauded you of a great deal of the pleafure to find her fo worthy of your good opinion, by that indifference with which she flips over, without inSistence on points that most of car fex would treat as the greatest matter of boast, the number and quality of the lovers who have presented themfelves, and whofe fuit she has eluded, without giving sherfelf the air of eluding them.
She has not I find, So much as mentioned to you Lord Lovell among her admirers, and that for a reafon which I fancy w’ould rather gall his lordship, if he knew it; but, on this occafion, his vanity
4
5
♦
■* Some letters, the receipt of which is mentionedi in the courfe of thefe Memoirs, and which being immaterial to the ftory, are cohtted.
D 5	remains.
58
Mrs. Buckley
\
remains, like a blinded hulband, unhurt by ofFenees of which he is ignorant.
For thofe of her Suitors, who have accompanied their declarations of love with Such honorable pro-pofals as topk away from her all right of complaining, (he has, I am perfuaded, all that regard, and even gratitude that they could deSire, conSistent with her firm refolution not to give her hand without her heart, which I am pretty fure is hitherto totally free. But as to Lord Lovell, I could almost Swear fhe never threw away a thought upon him. In quality of brother to Lady Harriet, for whom fhe has a boundlefs regard, he commands and obtains her utmost refpe^f; But for any thing farther, I am very perfectly clear, there is not that man on earth that is more indifferent to her.
Nor can I fay I much condemn her. He b one of Fortune’s Spoilt children, his education having been like that of too many of our nobility, principally committed to a tutor, who, not having in himfelf a fpark of elevation of Sentiment, could, hardly communicate it to his pupil.
His travels, which, in the old rote, were merely matter of fafhion, had been little better than a, filly, unmeaning Scamper over Europe, in the courfe of which he had expofed fome of the foN lies of his own country, and brought back with him many of thofe of foreign ones. Superficial observations on things themfelves beneath attention, the fopperies of courts, the childilh play at. Soldiers, in military raree-fhows, or, theatrical camps, with a, list of the names of the most celebrated fingers- and fiddlers of Italy, and a vile jargon of the technical terms of painiing ill-understood, and consequently for ever mifapplied, com-pofed the whole stock of improvement, which, at kis. return, made him appear, to his lady-mother
fuch-
/
to M". M E L L E F O N T .
59
c.
2*
Such a prodigy as princesses might kneel to, and kneel in vain.
To finish him, he fell into the rank with the reft of his fellow-lordlings, and went foufe into all the miferies which they have the impudence,, or the tasselesshefs, to call high-life; the noble Sphere of which confists in felling themfelves and their country, like negroes, to fome minister as worthiest as themfelves; in cheating or being cheated, at the gaming-table or on the turf; in being lived, on by their flatterers, poifoned by their cooks, and cullied- by drabs whom their footmen might difdain.. Not that, at bottom,. Lord Lovell had not with fome wit, more hopeful difpofitions, but he was weak- enough to be fub-dued by the instinct of imitation, fo as to be drawn into the whirl of the current follies, and became good for nothing by the force of example. No-
however, more common than that flimfy pliancy, that imbecility of charafter, which renders fo many the vidtims of a falfe Sname. They dare not break herd, afraid of the ridicule of idiots for not refembling them,, a refemblance which one would imagine no great temptation. Is not this much fuch an abfurdity, as it would be for a man in' health,, thrown by chance into a lazaretto of lepers, to dread their deriSion for not catching the infedfion; and for not having the honor to be covered like them with livid fpots and loathfome ul--cers?-
Thence it is, in a great meafure, that in conformity to the epidemical roitenefs of the times,. Lord Lovell, without t e fpirit to ralfe .himfelf above them, without regard for the welfare of his country, which might go to the devil for what he cares, without any passion for true honor, without, fo much as an idea of that heroic ardor which characterizes great men,-is filly enough to forgive
him--
6o
Mrs ^ Buckley
himfelf the wretched ufe he makes of fuch great advantages, as birth, title, and fortune, and withr all humble enough to fit down, like fo many others, ignobly in contented worthleffnefs, and under the just reproach of having heceflarily recourfe to tri-. lies from a want of relissi or capacity for great affairs. Alas! take from them their follies, their frivolous amufements, what would you leave them ? how would you fill up the terrible gap you would have made ? Nature is Said to abhor a vacuum : if their minds are over-run with the vilest weeds, is it not becaufe their minds are not a Soil for great Sentiments to grow or take root in ? It is not that all, or even many of them, are ignorant of their duty, but they have a want of manly enough firmnefs in their charadier to purSue it: they know, perhaps, the value of all the virtues, without its being in their power to praDice them ; as a man may know v/ell enough the value of a thoufand guineas, who cannot command a {billing.
Lord Lovell, it is true. Sometimes pays to vanity the tribute of attempting to gain importance, by rifing up to Speak in the houfe; but how he must acquit himfelf you w'ill eafily conclude, from the following reflection, obvious; to common fenfe, and applicable to numbers of his rank.
Let the frivolous objeQ: of purfuit, or fancy, of the generality of our lords or men of fortune, be what it wull, horfe-racing let me Specify, for example, you will find, that after making it the buSinefs of their little lives, to pafs for great men in it, when they come to take it for their topic of conversation, all consummately familiar as one would imagine it to them, they fpeak upon it in bad language, and with worfe judgment, even pitifully enough to be laughed at by their teachers, the horfe-jockeys, riding-grooms, lielpers, and
boot-
to Mr. M E L L E F O N T.
6i
boot-catchers. Now iS thefe great men mak^ So miserable a figure on thofe frivolous and favourite points, which they have studied for years, and which are hardly above the lowest capacity, what can be expefiled from them on thofe-great obje^s, the affairs of the nation, foreign and domestic, which they never studied at all, and which, if they did, would more than probably be above their comprehension ?
In the mean while, even their herding instin£t is owing to their being necessary to one another. Uneafy in company where they could not help feeling difagreeably their inferiority, they Seek for the mean defpicable eafe and relief to their vanity, in associating with Such as they cannot fufpe61: of giving them that pain. They live together, as women vifit, without a Spark of friendfhip ; they meet without esteem, and part without regret.
. Pleafure they worlhip as their idol, without one just idea of what it is, and ruinousty Sacrificing to it health, fortune, and fair fame, fall theirfelves the vifitims of an unknown God. Taste, you will fay, is arbitrary,, and that the pleafure of the plough boy, who wifhed to be a king, that he might ride upon a gate all day long, was as essentially pleafure to him. as carrying a point against, the country might be to a monarch, filly enough to have a Separate interest from it. True. But then the boy has not the abfurd impudence of demanding refpecl for his choice. I have no ob-je<£iion to a man’s rolling himfelf in a kennel; but I fhould wifh he would not recommend it to me for a delicious bath. Then the mifchief thefe men of power and fafhion do by diffufing their falfe taste, and making it the common nonfenfe of a nation, is really no laughing matter, nor indeed a . very triumphable fuccefs even for themfelves. In extirpating all the virtues which, make Society happy,
fuch
62
Mn. B U C K L E Y
Such as friendlhip, moral-love, generollty, and’ love of country, to make way for all the mean destrii6tive vices, felfissineSs, debauchery, avarice, corruption, thefe leaders of the multitude appear to me to a6t juft as wifely as the poffessbr of a garden, ftored with Salutary delicious fruit, would' do, who Ihould pull up all the trees that bore it^, and fill his ground in their ftead with a fhrubbery of dangerous plants and noxious weeds, poppies, bang, hemlock, nigl^shade, and the poifons of Marmol’..
The times then had; no doubt, their share im forming Lord Lovell’s charadfer. Among other choice inftances of the humor and pleafantry in; vogue, that of bantering is in high favor' with. Lord Lovell, who thinks it great wit to make a> common pradlice of it. It is Something in the low ftile of your old college wit of bamboozzling,, which being at length exploded at the Univerfity, is come to make its fortune in town; The greats joke is for one of theSe wits to deceive, and laugh at you for your not thinking him a knave or a liar.. Somewhat in this way, Lord Lovell will take bold of the hand of any man, eSpecially of talents or of worth, who has been unlbrtunate enough to addreSs himSelf to him for a favor, and telS him, with a tone of the greateft fervor and Sincerity, that “ he wonders Such eminent parts can^ ** be flighted—that the Scate Suffers by not feek-** ing out for Such men,, and employing them —
‘‘ that for his part, he is- Sorry for nothing So--much as its not being in his power to do the justice he wished to fuch tranScendant merit.”-— The poor man, who is the butt of this barbarous attempt at wit and humor, greedily devours this mockery, and'does not See that my lord.is enjoying his mistake, and expofing him-to by-standers, by winking with- one eye, and tonguing out his
cheek.
to Mr. Mellefont.
^3
cheek.
Among others, he Served your friend Dr. Morell So, who obferved it, and told me, he was horribly tempted to Spit in his face.
He. gives himfelf another air, which I own pleafes me extremely, and that is, the declaration of an outrageous averSion against matrimony. For this I would even greatly honor him, if it proceeded from a principle of justice to himfelf and of kindnefs to our Sex', in an unwillingnefs to make any woman of merit fo mifer^le, as a match with him could hardly fail of doing!^ But no ! the rea-fon, according to him, of his detestation of the nuptial tie, is, that the name of a wife would be a dreadful stumbling-block to him in his carreer of gallantry : and yet, if all his conquests are as un-triumphable ones as thofe I have heard of. I should think he gives matrimony its full revenge for his railing against it, Thefe I mean are the stale battered Countefs of Flautantribus, of whom half the town had been Sick thefe' ten years; tw'O baronets ladies, the one parted from her hushand for being caught a-bed with his footman ; the other, far from handfome, and a born ideot; and a coun-try-fquire’s daughter, who had Some time before come up to town to lie in of a bastard she had by a strolling player, with whom she fell in love on feeing him massacre the part of Tamerlane in a barn.
Peace be to his Lordship, with all his equipage of conquests at his heels; but without fee or^reward, 1 could let him into the fecret of the true reafon, at bottom, of his indifpoSition to matrimony ; a reafon which, probably, he neither knov/s nor fufpedis ; and that is, his moral incapacity for love. That passion, without being a ridiculous Platonifm, which never existed but in the fancy-ridden head of fome philofbpher, who having more imagination than judgment, left Nature out of the question, in
her



6a
Mrs. B U C K I. E T
r*
.■M
her favorite object of attention : that passion, I fay, for ever, tacitly, or exprefly, includes a pro-pofal of its duration and constancy to the obje£l of it, and’thus combines destre with the fentiment that; fantfstfies iti And this is fo far from being an over-strained or metaphystcal notion, that it stands instindlively the common, fenfe of mankind, where undepraved by falfe refinements, or fuperior to the being driven like mere brutes by the fenfual goad. To go no farther than our own country ; you See not only in the rural Sphere of life, where innocence of manners rnost flourifhes, but even a-midst: all the distblutenefs of towns, the honest mechanic, the industrious tradefman, the generality, in short of the people, hold it for a principle, to found their profpe6; of domestic happinefs on this very combination of a passion for. the enjoyment of the woman they like, with a wish of its fettled permanency in a legal union. And this fim-plicity of view,:which is, in fa£t, an instinct of Nature, may, in all ranks of mankind, from the King, to the Shepherd, with perhaps different degrees of warmth and of delicacy, justly be called Love. : A name, of which it is a prostitution to give it to matches of mere convenience of families* of fordid interest, or of a brutal appetite that looks no farther than a momentary gratification. In this, dear nephew, you are very lenSible that I am launching out into no viSionary ideas; you are, happily, your-fe,lf an instance of their being praQiically true. You, who furnish, in your own procedure, an edifying example of the permanent blifs to be found in moral love, a love approved by God and Mar. But, to be qualified for Such:happinefs, it is indif-penfably requiSite to have a heart; now that is what Nature has refufed to too many human creatures. And Surely a man without a heart, is absolutely; and in the worst fenfe, as disqualified for
the


to Mr. M E L L E F O N T,	65
the greatest and most exqmSite pleafurcs of love, as the guardians of a Seraglio. Is not, to a true taste, impotency of Spirit leSs eligible than impo-tency of body ? Or does enjoyment, without love, deferve the name of enjoyment ? In this light, which I defy any one justly to call a falfe one, how much would fo many of our miferable men of wit and pleafure, about town, have to difcount of their boasts of their having had a number of women as worthiest as themfelves ? In this light, I do not at all wonder at Lord Lovell’s disinclination to a state, for which he wants the most estential qualification, that of the heart: an incurable defe6f, for which I stiould think it as great cruelty to blame, or rather not to pity him, as it would be to laugh at or re-fufe compastion to a man born blind, for his want of fight. Beauty may give Lord Lovell defires, becaufe he has eyes; but never love, becaufe he has no heart; he may postibly I;now the grofs pleasures of fenfation; but never the voluptuous raptures of Sentiment: by nature difinherited of the most exalted blifs that it is in her power to confer, he stands for ever condemned to a volubility of defire, like Sifyphus, from the bottom of a hill to roll a stone, that never reaching or remaining on the fummit, but perpetually recoiling upon him, fubje£ts him to an eternal fatigue in vain. He is bound never to rife beyond the animal gratification of an appetite, as distindf from the noble palllon of love as vice is from virtue: an appetite that has no confistence: while inconstancy produced by difgust, and by the weaknefs of a foul incapable of attaching itfelf to a worthy objeff, makes him the bubble of a fickly fancy roving from mistrefs to mistrest, courfing pleafure, and never catching it, or at best a phantom in its stead.
Carried away by the fubjefl:. I was going on,when
s
a ca


€6
Mrs. Buckley
f
a caSual cast of my eye, on the tremendous length of the preceding Scrawl, admonifhed me to conclude for the prefent; with referve to give you, by the next post, the remainder of what I have to fay, .where you will abundantly fee the reafon of this preamble relative to Lord Lovell. In the mean while, I am ever yours, &c.
Lucy Buckley.


* • 'X
J	•
#
#
Nr"*
* •




LETTER IX.
Mrs. Buckley to Mr. Mellefont.

FAcbmond.
Resuming the fubje6l of my last, I proceed in the account I have to give you of Lord Lovell, by way of necessary introduftion.
As if every thing had confpired to give his head* a cast more wrong than perhaps nature meant it Should have, his evil genius betrayed him into the acquaintance of one Golding, whom he-picked up on the turf at Newmarket, and whom, he took afterwards for his companion and confident ; one who is infinitely worfe than a Scoundrel erefiled intp a gentleman, being a gentleman funk into a Scoundrel. Nor will you think the term too harSh, after the fafit I have to relate to you, which chara^erifes strongly this honorable friend and associate of the right honorable Lord Lovell.
A little before I went to Cornv/all, I had employed as a milliner one Mrs. Mabberley, a decent, Sober, industrious woman. She had often Sent home to me the tittle articles of her bufi-nefs by one of her journey-women, a girl of about Seventeen, but one of the prettiest creatures you can
ima««
Mr
67
Imagine, breathing the fweets of innocence and youth, and withal So well-behaved, fo fenssble, that I could not help taking particular notice of her. Some years afterwards, when I return d to town, I let Mrs. Mabberley have my custom again, and took occafion to inquire what was become of her pretty journey woman. Her anfwer was, that stie was a good-for-nothing huffy, who had been drawn astde by a vile fellow, one Golding, who had debauched and left her. This, I have stnce found, was the identical Goldipg, in Such high favor with Lord Lovell. At that time I thought no more of. the girl, and was only Sorry that one, who had appeared to me to deferve a better fate, had not efcaped a stiipwreck only too common to afford much Surprize. A few days afterwards, in a retired part of Hyde-park, who stould I meet with there but this young woman, dressed with great neat-nefs and Simplicity, with her child by that fellow, to whom She was procuring the benefit of a walk and the air ? At feeing me fo unexpectedly, stie' would have modestly decIirTed any notice from me, and, for that purpofe, turned her head astde, and was pasting on. I made up to her with all the encouragment I could throw into my looks and addrefs, and with really more of tender concern, than of an impertinent curio-fity, drew her story from her, which, on farther enquiry, I found to be exaSlly true, except that, in her diffidence and modesty, fhe had done her-felf lefs than "’justice in certain particulars.
Golding had, it feems, taken the advantage of her youth and inexperience to feduce her to his ends, by all the ufual artifices employed on thofe occafions. By this means she Soon lost her bread and fervice at Mrs. Mabberley’s, and being with child by him, underwent fuch a feries £>f bafe,
cruel

68
Mrs. B U C K L E Y
cruel treatment, as ended, at last, in a total de-Sertion of her and of her infant, whom he abandoned to all the miferies of indigence, and to worfe yet, to alt the temptations, with her youth' and figure, to refcue herfelf from the opprestions of adiual want, by the horrors of prostitution. Thefe temptations fhe had the virtue to withstand ; and after a train of Sufferings, and Severe trials of her constancy to her p’an of a con-ducl that stiewed how little fhe had deferved heC’ first fall, especially v/ith Such a monster, she arrived, by industry at her needle, and by, frugality of living, at a Situation just eafy enough for
the maintenance of herfelf and daughter, to whom-she behaved with excessive tendernefs, as if she thought it incumbent on her to make her a-mends for the negledit of the unnatural father. Streighfc as her circumstances were, she denied^ herfelf almost necessaries of life to give her child the best education she could. But what greatly charmed me in her was, the gentlenefs, the freedom from all acrimony, with which she mentioned the wretch to whom she owed her ruin, and for v/hom she had Suffered So many hardships, imbittered too by the reflexion, that it w-as through his bafenefs that she fuffered them. All her refentment was levelled against herfelf, whom she allows to have been justly punished for her fault, though she might think it hard, that her chastisement should come from him, with fuch atrocious circumstances. I have reafon to believe she Sincerely detests any thought of renewing v/ith him, and happily now she owes to her good fenfe, and to the merit of a long tried eondu6t, a condition that Sets her above any excufe of bad circumstances., to wish the refumption of any connexion with a wretch for whom her love must have been long obliterated by the justest contempt^
This.
ioMr.. Mellefgnt.
So

I ^
This, however, is the pretious wight on whom Lord Lovell has fo judicioully pitched for his confidential hanger-on, and of whofe meannefs in pilaying that part, it is not a little aggravation that he is not driven to it by want. He has fome .fortune, though perhaps infufficient to his extravagances, to which his lordfhip’s rewards for his Service to him in his vices and follies, may be no un-welcome Supply. I never Taw him, but your acquaintance Mr. Sutton, who, by the bye, carries oil his bufinefs with great Succefs and reputation of probity, had a law-fuit under his management. Certain incidents in the courfe of which gave him a thorough infight into his chara6ter. You may, perhaps, imagine, that Golding must have at least fome talent, fome accomplifhment. Some favorable distinfilion, to recommend him to his lord-Ihip’s-countenance and intimacy. Nothing can be lefs the cafe. From a concern for a perfon fo nearly related to Lady Harriet, whom I Sovereignly love and esteem, I fuffered myfelf to be told the charafiler of one who has Such an influence over her brother. With a foul of an ether, coarfe enough to have been made cut of the damps of a >coal-mine, his whole flow of wit, humor, and pleasantry, Springs out of the kennels and finks of Covent-garden, in a courfe through brothels, taverns, and night-houfes, of which it has gathered all the loathfom filth and offenfivenefs. Vulgar and illiterate to the last degree, there would be no conceiving how he could have gained the confidence of Lord Lovell, who is, himfelf, not absolutely without wit, but for his eternal ap-plaufe and assent to every thing he fays or does; for the wretch is fo determinate a flatterer, that he v/ould reprove the arrantest mifer for being too extravagant, and the most abandoned Spendthrift for being too strifil an economist; add to this,
a Con-
'S
70
Mrs. Buckley
a constant readinefs without referve, to perform any dirty offices on which his patron may put him. In return for which, his lordstiip most heartily defpifes him, and is governed by him, without So much as fufpefiting that* it is he himfelf who is that low fellow’s led-captain, and not that low fellow his.
Nor are you to think this strange. Nothing is at prefent fo common. It is even the general rule, for men of fortune and rank, to give their confidence to fuch as they neither love nor esteem, nay oftenest, to fuch as they contemn, who generally return them the compliment, and, m petto^ repay them in kind. In proof of this littlenefs in our pretious Great, take a list of them, I mean of thofe in the highest clafs of life, for title, o-pulence, and power, and, on the fairest examination, you will find that by much the greatest part of them, are refpedfively governed by Some little obfeure wretch, who creeps about them, fawns upon, and flatters them in all their little-neffes, follies, and vices: most commonly too he is the most palpably worthiest of the whole herd of dependents, who are but the lest jealous of him for his being fo, nothing alarming the whole camp of them more, than the rare cafe of their master’s (hewing any favor or distindlion to a man with whofe merit their w^ant of it must
stand in the light of a disadvantageous comparison. There is nothing they dread fo much, as the danger to them of their patron’s favor getting into a channel diflFerent from that to which they owe that countenance to them, which is fo much to his dilhonor and to his prejudice. For you need Scarce look any further, for the caufe of that ignoble, trifling, unelTential figure, the genera ity of our great people make, than their raeannefs of taste and Spirit in not difdaining to
be
I





to Mr. Mellefont.
71
be the centers each of a little dirty Sphere of Servile dependents, and naufeous flatterers, who must be So far from making great a man intrinfical-ly little, that they must make a real great man appear little, if it could be luppofed that Such a •chara6ler could make fuch a choice.
I have known too Some half-wits as fond of having a led-dunce as fome ordinary women constantly take Some fright abroad whlh them, as a foil for the benefit of the comparison.
I have dwelt the longer on this reflexion, rather digreflive, I confeSs, first becaufe this epidemical weaknefs of the men, who have the lead in this country, must naturally influence^ the condudt of public affairs, and then becaufe I really wifli to extenuate Cord Lovell’s folly, by Shewing it to be partly the fault of his times, from the contagion of example. A candor in me, to ‘which you will think him lefs intitled from my juf-tiee than from my contempt; when I Shall have acquainted you with an incident, which alone might defend this long preamble about him from .a charge of impertinence.
The other day, about noon, who fliould come to my door in a post-chaife, and alone, but Lord Lovell ? This was an honor I had no room to expert, from the refpe6tful and cold distance I had always kept him at, notwithflanding plain e-nough advances occasionally made me on his fide towards nearer acquaintance: advances of which I had no reafon to be extrenjely vain, considering their motive.
You may remember that I had very early observed his Lordfliip’s being Smitten with Clara, about which I was under no fort of apprehen-fion. I knew him fufceptible only of that kind of paffion against which She was more strongly guarded by principle than even by the fear of
a danger

72
Mrs. Buckley
a danger which w'as not a whit the greater t© her, for her thorough contempt of it. Lord Lovell, finding in her condu6t towards him fome-thing fo repulfive and difcouraging as to give very little overture for any hope of Succeeding eafily in any defigns of the nature of thofe he was • entertaining thoughts of upon her, did me, I fuppofe, the honor of casting his eyes on me, as a relation that might be of Some convenience to him, in the purfuit of his ends, from the influence he judged I had on her, by the great refpe61: and confidence with which that amiable girl has constantly treated me. Of my fitua-tion in life, my figure was not at all calculated to give him a very brilliant idea.. My being always in one gown, and that a stuff cne, with every other article of drefs uniformly in that stile, would at most, to a man of falhion, that is to fay, to a man governed by appearances. Suffer me to paSs for a decayed gentlewoman on the charL table list.
Lady Harriet, fo far from undeceiving him, iiSed to enjoy his mistake. He had precluded himSelf from any participation of her’s to him, even of the commonest occurrences of life, by constantly looking down upon her from the stupendous height of his own excellence, and fu-percilioufly treating her as an odd, infignificant girl, though stie has ten times his fenfe, without one of his defe<^ls. She had often, with ^ Smothered Smile, heard him tell me to my face, with a fine emphatic tone, as if he was Overwhelming me with honor, that he really took me for a mighty decent good fort of a woman. v
Heaven help his head! It was not for one OT^ his turn to diScover in that “ good Sort of a “ woman,” one who at one time, and before She was led to a just estimate of things by a huf-
band
w
to Mr. Mellekont.
73
band, fortunately for her, a man of fenfe, had lived not lower than on a line with perfons of the first distindion of the kingdom; to which I can fafely add, that it was the very dullest part ol my life; nothing being more certain, than that among thofe of his rank I obferved the least room for improvement, the fastest and most futile prejudices, the greatest vacuity of taste; a fistem, in short, only fit to fet the head wrong, and- to contradf the heart. The only acquifition I have to boast of among them, was that of a most meritorious contempt-for them, on a thorough knowledge of them. Judge then, dear nephew, whether 1 made a lacrifice that cost me much reluQ;ance, when entering, onthecon-vi£tion of my own experience, into Mr. Buckley’s ideas, I efcaped from thofe fcenes of taste-lefs enjoyment and ridiculous vanity, into the Snug of life, where in the bofom of eafe, tranquillity, and improvement, under the direflion of one of the best of hushands, I pasted the most delicious moments of my existence.
But I ash pardon while I dwell on this preliminary, I leave his most ferene Lordship too long at my door: Let me introduce him into my parlour, where I was fitting mobbed up, with a flan : nel pinned under my chin, for a violent tooth-ach, which did not, I fuppofe, extremely add to the awfulnefs of my figure, which was, at best, that of an old Fortune-teller, h either could the appearance of my houfe, very Small though neat, and chofen by me purely for its Situation, combined with the furniture of the room in which I received him the whole of which could not, at a fair appraifement, amount to much above fifty shillings, help to give him other ideas than thofe he had brought with him, of that mediocrity of my circumstances which he was come
VoL I.
E
most
74
Adrs. Buckley

XC
<c
XC
<c
most nobly prepared to infult, and to turn to the account of his villainous purpofes.
After the ufual Salutations, and Some Silly e-nough humming and hawing,, he began:
Why, you have got here a good pretty kind of a habitation —Let me fee ; the rent cannot, I should think, be very high. ludeed, the Situation is Something, Upon my word, Mrs. Buckley, a woman of your merit ought to have greater matters done for her.- I have always thought you a very valuable perfon.”
To this, and much of the like, no anfwer from me, except, now- and-then, ‘‘ I thank your Lord-ship—You are very good—To be Sure the times are rather hard”—And alstthis with fuch a profound air of, yes and pleafe you, to every thing he Said, as helped to draw him finely out to the point at which I wanted him, an explanation of the motive of this vilit. This was stridtly poetical justice; a banter of him in his own way.
Not to waste paper and time, I shall only give you a Summary view of his bufinefs with me. He had long entertained very Serious thoughts of my niece, {as he called her, from his having heard her give me the appellation of aunt,) and had nothing but honorable Intentions towards her. (In wshich I have pregnant reafon to think he lied.) That his mother’s oddity of temper could not be unknown to me, the meafures he was obliged to keep with which were the only caufe that he did not make his declaration more public—That being but too Sure that he could never obtain her confent to a match, in her way of thinking, fo disproportionate, he could not well venture to difoblige her, as she had still *a great deal in her power. (This is true.) That, in the mean while, he was dying of ardor and
impatience for obtaining the postestion of Clara,
whom
to Mr, Mellefont.
75
whom he would in all refpefits conSider and treat as his lawful wife ; and as an earnest of his honorable intentions, would immediately fettle fix hundred a year upon her for life : that he was afraid it would not be eafy, indeed, for h;m to bring her to acquiefce in fuch an arrangement, which he propofed Ihould last no longer than till the benefit of time and events should put it into his power to prove the legitimacy of his paf-Sion: that, for my part, he should not, as an acknowledgment for any good offices I might do him on this occafion. Scruple a thoufand pounds, which were ready at my Service as barely a retaining fee.
Obferve, that I abstrafil to you the Substance of his propofal, but Spare you the preambles and circuit of v:ords which he employed to gild the pill to me.
The truth is, that, at first, I did not conceive his drift. I imagined he' was aiming at Somewhat in the nature of a clandestine marriage, which, however undoubtedly unacceptable, would not, at least, have been fo grofs an affront. It was then, without deSign, on my part, and purely in a Spirit of explanation, that, by dint of doubts and leading questions, into which I took
care to throw no discouragement that have shut him up to me, I came at to an ascertainment of his meaning, which was, that all his honorable propofals were reducible to the terms of Clara’s being his mif-trefs, upon honor, and I his procurefs for hire.
You cannot conceive how much the impudence and absurdity of this overture diverted me. My fenfe of it was absolutely nearer to pity than to refentment. But I took care not to die in his lordship’s debt.
Compofing then my countenace to the highest
E 2	expreffion
Special
might
length
/
s
Mrs. Buckley
expression I Could throw into it, of mock-gratitude and ironical Submission, I made his lordlhip a curtefy down to the ground, and told him, that I confidered myfelf as under an immortal obligation to him for his charitable intentions, in Singling me out for his Service on So delicate a commission
That I
Should immediately enter upon il by acquainting Lady Harriet, and efpecially Clara and her friends, with the generossty of his flame, and the purity of his defigns: that I made no doubt of Clara’s jumping at the offer, and of her impatience to qualify herfelf for touching the first quarter of her honorable penfion ; but that as he was fo pretty a man, I Should think her unconstionable if fhe did not take that into the account, and afford him a cheaper bargain : chat for my part, I would fo far Set her a good example, that I would give up the brokerage he was pleafed to offer me; nay, that if his lordfhip wanted a couple of thoufand pounds, if he would fend his steward to treat with I was ready to lend it him at three and a half per cent.
You are fenSible, dear nephew, there was no conade in this proffer, I have a much larger
me

Sum by me, which 1 hardly know where to place out. ‘My passion for that Simplicity v>^hich confi-der as the standard of taste, and the true Sublime of life brings with it a Saving, for which I stiould have the greatest contempt, was the ceconomy I obferve to Spring from any thing fo Sordid as avarice. As it is, I do not Spend a third of my income, which enables me to make referves that may Serve o-thers; without occafioning me any Self-denial, or Self-reproach for meannefs of Spirit.
However, before I had well done Speaking, and I had Surely coolnefs enough not to loofe any of the degrees of impression that what I Said was Successively making on him, I could distinctly ob-
j	Serve
ii.
1
1
\
to Mr. Mellefont.
77
Serve the progressive growth of his confusson; rage, and lhame to their utmost pitch. Confounded at the turn againss him his application to me had taken, enraged at the cool contemptu-oufnefs of the irony with which I was treating him, and afhamed of the wretched figure he was making in the eyes of one he had begun with, addressing himfelf to , as to an objeist of charity, he funk under the Superiority which his ridiculous mistake of me had given me over him.
The point withTiim now was to recover So terrible a stumble with the best grace he could. For Some minutes he continued stunned, and incapable of uttering a Syllable. At length, getting a little the better of his oppression, he told me, with a faultering voice, and a tone of humiliation, that he faw he had taken a very foolifh step; that he Sincerely alked my pardon, and^ entreated me to confider that his punissiment was^ in my hands, and that as he lay entirely at my mercy, he hoped my generofity, af-d his unfeigned Sorrow for his offence, would induce me to Spare him; that as to Lady Harriet, my threat of acquainting her of his folly, affefited him incomparably lefs, than Clara’s receiving any ill impressions of him ; that he was but too Senfible. that much of his fate depended on my not doing him with her all the the dilkindneSs he had deferved, efpecially from me : but as to herSelf, he was refolved to repair the injury in a manner that fhould convince me, that the bottom of his intentions was purer than what that step he had just taken gave them leave to appear; a step into w^hich he had been betraid rather by the blindneSs and impetuofity of his passion, which had hid the irregularity of it from him, than by a difhonorable defign.
This was the fura of his apology, of all which
E 3	I hal
7^
Mrs, Buckley
I had to believe as much or as little as I had pleaS-ed. I knew too weli the nature and tendency of the inlinuation of his intention to repair the affront to Clara, to give him any the least credit for it.
I replied to him then in an extreme polite strain, but as vague, and death-cold an one, as the hol-lowest. Smoothest courtier could have employed, to elude an explicit declaration. 1 Suffered him to go away, under a perfect uncertainty of what my procedure would be upon this curious piece of conduct of his.
As Soon as he was gone, the first idea that naturally prefented itfelf, was to wTite immediately to Clara a SuccinQ: account of what had passed ; the weather being too bad for me to go in per-fon, under the pain I w^as in. About this there was no difficulty: but I much wifhed to Spare Lady Harriet the cruel uneaSinefs I was Sure that her brother’s procedure would give her. I was a-fraid too, that Clara herfelf might, in the first e-motions of her wounded delicacy, think it incumbent on her to remove dire^ly from Lady Harriet’s, to whom the abruptnefs of the step, combined with the caufe of it, could not fail of giving a great deal of pain. As I was then per-fedfly clear that there was no danger to Clara, with her way of thinking, from her continuing a little while longer with Lady Harriet, and that her coming away might imply to him Such a fear of his defigns, as She was much above having; I had, to her staying at Lady Lovell’s, till the Marquefs of Soberton’s imminent arrival, but one objedlion, which was the possibility of Lord Lovell’s imagin-
ing
that Such her continuance after fo great an indignity, which he would naturally judge I could not well anfwer Suppressing to her, was a kind of laying wait for his effedfuating that re-
paraiio.n
to Mr. Mellefont.
79
paration which he had infinuated to me, by a declaration in form of more honorable intentions. However this obje^ion I foon Solved to myfelf, by a reflexion on the groundlelTnefs of fuch a pre-fumptipn in Lord Lovell, from what I knew of my own ideas, and hatl the strongest reafon to believe of Clara’s. I constdered, that it would be great injustice to give the worthy, the amiable Lady Harriet unnecessarily great pain, for fear of any vain and falfe notion of her brother’s. There is not, perhaps, a more pernicious, nor a more common error, than the doing or not doing a thing, out of regard to the opinion of fools, which by the by is doing them rather too much honor.
In thefe ideas I fat down to give Clara the necessary and very candid information of Lord Lovell’s procedure, and withal! my opinion for her uot coming away immediately, and my reafons for that opinion, which, however, it was absolutely at her option to follow or not, as I was ever ready to receive her with open arms. This letter I Sent by a Special messenger, my own maid, fo as not to be delivered in Lady Harriet’s prefence, to prevent any referve which the novelty of it between them would render very aukward, and against which I eaSily guarded my Servant by equipping her with a collateral pretext.
In the afternoon I received by the return of the messenger Clara’s anfwer, of which I enclofe you the copy.
Yours, &c.
\
\
LuGY Buckley.
E 4
L E T-

So
Clara Maynwaring
letter.
Clara Maynwaring, to Mrs. Buckley.
Lonclon.

IAy ever rejpeIIable Aunt,
if
a
u
if
u
if
if
if
if
if
if
if
if
if
if
if
if
if
if
if
if
if
if
ti
if
if
i<
i(
AFTER exprelFng to you my pain for the indignity you have met with on my account^ a pain much lefiened to me by my reflexion on your fuperiority to it, fuffer me to give to a very fincere friendfliip the firfl: place in my ex-preflions of gratitude to you, for your tender concern for Lady Harriet on this occafion. Nothing can be more just than your apprehenSious for her: nothing more merited than your unwil-lingnefs to give her unnecessarily caufe of pain. In honour to truth, I must confefs, that I fhould most probably on the first fenfe of the infult done to you, (for as to myfelf, ray Lord Lovell cannot offend me,) I stiould have endeavoured to make Lady Harriet fenfible of the propriety of my leaving her, without any thing in my heart towards her, but fentiments of the utmost affec-. tion and esteem. I arn, I hope, incapable of fuch an injustice as that of imputing to her, as any demerit, thofe follies or indifcretions of a brother, which ssie would be the first to detest and deplore. Be it then as you have better judged. Lord Soberton will certainly foon be here, by his father’s orders, who is in a fair way of recovery. The celebration of his nuptials with Lady Harriet will naturally bring on a fepa-ration without any violence. The rest of the time, till my return to my brother Mellefont’s, in the country, as I originally propofed before the fummer comes on, I shall, with your leave,
fpend
y
to Mrs. B U C K L E Y.
8i
“ Spend with you, to my great improvement, I am> very Sure. In the mean while, I Ihall conceaS from Lady Harriet an incident that would give " her So great an uneafinefs: it is the only kind of perfidy of which my friendship for her is^ capable.
** Your’s, &C.
“ Clara Maynwaring.”’
CC
LETTER X..
Mr. M E L L E F o N T to Mrs. Buckley.
Lancajhiret Nov
My ever honored Aunt,
YOU cannot conceive what pstafure your: letters have given my wife and me, except-just in that part where we felt for the indignity of your treatment; which, however^, you»are fo right to treat with the fcorn and deristbn it deferves. As we unfeignedly join in our full SatisfaQion at Clara’s having the happinefs of your counfels at hand, and the good fenfe. to refpedi; them : we are not in any the least pain about the. issue of Lord Lovell’s de-ssgns whatever they may be : with fuch a pilot as you'there- is no fear of a shipwreck.
But if. I stncerely pity Lord Lovell, for his not being above the worthlesshefs of his times, I hope Lraay have leave to pity my country much more, for the danger of ruin to which it stands expofed,,. in having its fate depend on no better heads and^ hearts, than thofe of the. generality of the people; of power in. all parties. Nor do I fee any likeli-
E 5	hood.t
%
I'll I ■ifim III _____
82
Mr. Mellefo nt
s
hood of an. amendment, unlefs a few men of good Senfe, and real well-meaning, with the requisites of rank and fortune to give their operation^ due weight, fhould rife to the refcue of the nation from the prevalence of all the fuiility and corruption under which it is evidently Sinking. But if it is too much, or too chimerical to fuppofe, that there a few still remaining capable of fuch an effort of virtue, I hope no one will fay that fuch a country does not deferve its perdition, and that the chimera would be not to befpeak it.
And here fuffer me to offer you a few remarks on our titled nobility, which, as 1 principally derive them from the information of Mr. Buckley, who, I am fenSible, thought no fubjedl of this kind above your comprehenston, wille be rather reminding than prefuraing to instruct you.
The great authority, then, of our nobles wa unquestionably owing to their official duty, considered in two lights, that of Judges, Guardians of the Law, and Counfellors to the Throne ; and that of Defenders of their country against enemies foreign and domestic.
In their judiciary capacity they constitute the upper houfe, where they Sit merely in the civil charadler of Judges, under the titles of Lords or Barons, both which have no relation to any thing but the Law: the word Lord importing a Magif-trate, and Baron a Judge ; Barony a distridt of civil government, in former times feudally liable to furnifh its contingent to the national Service. In their military province they have other titles, which are an ingraftment on thofe of Lord or Baron ; fuch as Duke, Marquefs, Earl, &c. which are destgnations of martial rank, thofe distinguished by them being originally bound to perfonal Service, receiving for their pay certain allotments of lands, which they poffeffed by feudal tenure.
You
io Mrs. B u c k l e y.
83
You have here their office in one plain, Succinfl view. They were the first in the land for law and arms. Are they in reality, the first in either now? Or is it not a moot-point, whether they are better lawyers in the houfe, or better Soldiers in the field ? PerSonal Service in war they have long, in general, renounced, and left to younger brothers, and to any military adventurers, for a livelihood; content, for themfelves, to carry arms no where but on their Seals, plate, or coach-doors, lefs as enfigns of honor, than matter of a lastelefs parade. But then, you will fay, they have stuck the clofer to their civil charatster of Judges, of Comptrollers of Ministers, and Counsellors of the State. May be
So.
As to their being Judges; it is their essential prerogative to be fuch; and they,, no doubt, qualify themfelves duly for the difcharge of that great and refpe6lable office.
In their political charafiler of Diredlors of Ministers, I am afraid that, in former times, Ministers may have too often found them readier to pay a. court to them, than to corre6l them.
As Advifers of Kings, it is, perhaps, to be wifh-ed, that, instead of concurring with them, to plunge the nation unnecessarily into debt, they had lefs refpeSted thofe passions and weaknestes of theirs, which were the caufes of that debt, of which fo great a part has been incurred in a direct oppofition to the national interest; fo- that the worst was not the ad.t itfelf of increafing the. debt.
And here there occurs a not uncurious remark,, which I do not care whether any one has made-before me or not, fo it is but a true and a just one.
In the earliest ages of Britain and of Gaul, long before Julius Csefar aftually destroyed the
libertv

;*
I
'i
8a
Mr. Mellefont
liberty of one, and laid the foundation of destroying the liberty of the other, as he too fatally did that of his own country, the power of the Law was predominant over that of the Sword, which was nothing more than executively its'minister. But the guardianship of the laws made in the popular assemblies, was trusted to the peace-officers; a dessgnation I prefer to the word Clergy, (which, in thofe times, long prior to Christianity, bore quite another construQion than it now does; that I may not appear partial to my own order.) However, by various revolutions, the Sword at length prevailed. The power was wrested out of the hands of the Law, and put into thofe of the military, who to-trial by Courts and Juries fubstituted that of judiciary Duels, on the abfurd barbariSm of which it is Superfluous to inSist, In the ancient fistem, the Man of Learning and the Judge were united ; in the fubSequent one, the Soldier and the Judge. But how far our Nobles maintain either the judiciary or the military charafiter, let thofe who know them best determine.
I
To me our Lords in general appear Somewhat like the French Abies^ who having renounced the graver functions annexed to their primordial institution, constitute a kind of body, which the greatest privilege Seems to be that of doing nothing, and of circulating in Society, their Sad inutility. By this means thoSe Abhh have lost much of their dignity, nothing being more conformable to the principles of equity, than that whoever withdraws from the performance of thofe duties, for which they are allowed a consideration, lucrative, or honorary, or both, should incontestably forfeit fuch constderation. Where then any clafs of men falls ■under that defcription, if they are not dead in law, are not they manifestly So in equity ? Who is not fenSible, that a body from which the Spirit is departed.

to Mrs. Buckley.

parted, does not prefent an idea of great Sweet-nefs ?
Nothing is more demonstrable, than that originally most of the lands of the nobility were as purely military benefices as bistiopricks were ecclesiastical ones, both fubjefit to a difcharge of their refpefitive duties, and neither of them hereditary.
Kt length, indeed, the French Set us the example, which it was natural enough for the Barons, (who in their double quality of Judges and Generals had. both the Law and the Power in their own hands,) to follow, of changing the nature of the military benefices and titles, and of making them like allodial estates, tranfmifSable by inheritance. But even then it was not understood, that Such a right of defcent fhould abfolve them from the difcharge of thofe duties, for which the revenues of their estates were conSidered by the whole nation as standing falaries. A Duke, even on this new footing, was a born Leader of an army; an Earl or Count a General, a Vice-count a Lieutenant-General, and fo on ; but every one of thefe titles implied a duty of a6tual military fervice to the public. Nor indeed could any difpenfation from it take place, with more propriety, with more justice, than if our lords the Bishops were very gravely to bring in a bill into the houfe, for leave to entail their titles and temporalities in their families, without any incumbence on them to difcharge the epifcopal duties.
So that, in stridl fadf, our Nobles hold their advantages of fortune and honor lefs by the fpirit of the law, than by its prefcriptive-connivence at fuch a Sine-cure tenure, as is very different from the original institution, and even from the first alteration of that institution. Nor could the nation, in its grant of land for adtual fervice, or even for reward of past fervice, ever be imagined to include
86
Mr. Me LLEFONT
elude in the idea of reward, a birth-right to the descendants, from thofe So paid or rewarded, of lying an ufelefs infignificant load on it; or intend, as matter of claim for them, the privilege of worth-leffnefs, and the mockery of empty titles of a mi* litary fervice, which they never perform, and which they leave to others under the modern denominations of General, Lieutenant-general, Bri-
, &c. who have just as clear a right to expert that their pay, fubjeft to no difeharge of duty, shall be made hereditary in their families, as the merely titular officers of the nobility ever had to procure, as they actually did procure their feo-dal tenures to be; the fervice for which they have So prudently commuted for only paying their share of the general taxation.
Of this our Nobility, could not be too much reminded, even for their own fakes, as it might tend to excite in them a Spirit of gratitude to a country, by whofc curtefy they are allowed tbe uti poffidetis of So many gratuitous advantages. It might kindle a deSire in them to merit, by fome degree of utility to the public, that refpect which they cannot otherwife claim with the best grace imaginable especially while it is hardly poffibl'e for others topayleSs'of it to them than they do to themSelves : it might rouze in them a noble diSdain of any honor but what is intrinstcally honor in itSelf, in a just distindfion of it from that contemptible Spurious honor, which has no better foundation than a preScriptive error of opinion and vulgar prejudice.
As it is, how very few of them are there, that do not acquieSce in the most ignoble obfeurity 1 poor immemorable inSignificants, content with never being named among thoSe v/ho defend' their country with their arms, or proSper it with their counSels I .Does their august body, in fadf, form,
cow-
to Mrs. Buckley.
87
now-adays, many very great Generals to command armies, many Speakers of real eloquence in the houSe, or many Statefmen of abilities to take charge of the national power, or oare of the public interest ? Is not there rather a deplorable Scarcity of all thefe ? You cannot but fee, efpecially as to the offices of government, the distrefs to which this country is reduced for fupplying proper perfonagcs to fill them. Many have been called Ministers, but how few of them were chofen ! Some having born that name, who were no more of the standard of capacity requifite for the conduft of affairs, than the obfidonial coins of copper are of a metal anSwerable to the value stamped upon them, by authority, both, for want of better, owing their temporary currency to the urgency of necestity.
Nor is it a wonder that places should be fo contemptibly filled, while rank avarice, without a Spark of honor or of patriotism, is the principal motive of courting, or of accepting employments: Avarice, that execrable paffion, allied to every meanneSs, and which gives a rage for power to none more than to thofe who are the least capable of doing justice to it.
But if Some of our Great would but calculate the worth of what theyloSeof real good and Solid Satisfafilion, by Suffering themfelves to be blinded by a Sordid felfishneSs, which not only undignifies them; but endangers their much Superior interest in the public welfare, they would Spurn the idea of any complaiSance to a Court, at the expence of their duty; nobly just to which, they would, in fa£f, do much greater Service to their country, to their King, and even to themfelves.
As things are, the corruption of the men of power is arrived at Such an incredible pitch of profligacy, that there are Some of them, who make
it a point of their importance to be paid not only
for
ss
Mr. Mellefont
for the good they do not hinder, but for the miS-chief they do not do to their country. Figure to yourfelf the meannefs ef fuch as can hug them-felves not only on what they fave by not doing a good action, but on what they get by a bad
ene.
TheSe reflexions, however, are extorted from, me by my fincere regard for that part of our constitution, against which it can furely be no offence, to wisti it more essential, more estimable; their political life and dignity capitally depending on> their degree of conssderation with the public, which always meafures its esteem of men and things by. their utility to it.
You may alfo fee by this, dear aunt, that I am not likely to be dazzled by any offers, however honorable that may come from the Earl Lovell, merely in his quality of Lord, for which. Singly confidered, I neither esteem nor defpife him.- It is not in his title, it is not in. opulence, but in his-chara6ter that Clara is to find her happineSs: and I am much mistaken, if she is ever Atalanta-like,, lured out of her career of honor and prudence,, by the glitter, though it were of the whole globe in gold
What Ishould apprehend for her moSr,and of which' yet, I am afraid not only to wound her delicacy with: the mention, but in the very mention to incline her the more to what I apprehend, is. her giving to refpedls of family-interest a weight in her determination' that might unfavorably affedt her future condition. Knowing how much eafier it is to keep egotifm. out of ones’s words, than out of one’s thoughts and adiions, it is not toa fine verbofeform of protestation that I trust your doing justice to the clear— nefs of my fpirit, but to that instindlive worthinefs of your own heart, which cannot fail of doing justice to the. reality of my fenliments. It is then,,
OEt.
to Mrs. Buckley.
89
on this unaffefted principle, that I entreat of you to make Clara fenSible that fhe could not, on this occalion, offer to me, or to her Sister, a greater indignity, than that of not following the direclions of her own heart, in fo facred a point of perfonal importance to her, as the difpofal of herfelf for life.
Hoping and believing every thing for the best, I am ever, dear Aunt,
Yours, &c.
Edward Mellefont.
1. E T T E R XI.
Lord Lovell/o Henry Golding,
London.
All is lost, dear Hal, or lb very near it, that
I have but one chance left, and if that Should fail me, why then, heigh for the lover’s leap, for I will be curfed if ever I take the matrimonial one. That is a state of punifhment to which, I hope, I am not predestinated.
You must know, there is no stratagem, no art, that I could think of, but what I have been trying, to establifh my point with this strange, per-verfe, what fhall I call her, Angel, for that word is at the end of my pen, and places itfelf on the paper, almost without my leave.
I had often Seen a woman caught by the discontinuance of a lover’s chace, which as Soon as fhe perceived, fhe wheeled about infenSibly, in a doubling maze, and chopped into his mouth. Upon this plan, I had, for Some days, left off that constancy of vifits with which I had besteged her at my stster’s; or if I went there, I not only took no notice of Clara, beyond that kind of common
civi-

90
Lord Lovell
/
civility, which is half an infult, when it has been for fome time preceded by more particular distinctions, but I occastonally stngled out T^ady Arabella Castres, a very pretty young lady, who is often with them, and began to pay her fuch a court, as I flattered myfelf would be obferved by Clara, and pique, at least her vanity, or alarm that fear. So natural to women, the fear of lofing a conquest. But I might just as well have fpared myfelf the pains of playing a part that cost me So mach repugnance, for Clara never once gave the least stgn of paying any more attention to my airs of defection, or change, than stie had done to my tenderest afliduities. In short, I found myfelf not a whit the forwarder for this often fuccefsful stale stratagem of love-militant. I Soon then came back to my colors, without her taking any more notice of my return to her, than she had done of ray leaving her. But what yet hurt me worst of all, was that intrepid eafe, gaiety, and franknefs, with which she never failed of uSing me, in common with every one elfe, except when I ventured to be particular to her, when, without any Simpton of emotion, she behaved to me with Such a frozen reserve, So chilling an indifference, that her anger would have been a thoufand times more preferable, and lefs difcouraging. This is the more galling, Hal, for that you well know I am not ufed to fuch treatment.
‘‘ Give her over,” you will fay. Ay, that I would if I could ; but a hatchet struck into my head could not give me greater pain than but the thought of it. I am even obliged to perfevere, in my own defence; for while she remains unpof-feffed, she fo thoroughly engrosses my whole faculties of dessre, that she not only hinders me from being happy with herfelf, but with the whole
Sex beSides. Her incompatable image rifes to me
in
to Henry Golding, Efq'.,	91
in bar of every application to another woman. My constancy is not So much a merit as a necestity. In short, I could with pleafure facrifice half my estate to the getting her upon my own terms. Nay, I would gladly fay to her. Spare my liberty, and take my fortune. Nay, in Some moments the devil of defire tempts me fo violently, torments me fo fiercely, that I could almost marry her in a pafilon, if it were but to get rid of my damned love.
I had, however, a glimmering of hope left, and that was to come at her through a kind of aunt, one Mrs. Buckley, whom I mentioned to you in my last, and who, I had reafon to think, knew the world, and understood prafitice. To her, then, I made my application, with fuch offers as would have engaged many a lord that I could name to Sell himfelf, and throw his country like paper and packthread, into the bargain. But I happened to be devilishly out in my conjectures about her; I met with fuch a let-down, Haj, fuch a let-down ! I am not yet above half recovered of the curfed cut I then received over my crest. In short, that string is intirely Snapped; and against touching the matrimonial one, even though with no other intention than to make it fubfervient to my purpofe of avoiding matrimony, I have an aversion that equals the horror of water in one bitten by a mad dog. And yet, I find I must have re-courfe to that detested expedient, and strike my referve-blow.
I had fortunately thrown into my apology to Mrs. Buckley, the hint of my defign to repair the injury-she was pleafed to think done to Clara’s honor, in my application to her for her good offices. Now this hint lays a plaufible enough foundation for my intended plan of procedure.
I propofe, then to make a falfe-confidence to Lady Lovell, of my having entertained Serious
? - ,
U
92
Lord Lovell
thoughts of honorable addresses to Clara. There is not the least reafon to fear her taking me at my word. It is, perhaps, the only point I could pitch on, which 1 would not be fure of carrying with her fondnefs But in this I am as far from expecting to find her tractable, as, indeed, I am from wistiing it. No. The old Lady, at the bare mention of it, will take fire finely ; and the least She will do will be to lay me under t e whole weight of her difgrace. So much the better. The more noife fhe will make, and I dare fwear fhe will not make a little, the more Service fhe will do me. In aSking what I foreknow will not be granted, I Shall, to borrow an expression of Lord HaverSham’s, have ‘‘ a&ed a denial,” and that isr the very thing I want. In the mean while, the devil will be in it if this motion of mine will not at least look well. Such a proof of my Sincerity must reconcile me to Mrs. Buckley, and to Clara give me Such a merit of Suffering for her Sake, as may not improbably place me on a better footing with her than I have hitherto been. The ground will be the leSs hard for my approaches. Not to mention, that by this step, I Shall get Lady Harriet greatly in my interest, who would not, for the world promote it in any other way, and will zealoussy do it in this, from the joy it would give her at once to make her friend’s fortune, to contribute to what she fincerely believes would renderlme happy, and draw cloSer the ties of friendship between her and Clara, of whom she is excessively fond; nor, every thing confidered, faith, do I wonder at it.
Of Such a fituation, then, it will be hard, indeed, if I do not make my advantage, without the danger of being drawn into an engagement, which all this art is meant to elude.
But to put things at the worst, and to fuppofe an impossibility, was Lady Lovel to deprive me of ths plea of her refufalof confent, my game would
be
to Henry Golding, Efqy 93
be indeed more difficult, but far from defperate. I should, by the time it would take to bring her to that point, have, in all human probability, fo far lamiliarifed and ingratiated myfelf with Clara, as to stand fair for the benefit of that chapter of accidents, which fo often favors the bold and artful lover. You understand me, Hal.
And now dare, alter this, to think yourfelf fo necessary to my fchemes of gallantry, that I could not take a step out of your leading-strings. However, I really wish you was with me, though, from your last, 1 have not much room to expeQ; it.
Yours,
1.0 V®'-'"

letter XII.
Henry Golding, Efq\ to Lord Lovell
My Lord.,
Chejier.
W
PON my honor, your Lordship is a noble engineer What a train have you laid to blow up the fort of that little Spitfire ? Is it for me to preiume to be “ necessary to your Schemes of gal-“ lantry ?” No, no, you beat me hollow. ’Till I knew your lordship, I thought I was Somebody at that Sport, but I find now I am nobody. If 5 mean to get on, I must go to School to your Lordship ; you are aperfe6t Matchawellat intreagues. All I have to Say, is, and you must give me leave to be free with your Lordship knows I am apt to be too Sin-Imusttellyou, I think you give yourfelf a damned deal of trouble when you might have readier meals than running hares. May I be the capital figure of the first collar-day at Tyburn, if I think aii)f of the pusses worth the pains of hunting them
tender.
you,
cear
t
94
Lord Lovell
tender. Zounds! give me the thing at hand, a good willing tit, even though she stood at livery in one of the stalls at Covent-garden, before any of your shy ones, with all their damned vartue at their tails. I know your Lordship will immediately twit me in the teeth with the rilk I run of being had before Dr. Rock, for misdemeanours of that kind. All that is true, my Lord, but a little discretion is a fine thing. Merry and wife, fay I. With good care, and picking of one’s bits, there may be found flesh as fweet and as little fly-blown in a baud’s larder, as in the fafe of a nunnery. Indeed, it requires Some perfon that knows the market well to be the caterer, and grant clean bills of health, otherwife there is no infurance a-gainst confequences. Take things as they run in common there is no venturing on mufcles, mushrooms, and women of the town ; the danger fells the pleafure.
You are, I find, for keeping, but that Is a devilish expenfive lay. If your mistrefs should not even play you jades tricks, and keep true to you, as it is hot to be fuppofed she could do otherwife to Such a fine gentleman as your Lordship, why then there’s brats and christenings, till at last you come as much into family-order as if you was lawfully tethered ; unlefs your Lordship would do as I do, who always leave the cow and the calf to shift for their own fodder.
But as to bidding matrimony defiance, there we agree to a charm ; with this difference, that your Lordfliip, being much wifer than I, has taken upon trust the torments of that hell of a state ; whereas nothing would ferve me but I must be puppy e-nough to make perfonally the experiment, and it turned out as I deferved ; for by Jove I was finely Sped. I married for a fortune, which did not, however turn out near what I had imagined, a woman rather stricken in years, who caught me,
by
(
I
i
fo Lord Lovell.
9S

I
by looking as if she would die. But, what do you think ? My pretious had the impudence to he jealous of me, and gave herfelf the airs of expelling I shouuld be constant to her stale charms. Conr-stant, too ! with a vengeance! But I was even with her: I prefently broke the beldam of wearing vest low stockings, and cured her fufpicions for ever, by certainty ; for I brought home too strapping drabs, kept them for Some time under her nofe, by way of exercife for her patient-Gfizzleship, and then turned her a-drift upon board wages However, the dear creature is dead, at last, though, by the way, her heart was fo tough, it look a damned deal of breaking I found it a great deal easter to get rid of her fortune than of herfelf! — But if ever I am caught again in that noofe, may my wife turn the tables upon me, and fend me to the wrong stde of the turf.
I love women well enough, when I vrant them, but who the deuce would chufe to live in a cook’s 'shop, where the meat is for ever under his nofe, whether he has any stomach to it or not? Wives, too, are fuch unconfcionable creatures, they are for ever either picking a quarrel with you for the fake of the fweets of reconciliation, or extorting more fondnefs from you than you can well afford, when the poor devil of a hushand is like a debtor in a fpunging-houfe, Squeezed for e'xpence, without his either being in cash or in cue for it. , In short, my Lord, matrimony is the devil, and all the joys of it as much against the grain as statute-labor, or as dull as playing at cards for nothing. Talk of happy marriages! one may as well talk of Soft thunder, stow lightning, a jolly famine, a fweet plague, lively funerals, plump fkeleton’s, and pretty death’s heads.
From my foul, then, I worship your better genus, forinfpiring you with Such a Scorn of the trap.
As


► »

9^
Henry Golding, Efq-, yol
As for that vixon to whom you are now, it Seems, doing the honor of a chace, hang me, if I do not believe your Lorplhip is taking the advantage of my abfence to hum me. It is a very likely story, indeed that any girl of her degree in life, with flesh and blood about her, could hold out four-and-twenty hours against fuch proffers as yours, with fo hand-fome a young nobleman tacked to them Who does not know, my Lord, that you are the crack of the field, with gold to filver odds in your favor. But'l fee what it is, you are fo geuerous a fportfman, that you mean to give her law; you have not yet put forth half your strength ; whenever it comes to that, my life to an old flioe, that she will lay Subdued and breathlefs before you.
In the mean while, it is but too true that I am detained here Sore against my will, but I hope it will not be fo long as your Lordship feems to think ; and, to fay the truth, in the method of fap that you are conducting your Siege, I do not apprehend that I could be of much ufe to you, as you are fo much a better engineer than myfelf. Storming is more in my way. Say but the word, and I will, at all events, come post to town and provide four barrels of gun powder to blow up the beldam at Richmond, and half-adozen mirmidons, that in ti e face of day shall carry off your Princefs in triumph, and plump her into your arms.
Your Lordfliip is, I hope, perSuaded, that no Cormantine Negroe could be more abfolutely devoted to your commands, than,
My Lord,
Your Lordship’s most humble,
and most obedient Servant,
Henry Golding.
End of the First Volume.
THE
w
o
M
A
N
O F
H
O
N
O
In THREE VOLUMES.
VOLUME II.
Letters bring things more home, and repreSent them more to the life, than either Annals or Lives.
Bacon, Lord Verulam.

DUBLIN:
Printed for James Williams, in Skinner-Raw,
M DCC LXVIIL
BOOKS of Entertainment,
Published by James Williams, Book-
Seller, in Skinner-Row.
THE
BUS Y-B O D Y;
OR THE
ADVENTURES of Monfieur BIGAND,
#
A Man infinitely inquifitive and enterp.riSing, even to Rafhnefs; which unhappy Faculties, never-thelefs, instead of ruining, raifed him from the lowest Obfcurity, to a most fplendid Fortune. Interfperfed with Several humorous Stories. The whole containing great Variety of Adventures, equally instruftive and inviting. In two Vols. Price 5s. 3 d. bound.
ALSO,
L E T T E R S
FROM
ALTAMONT in LONDON,
To his Friend in the Country, Price as. 2d. bound.
• 4 •
ALSO,
The VIRTUOUS WIDOW:
OR, THE
MEMOIRS of the Baro NESS DE Ba'TT'EVILI.E
2s. 8d» bound.
By Madam de Beaumont.
N
M

O
R
OF A
WOMAN of HONOR.

•S



;> •
LETTER XIII.
Mr/. Buckley, to Mr, Mellefont.
Richmond.
Wrote you, I think, dear nephew. Some letters that the Scenes threatned to grow more
ago
and more interesting; and I have Such an one now for your entertainment, as though it came upon us as unexpefited as a clap of thunder in a Serene Iky, has not a little diverted and edified me, I need no great prologue to prepare you for anticipating Clara to be the heroine of it; which is the very reafort you would never frorn her hear the particulars. They do her too much honor for herfelf to Specify them to you.
Three nights ago I had received a joint card from Lady Harriet and Clara, acquainting me of their defign next morning to make a kind of grand tour of the Shops, to buy a number of articles of dreSs and decoration, of which Lady Harriet had prepared a list, [against the Marquefs of Sober-ton’s arrival, I fuppoSe, who is now hourly expected with the next fair wind; So that the proposed match will immediately take effedt;] the card concluded with a request to me, to assist them in quality of their council of taste; a Service for which, I was, however, disqualified, by my' having long lost fight of the falhion: Not
Vol. II.	Fa	that

lOO
Mrs, Buckley
’j
/ .
that I at all disapprove, especially in young people, of an attention to it, when not carried to a foolifli excefs; and am So far from defpifing drefs in our fex, that I think too great a negleft of it, a worfe fault, if poflible, than running into that of over-drefs, where beauty perifhes, overlaid with perfidious ornaments, through a mistake as miserable as that of the Roman virgin Smothered under the Gallic Shields, instead of the trinkets Ihe had bargained for, as the reward of her treafon.
In compliance, nevertheless with the defire of two perfons fo dear to me, I waited on them next morning; and, after finishing the round of our purchafes, we returned home to Lady Harriet’s a-partment, where, just as we were bufily employed in unfolding a piece of Silk of our Spital-fields manufacture, and admiring its richnefs of taste, and excellence of the work. Lady Lovell came into the room, abruptly and unawares upon us.
I fcarcely need, I should think, obServe to you, that, though frequently on a vifit to Lady Harriet, and Clara, both whom I almost equally love and esteem, I had always, though Avithout any ^caufe of umbrage or offence, declined any court to this lady, her humor, temper, and opinions, being fo different from mine, and indeed from her daughter’s. This you will have of your-felf concluded, from what I have precedently touched to you of her charadter. She was formally pdlite to me, I coolly civil to her. This was not, you may be Sure, the way for us to run into mutual intimacy, which I am fure I was far from defiring, nor, probably her ladyship either.
She had, I guefs, stood a few moments, observing us. At length we Saw her, and paid her the due reSpedks; which she did not in the least return. I could plainly fee her eyes Sparkling, her ..cheeks reddened, her lips blue, and quivering with
rage.
i ^ '
to Mr. Mellefont.
lOI
rage, but had not So much as the most distant Suspicion of the caufe : she did not Suffer us to languish long in the ignorance of it. The torrent presently burst out, direTed to Lady Harriet, in the following tenor, as near as I can recolledl it.
So! Lady Harriet, is this then the reward for all my tenderneSs, all my care of you, to be the instrument of stabbing me to the heart, in laying baits for your weak filly brother, to destroy the hopes of our family for ever ? Was it for this you have brought that firebrand to our houSe, that female friend of yours, that parSon’s daughter, with her whole dowry of charms, talents, and Sentiments; is that an alliance to illustrate So noble a stock as ours ?
n

€C
€C

€<


iC
Here has been Lord Lovell just now with me, to alk my confent for making his addresses, to that little creature there; but I have Sent him away with the anSwer he deServes, nor will ever fee him again if I know he dares but to think of a match, than his stooping to which, I would Sooner by much See him laid in his grave, as well as I love him, and, indeed becaufe I do love him too well to See him run headlong into Such mean and deSpicable ruin.—As for you, MiSs, (turning to Clara,) are all your pretences to virtue and morality reducible to nothing better than to the Seducing a Son from his obedience, and making a daughter an accomplice of the guilt ? And you. Madam Matchm.aker, (here I came in for my share,) what was you to have for your part of the management ? Gracious Heavens! how has the- honor and quiet of this family been bought and fold among Such a pack of you? Oh, my poor deluded Son!”
During this Speech, nothing could equal the consternation of poor Lady Harriet, except the
F 3	com-
€(
iC
fC
€C
€6
iC
<<
<c



ii

V
102
Mrs. B U O K L E Y
compofure of Clara. For myfelf, I can Safely Say, I felt no -emotion but that of a fincere ssmpathy for the tendernefs of a mother anxious for a fon’s welfare; as much mifguided as Lady Lovell was on this occafion, I refpefled her motive, and pitied her mistake.
Her daughter stood, literally Speaking, mute with ustonifhment and grief. I was myfelf, in default , of her anfwer, preparing to fay Something, when Clara , making a Sign to Ipeak, prevented me. Lifting then up her eyes to Lady Lovell, and fixing ^thera on her with the utmost modesty, . but with vall the dignity of infulted innocence, she Spoke with a tone of voice, So mild,' So Sweet, as made it plain, that the provocation had thrown no acrimony into a Spirit greatly Superior to it.
She told her ladyship, that ,nothing;in this treatment, which wa^ given a violation of hafpitality, -hurt her So much as. the affliOiion she Saw.it gave to Lady Harriet, than whom none better knew the injuriouSnefs of that fuSpicion, which: Lady Lovell had given for her cauSe of ill uSage; that she herSelf had never in word, adfion,; or thought, .encouraged Lord. Lovell’s deigning to-look down ;.So low as her; nor, whatw^as more, ever intended it, if that promise could give-her ladyship any ..Satisfadiion : that she was rather Surprised at his lordship’s having given Lady Lovell Such occaston of uneaSineSs, as afking her conSent, before he. had obtained her’s, (Clara’s ;) which she most humbly entreated; her ladyship to believe she was as far from giving, as her ladyship could poffibly ■ be her’s; that to quiet her alarms, she would venture to offer her the most Sacred affurances she could require, that she would never give any the least distant encouragement to her Son, who she hum-•bly prefumed might very well have Spared her
the
h' •
to
Me L LE F O N T.
103
the pain of receiving, in herfelf, and in the perfon of her equally innocent relation. So cruel and So undeferved an infult.	'
Turning, then, to Lady Harriet, who stood by in the utmost c'onfuSion, pale, and ready to faint with grief and shame at this treatment of her, she' entreated of her not to give herfelf any the least uneastnefs on her account; adding, that their Separation would foon have come on in courfe ; that its being a little prematured was of no great moment, and carrieff with it the confolation for the manner in which it was taking place, of nothing, on their stde, having provoked it ; that she took leave of her, and thanked her for all her' kind-nefs, which she should eternally remember 'with the utmost gratitude of heart, while she would certainly forget, or rather had already forgot, the indignity offered to her, by one So justly dear to Lady Harriet, and whom she should, on that account, never ceafe to refpeft;.
All this was Said and done without any fine tal~tidum Xowtf or any theatrical airs, but purely with Such an eafy natural stmplicity, as showed she was capable of the greatest fentihients, without any effort, as being rather born than bred in her. Then taking me by the hand, she was moving towards the door to leave the room immediately with me, when Lady Harriet, ihcap'a** hie of commanding her fentirhents, and unchecked by the prefence of her mother. Sprung round her neck, and bathed her with her tears, till Clara, in the fear of its being difagreeable to Lady' Lovell, diSintangled herfelf from her arms, and with the tenderest Smipathy once more took leave of her, Lady Harriet continuing fpeechlefs, and bursting with a vexation, to wshiclv her refpe£t for her 'mother forbid her giving vent. At parting she darted at me the tenderest and
F 4	most.
104
Mrs. Buckley
most befeeching look, expressive of the most earnest request not to involve her, with Lady Lovell, in my refentment of this ufage.
As for that Lady herfelf, I, who had all the time with great coolnefs kept the most contemptuous Silence, could eafily obferve, that the abruptness of Clara’s departure, combined with the irreSistible force of truth there was in what fhe had Said of her never having given her Son the least encouragement, struck her with Some astonishment, and with Some regret for having proceeded wi h Such precipitation. I read in her looks a willing-neSs to come to an explanation, which Clara e-liided, with a noble difdain, by immediately withdrawing.
We then went down direQ:!y into the hall, where nothing of what had pasted above had, from its SuddenneSs, yet reached ; and you may gueSs the Surprize of the Servants, when Clara, calling for her maid, defired her to come, as Soon as polTible, after her, to my houfe at Richmond with her trunks and baggage. Then whif-pering to me where she would go, about half-a-street off, for a few minutes, till a coach could be got ready, she addressed herfelf to the Servants, who were giving the most unfeigned ssgns of Sorrow in their countenances, and telling them, she hoped they wmuld forgive her having been of So much trouble to them, and begged them to accept, as a mark of her grateful remembrance, a purSe of ten guineas, which she put into the porter’s hands. All this did not take up the Space of two minutes.
We Soon got to Richmond, in the way to which Clara appeared wholly taken up with her regret of the pain she might Safely believe this untoward incident would give to Lady Harriet, who, however, she obferved, with a Smile of Sincere
to Mr. Mellefont.	105
cere pleafure, would Soon have her concern alleviated by the arrival of her long ssghed for Lord Soberton, upon which fhe would be the first to congratulate her. As this reflexion, 1 Saw, had brought back all her good humor,. I just ventured to touch to her on the caufe of the thunder storm, from which we were actually making our efcape, the preposterous step Lord Lovell had taken, in alking his mother’s confent, before he had her leave, whofe difpofitions should rather have been first confulted.
Clara, without caring to enter into a fubjedl, for which she appeared to have the utmost indifference, only laughed, and faid she was not verfed enough in the ceremonial law of courtship, to know whether he had erred against it or not.
but that if he had thought it worth his while pre-vioufly to know her mind, he might very well have fpared Lady Lovell (b terril)le an alarm.
For my own part, I realty do not know what to judge of this procedure of Lord Lovell’s. It may or it may not be well meant, but, certainly, confidering his mother’s known humor, he has aUed at least very indircreetly, in an application where he might fo reafonably prefume a denial, and has gained very little advance with Clara, by giving her room to imagine he confidered her confent as a thing implicitly in courfe. If his lordship, then, on the strength of his title, fortune and perfon, shall have taken for granted , his hav ing nothing more to do, even were he to obtain? Lady Lovell’s acquiefcence, than to fignify his pleafure to Clara, fo much, I think, I know of her,, I might question whether he would, find his pro-grefs much greater than that of Punehinello’S’ match, half made, fince he had got his. own confent. And, by the by, I should be loth to Swear his lordship had got his ’ own,.
■ F-	Clar.a’is
5


io6
Lady Harr i e r
Clara’s .maid did not till the next day come with the things shat her niistrefs had left -in town, to whom she brought the following letter from Lady Harriet, .with which I conclude this.
Yours, See.
Lucy Buckley.
O&0O000C000CHS000:00000000000000
'•f
L E T T E R XIV.
(
frm Lady Harriet	Clara Mayn-
WARING.
London.
I Need not, I hope, tell you into how deep a diS-trefs I was thrown by the indignity offered to you yesterday. I should in vain endeavour to ex-prefs to you the poignancy of my feelings ; but I should not do you justice, if I could fear your refufing it to me. You will difdain to make me refponfible for, thoSc errors of others, which I am but she greater objeft of pity, for my being forced, in fome meafure, not to condemn with all the aSperity they deferve.
Do you, if but on my account, deign to have any curiofity about what pasted after your leaving ns ? Without waiting your anfwer, allow me to take for granted that you have, and to Satisfy it accordingly.
My mother and I staying in the room after you was gone out, she had not quite recovered the Sort of confuSion in which your admirable behaviour had left her, when she, turned to me, who stood by keeping a stlence, in which it was plain to See no Small share of indignation at what had pasted.
I underwent, then, a Severe examination about th^shatter of her difpleafure; in the courfe of
which.
to Glara MaVNWARING.
io'7
which, nothing could be So eaSy as my part, ssnce I bad nothing to do but to tell the plain truth, v/hich Was only eonfirmative of your just assurance of iiever having in the least encouraged my brother’s addresses; I might Safely have gone farther, and , that you had constantly behaved to him with Such an excefs of coolnefs and indifference, as I had often thought rather leaning to the other excefs. But, in the humor The was in, I plainly Saw ssie might perhaps pufh her injustice So Tar as to call this artifice and defign. . I reSpedled, then my poor mother too much to give her occafion for adding one more egregious mistake to thofe under which she was already not making the. best of : figures,.
So far I'had done justice to youj but there now, remained for me to do a piece of justice onmySelf, , in a fair confession to Lady Lovell, Thatsthere was ■ nothing Thad hardly .wished more ardently, than ^ that my brother, should, be fo i happy as to gain i your good gracesj being; very Sure that he would i have the: best of the bargain.- My mother would ; not Suffer me to go on, but fell into Such a . fury ■ Nis exceeds description. I. verily once thought she-would have struck- me.. Aye! now she was Sure you had bewitched me as. well; as her Son, but she would,, as far. as was in .;her power,; deliver m from . yours; She forbad me then absolutely, on pain of her highest difpleaSure, to fee you and i Mrs. .Buckley any.more- adding, that when I was >. mistreSs of my own conduct, alluding, I SuppoSe, . to-my marriage with Lord Soberton,,I Tvas to dp as I pleaSed, but that in the mean while she : would be obeyed ; and that as-to^ her Son, he might lay his account with’ irrevocable marks of • her difpleaSure, if he should deServe them by an = alliance of himSelf So. contrary to her deligns for -

loS
Lady Harriet
Dear Clara, I love my brother well, but Sincerity still better. It is this that makes me obServe to you, that though there is Somewhat Specious in his propoSal to Lady Lovell, oS honorable addresses to you, there is, to me, who know him thoroughly. Something too crude, too irregular in that step. What could hinder him Srom previously opening himSelf to me, if he had not the heart to begin, as was most proper, by declaring himSelf to you } He could not, from my Sentiments of you. So well known to him, expe^ I Ihould be very unfavorable to him. In the mean-while, I pafs with my mother for an accomplice, where I ivas not So much as a confidant; though I Should not have had the least Scruple of being both. You fee, however, that I do not Shrink from the charge, or wish to diSown the honor of it. No. I think my diSgrace a triumph, without any impeachment of filial duty; becauSe I am very Sure my mother’s reSentment turns upon a falSe fafit; and though I am bound to reSpefit her errors, nothing obliges me not to See them, or not to hope her Seeing them herSelf.
- Pray my best and tenderest reSpedls to Mrs. Buckley, on whoSe excellent SenSe I may SaSely depend, for her Seeing, in my preSent fituation, nothing to forgive, and a great deal to pity me. I ssiall not exist till I fee you both. I have but one ithing to wiSh, that my choice in love may be as honorable to me as in friendship ; I may add, as happy, for I do not look on the late undeServ-ed, and, at bottom, ridiculous, injury offered to it, as any material interruption. May it have, with regard to me, the Same effedl on you it has on me, that of endearing you the more to me !
Yours, &c.
PIarriet Lovell.
L
(.

[ 109 ]
L E T T E R XV.
I
Mrs. Buckley, to Mr. Mellefont.
Pear nephew^	Richmond.
I Received yesterday a vistt from Lord Lovell, which I did not think I could well refufe. He made, as I expefited, a great parade of merit to me, in having done his best to repair the affront he had offered me, (and for which he renewed his entreaties of forgivenefs,) by the commencement of a more honorable procedure, in the overtures he had made of his deSigns to Lady Lovell, whofe dispositions he owned he knew, but did not defpair of over-coming.
His reafon, he faid, for not preliminarily addressing himfelf to Clara, was, that he thought he needed, erpecially after what had passed between him and me, a foundation of Sufficient proof of the purity of his intentions. He hoped he stiould find the acceptance of his Suit, independent of his fuccefs with his mother, and that he had now cleared his way for a request to me, that I would admit his vifits, on a footing, to which, he prefumed, there could be no objection.
He alfo expressed abundance of forrow and refentment for the Icene, of which he had been innocently the caufe, when Clara left the houfe, and concluded, with an earnest defire to pay his reSpefits perfonally to her.
As I was prepared on all points for this vifit, by a full knowledge of Clara’s mind, about him and his pretentions, I told his Lordfbip, in a polite, but preremptory tone, that, without entering into the merit of his fincerity, I thought my-felf obliged not to deceive him with falfe hopes ; that he might make Lady Lovell perfectly eaSy, by deSisting from a fruitlefs purfoit, for
mat
V-
iro
Mrs. Buckley
that Clara, independent of any confent, or refusal of confent, from his mother, Was determined to receive no addresses from stim; and that e-vcn if he was not, in quality of brother to Lady Harriet, entitled to the moss favorable distinction, tier common gratitude, combined with her detestation of all coquetry, would oblige her to Spare him the trouble in vain of a Solicitation, a-gainst listening to which she had taken an unalterable reSolution: that she acknowledged he did her more honor than she deferved, but that he would still do her a greater pleafure, if he Would^ take this anfwer as final.
You will, dear nephew, eaSily conceive how much a vain man, who had, du’ alt liis; advantages, and on the merit of the^ step- he- had recently taken, prefumed a reception with open arms, must be mortified’: at fuGh: a rebuff. He then wanted to draw me into-Some explanation of the nature and caufe of this averfion of Clara against, him; but I stuck clofely to my point, which was-fimply that of a flat difmiiflion of his Suit,, without giving any reafon, or leaving him. any glimpfe of, hope, that she might be brought to. alter her mind.
He alked me again- if he might have leave to fee Clara ; but to that request I anfwered by an. appeal to hinifelf, whether, after fuch an anfwer • as he had received, she could well admit a vifitr from him, unlefs he imagined that this rejedtion .-df her’s was mere grimace, lure, and artifice, which, were not at all in her charadler.
Lord Lovell interrupted ifie here,„ and' Said he -felt it but too Severely,; that,he was fo difconcer--ted, fo shocked, that he did not know what to -fay ; which I really believe, for I could plainly difeern in his countenance the distradling emotions ol wounded vanity and disappointed defire.
» , <■ ♦ to Mr. M e l l e f o n t. hi
He then took leave, and the next stay 'Sent a letter to Clara, who returned it unopened.
I am fenSible, that on fhis occaston the - world would be forward enough to condemn Clara, for being wanting to her fortune; and the World would be in the right, if felicity depended Solely on fortune, which may, indeed,' be always a de-ssrable accessory, but can never have the honor of being constdered as a principal. Is it, then, Clara’s fault, if the world makes wrong estimates info effenrial a concern? Gr is (he to facristce the happinefs of her life to the falfity of its judgment ?
Surely, of all the human duties not the least Sacred is that of not marrying one whom one does not love. It is even a crime against the perfon one marries under that circumstance. A crime fo often produdtive of many others; a crime into which no parents ought to wisti to Seduce a child. It then, purely on this virtuous, this indifpenSable principle, that Clara has refufed Lord Lovell. Nor is he the only one, by many, to whom fhe has given the like anfwer, a number of fuitors having already followed her to my houSe. But fhe is generally denied to every one, except to a few ladies, and to one or two gentlemen, much advanced in years, of whofe conversation she ufed, to be fond at Lady Lovell’s, not, most certainly, for their being old, but for the improvement of her understanding, which she is astlduousty cultivating. One of them you know very well, Dr., Tyfon, who, at past eighty, allies all the graces of youthful vivacity with all the dignity of age.. His manner of instructing young people is admirable : it is not by impostng on them his judgment of things that he aims at leading them, but by engaging them to form their own, on a due examination of all opinions propofed to them.
IS
e
112	Mrs. Buckley
by the lights of their own reaSon properly prepared, without trusting to it too much or too little. Nor is it a little honor to Clara’s taste and good fenfe, that she is delighted with his conversation and he with her’s.
Among her difcarded Suitors there was one cha-rafter which I thought the more curious, for his being a young man: one Mr. South wold, who is, literally fpeaking, ‘‘ dying of nothing but a rage to live.” With a great fortune, and all circumstances agreeable, he cannot enjoy life, for the perpetual apprehenSion of its shortnefs. He is constantly imagining himfelf Sick; while his difor-der is intirely that of his own mind. He fatigues with his complaints all the Phystcians he-meets with : Some laugh at him, others prefcrib for him, but they all take his fees, and he their phystc. There is not a quack advertisement he reads, but he fancies the cafe applicable to himfelf, and fends for the nostrum, and by this means he has at length arrived at destroying, or at least greatly damaging, an originally good constitution. He fcrupulousty weighs all his meat and drink, of which he regulates the quantity by the fanc-torian chair, as he does his drefs by a barometer.,
I really believe he turned his thoughts on Clara, as much with the view of advantage to his health, from having a nurfe of her exquistte bloom andi freshnefs as for any thing elfe. Another than. Clara, not tempted by his fortune, or not driven by the want of one to fuch an hofpital, would have laughed at him; Clara only good natured-ly pitied his cafe, and wished to recommend him; to Dr. Tyfon.
It is really but jpstice to Clara to obferve, that she postestes Sovereignly the talent of declining offers. without offence to thofe who make them. I know of but one to whom she perfonally gave
a. iiiort.
to Mr. Mellefont.
”3
a fliort abrupt diSmiffion, his vanity having been So offenSive that fhe could not keep meaSures with it, or disdained to keep them.
This was young Turpin, Son to the notorious Turpin, who has made one of thoSe fcandaloufly rapid and immenfe fortunes which fo justly pro-' voke the indignation of a public, that could not have been fo infamousty pillaged, if the guarding against fuch depredations had not been even treasonably negledled by thoSe who had the administration of the national treaSures, and who, for want of capacity, or of attention to their duty, made or Suffered Such bubbles bargains for their country. If Turpin was not guilty, the government could not be innocent; and, in the mean while, leaving that question to be decided as it may, he proceeds enjoying without taste, a fortune gotten without honor.
But as to the young cub of this beast of prey, you in your life never faw So ignoble, fo trivial a figure, with a dull heavy countenance, anfwerable to his understanding, as if nature had difdained a deception. This was the. wretch, who. Smitten with Clara’s beauty, made his addresses to her with an infolence ridiculous enough for its absurdity, but not very Surprizing constdering the condition from which this Son of a dunghill Sprung, among the dregs of the people. His stile of courtship was that of a man doing Clara great honor and not a little charity, by taking her with fuch a monstrous” disproportion of fortune, (as if beauty, virtue, and talents were, objects of calculation by pounds st 'llings- and pence,) efpe-cieliy too as he had a6t ally half a dozen Dukes daughters thrown at his head, over whom he was most graciousty giving her the pref. rence. Clara, rather Shocked than angry at his pretentions, which She looked on as fo degrading to her, was not
content
1 *
114
Mrs: B u c K t E Y
content with a fimple rejc6iion of him, but threw ‘ into it, to punish his infolence, much Such an air as one would ufe to a fodtman offering his Ser-' vice with worfe than no charafter, with a bad one.
This, however, is really a' Single instance, for ■ it is impossible for any one to have a greater a-verston than Clara for giving pain or uneastnefs. That cruelty of which thofe whom she refufes coihplain, lies, even by their own confession, in ' the refufal itSelf, and not in the manner, which • is alw;ays the gentlest, though the firmest,' and f the most peremptory imaginable. But they mistake the term ; 'her refufals are not cruelty in her, ■'shut delicacy, and even in that delicacy she is her-- Self purely passive, and confequ'ently not to blafne. Is it her fault if thofe who have hitherto courted her, could not excite in her a liking Sufficient to determine her choice, and prevail over her attachment to her liberty? H she artSwerab'e for their want of power to pleafe ? Or would it not still she a greater fault in her to encourage the addresses of thofe" she feels she can never love, and to keep them in fufpence with the lure of falfe hopes ? The truth is, she is only difficult; but r believe her heart is far from impenetrable to the passion of love; fenSible of which herfelf she dreads the confequences of a choice that is to embark her for life, on a fea, in which there are a thoufand shipwrecks for one good voyage. She may possibly, it will be faid, with her nicenefs, out-stay her market. Be it So: that is at her rilk and peril, and at the worst a difficulty of chu-fing can hardly be worfe punished than what a bad choice Commonly is.
In the mean while, from her prefent eafe and tranquillity, you would not conclude her greatly alarmed with the fears-of any very bad confequences to her future happinefs from her prefent indifference. Yours, &c. Lucy Buckley,
r-
[ MS 1 ■
LETT E R XVI.
Clara'• Maynwaring to Mr.r. Mellefoijt.
Richmond.
** CT^O what vicissitudes, to what unaccotmta->X ble turns: are human; affairs cxpofed!”
Do not- think, i dear stster, this is a Scrap of morality, ssolen from one of Mr, Mellefont’s Sermons, without too iuft a caufe of application. The Marquefs of Soberton,- after leaving bis father at Spaw, with Some hopes of recovery from his.^ illnefs, finds, at his return to England, a mother, whom he had left. in ' perfe£I healthy at the- point of death, from the Sudden stroke of * an apoplexy. She expires infenfible in his iarms. His grief was, I am told, immoderate. Poor Lady Harriet, too! ’ How deeply do I feel for her ! Independently of her concern for the Mar-quefs’s lofs, and of the retardment, in reSpe6t to decency, of an union which she passionately wishes with the objeD of her purest love, she loSes in the DucheSs a valuable friend. It was her interest with her Son, perhaps, too, even her afcendant over him, that engaged hirn to ratify the choice, which, without confulting him, she had ^made of Lady Harriet; a choice, to which she was more led by my friend’s merit, than even by the family-convenience, which, however, collaterally found its account in the match. I should, indeed, imagine it impossible for one of Lord Soberton’s character for taste, not to be struck with Such transcendent worth as that of my friend’s, in wfiom every; thing, beauty, youth, fortune, and, above all, an irrOSistible amiablenefs of character, • concur to Secure a profpeCt of happinefs.
It is now, indeed, that I cordially lament the bar which Lady Lovell’s chimerical fears have
thrown
I :
■ 1 :

ii6
Clara Mavnwaring,
thrown in my way, to my flying to Lady Harriet’s, and to my endeavours at alleviating her af-flidlion, by flncerely Sharing it. But, after what has past, for me to go to her mother’s houfe, is, by all the laws of procedure, stri6Uy forbidden me: And indeed I have ever stnce my knowledge of Lady Lovell’s injunction to her daughter not to fee me, had the just delicacy to avoid putting her duty into conflict with her inclination, and have never met her but once, the day before Lord So-berton’s arrival, at an auCfion of pictures, where my aunt cafually carried me, and where we exchanged complaints of the perverfenefs of our fortune, and mutual assurances of the constancy of our friendship. She did not then mention her brother to me, in which she obliged me : and in her letters to me observes the fame filence; on my part, I have not once made him an objeCt of inquiry : Nor should I now mention him, but to exprefs withal my pleasure to find that neither the incident of her brother’s fancy, nor the confequences upon it, had produced any diminution of Lady Harriet’s regard for me, or any alteration of our Sentiments of mutual esteem.
I have Sent her a letter of condoleance on the death of the Duchefs, to which her anfwer breathes a melancholy that greatly affliCts me. There is in it I know not what air of diffidence and alarm, that I can attribute to nothing elfe but to too modest an opinion of herfelf, and an exquiSite fenss-bility. Perhaps, too, the Marquefs is fo thoroughly taken up with his grief, and is himfelf, on his recent lofs, too much agitated by the Sentiments of nature, to pay attention enough to thoSe of love. That passion, is, I fear, of all the passions, not the least unreasonable in its expectations. A little time must Soon now clear up every thing.
In
to Mr, M E L L E F O N T.
1 17
In the mean while, dear Sister, I long impatiently to See you, and wisti I could prevail on our aunt here to come down to you with me; but of that, for many reafons, I defpair. But furely there breathes not a worthier woman. What obligations have I not to Mr. Mellelont for his recommendation ? He knows her, and that’s enough; that difpenfes from all panegiric.
Mrs. Proffer was here but yesterday, and has given me a packet for you, of a very good col-ledfion of Marcello’s composition. He is undoubtedly the Orpheui of church-mufic. She has in-clofed with it Mr. Harris’s Hermes for Mr. Melle-font. I cannot fay but I greatly esteem that woman ; she never appears in her element but when she is doing a fervice, and yet always does it with fuch an air, as if she was grumbling over it. I am convinced, by what I fee of her, that good humor breeds fat; if fo, I cannot think she has a bad bargain of her’s, for every body loves her.
You must give me leave to throw in my mite, for I shall cram into her packet the Statut mater of Pergolefe, and the Miferere of Des-landes, which, though inferior by much to the other, is not however without its merit. The whole goes by the next coach, with a whole cargo of play-things for the children, of which you will be fo good as to make an equitable distribution. Yours, &c.
Clara Maynwaring.

Xiv	^	x*.-
LETTER XVII.
Mrs. Buckley to Mr. Mellefo nt
Dear NepheiVf
Richmond.
I Can hardly conceive that you can be without fome curiofity about Lord Lovell, which, however, I should be unable to gratify, but for Mrs.
Vil-
118
Mrs. B U C K L E Y
Villaret, who, as I have before, I think, mentioned to you, , had Some acquaintance with the family, which was rather interrupted than dropped.
Upon the final rejefilion he received from me; in, Clara’s name, he returned to town, and appeared extremely mortified and difconcerted, and went near neither Lady Lovell nor Lady Harriet; not would Scarce fee any one but his old companion Golding, who was juft returned to town^ and with whom he has, at length, quarrelled, on a cauSe that really does his lordfhip honor. Golding; it Seems, to ingratiate himSelf with him, was strongly urging him to Some afl of violence, for getting Clara into his posseftion, which Lord Lovell totally disapproved. In the heat of the difcuftion, Golding, very probably without weighing his expref-fions, or in the ignorance of their force, happened to drop fomething that Squinted towards a reproach to his Lordfhip, for not having a heart for fuch a mettled enterprize. Lord Lovell, in whom his own licentioufnefs had, at least, its bounds, being naturally of not the most enduring temper, and befides, already on the fret upon that fubjefit, took fire, as if Golding had accufcd him of paltroonery; and over-heating himfelf with that notion, which, however, was not a just one, (for certainly the other had no fuch meaning,) came to violent words with him, and even to blows, of which he was afterwards heartily afhamed, as it might give the world room to fay, he knew whom he w'^as beating. Lord Lovell, by the bye, never wanted for courage, of which he has given unquestionable proofs. As for Golding he had no character to lofe by this incident; a Negro needs not fear being blacker than he is. For Some little time he made the most abje6l fubmistions to be taken into favor again by his Lordfhip, who, however, held out; and who, befides declaring himfelf forry for
having
to Mr, Melle font.
no
i
Mm
ha^ying ever countenanced fuch a fellow, niade no fecret of thc: caufe oif the quarrel. Such is gene-, rally the end of that fociety among unequals,
which is only founded on a community of vices and follies.	.
Golding, grown defperate by all this, has, by way of extenuating his own guilt, charged, in his turn, his Lprdfhip with having jio need to be fo
for that his honorable love to Clara
M * >
was all a pretence ; and that even he had made the overture of it to Lady Lovell, with the worst deligns. I really do not know how he Satisfied thofe to whom he told this story, but Satisfied it Seems, they, were of the truth of it
Lady Lovell, who paffionately loves this Son, and who was,So mortally averfe against his marrying Clara, is with all her weaknesses,,a woman of strift morals,; upon hearing this ,account, of the truth of which she was, it Seems, convinced, she had the candor to declare, that she could fooner forgive Lord Lovell’s meannefs in his courtship of a woman of inferior birth, than So abandoned a procedure, as that of preshng her'name into the Service of dishonor, and of defigning her for his tool of feduffion; fo that he was in thorough, dif-grace with her. All this, combined with Clara’s difdain of him, even on the footing of honorable love, had So overwhelmed him with shame. So crushed his vanity. So Sickened his gallantry, that he was not, likely foon to be in a humor, or in a capacity to projedit, with a very good grace, new conquests.
His revenge on Golding being out of the question, by that fellow’s being notorioussy beneath all farther anirnadverfion, he Seems to have turned all his revenge against himfelf, as if one folly could not be repaired but by another. He is now all for the joys of the bottle. You may gueSs what a
Set
N
%
„ . V

' 'Pi
I20
Mrs. B u c K L E V
Set of company hejs got into, with whom he can murder his time in midnight uproar and ghastly revels ; a company only fit to invert the miracle at the feast of Canaan, and turn the brifkest Burgundy or Tokay into ditch-water; to make pleasure stupid and gaiety detestable. There is great livelinefs, to be fure, in being carried to bed, after a fitting of fome hours, without hearing a fylla-ble of wit, and great humor and taste in the fro-licks of rakes, dull. Sober, and worfe drunk In Such a courfe, however, is Lord Lovell now Seeking to drown reflexion, and must foon destroy his health and intelle61;s, if he is not prevailed upon to stop himfelf in time in that infamousty pernicious career.
Already Lady Lovell begins to relent, and to be in great pain for him, and, did not her pride Secretly oppofe it, would perhaps own a wish that he had been in earnest in his addresses to a woman of honor, though ungraced with a coronet in her family, that should have Saved him from the con-fufion, “worfe confounded,” into which he is at prefent plunging himfelf. There is, however, one point of which it was with the utmost difficulty she was brought to the belief, that not only Clara had given her fon a flat refufal, but that her Ladyship might very Safely rely on her not retraft-ing it; an assurance that gives her the lefs pleasure, for its being beyond her conception, and for its rather hurting her vanity of opinion, as to her Son’s irrefistible merit. To know him defpifed by Clara was To her almost as bad, as would have been the knowing him married to her.
As for Lady Harriet, her Sisterly affeffion makes her Suffer greatly for him; she has labored very Sincerely to bring about his reconciliation with Lady Lovell, and it is to be hoped, that by the exertion of her good fenfe and influence, she will
bring
\
Mr
121
bring her brother to a cooler SenSe of things, and to a greater refpefi for himfelf.
Clara, in this point, very cordially fimpathifes with her, and' would, I believe Sacrifice to Lady Harriet’s fatisfadion, any thing but her heart, which is independent of her. This I can Safely attest in her favor, that I never heard a fillable come from her in the stile of triumph on this occafion, but many a figh of a compassion that had nothing of infult in it.
But enough, and too much of stiis at best disagreeable theme, of which I fancy we have got pretty well rid : in my next I shall have another matter of communication to you. Yours,
Lucy Buckley.
*
LETTER XVIII.
Mrs. Buckley to Mr. Mellefont.
Richmond.
I Threatened you, in the cloSe of my last, with a new fubjefl: I now keep my word, and proceed with pleafiire in the charadler of writer of an epistolary history, of which Clara is the heroine.
She had been by Lady Proffer introduced to Mrs. Pierpoint, a Lady of great worth, who has a noble houfe on Richmond-green, and is passionately fond of mufic, to indulge her taste for which, she has fet apart a very commodious falopn for a mufical assembly, by whom, under the dlreffion of a great master, there are concerts executed three times a week. The performers are chiefly Such Ladies as have pushed their talent in mufic beyond the degree of thofe common dillettantes^ who with their Small proficiency, and premature
VoL. II.	G	pre.
%
122
Mrs. Buckley
pretenSions, are fitter to torment than to pleaSe the-ear. The two Mifs Willoughby’s, the one with her harpfichord, the other with her lute, riiight play with distin6tion among the first professors of the art; Clara, as you well know, has an admirable voice, with great judgment, and an inimitable grace; the rest of the band are not quite fo excellent, but there are none of them that are not much above mediocrity. So that upon the whole they contribute to furnifh a very agreeable entertainment, which is never continued a moment beyond that in which it ceafes to be fo. Mrs. Pierpoint does the honors of it with great elegance of taste, and without any affedfation, taking effedfual care that none but real good company, in the justest fenfe of that word, fhould be admitted, as fhe would no more open her doors to a worthlefs Duke, than to an indigent sharper. Every thing is eondudfed there with the greatest eafe, joined with the most perfedb decency. Without prefuming to didlate to the taste of her company, her contempt of cards does not hinder her from indulging them to thofe who chiiSp them, and whom the hot reducing to the necessity of sheer conversation, renders hiore indifferent to them than they possibly might be if they w'ere not at hand. But all that can be called gaming is effedfually discountenanced. The refreshments provided are regulated by an attention to health, and to the feafon, and are of no very great expence to Mrs. Pierpoint, who gives the entertainment, being chiefly, coffee, tea, chocolate, bifcuits, and the like.
It is very Seldom, however, that Clara goes there, and never without Lady Prosser, whom she is always defirous of obliging, and with myfelf. Not that she does not greatly love mufic, or can have any objection to her exercifirig herfelf inht, in an assembly of which she is the adrniration
and

to Mr. M E L L E F O N T.
123
and delight; but I don’t know how it is, there is in her a natural difinclinalion to go into company, an invincible timidity, which Seems leSs to proceed from her not being ufed to it (which certainly is not the cafe, for fhe has feen a great deal,) than from an exquiSite delicacy of fenssbility which makes her shrink from the approaches of any but of thofe with whom she is well or long acquainted. She appears fo much born for domestic life, that she is out of her element in a public place, or iti mixed company. To thofe with whom she is familiar she lets herfelf loofe with all the boundlefs freedom of innocent gaiety; but, among strangers, she carries fomewhat of an air of referve, but a referve fo far from gloomy, fo far from re-pulstve, that it rather ferves us as a zest to that engaging fweetnefs of her’s which is in perfedi harmony with it.
Lady Proffer and I then had got her one morning to Mrs, Pierpoint’s, when there was no assembly, but only two or three ladies of her acquaintance, round the harpSichord in the mufic-fa-Idon.
Mrs. Pierpoint having received, the evening before, an Italian fong, fet to mufic, which has a great vogue, and which I inclofe you with this, deSired Clara to favour her with the execution of it, by way ©f rehearfal against the next assembly. Clard complied without the least hesstation, and fitting down to the harpSichord, was finging it at fight, with her Ufual eafe and fuperiority of fkill, when on a Sudden there
entered into the room, a young Gentleman in it feems, expedted by
without being anounced, deep mourning, who was Mrs. Pierpoint.
The attention of the company being abforbed by Clara’s performance, he had the time to place himfelf behind her chair, unobferved by her, and
G 2	for
%
124
Mrs. B U C K L E Y
for Some moments by the bye-flanders, wbofe eye» when he Saw fixed on him, he made a fign of in-treaty not to dillurb the finger.
In the mean while I, who had really never Seen him before, readily conjectured, from the air of familiarity and eafe with which he treated Mrs. Pierpoint, that he was Some perfon not only of character, for her door was open to none elfe, but particularly esteemed by her ; as then his eyes and ears were wholly taken up with Clara, it was eafy for me to examin.e his perfon.
With a very noble deportment and a stately prefence, there was in his countenance an air of languor that was even pleafing, as it appeared lefs the impreffion of a grief, than of a temper So habitually turned to tendernefs and humanity, that his face had moulded itfelf upon his he«-t> He was tall and genteel, in short a very agreeable figure.
No Sooner had Clara finished her Song, and received the applaufe which it was hardly poshble to deny her, in which the stranger emphatically joined, than Mrs. Pierpoint, taking him by the hand, preSented him to thofe of the company who did not know him, under his title of the Marquefs •of Sobertoru
At this name Clara could not help starting with the emotion of an agreeable furprife, when the Marquefs,, without giving her the .time to fay any thing, bowing very low to her, entreated her pardon, both for Mrs. Pierpoint and .himfelf, having laid this Scene for a first interview, for which Lady Harriet’s encomiums, both in her letters and verbally, had given him the most impatient curiofity ; adding, that he heartily forgave Lady Harriet for her not having done her justice in her defeription. Since he faw that was impostible.

to Mr, Mellefont.
125
\
Clara letting this compliment fall to the ground, with much more modesty than the taking it up' and dwelling upon it would have been, acquitted herfelf of the expression of civility on this occa-sson with a chearfulnefs, a franknefs of air, which I had never before obferved in her to a stranger, ufed as She was to be remarkably fhy to any, especially at the first fight. Her eyes Seemed to glisten with the Smiles of liking and approbation.
As for the Marquefs, as I had all the coolneSs of a by-stander, I could eafily diScern the impression that his view of Clara, as Ihe stood up to^ pay her reSpefits, made on him* He looked profoundly struck, which, however, might be nothing-more than the common effe6t of Clara’s appearance; foon, however, encouraged by her engaging manner of receiving him, which had even Something careS-ling in it, he recovered himfelf into rather more eaSe, and they preSently Aid into a conversation, of which Lady Harriet being the Subject, CHra was the lefs' referved, and the more drawn on to fpeak with readinefs and familiarity. Perhaps I refine too much, perhaps my partiality for Clara may fe-duce me, but I thought of the two it was not the Marquefs that was the least embarrassed. Soon-the conversation growing general, and the time approaching for Separating, the Marquefs, addressing himfelf to me. Said, he hoped he fhould have both our leaves to pay his refpedtful vifits to Clara, which, if admitted, he Should the oftener avail himfelf of the permission, as he was come to stay for Some little time at Peterssiam, with his aunt Lady Clifford.
As there could be no reafon, on the terms- he stood v/ith Lady Harriet for declining Such a civi* lity, Clara joined with me in assuring him, that
we stiould confider it as an honor, and receive as a
favor..
G 3
No
%
126
Airs. Buckley
No Sooner was Clara returned home, than she iat down to write Lady Harriet a minute account of what had pasted, which she concluded with a stncere congratulation on her profpe£t of happi-nefs, in a choice that did her taste fo much honor.
Lady Harriet’s anfwer exprested great fatisfac-uon at Clara’s having Seen this Sovereign eledl of her heart, and efpecially at her approbation of him, which, if it could not she Said, increafe her love, at least confirmed her judgment, and gave to her pastion the authority of reafon. Still there was in her letter a turn to the gently plaintive strain, lor the Marquefs not having given her opportunity enough to employ herlelf perfonally in the alleviation of his grief, by Sincerely sharing it, and for his flying for confolation to any thing but love. She concluded with thefe words:
You might wonder, my dear Clara, that fenfible as I ani of the power of your charms, I am not in the least touched with a jealoufy, which^ from my never having felt it, I may venture to aver, is not infeparable from love ; I fay, you might wonder at this, if you did not know me and yourfelf. Incapable of fo vain a thought as that of prefuming on, my Lord’s con-stancy from my own perfonal merit, I pleale my-“ felt with the unlimited confidence I have in his ** charadier. I would difdain to owe his fidelity to the poor circumstance of his not feeing a woman more worthy of being beloved than my-felf. On the contrary, I wish him fuch trials. If he comes off victorious, the honor will be the greater to him, and the Security to me. If he does not, I may and shall undergo the most mortal affli^ion, but fliould difdain a postestion on fo precarious a tenure, as that of a Super-eminence, to which I am clear I have no pre-
tentions.
iC
t€
CC
cc
<6
€6
f

to Mr. M E L L E F O N T.
127
K
tendons, or of that of a heart capable of facri-
ficing to a motive of change fo eaSily prefumable,
and which often depends on the levity of fancy,
the happinefs of a woman, that fhould entirely
** found it on the faith of his fuperiority to it.”
Nothing more just, nothing more generous,
than Lady Harriet’s fentiments on this point; but
the greatnefs of my regard for her makes me fear,
that Sne has not enough distinguished between the
cruel and too common acquiefcence in a family-
arrangement of interest and convenience, and the
clear-fpirited pashon of love, fuch as she finds it
in her own heart, and prefumes it becaufe she
wishes it in Lord Soberton’s, and becaufe it would
^ «
perhaps have hurt her too much to entertain a doubtj that might have led her to an examination. Her fincerity of pashon will have blinded her to the coolnefs of his return. Not that I think Lord Soberton capable of infincerity to her it i§ with, himfelf that he will have been infincere, in his taking thofe fentiments of esteem for Lady Harriet, which it is not poshble to know her and to refufe to her, for love, or for Something very likely to become love.
I have Seen and perufed his letters to her, from the Spaw, where he was with the Duke his father, and wherever he introduces the word Love, I thought I could, more agreeably to the fenfe of the context, have Substituted Esteem. I have marked his procedure fince his return ; it has always appeared to me in the highest form of goodbreeding, but without any thing of that eager-neSs and warmth, that charafteriSe a pashon, and leSs in the stile of Sentiment than of ceremony, rerhaps I over-refine, perhaps I may be mistaken, at least, I fi cerely wish I may be fo.
Mrs. Pierpoint, who is intimate with bis aunt, and has known him from his infancy, gave me,
G 4	the
♦»
%
128
Mrs. Buckley
the other day, his history, merely in the courfe of conversation, vvithout my having led her into it by the way of inquiry, and purely from her own pleafure in Speaking of him.
His education had proceeded in the commorr rote through School and college, without presenting any thing extraordinary except his stngular application to his studies, which produced a prohci-er.cy in them very uncommon for thofe of his rank, who are too often ruinousty indulged and even encouraged in a remisthefs, which, if ever years bring with them judgment, they are Sure to repent, Vv^hen the lofs of the most favorable time for learning of any kind is, generally Speaking, irreparable. What expectation can there be of an harvest where there has been no cultivation ? The Spring of youth is naturally the feafon of improvement, and man knows no Second Spring.
Upon finishing bjis studies, instead of being hurried away prematurely on that Silly wild-goofe chace after accomplishment, called the yrand-tourj in the manner it is commonly performed, he underwent at least a year’s preparation, not only by reading the very few good books of voyages, v.^hic' were Specially feleiSted for him, but by being instrufited in the adtual pofition of th Courts of Europe in general, and particularly of thofe he was intended to vistt, and in the cha-radiers and viewi’s of the refpedtive leading men in each. His defire v^as alfo excited to fee and converfe perfonally with all the eminent in arts and Sciences, to whom he was to carry introduQiory letters of recommendation. Such charadters being of all the least likely to make any advances to him, or to throw themfelves in his way ; the lights and instructions, however, to be gathered from whom were incomparably a greater obje£t of curioSity than domes, porticos, paintings, sta~
O
Mr,
12pi
toes, monuments, cabinets, or the like, that fb vulgarly Satisfy the sslly Superficial gap of travelling fight-mongers ; not that thefe need be wholly neglefted; the just point is only to confider themi in a very Subordinate view..
On his travels, thenj. his-taste thus previoufly formed was not only ufeful to^ himfelf^ but did honor to his country, by his Supporting the-dignity of a Britifh Nobleman, I mean Such as it was before the barely not total extinction of that character. Mr. Greville, who attended him as a kind of travelling council;, qualified by more years, and a greater experience to - advife. and direCt his conduct, was himfelf a real Gentleman ofi the politest education, the greatest elevation of fenti--ments, and a perfeCt knowledge, of the world; Xo define himj by negatives, which will give at once an idea of the happinefsiof the choice procured for his Lordfhip,,, and? of thb wretchednefs of that So frequently made for thofe of- his rank,, he was not one of thofe Hottentots of literature, thofe uncivilized pedants, with nothing to recommend them* but a few undigested Scraps of Latin and Greek, who themfelves need a preceptor of manners, and who have fo-strikingly the air of a bear leading his cub a dance;. As little was he- one of thofe pert, fhallow,. frothy led-captains, who equipped with a Smattering; of murthered French, and with all the. fcum of courtffutility,. imagine themfelves the-finest of fine Gentlemen, and consequentially enough'to So falfe a conceit, run theperfonage, wifely entrusted* to their charge, through a whole courfe of nonfenfe, of every thing,_ in short- that taste would fly from and difdain, a stupid circle of pandars, buona-robas, opera-fingers, the canaglia-virtuofa, mumping. Cicermes^ filly cicisheos, or foreign noblemen, more ignorant, if poffible, than themfelves: and when they return, what a boast
G 5,	to.
%
iiii
130
Mrs
il
' 1 f !
to have Seen the Pope, the Pre tender, and all the fine fights, with an emphafis that makes trifles more trifling. But no matter, they will, and the more is the pity, have feen Europe, and Europe them,” as an old Knight Said to his Son.
Lord Soberton having been happy enough to efcape the disadvantage to him of either of thefe choices, and being pre-instrudled in that art. So ufeful and fo little known, of feeing with judicious eyes, proceeded on his travels, which he finilhed with great and just fatisfadlion to himfelf and friends, under the care of Mr. Greville, who, attending him in the charaQ;er of companion, friend, and guardian, acquitted himfelf nobly of his charge.
He returned home, fraught with ufeful points of knowledge, and efpecially, by comparifon, penetrated with a reverence for the constitution of his native country, which he looked on as the fheet-anchor that would alone enable it to weather the temporary detriment to it, from the wretched government under which he found it, without order, and without authority, and, what is worfe yet, without deferving to have any : in a condition, in short, that made it no fmall merit, the not defpairing of the commonwealth.
So foon as he was arrived all parties made their application to him, not most certainly, for any good they expedfed from him, of which they had not the least conception, but for the ill that each of them apprehended from the weight which his acceshon would give to their opponents. Without honor enough to esteem merit in their enemies, they detest it in their friends, becaufe they fear it every where. It was not, then, polTible for him to have lefs merit than the heads of the parties wiflied him to have for their fervice, which' is fo exadtly true, that you would have Sworn the competition for
places
to Mr. Mellefont.
1.31

iC
QC
places was carried on by an emulation of worth-lelTneSs. One who is now associated to the rank of ia Peer, has had the candor to attest this me-lancholic truth, of worth being even a neceffary exclufion.
Perhaps, dear nephew, you may think this exagerated. Turn to his pamphlet, of which I Sent you, Some years ago, a copy, for the curioTity; it is entitled, A mode ft Apology for his Con-duBd"* You will find, page 15, thefe ever memorable words.
\
“ I cannot help recolle6ling to what numerous “ inconveniences, not to fay mifchiefs, a nation is fubje^;, where the very nature and necelTity of public affairs, or of thofe who diredl them, make ‘‘ it abfolutely neceffary to exclude the greatest, the “ wlfest, and the best of men.”
Yet what is this but in other terms imputing to a government the most fhameful, the most execrable of all falfe necessities, that of a recourfe to the Service of knaves and fools ?
In this condition it was that Lord Soberton, at his return, found his country,, much as he had left it, or rather growing every day worfe and worfe, its interest lying iiegle^led, like a houfe in chancery, between contending parties, and running to ruin So as to threaten Soon to be not worth to any the getting possestion.. He beheld, then, with pity and indignation, So vile a System as the current one, titles degraded, ribbons stained,, posts distionored by the dirty channel in which preferment to them generally ran, reverfions Ican-daloussy anticipated, penSions out of the money of the public, for incapacity offervice;, or, worfe yet, for notorious disservice to it ;• while many oS thefe infamous benefits were not even conferred by favor, or Spontaneous emanations from authority,, but infolently forced from it, the-trophies^ of victorious
%
II
13a
Mrs. Buckley
torious faction; in which cafe they had shockingly the air of the prifes of a low dirty Scramble, or of goods Snatched out of a houfe on fire, by ruffians watching the hour of distrefs.
With the Spirit, then, to prefer an inrolment in the book of state-martyrs for Serving his country, to a place in the Court-Kalendar for betraying it, the Marquefs Spurned the applications of all parties ; determined as he was to devote his whole power of utility to the real Service of the nation ; disdaining the implicitneSs of being inlisted, where a man dares not call his vote his own, even in the most facred of all cafes, that of the trust re-pofed in him by his country.
With thefe ideas, you may eaSily think he would not be ministerially recommended to any borough, and though Sure of carrying one by his family-interest, he looked on his exertion of that influence as a criminal prevarication against tl oSe laws, which.So wifely prohibit to Peers, their intermeddling in elections, and which are So dan-gerousty, not to fay treasonably, tending to Suffer abolition, by diSufe, connivance, or neglect. In vain did his father and friends preSs him to conquer that Scruple, which they even tried to turn to ridicule, by giving it the name of falSe heroics, in times when there was, no hope of effectually opposing the current, but by appearing to go with it: the Marquefs to this inflexibly oppofed for anSwer, That a man who was himSelf breaking the law in one point, could with a very ill grace oppoSe the breach of it in others, and that he would disdain to enter the houfe at a door he was determined, whenever he should have got in, to endeavour at condemning, or shutting up for over in future.
Soon after a borough deputed to him, with an entreaty to do it the honor of reprefen ting it
Lord
to Mr. Mellefont.

Cord Soberton, who was not at all the bubble of this invitation, and knew very well what it meant, did not think himfelf at liberty to refufe, though but a Seeming opportunity of being in a way to Serve the nation, but was withal determined to preServe an inviolable reSpedt for his own Savorite general maxim. That whoever buys his Seat will fell his country. He declared himSelf then, a candidate, but when it came to the pufh, though perhaps the kingdom cannot boast a Nobleman of a more truly generous Spirit, he would not Sacrifice Sixpence to bribery, diredi, or indirefit, in any of thoSe stiapes which that Proteus takes to elude the danger of the graSp of Justice, little as that danger is, confidering that her hands, on this occasion, appear taken up with being held before her eyes. But what was the conSequence ? His appearance in that charafiiter only Served to raiSe the price of the feat to young Turpin, who had stood against him, who, literally Speaking, was beneath the honor of being his footman, but who, in virtue of ten thouSand pounds of that money, of which his father had plundered the public, being thrown away by him, in order to make a most villainous figure in Parliament, carried it, in the jockey-jargon of the turf, hollow against his Lordstiip. On this failure, the Marquefs Said he was only lorry, that with all his execration of corruption, he had been the caufe of it in others; but that he much wondered at the abfurdity of our laws, who punistied with death any wretched debafer of the lawful coin of the kingdom, while they had provided no adequate punistiment for an infinitely more atrocious crime, that of debafing the lawful fubjefifs of great Britain by corrupting them. “ A kingdom (Lord Burleigh obferved) could not “ be rich while the coin was bafe he might have
justly added, that while the fubje^s were fo, it
Xould
%
V
1
I •
( i
t I
i!:,
’1'
. I
I '
11 I)
I
i ■
I
!l
( t
1 ;
; t .
I I '
I
t I
I i
m
Mrs. B U C;K LEY
*
could not be strong. When the very foiintains of good government, on which the national welfare and Safety fo capitally depend, are poifoned, what destructive evils must not flow from them ? While the facility with which Corruption, by talking a thoufand stiapes, eludes what little re-;str.aints there appear to be laid on it for form-fake, only shews it,at once the^ more mean, for its jecourfe to difguifes, and the more dang^^rous, fpr ,the difficulty of guarding agaipst it. Adding, that to murder a Bfiton was, in the eye of Sound policy, a venial trefpafs compared to that of corrupting him out of his duty to the public, stnce it killed the freeborn fubjeCt, while it left the villainous ^stave alive; for furely a bought voter is, in faCt, -no freer than a forced one, and certainly more-infamous; left him to rot above ground, a nui-fance to his own confcience, and a pest to his country. In which plain, unexaggerated light, though a maffacre of a multitude of Britons might carry in the found of it Something more dreadful, it could not, in the fenfe, give a more .horrid idea than the pestilential vapor of corruption’s destroying the nation itfelf, and making of it a cadaverous mafs, fit only, with its leaven of putrefaction, to engender and nourish Swarms of vermin; for furely it is not men that corruption -breeds.
To thoSe who, on his thus miffing two elections, expostulated with him, on, perhaps, an overstrain of rigor in him, in times that required a greater latitude of principle, his Lordship was thC; first to laugh at himfelf for aCting as if he was very fe-rioufly looking on the Houfe, as the Romans did on the fanCtuary of Honor, to which they allowed no accefs but through the .temple of Virtue ; but that, all jesting apart, he heartily adopted Sir Ben-
; ‘‘ That there was
nothing
jamin
3 opinion.
to Mr. Mellefont.
35
nothing in the world worth being a raScal for,” and that, according to his fixt principle, there could not be a more mean, rafcally aQ:, than that of tempting others to break the laws of their country, in a concern essential to its very falyation: bessdes which, he had an unconquerable aversson for his refembling, in any point, the knaves of interest, or the fools of fastiion.
That as to the first, whofe motive for getting into the houfe, was to make a traffic of themfelves, and of the greatest concerns of the nation, he had not words to exprefs his horror for thofe infamous political fortune-hunters, or adventurers, who had not a fingle ideaof reprefenting their country, or any part of it, except that most contemptible part of it, their own dear Selves, which they commonly fold a most bitter bad bargain to the purchafer, as they cannot possibly fetch lefs than they are worth, their whole stock of merchantable ware, conSisting generally in politics without knowledge, Speeches without eloquence, and votes without opinion ; votes, the rage of felling which had infected all classes of the fubjefts, being as common at market, and their price-current as well known as that of an]/' other staple-commodity : that Germany traded in its Soldiers, Egypt in its Eunuchs, Circassia in its fine Women, Africa in its Negroes, and Great Britain in its Voters, which might not impossibly be the caufe of its foon having no other trade.
As to thofe trissers, whofe pretty little lives dimple along, running to waste in their ssiallow current, and who mean absolutely nothing more by getting into the houfe, than a matter of courfe, with their fortunes to gratify thefilliest of all vanities, that of an attainment, in confequence of which they must make a poor, fubaltern, contemptible figure; one would be tempted to forgive them the
pur-


i'r
I ■
; I •
f I'
-li' ‘
ii^'
:| :
!■ •' 1 i I '
I I I ,.
1)
I i
ii:
! • :
136
Mri. Buckley
puTchafe of their feats in parliament, if they could at the fame time purchafe abilities to fill thoSe feats or the Spirit to do their duty in them; instead of being the cyphers of parties, the tools ©f ministers, or the bubbles of falfe-importance. Humanity would owe them Some pity, if that pity was not exhausted on the wretches who can look up to them, or on their country that Suffers by them.
However, when the Marquefs found he could-not get a feat, upon his own principles he with great eafe and great Scorn, renounced any thought of obtaining one by the pra^ice of the times,. shrugged up his shoulders, and left things to their courfe, which he was not the master of stopping. From an eminence on a bank he Saw the shallow dirty current roll away beneath him, carrying away with it the little trifling straw, fcruff, and bubbles on its Surface to-the gulf of perdition:-This he beheld with Sorrow and with pity, but Surely with no Sort of temptation to fling himfelf into the loathfome puddle.
Thus far, dear nephew, byway of giving yom Some idea of the MarqueSs’s political character ; ini his private he has nothing of the acrimony of mi-fanthropy, or of too Supercilious- an intolerancy of fools; an indulgence to whom he looks upon to be Something in the nature of clemency to brutes.. When bufinefs, when connexions of family, when^ chance throws them in his way, it never costs him- an effort to diffemble to them a Superiority, which might be plainful or offenSive to them; for he never thinks of it himfelf, and consequently throws nothing into his air or manner, that may make them think of it. His never taking the^nead of the conversation, gives him the chafi^^ier of the company, and he instinctively lets himielf down in unifon;, which, Sometimes, it is
not

t$ Mr. Mellefont.
137
not very eaSy to do. So as to be low enough. ThoSe who difpleafe him, he rarely condemns in any way, but that of stunning them, without letting them fee that he stuns them. He is extremely refcrved in the choice of his company, not from pride, but from taste. With a natural enmity to any distinction, that arifes out of liu tie objefits, nothing Satisfies him but real great-nefs in any thing. Small thinking he holds very bad, Small talk still worfe, Small writing Surely not much better, but Small life contemptible to the last degree, and among thoSe of his own rank, Avhat could be more common than Seeing all theSe at once ? His dread then of becoming himfelf bad company, made him keep as much as possible out of that which is So vulgarly and So impudently called good company, and which is only fit to contradl the head, and to corrupt the heart. And no wonder, fince among the greatest of them you meet with prejudices as pitiful, and passions as mean, as ainong the lowest of the mob, only with leSs nature, and more power of difguife. Compassion.is an honor to humanity, but it is a pain too; and the wrong heads, foul hands, and rotten hearts. So frequent to be met with in the present System of Society, giving him that kind of diSgust which one commonly feels at the fight of blotches and ulcers, makes him the fonder of Solitude and receSs. Who does not pity loathSome diSeaSes, and yet who would chuSe to live in an ho-Spital of incurables, or run the danger of their contagion ?
Yet, with all his Spirit of toleration of the follies of the world, he could not remark, without Some little refentment, that Scandalous indistinction between the worthy and the worthleSs, from which So many think it as cheap to be good for nothing as not, on much the principle that the
vilest

%

!l
b‘ ■
I ,
t ! '

til
n:
; t
ol
' I
)i
I '
13S
Mrs. Buckley
vilest mechanics will tell you that it is better to play for nothing than to work for nothing. Ignoble ideots, who never confider as indeed they never think, that merit is its own reward, independent of opinion, or of fortune, and confequenlly well worth all the pains of attainment, if it led to nothing more than to be with justice re-fpediable in one’s own eyes. But, furely, when thefe poor devils give you their fublime delights, taverns, brothels, foppery of drefs, dangling at a court, or a chocolate-houfe, gaming-tables, routs, horfe-races, and the like, for objeSIs of envy, and proofs of taste, the abfurdity of a beggar’s fluttering his rags as if they were finery, could not be more ridiculous.
His Lordfhip, fenfible that thofe who do not enough defpife trifles, will certainly not have a paflion for great things, very good-naturedly, and very fincerely pities the futile occupations of thofe titled infe6ts that flutter about, with a pert vivacity, which adds fatigue to dullnefs. For my part, when I fee them in that Sickly unmeaning whirl of frivolous dilTipation, they remind me of the flies, who, on a mifchievous boy’s plucking off their heads, move in Short, circular staggers, dragging for a while their bodies about, without point crview; and when their little lives are out, arc not one jot more immemorable. A fly or a fool the lefs in the world is no great damage.
But there is one vice against which, I am told, his Lordfhip has declared immortal war, though now grown fo univerfal as to have almost Swallowed up all the rest, the pitiful, low, dirty vice of avarice. A vice, with all its infamous little-nefs, big with the ruin of every nation in which it is not exploded with the Scorn and contempt it deferves; if but for its rendering unfalhionable
rliofe principles, the destruction of which must
be

Mr
139
be fatal to none more than thoSe who are actually hard at work, to promote, and have nearly effectuated it, under the instigation of that execrable fiend. Alas! take the calendar of our leading men, pe-rufe it, analife it with candor, and tremble for your country, to confider how few of them are exceptions to the general defignation of them for staves to that ignoble pastion, equally defpicabie whether its iffue be in tastelefs expence, or in fordid parcimony. But what a stiame ! what a reproach to human kind is it, that many of thofe wretches Ihould make of their not wanting money a plea, not for declining the degrading wages of corruption, but to raife their price on the purchaser in proportion to their infamy for their not being above the Sale of themfelves. Their noble reaibn amounts to nothing better than that the fatter the beast at market the more it fetches. Thence that callous infenfibility to true honor, or even but to common justice, from which they receive the pay for worfe than being only of no Service to their country, and rather for eating, literally Speaking, the black bread of treafon ; the fale of a vote, or the co-operating to carry through unnational meafures being nothing lefs. Or is it poflihle hardly to name a more atrocious breach of trust ; while thofe Soft, indolent triflers, who stand by and fee the detriment, without inter-pofing to hinder it, are but one degree lefs guilty, and liable, at least, to the charge of a mifpriSion of treafon ? The mifchief they do not oppofe, they in Some meafure commit, and are at least as much aniwerable for the ill they do not hinder, as for the good they do not do. Pitiful charaiSters! if but for being pandars to the avarice of others, who only defpife them for their connivence ; poor creatures, incapable of
opening
%
r
*
140
Mrs. Buckley
r!
i
f I
I ;
opening their eyes upon their own worthleffneSs: devoted to inutility, and content with being counted for nothing by the public, but efpecially by thofe who take the advantage of their tamenefs and ductility, to Seize all the best morfels for the feeding their own avarice, without giving them So much as the bones to pick. And this they Suffer ! nay, think it life to Suffer! I adore their Serenity ! but am rather Shocked at the impudence of their pretentions to dignity; yes, dignity, for-footh ! under the circumstance of Such consummate worthleffnefs.
It is, however, on the prevalence of this low tyranny of avarice, that Lord Soberton, who, as I have before obferved, is himfelf the most generous of men, will hear of no modification or compofition for the horrors of that villainous paf-fion. The univerfality of it is fo far from" intimidating him, that it only redoubles the stern-nefs of his indignation, which is barely tempered by the coolnefs of his contempt. He often,, it Seems, fays, that if he had but half a dozen co-adjutors, men of weight and authority, to assist him, and who Should be as much in earnest as himfelf, it would be no more than a party of pleafure to them, to go against the whole camp of Corruption, and force it in its innermost in-trenchment: that it would be but a kind of di-verfion to rout regiments of lady birds and batail-lons of butter-flies. And why not ? Who does not know that nothing enervates, nothing effeminates more than avarice ; which has no entrance into any but fouls as mean as the vice that inssaves them ? But if thofe half a dozen determinate assistants required by his LordShip are not to be found, what then ? Why fo much the worfe for this country: it would in its ruin, have np right evervto its own pity, if the fuppofition of
a possi-

to Mr. M E LL E F O K T.
I4I
a pofllbility to collefl So Small a number of men of real worth, on So noble an enterprise, should be, with justice, pronounced an utopian chimera.
Lord Soberton has, I am told a very liberal allowance from his father, befides an independent inheritance from a deceafed rich aunt. This would enable him, as he does not live with his father, to keep a great houfe, with equipage and fer-vants in proportion; but he has reduced his way of living, to the terms of the utmost fimplicity. A Small neat houfe, two Servants, and a chariot, which he hardly ever ufes, being, as he fays, always ready to run away on foot out of it, for its cheating him of his exercife, form the principal part of his domestic expence, combined with that of his table, which he keeps constantly open to a few fele^l friends, whom he takes care not to poifon any more than himfelf with thofe infernal ■made-dishes, which he never fees, but, he thanks God, he is not curfed with a palate for them. His plan is to unite the most exquifite delicacy with the utmost Simplicity, qualities fo far from incompatible, that the first cannot exist without the last, which does, not, however, imply it, the in-verfe not holding good. Excellence in every thing, in drefs, in diet, in poetry, in eloquence, idepends on fimplicity, yet fimplicity alone does not ;give it, choice is required, and for that there is 'in nature Such infinite variety, that taste needs be rat no lofs for its exercife.
. But as to the Savings made by this System of iiife fo inferior to his income, the purpofes to •which he applies them abundantly defend him a-gainst any fufpicion of a mean regard for money in them; a regard, from which even fome of our youug Noblemen are not exempt, and which must make them prodigies of infamy, being as "Unnatural to that feafon of life, as a hard frost
to

r

so
i:
r.":
■
.V ’
c
■;.!i
In:
V i
' ’ I
l;;i
r I
' I
I . » .
142
Mrs. B U C K L E Y
/
to the middle of Summer. The truth is, that he has, even to profufenefs, indulged himfelf in the noble enjoyments of private aQ:s of generossty, which would probably never have been known, but for the great delicacy and refinement of manner which he threw into them, and which defeated his defigns, and even his injun6lion of Secrecy, by that irrefiftible, pleafure it gave the parties who received them, to mention them with bursts of gratitude.
Another great outlet to his fortune is, his being a munificent patron to all literary merit, and, indeed, of all eminence in the arts and Sciences, the floristiing of which he looks upon to be a point of national illustration and profperity. His houfe is filled with the best works of Britisti artists, especially painters and Sculptors. Not that, with his taste, and with his candor, he is not fenfible, that they have not reached the degree of perfedfion to which Some foreigners have attained : but it is precisely for that very reafon that he thinks himfelf the more obliged to contribute all that lies in his power to infpire them to attain it. Seeing not the least stiadow of a reafon to imagine, that the British genius could not, with due encouragement, take as high a flight in any art as any other nation whatever, she is not at all afraid of pasting for the bubble of any afitual mediocrity in his countrymen, while it is to aid them to emerge out of it, and foar to perfection, that what it costs him in the preference of their performances to the however better ones of foreigners, is, in that view, a very unregrettable | Sacrifice of at best an objedt of vanity, to the virtue of a national Spirit.
I should here think it Superfluous to dwell on the mention to you of what is So much in courSe,
in

to Mr, Mellefont.
143
in a character like Lord Soberton’s; his constant and grateful friendship to Mr. Greville, of whofe fortune he had taken liberal care, but who has lately received a great addition to it, from the death of a near relation; he is adlually now in the country giving perfonally orders about building a houfe on his estate there. I find he is still his Lordship’s principal if not only confident.
With So much merit, however, you cannot well, dear nephew, be Surprized at the pastion, with which the Marquefs, young and handfome as he is, has infpired Lady Harriet; the only Wonder would be, that it should not be as much on his fide as on her’s ; for. Surely, there is no charm you can name that she has not. Nature, education, fortune, have all confpired to make her Such an objefit of, love, that reafon herfelf must ap-
a paflxon for her. I do not here throw into the account the Dutchefs’s having made fuch a point with her Son of this match, as I am aware of the averfion which love has against being laid under Such engagements. It is, perhaps, the only caiife why the MarqueSs has not as yet, at least So far as it appears to me, done justice to Ladiy Harriet’s merit, in an equal return of n. This is, I hope, to come.
In the mean while 1 have been the more particular to you in his charafiter, not only for my wishing you to be well acquainted with it, ■but for its So nobly contrasting to the generality of his clafs of life, and as I had much rather dwell on what does honor to humanity, than on what fo deplorably degrades it, as the common run of our degenerate Nobility.
I am, yours, dec.
Lucy Buckley.
L E T-

144
Lady Harriet
LETTER XIX.
Harriet Lovell, /o 4^^ Clara Mayn-
WARING.
My ever dearfriend,,	London.
YOU may be Sure I have not of late pasted my time the most agreeably in the world, not having Seen the Marquefs of Soberton thefe ten days. He had, it is true, at last viSit, prepared me for the pain of this abfence, by a plea of invincible necestity, of which he did not, indeed. Specify the particulars, but I have reafon to think him wholly taken up with the management of certain affairs he has in charge from his father, which, it feems, do not allow him the leifure of a reSort to town. But what yet hurts me more, is to find his Lordship still remain So affeSled with his late lofs, that it gives him an air of penfivenefs, referve, and chagreen, which, appears to keep all tenderer Sentiments of love at a distance. I do not wish him lefs the Son, but I should not be Sorry if he was more the lover.
I should, however, in my uneafinefs certainly have contrived a vifit to Lady Clifford at Petersham, where, he now stays, but that I could not well go without Lady Lovell, who is detained at home, as well as in a great meafure myfelf, by a very untoward accident.
Lord Lovell was, about eight days ago, at a tavern, which he had never before ufed, with Some whom, by a prophanation of terms, he calls friends, and Setting up till very late in the morning, the whole company was it feems, greatly over heated with wine when there arofe, between Mr. Salway and my brother, a violent difpute, upon Some extremely frivolous point, I think it was about the color of a race-horfe, which one infisted was black, the
other
to Clara Maynwaring
H5
other bay. This difference, on So very a trifle, brought, nevertheless, on Such high words, that the rest of the company interpofed, and the affair appeared to be amicably terminated; on Mr. Sal-way’s Side it certainly was. But my brother whether the more piqued for his having been the more in the wrong, which, I am told, he unqueftiona-bly was, on the parting of the company, staid behind in the room, giving Mr. Salway, by a pull on the steeve, an intimation that he had Something to Say to him. The rest of the Gentlemen, in much the fame plight of intoxication, had not minded this gesture of my brother’s, and went out without dreaming of the confequences. Mr. Salway staid, and Lord Lovell instantly Ihutting to the door, compelled him, against his every protestation and intreaty, to draw his Sword, which at length he did, purely in his own defence; and endeavoured, as much as he could, consistently with his own Safety, to avoid doing my brother any mifchief; till receiving from his mad fury, a wound in his fword arm, and dreading still worSe, he ran him through the body, misting, as it has happened, the vital parts. My brother falling, and the doors being burst open by the waiters, Mr. Salway had the generoSity not to leave him, but, at the hazard of his own lofs of liberty, to stay by and take care of him. Accordingly, a proper carriage was instantly provided, when Mr. Salway, who was but a new and fuperficial acquaintance of my brother’s introduced as a bottle companion, not fo much as knowing where he lived, but on a grofs guefs that it might be .at his mother’s gave diredtions for his being carried thither, he himfelf being determined, as he actually did, to Surrender himfelf to any demand of justice.
It was, then, about four in the morning that my
VoL. II.	H	poor


-U-
145
L ady Harriet
f ■
1 I
{ I
poor brother was brought home, SpeecbleSs, mo-tionlefs, to our houfe, which was, on this occasion, knocked up; and while the chairmen were Setting him down, with as much gentlenefs as could be, in the hall. Lady Lovell, alarmed with the noife, came down, and found her Son pale, dead, in all appearance, and weltering in his own blood. What a light for the tenderest of mothers ! It flung her instantly into fits. The Servants did not wait for her recovery out of them ito fend for two furgeons, both of whom came, and having examined the wound, declared that it had only gone through the flefhy part of the breast near the arrn-pit, and they would anfwer with their lives there was no danger but from the lofs of blood, or a fever Supervening on fo bad a habit of body as they apprehended in his Lordship, from his inflammatory way of living. By this time Lord Lovell had recovered his fenfes, and the first ufe he made of them was totally to clear Mr. Salway, Vvsho he hoped had received no hurt, taking all the blame on himfelf, as the aggrestbr, I fay nothing to you of my fenfations on this occafion, you will eafily conceive them.
, Mean while our .steward did a very fenfible thing: considering the pain which the publication of this incident would give to all parties, he fent round to the editors of the news-papers to have if fupprested.
As for Lord Lovell, he had lost a great deal of blood, and the fever, which the furgeons had feared, aftually did come on, and with a violence that manifested great danger
Lady Lovell hardly ever stirred from his bed-fide, and constantly watched him herfelf. Now it was that she began to refleQ: with grief and con-fufion, on the fatal epoch of that courfe of riots and dishpation, which had brought him into his
prefent
to Clara Maynwaring.
147
prefent condition; an epoch, which Ihe very rightly connefited with the termination of his pretentions to you, on your rejc(5tion of his fuit, which, whether that fuit was honorable or not, had wounded at least his vanity, if not his love, to fuch a degree, as drove him to that miferablc recourfe.
But this was terribly confirmed to her by his frequently invoking the name of Clara in his delirium, entreating your pardon, confesting his wrong, and, at whiles, outrageousty reproaching you for your barbarity, your difdain, and the like.
The effedt this had on Lady Lovell would be unconceivable, but for one just reflexion. Her strong averfion to Lord Lovell’s being what Ihe would call mis-allied, was purely the Suggestion of opinion, but the Saving her fon’s life was a didlate of nature, over the Sentiments of which falhion has very little empire.
There was nothing she had more ardently de-fired, than to fee him married according to her System of quality-matches; she had, fince your reducing him to defpair of you, propofed to him L^ady Catharine Beaumont, who is very far from difagreeable, and has rather a good fortune for an Earl’s younger daughter; would not hearken to it; and,
I Sincerely believe, that if he glimpfe of an opening to renew' with you, he would with all his fierce declarations against the nuptial state, have, on your acceptance of him, been very glad to “ Benedick” it. Of this I am Sure, he has very heartily repented the ridiculous ideas that had led him into thofe impertinences to Mrs. Buckley and to you.
Lady Lovell, on her part, is touched to the foul with the recolledfion of the injuriotiSnefs of her, behaviour to you, and indeed has long Seen you
Ha	in
but
brother
my
to do him justice, had Seen the least

148
Lady Harriet
; I
’ I 1
I I .
;
I
P ■
; j
1 : .
(( '
• I !
\ *
in a light worthier oS you, worthier of herSelf, while nothing but falfe Ihame, the natural istue of falfe pride, has hindered her from afking your pardon in form; mine fhe has actually condefcended to do, and gives me great credit for my choice of fo ef-tlmable a friend. I do not, however, tell you, that the danger of my brother had not Some fhare in this relenting of her’s. Her apprehenSions for his life, in which I verily believe her own is wrapped up, and her fears of his relapssng, if he Should recover, into the fame courfe, have greatly turned her thoughts to a wish of what she once fo much dreaded. Not content with Soothing him, and humoring his bent, which, whether he is in his delirium, or out of it, she obferves strong towards you, by hints, and ambiguous assurances of a willingnefs to comply with any thing that would make him happy ; for, if the declaration had been more dire A he woiiid probably shave ‘fufpeefed it of dessgn ; not content, I fay, .with this, .she has ferioufly, in the .way of ashing my advice, founded me about any hopes there might-he entertained of your accept-.ing her., advances to you.
She was already in theSe difpoSitions, when a fit .more violent than any of the preceding ones, and attended with his ufual ravings on you, for your name has sheen-constantly repeated in them, has fo renewed her dread of the worst to him, especially as the PhySicians theirfelves appear very diffident of the issue, that'she begged of me to write to you an assurance of her Sentiments of the utmost regard, and defire of making you every reparation in her power for what had passed.
My brother’s fit went off Sooner than any before had done, and a profound steep Succeeding, at his awaking there appeared a vifible alteration for the better, the Phyficians gave us the greatest hopes of him, and the Surgeons, on vifiting the
dreffings.
to Clara Maynwaring.
149
dressings, confirmed their opinion of the danger being humanly Speaking, well over.
Lady Lovell, overjoyed at this, was So far from-retrafiling her intentions, that fhe deSired me, a-frefh to apply to you, adding, that ssie would her-felf write to you to the fame purpofe.
Here, my worthy girl, you have the fatisfa£ition’oS having, without your deigning to give yourfelf any the least trouble about it, obtained a double victory, over my brother’s folly, and my mother’s pride. She Sincerely lays it at' your feet, and, I dare fwear, you are much too generous not to forgive an offence to you, that was more the ef-feO; of their weaknefs, than of any badnefs of heart. The fastiionable way of thinking of the times, had, doubtlefs, too much share in the Several errors of both; From refpefl, I refrain from dwelling on my mother’s foible; but, from the first, I ever thought my brother was taking away with you that would never carry him to any end but disappointment and confufion. To obtain your love, he ought to have begun with laying hiriifelf out to win your esteem, wshich^ he was not very likely to do by showing that he had none for you. But I heartily wish you would think he has been Severely enough punished, and Sacrifice fomething of your justice to a mother’s tendernefs, and to your friendship for a lister, who has- ever passionately defired to fee the tie of it drawn ctofer by Such an alliance, I know you too well to urge it to you on any Such motive of advantages as the world would annex to fuch an offer ; the most that I could hope would be youf forgiving thofe advantages to us, fure that you are more like to confider them as objeflions, than as inducements to your yielding to our entreaties, call them our Supplications if you will.
In all events, it is a great relief to me, to think
H 3	that
1 I
i ;
, I
t I
; »
«
II !
ji
[
t' ■ ■
I ;
• I »
:|l I
i
I
i
r
\
50
Lady Lovell
ihat Lady Lovell repents and repairs, at length? Iier wrongs to you, as far as it is in her power* You cannot conceive the pain which her injurious and unprovoked treatment of you gave me, nor do I think the atonement fhe now makes lefs than what you deferve. Of your forgivenefs I have not the least doubt, my only fear is, that you will not accept the offer that accompanies the entreaty of it.
My best, my fincerest refpefts to the worthyMrs. Buckley. What is it fhe might not command irom me for a retaining fee, to be our advocate with you in this caufe ; a caufe of honor, of compassion, of love, and of friendSmp ? I have the more hopes of it, for her having been offended; as I have Such an opinion of her Spirit, that she v/ill, I flatter myfelf, look on the favor she will do us as the noblest way of shewing how little she deferved her share in the indignity. Yours, &c.
Harriet Lovell.
LETTER XX.
Lady LOVELL to Mifs Clara Maynwaring.
Dear Mifs,	London.
•>
Am very fenSible of my having been much in the wrong to you and to Mrs. Buckley. My ashing you both pardon for it is but a duty in courfe, and I acquit myfelf of it v/ith great pleafure. But there is more yet; I owe you a more essential reparation, both for my Son and Self. This will, with great propriety, arife from the motive itfelf of the injury. The falfe light in which I then faw things has given way to juster Sentiments: I am very Sincerely the convert of your virtues. The prejudices which made me blind to fo much worth,
are

to Clara Maynwaring. 151
are totally dissipated, and you have not only my consent, but my -wish, that your acceptance of Lord Lovell may be the feal of your forgivenefs.
Your’s, &c. Arabella LoveLl,

LETTER XXL
Mifs Clara' Maynwaring to Lady Lovell,
Richmond.
My Lady^
v/hicli
N anfwer to your I,adySnip’s letter, breathes the truest fpirit of nobility, in the dif-dain it implies of leaving any cauSe of complaint to fubSist, I have the honor to assure you, that both Mrs. Buckley and myfelf are extremely penetrated with your condefcention, and have not So much as the stiadow left of a difagreeable remembrance of any thing that has passed, with refpedt to your Ladylhip or to Lord Lovell.
I have, then, to entreat of your Ladylhip, I will not fay the favor, but the justice, to believe that nothing of that kind has any share in my declining, with all humility, with all gratitude, the great and unmerited honor propofed to me, with fo much goodnefs, with So much condefensson, in the conclufion of your letter. My true and Sole reafon is, that I am perfedtly certain of its not being in my power to make your Son happy, and I leave yourfelf to judge, whether, under fuch a convidtion, it would not be a bafe, ungrateful return from me, for fuch a proof of your good opinion, were I to take fo unfair an advantage of it. In every other point but that, for which I may, indeed, deferve your pity, but never your blame, you may command me without referve, as I am, with the most heart-felt gratitude, and the most profound refpe<5l. Your Ladship’s, &c.
Clara Mayny/aring.
L E T-
H 4
%

T-V--
: < 1 !
M ' '
1 }i;
11
I i
I ;
1 .
I I
’ I ' •
Ci :
:c :
I ; I ■
iii : >
' I	•
i ■;'
I	C	:
I I
! t i '
1
I i
I
! r
i i
; t t
II
! I
i
I
I '
1 I
I {
I 1 I
t
I
r:
i
2 I
K
I<2
Clara Mayn waring
LETTER XXII.
Mifs Clara Maynwaring to Lady Harriet
Lovell.
Dear Lady Harriet,	Richmond.
Inclofe you, under cover and a flying Seal, my anSwer to your good mother, but wish you, before you give it a perufal, to read this I am now
V
writing to you.
It was not without much pain and concern, that I observed the diSaster beSallen to Lord Lovell, and am very happy that you give me room to hope that he is now out of danger.
I am withall greatly edified at Lady Lovell’s at once noble and tender procedure towards me and Mrs. Buckley, while nothing hardly could more Severely affli^ me than the impoflibility of my availing mySelf of the occafion that Seems to offer So fair for strengthening, if that were needful, our ties of friendship with thoSe of affinity.
I flatter mySelf, that you know me too well to think me capable of grimace, of art, and lefs yet Surely of inSolence, or ill-nature. But especially you would cruelly wrong me if you did not believe me ready to make the greatest Sacrifices to my regard for you. In the prefent point, my fi-tuation is really distreSsful. Your friendship induces you to wish me So great a good as an alliance to you, for I leave the other advantages out of the question, and I am forced to appear, in the declining it, ungrateful, while I am only adhering to an inviolable principle with me, which oppofes to your kind intentions towards me, an invincibles bar.
How often have you and I Settled the point, that there was not only great weakneSs, but great baSeneSs, in thofe of either Sex. giving their content to marry, where that content had not the Sanction of inclination! It is cruelty to
one-
to Lady Harriet.	153
oneSelf, it is injustice to the perSon accepted. Where there is a fincerity of love on one Side, and nothing but a regard for convenience' on the other, the one in this last cafe, who yields to a union on fuch different motives, gives one no> idea but that of a mercenary life. You may fay that love may come afterwards; as I know nothing of the nature of love, but believe it a re-fpe6table passion, from fuch characters as I my-felf know and fee made happy by it, I cannoV fay to the contrary of fuch a fupposstion; but this I know, fpeaking only for myfelf, I should-not care to run The rifk of it, or expeCl a hap--pinefs, any hopes of which T should have begun with forfeiting- by the commission of at once meannefs and an injustice.
I should ■ alfo be the more culpable for my utter disregard '* to- thofe. tyrants of opiniouj titular-.’ distinctions; and matter of interests But allowing to them even much more-weight than ever ** their intrinSic worth can'deferve, I' have no conception of their rout-ballancing, efpecially in our " fex, that protestatioiif made- by . an undepraved i heart, in its ssmplicity of nature; against fuch a -Sacrifice of v' liberty, of contentment; of delicacy, . and, let me justly add, even of modesty, to an' union unauthorised by inclination.- I-rdo not by this mean that inclination alone fuffices, but that r it is andndifpenfable essential, ,and that the whole , ceremonial' without it is an abfolute propha-• nation. Only think; dear Lady Harriet, of-the horror, and, perhaps, the moral impossibility ’ of honoring;^ and.obeying, where the loving is not,, in one’s power.- The heart is an arbitrary monarch, independent of our Reafon, though never, , unlefs through weaknefs, in oppoSition to it, and though' it hardly ever alks leave of it, for its . love, ^its averSionsj or its indifference.- Pethapj..^
H . 5 -	itvx
I
I '
I o [
» J
•	* r
i t <
•b
: (i
‘ I '
IM
''Ml
11 i
1 I '
!i:
: t '
I .
: •!
I ' I
H!'
M ! '
i!
i I
I . I

ii- :
J , i
I : f ' ' !
) ; t
■ iii :
if!
CM
I ; I , i I r I
J f
ilii 11 ,
li;
( I
i I
> ► *
O : I
, - I
M ’ M ! i f :
} t
h
il
I I
I I
! ,
154
Clara Maynwaring
it would be better if it was otherwise, but we must take nature as we find her, and, in my poor ppinion, there is rarely any thing abstituted to her with advantage. In general, the Law of the heart is the Law of ReaSon; at least, I am perfe6t-ly Sure, it is So, in the cafe of refuSing to marry without inclination, the want of which is never imputable, fince it is always involuntary; our will being no more at our command than our
faith.
There is alfo in this difpenSation of nature Something very just, there is nothing in a refufal that detra6ls from the merit of the perfon refufed, any more than an acceptance adds to it. This is mpst clearly, most equitably Solved by that arbitrariness of the will. Oiherwife the preference given to one over a number of others would be injurious to them ; but that is never the cafe. Vanity indeed may take offence at it, but when was vanity ever just? To bring this home to the point, may I, dear Lady Harriet, rely e-Bough on your friendstiip for your acquitting me in your own heart of any unkindnefs in my declining what now appears offered to me, or of any the least thought of dlfrefpeO; to your brother, who stands restored, in full right to my re gard for him, if but on your account ? But as that my regard ■ is quite of a different nature from love, and never can, i am intimately perfuaded, reSolve into it; judge yourfelf whether it stands with my Sincere affection for you, or even with common gratitude to Lord Lovell, for me to do him fuch an injury as to avail myfelf of his blind partiality for me, to render myfelf his partner in every thing but love, which is the great essential. Do you imagine, that my want of it could efcape his discernment, or when difcerned not mortally wound his delicacy ? No, I had rather, than commit
c-'
Clara Maynwaring, &c.
J55
mit Such a perfidy to you, to him, to your family, that he should think and fay of me, that fince I declined him, I did not deferve him.
In this apology, however, my ever dear friend, my ardent defire of your fair construction has drawn me into almost a dissertation in form, upon a cafe which I should imagine common enough, for me to have nothing new to fay on it. I recommend myfelf with full confidence to your candor, and efpecially to your friendship, in the fpirit of which your deSire to find me not unworthy of it, will fupply any deficiency of my justification.
Mrs. Buckley prefents her most tender refpe^s to you, and assures you of a thorough oblivion of any passed difgust at your Koufe. You did her but justice in taking it for granted, that she was incapable of letting any refentment overcome her generofity. She Sincerely loves and esteems you, and was rather inclining to that fide which your great friendship for me has engaged you to efpoufe, till her examination of my reafons, and the weighing my opposition of fentiments, fet her right in. her opinion of my procedure. Yours, &c.
Clara Maynwaring..
LETTER XIII.
Lady Harriet Lovell to Mifs Claras
Maynwaring.
My ineomparalle friend^
F my life depended on afcertaining which most' prevailed in me, affliction for the refufal contained in your letter, or admiration of that dignity of your fpirit, which does honor to our Sex, I could not decide the difpute.,
B save.

TI
11
.1
f t ‘
! 1
: (
I
» ;
if
!f
. \

Lady H A R RI E T
I gave your letter to Lady Lovell, wboSe motiorrs I watched while ssie was perussng it. They might be, and I rather believe they were, at first, thoSe of a pride not a little hurt by what I am liire she did not expe6l, your declining her offer. But this SenSation Soon fubSided into the confideration of that modest unnoffenfive turn you gave to your non-acceptance. If she felt the force, she felt the justice of it too; and I am perfuaded is fincerely Sorry for her former treatment of you, which your forgiving her, is but a reafon the more for her not forgiving herfetf. You have really made her feel that there is a nobility of fouls infinitely Superior to that of blood, and of which she had not before fo much as a conception. But as none are more apt to admire an aft of fublim* virtue than thoSe who have laughed at it in theory on judging it un-reducible to praftice. Lady Lovell unaffeftedly-acknowledges your great worth, while, I can assure you, no remains of her former notions of mif-alliance, interfere to lessen her prefent vexation at lofing the hopes of fo deSirable a match for her Son. Her fears for him are now renewed, not for his iflnefs, the danger of which may be pronounced pretty well over, but. for what courfe he will take on his recovery. She has not yet communicated to him your anfwer, though she only waits a favorable moment for it, as he constantly persecutes both her and me to interpofe with you in his favor, alas 1 in vain. I am really myfelf in great pain for how he will take it.
I was going on, but was obliged to drop my pen, on Lord Soberton’s coming in. He has kept me a good two hours, chiefly talking of you. He was that moment come from my brother’s apartment, whom he was greatly pleafed to fee in fo fair a way. As I knew Lord Lovell’s passion for you had b§en no Secret, I thought it no indiscretion to
com-
j' t
■ I .

to Clara Maynwaring.
•157
communicate your letter to him. It was not ap<~ probation he gave to your procedure ; no, it was a rapture of applauSe. He made me repeat all the particulars, many of which he had often heard me mention before, of every thing that had passed between Lady Lovell, Lord Lovell, and you: and all of them appeared to me to make upon him an impression of novelty and of pleaSure. In short, he admires you So much, that I dare hope you will have no fcruple against my taking him into partnership of your friendship, the most precious of all my prefent possessions.
My refpefits to Mrs. Buckley, they are always in courfe, for they are always in my heart, expressed pr not expressed. Yours,
Harriet Lovell.

^	-O-
LETTER XXIV. E^r/'LovELL to Mifs Clara Maynwaring.
Mifsy	London,
IT is with a hand trembling, and Scarce yet recovered enough to hold a pen, that my impatience to lay my fentiments before you, urges me to the giving you this trouble.
Lady Lovell communicated to me this morning the anfwer which you had made to her instances on my behalf. This, conssdering the pain which she might very justly conclude it would occafion to me, could not, in my prefent condition, have been extorted from her by lefs than the expression to her of my fears, that she had been only aiming at tranquillizing me with the falfe hopes, not only of her confent, but of her interesting herfelf for my happinefs, in the reparation which she really
owed
liu
I (
'!st , ■ t ■ 1 .
:'i;; iM ^
• 'll
i i '
K’'
II
11
■I
11
'h
• 11 k.
I	■
II	•
: I '
.» *
I I
i :
t
I!
t:
t •. \ (
I I
!■ i
■i: i 11
ii i
1.
158	Lord Lovell
owed you. I find I wronged her, and that the stroke of death to all my hopes, to all my wilhes, comes from yourfelf.
There has been a time, when Such a blow would have deeply hurt my vanity; but that weaknefs having been long driven out of existence, long ex-tinguilhed by you, I had no fenfibility left, but for the cruel difappointment to my love; that love, which has been but the stronger for all my struggles to shake myfelf loofe of it. I fought in vain to drown it in a courfe of distipation ; for still it kept fast hold of me, and by its difdain of fubmitting to the force of my vices and follies, proved to me that it was a virtue. It is, angelic Clara, to you that I am indebted for the difcovery of my having fuch a thing as a heart; it lay dead and buried to me in my breast, under a heap of rubbish, till you awakened it to life, by the double wound of love and defpair. You have opened to me a new world within me, and given me a view of a greater manner of existence. Fool that I was to imagine, that one of your incomparable merit was to be won by a total want of any! I shall, however, strike this advantage out of this overwhelming misfortune, or rather out of the just fenfe of the demerit to which I owe it, that it will be henceforward a perpetual goad, a noble incentive to me, to render myfelf lefs unworthy of you, and to lessen the distance that your Superiority over me places between us. My future life shall be one continued endeavor to repair the errors of the past, and to retrieve the time I have lost, together with myfelf in wretched non-fenfe and frivolous delights.
I hope the bottom of my heart is not defperately bad, though the furface of it has belonged to every folly that fashion could authorife, or depravity of taste adopt. It was referved for a love, which I
must

to Clara Maynwaring.
159
must not call wholly difastrous, fince it has been produdtive to me of So deSirable an effedt, to make me fenSible of the dignity of my being, and to refcue me out of the ignoble career, in which I was running to waste.	/
Your refufal, and the motive of it, which I must fuppofe, though you Spare me the mention of it, have recalled me to myfelf, or rather to my duty to myfelf.
I shall not, then, quite in vain have dared to love you, fince my future virtues will be your gift, and the restoration of me to the paths of honor your work. Yes I heavenly Clara, I am Sincerely your convert; nor is the cure of a coxcomb Surely among the least of miracles. You have opened my eyes for ever on my past worth leffneSs, and made me Salutarily ridiculous to myfelf. Nor needs the fuddennefs of my converfion render its duration fufpefiled : I am abundantly defended from all fear of a relapfe, by the clearest convidfion of the incomparably greater joys to be found in that state of grace with myfelf, into which I am now entering, than in the redudtion to practice of the utmost riots of a Seduced imagination. Not yet quite recovered of my illnefs, and even amidst the horrors of my defpair of you, I have felt more Solid, more exquiSite delight in barely the thought ©f getting into a way lefs unworthy of myfelf than ever was realifed to me in the a^ual gratification of filly vanity and falfe pleafure.
Such, then, is my deep, my heart-felt obligation to you. Nor will I prefume to hope your friendship, (for I must not mention the word love on a line with that of hope ) till my condudf shall have Satisfied you of my being lefs undeferving of your favorable opinion, than I now Severely, but Serviceably feel and confefs myfelf.
In the mean while, my purest refpedis, my best
wishes
1

i6o
7he Marquefs oj Soberton
wishes attend Sor ever the divine Clara, to whom I remain, ssncerely and unalterably,
the most obliged, devoted,
and faithful humble Servant,
Lovell.

<>	*7^ tE*	♦E* <•>




vtv>
LETTER XXV.
Marquefs of Soberton to Launcelot Greville, EJq'j at-, in Glouceferfbire.
My e’ver honored Friend^
Peterjham.
Your last contained a tender reproach, which I am Sorry to fay I too justly deferved, for my being in arrears to you, the anfwer of two Letters. You are very fenfible this is a failure of which I am very Seldom culpable, as I can hardly conceive a greater impertinence than a negle<st of pun6filioufnefs in this duty, which may fo properly be placed among the frnall morals, that are nevertheless of fuch great account in civil life. The not anfwering a Superior must be a stlly madnefs; an equal, an unpardonable impolitenefs ;.shut an inferior, the height of ignoble infolence and rank brutality. Yet we are not always to. condemn in a hurry, for fear of having our judgment to reverfe. Do you remember what a pallion Dr. Ellington was in, at his not receiving, an anfwer from Lord Chipley to a letter, in which he was doing him an essential Service, till I quieted him, by telling him, that I believed the poor man could net read, but was very fare he could not write. I am, however, fo far happy, that I can depend on your having made the. most, fair construftion ol my Silence; perhaps a fairer one than I deferve; for,, not to dissemble with you, I have had Some. Small repugnance
II

to L. Greville, Efq’,
i6i
nance to write to you, from a confciouSnefs of having fomething to fay, which I could not well, without a violation of friendly confidence, fupprefs, and of which I can clearly anticipate your difap-probation, fince I am actually Suffering under my own.
I have received a letter from my father at Spaw, by which it is plain he has not yet recovered the blow given him by our common, Severe, and un-expedled lofs of my dear mother, upon which he has given me Some orders, relative to his affairs, that greatly confine me. He has especially forbid my going to him, as he propofes foon to return to Britain, but means to take fo great a circumflex, as his intended trial of the waters of Barege may require. I do not find that thofe of Spaw have touched the bottom of his disorder, though the exerciSe of the journey, and the regimen that goes with thofe waters, had at first a temporary appearance of alleviating his complaints.
As to your recommendation of Mr. Mowbray’’s Suit for a penfion, you could not, for the injustice you did me, in construing too rigoroufly my general declaration against all penfions, make me a more agreeable reparation, than by throwing in my way this opportunity of making just distinctions.
I have, it is true, an invincible horror against thofe penfions which are obtained from the Court, as tacit recompences for the Sacrifices of nation interest, or as the bribes of a vile acquiefcence where oppofition is a duty; in either of thefe cafes, the accepters may justly be Said, to eat the
black bread of trealon, fopped in the kennels of corruption.
Nor, indeed, have I a much better opinion of thofe genteel Paupers cast on the charity of their
country,
i62
f: ‘
I! ■ ii ■
11 .
: ( ■ i: :
! I
i ,
i t
i I
I I ,
(	I	;
.' ; i
^	^	i
■	^	’
I
■	\	I
■	i	•:
f '
!ii
> I !
• I *
! ' !
J
11
! I I
Ml ;
:' ' ' ;. I
< ’ f i
I • :	‘
!i ; i
’ I
;! I
: 1
I !
! I
:i ! ;
i : \
! » i
i ( ‘
1 I I
* ; I ' 1 :
f
\ ) '
:
I ' !
: »
. I
: ;
{ !
The Marquefs of Soberton.
\ ; j ;
country, v/ithout any the least title to it, and with a much worfe grace than the vulgar poor are put into a work-houfe, where they become necessarily a rent-charge on the providence of a parish. For thefe Splendid beggars in all the triumph of worthlessheSs and idlenefs, to roll about in chariots, to strut in embroidery, or to dazzle you with an offenssve glare of plate on their fide boards, is fuch an infult on that nation, from whom they do nothing to deferve it, unlefs an implicitly inssaved vote be a merit, as that nation "well deferves which can or will endure
ih
V
But there is another kind of penssons, for which I want words to exprefs my Scorn and indignation; penssons, extorted by a pretence to patriotifm, forfooth ! that naufeous stale refource of difap-pointed ambition, or of fortune-hunting imposture : when Such as on the strength of an influence, which they could never hav# obtained by great talents or by real virtues, have been enabled to make their own terms with a weak ill-advifed Court, and render the Crown itfelf tributary to their powers of falfe patriotifm, falfe politics, falfe eloquence, falfe ‘‘ every thing.”
Nor do I think thofe others quite blamelefs, who, when their country appears like a bare car-cafe, devoured to the bone by the State-vultures, not to mention the vermin ingendered in the pu-trefcent mafs, can So meanly, not to fay worfe, stipulate for the Scandalous fuperlucration of penssons and reverssons, as conssderations for their most gracious acceptance of great places going a begging, though that portentous confuSion and niquity of the times, which deters or difgusts men of charadler from intermeddling with the state. In this, thefe are, I confess, very wrong; for it is then they are the most necessary; then is the time for every man to stand to his arms, and
run
1 I
! ! r k
tolj. Greville, Efqy
163
run to the breach, not to be defaulters to their country at its greatest need. But their aid to be valuable, or indeed effectual, should not be mercenary. As to thofe who inSist on money or lucrative considerations for taking their refufals, I leave you, or any man of fenfe or honor, to judge, what fort of fervice can or ought to be expected from perfonages capable of fo infamousty factious an ex-», tortion, fuch an unconstitutional fubje6ling to the rack-rent of avarice and infolence that countrv of theirs, which is, it Seems, of no more worth to them, than what they can fell it for, or Squeeze out of it. Of this, however, I am certain, that if this fordid, abje(£l, family-fpirit does not foon meet with an effectual check from
the powers of it will entirely with it every
the constitution, properly exerted, fwallow up the public Spirit, and hope of national Salvation.
But as to the penfions given for real fervice to the nation, I can hardly conceive a nobler ufe of the public money, than that of manifesting public gratitude, where the claim is clearly made out, and not too lightly taken for evirxed, on the impudence of importance, making its fport of the vulgar credulity. The truth is, that from my readinefs to allow the justice and fitnefs of bestowing penSions on thofe who have clearly titles to them, Springs, in fome meafure, my reprobation of that shameful profuston of the national treafure, Squandered away on imposture, on worthleffnefs, or on corruption, to fuch a degree as must render it difficult to Spare what is due to real pretenfions ; efpecially as in the prefent courfe of things, the wretch of interest is Sure to be preferred to the man of merit, against whom the people of power have ever that fort of prejudice natural to medio-
pity, or to worfe than mediocrity, when it gets into place.
It
164
Sfbe Marquefs of SoBERTON
It was, precisely, then, my Gonvi£Hon of Mr. Mowbray’s clear right to the objeft of his mit, that made me the "more diffident of my obtaining* for him a propitious issue. I know that he has not only run out an estate, (which, if not a great one, was at least his all-,) strictly fpeaking, in the fervice of his country, while others were feanda-lousty getting stupendous fortunes, in channels the most destru6tive to it. that the malice of hell
could devife ; but that he has alfo greatly fuffer-ed in his constitution, and twice ran the rilk of
his life among the enemies in the late war.
in a
very delicate commission, which he executed with great fuccefs. After all which, he was condemned to forfeit all his claim to rccompence, by his me-ritoriousty giving his vote, in favor of a very worthy honest man, fet up by the Public Justice to that charadler, in oppoSition to one of the most dirty, contemptible rafcals, than ever diSgraced the patronage of power, and who was countenanced by the Ministry, who, by the bye,, rarely countenance any other kind of fubje6ls ; in which they remind me, of a fitting Alderman, who, during the late war, on a. man’s being brought before him for a villainous mifdemeanour, recommended him to a regulating Captain, “ as a fit perfon to Serve the King.”
In compliance, however, with your recommendation, and, indeed, with my own defire to Serve, if possible. So worthy a man, I forced myfelf to go to the Minister’s levee having never been at one before. You know, I prefume, that it is a place of great trade, but as there are no staple commodities at that market but implicit votes or Servile interest, in which, 1 hope, I stiall- have the grace never to deal, either as- buyer or feller, I appeared with all the freedom and dif-engagement of a fim-ple fpenator.
But
♦ V—
to L. G R E V I L L E, Efq\
165
But I am ashamed to tell you, fince it is So much at the expence of my humanity, that I could not help enjoying the diverting Sight of the groupe of animals in waiting, that were making circle to the MiniJiriJJimo, who was, with the utmost auk-' wardnefs, proportioning himfelf to the different degrees of his noble attendants and waiters. To Some he threw into his looks a;n air of statelineSs and Superiority, that I should hav« wondered, if I had not known or guested the perfonages who were expofed to it, that they did not burst out a laughing in his face: but it was infinitely worfe yet, when addressing himfelf to perfons, whofe fortune, title, and rank awed him, though they had no right to awe him, fince they could be mean enough to defcend So low as to an attendance upon him ; he put on fuch a fine Simper of gracious affability and princely protection, as made me tremble for fear of not keeping my breakfast upon my stomach.
Among them, v/ho do you think I should fee, and who would have blushed, if that had been in his power, for my catching him there, but the ‘‘ third Cato” dropped from the clouds, Mafkill, Member for Windborough, that fierce, that independent raster against Courts and Ministers, till they were either filly or vindidlive enough to muz-zle him with a place, in which they could not but know he would cut a most ridiculous figure. The offer was no Sooner made him than the stroller bit at it, and all his plaister and varnish of pa-triotifm cracked, peeled, and came off with the first ray of the Court fun-shine. Do you remember my prediction of it at our hearing him from the gallery, theatrically fpouSing away rants of declamation in favour of his poor, dear, injured country, in a fine tragedy-tone, that reminded us of Harlequin, at Paris, in Columbine’s cloaths, crying
i66
The Marqiiefs of Soberton
ing out with a burleSc pathos, O Caro Padre!
0	amato Conferte !
I observed there, too. Lord Champignon, who has, at least, the merit of not adding hipocrify to that avarice, which makes him Set that intrepid face of his to every destrudtiye meaSure that a Ministry, as ignorant of the national interests as of their own, could put him on : and this, not out of any hatred, at his heart to his country, but out of his Superior love for half a crown, to which he would, if it lay in his way, Sacrifice half-a-dozen countries, and throw that delightful, precious foul of his into the bargain. He is the only one I know, who makes open profession of a contempt for all principle, and has, upon that foot, in defiance of the public, hoisted the standard of corruption, and marched vidtorioussy against his country, drums beating and colors flying, for which he has been rewarded according to the System of the times, with a title and a fortune.
I am Sure I should ficken you if I was to particularise to you the gallery of originals I remarked there, which would, indeed, be fuperssuoussy offen-five to you, for, there is Such a fame stupid uniformity in the sheep-mark of that rotten flock, that your knowing one gives you to know the whole mutton-headed Species, always ready to jump as the filly bell-weather leads.
As to the minister himSelf, he appeared, at the first fight of me, not a little embarrassed at my strange appearance where he could So little expe^ it, from the profound contempt in which he knew
1	held him, and which his vanity hindered him from returning. For though, among men, no debt is, generally Speaking, more faithfully repaid than contempt for contempt, the vain alone have not, it Seems, that relief of deSpifing thoSe who deSpife them : they are too much hurt not to hate ;
and
A 4 V«
\ *
\
\
miliation.
I will not here, however, afcribe to this last Sentiment the readineSs with which he gave me audience. Possibly curiofity to know what brought-me there might have its share in procuring me that difpatch.
Making up to me, then, with an affe6ted ea-gernefs ot the most gracious difposstion, he defired to know to what it was he was happy enongh to owe the honor of feeing me.
As I knew him falSe, narrow-minded, of a costive head and a cold heart, incapable of feeing objects as they really are, and ignorant to So great a degree, that he took the rote of forms to be the very quintessence of affairs, which rote too, was dictated to him by little creatures and Secondaries of offices, I did not amufe myfelf with opening the point of my bussnefs with him by a preamble of Mr. Mowbray’s merit, of his Services, and, in short, of the justice of his Suit, which made the issue of itan honor to the perfon who should procure him the recompence, and not a favor to the petitioner. All this, I knew, would be words in waste to a man who had no conception of the ideas they were deSigned to convey : I told him, then, with great politenefs, but firmly, that the Duke and myfelf expedited that a regard should be paid to our recommendation of this gentleman to the penfion, of his Suit for which I knew him pre-acquainted, and of which the event would in a great meafure depend on him, the Sovereign diS-penSer of his master’s favors. To this I did not add one Syllable that could be construed into a menace, though perhaps the eqiiivalent of one was in the tone of Superiority with which I Spoke, and which rather belonged to the justice of the plea
I was
\
IssM ’
• i •'
111
I (	'
I'
'' p I I
!■ ' i !
Iji' I •III.
'!■ i
li, '
I'll ,
'•It '

■ ;i •:
. ;
‘ >
. I j
68
The Marquefs of SoberTON
I was urging, than to any air of arrogance or pre-Sumption I was giving myfelf.
In anSwer to this my requisition, he started the obje6tion of the vote given against the known dif-postilon of the Court, and concluded with afking me, if I would not think that Minister a pitiful fellow that would not take away a penfion, and much more not refufe one, in fuch a cafe.
y \
A hare beating a drum could not have diverted me more^ than that instnuation of political courage by a man who had not a fpark of it, unleSs against any in fuch an inferior condition of life, that to opprefs them vvas cowardice itfelf. I only then anfwered him, with all the coolnefs of contempt, that I could not imagine a greater indignity offered to a minister, than the fuppostng him mean enough to expert or accept the Sacrifice of conscientious opinion, a Sacrifice which was nothing better thap the homage of a stave, to the stave of Some miserable Court-plan, in oppofition to the interest of the nation.. That I did not, however, apply to him to give him lessons of politics, and lefs yet to receive them from him, that I only de-fired to know upon what it was I had to depend, that I might acquaint my father of his anfwer, and take m meaSures accordingly.
Now, whether this peremptory manner of treating him overawed him or not, I will not pretend to Say, or upon what motives he yielded, but yield he did, and the penfion is now a6fpally Secured to your friend, upon the most honorable terms he could wifh, without condition or reServe, and expreSsIy as it should be, as a reward of his merit.
As Soon, however, as I had got my anSwer I left the levee-room, glad to breath a leSs putrid air than that of a place, which, confidering the prostitutes who were plying at it, had all the rank-
neSs
to L G R E v I L L E, EL;

Tiefs of a brothel, of which the choice pieces were at once, stupid, impudent, ill-favored, and rotten into the bargain.
Now, as to the obliging offer you write me Mrs. Williams makes, of keeping for me, against the next races, the apartment I occupied at her houfe the last year; be fo good as ta make her a handfome present in my name, fofthe compliment, of which I do not propofe to avail myfelf, as there is nothing I more firmly determine, than never punishing myfelf with another fight of that kind, which may divert whom it pleafes, fo it is not your humble Servant.
To Say the truth, I hate races becaufe I love horfes:, becaufe, having learnt from you to confi-der riding as an accomplishment indifpenfable to a gentleman, and having, in conSequence, ufed my best endeavours to acquire it, I must naturally look with contempt upon an ufe made of them that has no relation, or at least a very remote one, to that attainment; becaufe, too, I am grieved to fee fo noble, fo praife-worthy a motive, as that of procuring fine breeds of that valuable animal, put to fo vile an ufe, as to be made the pretext of Sacrificing So much time, money, taste, and cha-rafiler, to the abandoned stupidity of the preSent Sistem of races, and affemblies at races, compounded as they are of the dirty, defpicable misteries of the turf, of the infamous chances of the hazard-table, and, perhaps, to crown all, of the noify roar of a jollitry, railed by a wretched tartarous wine, the parent of fo many lingering difeafes and
racking pains, as well as of fo much lamentable nonfenfe.
It is, -no doubt, far from being beneath men of fortune and rank to, give their attention to the keeping up the breed of our horfes; but would not it be to the full as commendable for them to bestow VoL. II.	I ,	fomc

170 Fhe Marquefs oySoBERTON.
Some little pains on preferving their ownSelves from degeneracy ?
BeSides, l am not very clear, that the generality of thefe noble horfe-keepers do not make of it rather a point of parade, than of public utility ; as the King of Siam maintains a ^^hite elephant, more for state than fervice. Among'the egregious cullies of that kind of vanity, can you forget ’Squire Hobby-who having a number of capital racers, fome tf them’adfually entered for the plate, thought it fome, thing osta mighty pretty air to exhibit himfelf, ambling about the courfe, on a fcrub poney not worth fifty {hillings ?
As for thofe {harpers, or adventurers, who keep horfes for a livelihood, or the family-men, the bett-mongers, and the like locusts of the green, I have nothing more to fay, than that fuch as are devoured by them very well deferve their fate; for Surely a Sett of duller wretches never existed: they have not an idea out of the horfe-courfe, or above the capacity of that animal, nor a word to convey an idea, but what is contained :in the jocky-jargon, or cant of the turf.
Certainly, after all, a mere race-horfe is a thing of very little ufe, implying no ferviceablenefs for the road, the chace, or for war : unlefs, indeed, on fuch an oc-casson as the Battle of the Spurs in France, where the prize was for the fleetest run-a-way. As to the Sport itfelf, a more unmanly, a more frivolous one can hardly, be conceived, than that of feeing thofe creatures, under mercenary riding-grooms, put to their utmost Speed, and straining every nerve, to convey not a Single idea beyond the obvious one, that a horfe with blood and breeding for the courfe must run rather fwifter than a dray on a cart-horfe. Then as to any honor of the viftory, fo much of it falls to the {hare of the horfe and fhe jocky, that there is little left worth mentioning to the
great
Vo
to L. Greville, FJq\	171
reat keeper himSelf of the running-cattle, whofe . merit merely of property cannot be much Superior to that of a good horfe-dealer. For my part, I cannot fee where the mighty great difference lies, of a man’s having his mistrefs ridden for his pleasure, by a proxy, or his horfe, for his honor, by a groom.
I own, I thought the anniverfary race of the Pallio at Bologna stupid enough, in all confcience, though we could not help admiring the instindt of that noble animal, in the Barbary-courfers, who run for the prize without riders, and who consequently are not to be fpoken ’wlthF There was at least Something worth remark in the prancings, and exultations of the winning horfe, on the prize, a piece of brocade being carried, with mufic in state, before him ; while the others followed with dejeftion of head, and dragging their legs after them. Such a triumph does not mistecome a horfe, upon a victory all his own: but in the name of common fenfe, where can there be in this to the two-legged owner any great matter of strut, especially too to the owner that does not ride him him-felf? Though I think I fee the hardly Suppressed Swell of face of one of thofe immortal geniufes, for his horfe the Black-joke having won the last King’s plate, by the Superior jocky-Ship of Tom Collins, his riding-groom. Perhaps the growing fenfe of the emptinefs and numbing stupidity of this diverston, became the caufe of Seeking to render it more lively, more interesting, by the addition of betts, in which cafe the remedy was Surely worfe than the difeafe. Since that villainous accessary has Swallowed up the principal. Who does not now fee, that the Spirit of gambling has taken the lead of the Spirit of racing, and distanced it out of ^ght ? Are even Some of the illustrious fprigs of our Nobility clear of that Scoundrel vice ?
I 2	There
172 ^he Marquefs of Soberton
There is Lord Pigeonet: I do not Say he will di-reffiy cheat you of half a crown on the turf-lay ; no ; but he will lay what he thinks a devilish clever train to make you cheat yourfelf; and triumph on his fuccefs in fuch a low, dirty piece of cunning, as much as any of his ancestors could have done on the most heroic deed of arms. There is worfe yet; he will find among his noble compeers thofe that will or envy, or admire him for it. But this conformablenefs is no wonder; nothing more common than to fee Knavery arm in arm with Folly, its banker. I know, however, the tena-'cioufnefs of an abfurdity, reduced into fistem, too well to hope it will be foon exploded with the Scorn it deferves. There is no privilege more dear, more Sacred, to a fool, than that of perfevering in his fooleries with an obstinacy that gJorioufly .fills up to him all his void of reafon ; So that you j may just as well crack your whip in the air, as aim the friendly lash at his nonfenSe. I think I fee the figure Folly with her tail held up by Fortune, and with her broad unthinking face, sticking her arms a-kimbo; with her stupid bloated info-lence, bidding defiance to Wifdom, and telling her she will do what she pleafes for all her.
To compleat the joke, there is nothing wanting hut that fome crazy Frenchman, bit with this iprecious maggot, should carry it to his country! and, in procurion the adoption of one of our follies, give us fome revenge for the fhoufands we have imported of theirs.	i
But let that be as it may, my life for it there .will not, at the next races, be a horfe, an ideot, or a sharper the lefs, for any protestation of taUe against their futility, or of honor against the infamous ingraftment of gambling on that {ill] stock.
To fay but the truth, most of our bubbles o'
fafliioi
/
r -
to L. Greville,	173
Safhlon live intrinSically as thoughtleSs as girls of the town, and with as little concern as they, for cha^ radler, unlefs perhaps among one another, which is as much as to fay, they dare not break herd for fear of the ridicule of thofe they defpife, for nothing is more certain than their commutual contempt. It is even their principle of coheSion. A fooUs never more at eafe than with a fool, if it is but for the ill-natured pleafure of laughing at one another. A dunce never gives quarter to a dunce.
Thus far. Sir, in anfwer to your letters, which have carried me to a length that, if I did not refpect truth above every thing, I might afcribe to my deference to your advice of exercissng, at once, the faculty of thinking, and the talent of writing in fuch confidential emanations from the heart, in the epistolary vein; but let me be more just to you, or at least anticipate the shrewdnefs of your conjecture, which would probably lead you to guefs my motive. I have, then, been principally, in this tedious preamble, playing the part of the Schoolboy, loitering or taking the longest way to School, where he is fure of meeting with a correction he is right confcious of having deferved. This is but too truly my cafe. Prepare yourfelf, then, to lecture me well, for once more I tell you before hand, I am in the wrong, and stand felf-con-demned.
To the point, then. You know my Situation with Lady Harriet, whom I have often thought it pleafant that you fhould chide me for not loving enough, when I really was as much irt love wish her as it was in my power to be ; and certainly I loved no one elfe. You are certain I am not one of great profellions, and perhaps not the more for that deficient in fenilments. I had always done Lady Harriet the justice of confidering her as perfectly capable of making a reafonable man very
1-3	happy.
d ♦
r
11
> I
j 1
! i
174 Lhe Marquefs of SoBERTON
happy. Both her perfon and temper appeared very pleaSing to me ; her own merit, then, which did not even stand in need of my mother’s recommendation, I, in the stmplicity of my heart, thought Sufficient to fecure my heart to her. Perhaps I too little distrusted rnyfelst or I stiould not have now
to give you rather a difagreeable account of my-
felf.
I had choSen, after my mother’s deceafe, my aunt Clifford’s at Peterstiam, there to remain in recefs for fome time, till I stiould have finished the examination of fome papers, with the confe-quential notes upon them, by my father’s Special direiStion. While I staid there, you may be fure I would not omit to fee Mrs. Pierpoint, which is hut a gentle walk from my aunt’s. Finding her full of her encomiums of Clara, a companion of L,ady Harriet, who had often mentioned her to me, and always with great warmth of praife, but whom I had never Seen, she readily entered into a very innocent fcheme of mine for Satisfying with my own eyes, my curiofity. I found, too, that fome preparation was the more necessary, for that she hardly ever appeared in any of the royal gardens about Richmond, or in any public place where I might have the chance to fee her; I was told, at the fame time, that this referve, did not, as might be colledied from the rest of her behaviour’s being perfeiSUy clear of any = artifice, proceed from the confcioufnefs of how much value rarenefs adds to beauty, but purely from an averston for the glare of life^ and from a peculiar taste of her’s for domestic retirement, by the imitating of wshich negative prudence many of her fex might, be gainers, and the public no great lofer. Theydo not enough confider, that they are like Some kinds of merchandize which do not go off the worfe, for
the being rather kept in a warehoufe, than ex-'


to L. Greville, EJq'.,
1-75
pofed at a shop window. To Say the tfuth, none lofe more than the women by our prefent way of treating them. Instead of encouraging them to look upon themfelves, as they really are, born to be the bleshngs of domestic life, we make of them a vain, inSipid, foolish decoration,' and conSider them purely as butterflies fluttering about to amufe the eye for the moment without touching the heart. Nor can I imagine, that there can be ^any great joy in the confuston which reigns in mixed companies, where the figures, who are corrimonly filly enough caricatures, neither leave, nor deferve to leave any more impreshon on the head or heart, than thofe from a magic lanthorn on a wall, which Succeed and efface one another with equal rapidity. It is then in favor to the fair that I would have that just medium obferved, which preferves to them their dignity, without abridging them of their due share of the current entertainments. I would not wish them reclufes, nor not to go occasionally to public places, but I would not have them live in them. Pafs me this digreshon ; as it is to the honor of Clara I could not fupprefs it.
Well, then, to Mrs. Pierpoint’s she came, and I stole into the room just as she was executing, with the accompanyment of the harpfichord, an Italian Song much in vogue, with a divine voice, a most masterly fkill, and with more graces than ever La Gabrieli threw into her execution. This is no fulfom exaggeration ; it is literal truth. But, oh 1 my friend, when she got up to receive my compliment of introdu<£tion. What a celestial figure! What an irrefistible power of beauty; enough to strike wit stupid, or to irradiate stupidity with wit! Such a shape ! Such an air ! Such a complexion ! Let who will for me admire the Ivory of the Greeks, the Ebony of the Africans, the Copper of the Americans, the Jonquil of the Indians,
1 4	the
1
176
The Marquefs of Soberton
the Orange of the tawny Moors, but give me the Rofes of Britain! With what a delicacy did they not bloom on her cheeks, to loSe themfelves by degrees in the ambient White’ While all together Ihe displayed one of thofe rare forms, that Nature feems to create in complaifance to Love, for the greater glory of his prerogative, in the confufion of our reafon.
But when we entered into converfation, she Soon discovered t*o me that her outward charms were the least of her merit. So modest 1 So proper ! So correft, without stiffnefs! Then a voice which was melody itfelf; in fuch a harmony with every thing she faid, wh'i^ every thing she Said breathed the Spirit of truth, and the energy of Sentiment, that nothing could more strongly prove the power of reconciling fenfe to Sound, and of giving to reaSon itSelf the charms of mufical ex-prestion. But what Sovereignly enchanted me. was the total unconSciouSneSs that appeared in her, of her excessive beauty, without the least taint of affedlation, that horrid and detestable, Sm against the graces of nature. Her understanding Seemed to have all the nerve of manlineSs, under the Soft-nefs of the most exquistte female delicacy. Upon my honor, the more I reflect on fuch an assemblage of perfedfions, the leSs I find mySelf guilty or not having withstood their power.
I was not, however, coxcomb enough to be the bubble of that ingenuous frankneSs, that gracious eaSe which she threw into her reception of me. I was far from construing it extraordinarily in my favor; for I plainly discerned that I owed it to the footing on which I stood with Lady Harriet, and which, I confefs it with shame, I could, for an obvious reaSon, have been content with its not being quite So advantageous an one. Yet, to that confideration it was that I was obliged for leave to
pay
'/
A'
io L. Greville, Efq\
177
pay her my reSpe6ts, where she was living at one Mrs. Buckley’s, the widow of an Attorney, but a woman of a most cultivated understanding, and a most excellent chara£ler. I think, too, she must have been, in her time, remarkably handfome, which may be difcerned through all her preSent total negleft of any thing that might fet off her perfon. Her air is still extremely noble, and she carries with her all the deportment of one wbo has, feen the highest company, in the way it is the best to fee it, with a just Superiority to it. She brought but a fmall fortune to her hushand, who had a very competent one, independent of his practice, which was very extensswe, and very honorable to him for the probity with which he exer--cifed it. He had had, it feems, the good fenSe to discover thofe treafures of it, which Mrs. Buckley possessed, and which his own great learning, enabled him to improve to a, very uncommon pitch in return for which she made Him the happiest of men in her domestic condu€l:.. At his deceafe he left her in very eaSy circumstances.. All this I par-ticularife to youj not only as I know you delight in fuch characters, but as nothing is indifferent that has any relation to Clara, to whom she is a kind of aunt, by marriage: In short, she,is a very worthy refpediable woman.
Of my permishon then tO” visst them, I did riot-fail of availing myfelf; but took great care not to give it any air of mystery or destgn, So as to alarm the delicacy of Clara, or any fufpicion of Lady Harriet, who, on the contrary, was extremely pleafed at the notice I took of her friend. In another, this Security might have appeared a prefumption, but I: must do her the justice to fay, though the truth tends to condemm
, that it was owing either to her con-
I £	shleucs^
178
The Marquejs ofSoBERTOi?
stdence in me, or in Clara, and, indeed, I rather fancy in both.
The opportunity, however, of Seeing Clara, in which I indulged myfelf as afllduoufly as I durst, confistently with the necessity I Saw there was of keeping fair with all parties, could not fail of producing the natural effect of enstaving me more and nqiore. Every time I faw her I difcovered new beauties in her, and had the lefs power left to listen to the protestations of my reafon, and e-ven of my honor, against a new passion, in the circumstances I was in with Lady Harriet, whom I could not still fay that I did not love, though not in the violent degree with which Tburnt for Clara.
Whenever 1 was going to viSit this fovereign of my foul. It was always with the pain of a heart distradted between a dessre of fucceeding with her, and the inward reproaches of wounded honor ; but at the fight of her every Scruple vanished, to leave to love the entire rriastery of the field.
As to Clara, I am very Sure, that in the innocence of her heart, and the Simplicity of her intentions, she never once had any the least glimmering perception of all that passion with which she was infpiring me, and for which I was, at the first, myfelf the lefs diffident, from its being perfedily pure and clear of any libertine impression. My love wa^ mafked to me by that friendship which is perhaps bne.of the greatest proofs of love, being, in truth, infeparable from that passion where that passion exists as a Sentiment. I am, indeed, but too Senfible, and am perhaps myfelf an in-stance, that the cafuistry of love is rather a relaxed one, but not to Such a pitch as to allow of enmity to the objedt of it, and Surely there cannot be a greater hostility than projecting its dishonor or ruin. My infidelity to Lady Harriet v/as a great fault, though an involuntary one^ as I was yielding to a
refiStlefs,

/
y
to L. G R E V 1 L L E, Efq\	179
reSistlefs power; but I could not the more for that harbour a thought of injury to Clara, the innocent cauSe of my guilt.
Mrs. Buckley discovered as Soon, or fooner, probably, than myfelf, the weaknefs into which I was falling, and the drift of my afliduities, and I must do her the justice to attest, that she threw into my way every difcouragCment that she could, without coming, to an explanation with me, that must have ended in an open rupture, and without acquainting Clara of her fufpicions. This, I Suppofe, she avoided, either that she might not dif-quiet her, or becaufe she judged it best to let the discovery come from her ownSelf. I could have heartily wished to have had her on my Side; I founded the ford, but found it impradficable. In, short, as far as I durst ©pen myfelf, at a distance,, and and in oblique hints, I found her unapproachable, for which, in my heart, I detested and honored her, and defpifed myfelf.
My cafe every day growing more and more defperate, by the increafe of my pashon to an intolerable height, and by urgency of the term that could not be far off, for my making good my engagements to Lady Harriet, I was driven to a state of distradfion. Often had I been tempted to give myfelf the relief of acquainting Clara of the condition of my heart: but never could muster up courage enough to hazard the step. There was. always, when I approached her with that intention, Something in her looks that checked me, unknown perhaps to herfelf.
I knew she had at her option a number of advantageous offers, which she shewed no inclination to accept; I knew she had refufed Lord Lovell,, in a manner the most Spirited and the most no— ble. All this, while it raifed my paffion, funk my
hopes, especially as my cafe^ with regard tq her^,
Wa.5'i

PW
180
Th
O
?fs
was far from favorable. I had a double talk to fulfil, a perfidy to extenuate, and a palfion to declare. With many of the fex, indeed, the first would be rather a recommendation of the last, though I cannot fay I much admire the wifdom of admitting an infidelity to one woman, to be a very great temptation for another woman’s faith. But fo it too often is. Then as to the other’s being a friend, that consideration would but render the triumph the greater in the facrifice. But I knew Clara too well, and had too much love not to tremble for a very different reception.
To Speak, then, I fairly confefs it, I was afraid, efpecially having a plea to urge of the badnefs of which I was myfelf inwardly but too much convinced, my heart treating me So tyrannically, that while it was compelling me to obey its orders, it disdained to conceal from me the injustice of them. Shameful and detested weaknefs! We readily allow that we feel the force of the pastions, but do jiot lay strefs enough on our equally feeling our duty to refist them. On this occaSion I was mortified to the highest degree, to find that all the-authority of my reafon Submitted to their lawlefs Jway, and could neither bear the figure I adtual-Jy made to myfelf, nor that which I fo justly apprehended I fhould make to Clara, on the declaration to her of my fentiments. The worst of it, too, was, that I had too much caufe to think; I should have ail the guilt to myfelf, in vain, withr ®ut the confolation of making an accomplice,.
In the necestity, however, I was under of r.un-Jiing the riffc, which I had not the power of fo much as endeavouring to decline, I chofe of the only two ways there were for me to- run it, that which was the least embarrasting to me. I wrote to Clara, then, a letter, and received her anfwer, the copies of both which 1 indoSe you, for your
con-
A:'
L9 Mhp Cl AKA Maynwaring
I Sr
tonSideration, only entreating of you, in the midst, of judgment, not to forget mercy. Remember that I have begun as I now end, with condemning my-felf.	Yours,
SoBERTON.
LETTER XXVI.
inte Marquefs of Soberton to Mifs Clara
Maynwaring.
Mih,
Feierjham
DEtermined^ by a ressstleSs impulfion to write to you upon a point on which, I confefs, I dare not perSonally Speak to you; how fhall I go on, who have already So inaufpicioufly begun ? Or what can I fay to you, with any hopes of a favorable acceptance, while the very Suit I have to urge to you is itfelf my crime }:
Yet one would imagine, that a sstuation to the reproach of human kind. So common as mine, might, at least,, furnisti the form and matter of an apology in extenuation ; but you, O incomparable Clara ! stand in Such a degreejof Superhuman eminence, that, with reSpeft to you, there is nodrawing into precedent the past procedure of any of our Sex towards any of yours.
Every thing eonSpires to diScourage me. While thoSe perfections of your’s, which form, at bottom, the strongest plea in favor of my delinquency, are in the awe with which they strike me So great a check to my hopes of your forgiving it, what reaSon have I not to deSpair of your rewarding it, ef your crowning it with the highest happineSs, to which the greatest innocence joined with the greatest worthiness could hardly dare to afpire I
JL

! f
I I
r \
[r «. >
182 Lhe Marquefs of SoBERTON
•4
I shall not, however, make any merit to you of not ufing any falfe colouring or artifice, as I am very clear, that your great good-fenfe would immediately fee through it, and fpurn the indignity offered to it, from which you are, beSides, abundantly defended, by the fincerity of my fenti-ments towards you.
With intentions lefs pure,, lefs candid than mine, another would, at least, evade the mention of the degree of engagement in which I stand with Lady Harriet, if but to avoid the untowardnefs of the reminding you of fo unfavorable a Situation, and making, as it were, a necessity of honor to you, to> feize fo obvious a plea for your denial.
But, angelic Clara, I am fo far from wishing you to forget it, that it is precifely on your just, your fair confideration of that very circumstance, a confideration, efpecially, in the light of friendship to Lady Harriet, that I ground what very little hope I have of your fuffering me to fue for, pity, if in vain it is I must fue for love..
Is it not even comformable to your own principles, which, are fo admirably just, to condemn one, who should confent to the nuptial union with nothing more than indifference for the other party ? Yet, how much greater must be the guilt of perpetrating a marriage, with a violent passion in the heart for another ? In fuch a pofition may it not be truly faid, that Love and Honor both a-gree to forbid the banns, before it is yet too late ?’ If in fuch a dilemma a point of honor stands oppo-fed to a point of honor, is it not fit that the greatest of the two should carry it ? And, furely, the greater one is, in this cafe, not to confummate fo. unaufpicious a facrifice as that must be, to which the heart is wanting. In what is it that the worthy, the estimable, the truly amiable Lady Harriet can have deferved fa ill of me, that I should v/ish
tG'

to Clara Maynwaring.
183
to give her my hand while my heart is another’s ? Yes, another’s, without any fault of mine. Deign to afk yourfelf this question. Is not my prefent sh tuation one of thofe forced ones, to which pity is fo much more due than blame ? Is it not the necessary effe6\ of that invincibly, Superior power of your’s, which is at once the caufe and the justification ?
What friendfhip, then, would it not be to Lady Harriet, to deliver her from one, who is him-felf too unfortunate to make her happy ?
But what a Superhuman effort of generofity would it be, an effort worthy, in Short, of the divine Clara, not only to forgive an involuntary fault, if loving her could be called a fault, but in consideration of herSelf being the caufe, innocently fo, no doubt, but still the caufe, to think Some compassion due to me, if not Some amends, in that Spirit of equity, which didfates the reparation of any hurt to another, though but an un-. intentional one ?
Nor would I have you think, incomparable Clara, that I would wifh, even were it in my power, to draw you into any procedure that would, or at least ought to lessen you in your own opinion. No. It is by my passion’s being founded on ef-teem, that I know it to be a virtue ; and consequently Superior either to the meannefs of a clandestine obliquity, or to the greater meannefs yet of a falSe bravade.
I propoSe, then, I will not Say on your leave for it, but on your not exprefsly forbidding it, to repair diredtly to Lady Harriet, to throw mySelf at her feet, and, by an ingenuous confession of the state of my heart, merit, at least, her pity, if not her forgiveneSs. I will go farther. I will make her, next to yourfelf, the arbitreSs of my fate. I would even tender to her that instant my
hand.

0
!!!'
\: u
h'. .
in (r I ;:'.f ’
ii '
t
El
1S4
The Marquejs ^ySoBERTaN
hand, but for a reafon, which certainly would not be that of fearing she would take me at my word, in which event- I should unquestionably rea~ life my offer, but becaufe fuch an offer would have too much the air of indignity, as it I could imagine she would not Scorn to accept me in fuch a sttuation. To fay but the truth, I have fo high an opinion of her, that while I do not deSpair even of her showing clemency to my guilt towards her, I am fure of her doing justice t j your perfe6t innocence.
Unfortunately, the greatest of my fears is, not that of her reception of a declaration compelled from me by the neceshty of it, and even fan^ified by the inviolable regard I have for herfelf, and for thofe laws of honor that ffo strongly remonstrate against pushing to a conclufion an engagement, which is prophaned where Love refufes his plenary assent; I am more in* pain yet, and not without reafon, lest this procedure of mine should give you an ill opinion of my charaQier, or an unfavorable impression of my power of constancy. To an objection fo obvious on this occaSion, and, I add, even against myfelf, fo naturally to be inferred from my own plea; what fatisfadlory an-fwer have I to make ? Not any, I repeat it not any, except one, which is not a whit the lefs fa-eredly true for its being fo trite, fo commo nr place an one, and to which, moreover, your fupreme modesty will hinder from- giving the weight that it deferves. It is this that you are, by your match— lefs perfe6lions, placed above all fear, all danger-ef any prefent or future comparifon to your disadvantage, with any human beauty that the uni-verfe can be imagined to produce. O Clara ! deign, but to do yourfelf justice. Where is that requisste: |hat you do not fovereignly possefs, for gaining the-heart and fixing it for ever.J^
[ iSs ]
In this true unflattered light it is, that I contemplate you, with the full approbation of even my reafon, which assures me I can do nothing more agreeable to it, than to offer you, with all the diffidence of confcious inferiority to your merit, every thing in my power, to lay at your feet, and to intreat your acceptance, on your ow'n terms, while in every event I remain, with perfect devotion, refpedt, and esteem. Miss, Your most devoted, and most faithful humble fervant, Soberton,
</>c»	*A-^
LETTER XXVII.
Clara Maynwaring to the Marquefs ej
SoBERTON.
My Lord-Marquefsy
Richmond
THere is in your letter an alarming passage,
which has thrown me into So exquisste a di-strefs, that I hope I fhall stand excufed to decency for this injury to it, in anfwering one of your fex, efpeciaily on the fubjeft on which you have been pleafed to write me: It is, my Lord, where you cruelly threaten me to go to Lady Harriet, and to take me for your text of infult to the woman in the world who the least deferves it, and particularly from your Lordstiip.
You referve to me, it is true, the liberty to forbid that horrid step. But the w'ord ** forbid” belongs to a stile of authority, which I have no pretentions to ufe to your Lordstiip. As a very high favor, indeed, I may and shall take it, if you will, on this occaston, deign to allow me a reprefentation, which will, at the fame time, include an anfwer to the rest of your letter.
But first give me leave to return your Lordship
my

186
Clara Maynwaring
my most humble thanks for the compliments of which you have condefcended to be So lavilh on me, and of which not one flatters me fo greatly as the profession of your esteem : I value it lo highly, that I stiould be extremely loth to forfeit it; and if the Smcerest retribution of that fentiment may acquit me to your Lordfhip of rny acknowledgments, I can, with great truth, assfure you, that I have ever done justice to your merit, and never wifhed you worfe than that you should keep up to your great charadfer, nor ever derogate from yourfelf.
I do not here, my Lord, mean to enter with you into any difcuflion of the plea you draw from the power of that lawlefs passion, of which my knowing nothing, and my wish to know nothing, which is not, I assure you, lessened by this circumstance, difpenfes me from faying any more.
I have but one fuccindt peremptory anfwer to offer. Perfedfiy fenssble as I am of all it must have cost one of your Lordship’s strict honor to make me fo undue a facrifice, I cannot better prove my gratitude to you, than by my not accepting it. This is my unalterable refolution. Nor will you, I prefume, take offence at this, fince that cannot be called a refufal, which is only fo of what it is not in my power to grant, nor, indeed, very clearly in yours to offer.
As your Lordship, then, may rest fully assured of the impossibility of my changing my mind, I leave it to yourfelf to judge, whether you can, to any valuable purpofe, make ufe of my name to strike a dagger to Lady Harriet’s heart, and through her’s to mine, in fuch a confession as you have threatened hie with making to her.
Hitherto this transstory eclipfe of your reafon has had no other confequences than giving me the greatest uneaSinefs, which I ssncerely forgive : Nay,
shall

. to the Marquefs 0/ S o B E R T o N. 187
■fhall ever remember the motive, not only with gratitude, but to your great honor, on its becoming to you an occaSion for exerting the |fuperiority of your virtue, and proving your power even over yourfelf.
As this step of your’s is a profound Secret to Lady Harriet, and may ever remain So, you have no reparation to make to her, but that of returning to her with a regard only the greater, for its momentary intcruption : A procedure this fo much its own reward in the happinefs it will bring with it, in the innocence it will restore to you, and in the honor it will do you, as can hardly tempt in vain a heart So noble as that of Lord Soberton. In what could you find the equivalent of the only meaSure left for your recovering your own esteem ? Mine is not worth mentioning.
With this I incloSe and return your letter, in no intention of flight or difreSpedf, you may be Sure, but purely not to keep any monument that might have the air of a trophy on this untoward incident, which, however, it is now So much iti your power to turn into the greatest of all human triumphs, the triumph over yourfelf;
I am, with every Sentiment of esteem and reSpe6l
j
My Lord-Marque-ss
9
Your Lordship’s most obedient and
most humble Servant
9
Clara Maynwaring
End of the Second Volume
F

'Ii; !
t!=‘'
VI
‘1
;; I
Oil
t'
I ■
f'iii
;iir
i!i
J
, t.
i h
;h
!
If.'
It*
n
ii •
i- • ■
I -
iiT
i;;-
' ! I
. l.)C t
•'i,t
J1

j \
;«::
• *.' ' I
jl.
I:
' ■ »•
■ 11‘>'
hlb:
.■ <■ I
bi •
'»■ 1'
i;',
• -I I.
i'iii:!
if":
il|N|
' ' I • I
•is
l(
OS
.s
I ■
HI
IQ
ii* ••
c-t
i
Books of Entertainment,
Published by James Williams, Book-
Seller, in Skinner Row.

n
BEL LISA RIUS
By Marmontell.
price 2S. 8d. h.
le TRIUMVIRATE tic Memoirs of And; Carewe, 2 vols.
5S. fcL
The History of Sir Charles Gran
difon, 7 vols.
I
Qs. 6d
The History of Clarista Harlowe,
7 vols. 19s. 6d.
The History of MiSs Sally Sable. 2s. 8d.
The Adventures of Capt. Greenland, 4 vols
I os. lod.
The SuppoSed Daughter: or, the Innocent
Imposture.	2S. 8d. h.
True Merit, True HappineSs : or, the Adventures of Mr, SEATON. 2s. 8d. h.
i
THE
\
w
M
A
N
O F
TT
Jnl
o
N
o
R.
In THREE VOLUMES.
VOLUME III.

Letters bring things more home, and repreSent them more to the life, than either Annals or Lives.
Bacon, Lord Verulam.
DUBLIN:
* _____
Printed for James Williams, in Skinner-Row.
M Dcc Lxviir.
I

I! ■
l:
II:
[)•
li:
S'
k
■
ii ’
h
ki
iiil
i?' '
'b I
I 1
»< r
rii


t.
I
1
1
fi i
I.
1-^
id 1
i
if I
,?■	y
1-	V
Books of Entertainment^
Published by James W’^illiams, Book-
Seller, in Skinner Row.
The History of MiSs Harriet Fitzroy,
AND
Mifs EMEU A SPENCER.
Written after the Manner of Mr. Richardfon’s Clarilfa
By theAuthoroSLucindaCourtney. 2s. 8d.h.
ALSO,
The History of Felicia and Charlotte.
B Y T H E
Editor of the Death of Abel. 2s. 8d, h.
m
also,
The Country Cousins :
Or, a Journey to London. 2S. 8d h.
A L s o,
The Vicar of Wakefield, a Tale.
By OLIVER GOLDSMITH. 3s. 3d.

ALSO,
The Adventures, Voyages, and SurpriSing eScapes of Capt. Froude of Cork 2S. 2d,

[ <91 ]
M
M
O
R
O F A
WOMAN of HONOR,
LETTER XXVIII.
Launcelot Greville, Efq\ to the Marquefs of
Sobertor.
My Lord Marquefs
Gloucejlerjhire.
Your letter has given me great pain, on more accounts than one. But let me reply to it in order, point fcr point, in th hopes that considering how essential most of the matters are which draw from me this anfwer, you will forgive its unconfcionably exceeding all the uncommon limits of a letter. It is then rather an episso-lar pamphlet, that I am offering to you in virtue of that authority of friendly advice which you have not difdained to continue to me.
I am very forry, though not at all furprifed at My-lord Duke’s receiving no material benefit from the Spaw-waters. That Dr. Addle, in whom your father places So implicit a confidence, has, it Seems, for a lass ressburce, after he has done all the mifchief he can to his patient’s cpnssitution by his prescriptions of worfe than only ineffeSfual medicines, the rage of fending them to any waters that occur to his imagination, without the Shadow of reaSon or propriety.
I dare aver, that there can hardly a difeaSe be VoL. III.	named.

192 The Marquefs of %0'Bis.^‘V 0'S
named, to which the Spaw, must not, on the plainest rules of common-fenSe, be more likely to be unfavorable than Salutary. That many lick’ have returned thence, with their diforders diminished, or even cured, I make no doubt, but not from any good that could be fairly attributed to the waters. They have, on thofe occafions, the merit of a vidlory to which they contributed nothing, nay, oftenest obtained in Spite of them ; a circumstance in common to them with many a philician, whoboasts of curing where he could not kill, though, two against one, the difeafe and himfelf. A villainous marshy fituation, down a vale, with an air confined by the Surrounding mountains, and waters only the worfe for their being impregnated with harsh metalline particles, not only difficultly assimilable, but fo likely to throw their weight unfavorably into the ballance of the Solids against the fluids, afford not one SatisfaQiory reaSon why Such a place should be recommendable for the recovery of health. Nor is this my opinion lingular. The judicious Rbedi^ who was one of the first philicians, in ^heSe latter ages, that endeavoured to restore his art to the limplicity of nature, and endeavoured it in vain, makes the following perfectly fenSible remark on them.
Thofe fo much boasted mineral waters, always “ leave in the human body a great part of their
mineral faburraF
Your Lordship, even without that tindture of natural philofophy in which you fo much delight, and with no more than the plain lights of reafon, must ealily conclude that Such particles, only the more pernicious for their minutenefs, must make a dreadful havock in the Small' capillary vessels, on which, the great principles of life capitally depend, and into which the fluid in which they fwim,
com-
the Marquefs of Soberton. 193
compell the admittance of thefe hostile inmates. To old age, their destccative astringency must be highly injuriofts, and increafe the obstru6lions and rigefcence already too natural to that time of life. Nor indeed do I conceive any age, or any distemper, in which they can do other than harm, except perhaps in the Soft telaxed ststem of young children, or of girls eaten up with the green-fick-nefs; in granting which, I am not very clear, that I do not grant too much.
Sure I am, however, that Some Noblemen of the first distinction, whoSe cafes were, I may fay, palpably oppoSite to the prescription of them, may be laid to have perished, or at least, in all human probability, to have had their death accellerated by the ufe of them. If ever the light of a truly phifical enquiry should be carried into, this SubjeCt, I have strong reafons to believe that thefe waters, and many other thermal, chalibeate, and mephitic, now in vogue in a medical intention, will be banished into the wide and lamentable domains of chimera, together with the virtues of affes milk, of bezoar, of pearl, and that childish trick of Riverius, by which he got an estate, of the effer-vefcence of lemon juice, Saturated with Salt of wormwood, and a multitude of other articles, worfe than only unserviceable, which here is not the place to particularife to you.
It must Surely give an alarming pain to humanity to think, that while the laws are fo punCHli-ousty attentive to the defence of property, they take fo little care of prefervingthat health without which there can be no enjoyment of property. Would any one believe, that the lives of the fubjeCls should be left expofed, as they aCtually are, under Such insufficient guard, to credulity on one fide, and to ignorance or mercenary imposture, on the other ? How eafy, but efpecially how necessary a meafure of state would that be, to ereft a tri-
VoL. II.	K	bunal
194	L. G R E V 1L L E, Efq'.^ to
bunal of magistrates of health, for the protefHoii of that inestimable benefit of nature ?
Who can remember, without Shuddering with horror, that two^of the highest clafs of life perifhed, not long fince, under, and not quite impossibly, by Such an infernal prescription as that of brown paper in milk, boiled away to a third, for ajdiforder, which it was more likely to give than cure ?
I could name to your Lordship one Nobleman, recently deceafed, who had, long before his death, lost the ufe of all his limbs, by his fatal listening to the promises of a quack, whofe drug was rank poifon. The tortures and murders by thefe falfe pretences are innumerable, while Scarce a day pastes, without the boast of new Specifics, which, in Spite of the averred proved inefficacy and perni-cioufnefs of the old ones, still find fresh bubbles and fresh vififims.
Nor let me be fo unjust as to impute exclufively to quackery and empiricifm, mifchiefs from which the rational phific, as it is most falfely called, is itfelf far from exempt; the prefent theory of it, and especially of the powers of the various articles of pharmacy, being fo demonstrably .groundlefs and wrong, that a very eminent protestor of the art Said, with perfeQ; justice, that he was the greatest phifician who had the least faith in phific as it now stands. Another alfo, of a well deferved reputation, confested, he was in most cafes more embarrasted about prescribing what should not hurt, than what could relieve the patient. In the prefent prafitice, the regulars prefcribe upon a falfc judgment, the quack upon no judgment at all; and it is of thefe last that mankind must questionless have the least bad bargain, if if be true, that the march of Scientific error must be uniformly v/rong; whereas, though the odds against any good from the blindnefs of ignorance are extreme-
ly
the Marque fs 0/ So BERT ON.	195
ly great, it is not, however, impoflible, that the round of chance may produce a happy hit.
In this age of diOilonaries, a well-reafoned index expurgatorious, or didlionary of the medicines that are not to be trusted to in the difeafes for whicst theyare generally prefer ibed, or indeed to be trusted at all, would not be an undefirable work, and might help to atone for the thoufands of Superfluous or pernicious ones, with which the public is inceffantly pestered. Nor would the list be a short one of the pretended remedies thofe domestic traitors, taken into our Service on a falfe charaQier, and infamous for their breaches of trust to us at our greatest need. In short, nothing can hardly be more essential to mankind, than a new rationale of pharmacy, combined with a new theory of phific : both as things are, being demonstrably falfe, according to reafon, and, what I hope no one will deny, according to experience.
I should imagine, too, that whoever had power enough of perfuafion to explode but a ssngle noxious article of our prefent common Sistem of diet, however generally received, or rather with the more reafon for its being generally received, could hardly deferve much lefs of univerfal Society, than thofe fabled heroes of antiquity, who could have at best but the local temporary merit of delivering a country, or part, of a country, from fome wild beast, like that of Gevaudan, whofe ravages must be incomparably lefs extenstve, lefs durable, and, perhaps, constdering the torments and death accelerated by difeafes, intrinstcallv not more horrid. But even the hopes of fuch a fuccefs are denied by man to man, ever his own greatest enemy, and ever more ready to be perfuaded to his harm than to his good. Slight and ridicule are probably but the least cruel return, that would await the at-
tempt.
A pleastng, though pernicious habit of
K 2	the
196
Efa
i 1
If (; !■ i ,	1
>
i
the palate will for ever carry it against the vain protest of the human stomach and constitution.
I return your Lordlhip many thanks for your effectual exertioninfavor of Mr. Mowbray, whofe fuccefs is the more unexpe6ted for the justice of his claim. Befides, he was in all refpefts too worthy a man not to defpair of having any thing done for him. What stiadow is there for merit to hope a recompence, either among thofe who do not know it, or among thofe who are hurt at it ? Add, that by most of our pleafant Great, beneficence to men of real worth is confidered in the repugnant light of a lawful demand; whereas, their Serving fools has more the air of paying a gaming debt, to fay nothing of the favorable circumstance of their being more congenial to them.
Mr. Mowbray, however, is perfeQ:ly fenfible, that he owes to yout private interest that fuccefs which was due, from the public fpirit of the Minister, if he had been capable of any, and has accordingly written to me in the terms of the utmost gratitude to your Lordfhip,
To your remarks on PenSions I need add nothing here except that while the w'hole encouragement from the Government to Literature, or to ufeful talents, hardly .amounts to a .miferable thoufand a year, that very Government fuffers fome hundreds of thoufands of the public .money to be extorted from it by the pernicious influence, or the impudent worthlcffnefs of fubjefts, who never did their country five farthings worth of fervice, nor are capable of it; which last circumstance is, however, the only apparent reafon for fome of them thus quartered on it. This fuggestion you will not think exaggerated, if you will yourfelf be at the pains to cast up all the Penfions, Annuities, Reverfions, Sine cures, or, what is next to Sinecures, offices of which the falaries and perquifites
are’


the Marquejs of S o B E r T o N.	197
are enormoufly difproportioned to the public Service done for them, with all the various shapeis into which the pillage of the nation is methodically put, and which the Dictionary of La Crufca So emphatically and fo julily calls Upan di tradi-mento^ the bread of treafon : that black bread, for which few are now fo fqueamifli, as not to have an ever-open stomach. After all, is not that infamous avarice oftener than vanity itfelf, at the bottom of the rage of fuch numbers to get a feat where they abundantly prove themfelves to have been lefs tempted by the honor of doing their duty to their country, than by what they projedl to get by betrarying it ? And this, like the chambermaid’s putting into a lottery, they call being in Fortune’s way.
As to that low, beggarly levee-fcene which you ' defcribe, it has fomething too stiocking in it to be only ridiculous, when one conSiders that the great offices in this country, with all the numerous train of confequences to its welfare, are villainousty bought and fold among perfonages fo fcandalousty mean, as to defcend to an attendance there, and-to make circle to fome worthiest Minister, whofe foie title to fuperiority over them, is his impudence to prefume it, on the strength of Court-favor, of-tenest folely owning to his undertaking the facri-fice of the national interest.
Who can forbear laughing, on reading occa-fionally in she public papers, thofe most important pieces of intelligence, numerous Levies being held by little, trifling mushroom-ministers, whom, fo far from not difdaining to attend, a man of any fpirit or taste would think himfelf dishonored or miferable, if he was condemned to keep no better company ?
This is one of the blessed effe6l:s of that new form of Government, which has crept into exif-
K
3
tence

i
I	I	:
,	I	I
t
' I i
1 . ■ 1
i f
iji
• f
I t
f t
I I
)
> I
: t
»- ’
* i
' I
:i

V
M
f
198
L. Greville, Efq; to
tence, through the breach of our constitution, in resting the whole power of the state on the ssngle point, not of parliamentary influence over affairs, but of an undue influence over the Parliament itfelf, in favor of fome view oppofed to the interest of the nation, and often to that of the Court itfelf, too avaricious, or too ignorant to fee, that in ungratefully purfuing the detriment of that nation to which it was owing all its great-nefs, it was in faff implicitly feeking its own de-stru6tion.
The fublime projeQ; of fleecing the people by Charles the Second, to fupport the stupid liber-tinifra of his court; or of William the Third's coutinental attachments, covereff by the pretext of frustrating thefe fthemes of dniverfal monarchy, which were by us fo devoutly to be wished for in Lewis the Fourteenth, the man on earth the least likely to effectuate fo frantic a chimaera ; and lastly, in the two late reigns, that System, the most abfutd, the most cruel, the most ruinous for all parties, for everlastingly taking German troops into British pay; Such projedts, I fay, give you most plainly and most truly the whole foundations of that detested corruption, which, in time, only brought on the national debt to the enormous point at which we now fee it, but made of the Sovereign a kind of stave to any Minister, who, on the strength of the interest to carry, by a majority in the Houfe of Commons, thofe great trustees of the burfal power, that capital court-point of draining the country of its clearest treafures, and of plunging it over head and ears in debt, and into wars, which were the falfe pretext for creating nd eii creaSing that debt, might, in every other matter of state, ufe him like a Negroe, nay worfe, like an accomplice in fo foul a Scheme.
By this means the royal authority fell debaf-
ed
• \
)
Mara
199

S
cd and dishonored into the hands of Some private Suhje6l, often odious to the Sovereign, but necef-fary to him in that criminal view, and whofe trusty circle of agents dependents, and Subalterns constituted an impudent oligarchy, which received the new and improper denomination of Ministry;, among whom most commonly no one had fo\little interest as the Sovereign himfelf, who was compelled to continue them in his Service while their patron’s power lasted in the Houfe of Commons, which was the foie tenure of it at Court, and reduced the Sovereign, though certainly not without its being originally his own fault, to a difficulty of distinguishing which were his fubje6l:s and which his Minister’s.
The following farce has often my Lord diverted me, not very good-naturedly I confefs, for the extreme dulnefs and folly of it; I mean the progrefs of a political adventurer, or the generatioa. of a Minister out of the corruption of a Patriot.
A Member, efpecially of the Lower Houfe, af-fembles others, lays before them pathetically the grievances of the nation. All he fays is unfortunately but too just. Satisfied with the truth of his allegations, and detesting the Minister of whofe party they are not; and consequently not in place,. they choofe this new opponent for their leader, and list under his banners. Soon his party increases ; the public, whofe good is the stale \yatch-word, and always credulous, though fo often cheated, fortifies it with its voice., He is now in paSs to gall a Ministry, and Sometimes to overfet it. In which last cafe, the Court feels a necessity of purchasing its peace of him; and its gates are Set open on the eaSiest terms it can make. The stipulation once concluded, in which the good of the nation has not the compliment paid to it of being fo much as mentioned, the conqueror fneaks
K 4	in
\
Ill
I •
i I
. I
I t
I 1
I . I
i . *
ii.i
: 1
! ■ 1
: o ;
. 1 ■
■ij!'
I » I I t \
.VC
• {
1
; I
: i
it
. j
!l
f ,
! I
I I

1!
ili
I I
00
L. G R E V I L L E , ELi to
really best friends, Ieav« at the door, who might him turn So stiort, if the common : I call thefe his have the honor of a fate
This So often
lie was
In, and often drops his ing them like footmen be aHonistied at feeing thing was not quite fo really best friends, who in common with that of their Sacrificed country, in being left out of the villainous treaty. Thofe he takes in with him are rather worfe off, Smci they stare the infamy of deferting the public caufe, an infamy not quite improperly compenfated by a post, wstich their eternally lost charaQ.er and influence, foon make it fo eafy to take from them without much ceremony or much confequence.
naufeous game I have, my Lord, Seen played, that I stould wonder the pub-not fick of it, if I did not know it fo much more Seldom led by its reafon than drivea by its pastons, for which unfortunately the benefit of experience does not feem to be made. But what exceeds all bounds of ridicule is the strut of infolence, the airs of state assumed by the Successful adventurer. And yet in what is it that the most wretched employ of Scribbling in a white-limed garret, by the light of a farthing candle, with no Sustenance but a red herring and fmall beer, is not even an honorable occupation, compared to that of catch-penny patriotifm ? We hang a man, who, to defraud a private fubjefit of his money, is guilty of a fingle a6t of forgery of hand : but a man is advanced to the first posts of the kindom, who, to cheat, or to abet the cheating the public of theirs, is guilty of a whole courfc of forgeries of heart. He will even have cheated it of more than its money, of one of the greatest of all human goods, of its esteem, of which he will have made no better ufe, than to fell the too credulous people, like steep at a market, while,
stllier

the Marquefs of Soberton.
201
fillier than sheep, they will too often stand to be fleeced, without bleating.
Read, my Lord, but with attention, our history from Charles the First down to the prefent period, and you will constantly find Some Court-point that was, at the Same time, an unnational one; which was felt enough to put this country into a state of defenSive war against the court, and against its accomplices, in form of minister or ministers, who fold to the much mistaken Sovereign an assistance, doubly treachefous, in its being at once detrimental to their country and to himfelf.
The Marquefs d’Argenfon has very justly ob-fervedj that this new System of government by ministries, has- obtained in many parts of Europe, as- well as with us. True. But the difference is, that in other countries it is owing to the indolence oS defpotifm; incurs, to the corruption of > liberty i; .while fo many members of the Senate, , whoSe duty it is to conSider themfelves as the lawful 'judges and comptrollers of the ministry, in dutyibound, not only theirfelves to do no wrong to- the nation, but to fee that no one elSe does any, too often fink So low. as theirfelves to take their impulsion from it, and Suffer their votes to be as ' currently canvassed, prefumed, and undertaken for, •> as the drudgery of the arrantest staves, whofe bodies being venal may be only a misfortune, whereas ' a venal foul can never be lefs than a guilt. A do- ■ minion over the understanding is a -trust unalien- -able to any mortal, . and efpecially to fuch ^ an one as can have no reafon to pretend to it, > unlefs to make of it an ufe pernicious to his ' country. It is even treasonable - to > enstave, , on any account, the dignity and the eminence ’ of parliamentary rank. . As it is, opinions in gene- -ral are not anticipated from reafon but from ‘ interest, . humor, prejudice, cpnnexion,^	-
K 5 .	from*^
1
mi
1	0 d
; ■ • 'I
I , f
: ■ u
I .
! : • I:
1 ;:i,
I ' ■ I I
: ».
I (II
hi
>1 .
I I
!; • t
I
I :
I •
'i ' 1:
: I
I I
M-
.,	, I
i 11
I • i
i!
11
. . r , ,
II; :
d*' 1st
!C

I t
' t
r ^
f!i
I
■K
!fi'03
L. G R E VI L L E, FL; to
from every thing, in short, but the one thing needful, a regard for country.
From this remiffnefs or falstty of too many of the trustees to the public caufe, it is, that this originally mushroom power of the ministry has lately gained fuch a cedar-height. The government itfelf has currently taken the air and form of the System of Tonquin, in which there are two kings, the nominal, or king de jure^ called the Bua^ the o-ther the king de fabJo^ called the Civa^ or first rai-jiister, who difpatches all affairs, and is the great FaSiot'um of the state.
Many of our late Sovereigns have, in favor of Some unnational point to be carried, against their own clearest interest, most humbly acquiefced in being nothing more under their Minister than what the Roman Confuls were under the Emper-in the times of Imperial Rome. The public a£ts were, indeed, still loaded with their names, while they had no more power than what Some of our minister-ridden monarchs have had over a Servapt from whom they were obliged to take their orders, before they .could give them ; and who, to mend the matter, was not always their own choice; but elected for them, like the Dey of Algiers, by his influence among the mercenar yies.
Such a place, a place poffeffed by fuch a tenure, is, in all confcience, contemptible enough:; but what can you think of the men of rank and fortune, who can, without the excufe of indigence,, be mean enough to hold up his train, and a6t in quality of his fubalterns, abetters, and accomplices, with fome ministerial sheep-mark upoir them, in form of place or penfion, that obviates the qiief-tion of Cujum pecus f an Meliboei ? a poor mutton-headed flock, ready to follow any bell-wea-ther, and jump for interest after any party, whether of court or country.	It
i
'4.
the Marquefs ^SoBERTON. 203
Is it not, then, owing to this execrable lystem, that we now See the nation lie like a carcaSe almost picked to the bone, the ravens driven away from, which keep croaking at the vultures in poffeS-fion, who are preying on the miserable leavings ?
Soon, nay, perhaps already, power must go a begging with no one to take it in, it stinks So of the rottennefs of the times. Men of lefs public Spirit than Phocion will be afraid of Phocian’§ fate, who perished for having occafionally taken the helm, in what he stimfelf called the wreck of the State.,
In short,, my Lord, I See no refource for the Salvation of this country, but one, which I represented to my Lord Duke Some years ago, which, he entirely approved, and which nothing but his state of health hindered him from pushing with all his power : This was, a constitutional plan for parliamentary exertion, in a proper manner. Pray -heaven it may not be too late ! For even the noblest remedy may lofe its efficacy and charafiter, by being delaid till the difeafe shall have turned for death. Every other recourfe to oligarchical combinations will most likely be found a paultry and. dangerous palliation,
I was unlucky enough to state this notion of, mine to Lord Washerley, just to divert myfelf,' with hearing what I was Sure he would fay ; nor-did he difappoint me. His anfwer was perfect- -ly in chara<ster.. He Said, be was assured it would not do, the face of the times was So fet against it. For this I heartily forgave, and even pitied him ; for the very idea was enough to Sweat him., It is not eafy to perfuade men of the good to refult from efforts of which they feel themfelves. incapable. Every thing tending to greatnefs of Spirit is lost upon little minds; they are incapa- -ble of strength or ekvation. A Willow will ne--
ver.
I MI ;
M' 1

i I •
-!; I
I •
i 1
iii
I I I
J "
: t ( i; 1 t
1Mb
4 .
I|
; ' ■
Hi''
pii'
ii!'
jib:
iL'
::lib
! ll
5
i|
; 1
i.H
Ii;
i ■'
>1 I
I L
Hi
204
L. G R E V I L L t, KLi to
ver be an Oak, nor a Butterfly an Eagle, nor a Trifler a Statefman.
I shall punQually obServe the orders you gave me for making Mrs. Williams a genteel prefent, for the compliment of keeping her apartments for you against the next races, an offer which I do not wonder at your not accepting.
To fay nothing lefs than the truth, races, in their prefent state of amazing stupidity, would be even beneath your fcorn, for fcorn implies notice, but for the real mifchief it does to both the mobs, the little and the great.
The common people in the country, it robs of much more manly diverSions than that of Silly gaping at running horfes. It take them off from wrestling, leaping, bowling, throwing the bar, and other rural fports, which render the body robust, and qualify them for exercifes of the militia, that only constitutional army of Britain, which, to be effeflive, should, conformably to the original institutes of Nobility, be officered by the men of the first titles and rank in the kingdom, who, if they were in earnest, would foon give it a difci-pline as formidable as that of the regulars, or standing army, which Springing out of the corruption of the feudal government, after its dissolution, plight almost make that form regretted, with all its train of evils and inconveniencies. It has actually enstaved France ; but Britain it has hitherto only beggared, which leads at least to sta-very.
But as to the men of fashion, or rank, who have run into a folly So very wretched, that it has not even the excufe of leading to any pleafure which taste would not fpurn with difdain, what would it be to me, to you, or to the nation, that this,, or that titled ideot of fortune, should make it his
justng paflion, and court distinftion, from fo mr-
ferable
the Marquefs of SoBERTON'.
20<
Serable a futility, but for the melancholic const-deration, that the abfurdity of every individual contributes in fome meafure to form the general mafs of worthleffnefs, and helps to establissi a contemptible charaQier of the times? In which view, where men of power and influence are wrongheaded, their private folly may be deemed a public calamity.
While men of real good fenfe, and worthineSs of character, fenSible that attention to bufinefs, and to improvement, requires, at intervals, the relief of diverfions, but at the fame time convinced, that the eflTence of the foul confists in the a£t of thinking, look out for fueh manly amufements as m\y fatisfy that at once noble and agreeable faculty ; the little fry of triflers are on the hunt for nothing fo much as for fuch objefits as may furnish them with matter of not thinking; fuch as cards, races, and the like futilities.
As to races, the pretext of their being of ufe to preferve the breed of a very valuable animal, may originally have been juft: but I can hardly imagine any one driveller enough to attribute that motive to the prefent heroes of the turf. They would laugh at any one that would do them the unjuft honor of but fufpeO;ing them of it. No. The current fyftem of the rage of betts, is grown the primary confideration, and is nothing better than a vile ingraftment of avarice, on a ftupid ftock of vanity. The great fporters at the races, have no more in their head the idea of keeping up the breed of horfes, than gamblers while they are stripping their bubbles at play, have that of encouraging the manufacturers of cards and dice.
A plea of much the like validity, was offered in defence of the Bear-garden, and Hockly in the Hole, importing in fubftance, that the prefervation ©f the national valor depended on the encouragement
< r . (
! J n
I M b.
i i ' h i
': I j’
! ' ; S *
.to)
i C f" I
! 1
. j ■
t
I !;■
»i,
t»t
r; I
I! '
’: k
206
L. Greville, E/Fy to
ment given to the noble entertainment of a couple of the lowest wretches, under the name of bruifers, mounting a stage, and heroically fighting at fisty-cuffs for the houfe, that is to fay, for the money taken at the door, from Such as could find an amufement in So interesting and fo curious a fight; and this, I can assure your, though it may Seem incredible to you, that Some of them were of the highest classes of life. But avarice, in its true chara6fer, of there being nothing fo low to which it will not stoop, crept in here too, and produced its betts, which became the principal Sauce of the tastelefs dlverfion.
A pitiful complaifance, however, to the follies of she great, ere£Ied thefe black-guard battles into the dignity of the pugilate of the antients, with about as much propriety as the races of Newmarket may be compared to the hippodromes, or chariot-races of the Circus, before the degenerate times of Rome. And even then the fa9:ions of the various colors of the charioteers liveries turned' shore upon the humor of oppoSition than upon the vile admixture of any pecuniary confiderations; the laying betts being left, with great propriety, toi she dregs of the people.
The fad low nonfenfe of thefe boxin^-fmatches grew, however, to Such a pitch, and. was attended; with fo many bad confequences, efpecially that of ' railing no Spirit fo eminently as the Spirit of highwaymen and footpads, that the legissature intert fered to put it down; nor would it be very honorable to the British valor to fuppofe that it has Suffered in the least shy the Suppression.
Not that by this I would infinuate any wish of mine, that the races, with all their train of inconveniences and evils, should under go the like fate: let them rather die of themfelves, die of the diS eale the most common and most fatal to fiKh entertainments,
the Marquefs of SoBiRTON. 207
tertainments, their own rank intrinSic dulneSs and inSipidity.
BeSides, my Lord, Such an intervention might alarm the whole nation of the Dunces, for their inestimable privilege of worthlesthefs. To them it would have an air of persecution for their religion of bagatelle, that would only make them cleave to it the clofer. Unfortunately, too, for them, they have to plead the examples of feme men of very good fenfe, who have indulged them-felves in this amufement; but then thofe ideots ne-' ver stand to confider the distindlion between throwing Some trifling into life, and one’s whole life into trifling. A man that would never let hira-felf down to play the fool, would neither be the happiest nor the wifest man in the world. A-mufements, as amuSements, are even necessary, but it is only for fools to exalt them into occupations, on the plan of Seeking in them a diverston which they are condemned never to find, from their never having had ferious employment, without which the word itfelf, Diverfion, is an abfurdity. Who can be diverted that has not had bufinefs from which to be diverted ? Or will any one call the dreary waste of a fool’s life diverfion r And yet if you was to take from them their horfes, dogs, dice, cards, drefs, loungings at a court, fmali-talk, eleftioneering vanity, in stiort, all the futilities of falfe taste, of filly ostentation, and mean avarice, what would you leave them, but an uncomfortable defart of the head and heart, in which they would lofe themfelves? The vast dominions of Dul-nefs are their native country, out of which they would pine like the Swifs with their Hemjveb., A Greenlander would as foon renounce the eternal ice of the Pole ; a Negroe the Suffocating heats ol the Line ; and Arab his barren Sands; a Hottentot his gilts and garbage,, as a fool his stupid
■<r
fti

<' I
i ', :
t '
I ;
i’ :
:i ■ ^
I
‘I . b
I,'. J
I I
•Cl (
ilir!' '
■)i! 'I
.•bb':
> 1
I • I >
■flil'!

•itei:

O;'-
ilC
di '
O' I <M
i
i
iif
Pi"
'ih
I
l2oS	L. GrEVILLE, 5/^; to
pid nonfenfe, and his ridiculous conneffions of folly. Constitutionally unfufceptible of great views, they constantly prefer the ignoble eafe of worthlesthefs to that heroic fatisfaflion which is to be found in public utility, the only genuine parent of public esteem, and can fit down contented with the- in^ famy of never being So much as thought of, or named, by judges of merit, for any place of trull or eminence, which, however, I must own, ^ is not unfrequeutly the caufe oS their being chofen into one by a> Minister, for his Service, and for the misfortune of their country.
Another curfe which attends them, is, that in the truly tame and faint charafier of mediocrity, being generally destitute of all original fpirit, they are condemned for life to a fervile instinct of imitation, from which, though vainly fond of distin-guilhing themfelves, they dare to do nothing but what they fee others do. This alone would make it impossible for them to be great men, while they congenially take one another for models, and are contagioussy good for nothing. Thence fo many men of rank continue grovelling all their lives. If their private influence, or the public misfortune, puts power or trust into their hands, incapable of railing themfelves to an equality with their offices, they bring thofe offices down to their own level, and render them as contemptible as the.oj-felves.
Som'e again there are, whofe natural levity forbidding them any resting place, they are for ever Subject to wandering fits, like the Norway rates, and wishing to be any where but just where they are: fidgetting about, light as feathers, to the fport of every idle unmeaning-gust of fancy, now wafted over Sea, now • t lo wn about town and country, till they take ground for ever.
Such, or the like characters, the great point,
. \


tfs o/SoBERTON.
209
and not refemble them, ef-example is rather a living one would wilh not to be.
jny Lord, is to pity pecially while their lesson of every thing
I am very fenSible to the honor you do me of approving and even adopting my idea of the benefit, which muss obvioussy refult from occasionally treating, in letters to intimate friends, of fubjedis, as they ,occur to you. Among my political reveries there is hardly any that ssrikes me in a more favorable light, than that of its being made a ssand-ing order of the Cabinet-Council, that every Officer of the State, in a great employ, and efpe-cially our Minissers at foreign Courts, ssiould annually give in, upon honour, his opinion on the public affairs, not only of his own department, but in general of the whole State. Such )a pradfice might ferve at once to give a fatisfadtory idea of the talents and'abilities of the perfons employed, and often occafionally to contribute ufeful lights to the government itfelf. You will, perhaps, ob-jedl that Some might elude this ordinance by employing Secretaries, or Writers for them. True ; but even the merit of making a good choice of fuch would not be a Small one. It would alfo ferve to kindle a noble emulation, and excite many to acquire talents which they now fee they may as well do without, or indeed better, con-fidering the umbrage and offence taken by little people in power at any eminence of that kind. Such an inssitute, combined with the revival of feledling young Gentlemen of the greatess hopes from our Univerfities, to be bred in foreign parts, for public employment, might possibly ressore to this nation its antient charadter of breeding great men fo' the cabinet as well as for the field, or at leass preferve it from the ssiame and damage of
being Served by the meanest and most disqualified
perfonages.
1 ; i ■ • T ■
, . . ( I . i ' ■
Cil
. t
' I
.! :• I
I '
1 .
».
! .‘r -
•
. 1
. ►.
' f I
f •
r

■.f W :
'"•‘Ul. <■ .»?■ ,; »
^ V
‘	' • t
*
I	.	'
T'
'I'iii
r;	I
;?■ ■•
h!
! ' ■ :0 1
r'.i
M

210
L. G R E V I L L E, Efq; to
perfonages. Embassadors that cannot Speak, and Secretaries of State that cannot write.
I come now, my Lord, and I prefume you will think it high time, to that capital part of your letter which acquaints me of your new palEon for Mifs Maynwaring, and of your procedure on it, with her anfwer.
I am as far from the injustice of not distinguilh-ing in your favor between thofe things you cannot help, and thofe you can, as I am from the perfidioufnefs to you of foothing and encouraging you to perfevere in what you do yourlelf the honor of confessing to be wrong.
I do not, then, at all blame you for that weak-nefs which is nothing but what you have in common with the rest of mankind, of being momentarily Subdued by a Superior attradtion, real or imaginary. But, I own, I should expert from the Marquefs of Soberton’s power of reafon fuch a victorious effort as would distinguish him from the multitude, who on the like occafion are irrecoverably hurried away. Such an effort as would restore him to all his virtii^, with only the greater lustre for his having triumphed over a passion -which, circumstanced as you are, is So dangerous an enemy to it.
I fay circumstanced as you are, becaufe I fairly own, that but for your engagement to Lady Harriet, which, for many reafons well known to your Lordship, is gone too far to be retradled with honor, I would not have a Single reafon to objest to a choice that would fo nobly justify any Sacrifice you could make to it. I fay nothing of that beauty of her’s, which, to judge of it by its effeQ: on your Lordship, must be great indeed; but confidering only that Simplicity of principle, that clearnefs of Spirit, with which she has treated
your offer, I am ready to allow that there can be
no
the Marquefs oSSoBER TON.
2II
BO fortune or rank to which she is not at least e-qual, efpecially if you take into the account the mediocrity of her condition, which only exalts her the more. Clara on a throne, conld not be more intririiically majestic, than in her procedure towards you. Here the dignity is all her own. Her strift honor, while it is fatal to your love, justifies, at least, your choice, which to a mind fo noble as your’s must be fome confolation, and will, I hope, prove a not unprofitable incentive to imitation.
For, after all, not to flatter yourfelf, have you laid strefs enough on your engagement to Lady Harriet ? (3ould Clara, looking on it very justly as having proceeded too far to be retracted with honor, receive your addresses in any other light than thofe of a virtually married man ? You may obferve I fay nothing of her particular fitu-ation with refpeQ: to Lady Harriet, which might, however, have had its share in her determination.
In your defistence then, from your purfuit, the more hopelefs the better for you, as it is an argument the more for your defistence. You obtain the double good of proving your manly power over yourfelf, and of purchafing, though with the privation of a great pleafure, an ef-cape from a pain that must over-ballance it, if the duration of one may be Set against the momentary excels of the other. For, after all, your fuccefs with Clara could never have bred more than a temporary fufpenfion of your re-morfe for your treatment of that most worthy, and most amiable Lady Harriet, whofe confent to give up her claim to you, confidering her unquestionable and innocent love for you', would only have redoubled your guilt toward her. That compunction then would, to^one of your fenfibility, have
been
1
;! 1 I
1
i;i i
I !
■ »
hi
• I
■i:r
' I
I t
, I
:ii
h
f ;
212
L. Grevi lle, Bf<jy do
been a perrennial fountain of bitternefs, in which the torch of love would have run a great rifque of being cruelly extinguifhed. • Nothing being more unjust than the passions you would perhaps have, at the best tacitly, made Clara accountable to you for the failure of which yo’u would yourfelf have Seduced her into the being your accomplice. You would, and not quite without reafon, fufpedt her of having yielded to your propofals upon other motives than thofe of love. Then would fhe, in your esteem, fink into the ordinary clafs of women, ef-pecially of her pretentions as to fortune and condition, to whom the advantages of Such a match would have been an invincible temptation not toex.a-mine over-Scrupulousty the objedtions to it. But, a-bove all, you would have found it difficult to reconcile yourfelf to yourfelf. Your deliverance, then,by Clara’s noble procedure fromfo lasting a torment to you, as your own just reflexions would have been, is perhaps not a lefs happinefs than your accom-plistiing your purpofes with her, as great a blifs as I stiould readily own that must have been, but for that poifon of felf-reproach, which it might indeed deaden for a while, but never entirely kill. Soon would it recover its power to prove to you, that a pleafure, necessarily stiort-lived, when purchafed at the expence of honor, is not the least of bargains for a long repentance, inevitably consequential to the weaknefs of not having enough refpedt-ed fo facred a principle.
Nor think, my Lord, that in this I am crudely and even inhumanly taxing you with a breach of honor. No. I am rather congratulating you on your happinefs, in having made fuch a worthy choice in the perfon of Clara, as has defended you from that precipice, defended you against yourfelf. I have before allowed, and very justly allowed,
that fuch weaknesses are a tribute which the great-
ess
the Marquefs 0/ Soberton. 213
eft of men are liable to pay to human nature, in-fomuch that the first steps are absolutely not in their power, and thoSe first steps too often infenfi-bly betray them into ulterior ones, which consummate their fall. You have been evidently in the first cafe, and very fortunately are not in the Second : fo that, now to proceed, while you have So fair an opening for retreat, would be in you a determinate will to a£t against your own fenfe of right, which is what'I do not in the least fear for you. It is only for weak minds, like weak constitutions, not to expell the poifon they have once imbibed: but your establilhed Superiority to that claSs, does not leave you that fad excufe.
I do not then hope too much from you. For as to that character of invincibility, which the modern Tragedy-writers, and Novelists, have, in their crazy fancy, bestowed upon the pastion of Love, and of which that numbing frigidity, with which they in general treat of it, proves that they never knew what Love was, nothing is more falSe, especially with regard to great men. Heroes, you may find in history, have not been more exempt than others, from a pastion which, of all the human pastlons, has the most to fay for itSelf. You will find too, that Some have gone great lengths of inconfideratenefs and folly, for the objects of their attachment; but you will find few or none of them, Such deSperately true loiyers as to put themfelves theatrically to death with the dagger or bowl, merely for being crojfed in fove. You may indeed, nov/ and then, read in our new’s-papers of a love-lorn chamber-maid applying for relief to her garter, or a flighted apprentice taking the lover’s leap into the next pond; but rarely of any above their rank of life, or their Size of understanding, playing the fool in that manner. Nor can there be a truer, though So
trite
!ii;
I j' I
I
1
4
{ !

11
i »!
•	; i
*	M r

f;
': I
! !
; I
ill!
0
! I
k I

R '
i t
li
214 L. Greville, £L; to
trite a proverb, than that the bell rarely tolls Sor thoSe who die of love. The bills of mortality do not So much as admit it among the difeafes which “ flesh is heir to.” -All this I mention, my Lord, you may eaflly perceive, not most certainly, as Suppossng you in the caSe of Such nonfenfe, but merely to take from you any Scruple about an extra-ordinarinefs of procedure in your fufferirig So many Superior conflderations, but especially that of honor, to overcome a passion, in which, without very Sufficient reaSons for breaking its hold, I readily admit that constancy is even a virtue.
If tragedy and romance dealt more on truth, and consequently more in nature, or if they paid their court more to the virtues than to the weak-neflfes of mankind, they would, oftener than they do exemplarily reprefent, in the most amiable, and in the most encouraging light, Such charafters as do perhaps more honor to human kind, in their conquest over violent passions, than in that total exemption from them, which is much more frequently the effe6t of imbecility, than of a per-fe6fion, at least too rare among mere mortals, to afford hopes of imitation. I should, for example, imagine, that the continency of a Scipio, would’ be a fubje£l:, if handled by a real genius, to the full as interesting, and much more edifying than that of Anthony lossng the world for love, or rather for a luxurious attachment, for of love he had not virtue enough to be fufceptible. And by the by, well confidered, what does the story 'of his amours with Cleopatra prefent, but that of one of the most detestable, profligate, and withall stupid cullies, whofe name ever fouled the pages of history, ruining himfelf for an abandoned woman, to whom the title of Queen was,but a reproach the more, notorious only for pride without honor, intrigues without love, prodigality without
taste.
A V AAA
I
5
(Is
»
i I
t
it
■I
, » v,uiuacxer, in Ihort, Somewhat of the air and hue of his own, in which what brilliancy there ever appeared was that of a jet-black ? Could then the fall of the mean murderer of Tully, of execrable confpirator with Caefar against the liberty of his country, provoke any Sentiment, but that of a regret of his not having expired on a gibbet, or of his not having lain broken alive on a wheel ? I know this is di-grefllve, but I am carried away by my indignation, on my recolledtion of his catastrophe having been too tenderly treated, on the theatre by fome excellent "authors. I allow;, however, that fome poetical justice there was in the historical truth of things, fince he was brought to his death, tho’ a death not equal to his crimes, by one of his own gang, that cowardly and cruel in cold blood, Augustus, whofe Successes' as they are called, were the ruin not only of his own family, which would indeed have been nothing more than a just viSitation, but of the greatest repulic, that with fo many vices rendered every thing relative to it interesting in its favor, till finking into llavery, '^its annals, after that period, became of ' as little account or estimation as the Sessions-papers of the Old-Bailey; the reproach of humanity, the difgrace of history, and the Scorn of cu-riofity.
But that by the by. It may, however, without any flattery to human-kind, be averred, that the cure of Love, conquered by virtue, is not So extremely rare, as Poets, Novelists, and Romance writers would perSuade us, in their records of fancy and fhstion. The real truth is, that this passion, with all its arbitrary power, is not always invincible, efpecially by great characters; to represent.it otherwiSe is not only injurious but disheartening
2l6
i'l i
t;
*, .
, I
• h,
I ''.
I ‘
• I
.»
! ♦:
> ' I
I >> I
(IN
; I 4
i ii' I ,i:, '
'' I ' I
:
I .
: 1 I I
>■' ,
:{ :
li
§i
!
L. Greville, EJq\ ^c.
heartening to human reaSon. The statuary, who exhibited the man overcoming the lion, if he even granted more to invention than, to matter of faff, furnished at least to mankind an encouragement to try for the victory, which may Sometimes be gained with prefuming, but never by an abjest defpair of it.
Hitherto, my Lord, you have a clear right to treat this incident as nothing more than the greatest men, when they are not enough on their guard : but that captivity needs not be lasting; a noble exertion of manly refolution will eafily, and with a good grace, free you from chains, injurious to reafon and to honor.
I fay nothing to you of the reparation to Lady Harriet by your just return to her, nor of the refpedl you might think due to the memory of a lender mother, who So pashonately wished this match into which she engaged you ; I lay even no strefs on the regard you owe to yourfelf, to your plighted honor, and efpecially to the happinefs of a young Lady, to whom a defertion would be fo cruel an indignity, becaufe T am but too fenSible that love is not to be commanded by any reSpeds, and flies with difdain from every thing that has an air of tie or constraint. Liberty is its very effence; it will Sometimes, indeed, endure to be expelled, by the powers of reafon and virtue, but never to be compelled into posteflion. This point, then, is too tender, too delicate, too much dependent on yourfelf, for me to prefume or wish to touch upon it. Whatever refolution you may take, be the merit of it all your own. You have in your breast the most authoritative of all monitors. Confult that facred oracle, your heart.
I am, my Lord, &c.
Launcelot Greville.
LET.
[ 217 ]
LETTER
Lbe Marquefs of Soberton to LaunceloT
Greville, EJo'y
My ever honored Friend,
Peterjham,
I Would not Suffer you to remain a moment longer than I could help it, under any incertainty as to my reSolution and procedure, in conSequence of my disastrous pastion, and stiall, therefore in this letter confine myfelf to that objedt alone, leaving all other matters to future notice.
After that I had received Clara’s letter, I Avaited near three days before I could well determine what to do. At length, urged by the violence of my fentiments, I could think of nothing better than to try to obtain one more audience from Clara, in which I propoSed to exert my utmost efforts of argument and perfuafion to induce her to accept my offer : as little of hope, then, as the defign of this step prefented, I took it nevertheless.
I went to Mrs. Buckley’s, who, I found, was only denied; but as to Clara, stie had abfolutely, the day after (he had Sent me her anfwer, removed from Mrs. Buckley’s, without leaving any dire6lion or trace to where fhe was gone. Mrs. Buckley, I might very well fuppofe, knew: but it was not through her, I could hope any information. Without ever having come to any explanation in form, I was perfectly clear as to the unfavorablenefs of her fentiments to my defires.
In the perplexity of Spirit, caufed to me by this news of Clara’s removal, I, immediately, though not without confufion, not without reluctance, drove to Lady Harriet’s in town, where I wifhed, and yet dreaded to have my doubts cleared up, as to the difappearing of Clara in that manner, and at that junifiure. Lady Har-
Vol. III.	L	riet

11 ■!
< i I
Tl:;,:
i.li'fh
S' ’ i :
i
I •. !•'
' •; ’	* I ‘
liitS i ^
'.tC:
if'
I, I < ‘ I 1
: I'i' !
i 11'!!!!
n,
b it.
’S T ^
>U. *•• :l
:'ld L''‘f
V ! Si-f ) ; , 1
:!d'^
dbuibi ■ 1. ■ •

I
f :
fr.:
I'M I
t
I ;■ I ■ " ■
/! 'll’:
■iilc
I :
V

'•r.
11
■te;-
i....
j
I I
liT
* 1
i> !
II
r|i:
l-l’
ic
!C
O';. '

1
"I i 1 >
, ' I
»	■ i
{ I
I
; n
1 I
I ;i
O
i8
The Mqrqnefs o ^ S o B E R T o N
riet did not receive me with her uSual chearfulnefs, which, in the natural conScioufnefs of guilt, I instantly afcribed to Some intimation, I will not fay diredtly from Clara, for I did her difcretion and honor too much justice to fufpedt her of any ill office of that kind, but from Some quarter or other, of what had pasted against the regard I owed to Lady Harriet.
I was mistaken. Nothing of that nature had tranfpired, fo as to come to her knowledge. The little cloud I found on her countenance, and which was prefently dissipated, proceeded from nothing but her fenssbility to a fhort note, which stie had just before received from Clara, containing nothing more than a tender and fuccindt excufe for declining to take leave in form, for a journey into the country, which a hidden emergency required, and which fhe did not fpecify. Nor did Lady Harriet’s imagination lead her to any conjedture, but that of fome family-concern, which might render Clara’s prefence necessary, or at least important, fo that she laid no farther strefs on it.
It was not fo with me ; for I could plainly, and with great felf-reproach, difeern, that Clara had had recourfe to this step, not out of any fear of me, for with one of my charadfer that was quite out of the question; nor even out of any appre-henston of my viSits or assiduities being more frequent to her than she could have wished, for her own .q^^uiet, .or Lady Harriet’s, as she could not but be fenstble, that one ssngle exprefs prohibition of them would have rid her of Such importunity; but purely out of her candor and good-nature to deliver me, by that deciSivenefs of condudt, from the cruelty of incertainty, as it is the mixture of hope with dessre that creates and continues the torture. Possbly too she might, in her fpirit of friendship,think she was leavingjby her abfence, the fairer
'	st eld


4
to L. G R E v I L L £, Efq-^	21 gr
field for the justice of Lady Harriet’s reclaimer.
But whatever were her motives, and I am very fure, that to know her, and not afcribe to her, not the most virtuous and the most laudable ones, would be the height of injustice, my vexation, my Sorrow for my having disturbed her peace and thus driven her out of her propofed courfe, made it very difficult to reconcile myfelf to myfelf.
And here, my dear friend, do not let me make a parade to you of a falfe virtue; truth is to me above every thing : for Suffer it or not, honor, admit it or not, duty, murmur or not my heart, I must fay, that if I had Seen the least glimpSe of an overture of fucceeding with the invincible Clara, I should have Sacrificed every confideration to my passion for her. I could Sooner have parted with my life than with any the least shadow of a hope of obtaining, in the possession of her, the fupreme end of all my wishes, of all my defires. I had already a6lually given up more than my life, my honor, in the propoSals I had made to her, and which, for that very reafon, were, to my shame I confefs it, unworthy of So pure, fo celestial a character ; my passion, in short, burnt too fiercely to be extinguished by any thing but utter deSpair, and I preSume, there is no passion, except in ideots, that can furvive hope. It is in that light tl at it may, without a paradox, be Said, that what re--doubled my esteem for Clara, lessened my love, by placing her at a height So much above my reach, that not to have given over the purSuit was only tempting the renewal of the fable o" the embraced clouds. It is not, then, to me that the honors of the triumph are due, but to Clara I have not to boast of a passion vanquished by my own reafon, but by her virtue and my deSpair.
All theSe thoughts did not instantly occur to me during my stay with Lady Harriet, which my
L 2	vexaiton
t •
I ■ 1'
I ,l
I ' ‘	:
i o
I ‘ 1
i'!i
I ,
I
I 111
!! f
I
i J
1
t ;
< i '
' 'Ti
•	I ■ . '
•	,t : : ‘
! ( : .

, 11

'li'i ! !
lb
I
.1' .1
M -I
! 1 i|i; , i’:! fh
: !i
w I ’
i’ll'' Ii'lh'
' '.i i M
I.(
' 1 I ! :
fili' 'i (
i , -i t
I'li i
.til -I '
L- L ilS| :
220
The Marquefs of Soberton
vexation obliged me to make as short as it well could: but in the first moments of Solitude, I came to a clear explanation with myfelf, on the nature of my Situation. Clara’s cool and refolute procedure, combined with my perfect convi6tion of her Superiority to all Sufpicion of coquetry or art, had Satisfied me of what I had not to expe6t from her.
I had, then, a barbed arrow to pluck forth from my breast, which I was Sure would tear my vitals in the attempt. Do not let me, my worthy friend, give your fenSibility the pain of a minute description of the pangs it cost me, of the tortures I endured, before I could, in the agonies of my deS-pair, pronounce to my defires, the Sentence of death. They were criminal, mySelf their Judge, though too much their accomplice not to deServe to Suffer, as I afilually did, little short of death with them.
Behold me, then, restored to freedom j but pur-chafed at how dear a rate ! I shudder yet to think of it! still there was another piece of justice remaining for me to execute. A reparation to Lady Harriet, only the more her right, for her not fo much as fuSpefiling that I owed it to her. Nothing is more true than that in the midst of all my jage of pashon for Clara, I had never once had •the barbarity to impute to Lady Harriet as matter of complaint from me, whatever bar my fituation with her might oppofe to my fuccefs with Clara. Nor do I by this mean, with a coxcomb’s presumption, that that bar was the only one, for I have no fort of reafon to think I had made any fort of impreshon on Clara’s heart. However, I was fo far from looking on Lady Harriet with an evil eye on the account of her being an impediment to my defigns, that I was constantly in my inward Sentiments for her proving to mystlf,
that
r
to L. G R E V I L L E, Efq',
221

that though there may be no loving more than one at once, there is a greater latitude for esteem, as mine was, I am Sure, fairly divided between her-felf and Clara. It w*as, indeed, precifely on that Solid and unalterable foundation of esteem, that it became the easter for me to refume, even with greater force, that tender regard for Lady Harriet, which I had once taken for love, and which perhaps was love, though not in fo violent a degree of ardor as that with which Clara had infpired me. The Sentiments I had had for Lady Harriet, had more of the nature of a lambent harmlefs flame; but my pastion for Clara, more the character of a fierce fire, that had burnt reafon, duty, and even honor itfelf out of doors.
On this occafion, then, I have called myfelf to a strifit account; and believe me, my dear friend, could I, on the stri<stest Scrutiny into the deepest recesses of my heart, have found lurking at the bottom of it fo mean. So Selfisti a view as that of
filling the uncomforrab!^^	it, by my
failure of fuccefs with Clara, with a refumption of my addresses to Lady Harriet, I honor, I esteem^ and I hope I may now fay, I love her too much to make of her nothing more than a referve, or refource, in the cafe of another’s refufal. Instead of the indignity to her of fuch a motive of procedure i-n me, my whole thoughts, my whole foul are intent on nothing fo much as on entitling myfelf to her forgivenefs of that involuntary crime, by the fincerity and innocence of my future con-du^. There may be characters infernalj enough to hate where they offend ; but to me the injuries, fecret or not, which I had done to Lady Harriet, are to me but an indearment of her the more. Before, I had only Amply an engagement to fulfil, I have now a breach of it to repair. Befides, let me not dissemble with myfelf or you, it is not eafy
L 3	to
'hr
: ii:'
'■I;i ^ if
i]!

111-
'-H
•l ,1
;ii
;d.
.' 1 ' ii
'is
i!.!
I •

.i . I < I
bids
''IL,!
i'

•I
I
f ' ■
. i ■
■ C !
ibi
ib;
■'Ii ‘
• .1 I
I ,'L I I'
rii'i'
l ;!■!'
i
idi'ii
i' I. ■
I ■,
bl:|i

'r:i
n:
'<j|
b
t ,
•I I '
hi-
I!.'
-!l
I
t
I
: I
I I !i I
1
,1':
’ I
‘ I
■ji i
L I
b I
! i
!i
II
O 1
*The Marquefs <ySoBERTON
to conceive how much Lady Harriet has gained of advantage in my opinion, and even of lovelinefs in my eyes, by the confideration of that friendfhip with which she could infpire fo admirable a judge of worth as Clara. There must be in her own chara6Ier fomerhing extremely engaging and attractive to live with her, as, indeed, I always judged from what I myfelf could difcern of her; but Clara’s choice is to me a powerful confirmation.
I shall alfo have gained by that failure, which I own it was no merit of mine, that it was not entirely consummated, a benefit, which is not a little one, that of an experience of ray weaknefs, which will for ever henceforward keep me in a Salutary diffidence of myfelf, and on a thorough guard against another furprife of this kind, which, by the by, I have not greatly to fear. There are not many Claras in the world.
I am, however, fenfible, that in thus returning under the banners* which I had —
deferted, I fin against all the laws of romance ; according to which, though inconstancy is not approved, the best reparation for it, that of returning to the first attachment, is as little the praCiice; but leaving that pleafant statute of the Love-code to its proper authority in the imaginary Spaces of fiction and chimera, I am not in the least afraid of SubiTiitting this recovery pf my falfe step, to the decisions of Reafon and even of Love. The restoration of a lost heart to its right owner is the only atonement I can now make, and I arn but too happy, and more lo, I am fure, than I deferve, in that a^ of justice being as yet in my power.
In this Spirit it is, then, that I propofe immediately to fet about hastening the accomplishment of my engagement to Lady Harriet. I know, that her family paffionately wishes it, and I would fain
hatter
V* A- .*	4

to L. Greville, EJqt^
223
flatter mySelf that the pressing it will not be entirely disagreeable to herfelf. The more reafon I have to think So, I feel myfelf the more guilty, and the more obliged, in honor to devote the rest of my life to the making her’s happy, and on that happinefs to build my own.
But then that angel Clara! nay, do not be a-larmed, I cannot, it i$ true, mention her name without emotion, but it is most certainly not the« emotion of love. It is ratlier wnth fuch a rapture of zeal mixed with awe as one would fpeak of a fuper-human being. She is gone. But where ? That I lhall foon, I hope, learn, for my purpofe of fair amends to her for any disturbance I have given to her. Wherever fhe goes, my constant good wifhes, joined with the purest intentions for her fervice, fhall purfue her. My love has yielded its place to- an eternal friendship: I look on her family as mine: it fhall have as much the benefit of my wist to have been honorably united to it,
as it would have had of the deed itfelf.
I had naturally, you may be Sure, made fome enquiries about her relations: nothing could be more favorable to my views: you have already been apprifed of Mrs. Buckley’s tranfcendent worth: Her nephew, Mr. Mellefont, married to Clara’s elder lister, is a Clergyman of an excellent cha-rafiter; in short, one would imagine, that merit ran in a rich vein through the whole family, like the orestreak in a mine. Most luckily it is, just at this junOiure, in my power to give Mr. Mellefont, who, I am told, has a growing family, a demonstration of my good will to all who are related to Clara. The Duke has given me the pre-fentation, at my difpofal, of the living of Wel-borough: it brings in near feven hundred a year, which, even every other confideration a-part, I do pot find that I could bestow better than on fo wor-
L 4
thy

11
o o
4
>/
1
thy a man. Nor is this all; So far as my influence jfhail ever extend, I will have my eye on him, for any preferment or for any advantages it will be poS-Sible for me to procure to him and to his. Thefe overtures of Service, adlual and intended, I Shall, through Mrs. Buckley, render, I hope, acceptable to him both in the propriety of the manner, and in the purity of its motive.
As to Clara herfelf, my marks of friendship shall be as boundlefs as my esteem. With what I know of Lady Harriet’s generoSity, and efpecially of her difpoSitions towards her, I have not the least doubt of her being even thankful to me, for the propofal of her making, in the form of a wedding favor, a prefent to Clara of her jewels, as thofe of the Duch-efs will be full Sufficient for herfelf. Thefe Clara’s delicacy will engage her to receive with lefs repugnance from Lady Harriet than from me ; who do not, however, mean that they shall acquit me to her. I shall, of myfelf, join to them the gift of that neat fnug-box of mine in Surry, with the grounds round it, which may be about two hundred and forty pounds a year : but of this donation, 1 must alfo intreat Mrs. Buckley to undertake the making the acceptance agreeable to Clara, in its true light of an homage paid by the purest friendship to the mostperfedt worth. It would be hard, indeed, if vice engrossed So excluSively all rewards as not to leave any for virtue.
Mean while, I have not any fear of your impu^ ting this account I am giving you of my intentions, to any vain ostentation or parade: you will castly fee my drift in it is to recover what of your esteem I may have justly forfeited by my weaknefs, and to make you Some amends for the pain that weaknefs was but the more likely to give you, for your having laid the foundation of a stronger constitution of mind than what fuch a terrible falling.
to L. GrEVILLE,	22$
ling-off has betrayed. Remember, I can never be reconciled to myfelf, till I have your approbation for my Sandlion.
Yours, &c.
SoBERTON.
/I
1
b
LETTER
Launcelot Greville, Efq‘, to the Marquefs of
SoBERTON.
at -..^ Gloucejierjhire.
My Lord Marquefsy
YO U have recovered your fall with Such a Superiority of Spirit, that it is a question v/he-ther you could have stood fast with more dignity. It is without any compliment, which you know me uncapable of ussng with you, or indeed with any one, that I may venture to assure you, that you have given to that untoward accident of a passion, only unjustifiable by your Situation of a prior engagement, an issue worthy of yourfelf; you have refcued your honor out of jeopardy, and turned your defeat to a triumph only the more a triumph^ for your renouncing your claim to it. ^
Your difpolitions towards Clara and her family’ are truly noble, and strongly prove to me your complete vifilory over any little acrimony natural to be felt on the disappointment of defires So ardent as yours ; they prove you recovered, without any, danger of a relapfe.
But efpecially let me congratulate you on your return tp your engagement with Lady Harriet, who fo much deferves your love, and who ha given fo many proofs of her fincere affection . for you. What offers did she not refufe, on your ac-
L 5	' count
s

, I
226
Mrs. B U C K L E Y
count, even before matters were So much advanced as they have been fince ? Graced, as flie is, with all the advantages of blooming youth, of beauty, of fortune, of education, and efpecially of excellent fenfe and chara6ter, I do not hazard much in befpeaking for you the most exalted happinefs, in the form of the most indifpenfa-ble duty; that of keeping faith with that amiable and all-accomplished I^dy.
It is with that aufpicious prefage that I conclude, and am
Yours, &c.
Launcelot Greville.
y * I :
' I
LETTER XXXI.
Mrs. Buckley, to Mr. Mellefont.
Dear nephew^	London,
Prepare foon to receive your fair fugitive stster. , But for what a fugitive ? For Love ? No. Guefs again. For honor? Now you come nearer the matter. But let me explain myfell, after which I shall deliver the pen to L lara, who is, at this moment, with me, in Lady Proffer’s clofet, in the city, dated from which you receive this letter. Leave her, then, while I am writing to you a whole Iliad, to amufe herfelf with reading the last new play. But where is Lady Proffer? Patience, and I will tell you. She is at this instant as bufy as you can imagine, in preparations for her journey into the country, a month, at least. Sooner than she originally propofed, for the fake of Clara’s company, who is in a hurry to leave town, and to
go
to Mr. Mellefont.
227
A
J t
1

go down to you, for a reafon which will come in courSe.
No Sooner had she received the Marquefs of Soberton’s declaration, which, as I wrote you before, I had long, not without reafon, anticipated, and which, I assure you, gave her infinite pain, on Lady Harriet’s account,, than merely from the diO:ates of her own heart, she Sent him, in the politest terms, the most peremptory denial: after which she had the impudence to afk me if I approved her conduct, as if it was possible not to worship her for it'. To confefs the truth, I had done her, for Some time, the injustice to be in pain for her^ while I faw her,, with fo much facility and unreferve, deliver herfelf up to the danger of Lord Soberton’s distinctions and assiduities, whofe great and undoubted merit made me tremble for her, and, indeed, for himfelf. I knew him, irrevocably engaged in honor to Lady Harriet, or but. for that invincible bar there is not, as I conceive, in Europe, that match I should have been better pleafed with than between Clara and him.-He is, to do him no more than justice, a most worthy, a most amiable charafter, independent of his title and fortune, which I am very clear are, in her delicacy of thinking, lefs a temptation than ' an objeCfion :• matter rather of apology than of« boast to her. The worst that can be faid of; him,, IS, that on this occafion, a paffion foo an object the likeliest in the world to create and even to justify a violent one, be this faid without the least partiality to Clara, hurried him beyond the bounds of ; duty, and compelled him to take a-step,'in which, ., he was too worthy, too refpeClable a-charaCler,, in short, not to deferve the happinefs be met with, of being,,refufed where it would; have been death,. both , to his honor and to her’s to have been ac-
cepted.
As it has happened,, it v/as referved for
Clara’s-
if !
r
1
I \
i I
I!
11 '
'■ I
■
\ ■
it.
i	‘
ii	' I
f !
228
Mrs. B u
C K L E Y
Clara’s magnanimity not only to Save him from himfelf, but to give him withall the confolation of finding, that fince he was to fall into fuch an error, it was Somewhat mitigated by the dignity of a choice that was to preferve him from its being irreparable : one involuntary error, in fhort, compensated by a thoufand virtues.
It was then on a strong prefumption of the Mar-quefs’s probity, that Clara, founding a hope of what I am periiiaded she stncerely wishes, his return to Lady Harriet, started, of herfelf, the idea of confirming, by her immediate abfence, the de-cifiveneSs of her anfwer. But to this she added a
reafon, which I confefs would never have come into my head, and which yet is not absolutely without its weight. Of the two cafes she concluded one must be the confequence, that the Marquefs would not refiime his engagement to Lady Harriet, or that he would ; but that in either Supposition, it was clearly right for her to quit the Scene ; on which, if she staid, on his continuing his injustice to Lady Harriet, Sufpicions might arife of her defignedly hovering and playing a stale game of duplicity, or of attradfion by re-pulfes. On the other hand, if, as she rather hoped, wished, and believed, he should come to that con-clufion, to which he was bound by every tie of honor and duty, Lady Harriet would infallibly give her an invitation, which she could not ea-fily elude by any other excufe than that of a great distance, to affist at her nuptials, which, for any objedtion she had to them, she could fee with no Sentiment but that of a Sincere
a ceremony,
•/ ^
joy, on her friend’s account: but then she imagined, that after what had pasted between Lord Soberton and her, there might appear in her being prefent at them, a kind of air of bravade to him,
which
I)
Mr
12.2^
which was an infuk neither in her nature, nor indeed deferved from her by his Lordship.
To this refolution then of Clara’s, I concurred, with no repugnance, but that of parting frona fo fweet a companion; efpecially too, as I was fenss-ble that her original intention was to go down to you, in the courfe of the Summer. But as this removal was, by the circumstance, required, for obvious reafons, to be immediate, i thought she could not do better than to accept Lady Proffer’s preffing invitation to stay a few days with her in the city, where she might pafs as much for being gone into the country, as if she was a hundred miles off, and where she might, in the mean while, make her difpoSitions for effectively Setting out on the journey. But Lady Proffer was no fooner acquainted of this intention of her’s to proceed for Lancashire, than, ever ready to Seize an occaston of fervice, she propofed to take her down with her herfelf, and deliver her to you, as fafe and as well conditioned, as she terms it, as she received her from you. Nothing could be more agreeable to Clara, who has a great averfion for travelling alone; fo that you may very foon ex-peCt to have her with you, and in her one of the greatest ornaments of human kind. I think, too, I dare anfwer for you, that you will at once approve and admire the Sacrifice she has made to honor and to friendship; content to quit a Scene of numberlefs conquests, among whom there are certainly perfons of great worth, but who have not had the Secret to touch her heart, and to Seek, in your rural receSs, a refuge from all the pomp and glare of a world, in which she has So many univerfally received pretenSions to make a most distinguished figure. But ! repeat what I have before mentioned to you ; I never Saw one of her age, I think. Scarce Seventeen,- with So determinate a turn for
purely
!h

!' ‘
li:
lit
di
I.


) I.
: \ I
• i
I !
i 1.
>! I
^ii,
' I i I.
' 1
fi'
I* '
I
( •
I . i
< .
iM''
;iij
ri.l
i'i
.'l 1
I _ t
. ; I
, 1
:1
'I
(' ;
0
f.i
Y
,!!!
.!i.
i
h!il
'f
^‘1
*'!|
iji!
I'i
■i:
I'
!i!

s
ill
230
Mrs. B u c K L £ y
purely domestic life, which is Surely the greatest qualification for that connubial one, to which, however stie appears to have So little difpoSition. Nor can she re-appear among you, under the dif-grace of a negle6l:ed beauty, fince she has evidently refufed Some of the first matches of the kingdom,, and most of them from that principle of honor which is her unerring guide, that of difdaining, on any profpe6t of fortune or ambition, or, indeed, on any confideration whatever, to give her hand-without hpr heart. A prophanation of which whoever is voluntarily guilty, not only foreclofes all equity of redemption from one of the worst kinds of hell on earth, to which she will have condemned herfelf, but forfeits all right of repining,, at thofe horrors of her fate, which can hardly faik of being the punishment of her folly,, of her mean-nefs, and, indeed, of the bafeneSs of her perjured^ injustice to the man she marries, to whom she fo-lemnly vows a love she has not, nor is it probably in her power ever to have.. For furely any appearance of fondnefs afterwards must arife from a' motive too grofs to be mistaken for love. On the other hand, what execration is not due to- thofe tirannical parentSK who, facrificing Nature to h'or-tune, inflidf a punishment worfe than death itfelf, on children instindtively of a taste too just to fee the fame charms as they do in money or titles! If Such parents were but to conSider the torments to which they expofe a tender amiable child, by throwing her int® the arms of fome difagreeable wretch, whom not to detest wcnild be a want of common fenfe ; if they would but fairly weigh a-, length of loathfom horror against the difpatch of a moment’s mortal pain, they would owm that the facrifices of infants to Moloch, in the vale of Hin-’ were tender mercies compared to the fuffer-
non
ings toswhich they doom their innocent children ;
by

id Mr. Mellefont.
231
/
by making viflims of them to Mammon. While, to render the cruelty the more completely bitter, they infult them with the pretence of its being all for their happinefs, though they are all the while consulting nothing but their own interest or their own vanity. Ido not here lay any strefs on the temptations, to the falling under which they expofe their children, becauSe I am fenfible that thofe staves of the dirty Selfish pastions, never have delicacy enough to take that confideration, all natural as it is, into the account: indifferent alike to the mifery and to the guilt of their unhappy offspring. So they but humor their own eternally falfe and defpicable ideas, which unfortunately the world irfelf is too apt to countenance, in the abandoned turn it has taken to an avarice, which estimates every thing, even happinefs it-felf, not by the constitutives of perSonal merit, but by Something more current at market, articles of fortune.
But what an unnatural shocking fight must it be, that of a blooming beauty, allied either with the infirmities of decrepitude, or, with what is perhaps ' as great a Source of diSgust, with an ill temper or difeafes at any age, and eSpecially in youth, be-caufe there more extraordinary ! Is it for parents to exafit Such Sacrifices from their children ?
Let me give you here an example, which you will hardly think digrestively introduced. You have not, perhaps, forgot a Sweet little girl, then a child when you took notice of her, about eight years ago, Lucy Harwood, the only daughter of the goldfmith who lived the next door to us : she was, fince that time, grown strikingly Sightly, with all the glowing freshnefs of youth, and all the points of female beauty, graced, above every thing, with the most engaging modesty. Happening to be one day at Some public place, I do
not
232
Mrs, Buckley
! I
-I ;
I.
I
t;
?. •
I
I!
j'
not well remember which, where Ihe attracted a general admiration, she had no better luck than to make a conquest of one Mudly; a fellow, originally a follower of his father, a cryer of old cloaths, for whom he carried his bag, till by Some accident he got to be runner to a public office, and there made his way, by no other merit on earth but that of an implicit stave that would run any rifques for thofe in power to advance him, and would fet his hand and face to any job or drudgery, the fouler the more welcome to him. With this noble dif-poSition he could hardly fail of Succeeding, and he accordingly made a constderable fortune, originally, by the relaxation of management, and indolent connivence of authority at the waste and malversations in offices; but this fortune he Swelled immoderately, by occastonal hits in the stock jobbing way, and loans to the government, out of the very money of which he had cheated ; loans on occastons perfectly unnecessary, if counlels lefs courtly and more national had prevailed. After, then. Spending the greatest part of his life in enriching himfelf by Schemes against the public welfare, he began to lay out for pleastng himfelf, by a projedt against private happinefs. Senfually, then, affefited by the fight of Lucy, he Soon got himfelf introduced to her parents, and without giving himfelf any the least trouble about the girl’s inclinations, but with all the cockfure info-lence of the purfe-proud adept of a plum, he pro-pofed his right honorable intentions. The parents, dazzled with the opulence of this fon of Rag-fair, thought they could do nothing better for her happinefs than to bury her alive in the arms of that detestable lump of mortality. But to give you a juster idea of the happinefs they propofed for their child, Suffer me to furnish you with a description
of
io Mr. Mellefont.
233
•i'

d.
y
1
of his perfon, as I am apt to think you never Saw him.
Figure to yourSelf a little thick Squab animal, not much above four feet high, with a prominent belly, which, with the shortnefs of the inferior part of his body, might give you the idea of a toad Set on his hind legs, efpecially if you take into the pidlure a broad, bloated, tawney face, with a wide mouth that had the air of meaning to go round his head, if it had not been luckily stopped by his ears, in revenge of which it looked as if it would bite a piece out of them every time that in fpeaking he made a contortion with it. Add to this a flat nofe, blubber-lips, eyes goggling like thofe of a strangled cat, and a greafy undluous perfpiration for ever on the furface of his phyz. Somewhat like the Sweating of a vault in Summer ; and, with all this, your imagination can never reach half the horrors of his appearance: be this Said without any the least caricature.
The charms of his mind were alfo anfwerable to thofe of his pretty perfon, which, in all the stmplicity of good faith, he took for the perfedl model of manly beauty. Nor will you think this strange, when I tell you, that, take him out of his rote of official bustle, and the jargon of Change-alley, he had not an idea beyond that money-grubbing Sphere, and was Scarce not a born ideot, with a head as contradled as his heart, and nothing could be more So. Accustomed to fawn and crouch to thofe Superiors from whom he had any thing to hope or fear, he indemnified himfelf for that constraint by the utmost harffineSs and haughti-nefs to thofe whom occafions, or their disastrous fortune, had made any way dependent on him It was then that he would give a full loofe to all the infolence of his native meanneSs. And
yet

234
Mrs. Buckley
yet, with this very wretch I have Seen fbme of our first nobility, cheek-by-jowl, treating him with the utmost familiarity, flapping him on the Ihoul-der, and calling him honeji Tom Mudly ! It is true they had borrowed money of him in fome of thofe rare moments that his vanity had played his avarice, the trick of rendering him lefs Scrupulous than ufual about Security.
To a girl possessed of thefe invaluable treafures of Nature, the graces of youth, beauty, and innocence, and that girl too his own daughter, this was the pretious rich obje6t Mr. Harwood prefented ; an object rather lefs prefentable than a Negro dying of the yaws: for with his death there would be mixed an idea of delivery from him, whereas the disproportion of this poifonous monster’s age was not, after all, quite fo great, as not to threaten Such a duration of torture, as was likely to make an end of her first. At the bare of fight him, however, introduced on that footing, Lucy of fhuddered, and recoiled with horror and affright, which he very currently attributed either to her maiden modesty, or to the over-whelming effedl of his delightful perfon, or to both combined. But he did not long remain under that deception; fhe prefently let him know her Sentiments of detestation of him, with all the ingenuous candor of an age incapable of diffimulation. In vain had he the mean indelicacy of Seeking the Satisfadlion of his passion, which her refuSal had only the more inflamed, from the arbitrary will of her parents, who fo far complied with his request, that, after remonstrating to her the duty of unlimited passive obedience, after representing to her what She would loSe by her obstinacy, equipage, jewels, Side-board of plate, fine cloaths, every thing, in short, of which the ^ possession at best tires or grows indifferent after a
flgw days, but which with Such a condition annexed
#
to Mr. Mell£font.
235
!1
ed to it, as that of fubjeftion to Such a monster, would become even matter of execration; they concluded, on her non-compliance, with the threat of turning her out of doors, and abandoning her ro the wide world. And they were as good as their word: for Lucy, protected by an instinct of Naturejnfinitely wifer than their instigation of falfe opinion, ventured, for the first time in h^r life, to have a will that was not theirs, and perfisted in rejefiting him. The unalterable tenor of her ob-je6tion to their pressure was plain and unanswerable. I do not love him; and if I do not love “ him, I ought not to marry him; and this is a “ duty, to the breach of which no parents ought ‘‘ to compeii or vdsh to Seduce me,’^ This was her text, and (he stuck unremoveably to it. Nor was this in her any Spirit of diSobedience to them, but merely an invincible averfion against a man fit to inSpire nothing elSe. Neither had they the common reSource of imputing this refra^orinefs in her
to ^ny p.'‘C*-rhgageriient of heart contrary to her duty. She did not need that circumstance to fortify her abhorrence of So shocking an obje6l.
Both father and mother, then, enraged at her wilfully miffing Such a heavenly bargain, literally Speaking, turned her into the street, where she must have absolutely fallen upon the chance of Public Charity, or, worSe yet, upon the chance of private vice, if she had not been taken in by a distant relation, who, negledled by the family for her poverty, had been occafionally relieved, in Secret, by Lucy’s natural goodneSs of heart. With her then she was fortunate enough to find a temporary refuge, I was then in Cornwall^ or she should not have failed of receiving assistance from me. The grateful good woman, not content with only harbouring her, procured her means of Subsistence by the hnnest industry of an employ of her talents in
embroidery.
r
236
Mr/
embroidery, millinery, and other articles of female work. Nor was it long before she was taken notice of, and courted, by a Sober young tradefman, of very good morals, that -had just Succeeded his father, with a competent stock, in a flourishing way of bufinefs, who married her, and to whom flie makes a most virtuous, difereet, and happy wife. It was, however. Some time before her tender parents would be reconciled to her; and that being the only point wanting to her fatisfafifipn, I had the pleafure at length of Succeeding, in bringing about the restoration of her to their good graces, more for her fake, you may be Sure, than theirs.
Mean while, what do you think was the opinion of the world On general? To its eternal shame, a condemnation of Lucy’s condu^I: not for disobedience to her parents: no; but for her having stood in her own light, as they vulgarly called it ; in not prostituting herSelf for life, (and Surely a marriage merely for interest deferves no Softer name,) and that to a hardly human creature.
I have been glad to particulariSe this example to you, of the falSe and fordid judgment of the generality of mankind, in points of interest flighted or trampled upon, becauSe I know that Clara has not eScaped blame for the many great matches she has refuSed, not indeed with Such violent reaSons as Lucy’s, but Surely with full valid ones, in the eyes of nature and of honor, even, if she had had no other plea to offer but her want of Sufficient liking.
I was in a fine writative vein for tiring you to death, but here comes Clara, with impatience in her eyes to relieve you, me, and herSelf. (To Clara) What ails the girl ? Why do not you take the pen ?”
\Clara Jits doivn, reads what Mrs. Buckley has ‘written^ and continues the letter^ addrejjing
berf^lf to Mrs. Mellefont.'J	Deaf
((
tt
I
i
iSb

To Mrs. M E L t £ F O N T.
237

Dear Sifter^
IT is very happy for me I am efcaping from Mrs. Buckley, who would certainly Spoil me, if I was to stay much longer with her, she is So terribly partial to me. I adopt, however, in its whole force, her plea for me, where she has left off, of a want of liking being a fufficient caufe to forbid the bans of matrimony: I adopt it too, the more readily, for its reducing the whole of that great magnanimity, which she does me the honor of attributing to me, to my only not being jade e-nough to take the advantage of a transtent weak-nefs of a very worthy man, to effentially injury him, to betray a friend, and to dishonor myfelf; and all this wishout any temptation; for I never constdered as a temptation any views of fortune or ambition ; and then as to any liking, that was abfolutely out of the qirestion ; fo that having had nothing to Sacrifice to my duty, I own, I think it is even injurious to me, to allow me any mighty merit for my procedure, as if it had been just or natural to cxpeQ; any other from any one that was not totally unprincipled.
As for fortune, I neither meanly wish it, nor give myfelf the air of falfe heroics to defpife it: nay, for many obvious reafons, but efpecially for the good it enables one to do. I rather hold it a destrable objedt; only I think it may, like gold, ,be bought too dear, at the expence either of honor, or of thofe points of happinefs which it is e-ternally out of its power to give, or to Supply their place, though it may and often does destroy them. Content with my humble mediocrity, and having enough, what mifs can I feel of the more that I do do not want ? With my taste for retirement and Simplicity of life, in every thing, any Superfluity, as to myfelf, would rather perplex than pleafe me : I might indeed, wish greater circumstances, for
the
^ A
Clara Maynwaring
the Sake of my friends; but, thank Heaven, I have none that are in want, or that w^ould not be forry to profit by any advantages to me that were incompatible with my happinefs; I might wifh a more affluent fortune for the fake of relieving the poor or distressed, but that duty never exacting more than a proportion to one’s a6lual abilities, does not require improper Sacrifices to interest; and Surely no Sacrifice could be more improper, than that of a duty fo inviolable as of never marrying till the heart can join with the mouth, in pronouncing the Sacramental word of Love, not as mere matter of ceremony, but as a Solemn truth As to ambition, for example, of a title ; it is not barely matter of indifference to me, for it is without any the least affedtation I can aver, that I have rather a strong prejudice against that distindbion, especially as, in my Small Sphere of observation, it has appeared to me to be generally, I do not fay neceffarily, an unfavorable one. To perfons of real merit it adds no fort of lustre , while to the worthiest, it feems rather to throw a light on them, that directs the pointed finger of fcorn to its mark; as Surely where a title is unfilled, (and how few of them are not fo ?) the strongest contempt is even a duty. In short, I am almost tempted to fubfcribe, without referve, to Mr. Mellefont’s opinion, “ That titles are remains of Gothicifm, antiquated forms of appellation, the found of which having long Survived the fenfe, remain in vulgar ufe, without foundation, or meaning, and merely by the force of prescription. In short, as titles now stand, and confidering the perfons on whom they are commonly pinned, they appear abfurdities, to which custom is fo far from reconciling one, that ‘‘ it is only a provocation the more to difgust and “ derifion.”
I confest, too, that I have been a good deal confirmed
iC

cc

cc
iC
(C

t9 Mrs. Mellefont.
239
I
>
firmed in thefe ideas by the company oS that rank I faw while I staid at Lady Lovell’s, who did not, however, receive worSe charaflers than the common run of people of quality, and whofe rote of life Seemed to me one continued Scene of wretched trifling. It even hurt me to fee them reduced to fuch poor Ihifts for difpofing of their worthlefs leifure, when, by choice, taking refuge from the fad irk-fomnefs of not knowing what to do with themfelves, in parties at cards, which one would imagine rather enjoined for a penance, than a recourfe for amufe-ment, being neither recommendable for mirth, nor for exercjfe of body or of mind. It is, in truth, and without any the least caricature, hardly pofli-ble to conceive any thing more trivial, more in-fipid, or more numbingly stupid than their assembly-nights, when every card-table appears an altar erecled to Idlenefs and Dullnefs, at which the celebration of the Service is at once worthy of the Divinities, and of fuch votaries as are capable of Sacrificing time and taste to them. Lady Harriet ufed to call thofe ridiculous routs the States-ge-neral of Nonfenfe, and the perSon who gave the entertainment, their Stadtholder for the Night.
Motives, then, of fortune and ambition being quite out of the question of my non acceptance of Lord Soberton’s offers, there remains only for me to state my want of liking, which, rendering it no felf-denial, reduces to nothing any pretehtion to merit from it, and leaves it in the rank of or-
7
dinary procedure. For nothing is more certain, than that he had not infpired me with any the least inclination to enter into a partnership of his wrong. Not that he wanted merit. I know no man on earth that has more, or with whofe friendship I Should think myfelf more honored; but having never viewed him in any light but that of a man e-quivalent to be married to ray intimate friend, he had
never
r
240
Clara Maynwar'ing, C?r.
never cost my heart the question how it stood af-feQ:ed to him, in the point of a more tender Sentiment.
I shall then, dear lister, be with you Soon, and carry down a heart as clear and as free as I brought it to town, and as it is my fincere wish to preferve it, without airs, without affe6l;ation, without prudery. This my wish is the produce of my fear, I am but too fenfible of the nature of
the passions not to dread their violence, and not to put my heart, of the weaknefs of which I am but too justly diffident, as much as possible on its guard against thofe enemies to its tranquillity and content.
Here I should, of my real grief and concern for parting from the worthy Mrs. Buckley, whom I love and honor beyond expression, fay more, but that she is to read this letter before I cloSe it.
As to yourfelf, and Mr. Mellefont, I flatter my-felf I am arrived with you to the pitch of not needing professions or formularies of compliment.
Yours, &c. Clara Maynwaring.

LETTER XXXII.
From Mr. Mellefont to Mrs. Buckley.
Lancajhire.
AS your last letter, dear aunt, included an acknowledgment of the packet having come to your hand, which contained, together with the advice of Clara’s Safe arrival, our joint retribution of the most grateful thanks for all your kindnesses and favors to her, I should not, perhaps, have troubled you So foon afterwards, but for the indif-penfable duty of my conssdering every request of your’s as a command. That indeed of my ac-
quainting


To Mrs. Buckley.
241
cfuainting you of any incident materially relative to .Clara, carries whth it fo great a pleafure, that it robs me of any merit of obedience.
Something then having happened, in which Clara feems more deeply interested than probably even She herfelf fufpe6ls, I Seize the occaSion of giving you an account of it, but am obliged to introduce it with Some preliminary lights.
About three or four months ago, Mr. Sumners, an Officer, who had been put on the half-pay on the clofe of the last war, came into this part of the country, and took a neat Snug lodging at a Farmer’s, Scarce a mile and a half distant from my houfe. At that time I had not any the least acquaintance with him, and, indeed, he was little, if at all, known to any of the neighbourhood; a circumstance which had been one of his principal motives for the choice of this recefs, where he propofed to wait the return of a fon, who was ab-fent in Holland, on Some bufinefs. His turn for Solitude, independently of bis having long Seen the world with eyes rather of distike than of only indifference, was alfo, in part, owing to a languisti-ing state of health, from the wounds he had received at the battle of Quebec, and of which he hadi never been well recovered.
He had not been there long, before he was ex-pofed to the indignity of a distrefs by the failure of a remittance of his pay, through the infidelity of a Cashier to Mr. Stanley, a very worthy Ham-borough Merchant, and constant friend of his, to whom Mr. Sumners had entrusted that concern, and in -whoSe compting-houfe, Mr. Sumners, his fon, had been indulged admittance, there to take a tindture of Merchant’s accompts, and of commercial notions; in which fituation he had contracted a stri(5t friendship with his fon, who, it feems, went lately to Hamborough, on fome affairs rela-
VoL. III.	M	tirt
‘ h
r ■

f:
■s'!#

242
Mr, M E L L E F O N T
tive to trad
c.
It was, then, on this failure, that, for a debt far from considerable, incurred by the purchafe of a horfe and chaife, this worthy Gentleman was arrested when in a country where he was an intire stranger, he was, for want of immediate bail, or at least of fuch bail as he himfelf did not
chufe to incur an obligation by accepting, carried to a common jail; upon which he wrote immediately a tender expostulation to Mr. Stanly, who had not till just that instant difcovered his Castiier’s imbezzlements. On receipt of this letter, Mr. Stanley was not content with immediately fending down expreis the requiSite relief, with ample reparation of damages, but came down in perfon to make an apology, and fatisfy Mr. Sumners of his innocence; nor would he be perfuaded of his for-givenefs, till he.had confented to an arrangement, that stiould thence-forward make fuch another ac-
cident, humanly fpeaking, an impostibility.
And here, dear aunt, on the occaSion of my mentioning the treatment of Mr. Sumners, in his being fo unnecessarily and yet not illegally thrown into prifon, forgive me, in favor of humanity, a digressive reflexion on the impolitic cruelty of our laves, in authorising, under fuch little restridiion, thofe burial-places of our fellow-creatures alive, incomparably oftener Sacrificed to the cruel humor or to the revenge of mercilefs creditors, than to the calls of justice. I am ready to grant, that feme debtors do notdeferve a lefs punilhment than common highway men, their means of coming at the money of honest tradefmen,. or of others, by fraud, or circumvention, being not a whit lefs detrimental, and much more odious, than by open violence ; but if you would Set against thefe villainous debtors thofe inSidious creditors, who have by defign, by artifice, by taking the advantage of ignorance and inexperience, brought unfortunate ob-
jeds
t:

to Mrs. Buckley.
243
r 1%

I'l
a
/

je<sts under their clutches, by the letter of the law against its fpirit, and I fancy you would find the account of fraudulent debtors, in contrast to unjust creditors, fo nearly ballanced, as to afford ho fair argument in favor of the least humane fide; especially if it be conSidered, that it would be more eligible for ten of the guilty to efcape, than one innocent perfon to Suffer. This would clearly reduce the state of the question to the point for which I would contend, that Debtors, generally Speaking, (and it is from generals and not from exceptions thatconclufions are to be drawn, or laws framed) cannot, in the eyes of humanity, and especially of justice, the glory of which is never to be at variance with humanity, for whoSe fake it came into existence, deferve of all deaths the most horrid and the most torturous, that of perishing, as Such numbers actually do, in the dreary dungeons of legal captivity, by a Sickly languor more intolerable than the most acute pains, by atrophy, by ananition, and eSpcially by affliction and deSpair.
But perhaps I exaggerate. The term tortu-
rous” may appear over-strained, or declamatory. It can only appear So to thofe who either do not think at all, or are destitute of human feelings. ConSult any phyfician of fkill and ability, and I dare aver, that he will eafily Satisfy you, that the Sufferings of the body, and the anguisti of the mind, in the procefs of a confinement, under its generally concomitant circumstances of penury, cold, hunger, filth, want of free air and exerciSe, hardships of all kinds, and efpecially corrofive grief for the coolnefs or defertion of tired-out friends with, in Short all the train of thofe evils, from the very idea of which humanity Shrinks with horror altogether form a complication of torture, compared to which any other torture must appear light, eSpe-
M 2	dally
\
244
Mr. Me llefont
r
cially if you Set the duration of the one againfl: the fharpnefs of the Iharpeft imaginable.
Dogs gnawing one’s joints; the having every limb broken with an iron bar, and the being afterwards coiled alive round a wheel, with the head hanging down ; the cutting open the bowels of a man and fastening them to a windlafs, to be fpun forth for the amufement of tender-hearted fpe6ta-tors; or the Perfian device of a punishment for fome enormous criminal, by confining him to receive the falling of water stowly, drop by drop, on his bare head, clofe shaved, till, with the ex-. tremity of that exquiSite torture, he raves, de-fpairs, and dies, afford fome image, though a faint inadequate one, of that stow but excruciating pain, not only of the body by various hardships, but worfe than of the body, of the fpirit, under v/hich it is even a familiar event for fo many poor clofe confined wretches to pine away, in their execrable immurement, in Such a manner, that dashing their brains out against the prifon-walls would comparatively be a tender mercy, or a death-warrant a£t of clemency.
Certainly, certainly the deaths which are the most terrible to behold are not the most terrible to endure. That gloomy remorfelefs tirant TiberiuSj who might have given lessons of cruelty to an Inqui-fitor-General, hugged himfelf for the idea of favoring his revenge in the making his prifoners die by inches, and feel their death, which, on its. coming, at kngth, he envied them, as an efcape from him.
And, in faO:, the worst kind of execution is the civil one, by a length of torments, which fo often makes death be invoked, and fometimes defperate-ly reforted to, as a deliverance. “ I cannot in-' “ deed,” (faid a stony-hearted Arabian, and fighed,) hang my debtor.” (but then he added, with a
fmile,
i
n *
y

to Mrs. Buckley.
24$
fmile, on reflexion,)
** him hang himSelf,”
So emphatically calls and curfes, “ ken heart.*'*
I can do more, I can make This is what the Pfalmist

faying the bro-
A pound of human flesh, cut out near the heart, would Satisfy the gentle Tew of Venice ; but nothing lefs than the bleeding heart itfelf, and torn heart-strings, will glut the white-livered revenge and inveteracy of fome Christian Shylocks, who prophane, with a palpable mockery, the Lord’s Prayer, by the daily repetition of what fo Solemnly condemns them.* And yet, that it is but just for the Law to lend its hand to gratify this blef-fed humor is contended for by fome of our Law-puritans, with all the rigor of the righteous over much, and with all the infenstbility prefumable of Such as can loathfomely prey on the distresses of their fellow-creatures.
As the Law now stands, it would hang a creditor that should take upon him to murder his debtor in a compendious way; as if envying him the office of executioner, it chofe to take it out of his hands, only to put the unfortunate debtor to a more lingering torturous death, by burying him a-live in the receptacle it has provided for him to rot in by inches. And this in complaifance to a phantom uSurping the name and form of Justice, For furely it is not the lefs true for its being proverbially trite, that a prifon pays no debts. At least for one that it recovers, it cancells and destroys a thoufand. And yet the orginal intention of justice in providing Such places of durance, was purely tp compell the able and unwilling to pay, but never to punish unfortunate infolvents, or to make their inability more defperate by laying them under greater distrefs. A Lord Chancellor of England, at once a humane Judge and great Patriot,
M 3	ufed
!
, i '
'( : i i

; I ;
it
! r
•I I { f
246
Mr. Mellefont
uSed to Say, he could hardly conceive a debt So great that a year’s clofe imprisonment ought not to Satisfy ; and yet So literally true is the Saying, even in this SenSe, that a jail pays no debt, that no length of that horrid punishment is taken into the account of the diScharge, or reckoned part of payment.
But how happy for creditors. In general, would it be, it the Law w'as, even for their greater pro-fpeci of relief and benefit, as tender of the liberty of the Subjeci', as it aftedts to be of his property ; if justice, in Snort, diSdaining to humor, and especially to be the tool of their vindidiive-neSs, would conSult their interest more, and indulge their blind pastlons leSs! Between the creditor and his debtor, it is unquestionably the creditor that is entitled to the most favor. He is the party aggrieved. But is it any real favor to him, to abet his folly in increaSing the inability of a debtor, or to minister to his cruelty in murthering him, after trusting him, perhaps, injudiciousty, or will a view to make a property of him by extraordinary profits ?
Can the White-wash, as it is in deriston termed, of Some even baSe and fraudulent wretches, not preventively enough guarded against by the Law and sheltering themSelves under an adf intended for a general benefit, but, like all other human a£ts, liable to partial abuSes and inconveniences, be big with a blacker train of horrors, than the letting Such multitudes of thoSe who are only unfortunate, daily perish in jail, and worSe than needleSsly perish, to the reproach of Justice and of Humanity ? or can there be a more execrably falfe reaSon oppoSed to the putting an end to the tortures of the innocent, than its opening a door for the guilty to eScape them ; if any one can properly be called guilty enough to deferve worfe than death itfelf?	I have
U 1
i
to Mrs. Buckley.
247
K i
• I
1
t i
s!
..'i
• t
I have begun with fairly granting, what I here repeat, that there are debtors, who, for the villainous nature of their premeditated frauds in con-tradiing their debts, or for their bafenefs in eluding the payment of an honest worthy creditor, who is perhaps himfelf ruined, and liable to a jail, for their failure, deferve death equally, or rather more, than thofe who rob on the highway; and yet, I think, that the death by that lingering torture, to which fome of thofe vidfims to their own villainy are fo often brought, is rather too much. But be that as it may, to infer from their guilt any expedience of involving thofe clear of it in a parity of punishment, is at once to renounce juf-tice, humanity, and common fenfe. To take it for granted that the Law cannot provide proper distindtions, is to fuppofe Justice too blind, too unfeeling, or too indolent to make them.
Unhappily the tricking debtor has too often a better bargain of a debt incurred by fraud and treachery, than the honest debtor betrayed into his distrefs by mere misfortune, by error of judgment, or by Silly thoughileffnefs. The first being commonly better prepared than the other, and living on the creditor’s Substance as long as it will last ; while the other starves on his innocence of fo bafe a destgn: Sometimes the creditor will have laid the foundation of his right by law to his Suit of imprifonment, in having Avrong-ed, circumvented, or infnared him, in which cafe the villainous creditor is always the most unmerciful. How many objedts, at this instant, of both fexes, are, for want of means to prove their innocence of the debts for which they are Suffering their torments, perishing under them ! But putting their cafe at the best ; that they can at length make their wrongs and falfe imprifonment appear ; what Jury can estimate their past groans, or the floods.of
M 4	teapis
248
Mr. Mellefont
tears their oppression will have cost their families What Sufficient damages can be given for the vexation of Spirit or the agonies of grief ? and yet this is a distreSs much more common than is imagined, or.than the Law can redreSs.
But even among thoSe, who, on their first entrance into thoSe manfions of miSery, before they will have conSumed what had wrongfully efcaped, their creditors, and before their heart comes to be
broken by a length of confinement, affe£t airs of bravade and unconcern; among even thofe, 1 fay, it is eafy to obferve, that their festivity is loath-Ibmely forced, and their convivial jollitry aukward and unnatural. You may plainly perceive in all their difmally afted mirth, to which they have re-courfe by way of stunning their fenfe of their condition.
a funeral countenance, and the horror
of a ghastly fmile; a mirth, in short, to which the faint flame of falfe Spirits gives a difcolored Snap-dragon hue, that makes them look as if they were celebrating their own funeral obfequies, or finging dirges at the burial-fervice of tbemfelves in thofe graves for the quick, which may fooner than they imagine, make them figh for the graves of the dead.
Amidst, however, the confideration of all thefe abfurd horrors, it was not without Some pleafure that my refearches into the antiquites of Britain led me to the difcovery, that this infernal procefs, by imprisoning human creatures in dungeons, for civil debts, was a prafitice unknown to thofe times of fimplicity and humanity, to which the great bulwarks of liberty, the Trials by Juries, and o-ther privileges of the common law, can be traced. This impolitic, fenfelefs, barbarous custom, was, strictly Speaking, imported into this ifland, together with its stavery, under imperial Rome, when her assimilative policy bred fo great a change in
the

V
fi> Mrs, Buckley.
249
the laws, manners, customs, and religion of th^ British natives. And yet I have great reafon to think it was So little agreeable to their genius and Spirit, that it was abolished on the Romans with-drawing their forces, though it came afterwards to be revived by fubfequent alterations of the forms of Law in imitation of thofe of the Continent.
But do not imagine from this, that the Security of private credit was neglejfted by our more antient laws, before this baneful exotic plant of remorfelfs tyranny took ultimately root. The goods of the creditors were liable to Seizure, but the human liberty-was deemed too Sacred to be alienable for debt. A man could no more engage his liberty than his life. Private property, inherited or acquired, was confidered as belonging to the fubje^, and as Such was transferable and feizablc on private Suit; but the fubjefis theirfelves were held to belong absolutely to their country, and as Such were folely at her difpofal^ according to her want of them, for the occupations of peace, or of war. Throwing them into prifon was robbing the public hive. The country was held the preferable creditor.
But where there was any room to judge the debtor fraudulent, or contumacious, in the Secreting or with-holding lawful fatisfafition with his goods; he was not only, by a judicial procefs, rendered the objeft of public infamy and Scorn, but driven out, by a civil excommunication, from Society, and finally out-lawed. He was under a kind of interdifition of fire and water, till justice was Satisfied of his infolvency being involuntary, a misfortune and not a guilt. Thus were the rights of creditors Seemed fo Sacred, that the pay ment of debts was held even a religious duty.
This difpofition, dear aunt, existed adtually in thofe times, represented, by even very good au-
M 5	thors,
• t
;' t
f
i
, I
f
250
thors
Mr. M E L L E F O NT
as times of barbariSm, in which the Bri*» tons were fuppofed to be much Such Savages as the Cheroquees or Catawbas of North-America, though nothing is more true than that all that is the most excellent, in our prefent constitution and laws, derives to us from tboSe very pretended Savages, who were So uncivilifed as to place the law above the Sword, the greatest honor of which was, its being the guard of the law, and Subordinate to it. Thefe were the times in which Mr. Buck-
ley plainly demonstrated to me System was in reign before it
that the allodial
tain too great a mixture of the
was Supplanted by the feodal one, and that what of liberty we now enjoy is owing to tbq former, though we still re-
latter. This, too, in one capital point, we have greatly corrupted, or at least put on a vepy falfe footing ; the Substitution of regiments, formed by general levies out of the mafs of the people, to the antient provincial militias, which were attended with incomparably greater advantages. But, to enter on a difcuffion of this would be a digression within a digression.
To return, then, to the fubjedl of civil procefs,-in the cafe of debt. Let me here indulge the fatis-fadfion of doing justice to virtue wherever it is found. The French, who had from the Romans a-dopted the inhuman pradbice of throwing men into jail for insolvency, adopted it, however, with greater modification than we, and especially with one that does honor to their humanity. No man, after Seventy years of age, is liable, as l am told, to personal imprifonment for debt, or can be held to it, if already in custody. The prifon-doors are Set open to him; and this, on the tender consideration, that to the infirmity and helplesshefs of that fea-fonof life, it would he cruelty to add the miferies of confinement. Old age has, in that refpe£t, the privilege of its Second childhood.
sHowever.

\
» ':i

to Mrs. Buckley.
251

However, it is devoutly to be wished, fince it is not, in the prefent prevalent hardnefs of the human heart to be hoped, that this inveterate a-bufe may receive at least Some mitigation, and that the laws, on that point, as they now stand, may be restored, in as great a meafure as the general good will admit, to their antient humanity, and Spirit of tendernefs, for private liberty, in which public liberty has fo great an interest. An amendment which might be atchieved without any fori of wound to private credit, that life of commerce, which is but the better provided for by the Bankrupt laws. Our periodical A6ls of Insolvency, notwithstanding Some particular instances of their being abufed, favor, in general, this opinion. If that A£t of Humanitv is just at one time, what valid reafon can therf: be assigned for its not being fo at all times ? Or should Humanity not keep an even tenor, but b exercifed only by fits and starts; on occafions, too, where Such a^s are rather unmeaning, temporary compliments to power dian favors of juf-tice to the caufe of human-kind ?
I
It is not, dear aunt, that I have thus run into a digreffion unawares. I meant one, but not quite So long a one as that into wshich I have been betrayed by the matter of it ; a fault, for the pardon of which I dare relv on the interceshon of
J
your heart. You will only be forry that fo good a caufe is not in better hands, for the fake of your darling fpirit of humanity, to which it will be but an incentive the more, the consideration of the unfashionablenefs of the fubjedf. If the great are treated as they deferve for their paltry worthleffnefs, or their defpicable follies, thoufands of stupid Sycophants and dirty time-fervers are up in arms to curry favor with them, by repelling the attack, and by imputing it t© mean envy. And who are
theSe
I!
252
Mr. Mellefo nt
thefe they pretend are So envied, but Such as arc more properly objects of pity ? Or elfe they afcribe it to a cinic infolence, when the truth is, that the want of refpe6t is to one’s Self, in defcending fo low as to deign to animadvert on them. Of advocates, then, perfectly worthy of them, they need fear no Scarcity : there are always enow to step forth champions of the happy rich ; but who takes the part of the unfortunate poor ? Or who interceeds for humanity, expiring under lingering tortures ? Expiring obfcurely, unheeded, and efpecially to not one valuable purpofe of justice or example.
Mr. Sumners, then, after his recovering his liberty, refumed his habitation at the farmer’s, who had behaved to him with great tendernefs and fen-Sibility, infomuch as to offer to be his bail or Security, which Mr. Sumners declined with, per* haps, too much delicacy. His chief amufement ufed to be reading, angling, or stiooting. It was on the occaston of the last that I happened to fall into his way, when, without too abrupt an im-politenefs, of which his charadier was unfufcepti-ble, he could not well avoid joining company with me. It was, then, that the little I faw of him gave me a great destre of his acquaintance, which it was not, however, without Some difficulty, and the Sacrifice of fignal advances on my fide, that I could obtain. But I was, in truth, richly overpaid for my pains. I have converfed with many, but never, in my life, met with Such univerfal knowledge of men and things. He had been in the army from his infancy, and all the hours of leifure from the duty, study, and occupations of his profession, he had devoted to the cultivation of literature without pedantry, and of politics without party. And this turn was the more me-Titorious in him, for his being perfedily fure that
acquisitions of that kind were, in thefe times, more
I
to Mrs, Buckley.
253
r
likely to be prejudicial than Serviceable to him. But, independently of his being strongly impelled by his taste to the cultivation of his understanding, he had collaterally another objedi in it. This was the education of his only and darling Son : which he held too facred an imcumbence to trust to any one but himfelf. Accordingly he made a conscience of previousty Satisfying himfelf, not only of every truth, but of the degree of value of every truth that he taught him, together with the manner of examining it by the lights of his own understanding. He recommended efpecially to him, the propriety and, indeed, the modesty of that kind of rational fcepticifm, which fufpends deci-iion till fair judgment shall have warranted it; warning him efpecially against the dangerous Servility of too implicit assent.
Having been ordered early to America with the national troops; his wife, the daughter of a Merchant of the city, whom he had married with little or no fortune, but who, it Seems, made ample amends for that deficiency in the amiable-nefs of her perfon and character, would not Suffer him to proceed without her, and Leonard Sumners, their fon, then a mere child. She did not, however. Survive but a few days her landing in that country, being carried off by a dif-temper, too often fatal to new-comers. By this misfortune the care of the fon devolved entirely on Captain Sumners, and he acquitted himfelf most worthily of it. It was in the midst of the wilds of America, and of all the fatigues of his duty, that his Sweetest relief and refreshment was to accomplish this boy, at all points, and to give every virtue the best chance, by being the first in poffestion of his heart; not content v/ith forming which, he proceeded to store his head with Solid and essential knowledge in proportion to his
growing Susceptibility of instrudf ion, which to judge
of
At
L *
'i
f!
<u
i|!
;i I
, \ * •*
p
I
!i
:: f
li-
i >
* »
254
Mr. Mellefont

of it by what Mr. Sumners related, as fimple matter offacl, with great modesty, must have been prodigious.
To thefe accomplishments, he added that of accustoming him early to all the manly exerciSes, in a way to give hardinefs to his" constitution; and to inure him to fatigues. In thefe exercifes he grew fo amazing a proficient, that, without any prejudice to his studies, from - which thefe were indulged him as relaxations, he came to fur-pafs the Savages themfelves in all the points of bodily agility, dexterity, and valor, which they esteem fo effential a part of perfonal merit. He was barely fourteen when he could out-strip the fleetest of them at running, or defy them to out-Sw'im him in the roughest lakes, or crofs the stream at a tremendousty Small distance from the fall ,of Niagra; nor could one of them excell him as a markfman, whether with the bow or the gun. He was not Superior to them only in the chace of the fox, the moufe, or the elk, but would attack with more open intrepidity the bear and the panther. His father had often to tremble for his over-rashnefs in emulation, and in his daringly provoking dangers; and yet could not find in his heart to damp his courage byrestraining it.
However, just on the point of engaging in a Ikir-mish with the French, Some time before the fiegeof Ci^ebec, his paternal tendernefs had fo far prevailed over him, that, though Leonard-was tall and well formed for his years, he judged his age was a fuffi-cient difpenfation from expofing him to the chances Mof war. On this motive of caution, shefore he went himfelf, he gave his Son in charge to a trusty old Savage, with fpeciai order to keep him from the aeid till the addon .was over. Tut while Mr. Sumners
5
s

i
ft
«•
Id
to Mrs. Buck ley.
255
li
ners was in the heat of it, he was not a little furprifed, nor indeed a little concerned, to find his boy, with his little mufquet and bayonet, fighting clofe at his Si^e, crying, ‘‘Courage, father! “ I am with you.” The folution of this Sudden appearance was, that, in the noble impetuoSity of his martial ardor, he had, without standing upon ceremony, knocked down the Savage, who had not stood in the least on his guard, and whom he left Sprawling, while Snatching up his arms he flew to the Scene of battle, and Soon discovering where his father was engaged, gave him the terrible pleafure of feeing him at his fide.
But he afforded him a much more pure joy, when, after the combat was ceaSed, by the vidto-ry declaring entirely on our fide. Captain Sumners Saw him bussed in nothing but assisting the wounded, as they lay on the field, and assisting them, without any distindtion of frienffor enemy. He did more. As a French officer, left wounded on the field, was begging bis life of one of our Soldiers, the brute had twice Snapped his pistol, which twice miSgave, to blow out his brains; at fight of which, as he was prepared to make a third trial, Leonard pufhed his hand afide, just as he was prefenting the pistol a-frelh at the unfortunate officer. The Soldier, enraged at this, turned the muzzle of it towards him, and firing it, the pistol this time w'ent off, and the balls just grazing Leonard’s head, went through his hat. At this, and at hir cowardly cruelty to a Suppliant enemy, his own comrades were So moved with indignation, that'toa man clubbing their raufquets., they knocked him down, and would infallibly have -drubbed him to death, if Leonard had not effec-■.tuaily interpofed to Save.him. After which, giving the Soldiers a trifle to drink, he protected .the Trench officer from being plundered, and leadin
-him

2<6
Mr.
him off the field, preSented him as his prifoner to his father, by whom he was treated with the utmost tendernefs and civility.
As to the poor Savage, whom the blow given him by Leonard, to take off his oppofition to his eScape, had only stunned, with very little hurt, he not only begged his pardon, (which the other, the caufe confidered, readily granted him, with tears of joy to fee him Safe returned,) but gave him a very fine mufquet, and a complete cloath-ing from head to foot.
In relating this story, I will not fay that a father’s just pride in fo humane and valiant a fon, especially at his age, might not have fome Share; but it is certain, that he gave, at least, fo great a part of the praiSe to the gallantry and native genc-rofity of Spirit in the Britisti Soldiers, that it could not be Said he was not glad to introduce the narrative for the fake of doing justice to the virtues of his countrymen.
At the battle of Quebec, his fon, though barely fifteen, greatly distinguilhed himfelf in that memorable action, when poor Wolfe, after having in his last official letter to the Secretary of State, pathetically and justly lamented his having been Sent a Sacrifice, Sealed with his blood, the consummation of his complaint, falling himfelf the vidfim in the bofom of a viQory, gained by a rash but necessary stroke of defpair.
It was at (his battle, that while gallantly doing his duty. Captain Sumners received two gun-ssiot wounds, the one with a ball that went quite through his body, not without a confiderable offence, in its passage to the noble parts: the other was with another ball, that not going through, lodged a little a-bove the loins, but So that it could never be ex-tradfed. The confequences of thefe wounds were a total inability to continue the military profession,
which
• *
to, Mrs, Buckley.
257

which he, therefore, quitted to return home, and retire on half-pay ; under a languid infirm state of body, wdth few intervals from pains, and thofe at times very acute ones, which' he bore with the most manly patience.
On a confideration 6f the fufferings of this wor*-thy Gentleman, and of the mediocrity of his re-compence for them, in the streights of half-pay, I could not, without indignation, help comparing his hard fate with that of Some of the national

leeches that had fattened on the blood of the war, and whole monstrous fortunes, the produce of their country abandoned by the negligence of its Government to their unmerciful depredations, were at once a public Scandal and calamity. What a contrast ! Behold, on one hand, a true gentleman, and gallant officer, dying, by inches, of wounds received in the acquittal of his duty to his country, or expofed to perifh in a jail; and on the other. Some dirty, low-born wretch, in virtue of a happy hit of calculation, or of fome vile contractor’s job, given him through ignorance or breach of the public trust, by the interest of fome man of power as worthiest as himfelf; behold fuch a one, I fay, without having fo much as Seen the shadow of the dangers of war, rioting in the Spoils of it, and infulting his own plundered country with gorgeous equipages, glittering fide-boards of plate, and purchafes of estates of which the unfortunate owners were reduced to the Sale, by their being involved in the common mifery of the times, brought on by the politics and management of thofe who made thofe fortunes, or were the caufe of their being made.
Sometimes indeed Mr. Sumners would, in the midst of his pains, fay, with even an unforced fmile, that it was at least fome mitigation of torture to him, to reflect that he had received hi*
vioundt

258
Mr., M E L L E FONT
wounds in the cauSe of his country, and not in Serving against it, like the unfortunate troops in Germany, whofe valor was fo cruelly misemployed on the very Side diametrically oppofite to the clearest interest of their country; on the fide of, at bottom, the greatest friend to our greatest enemy ; on the Side of a prince., from whofe head had proceeded that tranSient hurricane, which, without any good to himfelf, had done fo much mifchief to mankind. Of this fatal epoch of falfe policy, with all its fuccestes in its train, fo justly contemptible on the crazy foundations which had been laid for them, Mr. Sumners could never fpeak but with a virtuous and truly patriotic indignation. Consequently thereto, this consideration it was, that a brave and loyal fubjeSt, fer-■ving in the army, might, at the will of a worthiest or corrupt ministry. Supported by a deceived, or implicit Parliament, be Sent on the most deplorable of all errands, on abfurd, fenfelest, ruinous expeditions on the Continent, fuch as undoubtedly our last was, that made him diSinclined to have his fon liable or fubjedted to that horror, by his continuing in the army.
With all his profound regard, too, for discipline, which he looked upon as one of the most indif-penfable estenfials of military force, he had, by reflexion, contradted a Sovereign diflike of the army on the footing it stands at prefent. Pie obferved to me, that the French had been totally enflaved -by the regular bands stolen in upon their constitution, which bad, very bad as it was before, com-padted of a number of petty foedal tyrants, was rendered still infinitely worfe by the power concentering in a Single hand, which turned the state itfelf into a mere stratocracy, of which the King was Generaliflimo, and in that quality was invested with ail the terrors of a military defpotifm, and fet
above

to Mrs. B U-C K L E Y.
259

above the Law, which was degraded into Its too* and Support. Whereas in Britain it had not, indeed, as yet, produced that ever execrable effedt. Slavery, thanks to the Spirit and genius oS liberty. So innate to Britons : but that it undoubtedly was., at bottom, the principal cauSe^ diredi and indirect, oS that most enormous evil, the overwhelming pressure of the national debt. This, he obServed, had brought on a worSe state than that of beggary, which if not, as yet, ssavery, had a manifest tendency to reduce us to it. That in the mean while, all the destru'diive cauSes were proceeding in full operation against us, without any thing material or worth mentioning, So much as thought of to counter-act them. On the contrary, we were inSenssbly entering into perdition, and that So imminent, that a man of any foressght, might, with tolerable justneSs, calculate the moment of the catastrophe, unleSs Some truly nationals, men of real v/orth and honor, touched with* a Salutary SenSe of the dangers of their bleeding country. Should, ere yet too late, reSolutely rife to her reScue, and join in earnest, to put the constitutional energy and powers into motion, and away with all this loathSome infernal nonfenSe under which She is So Shamefully Sinking. To Such virtuous Subjedls, posts would appear only deSirable as ccca-Sions of public Service, or rewards of approved merit, not the vile prostituted baits of avarice, in which even ambition itSelf is abSorbed. His rea-fons for this opinion were demonstrative ones, but it would be here too much out of place to Specify them to you.
As to that great movement of the state, the necessary military force, he averred himfelf ready to make it as clear as the fun, that a militia, equivalent to the army, w^as perfedily pradticable, and that there was no end attainable by an army that
was

I!
a6o
Mr. Mellef o nt
i
was not equally So by a welS established constitutional militia. Something in the nature of that in Switzerland. Of which by the by, it is to be noted, that one fingle Canton, land-locked and Surrounded as their country is by Papist-powers, itfelf at a distance of the fea, with hardly any trade or manufadiures, could not only, in virtue of its militia, defend itfelf, but by the moderation, probity, management, and patriotifrn of its government, keep out of debt, nay, amafs the astonishing fum, for Such a state, of more than a million and a half sterling, to throw into the funds of a nation, who had fifty times the reafon, from advantage? natural and acquired, to have twenty or thirty millions at least in store, instead of groaning under the load of a hundred and forty millions sterling, not a fingle shilling of which was ever borrowed on any exigency, but that of a falfe and unnational policy, on various pretences, palmed by a defign-ing Court, on a generous, brave, and credulous people. A candidly commented history of the Said debt, conducted thro’ every parliamentary mortgage of the national revenue, would, to the impartial, prove this assertion, beyond a doubt.
All this, together with Some perfonal observations on the preferences of interest to merit, and on the bad constitution in general of the military establishment, made him peremptorily take his Son out of the army, and trust his future fortune to Some civil or mercantile employment. In this last view he had placed him, as before mentioned, in a friend’s compting houfe, where he was, when he Sent him to Holland, on Some bufinefs, which I should imagine, could not be very extraordinary, as in his mention of it, he Seemed to lay no strefs on the issue.
His fon had not been long gone before the incident of his arrest, which I am apt to think he did
not


i
to Mrs. B U C KLE Y.
z6t
f
not write to him, for fear of giving him an unea-finefs that might interfere in his bufineSs, or bring him back prematurely. To the best of my re* membrance, he stightly hinted this to me, in fome of his more open moments. For in virtue of that unfeigned reSpedl for him, with which he could not but be fenSible that he had infpired me, I had the honor of being admitted not only to the plea-fure and profit of converfing with him, but even to fome (hare of his confidence. In the courfe of it he had historically, and always with great indifference, not to Say contempt, introduced the mention of his having been occafionally betrayed into the perfonal acquaintance of fome men of the first rank in the kingdom. This had made me, at first, wonder how, with his abilities to ferve, instruct, and delight, they could be So little their own friends, as not to do themfelves the honor of Seeking to be essentially and permanently his. But my furprife Soon ceafed, on the very obvious reflexion, that fuch a charaditer of real greatnefs as his, could never agree with their littlenefs. Even thofe very talents, to the reputation of which he might own their vain barren curiofity for feeing him once, would be against their defire of feeing him twice. In his company they would feel, or imagine they felt, a fort of necessity for what on all things on earth they hold most in horror, thinking. Now thinking is to them a state fo violent, that they are on tenters till they get out of it: and in the mean while wissi the caufe of this torture to them at the devil. Pining out of their natural element of infipid futility, and unmeaning merriment, they are miserable till they rejoin their blessed compeers in tame, faint, ignoble mediocrity, or, lower, yet, in abfolute worthlesshefs. The ** worshipful Society” of triflers is the true fool’s paradife.
How-

i K'
252
Mr. Mellef o nt
.1 ii
However, I was not to enjoy long the plealure of So valuable an acquaintance as Mr. Sumners. It was but a very few days before Clara arrived, that he was taken Suddenly fo ill, of the confe-quence of his wounds, that he had baiely time to make his last difposttion, which was chiefly that of leaving in my hands a packet Sealed up, of family-papers, which he defired might be fafely conveyed to Mr. Stanley’s hands, who would take care to deliver them to his Son, whom he mentioned with the most pathetic tendernefs and regret; faying, that his abfence, just at that jun<^ure, was even a confolation to him, as he was fenstble of the pain which the fight of him in that condition would give him, and which it was fo much better should be Spared him. His death, he obferved, could not, to his Son, in the eye of his reafon, be any caufe of furprife, or of Sorrow, considering that it was a relief from a life fubje(!st to fuch constant tortures, but that his prefence at it might too much shock his excellent nature. He requested, that he might be buried in my parish-church, and Soon after expired with the most pious fortitude, and the most placid refignation.
I wrote immediately advice of his death to Mr. Stanley, who, with great exprestion of grief and esteem, left the care of his funeral entirely to me, with a defire that no cost might be Spared to make it decent, and worthy of the deceafed, for which he Sent me an ample advance, excufing his not coming down himfelf, on the abfence of his fon, gone to Hamborough, on Special affairs, which, however, would have been no obstacle, but for Some extraordinary call of bufinefs, that would not alioW'of his leaving town.
You will naturally now afk, what is all this to Clara ? have patience, dear aunt, and you shall know, but not till the next post; for to tell you
but
1
to Mrs. Buckle y..
26;^,
but the plain truth, I began this letter too late to Save this, unlefs I break off, as I now actually do with the ufual affuranees. Yours, &c.
. Edward Mellefont,

LETTER XXXIII.
Mr. Edward Mellefont to Mrs. Buckley,
Lancafhire.
[/« Continuation
CLARA was, I may Say, but just arrived, when one day, as we were fitting after .dinner in our fore parlour, which looks to the door of the little fpot of garden before the houfe, the noife of that door opening made us turn our eyes towards it, and behold ! four men, with fome o-thers that followed out of curiofity, bringing in, on a hand-barrow, a man, in a blue furtout, without any hat, all bathed in his own blood, fenfelefs, and to all appearance rather dead than only dying.
Our hall-door being instantly opened, he was brought in, and laid on a couch, taken out of the parlor for that purpofe. He feemed to be young ; but there was no distinguishing any features of his face, it was, together with his hair, fo Covered with dust, and blood that gushed from two wound* in his head. He had alfo received a hurt in his right fide, not, indeed, deep, but broad and jagged, fo as to have more of the violent contufion in it than of a wound, though it had produced a great effufion of blood.
I difpatched a man instantly for a furgeon, and in the mean while thofe who had brought the stranger could give no other account than what they had from the post-boy, who had come with him from the last stage, and who was not
yet
It;
• % , . i;
ii
I!
264
Mr. Mellefont
yet returned from looking aster the horfe that wai the caufe of this accident.
The perfon fo hurt, was, it feems, riding post, and Setting his horfe carelefsly, being probably fo much absorbed in other thoughts, that, not heeding any thingon the road before him, he was unprepared for the Sudden start of his horfe, at assght of the car-cafe of a dead one which lay in the way; a start astde from it with fuch a violence, that it flung him against the ragged stump of a tree hard by, stuck with Some dry branches, fo stiarp-pointed, that they ran into his head in two places, bruifed his face and flde, fo as, upon the whole, to have greatly disfigured him, befides stunning him to Such a degree, that he was taken up for dead.
This accident not being forty yards from where I live, which Avas the nearest place of any likely to afford him aflistance, if not too late, Some who had joined to lift him from the ground, and to place him on a gardener’s barrow for conveni-ency of carriage, judged very rightly that they could not do better than to bring him to my houfe.
Mr. Atkins, the Surgeon, living but half a mile off, being luckily in the way came immediately, though not before the stranger had given Some figns of returning life and fenfe. On his arrival, he vifited his hurts and wounds, and pronounced them more alarming in the appearance than dangerous in the reality; and that as to his trance, he apprehended he was only stunned with the violence of the blow, and hoped it would have no worfe confequences, which were, indeed. Sometimes the cafe of contufions of the head; but that, in all states of the cafe, rest and compofure of body and mind were effentially requisite.
In a very few minutes, the stranger was fo far recovered, that be opened his eyes, stared wildly
about

to Mrs. Buckley.
2S5
about him, while raifing his head from the bolster of the couch, he leaned on his hand, and coming to his Speech, the first uSe he made of it was to thank us very politely for the astistance we were giying him : And the next was to afk us how faf he might be from Kettleby-farm ? That question instantly gave us all to know what the greatest probability • is that you have already anticipated, his being Son to Mr. Sumners, whofe refidencc had been precifely at the place fo called. On my telling him the Small distance, he Seeniied greatly pleafed, and afked me if Mr. Sumners was still there, by which I found he was unapprifed of hi$ deceafe. While I was hefitating my anfwer, the Surgeon, who knew the father very well, and had attended him in his last illnefs, relieved, with more prefence of mind, my embaraffment, by telling him, that his father was gone upon fome indifpenfable call, but believed he was very well, and much better than he had been years before : at which the poor young gentleman’s eyes fparkled with joy. Alas! how foon to be cf eeived of the fehfe in which he understood it, and of which the i
n was purely iheant in ten-dernefs to his prefent condition, when the stiock of the mournful truth might have been fatal, or at least greatly hurtful to him.
Common humanity would have Of itfelf alone induced us to take the utmost care of the greatest stranger, in Such a circumstance; but nOw the knowledge of him made still a greater point of our concern for him, Clara, lolely moved by a principle of compastlon, exerted herfelf with all the officioufnefs of a good heart, in assisting my wife in her difpoSitions for preparing an apartment, and every thing proper in his cafe ; moved especially by the consideration of the peculiarity of it: A young gentleman thus grievousty hurt on his return to a father, whom he would find dead, and
VoL. III.	N	who.

Mr. Mellefont
■who, in all probability, must have left him in very indifferent circumstances; All this only the more recommended him to her tender commifera-tion, and drew tears of it from her foftnefs, even before she could properly be Said to have Seen him. For the blood from the wounds in his head, mixed with the dust amidst which he had fallen, had fo disfigured his face, as not fo much as to afford a guefs at the features of it. But after it had been, by the furgeon’s care and direction, cleanfed, and restored to its native honors, it is not ealy to conceive the difference it made to his advantage. It is not poffible to imagine a more noble, a more engaging countenance ; while what palenefs from cffufion of blood took from its vividnefs of color, was made up to him in attractions of ten-dernefs and companion, by foftening Somewhat of an air of command in the not unpleafing stern-nefs of a brow, which in youth is a zest of manly beauty that tempers its foftnefs, and defends it from effeminacy. In harmony with his face is the whole of his form, cast in the most exquiSite model for shape, stature, and proportion. Then his port, manner, and air, have Something uncommonly great in them: he might have pasted for one of the first nobility, in the times when thofe of that clafs derived their air of distindion from elevation
of Sentiment, and from a stern difdain for any thing little or dishonorable : before indolence, avarice.
and meannefs of Spirit had, by an habitual im-prestlon, given them a trivial ignoble counteance, only the more ridiculous, and the more remarkable, for that strut of infolence, which they preferve in midst of all their debafement, and which they take for a fine air of state and importance, though it is but a fimptom the more of their beggarly want of true dignity. But leaving thefe precious compeers in worthlesthefs with my charitable wish for their waking, happily for themfelves, happily
for


to Mrs. Buckley
267

for their country, out of their portentoully stupid dream of the postibility of forcing rcfpeff, by laying upon a barren ground of vanity the falfe and yet poorer manure of dirty gains by venality, let me proceed to do but justice to Mr. Sumners. It is eafy to difcern instantly in him a native great-nefs of Spirit, Setoff with fo amiable a grace of eafe and fweetnefs of temper, as, combined witff his bloom of youth, and a figure formed to pleafe, can hardly fail of prepoffesting strongly in his favor.
As Soon then as the Surgeon gave leave for a vifit to him in his room, my wife. Sister, and I, went in to pay our refpe6:s, and to assure him that all imaginable care would be taken of him, with request to him to tranquilife himfelf thoroughly, as one of the most effeftual means for.his fpeedy recovery. But while Clara was acquitting herfelf of her compliment, the most indifferent by-stand-ers could hardly have efcaped observing the impression she made on him, of furprife, mixed with Something more powerful, more tender than fur*-■prife. His gaze was as intenSe as politenefs would admit. He appeared confounded, motionlefs, and, after a length of paufe, could hardly articulate, in breaks and confufedly, an anfwer to her civility: It would be premature to Say, that his appearance had on her an effedl, in any degree like or approaching to that which hers had had on him. And yet, I thought J could difcern in her looks, logether with her furprife, a certain melancholic tendernefs. Such as I had never remarked in them before, and which, after all, might be nothing more than an expreshon of a SimpathiSing mood.
After this, as often as it could be, without prejudice to his recovery, or without being disagreeable to himfelf, we gave him our company, to preferve him from the natural wearinefs of Solitude in a Strange houfe ; and I cannot, conSif-
N 2	tently
268
Mr. Mellefont

tently with truth, Say, that Clara betrayed atiy a-versson for contributing her, share in her affistancc at this discharge of our duty of hofpitality.
As foon, then, as he was enough recovered for conversation not to be prejudicial to him, fince the Surgeon had So managed, as to make him eafy about his stay with us, as more convenient than at his father’s little apartment in Kettleby-farm, to which he had, at first, much infisted on being removed, but was grown tnore indifferent about that point; we ufed our best endeavors to.amufe, and efpecially to divert, him from any impatience for the return of his father, till his health, grown more confirmed, would admit the cessation of this innocent fraud of concealing from him his death.
But in the mean while noshing did more real honor to his memory than the astonishing proficiency of his fpn, in all parts of learning, in all objedls of the human enquiry. Yet no one could be lefs ver-bofe than he was, a Succinfitnefs which was, stri^-ly Speaking, owing to his being a perfefit master of every fubje6l, on which we led him to Speak. In every Science, in every art, he had Seized the precife point which threw the clearest light on the whole, and rendered it comprehenSible, at one view, in all its parts. On my expreffing my asto-nishent at the progrefs in learning, he had made, in Such early youth: he attributed it, to the fair representation of study, by his father, under the form of pleafure, without deceiving him as to its limitations of possible acquirement. Learning, he Said, was a hill, of which if you should arrive at the Summit, you can no more expert to touch the Iky than if you had staid at the bottom : but then in the very aft of afcending, you have a great deal of pleafure, and on your gaining the top you enjoy more delightful profpefts, and a
fe~

Mrs
269
f
ferener air, when thus got above thoSe fogs of ig-noranee and prejudice, which involve thofe whom you will have left beneath you in the valley.
Yet all his profuSion of knowledge was rather drawn from him by the courfe of a converfation, in which he always followed, and never led, than it came uncalled for, in any fpirit of difplay. Every thing he faid, was So graced with winning modesty, with So unassuming, fo diffident an air, as gave me the highest opinion of his understanding and charadier. But what the most amazed me was, his prodigious facility of transstion from the most Sublime fubjedls, of which he treated with the greatest command of thought, and language, to the merest arrantest trifles, into which he entered with as much eafe and propriety, as if trifles had been his element, and he had studied nothing elfe all his life-time. By this means, he is the master of proportioning himfelf to every chara6ler, from the great Philofopher who thinks the most profoundly, down to the little Lord, who never thought in his life; from the confummate Scho-, and Statefman, verfed in the abstrufest points of literature, and of policy, to the gay Lady, whofe ideas never roSe above the humble circle of stich objedls, as ribbons, laces, pompoons, the misteries of the toilet, points of drefs, falhions, routs, lap-dogs, or pretty fellows.
You will eaflly judge, however, that I anticipate here the difcovery of his talents, which could not fo unfold themfeJves, till after he was more thoroughly acquainted, more recovered, more at eafe in his mind.
In the mean while, Glara, I dare aver it, at first, from nothing but her natural goodnefs,. and disposition to pity, was, in doing the honors of the houfe, and of fulfilling the duty of hoSpitality, of great Service to her Sister, who under favor of her
K 3	assist-
V. .
r\
r— /
o
Mr, Me l lef o n t
aflistance, and fupplying her place, could have the more leifure for her domestic affairs, and the care of her children.
In the purity of this view, she occafionally attended the fick young gentleman, and carried him in his broths, and fuch articles of diet as the Sur-
geon allowed him ; which he was obferved to receive from her hands with tranSports of alacrity and fatisfaftion. Nor was she deficient in the good nature of yielding to the great defire he expressed of her fitting down, and whiling away the tedious moments of his chamber-confinement.
In a little time, however, we had Some reafon to think, that this frequentation, originally Suggested by refpefils of civility, began, at length, to be granted to inclination. There appeared a most manifest revolution in Clara’s temper and countenance. Her air was, from the openest, frankest gaiety, foftened into a tender melancholy, her looks wore all the marks of an inward confli^ be-
tween a growing passion and her reafon, over which she probably dreaded the vidtory, without having the power to form refolutely a wish against it. It naiist, -no doubt, have cost her a violent struggle, to refledl on her refufal of fome of the greatest matches in Britain, and on the wayward-nefs of her fate, that was now captivating her to stmply a young gentleman, in far from paramount circumstances, without any thing but his perfonal merit to recommend him, which is, indeed, a great confideration, but ought not, perhaps, to be the only one.
We have all of us, however, refpefiled enough her fecret, which it is not impossible may be a le-cret even to herfelf, not to disturb or difeoncert her with our fufpicions. Though I must own, I am not perfedtly pleafed at the courfe I imagine things are taking. Not that any interested motives fway with me in the least. If I mention Mr.
Sum-

I
i.:
to Mrs. B u c K L1 y.
271
Sumners’s want of a competency, So obvioully to be prefumed from the ftreight circumstances in which his father died, a good part of my concern is for himfelf; I do not think Clara’s proviSion a Sufficient compensation for the bar and heavy incumbrance to him of the nuptial state, fo young as he is ; and at a time of life when fetting out in quest of adventurous atchievements of fortune, there is no being too light-armed. Yet let me not take tip Sorrow at interest ; a|l may still be for the best ; and of this at least, I am Sure, I mean and wish the best. I think match-making rather a dangerous office: but on Some occassons, not more So than match-breaking. Having, in fa£t, no controul over Clara, nor, indeed, defiring any, beyond the influence of the most tender friendlhip, I remain the more eafy, for my being perfe^ly fa-tisfied of her honor and discretion. A paflioa may gain Some empire over her, but never beyond a certain point. Her clear-Spirited ideas of a hap»^ pineSs independent of ambition and fortune, may, perhaps, lead her to defpife the falfe prejudices of the world, but will, I dare anfwer for her, never engage her tojconfound with them the just ones.
Mean while, her influence over Mr. Sumners has been of Some Service to him. You will eass-ly imagine, that fo fast as he recovered, we fhould be the lefs able to continue the concealment from him of his father’s death. We had. indeed, had
the early precaution, on finding that the moment he could hold a pen, he wrote to Mr. Stanley, in London, to fend away to him, by the fame post, a letter, containing the account of his fall, and of our luppreflion to him of his father’s deceafe.
This had had the effeSt of bringing Mr. Stanley down in perfon, who had, however, the discretion not to go in to Mr. Sumners abruptly ; nor before he had conSulted with us on the best means of
breaking to him, with the least danger, the misfor-
N 4
tune

27 2
Mr. MeLlefont
tune of his having lost his father, which it was every instant growing more and more impradica-ble to keepfrom his knowledge ; especially, too, as he expressed Some doubts of his well-being, from w’.hat he had heard on the road, of the indignity he had undergone of an arrest, and was inclining to impute his abfcnce to that circumstance, which he had been, till latterly tender of mentioning.
Conssdering, then his manifestly favorable dif-tinfition of Clara, it was propofed to her, to take upon her the difeloSure to him of that fad event; hut we could not prevail on her to accept the commission ; it went, fhe faid. So much against her heart, to strike fuch a dagger to his, efpecially in his prefent condition. For our difpenfing her froni this disagreeable talk, she gave other reaSons, So plaustble, (though by the by, Ido not think she gav^ the true one at bottom) that we acquieSced in them.
Upon this Mr Stanley engaged to hazard the discovery to Mr. Sumners ; and being let in, they
li4vl rt prcily	jri 1 Y
Mr. Stanley, almost immediately, fet off on his return to tov/n, where his preSence was necessary. At taking leave of me, he put into my hand a bank note, more than Sufficient to defray any incident charges, with many thanks, and a Special, but very needleSs recommendation, of Mr. Sumners to our utmost care. He had offered to fend
down a Surgeon from London, but Mr; Sumners being perfe^ly Satisfied of the shill and probity of Mr. Atkins had rejected the propoSal.
No Sooner was Mr. Stanley gone, than there appeared in the young gentleman So viSible an alteration for the worSe, that we began to repent of not having waited still longer to undeceive him. The news had adiually cauSed Such a revolution in his mind, as had affeded his body to fuch a degree, that it produced, what had been before kept off, a
feverish heat: and the wound of his breast, which
was
t-0 Mrs. Buckley.
2i?3
f
wa$ precedently in a very promifing way, began to break out afresh, not to mention other difcou^
His stomach efpecially turned against all Sustpnanee, and there \yas great reafon tor fear that his grief and dejeftion would have very facious eonfaquences.
It was now that.Clarafs talk was to commence, which, I assure youj she made little or no difficulty of undertaiking, that of confolation, and of endeavouring to Sooth aud mitigate his afflifitions But wh^le she employed herfelf with all the zeal] of fimp^thy, and not without efficacy, in this tender office of humanity, she was rather confult-ing the good of his health, than the Safety of her own heart. The moving expression of his unaf-fe^ed fiSial Sorrows; an expression which was even more in his air and looks than in his words, added greatly to the amiablenefs of his perfon; lb true it is, that the heart embellishes the exterior. Nothing, however, could fo powerfully have affe6,ed Clara, conssdering her turn for fen-timental tendernefs, and Simpathy for. the. afflidt-
ed.
I am, then, much mistaken, if, under the favor of this mood of foftnefs, a yet more tender passion has not stoln unawares into her bofom, and taken possession of it. At least, I am pretty clear that she has all the Sirnptoms. For her coufolation, however, all appearances are falfe, or. she is in no great danger of the inclination being, all on ■ her Side.. It is not difficult to difcern at the bottom of all the boundlefs refpedl and modesty of this young gentleman, the profound impression it is, indeed, no great wonder Clara should have made on him ; if you combine with the common effedls of her beauty on all who fee her, the additional charms of tendernefs in her offices. of compassion, and, I may venture to fay, in the difposttions of her heart
N 5	fo
274
Clara Maynwaring
lo new. So strange to her, and which are So far from mifbecoming her.
Such, dear aunt, is the prefent posttion of things. Our Angelica has, I fancy, found her Medoro. Of this event, I have, however, judged it my duty to apprize you, efpecially as you expressed fuch a concern for Clara, and for every thing that relates to her.	Yours, Sic.
Edward Mellefont.



0/

LETTER XXXIV.
Mifs Clara Maynwaring to Mrs. Buckley.
Dear Madam,
LaneaPire.
That cruel l shat unjust brother of mine ! ^ But hold! do not let me abufe him too much; for there is, I am afraid. Somewhat of truth in what he has written to you, and communicated to me; but, I hope, matters are not quite So defpe-rate with me, as he makes them.
Refpe^ling as I do the inviolable laws of candor, and the rights your friendship has to the clearest truth from me, I will not, nay, I need not dissemble, what I am not confcious of its being -a guilt, that I give to Mr. Sumners highly the preference over every one of his fex I have Seen. I go farther. I do not deny that this preference is attended wish a wish to pleafe him, which in my life I never experienced for any one before him ; and if, as I violently fufpeQ: it, their lurks, under that wish, any thing of that dreadful passion called Love, which I tremble to pronounce or write, fo horridly have I been terrified both at the word and the thought, (Modesty by your leave !) I will not offer to fo much reafon, to fo much honor, as introduced it, the indignity of denying it, as if I could
think fenSibility to merit matter of reproach ; Of
this

¥
to Mrs. Buckley.
MS
this I am very Sure, that every Sentiment of my heart, might, on this occafion, stand the Scrutiny of the Severest virtue. And yet, to judge of the power of that passion, by what I feel of the little I know of it myielf, I accede, from my whole heart and foul, to the opinion of its^being a dangerous one. I do not wonder shat parents are So much afraid of it for their children, conssdering that often the hap-pinefsof their whole lives is at stake, on their making, or not making, a proper choice. Unfortnately, they are both liable to error from very different caufes. The old are generally governed in their choice for the young, by the thing on earth that has the least to do with love ; interest : while the young are too often missed by.their own unfufpe8;ing truth and inexperience, into a reliance on the fastest pretences, under the Seducing malk of that passion. Unhappy fex that we are. So commonly doomed to the fatal alternative of being Sacrificed or betraid. Do not, then, dear Madam, do me the injustice to think, that, putting the conSequences at the •worjiy (I was really going to write, the heff) of what my brother apprehends for me, I shall not have taken my refolution, without fuch a deliberation, as may do honor to my choice, and defend it as much as poffible, from any air of weaknefs. Peace be to thoSe romance-writers, and novelists, who are for ever painting love under the character of madneSs, and calculate its strength by its triumphs over reaSon 1 In general, I fancy they may may be right enough! But I hope that exceptions are not out of nature. I should rather imagine, that a love founded on the great principles of honor, reafon, and virtue, must burn with a ten times brighter fiercenefs, than a love obScured or debafed by the admixture of mean passions, or unworthy motives. In the confcicufnefs, however, of my own weaknefs, I dare not be Sure that 1 should, if I was unhappily in the cafe of it, renounce

276
Mrs. B U C K L E V
nounee a passion for its not being authorised by reaSon, though I fliould eertainly try ; but of this I may be very dear, that inclination can at least not be the weaker for its having reaSon on its fide : nor can I think otherwise, but that love is never So strong. So invincible, as when it is a virtue.
Upon a fubjed lb delicate, and So new to me as this, a Subject that mocks definition, and can, as. I conceive it, be only reached by Sentiment, I know too well your candor not to rely on it for your excufing my not Saying more. I recommend myfelf, then, to your best construdion, the hope of which is among the strongest incentives to the regulation of my condu6t on my defire of de-. Serving it.	Yours, &c.
Clara Maynwaring.
letter XXXV.
Mrs. Buckley to Mijs Clara Maynwarinc.
My dear and ever ejleemed cb Idy
T is not eaSy for me to exprefs the pleaSure I received from Mr. Mellefont’s two last letters, with your epilogue to them.
I never thought So ill of Clara as to doubt of her fufceptibility of love. Nature, who has made her So amiable, would hardly, after she had turned out of her hands So finished a piece of work, ufe her-Self So ill, as to break off her communication with it; she would hardly bestow, all in vain. So many blessings as she has done upon you, under the curSe, vjhich, as St. Catherine of Sienna So shrewdly a.nd So justly observed, charaderifes she Devil, an incapacity of loving.
, Nothing, too, was more likely, than that a passion, So often rebuffed in. its attempt, to gain admittance to your breast, under she passports of
ambition
to Clara MAYNWARiN.«f.

s^mhition and fortune, should, at length, furprisse aji entrance under the cover of a virtue, efp,ecially. So lovely an one as that of pity.
Then, Mr. MellefonTs description of Mf^ Suna?* ners gives^ me So great an. idea of him, that if X was not So near threefcore,. as, in honor, to truth, I am obliged to confeSs myfelf, I verily think, t cpuld order a poft-chaife to my door, and. Set out for my nephew’s in a hurry, to. difpute him with you.
But, jesting apart, which by the by would not be very good-natured on a Subject So Serious to you, it is your choice of him, that fixes my belief of his not being without a very extraordinary, merit, flnce, he could make an impreffion on a heart So Solid;^ fo guarded as yours: it is not, in truth, from your having rejefled So many Splendid offers that X draw this conclusion ; I have known more than one, wo^ man, who, after having refuSed very advantageous, matches, have miferably thrown thernfelves away,^ on Some defpicable object of their fickly fancy, or wretched caprice. But I, do you more justice; X as little fufpefl; you of folly as of vice. Some of our Sex unhappily, and very confistently, conjoin, both ; you are infinitely above either.
In this cafe, it is the nature of the choice that for ever justifies or condemns ; in which are ne-cestarily implied, the inviolably Sacred refpefits of duty to parents, and of the laws of honor, under which a due degree of confideration of circumstances is undoubtedly included, as who would wish, to be the caufe of detriment or mifery to the object of one’s affefilion ? But in this last claufe, I only mean a just attention to the requisites of a competency for happinefs, without taking into the account thofe Superfluities, which oftener exclude than procure it.
With theSe referves, which are fo far from in-compatibie with a true affeftion that they are.
cffential

278
Mrs. Buckley
give coachman, maid, the
cffential to it, for I do not fuppoSe any one will to a girl’s running away with her father’s or to a vicious old fellow’s marrying his honorable name of love; with theSe referves, I fay, of duty and of honor, that paflion has all the chara^er of innocence, and is even under the Special proteffion of virtue. Not death itfelf is baldly a tribute more certainly paid by old age to nature, than love by youth. The Spring might as well be without its verdure, as that feafon without its fufceptibility of that passion ; nor think, my Clara, there is in this any ludicrous loofenefs of cafuistry. The horror and ssiame are to thofe who dare deny the bindingnefs of the law, of all the laws of nature the moss Sacred and the most innocent, the law of moral love. The abufe of that inssin6t, is, doubtlefs, indefenssbly bad, but perhaps not essentially worfe than the infernal praftice of exa6ting, under a most blaSphemoussy falfe color of religion, a Solemn vow of difobedi-ence to one of Heaven’s commands the most explicitly fignified by revelation and nature.
As I have, then, but the more esteemed you for your virtuous and honorable refufal of offers from Such as either had not been able to inspire you with a liking Sufficient to justify your yielding, or were forbidden to you by an invincible bar of justice or honor, I shall not, I assure you, esteem you the leSs, for not holding out, where there exist no Such objeftions, as are founded on thofe laudable principles, which made your refistence a virtue.
There is even in the choice to which you now feem inclined, manifestly clear as it is of views of interest of ambition. Something noble, magnanimous, worthy, in short, of Clara: and as you have a moral assurance of Mr. Sumners’s charadier, there is no great hazard of your distinction of him being lost upon him, or of his not being fenfible of its value. On this occaSion your greatest honor
••N
U Clara Maynwaring.
279
nor appears to me, what, however, is no wonder in perfe^ harmony with your greatest happineSs.
In all this, my worthy girl, I am the freer of my fentiments in favor of your inclination, not only becaufe I think it a virtuous one, but as I am fen-Sible your modesty needs, perhaps, this friendly encouragement.
As to the news oS the* town, as you, doubtlefs, fee the public papers, tho marriage mentioned in them of one of your ac<iuaintance, and nothing more than your acquaintance, will hardly have ef-caped your notice; Mils Bloomfworth to Billy Grinly, that egregious feather-headed fop, whofc rage for rendering by all the powers of drefs, that horrid figure of his Somewhat more tolerable, would have been So much in vain to any but Such an ideot as herfelf. You must have Seen him, I fancy; nay, if I remember right, he was one of your danglers, till you drove him from you, as you would any other noifom infe^, that pestered you with his buz. She caught, it feems, the little animal at Court, one drawing room night, or rather it caught her with a taudry tastelefs birth-day fuit, in which he was fluttering about like the king of the butterflies.
She had been, for fome time before, courted by Mr. Plowden, of rather a Superior fortune to his, and who had nothing against him, but a certain roughnefs, and unpolitenefs of character, which concealed much Solid fenSe and worth. This too was owing to anegleOiof his education by his father,
one of the most determinate fox-hunters that ever
#
nobly rifked his neck over a five-bar-gate; a neck which however was, at length, broke, in too ardent a purfuit of the glories of the chace. Thefe two fuitors Mifs Bloomfworth weighed in Scales, of which not Solid judgment, but fickly Fancy held the ballance, and accordingly the lightest in the eye of taste proved the heaviest with the Fair
one
3
28o
Air/,
one, and Plowdon had she good fortune to kick the beam, Grinly was the ele^' of hearh only made for trifles. She had not the fenSe to con-fid^r shat in fiieh a flimfy coxcomb, there was not the stuff ever to make a man; whereas; in the rustic, there was. a folidity of fubstance; that wanted only the polish which it was very of. receiving. Gut? of a blo,ck of marble, in the greatest roughnefs of its first chippings, there may be formed the- noblest statue ; but what the deuce-can you make better of a human-figured stick out of a toy-shop than a frippery rag-doll ? Befides, to love a down shay be but a trefpafs against opinion, but to love a fop, is a fin against nature.
Well, but therehas been another marriage which you could not lee in the papers, becaufe,, for certain reafons of decency and family-regard, which will be obvious to you, it was^ exprefsly kept out of them, and the ceremony hut three nights ago performed with the utmost privacy, in the prefence of a very few feled perSons. “ Ay, but what marriage?” I wonder at your assurance in alking me shch a question ; as if you had not yourfelf been prefent at the nuptials of Lord Soberton and Lady Harriet* Nay,do not stare. “What, I Clara ‘‘ Maynwaring, at that time in LanGashire at two “ hundred miles distance, I assist at a wedding in in London ? indeed Mrs. Buckley, I am Sorry ** for you, but you really doat.”—Abufe me as much as you pleafe, but I do aver, and will maintain it, that you, yes, once more you, was at that fame wedding^; I do not fay, mark me, quite, in your own proper perfon, but, virtually, through me, she felf constituted proxy for you on that oc-cafion, at the earnest request of the two parties* So that the old, fat, ugly, Mrs. Buckley, had the honor of reprefenting the young, blooming, beautiful Clara, of which, I assure you, I was not a little proud, nor a little welcome there; as I am perfectly
I
to Clara Maynwaring.
281
Se€l:ly Satisfied that the news will be to you.
But I have here anticipated Some material e-vents. As Soon as Lord Soberton had finished the ultimate arrangements for the nuptial ceremony, he came to my houSe, and with the most cordial expreshons of friendship and esteem acquainted me of every thing being fixed, and entreated,-in Lady Harriet’s name and yours, my prefence at it, in acquittal of <your promife of being one of her bride-maids.
But what Sovereignly pleafed me, was his telling me, that he had difdained to impofe himfelf on Lady Flarriet, under the stur, though but of a confcioufnefs to himfelf, of a Secret offence. The way he took to break it to her was not amifs, confidering the fairnefs of the step. He threw himfelf at her feet, and feriousty declared to her, that he would not quit that posture, till she should fincerely, and from her heart, pronounce his pardon for a fault he was going to confefs to her. You may guefs the anfwer of a women, who, you are fenfible, adores him; and, perhaps, the rogue knew it too. However, after Securing his terms of an absolute unreferved remission, he, with all the proper Softenings, confessed his wrong to her, and did full justice to your noble procedure on it, M'hich Solved, So much to your honor, the mystery of your Sudden disappearance.
The manner in which she took this difcovery, for it certainly was one to her, m,y Lord told me, had raifed her infinitely in his opinion. Without betraying any emotions of anger, or vulgar jea-loufy, she gave him So much credit for the frank-nefs and generofity of his confession, that she did not Suffer him to endure a moment’s pain of uncertainly about her fentiments. Not' content with immediately granting' her forgivenefe, as ample as he could dessre it, she, without meaji-iiefs, or weaknefs, Set Herfelf to Sooth his confufion, and even to Suggest excufes for his failure, which
she
2:82
Mrs. B u c K L E r
she principally took from her allowance of your tranfcendent merit. She faw, in short, too much, and too justly in this his acknowledgment of an error, the stncerity of his regret, and the Solidity of his return, not to let the fenfe of her wrong, be abforbed in the joy of his readinefs to repair it.
As for you, she wanted words to exprefs her fenfe of your worthinefs. You had not fo much furprifed her, as you overwhelmed her wish the dignity of your conduct.
I dare Swear she built altars to you in her heart. In her estimate it required a Superhuman pow'er to withstand the offer of a Lord Soberton, that god of her idolatry. And, to do him but justice, he is a prodigy of worth, an illustrious exception indeed to the delpicable generality of his fellow-nobles.
It was, then, with a transport of the most grateful delight, that she hailed his propofal of a nuptial prefent to you of her jewels, to which, however, she would not conSent, without adding to them a thouSand pounds in a bank-note, which, together with a deed of gift in her name, of an estate and manfion-houfe in Surrey, of about two hundred and forty pounds a year, will instantly be forwarded to yon in a box, by a Safe messenger. As to the estate, it is originally a donation from Lord Soberton to Lady Harriet, in order to her conveyance of it to you, as being preSumably more fatisfaflory to your delicacy.
There is more yet; Lord Soberton bestows on my nephew the living of Welborough, which is a good Seven hundred a-year, not to mention his af-furances of future patronage, of which I dare guarantee the stncerity. But all this will be better explained to you in their joint-letter, which goes in the box, and which is conceived in terms fo refpedl-ful, that the manner furpasses the benefit.
And now, good folks, (I addrefs myfelf to you now
in family,) I have undertaken for you, that you
shall
to Clara Maynwaring.
283
shall not refuSe the munificence offered you, on the foot of the most honorable regard and esteem. This would not only be falfe heroics, but high treafon against friendship; for of this I am fure, your non-acceptance would make Lady Harriet very unhappy: and as for me, befides that I should be piqued at your not doing honor to my engagement for you, I would go and fwear to whoever would hear me, that Clara efpecially re-fufed them, in dudgeon, becaufe you and she were forry, upon fecond thoughts, for her letting Lord Soberton flip through her fingers. So, pray, let me have at least no vain fcruples; for as to just ones, you will find me very ready to admit them.)
But, dear Clara, (I now write fingly to you, the Lovell-family has still another obligation to you, and a very essential one, that of the real and thorough reformation of Earl Lovell. There never was fo complete a change of conduct, which he himfelf frankly attributes to your being the caufe of his opening his eyes on his folly and worthlesshefs of chara^er. But no entreaties "of Lady Lovell could prevail on him to break the resolution which he took, on your refufal of him, to go abroad, and Seek, in travels, a dissipation of his discontent, at his not having Succeeded with you. He propofes, too, to go exadilly the fame tour of Europe, which he took when he made it in pure complaifance to fashion, and gives for his reafon, that he is Sure every thing will appear, to his eyes of observation, as new as if he had never Seen them with ihofe unmeaning ones, with which he went abroad the first time; and carried, like the Snail too much of home on his back, to make any progrefs in the knowledge of men and things. His mother and Lady Harriet are both forry for his being lost to them, just as you had restored him both to them and to himfelf; but especially Lady Lovell repents, from her whole
foul.
/
2^4	Mrs. B u c K L E y, Cfr.
Soul, her having oppofed, what she would now ardently wish, his happinefs with you, on a fup-posstion, that you might perhaps yet be brought over. Lord Lovell, however, is himfelf more justly perhaps yet be brought over. Lord Lovell, however, is himfelf more justly perfuaded of the im-poshbility, which confirms him in his determination to leave the kingdom for a while. He Sets out next week, having only staid fo long to assist at his lister’s nuptials.
And now, Clara, fuffer me to offer you my fervent wishes, of what, however, I make not the least douht, that the choice of your heart may make you ample amends far your noble contempt of title and fortune, fo often at your feet, and which you have fo virtuousty rejected, for their not being prefented to you by the hands of Love and Honor. But even independently of that event, what joy could title or fortune give you equal to what you must at this moment derive, from your reflexion on your having adhered unalterably to your principles! This is a real heaven you will have formed in your own bofom; and how fu<r perior that permanent internal one to the tranfi-tory fools- aradife of stupid greatnefs and infamous opulence ! There is not, furely, a general axiom more Sacredly true, than that we are effentially happier by virtuous Sacrifices, than by weak indulgences. Adieu, yours, &c. Lucy Buckley.
LETTER XXXVI.
l^r. Leonabi? Sumners to Mr. Ch-arlbs
y Merchant at Hamborougb.
I-T is, my dear friend, to you that your father only excepted, I write the first, on my recovery cff the ability to hold a pen, after the misfortune
of which he will before now have acquainted you.
You
To Mr. S T A >5 L E Y.
285
You cannot conceive what a disappointment it is to me, for many reafons, not to find you returned to England, from your Hamborough expedition. In my prefent Situation you would have been of great confolation and Service to me.
I do not, however, forget you, and as yet not releafed from the confinement to which thofe hurts have condemned me, that I received from an accident rather burlefc than tragical, I Seize what leafure is afforded me from that circumstance to acquit myfelf of my promife to you of the account of my fuccefs, whatever it fhould be, in the profpefit on which I went to Holland, fore, indeed, against my will, as I was loth to leave a father, whom, as it has happened, I was never to fee again ; a father whom I Supremely and de-fervedly loved and reverenced ; a father languishing under pains and infirmities, and whom nothing left than his exprefs command, could have obliged me to leave.
His reafons were nevertheless very cogent ones. You are fenfible of the streightnefs of his circumstances, and of the paffion he had for their taking a better turn, upon my account, more than upon his own. This led him to embrace for me the overture of Mr. Arnold, my grand-uncle by my mother’s fide, to whom I was naturally heir at law, being next in blood, and who in a decrepid age, being eighty-fix years old, had Sent exprefsly’ for me to Amsterdam, where he had reSided, in quality of Clerk and Merchant, from his tenderest infancy. But as his perfonal history is not foreign to ray purpole, I give it you Summarily here.
Born and bred till the age of fifteen in London, he had been by his father, who was not able to give him any fortune, placed, for his education, in the commerical way, in the compting-houfe at Amsterdam of Minheer Vanstieben, his correspondent, and
a Mer-
286
Mr. S U M N £ R g
a Merchant of Some repute in that city, though originally only an orphan, without friends/ brought up at the Wees-houfey and who, at length, by his in dustry, had made his way in the world. With him,, in the quality of Clerk, my uncle had lived Several years, upon the hardest terms, and with barely an allowance of necessaries of life, which had inured him to a habit of penury he was never afterwards able to shake off, though it had long ceafcd to be a neceshty. For his master, all on a hidden, and without observing any interfnediate degree, descended from the height of the most distant referve to the level of the mostfften'dly familiarity.
I have been told that this is not uncommon to the Merchants of this city, who exadf, indeed, from their Clerks a long and stridi probation, but when that is fatisfa6lorily got over, they immediately take them to their tables, raife their stipends at once from two hundred to two or three thoufand florins a year, and often abandon to them the whole management of their concerns.
But Minheer Vanstieben had collaterally another motive. He had but one child, a natural daughter by a young woman of a reputable Burgher’s family, who had been In a great meafure, the caufe of her fault, by their not confentlng to her marrying him, and who, on the difcovery of her pregnancy, treated her So ill that she died of their perlecution, immediately after her delivery. Vanstieben naturally took care of the child ; and Was So faithful to the memory of the deceafed, that he never would marry again.
On his daughter’s being grown up, he pitched on this my grand-uncle, for her hushand, having before Satisfied himfelf of their mutual liking, and took him into partnership, which continued till Vanstieben’s death, Some years after.
Mrs. Arnold had brought with her not only a competent fortune and the share of a good bust-
nefs.
i9 Mr. Stanley.
487
L
nefs, but a difpoSition to carry economy much beyond thoSe bounds where it ceaScs to be a virtue; in which she proved but too congenial to her huS-band, who was himfelf not a little touched with that miserable vice.
They had two Sons, who both of them died young and issuelefs, the one, of the fmall-pox, in his father’s houfe, the other at Batavia, where he had been very unnecessarily fent, on the pretext of making a fortune, while the real motive was the Saving to them the expences of his maintenance. Nor do I find that they much regretted their children, avarice giving a fort of hard-nefs of heart that makes it infenfible to the feel-
V
ings of Nature.
Mrs. Arnold furvived them many years, and died Something more than a twelvemonth ago, in a good old age, at which I do not much wonder, having ohferved, that from that very frugality, which is even a virtue when not owing to fo great an evil as covetoufnefs, there arifes, however, one good, the preservation of health, if the prolongation of fuch miserable lives can properly be called a good. Mr. Arnold thus widowed, and left without a Single relation, in Holland, for whom he could have any the least regard, and being, by many infallible Symptoms, admonished of his own approaching end, turned, at length, his thoughts towards his own family in England, which he had for above half a centnry So totally neglected, that it cost him Some pains of inquiry to diScover his next heir in blood, to whom he was determined to leave his fortune and possestions, probably not fo much from any motive of tenderneSs, as merely from an impulSe of the custom of prefer-ing a relation to a stranger.
Having committed, then, this enquiry to Mr. Von-Hock, his correspondent in London, with proper indications, I was, after Some refearch discovered
288
Mr. Sumner®
covered to be the perfon entitled; upon which Mr. Arnold fignified his defire that I ssiould go over to him, for Some very Specious reafons which he gave. Hereon, my father, who had hardly ever heard of this Arnold, So complete had his dctachednefs been from his family, and who had not conceived any great idea of the invitation, judged however, that I should be wanting to myfelf, if I did not make a trip to fee what there might be gained, and nothing could be loft but a little time, and Some expence Scarce worth mentioning, by this step of complaifance. He laid, then, his injundtion on me to go, and I accordingly took, alas! my last farewell of him.
As foon as I was arrived at Amsterdam, e-quipped with the most: authentic testimonials of my identity of perfon, together with a letter of introdufilion from Mr. Van-Hock, I repaired di-redlly to my uncle’s houSe, which was far from a confpicuous one, though very commodiousty fi-tuated near the Stadt-houfe. I was, on mentioning my name, received with as much civilty as could be Well expefled from an honest: old Swifs, who, having lived long in Holland, was, as our Cambridge-friend would fay, hardened like a quill, by being Dutched, and who had probably never faid a thing,before in his life that was not dry or harsh. This man, who with his wife, as much stricken in years as himfelf, compofed the whole domestic attendance of my uncle, who, he told me, was very ill, but he would go instantly and acquaint him of my arrival.
In the mean while, I could not help taking notice of the furniture of the hall, or outer room, consisting of four broken back chah^s, and a table that appeared rickety w'ith age, and of which one leaf, off the hinges, hung on the -ground. Who does not know the mechanical force of appearance ?
fo Mr. St a n l e y.
289
ance ? My heart was chilled within me, at the fight of So cold and comfortlefs a proSpeff.
I was, however, after Some little wailing, introduced to my uncle, in an inner apartment, very little better furnished, where he was Sitting up in his bed, with the letters and papers I had brought him, on which he had just cast an eye. He appeared to me a venerable old man, but fo much broken, fo far gone in a decay of nature, that the first idea he excited in me was that of compaffion.
I cannot fay that he gave any great figns of e-motion at the fight of me: on the contrary, I thought I remarked in him rather an inSenfibili-ty, which finished the disheartening me. I was wrong. There was a double reafon for it; first, the natural indifference of old age to every thing, especially under a mortal infirmity; and then his having contracSfed, by his long reSidence in Holland, a habit of the Dutch phlegm, which does not abound in outward demonstration, and yet, often, is not deficient in inward feelings. This was precisely the cafe of my uncle towards me. For after fome inquiries into the state of our family, and thanking me, in his dry way, for the pleasure I was giving him, in letting him fee me before he died, he ordered the proper public officers im-diately to be Sent for, and a will, he had ready prepared, with blanks for the purpofe by him, was filled up, in the most valid and authentic form, with my name and proper defignations, as his foie heir, and executor, with not a fingle legacy befides, except of an annuity of four-hundred storins, to the old Swifs and his wife, for their lives.
It was high time he should take this step, if ever he was to takerst; for though after it, he appeared rather on 1^ mending hand, he did not Survive it quite a week, during which, confidering the nature of the difpoSition he had made in my favor, it is unconceivable with how cold a re-
Vo l. III.	O	ferve.
2Q0
Mr.
Serve, how Superficial a regard, he received tnj dutiful attcndence and Service. Sometimes, indeed, his eyes, already dim with the fhades of death, he would fix on me, with a faint exprellion in them of pleaSure and approbation ; but then he would instantly take them off again, with a figh, and air of regret. Very probaly, it was lefs in the light of his nearest relation that he looked on me, than in that of an heir, longing for his last moments to rob him of poffestions, which nothing but his inability of carrying them with him, could have engaged him to leave to any one. If that was his idea of me, he wronged me greatly; but he furnistied in it one of the strongest arguments against that' money-mad avarice which leads its wretched votaries to accumulate wealth against that moment in which they are to ceaSe for ever to want it, and in which it must paSs to heirs, whom they must naturally hate, on the not improbable prefumption of that joy at their death, for which their life will have fo fenSelefsly been employed to collefit caufe and matter; a life, the whole fad dirty ground-work of which will have :been the thinking how or gain to fave a fix-pence.
.1 am Senfible, indeed, that fome have made of their innocent children an excufe for their fordid penury. One wretch of this kind I knew, who, against every call of generofity, or charity, ufed for ever to plead his being accountable' to his dear children for every Shilling he Spent. He was, in fa6t, very rich; but as to thoSe Same dear children of his, and he had two, he would, for half-a-crown, have put them both into a pie, and for another half-a-crown eaten the pie, and hugged himSelf on being hired to Save by it the expence of a meal. The truth was, that he starved to death one of them, and by ill uSage broke the other’s heart.
But abstracted from the laudable Satisfaction
oi

to Mr. Stanley.
201
b

of a parent’s leaving to his children in a moderate provifion, rather a Spur to their virtuous industry, than, in an overgrown fortune, a caufe of idlenefs, of worthlesthefs, and often of min, I cannot conceive what difference it can make to a man, whether he dies poffeffed of fifty millions or of not five (hillings, unlefs to his greater regret in the first cafe.
I had, however, at first, been So much influenced by appearances at Mr. Arnold’s, that I had written to my father, not to entertain over-high ideas of my expeftancies; which I had room to believe were much lefs confiderable than we had been made to believe.
Being now, by my uncle’s direftion, in quiet poffestion of every thing but his private clofei and papers, I apppeared, and indeed was, master of the houfe, in which he gave himfelf no longer any concern, leaving every thing to my difpofiti-on, in which, I dare affure you, I behaved with all the modesty and circumfpedtion imaginable. He had, as his voice grew, like his perceptions, fainter and fainter, faulteringly acquainted me, that the keys of his clofet, and bureau, were under his bed’s-head, which he defired me to take as foon as the breath fhould be out of his body. But, what you will think Singular enough, when that happened, which was about ten in the morning, he was found to have expired, with his keys fast graf-ped in his right hand. The Swifs, who had faithfully attended him, and who knew him better than J, told me, he fancied it was in order to deliver them to me. May be So. I (hould otherwife have currently imputed it to his tenacioufnefs of a Secret which thefe keys are now to difcover, and of which I am very dear the honest Swifs himfelf was ignorant: fince even to me^ his defigned heir, whom it fo much concerned, he had not opened his lips about it.
O ^	The
2^2
Mr. Sumners
The first leafure moment, then, after his death, and after giving the necessary diredfion for his funeral obfequies, in the manner which he himfelf had pofitively dilated, I went to the clofet, unlocked the door of it, and the first thing that struck my eyes, was a pretty thick folio-book, laid on a kind of writing table, and which hastening to open, I found was a Schedule or inventary of his whole fortune, written in the most legible hand, and in the clearest order.
Mr. Arnold had always passed for rich; but that being a vague general term, gives no po-fitive idea of the Specific degree of opulence which constitutes that title. Now, though, confidering the nature and greatnefs of his dealings, combined with his Spirit of parfimony, it was humanly Speaking not possible for him to efcape, as he had wlstied to do, the being reputed rich, contrary to the common run of miSers, who though they affect the outfide of poverty, are nevertheless pleafed with the reputation of wealth, and especially with the mean refpeO: commonly paid to it. He had, however, by the most Sedulous endeavours and most guarded attention to the gratification of his and his wife’s peculiar humor of concealment. So far Succeeded, that no one’s conjectures or Sufpicions had ever come near to the reality of that imraenfe fortune, which he had amassed; and of which this book contained the clearest documents and indications. There were not only, in it, the refpeClive references to his proofs of great property, in all the great Banks of Europe, Such as thofeof London, Amsterdam, Venice, Genoa, the Steur of Saxony, &c. but to Substantial Securities of mortages, of bills, of bonds from Public Companies, and of various other articles of that kind, and all of them most eafily and most readily to be realifed and converted into casti. There were alfo the deeds of two large estates,
which
fo Mr. S T A N L E Y.
293
t
1.
which he had purchafed in Gloucester and Kent, in his own nanae, with only the more Secrecy for his having affected none, unnoted by any but Such parties as were immediately- concerned, and which I found he had. Since my arrival, and without mentioning a Syllable of it to rnyfelf, left to me by particular astignment, on a prefumption, perhaps, that the general devife in his will was not fufficient. In Ihort, I found that nothing had been omitted by him, rhat could enlighten or Secure me, in obtaining or keeping polTefllon of that great fortune, which be had bequeathed me; and fo strifitly Speaking, great it was, that I was obliged to confume near a week in barely going over the various articles, and ascertaining their refpedifive references: the whole amounting to fuch a Sum as I can hardly venture to Specify to you. It was not only beyond my imagination, but beyond any wishes that I could have dared to form.
Then his books, which were kept with admirable accuracy, and in which I could obferve but two hands his own, and that of Mrs. Arnold, clearly pointed out the Sources of this astonishing accumulation of wealth. It is true, there appeared on them fnndry branches of dealing, but the principal Spring-head was absolutely in our own Change-alley.
Mr, Arnold had, it Seems, long made a profound study of the nature, essence, fluQuations, and cauSes of ssufituation of our stocks; by a constant Series of bold and shrewd Speculations upon which he had improved an originally not inconssderable capital into that stupendous one of which I now found mySelf in posseshon.
He had not only made occassonally Sundry trips to London, but had kept, till two or three years before his death. Special meffengers and advice-boats, stationed for the Speedier conveyance to him of any in-
O 3	telligence
I
2:4
Mr. Sumners
telligence that could affe6l his transactions in that way.
I found alfo afterwards, that, upon his plan of concealing the enormous fwell of his fortune, he never made more bitter complaints of ill-luck, in that Species of gaming, than when he had gained by it fome confiderable advantage.
But v^hat was more fingular yet, he most heartily defpifed this very branch of dealing, by which he was making thefe exorbitant profits. There was, however, in this nothing paradoxical. This very contempt gave him the greater cool-nefs both in his fpeculations and reduction of them to practice. Though our Jonathan’s and Garravvay’s were to him, in virtue of his correspondences, the mines of Mexico and Peru, he treated, in confidential letters and converfatioij, the whole System of them, with the utmost disapprobation. Independently of the total needlesthefs of contracting the public debt on which they were founded, he Saw nothing in the reigning praCtice of Stock-jobbing, but the calenture of the year 1720, ivhich had made So many take the South-Sea for green-fields, and drown themfelves in it, Since then converted into a continual flow fever, that would only the more certainly confume and destroy the body politic : and, indeed, what better could beex-peCled ? T'he fair Spirit of commerce, the meritorious courage of attempting new difcoveries, had Seen the streams of wealth, that ufed to Supply thofe Salutary channels, pefnicioufly diverted and running into that Spurious one, the navigation on which, in paper vessels, Mr. Arnold ufed, not quite unhumoroufly, to fay, was, literally Speaking, in the way of a trade-wind, or rather itfelf a wind-trade; fincea’paltry, ridiculous, unauthentic puffin the news-paper could make fair cr foul weather, rife or fall the stocks. This he had often experienced ; having Sometimes gained from one to two,
or more thoufands of pounds by nonfenfe of this
kind
to Mr. St a n l e y.
295-
kind.
And, in this courSe, his lofing was comparatively very rare, which was owing to his Superior knowledge and constant alertnefs at watching events, and gaining the earliest true intelligence, or at making the most of falSe. ConSidering, then, the advantages of a cool experienced gamester, at So long a run, amidst the pastions of heat and unfkil-ful players, the wonder was intirely’taken off to me of his having been able, in a term of near half a century’s clofe application to that lingle objeQ:, to a-maSs the fortune he did. The point of furprife lay in his havingfo effetluallly concealed it, to his endeavours at which he must have been little lefs than astave;
The very diforders, however, and weak fide of the stocks, which none knew better than he who had gotten fo much by them, made him bethink him-Self in time of drawing out his great stake in them, and of realising the Sums he had amassed in them.
Among other reafons, which he gave, in a letter to a friend, and which I will deduce to you more at large, when I have the pleafure of feeing you, he very fenSibly obferved, that the national debt could not go on augmenting ad injinitum ; that it was more likely the fabric would first fall to the ground, by its foundations being overbuilt: that if that cafe was not already in existence, it imminently threatened to be fo. In the mean while, his availing himfelf of the current practice, did not hinder his making another not lefs judicious reflexion. On the trite but undeniable principle, that in all human affairs there is a certain line or meafure beyond which there is no going with impunity, he averred it demonstrable, though the cafe was certainly a rare one, and even at the first view bordered on the paradoxical, that an excefs of real wealth might,.for reafons not difficult to give, be hurtful to a nation; and if fo, how much more pernicious must be an over-flow of fidlitious wealth. Such as actually exists in the prodigious glut of our
O 4	paper-
2q6
Mr. Sumners
paper-mill coinage ; not the least of its miSchiefs being that of railing, on fo craxy a bottom, the prices of all the necessaries of life, to the manifest injury of the community, and efpecially of our commerce, foreign and domestic, the folid advantages of which have been fo impolitically Sacrificed to an unwholfome bloated appearance of falSe opulence, from a nation’s being mortgaged without necessity, and posterity Burthened without de-ferving it, and all without one valuable end being gained for it, but much the contrary.
In the fear, then, of worst, and with that Spirit of caution So natural to the love of money, ever Seeking its greatest Security, Mr. Arnold had latterly begun to take meaSures for that thread’s not breaking in his hands, on which his fortune in the funds hung, and Sat about winding out of them, as Snug and as ur.obServed as he could pof-Sibly contrive to do. I heartily hope, however, that his apprehenSions were rather the produce of a timidity constitutional to himSelf, than of a rational mistrust ; ‘ and that the edifice of the stocks may" be like the leaning tower of Afinelli near Bologna, which always appears to threaten a fall, without ever falling.
Upon the plan, then, of the Solldest realisation, he, at length, converted the bulk of his fortune into various articles of the Safest nature. Nor do I mention but as a very Small part Some bulSes of diamonds and jewels, to a pretty large amount, which I found in the drawers of his bureau.
But there was one inconsistency which I confefs struck me a good deal, confidering his unquestionable knowledge and SenSe of the value of interest. A-long the back part of the cloSet, there Stood., on the floor, a range of thirteen chests., rather Somewhat larger than the common fize of the thousand-pound-ones for stiver bullion, or dollars for exportation. On opening the chests, they were,
accord-
to Mr. Stanley.


according to the Specification in his books, full of the gold coins of various nations. But, I own, I could not conceive any fatisfa6lory reafon why he had thus fuffered, at least fome of them, tp ste dead for many years, the cords, with which they were tied, being rotten with age. The interest of them must, in that prefumable time, have ampunt-
near if not quite double the fum. How-there they were, and I immediately fent for fecurity, to be depofited, for me, in the Bank of Amsterdam. This alone was clearlv a
ed to ever, them
princely fortune.
On finding, then, this glut of wealth So fud~ denly, fo unexpefiledly poured in upon me, how much was I not indebted to that philofophical cast of mind with which my father had infpired me,, and which hindered my head from being turned with it ? My great point then was, to stand on my guard against that infatuating quality, for which, opulence is fo defervedly infamous: Fortune being fo fond of Folly, that where fhe does not find men fools, fhe makes them fo. Of one thing, however, I am very fure, that if I cannot ennoble my fortune by the ufe I hope to make of it, I fhall ever fpum with difdain the thought of my fortune’s ennobling me. Nor can I conceive any thing fo very defpicable as a money-made Lord, except a Lprd by defcent degraded, or, more properly fpeaking, unmade, by fuch a fordid attachment to lucre, as is abfolutely uncompatible with the ideas of honor, once annexed to that distin6lion ; but now pretty well abolished, fince vanity is Seen capable of erecting the very dirtiest money-grubs into Peers, as a-varice is of finking the most illustrious Peers into the arrantest money-grubs.
As fbon, however, as I was clearly Satisfied of ,e-very thing, I wrote ray father a fuccinfit account of my fuccefs, and gave the letter to Mr. Haynes, a Gentleman, who was going over to England, and
O 5	whom
298
Mr. Sumners
whom I overtook, about a month afterwards, at Helvoetstuys, when he had, by a very uncommon accident of a contrary wind of fo long a duration, been detained above three weeks, as he was waiting there to go by the packet; fo that my poor father died without the fatisfadtion of knowing my fucceflion to that fortune, which was fo much endeared to me, by the profpedt of fharing it with him, and of rendering the remainder of his life more eafy, and more commodious.
During that month, I had fo fettled all affairs, and fo fecrflrely quieted my possessions, that I could with peifedt tranquillity quit Amsterdam, to return to my native country, where I was determined to be intirely governed by my father’s advice, and not even to take a Single fervant or domestic, or make any the least (how, till I stiould have his opinion and diredtion.
As to the honest old Swifs and his wife, who had been long faithful Servants to my uncle I raifed their annuity from four hundred to twelve hundred florins a-year; and, what will make you laugh, 1 could hardly prevail on them to accept it; not that they did not love money ; not that they piqued them-Selves on generoSity; but the augmentation appeared out of rule to them : in the hardnefs of their heads they had no conception but of the letter of the legacy, and almost dreaded Some trap in the addition. However, they were foont convinced, thankful, and very well pleafed.
But before I leave Holland, with which I conclude this letter, with reference to the next post for continuation, allow me one Summary stricture on the national chara6ter of the Dutch. By what I could fee of them, in my very Short stay in their county, where I was too much engroffed by my private affairs, to make any valuable general ob-fervations, they appear to me to be, to the test of mankind, what the be«s are to the animal kingdom.
a
to Mr. S T A N L E Y.
299
a Solitary kind of beings, hived a-part, the free-boo~ ters of every plant or flower that offers them honey> always murmuring, inceffantly intent on their work» ready with their flings for any diflurbers, induflriouSj but unfocial.
I am afraid, too, that their hive is liable to be pillaged by bad neighbours; but as the old faw has it, “ Let the Bees look to that.”
I am, yours, &c.
Leonard Sumners.
LETTER XXXVII.»
Mr. LeonardSumne rs to Mr. Charles'
Stanley, Merchant at Hamborough.
LdTlCdJJIlV^ •'f
Resuming, dearCharlcs, where I broke off in my laft,, lam to tell you, that I embarked one morning at Helvoetfluys,,and arrived So early the next at Harwich, that I could with the greatefl eafe lay my account with breakfafling at Trevil’s, whofe country-houfe lies but three miles out of Harwich on the northern road, jufl in my way as I was direcSfly making my point for Lanca-fliire, to my father’s place of retirement.
It can, I prefume, be no news to you, that by the unexpefted dropping of two elder brothers, he is lately come to an eftate of a good two thoufand a year, befldes a-confiderable Sum in the funds: a windfall, that had raifed him from the lowefl cir-Gumftances imaginable, which you well know, to eafe and affluence.
To fay the truth, I prefigured to my Self great pleafure in his being the firfl bid acquaintance I fliould meet with in England, and' in embracing him as doubly my brother, both in adverfity and good-fortune. All my pain was, the fear of being fo overwhelmed with careffes and civilities, that I ffiould find it difficult to get away with that exrr
pedition.
300
Mr. S u M ir E r s
\
pedition, which my duty and destre to See my Sa-ther required.
I proceeded, then, thither in a post-chaiSe, being pre-affured that he was at his feat. Stopping at the door, I Sent up my name, and after waiting a good deal longer in the Servant’s hall than the urgency of ray time would allow, at length down he came to me. I ran to embrace him, expecting to be met with out-stretched arms, when I could not but obferve, that he rather drew back and flinched from me, keeping his hands behind him, very probably acrofs, for the fure avoiding my stiaking him by them. He contented himfelf, then, with only making a flight inclination of the head, in return for my cordial and friendly Salutation. But what painter could do justice to that face of his ? Such a mixture of forbidding referve, and majestic haughtineSs, as distanced every idea of familiar compellation !
This reception immediately struck me"with the character of the man, and I was determined to enjoy it, and to give mySelf the Sport of drawing him out to the utmost length of my line.
After, then. Such a look, and Such a how-d’ye, as made me plainly feel the wind was in a cold corner, and my Some-time Pilades’s friendship at the freezing point, he bid me v/elcome, with an air that gave him the lie, and Satisfied me that he wished me at the devil. This gave me my cue ; and I had the malice to tell him, I was just landed from Flolland, where! had been on a certain affair, and being bound to the North, I was come to take a dinner with him.
He told me, he was horridly out of luck that he could not have that pleafure, but that he was indif-penfably engaged to his neighbour Lord Gossamer. To Lord Gossamer 1 thought I; a wretch, that a man of any taste or honor would have preferred
the penance of walking twenty miles barefoot, to
the

kJ J.VJU •

t' I
!‘i
I
I'
i
•• U
« k
:i
■d
the horror and stupidity of a quarter of an hour Spent with him. I was only Sorry within me to believe, that, on this occasson, Trevil’s excufe was a lie. Its being true, was what I should havo wished for his punishment-fake. As to his pretended engagement, it was certainly no disappointment to me ; who fooner than dine with him, after what I had room to think of him, would have fat down to a meal with the hangman’s helper.
He then offered me a dish of chocolate, but in fo flight a manner, that I was obliged to refufe it, refolving to trust rather to the next stage for my breakfast.
But what shocked me beyond meafure was, his telling me, with fuch an air of indifference, mixed with infult, of a distrefs befallen my father, by an arrest, out of which he was, he added, immediately relieved by yours, that I could with great voluptu-oufnefs of fcorn have fpit in his face. This piece of news changed, however, my purpofe of proceeding in a chaife, to that of riding post, for the fake of greater fpeed, and became remotely the caufe of that fall, of which I am but just recovering.
I was, by this time, all on fire to be gone, and yet could not refist the temptation of playing off my last referve of fport with him. I then put on an humble grave face, and defired him to lend me twenty guineas, (obferve, I faid to hnd^ not to />«y, though he owed me at least twice as much, which I had, at tixes. Spared out of my poor pittance, to relieve him, in very ugly fituations.) To this, “ my “ dear friend,” (you remember that was the name he ufed to give himfelf to me) anfwered, with, a vi-fage cafe harden against every impreflion of shame,
. that he really had no cash by him, but that if a guinea would be of any Service to me, there it was, and hoped he should fee me in town, when he would do me any good office that lay in his power.
I took
302
Mr

I took the guinea, and to his great SurpriSe, the window being open, I flammed it out, with a Smile of the most confummate difdain: an action for
which I aflc pardon of the poor for the wrong it did them, as it would have better bestowed in charity to them, than thrown away, on the imaginary punishment of a fellow beneath it. Imaginary I call it, for I dare anfwer, that he did not even feel it: or if he did, it was abforbed in his hugging him-felf on having Saved the other nineteen.
Upon this, giving him fuch a look as he de-ferved, without Speaking a word, I Spun upon my heel, master enough of mySelf not to stoop to any explanation with him, or to Satisfy him of my having fifty times at least, the Sum about me, in cash and notes, requifite to carry me to my journey’s end. His thoughts were too much beneath ray confideration, to throw away one of mine upon what they were, or might be.
On flinging myfelf into the chaiSe, which I was to change at the next stage, for post horSes, ! could not help recollefling your juster judgment of Tre-vil, in whom'you had always Seen the raScal through his hundred folds. You are SenSible he knew a great deal of what is called the Town: and currently enough passed, in the jargon of it, for a devilish honest fellow. Neither did he whnt for a fort of wit ? he could tell a story with Some grace, humor a ballad,^ and fifty other Small qualities, that took with one fo young, and unexperienced as I was. I never could find in my Heart to fufpe6t him of not having one. But above all, his ingratitude was what shocked me, which, as one of our poets (Thompfon) justly expresses it, is “ high “ treafon against mankind.” He had obligations to my father, he had obligations to me, who, had often watched his wants, that I might have the pleafure of preventiug his application to me on the
fixed
to Mr. k> T A N L E Y.
30
3
I
I
I
fixed principle with me, that he who, knowing a friend’s distrefs, and having it in his power to relieve him, does not from his own mere motion relieve him, has already in his heart denied him, or if he waits to do it, for his alking him, he overfells the benefit. You know I have even borrowed money of you to lend him, and, in that, did more for his wants, than I ever did for my own. And this was the retribution.
However, dear Charles, in this confefllon to you of my defeat of judgment, in fuffering Such a wretch to impofe himfelf on me for a friend, I am glad to make you honourable amends for my having too crudely, imputed to you too great a Severity of opinion, in your contempt of him.
I am alfo really obliged to him for this warning, which will have this good effect, that in future, I Ihall be more cautious, but not more unwilling to do good offices. I even think myfelf piqued in honor, to atone by Services to the worthy, for my folly of having fo much mifplaced my obligation on So ungrateful a monster. Yet, after all, is he fuch a monster, at least, in point of rarity ? I am afraid not. I fancy he rather reprefents in general the World.
But enough, and too much on fo loathfom a fubjeft. I have done with it for ever. And now an indiSpenfabie interruption hinders me from going on with my narrative. I refer you then to the next post. Yours, dec. Leonard Sumners.
LET

•	r*
V
$04
Mr. S U M N E R S
Letter xxxviii.
illir, EeO N A RD S U MNERS tO Mr CHARLES Stanley, Merchant at tjamborougb.
I N my journey, dear Charles, to the Northward I met with no ssnister accident, till, I fay, I touched the end of it, when I was flin>g from^ my horfe, by a Sudden start, and rather (orely than dangerousty hurt. The particulars of it, your worthy father tojd me he had written to you, as well as of the kind deception employed to conceal from me for fame time my father’s death. The repetition here then would be fuperstuous.
I had been carried, stunned and fenfelefs, into Mr. Mellefont’s, a clergyman of great worth, and goodnefs of charadter, where all the requisite assistance was instantly procured for roe. As Soon as I was in a condition to receive the viSits of the family, Mr. Mellefont introduced his wife, attended by her younger Sister, Mifs Clara Maynwaring. But when this young lady came to pay me, in her turn, a compliment of condolence on my accident, during which, I could not help looking at her ; I own to you that I must have made, even in the light of common civility, a most contemptible figure ; for Surely the most confummately ill-bred clown could hardly have exhibited a broader stare of fur-prife and wonder at any obje£t, than I did, just then, at the first fight of this miracle of beauty. It was a blaze that overpowered me : a rapture that kept my eyes motionlefs, and fixt on the di-vinest face that in my life I ever beheld. I could, with pleafure have anfwered her by an exclamation : Angels are ye, are you not all in Heaven ? ** For fprely this is a more than mortal beauty.” Perhaps I stiould aftually have broke out into fome Such intemperate fally of admiration, if I could
have-
to Air. Stanley.
S05
I cannot be
have articulated my words clearly.
Sure that what I did Say was not wo'rSe, for I can fafely Swear, that I do no not know what f Said ; nor, I believe, they either; my utterance was So confufed and unintelligible. So much the better. No words could have done justice to my Sentiments.
But when I reflefied on the combination of the exquiSite beauty of her most delicately featured countenance, enlivened with the frefhest colors, and of the most perfedt modeled Shape, with the inchantment of her naturally melodious voice, now still more foftened by that strain of tender pity, which melted on her tongue, and glistened in her eyes fuffufed with tears, my whole heart was forced to agree to the confession I inwardly made to myfelf, that Clara fulfilled to me the Sublimest i-dea of the power of her Sex to charm, that the human imagination could form. And yet I did not then know half her excellencies: thofe of her mind were, if possible, equal to their perfedli-ons of her perfon.
Believe me, dear Charles, there is not a fillable of exaggeration in this. If you do me justice, you may remember that I am not of the most inflammable temper, and have Seen very great beauties, with very little emotion. To Say the truth, all the women that S had ever beSore Seen, roSe, to my recolledtion, in no better view, than as the common flowers of the field ; while Clara appeared to me the perennial roSe to be worn in the boSom. It was reServed for her goodneSs to rivet the chains in which her beauty had begun to hold me.
It was, then, at Some of thofe times which that hoSpitable family might judge hung heavy on my hands, in the courSe of my recovery, that Clara, in her turn, or fupplementally for her lister,
w'ould blefs me with her company, Sit by me, pity
my
3o6
Mr. Stanley.
my pains, and footh my impatience. It was in thofe delightful moments that, without affefiation, without intention of difplay, (he |let me difcover in her. So cultivated an understanding. Such an admirable fund of fenfe, as defended her good nature Srom any fuSpicion of weaknefs, and exalted it into a virtue, which made all the other virtues in her, the more confpicuous and the more amiable. There was in her So graceful a modesty, fo Sweet an un-pretendingneSs, Such an unaffected ignorance of the power of her charms, as astonifhed and captivated me. Formed to be one of the greatest ornaments of Society, stie Seemed nevertheless, in her air and conversation, to breathe nothing fo much as a taste for the Shades of retirement, and the Simplicity of domestic life. She was at that very time com ted, followed, hard-preffed,by perfons of the first distinction and fortune in the country and declined them all without -affeCting it, and without, perhaps, herSelf knowing that She was declining them. And yet fhe did not diSdain to come occasionally into my stck room, and paSs hours without any Show of reluctance or difgust, granting to pity what fhe had denied to love. ' Nor, by any thing that ever eS-caped her to fay, v/as I led to conjeClure, what I afterwards learnt, by other means, that fhe had refufed the most advantageous propofals on the most honorable terms, for no reafon affignable but that of her not liking the parties enough to listen to them.
But what had the greatest power to enstave me, was the pure difinterestednefs and nobility of Sentiment, which were fo unfufpiciousty fignalifed, by her condefcenfion, her affiduity, her care of one like me, in the character of an unfortunate and distressed perfon. To that very circumstance it was So plain, my owing her redoublement of attention
to
U Mr. St A N L e y.
307
to me, that I never let a hint efcape me of that change of my fortune, of which, in the delicacy of my love, I absolutely Should have been jealous.
And here let me confefs a fault, and a great one. The paffion with which she has infpired me — But hold, do not let me give to So virtuous So rational a love as mine, the name of a weaknefs; my love produced, however, a weaknefs. It was the caufe, the undoubted caufe, that the charms I found in her company, making me forgetful of the past, and improvident of the future, in favor of that enjoyment of the prefent, in which I was totally absorbed, contributed not a little to my meeting more than halfway their innocent deception of me, as to the fate of my poor father; and, though I certainly did not fufpedf his demife, to render me lefs Solicitous than I ought to have been to procure more circumstantial intelligence about him. But when were credulity and negleft of duties not the failures of thofe in my condition ? Lovers believe every thing like children,or break through every thing like madmen. I had greedily Swallowed a grofs enough illufion, and had omitted Some very important incumbences, both of filial regard, and of the difpatch of my affairs, which you will eafily think were immediately urgent. But what of all that ? I was in love to distraction, and thought of nothing but itsobjeft.,
I was in this Situation of mind, when your father came down to me, and, with the properest preparation, acquainted me of my father’s death, and of the motives of tendernefs from which it had been concealed from me. It was then that love yielded for a moment its empire to the feelings of nature; and I had nearly funk under the Severity of the stroke, but for the abfolute dominion Clara
had
to3
Mr, Stanley
had over me, even without knowing it herSelf. Her confblations assuaged. Soothed, calmed, my grief, and amidst all the gloom of it, drew even Smiles of joy from me, at her entering So compassionately into it, and eSpecially at her continuance in the mistake (for I had defired your father not to mention my circumstances) of the state of my fortune, as it helped to keep up that Sentiment of pity, of which I felt all the advantages to my love, and, let me add, to my delicacy of love.
Another fault of lovers is, that they imagine every one to whom they relate the progreSs and particulars of their fucceSs, is as interested in it as they are theirSelves. ConScious of this dear Charles, I will Spare you all the gradations through which 1 at length arrived at that critical step, a declaration.
I did not make it till I had, be it faid without the least tincture of a coxcomb’s vanity, prepared my fucceSs; and perhaps by nothing So much as by my real diffidence of it; till, to Clara’s honor be it observed, it was Srom my high opinion of her clear Spirit of candor, that I derived, at length, the necessary courage. I flattered myfelf, that I could not be mistaken in the hopes which her eyes, her looks, her tone of voice gave me, of my having led her, by rnSenstble degrees, from a Sentiment of pity to a Sentiment of esteem, and from that to a yet more tender one.
‘The necessity approaching of my removal, on the vifible forwardneSs of my recovery, I had no time to loSe. After, then, taking my reSolution, on the first opportunity of Clara’s being alone with me, I threw myfelf at her feet, and with all the modesty of a fear inseparable from genuine love, laid before her the state of my heart.
Clara, who had not Suffered me to go on, till she had raiSed me from that Supplicant posture.
Seemed
to Mr. S T A N L E Y.
309
Seemed to listen to all I Said, without any Sign oS anger or difpleafure. But when I expected her answer, fhe gave me no other than that of bursting out into tears and deep fighs. At this, nothing could equal my furprife, but my pain for having occafioned any thing like grief, to one for whom I would have laid' down a thoufand lives. I ap-
> then, as I really was, under the greatest consternation and dejeftion of Spirit. But I had not long to languisti under this torturous fufpence. As foon as Clara had recovered her Speech, fhe defired me not to be alarmed or hurt at her expression of grief; that the caufe of it was very far from injurious to me; ssnce it was entirely owing, not to the novelty of her receiving declarations, to which it had never cost her any effort to give a peremptory denial, but that, in her prefent Situation, her terror, her grief arofe from the difposttion. So new to her, of her own mind to listen to me, at the expence of that liberty of heart, which she had hitherto possessed, and which she had cherished as her Supreme blessing.— That, having always thought nothing more dishonorable than dissimulation, she would not now begin to ufe it with one who had infpired her with Sentiments before unknown to her, and whofe hap-pinefs was Secure, if he made it depend on any thing in her power to contribute to it. This anfwer, she added, did not come from her eaSi-nefs, or weaknefs, but from her judgment, which had decided every thing in my favor.
I had, dear Charles, often heard and red of instances of dying of joy ; I now do not believe a stllable of its poshbility, or I could never have Survived the rapture into which this her acceptance of my Suit threw me. I remained mute with extafy. No matter. Such a Silence had
more

•••

- - -»»«
■^10
%>'
Mr. Sumners
more of eloquence in it, than all that I could have had liberty enough of heart to utter. But, O power of Love! O charm of Sentiment! what an increafe of beauty did you not give to the divine Clara! What a true glory did flie not derive from that noble Superiority of her’s, to the falfe honor of trifling with torture by prolonging fuf-pence. What obligation had I not to her, for all the pain she Spared me ? I was, however, happy enough to make her fenfible of all the esteem that my gratitude for this procedure, added to my love; she believed me, nay, readily believed me, and why ? Not, I assure you, from any weakneSs of preposseffion in my favor, but becaufe I was ssn-cere in all I Said ; and becaufe truths from the heart are irressstible.
For the first time, then, I ventured to Snatch her hand, and imprint on it a kifs, burning with the fervor of the purest Sentiment; and she was rather struggling to withdraw it, when all on a Sudden, Mr. Mellefont, followed by Mrs. Melle-font, came into the room, and Surprized us, most certainly, without any defign to furprife us, and merely to bring Clara a letter just received by the post, and which they knew by the Superscription to be from their aunt, one Mrs. Buckley.
I cannot fay but I was Somewhat hurt and confounded at their interruption of us, just at that critical juncture But on a moment’s reflefilion, recolleSting myfelf, and before Clara could take the letter out of his hand, I addressed myfelf to Mr. Mellefont; and with an air of as little prefump-tioni as if my fortune had been in no better a condition than v/hat appearances placed it, I made the overture to him of my honorable pretentions to his fister. To do him but justice, he heard me with great politenefs and reSpedf, without anfwer-ing a word, till fixing his eyes p,n Clara, who modestly
Mr
311
r
deftly dejefled hers, and reading in her looks that this my application was not unauthorifed by her conSent; he told me, with the beft grace imaginable, that Clara’s difpofal of herfelf was intirely in her own power; that, nevertheless, if his opinion w'as of any weight with either, he did not Avilh to with-hold it : that from his whole foul he ratified her choice with the highest approbation, fo far as what he was pleafed to call my perfonal merit, was concerned ; but that with as clear a contempt for mere refpe6ls of interest, as the Spirit of his profeffion, Superior to that word-ly confideration could require, he was only afraid that the mediocrity of Clara’s fortune might not fuffize, fo young as we were, for Supporting the appearance his regard for us made him wisti we Should make; and that eSpecially he was apprehenfive of its throwing an obstacle in my way to the pusti-ing my advancement, and to the bettering my circumstances.
(At this last hint I gave a Smile, for which, I dare Swear, they were all of them, Clara included, at a loSs to account.) He then went on w^ith remonstrances drawn from the worthiest friendship, and the tenderest esteem for both of us, and concluded wdth observing, that he had not been in the least, in all he had Said, meaning to refufe his concurrence to our determination, and that a realon was not a denial ; as he , would prove to us by the alacrity with which he would acquit himSeif of the Sun61;ion of his office, in uniting us.
Upon this he gave his aunt’s letter to Clara, who in the stile of politeneSs, afking me leave to read it, withdrew towards the window. Mr. Mel-lefont and his wife remained with me, assuring me, very obligingly, that they were neither Sorry nor Surprised at this event, which they had anticipated
w
Mr. Sumners
ticipated by what they had obferved of us both. We were, then, infenlibly Aiding into a perfeQ; good understanding, when Clara called to them both, and dessred them to join with her in the re-perufal of his aunt’s letter to her. I kept, in the mean while, at a little distance ; while presently Mr. MeUefont ran to me, and taking me by the hand, told me, that certain points in that letter had greatly removed his objection, which, however, had never been a very violent one, to the incompetency of Clara’s fortune for the hap-pinefs of both. At this I stared a little at him, and looking at Clara, who had followed him, I thought I obferved her eyes fparkle with joy, which I afterwards found was owing to the Aiare Ihe took in the fatisfaffion of a certain Lady Harriet, of whom Aie had often fpoken to me, without ever mentioning the facrifice stie had made of Lord Soberton’s offers, to the truth of her friendship for her, and to her own strict ideas of honor.
As to the accellions to her fortune, mentioned in that letter, they were rather, it Seems, matter of doubt with her as to the point of her accepting them, than of exultation. This doubt I was happily enabled foon to dissipate.
It was now high time for me, after my being thus doubly, indeed, convinced of the dissnterested-nefs and purity of fentiments of this worthy family, to declare myfelf, and to leave not a shadow of fcruple about my circumstances, which I had hitherto, with fuch an honorable intention, lefs myfelf dissembled, than I had fuffered the appearances of them to fubssst. After a proper preface, I laid open to them the real Situation of my fortune, which could not but be fuperior to their most fanguine imaginations ; and I laid it open with that true and unaffe6fed indifference to it, which became one that had never entertained a

thought
-4
to Mr. Stanley.
3H
thought of being obliged to it for any recommendation. And let me do justice to that clear-fpi-rited family, and to Clara efpecially; I did not find that the difcovery affected them much, or her, in the least, with any delight. On the contrary, I had reafon to think myfelf happy, that it did not do me a prejudice in her opinion ; for nothing could be more certain, than that the prefumed distreSs of my circumstances had not a little contributed to my v/inning her, by the Sentiment of pity, which they had excited. In short, she barely forgave my hot being So unfortunate as I had appeared.
However, all being now referred to myfelf, as to the acceptance of thofe offers contained in Mrs. Buckley’s letters relating to Clara, I acquiefced in her receiving fome jewels destgned her for a wedding-prefent by Lady Harriet, on the footing of friendship, becaufe I propoSed to contrive Some return of twice the value. But the money which was to accompany them, Clara will abfolutely refufe, with all the politenefs due to the good-neSs of heart from which it is offered.
As to the donation of a Small estate, in Lady Harriet’s name, but which came originally from Lord Soberton, my delicacy would not allow of her having Such an obligation to any one but myfelf, though Surely the motive of the donation, does immortal honor to Clara’s virtue and great-nefs of foul. Mr. Mellefont takes it upon him to e a proper color and Softening to this refufal; as well as to that of a living, very nobly offered him by the Marquefs, but which his delicacy will not Suffer him to accept, for reafons I cannot but highly approve ; and, indeed, rejoice at, constdering how much it is in my power and inclination to make him ample amends for the Self-denial.
VOL. III.
P
V
3’4
To Mrs, Buckley.
Every thing, then, dear Charles, is Settled per-fe£Hy to my defire. I only wait now the time that decency requires, for the celebration of the nuptials that will make me the happiest, of mankind. I lay my account with my being fully recovered by then, and hope I may depend on your Speedy return to this country, for more reasons than one, but for none fo strong as that of friendship, and of my defire of gratefully proving mine to you, now it is in my power.
Yours, &-C.

Leonard Sumners
- T
<50


LETTER XXXIX.
'Exiradi of a Letter from Mr. .MellefonT U
Mrr. Buckley.
• ^
hancajhire.
—— THIS very day I have had the exqui-fite pleafure of doing the office of uniting the most amiable pair that I know in the world ; the thoroughly recovered Mr. Sumners to Clara Maynwaring, under the united aufpices of Love and Sionor.	?

Edward Mellefont.
E N D

U, of Pa.
Library

/

. /
.’V*'
r
«
i
L U *■ ^
. Si
■».

;• -• ^-4
. -eir*

ii
-*l
y '
r
i ^ ■

^	'--C

1
i
:
%■
••.» -1
.
i
\ y
i
r
t
%
• • •d
- n;
. - * • V ••
♦	' ’.^t •-*>'■» ^.-i’ t.S‘
-, ^ ~-
•V -T^ :*'F ■	•
V .'
*v. ^.
I* • '

I
r '•


.'j	*.•
T|. ,.
-i'

U-

i>I ..^i^ ..
" V c

.V

\:
f
V.^,v
> f
/ •••':;
r ■-'
K

•/.
J



iT




°AV‘

vy^"
€^- '1
n

m
ii

- V' fi'
• .•
• {
*
/
/

i,.i
% .



:.CLNC-r'*
^ -V:	■■	^'


•'0-.

.,•1
.	. h .• • 'rC- ■•	■' •
■• •'■	r-TL-■-•'L
* •	'	*•	: r^LJL- ^	: A ' .:	.	‘	• :•	-•
'•'U *
i> Xh
1y
.«
» -
V^:-:
s .N . : :VM'
T* V S

i ^ r • ''L^*-1/^:
- ;

.	, -c •»:
*•	• • i . '-
.. .5- ' ■O. v'''^'.'	;/‘.--'fn--'.^'■
. }-A'
.Y • . - •
'S . c,
t. ’•'-.■ r-l.VgJr- '	*		»* N }*•.:• •	
Ptt ' * ^.r--Ci<-' * ,.;-sNA;. -	f w N • ,.V: . ,.		• * • • :> ■'•Vi	■
iAjliN '	V. '■■ ^		-'«• * " *	•

V

'• ' • ». ^


V ' ■ -■. ■■	d V ;	■ -..L
4	‘	-.-A	\	....	•
c
t

>.
■\«
f •■''■»•,.' Arri

■ >
y.
: .
• »

*• '.



V

I



:'A.
‘‘•V *	■ - -
VJT.' eV .- -•;^-,	.
■>. -■ '”
/
4	»
Vr"-
V •'

» 'Nr
**•
—	.; ?y «-4.	,,	. jsi.

-1 *
. r
w
?'-•
' N '. '

L,
r -.
. 1
'■
d
.•.Vj-* ■
•%“-
■.-
/.
“c. "
s. ys ^ r;;---'i
■ ii;-.
a
!Tl-
■
(' ,
pJs'^. ' »'

i'
■ .A-

*■• -
Ti’ ...	.- •.	•■.•
■—^1* ..'O'-' •	■-':•■ . -.
....
SSI'-j- •■, '
>■ *■

--- '• ' Al'^^'rP-V
' r .	■;	' —, ■ ^	■-'—
1
/
" ■ ^
,\ i'
. iH
j; — - .•’•■ -&r^	■ NrVlf
*■'	- A?N
- ®5%S, :■
' -‘ni
%
Ir'
/ ■ t
> -•’
/ N' Nh- ''V''-ISs.'"-V	'-V '	• ■	' ■
/. h'-VTc"''*' te' ‘-, -
^	vT	■-■■- N,. -	..V,, ;• vAv
• K 4^*

:j:.-
W^'^y •-'^.N'•*■-' -—IL	.-	-w.' •	•■••-
■ ,-,:	?<,“■	'•■"■'•	•	'	■‘'^	-	■	-•-	., ■•■	.••■:*.■ T.
‘	. V -AN _ ;.	■■ _ ■	yvy •
Wi
. ;

•H ; ■•	• ^-.L4*A. - C
-^C't '/ • .)	-*■ '/tc-,.' - 'i • ‘ t . k' ■ ^ J'
N.


A *

‘ .'W,
V>1	‘-^ '




-S'-
.. . •' CA..VN . / AA.>	.
-• . -’t:. ' .	h'.r--	:
'	■ '■.	■' ‘
.	=t.kSwJ	--	-J
■ yffw ‘^‘Fr L- > -W9>. ■
■ ,.afa^saaF-
J--A
' . ,	/ . ■ U<.C' * v^. .
•h' 1 •••. ♦
'* •

• V ^
Fri
C'.'- . ..*• *'T»	•,	,	.. -.
> *N ,N:Sr ^	L	\
-tf'
* %■•	^'“i ■■•adf ■>•' ■* ' '■* ’’•	- * ■ "•^^' N' ..y^l^v •"	. ' '4LV	iS*-•■.	^
•V N-•	•	-	-i. -,cjf ‘v.-Nv'-^v.-.f:	C* r--r- /--. - .	- ‘
■■ . - .	''j.	"	^
•	• ^	■ t I »■ '	'- .	'a5:	:4	' VV*. c- V i -	'■
-rf
rVr
r.-if
■-. y
sc-
r i
■*-• r^.

y
• r
V
ft*-. .-V,	
' “V •<	
	'Jmk
^ N	
r A	

it . «


»v.1

^	i

•v-


...*, A »t
' F.

:-\‘>rr' i

\?F
/,
k 'F. '^r.
' V
r '•
AA


I*'’-.*.-
• • /•^fc,.
-ff-
^ <

It
\




pis
■
r/F a
'^r’ -J
I



.^J. .'ii'-JS r
>■ *i‘ i:
>r^i
tm
h
I «
b
iCl^	• • -i-r»cr ■/
1-.'vh^.-'*.
■Ir'

: t
W-

> V •“
P
• ^ r
k
-*r'r ^T.ir


I

.-V

»•- Lk'n:!'.'
A ?-k\ *•
K i-Jr • t
f'-^N
Ipki
1 4
o ?:l
i
% ■:
:i^
% •
k
f-, f
^ 'i

fj"-j
dr-


• ?; <-x»*,
V K\
p

■#.

*S-i
■>ir\
• V.
hi
ff 1

J if


inches


li
r
'^SJ'
jw if!:

	1 1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10	11 (A)	12	13	14	15
L*	39.12	65.430	49.87	44.26	55.56	70.82	63.51	39.92	52.24	97.06	92.02	87.34	82.14	72.06	62.15
a*	13.24	18.11	-4.34	-13.80	9.82	-33.43	34.26	11.81	48.55	-0.40	-0.60	-0.75	-1.06	-1.19	-1.07
b*	15.07	18.72	-22.29	22.85	-24.49	-0.35	59.60	-46.07	18.51	1.13	0.23	0.21	0.43	0.28	0.19
D50 llluminant, 2 degree observer
Density
0.04
0.09
0.15
0.22
0.36
0.51
/**
'.Sar.v '. — - .•»j






gi §1 SI Si
S	55 irt
da<» p»f icKh (op<k1|	gQp
§1 Si
01 I I I I
5(29	200
700
809
300
’5(29
850	550
'e/(
fkr^ad


centimeters
lll|■/lil|llll|2lll|lNl[3lll|llll|4lll|llll|5lll|lllll6lll|llll|7lll|llll|5
9 I I I I I I I I Oo

16 (M)	17	18 (B)	19	20	21	22	23	24	25	26	27	28	29	30
49.25	38.62	28.86	16.19	8.29	3.44	31.41	72.46	72.95	29.37	54.91	43.96	82.74	52.79	50.87
-0.16	-0.18	0.54	-0.05	-0.81	-0.23	20.98	-24.45	16.83	13.06	-38.91	52.00	3.45	50.88	-27.17
0.01	-0.04	0.60	0.73	0.19	0.49	-19.43	55.93	68.80	-49.49	30.77	30.01	81.29	-12.72	-29.46
Colors by Munsell Color Services Lab ^