AN INTERESTING
S K E T C H
O F
genteel .lieE.
■ IN THREE VOLUMES.
AN interesting
S K E T C H
%
O F
GENTEEL LIFE.
BY A LADY.
V O L. I,
SOUTHAMPTON:
PRINTED BY LINDEN & CUNNINGHAM. SOLD BY SKELTON & MILLS,SOUTHAMPTON, and B, law, AYEMARY LANE, LONDON.
M DCC LXXXII.
AN INTERESTING.
i	SKETCH
0
1
f	OF
S
G E N T E E L LIE E.
Sf
e ____________
V.
^	LETTER I.
.> r/.'e Honourable Mfs Beaumont to
'<4
y '	M'fs Fiiimii.
Grove Place, Yorkfliire, •
Y ever dear Charlotte will, I am perfuadcd, be anxious to hear from her friend, and receive fome fa-tisfadlion from being; informed, that the peaceful retreat, wiiich fate has ^ VoL. I.	B	allotted
[ ^ ]
allotted her is every way anfvverable to her most fanguine wishes; nor can she with (reafon on her side) regret the want of thofe pleafures she never yet experienced;—for the private way in wdiich she fpent the few weeks she ufcd annually to be in town, during Lord Beaumont’s life, was very far from giving her a dissipated turn. On the contrary, thofe unfubstantial pleafures, of which she now and then partook, made her sigh for fatisfadtions of a purer nature, more easily obtained, and more agreeably ressedled upon ; and she never experienced a more heartfelt delight than when, on her return to , Devonshire, her eyes beheld the venerable
[ 3 ]
rable castle of her nativity, and Summer Hill, the abode of her amiable friend.
My ever honoured mother (Lady Beaumont) wifnes to appear before her children refigned and eafy; but, alas! I but too plainly fee that grief sits heavy at her heart. She never will, I fear, get the better of the melancholy that oppresies her; nor is it to be W'ondered at, when we consider the many astlicstions she has to combat with ;—the lofs of an assedlionate huf-band, the first and greatest; the dif-pleafure of a once indulgent father and mother, for having united herielf to a man who had the crime of poverty,
B 2	the
[ 4 3
the fccond; and three destitute cltil-dren, to sill up her meafure of wo ;— but why should I fay destitute ! let me recal the word, as we cannot be faid to deferve that epithet, while we continue to place our confidence in that Providence which alone can fupport us un-' dcr thofe asslidions he thinks proper to put upon us.
Let me hear from you loon, my
dearest and best friend; and be pcr-
fuaded that I love you better than
'eyer since cruel fate has feparatcd us,
and that, jn my retirement, there are ■% *
but two things necessiry to make me completely happy, viz. the perfedh recovery of Lady Beaumont’s health
and
I 5 ]
and fpirits, and the company and converge of my Charlotte.
AsseCiionately your’s, Amelia Beaumont.
LETTER II. iMifs Finch to Lhe Honourable Mifs Beaumont.
Summer Hill, Devon.
T 7HAT pleafurc did my Amelia’s last letter convey to the heart of her Charlotte, who sincerely rejoices that her philofophic Soul teaches her to bear, with So much Sortitude, the uncommon share of misfortunes she has (at So early a period) undergone. Continue, my amiable Sriend, to bear
B ^	iro
[ 6 ]
up against all the trials that may in future assiil you. That they may be few is the constant prayer of your Charlotte, who intercedes that you will make her a sharer of all your concerns; pour out your whole foul into her fympathetic bofom, and make that the repository of all your cares; let your confidence in her be unbounded, and be assured she will never abufe the trust.
I am forry to hear that poor Lady Beaumont is in fo declining a state. She has certainly fussered unheard of afflidSions. Has she received any news from her fon ? I .know she waited impatiently for a letter.
What
C 7 ]
What obdurate hearts must Lord and Lady Spencer be possessed of, to know that a once beloved daughter is now sinking under a weight of grief which their friendly interference might easily remove, and yet not administer the falutary balm to her drooping heart. Oh sie ! I shudder , when I resiedt on fuch barbarity !
-7---How is the lively Harriot ? you
don’t mention her. I hope she is contented and happy in her new situation.
My ever honoured father and mother desire to be cordially reniem-bered to Lady Beaumont and her fair companions. You will, I flatter B 4	myfelf,
[ 8 ]
rnyfelf, believe that I am, more than ever,
Your sincere, and asscDionate,
Charlotte Finch.
LETTER III.
IShe Honourable Mifs Beaumont to Mifs Finch.
Berkeley Square.
LS, my Charlotte, to thy friendly bofom thy wretched Amelia sties in this her day of trial; for now is she truly miferable; nor has she one friend upon earth to whom she can fo freely Imbofom herfelf as to her long loved Charlotte Finch, whofc fcnsibility will receive a fevere shock when she hears
^ that
[	9 ']
that Lady Beaumont is no more, and that Amelia has now no mother !—
V
nay, grieve not my friend, or I shall
\
repent my fatal rafiinefs of making your generous heart share the pang with mine! But yet, why should I wish to deprive you of that best attribute of Heaven, Gratitude i (If not for me, then) bestow one tear to the memory of the departed, who, I know, you had a sincere regard for. Buf I can no longer , dwell on the mournful fiibjeCr—my fpirits are not equal to the tash—nor can I hold 'my pen but to inform you, that in this, my hour of afflidlion, I have met with two friends in the perfons of Lord and
Lady
[ lO ]
Lady Spencer, at whofe houfe I now am. My dearest Harriot is with Sir William and Lady Manning. Excufe this incoherent fcrawl. My next, I hope, will be more methodical.
Your assedtionate, but afflifted friend, Aivielia Beaumont.
LETTER IV.
Mifs Finch to Lhe Honourable Mifs Beaumont.
,	Summer HU!, Devon,
CRUEL Amelia, to grudge me the participation of her forrows! What heartfelt anguish did I not •experience on the receipt of her last ?
My
C ” ]
My fensibility, indeed, my dear, fuf-tained a very fcvere shock; nor could I help exclaiming, Relentlefs destiny!
, what further trials hast thou in referve
\
for my Amelia !—My dear mother
inquired tenderly into the caufe of
myuneasinefs; but my forrow was too /
big for utterance—(and folding the letter, I gave it to her) and stew to my apartment, to enjoy, unmolested,
/
, the luxury of grief.
What dreadful ideas did I not form of my Amelia’s situation, unprotected, and left to the wide world, as I Imagined ?—[for I had not attended either to the date, or that part of your letter where you mention Lord and Lady
Spencer
I ]
Spencer having given you an afylum in their houfe.]—Wliat were my re-fiedtions on the fubjetft are too difmal to be related;—I fat like one in a state of stupefadlion when the fervant came to tell me tea was rcadv; I went down immediately, and found my dear Lady Finch in tears, and ,,Sir 'Edward in a pensive silence. Your letter (the caufe of all our griefs) laid upon the table, which I mechanically opened, and was struck with the date ; I then read it througli again to find out the meanins; of vour bcins; in Town, and was delighted to hear that Lord and Lady Spencer were brought to rcashn. I hope they will prcAX
indulgent
E 13 }
indulgent patrons to my Amelin, whofe amiable difposition must (if they have the fmallest share of feissi-bility) enfure her their love.—I hope your fpirits arc by this time better. Write to me, my dear girl, and assure me they are, for, still you do,' mine will not mend. Accept the sincere love of all under this roof, but particularly that of
Your affectionate
/
Charlotte Finch.
LETTER
[	14 ]
LETTER V.
Sir James Fitzherbert to Lord Maitland,
Parliament Street.
J Promifed you, Maitland,you should hear from me immediately on my arrival in town, and, as I have more honour than to be worfe than my word
i
(independent of any other motive) I have taken my pen in hand to oblige both you and myfelf ('mind that, Charles) though, really, I have nothing very material to relate.
My guardian (old Lord Spencer) was not, I believe, very well pleafed at my returning to^ England without
his
L 15 ]
his recalling me, but you know, Charles, I hate restraint, and don’t stand in very great awe of him; and, as I am not difpofed to hear many more of his ledl’ures, lam thinkihgof a country expedition, where, if I find I pafs my time tolerably, I mean to fecludc myfelf still I am of age ; but all this must be kept a profound fecret from the old nobleman, as I have parted with Mr. Salter, and he would think me too much of the boy to become the master of my own actions yet, unlefs I was under his eye. Now, pray, what part of Arcadia are you going to, Fitzherbeit, methinks I hear you fay ? Why, into Wiltshire, to^ visit
» our
[ i6 ,]
our old friend Holland, who is abfo-lutely reduced to that fobcr domestic animal called Hushand ! and lives there at the old family estate. ■ A$ I know he will be glad to fee me, and, as I think, I can pafs a little time very agreeably there, I intend him the honour of a visit: fo in about a month’s time I bid adieu to this gay city and all its pleafures, ’till I have it in my power to enjoy them properly, which the income I am at prefent allowed will by no means enable me to do. There’s prudence for you ! Shew me shell an instance in the courfe of your life if you can. But I forget, wc are not allowed to found our own
prahes
[ H ]	i .
praifes; therefore. Dame Vanity,. I
difclaim thee, and desire, for the fu-ture, you will resign all pretensions to my heart, and let Humility there take up its abode in your stead.
(Apropos to Vanity.j—There are at Lord Spencer’s two nymphs, both beautiful, but not both amiable—this difeovery I have been able to make already. One is award of his Lordship’s, and has the honour to be my cousin, and to bear my name. I find she has a large fortune; but she is as pi Olid as Lucifer. She is tall, well-made, has sine dark eyes and hair, a Roman nofe, a beautiful mouth, and a charming fet of teeth ; but she is fo OL. I.	c	horridiv
j
C I8 ]
horridly conceited, that I canst like her. She may do very well for one who can fall in love with mere outside,f but she is not to my taste.
Mifs Amelia Beaumont, granddaughter to Lord Spencer, is the other fair nymph, and I fancy her pidlure will pleafe you better than the former.-Shc is of the middle heighth, her ' shape fymmetry itfelf, her complexion the clearest in the world, rather more inclined to the lilies than the rofes; her features are regularly beautiful, and thtee is fuch a melancholy over-fpreads them, that one cannot help feeling one’s felf interested when gazing on her charms ! Don’t now fuppofe
that
C 19 3-
that I am fallen headlong in love ;— no, really, I feel nothing more for the lovely, amiable, gentle Amelia, than friendship (and pity, I would fay, if it was not too humiliating an expression.)	\
I think I give a very Sussicient proof of not being entangled dans la belle pajjiony by my retiring fo Soon into the country, where it will be impossible to gaze on her interesting figure but in idea, now and then, when I have nothin^’ elSe to do. Believe that I am. Unalterably your’s,	'
James Fitzherbert.
C 2 LETTER
[ 2° ]
LETTER VI.
Sthe IIonourable Mtfs Beaumont t‘o ' Mifi Emeu.
Berkeley Square.
rj^IME has at length worn off the edge and poignancy of my grief; but yet I cannot entirely divest myfelf of fome degree of melancholy (nor would I wdsh to do it) for I find nothing unpleasing, nothing harsh, in indulging its influence. It is true, I Would wifli to appear cheerful and eafy in*the prefence of Lord and Lady Spencer, and, for that reafon> often force a fmile when my heart is ill at eafe, and my bofom ftruggles to fup-
prefs
f 21	}
prefs a sigh; but I really think it a duty incumbent on me to appear happy, as they make it their daily/ endeavour to render me fo.
Fm fure you have imputed my silence to the right caufe, as I think I know my Charlotte too well to fuf-pe(S: her capable of harbouring a thought injurious to her friend, and could she fuppofe she for one moment forgot her, would be highly fo-.
I am very impatient to receive a letter from my dear Harriot She has ' not yet wrote to me since our fepara-tion ; but by letters I have received from Lady Manning, I am informed she is well in health, and much better
/
c 22 i
in fpirits. You who have never experienced the pang of having a beloved sister torn from your bofom can form no just idea of what I felt when I. received the lovely girFs parting embrace ; and nothing, I am fure^ could have prevailed on me to make fo cruel a sticisisice, but the rcssedcion of Iiow^ infinitely to her advantage it w'ould be. Sir William and Lady Manning are, you know, very worthy people ; they have no children, and were al-i^ ways particularly fond of Harriot; they have it therefore in their power to be greatly of fervice to her, and I make no doubt but they wdll. I have WTitten to her feveral times, and have
t 23 ]
been rather alarmed at not receiving any anfwers to my letters. Indeed, I still fufpea there has been more in the wind than they tell me ; but why should I create evils., who have sh many already to combat v:ith.
It is now almost three months that I have been in tovvTi, but, as I have not had either Spirits or indiaation to enter into any oS ite gaieties yet, you must -excuSe my not entertaining you with ■descriptions of public places i however, I Sancy it will Soon be in my .power, as Lady Spencer tells me, she shall not longer perfuade, but lay her commands on me, to try a little dtjp-Ration. 1 Smile,—and by dint oS beg-
•C .4
[	24 ]
glng, have got excufed till I leave off my first mourning, which will be in a fortnight’s time.—Mifs Fitzherbert, who is a ward of Lord Spencer’s, and lives w'ith us, ridicules me for my folly (as she calls it) and assures me that it is quite Gothic to mourn either outwardly or inwardly fo long; that the fashionable term of mourning for 7‘elations is now no longer than six weeks upon the whole; and, to render . her argument more forcible, declares, she was tired of wearing fables even that time for Lady Fitzherbert;—but, as I by no means, wiSn to be fuch an adept in fashion as she is, I shall mourn outwardly fix months, and inward-
te.
[ ^5 ]
ly, I am afraid, all the days of my life.
Sir James Fitzherbert, a cousin of her's, returned last week from his travels, who is likewife under Lord Spencer’s care. I think him (if I may judge on fo short an acquaintance) a very amiable young man. He furprifed us last Thurfday just as the butler was clearing the table. I find he did not wait for Lord Spencer’s fending for him, for, upon one of the fervant’s coming into the parlour to acquaint him that a young gentleman was just arrived in a chaife-and'four, and that he had shewn him into his Lordship’s dreshng-room, he turned to me and faid, your brother.
[ .6 ]
ther, my Amelia, I dare fay. My brother, Sir ! exclaimed I; and I felt fuch a tremor come over me, that I could not move. My Lord then ' left the room, and my dear Lady Spencer and Mifs Fitzherbert were employed in endeavouring to prevent my fainting, when he returned and introduced the amiable stranger to us. You can have no idea of my difan-pointment when I found it was not my brother; but a copious stood of tears came to my ashstance, and greatly ■ relieved me, though I fear I received Sir Jameses compliments with a very bad grace when Lord Spencer introduced him to me. Slaving paid" his
ar.omnl intents
[ 2? ]
compliments all round, he took his feat, and the gentleman entered upon that fort of converfation that is natural upon thofe occasions ; but I obferved that he kept his eyes sixed upon Mifs Fitzherbert, who fat playing css all her airs, and rallying me on m.y quick fensibility. Lady Spencer obferving my confusion, propofed the Ladies withdrawing, upon which we left the room. I went direftly to my apartment, as I wished to be alone, but Mifs Fitzherbert followed me in quick
as lightning, and, shutting the door,
♦
told me, she should be very angry if I continued to be fo dull and stupid;
that she had not endeavoured to shew
rn.e
\
L ^8, ]
me the folly of it fooner, as she thought it would appear impertinent on fo new an acquaintance; but, that now she could no longer refrain from telling me it w'as time to throw oss all grave airs. ‘‘ And besides, my dear Mifs Beaumont (added the lively girl) you must know I am in fuch high fpirits myfelf, on account of Sir James’s arrival, that I don’t' care to have my joy damped by feeing one difmal face in the houfe, fo do now, my fweet friend put on your Smiles and Graces when you attend the tea-table, and let us be candidates for his heart, and fee which has the glory of carrying oss the prizCc” 1 fiPsiled amd told hex I had
naf
[	29	]
.not vanity enough to difpute the point with her. She curtfy’d and left me, faying, as she went out of the room. Remember the Graces, remember the Graces.”
When we went down, we found Lord and Lady Spencer, and Sir James, waiting tea for tis. As we entered, the latter bow’d, and, feeing me go towards the table, placed a chair for me, and then returned to his own. Mifs Fitzherbert had by this time stated herfelf in one between his and Lady Spencer’'s, but recolledling herfelf, turned to me and faid, Mifs Beaumont, can I affist you ?” I thanked her, but declined her obliging offer.
Lady
[ 30 ]
Lady Spencer, who is indulgence it-felf, desired I would let my young friend help me, and faid, she could anfwer for her not thinking it any trouble. ‘‘ Mifs Beaumont is convinced of that, I hope. Ma’am,” re-ply’d the droll girl, and ssew to the table, where she rather hindered me than otherwife, as you may very well fuppofe; for her attention was bestow’d on a more agreeable objed than either the table or the tea-board, and once mistaking the cream-pot for the coffeepot, she began pouring, and would have emptied it, had I not convinced her of the error she was in. She laughed heartily at it, and (whlfper-
ing)
C 51 ]
ing) told me, it was very excufable.. I really blushed for her, as I was afraid Sir James would take notice of her behaviour —^When tea was over, she turned to me and faid, You must excufe me if I gape a little, for really I am quite unaccustomed tofpend a whole evening at home and then, addressing herfelf to Sir James, told him, she hoped he would estimate her compliment at a very high price, when she had informed him she had put off ' a very agreeable engagement, in order to fpend the first evening of his arrival at home with him, and should expedh,. as the reward of her condefeension, that he would be her Cecijheo for a
month
L 32 ]
month to come. Hefpokehis thanks in a very graceful bow, without uttering a fyllable; but, I own, he feemed fui prized at her freedom. Some time aftei, he went and leaned over her chair ;—they held a short converfation which I did not hear then, taking hold of her hand, he led her to the harpfichord, faying, After the proof I have had of Mifs Fitzheishert’s obliging difpofition, I cannot doubt but she will favour me with a few lessons on my favourite instrument.” She con rented with a very good grace, and play’d fcvcral very fine pieces, after which, your poor friend was called upon. I performed to the best of my
abilities ;
C 33 ]
abilities; but, as I had not pracstifed since I came to town, I fear I did not come off with flying colours, though Sir James had the politenefs to compliment my playing exceedingly. I am heartily tired of writino;, which I am not iurprized at, as I have written you an enormous letter; but it brines its apology with it, My wish to oblige my Charlotte,” who will readily believe that I am her
Truly assedlionate
Amelia BeAumont.
VoL. I. D LETTER
_ C 34 ]
LETTER VII.
Mifs Finch to The Honourable Mifs-Beaumont.
Summer Hill, Devon.
A TFIOUSAND thanks to my dear Amelia, for her last kind letter, which afforded me infinite fatisfadion, as I could perceive through the whole, that her heart was more at eaSe than it had been for Some time past, and IcSt me room to hope site will Soon regain her wonted eheerfiilneSs. That this may be the caSe I Sincerely wish. And, really, my dear Amelia, you must not let grief get the better of vou ; argue yourSelf out of it, and
enter
[ 35 ]
enter a little into the world ; for nothing can be more prejudicial to a young petsion than that fettled melancholy that you talk of. It fours the disposition, gives a gloomy habit of thinking, and creates a diSgust to the innocent pleaSurcs of life.
I must own, my fweet fisienth I was rather Surprized at your long silence. IllneSs, I knew, was not the cauSe, as I heard frequently of you by
Some friends I have in town ; and as
«
for a diminution of your friendship, that I could not SuSpeD; therefore I made mySelf perfetLly eaSy. I should not have waited the punOiilio of letter lor letter, could I have found time for D 2	writinp-.
[	3^	}
writing, but we have had company In
our houfe, who have taken up all my
time. I think you must remember
Col. H------, who is now returned
from Montpelier, where he went for
the re-establishment of Mrs. H-----’s
health ; but alas ! poor woman, she
lived but to undergo the fatigue of a
boisterous voyage. He has two sine
daughters, and a fon who, I have ic
rcafoiyfhink, is a very dissolute young man ; we have had them all with us for this month. The young ladies are very elegant, and have been educated in the highest style. I pity them on account of their having no mother to introduce them into life.
They
[ 37 ]
They are gone to Bath, where they intend figuring away the whole feafon.
I believe, while they were with us, my mother thought herfelf obliged (as we live within reach of a town, where a little dissipation is continually going forward) to offer her fervices to attend them in public ; w'hich they, poor things, readily accepted of. I assure you, I have been heartily tired of balls, breakfasts, concerts, &c. &c. We went to a public breakfast given by
-----regiment that are quartered there,
but I received no other pleafure from joining the gay throng, but that of feeing my tw'o friends happy. I expert to hear from you foon, and hope :	D 3	to
[ 3^ ]
to be made acquainted with all the fashionable places of refort.
My dear father and mother beg you to accept their most assedtionate love. You are already acquainted with every fentiment of my heart, and therefore must know, that it glows with the warmest wishes for health and happi-nefs. From
Your much attached friend, Charlotte Finch,
letter
\
[ 39 ]
LETTER VIII.
Lke Honourable Mifs H. Beaumont to Lhe Hon. Mifs Beaumont.
Manning Caftle, Wlltfhire.
jX MIDST the afflidions I have of late experienced, that of not being able to write to my Amelia has not been one of the least ; but I have been fo ill, that pen and ink have been denied me, and, indeed, had they not, I have not been in a condition to have made ufe of them. How feverely have I lamented our feparation. What heartfelt anguish did I not experien-ce that cruel day which tore me Irom your tender bofom; but I will not D A	dwell
[	40	]
dwell on evils that cannot now be remedied, bur rather offer up my grateful thanks to that Providence, who, in depriving me of a Sister’s company, has kindly bestowed on me Such an uncle and aunt as, I believe, few can boast the poffeffion of. They are kind to exceSs. Oh ! may I continue to deServe their indulgence and protedtion !—I am happy to hear that you begin to recover your fpirits. Mine are still very low, too much So to Suffer me to enter upon the Subjedl of our recent misfortune. Tell me, my Amelia, are you happy in your new situation ? Conceal nothing from 3'Our Harriot, who will be wretched
indeed
C 41	]
indeed if she perceives the least air of restraint or mistery in your letters.— 1 have many things to fay, but I feci myfelf too weak to hold my pen any longer. 1 beg S.ord and Lady Spencer to accept of every dutiful remembrance, and you of every assedlionate one, from,
Vour’s fmcerely,
Harriot Beaumont.
LETTER IX.
The Honourable Mifs Beaumont to The Hon. Mifs H. Beaumont.
Berkeley Square.
Tk /TANY thanks to my ever dear Harriot for her kindnefs in
wishing;
[	42	]
wishing not to add to my afflidions, by informing me of her illneSs. It was kindly done, my Sweet girl, for, at above a hundred miles distance, I could not poffibly have been of the least Service to you, and I should have iretted mySelf to death. Are you really neaily recovered ? I hope you donst deceive me.—It makes me inexpressibly happy to hear that Sir William and Lady Manning are So kind to you. Lord and Lady Spencer are every thing to me that your fondest wish would have them. How thankful ought we to be for the blessincrs we have received at the hands of Providence,!
My
[	43	]
My fpirits are much better, and I find a little recreation of infinite advantage. I have been feveral times in public lately, but, as my time is
lit
very much taken up, and I fmd very little leifurc for writing, I mean to enter into an agreement, if you approve of it, viz. that I will look upon you and my Charlotte Finch as one (and indeed I must be candid enough to fay, my heart owns no difference) nor will you, I am perfuaded, be averfe to the proposition I am about to make, as you are certain I place an unbounded confidence in that lovely girl, whom I have adored ever since my infancy ; for our friendship grew
with
[	44 J
with our Growth, and strengthened with our Strength ;—you will therefore be acquainted with every fecret of in)gheart, by my making the letters I write to her Serve for you both, and can have no iuS[)ic:oii or my concealing any thing from you, which, I am but too well assured you would otherwise, were I not equally ingenuous. I shall therefore Send her Some Stanks, and she will let you have my journals as Soon as she receives them.
Present my best reSpesss and ass Sedionate compliments to Sir William and Lady Manning, with my gtatelul thanks for their indulgence
o
to
C 45 ]
/
to you. Accept the sincerest love of,
Your asse^ionate,
Amelia Beaumont.
P. S. You may expedt a journal foon. . Let me hear frequently of your welfare.
LETTER X.
Lhe Honourable Mifs H. Beaumont to Lhe Hon. Mifs Milner.
Manning Caftle, Wiltihirc.
LL my Horatia’s kind letters lay now before me, for which I fend her a thoufand and a thoufand thanks. I wish it had been in my power to have anfwered them fooner;
but^
C 46 ]
but, alas! I have been reduced to a state not many degrees from death, at a time when my fpirits were, with great reafon, fo bad, that my life has been deSpaired of. Don’t be alarm’d, my fweet friend, I am now quite recovered, and have nothing to struggle with but exceshve weaknefs; yet I doubt not but the country air and exercife will foon restore me to my former strength. I imagine you must have heard of the lofs I have fustained, and have pitied me, but (thank God)
I have at last reafoned myfelf into a little philofophy, and begin to think, that what is, is for the best, and that the tyrant Death never strikes the
blow
[ 47 ]
blow at random, but is diredted by an all-wife Providence to the completion of fome great design which is not to be feen through by us blind mortals. Our province, therefore, is cheerfully to fubmit to his decrees. But I Snail, perhaps tire my lively friend if I write in this grave style—I will therefore endeavour to get a little out of it, though I fear my pen will involuntarily take its courfe that way.
I am astonished at Lady Milner’s recalling you fo foon from (yueen’s-Square. What can be her motive ? She cannot furely think of introducing you into life yet. But you must ex-cufe me if I fay I think her a very
unaccountable
[ 43 ]
unaccountable creature, and a true w'oman, being a compound of contradiction. I should rather have imagined, from her turn of difpofition, that she would have kept you back, lest your charms should outrival her’s; but what she can mean by her prefent con-dudl I am at a lost to determine.— You must not be angry with me for fpeaking my fentiments fo freely, for really I am quite out of patience with Lady Milner’s behaviour, as, the dish-pated life she leads will not, I am fare, be to your taste ; but, however, it is incumbent on you to obey, which I make no doubt but you will. As I fuppofe she means to exhibit your
perfon
[ 49 ]
peision in public this winter, I shall expcdt you will remember you have a friend in the country who interests herSelf in all your concerns, and who will be happy to hear from you whenever you have a leiSure moment to bestow on Sriendship. I am now at
Manning Castle, in Wiltshire, the Seat
\
of my uncle, who has taken me undef his protedlion. My Amelia, on whom I So fondly doat, is Separated from me, and is in Berkeley Square, with Lord and Lady Spencer; So you See we are both amply provided for. The country where I am is beautiful, the houSe magnificent, and the situation plca-Sant. We live very retired, and See VoL. I.	E	little
C 5° ]
little or no company. There is indeed one family that we are very intimate with, but it consists only of a good kind of a humdrum man and his wife, two fqualling children, a few domef-tics, a cat and a dog. After this account you will, perhaps, be curious to know who they are ; and, as I always love to fatisfy rcafonable cu-riofitv, I must inform you he is a Baronet, and their names are Hoi-land.
When you write to me, you must
eliredt your letters to Mifs Manning,
as my uncle (who has a few particu-/»
larities) insists upon my being called by his name. He fays I am his daughter ;
[ 51 ]
ter; and indeed I may easily past for fuch, as few people in thefe parts know to the contrary.
This is the longest letter I have written for fome time. I assure you I am quite tired ; and as all the family are retired to rest, and I feel myfelf difpofed to steep, I think 1 had better indulge its instuenCe., Accept every wish that an assedtionate heart can offer, from,
Your stneere friend, Harriot Beaumont.
E 2 LETTER
[ 5^ ]
LETTER XI.
The Honourable Mifs Milner to The Hon. Mifs H. Beaumont.
St. James’s Street,
r’T^HE long looked for and anxiousty expected pleafure of a letter from my Harriot I have at length received. I had indeed heard of the melancholy event of Lady Beaumont’s , death, and wrote a letter to you on the occasion, which must have mif-carried, as yoy do not mention the receipt of it.
Sincerely did I partake of your af-stidlion, as I was convinced that my dear Harriot’s fenfibility must (before
■TIt
[ S3 ]
she could have been torn from fo indulgent a mother, and fo assetstionate a sister) have been put to a very fevere trial; but I will not probe afresh her wounds;—I will entertain her with a little of my affairs, which, I am forry to fay, are not in the train I could wish they were. Just turned of fifteen, to be introduced into the beau monde might, to fome girls of more volatile difpositions, be a pleasing circumstance ; but I find it far other-wife, and, without pretending to have the least degree of Stoicifm in my composition, can look with contempt on thefe idols, Vanity and Diffipation, ■ that I every day fee courted by thou-E 3	fands;
[ 54 ]
Sands ; nor do I think I have the least merit on that account, as I do it lefs, I fear, from principle titan from taste. My mother has already difcovered this, and is not a little chagrined. ** tloratia,” fays she to me, a few days ago, you are now grown a sine young woman, I must have you throw off all girlish airs, and no longer fuppofe yourfclf at the boardingsschooL It is time a young lady of your fortune should fee a little of life; and, in order to be introduced properly, I fuppofe you will not objeO: to my having thofe stowing trestes handled by my fi-ifeur, who is one of the best hands, and will drefs you au dernier gout. I have
Sent
C 55 ]
fent for Mackenzie, who will shew off your elegant shape to great advantage in one of her inimitable Circaffians. They are all the ton, and she shall make you feveral. We will go to the mercer’s this morning and fee if we can meet with any thing pretty.”
I
Then, looking at her watch, she exclaimed, Oh, [sseavens 1 it is near one o’clock. Well, I will poiitivcly wait no longer for Wilkinfon ! Thclc tradcTpeople are the most tircfomc creatures in the world, they never keep to their appointments 1”	1 hen
ringing the bell, and one of the fer-vants coming in, fne thus addressed him:	Tell Wilkinion, when stie
E 4	comes,
[56]
comes, that I have waited at home a full hour for her, and that she must eithcr call or fend again to-morrow', as I cannot waste the whole morning in the expedlation of feeing her. No, indeed ! I, who have iiumberiefs engagements upon my hands, can find a better ufe for my time.—Is my coach come r’’ Yes, my Lady.” “ Oh, then, Horatia, ive will be go-ing.” “ John, desire Mifs Milner’s Icrvant to bring down her clokc and must.” When her ladyship’s commands were executed, we trot into the. coach, and she gave orders to drive to Van Somers ’s, in Pall Mall, where, after having tossed over a variety of
beautiful
[ 57 ]
beautiful silks, she told them, with the greatest degree of compoSure, there ^ Was nothing that Suited her, and wa^ going to leave the shop, when I fixed on a Devonshire brown Satin, which, I Said, I thought very pretty. SVell,” exclaimed her ladyship, “ I pity your taste, Horatia, it is absolutely odious; but, however, as you are to be the wearer, I beg you will pleaSe yourSelf, though I would adviie you, my dear, to have a few yards of white Satin Sor a petticoat, and then we w'ill have it made in a Circaffian—as a gown and petticoat would be quite affreuxP To which I xonSented, and was delighted, at any rate, to liicnd a little
money
[	58	]
money there, alter having given them So much trouble. We then went to ieveralshops near Covent Garden—still she could not meet with any thing to pleaSc her; but Sortune Savoured us at the back of St. Clement’s, w’hcre she fixed upon two or three pieces, ,.aftcr having had day-light shut out, and the room illuminated with wax candles, to lee which colour she best became. We then returned to the coach ; and the Servant waiting her commands with hat in hand, she, aSter a few moments deliberation, Said, To Child’s—I want a little money; tell the coachman I defire he would mot di'ivc'nic fo dreadfully stow, I am
in
r - -L b^J J
in a hurry, and love to difpatch bufi-nefs. He knows that I cannot bear to creep as if ive were going to a funeral.” Then turning to me, “ Mlfs Milner, if you have any thing to do in the city, the coach is at your fervicc while I am tranfading businefs at Temple Bar.” I thanked her, and faid I had nothing to do, and could very well wait in the coach still she returned. We by this time arrived there. Her ladyship got out, and poor I fat freezing in the cold, thinking every minute an hour still she returned ; but I very foon quitted my impatience by restedlng, that, it I, who was shut up from every breath
of
[ 6o ]
of air, could fuffcr fo much, what must the poor fervants and horfes feel that were fo expofcd to it. I was indulging this thought when Lady Milner got into the coach, whom I did not at first perceive, ’till tapping me on the shoulder, ssic, lauo-hino--. faid, Now would I give all the world to know the fubJeO; of your meditations.” “ You shall, if you plcafc, my dear madam, at a cheaper ratc, I was only pitving the poor fervants, who, I think, must fuffcr dreadfully from the cold.” Poh, nonfenfe! I shall never make any thing of you, if you have fo much consideration for thefc creatures. What, I
fuppofc.
[ 6i ]
fuppofe, if you had bought yourfelf a ticket for the mafquerade, had ordered your drefs, and fet your heart upon going, you would deprive yourfelf of the pleafure, truly, if it unfortunately should happen to be a wet evening, lest your fervants should catch cold ! If I can help laughing at the idea !— but I hope, in a fortnight’s time, you will improve, and fend your stiff air, and your* fenfibilities together, as a prefent to your fchoohd.ijlrefs, with vour thanks for the loan of them While
j
you was under her care, and that you find no life for either now !'’ Thus she ran on, ’till I was out ef all patience, and could not help shed-
ding
[ 62 ]
ding a few tears at her having fo little feeling. Blefs me/’ fays she, ‘‘ there
is furely a fale at Lord L------’s to-
,clay ! Do, my dear, pull the checkstring, that we may inquire.” “ Pray, John, what is going forward at Lord
L------’s, I fee a vast deal of company
there ?” “ It is an aucstion, I believe, my Lady.” “ Oh, then, I will be fet down, that we may know who and who are together;” but my poor un-, fortunate head-drefs entirely frustrated this fcheme, for, recolledting that my hair had not then been tortured by her barbarous frifeur, she thus continued;
Oh, Picavens ! I forgot your head w'as that figure! I would not, upon
any
[ 63 ]
any account, have you Seen while it is in Such a State. I should be ridiculed in all companies for having.introduced fuch a little Savage into a polite assembly.”—« Home, home, John ! as fast as you can. I must dreSs before dinner
for Mrs. H-------’s route, and the
Qpera.”—“ I wish, Horatia, I could take you with me, but Bogue cannot possibly curl and drefs you ’till tomorrow; however, you must amuSe yourSelf as wtU as you can, for I would not, for the world, miSs a new opera, as every body will be there.”— I assured her my time would not hang-heavy on my hands, having a very dong letter to write. A long letter
to
[	64	]
to write, indeed ! No, no, my dear, you had better let that alone, as too much stooping is very bad, both for your health and complexion ; and, bcfides, I have a feheme in my head that I hope you wdll approve of, which is, to fend for Lady Charlotte and kady Sophia Stanly to fpend the evening with yon. They are very genteel, well bred, young women, who, I am furc, you will be very fond of; and whofe manners and behaviour I would have you copy, as they are the very essence of politenels.”— But her ladyship must give me leave to disser from her in that particular; for I Sind them very proud, Self-con-
ceited
[	^5	]
Geiicd girls, that have refiPd away every noble fentiment which they might once, perhaps, have possessed, and are now the staves of Vanity and Diffipation. I am not tired of writing, nor have I exhausted half my little budget of nonfenfe; but yet I am compelled to conclude, as the coach is at the door, and I have already had two messages to attend Lady Milner; • therefore, adieu, my fweet friend, and oblige me by accepting my sincerest wishes for your profpeistty.
Most asscCtionately your’s, Horatia Milner.
P. S. You must not exped; to hear from me very often, as my time is not
VoL. I.	F	my
/
[ 66 ]
my own. I hope I am not too minute, as I wish not to tire, but to entertain. Do not mention the circumstance of my uneasinefs on any account, as I should be forry to have Lady Milner’s conduct known but to my Harriot, who, I look upon as my other felf, and conceal nothing from her.
LETTER XII.
Lhe Honourable Mifs Beaumont to Mifs Finch.
Berkeley Square.
T HAVE at last found a leifurc mo-^ ment to dedicate to Friendship and my Charlotte, as Lord and Lady Spencer are gone to fpend the day at
Richmond,
[	67	]
Richmond, and I have got excuSed from attending them ; but MiSs Fitz-herbert, who was afraid my time would hang heavy on my hands, has engaged
me to dine at the DucheSs of L----’s,
and I am consequently obliged to Spend Some part of the morning in Sacrificing to the Graces. But I will now make good uSe of my time, and tell you what I have been doing Since I wrote last.—I think I told 3^11 I
t
had begged a fortnights reprieve before I entered into the fashionable follies of the h-eau monde; but,^ before it was well expired, MiSs Fitzherbert came into my dreffing-room, and (in
9
her uSual way) Said, she was come to F 2,	give
[ 68 ]
give me another ledlure. I begged her to be stated ; and she thus began : You may, perhaps, Mifs Beaumont, think me impertinent, but I really fpeak through a motive of friendship, and I think no young woman ought to be above the opinion of the world, ' particularly a handfome one. It is now three months since you came to town, and have not, in all that time, been sten any where but in the Park, where you have now and then walked for your health. Several people have inquired of me, who that beautiful pidsture of defpair was. When I have told them your name and the nature of your affliction, I have frequently
obstrved
[	69	]
obferved their fneering, and faying to each other, There are, doubtlefs^ other motives for her grief than the lofs of a mother meaning, that you was a love-sick girl. Now, as I am fure you do not deferve that epithet, and would be forry to be looked upon in fuch a light, let me perstiade you to go about a little and siiit if away with all the pretty fellows, to shew them they are mistaken. Come,
now, I insist upon your attending iiw /
to the opera next Saturday. We will get Lady Spencer to attend us;—-she wishes you to make your appearance in public, and desired me this morning to ufe all the eloquence I was
T' o	TVM H rr'i e
I
[ 7° ]
mistrefs of, to prevail on you. Con-fent, now, I fay, or I shall call you an obstinate girl.” What could I do ?
I was obliged to comply, to get rid of her importunity ; therefore, telling her, I thought myfelf much oblig-ed for the share she took in mv affiirs, promifed to attend her the Saturday following to the Haymaket. You can • stave no idea how delighted she was that she had gained her point; and after thanking me, she stew downstairs to acquaint Lady Spencer.
Bennet then came to tell me Flam-ment, the mantuamaker, was come. ■ I ordered him in, and the remainder of the morning was fpent in adjusting
C 7‘ ]
matters relative to drefs. Before I had well difpatched Flamment, the fervant came to acquaint me dinner was ready. I went down with a heart lip;hter than ufuast which I could ac-count for no otherwife than from that fenfation which we naturally feel when we oblige thofc that are dear to us. When dinner was over, the defert fet
I
on the table, and the fervants retired, Lady Spencer, addreffing herfelf to me, faid, I thank you, my amiable Amelia, for making us all happy. Mv Lord, as well as myfelf, thinks himfelf much obliged by your ready compliance of going a little into public, as it is what we wished you to F 4	do ;
C 7^ J
do; for, let me tell you, we are not a
little proud of our grand-daughter.’’’
I thanked them for the good opinion
which they entertained of me,, and
hoped my condud: would always meet
with their approbation, as I should *
make it my study to oblige them in every particular. “ A mighty sine fentimental fpeech, truly,” fays his Lordship, how I love to hear women prate about duty ! but don’t make any promifes, I befeech you, Amelia, as I shall not have a jot the worst opi-' nion of you for not doing it: fo, pray, let me hear no more of your grave nonstnst, but be gay and lively; for though I am an old man, I love to
C 73 ]
fee all the young people about me pof-
fefs that stinshine of the mind which,
/
in ray juvenile days, afforded me fo much content and happinels. There is no plcafure in life without content. Beauty fades; riches pall; and boif-tering mirth tires ;—but a contented mind is a continual fource of delight —it renders every state happy. To the rich it adds riches;—to the poor k teaches them not to repine becaufe they are shut out from fupersiuities of life, but to be thankful and fatissied • with the little they posseSs;—and to the wretched it assords confolation and patience to bear the burden that oppresses them.!’
When
[ 74 ]
When the defert was over. Lord Spencer beckoned me out of the room, and, taking me into his study, took out of his bureau tvventy-sivc guineas, and prdented them to me, faying, Put them in your pocket, my Amelia, and this day three months my steward wilh [>ay you the lame fum, as I mean to allow you a hundred a-year for pin-money. Is it enough, my good girl, tell me sincerely, as it is my pride and glory to iee you make a genteel, nay, elegant appearance ? Old men, you know, have whimsies, and they do not love to be contradicted, fo, pray, now, let me fee you quite fmart, and don’t fancy yourSelf a poor destitute orphan,
C 75 ]
for, if you behave well, which I make no doubt but you will, you shall find in me an indulgent father while I live,, and at ray death I will take care to fet you above the frowns of the world. Now'’ hold up your head^; and throw aside that dejessed air.” I threw my-felf on his neck, and wept aloud, w'hich w^as the only thanks I could give him. He embraced me tenderly, and desired I would go to my apartment, and not niake my appearance ’till 1 had dried up my tears and assumed a more-cheerful air. I left him, and stew to my dreffing-room, where I could not help indulging myfelf in a stood of tears; but recollecting that was not
the
[76]
the vvayto oblige my generous patrons., I got up, and looking at mySelf in a glaSs, was quite shocked at my appearance,—pale as d h, and my eyes red and Swelled ; but, with the assistance of a little roSe water, I Soon removed the last inconvenience, and when I thought mySelf a tolerable figure, went down into the drawing-room, where i found the amiable and ao;rceable Fitz-herbert, who, witlx)ur afieing me the uSual queSLion of “ Flow' do }'ou do,” exclaimed, “ What ! not dressed for the Pantheon, MiSs Beaumont r”—■ “ No, Sir James, it is not in my power to be of your party.” “ Vvfoll, then, I am confoundedly disappointed ;
[ 77 ]
ed but, turning to Lady Spencer, Mifs Beaumont, Madam, is furely of a very charitable dirposition, for fne well knows what hostilities fne would commit upon the gentlemen’s hearts, was she to make her appearance in public, and for that reafon keeps herstlf entirely ssciuded from the world.” ‘‘ She is indeed a very naughty girl, Sir James; but I hope and believe her condud is not aduated by fo vain a motive. She has pro-mifed amendment, and wc are to go to the opera next Saturday, will you be of the party	If your Lady-
ship and Mifs Beaumont will permit me that pleafure.” We both bow’d.
Then
L 78 ]
Then leading me to the harpsichord, heprefented me with fomte nevv music, and faid, As I know you and Mifs Fitzherbert are great proficients, 'I have procured fome favourite pieces which I think you will like.” I thanked him, and began strumming the first that I cast my eyes on ; but not executing it properly, he bent forward, and, begging my pardon, faid, I believe it is play’d fo.” The eafe and eletrance with which he ran over the keys quite charmed me ; and to shew him I had profited by his instruDions, I play’d that passage over again. He complimented me ex-■ccedingly on my performance, and
Pegged
L 79 ]
begged I would favour him with an air, that he might hear me sing. I thought it best not to refuSe, and he fixed upon one in the opera of Love in a Village. It was a very plaintive one, and I recollected that it was a great favourite of poor Lady Beaumont’s, which made me enter into the Spirit of it. In an instant my eyes filled with water, and my whole frame Seemed agitated, which Sir James perceiving, stopped me, and Said, “ Vour inclination to oblige, MiSs Beaumont, leads you too great lengths. Your Spirits are not equal to theSe exertions.” I then took out my handkerchief, and looked just like a fool.
The
t 8° ]
'fhc tea-cquipage was by this time
I
brought in, and I fent .up to Mifs Fitzherbert to acquaint her we waited for her. After expeding her a considerable time, she at last came down, and, without taking notice of any living creature, or making any apology, she ran to the glafs, faying, Is not my head-drefs divine ! with what taste and elegance Robere has placed my diamonds.”—To wssom do you fpeak, Mifs Fitzherbert V faid the agreeable Sir James; to me, though,,! fuppofe, as you no doubt prefer die gentlemen’s opinion to the Ladies’.”—‘‘ To you, indeed ! I had not even obferved that you was
in
[ 8i ]
in the room;—it was to Mifs Beaumont that I f[ioke, but she fcems to prefer jher own thoughts to the found of my voice, for the deufe-a-bit does she attend to a word I sty.”—“ 1 really beg your pardon. Mist Fitzheissert ; Out I was fo taken up in admiring your head-drest (which I thinic very elegantj that I did not even hear you fpeak.—^Give me leave to pour you out a dish of tea ?”—“ Ob, by no means ! I have other businefs for you of greater importance; let that lazy _ cousin of mine do the honours of the tea-table, and do yon come and help me to rummage over this band-box which Frith hath just fent me, that VoL. I, ■ G	vve
[ 8z ]
we may six upon a pretty and becoming fet of ribbons.” I fmiled at her lively fally, and ashed Sir James whether he agreed to the propofal. Certainly, Mifs Beaumont, you do not, I hope, fuppofe me fo degalant a fellow as to refufe being of fervice to the ladies.” I then resigned him my feat, and went to the fopha, where Mifs Fitzheishert was examining a variety of ribboiis ; and after an hour’s con-fultation we fixed upon one, but not ’till every body’s opinion had been given on the important article 1 This affair being fettled, she had leifure to difcover that Sir James was not dressed, and, looking at him with astonishment.
[	83	]
nishment, exclaimed, “ In dishabille, Sir James! I thought you intended going to the Pantheon. Pray, let me afk you what prior engagement prevents your Lordship from attending
/
me ? however, I am auitc indifferent as to whether you go or not, for the
Duchefs of L--------will c.all for me at
ten o’clock, and she always has beaux enough in her train. She desired me, ’thongn, to Siy, that if you was dil-pofed to go, there was a corner of the coach at your fervice.”—I am infinitely obliged to her Grace, and shall certainly do myfelf the honour of attending her.^ Mifs FitzliCishert.”—She Seemed piqued at his reply, and left G 2	thz
C 84 ]
the room.—Sir James then, looking at his watch, faid, “ Issaith, it is later than I thought, half after eight, and I have got entirely to drefs. I must run home as fast as I can.”—He took leave, and I went up stairs to fee if I could be of fervice to Mifs Fitzher-bert, who, I found fretting and raving at her woman, for her stupidity in not knowing how to pin on her bows with taste. Thefe creatures, my dear Mifs Beaumont, have not the fmallest idea of elegance ; nor can all the eloquence in the world dun it into their stupid heads ! Would you be fo good as to alter my bussont. Did you ever fee fuch a dowdy as Crofts has made
me ?”
[ 85 J
me I told her I thought she looked quite charming, and afkcd her how many beaux she meant to kill. “ Ah, MiSs Beaumont, my reign will Soon be over! I mav do very well when you are not by; but the men must be tastelcSs indeed, if they have eyes for any body elSe while you are in company.”—Mighty fine! mighty fine! Pray how long has this fit ofi humility been upon you ? But, as I think you must find it rather an unpleaSant eoin-qianion, let me adviSe you to take another furvey of yourSelf in that large glaSs, which, I warrant, wtSst put you in good humour, and make you think better of youisielf.”—Whv, upon
' [ 86 }
the whole, I donst think I look amifs. My shape is uncommonly elegant to-night, and my toute enfemble will make no defpicable appearance in the motreyTlirong.”—I assured her I was quite of her opinion, and, after taking my advice {which, by the bye, she needed not have done to main a eood opinion of herfelf) in viewing her elegant perfon from head to foot in a glafs that she has in her room for that purpofe, w'e defeended into the draw'^-ing-room,. where we had not been long, wdten the agreeable Sir James made his appearance, dressed perfectly in the fashion, without difplaying either the least folly or extravagance.
E 87 3
But as I know you wish me to be minute, I will give you a defcription of it. His hair was dressed in the most fashionable manner, feathered back, but npt in the extreme ; his coat was fcarlet, lined and trimmed with real fable, lapellecl back, and tied together with gold tastels; his* ruffles of the beautiful Drefden ; his shoe and knee buckles diamond. In short, I never faw fo complete a sio-ure.” When he entered the room, it was in fuch an eafy and unassedted manner, that you would imagine he had not the least idea of his captivating appearance. He began talking on indifferent fubjesss, fuch as the G 4	weather
[ ST,}.
weather and tliefe other common-pkcc
topics, which often make up the
greatest part. of a sine gentleman’s
converfatioii; and was fo obliging as
to fay that my company would have
been a very great acquisition to the
party. « Perhaps, Sir James,’' faid
Mifs Ficzherbert, “ a little of your
perfuasion would have more essedt
upon that little Reclufe than either
Lady Spencer’s exertions or mine;
for niy part, I cannot conceive what
she'does by herstlf at home, unlefs
she is writing her life and adventures !
Is not that the cafe, my good girl, ?
Well, I hope you. will oblige a friend \
or two with a perufal of it in manufeript
before
[ 89 ]
before you fend it to the prefs.”—*f I have met with fo few adventures in the courfe/of my life,, and thefe are of fo melancholy a nature, Mifs Fitz^her-bert, that, was I difpofed to turn autliorefs, I Snould not make my life the fubjed; of my pen, as I am very certain there is nothing in it that the w'orld could prosit by, and it would be of too insignisicant a nature to deferve the notice and protection of the public.” She feemed confufed, and, to turn the converfation, afked Sir James whether his coat was made here or abroad. “ At Paris, ma’am.” “ I thought fo, they have a manner peculiar to themfelvcs. Do you dance
to-nip'ht
[ 9° ]
to-night?” ‘‘ If Mifs Fitzherbert will favour me with her hand.” I cannot positively fay I will, Sir James; but if I don’t fee any thing I like bet- ' ter, you may depend upon my con-ierring that honour on you.”
Before she had well finished her obliging and condefcending fpcech,
, Vv'e were put in a siurry, by a loud knock at the door. “ Oh, heavens ! where is my cloak and muss? I desired Crofts to bring them down, but she never attends to what I fay ! Now shall I make the Duchefs wait!”—I ran up stairs and brought them down to her, for which she thanked me, Wished me good night, and giving her
hand
C 91	]
hand to Sir James, difappeared in an
(
instant.
I then went into the parlour to Lorel and Lady Spencer, who I found playing at cribbagc. On casting my eyes carelefsly round the room, I per- > ceived a large shagreen cafe which lay upon one of the tables. I was ciirious to know what it contained; and having ashed her ladyship’s permission, I went and opened it. My eyes were struck with the. brilliancy of its contents,, which were, a beautiful enamelled watch, and chain ; a vast number of diamond pins; a pair of elegant bracelets fet round with brilliants; a quantity of rings; a pair of buckles and
ear-iintrs
[	92	]
car-rings; my dear mother’s and Lord and Lady Spencer’s pidlures; with Several other things of*lefs value. I was expreshng my admiration, when her ladyship came up to me and Said, she hoped I would do her the favour to accept of them, as she had got them new Set on purpofe for me. “ Why, my dear madam, would you overwhelm me with your kindneSs! The weight of obligations I already lay under to you and my Lord is Sufficient, without adding to the number this instance of your indulgence.”—You will diS-pleafe me exceedingly, Amelia, if you Say another Syllable. Accept thjcSe baubles as a token of mv recrard, and
lie
t 93 ]
be pershadcd that I feel more pleasiire in giving than you possibly can in receiving them.” How kind was this fpeech. It delighted me more than the gift itfelf.
V	•
As it was by this time very late, and we feldom eat fuppers, I wished
\
them good night, and retired to my apartment, where, after having gazed on the portrait of my mother, and bedew’d it with my tears, I undressed, and went to bed; but ruminating on Lord and Lady Spencer’s bounty to me, I fell into a train of the most pleasing resicaions, ’till Morpheus locked me in his downy arms. I stept all night, which was what I had not
done
C 94 ]
done for many months : So, true it is, that
Tir’d Nature’s fweet reflorer, balmy Sleep !
He! like the world, liis ready vifit pays V/here fortune fmiles ; the wretched he forfakes : Swift on his downy pinion flies from wo.
And lights on lids unfully’d with a tear.
Young.
When I rofe in the morning I felt myfelf In unnfual fpirits, which Lady Spencer obferved when I went down to breakfast. My Lord was quite in raptures; and declared he had never Seen me look half fo handfome as at that moment. It is well,” faid he, I am your grandfather, or I donst know what might be the confequence, however, I am refolved to have a
kifs.”
L 95 ]
kifs.” You maybe certain I did not refufe him ; and while he was in the adt, the fervant announced Sir James. ‘TGood morning to you, Fitzherbert, you did not, I dare fay, take me for fuch a Jhittip old fellow; but I can tell you I love to kifs a pretty girl as well as the best of yoUj and that little hussy has got the fweetest lips in the world, try them, Sir James, I’ll warrant you’ll be of my opinion.”—I was exceedingly confufed, ttdss felt the colour come in my face; but Sir James came up to me with a gallant air, and took hold of my hand, faying, -Since I have Lord Spencer’s fane ■ tion, Mifs Beaumont will not, I hope,
deem
f 9« 1
deem me prefuming if I do not deprive myfelf of fo great a felicity,” Well, Sir James, is it not as I faid ? Is not
she a charming little hussy ?”_All
who fee Mifs Beaumont, my Lord, must think her perfectly amiable.”
Do not imagine I am grown vain, by my repeating all the civil things that are faid to me, as I sind myfelf obliged to do it to you, who, I know, wish me to be minute, and I could not otherwife reduce my narrations into method ; but I hope you are fenSible that I do not receive the least plealurc from grofs fiattery. Tlie prastes and good opinion of fenfible people I should always wish to possess,
bur,
r •
C 97 3
but, at the Same time, I am quite
indifferent as to what that ridiculous
Set of petit nmitrcs think of me.—It
is in vain, Mifs Beaumont, I fuppoSe,
to endeavour to perSuade you to go to
Rozzini's benefit to-night, as you have
a particular distike to all public pia-
*•
ces.”—You are greatly mistaken, Sir James, I have not the least objection to a little dissipation, or to public places in general; and, were my Spirits equal to the taste of attending them, I should long before this have obliged Lorcl and Lady Spencer by my uc-quieScence. Her Ladyship has given me a reprieve of one short week, after Lvhich time you will, I fear, be old in VoL. I.	H	the
C 98 ]
the once grave Amelia Beaumont, k vain diffipated good for nothing girl.” —“ That, I am convinced,” replied Sir James, “ will never be the cafe.” Crofts then came in to tell us her young lady chofe to breakfast in bed, as she found herfelf greatly fatigued. Pray, Mrs. Crofts,” fays Sir James, tell her I am here, and that I want to'fee her, having fomething to pro-pofe that will be an immediate cure for her lazinefs. Here have I been up for thefe three hours, walking in Sr. James’s park to get an appetite, and yet I was not in bed a moment fooner than her fair Ladyship. Don’t forget to tell her all this, and that if
she
C 99 ]
she does not make her appearance in twenty minutes, I shall certainly come, up and storm the castle.”—I fent her a bafon of tea and fome muffin, with my compliments, and that if she was not too much fatigued, I should be .glad of her company at one o'clock, to go a shopping with me, as I had ordered the coach at that time,; and while I fat expecting an anfwer, the door opened, and in walk’d the half-dressed MiSs Fitzlicrberr. She had on ' a large dormeufe, with pale pink rib-*bons, a white dimitfy jacket and coat that had not more than three pins in it, a laiTC double gauze handkerchief thrown careleSsly ever her neck. In H 2	Snort^
[ lOO ]
short, all together, she made a very droll appearance. She had the grace to yawn out, Good morning to you, good folks.” Then, addressing her-felf to Sir James, faid, VVhat will not curiosity make a female do ? Here have I got up two hours fooner than I intended, merely to know what this great matter is that you are going to propOfe. If it is not fomething very clever, dread my difpleafure./—‘‘ It is an affair of very great importance that I am come upon, I assure you, Mifs Fitzhcrbert, which is to inquire if you found your garter before you left the Pantheon last night.”—“ Upon my word, Sir James, you are very infolent!
You
[ I°I ]
You fee how-it is, Mifs Beaumont, thefe cousins always fuppofe they have a right to take liberties.”—Why now, don’t deny it, Did I not hear
you fay‘to the Duchefs of L------,
Good heavens ! What JJoall I do! I am in the greateji dijtrefs! Why, what’s the matter?” Ihur Grace will, I am fare, pity me when you hear 1 have lojl— (then, perceiving me at your elbow, vou turned the converfatioii with an assedledj—blefs me I here is Sir James! Now, pray, my Lord, what could I infer from all this, but that she had lost her garter ?”
I fee you are difnofed to be fa~
V	i.
cctious this morning. Sir James,” laid ' H 3	stK'
[	102 J
the erwaged Mifs Fitzherbert; but, as I do not feel myfelf inclined to be the fubjedt of your ridicule, I shall quit the room. Therefore, I wish you good morning.”
Stay, stay, my dear cousin, and let me ^make my peace with you before you go ? Will you do me the favour to accept a ticket to Rozzinih bene-sit	If you will promife not to
laugh at me again, Sir James—but my time is precious—I must go and drefs to attend Mifs Beaumont—fo your fervant; we shall meet, I fuppofe, at Mrs. Cairy’s route to-night, where we will talk the matter over.” And away she stew.
Sir
[	103	]
Sir lames then took leave, as he was going to Xatterfal’s, and I went up stairs to write an inventory of the things I wanted j which, before I had finished, the coach came. When Mifs Fitzherbert had completed her dreSs, we jet off on our peregrination, and after we had racketed all over the town, and were returning through Clergy Street, we obServed a vast deal of company going in at a glaSs and china warehouse ; Mil's Fitzherbert stopt the coach to inquire into the caisse, and w'^as informed that it was an auction. “ SuppoSe we arc Set dowm/’laid she, there Seems to be shmething clever going forward. Blels me ! there is H 4
[	■■ j :
the Countefs of G--------’s coach ! I
wnTi exceedingly to fpeak to her ladyship, You can furely have no ob-jedion to our going in for half an hour. I told her I thought there xvas rather an impropriety in two young women’s being feen going into an auction without a protedor. “ Not in the least. It is done every day; and besides, as we shall go to the Countefs
of G------Immediately, there cannot
be the least harm in it.” J at last confented, though with very great reludance.
We found the room exceedingly ciowcied; fo milch fo, that it was impossible to find out Lady G________.
I assure
C I°5 ]
I assure you, I was quite, shock’d, as eve were obliged to pafs through a great crowd of gentlemen who stood at the dopr ; but Lord Nassau, who had often met Mifs Fitzherbert in company, feeing our embarrassment, came to inquire if he could be of any fervice to us. Oh, my Lord,” faid she, “ you are come very opportunely to relieve two poor distressed damfels. Can you inform us where
\
to find the Countefs of G------? I
know she is here, for her carriage is in waiting ; but I cannot, for the life ot me, find lier out.”—“ I will endeavour tado it for you, ma’am but I tear it will prove but anaciempL. Will you
wm ••
L	j •
walk on farther, I will endeavour to keep the crowd back ?”—We told ^ him, we thought it better to remain where we were still he had difcovered the -Countefs, as w'e should be lefs obfcrved. He then left us, and we were furrounded by a vast fet of coxcombs, who ail offered their affistance to condudt us through. Mifs Fitz-herbert could hardly keep her countenance ; but I looked remarkably grave. Lord Nassau foon returned, and told us it w'as imposhble to find
out Lady G-------, and that he had
tired his eyes to no purpofe. I then p'ropoled returning to the coach, to which my companion confented, as,
she
[ ■]
she faid, there was not much amulc-ment in standing in fuch a throng.
Glad w^as I when we got out. Lord Nassau condudled us to the carriage, and inquired whether he should be lo fortunate as to meet us any where in
\
the evening. Me you will most likely fee,” • replied Mifs Fitzherbert, but as for this little stoic, she never goes any where.” Fie assedled to be forry, shrugged up his shoulders, put on a difappointed look, and took his leave.
We got home just time enough for Mils Fitzherbert to have her hair dressed before dinner. I fpent the remainder or the day, in. my room,
writing
[ loS j
writing and fettling accounts. In the evening, I went with Lady Spencer to a private party at Lady Sandes’s. The company was feled; a mixture of old and young; many beaux, and Some belles ;—but I was particularly struck with the appearance of'a beautiful girl, who feeme.d to be about fitteen. Her peisson was delicately elegant, her drefs and manner genteel,
i
and her route enfemble quite irresistible. I obferved that she took particular notice of me, and our eyes were continually meeting. As there were few people of my acquaintance in the room, I wisticd to be introduced to her, and gi)ing up to Lady Sandcs,
aSred
[ log ]
ated who that young lady was, “ She is, my dear Mifs Beaumont, the youngest daughter of Sir George Cockburn, who died fome time ago.. She will, I am fure, be very proud of an intimacy with you, nor will you
f
be forry to cultivate So agreeable an acquaintance ; give me leave, therefore, to introduce you to her ?” Then,,
turning to Lady Cockburn, who was %
engaged at a whist table, faid, I have no doubt, madam, of your con-fent to bring your daughter and this amiable young lady acquainted ?”— Certainly, madam,” (bowing at the
t
fame time to me, and fmiling in a most affable manner.)—Lady Sandes
then
[ uo ]
then took me by the hand and led me to Mifs Cockburn, who, feeing we were coming, rofe to receive our compliments. Give me leave to introduce Mifs Beaumont to you, Mifs Cockburn, she will be very happy in your acquaintalice, nor do I doubt but you will be equally fo i«i hers.” We both bow’d, and she left us too;ether.
There was fuch an eafe and affability in Mifs Cockburn, that it was iinposhble to be referved in her company ; we therefore very foon got acquainted, talked on various fubjeOs, and made our remarks on perfons and things. As we were standin?- at one ■of the card tables obferving the game,
I hcartf
[ III ]
I heard fomebody pronounce my name, I immediately turned round, and who should be at my elbow but Lord Nassau. He addressed me in the most familiar manner. “ Ah, my dear Mifs Beaumont, how happy am I to meet you ! What lucky star fent me here ? I’m fure I have reafon to blefs my good fortune. I hope you don’t find yourfelf mucli.fatigu’d after your frolic this morning ? Ah ! where is the lively Fitzherbert, that you are here without her ?”—I positively was thunderstruck with the man’s info-lence in aadreffing me in that free style, and, coolly, faid, “ I thought, my Lord, she told you she designed
being
L J
being at Rozzini’s concert.” “ Did she ! well, ril be shot if I had not forgot it! but, I’m furprifed she did not come here first to shew her finery.” Your Lordship is rather fatirical, if Lam not mistaken.” I am fo, Mifs Beaumont, and you must know fatire is my pashon. Beware, therc-iore, of difpleafing me, or I shall certainly lampoon you. But perhaps you would like to make your appearance in print! The Honourable Mifs
A------a E------1 would make a very
' great shew in Bates’s paper!”
I I really turned from him with dif-gust, telling him, I made no doubt but he was very deveiri of which his
last
t 113 3
last eloquent J’peeA was a fufsicient proof. At this instant, our attention was called another way, by Sir George Cockburn’s entering the room. The eyes of the whqle assembly were fixed u^ion him. He did nor, however, appear the least confufed, but, like a true well bred man of fashion, feemed as cafy and unastedted as if he was entering a room where there was not a living foul, paid his compliments to Lady Sandes and ho all his acquaintance, then came up to his sister, who introduced him to me, and we entered into difcouiste.	I could not help
making comparisons between him and
a
Lord Nassau, but they Vvcre indeed , I,	J	ton
C 114 ]
too odious. His converfation was fprightly and entertaining,, without the least assedlation or pedantry; and, ‘ unlike most of his fex, he did not convince me he had a contemptuous opinion of ours, by paying any high-siown compliments. No! He was truly polite, and shew’d me, by his attention, and the language of his eyes, that he thought me agreeable, without fussering the least norifenfe to stow from his tongue.
When the rubber was out. Lady Spencer propofed going. I faid I was ready to attend her; paid my compliments to Lady Sandes arid what few acquaintanifcs I had in the
room.
C “5 ]
Toom, and followed Lady Spencer ciown stairs, handed by the agreeable Sir George?, who returned to the gay assembly, as foon as he had put us in the "carriage.
Lady Spencer was delighted at the ■ acquaintance I had made, and faid she had a very great esteem for Lady Cockburn, who was a peisson of. distinguished wordi. I went to bed immediately after I got home, therefore did not fee Mifs Fitzherbert hill the next morning, who then addressed me in the following terms.: “ Now, my
dear Mifs Beaiunont, what will you
. * give me to tell you of a conquest you
have made “ My thanks, Mifs Fitz-
I 2	■.	herbert
E Ii6 ]
hcishert, which is all you can expedt, as conquests go now-a-days.^’—“ But this is fomething out of the common road, I can assure you. Now, I warrant, you think it is Sir James you have enfnared, but in that you are mistaken.” I fuppofe,^Ma’am, the peisson you allude to is the insignificant Imrd Nassau.”—“ No fuch thing. How I enjoy your perplexity. Did you not meet any other beaux at Lady Sandes’s, my dear ? What think you' you of Cockburn ?. He is a very hand-Ibme young man, has a large fortune, of which he is his own masier, a fine ho/fe, and an elegant equipage, and, tp fum up the whole, he is over head
and
C 3
and ■ cars in love with Amelia Beau^ mont! What, silent, my love ! Why, you certainly hold the philofophic virtues in very high estimation. Had I been in your place, my joy would have been unbounded, and my elated fpirits would have shewn themSelves in every feature, action, and gesture ! But you, like a little cold inanimate, girl as you arc, arc totally infeniiblc to what I Ihould look upon as the heighth of puwty Wdl, give me a girl that has all her fenSes about her, in preference to a dozen of your langd.d, fiber, wifi, good fir! of danifih ! Hilarity’s my motto—but your’s, I fancy. Mils Beaumont, is Suituity !” la	‘■‘I
E o8 }
I am obliged to you for the insinuation, Mifs Fitzherbert, but you should consider, that faults in nature are not easily conquered. I own myfelf perfeDly indifferent as to the felicity of making a conquest, where I know I cannot feel a return of the passion i and the only fenfation that I possefs on thefe occasions, is pity for the perfon who does me the honour to own a preference for me.”
Well, I will allow this to be found reafoning, but you must give me leave to- be of a different opinicn from you, as I still persist, that there cannot be a greater happinefs upon earth, than to have a dozen of pretty
fellows-
f 119 ]
fellows dying for one; to fee, their faces animated in turns by hope, fear, and iealoufy ! fometimes to prefer one. Sometimes another. Oh, the joy oS Such a liSe ! I would not exchange it to be imitcd. to a monarch. I have now no. leSs than Sour dying Swains upon my list, besides an equal number of danglers! I give them all room to hope, but mean to bestow my hand on neither—which I shall let them know when the winter and Ranelaugh SeaSons are over, Sor it gives one an air of conSequence to have a number oS theSc animals about one there. What can be So charming as a little Soft nonSenSe pour pfffer U tents f tor,
I 4	Surel\^_,
[	120 J
Surely, you will allow, that; a pretty fpeech, dish’d up with a few sighs, is pleafant food to every female !”
I 'must differ from you there-, Mifs Fitzheishert, as nothing to me is fo difgusting. I .enjoy the converfa-tion of fensible men,, but detest the lifping prattle, and half-fuppreffed fighs of thofc men in stature, but babies in mind,, called Coxcombs !**
Well, but to the- point, Mils Be-aumont, Cockburn is certainly your stave 1 What fays your little infensible heart upon the occasion ?” That I am obliged to Sir George for the fa^ vourable opinion he entertains of me, and that i shall, as foon as he enters
upon
[ ]
upon the fubjedt to me, grant him his immediate freedom, by dealing candidly, and -telling him that I never can return his pashon. I am above difguife, Mifs ‘Fitzheishert, and would not, for the fame of being followed by the handfomest man on earth, keep him one moment in a doubtful state, when I could, consistently with' ■feafon, do otherwife. If a man has fo little delicacy as to persist, after giving him my fentiments on the occasion, it is his fault, and I cannot be condemned.”—Chacun h fon gouty Mifs Beaumont. I w'ish you, may find the fame fatisfacstion from you-r plan of condud; that I do from mtne;
but:
£. 122 ]
bur let us drop the fubjedt, as I hear Lady SpenSer coming.”
When breakfast was over, MiSs Isitzhei'bert followed me up stairs, and reSumed the conversation. How do you think, MiSs Beaumont, I gained my intelligence concerning the affair r” “ It is impossible for me to gueSs, my dear.”—Well then, I will not keep you any longer in SuS-penSe. Sir George, Lady Cockburn, and his little inanimate Sister were at the concert. I obServed that the agreeable baronet was uncommonly dull and thoughtful, and could not help inquiring of Lord Nassau, who
I
followed them in, what was the cauSe
of
[	123	}	\	■
of it. “ Ah, poor devil!’’ Said he,
“ Cupid has been too buSy with his heart, and has this night doom’d him to stavery and fetters.” Who, pray, my Lord, is the Venus of his adoration ? “ A lady of your particular acquaintance. Madam, whom I have had the pleaSure of conversing w'ith this evening at Lady Sandes’s.” . Not MiSs Beaumont, Surely ! W”hy not,. Madam?” Oh! keep me no longer in anxiety, but tell me, Is it her!
It is, charming MiSs Fitzheishert.”' You can have no idea how my heart bounded with joy at this piece of news, and assually felt in idea tliC' pleaSure of being the harbinger of
Such.
[	124 ]
Such good tidings. Before the concert was half over. Sir George, who fat near us, complained of ennuis and tvent' out. Indeed he appeaa'cd quite ihjlrd.t the whole evening. So }^-ou S?e, my dear girl, he is very far gone Lns la belle fajftonf'
All that you have faid, does not convince me of that, Mifs Fitzher-bert. Lord Nassau, very probably^ meant nothing in what he faid ; for impertinent a'nd ignorant coxcombs like himfelf frequently magnify matters, merely to arrogate a conSequence to themfelvcs.”—I will not have you abufcyaim, Mbs Beaumont, for lie-once stood sir Sr on my list;—but a
few ,
[ 1
few weeks ago I Scratch’d him off, though, I believe, I shall foon take him into favour again.”—You can^ not like him, Mifs Fitzheissert !”— Why not, pray ? he is very hand*-fomeand the greatest puppy i know.”—‘‘ Oh ! don’t fay fo, Mifs Beaumont ! as I cannot possibly agree with you. He is certainly very civil and polite.” As a lover ;—but I fancy the woman that calls him Jouf-hand will find him far otherwife.” Perhaps she may; but, as I do not at prefent dessgn to be that woman, I need not trouble myfelf about the matter.”
Before we had finish’d our dialogt->e,
one
[ 126 ]
one of the Servants came up toinform us Sir James was below.. We both w'ent down, and found him in the breakfast parlourj reading the newss-paper. As foon as he faw us, he threw it carelefsly aside, and faid. Good morning to you, ladies— What is your plan of operations tonight V “ Why, really. Sir James,” replied MiSs Fitzherbert, “ I have not yet made up my mind as to w'hat I shall do; and as for MiSs Beaumont, I think I Can anSwer for her choosing to stay at home.”—Sup-poSe, then, you was to have the com-jstaiSance to Spend the evening with Jier, I thhik it would be'more to
yOLlT
C 11^7 ]
your credit, than to be fecn fo continually in public.” I’m obliged to you for giving your opinion, Sir James, but I think you might haVc waited still I ashed you for it; and, give me leave to fay, you possefs a tolerable share of vanity, in lupposing you have gained experience enough to become a mentorNor can you complain, my fair cousin of not having a fufficient quantity of that ingredient in your composition, since you can fancy yourfelf a Penelope in beauty, and that your charms can stand the test of being exhibited every night in fome Scene or other oS dish-pation ! Don’t be angry with me,
fo?
Ji 128 j
for I fpeak to you as a friend; and, believe me, that thofe very people who commend your prefent conduct to you, condemn you privately, being too mean to fpeak their fentiments out. I meant not to ossend you, though, perhaps, '! expressed myfelf in .wrong terms. I was about to propofe a party whom I thought might be agreeable to you and Mifs Beaumont; and that was, to introduce a friend gf mine to you this evening. He is a very agreeable young gentleman, whom I knew inti* mately when in Italy ; he is likewife very musical;—and I prbpofed having a little concert.”—The mention of a
beau
C 129 ]
beau put Mifs Fitzherbert in a good humour, and she gracioussy conde-fcended to alk Sir James who he was. “ His name is Cockburn, Ma’am, he is a baronet, and has an immenfe fortune, and will, I am Sure, be very proud of being introduced into fuch an agreeable family as this.” I coloured, I can’t tell why—Mifs Fitz-heishert fmil’d., and cast a significant ■glance at me—-and Sir James feemed inquisitive to have the riddle Solved. I drew out my handkerchief, hemm’d, nnd at last stammer’d out, “ Lord and Lady Spencer will, I’m fure, be happy to fee any friend of Sir James’s.” Mifs Fitzherbert relieved me by fay-VoL. J.	K	ing,
[ 13° ]
ing, Well, Sir James, you will, I hope, allow me to have a little merit when I tell you, I forgive your. past mifconduft, and shall be at home to receive you and your friend.” He bow’d, kifs’d her hand with a gallant air, and called her a lively girl.
The fervant then came to tell me the coach was at the door, and Sir James insisted upon not detaining me. I rang for my cloak, aiid giving him my hand, stept into the coach, faying, lat the fame time, “ Lady Cockburn’s, St. James’s Street.” Are you really going there, Mifs Beaumont!” Really, Sir James.” I wish, then—but I dare not alk the quef-
tion”
[ I3I ]
tion”—“ Can I in any degree be fer-viceable to you, Sir ?”•—“ Charming Mifs Beaumont!—but I will not put your friendship to the trial. Good morning to yon. My compliments, if you pleafe, where you are going."” He bow’d, and the carriage drove off, I was vexed at his mysterious manner, and, to be candid, must confefs to you, I began to fear Mifs Cockbuni was the mistrefs of his assedlions, and that he meant to afk me to become his advocate. This thought rendered me ■miferable, however, I refolved, that my regard for Sir James should be as generous as it was sincere, and that if I found I could in the fmallest degree.
K 2	promote
[ 132 ]
promote his interest with the idol of his heart, I would leave nothing untried to accomplish that end. By this time I was arrived at Lady Cock-burn’s, when the thundering knock which my fervant gave at the dooS, roufed me from my reverie, and I was shewn up to Mifs Cockburn’s dreffing-room. I found her drawing; in which accomplishment she excels. She received me witli a grace peculiar to herfelf, faid, she thought herfelf honoured by my visit, and hoped we should not stand upon the pundilio of fashionable intimacy, but fee each other as often as postible. I assured her there was nothing I more sincerely
wished
[ 133 3
wished for. She was dressed in an elegant dishabille, and look’d, if pof-fible, more beautiful than the preceding night. She plays astonishingly well on the harp, and sings charmingly ; is perfect mistrefs of three languages, French, Italian, and her own. In short, she is one of the most accomplished young women I know.
I fpent an hour in the most agreeable manner with her, then took leave, and returned home. In the evening, her brother and Sir James came. I felt an aukward confufion as loon as they entered the room. Fitzherberr introduced him to Lord and Lady Spencer, who received Sini with po-K -2	liteneA
C 134 ]
iitenefs and assabilitv. The evening passed away in a most agreeable manner : We had a little concert after tea, which lasted ’till ten o’clock; we then adjourned to the parlour, where was a little elegant fupper fet out, and fpent the remaining two hours very fociably. The gentlemen then left sss, and we retired to rest.
You may be fure I stridtly fcriiti-nized Sir James’s behaviour during the time he was with us, and can, without vanity, fay, his whole conduct befpoke the Lover. His attention to me was exceedingly particular, and I was fatisfied. As for the amiable Cockburn, I really pitied him; he did
not
C 135 3
not mention a fyllable of his pafsion, but his tell-tale eyes, and the frequent sighs that efcaped him, revealed the fatal truth. I hope he will foon make an avowal of it, that I may put him out of a state of uncertainty, and not permit him to indulge a hopelefs pafsion. He is a worthy young man, and I am fure my dear Charlotte would like him, could she but fee him.
The next morning Mifs Fitzher-bert came into my room before I was up, and reminded me of my promi/e of going with her to the opera that eveninp-. I assured her I would be as
O
good as my word, and she lef t me to -get up.
K 4.	I shall.
[ 136 1 ■
I shall past over the businefs of the -day, which chiefly consisted in dress-ing, and call your attention to a large drawing-room full of company, where you may fuppofe you fee me'sitting, furrounded by beaux and belles of every denomination. We did not go to the opera ’till nine o’clock. My drest was a rich- black lustring iong Polonelc, witn a white fatin petticoat, prettily trimmed, and gauze sieeves, which are now the ton ; black Sttin flippers, with pearl rofes; my hair exceedingly well dressed, and ornamented with a helmet of white feathers, and a velvet bandeau, with eight beautiful pearl pins fluck in it;, bracelets
[ 137 J
lets and collar of the fame. We fpent an hour in this gay throng, and then went to the Havmarker, where we had not been long stated, before I difeovered that wretch, Lord Nassau in the pit, who, as foon as she steond aCl w'as over, came to our box; at wdiich circumstance i was-truly mortisied, for he is a man I can by no means approve of He talk’d a vast deal of foft nonstnfe, which he stems to think is the only language adapted to our capacities. Sir James was of our party, but was at a distance from me the whole evening. Sir Georo-e Cockburn and his sister were
O
there, but I csid not fee them ’nil we
went
[ 138 ]
went into the Green Room to wait for our carriage.
What a world is this we live in, my Charlotte, where nothing but novelty will go down !
Don’t think me vain after this, when I fay, the eyes of the w'hole assembly were fixed upon me, as if I had been fomething fupernatural; nor did I past one perfon but what turned round with an inquisitive « Who is Jhe Mils Fitzheishert perceiving, and fearing I should glory too much in my triumph, faid, I must expeO; to be stal'd at a little while I was a new thing, but that the inconvenieiicy tvould foon be removed.
The
[	139 ]
The agreeable Cockburn handed" me to the carriage; but I did not feel .^uite fatissied at his monopolizing that . hand which I meant to bestow on. Fitzheishertjwho followed flirting with his cousin, and feemed perfedly fatif-sied.
My frifeur is now come, who reminds me that it is time to drefs; and. indeed 1 am heartily tired, for I have been writing thefe four hours, of which this monstrous long letter is a proof, and was you to fee how fast my pen runs, you would be astonished at my ideas keeping pace with it.
Your’s, assertionately, Amelia Bea,umont.
P. S.
[	140	]
R. S. Dosst forget to fend this away (as foon as you have anfwered it^-to my dear Harriot, who, I hope, is well, and will accept my sincerest love. I think I have fent you both a great deal of news. I shall therefore exped long letters in return. Adieu.
LETTER XIII.
Sir James Fitzherbert to Lord.
Maitland.
/
Holland Manor, WiltiTirre.
J WRITE to you, Maitland, from one of the most beautiful fpots in England, yet I am very far from being ha.'py, which is a proof that a . man’s enjoyment an!st be wirh.n his
own
C 141 ]
r)Tvn breast, and that it depends more upon his difposition than either connexions or situation in life. ,
You will, perhaps, be furprifed at my gravity, but the wonder eeafes when I tell you, I am in love. Yes, Maitland, in love ! after all the protestations I have made never to resign my liberty. But yet, while my reafon
revolts at the idea of charms, my «*
heart urges me to wear them, and perfuades me they will be silken ones, ^ and that I shall enjoy more real hap-pinefs in them than I have ever done while a poor folitary bachelor. Nay, laugh not, Maitland, for the time may come when thy 'hitherto invulnerable
heart
C 142 ]
heart may fall a facrifice to fome proud beauty.
Cruelly, indeed, have I been rewarded for my prudence in flying from fafcination and the gay metropolis, and as cruelly difappointed in my expedtations of finding relief in the peaceful pleafurcs of a country life ;—but I rave !—excuSe me, Maitland, and listen to my Sad story.
In a Sormer letter, I think, I gave you a description of MiSs Beaumont’s perSon—(preSumptuous wretch that I was to imagine I could long remain iiiSensible to the nnmberleSs charms that centered in her.!) The strlkincr contrast that there' was between her
and
[ 143 ]
and Mifs Fixzherbert made me very foon feel the force of her merit, and I never thought myfelf fo completely blefs’d as when in her company. I was fool enough to imagine I was in love, and had the refolution to tear myfclf from her prefence, and sty to the shades of Wiltshire for refuge ; but, alas! I had not been here many days before I learnt, to my forrow, that I loved Amelia but comparatively. A beautiful girl, introduced to me by the name of Manmng, taught* me to make this difcovery. Never did I at once behold fo much beauty, modesty, and fensibility blended to-c:ether. She came with Sir W illiam
O '
and
L H4 ]
and Lady Manning to drink tea with Lady Holland. I was not at home when they arrived, but returned foon after ; and when I entered the parlour I was struck with her appearance. She was sitting at the harpsichord, and, hearing the door open, just looked round and bow’d to me, but continued playing, which convinced me she had none of that niauvaije ho^tte, which is too often the charatsteristic -of a country lady. When she had ended the piece of music she was play-ing, she bow’d to the company, and walk’d with inimitable grace to a chair that was placed by Lady Manning’s. My eyes were all the time riveted
upon
C 145 ]
upon her ; nor could I perfuade my-felf but that my fenfes deceived me. From that moment I really lost my heart. What fatality !—to sty from love, and yet be more entangled in its shares !*—I was indulging this re-ste(5tion, when Holland came up t® me, and whifpered, that he wished to introduce me to his friends. I rofe from my feat, and he recommended me to their notice by the name of Mufgrave (which, by the bye, I must; inform you, is the name I assume show, by way of fecurity, for, was I to acknowledge myfelf to be Sir James Fitzherbert, Lord Spencer would, ho doubt, very foon find out the place of VoL. I.	, L	my
C 146 ]
my concealment; fo, pray, mind how you diretst your letters, if you write while I am here.)
When this ceremony was over, I ventured to take a feat nearer the lovely Harriot’s, and entered into converfa-tion with her, play’d with and carefs’d her little dog, not forgetting to kifs it for it’s mistress’s fake. She feemed pleafed with the attention I paid the little animal, and bestowed on me fome of the most bewitching fmiles in the world. When tea was over, I begg’d of her to favour us with a little more music. She gracefully confented, when I led h^r to the harpsichord, and indulged myfelf in the felicity of
leaning
[	147 ]
leaning over the back of her chair.
I was charmed with her performance. She plays astonishingly well, has great execution, and put in fo many little graces, that it is pleasing beyond de-fcription to hear her. She then desired me to take her feat, which I did, and, after havins; run over feveral very favourite pieces, I fung and play’d an old fong, which I thought quite applicable. The words run thus ;
When gentle Harriot firlT: I faw,
Struck with a reveientlal awe,
I felt my bofom mov’d ;
Her eafy ftiape, her matchlcfs face,
(She fmil’d, snd talk’d with fo much grace)'
I gaz’d, admir’d, and lov’d.
After this she fung feveral airs, with La	a star-
[ 148 ]
a harmonious voice that perfedlly enchanted me. But, perhaps, you are impatient to have a Iketch of her pcr-fon :—First, however, let me caution you not to fall in love with her portrait, for I am a very jealous fellow, and will not allow you to gaze even on that with impunity ! She is rather
what is called tall, and a little en bon a
point. Her complexion is brown, but the clearest in the world ; to heighten the beauty of whi^h. Nature has been very lavish of her rofes. Her features are all the true Grecian character; and her eyes !—but I must not attempt to defcribe them !—fuffice it to fay, they are the true languishing eye
which
[	149 ]
which I always fo much admired.— Don’t think I have fent you a perfect: defcription ; no. Believe me, I have not done her justice. And I am convinced she possesses a heart worthy of its elegant habitation. They flipped with us, and at twelve o’clock the coach came for them. I handed my charmer to it, and Holland efcorted Lady Manning, who was fo obliging as to fay, she hoped to fee me at Man-nins: Castle. I assured her I should be proud of the honour of waiting on her ]—and, as a proof of my being in earnest, called the next morning on horfeback, to inquire after the ladies' health.
L 2	I was
[ 15° ]
I was furprifed to fee a fervant vfith two horsts at the gate, and inquired if there were company within; but being informed by the man that the hor-fes stood there for his master and young lady, who were going to ride, I immediately difmounted, and walked in. I found Lady Manning foh in the parlour. She received me ^ with great cordiality, and faid, that as Sir William and her niece were going out a-riding, they would think my company a great acquisition to their party. You may be certain I did not hesitate whether to attend my enchan-trefs or not, and waited impatiently her coming down. At last she made
[ I5I ]
her appearance, dressed en Ama%one> You can have no idea how beautiful she looked. When she difcovered me in the room, her natural complexion was heightened by a becoming blush. This my vanity attributed to joy at fo unexpedt^d a pleafure, ’though-perhaps, it was merely the essedt ol furprize. Her habit was white, lined and lapelled with black; waistcoat the fame; and a large black hat, crowded with feathers. In Snort, Maitland, your imagination cannot paint a more angelic figure.
When Sir William was booted, wc fet off; and never did I berore enjoy fo fweet a ride. She is an excellent L 4 horsswoman,
[	152	]
horfewoman, and very fond of the exercife. Oh, that I could tear my-felf from her prefence ! but that, alas 1 I find impossible ; which is one plain proof that I never was in love with Amelia, or I could not So easily have relinquished the pleafure of her company. How am I rejoiced that I nevei made an avowal to her of my imaginary passion, or endeavoured to engage her .afFedionsfor, had fuch been the cafe, agreeable to my notion of honour, I shoiiki have thought my-felf bound, by the strongest tie, to offer her my hand, if She could have been Satissied with that without a heart.
If you have but patience to reach
this.
C 153 ]
this part of my letter, how you must laugh at your poor friend, and exclaim, What! are you really at last drawn in, Fitzherbert! abfolutely enstaved by the rofy cheeks, and blooming youth of a pretty wood-nymph ! Well, I sincerely condemn and pity thee, but will, in the abundance of my humanity, pray, that the matrimonial chain may sit eafy on thy poor shoulders; though (vain boaster that thou art) thy folly well deferves thou shouldTt experience what it is to be a henpeck'd hushand.”—But blame me not, as the reproaches I am continually loading myfelf with, are punishment enough, without adding yours.
As
C 154 ]
As for Mifs Fitzherbert, she does not deferve to sill a fpace in this letter, being a compound of fashion, folly, and assentation ; for ever restlefs and iineafy, and flying from onefcene ■ of dissipation to another, in fearch of that happinefs, I tear, she never will attain, a contented mind. But I am tired of writing, as you will be, I doubt not, of reading fo stupid a fcrawj. Remember I am in love, Maitland ! and let that plead a fuffi-cient excufe for.
Your unalterable friend,
James FrryHerbert, -.
LETTER
C 155' ]
I. E T T E R XIV.
Lhe Honourable Mifs H. Beaumont to Lhe Hon, Mifs Beaumont.
Manning Caftle, Wiltdiire.
And does my Amelia really think to put me off with a fecond-hand correfpondence, and imagine that I am fuch a tame animal as to fubmit patiently to the indignity ! She must certainly have forgot the perfon she has to deal with, or I must be very much altered since she knew me, if I could ever fubmit to be ufed in this abominable way, without giving her a proof of my not being totally devoid of fpirit! To convince her, however,
that
[ 15^ J
that I am not- unacquainted with the art of Retaliation, I shall enter into a compromise, that we may be upon equal terms;—SuppoSe, then, Amelia, I write only to MiSs Milner, who will convey my letters to you, shall you be Satisfied ? Yes, I am convinced you will, for the fame reaSon you affigned in your last. I think, then, it will be a very good Scheme, and Save us both an immenfity of trouble.
, One of }mur dear long journals I have this moment received from Mils Finch. I hope it is neediest to fay how happy the perufiil of it has made me, and how rejoiced I am to find that you are recovering your wonted
fj)irits.
[ ‘57 ]
fpirits. Pray, who is this Sir James, Amelia, that you fo frequently mention ? He must abfolucely be quite a paragon if he anfwers your defcrip-tion ; but I fear, my dear, he has run away with your heart, though I cannot, upon fecond thoughts, fuppofe you to be fo silly a girl as to furrender still you have been a little in public, where you will, doubtlefs, fee many equal, and fome fuperior to Sir James. Obferve, then, that I would wish you to own a Friendship for the above amiable baronet, but nothing of Love, still you have looked a little about you.
I don’t like Mifs Fitzherbert. i
think
0. -15*5 J
tliink her a vain diffipated girl; how-ever, you are, ccrtiainly in the right to be upon good terms with her, as she might prove a very formidable enemy. How asseftionatcly kind do you re-piefent Lord and J.,,ady Spencer^s con-dud towards you to be; and how fuperlatively happy does the knowledge of it make me. Wliat further blcshngs can the even-craving heart desire than thofe which we enjoy ! Ves, alas! one rebel wish still remains unfatissied, which is, the arrival of" OUT dear brother in his native countrv. But think not that I murmur at it; no, my grateful heart cheerlully fub-*inits to this one hard decree of Providence,
['159	]
vidence, and thankfully enjoys what bounty he has bestowed.-
We are going to make a little excursion in a fortnight’s time, but it will not be without regret that I shall leave this place, where I have pafs’d So many peaceful hours; nor shall I quit the leasieSs grove without a pang. But Sir William and my aunt think that chanssino- the Scene a little will be of Service to me, and have pro-poSed our Spending a few weeks at General Slater’s, in Kent.
A gentleman has lately arrived here who is upon a visit in the neighbourhood. He is a very agreeable man, and his name is Mufgrave; but I shall
fay
[ i6o ]
fay no more concerning him, lest you should fufpecst me to be as ridiculous a girl as yourfelf, which, I assure you, is not the cafe. Believe that I am, Your truly affectionate, Harriot Beaumont.
END -OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
.
AN INTERES TING
SKETCH
i
O F
gente el life.
/
BY A LADY.
VOL. II.
SOUTHAMPTON:
PRINTED BY LINDEN & CUNNINGHAM. BOLD BY SKELTON & MILLS, SOUTHAMPTON, AND B. LAW, AVEMARY LANE, LQKDON.
M DCC LXXXir.
t
I
♦
AN INTERESTING
SKETCH
G F
GENTEEL LIFE.
LETTER XV.
Lhe Honourable AIifs Milner to Lhe Hon. Mifs H. Beaumont.
St. James’s Street.
A H, my Harriot, feel for your unhappy friend, and grudge her not that debt of pity which your tender nature would bestow on even a common acquaintance in the like cir-VoL. II.	B	cirenm-
[ 2 ']
cumstances. Condemn what^ you think improper inker conduss, and teach her unexperienced heart to triumph over and fubdue the storm that clouds and hovers round it. Surrounded as I am by pleafures, and courted by thou-fands, how comes it that I still am watched ? Is it from a natural discontent in my difposition, which damps the edge of all my enjoyment ? No.—Far be removed from my breast fo gloomy an inhabitant. How then can my melancholy be accounted for?
The caufe (fays Reafon) is evident, viz. the company you are furrounded with, and pleafures you enter into are not fuited to your taste, and confe-
quently
C 3 ]
quently do not reach the heart; besides, it is morally impossible that any enjoyment should be permanent without the confent and interest of that little member.” But then the question that remains is to know, whether there is not a poshbility of fuiting our tastes to our pleafures. This, I fear, must be anfvvered in the negative, as the heart, in thefe cafes, generally refufes to be dictated by reafon.
Of this one thing, however, I am but too well assured that I am very far from happy, and that I lee very little proSpeft of my ever being iu. The gay fccnes, in which I every night make one, have not power fufh-B 2	dent
C 4 ]
dent to calm my ruffled fpirit, nor to afford me but a momentary fatisfac-tion. I look round and fee every face dressed in fmiles but my own (cruel mortification I) and, from the enjoyment that is apparent in each countenance, I judge that every heart is at eafe but the wretched Horatia’s. Yet, let me not envy others the blifs I cannot myfelf enjoy, but rather derive fome fatisfadlion by resteding, that ail are not alike miferable. Since I last wrote to you, I have been a partaker of every fashionable folly that dissipation or extravagance could invent. My mornings totally dedicated to mantuamakers, milliners, audions,
exhibitions.
•	[ 5 ]
exhibitions, &c. &c. and my evenings to routs, balls, operas, plays, mafque-rades; my thoughts kept in one continual hurry, without a moment for restedlion ; and my ideas fo confufed, that, for a time, I was almost infen-sible, at the folly and mifery of fuch a life. Happy state, where cares are lull’d and forrows are forgotten ! Far better had it been for me still to have remained in it, than to have my fen-fibility awakened, and feel all the wretchednefs of my condition, without having the power to alter it. Num-berlefs are the offers I have had made me; but, among thofe who have professed themfelves my admirers, I have
B 'i	not
[ 6 ]
. not been able to difcern one fuited to my inclinations; their ssattery was grofs, and the veil of fondnefs they
l
put on too thin to conceal the motive of their pretended attachments. Sixty thoufand pounds they considered as a prize worth putting in the lottery for, and every adventurer was in hopes of fuccefs. You understand me, my dear Harriot, and, I hope, are well convinced that thefe fycophants met with the treatment they merited from me, by putting a negative upon each of their demands as foon as they mentioned the fubjedl to me. But I must not omit naming one of the number in particular, as I have too much
reafon
[ 7 ]
reafon to fear he will prove a principal charadSer in my drama. He is a nobleman that makes a great noife in the world, though his insignificance would long ago have buried him in oblivion, had not the folly of his actions kept alive his memory. Lord Nassau is known by every body, and though he bears a very vicious character, is encouraged and courted by almost all the world. I had the misfortune to be in company with fome ladies at the Pantheon one evening, who were acquainted with him. He join’d our party, and hearing that I had a large fortune, endeavoured to render him-Self agreeable to me by a thoufand B 4	little
[ 8 ]
fittle attentions, flirted with me the whole evening, faw me to my chair, and call’d the next morning to inquire after my health. From that time he declared himfelf my admirer, accompanied me every where in public, per-fecuted me continually with his non-fenfe, and, in short, appeared to be the most passionate of lovers; but finding that all his eloquence could not move me in his favour, he applied to Lady Milner, who interceded very warmly for him. I told her that she might depend upon always having the power to put a negative on my choice, but that I could not fubmit to her forcing my inclinations, and
that
[ 9 ]
"v ,
that I was refolv’d never to pay any man fo bad a compliment, as* to bestow my hand on him ‘without my heart. She approved of my refolutions in fome meafure, but faid, I was too romantic in my ideas of love, and that she thought I ought to favour Lord
o	o
Nassau’s addresses. I expressed my furprize at what she faid, and alked her how she could possibly wish me to be united to a man of his Lordship’s character. She laugh’d at my nice notions, and assured me, that if I remained single till I met with a piece .of perfection, I should die an old •maid. "She confessed that Lord Naf-fau had run through a large fortune,
and
[ '° ] ,
and had two or three intrigues, which
could be of no manner of confequence,
as he would be in posseffion of two
very sine estates after the death of an \
uncle; and that a reform’d rake generally made a good hushand. I told her the chance was too great for me ever to make the trial.
Things were in this situation when we became one evening accidentally acquainted with a gentleman, whofe name is Miibank. We were in the
i
stage-box, at Drury Lane, to fee the tragedy of Percy performed. My fpirits WTre rather low the whole time; but before the conclusion of the piece, I was fo much assented, that we were
obliged
C II ]
obliged to leave the Houfe. Mr. Milbank, whom chance had placed in the fame box, obferving the confusion we went out in, followed us, and fupported me, fainting, in his arms, still a chair could be procured. Lady Milner was in the greatest afflidtion, and he endeavoured to footh her with the tenderest and most perfuasive arguments. He at length recalled me to life, by bathing my temples with hartshorn ;—but, oh, my Harriot! what were my fenfations upon opening my eyes! A form fo lovely I never before had feen! His height majestic,, his features expreshve, and his manner tender and obliging! Such was the
objedl
[ 12 ]
objedt that appeared to me on my recovery. I likewife found the warmest
t
gratitude for the kind concern he expressed at my indifposition, and the means he had uled to restore me. W^hen I was able to w^alk, I propofed going home, and fuppo.rted myfelf by leaning on his arm to reach the carriage; into which he lifted me, and leicus, but not till he had ashed Lady Milner to allow him the happinefs of fending his fervant to inquire after my nealth the next morning, Iler Ladyship assured him she should always be
very happy to fee him in St. James’s . ■Street.
-J obferved, when we got home,
that
[ 13 ]
that Lady Milner’s fpirits feemed
greatly agitated, which I attributed to
my illnefs ; but I foon had reafon to
believe that was not the only caufe.
#
She was uneafy, and fretful, even to me, and rang for her woman earlier than ufual, obferving, that she wished me to retire. I went up to my apartment, and was forry to find myfelf in the fame difposition as her Ladyship. Every trifle vexed me. I was out of humour, and found fault with my maid without reafon ; in bed, I was restlefs, and could not help faying,
I turn and turn, but no cotnpofure find,
No comfort other but a troubled mind.
I did not steep^all night,-and could
think
C 14 ]
■ think of nothing but the amiable stranger that had shewn me fo» much tendernefs. I wished to know who he was, what was his name, and wdio were his connexions. Then I blamed myfelf for being fo inquisitive. ‘‘ What can it posiibly signify to me—I may, probably, never fee him again ;—but he has promifed to fend his fervant to-morrow, that assords me fome con-folation.” In this manner I condemned and foothed myfelf alternately, and passed altogether one of the most wretched nights I had ever done. At eight o’clock, I fell into a dofe, and stept till eleven, as Lady Milner desired I might not be disturbed. I
breakfasted
[ 15 ]
breakfasted in my room ; and her Ladyship having gone out before I went down stairs, J, did not fee her still dinner. I fat down in her dressing-room, and, for want of other employment, was reading the cards that had been left at the door, when I met v:ith one which I fufpedted to be the amiable stranger’s-, as it was a name I was totally unacquainted with.. I rang the bell to inquire, and was-informed by my fervant who was witss me at the play, that the gentleman who siiw me to the coach had called, and fat an hour with Lady Milner before I came down.
Do you know, Harriot, that triste
vexed^
C I6 ]
vexed me, and I was angry with my-felf for having lain fo long; but I could not imagine why he should leave a card when my mother received him, however, I was glad he did, as I by that means became fooner acquainted with his name than I otherwife should have done. When Lady Milner came home, she was in very high fpirits, inquired tenderly after my health, and faid, she was happy, beyond expression, to fee me look fo well; told me of Milbank’s having called and left a card for me as I was not up. She fpoke of him in very high terms, and feemed to wish to know my fentiments concerning him. At dinner she ashed
me
E 17 ]
me if I was v/ell enough to attend her
to, Mrs. H------’s and Several other
routes. As she . did not Seem very desirous of my company, I was happy in the opportunity to decline accepting her offer, and told her, that if she would permit me, I should prefer staying at home, as I found mySelf very unwell. She readily conSented, w'hich greatly astonished me, as she had always before made a point of taking me every where. After dinner, her Ladyship dressed, and at nine
I
o’clock went out. Just after she was gone, I was enjoying in idea the pleaSure of writing my Harriot a long letter, when I heard a loud knock at VoL. II.	C	the '
C IS ]
the door, and before I had time to tell the fervant not to admit any body. Lord Nassau was anounced. You can have no idea how angry I was; and, between joke and earnest, I told his Lordship, that I never admitted male visitors in Lady Milner’s abfence. The wretch feized my hand, and, with a warmth and freedom I had never before perceived in him, carried it to his daring lips. I hastily withdrew it, and, fcornfully, bid him be stated, faying, “ If you have any bufmefs with me, my Lord, be expeditious, as I have fome letters to write that must be fent to the post this evening.” He hesitated, and
after
C 19 ]
after conning his fpeech over like a
fchoolboy, thus began :	JLong have
I fought an opportunity of ajfuring the
lovely Mifs Milner that I am the Iruejt
of her devoted Jlaves, and that, from the
firfl moment 1 beheld her lovely form, I
have been her captive. Fruitlefs have \
been my attempts hitherto to infpire her tender bofom with a mutual pajjion; but, oh, charming Harriot! if you cannot love, pity a wretch who loaths the idea of dragging on a hateful exiftence without yotiV'—My pity you have, my Lord, which is all that is in my pow'cr to give you. I thought you would never again have mentioned the fub-jeft tome, as you have long knowm my C 2 fentiments
S 20 ]
Sentiments on that head.”—Could ;Sou imagine, MiSs Milner, I should So easily give you up. No ! that were cowardly indeed !—rather let me perish ! I will peissevere. Madam, and perhaps my courage and constancy may at last move your obdurate heart.”—‘‘ Pardon me, my Lord, and give me leave to assure you that you may Save yourSelf the trouble of a long siege, as I shall not be inclined to crown you with laurels, however bold and enterpisizing may be your actions.”—“ Is that Sentence irrevocable, Madam ?”—It is, my Lord, and my final determination.”—“ Then am I wretched, indeed ! But know,
inexorable
[ 21 ]
inexorable Beauty, that your triumph is no fmall one, for thoufands of your fex live by my fmiles, and would look upon themfelves as the most fortunate of women, if I was to make either of them the offers which you fo fcornfully rejedt.”—I think, then, your Lordship cannot do better than to transfer your assedtions to one of thefe unfortunate ladies, as I look upon it that there cannot poshbly be any happinefs in the marriage-state where there is not a mutual attachment.”— Very true. Madam ; but may I be bold enough to ash which of all your fuitors is my favoured rival.”—You have none, my Lord, as 1 am at pre-
C	Sent
[ 22 ]
fent totally unacquainted with la htlle paffwnL—« Say you fo, my Horatia, then am I not quite without hope, as your last fpeech has cast a ray of light , upon my darkened profpedls; for why-may not I, as well as another, hope to make an impreshon on your tender heart ?”—« Be not, my Lord, fo much your own enemy as to encourage a hopciefs passion, for I must inform you, there are unfurmountable obsta-, cles to our ever being united.”—Un-furmountahle ohjlacles. Madam, I do not underjiand you, hut Jloould be glad of an explanation /”—Your charaCcer, my Lord.”—My charaBer, Madam ! who dare afperfe that f But I know the
villain,
[ 23 ]
mllain, and'Will meditate injlant revenge, Ihiir fervanty Mifs Milner',—when this fword has cleared its majlePs honour, then, I hope, you will allow there are no unSurmountable obstacles to prevent our union He then stew down stairs and left me in a state not easily to be described.
I was sitting like one in a state of
O
ftupefadtion wshen Lady Milner eame home. She Soon perceived my unea-sineSs, and inquired tenderly into the caufe of it. I related the whole affair, and was Surprized at her not exp resting the least astonishment or diSplea-Sure at his conduct; but, wdien.I had finished my story, she burst into a C A	hearty"
C H ]
hearty laugh, faying, Now I dare fay the little idiot will dream of nothing but fwords and pistols all night, but be compofed, my love, and assured, that Lord Nassau is as fond of a whole Sidn as yourfelf, and will terenge himfelf but ideally on his rival’s head. It was merely a flight of his Lordfliip s to frighten you into a paffion ; and, indeed3 Horatia, you are a naughty girl for treating the poor fellow in fuch a cavalier style. He doats on you to distradlion, and, if you wifli to oblige me, you must look upon him as your future hushand.^’— Imposhble, Madam, rather would I lemain single than be united to fuch
a wrrrrh I”
[ '^5 ]
a vrretch !”—Very well, Horatia, since I find that my persuasions have fo little essedt on you, I shall desire your guardian, whom you know to be a very rcfolute man, to command vour obedience.”
j
I fell on my knees, and entreated her not to peissecute me any more on thefubjedt. But she was deaf to my interceshons, and ordered me, in a peremptory tone, to quit the room. In the last instance I proved my obedience, by retiring immediately to bed, but not to steep, as you may very well imagine that I passed, if poshble, a more wretched night than the preceding one.
T rnffi
[ 26 ]
I rofe early in the morning, and took a walk in St. James’s Park before breakfast, which I frequently do for my health. I had taken but one -turn, when I met Miibank ,* he accosted me in the politest manner, inquired tenderly after my health, and faid he was rendered uneafy the evening before, in not meeting me at Mrs.
^-------’s route, as Lady Milner had
informed him I was indifpostd. I pleaded a flight cold, and thanked • him for his kind folicitude ; but feeino-Lady Sophia and Lady Charlotte Stanley’s in the next walk, I joined them, thinking it more proper than to have only him and my feryant with
'	me.
[ ^7 ]
me. We walked still half after ten, and then imagining that Lady Milner would be dressed, I propofed going home. They all approved ; and the young ladies faid, if it was agreeable, they would breakfast with Lady Milner and me. I feemed pleafed at the favour, though I was very far from having fpirits to entertain them, and prevailed on Milbank to accompany us. He at first refufed, but confented, upon my assuring him that Lady Milner would be proud of the honour of his prefence.
When her Ladyship came down,, she was going to addrefs the young . ladies (who, by the bye, I must inform
[ 28 ]
form you are great favourites) ii> her uSual lively manner, but, perceiving Mr. Milbank,: she stopt short, and addressed herSelf to him with Such a mixture of joy and Surprize in her countenance, that I plainly discovered he was no indifferent objedt to her. I paid my reSpedls to her, but she Scarcely deign’d to anSwer me, which shocked me exceedingly; nor could I refrain from shedding tears at Such treatment. Milbank perceived my nneastneSs, and Seemed really to feel for me, though he was a stranger to the cauSe. I complained of a fevere head-ache, and left the room, as I could no longer remain in it without
exposing
[ 1
exposing myfelf to the company, I went to my apartment, where I in-dulged myfelf in the luxury of grief, and remained unmolested for fome time. My restedtions, you will readily believe, were not of the most pleafaiit kind, and, pour comhle tie malheur, I found, upon examining my heart, that I loved! Milbank’s image prefented itfelf continually before my eyes, and his name dwelt always upon my tongue 1 My bufy imagination reprefented him to me as the champion who would relieve me from my prefent uneasinefs, and shield me from the perfecuting addresses of - Lord Nassau. But when I resieded
on
[ 30 ]
on Lady Milner’s attentions to him, I blamed mySelf for entertaining the idea of becoming her rival, and reSol-ved to undergo the feverest torments that hopeleSs love could instidt, fooner than frustrate her fchemes of happi-neSs. I was indulging this ressedtion when her Ladyship Sent to command my attendance. I went down with fear and trembling, but was ready to sink to the earth when I Saw my guardian sitting by her. His Lordship, perceiving my embarrassment, roSe and handed me to a chair, inquired after my health, and expressed much concern at my alter’d looks. I thanked shim in the most grateful terms, and
Said
[ 31	]
faid I hoped foon to be restored to perfect health.
After having chatted fome time on trifling fubjesss, his Lordship, addressing himfelf to me, faid, “ Vfell, Horatia, have you turned your thoughts to matrimony yet ? Most young women, before they arrive at your age, have fixed upon a hushand, have you yet made choice of one r’* I assured his Lordship I had not, and hoped never should, without his con-fent and approbation.—That is well, Horatia,” replied his Lordship, ‘‘ but will you permit an old man to direft your choice ?” “ In fome mea-, fure, but not entirely, my Lord, as
I think
C 32 ]	.
I think you will allow that it is impossible to command our affedlions, and, I am perSuaded you would nevTrwish me to facrifice my happineSs at the shrine of either riches or ambition.” —From what romance have you learnt that sine Speech, my fair ward ! But if you will graciousty condeScend to anSvver a plain question in plain English, I should be glad to know your fentiments in regard to Lord Nassau, as I understand he is your admirer, and a man whom Lady Milner approves of? No Heroics, I desire, for you know I am an honest blunt fellow, and donst like the trouble of Solving enigmatical Speeches.”
I will.
[ 33 ]'
—“ I will, then, in compliance with
\ ‘ ♦
your Lordship’s request, be ingenuousy and inform you that Lord Nassau is a man I never can love. After this candid confession, you will not, I hope, be angry if I add, that I am refolved never to be united to him.”
-—’Faith, that’s plain enough. Madam, but I must give you to understand, that though I allowed you the
liberty of fpeaking your mind, I did /
not mean to divest myfelf of that authoritative power which your father’s will gives me over your perfon ; and I must further add, that I insist upon your encouraging his Lordship’s addresses ; he has been with me this VoL. II.	D	morniiig,
[ 34 ]
morning, and I approve exceedingly of his overtures. He is a very worthy man, as times go, has large expectations, is defcended of a good family,
has great connections, and is just the /
man I ever wished for you. Indeed, I cannot understand what reafonable objection you can have to him, as he is a character that all the world courts. His perfon is far from defpicable, and his manner and addrefs foft and en-gaging to the last degree. Wliat more can you desire ?”—“ Think me not impertinent, my Lord, when I fay, that he has been mifreprefented to you. I am inclined to think, from the tenor of my dear Lady Milner^s
conduct
C 35 ]
condudl; towards me hitherto, that she wishes to promote my happineSs by the propoSed alliance, but I must take the liberty of assuring her, that she is pursuing a wrong method. Lord NaS-fau is, of all his Sex, my greatest aversion, nor is mydistike of him founded on caprice, as I have a thorough detestation of his charadler, which is infamous to the last degree; nor would I Scruple Spending my days in penury and want, rather than unite my fate to fuch a wretch. I am grieved, beyond description, at appearing refractory to any commands which your Lordship or Lady Milner thinks proper to exadt of me, but, in this one D 2	instance.
[ 36 ]
instance, I must prove difobedient.’^
—^When I had ended my fpeech, I burst into tears. Lady Milner rofe from her feat, and walked to the window to concea^lhe tumult of her foul. Lord Rivers traverfed the room with evident difpleafure in his countenance, and I fat like a poor criminal, dread-inp; the fentence of my judges. A dead silence enfued for fome moments, which my guardian broke, by exclaiming, “ The.ciie is cast, and I am determined what to do. By all that s o-ood. Lord Nassau shall call her wife 1 What! shall it be faid that I was undermined, and my fchemes frustrated .. by a little forward March chick ! Nod
I will.
[ 37 ]
I will, mySelf, fee the ceremony performed in leSs than a fortnight, or may I perish ! Then will my conscience acquit me for having prevented her ruijning headlong into matrimony with a destitute knight-errant.”
Then coming up to me, he Said, I am reSolved how to adl, MiSs Milner! and the next time you See me, it will be in company with lawyers, and your hushand eled, to Settle Some writings relative to the alliance that I am determined shall take place. Weigh well the assiir, and remember that you lole half of your fortune if you are diSobedient. Your .Servant, Lady Milner, I shall, I hope. See you
.D 2	■flmrtlu
[ 38 ]
shortly. Good morning to yon, Ho-
ratia, and don’t forget that it is Lord
Rivers you have to deal v>?ith.”—He
then left the room, and I fell on my
knees to Lady Milner, to implore her
pity. She feemed at first assented, but
very foon convinced me that nothing
would divert her from her purpofe.
Finding that my arguments were
of no essed, I went to my room,
/
where I remained abforbed in grief, ’till the fervant informed me that dinner was ready. Lady Milner was thoughtful the whole time, and Scarcely fpoke to me. She faid, she was going to the Pantheon that evening, and should be glad of my company,
if I
t 39 ]
if I cliofe to attend her. I thought it better to accept of the invitation, notwithstanding my fpirits were fo dejefted, that the world might not fufpedl a breach between us. I went quite in dishabille, and the languor and afflidSion that had taken possef-sion of my teatures, did not help to fet me off It was a very full night, ' and the gaiety of the fcene for a moment lulled my forrow, but I foon awoke to wretchednefs and myfelf! Lord Nassau'was there, but did not approach me the whole evening; however, his prefence quieted my fears in regard to a duel.
The ansiable Milbank joined our D 4	party..
S 40 3
party. He expressed great concern at my morning’s indiSposition ; and too plainly did his inquisitive eyes convince me that their master ardently wished to know the cauSe of my un-easineSs. How anxiousty did he, endeavour to divert my'melanchbly,. by pointing out Such objects as wer-e worthy of observation but when he Saw that nothing could remove the load that Sat So heavy at my heart, his caught the infection, and cast Such a ■ dejedtion on his sine features, that it gave him at once an interesting and amiable ^appearance. This circumstance did not fail of moving me in his favour, as it convinced,, me that he
possessed
[ 41	]
possessed a fympathetic heart, and a great share of understanding. Lady Milner, who was dressed out at all points, was not a little mortified at his preferring my converfation to her Ladyship’s, and endeavoured, by a thoufand little stratagems, to gain hi-s attention, but finding it all to no pur-pofe, complained of ennuis and left the gay throng at a much earlier" ho^ir than ufual.
When I got home, and restected upon my pillow on the occurrences of
i
■the day, I thought myfelf the most ■ wretched of beings, and regreted my duty and inclination’s being sso , exceedingly difunited; however, I re-
siolvcd
[ 42 3
folvcd to run any rilk rather than pro-mife to honour and obey that wretch Lord Nassau, and planned a fcheme which I refolved to put into immediate execution, which was to write to Lady Seaport, who resides with her daughter in Essex, and entreat her to give me an afylu-m in her lioule still the storm was a little blown over, as I should by that means efcape ■the mifery of giving up my liberty to a tyrant—heal my wounded heart, which I found had been fubdued by the all-conquering Milbank—and relieve Lady Milner from a rival. The next day I fulfilled my intention, and wrote to Lady Seaport. You know
she
[ 43 ]
she was always my father’s favourite sister. I related the wdiole of my fad ' story, and entreated her to take compassion on her distressed niece. I have not yet received an anfwer, but I ex-pedl one this evening, and hope it will be favourable. I have been out every evening, as ufual, w'ith Lady Milner, to prevent fufpicion, and have received the visits of Lord Nassau,, but have given him no room to hope, I assure yon, as I cannot bear deceit. The most rigid difpositions cannot blame my conduct in this refpeO:, as I find it the only means of preventing my being given to the arms of the man I almost hate; and furely there
can
V
C 44 ij
can be no harm in putting myfelf under the protedlion of an indulgent aunt, when a mother fo totally forgets the duty of that character. I .shall frequently write to her during our feparation, though I mean to keep my plea of ufage a fecret from her, and every creature but my Harriot, who may depend upon hearing from her Horatia wherever the destination be. Write foon, and convince me that I am as dear to you as ever; for that. Thought constitutes one of the greatest ibleffings I am at prefent capable of scnjoying.
Assedlionately your’s,
Horatia Miljler.
C 45 ]
P. S. I would keep this letter open still I receive Lady Seaport’s anfwer, should it not then be too late for the post.
LETTER XVI.
Lhe Honourable Mifs H. Beaumont to The Hon. Mifs Milner.
Orange Grove, Kent.
My dearest Horatia,
OHALL tyrant man, with arbitrary fway, dare to rob our fex of the bleshng, that constitutes the chief hap-pinefs of their existence, and vainly boast the power to render their whole lives miferable, and crueilly stretch that power to its utmost extent ! Forbid.
[ 4b ]
bid it Humanity ! forbid it Honour! nor let it be faid, in a free country, governed by fo humane and generous a Sovereign, that power is fo unequally difpofed of as to let one fub-jedl doom a fellow-creature to perpetual wretchednefs, either through caprice or ambition ! for fuch I muS look upon to be the fpring that actuates the condudl of both your unnatural mother and Lord Rivers. How sincerely did your last letter interest my pashons, nor could my heart forbear bleeding in every vein for your fusserings. Pity, admiration, esteem, horror, and difgush alternately took possession of my mind. The
two
[ 47 ]
two first were excited by Horatia^'s afflictions, and the magnanimity and generosity she exerted towards her cruel perfecutors; the third I bestowed on the amiable Milbank, for participating your forrovvs; and the two last acknowledged Lady Milner and -Lord Rivers for their fource ! Can her Ladyship poffibly have fo little affection for her offspring, as to wish to fee her united to difeafe and poverty ; for fuch, I am perfuaded, would be your hard fate, was you to marry that wretch, whofe only aim, I am convinced, is your fortune ! Had he the asseClion for you which he pretends- to have, he would prefer your
happinef&i
[ 48 ]
happinefs to his own, and his delicacy w'ould not fusser him to marry the woman that did not profefs an equal paffion for him. You will, I hope, excufe me if I fay, that the fiend Jealoufy, that destroyer of every focial virtue, now reigris uncontrouled in Lady Milner’s breast. The whole of her condudl is evidently expreffive ' of the fatal truth, and it shocks me when I refledl on what may be the dreadful coissequences of fo unnatural a paffion. May you efcape the storm that threatens you, is the prayer your Harriot each moment offers up; and may 3-our philofophic foul teach you to bear with fortitude the fcourges of
affliction.
[ 49 3
afstidlion, until Providence thinks proper to brighten your proSpefts. I exceedingly approve the fcheine of putting yourSelf under Lady Seaport’s protection, as Scandal itSelf cannot then blame you, but must hide her baneful
\
face, and throw aside her envenomed darts, through deSpair and envy at So perfect a character; for it must be allowed, that few girls at your age would have aCted with the Same prudence and discretion, but would, with half the opportunities you have had, thrown themSelves into the arms of the sirst libertine that offered, and at the hazard of their reputation, taken a trip into the north ! But my Ho-VoL. II.	E	ratia
C 50 ]
ratia always possessed more fenfe than most of her fex, of which her condudt on fo trying an occasion is a fufficient testimony. I impatiently long to know the refult of your letter to Lady Seaport, and beg you will put me out of a state of dreadful fufpenfe as foon as possible.
How noble are your fentiments in regard to Milbank. You love him, and have reafon to think you are not indifferent to him, yet wdll you gene-rousty relinquish your own happinefs to promote the interest of an unde-ferving mother, who is at the fame time planning your destruction. How ought the contrast to make her blush,
if
r 51 ]
if she is not dead to all the checks of Nature and Confcience !
The date of this letter will, I doubt not, have furprized you. I have a long story to unfold, which I at first meant to conceal from your knowledge, that I might not add to your fusser-ings by the fympathy which you will feel for your friends; but, upon re-fieftion, I think it would be a breach of considence, and that you would be difpleafed were I to fupprefs the recital of it. I will, therefore, open my whole heart to you, and make your tender bofom the repository of my cares. Some time ago, Sir Robert Holland, who is very intimate at our E 2	honfe,
[ ]
lioufe, Introduced a friend of his to us. [I will not conceal from my Ho-ratia the feelings of my heart from the first moment I beheld the amiable Mufgrave !] There was fomething in . his sine open countenance that prejudiced me exceedingly in his favour, and stamped the character of the man. His perfon was elegant, his drefs unstudied, and his converfation and ad-drefs that of a well-bred man of fashion. In short, Horatia, my poor heart fell an eafy prey to the number-lefs charms of this captivating Adoms\ but think me not vain when I add, that I very foon difcovered the passion to be mutual. His attention to me
was
[ 53 ]
was exceedingly particular. I never rode out but he attended me, nor walked but he was by my side; our evening parties were incomplete without his company, and every pleafure was but half enjoyed that he did not participate with me. Numbeilefs are the evenings he has fpent with Lady Manning and myfelf, when he frequently declared, that he would not relinquish the pleafurable trio for the most luxurious delight which the gay metropolis could offer him. His con-veissation was fprightly and entertain-ing to the greatest degree, his fenfe refined, and his knowledge of men and manners as extensive as just. He
T?
C 54 ]
would often entertain us with histories of the customs of different countries, and of the curiosities he met with while abroad; read to us while we worked, or accompany me in the violin or flute, while I performed on the harpsichord; on which instrument he like wife played extremely well. My drawings and paintings were totally negledled, unlefs he propofed the fubjed:, and mixed my colours ; and then none were approved of, but what met with his approbation. In this happy manner the rapid hours stew on eaglets wings, and I was for a time the happiest of my fex; but, alas! I foon learnt that all
C 55 ]
Sublunary joys were vain and transient! —Some time ago a friend of MuS-grave’s, who was just returned frOm his travels, came into Wiltshire/ in the ardour of his friendship, and impatience to embrace him. His name is Maitland ; he is a Nobleman, and one of the most agreeable men I ever faw. He was introduced into our family^ and was shewn every civility that a stranger couklexpedt. I obferved that Mufgrave was grave and thonglitfuh foon after the arrival of his friend; a melancholy languor took possession of his features, and the frecpicnt sighs that efcaped hhn, fpoke his heart to be iM at eafe. I was rendered wretched E 4	. sheyond
• C 56 ]
beyond defcription, by this alteration, but was constrained to conceal my emotions, as he had never declared a paffion for me. I obferved, likewife, that he avoided me as much as poshblc, and appeared, when in company, to envy me even the civilities due from the stranger. Greatly concerned at hi*s behaviour, I was one day lamenting my fate in a room which looked into the garden, when I heard his voice, and could plainly distinguish that he was in earnest conversation with his friend. Shall I own, my Horatia, that I was shjedt enough to conceal myfelf, and listen to their difeourfe! which ran thus ;—I tell you, Maitland, • I
never
[ 57 ]
never loved her—curfe on my foolish heart for perfuading me I did !—she is a sine girl, and, when put in compari-fon to many of her fex, is a desireable objed:; but she wont do forme.”— “ But tell me, Mufgrave (and excufe the freedom of a friend) did you never
r
perfuade her, by your adions, that she was dear to you ? and have not your significant eyes declared what your tongue refufed to do ?”■—‘‘ Never, my friend; I was civil to the lovely girl, ^ as every man ought to be to the fair-fex, but nothing more, I assure you : No, no, the infurmountable objections I have to the marriage-state, is not to be fubdued by any thing under
'	..	entirn:
C S8 ]
. -entire perfedion.”—“ Then you-will, I fear, remain a bachelor all your life.”
I staid to hear no more, as I was apprehensive of being difeovered. I stew to my apartment, and condemned the whole fex, fupposing them all unworthy, as I concluded Mufgrave to be. However, I refolved to banish myfelf from his prefence as foon as poshble, and obliterate him from my memory; and as Lady Manning had fome time before propofed our making a little tour into Kent, I perfuaded her to forward it, which she kindly confented to do, and we fet off for General Slater’s three days after. I
C 59 ]
was, during the remainder of our time there, exceedingly referyed to Muf-grave, and kept our intended journey a profound fecret from him; nor does he now know where 1 am.—What creatures are thefe men, Horatia! the very best of them, I fear, have many imperfections. O man ! man ! I abjure thee, since one (who, of all his fex, appeared the best) could aCt fo bafe a part; and, after all, how poor would have been the triumph of breaking the heart which bore his image, and which his pretended fondnefs had drawn in to doat on him; but, Oh ! may I foon forget him and his perfidy; for,
■Had
[ 6o ]
1.
Had I a thought that now could bear The ftamp and I'mage of him there,
I’d pierce my heart through cv’ry vein,
And die, to lec it out again,?
But I will drop the fubjeft, as I wish to give you fome account of General Slater’s familjr. He is a very worthy man, and an old and intimate friend of Sir William’s, is quite the rough foldier, and bears many testimonies (of which a wooden leg is not one of the least) of his having expofed liimfelf for his King and Country. He is a very plain old-fashioned man, loves good cheer, and gives every body a hearty welcome that comes to his hofpitable mansion. Mrs. Slater is a middle-aged woman, has been remark-
Ti h ] V
L J
ably handfome, is exceedingly tall and elegant in her perfon, and very fensible and lively; fine has read a great deal, and is what is called a learned Lady, but without having the least pedantry in her manners. Her family is conduced in the nicest order and regularity. They have but one daughter, who is a very amiable and accomplished young woman. She feems to ' be about eighteen, her manner the moss engaging in the world, and her perfon the most preposseshng. She has had a very liberal education, and possesses an infinite share of good fenfe; but is not very lively, as she feems to be rather of a fentimental turn. I have
already
[ 6^ ]
already perceived that she has many admirers, but feems totally indifferent to them all: I fancy her assedtions are engaged elfewhere. She is extremely . obliging to me, and indeed I begin to feel a very lively friendship for her. Their houfe is full of company; and I understand it is feldom otherwife.
Colonel H--------is returned from Bath,
and is here upon a visit, with his two ■daughters and a fon. The young ladies are very agreeable, but I cannot fay as much for their brother. Mr. and Mrs. Stanley are here, and many other people of fashion. The General gives a ball to-morrow, of wshich I will give you an account in my next.
I shall
C ]
I shall direfl this to St. James’s Street, jjs I hope it will come to hand before you leave London, Do not fail writing to me foon, as you may be certain of my being anxious to hear of your welfare. Believe that I am.
Sincerely your’s,
Harriot Beaumont,
LETTER XVII.
*Lhe Honourable Mifs Beaumont to
Mifs Finch.	r-
Berkeley Square.
J FEAR you was but too good a prophetefs, my dear Charlotte, when you predicted that Sir James would possess my heart; he does indeed.
L 64 ]
deed, my dear, the truth of which I am but too well convinced of. But why too well ? I think I hear you inquisitively afk. The anfwer that I should be obliged to make to that question is fo humiliating, that you will, I hope (in compashon of my vanity) fpare me the cruel facrisice. We have all been in the greatest confusion here, on account of his fudden departure. Mifs Fitzherbert is abfo-Intely distradled. Lord Spencer very near raving mad, and my poor grande-mother very melancholy ; nor is the wretched Amelia the least fusserer, ’ though she is constrained to fupprefs her grief, that she may not difcover ,
her
t 65 ]
sher unhappy attachment. His going ‘Oss in fo fudden a manner is certainly the strangest thing In the world ; but I forget that you are many miles dil-tant from this great city, and it is likely you have not heard of the assair, I hasten, therefore, to fatisfy your curiosity. About three weeks ago, we were one night at the Pantheon; our party was very large ; but Sir James, who accompanied us, attached himSelf to me the w'hole evening. I need not fay how flattering this preference w^as, as there were many young and handfome ladies in company. We danced till very late; but I obferved,. when he handed me to my chair, that V©L. II.	F	he
C 66 ]
he was greatly agitated, and appeared to have fomething upon his mind that he wished to communicate. He once began a fentence, but stopped, as if recolledling himfelf. What w'as you going to fay. Sir James ?” He looked thoughtful, but made no an-fwer, and putting me into my chair, hurried away.
I fpent the greatest part of the night in endeavouring to unriddle his con-dudt, but could not fatisfy myfelf in that particular. When I went down the next morning to breakfast, I expected to have found him in the parlour, but my eyes fought for him in vain, and I made a most uncomfortable
meal.
I ^67 ]
■meal, being upon the rack of fuf-penfe. At length one o’clock struck, and no Sir James! I then began to be piqued, as I thought he might have ’-called to inquire after my health, according to his ufual custom. Mifs Fitzheishert easily perceived my dif-appointmeiit, and propofed a ride in Hyde Park, to divert my attention-to which I confented, but, I am ashamed to fay, more through the hope of meeting him there, than the defire of obliging her. We ordered our horfes to be got ready, and parted to drefs ourfelves accordingly.
Poor Mifs Fitzherbert was quite shocked at our being beaulefs^ but I F 2	did
[ 68 ]
did not mind it, as we had two fer-
I
wants ; however, fortunately for her. Lord Nassau (who, by the bye, bears a wretched charader) came to her relief, and joined us. I am astonished at her encouraging fo great a libertine as his Lordship, who makes a pradicc of courting every lady’s assertions he meets, still they difcover his charader, and difcard him. I understand he has now two or three amours upon his hands, and is abfolutely upon the point of being married to a young Lady of large fortune. How is she to be pitied, for he still addresses Mifs Fitzherbert in the style of a lover, and is admitted upon that footing; but excufe this
digression.
C 69 ]
digreshon. I need not fay what objeft my eyes were in puissuit of, during our ride; but, alas! the feareh was-vain. Sir George Cockburn and his amiable sister joined our party, which •in fome meafure raifed my fpirits, as I am extremely partial .to them both, though I cannot tell whether that word is licenfedy when we fpeak of an unmarried man; but furely it ought to be, when he is the brother of a friend ; but, believe me, I feel nothing more than friendship for him. We had a delightful ride and on our return we found the coach waited for us at Hyde Park Corner; we therefore left our korfes, and took a jumble.
F z.	‘ sshime-
[ yo- ]
Immediately as I got home I in-i-quired if Sir James had called; and. tvhen the fervant anfwered me in the negative, I really began to be alarmed., His prefent conduct, and his miste-rious manner of behaviour the nieht before, silled me with apprehensions... Lord Spencer, who was by this time exceedingly uneafy, fent his-fervant to Parliament Street, to inquire after him, who very foon returned, and informed us he had difcharged his lodging, and, was gone out of town, he believed, as the people of the houfe told him he fet off, in a post-chaiie-and-four, at five o’clock in the morning. Never did any man’s countenance betray fucb
visible::
[ 71 I
visiltle sisns of uneafinefs as Lord Spencer’s did, when he heard this: news; my poor grandmother burst into tears; Mifs Fitzheibert, for the first time in her life, I believe, looked grave, and your poor friend was very near fainting away ; but I made fome frivolous excufe, and retired to my apartment, W'here, you may very well conceive, I WTS not blessed with the most pleasing rcsiedioiis :—fometimes I railed, called him persidigus-, and immediately after afKedmyfelf what ngbt I had to do fo, as he had never professed a passion for me ; at least, his-toRCue had never told me he lovea, but I was vain enough to imagine hi& F 4-
C 72 ]
eyes had often revealed the fecret. S'
w'as buried in thefe resteaions when
Lady Spencer entered my dreffing-
room. I started, but got up to receive
her.. Perceiving my embarassment,
she. was going to retire; but I entreated
her to return, and assured her that her
company would give me the greatest
pleafure. She then returned, and feat-
\
ing herfelf, began to inquire into the caufe of my uneasinefs., I replied, that I had too much fensibility to fusser me to be an unasseftcd fpectator
of Lord Spencer’s- and her grief.”_____
“ You are very kind, my Amelia, and I am convinced of your having a fympathizing heartbut did you not
feel.
[ 73 3
feelssomething more than that, when> you were fo near fainting to-day ?”—I burst into tears, but was encouraged by her goodnefs to own the truth. I confessed I felt a partiality for Sir James; but, to acquit him of the imputation of duplicity, assured her (which is the real truth) that he had never professed himfelf my admirer,, or tried to engage my assedlions. She told me, that Lord Spencer and. herfelf had always- wished to fee us united, and had often expressed a desire that they might live to fee that happy day ; but his prefent condudS,. she faid, had entirely crushed their fond expedtations,., as she doubted. not
butt
[ 74 ]
but he had been drawn in by fome artful creature, and was now on the road to Scotland..
Fine converfation for the already' wretched Amelia! Hovvever, I folved to call a little philofophy to my affistance, and do the best I could and being engaged that evening to a concert at Lady L—’s, I dressed comme a fordinairei and went, that I might not give the ill-natured part of the world an opportunity of talking, or sill a fpace' in the fcandalous Chronicle. I exerted myfelf while there to the utiiiost; but the veil was too thin to deceive any but fupersi.cial obfer-vers ; for Cockburn,. who thought this;
a, favourable
C 75 ]
a favourable opportunity to plead his7
. own caufe, faw through ir, though he
was too delicate even to hint that he
did. I was very ingenuous with him,,
/
and informed him, that was my heart difengaged, I knew nobody fo likely to make an impreffion on it as himfelf. This anfwer did not feem to give him much pleafure, though he was prudent enough to drop the fubjed:,. and not refume it the w'hole evening. When: I went home, I found on my dreffing-table a letter, direded to me; the hand and- arms I knew to be Lady Spencer’s. I broke it open in the greatest agitation, and found inclofcd* a. letter from Fkzhcrbert to my grandfather.^
[ 7^ ]
father, which, as I think it an original^
I will here infert for your perufal, ,
Sir James Fitzherbert to the Right Honourable Earl Spencer.
My Lord,.
Brand me not with the name of coward, when I inform your Lordship that my reafon for quitting London in fo abrupt a manner, was to avoid* a danger which must inevitably have befallen me, had I continued longer there ; but as I hold myfelf in fonie meaSure accountable to your Lordship for my adtions;, I have taken this method of acquainting you, that I intend to remain in the country till I am
of
[ 77 ]
■of age, and, as I do not wish to have the place of my retirement difeovered, have taken care to prevent it; therefore any inquiry you may make will prove inessedtual. Being convinced of this, I hope you will not experience the least trouble on my account, but be assured that I am, with the greatest cefped:.
Your Lordship’s
obliged humble fervant, James Fitzherbert.” P. S. My compliments and best wishes attend jonxpartie quarrbef’
You will be kind enough to forward this to my dear Horatia, who I am very angry with for not writing, as
Mifs
[ 78 ]
Mifs Milner has never yet fent me one of her journals, and I am kept quite in the dark in regard to my Wiltshire friends. But I hear that young Lady is shortly to be married to Lord N assau.
I
Sincerely do I pity her, and wish that my lovely Charlotte would acquaint her with his vile charadler, that she
I
might retreat before it is too late, as he is a most detestable wretch. I beg you both to be assured that I am Your sincere friend,
Amelia Beaumont.
I’-. S. Write Soon, I befeech you.
LETTER
[ 79 ]
L E'T T E R XVIII.
From the Honourable Mifs Milner Mifs Finch.
Berkeley Square.
OU will doubtless be furprlzed at receiving two letters frcm me in So short a fpace of time; but well
N
knowing what real pleafure it would give my amiable and adored Charlotte, to hear of my brother’s return to his native country, I could not negledl doing what my heart prompted me fo eagerly to perform. He arrived three days ago in perfect health ; but being very desirous of feeing Harriot, who we imagined still on a visit at General
Slater’s,
[ 8° ]
'Slater’s, in Kent, he went in pursuit of her, but unfortunately she left that place a day before he got there; and we are at a great lofs to determine what can detain him with strangers, and prevent his purfuing his journey into Wiltshire. Do not be alarmed, my fweet friend, nor fuppofe that his heart is enfnared, as I can assure you he inquired very tenderly after your Ladyship. I make no doubt but he will very foon visit Devonshire, as he is desirous of examining a little into his affairs. I fuppofe you have heard -of the large fortune he is now in pof-Seshon of; but why should I fuppofe So ! I always forget the distance you
are
C Si ]
are from town, and that (though on wings immortal fcandals fly) good news is not fo rapid in its progreSs; I will therefore give you a brief account of it.
Wlien my brother vras in Paris, he contradted an acquaintance with a young Nobleman of large fortune,, who was extremely enamoured of a beautiful young'Lady that happened to be there to complete her education. She possessed every requisite, both per-fonal and mental, to render her completely amiable. A friend of my brother’s introduced him into the familv, and he acknowledged that he felt fomething like love for the angelic
TT
C S4> ]
of coward and villain, and accisscd him of being'a traitor to his friend. This was too much for his noble fpi-rit to brook, and they went out to choofe their ground. Lord Foley sited first, but fortunately .the ball misted ; its aim; my brother then difcharged his pistol in the air, which fo enraged his haughty antagonist, that giafpmg . his fecond pistol, and intending to sty , on his adverfary with redoubled fuiy,-, his foot flipped, and the instrument of vengeance difcharged the ball in his,own side. My brother, w'ho had,, unknown to him, ordered a furgeon ; and Servants to be in waiting, had him taken up ar/ss carried to his ho el,.
[	83	]
ef fiudtuating fufpeiife. Lord Foley took his advice, and had the mortisi-cation to have his proffered hand and fortune rejedled, which fo exafperated him, that he fent my brother a challenge, accusing him of deceit. He did not wait to anfwcr it, but went immediately to his hotel, where he found him raving; nor could he perfuade him to hear reafon, for he fwore that if Lord Beaumont would not confent to fight, he would shoot him, and him-felf immediately after. What could he do in fuch a situation, when the alternative was equally dreadful ? In his passion, he branded my generous brother with the opprobrious epithets
G 2	of
C ]
creature, though he took care to stifle his pashpn, as foon as he learnt that his friend, Lord Foley, had fet up as candidate for her heart; but, nevertheless, kept up an intimacy with the family. You, who know his generous foul,- will not be furpisized when I inform you that he constantly endeavoured to promote his friend’s interest, and was at every opportunity launching out in encomiums on the young Nobleman, whom he knew to be almost distraded for love of her. He at last perfuaded him to make a declaration of his pashon, as he gave it as his opiivion, that the most unpleasing certainty was far better than a state
of
[ 85 ]
^where he remained while the ball was extradled, and the wound dressed, and
N
had the pleafure to hear the furgeon pronounce it not mortal. He fat up with him all night, during which time 'he remained peVfeCrly fenfelers; but in the morning he left him to the care of his fervants, to take a little rest, which he stood very much in need of, having fussered greatly both in body ■and mind. In the evening he had the pleafure to find him much better, and restored to reafon. He appeared fur-prized at feeing my brother enter the room, and exclaimed,—Is it you, Charles ? how unmerited is this kindness ! What a gen ro'js fellow must
Li rt	xrr\}^
[ S6 ]
you be, to interest yourfelf for the life
. of the wretch that wished to be your
murderer! But pardon the injury I have
•done you, in doubting your friendship,
and attribute the weaknefs to a fault in
my head, not my heart, of which you
now possefs the principal share; for I
1
have torn my Lucretia’s image from it, and, though painful the facrisice, am refolved to think of her no more. Pity me, Charles, though I fear you can never again love me ; but believe me, my friend, that in this trying instance I have fussered torments eeiual to thofe of the Separation of Soul and body. I have this morning received Sufficient proofs of your unSeigned re-
•sard
C S; ]
gard for me, and detest myfelf for my bafe fufpicions.” — Charles thinking his fpirits too low to dwell on the painful fubjedt, assured him that he had as sincere a friendship for him as ever, and immediately turned the con-verfation. When the physicians came in the evening, they pronounced him in imminent dang;er, and declared that his malady was incurable. He gave a -steep groan, and feizing my brother’s hand, exclaimed,—Why should a wretch like me desire to live ! and what is there in the world worth my attention, now that I arn rejected by my Lucretla, and have forfeited a claim tto .Beaumont’s friendship! No; let
G A
\
-[	88 J
me die, and by my death in fome mea-fure expiate my offence. But. one thing, Charles, you must promife me, and furely you cannot refufe the request (jf a dying man, whom once you called your friend.”—My brother wept and assured him of his regard.—Vv^ell then, my friend, 1 shall die in peace, il you will promife to be united to that angelic creature, who is the innocent caufe of my death ; but omit not to tell her, when I am no more, that ■Foley bravely died, and with his latest
I
breath offered up a petition for her p.refervatiom” — The feene was too assed'ing for my brother, who was constrained to leave the room. His
. Lordship
t 89	]
Lordship then ordered a lawyer to qc fent for, who was left alone with him for fome time ; and when Charles returned to his friend, he found him .greatly agitated with pain and fatigue ; Charles therefore determined to sit up with him all night, during which time iie was very restiefs, and could not get any .steep, and in the morning expired
in his arms.-—---When the will was
opened, Lord Beaumont was furprizod to find he had left him foie heir to his large fortune, as he had but very few relations, who WTre all rich, and had never taken the least notice of him. Before he died, he had likewile had a writing drawn up, w'hic.h he stgned, to
clear
[	9° ]
clear my brother’s charadler, and to prove to the world in whar manner he died. Fruitlefs were the means that Charles ufed, after this dreadful catasi trophe, to gain any tidings of the young Lucretia, who with her family left Paris immediately as the fracas happened; nor has he heard of her since.
No news of Fitzherbert; I cannot conceive where he is; but Lord Spencer thinks he is gone to the continent.
Positively I have almost forgot him, at least my brother’s arrival fo entirely sills my heart with joy, that it feema ^0 have totally expelled the gloomy
fiend
C 91 ]
fiend Care. Need I fa) how sincerely I am
Your assedionate friend,
Amelia Beaumont.
LETTER XIX.
Mifs Finch to Lhe Honourable Mijs Beaumont.
Summer Hill, Devon.
'\T ES, my dear Amelia, I do in-deed rejoice with you on your brother’s arrival, and at his good fortune ; but why would you cruelly wish to revive a passion in my breast, that has long ssnee been extinguished ? and particularly as it would now, in my opinion, be criminal in me to
afpire
t 9^ ]
afpire to the possession of that heart, ' which is the lawful property of another. Yes, Amelia, I again repeat it, and think you will allow, that the amiable heroine of the melancholy event that put Lord Beaumont in the .possession of fo competent a fortune, ou2:ht to be his wife. He confesses that he once loved her ; and as he was -candid enough to fpeak the truth, I will venture to fay he still declares the Same ; and notwithstanding he has not •yet been fo fortunate as to difeover the .place of her Sight, yet there is reafon to fuppofe he will ere long ; and from many circumstances in your letter, I ,.am periuaded that he is the object.of
her
[ 93 J
ster affections. I am therefore detcr=' rained to think no more of him, that Lmay not prove a bar to their happi-nefs. I hope it will not be long before he visits Devonshire, as we alh anxiousty wait his arisival. Sir Wil--: Siam and Lady Finch are almost out of patience, and I begin to find that mine is not inexhaustible. Do not be uneafy about my heart, as 1 have taken care to steel it, and am prepared to fee an JIonis (in Lord Beaumont) without emotion ; but I must inform you that it has been a work of time and much labour, to bring myfclf to-^ this state of stoicifm ; for I have long endeavoured to crafe his image from--
my:
[ 94 ]
my memory, it being my firm opinion, that after fo long an abfence, he must have forgot our youthful endearments and juvenial frolics; and indeed wc were fuch children when we were parted, that it would be the heighth of folly to interpret our mutual fondnefs into a paffion.
My correfpondence has hitherto been exceeding dull and unentertaining, and had it not been for the friendship ray Amelia possesses for me, she could not have been blessed with patience fufsicient to read my stupid letters ; but 1 hope they wtH be more amusing for the future, as we propofe fpending a few weeks at Bath. I hope
we
C 95 ]
we shall fee Lord Beaumont before we go; but I am called down stairs for a few moments, therefore I must leave my Amelia.
The trial is over, my friend ; and I think I may boast of posseffing an abundant share of fortitude, since I could, unmoved, behold fo perfedl a piece of Nature’s workmanship; but I will be methodical.—When I WTnt down, the fervant informed me a gentlemian was in the parlour alone, and that Lady Finch desired I would wait on him, as she was dressing her-Seif. This intelligence gave me a notion that it was Charles, and I went in with the full expeftation of
feeing
[	9« ]
iccing him. As foon as I opened the uoor he flew to meet me, and embraced lire Vvdth marks of unteigned joy. I assured him ot the pleaSure his pre-lence gave me, and as my heart dictated what I faid, I hope I left him no room to doubt of the sincerity of my words. We talked over past times, which brought many happy feenes to-my remembrance, and recalled the most pleasing ideas. He inquired whether my assedions were eneac^ed and very delicately gave me to understand that his were; but he did not name the objed of them. He is a charming fellow, Amdia ; but yet 1 do not perceive any alteration in my
puke
[ 97 ]
pulfc since I have feen him, nor does my heart go pit-a-pat. You may depend upon my letting you know who and who are together at Bath, and I shall expeD you to fend me all the news you can pick up in return. Believe that I am
Unalterably your’s, Charlotte Finch.
letter XX.
The Honour able Mifs Milner to'The Hon, Mifs H. Beaumont.
Seaport: abbey, EiTex.
TOEING convinced that my adored
-1,-3 r T •	.
iTarriot is anxious to hear from
her Horatia, she eagerly embraces the
s.
^ OL. IL	H	sil.-si;
[ 98 ]
first opportunity of informing her that her indulgent aunt has afforded her a kind afylum ; but as she has many things to relate, will attend a little to method, and continue her journal from whereshe last leftoss First then, let me thank you for your last favour, which came to hand before I left town. How grateful am I for the kind concern you exprefs for my fusserings; but you cannot have a competent idea of my gratitude, unlefs it were possible for you to look into my heart, as words are not fufficient to exprefs the fullnefs of it. Grieved beyond defcription at Mufgrave’s perfidy to you, and Lord Nassau’s indelicacy towards me, I am
almost
C 99 ]
almost tempted to abjure all mankind-, and adopt the fystem of my aunt Deborah, as I begin to doubt v^ihether there is any merit to be met with in that rank of beings who style them-felves the Lords of the Creation ; but I will refume my journal.
As foon as I had fent oss my last to you, I received the kindest and most, assessionate letter from Lady Seaport, informing me Sue sincerely pitied my misfortunes, and would, with the greatest pleafure, receive m.e into her family. She desired me to -six the day of my departure, that she might be in town to convey me to her feat. I immediately anfwered her letter i® H 2	very
[ 100 ]
very grateful terms, and assured her that nothintr but cruel necessity should have Gomudled me to be difobedient
X
(even in appearance) to my mother, but that which she exacted of me was more than either my duty or religion would permit to perform ; and as the day w'as then abfolutely fixed for the celebration of our nuptials (notwithstanding my abhorrence of the w'retch they deSiincd to be my liufoand) and I was to have facrificed my happineis and liberty at the expiration of one short week, I fixed on the Ihuistday following for my elopement, and entreated Lady Seaport to have her carriage in waiting at a milliner’s
U lOI ]
liner’s in------ Street, at eight o’clock
in the.morning, when I would be fure to meet her at that time. I entrusted Bennet with the fecret, as it would have been quite i.mpoffible for me to have accomplished my fcheme without her assistance, and whom, I must con-fefs, I wished to take along with me.
I
Accordingly, the night before my intended elopement, I ordered her to put 'up fome of my wearing apparel, and feveral other thino;,s I thoug-ht I misiht w'ant, whilst I attended Lady Milner to a mafquerade, though I was very little difpofed to enjoy that fpscies of entertainment, I was dressed as a •Slieplierdefs; my jacket was made of H 2	rich ■
£ ^102 ]
fiich white silk, bound with blue, my .petticoat the fame, ornamented with ':gauze and large natural stovvers; my ■hair Without powder, and flowing in Minglets on my shoulders, and a fmall ’ hat put on one side, with a profusion of •diamonds and flowers; my jacket was buttoned clofe to my waist with diamonds, and my crook ornamented with blue ribbon and flowers. Lady Milner fupportcd the charadler of ' Fortune inimitably. Her drefs was the most becoming in the world, but yet llie had not attractions fuflicient to -make a convert of Milbank, who re~ fufed to offer up wows at her ■flirine, though.file promifed to turn her wheel
Til
C I°3 ]
ill his favour, if he would confent to own her power. But, alas! the han-deau on her eyes could not prevent her feeing that the Arcadian fwain preferred a Mortal to a Goddefs, as he was very attentive to me the whole night. He did not go in our party, but foon found us out. V/e staid till two o’clock in the morning, and then, harrassed and fatigued almost to deadi, returned home. I immediately took off my sinery, and put on a habit, as I was refolved not to go to-bed, being well convinced that I should not steep. My mind was fo exceedingly agitated with the ideas of what I was about to do, .that I fainted feveral times; nor H 4	could
[	104 ]
could Beniiet’s perfuasions compofe my drooping fpirits. The folemn silence that reigns at that feafon silled me with the most dreadful apprehensions ; but, resteCdng on the motive that adtuated my conduct, my heart acquitted me of difobedience, and when Aurora undrew the fable curtains of the night, the g’oomy phantoms vanished, and I was all hope and , expectation. Immediately as the Servants were up, I ordered Bennet to desire my Servant to call a hackney-coach. As Soon as it came to the door I went down stairs, and stepping into ir, desired Bennet to Scllow me, and told Vv^illiam that I did not want
him^
[ i°5 ]
him, as she was with me, but bid liim diredt the coachman to drive me to Tavistock Street. I let him turn out of St. James’s Street, and then pulling the check-string, ordered him to take
me to No. 2 1 in C--------- Street. We
foon arrived there, when i o;ot out of the coach, leaving Bennet to pay the fare. Lady Seaport was in a back room waiting for me. She embraced me in the most tender and affectionate manner, but would not permit me to utter my grateful thanks. We hurried into her coach, and were fet down at her hofpitable manfion in the fpace of four hours., which is ten miles out of town. We -did not stop to.take any
xeSrelliment
[ io6 ]
refreshment on the road. Mifs Seaport received me with every mark of friendship ; but it is necessary that I should here give you fome account of her charadter, to prevent your being too much furprized at an anecdote which I shall foon relate concerning her. I shall therefore begin with a defcription of her perfon.—She is very shorty, and .rather too much	; her
complexion a fallow brown ; her hair and eyes exceedingly dark ; her mouth extremely wide, which difplays a sine ,sset of teeth ; and her nofe a very long Roman one, which gives her an exceeding arch and penetrating appear-..cncco She is lively to excels, and
-possesses
[ 1=7 ]
possesses more tvit than folid fenfc. .She has not the least idea of the propriety required in the conduct of every young Lady, and professes herfelf to be above the opinion of the world, thinking it is fufficient to be virtuous, and that if her own heart acquits her, it is enougho ‘•She is good-natured, and of a very eafy difposition ; but is too volatile to be steady in her friendships. Nothing can perfuade her to give up a point that she has once fet her heart on ; nor does she fcruple to run any rif^, .rather than be difap-pointed of a favourite fcheme. She feemis to be very strong in her preju-i^dices, and rather too great an adept
'ill
c io8 ]
V
in the art of retaliation; nor can she ever forget an injury done her. She is whimsical to the greatest degree, but never dull.—Wc were foon upon very good terms; but she would irequently ridicule me for refusing fo acc(,'mplish-ed a man as Lord Nassau, and dechu ed, that to her he would have been irresistible.
I wrote to Lady Milner foon after my arrival in Essex, and informed her that I was well, and under the protection of fome very worthy people.
I aiiuiedlier that nothing should have induced me to have left her houfe, but' the certain knowledge I had of an event that would iiave happened to .me
had
[	1=9 ]
had I remained any longer there, which, I was convinced, would have robbed me of every earthly comfort. I had the letter carried to town by one of Lady Seaport’s fCrvants, who put it into the penny-post, that my retirement might not be difeovered by the post-mark. I knew she wTuld not fuSpedt my being at Seaport Abbey, aS' she had long since shook off an acquaintance with my aunt, on account of her havsinp' oiven her fome advice
O O
concerning the regulation ot her con-dud:.
As I was walkinp- alone one morn-*
O
ing in a meadow, at fome distance from the liouSe, and ruminating on my un-
ha^.pf
[ Iio ]
happy fate, my imagination painted my afflictions in fo forcible a manner,, that, in the horror of my mind, I exclaimed :—“ Ah ! wretched Horatia I how hast thou merited fo great a share
of misfortune! and when will thy
*
gloomy profpeCts brighten ! Alas ! I fear they never will; for great will ever be the conflict between thy duty and affections. What ! must thou fa-crisice thy happinefs as a proof of thy obedience ? that wTi*e terrible indeed ! What then is the alternative ? a dreadful fentence to fufceptibility ! for thou must pafs thy days a stranger to maternal fondnefs, and an alien to thy clearest friends!—Ah, cruel Destiny!—
But
[ III ]
But let me not arraign that Providence who orders every thing for the best; and though I am doomed to tear his image from my heart, I will fubmit. Yes, Milbank, I renounce thee, since it is facrilege to love the man who is destined to be the hushand of my happy mother 1”
Judge, my dear Harriot, what were my emotions, to behold Milbank that instant at my feet I My whole frame underwent a fevere agitation, and I was going to retire, when he feized my hand, and entreated me not to doom him to perpetual wretchednefs. My confusion was very visible, as I was Surprized beyond description at his
having'.
[ 112 ]
having been witneSs to my Soliloquy^ He endeavoured to compoSe my siur-licd Spirits, and in the tenderest manner breathed out his pashon ; kindly entreating me to revoke the Severity of of my last Sentence, and assured me that he never could be baSe enouo-h to
O
conSent to an union with Lady Milner, while he felt So ardent a passion for me, and that he had ingenuoussy told her the Situation of his heart, upon her having acquainted him that she honoured him with a preference. I entreated him to tell me the reaSon of his being in Essex, and whether he knew that I was there. He declared that he had not the most remote idea
of
C ”3 ]
t
of it, and that he left town in mere
difpair, not in the least fufpecting the
happinefs that awaited him. I ufed %
every perfuasion to prevail on him to leave the country, and assured him that I never could confent to be his, being convinced I should thereby embitter all Lady Milner’s enjoyments, and render her continually miferable and unhappy, as she would have the objedlof her difappointed love always before her eyes. I confessed that our passion w^as mutual, and that the pangs of a perpetual feparation would be equal on my part, but that it muss be done. He informed me that he was
then at his brother’s, Lord G------»’s,
VoL. II.	I	who
[	”4 ]
who resided a few miles from Seaport Abbey, and who was member for the county ; but that my commands, however cruel, should be obeyed, and that he would never again offend me with his prefence, but fettle a few affairs in town, and siy for comfort to a foreign land. He pressed my hand to his lips, with tears flowing down his manly cheeks, and left me with precipitation. I returned home in a state of mind not easily to be defcribed, and confined mySelf to my room, under pretence of a violent head-ache.
The next day Mifs Seaport insisted on my taking a walk with her. I was not much difpofed to do it, but could
not.
[ ”5 ]
not, consistent with good manners, refufe ; and as the weather was exceedingly fine, thought it might be of fome fervice to me. We walked a considerable way, without resieddno- that we were to return; and when we were about three miles from the Abbev, we found ourfdves both fatis;ued and benighted. As it was rather late, we were uneafy lest; Lady Seaport should be alarmed ; but beino^ within sicrhi of a fmail village, Mils Seaport pro-pofed our going on, and hiring a post-chafe, to vrhich I consented. We loon arrived at a decent looking public-houSe, w'here, with trembling steps, wc entered the yard, and inquired whether I 2	We
[ ii6 ]
we could have a post-chaife. They informed us that one should be ready in five minutes, and shewed us into a fmall but neat parlour, to wait till the horfes were got ready. We had not been long there, before the landlord came in and told us he was very forry to difappoint us, but that all his horSes ' were out. We inquired if there was a possibility of our hiring one at any other place in the neighbourhood ; he assured us there was not, he being the only perfon who let out carriages. A fudden panic feized us, and we were confulting what was the best fcheme to fall upon, when a gentleman’s Servant, out of livery, came to the door,
and.
[ ”7 ]’
and, in broken English, told us that his mister had heard of our distrefs, and fent him to beg we would do him the honour to makeufe of his chariot, which was waiting at the gate. At first we hesitated, but resiedling on the hour, and the distance we were from home, accepted of the offer, and were immediately conducted to it by the -French valet. We were no fooner feated, than the carriage drove off with the utmost rapidity. I was greatly nmazed at our being fo long in reaching the Abbey, and at laSt began to be very iincafy. I expressed my Surprize to MiSs Seaport, who entreated me not to be alarmed; and Said, she imagined
I'l	t ] n / 1 r
j
r 118 j
they were going a round-about way. Her arguments foothed me for a short time; but I foon relapfcd, and began to be exceedingly terrified and uneafy in mind. My fears made her laugh ; and taking me by the hand, site faid,—“ Will you not be angry, if I tell you that this is all a fclieme of mine to punish Lord Nassau ?”—For Heaven’s fake explain yourfelf, dear Mifs Seaport! What is it I hear you fay about Lord Nassm r”—« Promife, then, that jmu will not be angry ?”— Ido! 1 do !”—Well then, my dear Mifs Milner, I muft inform you, that I wrote Lord Nassiu word that you were with ns, and promifed
to
[ ”9 ]
to stand his friend, and affist him in carrying you off to Scotland. I made an appointment to meet him at the little village we left three hours ago, and prevailed on you to walk, on pur-pofe to accomplish my destgn.”—-Cruel Mifs Seaport, thus to fport W'ith the affiissions of others; but be assured, that though you have forfeited my friendship, and abuied the confidence I repofed in you, your bafenefs must stop here, as nothing that vou or your cruel accomplice can do, fiiail ever prevail on me to give my hand to that vmetcli; and if yoB really thought it would have been punishing liiiii to put me in his pofieshon, how I 4 fuperiatively
f 120 J
Superlatively cruel were you to hope to derive pleafiire from the mifery of two perfons, who never ossended you.” —Have patience, my dear Mifs Milner, to hear my story out, and then condemn me if you pleafe. I left a letter upon my dressng-table, which I desired my maid to find, as if by accident, at twelve o’clock, and give it to Lady Seaport, the purport of which was to inform her of my fchcine, and to beg of her not to he uneafy for us. I likewife took care to order my fervant to ride with all expedition to Berwick, and to be careful to have horfes and a chaife in waiting
O
to-morrow night, I directed him to
put
[ Jll ]
put up at the Globe, which T knew to be the inn l.ord Nassau meant to stop at; and I propofe, when he is retired to rest, and tancies us feciire, to stip through h;s singers, get into a carriage, and return home as fast as we can, leaving the little Nobleman in the lurch, bv way of punishment for having dared to pay his addresses to two of my friends at the fame time.”—I remonstrated with her on the improbability of our being able to
*
elude Lord Nassau’s vigilance ; biit she entreated me to be coinoofed, and assured me his Lordstiip would be oss his guard, thinking she was in his in-teresh—You may be fare 1 was not in
very
[ 122 ]
very good humour at this manceuvri, as I was apprehensive of the world’s putting no favourable construction on the affair; but Mifs Seaport was perfectly eafy on that store, and declared that she did not in the least degree value the good opinion of the world ; but, as I was of a different way of thinking, I could not help being exceedingly uneafy. We travelled all night, and ffopped but twice to change horfes. You can have no idea of the perturbation I was in the w hole time; and when I reflected on the rifk we ran, was truly miferable ; but as complaining would have availed nothing, I was silent. Mifs^ Seaport
kept
C 123 ]
kept up the farce, and was continually calliiiErout of the window for affistance, but she took care to do it when nobody were in hearing, to avoid a fracas, which would have entirely frustrated her fcheme. We stopped in the morning at a little hedge ale-houfe to breakfast, where we had no opportunity of making our efcape, had we been difpofed to do it, as we faw no perfon, but the French valet who attended us, the whole time. We entreated him to inform us what he meant by his con-duQ; towards us; but all we cou d get out of him was, f obeis aux crdres de ■mon md.tre. Wc begged him to tell us who* his master was, but that we
could
[	12.4	]
could not prevail on him to do. It would have been in vain to attempt getting the people of the houfe over to our side, as they were fuch ignorant creatures, that they could not have either the ability or inclination to ferve us; we therefore fussered ourfelves to be put into the carriage, and purfued our journey with the greatest fpeed« We dined at a houfe little fuperior to that we had breakfasted at, and arrived ■that night at the Globe, in Berwick,
_ where, Monjieur le Falet told us his ■Lordship designed to meet us. We were Snewn into a handfome-apartment, where was a table fpread for three,. 1 he wretched Lord Nassau very sioon
made
C *25 ]
made his appearance, dressed out at all points. I fainted at the sight of him, though I had endeavoured to arm my-felf with courage to meet him undaunted. When I recovered I found myfelf in his arms; and struggling to be difengaged from him, addressed him in the following terms:—Wretch ! I defpife thee; nor shall thy vile arts force me to thy arms. Mean as thou art, I blame myfelf for condefccnd-ing to fpeak to thee; but this I must assure thee, I never will be thine.”—Mifs Seaport, for the fake of appearance, pretended to be exceedingly angry ; but, however, she did him the honour to sit at table, which
I abfolutely
L 126 J
I abfolutely refufed to do. He endeavoured to footh me; but I felt fuch a thorough difgust for the man, that his arguments failed of the desired essedl. Mifs Seaport inquired after our French attendant, and pretended to be highly entertained when his Lordship told her, that he had assumed the difguife that we might not know him. He then gave us a long story of his having been informed of my being in Essex by a friend in town, and that he had
been in---------village fome days to
watch my motions; but that he was indebted to chance for throwing me in his power fo foon ; all which was meant to exculpate Mifs Seaport, lest
I might
[ 1^7 ]
I might otherwife fufpedt her to be accessary to the plot. At twelve o’clock my fair companion expressed a wish to retire, and fmiling faid to Lord N assau, I hope, my Lord, you will not expert us to renew our journey before twelve to-morrow, as we find ourfelves very much fatigued ; and your Lord-ship need not be afraid of purfuers, as none of our friends will fufpedl our having eloped, and particularly with Lord Nassau.”—He gave a fuperci-lious fmile, and, bowing, wished us a good night. We immediately rung for the chamber-maid, who put a paper into my hand, which I opened, and in it found written thefe words :—“ The
bearer
[ ’128 ]
bearer of this is in our fervice. Care shall be taken to have the chaife ready at one o’clock, and she will conduct . you to it, when all the family are retired.”—We went to our room by way of blind, and as we passed by Lord Nassau’s, appeared to be in earnest conveissation, that he might hear us. There were two doors to the room, one of which led to a pair of back stairs, which we defcended about one o’clock, and, by the affistance of a golden key, and a promife of more if she did not difcover us, we found our-felves fafely stated in a chaife, attended by a guide, and Mifs Seaport’s strvartt. We made all imaginable haste, and in
two
C 129 ]
two days arrived at Seaport Abbey ua-purfued.
Lady Seaport was at first a little angry with her daughter, but the joy of feeing us put her very foon in good humour; and she laughed at the frolic as she termed it, though I must ever look upon it in a very different light. She has ever fpoiled her daughter through excefs of fondnefs. I am really quite shocked when I rested: on what has passed, and fear we shall both fusser fevere reproaches from a world too ready to put the worst con-struedion on the adions of others. - I wish to know whether Lady Milner has heard of the affair, What can
yoL.II.	K	she
C 130 ]
she think of me if she has ? I find that Mifs Fitzherbert, who reiides with ymur sister at Lord Spencei’s, is a ■friend of Mifs Seaport’s, and that it wais a concerted fcheme between them. I own myfelf very little obliged to the ladies for making me the instrument of revenging themfelves on Lord Naf-fau; and I am desirous of knowing whether he has ventured to shew his face in town since. 1 doubt not, if he ever does, but he will acquaint Lord Rivers where I am by way of retaliating. Your poor friend will then de-ferve pity. But Hope, that last best comforter, perfuades me that he will be silent on a fubjeft fo little to his credit,
How
C 131 3
How dreadful is my fituation, to be obliged to sty from a hitherto indulgent mother’s protedlion, but fuch is my hard fate, that I am compelled to do it, or facrifice every other earthly' enjoyment, by placing my Honour in the hands of a wretch who, I am
s
convinced, would abufe the trust; but, as I find I am furronnded by dangers in this houfe (for Mifs Seaport may again put fome foolish Scheme in execution that may not end So much to her Satisfadlion) I am re-Solved to quit this place, and if my Harriot could find out Some creditable family near her that would take me as a boarder, and where 1 could remain K 2	i«
[ 13^ 3
in peace and obfcurity till I am of age and can demand the half of my fortune, how extremely happy should I think myfelf, where, in the friendship and converfation of my only friend I should in fome meafure forget my forrows, and, by participating hers, lessen their number, and afford her fome fmall confolation. And as I am not allured of Milbank’s having quitted this place, and may therefore, if I continue longer here,beexpofed to a fecond trying interview, lam refolved to fly the danger as foon as poshble. Write, therefore, to me immediately, and fpeak comfort to the diftressed Horatia Milner.
LETTER
C 133 ]
LETTER XXI.
Lhe Honourable Mifs H. Beaumont /<?
.Lhe Hon. Mifs Milner.
Manning Cafile, Devon.
ILL my Horatia’s troubles know no end Yes ! in the friendship and conshlatioa of IWr Har-•'riot. They must ! Fly then, my lovely girl, to my longing arms, which are open ready to receive you. How do I long to embrace you. If, therefore, your friendship is ecjual to mine, delay not one moment after this rcachcc you, to let out for Manning Castle, whole owners are impatiently anxicii3 'Xo lee you, and to assord yau that K 0 ''
[	134 ]
Security in their houfe which you were a stranger to while with relations. I have manv wonderful things to relate which will ferve for converfation when you are here. Fail not to obey this Summons, or I shall imagine that you no longer love
Your unalterable Sriend, Harriot Beaumont.
LETTER XXII.
Lord Nassau to Sir Benj. Cotterill.
Bond Sfeet.
rr^HE devil take all women, fay I, —how confoundedly have I been jilted ;—but I am detcrn'iined on revenge, and wish, Ben, to make thee
the
[ '35 ]
the instrument of it, as I think thoU; art every way cut out for it, and would ferve my purpofe admirably. Do’st think, boy, thou, could’st shallow the bitter pill of matrimony, be-caufe, if thou could’st, I can provide a wife for thee ? She is young, agreeable in her perfon, and will have twenty thoufand pounds, which, you know^, would enable thee to shake thy elbow ^ few weeks longer. What fay you ? Come, pluck up courage, Ben, and dont be chicken-hearted ; follow my example, who, you arc convinced, have as great an antipathy to turn Benedick as yourfelf;—but necessty compells me, and 1 plunge into ma-K 4	trimony
[ 136 3
trimony as my last rcfource, without caring one straw what materials my help-mate is compofed of, fo as she is but weighty ! What a curfed fool was I to let Horatia stip through my singers, and to put my confidence in rhat little devil, Seaport. Never shall I rorgct the ridiculous appearance I made in the morning, when I was informed (after having like a tame Ideot waited breakfast till twelve o’clock) that the ladies were no where to be found. I ran, like one distradSed, all over the hoiife, gardens, &c. &c. and Swore, if they were not found, I W'ould murder every one in the houfe; but my thr.eatnings availed nothing;
.and
[ 137 ]
and I was obliged to return homc^ disappointed and Satigued, aSter having paid an enormous bill.
Wshy did you not, when I shewed you the letter Sent me Srom that little artful hussy, tell me it was a cheat, and dissuade me from So rash a Scheme ? but you never had the Smallest degree of penetration. I’ll forgive you, however, upon condition of your going into Essex. You arc acquainted with
Lord G-------, and can therefore very
reasonably Spend a Sew weeks with him, and get introduced at Seaport Abbey, where your handSome per Son and insinuating addrefs will Soon make 3'our fortune^ You have nothing to
do
/ '
C 138 ]
-dOibut to give Mifs a large portion of %tfer'', and persiiadeher chat, you arc violently in love with her, but too. modeft to declare yoiirfelf to her mother, as you are not yet come to your
s
ejlate^ and fear she will think you too young a hushand for her daughter, but you would never ceafe to adore her, if she would confent to a clandestine marriage. You need not doubt of your fuccefs, as she is one of thofe characters that defpife the opinion of the world, and would throw heisielf into the arms of the first man that offered. I hope you will not hesitate to comply; nor need you be frightened at the picture i have drawn of her,
for.
C 139 ]
for, in the light which you and I hold a wife, it is- immaterial whether she is good or bad;—but remember, when you have her fortune in your posseffion, that you break her heart through bad treatment. I exadl it of you as a proof of your friendship for me,
I am likewife refolved how to punish Horatia. I will acquaint I ord Rivers where she is, who, I hope, will insist upon her making me reparation, by marriage; but if he does not I shall not be much affiidted, as I (like a wife fellow) have two strings to my bowq and can, whenever I pleafe, marry a lady with thirty thou-fand pounds, though my ©nly reafon
for
[	140 ]
for preferring Horatia w^as, becaufc she had fixty^ not through any particular regard. How greedily did her old guardian fwallow the bait of my coming into pojjeijion of Aw o large ejiates at the death of Lord Robert, little fuf-
*
pedting^ that they will both fall int® the hands of Jews and stockbrokers, whom I have fold them to long ago.
As my circumstances begin to grow preffing, fomething must be done. I shall therefore try what I can make of Lord Rivers, and, if things do not turn out there as I could wish, I will lay ciofe siege in Berkeley Square, and marry Mifs Fitzhcibert, in mere diS-pair, to revenge myfess on the hole
feio.
[	^41	]
fex. Write foon, and inform me how much longer you intend staying in the country, what you are doing there, and whether you approve of my commands. In the mean time, ■feelieve me to be.
Your sincere friend, and Brother in iniquity, Frederick Nassau.
LETTER XXIII.
Lhe Honourable Mifs Beaumont to Mifs Finch.
Berkeley Square.
i
OEICFI an adventure have I to re-^ late, my dear Charlotte! and
though I am but just returned from a
■petit
C 14^ ]
fefit fnupe, given bv the Duchefs of
L-----, 1 cannot steep till I have un-
burthened myfelf to you. Prepare, therefore, to hear fometbing very wonderful. But I must be methodical, and, as I know you are very particular, I will be minute.
The Duchefs of I.-------, about a
fortnight ago, engaged Mifs Fitzher-bert and your humble fervant to be at an entertainment she gave this even-inp-, and to which she invited all the world, at least all the fashionable part of it. Impatiently did we count the lingering hours, till the aufpicious morn arrived that ushered in the day of execution* From twelve to four
w^as
C 143 ]
was fpent with our friJd.-io*s; we them dined ; and the remaining hours, till nine o’clock, were employed in completing our drefs, and sipping of coffee.
But you will not be fatisfied unlefs I give you an account of our dresses. I shall begin with Mifs Fitzherbert. Her hair was done in the most elegant stile, ornamented with silver gauze, and tiffliny flowers, and her diamonds placed in a very becoming manner; her gown was pale pink fatin, with a white fatin petticoat, over which she wore an entire gauze one; her gown
was trimmed in the Vandyke stile with \
very rich fpoited gauze, and the points
ornamented
t 144 ]
ornamented with silver gauze; her neck, quite uncovered, with only a piece of narrow black velvet round her throat, and her father’s picture, fet round with brilliants, fastened to the end of it; her shoes wer-e white fatin, with diamond buckles. In short, she made a most striking appearance.—My drefs was made in every refpeO: like hers, but was blue, instead of pink, and had no silver about it, as I thought ermine would look neater and quite as genteel; my hair was exceedingly well done, and I had on an elegant full-drefs cap, and all my diamonds for the first time. But I am tired of thele trifles, and
impatient
C H5 ]
Impatient to relate fomething more material. At nine the Duchefs of N—^— called for us, but we did not .gain admittance into the ball-room at
■the Duke of L-----’s, in Grofvenor
Square, until near ten o’clock, on account of the prodigious crov/d of ■carriages and chairs that were going there.
( The Duke, who is a very forma^ man, was stated near the door, that he might receive all his company ; and as foon as he had paid his compliments to ns, he stew from us with visible joy in his countenance, exclaiming, at the fame lime, “ Sir James, how rejoiced am I to fee you ^'OL. II.	L	in
c 146 ]
in town again—we have missed you exceedingly—where have you hid youisielf all this time?” My curiosity prompted me to turn my eyes towards the door, that I might fee who the welcome stranger was; but judge what were my feelings, when I beheld Fitzherbert I a chilling sicknefs came over me, and my head turned fo giddy, that I was obliged to lean on Mifs Fitzherbert’s arm to fupport myfelf from falling. She easily perceived I was not well, and inquired what could poshbly have put me in fuch a flurry, for she had not feen Sir James, being anxioufly engaged in looking round fpr her divine Lord Nassau, whom
she
C 147 ]
she has again taken into favour, notwithstanding his affair with the amiable Mifs Milner. I told her I could attribute my illnefs to no other caufc than the bustle and difficulty we had met with in coming in. She perfuaded me to leave the room, that we might set fome assistance. Before we could reach the door. Sir James perceived -us, and approached to pay his devoirs, but Mifs Fitzherbert could not be ;prevailed on to stop, until we came to ,a room, where all kind of refreffimentS' were fet out, and to which place Fitzherbert followed us. By the assistance of fome hartShorn and water, and strong eau de luce, I foon recovered.
L 2	.After
C 148 ]	/
After the ufual compliments were over, he introduced a most elegant man to us, who had all this time been a silent fpeftator; but oh! my Charlotte, accule me not of inconstancy, when I fay, that as foon as I beheld Lord Maitland, my heart acknowledged him to be the most perfed; figure I had ever feen. Even Fitz-herbert, who before had fo large an interest in that heart, shrunk into nothing, and I was astonished at my ever having a partiality for him,
i
I expressed my furprize at not having feen him in Berkeley Square; but he assured me he did not arrive in town ten o’clock this morning, and
that
t 149 ]
that he had feen Lord Spencer at .a cosseehoufe, who had informed him that we were well, and that nothing but his having been engaged with his friend should have prevented his calling upon us; that hearing fome-thing was going forward in Grofve-nor qua.% he came there, though not without the stattering hope of meeting us. You are, perhaps, furprifed at Lord Spencer’s not having told us of his arrival in town, to acquit him, therefore, I must inform you that he went out early in the morning, dined our, and did not come home before we left Berkeley Square,
As I was quite recovered, we fallied L a	ap-ain
C 150 ]
again into the ball-room, and were fortunate enough to meet the Duchefs
of N-----immediately as we entered.,
Shf was in clofe converfatioii with the Duchefs of L——, who honoured us with every mark of civility, and expressed much uneasinefs at my indii-position. — Fitzherbert, wlirSpering,, aiked me if I was engaged, and, upom my anfwering in the negative, pre-fented Lord Maitland to me, who, he-faid, wished for no higher felicity thair the honour of my hand, but I declined '^‘dancing, as I did. not think myfelf wcU enough to join the fprightly throng. His Lordship feemed disappointed, but stiid he was not ini-
menshlw
t I5I ]
menfely fond of dancing, and never entered into the amufement but for the pleafure of enjoying his partner's Gonverfation; he hoped, therefore, I would permit him to be with me a looker-on. I fmiled, and bowed ail assent.—Lord Nassau, that vile creature and horrid piece of effeminacy, at last entered the room, and perceiving Mifs Fitzherbert, stew to her on the wings of love. But it will afford you fome entertainment to be made a little more acquainted with his perlon, drefs, and manner. He is a short man, ancL as thin and taper as it is poshble to be; he has languishing blue eyes, which fay the foitest things in nature to Mifs L 4 Fitzherbert;
C 15^ ] '
Fitzherbert; his complexion is the
’i
lilly and rofe equally blended, and he^ has the prettiest little nofe and mouth imaginable; his teeth are exquisitely white, and regularly beautiful; his hair light brown, always dressed en dernier gout, and well powdered with jessamine and marechal powders; he has likewife a little round chin that fcorns a beard, and is fmooth as the fairest lady’s; his Ulliputian hands are as white as show, and his long-thin singers ornamented with a quan>-ty of rings; hewas dressed in a fcarlct velvet coat, lined with ermine, dia^ mond shoe and knee buckles. Ires hair feathered back to an enormoi^s
h eighth,.
[ 153 I
keighth, and tied very lo w-Upon hif ^shoulders, with large dropping curls? and to complete his-beauship,Che had on a very handfome gold-hiked fword*^ and two watches, . with an immenfe quantity of trinkets and feals. Thus equipped, he entered the ball-room> stew to Mifs Fitzherbert, and, with all the eager inquietude of a lover, ashed if she had difpofed of her hand for the evening. He was in ecstafy when, she informed him she had not, and led her triumphantly into the cotillon-room, where we shall leave them for the prefcnt.—-Sir James did not dance, as he complained of being exceedingly fatigued from-his journejq
1 had,,
C 154 ]
I had, of courfe, two beaux to my share, and never did I fpend a more agreeable evening. The converfation of both was fpirited and lively, their remarks judicious, and their obferva-tions on perfons and things accurate to the last degree.
The DucheSs of N------, whom I fat
by, was fo fully engaged in paying and recciyint>; compliments from her large acquaintance, that I had not much of her converfation, which, by the bye, I was not forry for, as she is rather a weak woman, and detests every thing but fmall-talk. Do not noiv infer from this that politics was our Subject. I do assure you it was
not.
[ ii'5 1
not. The curiosities of France and Italy furnished us with converfation fufficient for one evening; and as I once had the pleafure of travelling over their fertile plains, I received infinite fatisfadion from resteding on past enjoyments. Fitzherbert ventured to afk me what the world thought of his fudden departure from town. I told him the conjedures were various,, but that the majority gave it as their opinion he had taken a trip to the' north upon a matrimonial expedition.-He laughed heartily, and entreated me to tell him whom the world had given him for a help-mate; and I assured him that point had never been
cleverly
C 156 ]
cleverly fettled; I very foon learned', from the tenor of his conveissation, that he had left his heart in the country, and I begin to fufpe^l who is the possessor of it, though I could not prevail upon him to tell me what part of the world he had been in for fome time past. Do not imagine that I felt the least uneasinefswhen I found that I was not raistrefsof his assedlions,. no, I sincerely rejoice at it, and am determined to promote his interest as-much as poshblc,
I am now tired of writing,, and my eyes begin to draw straws, therefore I wish you a good night, and propitious dreams; mine will,' I doubt, not be
[ 157 ]
So, as I go to bed in the best humour imaginable. Lord Maitland, I hope, will be the hero of mine,—but once more good night.
Your’s assedUonately,
Amelia Beaumont.
P. S. Let me know how you go on at Bath. You need not fend this to Harriot, as I shall very Soon write to her.
£ND or THE S.ECOND VOLUME-
A N I N T L R E S T I N G'
S K, E T C IT
o F'
GENTEEL LIFE.
B Y A I. A D Y.
V 0 L. III.
I
SOUTHAMPTON:
J> R. I N T E D BY L I' N D E N &: CUNNINGHAM.
SOED BY SKELTON & MI LLS, SOUTH AMBTON,-
AND B. LAW, AVEMARY I, A 14 K , LONDON.
• M DCC LXXXII.
AN INTERESTING
SKETCH
O F
«*
GENTEEL LIFE.
LETTER XXIV.
Mifs Finch to Lhe Honourable Mifs Beaumont.
• Bath.
My ever dear Amelia,
■^7'OUR last kind letter is this mo-^ iiient come to hand, for which you have my most sincere thanks. I am glad to hear you have conquered VoL. III.	B	your
t 2 J
tr
your attachment for Fitzherbcrt, as-1 know nothing half fo dreadful as being entangled in a hopelefs paffion. But, do you know, Amelia, I too am become your rival 1 Nay, start not, child—Maitland has not yet stood the test of my charms, but they have fub-dued the amiable Cockburn’s heart, and made him acknowledge that Amelia Beaumont is not the only woman capable of infpiring his breast with a tender paffion. He is every thing that is charming, though rather too much in the penferofo style for your lively friend, but that I chiefly attisi-bute to the late malady of his mind. As you must doubtlcfs be inquisitive tO’
know
[ 3	]
know how I became acquainted with him, I will take compassion upon you and fatisfy you in that particular.
One morning, about a week ago, I tvent, as ufual, to the pump-room, where I was fcarcely entered, when a gentleman in a most elegant undrefs passed by me. His perfon was truly interesting, and, from his languid air and manner, I judged him to be exceedingly ill. After inquiring oS an acouaintance who he was, I Sound him to be Sir George Cockburn—come to this place to drink away an unhappy ' paSfion he entertains for a young lady who is not inclined to return it. Then, replied I, sincerely do I pity him, B 2	and
V
L 4 ]
and as sincerely do I hope the waters? may j-rove falutary.
I could not help examining him attentively ; nor could my fpecuiative powers convince me how it was possible for you to rejed the addresses of Such a man. His features are cast in I a fensible mould, and his eyes have fo much sire in them, notwithstanding the melancholy which oppresses him, that I am astonished how you could resist their eloquent language. I left the pump-room with more regret than I had ever done before, and was fo buried in thought while I walked home, that I should certainly have lost my way twenty times, had not my
fervant
[ i ]'
Servant eve.^y now and then roufed mC v from my reverie by informing me I was going wrong. I believe the poor fellow thought me mad. At break-fast, my father informed us he intended to introduce a young gentleman to us, the Ton of a very old friend of his, as he had heard he was arrived at Bath, and he should make it his businds to sind him out. My mother was anxious to know who he w^as, and your poor Charlotte exclaimed, Is it Sir George Cockburn, Sir (So true it is, that fe rahondance du emir la heuehe park.)
It is, my dear,” repl-ed Sir Wil-iiam, i once laid under fome obligations to his father ; and you know
B ^	it
[ 6 ]
it is my maxim never to forget a generous adtion. But how come you acquainted with his being herc.’^ I told him of my having feen him at the pump-room, and he fet out in puissuit of him immediately after breakfast. I then retired to drefs, not omiting to tell my maid, I wished to have my hair uncommonly well done, and to put on the genteelest dishabille I possibly could; fo you fee, my Amelia, I had a design upon his heart. But be-
i
fore I had well finished the important article of drefs. Lady Finch came into my room to beg I would make all imaginable haste, as my father was impatient to introduce me to Sir Georo;e.
O
t 7 ]
I took another furvey of myfelf in the glafs, and hurried down to the drawing-room, armed for conquest at all points. As foon as I open’d the door
k
Cockburn rofe, and my father introduced him to me. I then took a feat, and the common-place topic of the weather, the company at Bath, &c. furnished us with converfation, till the fervant informed us dinner was upon, table. We WTnt down, and, all circumstances considered, made* the most agreeable parts quar'e im|ginable. The melancholy that oppressed him wore oss by degrees, and he entered into converfation with vivacity and Spirit. I endeavoured to divert him B .4	by
' ' C 8 S
by introducing fuch Subjedls as were entertaining and amusing, for which he feemed grateful; and I once ob-ferved him fixing his eyes on me with ^ the utmost attention.—Ah ! thought I, he is making comparifons that will not be much in my favour.—The idea humbled me., and I was not myfelf for fome time.
When the cloth was removed, and the defert put on table, my father begged he would not confine himfelf to fpend the evening with us (though his company afforded us great plea-fure) as the gay feenes of Bath demanded his attention. Sir George bow’d, and inqisired if I went to the
[ 9 ]
Rooms. “ No,” replied Sir William, “ we cannot perfuade her to grace the Assemblies with her pre-> fence ; from the gaiety of her difposi-tion one would think that kind of nonfenfe would pleafe her, but she is a contradictory girl, and a compound of inconsistencies.” 1 bridled up, and began to look a little angry, when ■Cockburn relieved me by making the following eloquent Speech : “ 1 doubt not, Sir William, but MiSs Finch is abuve the vulgar prejudice of giving into Sashions (however contrary to her inclination) merely becauSe they have that distinguished title ; nor is she, I ■iWiii venture to Say, ashamed to own
however
[ 10 ]
(however facrilegious it may appear To the fortunate world) that she prefers the fociety of a few feleCt friends, where harmony and good humour abound, to the most brilliant assembly, where all is hurry, bustle, and imperdnence.”—You will readily believe that this fpeech put me in good fpirits, and I was delighted with his fo foon feeing into my difposition. After we had fat fome time, Lady Finch ;and your humble fervant returned to the drawing-room. Her ladyship requested my opinion of our new guest. I informed her ingenuousiv that I thought him the most agreeable
O	O
.man, without exception, I had ever
[ II ]
Seen, and that his being handfomc was not his greatest perfection, as his mind (if one might judge from his conveisiation) was fraught with every noble fentiment. Our conversiiMon was interrupted by the entrance of fome ladies on their flying visits, but who, hearing we had a beau below, agreed to stay and drink coffee with me that they might fee him. He foon entered the room with an air of cafe and grace peculiar to himfelf, and fat down on the fopha by me. The ladies obferved him with the strictest attention, and endeavoured to attraCt his by chattering and laughing af-feCtedlybut it was all to no purpofe,
as
[ 12 ]
as he did not take the least notice of them. He appeared to be buried in tnoLight, but though silent, we were evidently convinced it was not- for Want ot knowing what to fay; it originated from a dejedtion of fpirits which he could not totally get the better of. Lady Mary Nishet, who is a very lively young woman, thought it an astront to her beauty for him to remain in that lethargic state while she was prefent, and refolved to try the force of her fprightly wit, to fee what eiteil; it would have on his feelings.
O
She addressed him in the tollowino* manner, though she had never belore been in his company ; Sir George,
C 13 ]
are'vo'1 to be at iin grand Gala given b)	ii'.cofQ-’--— to-niglu ;■ All
tl- <..A. Wii! be vi.ere, and \ ou v ill be iioked upon as nobody, if ^cu do not go.”—i leally am not yet determined, Madam—but—I believe I shall not be there.”—“ Is it poisible. Sir George I Weil, I propofe ru my-felf a deal of happinefs from joining the gay throng, I have not thought of any thing elfe for this week paft; and indeed the adjusting matters relative to drefs on fo particular an occasion has furnished me with fussicient employment;—but, dear Mifs Finch, you must give me leave to pull the bell, to inquire whether my fervant is
in-
L 14 J
i ^
m waiting, as I am compelled to go home, having appointed my frifeur to be with me at eight, and he will be difplealed if I am not pundfual. So your fervant, good folks.”—Stop one moment, dear Lady Mary,” exclaimed I, At what time, pray, do you mean to be at the Duke’s, if you
do not begin to drefs still eight ?”_
Between ten and eleven, my dear, is a very good hour. If I was to go fooner, I should be thought ungenteel, which would afflidl me immenfcly. And, to-morrow, when you are drinking the waters in the pump-room, I shall be yawning, and putting on my night-cap, —She then stew out of the
room.
L 15 ]
room, leaving us to animadvert on her strange charadler.
What a mad thing it is,” fays Louifa Dashwood, who had all this time been silent, I thought she never would give me an opportunity of ashing my dear Mifs Finch the reafon of her not going to the ball to-night.”—> Becaufe,” replied I, “ I am a fober domesticated animal, who prefers the company of an indulgent father and mother to the glare and folly of a ballroom.”—And fo you really do not mean to go. Well, but tell me how you like my head-drefs ? What do you think of this Circassian t is the trimming to your mind ? How do you •
think
[ ]
think my hoop sits ? In short, tell mc' how voLi like my touts enfemble V— Your ladyship looks charmingly,” replied I. “ Your drefs is extremely elegant, and the colour fuits your
complexion inimitably.”-------“ You
really then think I look tolerable.” Cockburn, who was all this time listening very attentively, endeavoured to conceal a laugh, which he did with a very bad grace, and turning to her, faid, Your ladyship is fuch a captivating figure, that I tremble for the
I
hearts of all the beaux.” She took this in good part, and, tapping him on the shoulder with her fan, told him, she was glad to find her charms
could
C '7 ]
c-olild work fo 'o;reat a miracle as to draw a word from him. He very gallantly assured her that the force of beauty could do any thing !—But I am tired of theSe trifling women, and iliall therefore difniifs them.
Cockburn fpent the remainder of the evening with us, and has ever since been here constantly every day. He has recovered his fpirits, and appears a tlioufand times more amiable than when sirst I knew him. Can my Amelia pardon my becoming her rival ! Yes, I am convinced fliC will, iand will rejoice to find Cockburn has transferred his afSedlions to her friend, .and is likely to regain that peace which
VoL. III. C	he
[ IS ]
lie always enjoyed till he knew her, I acquainted him with the friendship ‘ that fubsists between us, as I knew it would raife me in his estimation. He heard your name mentioned without emotion, and faid many handfomc things of you.
Upon looking back through this horrid fcrawl I am ashamed to fee that felfh the fubjeess of every line. Pray, my dear Amelia, be more particular concerning Lord Maitland in your next, and do not fail to fend me a shetch of his perfon. Tell me too who you fufpeO: to be Fitzherbert’s intended.
The affair of Lord Nassau’s difap-
[ 19 ]
jpointment is talked of here in all comi-passes. How can Mifs Fitzherbert encourage the addresses of fuch a man? Your defeription of him has afforded us all much entertainment.—Cock-burn is in the Parlour waiting impatiently to fee me; I hasten, therefore, to relieve him.—For the prefent I fubferibe myfelf
Your sincere and affectionate Charlotte Finch.
€ 2 LETTER
[ 20 ]
L E T T E Pv XXV.
Lhe Honourable Mifs Milner to Lhe Hon. Mifs H. Beaumont.
St. James’s Street.
JN what terms can I Sufficiently ex-preSs my gratitude to my dearest Harriot, and the worthy Sir William and Lady Manning, for their unbounded generosity in offering to shield me from the shafts of adversity, by affording me an aSylum under their hoSpitable roost I should certainly have accepted of their kind invitation had not an astonishing reverSe of fortune taken place. Yes, my Harriot,
I am once more restored to peaee and
rrannnillirv.
[ ill ]
tranquillity, and should be completely-blessed, did I not know that Lady Milner is far from happy, and, alas ■ I fear, she never will again be. ' Her health visibly decays, and her fpirits are fo reduced that you w^ould not recoiled: her w^ere you to fee her now. But I will refume my journal, as yon must be anxious to know how this miracle w'as wrought in my favour.
The difappointed Lord Nassau no fooner returned to town, than he went to Lord Rivers’s, vainly flattering himfelf to be highly commended for the flep he had taken; but his ai-furance let my guardian at cnce into his real character, who, with the ut-
C 3	most
[ 2Z ]
most contempt, forbade him his houfca. Such a reception being fo exceedingly different from what he ex-pedied, he had the effrontery to abufe Lord Rivers under his own roof, and to threaten, that neither his age, nor the place they were in, should ikrcen him from the chastifement a villain deferved. This part of his condudt stamps him a bully; for no man of real courage would offer violence to-the aged and infirm;, and his hurrying out of the houfe after his threat-nings (before Lord Rivers could ring for his attendants) is a confirmation, of his meriting that title.
My guardian went immediately to
Sr.
[	23	]
St. James’s Street, where he found Lady Milner in tears. The news of my going off with Lord Nassau had just reached her, and she had, to complete her misfortunes, been informed of his character by a female friend, which made her condemn hershlf for not having inquired into it iooner; but Lord Rivers instantly restored peace to her asihded mind, by relating to her the whole assiir, and informing her that I was then under the protection of Lady Seaport. They both rejoiced that I bad eicaped the share, and feverely reproached theni-felves for having lo long been advocates in a villain’s caule.
C 4	Lady
C ^4 ]
Lady Milner immediately wrote nie^ the tenderest and most assedlionate letter, entreating me to forget what was past, and to sty to the hrms of an indulgent mother, who never more would oppoie the fentiments of my heart, but study, in every refpess, to promote the interest of one, wliofe happlnefs she should ever, for the future, prize above her own. This welcome letter came to hand by the fame post as your affectionate invitation, but I could not hesitate what to do ; therefore, taking a grateful leave of Lady Seaport and her daughter, I fet ost dircdtly, in her ladyship’s coach, for London. You can have no idea
what
j
[ "5 ]
what were my feelings when I stopped at Lady Milner’s door; I jumped out of the coach, stew up stairs, and threw myfelf on her neck, while the big tear rolled down my cheek, and bedewed her tender bofomshe clafped me in her arms, and thanked me (as w'ell as her emotions would permit) for this proof of my obedience. She gazed on me w'ith rapture, but her emaciated form struck horror into my foul, and my heart bled for hershffer-ings. I inquired w-hethcr she had been indlfpofed. She sighed, and made me no reply. I fell on my knees, and implored her to forgive my paSf difobeciience, assuring her, at
the
[ 26 ]
the fame time, that nothing but a thorough knowledge of Lord Nassau’s character could have prevailed on me to have adted as I did. She embraced me tenderly, and assured me I had more to forgive than she had.
Lord Rivers came in the evening to fee me, and congratulated me on having efcaped the mifcry of being united to fo vile a charadter, and entreated me to prove the greatnefs of my foul, by forgiving the promote of it. I told him I was convinced that neither his lordship nor Lady Milner would have been fo earnest in his caufe, had they not thought it to my advantage, and therefore I had
no
[ ]
BO fubjedt for complaint. Generous girl! exclaimed his lordship, and embraced me with the assedtion of a-father.
How can I be fuffidently thankful to Providence for fnatching me from the gulf into which I was fo near falling ? Oh! may I never forget the arm that was stretched out to stive me. If I could tear Milbank’s image from my heart, and fee Lady A'lilner restored to her ufuai fpirits, then should I be happy indeed. But peistedt felicity no mortal can enjoy,. Why, therefore, should I wish for it!.
9
since it is most probable, wei'Q I in possession of it, that arrogance and
pride
[ ^8 ]
pride would be my portion. May I hope that my Harriot will preScnt my most grateful thanks to Sir William and Lady Manning, and accept her-felf every assedlionate v/ish that a devoted heart can offer.
Her sincere friend,
Horatia Milner.
P. S. Do not fail to acquaint me how your affairs go on, as I am impatient to hear of your welfare.
}
LETTER
C 29 ]
LETTER XXVI.
I’he Honourable AIiLs H. Beaumont Lhe Hon. Mifs Milner.
Manning Cafllc, Devon.
adored Horatia cannot feel more fatisfaCtion from the favourable turn in her affairs than her Harriot, who sincerely congratulates her on the happy occasion. Long, long may she remain a stranger to adversity—^and forget that there ever existed fuch a perfon as Milbank, since the remembrance of him would plant a dagger in her heart. The tailv will be an arduous one, but then there will be more glory in the
fn nm nh -
[ 3° ]
triumph.—How impatiently did I expeft you, till your letter came to hand; but I must be candid enouo;h to own that I was fo felsish as to feel a regret, amidst all my joy, at being deprived of the pleafure of folding you in my longing arms.
I had planned a thoufand delightful fchemes, and had already talked over my affairs with you in idea, condoled with you on your fusserings, and afforded you what fmall confola-tion was within my reach ; but, thanks be to Providence, you do not now stand in need of the two last ; and the first I must content myfclf with fending you a narrative of journal-
•r
C 31 ]
wife. To be methodical, I will begin with the ball, which I informed you of in my last, that the General was to give while I was in Kent. Every thing was conducted in the best manner imaginable. The furniture was taken out of the great drawing-room (which is an immenfe large one) and two rows of benches put all round, covered with red damalk. There was a kind of orchestra ereded at the lower end of the room for a very excellent band, and three large chandeliers were lighted up, which gave the room a lively appearance* The company was very numerous, and many perfons of very great fashion
were
[ 32 ]
were there. When the gentlemen
chofe their partners, young H---------
filed for the honour of my hand, and, as I was totally indifferent to every perfon there, I did him the honour to comply with his request, but, I fear, with a very bad grace, as I wished to make him fenfible that I was conferring a favour, which he did not feem to understand. He talked fuch a world of nonfensh, that I was c|uite difgusted with his puppyistn. After Supper I pleaded fatigue, and begged to be excufed dancing any more that evening. I went into the card-room to Lady Manning (as MiSs Slater had joined the fprightly throng, and there
was
[ 33 ]
was no o:' er perfon in the ball-room that I choofed to be with) where her ladyship was engaged at whist. I took a chair and Sat down by her, and was very intent upon the game, when I heard a confufed noife in the next room, laughing and fcreaming. In short, I was quite alarmed. I immediately rofe from my feat, and was drove by the crov:d into the room from whence the noife issued, where, to my great Surprize, I Saw two figures in masses, one in the character of a hermit, and the other a marician.—
o
The eyes of the whole afiembly were fixed upon them, expressive of the greatest curioiiLW to difeern who they VoL. III. D	were;
[ 34 ]
\Vere; but the wonder very foon ceafed, and the parties went to their different occupations. I own I still continued anxious (I could not tell why) to difcover who they were. While I was revolving the matter over in my mind, the magician approached me, and begged I would permit him to give me a proof of his Ikill, by telling me my fortune.— I confented, and he related many very interesting circumstances; told me the state of an amiable man depended upon me, and that it was in my power either to doom him to happinefs or mifery; llkewife, that he never had ventured to declare his pashon, having
C 35 ]
log always, until he knew me, had an insurmountable objedion to the marriage state, and that he once flew from the Society of his friends, into a strange country, upon SuSpeaiing that he loved a beautiful girl he uSed continually to See. He added, He consulted me a few days ago, and I know him to posseSs the strongest affection for you; I therefore adviSe you to encourage a passion for him, as he deferves your heart, which, I am inclined to hope, pleads a little in his. favour.” He ended this strange
O
Speech, by taking a ring off my singer, and Saying, That he whoSc hand I Should See it on next w'as the D 2	perSoii
[ 36 ]
perfon he alluded to.” He then left me, mixed in the crowd, and I faw no more of him the whole night. As I wished exceedingly to know who it was that had been fo long entertaining me, I went and ashed the General if he knew who the mashs were. He replied, that he did, intimately, but was under obligations not to difcover their names, I then addressed my inquiries to Mifs Slater, who faid she did not know for a certainty, but fust pedted them to be (from many things the magician had told her) the Colonel and Major of the regiment her father was once in. I concluded, therefore, that what he had faid to me
w'cre
[ 37 ]
^ ■
were mere words of courfe, and thought no more about it; though Sometimes I could not help fufpedl-ing that it was Mufgrave and Maitland.
The ball did not break up till three o’clock, and Mifs Slater offered to ffeep with me, that we might talk the matter over.—She assured me she had every reaSon in the world to think they were the peissons fufpedted, and could very well account for the reafon of their coming in mashs. We agreed that the dealer in magic muff have mistaken me for fome other perfon, and regretted my having lost my ring.
D $	A few
C 38 ]
A few dtiys after this we were recalled home by the fudden illnefs of an old fervant, whofe cafe demanded our immediate attendance. I, however, flattered myfelf that Mufgravc would have left Devonshire, but in that we were mistaken. As foon as he heard of our arrival he came to the castle. I received him with the most distant civility, which assefted him exceedingly. He expressed much fatisfadtion at our return, and cen-fured us for going oss in fo abrupt a manner. The coolnefs of my replies shocked him fo much, that he declined a flight invitation to drink tea with us, and went home immediately.
We
C 39 ]
We did not fee him forfeveral days after this; but he wrote me a card, befeeching me to tell him in what he had offended me, and informing me that my condu<st towards him made him the most wretched of beings. As I was at a lofs how to aCf, I con-fulted Lady Manning, who advifed me to take no notice of it. A few days after. Lord Maitland came to intercede for his friend, and to beg we would grant him an audience. Lady Manning, who was ever very partial to him, confented, and he came the fame evening to drink tea with us. He then declared hirnfelf in the most honourable manner to be my lover;
D 4	hut
[ 40 ]
but I did not give him. much encouragement, as I could not forget the garden converfation. However, as I was refolved to adh honourable by him, I afforded him an opportunity of vindicating his condudl, by^ relating the circumftance of having overheard his difcourfe with his friend. He immediately cleared up the point to my entire fatisfadion. You need not
doubt but the arguments my heart \
pleaded in his favour were very powerful, and I rejoiced to find that he merited that love I had long felt for him. After this, he ufed to be constantly With us every day.
But I must not omit to acquaint
. you
C 41 ]
you of a droll circumstance which happened about a month ago. Muf-grave and I were walking in the garden, and we heard the found of horfes. I felt my colour come and go, as I had a prefentiment it was my brother, who I was in daily expedlation of feeing. At last a footman and fervant out of livery rode up to the gate, and in*-quired of us whether Sir William Mmning lived there. I told them he did;—^upoii which, they clapped fpurs to their horfes, and galh.pped away as fast as poshble. I was very near fainting when I faw it was my brother’s livery, but would nor tell Mafgrave,.' that I might furpiife him, aj he had
never
C 42 ]
never heard me mention that I had 2 brother. In five minutes after, a chariot-and-four stopped at the gate, and my beloved Charles, in a most ■elegant undrefs, jumped out, and folded me in his arms; my joy was too great for utterance, and I fobbed upon his bofom. Mufgrave, who was feized with a sit of jealoufy, instead of following us in, returned home in defpair, and immediately difpatched a card to me written in the following terms:
-----Mufgrave’s compliments to
Mlfs Manning—to whom he should think hiinfelf much indebted if she would facrisice a few moments to clear
up
[ 43 ]
up a point that puzzles and perplexes
him. He fears his request will be (
deemed an unreafonable one, and that he shall be looked upon as a monopolizer, in wishing to deprive a favoured rival of a few of thofe precious moments that would otherwise be dedicated to him.”
I immediately Sent him the follow^-ing anSwer:
MiSs Manning returns her compliments to ------ MuSgrave, ESq;
whoSe request she really deems very unreafonable, in wishing to deprive her, even Sor a few moments, of the company of one on whom her heart So fondly dotes; but if he can Submit
C 44 ]
mit to an interview with his formi-' dable rival, she will be very glad of his company, to make a trio at the tea-table, otherwife she must beg leave to be excufed receiving him.”
This anfwer was not very fatisfac-tory; however, he came ta the castle, and I introduced my brother to him-by the name of Manning, as I have another furprize for him. Charles and his worship were very foon upon good terms, as he easily learnt to love the brother, though he could not the lover of your Harriot, I am rather hurt at his having fo much jealoufy in his composition^ and have told him fo. He assures me, that when once
the
t 45 ]
the indissoluble knot is tied he shall be fatissied; but that until it is, he shall not think himfelf fecure, as women are capricious mortals.—And do you hnow the creature is abfolutely gone to town to have the writings fettled, fo great is his impatience.— Oh, thefe men are odd animals, Ho-ratia ! I tremble when I restedl that I shall stridly promiSe to honour and obey one, who may, perhaps, make me Sulsil my engagement to the utmost ; but the regard I have Sor him will teach me to do it without repining, as the chief study of my life shall be to pleafe him. May I continue to possefs the fame share of his
assedlion
C 46 3
«iffe<stion after marriage that I do now, for I am well convinced a diminution of his regard would be the feverest afflidion I could fustain.
I am now going to relate a piece of news that I hope will give my Hora-tia pleafure, which is, that I shall shoii have the felicity of embracing her perfonally, as we shall be in town the latter end of next week. How long will the tedious hours appear until I fold her in my arms, and hold the friend of my youth to that heart of which she has fo large a share; but I would not defer fending you this nairative, as I am certain you would be anxious to know how my
affairs
[ 47 ]
affairs went on. Accept the siiicerest love of
Your assedlionate
Harriot Beaumont.
LETTER XXVII. f'N Right Hon. Lord Beaumont to Lhe Hon. Mfs Beaumont.
Beaumont Place, Devon.
My dear Amelia,
TILL the gay fcenes you arc * ’ immerged into afford you leisure to attend to the advice of a brother, who has your interest fo sincerely at heart, that he can offer no other cxcLife but that for the trouble he gives youj yet, knowing as he does
the
1 48 ]
the inestimable value of that heart, he ventures to undertake the talk, and not without the most flattering hope of its being received in the manner he would wish it to be. You are, my dear Amelia, at a very early period, thrown into a world, where every thing at first feems inviting, and eourts your assedion; but beware of being led away by the torrent of pleafure that furronnds you. I know nothing more conducive to happinefs and enjoyment of either fex than recreation, while under proper regulations.; but when it becomes the bufi-nefs, instead of the amufement of any individual, nothing more destrudive.
You
L 49 J
You will, I hope, excufe me, when I fay I do not in the least approve of your intimacy with Mifs Fitzherbert, who, I obferved, even in the short time I was with her, did not possefs that delicacy of fentiment and behaviour which I could wish the friend of my sister to do. She feems to think there is no fpecies of happinefs shut what centers in a crowded assembly, and is (for that reafon) continually hurrying from place to place, making an exhibition of her perfon, which is fo well known about town, ihat any one would be looked upon as a country shoor, was he unfortunately to aSic, in any company, who that lady VoL. III. E	is.
[ 50 ]
is. I know not whether this may be a pleasing circumstance to her, but, I own, I should be very forry to have either of my sisters in the fame situation ; for you may depend upon it, that although Such characters meet
with more flattery and adoration than
/
the more prudent of the fex, a feasible man would as foon think of marrying his grandmother as a lady of that turn. Believe me, when we mean to Settle for life, we look Something farther than outward appearance; for what enjoyment can a man expeCt in the converfation of one whofe mind is absorbed with plea Sure, and whoSe highest enjoyment is within the limits
of
[ 51 3
of a ball-room ? How unpleafant must be liis home, where he must either sit alone, or fubmit to the upbraidings of
s
a wife, while she is yawning and half asteep, and continually telling him of the insinite obligations he lays under to her for facrisicing an evening to him, that might have been fpent much more to her fatisfadlion ? This, I hope -and believe, will never be the cafe with my Amelia. But give me leave to tell you, my dear, that, as you are just fetting out in life, your charaaier will in fome meafure take its colour from the company you keep. I wish, therefore, if you could reafonably avoid it, that you would not be feen fo much E 2	with
[ 5^ ]
with Mifs Fitzherbert, as she is by no means a proper companion for you. I will now conclude my fermon, or I shall tire you to death, and, as a proof of my considence in you being equal to my regard, will enter a little into my own affairs.
You know with what eager impatience I left London to feek my
Harriot in Kent, but unfortunately she * •
left General Slaters the day before I arrived there. You was no doubt furprifed at my remaining with that family, wheri the objeCt I was in fearch of was not to be met with ; but my Amelia will no more wonder at my delay, when I inform her that the
General
C S3 ]
General has a daughter, and I no lono'cr have a heart 1 Vou must un-doubtedly recolka the adventure I related to you when in town ; butlktle did I think that my excursion into Kent w^ould have introduced me to the objedl I had fo long fruitlefsly been in fearch of. R.ejoice with me, my fisticr, when I inform you, that MiSs Slater is the young lady w'hoSc name I fo carefully concealed from you, and was the heroine of the fad assail* which happened at Paris. I have told you before that I ever loved her, but my passion now knows no bounds; my life is wrapt up in hers, and I could know no mifery eqi al to E 3	that
C 54 ]
that of dragging on a hateful existence without her. Think me not vain when I Say I have reaSon to believe she honours me with her partiality, for, being above the paltry arts of her Sex, she could not diSguiSe her feelings when she first Saw me. I could not tear myfelf from her prefence, though I ardently wished to See Harriot, till I had been with her Some time, that I might have an opportunity of observing whether her heart acknowledged me as its possessor; for I have too much delicacy to marry even her, did she not posseSs an equal passion for me. I mean to diSpoSe of my estate as Soon as I can advantageoussy. You will
then
C 55 ]
then fee me in town for a short time, as I wish to fettle fome affairs with my agent. Afterwards, I shall go down to one of my estates in Kent, where I shall hope foon to have one of the most beautiful of her fex to grace my habitation.
I leave the distribution of my compliments and love to your difcretion ; but I entreat that you will believe me to be, with unfeigned regard,
Your affectionate Brother, Charles Bealtmont,
P. S. I do not mention Harriot, as I have not long left Wiltshire, and have related the whole affair to her.— Mufgrave is a worthy fellow, and wdll, E 4	I am
[ S6 ]
I am perfuaded, makB a good huf-band.
letter XXVIII.
Lhe Honourahle Mifs Beaumont t& Mifs Finch.
Berkeley Square.
^^INCERELY do I congratulate my much loved Charlotte on the noble conquest she has made ; and fo far from being angry with her for becoming my rival, I love her, if possible, ten times better than ever, lor ha,ving restored tranquillity to a worthy mind. Cockburn deferves 3'ou, my Charlotte, you were framed for each other j therefore, I beg you
[ 57 ]
would not trisie with his pashon, for 1 know him to have a generous foul, and he will esteem you the more for Scorning the vulgar notions of our Sex, making him dangle after you longer than it is necessary. I have received a long letter from my dear Charles. At one time I should have been apprehensive of letting you fee the contents, but, as the cafe now stands, I inclofe it for your peruSal;—nor need I caution you to have a proper provision of hartshorn and eau de luce. I am, on the contrary, perSuaded you will receive a very Sensible pleaSure from being acquainted V/ith the proS-
pect of happineSs that is before him.
Harriot
C 58 1
Harriot and the Manning fa^miiy arrived in town last night. She is grown extremely handfoine, and is, in a month’s time, to be married to Fitzherbert—Do not look furprifed, Charlotte, for it is even fo. The little sty hussy is abfolutely become my rival; but, I must do her the justice »to fay, that it is without knowing it.
In my last, I began to tell you who was the possessor of Fitzherbert’s heart, but, as I wished to know whether I was right in my furmifes, I ventured to touch upon the fubjefb, as he had before told me his assedlions were engaged. I could not prevail with him to tell me the lady’s name;
but
E 59 ]
but he put a little shagreen cafe into my hand, desiring me, at the fame time, not to open it till he was gone, and to return it the next time I faw him. I was all impatience to fee the ' contents of the little calket, and, immediately as he left us, flew tomy chamber, that I might fatisfy my curiosity. When I opened it, the lovely Harriot’^ fmiiing countenance prefeiited itfelf tO' my view. You can have no idea what were my feelings at that moment. I gazed on her heavenly face,, and offered up a fervenssprayer for her pre-fervation. I refolved not to let him into the fecret of her being my sister, and enjoyed in idea the pleafure I
should
C 6o ]
should receive from her furprize, when I undeceived her in regard to Fitz-herbert. He called the next day with his friend, Lord Maitland. I returned his little bijou, faying, at the lame time, “ It is a very strong refem-blance, Sir James, donst you think it is exceedingly like ?”—“ I do, Ma-‘ssam; but, pray, are you acquainted with the lady —‘‘ Slightly.”—He looked thoughtful, and dropped the fubjedS. They staykl dinner with Sir William, and attended us to Pvane-lauch in the evening. It is needleSs to tell you that circumstance gave me pleafure. His Lordship endeavoured to render himfelf agreeable to me by a
thoufand
[ 6i ]
thoufand little namelefs attentions, nor did he tail in the attempt. He did not, like most of his Sex, flatter grofsly, but couched his compliments in Such pretty terms, that the nicest delicacy could not be ossended. They breakfasted with us next day, and rode with Mils Williams and me in Hyde Park. They likewife called the next m.orn-ing to accompany us to the exhibition in Pallmall, where his Lordship proved himfelf to have an excellent knowledge and taste in that Science, by pointing out every little beauty that might otherwife have passed unnoticed, or any particular imperfec-ilion which would have been unob-
ferved
C 62 ]
Served by thofe who wTre lefs connoisseurs than himfeif. The gentle^ men fpent the evening with us at home. We had a little concert, and Maitland difplayed the greatest taste in That accomplishment, though he is no performer, nor has he the least voice. It is now fome time since I became .acquainted with him, and though his whole condudt has been expressive of shis honouring me with a preference, .yet he never ventured to declare his :passion till last Saturday, while we were at the opera. He could not have fixed upon a better place, for the 'melting strains of a Bernafeoni would
tune even a Xavage’s br-east to harmony.
C 63 ]
ny, how much more fo then must they render my heart fufceptible of foft impressions ? I listened to his pleasing talc, and, as I hate difguife, was not ashamed to own that I felt an equal paffion for him; but referred him to Lord Spencer for a final an-fwer. You desire I will fend you a Iketch of his perfon, your commands shall be obeyed, though I know my-felf to be a very bad limner :—He is about my brother’s heighth, and rather inclined to en bon point, is exceedingly well proportioned, though not the least handfome. He has that kind of face which is more striking than beauty in a man; his eyes are
dark.
[ 64 3
dark, and his complexion clear, tho’ .brown ; he has a low forehead, and his hair (of which he has a great profusion) grows beautifully round his temples ; his mouth is extremely wide, but, to make amends for that defecst, Nature has furnished him with
s
the most charming fet of teeth imaginable; and nothing can equal the .dimples that .play .about his chin and .cheeks when he fmiles. You would be charmed wdeh his addrefs and '.manner; there is fomething fo open .and unreferved in his deportment, .that vou ermnot doubt of the sincerity of what he fays. He is no puppy ; but conforms to and gives a little into
fashion*
[ 65 ]
fashion. In short, my dear, he is, in every rcfpedl, a charming man.
The Mannings are to dine with us to day; and Lady Spencer has in-vsted Fitzherbert and Maitland.— They do not know that Harriot is in town; but I told the former to steel his heart, as I intended to introduce him to a very beautiful girl of my acquaintance. He fmiled, and shook his head, as much as to fay. My heart is very fafe. I shall call for the Man-nino:s in Ladv Spencer’s coach, that Fitzherbert might not fee their equipage, as that would entirely frustrate my feheme. I shall tell Harriot that •Sir James is to dine with us; and VoL. III. F	when
j
[ 66 ]
when they meet, how shall I enjoy their mutual furprize. But my fer-vant tells me the coach is at the door | adieu, therefore, for the prefent.
Lwelve PclocLr-AW\i2.t heart-felt pleafure must every worthy mind experience from bestowing happinefs on others. Not the greatest epicure could feel half the fatisfadlion from feasting on the most luxurious rarity, that I have this day derived from the happinefs of stitzherbert and his Harriot.
I left you, my lovely friend, to call on the Mannings. When I got to Cavendish Square, I found them ail ready. Harriot looked fo beautiful,
4 ■	•	'	•
that
[ 6? ]
that I began to fear she would rival me in Maitland’s opinion, and then 1 should have been angry indeed. While we were jumbling over the stones, I afked her whether she had feen Mufgrave. No, my dear,” replied she,^*^ we do not know where he lodges, and therefore could not let him know 'We vrere come to town; but Lady Manning propofes going to Ranelaugh ithis evening, where I hope we shall meet him, as I am very impatient to introduce him to you.”—The coach by this time stopped at x)ur door; at which iinstant, Lord Maitland and Sir James came, and, obferving it was our carriage, waited to hand us out; but
Fa	it
[ 68 ] ,
it would require greater powers in the descriptive way than I am mistreSs of to give you an adequate idea of the Surprize and joy painted on their countenances, when they beheld each other. Sir James, who had not the least idea of her being in town, thought it all enchantment; but when I presented her to him as my sister, he looked as if he had hardly dared believe the evidenee of his fenSes. I then turned to Harriot, faying, I hope my Harriot will be inclined to look as favourable on Sir James Fitzher-bert as she has ever done on Muf-grave,” when she exclaimed, ‘‘ Never, never will I be his!” and fainted in
my
r % ]
my arms. The afflidled Fitzhcrber^t traverfed the room in the greatest agitation, while Maitland affisted me in bringinff her to life.- As foon as she
O O
recovered she entreated to be left alone with me; and when her request was complied with, she addressed me in the following terms: Cruel Amelia, thus to triumph over me in generosity ! Could you imagine your Harriot bafe enough to marry the man who pof-fesses your heart ? No! though .1 loved Mufgrave,. I cannot love Fitz-herbert!—Why did vou fubjedt me to this dreadful interview but to fee me united at the expence of y;)ur felicity ?—yet know, Amtlir, I will F ^	not
C 7° ]
not be outdosse in greatnefs, and will die rather than marry him at fo dear a rate !’*
When she had ended her fpeech, I begged of her to be compofed, and to attend to what I had to faj^, I then Went up to my bureau and brought down a copy of the last letter I wrote to you, and what I had written of this, which convinced her that he was not the master of my assertions; and I assured her that (though I imagined I did) I never loved till I faw Maitland. She was fftissied; and foon regained her ufual fpirits. We joined the rest of the company in Lady Spencer’s dreffing-roorn, and this little
damp
[ 71 ]
damp gave us a higher relish for the happinefs we otherwife enjoyed.-—^ Fitzherbert entreated Harriot to acquaint him what caufe she had to denounce fo harsh a fentence against him. She told him^ that a circumstance occurred to her, upon hearing his real name mentioned, that would certainly have been an obstacle to their union,, had it not since been cleared tip entirely to her fatisfaClion. He then acquainted her with his motive for having passed- by a feigned name ; and she regretted being difappointed of the pieafure Sue had planned to herfclf of introducing him to her sister. But now comes the worst of the story, F 4	and
C 7^ j
and I am fure my dear Charlotte will lament with me the depravity of human nature, when she is informed, that thofe whofe happinefs I had fo earnestly promoted were all in the league against me, and extorted a promife of me, by dint of expostulation, to resign my liberty this day six weeks. to the afpiring Maitland!— Harriot is the fame day to be united to Fitzherbert!—Heigh ho !—I wish my Charlotte would blefs her friend with her prefence at that awful period, and lend her her fupporting hand, for she already, feels that she will be a very coward ;—but, in the downy arms of steep, I will, for the prefent, endeavour
to
C 73 ]
to forget my cares. Adieu, dear Charlotte,, and never ceafe to love Your assedtionate Amelia. Beaumont.
P. S. What a thoughtlefs creature I am- to. omit telling you, that next Thurfdaygives Mifs Fitzherbert to her ' adorable Lord Nassau, contrary to the peissuasions of all her friendsbut she is of age,.and confequently the mistrefs of her actions. I sincerely pity and condemn her.—You may depend upon my fending you. an account of the ' wedding.
LETTER
f"
L 74 ]
LETTER XXIX.
Mifs Finch to Lhe Honourable Mifi Beaumont.
Bathi
Jj^INE goings on in-the gay metro^ polis; no lefs than three weddings fur le tapis! Weil, good people, you have my sincere congratulations on-the occasion; and may the day that is to unite you. to Maitland, and Harriot to Fitzhe.rbert, be ushered in lyith the mildest aufpices. But think not that I mean to wlth-hold myfelf from your prefence at that time. No, I shall
j
certainly come to town, and officiate as bride-maidr Be careful, therefore,
to
C 75 ]
to have a favour and a pair of gloves in • referve forme. My dear Lady Finch-has already received great benefit by drinking the waters^ and,.without the least relucstance, acquiefced with my desire of being prefent af your nuptials,. and desires (as does Sir William) that I will fay every thing that is assedtionate and civil for them.^-But I must tell you, my Amelia,, thatl-have another reafon for a London expedition, which you will, perhaps,, think a felfish one, when I fay it is to ■ try the strength of Coekburn’s pashon; for, if he refufes to accompany me, upon the fcore of not being able to fee you united to another, it is all over with
him::
[76]
him; but if, on the contrary, he coiv fents, and cheerfully fees you give your hand to the aimable Maitland, then shall I be fatissied, and will, no longer triste with him; yet I have too much fpirit to brook the idea of marrying a man who does not love me with his whole heart.—-I read your charming brother’s letter with infinite pleafure,. and fiiicerely do I rejoice at his approaching happinefs* May he be as hapyy as he is deferving, and then, I am fure, his cup will- run over.
I am. heartily tired of this stupid place,, and fincerely wifli that Sir William and Lady Finch’s health would permit us tO' leave it,, as I
never
C 77 ]
liever yet was in any town where fcandal reigned with fuch arbitrary fway. I have been obliged, through civility, to be out a great deal more
4
lately than I could have wished, and have therefore had an opportunity of hearing of numberlefs amours carried on in a clandestine manner, lost reputations, &c. &c. As I feldom give much credit to what rhofe fay who are infedfed with that fashionable dif-©rder, the perfons whofe initials were -mentioned in loud whifpers round the • room never lost much in my estim.a-tion. It is -really laughable to observe, that when fcandal lifts its Hydra Iiead, how eager eveiy tongue -is employed
[ 78 ]
ployed to‘bring in proofs against the vidtim of their malice. As I have nothing material to relate, I will hasten to releafe you from this insipid fcrawl.
I hear fomebody coming upstairs.; ;I dare fay it .is a fummons to attend rCockburn. “ Who knocks at my -door? Sir George, is it you!—lam .really furprifed at your breaking in upon my retirement.—I am conciud- , ing a letter to JVIifs Beaumont, and . .will attend you in the drawing-room in five minutes.—Prefuming vvretch, To thrust open the door! and to endeavour to take the pen from me too.— Patience, patience. Sir George, anti I
will
I 79 ]
will resign it to you; but let me first turn down what I have written, that it may be fcreened from impertinent
euriojityf’------Sir George,
I have at length, with the utmost .clifficulty, fairly distodged the amiable Charlotte, and have stated mystlf at her bureau, to addrefs a few lines to her charming friend, whom I hope -will permit me to congratulate her on an approaching happy event. How shlessed must be the fortunate Maitland in the possession of fuch a trea-ssire.—Oh ! may he never forget the value of it. He is a generous fellow, and. highly merits the distinguished marks of favour fortune has bestowed
on
[ 8° ]
on him. We were very intimate while in .Dermany together, and I had feveral opportunities of obferving that he possessed every virtue and accomplishment that could render him worthy of your heart. Shall I trouble you to tell him, no one more sincerely participates his good fortune, than does his old fiiend, George 'Cock-burn. "Was I-not well convinced of Mifs Beaumont’s generous difposition, 1 should not venture to request fo great a‘favour of her as I am now going to do; but, knowing as I do the enlarged Sentiments of her'heart, what have I to fear; I shall not, therefore, hesitate to entreaf'herto become my advocate
with
[ 8i ]
with her friend, whofe amiable temper and obliging manner have doomed me ever to be her stave. My condufh would have the appearance of caprice to many, but I am perfuaded I can easily acquit myfelf of that imputation in the opinion of Mifs Beaumont. I must be brief, as my adored Charlotte is impatient to have’the pen restored to her, and threatens to take it from me by force.
“ When you rejected my proffered hand and heart, I knew it was not through that cruel motive (which I am forry to fay too many of your fcx frequently adopt) of keeping a heart Suspended between hope and Sear, in
VoL. m. , G	order
[ ]
order! to glory in being a difficult conquest. Your generous franknefs convinced me that I was not, nor ever should be, the happy master of your assediions. I therefore refolved to perfecute you no further on the fub-jesh, but endeavour, if possible, to conquer my unhappy passiom Re-gardlefs, therefore, of what became of me, I left a place where I knew I must continually meet you, and was condudted by ,a fortunate destiny to Bath, where J met, in the peisson of Mifs Finch, Mist .Beaumontst counterpart. Permit me to add, that every thing which wore your femblance was dear to me, and that I found a fweet
confolatioB
[ 83 ]
confolation in the converfation of your friend, whofe vivacity and obliging difposition very foon made me find that fatlsfadtion in her prefence, that I was totally divested of when the -lovely and enchanting Charlotte was abfent.
The freej^uent opportunities of being a witnefs of her numberlefs per-fedtions have endeared her fo much to me, that I am convinced an alliance with her is necessary to render my existence at all tolerable. I have therefore applied to the most amiable Mifs Beaumont, in whom I am emboldened to hope I Snail find a powerful advocate, and who will nor, G a	I fatter
[ 84 ]
I flatter myfelf, refufe to plead the caufe of
Her most obedient
Humble fervant,
George Cockburn.” Now 13 my curiosity raifed to the utmost pitch; but I have given my word that I will not pry into the fc-crets of others, and I am too much the woman of honour to commit a breach of trust. As I promlfed I would follow him down stairs in five minutes, I must'wish you good bye —I would not for the world break my word with him. Besides, he feems fo very partial to me that I fancy he will Soon trust me with his ferious
intentions ■
C S5 ]
intentions!—Let me hear from you once more before I fet off for the gay metropolis.
Your’s assedlionately, Charlotte Finch*
LETTER XXX.
Lhe Honourable Mifs Beaumont t» Mifs Finch*
Berkeley Square.
J'ELL, my Charlotte, this great ^ assiir is over, and Mifs Fitz-herbert is united to- the man of her choice ! That she may be happy, is ' my sincere wish ; but I am forry to lay I have my doubts about it. Ai-tho’ nothin» verv material occurred, G 2	yet.
t S6 ]
yet, as I promifed to fend you am account of the whole affair, I am (to ufe your own terms) too much the woman of honour to be lefs than my word.
The ceremony was performed in Lord Spencer’s drawing-room at eight o’clock in the evening. Mifs Fitz-herbert’s drefs was. as follows : Her hair was done in a round toupee, and she had on a beautiful Hsmn quatre, with two rows of sine blond round the face (than which nothing could be more becoming) ; it was ornamented with lilach ribbon, and three white feathers drooping over the top of it.
1 o	X
She wore a lilach Circassian, with a
white
[ 8? ]
white lustring petticoat, both trimmed with gauze, and a short apron bound round with the fame coloured ribbon. In short, nothing could poshbly be, better calculated to fet oss her sine perfon than was the vvhole of her drefs. She looked beautiful; and I never before faw her appear half fo amiable, as she had a foftnefs' and modesty dissufed over her countenance, not her ufual characteristic.——Her little Lord wasdecked out at all points. He had a flesh coloured coat, waistcoat and breeches, made to sit him St> exactly, that he looked quite horrid. His hair was dressed two inches higher than uSual, in order to bring him a G 4	little
[ 88 ]
little nearer to his wife’s fcandaiss,* his fword was put on with a peculiar grace, and his large diamond buckles placed with the greatest exaCcnefs; nor, in his hurry, were either of his watches excufed their attendance. The odour of his perfumes fcented the whole room; for it was difficult to tell whether rnarschal or otter of rofes Was most predominant. He acquitted himfelf tolerably well in a minuet with his bride, who did not appear to lefs advantage for having fucli an excellent foil ! I need not fay who were Harriot’s and my partners. The ball was exceedingly crowded, and did net break up till two o’clock.
I think
[ 89 ]
I think I have been very minute in regard to the wedding; and now let me thank my lovely friend for her
f	*
kindneSs in promising to be with me on an approaching event. You may assure yomsielf, my dear girl, that Cockburn’s love for you needs be put to no farther trial. He adores you ; —he adores your merits;—but I will Say no more on this Subjedf, till we meet, at wdiich time I shall have it in my power to convince you that you. alone are the mistreSs of his invaluable heart. I doubt not but he will attend you to town ; and I beg you wall tell him that I esteem mySclf very much honoured by his kind congratulations.
Let
[ 90 ]
Let me befeech you to treat him with lenit}^, for he is a worthy fellow.
My brother has fold his estate in-Devonshire, and we expedt him in town daily. He will stay but a short time with us, and will, I know, bc' impatient to have a certain astair over, as he will wish to be prefent at the ceremonj''. We are very bufy in-preparing clothes, &c. &c. which in fome meafure diverts my attention, and prevents my giving way to gloomy ideas; for, after all, Charlotte, thefe men are fad creatures I and who can tell whether they will not, when they have gained the feepter, govern with arbitrary- sivay !-—But marriage is a
lotter}',.
[ 91	]
lottery, and, as there are fome prizes,-I will comfort myfelf with refledfing, that I may be fortunate enough to draw one.-^In the pleasing hope of embracing you in the courfe of next week, I will releafe you from this-wretched fcrawl, and fubfcribe myfelf. Your truly assedlionate Amelia Beaumont..
LETTER XXXI.
From the Honourable AFifi Milner /r The Bon. Mifs H. Beaumont.
Dover.
A HI my Harriot, what a cruel ^ destiny is mine, continually fur-rounded as 1 am by evils, that haunt
me
L 9^ ]
me like my shadow. A few days ago I thought I could not experience a greater pang than that which I felt when I tore myfelf from your arms, and followed Lady Milner into the chaife which carried me from your sight. Alas ! I knew not then that I was referved for still further trials.— But avaunt complainings !. rather let me fubinit, without repining, to my hard fate, and kifs the rod that in-fiidts the punishment ! Surely I shall be entitled to my Ha,rriot’s pity, when I have informed her, that my dear mother now lays at the point of death. Oh! had she been fpared but a few years Icngcr, that we might have
ended
C 93 ]
ended our days together, within the peaceful confines of a monastery, I should have been fatisfied; but, the grim tyrant Death, as if envious of the Small portion of happineSs allotted me, is cruelly laying his iron hands on my only remaining comfort. Oh ! may I be blessed with fortitude fufii-cient to bear up against the afflidfions that furround me. Hope! that last, best comforter, feems to have forfaken me, and when I look round, the biackneSs of the profpedt frightens me.
Pardon me, my Harriot, for damping your joys.-—May you be happy with Fitzherbert, and experience
C 94 ]
Tience that calm tranquillity which k ^denied
The wretched
Hgratia Milner.
LETTER XXXII.
Finch to Lady Finch.
BerJcdey Square,
ever honoured mother wish I doubt not, be happy to hear •that her good-for-nothing daughter is ■.arrived in Berkeley Square, without meeting with any adventure on the •road either alarming or iuncommom I hope both my honoured parents are as well as I left them, and do not re-rpent their inclulgence. I am much
siatieued
[ 9S ]
fatigued with my journey, but could not think of resigning niyfelf into the arms of steep., until I had fent them this proof of dutiful remembrance. My heavy eye-lids now refufe their office, and I am obliged to fubfcribe myfelf, in haste.^
Their dutiful daughter,
Charlotte Finch.
P. S. I found all friends well in ^Berkeley Square.
LETTER XXXIIL From the fame to the fame» Honoured Mother,
what anxiety did I wait ' ' the arrival of the post, and
how
C ]
how fuperlatively happy was I reti“ dered when the fervant delivered your letter into my hands. The contents of it added to my felicity, as 5mLi assured me, that both your Ladyship and Sir William continued mend-Jng. That you may foon be restored to peisseCl: health is my constant prayer. You dessre me to fend a circumstantial account of our proceedings. Your ■commands are always facred, but in this instance I shall obey them with particular pleafure. The day after my arrival Lord Beaumont came to town. He has fold his estate near our little cottage, and has been (con-tiary to nis first planji again upon a
vmt
C 97 ]
visit at General Slater’s, which family are likewiSe come to make a short stay in town. He has introduced them to his relations, who all very much approve of his choice. MiSs Slater is an agreeable and accomplished girl, and does great honour to his taste. He was impatient to fee his sisters united, and they (in complaifance to a brother whom they both adore) resigned their liberty Some days Sooner than it was at first intended. As you are desirous of having an account of the wedding, I will not keep you any longer in SuSpcnfe.
My Amelia, you know, has an un-furmountable objection to chainber-
VoL. III. H marriages^
L 98 3
marriages, they were therefore united last Saturday at St. George’s Churchy Hanover Square, in as private a manner as poshble. Lord and Lady Spencer, Sir William and Lady Manning, Mifs Slater, Lord Beaumont, Sir George Cockburn, and myfelf, were all the company that attended. We fet off immediately as the cere^^ monies were performed for Lord Spencer’s villa,, near Windfor, which he has lately purchafed. It is a beautiful place, a perfed; Eden. The gardens are laid out in the most romantic style, and nothing can be more delightful than the extensive profped; they command. We arrived
C 99 3
rived there about two o’clock, and found every thing ready for our reception. The weather was extremely sine, and fpring feemed to have shed all its choicest stores to crown the happy day. In a temple that is builc on an eminence at the bottom of the garden was every kind of refreshment, as coffee, chocolate, orgeat, and cakes; likewike fruits of every kind, the produce of their hot-houfes. The walk that led to this beautiful little retreat was covered with an enamelled carpet ■of Nature’s workmanship; nor did the blushins: rofe and violet with-hold their fweets, and waft their fragranc 3 in the air. When we had partook of H z	the
f 100 ]
,\
the regale, we went into the faloon, and amufed ourfelves with admiring the richnefs and elegance of the furniture. We then adjourned into the music-room, and had a most delightful fnug concert, which lasted till we were fummoned to dinner; at which was difplayed hofpitality without profusion. Every thing was elegant, and ferved up with the greatest degree of taste and decorum. After dinner, we left the gentlemen to enjoy their champaign and politics, and repaired to the garden; but our two bridegrooms found no pleafure in either, without thefociety of their fair brides, and very foon joined us in a pretty
little
[ lOI ]
little arbour, situated in a most roman-' tic part of the garden, where we were sitting to enjoy the fweets of fpring. Lady Spencer had privately ordered one of the fervants to bring Harriot’s harp ; and you can have no idea hoW truly piissurefque the fcene was, nor of the foft and melting founds that issued from her instrument, which were ren-dered more melodious by the arbour’s being situated near a beautiful canal, whofe glassy furface resiedted the image of the enchanting performer. It is as dissicult to fay which was the happieSt
I
man. Lord Maitland or Sir James, as it would be to determine which of the two silvers looked the handfomest.
H a	Thev
C 102 ]
They were dressed both alike, in ' riding-habits of jonquille coloured cloth, lined and lapelled with lilach ; and large black hats, which shaded their eyes, ornamented with a vast quantity of black feathers. In short, they looked lovelinefs itfelf. At feven, we returned into the faloon, where the gentlemen joined us. We had a most agreeable dance, but no minuets, as we were all en Amazons.
There was a kind of melancholy that dissufed itfelf over Lady Fitz-herb..rt’s countenance, which rendered her insinitCiV lovely, and which she in ■ vain endeavoured to difpel. It was occa;i^ned by her having, a few days
before.
r 103 ]
before, taken an eternal adieu of the friend of her youth, a young lady of uncommon merit and afflictions, whofe history I will relate to you when we meet.—-We fpent a fortnight at Windfor, and then left that beautiful fpot to partake of the more tumultuous joys of a town life.-
I
I am now going to relate a piece of news which, I think, will give you and Sir William pleafure, viz.. That Sir George Cockburn has done me the honour to declare himfelf my adorer ; and that I have every rcafon to believe myfelf the only objeCl of , his affection, as a letter he had wrote to my Amelia upon the f.ibjeCt, and Ha	W'hich
[ 104 ]
■*.vhich she has shewn me, convinces me that he now only regards her with cool friendship. He is continually teasing me to permit him to write to Sir William; but I have particular reafons for not confenting to that while I remain here, and preach patience to him twenty times a-day. I assure him that I shall return to Bath in three weeks, when he will have an opportunity of pleading his caufe perfonally, but this does not fatisfy him, and he looks upon three weeks as an age. I have met Lady Cockburn and his sister very frequently. They are both | agieeable; but I am particularly pleafed with the latter, who, I must
siiV,
[ lOJ }
Say, honours me with much of her time and attention.
I am tired to death of the diffipated life I lead here. Ranelaugh, operas, concerts, balls, and routes, with drefs and visiting, have taken up all my time, and nothing but the enjoyment of my Amelia’s company could com-penfate for the continual hurry and agitation I am in. Lord Maitland propofes fetting off for his feat in Norfolk on Tuefday fortnight, but,, as the Fitzherberts think of staying a few days longer, it would be unkind in me to leave town before them. Lord Spencer has since made Amelia a prefent of the villa near Windfor,
befidesi
[ io6 ]
besides twenty thoufand pounds the day she^was married; and I hear that Sir James Fitzherbert received the fame Sum with Harriot. Lord Maitland has taken a houSe in Portland Place for his winter residence, and Sir Janies is to Spend the Summer at one-of his estates in Yorkshire.
The Servant informs me the carriages are at the door, I am therefore compelled to leave you for the orefenn as we are going to pay a hundred visits.—Prefent my refpedful duty to Sir William, and accept the fame from
Your dutiful
Charlotte Finch.
L K 7’ T F. n '
C I°7 1
LETTER. XXXIV.
Lhe Honourable Mifs Milner te Lady Fitzherbert.
,	Dover.
J JARRIOT! Lady Milner lives, and I am once more restored to peace ! You will, I am fure, be doubly happy to hear what has fo much contributed to her recovery, I therefore hasten to communicate the pleasing, tidings. Start not, my friend, when I acquaint you, that Milbank has proved the best of physicians! Nay,, child, why that look of furprize—■ Yes, i again repeat it, Milbank, the divine Milbank! has restored her to
health
L io8 ]
health and happinefs.—But take the event as it happened. My last informed you of Lady Milner’s being taken fuddenly ill on the road, and, if it fpoke the didlates of my heart, must have given you fome idea of the fnsserings I endured, though it was impossible that my pen could exprefs the fullnefs of them. Her ladyship’s disorder was occasioned by the agitation of Spirits she has lately undergone, which at first brought on a stight Sever, that was greatly augmented by the Satigue oS travellins:. I perceived her indiSposition Some stages beSore we arrived at Dover, and in vain endeavoured to dissuade
her
[ i°9 ]
her from purfuing our journey for Some time; but when we reached this place, the fever was fo high, and her strength fo much exhausted, that it brought on a delirium, and she was put to bed fenfelefs. Judge what were my feelings on this occasion, to be in fuch a situation, in a place where I had neither friends nor acquaintance to afford me that relief I stood fo much in need of. I difpatched one of our fervants for the best advice that could be got; but not being fatissied with the account the physician gave of her, I fent my fervant to town for Dr. L——, who came post to Dover, and found her in the most dangerous
situation.
[ no ]
'limation. For three whole nights die I sit up with her woman by the bee fide. I refufed to stake any refreshment, and my sinking mind lost aS energy. I would not wTite to my Harriot Sor Some days, as I knew the melancholy news would damp the joy of that day which I wished to riSe and Set without a cloud to rustle her hap-■pineSs; but when Lady Milnerst cafe
became So deSperate, that Dr, L------,
in the mildest and most assedlionate terms, prepared me for the worst .'of all events, I could no longer refrain myfelf from pouring my forrovvs into the bofom of a friend, whom I knew tvoiild assord fome confolation, by
strengthening
[ III ]
^rengthening me to fupport my complicated misfortunes. I never quitted the melancholy fcene, but was continually bedewing her pillow with my tears. At intervals, Reafon refumed its throne, but they were short, and helped only to make me feel more exquisitely the wretched essedts of a relapfe. I was sitting by her one day, watching her while she dofed, from which, wshen she awoke, she feemed a little refreshed, and stretching out her burning hand to me, faid, Horatia, could I but fee Milbank, my life need not be difpaired of:—my malady is of the mind, which his prefence would remove.” At the mention of a
man
[ II2 ]
man I prized above all the world (hcrfelf excepted) a iudden chillnest ran through all my veins. However, I wished nothing more ardently than to behold him, that I might, by fa-crisicing my dearest interest, restore Lady Milner to happinefs, and prayed, in the anguish of my foul, that he might be the means of her recovery. I wept, and she continued thus: Before . I fixed my refolution of ending rny days in a convent, I left no means-untried to gain an interview with him, but, alas! all my efforts proved abortive. I have every reafon to think he has left his native country, and that I shall never fee him more. I
bcTCcd
OD
t "3 ]
Legged of her not to admit dlfpair a place in her bofom, nor to resign hope, and entreated her t® live for the Sake of a daughter, whofe life was wrapt up ill her’s. She sighed, and again relapfed into a state of infensi-bility. I was almost in the fame condition, but left the room, that I might indulge my Sorrow aloud, I threw myfelf into a chair, and, in the most piercing accents, bewailed iiiy unhappy fate. I called upon Milbank, .and was indulging a most poignant grief, when my woman came into the room, and with a confusion and wild-nefs in her manner, told me she had feen Milbank, attended only by a fer-VoL. m.	I	vanr,
[ 114 3
vtmt, digsit from a ppshchaife-and--four, and had learnt from the fer-vant, that he designed to embark ' immediately for Calais. This news made hope once more force passage To my heart, and, taking a card out of my pocket-book, I wrote thefe words tvith a pencil:
Milbank ! refufe not to attend the fummons of an unhappy woman, rendered fo by your uncommon mC"-iits.! but come and prove the great-nefs of your foul, by restoring peace to the heart of the affiifletlP
I difpatched her to him, and desired ner to deliver the card into no one’s hands but.his own, and to wait for an
anfwer.
[ ”5 ]
anfwer. While I was waiting her return with the utmost impatience, the door opened, and the altered form of Milbank prefented itfelf to my view. I cannot exprefs the tumult of my mind at that moment. Every tender fenfation possessed my foul, and my tongue refufed to articulate the -didlates of my heart for fome time. ^ At length a stood of tears came to my relief, which, in fome meafure, relieved me, and enabled me to addrefs mystlf TO him in the following terms:
‘‘ Milbank, you fee before you the most wretched being on earth. Will not your humanity induce you to . assord her the confolation that is within
I 2	ycur
[ ii6 ]
your reach! I fay, can you.refufe t« restore peace and happinefs to the heart of the woman you once honoured tvith your esteem !-—Lady Milner, fare, ought not to be rejedScd !—Her birth, accomplishments, and beauty, added to the amiablenefs of her disposition, render an alliance with her worthy even -oS a Milbank!—Tire disparity of your ages can be no bar, as she is still young, being but just turned of thirty-four, and I think your generosity ought to impel you to V bestow on her your heart, as you hear that her endeavours to conquer her fatal passon for you has reduced her to the bed of death, from which nothing
E 117 ]
tiling upon earth can raife her but your fupporting hand !’’—I stopped.
The tears started in his sine eyes, his boSom heaved the sigh of anguish, and his generous heart didtated the following reply
Yes, fvveet pleader ! you shall be happy,- if it is in Milbank’s power to render you fo !—--The facrisice I am about to make shall convince you that I have a fouh too great to prize my ov:n felicity above thine !-—Lady Milner lives, if this hand can be the happy means of raifing her from the bed of death.- My friendship she shall-ever haveand the knowledge of her worth, with the resiedion of her being I 3	. the
C Iis ]
the mother of Horatia, will ever make her experience from me, when united to her, the most tender regard.’*
I thanked him with the tears of gratitude, and flew to Lady Milner’s apartment. I found her again restored to reafon, and ventured to afk if she
/
thought she could fupport an interview with Milbank. She assured me that nothing would prove a greater restorative. I told her he was in the lioufe, and left her to condud: him to the melancholy feene. He advanced towards the bed with stow and pensive steps. Lady Milner received him without the least emotion, as the effedl of her diforder blunted the edee of
O
her
[ ”9 ]
her feelings. She beckoned to me to withdraw, and I left the room immediately.
When I was alone, I restedted on what had passed, and rejoiced that, in the constidt between love and duty, the latter had borne away the prize. “ It is over now,” faid I to myfelf, long, long may Lady Milner live to enjoy the happinefs that awaits her I Milbank, '! reSign thee ! though thou art now dearer to me than ever! Thy friendship, I hope, I ever shall possefs, and that is all that I afpire to !” Vf hiie I was indulging thefe ideas, the fervant acquainted me that Laay Milner wished to fee me, I iiew to attend
I 4	her,
[ 120 ]
her/and was astonished, upon entering the room, to obferve the ferene joy that was painted on her countenance. I embraced her with tears of filial affedtion, which she returned with a maternal warmth that charmed me, and, taking my hand, she put it into Milbank’s, Saying, “ May I live to See the happy day that will unite you, that you may not want a mother’s bleshng !—Horatia ! there is nothing wanting to complete my felicity but your conSent to become the wife of this deServsing man.—Be not fur-priSed, my child (for I looked, as you may very well believe, exceedingly So) I am not ashamed to own that I once
loved
C I^I ]
loved him to a degree of enthufiafm^ but the state to which I have been reduced has made me fee things in their proper medium, and there is nothing I fo ardently wish for, and which will contribute more to my recovery than to behold you married to him. I now regard him only with cool friendship, and (if I live) shall never feel other fentiments in his favour. Confent, therefore, and blefs your mother, to blefs a man that adores you.”
Milbank pressed my hand to his lips, and entreated me to reward his constant love. I replied, that it had ever been the businefs of my life to
contribute
[ 122 ]
contribute as much as lay in my power to the happinefs of my mother, but that, in this instance, I feared, she studied my interest more than her own, as I would be candid enough to acknowledge that my heart had long felt a preference for him. She clafped me to her bofom, exclaimed. Generous girl! and fainted away through excess of fatigue. When she was restored, nothing would fatisfy her but our being immediately united; and next morning, the impatient Milbank fent for an efpecial licence, &c.—The messenger is not yet returned from town, but he is expedied this even-ing.—Lady Milner, since Milbankss'
arrival.
[ 123 ]
arrival, has gained strength every day. She fat up yesterday for the first time,, and stept found all last night. Dr.
L-----has recommended the Germam
Spa, and thinks that she will be able to undertake the voyage in a few weeks.
My Harriot will, I am fure, sincerely participate with me the reverfe of fortune that has taken place in my favour. Oh! may I ever retain the' most grateful fenfe of it, and make it the businefs of my life tO' merit a continuance of the gifts of Providence.
The messenger is returned with the licence, and a letter of approbation from Lord Rivers. To-morrow I
beScOW
[ 124- ]
bestow my hand on the man of my heart.—Ah ! Harriot! pray for The grateful '
Horatia Milner.
P. S. Dr. L— — is to aft as father. •—I wish I could fee you before we embark.
LETTER XXXV.
Lady- FlTZHE R BE RT /c	MIL B AN K .■
Cavcndifh Square.
Y beloved Horatia will receive but a short letter of congratulation from her friend, whofe joy was unbounded when she received your last, which fortunately came' to hand the fame time as the foimer, having
passed
[ i^i ]
passed a delightful fortnight at Lady Maitland’s villa, -near Windfor, in the fociety of dear friends. Receive the .effusions of a heart elated at the pleasing turn in your affairs; and do not refufe, I befeech yoii, to retard
I..
your embarkation a few days, as my dear man (who indulges me in every wish I can form) has confented to our fpending the fummer with you at fpa, •if you will admit us of your party. -How do I enjoy the idea of embracing €ny friend; and as I doubt not but she will receive as much pleafure from it as I do, I will no longer defer fending sher the pleasing news. Joy, joy to ■you, my friend, and joy to your good
.man.^
[ 126 ]
man, to whom 1 ardently wish to be introduced,-as does my dear lord and master.
Your assedtionate
Harriot Fitzherbert. :
LETTER XXXVI. Lady Nassau to Lady Maitland.
Berkeley Square,
O W will the feeling heart of Lady Maitland bleed at the fad 'story I am about to communicate.-— 'Yes! I am convinced she will pity the wretched Lady Nassau, though, ..perhaps, she defpifes her for her imprudent conducl. How can I relate the shockingevent ' yet I sindit necer-
•farj''
C 127 ]
fary to unburthen myfelf, as I know not one who has fo fympathising a heart as your ladyship, and our for*-mer intimacy (I dare not fay friendship) encourages me to hope you will at least afford me one confolatory line to footh my afsticfted heart. I shall, perltaps, find it a -dishcult matter to perfuade you. Lord Nassau is a wretch ! He is not fo mild and gentle as he appeared before our union.—• Believe me, he very foon threw off the difguife after that fatal period, and .gave me to understand he was a wolf in sheep’s cloathing. I look upon my pfefent mifery as the just punishment of my indiferetion. Why did I not,
attend
[ 128 ]
attend to-the wife counfels of Lady Spencer, and the fweet perfuasive re-'liibnstranees of my dear Lady Maitland! Alas! to my forrow, neither had any essedt upon me, as I thought myfelf the best judge of what was, and what was not, right. I w^as pleafed with my having made a conquest of Lord Nassau, and gloried in the triumph of bestowing on him my hand, and dooming him to be my 'stave, who led aw^ay fo many captive -beauties in his train.—Fatal idea ! which is the fource of all my misfor-
i
tunes! Your ladyship must recollect that we staid in to;vn but a fo,rtnio;bt after our marriage, and -then fet oss
for
C 1^9 ]
for his fummer residence, which is in the Horth. It is a gloomy, old-fashioned mansion, furrounded with high walls and thick trees, which gives it fo difmai an appearance, that I was quite in the horrors when we entered the dark receptacle, wshich feemed to he calculated to infpire melancholy. However, I though it most prudent not to appear dissatisfied, and confokd myfelf by resiedting, that in the company and endearments of my lord, and tlie fociety of a few agreeable neighbours, I might pafs the fummer months there very happy. But, alas! how miferably was I mistaken; for, tired of the restraint he had fo long Vor. III. K	put
L 130 ]
put upon hiriifelf, he very foon shewed himfelf in his true colours, and treated me with a degree of indisserence that bordered on ill manners. He main^ tained a constant referve, and fcarcely ever fpoke to me. Long did I lament his altered condudl in silence, and never even hinted my chagrin to him until one evening that he was uncommonly dull. Thinking to divert his melancholy, I went to my harpsichord and played thofe pieces of music that I knew he most admired, imagining •it might restore him to good humour. Instead of which, his brutality permitted him to addrefs me in the following terms: ^« Do, I beg of you,
Lady
[ I3I ]
Lady Nassau, ceafe that strumming I '—Am I ever to be disturbed by your noife!—I wish, when you are in thefe ridiculous humours, you would confine yourfelf to your apartment, and ^ not break in upon my retirement.— ril give orders for your instrument to be carried there, and ilkewife your parrot and monkey, that you may, when you are hoaisie with finging, timufe yourfelf with them, as they % will be better pleafed with your non-fenfe than I can possibly be.” This fpeech, which wds delivered with a sheering accent, abfolutely petrified '■me with horror, and my proud fpirit ^unaccufiomed to brook Sacli infults)
K 2	dissa'.ei
C 13^ ]
didtated the following reply : Your lordship is exceedingly flattering ! C-However, as I am fenfible that we are not to credit one half of what your Sex fay, I cannot possibly fwallow the compliments you lavish on me.—I was playing to divert myfelf, as I had ■ not the vanity to fuppofe that your lordship paid any attention to my proceedings; but as I am fond of V music, with your permiffion, I shall conclude this piece, which is very justly admired by every body.” With fury in his countenance he came up to me, and fnatching the book from tho. stand, threw it to the other side of the room, then locked the harpsichord,
and
[ 133 ]
and told me to touch it at my perih I was vexed—-the tears started in my eyes, and I faid, your lordship may one time or other repent this treatment. “ No threatening, madam, if you pleafe, but resteft you are now my wife, not my mifirefs V This was too much—I left the room with precipitation, and stew to my apartment. I rang for my woman to attend me, who informed me that my lord was writing, and had given orders for a few things to be put up, having told his fervant he intended to fpend a few days out. This intelligence alarmed me, I fent to him to know if I could fpeak with him before he K I	[went;
[	134 ]
«k
went; but he bid the fervant inform me that he was bufy, and had rather difpenfe with mj'- company. Four • days passed without my hearing from him, and the fifth brought me two letters by the post, both which I shall inclofe for your perufal.
I immediately refolved upon quitting a houfe wdiofe owner was now become hateful to me, and ordered my own woman (whom I knew I could trust) to hire a chaife-and-six, to be at the door by four o’clock in the morninp': and I arrived in town, attended only
by 111]' maid, last night____I left a few
lines upon Lord Nassau’s dressino;-tabic, informing him of the reafon of
my
[ ^35 3
■ my departure.—‘The worthy Lord and Lady Spencer received me with open arms, and have promifed to shield me 'from any further infults from that horrid man. How thankful ought I to be that I have efcaped the share he had laid for my virtue ! He had frequently mentioned that he expected Some friends, and desired I would receive them as fuch. Bale man !—'I wiish I knew who to thank for my happy deliverance.
Be fo good as to preSent my best; compliments to Fitzherbert, and ex-eiife the ’ liberty I have taken in troubling )TU with my ashiirs—but the kno',vkdg;e I have ol your neart K 4	aiilircs
C 136 ]
assures me that you wdll—^and that
I may fubferibe myfelf.
Your assedlionate Nassau.
Letters Pent bypojl to Lady Nassau, and fnelofed by her to Lady Maitland,
letter I.
Yb Lady Nassau;
London,
Sincere wellwisher of Lady Nass fau’s takes the liberty of fending her the inclofed.—He truly com-miferates her unfortuate alliance with
that vile man Lord N---, and thinks
the emergency of the caufe will prove a fufficient excufe for his abruptnefs • L	in
[ 137 J
in opening her eyes to the share that is laid for her. He can take upon him to fay (that if flight is necessary) Lady
N----will sind a fafe afylum in the
houfe of Lord and Lady Speneer, who are still in town, and who will receive her with unabated assedion. —He begs leave to fubferibe himfelf Her most obedient Humble fervant,
LETTER II.
Lord Nassau to Sir Benj. Cotterill,
Berwick upon Tweed.
^ONFOUNDELY out of humour, Ben ! I take up my pen to make thee my complaints. A sine
job
C 13S 3
job have I made of it! I every moment execrate myfelf for not having, followed thy advice, then I should not have been encumbered with that plague, a wife!—A wife!—I abfoutely shudder while my pen traces the odious word! Had it not been for her fixty thoufand pounds,, her fweet ladyship had certainly died a maid for me; bur, Ben, I found the greatest part of that a very convenient fum to clear fome debts of Honour that I had contradled at Stapleton’s and other fashionable place's of refort;—and you know, in this life, v:e must compound to take the bitter with the fweet. But, alas L the latter (in this instance) greatly
Gverbalances
t 139 ]
overbalances the former, and I know not what I would nor o;ive to be un~ married again. Canst: thou not, Ben, help me to fome expedient whereby I may dissolve the Gordian knot, which, to tell you the truth, does not sit at all eafy on thy poor friend’s shoulders,-and who, I believe, makes the Devil of a hufband. Do, Set thy head to work to contrive Some machination-tnat may releaSe both her and me, for I believe she hates me heartily.
Come down, Cotteriil, and enliven this dreary place with thy preSence ; . and if thou canSc prevail upon two or three of the junto to accompany thee to vistt a Benedicl:, I fiiall be glad to
fee
[ 140 3
fee them. Tell them I do not love my deary well enough to be jealous, that she is very handfome, and infinitely at their fervice. At all events,
I do insist upon feeing thee, and shall, if thou dost not immediately obey .my fummons, fcratch thee off the list ' of my friends. In the mean time, I must fubferibe myfelf Your sincere.
But wretched friend,
F. Nassau,
C.....
LETTER
[ I4I ]
LETTER XXXVII. Mifs Finch to Lady Maitland.
Bath.
I hesitate one moment to obey my lovely Amelia’s com-mands} Write foon were the last words at parting that stowed from her perfuasive tongue. I gladly obey its mandates, as I am of too felsish a nature to relinquish any part of the fmall portion of happinefs that is allotted to us mortals, and hope I need not add, that the friendship qf Amelia constitutes the greatest part of mine. I had the pleafure to find my dear Sir William and Lady Finch much better
on
[	14^	]
~on my return to Bath, where I arrived fafe, without meeting with any thing new or interesting. My amiable Baronet attended me on horfeback. Vv”e were’both at first rather in the fenfe-rofo style, as it was natural we should, after parting w'ith fo many good' friends. But when I restedted that I was hastening to meet the embraces of stwo fond parents, the thought revived i,me, and gave me fresh animation. 'The divine Cockburn very foon fuited ihimfelf to my humour, and the remainder of our journey w^as pleafant .and agreeable. I did not leave the Fitzherberts until the day before they fet off for Dover, where thcy^ went to
meet
C 143 ]
meet Harriot’s friend, who is now married to the only man she ever loved. They intend fpending the fummer at Spa with them, to which place they are going for the recovery of Lady Milner’s health. Lady Fitz-herbert desired I would inform you of it, as she had not time to write before file went. I have likewdfe a message from her to deliver to your caro fponfo^ which I must do through your means. You must tlterefore inform him that Harriot intends to recommend him, W'herever she goes, as a perfon who may be applied • to in all cafes of ■ilistrefs, and means to have hand-bills printed, fetting forth, “ That all dam-
fcls.
[	144 ]
‘fels, who wish to take a peep into the book of fate, may apply to the Right Hon. Lord Maitland, who possesses the art of divination in the most emi~ nent degree, as his prophecies never fail.” In short, she intends to found his praife through the trumpet of fame, for having fo accurately foretold the events that were to befal her. Need I after this add, that the ring taken from her singer at a ball at General Slater’s has been restored to her by her amiable Fitzherbert.
Has my dear Amelia thrown aside her London airs yet, and assumed the habit of an Arcadian shepherdefs ? I think the drefs would mightily become
[ 145 ]
'GOme her, and that she would handle the crook with a peculiar grace. I think I fee the amiable Maitland re^ dined by your side on a bank of violets gazing on your charms with rapture, and adding to the melodious accents of your voice the foft strains of a well-played flute. Have I not drawn a pretty pidure of rural felicity ? I am fare I sincerely sigh for the pastoral pleafures, and hope the day is not far distant that will tranfplant me in the happy fpot of my nativity, as we think of leaving this horrid place very foon.
A-propos—Cockburn has purchafec Yoiir brother’s estate.—V/hat a sty fel-VoL. III. L	lo’.V,
C 146 ]
low, not to acquaint us of it before. 1 hear that he has caufed ^reat altera-tions to be made there. I must leave my dear Lady Maitland for the pre-fent, as-Lady Finch fends to desire my attendance.
Six o’clock.—Well, Amelia, I am returned to you, after having had a converfation of an hour and an half long with Sir William, Lady Finch, and Cockburn; the refuk of w'hicli is, that WT leave this place in lefs than a w'eek, and that I am this day fortnight to give my hand and heart to-one w'ho, I am fare, is deferving of it.-Let me that day receive a letter from my Amelia, or I Snail think my felicity
C 147 3
iclty incomplete. Remember me to the amiable Maitland. You and his lordship must excufe my using his name fo freely; but friendship will Sometimes exceed its bounds and take liberty, Ib believe me to be Sincerely your’s,
Charlotte Finch,
LETTER XXXVIIL Lady Maitland to her Friend.
I
Haveiing Bower, Norfolk,
' /t CCORDING to my calculation, ^ mv beloved Charlotte will re-
j
ceive this on the happy day that gives her to one 01 the worthieSu of his fex. Tropitious my it bc^ and may she -L 1 henceforward
C 148 ]
henceforward look back to it as the date of her felicity. May peace and pleafure wait upon her steps, and every revolving year be happier than the last. Maitland is every thing that my fondest wish would have him— tender, generous, and sincere.—-There is not a manly virtue but what inhabits his breast; and I doubt not but my happinefs will be lasting, as it has religion for its basis; for it is no fmall comfort to me that my lord has morals, and does not assedt to defpife the first duty of a Christian. Poor Lady Naf-fau is with me. You must certainly have heard of her distressed story, although you omit mentioning it. I
have
[	149 ]
have engaged her to pafs the fummer with me, and shall endeavour to difpel the gloom that has taken possession of her mind. She has by no means a bad heart, and her dear bought expedience will, I doubt not, convince her how fatal it is to a young woman’s reputation to lead the dishpated life she has hitherto done. Her prefent iusserings are the almost inevitable confequences of that fatal turn in her .difposition. How fortunate ought she ■ to esteem herSelf that Lord Spencer had fo large a fettlement made upon -her, as she would otherwife have been 'reduced to penury and want; for that wretched Lord .Nassau, who alwas'S
passed
C 15° }
passed for a man of fortune, had not a farthing of his own, and has already run through all her large inheritance that was in his power. May die be made Sensible of the folly of his ways, and repent before it is too late. He does not know where Lady Nassau is, nor shall he,’ if I can avoid it. How fortunate it was that the horrid letter fell into my brother’s hands^ I do not mean to tell her to whom she is indebted for her happy eScape, as it miight give, her the idea of an obligation, and touch her too keen Sensibility. It is no Small addition to my happinefssshat he is united to So worthy a woman. Last ThurSday
nave
O
[ IJI ]
gave him to the objedl of his desires. May every blefsing crown their happy nuptials, and may they long enjoy the pleafures arising, from fo desirable an alliance. We expedl to fee them shortly, as they have promifed to pafs part of the fummer with us. My dear Lord and Lady Spencer are here, and I hope to detain them until we return to town. I wish we could flatter ourfelves to be favoured with a visit from you and Sir George ;• bur, alas! that, I know, is impossible. I therefore rest fatissied in the assurance of your friendfnip, by letter, until the winter recalls us to the gay metropolis, wdiere I hope we shall all meet
in
[ iSii ]
in perfeft health. Accept the kind congratulations of all under this roof, and believe me to be, at all times, and in all places,
Your sincere and assedllonatc
Amelia Maitland^-
FINIS.
%