
1HE
GODFREY F. SINGER MEMORIAL PRESENTED BY
MR. AND MRS. JACOB SINGER
LAURA AND AUGUSTUS,
A H

AUTHENTIC STORY:
I N

•*' 'I'ii-i

A SERIES OF LETTERS
2
By A YOUNG LADY.
IN THREE VOLUMES.
VOL. I.

fi
•——A whole host, a war of foes, May Sooner be fubducd, than love.

PajlLLlPS.

■m
i '■
A
\
D U B L I N;
, fk *

.L.
W
PRINTED FOR R MONCRIEFFE, G. BURMET, T. WALKER, R. MARCHBANK, R. BURTON, t. BYRNE, S. COLBERT, B SMITH,
N. CROSS, & J. CASH,
tA,DCC,L!IXXU'*
- ..

• e
C .


'i\ri


» V* ^	«
.'.• V< .J-'-

' 'L^*' -•'
.	fi.'.-'-
''A^ '


'A''.




V
'» .
V* '.
• / .
rr - '	.
b	:
\ *
(:
s
QQ < 03 _)

TO THE
RIGHT HONOURABLE


THE
D O W A G E
V'-
COUNTESS SPENSER.

t r
i >

# ■ 0 0
' d

•T

E author of tho following fheets, unhackneyed in the arts of dedication, .feels herfelf at a lofs, to exprefs her fentiments with all that energy, and delicacy, fo requifite to one of your Ladylliip’s exalted underftanding. She flatters herfelf, however, that, notwith-ftanding her pen is incapable of deli-neating, with that elegance flie could wifh, the perfeifl efteem and veneration her heart warmly acknowledges for the virtues and accomplilhments Lady Spen-
j *'
VOL, I
A
fer
5^
(T

IV
DEDICATION.
fer is fo highly diftingiiifhed for, that
her Ladylhip will have the humanity to
receive under her patronage the follow-

ing piece
Though the author has not the pre-
X
Sumption to fuppofe its merits fuflScient
/.
to claim fo illullrious a patron; yet Ihe
\.
imagines, that when the produce of her
virgin pen Shall he graced with the
name of a Spenfer, it will, procure it
that conlideration and indplgence which
its want of merit render fo neceflary.
In which hope, She does heffelf the ho-
nour of fubfcribing herfelf.
Lady Spenser’s
« j
i
Moft devoted.


Grateful, humble fervant.
The AUTHOR.

LAURA
J*
V
LAURAand AUGUSTUS
LETTER I
Grenada
MISS LEVISON TO MISS BYNG.
T_T E A V E N be pralfed ! your friend, my dear ■ ^ Cecilia, has it once more in' her power to add refs you from Terra firma. Words Seem not Sufficiently expreffive to defcribe her joy on hav* ing efcaped the perils of that boifterous element, to whole mercy ffie was fo lately configned. You, my dear, having never quitted the joyous Scenes of England, can form but a very iinperfcd: idea of the fufferings of inexperienced voyagers. For the firft eight days, I was incapable of quitting my cabin. Nouriihment, that is. Solids of every kind, my ftomach refilled; and as for liquids, porter was the only one it would bear; and though a liquor I never touched when on
K 4	Shore,
6
Laura and Augustus.
aw, cap-
fhore, yet found it palatable even in the night. Kfy father at length hit upon an expedient to procure frefii air, by having a mattrefs laid upon the deck for me to repofe on, which foon enabled me to walk thereon, and join in the amufemepts that our imaginations fuggefted^
Among our companions was a captadin upon half-pay, and his wife’s lifter; a lively good-na-(turcd, uneducated girl. Her ftory appeared to me rather myfterlous. Her brother-in-tain Walker, introduced her to us at Portfmouth, .under the name of Mifs Weftley. But about a a month after we had been on board, broad hints
; - r	^
were given both by the captain and lady, that were Mifs reverfed into Mrs. it would not be misapplied. This, ^you muft naturally imagine, raifed our curiofity; and at length, after much entreaty, ftie was prevailed on to declare her real Situation; a narrative of which follows: In the village where ftie relided lived a Mr. Ander-fon, ah apothecary. This gentleman had an only fqn, who, it feems, had long felt a ftr.png prepofteftion in Mifs Nancy’s favour : it was mutual. Hitherto the youth fuppreffed his defire to announce his .paflion ,to ,his father; howeyer, young i®rcukpius, unable any longer to retain the ;5veighty Secret, like a dutiful fon, refolyed to make him his confidant. But, cruel to tell, their hearts by ho means fympathifed ; for tho’ the lady poflefled youth and good-nature, and was in every re^£t what her lover could wifh, yet thefe were no recommendations to the more provident father; with whom, Jhad She been endowed with all the virtues and graces, a want of fortune made it his duty (in his opinion) to op-pofe .the meafure.
'	He
Laura and Aijgustus;
r
)
Re peremptorily refufed his concurrence ; and at the fame time informed his fon of his havirtgi received overtures from farmer Ploughihare, who, would give his daughter Jenny two hundred pounds on her marriage, and a reverfion of three hundred more at his death. He therefore ex^’ pe6fcd, that if he wilhed to bc' called his fon,> he Would, without further delay, withdraw his' addrefles from Mifs Weftley, and transfer them, to Mifs Ploughihare. In vain did the loyer plead' his paffion to an inexorable father. The poor youth flew to his miftrefs for confojafiori', inftead-of which he experienced what' thoufands have, an additional Ihook. Finding- the houfe in the utmoft confufion, and enquiring the caufe, his beloved Nancy informed him; that her brother found it necellary to return to the Weft Indies, where his wife then was; and that they were to fail next week for the ifland of Grenada in the Collier, captain Marfti. Poor Joe, who had often heard how fcarce lily-coloured females were
•	J	* *	<*	¥
iti that part of the globe;- fennble of the influ-ence Nancy’s' charms had over him, much feared they mightf operate as powerfully oh fome wealthy planter ; therefore thought it moft adyifeable to fecure the fair-one’s hand, before ftie bid adieu to the chalky cliffs of Albion. In confequence whereof they were privately married on the very morning of her joining our party. The parting on the hulband’s fide, we may fuppofe to have been very tender and affe£bing: but, if one may be allowed to judge from the frriall traces of for-row which appeared in the countenance of the bride upon our meeting,-her heart had not felt the feparation with much feverity. After this hifto-ry, what think you, nay dear Cecilia, of our
A3	laughi^
g
Laura a^d Augustus.
laughing companion ? Is it not rather whimfical to marry a man in the morning, and fet fail in the evening for a diftant clime; to leave him with a profpedl of never more beholding him; and yet not drop even a tear to the parting ? does it not argue an infenlibility one would conceive impoffible? How different were our feelings, my amiable friend, at our feparation ! for neither the novelty of furrounding fcenes, nor the tendernefs of my parents, could for one moment banifh you from my thoughts. But, alas, Cecilia, what am I about I The retracing tho lad hours we fpent together at Byngham Grove, bedew my cheeks and blot my paper. Shall therefore quit my pen for the prefent, in order to re-compofe my mind: and, in obedience to your commands, will, at fome future opportunity, attempt a defcription of this country and its inhabitants, as well as that of Madeira ; which place we touched at on our paffagc hither.
This letter I Ihall give in charge to captain Mann, who leaves this port to-morrow. He will alfo prefent you with a few trifles, the produce of this country. He has likewife promifed to get the pine-applc-rum on fliore, which I have fent to your good father; well knowing it is not to be purchafed in England, and not doubting but it will be very acceptable.
Neither my time nor fpirits admits me to fay more at prefent, than that I remain with un-
feigned affedion yours.
Laura Levison.

LET
Laura and Augustus,
9
LET T E R II.

» I
Bynghafn Grove.
MISS BYNG TO IvIISS LEVISON
for the Weft Indies.
T AURA, my father enters my apartment, and informs me a packet fails on Wednefday
I gladly received the information, and am Set down to fcribble to ray fweet friend. Here then is ray ladyfliip, with ail her
ready to thank my dear Laura for her
Captain Mann was himfelf affeftionate letter, and deli-
apparatus, kind remembrance.
the bearer of your vered all the rarities you fent with the greateft pun6lua!ity. The pine-apple rum, ray father declares, is the beft he ever tafted j and, be af-fured, repeatedly drinks my dear girl’s health. Soon after the honeft Ikipper had left me (who, by the by, is a fmart agreeable little fellow) our giddy friend. Lady Charlotte Bruce, was announced. In ftie came, half out of breath.—Cecilia, I have got the vapours, and am come to fpend the day with you. But, blefs me, what have we here; jars, bottles, flowers, and the Lord knows what. Let me fee, I will take a peep into this great jar.—Stop, Lady Charlotte, when you have recovered breath, I will inform you, without your running the rilk of d’rting thofc delicate taper fingers.— Blefs me, Cecilia, how teafing you grovv ; Surely your fate will be to lead apes. I fuppofe it is fome mighty Secret not worth keep,ng. But, however, if you are not the hardeft hearted creature in the world, you will not torment me, for I am really very low-
A 4	fpirited
lO
Laura and Augustus.
Spirited to-day.— Well, Charlotte, out of com* paffion, I will tell you. But firft inform me what Ihocking affair has happened to-day,: that your Spirits are fo depreffed.
You may laugh if you pleafe, Cecilia ; but I ■will be hanged if you would not have been vexed; too, had you been in my place. That teafing little urchin of Lady Wynn’s, by Some accident, got hold of a beautiful fan which Harry Seymour had juft brought from Paris, and fnapped the ftieks right in two.——For my part, I wonder how people can pefter ftrangers in Such a manner with their brats.— Why really, Lady Charlotte, the misfortune you complain of was very mortifying. You had never yet ftirted with the pretty bauble,. I fuppofe ?—No, never; it was that which mortified me.—^Well then, fince your Ladyftiip has received fo great a mortification this morning, I will not keep you longer in fufpenfe; read this letter from our friend Laura.—She is ftill the fame good-natured giddy creature, as when at School.— There is a talk of her being married to the Honourable Mr. Seymour: he is an amiable man, and juft returned from his travels. Should the match take placey they will ftand, I thiuk, as fair a chance of happinefs, as any of our modern couples. She was much diverted with the account you give of Mifs Weftley, alias Mrsi. Anderfon; and declared ftie would freely have given up the happinefs of the laft mafquerade, to have had the pleafure of a few jells with the maiden
as Ihe humouro^ully ftyled her. But away with fuch trifling, or my friend will imagine that her Cecilia has acquired fome of Lady Charlotte’s levity.
Need
Laura and Augustus*
n
Need I tell vou, my dear Laura, how much we lament the want of your fweet Society. For a month after the departure of my beloved companion, 1 wandered like a dove who had loft its mate. The fields, the groves,. loft all their charms, and alike Served but to nourifti melancholy. My father, ever anxioufly Solicitous for the peace of his poor girl, infilled on my going for a fortnight to my uncle Lord T———, in Albermarle Street. You are acquainted with their mode of living, therefore will not require a Sketch. I (hall only fay, that during my ftay, I was hurried off my legs; tHe diffipation of a town, life, ill Suited with one accuftomed to the calm* delights of the country. How much preferable is the life of a country milk maid, to that of a modern fine lady ! The former feels not a wifti to rife higher; ambition is a ftranger to a ruftic bo-fom ; Ihe has not a dread that her fit nation may be humbled ; (he rifes with chearfulnefs to perform the duties of her ftation'j and, while (lie fits innocently milking her cow. Sweetly Warbles forth Some fimple d tty. Perhaps too, the blooming Collinj the obje^ of her tendereft affection, beguiles the toils and fatigues’of the day, by kindly partaking in them; Compare this I'fe^ with that ofa belle. Ambitioni envy, jealoufy,-and pride, alternately'take peffcffion'of the fair-one’s breaft. If Ihe lives beyond the limits of her income,* oeco-nomy is'expelled by pride, and her happinefs is Sacrificed to it. If Ihe imagines her beauty will attach a DucaTCoroneti andthat Ihe may-one day ecliple the lovely D-utche's of Devonfhire ; if her affe6Uons are fixed pn an obje(5l whofe heart is-already engaged-—She flies from one public place to another,, in hopes of firiding that happinefs ftis
A* 5:,	iss
12
Laura and Augustus.
is in Search of ; feels herfelf disappointed j—returns home fatigued and jaded; and reverfes the order of Nature, by turning night into day. The head ach torments her; and iHeft a moment to herfdf, is rrioped to dpath. Before the age of th ipty her conftitution is broken; (he grows pee-vilh, and out of humour with herfelf and all the world; envies everyobje6t (he beholds, thinking they are poflefled of that jewel, fhc has So long and painfully been in Search of.
O bapp^nefs! our being’s end and aim f Good, pleafure, eaSe, content ! whate’er thy name ,
That Something ftii! which prompts th* eternal figh^
For which we dare to live, or dare to die ;
Which still fo near us, yet beyond us lies,
O’eriook’d, Seen double, by the fool, and wife*
Plant of celestial feed \ if dropt below.
Say in what mortal foil thou deign’lt to grow )
Por B*
I am called away, but will refume my pen on my return.
I was interrupted by a vifit from Mifs Sidney. You have heard, I fuppoSe, of the death of her two lifters The Sweet girl Seems much affli6Ied on the occafion. How fincerely are Sir Charles and Lady Sidney, to be pitied ! Though, indeed, If we may judge from Lady Sidney’s con-dufif, ftie muft have poflefled a very Small degree of maternal feelings, or could never have consigned Such delicate blofloms to the nouriftiing hands of ftrangrrs, to embrace infamy and Shame ! Gracious heaven ! what muft be the re-fle6Iions of that woman who breaks through every law, human and divine, to gratify an adulterous love 1 But as this fubje6l, my dear Laura t requires a more able pen than mine, to treat it with the Severity it fo juftly merits, I fhall bid it
adieu j
Laura and Augusipus.
^3
adieu.; and content mylelf with wilhing, that all happincfs may attend the filler oF my heart ; "and that file may ever entertain the fame lively friend-fhip for me in her breaft, which is implanted for her in that of
Cecilia Byng-
L E T TER III.
Grenada.
MISS LEVISON TO MISS BYNG.
CCORDING to proinlfe# my dear friend, I refume my pen, to attempt a defcription of where I have been, and what I have feen, fince my departure from your peaceful abode.
But I fear, Cecilia, however good my inclination niav be. In endeavouring to amufe the lei-fure hour of a beloved friend, I fliall fall far fliort of my wiflies. For thy Laura feels herfelf fo mccr a novice in the defcriptive art, that (he fears her pen may excite difgufi, inftead of giving that pleafure fhe would wilh to impart. However, in-fiead of offering any further apology, I will pro'-cecd.	'
In about a month after vtc failed from the AU Han coajiy we came within fight of the ifland of Maderia. To exprcfs my joy upon once more viewing land, after being fo long at the mercy of the waves, is almofl impofllble: my heart dilated with pleafure, when a failor from the top-maft announced the fight of land. So extravagant M^as my joy, I could have hugged the honefl tar for his intelligence ; and gave him a dollar to drink my health on landing. Quite elated, i
defcended
14
Laura and Augustus.
/ • > descended to my cabin toadjuft my attire ; which
important point was Scarcely finiflied, when the gentlemen came down to inform us, that a boat was arrived along-fide the fliip to convey us on Shore. Quickly was I on deck; but, gracious heaven, what were my fenfations, when, on looking into the boat that was to convey us, I beheld three or four Portuguefe felbws more than half naked! In an inftant my neck and face were fiiffufed with blufhes; trembling, I fcarce knew which way to turn my eyes j fearful of venturing myfelf near fuch monfters in appearance. Figure to yourfelf, my friend, my perplexity at that moment. But here my terror was not to ceafe; for, to my great amazement and dread, we had fcarce proceeded ten yards before two or three huge oxen were brought, and faftened to the boat with chains, to drag us out of the fea upon the bay; the fiuf in that ifland running fo exceeding high, that without the friendly afliflance of thefe cattle, you would be continually driven back.
The agitation my Spirits had experienced rrearly exhaufted my Ilrength ; fo that, on landing, my feet almofl: refufed their accuflomed aid ; and I Ihould doubtlefs have made but a {fumbling piece of work of it, had 1 not accepted, the proffered arm of Mr. Fanburg.
This gentleman, who Seemed pofTeffed of the greateft humanity, kindly endeavoured to Support my drooping Spirits, by offering me every GonSolation in his power. Thus fituated, ! could not help: regretting my departure from good Old England j wifhing mySelf once more in the peaceful regions of Queen Square, Safely lodged under the prote61ing care of my indulgent friends, the
Mrs., S: ...’"-nsh But my defire being vain,
recoi-
Laura and Augustus.
15
rceolIeSIion told me it was prudent to fubmit with patience.
We were condufted to the houfe of Mr. Man-fel, a merchant, whofe pohtenefs and hofpitality were eminently confpicuous. His manlion is Spacious and handfome $ and his manner of living corresponds with his fortune, which is immenfe. During our ftay at this houfe, there was a con-ftant fucceffion of company. Our parties con* lifted entirely of gentlemen ; for there are very few European ladies refidents upon thi» ifland,. which is a eircumftance that aftonilhes me much as not only the climate is- delightful-, but their mode of living very Sumptuous.
The trade of this place, you know, confifts> moftly in wines, it abounding in vintages. But the Soil'is So excefllve luxuriant^ that it yields nor only the produce of the weftern clime, but aIfo> thofe of Europe; The only inconvenience, in* my opinion, attending the ladies of this town,, is the badnefs of the ftreets f which, being paved-with Small rough pebbles-, renders walking,, though not impra6ticable, very unpIeaSant. the country, which is a paradife of Sweets, amply compensates the above disadvantage. The hedges are formed- of roSes, mirtle, and dtron, which-here grow- wild, planted by the hand of Nature. Fruits of all kind are in the greateft profufion,, especially peaches- and 'ftrawberriesgrapes, I> need not name.. The onions of this ifland' are remarkably fine, and-grow to a prodigious fize-;, they are, I believe, frequently imported to England for Sale,- as well as prefents.
The natives of this Sweet Spot are PbrtugueSe a* Set of people; to me, the moft difgufting; they are the fi.lthieft.-looking beings eyes ever beheld
. theirr

o ^
i6
Laura and Augustus.
their mode of drefs the mofl: uncouth. The men never walk out without great-coats, though the weather is fufFocating; and fwords, though the/ apprehend no danger. And cuftoin has fo ordered it, that an Englilhman cannot l^ir without taking his fword as his companion.
The women of this country are in general very plain, their complexions remarkably fallow, and their drefs very Angular, not at all calculated to prejudice one in their favour. I do not remember ever to'have feen one Portuguefe female out of mourning fince my arrival in this part of the world. A black crape gown and petticoat, with the Ikirt of the former drawn over the head, fo that no part of the face is to be feen excepting the tip of the nofe, is their ufual habiliment^ in which attire they parade the ftreets, and fit in their churches. How they decorate themfelvcs when at home, 1 cannot fay; but this is certain,, their appearance abroad is truly forbidding.
Their cathedrals may be juftiy ftyled magnificent. One morning as Mr. Manfel, Mr. Fan-burg, and myfelf, were amufing ourfelves with viewing the different buildings in the town, observing one of the churches open, we in'Iantly made up to it, and on entering, found it was their hour of worfhip. The women, who were all feated on the ground, on our entering fet up a tittering, which furprifed me not a little, as it expreffed an indecent levity, which I fhould have thought the place they were then in, and the ftri-St lefs of their religious duties forbad We had fcarce entered the ayle of this beautiful edifice, before a man came up and addreiTed us in the Portutruefe language; when imagining 1 had
n imagining committed fome error, I immediately quitted the
placev
Laura and Augustus.
17
place. But upon enquiring of the gentlemen what the man faid, was told they never remembered the governor to have behaved with fo much politenefs to any ftranger before ; for that Mon-fieur le Gouverneur had Sent his compliments to la dame Anglaife, and that as no perlon was admitted to approach with their heads covered, if fhe would do them the honour to take off her hat, and bow her knee to the Bleffed Virgin as Ihe afcended up the ayle, her company would be ef-teemed a favour. Upon this polite invitation,
I refolvcd not to be out-done in the etiquette of good breeding, and indeed looked upon it as a compliment due to the governour’s civility.: though my hair was not a little derange, 1 pulled off my hat, and re-entered, boWing my knee all the way, till I arrived at the altar, to the no Small diverfion of the female fpe<£lators. After kneeling to the Virgin Mary and bowing, I rofe up, courtefied to the governor, and withdrew much pleaded at having got rid of fiJch an auk-ward pi ce of bufinefs.
Their funeral rites are lingular and Solemn f and having Seen an infant’s, will give you a description of the ceremony. The child was laid in a coffin made of pafte-board covered with Crimfon velvet, bound with gold lace. The lid of the coffin was thrown open, and discovered the babe ftrewed with the choiceft floweis. Six priefts attended, with about fifty little boys dref-fed in white Surplices, bearing in their hands wax tapers, and chanting in the moll heavenly measure; the mourners followed. By this proceffiom was the little innocent condu6fed to the ground, where, when it arrived, it was taken out of the-coffin and laid in tb-j earth ; which laft ceremonv
fliocked'i
18
LaiJRA AND’ AuGUS^TOS.
fhx)cked me greatly (as it would any other Euro-pean) whole mind was not familiarifed to this mode of interment.
A few days after the above ?cene, I was wit-nefs to one which far furpaffcd any thing your imagination can* form, or fo indifferent a pen as mine paint. It was one of their grand feliivals, called Saint Clara’s day ; we were told that every convent would be thrown open,- as well- as their cathedrals, our party therefore determined to fally forth,, and Satisfy their curioffty J we vilited their different churches, as on that day grarsd maSs is held; from mafs the pricfts, and two or three hundred little boys, marched two and two, as in the lolemnization of the before-mentioned' burial, accompanied by all ranks in the fdme order, chanting, and kneeling every ten yards as they proceeded The nuns at the different-convents ffood ranged with Small balkets of flowers in their hands* confifting of roles, jafmine, and; full blown myrtle,, with which they Are wed the priefts as they entered; none but them being permitted to go within the gates. However having followed the pmceflion pretty clofely, we did not efcape their odoriferous favours. The ftreets aifo-were Scattered with, the iweeteff: bloIToms. in ftort your ideas, ray dear Cecilia, muff: form but an imperfe^- pi^ure of the magnificence and beauty of this ceremony* My p. n is inadequate to the talk I have unde; taken. And my fingers are fo crampt, as to oblige me to lay it down.
Having contra6Ied an acquaintance with one ©f the nuns the day preceding my quitting Ma--deira, I received from her. as a piefent, a box ®£ candied citron,, a work bafket, and flowers oS
her
Laur
r®
her own workmanlhlp, with a letter containing the hiftory of her life. The fynunetry of her figure, and the melancholy imprinted on her languid countenance, claimed my attenfionr-when I firft beheld her, fhe was among the nunr-ber of thofe poor deluded wretches whom I meii-tioned as being ranged at the gates of their different convents to ftrew the prieds with flowersv. prepoffelSed in her favour from her amiable apv pearance, I refolved to take'an early opportunity of re-viliting the monadery in which flie was a captive. Accordingly, in a few days, I appeared at the grate, and defiring to- Tee fome of the gcw'gaws they ufually make for fale;' one of the nuns retired, and in a few moments returned,, accompanied by the identical' perfon I wifiied So much to fee. Having finifiied my purchafes, we entered into a eonveffation in the French language, which fhe fpoke with great elegance and proprietyv I could not avoid expreffing my fuf-prife, that one who feemed fo well qualified to fhine in the politeft circles, fhould prefer a cloifter. at fo early an age, thereby fecluding herfelf from the world, and all the joys of fociety ; looking at me, fhe fighed; then turned her head afido to wipe the falling tear. My heart was melted 1 it felt the foHeitude of a friend. At length, with , eyes overcharged, fhe articulated thefe v/ords: Alas! Madam, you fee before you one, whofe Sorrows admit of no palliative,—the greatefl bleffing I can hope for is death. To that happy period I look with anxious impatience, his the" only friend that can reflore my loft peace 1 Here my eyes could not withhold teftiying how much my heart commiferated her misfortunes. We
were
20
Laura and Augustus.
were interrupted by the prayer-bell Summoning her; but I have frequently vilited her fince, My feelings would not fulfer me to take a pcrfonal farewell of her ; therefore wrote a few lines bidding her adieu, and requefting her friendly remembrance of me in her prayers.
How fincerely, my Cecilia, do I pity thofe wretched females, whofe lot it is to Spend their bloom within the Solitary walls Wf a raonaftery ; baSely Secluded from all the joys of friendihip and a virtuous love 1 And Ihouid fate ever throw an objefl in her way worthy of her attention, after the irrecoverable vow had paiSed her lips, what muft be her mifery 1 deSpair, and Sharp repentance, muft be her fate."--—Ye Superflitious fair, could you but view the mifery which reigns within the dreary walls of a cloiller, fo many of you would not fo eagerly embrace the veil.
Gracious Heaven 1 defend me, and the friend of my heart, from So cruel a Hate 1 Merciful Father! look with an eye of pity on the SufFer-ings of the fair Eliza.
Alas! my love, I cannot proceed. The af-fll6l;ions of Eliza demand the Sacrifice of a few tears. The dear girl’s ftory accompanies this, which, if I do not Strangely deceive my Self, will draw a tear of Sympathy from your dove-like eyes. With tendereft willies for your happineSs, I Subscribe mySelf yours fincerely,
Laura Levis on.
LEt-

Laura and Augustus.
21
LETTER IV.
Madeira^ Convent of'
ELIZA TO MISS LEVISON.
‘C'NCOURAGED by your kind and flattering friendfhip, and impelled by motives of the lincerefl: efteem and affe6lion for one fo truly amiable, I take up my pen to aflTure you, my; fweet fympathetic friend, how Severely I (hall feel the lofs of your condoling converfation. Your company has been the only Solace my aIfii6Hons have received, fince my refidence in thefe gloomy cells. Your humanity in devoting fo much of your time to fo melancholy an obje<£t deferves a no lefs grateful return.
Often has Mifs Levifon hinted her wifli to know what had plunged me into my prefent me* lancholy, and driven me from the commerce of mankind. She Ihall be gratified; and what my tongue refufed to utter, my pen Ihall truly delineate. This paper Ihall rranfmit a faithful account of the Source of all my griefs. „ I already feel the pangs I Ihall endure, in reciting my mif-fortunes. But his a facrifice due to your generous fricndihip. Perhaps too my fins are fuch that require many tears as an atonement.
/
’Tis grief, pure grief, that does my tears excite,
And real Sorrow does each line indite*
Forgive me, my fweet friend, my tardinefs; thought wanders up and down. Indeed a re-trofpe^ioti fo agitates me, that I snufl: lay down
niy

22 Laura and Augustus.
my pen, but will refume it when more cUnr* pofed.
Tears have relieved me; therefore I will without further digreffion proceed.
Fontainbieau was the place of my birth, and in giving me life my unfortunate mother expired. She was a native of Italy. I was educated at the ^nvent of the Noble’Be' in Paris, and-' received every advantage which the attendance of the molt renowned mafters could give. At the age of fix-teen I quitted my retirement, and refided with Madame la ComtefSe de Davenport; a lady pof-fefled of all thofe amiable accomplifhments which add dignity to Tank, and heightenThe luflre of the mod exalted dation. To her care was I con--figned by my dying parent. This lady had been-the friend and companion of my mother’s childhood. But oh marrying Monfieur le Comte de Davenport fhe quitted Italy, and refided at Fon-tainblcau. The friend's for fome time kept up h regular correfpondence, till my mother, for what reafon was then unknown, dropped all inter-courfe with the amiable ComtefSe. Chance, however, brought about a meeting (though a fhock-ing one) between the friends.
As Madame de Davenport was one day walking by a fmall retired wood<, near Fontainbieau, Ihe efpyed a pretty cottage at a little diflance. The neatnefs of the building tempted her to enter, the internal elegance and fimplicity of which amazed her; for a few moments, fhe was loft in wonder and aftonifliment. But the piercing cry of anguifti moving her attention, fhe followed the impulfe of humanity, and entering the chamber from whence the voice proceeded, beheld a lady in the pangs of child-birth, fhe approached to
tender
% *
Laura and Augustus.
23
what
tender her Services.’ But, good heavens ! words can exprefs her amazement and horror, at beholding in the diftreffed female her loft friend Adelaide. She Screamed, and fainted ; her Scream attra6l:ed the attention of my mother, who, on recognifing her, was no lefs agitated than pleafed. The Sudden SurpriSe, however, haftened her pains, and before the Comtefle was well recovered of her fit, I wai prefented to the world; my unhappy parent had but juft power to recommend me to the proteQiion of her friend, before death cloSed her eyes. My beloved guardian, who had ever Selt-the tendereft affe6Hon for my ill-fated mother, fincerely lamented her untimely death ; and, by her outward garb, paid that compliment to her memory which Ihe judged their former friendftiip demanded.
From that memorable day, until I had reached my eleventh year, I conftantly refided under the fame roof with ray noble benefa^reSs : at which period, the Compte took a whim into his head of vifiting Europe, which obliged my generous friend to place me at the before-mentioned mo-naftery, where I remained till I arrived at an age proper to be introduced into life.
Happy period ! bleft moments of innocence 1 ah, whither are ye fled ! Why did I quit the calm retirement of a oloifter ? the innocent conversation of Veftals, to mix in the gay and noify world ; a world made up of Sorrow, pain, and disappointment ? Why did not one grave receive the wretched child with her unfortunate parent ? Why was I left to contend with the ftorms of ad-verSe fate ? Alas, I rave.—-Pardon, heaven I none Ihould preSume to arraign thy providence ;
buj:
,• /
24
Laura and Augustus.
but with fubmiflion bow their knees to tby alh wife decrees. ■ ■
My highly-valued friend the Comtefle transferred the tendernefs fhe bore my dear departed mother to her helplefs orphan ; and made it her ftudy to drive from my mind all thoughts concerning the myftery of my birth: young and thoughtlefs, and furrounded by flatterers, flie found that no difficult talk. A twelvemonth was paflTed in uninterrupted fcenes of joy and feftivity. The Comte and ComptelTe having no children, and fliewing a great partiality for me, it was generally believed I fhould be their heir, which drew about me many admirers ; feveral of whom made their application to the ComtelTe. But as my heart felt no prepoiTeffion in favour of any particular objefl, 1 requefted her Ladylhip not to prefs me upon fo difagreeable a fubjeft ; aflairing her ray fituation under her prote6tion was fo per-feflly agreeaible to my wilhes, that I was appre-henfive, after having fo long been accullomed to her tender indulgence, my difpofition might refifl: the tyranny of a hufband.
A few days after the above difcourfe, the good-natured ComteflTe entered my dreffing-room, and, laughing, faid. Ah, Maderaoifelle, we have an Englifli nobleman to take foupe with us today, that will, I guefs, put all your boafted indifference to the ted : but however, my lovely child, do not defpair; who knows what effe^ your innocent fmiles and dimpled cheeks may have upon him ?
I knew not how it was, my fweet friend, but certainly that day I took uncommon pains in decorating the few charms Nature has beftowcd up-<on me.; and if my glafs deferved confidence, I
never
Laura ^and Augustus.
2$
never appeared to greater: advantage, I. entered the-room in which the company were aflembled with a heart! palpitating with expeflatio'n.' The Gomte looked at me with a fignificant glance; Spread his hand upon his breaft, and heaved a ligh. I felt the force of his meaning, and, mortified at being discovered to poffefs fo large a Ihare of vanity, I blulhed. At that inftant a domeftic announced the Marquis of C-————. The Comte having introduced his Lordihip to the Comtefle, prefented me to him as his adopted daughter. Never did I feelmyfelf So embarralTed as at that moment; and it was confiderably augmented by the archnefs of Monfieur’s looks. When dinner was Served, it was with difficulty I performed the trifling etiquettes of the table. Indeed the amiable Englilhman engroflhd my whole attention, while the Comte increafed ray auk-wardneSs not a little, by enquiring Several times if I felt mySelf indifpofed; it availed nothing aS-furing him of my health. At length, to my great fatisfaflion, the carriages arrived that were to convey us to the opera. This afforded me Some relief, as it took off the attention of the Comte, who Seemed determined to make me fuf-fer for my former indifference.
I fear I tire you, my charming friend, in being So circumflantial, but rely on your goodnefs for pardon. I feel a dawn of happinefs in retracing the firfl: interviews I had with my beloved William. From that day the Marquis became a conftant vifitor. He attended me to every place of polite refort;.-was my conflant partner at affemblies; we Seemed to live but in the prefence of each other. He ktiew my myfterious birth, and the dependant ftate I was inj but they made no impreffion on
X	n?7
S6
Laura and Augustus*
my generous lover; his heart was Superior to Such fordid, narrow Sentiments. Our love was pure and difinterefted; our Souls appeared formed for each other. On our firft interview, our minds Secretly acknowledged its counterpart.
Three months were palTed in the mutual exchange of love, when the Marquia, impatient to make me his by the tendereft tie, wrote to his father, not in the leaft doubting his concurrence, as no objeflion could be made to fortune, my kind benefactors declaring their noble deligns in my favour.
At length the wiIhed-fo<r anSwer arrived: but, good Heavens, what words can paint my feelings ©n receiving the letter from the hands of the ComteiSe inftead-of my amiable lover ! My friend informed me, that the Marquis was a little indiS-pofed, and could not wait upon me himSelf, but that the Comte was gone to vifit him. At that in-ftant my heart foreboded my misfortune, and with trembling hands I opened the rSatal letter .: on reading which I fainted.
The Duke declared his disapprobation of his Son’s marrying a foreigner; and at the fame time he defired his immediate return to England, informing him he had engaged his hand to an heireSs of immenfe poITeffions, and a noble birth: and as a mark of his duty, commanded him to give up all further connexions with me.
That day and night tears and lamentations were my companions. The next morning my lover appeared; but, O heavens, how changed ! No longer the bloom of health fat on his countenance. Pale and dejeCled he entered my dref-iing-room. I arofe, and, alTuming all the fortitude .I was raiftr.efs oh requefted him to be Seated :
Laura and Augustu*.
•
2t
ed ; I told him, fince we muft part, I begged this might be our lafl: interview: as my attachment to him was too fincere, to wifli him to deviate from the paths rigid duty had chalked out for him. I defired him to root me from his memory, and to obey his Grace, by giving his hand to my fortunate rival j and entreated him to deftroy the little portrait of me (which he conftantly wore hung next his heart) as it could but ferve to cncrcafe his affliction, and might be a means of creating jealous doubts in the bread: of his future lady, Ihould flie ever chance to fee it. Thefe requefts, I confefs, cod my heart the fevered pangs; nor were they made without many interruptions. At the lad words, my tears would no longer be re-drained. The Marquis threw himfelf at my feet, and with every kind expreffion which the tendered love could dictate, tried to footh my grief, though at the fame time he himfelf dood in as great need of confolation.
He preded me to receive his hand before he quitted France : fwore no power on earth fliould force him to marry any other woman but my-felf. This requed I peremptorily refufed. At lad it was concluded, that, indead of returning to England as he had purpofed, he diould write to the Duke, and inform him of his averfion to the match his Grace had mentioned ; and his determination of never quitting France until holy laws had made me his. This letter was accompanied with another from the Comte de Davenport, offering the mod generous terms which his friend-fliip and affeCIion for me could diCIate. Thefe cpidles were anfwered by a polite refufal to the Comte, and a peremtory denial to his fon. He alfo informed the Marquis, that he iliould fet out
VoL. I.	B	iuiraedi-
2.8
Laura and Augustus.

Immediately for Paris, and expelled to be with him pretty near as Soon as his letters.
My amiable William upon this claimed my promife ; and, not imagining I ihould a£l in the leaft derogatory to the delicacy of my Sex, as haying the Sanction of my noble bencfaflors, I yielded him my confeiit. It was agreed that my lover Ihould immediately apply to the Englilh ambalTador’s chaplain, with whom he was upon intimate terras; and that, left the Duke Ihould arrive as foon as he had predi^ed, the ceremony Ihould be performed the following morning. Fa*
tal morning ! myfterious Heaven ! i can no
more, alas ! my heart is burfting.
,1 have Jknelt; I have prayed the blelTed Virgin to give .me fortitude to proceed in my horrid tale. The ..clergyman was .pronouncing his laft bene-di^iom when in rulhed a man with dilhevelled hair, and all the horrors of defpair and anguilh painted in his countenance: It was the Duke. My hulband feized my hand ; we knelt; he clafped the knees of his father ; he begged his fprgivenefshe implored jhis blefling. But the unhappy parent was incapable of a reply,; he fat like one ftupified. At length he articulated thefe few words ■ ■■■-■■Both—-both my children
andthe name offijier died upon his tongue. Nature was exhaufted^ he fainted. My hulband ran >to Support his venerable parent. The agitation of my Spirits threw me into hyfterics;: my William was almoft diftraffed,. Turn either fide, lie beheld the twodeareft perfons to him on earth, in the moft diftrefled ftate. The Duke was conveyed to bed,; and, on recovering his Senfes, defired pen and ink to be brought hini, when,
;fup-
i
Lactra and Augustus.
20
i
fttpported by pillows, he wrote the following letter;
To the Right Hon. Marquis of C
AS I feel the fands of life are running low, my beloved fon, and as it is uncertain how long k may pleafe the Almighty to prolong my days, I mull: endeavour, while I am able, to render you all the reparation that lies in the power of thy wretched father; and however painful and mortifying the recital of my guilt rauft be, yet it is the only method left me to fave you from inevitable deftru^Iion ; therefore, without repining, will perform the talk. My marriage with your mother C , was a match of intereft, not of love. You, my fon, was the only fruit of this union. About two years after your birth, I quitted England with a defign of vifiting feme of the foreign courts. The Dutchefs propofed accompanying me j but as her Grace, though an amiable woman, never poirelfed my love, I made fome frivolous excufe ; and Ihe being of a mild pacific difpofition, Suffered me to depart without her. To my fliame, I mufl confefs, I made this excellent woman the worft of hufbands. On my leaving England I vifited France, and proceeded to Italy, where I became acquainted with the daughter of a nobleman of that place, her name was Adelaide. We conceived a mutual partiality for each other, and for fome time carried on the tenderefl: correspondence. At length the bufy tongue of Fame informed her of the duplicity of my condufl: fhe being affured that I was already united to an amiable and deferving woman in mv native country.
B 2	Thi
o
Laura and AucusTuis.
The next time I vifited her at her convent, fhe related to me the above intelligence. At firft I attempted to treat it as a groundless report, raifed by Some wretch who envied my happinefs. But the Sweet maid was not to be duped by So evafivc an anfwer: and Soon reading in my countenance the truth I wilhed to conceal, forbad my future attendance at the grate. But to keep you, my Son, no longer in fufpenfe. Suffice it to fay, love got the maftery of prudence. I Swore to aban* don my friends and country; and as our flay in Italy would be madnefs, to make France the place of my refidence. Heaven was called to witneSs, that I Ihould ever look upon her as my lawful wifej and that it Ihould be the whole ftu« dy of my life to make her forget thoSe advantages Ihe had for my fake renounced ; that every art Ihould be ufed to make her retirement Sweet; and that every Succeeding day in her charming Society would bring forth an increaSe of felicity, though even in a defert. I exhaufted all the eloquence of love, in prefling the lovely maid to elope ; and was So SucceSsful, that in lefs than a month we were fettled at a pretty neat cottage near Fontainbleau. In this beautiful receSs we lived for fix months; at length, weary of Solitude, which by no means Suited my dilpofition, being naturally of a gay, roving, turn of mind, and cloyed by poflTeffion, determined, villain as I was, to abandon the gentle Adelaide ; leaving her mif-trefs of valuables to a confiderable amount, and of the habitation we then lived in, which I had
.r	^
before prefented to her. At this period the unfortunate girl was far advanced in her pregnancy; nevertheless, my heart was rendered So callous by frequent SedufiUon, that humanity was baniftied,
and,
Laura and Augustus.
31
and, like a true libertine, was So ungenerous as to conclude, that any other fool would be as welcome as myfelf, what little partiality might remain, or recolleflion obtrude, diflipation very Soon obliterated.
About twelve months after my return to England, your mother failing into a decline was ordered to the South of France. As I accompanied-her, on my arrival in that kingdom, curiofity led me to fend my valet to Fontainbleau, to enquire after the fair Italian. On his return, he informed me, that the lady h'ad died in child-' bed, and that the ComteiSe de Davenport had taken the little girl under her own /protedfion, and treated the infant with every mark of maternal tendernefs This fatisfied itiy feelings (if I had any) as I well remembered the friendfliip whicli had lubfilted between the amiable ComtefTe and Adelaide. And though all intercourse of letters had for Some time been dropped, owing to my machinations; yet had I fo great a reliance on the exalted Sentiments of that lady, that my bread harboured not the lead doubt of her tendernefs to the orphan of her departed friend.
Heaven alone can witnefs for me the remorfe I feel for my pad crimes ! and what adds to the poignancy of my grief, is the mifery into which my unpardonable folly has plunged my unfortunate children.
Had not Ihame tied my tongue, my lord, your flrd addrefs diould have been anfwcrcd by a full avowal of my guilt.,
But, gracious Heaven I when 1 confider that one moment’s delay would have funk thee, William, and thy wretched fider into infamy, and
B 3	the
32
Laura and Augustus.
the greateft gulph of mifery, I tremble at myfelf^, and reafon can with difficulty retain her feat.
O I my fon, my daughter, my beloved chib drcn, pardon thy repentant father. Do not xurfe his memory. And, O ! thou bleft fhade of my Adelaide 1 thou injured innocent, rife not in judgment againft thy bafe betrayer- Heaven will, I truft, in his great mercy receive my fin-cere contrition ! Nature is fpent; farewell, my children. The bleffing of thy dying repentant father attend ye.
L
A W
*
ELIZA TN CONTINUATION'.
T H E above letter, my dear Mifs Levifon, was not written without many interruptions}, the Shock my unhappy parent had received was too much for one at his advanced time of life. Nature funk under the blow, and a few hours ended his exigence.
As to myfclf, and my beloved William, we lay eight days bereft. of our fenfes. Happy interval 1 at that moment we felt not the horrors of our fituation. My unhappy brother was the firft who recovered the ufe of his reafon ; he infifted upon being conveyed into my apartment. The wretched youth vowed to watch the lafl: embers of expiring life in his beloved Eliza.—He fwore to follow me to the grave, that one tomb fhould unite us. In this diftraSed ftate did he remain, until at length it pleafed the Almighty Difpofer of events to reflore me to reafon, and a juft fenfe of my mifery On the firft dawn of recolleflion, I beheld my darling brother with the fondeft folicli-tude hanging over me, watching the extinction
or
Laura ai^d-'Augustus'.
33
GT renewal of life.——Buti‘good God! fo altered, the Ihadow only of His former Self, fuch wretched* Tiefs Teemed depifted in his once' blooming countenance,- that I was near rdapfing into my for* mer Hate of infenfibility ; but the carelSes of the dear youth foon brought nie to a jull: fenfe of mj unhappy fituation. And'when the idea, of inceft rulhed acrofs my mind ; I pufhed him- from me with the utmoft' horror! To paint'the looks of my difl:ra61:ed^William-at that inftant is- impoffi* ble! Pe rmit'me to,' draw a veil .over this hcart-riending feene, and^ for a” few moments to lay down my pen.
I am now more calm, and will therefore haf-ten, while able, to the conclufion of' my melancholy tale.’ ,	^	■
My kind benefa£lors infilled oh ah immediate feparationi To attempt a defeription of our parting would be'vaini' Your feeling heart will bell paint our mutual agony ! My beloved brother, recommending'his ilhfafed filler To their tender care and afre<51ion, departed for his native country, in a Hate of the moll poignant wfetch-ednefs.

The Comte and ComtefTe, thinking that any correspondence vrould but Serve to nourifli our grief," ftrenuoufly forbad any intercourfe whatever, until'time and abfence had rooted out that cruel paflion which predominated alike in both.
I pleaded hard with my friends for their permif-fion to retire to a monallery, there to hide my Sorrows from the prying world ; but in vain : my brother on his departure had made it his requeft> and had gained a Solemn promife from them, to ufe every art to keep me from fo great a Sacrifice, as my beloved William ftyled it,
B 4	For
34
Laura and Augustus.
For two months I dragged on a wretched eir* jftence at Montpelier, to which place my more than parents had removed me for the benefit of the air; as I was declared to be far gone in a decline. Alas ! where is that medicine to be found that can cure a wounded mind ! The air has no cffefil: upon a broken heart. However, my generous guardians, wilhing to try every means to fave my miserable life, called a confultation of phyficians, who gave it as their opinion that the laft recourfe which they had left was a voyage to Some of the Weft India Settlements.
My friends, anxious for my recovery, determined to fend me to Madeira, having a relation fettled in that place. They would have accompanied me thcmfclvcs, but the amiable Comtefle was afflicted with a diforder, which a fea voyage would have rendered fatal. Our parting was mournful. But I had furvived a ftill more cruel
——■gracious
Separation. O ! my brother, my———
Heaven, pardon thy weak Servant!
A woman who had been my nurfe and her hulband were my attendants. We arrived after a prosperous voyage at the houSe of Monfieur Fontaine, whoSe family received me with the ut-moft tenderneSs; I tried to make Madame Fontaine, Sensible of the neceflity there was of my taking the veil; and, as that lady was one of thofe who are bigoted to their religion, eafily fuc-ceeded.
She declared, that She looked upon my misfortunes to have been a call from Heaven; that, by thus Sacrificing the world to God, I ftiould by that means waffl out the offences of my unfortunate mother. As to my father, he was a heretic* I miift confefs, the freedom ftie ufed in Speaking of
my
Lavra and Atrcostus.
35
my unfortunate parents made me So unhappy, that I mourned their misfortunes in private,;and Ihed a torrent of tears to their memory.
About a month after I had refided at Monfieur Fontaine’s, I found means to elude the vigilance of my nurfe, and with the affiftance of Madame Fontaine entered this retreat; where I wait with patience for that happy moment which will free me from a load of mifery. I feel, I have not long to remain a burden in this life. The image of my ill-fated brother is ever prefent to my mind; and what is become of the unfortunate youth. Heaven only knows 1
The only wifh I have now remaining, is, that my wretched body may be conveyed to Bjuiiope, and laid in that vault which will receive fKe re* mains of my dear William. To this purpole I have written to my affe61:ionate friend the Com-tefle, and truft, this my laft requeft will be fulfilled. I am now worfe than I have yet been; my flrength is nearly fpent; exhaufted nature cannot hold out much longer. I feel the vital fpark expiring ; a little longer, and I fhall be qo more.
Adieu, my charming friend; permit my memory to retain a place in your heart ; and that Providence may Iliower down his choicefl: blef-fings on your head, and keep you in his watchful care, is the fervent prayer of the unfortunate—————
Eliza.
E 5
LET

3«
Laura and Augustus
LETTER
V.
Grenada,
MISS. LEVISON TO MISS BYNG.,
H E day after my receiving the- unfortunate Eliza’s packet, I failed from, that delightful fpot. But, before my departure,, intreated Mifs Solley, a young lady of Maderia, to- feize every opportunity to inform me of the health of the fweet Sufferer, which file has promifed to do. We arrived at the end of our perigrinations on the firfl; of September, and landed without any of thofe terrors I had encountered- at the before* mentioned ifland.
dufted
We were immediately con-horfe-back to my father’s eftate, attended by a number of gentlemen,, inhabitants of this place,, who came on board to-compliment us. The flaves, having received intelligence of our arrival, had aflembled themfelves at the dwell!ng-houfe, to- welcome our return. Their delight at beholding their young Milfey (as they ftyle me) was great. As for my part, I had not the leaft recolleftion of any of them, having left the WeftTndies at four years of age.
Figure to yourfelf between two and three hundred black men and women, gathered together, about your friend, and expreffing the mofl; extra vagant joy, which their faithful bofoms could didate.
I really
Laura and Augustus.
37
I really was loft in amazement^ and was heartily glad when I was releafed from fo Babylonian a noife, as it was late before this ceremony was ended. I foon retired to my chamber, and being fatigued with the hurry of the day, my fen* fes were quickly fteeped in forgetfulnefs.
The next morning my fight was enchanted with the beauties of the furrounding profpefl:. The houfe ftands upon the fummit of a hill; at the back of the dwelling you command a moft extenfive view of the towns called Marque and La Baye, with all the Ihipping. In the front gallery you behold the greateft variety of wood and water you can imagine; with a number of gentlemen’s plantations fcattered about.
The fruits of this ifland are very fine, and -in great abundance, and grow in general fpontane* ous. Every kind of live flock we have in the utmoft plenty; beef and veal excepted, which is Seldom to be met with,'unlefs a proprietor kills them upon his own eftate, and then a joint of * either is efleemeda genteel prefent. '
T'he people are hofpitable to a folly, and live in a very Superfluous flyle; indeed, they in general keep up an appearance far beyond their income ; * therefore (what with'the lofs of negroes,'Cattle, • bad crops and their own extravagance) frequently the wealthiefl planters in a few years are reduced to a perfe6l: flate of indigence.
We have feveral agreeable .Drench families' amung us,- which ! efleem a very great acquifiti-on, as there are very few'European women fettled here; T cannot flyle them ' ladies, for they are in*general (one or two excepted) the vefafe of* Englaind, Scotland, and Ireland. ^

Laura and Augustus.
^tVe are the only Englifh family that vifit among the French; I like their Society much, they are a lively, good natured, generous people, and make it their lludy to oblige and entertain you. Sincerity I never trouble my head about, it is not their chara6teriftic; and indeed deceit is a coin So current among all ranks of men, that they who flatter themfelves with finding a friend in every acquaintance, may reft alTured that they ■will, like poor David Simple, be moft woefully disappointed. For my own part, I behold hypo-crify dealt with fo lavifti a hand from one to another, after the warmeft profeflions of efteem and regard, that ’tis with difficulty I refrain from laughing, when the fame profufion of words are offered to me: the fmile that plays on my countenance, upon thefe occafions is ufually conftrued as the effufions of gratitude, and an acceptance of their proffered friendftiip; while in my heart, I moft cordially difpife the Speaker. For how few are there in the world, that know the juft etymo' logy of the word friendftiip 1 methinks his a word that conveys fo extenfive a meaning, that there are few hearts capable oif defining it.
A generous friendfliip no cold medium knows^
Burns with one love, with one refentment glows :
One (hould their paffions, one their interest be^
My friend must hate the man who injures me.
Gat.
You, my Cecilia, have a mind replete with all thoSe noble and generous Sentiments, and a heart fufceptible of all thoSe delicate and refined feelings which are So great an ornament to human nature, and which alone can render friend-ftiip permanent.
But
Laura and Augustus.
39
But I muft now draw this fcrawl to a conclu-Iion, or Ihall far exceed the limits of a letter, and my packet is already Swelled to a mod: enormous nze : a velTel is juft coming in, therefore will not feal this, till I know whether there is any letter from my friend.
I have received yours as expe6Ied, my Sweet girl, and was highly delighted with your description of Lady Charlotte Bruce; file is a good-natured creature, and I believe poITefles a good heart; though her extreme giddinefs, and turn for fatire, has created a doubt of that in the bread: of many. Make my compliments and bed: wifli es to her, and tell her that I fincerely hope the Solemnity of matrimony may not have too powerful an effe6t upon her Spirits.
You know not, my dear Cecilia, how tenderly I Sympathise with poor Harriot Sidney; indeed I love her, file was ever of an amiable, mild dlfpofition, and the lituation of her mother muft Severely afflidl a girl of her quick fenfibility. But really divorces are now grown fo frequent, that I expe61: fiiortly to fee marriage totally abolifii-ed. I wHh there could be Some punilhment invented for adultery, fo as to render infidelity lefs common: methinks not only the women but the men fiiould be puniftied, for the fault in general originates with them. Would that our legislative power would take this hint Into confideration ! But as their fex is (as I have already faid) the primitive caufe of the difaffedlion of the poor females to their lords and maders, how can I be weak enough to imagine, that they will dudy the good of pofterity in defiance to felf-intereft; But whither am I wandering to? diving, the men
will
40
Laura and Augustus’.
■wil} fay, beyond the depth of a feminine pen: I will therefore with fubmiffion, confefs my pre=* fumption, and: be content in fubfcribing myfelf, your finccre and affectionate friend,
Laura Levison.
Pi S. A letter is juft brought me from Mifs Sol-ley; ’tis enclofcd for your pcrufal. You will there fee that the ill-fated Eliza is no more.
L.D T T E R Vi;
Madeira.^
MISS SOLLEY To' MISS LEVISON,.
EMBRACE this opportunity, my dear Madam, of fulfilling the promife I.- made you at parting^ and wilh it were- in'ray power to lend you more pleafing intelligence. I'have called fe-veral times fince your departure ar the convent of	.—, to enquire after the- unfortunate
lady you mentioned.- A-fight of. her-Inever was able to gain, as: I was informed by one of the fifterhood, that (he had been confined to her cell for Some time, and that they did not expe6t fhe could hold out many days longer, for-that her ftrength (eemed> entirely gone,, and . her infide wafted awayi
Xhi-s
>•

Laura and Augustus.
4T
This anfwer was all the Satisfaction I could gain to my repeated enquiries. About a fortnight ago I again vifited the grate, in hopes of hearing: a more favourable account of the unhappy lady. A nun appeared ;■ (he Seemed to have been weeping. I named Eliza, and the tears ftreamed afrefh ; I reiterated ray enquiries; Ihe anfwered' with a figh, “-She was no more ; that her forrows-were now lodged within the cold'and lilent bofomi of the grave.———She died,” continued fhe, ** as-Ihe had lived, perfectly refigned. Sifter Eliza, had refided among us a very Short time ; but her exemplary conduCt, her mild, and Sweet difpofi-tion, her zealous and,fervent devotion, had ac* quired her the prayers and love of our whole fiS-terhood. She expired lajft night without a groan. Not a dry eye was to be Seen within our wallsi. Never was Suffering angel more lamented.”
I have fince heard, my dear MiSs LeviSon, that' intereft has been made by Some friends of the de-ceafed, to have the body preServed,, and Sent, to Europe,, there to be interred.;
1 have now, my dear madam;, obeyed your commands, and my own wifties,. in giving you every information that lay in my power to procure, and am mortified my intelligence is of So melancholy a naturebut as the young lady’s Sorrows admitted; of no alleviation, deathi muft have been a welcome relief. The fair Eliza might' juftly.be ftyled “-The childiof-Sorrow,■ baptized'
in. tears.”.."Believe me,, madam, though I had
not the pleaSure of the unfortunate lady’s confix dence, yet do I fineerely lament her untimely fate: youth, beauty, innocence, and'truth', cut off in the full pride of years. Alas, what muft
her
4^
Laura and Augustus.
her unhappy brother feel! Wretched youth, thy fate is truly deplorable! The grave* in thy fitur ation, muft be the moll welcome afylum. My heart, my dear Mifs Levifon, bleeds for the unhappy amiable Marquis. I fit and ruminate for hours on the fate of this ill-fated pair, till my Spirits are fo deje6Ied, that I am rendered incapable of enjoying the Sweets of fociety. At this moment I feel the tear of Sympathy fteal down my cheek j and left the melancholy which falls from my quill Ihould increafe your anguilh, I fliall take my leave, with wiftiing you every hap-pinefs which this mortal ftate will admit, and fubfcribe myfelf with the warmeft efteem for your many amiable virtues, my dear Mifs Levi-fon’s fincere well-wiflier,
Caroline Solley,.
J
\

LET.
Laura and Augustus.
4S
.•X
LETTER VII.
Grenadum
MISS LEVISON TO MISS BYNG.
O T E A L I N G from the noife and buftic of
^ company, Laura flies to the bofom of friend-fhip. Yes, my Cecilia, this epiflolary converfe is my greatefl comfort: the continual rounds of company in which I am engaged ill fuit with one of my retired, thoughtSu! turn of mind.
Our houfe fwarms with vifitors; I can fcarcc find time for a moment’s refle£fion ; iheir conver-fation fatigues me. I was necefSitated to excufe iny abfence from the card-table, by complaining of the head-ach.
The ferenity of the evening is delightful; all Nature fmiles around. I am now fitting upon a large (lone at the top of a gentle rifing hill; and, for a table, fubftitute my knee. My feat is on one fide furrounded by fugar-canes, and on the other by a hedge, formed of lime, orange, and pomegranate. The wild melody of Nature’s forefters, the gentle cooing of the dove, with the prattling of a beautiful cafeade, lulls my foul into a kind of heavenly tranquility.
This fweet fpot I have given the name of Orange Grove and mean to have a little building ere<9:ed here, where I defign placing my piano forte, library, drawing and writing utenfils; which charming retirement fhall be appropriated Solely to my own ufe j for none fiiall be admitted
whofe
44
Laura and Au'GUSTu'Si
•whofc fouls are not congenial with tny own. Here will I dedicate many hours to improvement j and'y
thinking on the virtues of my Cecilia, try to imitate them.
The appearance of a Mr. Montague interrupted me this afternoon ; he was at my elbow before'
I was aware.------What, xyritiirg, my charming
Mifs Le vifon ! What happy fubjefl: employs your pen? But I fear I intrude.———Not at all, Sir^ and he feated himfelf at my feet. I was only Scribbling to a friend, and IHe may thank you for this interruption; as my fcrawl would^have proved but flupid : for my thoughts run rather on the
melancholy ftrain to-day.....Perhaps Mifs Le-
vifon, (and he took my hand. He paufed,) perhaps what, Mr. Montague,——I would have faid, Madam,"r-that perhaps your hearti hghs for Ibme amiable youth, whom the extenfive ocean
Separates from your view...——You have defined
right. Sir. My eyes ardently long to behold a Triend. whom, the fea divides;, but that friend is of jny own-fex-.
Happy woman, ta poflefs the efteem of fo ineftimamable a heart! how many would envy your fituationl This lady, my dear madam, mull have many rivals. Is there no happy man that Supplants her ? Surely your heart is formed for the more acute feelings of love ?' He fighed. You figh, Mr. Montague; I fear the little blind deity has created fome Small dillurbance in your own bofom ; as to myfelf, I defy his power.
But come. Sir, the company will wonder at our abfenee, we had as well return, ©n our entrance into the hall, we met my father, who having afked where I had been. Said, the ladies thought my abfenee Ilrange,. and feemed rather
-	difpleafed,
Laura and Augustus.
4'5^’
difpleafcd. I entered the drawing-room; the' company ralfied me on my fondnefs for Solitude,, and declared it as their opinion, that, were I not in love, I could not prefer the lonely grove to the more enlivening fnip-fnap fnorum; which game they were then playing. Mr>Bofwell, a feemittg good natured kind of man, came up to-' me with a puritanical gravity, and enquired* whether I had Seen Mr. Montague ; J replied, yes,, that I had Seen him in the hall, and obferved that he looked fad.—Alas, anfwered he, I knew not whether the defpairing Strephon had not leaped from yonder clifE—-Why truly Sir the Soldier is greatly indebted to you for your kind folicitude.. But h ere he comes } I will inform him of yota* friendfhip.—Montague, Bofwell has been under great apprehenfions upon your account, and has been making many enquiries after you. I told him-1 faw you this minute in the hall; now. Lieutenant,. pray account for your defertion of thi-s good company. He bowed.—your commands,. Mifs Levifon, I Ihall ever be happy to obey : the-card-table, I thought, might difpenfe with my attendance ; and as I felt an oppreffion on my ftomach, imagined a fliort walk might be of Service in-removing the pain.—And your walk. Sir, (faid Bofwell) was, I hope, of benefit to you. “ A ma foi Monfieur Bofwell returned Madame De Blondeau) la jeune homme a bien expliquer., Comment va la fante mon belle foldat.”—Better, thank you, my amiable advocate, faid Montague, killing her hand.—Etes vous las Monfieur ? —No, Madam, I did not walk, far; I have been enjoying the beauties of Nature in yonder grove.
•II fair fort beau, ^ ecs ombres font fort agre-ablcs ?—Enchaiitingly fo. Motague and I now
46
Laura and Augustus.
joyned in the game and played till fupper. After the cloth was removed (according to cuClorn) linging was propofed- I refufed for fome time ; at length I was prevailed upon, and warbled, “ Young Lubin was a Shepherd BoyS’ Mr.‘Montague, who has a moft melodious voice fung, “ Beneath a green fhade fat a lovely young fwain.” At one we retired to our Separate apartments; and, not finding the god of fleep favourable to my wilhcs, have refumed my pen.
You will naturally alk me, my friend, who th is fame hero is, who has So much cngroffcd my quill, and who dared v/ith impunity break in upon my retirement ; I v/ill in as few words as poflible inform you.
Auguftus Montague is the youngell; Son of a noble but reduced family. The whole extent of his fortune confifts in a lieutenancy. He is about two and twenty ; a little above the middle fize, and elegantly formed. His face cannot critically be ftyled beautiful ; but there is a namelefs Something that renders every thing he Says or does in-terefiing. His complexion is pale his eyes blue. Shaded with the fineft dark fringes I ever beheld; his eye-brows delicately arched, his teeth white and regular. In Short, my Cecilia, whoever converses with this deferving youth admire him, and cannot withold from him their friendihip. He deals imperceptibly upon their edeem. The whole regiment love him ; the Soldiers adore him r in diort, he is beloved by all who know him.
On reviewing what I have written, I apprehend, Cecilia, you will imagine this amiable man has gained an intered in my bread. But no, my Sweet girl; love is a paffion, I trud, that will ne^
ver invade the boSom of thy Laura. The miseries
Laura and Augustus.
Al
leries of the fair Eliza have fortified my heart againft the Ihafts of that little urchin Cupid. I efteem, I feel a friendlhip for Montague, but my heart is ftill ray own ; and therefore, my love, do not wrong me by fuipicions which I do not merit.
My mother is making great preparations againft Chriftmas ; my father having promifed a ball to the ladies. In ftiort for the next week, our houfc will be fo crouded, that I fear I fhall not be able to converfe with ray beloved friend for thefe ten days ; but this letter fliall be difpatched by the firft Ihip that fails for Europe.
Adieu, thou tender companion of my youth : may heaven blefs and preferve you, is the prayer of
Laura Levison
/1
L E T.
4S
Laura and Augustus.
LETTER VIII.
MISS BYNG TO MISS LEVISON
An D art thou at laft caught, my dear Laura ?
Is thy inflexible heart Subdued by the irre-liftible charms of an Epaulet ? Sure, red coats were formed for the defl:ru6tion of our poor help-lefs fex ! But no, my fweet girl, I wrong you, by piy unmerited fufpicions; you feel only an efteem, afriendfhip for Montague. Ah I Laura, Laura, beware of deceiving yourfelf; it is the province of friendlhip to warn thy fenfibility of danger. Yes, my gentle friend, I fee inuinerable difficulties Surrounding this fatal paffion. The cloak you put on was too thin for the prying eye of affeffion. Your very attempt to deny that Montague has made an interefi in your heart, is a convincing proof of your tendernefs ; befldes, my love, you was not always fond of Solitude. O ! Laura, drive I befeech you this cruel intruder from your bread. You are yet a ftranger to the repofe ’twill rob you of, for I am Sure your father will never confent to your union with a man, however amiable, who can boafl: no other fortune than his Sword. You know him to be poflTelTed of an inflexibility of difpofition, which •will never parden the lead deviation from that, duty, which he looks upon as his due j therefore Ihun the impending danger, that would plant daggers in your dutiful bread, and banifli from your remembrance the too charming Augudus. It may not yet be too late to recover your former
Laura and Augustus.
49
mer indifference. I like not Mr. Bofwell; my judgment of this gentleman may be premature, I will therefore drop his name and the above fub-
jca.
Lady Charlotte Bruce was laft month married to Mr. Seymour. I have paid her ladylhip the bridal vifit. Ihe Seems perfedly happy, and Seymour doatingly fond of his giddy bride. I have promlfed Lady Charlotte to Spend a month with her at Seymour-vale this Summer; Harriot Sidney is alfoto be of the party. The Sweet girl ever makes the kindeft enquiries after your ladylhip ; file longs to fee you, and wifhes to know if you defign Spending your youth in the Torrid Zone. She wonders at your courage in trufting yourfelf among fuch an uncivilized fet of people as the Negroes. She declares, Ihe fliould be in hourly dread and fear of receiving poifon mingled in her drink or food. Indeed, Laura, I Ihould in Some degree poffcfs her fears, but you are above fuch mean prejudices.
Harriot was with me the morning I received your letter, containing the hiftory of the unfortunate nun. The Sorrows of the fair Sufferer beguiled our eyes of their briny fluid, and rendered us ill-calculated to partake of the pleafures we had promised ourfelves in the evening. Lord Gray has built a pretty little theatre in his park, where the comedy of the Jealous Wife was to be performed. Among the numbers invited, Mifs Sidney and myfelf were included. Lady Gray wiflied me to have taken a chara6ter; but, knowing my own incapability, I as politely as-poflible declined it.
The play went off with prodigious eclat, and was received by a moll crowded and brilliant
com-
xo
Laura and Augustus.
company. The principal parts were performed by Sir William Eagle and Lady, Captain Bof-tain, Mr. and Mils Manfel. You may judge how highly I was delighted, who know my parti* ality for theatrical amufements.
An a6trefs has this winter made her appearance at Drury-Iane theatre, whole amazing powers, like the riling fun, dazzles all beholders. - She is at prefent quite the rage, the SEtoile the Englifli Worfliip. Her patrons even pronounce her fuperi* or to Yates, Crawford, and Young; yet, ftrangc as it may appear, this fame Mrs. Siddons offered herfelf fix years ago to Garrick, and was refufed; what his reafon could be, it is impoffible to conjecture, as Ihe is undoubtedly a moft admirable aCtiefs, and plays the moft to the feelings, of any woman I ever yet beheld.* Her attitudes and actions feem the rcfult of nature, and to proceed from the fenfibiiity of her heart. She has, I think, defervedly received furprifing favours from the managers, as well as the public. In ftiort, the Siddo ns is the general topic of converfation at all tea-tables.
Good-night, my Laura ; I feel the drowfy god taking poffeflion of my fenfes, and warning me that tired nature needs his kind affift-ance.
Yours fincerely.
%
Cecilia Byng.
L E T-
Laura a»d Augustus.
SI
LETTER IX.
Rofi-Bli
LIEUTENANT MONTAGUE TO
CAPTAIN YORK.
Y Heavens I York, I can endure this racking uncertainty no longer. My fouf, you know, is full of fenlibiHty, formed for all the luxury of the melting paffion; but it is equally true, that the fweeteft delicacy had ever a place there. Nor could any woman, however fair, however lovely, have gained a place in my heart, whofe mind was not call: in the mofl: refined mould of feminine virtue and fenfibility. You can witnefs for me, York, that whenever the Loves prefided at our entertainments, the Graces were not abfent, that in the very delirium of pleafure the rapture was chaftened, and the transports reftrainedw I have already, Ned, in a former letter * told you, that I had, feen in Mifs Levifon all that my moil: fan-guine wifties could defire. I told you too, that Ihe was beautiful, that fhe was amiable. But, O ! ray friend, 1 could not tell you the tenth part of her perfe6tions. Her heart is pregnant with the noblefl: principles; gentlenefs, and meek-eyed pity, fit enthroned in her lovely bofom.
VoL. I.
C
To
♦ The letter referred to is loft*
52
Laura And Augustus-
/
To defcribe to you, my friend, the various paffions that agitate my diftra6Ied foul, when I behold her Surrounded by a fet of infignificant flatterers, is impoffible. One Bofwell, in particular (a child of fortune), gives me the greateft uneafineSs: alarmed at his affiduities, the other evening I followed my lovely enflaver td her favourite recefs, with a full determination to make my love known to her; though I doubted not, my eyes, thofe juft interpreters of the mind, had already been the gentle meflengers. But a certain awe,oever attendant upon true affe6lion, flopped the utterance of my words, and I returned to the houfe without, the wilhed-for relief.
For myfelf, I am well .aware, the world will not be my friend, nor the world’s law—intereft. They will probably fay, that, fenfiblc of my own lituation, as J muft be, mafter of no greater fortune than an humble lieutenancy, I have a6Icd a bafe part in feducingthe affections of the daughter, while the father entertained me with the greateft kindnefs at his ;table, and whofe houfe I made my home. They will probably fay, I have violated the laws of friendfhip,; that I have broken through every principle ,of virtue; and that I have offered an infult to the kind genius of hofpitality, the benevolent fpifit of good neighbourhood, and the facred and dignified powers of friendfhip! I mean not, York, to exculpate my conduS, let the fervency of my love plead my excufe. Behold, the fair caufe, Ned, of thy friend’s mifery appears. I fee her afeending yonder hill; ftic goes to meditate the virtues of an an abfent friend; I will follow her, and with melting, youthful ardour, reveal the fecrets of
my


Laura aki> Aucuistus.
tny foul to her gentle bofom. Forgive me, Laura, for thm intruding upon your privacy.
IN CONTINUATION.
53
fair
GIVE me joy Nedl I have fighed forth my art* lefs tale in the ears of the charming Laura; and file did not difdain to liften to my humble fuit.
By my foul, York, I am the happieft of mortals, I feem to tread on air.
The fweet girl at firft referred me to her father; but, when I painted to her the little probability there was of Mr. Levifon’s confenting to give his lovely daughter to the arms of a needy lieutenant, me replied. Sweetly blulhing, if her father confulted her happinefs, he would bellow her hand on worth, and not on wealth.’* Heavens! my friend, what a treafure is this woman I how difinterefted, how every way amiable 1 there is an irrefiftible grace attendant upon her every word arid movement. Her foul is the receptacle of every virtue; how blell will thy Montague be in the poITeffion of fo ineftimable a jewel !
We have agreed to keep our love a profound Secret from the family for Some time; as I have convinced her, that a Separation would immediately follow the difeovery.
i have entreated her to make Madame Dc Blondcau (an amiable French woman) the confidant of our mutual attachment, to which (he has confented.
G 2
Adieu :
H'
ti
0
S4 Laura and Augustus*
Adieu : when ■writing to your lovely filler, pre-fent my bell refpe£ls , and believe me to be thy fincerc friend
9
Augustus Montague*
L E T T E R X.
r
i
RQfe-Hilh
o*
MISS LEVlSON TO MISS BYNO.

OCpcilia, the amiable Augullus has confeffed to thy happy friend, that file reigns foie miftrefs of his heart; had you heard the dear engaging youth vow perpetual truth and conftancy; you, my fweet girl, no more than Laura, could have withftood the infinuating pleader; with blulhes I confefled a. reciprocal ellecm. ■ But, ah ! my friend, what happinefs is there without, its alloy I I am convinped my father will never confent to our union, knowing his ruling paflion to be avariee. Then can I imagine he will ever permit me to bellow my Self upon a man in the ntuation of Montague ? Indeed, Cecilia, thy Laura feels; were Ihe deprived of the hopes, that fate would one day blefs her with the man Ihe loves, her exiftence would be rendered infup-portable.
With



,/d^ Aid'd./s^fy-
Laura and Augustus.
55
«
With him alone, and only him I’d live,
It’s all I alk, and all that Heaven can give ;
No other objeft can admittance find,
- Whilft his dear bright ideas fill my mind.
Our ball is over; Courtney was my partner^ He dances mofl: admirably; grace was in all his fteps. We were the only couple that figured in the Devonftiire minuet, and, I affure you, came off with very great applaufe.
l am now making great preparations agatnft a fete champetre, which the governor gives the ladies on his quitting this illand. My drefs, I think, will be truly elegant. My petticoat is of white luftring, a fpangled gauze thrown over it, and feftooned with wreathes of flowers confifting of rofes, myrtle, and fage, faftened with feflu« cous bows; round the coat a flounce fringed with filver. The gown to be crape ftudded with fil-ver ftars, and fringed all round with a broad filver fringe; the body to be made of white luf» tring, the lleeves of fpangled gauze drawn to the wrift, with flowers twilled round the arm, a fafli of tiffany tied with a bunch of rofes; this drefs to be worn over a Small hoop;.my hair without powder, the front to be pinned up in large curls, the hind hair to hang in loofe ringlety about ray neck and flioulders; on one fide of my head a turban of white crape, ornamented with a large plume of oftrich feathers.
My amiable Montague has has made me pro-mife to figure in an allemande with him. His drefs will be no lefs elegant than mine; could it be otherwife, when it was Laura’s tafte ? his waiftcoat and breeches arc white luftring, the
C 3	waift-

J
56
Laura and Augustus.
: t
i I
waiftcoat wrought in rofe-buds, and faftencd with bunches of filver; the knee bands worked as the above, and tied with ribbon; the couleur de feu-ille morte, a jacket made of the moll beautiful tambour muflin lined with white; his hair, which is of the fineft brown, without powder, is to flow in ringlets down his back, loofely tied with the above coloured ribbon. I, laughing, told him,
' that upon this occafion he raufl: ufe a little rouge to render him quite irrefiftible. All our drelTes are to be kept Secret, that the fight upon meeting may appear more ftrikingand could but my Cecilia add one to the party, I fhould think the pleafure of the evening complete. Montague fends to requeft, I will favour him with the pleafure of my company, in a ramble; defires I will obferve the refulgence of the moon, whofe mild influence tempts the evening walk. I will not refufe the artful pleader, as this will be the laft evening, in which I (hall enjoy his dear Society for this fortnight.
The encroaching rogue has been trying to draw me into an epiflolary correspondence with him, during his abfence. I have, with the fortitude of a hero, denied his requeft; but, I fear, my resolution will fail the firft tender billet I receive from his dear hands. Nay, it would be a breach of politenefs, my dear Cecilia, to fuller a friend’s letter to remain unanfwered.
But I muft now, my fweet girl, clofe this fcrawl, to keep an appointment I have made. You ftart, my love! well you may; an appointment after the family is retired, has, I con-fefs, a very intriguing found. But to eafe your fears, learn that the aflignation is with a female.
Madame
Laura and Augustus
SI
Madame Dc Blondeaii and I have agreed, attended by our Mulatto women, to bathe in a pretty rivulet, (haded by bamboe and other trees} this Spot is quite retired, and lays at the bottom of the hill, I in a former fetter mentioned to you. The foot of man, I believe. Scarce ever trod this Spot; and it was by mere chance that I discovered it. You may probably be furprifed at our temerity, in venturing at So late an hour to So fequeftered a place. But I muft inform you that its diftance from our houfe does not exceed three hundred yards, and that. So far from apprehending danger in- this part of the world, all deep with our windows and doors unfatlencc. My maid reminds me, that it is time for me to depart} So adieu, my charming friend.
I
Yoursy
Laura Lxviioh
C 4
LET.
58
Laura and Augustus.
LETTER XI.
BENJAMIN BOSWELL, ESQJ TO
JOHN WILSON.
^ O N F U S I O N Seize that pale*faced raf-cal Montague ! the fellow has got the ftart of me. Yes, Wilfon, Laura, like moft of her filly fex, has been caught by the glare of a red coat. The pennylefs dog has gained the heart of the only woman I ever liked well enough to make my wife. While I, like a whining puppy, may Cgh and be*^——By Heavens I it Iliall not be, Laura’s perfon Ihall be mine, let who will take her heart ! I will fwear old Levifon to Secrecy, and then inform him of their romantic love. I have already faid enough, to have awakened the fufpicions of any man, except Such an old droner. I am Sure he’ll not Suffer this Sentimental blade to marry his daughter; for the old rogue loves money to his foul. At the Same time I give him the above intelligence, I will offer myfelf as his Son-in-law. The fight of my rent-roll will work the old fellow in my favour. In the mean time, I Shall take Special care, that Madam does not fteal a wedding upon us. The dove-like creatures have frequent meetings at a place, the romantic girl calls Orange Grove.
This
Laura and Augustus.
59
This comes of people Suffering their children to read thofe ridiculous books called novels. There is to-night a fete champetre at Bevile-Lodge: t Ihail requefl; the honour of her hand for the evening; but I fuppofe the pretty Mifs will be engaged to her lover. It does not fignify, one evening’s pleafurc they may enjoy j for I fhall be greatly out, if they have many more-*
t h I n e "W"—
♦
*
Benjamin Boswell.
LETTER Xil

Grenada.
/
MISS LEVISON TO MISS BYNG.
At the condufiohofray lad: letter, mydear Cecilia» I informed you of the defign Madame De Blorideau and I had of refrefhing ourfelves in a cool liquid ftream. The night was remarkable fine; the moon ftione with uncommon brilliancy, and exactly refembled the following description :
As when the moon, refulgent lamp of n?ght.
O’er Heaven’s clear azure fpi ead^ her facred ligbt|
When not a breath dillurbs the air ferene.
And not a cloud o’ercafts the folema Scene;
Around her throne the vivid planets roll.
And stars uanuinbered gild the glowing pole \
c 5
O’er
: I
1 ■ ; I
6o
Laura and Augustus
<7h
O’er the dark trees a yellow verdure ftied,
And tip with Silver every mountain’s head ; Then (hine the vales, the rocks in profpe6t rife^, A flood of glory bursts from arf the ikies;
The confcious mind,, adminng at the fight.
Eye the blue vault, ind blcfs the ufieful light*^
Juli as we had plunged into the prattling Broolc, the ruftling .ot the trees alarmed us : we quitted its gentle current, andi wrapping a loofe gown over us, we Hood petrified through fear. At length a female form appeared, and, falling at our feet, implored prote^ion* Surprized, and Scarce believing the object before us to be real, we ftarted. The poor wretch,, feeing us retreat, begged us not to be alarmed, as Ihe meant not to do us. any injury.-—I am, continued the poor creature, unfortunate, but not guilty: do, my dear ladies, let me implore you to lillen to my misfortunes. Wc complied;; andv. Seating ourfelves upon the grafs,, defired her to do the fame. Having recovered from our amazement, we had nowHeifure to reconnoitre the figure before us. She appeared to be about twenty^ Want, and Sorrow, had- worn her to the bone : and, to compleat her wretched afpe6t, (he feemed far advanced in her pregnancy. She was fair, but had not the lead trace of beauty.. Her drefs was clean,, but age had worn it threadbare.
She' began her dory in the following manner.. “ I mud entreat your pardon, ladies, for my abrupt intrufion ; but the miferies of my fituation will, I hope, plfcad my apology.” We told her no excufe was necelTary ; that the tears of the afflicted ever diared our tendered Sympathy; and
there-
Laura and Augustus.
6H
therefore, if any thing lay within our power to Serve her, Ihe might without ceremony command us. She bowed; thanked us, and proceed* cd.
** My father poffelTed a Small curacy in Wales? I was the eldefl: of ten children. At a proper age I was Sent to London, and bound apprentice to a relation of my mother’s, who kept a capital milliner’s fliop in Taviftock Street, Govent Garden# Mrs. Bufy, who was a good-natured motherly woman, treated me with the greateft kindnefs, and gave me every indulgence in her power. With her I lived, perfectly content, till about a twelve-month ago, when I became acquainted with one Lucy JOnes, a young woman in the neighbourhood, who always appeared a very mo-deft, decent kind of girk She one day invited me to go to Deptford with her, and fpenid the day at a relation’s,- who, Ihe faid, lived at that place. She alfo told me, that it was not unlikely we might dine on board her coufin’s fhip* ( She urged me to comply : young 'and ,thought-lefs, I too readily consented. I gained .the per-miflion of my miftrefs and early one rnorning fet off with ray falfe friend.- As Ihe had predi6t-ed, we went on board; The captain, on various pretences,, kept us down in the cabin, Supplying us plentifully with wine and punch. Between four and five, I remarked to my companions, that it grew late, and propofed returning on; fiiore. But Lucy laughed in niy face,- and alked me if I did not know we had been three hours under fail for Jamaica ? Lamentations'rvere vain Too late, ladies, I found that I had been' bafelv
decoyedTrom my friends,, and that Lucy was no-
I »
62
Laura AND Augustus.
I i
I <
•t*
thing lefs than the vile captain’s millrefs; and, ■wanting Some female companion, had hit upon this expedient to carry me off, and make me as •wicked as herfelf.
If f. We had not been on board a ■week, before
4l	^	*
that bad man, the captain, entered the ftatc-room allotted me, and ufed every art to compel me to yield to his brutal defires. The wretch even attempted violence; and I was obliged to lay for three weeks with an open pen*knife by my fide. At laft, the Second mate, pitying my dreadful fi-tuation, promifed me his proteftion, provided I would confent to marry him at the firft place we could make our efcape to. To this propofal I agreed; and by good fortune efcaped from Ma-deria to this ifland. My hufband took a fmall in the town of St. George’s, and we pro* cured credit for the few neceffaries we wanted, and lived for two months in that way; at laft our Creditors infifted upon being paid, or that my hufband fliould go to prifon. Alarmed at this, he one night left me while afleep; upon which, they Seized the few things that remained, and turned me out to mifery and want. A Mr. \Wii-fon offered to maintain me as his miftrefs. And J was furthermore informed, if I did not comply with this offer, I Ihould be taken up and thrown into jail. Terrified at this threat, I fled; and chance bringing me to this fpot, the watch belonging to this cane-piece received me to his hofpitable hut. I fworc the faithful negro to Secrecy ; which he has, I find, mod: religioufly preserved. I have dragged on five months in this gloomy retreat, partaking of this poor creature’s allowance, and the produce of his little
garden.
Laura and Augustus.

garden. But thoughts of the dreadful hour which now approaches, and the idea of what muft be the fate of the helplefs innocent I carry about me, determined me to apply to Mrs. Levi-fon, to whofc huiband 1 am told this plantation belonged.^* On fpeaking of her fatherlefs babe, ihe (hed a torrent of tears. We Soothed the unfortunate girl, and promifed to have her provided for. I would have had the unhappy creature return home with me that night, but Ihe begged to be excufed, till file knew whether it might be agreeable to my family.
The next morning I related her pitiable talc to tny mother, who fortunately wanting an upper-fervant, her own being obliged to return to England for the recovery of her health, agreed to receive her in that capacity. The unfortunate woman is now with us, and feems well calculated for the place flie is in. Should the child live, I mean to take it under my own prote6l:ion.
We havefince made enquiries after the wicked captain, and his vile aflociates, and have heard that the wretch, and all his crew, perifhed in that unfortunate hurricane which happened in the year 1781. Donotthefe circumftances, my dear Cecilia, fiiew the workings of an all-wife Providence ? Great God ! how uncertain are all the enjoyments of this life ! Short-lighted mortals I how vain are all your earthly purfuits. Today, you probably are planning how you may acqhire wealth and fame; or perhaps flattering yourfelves with the idea of enjoying years of blifs, with the obje61: of your tendereft alFe^ions ; likely ye are ufing every art to enfnare unwary innocence, when perhaps in the very moment
that
64
Laura and Augustus.
that ye think fuccefs will crown your wilhes, the Iharpened Scythe of death, with one blow, levels you to the earth. O, my friend ! how prepared ought we all to be, to meet the Summons of fo grim a tyrant! People in general are too apt to put off the hour of reflection till too late; and instead of accuftoming themfelves ta look upon the grave as the neceffary appendage to mortality, they Seem to live but to pleaSure, and forget that the extinction of life is a debt we muff all one time or other pay.
Let not you and I, my Cecilia, follow the exi-ample of the world;, but by frequently ufing our-Selvcsto reflect upon futurity, learn to beholdthe grave divefted of its terrors and, dying as Christians, Say, . O death, where is thy fling 1 O
grave, where is thy victory 1”-------- Thy fln/«
cere-
i 1
Laura- LEvtsoN.
■ r-V
. t	^

■V’* ■? ! .t.


1
* %
0t
Laura AND Augustus

0.5
LET TER XIIL
i i

MISS LEVISON TO MISS BYN<b.
. »
E S T E R D AY, ray dear Cecilia, was the * appointed day for the fete champetrc, given, by Governor H------; the elegance of the enter-
tainment exceeds all defcription nature and art feemed to vie with each other in this rural entertainment ; and I might with truth have ranked that evening as the moll agreeable I have known lince I quitted Europe, had it not been interrupted by the continual prefence of Mr. Bofwell, who followed me like ray (hadow. Indeed, Cecilia, I fear I Ihall find him an unlucky acquaintance. Do not impute what I am about to fay to vanii-ty ; but I apprehend that, in him, I Ihall find an obllinate lover.. Ah ! iny friend, what will become of me, if my fufpicions prove well-founded ? Alas ! I tremble; a fumraons to attend my father obliges rac to lay afide ray pen for the pre-fc nt.-
IN CONTINUATION..
W I T Et a trembling hand, and anxioully heating heart 1 my Cecilia, I fit down, to entreat your friendly advice. I am in the moft cruel Hate imaginable. Mr. Bofwell has, as I feared, made propofals to my father in my favour ; l^s offers were too great to admit of a refufal, four
thoufand
) 1 t 1
65
Laura AND Aucdstus
' t V
1
* (
■ I I ‘ I
I'
iJ

I ;	»
I •
« I } <
'! !
I (
■t
n

thoufand a year was not to be reje£Ied» and my father has laid his injun6Iions on me, to prepare to liften to his addrefles. I pleaded ray youth, and difinclination to change my (late. But to no purpofe, bis commands were abfolute* What courfe was I to take, duty and love at variance ? I wrote to Montague, defiring him to meet me in the dufk of the evening, at the Orange Grovei He was pundual to the appointment ; I told him my fituation/ and wept; he tried to raife up the kind deceiver Hope. ** Thy father, my dear Laura,” (laid the lovely youth) ** can never remain inflexible to our united tears; nature will prove an advocate in our caufe.
He ceafed.—O ! Montague, my father will never confent, avarice is his ruling pafKon. In Ihort, the amiable man entreated, fhould my pa^ rent prove obdurate, and infill upon my marrying Bofwell, that I would confent to blcfs him by fliaring his little income. It is true, my Laura,” continued he, *• the pay of a Lieutenant is not worthy your acceptance, and the Splendid offer you reject. But, my fweet love, what we want in gold (hall be made up in mutual affection. Perhaps fortune may fmilc ; I have fome powerful friends, who will ufe their interefl for my promotion. In the mean time, love, my fweet maid, (hall be the fauce to our homely meal; the fweet exchange of tendernefs (hall be* guile the lone retirement.
Thefe, and fuch like arguments, does my charming Auguftus ufe, to perfuade his Laura to what her heart is already but too well in* dined.
But
Laura and Augustus.
^7
But think not, my Cecilia, that thy friend is pofleffed of fo little pride, or that fhe is fo little millrefs of her paflion, as to prove a burthen to the man ftie loves. No, Montague Ihali never receive my hand, without it can bring with it a fortune worthy his acceptance. But, at the fame time, I make this refolution: I Solemnly fwear, no power on earth, Ihall force me to unite myfelf with any other; Heaven has witnefled our vows of conftancy, and they are regiftered ab:-ve. And can I then with impunity think of violating that vow? Impoffible! I feel, my friend, I have much to Suffer But there is no calamity, which I cannot endure without murmuring, while I poIIeSs the heart of my Auguftus, and health plays upon his benevolent features. However, my lot will be Soon determined, as Montague is to wait upon my father to-morrow ; till which time I will quit my pen, and try to amufe myfelf with mufic. But I fear, I fliall fay, with Ahneria, ** Am I
more fenfelefs grown than trees, or flint ? O ! force of conftant love 1 Tis not in harmony to calm my griefs.”
The dye is caft: Montague is forbid thefe doors, and I am doomed to perpetual wretched-nefs! My cruel father treated the deferving youth in the mofl: outrageous manner. On ray Augustus’s departure, he flew to me, and upbraided me in the mofl: indecent language, his paflion could invent 1 To this harfli treatment, I am perfuad-ed, he has been urged on by Some foe to my re-pofe. I fufpeft Bofwel: God forgive me, if I do him wrong ! But my reafon for fufpeiSing him is, that an old Mulatto, who waited upon me when a child, and is now one of my attendants, overheard
\
68
Laura and Augustus.-
i ♦
! 1
I
( ' i I
f ■
i > 1 i
j ' I
: t
: i
‘ I
: I
heard Mr. Bofwcll and his Servant Joe in deep conversation ; when flie heard the above gentleman damn Montague, and defire his man ta keep a good look out. She further fays, that Joe has lately been very flulh of money. Upon her relating thefe circumftances, I recollc61:ed to have Seen this fame Negroe, frequently walking about the Grove and the door of my chamber, but never till now' entertained the leaf! doubt of him. In order to elude this Argus, I have written to Montague, to meet me, when the family is all retired to red, at' the hut where the unfortunate Jenny refided So many months j as, I think, I can depend upon the fidelity of the old watchman, who fo humanely affifted her in her diftrefs. I have alfo Sent to requeft Madame Dc Blondeau to come and ftay with me a few days; Ihe is a worthy creature, and will fincerely fympathife in my Sorrows. As to my mother, you know Ihe never dared to contradi6l her hufband ; he ever ruled with tyrant Sway; and Ihe, poor woman, mufl: bow obedience under the rod of Lordly Man. I have often commiferated her fate, in being yoked to fo tyrannical a being. But Ihe, dear good creature bears her lot with the fortitude of a martyr.
I hear my father’s voice: he may probably take it into his head to pay me a vifit. I will therefore put an end to this letter, with alluring you, how fincerely
I am my dear Cecilia’s
Laura Levison.
LET-
Laura and Augustus
69
LETTER XIV.
St. Georgft
lieutenant MONTAGUE TO MISS
LEVISON;
Heaven first taught letter«| for feme wretch’s aid,
Some banifliM lover, or fome captive maid.
They Hve> they Speak, they breathe, what love infpircs,. Warm from the foul, and faithful to its fires.
/
Pope’s Eloife*
"yj E S, my Laura, who could Support the heart rending Separation, the cruel abSence from all that is dear on earth, were it not for the Soft confolation attending an epiftolary intercourse ? It is this alone, my amiable, my adorable maid, that can Support thy Auguftus in his dreadful banilhment.
O, Mifs LeviSon, liSe without thee would be an inSupportable burden ; cxiftence would become the greateft of misfortunes, and the world appear defolate.
But two days expired Since Mr. LeviSon’s cruel prohibition, and I already begin to----------the tar-
dy miijiutes. But how fhall I tell my angelic Laura the ftate of my mind, when I confider the fituatio'n in which I have left her, expoSed to the
arts
1
70
Laura and Augustus.
■ *
/• ‘ S*-V
i
U <
A-
A
*•
arts and afliduities of a man countenanced by her father, and backed by his authority ? Fear, hope, defpair, and grief, alternate reign in my bread, rack ray fond heart, and torture every vein. And, were it not for the exalted idea I have of the delicacy and noblenefs of your fentiments, diftrac-tion would fuccecd.
. O, Laura ! why will you not confent to our immediate union ? We have enough, ray fweet love, with (Economy, to procure us the necelTa-rles of life. What need have we for its Superfluities ? Whatever is wanting, Ihall be amply Supplied by the moft endearing marks of tender love and affe6l:ion. Yes, my charming maid, the bufinefs of thy Montague’s life fliall be to obliterate from thy remembrance tbofe advantages of fortune thou haft fo generoufly Scorned for his fake.
I have been fo hurried, my deareft life, fince my arrival in this town, that what with the heat of the weather, which is rendered ftill more in-tenfe by the proximity of the buildings, and the agitation of my mind. Symptoms of a feverilh difpofition feem hovering about me. But do not Jl^t what I have faid make you uneafy ; for, be ■^Ured, my illnefs is too trifling to merit even a thought.
I owe much to the tendernefs of Mrs. Christian, at whofe houfe I am now a refident.
Governor Willis is arrived, and keeps mighty ftate, and levees. The H———, C——, and Party, with their families, took up their quarters in town above three weeks before his arrival, in order to Secure him when he did arrive : accordingly they penned the poor man up in Mel-
vil’s
Laura and Augustus.
71
vifs band-box, until, for want of air, and an opportunity to breath, he was obliged to beg the privilege of two days to himfelf and family; and that in future his flag would fly when he was in a difpofition to be teafed, or to receive their adorations.
This has hurt their pride; he keeps all at an equal diftance is determined to execute his maf ter’s infliruftions; and, as his powers are absolute over the council, they are reduced to a ftate of uncertainty, whether to acquiefce or rebel. I, you know, was obliged to make my bow in the circle, and like him much; he Seems a well-bred, Senfible man. I wifli much to know how Mr. LeviSon will conduct himSelf towards him. Your father, you are Senfible, is a wonderful politician. I have been told he was heard to fay, that he fhould give him very little trouble for a long time, unleSs called upon by duty in a public capacity. You fee Laura, how I communicate politics to you.
1 have little to fay to you now, my deareft love, unlefs I were to renew the fubjefl: always ncarefl: my heart, and which I could ever dwell upon, but am prevented by the melTengcr, who waits to convey this to your fair hands.
It is impoflible to exprcfs my anxiety, to hear how you go on at Rofe Hill. But I doubt not your goodndfs will lead you to Soften the anguifh of my mind, by a few lines to him who, with pleafure, fubfcribes himfelf your faithfully-devoted.
Augustus Montague.
LET-
I •
I '
I :
I .	;
I .
I I ’ I
I I
72
LaORA AND AUGtlSTUS.
T
LET TER XV.
• i
FRiOM THE SAME TO THE SAME.
I !
I
* 1 t
J	•	•	'i
E N thoufand thanks to my lovely inflaver for her charming letter, which came mofl: opportunely, to revive my drooping ftrength. It pro* ved the befl: reflorative, that had yet been administered to your Auguftus. Fairit, and languifli-ing, I lay upon the bed of ficknefs : the Servant entered, he delivered, me a letter; the Superscription of which befpoke the writer ; I preffed it to my beating heart ; and imprinted a hundred kif-fes on the dear contents —O! my beloved Laura, how fhall l be able to repay Such a world of good-nefs! who am a bankrupt in every thing but love ! You, and only, you, moft lovely of your Sex, are the ^ Sole arbiter of my fate] On your Smiles depend my very exillence; Laura is mi£ refs of my every aftion, polTeSres every thought.
If virtue were to take a human form^
To light it with her .fmifes and namelefs gracc^
O ! (he would chufe the perSon of my love#
^	\ i ■ j ■	‘	■
Yeller’day Lhad like to have made my exit in a very foolifli manner. 1 have for Some time made a pra6Hce of drinking cream of tartar whey one morning in , the' week; and, by Some lulftake, between the Do(^or and my man Thomas, he put about about one hundred and fifty
graini
Laura and Augustus.
73
grains of tartar fmetic into a pint of milk «ind water, all of wich I drank off, except about a half Spoonful, which Mrs. Chriftian took when fhe was Sweetening it with manna, and which had nearly done her bufinefs. It operated about an hour before I fufpe<5led any miftake; and, thanks to a noble conftitution, and a happy re-folution, it wrought itfelf off by noon, but not before it had thrown me into convulfions, and cramp; my extremities were cold and chilled; and it was a miracle I got over it. It has demo-liflied my throat and bowels, and I have ftill Smart twitches of the cramp. However, experience will teach me for the future to avoid any more miftakes of the kind.
I muft lay by my pen until to-morrow, as my Ilrength is not Sufficiently eftabliftied, to permit me to relate an anecdote of your father which happened the other day; and as I wifli not to dif-patch this till I can with certainty inform you of the eveiiing on which I ffiall vifit the good old Ne-groe’s hut, with the pleafing expedation of once more beholding my adorable maid.
End of Vol, I.


N-■o.lNClcMSl:^-:''-■
1


« >

-..	«r
r .

> -
t t
>
. >
t .1


♦	•• j. ;
cr'
> '•
^ . r
K
•V	'
;.sa7i|: ?r

J -
\ .1

:
‘p^;.*-.:i -
w#

sw"
pi ^•*1	
fn^K	V
	W# ♦ *
m	
	
y-v®	Wi'•■ .. *■.,
	m
" -'4-	'■	'
i.-.- ^ rafcC	r.‘ -' • _:


: • f. < >:? y'- -^ ; •
V-
1> ■
■ : ^t^^»?v:^: • ^
J
f1

‘iL •■■

- «(-
. L^VCSdl
V > -.	>4	- ., .♦ F
W
t ' '. -i
f.r
■'• •- . <v

/
?{T
t.;
\,...

f'Lr	. <*
' * •- r	/■ /•'
\ * ^ •»	
	if
, ^	'• .
' .•	C * '
» 4	
	
■•• r r
\
T I
S
\'
>
•> ,
^■■4.5?;^
^ ,
; r
d'
/*
*L •	♦ •■
-'•t
^ - •
..r
':fC-|:V^^TL CIN'"
A
s
f: C..
Fk ri
X it
V
h €:.

'•4
V
9 ’ ,■ «
> r
L •'
:

'Xi./
1.
'i
S';
r


> - ■' ■
.' -.'	3'
V
%—I

~T
V
4	■?.
» -I
* * .
ivi
..f.
'i
•Si
■t r	'V-^ySt
litg .-C?.
- ^
’!?
- . \.

. *
1^ y '
4 .-
' • <
} . ^ ri r-
.»
.'•so'
>:
«
•
i >.
*•1- -i.
'-: '■r-
i
f
\
"AO
> .

A.r.
V*
A _4tf*	.
*• €

O' ’ ? •
i •: - •
i ^

4	%
• . t • •	>	•
^•* • :..' * ;■
r
*•
■■ r ■ i

* 4
^ ■
? f
^ I i /*



^/'i" '-,' i A
0^.
-%.r

r -
\ ''
•; »
^o:p	.
». • ■^-
T*;N-:':. '
r- . ■>> -■
j.-.i .T.,-:-ii"
'	^ S- '-
^ ~. .*	_•■'.	•-	_	.f'*'
VVS \-IASL- :
.It-';,. . 'A’.v	■ L-:-
fr±

y-ii- 3

^ ♦ *	:.- s::» H'			»*		i			
	of *		1		N* ■ ' /		w	•	«

\ -'
y '■

/
. /*
•'Nb/--. . /
V.
■f :_4-."
LAURA AND AUGUSTUS,
A N
AUTHENTIC STORYi
1 N
A
A SERIES OF LETTERS,
Byayoung lady.
IN THREE VOLUMES
V O T II.
....."A whole hoft, a war of foes,
May fooner be fubdued, than love.
Fhimivs.
DUBLIN:
PRINTED FOR R. M 0 N C R I E F F E , G. BURNET, T. WALKER, R. MARCHBANK, R.BURTON,
P. BYRNE, S. COLBERT, B SMITH,
N, CROSS, & J. CASH,
m,dcc,lxxxiv.

	- -' 1 •• • , ♦ ‘ ^ 0 ' .
•	- .-••*.4 *	% 1	f '■< f '*i :
	1 r* 1 ?
V -H*	
S'N- '.,h;”--;vi--' ' -
.N	'Cc:'-'
I ’
» > .

w'- •%
*;

f
i


*. V
CH
/. Cl
; c-' .■f * '• p- ' • 1	t" i -4 4 -	> •V	IJ	l-1r ^ T c i ' ' 1 i. Ji«. ?T9.%
	P		/	

V •
r
0
V.
\r r
.'4. #

1
y
i - ^ t
t ' ,F \,A
^...
V
> i

1 . •
t
k	«	#	^	;
•- *

'<•;
d^i
Jt. ■,
'r'
^ f

L-
r«
i-
?.
- *■ -4 . .•					
.y j^- —».	*'f ::i	/ k • %	.« 4	# < ' • * V A	yt ♦ « V >■■*-
S '
' *•	X.	
V. ^ '	f	.j*
9 \
vT

■r t
K'l /
\A:
:r*'X
-.£	9

u
/
k- '-"
S- "■ X
kJ-

0 * ’■ a'N ••.
?'/■’ ^

T c
•>. f L
i- ’ >
"* >
#
ir V
V-
o
•'^i:	?	I'-i	i ■»
-	K.f	/J	1:1
i . «
i
N
• ^
A '»r
5
P?:-;
V. .* L
m


■ . T *.	■
» t F' “ *	>
A ^
2f ? •
^*>011 -V V t ^{fwS
*	' T*>; i l A	»• 'Iff	v^ f
*w	kJ 'Tr**	t
mhT
'» «
'' V	'
r ^	•
\
y
V .... •-V;	' t
C-rWV
thVri SL V^
-	".,^-.‘=53'
■- V ■'
■	kT~
. . - . *■ . .
---6



1

-»»'
/ •»
1' f '... d.
r r
/I
iiFi
* ■ .-J\ ■
./
.► ..

.i<,- -.' •' <.^’"' ■''" i|i! if	j. - •'IV ■%,	-. /N -?*■■- .;. - Cf' ,Ji . - ./ 4 .<> i > >	♦ ^ , Nr " -' * ^ ■ - » '- . H T •■ ' , *	' i
u^- . -' .'. •	-s :		./■ _-■-*	
* 9 '	* • * ^ : j	‘,' f ^ -^ '■ ■ - < ■. '' - * •'A ■ ^ ^ .■• s ■'.. 9	*	( • « 1
■V /:■ f "■	. > c .	, * ST ,' . 1 . •	1 - •» ♦ • .	•• 1
y (
t '
*. <
' •
^
’ %A' '
- v. ^*-?:-- •
••	' V.
WL s
»T.<	-	.	• , -
r
. t
/




.y
LAURA and AUGUSTUS
LIEUTENANT MONTAGUE TO
MISS LEVISON.
IN CONTINUATION.
RESUME my pen, Laura, to inform you of the anecdote relative to your father^ you are no ftranger to the confummate pride he is mafter of, and the oddity of his difpofition. Lafi: Friday he arrived from his little excurfion, and aviflied to weigh anchor the fame night for Domi« nica; but before this could be accomplifiied, it was neceflary for him to apply for a paflport at the Governor’s office; he accordingly did, habited in a feaman’s attire, which drefs it feems he always wears when on board his floop. The long trowfers, dilhcvelled hair, and unmowed
D a	beard
II!!
,]
; hi
!ii
'll
n
«;
• 1
: I : 1
78
Laura and Augustus.
beard^ did not befpeak the man of fortuiie, or great politician. But his pride would not Suffer him to make any alteration in his drefs; therefore, thus equipped, he made his appearance at the government houfej he enquired for the Secretary: Mr. Shiffnell appeared, whom he acquainted, that he wanted a pafTport for his vefTel, which was to fail that afternoon. The Secretary replied, he could not give him one until the Governor came into the officei nor could he difturb him, as he was that inftant fatxiown to dinner.
This was enough for your father’s fiery temper,; he, with a farcaftic fmile, leaning upon a flick he held in his hand, replied; What, the Governor is at dinner, and therefore my veflel' mufl be detained here all night! By G—d. Sir, this is very curious. I afk you, if you will pleafe to give me a paffport or not ? I have no time to fpare. Mr. Shiffnel declared, he could not pof-fibly think of applying to the Governor at fo improper a time. Then G—d damn it. Sir, if the Governor has Such a voracious appetite, 1 mufl go without it.
The Secretary not knowing what to make of this over-bearing conduQ:, defired him to wait a moment and h.e would Speak to his Excellency. He went to the Governor, and informing hjm of the above circuniflances, requefted he would juft flep into the office, as he really did not know how to a<5l. The man’s drefs. Sir, does not befpeak him a gentleman; but he feems a damned keen fellow. Willis, upon this, rofe from table, and accompanied his Secretary to the office: when
they entered* the Governor and your father cx-
-	changed
Laura and Augustus'.
79
4
changed bows, and the following converfation enfued;
Gov. What illahd is your velTel to- touch aty
Sir ?
Mr. L—'	—. Dominica, Tobago, arid likely
Barbadoes. But I beg you will give me a paft for all. ^Spoken in a furly tone. Fhe Governory not knowing hiniy did not deftre him to,be featedi this added greatly to your father’s ill humour
Gov. Pray, Sir, is the floop your own ?
Mr. L-^-----I don’t know but it may.
Gov. Pray, Mr. L
Si
r, your name
?
My name is William Levifon', if I know k. But I defire I may not detain you longer from your dinner,: if may cool. My pafiT-port is ready, I fuppbfe.
Gov. It is of rto confequ'ence. Sir; my dinner is feldom brought up very hot, therefore it will not become much cooler. You fay. Sir, your name is Levifon : pray, are you acquainted^with one William Levifon, Efq. that lives at^—at~I forget the name of the place, a damned clever fellow, I am told ? [The Governor all this time holding a pen as in the attitude of varitingfl
Mr. L-------. I believe I am.
Gov. Is he any relation of yours. Sir 7
Mr. L-^----—-. I think he is. \Still leaning upon
his cane.^
At that moment old Goldwire, fecretary to the late governor, entering, run to your father what, Levifon, my old friend, who the devil would have thought of meeting you here : when did you land?
D3
The
%
So	Laura and Augustus.
The governor was now convinced of what he had before fufpe6i:ed, namely, that this was the very Levifon, that damned clever fellow. The Scene was now changed : Willis had heard what a bitter enemy he was capable of being, as poor governor M— had already experienced. The paflport was ready. The Governor begged he would favour him with his company to dinner, and would rake no denial. Your father, by this time, over powered by Willis’s civilities, began to relax of his Severity, apologized for his ap* pearance; and, on the Governor’s ordering his Servant to carry the paffport to the wharf, consented to (lay; he was introduced to Mrs. Willis and her (ifter, and from that day the Governor and himfelf are become fvvorn friends. I fuppofc Mrs. Levifon and yourfelf will Soon be ordered to town, to pay your compliments to her Excellency, whom I think you will greatly admire.
I win not, Laura, pain your gentle heart, by making any comments on the above condu6t; and will conclude with affuring you, how impatiently I Ihall wait the arrival of next Saturday, when I defign myfelf the ecftatic felicity of once more beholding the obje6t of my tendereft affection, the partner of my foul 1 Yes, my beloved maid, at the clofe of the evening, thy adoring Montague Ihall wait thy prefence at the faithful Negro’s hut; till which time he fubfcribes himfelf, thy ever conftant admirer
Augustus Montague,
let
Laura and Augustus
Si
LETTER XVI.
MISS LEVISON TO MISS BYNG.
WRITE to you, luy Cecilia, though im*
prefled with the mod: melancholy forebodings. My father continues inflexible in his determination of facrificing your poor friend to that idol Wealth. The detefted Bofwell is ever at our houfe, peftering me with his hateful love, from room to room following me like my fliadow. I have tried every art to move him to compaffionate my affliftions, and to withdraw his odious ad-drefles, but in vain.
The other morning, after he had finiflied one of his elaborate Speeches, I addrelTed him in the following words: “ I feel, fenfibly feel, Mr. Bof-wcll, the honour you do me. But, alas ! Sir, what can I do ? it is not in my power to return that love you fo generoufly proffer me. My heart, I will candidly confefs, has been for Some time engaged to a moff: deferving youth; our af-fedion is mutual; I live but in the hopes of one day being united to the befl: of men. Then, O, Sir, do not dellroy this flattering expectation, but nobly renounce your pretenfions,-——prove yourfelf my difinterefted, my .true friend, -——let me have caufe to efteem, if I cannot love you;
D 4	my
82
Laura and Augustus.
my Montague too will blefs you for your gene*
rofity.
He heard me, Cecilia ; the wretch did deign to liften. But good heavens ! what think you was his anfwer ? O ! Cecilia, I cannot pen it; the villain. Sure of my father’s fan^ion, treated me in the moll infulting manner ; rediculed my lover, and left me drouned in tears, for as the poet fays
Of all the griefs that harrafs the distrefs’d,
Sure the most bitter is a fcornfull jest ;
Fate never wounds more deep the generous heart.
Than when a blockhead^s infult points the dart.
When the fervant informed me dinnerwas rea* dy, I fent to requefl: the privilege of remaing in my chamber, as I felt myfelf greatly indifpofed; But the requeft was denied, and I was commanded to attend, or my father would fetch me if I was too weak to walk. This ill-natured Broke obliged me to quit me retirement. When 1 entered the hall, the hypocritical Bofwell attempted to take my hand in order to lead me to a feat, which ] with a proper degree of contempt'haftily withdrew. My father frowned, and defired me to take a chair, for by G—d I will have none of this damned whimpering, your Sex’s ufual art. O ! Cecilia, it was impoffible to fupprefs my tears: my father, with that degree of fpight which you know he is mafter of. Snatched my hanker* chief away, and imitated my fobs. O ! my friend, this was to much, my heart was ready to burft; I was incapable of fwallo'wing a 'morfel. My father defired I would not quarrel with my meals, for by G—-d (Said he) that is the moft child-
ilh
Laura and Augustus*
83
and.
indeed. So he feem-
life I never remem-
Glacf
ifh thing in life ; ed to think, for in my bered to have fcen him eat fo heartily, was I, my friend, when the cloath was removed, and myfelf at liberty to withdraw. To prevent the mortification of fitting at fupper, I undrefled, and retired to bed : but was obliged to rife, as Montague had appointed to meet me at our ufu-al place of rendezvous. I concealed as much as poffible from his knowledge the cruelty of my father, and Infolence ofBofwell. ForOT my Cecilia, I dreaded- left fome unhappy confequences might arife between thatmonfter and my amiable lover; I have however guarded-againft it as much’ as human forefight poflibly could, by making my Auguftus vow, in the moft folemn manner, to avoid every chance of meeting him.
I have received, me dear, great confolation from the fricndftiip of a Mr. Worthy : this gentleman happened’ to be prefent af table the day I was fo cruelly diftrelfed. I obferVed him to notice me with-the greateft’marks of compaffion in his man--ly countenance.—The tear of pity gliftened in-in his eye;”.and on my quitting the room, he flipped a bit of paper into my hand, containing thefe words, written with a pencil	Your
tearful'eye, my amiable Mifs Levifon does not plead in vain for pity in the breaft of humanity I Look up, Iweet mourner, fee where one'appears,-ready to lend thee every relief within the power of friendfhip to impart.' Command me. Madam in any refpe6l;; my houfe is at your difpofal ;■ and, believe me the pen of Henry Worthy ne--ver offered what his heart would not gladly perform.”
D 5	I. took
I
t)
84
9
Laura and Augustus.
“	A
I took his generous meaning, my friend, with regard" to his hpufe being at my difpofal; I have lince frequently pour’d niy griefs into his fym-pathifing bofom ; I. find him the heft, the moft generous of men ; he is intimately, acquainted with Montague, and indulges my love by dwelling ©n his praife. Good God! the Servants infoim me poor Jenny is taken ill. I muft lay down my pen, to vifit the poor creature, who is greatly attached to, my intereft.
I
IN CONTINUATION.
S H E is as well as can be expected. The infant did not live to be baptized. My Spirits are fo agitated, that I muft put an end to this epiftle, as I am incapable of at prefent adding more than that 1 am.
Your truly affefilionate friend,
Laura Levison.
LET
Laura and Augustus.
H
LETTER
)
FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME.
9
O E C I L I A, the fate of thy friend is haften-^ ing on apace. I muft either embrace mifery and affluence, or poverty arid Auguftiis. :Oh! my friend, pity my diftrefs. My father’s cruelty drives me to diftraDion. But one poor Solitary week, to refolve what Hep to take. Alas! Cecilia, what can I refolve upon ? Bofwell’s I never will confent to be ; and Montague’s, prudence forbids.——Heavens I what Sorrows am I doomed to encounter ! The noblcj the generous Worthy advifes me to give my hand to ray amiable lover; he would fain : perfuade me,i my father will relent when the Hep is once taken. “ Conlider,” cries the good man, you are his only child; he cannot, will not,—nature will not fuffer him to throw you off.”—O ! my Cecilia, my weak heart would fain yield to thefe per-fuafions; and, indeed, I believe it muff be at laft the only ffep I can take. My charming Montague kneels, and with tears implores me to deliver him from his cruel uncertainty, by confent-ing to give him the authority of a huSband, to prote6t me from the machinations of that wretcff Bofwell. Mr. Worthy infiffs, nay commands it as a mark of our efteem, if I am driven to quit my father’s prote6.ion, and to unite myfelf againffr
his
86
Laura AND Augustus.
hi3 inclination to my amiable Auguftus, that vre make his houfe our home, and his Servants our own. ** And as to you, my young Soldier, ufc my purSe, my intercft as you pleaSe. I have no wiSe, no children, no relations that I know of; nor am I accountable to any body for my afkions.” Are not theSe, my friend, uncommon, noble, ge-nerous Sentiments
His generous foul, receptacle of good I With ardour glowM, and panted to redrefs^
To feed the poor with hcfpitable food,
Andfooth the pangs and tortures of diftrefs.
His mind the most exalted gem poffeffed.
That gem was pity, offspring of the Ikies ;
The woes of others pierc’d his noble breasts And tears of pity flow’d at others fighs.
Few, very few, my dear friend, are poflefled of his exalted way of thinking. Would my father had one-half of his tenderneSs! but, God forgive me ! I believe, there is very little of the milk of human kindneSs in his heart. But flop my pen; he is flill my father, and to him am I indebted for every advantage of education I am miflrefs of. I owe him many obligations, which my heart fliall ever gratefully acknowlege, or no longer be deemed worthy your friendihip, or the affedion of my Auguftus.
A ftiip is to fail this afternoon,; I fliall take the opportunity of fending you a few trifles with this fcrawl, and fubferibe myfelf as ufual.
Yours,
Laura Levison.
LET-
Laura and Augustus,
87

LETTER XVIII.
FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME,
Ty>f Y beloved friend, the dye is call j your Laura has conSented — to what — to elope, Cecilia j pray heaven, fhe may never repent the ftep.—My heart linhs within me, at the bare thoughtwhat mud I then experience, when the hour arrives ?—Ah 1 my friend, what wretch* ednefs may I not be preparing for myfelf !—what ftore of repentance 1 May not this ftep give a Block to my Montague’s efteem ? O Heavens ! diftra6fcion is in the fuppofition ;—but, be it as it will, I mud fubmit, my promife is given. Next Saturday, I bid adieu to this dear Spot, the place of my nativity. My unhappy mother, gracious Providence Support her on this trying occafion I Merciful Heaven 1 foften the heart of my father, in his Laura’s favour. O ! my dear, my fym-pathifing friend, if ever a ftep of this kind was excufable, it is in me. You can form no conception of the treatment I have experienced; my father’s cruelty is beyond credibility. Ah ! Cecilia, could you believe, your poor Laura has been beat, cruelly beat, for no other reaSon, but refufmg to unite herfelf to that defpicable mon-fter, Bofwell. Next Sunday my father fwear§, by all the powers above, ftiall fee me the bride of that hardened villain. Mr. Claftick, the clergyman, is a wretch dead to all the feelings of humanity.
88
Laura and Augustus.
manity, and a creature of Bofwell’s What then have I not to apprehend from their united vio« lence ? My poor mother weeps my misfortunes, but that is all the relief Ihe can afford me ; my father has even threatened to confine her to her chamber, as he declares Ihe fupports me in my undutiful condufit.
Well then, my friend, next Saturday evening I once more truft this unfortunate body to the mercy of the waves. Our valued friend Mr. Worthy has procured a paffport for a fmall veffet of his own, to convey us to Montferat, as it is impoffible the ceremony can be performed in this illand.
This kind friend, and my faithful Jenny, ac* companies us in our flight. This poor creature’s affeftion to me, my dear Cecilia, is beyond ex-preflion ; Ihe declares, Ilie holds herfelf indebted to me for every comfort Ihe now poffeffes; and vows, as a fmall mark of her gratitude, to ferve me through every change of fortune I may experience. Ah ! my friend, ought I not to be thankful to Providence for this faithful Servant ? How much more indelicate would be my fituatiaa, fo young, fo inexperienced, without a female friend near, to confole, to comfort, to relieve my drooping Spirits. Alas I my fweet companion of my childhood, I mull: quit this mournful fubje61, and diflipate my thoughts by a walk. I will, I think, take one more look, at that fweet re« cefs, where my adored Montague and myfelf firft exchanged vows of mutual conflancy and love. I will bedew each beauteous relic of my former tranquil hours with, tears.
The
Laura and Augustus.
89
The night is louring ; well does it Suit the pre-fent gloomy habit of my foul, and bears a juft re-femblance to my grief. Farewell, my friend, I feel a ftrange foreboding, that we never more lhall meet: if fo, may every good angel keep you in his watchful care ! and when the hour lhall arrive, that will fummon you from this ftate of probation, may we, my amiable, my loved friend, meet in thofe regions of uninterrupted blifs, where no tyrant father, no wicked Bof-well, lhall arife to difturb the tranquility of-
Your unhappy
Laura Levison
LETTER XIX.
benjamin BOSWELL, ESC>j TO
A
JOHN WILSON.
ERDITION overtake the fugitives!
tricked, by Jupiter,—was ever fo artful--
By Heavens I I know not a name vile enough to give her. But one day more, and I fiiould have bid her defiance; fure the Devi! owed me a grudge : however, you lhall hear. Old Levifon, whole difpofition, by the bye, you knov^ to be none of the moft gentle, determined through my machinations to force Madam to become my wife; every thing was en train ', Mr. Claffick was to
perform
go
Laura anb Augustus.
.V
perform the important ceremony j a licence was prepared} we were provided againft faintingSy tears, and all the &c: of female artifice.
Early on Sunday morning the father went to his daughter's chamber, the door of which was faftened; he called, but no anfwer was returned. At length prefaging what had happened, he burft open the door, and fearched not only the apartment, but the whole houfe, in vain,—-the bird was flown. I, raving at ray own ftupidity in not keeping a better guard, dire6led my courfe to the Orange Grove, a hope ftill remaining that the little Jezebel had fled thither;- in this I was alfo difappointed. Old Crabtree, however, in his hurry to force open the door of his daughter’s chamber, had rather ufed too many implements, for, not content with footing', he headed, and handled the door fo dextreoufly, that he Sprained his collar-bone,- and'disjointed his thumb, This added fuel to his fury, and in a rage he on'his knees not only imprecated mofl: ardently, that mifery might be his daughter’s portion j but fo-lemnly made oath, that, were Ihe ftarving, he would not beflow a fixpence to Save her from rotting in a prifon.
On rummaging the building in the Grove,. I found a letter addrefled to her father; and a few poetic lines, laying carelefsly on the table, whether of her own compofing, I know not ; and all I can fay is, that (he is a very romantic jade, and lhali not fo eafily efcape me, as flie imagines. By Jove, Wilfon, I will yet have her in my pof-feflion, or I am greatly miftaken. But, when
we meet, you Ihall hea.'’ what further Heps I pro*
pofe

Laura and Augustus.
91'
pofetotake; in the rnean time, I requeft you will take a ride over to my eftate, and fee how things go on there. I dehgn being down in a few days.
Yours,
Benjamin Boswell.
P. S. Though hackneyed in Scenes of Sorrow, I muft confefs, I feel Some remorfe, when I behold the mother drowned in tears, lamenting as She calls it her loft child.
The Lines found by Mr.Boswell in the
Orange Grove.
When night had cast her fable veil around.
And darknefs reign’d throughout the midnight air,.
Nought broke the Solemn filence but the founds The plaintive found, that rofe from deep defpair* rrwas then with penfive step the grove I fought,
(Sacred to melancholy’s mournful train,)	'
There pining fadnefs mark’d each rcftlefs thought.
While heait-feh Sorrow urg’d the gloomy strain.
Once, ye embow’ring (hades, (the child of joy,)
I carelefs rang'd each inmost Sweet recefs,
(Soul-piercing thought!) ’twas then my glad employ To contemplate increasing happinefs.
Yet oft’ for others has this boSom bled.
For others woes this friendly heart could feel.
Sweet Heaven-born pity drops of kindnefs (hed,
Aad wept thofe Sorrows friendship could not heal.
Then fay, my father, will you now restore The peace of mind by cruelty betray’d J Ah \ what on earth can heal the rankling fore Which fell tyrannic’s fharpenedctooth has made ? Prefumptuous mortal I dare not thus complain.
But filent weep thy unexampled woes:
Shalt thou, the wife decrees of Heaven arraign ?
Submit, nor dare it’s awful will oppofe.
L.E.D
t
i!
92
Laura AND Augustus.
LETTER XX.
MISS LEVISON TO WILLIAM LEVISON,
ESQUIRE
Honoured Sif}
T J R G E D by the miSery of my lituation, I ^ have taken a ftep which in the eyes of the world may be deemed imprudent; but my cafe is fo defparate, I know no other means of avoiding a hateful marriage. Pity your poor child, Sir: could you but witnefs the agony I now endure, your heart would meltingly acknowledge the pa-rent. Permit me, my dill dear father, (for 01 let the wretched Laura once more addrefs you by that tender name) to implore your forgivenefs, for this ftep which in your eyes may be ftyled a breach of duty. Forget not. Sir, I befeech you, that I am your child ; Suffer the many amiable virtues of my Montague to plead in my behalf; he beholds you with the utmoft duty and refped; he longs to addrefs you by the endearing appellation of Father. O ! my honoured parent, do not, I pray you, dafli from my lips the cup of happinefs; your difpleafure, my dear Sir, will imbitter all my future days. My unhappy mother too—O ! my heart 1 my father, comfort her, for the lofs of her daughter. O Heavens 1
I know
Laura and Augustus.
93
I know not what I write ; in a few moments I fliall bid adieu to my parental abode; be merciful, fuffer it not to be a long adieu ; on my knees, I humbly intreat your forgivenefs; and, believe me, my judgment and not my heart has erred.
I am now fetting fail on a tempeftuous ocean, where Ihoals and rocks are hid, to wreck the unwary mariner. But I will truft myfelf to the pro-te6lion of that all merciful God, who never abandons the guiltlefs unfortunate. I alfo depend much upon the workings of parental love, and in that dependance bid you farewell. And 01 may every watchful angel guard your pillow round, pour in the balm of confolation on your uneafy thoughts, and lull you to a forgetfulnefs of every care! My heart is too full: I can fay no more but beg you to pardon your truly affectionate, though wretched daughter, while labouring under your difpleafure,
/
Laura Levison.
P. S. My tender affeCtion and duty wait upon my dear mother.
LET*
94
Laura and Augustus
L E T T E R.
Dorn!
me a'.
SIRS. lilONtAGtJE TO MISS BYNG;
"SA O U doubtlefs, my dear, will be furprized at the date of this letter ; but my hulband and g^enerous friend, anxious to diffipate the gloom which my father’s unkindnefs had oceafioned, de* teriTiin'ed on mir quitting Montferat, to vifit Dominica.
In my lafl: letter Cecilia, I informed youths dreaded event was over; that I had exchanged the name of Levifon for that of Montague. Yes, my friend,' could I but obtain the pardon of my offended' father, ray blifs would then be compleat. Montague'is all gentlenefs; ever indulgent to his Laura. With the moff melting winning accents, does he footh my griefs, when the difpleafure of my incenfed father comes athwart my meniory. As to my dear mother, Ihe was privy to my flight: I have written to her, by a friend who will, I know, convey the letter, unfeen, into her dear hands.
O my friend, what acharafler is this Worthy! He entered my chamber this moment.—‘‘ My dear Laura,” faid he, ** you know I now look upon you as my adopted daughter, and therefore
muff
* Thi« lietter does not appear*
Laura and Augustus.
pe
inuft nut refufe any thing from your father^ ac* cept of this, my fweet girl; it will purchafe you a few trifles, which your abfence from home may render neceffary.” He prefented me with a piece of Sealed paper, in which was inclofed fifty Johannes, and inftantly quitted the chamber, nor would permit me to return one fingle, poor acknowledgment. I burfl: into tears; not of pride, Cecilia, but of gratitude. The god like man’s generofity overpowered me. I feel the aflTe6l:ion, the duty, of a child towards him ; and it fliall be my ftudy to foften his decline of life, to fmooth the rugged pillow of difeafe. In me he Shall.find a tender, an afSedlionate child; T owe him this, and much, more. My beloved Montague t6o will aflifl; me in the tender office. Ah, my friend, has he not been more tender to your Laura than an own parent ? Alas, my dear, I never till now experienced the fweet affiduities of parental affection. My father, miftaken man, ever treated me with that degree of Severity, which always rendered his prefence a terror, rather than a pleafure to me. When in company with him, my conversation was refirained, from a fear that I Ihould inadvertantly differ in opinion with him. How, Cecilia, have I envied you the tender, the friendly confidence your father re-pofed in you, while mine Seemed fufpicious of every look ! Ah ! my friend, how miftaken is that parent, who rather wifties his child to fear than love him ? For which reafon, when addref-fing their unhappy offspring, they throw off all the milkinefs of parental tendernefs, and put on the afperity of a Severe judge. By this condu6:, what do they acquire ? It frequently hurries the
child

q5
Laura AND Augustus.
child to indiscretions which they otherwife would never have been guilty of. It often brings Ihame and infamy on a refpedable family ; mifery and repentance on the unfortunate Sufferers.
Think -not my Cecilia, that in what I. have faid J mean to reproach my father, and to juf-tifyvmy own conduQ:; far from it ; I fincerly forgive him : and may he' meet with the fame pardon from heaven, for the heavy imprecations which I am informed he has pronounced againd his helplefs daughter ! Ah, my friend, were I not fenfible of the juftice of the Omnipotent Power, how fhould I tremble at fo dreadful a denunciation 1 But Heaven, the all-wife difpofer of events, will not Suffer an innocent child to fall a viffim to a father’s unmerited rage. This fub-je6l, my dear, has rather unhinged my Spirits : I mufl; therefore quit my pen till more compofed, when I will inform you of a very extraordinary flory, which I yeflerday heard at, the Government houfe where I dined.
IN continuation.
THE affliction which agitated my Spirits this morning, has in Some degree fubfided, and I artt now calm; and will therefore fulfill my promife. Yeflerday, by invitation, Mr. Worthy, Montague, and your Laura, dined at the Govern-ment-houfe. On the removal of the cloth, among the different topics of conversation which enfued, that of the poffibility of people appearing after their death was introduced. For rny part, I never could bring myfelf to credit fo improbable a thing; but a gentleman at table, th
lieutenant
A
w
Laura and Augustus.
97
lieutenant governor of that Ifland, alTerted as a fa^, that in that very houfe he himfelf had beheld the apparition of a departed friend. This declaration raifed my Ciiriofity, and I intreated, if it were not too great a liberty, he would favour me with the particulars. He bowed, and begun as follows:
When Sir William Y———— was governor
of this ifland, I was a lieutenant in the regiment; a gentleman of the name of B was a Subaltern in the fame corps with myfelf. He was of German extraction, and had married a Mifs L ■ , by whom he had one child, of whom he was extravagantly fond. Mrs. B —, foon after the birth of this boy, died. My friend, who was a man of uncommon fenfibility, mourned the lofs of his amiable wife with the greateft fincerity; and transferred all his affeCtion from the departed, to the living objeCl of his care. When his boy had reached his Second year, Mr. B——— was ordered to this ifland; and, unwilling to leave this little pledge of his Caroline’s love to the care of ftrangers, he hired a nurfe for the infant, and refolved they fliould accompany him in his voyage.
My friend, who doated on this child, and whofe whole*happineSs centered in its little prattle, was never eafy but when the little Edward was with him. If he rode out, you were certain of feeing his blooming Son Seated before him : in fliort, he exifted but in the innocent Smiles of his boy. About nine months after he had beeh ftationed here, bufinefs carried him to the windward of this ifland. At this time the Government-, houfe happened tobe exceedingly crowded; for barracks not yet being built, moft of the officers
were
9S
Laura and Augustus.
•were obliged to take up their abode in this mail-lion, and double beds were placed in the chambers. A few nights after Mr. B——— had been abfent, I had not been in bed a quarter of an hour before I heard a perfon enter my apartment, and advance to my bed, and undraw my curtains. I found it was B——. I enquired when he arrived in town.. .,..ln reply, he informed me, he died that very night : and then, in the moft pathetic words, recommended his Son to my protection, and difappeared. Struck with aftonifh* ment, I rubbed my eyes, and fain would have perfuaded myfelf it was the vifion of a dream;
but calling to Mr. M----------, a gentleman who
flept in the fame room with myfelf, I enquired of him if he had heard any body enter the chamber ? He replied, “ Yes, I thought it was
B—-------: what brought him here at fo late an
hour.”—“ Did you hear him fpeak” (faid I) ? He anfwered in the*^ffirmative, but could not diftinguilh what he faid. I then related the particulars ; and the next morning mentioned it at the breakfaft-table, when I was mofl: fevercly bantered. But, however, in the evening news was received of ray poor friends death, who had fallen a martyr to a bilious fever, which attacked him the very day of his arrival at the place of his deftination. This confirmed ,what I had before related. I inftantly took the little orphan under my protection ; and on looking into my friends papers, I found forty pounds; and traced by fome letters, that the mother and
filler of Mrs. B	were living in--------—
Street, H-----------Square. I found alfo, that
though they were people of family, they were in
^	but
Laura and Augustbs.
99
hut indifferent circumftances, and received a pen-fion of fifty pounds a year from her majefty. Therefore confidered it necefifary to inform'them of the circumftance : nevertheless I determined, in cafe no perfon fliould have pity upon his youth, never to abandon him.
And though a lieutenant’s pay is too trifling to mention, ’twas all the fortune I could boaft, yet refolved he Ihouid partake of my Scanty pittance* I embarked the child and his nurfe for Englandj and gave the woman a letter to the grandmother, in which I enumerated the above particulars, and ordered her to carry him to	■■■
Street; but, ftrange to tell, both grandmother and aunt refufed to receive him. However, they related the circumftances to a perfon of fafhion, diftantly related to them, who thought the ftory fo extraordinary, that file mentioned it to our gracious queen. Her majeffcy, whofe foul is formed of the mofl: delicate and refined fenfibility, and whofe heart is ever touchingly alive to every call of Sympathy, pitied the helplefs babe, defired to fee him ; and nobly had him received, and educated with the young P——. Her majefly had the goodnefs to over-rate my Small kindnefs to
the boy, and defired lady----------^ to enquire
what would be the mofl; defirable Service Ihe could render me. The government of Tobago at that time becoming vacant, it was offered for my acceptance; but as my friend. Sir William Y—, was then governor of this ifland, I preferred the lieutenant governancy of Dominica, which I gained.—-Pray Sir, Said I, may I afk if the young gentleman is ftill with the royal family ?■—Undoubtedly, Madam, And I will with pleaSure
VoL. II.	E '	inform
r
I
II
Laura and Aucustus.
5 06
inform you of the remaining hiftory of my young friend.
A Oerman lady, about the court, took a particular fancy to the child, and treated him in eve-ry refpe6t with the tendernefs of a mother. Between three and four years ago a gentleman died of the name of B-——leaving an eftate Irora fifteen hundred to two thoufand a year. No heir appeared; and this lady had the generolity to Hand forth the friend of the young Edward. He heing of the fame name with the deceafed, a diftant relationfhip was traced-; and through the affiduity and liberality of the before-mentioned lady, he has gained the fortune, and is now at the univerfity purfuing his ftudies. His amiable be-nefaftrefs, anxious to be near him, has taken a houfe in his neighbourhood ; and, it is imagined, at her death will leave him all flie is poffelTedof. Here he ceafed.' I.returned the gentleman many acknow:ledgments for his interefting narrative, and
could not help exclaiming,
¥■ '
Who, Providence, .(hall trace thy Secret steps,
Meafure thy counfel, or direct thy plans ?—
However ^extraordinary and improbable this ftory may appear, my dear Cecilia, yet it is an undoubted fa6t; the parties are now living, and the veracity of the governor unqueftionalde.
I could not avoid Ibedding a tear* when I rc-fleiSted what mull have been the fufierings of the dying parent, when he confidered he was leaving his little Smiling companion defencelefs, and ex-pofed to all the miferies attending poverty. No
wonder that, upon fo agonizing an occafion, the
foul
I
Laura and Augustus*
lOI
foul was permitted to linger a Ihort time longer on earth, to demand the protcflion of a friend for the helplefs innocent. 1 Ihall ever love the generous S..... ■, for his humanity to the unhoufed
Edward. How few would, upon So Scanty an income, have thought of burthening themfelves with an unfriended babe ! You fee, my dear, its own grandmother and aunt refufed their Succour:
therefore how much more noble was it in S .,
to declare he would Softer the young plant, and preferve it from the chilling blafts of a cruel and mercenary world! Our amiable Sovereign too ! fhe felt the force of maternal feelings, and kindly transplanted the beauteous flower into a richer foil, there to flourifli in a parterre of the fweeteft bloflbms.
O! ray friend, do not the above circumftances (hew the hand ol an All-ruling Providence ? How dare prefumptuous man to doubt the exiftence of a Deity ? Does not the firmament, the fun, the ftars, all declare the workings of a hand Divine ? Can thefe be the effe£l: of chance ? Impoflibie. Then how can vain mortals be fo blind to fuch convincing truths ? But let us, my valued friend, return the Almighty thanks, that we, nor none we efteem, are among the numbers of thofe wretched beings whofe hearts are bar’d to conviction ; and in this fweet confolation I fubferibe myfelf your affe6lionate friend,
Laura Montague.
P. S. My charming hufband, though unknown to you, defires I will befpeak him a place in your efteem.
E 2
LET
10,
Laura and Avcvsrvt
LETTER XXII
Ioniin.
MISS BYNG TO MRS. MONTAGUE
Long my Laura, may your tender union last,
And no dull care your blooming plealures blast ;
But every day may you in Montague find New charms unfolding both in form and mind ! '
M
A
A Y your father relentingly confefs the parent, and with extended arms receive the lovely pair. Ah, my dear, what were my emotions on reading your firft epiftle 1 I perufed, and re-perufed the letter ,; I .could Scarce believe the evidence of my own’eyes. I trembled at the heavy clouds which my imagination formed, as gathering round your defencelefs head. What! cried I, my friend, the young, the tender, the timid Laura Levifon, turned an eloper; quit her father’s houfe by nighty truft herfelf with an a!-moft entire ftranger; Suffer herfelf to be conveyed on board a veffel by two gentlemen, with no other fecurity for their honourable behaviour but a yague promife ! Ah ! ray fweet friend, what at that moment was the fituation of my mind! I dreaded to open your other epiftles, left they fliould confirm what my coward heart foreboded. At laft I muftered up courage to break the fealsi and, with inexpreffible delight, read your fafe ar
riv3.
Laura and Augustus.
103
rival in the land of matrimony. From what a dangerous precipice has rhy inelliinable friend efcaped ! Few, I apprehend, are the young meii' of the prefent age, who would have a£led with that degree of delicacy arid honour which your amiable Auguftus has done'. The generality would have taken every advantage of your parti-ality in their favour, and added immortal fcandal to your name. They would have brought the ver ry (lep you' had takeny out of your ungoverned a(fe6bon to them, as an accufation againll you. Few are the men,' whofe efteem would not have been forfeited by fuch a condu6I. How many of our fex are now living examples of the perfidy of man ! Let us look round us, and behold with a pitying eye the miferable condition to which many a' fond believing maid is reduced; In Ihort, I mull with Horatia fay.
Were you, ye fair, but cautious whom ye trust,
Did you but think'hoW fddomfools are So many of your fex would not in vain Gf broken vows, and faithlefs men complain.
But pardon, my fweet fricndj thefe rfefle6H-ons, as they proceed from a heart wHofe anxiety^ on your account, is not to be exprefled.
Tell your charming hufband, as you afFe6H-onately ftyle him, that his tendernefs for the lifler of my heart, exclufive of his own perfonal merit, will ever fecure him a place in my warmeft efteem. Inform your valued friend, Mr Worthy, that I revere, I love his noble, his generous Sympathy; and that if he has any defign to take
unto himfelf a helpmate, Cecilia Byng is in his option.
E3
Juttly
if 04
Laura anb Augustus’.
Jullly may you ftyle him a god like man; hij foul, indeed, afpires above the vulgar flight of low mortality. I look upon him as a being fent to Save my dearefl: friend from mifery. Yes, my dear, without his alhftance and proteftion, you could not have traded yourfelf with Montague. Would you not, ere this, have been facrificedto that villain Bofwell ? By the bye, my love, what a heart muft that wretch poITcfs, when the plead* ings of my gentle friend produced infult and ridi-cule, inftead of pity 1 But, however, my dear Mrs. Montague, notwithftanding you are married, and. under the prote6Iion of your hulband, let me entreat you to be guarded againft any vile attempt he may hereafter try to execute.
A man poISefled of fuch calloflty of foul is capable of any undertaking, be it ever fo' hazardous. I therefore once more implore you to be av/are of any nets he may Spread to enfnare you; and with fervent prayers for your profperity, and encreafing happinefs, fubferibe myfelf, your very afie€Honate friend.
N
Cecilia Byng.


N
LET

Laora AND' Augustus;
105
LETTER
ST J
PROM THE SAME TO THE SAME
T E'R M I N E D that the fheet of paper,-'
^ which contained the congratulations of Cecilia to her Laura,' Ihould breathe nothing but peace and-tranquillity, I deferred informing you ©f z circumftance,’ which gives me' the molt heart-felt unealinefs. My father, whofe unfortunate attachment to play had greatly encumbered his eftate, has, by the united interefl: of him* Self and friends, prCcUred a lucrative and honourable appointment in one of the Eaft India fettle* ments; to which place my duty, as well as my affe6Iioni obligcf me to accompany him; For dan I, Laura, facifice too muchy to fo indulgent a parent, wliofe tender care and paternal affection have amply fupplied the lofs of a mother,-whom the icy hand of death fnatched awayy ere I was fenfible of her worth ? Nay, my dear, for whom does this incomparable parent, at his advanced' time of life, take fo long, fo hazardous a voyage. Is it not to reinftate his darling Ceci* lia in her birth-right ? And Ihall flie then, re* fufe to be the folace, the prop of his declining years, and by an unwillingncfs to fliare the fatigues of a- tedious and dangerous paffage, with
E 4	a para-
io6
Laura and Augustus.
a parafitical hand, ftrike a thorn in his generous breafl: ? Heaven forbid ! that thy friend fliould 'prove fo great a monfter ! No ; gladly, my fa-ther, will thy dutious, thy affe<5lionate daughter follow you, through the painful, the toilfome journey of life. O ! Laura, could I but once more behold you before I bid adieu to this enchanting ifle, and on thy tender bofom Ihed the warm tear of friendftiip, and hear thy Sympathetic Sigh; I could, methinks, with more eompofure, quit my native country. But that, alas 1 is a happinefs that is denied me, the mountainous fea already divide us. Ah ! my friend, what a fate is ours ! But as Some alleviation, let me entreat you will fend, by every opportunity which offers, a kind of journal of your life, as I defign of mine. And remember, Laura, I befpeak the dionour of Handing fponfor to your firfl: blooming
t
• Next week I embark for Madrafs: but when I Shall re’-embark for England, Heaven only knows. I Shall bid my fweet friend adieu, v.'ith wifliing Montague’s.tender love, and indulgent care, may
blefs her amiable virtues.
I	^	;


Cecilia Byng.
9-
■%	f
t .


J
f '
0

f '
LET
Laura and AuGUiTDS.
107
LETTER XXIV.
\ !
Dominica,
MRS. MONTAGUE TO MISS BYlTG.
A H1 my friend, ■ what a fate indeed is ours !
how arc my pleafing expe6tations dalhed to the ground I “ and, like the bafelefs fabric of a vifion, leave not a wreck behind.” Yes, Cecilia, I had fondly flattered myfelf-in a few months to have held the After of my heart in the cordial embrace of friendfliip, and in her foothing con-verfation fo'und a balin'for the cruel, the unre-
^	s	*	„
lenting dirpleafure of my father. O ! Cecilia, what a deftiny is mine; to.involve the man, on whom my foul doats with the moft extravagant fondnefs, in the moft dreadful fituation 1 You will fee by the date of this letter, that I am ftill at Dominica. Would you believe it ? my father adfs with a degree of madnefs, fcarcely to be credited. My beloved hufband dare not venture to return io Grenada, left in his own defence he fliould be obliged to lift his arm againft the author of his Laura’s life. For we are informed, my father never ftirs out without his piftols,
' vengeance againft my Auguftus.
E s;
Mr
io8
Laura and Augustus.
Mr. Worthy, that invaluable friend, purpofes returning in a few days, to attempt in perfon an accommodation. I have written to Mrs. Willis, the Governor’s lady to entreat her kind intercef* lion with my father, in my behalf; though ray knowledge of her was but a month antecedent to my departure from Grenada. Yet I truft thefin* gularity of my eaufe will plead my apology, What adds, Cecilia, to the horrors of my litua-tion, is, that what I took for an indifpofition oc* caiioned by griefj I find but too plainly, that im« prudent love has produced a new misfortune that I bear about a living teftimony of my affeflion, Ahi!' unhappy babe, thy mother’s anguifh foreruns thy bnrth ! throbs of terror were thy firft Symptoms of exiftencc. To this circumftance, my love, my father is no ftrangeri as in my laft letters I pleaded the fate of the unborn infant. Ah 1 my friend, what an inflexibility of temper muft he be poflefled of ^ True, I have offended him, and he has a right to punifli ? but will not penitence turn, afide the thunder bolt of Heaven 1 and vengeance is the work of the Almighty. Why is it then, that my earthly parent is lefs relenting than my heavenly one f Why is it that he> who is guilty himfelf in. Some cafes, will not forgive guilt, though it is the condition of hisob* taihing forgivenefs!' Merciful Heaven, have mercy on the unmerciful! Let my life, let the life of that unborn infant expiate my crimes, hut Save, fnatch my hufband from the jaws of def* tru6fion* O Cecilia, I cannot proceed: for* give this bliftere'd Iheet; my tears will not be re* drained. Adieu.. Heaven blefs and preferve you is the condant prayer of
Laura Montague.
let-
Laura and Augustus.
109
/
L E T T E R XXV.
MRS* MONTAGUE TO MRS. WILLIS.
H O U O H my acquaintance with Mrs. Wil* Ks has been but of a late date ; yet, as the goodnefs of her heart appeared-too conspicuous to efcape my obfervation, emboldened by this foitiment. Madam, I take up my* pen to implore your humane interceffion with my father, in far vour of njy beloved Montague, myfelf, and unborn babe. © my dear Madam, Fbefeech you^ ufc all the energy and‘el6qu6iCe you are lb much miBrefs'of‘ in our biehalf; touch his pride, knock at nature in bis heart; do not fufFer him to triumph in his obduracy. Intereft'the Governor in my caufe;^ let him but plead for rny bulband^s un-molefted return to his regiment:' he cannot much longer remain'abfent; he has already been away eight months; and I tremble left my father’s violence Ihould'oblige my amiable Auguftus to dfaw hrs fivordj leteither fall, and lara’doomed to perpetual mifery. Great God ! what a ftate is mine I Why 'mil he, who ought by nature>to be a friend, a guardian:
• t
o
no Laura and Augustus.
diari over myhappinefs, be my bittereil: enemy j and poifon all my promifed joys ! Is not thiscon-du6I: enough to alienate the affe61:ions of the tendered hufband ? But happy is it for me, that in the midft of my father’s unremitting rage, my adored Montagcie, ihy huifbahd, ’ my all of blifs, continues the fame kind affedlionate creature, and if poffible more tender than ever. I depend much, my dear Madam, on your humanity to plead for me, and blulh at having faid fo much to one, whofe own goodnefs of heart will urge her to do all in her power to Save an unfortunate woman from the mod poignant wretched-nefs; and be aflured, ray worthy Mrs. Willis, I diall ever gratefully acknowledge your goodnefs to the unfortunate
»
* $
r
Laura Montague,
s f
%
* H

V	r- •
• f
o
H
.. ^
LET.
Laura and Augustus
I
letter XXVI
Grenada.
MRS. WILLIS T6 MRS. MONTAGUE.
\
S
.W
LE T thefe few lines, my dear Mrs. Montague,, convey in fome degree peace to your diftrefled mind. Mr. Montague, my dear Madam, I with pleafure inform you, may withfafe-ty return to this ifland, as through the Governor’s perfuafions he has gained a promife from your father not to moleft' him.
I am forry to fay, your father ftill continues deaf to all our entreaties in behalf of a reconciliation; but, I hope, time will abate the violence ©f his difpleafure, and Soften his heart to the Supplications of his only child. Do not defpair, my dear Madam, but preferve your Spirits for the Sake of the little innocent, and truSI: your caufe to the mercy of an all-wife Providence; and in wifliing you a happy moment, fubfcribe myfelf your lin-cere friend and well-wiftier,
f
Mary Willis.^
i
LET
IIZ
Laura and Augustus.
LETT E R XXVIB
JENNY MORGAN TO MISS EYNG.
Honoured Madamy
T T is with infimie pldafure, that I have it in my power to inform you that my dear Lady was a fortnight ago Safely delivered of a lovely girl; the mother and child arc both as-wcll as we coulcl yrifti. Mrs. Montague would herfeK have informed you of her Safety f but her hufband, ever apprchenfive for his Laura’s health,.has laid ftrifl
injunftions on; us all, not to fuffer pen; ink, or
paper to come within her fightand defired ine to inform you of the happy event: as to him-Self, he fearce ever quits her fide,, but watches over her with the moft tender anxiety. Could you but behold"him,, my dear Madam,, adminif-fering nourifhment to- Her,, every thing he taftes to fee whether it is palatabh, or whether too hot, or too cold, before he prefents ifto herp and - (he with the fweet fmile of reciprocal affe6Iion receives it from her adoring h’ulhand.‘ The exalted, the amiable Mr. Worthy !' to fee with what
looks, of paternal aiTedion he beholds the lovely
pair
Laura aiId Augustus#
II j
pair ! The little babe, whom he fondly calls his grandchild, he carcITes with Such tendernefs, that it frequently draws the unwilling tear from my lovely Miftrefs’s eyes. But it is now time to adminifter feme refrelhment to my dear Lady $ I muft therefore quit my pen for the prefent, but will on my return refumc it*
IN CONTINUATION.
i»
O M A D A M, what a beautiful fc’cnc have I juft been witnefs to 1 permit me to give you a (ketch. Mrs. Montague was feated in a large chair of white dimity fringe, herfelf, as you may fup-pofe, in fpotlefs white j the fmiling angel in her arms, receiving that norifhment which providence ordained it ; fhe had hold of one of its little hands, which (he kilTed with the greateft marks of maternal tendernefs. The delighted huftiand hanging on the back of her chair, feemed to behold them with a kind of cxtatic delight ; the tendereft love and affeflion teemed in his expreffive eye. At a fmall diftance fat the good Mr. Worthy t a book was lying upon the table, while his head reclined upon his hand ; as his arm refted on the table, his eyes were fixed on the lovely group, and the moft benevolent complacency fat on his venerable countenance. O ! my God f thought I, would that Mrv Levifon was at this momet in ray fituation 1 he furely could not withftand the powerful voice of nature. O 1 Mifs Byng, happy is it for my dear Miftrefs, that (he has met with fo generous a friend as Mr. Worthy t but, indeed), foe deferves, if ever woman
114
Laura and Augustus.
I	.
man did, to meet with humanity^ for her heart and hand were ever open to the fdrrows of ano. ther. You, Madam, no doubt, have heard my unfortunate ftory; what would have been my fate, if Providence had not fent fuch an angel to my relief ! I muft ere now have funk with wretched*
S
nefs and want into the filerit grave.
But I will not detain you longer than to inform you the inflrant my Millr’efs is able to bear the voyage, we return to Grenadaj and are to take up our refidence at bounty hall, the hofpita* ble manfion of the noble Mr. Worthy, from whence Mrs. Montague will write to you ; in the mean tirhe,, 1 have the. honour to fubfcribe
m
Madam,
^	- A V
. i
f
*' A

%
Your mod obedient
. \
•	t	.
humble fervant, Jenny Morgan;
I •
9
V
• k
LEX*
Laura and Augustus.
^^5
LETTER XXVIII
Bounty-half Grenada.
MRS. MONTAGUE TO MIS9, BYNG
I T H gratitude to the Supreme, my dear* * eft friend I am once more enabled to take up my pen My faithful Jenny tells me, ftie has already informed you of the birth of my little girl: the dear little moppet was baptized the day preceding our departure from Dominica; my invaluable friend Worthy, and your Ladyftiip, were its fponfors; the loved name of Cecilia was beftow-ed upon the little ftranger. And, O ! may Ihc with that name inherit the virtues and amiable qualities of my friend ! Gratitude feems already to poflefs her heart, as by her innocent fmiles Ihe appears willing to repay me the pain I have endured for her fake. My Montague too, could you but behold him, with his little daughter in his arms, fondly prefling it to his amiable heart, and gazing with , all the marks of fatherly affe6tion, depi^ed in his expreflive countenance on its little delicate features j how would you adore him 1 It would al-fo divert you to hear us difpute about the little urchin ; my hufband (what an uncouth found !) ■Will infift Ihe greatly refcmbles me: while I am
perfuaded
V
ti6
Laura ai^d Augustus.’
l
pcrfuadcd its every feature bears the grcateff fimilitude to thofe of my beloved Auguftus; indeed, letting afide the partiality of a fond mother,, fhe promifes to be very handfome.
I make an excellent nurfe to the dear little crea-
ture, and am not a little proud of being able to go through fo delightful a talk. 1 fuppofe many people would be quite Ihocked at my old-fafliioned Sentiments ; but you, my dear^ who know what ftrange particular ideas I have, will not at all be furprifed at it. I fe-e, from my window, the friendly Worthy taking my little marmofet in His arms ; he brings- it this way; you would be charmed, my’dear,, to'fee what an admirable nurfe he makes ; he enters my chamber. Laura,- my child, I think it is necelTary that you and my pretty grandchild here Ihould go and return'your thanks to MrSi Willis,* for her kind interceflion; w^ith' your father,, and to requeft the continuance of Her friendlhip j have you any objcdtion to go-this'after noon ?■ None in-the lead, my dear Sir ; I look upon it as a duty which I owe her. So- you fee,- my amiable friend, I mud quit my pen for the prefent, to prepare rnyfelf and the- fweet babe for this vilit.
IN COiTTINUATION.*
G R E A T God r Cecilia, what a Hurry have I been thrown into ! but I* will lead you on methodically. I left off informing, you of my de* Hng of paying my compliments at the govern-ment-houfe; accordingly, at a proper hour, attended by my hulband, Mr. Worthy, and my little mrl,, fet out for Melvil-houfe : we were received
Laura and Augustus.
117
1
ceived with great friendlhip, nay, affe£Iion. flattered myfelf to enjoy a moll delightful afternoon. Mrs. Willis chid me for not coming, and taking a family dinner with her, inllead of ufing the formality of a tea vifit. The feaft of reafon and the flow of fouls was fubHitutcd in the place of the infipid card-table f Mr. Worthy and the Governor were playing backgammon; my dear Montague was of our party, I had my little girl at my bofom nourilhing, when the door opened, and in entered Mr. Bofwell.———I ftarted, the child dropped into my lap; I fell back into my chair, my eyes clofed ; my huflband and Mr. Worthy both flew to my affiftance ; my Au-guflus gently took my hand, and in the mod tender manner implored me to fpeak. I was incapable ; but, yielding to tears, found relief. O! Montague, was all I could articulate ; I laid my head on his bofom, as if fenfible of fafety while refting there. The good Worthy took my other hand: My dear Mrs. Montague, why do you alarm yourfclf thus ! Is not your beloved Au-guflus with you I Am I not here I is not Worthy your friend your father, and Ihall any one infult ou with impunity t Look up, dear Laura, Mr. ofwell is retired into another room, and will not return but by your permifllon.—I raifed my head. —O ! Mrs. Willis, my huflband, my friend, my more than father, pardon my weaknefs ! but the prefence of that wretch recalled a thoufand painful circumftances to my memory. But let him enter, I will try to compofe myfelf; and I drank a draught of hartihorn and water from the hands of my Auguftus. In a few moments Bofwell returned, accompanied by the governor. I trembled,—I leant againll the chair, he advanced to
me.

ii8
me.
Laura a?7D Augu^tusv
I am greatly mortified, my dear' Madam, that my prefence Ihould prove So hateful to you;' permit my fincere penitence for my paft condud to plead my pardon in your gentle bofom ! Mr. Montague, be my advocate with your lovely Laura; Ihe will not refufe your requeft. I am Sufficiently puniflied with the lofs of So ineftiinable a jewel, do not add to my disappointment by your averfion. My Sweet love,” cried my Au« guftus, lillen to the dififcates of your good-nature ; fpeak to Mr. BoSwell your lofs, as he jullly Says, is a Sufficient punilhment.” I gave him my hand t “Rife, Sir,” (for he had thrown himSelf at my feet) : “ I freely forgive you.” He took my hand, and reSpeSlfully kiffed it; he bellowed many careflcs on my dear babe. But not-withllanding all that my reafon could' urge to compofe my mind ; yet was I So reftlefs at being in his company, that, notwithftanding his extreme politenefsto my dear Montague, which I thought rather bordered upon hypocrify, that I could not be Satisfied tillT had requefted the indulgent Mr. Worthy to fhorten his vifit. I apologized to the friendly Mrs. Willis, for my premature departure, and promifed to make amends, by taking an early opportunity of Spending the day with her. Mr. Bofwell begged to have the honour of placing me in my hammock; but, to my great joy, the Governor good-naturedly came up. Saying : “ No, BoSwell, that privilege be* longs to me ; permit me, Mrs. Montague I instantly gave my hand to the General, as really, my dear, the touch of the ipan is hateful to, me.
On
i
Laura and Augustus.
I JO
On my return home,-Mr. Worthy and Au-guftus • infifted on my retiring to reft, which in obedience to their wifties I did. But not finding myfeif inclined to fleep, I rofe up, and flipping on a rope de chamber, determined to inform you of this difagreeable meeting. But hark I hear a ftep advancing ; I muft bid you a good-night, or I Ihall receive a le6ture.
>
y ours,
Laura Montague.
LETTER
Grenada.
BENJAMIN BOSWELL, ESQ^ TO
JOHN WILSON.
A
4
VOU alkme, Wilfon, ifl have yet gained a fight of Montague’s wife fince her return to this ifland ? In anfwer to which queftion, I tell you I have. My trufty fellow Joe acquainted me that Madam defigned taking tea at the Governraent-houfe yefterday afternoon. Ah, thought I, a lucky opportunity, by Jove ; my intimacy at that houfe will warrantmy dropping in, in the evening.
Accord-
120 Laura and Augustus*
Accordingly at about Seven o’clock, I mounted my trufty Rofinantc, and Sallied Sorthi On alighting at Melvij-houSe, without alking any queftious oS the attendants, whether Maftcr or Miftrefs was at home, I made the beft of my way towards the drawing-room. For, to confefs the truth, I was apprehenfive that orders might have been iffued out, that on this day my worlhip fliould not be admitted. I Say, I advanced to the drawing-room, threw open the door, and made my entrance, without the previous ceremony of my name being announced ; down Sunk Madam Laura, up-flarted all the good folks. By my foul, you would have imagined the town had been befieged. By Heavens ! I never cut So d filly a figure ; Willis requefted I would accompany him into the next room, till Mrs. Montague had recovered from her furprife. At length I was recalled from my banhhment. Now, thought I,
for Some d..— Sentimental Speech. I advanced,
down I Sunk on my marrow-bones (by the bye, a little the fliSf for want of ufe) with a devilifli woebegone countenance, condeScended to dreSs my purpoSe up in gracious words. Such as might Softly fteal upon her mind. But d— Sentiment, I kifled her lily fair hand, and received her gracious pardon.
But now. Jack, to Jet you a little into my future plan of operations, for be revenged of her I will, by Heavens 1 or perilh in the attempt. You mull know, that that fond fool her hulband will in a few months be ordered with others of his brother blades over the country, to view a place where they have thoughts of building a fortification. Now, as good look will have it, the turtle
Laura and Augustus.
lai
cannot poflibly accompany her mate, as there ,-is no road, and they will be obliged to travel great part on foot, over hills, through woods, and wade rivers. In this period I defign carrying off the wanderer’s deary ; and when once. Jack, 1 have her in my pofleflion, if I do not feverely punifti her haughty, difdainful conduft, her re-jeflion of me, for that^ pale-faced puppy her huf-band, “ may,” as Lothario fays, ** the fliamc,_ ** I mean to brand his name with, reft on mine.”
GId Levifon fails next week for England, pur-pofely to avoid the chance of hearing or Seeing any thing of his daughter. And I know fo well the flintinefs of his nature, that I’ll be eurfed if he ever receive her into favour. It is wonderful, how that dog Montague and his pretty dove have wheedled that old fellow Worthy; he is one of your fentimentals, and I’ll be d—w—— if they do not fentiment the don out of every fixpence he is worth, and he is a warm rogue. You know he and his coufin Tom Rolley have had a devilifh . quarrel,—-fo no hopes you may fee for our old friend.
But, Jack, what the deuce poffelTed me to write fuch a curfed long letter ? Woman ! you doubtlefs will cry. Well, be it fo, and not another word from thine—
Benjamin Boswell,'
LET-
laa
Laura and Augustus.
LETTER
MRS. MONTAGUE TO MISS BYNG.
OC E C IL I A! he is gone, my incenfed fa* ther has quitted this ifland, left me without one parental embrace, one tender loolc. O! my God ! can nature be fo extinguiftied in his bread, that not one fpark remains to plead my caufe 1 Sure, the letters I have written him, would have foftened a heart of flint ! would one not think that tigers had nurfed him in their defart fliade 1 O I my friend, he forgets that it was love, and his own tyranny, that wrought my difobedience: for not all the eloquence of my beloved Auguftus Ihould have prompted me to forget that duty which as a parent I owed him ; had he not cruelly defigned compelling me by force to marry the man whom my foul detefted ! He urged a right to tyrannize over my heart, which right furely nature never gave. Could he imagine me fo weak of mind, that I would patiently fubmit to be led a vi(9;im to the facred altar, and in the prefence of the Supreme violate the Heavenly inftitution 1 No, my foul difdained fuch tyranny ; and 1 refolved to give to merit that, I to force refufed. Why was I endued with reafon ? was it only to fulfil the harfli commands of his capricious difpofition ? No, no, my right I know, and refolved to follow thofe diftates which juftice
war-
/
Laura and Augustus.
123
ranted. I weighed what Heaven defigned, and formed by her rules my free born mind. .
I am fenfible, my friend, that the generality of the world, whofe hearts never felt the tender fympathy of love, will condemn ray conduft. The low-minded part of mankind imagine, that a direfit fubmiffion is to be paid to a parent’s every will. But if my condufit is rightly weighed it will be found that a compliance would have more de«^ ferved blame, thanpraife; for thofe who would ftyle fuch an obedience virtue, would but profane her name. Yes, my Cecilia, is a marriage, wherein the hearts are at variance, any better than a legal proftitution; and can that be called t'irtue ? Impoflible. Well then, my dear Cecilia, as my own heart acquits me, I will confolc myfelf with thefe lines :
Virtue, rejoice, tho’ Heaven may frown awhile,
That frown is but the earnest of a Smile;
One day of tears prefages years of joy,
MisSortunes only mend us, not destroy !
Perhaps my dear father, when he comes to re-fled M'hat a tender affefilionate hufband my be** loved Montague makes his Laura, will relent; and once more receive me to the bofom of parental love. I will clofe this letter by humbly Supplicating the all-gracious Providence to preferve him and my dear mother; and to Swell with profperous winds his flying fails, andj in the heart-reviving hope of once more being admitted to their dear prefence, fubferibe myfelf your truly afledionate friend.
Laura Montague.

VoL. il
F
LET-
154
Laura and Augustus

LETTER XXXI.
*
BENJAMIN BOSWELL, ESQ^ TO
JOHN WILSON.
\
* F
H E lucky moment, my honeft fellow, is **■ arrived, ~ I fend this off exprefs, — prepare every thing for my reception at Guava; I fliall be down by Saturday night. Now, love and fortune aflifl me! JacC Laura fliall yet be mine; that haughty beauty fliall bow fubmiffive before me. By Heavens, I am half wild with joy !— Montague fets out on Thurfday morning on his reconnoitring plan, leaves his little divinity to the proteflion of that old dotard Worthy. Fly fwift, ye tardy minutes; revenge. Sweet revenge, how doT bend to thy Ihrine !
By my foul Wilfon, I have laid the trap too well, to doubt of fuccefs; Joe, with three other Haves, are to fkulk about Bounty-hall, till they fee the lonely dove wandering about, which flie conflantly does in the cool of the day ; they are then to rufh out upon their trembling prey, and convey her fafe to an adjoining wood, where the happy, thrice happy Bofwell, waits her reception.
i Fapewell, Jack; enyy the felicity of thy
t ■	■
Benjamin Boswell

LET
\
m
Laura and Augustus.
I2S
letter XXXII.
MRS. MONTAGUE TO MISS. BYNG.
II
WHEN clouds of troubled thoughts invade my minily Thy C9nquering image there^ dear youth, I find ; Still you prevail, ail potent, in my breast,
Now more than ever of my foul poSTefsM.
To thee 1 talk, tho’ abfent, and thy name Its best loved talk my tongue delights to frame ;
Thou my companion, fweet defcends the nlghjt;
Without thee rifes no returning light-
My amiable Montague, my dear Cecilia, yef-terday morning quitted his affe6tionate Laura for a week; he was obliged to accompany fome brother officers, to view a piece of ground on the op-polite fide of this ifland : and how I Ihall Support this cruel abfence, I cannot tell. My kind, my tender friend Worthy has been planning out little parties to amufe me during this Separation. But alas, my dear, what pleafure can I receive, while the dear tenant of my bread: is diftant } Nothing can fill up the vacuum, the void will ftill remain; my only employments will be to tread the paths his foot-fteps trod, to join with my generous Worthy in enumeratin-g his numberlefs virtues, and to trace in the fweet features of my darling girl the image of her loved father. My little angel now lies wrapt in the arms of downy necp, fweet innocent; Cecilia, I will take a tender kifs of my little blooming cherub, and then try to diffipate my thoughts by a ramble.
Fa	My
n6
Laura and Augustus.
My friend, I know not how it is, I feel a ftrange deje6i:ionT but it is owing, I fuppofe, to this being my firfl: Separation from my Monta* gue: adieu; heaven blefs you.
Laura Montague.
LETTER XXXIII.
Bounty'Hall.
JENNY MORGAN TO LIEUTENANT
MONTAGUE.
Honoured Sir,
• ^
O R God fake ! as foon as this reaches your hands, fet off with all poflibic expedition: I fend this by an exprefs, who has orders not to reft night nor day, till he finds you. O Sir, prepare yOur mind for the worft. Excufe hafte.
Your faithful
and devoted fervant,
d	f
• Jenny Morgak.
c
LET-
Laura and Augustus^.
127
LETTER XXXIV.
Marque.
JENNY MORGAN TO MIS* BYNC.
Honoured Madam.
• •
Ayr Y dear lady, being So much indifpofed by a late unfortunate event, as to be rendered incapable of writing; has commanded me to inform you of the dreadful particulars.
My Miftrefs, the evening after my Mailer’s departure, accompanied by Mr. Worthy, went out to take a little walk. It feems they had not proceeded far, before four armed Negroes rufhed out, from behind a hedge, and feized hold of my Miftrefs: the diflra6led Mr. Worthy attempted to refeue 'her : a Scuffle enfued, in which her generous protestor fell. Yes, Mifs Byng, the great, the noble Mr. Worthy received from the arm of a bafe aflaffin, a flroke which pierced his generous heart! he reeled ! he fell! he groaned ! and expired. To this heart-rending feene, my dear lady was witnefs: flie Screamed ! tore her
fair! and in that frantic ftate was carried off by the vile crew.
In the evening the unfortunate body of the excellent Mr. Worthy was found by fome flaves
F 3	pafling
I
128
Laura and Augustus.

pafling by ; they conveyed it home. My dear Miftrefs was no where to be found : half diftraQ. ed, I inflantly fent an exprefs off to Mr. Montague. He came. But O ! Madam, what words can paint his agony ? His friend murdered, cruelly murdered ! The wife of his bofom inhumanij torn from his arms ; he raved ! he wept over his little babe ! At laft his fufpicions fell on the vile Bofwell! he flew to his fword, and putting his piftols in his pocket mounted his horfe, in a (late of the mofl: horrid frenzy.
Two days after his departure, as I was littin? lamenting over the fweet little Cecilia, my Mif. trefs entered, attended by an old Negroe wench, I darted and Screamed; I had nearly let the infant drop Poor Mrs. Montague flew to her child ; but here defeription fails. My dear Mif* trefs, when flie found my poor Mafter was gone to feek her at that villain Bofwell’s, fainted, and has fince been exceeding weak. Mr. Montague is not yet returned; and, indeed, I know not where to direfil a melfenger to him.
We are at prefent at the houfe of Madam Dc Blondeau, a friend of my dear lady’s. As the exalted Mr. VSorthy died inteflate, his eftatefellto a coufin, a Mr Rowley, xvho immediately on the unfortunate accident came down to take pof-feflion. H is lamented body was luckily interred, before Mrs. Montague’s return ; who poor lady! upbraids herfelf, as the .caufe of his untimely death.— O 1 dear Madam, never to be hire was fuch a feene of horror and confufion ! But ought we not, Mifs Byng, to return thanks to Almighty God, that my amiable lady has efcaped uninjur*
cd ? O ! what a moafter of iniquity is that Bof-
well!

Laura and Augustus.
12G

r X?
V
well! for, too true> it was he who perpetrated this vile a6I ! My Miftrefs fays, that when they dragged her from the bloody Spot, Ihe was carried into a wood, where the abominable Bofwe'll met her; happily, Ihe never loft her fenfes. She Ivas conduced to a place called Guava, where it feems he has an eftate ; that he ufed every means to compel her to a compliance with his bafe de-fires ; that for two days Ihe remained in this melancholy ftate, continually infulted with his vile paffion. He told her, refiftance was vain, that file was then in his power, and yield ftie muft, or dread the confequences.
Poor Mrs. Montague, terrified to death at this threat, on her knees, with up-lifted hands, and llreaming eyes, implored his mercy ; at leaft,. laid file, “ permit me to have one day to myfelf. This requeft the villain granted ; ftie inftantly retired to the apartment allotted her, faftened the door, and humbly fupplicated the afliftance of Providence: her prayer was heard. At night, as Ihc fat ruminating on her deplorable fituation, a door opened; which had before efcaped her ob-fervation, being hid by the bed: an old negroe wench entered, defired her to follow without fpeaking at firft fhe hefitated; bufreflefiling that no circumftances could well be worfe than thofd file already was in, complied. The old woman, conduced her into a little hut by the fide of a river, lhaded with trees. She then informed her, that file had originally belonged to Mr. Levifon, and hearing a report that the lady whom Mr* Bofwell kept confined, was that gentleman^s daughter, ftie determined to fave her if poffiblc from deftruflion. She accordingly made intereft
F 4	with
130
Laura and Augustuj.
with her daughter, whole hufband was an attendant in the houfe, to get her admitted to that door; Ihe fucceedcd, and my dear lady was happily refcued from the villain’s arts. Bofwell, it feems, raved like a bedlamite, when he found >Ihe was flown ; every place was Searched to no purpofe. She was under the neceffity of remaining a whole day in her concealment; and at la(l was obliged to travel by night. She has hand-fomely rewarded the faithful Have, and is now rather more compofed, as hoping Mr. Montague may not meet with the detelled Bofwell, as the moll dreadful confequences are to be apprehended from fuch an encounter. I mull: now beg leave to allure you, my dear young lady, how much
/
I am
Your moll: obedient humble Servant,
Jenny Morgan.
LET
Laura and Augustus.
131
LETTER XXXV.
FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME
» _________
0! Mifs Byng, what mifery attends this un* fortunate pair ! My poor dear Miftrefs Oh, Madam, fuch a fcene.——But you Ihall hear. Laft night as my dear lady Avas weeping over a , Tmall miniature of my unfortunate mafter, a Servant entered, and" informed her, a failor wifhed' tofpeak with her: ftie accordingly defired him to be admitted. On entering, he flew to herf caught her in his arras: Ihe Screamed and Slrug-gled.—“ Ah r cried he, can this difguife hide me fromThe prying eye of love ?”—** My Montague !” cried' fhe, faintly ; and funk into his arms. Her eyes clofed, and her fenfes forfook her.——Oh ! (Said the diflraSIed huiband) I am to blame to take thee thus unprepared. Oh 1
come again; it is thy Auguftus fommonfes thee to life and love. Thy lo^'^ed, ever-loving huf-band callsthy' Montague Speaks.”—My hufband, alas ! where have I been ? Why do you keep him from me ? Indeed^ I am unpolluted. F kn ew his voice ; my life, upon the wing, heard the Soft lure ; it calls me back again. O'! my much-loved hufband; my Montague ;■ ir.y dearefl: love ; do I-hold you fafi never to part
5
again
/
‘
J32
again
>
Laura and Augustus.
O ! there is more than life itfelf in dv* ‘	’	' th/fc
mg here 1 Death would be welcome in dear arms.”
“ O ! my life, my love (cried the enraptured hufband) live ever in thefe arms! But, Oh, Laura, my loved, my adored wife, I have a dreadful tale to unfold.—“ Ah, my Montague, what means this difguife ? Alas, I fear. O! tell me all, and cafe my difl;ra<9:ed mind. Bofwell; is it not ? But are you not hurt ? My every thought confounds me.”—No, my heft love, I am not hurt, (replied my mailer) but let ray arrival be kept Secret; I will to-morrow tell you all; at prefent I Hand in need of reft. But can’t I fee my little angel ? Where is my child ? I brought his blooming daughter to him; who, re-colle6ling her father, ftretchcd forth her little arms to welcortie him. The tender parent Snatched it to his breaft, and lavilhed a thoufand fond endearments on the Smiling cherub. But I will now refpe<9:fully take my leave, as I doubt not my dear miftrefs will herfelf in a few days take up her pen. I muft requeft you will believe me to be with unfeigned refpe6l.
My dear Madam,
Your moft obedient
humble Servant,
Jenny Morgan.
LET

Laura and Augustus
*33
LETTER XXXVI.
MRS. MONTAGUE TO MISS BYNG,
Sure ’tls Some hideous dream—*
Some horrid fantacy ! that haunts my foul	*
With images of woe I O that it were ^	*
A tranfient fantafy ! Too well my heart Feels her misfortunes—-feels the dreadful truth.
That thy Laura’s loll to peace and happinefs,
^ Cecilia, what will become of me ! Alas, my beloved Auguftus is a wretched exile. 0, my Iriend, pity thy miferable Laura, my unhappy hulband has killed that villain Bolfwell. Do I live to write it ? My Montague become a murderer! O, heavens, that he had fallen by any other hand! Great God, Support me; for the fake of the dear partner of my foul, and helplefs babe.
O, my friend, if I give way to thought, I lhall run diStraSled. Alas, where will our Sorrow end ? My much loved hufband is obliged to quitthefe conftant arms. In difguife he is fled to Martinico, where myfelf, my poor innocent, and faithful Jenny, are to follow with all pofliblc expedition. Do you not behold the mifery that will attend this fatal adventure ? The friends of the detefled Bofwell will purfue him. O, thou loved fliade of my murdered Worthy, look down from thy blefl abode, with pitying eyes, upon thy defencclefs children. Alas, Cecilia, I rave.
But
K
»
J34
Laura AND Augustus.
But I wouldhf poffible, pray, that you, my love, may never experience the Sorrows of thy poor Laura. Indeed, my mifery is Such, that would
draw, as Milton fays, ** iron tears from Pluto’s cheek.”
Farewell. May heaven protect you, and grant you more peace than has fallen to the lot of
Laura Montagus.
LETTER XXXVII
Marttnico.
FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME
T Snatch my pen, my tender friend, to inform you I reached this place in Safety, and found ray beloved hufband better than I could expe6t. Next week we embark for Havre-de-Gras in a French Veffel, and from thence proceed for Eng* land. My dear Auguftus defigns changing his name : his Scheme is to get into Some merchant’s houfe, till he can hear of Something more de-firable. The faithful Jenny infids upon fharing our fate. She fays, Ihe thanks God die can work well at her needle: and this, my dear Ma»
dam, Ihe cries, will be Some little aliiftance. 0>
my
Laura and Augustus. 155
my Cecilia, amidft all my miferies, what a happy circumftance it is, that I poflefs fueh a trea-fure ! Her education and Sentiments place her above the level of a Servant: Ihe is my friend, my filler, my companion. But adieu; I cannot for any length of time leave my dear Montague, he needs all my comfort to Support his fpirits.
Yours,
Laura Montague.
The Editor mud here beg leg leave to inform the gentle Reader, as through the ambiguity of the unhappy Mrs. Montague’s expreffions to her friend, he or Ihe may be led to imagine that her hulband had bafely alFaflinated Mr. Bofwell; we mull therefore in vindication of that gentleman’s charaQier, intreat permiffion to lay before cur readers the particulars of the unlucky rencounter.
The reader may remember, that Mr. Montague, fufpe<5ling BoSwell to have been the perpetrator of the diabolical Scheme praflifed againll his wife, Snatched up his Sword and piftols, and hurried away. The unfortunate gentleman direfl-ed his courfe towards Guava, where he knew Bof-well’s ellates lay. . In his road, chance threw t'he monfter in his path, attended by his vile accomplice Wiifon. Montague galloped up to him.-*^ “ Villain (cried the enraged hufiband) difmount,
and

136
Laura and AucusTtis.

e at the
and defend thy curfed life. Here are a brace of piftols; take your choice. I do not afk you after my unfortunate Laura, as I know thee bafe enough to deny fa6ts, though clear as yon brilliant fun.”
As cowardice is ever an attendant upon villain-ous a6Hons, the reader will not be furprized to hear that fo great a wretch Ihould trerab determined air of the noble youth.
** Mr. Montague (cried the horrid monfter with quivering lips) I hate fighting : your wife is fafe, and as pure as the unborn babe .for me; fo pray let that content you.”——** No, by G—d, (cried the diftrafited hulband) I will receive immediate fatisfafilion for the infult you have offered to my honour. If my wife is uninjured, no thanks to the cowardj” And with his whip he held in his hand, he ftruck him over the head. Upon this the villain quitted his horfe, and, turning^to Wilfon, cried,—** Remember, if I fall, JacC you pur-fue my murderer; I fight but in my own defence.” They took their ground, and Montague. defired Bofwell to fire; he did, but with fo trembling a hand, that the ball juft grazed our hero’s hat. The injured hufband’s aim was more certain ; the ball entered the villain’s bread:; he fell, and, grafping the wound, with a weak voice exclaimed,——** Montague, you have conquered in arms as well as love; and the only pang I feel in dying is, that the flight of your wife prevented me from——Here his ftrength failing, he turned his dying eyes on Wilfon, who Supported him, and faintly crying,—^Bafely murdered, expired. Mr. Montague, thinking he had no time to lofe, mounted his horfe, and galloped
Laura and Augustus.
*37
loped with all Speed till he reached a friend’s houfe; and there learning that his Laura was Safely lodged at Madame de Blondou’s at Marque, he exchanged his uniform for that of a Sailor’s habit, and vifited his Wife as has already been related by Jenny.
LETTER XXXVIII.
London,
MRS. MONTAGUE TO MLSS BYNG.
ALAS! my love, that mournful themes Ihould for ever employ my pen ! that a fad detail of woe muft be the only entertainment I can fend you ! But you delired, Cecilia, that I would write a kind of journal of my life ; I will obey, however painful; ’tis friendlhip calls upon me to repeat my griefs.
Surely the moft difmal Scenes have prefented themfelves to my view, that ever mortal Saw.— O ! my friend, I have Scarce yet recovered my wonted Strength, indeed, I fear it will never more be re-eftablllhed.
By this letter you will find I am once more a refident in England. We failed from Martinico on the fifteenth of September j the wind was
in
138
Laura and Augustus.
;«
in our favour, till the nineteenth, at half an hour pall eleven, the velTel was ftruck with lightning, which beat down moft of the perfons on board: feveral of the failors were fo much hurt, that they hardly had flrength enough to rife, but no lives were loft. O ! my dear Cecilia, what a lituation. was this for thy poor Laura I My beloved Montague knelt by my fide, and endeavoured to fup
port my finking frame clung round my neck, her cries ; while the
I
<
I.
I.
my little babe terrified and pierced the air with faithful Jenny was on her knees, fupplicating the mercies of the Omnipotent. As foon as they were- able- to difcover one another, through the furrounding cloud, the captain gave orders to Search over the veffel; no traces of fire could be found in any part of it: but we had Scarcely tiine to- recover ourfelves, before a Sulphureous Smell preSaged what we had to apprehend. A black Smoke came up the hold of the ihip,. and increaSed vifibly ; there was an immediate cry for water, and a great quantity was poured down : the Smoke ft'iil increafing, the captain caufed the rum to be thrown over-board as faft as pofible. Happily I never loft my Senfes, but fortified my mind with the pleafing idea, that tho’ the greateft agonies Should terminate my ex-iftence, yet I Should Share the fate of my'amiable Augustus, and that my darling infant would not be left defcnceleSs on the bleak world, but happily breathe her'laft, with her ill-fated oarents. I
^	X
Sincerely forgave my father all the wretchednefs he had occasioned me ; I offered up a prayer for his peace and happineSs with that of my dear mother’s: I included my tender friend in my
1 exhorted my beloved huSband to
patience,
petition
Laura and Augustus.
H9
patience, who ceafed not upbraiding himfelf as the caufe of all ray Sufferings. At this heart-rending moment, the captain, deScended into the cabin, defired we w'ould inftantly Save ourfelves by following hini. We found that he had ordered two boats to be thrown out, which they did with too much hade, and threw themfelves almoft headlong into them. They inftantly funk 1 They opened every place for water to come into the hold ; but all effoits were vain ; and the horrors of the laft night, added to the dreadful death which prefented itfeif. Seemed to add fiercenefs to the flames which inclofed us. The fire then reached the long boat, and deprived us of the laft refource. The progrefs of the flames was very rapid ; the mainmaft fell half burnt, and the whole ftern of the velfel was on fire ; the crew and paffengers preffed forward, there was no time to deliberate ; we were to perifh in the flames, or throw ourfelves in the fea, with the faint hope of Saving ourfelves on Some pieces of the wreck ! Between twelve and one the flames reached t
UO*
The people cried, Save, Save yourfelves, you are yet in time.” I held my child locked to my bread:, fear gave me ftrength ; my Montague caught me in his arms, and Scrambled from- rope to rope ; in proportion as we went from the fire, we came nearer the other element. Supporting ourfelves on the falling mafts and rigging, which Served us as a float; the excellent captain had humanely affifted my faithful Jenny.
As the morning grew lighter, we were able to reckon up five and thirty perfons, my little family included. And in this terrible fituation, we continued two whole days, when Providence,
whom


: J !■[ i!!
! t
\
‘ I !' !i;
\
|l !
L ■
'll Vr t
I • r i
I. I *
U I
ini
i'-.
ill!
ii
li
11.
I
II

!!■
< i
'll’
ii;;’
il
/
14-0
Laura And Augustus.
■whom I did not ceafe to implore,^ v;as plcafed to prefcrve us, to the number of nineteen. Numbers of the crew perifhed through^ fatigue, and we who were left had little hopes of palling another night. Several of the peopleOoft their fen-fes, and afked the captain who flibuld be killed firft„to ferve for food for the reft. I had fortunately fome bifcuits in my pocket, which. Hooping over ray child, I unperceived by any but my hufband fed her with, firft chewing it myfelf to nioifteiTher little mouth ; or otherwife ftie mud have died for want. My voice and ftrength now began to fail me, as well as that of my faithful Jenny.
At laft, fome of the people discovered in the night by the light of the moon a Small velfel, which did .not perceive us.- They cried for help, but could not make themfelves heard. At length two of the failors left their hold, and tryed to reach the vefSel by Swimming j finding their ftrength not Sufficient for this, they Supported themfelves on the fop fail yard, and rowed with their hands.- By this means they came up to the ftiip> which was an Englifti one, and had the happinefs to find the people ready to give them every affi-fiance in their power.
The commander immediately Sent out his boat, and about nine in the mornig we were received on board the Englifh, with all poffible humanity. We were then nineteen in number} proper nou-riftiment was offered to us, but we were able to Swallow but a few drops. Warm beds were prepared, in which we were tenderly put. All but one are happily recovered. Fair, winds foon wafted us to Europe. But, good God i in what a fituation were wc to land, without
deaths
Laura and Augustus.
141
*
deaths, without money, without friends. Captain White generoufly offered us any affiftance in his power. My hufband begged the loan of ten guineas, which was inftantly granted. We came on Ihore at Gravefend, and have taken a fecond floor in a little fireet near Mary-Ie-bone, confining of two rooms, the one ferves as parlour, kitchen, and our good Jenny’s bed-room; the next my Montague, child, and felf, occupy.
My hufband had wrote to a friend of his, a Captain York, which letter happily reached him before he failed for Gibraltar, where he' was Rationed, who humanely font him thirty pounds. Auguftus immediately offered to return Captain White the ten guineas he borrowed, who nobly refufed receiving it, till it Avas more convenient to repay him. This good man has frequently called to fee us in our humble lodgings, and pref-fes my hufband to inform him in what he can ferve him.
My cieareft friend, a fcheme has juft ftruck me. My inexorable father has never.yet beheld my blooming daughter; I will make one more effort to move him to compaffionate my diftrefs. My little angel fball plead the caufe of her unfortunate parents. O ! Cecilia, with what heartfelt pleafure fhould I introduce my beloved Au-guftus to that affluence to which he was born to fhine! O! my friend, I may, perhaps once more be happy; let me indulge the pleafing hope. My father’s intereft may fave my hufband from the fury of Bofwell’s friends, who I hear fwear vengeance againft him, if ever he appears. Yes, I will yet hope Providence will once more blefs us
with
1
F4T.
Laura and Augustus;
with returning peace. Adieu; heaven preferve you> is the conftant prayer of-
f
Your affectionate
Laura Montague.
LETT E R
MRS. MONTAGUE TO klSS. BtNG.
! Cecilia, tKou dear companion of my hap* pier days, drop a tear to the heart-felt dif* appointinent of thy unfortunate friend. Yes, my dear, my flattering dreams arc vanilhed. O ! my father, could nothing move you to compaf-lionate my forrows ? Alas 1 why was I born !■ had my Anguftus never feen me, he never would have known the mifery which he is now a prey to. He would not now have been.—O ! my God ! I cannot proceed; I muff for the prefent lay down my pen.
Well my friend, now take the ftory of my difappointment. You may remember how I in the conclufion of my laff letter buoyed myfelf with the hope of again being received into the paternal embrace. My fcheme of throwing my-ielf on the mercy of my ftill dear father filled
my
Laura and Augustus.
HS
imr every thought. The next morning I deftined for the completion of my high-raifed expe6Iations. i accordingly, as Soon as my amiable Auguftus had quitted home, took my little girl in my arms, and dirc6Ied my fteps to my father’s houfe; I foon reached Harley-fireet. But O ! Cecilia, how my heart trembled ! fatal foreboding of the reception I Ihould meet! When I reached the door, I could fcarcely ftrpport myfelf;
I leant for, I believe, five minutes againft the palifades: at length, I muftered up courage and rapt gently ; a Servant opened the door ; I enquired whether 'Mr. Levifon was at home; and was anfwered in rthe affirmative. I begged for a glafs of water, as f was apprehen-five of fainting. I defired him to tell his mafter, a ftranger wilhed to fpeak with him. In a few moments I heard my father’s ftep. He entered, and on feeing me ftarted. Ah S’ (cried he) ‘‘ who gave you admittance within thefe doors, ungreate-ful girl !” O ! my father (returned I), throwing myfelf at his feet, do not look fo harfhly on me, but pity your poor unfortunate Laura !” Be gone,” (refumed he) “ there’s your road : whoever of your friends directed you this way, mif-gulded and abufed you. What could you expe6t from me ?”
** O ! I have little to expe<9: on earth, but this laft trial of a father’s love, to Save us all from linking. 0,-my child ! let thefe innocent fmiles. Sir, knock at nature in your heart; let them renew my infant years to your remembrance. Oh! if ever you hope to meet with pardon in a better world, forget my faults, that Heaven may pardon yours.” (My poor little innocent Cecilia
caught
144
Laura and Augustus.
j !
t
' (
caught hold of the Ikirt of his coat, as if to plore his prote<5Iion.)—-O, my father, look on this innocent; Ihe never offended you.”——I al-moft pity the unhappy child,”	he);
but liften to what I have to fav, Laura. In com-paffion to this unfortunate little girl, I will once more prove a father to you, provided I find you willing to obey me. Now mark me, no damned romantic flight; this lafl: propofal I have to make, which if you refufe, you can expefit no further favour from an infulted parent. Here, rife, and take a chair.” I obeyed, and he proceeded.— You have, I fuppofe, fufficiently experienced the fruits of your difobedience ? Had you not, by your curfed folly, blafted all my expeQations, by' marrying that beggarly rafeal, that pratling coxcomb ; but you fee the confequence: poverty and wretchednefs have attended you.” O, my friend, this fpeech was like fo many daggers to my heart.
I preffed my little cherub to my bofom, as Some compenfation for my father’s unkind expreffions of my beloved Montague : but he continued— On the contrary, with Bofwell, every blefling would have been at your command; love, pomp, fplendour, riches, and honour, would have fur-rounded you. But now, Laura, here comes my final determination : if you will confent to abandon that wretch who has mifled you from your duty, will Swear never more to fee him.—“ Heavens ! exclaimed I, ftarting up. O, my father, ^vhat is it you propofe ; to feparate me from my hufband ? Are not our hearts one ? Mufl: not our Sorrows be one likeviife ? Did we not promife at the Sacred altar, that nothing fhould part us ? If we were mutually to cheriih each other in ficknefs
and
Laura and Augustus.

?md in health, can mifery give San6Uon to Separation? No, my father, I am his; I will grieve or rejoice, I will live or die with him ; I will lhare his affliftions, and by Iharing them, will leffen the load that opprelTes him. I Ihall glory in the idea of feeling all that he feels; in braving all the dangers that he braves; in (hewing that I am a man in heart, though a female in external form. O, ^ic^ my deareft father (and I embraced his knees) you muft not part him from me; no never, my AuguBus, while life fuftains my frame, will thy Laura quit thee. O, my honoured Sir, talk therefore no more of parting us; the thought carries death with it; and thou mayell as well preach patience to the winds, as endeavour to perfuade me to change my refolu-tion, it is as immoveable as the rock of fate.
Thp frenzy with which I Spoke, I imagined, fiifpeaded his paffion, for, to my aftonifnment, he heard me without interruption. When I ceaf-ed Speaking, he in a rage Spurned me from him, faying,—Then, Madam, by G—*d, you have nothing more to expe6I from an infulted father; take yourfelf. off with your beggar’s brat, and fee if love will Support you : you will find it. Madam heroine, I fancy damned flender diet.” Yes, Cecilia, thefe 'were the (hocking words of my cruel father e at the conclufion of which he quitted the room, calling to the Servants to (hew the woman and her brat out of the houfe.
O my friend, to my dying day, J never (hall forget this Scene ; I thought my poor heart would have burft. My little girl, terrified at feeing her mother in So terrible a (ituation, began to Scream. For my father, on flinging from me, had thrown
me
146
Laura AND Augustus.
,l'.
me on the floor; and, my fpirits cxhaufled, I was in a kind of hyfteric. The Servants, poflef* fed of more humanity, rendered me every alGft* ance in their power, though ignorant who I was. When able to articulate, I requefted one of them to call me a coach, as I was Scarce in a fituatioti to Hand. As Soon as I gained my own apartment, I threw mySelf into a chair, and gave a free vent to my tears. The alarmed Jenny, kneeling by me, implored me to be pacified.
O, Madam (cried the faithful creature) con-fider, Ihould my mafler come in, and find you in this melancholy ftate, how it would wring his afSedtionate heart. Do not give way to unavailing Sorrow; you could expe^ little leSs from fo obdurate a man.”—
O, Cecilia, I cannot proceed; the repetition of his inhuman condu6t has So exhaufled ray Spirits, that I mufl: now bid you adieu ; alTurlng you how much I always am
Your afFe6Uonate
Laura Montague.
LE%
Laura ai?d Augustus
UT
LETTER XL.
London,
MRS; MONTAGUE TO MISS BYNG
Montague, my dear , Ceciha, has at laft gained an employment, through the kind offices of Captain White. This humane and friehdly tar has procured him a place as clerk to his brother, an attorney in Gray’s Inn : his fa-lary is five and twenty Ihillings a week. O, my friend, what a mortifying ftroke is this ! But, in-ftead of repining, I return thanks to Heaven for fo timely a relief, as our forty pounds was nearly cxhauffed, having had ourfelves and Jenny to death. This fum, you will think, would go a very little way towards purchafing raiment for four people. But, my love, you muff: take notice, that fuperfluities were not thought of; nothing but common neceflaries, and but few of them. Indeed, Cecilia, I queftion whether you would recolle^I the features of the once courted, once admired Laura Montague, in her homely garb. A Quaker-coloured ffufT Polcneys is the tip-top of my finery. , Were you to behold mif-trefs, maid, and child, you would fuppofe, from the plainnefs of their drefs, that they certainly belonged to the fober fifferhood of Thee, and
Thou.
VoL. II.
G
My

148
Laura and Augustus.
My faithful Jenny has already fpoken to Mrs, Bufy, a milliner in Taviftock Street, a relation of her’s, who has promifed to Supply us with work 5 and I defign at fqme future period, if noi* thing better turns out, to make a few fetts of glafs dreffing'boxes for Sale. ;So you fee, Cecilia, that what formerly ferved as an amufement for a leifure hour, in happier days, will fiiortly be made a means of procuring bread.—-Forgive this blot, my friend ^ the tear would fall, upon a recolle6tion of happier times.
Is it not wonderful, that I have never chanced to fee any of my old companions ? But indeed, were I to meet them, I fhould avoid making ray-felf known, not only out of a degree of pride, which I confefs I cannot totally diveft myfelf of, but in confideration of the Safety of my adored hulband.
O, Cecilia, what a lot is mine ! Brought up, as I may juftly fay, in the very lap of profperity and indulgence, to fall into fo low, fo degrading a lituation ! Could you ever have believed that the once pampered, nay, the almofl: idolized Laura Montague, fhould ever have been reduced to induftry for her daily Support ? O, my inefti-mable, my lamented Worthy, what a fatal ftar prefided, when death claimed thy invaluable life 1 From that dreadful, that Ihocking hour, I may truly date my misfortunes.
Cecilia, in lofing that exalted man, I loft a virtuous patron, the only friend that could effen-tiaHy Serve my amiable Montague : by his friend-fliip and affedlion, he intended to nave fecured our felicity. But what do the vain defigns of frail mortals avail, againfl the power of accident,
which
Laura and Augustus.

which overthrows the deepeft and beft concerted fchemes ? In an inllant all our difpofitions are fruftrated, our hopes deftroyed, and we are devoted to air the misfortunes from which the limited view of human Sagacity thought to have Secured us for ever.
My friend, do you remember our peaceful days In C^een Square ? How bright were the firft dawnings of my fate ! No cloud intervened to darken the bright proSpeft; all was peace and happinefs; each returning day brought with it fome new pleafure. No thought intruded about to-morrow ; to-morrow was already provided for. The anxiety of wife and mother were then unknown. No hulband claimed the foft confolati-on, the gentle afliduity of love, to Solace his af-flifted mindj to Soften the toils of life encumbered by Poverty.
No fmiling babe demanded the kind hand of an affiduous care to rear its tender thought; to inftru6I the opening mind, or with maternal folicitude to watch over the tender plant, to raife the youthful twig to maturity.
O, Cecilia, thefe are the painful pleafures of thy once thoughtlefs friend ! But adieu. My good Jenny, my companion in adverfity, has, I find, brought in Some millinery frippery ; I mud therefore quit the employment of the pen, for that of the needle.
Yours as ufual.
/
Laura Montague
G 2
R S

150
Laura and Augustus.
P. S. My hulband defired me to tell you, that though matrimony had Spoiled him for gallantry^ he begs leave to kifs your fair hand ; and as he cannot do it in perfon, requefts you will fubfti-tute Some favoured youth.

LETTER XLI.
FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME.
A F T E R a tight day’s work, my friend, I fit down to unbend my mind to the lifter of my foul. Yes, Cecilia, this epiftolary correspondence is a Sovereign remedy with me, againft that melancholy intruder. Thought. My dear Montague’s employment deprives me greatly of his loved fociety $ as he quits me early in the mornr ing, and returns but to meals. Indeed, my dear, I am apprehenfive that this clofe confinement will by no means agree with my amiable Auguftus. He is fo greatly altered in his perfon, that he bears about only the Ihadow of what he was. I think the diftance ,too, which we are now from Gray s Inn, is too much for his debilitated ftrength. I have therefore been in fearch of lodgings nearer the chambers he writes in, and have taken a firft floor at a holier’s, which I got at the fame rate as the Second floor which I at pre* Sent occupy.
Another convenience will attend our removal; we may, without dread of meeting any of my
former intimates, indulge ourfelves with an evening
Laura And Augustus.
151
ning walk, which in this part of the town we have been cautious of doing.
My friend, you would be Surprized to fee with what dexterity the poor Caura Sets about her daily employments. After having paid the proper duty of a mother to the appearance of my little daughter, and my faithful Jenny, made the ne-ceflary marketing for the day, and put our humble apartments in order, we feat ourfelves round the fire with our needles, and beguile the tedious hours with retracing former Scenes. My little angel, who now begins to lifp her infant ideas, often diverts our Sober reflexions with Some of
her little antic tricks.
, ✓ •
Thus pafs our days,' uninterrupted by idle vi-fitors. Sometimes, when my dear Montague can return early honie, he amufes us by reading an entertaining paflTage out of Some chofen author. And could I but See health brifrhten the features
of my charming huSband, I think I could, wdth-out a murmur, endure the moft laborious employment. But, O! my friend, when I gaze upon his altered looks, and behold myfelf the wretched cauSe of all his Sorrows, I confefs it bears heavy on my heart.
The other evening, as he was reading, his voice founded fo weak to my ears, that I involuntarily dropped the work I held in my hands ; and, raifing my eyes to the dear objedb of my Solicitude, I fancied I Saw a death-like palenefs overfpread his lovely features; the tears ftarted in my eyes, and I funk back into my chair. My poor Auguftus, alarmed at my fituation, threw afide his book, and flew to my afliftance.-—*“My Laura, my wife, my darling girl! for God’s fake,
,G 3	eafe
152
Laura and Augustus.
cafe my fears; anfwer me. What caufcs this fudden perturbation ? Tell me, my love.”
** O, my Auguftus (returned I), you are not well; I fee it but too plainly in your altered looks, melancholy fits enthroned on your countenance. O, my God ! if I Ihould lofe you, the meafurc of my woes would then, indeed, be compleat.”
** No, my tender love (cried the dear youth), I am not ill; your gentle heart is caufelefsiy alarmed. But O ! my angel, how can I repay fuch a world of goodnefs ? my Laura, my foul’s beft comfort, I am not worthy of fuch a treafure.” “ Heavens! my dear Montague, talk not of being unworthy, you are my pride, my glory, my happinefs; and I would rather (hare the fate of the man I love, though in the dreary defarts of Arabia, than the throne of the firfl: monarch in the univerfe !”
But pardon me, my excellent friend, thefe flights of my pen; mine you know ever implicitly obeyed the didlates oF my heart: you niuft not therefore wonder, that it Ihould delight to dwell on his loved name. For Auguftus, ever prefent to my imagination, fills up every fpace, and makes me lofe the recollection of thofe melancholy ideas I Ihould otherwife entertain, when I Survey my prefent humble abode. Love is the only paffion, which is capable of engrolfing the mind altogether; this Sovereign miftrefs of the foul infenfibly banilhes every idea which does not relate to itfelf. When we are in love, we forget that there are any other objeCls, befides that on which our aflfeCtions are placed; the vail: extent of the univerfe feems to Ihrink in our fight, and
we
«
Laura An6 Augustus.
153
we only behold that Space which includes our de-
lire.
t
I mufl: now my fnehd, quit my quill, to prepare for our removal, which is to be to-morrow ; when I am fettled in my new abode, you Ihali hear further from thy—
Laura Montague.
LETTER XLII.
FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME.
TAM abfolutely at alofs, Cecilia, for a fubje6k to write upon. I have nothing particular to inform you of concerning myfelf; but you will doubtlefs expert, on the arrival of every fliip, to receive Some manufcript from your Laura ; and I confefs myfelf loath to disappoint the friend of my bofom. So here I am Seated to write to you, without having yet determined upon a fubjeft, in hopes that my pen may gather materials as it moves. A remarkable incident, which happened to a grandmother of my late excellent and lamented friend Mr. Worthy, has juft occurred to my remembrance. I will therefore, I think, as I am fo barren of matter, employ my pen in a relation' of the wonderful incidents which befell an amiable and unfortunate woman; and will accordingly without furthur preface begin.
At that period, when the ifland of Dominica was a wild, uninhabited by any but a fet of Indl-
G 4	ans.
154 Laura and Augustus.
ans, commonly called Caribbs; and which to thri day there are many refident in the mountainous parts; this people frequently made excurfions, in their canoes, to the different iflands, among which was that of Antigua ; by fome means or another, a Mr. L ee, judge of that ifland, offended them. They fwore vengeance againft him, and-took an opportunity fliortly after of ftabbing his peace for ever. Mr. Lee had taken to his third wife a lady of exemplary piety and virtue, and for many years lived a pattern of conjugal felicity. This la-day had born to her hufband three children, two boys and one girl; the eldeft, which was a fon. Was between ten and eleven; the youngeft a girl, had Scarce attiane® her Second year. The judge, on one fatal morning, left his wife and family at falmouth, a place where they moft commonly rehded, and went to the town of St. John. It was the cuftom, and indeed prevails to this day among the French, of hanging a hammock in the hall, where they often repofe themfelves for hours in the day. The Caribbs had watched the moment of Mr. Lee’s ahfence, to put their vile Scheme of revenge into execution ; they had long Iain in wait for this opportunity, and the inflant it arrived, they rulhed like a torrent upon the defencelefs Mrs. Lee, who was then lolling in her hammock, with her children playing around her. The wretches Seized the trembling victim and her unfortunate infants, gagged their mouths, and condu6i;ed them to the fea-lide. They were then placed in the canoe ; and the diftraSed mother had the horror of feeing her youngeft child moft cruelly murdered. Thefe monfters dafhed out
the brains of the infant againft a large ftone,
which
Laura and Augustus.
*55
Which flood by the fea-fide. She was then conducted in the moft dreadful flate to their ifland. When they landed, they Separated the wretched mother from her ill-fated children; and drove them to different parts of the country. This unfortunate lady happened, at the time flie was carried off, to be far advanced in her pregnancy, which rendered herfituation flill more deplorable; as fhe expected no lefs than to fee this innocent, fo foon as born, as cruelly maffaCred as her other babe had been.
It is impoffihle to exprefs, or paint the treat ment this unfortunate woman met with. She was however Safely delivered of the- child, whom fhe contrived by different arts to conceal. Sometimes by digging up the earth, in which fhe laid the infant, and covered it over with green leaves, frequently did fhe wifh- that, when fhe came to Seek the little innocent, fhe might find that it had breathed its laft. But-heaven-had otherwise defigned it ! This lady, as- I before remarked, was a woman of ftriCt piety, and always carried a prayer-book in her pocket; this book was flill her companion, and the only Solace to' her afflictions. The inhuman uSage fhe received was Such, that fhe frequently abfeonded to the mountains, tho’ certain to be flill more cruelly treated when found. Happily for her,- this Set of people are remarkable for their delicacy towards the female fex ; which, we may fuppofe, pre-ferved this unhappy lady from violation. At length a young Indian,- pofTeffed of more milkinefs than his fel-low*country men, took compaffion on the miserable and deplorable fituation fhe was in, and inr formed-her,: by figns and a little broken Englifh,
G 5‘	which'
i<6
Laura and Augustus.
■which he had acquired by frequent trips among* the Europeans, if Ihe could contrive fome method for him to acquaint her friends of her wretched ftate, he would convey it the next time he vifited Antigua. The poor creature, over-joyed at fo happy a profpe6b of relief, cut upon the bark of a tree the name of the tfland ihe was upon with the iignature of her own ; and gave it to the Caribb. This humane creature contrived to have it faithfully prefented to the judge, the very next time he went to that ifland. Mr. Lee had made every poffible enquiry after his wife, but to no purpofe ; and had now given up all hopes of feeing her more, as nine months were elapfed fince the fatal morning ihe was fo . inhumanly forced off. Rejoiced therefore was he, when the above mentioned bark of the tree was Sent him j at firil he was at a lofs, what ilratagem to fall upon for her enlargement ; he at lafl: bethought him-felf of a feheme, which Succeeded to his moil fan-guine wiihes, and which was as follows He hired a iloop, and fet fail for Dominica t on anchoring there. Several of the Indians came off to the veffefs fide, to view the great houfe upon the water, as in their language they ftyle all Blips. Mr. Lee received them with great kind-nefs and affibility f and told them, he defigned making a great treat for as many of their countrymen as chofe to partake of it ; accordingly moil: of the principal or great men of the people came on board; a profufion of vifituals was provided for their reception. Thefe Indians being remarkably fond of rum, Mr. Lee plied them plentifully with it 9 when the fumes of the liquor began to deprive thefe monfiers of their ufual fa-* culties, he had them all tied down except a couple.
Laura and Augustus.
151
pie, whom he had contrived to keep rather Sober. He then addrefled himfelf to thefe two in a peremptory {train, commanding them inftantly to bring to him his wife and children, or he would caufe every one of their countrymen to be put to death-The wretches, terrified at fo dreadful a threat, iromifed to obey his commands. Unluckily this lappened to be the day on which Mrs. Lee ufu-ally abfconded. The two Caribbs took different roads, the boys were foon found; but it was feme hours before they could light upon the unfortunate lady, whom at laft they found fitting in a wood, with her infant in her arms bathing with her tears. The wretches were now afraid to llrike her as cuftomary, and therefore contented themfelves with puihing her along with great violence. This unhappy woman had never feen her two Sons from the day of her arrival on that Mand, to this which I now fpeak of. Judge then, Cecilia, what mud have been her joy, at once more beholding them fafe and unhurt; fhe would have clafped them to her wretched bofom, her arms yearned to embrace hef ' helplefs- children : but the Barbarians refufed to gratify maternal tendfer-nefs j fhe was therefore obliged to content her-felf with once more feafting her eyes upon thefe o'ojefts of her tendereft affection. At length they arrived by the fea-fide, there-Ihe beheld the veffel ; hef heart expanded with joy. But, good God !” cried the afflifled mourner, what an objefi muft I prefent myfelf before my huf* hand, before the crew !” Cecilia, fhe was almofi: naked ; fhe had fcarce any covering but what leaves afforded'hen She was received on board.
I will not pretend a defeription of her meeting :• fafKce it to fay, that, notwithllauding all her pio-
tefiations
1

1
158
Laura and Augustus.
teftations of innocence, her hufband never after* wards could be brought to live with her j nor Ihow that aflPeflion to the innocent babe, who had the misfortune to be born among thefe barbarous wretches. This unhappy lady, when flie found not all her proteftations and oaths of innocence could regain the alienated affeflions of her hufband, retired from the world, with a faithful Have, and Spent the remainder of her wretched cxiftence at a place called Ding-a-Ding Nook; this Spot is So fequeftered, that the foot of man was never vet known to have trod it. She relid-ed there many years dedicating all her thoughts to heaven ; and on her death-bed ftill perfifted, that no-;^iolence had been offered to her.
This unhappy lady, my dear Cecilia, as I be fore-mentioned, was grandmother,, or great grandmother, I forget which, to my dear departed friend Mr. Worthy : and however improbable this circumftance may appear, yet it is an indubitable faifil. Adieu : your friendihip will, I flat-ter myfelf, make allowances for the many inaccuracies, defcfls, &G. which this letter, as well as my others, I am fenfible, muft abound with.. The relation of the above ftory I undertook merely to divert my thoughts from dwelling too intensely on my own melancholy fituation, and to deter my pen from' wandering to thofe Sorrows which are ever prefent to my imagination. But however, Cecilia, let the ftate of niy mind be what it will, be aflured, no earthly power can-ever defpoil me of that friendfhip and regard for you, which will only ceafe, when I ceafe to
b«—----
Laura Montague..
End of Vol II.
LAURA AND AUGUSTUS
9
A N
'N
AUTHENTIC STORY;
I N
A SERIES OF LETTERS
By A YOUNG L ADY.

IN THREE VOLUMES
VOL. III.
A whole* host, a war of foes^
May Sooner be Subdued^ than love.
Phillip 8
/

DUEL 1 N:
J'RtNTED' FOR R. M O NC RI E F F E, G. BURNET.
T. WALKER, R. M A RCHB A N K,. R. BURTON,
r, BYRNE, S. COLBERT, B SMITH,
N. CROSS, & J. CASK,
M,DeC,LiXXiVi


'^^'Br 'i-
r. i'V Cl!
T--;,

■ '


I
r

W,';,
1 ^
!
5
V
. /
.?l!- .
^<£1—s^ ■»


— . 1^ ' •» ► -	‘ v«'r ».• •.
V
-z'
»		■ - ; ' ■: '■' ■•■/rf	•• i-Svt' • ‘Vr^*’ ' f:K
		^ ^ C ’ *	-■ > tv
r»'i
‘»' C
•'v
/>•'

^ • A:

- -V - C'^
4
V
^ t.
■
rf _ •
i'
-,“ <
L- ?- ■-
.it-
. ... ,|^- . ,
■%.
; ii^'b
.•^' • H ■-3'
C VVO-
: X •	.;
: ^
V^/
.
' •/
.~i%-
•J
' ■ i vCCi ■■■* -■V'
Mr
- -'^•- 7
C;V„r:	j,-.-'- 7., •	--	•	-
ft-7^	- .:- ■-.
.-’■.'.•’-v^	— t\- .•_.-r,:	r •-.
•H-^’-^-j: ^Itj--' - *fl'', .	' . I ',.	■'- '■
7^i_; A 77 7■ •..■••
' 'fr . ?:■ . '
•-Sr^ ■	...'ifc
‘ J '
V ..	‘ ''**•* '* X	'
■	-	■ ••	i

b
:•- - • A
%
<-
fA
'X
'^!n
f.^ ^
S-Ci f
-L -
i - ►
-V
^
r .
« 't
%'* -•
...Dt-»‘'-
•I iv • ij
^•Vv%--
/.
»
— yjri -
»
/"ii V



o
V
'.•r*r>

•	'w*
/
-■	^r:


S^v
i”*
• *
'f'i'i
m-A
-.	-	'»•	' 7'’'^
• • ^ V h- .■	. V
^. ■ ti
• -J
•V
■ i ■
k

/. V
A
~ ! ^
^avl .
,—t-
■> • ■;
••-V
"L .«*;.' il.r',	^3►■s
• ^' ' • y .	-	•


~r^sv-.:S- / -
^	'	■ - '5 --.;.
. •
■*-sC

t;.
4
7 -i. -
•r.- 'm , A
*Z.‘	.
ri-i-
rihF-

' ^ . ?^Si* .
'►/'
• ►

"• f-
.O?-; V
I
LAURA AND AUGUSTUS.
LETTER ^JLin.
MRS. MONTAGUE TO MISS BYNG.
M
« •
Y dear Cecilia, I am not the only unhappy being on earth. The good couple we lodge with are in the utmoft wretchednefs; they find bufinefs does not anfwer, whether through neg-leQ: or extravagance, I cannot fay. But this far mull: be confefled, their cafe is peculiarly to be pitied, having fix young children, and the woman now lies in of the feventh. I am grieved, not only on her account, but on my own, as we lhall be under the neceffity of quitting our comfortable apartments; as their goods are to be dif-pofed of the moment the woman recovers. Poor unfortunate people ! you cannot imagine how I fympathize with them»
About

V;i
V
•Or
■i
i
' f
4
.1
j
i6a
Laura and Augustus.
About a week ago, as I fat buSil/ employed with my needle, their Servant came up with her mailer’s compliments, to requell, I would juft flep down a minute } down I went, ever willing to oblige- But what was my horror and amazement, to behold the unfortunate man Surrounded by bailiffs. The tear of mild' compaffion Hole down my cheek : I enquired the amount of the debt, for which he was in eullody ;■ and really, had I been millrefs of the fuin fpecified, tender pity for the unhappy babes would have got the maftery of prudence, and I Ihould have freed their dillreffed father. I found too, this was not the only debt, if eveu it could have been discharged. The unfortunate man told me, he had taken the Bberty to requell my prefence, to-intreat I would be humane enough to break the Blocking tidings to his poor v/ife. O I Cecilia, this’was a cruel office to me., more particularly when I conhdered the woman’s lituation. However, as it was neceffary that Some perfon, Should tell her.'of it, I undertook the difagreeable tallc, I Sent for . the unfortunate creature, and in as gentle terms as poffible informed her of her huf-band’s misfortune. Tlie poor woman, half dif-tinfted, infilled upon feeing him, nor could we prevent it. But, my dear Cecilia, what a mournful meeting was it! I think I- never Shall forget itthe unhappy creature fell into fits, and in that fituation was condufiled to her chamber, where, in a Ihort time the agitation of her mind> brought on.the.pains of child-birth.
Ahl
Laura and Augustus.
/
Ah! my friend, how apt are we to imagine, when we are vifited by any misfortune, that fate has been peculiarly Severe to us, and, in the words oS feme poet, cry out
Is there in all the various rounds of woe^
A curfe So great, or pang Sc exquifite,
As this poor heart is fingled out to feel ?
%
And yet, were we but to look about us how many far. more wretched obje6ts fhould we find than ourfelves, who perhaps, though miferable in fome rcfpe6Is, have yet Some comforts to alleviate our forrow 1 for example, here is myfclf, who from my earliell: infancy have been accuftomed to affluence, am now reduced, and neceffitated to affift with my needle to Supply our daily wants; and who live debarred the privilege of feeing, or fonverfing with the authors of my being.—Yet, Cecilia, do I not poflefs bleffings that counterbalance thefe and everv other misfortune ? Is not Montague the man of my tendered: affeSH-ons ? Arc not our hearts mutually united ? Is it not the tender ftudy of each other’s life, to render the other happy ? Cecilia, thefe lines written by a friend of mine we may w'ith juftice repeat to each other:
Was there a thought that gave yourbreaft alarms,
A mournful care, made gay by fancy’s charms A gleam of hope, a dillant view of pain.
Or what the moft afpiring heart could fain ;
I felt thofe prefent joys, or forrows pad.
With fmiles as true, or tears that fell as fall.
N®
»
i64
Laura and Augustus.
No, my friend, the fie that binds as Thompfon fays.
us is not
The coarfer tie of Hirman laws, Unnatural ofty and foreign to the rtiind.

Ours is a pure difintereded friendihip, the hap-pinefs of the beloved obje<9: our only aim; a tender Sympathy of foul, an unbounded confidence, which alone can ever render blifs permanent. What is the pomp and pleafures of the jvorld to us, who behold in each other our all of joy and happinefs ? Are we not bled too with a lovely bloITom, which daily opens, and difco-vers fredi beauties to the admiring eye, both mental and perfonal ?
My child too, my friend, will glean from the misfortunes of her parents, an education which the mod renowned Seminary could not have afforded her. Her chara6Ier will be formed in the
#
hardy School of adverfity; her mind drengthened by continual exertions of prudence and indudry 1 fhe will be taught humanity by having been her* felf a Sufferer, and experiencing the pangs of the unfortunate. Having frequently dood in need of friends, die will learn to know the value of their attachment, and her heart become capable of friendihip. Another advantage too die will reap^ from her early initiation into the habitation of affliction ; as difficulties and didref-fes often drike out particles of genius, which otherwise might have remained latent and ufelefs; So misfortune contributes to the formation of the mind, by animating thofe Sparks of virtue, which
a life
Laura and Augustus.
1^5
a life of indolence and prosperity would have completely extinguilhed.
Thofe people, my Cecilia, who from their ear-lleft period have been pampered up, and bountifully provided for, by the lavilh hand of fortune, are never poISelTed of much ambition, and con-fequently are Seldom excited to any great exertions of their faculties, and generally feel the faculties of the mind dwindle and grow weak. Indeed, I cannot avoid thinking, that the faculties of the underftanding, like the finews of the body, are relaxed by floth, and firengthened by exercife. I imagine the fame analogy holds in the fame degree between the body and qualities of the heart. Benevolence, pity, and gratitude, are, I fufpefl, exceedingly apt to ftagnate into a calm, fluggifli infenfibility in that heart which has not been agitated by real misfortunes.
You feldoin fee, my friend, thofe whofe minds have never experienced adverfity, enter into dif-trels which they have never felt, and doubtlefs imagine the run little rifk of ever feeling. I have often heard it remarked, and I believe it jufl, that thofe, who have only known a Series of fortunate events, moftly acquire an aflonifbing degree of infenfibility to the misfortunes of others; for I am convinced, that calamities refine and humanize the heart.
Indeed, I almofl: now begin to agree with my favourite author Pope, “ That whatever is, is right j” as had not your poor Laura been driven through the tyranny of her father into Such end-barrafled circumftances, her darling child would never have been thrown into that line of life,
which
i66
Laura and Augustus
which may be ‘the means of drawing forth thofe virtues and talents which otherwife might have lain dormant. But adieu ; I have already wan* dered far beyond the limits I had prefcriSed my-Self; therefore, left I tranfgrefs further, affure you of my tender efteem and friendfliip, and with exultation fign myfelf the wife of an honed amiable man, though poor; the title of which, I would not change for the firft name Europe can b oaft.
Laura Montague,
LETTER XLIV.
Holhora.
)
FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME^

I^aft night, my dear Cecilia, mobbed it to the play for the firft time in my life. You, who know my partiality for theatrical amufements, will not be furprifed when I tell you, that, happening to fay yefterday morning at breakfaft, th,at the tragedy of Elfrida was a favourite play of mine (which was that night to be performed), my ever-attentive Montague infifted upon my going, and that too into the green boxes; this however, as the expence I thought was far greater than our pockets could afford, I pofitively re-
fufed.
r
Laura and Augustus.
i6y
fufed, and at length we agreed to mob it to the gallery. We fortunately got moft excellent feats. My whole mind was engrofled by the tender and delicate fituations of Athelwold and Elfrida, when my attention was roufed by a trifling dif-turbance which arofe in the pit. In dire6ting my eyes to the fpot from whence the noife proceeded, I call a glance towards the fide-boxes, when who fliould be the firfl: objects which pre-fented themfelves to niy view, but the lively Lady Charlotte Seymour, and our amiable Harriot Sidney ? Ah! Cecilia, what were my fenfations at that moment! I felt, I confefs, to my fliame, a kind of mortified pride in feeing them, my old companions and play*mates, fparkling in the boxes, whilfl: the now greatly-fallen Laura was humbly feated among plebeians : the tear ftarted to my eyes; when fuddenly calling them on my Auguflus, I quickly difperfed the briny fluid, and once more rivetted my attention on the re-prefentatives of affli6lion. The woes of the gentle Elfrida claimed the willing tear, which now began to rulh copioufly from their watery orbs. My Montague, feeing me abforbed in tender (ympathy, gently took my hand, and tenderly prefling it,—My Laura (cried tiie dear youth), thy foul, I fear, poITeffes too great a 111 are of fenfibility, ever to render your happinefs in this life permanent. Your heart, I doubt, my gentle love, is too fympathetically alive to every tale of woe ; you fhould not give way to fuch quick fenfibility. While thefe tears are flowing, you fhould confider, that the woes you weep for are not real; the cunning of the feene, I confefs, deceives one, and we are apt to • forget we are
only
i6B
Laura and Augustus.
only in a play-houfe: but when we recoiled that the whole is fi6Iion^ our Sympathy and tears ihould ceafe.”
%
No, my deareft Montague (returned I, Smiling through my tears), you miftake; it is not So eafy a matter to banifh well-wrought Scenes of mifery and anguifh from the imagination, efpe-cially where misfortunes have humbled the mind to the ftandard of humanity ; nor would I yield up this luxury of tears for all the boafted ftoicifm of the greatefl: philofopher. But methinks you, Augullus, have been as little capable of withholding the tribute of a tear to the woes of the love-lorn Elfrida, as my Self.” I then turned the conversation, by pointing out my two former companions to my amiable hulband, who greatly admired the beautiful and innocent- countenance of our old friend, Mifs Sidney : we foon after this returned home, not chafing to fit the entertainment.
You will find by the date of this letter, that I am removed ; we are now lodged with a Mr.
o
Snarley, clerk to an attorney. I cannot fay I am fond of having dealings with any of the long-robe tribe, as they are in general a litigious fet of people. Indeed the gentleman with whom my huf-band writes, is an exception to the general rule, as he is, I believe, a man of the fl;ri6tefl: honour and humanity ; at leaf! his condu6t to my Montague hasfhewn him fuch. He feems, in good-nefs, to be the counterpart of my loft Worthy: but I will now give you a ftiort fketch of the Snarley family. This man was originally a foot-boy, but by art and cunning foon ingratiated hirafclf into his mafter’s favour, who from that humble
ftation
Laura and AuGusfus^

ftation raifed him by degrees to be his head clerk. But, as is the cafe with all upftarts, his temper grew infupportable; and, it is confidently reported, nay, indeed, his own daughter declared it to Jenny, that his difpofition was So violent, that though he married a very amiable good kind of woman, he had by his ralhnefs, before fhe died, entirely deprived her of her helm of rea-fon, and that file expired in a mofi: horrid ftate.
He has five children, three boys and two girls: his eldefl: fon, an unfortunate young man, has committed crimes of fo black a die, that were they publickly known, he would undoubtedly meet an ignominious death. The poor wretch, I have been informed, has been confined to the houfe thefe fix months, and is at this pre-fent time a moft terrible obje6l to behold. His eldefl: daughter, a. girl of eighteen, keeps his houfe; and, if we may judge by appearances, is an innocent good-natured chubby creature : her filler, a girl of fourteen, is not two degrees removed from an idiot. I have been here, Cecilia, but one month, and have already been twice alarmed by the cry of murder, which was occafi-oned by Mr. Snarly’s beating his eldefl: daughter in a mofl: unmerciful manner. This, you may be fure, is very difagreeable to one of my quiet difpofition ; but as in all other refpe£ls they arc comfortable and cheap lodgings, and as we can no where expert to meet with every convenience, I the more willingly put up with thefe few difa-greeables.
In ftiort, my friend, I am weary of moving about, and fincerely wifii it were in our power to
retire
l^O
Laura and Augustus.
retire into the country, far from the noife of the bufy world. Poflelfed of fome fmall cottage, with a Sufficiency to keep us from dependance, and a Sure provifion ^o bequeath our little darling, to fave and defend her from thofe infults and wrongs which fall upon the poor. But farewell, my dear Cecilia. When writing to you, I never know when to fubfcribe myfelf your affectionate
Laura Montague.
LETTER XLV.
FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME.
Nature gives way, the tottering fabrick reels,
And strong convulsions thro’ its vitals feels ;
My fick’ning body racked with inward pain.
Tumultuous roll’d the blood thro’every vein;
Each nerve relaxed, and all my vigour Spent,
While natuie struggled for the great event;
The healing art could no affistance give,
Death was my only hope, for 1 defpair’d to live.
’Twasthen, my Sriend, in that terrific hour.
When the departing foul collects her power;
Then, then 1 knew how vain the fleeting joy ;
How vain the pieafures which mankind employ.
H I S, Cecilia, has been the fituation of your Laura; a cold caught at th^ play brought on a fever. I have been exceedingly ill; my life was despaired of. My\afiedtionate Montague
w^ched by my fide both day and night; nor
could
Laura anu Augustus.
171
could he be prevailed upon to take any reft, until I was pronounced out of danger. Lvery medicine was adminiHered through his dear hands. 0, my friend, can I ever Sufficiently acknowledge his tendernefs ? He is the beft, the worth!-eft of human beings! For his fake, and that of my little angel, I will try to preferve my unfortunate life. This illnefsi my dear Cecilia, has proved a terrible draw-back to us; it has involved my amiable hufband in much expence, and has entirely drained our pockets: we have been obliged to make an apology to our landlord, for not being fo pun6lual in our payments as ufual. But, what is yet worfe, my poor Auguftus has, by watching and anxiety, fo impaired his own health, that I tremble when I look at him; the alteration is but too vifible ; but indeed he never perfeQly recovered his wonted ftrength, fince that dreadful Storm which happened on, qiir paf-fage home. ^ But however, Cecilia, I .will hope for the bed, and trull: ray caufe to the Almighty, who will not Surely vifit the back with a greater burden than it is able to bear: and in this flattering hope i will conclude this letter, as my llrength is not Sufficiently recovered to allow me to write my ufual long epiftles. And hefides, as foon as I am a little refted, I defign to try once more what cfFeT another addrefs may have upon my yet unrelenting father; if he would, ray Cecilia, but extricate us out of our prefent difficulties,' as indeed this ficknefs has introduced poverty with all its horrors. And when I refleef upon Mr. Snarley’s callofity of foul, my heart .(brinks with dread and apprehenfion. But I will VoL. HI.	H	write
172 Laura Aj?D Augustus.
Write no more upon this horrid fubjeQ:; fo once more adieu ; and believe me ever yours in fick-nefs or in health,
Laura Montague^
LETTER XL VI.
MRS. MONTAGUE TO WILLIAM
• ■ * * -
LEVISON, ESQ.
w
HAT can I fay ? What horrors furround me ! My father recQgnife my forows ; ceafe to let itie plead in yain ; fuffer ,my misfortunes to raife your compaflion.
Ah ! my father, were it .poflible for the powers of utterance to reveal the emotions of my foul, the anxiety, the chilling fears that Rule my bread by turns, when I take a view of my deflitue litu-ation, I fhould need no other witnefs than this paper, to evince the horrors of my circumftances. Surrounded as I am by mifery.
But alas. Sir, what avails my trying the powers of eloquence to move you to compaffionate the diftrelTes I am now labouring under, when you feem to have rooted out every fpark of affection, which by nature is implanted in the bread of a parent ? Few are poffefTed of a heart capable of withftanding the fupplications of their offspring ; few can hear of their didrefs, without feeling all the parent rulh through the heart. But
Provi-
Laura and Auoustus# 173
» the all-wife Difpofer of events, has doubdefs Some feccet defign in thus reducing me to the lowcfl: ebb 5 and he will, I trull, in his own good time, either releafe me from this world of miferj by a happy death, or move you, thro* his gracious Qiercy, to relieve me by a timely affiftance.
Retired in the midft of the town. Secluding our-fclves from every former connc<Slion, entirely ab-forbed in our own misfortunes, both Montague and my Self tried to forget our pride, and attempted by induftry to fupply our daily wants: our attempt to gain a maintenance fucceded to our wilh, and though poor were content. I Ihould not, therefore, my honoured parent, after the heartrending propofition I received from you, have dared venture again to folicit the tender compaf-fion of a Hill dear father, but that the iron hand of penury has once more grafped us as its prey.
O ! my father, your poor Laura has been ill— very ill ; the yawning grave Hood ready to receive her. This ficknefs has neceflarily incurred expences, which we are unable to bear; Poverty and all its attending calamities Hare us in the face. O, Sir, my honoured father, could you endure to fee the hulband of your child, the father of her infant, dragged to a loathfom goal, languilhing in mifery; O ! if ever-foft humanity touched your bread, do not wit-hold from your fupplicating daughter a kind relief. On my knees I humbly implore it. Let the tears which, dropping, kifs the paper, open a pafSage to the avenues of parental affeStion. I rely much on the tendernefs you once declared you poffefl'ed for the unfotunate Laura, and trufl that nature will
H 2	move
174
Laura and Aug.ustus.
/
move you to become a parerit to my neeeflitics j especially when you confider, that they have riot been brought upon us by'any prodigality, but through the unavoidable chances attending this tranfitory life.
O,' God ! if it be thy hleffed will, turn the heart of my father to his unhappy child i let him view my errors in their proper light; let him not hold out lon.ger againfl: the cries of his wretched daughter and her helplefs babe. Influence him, fecretly influence him,, O ! Father of Mercies! Soften his heart, make him fenfible of my forlorn lituation ! Let him but remove the load of wretch-ednefs which bears too heavy on my years ! Suffer me not longer to linger out my days in adver-lity and Sorrow ; reward me not according to my deferts. O heavens grant this my earndl re* queft.
How often, my honoured father, do I Secretly wifli, that it would pleaSe the Almighty DireQor, to Snatch my hulband, helpleSs babe and fell, from this vale of tears, O ! that one aravc could open its hofpitable boSom to receive us; then fliould we, who had^been So long toiling in the thorny road of Sorrow, and roving forlorn in the dreary wilds of gloomy melancholy, deftitute and unfriended ; no more be expoSed to dreadful hurricanes, fliip-wrecks, and bellowing furges, which often howl above, beneath, and all around, threatening, every moment to Swallow us up ! No ; adieu,'to all thefe, adieu to the viciflitudes of fortune, adieu to Sorrow, pain, baleful woe, and all the long train of evils innumerable to which mortals are SubjedI, in this clime of mifery and woe.
stappy
^.1
Laura and Augustus.
H5
We
Happy tranfition ! propitious voyage !
(hould then be arrived at the blefled harbour; arrived fafe at the mafions of everlafting reft, where frowning Ikies, difeafe,-pain/and difappointment are no more.
If what I have faid, and again repeat, my dear father, of my unfeigned Sorrow for having difobliged you, prove ineffe£lual to remove that anger which you fo unrelentingly harbour againft: your ill-fated daughter; what muft be her lot? what muft be the wretched fate of her adored hulband, her darling child ? Where ftiall flic find a friend humane enough to endeavour to diflipate the gloomy cloud of unutterable diftrefs, which hovers over her? Alas! T fear I muft: wander long ere Such a friend fliall be pointecTout tome. But to you, dear Sir, I look up as the friend and prote6tor heaven defigned me, therefore to you I truft,- and relying thereon, I once more beg leave to fubfcribe myfelf.
y
Your ftlll dutiful and affeftionato,
Tho’ wretched daughter,
Laura Montague.

/
H 3
LET-
176
«
Laura and Augustus.
LETTER XL VII
WILLIAM LEVISON, ESC^. TO MRS. MON-
TAGUE.
/
TN every ftep you move, Seine new inconlhlen-cy prevades it; frelh provocations Succeed to thofe which wanted not additional incentives to procure condemnation. The infolent letter which you have dared to write me, after your heroical rejeflion, as you doubtlefs judged it to be of the offer, which through compaffion to that little wretch your child, I made, and in which you have with the moft barefaced and indecent effrontery introduced the nanSe of that curfed villain and afiaffin your hufband, has, inStead, of gaining, lofl: ground. To an undutiful conduQ: you have added falsehoods; for I believe every Sentence in your letter a violation of the truth. I am not. Madam, So eafily to be impofed upon : therefore, for the Suture, reflect what vou are about, and trouble me no further with any more of your elaborate Scrawls, as they will without any ceremony be returned unopened by him whom you ftyle father : would to Heaven, I had no title to that name, as it has proved the greatest torment to the juftly incenSed
William Levison.
LET-
Laura ahd Augustus.
177
Letter xlviii
MRS. MONTAGUE TO MISS BYNG.
A H ! Cecilia,> who n^,v lhall fpeak comfort to the wretched Laura S peace is for ever ban-iftied my bofora-. My charming hulband is very
Yellerday he was brought home to me in a coach. It fecms, as lie M^as writing in the office, he dropt off his chair in a fit, from which when recovered, the humane Mr. White had a coach called; and accompanied him himfelf to our lodgings.
O ! Cecilia, my fympathifing friend, what language can paint my grief, when I beheld my poor dear emaciated Auguffus enter, fupported by his generous employer ! I thought I Ilioufd have fainted : never (hall I forget the generous behaviour of Mr. White ; the tear of tender companion flood in his manly eye. ** My dear Mrs. Wilmot,” cried he, for that you know, Cecilia, is the name we pafs by, “ do not be alarmed ; my young friend, I hope, will fhortly be reftored to his former ftrength : I will this afternoon take the liberty to bring a friend of mine to vifit him j” which he accordingly did. That friend was a phyfician: he has written a prefcrip-tion, but 1 fear my hufband’s malady is beyond the reach of medicine; afflidbion has taken too deep a root in his breafl: I doubt if any cure will be found, but the peaceful grave, and in
H 4	that
t
178
Laura and Augustus.
that thought diftra6Uon lies. O ! my friend. If I lofe him, then a long . farewell to every glim* mering of happinefs: But there is yet one comfort, 1 could not long furvive fo cruel a flroke; human nature can fupport calamities but to a certain degree; and when I am deprived of my adored Auguftus, then indeed will the meafure of my woes be full, my ftruggling heart will after fo mortal a v^ound ceafe to vibrate.
O! Cecil ia, fuch a cfoud of horrors hangs over my head, as render life infupportable; in this dreadful (late every pdeafing idea is banilhed, and all ray fources of comfort nearly dalhed to the ground. ITow have the joys of ray youth been poifoned by the tyranny ot a parent ! from him have originated all my forrows. hdy dear Cecilia, I wrote as I defigned to my inexorable father, and have received the mod cutting anfwer. The abuSve epithets he loads ray dear hufband with has linfiicled the keenefl pangs, and ftabbed me to the foul. O ! my friend, can hts bread be fo devoid of humanity, that not all my tears, my prayers, my fupplications, have been able to move him to compaffionate ray affli6Hons ? can human nature be fo loft, fo deadened to the feelings of Chriftianity ? O ! my God, teach m.e patience, learn my heart to bow fubmiffivc to thy mandates ! Shield, O ! ftiidd ray child from.thofe wrongs which fall upon the poor and fatherlefs. Ah ! Cecilia, what will become of my little darling, my innocent prattler ? who will prove a friend to her misfortunes ? Like a plant torn from the ground, and thrown afide as ufelefs, any one may tread her under foot, without being afraid that a lingle creature will rife in her defence.
O !
Laura and AuGUffTUS.-
179
' O ! my friend, my mind is a perfe£I chaos, reafon at times totters; wild with defpair, I Snatch my fweet babe to my palpitating heart 1 I bathe her with my tears I I lament over her! I almoffc curfe my own exiftence. But I will quit this horrid theme, and fee if my poor invalid is yet awake ; I left him in a fweet Humber. Heaven grant that it nday prove propitious 1
**	’ ’t
Your affeiSIionate
'• ...
Laura Montague.
O
.	•. t r r
• f «
J
)
> V
L T T t E R XLIX.
FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME.
w
ELL, Cecil ia, hope is for ever fled ; my poor loll Auguflius is declared to be in a galloping consumption. 01 my God! why, why was I born to Such variety of wretchednefs ? But I mufl: now exert all my fortitude, to Support my mind under this fliocking calamity; my poor Jenny and, I mufl: apply ourfelves with redoubled diligence to our needle, to Supply his neceffi-ties.
Do you remember, know he had the care
was to all appearance to the poor Laura.
Cecilia, Mr. Parfons ? you of me w'hen a child, and
ever remarkably particular What do you think of a Scheme I have formed of applying to him in my
H 5	diftrefs?
V
l6o
Laura and Augustus.
difirefs ? I have heird that friendfliip is a plant fddora to be luet with j that it is of flow growth, and delicate texture. But notwithftanding I will flatter, iftyfelfj that I Ihall in Mr. Parfons find the valuable exotic.	.
Will not the length of time he has known me warrant my applying to his friendfliip ? I think it will; there will be no harm at leaft in making the experiment. ' If I am disappointed in him, I never more will make an application to any other, who has known me in happier days; but rather beg my bread from door to door, to fupply our daily wants, than fubje^ myfelf to a Second mortifying reception.
I do not defign that my hufband Ihall know a Sentence -of this affair, unlefs I Succeed to my wifli.	(
0
Our landlord has behaved better than I could ' cxpe<9; from So mercenary a difpofitiOn j but I hope, I do not Speak too foon.
Yours,^
Laura Montague.
LET
Laura and Augustus*
iti
L E T T E R L.
MRS. MOnI^AGUE to JOHN PARSONS, Esq.
|S E E M not this letter. Sir; I heS^ech you, ■Cr either intruding, or impertinent* I confefs, if merit; claims your friendihip, I have none; but if mifery can demand it, none has a greater title than the ill-fated Laura. It may appear as impertinence and intrulion, the encroaching upon your feelings, by a repetition of the Sorrows of an unfortunate wife and mother ; nor would I now force my complaints upon your ears, but that I am willing to believe Mr. Parfons the fame humane and noble-minded man I formerly painted him to be: r therefore flatter myfelf this letter will meet" a Sympathetic reception;' and am willing to credit this idea; as my felf-love would be too cruelly hurt, were I to own I had formed a romantic notion of Mr. Phrfons’ Sentiments, and that he, like the generality of the w’orld, fled the unfortunate.
When rrcfle6t, Sir, the many years you have known me,' even from my infantine days, and the kindnefs of your behaviour to me at that period, I cannot forbear flattering my felf that you will not unmoved fee me reduced to the greateft mifery, without a friend,, who is capable of fup-
plying
i 82
Laura and Augustus.
plying me with the common means of fnpportlng nature ; when you. Sir, have it So pmply in your power to relieve my wants. My father’s unrelenting difpofition has reduced me to the greateft wretchednefs. My poor dear Montague now lies languiftiing on the bed of ficknefs, and I am def-titute of the power of adminiftering the necef-faries requifite to Support finking nature.
Excufe, I entreat you, the freedom of applying to you in this exigence J and, believe me, nothing but the Supreme command of neceffity Should urge me to be thus troublefome.
Permit me now to alTure you fimply of the efteem and regard with which ! ever remain,
Mr. Parfons’
Moft obedient
/
humble Servant,

Laura Montague
\
LET-

Laura and Augustus
i8
5
LETTER LI
JOHN PARSONSj ESQ^. TO MRS. MONTAGUE.
Madam,
AM Sorry to find, that the imprudence of your condufib has brought you to So dlftrefTed a ftate as your letter defcribes. Your unrelenting father, as you are plcafed to ftyle hiix), has I think a6ted with a proper degree of Spirit ; when you threw yourSelf away upon a needy adventurer, you Should have fortified your mind to meet with the diftreSs which is ever the attendant of So undutiful a condufit as yours has been.
I confeSs, Mrs. Montague, your application to me is rather Surprizing; nor can I See any right you had to imagine your letter would meet with Sympathy Srom the friend of Mr. LeviSon. Had you a£ted with common propriety, you might at this day have Shone in all the Splendor of riches. But when people are headSIrong, and will not be adviSed by thoSe whom age, and a perfect knowledge of the world, have renderd their Superior, but will a6t in opposition to their own intereSl; they muSl; abide by the conSequences, in which Sentiments, 1 Subfcribe mySelf the Sjnnpathetic friend of an abufed father,
John Parsons.
L E .D
V.
\
Laura and Augustus

L E T T E R. LII.
BRSi MONTAGOE TG MISS. BYUG.
And what is friendship but a name,
A charm that lulls to fleep ;
A^fhade that follows wealth or fame,
But leaves the wretch to weep }
goldsmith;
# *
Cecilia, read the inclofed anfwer from Mr.
Parfons: this is a man of fentiment, a man of honour, a man of feeling. O ! how is the name of friendIHip profaned ! bale proftitution, vile, cloak to cover the mod contemptible of actions! Cecilia, I was miftaken; the mournfur cries of adverfity Seldom affed thofe who are in affluent circumftances; it is in a narrow fortune,, it is in-a middling ftation which leaves us Something to want,, which fubje^Is us to reftraint and continual ffclf-denial, that we look down with corapaffion.
Ah I Cecilia, where is the charity which formerly flood as porters at the hofpitable gates of our forefathers ?' O ! Heavens, that men Ihould be fuch brutes 1 that they fliould fteel their breads againd the cries of mifery 1 Is not this Parfons a.difgrace to Society ?' Was it not enough, my friend, for him to refufe me his frienddiip, but he mud add infult to the reje6tion? O ! Laura, Laura, how art thou fallen 1 What now remains for thee, befet with poverty and wretched-
nefs i
Laura and Augustus.
185
Viefsj	calamity ; .
loft to all fenfe of happineSs, hut to fall humbly on thy knees, and implore the All-graeious Father, in his great mercy, to releafe thee, and thy Auguftus, at the fame moment, from this
world of mifery 1	_	.	.	^
For, Cecilia, dreadful as my lituation is, I
would not coward.like wiilirigly kave my Montague, to 'teffle the ftorms of calamity alone. My faithful Jenny will, I know,- proted my child. But is that, you cry, the only protedion you would leave your infant ? OI Cecilia,^ touch not that firing, left the wretched Laura run diftraft-ed, and in a fit of frenzy commit an a^ion which nature recoils at. Juft God 1 All powerful God \ who art witnefs of my forlorn ftate, and the grief which opprefSes me, hear my voice 1 hear my fervent prayer I Open to my child Some friendly bofom! Vouehfafe, O my God I, vouchsafe to receive me in thy mercy, before my murmurs and •complaints have made me guilty in thy fight 1 O ! my exalted, my irreparable Worthy, how do thy virtues rife with redoubled luftre to my mind’s eye ! O ! bleft fhade of the worthieft bell of men, how does the grateful Laura and the debilitated Auguftus venerate thy memory I May the green turf lie lightly on thy breaft ! and ■may thy foul be kept in ignorance of thofe agonizing pangs, which the children of thy bofom are doomed to encounter in this ftate of probation ; or thy fenSibility would interrupt the tran-■quility of the bleft regions of immortality 1

i8(5
Laura and Augustus.
Cecilia, my ,heart is‘ burfting, I cannot pro ceed, a ftiort time—r-—and——but adieu ! Th
wretched	..
Laura Montague.
k I

i i
.i

I •
^ 1
L E T T E R LIU.
\ (

FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME.
ft
This morning, my Cecilia, received a note from our landlord, requefting the difcharge of our bill, which, as you may fuppofe, lay me under great anxiety, knowing my incapability of paying him. However, I went down, and in-treated he would have a little patience, and that I would as foon as poflible procure the money. “ I’ll tell you what, Mrs. Wilmot, (cried he) if you will afcertain the day on which I Ihall be paid, I have no objection to wait a Ihort time longer, as I am in no want of money. But I have no notion of wafting my fubftance on gentle folks, as you call yourfelves.” “ Indeed,’^ (returned I) Mr. Snarley, it is not in my power to do what you defire f you fee the ftioeking ftate of my hulband’s health, he is at prefent incapable of aflifting me, and therefore I muft think of Some method of making up the fura: believe me Sir, you Ihall lofe nothing through us; but, were I to attempt fixing a day, when I knew it was uncertain when I ftiould have it
in
Laura and Augustus.
187
in my power, would only be deceiving you, and injuring my own character.”———Cha-ra6ter, indeed!’’ retorted he, with a Sneer, I love to hear people make a fufs about their chara6Ier, who go about cheating honeft men f for what I know, you may not be married j I know nothing about you, and if yUu had paid me my rent, you might have been any thing for what I care. But, however character or not cha* raDer, I infill; upon knowing when I may ex-pe61: to receive my own ; I am not to be caught by fine words, fine words won’t give bread tO‘ my family.” ** For God’s fake, Mr. fnarley, wait a few days, give me a little time to look about me; we really mean to aft honeflly.” I wifli I could fee it,” returned he ; “I have heard enough of it; but by G—d, if in a week my money is not forth-coming, I will make that fine gentleman up flairs honefl, with a bailiff at his heels. I do not know what the Devil you mean by Such fhilly-fhallying, not I.”—With this, my Cecilia, the brute left me. *'0! my Godl’^ cried I, (throwing 'myfelf into a chair, and burfl-ing into tears) ‘‘ dire61 thy affixed Servant. O!’ Merciful Father, do not abandon us, but graci-oufly Save us from the threatened ruin I I know not, my friend, which way to turn, to procure the wifhed-for fum. I have not a friend on earth to apply to; Mr. Parfons, who I had fondly flattered myfelf would have affifled me, has fliewn himfelf a man of the world. And as to applying to any of .my former fafhionable friends, it would be folly, as I Should doubtlefs meet the fame mortifying and infulting reception. O f how wretched, how miserable has been the lot of the ill-fated Laura! But however. Sooner or later
all
► ‘
t'
L A u R A A Ni) August u s i>
all things pafs away, and myfelf and forrbws will be no more remembered. Bat may I not hope, that one time or other'my father may relent, and though too late for the poor Lauraj yet may he not receive my little orphan ? But, my dear Cecilia, do you not think if ftrange, that my mother has never contrived to affift ray neceffities ? But perhaps my inflexible father keeps too ftri6t a watch on her a6lions,' to admit her to convey any relief to the deflitute Laura.
My dear Montague is' fo weak, that he can with difficulty walk a-crofs the chamber ; as I was juft now working by his fide,'he tenderly threw his emaciated arm round me, and began a moft heart-wounding converfation. “ Laura,” cried he, ** my gentle Laura, what accumulated wretch-edhefs Have I- heaped-on thy defencelefs head ! Can you pardon your Auguftus? do you not hate me ?”-—** Hate you ! my Auguftus,” replied I, ^*^^‘no, heaven forbid ! you are my only hap-pinefs ; nor ftiould I feel one pang, if you, my deareft life, were but reftored to health.”
O! my virtuous, my invaluable Laura 1 talk not of health > that, my fweet love, is ever fled ! But there is a dawning joy upon my foul^ when I refle6b upon the grave; I doubt not, my deareft girl, the death of thy Montague will greatly jfliock your fenfibility; but when you, my charm* Ing wife, call reafon to your aid, I flatter myfelf, you will be enabled to fupport the blow with refig-nation; and I do not in the lead: doubt but that when the unfortunate caufe of your father’s dif-pleafure is removed, his former tendernefs will be reftored to his amiable Laura. My little girl too
will, I truftj. find at my demife a parent, more
abla

Laura aitd Augustus.
189
able to Softer her than the ill-fated Montague* My tender, my angelic girl, do not let unavail-ing grief difturb the quiet afhes of thy Auguftus; we fhall meet, my Laura, in a happier clime, never to part again where no tyrannic father have power to embitter our joys; no frowning fortune will there interrupt our love. Conlider my diflblution, my love as a debt we muft all Some time or other pay ; think I am but going a journey ; we muft j in all probability, had I continued in the army, have had many temporary reparations ; look upon this in that KghtS'
Ah 1 Montague,” cried I in a voice broken by my fobs, “ and can you fo coolly talk of parting, when to me the thought carries death ? can you without relu«£tance leave your Laura, your poor wife ? Ah ! Auguftus, you never loved.”
“ O ! my Laura, do not attempt to deftroy that refignation, with which 1 have been endeavouring to fortify my breaft, againft that trying hour ; the thoughts of this cruel Separation have occafioned the moft- agonizing pangs ; but in my death I have fondly cherilhed a hope, that with me your misfortunes will end. Our marriage, my love, has been an ill-fated union. But my deareft life, I find " ftrength greatly exhaufted, I will try and comr jic myfelf to reft, for a few moments.” He is now, my Cecilia laying down for that purpofe. And,
Oh may the Softest arm - OS downy flumber rock htm to repofe,.
Lull all his Senfes fast ; and may no thoughts To interrupt the quiet of his bed,
In the loofe revels of a dream prefent Thofe thoughts that rack thy Laura here.
You,
106
Laura aitd Augustus;
You, rny friend, whofe foul is' forrned of the tendered materials, will drop a tear of fympathy to the woes of the unhappy Laura.
I have been making, my friend a couple of fets of dreffing boxes, and' have formed a fcheme of applying to Lady—— to get them raffled off; Ihe hears an amiable chara6Ier, and, as 1 am an entire ftranger to her, fhall not feel my pride fo deeply wounded, if I fhould be treated with contempt.
But you will doubtlefs alk, bow I defign to introduce myfeif? Why,- I will tell youa I intend to write a few lines to her Ladyfhip, and to be the bearer of them-; by which means, curiofity will na» turally excite her to fee the author of the letter j and, when admitted I will, concealing my name, reveal the dory of my woea ; which, if die is the woman I take her to be, I do not in the lead doubt, die will prove a friend to my afflictions". Something' you knowy my Cecilia, mud be done, or that brute Snarley will in all probability didurb the lad moments of ray adored Augudus.—But adieu j I will now fet hard to finidi my boxes.
Yours,
Laura Montague.
X

LET^
Laura and August us
»f
k •

r '
V
L E ST T E R LIV.
Madrafs

MdSS BYNG TO MISS SIDNEY.
Y dear Harriot, for heaven fake, on the receipt of this, haften to the relief of, our fweet friend Laura Montague. But alas, Harriot, I .fay, haften, though I know not where to dire6t you to find her; the dear girl has never fent me any direction; indeed ftie could not, as flie has been for Some time paft in a very unfettled fituation. My own letters have always been dire^ed to be left at the India houfe till called for.
The laft accounts I received from her informed me fhe had been fhip-wrecked. And my lovely girl talked of working with her needle for fupport, the bare idea of which has ftruck a dagger to my heart. Apply, my dear Harriott, at Mr. Le-vifon’s, in Harley-ftrcet; he doubtlefs knows where fhe lives. O ! my friend, what a hardened heart does that man potfefs, thus to abandon his only child to the mileries of poverty ! I never for my own part. So much regretted my abfence from Europe as at this prefent. The image of niy fweet fuffcring friend haunts my imagination. What happinefs had I flattered myfelf would have
attended
V
Laura and Augustus.
attended her, under the generous prote<5Hon oT the amiable, the excellent Worty l But alas ! how vain are our dchgm of futurity on earth ! how uncertain are ferene days ! and what a mixture of misfortunes is daflied into the cup of hap-pinefs even at our lips. 01 my beloved Laura, the gentle friend of my bofom, perhaps at this moment, you are experiencing all the hardihips of life, while thy Cecilia is culling all the luxuries !
You, my Harriot, ever tenderly loved the dear Laura : will you not therefore be affli6ted at her misfortunes? Yes, Surely you will. And my Harriot Sidney is not one of them who allow any emotions of that nature to pafs unimproved, or evaporate in fentiment^ you generally put them to Some pra6tical ufe ; ■ exercife then that genero-' hty of foul, in favour of my unfortunate Laura. O! my friend, until I hear from you, I Ihall be agonized with the mod cutting reflefilions, and diftra6ted with defpair. Adieu, I can neither write, nor think, upon any other fubjedt at. pre-fent.
Your fincere and affefilionate,
Cecilia Byng.
L E T-
%AJ3KA AND AUGUSTUS.
m
L E T T E R LV.
tPorthnd-Flau
MISS SIDNEY TO MISS BYNG.
T T is irapoflible to defcribe how mortified I feel myfelf, my dear Cecilia, .at not having as yet been able to difcover the retreat of our amiable and unfortunate friend, Mrs. Montague. Immediately on the receipt of your letter^ I ordered the carriage, and polled away to Mr. Levifon’s. Mrs. Levifon was out; but I found that obdurate father at home. I told him I had taken the liberty of calling at his houfe, to re^uefi: a direction to his daughter, who I undcrflood was returned to England. “ Mifs Sidney,” cried he, ftarting from his feat, “ I have no daughter ; at lead. Madam, I difclaim the name of father 5 but I fuppofe you mean Mrs. Montague; if fo, Mifs Sidney, give me leave .to inform you, I know nothing of that imprudent ruined creature, and I wilh I had known lefs.”
O ! Mr. Levifon,” faid I, do you, can you forget that file is your daughter ? if you do. Sir, the world, believe me, will not : for God’s fake, my .dear Sir, do not fuffer paffion to overpower your better judgment. Do you confider that your daughter .can experienGe no difgrace,
that
194
Laura and Augustus.
form
that will not fall with double violence upon your own head ; fhew therefore fome Small degree of compaffion to my xunfortunate friend; fhe is at this prefent, Mr. Levifon, I am well affured, in great diftrefs; perhaps at this moment Ihc is in want of the common necelTaries of life.” ,
Then, Madam,” returned he, Ihe has no one to thank but herfelf: had it not been for her damned romantic folly”—“ Stop, Mr. Levifon, I do not wilh to hear any inve^ives againft my Sweet fiiend; all I have to requeft is, that if you will not yourfelf render her any affiftance, do not refufe her the confolation of a tender friend ; in-me. Sir, I befeech you, where fhe lives.” “ By heavens !” cried he in a rage, 1 know not; and you, Mifs Sidney, cannot offer a greater infult to me, then to reap up the curfed name of Montague in my prefence; he is a low beg* garly Scoundrel, and fhe an ungreatful girl, and a difgrace to her family. And by G—d, Madam, Sir Charles a6ls the part of a madman, if he Suffers his daughter to hold any correspondence with So artful. So undutiful a wretch.” Cecilia, this Speech rouSed me, my blood boild indignant. The abuSe he So lavilhly beftowed upon his injured daughter, deprived me entirely of the command of my reaSon ; rifing from my chair, I ad-dreffed him thus: “ Unfeeling inonfter, you are unworthy So great a treaSure ; but know, that every company I enter I will loudly proclaim the injuries of ray Sweet friend. And O 1 may the fharpefl: pangs of remorfe and anguilh be thy lot 1 may deSpair prey on thy vitals 1 and may’ft thou be deftitute of a lincere friend ! that thou may’ll in fome degree expiate thy crimes ! Farewell,
Sir,
Laura and Augustus.
195
Sir, if fo hardened a nature as yours is can be fenfible of compunction, truft me, you will one day feverely repent your unheard-of barbarity.” Upon faying which, I haftily quitted the houfe, not waiting a reply.
I confefs, that upon cool recoIIeClion I was forry, for having made ufe of fuch harfh language ; but at the moment his brutal conduCt quite over-powered every idea of reafon.—O ! my dear Cecilia, what a callofity of foul does this fame father of our friend poITefs I Gracious God ! how thankful ought I to be that I am bleft with a parent, whofe every aCtion feems to aim at cftablifliing the happinefs of his child ! O ! merciful heaven ! grant that the exiftence of Harriot Sidney may end, ere her heart ceafes to acknowledge the gratitude and affe(9;ion flie owes to the heft of fathers ! Adieu, my friend, and reft alTuied, that my own warm friendihip and affe-^ion for the amiable unfortunate will prompt me to exert every method to trace out her place of refidence, exclufive of the real efteem and ten-dernefs which my heart has ever fincerely felt for the virtues of my dear Cecilia; and with the warm-eft wilhes for your health and felicity, I fubfcribc myfelf.
Yours
Harriot Sidney.
VOL. III.
i
LET-
iq€
Laura and Augustus.

LETTER LVI.
MRS. MONTAGUE TO MISS BYNG.
w
E L L, my dear Cecilia, I yellerday put my plan of applyingtoLady^——into execution; but you fliall hear how I proceeded. I wrote a letter to the following purport:
TO T
RIGHT HON. LADY
T H E humane and generous difpofition for which your Ladylhip is So juftly celebrated, has emboldened an unfortunate child of Sorrow to addrefs herfelf to your known humanity. A heart fo feelingly alive to the misfortunes of others as yours, muft, I am certain, intereft you in the fate of the bearer of thefe lines, whofe early dawn has been clouded by a continued Scene of unfortunate events.
I have taken this extraordinary method of introducing myfelf, as I was fenfible I Ihould never be able to make the reafon of my unwarrantable intr.ufion known by words. But I am well affured, would your Ladyfliip but permit me to acquaint you with the ftory of my wretched life, you would at lead pity and pardon my inexperienced youth.”
This letter, my dear, I carried myfelf: it foon, as I expefled, procured me admiffion, and her Ladylhip has promised, that if upon enquiry
flic
Laura ANt) Augustus.
197
\
{he finds what I have Said to be juft ftie will render me every afliftance in her power ; flie defigns fending fome perfonto fee if my hufband is in the deplorable fituation I reprefented him to be. I am therefore momently in expe<9:ation of receiving a vifit from that quarter.
Ahl Cecilia, what a mortifying procedure is this! But what elfe could I do, to fave a tenderly beloved hufband from the horrors of a gaol ? Pity me my friend, for fure no miferable wretch ever ftood in greater need of commiferation ; my poor Montague’s ftrength daily decreafes, the gloomy harbinger of death makes quick approach. O ! Cecilia, my poor weak heart can never fupport the ftiock of lofing him! My anxiety on his account at prefent ferves in fome degree to keep my Spirits from finking.	-
IN CONTINUATION.
THIS break of my letter, Cecilia, has been occafioned by the expected vifitor; the perfon, whom Lady——commiflioned, is a Mifs Lincoln, a young Lady whofe appearance befpeaks humanity. She entered while 1 was writing. ‘‘ I fear, Mrs. Wilmot, I interrupt you, but 1 come, madam, authorifed in this intrufion by Lady--—, who wifties as much as in her lies to alleviate the misfortunes of the affli6ted.” From her pretty gentle addrefs, I had no doubt of the benevolence of her heart. I told her, I flattered myfelf, fhe would excufe the requeft I was going to make, for that my hufband was a ftranger to the ftep I had taken, and which nothing but extreme ne-ceffity could have driven fne to : I mull: therefore beg leave to introduce her as a perfon defirous of
I 2.	pur*
1.9^
Laura ai^d Augustus.
purchafing the'^dreffing-boxes. To this propofal ihe readily conSented. I condudled her into the chamber, where fat my poor emaciated Auguflus, Supported by pillows; Ihe feemed greatly affected at this light, and after examining the boxes left me, with an aflurance of foon hearing from her. This, my friend, is my prefent lituation; how it will end, heaven only knows : but I cannot help buoying myfelf up with plealing expeftations. People furely cannot out of idle curiolity think of prying into the misfortunes of another, without an intention of granting relief to their affliction. But farewell, I muft now quit my pen, and afiure you how fincerely I am, in all litua-
tions.
Your affectionate
Laura Montagu:^.
LETTER LVII.
MRS. MONTAGUE TO MISS BYNG.
Alas, my friend, I am in the moff extreme mifery ; that wretch Snarley has behaved in the moft brutal manner: for this week paft he has continually tormented us for his rent. Not content with demanding what is his due, he has abufed us in the groffeft language. His continual cry is, My money ! When do you mean to pay me my money ? By G—d, I inhft on knowing the time I am to be paid ?” In fliort Cecilia, yefterday his condudfo flurried the weakened fpi-
rits
Laura and Augustus,
09
I'lts of my poor hulband, that I loft all patience
at his inhumanity.----O ! gracious heavens !
(cried I ) Mr. Snarley, is it poffible that you can be So deftitute of the feelings of chriftianity ? I Gonfefs, Sir, that your demand is juftly your due ; but do not forget that mercy ftiould ever temper juftice. Mercy is a God-like attribute——“ None of your fine Speeches (interrupted he) I will have my money, I fay !’
“ Good God, Mr. Snarley (returned) I would you, like Shylock, have a pound of flefti ? Will nothing lefs Satisfy you ? On my life. Sir, I never faw one who a<^ed better up to that chara<51;er than yourfelf. But remember, thou child of fortune, who for a ftiort feafon art Suckled with the milk of prosperity, which- flows-from her impoi-foned brcafts, be not too much elated with the happineSs of thy condition ; I, like thySelf, once rocked in the cradle of eaSe. Do not therefore forget, that the fame Almighty hand which raiSed thee to independence, may in one moment reduce thee to the fame ftate with ourSelves, the children of Sorrow and of mifery : forget not that you now ftand tottering in the uncertainty of life, and that in the next world you may ftand in as great need of a friend as I do here.” Saying which, Cecilia, unable longer to Support my agitated Spirits> I burft into tears. My poor de*' bilitated Montague was incapable of affording me any conSolation : this torrent of calamity bears heavy on his weakend conftitution. O, this vile, this worthless Snarley ; the vengeance of heaven will doubtleSs one time or other overtake his crimes. When I have Seen the inimitable Mack-lin perform the part of Shylock, I have ftarted
I 3	with
200
Laura and Augustus.
with horror, I Scarce believe the world contained fo great a monfter : but here I think all my doubts mud end in certainty, as deftiny has thrown in my way his very counterpart. But however, my friend, before the brute can put any of his execrable Schemes into execution, I hope to be enabled, through the humanity of Lady ——, to extricate ourfelves from his tyrannical power.
The light of this monfter is become hateful to me; his barbarous behaviour wilb I fe^r, ha-ften the gloomy meftenger of death. O, my beloved Auguftus, into what wretchednefs, what accumulated mifery, has an unfortunate attachment iiivolved us! What an unhappy concatenation of events have Succeeded our ill-fated union f Cecilia, take warning from the fate of thy Laura j never fuffer a tender inclination to hoodwink your discretion, let the ohjeT be ever fo deferving. Had I, my Cecilia, ftifled the firft dawnings of this fatal paffion in my breaft, inftead of weakly yielding without refiftance, I ftill might have been, though not a happy woman, yet not the very wretch I now am. I ftiould not at this moment be accufing myfelf as the wretched caufe of all my adored Montague’s Sufferings. O, my Cecilia, think what I endure, when I behold the ob-je£l; of my tendereft, ray youthful love, lan-guiftiing upon the.bed of ffeknefs, deftitute of thofe little conveniences and nourilhments which his prefent ftate requires. But he will not long, my friend, be thus wretched ; that barbarian Snarley has ftruck the final blow; nature flirinks under fo Severe a ftroke. Myfelf too, thank God, Cecilia, will not long trouble this patient
earth | I feel an inward afliirance of this. O I
bleiTcd
Laura and Augustus. 2©i
hlelTed prophecy ! My friend, thou filler of my bofom, when you again re-vifit this happy ifle, will you not deign to drop a tender tear on the cold grave of thy Laura? Will not the fate of our unhappy love caufe the gentle figh to heave inthe bofom of friendlhip? Will not mild compaffion lead you to patronife the innocent offsprings of thy wretched friend? O, yes 1 I know it will Cecilia ; the former companion of my happier days, will not fuffer her friendlliip for me to defcend into the filent tomb. It will revive afrefh, and , bloom anew in favour of my little darling, my fweet child. O, Cecilia, fuffer her not to feel the lofsof her parents; foller the tender branch; be a mother to the motherlefs;' O, my friend, it is thy once-happy Laura, that now implores your prote6lion for her helplefs babe. But alas, I can no more, tears blind thy
Laura Montague.
LETTER LVni.
•r*'
MISS LINCOLN TO MRS. WILMOT
AS I am fenfible. Madam, that, to a delicate mind, nothing is fo painful as talking over its Sorrows to thofe who have no right to the confidence, but that of a feeling heart, I take this method of conveying Lady ——’s anfwer to you > wiftiing at the fame time to fave you the trouble of fo long a walk. She requefts you will fend the boxes to my houfe ; and defpairs not of being
I 4	able
202
Laura and Aucustus-
able to affift you in raffling off your pretty piece of work. In the mean time She requefts your acceptance of the enclofed five guineas. I muft entreat you will be affured, that I ftiall be extremely happy to render you any fervice that lays m my power. I flatter myfelf this will find Mr. Wilmot in a better llate of health than when I Saw him ; and w'ith withes for your happinefs I fubfcribe myfelf. Madam,
. \ Your obedient humble Servant,
Charlotte Lincoln.
LETTER LIX.
MRS. WILMOT TO MISS LINCOLN
<9-
T N what words fhall I addrefs you. Madam, '*• borne down as I am by the iron hand of misfortune ? Sorrow Seems to have marked me a&-her own ; but the will of heaven mull be obeyed, and I will learn, if poffihle, to Submit with patience to my unhappy delliny.
You, Mifs Lincoln, hinted to me, that you had felt the keen hand of adverSity ; if fo, your fenfibility will befl: paint to you what my feelings mull: have been on the receipt of Lady———’s humane enclofure. But alas. Madam, how did I feel my pride wounded, on receiving a prefent of that nature from a flranger; though at the fame time I confefs it is Some alleviation of my diflrefs, that I am obligated to a lady of fo exalted a cha-radler as Lady —-----------
Permit:
Laura and Augustus.
205
Permit me, Mifs Lincoln, then, through your means (as a letter from me might be deemed intruding) to prefent my fincere acknowledgments to her Ladyfhip ; and affure her that I fhall ever retain a moft grateful remembrance of her humanity ; and that as long as I have life, my heart will never ceafe feeling a moft fenfible ef-teem fcM" the many amiable virtues her Ladyftiip poflefles.
Give me leave now. Madam, to offer my thanks to you for the generous intereft you have taken in my unfortunate affairs, and the friendly affurance which your letter eJrpreffes ; but thanks, I am convinced,’ to a noble mind, muft be rather oppreffirig than plcafing.
An apology, I am' fenfible, Mifs Lincoln; would be highly neceffary to fome ladies, on detaining them from a more pleafing employment than that of reading a dull uninterefling fcrawl
from a child of adverfity. But a Lady ——.....,
or a Mifs Lincoln, whofe hearts feem a receptacle of every virtue, and to be feelingly alive to every call of pity, would, I doubt not, be rather deemed an affront.
Would to God, my dear Madam, I could anfwer your kind enquiries after the health of my dear Mr. Wilmot, as I could wifli ; but I apprehend a fhort time will put an end to every earthly care on his account. Excufe my dwelling longer on fo mournful a theme : will therefore no further detain you, than to affure you I Ihall ever gratefully remember your generous conduct to the truly unfortunate and ill-fated
Laura Wilmot.
I 5
LET
2 ©4
Laura and Augustus.
LETTER LX-
MISS LINCOLN TO MRS. WILMOT
T D O aflTure you. Madam, that it was not without great emotion I read the letter you Sent me yefterday, which fliould have immediately anfwered, but was waited for by Lady	,
who called to take me out at the inftant I received it. Could feeling for you alleviate your dif-trefs, you would have no caufe to complain. I Lave nothing to offer for your confolation, excepting that you may reft affured that Lady -will, as foon as poffible, difcharge her promife to you. I think you would do quite right to fend her Ladyftiip any acknowledgment you may think neceffary by letter; and, to Save you trouble, I would advife you to fend it by the penny-poft. When you have a wifli to fee me, let me know by the fame method, that I may not difap-point you by being out.
** The will of Heaven, you fay, muft be obeyed, and you will learn, if poffible, to fub-mit to your unhappy deftiny.’^ Alas, Mrs. Wil-mot, the will of Heaven muft be fubmitted to. There is no counteraSling the divine ways of Providence ; and you are fo little ufed to the calamities of life, that you do not know that there are millions in the fame fituation with yourfelf: millions that have fuffered every misfortune the
hand
Laura anu Augustus.
hand of adverfity could infli6I; who, from a proper refignation to the Almighty’s decrees, and implicit confidence in his mercies, are now above the Scenes of mifery they have felt. Depend upon it, though we cannot fee why it pleafes God to affli6i: us, he has his reafons. He loves us. too well not to order every thing for our good ; and* though that good is fo‘ remote we cannot fee it, yet do not defpairfor I know by experience, that when we think all is lofl: to us here, we are the neareft to happinefsi Do not defpond; trull in him, who never difappoints us; I fhould have Sent this before, but, to my Ihame be it Spoken, I have not had' one moment’s leifure till now. Pray write to Lady————, and excufe the liber--ty I have taken in writing to you-in this ftyle.
I will not broach the fubjefit of Mr. Wilmot’s' health, left, by touching the wound, I unintentionally caufe it to bleed afrelh ; but beg you tc believe me at all times ready to affure you l am-
Very much,.
Your humble Servant,
C H A-R L OT~ T B L LNC 0 L N.
E .D
\
15b6
Laura and Augustus.
LETTER LXI
MRS. WILMOT TO MISS LINCOLN.
O convince the amiable and highly-efteemcdi Mifs Lincoln, in how kind a light I take the letter fhe has this day favoured me with, I have immediately on the receipt of it fat down to acknowledge her great goodnefs. Your defire, my dear madam, of my writing to Lady ———, I have fulfilled; and hope my remaining fo long without acknowledging her generofity, has not given her Ladyfliip a mean opinion of my gratis* tilde. Suffer me Madam, to requefi: you will endeavour to eradicate that idea, if Ihe has formed it: as be alTured, my filence proceeded from nothing but a diffidence, owing to my prefent humbled fituation.
You, Mifs Lincoln, have a heart and fenti-^ ments fingular, and Seldom to be met with in thefe diffipated times; but you tell me you have already tailed Sorrow deeply. I truly have experienced adverfity, and hope I have gleaned from my Sufferings, patience and refignation. But believe me, that whatever pang5 this poor heart is fingled out to feel, I Ihall ever regard.your friendihip as a very fortunate acquifition.
Alas, Mifs Lincoln, I feel the full force of your expreffions, when you defire me not to deS-
psi

Laura and Augustus.
2G7
pair. I will not; for happinefs does not leave its habitation in the human breaft, while it has a fingle point whereon to reft, though it enjoys but a Small repofe, though it never knows an uninterrupted interval. Hill it yields with reluftahce the little it poffelTes; and when it is driven fiom-the fan61:uary, it will cleave to the threlhold.
But I will no longer detain you with my reflections, or a definition of that happinefs which my foul ardently longs to poflefs. My hopes now center in one Spot; time will unravel my meaning. But be aflured. Madam, your converfation will be a Solace to my affli6tiGns ; and with' your per-^ million, will w'ait upon you either Saturday or Monday, whichever day may be moft agreeable. Adieu, Madam r and may none you love ever experience the Sorrows I have felt, prays from her heart.
Your gratefully fincere
4
Laura Wilmot.
LETTER LXU
Madrafs
MISS BYNG TO MRS. MONTAGUE.
%
MY gentle Laura, how does my heart bleed for your fuflferings ? What copious torrents of tears have not your melancholy Epiftle cofl: me ? The raifcries of my Sweet friend, are ever
prefent
2o8
Laura and Augustu*.
prcfcnt to my mind’s eye. I figure to myfelf my Laura finking under the cruel preflure of affliction. Want, and all its deadly attendants, appear to my haunted imagination, as Surrounding the filler of rny heart. O, my Laura, why has cruel deftiny raiSed fo dreadful a barrier as the fca between us ^ Why is not thy Cecilia permitted to fly to the relief of diflrelTed virtue; to heal the infuflPerable pangs of mifery ; to fpeak comfort to thy defponding mind ? O ! my fweet friend,, we Ihall yet, I truft, fee many, many happy days. Take courage, and baffle, if pof-fible, the hard gripe of an arbitrary father.
I have,, my dear, a ftrange,. though plcfifing adventure, to inform you of j but mull firfl: re-quefl; you will be kind enough to fend'the enclofed letter by the poll to Mifs Sidney.
Now, my dear unfortunate friend, for my adventure. You mufl: know that about a week ago a party upon the water was propofed ; the day was remarkably fine; the fun’s enlivening beams played round us; all nature confpired to our wilh. Provifions of every kind were imported to a hermitage at the foot of an extreme high mountain, on the banks of a beautiful meandering lake ; we were conveyed in a barge gaily ornamented, while a noble band' of mufic played the foftefl: airs; the gentle babbling of the water, and the delicious landikip which difplayed itfelf to the admiring eye, Ihewed art was banifhed, and that nature here held her court. Huflied was every voice ;■ a filent contemplation reigned. My thoughts involuntarily flrayed to the affli^H-ons of my Laura; and I was mortified, when my tender fympathy was interrupted by the flopping

Laura and Augustus.
209
ping of our barge at the deftined place of landing. After having Spent fome time in viewing the cave, and the enchanting works of Providence, we bent our eourfe towards a large tree, whole Spreading branches was to Screen us from the too piercing rays of Phoebus. Under this canopy of of nature was a cold collation fpread.
When our repaft was ended, we rofc, and Sallied forth once more to view the wonder-work-ing hand of the Creator. The gentleman to whom the barge belonged, politely offered me his arm, which I accepted. Before we had proceeded many yards, he addreffed me in the following words.
Your amiable difpofition, Mlfs Byng, will,, I hope, pardon the liberty I have taken in reading this letter (pulling a paper from his pocket) which you. Madam, dropt on quitting the boat. Not knowing to whom it belonged, I picked it up : I blufh to fay, that,, fuffering my curiofity to bear down my politenefs, I opened and read it ; and there found the hiflory of one nearly con-ne6ted to me, penned by your friend. Alas, you fee before you, Mifs Byng, a man who was for many years the fport of fortune. But I will, my dear Madam, as fome palliation for my freedom in reading your letter, inform you of a few particulars relative to my life.
However, Laura, I will, to avoid circumlocution, ceafe to pen the gentleman’s expreffions, and inform you in brief of his hiflory.
He informed me, that he was originally designed for the bar; but not being of a difpofition to relifh fo dry a ftudy, he had abfeonded from bis mafler, and entered on board a veSTel bound
for
210
Laura and AuausTtrs.
for the Weft Indies. This rambling life agreed perfeflly with the bent of his inclinations. At length he was promoted to the rank of mate on board a merchantman belonging to Jamaica: that while on board, he had the good fortune to refcue a young woman from the brutal violence of his captain. In fliort, Laura, this gentleman proved to be your faithful Jenny^s hufband; therefore I need not repeat thole misfortunes which obliged him to quit her, as he did, in a ftrange country; but proceed with his adventures. When he left his wife, he, by the intereft of a brother tar, concealed himfelf on board a Ihip bound for Liverpool, to which place he failed with the reft of the crew. That foon after his arrival in England, he had, by the interceffiorrs of his friends,, regained the favour of his uncle, whom he had greatly difpleafed, by quitting the attorney with whom he had been placed. The old gentleman finding that his nephew had fo particular a difguft to the bar, he generoully determined to provide for him in his own way, and accordingly got him appointed on board an In-diaman. By a fucceffion of lucky events, he has amafted a pretty little fortune, and now trades from the different ports in a fmall velTel of his own. He is much eftcemed in this part of the globe for his upright and honeft dealings with the natives. His treatment of his wife, he declares, in having abandoned her in a foreign clime, has been a continual fource of difeontent in his mind ; and had‘he known where to have found her, he ftiould undoubtedly have fupported her as became him. He defigns fettling his concerns here, and returning to Europe next year,
to
:v
Laura and Augustus. 2i'i
to enjoy the fruits of his induftry. With this comes a letter to his wife, and a remittance for her prefent fupport.
It feems, the letter I fo fortunately dropped was that in which you related the misfortunes of that excellent creature, and which I had felefled from the reft of my papers, to ftiow a young lady of this place. Adieu, my friend. I partake in imagination of that felicity which you will experience, in giving joy to fo worthy a heart as your faithful Jenny’s. The Sentiments which erabel-lifti the mind of my Laura are fo juft and noble, and fo prone to communicate pleafure to all around her, that I cannot forbear painting to my imagination my fweet friend, adorned with all the charms of beauty, the graces of the mind, the greateft dignity of foul, and in whom are united all the virtues of the humane breaft, tenderly .breaking to the wonder-ftruck Jenny the amazing intelligence. But once more farewell. Remember me affectionately to your deferving Auguftus. And I flatter myfelf my Laura’s exalted Sentiments will fet her above the little meant pride of refufing to accept the enclofed trifle for the ufe of my fweet little god-daughter; and believe me thy very fincere and' tenderly affeci^ tionate
Cecilia ByNG.
LET
S^IZ
Laura and Augustus
LETTER LXTir.
MISS BYNG TO MISS SIDNEY.
4
T H O P E, my dear Harriot, that I have af laft hit upon an expedient for you to find out our beloved friend, by inclofing this letter to her, and requefting her to forward it by the port j by which you will be enabled to trace out her place of refidence, by the poft-mark. I hope, Harriot, this little ftratagem will fucceed to my wilhes, as I am greatly apprehenfive on her account. Put adieu, you will receive by the fame Ihip, letters which contain more cirumftantial accounts of the welfare of—
Your fineere and afFe6Iionate
Cecilia Byng.
LETTER LXIV.
Fortland-Place.
MISS SIDNEY TO MISS BYNG.
■TT^HAT my moll unwearied endeavours were * * incapable of gaining, chance has by one
©f her lucky hits done for me. But to keep you
no
Laura and Augustus.
215
no longer in fufpencc, know that I have found our lovely friend.
Yefterday morning I happily fixed upon to pay a vifit to Mils Lincoln; happily, I fay, for it was there fortune threw our dear Laura in my way. Mifs Lincoln was ftiewing me a very
pretty fet of glafs boxes, which Lady -------------
had promifed to raffle off, for an unhappy woman, who was then labouring under the mofl: complicated mifery. I requefled to place down my own name for two chances; at that inftant a Servant entered, and informed Mifs Lincoln, that a perfon waited below, of the name of Wilmot: “ Show her up,” cried fhe. “ Mifs Sidney, this is the unfortunate woman we have been fpeaking ofat that moment, Cecilia, the door opened and announced the approach of diftrefs. She entered, but fcarce had Ihe raifed her eyes from the ground ere Ihe faintly exclaimed, O I heavens !” and funk into a chair. We flew to her affifiance. I untied the hood of her cloak, which had been drawn clofe round her face. But, good God 1 what was my allonilhment to behold in this unfortunate woman our beloved Mrs. Montague. In a Ihort time, by proper applications, Ihe recovered; (he call her lovely eyes upon me. “ O ! Mifs Sidney” cried the dear girl, “ will you deign to recognize fo poor, fo wretched a creature as myfelf ? will you not blulh to own you have any knowledge of fo unfortunate a being as Laura !”
O ! my fweet friend,” cried I killing her pale cheeks, “ think not fo meanly of your Harriot. I had flatered myfelf, you had had friendihip enough for me, to have informed me of your re-
turn to Europe.” O !
my dear Harriot,” re
turned
2I4
Laura and Augustus'.
turned Ilie, I found the name of friendfliip fo-empty, and have fo often experienced the fallacy of tender profeflions, that I unwittingly blended fincerity with hypocrify; by which means I have over-looked at lead: one virtuous heart j pardon my injudice.”
Mifs Lincoln Hood lod: in adonidiment; but I Soon unravelled this feeming myftery; and I accompanied our dear Laura home.
O! C ecilia, never fure was there fo great an alteration in any woman: diarp raifery has worn her to the bone; the rofes entirely ded; a deathlike palenefs o’cr-fpreads her beautiful features* In diort, I fear I am arrived too’late. O ! my friend relentlefs death will in fpight of all my efforts feize its lovely prey; die cannot hold it much longer; her gentle heart has received a fhock that will deprive the world of one of the' mod virtuous mod lovely of women. The amiable Adontague too feems each moment approaching nearer to eternity; difeafe has not been able to rob him of thofe charms, which proved fo fatal to the repofe of our dear friend. He dill retains
the mod benevolent countenance. Indeed Ceci-
*
Jia my heart pleads for the Sorrows of this ill-fated pair. What a heart! what a foul of rock does old' Levifon podefs 1 to have reduced fo amiable a couple to the thrediold of the grave.
Ady dear Alifs Byng, you never beheld fo lovely a creature as their blooming Cecilia is, fo engaging; in diort, die inherits all the tender gentlenefs of our Laura. I infided upon our friend’s permitting me to take her home with me and am greatly delighted at having gained the love of the fweet little moppet. Aly father was enchanted with the dear prattler, and has kind-
Laura and Augustus
215
ly confented to my taking the charge of the lovely girl, when it fhall pleafe the Almighty to releale her unfortunate parents.
But I will not dwell longer upon this heart-piercing theme but inform you that the excellent Mrs. Morgan bears her advance of fortune with the fame magnanimity of foul for which we fo juftly admired her in her adverfity. Adieu, my dear. Cecilia; the carriage waits to conduQ; me to the dear obje61; of my Solicitude.
Yours,
Harriot Sidney.
LETTER LXV.
FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME

A M jufl: returned my dear Cecilia, from fe
ing our valuable Laura. I was pleafed to fee
with them a gentleman, who my Sweet friend
informs me has a6led with the utmoft friendlhio
1.
towards them. His name is White, and is the attorney who humanely employed the unfortunate Montague on his arrival in England. He has proved himfelf a truly good Chriftian, for in the midfl of all their aiilidtions he never abandoned them ; but on the contrary humanely af-fifted their wants and had the goodnefs to at' tempt bringing that wretch Snarley to a proper fenfe of humanity. His condudl through the
”	CD
whole courfe of their connexion does honour not only to his heart, but to his iindcrflanding; he
has
2l6
Laura and Augustus.
has generoufly Supplied them with all medical aP fiftance. In Short, he is an honour to his pro-feflion; and if virtue meets with its reward in this life, this excellent man need not doubt, but that prosperity will attend all his endeavours. I defire, ray Cecilia, you will not imagine from what I have Said, that this worthy chara6ter has robbed your Harriot of her heart. No, my friend, this gentleman is already married, and that too to a lady many years older than himfelf, by whom he has one child: he fhines not only in the chara6ter of a friend, but alfo in that of hulband, and father. In fliort, my Cecilia, he is one of the moft pleafing men I ever yet met with; his friendftiip to our dear unfortunate couple has gained him a place in my warmeft ef-teera : he fat with us till eight o’clock, and then departed to the mutual regret of our little Society. Poor Montague run out in the higheft encomiums upon the benevolence of his heart, the ftrength of his underftanding and his thorough knowledge of his profeffion.
I then opened a propofal which I defigned mak« ing to our dear friends, which was to accompany me down to Hatfield, as I doubted not the country air would be of benefit to both But Montague Ihook his head, and declared he was fenfible that no air could now prove efficacious ; and indeed, my friend, I am of his opinion. But I am willing to try every method to Save fo ineftimablc a pair ; as to our poor Laura, I fear, by concealing her grief, it has added to its poignancy, and made the poifon more venemous. I did not quit them till late, and intend dedicating all my time to their confolatioii. I defign to carry with rne tomorrow
Laura and Augustus.
217
tworrow Sir Richard Jebb, as I am anxious to know his opinion of their cafe; and if he thinks the change of air will be of the lead benefit, I will pofitively force them to their good.
My dear father, Cecilia, has kindly given me permiffion to make what ufe I pleafe of Hatfield; and has humanely defired me to remove my friends to Portland Place, which I fhall certainly do, if Sir Richard does not advife the country. But I mufl: now afiure you how much I am.
Your affeflionatc
' Harriot Sidney.
LETTER LXVI.
FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME
S I purpofcd, I carried Sir Richard Jebb to vifit our dear friends ; and it is with the moil heart-felt anguifti that I acquaint you he gave me no hopes of the amiable Montague’s life, for he declared it as his opinion, that he could not ftruggle with his-diforder many days longer : and our fweet Laura, he fays, is far gone in a decline. O 1 Cecil ia, what a cruel fate is mine no fooner to have found, than to find myfelf obliged to yield two Such valuable friends to the cold and icy erribrace of death! It was with the greatefl: difficulty that I have been able to prevail on this lovely couple to remove to our houfe. But I was obftinately bent in carrying this point ; as I ftiould be enabled, by having them under the fame roof
with

Laura and Augustus.
■with myfelf,, to render them a thoufand little attentions and Tervcies, which the diftance of their lodgings made impoffible.
It was two days before I could accomplilh my "wilhes; but I had the fatisfa^Iion at laft to prevail- The poor emaciated Montague was oblig-ed*:td be carried down ftaits : when he was put in the chair, he was fo^much fatigued, that he Ivas near fainting. But, however, thank God ! we got him and our;dear friend Safe to Portland Place. They have now been with me two days. The poor Auguftus is thoroughly fenfible of his approaching dilTolution. Yefterday while our Laura had fallen into a gentle Humber, which her extreme weaknefs obliges her frequently to folicit, the expiring youth addrefled me in the moll pathetic terms: “ My amiah^eMifs Sidney,” cried he, ‘‘.how kind you are,	who have been
nurfed in the lap of preipPHte are capable of fuch exalted humanityTyour gdodnefs towards fuch wretched, forlorn beings as us, has im-prelTed in my heart the liveliell fenfe of, gratitude, and the trueft efteem* But alas ! I feel all your kind Solicitude is vain ; exhaufted nature Seeks that repofe in the peaceful grave, which tyrant man denies it here.
The lot of my adored Laura and myfelf has, as you know, been far from a happy one ; our youth has been fpent in Sorrow and, notwith* Handing the confcioufnefs that our misfortunes have not originated from any imprudence of our own, unlefs indeed our marriage can be called a crime, yet have we been unable to baffle with the venoraed dart of adverfity. I have endeavoured
to refign myfelf to the will of the Supreme, and
have
Laura and Augustus.
219
have bent with true fubmiflion to the Severity of my fate j confdous that impatient murmur-ings againft the all-wife decrees of Providence would but irritate that power, whofe wrath I humbly deprecate. But I 'find now, my dear Madam, that a few days will end all my care^ ; my death will, I know, though expected, prove a Severe blow to my tender Laura; her weakened conftitution will, I fear fink under it, and my only hope is in the Soft confolation of your friendlhip towards her ; that may produce furpri-ling effeds. I need not, therefore, implore you to exercife all that benevolence of foul, you are So much miftrefs of, in her favour; your friendship to the dear Sufferer will urge you, I am Sensible, to ufe every balm to her wounded mind. But O ! my tender friend, I have a truft, a precious tfuft, to depofite in your hands ; you doubtlefs guefs what I mean : will you accept the , charge ? will you preferve the tender branch from the frofts and chilling blafts of a malicious world ? will you deign to Supply the place of her deceafed parents? will you, MiSs^ Sidney ? And O Cecilia ! he took my hand, anef. I felt the warm tear of parental Solicitude drop from his eye ! You need not doubt that I Said all I eould, and promiSed every thing, and hope t have Satisfied the fond anxiety of a parent. He Seems afiured that his poor Laura will Soon follow him j his ftrength is So Spent, and his breath So fhort, that it was not without many interruptions and pauSes that he articulated what I have Written; wheii I aSTured him of my prote6I'^ ion of his Sweet babe, a heavenly compoSure animated his expreffive features. O ! Cecilia, that So much virtue, truth, delicacy, and honour, VOL. III.	fliould
220
Laura and Augustus.
Ihould fall a Sacrifice to the tyranny of an unfeeling monller I But, good God ! Cecilia, I am interrupted ; they tell me the unhappy Monta** gue is worfe.
IN continuation.
O ! my friend, the unfortunate Auguftus is no more ; death has at length releafed his pure foul ! But I will, if my grief will permit, inform you of every particular. Upon hearing he was worfe, I flew to obey the call of friendihip ; I entered the apartment of my friend, and there beheld him ftruggling with the grim meflenger of death ; he was fpeechlefs; he grafped the hand of our lovely friend j he fixed his eyes upon her} he railed them up to heaven, as if to implore a blefling ; he attempted to raife her hand to his lips, his ftrength failed} he funk upon his pillow, and expired ! The diflra6i:ed Laura Screamed, threw herfelf upon his lifelefs body, and fainted. It was with the greatefl: difficulty we were able to remove her, for in her agony flie had clafped the body, with fuch force, that it required the utmofl: violence to loofe her hands. We however took advantage of her fenfelefs flate, to remove her from the melancholy Scene ; for fix hours, Ihe was in fucceffive fits ; we have had, as you may fup-pofe, every affiftance } but tfie do6tors declared, that, unlefs Ihe can be brought to flied tears, nothing can Save her: I am now writing by her bed-fide, where Ihe lays in a perfect flate of infenfi-bility. Cecilia, I mufl quit my pen to give vent to my over charged heart. But will refume it again upon any alteration.
O ! Cecilia, what a melancholy piTure does our poor friend prefent of the mutability of all
earthly
Laura and Augustus. s-zf
earthly advantages ! Behold her now, divelled of that delicate and refined underftanding, for which Ihe was once fo highly diftinguilhed. Behold her now, in her prefent ftate of diftraftion, and fee what vain mortal Ihall dare to pride himfelf upon either wit, beautyj rank, or fortune. O ! my friend ! how would it pierce your fenfibility to behold our dear Laura ! difl:ra6Hon has Succeeded her ftate of infenfibility; Ihe incelSantiy calls upon the name of her departed hufband ; and at times in the moll pathetic words implores him to wait a Ihort time longer. “ O V’ cries the frantic creature, “ my Augullus’! my bed, my only love ! wait—‘a moment longer wait 1 and thy faithful Laura will, accompany thee. O ! God 1 he hears me not—^Cold ! and dead ! Ah ! look, look !• yonder where he goes !'. fee how he Smiles ! he beckons me.” “ Hark !” cries Ihe, holding up her finger—** hark ! again do you not hear the mufic of the Spheres 1 fee how he rides on yonder cloud 1 how beautiful he looks ! I come, I come Augullus, thy Laura comes !.’ Then, again, Cecilia, Ih« calls upon thy name, her father’s, her mother’s, her child’s, Mr. White, that good friend, and my father, are gone to Mr. Levifon’s, ter inform them of her dreadful fitua-tion, and I momently expe6l their return. As to myfelf, unable longer to behold the cruel condition of my fweet friend, I^^ave llolen from the chamber of anguilh-, to vent my griefs to ray dear Cecilia. But I will now return to the relief of poor Mrs. Morgan, who fits abforbed in Sorrow by the bed-fide of the frantic Laura.
O I Cecilia ! what a heart-wounding Scene have I been witnefs too ! as I expeSed the gentlemen foon returned, and with them brought
Kz	Mrs


Laura and Augustus.
Mr. Levifon. Mrs. Levjfon would have accotft-panied her hufband, but the intelligence of her daughter’s unhappy ftate had thrown that unfortunate into eonvulfions. I however, introduced this once obdurate father to the prefence of our poor diftrafted friend | fhe was laying in bed, with her,eyes fixed on the deling. Mr. Levifon advanced to the bed fide, and gently took her hand, ** Laura,” cried he, ** will you not turn to me ? will you not look upon your repentant father ?” “ Father 1” cried the fweet fufferer, O ! yes, I remember, I had once a father 1 But, do you know, that father flruck a dagger to my poor Montague’s heart ? he forgot too poor Laura. But fee that pretty angel, ’tis the Spirit of my Auguftus ! I hear his voice calling on his fad Laura to follow.” O 1” cries the now re-
pentant Mr. Levifon, my child ! my dear loft child ! look upon thy unhapy father. Laura, will you not deign to pardon me ?” O 1 Mifs Sidney” cried he, turning to me, that I had but liftened to your gentle advice ; what reproaches had I then Saved my Self !”■
In ftiort, my Cecilia, however barbarous and brutal this man’s condu£t has been, yet is he at prefent an objefit of the greateft pity j his mind fcems thoroughly humbled.
Sir Richard Jebb has adv ifed> that fhe fhall to-morrow be carried into the chamber where the
f
body of the deceafed Auguftus lays, in hopes that this fight may be a means of caufing her tofhed tears.
.1 have juft heard that poor Mrs. Levifon is in
fever. To»morrow I will renew my
a
high
pen
IN
Laura Atro Augustus.

IN CONTINUATION
I
W ELL, Cecilia, the doctor’s advice has Succeeded to our wilhes. This morning our poor friend was carried into the chamber 6f death; the lid of the coffin was thrown off. Laura, my love,” criedT, “would you wiffi to behold the body of thy Auguftus ?” She looked wifli-fully at me, and lighed. I drew her to the cof* fin j Ihe clafped her hands in an agony of Sorrow; file gazed upon the lifelefs body for a few moments; burft into tears, and funk upon my ffioulder. This was what we wiffied; they were the firfl: tears ffie had dropped fince the fatal moment of Montague’s death. I fuffered her to vent her grief without interruption ; at length,, however, L thought it time to convey her from fo mournful a Scene, f therefore took her hand : “ My Laura,” cried I, “ Suffer us to remove you from the melancholy objedt before you; be not too far deje6ted;-hitherto the affefilions of the heart have gained the afeendant over you; henceforth let the diflates of the mind be attended to
in their turn..... The moll invidious ftroke of
fortune is pad; and you ffiould be free to repair the breaches file has made in your Internal frame.” She heard me, Cecilia, with Silent attention; with clafped hands did She fit gazing in fpeechlefs v/oe. I continued. “ My Laura, my difeonfo-late friend ! ceafe longer to grieve the departed fpirit of fo dear a lover ! methinks, I hear his voice calling on the mournful Laura, to fupprefs-her fighs; ceafe to diilurbhls repofe, who is him-felf at peace, and unacquainted with the heartfelt forrow of a defolate 1 yer; no longer wander
K 3	over
4
224
Laura Augustus.
over pall: melancholy Scenes: permit us to hope.”" Ah I” interrupted fhe, who talked of hope I Hope, the lafl: pillow of the wretched, has fallen to the ground, defpair has Seized hold of my foul. But flop !—indeed, my poor head is quite gone ! I think, I had a father once ! a mother too ! But no matter, they forgot their poor Laura !’^
“ No, my Laura,” cried I, “ they have not forgot you, they long to clafp you to their tender boSoms.——Would you wilh to fee them ?” O! yes!” anfwered flic, I would wifli to recommend my little darling to their care ! to implore their blefling ere I go 1” Upon faying which, we attempted to convey her from the dif-mal chamber. ** Stay I” faid flie; “ then, turning to me with the moft Supplicating look, Harriot 1 you love me ! you are my friend I then do not deny me this laft comfort! let me ftill gaze on his lifelefs corpfe, till the laft fand be run ! It will not be long ere then—I feel it here j” cried Ihe, laying her Spread hand upon her heart; “ and then, my friend, let one grave contain our fad remains.”—Her ftrength failed her, and flie fainted..The dear Sufferer is now fallen in-
to a fweet fleep : and O ! may it prove propitious ! Sir Richard fays, every thing depends up* on the ftate in which Ihe wakes. But I will now go, and take a look at my Suffering friend.
Yours,
Harriot Sidney.
L E .D
Laura and Augustus*
2*5
LETTER LXVIL
FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME
/^! Cecilia, Cecilia, the mod: difmal day has pafled that ever dawned, wherein nature her-felf mourned for the loveliell of her daughters ! A fable mantle of clouds hid the fun’s enlivening beams ; the birds denied their ufual fongs : need I fay our beloved Laura is no more ?
I concluded my lafb with informing you, that our future hopes depended on the Hate in which fhe awoke. I entered her apartment, I, Hole gently to her bed fide; fhe was fleeping, and lay in this flumber for a quarter of an hour longer, when fhe awoke, and complained of thirfl: the doflor was Summoned, he looked at her, and Shook his head. ‘‘ Do61:or,” cried the dear angel, do not flatter my friends, I feel my end approabhing, the pulfe of life is nearly (lopped ! But, Harriot my love, I would wifh to fee, before I die, my helplefs babe, to bellow on her a dying mother’s laft bequeft, my blefling I You told me too, my friend, I might hope to receive the forgivenefs of my honoured parents 1 where are they ?” My Laura,” cried I, Scarce able to articulate, your mother is not well, and therefore cannot attend you; but your father longs to alTure you, how dear you ftill are to his heart.” Well then my friend,, requeft him to enter, before death clofes my eyes for ever; as to my dear mother, we (hall
meet
Laura and Augustus.
€(
€C
2 2d
meet, I hope, in happier realms!” At that mo^ ment the affli(5led father entered, bringing with him the fweet Cecilia: Mr. Levifon approached the fuffering angel, he knelt by the bed, Iheheld out her hand, My father,’^ cried file, “ will you deign to pardon your poor Laura! will you bury with her, in the humble grave, all her failings. ? may I hope to receive my parent’s Bleffing and forgivenefs ?” O I my child, my Laura ! it is thy barbarous father who (hould kneeling implore your forgivenefs.—O I what a heart had I, to be deaf to the pleadings of my only child 1” O I my father,” interrupted the dying faint, do not upbraid yourfelf, every thing happens for the beft, recommend my duty and affe^ion to my honoured mother ! And now, my Harriot, bring me my child, raife me up a little high* er.” She then embraced her fweet infant, who fobbed as if its little heart would break. The lovely angel threw her arms round her mother’s neck; our dear Laura held her babe clafped for Some moments to her maternal bofom. ■ “ Ah 1” cried fhe, thou dear pledge of an unfortunate love I thou dear refemblance of my adored Au* gaflus! mull I leave thee behind me ? mufl: thou be expofed to the miferies of the world ? Alas ! thy unfortunate mother can do nothing for thee 1” ——Sir,” cried Ihe, addreffing her father, “ may I hope my child will find a parent in you ? The protection of my Harriot was the only bkffing Heaven allowed me to hope for m her favour. But now, Itrufi, my Hill dear parent will receive to his bofom the unfortunate offspring of the ill-fated Laura I And may heaven, which abandoned me to the deepeft afflictions, vouchfafe to look with an eye of kindnefs on' this unhappy orphan ! and
may flie never know- Sorrows equal to thofe which
have
V
Laura and AuGusrur.
227
have put a period to the days of her wretched parents I” “ If Ihe lives, my Harriot,” continued Ihe, turning to me, “ acquaint her with the woes of the ill-fated authors of her being ! let her drop Some tears to the death of her loved father ! may his memory be dear and rcfpeQ:abIe to her ! and may her mother’s Serve as a melancholy and ufeful leffon to her, to avoid the rock on which the unfortunate Laura Split .'Harriot, my kind, my Sympathetic friend accept my grateful thanks for all your tendernefs ; take this, and preferve it, till my darling girl (hall be old enough to fet a jud value upon it.” Saying which, Ihe took from her bofom a miniature of the unfortunate Montague. I took it, and pref-fed it tO' my. lips, I could not fpeak :	Thank
you my friend, for this mark of your clleem to my departed Augufl;us.” She paufed; “ Remember me to my Cecilia, tell her to my latelb breath I never ceafed feeling the mod lively friendihip for her.” Her ftrength now vifi-bly declined ; Ihe took a tender and melancholy leave of her faithful Mrs. Morgan ; Ihe repeatedly kilTed and blelTed her Sweet child, nor would Suffer us to Separate her from the fobbing babe. Mr. Lcvifon, that wretched father, knelt, Ilupi-fied in Sorrow; a folmn lilence enfued, tears were the only interpreters of our grief; at length Ihe complained of being thirfty, Ihe begged for water, but before Ihe could take it to her lips a kind of convulfion Seized her. The now dillradfed fa-ther ftarted from his kneeling pofturc, and in a fit-of frenzy Seized his expiring daughter in his arms, and before he could be difengaged from his hold, her fpotlefs foul had taken its flight to its congenial place.
To

Laura and Augustus.
To dcfcribe our grief upon this Blocking occa* , fion is impoflible ! The loved idea of this helplefs pair ever intrudes itfelf into my imagination ! I, however, try to comfort myfelf with the thought of their having attained thofe blifsful fcenes, early virtue, innocence, and forrow, have entitled' them to! Fancy you' behold the blooming couple encircled with never-fading wreaths of glory, and blefled with fupreme delight: thefe are the fentiments I nourifh, to difpel the dark clouds of melancholy, which the lofs of Such ineftimable friends cccafioned. And thus, Cecilia, fnould you heal the wounds of your heart, for the lofs of the tender companion of your bofom'; we fliould confider, that in a fituation like her’s all happy, nefs is fled, rearoning becoms vain, and evei| arguments of religion have but little weighty The dear fufFerer embraced death as her only |friend, W'hich Ihe thought might terminate, but cdiild not augment her mifery. It will be unneceflFary to comment further on this mournful event to a per-fon of your fenSibility ; your grief mull: be allowed its courfe; and in time, no doubt, proper re-fledtions, which arife fpontaneoufly in a well-form^ ed mind, will blunt the edge of grief.—Adieu:;
the bodies of our dear friends will on Thurfday next be interred in the family vault of Mr. Levi-fon, with every funeral honour. Mr. Levifon-Mr. White, my father, Mrs Morgan, and myfelf, will attend their dear remains to- Northamp* tonfliire.
I
Your ever affectionate,
Tho’ afflicted,
Harriot Sidney,
FINIS

-'.V*
i'<'' ^ . S, . •	,	^	.D.	•	•	...
V A
	
	
	Hn9^^HHI^B^^
	



- V- 't.;
'.• S.'	» -
i . •• - A
V i
f * .V^i»-v	Nt*
«	__.^.m	K.	*^»V	, ■*S.
nail IM5^,-	^
ar^arrxrss.j:: *i.^3aaax2 *,h
'/T^“ _v
■s^	.'■*■	-^- .1
^	^	JA. M
CLT
. 7*^ f " T" !i*?r '.'
•Njifc-.V -v;- lA A -h ?•-
*	~	’^'	>r'- •—*

^ ] !■
- )f '
_-A -V
\I'
,!jr .




r»i<\ .'

- . V*»	4^-
c •	\ ^
inches
D50 llluminant, 2 degree observer
Density
0.04
0.09
0.15
0.22
0.36
1	2	3	4 ■	1 5	6	7	8	9	10	11 (A)	12	13	14	15
39.12	65.43	49.87	44.26	55.56	70.82	63.51	39.92	52.24	97.06	92.02	87.34	82.14	72.06	62.15
13.24	18.11	-4.34	-13.80	9.82	-33.43	34.26	11.81	48.55	-0.40	-0.60	-0.75	-1.06	-1.19	-1.07
15.07	18.72	-22.29	22.85	-24.49	-0.35	59.60	-46.07	18.51	1.13	0.23	0.21	0.43	0.28	0.19
0.51
lO' I I M
500	200
SI §■
de<« tnch (epOwO	QQQ
fi SI
lo m
Ol (O'
eo CO
700
300
'e/(

I I I ■/1 I I I I I N 12 > > I I I I I I 13 >
I I
I I M |5l I I I I
16 (M)
49.25
-0.16
0.01
IZ.
38.62
-0.18
-0.04
18(B)
28.86
0.54
0.60
16.19
-0.05
0.73
IS. 8.29 ■0.81 0.19
II
3.44
■0.23
0.49
II. 31.41 20.98 -19.43
72.46
■24.45
55.93
I I
I I
72.95
16.83
68.80
II
29.37
13.06
-49.49
IS. 54.91 -38.91 30.77
SN: OL0§07
I I |8I
27
43.96
52.00
30.01
82.74
3.45
81.29
IS. 52.79 50.88 -12.72
I I
centimeters \10
IS. 50.87 -27.17 -29.46