





^:‘:':‘:':*:W:%*AVA';*:':::i?:'
■ilii:
illilli
iiiilil"

K-x*:*?:*:-?:*:::*::::;
ViliiliUp


m
CD
I	I
I	^
I	I
1	S
I	¥
I i
r
m I
in I
1^

•x.^:<.
i

r

I
rsj
m
m
tD
o>
o>
cr>
o
u
O)
to
CtO


to
U
Ly^
^^x<xx-xxxx

i^x<-x->x«>x^x?
Sjk-v.
I	1
Ax«x«x'>x«x-x<*x*:»x<«x<-xx«-»x5:
• • c	to 0) tdO CD E	• • to
o		13
• amam		O
U		“O
	75	o
"5	o	LL
u		tt
to
(U
• •
t>0
• mam
Q
O
to
(U
DO
(D
O-
O
U
cu

o
O-
•x*xs^<*i«*wi«'XXrt';sw>>;^x»X'tv;'X<»xvx»iXFX'»4'Xv«FX»xvt<*«xxxwxK«X";';s*x^
D50 llluminant, 2 degree observer
Density
. t./ v'-,-c'i '	■•.,•;•■•-r.,: A ;. C'-V--..-.	- «	>
V-i:- ' : ' '	• c V’ •:-^ =-. “O-■'. t-'-- ^
;• V..
. . b V ’ •/./- ■	•
- •,'■ —; ' > - >
i'-v

■ SMC .t'i,
if ^,
■ ■,. • « ■
• i ':	sSsfe.i'iSK

CO
c
O
u
CO
CO
(U
i2
O
m


01 I I I I I I I 1D > > MI I I|2iI I I I
fkr^ad
'	i	»	*		■
18(B)	19	20	21	22	23
28.86 0.54 0.60	16.19 -0.05 0.73	8.29 -0.81 0.19	3.44 -0.23 0.49	31.41 20.98 -19.43	72.46 -24.45 55.93
72.95
16.83
68.80
29.37
13.06
-49.49
54.91
-38.91
30.77
43.96
52.00
30.01
82.74
3.45
81.29
52.79
50.88
-12.72
50.87
-27.17
-29.46
0.75
0.98
1.24
1.67
2.04
2.42
SN: OLO0O7
Color^by Munsell Color Services Lab

' . >	i*”*	^	A C ' ' -

■TH.' ^ •
J i>-	>Cjr'.‘ S
'■ . '	'' ^	- ■., ^	.''I	' t
•	?*. L- 'tI- '•-	•,^' c.), r
■	i	,V' i ’ f • Dll’*	'■ ■• •'• • ■■ ,V ••	b
; r -V
’3^'



■ ■C-.'-.j,




-■/	te	i' ^'' ■ V '■ ^' * ''^' ''' ''	' ■ ' ' ri ‘f'"'>'-• ---■;■-■'=•■■ SC*'N-v"''_' '" ■'	~i C'-'"''*'l ■'
' -i	-■.. ■cTbvTse ■cyNN"' :ALdt:}di ' M- -VV:A VIiA 'i'TSc.;; C; VS-.-.- S,-C>N,	■'/■■■'
pj-

	. * >-i. -sV*" • •
	' • %* .* • v** *
	7 i \>V0'
ri , '■	• 1-- iC* .* * ** \***^‘
» • '	'. .
	
••*... I . ■	^
*?• C r.'
			
C*		* '* ■ ^ ^	• '^V*
R'-.’	s. •	• ***** * Vs*	•*^ - r f
^V.		'rX<\ --A' L~'	»* ,• -
		;x . ■•.'•	• * ' sS"
1'—	• • . r '.	■ ” • ’. •* > ' *♦ •*'	
■ '	. • '	V *•' A • i	
		I'..' '* *Vj* *T .	"ri ■'•
L - *• h		* .<■ •* •*•'•> ' • b' '*	
		' ^ A *• “b * .b ^' y. .*	• ^\'*.
* - .''.A'- -	'.;



.. 7./cj; b'v^ * »N 1' *• 'L'AV.. .>•*.' ; < V *	ri Fdy-'. FiA Tb'bV 'J-.'b -■;**' b;	■ * • ...*- •* ', ** - V
V ^ '	'■'L •/•. :' N'-'\- "'-'h'd-'' ' ' v''- •	*- .'''* **• • '• > •» \S '
N-b;-ybtebb’	‘b'T '■''' -'K''SL?ri-y''d.K--' S*:»;" ''b.	b V.: .' ‘ b‘*^
:•*'; "i;.. *.!.•■••'■ ;- ■■■ ■'/	bb'bCb VbT'V'bN S-;bVAb	; V • 7V h’* .
. b-bC;.;Cbte;		•?:^• -^vV•* * b ‘r/:*.r



mV
m:-	- -




>.<.y-. :.D ;.; :'...:
' T". vO-A'L	;.;-cC S '-b'
^.;, rMVVV-'AV' ->i ■ -V bi : b V
t'^ ' s •%	V AA.i.
	• V ,• rv. /■ *’.*'
f^V\* »	• .
L^.	.'■ 'v‘‘. • ryh r
	
-r,»	•..•-■


CvC’^V* t>~''T'ibv •'* rC'‘''b.'^ ■	•.'■• rri -. bb-'^ b '
T-NbSN'CCLbb-.'b --b---b	b'..--‘ ■.
S'■'	' 'Db'-'
• -s’’'- .
r /
'•V '■- '





■.-' b'--	■ . -	■'.
-■b'-	-b	/■'■'';"-■ -vbDSi--JbV'VLc'^^


x'- >. b * s ‘ <*
'' ■ b '■; .V . — b' '- *	«.' • ■. ’ bN'.' "'--'•.7*' b
- w. • ■ f'- <
. ■ * '''"	•y.-v'-'! SA'iAri S-T". *-b *' -'•	
,v *> • A;	■'< ----.'‘•■A'-'' -*’, '~n *”-•	■ '••' -•■■••^ ’ ■■:• •V-’^ •• \- .■-•_■ •'-. •- • vvf^r'
1-V\ ■•'.	'''. ■•■bCbb'*Nbv>';bbv.>	
-NbN > - ^ b • b b: N •-: 'N A		'A-AVSfV-^^
	id.AfriSf. .,’^'"-:V-	• A'" **.S\b», *,^ sA'
7^	ci>.«
‘‘M'-' - ■
K-^-V.V- ' ■'


-V
>•1



' ' -.♦*'
.. • -
.' -L Ay'
.:-(■-ri
A
A
-■•;• • • .' .---•^ '



1
I'
THE
HT
Xl
TORY
O F
M iss Lucinda Courtney ;
In a SERIES of
X
ORIGINAL LETTERS;
/
Written by Herself,
To her Friend'
Miss Constantia Bellmour.,
Ip
A New Edition.
IN THREEVOLUMES.
VOL. I.
L O N D O N:
Printed for F. and J. Noble, at their relpeflive Circulating Libraries, near Middle Rghv, Holhorni and Saim Martin’s Court, near Leicejier Square,
MDCCLXXIII.
r

r
\

¥
at
co;r
2 ,2
**?.€****3-{**
m	•
•	•
•	a
•.	*
m*	m
•	m
m	^
••n*'**n**
THE
HISTORY
O F
f^'S

Mifs Lucinda Courtney.
0
✓
<^c^C!!Soc^c^c^c$oo$oc^o^c^oj^c^c^c^c^:^
i'^
'4
INTRODUCTION.
f ’ '

tfi
I
r\
h
•V
V
To Lady L
4
tx
is with great Pleafure ^ I ^ I obey your Ladyfhip, in
fending the Letters you requefted, and hope they will give you PleaSure in the PeruSal;

J
VoL. I.
B
&
0
i.<r
though
-
i r>
- /■
<r
n?;5o4^
2 The history op
I.
1
though I cannot expect them to affect you So much as they did me; ffnce the Friendship I have for their Writer gave them Charms, which may not, perhaps, appear to an indifferent Reader: The Intereff I take in all that concerns her, made me overlook their Faults; but you will be more quick-fighted : Yet remember, as they were wrote with negligent Freedom, not imagining they would ever be honoured with the Attention of one of your Tafte and Judgement, they claim your Candotir; and for my Sake, if not for the Author's, I beg you will elcert your Ufual Good-nature,
and lay afide the Critic —And
. <
now, after this Short apology, I

<• i i
Miss Lucinda Courtney.

commit them to you; but, for the better understanding them, it will be necefSary to give you a
fhort Sketch of their amiable
/
Writer.
Mifs Courtneyi then, is the only
Daughter of a Gentleman of good
Family, and genteel Fortune. My
first Acquaintance with her was
at a Boarding-fchool, where we
contracted a Friendship, which
nothing but Dehth can difiblve;
at least I can anfwer for myfelf,
and have no Reafon to doubt the
fame of mv beloved Lucinda x for
•/
never fure was there a more delicate, or more noble Heart than hers. Nature never put a brighter Gem into a more beautiful Cafket. But I will not attempt to deScribe ei-
B 2
ther

4 The HISTORY of
ther her Mind or PerSon, fince I feel mySelf unequal to the Talk. Let it Suffice, that, excepting your Ladyfhip, fhe comes the neareft to Perfection of any Creature I ever met with. I may be partial, but her Merit is univerfally ac-
f
knowledged, though, perhaps, others may not think fo highly of her as I do: Yet if they do not,
I
it must proceed from their not having the Pleafure of knowing her fo perfectly. I fhall never forget the happy Days, or rather Years, that we have pasted together ; for we both continued much longer at School than is common. My Stay was prolonged by the Death of my dear Father, who left my Mother involved in Law-
fuits;
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 5
fuits j for which Reafon fhe chofe I Should continue where I was, till her Affairs were fettled; nor did I regret it, fmce I was blefied with the Company of my Sweet Friend, whofe Father, being a gay Man, was in no hafte to recall her Home, juflly fuppofing, that a Daughter, who was remarkably tall of her Age, would not help the World to believe him the young man he 'defired to pafs for; and Self-Love is much more predominant in him, than paternal Affection. Indeed, no Man was ever lefs calculated for a Father and Hufband, than Mr. Courtney', and little was he worthy of a Lady, who was the Ornament of her Sex, and who merited more
B 3
than
6 The HISTORY of
than all his Tendernefs, which he profufely lavifhed upon others. But his want of Affection was not all
V
\
She had to complain of; his Extravagancies were daily exhaufling their Fortune, and threatening them with Ruin s for, amongfl his other Vices, he was paflionately addicted to Gaming. Judge what Grief his Conduct muff give a tender Mother, who had the Welfare of her Child So much at Heart! Who juflly doated on her Lucindai yet faw her in danger of being deprived of the Means of Supporting her Rank, and living up to the Hopes fhe was born to! How often did fhe prefs Mr. Courtney to permit her to return Horne, believing her Prefence and
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 7
amiable Behaviour would excite his TenderneSs, and make,him a little more mindful of her Inter eft ; but he always framed Some Pretence or other to delay it; and his Lady had no other Confolation but that of vifiting her, which fhe did very frequently; and it was greatly owing to her Letters and admirable Inftructions, that my Friend is become fuch an accom-plifhed Woman.
There was an entire Freedom and Confidence between this amiable Parent and Child. Nothing could be more engaging than
their Behaviour to each other.
$
Mr. Courtney, on the contrary^ was Satisfied with hearing her Praifes, without having Curiofity
B 4.
enough
8 The HISTORY of
enough to excite him to go him-felf and judge if fhe deferved them. He wrote to her. Some-times, indeed, but that was all; yet this Neglect did not diminidi the Duty and Refpect Mifs Court’-ney knew file owed him as a Parent : And fhe reluctantly Suffered herfelf to complain of his TJnkindnefs, even to me, from whom fhe never difguifed her moft Secret Thoughts.
As fhe found fhe muff remain at School, fhe endeavoured to
s
profit by it. She applied to every kind of Learning, with Such Afli-duity, that never young Lady had a more finifhed Education ; I mean Such as is Suitable to her Sex; for, except reading more than is
fhe
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 9
fhe afpired to nothing out of her Province, and Spoke no other Language than her own, excluding French, of which fhe was a perfect Miftrefs. But what fhe mofl of all excelled in was Mufick and Dancing. I never faw any one have a more graceful Air in the latter, nor more Judgement and
Execution in the former
To
which I may add, one of the
✓
fweeteft Voices in the World, You may believe, by all this, we did not want for Amufement i and, I muff: acknowledge, it was with Some Regret, that I at laft received a Summons to return Home.
Mifs
Mother
B 5

10 The HISTORY of
f
ing Permiflion to leave the School at the fame Time that I did; and begged her to prefs her Father for his Confent. I likewiSe petitioned to wait till fhe had received an Anfwer. In the mean Time we agreed, in order to foften the Pain of Abfence, that we would keep up a regular Correspondence, and inform one another minutely, and by way of Journal, of every thing that happened to us 'y for we feared we fhould very feldom See each other, as my Father had taken a HouSe a great Distance from Town. In fettling this Plan we amufed ourSelves, till fhe received a Letter from Mr. Courtneyy in which he granted her
Request ^ and her Mother informed
her.
Miss Lucinda Court net., ii
her, fhe would fetch her the next Day. Great was her Joy at this Information, which was damped,, however, when fhe reflected fhe was to part from me., I will not attempt to defcribe this Scene, as I have already exceeded the Bounds of a Letter, and, I fear, exhaufted your Patience.
Upon looking over what I have wrote, I find it very confufed and incorrect 3 but my Motives muft plead for its Defects, fince I did
your Curiofity, and Comrnands.. I am,
V
Refpect and Esteem,
it to
%
obey
with
11
f
CONSTANTIA BEti.MdUR
tBP
B 6
12 The HISTORY of
Mifs Lucinda Courtney, to
Mifs CoNSTANTIA BeLLMOUR.
\
Monday.
Otwithftanding the Pleafure
I feel at my Return Home,
are opprefTed with

my
Melancholy, at being deprived of the Company of my beloved Con-jiantia. I feel your Embrace, and Seem still to fee the friendly Tears you fhed for me. Alas! my Con-jiantia, when fhall we meet a-gain ? Can I ever taste fueh Pleafure, as I have done with you, where every Hour was crowned with Innocence and Peace ? I am entering on a World which, thofe who have tried it, fay, is full of
Mifery
\
/
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 13 Mifery and Disappointment. I
have, as yet, known none of its Cares, but now I look forward upon it with a kind of Dread; but whatever happens to me, whether Pleafure or Pain, will be heightened, or Softened, Since my Friend permits me to eommuni-cate it to her.—Yes, my dear
with Pleafure
t
Conjiantiay I keep the PromiSe I made you; we will still eonverSe, though at a Distance. Every Thought of my Heart mall be open to her who So justly postefTes my Affections.
Your Superior WiSdom Shall still
• '
direct, and make me more worthy of your Esteem. I have received the little outward Accomplifh-ments of Education from others,
'	, but
14 The HISTORY qf
but if I have real Merit, I must attribute it to your amiable Example. Remember your Lucinda^ and be punctual in writing.
As for myfelf, I am going to be-gin my Journal, according to our Agreement, and will take the Privilege you allow me, and be very minute, however trifling the In-^ eidents may be, which I may have to relate; knowing, that nothing
I
will be uninteresting to a Friend, infipid as the Relation may appear tp others.
After parting with my Conjian^ tiay and the other agreeable young Ladies, with whom I had received my Education, I was conducted to my Father’s; my Mind, during my Journey, agitated between*
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 15
Grief and Joy. My dear Mother (who greatly efteems you) will forgive this Confeffion, fince none but yourfelf could have prevented my being completely happy, while I was in her dear Company. After a pleafant Ride, we arrived at my long wifhed-for Home. My Father was juft gone out, but expected to return every Moment. I waited for him with a Mixture of Impatience and Fear. In the mean Time, the Servants crowded about me, and exprefted their Joy at feeing me, efpecially the good old Margaret, whom you have often heard me mention as a faithful and affectionate Creature, and who has lived with my ever Since She was a Child.
Mother
\
You
i6 The HISTORY gf
You may believe I felt great Pleafure at gaining my Freedom after a kind of Banifhment; but flill, the Dread I had, left my Father fhould receive me ungraci-oufly, hung upon my Heart, and weighed down my Spirits. My Mother kindly endeavoured to footh me and diflipate my Fears; Oh this dear Woman!
What a Bleffing it is to have fo in-
#
dulgent a Parent! You, too, have an amiable Mother—Let us then be thankful, my Friend, and not repine at trifling Misfortunes, in Confideration of fo great an Hap-pinefs.
As it was uncertain when my Father might return, I begged> leave to retire to my Apartment,
where,.
Mi$s Lucin£)a Courtney. 17
where, mindful of my Conjiantia, I immediately took up my Pen. Tell me, my Friend, is it a plea--fant Place that your Mother has retired to ? Favour me with a De-fcription of it; fure it mufl: be much more delightful than this noify town. Let me have an exact Account how you pafs your Time. — What are you doing now} But I forget, you are but juft returned, and you will be engaged in receiving the Congratulations of your Neighbours. I hope you will find fome of them agreeable, but do not let any of them rival me in your Friendship, I am as jealous as a Lover, in this Refpect; be civil and obliging to all, but love none but me; at
leaft.
i8 The HISTORY of
leafi, not So well. Parents excepted : and then, and then only, yon can come up to me in Affection, for you, have all that the Ties of Nature have left of my Heart; and Should a Male Creature make pretenfions to it, he must expect but to Share it with you; and if I find it too little to fatisfy both Love and Friendfhip, I would exclude the first, rather than part with the latter.
A Note is just brought from my Father—^He cannot dine with us, but will be at Home in the Evening. I am forry for it; I long
for the Pleafure of feeing him
«
’ How happy Should I be, if I could believe he was equally impatient!
Blit, adieu, I am Sent for.
My
Miss Luginua Courtney. 19
My Father is returned, and the Interview is over. I will not be particular, as I think he was not quite So kind as I could have wished—I hate to dwell on difa-greeable Circumstances, efpecially when, by relating them, I must be obliged to Set my dear Parent in a Light lefs pleaSing than I destre to introduce him to you. Time, and my Endeavours to pleaSe him, may produce happy Effects.
We had Company this Afternoon, but their Characters and Converfation were too common to deServe a Description — when I am fettled I will be more particular. I feel myfelf a little fatigued; it is almost Eleven o’clock, and Time to bid you good Night.
T o-morrow.
20 The history of
\
\
To-morrow, and Some Part of every Day, fhall be dedicated to my Pen and my Conjiantia.
I^uefday.
I	am 'melancholy—My Father has been a little angry with me. After fome Difcourfe with my Mother about Family Affairs, which made him peevifh, he turned to me : You See the Plague of Matrimony, Said he j nothing
but Trouble and Expence attends
\
it; and yet 111 warrant your light Head is giddy with high Expectations, and half wild for Diffipa-tion and Amufement, like other foolifh Girls of your Rank, who think their Parents have nothing elfe to do with their Money but
4
to
Mis5 Lucinda Courtney. 2i
to give it to them to Ipend on their Pleasures; but you will find your-
felf miftaken
The World
may
think what it pleafes of my Cir-cumftances, but I muft tell you, you are not to flatter yourfelf with Expectations of a Fortune from me, and therefore behave accordingly.
You are tolerably handfome, and may, perhaps, get a Hufband if you take Carej but the Duce is in all your foolifh Sex, they never know their own Interefl, they die if they are not Seen; and fb run from one publick Place. to another, till their Faces become fo common, that nobody will take the Trouble of looking at them. But let this Houfe be the Sphere
of
22 Tni HISTORY op
9
of your Actions, added he, and try if you can kill the tedious Hours without gadding abroad.
Dear Sir, Said I, I am all Sub^ mifiion to your Will. I hope my Behaviour, for the little Time I have been at Home, has not given fuch Proofs of Levity, as to require a Lecture upon Prudence. Really, my pretty Mifs, faid he, you have made a very womanly Speech j but harkee. Child, I would juft hint to you, that you are not yet So over-wife as to need
no Inftruction.
I	was Silent.
So you are Sulkey, faid he, pretty Creature! but look here, leading me to the Glafs; fee what a
have to
fweet Countenance you receive Company with
They
will.
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 23
doubtleSs, be delighted with
you
Dear Sir, Said I, I befeech you
to Spare your Raillery. I am not Sulkey—you have a right to treat me as you pleafe. Hey-day ! cried he, you are a fine Gentlewoman truly ! Treat you as I pleafe! And pray Mifs, may I preSume to afk what Mnd of Treatment you would pleafe to haveI warrmt I have been very cruel to you, have not I ? But pray go up to your Apartment, and try to get your Self dreffed a little lefs frightfully.' I courtfied.
and left
I went to
my
Mother, who had quitted the room at the beginning of his Difcourfe to me. I looked a little vexed,
I be-
24 The HISTORY of
I believe; for fhe afked me what
was the the' Matter with me. No-
thing, dear Madam, Said I; only
I think my Father is not near So
well pleafed with my Return as
I could wifh. You are miflaken.
Said fhe; your not Being ac-
quainted with his Manner makes
you think So. I am Sure he loves
you; but he has a particular Turn,
which you will Soon be accuflom
ed to. Retort his Raillery ; he
mufl not look grave; be chear-
ful, and ril anSwer for it youll
dam. Said I, how can I be other-
wife, while he treats me with
fuch Supercilious Contempt ^ I
1
{
1
is fond of Life and Spirits. You 1
f;
t
gain his Favour. But, dear Ma- P
u
b
T
am not myfelf in his Prefence.
Time *
Miss Lucinda Courtney. ^5
I	•
Time will wear off that Restraint, Said stie; you must study his Temper. Really, Said I, he struck
into me the, first Mo-
a
ment I Saw him — I had hardly been a Minute in the HouSe be-
4
fore he begun to find Fault with my Drefs and Manner. I never was accuSed of being inelegant in either, till I was So by the PerSon in the World I most defired to pleafe.- He only jested with you,
my Mother; he ,wanted to
$
try your Temper: But go and put on your Cloaths, and be as unconstrained as you poflibly can before the Company we expect To-night. I make no doubt but your Wit and good Senfe will re-ore you again to his Favour. I
VoL. I.
C
fear
26 The HISTORY op
fear, Said I, what little Share I have (of what you are pleaSed to compliment me with) will appear to little Advantage under his fcru-tinizing Eye; but I will do tlie best I can. So faying, I repaired to my Toilet.
And now, my dear Conjiantiai
\
let me afk you, how you like this Specimen of my prefent Situation ? I can tell you I am not doatingly fond of it. The Company we expect To-night Strangers to all the Family but my P'ather : He is very profufe
are
in their Praife, and Says, he is Sure we must be happy in their Acquaintance. — But ' here thej come. Adieu, my Friend ; Iwil
givi
1
LtTciNDA Courtney,
give you my Opinion of them as fbon as they are gone.
My Father^ with a Smiling Countenance, which he can af-
f
fume when he plcafes, flew to hand them from their Coach. Dear Ladies, Said he, I rejoice to fee you. Mrs. Courtney is all Impatience to be introduced. He led them to us. This, Said he, is Mrs. Henley, whom you have heard me fo juflly praife, and this Mifs Henley, the Torment and Pleafure of half the Men in Town. Why not all the Men, Said She, with a fprightly Air, to make your Compliment more compleat} Mr. Courtney, Said Major Freeman, (who came with them) was not aiming at a Com-
C 2
pliment.
28 The HISTORY of
pliment, but only meant to give his Lady a true Idea of you. Oh, your Servant, faid fhe. But
I
come, Mr. Courtney, pray intro-
duce the Major as well as me,
and give your Lady an Idea of him, too. I leave' that for you, faid my Father, as you know him heft; and, indeed, I ftiould find Some Difficulty to defcribe him. Since he is always endeavouring to be what you would have him; and your Mind changes fo often.
r /■
that h

Minutes

>t the fame Man two ther. Oh, V/retch! cried -fire, what an inconstant Creature have you
made
me
I

But doiVt believe him. Madam, turning to my Mother. Not if you diflike the Character, faid
She;
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 29
#
4
fire; though I believe he meant it
as a Compliment. I did, indeed. Said my Father; Sor I am, Sure, in this Lady, at lead:, it is becoming. You are a flattering . Creature, Said She; but pray tell me, is this young Lady your Daughter ? I protefl; She makes you an old. Man. I would advife you to fhut her up, if you would wifli to Shine as a gay Man of Gallantry ; for in her Prefence I fliall never be able to look upon you in any other Light than that of a
f
reverend old Gentleman.
Odi-
ous ! faid my Father; how can you mortify me So ? You Should rather fuppofe the great Girl is my Sifter. I intend to pafs her off as Such; I am Sure my youth-
c 3
ful
30
The history of
ful Looks will make the laft much
eafier believed than the former.
Vain Wretch! Said Mifs Henley,
do, dear Mrs. Courtney, help me
to lower his Pride. Tell me his
Age; I am Sure he is at lead: as
old again as you are. But pray
obferve the Major, continued She;
he is examining Mifs Courtney,
to fee if your Scheme is feafible.
Vv hat Says your Wifdom ? Will
She paSs for his Sifter, think you I
I believe not. Said the Major,
(withdrawing his Eyes, which
had, for Some Time, been tor-
menting me with their offtcious
Glances) She might much more
eafily be taken for Mrs. Courtney s,
« _
fince She has a greater Refemblance
to that Lady. She is mine, ne-
Terthelefs,
I
I
1
t
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 31
verthelefs. Said my Father, laughing, you Shall not make me doubt my Relationship to her, nor would Mrs. Courtney be much obliged to you if you did.
Mifs Henley did not Seem to relish the Attention that her Lover honoured me with. She tried to?
draw me into Conversation, not
;
doubting but She would Shine at my Expence, having fo visibly the Advantage of me in modeSf; Af-Surance and SprightlineSs.
Ax'e you not happy, MiSs, Said file, to be delivered from the Confinement of a Boarding-SchoolI am Sure I was like a Bird efcaped from a Cage, when I was releafed from one^ and, I believe^ my Governefs was no
C 4
lefs
32 The HISTORY of
lefs pleafed than mySelf; for 11
t
took a mofl unaccountable Delight | in Mifchief, and played a' thou-fand unluckly Tricks, to torment}
i
the good Lady Abbefs. I mud* |
i
own myfHf a little deficient in i that Part of my Education, laid I; \
'	lb
it was Want of Spirits, I flippofe; I but, I confefs, I aimed more to^ be the best Scholar, than, wittily.
to
myfelf
as
bed
Romp. Oh, your Servant, ivveet Mifs, faid stie; but, ' take ray Word for it. Life and Spirits will make a better Figure in the Beau Mondey than grave Stupidity, with all the Learning of a College. I hope. Madam, faid I, Gravity and Stupidity are not fynonymous TermsVery nearly fo, in my
Opinion,
, Miss Lucinda Courtney. 33
Mifs Henley
T rue. Wo-
men to do with Learning ? Their
Heads
A
wiSe Woman is an Absurdity. All fhe* ought to aim at is, to be lively and entertaining. I would not give a. Rufh for a. Woman, who is dully uniform* and reasonable. Little, volatile Inconliften-cies are their greateff: Charms: It is thefe which diflinguifh them from'the more Solid Sex. They
deviate from Nature,, when they
endeavour at Excellencies that were never deligned for them. I leave the Ladies to thank you for the pretty Compliment you have paid them, Said the Major t but I have the Honour to diifer with you in
c 5
my
34 The HISTORY of .
my Ideas of an accomplifhed Woman. I allow, indeed, that unmeaning Vivacity may make Some
Figure at an AJfembly, but commend me to good Senfe for a tete a tete. That is, faid Mifs Henley, you would prefer a Prude in private, to a Coquet, becaufe thofe Ladies are generally more liberal of their Favours. But vive la bagatelle, fay I; none of your Sententious People for my Money. In my Opinion, faid I, a Woman cannot be a true, refined Coquet,, Vv^ithout a* great Share of Senfe. This Character would not be fo ridiculous, if we did not fo often fee it attempted by thofe who have no Talents for it. I admire a Woman who has Wit
to
Miss Lucinda-Courtney. 35
to be one, but too much Prudence to chufe So light a Belia-haviour. I do not, more than you, love grave Formality j yet, I own, I prefer it to brilk, infipid Folly.. Upon my Honour, .Mifs, Said the Major, you have Wit and Senfe enough to be what you pleafe; I
blufhed at this blunt Compliment,.
\
and observed MiSs Henley bit her Lips and bridled; but fhe endeavoured to hide her Chagrin, by turning careleSsly to my Father,, to whom, fhe whifpered Something,.
at which they both affected to*
•»
laugh very heartily. My Mother endeavoured to render the. Conversation more general..
And now., that the lively Mifs ILenley would give her Sister Time
G 6
to
36 The HISTORY of
,to be heard, I found her a most agreeable Woman, and really believe I fhall have a great Regard for her, when we are a little more intimate. She told me,, fhe fhould efteem it a Favour if I would permit her to attend me to fome of the public Entertainments. She was Sure, fhe was pleafed to fay, that the Remarks, a young Lady of my good. Senfe. would make on them,, would give, a Relifh to what Custom had made almost
S
infipid to her. I bowed in Ac-
of fo high a
V
ompliment. The Major told Mrs. Henley,, he must put in for a Share of her Happinefs,, and pro-pofed oui going, to the Play the very next Evening, My Mother
objected
knowledgement
c
\
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 37
objected to it, as She happened to be engaged, and, I believe,, did nc^ much approve of my going with?-out her; but as the Ladies did noA Seem willing to postpone their Pleasure, my Father gave his ConSent that I Should go, though neither he nor my Mother could attend us. It was accordingly de^ termined that I Should drink Tea with Mrs.. Henley.^ and. accom»-pany them to the Theatre. They Soon, after took their Leave,, and
my Father, continuing, in a pretty
«
good Humour, favoured us with
Particulars of their HiSf
t
tory.
Mrs. Henleyr it feems, is- a
1- '
Widow of good Fortune, and
Children y, stie has, there,-
i^re.
3S The HISTORY op
fore,, defired her Sister to live with her, which is very agreeable to the other, as her Fortune would not enable her Separately to maintain that Rank in Life which stie is fond ©f. Mrs. Henley is determined against a Second Marriage, and that,, partly on her Sister’s Account, for stie has a. great Regard for her^ Indeed, this young Lady is not void of Merit, though fhe is, I think, a little too fenfible of her Perfections. Her Face is not what one. can call pretty, but all together She may pafs for a fine, Ihowy Woman. Her Air is quite degageey. and fhe is very lively and chatty.. The Men are fond of her Company, and fhe is generally adinired.
The
* .
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 39
The Major, it Seems, is looked upon as her Captive, by herfelf„ and most of her Acquaintance, though he has not yet been very explicit on the Subject. But now for the Major; though last, least beloved, nor, in Justice, he ought not. Since he took no Small Pains to recommend himfelS to me, though, good Man, he has been rather unfucceSsSul—-here’s his Picture.
not
But
In the first Place, he is tall, and, what Some People would Say, genteel. His Face, indeed, is rather plain ; but for a Man, you know, that is not of much ConSequence. He is, all together, a good manly Figure, and, I fuppofe, has his Admirers, tho’, I believe, I fhall never
add

40 The HISTORY op
add to the Number. His Estate, is but Small, but he has great Expec-
tations,
William
Ereemariy is unmarried, and in a bad State of Health.
After my Father had thus, made us a little acquainted with the Hi-story of our new Friends, he honoured me with Some Instructions as to my Behaviour in public, in
which he took Occafion to be a
/
Satirical on us poor Females>
though the amiable and prudent Conduct of my Mother, ought to have given him a better Opinion of the Sex T but the gay Part of Mankind converfe too much with the abandoned Part of the Women, to do Justice to the truly
virtuous.- I wonder the Ladies
Should
\
r
I
I
Miss Lucinda Courtnev. 4s
I
■>
\
fhould ever have any partial Fa-
n r
vour for Rakes, who, of all their Species, are least apt to esteem them, becauSe they are most Sen-
sible of their Frailties.
But let
me take Care that I am not caught To-morrow Night, by one ox thofe Specious Animals.
Between you and I, I do not think the Stage one of the most innocent Diverfions. ' I have read a great Number of Plays, and tho’ I do not like Some rigid People’s
condemning them all without Dif-
/
tinction, we must allow, there are Numbers of them that have no very good Effect upon the Morals. They are Said to be our most rational Amufement, and the Stage is thought, by Some of
. its
42 The HISTORY of
its Advocates, to be more condu
cive to our Reformation than
even the Church, as Example
goes farther than Precept ^ but let
us judge of the
We
I
find this School of Virtue crowded
I
•with Libertines and Courtezans,
!■

who, in Spite of the nightly
r-
r
Lectures they hear, ffill continue
the fame; So that whatever good
Defign it may be intended for, it
I
is clear it does not anfiver the


li-
fe
Purpofe. But even while I talk
So mighty wife and prudent about
'F
it, I muft acknowledge, I look for-
ward with Impatience to the Plea-
sure I expect To-morrow Night.

fhall
love celeftial Melancholy
as
/f
[cw
Mr. Hume
I"
Price

Miss Lucinda Courtney. 4^
Price of a few Tears. What would I give to have my Conjian-tia of the Party! Her Superior Senfe would point but and teach me to feel every delicate Stroke, and well-wrought Scene — But, alas! my Wifhes are vain: My Friend is delighting herfelf with' contemplating the Beauties of Nature, without defiring to change them for thofe of Art.
It is rather late in the Year to expect much Company at the Play houSe 'y though the People Seem every Year leSs fond of leaving the dear Town, and dp not quit it for the Country, ’till almofl half the Summer is over. I wonder at
I
their Taste y for Londony in warm, dusty Weather, is, in my Opi-
A
nion.
44The HIST0RY of
«
nion, intolerable, and not to be
compared to Fields and. Groves,
0
and purling Streams. Do, let youi; Letters be as rural as poffi-ble, that I may be conveyed to you in Imagination, though, I fear, I Shall not taste the PleaSure in Reality. —- But, adieu. Supper waits for me. Need **1 tell you,, that I am, unalterably,.
Your Lucinda

Xu
Mifs Lucinda Courtney, to
Mijs CoNSTANTIA BeLLICOUR.
O R D blefs the Male' Creatures ! they do not know what they would be at. They may fay what they will of the
Incon-
;
►

£
OK
"I
A-!

ti
1.
n
,0!f
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 45
«
Inconstancy of Women, but I am much mistaken, if the most
volatile of them have Half the Whims and Changes of Temper of one I am nearly allied to.
My Father has been peevifh and out of Humour all Day; Nobody could pleaSe him — the more we tried, the more he took Delight to find Fault. I told my Mother (when he was gone out) that I fuppoSed he was difpleaSed at me, with the kind Defign of moderating the Pleafure (he feared) would too much intoxicate me in the Evening; but that he might have fpared himfelf the Trouble, ^for I was. in no Danger of being too happy; and he has tki fo over-acted his Part, that I can-
3H'
not
46 The HISTORY of
Jiot bear the Thoughts of going. My Spirits^ continued I, are quite cxhaufted* I fhall not be able to think of any Tiling all Night but his Difpleahire. How often have I toM you. Said my Mother, that he means nothing by hi§ little Perverfenefs i I’ll engage he will have forgot all that pafTed, before he comes home
again
and will return in the bell
Humour imaginable. He is paf* Iionate, but his paffion is Soon over, True, Madam, Said I, it is Soon 'ever, as you fay, but it is like-S wife very Soon on again, f think (notwithstanding the general Opinion is against me) I fliould prefer a T emper whofe Anger lalfs longer, but' whofe Fits come fel-
My Father (with Reve-
domer
rence
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 47
I
Tence be it fpoken) is the very Emblem of our Climate; now
fair
now
foul
now calm
now bluflering—Hufh! faid my Mother, interrupting me; I must not Suffer you to take Such Liberties. You must not, for any of his little Faults, forget the Duty and ReSpect you owe a Parent. You ought not to fuffer yourSelf fo much as to think he acts amifs. Dear Madam, faid I, liniling, I
I fhall find my Thoughts a little untractable—-but forgive me, added I (feeing her look Serious) I will endeavour to follow your amiable Example j and hope my dear Father and you will always find my Behaviour what it ought to be. I will not, again, (if it
difpleafes
f
48 The history op
difpleafes you) take So much Free-dom 5 and yet I find myfelf much revived with this little Sally of Levity. I
your
Hair in that Manner!
You look almofi: as frightful as thofe pretty Innocents who
4
comb it over their Foreheads,
S	^
as If Nature had not riiade their
Faces
begin to get up my Spirits again; and if my Father Should come Home in good Humour (as you flatter me he will)
\
I Shall be able to relifh the Amufe-ments of the Evening. His Return put an End to our Conversation. He was humming a Tune
\
as he entered the Room.
What a Head! Said he, looking at me ; I hope in Heaven you don’t intend to go with
nJ'i

Miss Lucinda Courtnev
Faces Silly enough already.
49
Dear Souls! they would walk up* on their Heads, iS they thought it would pleafe the Men. I think
Some of us Should take Pity on
%
them, and tell what we like, and not let them rack their weak Brains
I
with fruitleSs Inventions. ^
Tell me, at least. Sir, Said I, what will pleafe you; stnce my Study in Drefs is only to make
myfelf agreeable to you, I defire to conform intirely to your Taste. He Shook his Head.—A pretty Story truly !—that a Girl Should drefs with no other View than to pleafe her Father!—I give you Credit for that—but come,, Send for the Frifeur, and let's fee what he can make of you. I Shall stay
VoL. I.
D
at
50 The HISTORY of
at Home ’till you are drefSed. I
would not, for my own Sake, have
you appear in Public without be-
ing
quite the Thing. I curt-
fied, and obeyed him.
And
now, till the Thing arrives, who
IS
to have the . Management
of my Head, I have taken up my
Pen, to converfe a little with my
Conjlantia
My
of my Drefs, and, let me tell you,
I make no Small Figure.
I ex-
pect to make great Havock
among the pretty Fellows
but
the Chair waits for me. I will
tell you, when I return, how
many Captives I have made
they will, I fuppofe, be almoft
innumerable. — Dear Creatures 1 i

5^
Miss Lucinda Courtney.
they little think. what a Misfor tune awaits them ! — Did they, for this, fatigue themSelves at the
Toilet all the live long
Day
to come
to fee
and not to
conquer; but, alas! to be conquered by my irrefiftible Charms ? I could almost pity them *-—«
f
Adieu, I sty to Execution.
t
11	d.dock at Night. I cannot, you. may be Sure, go to steep, till I have re-enjoyed the Pleafures of the Evening, by communicating it to my Friend. One has always a thoufand Things to fay upon thefe Occast-ons, which appear interesting to one’s felf, however tristing they may be to others. But I know
D 2
you
52
The history of
you hate Apologies; So, without further Ceremony, 111 proceed with my Journal.
I went to Mrs. Henley^, where I found two Ladies and the Major. Mifs Henley had not finished the important Talk of Dreffing, The Major advanced to me with great Politenefs, and led me to a Chair. I fee. Madam, faid he, you are refolved that Murder I Shall not be confined to the Stage, j Since you have armed yourSelf! with Such killing Charms, as mull; do great Execution amongft the
innocent Spectators. And mudi[
« .
about as fatal will their Wounds be, faid I, as thofe the Actors will receive from the Sword and Dagger. There the Compa-
rifor
1
Miss Lucinda, Courtney. 53
rifon will not hold good. Said he. It’s well my Sister is not here. Said Mrs. IIenley, to be Witnefs to the Perfidy oS her Swain, who Seems to have broke her Chains, to-put on yours. I will, willingly, refign my Captive, Said I; for his Inconstancy renders him unworthy of Acceptance. You differ from other People, then, faid one of the Ladies for they look upon it as a greater Proof of their Charms, to gain the Admirer of another, than one who is difen-
gaged. It may be fo. Madam,.
/
anfwered I; but I fhould rather esteem it a Proof of his Incour-^ ' stancy, and expect, in a little Time, to meet with the Fate of
his former Mistrefs
D 3
Impoffible,
cried
54 The HISTORY or
cried the Major; thofe . who have once enlifled themfelves under your Banner, will never think of deferting it, fince they cannot hope to meet with a more delightful Service. This Speech' is quite in Character, Said. I; perfectly military; but remember. Sir, I have no Thoughts of enlisting you. I restore you to your former General, who, I hope, will
----but
punifh you as you deferve----
fee, fhe comes; I v/ill deliver up her Delinquent. It is not now in your Power, whifpered he ^ I am chained with Fetters too strong ever to be broke. I made no Anfwer, but paid my Compli-ments to MMs Heitley^ who looked charmingly.
Tea


;\
r
K
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 5
r*
0
Tea was immediately ordered.
lively, to ob-
The Converfation was Mifs Henley did not Seem
Serve any Change in her Swain, but gave him her Hand, as Soon as it was Time to go, to lead her to her Chair. He took it reluctantly, I thought, and looked back at me, with a Sigh. I did
not Seem to obServe it, nor made
/
any return to his KVendreJfe,
The Curtain was juft drawing up,, when we entered the Box. I own I was agreeably entertained, with the Variety of Objects that Surrounded me. The HouSe was very full, and the Company were more brilliant than I expected j but
Garrick was
one
Ql
the -" Per-
formers, and it was a. favourite
O 4*
Tra
56 The HISTORY of
Tragedy, So it was the lefs to be wondered at; though it was, as I told you, an iinfafhionable Time
of the Year for the Theatres. I
%
looked round me for fome Time,, with all the Curiofity and Sur-prife of one unaccustomed to public Places ^ but the interesting Scenes on the Stage, Soon drew all my Attention from the Audience.
As we came in pretty late, we attracted the Eyes of Several Gentlemen, who stared at me So sted-fastly through their GlafTes, that I could hardly keep from blusti-ing } but I fcon got over my confufion, by entering deeply into the Spirit of the Play, which
fixed me So intently upon it, that
I ah
MI Luc iN D A Courtney.,
%
1 almofl Sorgot where I was, and gave way, to: the different Emo-tions it. produced ,iti: me.
The'Major (who had, it Seems,, been looking at me more than the Actors) told me. Smiling^, that I: had dared to be very lingular.. Look round*. Said he; you. will not find one Lady, but yourfelf, who^would venture to difcompoSe the unthinking Caft of her Face, to fhew' her Senfibility.. Believe me, you'will not eafily find Pardon with the Ladies, for giving, a Proof of your good Senfe, in Defiance of Cufiom; I Should find great Difficulty, faid: I, to. be hfhionably^ unconcerned, while, filch moving* Scenes are prefented; to me. I cannot pretend; to fuclu
f
D 5

Stoicifra
V
r
y .
58 The history of
I
Stoicifm — but fee, my Behaviour is not without a Precedent; that Gentleman, who is, I think, one of the mote graceful Figures here, does not difdain to fnew the Tender nefs of his Heart more than I do. Juft then I turned my Eyes to the Stage-Box, where two gay young Gentlemen had prefented their GlafTes at me, and were looking with great Attention. I
blufhed to find myfelf So Scruti-
/
nized, and turned from them. Will you not honour the hand-fome Lord Cleaveland with another Glance ? Said the Major : There is not a Lady here that does not envy you for having taken PofTeffion of his Eyes, ever fince you appeared. What would they not
give
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 59 '
«
give to be So ciifHnguiShed, while you mortify him, by affecting to be infenfible of the Favour! Do I only affeB it thenSaid I. Ought I to be obliged to him, for ifaring me out of Countenance ? But pray. Sir, let us mind the Play; talking now is a little un-feafonable. So Saying, I turned to the Stage, and continued attentive till it was over.
The Major gave his Hand to Mrs. Henleyy to conduct her to her Chair; I followed them; but juft as I was ftepping out of the Box, I Saw Lord Cleaveland
s
ftanding, as if waiting for fome-
He accofted the Major
with great Freedom and Polite-
( «
nefs y and I judged, by their
D 6
*
Man

6o The HISTORY of
Manner, that they were pretty
intimate. He then prefented his
Hand to me, to lead me through
the Crowd; I obServed Mifs' Hen--
ley looked a little mortified to
find herSelf neglected. My Lord
affected to be in Raptures with
me, and preffed my Hand mofl
unmercifully, as he handed me
along.
How proud would it
have made the Actors, Said he.
could they have obferved the ju-
dicious Applaufe you honoured
them with! Let me die if ever I
faw any body enter with So much
Judgement into the Spirit of
the Author. By Heaven! I can-
not exprefs half my Admiration
of you. Do not attempt it, then.
Said I, Smiling^ I will willingly
Spare

\
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 6i
Spare you that Trouble. No, but you must not. Said he, with a Sree Air; I fhall never, for the future, be able to think or talk of any thing but you. Then you will be but very indifferent Company, Said I. To others I may, replied he, but to you, at leaft, the Subject ought not to be difagreeable. Upon my Word but it will, faid I j you must not imagine, that every Woman is fond of Flattery. I have not Time to anfwer, cried he^ behold the fatal Chair that is to convey my Treafure from me He put me into it. Adieu, divine Creature, faid he in a Whifper, I Shall be miserable, till I See you again, I bowed a Return to his
Com-
/
62 The HISTORY op
N„
Compliment, and ordered the Man to follow the other Ladies. I had not proceeded far before I obferved a Footman, in a rich
Livery, talking to my Servant;
I fuppofed he belonged to Lord Cleave land. The Youth is won-
t
derfuliy struck,, to be furej but his Pastion is too violent to last long. I make no doubt but a good Night’s Rest will recover him. I was almost compelled to fup at Mrs.. Henley s y I feared my Father would be difpleafed with me, for staying So late; but stie would take no Denial; the Major promised to fee me Safe Home ;, fo I was obliged to con-fent. Every body was gay; the Play, for Some Time, was the
'	Topic;
\
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 63
Topic; we all, gave our different Opinions of it; but our Remarks were too trivial to be repeated. Mifs Henley aflvcd me how I liked Lord CleavelatitI. I can form but little Judgement of him. Said I, from So fhort an Acquaintance. But I mean as to his Perfon, Said Sheb is he not a charming Fellow} He’s handfome enough. Said l y but I did not much obServe him. No, to be fure, cried ^Ihe; you
are a little Hypocrite, I fee' that.
/
Upon my Word, Said I, I fee nothing extraordinary in him Nor I neither, faid the Major y and yet the Ladies are all ready to run mad for him : but he is too inconstant to make a Serious
Return
The history of
Return to any of their Pallions: Perhaps* they admire him the more for it. Since he gives none CauSe to boast of a Preference ; and yet, by his Gallantries, leaves every one Some Room to hope* stie may be the happy Woman. If your Character is just, faid I^ I Shall never add to the Number of’ his Conquests. And yet, faid the Major,, he. will do all in his Power to: make you fd. FI! give you my Word, he’ll be disappointed, faid‘ I; but I have no Reafon* to think he. has any* Such Defign; his Behaviour tO; me was no more than, what one might expect from fo gallant a: Man. I dare fay he meant no-
thing, nor will
any more about
Miss Lucinda Courtney.
about me. I am of your Opinion, Said Mifs Henley \ 111 an-
w	\
Swer for it, he would have been equally polite to any other Lady in your .Situation. He Saw 3:ou had no humble Servant with you, and therefore took the Office upon himfelf. Thefe Things are extremely common; a Woman must be very vain to fet a Value on So trifling a Distinction. I don’t know any body that does, cried I, fmiling; fhe must be filly, indeed, as you fay, if fhe did. You may talk as you pleafe, faid the honest Major j but I’m Sure My Lord was uncommonly struck with the charming Miii CQurtney. Trifles, light as Air, faid Mifs Henleyy
fcorn-
/
66 The HISTORY of
>•
fcornfally ^ you know the reflj
♦
and may apply it. Well, Said! 1
Mrs. Henley, I hope Mr. Freeman
wifh Mifs Courtney a Lover of
So abandoned a Character.
For
Heaven’s Sake, cried MiSs Henkj,
let us change the Subject; I
am
I
Sick of talking of this Man; you
all rail at him, and yet none of
you
feem tired of
0i
him for my Share I am
to fall afleep. I looked at
m
Watch. I beg a thouSand Par-
dons for keeping you up So long:!
I had no Notion it was fo late.
Mifs- Henley made an Apo-
logy for what fhe had faid, and |
protefred flie meant nothing by
It
intreated me to favour her
t
v/ith
1
j	r
is miftaken y for I would not 1
1
1
i
I
»
i
'■ (■ r
i-
I.
If
I
4
f
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 67
with my Company one Hour longer, or fhe fhould think I was offended at her. I told her, I durfl not comply with her Requeft, as I feared I had staid too long already, but that fhe might affure herfelf, I could not take an Affront, where I was convinced there was none intended. I ordered my Chair, and took leave j the Major Saw me Home,
I .	/
according to his PromiSe, tho’ I remonstrated against giving him So much Trouble. He left me as Soon as the Door was opened, and I entered with Some fearful Apprehenstons, as I was told my Father was not gone to Bed. I
.	N
went into the Parlour, like a
f
Criminal, and was treated according
68 The HISTORY of
i i
ing to my Fears. My Father received me in high Dilpleafure, and read me a Short Lecture upon Prudence; then left me, with a Stately Air, to go to Bed.
Dear Madam, Said I to my Mother, when he was gone, teach me the difficult Talk of pleaSing my Father, if fuch a Thing is poffible. He has met with fome-
I
thing to vex him. Said my Mo-ther j you don’t know what Caufe he may have to be uneafy. h Should be Sincerely Sorry, faid I, if he has any real Caufe ; but I must own it makes me unhappy to fee him out of Humour for nothing. Come, faid fhe, talk no more of it; I will go up with you, and you Shall tell
me
i.
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 69
me how you was entertained. Alas, my dear Madam, Said I, my Father has put all Thoughts of Pleafure out of my Head.
• Nay, Said my Mother, you have no ReaSon to be So much affected * he did not fay So much to you. True, Madam, Said I; but he looked a great deal. — I really think I am his Averfion.—You muff not Suffer Such Thoughts, anSwered my Mother j they are,
I am Sure, without Foundation.
%
But I will defer my Enquiries till To-morrow, fince you do not Seem in a Humour for talking. Good Night, Lucinda •, strive to be happy; you have no just Caufc to be otherwise. Pardon me. Madam, thought I; but I must
I
70 The history of
differ with you. I have too mucli
Senfibility to be eafy under fuch
unkind Treatment from one I willi
to love. — Adieu, my Conjiantia,
I am am tired of writing, and al-
most afleep; believe me ever
Your Lucinda.
• •
c*
■(	**	*9	*	*

Mifs Lucinda Courtney, hi
Mifs CoNSTANTIA BeLLMOUR.
HERE’S my noble Captive,
Lord
Cleaveland,
• •
airing
himfelf before my Windows. I
fhall take care not to approach
them, lest I fhould interrupt his
Meditations. I am going to fit
down to work; ^ I hope we fhall
have no Company To-day. I
fhall
1
II
Miss Lucinda Courtney.. 71
/
Ihall absolutely contract a Habit of IdleneSs, with this conflant Diffipation. — Was there ever any thing So tormenting ? They tell me the Major is come to pay me
a Vifit. Teazing Man! to disturb me, vdien my notable Fit
My other Lover is vanifhed, I fee: I hope his Morning’s V/alk will agree with
was on me.
him. Adieu.
But I forget the Major.
Now for my Pen again. Mifs Henley came in foon^ after the
Major; fhe afked me to walk in
#
the Park. I thought it would
my Father, ■ fo I endea-
oblige
voured to excufe myfelf.
He,
on the contrary, as if out of
%
Contradiction, thinking I wifhed
to
72 The HISTORY OF
to Stay, ordered me to attend her,
and Said, he would go with us
for he had an Engagement with ai
Gentleman, whom he was to meet
there. We accordingly Sallied!
forth. The Day was delight*
fully pleaSant, and the Park
crowded; my Father was obliged^
to leave us, after one Turn, to join
the Gentleman he had an Appoint
N	^	^
ment with. Tuft as he left us, I Saw
Lord Cleave land enter one of the
walks with fome Ladies. There’s
your Servant, Said the Major;
we fhall fee whether he is or not
Said Mifs Henley. Mifs Courtm)
may give him up as a lost Thing

) I
if he does not walk with us, and
I hardly think he will, fince he
is in Company with the handfome
Lady
Miss' Lucinda Courtney
73
Lady V—. I Shall bear the Mortification with great F ortitude. Said I, as you fhall See; but, I muft own, I Should rather think it odd, if he Should join us on So
flight an Acquaintance, or, rather, no Acquaintance at all. Why So t Said Mifs Henley; he is intimate t with the Major, and Men of his I Rank are pretty Sure of being ac-! ceptable, Befides, if he is So captivated, as fome People would make us believe, he will not neg-

lect fo favourable an Opportunity of paying his Devoirs to you. She had . hardly Spoke the Word, when we faw his LordShip advancing towards us, having left the Ladies in another Walk. The Mortification Mifs Henley felt at
,VoL. I.
E
this
74 The HISTORY of
A
this Proof of his—-what fhall I call it^—to me, was a little Soft-ned, when fhe cohfidered She fhould walk with one who was So much admired, and fhe knew it might as likely be fuppofed to be on her
1
Account as mine. He accofled us in an eafy, graceful Manner, and entertained us very agreeably, by giving us a lively Account of Some of the Company, whofe private History he Seemed: perfectly well acquainted with. He did not behave aCall particular to me, fo I [thought his Conversation tolerable.
I : had, for feme Time, been endeavouring to. find my. Father, but: in . vaiiij fo I determined to return Home.: without him. When |
we-
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 75
we came to Sb, yames's, MiSs Henley took her Leave; but what was her Joy when my Lord offered to attend her! She cast a Look of Triumph at me, not doubting, I fuppofe, but her Superior Wit had robbed me of my Conquest. With all my Heart, fhe’s but even with me ^ for the honest Major, good Soul, is my most devoted humble Servant. But, without jesting, I Should be very forry if he has any Serious Thoughts of me. He may come to give me no Small Uneafinefs if he fhould, as I fuppofe my Father would be glad to diSpofe of me fo well. But he has not declared himfelf yet^ and long may his re-fpectful Silence continue. Say I.
E a
H

/•

Th
: good People are gone, thank Heaven, I had almoft laid. My Head is filled with a con-fufed Jumble of Cards, and Poli-
ticks.
The
grave
old Gentle-
women have been playing, over again, every Hand they have held thefe fix Months, to the great Edification of their Auditors; and the Men have fettled the Affairs
F
76 The history of
He attended me Home, and my [ over-kind Father (who came in fbon after us) invited him to flay Dinner. There’s to be more Company, it feems; three old Ladies and a middle-aged Batchelor.
It will be a joyous Day, to b fure—But, adieu; I muft drefs I Shall hardly have Time before Dinner.
r
r*
I
t
r
I
r
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 77
fairs of the Nation, in So maflerly a Manner, that we may expect nothing but Peace and Happi-neSs for the future, if their wife Schemes are put in Practice.—Odd Mortals, all of them; I will fay that. — But Good Night; I am heavy, and cannot write; more fit for Sleep than any thing.
When fliall I have an Hour to myfelf ? I proteft I am fick of this Town Life. How much happier are you, my Conjiantia, who are fo much Miftrefs of your Time, which I am obliged to dedicate to others ! How^ever, I am refolved, when I have Seen a little of what i,s called the
N
World, I’ll change my Conduct, and fpend it more rationally and
E3
%
agreeable
7,8 The HISTORY of
agreeable to my TafSe. I have been engaged, for this Week past, in paying formal Vifits. urely, my Dear, there cannot
C
b
a more
menti the
I

I
I
on thofe is fb trifling and in-Constrained by the Prefence of a Number of People who are not intimate enough to ^eak their Sentiments, and yet compelled, by Good-breeding, to keep up the Difcourfe; for Silence is the only thing to be dreaded;
V*
and Something must be Said, no [ matter what. How have we all [ iat upon the Rack, when a Paufe | has happened. among us, nobody j knowing what to fay next, and at I
r;
last obliged to have Recourfe to j
that I
I
t.
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 79
that never-failing Topick, the W eather!
At every Place I have been at, for eight Days pafl, I have heard the fame Things over and over again, till my ComplaiSance was almost exhausted, and I could hardly keep up the Attention and Surprise one is obliged to exprefs upon thofe Occafions. But last Night’s Vistt outdid every thing of the Kind I ever met with. I cannot help laughing at the Recollection of the bright Astem-
bly. It was. at Mrs. B-----
Widow of General B--------.
the where
4
fix or Seven Ladies and Gentlemen, nicely drested and Seated^ in Elbow
to.
which invited us: , made a very pretty E 4	. Circle..
8o The HISTORY of
Circle. Happy had it been for us, if we might have indulged the foft Propenfity! But noj we
were met together for nobler Pur-pofes; to enjoy the dignified Priviledge denied to Brutes ^ we
were to make Ufe of the Gift of "Longues', and truly we did it to no mean Purpofe. I will try to give you a Specimen of our Conversation.
When my Mother and I entered, the Company role, and, with great Alertnefs, performed the Ceremonies proper for the Occafion. After a little polite Buftle, we were Seated, but all continued filent. Every one’s Eyes fix’d on the Fire : Fans and Snuff-Boxes in full Play; each endeavouring
t
Misb Lucinda Courtney. 8i
/
vouring to look eafy, but inwardly, upon Thorns. How long our tranquil Reveries would have lafted. Heaven knows; but, to
our great Comfort, Mrs. B------
obliging little Lap-dog interrupted usj for a Coal, happily falling from the Fire on his Foot, fet it a yelping, and excited all our Care and Attention. Sweet little Creature! cried every one in a Breath ^ I hope it is not hurt!
Mrs. B— took it on her Knee, and it was pacified^ but this little Accident introduced a long Conversation about Dogs. Every Lady gave us a Description of
Some remarkably little, or amaz ingly large. Creature of this Species, which fhe remembered to-
I

5
have
I
cried
Legs I I protefl. Ladies, I
H
R
82 The history op
have feen. Dear Mrs. M-one, do you recollect our walking up the Park one Day, where we faw a Footman carrying the [ most precious little Creature in the World} Did you ever See .any thing So pretty, or fo Small.? Such
donst think they were thicker, or longer, than this Toothpick. Here She was interrupted by a-nother, who produced an Instance of one as uncommonly large—She declared fhe could hardly help trembling at the very Thoughts of it. Now the Gentlemen put in for their Share, and expatiated on the Sagacity of thofe Animals; and favoured us with a Number of Anecdotes, pertinent to the
Subject;
t.-
k
i*
(.
k
r
r
i»r
I
(
k*

r-
I
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 83
Subject; all which we had heard a thoufand Times before, and could have difpenfed with the Repetition of. During all this interefting Difcourfe, I had been an humble Hearer; for in vain I ranSack’d my Memory, to find Some Wonder of the fame kind to repeat, but I had none: However, loth to be thought dumb^ I joined the general Chorus of
amazing
I
wonderful!
and
other Exclamations of Surprife, that were uttered at the End of every Tale. At last, our Chace being ended, and the Dogs run
down, we
for Breath
however, we never lost Sight of the Motive of our Meeting. Something was to be Said
but
E 6
wha
t
V

I
84 The HISTORY op
what, was the Queftion. We now Secretly began to regret our hav-r ing So Soon given up the Dogs, which Subject had hardly lafled three Quarters of an Hour^ but
i
Mrs. B—, once more, relieved us, by observing, that the Evening was very cold for the SeaSon, and immediately applied the Poker to the Fire. It is, indeed, very chilly. Said one of the Gentlemen, and drew his Chair clofer. I think, faid another, it is rather warmer than it has been for Some Time past, though last Sunday,, indeed, was a very fine Day. Here the Weather dropt ^ for we Seemed each to remember how often this Subject had been ridte culed.—Now, in what Manner it
was

Miss Lucinda Courtney. 85 was introduced, I cannot recol-
4 .
%
lest; but we were, all on a Sudden, deeply engaged in diScuffing the dangerous ConSequence of damp Sheets. Here the Innkeepers were tried, cast, and condemned, without Judge or Jury. The poor Subject of the Sheets was turned and winded all Man-
ft
ner of Ways; and we Should
\
certainly have worn them to Tatters, had not the Entrance of a Gentleman put an End to it. As foon '^as he was Seated, the Lady of the Houfe afked him,, if he had heard any more of the
ridiculous
Marriage
of Lady
which he had diverted her So much with, the last Time She had the Pleafare of feeing him ?
Every
86 The HISTORY of
%
Every Mouth was now open; and, for the first Time, they began to talk with Spirit; but my [ Mother, looking at her Wateh, found it was Time to^ make an End of our Vifit: We accordingly roSe, and, with great Ceremony, took our Leave, to my no Small Joy, as you may imagine.
And now, my dear Conjiantia^ having put you in the Method to entertain your Neighbours in the fafliionable Way, I bid you Adieu,
Yours,
Lucinda Courtney.

Mijsl
\
I
h.
t
Misb Lucinda Courtney.
;it«(S:.«*5sssss:ss
Mifs Lucinda Courtney, to
Mifs CoNSTANTIA BeLLMOUR.
NEVER go to Mrs. Henley but I meet Lord Cleaveland. I begin to think he really has a "Pen-
drejj'e for Mifs Henley
ehe.
is he perpetually there} He has
never fhewn any Inclination-'to vi-
✓
* fit me; and indeed, I am fincerely glad of it. I do not wifh to be diftinguifhed by what he calls his Love, as his Character is too abandoned to expect any Good from Such a Conquefl. He pro-felTes, however, a great Friend-fiip for me, and bn the Strength of it,, has, in a delicate Manner,.
endeavoured;
f
88 The HISTORY of
endeavoured to Sound my Inclinations, as to the Major; for whom he likewife. profefSes to have a great Effeem. I was not willing to. fatisfy his Curiofity, and in-flead of leading him to the Truth, gave him fome Reafon to believe I had a Partiality for that Gentleman. He has watched my Behaviour very narrowly ever lince, as well as the Major’s; but for no other Reafon, I really believe, than to know if I was fincere, wTen I fpoke favourably of him. My Swain and he are Sometimes at crofs Purpofes j but my Lord, after faying fome Things a little Severe, upon his Perfon or Wit, always turns it off with a Joke, declaring, he means nothing by
his
I
1
f

i
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 89
ff
his Raillery but to give the Major an Opportunity (by retorting it) of fhewing his Smartnefs before
his MiflreSs. .1 don’t, know how
/
he likes it, but I am Sure he has no great Reafon to be pleafed. Since his Lordfhip has manifeftly the Advantage of him in Life and
I
Spirits; for the Major’s SenSe, good Man, confilSs chiefly in the Solids, which my Mother tells me, however, is preferable to all others.
Do you not think. Said fhe, that a grave, fober Man makes a better Figure, as the Head of a Family, than a laughing Trifler, or even a fatirical Wit, who will perhaps defpife his Wife for want of Smartnefs, and treat his Children
00
The history of
dren vdth Raillery, instead of Tendemefs ? Say no more, dear
cried I; Example goej ( farther than Precept. I can pro- j duce an instance that confirms, but ^
you
. It
must be acknowledged, that the light Qualities nf a gay, fine Gentleman, Set a fully upon a Father. Enough, Said my Mother, we may go too far on this Subj ect; we understand one another.
I have had no Time to finilh
f
the
Book you recom-
mended to me: indeed I
an
will, if mainder
to my Self, but dedicate the Re-Day to it. My off this Morning for
the
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 91
%
the Country, where he propofes^ laying a Week.
I had but juft Sat down to read, when a Servant brought a Card from Mrs. Henley^ requefting my Company to an Opera, which, Ihe fays, is to be the laft for this Seafon, and therefore entreats me not to refufe her. I would much rather be excuSed, e:^ecially as my dear Mother is not very well, and
cannot accompany me
B elides.
I don’t know if my Fatlier would give his Confent, were he at Home y and I am loth to do any thing withou t being fure of his Approbation. But my Mother thinks I fhould go, as She is wdlling I Ihould fee every Thing, that my Guriofity may be Satisfied, though
She
92
The history of
fhe would not have me be too fre»
X
quent in public. I have, accord-
ingly, Sent an AnSwer, that I
v/ill attend her; yet, I don’t
\
know how it is, I feel a Sort of
Reluctance at going. I would
much rather finifh my Book, and
now leave it, with Regret, to
have my Hair drefSed. This
IS
one of the Things I am moft un-
willing
to wafte my Time in,
and yet it takes a great deal. I
wonder who is to be of the
Party !—but 111 tell you when I
return; mean Time, I muft lay
down my Pen, and bid you
Adieu.

Oh, my Confiantidy what a fatal
Adventure am I engaged in
!
Good
I
(
t
f ■V
I
t
1
What
Miss Lucinda Courtney, 93
Good Heavens!—Am I indeed in
/
the Power of a Villain ? — What will become of me f ftiall I do ? — How efcape from
this dreadful Situation ?—I write,
/
*
but, alas! my Friend, to what Purpofe, fince you cannot now receive my Letters ? Heaven only knows if you will ever again hear from your,unhappy Lucinda. Who would have fufpected this vile Man would have laid Such a Snare for me !—But I will die, ere he fhall reap the Fruits of his abandoned Scheme.—Let me try to be more particular. >	,
That vile Opera ! what Bufinefs had I at thofe public Places Alas! I, fear, I but too much relifhed
I
them; and Heaven has punifhed

me
94
The HISTORY, of
me for the Depravity of my Talle. But I still wander from my melan-clioly Subject.
I found the hated Lord Clemth
land at Mrs. Henley s; his Eyes
\
fparkled with odious Joy, as foon as he faw me, which I took but little Notice of at that Time; but can now, but too well, account for. Mifs Henley was in high Spirits, which my Lord kept up, by a Number of Compliments, which confirmed her
in the good Opinion fhe already had of her Charms. She made no Doubt of her having made a Conquest of him, and Seemed to pity my being, as fhe fuppofed, greatly mortified at his Neglect 5 yet fhe was much mif-
taken,
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 95
taken, for I was perfectly eafy about the Matter. He continued his Affiduities to her, and when we were going, led her to her Chair. All the Time of the O-pera fhe feemed to engroSs his whole Attention 5 So that I really was convinced he liked her. Artful Villain ! how fatally did he make me Suffer for my' Credulity! When the odious Opera was over, he again gave her his Hand. I had brought no Servant with me, hut Mrs. Henley s had received Orders to get three Chairs for us, against
our coming out.
But
when that Lady- and her Sister had got into theirs, he told me, he had in vain endeavoured to get another, but found them all engaged i
96 The HISTORY op
■A
gaged ; I was frightened, and wanted to go in the fame with MiSs Henley, but the Men refufed to carry us both. What was to be done } — My Lord flormed at
I
the Servant, but told me his Chariot (which he had ordered to be there) was at my Service, and he would do himfelf the Pleafure of feeing me Home. I would have
refufed, yet what could I do?
*
There was a great Crowd about us,
f
and I was ■ afliamed to Hand any longer in the Street. While I was waving and irrefolute, my Lord took my Hand and hurried me into his Carriage, and Seated himfelf by me. For fome Time I condemned my needlefs Scruples, as I then thouctit them, for his
Behaviour

Miss Lucinda Courtney gf
Behaviour was polite, but reServedy and as distant as I could with. He even talked in praiSe of Mifs Hen/ey, whom he pretended greatly to admire. I began to be quite eafy, and was not SenSible of the
J our
At last.
however, I began to wonder the Chariot did not stop, and expreff-ed Some Apprehenston that the Coachman had mistaken his Way. My Lord faid, it was impostible he fhould, as he was perfectly acquainted with every Part of the Town, and he had given him very particular Directions y hut he fuppofed he had gone round about, becauSe of fome of the Streets being badly paved. As I had no Sufpicion of his
VoL, L
F
detested
9^ The HISTORY op
detefted
I believed him,
tho’ I have finee recollected he appeared abSenfr and confuSed. At length the Chariot flopped My Lord got out but, oh, my
How fhall I exprefs my Amazement and Terror, when I, in going to follow him, perceived we were in the Fields'?
I fcreamed, and law, at once,, the Horror of my Situation. I
funk down half dead with Fear,
» '
me in his Arms: I
He
flruggled to
difengage mySelf,
faileii
but m vain —My Spirits me and I fainted. When I recovered, I found myfelf on a Bed
in a
magnificent
?
Apartment,' and the detefled Man, with fome
I
endeavouring fo Teftore'
. 2.
’ me
f

Miss Lucinda Courtney. 99 me to Life and Mifery. When
I
he Saw me open my Eyes, he retired fome Diffance from me. I looked wildly round, and, lifting
4
my Hands and Eyes to Heaven;
uttered a deep Sigh, and again
• . • ^ • «
fainted. I don’t know hOw long
I continued infenfible; hut hap-
• ! * * ^ ‘ '
py would it have been for me had I reniained fo'for ever. The vile Mari was kneeling at the Side of the Bed, and had hold
V	'	.	' .	’	' -i ' '
of my Hand, which he was bathing with his Tears. I fnatched
♦ j
it from himi and, weak as I
• • *
* \
•	*	m	^	J
was, fprung from the Bed. You
weep, My
faid I ^' have.
you then any Humanity.? If you. have, pity me. I flung m on my Knees
ReSloi
F
2
re me to
my
100 The
I ST CRY OF
my Family — Olij my dear Mother, and thou, my enraged. Fa-» what will you not Suffer for
your unhappy Daughter! Then, rifing with an Air of Indignation; How dare you treat me in this Manner ? Said L Do you know who it is you have Such Indignity to ? You may
repent it, my Lord. He fell at
\
my Feet and endeavoured to ex-
cufe himSelfj
that what
he had done, was dictated by
the Excefs of his Paflion. Paf-
fion! exclaimed I ^ what Part of
my Conduct could tempt you
to exprefs it in this Manner?
But, remember, I am still myfelf,
tha in your Power; and that no-
tliing fhall ever make me ceafe to
defoife

1
Miss Lucinda Courtney, ioi
defpiSe and hate you, if you dared to entertain infolent Hopes against my Virtue. But, added I, Softening my Voice; I wifh not to believe you Such a Villain; I will hope you now repent this ralh Action. Convince me you are a man of Honour, my Lord, and let me, this Night, be conducted to my Parents. I fee you are Softened ; be generous, and give Orders for your Chariot to carry me Home. Im-
l Said he; put my Obe-
*
dience to any other Proof, and I will die, rather than not obey you. I love you, divine Lucinday with a Paflion as fervent as ever warmed the Heart of Man. Nothing but my Averston ta
F 3
Marriage
102 The HISTORY
OF
Marriage could have induced me to act as I have done. I feared, while I was irrefolute, and not able to prevail on myfelf to fubmit to the galling Chain, the
too happy Major, my envied Rival, would rob me of' all ihy Hopes. Gan you, then, wonder that I have put it but of * his Power to make me miferable? YCiir furprifing Beauty may,
I	•
perhaps, work a Change in me, and reconcile me to the Thoughts of Matrimony. I interrupted him here- with a diidainful Look. What, my Lord, faid I, am I, then, to think the Honour of
your
Hand So tranfcendent a
Felicity, as to forget the Violence
you have treated me with, on the
bare

r A
Miss LucInda Courtney. 10
.i-
bare ProSpect' of Siieh a Happi-
« * *
nefs ? — InSolent Vanity! Know,
*	i A
my Lord, that I queflion'if your
. .. *
Offer would have been accepted,
even before you had given me Such juff Caufe to diflike I am not, as you fliall find, fo
eaSy a Conqueff. Do not, faid he, (mortified at my Declaration, vrhich alarmed his. Pride) do not
treat me with fuch
%
left you provoke.
me to
behave
in a manner that will juftify your Hate —I cannot bear your Scorn. At prefent you have the entire Command of my Heart and For-
4
tune. Every thing but your Liberty, and even that Want fhall be Softened, by my unremitted Endeavours to make your Situa-
F 4
tiou
tiou

$
iOA. The history op
,. Suffer me, o Tendernefs	jConftaiicy
to try to Soften your too obdurate Heart. Impoflible, my Lord, laid Iyou take a very unlikely Method — But leave me. Sir. Since I cannot prevail upon you to restore me to HappineSs, let me at least enjoy my MiSery without Interruption. I will obey
cruel, but adorable Lu-
you,
finJa, Said he; I will leave you, stnce you command it; but let me intreat you to compoSe your^ Seif. This HouSe is your own, nor Shall you meet with any
unseasonable Intrufion. I will
owe the HappineSs of Seeing you
4
to your own Goodnefs only; but be generous, and reward my Self-


Miss LvciNDA GotiRTNEY. id^
Denial, which will require all my Resolution to put in Practice.; He again begged me to be com-
posed, and respectfully left me.
A Servant came up to undreSs mej but I refuSed her Afllstance, determining not to take off my Cloaths while I remained in this vile HouSe. I defired her to bring; me Materials for Writing.- She
very readily obeyed me, and fur-
• »
me with Pen,. Ink, and Paper : I immediately fat down to write to my dear Mother, hopin
I fhould be permitted. to fend my
%
Letter, as I would let this hated Man fee the Contents.—I wrote as follows.^
O*
F'
5
io6 The HISTORY of
:S-
« •
Lo Mrs. Courtney.
H A T,... my beloved. Mo-therj mufl be your Anx-iety for the AbSence of your un-

fortunate Lucinda '^ Good
how Shall I calm your
ven
I
Fears on my Account ? Or how I moderate my own? Yet, let me j
, ' .	' ■ - ' -	.	. . . ^ 'I
hope, my Innocence will not final- J ly be abandoned I It may be fome Confblation to my deareft | Parent, that She may afSure her- | Self,
Child will never do
$
* • '
any thing to make her unworthy
of that Name.—No j I will die,
^ \
confent , tu my
I have ever the 1
. ^
of being reflored to it fhall be w.kh that Purity
and. I
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 107
and Virtue which I flill pofTeSs. Moderate your Affliction, therefore, my dear Mother, and fub-mit to a Misfortune which will only be aggravated by Impatience.
I dare not write the Particulars of my Situation', as my Letter will be fcrutinized by thofe who>
will not Suffer-you to receive it
«
if I am too explicit; but 6nd of my Motives for writing is, td caution you againft making unhappy Affair ptiblick contrive Some : Exeufe for my Abfence.
I need but juft hint to, one of
■ '	L	... i'i •
your good Senfe and Prudence,
^	•	I '	’	'	’	)
that my Reputation muft Suffer
V • * *'	•	' !	‘ :
by fruitless ^Enquiries. No ,one^, but the Perfous concerned, can
r •
know where I am. Be fecfet,
F 6	there-
io8 The H I S T C5
GF
therefore, I intreat you ^ afk no QuefHons of Mrs. Henley or Family about me; they are innocent. Strive, my beloved Mother, to calm the Rage of my Father against his
gui
but not
Daughter. My Tears flow afrefh at the Thoughts of his Anger. Alas! he never will forgive his, miserable Child !~I can no more—-pray for the Deliver--ance of
Your dutiful and affectionate,
Lucinda
As
as I
this
Letter, I rang the Bell r a
appeared to know Pleafure, I -afked if her Lord was gone to Bed ? She told me he
was
Ml s s Lu e IN D A Court net 109 was not. I begged her to conduct
me to him.
followed
the Parlour, where I found him fitting in a mufmg Posture. He
up when he faw me. Do
«
not be furprifed, my Lord, faid I, at this Vifit. I come to prove the Sincerity of the Profeflions you
I
made me. You promifed to grant any Request but one; let this Letter then be fafely conveyed to my dear Mother, and that as early in the Morning as poS not Seated it, as, I
I have
you
would have opened it, if I had. There it is. Sir, laying it on the Table; if you have any Spark of \ Goodnefs, my Request will be granted.—Doubt it not.
Creature ! (taking it up and; prefS-
H
•»

ing it to his Lips) I rejoice that you have honoured me with your Commands. It Shall be at Mrs.
Courtney s ^S-S early as you could
>
wifh. I would carry it my Self; rather than you fhould be difap-
He approached me, and with Such a Look, that I thought it neceflary to retire 'with Some
ion.
When I got into my Apartment,
• • • «,
I took Care to Secure the Door, which I was pleafed to find had Sevctal ftrong Bolts. . I then ex-arnined every Part oS it, for Feai'
of Some* private Door, but found
%
none;; So I, flung mySelf upon the Bed ill my Cloaths, and gave way to the Agitations of my Mind; but, in Spite of my Uneafinefs,
my
Mlss LlicIND A'Goirktnbr. 111
my Fatigue rhade theui- give way
to Steep 5'‘but it was’broken and
interrupted with frightful Dreams.
%
I rofe as foon as it was Day-light, and ran to the Windows to fee if there- was any -Poflibility of efcap-ing from my Prifon ^ but, alas f Cmjiantiaf 'I fee no Profpect of
it. My
looks into a pretty large Garden^ furrounded by a very high WalL_ There: is a Gate, I fee, that opens, to
'	i ? ♦ * % * *
the Fields; but that, I am afraid.
will be carefully fecured. I don’t know what Part of the Town I
I \

am in, as I have not been in any
, i.'v'c ..I ■•■V;';.v	Vf,
of the Rooms that look into the
* ...
Street. Oh, my Friend I how fhall I get out of thi§ vile .f^oufe :c
Heaven protect and defend me
• •• *
from
%12 The history of
from Violence, and fend me a Deliverer 1 I will once more try to Soften this obdurate Man. Yet how can I bear the Thoughts of feeing him, or Submit to talk to
?
Power ?
But am I not in his And will not NecelTity compel me,, in Spite of my Un-willingnefs ^ Alas 1 too Surely it will.
He Sends to entreat the Favour
of my Company to Breakfaft. — I
win go — perhaps he may relent
•yet this I fear is, too flattering
a Hope.—What a Fate is mine?
But aclieu, till this mortifying.
Interview is over.
^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^
©nee more I refume my Pen, the only Confolation that is left


■I
me.
Miss LuciND.a Courtney. 113
0e.—When I entered the Parlour,
he aroSe to receive me.-^Charming Lucmda, Said he (offering to lead me to a Seat) I hope, if I may judge by the Bloom that adorns your Sweet Face, my adorable has a little recovered her Fa-
Oh, no Compliments, I
tigue.
beg of you. Sir, Said I, (fitting down) I come to talk of more Serious Matter. I hope Reflection has Shewn you the Cruelty of detaining me here, and that you
Hufh, for Heaven’s Sake, cried he, interrupting me. Spare me a little y let us breakfaff
—What then.
now
lirft, and then---------
my Lord ? faid I, with Impatience y you may believe I have no
•’ / •
great Appetite. Your Lordfhip,
indeed.
\
114 The HISTORY OF
indeed, who are not over-bur-thened with Tendernefs and Senfi-bility, may eat, if you think proper, but for me, my Grief be my only Food. You reproacli
m
me very unjuSfly, my Angel,
✓
Laid he; I have but too mud Tendernefs : if I had lefs, I could more ealily be prevailed upon to part with you; but Heaven knows, I could not furvive fo cruel a Separation. Let me prevail on you to drink- this DiSh of Coffee; fet me an Example, by fome little Condefcenfion. If you are fo inflexible, how can you expest me to be more yielding ? Put Some Confi-dence in me, and, I give you
*
rny Honour, you
Shall have no
Reafon to repent it. If you will
but
Miss Lucinda Gourtnby. ii<
but give me the leafl Shadow of Hope that you do not hate me, you may govern me as you pleaSe,; but if you continue to treat me with Averfion and Difdain, you will drive me to Defpair, and I cannot anfwer for the Confe-
quences
I have not been ufed to
Repulfes from your charming Sex : but what is their Approbation, if the only one I ever ferioufly defired to pleafe, rejects my Paffion with Scorn You will have a Sufficient Quantity of Vanity, my Lord,
Said I, even after fuch a Mortifi-
%
cation : I will endeavour to rec-
, » \
\ • ^ ^ .
tify your Opinion of ‘Womankind, and Shew you they are not all fuch foft, eafy Creatures as thofe you Seem, till now, to have
♦	4	•
conversed
ii6 The HISTORY of
Very well, ny
he, go on with
but take Care
do not provoke me to revenge
your Indifference •, but, continued
he, I will not Suffer you to be fo
infenfible. Thus (Snatching my
Hand) will I infect you with
Some Part of the Flame that com
fumes me. I ftruggled, but he
caught
me in his Arms. I was
terrified, and began to think I
muff change my Behaviour, left 1
fhould make him defperate.
For Heaven’s Sake, Said I, trem-
bling, let me go. Is it thus you
fulfil your Promife to meWhat
Promife, cried he, my lovely
Creature ? ftill holding me., I faid
I would love you; and can you
complain
I
(

Miss. Luctnda Courtney. 117
\
complain that I am not as good as my Word ? But come, don’t let me. fee thoSe precious Tears — no more weeping—There, mjLucinda, Sit down, and forgive me this involuntary TranSport: I will be more trastable for the future; but don’t again provoke me with your intolerable indifference, I could not Speak, but fat down frightened to
Death at
Wildnefs of, his
Looks and Manner. He brought me a Difli of Tea, and, with great Tendernefs, intreated me to
drink it for his Sake, I ddrff' not
/
reSufe, but took it. ThaCs my^ Sweet Girl, Said lie ; now I Hope we are Friends again. But give me your dear Hand, as a Token of our Reconciliation. What could
I do ?
ii8 The HISTORY of
%
I d6 he took it with Tranfport,
prefSed it to his Breast. [
would not exchange my Situation,
to be Lord of the Univerfe, Said
he, if I had Postestion of the
* * . »
Heart that belongs to this Soft,
white Hand. Oh, my Luanda,
will you not reward the une-
.quailed Paffion’I feel for you? I
wistied to turn the Conyerfation,
and afKcd if he had fent ^my LeN
W	••	•	.	\	'
tei% , Tliree Hours'.ago> faid he:
i V
your Mother has it; my Servant
affured npie. it was Safely, delivered,

to her.. I am obliged tp .you, my
Lordj Said I; and now, Ysth your
Perrnistion, I will ,gO; ;to, my

Chamber.' Not-, yet, dear Crea^
ture, not; yet, I befeech you j bleSs
me ■ a little longer with your
Company.
1
1
Miss Lhcinda Courtney. 119
., Excufe me. Sir, faid-1, ■
# •
%
you have greatly diScompoSed me. i I left him, in Spite oS his Endea-S vours to detain me, and heard him go out foon after.
Do you not tremble for me, my antia^ How dreadful to be' in the Power of a Wretch who will flop at nothing to gratify his abandoned Inclinations ! I believe he.was piqued at my Behaviour; for I juft now - received a Card from ■ ham, wherein he tells me, fince he' finds 'his Company is fo odious- tome; he will mortify him-felf fo far as to banifli hinifdf
«4

from my Prefence for this Day,
which herhadehgaged to'pafs with.
*	' ■*
fome Friends, wh6,’’"he hopes, will
enable fiiTh"'td recovct him rrom'
the
120 The history op
the Chagrin my cruel
has overwhelmed him
but
he would advife me, if I wifh
to keep any Meafures with iiie, to
change my Conduct,
Though I have Reafon to fear
his Threats, yet I rejoice at his An
fince his Abfence, which is
of it, has left me at Li-
berty for this Day. And now let
me employ it to the beft Advan
tage, by examining the Houfe, to
fee . if there is any Poflibility of
cfcaping from my detested Prifon.
For this Purpofe, I must bid you
Adieu;

Impoflible 1
nothing but a
Miracle can deliver me. Evet]
Door is v/atched, I went' to the
Fore
}
]
\
]
Miss Lucinda Courtney. i2i
1
f
Fore-Parlour; the HouSe-keeper
was fitting at work in it; fhe rofe
\
reSpe6lfully on my Entrance. I went up to the Windows, which look into a fine, broad Street; but I cannot guefs Vv^hat Part of the Town it is in. I afked her the Name of it: flie hefitated: I did
making
not repeat my Queftion, juftly fuppofing fire had Orders not to tell me; and her Looks were fo unfavourable, that I defp aired of
her rny Friend. Alas!
«• —
what will become of me ?
I took a Walk in the Garden. The Walls are very high ; the Gardener had just opened a little Gate that fronts the Fields; he was throwing out fome Weeds: e I I haltily ran towards it; but, be-
A
VoL. I.
G
fore
122 The history of
fore I could reach it, the Man had locked it. Oh, my Conjian-tia ! what fhall I do ? Again I returned to my Chamber, and, flinging myfelf into a Chair, gave way to my Tears. I had but juft wrote the above, when a Servant informed me. Dinner waited for
f
me. I told her I could not eat: fhe refpectfuily begged my Per-mifTion to ferve it up in my Chamber. I care not what you do, faid I. She brought it, but it went away untouched. I am teafed with her officious Care, but I will now lock my Door, and admit no Per-Ibn for this Night: It is enou that I am tormented with her Mailer. The reft of this Day fhall be my own. But in what
Man-
I.
1
I
a
P
ti
h
tl
f
:r
a'
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 123
Manner Shall I Spend itI am incapable of Writing, and Reflection is my Torment, as it prefents me with a tender Mother, overwhelmed with Grief, and an enraged Father, jealous for his Ho-
■b
nour.
I am half diffracted
I
muft lay down m'y Pen—I am al-mofl blind wdth my Tears.
t -»






Another Night is paft, and flill I am in this vile Houfe! I have not yet Seen my Lord. I excufed my not breakfafting with him, on account of my Health; for 1 am greatly disordered. My Lord ex-preffed great Concern, and is continually Sending to know if I am better, and if he may hope for at I the Happinefs of feeing me, pro---
testing
G 2
124 The HISTORY OF
telling he cannot live another Day
without that Satisfaction. I have
however, been permitted to dine
in my own Apartment. I will
not See him, if I can avoid it. Sure
I hear him at the Door
I will
lay away my Paper and go down
with him, for I wifh not to fee
him here.
•Sff *	^	*
^!c-

■5fC-	«	%
He was delighted with me for
obliging him with my Company
as he faid, and gave me no great
Reafon to complain of his Beha-
viour. But what a poor Confola
tion is this. Since he has still as
much as ever determined not tof 1
grant me my Liberty ! We had a|
great deal of Conversation on this
Effecl
t
1
Head; but my Intreaties had no| f

^ Miss Lucinda Courtney. 125
Effect upon him. Is it not e-nough, Said he, that I behave with Distance and Refpect, and do nothing that can justly wound your Delicacy } Will you not give me a Chance to be reformed You have often told me I have ‘great Occalion for it, and I know no PerSon So capable as yourfelf of effecting it. But, dear Creature, let us change the Subject, for I am quite tired of this. I know you love Mustcq let me prevail upon you to touch that Harpst-chord: do, my Angel, favour me with a little Harmony. Impoffi-ble, my Lord, faid I, my Spirits are too much out of tune, to think of playing well. If you will not, hid he, I cannot help it y may be
0
C 3
.
126 The HISTORY of
you prefer Difcord at prefent; if
you do, you fliall fee how ready I
am to oblige you. So faying, he
fat down and played with more
Jud
and Tafle than
any
Perfon I ever before heard. Pity
that Such Talents, as he is Mafter
of, Should be perverted to fucli
bafe Purpofes!
There now, my fairefl, faid he,
there’s Execution for you! But
come, dear Soul, don’t be fo So
lemn, let me fee you fmile, though
it Should be at my Expence. You
know your own Merit, my Lord,
faid, I, and need no Compliment
to convince you of your excellent
will not be your Fault, my Sweet
SatireSf, faid he, if I am not more
1.
humble,
i-.
1
i

1
n
f(
Judgement and Performance. It[ P
fc
Ci

Miss Lucinda Courtney. 127
humble. Since you fpare no Endeavours to make me fo; but I ‘ have So often been told that I am ahandfome, clever Fellow, that it will be Some Time before you will be able to convince me of the contrary. But do, dear Mifs Courtney^ let me have one Song, be it ever fo
fad: even the Children in tlie
%
Wood. You are pleafed to be merry, my Lord, faid I; I will leave you, left my Melancholy Ihould interrupt it. See, faid he, your grave Rebuke, Severe in youthful Beauty, has transformed me into a Philofopher; I am all fober Sadnefs; any thing to pleafe you. Permit me to go. Sir, faid I j I find my Indifpofition in-
In reality, I found myfelf
creafe
G 4
ready
128 The HISTORY of
ready to faint; he faw it by my Pctenefs, and haftily rang for Af-
fiflance.
great
Tender-
nefs; but has he not proved, by his Actions, that he is incapable of any Thing that deferves that Name? A little Water recovered me, and then, with Reluctance, he permitted me to retire, and, ill as I was, I fat down to write.
What would I give for the Ad-vice of my dear Conjiantia, in this my unhappy Situation ? She would inflruct me in the fafefl Method of treating this vile Man, who, I fear, will too Soon change his Behaviour. How fliall I conduct mySelf, to avoid driving him to Extremities ? Mufl I condefcend to Smother my juft Indignation ^ What
will


Miss Lucinda Courtney. 1Z9;
v/ill it avail ? He has, doubtlefs, determined my Ruin, though he defers it, in Hopes of Softening, me to Compliance. Defpicable' Wretch ! how little does he know me! He trufls much, I Suppofe, to his fine Perfon, and Addrefs his former SuccefSes have made him prefumptuous; but, in' this Inflance,, he fhall find himfelf disappointed. Death is ftill left me,, and I will embrace it, rather than Infamy. — But, adieu, my Friend,. I v/ill try to take Some Reft. Hard, is the Fate of your Lucinda 1
Another Day is. gone, and no^ Profpect of Deliverance.. I will not take the trouble of repeating; particularly what pasted between us but Suffice it to Say,-, that on
^ 5
/
130 The HISTORY of
his Part it was all Rapture and NonSenSe ^ on mine, Flatred flifled by Fear.
He Says, he cannot hope for my Company To-morrow, as he is to be tormented , by Some Gentlemen who are.to dine with him.
•1 b
■I
He raved at the
Thoughts
O
of
Such an Interruption to his Hap-pinefs, as he called it, and con-|ured me to beftow Some little Mark of Favour on him, to ena-him to live, till he again Should be bleffed with my Prefence. He then offered to take my Hand, which I Snatched aw with DiS-dain. He flormed ar ny Cruelty, and dropped Some Hints that terrified me into Compliance. He prefled it to his Lips, praifed my
Good-
Miss Lucinda Courtney'. 13i
Goodnefs and Condefcenfion,, and Swore he loved me with unutter-i able Affection. I was filent to all his Profeffions and pretended Rap-, tures, and took the firft Opportunity to withdraw. — I always dread the Thoughts of going to
Bed in this vile Houfe.
I reeom-
mend myfelf to the Protection of Heaven—------
• Good Night, my are you that can
Friend,
Sleep in Peace and Safety will your Luanda enjoy that Comfort}
Oh, what a dreadful NighCwas
the lain—I can hardly compote
«
myfelf enough to tell you the
I
Particulars ■— yet, let me attempt it—Hated Man 1 I am fure,. not-withflanding his Protestations to
G 6
the
132 The HISTORY of
V
the contrary, it muft have been a Scheme laid, by him, for my Ruin.
Sleep had but juft buried the Remembrance of my Miferies, when I was awakened with a N oife at my Window, which I heard thrown open, and, foon after, Somebody came foftly towards my Bed with a Lanthorn. Judge of
»
my inexpreffible Fears! I Shrunk under the Bed-cloaths, and gave my Self up for loff. The PerSon opened the Curtains and took my Watch from the Head of the Bed. Dreadful as my Situation was, I felt a Gleam of Joy, thus convinced that it was not Lord Cleavelandf whom I, a Moment before, imagined it to be. I lay
half
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 133
half dead, hardly daring to breathe. The Robber, having fecured my Watch, looked about for my
Pockets. In
taking
Os
them from
under my Head, he uncovered my Face, and held the Lanthorn to it, to examine if I was ftill afleep. Frightened to Death, imagining he was going to murder me, I opened my eyes; and, clafping my Hands together. Spare me, dear, good Sir, Said I, fpare my Life, I will give you no Diflurb-ance. The Man drew out a Knife. Make no Noife, then, faid he, or you are a dead Woman.
i
He then left me, and unbolted my Room Door, and going to the Window, another Villain got into my Chamber, who was to watch
me
N
134 The history of
me while the lirst went to rob the reft of the Hoiife. Dreadful was my Situation : I' fervently invoked the Protection of Heaven. The Man flood by the Window with a Knife in his Hand, as I could fee by the Light of the Moon, which fhone very bright. He Sometimes went Softly to the Door, as if impatient for the Return of his Companion. But how terribly were my Fears augmented, when I heard a great Noife and Diflurbance, and Several Voices calling out. Thieves! I expected nothing now but to be murdered by the Villain who was in my Apartment, out of Revenge
for his Disappointment; but I was happily deceived: He thought
of

Miss Lucinda Courtney. 135
of nodiing but making his Efcape 1 and, with all imaginable Haile, got out again at the Window, My Heart overflowed with Gratitude to Heaven for my Deliverance ; but, alas ! my Mifery was not yet at an End. I had juft got up to Secure my Door till could put on my Cloatlis, with an Intention to go down and
know how this
AfFair
had ended, when Lord Cleaveland rulhed into my Room. He caught me in his Arms, naked as I was. I Screamed with all my Force, and ftruggled to difengage mySelf. Are you, then. Safe, my lovely, my adorable Lucinda ? How terrible have been my Apprehensions on your Account!
But
\
136 The history of
But diSmiSs your Fears, my Love; the Villains are gone. Are they! faid 11 — what, then, are you? Your Adorer, your Friend, faid he, preffing me clofer to his Breafl. Rage and Indignation gave me Strength. Vile and de*
cried I, kill me;
Monfter
but do not. Oh ! do not proceed in your abominable Defign. Save me, good Heavens, fcreamed I, finding him flill perfift in taking more Liberties; will no one come
t
to, my Affiflance ? Oh ! Mercy, dear good Sir. I will have Mercy, my beft beloved, faid he; but yield, yield, my Charmer, and be entitled to it. Oh ! I am A Villain, faid I j and exerting myfelf with, redaubled Force,
fprung

Miss Lucinda Courtney. 137
Sprung from him, and flew to the Window, which was flill
m
open, with a DeSign to call my-felf out of it. He haftily followed, and caught hold of me.
I clung by the Cafement. He conjured me to get down again. Swearing, by all that is good and facred, he would . offer no farther Rudenefs, but leave the Room, as Soon as he was aflured I would not proceed in my dreadful Defign. Forgive, adorable Lucinday cried he, what the Sight of your Charms and the Madnefs of my Paffion have made me act. I had no Deflgn of offending your Delicacy, when I entered your Chamber 5 I came only to enquire after your Safety.
I re-
138 The history of
I repent of my Folly, and thus,
on my Knees, (falling on the
%
Window-Seat, ftill holding me thus penitent, for my involuntary Crime, I implore your Pardon. Leave me, fcreamed I, leave me; let me never more be forced to behold Such a Monfter. Do not, Said he, with Emotion, do not provoke me to take Revenge for
^	•	m
your unjuft Hate. Unjuft ! my Lord, Said I j but why do I con-defcend to expoftulate with Such a Wretch ? Tis well. Madam, Said he, in a Rage; but remember, you are ftill in my Power. You could not treat me worfe if I had juftified your Anger. Why will you exafperate me ? Have I not acknowledged my Fault ? Will
nothing

Miss Lucinda Courtney. 139
nothing plead in my Favour ? The Time, your Situation, all con-fpired to put me off my Guard. This is the firft Time I, have ever given you Caufe to complain of my Behaviour; and I fwear, by Heaven, it Shall be the late. I put no Confidence in your Promises, faid I; but thus (Snatching up the Knife which the Robber had dropped, and which, jute then, I had the good Fortune to fee) thus am I armed againte your Vil-lany. I now got down from my uneafy Situation, and his Lord-Ihip retired to Some Diteance.
Do you think, faid he, that
you could defend yourfelf from
^ \
me, if I really had a Defign to
injure you I Vain Confidence!
no.
/
140 The HISTORY of
no, my too cruel Lucinday believe me, you deceive yourfelf. That murderous Weapon could not intimidate me, if I had not before determined to act like a Man of Honour. But moderate, dear Creature, moderate your Dif-pleafureand let me, before I force myfelf from your Prefence, receive Some little Hopes of Pardon, to fave me from Defpair. Once more, on my Knees, I kn-plore your Forgivenefs. Leave me, my Lord, faid I, leave me
a Flood of Tears deprived me of
«
Power to add any more. He arofe and approached me. Do not, ah! do not weep, my LiF
dtida, cried he, you wring my Heart, to fee you thus afflid
yourfelf.

Miss Lucinda Courtney. 141
yourSelf. at your Threats!
Come no Peril, Said I.
nearer.
Vain
faid he, I fear neither Wounds nor Death; nothing but the Continuance of your Difplea-fare. Well, Sir, faid I, leave me, and I will try to forget what is pad. Heaven rew'ard you fur this Condefcenfion, he cried} I will leave you, fince you command it, henceforth you lhall govern me as you think proper. Never more will I offend my fweet Lucinda. So faying, he v/ent from me \ but, before he left the Room, conjured me to compofe myfelf and take Some Reft,
As fooh as he was gone, I fell on my Knees, and poured out my Gratitude to Heaven, for my
E Scape
142 The HISTORY of
EScape Srom Such imminent Danger. I then put on my Cloaths, and, finding mySelS very faint and ill, drank Some Water, and then, unable either to fit or Stand, I funk down by the Side of my Bed, laying my Arms acrofs upon it, and my Head upon them, and in this Pofture, I fj^ent the reft of the Night, in an Agony of Mind impoffible to be exprefled. I had fome momentary Slumbers, but always waked from them in Terror and Affright. .
In the Morning the Houfe-keeper came into the Room, for
I had forgot to bolt the Door.
#
I lifted my Head on her Entrance, but refumed my former Pofture, when I faw who it was. Dear
Lady,

I
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 143 Lady, Said She, let me befeech
you
to rife and take Lome Refrelli-
ment. My Lord fears you are too much difcompofed, with your laft Night’s Fright, to hope for the Pleafure of your Company in the Parlour. To be Pure I was almoft terrified to Death myfelf; and the Villain has wounded one of the Footmen in fuch a Manner, that I quefl'ion if he ever gets the better of it. They were
s
defperate Fellows, that’s to be certain. They have broke open the Garden Gate. It was a Mercy
we were not all murdered.
To
be fure, I hate thefe Houfes that
Hand fo
nigh
the Fields.
See
here. Madam, is the Ladder ftill ftanding that they got in at the
Window

144 The HLSTO RY of
Window with. I made 'no An-fwer to this Harangue, but continued in the fame Poflure. Come, dear Madam, Said ihe, pray let me help you to get up; if you won’t, I mufl call my Lord. To be certain you will make yourfelf fick, if you fret fo, and eat nothing. I got up, terrified left (he Should do as fhe faid. I charge you not to call your Maf-ter, faid I, I want to be alone— You will oblige me, if you will leave me. I dare not. Madam, faid She, till I have feen you take your Breakfaft j my Lord would half murder me, if I Should dif-obey him. Teafing Woman! thought I. Give me a Difh of Tea, Since it must be fo. . I care not
what

!
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 145
what I do. She brought me Some immediately, and again began prating about the Robbers. I was heartily glad when I got rid of her, which was not till fhe had, in a manner, forced me to eat.
When She was gone, I bolted . my Door, and Sat down to write to my Conjiantia. This Confola-tion is flill left me; but, alas! though I write, my Friend is ignorant of my dreadful Situation !
When I Shall be permitted to convey my Letters to her. Heaven knows 5 but if it is not Soon, Death will be my Deliverer. I hear the Company are come,’ that the detefted Man told me he ex-pe6led. They are in the Room next the Street. Oh, that I
VoL. I.
H
could
\
146 The HISTORY of
could get out at the Garden, while my Jaylor is otherwise engaged ! —but impoffible —- the Gardener is continually upon the
Watch
Wretched
Luanda \
what will become of you ! I muft lay down my Pen — I. am So fa-tigued both in Body and Mind,
I can write no more.—I muft lie down—Adieu—Do you not pity your wretched Friend?
•5^
myfelf Something bet-
%
I
ter.
I
I
venture to
take a little Airing in the Garden. I See there is no The
there.
I believe, have not yet finifhed their Dinner. The officious Woman has again been
tormenting me to eat.
The
Cloth
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 147
Cloth was laid in my own A-partment, where I was attended with great Refpect; but I had no Appetite, as you may Suppofe; however, thank Heaven, the dif-agreeable Ceremony is over, and now I will take my diSconfolate Walk. Adieu.
Oh my Conjiantia! rejoice with your Lucinda ! I have fome Hopes of eScaping ! After fome Turns in the Garden, I was going again to enter the detefled Houfe, when, in crolTing a Walk, I met a young Gentleman of a moft amiable Appearance. His Perfon was lovely beyond DeScription, and his Face wore fuch vifible Marks of Good-nefs and Humanity, that I in-
H 2
stantly
\
148 The HISTORY of
ftantly reSolved to implore his AS-' fiftance and Protection. I flung mySelf at his Feet, and, with great Fervour, conjured him to pity and deliver me from a Place where I was forcibly detained. He gazed at me with Aflonifhment, raifed me with great Sweet-nefs, and declared his Readinefs to Serve me to the utmofl: of his Power. Oh, generous Sir, faidi, contrive fome Way for me to make my Efcape from this detefted Houfe, and Heaven will reward the noble Action. I will. Said he, charming Creature 1 I will do it, though I fhould lofe my Life in the Attempt. Beware, faid I, dear Sir, of expofing either your-felf or me. It must be accom-
pliflied



•	N
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 149
plilhed by Stratagem, not Force.
I would not,' for the World, endanger my Protector* I have thought of a Method, faid he, after a Paufe. This Night, if Heaven ■ permit, I will convey you to a Place of Safety. Be ready, and expect me, at one in the Morning. I will provide Rope-Ladders, and every Thing necef-fary to effect our Purpofe. Depend upon the Honour of him you have ventured to put Confidence in ■— you fiiall never have ReaSon to repent it. —-1 fhall not reft till I have convinced you how readily, I would facrifice every Thing, rather than not de-
liver
you
I lifted up my Hands and Eyes to Heaven in Prayer for
his
H 3
* t
^	> J
150
The HISTO YR of
his Succefs, and blefled him for his Goodnefs; but he put me in Mind that it was not fafe for us to talk any longer, left any Per-fon ftiould furprife us, and frustrate our Scheme. Fear nothing, Said he, dear Lady, but truft to
my
Care
and	F idelity.
He
bowed refpectfully, and I returned to my Apartment, half wild with Joy.
, Oh my Conjiantia, this Night, how different will it, I hope, be, from the preceding one! Hea-ven grant I may not be disappointed ! Sure this charming Youth is Some Angel fent for my Deliverer. I can hardly Support my Joy. If I muft again fee this
detefted Lord, I will Submit to
play

Miss Lucinda Courtney. 151
play the Hypocrite, that I may lull him into Security. I muff endeavour to conceal my Hatred of him, left: he Should again form
Some
Stratagem to undo me.
I
So long
fliall not long, I hope, be under a Neceffity of acting fo contrary to my Nature. When will this
t
tedious Day be over ^ Never did any one before appear The Company are not yet gone.
Heaven grant my new Friend may not forget his PromiSe ! Yet it is unjufl to fufpect him—his Face is the Emblem of every Thing that is great and good. Hark 1 I hear them going. Heaven guard my Protector !
My Lord has Sent to' beg I
#
would honour him with my
H 4
Com
152 The HISTORY op
%
Company, only for a few Ml-
/
nutes, he fays. I go
I will
not refufe, left I fhould exafperate
#
him. Yet my Heart rifes at the
4
Thought of feeing him; but I muft put a Conftraint upon my-felf.
My Lord is in Extacy at my Behaviour. I have given him Hopes that he is forgiven his vile Attempt. He even talked fome-thing about Marriage^fwore I had almoft reconciled him to what he thought he never could have fubmitted to. I feemed to
liften with Pleafure.
He
pre-
vailed on me to play on the Harpfichord. Never Man poured forth fuch a Profulion of Raptures. He raved at himfelf, for
ever
I
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 153
ever having dared to offer Rude-neSs to Such Merit and Virtue; and promised and Swore never to give me any more CauSe of UneafineSs. In this Manner we paiSed the Time till the Clock ftruck Eleven. I then begged him to permit me to retire, as/I found mySelf greatly indiSpoSed by the Difturbance I had Suffered' the Night pad:. He reluctantly Suffered me to go, but not till I had permitted him to kiSs my Hand, in Token of our Reconciliation. I then wifhed him a good Night, and flew to my Apartment, where I am now impatiently waiting for the happy Hour that I am to ex-pe6l my Deliverer. — Sure it will never come ! — I look out at the
H 5 Window
154 The HISTORY.op
Window every Minute.—Hark, I hear a NoiSe—’tis him !—’tis my Guardian Angel! I mufl put up
all my Writings, and attend him.
\
Adieu.
Conji.
my Joy! I at lafl in a
am, dear Place of Safety. Heavens reward my dear, my amiable Protector! But let me tell you the Particulars of my Efcape.
As foon as I Saw the lovely Youth, I took up the Candle,
and stole Softly down to the back Door that opens into the Garden ; but what was my Terror and Disappointment, to find it locked, and the Key taken out! I was ready to fink with Fear and
I
Grief. The young Gentleman
rapped

Miss Lucinda Courtney. 155
rapped at it, to let me know he
was there. I, in a Whifper through the Key-hole, told him I could not open it. No Matter, Said he,, I have provided againfl this Accident : Return to your Apartment, and I will fling up a Rope-Ladder, on which you may descend without Danger. My Spirits recovered. I again stole to my Room, and held my Hands out at the Window to receive it; but my too great EagerneSs, for Some Time, prevented me from catching it; however, I perfe-vered, and at last was So happy as to get hold of it. I immediately faftened it to the Window, and got down} my Deliverer received me at the Foot of it. I could not
H 6	Support
156 The history of
Support myfelf. So great was my Agitation; I was forced to lean upon his Arm. He Soothed me,
and congratulated me on my E-
/
Scape, with inexpreffible Tender-neSs both oS Voice and Manner. I found he had kroke open the Garden Gate, So we had no more
Difficulties to encounter.
His
Chariot was ready .in the Fields to receive us 3 he lifted me into it, and we drove off. But what the Situation of my Mind was, on this happy Occalion, is impoffible to be defcribed. My Gratitude to the young Gentleman was, unbounded, but exprelSed in almoft unintelligible Words — he would hardly Suffer me to thank him. I have done nothing but what every
Man
I
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 157
>
Man of Honour, in my Situation, would do. Said he, and can claim no Merit or PraiSe for what was only my Duty. I rejoice that Heaven has made me an Inftrument to fuccour So much Innocence and
Beauty.
I am, continued he.
\ conducting my lovely Charge to the Houfe of a Lady, who will efteem herSelf happy in having fuch a Gueft. She is my Aunt,
Woman
I
have acquainted her with my Scheme for your Deliverance, and Ihe is all Impatience for the Suc-ceSs of it, and will rejoice when I
prefent you to her. We are, I
fee, almofl at her Door. In a
%
Minute, the Carriage Stopped; my Conductor led me to this a-
miable
/
158 The HISTORY of
miable Lady, who received me in the molt polite and friendly Manner. I was fo overwhelmed with Pleafure and Gratitude, that
4
I loft the Power of Utterance,
/ <
and could only exprefs the Senfe I had of their Goodnefs by my Tears. I was delighted with her graceful and winning Deportment, and fhe declared herfelf no lefs fo with, me. Mr. Montague (for that is the Name of my noble Deliverer) begged we would poft-pone all farther Compliments till the next Morning. My charming Ward, faid he, has need of Reft, and I imagine none of us will be the worfe for it, To-morrow, we fhall again, I
hope, have the Happinefs of feeing
great
.
I
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 159
/
ing each other, and may then ex-preSs our mutual Approbation. The Lady agreed to his Propofal, and politely led me to my Apartment, where She wiflied me Re-
frediment after my Fatigue, and
/
left me----but not to Sleep, I
could not clofe my Eyes. Joy now produced the fame Effect in me, as Sorrow had done before. So that I hardly flumbered till about Eight in the Morning, and then. Nature being quite ex-haufted, I fell into a profound Sleep, from which I did not awake till almost Twelve.
I arofe, half afhamed of my Lazinefs, and was preparing to go down Stairs, when a Servant came to drefs me. I enquired if
her
i6o The HISTORY of
her Lady was ftirring ? Yes. Madam, faid She, and has fent me to
» .
know if you chufe to rife, or have your Breakfafl fent here. Lead me to her, faid I, I hope I have not made her wait? No, fhe re-, plied, neither fhe, nor my Mailer have been up a Quarter of an, Hour, though they did not ufe to be fo late.
I followed her into the Parlour, where I found the dear Lady and my amiable Deliverer. Never did I See fo handfome a Youth. I cannot defcribe his Perfon, he is fo inexprellibly lovely. Such a Face, filch Eyes and Teeth 1 Oh my Conjiantia / and Such a Voice and Manner !
^ After
miums
Miss Lucinda Courtney. i6i
After the firfl Compliments were over, I related fome Particulars of my unhappy Adventure,
and who I was. Mrs. tVilliams (for that is the Name of my dear Protectrefs) made me high Enco-
on my Conduct in So dreadful a Situation, and exprelTed, very feelingly, the jufl Deteftation. Ihe had for So vile a Character as that of Lord Cleaveland-, but I cannot defcribe the virtuous In-dignation that fparkled in the fine
Eyes of my Deliverer. He often
*
interrupted me with Exclamations of Pity and Surprife, during my
Recital. I blufh, faid he, (when
I left Speaking) for my Sex. What Opinion mufl you have formed of us, from Such an Example!
and
i62 TheHISTORYof
✓
and what Idea can you have of me, whom you have found to be of his AcquaintanceOh, Sir, Said I, your Behaviour has convinced me of the wide Difference there is between you. Had this vile Lord many fuch Affociates as yourfelf, one might hope in Time to fee him reformed: But I cannot think you have known him long ; his Intimates, if I miflake
not, are of a very different Cha-
%
racter. He bowed, gracefully, a Return to my Compliment. I think myfelf happy. Madam, in your good Opinion, but your a-miable Gratitude makes you willing to think well of one who has been; fo fortunate as to render you an inconfiderable Service; yet
I hope
'

Miss Lucinda Courtney. 163
)
r
t
e
I hope a farther Acquaintance will not give you caufe to change thefe favourable Sentiments; at lead, it Ihall be my Study to deServe your Approbation, fince I already feel I fhall be miserable without it. He flopped, and feemed to j think he had faid too much, for he appeared in Some little Con-fuSion. Why did he flop .? and why his Emotions.? Ah! take Care, my Heart, that you do not put a wrong Conflruction on them, and vainly flatter yourfelf with delufive Hopes ! — But what I faying.? Delufive Hopes ? Do I then wifli they had a
am
Foundation.?
Thefe are bad
Symptoms. Already am I So Soon entangled.? Heaven forbid I
And
i64 The HISTORY op
And yet I am very differently affected in the Company of this Man from what I ever was in that
of any other.—But my late Af-
fair has unfettled my Head.—I
«
fhall be myfelf again when I can reflect cooly, and am recovered from the F atigue of my unhappy Adventure.
. Mrs. Williams afked me if it would not be proper to fend for my Mother here, rather than for me to go Home; becaufe, faid fhe, Mrs. Courtney can then inform you of what has paffed in your Abfence, and inftruct you how to behave, to prevent giving any Suspicion: Befides, your Emotions, at fo happy a Meeting, could hardly be concealed from
fome
I
k
I
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 165
fome of the Family, who would, doubtlefs, be SurpriSed at it. Here you may act without Constraint, and I fhall partake of the joyful
Interview. How fhall I find
\
Words to thank you, my dear Madam, faid I, for fo kindly in-terefting yourfelf in what concerns me ? I entirely acquiefce in your Reafons for my Mother’s coming here, and will write a Note to inform her of my Deliverance, and of the generous Protection I have met with, which you will permit one of your Servants to carry to her. That Servant fhall be my-felf, faid the obliging Mr. Mon-
0
ta^ue; you must not difcard me from your. Service, till you have fuftered me to give Proofs of my
Diligence
i66 The HISTORY OP
«
Diligence and Fidelity, in obeying your Commands. You have told me where Mr. Courtney lives, I will order my. Chariot immediately, and bring your Mother to
you
I fliall tell her, continued
he. Smiling, that I will put her in a Way to recover the Jewel die was robbed of, but that the Thief is already Sufficiently puniffied, in being obliged to reffore his ill-gotten Treafure. I Shall likewife caution her, to guard it with double Diligence, Since the Temptation is almoSl too powerful to be refisted. He rang the Bell, and gave Orders for the Carriage to
9
be got ready.
You may believe I was not backward, in expreffing the SenSe
I had
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 167
Iliad of the Obligations they were continually laying me under. You
V
think too highly of Such trifling Favours, Said Mr. Montague; your having So lately converfed with one, who had no Senfe of Good-nefs, makes you magnify every common Civility, into an heroick Ad of Virtue. You know not how fervently I wifli your Hap-pinefs, and would to Heaven it weije in my Power to tefliify the Reverence and Attachment I feel, for Such uncommon Merit and Beauty. But I fee the Chariot is at the Door. I go, my dear
to bring you one who will make you happier than all my Profeflions of Esteem. He bowed, and left us. T never
faw
\
i68 The HISTORY of
Saw any Body make So elegant, So genteel a Bow; but, indeed, his
whole Addrefs is uncommonly graceful and eafy. I fhall be undone if I fee him often. When
he was gone, I begged Mrs. Wil-
»
Hams''s Leave to retire to my Chamber, as I found myfelf a little in-difpofed.
I am better; and now refume my Pen, to inform my Qonjiantia of
Situ;
JL	L-v-r XXXX v/X JLXX XXX^
the happy Change in my tion.
What, my dear, will be my Emotions, when Mr. Montague returns with my beloved Mother! I cannot Settle a Moment in a Place 3 I lay down my Pen every Instant, to look if they are coming
I
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 169
Ing. Are you not charmed with my agreeable new Friends? And do you not fear that I Shall be too much So ? with -cone of them at
-— I hope you need not.
leaf! ?---
The Chariot is returned, my dear Mother! I come! I
Oh,
i come!
I fit down to wTite. Thank Heaven I Shall Soon be
Again
at Home!
How much will
my late Troubles endeai* it to me! All the little Uneafineffes I have fuffered there, appear nothing, when I compare them with wdiat I have been delivered from. But you expect me to be particular.
When I
Mother
alight, and led into the Houfe by my graceful Deliverer, I flew to
VoL. I.
I
meet

170 The history op
V
meet her-—She received me in her
4
Arms. Our first Tranfports were
too great for Words---Tears of
Joy relieved us. I then enquired after my dear Father. The amiable Mrs. Williams^ and her Nephew, Seemed to partake in the Pleafure of this happy Meeting.
After my Story had been told, we were a little compoSed. My Mother turned to them, and, in very high Terms, exprested her Gratitude for the Protection they had granted me, as well as for Mr. Montague'^
(	1 I
uncommon
Good-
nefs in my Deliverance. If you think we have been fo happy as to render you any Service, faid
the obliging Mrs. WilUatnsy let
me
\
I
t
e
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 171
me claim,, as an ample Return, the PleaSure of your Friendfhip,
A
and that of your lovely Daughter. That will be ftill adding' to or Debt, Said my Mother; however, I, with PleaSure, agree to your obliging Requefl.
While they were fpeakin
cr
I
ventured to look at Mr. Monta-Iney and found his Eyes fixed on my Face, but with an Air of Melancholy, which, I cannot account
for
he fighed too
Why did

But what’s the Mat-
4	\ \
N
he fighi
ter with me, my Friend.? Why this exact Scrutiny into his Behaviour? Don’t laugh at me, for I begin to fear I fliall deferve your Pity, Ihould I foolifhly give up my Freedom to one, who, per-
I 2	haps.
172 The HISTORY OF
haps, cannot--and what is w^orfe,
may be—does not think of me in any other Light but that of Friend. Jhip ^ But I will not dwell on this
disagreeable Subject-—it is too humbling.
Juft as I was preparing to go, and Mr. Montague had taken
my Mother’s Hand to lead her to his Chariot (which was to carry us hortie) I was Seized v/ith a Giddinefs, that
obliged
me to
hurry to a Chair, to prevent my
Mr. Montague obferved my Illnefs, and flew to Support me. Mrs. Williams applied her Smelling-Bottle, but without Effect. My kind Deliverer held
me up in his Arms with great
into which I fell
without
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 173
without Senfe or Motion. I recovered a little, as he was carry-1 ing me up to my Apartment,
my
-Mother and Mrs. Williams
following us. I, faintly, not being able to fpeak diflinctly, ex-preiTed my Concern at the Trou-
' ble I
gave
him^ to which he
made me no AnSwer, but preffed me cloSer to his Bread, and Sighed. When we got into my Room, he laid me gently on the Bed, and refpectSully withdrew.
My dear Mother, and Mrs, Williams, tlien Sat down by me,, I and tenderly enquired how I was. Much better. Said I> I hope, in a little Time, , to be able to attend you home. If my Advice, has
I3'
t
I
1.
174 The HISTORY of
any Weight with you. Said Mrs. Williams^ I would perfuade you to defer your going till To-rnori ow; you have lately undergone great Fatigue, both of Mind and Body, and ftand in need of Reft. We will acquaint Mr. Courtney with the Reafon of his not feeing you fb Soon as he expected j perhaps he will favour
0
us with . his Company here. Obliging Mrs. Williams ! faid my Mother, you have made the very Propofal I wished for. I will make no Apologies for the repeated Trouble we give you. My Lucinda Snail accept of your kind Offer j and as foon as I fee her a little more compofed, I will, my-Self, return to Mr. Courtney, and
inform,

1
I

Miss Lucinda Courtney. 175
» \
inform him of her Illnefs; and.
in
the Afternoon, with your
Permiffion, will again be your
Guell. For Heaven’s Sake, cried
Mrs. Williams^ Smiling, let us
w
have no more to do with Cere
mony; look upon this HouSe as
your own, and command my befl
Service, with the Freedom of a
Friend j except you mean to de-
J
bar me of the Liberty of that
Title. But I forget ^ you must
have a great deal to fay to your
amiable Daughter: I will leave
you together.
I fear to talk to you. Said my
I
dear Mother (when Mrs. Wil
Hams was gone) in the Condition
you are in: I believe it will be
better to defer it, till you are
14
more
jj6 The HISTORY of
more perfectly recovered. No, dear Madam, cried I, I befeech you to fatisfy my Curiofity a little ; I am impatient to know what has paffed during my Ab-
sence. I am well
I think I
/
can bear it without being dif-
compofed. Tell me, did my Father fee Mr. Montague 1 How did he receive him ?
I flopped — Why was this the first Question I He did not, faid my Mother j your Father was not at home, though I wifh he had keen, that he might have helped me to thank him for his Goodnefs. Not at home! Deal’ Madam, cried I, interrupting her; then he knows nothing of my Deliverance., Yes, replied
my
.
1

Miss Lucinda
RTNEY.177
\
my Mother, I left a Note to ac-. quaint him with it, and like-. wiSe that I was gone to fetch, you. I am glad of that, faid I, he will then be prepared to re-r ceive me, and I hope, not un-.
Yet I both dread and
You
his Temper, my Dear, Said my Mother y he has, been ex-ceflively uneafy at your unhappy Adventure; yet,, doubt not, but-
Joy of your Return will
Ah 1 Ma-.
I lay my Ac-.
wish for the interview.
overcome his dam, faid I,
count to feel his. Difpleafure yet, I hope, it will be- moderate, when he reflects, that both his; Honour and mine are inviolate y Since, I trust, the, Caufe of my
Abfenco
11
178 The UISTORY of
\
AbSence is a Secret to all but this
Family
It is. Said
thing
Mother j no one fufpects any of , what has happened.
Your Acquaintance all believe
you are upon a
ViSit
in
the
Country. Mrs. Henley, her Sifter, and Major Freeman have called almoft every Day to know if you were returned. I excuSed mySelf from Seeing them, on account of my Health. You know I was not well the Night you went to that fatal Opera; and
you may believe the Torture of
/
Mind I was in, during your Absence, was not likely to effect my
Cure.
Mr
Courtney did not return from the Country till Yesterday., I will not attempt
to
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 179
to defcribe his Rage, when I informed him oS what had hap-'
pened) you may believe I was greatly blamed for Suffering you to go out in his AbSence. Oh! my dear Mother, cried I, how I much have you fuflered on my ^ Account! Grieve not, my Dear,
! faid She, it’s all over now, and let it be forgot* But now, continued She, I think you Should try to take Some ReSf. I will leave you till the Afternoon, , when I hope to find you better*
Mrs* Williams came up,, Soon after my Mother was gone.. Well,, my dear Patient, Said fhe,.. how ^re youQuite recovered. Said I, thanks to your Care and Ten-dernefs. That’s well. Said She 5.
I 6
but
I go The III ST cry op
hut I won’t difliirb you: I came at Mr. Montague s Request; he is impatient to know if you are better. So faying. She drew the Curtains elofe, and left me.
I tried to steep, but in vain; a thoufand Thoughts, pleafing and yet painful, crowded upon my Mind, and my Deliverer
had but too great a Share in them. After Dinner, my Mo-
ther paid us another Vistt, and was delighted to find me So com-
pofed
well.
She told me,
my Father wistied to receive me at his own Houfe, rather than where I was r for which Reafon he had Sent an Apology to Mrs.
,. for not waiting on her
according
Miss Lucinda Courtney. i8i
according to her Invitation; and, at the Same Time, very politely
acknowledged the Obligation fhe
and Mr. Montague had conferred
on him and his Family. I believe,,
added She, his Motive for dedin-
I
ing to fee you here was,, left he
1 ihould not be able to command
his Temper; and, indeed, I am pleafed with
Prudence i for
if he had received you he muft have appeared to act a. little ineonfiftently, and I fliould. dread nothing, more than to have thefe amiable People thmk meanly of him.. To-morrow, I hope,, every thing will be fettled agreeably to our Wifh. Heaven grant it! faid I. But, dear Madam, is he ftill difpleafed with me t It will
i
feon
/
i82 The HISTORY of foon bo over, if be is, laid my
Some
Motherwe must
#
Allowance for the UneafmeSs you have, innocently,, made him
Suffer. True, Said I, I am all
\
Submifiion, let him treat me as he pleaSes; it is enough I am restored to his Protection Safe and virtuous. It is, indeed, anSwered my dear Mother; let us be thankful for So great a Blefling,. After Some more Difeourfe, fhe left me, to attend Mrs. Williamsy who expected her Company in the Parlour.
Will not thefe dear Friends think my Father very indifferent about his new-found Daughter.? But no Matter; they might, perhaps, have thought worSe, if
they

Miss Lucinda Courtney. 183
they had Seen our Meeting
Yet,
ought he to be So much difpleaSed at me, for a Misfortune, rather than a Fault.? — But why theSe (Jueftions.? Have I a Right to judge of his Actions ? No^ let me do my Duty, that is Sufficient for me.
About Eight o’clock I told the Ser\mnt (who conflantly attended in my- Chamber) to inform her Mistrefs, that, if She had no Objection, I would chuSe to rife, as I
imagined
I Should have a better Night’s Reft for it. Could you believe I was So weak as to wifti to See Mr. Montague f Think favourably of me, however, with the Indulgence of a Friend, though I tell you all my
F railties
rS4 The HISTORY of
Frailties — I did not ufe to be So
filly.
The dear Lady came up to me
and kindly
to drefs me. I felt no
Remainder of my Indifpofition,
except a little Faintnefs,, which,
I hoped, would foon go off.. She
affiffed me down Stairs. When
the Parlour Door was opened.
Mr., Montague came forward.
and led me to a Chair.
How
tender were his Enquiries after
my Health! Oh, my Friend!
What
an ami
Manner has
this
become
Man !' What will
Heart! After
a
while, he drew
his Seat clofe to mine. Let me,
Said he, fmiling, affume the Cha

raster
J
tions
>
7
?
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 185
raster of a Phyfician, and complete your Cure by my f^refcrip-
permit me to feel your PulSe j you Shall foon fee a Proof of my Judgement. He took my Hand; I blufhed, and withdrew
it; but with an Air of Freedom,
%
lest he Should put a wrong Con-ftrustion on my Referve. Well, Sir, Said I, what is your Advice I don’t know what his may be, cried Mrs. Williams, interrupting me, but mine is, that you fliould not be disturbed with talking. I wifh to have you perfectly recovered, before I restore you to your Parents. I believe you are right. Said Mr. Montague; I yield up the Management of your fair Patient, whom you have hitherto
\
i86 The HISTORY of
therto governed with Such Discretion — and now Silence is the Word. I bowed in Token of
V
Obedience. Mrs. Williams took up her Work ^ I ventured to look at Mr. Montague, to See how he was employed : he Seem-
y
ed buried in-Thought, his Eyes fixed on the Ground. Juft as I was v/ithdrawing mine, he lifted his, and met them v/ith a tender Glance: he immediately aroSe from his Seat, and, v/ith a pen-five Air, took two or three Turns acroSs the Room, and then refumed his Seat with vifible Emotion. What can all this mean ? Why is he So thoughtful and melancholy } Why all this Care to
fupprefs his Tendernefs ^ for that
he
1
1
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 187
he vifibly does. If he loves, why fhould he conceal itOr does he wifh to get the' better of his Paffion ? — But, foolifh Girl!
I
I
I
Perhaps he means nothing •, and all thefe teafing Conjectures are owing to my fecret Wifhes, and a lively Imagination. Would I were Safely at Home ! and, I could almost add, had never Seen
him!
After fitting about an Hour, Mrs. Williams, too kindly, I thought, advifed me to go up to my Room, lest I Should be the worfe for fitting up fo long. I was afhamed to make any Ob-jestion, and rofe at the first Motion. Mr. Montague Seemed to wilh my Stay, but Said nothing,
but
\
/

i88 The HISTORY of
but by his expreffive Eyes. I made him a low CourteSy, which he returned with a profound Bow, and looked after me, till I was out of Sight. Mrs. Williams fat about a Quarter of an Hour with me in
my Apartmentthen, kindly embracing me, wished me a good Night. As Soon as She was gone, I difmilTed the Maid ^ and, finding, no Inclination to deep, fat down to write.
With what Friendship dees this>
good Lady treat me 1 I think my-felf happy in fb amiable an Acquaintance, and could almost forgive the vile Lord Cleave land, fince he has been an Instrument of
4^
bringing fo much Good out of Evil.
The
i
I
I
Miss'Lucinda Courtney. 189
/
— The Clock flrikes Ten. Adieu for this Night.
The Conversation was very fprightly this Morning, at Break-fall. I determined to keep up
my Spirits, lest I Should betray
\
the UneafineSs I felt at the
Thoughts of parting with a certain PerSon; and what his Motives were, I know not; but I
had never Seen him So lively. I could have dilpenSed with this Proof of his Indifference for me, though it was, perhaps, well meant. I fuppofe he has discovered, that my Sentiments for him are too tender; and he is loth to give Hopes, where he has no Intention to encourage. Very constderate this! But, outwardly.
190 The HISTORY op
%
wardly, at lead:, I appeared as eafy as himSelf. — I have Pride, which, I trust, will get the -better of this infant Love, I was almost angry at my Self, for not being able to help admiring his Wit: He has, naturally, a great deal of Humour; but, upon this
i
Occafion, I thought it a little un-feafonable.
About Eleven my Mother came
for
me.
Before
we
took
our
Leave, Mrs. Williams begged we might fee one another often y and promised, for her Part, to drop in upon us frequently, and without “Ceremony. Mr. Montague faid nothing j but,, I thought I perceived he looked a little more penlive than he had done for
fome
1

> ;
•1
Miss Lucinda Co,urtney. 191
fome Time before —- but I won’t be certain, I may be mistaken I wifh to be cautious, in judging
i
in this delicate Point y I may Suffer for it, if I deceive myfelf. He led my Mother to the Coach, then handed me into it, but did not fo much as prefs my pastive Hand, which, perhaps, expected it. He Sighed, however, and his Countenance wore a Sort of Languor, that, I thought, was far more becoming than the Life and Spirits that fhone out in it about an Hour before.
Shall I tell you how I was aS-teded when the Coach drove off ^ Say, No i for I cannot deScribe it
j
if I would. My Mother attri-
0
buted my Emotion to the Dread
I had
/
192 The HISTORY op
I had of my Father’s Dilpleafure,
9
and kindly endeavoured to com-
fort me. I was glad She put So
favourable a Conflruction on my
Behaviour, though, till now, I
had not a Thought that I wifhed
to conceal from this dear Parent.
I hate this vile Love, for making
me lofe the frank OpenneSs of
Heart which was natural to me.
But I will conquer it; and, in-
deed, to what Purpofe fhould I
indulge itWhen the Coach
flopped at the Door, my Heart
fluttered, and a Trembling feized
me, which increaSed when I Saw
my Father.
Forgive me, 5ir, cried I, in
Tears, forgive the Trouble and
UneaSmefs your Daughter has
been
I
«■
f
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 193
been So unhappy as to caufe you. Ought I, Said he. Sternly y can you acquit yourSelf of indiScretion and Folly? I was confounded. To what Infamy, continued he, have you expofed both yourfelf and me But, Said I, dear Sir, Heaven has delivered us from it. True, an-fwered he, but no Thanks to your Conduct; if my Advice had been followed, all this might have been prevented. I acknowdedge it. Sir, faidi, and, for the future, that Shall always direct me. But pardon this my firSt, my involuntary Fault. If you will have the Goodnefs to confider this unhappy Affair, you will find I am more to be pitied, than blamed. Not blamed ? cried he, dare you to justify yourfelf ? You must have behaved very im-VoL. L K prudently.
194
The history of
•J
prudently, or nq Man would
have thought of treating you in
the Manner you have been treated.
But fay no more of it; if you
are wife, be thankful that you
ffill have a Father in me.
Let
me fee you a little more domes-
tic for the future: this Houfe
is the Province for your acting.
So
faying, he got up
and
walked to the Window, and I
took that Opportunity to go to
my Room, where I found my
Mother impatiently waiting to
.know how I had been received.
I Softened the Account as much
c
was conSiftent with Truth,
that I might not make her un-
eafy.
She embraced me—Now,
then, my Dear, Said fhe, I give
you
1
’Miss Lucinda Courtney. 195
N
you Joy, I hope this troublefome Affair is it an Endj may your future Days b,e happier; let what
is paft be forgot my dear Madam,
Be it So,
»
I, except
while I am writing to my Friend, which, with your Leave, fliall be immediately. Do fo, faid this indulgent Parent, for I have a great

effeem for th
So faying, fhe left me.
amiable Conjiantia.
And now
you
fee
me • again
returned to common Life, no
I
j
] more the Heroine of a Ro-
3
I malice; and long may I continue
r
fo, fay I 'y for one Adventure has given me a Surfeit. But fliall I ftill Trouble you with every trifling Incident that I am ^ gaged in ? Incidents, which no-
en-
\
K 2
thing
\
1
The history op
thing but your Friendship could make you intereft yourfelf in ? No more of this, my dear Lu-Anda, I think I hear you Say; go on with your writing.---------
will, then, fince you command itbut I mufl leave you now, I am Sent for.
It was a MefTage from Mrs. Henley, to know if I was returned j and, if fo, fhe would drink Tea with us. I would gladly have been excufed feeing any Company, much more that of Mrs. Henley, in whofe I fo lately met with fuch able Adventure ^ though fhe was
not in the lead: to blame, and is, indeed, in every Refpect, an
agreeable Acquaintance, and particularly
a difasrree-
live in the V/orld and
Miss Lucinda Courtney, igj
ticularly obliging to me. We returned an AnSwer, that we Ihould be glad oS her Company.
Tell me, my Friend, can one
always
Speak Truth I If you think it poffible, teach me that Art, and yet preferve me from RudeneSs.
I forgot to tell you the Major is to come with her, and her Sifter. Should I have had So bad a Memory, if it had been Somebody elfe ? — Don’t anfwer
But, adieu. Dinner’s on
! this
the Table. I fear it will pafs in Silence on my Part, and worfe on that of others; however,. I will try to eat; for I have lived, for Some Time paft, like other
KS
diftrefSed
io8 The HISTORY OF
diftrefled Damfels, in the Volumes

of Knight Errantry, on Sighs and
Tears.
You fee my Spirits are a
little revived; pray Heaven my
Father does not damp them! But,
once more, adieu.
iMy Father fixed his Eyes on
me

o
entered, the Dining-
Room, with a Scrutinizing Look,
funk
which
S
raduaily
into a
Frown ; he helped me at Dinner
with
an unsrracious
Air.
I
fighed
Alas!
thought
I, my
Life’s not very enviable.
If I
had not a real Love of Virtue
built upon Religion, -(the only
Sure Foundation) you take the
ready Way to make me act im-
prudently, by rendering my Home
fo disagreeable.
I checked this
Thought,
i

I was
I
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 199
Thought, remembering he was my Father. But, . indeed, my dear Friend, you cannot imagine any thing more unhappy than to live in constant Restraint, always endeavouring to pleaSe one, who is not to be pleafed.
getting up to leave the Room, Some Time after the Cloth w^as
removed, as no one feemed in-
\
dined to break the Silence. Stay, where are you going ? faid my Father. I fat down again. He continued filent for Some Minutes, I fitting but half on my Chair, in Hopes I might foon have Leave to quit it. He at last raifed his Head, which had been leaning on his Hand, and, turning to me, The Major
K 4
IS
200 The HISTORY of
is to be here this Evening, Said he; you Saw the Card Mrs. IleAejt fent? Yes, Sir, Said I, iin-eafy at this beginning. He likes you, refumed my Father, and has allied my Confent to pay his Addreffes to you——
——you may be fare I gave it. I tell you, that you may be prepared to receive
him as you ought, the Sooner the Match is concluded the better
Tis a great Offer for you who have no Fortune, fo talie care you don’t prevent it by any Thing in your Behaviour. He
looked at me for an Anfwer
I
was ready to faint. Why don’t you SpeakSaid he. What can I Say ? anSwered I — I fear you’ll be diSpleafed^ if I Speak my Mind.
And
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 201
And what may your Mind be ^ Said he,, with an ironical Smile pray favour us with it. It is to little Purpofe, I fear, anfwered I. Oh, I befeech you, fpeak to the Purpofe, faid he, or not at all. Then, Sir, I muff: take the Liberty to fay, that I cannot marry the Major. Is this all the Liberty you will take, my pretty
Mifs ? returned my Father---------
well,., we will grant you that,. jQnce you only fay fo, for faying_ and doing are two Things, 'we-know y now Fll anfwer for your doing it, and give you Leave ta what you pleafe. You want,, I fuppoSe to fupport the Character of the Heroine of a Novel., First,, you are run away with y
KS
tlieii
202 The history of
«
then you are delivered from the Hands of your Ravifher, by a
----fo far
true Knictit Errant:-------
O
you have fucceeded; but now, if you pleafe,. we will defcend and drop the Romantic. I fay, in plain English, then,' you JhaJl marry the Major.—Oh, no more Tears, * I defire. I tell you, I can no longer fupport the Expence of a Family, fo remember, ^i^ou either marry him, or provide for yourfelf. I want no
Anhver but Obedience.
You
may go now, I have no more to fay to you —• only advife you to put on a better Face to receive your Lover, or he may, perhaps, fave you the Trouble of refufing
him.
I left
'Miss Lucinda Courtney. 203
I left the Room,' and, running up Stairs, flung mySelf on my Bed. My Mother came in. Was ever any one So unhappy ? Said I, weeping: No fooner de-livered .from one Misfortune, but a worfe, if poflible, comes to torment me. Oh! this odious
Man!
but I cannot
forgive
me, , Madam — nor I will not marry him. Be pacified, my Dear, faid my Mother, compofe
may turn out
yourfelf; Things
better than you think for. But what Objections have you to
this
Gentleman ?
Oh! don’t
name him, dear Madam, cried I, I cannot endure him. That’s firange 1 faid fhe, and, I think, a little unreasonable I for he has
K6
a great
204 The HISTORY of
a great many good Qualities, and^ I doubt not, would make an excellent Hufband. Oh! Spare
me.
Say no more, of him; I never Shall be able to love him. Love him! Said my
JL
L
her, fliaki'ng her Head; alas I Love alone will not make Mar-riage happy. If you would enter that State with a ProSpect of
chufe a Man of eaSy and Good-nature. Beit,
Good-nature is: the beft Qualification in a Hufband. I fear your Notions are a little romantic, a
lieve me, who have
Fault
very common m young
People, who form to^ themfelves nothing but Scenes of
and
Fondnefs from
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 205 Man they love. ‘ But, alas 1 how
t
disagreeably are they disappointed Take my Word for it, my Dear, the very happiest Couple can
boast of little more than living
\
tolerably eafy and comfortable^ Oh, dear Madam, cried I, what a Picture have you drawn of Matrimony! What a dreary Word
is this j returned
nfortable l Dreary I
Mother
upon my
Word there are few that^ even arrive at that. Well, then, pray Madam, faid I, let me remain Single, rather than lit down in
fober SadneSs, fiich
table still Life
nfi
If I am to hope
for no more, even from the Man; of my Choice, much lefs can I think of changing my Condition
for
2o6
HI
i
for one who is my Averfion. With another I may, at leafl, have the Pleafure of amufing my-
felf with imaginary Scenes of
Happinefs, but to run with my Eyes open into certain Mi-
fery
excufe me — I hope you
will have the Goodnefs not to prefs me to it. I Should be forry, anfwered my Mother, to put any Force on your Inclinations ; but, confider, my Dear,
your want of Fortune. It is ne-•/
cefTary you fhould marry ^ for
»
what will become of you without a Protector, if Death Should deprive us of your Father.? You have now an Offer of a Man whofe good Qualities might entitle
him to your Superiors: he is rich
enough
r
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 207
»
enough for one of moderate Ambition, and loves you with uncommon TenderneSs. Reflect, my dear Child, exert your good Senfe on this Occafion 1 perfect HappineSs is not to be attained in this World; take, then, the moderate Share that is now oS-fered you. We cannot always chuSe for ourfelves, nor we, Since we, too often,, make a had Choice. Mv dear Mother Sighed when She Spoke this; and, getting up, I leave you. Said flie, to compoSe yourSelf, before the Company comes. I hope you will act prudently. So Saying, fhe embraced and left me, and I Sat down to acquaint my dear Coa-ftantia with this new Misfortune,
What
ought

2o8 The HISTORY of
What fhall I do ? AdviSe me, dear Friend — but not to take this odious Man. — Yet, how Shall I avoid it ? — My Father threatening
my
Mother
in-
treating — the Man tormenting me—Good Heaven!: whaf Shall I do ? I raek my Brain to no PurpoSe'; a Clarijja or a Sophy would run away — but, alas! alas I this is a true History Would it were' not I
wonder what
Mr
I
Montague
would advife me to ! — This is
Folly
But I See the odious
Coach at the Door,., and the; more odious Major is just stepped out of it -— So erect, his Chest projected, handing the Ladies with Such a Parade!.—Now, if
lit
Miss Lucinda Courtney. ^09
it was not for this fame Father of mine, I would go down and lower his Pride; but, alas 1 I muSt be all fimpering MeekneSs
before him.
Adieu
I won’t
have him though — mind that.
The Vifit is over, and I return to my only HappineSs, that of conversing with you. Here I am all myfelf, without Difguife; permit me, then, to eafe my
Mind, by
relating
the trifling
Particulars of the Afternoon.
When I entered the Parlour, the Company rofe to receive me; the Gentleman offered to lead me to a Chair. I paffed, without Seeming to obferve him, and went up to Mrs. Henley. Dear Madam, Said I, I am extremely glad
to
210 The HISTORY OF
to fee you; I hope you have had your Health, fince I had that Pieafure laft. — She returned my Compliment, and exprefSed her Joy at my Return. ,MiSs Henley
followed
her
Example,
and
added, we have greatly mifSed your agreeable Company; nor are we fingular in this; the poor Maj or, you See, has, pined himSelf to a meer Shadow. If the reft of your obliging Compliment has no more Foundation than what relates to this Gentleman, faid I, I muff be mortified in doubting
the Truth of it; fince he is, I
think, one of the moft fubftan-
«
tial Shadows I ever Saw. That is no Proof of my not mourning
your Absence, faid he; but I
am
.Miss Lucinda Courtney. 211
/
am one of thoSe Lovers that would rather live with you, than die for you ; though, if I am denied the firff, the other muft, inevitably, be the Confequence. Oh, 111 anfwer for it, faid I, no fuch tragical Effects will follow ^ or I would do all in my Power to make you fo fhining an Example to the degenerate Race of modern Lovers. Would you fo ill reward my Tendernefsfaid he. Ill, do you call itan-fwered I; what! to make your Name immortal ? and give you, perhaps, the only Chance you have for Fame ? What do you think, Mifs Henley, would ^ not his Fate be enviable ? Doubtlefs,
anfwered She; but, I hope,' you
will
212 The history of
will not be So kind to all your Lovers, as to Suffer them to die'
Cohfider, Men are
for
you
' Scarce; it is bad enough of you to monopolize So many of them as you do; but while there is Life there are Hopes, that they may
Spare
come amongff us
again
Lord Cleaveland, at leaft, if he fhould become your Slave, which he feems in a fair Way for y he is always talking of you, and, every Time I fee him, regrets your Absence.
I blufhed, and was in great
Mention
Man. My
in Pain for me, and changed the Difcourfe, to take off their Attention from me. The Major,
however.
Miss.Lucinda Courtney, 213
however, obferved my Confufion. Ah! Madam, whifpered he, how happy Should I be, if I was Lord Cleaveland! I dare fay you think fb, anfwered I, a little disdainfully ; a Title is a pretty distinction. Only as it Seems to be distinguished by your Love, replied he. I gave him a Look So full of Contempt, that he Seemed difcon-certed.
The Conversation for the rest of the Evening became more general. — I remember nothing of Particulars : — But, upon the whole, the Major was officious, and Mifs Henley obliging 3 Seeming to have forgot that I had deprived her of an Admirer. I wiSh
I could
SI4 TheHISTORYop
I could repay her KindneSs by making him return to his Duty. Before' they left us, the Gentleman took an Opportunity of Speak-
1
ing to my Father in private.—I fuppofe I was the Subject.
What

Man
Jufti
a Hufband, increaSes every Time I fee him; and yet, to do him
e, he is rather handfome than otherwise, and no Fool. But he does not pleafe me.—I am fure I cannot be happy 'with him.
My Father 'went out aim oft as Soon as they were gone, and iii a pretty good Humour. I fuppofe he is pleafed at the Thoughts of getting me off his Hands.
Yet
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 215
Yet let me not put a wrong Con-ftruction on his Behaviour----

I
Perhaps he only rejoices at the , ProSpect of my being fo well provided for.
My Mother, again, with great Sweetnefs and good Senfe, endeavoured to reconcile me to what. She faw, muff inevitably happen. You know, faid fhe, the determined Temper of Mr. Courtney'y yield, gracefully,, then, my Dear Child, to what your Duty obliges you to. Dear Madam, anfwered. I, does my Duty extend So far ? Muff I have no Regard to my own Happinefs, and only ffudy that of others} This is hard, indeed! I am yet but young i perhaps, I may. Some
Time
i
2i6 The HISTORY of
Time or other, be able to marry one who may pleaSe my Father, and not be difagreeable to mySelf. Perhaps you might, replied my Mother, but, I fear, he will not, put it to the Trial. Your late unhappy Affair with Lord Cleave-land makes him impatient to fee you out of his Power, as he judges him to be a Man of Stratagem and Intrigue, who may, perhaps, even now, be plotting your Ruin. People, of his Turn, are not eafily difcouraged; the Difficulty generally inhances the
Pleafure.
His Pride will be
piqued at his Disappointment, and, I dare fay, he will Spare no Pains to Satisfy that, and what he
calls his Love., Oh, dear Madam*
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 217
dam. Said I, what a Regiment of May bes and Suppofes is here mu-ftered up to make me embrace a real Evil, by way of avoiding an imaginary one I But we v/ill drop the Subject, if you pleafe. Time will determine my Fate. — I will do all in my Power, within the Bounds of Duty, to avoid it ^ and if I cannot—Tears prevented my adding any more—I courtfied, and left the Room.
After taking two or three Turns acrofs my Chamber, I fat down to write to my Conjiantia.—But I begin to be drowfy. I will encourage the kind Meffenger of Sleep, that invites me to forget, for Some Hours, my Care.—So, Good-night,
VoL. I.
L
my
2i8 The HISTORY of
I
my Friend; believe me to be, fin-eerely.
Your Lucinda.
My dear Mrs. Williams has been here this Morning. My Heart fluttered exceffively, when I Saw the well-known Chariot; but it funk into the lowed: Dejection, when I found She was alone.
Don’t,you think it would have been more polite in Mr. Mon-
tague
if he had condefcended to
pay one fhort ViSit to her whom he had conferred Such Obligations •on, and who was So very grateful for them ? — But, perhaps, that would have been doing too much. Yet, if he had but juft alked me
how
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 219 how I did, after my Illnefs — but
0
then, indeed, he knew Mrs. IVil^ Hams could inform him, when She returned — and, I fuppofe, if the Truth was known, he cares very
little about the Matter
Yet,
what high Profellions he made me!
Oh, thefe Men 1 We poor Females may truly fay, with the Frog in the Fable, Whad.s Sport to you, is Death to us. But it will Soon be out of his Power to give me any more falfe Hopes. When I am Mrs. Free many I fliall, perhaps, never fee him more.
My Pride is So much hurt, that I think I could almost marry this Man out of Vexation. Yet why punifli myfelf, stnce I am but too fure it will not affect fomebody
L 2
dfe?
220 The history of
elfe ? Though I ought to do it, as a Penance, for my being fo foolishly prefumptuous as to believe, without better Reafons, that I was dear to one who, it is vi-fible, by his Conduct, cares not for me. — I am afhamed of my Weaknefs.—Oh, my Dear, am I not very unhappy I, have hardly ceafed weeping, fince I returned Home.
He Sent his Refpects and befl Wishes though, it Seems, by his
amiable Aunt.
And was not this
enough ? nothing!
Willies, which coft Yet, to be Sure, it was very civil of him — but no one is better bred.
My Spirits were very low all
the time Mrs. Williams stayed with
us.
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 221
us. She took Notice of it, and my Mother, as a Proof of the Friendship She had for her, told her fomething of my intended Marriage, and how difagreeable it was to me. The good Lady ex-prelTed her Grief and Pity for me
9
and conjured my Mother to ufe her influence with Mr. Courtney,
^ V
to make him alter a Refolution that made me So unhappy.
How kind was her Confolation and Advice ! I could make her no AnSwer but by my Tears. I had hardly ever known them flovv^ fo
freely \
but that S
ubject always
makes me miferable : And now* too, the Thoughts of Mr. Montague (who, to this TimCj I could
L 3
11 >
222 The HISTORY op
not have believed had made So great a Progrefs in my Heart) added to my Sorrow. Pvirs. V/il--
t
Hams was deeply affected i and, when She embraced me, at part-ing, her Eyes were moiftened by her SenSi-bility.
I wonder what Mr. Montague
will think when he hears of ray
intended Marriage I^Will he pity
me ? What would I give to talk
with him upon the Subject ! If
he was to perfuade me to it, I
think I fhould yield • he would do
it in So gentle. So tender a Manlier.— Yet, could I bear to hear
«
him pleading for another [ -^ I believe not —it would not, I
think, Sit
upon
him.
How happy will that Woman be.
my
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 223
9
my dear Conjiantia, who is blefSed with his Love ! — Stop, my too lively Imagination, I cannot bear
theSe Thoughts.
Oh, my
Friend! I was Suppoling him in Company with his Lady, and Saw his elegant FondneSs, and the Delicacy of her Return to it. — I Saw his fine Eyes fixed on her, with unutterable Pleafure, while Words, Soft as the Summers Breeze, flowed from his ruby Lips. — This is too much; why do I Suffer myfelf to indulge fuch Foily ? Mrs. Williams tells me fhe goes into the Country next Week, and has given me an Invitation to Spend a Month or two with her there. I fear I Shall not be permitted to comply with her
L 4
Request
224 The HISTORY op
Request j however, I will pafs a Day with her before fhe goes. But, adieu, my Dear, for the pre-fent; I can hardly bear my own Thoughts, much lefs to fet them down on Paper. I hope, when I write again, I Shall be more compofed.
Luejday.
I fat down to work this Morning in the Parlour; my Father came in foon after. I was every Minute afraid he would begin to talk upon the dreaded Subject o-f my Marriage; but I was relieved, v/hen I faw him take up a Book. After haying read fome Time in it, he looked at his Watch. The Major stays long, I think. Said he. I trembled at his Name,, and
got
Miss Lucinda Courtnev. 225
got up to leave the Room. Where are you going ? qried he. You Say you expect the Major, Sir, Said I, and I Suppofe my PreSence is not neceflary. How-People may be miffaken ! Said he} but fit down again, for the Vifit
V
is to you, and / am the Perfon whofe PreSence is unnecelTary. I hear him coming — Remember he is to be your Hufband, So treat him accordingly. I leave you to receive him, and take Notice I expect to be obeyed. He left the Room, and in came the odious Man.
What foolish Figures we both made! Can any Thing be more ridiculous, my dear Conjlantiay
than two Perfons cooped up together to begin a formal Court-fhip.? I declare, notwithstanding
L
5
my
226 The HISTORY of
Hiy difagreeable Situation, I could hardly help laughing.
ASter the uSual Compliments, he took a Chair, and I my Work. He was Silent for Some Time — I followed his Example, refolving not to Interrupt his Meditations. At laft, after clearing his Voice, he began*
I SuppoSe Mr. Courtney- has informed you. Madam, that I pre7 fume to hope — He paufed — I continued filent. Forgive me, Madam, refumed he; I want Words to exprefs my tender Sentiments — my Heart is too deeply affected to Suffer me to be elo-
•'V
quent
the Sincerity of my Paf-
fion muff plead in my Favour, iince the Timidity it infpires, deprives me of the Freedom I
Should
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 227
fhould have on any other Subject. You did well then. Sir, Said I,
to addreSs me by Proxy.
By
Proxy! cried he, interrupting me} I hope I was not to blame
in making Mr. Courtney ac-^ quainted with my Love? Perhaps not. Sir, anSwered I; but it would have Shewn more of the Love you profefs, if you had endeavoured to . know my Senti-ments, before you revealed it to one who will, perhaps, deprive me of a Freedom I ought to have in an Affair that^fo nearly coh-
It appeared that you did not much doubt of Succefs. How much you wrong me! interrupted he; and how unhappy do I think myfelf in your Dif-pleafure! So far from Prefump-
tion.
cerns me
228 The HISTORY of
tion, I always feared, and ftill do, that 'my Paffion, as it could
>4
claim no Merit, would not be rewarded with fo great a BlefTing as the Return of your Love. But you cannot blame me for attempting to gain fo rich a Prize, especially as I have Hopes your Affections are not engaged. I will fpare you the Trouble of faying any more on this Subject, fai d I; permit me to declare my
Sentiments without Difguife.
If
I could think of encouraging your Addrefles, I wuuld not have given you the Pain of making an Apology for having acquainted my Father with your Intentions. I believe it is the moSt prudent Method ; but I cannot — forgive me. Sir, I cannot but regret your hav-
. ing
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 229
ing (undefignedly, I believe) Subjected me to a great deal of Un-eaSinefs, which would have been prevented, if you had firff made yourfelf more Sure of my Con-Sent. I am obliged to you for the Honour you do me, in making me your Choice, when you might juftly pretend to' my Superiors; but I Should ill repay the Favour, if I fliould give you my Hand, when it is not in my Power to bellow my Heart. I can make no Objection either to your Per-fon or Fortune; but, you know. Love is involuntary — I may, perhaps, make a lefs justifiable Choice; but — Oh! Madam, interrupted he. Sighing; Spare me a little — leave me Some Glimmering
I ought not to grant: No
230 The HISTORY of
ing of Hope — do not let me take this as your final AnSweft fufSer me, by my Afliduity, and the moft tender and conftant PaS-
fion, to endeavour to Soflen your
Heart. Time may—Permit me to interrupt you in my Turn, Said I ,* you have made a Requeft that
%
Sir, do not think I would keep any one in SufpenSe in an Affair like this; I have not given my Anfwer raShly, but have deliberately confidered, and find I could not be happy, iS I confented to be yours. Why, then. Should I give you . Hopes ? The only Re-turn I can make for the Honour you do me, is to be fincere, and Save you any farther Trouble on my Account and not, as Some,
perhaps.
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 231
perhaps, would do, give Encouragement, where there was no Defign of fulfilling, merely to have the Pleaflire of retaining a Captive, whom a pofitive Anfwer would releafe. Do you think, then. Madam, faid he, that your cruel Anfwer has releafed me ? Alas ! I am, if poffible, more enflaved than ever! Your very Refufal has more Charms than the Confent of
another. Let me then
delude
myfelf with Hope, the Comfort
of the miserable, fmce I cannot ceafe to love. Do not blame
me, then, faid I, for your being disappointed. I have taken the Liberty to Speak with Sincerity; /if you will ftill hope, you must build Something on the Incon-
' stancy
232 The HISTORY of
stancy that is attributed to our Sex; but you fliall find there is no Rule without Exception, and learn to give no Credit to general Afperfions. He made no An-fwer, but fat with his Arms folded, and looked really very pi-tiable.
But what can I do ? He would
*
not have loved me, if he could have helped it—nor would I dif-like him, if I could have helped k — So there we are even. I fee not, my Conjiantia, that we are So much obliged to a Man for his Love, fince it is acknowledged to Fe an involuntary Paffion.
He got up, and walked about
the Room, profoundly Sighing.
I arofe. For Heaven’s Sake, don’t-
/ ^
leave
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 233
leave me yet, Said he. Why Should I flay ^ returned I; you
Mind
we have Said
enough on one Subject, and are like to be very dull Company now that is diScuSSed. How happy are you. Madam, Said he, in your InfenSibility! I own it. Sir, Said I; I wifh you to be So too, and endeavour to reflore you to it. Oh, how vain is the Endeavour! Said he 5 no Time can effect it. But what fliall I Say to Mr. Courtney‘S Direct me. Madam, that I may not be the unhappy Caufe of your Suffering more Uneafinefs. You are very generous. Sir, an-fwered I, but 1 fear it is not to be avoided, without telling a
FalShood^ and I would not
buy
/ "
234 The HISTORY op
buy my Peace at fo dear a Rate. He was going to anSwer, when my Father entered the Room. His Countenance wore all the Marks of Difpleafure.
I have overheard
your
Dis-
course, Said he, and am juftly diS-pleaSed with your Part of it, turning to me; but if you. Major, can still think of honouring her with your Esteem, 111 undertake to bring her to a proper SenSe of it: You have my Content, and I know my Prerogative too well, to yield to the unreafonable Ca^price of a Girl who would frustrate her own HappineSs. The Major was going to Speak, and, by his Look, I judged it was in my Favour; but my Father stopped
him.
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 235
him. Excufe me. Sir, I gueSs what you are going to Say; but don’t attempt to extenuate her Fault; nothing but Obedience
can atone for it.
If
you
can
though
ftill, as I Said, think her worthy Worthy! exclaimed the Major; I fliall think mySelf the happieff: of Men, if fire will, without Compulsion, confent to be mine; but
I fhould be miferable without her, I cannot think of owing her Hand to your Authority. Suffer me, then, by the unremitted Endeavours of a moft lively and conftant Paffion, to try to gain her Heart as well as;Hand. i muff entreat you not to give
i
her any Uneafinefs on 'my Account ; or, instead of her Esteem,
I lhall
236 The history, &c.
I mall excite her Hatred. You
act generoully, faid my Father; She rnufl be inSenfible, indeed, if
fhe. makes no Return. Go, Said he, with an angry Look, turning to me, who flood like a Statue;

go, and recollect yourfelf, and try, in future, to act a little more confiftently with your Duty.
I was glad to retire, which I did, without anSwering; making a low CouiteSy to the Major, who bowed, fiplied, and looked fad.
i
"Lhc End of the First Volume




F'

1? -^AA ■■' .,
^ /'I ..	,•/
nd i4.<AA
i*	■♦»«' w- ^	Z\^


.1^
V	.’ U
A\. '■«> / >
■V
< *4
•' J /f
AML
■H
\
V\
J
- ..■% V.V.V. • . gtr*.'.Tnr.«“-N
4»> A ^	^
r ;,H
V
r'-t A	V
wVC;^ i 4vi;-
7.S	^

.^ .	.N» . A
»-4
•k.	W
I \ v'* •	.»
1
Il>-
RARE BOOK COLLECTION
LIBRARY
UNlVERSITYjT'
PENN5YL\ANIA


e*
a

\	' V V
.\VV ''L	\ .
, j, -. y	^	■;;- ''L-‘^'teV-Vr.'' ' ^‘S-'.''.0''. S:’ 0-	’S. ?■' C' '-;'	■ ■■ '
■' -i ;-'hy04CV'-’S' Cr-teS'	'F'ii'ri-'	P ' -.'' , 'Ad - 'S' . •: SA	LAf- --K K- A'tC' ' 'V ' ' *	' ' ■■'’ ‘ ■	'"''" '"






- '		
• r ’ V,	yI:'	*
/ . V. • M ' V A^-'-.r-y .... 1 y*. ^ ■ - .	c.' ., 'icVciAVc-	* '/*" * • *•
'V,‘- .'•- lS •■•-■'.		,r** "k*
	.’•^C S'- •'St.	

; T'^ ■' Cv ^A: •'>
yC-TN'-T CC^hV^/^:L ;.;;
'A'".A-' ■ yyr-'r.r‘Ay■■>’'< ■ '- <^..A	. '- .^\'-
J- ' ■ '■
> - '	- . N,
■• - - > ' .

\. - <•
■-V'l \.'V*;V,
:i ■'•-'■ '■ ■-

» ^
?! .
y..
: ; • • .r,-'
'. y.
> ~	. f' . •
:vT..rC's>.- •
C-v----' V.

*'■** *. “• ',- “* *’■
Ah	f ■' AA-A'A, - . ■■'	''.^V"'*':' '. -i-	\	’.
CT.'SC--.: .-.:yL,.' ,,;	S.v/A ■ ' .	.

i --	.•, ;	<
A A.d
■a’’■'•"■‘C •.-'	• '. ' --	•••■■
■ «.

i^AS~:	SSVALA	■ S''V'S-i‘/■'-j	^	■ 'ST-C;
■-.-S:'':	-'.^T-' vCSivO A--'■•■	L- A-AAS Ar S'CrCC ;.,--V.
-AytKA.^-A'P:	V:hCc .'T-.T-S'c-- >S^'':C;‘-,N:VyC>	V h‘N-
•' »•> • ■' '
♦SC .' A: '•. '• V'	•V ' .•’ : •'. ■ •	* * "* ' '
- •	* N'"	A - . * %
> o. A't.	'■< > *T . '/*■ *	■. h : ’ ':N^ . .•.'
C- .-• ' ■A'-A ' ' 'F.- *'	’•'•'. C*'?* •	-y '• -.-■ :. •'



■ ''SjC--''CC<'-v ^ .-'D‘;C. •'’T:C.:C	S':C^S:;	C:te; .tevNC te>h:T‘te'^cCC :
-	'^A'^-Vy -'V'f L T	' y-C ’"*"' '	% .■'V'T^- ■ ' - 'i-	Ss.'.'; A--'^	■■'■■. ■■V'y'-'.'' -"■ ''A' AA AL S- '	S '''■’S' ■'
'	"'-. V''- _' N ',.-	■ '"■'-''■■■‘ST	A"' V''"'-■■-S VA -V- '■•S'.'-OA-' d.	.-Si ' ■? ^ -ySA t .-'O'- V. ' V-L''- '- A'—AAriA'. .-■•
-•	s-‘- -V '	• .L	.C.,- r	...•s'-.l;:::.,-;---.-/'-	-•>.• .	•-*^> L - \

f ■ ■	*

'■-■AVAyA C-' h''	; T	cs.--v--Cv='v	h
v-'^'^TCCi S-:--	VAAA .■■--d.'■■A' A. ''A-.	CT-AS	V
'.‘C' ■' C	-V'Tr'C-'-CN.''’'b ” '-C	*' '	'''''•

>*•

• -'N'i


■■ ■ '7.
■■' 'X



:V;3.:.;; -* . „'



, f /•
A \'d. ;
' V.- ?	*:



. N' t
,-X «:•
• : -V •/'vT
.> -




• ^ ■
i ’ > ; «»
1^-* r ^ ..-
AfyAMri ;T%>r .i;-'
>^'. '''--' .	'-N'. dr-.'.' -M-.-'	.-- ^'' :-	' '-■ ■ ■':'
--vr'N-T^ *	>• r^ -;--;-: i
■• .'■'.■ A>=i: . .ON- S’--- Niicco ■'■;:■■-:'CAA-'i 'Vv-''teT}N::yv%
V-'... - 'J-	.^.■■*N--. >\/N;bx3.AT^^'^
'Z * **>*^ ■

■ S	‘.-r •	.-e-F'y^i	' -^

'w><'‘TV'S

V 4.
■• ✓*

" . r:^hV^'^;?-:%
. ' •> Cl* ; >:'-. t;<
^-v
L-■ ?w<~v	,*V'5*“.-c-.'.-'
' -C.'--^ ..
.• -■	•■"'.-:ji.’j-C-^v-: i--;
>^,*V,--)

-Vrt'' ■V'A'Ad<-- V- ' ■ h'V ' -^KAFVd.. '	fLSVri^V^: -S-v':‘*>V/*l:
^:A.'^' K'S-''V-.'AAE- : SL:F'^
■ vi5:;AV -. '-V^ f h?(cc'Tic:
^*■>6?^'^V"‘I'-C'' '■••■'•'■	,-.	'-■. •-.'Ti.*' ..'>.*^ -'- -C''	’’vN.*;-' '■?'L:"'-N-
'^‘^V-d'V .:^S-N?;/

Cc-cTT^v'T*':
•■• d’''- riyri'F' V-v''	"••' -•" 'A' -.'^r'-;!- 'F- -■LK^N‘‘ '.*■#.•• .-“L'i*.r[ '-■•r> '- '■	'	'-'^'■r
-■	<-,*•.	--St'-> .•• v:-- .v--
V' -NN.-T'	;h,N‘. '^7 s''-T .h%‘A'-'
• ■ r- •■-.	.• .	'•••'•	••	,■-^'"TV. .ic”-i‘	•'-■•V '--
O':-'*'	V . •\	' L	-	••	- .xV > r :	:'C
C.-, ■	•*: ■ -	ci- N' - t--.?' t’’
; ‘''.N'.‘ ,.-	- < v C -''-, ■■' ■'. rDV. '..-	■ -V-	-'Sh
A'-c:' '•'L	AV'^'A'' AE-L'- Ay .rP£-^
7 Ah' TTC ' .>\cy '-h;,cAC'
■-	■ ..:	■' '; ■	^-S>'"--i'-.	■.■■.'‘■’■'■C'''	■" h^CVS.;.'7''-C	.'■'■Ce'- ''V 'b ' V
**' •> *



A r‘ '.	. • N ■'

t
•?- *.
■\.


\	-r- :-

■■ I
r. '
y
t
• y .

(
, y
'• 7.'7- C';^'

' /• .
v.v.
'j'
Nv>; '	V	V ■ -k': '	■''
nS’>~v- :b	.
'	i'	' :-i'	' cN c A^vv'■ cNC - - vr
‘	ridri-VAd'-'A \	■' L,'
''	'' *■•-■-." • ' - 'S’.'
•v'V j C
• ■ •■ F' •.•'.’; •"
-O'. ••	•••'

• ... ' -V
THE
TT
T O
V
X
O F
M iss Lucinda Courtney;
In a SERIES of
« %
^	I
#
f
ft
ORIGINAL LETTERS;
Written by Herself,
To her Friend
I
Miss Constantia BELLMduR
A New Edition.
IN THREEVOLUMES
VOL. II. * •
LONDON:
iTinted for F. and J. Noble, at their refpedive
Circulating Libraries, near Middle Rokv, HolborUy
and Saint Martin’s Court., near Leicejier Square,
•
.ft ,	_ . _ . _ _ _
MDGCLXXIII,
•	V


r
«- T*
St'
! ^ ■
*


ri

■V .-.'



•2^
• *

-.<v

NVS;
iS'


-Jj

•>
.?
L
"'/

riy ^
■•• J
■L-y -c

, jfc
•"\;.-^r'.»:..-.

*-
>•
. j
■^?-

r
,y
> .-
\


»•
fe' -
rT

•'*.
'V.^-
'^>L<.
'>i
>*:• *'
^ S'


* f

-‘Y
r
Lj	«.
^.3.	
	
‘A	- * ' : . V
r r k . ^ ■ •	
■*« Aa
•' »*
r
’7
V »

' '. . *■ -i-	♦
6 . ' jT- < '- •	> 0
Ly	y
	

•y
d
■‘-vv
V
I
**. >. • •- :j>
.-I

^tf	*.

'*1.
V •>
>.
. .r ■
-'/ "tV‘.
% -V
V. -
'. J’ ..
U. of Pa Ubrary

7



!W^':
I
/
iV3

ii^i5
|CO:i:

•	«
*	c
•	•
•	•
•	•
*	X


# 4
» •
-n-ii
THE
HISTORY
O F
MiSs Lucinda Courtney.
'A
i

c.

. f
T V'
(I
v»
«r
f

Mifs Lucinda Courtney, . to
CoNSTANTIA BeLLMOUR.
(In Continuation.)
O do the Major Juftice,
13^
T' ^
he behaved
very well;
and fhall I, in return.
?
^ punifh the poor Man with a Wifef
- No,
VoL. II.
B
-r
•t>
\|VT'
.
<‘1
I'gSo S"D
The HISTORY of
No, no; I understand Genero-fity better than that comes to.
I think I fee you frown at my Levity, at a Time when I have fuch Caufe to be grave, when Matrimony is staring me full in the Face, ready to Seize me, and I have no Way to efcape, but by leaping over my Duty, But, believe me, it is only a Flourilh; my Mirth is only in my Pen, and very far from my Fleart. But I think I have gained a fhort Respite, and Time may do Won-ders : If the Major has any^ Spirit, he will never think of having me, after Such a Refufal.
I have juft had a grave Lefture from nay Mother, with a great deal of good Advice, which I de-
fire
Miss Lucinda Courtney.
3
. t
fire to follow in every thing, but what concerns the good Man, whom I am Sorry I am obliged to make So much the Subject of my
Letters. ► Dinner.
I aril Summoned to

Once more I return to
my
Friend, low Spirited and in Tears. My Father has treated me with great Severity. What Shall I do ? He declares he will no longer look upon me as his Daughter, if I refufe the advantageous Offer that is made me; nor will he be
burthened with one who has it in
(
her Power , to deliver him from an Expence that his perplexed Cir-cumflances can but ill bear. This last is a weighty Argument.
B 2
S h all
4
The history of
Shall I diftrefs one to whom I am
-under Such Obligations ? One
whofe HappineSs I am bound, by
Duty and Nature, to fludy more
than my own Oh ! that !*■ could
obey him in any other Way than
that which mull make me mise-
rable ! In vain •! call my Reafon
and Prudence to my Affiftance:
my Heart rebels
againft
their
\

Dictates. I endeavour to fet the
good Qualities of the Major in the
faireft Light ^ but, forgive my
Weaknefs, while I own, with a
Blufh, that when I would think
of him, the fuperior Charms of
Mr. Montague rulh upon my
Imagination, arid darken all the
little Merit I have been trying to
find out in the other. This is a
Folly
Miss Lucinda Courtney.
5
Folly I would not expoSe to the Eyes of any but a Friend like you. Yet do not imagine it is from any latent Hopes I have
flattered myfelf with, about this
/
too amiable Man, that I refufe
I
the other; no, believe me, I have
\
not any} and, I declare, I could
Ma
Man
I have
a mofl: unconquerable Antipathy (I think I may call it) for him. Flow do I know what his private Character may be ? Perhaps he is
loofe and immoral-—Thefe Things
>
are more neceflary to be enquired
into than his Rent Roll---------
though Fathers have different Notions. — But I fhall tire both you and myfelf, on this difagree-
B3
6
The HISTO RY op
able Subject. I will try vdiat Effect Harmony will have upon me. My Harpfichord is now very
ne
Adieu.
TVednefday.
I am just returned from Mrs.
where I have paffed
the Day — and Such a Day !
Oh ! my Friend ! it was worth an Age!
My Mother was engaged at home. So could not go with me to Dinner, but, joined us in the Afternoon. When the Chair Set me down at the Door, my Heart fluttered exceffively — you may guefs the Caufe. A Servant fliewed me into the Parlour, and went to acquaint his Lady I was
there.
A
Miss Lucinda Courtney.
there
7
. You know how naturally one turns to the Glafs, on thefe
Occafions Hair
I was
g my

when the Door opened and Mr. Montague came haftily into the Room, I believe, for his Hat j for he was dreffed, and, I fuppofe, going out. He Started when he faw me, and a Glow
fine
Face.
For
overfpread his myfelf, I cannot exprefs the pleafing Emotion I felt. I blufhed, and lofl the Power of Utterance. He approached me with Dignity, and, in a Voice of mod: engaging Softnefs, ex-
preffed his Pleafure at the unexpected Happinefs of feeing me.. Does Mrs. VVilliams know you are here I Said he, approaching:
B4
the;
The history of
the Bell------
fmiling; I will not ring
Yet, no, added he,
let
me be So felfifh, as to monopolize your Company, as long as I can. Then taking his Seat by me, he looked tenderly on my Face. I
was a little diSconcerted
he
withdrew his Eyes immediately, and Seemed at Some LoSs what to Say. I believe where the Heart is
affected the Tongue is not very fluent.
■The Entrance of Mrs. Williams relieved me. I roSe to
V
meet her, but with Such Precipitation that my Foot catched in the Carpet, and I fliould have fallen, but that Mr. Montague prevented me, by extending his Arms to receive me. I felt his
Face
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 9
Face touch mine, and my Con-
fufion was increaSed. Mrs. Wil~
%
Hams laughed. Now, laid She,
that you have Saluted my Nephew, I expect you will confer the Same Favour on me. With great PleaSure, dear Madam,. Said I; I will voluntarily repeat what I before did by Accident-Nay, don’t Spoil your Compliment, Said fhe, by an Apology Mr.. Montague will not thank you for that. I will not think of the. Caufe, Said he,. Smiling but	muft	rejoice	at	the Effect-
Very well, faid I y I take Mrs. WtUiamd.^ Raillery in good Part y
but you, I think, Should Spare
I
me.	Sir;	fince,	as	a Man	of
Gallantry,	you must	pretend'	to
B 5	be
ro The HISTORY of
be a Gainer by what has hap-
pened.
He bowed, and we
took our Seats, and entered into a rnofl agreeable Converfatiqn:
Yet
Mr. Montague
was Some-
times very abfent, and fre-
quently checked a Sigh.
After
Dinner, I played on the Harpfi-chord, and accompanied it with my Voice. I will not repeat the
undeferved
on me.
they beftowed Mr. Montague, in parti-
cular ; though
if I had known
he had been fuch a Judge, I
%
Should hardly have been prevailed on to play before him; but I did not know this till he afterwards
favoured us
then
with a LelFoh, and indeed, there was just
V
Caufe for Encomiums - which,
♦ .
however.
Miss Lucinda Courtney, ii
w
however, I durst not be too liberal of, lest I fhoald betray my
more than Admiration of him. He lings, too, enchantingly. At Tea, my Mother gave us her Company.
About Eight we offered to take our Leave, but were earnestly preffed to stay Supper. My Mother Said fhe could not poffibly eonfent, as stie had promifed my Father to be foon home ; but, at their Request, stie permitted me to stay.. You may believe I was
not difpleafed; for what, my
♦
Friend, can equal tlie Pieafure of
being in Company with a Perfpn, one—loves ?—I had almost faid and, to. be ingenuous, I . believe I may fay it too justly. I know
B. 6
I aiBi
12 The history of
I am to blame to give way to it, but the T emptation was too
pleafing to be refilled. I had
Suffered So much Uneafinefs foe
%
Some Time paff, that I yielded the more readily to the pleafing Senfation; but I determined to forget my Paffion, as foon as I had loft the Happinefs of feeing the Object of it; though, I fear, I fhall verify the Words of an old Song, which I remember to run thus:

if
I did but look and love a while, ‘‘ 'Lwas but for one half Hour ^ Lhen to refjl I had no Will,
iC
And now I have no Power.

But
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 13
But be it So —who can repel their Fate ? There is an aching void in every Heart: I could not have filled up mine with a more lovely, or worthy Object. Had you Seen him, you muft have admired } had you heard him, you muft have done more —But then his Behaviour to me is a Riddle beyond my Comprehenfion. What would I give to know his real Sentiments, and the Reafon of that Mixture of Tendernefs and
Help
Referve in his Manner!
me to unravel it, that I may either indulge, or timely Rifle, the growing Flame.
Mr. 'Montague accompanied
*»
me Home in his Chariot. You would, I am lure, have been
highly
H
The history of
highly delighted with our the a
tcte
I cannot defcribe it.. We talked only on general Subjects,, and yet he Seemed, every Moment,, ready to break through the Re-flraint that he was vifibly in, to: Speak of Something more inter-
esting.
His Actions were all
TenderneSs,, but he checked him-felf. Several Times, when his Tongue Seemed ready to divulge-, what, I find, he has Some Reafons' for concealing. I reaUy believe he loves me — Do not think me vain for this Declaration, fince, if I may believe his Eyes, I have
Proofs for what I fay. The odd Restraint we were both, in made me almost wiSli our little Journey over — and yet, v/hen
. the
strong
Miss Lucinda Courtney.
15
the Carriage flopped at my Father’s, my Heart Sunk at the Thought of parting, and a Sigh,, in Spite of myleif, flole from
me.
Monfag
prelTed his Regret at fo foon lofe-ing the Pleafure of my Company; efpecially, as he faid, he was to go out of Town the next
Day
My Aunt, he added, will
enjoy a Happinefs that I fliali envy her for. It will be an Age before I fee you again; and yet, continued he, hghing, and taking my Hand, I ought not, for the Sake of my Repofe, to wifh the Time fhortened. Farewell, mofl amiable young Lady; favour me with a Place in your Memory,
and
s.
16
The history of
and when you honour me with your Thoughts, let it be as of one who deferves your Pity. He put my Hand to his Lips, and his Voice fpoke his Emotion.. I
f
could not anfwer—I was ready to faint — He led me into the Houfe My Mother came To us — he
bowed to her, and, giving me a
\
mod: expreliive Look, hurried into his- Chariot.
t
I cannot defcribe what I felt at that Moment — Or rather, I had no feeling at all, but flood
\
without Motion. Come, my Dear, faid my Mother, what do you Hand there for} I made no Anfwer, but, taking the Candle from the Servant, flew up
S tairs.
Blefs
Miss Lucinda Courtney
17
BleSs
me
I
following me, ter with you }
Said my Mother, what is the Mat-A Trifle, dear Madam, Said I; I have not been well all the Evening, but I Shall Soon be better. I fat down; my Mother, apprehenfive of my fainting, ran for Help — A little HartShorn and Water revived me.
t
What has happened, my dear Child f you frighten me to Death* Don’t be alarmed, faid I, embracing her; nothing has happened I am well. I cannot account for my Indifpofition; but it is over now, I will go down with you to the Parlour. No, faid my Mother, I advife you to go to Bed immediately. I will inform your Father of the Reafon of his not
fe

ving
I
The history of
feeing you. So faying, fhe wifhed me a good Night, and left me. I then difmifTed my Maid, and went to Bed, in a Situation of Mind that I had never before experienced. A Torrent of Tears gave me fome Relief.
i'
Do you not pity me, Conjlaittia ?
V
All my other Misfortunes are light, when compared with what I now feel. I love—and believe myfelf beloved by, the moft accomplished of his Sex; and yet, my unhappy DelHny has fixed a Bar betwixt us, that feems un-
furmountable.
What can it be ?
* ■
but no Matter — it is what, I find, will make it impoflible for me to hope to be his ; and, what aggravates my Mifery is, that I
Shall
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 19 led fhail be forced into a hateful
c.
le
I
I '
But

I	I
J Marriage with another.
II
;n| does my Duty, indeed, oblige me id] to make fo great a Sacrifice ?
What is Life ? And yet how fond are we of it! — I hope the Enchantment is now broke, and I Shall no more flatter myfelf with Dreams of Happinefs. — I need not call upon Philofophy to make me indifferent to its Pleafures r but where Shall I gain Strength of Mind to Support its Mi/enes t Mine, I fear, are but begun; where they may end. Heaven
But, adieu ; I have
knows!
ftill one Happinefs while I enjoy your Friendship. Do not deprive me of that; for I hope I Shall
that will
make
never do
any
thing
20 The history of
t
9
make me unworthy to Subfcribe myfelf.
Your Lucinda,
IIhurfday.
J	r ^
I find a compofed Melancholy has taken Pofieflion of me; there
f
is Something pleafing in it. My
Imagination wanders over Fields
%
and Groves, and purling Streams.
I could fit, my Self down and liften
♦ _
to the feathered Songilers, till I loft the Memory of a tumultuous World. No Paftion fhould disturb my Peace —^ I would ftill love the accomplillied Montague^ indeed; but it fhould be a Serene, a gentle Flame, juft to warm my
Breaft, and give a Relifti to the
♦
blooming Beauties of Nature. I
defire
k
•tl

Miss Lucinda Courtney. 21
A
delire no more but to be permitted to love him, without Moleffa-tion. I am no Enemy to the Platonic System : Matrimony too oS-ten destroys the most fervent PaS-fioh. I am enamoured of a stngle Life. Oh, that I may be permitted to enjoy it! But Want of
Fortune, which fo often bestows
*
this Favou#*on thofe who would very willingly difpenfe with it, will be the very Reafon that I fhall not
be allowed to follow my Inclinations.
Mifs Henley is just gone. She '
came to afk me to go with her
into the Country, for a Week or'
two. She has not been well, and
*
was. She fays, advifed to Change
She has, accordingly,
taken
of Air
V
22 The HISTORY OF
;
*	I
taken a Small, ready furnifhed Houfe, and, as
Miles
Mrs
which will prevent her accompanying her, file was very earneft with my Father to let me go. I left it entirely to his Choice, whether I Should, or not: indeed I was indifferent about every thing, and very low Spirited j for, before fhe came in, we had
been talking on the old Subject; to which I only anfivered with my
Tears.
My Father told MiSs Hettley, he would give his ConSent, if fhe would grant him one Favour, in Return. Name it. Said fhe 3 I promife, Fe it what it will. That is kind, ^id he, Smiling;
however,
le
1
)}
d

Miss Lucinda Courtney
23
however, I will not abuSe your GeiieroSity. What I would beg of you is, only to perfuade this perverfe Girl to confent to her own HappineSs. I underhand you, cried flie; leave that to me. Then going towards the Window with him, they had a good deal of Talk; but they fpoke too low for me to hear what they faid; nor did I much care. At laft jflle turned to me again. I have prevailed, my dear Creature, faid fhe; I am to be favoured v/ith your Company for Thank you, Mr. Courtttey; you are an obliging Wretch. I’ll take Care your Daughter is not run away with. We fhall admit none of the male Creatures, but ; -	the
one


24 The history of
the Major. But now I talk of male Creatures, turning to me, who do you think, MiSs Courtney^ I have had to take Leave of me this Morning ^ No other than the renowned Lord Cleaveland! He is going to Paris. You know, Said he to me, one mull do like the reft of the World; every body goes to Francey now the War is over. It is absolutely neceflary they Should endeavour to polish themSelves, and wear off the Ruft they have contracted in the Service of Mars. He pays a great Compliment to the French, faid I j fince he feems to think they cannot wear off this Ruft at Home, without travelling there to learn their Manners. It would
be
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 25
be well for that People if they were as fond of imitating us, as they might reap aimpft as much Advantage by learning our Valour, as we fhall by copying their Effeminacy. However, I wifh
him a good Voyage
there’s
room for Improvement in him, as well as his Neighbours.
Well, really, faid Mifs lien--leji I cannot fee that: for I think him, without Exception, one of the moff compleat, fine
Gentlemen I ever met with.
I
will not difpute your Judgement, Said I. She bowed; then looking at her Watch, I forget my-felf, cried She, I have fifty Vifits to pay this Morning, and here I fit, chatting away my Time,
VoL. II.
C
with-

6
The HISTORY or
\
ever thinking of them. Adieu. Remember yohr Pro-iniSe ; I Shall expect you on Lhurjday, to, accompany me to
my rural Habitation. So faying, fhe tripped off, my Father attending her to the Door.
I ,am not difpleafed at th Thoughts of going into the Country; I was always fond of it, and much more now,
I v/ilh to enjoy my without Interruption. There
but and
c
will be nothing the
oven thofe will' be lefs torment
J
at
, as I
take the Liberty to treat him as I
my
js
not Witnefs.
My
Miss Lucinda Courtney,
27
My
Father came in from at-I Mifs Henley. I have con-fehted to your going, faid he, be-caufe I thought it would give
you Pleafure. ought not to r
Judg
if

you
You’ll Se

Mai
MiSs
you are in the Country.
Hettley is acquainted with his Pafficn for you. I expect every thing will be fettled to my
t
Willies before your Return. The Marriage fhall be delayed no longer than till you eome to Town again. Have you no Ambition to be a Lady ? added he; I can tell you. Sir William Freeman is in a very bad State of Health j but if you flay till his Death, the Major may, per-
C 2
haps
28 The HISTORY of
haps, think he owed your Con-Sent to the Love of a Title, more than of himSelf. He will then be mistaken. Said 15 my Views are very humble; I would prefer the Man I liked to all Grandeur. Well, but, faid my Father, Since you cannot have that, you must even be content with the other..
But adieu, my Friend, I must prepare for my Journey. I have Some Vistts to make, which-will prevent my writing" till I arrive in the Country. Till thbn, my dear Conjiantia, Farewel.
I received your last charming Letter, with the PleaSure your Senstble Observations never fail to
give me
I have fent the Com-
mistions you favoured me with,
and
r
»
f '•
r
f
Miss Lucinda Courtney
20
and hope you will receiye them Safe. Once more. Adieu.
Friday.
♦
After a Journey, which would have been agreeable, but for the Company of a certain Perfon, who accompanied us, we arrived, without Accident, at the Habitation of Mifs Henley^ which
is really delightful. The Situation
(
is perfectly rural ^ ’tis about half a Mile from a pretty large Village. The Major pafTed the Day with us, and at Night took up his Lodging at an Inn. He breakfafted with us the next Morning, then took his Leave, and Set out for London. You may guefs what his Behaviour
C 3
3© The HISTORY of
\
was to me j I did not, however.
1
give mm any
Mifs H.enley has, in a very delicate and fiiendly Manner, endeavoured to perSuade me to receive his Addrelies. She Says, flie will not make my Stay disagreeable, by talking on a Subject that I do not like but I promiSed
Said fhe, and, in-
Mr.
deed, I with I had Influence enough to prevail on you to accept of a Man with whom,, I am convinced, you would be happy. She then expatiated on his good
Qualit
his agreeable Perfon,
and, above all, the Probability of his having his Brother's Title and Eftate. How happy Should I
myfelf, continued She, if
• »
I was
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 31
I was in your Place! For, to be free with you, he
was once
c
from, a
more than indifferent to me. But, to do him Juftiee,
he never made any Dedaratibn of Love; fo I can only blame my
if I formed little unmeaning Gallantry.
You are a generous Rival, I: I wifh I could make the
us
oblige me.
Return
if you will let
upon
as we can find
more agreeable to talk Be it fo, faid flie; I fhould
be Sorry to do any would make
me
with
your
your,
C 4
This
32 The HISTORY op
This 'was very good of her.
I begin to like her much better
%
then I once thought I ever could. I fear I was unjuflly prejudiced againft her. I will not, for the future, be fo rafh in forming Judgments of People, before I am better acquainted with them.
We
amufe ourfelves
very
agreeably with working, read-
ing
and
walking.
Our Time
is not likely to hang heavy on
our Hands. I arofe early this
/
Morning, and was enchanted with the Frefhnefs and Beauty of the Spring. I think, when it is a little advanced, it is the
Sweetest Seafon of the Year.
I
have already found a Place for
Meditation,
Miss Lucinda Coup.tnty..
Meditation, where I fhall fre-
^ •
quently retire. You may gueSs what will be the Subject of my Thoughts. Every Object con-fpires to Sooth my Soul into a Soft and pleafing Melancholy* I think I fhould never tire of the Country, though, I must confeSs, I fhould once have looked on Solitude in a very different Light* I do not think it can have
Charms
any
but Poets or
Lovers : Poetry or Love gives an agreeable EnthuliaSm to the Imagination, and prefents alt Objects in a different Light from that which they appear in to vulgar Eyes.. To the fatter. Trees are only Trees, and Water,. Water i but, to the former, they are^
^ 5
Woods

34' The HISTORY of
Woods, and Groves, and purling
You See me, then, converted into a ShenherdeSs;
Jt	^
but, alas 1 without a Shepherd f unlefs I fhould have the Fortune to make a Conquefl, To-morrow, at Church.
You are likely to receive but Entertainment from my Letters, while I continue here, as I expect no Yariety: How-ever, I muft write: for I have got Such, a Habit of it, that nothing, but your Commands to the contrary, can make me refrain. Farewell, my dear Friend, I Jeave you, to take a Walk It is a moll: delightful Evening.
S S Luc IN: D A C OUR TISEY. 35
We k^ve been at Chureh, and

I have
extraor-
dinary to tell you, yet, as I wifli
*
to write, I muff: not be top nice in the Choice of my Subject, or I fhouSd be obliged to be lilent.
We had a pleafant Walk, and found a very Spruce Congregation, especially the young Ladies, vvho-
4.
were very gay, though not ex--actly in the Mode. On our Entrance, every Eye was fixed upon
us.
MiSs lIenley is remar
elegant in her DreSs, and, I believe,, created no Small Amazement, amongfl the female Part of
*	\. •
the Audience.. I was glad when we got to a Seat, as I do not like to have
C 6
36 The HISTORY of
Peoples Thoughts diverted
from
the folemn Occafion of their meeting. We were juft feated, when
%
the Clergyman entered. I am miftaken if the Hearts of the Fair Ones were not again fluttered, though from a different Caufe. Lhen, Hats, Caps and Ribbons gave the Alarm; but now. Youth and Beauty was the Subject. Upon my Word, I never faw a prettier Figure. But fuch an Air! fo jemmy! fo ftudied!
I began to fear he had miftaken Ids Talent, and contradicted N a-ture, who feemed to have designed him for the Sword, rather than the Gown. A good Smart
Fellow this.
Peace,
Mifs I will
give
Miss Lucinda Courtney.
37
t
give you my Opinion when he has performed that which he ought most to endeavour to excel
m.
She Said no more
The
Prayers began — the excellent
Prayers that almost lost their good
• /
Effect on the Audience, by the affected Manner in which they
were
read.
You
may imagine
by what I have Said of this Youth, that his Sermon was not very edifying : it was not, indeed. It feemed more calculated to Shew his Eloquence, than to improve his Hearers. We stayed till most of the People w^ere gone out, before we made our Exit j but we
V
found them all in the Churchyard, waiting to have another View of the London Damfelsv
Amon
\
j8 The his; TORY OF
Among the rest, the too, was fpeakingsto Some Nymphs,
who Seemed
of the Fa-
vour. As we pasted, he looked stedfastly at us, and, made us a. most reverend Bow.
Mifs ILenkt wanted to contrive
Some
to. get acquainted
: but I told her, I had not the least .Defire to, know any more of him.. He is.
very
faid I; which, I


would / have
a Grace to his Sermon, if it had been good for any thing; but I am far from thinking Beauty a fusticient Recommendation, with-
t
out Merit r which latter, if I may . judge from his Behaviour, he does not Seem to abound in.
i '
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 39 Well Said, Mifs Grave-airs, cried
MiSs
i you are very right, to be Sure; but as I am nut
quite So
you must allow
me to take People as I find
them
we must not look for
Perfection. Some excel in one
fome in another.
You
allow him to be a pretty Fellow but you . don’t admire forfooth 1 continued She, with an
arch Look: Now I do. And fo-do I too, when accompanied, faid I. But you don’t think it makes a good Solo, Said stie. No> indeed, anfwered I; especially in
a Man. But, for Woman,
♦
think it may do, returned fhe. The Gentlemen
judge of
that, anfwered T I Should not
»
'	chufe
40 The HISTORY of
#
chufe a. Friend Sor that alone. But a Woman without it, tho’ fhe may be eftimable, will fel-dom find herfelf the Object of Love. Then you will allow poor Beauty to be good for Something, however. Said Mifs Henley; and, let me tell you, you have attributed a Power to it that would make mofl Females prefer it to all the other comfortable Perfections put together. You have a worfe Opinion of our Sex than I have, faid I; for, I dare fay, there are many Women that would not exchange their good
Senfe, good Humour, and Prudence, for all the Admiration that Beauty could procure them.
Well, Peace be to them, faid
Mifs
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 41
Mifs Henley; but give me a lit-tie Flirtation. But not on a Sunday, Said I, Smiling we forget we have been at Church; let, us change the Subject to one more proper for the Day. Poh, faid fhe, I hate grave Subjects. Have
we not been hearing a Sermon ? Is hot that enough ? Would you make Religion a gloomy, flupid Thing ? Muff it confift of Canting and Wry Faces } Is edifying Converfation cantingfaid I; or does it diftort the Face more than any other SubjectMoft certainly, faid fhe, laughing; if you begin, you \vill foon fee a Proof of what I affert; for I Shall yawn most intolerably, and that, you know, will difcompofe the
Face
\
42 The HISTORY of
in a
to
you
tedious
Hours that mufl hang heavy on
you do not
Seem to have
proper Employiuent of them, and ' Stuoiditv of our

not allow
any
that you
. If
would think an the Parfbn had come. Said She, I Ihould have been very well amiif-
ed i but, as you fay, without fomething, of this kind, I ihaH be
but very hum-drum. But pray,
Mifs Grave-airs, how do you in-tend to fpend your Time ? In Slumbering over a Sermon, I fuppofe,
N ot
1
Face as much as any thing. But ] if Sleep flrould follow, faid I, ]
not be Sorry, .
%
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 43
f
Not in flumbering over it,, faid I, but in reading one with and Pleafure, With Pleafure !
I
exclaimed fhe, laughing; well, that is very amazing. However, I will follow your Example, as to the reading Part of it; but I muff: take the Liberty to choofe a different Subiect for mv Medita-
/
tion
I. have a mofl
Novel to finish, which I very me-ritoriouily tore myfelf from, this Morning, to go to Church. So you read Novels on a Sunday Morning, faid I, in order to prepare
r
your Mind for the Solemnity of the Day} And why not ? faid fhe j where are they forbid in Scripture ? Where ! faid I ^ why, in
4
every Page of it. — Our Arrival
. at
44 The HISTORY of
at Home put an End to the Con-
versation .
This Chit-Chat, my dear Cm-
fiantia, is very trifling j but I
think it gives you an idea of the
PerSon I would defcribe better
than any thing I could fay of her.
If you think it tedious, ufe the
Freedom of a Friend , fpeak your
Sentiments, and I will be govern-
ed by your Judgment.

Oh, my dear Creature! Such
an Adventure ! I can hardly re-
cover my Spirits enough to de-
fcribe it.
I left Mifs Henleyi aster Dinner,
reading; and, with Hervey s Me-
ditations, I walked out, delighted
with the beautiful Profpects that
Surrounded

1
I

X
i‘

it
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 45
Surrounded me. My Mind Serene, every Care forgot, and wrapped in moft agreeable Contemplation. Sometimes I Seated mySelf at the Foot of a Tree, and listened to the momentous Truths, that are conveyed with the Eloquence of Angels, in the charming Book I had brought for my Companion. Sometimes, I
walked
through Fields
and
Groves, Such as are there described with the most striking Beauty. The PleaSure I felt, in my Excurston, led me, inSenfibly, a great Distance from the HouSe, without my observing it, till, looking at my Watch, I was amazed to find how long I had been out, and was thinking of
returning.

The HISTORY of
returning
when.
Eyes acroSs a Field, I Saw a Small
HouSe, fituated in
So delightful
and romantic a Manner that my
Curiofity prompted me to take a
nearer View of it. I could not
help thinking I Saw the Sweet Ha-
bitation Mrs. Rowe defcribes So
elegantly in one of her Letters.-
While I flood gazing at it
with great Pleafure, my Atten-
tion was Suddenly called off the
Houfe, by the Appearance of a
Gentleman and Lady, who came
out of it. I ran behind Some
Trees, where I could fee without
being Seen. But oh ! my Friend,
what was my Emotion, when I
difcovered the Gentleman to be
no other than Mr. Montague I A.
Giddinefs
1
nn (

I
Miss Lucinda Courtney.
47
GiddineSs Seized rrie, my Eyes grew dim, and, for Some Minutes, I was infenfible.
When I reGOvered a little, I turned my Eyes eagerly to the fatal Objects. The Lady Seemed to be talking with great Fervour.
They came nearer the Place
%
where I was concealed ^ and, I perceived, She was weeping. Ne-
ver did I fee a more
ming
woman.
Mr. Montague appeared with an Air of Sadnefs, his fine Eyes fixed on the Ground. He taifed themat laft; and, turning to her. Said Something, at which her Emo-
He was walk-
tion
ing with

his Arms
never did I fee him look So lovely.
After
4B
The HISTORY of
After two or three Turns together, he at lafl took her Hand,f
and, making a low Bow, feemed|
• [
to have taken his Leave: for he;
^ ;
• ^ walked from her. The Ladyl
flood motionlefs, her Eyes fixed j upon him, till he was out of Sight. I followed him at a Distance, till he came to a Gate that opened into the Road, where
his Servant waited for him with
• *
his Horfe. He mounted immediately, and rode off. I flood like a Statue, till the too pleafmg Object was out of Sight; then, with very different Meditations from thofe I. had been amufed with, when I began my walk, I returned home.
. How
, »

t
I
Miss Lucinda Courtney.
49
How miserable , arp I, my Friend, to have fuch. convincing Proofs that I can have no Hopes,
and that from Such a Caufe ! To
/
have a Rival, who is either his Wife or his Miflrefs ! If She is the firfl', I mud: not think of him with Lqv€—- and if the latter, I ought not even to ejieem him. What would I give to know the
Particulars of his Situation 1
And
yet, what can it be to me now ? Is he not engaged ? and that too to fuch a Woman ! How could he
?
fay he was unhappy I
When I, got home, L found Mifs Henley waiting Tea for me, and greatly Surprized at my flaying fo long.
VoL. II.
D
Good

o The history of
Good Heavens ! cried
I he,
when - I entered the Parlour, where have you been all this Time ? I proteft I thought fome Giant had run away with you, and was juft going to fend for
your Knight Errant, the Major, to go in queft of you. But, feri-oufly, continued ftie, I hope you have met with nothing to alarm
you
you frighten me, you look fo pale. Don’t be uneafy, faid I ; I ftiall be well in a Minute. I have only taken too long a Walk.
I thought fo, faid She; this comes of your intolerable Love of the Beauties of Nature, as you call them. A fine Figure I fhould have cut at Mr. Courtney s, if any thing had happened to you! But
here,

Miss Lucinda Courtney. 51
here, drink Some Tea, it will revive you. ' I did as ihe bade me, and, as Soon as I could find an Opportunity, fxew to acquaint my Conjiantia with what had befallen.
And now, my dear Friend, I * cannot, without Rudenefs, leave MiSs Henley any longer by herfelS.
So mud: bid you. Adieu, for this Night. Believe me ever.
Your Lucinda*
Mifs
Mor
is gone to pay a ling, to a Family of her Acquaintance, that are come to pafs the Summer in our Neighbourhood: die wanted me
D 2
to
52

The history of
to go, but I excufed mySelf, as I
had feveral Letters to write.
I
believe She will dine with them. So I fhall have mofl of the Day to myfelf.
I have finillied my Epiflles, and am. almofl tired of writing, fo will bid you adieu, to go and indulge my Thoughts, in a, pleafant Arbour, at the Bottom of the Garden, where I generally fit to work or read. The Weather is moft invitingly delightful — Once more. Adieu.
When will my Misfortunes be at an End?—Terrible has been the Caufe of my not writing to you for this Week pafl! — Oh,
what
/ ' #
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 53
what a Week has it been to your F riend!
I was fitting in the Arbour, bu-
ried in Thought, my Head leaning on my Hand, when, lifting my Eyes, who can deScribe my
Terror and Amazement

<X
t
my
feeing Lord Cleaveland, haflily advancing towards me } I Screamed, and rofe to avoid him, hut he was already clofe to me. I made an Effort to get by him, but he
Seized me in his Arms.
Once
more. Said he, I have Poffeffion of my dear, cruel Fugitive, and neither Men nor Devils Shall tear '
her from
me
I Struggled to m^yfelf, and Screamed with all my Force. .Dis in vain to make a Noife, faid he 3 I have
D
3
not
.■)
4
The HISTO RY of
not So ill contrived my Plot as to fear any Difturbance. I lifted my Eyes and Heart to Heaven for Affiftance. You have but ill re-paid my generous Treatment -of you, my fweet Lucinda, faid he, when you was laft in my Power, You muff, therefore, expect a different Behaviour from me now. Oh, Sir, pity me, faid I and, struggling from his Arms, 1 funk down on my Knees. Confent then, to be mine, faid he, endeavouring to raife me, and my whole Fortune fhall be at your Command, Infolent Propofal I
faid I,
rifing
with Indignation.
f-
He again offered to take hold of
Again I kneeled to him.
me.
Pardon me, fpare me, dear, good
Sir,
Miss Lucinda Courtney.
3S
Sir, have Pity on me, cried I, with a V^iidnefs hardly knowing what I did or Said. He {looped down and attempted to kifs me; I Shrunk fi'om him and Screamed for help. Tis well. Said he, with a deteimined Air, his Eyes Sparkling; I See you are not to be moved — I but Force.
have nothing left
Blame
your
own
PerverSeneSs, my dear Girl, and take the ConSequence.
Oh, my Friend, I can deScribe no more of this Shocking Scene My Strength began to fail me but juft when I thought my Ruin inevitable. Heaven inter-poSed in my Favour. I continued to ftruggle and call for Affiftance, with all the little Strength I had
D 4
left
<6 The HISTORY of

tions.
left—but who can exprefs my Joy, when I faw the Major, running towards us, ' his Sword drawn ? My Lord faw him too, and, ut-tering the mofl horrid Impreca-
left me, half dead, between Terror and Joy, and put
i
himfelf in a Pofture of Defence. My Spirits, almofl exhaufled before, now entirely forfook me, and I funk down in a fainting Fit; from which, when I recovered, I found myfelf on my Bed, and Mifs Henley and the Major endeavouring to recover me.
lives! faid he, when I

She
1
opened my Eyes. — Oh ! Madam, i how happy do I think myfelf, m having fo providentially come to your Afliftance!
I could
r
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 57
I could not yet Speak, but endeavoured to exprefs my Gratitude by my Looks. Mifs Henley then took my Hand—Tears in her Eyes — What can you think of me, laid She, after what has
4
happened I And yet, Heavem knows, I am innocent! Hold,
Madam,. Said the Major, let us
fay no more, at prefent, on this disagreeable Subject; you v/ill have Time enough to juftify yourSelf. Mifs Courtney mufl not be difturbed with talking. You* muff permit me to flay here this* Night. To-morrow, if the dear Lucinda is well enough,. I will do
/
myfelf the Pleafure to conduct her to Town. Lord Cleaveland
4
will, be taken Care of—^ I have
D
5

Sent

58 The HISTORY <JF j
%
\
feist for proper Affifiance for him I I hope his Wound is not mor-! tal—but let what will be the Con-fequence, I will not fly, fince I can juftify my Conduct in this Affair. I will now leave you with Mifs Courtney., and adviSe you to let her take Some Reft. I ftarted, and looked terrified: Oh, don’t leave me 1 exclaimed I, with Emotion. Fear nothing, faid he, I will protect you from farther Violence, though at the Hazard of my Life. I was going
---Compofe your-
!■
to thank him.
felf, adorable. Z	faid he; I
muft not fuffer you to fpeak, ’till you are better. So faying, he left the Room; as did Mifs Henley, Soon after.
i
me
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 59-
me to undrefs. I did not fay one Word to her, all the Time She flayed, not being able to perfuade myfelf fhe was ignorant of the Plot that was laid for me.
When every body was gone,, I endeavoured to compofe myfelf, but never, fure, did any one pafs a more miferable Night. When I awaked in the Morning, I found myfelf feverifh, and hardly able to put on my Cloaths, but was determined to leave a Houfe that was juflly become odious to me.
What can I think
of
Mifs:
Henley ? Is it poflible fhe fhould be innocent .f* And, if not, what
a deteflable Part has fhe acted
«
The Major has laid me under an eternal Obligation — yet, what a
D 6
6o The HISTORY of
I
*
fatal Return will he expect ? A Return, which, I fear, I fhall now be compelled to grant.
Miferable Lucinda I — I fhall Soon,
\
I hope, be out of this detefled Houfe.
Mifs Henley has been endeavouring to clear herfelf from having any Hand in this black Affair. Appearances are against you, faid I j but I destre not to hear any more, on fo Shocking a
If you are innocent, you are the more happy. — She w^as going to anfwer,, when the Major came in.
After the most tender Enquiries after my Health, he pro-pofed
our
going
I confented
with Joy. The Maid had already
packed
t
I
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 6i
great
packed up my Cloaths, and the obliging Major had provided a Poft-Chaife. , I took a cold, but
t
polite Leave oS Mifs Henley, who was, or affected to be, in Grief.
When I found myfelf moving from a Place where I had met with fuch a fliocking Adventure, my Spirits returned, and I began
to breathe with Freedom. The
#
Major was all Joy and Affiduity: yet what would.
at
ry
a
nother
Time, have been very difagreeable to me, appeared nothing, in the Pleafure I felt for my Deliverance^ though my Gratitude has, I fear, given Hopes, which I flill pray Heaven to deliver me from the Neceffity of fulfilling for, after
all,
K
r
->
41 5
i#:
62
The HISTORY op
i
all, I fliould be more wretched than I have ever yet been, if I am forced to marry this Man,
Worth
Heart refufes to love.
As foon as I faw
my
dear
Mother, I stew into her Arms. Both my Father and stie were
furprifed at my Return, I begged the Major to inform them of
what had happened, having before cautioned him to Soften every thing as much as postible. He accordingly went with- them into
I
th
Parlour, while I,
etired to
mv
afked Leave,
Chamber.
A little Time after my Mother came up to me. She looked pale. Oh, my dear Lucinday Said
fhe,

Miss Lucinda Courtney. 63
fhe, what a Scene of Mifery have you been engaged in ! What Gratitude do we not owe to Heaven, and the worthy Major, for your Deliverance! To the one we can make no Return, but in PraiSe; but for the other — Spare me a little, dear Madam, faid I, interrupting her ^ after what I have fuffered — I guefs what you would fay. I hope, faid flie, you can have no Objections — if you have any Gratitude, you ought not,
I would not give you Pain-------
but, after fuch Proofs as you have had of this Gentleman’s Good-nefs, I Should imagine the Subject would not be difagreeable. Oh Madam, faid I, fighing, it ought' not ; but, alas! it is So, nevertheless ,


6a T he history of
thelefs. My Mother looked dif-pleaSed. I had hopes, Lucinda^ laid She, from your good Senfe, and the Education I had given you, that I Should not have been difappointed, Avhen I flattered myfelf you would act above the Foibles of the weak Part of your Sex : — but I find myfelf miflaken hardly any one can be lefs tractable, or lefs confiderate
of
their real Welfai
You have
, /
not one juft Objection to make to this Gentleman, and yet you dif-obey your Parents, and refift your own Happinefs, only to indulge a perverfe HumourBut you had better yield with a good Grace; Since your Father is now, more than ever, determined.. I biirft
into


Miss Lucinda Courtney. 65 into Tears, -r- My Mother Seemed
to be moved.	*
My dear Child, faid She, embracing me, why will you oblige me to act againfi my Nature ? I cannot bear to fee you weep. I wifh your Happinefs more than my own: But, indeed, I mull think you to blame, in regard to this worthy Man. Ah, Madam, faid I, can I love him, becaufe I am defired to do fo or, becaufe I ought} I fear, anfwered file, you have formed wrong Notions of Love. Can you refufe your Efleem to his Merits ? or can you have any Averfion to a Man that is ■ perfectly agreeabl If not, what Objection can you
have I hope, Lucindat you have
not
\
6 ^
66 The HISTORY of
I U
not
wronged
{
my Friendfliip fol far as to engage your AffectionSi
a:
without my Knowledge — fuch a| ]\
I
Behaviour, fuch a Referve to me,j would be ungrateful; fince I have 1( accuftomed you to treat me with the Freedom of a Friend, rather than with the diftant Character of
a
Daughter
and yet, I fear
you have not availed yourfelf of this Indulgence; elfe, to what can I attribute your unaccountable Averlion to this Marriage! (looking fledfaftly at me while file fpoke)
n
I blufhed
You
' confefs it then. Said flie ^ O, Lu-dnda / have I deferved this Referve	You wrong me, dear Ma-
dam, faid I, in fome Confufion; I blufh to be fufpected. But, believe
c
1

p
ID
Ilfl
icli
llJ
wii

Si
11
d
it
I >1
Miss Luc iNDA Courtney. 67
lieve me, it was not Preference to another, that made me refufe the Major, but an unconquerable fome--thhtgj that will not fuffer me to love him. I Ihould be forr}^ to ac-cufe you wrongfully, faid fhe j as I wifh to find you, what I have alw^ays thought you — above Dif-guife: But you muff try to get the better of your Difgufl. — Remember the Duty you owe your Pa-
%
rents, and the Danger you are, and have been, expofed to. You will be guarded from all Such Attempts when you become his Wife.
I made no Anfwer but with my Tears. My dear Mother was endeavouring to confole me, when a Servant came to inform us my Father deSired our Company. I
wiped

68 The HISTORY of

wiped my Eyes. Put on a morelh
chearful Countenance, Said m)|/K
Mother
take Care you do notlP
exaSperate Mr. Courtney, already fc
diSpleafed, and out of Humour] H
at your late unhappy Adventure]!
Oh, Madam, Said I, but I onlyh
Suffer for ail — yet I will try toj t
obey you. So faying, we went
down, my Feet hardly able to
Support me.

My Father was {landing with
his Face to the Door, waiting for
our. coming
What continual
■%
Trouble do you bring upon me!
faid he, with an angry Look,
when I • entered the Room. - I
am forry for it. Said I; but, alas!
Sir, my Crimes are involuntary.
V/ell, vvelh.Daid he, may be fo;
but
01 Miss Lucinda Courtney
69
2rbut let the Remedy^ then, be vo-'^iAuntary — You have it. in your Power to prevent any Uriealinefs
:for the futurethe heft of Men 'Ifill thinks you worthy of him. I hope. Sir, faid I, I have done hmothing .that Should make him think otherwise.^ Do not be pert. Said he, frowning; I did not fend ;for you to hear you talk, but -to
V
tii
I
*
fei:
teach
you
how to act. I hdve

again given my Promife that you fhall be his; it remains, therein fore, only, that you fliould freely
%
IS confent to your own Happinefs. Li He was filent, and fo was I.
Why do you not fpeak } faid he j or am I to take your Silence for
Oil
Confent ?
Alas ! Sir, faid I;


(Tears, in fpite of my Endea-
vours,
The hist ORY of
vours, in my Eyes) what can ij fay ? I fear you are not to k\
moved. Moved ! faid he, flernly,| what does the Girl mean f Eiit
: I cannot bear to fe?
be
gone
any one look fo like a Fool, witli your Ahs! Tears, and theatrical! Airs—Go out of my Prefence, foi
Heaven’s Sake; I cannot endure
%
the Sight of you.—Your Mothei and I can fettle every thing, without your Affiflance. —You have only, Madam, to keep that fame rueful Face till next Week—it will become you very well at the Altar, where it may pafs for Modefy, and need be no Impediment to your faying, I will—which is that is required of you.
I Sa\^'

Miss Lucinda Courtney.
71
I Saw it was in vain to reinon-fcrate againfl: his Cruelty 5 fo, making a CourteSy, I retired.
And now, my Friend, who is fo miserable as your Lucinda ?
‘ Muff I, at laft. Oh, Conjlantia! muft I, at laft,. be the Wife of
r •
a Man I hate ?
There is no
%
Remedy — Be it fo, then. This
Life, it is faid, is fhort alas !
how long
but,
has been, and will be, my Mifery ! Next Week, the dreaded next Week,
I I -t >
I •
(*
will put an End to all the Joys of this Life, except your FriendSnip let me never be deprived of that, or I Shall fink under the Weight of my Sorrows.—I can
Farewell then all Thoughts of the lovely Mc?n~
tague-
write no more
72 The. HISTORY op
tague—they will foon be criminal. Adieu.
TIueCday.
My
fatal
let me not name it.
I have no Companion but my Sorrow — even my dear Mother is cruelly bufy on this dreadful Oc-cafion. The Major is here continually, fo full of infulting Joy !
Oh! my Fiiend, how little does he know what love is !
If. he did, could he be happy, while the Object of his Affec-tions is in Mifery ? No; Love is a noble, difmterefled Paflion, which feeks the Happinefs of the Perfon beloved, more than the Gratification of itSelf. Such is mine
for
'Miss Lucinda Courtney.
73
for the amiable Montague, but what this Man calls So, is all Seififh.
I fee him as Seldom as I can; and, when I do, am filent to all his affected Raptures. Let him entertain my Father with them, fiiice, to his Authority alone, he owes my Confent. Confent did I call it? Alas! that Shall never be — but let them do as they will with me, fince I am' in their Power. I will try, however, if I can prevail on this man to procure me a little more Time*----
\
Next Week! — Good Heaven! it
is impoflible!
I fee him coming — I will fpeak to him on the Subject, though I
VoL. IL
E
detect


74
The history of
\
detest the Thoughts of being obliged to him.
He has, reluctantly, granted my Request; accufes me of Cruelty; but, stnce I defire it> will fpeak to my Father for me. If he procures me a Repiieve, I wall pafs the bleffed Interval with
my
dear - Mrs.
m
the
Country:^ Her Nephew is not to be there, dr I would not think of going. The Major is now with my Father —- Heaven grant
Eloquence on this
a
Occafion! -
' I am Sent for
In
a Momestt I Shall know my Fate. The Major took my
I
Room.
I
have
nevy
m/
upon Mr. Court-adorable Lucinddy Said he,
to
k /•
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 75
to grant your Request—one night longei' is my Happinefs to be deferred. I curtsted my Thanks, not daring to lift my Eyes to my Father.
You yield too much to the Caprice of this Girl, faid he s but, take your own way — She will foon be yours. So guide her as you pleafe. May fhe study to be a more obliging Wife, than fhe has been a Daughter.
Forgive me. Sir, faid I; ’tis but in this one Affair that I have ever ventured to oppofe your Will. And this, replied he, is the only Thing in which I ever put your Obedience to the Test. But no more of it; your Marriage, at the Requeji of the Major,
E 2	(he
76 The HISTORY of
*
(he Spoke this with an ironical Air) is deferred a Fortnight lon-
LOt want to force you
Oh! Mifs Court-
geri
upon
nefy i
him.
Mai
%
proof have I incurred, by endeavouring, againfl myfelf, to oblige
you
I
Heaven knows with what
Eagernefs I long for the Happi-nefs of calling you mine—but 1 facrifice my Impatience to your Pleafure—nor fhould I regret this Self-denial, if, after this flrong Proof of my Love, my dear Lucinda would confent to blefs
me without Reluctance.
For-
give my Petulance, faid my Father ; but the Perverfenefs of this Creature will not fuffer me to keep the Command of my
T eruper.
gain
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 77
Temper. Go, continued he, turning to me, your Prefence is no longer necefSaiy. — I curtSied to the Major, and gladly obeyed him. And now, my dear Friend, I have only one more Point to ; that is. Leave to go to Mrs. Williams smuff: try what I can do with my Mother. I fear they will object to my going from Home — perhaps they will
think I have found forae Scheme
A'
to elope from their Cruelty — but they need not, I know my Duty better. — But here comes my Mother.
What is the Reafon, Lucmda^, faid Ihe, your Father is again dif-pleafed with you Can you blame me. Madam, anfwered I, for
E 3	endea-
V
7
The history of
endeavouring to defer my Mifery as long as I can
I
fhe; really, Lucinda^ you talk very unaccountably: I fee you
m
at
to nothing but what is for your Good : but, allowing it to be otherwise, why not confent
, as well as laft F You intend to be the Wife of this Gentleman, and why not at our Time as well as your own f — but be-eaufe you wifh to be perverfe. Ah, Madam, faid I, weeping, I fee I have loft your Friendship, too—you are become as cruel as my Fatheryet, what have I not done, or, rather, what am I
not going to do, to oblige' you.^ Is it fo great a crime to put off
the evil Day as long as I can?
To
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 79
To whom Shall I fly, if you for-fake me ? ForSake you, my dear Child, Said She, embracing me; do not talk fo wildly: you don't know how I love you, nor what Pain I feel to fee you thus afflict yourfelf. Ah, Madam, Said I but I will not blame you for what
has happened — my Father is de-fpotick. But will your Goodnefs grant me one thing which is yet in your Power ? What is there in my Power, anfwered She, that I will not grant, confiftent with the
your
?
Father and
Only this.
your Happinefs i
dear Madam : Permit me, for
(
this one happy F'ortnight that I am reprieved, to leave this Houfe. This Hoiife, that once was the
E 4
Sphere

8o The HISTORY of
Sphere of all my Joys, is now become irkfome ta me, by the continual Prefence of the Man who has caufed all my Mifeiy.
Mr
s
(Viiliams has often inwted
nor
me to fpend fome Time with her in the Country; permit me to ac-cept her Invitation — When I return, I will try to obey you.
I fear, Lucinda, Said She, your Father will never confent do I approve of it. Why fhould you wdfh to be abfent from one with whom you are to pafs your Days ? You ought, rather, to take every Opportunity of being with him, that you may reconcile yourfelf to him, and be better acquainted with his Merits. Dear
Madam, Said I, it does not require
Miss Lucinda Courtney.
quire long Time to find them out} they are not So numerous. I know enough-—far more than
enough of him already.
Very
well, faid fhe; do as you pleafe. Then, paufing — Is Mr. Mo/t~ tague to be of the Party ? Said fhe,. looking at me. I blufhed, in Spite of mySelf. How now, Lu-cindat faid fhe, why this tion, at my naming this Gentle-manIs it pofiible — but I cannot think you would fo far deceive me. Indeed, I would not,, anSwered I y that Gentleman is nothing to rhe, nor fhould I think of going, if he was to be there. Why not, replied fhe.
he is indifferent to you ? — Tell me, Lucinda, is he. not more
E 5,
efleemed
82 The HISTORY of
efteemed than he ought to be?
You bluflied, when I mentioned
him r and now I recollect fome
Things in your Behaviour that
make me fear for your Heart
vet, I hope I am miftaken. Ef-
teem him more than I ought!
fear for my Heart! — Dear Ma-
dam, you amaze me! But, be-
lieve me, you need be in no Pm
on his Account
he can be no-
thing to me. But do you
ijh
he could ^ Said She. Spare me.
Madam, when I again af-
fure you, he can be nothing to
me. Ah I Lucinda, Said She,
fhaking her Head, you have not
been quite So frank on this Sub-
every
II
ufed to admire your OpenneSs of
Heart
f
Mi s s L irc in d a Cau r t n e y . 8 j
jjeart—but I do not Seek to know your Secrets. Secrets! dear Madam, Said I, you wrong, me,, if
you
I have any.
I ac-
knowledge, I think him one of the moft amiable of his Sex but what of that ? Sure I may admire him, without being in Love I hope you can, anfwered
but
no more
of
my Mother i him ; you fay he is not to be at Mrs. Williams S', I hope you are prudent enough not to wifh he fhould: Your Admiration may eafily be converted into warmer Sentiments. Do not think meanly of me. Madam, faid Ibut if you dare not trufi to my Difcre** tion, let me flay at Home and be
wretched — I fubmit,. Not if I
E 6.
can
84 The HISTORY of
can help it, faid fhe; I will mention your Request to Mr. Court-
nej, and try to gain his Confent you Shall leave this detefled Houfe—Once my Lucinda thought no Place So, where I w^as — but,
• 4
no Matter. I was going to reply,
but fhe left the Room immedia-
..
ately.
How Sorry am I to have incurred her DiSpleafure ! She is the beSt of Mothers! Never did She give me one Moment’s Pain, till
this abominable Man came to Sow
> . *
Difcord amongft us — however,, I have Hopes flie will procure my Father’s Confent—I long to leave this Place but, alas! it is myfelf I muff: fly from, if I hope to be at Peace.
A Servant
Miss Lucinda Courtney.
3
A Servant has informed me
that I have Leave to go
My
Mother did not deign to inform me herfelf—but I cannot help it. To-morrow, if Heaven permit, I will be with my dear Mrs. Wil--Hams.—Adieu, I go to pack up my Cloaths for my little Journey. I will write to you from Hamp--(lead.
Monday.,
I am fafely arrived at the fweet
Habitation of my dear Mrs. WiL
Hams. My Father parted with
me in Difpleafure, but my dear
Mother embraced me very kindly. The Major, too, took his Leave, after conjuring me to haflen my
Return, faying,, he Should only
breathe.
f
8d
H
breathe, not live, till he Saw me
. And I, on the contrary,,
muff: make the moft of this little
%
Fortnight, which is all that I fhall think worthy to be ranked
my Ex.-^
among the Days istence,
Mrs. WilHaniSy wh Situation, omits nothing in her Power to amufe me. I am fond
knows
of Reading,
W alking, but
fhe endeavours to divert my Melancholy, by her fenSible and en~ gaging Converfation, and a Variety of Company ,* for there is a
N eighbourhood,	who
vifit her, without Ceremony.
Amongft the reft, and the mofl
*. •
agreeable of them, is a Merchant’s Family, of the Name of
P ranklin.-
.1
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 8
/
one
Son and a Daughter.
Prmklin. Mr. Franklin is extremely rich, is retired from Bufr nefs, and fpends, his Fortune freely, and with Elegance. He is of a mofl chearful Difpofition,, as well as his Lady ; has only
The
young Gentleman, indeed, is not very bright, but good-natured: a little noify now and then.. His Sifter is a very pretty, little Woman, full of Life and Spirits. She has taken a great Liking to me, as fhe fays, and I am /
no lefa pleafed with her Company.
She came running in this Morning, her Guitar in her Hand. I was- mufing, in a melancholy Mood, when fhe entered
the
\,
SS The HISTORY of
the R oom. Hey day. Said fhe,, what’s the Matter with you, my Dear.? Why you look like the Picture of Heigh-ho. — Let me die if I don’t believe you are in Love ! — Come, tell me directly You know we are to be violent Friends,, and Female Friendship cannot fubfiSl without Secrets ; So
out with them. But, come,.
*
added fhe, I will Set you the Example. So faying, fhe took a Chair, and putting on ain affected Gravity, fhe began. You muff: know, I too have been in Love 111 tell you how it was. I went to an Affembly, and danced with
amazing pretty Fellow,,
and he — Squeezed my Hand,
and.
talked
a
played with my Fan,
2
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 89
talked — Oh, my Dear, it would have done your Heart Good to have heard him 1 But the vile Fiddles made fuch a Noife, I did not know a Word he Said.
But it was very fine, very Toft, and all that. In Short, I talked of him, thought of him, and Sometimes dreamt of him. Now this, you know, was the very Qiiinteffence of Love, and not to be borne. Now what do you think, I did ? Really, faid I,
Smiling, I cannot guefs. — I’ll tell you then, faid She. Finding I could not get the better of it —- I went to another Affembly, and, Ilap-daSh, fell in Love with four
more. Unconfcionable! faid I,
.»
laughing j but what then } What
then !
\
90 The. history of
then! replied She; why I Set them all together by the Ears in my Heart, I mean — and there was the prettied: Civil War you ever heard of. Black eyes againft white Teeth, fine Speeches againlf Sword Knots, and laced Cloaths againfl dirty Acres; and fo they fought it out, and in a little Time they deflroyed one another, not leaving one alive to cry Victory,
and then I was m
again
And all this was begun, carried on, and ended in lefs than a Fortnight.
A mod: notable Scheme, Said I,
diverted with her Sprightlinels. Was it not Said fhe; and let me
tell you, it is the only Way of
«
dealing with the dear Wretches
fo
f
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 91
So Speak quickly, if you are infected with this Same deadly Difeafe, and 111 undertake to cure you. Ill pick out a Champion for this harmlefs Battle, and my Brother Shall be the Man: He doats upon you already. — Now, you may fet his Wit againfl your present Lover’s Cockade, if he is an Officer} or if not, againSI any other Trifle of equal Value. A pretty favourable this, for your Brother, faid I; I’ll tell him, next Time I fee him, that you may receive his Thanks. Do fo, my Dear, faid Slie ^ for I am not often favoured with them ; but we will polish him between us. Well, returned I, but do you know that your
92 The HISTORY of
will be loft upon me, and that you have miftaken my Diftemper ? Have I ? faid fhe; but no Matter, it will not be loft; for Love is like the Small-pox; we all feel it fome Time or other, more or lefs; fo treafure it up in your Memory, and apply it when affected. But what is the Matter with you, then ? — Only a Fit of the
fine Lady, troubled with the Vapours, I fuppofe: if fo, fpeak, here is Harmony to revive you.. So faying, fhe played a Sprightly Air on the Guitar.
Mrs. Williams came in Soon after. Where have you been} faid Mifs ErankUuy as foon as fhe
faw her.
A fine Piece of Work
I have had with this Sweet GirL
I found
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 93
I found her, like a Turtle, left alone — to droop and mourn the Abfence of her Mate. When I came in. She was over Head and Ears in the Hips, on the Brink of being converted into a Tea-Pot ; and here have I, like another Davidy been playing on the Harp, to drive away the evil
Spirit
Have I Succeeded, my
Dear ? turning to me.
Moft
admirably, faid I : you have a moll effectual Charm to difpel Melancholy. It is my principal Study, anfwered fhe : I hate that Fiend, and never Suffer him to keep Poffeffion of me, nor of any Perfon elfe, if I can help it. Your Fate mufl have been uncommonly fortunate, faid I, if
you
The history of
you have been always able to keep your Self free from it. Fortunate ! cried flie; why, yes upon the whole it has been well enough; but our Happinefs, you know, depends greatly upon the Imagination. —- But come, I die to hear you play, and had almoft forgot I came for that very De-fign. My Brother Swears he ■would as Soon liflen to a Jew’s-Harp, as to hear me touch the Guitar; fince he was, as he fays, raviflied with the harmonious Sounds you made it yield. He
ran on for an Hour about it, till I was almoft convinced that you
could not play at all : for, between you and I, he has no more Ear than a Block. But come,
let

Miss Lucinda Courtney. 95
%
let us hear, my Deai\ If he had not praifed you fo much, I Should have had no Doubt of your excelling in this, as well as every
% S'	^
Thing elfe. I bowed, and played a Scotifh Tune, the Words of which, I remember, you was very fond of, and often made me fing in thofe happy Days of undifturb-ed Repofe we Sweetly palled together.
Mils Eranklin exprelfed her Approbation in high Terms.
not the Company of a Woman that is a Singer, fays Somebody, I forgot who j but he was a Shrev^^d Fellow, I’ll warrant him. I am determined to mark down Place for the Ufe of my Brother;
for if he hears, he dies. But
how
o6
The history of

how amazingly Swift Time flies away in agreeable Company ! See here, my Dear; I protefl it is paft One; and our Family, like true Cits, ftudy their Appetite more than the Fafliion, and dine
at two o’clock—Adieu
I Shall
hardly have Time to decorate mySelf before Dinner; but, remember you are to teach me that Sweet Song---------
How is it ?
No
‘‘ Hear me, ye Nymphs” Ceremony—So Saying, fhe tripped away, leaving her Guitar, and one of her Gloves, behind her.
What a happy Creature is this! Said I to Mrs. Williams; what would I give for Some of her Spirits, to carry me through my
Difficulties! She is too volatile
to
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 97
to have much SenSibiiitv — would I had lefs ! You ought not to widi So, my Dear, Said She; it would deprive you of a great deal of Pleafure. So would it of a great deal of Pain too, an-fwered I.
We had juft dined, when a
Note was delivered to me from Mifs ErankUn. —I trailfcribe it for you, to Shew you her Manner of W riting.
Lo Mifs Courtney.
Muft not be refufed — fo put
your Work in your Pocket,
and let me fee you this Afternoon ; and that for two Reafons :
Firft, to oblige me; and, next.
VoL. If.
F
to

98 The HISTORY of
to divert yourfelf — for we are to have fuch a Vifitor ! — But, walk | in. Ladies, and fee the Raree-Shov/. Now, don’t let your Imagination run away with you, and prefent you with fome pretty Fellow, whom you are to come to fee, and conquer. No, no quite a different Kind of Being is this I mean to prefent to you. "ris a middle-aged Damtel, plump
and well-favoured, and one of
thofe People called Methodiffs; retired here, good Soul, from the wicked World: armed with
Stores of Prayers,
Morning;
Noon, and Night, and an into-
Quanti
which
hie displays in railing againft the
and Vanity of Caps,
Ruffles,
Miss Lucinda Courtney
Ruffles, and Furbelows.
99
- She
hvears — fays, I mean, that my Drefs is all finful, from my Shoe •to my Top-knot: And I ’ll en-
gage
Ihe ’ll
find her righteous
Spirit moved, as Soon as fhe fees you. Your Beauty will make her lift up her Hands and Eyes, to blefs her precious Stars flie is not handfome ! Pray, come; for you muff be diverted with Such an Original. As foon as the Note was read, which promised us the inexpreffible Pleasure of feeing her, up rofe my
Brother, with Such Precipitation, that he overfet a Glafs of
Wine that flood before him, and flew to his Hat 5 but I was as quick in my Motions as he;
F 2	and,
100 The HISTORY op
» ^
and. Seizing his Arm, Where So faff. Squire faid I; you are as nimble as if you had burnt your-felf. But you don’t efcape me So. No, No; I remember you was much the better for the laid Lee-ture this good Lady re^d you; and, pleafe Heaven, yoteflialHfay and have another. Come, come, fit dovvTi like a' good Boy : do not be difeouraged^ we fliall make fbmething of you amongft us. He Struggled, but I held him faff. My Father laughed. You are not Strong enough, Clara, Said he, to keep him by Force; why do not you ufe Policy ? If you
tell him Mrs. Williams and Mifs CoutAney are to be here, you will make him tractable in a Moment.
Faith,
Miss Lucinda Courtney, ioi
Faith, Sir, faid my Brother, you have found out my weak Side : Bring that dear Creature here, and I fliall be as eafily made a
when Well,
Prisoner, as Samfon was.
his L
1
Ci ^ It q
KL ^ jLx C)
vvTre Shorn.
Said I, I will try if your Delilah will come j but remember, not
Sake
3.S
my
almoft forttot
/ O
o
So much for your own. So, pray oblige me, dear Courtney, and Mrs. JVilliams too j for I die to fee you. —- Oh ! I had
I left my Guitar
%
with you this Morning. — Be fo good, dear Mrs. Williams, as to let your Servant bring it j for we Shall want a little Harmony as, I am Sure, the Saint will put us
How is the pretty 111 tell how Peggy
but of
i une.
Song i
?
I
3
grieves
102 The HISTO RY of
grieves me.
I cannot get it out
I
of my Head. — Heavens! what a, Length of Scrawl is here ! Yet I only meant to tell you we begged the PleaSure of feeing you, and that
Yours, unfeignedly,
I am
Clara Franklin.
Do you know this remarkable ' Lady? Said I to, Mrs. Willianu. Yes, faid ihe, I have Seen her, and think her, indeed, too re-markable. Nothing gives me more Pain, than to fee Religion cloathed in the Garb of Folly. I was always againfl nick-naming any Se61, however, in Some Things, they might appear ridiculous. Religion, in every Form, demands our Refpect. I doubt
not
i
r
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 103
not but, amongfl the People the World calls Methodifls, there are many eminent Chriftians : I myfelf have known Some diftin-guillied by their unaffected Piety } and the fenfible Sort of their own Party allow, that there are many too apt to run into a foolifh Singularity, mixing their own fan-dful Notions with the moft aweful and important Truths, which
their Preachers, with exemplary
%
Care and Affiduity, enforce. But this good Lady is quite , an En-thufiaPc—She talks of nothing but inward Feelings — and immediate Revelations from Heaven. She was once fond of Gaiety, particularly in DreSs; 'but is now as
t
much on the other Extreme; as.
F 4
if
ro4 The HISTORY or
if Piety confifted in fuch Trifles. Yet, I would not, as many are
ft
too ready to do, fufpect dier of
Wan
Hypocrify Charity: I hope, nay, believe, fhe means ■ well j and, in Some Things, is worthy Imitation. — But you will judge for yourfelf; I forget you are going to lee her, I am not the lefs obliged to you, Said I, for helping me to form a
right J
lure.
of her. I
am
however. Mils Franklin will be mistaken, in thinking I lhall be pleafed. I take no De-
in
feeing
any
one
make
light
themfelves ridiculous. Yet we will go, if it is agreeable to you j Since they are too obliging to be re-fufed, I have a Letter to linifli,
if
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 105
if you will give me Leave; I Shall have done writing, before it is Time for our Vifit.
/
Thus, my dear Coitflantta, do !■ endeavour to amufe myfelf, by Diffipation; but, alas ! I cannot
forget
that
every
Hour
brings
me nearer to the dreaded Time of my returning Home. This Reflection hangs like a Weight
i
Upon my Heart, and keeps down every Pleafure. I have not yet dared to mention Mr. Montague I mufl not truft myfelf on this
f	‘
Subject.—I wonder Mrs. Williams never fpeaks of him — but, I believe fhe means nothing by her Silence.-----
----No Matter—I ought
not to think of him—and, that -I may not be led to mention
F 5	him
io6 The HISTORY of
him again, I lay down my Pen.
Adieu.
This teazing Man—young Mr.
Franklin I mean — Satigues me
with his OfficiouSnefs : So full of
Compliment, and, v/hat he thinks.
fine Speeches, that I am perfectly
fick. If my Mind was more at
Eafe, his Oddity might, perhaps,
amufe me
Spirits to flem the Torrent of his
Impertinence. His Sifter enjoys

my Embarraflment, and, hyaffest-
ing to manage him for me, makes
liim pefter me the more. Yet,
I am Sure he means nothing but
to ftiew his Gallantry j and llie
only v/ifties to divert me. But I
forget; you will, perhaps, be cu-
Mrs
/ I *
i
I

but I have not now •
i
T
Miss LucindA CotiRTNEY. 107
Purefaith, the religious Lady. Really, my Dear, I found more Inclination to cry than to laugh; for fhe railed So furioufly againfl every Pleafure in this Life, and represented the Terrors of the next in fach dreadful Colours, that I
was quite
frightened.
If all are
%
excluded from Heaven that her Zeal has fhut the Door againfl, I think there v/ill be none but her-felf, and a few of her Select Friend^ admitted.
Mifs Eranklin behaved with Such arch Gravity, and now and then afked her Such out of the way Queflions, that it was impoffible to keep one’s .Countenance. After a good deal of Difcourfe, young Franklin whifpered me, Do,
F 6
dear
io8 The H I S T O Pv Y of
dear MlSs, favour me with
Air on the Guitar
If
an
my
Eyes had not your charming Face to gaze at, I fwear they would clofe themfelves in Sleep,
got
in fpite of Politenefs. He up and gave it me. I made, fome Excufes, but was forced to
play.
Mrs. Pure faith primmed
up her Mouth, fixed her Eyes on 'the Cieling, and remained Si-
e
lent, while the reft of the Com-
■ i
9
pany thought proper to beflow on me a great many undeferved En-
V
comiums.
MTat are you thinking of ? faid Mifs Franklin, tapping her on the Shoulder. Come, you may open your Ears, and unikrew
your Face, the profane Song is.
over^:
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 109
over; and now, at the End of
the Voluntary, you may begin
your Sermon. Let’s have a Lee-•/
ture againSl: Matrimony; I know you think it a very carnal Infti-' tution, fo give me Some Arguments againll it, for I have lately had Some Temptation to commit it. She ftill remained li-
*
lent.
Fye, Mifs Eranklhi, faid I; the Lady is juftly offended at your fuppofmg flie would call that a Sin which is of divine In-
ftitution.
Nay,
replied Mifs
PranIlin, I Swear I have heard her fay fo often. Very true, an-fwered Mrs. Purefmth, . I do think it a little inconfiifent with the Self-denial a true Chriffian
ought

I 10
The history of
ought to practise. Very well,
young Gentleman,
Said
the
laughing; this is a pretty' free
Confeffion. It cotes you no Small
%
Pains then, I find, to continue teill in your Virgin State. Matrimony is much obliged to you for the Compliment you have paid it. Laugh on. Said flie, the Mirth of Fools is like the crackling of Thorns, the
9
will Soon be over.
I began to be tired of the Vi-Sit,. and endeavoured to expreSs it in a Look to Mrs. Willtatnsy die underteood me, and roSe to take
her Leave. We were prefSed to flay longer — MiSs ErankUn pro-
a Walk, as the Evening was delightful. This was agreed
to
Miss Lucinda Courtney, iil
to by all but Mrs
refaith
who went Home. I wiSli I had done So too 5 for Mr. Franklin took this Opportunity to difplay his Gallantry, and torment me. I was glad when I found myfelf
once more in Peace at Mrs. VAl-
\
hams Sy where I immediately betook myfelf to my Pen, which
always conveys a real Pieafure, when employed in writing to my
Oh, my Friend ! in a few Days more, what a dreadful Scene fhal I be engaged in! How Shall I avoid it ? Alas! it is inevitable i
Mrs. Williams fends for me-------
Slipper is on the Table for this-Night.
O
Friday
I J2
The history
OF
F
rj
0^
Poor Mr. Montague
naay
You
are
amazed, and afk what of
him ?-------I’ll tell you, then, my
Friend. We had jute done Dinner, when ,a Servant brought a Letter for Mrs. V/illiams. She
the Direction — From
— with
clL
looked
my Nephew, faid Ihej your Leave, I’ll read it.—I am impatient to know how he is. 1 bowed, my Heart fluttering with Emotion at the Sound of his dear Name, Tacked with Curio-fity to know the Contents.
When She had finiflied reading it, Alas! my
Mr. Mont a-
gu
^ y
faid fire, how much am I
affected with your Situation! I
could
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 113
could contain myfelf no longer,
but, with a trembling Accent, hoped no Misfortune had befallen him — I am obliged to %
you, my Dear, faid fhe, for the kind Concern you exprefs, and yet the more than common Admiration and Efleem he has for
you
demands fome little Return.
He is not happy, Mlfs Courtney^ faid fhe, ’tho’, if Merit could give a Claim to it, none can have a jufter Title than himfelf; fince, without Partiality, I think there cannot be a more noble, a more generous Mind, than his; fo tenderly fenfible of the Dihrelles .of others 1 But why am I dw^ell-ing on his Perfections, while you are, perhaps, curious to know ]
the
114 The HISTORY op
t
the Reafon of his UnhappineSs] 1 am, indeed. Said I, with Impatience, defirous to know his Situation, if it is agreeable to you to reveal it — I v/ould not be impertinently inquifitive—-I flopped,
longing to put an End to all farther Preface.
Mrs. IVilliams obligingly began. It will be neceffary, faid fhe, to fay Something of his Family, in order to make you the better acquainted with his Story, Vv^hich, however, has nothing extraordinary in it, fo don’t raife your Expectations too high.
My Brother, Mr. Montagues Father, the youngefl Son of Sir William Montague, belonged to the Navy, where, having diflin-
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 115
euiSlied himSelf in the Service of
D
his Country, he obtained the
Command of a Man
of
Wa

and made a genteel Fortune, which was aftei^wards augmented,
fettling in the Indies, at the Conclufion of the Peace:
by hi
0

There he married a Lady of great Merit, by whom he had a Son
and
Daughter :
The Son, at
Twelve Years of Age, he fent over to England for his Education, and did me the Favour to cornmit him to my Care; a Trufl
I undertook with great Pleafure, not doubting but the
young Gentleman would more
i
than anfwer the fondeft Willies of his Parents : For, young as he was, the Gracefulnefs of his
Perfon,
ii6 The HISTORY op
gave the moil happy PreSages of
difappointed us in.
As I had no Children of my
tion of a Paren
After fome Stay with us, he was
fent to the Univerfity, where he
made an uncommon Progrefs in
his Studies, and was univerfally
admired, for the Brightnefs of his
Genius.
His Father, impatient to fee
him, wrote frequently for him to
return, but his Fondnefs for his
Studies made him frame ExcuSes
and
I
Perfon, the fprightly Vivacity of a
his Manner, and, above all, the f
amiable^ Sweetnefs of his Temper, I I
1
what his maturer Years have not I c
i
own, I felt for hirh all the Affec- I 1
nor was he ^
lefs beloved by Mr. Williams 1 ^

J

Miss Lucinda Courtney. 117
V
and Pelays, though in the mofl Submiffive and dutiful Manner, However, Mr. Montague^ find-
ing himfelf in a declining
State
of Health, informed his Son of it, and commanded his Prefence.
You may believe the young Gentleman was not backward to obey the Summons, when he
heard of his Father’s Illnefs. He
#
was filled with the moft painful Apprehenfions, left he fliould never more fee his indulgent Parent, and now condemned himfelf, for having (though from a laudable Motive) fo long denied
Every
himfelf that Happinefs. thing was fbon got ready for his Voyage, and he took Leave of me in the moft tender Manner.
For
Ii8 The HIST ORY ,of
For' my Part, I cannot exprefs •the Grief I felt for his Lofs, fo much had his amiable Qualities endeared him to me.
After about three Years Ab-fence, land. -
«
he acain returned to
^ 6
------I will, as briefly a
pofTible, relate what . happened to him during his Abfence, as lie informed me of it, on his Arrival.
Vvhen he got to the Indies, he found his Father in a very declining Way; but the. Sight of his beloved Son, fo much improved in Perfon and Mind,, produced fuch a happy Change in him, that, for fome Time, they had Flopes of his Recovery. Nothing could equal the Felicity of
this
1
le
y
a'
Miss Lucinda Courtney, ho
this amiable Family, till Mr.
again relap fed, and
Mo n fag It e
his	Illnefs again	attacked	him
with double Violence. I will not	attempt to	defcribe	their
Grief j you may judge of the Excels of it, from the Harmony that reigned amongll	them.	Never
e| was there more indulgent Parents, or more grateful and affectionate Children. Mr. Montague hardly
ever left his Father’s Bed-fide,
^	\
though his agreeable Company
of I was univerfally fought, by the
Gentlemen of the
Neighbour-
0*1 hood; nor was he lefs admired
B
in| by the Ladies, as I have been in-lejl formed, by thofe Vvdio came from io-| that Part of the World; where, ofl they fay, his Humanity and other bisl	Accomplifir-
120 The history
OF
Accomplishments, are flill talked of with high Encomiums — But I grow too prolix on this pleaSing Subject, which is rather foreign to the Purpofe of my Story—I
111	all tire you. Not at all, dear
%
Madam, cried I, he merits all you can fay in his Favour. 1 bluShed at the Earneidnefs witli which I Spoke this, but, happily, Mrs. Williams did not look at me, but went on v/ith her Relation. .
One Day, when there vv^as Nobody in the Room with Mr, Montague, but his Son, he drew I J back the Curtains, and looking at him, for fome Moments; I 1 fliall die in Peace, my dear < Hany, Said he. Satisfied witli
- '	■	the
Miss Lucinba Cour
\
the repeated Proofs you have
me of your dutiful Af-
nothing, but
given fedion: I
m
that your Education (which yet , has amply repaid my Pains, and more than anfwered my Expectations) Should So long have deprived me of the Pleafure of having you with me : but Heaven’s Will be done! To have lived longer, and Seen the Pro-greSs 'of thofe Perfections which give Hopes of your being an Ornament to a Family (which yet can boafl its Antiquity, and the Names of a great Number of worthy Progenitors) would have been more Hapninefs than
\

we
ought to expect in this Life. It
that. I have, though
it
IS enough VoL. II
G
for
122 The history of
for a fliort Time, enjoyed all that a fond Parent could wifii
4
for, and am able to leave you a Fortune that will make you, and, by your Means, others happy. He paufed through Weaknefs.
could not anfwer
Mr. Montague
for his Senfibihty — His Father refumed.
Oh that I could have feen
you
married to a Woman worthy of you! I fhould then have had nothing left to do but to lie dov/n in Peace; nothing elfe to vvifli for. This is an important Affair, my Son — nothing in this Life is of equal Confequence — a right or wrong Choice will either make Table
you
bleffed
or
mife-
there’s hardly any Medium
in
Miss-Lucinda Courtney. 12^
o
in that State. The Happiiiefs have tasted in it, makes me an
Advocat
6
for Mat I
1
wbuld not, indeed, have you pre-
cipitate
you are yet but young ;
though, I believe, if Gentlemen, whoSe Fortunes will permit it, would, fooner than they commonly do, fettle themfelves, by
marrying
Worn
would preferve them from many Vices, to which Freedom and Youth are fubject. But tell me, added he, fixing his Eyes on his Son’s Face; are you still Master of your Heait} Have you beeii able, amidst Such Numbers of lovely Worsen, as adorn my dear, native Country, to keep your Af-
feclions disengaged ? Believe me,
G 2	I have.
124 The HISTORY OF
I have. Sir, faid Mr. Montague', my Duty to you would not Suffer. me to engage in an Affair of that Nature, without your Approbation : Or, if an involuntary Pallion had taken Polfeffion
of me, I Should, at lealf, have informed you of it. But, indeed,
I had little Leifure for any thing
%
this kind, fince my Studies took up all my Attention.
i
I am much pleafed with this AlTurance, faid Mr. Montague,
fince I may now make a Propo-
«
fal in which my Heart is very much interested—but my Strength
----G o, my dear Harry,
_ r
or
fails me.
open that Eferutore, and you will there find Some Papers Sealed up, and directed for youwhich will
Save
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 125
Save me the Fatigue of talking. I will tfy to get Some Refl, while you read them, and hope I lhall find your Anfwer agreeable to my Willies.
Mr. Montague aroSe to obey his Father, and, with great Anxiety and Curiofity, fat down to the Defk, and opened the Writ-

ings, not without Some Appre-henfions that the Contents would give him Pain.
Oh, my dear Conjiantial thefe
. t
fatal Papers! I already guefs
(
their Purport.
Jult as Mrs. WilUams had got to this critical Part of her Story, Some Company, very unfeafonably,
broke in upon us. I was vexed at this. Interruption, and forced
G 3
to
126 The' HISTORY of
*
to retire,. for a few Moments, to compofe myfelf, before I could
think of
into Conver-
fation; and, after all, never was any body fo liftlefs and inatten-
tive. I die with Impatience to hear the Gonclufion of this Relation. After Supper, I muft get my dear Mrs. Williams to finifh <|i it—-—il Shall foon—too foon, be able to account for his Behaviour
------ But, adieu. I muft
go down now. I fhall write to you again, before I go to Bed.
to me
if} i^ ^	i^ ^	i^
I will now fulfil my Promife, and again fit down to my Pen. Indeed I have but little Inclination to deep.
I left
mg
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 127
I left Mr. Montague jull.open-the Papers, refumed Mrs. IVilliams; w here he read as follows: As my Life is uncertain, my dear Son, I think it necelSary to comitiit to Writing an Adventure

.that befel me, whilll you was in England; and the Confequence of which will (if you continue to have that dutiful Regard to my Requefls which, as yet, I never had Reafon to doubt) nearly concern you.
About two Years ago, as I was travelling through an. adjacent Foreff, with only one Servant, a Company of wild Indians, whether through Hopes of Booty, or the natural Averfion they have to Europeans,, fiercely
C 4
rufhed
128 The H 1 S T O RY OP
rufhed upon me : I Saw Refinance would be vain, as their
was So fuperior j yetj as I could expect no Quarter, I refolved to fell my Life as dear as poflible. Both myfelf and Servant were armed with Pilfols, which we immediately fired, and not without Execution. I then had Recourfe to my Sword, with which I defended myfelf for a
confiderable Tim

but F aint-
nefs, and the Number of my Enemies, began at last to overpower me, and I must inevitably have perifhed, but that Heaven was pleafed to interpofe in my
F avour.
Moment
thought my Death certain. A
Gentleman,
travelling
through
ss Lucinua Courtney, izg
N
through the Same Wood, heard the clalhing. of our Swords, and humanely Hew with his Servants to the Place where he found me„ Surrounded by the B^barians, and immediately came to my Affiftance, which he did in So valiant a Manner,, that the Indians
began to retire.
Hopes re-
vived at this timely Succour I exerted myfelf with redoubled
4
Spirits, and Saw, with Joy, eafier
to be
imagined
than expreffed, the Villains betake themfelves to Flight. I was, however, much wounded y but my generous De« liverer gave me all the AfTiflance in his Power y and,, with the; Help eS his Servants, bound, up my
Cr r Wounds*
0

130 The HISTORY of
Wounds, tearing their Linen to flop the bleeding.
Judge of my Gratitude, for fuch uncommon Services ! My noble Friend received my Thanks v/ith great Modefty, and declared himfelf highly pleafed with having had an Opportunity of giving a Proof of the Efleem he had long entertained for me.
I am a Stranger to you, Mr. Montague, Said he, but you are not So to me. Your Worth and Goodnefs are univerfally known. You have even conferred Favours on me, tho’ unknown to your-
felf
My Name is
I
then recollected I had once procured Juftice to be done to a Per-fon of that Name, againff an
Enemy,
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 131
Enemy, who had bafely wrong’d
him; but I did not rememben
• ever to have Seen him, as what I
, did v/as from a Love of Juftice,
and at the Inftigation. of a Per
fon who told me the Affair,
and gave To good a Character of
the injured, that I employed all
my Credit to fee his Grievance
redreffed: for which I afterwards
had his Thanks in a moft grateful
and polite. Letter.. But as. this
Affair happened Some Years be-
fore, I had hardly ever thought
of it, till , the Name of Bellamy
brought it to ro.y Remembrance.,
You may believe I now greatly
rejoiced at, the Knowledge of
ever having, been ferviceable to
him, which, though inconfidera
G 6
ble.

132 The HISTORY of
ble, had difcharged fome Part of
th
O
Debt of Gratitude, which
yet no Time nor Endeavours will be able to pay.
As this Gentleman’s Houfe was nearer than my own, he kindly propofed my going there,'
and flaying with him till, my Recovery, promifing to acquaint my Family with what had hap-
I made no Objection; he helped me into my Chaife,
etting into it with me, left his Servants to take Care of my
Man,
who had received fome
Wounds in the AfSault, as well as myfelf.
I' cannot defcribe the Friendship with which this humane Gentleman treated me»——In lefs
than
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 133
than a Month, my Health and Strength were perfectly relbored. From that Time the mod: cordial Intimacy fubfifted between us. I enquired diligently into his Affairs, which I found a little perplexed : I was fo happy as to be aflifting to him, in fettling them on a better Footing, and making his Circumftances eafy.
Mr. Bellamy was a Widower, having loft his Lady a few Years after their Marriage,^ who left him only one Daughter (Oh,
this Daughter!
Conjlan tia I)
of whom he was doatingly fond, and not without Reafon, fince
Die excelled in every Accomplish-
\
ment of her Sex. I never faw a more lovely Creature; and yet
her
134 The HISTORY of
her Mind was, if poflible, more worthy of Admiration than her
Perfon. The firfl Moment I Saw her, I wished to be intitled to the amiable Efleem flie expreffed for me: and thought I contemplated in her the future Wife of my darling Son — I truft, Pleaven has defigned her fo. About a Twelvemonth after my Acquaint: ance with my' Friend, he, witli my Advice, fent this beautiful young Lady to England^, to the Care of a Merchant, a dilfant Relation.
Mr. Bellamy, in her, Abfence, had no Pleafure, but in my Company. You may believe our Children were frequently the Subject of our Converfation. 1
eafily
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 135
eafily Saw my Friend’s Sentiments were the fame as mine, with Rer gard to our Union; but the Con-fcioufnefs of his inferior Fortune made him refrain from the mentioning it, left he Should feem to encroach on my Friendship, and fet too high a Value on the
Services he had rendered me, which,
%
he always protefted, were more than repaid, by the Returns I had made him.
However, one Day he ventured to afk me, as a farther Proof of my Regard for him, if I would condefcend to be his Daughter’s Guardian, in cafe he Should die before me; which, he faid, he had Reafon to think would be
the Cafe,, as he was in a very declining
136 The history of
clining State of Health. Yes,, my dear Friend, Said I; banilh all Fears on her Account., I promise not only tOi be a Guardian, but a Second Father to her. If Heaven permits my Son to return in Safety,, and unengaged in his Affections, we will perpetuate our Friendship by an Alliance between, our Children. I will not force my Son’s -Inclination ^ but if he is not prepoffefied in Favour of another, his Duty to me,, and the Charms of Mifs Bellamy,, muff make him yield, with Pleafure, to So happy an Union. F hope we Shall both live to fee them blefled; in each other.
My Friend was overwhelmed
with. Gratitude, at this wiShed-for
PropofaL.
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 137
/
PropoSal.—He graSped my Hand, and, for Some Moments, was unable to fpeak. At laft. Gracious Heaven! exclaimed he, is it poS-fible!—Oh, my beloved Child, I fliall then leave you happy ! And can you, my dear Mr. Montagiiey can you be fo genei'ous, as to overlook her Difparity of Fortune ?
----But forgive me, I know you
are above fuch low Confidera-
tions.
Yet will your Son
But
is he not yours ? — And does he
not, as I have heard, refemble his
Father in every noble Virtue ? —
It is enough, more than enough
You overcome me with your
Goodnefs. Think not fo highly
of what I wifh as much as you,.
faid I; do I not owe my Life to
you ?
138 The history of
you
?
But I am too
And is it pofTible to discharge hich an Obligation ? You wrong my Friendship, if you do not believe your Welfare is as dear to me as my own. minute.
About a Year after I had made this Promise, ' I had the Misfortune to lofe this valuable Fpend. His Death was So fudden, that he had not Time to fee his Daugb ter; but, before he expired, he dictated a Letter to her, which I wrote for him, wherein he informed her of my kind Intention towards her. I enclofed this in one from myfelf, confirming what her Father had wrote; but, at the fame Time, left her the
entire. Freedom of difpofing of
herfelf

Miss Lucinda Courtney. 139
herSelf,
deSiring only.
as
her
Guardian, that She would do me the Favour to conSult me in her Choice, in cafe fhe had any Ob-jedions to my Son, who, I hoped,
would receive the honour of her
<
Hand with Joy, ^ if he was not already otherwife engaged j but, if So, I flill, out of Gratitude to her Father, fhould look upon her
as my Child, and would make her Fortune equal to her Birth
and Merit.
Soon after thefe
*
Letters were Sent away, Mr. Bel--Imy expired. Almofl the laft Words he faid, were, preffing my Hand fervently betv/een his. My dear Friend, remember your kind
Promife,

I imme
140
The history of
I immediately wrote for you
mv dear Son, to return.
And
now‘it only remains for yon to testify your Duty and Affestion to me, by your putting it in my Power to fulfil my facred En^
; which I trust if your Affections
you are
free; Since the young Lady, whom I have chofen for you, is worthy of your highest Love and Esteem; and, except in point of Fortune, hardly has her equal. Blit if you are not at Liberty to
marry this Lady, which Heaven avert! you will find, when my Will is open, that I have added
ten thoufand Pounds to her For-
/
tune, which was before very in-'	considerable.


I
f
}
I
y
d
«•
y
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 141 considerable. This I hope you
p
will pay without murmuring. Since you will find what remains, at leaft, Sufficient to maintain your Rank and keep the Dignity of your Name, if (which my ill State of Health makes me apprehend) I Should never fee you more. You have here my laft Re-queft, which I earneflly hope you v/ill fulfil. And now, my dear Child, fare you well 3 Heaven profper and guide you in all «
your Ways : This is the Prayer of.
Your affectionate Father,

John Montague.
%
When my Nephew (conti-
nued Mrs
had read
thefc
142 The HISTORY of
/
thefe Papers, he fat for Some Time holding them in his Pland, unable to determine what An-fwer to make to his Father. He dreaded the Thoughts of marrying a Woman he never faw; for, notwithftanding her Beauty and Merit, he knew his were not , in his own Power, and he might, perhaps, fee her with very different Eyes. But then, to deny the Requeft of a tender Parent, whom he entirely loved, and whorn he knew it was his Duty to obey, fliocked him, as he could not but own his Requeft was reasonable. Since the Lady was So every Way accomplifhed. Thus were his Thoughts employed,
when
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 143
3
s
on
when Mr. Mont ague ^ impatient to know his Refolutioii, drew back the Curtain.
Weil, my Son, Said he, have you perufed the Writings ? If fo, fit down by me, and let me know what you are determined. My Nephew aroSe, and approached the Bed. His Father looking ftedfaftly at him — You are irre-
f	,
folute, faid he; do you feel no , Gratitude, then, for one who
faved the Life of your Father? If fo, I cannot expect my Re-
queft to be granted, fince, it is plain, you have not that Regard
for me, with which I have, hitherto, flattered myfelf. ;
Dear Sir, faid MX. IVIontague^
I
with Emotion, Spare me
you
wound
I
144 The history op
%
wound my Heart by Such im-
*
kind Suspicion. I only wiShedto deliberate om an Affair of fucli Importance to my future Hap-pineSs.
Forgive me, faid his Father; I was too hafty y but my Heart is deeply interefted in your Compliance. What Objection can you have to itYou fay your Heart is free j why may I not, then, direct your Choice ? Believe me, I study your Happinefs, when
Mifs
Re-
member, my Son, what I owe to her Fathers Humanity. I yield,
dear Sir,
Mr
tague, ‘ This Gonstderation is too weighty to be reststed: Yes, my
Father, I will take the Daughter
of
)
:r
)f
Mi'ss Lucinda Courtney. 145
of. him who Saved the Life of my
honoured Parent ; and, if flie
\
has nothing elfe to recommend her, I will Strive to love her for her Father’s Sake.—Be Satisfied, I will marry no other, if flie is not otherwise difpofed of. Mr.
Montague embraced him with a Transport of Joy.
Oh, my Son, Said he, this is like yourfelf! Yon have highly
I Shall now die in Peace, Since I can meet my Friend without Shame, having So fully executed the PromiSe I made him. And, believe me, my dear, duti-
obliged me !
fill
, you may look forward
31 to a ProSpect of Felicity, that y I will crown your future Days;
fince you will find MiSs Bellamy
Vox. II.
FI
more
146 The history of
more perfect than I have been able to deScribe her.
Mrs. Montague and her daughter came in, and the Subject was dropped; though that Lady was acquainted with the whole Affair, and knew what their Con-verfation had been.
My Nephew, foon after, withdrew to his Apartment, where, flinging himfelf in a Chair, he
began to meditate on the Engagement he had entered into. As he found there was no Remedy, he endeavoured to reconcile himfelf to it. He recollected all his Father had faid, in Praife of the Lady, and took no fmall Pains to prepoffefs his Heart
in her Favour. He determined
to
/
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 147
to talk to his
and know
her opinion of her. He did So, and found She adrhired her more,
f
if poflible, than her Father did, Mrs. Montague, too. Spoke very favourably of her; though, he thought, not quite fo feelingly
as the others. To fay Truth,
\
this good Lady wiShed not, if it could have been avoided, to have laid any Conffraint on his Choice, wifely forefeeing, that that alone, however great the Merits of the Object might be, was enough to render them fruitlefs; yet fhe could not blame Mr. Montague, obliged as he was to Mr. Bellamy, and, confidering the Beauty of the Daughter, he might juSlly

H 2
think
148 The HISTORY op
think their Son could have no Objections.
In a fhort Time after this Affair was fettled, to the great Grief, not only of his Family, but of all that knew him, my dear Brother died. I will not pretend to defcribe the lively. and unaffected Sorrow of his Son: The immenfe Eftate he found himfelf Mafler of could make but fmall Reparation for fuch a
As for Mrs. Motttague,
Lofs.
who had paffed fo many happy Years with him, and during which fhe had never known any Abatement in his Regard for her, fhe was inconfolable j and, in Spite of the Confolation her
Children
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 149
t
Children afforded her, fnrvived. him but a Sew Months.
Judge of the Effects of this frelh Affliction ! — Mr. Montague has fince faid, that he is amazed, how he was able to fupport him-
uncler___it
to Imve____fuch
tenderly - beloved	Parents both
Snatched from him, in fo fliort a Time, aim oft as foon as he was reftored to them, after a long Absence.— But Time, ; and a Multiplicity of Affairs, in which lie was obliged to employ himfelf.
in forne Meafur

overcame
his
Grief. But he haftened to leave a Place that had once been dear to him, but now only Served to revive in his Memory, the great and irreparable Lofs he had fuf-
H 3
tained j
I
ICO
The HISTO RY of
tained; vet he deferred his Re-turn to England, till he Saw his
Sifter happily difpofed of in Marriage, to the Man of her Choice, and who was worthy of her.
This over, and all his Affairs
be__sift&x" tKree	Ab—
fence, again blefted me with his Company.—Mrs. fVilliams paufed.
Di ir Madam, faid I, hut what of tiie Lady ? I long to know how he was received by her, and if he did not regret his Engagement. Your Curiofity fhall be Satisfied, faid fhe. I am trying to recollect Some Particulars of their Interview ; and will, if you are not already tired, relate Some of the Circumftances. Do, dear Madam, faid I; I long to hear
them
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 151
them nute
you cannot be too mi-
V
I always take Delight to hear you talk. She bowed, and went on as follows :
Mr. Montague
did
me
the
Favour to entrufl me with the Particulars of his Situation, which he owned he thought very dif-agreeable. For, my dear Mrs. Williamsy faid he, I have a Pre-poITeflion, that I Shall never be able to love this ^fame intended Spoufe of mine, notwithftand-ing her Beauty and Merit. I
don’t know how it is
but I can
form no Idea of her that is pleaf-ing. So much the better, faid I, I hope fhe will ftrike you the more, when you fee her. I hope fo, too, replied he ; I Shall go
H 4
willing
IC2 The history of
\
willing to yield my Heart, and ready to receive the Impreffion of her' charms — flie fhall have all the Advantages fhe can wifh for-------
/
-----I will fhut my Eyes to
every other Female, till our Interview is over — and I am juft imported, you know, from a-mongft a Race of Nymphs, who, without degrading their Charms, I may venture to fay, are Several Degrees removed from the Brightness of Angels.
I am pleafed to find you can be So lively upon this Subjed, faid I, Smiling. Why, you know', dear Madam, ' returned he, his best to do a T hing with a good Grace, w'hen it is not to be avoid-ed. I have no Difiike to Matrix
mony,


Miss Lucinda Courtney. 153
mony, I rather wifh to enter into that State—but then
Can Love be coittrouPti by Advice ?
%
Will Cupid our Parents obey ?
I
I fear not — but I’ll See what can be done. But when. Said I, do you propofe to vlfit your Miflrefs ? To-morrow, at farthefl, replied
My
he. Am I not commenced Lo-
/
ver ?—^and, confequently, muft I not be all Impatience to See the fair Object of my Hopes new Chariot will come home this Evening — I muft endeavour to make an Appearance fuitable to my Fortune. I fhould hardly be able to pleaSe the fair Lady, without this outward Trapping; beSides, I know our worthy Citizens are fond of Parade and
\
H 5
Show.
154 The HISTORY of
. Mine, indeed, will be a little dreary, as I am in Mourning—My Servants will not make So flaming an Appearance in Black, as they would have done in their party-coloured Liveries. I have nothing left to fupply this Defect, but to hang the more of them' about my Carriage; and So let the Quantity make amends for the Quality. Well, cried I, laughing, I long for the Time of your going. — So do not I, faid he, with his ufual Gaiety; for, between you and I, I have no great Stomach to forced-Meat. But, adieu j I had almost forgot I had Letters of BufineSs to write —When I stiall have Occasion to mention promiSTory Notes,
I stall

Miss Lucini3A Court net. 155;
/ «
s,
I Ihall certainly think oS promiS-fory Marriages—I wifh I mayn’t
i
confound the Subjects. He left me, humming
Te GodS) who gave to me a Wife'
He has, naturally, very high Spirits ; and, except the Lofs of his dear Parents, had not then met with any thing to damp them.-About Five, the next Evening, he came into the Parlour to me, dreffed for his intended ViSit; and,, I think,. I never faw him look fb^ lovely; for his Mourning became him remarkably well.- Here am I, dear
Madam, faid he, on his Entrance;
«
armed at all Points, and ready for the Encounter. •*
----And yet, I
think, I could not have more
H 6
156 The history of
Hopes and Fears, if I was going, Singly, to face a Regiment of Enemies, than I feel at the Thoughts of feeing this one gentle Female. — But with me SucceSs i for I See the Chariot at
the Door.—Adieu; I Shall return
\
to you either very miserable, or very happy.

He
got into his
Carriage, and away he drove.
You may believe I was very impatient for his Return; though I had hardly any Doubt, but that a young Man, remarkable for his Senfibility, would be charmed with a Lady, of whoSe Beauty I had heard Such high Encomiums, notwithstanding his Apprehensions to the contrary; his Affections unengaged, and coming,
as
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 157
as he drolly Said, from amongfl a Set of Women, whofe Faces had nothing of the Angelic in them.
I counted the Hours, and thought them very tedious, till I heard his Chariot flop at the Door. I ran into the Hall to receive him : he ^took my Hand, and, without fpeaking, led me into the Parlour. My Heart funk at the Air of Chagrin I
I
observed in his Countenance. I feared to afk, yet longed to know his Opinion of the Lady.
He took his Seat by me; and, after a Short Paufe,—I told you. Madam, faid he, when I left you, that I Should be either very happy, or very miferable. Now,
cannot
158
The history op
cannot you guefs which I am at preSent ? I dare not, anSwered I • alas ! I fear the latter. You have an excellent difcernment. Said he. Heaven forbid ! cried I v at leafl in this Inflance. But do, if it will not give you too much Pain, favour me with fome Par-
of your Meeting.
I
will. Said he; your Friendship
y ^
has a Claim: to every thing you can alk of me I will relate all that I can recollect of this important
When I arrived at Mr. Korn am d.s, a Servant Shewed me into an Apaitment,. where I found that Gentleman’s Lady. She received me very politely. I told her mv Name, and that I
came
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 159^
came to pay my Refpects to MiSs; Bellamyy the Ward of my late honoured Father. Her Civility enereafed, when She understood who I was, and fhe immediately fent to acquaint the young Lady., The Servant returned,, and informed us,, fhe would be with us in an Instant: However, that Inftant was,, at least,. Half an Hour.- Mrs. Pomainsy in the
mean Time,, entertained me with
A
Variety of Converfation, which, file artfully enough,, took fre-i[uent Occafioh to turn upon the Subject of Mifs Pellamy's. Beauty,
and other Perfections. You may believe I was not a little impatient for her Appearancebut'
I
the important Article of Drefs
was

i6o The H ISTORY of
\
was to be adjufled. At M, however, I heard the Rufiling of Silks. The Door flew open, and in came the expected Fair, bright as an Angel, and adorned in all the Pomp and Glare of Finery.
I thought, at. that Inflant, I fhould have liked her better if fhe had taken lefs Pains to pleafe, and depended more on her native Charms: Yet, ought I not rather to look on it as a Compliment, fince it was, I fuppofe, on „my Account ? Though, by the By, ihe might flrfl have known, if I was' worthy of her Regard. Was it not, rather, the Effe6l of her Vanity, that determined to make a Conquefl, no matter how
contemptible

Miss Lucinda Courtney. i6i
• %

contemptible the Object ? Thefe Thoughts were no Advantage to the Lady; thougli, I mute acknowledge, when fhe firfl struck my Sight, I was dazzled with her Beauty, and, for a Moment,
thought I had never feen a finer
/
Face, nor a Figure more graceful .
I refpectfully took heir Hand, and led her to a Seat. I rejoice. Madam, Said I, at the Pleafure'of feeing one, who v/as fo highly elleemed by the Man whole Memory must be ever dear to
me. And I, Sir, returned fhe,
«
very prettily, am equally pleafed with the Prefence of the Son of
my Guardian and Friend.
I
bowed
She enquired, how long
I had
i62 The H I ST O RY of
I had been in England^ Not a Week, I told .her; for I ha-ffened to pay my Compliments to a Lady, whofe Family had conferred fuch Obligations on mine
paid.
as were never
to b
s re
You are very obliging, Sir, replied She, to remember it
fo gratefully.---------- My Father
thought hiihfelf amply repaid, in the Honour of Mr. Montaguet Friendship. — I wifhed She had Siiewn a little more Senfibility, v/hen fhe mentioned her Parent I thought, at the Time, a few Tearsr would have fet her off to great Advantage. — But I condemned my too great Refinement, She had long loft her Father, and her Grief muft, naturally,
be
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 163^
be worn off. If (he had wept,
I Ihould, perhaps, have been as ready to cenfure her for Aftecta-tioii. Every thing is wrong, where one has no Inclination to be pleaSed j and, I believe, that too much the Cafe with me ?.
v.’as
tor,
LovCy free as Air^ at Sight of human Lies,
Spreads its light Wings^ and iA a Motnent jiies.
Mrs. Romaine nov/ joined in tliC: Conversation, and it turned upon general Subjects. Mifs
talked very well, and feemed to be of an amiable Dif-pofition: but there was nothin
new

164 The HISTORY
OP
new or linking in her ObSei
.73'
tions or Remarks—■but then, 1 ought to confider, that we were perfect Strangers to each other, and this always lays a Reftraint upon People, which hinders them to appear to Advantage. I tried feveral Times to turn the Difcourfe from Facts, to See if She could fupport one that depended more on Sentiment and Imagination. But here fhe was, or, at leafl, I thought So, a lit-

tie deficient.
While Mrs. Ro-
maine was talking, I often, as you may believe, call my Eyes upon my fair Miflrefs, and frequently met her’s upon the fame Errand, and with Glances more
favourable than
I,
s
perhap
wished:
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 165
wilhed:
But then, flie knew
llie was my Spoufe elect, and was more prudent than myfelf, in endeavouring to reconcile her-felf to her Father’s Choice, by ftriving to make it her own.
At Tea, Mr. Pomaine joined US; his Lady introduced me to him, and the good Man overwhelmed me with Civilities. He
\
is a plain, well meaning Man, and does not Seem to have much ftudied the Art of Ceremony and Punctilio; for he very bluntly congratulated Mifs Bellamy and me, on the Profpect of our Felicity;
tainly made on Purpofe for each other. Mifs Bellamy bluflied ex-
fwearing.
we were cer-
celTively
at his unfeafonable
Franknefs;
/
i66 The HISTORY of
Franknefs; and, for my Share, I could have found it in my Heart to have beat him; for I had fully determined to fay nothing of this Affair, till I knew how tk Lady relifhed the Thoughts of the ten thoufand Pounds my Father had left her, with the Freedom of difpofing of herfelf. 1 had fome Hopes, when She knew of this Addition to her Fortune, She would fpare me the Trouble of my Addrelfes, by choofmg
fome other, perhaps, an alreadj favoured Lover; for I could hardly think, amongft the Number of Admirers her Beauty mull naturally procure her, that Ihe had not yet Seen fome one who
would be agreeable to her, and
to

Miss Lucinda Courtney. 167
to whom fhe might

of
I 11
herSelf, having fuch an Addition
t
to her Fortune, as mull remove all pecuniary Objections.
I had flattered myfelf with theSe Hopes, and determined to be very cool in my Behaviour to her, that She
might
the
more


readily difpenfe with my Engagement; but this Marplot was fo premature in his goodWiflies!
but I only bowed a Return to them, and Soon after took my
first promised to
having
e aa
f Leave,
I wait on them on
when that Part of my Father’s t 1 Will, which concerns Mifs Be//a-
MV
y
IS
to be read to her. I fhall
) 1 then endeavour to found her In-
11	dinations about our Union.?—It ) \	will
N f
i68 The HISTORY op
\

will be an important Day to me! Till then I Shall entertain Some Glimmering of Hope that I may regain my Freedom; for I cannot think of Mifs Bellamy^ as a Woman with whom I am to pafs my Life, without grea.t Uneafi-npfs. She is not (though very handfome) at all to my Talfe: Beauty alone will not make a Captive of me; there muff: be a ne ffat quoit in the Perfon I could love, which is not in this
Lady.
Thus,
my
dear Mrs.
Wtlltams, continued he, have I defcribed the Adventure of the Afternoon — but Wednefday is the Day that muff decide my Fate.
You may believe. Said Mrs. Williams to me, that ^ I was
greatly
«
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 169
greatly diftrelTecl at his Situation.
I endeavoured to reafon him out of his Prejudice againft the Lady, but in vain. It does not fignify talking, my dear Madam', faid he j for fay what you will, I find I fhall never be able to love her. I dare not break the Promife I made to my Father, and muff marry her, if fhe makes
k
no Objections; but I am Sure if I do, I Shall be unhappy. But let’s^ talk no more of \t—MVedneJday will too foon arrive, arid then I fhall know my Deffiny.
Do you not pity him, my dear Conjiantia? If you do, remember to include your Lucinda. •
On LVednefday, refumed Mrs.
;
Williams, Mr. Montague again
VoL. II.
I
Set
ijo The HISTORY op
Set out Sor Mr. Romaind.s; but not with Such Gaiety as he had done the firfl Time.
Eight
About
in the Evening, he re~ turned, made an Apology to
me, and went up to his Clofet. I was greatly affected. He favoured me with his Company at Supper, and Seemed tolerably compofed. We talked on in-:ent Subjects, till the Servants were gone 5 he then turned
All’s over. Said he;
to me
there’s no Help for it
Mifs
Bellamy mufl be the Woman at last. Then I hope, returned I, you are more reconciled to her ? Not one Grain, anfwered he;
but what must be
must be.
True, my dear Sir, Said I—I Sincerely
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 171
cerely pity you. But favour me with Some Account of your Vifit. It’s hardly worth while. Said he j however, to oblige you. I’ll tell what little I remember of it.
I will pafs flightly over every Particular, till I was left ‘ alone with Mifs Bellamy; which' w^as
as Soon as the Will was read.
*
She behaved very well upon the Occalion, and did not appear too much elated with her Increafe of Fortune; indeed, fhe Seemed, by a Sort of bafhful TenderneSs in her Eyes, when fhe looked at me, to take more Pleafure in the Profpect of being mine, than in any other
Consideration. Why does my Heart refuSe to make a Suitable Return to this GoodneSs? Sure
y
I ^
It
172 The HISTORY OF
it mull be incapable of Love, or it could not be infenfible to So many Charms. I am amazed at myfelf, when I confider, with how little Emotion I beheld her Beauty and obliging Endeavours to pleaSe.
As Soon as the Will was read, as I told you, we were left to ourfelves. I took my Seat facing Mifs Bellamy and with fome He-fitation — You have heard. Madam, faid I, the great Efteem my Father had for you, and, I am convinced, mofl juftly. You have, likewife, heard his Willies for an Alliance for his Son with fo, much Merit; yet, with how ill a Grace muff I make a Proposal of this Kind, circumstanced

# I
j
as
I
i
s

Miss Lucinda Courtney. 173:
as I am ! Will it not look like Compulfion, rather than Choice, when you are fenfible that my firft Thoughts of it were owing to the Command and Entreaties of a Parent, to whom I could refiiSe nothing ? How will you be able to judge favourably of one, who confented to pay his
to you, without ever having had the Pleafure of feeing you ? Is not your Delicacy alarmed, while you have Reafon to Suljoect that your Charms are not the only Motive ? Charms, which ought not to be bellowed any one, whofe Heart is not
wholly religned to them ?-----
Speak, my dear Mifs Bellamy
Ton are free, though I am fettered.
I 3	May
on
174 The H I S T O R Y of
May I preSume to hope ?—I paufed. I wished to fet my Pretenfions in
as I
bad a Light as
O
defired rather to prepofSefs her agai?2ji than for me.
She was filent.
You do not
anfv/er, refumed I j what am I to think of your Silence ? — yet I dread to hear your Thoughts. But fpeak, dear Madam, and let no Confideration have any Weight with you, but your own Incli-
Once more I remind
i".
nations, you, yo
fi
I am obliged to you. Sir, Said She; I believe you tell me So
Motive
but I can-
not think myfelf So free as you would perfuade me, indebted as I am to the Bounty of Mr.
e.
I
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 175
Montague. His Wifhes are Sufficient to determine my Choice, and I may add, too, the lafi Re-queft of an indulgent Parent: And can I then. Sir, ought I to make any Objections ? But mull I owe your Confent only to them ? replied I — Forgive me. Madam, I could not be happy, though bleSs’d with your Hand, if I thought I had not an equal Right to your Heart. My Delicacy would but ill brook the Thoughts of having obtained you from Mo-
y
tives of Gratitude only.
Might
I not make the fame Objection to
you} faid fhe, if not more, fince you are really conftrained by a ?romife to act as you do} In my Cafe, there is Room for a diffe-

rent
176 The history of
rent Interpretation. I own it, Madam, anSwered I; you may very juffly make Exceptions—it is that very Thing that creates my Fears. I would not attempt
to veil the
under -
which I labour, I rather chufe
t
to reprefent them myfelf, than, to
s
leave them to your Conlideration j as your Delicacy might, perhaps, aggravate, and make you think them worfe than they really are. You cannot wonder at my being filled vdth Apprehenflons, when
I
you reflect on your own Charms, and what Reafons I have to fear a Refufal. My Affections
but could I hope that yours were So, Surrounded as you muff be with Admirers ?
May
were


I
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 177
May I not, then, juftly doubt, left your Gratitude fliould So far govern you, as to make you pu-nifti me with Half a Heart, in Obedience to your Father and Regard to mine.? Nay, have you not already declared as much .? How, elfe, am I to interpret your Saying, Duty Should govern your Choice .? You afk. Can I, ought I to refufe .? Yes, dear Madam, if you yield from no other Mo-
tive.
?
What would you have me fay cried She, cafting down her Eyes,
with a bafliful Air. Only this, dear Madam, faid I, taking her
Hand
j (could I do lefs .?) act without Referve, and help me to guefs a little at your real Sen-
15
timents,
178 The B rST'ORT op
timents. — She raifed her Eyes, and gave me a very obliging Look, flill her Hand. -
me to hold are very peremptory, Said fhe. Smiling^ will
nothing Satisfy you, but my telling downright, that I love you? That, I fear, is too much to hope for. Said I; but cannot you give me Room to guefs itThat would be as bad, replied flie; however, if it will be any Con-folation to you, be afiured that I find no Reluctance to — She flopped, blufhing, lest fhe had faid too much. . I faw, by her whole Behaviour, that I was not in-different to her, and all Hopes of Freedom vamfhed into .^ir.
It
>1
I

Miss Lucinda Courtney. 179
It is enough. Madam, Said I,, putting her Hand to my Lips; I will finifh, in my own Mind,, the Sentence where you leSt off; and you need not doubt but I Iliall make it very favourable to^ myfelf. She honoured me with-a Glance, that bade me interpret it as I pleaSed. The Return of Mr. and Mrs. Romaine put an End to our Converfation.
The good People; I knew that ’ Matrimony was a fad> Sober Subject, and thought, by that Time, we Should be glad to change it. They were not much miftaken, at leaft with regard to
I ffayed not long after they came inindeed,., if I had., I
me
I 6
fhould
i8o The HISTORY of
/ *
Should have been but very bad
Company.
Thus, my dear Mrs. Williams^
have I told you Some of the
Heads of our Converfation. You
fee how I am fettered
I don’t
know how I Shall be able to re-
i
concile myfelf to my Fate—all I
can do is, to defer the Marriage
as
long as I can. I have, for
Some Time, had a Defign to tra-
vel.
I fhall mention my Reso-
lution to the Lady, next Time I
fee her 5 her ModeSly will not
fuffer her to make any Objection,
whatever Slie may think; and if
She Should be fo highly piqued
at my Coolnefs, as to take it into
her Head to marry another, by
way

Miss Lucinda Courtney. i8r
way of Revenge —why^—I cannot help it you know—I hope I fhall have Fortitude enough to Support the Shock. I will pay her Legacy before I go ^ it makes no Difference whether I marry her or not; as to that, flie may as well have it before as after.
This, my dear Mifs Courtney^ was the Situation of his Affairs, continued Mrs. WilUams, when I firff, by his Means, had the Pleafure of your Acquaintance. You know he has, for Some Weeks, been in the Country: in
the Letter I received To-day, he informs me, that he has taken
Leave of Mifs Bellamy, who was vifibly Shocked, but did not
attempt

i82 The HISTORY of
attempt to difTuade him from his Defign. He tells me, he will pafs a Week with me,, before he fets off on his Travels,, which he longs to do, as he has, for fome
Time, been more deeply fenfible of his unhappy Engagement, and hopes to find fome Relief by fatisfying his Curiofity, in feeing what is remarkable in France and Italy. — He fays, likewife, Mifs Bellamy propofes to pafs mofl of her Time, during his Abfence,.
at a
Houfe of Mr.
maind.Sy that is pleafantly fituated
Miles from Town, and
a
where She has been, for fome Time,, much pleafed in retiring from the Noife and Hurrv of the
Miss Lucinda Courtney.
183
You may now guefs, my CAn--
ftantia, who the Lady was I faw
>
with him, while I was at Mifs Henley s—and what a lovely Woman was that! I am amazed at Mr. Montague Sor not liking,, and Sincerely pity her foi* doing So, without a Return.
I afked Mrs. Williams if She
had ever Seen her.
F requently
Said She, and greatly admire her.
I gave her an Invitation to paSs' the Summer with me here, but She excufed herfelf. . Poor young Lady! She’s too fond of Soli-. tude.
Oh! how I pity her
my
Friend! The Thoughts of her make me quite melancholy. Yet I have Grief enough of my own
to
%
%
j84 The HISTORY OF
to produce that Effect, without having Recourfe to that of others. Oh, this charming Harry!—But he’s unhappy too. — Who, then,
deferves
to
be otherwise}
Have I not Region to think that I have added to his Mifery ? He
more
has, lately, he fays, felt Severely the Weight of his disagreeable Engagement — And for what, my Dear ? Is it not, becaufe he has now, too late, feen the Woman he could
Oh! what a Fate
IS
love ? ours!
I was forced to withdraw to my Apartment, as foon as Mrs. Williams had ended, left my Emotions Should betray me.
Do
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 185
Do you not pity me, my dear
Conjiatitia ? How can I look forward to the approaching, dreadful Week, without Terror, Since I
have now Such Reafon to believe, that the too charming Montague will, perhaps, equally regret it ? Who knows what might have happened, had I been permitted
I	'
to remain fingle for Some Time longer? But, Soon, alas!- all
flattering Hopes mufl; vanifli. — I
am
very
miserable
but as I
know my Friend Shares in all my Griefs, I will no longer wound her tender Heart, by dwelling on
my Misfortunes. — Farewel —Believe me, whether happy or wretched, ever Your’s, unalterably,
Lucinda.
Monday.
i86 The HISTORY of

Monday.
What an agreeable Woman is this Mrs. Williams! So chearfuU and yet her Conversation is So edifying! She is near Fifty, but has hill a moh amiable Perfon. She fhewed me her Picture, the other Day, drawn when She was about Eighteen, and I never faw any Thing more lovely. Tho’ her Features are not quite regular, yet her Face is one of thofe that pleafes more than A blooming Complexion,
Eyes, white T eeth.
Hair, with Something So fenfible and engaging in her Looks, that I am perfuaded, the must have
been
i

Miss Lucinda Courtney. 187
been greatly ;admired dn her Y outh.
We were talking this Morning about Marriage, and I /cx-prefTed Amazement, that So few People were happy in that StateC It may, in Some Meafure, be accounted for. Said fhe; I am apt to think it proceeds, generally, from want of Conduct in the Wife. Moft Women think they do enough, if they are faithful and obedient to their Hufbands, not confidering, that
more Skill to keep a
They
\ d



It
Heart than to
gam
one.
are, befides, not ftudious enough of outward Embellishments and Refinement of Behaviour: Even uniform Goodnefs will pall.
Man
i88 The history of
A
%
Man is an imperfect creature, and does not always admire what he efieems — Variety is neceffary to excite his attention. A Woman of Senfe and Spirit will ftudy to gratify this Humour: for which Purpofe fhe mufl condefcend to ufe a little Art, and even affed Some Imperfections, by way of Foils to her more valuable Accomplishments. It is a harder Talk than is generally imagined, to keep the Affections from flagging, between two «Perfons who are to pafs their Lives together. Women are too unmindful of thefe Points, and we fee the Confequence. They Ihoukl ffudy the Tempers of their Lords and Mafters, and carefully observe
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 189
Serve what they admire in others, and endeavour to imitate it, even though their Judgment fliould condemn his Tafte. But as Ex-j ample can heft illuffrate this, ‘ I will, iS you can have Patience,
relate Some Particulars of my
\
own Behaviour in that Situation .
I declared nothing would give.
V
me more PleaSure; that I was all Attention, and would endeavour to profit by her Example ; fmce, added I, I Shall too Soon be put to the Trial. I do not. Said She, pretend to Say there is any Rule without Exception ; but your Wisdom will direct you in what is proper, according to the Temper of the Man you have to deal
with,


190 The HISTORY of
with. With mine, I found my Schemes fuccefsful.
You have feen, continued She,
that my Perfon v/aSi tolerably
and
my
Parents
agreeable ^ fpared no Expence to give me a finifhed Education. My Mother, who was one of the heft of Wo-
men, with the mofl tender Affi-
*
duity, endeavoured to form my Mind to Virtue. She was fond ■of that Simplicity of Manners
which She had been accuftomed
%
to fee practised in her youthful Days, and thought, a modeft Diffidence and Silence more becoming and commendable in a young Woman, than the more
Oiowy and volatile Behaviour we now fee fo much in Vogue. She
endeavoured,


furing

Miss Lucinda Courtnby. 191
endeavoured, with, great Wifdom, to give me an Indifference for the little outward Accomplishments of Perfon, and plied me with Arguments and Remonffrances againSf Vanity and a Love of Drefs; af-
me, that no wife Man would efceem me one Grain the more for Beauty. Such an one
will admire it, and, perhaps,
flatter the PofTelTors of it, added
•»
flie; but you will Seldom find, that he Sets any great Value on it, in the Choice of a Wife. Trufl me, dear Child, Virtue and Discretion are the only Charms that can make a true and lalfing Impreffion on the Heart. Seek not to be admired, but study to be worthy, and you will
then
,192 The HISTORY of
%
then pleafe thofe who alone are deferving of you. Do not be dazzled by the Court that is paid to the light and frivolous Part of your Sex. Believe me, the Men defpife them in their Hearts, and only follow them for Amufe-ment. I know they laugh at them behind their Backs, for their Levity and trifling Prattle; while they revere a Woman, who, with fiient Modefty, bears her Faculties meekly.
- I liflened to my dear Mother, as to an Oracle, and punctually followed her Inftructions; fo that I was as demure a little Gentlewoman as you would wiih to fee. But though my Reafon
was convinced of the Jultnefs of
what
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 193
what She Said, yet my Paffions were. Sometimes, like to rebel, wh^n I found mySelf quite overlooked by the Men ; while others, who, I may Say, without Vanity, had ieSs Beauty, were admired and followed, only becauSe they were more forward, and took greater Pains to diSplay their Charms. I
a mere Cypher, when in Company with the other Sex, Silent and blufliing, if they did but look at me; though, if I could have mustered Courage, I think I could have talked as wifely, and, perhaps, as wittily, as
the best of them. But while I
A
was thus neglected by the Men, the Ladies honoured me with the highest Marks of Esteem.
VoL. II. K	They
was
194 The history of
0
They were never eafy without
me
; nobody was So ingenious, forfboth I nor Such pretty Com-
pany, as Mifs Montag.
They
knew no Perfon they had So great a Regard for. They might well like me, for I was nobody’s Rival, and neither excited their
J
My Mother
\
was constantly exhorting me to perfevere in my good Condud, and perpetually warning me a-gainst the Follies and Vices of
O	.	.
the Age. She would Seldom Suffer me to go to publick Places, and when She did, constantly attended me. In this Manner I lived till I was about Eighteen, without one profested Lover, but with an amazing Quantity of
female
^ I

I
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 195
%
female Friends j when, being one Night at the Play, a Gentleman faw me, liked my PerSpn, and, upon Enquiry, found my Character Such as he approved for a Wife. My Fortune, too, was equal to his own. So that he determined to afk me of my Fa-
t '	'
' ther. My Mother was greatly pleafed with him for applying to my Parents in the firfl Place. Ill engage, faid fire, he is a
very prudent young Man, and, I dare fay, will make you happy. As fhe thought So, it was fuf

ficient to influence me, for I always fubmitted to her Superior
V
Judgement.
/
Mr. Williams was extremely handfome, lively and agreeable.
K 2
I was
H

I was pleaSed with his Ad-
dreffes, and Soon began to tafte
the Pleafures of Love without
its Pains. I repaid his Tender
neSs with modefl Approbation,
and he Seemed delighted with my
Behaviour. In fine, every thing
was Settled, and we were mar-
ried .
Before I left my Father’s, my
dear Mother did not fail to in-
ftruct me, with reSpect to my
future Conduct. Now, Said fhe,
you are entering upon a
new
Scene of Life j it. will require
all your Care and Prudence to
pafs through it with Innocence,
and Comfort, Continue your mo-
dest and unaffected Behaviour,
t
study to oblige Mr. Williams
and

A
• I

Miss Lucinda Courtney, 197
and when you diScover his Faults and Frailties (for as he is a Mortal, and, consequently, imperfect, you muff: place it to Account that he has both) make as much Allowance for them as poflible : Take no other Method to reform them, but by good
Humour and Submillion. Never
%
encourage any body that would, through Seeming Friendlirip, reflect upon, or Speak againfl him,
V
remembering your Interefls are one, and that to condemn him, is to injure yourfelf. Since he is your other felf. Difcourage Tale-bearers, and never pry into what your Hufband would wifh to conceal. Beware of Jealoufy^ and take Care not to give him
K 3
Caufe
jg8 The HISTO RY of
Caufe to be jealous oP^you. Cultivate a domeftick Turn, Seek more to be ufefid to him, than arnujing \ and give him no Oc-cafion to think lightly of you, by your gadding abroad, like too many Wives you will meet
with.
who are Strangers
no
where but at Home.
After this kind Lecture Hie embraced me. Heaven bleSs you, my dear Child, continued fhe, and guide you in all your Ways! I took a tender Leave of her, and my dear Father, and went to an elegant Houfe Mr. Wil-
Hams had provided for me.
*
For fome Months my Hap-pinefs was without Alloy. Never Man was more fond than my
Hiifband;
f
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 199
%
Hufband; and I, in Return, gave him full Poflefiion of 'my Affections. Our Family was a little Paradife, fo regular, peace-
f
ful, and uniform. My whole Study was to oblige, and I neither wished, nor fought for any
other
Amufement
than
the
Company of my dear Mr. IViL lta?ns. He, too, feemed perfectly fatisfied with mine, and
hardly
ever
left
me.
In my
Drefs I was perfectly neat, but rather grave than Showy. Would you think that fo good a Foundation for Happinefs could be Shaken ? And yet, my Dear, I, too foon, found it was not Solid. Mr. Williamsy by little and little, began to estrange himfelf from
K 4
me.
200 The HISTORY oi>
me. His Engagements were dai-
ly increafing; he was leSs tender
in his Behaviour to me, though
always polite ; often took up
a Book, instead of converstnc:
would frequently yawn, and look
at his Watch, as if impatient
for the Hour of leaving me.
Judge how my Delicacy and Love
must be hurt by this mortifying
Change ! But I remembered the
Instruction of my Mother,
and
endeavoured to form Exeufes for
him, never So much as breath-

ing a Complaint, but was always
the Same; mild, good-humoured
and obliging; constantly receiving
him with a Smile, diverting my-
felf, in his Abfence, with my Mu-
stek, Needle, and Books. But my
Com

Miss LtrciNDA CourtneV. 201
Complaisance produced but little Effect, From Coolnefs he began to be peevish, though I obServed he checked himSelf Sor it. A Sort of Laflitude poffeffed him, whenever he was at Home, and he Seemed dilgufted, becauSe he had nothing to oppoSe or vex
him.
V
He came into the Parlour one
• I
Morning, dreffed moft charmingly, and never did I See a finer
Figure.
Are
you going out.
Sir ? Said I. Yes, my Dear, Said he, turning, careleSsly, to Survey himSelf in the GlaSs ; I am en*-gaged for the whole Day. This
vile Coat, observed he, does not
/
fit at all to pleaSe me. There’s
Taylor in a thouSand,
K 5
that
202 The history of
that underffands any
thing
of
Tafte or Elegance. Upon my Word, Said I, I think your’s, at leaft, has done you Juftice, lince you never looked better in any I
Do
you
ever Saw you before, til ink So} Said he, with an Air
of Self-complacency; I will
trufl: your Judgment, for once, and Suppofe it is tolerable. He pulled out his Handkerchief, and dropped a Letter, but which I did not fee till he was gone. I looked at it, and found, by the Direction, it was a Woman’s Hand. My Heart fluttered, and, for fome Moments, I had a Conflict with myfelf, whether to open it, or not; but,, at last. Duty and Difcretion prevailed
s
over
Miss Lucinda Courtney* 203
over my Curiofity, and I put it, unSeen, into my Pocket-book, and, by the Force of ReaSon, brought mySelf to my ufual Compofure.
You acted nobly, my dear
Mrs. Williams^, Said I, interrupting her; I fear I Should not have been able to practife fuch Self-
denial, had I been in your Place. She Smiled, and replied, it was, however, no more than what I ought to have done, both out of Prudence and Dutyfor what Good could it have done me ? or rather, how much more unhappy fhould I have made my-felf, by being convinced of what I before only fufpectedPray go on with your Story, Said I, and
K 6
excufe
204 The HISTORY of
excuSe this Intermption — I am all Impatience to know how you produced a Change in him. I will obey you, with PleaSure, returned She.
I did not fee. Mr. Williams 'till next Morning, at Breakfall,
when I produced the Letter, and
presented it to him. He bluflr-ed excefllvely. — Have you read itSaid he. What a Question is that, my dear Sir ? I replied 3 I thought you had known me better—but, upon my Honour, I have not. Forgive me. Said he>
I ought not to have fuSpected you would-—it is like yourfelf, to fup-prefs your Curiofity. I did not wish you Iliould fee it, as it contains Some Secrets relating to a
F riend ^
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 205 Friend, which I do not think
V
myfelf at Liberty to divulge. I do not defire to know them, then. Said I. He did not, however. Seem perfectly eafy, but looked at me, and watched my Countenance, as if to difcover whether I was fincere. He left me foon after, but told me, before he went out, he had engaged Sir Harry Villiers to dine with us* He’s a very accomplished Gentleman,
he, and one for whom I have a particuar Regard. You have Secured his Welcome, anfwered I; I Shall endeavour to treat him as your Friend. He then left me.
About Three he returned, and introduced Sir Harry. I never
I
faw
' i
206
The history of
Saw a more elegant Figure; his Conversation, too, was fenfible and entertaining. He was
very
Studious to oblige me, and extolled every Sentence I uttered. The Day pafSed agreeably, and he received a general Invitation, which, he Said, he fhould profit by, and often do himfelf the PleaSure to wait upon us. After Tea, Mr. Williams and his Gueft went out together.
The next Day I received an anonymous Letter, wherein I was informed, that Mr. Williams
I
kept a MiftreSs, on whom he lavished all his FondneSs, though She was as inferior to me in Per-
fon as in Virtue.
The

ended


Miss Lucinda Courtney.^207
ended with informing me of her Name, and Place of Abode,
I was uneafy at reading this falfe Piece of Fiiendfhip, though I feared it was but too true. But who, thought I, can this officious Perfon be, that gives me this Information ? I fometimes fuf-pected it to be Sir Harry, yet
why Should he expofe his Friend ? What Purpofe can it anfwer
Befides, the Writing fhewed it to
be a Female. I was
weary
of
Conjectures, and just going to commit the Letter to the Flames, when Mifs Blair, a young Lady, for whom I had a very great Regard, and who was my most intimate Acquaintance, came in. Slie observed I looked uneafy,
and
2o8 The HISTORY of and tenderly begged to know the
Caufe.
I could not refifl: her
N
Importunity, but fliewed her the Letter. /She did not Seem at all liirprifed. It is right. Said She, that you fhould be the lafl Per-Son who are acquainted with Things of this Nature; yet I believe it’s no Secret to any body elSe. But why Should you be
at what is So common? There is not one Hufband in a
thouSand that is So complaifant to his Wife as yours. And as to his keeping a Miflrefs, why, you know, it is the Fafhion. If you cannot bear one Rival, what would you do if you was married to the Grand Seignior ? Believe
me, my .Dear, Inconstancy is the
very
r I
manage
them.
Miss L uciNDA Courtney. 209
very CharacterifHck of the Sex, and it requires all our Art to
You trust too much to Nature. — I have often thought, was you lefs uniform and obedient, you would pleafe him more. Do, dear Creature, let’s lay our Heads togestier, and fee if we can reclaim him. Take my Word for it, you are not in the right Way at prctent. I have Sometimes thought of Speaking to you on this Subject, but feared to offend. Now the Occafion is too favourable to be
I
Be a little more modern it as well as he — and, my Life for it, well make him look about
y.
neglected, coquet
him.
But now
you
never
op-
pose his Will, always obliging
ever
210 The HISTORY of
ever good-humoured, let him do what he pleafes j no Wonder he takes So little Pains to gain your Approbation, Since he’s So Sure of it. I’ll tell you what I heard him fay one Day to a young Lady
who ftruck his Fancy, and whom he was treating with a great many
fine Speeches.
She
was
lively.
and, when he was profelling his Admiration of her, afked him, how he could be So profufe of his Compliments to another, when he had So charming a Wife, who deferved all his Love? True, anSwered he, fhe’s very hand-fome. So are thefe Pictures. If She had your Spirits, indeed, I fhould like nobody better. She
is, however, a very good, prudent
\
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 211
dent kind of Woman, and I have a great Esteem for her. Thia is enough to strew you his Taste. True, faid I, stghing, but stis
now too late! A Heart once lost, is never to be regained!
You are mistaken, returned stie; at least it’s worth the Trial.
But I cannot, faid I, affect high
Spirits when they are fo much deprested as they now are. I will, a little longer, try v/hat good Flumour and Prudence will do; and if they continue to fail, you Ihall astist me in putting your Scheme in Execution. Well, faid She, I will not prefs you to what is disagreeable, but hope. Some Day or other, to See you
profit by my Advice 5 in the
mean
212 The history op
%
mean Time, I will watch his Motions, and, in Spite of your Self, inform you if your Sweetnefs and Submillion have attained the de-fired Effect. Mr. fVilliams coming in put an End to our Con-
t
verfation, and my Friend took her Leave.
Sir Harry was veiy constant in his Vifits, and adapted himfelf fo much to my Humour, that I could not help thinking his Company agreeable. He dropped frequent Hints of the Folly and Ingratitude of Mr. Williams', who, he thought, did not make a Suitable Return to the Tender-nefs I honoured him with. How happy, would he fay, with a Sigh, fhould 1 think ihyfelf, if
blelfed
i 1
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 2,13
blefSed with the PofTeffion of a Woman, So lovely in Perfbn, and accomplished in her Mind I I always discouraged this Sort of Conversation.
In the mean Time, Mr. IViL Hams continued his ufual Diffipa-tion, and my Pride, at'his Neglect, began to get the better of my Love. I was still as complaifant in my Behaviour to him, but lefs tender, difdaining to bestow any Marks of Affection on one who made fo bad a Return.
Things were in this Situation, when a young Lady, a Relation and School-fellow, wrote me
^ /
Word, She intended me a Vistt. I had not Seen her for Some Years, as She lived mostly in the Coun-
trv.
214 Thb HISTORY of
try, but we had always corresponded, and I greatly efleemed her. She was lively, and a little coquetifh; her PerSon tall and flender, and her Face pretty, though a little childiSh. I ex-
preffed my Pleafure at the Thoughts of feeing -her, and
t)ggged her to hasten
Jour
ney
Mr. JVilliabns
pected her, and defcribed her to
him; he Seemed pleafed, and
was daily enquiring, when stie
would be with us.
Mifs Blair, the Friend whom
I mentioned to you before, came
with a Look
You
in, one Morning, full of great Importance, must hear me. Said fhe; I have Something to tell you that will
pleafc
1
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 215
pleafe you. I give you Leave, anfwered I, provided it is nothing against Mr. Williams. Did I not fay it would pleafe you ? faid She, fmiling; that’s enough to fecure
that Point. But how is the good Man ? In the Dumps, I fuppofe.
Why
Why
?
stie; why he has lost his
«
Sir Harry has played him a fine Trick, and all for your
MistreSs
Sake.
Never Man admired a
Woman as he does you! He thought it would oblige you to rid you of your Rival, and there has he gone and married
Frenc/j
a good
pretty Fellow, on \yhom he has
fettled an handfome Annuity, and packed them both off to
France,
2i6 The HISTORY op
France. I am Sure you ought to make him one of your bell Curt-lies, and thank him. Now is the Time to follow my Inflruc-
tions, when the Affections of
0
your Lord and Mafter are not engaged to any other Object. Take my Advice, and, once more, re-inffate yourfelf in his Heart. But how ? Said I ^ how am I to do it "t How ? repeated She j why drefs, flaunt about, and, to crown all, make him jealous. Sir Harry will affift you in this laft Project. Oh, Said I, Shaking my Head, this is a deS-perate Remedy, and, I fear, may prove worfe than the Difeafe. Pifh,
* i
returned file, you are So full of Fears and Scruples—I See I Shall
make
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 217
make nothing of you, at lafl. So take your own Way. Nay, don’t
be angry. Said I, laughing; have Patience, I will try what can be
done. ■ Patience! returned' fhe, you think every body as much a Grizzel as yourSelf.
Have
you
not Seen, by woeful Experience, that your preSent Conduct will do no Good ? I wiSh I had a Hufband, I would teach him
I
better Manners—I’d train him up in the Way he fhould go. Oh, Said I, Maids and Batchelors are always excellent Managers, and very Sagacious: much like
CofFee-houSe Politicians, who fight Battles, and conquer Armies over a Bottle. Well, replied Ihe, a little poutingly, let
our
VoL. IL
L
your
2i8 The HISTORY op

your Wisdom direct you—I have done. No, Said I, I muft beg
your
Afliftance —-I will, when I
think it can be effectual, fol-
low
your
A	9
Advice. Nobly re-folved. Said fhe, her Face bright-ning up V I am always at your Command.
My Coufin, MiSs Kitty Eorejly impatiently expected, came at
. s
laft. Mr. Williams was at Home:
I
he Surveyed her with Attention, and, I could obferve, he her Perfon—fhe was, indeed, a very agreeable Figure.
Soon became intimate—^her Vivacity entertained him, and fhe Seemed more dctighted with Company than vrith mine, and was never So chearful as when lie
was
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 219
was
preSent.
They laughed
Sung, and romp’d together very prettily, You may believe it was no great Diverfion to' me, to See her engroSs his whole Attention,
but my Pride was too Iliew any UneaSmeSs.
One Day, in paSHng by her drefling Room, the Door being
great
to
half
open
I Saw enough to make me fear they would carry their Toying too far, but I ftifled my Sufpicion, and longed for a favourable Opportunity to fend her Home to her Parents. She was young and imprudent, but I hoped Mr. Wiilimns was. not yet So abandoned, as to take Advantage of her Frailty.
L 2
The
220 The history of
The conflant Proofs I had of his Indifference for me at laft exhaufted my Patience. I Saw my dear Mother’s , Inftructions were wife and good, but not effectual: I,. therefore, determined to change my Conduct.
Sir Harry had often been endeavouring to prevail on me to vifit Lady L------,
--------------------, a diflant Relation of his, and who had ear-neftly fought my Acquaintance, but I knew fire was a Woman of Intrigue, though countenanced by People of Fafhion. Her Floufe was a conflant Theatre of
t
Pleafure and Diffipation, and I did not doubt but Sir Harry had his Motives for engaging me to viSit herj for tho’ he was always |
refpectful,
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 221
refpectful, and profefTed nothing
but Friendship, I had DiScern-
\
ment enough to fee he wifhed
for Something more. I now-thought this Lady, as well as' himfeif, would aflift me in my Project; So the next Time he mentioned her to me, I consented that he Should introduce
me to heri His Eyes fparkled with Joy, at having carried his Point, and the following Evening was fixed on for his attending me to her Rout. I faid not a Word of my Intention to Mr.
Williams.
but.
after Dinner

went to my dreliing Room, and did not return to the Parlour, where I had left him and my Coufin, ’till I was dreffed, and
L J
that
222 The history of
«
that in fo different a .Manner from what was customary, that they were struck with Amazement, when I made my Appearance. It must be owned, Drefs • •
is a great Advantage; I knew mySelf, So great a Change had it made, for the better, in me: for I'had not confined my-
Self to the Rules
Mother
had Set me, but put on my deaths in the most fafliionable
*	-	-	-	-i	.	,	.
and alluring Manner.
Are you going out, my Dear faid Mr. Williatns. Yes, Said I, carelesty, humming an Italian
Air 5 then turning to Mifs Eor^ ejiy Forgive me, dear Creature, excufe my Abfence, this one
V
Evenings I have an Engagement
that
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 223
that I would not break for the
%
world; but Mr. Williams will


entertain you — or, if you choof to go to the Play, I will fend for
i
Mifs Blair to attend you. But I cannot think you will want for Amufement, fince I know my good Spoufe will fpare no Pains to divert you. I Spoke this a
<4
little ironically,
MiSs Eorejii who, I dare fay
«
rejoiced at the Thoughts of my Absence, begged I would make no Apology. Am I not at Home ? Said fhe ^ Why, then, fhould you uSe any Ceremony ? Pray„ Said Mr. Williams^ may one afk where you are going.? Why, I don’t know, anSwered I, whether you may or notr—it is not, perhaps,^
\
L 4
doing '
224 The HISTORY of
doing as you would be done by. But, however, my Appointment is no Secret, I am only going to
---. Lady
/ cried he with Amaze-
pay a ViSit to Lady L
L ment
you furprize me!
1 IS
even So, for all that, Said I, care-lefly. Then turning to my Cou-fin. Dear Kitty, help me to recollect that pretty Song Sir Harry Sung to us the other Night. I have done nothing but thought

of it
ever
fince.
How is it ?
added I, going to my Harpfi-chord is this right ? You are wondrous fond of Mufic, Today, faid Mr. Williams. O, doatingly, I replied j they that
love not Mufic, have no Souls. Mighty "pretty, all this, faid he;
you
IVIiss Lucinda Courtney. 225
you are ftrangely altered of a
Sudden.
Nothing like dear Va-
riety, returned I; one cannot be always in the Same Humour—all Things change — we have daily
Instances of that.
But
w
hat
can keep Sir Harry So long ? added I, looking at my Watch j I Shall discard him from my Service, and. chufe another Cijijbeo, if he does not mend his Manr-ners.. I had hardly Ipoke,, when he entered the Room.. A pretty Hour,, this. Said I ^ what in the Name of Fortune could keep
r
you fo longSo long! cried he, look here, I am Some Minutes befpre the Time you ordered, me
T hen your
to attend
you
Watch, ia wrong. Said I, for I
-.A
L 5
am
226 The HISTORY of
am Sure mine must be right. DoubtleSs, Madam, returned he, every Thing oS yours is So—I stand corrected. Come here, then. Said I, and I will put you in a
Method
Peace.
to make
Sing
me
your
pretty
Song that pleaSed me the other
and i'll
ive
you
very eaSy Penance, he. Smiling; I Shall take Plea-
Sure to obey
He Sung.
Inimitable I cried I; is it not a
Air, , Mr. Williams ^ to be Sure, Madam. —-1 am pafiionately Send of Mustc, Said I.
I
not think
you
had been
pafiionately fond of any thing.
Said he.
No ? exclaimed
Heavens, how
you
me
f
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 227
me !—But we fhall be better ac-
h
j quainted in Time — Adieu, my I Dear. Come, Sir Harry, it’s ' Time to go—Farewell, my Sweet Coulin, I hope Mr. Williams will amuSe you, for he Seems in ex-
1
cellent Spirits.
Sir Harry led me to my Chair. When I was Seated in it, I re ctected on my Behaviour. I had afSumed a new Character, but I
<
found it fat tolerably eafy on me.
It may not, perhaps,, thought R
•)
produce the defired Effects but it will, however, mortify him, and revenge his Indifference, by
4
Shewing him that I am not • that fond, eafy Fool he takes me for. I can but lay afide my Airs/h^ the Jest Should grow too Serious.
L adv

228 The HISTORY of
Lady L
cxprefTed her Plea-
sure at Seeing me, in very polite Terms. I found her Apartments
crowded with gay young People of both Sexes. The Card Tables were foon filled. I made one, but had a Run of ill Luck, being unaccustomed to play. Sir Harry was my Partner, and too polite to find Fault with my want of Skill in this polite Science. I forgot to tell you, that I defired my Friend to drop in upon my Coufin and Mr. Williams^. as if by Chance, and pafs the Evening with them. A little fpiteful this, to fpoir Sport; but I thought a Tr/i? would be full, as fafe for Mifs Foreji as a tete a tete. ;
i
I was:
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 229
I was Surprifed, after having been Some Time at Lady L—’s, to See Mr. Williams come in, who, after paying his Compliments to fome of his Acquaintance, came up to me, and alked what Luck I had f Oh, very bad, faid I; I have loft every Rubber. He flood fome Time behind my Chair. I was gay and lively,
but took little Notice of him. Soon after I left off Play, and Seating my Self on a Window,
was inflantly Surrounded by a Cluster of Beaus; Sir Harry
amongst the rest
I laughed.
chatted, and gave myfelf a vast many Airs. Mr. Williams was Set down to Cards, but played So inattentively, that his Part-
ner
230 The HISTORY of
#
ner was out of Patience with
t
him; indeed he was more ob-
w
Servant of my Motions than of
the Game. When the Company
%
broke up, he afked me if I was going Home ? No, Said 1 care--
lefsiy, I have promifed tq fup
with Lady L
Have you.?
faid he, with Emotion > I am
fbrry for it. Are you.?
Ithat’s amazing! I cannot fee how it fhould. concern you. I am equally furprifed to fee you here, fince I think it was not quite polite to leave Mifs Forefi by herfelf. I did not, faid he; MiSs Blair is with her —but I
with, continued he, you would
make an Apology to Lady Z,——, and go Home with me.
Im-
possible,
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 231
poffible, cried I; I will not break my Promise. Befides, whyfhould you defire it} you have not always been So fond of my Com-
*
pany. As you pleafe. Madam, Said he, and left me with an Air
of Chagrin.
We Soon after went to Supper. The Company were gay to
. I had no great Reafoii to approve, of their Behaviour, and endeavoured to check their
• V-	* I.	• »	•	>
too great Freedom, by refuming my native Character. Sir Harry had not yet fo far overcome the
Refpect he had for me, as to make an ungenerous Ufe of my prefent Situation, by undue Liberties. I believe the reft of the Company were not much de-
. lighted
232
The history op
lighted with me, as my Referve was a Sort of Check upon them. I took my Leave, as Soon as I politely could, and Sir Harry conducted me Home, not without Hopes, I fuppofe, that Time, and my new Acquaintance, would produce the Effect he defired.
I found Mr. Williams juft gone to Bed. He alked me how I liked my new Affociates ? Oh, immensely well. Said I. Indeed! that is ftrange, faid hej your Tafte, then, muft be greatly altered, from what it was Some Time ago. Why, I can’t fay but it is, faid I; but, I think, it is rather improved. Reallyfaid he; I muft own I differ with you. Oh,
that’s nothing ftrange, returned 15
we
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 233
we are very oppofite Characters; but I hope we fhall Soon have a nearer ReSemhlance. It would have been better, however. Said he, if I had flrove to imitate
.	..I
your Manners, than that you Ihould copy mine. May be So, anfwered I; but as you did not Seem willing to try the Experiment, I determined I would. I am Sorry for it, replied he. I can’t help that, returned I; I , in vain, strove to you—’tis now high Time to endeavour to amufe myfelf. While I loved you, I wifhed for nothing more to make me happy, believ-
ing
I met with a Suitable Re-
turn ; but when you flung off
the Mafk, my Affection ceafed,
and
234 The HISTORY of
and left a Void which I will endeavour to fill up with Pleafure and Diffipation. Is it poffible! cried he ; do you, then, no longer love me ? How can I, anfwered I> lince I have as much Pride as Tendernefs ? TheSe two Paflions have been long contending for the Mastery, and Pride has> at last, got the Victory. Do not think that I have been blind to the Indifference with which you
have
re
treated me—I will not
you
I know
our Affections are not in our own Power. While I loved, your CoolneSs gave me Uneast-nefs; but when once that trou-
blefome Paffion ceaSed to torment
me, I became eafy, and carelefs,
like
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 235
yourfelf. So now we will both Seek Happinefs independent of each other.
He fighed—I have been to blame, I own, faid he ^ but you have deter-
on a very fevere Punifh-ment for my Follies.
Not too fevere, returned I; I think it is but the natural Con-
fequence of your Behaviour. Yet I do not condemn you; I know
the Fault is in your Nature, and
\
my Want of Charms. I upbraid you with nothing, but only tell you the Change it has produced in me—but no more of this dif-agreeable Subject-^I detefl Curtain Lectures — I am half afleep So faying, I turned from him..
N
I don’t
-236 The H I S T O R Y, &c.
I don’t know how he pasted the Night, but,- for my own Part, I hardly cloSed my Eyes; for, in Spite of my affected Tranquillity and Indifference, I found I still loved him too much for my Repofe.
\ •
The End of the Second Volume.
».





U. of Pa, Library


-v^...................................................................... .............
•sT ■_ :T:-. NN;:vCteTr->T >X'T c> :-;cT-Avi v':^^



blO*'‘.'5Cb^-



^NNS- C^C';: V- 'AdffiiAACdriAASriA^
•- 1 •♦ - 'til* **>•'*5'"^^X	* ^<V»^ -i
''' ri VL~-^^tVrit^’^}hAr'iA:





• - > . ^ . » '. - ' 'V'



T: •.>

N/.C-V.,-..; .^S': N ;. NC'' ".'	' ■ D i‘ •'* ':• .'	• .->"*	•.« • - •- • :--

V 'ri.-- ■ ’' '■• / '■ --' ■ ■'•
>>
’% * - *
-C c?S-' r-
N:’ C’.Lvr'.-L
V-'	-■<•



• • - ^ . .
.•;-*• '.* • '"'^s

\ ■ u\ .\V


^ ~ -

'■i '

•< - ■ > . ■

't. -



i--SCVr'CV'
* . ■	' S".
' . . -
V.

V
. ‘ ^
V ,

-t‘ V -.

- ^ .ri *
f
M C * 's


• V.* -S'*
-
V _ .	; •
i -V ■ V	.


•A '
•-> • *'.v V_.- •




■ r ■ ,.
-•-•i' r • . *•■

; > .•
• • . . • V
. - -	. .s -


	-					_ V	• *- s *
1 » *	'	•			- '■ '<*'“. *	-	• V* S*/
	, *	'	s	«	i * “ * ^		
		- ■ -/'r				^ ; '	•* N ’ * "*^* \* • ',
							
. *Vy*‘ •!	N V			>	V ' ^“ ■ ' •*	- L..	V •*
	•	^ • '**	^ •	.	* C - •		" . , _ .’V •
						/	’ Ci •
* /							-■*•■■■ '
		* ' ‘ •• i-*'			” •* c		- • '* *
	■	. .		--	•'•. A ^ ’ A ,		
• f ‘r	■ ;•		y. ,*		\> N'-. /*•		Fr ' d ■
- -y •
• ■«. • r


. -> -
c: c:




^ ’ V d- V - C



- i
- -. V-
u/ . .
y. •


i-''": ’ ' •	f.'A Ai-r'	C-h-;''
C-• •', • '.S '-N
' « >, A A ^ •
/r -	.	•
* *.






<.*. ' • .■	./ ’ .	.. -i e.,^’	* . S	•,.’ •' h'‘ *. C \ * .’ . • : .V''-'V' *• ' ^•
*‘ • '• - ■*'.’<•':*'*••.	*/*v'r/*	.* 1	•••"*-- ,** '
:-	/	■N;'V:^.-'.: •-• L v•„-L '. -
• .C

*:• *<!•'



->

V-A- VS:L'--'VVPVFVrC-'AAT ■. ■':*s.:;‘hN:,>fN'iALcSSC-;c,N--'CLAAAAT^^TA;^S^>^NA^

- . .	.rr^:e^A^-^ririAmAFdAAriAriAAM
•	•'•'^v--.-; • J-.V -. .	•• “■v^ *' •• -: •-■•.*.'• '-■.•■■ •-••’■,• ' '-. -'''iv'--'- -.f-~	■-'■“• '.T-'-•'■"'■i
■ :'T'-'y^ ■'*-' ■'’	■ ■	1 ref <• ‘	" ■ /*'	-h 'S' /-.'	'■''''■' '"■ v'iSlS
- ■L'S :.-■-	•S'h:T--i'‘,'i:-; c-’ Vv..
- v.'S'”'' *' ^'‘'''' A ' 'te-'A-zi>-r ' - f’.\ '■ ■' TAC'.v^ -'-‘V •'csT' ■'.'■-'S'
■'	-•• • - -■^■■rif'''S.' ‘	■■-'A.--r	'-'/F, Add'-A''
'■'•,. •- ’	'	■- •, - i .'■.' -. ■ C-'" '■	■” ‘hi"'*''''' t ' ’''"'	*'■ *' h" ^ '.'•'
•• • ■'	'r-.td.at;- ■Af'---' '"b '-■; -l-'v"' ’-’ 'V Af:'iSi i-'-\’y'd'iAL-'■'F.'A'^i^'L’''A.'^
"■ ‘ ' ■'' "'Sv r"	^	' i.	^	'	V^'	'	"'
::-.r	-.;N ••.	'-C	K-K^-A A
.-' s
-'.tt-..
'f"
' * -N'. ,

V. .
’ "'s« ./ 'I *!.
• V ‘.

^ 'V . *



N . * N
r.
}■


■ A.. I' '•
r
o
* I ,'	. '
/

i i
K.. '■ y
/'
A

/'
If
•A •
T-

*'S
i D
/
^hT
,>1
V'
vT
S'
V
<t}
L

»<
A
A
V
i •
r V.. .


^ f
V ^


>?

../ s
I
i
I
I
>
«
i
I
1
r
j
f
•«
f
i
-1




^ • ’7.T
r^Xr'^	■’?♦
aijt W- i 'w ^ I
■-::aF*v MISS lOCitM
? ft» 6' K t . ‘ y
V-V.w-A•
•*'*— '■— "fZia .
*. *
.	. •	-»V.-._ v. :
>'	.• : N *

■'^. ■ N

^ ■' ■-.. -fA .
-• -•:_, i'V- ‘ ■
... tA'Ajtyi
.V “ - . .
%f- -tr	—. .'1

•■ITT ' ■ W '.



- i
I •	••
'i.
V.

b//
	'■‘VAir'V'Ak.
r--' '7*	■ ..; -..«»■
►Jr ^ a^’»* 7 ,	; • * . - 7 ■ .-teh A
	
><'/>.*Cv'.:;r'''‘-'-N;	■^'AF.^.ri.yA
'iisi'C.	, .'••‘•■'j;'‘	LdL
. -C . _/ ■'• ■' S ■	'*t , ✓
•■*:•■, ••'> ?•'	. *>.;	.>V'C V'i
^K:- ■	■ C'
h“ -te** ■' -Vr*:"-iCCr'	-AFICz
,V'AS£VV'^ ’ V :V	id
7- » .
	.s7
> ,c* *•	• e,«.«.
*• ’ i. y A '	
. - ' '7	vv/;
^dLrAfdALf	S'^‘7
'7-'C S;:
■ CC;v7^
fev;y:^r^'; A-	yyC:i.A;V'CT^^
.sy. ■yNNccy :‘vy:N"NT-.- AAi
•—''■■>•- .'. ■ -’-■ - 'iF-^h-A'' -r..' ~ d\-A t^F'F d.\‘ , '.,'- ‘
WfLVI.	"- SsA
V yyS; N^>A>yrA-■r AA-fA^LVVf;, ? ^dh ~ d.\'Ari\Kf‘ 'ri Ari'-F'-'' PP'^ ',' >i/yv
S^ST..te''	-C''';.; -iVA'A^
fcAv'•' ■--■ S-' N>;->i:v'r.-.-,-v_ r*	■-:"*i-:i
^-; :-;•:'*■'	L.' ■*' r- sv.vL-i-: ,.v; -•■„	- Vi
.k^AVE '■■ ^'-^A'AdVA-.:-P^'Ah '-r
p;SvA	iV L-L:.^ ^ -iC'^-AA
AS •'• ■• ■':V ■ N
0 0 y:v-''-: A^'-* ''•■'■OOhA-O - 'CT''^
=^T0C'’-v:"'" nT::n': ;s, \	N-yy' cc^
•-A:.*'*--. ■ S-'-Nv: •, •'-.-‘N-y A-"--:; '-'-'f'Pd.
J?fe:'OTho-;'-:vOvO. ovCiA^iAA-^ -hNAA
^Sp^T-•%/.-. -..r.jr FA - ~- 'AtA.-.T '.;.'S'* .D' ''.■-■'•N^O.7>S*r '-Av’-'A ^.'.*. t .•.n-'Cs-v
. -'e'-AiiA-cAL	"-■'"■: •■'■ ‘‘' ■S'AAc-.A^ 'vC -- h;
' -S AV'd ' ■’\.--'' ''- A':.'-'Cx:N	t"-' • S'..'.- . '.* '• V 'Al
-	-.,,- y .	' . - ',. ' -' 'N,' -'	' 7 'ff' 7^ ' 7 y ■- : ' * '.! y' S '
AAA-riF. riAfri' 77 i^/-' 7	■■':■ -7^:'' ■ ; w riA-'r lA'AA^:
_ j7^:77.jV-7yL7 ::777v 7■ 077N7AiSV-'7'7-vNN>7
'-A'' '_.'' y A- Aj'V’’"	f-‘"	^
LLV-' SVV'SA-V■ \ : 'V F\A-V/V' ^ V ' Ld.'fVV^A^AK‘-SVA^L'''^'.-''	F ' * -OS'^
S ''7':-‘’N>'7	,,.•■7-:'.’.-';	•' IA-At:-' "--' ri‘^-:d.-.FVA^..-'d'- .y.‘-:'7--'i, --7.7' - 'S'S' '^'■: S'C'N- '•
’^LPVri VV:'--rf 7." N wAnS SvT.AyC^' A:;VAT'CiAb- Aiyo** • .-AoNy^l'.-cy:.7-vi>
^^^3^77 .■ >-. ^.- ' -7 7V7.. ..-■ ' -. .. y :j,. ..7 : ^'7:.'y^v 7;vS-'- -7^7'V''^.7:,77 ^.7 V-- ..':;.. ' :- ;■ -yyON7-,\r‘;777 -..iyspsAA' 7'hs;'.cy>;C7:AA ;;yOOC:.;:;7;7;.y7_^ V\AVd^ Y'A'dMi
'■ .. *- ■> ■

. .	•-.‘jj
•.'-■y;- -: ^7:-. -T;^;

f '	-Is F■77'7.	.7'’■-*''-*7'' T' ^-*'- '■-7.-''7*‘--0.'. :7'^'''.•‘^'.''"'‘7:-,7
■- ' '	■' 7-'.. ■-'7:i'j:'--■.’. -SS~-'	-' ,7 ,,7'-	-'''7'7-; i- ''-	r'. AfVV'h,	■ X.7',‘ t S'"'NS'-'S'C.:-	■ ''^

. ^ . /

V

». -j



l -'	
i.r, • T	V,
ri-c—	
	
	




* -.<? ,•
., >' iV *
^ ''^LVidVd’^SA^d'-L-^'A	-j£v	N'cT
■ ..'■ •.••■-•>.' :?-!5^-V:.'• . -?> v	. T-v. v-'* •	•%•:;- -.*■	*



* ' h N'*C ‘ >"



*	< V
:, .‘'i--^' ’ e*- .': -. '.'<. >. *■•'•.%• -•■	--•••• -„~'	, ; ‘r.',.'. .-, ' ‘>-.-
.-L.- ,r->vTV iL.V'i,.;;-jN.--'j- •.	_	_	/-.. - -f,	'	.• .
'K ■•.,-riyfAA'^^ . V:"-'■ -	— 5'A''	'"' -' -S' - ■ - "A. i'i ■ ■ - ‘' ■'':-- '.A . ., ■	* '“■■'■
L'.-' .• T.-u■• ’' .	.S ’- - If-.:	. . - s,»C'^'v*'‘.'-.*X.N	• .'■	■	'
. r*v-■ -i	A.;$:;c-yL*'T-o	-,;i •.	''.r ■ ••"^;.	-	-■ r-,	^ -_•
V"" <:	LAVA:'- ^	-•.T' ' S'
N4^SS|NS^S	.■ ^v>-i:oiSN "SvN- S-'v

■ r^.;- ■

• V. .	t, .
VALAAKVA
" ^ *•	.•	'.•■	■'.y.'■	■ ' .-•	-t-T“ /• V.t	•
^	v.'L - ''■..■■.•■ "A ■ ''*	'• '". .. , *•',.	'■■'*0'' . - C-• /I':-'.*'-‘
-A -	■	*'■ ■ L -	•'•• bF'' .' X ■	'»•’; •	' ■ -A./'Vy y'"
•	■' '■• ■	. J.:'" ,’.-■ •,• ^	S ''■■< S - ‘' A'- '■'■ '*• h- •^v' '*■-'■ ■'-■•. *• '' i.'S'*'"*. *. • ' '	‘	’ V^r'—.-C'
- -■■■■:-■	'F-> . t - ■ T	\ ' Vt- ■-.-S' V-A C '-V:L-''-" s'
'->v ' .'A'' ^ ^'T'V	-"-’C-rT A'/-NT

' • ■: ,.;v

•■ ■< ■
V ' **•
- ‘A.L '; ^

■ '.f'c'
T "/ ' VT'- ■
at:


:• --- 'S-DcCN - ■•' C-.N-NN7N^
ddr^FFA--' ■'
V>- ^ i
';Vr 'S-.	'"'S^	- v '
L'FS-VVVx IV'' ' C-. ' V


"""L-> ALvAriVAVAfVVVM
w ^ . 1 S
;
THE


H
T O
Y
O F
Miss Lucinda Courtney:
/
1 In a SERIES of
ORIGINAL LETTERS:

V
Written by H e r s e l f,
r
0
To her Friend
I
Miss CoNSTANTiA Bellmour.
A New Editi O N,

IN THREEVOLUMES.
LONDON:
Printed for F. and J. Noble, at their relpedive Circulating Libraries, near ^diddle Ro^Wy Holhorny and Sai7it Martin’s Courty near Leicejier Square.^
MDCCLXXIII.
u. of Pa,
Ubrafi
co^


>' T
§
•t
••
«	•
•	•
•	«
»•

t 4
•	•
«	#
»•
♦•n ^ j F<*
S f
•»
•»
’»T<.'
A
THE
HIST O R Y
O F
Mifs Lucinda Courtney
C^c^c^c$oc^c$oc$oc^c^c^c$ocj^o$oc^o^^ oj^c^c^
Mifs Lucinda Courtney, to
ikf^ CoNSTANTIA BeLLMOUR,
(In Continuation.)
H E next Morning I went
V"i
^ T ^ down to Breakfafl i
in an
I
-1.'.
>	•'fT
elegant Difhabille. Mr.
li K
was Sitting in a penfive

VoL. III.
B
#
Posture,

.At

il

<Si
<r

i

The history of
Posture, leaning against the Back of his Chair, my Coufin playing with my Lap Dog. After the ufual Compliments, we reinained filent for Some Time. At last. Give me the Dog, faid I, fmiling, fince it fsems to be all the A-mufement we are likely to have,
I
I cannot think what makes us all Such pretty Company this Morn-
As for me, I have Some Ex-cufe. Since I was a Rake last Night, and exhausted all my Spirits; but my dear Coustn, and the gay Mr. Williams, what has put you into the Vapours ^ I don’t know. Said MiSs, Foreji, I
ing
r
think your good SpouSe has infected me with his Stupidity.
But come, tell ine how you was
entertained
Miss Lucinda Courtney.
3
entertained last Night; fay Something, for Heaven’s Sake—give me a Description of the Com-
I did So;—but in So ludi-
pany.
crous a Manner, that Mr. WiL Hams laughed in Spite of himfelS. Upon my Word, Said MiSs Kitty^ you are a witty Creature, when you chuSe to difplay your Vivacity. I find one must be careful of one’s Behaviour before you. Since you are Such a critical Observer.
A Servant just then brought me a Letter. I Saw, at the first
MiSs
but I affected a
Mystery
and put it into my Pocket unopened. Mr. Williams watched my Looks with Attention, and
B 2
vistble.
I
4
The history of
viSible UneafineSs. I Soon after
4
went to my Chamber to read it. She informed me that fhe had followed my Instructions > and fpent the Evening with my Cou-fin. She congratulated me on the Succefs of my new Method of treating my Hufband, declaring She never faw any Body fo restlefs and uneafy as he was the lafl Night; that he hardly took any Notice of Mifs Forejiy but made a Slight Apo-logy, and went out. She like-wife told me, that She discovered a growing PaSTion in my Coufin for Sir Harry; exhorted me to perfevere in my afiiimed Character of Sprightly Indifference, and, her Life for it, I Should be fucceSsful.
She
Miss Lucinda Courtney, c
w"
She added, there was a Ridotto in the Evening, and advifed me to
p
£0 to it, and She would accom-
pany me
I determined to follow
her Counfel, and went immediately to propofe it to my Coufin, who consented with Joy.
Who is to be of the Party ? faid Mr. VVilliams. 1 don’t know yet; Mifs Foreft and Mifs Blair
are the only Perfons I am fure of.
♦
If you will permit me, faid he, I will make one. I have no Objection, faid I, Smiling, but that it will be a little in the AntedV luvian Manner, to go in Company with your Wife. No Matter, faid he; we will endeavour to revive an old and better Fashion than at prefent prevails
B 3
Though
6
The history of
Though, perhaps, you would rather have Sir Harry to eScort you? Fm too complaifant to own it, if I had. Said I; but your going
need not prevent his. Yes, by
%
Heaven, but it Shall, cried he, with Emotion. Dear Sir, Said I, Smiling, moderate your Tran-Iports; he is, perhaps, engaged, and I am Sure I Shall not afk him. But I will. Said Mifs Fareji, if I can meet with him, for he is an irnmenfe Favourite of Happy Man! Said Mr. Williams; I would not with him to know his own Confequfence, fince he would not, perhaps, makq the most generous Ufe of it. Fye, my Dear, cried I; it is not well done to fpeak against your Friend.
Tow'
mine.
Miss Lucinda Courtney.
7
Tour Friend, you mean. Madam,
----- That’s the Same
I fuppofe.------
Thing, Said I, with Vivacity for, you know, what’s mine is yoursthough, I believe, you Sometimes think what’s yours is your own. Company coming in, changed the Conversation.
After Dinner, I once more made the heft Ufe of my Toilet. My Motives mull plead my Ex-cufe for this Vanity, Since I only drefled to pleafe my Hufband. I Succeeded prctty well, I believe ^ for he paid me Some Compliments. I admire you,^ faid he; v/hat have you done to yourfelf ? I never faw you look fb well. How happy might we both have been> had you taken as much
F 4
Pains
8
The history op
Pains to pleafe me, as you now do to gain the Admiration of the

World ! Would you, then, have loved me for fuch Trifles ^ Said I. I thought you had a jufler
Taffe, and that Good Humour and virtue were the heft Arts I could ufe to fecure your Heart.
True, anfwered he, they have the moft intrinfic Worth; but what is a Diamond unpolifhed ? Well, obferved I, it’s a Pity I did not know your Mind fooner—its too late now.
Here Mrs. Williams was inter-
✓
rupted by a Servant, who brought me a Letter. I faw it was from my Father, and trembled with
Apprehenfions,
fuppofing
the
Contents would be difagreeable.
I would
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 9
I would have deferred reading it ’till Mrs. Williams had finished her little History, but fhe would not Suffer me, hoping. She faid, to have Time enough, before fhe lost the Pleafure of my Company.
^ I went to my Apartment, and, with great Emotion, opened the Letter.
Oh, my Friend ! my Father commands me to return to Town immediately ^ and informs me that the Major is novy (by the
Death of his Brother) Sir George Ereemariy with the Addition of a
large Estate.	He congratulates
* \
me on my approaching Felicity,
as he calls it, which, he fays, the
•
impatient Sir Geidrge will defer
B 5
on
10 The history of
f
no longer than till the Ceremony of his Brother’s Funeral is over.
Hated
But be it
So—I ought to be unhappy, fince
the dear Monbag
So. Yes,
my Father, I will obey you. Good Heaven ! —but thy Will be done.—Adieu, my Dear, I go to acquaint Mrs. Williams that I muft leave her To-morrow Morn-
mg

London.
I took an affectionate Leave of Mrs. Williams. MiSs Franklin, hearing I was going, flew to fee me.
Oh, my Sweet Creature ! Said flie, am I then So foon to lofe
you

Miss Lucinda Courtney, ii
you

And that beSore our
a
Friendfhip is half cemented ? I
had* ten thouSand Things to tell
you—fee how you affect me. I
have hardly wept So much fince I

was born, as I have done within
. this half Hour, that I heard you
was
going
Men,
Monkies,
Lap-Dogs, Parrots, periffi all!
If you forget me
s
worth my Care.. But fay, will
you write to me } — My poor
Brother too—let me die if yon
have not turned us all topfy
turvy.
I Smiled. I cannot forget you.
my Dear, Said I; but, if you
think it poflible, write often
9
and put it out of my Power.
She embraced me. I take you at
B 6
your
12 Th
LP
HISTORY OF
your Word, I fhall pefter you with Letters. The oftner, the more welcome they will be, an-fwered I; but. See my Dear, the
Chaife is at the Door.
Adieu.
X
Continue to love me, I fhall efleem it a great Happinefs. I then hurried from her. Mrs. IVt/-liafns again took me in her Arms Heaven blefs you. Said fhe, and fupport you under your Trials. I fhall See you when I come to Town, and hope to find you more
I
happy than you expect to be. I made no Anfwer, for my Heart was full.
I found young Mr. Franklin at the Side of the Chaife. He handed me in, fighed and preffed my Hand — I bowed my Head,
and
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 13
and the Chaife drove on. Alas !. with what cruel Speed did it bring me to the end of my Journey, and the Beginning of my dreaded
Misery!
My
Joy
my Marriage. My Mother embraced me with her ufual Ten-dernefs, but my Pleafure at feeing them was damped with the cruel Reflection of what I was going to Suffer. My Father again congratulated me on my good Fortune. You’ll be the happiefl: of
I
Women, my dear Lucinda, faid‘ ; Sir George is the worthiefl of Men. I fighed—he looked a little difpleafed. My Mother feared I flrould offend him, and
I
therefore
he
14 The HISTORY op
therefore Said, I had better go to my Chamber, for She thought I looked a little fatigued. I gladly took the Hint, and retired, and immediately fat down to inform
my dear Cotijiantia of my Situation —- and now, every Thing is preparing for this hated Marriage .
The Major, or Sir George, I care not which he is, is to be here this Evening. Lm out of Breath, I Shall never have Spirits to go through with it. Adieu. My Mind is fo uneafy, that I cannot even write to my Friend I hardly know 'what I fay. Once more, adieu.
Sir George has been here—nothing but the detested Marriage
was
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 15
was talked of.—My head aches
#
I’m teazed to Death—He has beSpoke a handfome Equipage. The Mercer is Sent to, with an Order for Some very rich Silks But all thefe Things that our Sex are faid to be fond of, are Trifles, that cannot engage my Attention for a Moment—My Heart is incapable of tasting any Pleafure.
A Letter is just brought me, from Mifs Franklin.—Dear Creature ! She is very obliging.
Fo Mifs Courtney.
O
H! my dear Lucinda, how; Shall I Support your Absence ? Let me die if I know what to do with mySelf. — You
have
The history of
have carried all the Beauty of the Country to Town with you : I can hardly believe it’s the fame Place.
But how is my fweet Friend ^ Well, I hope—IKotA/a Sadifimo but free from the Vapours, like poor half-witted me,''who have not Solidity enough to be Sorrowful, except when I think of your Abfence.
Tell me what you are doing I want to alk you a thoufand Queftions. How do the Fellows
go
on
Your Slaves, I mean
Are they tractable ? They fay _ here, you are going to take the Management of one of them on yourfelf.—I with you Joy—fliut your Eyes, and take the Leap
It
Miss Lucinda Courtney'.
17
It can’t be helped. Since Marriage is a necefSary 111, and will come
when it will come.
But, for Heaven’s Sake, tell me all how and about it. -You know we Spinfters love thefe kind of Subjects — Heigh Ho ! the very Thoughts of it make me figh.
Here has been my teazing
Brother
He wanted to know
who I was writing to, but I would not tell him. You love Secrets, Said he, but I can gueSs who it is—I, too, am going to
write to the charming Lucinda. He is actually doing as he Said.
What Nonfenfe can he be Saying Telling you he loves you,
I SuppoSe; if So, let me not call
it

1
The hist ORY of
it Nonfenfe, fince it is almost the only thing he ever strewed any
Taste or Discernment in.
But
he is rather too late—a Day behind the Fair, as they Say.
Oh, I had almost forgot. The finest Fellow in the World I die for him—Harry Montaguey I mean—you must have Seen him Yet, no, it can’t be, or you’d have told me; for he is, with-

out Exception, quite the Thing j only a little too much upon the
not So much awake as I would have him. —And yet the Wretch can look very waggisti, when he pleaSes. Such a Pair of Eyes! If he had only one Eye, with that alone, he would do more Execution than Half the Men in
England
**
Hi
t
'ill
(■
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 19
England could do with a Dozen. Yet I don’t know what to make of him—we can hardly ever get him amongft us—-he wanders a-
bout and hides himSelf in fliady Groves, So like a Pajior Fido The dear Creature—-I fhall absolutely grow in Love with him.
We are to have a Ball—I’m beating my Brain to contrive Some Method to get him for my Partner; and if I Should, what a Triumph will it be over our rural MifSes, who rave about him as much as I do ! What an envied Creature Shall I be, while I look , Disdain on little Folks below! Then my dear female Friends wHl hate me So cordially,
that it will be quite delightful.
But
20 Miss Lucinda Courtney.
But I fee him
Sure he is com^
Fi
mg
here
Quick, quick, Betty;
m
bring Powder and Patches in an
Inflant. I fly to meet him.—Dear
Creature, adieu. I love
you
WitneSs my Hand,
Clara Franklin.
would I give to be in. your Situa-
tion !
Envied Felicity ! to be
blefSed with the Prefence of the
most amiable of his Sex! Well
may you admire him ! Oh ! my
Donjiantia, what a Fate will that
Woman’s be, who stiall call him
her own !
Be gone, ye too
pleafmg Thoughts, how dare you
interrupt, my Miferies ? It will
foon be a Crime to indulge you.
F arewel.
fv
tl
d
s
Happy Mifs Franklin ! What ^
The history of
21
li
,n

al
h
i
y
I
1
t
at!
m
)0
)U
ill
a.
;L
Farewel, then, most lovely and most beloved, farewel, for ever !
Adieu, my Friend, I must an-fwer Mifs Franklm s Letter, and then my Father expects me.
I have a thoufand Things to do, yet want Spirits to apply to
any thing. Alas !
Co7iJi,
this is the last Time I stiall be permitted to fubfcribe myfelf by the dear Name of Courtttey, tho’ no Change fhall ever make me 'with 11 lefs Sincerity your
Lucinda-.
SChurfday Morning.
Here am I, my dear Friend, more dead than alive, dreffed out and adorned, waiting to be facri-
ficed;
2i2 The HISTORY OF
Feed ; for So I think I may jullly fay of this hated Marriage.
My Mother has been endeavouring to conSole and fit me for
How through
the dreaded Ceremony. ftialL I be able to go
with it—Mufi: I, indeed, fwear to love, honour and obey a Man whom I cannot fo much as endure the Thoughts of} Will it not be downright Perjury ? —But let
thofe who force me to it take the
^ }
ConSequence—I made all the Re-
f
fiftance I could, confistent with my Duty.
Every Carriage I hear puts me
<'
in a Tremor—My Father is a-
% »
mazed at the Man for flaying So
.
long, and half angry.—I, on the contrary, pray Heaven he may
never
ti
la
e,
HI
tl
) a
7
3
IHJ
iev(
Miss Lucinda Courtney.
23
never come. Yet this Delay is a little extraordinary — Tis almoft ‘a] Eleven.—I am Sent for—Sure he
1 ■
is not below ! I fliall faint how I tremble!
Oh,

A little longer ReSpite.
To
be fure, the Man has changed his Mind. My Father is out of all Patience. He has, indeed, to come from Kenjington, where he has lived ever fince his Brother’s
Death, and that would take fome Time. — I fancy he has over-flept himfelf.—Heaven grant he may
not wake thefe Twelvemonths !
%
I wonder how I am able to write—but I believe it is a Relief to me. Yet, after all, I
Shall
24 The HISTORY op
(hall never be—Hark ! Somebody knocks at the Door. Good Heavens!
Oh, my Dear, ' Sir George has met with a dreadful Accident ! My Father is Sent for to him. It is faid his Life is in Danger. I declare I am Sincerely concerned for, though I could not like him as a Hufband, I efteemed, and would willingly have looked upon him as a Friend, if he would have been Satisfied with' that Title, without afking what I could not grant, but with the
greatest Rductance.
Man
he will foon, I fear, be indifferent about either. It was by the Overturn of his Chariot, that he received his Hurt. He had ordered his Man to, drive very faft,
willing
Mj[ss Lucinda Courtney,
to fbew his Impatience, for what he was pleafed to call
willing
hiB Happinefs.
Fatal Impa-
tience for him, poor Gentleman! ----How ,I pity him! So lately
come to his Title and Estate, and fb Soon to iofe them, without ever having enjoyed them ! Such is the Instability of all earthly Happinefs ! I long for the Return of my Father.—I dread, yet
yet the Surgeon gives but little Hopes of it — however, I fhall
have a more certain Account,
\ ^
when my Father returns — I am quite impatient for it. — Heaven knows, I would not wiHi to be delivered from a dreaded Mar-
wisti Sir Georges Recovery5
xiage, by his Death!
VoL. III.
C
I hear Some-
s6
The HISTORY of
Somebody knock at the Door. My Father is come — I must go down to him.
There are no Hopes of his
to See me.—My
begs
Life.—He Heart dies within me, at the Thoughts of the melancholy Scene I stall be witnefs to—But I go. Adieu.
Do you not pity the worthy
f §
Man ? I am almost blind with
crying. The Toy I stould have felt at being delivered from a hated Marriage, is lost in Sorrow for the unhappy Caufe. I rejoice, however, that I had con-fented> as Difobedience to my Parents must have drawn a Curfe upon me. But once more
adieu.
t
I
it
a
(
i
h
11-
1
01
Miss Lucinda Courtney.
27
adieu. The ChaiSe waits to carry
me to the difmal Interview.

I am returned.
Oh !
my
Friend, how moving was our Meeting ! The poor Sir Gtyrge, pale and dying, Seemed to revive a little when he Saw me.—How kind you are ! Said he; this obliging GoodneSs makes amends for my unhappy Deftiny. Alas I my adorable Lucinday with what
“V
different Profpects did I hope to
fee
you again
when we lafl
parted! Good Heaven ! — but I Submit. Yet, Surely, my Fate is Singularly unfortunate; Sunk
y
thus, from the Height of Hap-pineSs to the Depth of MiSery ! ^"1 He was too weak to proceed,
and
C 2
2$
The history of
and I too much affected to make f any AnSwen After a Paufe, For- |
'	#	i
give me. Said he, moft lovely and ’ befl beloved of Women, that I
I
have ever given you Pain, and do not hate my Memory. May you be happy with the Man of your
Choice, and may he adore you as I do—I fee your Senfibility—Pre-
cious Tears!
and for whom are
they fhed? Let me enjoy the
delightful Thought I
The moll
charming of her Sex weeps for my Misfortunes! They vanifh they ought not to appear, fince they have procured me So rich a Confolation.
I was Sitting by his Bed-fide He took my Hand and prefSed it to his Lips—-I fobbed, unable to
Speak
■J
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 29
My Father was leaning
Speak
upon the Table, his head upon his Hand, with a fixed SadneSs
upon
his Countenance.
He
mourned both Sor Sir George and his own disappointed Hopes. You cannot imagine a more diS-mal Scene. I exprelSed Some Part of my Sorrow in almost unintelligible Words, my Hand still held by the now Sir George. I called for Help Some Cordials that were given him, a little revived him. He fixed his Eyes on my Face, and, after Several Efforts to Speak, in a weak Voice, I wiSh, Madam^
[ I
Said he, to testify the Sincerity of my Affection to you, by bestowing Some Part of the For-
c 3
tune
3°
The history of
tune that Death will foon de-prive me of, upon the moll wor-: thy of her Sex. I beg that you,;
I
Mr. Courtneyy will order the re-
* 1
quilite Preparations for my mak-|
ing my Will, and be fpeedy, myi
1
good Friend, for I find there is ho Time to be lost.
The Doctor came in just then, and likewife an old Gentleman, who, I found, was a distant Relation, and next Heir to his Title and Estate. As foon as Sir George faw him, he held out his Hand. I give you Joy, Said he, on the near Profpect of the Advancement of your Fortune. You have a large Family — It gives me Some Pleafure to know that my Death will deliver a deServing
.Man
Miss Lucinda Courtney, ji
\
t
Man from Difficulties, and make So many happy.
The Gentleman Seemed much affected with this generous Speech, and was going to anfwer, when the Doctor, feeling the Pulfe of his Patient, declared, that if we would not wifh to Shorten the little Remainder of his Life, we fhould leave the Room, for his Fever was already greatly heightened by our Difcourfe. I arofe, and flipped out, without being obferved by Sir George, to whom I was loth to give the Pain of parting.
As Soon as I got into' another Apartment, I flung myfelf into a Chair, and gave free Vent to my Tears. You will, perhaps.
C 4
wonder

The HISTORY of
could not love j remember, my Dear,
wonder at the Sorrow I exprefs
for one I have often declared I
you muff
as I
before Said, I only diiliked him as a Hufband. You condemn, aps, my obflinate Averfion to him in that Character, fince I acknowledge I efteemed him. But, Oh! Conjianfia, you muft be ignorant of Love, if you don’t know that it is a much more
exalted PafTion, a tender, inex-
#
preffible Something, far different from bare Approbation, or cold Esteem. I fuppofe, one might make fhift to pafs one’s Life with tolerable Quiet, with a Man who is only not one’s Averfion i but what an inflpid State must that
b
»
P
^5
%
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 33
be, and how much is a Single Life to be preferred to it.? You See, then, if I have exprefSed my-felf clearly, that one may like and yet be far from Love. But had Sir George been my Averfion, in every Refpect, I must have
been moved at the melancholy Condition he is now reduced to.
My Father had ordered the Chaife for our Departure. He came into the Room where I was, and looking at me, Yon
have Caufe to
weep
faid he
I hope you now See your Error, but your Repentance comes too late. Had it not been for your Perverfenefs, you had now been Lady Freeman, instead of which, if Sir George dies before I return.
c 5
you
\
34 The HISTORY of
you will be--But come, let us
go, continued he, I need not anticipate Misfortunes.
What can he mean ?—^I would not afk, but followed him, and
we
fet off for Town.
Our
Journey pasted in filent Sadnefs. My Father left me to go to Sir George s Lawyer, and I drove Home, where my dear Mother was waiting, with anxious Impatience, for my Return.
Are there any Hopes ? Said fhe, as foon as fhe faw me. I fhook my Head.—Alas! refumed She, poor Sir George! Is he, then, dead ? No, Madam, Said I; at least he was not when I left
him, but he is not expected to
live.
My Mother wept
Ah 1
Luanda
5
Favour.
Miss Lucinda Courtney, 35
Lucinda! Said She, you have lost a valuable Man I True, Madam, Said 15 yet I cannot regret him as a Hufband, though I Sincerely lament him as a Friend.
She alked for my Father. I told her where he was gone, and what Sir George defigned in my
Generous Man I Said Ihe ^ but no new Instance of your Worth can add to the Value I always had for you. I
wifh—and yet dread the Return of Mr. Courtney—You fay there are no Hopes—but still I fhall
not be able to divest myfelf of
fome, till I know the worst.
I left my Mother to inform you of this strange Turn in my Affairs. This was to have been
C 6
the
36 The HISTORY of
\
the Day of my dreaded Mar-
---What an unexpected
riage
Change I My Heart is divided between Grief and Joy, but the latter has only found Place in it, fince I began to write to you. I have Time for no more at present—-I must attend my dear, afflicted Mother.
My Father is below.
Poor
Sir George! I dread to have my Ptears confirmed. Yet, there can, alas! be no doubt of his Death, stnce my Father has left- him
But I must go down. Adieu.
’
It is too tme^—Sir George is no more! I found my Father
leaning ba^k in his Chair, with a Countenance that exprested the
deepest
Miss Lucinda Courtney.
37
deepen Concern, and my dear
Mother in Tears.
This
was
enough. I Said nothing, but Sat down, and join’d in their Grief. My Father, for Some Time, continued Silent—At laft. Unhappy Girl 1 faid he, looking at me;—you will now have real CauSe for Sorrow! You have long lamented thofe which were imaginary, prepare now to feel
remedilefs Misfortunes!
Your
generous Friend was dead before I returned, and his Intentions in your Favour are frustrated. His Succestor told me he died with-

out having Time to Will. Dear Sir, Said I, let not this give you Pain—I am but as I was, and destre no other For-
V
tune
3^
The HISTORY of
tune than the Affection of you
I
and my dear Mothen This is fine talking. Said he; but you will too Soon be fenfible of many other Wants; for I muff now let you into the true State of my Affairs, wliich I wiffied to conceal till you Was provided for in Marriage, hoping, that fo no-ble-heaited a Friend, as Sir George^ would have afliffed me to bring
them into better Order
but
> .
that happy Profpect is dead with him, and novy I fee nothing but Ruin ftaring me in the Face.
What ffiall I fay to yoiit continued he, turning to my Mother, with Emotion; how excufe my Imprudence ? My haughty Spirit would never, till I was thus
Miss Lucinda Courtney.
i
i-
HI
3.9
fully convinced. Suffer me to acknowledge mySelf in the wrong; but now I am compelled to con-fefs your Worth, and the ungrateful Return I have made to
So much GoodneSs. Alas I
I
have luin’d you!—^He could not proceed, and was obliged to pull out his Handkerchief.
You may guefs my Amazement and Concern. I got up to leave the Room, thinking it improper for me to be Witnefs to a Father who was condefcending to acknowledge his Faults. He obferved me.—Sit ftill, faid he; you, too, have been a Sufferer by me—I have not always ufed you fo kindly as you deferved.—Dear Sir, faid I, fobbing, Spare me;
ft
I can-
40
The HISTORY of
I cannot bear this Goodnefs, GoodneSs 1 repeated he; alas! it is now fruitless, it will not
repair my
Errors.
My dear Mother, ctways patient and compoSed, entreated him to forget what was paft. Do not condemn yourfelf. Said She, and, believe me, I never will reproach
you
Let me know the worst of
our Affairs: I fliall not be fur-prifed, as I have long fufpected they were a little involved. But do not defpair, trust in a gracious Providence, and let us not be wanting in the Ufe of Means to retrieve them, as far as we can. Best of Women ! faid my Father, embracing herj your Goodnefs
cuts me, to the Heart. What a
%
Fortune
Miss Lucinda Courtney.. 41
Fortune did you bring a worthlefs Wretcii who has Squandered it, as well as his own 1—And yet
»'
will not upbraid your Undoer 1 If you love me. Said fhe, talk not in this Manner. He lifted up his Hands, and Eyes—Alas ! my Dear, Said he, you fufpect not the w^oict, or you could not be.thus patient. The curSf Love of Gaming has been my Ruin. I mufi fell my Eflate, already deeply mortga-ged
I have Debts of Honour^ as they are called, but what I now, too late, reckpn my greatest Difio-flour'y befides a Number of oth--ers—The little Remains of my Fortune will hardly be Sufficient to discharge them.—Good Heavens I what will become of us!
He
42 The HISTORY of
k
He claSped his Hands together, and, fixing his Eyes on the Floor, continued filent.—At laff, ffarting from his Reverie, It miift be done, he cried; I can no longer endure the Infblence of my Creditors—they will no longer be put off—my Perfon is- not fafe. Let it be done. Said my Mother, I am eafier, fince I know the worfl. Settle your Aflairs, let the Eflate go, we cannot be So mi-ferable in any Situation as that of being in Debt. Endeavour to recover your Spirits, my Dear Huf-band : Things may turn out better than we expect; you have Relations of Rank and Power. Relations ! faid he, interrupting her, and Shaking his Head}
true,
Miss Lucinda Courtney* 43
'	i
true, I have Abundance of theiu, but very few Friends : and you know they have taken it into
Heads to be offended at
%
me; for what, indeed,, I acknowledge myfelf to blame, but my
Family, and not they, are the Sufferers. Every Pretence is eagerly feized, that may free them
t
from giving thc nfelves any Trouble. I have no Hopes in them: I mull, without' their afiiflance, make the befl of my Shipwrecked Fortune. I will immediately apply myfelf to the fettling my perplexed Affairs. I w'ould not, for another Month, endure the Torment of Mind 1 have for fome Time felt, for the Wealth of the Indies. My dear
Mother,.
/
44
The history of
Mother, in the tendered: Man-
✓
ner.
encouraged him
in his Re-
Sol Qtion.
I had hardly been able to keep
mySelf from fainting, during this
Conversation, and was forced to
leave the Room, as Soon as
my Father had done Speaking.
My Mother came up to me foon
after.
Oh! Madam, laid I,
a
Stroke is this ! Peace, Child, faid
file, do not let us make it worfe
by fruitless Complaints. Oh! my
r
dear Mother, anfwered I, but
who
can help feeling ?
Yet,
Heaven knows, I do not grieve
for myfelf; I can eafily be pro-
vided for, but what will become
of
my beloved Parents ? Have
you
I
1
«

ii
i
i
fi
I
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 45
yoh forgot, replied She, to whom we have hitherto been indebted^ Is the Power of the Almighty abridged ? Or, will he forget to be gracious ? Recollect yourfelf a little, and beg of Heaven to-
ff renethen
your
Faith. Do not
rr
me
thus afflict yourfelf (feein ftill continue to weep) remember there is a Providence.—I muff go to your Father, he stands most
in need of Confolation. I expect to find you more compofed, when I fee you again. So faying, stie left me.—-I fat Tome Time half stupified with Grief.
Oh! my Conjtandia, what an unlooked-for Misfortune is this! I knew my Father’s Estate was large, and that my Mother’s had
greatly
46 The HISTORY op
greatly added to it. I was, in-
w
deed, Senfible, that he Spent too
freely, and the Hints he gave
me not to expect a Fortune,
made me conclude our Affairs
where a little embarraffed; but
how little did I imagine what has
happened! Yet, believe me, as I
Said before, I do not fear for my-
felf, nor think I have any Right
to call his Conduct in Queftion;
it was his own, and he ought ,to
do as he pleafed with it. But,
alas! my Friend, Shall they, at
this Time of Life, have Such
Difficulties to flruggle with, as
are inseparable from Poverty.? I
must lay down my Pen—I can-
not See for my Tears—The Pa-
l
per is So blotted, you will hardly
be
b
V
r
1
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 47
be able to read what I have jlJwrotel—Farewel I Heaven grant better Days.
love
Do not ceafe to
Your unfortunate
Lucinda.
I'i-
r
Monday.,
X
What a Scene of Bufinefs is his Houfe ! And what Sorrowful
Company are we to one another! Only my dear Mother firives to appear chearful; but, alas! her
eart is deeply affected. I fear or her Health. She hurts her-
her Yet her
ale Countenancei in Spite of er Endeavours, difcovers her in-ard Troubles, ,
, My
}
^_elf the more, by concealing Grief. All patient!
:ail'
Fa-'
The history of

My
is continually re-
proaching himSelf as the CauS of our Misfortunes,—All our Servants are difmifTed, excepting one Maid, who lived with my Mother
before fhe was married.
This
.good and faithful Creature is as

as any of us, for Nearly does fhe love her Miflrefs. We are denied to all company Indeed our Affairs have not been So Secretly carried on, but that the Caufe is gueffed at, and every one is eafily' perfuaded not to moleft the unfortunate, by too much Civility. I doubt not but
4
Vie Shall be forgot by our numerous Acquaintance, as Soon as our Fall has been canvaffed at the Tea-Table, and Supplied the
f
Dearth
t
I'll,
.1^
s« Li>cinda Courtney.
49
Ibrting
Dearth oS Conversation and Scandal; then we may fink into Oblivion.—But be it So; I am tired of the World, and do not Seek its Friendfhip, -
My Father is almoft contiiiu-ally engaged with his Creditors, while my poor Mother and I are
what Plate and Jewels ai*e to be fold^ and Selecting the deaths. See. we intend to keep
the general Ruin. —- G ood Heavens !' /What a melancholy Talk! Yet the dear Woman never breathes a* Complaint. The rich deaths, that were bought for my unhappy Marriage, . are now laid out; but with what a different Intention from what
they were defigned for 1
VoL. IIL
D
But
thofe.
4^
V
50
The history of
Marriage.
thofe, at least, I part from without Regret, Since I never pro-poSed myfelf any Pleafure in the wearing them and, in Spite of all that has happened, I feel Some little Joy, when I reflect, that I am now in no Danger of a forced
But what do I fav?
j
Alas 1 I hardly know either what I would or have. All my Leifure is still employed in the dear Talk of writing to you.
I have had a Letter from Mrs. Williams. She tells me fhe Shall Soon return to Town, as Mr. Montague is now Set out on his Tour. — Heaven preferve him! But. I cannot with to See Mrs.
not
Williams.
She
is very good
but
s'r*r
Miss Lucinda Courtn'by. 51
but Pride (Misfortunes ‘ have taught m.e that I have my Share) will not Suffer it. Adieu. I am called.

*
^ •SJ


I fhall Sink under the Weight of my MiSery. My dear be-
Mother
IS
ill
very
ill.
r
She concealed it till her Weak-nefs threw her into fainting Fits. Hardly would fire be perfuaded to go to Bed 5 and endeavoured to affuage our Fears, Saying, fhe Should Soon be well—but, alas! her Face contradicts her kind •Delign.
My Father is
Oh,
my Friend!—the very Picture of Sorrow. Fie fays little, but, every now and then. Such Sighs efcape him, as would melt the most
D 2
Savage
52 The HISTORY of
lavage Heart into Pity.
He ne
ver leaves my dear Mother, but when his Bufinefs obliges him. For me, my Eyes are, indeed, become a Fountain of Tears:
t
Only my dear Mother appears all Refignation and amiable Patience. But I fliall lofe her! MiSerable Lucinda! This lafl, this beft-loved Bleffing, muff: likewife be torn from you, that you may be a Monument of perfect Wretch-ednefs ! It would melt your tender Heart, if you was prefent at the melancholy Scene that is presented in my Mother’s Chamber. My Father fits with his Arms acrofs, his Head leaning againfl the Back of his Chair, his Eyes fixed on the Fixe; but who can
defcribe
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 5^
defcribe his Countenance ?
I
take my Place at my dear Mothers Bed’s-head, my Handkerchief fpread over my Face, to hide my Sorrow, all wet with my Tears. , My loved Mother Suffering a painful Sicknefs, yet not fo much as uttering one Sigh, far lefs either Peevifhnefs or Com-
plaint.
Oh! my CojiJlantia^ I
cannot bear it! My Heart will break!
My Father has prevailed on his Creditors to poftpone all farther
Eufinefs, till fhe is either better, or — I cannot name the fatal
W ord.
Good Heavens avert it!
She drew back the Curtains this Morning, with her dear
D 3
Hand
54 The HISTORY or
Hand, almost reduced to a Skeleton.
My Lucinda, Said She, where
are
you
?
Here, my beloved Mother, Said I, taking her burning Hand in mine^ what can your Child do for you ? Only this. Said She; forbear
to
yourfelf in this Manner: you will not let me recover. I stiould
have Hopes, if I could fee my
\
dear Mr. Courtney and you more eafy. My Father drew near to the Bed; he could not Speak, but, with a deep Sigh, her Hand to his Lips, lifting up his Eyes to Heaven. My dear Mother withdrew her other Hand from me, and took my Father’s
in
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 55
in both hers, and looked on him with inexpreffible TenderneSs: At laft, turning again to me. Let us not, my Dear, Said fire, wafle our Time in fruitlefs Grief. You will oblige me if you will order the Bible to be brought: let me be feafled with its delightful
Truths. — Read it, my Luanda, it will give us all Confolation. I obeyed her immediately, and, endeavoming to compofe myfelf a little, I dried my Eyes, and
read to her in a low Voice.
I
opened that Chapter, where St.
Paul fays. We reckon, that the Sufferings of this prefent World, are not worthy to be compared with the Glory that Jhall be re-vealed* Delightful Truths! ex-
D 4
claimed
56 The HISTORY of
claimed my dear Mother ^ I be- ] lieve, and reft fatisfied in Such' a noble Profpect. My Father i liftened, with a fixed Attention, i while I was reading. I fome- ' times looked at him, and found
^	I
his Hands clafped, and his Eyes turned up, as if with ejaculatory ' ’ Prayer. A fick Bed, my dear Cortflantiaf is a moft Memento — few are fo hardy as not to feel the Leflbn it teaches^ at leaft, wTile prefent.
After I had read for fbme
ftriking
Time, my Mother told me flie felt a Heavinefs, which made, her hope fire was going to be blefied with a little Sleep. I think I feel myfelf much better, Said fire; I do not defbair of my

. 0
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 57
s
Recovery. My Heart leaped for Joy at this reviving Speech. 1 retired Softly, and went to my own Room, that I might acquaint you
Re-
t
with this happy Change, joke with me, my dear Conjiantiai I feel a Dawn of Hope She may
yet live — Good Heaven grant
\
it! Adieu, my Friend, I will go down to her. Continue to love

Your Lucinda.

Oh, Mifery
fery!
This is too much! Mother! Alas! fhe’s gon Wretched Lucinda!
Mi-
My
ever!
can no more—I grow faint.
I
D 5
Monday.
58
The history op
Mondaj,
It was not Suffered me to write, Til now. What a long
Fortnight has this been I What
did you think was become of your poor unhappy Friend? Alas ! my Dear, I have been at the Point of Death. — Happy for me had I never recovered to a
Life of Wretchednefs! Oh, my
beloved . Mother!
Since
I have
loft you, what can be worth my Care? My Tears, at the Remembrance of this dear Parent, will not Suffer me to proceed. Sound, indeed, was thy Sleep,,
Oh best of Women: for never
/
more v/as you to wake in this miserable World I But I muff
not
-.
Miss LuciNnA Courtney- 59
not dwell on this melancholy SuB^ ject.
My poor P'ather is inconsolable.—His Affairs are fettled, and, Small indeed, is the Pittance that remains of his once flourish-ing Fortune. He is going into the Country, "till he can determine on Some Plan for once more eftabliShing himSelf in Life. His Friends have promifed to procure him Some Place under the Government: They have it in their Power, "tis true, but Pro-
c
miSes are not much to be depended
N
on.
Our Furniture, and
every
other Thing of Value, is difpofed of, and your forrowful Lucinda
IS
endeavouring,
D 6
being
waited

6o The HISTORY of
f
waited on, to reconcile herSelf to the Thoughts of performing that Office to another. Begone, my Pride, you will ill become my humble Condition! Yes, my Friend, I am determined to Submit to this, rather than be dependent on the Bounty of Relations, or infulted with the Pity of my Acquaintance. What
t
conftant Mortification fhould I meet with, and what cold con-
ftrained

from
thoSe
who were, once^ proud to be thought my Friends! I know e-nough of the World to make me wifii to fly from it, and this is the only Way to be lofl to all
r
but my Father and my Qonftan-tia,
Mrs.
Miss Lucinda Courtney.. 6i
Mrs. 'Williams has called Several Times. I could not prevail on myfelf to See her. Yet I believe She loves me.—But fhe cannot be offended, as my juft Grief gives a too good Pretence to avoid all Company.
I am determined to take Lodgings at my Milliner’s, who,' I know, will do all in her Power to affift me in my De-fign, and is the propereft Per-fon to apply to on this Occasion.
My Father Sets out for the Country in a Day or two; at which Time I fhall, likewiSe, re-move to my new Habitation in the City. I am pleaSed that Mrs. S?mIh lives there, as I ft all
be
62
The HISTORY of
be quite unknown, and far enough removed from my Acquaintance, who, I wish, for the future, may be ignorant of every Thing that
concerns me.
I Shall write to you from thence. Since I am convinced, in whatever Circumflances I am, you will honour me widi your Friendship, and kindly interek yourfelf in the Prosperity or Ad~ verfity of your
Lucinda.
I cannot, my dear obliging Conjiantiay accept of your Invitation. I know you wifh me to comply with your Offer; but I need no new Proof of the Sincerity of your Friendship. If you was
indepen-
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 63 independent, I would, without
i
Scruple, make you happy, by giving you an Opportunity to oblige ;—but, polite as your' Mother has always been to me, flie may not, perhaps, like an Addition to her Family, efpecially as you have lately hinted at her having Thoughts of a Second Marriage.—In that Cafe, it would be quite improper*
Do not be uneafy, my dear Creature, I am reconciled to my
Fate — only continue to love me.
I know you will. Since your Mind is above the rest of your Sex, and your Esteem for me is founded on Qualities which Fortune cannot rob me of.. Do not afflict
yourfelf for my Abafement — I
look
64 The HISTORY of
look forward to it without any great Concern.
My Father took a melancholy Leave of me Yefterday, and I am now at Mrs. SmkEs, who is a good kind of Woman, and.
what
is very uncommon, treats
me with as much Refpect as ever, notwitliflanding my Change of Fortune. She tells me, I fhall Soon be provided for, as Ladies are frequently applying to her for young Women who are in want of Places.
I have now been a Week here, and Mrs. Smkh continues very agreeable. If I could forget what I have been, I Should not think my Situation unhappy. I
enjoy my Thoughts v/ithout In-
'' 1,
terruption,

Miss Lucinda Courtney. 65
terruption, and Time begins to
Soften my Grief into a melan-
/
clihly which is not unpleaSing.
»
I begin to think the Remainder of my Life will glide on in quiet Obfcurity. I feem to have no Concern in this World,, and, but
♦
for my dear Father and you, fliould fink into perfect Infenfi-hility to all beneath the Sky—I Sighed juft then, hecaufe Mr.
Montague
fliot
acrofs
Thoughts. Where is he now I What a vaft Tract of Sea and Land divides us !—But what is that to the innumerable Bars that are placed between us Such is the Will of Heaven, and I Submit. I have nothing left me
but to pray that he may find
that
66
The HISTORY of
that HappiheSs with another, I
once had a diftant
he might
fhare with me—for, alas! thus
Sunk as I am, I can never hope
to fee him more.
Mrs. Smith fends for me—i
Lady waits to fpeak with me i
in
the Parlour. I come—My
rits are
go, I fup
pofe
to fee
my
Mist
How Hiall I ftipport this humb-
^ • k.
ling Interview I—Adieu—I mui
try.


^ %
When I went down, Mrs
Smith met. me at the Foot of the
Stairs. My dear young Lady,
Said She, Mifs Hill is in
the
Parlour. She is pleafed witli
the Description I have given
her
of

{
1
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 67
of you, and is deSirous that you iliould live with her—rl hope-you will not find her diSagreeable. She Said no more, but opened
the Door, and I went in.
The Lady was Standing before the Glafs, humming a Tune. She
turned round on
my
IT
I curtfied—flie eyed me with Some Attention, and bridledS Is this the Perfon you mentioned to me ? Said fhe looking at Mrs. Stnitb, Yes, Madam. — I don’t know whether She will do. Said Mifs Hill. Then, turning a-gain to the poor blufhing Lucinday
I
alked me, with a haughty Air,
if I had ever been in
be-
fore ? No, Madam, anfwered I, piqued at her Behaviour. No!
repeated
' '--vr'--
68 The HISTORY of
M
repeated fire, I am Sorry for that
I fhall not like to be at tk
YO
Trouble of
teaching
you yout Pi
Bufinefs. I am afraid you’ll be ta
very awkward—you fcem to want p
Spirits : I hate a dead lumpilli h
Creature about me. I fancy I <;
flrall not be able to pleafe yon, y
then. Said I j I am obliged to ]
Mrs
1
find one more
to the
1
Lady’s Tafte. I curtfied, and
was going
Mifs Ht/l
to b
O
C/
good tempered, and,
1
fuppofe. Would wifh to be pro-
vided for—^^I think I will try
you
I muff absolutely have a
Servant immediately, as I am go-
ing into the Country in a Day or
two.
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 69
two. Few People would take you, as you have never been in Place, but I am of a very charitable Difpofition, and Should he
loth to leave a young Creature
#
dellitute—You know this is my Character, Mrs. Smith—^You Say;, you’ll anSwer for her Honefly, lb ni e’en venture to take her. You may come to my Houfe To-rnorrow Morning, turning to me, and we will fettle about your Wages. I made her no AnSwer, but curtfied, and left the Room.
As Soon as I got to my Chamber I burfl into Tears. I in doubt whether to accept of
t\,
this Place, mortified as I was
was
at the disagreeable and haughty Behaviour of Mils Hill. Yet, alas!
thought
The HISTO RY of
thought I, I may wait long enough before I meet with one who will treat me as I Should
wifli. Submit, then, unhappy
Lucinda; lay afide your Pride,
and Submit to your humble Fat^,
Mrs. Smith came up, as Soon
<■
as the Lady was gone. I am a-fraid you will not like Mifs ILi\[
Said She; I did not expect Ilif would have treated you as She has done. I advife you not to go her To-morrow, and will let hef
I
f
know you are otherwise provide!
for.
No, obliging Mrs. Smith
Said I; I will not give you that Trouble. It’s true, her Behavioii
has not prepofTefTed me in he Favour j but I am, neverthelefs determined to accept of tli
Place
(
(
''' Miss Lucinda Courtney. 71
ilk	'
Place. One, in my Situation, muft not be too nice. I will be
if
humble—fhe may be file thinks proper; I Shall endea-
vour not to -regard it.
If you
can put, up with that, my dear Lady, Said fhe, you’ll find no other-Reafon to diflike living with her—but I’m afraid you’ll never be able to^ Submit to her imperious Temper. Never fear, faid I;
I am determined to try. Are Mifs iZ/7/’s Parents living ? Only her Father, replied Mrs. Smith', he was formerly in BufineSs, and acquired an immenfe Fortune. This Lady is his only Daughter, who, notwithflanding her Perfoii is very plain, is followed by a Number of pretended Admirers,
whicli
A
72
The history op
which makes her think herSelf ex-treamly handfome, and her natural Vanity is greatly heightened by a Match which is on foot
between her and a young Noble-
/
man, who, it is Said, is a very -accomplifhed Gentleman. His Efiate, indeed, is greatly encumbered by his Extravagancies, So that you may gueSs at the Motives of his AddrelTes; but Mifs IH/I
attributes it all to the Effects of her Beauty; fo blindly partial is Self-love. I am Sure it was your Perfon that made her treat you[ as fire did; and, I dare fwear, if
V
fhe had Time to get another,
before fhe goes into the Country,
»*
fhe would never have confented to take one of your Figure.
You
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 73
You are going, my dear Mifs
Courtney, to the mod: delightful
»
Situation , in the World. Their Seat is a mofl charmino; Place.
w	O '
That’s Some Comfort,. faid I ^ I am very fond of, the Country. But now I must beg the Favour of being left by myfelf, as I have Letters to write. She took her Leave immediately, and I wrote to' my dear Father, to acquaint him with wliat had happened,
and likewise to you, my dear
Conjiantia. ■
Adieu^it is late—Good Night.
I fhall dream of Mifs Hill.
^ ^ ^ % A: %

I have just drested myfelf for my Expedition, and that in the plainest Manner. Here comes
VoL. III.
E
Mrs.
74
The HISTORY gf
Mrs. Smith.—Don’t you. think I
am a compleat Abigail? No, really. Said fhej I think I never
,
Saw
you
look
genteelen
Hill is fond of having her Maid drefs gaily: She fays it is the Fafhion at the Court End of the Town. She would not, there-fare, think yours Showy enough, on any body elfe^ but I fancy fhe will difpenfe with your mak-
ing Ufe of Ornaments.
Hufh,
hufh, my dear Mrs. Smith, cried I -y don’t let me hear any more of your agreeable Flattery—you’ll absolutely make me vain. I took up my Gloves. I am going, faid I, wifh me Suceefs. That I do, with all my Heart, returned She, and attended me to the Door.
I
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 75
I eaSily found Mifs Hiirs. When the Door was opened, I for the HouSe-keeper. She came immediately. I aiked if her Lady was at Leifure, and if I could be permitted to fee her ? The good Woman (for I pearance) Said flie would enquire, and, (hewing me into a Parlour, left me.
I waited a considerable Time,
without feeing any , body. At laft (he returned, and, bidding me follow her, led me into
r
IIilIs Dreding-Room, which was very elegant. She was fitting at her Toilet, her Maid attending.
the Room, flie
When I
was
where to
ce a
Patch to moft Advantage, and
E 2
took
76 The HISTORY of
took no Notice of me, though I had made two or three oS my heft Curtfies. When She had put on the killing Patch, She turned to her Maid.—What are you about? dawdling Wretch ! How long am I to wait for my Cap ? May I die, if the Creature is not afleep.
Pray roufe yourSelf, good Mrs.
Drowfjy and bring it me. Which would you pleafe to have ? Said her Maid. Stupidity ! cried Mifs Hill'y that with the blue Ribbons, to be Sure. You know I never intend to wear any other Colour, Since his LordShip told me I looked So charmingly in them. I am Sure they are quite the Thing, for he has an immenSe Tafte.
Then,
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 77
t
Then, looking flightly back at
But
me
$
So, you are come
what do you fland there Sor} You may venture to draw a little nearer—I fliall fprain my Neck if you don’t. I ' approached. She
looked at me with Attention, then at herfelf in the GlaSs, and coloured.
I don’t believe you will be able to put on my Cloaths,- Said
She;
3.
t lead:, if I may judge
by the Manner you have dawdled
on your own. There is a great
^ • /
Difference between us. Madam, faid I; I ftrove to drefs according to my Station, but fhall
be under no fuch Reftraint when
#
I put on yours. True, faid She.
E 3
Indeed
?s
The HISTORY of
♦ Indeed it’s no great Matter how you are—Some People will not look well in any things—III e’en
tiy you—I fhall give you T wenty
♦
' ♦
Pounds a Year, and you may come here To-morrow, for I go into the Country the Day after.— , harkee — (for I was going) I’ell Smith to fend Home my
Linen, and be fure She does not
/
disappoint me, or I’ll never for* give her. I promifed to obey her Commands, and left her, heartily glad that this difagreeable Affair was fettled.
I told Mrs. Smith how I had been received, and that I began to be reconciled to the new Way of Life I was entering into. Since I was more inclined to laugh at
Mifs
Miss Lucinjda Courtney. 79
MiSs iJ/Z/s ridiculous Vanity,^ than be angryand if th^ was her only Foible, I could eaSily put up with it. ——'She exprelSed her Joy at
rance^
^ •*
I delivered the Lady’s
her Maid came in a Mb-ment after with new Orders. I ain glad I have got away from my Tormentor. Said She. I wifh you Joy of your Place, but I can tell you, you had need to have the Patience of a Grizzle^ to bear
with
her
perverfe Humours. Such a little Lump of Vanity I never before met with L I was ready to die with laughing this Morning after
was gone. Did you ever. Said fhe, looking
E 4
after
8o The HISTORY of
after you, fee fo awkward a Creature - No, Madam — for I always Say as fhe does. She has a tolerable Complexion, tho’, proceeded She ^ but then, your fair People fade much fooner than the brown j nor are they Half fo much admired by the Men.
No, to be Sure, Madam.---
But what a tall, Gralhopper-
Thing it is! faid fhe.
My
#
Lord would not be able to en-dure her —he detests your long, May-pole Figures.
I was foon tired of this talkative Dam fel, , and went to my Room, where I fat myfelf down to inform my dear friend of what has pasted.—But I must lay down my Pen, for Mrs. Smith invites
me
» %
A)
Miss Lucinua Courtney. 8x
me to fpend the Short Time I have to stay in her Company. I cannot do lefs out of Gratitude and
Civility; for I am now under great Obligations to her, for her friendly and polite Behaviour to me.
.When I am at Mifs	you
fhall hear farther from
Your Lucinda..


Behold ine, now, my Friend a commenced Abigail.
>
as
Mifs Hill fent for me, as foon the Servant informed her I
was
come. I found only her and her rather in the Parlour.
a
r
He looked at vme
•V	F 5
Is this the;
young
I
The HISTORY of
F
young Worn an you mentioned ? Said he. Upon my Word, a good
Perfon. His Daughter
#
gave him a Look, that might justly be called a Piercer. Go, Said She, turning to me, the Houfe-keeper will Shew you my Apartment, and give you my Keys, that you may pack up my Cloaths for my Journey. I did as stie ordered me.
We were very bufy, and had almost stnistied our Talk, when Ihe came hastily into the Room. Lay down my Things, Said fhe,
and drefs me this Minute.
you know-.
turning
Do
to
HouSe-keepe
is come to dine with us ? I did not expect his
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 83
« •
till we got into the Country--*but the dear Man cannot live without feeing me.—Come, be quick, good Belli (that is my new Name) for Heaven’s Sake, make me a little decent — I protest I am excellively
fluttered.
She fat down to her GlaSs, and I began to comb her Head, which, like Lord Foppington\ Wig, has not above nine Hairs on a Side; but, as I have a pretty good Knack at Dreffing, I friz’d it out, and made it look tolerable y and put on her Cap too, much more in Taste than 1 had ever Seen her wear it. When I had done, She looked at herfelf, and her Eyes Sparkled with Pleasure. Upon my Word, faidfhe.
E 6
you
84 The HISTORY op
f
/
you are a clever Wretch, to what I thought you. My Head looks
i
charmingly! My Lord will be in Raptures ! But, indeed, my| Hair is reckoned good, andj drelTes very eafily. Come, put^
I
on the reft of my Cloaths—I die to go down. When this important Affair was over. She took out Lace and Wire, ordered me to make a Smart Cap for the Morning, and then flew to her Lover. I took up my Work, and went to my own Room, where, before I begin this Said
Cap, I have a great Inclination
*
to attempt the Picture of it’s
though
She
IS more
than Painting can well exprefs.
In
large

Miss Lucinda Courtney. 85
In the firfl Place, flie is fliort and thin; not very v^ell fliaped; Hands and Arms lean and veiny; her Neck long and fciaggy; the lower Part of it as flat as you pleafe, and of a moft dazzling Brown. Her Forehead is and fquare; her Face towards the Bottom,, thin and picked; a fliarp Nofe; a wide Mouth, which displays a Set of Teeth not much reSembling Ivory; ancl her Eyes, which fire fays are greatly admired,; are little and black ; one of them rather too much enamoured of her Nofe; and her Complexion, when in its native State, brown and pale. Such is the fair Mifs Dol/y IlilL .
Her
\ \

86
The history OF
Her Father, for I must intro-
duce him too; is a little plump
round Figure. Wears a bufhy
Wig, which forms a Rampart
round his Head broad enough to
l
walk on. His — but I forget the
Cap
Adieu.

I am pleafed to find that the
Butler and Steward, with whom I
dined, are grave, elderly Men,
and very civil.
My Lord took his Leave after
Tea. We are all to keep good
Hours To-night, as we must rife
early To-morrow for our Jour-j
ney
It is not yet Eleven, and 1
hear the Ladj’s Bell for me to
I
undrefs her.—Good Night

1
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 87
r
t
t-
1
Stx o'dock,
• »
MiSs Hill is in a very bad Humour. They tell me She is al-
ways So before Breakfaft
I hope
then, it will be better, when I See her again. The Coach is at the
Door
I am to have the Honour
of a Seat in it, with Mr. Hill and his fair Daughter. — Wifh us a good Journey.
I am arrived at the fweetest Place in the World, after a tedious Journey, as I thought it, for the Lady continued in an ill Humour all the Way. I find
her Father doats upon her, but
#
fhe does not Seem to make a very grateful Return; her, Face, indeed, brightened up now and
then.
88
The history of
I
then, when her intended Marri
c
age was the Subject. It Seems it

is to be folemnized when they re-
I
turn to Town again. My
1
(
in the mean Time, is to be their| |
Gueft in the Country for a Month
i
or two. I fuppofe flie will not
i (
be perfectly in Tune till he comes, i
1
She fays fhe hates the ffupid
Country. Eefides this, fhe de-
tefls reading, and is not doat-
Work. However,
She expects I fhould, for fhe keeps
me in conflant Employment. I am
now about finilhing fome Chairs,
the whole of which are to paSs
for her own doing.
I could wish for more Leifure, [
to ramble about this delightful
Place 3 however, I make the moll
of
I
Miss LucInda Courtney. 89
of my Time, by rifing early, when I am Sure to have feveral
Hours fo myfelf, for MiSs Hill
%
lies very late of a Morning j in-deed when flie is up, fbe hardly khows what to do with herfelf Saunters about, and is peevilh. to every body, for want of Some-
thing . to
amufe her.
Amazing I
that People, who enjoy every Thing they can wiSh for. Should not be happy. I think I could, if I was in her Situation—Yet, perhaps, I may be miffaken—’tis
not the Time, nor Place.—I muff break oft' my wife Reflections in the Midft—I hear her Bell.
Heaven be praifed, my Lord is come at laft. I fliall now have a little Peace. I was dreffing my
Lady

90
The HISTORY of
Lady this Morning, but could
do nothing to pleafe her; when,
lol our Ears were invaded witii
the pleafing Sound of a Carriage
Mifs flew to the Window.
Good Heavens! cried flie, there’s
my Lord’s Poft Chaife! I looked
over her Shoulder, and Saw a verj
fplendid Equipage, and a Numbei
of Servants. I wifhed to fee his
Lordfhip, but my Lady tent me
for her Ruffles, before he alighted.
I finifhed her Drefs in a violent
I
for fhe was all Impatience
to fee her Lover ^ yet fire took
Time, before fhe left me, to give
me a strict Charge not to leave
my Work, but to keep dote in
my Chamber, and, above all
Things, not to walk in the Gar-
den

de
m
0
P
a:

t
c
r
t

a
.t
if
li
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 91
den, for She would never forgive me, if She met me there. Droll Orders, enough, theSel but I will pundf ually obey her 5 Since I am as^ averSe to being Seen as flie could wifli. I still have the Morning to myfelf, as I do not our noble Guest is an early stiSer, more than his charming, Mif* treSs.
My Lady is
•	f
Creature, Since the , Arrival of
*
ili her Swain i and I fhould now
. if
«
II'
•)
like my Situation very
4
I; it vfas not that I am obliged to
I
I
t dine with my Lord’s Gentleman, a most ridiculous Fop, who has taken it into his Head to be vety fweet upon me, truly. I
can
1.
%
p2 The history of ;Mis
r
can hardly behave with commollias
Civility, and fometimes almolftliat
forget
my Station. How darlishr
fuch a Wretch look at a Womaihear
whom a Montague thought tolera|])in:
bl
el
I hope he’ will not have tlv jy
AiSurance to fpeak plainly to nit
about his infolent Love! I
Hm
lofe all Patience, if he does.
er.
I
tha'
My Lord has brought a Frienljy^j
of his to pafs a Week or a Fort-tj)e
night here; one Sir George Spright
out
fy. Our Way of Life is quitelfee
changed fince they came. I likejGi
nothing worfe than being obligedlsir
to fit up very late. The Houfe is Fc
continually filled with Company.Ide
I have not yet Seen our two Vi-'yc
fitors, as I punctually follow mylui
Lady’s Orders, and tjie Room fliehc
has

Miss Lucinda Courtney. 93'
n I has picked out for me is fo fituated ft I that I can fee nothing. Writing re i is my only Amufement. Adieu, hi I dear Conftantia — I am called to ^■ | Dinner.
'	i»	•
My Lady was a little out of
Humour, when I went to undrefs
>
her. My Head akes, faid fhe;
lie
ne
all
^ed
; IS
Die
has
that little impertinent Creature, j Mifs Elliot, has tired me to
rb I Death. I ana fick of her Co-
I quetry. I vow it is amazing' to
fee the Forwardnefs of fome ike I Girls! She is ready to ride upon
Sir Georges Back -—
IS
loft
I am
• but her
e ne
ny. I defpiSes her -^‘But come, what are
9	■
V1-f you gaping at Why don’t you my I undrefs me.? You plague me.
^	•	J| V-X	X.	Vrik
too, with your Awkwardnefs.
I
found
94
The history of
fhe
relapSed
U
old Humour, So I made no An
ac
fwer, for I am always Silent upo|
Ih
ar
thefe Occasions.
MiSs
iHi
be .handSome, by her being

much out of Favour with Mi
ILt'/d. She Suffered me to takeol
tu
her Cloaths, without Speaking
ki
an
Word

Meditations,' to have a little Cli
li(


with my Friend.
A

You make me ferious, f
Dear, by the Description yq q
give
of .your new Fatki ]]
I must take the Liberty to
COB;
P
demn your Mother for marryiBi
at her Years, efpecially So yoiiBj n
a Man. Yet I hope he
|r
m
treat you better, when he is moii
o:
acquaint
It
11
f
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 95
acquainted with your Merit. I Ihall be truly wretched, if you are unhappy. — Heaven forbid I Ihould have fuch an Aggravation of my already too great Misfor-
r
'If tunes.
ils|
)f
fl'
leil
lati
m
101
ler,
III'
ms
}
LIB
?
.1
Wlii
(
lOli'
its
I am obliged to you, for your kind Enquiries after my Father. He is well,, but, you may believe, very melancholy, on my Account, otherwise he is pleafed with his Retirement, which, he fays, he would never wifli to quit. He is quite altered in his Difpofition> which gives me great Pleafure.
Adieu, my dear Friend, I am fo fleepy I can hardly keep my Eyes open—’fis alrnoft two oiclock.
I-have
\
96 The HISTORY of
^	^	^ '	^ Hi	^
I have-had a little difagreeablc Adventure this Morning •— I am a good deal vexed at it.
' I arofe early, as. ufual. The| Weather was delightfully plea^
which determined me tol an Hour or two in tliel
V
Garden. In palling the Parlour, I Saw Mifs IIi/Is Guitar, lyingj on a Table, "and was Seized witli a foolifli Inclination to take it with' me; which I the more readily indulged, as I knew I couldj tune it again, in cafe of any Acd
dent.
my
I accordingly flipt it un
for fear of meet-
ing any of the Servants, and, running. into the Garden with it, fat down in a Sweet Arbour, at
,.	'	a good
’.i
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 97
a good Distance from the Houfe, and begun to Sing and play that pretty Song of ThomfoEs, which
a little applicable to
I
inyfeLf.
“ For ever., Fortune., wilt thou frove^
“ An unrelenting Foe to Love ?
“ And when we meet a mutual Heart.,-“ Come in between., and hid us fart V
I had just finished, when a gay young Gentleman Sprung into the Arbour.
If MuSick has Charms to Sooth
K
the favage Breast, cried he, what Effect must it have upon mine, that is all tender Softtiefs?-. You may imagine my Situation. I Screamed, and hastily arofe to leave the Place. Nay, you stiall
VoL. Ill,
F
not
98 The H I S T O RY of
not fly from me. Said he, extending his Arms; I am your voluntary Captive, and thus (catching hold of me) I make you mine. I Struggled from him—I befeech you. Sir, Said I, let me go you
don’t know what ill ConSequence
%
it may be of, if you detain me here. — You are, I Suppofe, my Lady’s Lover; if So, I entreat you not to mention your Seeing me to her—She will never for-
Your Ladyi cried that So angelic
give me. he; is it a Creature as you Should be placed in a Situation So unworthy of you, whofe Beauty and Accomplishments entitle you to be Mistrefs of the World? I beg a Truce from your Raillery, Sir,
faid
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 90
1
c
c
T
ne
a
r.

Said I, and again entreat you to let me go. You fhall, preSently, my Sweet Girl, returned he; but, firft, I muff undeceive you, as to who I am. You fuppoSe. me
mu
> Lover; there you are miftaken, nor do I know any body that is. It’s true, my
Friend has
LendrelTe
Fortune, but he muff have a de-vil of a Tafte, that could fancy any thing elSe about her. Well, Sir, Said I, you might have Spared this Explanation — it’s nothing to me who you are. Yes, but it is, cried he; you ought, and iliall know, that I am your Slave. Shew your Obedience, then. Said I, and let me go, this Minute. I will, Said he; but first you
Id
F 2
must
<
100 The HISTORY
OF
muft promise one Thiiig—Pra
I
Sir, interrupted I, don’t torment
me any longer — I endeavoured to

prefs by, for he flill Hood at the
Entrance of the Arbour to
pre-
vent my getting out, but he Seized
both my Hands — Now, he Said
let’s See which is strongefl, you
or I. I beSeech you. Sir, Said I
You fhall, in a Minute, replied
he, endeavouring to kiSs me. —I
was ready to die with V exation, at
being treated in Such a Manner,
and looked disdainfully at him.-
My Station is humble, faid I,
but it Snail not Subject me to
Such inSolent Freedoms,
Oh,
my Statira /
Oh my angry
h
s-
f(
«
ti
Dear ! — cried he, ironically, be-
hold


(
1
out of all Patience, let me pafs i
Miss Lucinda CourTney. ioi
A
hold your penitent Admirer a Supplicant at your Feet, fueing for Pardon! I was highly mortified; and cried with Anger. Nay, Said he, this is too much I fliali be miserable iS you are ferioufly offended. Have I not CauSe.? Said I—but, perhaps, you think a Creature, like me, ought to bear any Indignity from one in your exalted Station. —• Let me die, Said he, if ever Such a Thought' entered my Head : Your noble Behaviour and amazing Beauty, raifes you above your Condition, and claims the higheft Refpect. Permit me, my lovely Crep|ure, to exalt you to one worthy you. IIebafe me, you mean, returned I bdt come. Sir, I claim your
Promise
F
3
102 The history of
Promlie—it’s full Time for you to
✓ *
grant me my Liberty. I cannot think what Pleafure it can givej
yon to keep me in Pain. Go,
\
then, divine Creature! Said he, Since you infill upon it, and Mum’s. the Word; not a Syllable of the Happinefs I have enjoyed this Morning, will I mention to the fair Cit; and one Reafon is, be-caufe I would not have my Lord know any thing about you, for the World. No, no, I has^e no Inclination to add to the Number of my Rivals—Remember, I know there is Such an Angel in the Houfe, and I expect you will Sometimes appear to me, notwithstanding the Care your Sweet Mif-
irefs

'

Miss Litcinda Courtney. 103
trefs taLes to keep you inviSible. Let me die, if I am not infinitely amazed how her wiSe Lady Ship eould think of taking Such a bewitching Creature into her Floufe, except it was to lock you up from the World., Oh, pray no more Compliments,
I; I
fhall be obliged to you for not mentioning your feeing me ; and So I bid you Good Morrow. Pie bowed—and I flew towards the Houfe,
heartily glad
to be re
leafed from my tormenting Companion I and if ever he catches
me again
111	give him Leave to
eat me. — So there’s an End of my Morning Walks — yet. Sorry am I to be deprived of them I fhall now be a Prifoner indeed!
F 4
I laid
IQ4 The HISTORY of
I laid the vile Guitar where I found it, and went to my Room,
where I am
waiting
for MiSs
IHIFs Riling. And now, what do you think of my foolifh Adventure ?—It gave me a good deal of Uneafinefs, but it is over, fo ril think no more about it.
Sir George feems to be good-natured, and, I fancy, will not mention it. Good Heaven! what
would Mifs Hill have been in, had fhe caught me
away with her Gui-
I
tar! I can hardly help laughing, at the Thoughts of Such a whim-
-----but, thank my
a Rage
chanting
fical Scene
Stars, it did not happen.-----^Do
you know, that Sir George very much refembles Mr. Montague‘S
Judge,
r
Miss Lucinda Courtnty. 105
Judge, then, if he is not hand-fome! and if I have not a Sort of Partiality for him! I dare fay
this fame Lord (I don’t know his Title) Mifs’s Swain, I mean,, is not half fo charming. Adieu, I hear her Bell.
The Butler tells me, the Company talk of a Dance. There are, it feems, juff fix Couple of them. My Lady, he faid, did not feem to relifli the Propofali but fhe was forced to confent, overborne by, the Beaux and the Belles,, who all voted for it, againft the World. Mustek is fent for—It is Pleafui'e’s Golden Reign with them — Every body joyous but poor I.-------

IS
----Yet do
not think I can be unhappy,
while
F 5
io6 The HISTORY of
while my dear Father is well, and I am honoured with the Friend-fhip of my beloved C4onflcmtia.
I
I was fitting in the Houfe-keeper’s Room, when the Butler
came m
from
waiting
at Tea'*
There’s a fine Piece of Work in the Parlour, Said he; I could hardly keep my Countenance. Vctiat’s the Matter? Said I. Matter 1 Why, there’s ’Squire Eoxley come, and overturned all
their Schemes.
H o w fo ?
Why, he loves Dancing almoft as well as Hunting, and there’s no Partner for him. Madam, who was all along averfe to it, made this a Pretence, and Said, they had better defer it, till fome other Night.. Every body was
againft
Miss LircrNDA Courtney. 107
against this. At last Sir George cried out, he had hit upon a Method that would Settle every
thing.
They all eagerly afked
what it was ? Why this. Said
he 3
Mils ILill has an Abigail^
I Suppofe. Oh Lard ! cried my Lady, interrupting him j how can you think of Such a Thing.? Nay, Said he, hear me out, there
is nothing So uncornmon in the Propofal—I have Seen thofe Dam-fels introduced a thouSand Times, upon the like Occafion, where
there were' not Ladies enough.
*
I dare Say none of the Company
will have
any
ion
You
know they are only brought in as a necestary Evil, like the dead Man at Whist. Very .true, cried
F 6
all
io8
The history OF
\
all the Ladies; it’s an excellent Scheme. Do, dear Mifs IIjll, let her be admitted, rather than Spoil our Frolick—The awkward Creature will add to our Diverfion.
I can never con Sent to it. Said my MistreSs—thoSe Kind oS People ought to be kept at a proper Diftance—befides, I am Sure my Dawdle can’t dance. So that fhe
will only give us Trouble. I dare Say you are miftaken as to her dancing, Said my Mailer j fire looks as if stie could prance about as well as the befl of you.
Well Said, my old Friend, cried Sir George, clapping him on the Shoulder; , I See we fhall carry
s
the Day. —My Lady gave her Father Such a Look—I never Saw
one
r

Miss Lucinda Courtney. 109
one like it.
You’re a fine
Judge, to be Sure, faid fhe; I wifh you would pleafe to keep your Opinion till it is afked. Well, faid Sir George, to end all Difputes, rU take her for my Partner, unfight, unfeen—I ought to take the Confequence of my own Scheme. Let it be fo, then.
faid my Lord, Lady, who fat
turning to fwelling
my
with
Anger, which fhe was obliged to Stifle; e’en let her come, my dear Creature, you will oblige me, by giving your Confent.
t
As you pleafe, faid ihej it fhaU
He
be fo, lince you defire it. took her Hand, and put her into
a little better Humour.
And
now, my pretty Mistrefs, continued
I I
no The HISTORY
OF
tinned the Butler, you may pre^ pare yourSelf for the Ball. I am delighted to think how the Miffes
will stare, when they fee you— Istaith you’ll cut them all out. Sir George will have the best of it, that’s all I Shall fay—My poor Mistrefs, how stre will fret! I think I fee her ready to burft with Envy.—He was running on
in this Manner, when the Bell
^ /'
rung for him.
I am vexed to Death at the Thoughts of this fbolifh Dance I heartily v/iSh my Lady may change her mind. I hope the Butler will bring me Word I need not go — I will go down
-----Well, what News}
to him.-----
Said I. The good Company pre-
fent
Miss Lucinda Courtney, hi
Sent their beft Refpects to Mifs
Said he, and beg the Favour of her Company to a Ball. Pilh, Said I, don’t teaze me. Well, ferioufly, returned he, my Lady’s Orders are, that you make your Appearance as^ Soon as Minuets are over. I am forry for it. Said T I could wifh my-felf lame, rather than be obliged
tne
to do what is So
to
me. Heaven forbid! faid he; I would not, for the World, lole
feeing you kick
the Pleafure of
up a Drift amongft them
So
pray put on your beft Bib and Tucker. Not I, indeed, faid I* I fhall go juft as I am. Nay, observed he, for ■ that Matter;
you
ti2 The history of
you want no Ornament—you are pretty enough already.
Was there ever Such NonfenSe, my Dear! I hate the Thoughts of it I However, 111 go quite plainly
%
drelTed—my Lady fir all not have it to fay, that I took Pains to adorn
. But adieu—I must go.
You will be Surprifed at what I am going to tell you—But let me lead to it.
I went into the Parlour,
as
Soon as I was Summoned, with an eaSy Air of Unconcern, without that Bastifulnefs and Confu-ston that, I fuppoSe, they expected to See me in. I looked Rightly over the Company, and
took
Miss Lucinda Courtney, i 13
took my Place at the Bottom of the Room. Sir George came up. to me, and looked as if he was
highly delighted.
Come, Mrs.
Bettyy Said he, you and I
foot it together, it Seems, And
no bad Thing neither. Said Squire
, who flood next us, you
may think yourfelf well off, in having Such a proper DamSel I’ll be hanged if you have not Seen her before, or you would not have been So ready to take your Chance. Mind your own Partner, Said Sir George^ you have no Bufinefs with mine.
The other.
more’s the Pity, cried the The Dance beginning.
put an End to this foolifh Dif-courfe, and I now cad: my Eyes
to
II4 The HISTORY of
to the upper End of the Room, in order to See who was Mils IIilIs- Partner — but, good Heaven! what was my Amazement, when I beheld in him the de-teiled Lord Cleave]and I A Faint-nefs Seized me, and I trembled fo that I could hardly fland.—Sir
George,
whoSe
Eyes were never
off my Face, obServed my Pale-nefs. What is the Matter, dear
Creature.? Said he. Softly, taking
/
my Handj you are not well No, anSwered I, faintly; a little Water, if you pleafe. I was going out of the Room,, but fuch a Giddinefs Seized me, as obliged me to throw my Self into a Window-feat, to prevent my falling.
Sir George brought me fome Wa-c	.	ter.
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 115'
of the Room
ter. The Company, farprifed,
gathered round me. —> My Lady
She thought what would happen: the poor Creature was confounded at being in fo much Company.—Let her be carried out
we can do without
her. No, Said Sir George, thank you for that, I have no Inclination to fit Still, and be an idle Spectator of your Pleafures—Leave her to me, I will Soon recover her.
My Lord (for, as I did not quite faint, I could hear and fee
My Lord, I
all that
Say, looked as if he did not know whether to believe his Eyes or
not.
I never faw a Man So
aStoniShed. — At lad:, coming a little to himfelf, he endeavoured
to
ii6 The HISTORY of
to get between Sir George and
Stand a little farther off,
me.
Want
Said he, you stifle her far of Air. Mifs Hilly out of all Patience at this Scene, took hold of his Arm. For Heaven’s Sake, cried fhe, take no farther Trouble about the Creature. Let the Servants attend her. Come, my Lord, we may go on with the Dance. He could not refufe
N
her, fo permitted himfelf to be led to the other End of the Room j his Head turned back, hardly knowing what he did, to look at me, who now began to
be much better.
I made an
Apology for the Trouble I had been fo unfortunate as to give > but the Ladies took no
Notice
MissLucinda Courtney. 117
\
Notice of what I Said, and left me, to refume their Places. Sir Gevrge then, freed from Wit-iiefles, began to treat me with great Tendernefs; to put an End to which, I arofe, and drinking a little more Water, faid I was well, and if he ffill chofe that I Ihould dance, I was ready to attend him. He prefled me to defer it a little longer, till I was more perfectly recovered. ’Tis enough that I have the Happi-nefs of being near you, faid he; I am indifferent whether I dance or not; I want no greater Pleasure. I made no Anfwer to this Compliment, but flood up in my Place, endeavouring to refume my Spirits, My Lcurd was dancing.
ii8 The HISTORY of
ing, but So abSent, So inatten
lively, that he forgot both Fi-
gure and Time. Mifs Hill looked
very much difpleafed, and the reft
of the Fair Ones call none of the
mofl favourable Glances at me.
I was piqued, and, calling upon
my Pride to affifl me,' determined
to recover my former Serenity.
What! thought I, Sliall I be af-
fected at the Prefence of this vile
Man
No—let Mm be difcon-
■certed, he who has Peafo
afhamed. I will be compoSed,
and Shew him, I difdain to give
myfeif any Concern about him
I hope I am now out of his Power
I will not give thefe Ladies, who
already look with fuch Haughti-
]
I
1
nefs ]
Miss Lucinda Courtney, i 19
♦
f
neSs on me, caufe to think I am awed by their Prefence.—Tliefe Reflections were of Ufe to me
I held up my Head, and looked,
I believe, a little flately, determining not to call: fo much as one
V.
Glance at his LordShip.
While I was thinking in this Manner, he came to turn me.
1 pretended not to fee him, that I might avoid giving him my Hands; but he, it feems, was determined to have them, though he put himfelf out of Time by it. ' He prelTed them, hut I took no Manner of Notice, not fo much as lifting my Eyes, Sir George whifpered me, I fee my Friend is caught as well as I^ but you do well not to give him any
Encou-
120 The history
OF
N
Encouragement. I had neither Time nor Inclination to make him an Anfwer, as it was our Turn to go down with the Dance. I -believe I may, without Vanity, allure you, I did not perform amifs. Sir George affected to be in Raptures. — He took my Hand.------
Charming 'Creature! Said he; I never Saw Such a Dancer before. I Swear I would not change you for the Queen of Sheba. I Smiled. You Shan’t Smile, Said he, you’ll kill me outright, you little En-chantreSs.—I Shall call you Names, if you go on in this Manner. PiSh, Said I. You may be angry if you pleafe. Said he; I wilh you could make yourfelf ugly. I turned my Eyes, by Accident, on
My
Mi5s Lucinda Courtney. 121
4
My Lord, and found his fixed on Sir George and me, with an Appearance of Jealoufy and Chagrin. I muft own, I enjoyed his Pain, and was glad to mortify him, by Seeming to liften to his Friend. You may believe, however, I was heartily tired of this
Scene, and earnefily wifhed to be releaSed from it. This Happi-neSs was granted Sooner than I expested; for MiSs LZ/V7, amazed, and highly difpleafed at the cold Behaviour of her Lover, w^as Soon tired with dancing j and, pretending to be greatly fatigued, flung herSelf into a Chair. My Lord reludiantly followed her. Mifs Elliot (not much delighted with
the honeft ’Sc[uire, her Partner,
%
and.
VoL. III.
G
/
\'
122 The HISTORY of
and, perhaps, envying me for having her Favourite, Sir George, whom She had watched very narrowly the whole Evening) likewife took her Seat; when, my Partner leaving me to endeavour to make them stand up again, I jo Seized the Opportunity of his Absence to quit the Room, imagining that my PreSence was no longer necefSary, as this ridiculous Ball teemed to be at an End. I waited, however, at the Door, that I might be ready in cafe of another Summons. Every body
was sttting, but Sir George, who
1*
stood in the Middle of the Room,
\
turning round upon his Heel, looking about every Way as if he had lost fomethingj when Mils
■ ‘ Elliot,
Miss Lucinda Courtney, 123
/
r
Elliot, running up to him, tapped him on the Shoulder, as a Signal to follow. He took the Hint, and, putting his Arm round her
Waist, led her to a Window, into
_
which they nung themfelves, and (began toying in a very pretty Man-ner. The jolly ’Squire got up, and making a Noife as if he was calling his Hounds, What aPlague, Said he, are you all stole away?
You’re fbon tired of the Chafe, But, harkee. Friend, turning to Sir George, what BuSmefs have you with my Partner.? Yet, faith, to
fay the Truth—and then he whiS-pered
Something,
at which the
other laughed heartily.
The Company now all appeared in better Humour, except
G z	My
124 The HISTORY of
My Lord, who fat motionlefs and inattentive to all the Smart Things his fair Miflrefs was entertaining him with. In this Situation were the good People in the Parlour, when poor Mar-
plot retired to her Apartment, to
«
inform her Conjiantia of what had happened.
Was there ever any thing So unfortunate, my Dear? I muft not think of continuing in this Place, after what is pasted. Indeed, if I could think of it, Mifs IIill would not, perhaps. I fhall, therefore, leave the Houfe as Soon as I poflibly can---
-----1 dread the
Thoughts of feeing her, though
/•
I have given her no just Caufe to be offended.
The
Mrss Lucinda CotJRTNRY. 125 The Cdirxpany are not yet
broke up
I tremble at
every
Sound of a Bell, Searing it fliould be hers. I know' She will rave. My Lord’s Behaviour was So par-
fufpect
tiGular, that fire muff there is Something between us more than (he can fathom. But, hark! As I live, I hear the fatal Summons. Adieu.
Such a Scene of Rage and Invective!— Oh, my Friend! never was your Lucinda treated in fo cruel a Manner 1 — I can give no diftinct Account of it; it was all
Clamour and ConfuSion.
For
Some Time I let her rave without
G3
anfwering
126
The history of
anfwering her; but, at lalS, unable to contain mySelf any longer, I burst into Tears. You are beneath my Anger, Said I. You durst not treat me in this Manner, if you knew who I am. But let it Suffice, that my Birth and. Education is as much Superior to yours, as is my Soul.—;Oh, Fortune [ now, indeed,, I Seel your Malice, fince you have fubjested me to Such Treatment! But not another Night fhaH this detested HouSe hold me.
You may imagine the this Speech produced, in the now almost frantick Mifs Ht/d. Rage deprived her of the Power of Utterance — She stew at me like a Tygrefs, and would have boxed
iny
t
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 127
/
my Ears, but that fhe was not tall enough to reach them. I Saw it was Time for me to fiy> So, without farther Ceremony, I took to my Heels, and ran to my Chamber, and So put an ]End to this fierce Encounter.
4
And now, good Night, Sonfiantia.. Your poor will endeavour to take a little
Reft. To-rnorrow, pleafe Heaven, I will fet off for the Tofpi“ table Manfion of the kind and
-----What a
obliging Mrs.. Smith.^------
Pilgrim am I on this Earth!
When fhall' I be. fettled!
But
lye dowm, my Pen—Enough for this Nights
> *w*
4
Lkurfday
128 The HISTORYof
Sthurfday Morning.
I
I am endeavouring to muffer Spirits enough to fee my termagant Lady once more. I will not leave her Houfe like a Criminal, as I have done nothing I ought to be afhamed of — She Shall know
This is about
that I am going
the Hour fhe ufually rifes.—I will, for once, attend her without
i
a Summons.


I am again returned to my Chamber, without feeing her. A Servant met me, as I was going to her Apartment, who delivered me a Letter, which, he faid, his Miflrefs ordered him to give
me. It has no Direction—I have
not
f
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 129
not yet opened it, but now lay down my Pen to read it.
Amazement!
The Letter is
not from my Lady, but her Loveiv He exprefles great Penitence for his past Behaviour, declares his joy at Seeing me again,, but, delicately enough, hints his Concern at feeing me in a Situation So unworthy of me. Says, he cannot
now
endure the
Thoughts
of
marrying a Woman whoSe difa-greeable Perfbn and low Birth make her his Averfion; that the
Situation of his Affairs first coin-
%
him to think of it, but Since he has once more- been blest with a Sight of me, who am. the only Woman he ever did or can love,, he will drop all farther
G 5
Tho Lights.
130 The HISTORY of
1
Thoughts of So detefled a Match. He then conjures me to honour him with a Meeting; Swearing, by all that’s good and Sacred, he will not make an ill Ufe of the Favour. He has fomething of Confequence to communicate to me—fomething which, he flatters himSelf, will not be diSpleafing he durfl; not, he fays, trufl it to a Letter, but if-

Thus far had I indulged my foolifh Curioflty in reading this Letter, when it was Suddenly Snatched out of my. Hand—and, by who, do you think,, but the
enraged Mifs IIili^ who was com-
\
ing into my Room, with an Intention, I fuppofe, to diSmifs me. But I thought there was now no
Time

iss Lucinda Courtney. 131
Time to be loft. So, without waiting to See the Effects the fatal Letter would produce, I made my E Scape, while fhe was reading it ; and running acrofs the Hall, I met the Butler. Whi-
ther So faft. Said' he, my Sweet
What’s the Matter?
t
You are as nimble as the Hare when the Hounds are after her. Oh, my good, Friend, Said I, there are fad Doings—My Lady is perfectly mad^—I muft leave the Houfe immediately. Heaven forbid! cried heI would not lofe you for. the World—Have a little Patience — let her rave a-
while
the more violent her
Rage,, the Sooner it will be over, Oh, no, no. Said I; I am re
G 6	Solved
i
132
The history OF
%
Solved to bear it no longer—But,
yoIn
me one
Favour.? That is, to fend my Trunk, which I must leave behind me, to the next Town, where the Stage Coach puts up? Contrive Some Method to get it conveyed there, and be So good as to put the Direction on it, that
you will find in this Cover. I
will. Said he ^ you Shall get it Safe, if I stiould cany it to Lon-don on my Back. But, dear Mrs. Bell, let me perSuade you not to leave us. I cannot help it, my
Friend,
I: MiSs Hill will
keep me no longer. I gave him my Hand, which he Shook very
heartily, and So I bade him fare-
well 3 and, as I had
on my Hat
and


Miss Lucinda CourtneYc 135
%
and Cloak, when I first got up, refolving to leave the Houfe as Soon as I had Seen Mifs HilL I
was r
March
I began immediately, walking as
fast
Mile
i
without ever looking behind me r but then, tired with my Pace, I stopped, to take Breath, as well as to look out for a Houfe, where; I might procure a Guide to conduct me to the Town, about three #
I ex-
pected to meet the Stage.
I was in Some Danger of lofe-ing myfclf, for I did not know a Step of the Way, nor could I, after wandering about a long Time, meet with any body to direct me,- and what added to
my
H
OF
my Uneafinefs was the exceCwe Heat of the Day. I was
ed
\
to fit down under the Shade of a
it
Tree, Shepherdefs like, hut quite
which At
m
ir. not
Way to fleer my Gourfe. last, thank Heaven,, I Saw a Man
along, with a Pack upon who had the Appearance of a Pedlar. But, Surely, no
Heart ever stuttered Prefence of a tinfelled
as mine did at the Sight of this Retailer of Small Wares. I
called to him to stop. Good;
\
Friend, faid I, if your Bufmefs will permit, I stiall be obliged to you, if you will strew me the Way to Windfor.- I wist reward you for your Trouble. With all
my



Mess Lucinda Courtney.. 135: my Heart, Mistrefs, Said he ; I
am never out of my Way, as long as I do but make Money-Come on„ then,. Said I, and I will pay you for your Pains, He immediately faced about, and, as I was but a bad Walker,, presented me. with his Staff to help me along; and in this Manner we jogged on„ he whiffling, full merrily,, all the Way, till he. brought me. Safely to the End of
I
my Journey; where, after I had
him for the PleaSure of his good Company, he took his Leave,, fliewing me the Inn where the Stage went out at.
I was in Some Confufion, being obliged to pafs through a
Number of Servants, who were
ftanding
I
The HISTORY op
Handing in the Yard, and; I be-
Eeve, I looked very filly; but
%
there waB no Help for it. So on I went, till I met the Mistrefs of the HouSe, of whom I when the Coach let off for London, and if there was a Spare Place? She told me, there was, and that the Stage would fet off
I was heartily News. I then
next
rejoiced
ordered Tea, and found myfelf greatly refrefhed with it. But now I began to confult with myfelf, whether I fhould stay in that Place all Night, or endeavour to get a Bed at Some private Houfe. The latter, if it could be done, was much more agreeable, for I was terrified at the Thoughts of


Miss Lucinda Courtney. 137
f
lyn^ by myfelf at an Inni besides, I was not free stom Appre-benfions, that My Lord might take it into his Head to purSue me. I, therefore, determined to look out for a Lodging; but I walked about a great while to no Purpofe, and was thinking to give over the Search, when, feeing a Cobler very biifily working and finging at his Door, I went up to him, and afked if he
could inform me where to get a
$
Lodging for one Night} for that I had taken a Place in the Stage that was to go for London next Morning; but, as I was by my-
Self, did not chufe to lie at an
/
Inn. He flared at me for fome
Time 5 at last — Why, no,, Mif-
trefs.
138 The history of
♦
trefs. Said he,, I can’t fay I do know of any Place fit for you.
you may be. deadly nice, No, not at all. Said I ^ I don’t
care what Sort of a Place it
IS,.
#
So it be but tolerably clean. Nay, if that’s the Cafe, Said he, mahao you may be able to put up with minej and, if fo, I have a Bed
- the
at your Service. In good Man and I foon struck up a Bargain, and he introduced me to his Wife, a neat, decent Woman, who received me very ci-
I had not been
long in
villy.
the Houfe, before I faw Lord Cleaveland galloping up the Street towards the Inn. I hastily ran back from the Window, trembling and frightened..
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 139
a
lucky
was
this of coming here \ — I thank
Heaven for Such an Efcape!
I am determined to keep clofe to ray Retreat, where it is impofli-l)le he fhould ever think of looking for me, till I get Some other Method of going to Town; for, I fuppofe, he will flay till the Coach Sets of, not doubting but to fee me amongff the PalTengers. What would I give to be Safe iix London I
Friday Morning.
I have pasted the Night without much Rest. The Coach is, by this Time, far on its way to
Town. Would to Heaven this fame Lord were at as ereat a Dis-
tance!
140 The HISTORY of
tance!—I dare hardly approach the Windows, for fear of being feen.
- I have told my Landlady, that I muff beg Leave to trouble her a
little longer, as I found myfelf fo
>
ill that I was obliged to let the Coach fet off without me. She does not Seem to trouble her Heael about the Matter, neither does her Hufband; and, as I make them live well, would not be difpleaSed, I fancy, fhould I ffay a Twelve-month.
I hear the' trampling of Horfes I muff look out. I long to fee this troublefome Man make his Exit.
It is he, riding as fall as his Horfe can carry him, his Servant hardly able to keep Pace with his
n ‘
]
r
Mis« Lucinda Courtney. 141
V.
Swiftnefs. Heaven be praiSed! I hope I fhall never See him again. Now I am refolved to purSue my Journey. I will fend for a Post-Chaife immediately—Sure I Shall, at lalf, be permitted to get to a Place of Safety! May be. My Lord intends to watch upon the Road for me! But, I fuppofe, he will hardly stop a Carriage, with-out being certain that I am in it
and I fhall draw
up
the
Blinds, fo that he will not fee
me,
The Chaife is come
Adieu
I will write to you, when I get to Mrs. SmifEs—rBelieve me ever.
t
s
Your Lucinda.
r
Monday.
142 The HISTORY of


Once more your Lucinda is in
Peace and Safety at Mrs. Smith’t\
That good Creature received rae
with great Joy, without the leaft
Surprile at my leaving MiSs Hill,
whom stie always Sufpe6led I
Should not be able to like. I will
be more cautious, for the future,
in the Choice of the Perfon I am

to live with, as I have Suffered fo
much Unealinefs by being pre-
cipitate.
I have
again
deSired
Mrs. Smith to enquire for me.
Oh, my Dear, what a Happi
nefs is Independency! I
never
knew the full Value of it, till I
had experienced the contrary,
Even
3

r

r
I
e

n
;d
II
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 143 Even this Small Apartment, and
obfcure Way of living, is delightful, becaufe I am my own Mi-llrefs.
N
I received a Letter from my Father, Since I came to Town.
11 He tells me, he is quite recon-I ciled to his Solitary Way of Life,
I	and has no Wifh but to end his
II	Days in quiet ObScurity ; nor does he defire any Increale of Fortune but on my Account.
fo j Dear and beloved Parent, if you are happy, I must be fo!
Mrs. Smith has just fhewn me
a Letter from Mifs HtlI
What
-er
I
1'
en
a black Character has She given meJ but it has not produced the deSired Effect. She charges her not to recommend me to any
other
144 The HISTORY op
other Place, as She may depend upon the Lofs of her Cultom, and all the Injury in her Power. Foolifh Creature! IKH Mrs. Smithy how little do I mind her Threats! My BufineSs is too well eftab-lifhed for her-to hurt me. I only
Shew
that
you
may join with me in laughing at her impotent Malice. Flow much
s
am I obliged to you! Said I; I fhall never have it in my Power to repay you — but it gives me great Pain to think you Should Suffer from your Friendship.
I Feg you will fay no more of it,
Smith; I do not want to make a Parade of the little Services I have been fo happy as to
do you. Had I thought it would
%
have
Mrs
I

;o
.d
i'C
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 145.
have given you the leaft UneaSi-neSs, I would not have Ihewn
^	V
you the vile Scrawl. But let us drop the Subject for one more agreeable. I have, this Morning, feen an amiable Lady who is charmed with the Description I have given her of you. I have promised to introduce you tocher To-morrow — I am Sure you will Be pleafed with her—She is the
very Sort of Temper that will make you happy—indeed, it is her conftant Study to make every body So, and a very large Fortune puts it amply in her Power—but I may talk for Hours, and not tell
you Half of her Perfections. When
%
you fee her, you may judge for yourfelf, by your Reception.
VOJL. III.
H
You,
146 The history op
You may believe, my Conjiantia, I am greatly pleafed with the Description of this Lady, and long for To-morrow. The careful and obligingButlerhas Sent myCloaths, and likewise a Letter, which I give you in his own Words*
Lo Mrs. Bell, &c.
Y fweet Miff re f|, I hope you are well, and fafely got to London. I am Sure nobody can wish you better than I do. I have Sent your Trunk, hoping it
will come Safe to Hand.
Dear

Mrs. Belly there was fad Doings
after you left us—My Lady was
*
in a great Paffion, to be Sure, and
not a Servant of us durst come
»
near
)
r
I
it
ar
'as
nd’
I
line
lear
r
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 147
\
near her. To be Sure, I thought (he would have killed the poor Housekeeper for taking your Part, when She was calling you all to Pieces—But don’t vex your-felf, for nobody believes any thing fhe fays. There She went to my Master, too, and Scolded him; but that, you know, is no
, And who
»
Ihould come t6 me, do you think, hut his Lordfhip ? And there he begun afking me all about you, and where you was, and offered me, I don’t know how much, to give you a Letter from him ^ but I told him, as how you was far enough by this Time; and there did he storm and rave like any Mlam, Well, at last, he calls
new Thing with her.
H 2
his
148 The history of
his Servant, and orders him to
Horfes ready in a Mo-
get his
A
ment, and then he threatened to kill me, if I did not tell him where you was gone. Lord help the Gentleman! I thought he was crazy. I tells him, however^ all I knew of the Matter. So what does he do, but he mounts his Horfe, and, without faying, witli your Leave, or by your Leave, to rny Mistrefs, or any of the Family, he, with his Valet, Sets off, whip and fpur, as hard as liej I could drive, having firfl told the reft of his Servants, it feems, to follow him to Town with
1
f
his
But, oh, dear me, what a Piece of Work there was!
As foon as Madam knew he was
gone.
i '
s
> •
s
e
,e
0
ii
e.
S!
le,
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 149-
gone, there was Screaming, and tearing, fainting and Squalling Every body running one against another, as if they were be-
V
witched. Sir George tried to comfort my Lady, though, poor Gentleman, he was deadly vexed hmSelf, when he heard you was
gone
I don’t know when the
Hubbub will be oveiq but in the Middle of -all the Fray, I took Care to fend your Trunk. So, dear Mrs. Belly wifhing you all good Luck, I rest
Your faithful Friend,
Till Death do us part.
John Simons.
H 3
Honest
150 The HISTORY op
, *
Honefl Mr. "John, I heartily thank you for your Letter. What a Diflurbance have I made in that ( Family ! I am really Sorry for it
but hope Time will Set all right I a^ain, and that the faithleSs Swain
will return to his Did cine a. And So, my Conjlantidy I reft, as Mr, John Says,
..
Your’s, till Death do us part,
Lucinda Courtney.
^ •
Saturday.
I have been to wait upon Mrs. Cartwrighti and am charmed with her. She more than anSwers my high-raiSed Expectations. She told
Adrs. Smithi too, it Seems, that Ihe
was

I
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 151
was uncommonly pleaSed with my Appearance and Manner, and thanked her for having procured her a Perfon whom She already found fhe Should have great Rea-fon to value. ' §he defired I would come to her as Soon as I conveniently could, and, you may be-
’ lieve, I Shall very readily obey
«
her. Yes, my Dear, I begin to fee a Profpect of Felicity. I fliall leave this Ploufe in a Day or two. How kind and obliging has the good Mrs. Stnith been to me! What would I give to have it in my Power to make 'Some Return!
But I am a Bankrupt—except in fruitlefs Thanks.
Pray be a little more particular in your next, about the. Affair

H 4
you
IC2 The history of
you mentioned—your Hints have
mad
me
very uneafy. Am I not worthy to be truSted ? You know how unreferved I have ever been to you. I believe, indeed,
the Motive is kind, but, believe
%
me, I muff: be miferable, while I but fuSpect tliat you are not happy. I am fummoned to Dinner.
Adieu.
\
av.
I have now been a Fortnight at Mrs. Cartwright's, and am delighted with her Sweet Temper. I am rather her Companion than Attendant: nothing can be more Sree from Pride and Caprice than her Behaviour. Our Way of Life is perfectly regtdar.
I am
'

Miss Lucinda Courtney.

153
I am almofl conflantly with this dear Lady, reading to her while She works. She is not fond of much Company, and fees only thofe whom lire really efteems, determining. She fays, never to continue to vifit any but thofe whom She can look upon as Friends, defpifing the foolifh Parade of a numerous Acquaintance; fo that her Drawing-room, when filled with her Intimates,
may juSlly be called a Belle Affem-
%
blee. She feldom admits Cards, nor have they Occafion for this trifling Amufement to fupply the
Dearth of Converfation. I am both improved and entertained, when I make Tea, in listening to tlieir Sprightly and fenfible Con-
Hs
verfations

15^4 The HISTORY of
verSations. Mr.
Cartwright is a
mod: agreeable Man, and a Pattern Sor all Hufbands to copy by, in his Beha^^iour to his Lady, to whom he is a Friend, without forgetting to be a Lover. We have frequently private Concerts,
in which Mrs. Cartwright bears no fmall Part, as file both fmgs and plays admirably on the Harp-
fichord.
Is not this a moft
happy Situation for me ? Heaven
grant
it may continue!
I am
fure you fay. Amen, to this Wifh. Adieu.—I am Sent for.
Friday.
My Lady grows every Day more obliging to me. She has found out that I understand a
little
Miss Luctnua' Courtney. 155
little of Mufick,, and Sing tolerably, and She inSifts upon my being a Performer at the next Concert. She did not feem at all furprifed at one in my Circumstances having received Such an Education, She fays. She is Sure I am not now in my proper Sphere. You was born to better Hopes, Said fhe; however, nothing in my Power Shall be wanting to make; your prefent Way of Life as happy as it will admit of. Generous Lady! Indeed, fhe more than makes good her Pro-mife.. I go every where with her, and fee ail the Company that come to the Houfe.. She will hardly fuffer me to aflist her in Dresting. Indeed, it is a Tafk that
H 6
IS

156 The history of
is foon perSormed; Sor, though fhe always looks elegant. She bestows very little Time or Pains about her PerSon.—She is above regarding Such Trifles. I might fill a Quire of Paper and not tell you
Half her Perfections; but, in
4
one Word, I fhall fum them all up, by faying, fhe is a Christian. How happy do I think myfelf
in having fo bright an Example
«
of every female Virtue! Sit fhall be my Study to copy fo noble an Original.
I return you a thoufand Thanks,
Conji.
for the kind Pro-
feffion you make me of the Sin-cerity and Continuance of your Friendship; and, what adds to my Joy is, the Asturance that
your
4
N.
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 157
I
your disagreeable Perplexities are at an End.
Lucinda Courtney.
Monday.
Sir George is---Oh, my dear
Friend! my Father is below With what Impatience do I fly to receive him!—Adieu.
^ ^ '
You will be amazed, when I tell you -the unexpected Turn of
our Affairs. Fortune, weary of persecuting us, is now profufe of her Favours. I can hardly help thinking myfelf in a Dream, and fear, left I Should awake, and find myfelf, inflead of Mifs Lucinda. Courtney, a young Lady of Fortune, which my Vifion reprefents
me
\
15S The HISTORY of
me to be, only humble AUgd to Mifs PIill.—But let me unravel this Myftery.
Know, then, that my Father
had, the other Day, a Letter from
\
Sir Richard Freeman. The Mef-fenger told him, it was with great Difficulty he found out his Retreat; and added, that his Mailer was impatient to fee him. The Letter was equally preffing, declaring, he had Something to
communicate that would greatly Surprise him, begging him to hasten his Journey to Town, as he was in So ill a State of Health, that it made him apprehenSive lest he Should die without feeing him. You may believe, my Father was Surprised; however, he
determined
1
L



I
Miss Lucinda Courtney.- 159
I
determined to Set out for LoriIon immediately, without acquainting or Seeing me till the whole Affair was unravelled. He accordingly waited upon Sir Richard^ whom' he found confined to his Chamber by his Illnefs. As Soon as my Father entered the Room, he held out his Hand to him.
Welcome, dear Sir, Said he, thrice welcome, to a Wretch, who will now be delivered from a Burthen of Guilt that is become insupportable ! My Father was amazed. I do, not comprehend you. Sir, Said he. No Wonder, an-fwered Sir Richard, but I must tell you, that you have now before you a Villain that has unjustly defrauded you of your
Right
i6o The HISTORY op
Right
but Heaven has Sufficiently puniffied me, by not granting me one Moment’s Peace, in the Enjoyment of my unjuft Gain. You may remember, I told you, that
your Friend, and my worthy Pre-decefibr Sir George Ereemciny died without a WilL
s
Good Heaven! cried my Father, interrupting him; is it pof-fible.^ — It is, indeed. Said Sir Richard y though I blufh to own it^—I See you comprehend this Ad
N
of Iniquity—Spare me, then, dear Sir, the mortifying Talk of re-, lating the Particulars, though not your Reproaches, for I deServe them all.—-Your Daughter Di/-cinda is entitled to Ten Thouf-and Pounds, which I am now
ready,
r

1

Mi5s Lucinda Courtney. i6i
ready, though late, to .pay her, as likewise the Intereft for the Time I have unjuftly detained it from her. —• Can you. Sir, added he, after fuch Bafe-nefs, have the Goodnefs to for-give me, and reflore me to my long-loft Peace.? — Heaven will, I hope, accept of the Sincerity of my Repentance, and if I have your Pardon likev/ife, ai^d that of Mifs Courtneyy I Shall die fa-tisfied.
Forgive you! Said My Father,.
taking his Hand; I do moft fm-
%
cerely. You have only been an Inftrument, in the Hands of Providence, to punifh me for a Life of Extravagance and Intemperance. I thank Heaven for withholding
i62 The HISTORY of
holding its Bounty,
till I
was
brought to a SenSe of my former
r
ill Conduct. Adverfity, only, could open my Eyes to a Knowledge of myfelf. I, as well as you, am a Penitent for, though
not guilty of Injuflice, my
Crimes are numerous. But I
)
have fuffered — and I adore the
merciful Hand that has
%
me, fince it has produced the mod: Salutary Effects. I long to acquaint my beloved Daughter of her good Fortune, and then I will return to my peaceful Solitude, and dedicate to Heaven the little Remainder of a Life whidi
has too long been wafted in Vanity and Vice. Farewell, Sir,
1
Joy
com-

Miss Lucinda Courtney. 163
companies every act of Virtue. Sir Richard, delighted with, my Father, would fain have per-fuaded him to prolong his Vilit, but he could only obtain his Promise that he would fee him as often as he had Leifure, while he remained in Town. My Father
then took his Leave, and came, with joyful Haste, to inform me of what had happened.
f
I cannot exprefs the Emotions
I felt on this Occaston
I almost
fainted. My Father embraced me with Tears of Tendernefs in his Eyes. Good Heaven! I thank you, cried he ^ my dear Girl will at last'be happy. Oh, my Lucinda! how have I de-ferved this, after all my Faults f
But
\
164 The HISTORY of
But I could not deferve it, it is
*
all unmerited Bounty. My dear, my honoured Father, Said I, do not damp my Joy, by aceufmg yourSelf. I ought, liiy . .Dear, returned he; it is the least

I can do to acknowledge my
* t
Faults. I beSeech you, do not, my dear Sir-, faid 1; let us forget what
is past, and look forward to the
%
pleafing Profpect that fenow before us.	';
Mrs. Cartwrighty impatient to welcome my Father, whom fhe heard was with me, opened the
.Door, and lookihg in, I hope I do not intrude unfeafbnably, faid fhe. Intrude! my dear Miadam, cried I j impostible! I rejoice to fee you—my Happinefs could not
be

Miss Lucinda Courtney. i6^
be compleat, ’till ! had acquainted my heft Friend with it. . This, Said I, introducing her to my Father, is my kind Benefactrefs, whom I have So j uflly praiSed in my Letters to you. I cannot, Sir, Said She, deSerye So high a Compliment. I have had, indeed. Discernment enough to find out
t
and efteem the amiable Qualifications of your Daughter, and have endeavoured to treat her accordingly j but I claim no Merit from it. Since I could not help loving her if I would. My Father made a Suitable Return to this obliging Speech, and, after a little general Conversation, acquainted her with the Motives of his coming to Town, and my
unexpected
i66 The HISTORY of
r
unexpected Turn of Fortune;
I
Mrs. Cartwright congratulated me, with the mod friendly Ex-preffions of Joy, on my Happi-nefs; but our agreeable Friend was interrupted by the Entrance of a Servant, who came to inform her, that a young Gentleman waited for her in the Parlour. Who can it be} faid She. I
V
could have difpenfed with his Vifit at this Time, as it will o-blige me to leave you So foon but, remember, Mr. Courtney, you dine with me. So faying, She left us, but returned in about a Quarter of an Flour, in a Flutter of Joy. Come down, my dear Friend, faid Ihe, come down, and welcome my beloved Brother,
Miss Lucinda Courtney. ' 167 ther, for it was -he that waited
i ^
for me-—I am all Rapture at hav-■ ing Seen him. So unexpectedly.
after So long an AbSence------1
thought he was not in England. Come, dear Lucinda, I know you
will like him
he is a mofl ami-r
able Man. So Saying, She took
f
my Hand, and conducted me down Stairs.
I
As we were entering the Room, Now, Said She, I will introduce two of the most charming PerSons in the World to one another. She led me to him and, oh! my Conjlantia! he was charming, indeed! fince it was other than the lovely Montague himSelf! —You may imagine what I felt upon this Oc-
caSion
no
i68 The HISTORY of cafion—yet, no—it is impoffible
’tis neither to be defcribed
nor
imagined—it was the very Quin-teffence of PleaSurel He folded
me in his Arms, with a Warmth far different from the civil Salute of a Stranger.—Am I, then, once more bleffed with a Sight of the mofl lovely and befl-beloved of
Women ? faid he.
Oh!
my
Sifter! you know not what a Happinefs you have procured me, nor how fervently I love the dear, the charming Lucinda / But, for-give me, added he, feeing me pale, and hardly able to Support mySelf, the Tranfport I feel at this unexpected Interview makes me, I fear, too precipitate in the Avowal of my lively, conftant
PalTion.
]

<•
Mi5s Lucinda Courtney. 169
Paflion. If you are difpleaSed at me, if you Should reject a Heart that has long been yours, even when I could have no Hopes, I mull again fink to my former Mi-
fery. Oh! Sir! (turning to my Father) plead my E xcuSe with your charming Daughter.
I am amazed! Said my Fa-ther; this whole Scene is a My-ftery to me! You are, I think, the Gentleman who delivered my Daughter from a mofl unhappy Adventure; but I never fuS-pected you had any^^ particular Attachment to her. — Indeed, I thought you had hardly ever feen her, after that Affair. True, replied Mr. Mont ague y	I have
t
VoL. III.
I
not
now,
170 The history of
i
\
not often had that HappineSs, but I loved her, from the firft Moment I beheld her, and nothing but an unhappy Engagement, from which I am fortunately, delivered, could have prevented my declaring it long fince.—But I am now free, and returned to England with a Resolution to make her an Offer of my Hand, for Slie has long had Poffeffion of my Heart. This unexpected Meeting has made me a
%
little too abrupt in my Declaration; but let the Excefs of my Paffion plead in my Favour.

I think, faid my Father,
*
need not deSpair of
yours'is but a venial Tranfgref-
fion.
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 171
fion. I believe my Daughter is
above the little Punctilios of her
%
Sex—and, indeed. Ladies are Seldom diSpleaSed at a Lover for acting with Indecorum, when it proceeds from the violent Effect of their own Charms.
n
I began now to recover from the Emotion Mr. Motttagues PreSence had caufed, and. Smiling, told my Father, I muft take the Liberty to interrupt him. Since I found he was going to expofe the Vanity of my Sex. Mr. Montague^
faid I, feems to have Eloquence enough to Support his own Caufcj Sis Time to drop a Subject that is too particular. We forget, that
Mrs
i.
I
is ex
eluded i
172
The hi S T O R Y op
eluded; we put a Stop to the Joy She, no doubt, longs to ex-prefs, and the thoufand Quefti-ons fhe mud: have to alk a Brother, So lately reffored to her. Nothing can be uninterefHng to me, returned this amiable Lady, that affects one who is So juftly dear to me. My Joy for his Return will be greatly heightened, if his Wishes are crowned
♦
by the Confent of my lovely Friend, whom I long for the Happinefs of calling Sifter. Mr. Montague took her Hand, and put it to his Lips.—Nobly faid! cried he, and what I expected from that Goodnefs that has endeared you to me more than the
’Bands
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 173
Bands of Nature. Then
proaching me, with a re
Air, but full of Tendernefs, Let
me hope, too, faid he, that my Prefence is not unwelcome to
the charming Lucinda, and I will give a Loofe to Joy, that will amply reward me for my former Sufferings.—I blufhed.—I cannot diffemble, Said I; I may wifh to be Silent, but, thus called upon, I muff frankly declare your Prefence is fo far from being unwelcome, that I rej oice to fee you.
I cannot refufe the Esteem that is due to your Merit, and the
Services you have rendered me, lay Claim to.—I cannot be ungrateful. — Amiable Franknefs!
13
faid
174
The history of
*
Said he, preffing my Hand; believe me, I will never make a wrong Ufe of your GoodneSs. He fat down by me, still holding my Hand between his, which I, recollecting myfelf, withdrew in fome Confufion. He made a gentle Effort to retain it, and, figh-ing, gave me a Look of unutterable Softnefs. Mrs. Cartwright) who faw me a little diSconcerted, turned the Conversation, by alk-ing her Brother fome^ Questions about his Travels. Oh, Madam, Said he, I believe I must refer
J ou rnal
my Ac-
count will, I fear, at prefent, be a little confufed. — I can only tell you, that I met with nothing
Abroad
I
'1
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 175
Abroad that was half So worthy my Attention as the lovely Object that is now before, me. I Saw the most celebrated Beauties with Indifference, except they had the Happinefs of refembling her who was constantly prefent to my Imagination. The Sweetest Hours I pasted abroad, was in Company with a young Lady, who, I thought (looking at me) had Something of your Air and Manner — but it was a painful Pleafure, stnce it only put me in Mind of the Distance there was between me and the bright Original. Well, but Brother, faid Mrs. Cartwrighty Smiling; I allied you what you had Seen re-
I4
markable
176 The history op
/
markable, and you only tell me of fine Women, which are common every where. True, an-fwered he; but.

** Let Rufus writei ajk ^eJUons,
or difpute,
** Still he muft talk of N'sevia, or
be mute.
yy
I cannot help it. — You mufl not
«
expect to hear me converfe like other Mortals, till I am reduced to the common Standard of Hap^ pinefs. You must permit me to be all Extacy. Am I not Seated by her whofe every Look gives
Transports not to be exprelfed? He turned to me, and fixed his
Eyes
I
I Miss Lucinda Courtney. 177
Eyes on my Face. I cafh mine down with BafhfulneSs, and, wishing to divert his Attention to Something elfe, aShed, if he had Seen Mrs. Williams, fince his Return I fancy not, faid Mrs. Cartwright, . as She lives almost con-ftantly in the Country. You are right, faid he; for, as foon as I arrived in England, I heard the a-greeable News that my Sister was come to fettle there; and, notwithstanding my Impatience to fee my Aunt, efpecially as I.hoped to hear from her Something of my adorable Mifs Courtney, I could
not refist the Inclination I felt
. . /
to embrace, again a Sister justly beloved by me; but how, be-
15
yond
178 The HISTORY^of
yond all Bounds, is my Happl-neSs encreafed, fince at the fame 'rime I am blefSed with a Sight of the Perfon in the World who Is most dear to my Heart!—He was interrupted here by the Entrance of Mr. Cartwright^ who ran,
with open- Arms, to embrace his
\
Friend. I took that Opportunity to whisper Mrs* Cartwright^ for Leave to retire^ as my Spirits had been, and still were. So agitated, that I longed to be alone. When I got to my Chamber, I
Sat down to ruminate on this unexpected Event.
X
Am I awake, my ConfiantlA. Is it postible, that I fhould be fo happy ? Have J, indeed > Seen the
lovely



Miss Lucinda' Courtney. 179 lovely Montague? And is he at
Liberty to declare his Love ? How amazing is all this I I long to know what is become of Mifs
I hope She is not dead! Yet, if fhe lives, mufl fhe not be miserable, to fee the Object
of h^r Affections the Hufband of another?—-For So I hope Heaven intends him. —Yes, my Con^ Jiantta, I Shall .think myfelf the happiest of Women, in fuch an
I cannot be eafy, till I know Something of this Lady. When I can get an Opportunity, and am a little more myfelf, I will alk the dear Harry about her.—I hardly know what
I write.
16

i8o The HISTORY of
BleSs me with your Prefence, my dear Friend, and let me pour out the FulneSs of my Heart. I infift upon your obliging me with your Company, for a few Months. I know your Mother will not refufe me this Favour. I have ten thoufand Things to fay to you. Come, then, and
f
Share in my Joy, as your Friend-fliip has long made you do in my
Mifery.---■! arti fummoned to
Dinner — Mr. Montague waits to lead me to the Company. Adieu.
t
L’uefday.
My Father is delighted with Mr. Montague, and infills on
s
rny fixing an early Day for our
Nuptials.
Miss Lucinda Courtney. i8i
i
Nuptials. You may believe, the other, too, is not Silent on this Subject. Mrs. Cartwright, likewise, adds her Intreaties; but I
would fain wait for your Prefence.
Sir Richard Ereeman, who ffill continues very ill, has paid my Legacy. My Father, at his Defire, is frequently with him. Mrs. Smith has been informed of my happy Change of Fortune, and I never, be-fore, faw a Woman in fuch Raptures. I hope I can now make her fome little Return for her Kindnefs.
She Tells
Mifs Hill
come to Town, and that the Match, between her and Lord
Cleaveland, is flill likely to take
Place,
i82 The HISTORY op
Place, his
finding her
high Opinion of
Fortune as attractive as ever. Good Creature! She mufi be of a very placable Difpolition, to take
him into Favour again, after his ftrange Behaviour to her.
I have heard Something about Mifs 'lIenky, that furprifes mej yet, you know, I never had a very
However, my Lord has for her, by maiTying her to his Chaplain, to whom he has, like-wife, presented a good Living, to make fome Amends for the
his fair Spoufe. I mofl of this Day to myfelf, as Mr. Montague is gone to fee Mrs. Williams^ who, we
hope,
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 183
hope, will accompany him here.
Mrs. Cartwright has infiffed on my Father’s making her HouSe his Home, while he flays in Town*
9
I fhall now take my Leave of
. /
you at preSent, having nothing elfe to tell you, but that I am, fincerely,
n
Your Lucinda*
a
Mrs. Williams \s come
What
It is
now
a happy Society!—— compleat. This dear kindly upbraided me for having So long Concealed mySelf from her*
- ' ♦
You
i84 The history op
%
You do not know, faid She,
the Pain I felt, after a thoufand
^ \
fruitlefs Enquiries, at not being able to learn where you had retired to: You was unjufl to debar me of the Pleafure of teftify-ing the Sincerity of my Regard
for
you
I excufed myfelf, as well as. I could, though, I mull own,' fhe merited more Confidence — but I was unfortunate, and unwilling to publifh it. Mr. Montague undertook to reconcile us, which was, indeed, eafily effected. The dear Lady embraced me: at that Inflant, Mr;. Montague put his Arm round us both. I envy you this Happinefs> Mrs.
'f
Williams, faid he; and must put
in
I
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 185
in for a Share of it. Unconfci-onable Creature! faid fhe; muff
?
nobody be happy but yourfelff I can tell you, I expect to be loved, as well as you. Not as
well.
Madam, returned
he.
^ 1
fmilingj I fhall never eonfent to that. But how will you help it.f^ faid fhe. How.? returned he; why, I will love her fo much more than you poflibly can, that fhe fhall not, in Gratitude, be able to refufe me a Return fuitable to
the Excefs fhe not my
Paffion.
Is
%
added he.
catching me in his Arms. I muff: and will be very tenacious
of my Right. Softly, faid Mrs.
$
Williamsy I deny that —- fire is not
yours,
• i:
186 The history of
yours
yet
but, however, I
heartily wifh fhe was, and, can af-fure you, it Shall not be my Faultj if She is not So very Soon. My dear Madam, cried he, eagerly, you will lay me under an eternal
if you will ufe your Influence over my Beloved to Shorten my State of Probation. Let me lead you to her, and may Some Angel lend you his Eloquence, to perfuade her to make me the happiefl: of Men, by fixing To-morrow, or next Day at
farthest. — Oh, Heaven! cried I,
%
To-morrow I — How can you think of Such a Thing ? Think of fuch a Thing! repeated he; let me die if I think of any
Thing
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 187
Thing elfe. But I will not plead for To-morrow, fince that Day
■ Seems to be out of Favour
You
do not, however, make any Objection to the nextf let that, then, be marked out as the happiest
No, Said Mrs.
«
not be the hap-
of
my
Life *
Williamst it piest^—at least, I hope you will be equally pleafed with all that fhall follow it, till your Life’s End. It must be lb. Said he; I fee nothing but a Profpect of continual Felicity before me—I only meant it would be more bleffed than any Day I had yet faffed. — You’ll frighten me from being yours, faid I, if you flatter yourfelf with
fuch extravagant Scenes of Hap-
pineSs,
i88 The HISTORY of
/
pinefs, as you muff: certainly be
difappointed: And it will fit hea-
vier on you, than it would upon
thofe who enter upon Matrimony
with lefs Sanguine Hopes. Why
fhould we expect more than Ex-
perience teaches us is the com-
mon Lot of MortalsI never
yet met with a Pair—Ah! do
not, my beloved Ducitida, cried
he, interrupting me; do not
compare my Love with the com-
mon run of theirs who pretend
to that noble Paflion j lince mine
is founded as it ought, not only
on the adniirable; Beauty of your
Perfon, but the never-fading
Graces of your Mind. Can I,
then, 'change, fince thefe mull
ever

Miss Lucinda Courtney. 189
ever remain the Same? What can tempt me to Inconflancy, fmce it is impoflible to meet with another who excels So much in both ?
How is this, my Friend, Said Mrs. Cartwright to me; dare you, in my PreSence, fay any Thing againft Matrimony? I find I mufl chide you. What think you of Mr. Cartwright and me? Are not we a happy Couple ? And yet we have many Years worn the pleafing Chain.—I Hand corrected. Said I, dear Madam; may I be but as happy as you are, and I ought not, cannot wifh to be more fo. If the mofl tender Paffion, faid Mr. Montague, that ever warmed
the
' j
J90 The HISTORY of
the Breall of Man, and the truell Friendfliip, can give you a ProS-pect of being So, then let my Lucinda lay afide her Fears. He took my Hand as he Spoke this, and I anfwered by a Look that teftified how willing I was to believe him.
But, my dear Conjiantia, I Shall tire you, by dwelling upon thefe Trifles; for, if the Company of Lovers is difagreeable, to thofe who are Spectators of their little Lendrejfes, how much more infipid muSl the Relation of them be, fince there is no conveying an Idea of the winning Grace with which my dear Harry gives a Dignity to all he fays, and does?
But
f
Miss Lucinda CourtneV. 191 But are you not impatient to
know fbmething more of
MiSs
There was nobody in Room with me, the other Da}N hut Mr. Montague. I took that Opportunity to enquire about her, exprefling my Hopes that She was happy, or I Biould not be perfectly So. He paid me a Comipliment on the Goodnefs of my Heart, as he was pleafed to call it; and added, that it gave him Pleafure to be able to af-Sure me, that I might be perfectly eafy on her Account, fince her Fate had ordained her to blefs a Man who was as much more deferving, as he was fenfible of her Perfections. Well, but dear
Sir.
192 The HISTORY of
Sir, Said I, be a little more explicit, and favour me with a few Particulars. I dare not difobey
t
you, faid he. Smiling; and yet, I think I could employ my Time ten Times more agreeably, than upon this dry, and, now, uninteresting Subject. — He paufed ,a few Minutes, his Eyes fixed on
my Face.—By Heaven, I cannot, cried he. Snatching my Hand; may I die, if I know where to begin—I was thinking of Something elfe. — ’Tis well, faid I,
>
with an affected Gravity; I will leave you then to recollect your-
felL
logo
rant! faid he, Seizing my Hands;
I fee
* I
I arofe, as if with Defign Oh, my dear arbitrary Ty-
p

Miss Lucinda CouRTMEY. 193
t fee you will be obeyed. But, for Heaven’s Sake, drop a little of your Majesty, or you will over-awe me So, I Shall not be able to tell my Story. He hem’d once or twice, and then began.
Once upon a Time, Said he, with an arch Simplicity in his Looks — I laughed — Pifh, cried he, cannot you be Serious ^ I asture you I am. And So am I, too, replied he — most Seriousty
0
in love with you. But this is a pretty, reSpectful Behaviour of yours, truly, to interrupt me in this Manner—pray be a little more polite for the future, or I am dumb upon that Subject. And now, in Sober Sadnefs, I begin
VoL. III. K	what.
194 The HISTORY of
what, I dare fay, will make me fad in Reality, before I have done j lince it will recall Scenes to my Remembrance that were, once, my Torment.
Mrs. Williams has, I fuppofe, told you the Situation I was in.
with regard to
Bellamy y
when I had first the Honour and Happinefs of your Acquaintance. Till then, I had hardly felt the Weight of my difagreeable En-
and was endeavouring
to reconcile myfelf to it. As I
1
found I could not love Mifs BeK lamjy I took all Imaginable Care to guard my Heart from the Attractions of any other Woman. I perfevered tolerably in my Indifference,
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 195
ference, notwithstanding an un-
\
common Attachment to your charming Sex. But my Time was not come; for as Bruyere
, He that is infenjibh Teen the Perfon he j
i he is to love. So, the first Moment I beheld you, I lost my Liberty, and Peace—-It was then I began, indeed, to feel my unhappy En-
I struggled to get the better of my fruitlefs Pafllon, and forced myfelf to fee you as little as pofiible, and when I did, endeavoured to conceal my Regard, not daring to make an Offer of a Heart, when my Hand was not at Liberty. You must have obferved the torment-
K 2
mg
196 The history of
ing Referve I was in, when you was preSent—but, ah 1 my dear Angel, it is impoflible to de-
cribe the Anguilh I fufjered, by this cruel Reftraint.— I was obliged to fly from you, but very injudiciously choSe the Country, where Retirement added to my
Paffion. I thought of nothing
>
but you, and had nobody to interrupt my Thoughts, no Remedy, and that my Malady was incurable, I determined to fet put on my long-talked-of Travels. You may believe it coil me no Small Pain to perfevere in this P^efolution. Before I fet off, I paid a reluctant Vifit to Mifs BeUamy. I will
not
Seeing
1
c
i
k
#
.k
I
i
r
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 197
not deScribe our parting Scene; indeed, I have forgot moft qS the Particulars of it, though, upon the whole, flie had greatly the Advantage of me, for my Behaviour was certainly mod: uncommonly rude, and void of Gallantry, in leaving a Lady of her Beauty, in fo cold and in^ different a Manner. Indeed, I
r -
wonder how She could have Pa-tience^ or be decently civil to me; but the Truth is, at that Time, flie did me the Honour to
be a little partial to me. Yet, my Love to you would not Suffer me to play the Hypocrite; fo that I did not fo much as endeavour at concealing my IndiL
K 3
ference.
1

198 The history op
f
ference. I believe fire Saw it but . too viSibly, for fhe. could not entirely conceal her Chagrin. Yet, perhaps, (fo perverfe is Human Nature) flie might not have liked me fo well, had the Con-quefl been eafier. Before I left her, fhe
me a
Prefent
or
her Picture, in a very pretty and graceful Manner, as a Return for mine, which I had, at our firfl Acquaintance, prefented to her. I then took my Leave-and, oh ! how ardently did I wifh to fee you, before I left
Englatzd
perhaps, far ever
(
But I durfl not trufl myfelL I travelled from Place to Place, but neither Abfence, nor Variety
of
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 199
of
could banifli
your
dear Image from my Breast.
During my Stay at Paris, I had contracted an Intimacy with a ■young Gentleman, v/hoSe Name is
Obrien ; one of the most agreeable and accompiifliedYouths lever met with I and So handfome in his Perfon, that he was the reigning Favourite among the Ladies i
9
yet was he neither foppifh nor vain. He cultivated my Friend-stiip with the most earnest Afli-
duity, a Favour which I repaid,.
*
by a frank and unreferved Re-
; yet, by fome Means or other, we had been a good while acquainted, without my communicating the Particulars of my
turn
K 4
Situation t
200 The HISTORY op
^	A
Situation; not from Want of
Confidence, but his never making any Enquiry, though he might guefs that I was in Love,
and muff: know it was with her
• * ■
whofe Name he had often heard me mention with Rapture, and
in whofe Praife I was juflly la-vifii. But, indeed, he looked
on Love in no other Light than
«
an AmuSement, and would hard-ly fuppofe my Uneafinefs proceeded from that Source, ’till, one Morning, when I was more than uSually melancholy, he prefied me to reveal the Caufe. To
j
what Purpofe, Said I, fince you
cannot remove it; while your
Friendship will, perhaps, make
you
V
• % • • ^	^
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 201
you lhare my Pain ? Do you think I da not already, anfwered he, without knowing what it is that affects youBe frank, then, dear Harry, Aind let me know what can So often damp the Fire of your natural Vivacity. I Sometimes fufpect-—yet do not tell me it is Love j for I Shall certainly fmile, though now fo much dif-
But
you
pofed to be grave, know the light Opinion I have of that Paflion. And for that very
ReaSon, cried I, I will not make
' >
you my Confidant, But you have, already, Said he, laughing; and
is this the mighty Affair .'‘—Nay, don’t frown, for I mufl have my Mirth out. But. i^ it poffible.
^ 5
that
202 The history OF
P
that a Man of your Senfe and Spirit,, fhould be made uneaSy by
the little blind Urchin ? If your capricious Fair One is unkind,, forfake her, and fhe'fl break her

Heart out of Vexation^ for the
Lofs of Such a
F ello w.
There’s not a Girl in Paris, high or low, rich or poor, but who will be glad to take up with her Leavings, Very well, faid I, go on with your Raillery—Love, to-be Sure, is a mere Joke, but what fay you to Matrimony ?—Matrimony f exclaimed he;—you may well be Sorrowful, if any thing; ©f that Nature is the Cafe—^But, Heaven forbid 1 I hope you are not within a thoufand Miles
It
/
ss Lucin:i>a Courtney. 203^
it. Much about that Distance, anfwered I.—But,, ferioustyj my Situation is very unhappy j yet the Unhappinefs proceeds from)
V
two of the "most lovely Women
in the World.—Uneonfcionable !
%
laid he j from two} That no^
I
Mortal can bear. Yet, if that’s; all, here am I, like a true Friend, ready to take one of them off your Hands; though. Heaven knows, I have already more than I know what to do with. But*
f
a propos—Whofe Picture is it that peeps from under that Book ? Is it the Lady you are to keep*
or- is it mine I Yours, if pleafe. Said I. With all my
I
Heart, cried he, fnatching it off
\
K 6
the
204 The HISTORY OF
the T able.
unfisiht, unfeen.
Venusy befriend me, and grant file prove handfome ! So Saying, he turned up the Picture, on which he -gazed, for Some Minutes, in filent Wonder. At
laft, eagerly
my Hand j
Tell me, I conjure you, deaf
%
Harry, faid he, has this charming Picture an Original} Or is it the lively Imagination of the Painter ? Speak quickly, . or I fhall Suffer the Fcte of Pygmalion^ What Eyes ! What Lips
tinued he. Oh,. Harry, did I,
*
daringly, mock the little God ?
* *
l am puniflied—I recant—I feel I fhall become a Convert, and
.	t;-	^
high, and whine as well as the
I
con-
beff
Miss Lucinda Courtnev., 205
beft of you—7be a downright Am^rato. Come, her Name, in
an Inftant, good Montague^ her Name, I befeech you, cried he.i without looking off the Picture. Bellamyy Said I j laughing, in fpite of my UneafmeSs. Bella^
f
repeated he;
good
an-
my
other Dart—I am done for Sufficiently.—What a Sweet Name I
All of a Piece, by Heaven I Angel, every Inch of her I Now, 111 tell you what, Harry—l am determined to fight, if you are my Rival—and, indeed. So I will if you are not, for your
, So you are determined to fight, at any Rate, Frank) but wnth whom .? laid L
With
2o6 The history op
With you, to be fure, cried he; No, no> returned I, laughing,
mean
with my Picture, you Should have a Shadow of a Rival, to keep your Shadow of a Mifirefs in Countenance. None of your Wit, Said he^ tho’ I own it’s your Turn
me, ferioufly, dear Creature to be had for Love or Money I For Love and Matrimony, I believe fhe may. Said I. Will nothing lefs do ? interrogated
now.
IS
he.
Heigh ho.
dear
Li-
must I at last, then.
with thee I So,
I,
a Poet
! You are far
gone indeed. Oh, confoundedly
far
%
\
Miss Lucinda Courtney, 207
far gone, as you fay. I
never
befon
crambo
in
my
Life
but mighty Love could
teach a Clown to plead fhort, I die for Iphigenia
in

I mean •, So there’s an
End on’t.
Here the lovely Montague was interrupted in his Narration, by
the Entrance of fome Friends,
onHay fhall afk
You, my him to finiflr it when you favour us with your Company but, no doubt, you guefs that Mr. Obrien was the happy Man, who, by fettering himfelf, has releafed Mr, Montague. > He has promifed to introduce me to the happy Pahi Come Soon, my
dear
2o8 The HISTORY of
dear Conjiantia, and be of the Party with.
Your Happy,
^ ‘
Lucinda Coijrtney.
/ s.
< *	' t. A -
*	Monday.
A Servant informs me> my dear Mifs Franklin is below. I fly to embrace her. Her Sprightly and
agreeable Conversation will add to my Happinefs—Let me Soon be i favoured with your Company
alfo, and my Blifs will be com-^ pleat. Adieu.
*	^ Mi ^	m ^ Mi
* - ' *
My Father is impatient to re-
turn to his Retreat. The Death
• •
©f
\
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 209
of Sir Pickard, at which he was prefent, has made him melancholy. Nothing, but the Defire he has to fee me married, could detain him a Moment longer in Town. He told me
this Morning he thought it was high Time to fix the Day; and, if you will oblige me, added he,
let it he an early one. I anfwered, that I had always endeavoured to Submit to his Pleafure, even in Things which were not able to me; he need not, therefore, doubt of my Readinefs to obey him in this. Name the Time, Sir, that is agreeable to yourfelf, and it diall be So to me.—Let it, then, be VVedneJday-,
Said
acTee
O
210 The HISTORV' of
y
faid he. Every Thing is ready,
and I See no Reafon to defer it any longer. I will acquaint Mr.
Ivlontague that I have prevailed on you to fix that Day. Dear Sir, faid I, with Emotion, are
not you a little precipitate.? On Wednefday / — Good Heaven! and
this is Monday. — I hope, replied
'
my Father, with a Serious Air, you are above Affectation. Why Diould you wifh to defer it I
This is falfe Delicacy, let me tell you.
Manner than what I expected from one of your Underflanding. I yield, dear Sir, faid I—it fhall, then, be Wednejdayy Since you defire it. My
and acting in a different

Pleafur
ii
•y
iO
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 21 i
Pleafure at my Compliance, and went to acquaint Mr. Montaguf
with it.
I cannot repent what I have done — and yet I am ftrangely fluttered. Mifs FranMn came running to me, Soon after my Father left me.
You are a good Girl, Said Hie j I have overheard Something of your Resolution—a Word to the Wife, you know —^^but, come, none of your Maidenifh Airs, between you and me, at lealte they will be proper enough before your Swain, but I Shall fufpect you of rank Hypocrify, if you are not ready to run mad v/ith Joy, at the Thoughts of having So charming
a Hufband,
212 The HISTO RY or
a Hufband, Come, confefs, is he not a delightful Fellow? Let me die, if I would not run
to the World’s End to find Such another, if I might have him for
my Pains. Let’s

down to
him, that we may give him an
Opportunity to fay fome fine
1 ■’
Things upon the Occafion. I long to fee him call himfelf at your Feet, and talk unintelli-
gibly
There is Something So
pretty in the Soft Nonfenfe of
----Gome, come
thefe Lovers 1
along.
I am already on the
Wing. A little Patience, my dear Mifs Eranklmy faid I^ I cannot go yet—I mu ft write to my Conjiantia firfl. A Fig for
your
Miss Lucinda Courtney.
i

ai3
your. Conjlantia-t Said She; none of your Scribbling now; you have Something elfe to think of. Let us poor Spinffers, who are not So happy as to have 2i Montague to entertain us, flourilh with our Pens, and die for Lovers whom we never Saw, and boafl of Conquefis that we never, made. If this precious Friend of yours muft be wrote to, make me your Scribe, I’ll warrant. I’ll tell her all how and about it.
I take you at your Word, returned I; I own I fhall be a ifttle unfit for the Employment for Some Time: You will oblige
me, therefore, if you will inform

214 The HISTORY op
♦
form my Conjlantia of what happens from Time ^to Time, till I have Leifure to reSume my Pen. I’ll do it, fakl Slie; leave it to me—but, by the by, what am I to tell herThat Harry and you are billing like a Pair of Turtles, and that, finding no Remedy for the Excefs of your Paflions, you married, which broke the Enchantment, and reflored you to perfect Indifference? I fuppofe, too, I muft tell her how prettily you behaved on the .Dccalion; how prim and mo-Heft you was, and how Harry talked to you, looked at you, and all that, — Have I my Leflbn right? Dear Creature, cried I,
what

Miss Lucinua Courtney. 215
what would I give for your charming Spirits ! Give me Harry, Said ihe, and you fhall have them, every Ounce — Oh, I fee,' there go two Words to that Bargain Well, well, e’en keep him—but
let’s ever.
go
down to him, how-
I promifed to follow her immediately, which I will now do, as I have finillied my Letter to my beloved Friend.
Once more I entreat you to let me have the Happinefs of feeing you foon. Mean Time, I dare fay Mifs Franklin will keep her Word, and write to you. She is a mod amiable Girl—I am Sure you will love her.
Adieu
2i6 The HISTORY of
Adieu—I muft not flay any longer with you.
f
Oh, my Friendl What an important Day will it be for
Your
Lucinda Courtney
•;*!*:*
• : ‘ '
:	t
^ %
0

Miss Lucinda Courtney. 217
Mifs Clara Franklin, to Mifs
CoNSTANTIA BeLLMOUR.
f

li
t •
ELL, Mifs—what’s , your Name ?—-Oh !—Conjiantia I am to write to you, inflead of Luanday it Seems. I wifh, fince She would have a Proxy, fhe had pleafed to let it be in her Marriage j you might then have ftill been entertained by your Friend, while I Should have been employed in a Manner more
agreeable
to my
Tafte.
Girl behaves like a Fool
This afking
her Pardon—So prudilh. So fluttered, forSooth, at the Thought of what’s going to happen! Dear
VoL. III.
L
Soul,

2i8 The HISTORY of
Soul, I am ready to die with
laughing at her—-and yet. See
what it is to be handfome ! Every
\
thing fhe does looks graceful.
She’s a Sweet Creature, it mull
be acknowledged
and fo is tliis
bewitching Har?y. It’s well for
you that you was fo wife as to
keep out of Harm’s Way.—I
wifh I had never feen the Fellow.
I fhall
grow
quite: in Love
with Matrimony if I flay much
longer in this Houfe.
Pray Hea-
ven I may not catch the Infection!
This Courtfliip is a joyous
Thing, where it is between Peo-
ple of Senfe and Refinement. I
have Seen a Pair of Lovers paw-
ing at one another, like a Couple
of
J
i
4
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 219
of Monkies, enough to turn one’s Stomach.—But here, it is all fo delicate, fo tender, and So pretty, that it would do your Heart good
to fee it. "
-<
Harkee, my Dear — you must promife to be very fond of me, when we meet; for I intend to enter into a violent Friendship with you; fo don’t judge of me
by my Letters, for I can tell you I am a good kind of a Girl, tho’ a little harum-fcarum now and then; but you must love me for all that; for, between you and I,
I would not give a Pin for a Wo-man after She is married; She grows fo wife, forfooth! and fb notable ! there’s no enduring her. Then, farewel all our little Se-
L 2
crets.
220 The history of
crets, about Lovers, the very Life of female Friendfhip; they have Something elfe to do, than to mind Such Trifles.-—So, as Lucinda will be Soon good for nothing, we ought to flrike up an Intimacy in our own Defence; for there’s no living without a Confidant to tell one’s imaginary Secrets to. I have a whole Budget full to entrufl you with, and you, I fuppofe, are Brim-ful
of them. I Shall then hear of
your Damons and Strephons, and Oh, I die to fee you—fo pray be a little quick in your Motions, for I have nobody to talk to but the old Grecianj Mr. Courtney; for Mrs. Cartwright and Mrs. Williams are as bufy as Bees about
this
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 221
this Same Wedding, and the happy Pair are So taken up with one another, that there’s no Such Thing as having their Company a Minute together.
But I forget
This is not the
kind of Letter I was bid to write I had Orders to tell you all that paffes here, very minutely; inflead of which, I have been fcribbling
away
without either Form or
Method—But, hang me if I know how to help it. Here’s nothing
going forward, but what you may imagine better than I can defcribe. To-morrow is to be the Day of Days—yet, even then, what is it but a Wedding ^ though, I believe, an uncommonly happy one.
L 3
Adieu,
222 The history of Adieu, Child—I cannot end this
•v
fine Epiflle better than by wifhing us both good Hufbands, and that
very Ipeedily. I embrace you, my
\
Dear, according to the French Style, and am
Your
Clara Franklin
Mifi
Miss Lucinda Courtney.
22 2
Mifs Clara Franklin, to Mifs
CONSTANTIA BeLLMOUR.
The mighty Affair is over
My dear Luanda is now
•
Mrs. Montague, and the hap-pieff Woman in England, in my Opinion—and her own, too, or I am mistaken.
The lovely Bride looked like an Angel, and the charming
Bridegroom was, at least, the
%
handSomest of Mortals. They were both elegantly dreffed. Lucinda in a white Negligee, with Small Silver Sprigsover it, a Small black Lace Cloak, which
f
«
Set off the inimitable WhiteneSs
La	of
224 The HISTORY of
of her Neck; round which was a black Collar with Stars of Diamonds, and her Hair, which is the fineft in the World, w^as frenched, and adorned with the fame, Mr. Montague was in White and Silver—but I cannot convey an Idea of his eafy, graceful Figure. His long, light-brown Hair was drefled with most becoming Negligence-—In Short, it was Paris and Helen, Venus and Adonis, Adam and Eve, or, if it pleafes you better, you may fuppofe they looked like your fweet Self, and your favourite Swain, and then, I am fure you’ll think them handfome.
After
Ts s L u c IN n A C o u r t n e y . 225
they were decorated in this Manner, and I had dizen’d out mySelf a little, we Set off, Sor Church. Mifs Lucy was mighty grave all the Way, and talked much of the Solemnity of the Service, and the awful SenSe flie had of the State fhe was
entering upon
as MifSes are,
wont to do on thefe Occafions;
%
and very right, to be Sure but, let me die, if I could help laughing at this fame Solemn Service. I wondered how fhe could keep her Countenance but the Sweet Soul curtfied, and looked as prim as a Nun. Mr. Montague behaved, with eafy
•GracefulneSs, and had his LefTon
^ 5
as
226
The HISTORY of
as pat as you pleafe, and repeated it with a manly and noble Air.
When the good Man pronounced them Man and Wife, Mr. Montague^ according to Cuf-tom. Saluted his Spoufe, and, taking her Hand,^ led her to his Coach, into which he likewife pufhed me, for I can hardly fay he handed me; So impatient was he to take his Seat by his dear Help-mate. I kept him, however, in pretty good Order, all the Way Home.
The Day pasted happily^ every body was in Spirits. The Bride
V
and Bridegroom were, indeed, a
little abfent, now and then, but none, but myfelf, took Notice of it.
After
Miss Lucinda Courtney. 227
After Dinner, t would have given the World for a Dance, but there were too few of us, fo I was obliged to be Satisfied with a little Concert, of which we were the Performers. Mr. Montague
plays divinely, and, you know, how Sweetly Lucinda fings.
I proteft I had almofl forgot
My Brother was one of the Party ;
✓
but he, good Soul, could make but little Harmony. I would have recommended the Salt Box to him,
9
as an eaSy Instrument; but he excuSed himfelf, and chofe rather to kick his Heels, by way of Tabor. Poor Fellow 1 he had no great Relisti, either to Singing or Dancing — he had lost
his
228 The HISTORY of
his Miftrefs, you know ■
but his Sorrow is not deadly I think he’ll get the better of it.
In this Manner we rnade the Hours fly away, till Twelve o’clock gave us Warning to Separate. Every body is gone to Bed, but your new Friend, who, to Shew her Love to you, has kept her Eyes open, not-withftanding Some moft dreadful Yawns, to inform you of what is past. I know Lucinda would have done it ten Times better ^ but what I have omitted, we will tell you by Word of Mouth, when we have the Pleafure of feeing you, which
I under-
Miss Lucinda Courtney. ,229
I
I understand, you have promiSed
stiall ______________
then, believe me.
or two. Till
Yours, Sincerely, Clara Franklin
‘ - * , • - •

\
F I N I S.
r
/
B
O
O
s
Printed for F. and J. NOBLE
E'uety Article In the following Catalogue Is marked as It is fold bound, unlefs otberwife exprejjcd.
APPARITION; or, Female Cavalier,
3 vol.	—	9s
Adopted Daughter; or the Hiftory of Mifs
Clarifla B
2 voL
6s
Adventures of the Marquis de Noailles and
6s
th
c
Hiftory of ——«-	6 s
2 vol.	6 s
Mademoifelle Tencin, 2 vol.
Affected Indifference; or.
Lady Frances Conner, 2 vol.
Abbaflai, an eaftern Novel,
Alethia; or Letters from Selima, Emprefs of the Turks, to her Daughter Ifabella, of Grand Cairo, 2 vol. fewed	— ■ 4s
Belle Grove; or the Fatal Seduftion, 2 vol. -6 s Bubbled Knights; or Succefsful Contrivances, 2 vol.	--------—	6 s
Bracelet; or Fortunate Difcovery, 2 vol, 6s Conflict; or the Hiftory of Mifs Sophia Fan-brook, 3 vol.	—	—	9 s
Commentary on the Dyfentry or Bloody Flux, Trandated from the Latin of Mark Akenfide, Fellow of the College of Phyficians, Member of the Royal Society, and Phyfician to her pre-fent Majefty. By John Ryan, M. D. fewed, 2 s Clementina; or the Hiftory of an Italian Lady, who made her Efcape from a Monaftery, for the Love of a Scots Nobleman,	3 s
- Contraft; or, the Hiftory of Mifs Welldon and Aiifs Alofely, 2 vol.	..... 6 s.
Country
•.vJ
U. of
BOOKS Printed for F. and T. NoBLf.
f
f
i
f ■*
4
3
Country Coufins, a Novel, 2 vol.	6s
Child's Entertainer. A Collection of Riddles, embellhhed with a Picture of eaeh Subject,	-------- --------------- 6d
Captive j or, the Hiftory of Mr, Clifford,
2 vol.	-------- ------------- 6 s
Devil upon Crutches in England, or Night Scenes in London. The Sixth Edition; to which is now added, the Hiftory of a celebrated Courtezan, and the adulterous Amour
of Lord  ----with Mifs H——,	3 s
Double Disappointment, a Farce, by the late Mofes Mendes, Efq; Author of the Chaplet, ftitched,	----- ---------------- IS
Entanglement; or the Hiftory of Mifs E*-leonora Frampton and Mifs Anaftatia Sh. ftoe,
2 vol.	——	----- 6 s
Eliza; or the Hiftory of Mifs Granvile,
2 vol.	------- -------------- 6 s
Each Sex in their Humour; or the Hiftories of the Families of Brightly, Finch, Fortefcue,
Shelburne and Stevens, 2 vol. -------- 6 s
Elopement; or. Perfidy Puniflied, 3 vol. 9s Fatal Obedience; or the Hiftory of Mr.
Freeland, 2 vol.	--------- 6 s
Fortune-Teller; or, the Footman ennobled: Being the Hiftory of the Right Hon. the Earl of R*** and Mifs Lucy M—n—y,, 2 vol. 6 s Fortunate Villager; or, the Hiftory of Sir Andrew Thompfon, 2 vol.	—	6 s
Force of Nature; or the Hiftory of Charles Lord Sommers, 2vol.	■■ ■ ■	6s
F emale
BOOKS Printed for F. and T. Noble.
Together with the
6s
- 6s Sir Ed-Adven-
Female American; or, the Adventures of Unca Eliza Winkfield, 2 vol. —	5 s
Female Frailty; or, the Hiftoiy of Mils
Wroughton, 2 vol.	-------- 6 s
Feelings of the Heart; or, the Hiftory of a Country Girl. Written by Herfelf, and ad-drefled to a Lady of Qiiality, 2 vol.
Farmer’s Son of Kent, 2 vol.
Hiftory of Sir Harry Herald and ward Haunch: tures of Mr. Charles Herald and Mifs Felicia
Blanchman, 3 vol.	------ 9 s
The Hiftory of a young maiTied Lady of Dif-tinftion; in a Series of Letters between Madame du Montier and the Marchioriefs de ***, her daughter. A new Edition, 2 vol.	6 s
Hiftory of the great Plague, which raged in London in the Year 1665, &c. Alfo, a Journal of that at Marseilles in the Year 1720, 5 s
in boards, or bound	------ 6 s
Hiftory of my own Life; being an Account of many of the fevereft Trials impofed by an implacable Father upon the moft affectionate Pair that ever entered the Marriage State, 2 vol.	—	—	6 s
H ftory and Adventures of Frank Hammond,	------- -------------- 3 s
Hiftory of Mifs Sally Sable, a Foundling,
2 vol.	-—	----- 6s
Hiftory of Mifs Clarinda Cathcart and Mifs Fanny Renton. Dedicated (by Permiffion) to the (^een. The Second Edition 2 vol. 6 s
BOOKS Printed for F. and J. Noble.
I
Hiftory of Benjamin St. Martin, a fortunate
Foundling, 2Vol.--------------------- 6s
Hiftory of Frederic the Forfaken; inter-fperfed with Anecdotes of Perfonages of Rank and Fafliion in this Metropolis, 2 vol. 6s Hiftory of Mr. Byron and Mifs Greville,
2 vol.	----- ---------------- 6 s
Hiftory of Sir Roger and his Son Joe,
2 vol.	-——«	---------- 6 s
Hiftory of two Perfons of (^ality, 3 s
Hiftory of Mifs Katty N-----. Containing a
faithful and particular Relation of her Amours, Adventures, and various I'miis of Fortune, in Scotland, Ireland, Jamaica, and in England.
With a Key.	.	—..... 3 s
Hiftory of Lady Louifa Stroud, and the Hon. Mifs Caroline Stretton, 2 vol.	—	6 s
Hiftory of Mifs Harriot Fitzroy, and Mifs
Emilia Spencer, 2 vol.	---- '	6 s
Hiftoiy of Mifs Lucinda Courtney; in a Series of Original Letters, written by herfelf to her Friend Mifs Caroline Bellmour. A new Edi-

tion, 3vol.	----- ------------ 9s
Hiftoiy of Emily Willis, a natural Daughter. The Third Edition, 2 vol.	6 s
Hiftory of Emilia Beville, 2 vol.	6 s
Hiftory of Amanda. Written by a young
Lady,	----- . ------------- 3 s
Hiftoiy of Charles Chance and Mifs Clara
Vellum,	----- -------------- 3 s
Hiftory of Henry Dumont, Efq; and Mifs
Charlotte Evelyn,	----------- ^ s
Hiftor)’’
BOOKS Printed for F, and J, Noble,
Hiftory of Lavinia Rawlins, A New Edition,
2vol.	-------- ------------- 6s
Happy Extravagant; or, the Hiftory of Charles Clairville, Efq; 2vol. —	6 s
Hiftory of Mrs. Drayton and her two
Daughters, 3 vol.	---------- gs
Hiltory of Sir George Ellifon, 2 vol. 6 s Injured Daughter; or, the Hiftory of Mifs Maria Beaumont, 2 vol.	—	6 s
Indifcreet Connexion; or, the Hiftory of
Adifs Lefter, 2 vol.	----- 6 s
Jelly; or, the Bridal Day, 2 vol.

Letters
.tTTT
5s
s
d
itten from' Leverpoole, Chefter, Corke, the Lake of Killarney, Dublin, Tunbridge Wells, and Bath. By Samuel Derrick, Efq ; late Mafter of the Ceremonies at Bath,
2 vol.	——.	----- ^ s
Life, remarkable Adventures, and Pyracies of Captain Singleton. Third Edition. 3s Life and furprifing Adventures of Crufoe
Richard.Davis, 2 vol.	----- 6 s
Life and real Adventures of Hamilton Alur-ray, written by himfelf, 3 vol.	9 s
Life and Adventures of John Van, a Clergy-' man’s Son, of Woodhay in Hampftiire, 2 v.os Love at Crofs Purpofes; exemplified in two fentimental and connected Hiftories from real life, viz. I. The Forced MaiTiage; or, the Hiftory of Sir George Freemore and Mifs Emily Alenel. 2. Memoirs of Lady Freemore, and her Fami ly, 4 vol.	——,	12s
Mother- •
BOOKS Printed for F. and J. Noble,
Mother-in-Law, or the Innocent Sufferer; in-terfperfed with the uncommon and entertaining Adventures of Mr. Hervey Falconer, 2 vol. 6 s Memoirs and Adventures of Sobrina, 2 vol. 6 s Memoirs of a Coquette; or, the Hiflory of Mifs Harriot Airy, 3 s fewed; or bound, gilt and lettered	■——■	----- 4 s
Mufe in Good Flumour; ,a Colledlion of Comic Tales, by the moSc eminent Poets, 2 vol. 6s Mufe in a Moral Humour; a Colledlion of aereeable and inftruffive Tales, Fables, Pafto-rals, &c. By Several Hands, 2 vol.	6 s
Moral and Critical Reficdfions on Several
Subjects; among which (by way of llluftra-tion) various Characters are occai[)onaliy.'inter-fperfed,
3s
Man of Honour; or, the Hiflory of Harry Waters, Efq;
3s
Modern Couple; or, the Hifeory of Mr. and
Mrs. Da\ers, 2 vol.	-------- 6s
Memoirs of Lady Woodford, 2 vol. 6s Nunneiy; or, the Hiffory of Mifs Sophia Howard, 2 vol.
Northern Memoirs; or, the Hidory of a Scotch Family, 2 vol. --------- 6 s ^
5s
Orphan Daughters. A moral Tale, 2 vol. 6s Perplexed Lovers; or, the Hiflory of Sir
Edward Balchen, Bart. 3 vol. -------- qs
Point of Honour. A Novel, 2 vol.	6s
Pvival Mother; or, theKiStoryof theCoun-tefs de Salens and her two Daughters. A New Edition, 2 vol.,	--------- 6s
Reclaim’d

BOOKS Printed for F. and J. Noble.
'Reclaim’d Libertine; or, the Hiftory of the Honourable Charles Belmont, Efq; and Mifs Melvil. In a Series of Letters, 2 vol. 6s Rational Lovers; or, the Hiftory of Sir Charles Leufum, and Mrs. Frances Fermor,
2 vol.	------- ------------ 6 s
Reformed Coquette; or, the Adventures
of Amoranda,	——	....
Suppofed Daughter; or, Innocent Impoftor, In which is comprifed the entertaining Memoirs of two North-Country Families of Diftin6tion.
A New Edition., 3 vol,	----- 9 s
Summer-Houfe; or, the Hiftory of Mr. Moreton and Mifs Bamfted, 2 vol.	6s
Storm; or, the Hiftory of Nancy and Lucy, 2 vol. ------- .......... —.......	6s
2S t
True Merit, True Happinefs; exemplified in the entertaining and inftrudtive Memoirs of
Mr. S—-------, 2 vol. ---------- ------- 6s
T'eft of Friendftiip ; or, the Hiftory of Lord
Oeorge C-------, and Sir Harry Adlon, Bait.
2 vol. ■   ""	-----—— ■	6s
True Delicacy; or the Hiftory cf Lady Frances Tilney, and Henry Cecil, Efq; 2 vol. 6s Unequal Alliance; or, the Hiftory of Lord
Aftiford, 2 vol. --------- --------- 6s
Undutiful daughter; or, the Hiftory of Mifs
Goodwin, 3 vol. . ——	---- 9 s
Voyages, Travels, and wonderful Difcove-ries of Captain John Holmelby,	—■	3s
Virtuous Criminal; or;- the Hiftory of Lord
Stanley, 2 vol. -------- ----------- 6s
Ways to kill Care; a Colleftion of Comic Songs; written by Young D’Urfey, fewed, is6d
.cc ^ -ifA •'■-/•■’■*. ^.F'K-A’'.V- •' .' -‘-'C X .•,v.-.: .':. •■ -;,V-'-Li;- •''N ^ / v

.V,
•*. %* - .
V o :*
:V . .	.	1'* --
-''r'-ii-’ii'h ’••V-- 'Cl'Tote'., b.
V '* V' '**	<C' CC: N-' h. 'V'-'. ■ ’■ v'.’. ■' br N.' ".t/'-v.'.-
- -b‘ - :0 ■'. _ j'- :-O', •• ^ '-:0L


^ Lb-'C ^-Ov'bbS vb b 'Tb'^; -^:
or-C'S-.. -■ ‘'
• ■■■Ni^V-ib Li "a
IAC-ST;	■’ ■■.' ?■;''"'bb'-. '.'h ccb. -'.-C.','■''''v bb; ■; ,' .
'« ■ •
- - . .
.'c.	'r''F'r'f'	^''■
bbS ■'‘.-n'b'	-' — v-n. ;:







• ..'v <

N . ^	.,

- '

T .**^.1	• •’>

. % •
^ ' *S • '
■ c* -r "'-V'--'	V'.'-rb'.	:C L.r ;L. T., '.i';'	•-.,. V T


J .
• . »-

.- .‘'f
\x '. r...
V.'



-1 i"-:-' ■ f '-	-'A S’	•■■' V*^^ ■	". ■ '■' .'	'. ■	'	'

V"	4	4	*	•• V	^	■
CNTro;:'-:	:;'CV
V 4'-‘-’- b-t V",'S' ■ '*'bb'N i;:. b.N'b.VD ' -Ni l,/; . ■	^ b,	. '.’b
/b-.:’Vb-'v--	bccc ib'V ••"bc-bb bbsT',:,. N'-': bN -n ,
b*' 'b.'*'b b'b I'''	' \ ~ '''''^''''''''' \ \ '	'	~	^''	'' ''''L'""'-'
’■■ ■■‘SiA^FZ. 'V	A	. -■.•	'•■	■-»■'•.••■	••. *	-•-	•-	. vT .•
’• . 1.^''-L’- '•-..	'y-	■'- - ■ ■• • "	•• •' ■»	■ '


• ; uJ'. •..
'>

b/ V * . •*'




-‘N ■	.
- • C''
.^ >
		• * ^ A
'■ Lb S’ ».-• '		f*' ; ' f > ;V' ' •V , * C' ^ • s .
..-V- ^5-.'



f. -

■b' - -

- . ^ v:

' /•





,
*' /c'*'
' / I

'	. . *C>
V
^ r

-LrTLs.^-A‘.-r^'j>-Jo-.? - '!j"5£65
,

->- :-J
■t.
:>SV :'^
< '.
'/ , ; '<1^
<•
r ^ V *
< -s *
I . •


iv.'
L.i ■■
i:
i:'
♦ . * *.

’v	i'-.■	^.'^-v-\ ■’v>'•is'*'-^‘Ci*'T-’VVVv •*:-

V y
-S	/ ■ /
^/vf PAi /Tv-/i.'S;'"-'''-v/
/ /A''
r"‘j . ..
N
V ■ * V*
<v ^
.r
/-*■ /;■ .
:	'A
V
.	./'V-
./ V	^ f /
^	^	-f • ^

4

\\
SI
'J'
A



V'»
s.-

s*	
	'i
i'	/
	t‘- vV
	
f
n. T V.K1*/
r ■’
«*-'h
mC.
•vS



.f--*	V


\ .
•'-'V.v --;-i ; c--. y.
. •. I
•


A'i.
X
\ 2;NS- - ■; ■: • ^
r. f ■'” i f.v*'*’’"--'■ ■' rid ■':■	.’•


■	C-- ' '0V^'■. : '
. '* S 'it', -fd f-	•	•-	•'.•	-
V

•4

c:<






i





. . • ■ >
•C'Cte;*-
t*
f'.
V. . -	.


' ■ i

■■ - • >' '

.*	.	■	"l'

’	• • .••Cf'
■ t'	■ -r


- f' f -•

V '
•VrV.-c,i-'• .r'S'■'	' -'

.. . - -. ..
* V • • ‘




«" •	•“** ‘t, - :
* -* •*


inches
D50 llluminant, 2 degree observer
Density
0.04
0.09
0.15
0.22
0.36
	1	2	3	4	5	6	7"	8	9	10	11 (A)	12	13	14	15
L*	39.12	65.43	49.87	44.26	55.56	70.82	63.51	39.92	52.24	97.06	92.02	87.34	82.14	72.06	62.15
a*	13.24	18.11	-4.34	-13.80	9.82	-33.43	34.26	11.81	48.55	-0.40	-0.60	-0.75	-1.06	-1.19	-1.07
b*	15.07	18.72	-22.29	22.85	-24.49	-0.35	59.60	-46.07	18.51	1.13	0.23	0.21	0.43	0.28	0.19
0.51
lOl I I I I
500	200
S'	o'	qI Si
3	^	in	irt
tfota p«r Inch (opOccI)

600
700
300
>400

centimeters
lll|■/lll|llll|2>>lM><l|3lll|llll|4lll|lllll5lll|llll|6lll|llll|7lll|llll|slll|llll|9lll||||lHo

■I.^I	»	. If,

%•* »*•	Jt* t"
' /.'»*>
S^.	T^.	^
i \ ri
.	'	V
tsL ^ -ic
tv.
« •■	wai-/
^ .
ilOiLSIH

