' :f	fij
ijs HBmBSH yM	®yj
cx murts
Cfnlrman IjaSSmfe
The G e n'u ike	§gjj
LETTERS
O F	‘
Ma RY Qjdeen of Scots,
T O .**	*
James Earl of Both well:
Foupd in his Secretary’s Clofet aster his Deceafe; "‘and now in the Postef-fion of a Gentleman of O x f o r d.
Difcovering the greateft and mod feeret
TransacTions of Her Time.
a ranflated from the French Originals,
By % D W A R D S I'A M 0 N D S
I	Late qfCbriEs-Church College, Oxfrd.
'Never before made publick,
To which is added,
Remarks on each- Letter, with an Abstract of her L1 FE.
In a Letter to jthe BookfeUer, fto\r\ an unknown Hand.
The S eco nf> Edition,	«
_______ . V	"	■ •	-
WESTMINSTER V i
Printed hy A. Campbell, in Union-Street, near New PAace-Tard1 for J. MiUan i*n Shug-Lane, near the upper End of the Hay-Market. Sold hy jf. Roberts in Warwick*Lane ; and the Bp'okfellers of London and Weftminjler, JMDCCXXVI.
^PHce Ope Shilling, j	\
THE
PREFACE.
HEE Hiftory of Mary Cjueeri of Scots ■ ha3 made fo great a Noife "ill the World, that 1 thought it would not be unweh eome, to communicate Ibnie Qri~ ptitil Letters Written with her oWn Hand f and which, either never came to the Perufal of thdfe who have written of her, or Were not thought proper to*be inferted, betaufe they feem to prove, a little mote plain than
A z	the
iv F R E FA C E.
V.	,
the Papists wilh, her Conversation with the Earl of Both'well; But I am of Opinion, that the former of thefe two Reafons is --the right; and I doubt not but my Readers will be of the fame, when I Shall inform them, that thefe Letters, being found after the Deceafe of the Earl’s Secretary, by the Heir of the Estate, they have ever Since been pre- -Serv’d in the Family, from Generation to Generation, till the Race being extimst, they fell into the Hands of a Gentleman who look’d on himfelf as lefs oblig’d to .conceal them. A Reverend
A1
Clergyman of the Church of England being, Some Time ago, about to publish the History of
this
PREFACE. A
1 ■	/ o . i ‘ ' ..	S--iA~ "	: V*■' \{?
this Queen, intended to infert theSe Letters: But having chang’d his Mind; through his Interest, H I obtain’d Copies of them: My Understanding in Chara&ers, almost of all kinds, tho’ never So obfolete, made him think me a proper Perfon to render them intelligible; which, I hope, I have done to the Satisfaction of , as many as Shall perufe them.
E. Simmonds.
To the Bookfeller.
sir,	i
\	n
HEaring you are about to puUifh the Letters of Mary Queen of Scots to Bothwell; and having an Opportunity, pome Lime ago, of perufing the Originals, to fatkfy the Cufiojity oj fome Friends, I coU letted the inclofed Abstract of her Life, 'with fome Remarks on each Letter, to vin> dicate her of feveral Afperflons falfly laid to her Charge by the Partial and Brib'd Buchannan. By adding of them to the Let * ters, you 'will (no doubt) oblige mofi of your Readers, and in particular
Tour unknown Friend,
B, S.
Errata, Page to. Line 3. for Mirror, read Minion. P. 12. L. 6. for Corcoin, read Lorrain, P.13. Dio. /orfatifieeb read falsified. *
, BOOKS fold by y.	at his Shop
in Sbug-Lane, near the Golden Horde* Shoe, by the Upper-end of the Hay-Market ; and the Bookfeller next to the Horfe-Guard, Whitehall.
f	In F O L I O
HART'S Antiquities of Wejlntinjler Ally, 2 Vol. Fine Puts*
Beaumond and Fletcher's Plays.
Architeltura Nova Curiofa. 2 Vols.
Buck's Bille. Ruled.
Bible, Queen Elizabeth. Large.
Bloom's Hifiory of the Bible. Cutts.
Burnet's Hiflory of his. own Time.-Clarendon's Hifiory of the Rebellion.Jj Vol. 1704, Baxter's Works. 4 Vol.
Bate's Works.
t Common Prayer. Black Letter.
Ditto. White-Letter.
Caffandra. A Romance.
Carryle on Job. 2 Vol.
Dry den's Plays. Vol, 1.
Dryden's Fables and Poems.
«—- Poems.	Hevelii Opera. 3 Vols.
Davila's Civil Wars of France.
Echard's Hifiory of England. Vol. 1.
—-— Ecclefiafiical Hifiory.,
Bible. With Maps.
Heyleyn's Hifiory of the World. Be ft Edition. J70J Jofephus.	1704*.
JKjnnet's Hifiory cf England. Vol. 2.
Leybourn's Survey.
Murray's Laws of Scotland.
Manton's Sermons. Vol. 3, 0 4,
Prior's Poems.
Parthe-
Parthenijfa, A Romance.	Pharamond\ Ditto.
Rye-Houfe Plot. _ c V
Stryp's Annals of the Reformation.
Taylor's Sermons. Hid Supplimetrt.
CL U A R T O .
Bible with Sturt's Cuts, and Maps, neatly Bound\ Dittoi With other Cutts, neatly Bound.
Ditto, With Maps, plain.
Ditto. Small,, without Maps.
Brown's Travels.	Lithgow's Travels.
Palidio's Architecture•"
P C T A V O.
Art of making Glafl.	. Attalantis. 4
Bhen's Plays'.	------ Novels* 2 Vols.
Clarendon's Hiflory. 6 VoU Ben• Johnfon's Plays. 6 VoU Nelfon's Feafls and Fafls*
Whole Duty of Man.
Taylor's Holy Living and Dying.
Utopia. 2 Ntf/r. Turkifh Spy. 8 Vols.	\
Spectators, 8 Vols- Row's Lucan. 2 Vol.
Boeccatio's Novels. Collier's Antoninus•
Hypollitus, and Mackbeth King of Scotland\
Oliver's Republican Scheme of Government, and feveral other Particulars never before publish'd. Where may be had Variety of Hiflory, Husbandry, Trade, Voyages, Lives, Divinity, Phyfick, Mathematicks,. Dictionaries, Clajpcks, Plays, Romances, Poetry, &c,
*fuflPublifh'd, The prefent State of Poetry, a Satire.	1
Addref'd to a Friend, and dedicated to Mr.
Wei fed. ■	Alfo
Neceffary Obfervations on the Ad for the Relief of Infolvent Debtors: Proving the faid Act to be of great Ufe to Creditors as well as to Debtors,
By Roderick Mackenzie, Sen. Quondam A< J,
Sold by the Hove Jr Mill asst
r 'AO:;T*E TTER Tn'S;
this firft Letter, ad appears ly Brantomeh Me* moirsy map be written when the Earl of Both-well was in Banifimentf, where he had been fome Time, on an Informatim given ly the Lord Arrau, Thttf'he htfdcfflfpiPIagaitofi theLife If M urray i * Befidesj the Complaint fie makes in it how impoffille it idi for her to a& ad fie WQuIddo^
; having her Power limited Iy two different Fait ions, per fitly agreet^witf ;Spodwood, Sir James Melvil, and alhiofi all the Authors who have written the Hrftories of thofe Times y the la'ter of them-very confidently affirming, that fie i had neper confented to marry with Lord Darly, lut that fie hop'd, ly that Means, to fupprefi the, Incroachments which the two Parties, head* ed ly Hamilton and Murray, were daily making on her Prerogative*
HI Old complain of me* my deac BothwcU,pjit\\Qxxl Cauie: Did + you -know what unfurmounta^ _________ ble Difficulties attend a PeripiJ
; of my) Station, in the Purfuit of an Af&ir,; Inch as ours, you would not blarney but pity me:: All my Moments Sh*	B	are
2 If Original Letters of
ar£ taken up with Confutations—--^-—the Distractionof the Times overwhelm me—•
1 ought to exchange this Soft and gentle Nature of mine, for one all rough and mafculine, to be able to cope with the §3 Oppositions I daily meet with;	befides, ;
the Lord Darlj is perpetually with me, pretends to testify his Paffion by his Jea-loufy; and, back’d by that afluming Ar-bitratrefs of my Fate, the Bwglijh Queen* already takes upon him the Authority of a Husband —— What can 1 do ? torn and divided between different Factions, both equally pernicious to their Sovereign’s Interest-—---Yet in Spite of the contending * Storms, in Spite of Bufinefs, Cares, and all my vast Fatigues, still does my Heart find Room for Love : ——Yes, I protest* my ever dear Botb-weUy that, for an humble Life with you, I gladly wou’d exchange this Load of Greatnefs, and throw it to thofe who Seem fo ambitious of it, this gawdy Burthen of a Crown :
But even That is a Privilege deny’d me ;
I must either continue to reign, or ceafe fo live; my Power is all that can protect my Bothwell; fhou’d I relinquish you, or Want thfe;Meajni$ of proferying you ? it is
' “7 i	■ not
»	Mary Queen of Scots. j
not the pretended Friendship of the ever-changing Murray wou’d afford yon any Shelter : Do not therefore impute it to my Want of Impatience to fee youy that > I still delay your coming to Edinburgh*, }th for the future Repole of us both, that I command you to tarry yet a little longer where you are: But methinksl need not any Arguments to convince you, that it is wholly |your Interest Tstudy $ too precious have been' the Proofs I have given you of my Tendernefs for you, to doubt the Sincerity of it; nor do I believe you want Senle or Gratitude to acknowledge what I have done for you ———Time, however, must be the Touch-Stone of the Hearts of both--------write to me as
ufual: Believe me, all the Confolation ' your unhappy Queen enjoys, is in hearing from you, till Fkte allows us the Bleffing of a nearer Converfation, which I hope and pray may be Sooner than you s expect, and as Swift as my pelires. -------
A Legion of Angels attend and be yout Guard from all exterior Harms, and keep ^ you ever faxthfal to
:	B 3	T. S.
4 Original Letters of/
I had forgot to warn you of Lord Her-j rif, he.designs you a; Vifitit can be for no other Reafpn than to pry into your behaviour y--r---be.canticMJ3 of. your lelf ,T before him. Parnell. 4	.
VfT -%rii jT -	/'-Vi-j stou OI	j'S'f A CN
LET t;E;E... IlCf’
4fhis feems ito hie written afmalUTme after: the i Dormer ‘ ty?td bother Ftcgwfyg to \ Bstdiannaix, .ypfi hem Date al out the Middle of the Tear 156^. She was at tDajf 'Time greatly incom- y ; mbded.Iyfhe Dafffoh oftheDikmi\io\Is \ land wI4 h > tfoeW 'fogtiming ko contrive Metiftires for their ; i; RtikhW	£*&\£nvN'd.MetfrtirL,	Spotf-
jg ^9©d,;Lnwwfgrd., r?l	. c
"1" T is ^dth, f .Dfanfport proportionable
niy.Jate Exquietitudes^ that1 now r |:Q^^ud; ;ihe: Prelence. of my dear Both-gr^fest Part of my Anxieties * ate oypr | ^M%4be$h has chang’d her Mind v in Fayour o£ my Lord Darly^ and I Shall be persecuted no more with her Menaces ;., or Perihafions on his Score; Murray alfo declares himfelf an Enemy to t he Match,
• *y	.	and
Mary §tyeen of Scots. £
and I Shall have the double Satisfaction of obliging my Subjects and my felf; ——but oh ! there.remains a greater Felicity in Store for me, I Shall not only: be eas’d; of if the Solicitations of the Man I hate, but enjoy with more Security than ever,, the Society of him 1 love. -—---The Council teem perfectly Satisfy’d of your Innocence as to the late Troubles; you will havfe a publick Mandate to recal you | but I canf* not restrain my Impatience; from fending you this Harbinger of our appioachfirtg Happinefs; -—be Secret, however, I opiir jure you, a too quick Discovery of your r Contentment yet, might ruin all,:—t--?-Always remember this, That the Favourites" of Princes, have as; many Obfervers, ,as Eyes upon them,—I learn’d this Maxim fibom Katberim de Medicis, to wear a Countenance the reverfe of my Heart.-—-Propofals frequently are made for no other Reafon, than to found the Inclinations of the Perfons to whonj they are offer’d; that politick Queen therefore qever.dif-clpfes either the Plealure or Dilcontent She conceives, at what me hears y but, leaving it to Time to bring out theReality, fathoms the Whole of the Defign,
'	without
6 Original Letters of	\
without giving even thole who thin& themfelves in the very Bottom of her Secrets, Liberty to know the least of her Thoughts; it is alfo by this Means that Elizabeth circumvents all the Plots of her jK Enemies: And this, in fine, is the only Security of a Great and Envy’d Perfori.—-Diflemble, therefore, my dear BothweM with all the World but me, who, I do believe, will be most pleas’d when most I know your Heart;—-lee the Confidence which Love infpires, JealouSy and Suspicion are Paffions I am utterly a Stranger to; but in the Affairs of State, I contest I have Vanity enough to affure my felf, that the Man I condescend to favour in the Manner I have done you, cannot but be mine;—-as for the Divorce you writ to me concerning, I wou’d not have you think of it as jet; the Times are at prelent too mudi unfettled, and your Wife has powerful Friends; strengthen first your own Interest,which may be a Means to weaken hers;-and leave to me and your •good Friend the Biflhop of Rofs, to manage That thereafter ; we have already laid the Scheme, and I am certain that
worthy Mari will not fail to perform the $iiq OH //	j-	Part
^-KV .	pg r.-i ■■;	- -r>yA	- IA 'A	' '	jl fi&r - i	‘	‘
Mary gf Scots. y
Part enjoyn’d him, to the Satisfaction of us both; in the mean time, wou’d not have you give the least Hint of your De-iign : But of this we Shall have Leifure to |t talk at your Arrival. f I haye thele three Days waited an Opportunity to convey to you the tender Meanings of my Soul, and must not waste the precious Moment in dull Narrations. —— No Time is pleafing to me, that is not Spent in giving you new Demonstrations of mv Affection: well may I err in the Rules of Government and State, when all my Thoughts {are taken up with Love; and yet perhaps I * Shou’d be lefs ’capable than I apstj if,my Concern . for the Establishment of your Happinefs did not make me now and then apply my Self to thofe Maxims, which alone can have the Power to fix it,—-the Ambition I have to make you Great, keeps alive my Defire of continuing fo my Self— -the Setter, I am very certain, wou’d foon grow too unweildy for the Weaknefs of A my Hand, were it not for the charming Hope I Shou’d Shortly have; the Means to s transfer it into yours j ftis there I wifh to fee it Shine, and look oh my felf but as the Steward of the glorious Relict, -^—
;	ia "	- '	I
§ Original Letters of
I do believe, however, that there are Joys to my* PcAvef to bestow, infinitely more valuable tto ymi that! this y but I think not my Heart and Petfon-Sufficient1 Re-Wstj&t to the Merits of my B'othwell^ and long for the happy Hour when I may give & Kingdom In Dowry with my Love, till them! Can^tdky my Joy imperfectly com-pMr, *-Inbr'WiiP-F ever rest till this, the ftipJea.rc^S.I]teSfte- my Soul Can know, is feomplisti’d—— 1 am flow going toCoun-wbe^^lHave-order’d-' 'it lby that the Earl of Hamilton,' whom I know your Enemy, Jffiall be accus’d of Things which foie a-Time,! atjteast, Shall deprive him of f the PoWerbf‘giving any Interruption to fiM^Happineik I pfopoie td-my lel£>cm theli Enjoyment^ of my.Dd£af Mt&hweMh
■1 ©xpect to a few Elays to be calfd to Court,1 and to the impatient Arms of
, poolfatoow	. MIR. j
Pggg| i	Letter, j
. L .	: t V:
!	Mary §yeen of Scots,1 p
si ,v s ■	/
L L E TTER III.
This Letter was written in the Beginning~ pf the, Tear 1564, at which Time Queen Elizabeth propos'd the Earl of Leicester to her for a ILuf3 hand, according to Cambden* Holingfhed,, and almofi all the Hifiorians, who mention. that Af. j fair with Wonder 5 the greateft Politicians of that Age dot being alte to fathom the fecret Motives which induc'd her to fo Unexpected a Behaviour.
HHat a Sudden Tiirrl iri out Affairs!
—^-good Go d ! how are the. Face of all Things alter’d1----- Scarce have;
I Courage to report the Story ) but you, alas l are but too well acquainted with the Misfortune in general* tho’ the Par-, ticulars cannot yet have reach’d you.——i I am for ever doom’d to be the Vaffal of the EngUJh Queen, the Tool of her curs’d v Policy, the Property of her Ambition, without a Friend to aid me f ------She
Writes me nowy That her Reafons for i breaking off the Match with Darly^ were hecaufe^ She thinks Lekefter more worthy;
C	©f
10 Original Letters of
of my Crown and Bed.—Leiceflerrtais’d I' bpt by her partial Favour, and long the Mirror of her loolest Wishes, must now be recompens’d with thz &coufh Crown,
-— but it Shall periSh first,--- tho Mur- _ ray and the Faction again threaten to take 2 up Arms, tho’ the Remainder of the Gordon Race rejoyce in this Opportunity of Revenge, not all I have endur’d, nor all I can endure Shall fright me to an Act So loath’d, lb fcorn’d—— no, if not decreed for BothweJly 1 will be for no other; -— in this I will be Mistrefs of my Self, as for the rest let Fate difpole; 1 am grown weary of the Light, and almost cou’d .resign that Life they make fo wretched, by % perpetual Troubles.——Attempt not to appear in Edinburgh I intreat you, where all Things being in Confufion, in this univerlal Hurry, you may fall a Viftim to the Malice of your Enemies; I am , .now more than ever concern’d, that Murray, fearful of your betraying thole i'e-cret Practices he formerly intruded to 1 your Care, privately confpires againft.
your Lite------- Hamilton gave me fome
Hints of it the other Day, and ‘Douglafs (
j afterwards, in Heat of Blood, pccahon’d
jv.	: ii	' . by
1 Mary §hieen of Scots. I i
by a Debate between ’em in my Prefence, confirm’d it all; all are falfe, all Traytors
to their Queen.----Oh Botbwett! where
Nr is one faithful Friend to be chofe out a-N mong a Thoufand bale Designers-—I aim not at Encreafe of Power, opprefs not my poor Subjects by exorbitant Taxa^ ■tions; nor envy the Provinces my Neighbours rule; all I defire is to poffefs, in Peace, the little Territories Twas born to govern, and that is deny’d me—--Sure I was born to everlasting Cares——like Hydra s Heads, one no Sooner disappears ^ than another riles in its Room, and drives j§ me from Repofe.—I am in too much Distraction to lay much at prefen t, but the Perfon who brings you this has a Com-miSfion to inform you all the Circum-. stances of this unexpected Blow ; I can B only tell you, that l am, as ever, wholly devoted to the Interest of my dear Both* well; and will yet, Some Way or other, s compleat his Happinefs, or fink in the Attempt.-—If you have any Advice which may be of Service in this Exigence, let > it be lpeedy; for never had I more pf Confolation. Tours, M* K.
J2 Original Letters of	|i
§	9. S,'
Direct as your last, under a Cover to the Vunfio, that Man I think is faithful hut bewar of Seaton, he has a Brother in i the Service of the Hamiltons * I more than fear he has already betray’d Some Things to your Prejudice-—my Uncle of Corcom (contributes to my Persecution, by pro* poling an: Allyance with the Houle of Auflria: The Bearer will inform you at full the Contents of this Letter——farewell, pity me, and continue to love me,
-A: ^	| NhTTJttSN::®	y;*
vr*	cr* j* «Sp c7* tr* cr* J* cr» trf <r» a* crs i/* cr* <7* >T* cr* i/* <j* lt* (/» cr*
Letter IV. ,
Contents of this Epiftle makes it evident to le - written immediately after her Marriage with Lord Darly; and not only Melvil, hut feveral * l| other Hiftorians alfo report, that the Earl Both-, \yell was/recalPd to Court about that Time; the g Reafons fie gives for her Confent to the Mar* (
2 Artage are fuch "as, whoever reads any of th Treaties of her Life, will fad both natural and reafonaMe j all the Writers concurring in this,
W	! %	that
jgmjfe Sk-- -4L
Mary Qfueen (d. Scots. 15
that if {he had continu'd finglej the Parties of Hamilton and Murray wou'd} in a (hart Tim^ have left her nothing hut the,Name of Queen* ,
^^Ruel as your Reproaches ^re, 1 pat> don them; but oh f too little iem Able of the Pangs I feel, you ought * rather to have apply’d Balfams than Gorri-
. fives to Wounds like mine:-----Tis true,
I am married, and have given my feff to another, and in that Act have fatisfy’d the oft repeated Promifes I made, you : But were Self-Interest forgot, and impartial Justice had Liberty to Speak, you wou’d with the foftest Compaffion reflect on the lad Neceflity which forc’d me to
it-----France, Spain, England and Rorne
were providing me Husbands y Murray was depriving me of every Thing but the Name of Queen; how but by Mar* riage, cou’d I put a Stop to the Solicitations of the one Side, or have curb’d thfc Infolenceof the Other? Well you know it was not in my Power to make Choice of you, without I cou’d have been com* tent not only to fee my Crown torn froxft me, but alio refign both our Lives to glut the implacable Malice of our Foes.-—% You tell me the Lord Parly is handfcme* I	and
14 Original Fetters of
and well made; ungenerous BothweU! well are you convinc’d I have no Eyes for any Charms but yours; what induc’d me to make Choice of him rather than any other, was, becaufe I wou’d avoid giving any Umbrage to the contending Princes, whofe equal Pretenfions might have ex^-pected equal Favour; but in this Marriage, which in the World’s Eye will Seem wholly induc’d by Inclination, neither Rome, nor France, nor Sjiam can be difo-blig?d: Nor can Elizabeth, with any Show of JuSiice, blame me, becaufe it was on . her Recommendation I first contented to listen to his Suit; and in preferring him to Leicefter, I cannot but have the Approbation of the whole judging World.----
Think not that it is Love which furnifhes me with Arguments to justify my Choice* for I protest by the fame dread Power, by which 1 have So often Swore, that Both-well was the dearest Thing on Earth, that he is still, and ever will be lb, while I have Life \ and Darly but the Property of
my Revenge on Murray.-----Oh, Both-
well! did you but know with what un-paralell’d Tyranny I was treated by that burning Tray tor, you wou’d not wonder
fe : ' ■'	r
Mary §tyeen of Seots. I $
I had Recourfe, for Shelter, to this Ex-
pedient;---the haughty Arrogance of
both him and Hamilton are now reduc’d to low Submiffions; and tho’ they murmur, dare not complain.Depend on this Truth, That nothing lefs than what I have done, cou’d have Secur’d the Life of BoIhwell: The cruel and defigning Murray had inevitably made you the Sacrifice of his Ambition; and I think it needlefs to fay that Motive was Sufficient, and perhaps the most weighty of any, to influence me to this Action ; that by making my Perfon the Victim of one, I might preferve the dearer Part of me from falling one to the other more destructive
Paflion;--: the first Step I took, was to
inipire the new-made King with Notions to your Advantage,——By the Time this; reaches you, you will receive an Order to return to Court, where you will be encourag’d and promoted:——I Shall See you, my dear Bothwellj tho’ not as I cou’d v wifh ; yet I Shall lee you in Safety, and while Heaven permits that Bleffing to me, . 1 never can be truly npdfciahle.
> v	v \ 1: m MI R,
lIS	Letter
'•v	.	/	;	f'	' „,
16 Original Fetters oP
*|p ‘t*it* ‘I? $ ^ ^ 4* $ 'f* •&**1? 4* $ & *1?	^ 't* rT*	*
Letter V.
~^M
There Can he no Certainty of the Date of thisj any further than that it was writ prefently after the Arrival of JBothwell; they having never, as the Contents exprejfes, feen each other in Privatet till this Billet appointed the Place of AJfignation :
The Lady Lacy, at whofe Houfre it was they mety was a nearLielation to the Ear Vs Mother , and entirely in his Interefiyas appears not only \y the
. Trufl which the QFeen repos'd in herf hit alfo ly her ajjifiing him with a large Sum of Moneys when, before his Favour with the Court-Party, his Extravagancies had reduc'd him to great j Straits. This from Cauffin, who, to render it improballe that the Queen jhou'd love him, frpedks of his P erf on and Behaviour with the utmoft Contempt, calling him a Man of adefpetate For* tune.) and capable of the mojl mean and vile Actions*
8	,	f
Believe you are now perfectly convinc’d that there was an abfolute Ne-* ceflity for my Marriage, tho’ the Regret / with which you behold me in another’s Arms* will not permit you to acknow-? ledge it.-;—I lost nothing of the few ( kWords you Spoke to me as you left • c .•	; .	the
f Mary §tyteen of Scots. 1*7
the Drawing-Room ; I have provided to gratify the Impatience they exprest for a Renewal of. thole Joys we have been fo ** long depriv’d of:-—-The Lady Lacy> l who is in the Secret of my Heart, pretends an Indifpofition, a Vifit from me wiil not be wondefctat, becaufe the whole Court knows how much She is in my Ea- . vour; I will be at her Apartment to Morrow about Seven in the Evening, but wou’d have you prevent that Hour, lest any of the Pages, or Maids of Honour, who attend me, Shou’d take Notice of your being there ——Tis ealy for you to / go incognito y I wi(h to Heaven it were no greater Difficulty for me—our Interviews wou’d then be more frequent, and Love abundantly make up for Want of Grandeurbut I (hall defer giving you any Testimonies of the Tranfport which the Expectation of feeing you affords, till I am fo blest in Reality. —- Adieu, my w dear, dear Bothwell. I have Time to add no more, than that 1 am, and ever Shall be .., jpg ijgj #
Tours,
M. R.
\ D	L^ XT:E1
18 Original Letters of
Letter VI.
This 'was fent to Bothwell at- the Time when the Afiimofities between the Queen and her Husband were grown to the utmofi Height; and proves ^ that if jbe were acceffavy to his Deaths it was, how ever, contriv'd and plotted by Murray, tho* Buchannan, with fo much Warmth, ejpoufes his Caufey contrary to all the other Authors of that Time, who clearly make manifeft, that loth he and Morton were the chief Abettors of that horrid Deed,
T Tlth a Difficulty not to be imagin’d, W not to be exprest, do I get an Opportunity of writing this; my bodily IndilpoSition, joyn’d to the Troubles of my Mind, render me uncapable of Invention ; I Suffer my Self to endure the eternal Prefence of the Perfons I most hate, father than be at the Pains of making an Excufe to be alone ;~r~ that Spirit, that Courage which was us’d to bear me thro’ the greatest Fatigues, is now evaporated and extin$;—— a Lazinefs of Soul post feffes me, I cannot think, cannot refolve on any thing—^astift me in this Perplexity, jjlljl jgjjj 1 | gjj jj :, my
Mary §yeen of Scots.1 It)
my dear Botbwell, — —adviSe me, comfort me, find Some Way for my Relief* I have no Friend but you, and lure, if you are Such, you will not fufe me long to en-f dure thele Infults, —— But what is it I am asking? —— ’Tis dangerous to be loyal} —* poor Riezoj only becaufe he lov’d his Queen, fell a Sacrifice to the Tyranny off this injurious Husband3 my Life is next, noram I Spar’d, but for the Sake of the unborn Heir of Empire 3 deliver’d once of that dear Burthen, my Bufinefs in this World is done, 'dn&Darly will reign alone} —-1 know my Death alone carl gratify the Ambition of that ungrateful Man, or the unceafing Malice of theEngUjh Queen; yet might a Way.be found to fnatch me from the Ruin, had any One the Bold-nets to attempt it**----Murray all stern and fierce, as he is* by Nature, exprefes a Concern for my ill Treatment, and Seem’d to hint at Some Defign -on Foot for my recovering that Prerogative I So unadvifedly gave up, but he, alas! has been fo Sullen already, lb arbitrary and infulting when in Power, I dread to invest him with the fame again} I fear it would be but exchanging one Misfortune for another.—i
D a	If
20 Original Letters of
If he Should communicate any of his In* tentions to you, Anfwer him with Caution ; — if he could be Sincere, I know he has the Means to Serve me,—fathom him, if poffible, and let me know your Opi- ^ nion, directed under a Cover to Lady Lacy. The Rifihop of Rofs informs me, That Morton is returning from the North, if fa, I may believe that Murrays working Brain has not been idle, but whether for mine or his own Interest, Heaven only can relblye :—Keep a fair Correspondence with him, however, ’till we fee the Iffue, which a little Time will Soon determine.*-^—I would reward the Fidelity of \ Lartich by giving him Some handiome Post about me, but as Affairs are* it may be dangerous both for him and me; allure him of my Gratitude and Favour when once the Times permit me to make
Show of it.----Farewell. Keep me ever
in your Thoughts.
M R.
5P. £
Since I wrote this, Murray has been to vifit me, and finding me all bath’d in Tears, the daily Tribute which my Griefs exacts, bad me be of good Comfort, for ff 11 •- f; Q % | § jj V Bp a
Mary §iueen of Scots. It
aBlow wou’d Soon be given, which would restore all Things to their proper Order; I know not what he means, unlefs it be the Death of the King, nor had 1 Time to ask: Hamilton came in and broke off
our Conversation.--1 wilh you woilkl
endeavour to inform your felf and me with all convenient Speed, but do it in a Manner that he may not think l am concern’d in the Enquiry.-—-Once more, adieu, my ever dear Botbwell • pity me, pray for me, and never ceafe to love me.
Letter VII.
There is little contain'd in this, any more than a Confirmation of the foregoing One, viz. That Mortoa’and Murray were the frfi Propofers of the Murder of the Kjng1 and that Both well was no more than their Agent in the Affair, as, indeed $ is manifefi enough, in their being the Per-Ions, who made a hind of mock Accnfation, that they might have the better Opportunity of clearing him by a Form of Judicature*
L npHAT I anfwer’d yours no Sooner, A was owing to the Struggles in my Mind, occasion’d by Proposals ib Shock* *	i«g
22 Original Letters of
'	,	’	V
ing to a Woman of my gentle Nature.*-* Heaven knows I love not Blood, and the Thoughts of feeing that of a Husband’s Spilt is terrible to Reflection; yet Self-Preservation is the First of Laws, and if ^ there remains no other Means, must fub- * mit to this 1 could wifli, either that Murray were not engag’d in the Defign, or that he did not know I were acquainted with it:---You, my dear Bothwett\
are too liable to give Credit to his Infinu-ations, but I both fear and hate him.— Who knows what Ufe he may hereafter make of the Guilt he obliges me to become a Sharer in ?--But it is now past % Remedy, and I must make a Show of Confidence.-—Never was a Soul more Jhurried than mine has been this dreadful Night, — a Thoufand horrible Idea’s have run thro’ my distracted Brain, Sometimes methought I law the King all cover’d o’er ', with Wounds, and with his dying Breath imploring Vengeance on his inhumane Murderers; —— at others, wild Jmagina- ^ tion prefented the Conspiracy unravel’d, and Morton, your Self, and Murray, al-ready fallen the Victims of his Revenge, while he, exulting in his Cruelty,, held
a
Mary §hteen of Scots. 2J
a drawn Dagger at my trembling Breast,
-——Oh! what Variety of Horrors has this Defign involv’d me in ;~- Why was I endu’d with a Soul To little capable of Cruelty, yet urg’d to Acts which have fo much the Appearance of it ?-—I never lov’d this Burly, and his Ingratitude has made me hate him, yet cou’d I with Plea-* Sure part with Some of my Blood to ran-fome his, were there a Poffibility of avoiding it, how am I guilty then ? — ’Tis he himfelf that brings on his own Fate; he forces me, he drives me to this abhorr’d Extremity, and his must be the Blame.-** T Oh ! that I cou’d always retain this Thought, that I cou’d wholly baniSh a Softnefs prejudicial to my Peace, but’twill not be, in Spite of my Efforts, and all my monst’rous Wrongs, Pity returns and overwhelms my Soul:—Cure me of this Weaknefs, and infpire me with Notions Suitable to theEnterprize in Hand, the very Idea of it will other wife distract me, and in the Moment of its Execution, I Shall cry out, Forbear, and all betray.—Ex-) eft then, my dear Bothwett, that all-prevailing Wit and Eloquence of yours, to Surnilh me with Arguments to overcome $	fo
24 Original Letters of
fo unfeafbnable a Tendernefs; his in your Power to make me almost any Thing.— Reprefent the Injuries I have receiv’d from this Tyrannick Husband, the vast Indignities, the Dangers which nothing T but his Death can free me from ;——but above all, make me remember that while he lives, I am depriv’d of Power to render Bothwell happy;-—that last Remonstrance, perhaps, may arm my feeble Re-Solution, and while that glorious Image is in View, I cou’d, methinks, with unrelenting Hands, my Self perform the fatal Deed.--1 expect a Letter from you
this Night, with a further Account of t the whole Plan of this Defign, which, while in Agitation, will never fuster me to know a Moment’s Peace.—Afford me all the Satisfaction you are able, in this Tempest of my divided Thoughts, and know that what I do, I do for you.
M. R,
|	Letter
Mary §iueen of Scots. l<y
7 Letter VIII.
this -plainly appears to he written fcon aftef the Murder of the lying, which happening on the 16th of February, 1564,- and the Procefs of Dif vorce between the Earl of Bothwell, and Jane Gordon his IVife, being ijfuedout on the 26th of April,, the fa?ne Tear7 makes it evident, That this mufi be fent to him before he had follicited the Court upon it* Concerning thefimes of theft Two Tranfafionsy there is no need to quote any ^ particular Author7 all Hiflories agreeing as to l	this. \
T1Y IIariyh Death I ant, indeed, dncfe JL) more fa Queen, again enjoy thofe Plealiires which Power affords, and have the Means' of punishing or rewarding in-* different PerSons, arid in trifiirig CauSes * yet am I still circumfcrib7d, the rriore material Bufineis of my Life remains* unfiniSh’d } I am a Queen, but you are riot a King, hill I accomplish that, the Work is not | compleat, not can I taste the Sweets or Royalty.——I begin to think Murray7 at last, Sincere, and approve of your Defign in engaging him to favour your Divorce,
E	which
z6 Original Letters of	'
which the BiShop Seems to make a flight Matter of, but 1 am afraid will not be fo eaSily obtain’d as he or you may imagine.
-----The Apology you make for your long .D
Stay at Bunbritton is altogether neediest, 1 am fo far from refenting it> that I look on this Self-denial as the most prudent Thing
you ever did.-----There are, atthisTime,
many Eyes upon our Actions, and to be too frequently Seen together at prefent, might be a Means of preventing our being for ever together hereafter.---Send
me a Copy of what you write to Murray, enclos’d in your next, and, if poSlible, f make an Interest with Lansford, in whole Power it is to be Serviceable to you on this Account: Let my Secretary know what Sums are wanting to carry it on, and they Shall be remitted to you.—Mor-tony and ibme others, attend to fpeak with me, and I have Time to fay no more, but that I am ever my dear BothwelTs.
M- 2?.
2V-&	|
The BiShop of Rofs intends you a long Letter of Instruction? which I wou’d have you pbferve in every Thing:—You
have
Mary ^fyecn oj scots. 27
have not a better, / nor ^actnore Sincere
Friend on Earth.
Letter IX.
It was in the utmo(l Transports of impatient and expecting Love that this Epiftle was diltated, and Jeems to be immediately after the Earl had obtain'd the Divorce from his Wife, which, according to Caftlenaw, Bucchanan and Melvil, was on the nth or 12th of May, in the Tear 1567.
BOrtune, grown weary of persecuting me, at length grows as extravagant in herBleffings, as She was the former Part of my Life in her Cruelty.—-Your Divorce being now look’d on as good as compleated, JVlunay himl’elf propos’d you to me for a Husband, nay, Seem’d eager * in his Preffures, That I wou’d give him my PromiSe that you Should become So immediately after you were in a Conditi-
§| on.----Scarce cou’d I contain the Joy of
my exulting Soul, Scarce keep my Tongue from letting him know how much my Heart took Part with his PerluaSions, and
E 2	never
Original Letters oj
never did I So much as then affume the i Politician ;—-Had any other discours’d me in that Manner? ■ hare I am? I had not been able to have conceal’d the Pleafure it gave me ; but the often experienc’d palihood of that Earl fecurd my Cauti- J pn? and made me reply no otherwise than That I would be advis’d by him in eyery 'Idling .D—’Tis poflible that he may? in this? be cordial? but to apprehend the worst, is certainly most Safe ; he cannot? however? recede from what he has laid? and Mortony and Several others? have of late Spoke of you v ith that ReSpect, that I am convinc’d he has communicated to them his Intentions of uniting us.—Tho? i J know you are to be in Edinburgh in So Short a Time? I cou’d not delay making you Partaker of thofe Tranlports you are the Author of-There is a Delicacy in Such a Love as mine? which will not Suffer me to be blest alone; and when I think this happy News has reaeffd you? Shall indulge my Self in Sympathy, with thofe Extafies which, I flatter my Self? you will \ feel at the Receipt of So unexpected an Information, r-r— Make all the convenient Speed you can to Town? I now long with
double
iYiary	uj Otuw. F- t-y
double Impatience for your Prefence: It is not Botbv’cll, a Man, whole Freedom with me Love alone cou d authorize, blit my intended Husband, and my future sting, that I lhall now embrace :--Hafte then to the Arms, thou ever preient to the Heart of	.
R-
Letter X.
. Jhis was occctfion d on the Fir(l Contrivance of the pretended Ravifhmentj as Bucchanan terms it, it and difcovers rdf ?, that Murray and Morton had a Hand in this, as well ns in the Murder of the Jfing ; tho the former of them made this AEtion appear wholly the Queen* s own Acly when the Affair was examined into Iy the Delegates of Queen Elizabeth at York.
If Receiv’d yours at a Time when I was So overwhelm’d in Grief, thaticarce the flowing Tears wou’d give me Leave to read it: Need had I, my dear Both-<well) of all that Confolation which this pew Stratagem affords, yet am I not convinc’d, plauflble as it teems, of its Suc-
cefs;
Jueiiers oj
cefs; we are fo much accustom’d to Treachery, that, methinks, there is nothing to be depended on —Shou’d this pretended Rebellion you have in Hand, be detected or betray’d by any you confide in, by what Pretence can I fcreen you from the Sword of Justice; fhou’d I not be oblig’d to give you up to Law, and hear you condemn d for this imaginary Crime -However, as our Cafe is def-perate, I will not confine you from making uie of ail the Methods ingenious Love can form for our common Felicity; this brings a Sum large enough to raife more
Men than you will have Occafion for, and
depend, that I will come attended by as few as poffible.——Hamilton is the Perfon I most fear, both for his Courage, and the Interest he has in thole Parts: I cannot think it was well advis’d, that Murray Shou’d not be in the Way, his Prefence would have been of infinitely more Ser-vice than that of Morton, but that is now past fecal, and if he has engag’d So many Hands as he pretends to you, for the Signing the Articles of our Marriage, I do not, indeed, forefee it will be in the Power of the contrary Party to oppofe it
—I
Mary §lyeen of Scots. 31
—-I must, however, all along, appear refractory to that, which i$ the only Wifh of my defiring Soul: — How Shall I fo p- greatly diffemble ? How appear at the Head of an Army, animating them to purfue to Death the Man I love far more than Life? How Seem to repreSent that as a Rape, which to embrace, I would run
i through the most eminent Dangers!----
aSfist me, all the Artifices of my Sex, for all will be too little in Such a Circum-Stance.—The BiShop of Rofs Smiles at my Fears, and. Seems affur’d of Succefs : f —I know his Integrity, and, as I find, Murray has been perfectly fincere in this Affair, doubt not but he has left EmilTa-ries capable of bringing it about; yet, Doubts and Anxieties are ever the infe-perable Companions of Love, while in Puri uit; Heaven fend ours once com- , pleated, and give feme Period to this distracting Sulpence. Adieu.
s	M. R.
*P. 5. Once more I warn you to be I careful who you trust in this Affair Remember ’tis our last S take, and if this fails, farewell to all Hope of Happineis hereafter,
Letter
32 Original Letters of	'
Letter XI. 1
The? Bucchanan fo very fir end on fly takes upon him the Vindication of Murray, 'tis evident ly thisf and the preceding Letter, that he was the Prdf moter df this Deftgn ; and that before he left Edinburgh, he had engag'd niofi of the Nobility to fet their Handsto the Articles of Marriage between the Queen and BotlrwelL It is remark'd ly Caftlenaw, Mcivil, Cauffin, and even Cambden himfelf that when there was any fmifier Affair in Hand\ that fubtile Politi-cian9 Murray, always took Care to be abfenty \ leaving his under Engines to work out the Schemes he had form'd\ and by that Means reap'd the Profit of his Defigns9 and threw all the Odium on the Queen.
S Write to you with infinitely more Tranquility of Mind, than that with
which my last was dictated.--Murray
* has well retriev’d his Character, and more ' .contributed to my Felicity than heretofore to my Vexation.----The BiShop of
Orkney, from whom I least expected it, is J wholly on our Side, and ’tis the Earl to whom we are indebted for this Change
in his Behaviour:-1 put my felf among
SHpri :: - .1	the
*	Mary §^ueen of Scots, 33
the Number of the oblig’d, becaufe I, really am fo ; tho’ they who Serve me most, believe, at the fame Time, they |c are acting the Reverfe of my Inclinations* Lr~ See by this, how very neceSTary Dif-fimulation is;—my very Enemies, by imagining they undo me, make the Hap-pinefs of my Life, and thole who wifh to fee me most wretched, unite to make me most compleatly blest: — Did Murray, Morton, Orkney, and the rest of that turbulent Faction, know the perfect Attach-,. ment we have to each other, wou’d. they ;* thus plot to join us ?-—No, rather they would fevef us for ever. Thus by a Concealment of our mutual Tendernefs, do ^ we difappoint all the Stratagems,
■ which other wife wou’d be form’d to the Ruin of it, and triumph in Security*—
I expect not to hear from you any more, neither do I defire it; the great Defign grows now fo near the Point of being
*	executed, that I wou’d have yourThoughts wholly taken up with mafiaging, to the
I best Advantage, this last, afid onlyTryal of our Fortune. I am now of Opinion, that it annot fail, sthd feed my fond Imagination with a Thoufand glorious Idea’s
§	of
34 Original Letters of	|
of your approaching Greatnest.—It will be a Joy unSpeakable to fee you on the Scotijh Throne, but to reflect you are feated there by me.;, a Pride and PleaSure, ^ which it is not in Language to reprefent,
and can only be reach’d by Thought.-
Oh! my Botbwell! my Heart beats high with Expectation, and every Faculty of my Soul’s on Fire with the impatient Hope:—’Tis but Three Days before the great Catastrophe arrives, yet do they feem fo many Ages; be you more cool to attend the long’d-for ISTue, or you will be little able to carry on the Charge en- <j( trusted to your Care, and on which depends not only.Dur Lives, but future Fame.—Indulge, in Secret, the Swelling Rapture, but let no outward Sign of Joy appear, ’till you are, past’d Prevention, in the Arms of
IVU	AN
A N
ABSTRACT
OF
The Life of Mary Stuart,
Queen of Scotland;
Extracted from the best, and most cele-p brated Authors of that Time.
HHO’ nothing can be more different, than theTestimonies which are given of the Conduct and Difpofitidn of this unfortuna e Princefs ; yet all agree. That She was not only the most loveliest, but alio most accomplish’d and wittiest Women of her
V fTA*
Time.
But as Wit, without Wifdom, rather j fubje£ts the Owner to Inadvertancies, than the contrary ; fo the Brightnei’s of
F a	her
30	7he Life of
her Genius inclining her more to other Studies than that of Policy, fhe was often greatly at: a LoSs for thofe Maxims necelfary for allPerfons; but more particularly for Princes to obferve : And her ’ Yquth, Gaiety, and good Humour, rendering her often forgetful of her Birth, gave Room for Encroachments to be made on her Prerogative ; which afterwards, She found was not in her Power to remove.
When tnarried very young to th$ <Daur fihin of France, afterwards Francis the Second j Katherine de Medicis, Queen Mother, taking the Advantage of her eafy Nature, manag’d every Thing as^jhe pleas’d; and when She came to be a Wi- .D dow, took Care to make Things So un-eafy to her, that She was oblig’d to leave France; tho’ the Place where She had receiv’d the best Part of her Education, had ipany Relations and Friends, and which to quit She look’d on as the greatest Misfortune that cou’d befall her. Monsieur Brantome fays, That when She embark’d She appear’d So difconfolate, and y - void of all Comfort, that She drew Tears from the JSyes of as many as accompa- ; ny’d her.
i
Mary <gueen oj boots. 37
As She grew to riper Years* her iPaSE-. ons encreas’d inStrength, blit herSoftneSs of DifpoSition still remain’d; and tho’ Bucchanan brands her with Cruel and Malicious, all the other \Writers of her Life r H have laid the Mifcarriages of it rather on her being too open to PerSuaSion, and ReadineSs to believe the Insinuations of her filfe Friends, than any Intention of revenging the Infults offer’d her by her publick Enemies.	■
On her landing in Scotland, She found
The Kingdom divided between Two FactL
ons, the one headed by the Earl of Ha-■Mjiltony and the other by James Stuart f Earl of Murray, both equally Enemies to her Authority, as they were to the Peace of their Country. But, as if theSe were not enough to distract the Mind of a young Princefs, little accustom d to the Toils of State, there arofe aThird, who, under a Pretence of Love, made her feel all the Effects of Hate; this was John Gordon, eldest Son to the Earl of Huntley ^ The Earl of Arran alfo, Heir of the Ha-yniltonf Race, flattering his Imagination I with ambitious Views, hop d to raife himfelf to the Dignity of King by mar-
j§	|	\ iTin§
%
38 uTW JLife
rying his Queen: Both finding their Ad-d redes flighted, were either one or the other continually raifing Rebellions, endeavouring to feize that by , which they found impoffible to obtain by Infmu-ations, and tearing the Bofom of the Kingdom with inteftine Jarrs. For this Part of the Troubles in Scotlafee Cambden, Sjjo tfwood, Alelvilj Cafllenaw, &c.
Young Gordon being apprehended, and expiating on a publick Scaffold, * the Fault of his Ambition, gave a Terror to the rest; the Hamiltons prefum’d not to ' make any farther Claim for fome Time, and Murray feem’d to applaud the Justice of the Queen; tho’ all the while he privately infinuated among thofe inclinable to believe the worst, That She had privately encourag’d the AddreSIes of that Lord, and but thro’ Compulsion, fuffer’d him to fall a Sacrifice to Interests of State.
But this Tranquility was but of Short Continuance ; the Protestants, headed by the Earl of Murray, who made Religion the Cloak of his Ambition, began to raife new Disturbances in the North; and this giving a Pretence to the HamiU tons to take up Arms again* kindled fuch " c \	;	a
Mary §tyeen of Scots. 3#
a Wild-fire among the People, as for many Years was not extinguilh’d; but on the leaft Diiguft, on either Side, blaz’d out almoft to the DeftruCtion of the Nation, r In the midft of thel'e Perplexities, the Cardinal of Lorrain, Uncle to the Scotijh Queen, propos’d Charles Duke of Aujlria to her, for a Husband; but Queen Elizabeth, who kept her in continual Awe, by Reafon of her Expectations of fucceeding her in the Throne of	, deterr’d
her from accepting this Offer; which, in all Probability, had been a Defence from v the ill Fate which foon after attended her,
■ he being a powerful Prince, Son to the Emperor Eerdinand, and ally d to the greateft Monarchs in Europe. There were alio, at the fame Time, Ambaffadors fent from Thiliy the Second of Spain, to treat , with her about a Marriage with his Son, the Infant Don Carlos but this, as well as the other, the Englijh Queen oblig’d \ her to rejeCt; and, to Ihowhow much lhe was in Earneft, writ a Letter to her with her own Hand, telling her, '• That ^ if lhe C entertain’d any Hope of fucceeding to her Crown, lhe muff not think of matching with a Foreigner; and alluring her, .	That
4b The Life ,
That if fhe would accept of Henry StervuZ arty Lord IIarly, Son to the Duke of Lenox, She wou’d caufe her? on the next fitting of the Parliament, to be declar’d her Heir. By all Accounts, as well aS the foregoing Letters, She had about thi& Time, entertain’d that fatal Paffion for the Earl of jBothweU, which plung’d her into all the enfuing Misfortunes of her Life : But this was, as yet, a Secret dole lodg’d within her own Breast : And as She made the Queen of England's Propofals,, and the Fear She was in of difobliging her, an Excule for refufing all others; So Y likewife, She found Evafions to put off the Lord L)arly all’o, for a constderable Time : But Murray i who, according to •jSfotfwood, had his own Reafpns for obliging her to comply with this last Offer, distrefs’d her fo much with his Party, that fhe was, at last, driven to take Shelter in thole Arms which her Inclinations wou’d have made her Shun.
A Marriage thus made lip, coffd not be expected to be very fortunate; the Queen thought her Self above counter- j feiting a Tendernefs which She was incapable of feeling, and her Indifference, in a
little:
Mary ®Iueen oj bcotsV 41
little Time, occasion’d her Husband to treat her with the fame; ’till the Animosity grew So great between them, that they not only parted Beds, but Houfes al-.
To : As he pretended to exert the Authority of a Husband, fine endeavour’d to do that of a Queen; and ill Offices being done by thofe trusted on both Sides, to- : gether with her unhappy Bastion for Both-\well, brought her, at last, as Bucchamn | undertakes to prove, to confent to his Death: But other Writers are of a contrary Opinion; tho’ all Circumstances,, and in particular, thefe Letters written by her own Hand, leave us no Room to doubt the Truth of it.
Once more a Widow, She thought She had it in her Power to raife the Man She lov’d, to Authority; but a little Time convinc’d her, That, tho’a Queen, She ■ was left Miftrefs of her felf, than the meanest of her Subjects ; and that to make Both<weU a King, stie must have Re-courle to Artifices, to which She was not in her Nature inclinable. Murray, Mor~ tony and Some others, who wifh’d the Ruin of them both, contriv’d that he Should Seize thePerfbn of the Queen, as She was going to Stirling to vifit the young -VC, '	G	Prince Jf§l
r	I he Xi ifF of
Prince her Son : TheSe Meafures, her unadvifed PaSlion obliging her to give into, was, indeed, the Blot of her Life ; and caus’d many to think her guilty, who otherwife would have parted with their dearest Blood in Vindication of her Innocence ; viz. CaftlenaWy who laments this Tranfaction in very moving Terms , as does alfo Monfieur Brantomey and Bi-Shop Lejly, in* endeavouring to defend, makes it appear more blameable.
Seemingly forc’d to what She most de-fir’d, Botbweli was at last married to her; but little Satisfaction did thefe Nuptials yield ; Mart on, and the rest of the rebellious Lords, took the Opportunity of af- * perstng the Act they had been the chief Instruments of promoting, and rais’d a, considerable Body of Men, under Pretence of bringing Botbvuett to Justice, for the Murder of the King and Ravishment of the Queen; tho’ in both thefe Facts he had been but theTool of their DeSigns, and for the First of them had been declar’d guiltiest in open Court, where he had taken his Tryal: ’Tis true, indeed, the Judges had been corrupted, but it was by thofe very Perfons who now ac-cu«fd him; and who had, all this Time,
no
Ma ry §ltteen of Scots. 43	^
no other Aim than to make him, first, fabler vient to their Ambition, and afterward to fall a Sacrifice to it. This is evident from his own Confeffion made at 2)^~ marh, just before his Death, and publish’d by that King in all the Courts of Europe.
Having rais’d an Army in Opposition to that which the Earl of Morton led into the Field, the Queen wou’d needs accompany him; but, the Day before the Charge was to be given, the Earl, whe- , ther dubious of the Succefs of Battle, and fearing the Punishments to which he . fhou?d be expos’d, if defeated; or, as fome Authors affirm, terrify’d in his Confidence by the Idea of the murder’d King; or, as others will have it, on a Sudden Quarrel between the Queen and him, is uncertain to this Day, but he forSook the Camp, and stealing privately away, was never Seen in Scotland after. Nor was his Departure more strange than that the Queen, immediately on it, refign’d her felf into the Hands of the Rebels, having no other Security than their PromiSe,
That they wou’d ufe her as their Queen.
\ Her Infatuation, as Brantome justly terms it, was fo great, that She never So much as ask’d to what Place they were conducting
G |	her
§8 44 The Life of %	;
her, ’till She found her Self clofe Pri loner in the Castle of Locbleven, under the Custody of the Earl of Murray s Mother, formerly the Concubine of King fames the Fifth, This cruel Woman treated j her Royal Prifoner with the utmost In- ^ dignity, telling her. She was no more j than an Ufurper, and boasting, that She was the lawful Wife of the deceas’d Monarch ; and that the Crown, of Right, belong’d to her Son fames Stuart.
In this terrible Confinement it was, that Morton^ and the rest of that Faction, forc’d her to fign an Instrument of Abdication, refigning the Kingdom to her Son, and appointing the Earl of Murray Re- \ gent, during his Minority. Caftlena‘w> in his Memoirs, reports, That the Lord Lindfay stood over her while She Set her -Hand to this Paper; and as her Tears and Tremblings, for fomeMoments,wou’d not give her Leave to do it, he bad her make haste, or he wou’d oblige her to Sign it with her Blood. In thisManner Brantome, as we as Cafllenam and Caujjin, relates this Story, gf This being done, She was* lefs strictly guarded than before; and William I)ou- | Youth, of about Fourteen Years of Age, compaffionating her Distrefs, stole
the S
iviary ggpip^i
the Key of the Apartment where (he was	|
confin’d, and having prepar’d a Boat, convey’d her over the Lake, where the Lord Seaton, with a Small Body of Horfe, waited to receive her, and attended her,
| to Wefl-Lothian; there a great Number of the Nobility and Gentry stock d to her, acknowledging her still, as their Sovereign and lawful-Queen.. This is attefted .by Cambden and Syotjwood, as wel I as gffgp and the Writers of the different Party.
Great Numbers of People flocking to her from all Parts, flie form’d out of them a kind' of regular Army, and began to march towards Ixl&fMmit where the Lari of Murray then was, but he having always Troops in Readinefs, came forth to
meet her, with Forces ib much lupenor, that lhe, with Reafon, was unwilling to hazard a Battle r She was, however, encourag’d to it by the Earl of /ApT, w“° jj depending on the Juffice of die Caufe, thought himfelf lecureof Viaorw r -he Engagement was very fierce on both bides, but, in the End, the Queen’s Troops were wholly routed, and feveral Hundred Men
kill’d on the Spot.	•	.	|	9
Blackwood reports, That a Perfon, who had efpous’d her Caufe tor no other run-
g jejif e oj
M	to betray her, had difdos’d her !
Defigns to the Regent, the Night before the Battle; and advis’dhim by whatMeans he mould difpole his Army, fo as to make : jt moft lerviceable; and that on this Information he took Poffeffion of the Ground near	and owed his Victory
wholly to the Advantage of this Scituation.
It was with no fmall Fatigue and Hazard, that this unhappy Queen ’fcap’d fal-; tog mt° the Hands of her Enemies this Day, Being oblig’d to ride Sixty Miles be- % L fore flie refted. A few faithful Friends were the Companions of her Flight, who attended her to ‘Dmdre, a Seat of the Lord Ferris’s, where ihe flay’d a little
ilme to refrelh her felf, and to confult whidi Part of the World was moft likely to afford her Shelter.	or
were the only Places where Ihe cou’d pro-mile herfelf to find it; and after iome ® , Debate, made Choice of the latter : tho the Archbilhop of St. Andrew’s entreated her, with Tears in his Eyes, to the contrary: Cajllemw and Sir famesMel-m affirm. That when ffie took Shipping he leap d into the Water, ftill conuiring her to turn back, ’till he was almoft fwal-ow d up by the Waves, and carried back
lllllllllll	11
A* : •	•	-v ;-v;
Mary §hieen of Scots.
Force by his Servants,, who plung’d in after him.	V^Snggpte -^9H
Soon did the find how much Reafoa that good Prelate had to fear the Reception fhe; Wou’d meet with. As fhe was on the Road to London,fhe was met by theLord Scrojj) and 1 Mirier, Deputy-Warden of the Caftle of Carlifle g and, by them, convey’d thither as a Prifoner; haying been firft inform’d,That the£»g(^ Queen cdh’d not confent to fee her, ’till fhe had clear’d . ; ^ her (elf of the Crimes laid to, her Charge,
Many Years (lie remain’d in Cuflody, tho’ not in one Place, being frequently.re- y mov’d from one Prilbn to another; tear- " ing that her extraordinary Beauty and Ac- { complifhments fhou’d move her Keepers to Compaflion, as it had donei the young Lord	Douglafs ■ continual Attempts being
made to let her at Liberty, iif particular, thofe of the Duke of Norfolk, Ridolyb, and Babingtm, Tfor which the!Duke loft Jiis Head, by the malicious Treachery of Murray, and molt ofth zEnPeers, all ' pretending abfolute Friendlhip to him.
She was Try’d by the Deputies of Queen gElizabeth, and, at laft, after almoli Nineteen Years Impril’onment, beheaded in Adberi^bm'GaMeimNmbampou. The
Hiftory 9M
igpr. ifiipiiiipiii gg
t ic? fdistory of herTiyal is too well known to ^^^ieed to be infertedhere j; or, to thofe i'gho- ] ‘rant of it, 'may be Seen at large in Camhden* ^^HThus ended a Life, which, from the ' Beginning, feenfd. to be under the Di-v ■	Planet ;befet. with |
Difficulties on.every Side, of a DifpohtigjH m dctestingy and unfit for BuSinefs, or the* » 11 Toils of .State,1 yet doom’d to know no* Refpite feom them f .plung’d in inceflant Hp-' Cares, with Scarce an Hour of Happinefe§ WmV to rela^ the Weight ^^nfeccefeful in m gj|| Jber I Undertakings^ and only fortunate, V	of her Sex, or
^B th^ Fears, of Death, cou’d make her be-v shave, iuT^dast Moments, So as to give her Enemies anyCaufetotriumph over her. Hying much more a Queen than. She had ■ T*' liv’d*, and by her Fortitude and Magnani-C f mity, proving, That hadTortune been onJ her Side, She might have made as 'glorious a Figure in History^ as now She does the • contrary-; nothing being more true than
IthofeldneS of the Poet,	1	^ o
■	' K; ' V'-'r---, ,;s C-	' -4v>	. - •
' • ■ ‘Arid-.
. , Tor that whkkAmkes. a MSmnWs ffappIhejfe Is not m reignlng ztoeil-, but vhith Sttcce%
t>	\	•
F l N ;i #S|'iSiil
9|Kpj£ A |J§%«•;	*	*jf
||8