
>
/
■s
\

MASQUERADES,
O R
• \
WHAT YOU WILL.
B 7 T M B
AUTHOR OF ELIZA WARWICK, &c.
IN FOUR VOLUMES.

V O L. I.
LONDON*
Printed for J, B E W, in p4ter«Nofter-Row.
MDCCLXXX*
£•
r-








A A.
\ * /
V
MAS QUERAD
C*
%
\^h


^0 Lady Louisa SyoNEy.
■ Mortimcr-lLalh
y amiable friend judged very properly in fuppoling my time would be fo much engroiTcd by the tumult which generally attends the weddings of great peopky that I fhould hardly find a moment to dedicate to the more pleafing calls of my Louifa.—It haS'really been the cafe my fprightly fifier has -fhared much of the public admiration^ and was fo exceedingly careffed that flie had hardly time ,to breathe; and I mull have been of her parties, or have appeared defi-« cient either in the exadt rules of politencfs, or (what is worfe) in thofe of tendernefs for VoL. I.	B	one
2
M ASQ^UERADESj or
one who defervedly claims every afFed;ionate fentiment from me.
Howeafily are the moil volatile fpirits cad down !—Who could have conceived, that changing a name, and travelling eighty or ninety miles from the fmoaky region of London, to a place that feems formed in a ‘‘‘ Prodigality of Naturewould have worked any effcdl on the naturally gay difpoiition of our Caroline !—and yet, believe me, for the fil'd two or three days after our arrival here, die appeared dejetded, melau’fcholy, and fo uneafy as to be often in tears. However, die is once more herfelf, which we are all much pleafed at, as \\\t penferofa of a madona by no means become her.
Our journey was a very agreeable one. Lord Mortimer carries his head at lead two inches higher than ufual: he feems to be quite happy, and,never glances at his car a without turning his eyes about, to fee who envies him. He certainly diines as a Benedick, mor does the part of Beatrice fail of occurring to my remembrance, when L obferve Caroline’s droll, yet good-natured manner of
him. Hearts linked by affedion as theirs have been from their fird acquaintance, give us every reafon to
hope
treating
fo firmly

WHAT YOU WILL.
3
nope that their felicity is built on a permanent foundation, and that they will be an example of conjugal happinefs to a licentious age, that requires fuch a pattern.
Tho’ we are advancing haftily towards the end of autumn, this place is yet beau-
ful-
fine dious
rhe profpeds around are uncommonly the houfe itfelf is large and commo-
the conftrudion very old fafhioned, which I do not diflike—
ings always kind of awe.
fill
my
—Your antique build-foul with a pleafing
agreeable:
number
Our neighbours are in general very
we are daily furrounded by a of belles and beau:>c; among the former are the two Mifs Pol worth’s (who were much celebrated lad winter), and Mrs. Armiger, whom you fo greatly admired, at a card-party we were invited to, one night Mrs. Nelfon’s. Sir James Wedbrook.
at
The
Lord Budenall, and Mr. Montague, are at prefcnt vifitants of l.ord Mortimer, gentlemen hunt, fhoot, and join the ladies in cards, dancing, walkings &c. Lord and Lady Mortimer intend to remain in the country till after Chridmas; but my brO'*' then, whole attendance in town will be ne-celfary very fliortly, goes up in a fortnight.
B z	Lady
%
MAS.(LUE RAPES: or.
Lady Pemberton and' I accompany him. Our fociety will be broke up :——however, in fo excellent a neighbourhood, the dear inhabitants of this manfion will find many agreeable fubft'itutes.
A paragraph in your laft hints that you incommoded
are
by

a -Jlight indifpofuion, SUghd'^ I flatter myfelf it is; or, furely, my Louifa would not adl in fo ambiguous a manner! Inform me by the firfl; opportunity how you are, I befeech you—Whije my amiable friend labours under the leaft an-jtiety, occafioned either by pain of mind or body, happineli muft be ever a ftranger to the bofom of.
Her inviolably affejdionate.
Julia Herbert,

What YOU w ill
s
‘Po Lady Julia Herbert.
*Sommerville-Houfe > % ^
HE arrival of my Julia’s letter quick
ly difperfed the gloom which is a condant attendant on fufpenfe and expectation 1 Impatiently had I been waiting for a few lines, to raife my deprefled fpirits, which illnefs had funk to their lowed: ebb 5 and was beginning to defpair, when the much-widied-for packet was put into my hands.
And has our Caroline really given up all claim to the name of Herbert !—Sincerely do 1 give you joy-—and participate, in the opening profpeds of pleafure to the Pemberton family. May fhe tade every blifs the Hate die has fo lately embraced is capable of bedowing! Tho’ naturally gay her difpo-fition, it never can make her lefs fenfible of the invaluable treafure Heaven has allotted her in the worthy Lord Mortimer. Pie is truly deferving of the jewel he pofielTes j fhe is an acquifition he may with great juf-tice be vain of.
Do nor, my Julia, fuffer
B3
your attention
to
€
MASQ^UERAPES; or,
to be too deeply engroffed by the feenes of diflipation with which you are at prefent furrounded : bellow a frequent thought upon your fick, and I may add unfortunate friend*, for fuch in my prefent fituation I can with judice dyle myfelf.—The hours of real hap-pinefs, which I fhould have experienced at being prefent at the late intereding and joyful occafion, I have been deprived of, by a feeming combination of difagreeable incidents. My indifpofition when lad I wrote
—it has fince increafed; a Oow
was triding,— fever hangs upon me, which feems pleafed with its habitation, and unwilling to quit it : nor can I hope for relief while 1 remain involved in an unhappy affair, that preys continually on my fpirits, and fubjecHs me to reproaches which your Louifa’s heart can ill brook.—I will not fay more upon that head by this opportunity. I never take up a pen but fufpicion haunts every bread, that Mr, Melmoth is the only one to whom in my prefent fituation I v/ould addrefs myfelf. Ah, my Julia ! repeated hours of mifery do I fuffer on that unfortunate man’s ac-
count—have I not never feen him ?
caufe to wifh I had And yet I owe him every grateful femiment for his attachment
to
me
Wfl AT YOU WILL.
But enough of this fubjedt
■7
it makes me feel too fenfibly nor can I bend my pen to any other for the pre-fent---'fo adieu, my Julia ! and believe
me
Your faithful
Louisa Sydney.

fo Lady Louisa Sydney
t
' Portman^ Square,
E left Mortimer-Hall four days ago with what fenfations, your delicate heart will fugged to you.
How little does my Louifa know, even after fo long an intercourfe of frienddiip, the foul of her Julia !—Why would fhe conceive fo ill of me, as to imagine that diflipation can make me forget her for a Tingle moment ? My heart fighed for the pen, when horrid parade and ceremony denied me the ufe of it j and molt frequently were •iny thoughts wandering to Sommerville-
Ba
Houfe^
8 MASQ.UERADES} oft
% * '
Houfe, whilft pomp, magnificence, gaiety, unfuccefsfully ftrove to engage my attention.
That you are unhappy, my amiable friend 1 is evidently feen—you, who never till the laft
eighteen months of your life knew more of pain than the name, are now become an abfolute valetudinarian :—a cir-cumftance which cannot fail of infpiring v/ith the moft dreadful alarms every bread:
that fympathizes In your fate.-------From
whence, Louifa, are we to derive the caufe ? I will endeavour to
ucfs
and inform you, v/ho muft be ignorant yourfdf of if, or, furely, you would not have denied me your confidence!
Amongft the various reafons that have obtruded on my imagination, 1 will tell you lhat which ftrikes me as the moft probable.
You may remember the affedlion that fubfiiled between you and a certain perfon now on the other fide of the Alps j a/r^-ternal one you both called it, but whether abfence has not made you fenfible of its deferving another appellation, is a doubt with me. I thought I difcovered that your mutual regard originated from fomething more tender than the efteem we ufually entertain
for
w
YOU W
9
for a brother or a fifter.—I believe you are awakened from your error; and, finding yOurfdf oddly fituated between your engagement with Mr. Melmoth (which commenced long ago) and the partiality you feel for our newer acquaintance, occafions the confiidb that renders you unhappy: and whem the mind is difturbed, muft not the frame which contains it be a fufierer ?
Sure, there was fomething remarkable enough in your firft meeting with our amiable traveller ! You muft remember it—whether you do or not, I will gratify myfelf ia relating it, as I have often done, to you.
If you are interefted in behalf of the party 1 am going to mention, as I fufped:, you will not yawn over the paragraph—nor join the poet in thinking “ nothing fo tedious as a twice-told taleP
The difficulty we had to prevail on Sir George Sommerville to permit^you to pafs the laft winter with us in London, you certainly never can forget. Soon after our arrival here we went one night to fee Garrick play Hamlet: at the latter end of the firft ad, a cavalier entered the next box to ours, whofe handfome perfon inftantly attracted the notice of the admiring furrounders, 1 Kiev^r
B 5
to
MASCLUERADES; or,
faw elegancy, dignity, and eafe, fo happily blended in any form. He appeared unconfcious of, or above regarding, the general adulation paid him by the eyes of the audience. The Ladies that my mother cha-perotfd^ were by no means infenfible to the charms of this incognito.
Mon Dieu! ” cried Caroline, “ he is a divinity!” and, I make no doubt, would have been fo loud in her encomiums, as to have convinced him that Jhe had tafie^ if Lady Pemberton had not in due time called her to order. Caroline’s curiolity, once- gratified with a fight of this Adonis^ gave her no further difturbance, and her attention afterwards was fixed on the hero of the ftage. Not fo Louifa ! I took notice that her looks were other wife beftowed, and, to fay the truth, them.
they fought an object worthy of
A night or two after, at Lady Denley’s aflembly, the Duke of Northington brought up the ftranger, and introduced him to Lady Pemberton by the title of Sir Charles Mon-
He begged leave to be permitted to pay his refpedls in Portman-Square, and the next evening his name was announced in
my mother’s drawing-room.
The
tague.
WHAT YOU WILL.
u
The vilible preference he gave my friend foon teftified that his admiration of her exceeded, by many degrees, that which (he favoured him with; and every day producing accumulated merit in both, heightened their well-founded affedlion for each other. Examine your heart, Louifa, and tell me whether I have divined the real.caufe of your imeafinefs ?—I hope I have ; for then, in my opinion, it reds entirely with your-felf to difeard the load of anxiety v/hich with its cankerous quality undermines your health, and renders you fo wretched.--Indeed, my Louifa, you muft difeard it--for the fake of your Julia, whofe feelings are fo interwoven with yours, that if you are unhappy, I muft be miferable.—Adieu and think me ever

Aifedtionately yours.
J, ITerbert*
B6

12
MAS dUER ADES; or.
fo Lady Julia Herbert.
Sommerville-Houfe,
_ cupied fo much of my Julia’s attention i* I was ungrateful to have entertained a moment’s doubt of it; your amiable heart is ever alive to the voice of friendlliip. Can fhe who lhares yours fo largely, dare to own herfelf unhappy i* Oh no I fupported by that pleafing thought, every pain muft wear a trivial afped:.
I well recollefl the agreeable evening you remind me of, which, as you obferve, pre-fented to our fight Sir Charles Montague Your conjedlures with regard to the tendre that you think fubfifted between us, are
very wrong.-----If I know my own heart,
it is entirely free from any other attachment but that of efteem for him. Were he to return to us the fame fafcinating obje(5l he was when he left England—and again dif-tinguifti me by the fame flattering attention he formerly paid me,—my fituation might indeed be rather dangerous.—'But there is little probability of that: he is deftined to
make
WHAT YOU WILL.

make fome perfon happy, whofe fuperior merit renders her better deferving of worth
like his—----Your kind prepofleffion leads
that every one regards
you to imagine,
Louifa with your eyes!	^
Do not, my fweet friend, think me backward in repofing any confidence in you I know nothing of myfelf if I poflefs a fen-timent I wifh you to be a ftranger to.—Do you deal as candidly by me ? Is not your real opinion of Mr. Lenox kept too clofe a fecret ?
You profefs a regard for him ; but is that alone fufficient to fatisfy the man you mean to give your hand to? Your behaviour to the amiable Lenox is, indeed, quite inconfiftent with that candour and fincerity, which, in every other point of your con-dudfc, fhew themfelves the principles of your heart. I am furprifed, I confefs, how one of your fenfibilitv can affebt fuch
fenfibility can
his merit.
to
feem* Fictitious
tng inattention only it can be; I would not think fo erro-neoufiy of your judgment, as to fuppofe you fpoke your real fentiments of him. The truth is, we are all fond of exercifing the (hare of defpotifm that is allowed us during the day of JUrtation, and too often ufe it to
a wrong
H
MASQ,UERADES; or
a wrong purpofe. Follow not our weak fex in this point, dear girl, and convince the world how much you defpife the paltry fuperiority your prefent fituation gives you over a worthy man. AlTure yourfelf, your generofity before marriage will render him doubly fenfible of the obligation he owes to you, and will more firmly rivet him yours, after this important affair has taken place. He will then be convinced, from the contempt you fhe wed for power, while privileged to exert it, of your readinefs to refign that which you no longer will judge to be your prerogative.-—! am fummoned to attend Sir George.-—I remain, my Julia,
Much yours,
Louisa Sydney.
fa
\ >
WHAT YOU WILL.

fo Lady Louisa Sydney.
Port man-Square,
YOU have wounded me to the Ibul, my
amiable friend, by fuppofing me ad-dibled to a fpecies of coquetry that I deteft. It is now time for me to declare my fentiments relative to Mr. Lenox, left I fhould
fuffer in your opinion.
I know not whether I am to charge it as a fault to nature, that I have no very fuf-ceptible heart;-—or, perhaps, I have never yet feen the man wLo could infpire me with the belle pajjlony which I have fo often, with amazement, heard fpoken rapturoufly of.
Mr. Lenox is an amiable man ; he has the fineft talents, and is endued with the ftrongefl natural good fenfe, which has been well cultivated by the mod: liberal education. There
are few whofe company is more agreeable than his: it is fought after by numbers, but gives no creature more pleafure than your Julia. Yet, I ip.uft own, I never fuffer any great uneafinefs at his being abfent a few days longer than I expebl; nor am 1 violently rejoiced if he furprifes me by coming
fooner
t6
MASCLUERADESj or
fooner than 1 hoped for. I efteem him greatly; and think I would not make him uneafy for the world. With fuch fentiments, I dare anfwer, that we ftiall be happier than if the moft: romantic love filled my bofom. If I marry him (which 1 expebl to do), to promote his felicity will be not only the duty, but chief pleafure of my life. I believe there might appear a little incon-fifteiicy in what I have written, yet, I declare to you, I have defcribed, as near as pofiible, the fituation of my heart. I had a prejudice in Mr.Lenox’s favour, from his attachment to my brother, which commenced while they were at Oxford, as they have told me. Befides, his character has always been thought fo amiable a one, that I faw pleafure fparkleon each countenance around me, at the idea of my confenting to a union with fuch a man: it diffufed a fatisfaCtion over my mind, and prevented my entertaining a defire to aCt contrary to the wilhes of my friends.
a
Mr. Lenox leaves London to-morrow, for a fortnight: he goes to his father’s, whofe ill ftace of health makes Mr. Lenox’s abfence infupportable to the old Lord.
And now, fince I have cleared myfelf
from
w
YOU W
t1
from all imputation of coquetry, (to youff fatisfaCtion, I hope,) you muft allow me to tell you, that I am very uneafy about you. I can allege nothing in vindication of your partiality for a man who proves himfelf but ill adapted to the nice fentiments that adorn your breaft. Sure, it is a kind of infatuation that chains you to him. When we are unwilling to break with a pleafing objeCt, how many plaufible pretences do we find out to excLife a continuation of the attachment! You fay nothing to me, my Louifa, in your laft, of your intentions 5 whether (in oppo-fition to the willies of your friends) they are to marry Mr. Melmoth, or to purfue the more eligible plan of rejecting him. — You
muft be agitated :—I am well convinced of the arduous talk you have to perform*,-—it calls for refolution, which I know you will exert.
On the commencement of your acquaintance with Mr. Melmoth, he aftumed the deportment of a very worthy man *, not a fentiment did he fuffer to efcape his lips, that did not refleCl honour on the heart that dictated it: his wit was always tempered with good-nature, and never flew at the expence of any-one. There was nothing extraordinary
iS*

MasqaeraPes; or
traordinary in giving a preference to Rich a creature as he Jeemed to be; but, when he was fenfible of that preference, how foon was the mafl<. dropped ! Inftead of the diffident, gentle Melmoth, behold a paffionate, jealous, over-bearing man, meanly abjeCt where he had any-thing to hope, and haughtily de-fpotic to his unhappy dependents*
My amiable friend,, can you be diftreffed for a caufe to put an end to this affair, after allowing (which you muft do) the character I have drawn to be a juft one ?
My advice to you is, to tell him candidly, that, with the morals he pojjcffes, he never can make you happy; neither would it he in your power to fiudy the felicity of one to whofe fen* timents you have an utter althorrence.
Do not fuffer a falfe delicacy to precipitate you into an abyfs of lafting mifery. My dear Louifa ! fummon up a proper degree of courage; difmifs Mr. Melmoth, and with him all your cares.—'Adieu !
Julia Herbert.
fa
WHAT YOU WILL.
ig
fo'Lady Julia Herbert.
Somerville-Ho life.
Cannot fay that I feel, at this moment, the pleafure with which I am ufually in-fpired when addreffing my Julia. With pain do I own myfelf under the difagreeable neccflity of difclofing my fentiments to you on an affair, the knowledge of which will furely wound your fenfibility: but, were I to conceal from you what an unfortunate minute difcovered to me, I fhould aCt very inconfiftently with the ftriCl friendfbip I have ever profeffed for you. You are, I hope, perfectly convinced how much I have your happinefs at heart, and that, of courfe, I think myfelf under an obligation to, acquaint you with the moft minute circum-flance which threatens an interruption of it. —But, to keep you no longer in fufpenfe, I will relate my unpleafing ftory.
I went the other evening to pay
vifits in the village of------, and intended
afterwards to fit an hour with Mrs. Dorfel, Mentioning my intention to do fo at Mrs. Topham’s, I was informed, that it was her
ufual
fomc
r .

MASQ^UERADES; oS#
iifual practice to go out to a friend of hers, and fpend her evenings wkh her* I had hardly heard this, when f faw Mr. Lenox’s chaife flop at an oppoQce houfe, and a lady get out of it, followed by Lenox.- “ Good God !” exclaimed I, Is this poffible! I thought he was at my Lord Lenox’s. What can have brought him hither?” One of th« ladies gave the moft ftgnificant fmile at my furprife that ever I remember to have feen, and anfwered, Your Ladyfhip knows Lord Lenox is fo ill that he cannot entertain his fon; and it is natural that he fhould feek for amufement fomewhere : befides, Lenox-Caftle is but ten miles from hence.”
“ And does he take this airing frequently ?’* Oh, yes! conftantly as the evening comes.”' I could bear it no longer, but fent one of my fervants to beg the favour of Mr. Lenox to let me fay a few words to him. The anfwer was, he would wait upon me di* re5ll)\ 1 remained in all the torture of ex-
pectation a full hour, when I faw him reenter his carriage, after handing in Mrs. Dorrell. It drove off, and one of his fer-Vants brought me his matter’s compliments, and that he was forry fudden indifpofition prevented his having the honour of attending me* He little imagined that I was, at a Window, witnefs to the manoeuvre.

'i
WHAT YOU WILL,
21
One of .the ladies, pitying my uneafinefs, faid, “ Lady Louifa, it would be the height pf cruelty to keep you longer in fufpenfe. Your friend Lady Julia Herbert is much abufed by Mr. Lenox and Mrs. Dorrell. When he is from London, his whole time is
in clandeftine meetings with her: neither the cold of thefe long evenings, his father’s iilnefs, or, what is more, the preference given him by that heavenly angel. Lady Julia, can keep him from her. Your own eyes have convinced you of this truth j and it is incumbent on you to make this difcovery beneficial to your fweet friend.”
Her voice, her manner, pierced my foul. Ah, my JuJial my dear girl! will your phk lofophy teach you to bear this ftroke with patience? Much J fear, not!-—! defired Mrs, Topham to inform Mr. Lenox of what had paired; the confequence of which he ipight foon guefs.
I have not feen him, as a vifitor, fince his return to the country, .though we live, you know, but four miles from Lord Lenox, I had heard fome malicious reports concerning him and Mrs. Dorrell, but never fuffered myfelf to regard them in a ferious light, as you may imagine: yet, after what I faw laft night, I think it time to put yog on your guard,
22
MAS ERADES; or
There is no good in repeating niy fentiments of Mr. Lenox : he is as much funk
* ^
in my opinion now, as he was exalted in it before. As to Mrs. Dorrel, what notions of delicacy can fhe have, to admit of fuch behaviour, as muft give a licence to ill-natured tongues, from a man who, fhe has every caufe to imagine, is under an engagement to another}
Adieu, my Julia!
Louisa Sydney,
To
WHAT YOU WILL.
n
fo Lady Louisa Sydney.
c
moft trifling
Portman-Square,
OUR account of Lenox’s conduCl, my
amiable friend, both ftiocks and afto-
nifties me. He certainly cannot mean to
«/
deceive us*—No ! no !-—1 will hope that your fenfibility, ever awake to th circumftance which concerns my happinefs, caufes you to apprehend a danger, on th bare furmlfes of fome whofe whole pleafure conflils in wounding the peace of others. Be convinced, that a foul like Lenox’s can never be attached to one formed in fo different a mould as is tjie lady’s whom you fufpeCl to be my rival. The generous, the amiable Edward, * is not capable of deviating from the ftriCl path of honour which he has hitherto trod with fo much applaufe. This is my real opinion of him ; and, I am perfuaded, my Louifa v/ill foo*n acknowledge to me that flie has injured, by her fufpicion, an objeCl deferving of every kind thought. But, fliould his deftiny have decreed her to be the goddefs of his idolatryd^' I ftiali afl’ume all the Jioicifm 1 can, and endeavour
u
MAS Q,U ERADES; os
deavouf- to erafe from my remembrance every ide,a of a perfon in whofe charaCter .dwells fo much diflimulation, and who will have proved himfelf, by his behaviour, en-? tirely unworthy of my regard. Yet, till corroborating inftances of his guilt appear, I will guard my bofom againft every fymptom of the peace-deftroyer, jealoufy ; and believe it a paraxlox, that a man who has fo well preferved the appearance of virtue, fhould, in fiis heart, be quite a different creature from what he has inftruCted us to think him.
V
“ Sure,” you will fay, “ there is a change in my Julia ! I need give no more leClures on indifference, 1 find.” ^— And yet, believe me, Louifa, that foul you have fo often taxed with coldnefs, retains its primitive emotions: I am ever ready, though a female, to enter the lifts, where I think an abfent party injured. However, the next time I fee Mr, Lenox, (and l.expeCl him in London to-morrow,) I will honeftly tell him what 1 have heard, give him an opportunity for vindication, and, if I then can think him guilty, begin to look a little to myfelf.
1 have fome pleafing news to communk
cats
\
V/HAT you WILL:
25
cate to you,. Sir Charles Montague is arrived, and called on us this morning. The air of foreign climes has agreed well with him : he looked handfomer than ever. .
“ Dear Sir Charles,” faid Lady Pemberton, “ how will your friends be able to ex-prefs their joy at your long-expeCted and much-wiihed-for return ! Surely, your in* tention is, now, to make fome refidence in your native foil.”
“ My friends, Madam, do me too much honour. Whatever allurements the French or the Italians may boaft of poiTeirmg, Lady Pemberton, I hope, knows me fufficiently to be convinced that I would with pleafure refign them all for the happinefs of becom* ing an inhabitant of my own country. X am a true Britifii fubjedt, and fo much attached to Albion’s coafts, as to prefer being one of her ufeful members (as it is the duty of every Englifii gentleman to be) to living in a vortex of difiip.ation a^d gallantry amongft foreigners, who could not fupport life without calling both to their affiftance.’* “ Sir Charles, you made a longer ftay abroad than you intended,”
“ I did, my Lady; I was determined, as polTibly it might be the laft time I fhould
crofs
26
MASQUERADES; or
5
crofs the Alps, to be very minute in fur-veying all that was worth obfervation in the places 1 travelled through : befides, I had left many friends in Italy, when I firft re* turned from thence, and was glad to go over again with them fome of the joyous hours we had pafied together two or three years ago.—But, Lady Julia, how is Sir George Sommerville ? I hope there is no impropriety in that queftion.”
“ None in the leaft, Sir Charles: he is in a very bad ftate of health, and I fear will fliortly leave my dear Louifa to lament his Jofs.”
At your name he blufhed, and afked how my charming friend was ?
My heart was deprefled, I know not why, which made me paint bir George’s fituation
to be fo melancholy a one.
I was furprifed
told Sir
at myfelf the- minute after, and Charles that my apprehenfion, perhaps, anticipated a danger as yet very far off;— therefore be not uneafy, my Louifa, at my anfwer: not but that 1 fliould be cruel to flatter you with hopes, the difappointment of which would make you feel more keenly your fufferings. I never do: ftiil I think bir George will live fome years. Heaven
grant
WHAT YOU WILL.

rant it! And now no more of the painful fubject.
Sir Charles flaid an hour, and then took leave; but firft begged a place in our box to fee Mrs. Barry in the Countefs of Salif-bury.
1 have written a long letter-fo farewel I
Julia Herbert*
fo Lady Julia Herbert.'
Sommerville-Houfe,
Rave but time to fend you a few lines,* and to tell you, that you may now, with propriety, wifh your Louifa joy, Inclofed are the means which have effetftually dif-
Mr. Melmoth*3
folved the tie of llavery
find dictated
anfwer you will find dictated with more fubmiflion than either you or I could have expeded from fo turbulent a difpofition.
I have brought myfelf off pretty well, cbnfidering the difficulties my imagination prefcnted to my view. My condud: has, I
^ Tbefe Letters do not appear,
C 2.
hope;

QU
OR
hope, been fuch as not to deferve cenfureJ The name of filt, joined to Louifa Sydney,
I have
have
would found dreadfully in my ears, taken your advice, dear Julia, and aded entirely by your didates; therefore will reft afiured that I muft be right.
The reports of Lenox’s attention to Mrs. Dorrel become worfe and worfe. 1 am glad to hear of Sir Charles Montague’s arrival;
he will be a valuable acquifition to our
My uncle feems better. I know, my Ju-
lia, he cannot recover; his temporary reliefs from pain no longer flatter me with hope. I was fo well convinced of his danger, that I was not alarmed at your reply to Sir Charles.---
can only fay that I am
Yours,
your
I am in a monftrous hurry, and
Louisa Sydney.
fa
WHAT YOU WILL.
29
fo the Same,
Somfnerville-Houfe*
WAS
George to a little village, a few miles off, where he has a very pretty lodge: there we dined, and returned home early to receive fome company that we expeded to fpend the evening at Somerville-Houfe. I was appre* hen five of not finding another leifure moment in the courfe of the day to write to you ; therefore, whilft the horfes were putting to, fcribbled away thofe few lines.
1 was right in my conjedures; till this hour (paft two o’clock) I could not call a minute my own. The whole houfe is wrapped in deep : my fears for my Julia will not let me clofe my eyes.
We are ever flow to credit what will give us pain.—Ah! my fweet friend, for Heaven’s fake, do not deceive yourfelf, but liften to the caution given you by her who would facrifice her life to enfure you happinefs \ Let me warn you, ere it be too late, to look to a heart that has never yet felt a pang, and of courfe will not be able to bear the
C
3
keen
3o
MASOUERADESj or
keen anguifli of difappointment, unlcfs prepared a little for the blow before it falls. That Mr. Lenox is to marry Mrs. Dorrell Is no longer to be doubted; it is the conftant fubjed of convjerfation amongft her friends: they extol her generofity in making large fettlements upon him, as his fortune at prefent is fo moderate a one, compared to hers. Ungrateful man ! Ah, good God ! will perfidy like his to innocence like my Julia’s go unpuniilicd ? Surely not.—My dear girl, take the earlieft opportunity of baniftiing from )mur favour a man who has injured you, you will foon find, beyond his power of re-com pence.
Lord and Lady Arne called yefterday to fee us, in their way to town : Ihe exprefled the utmoft concern at my emaciated appearance, and infifted on my going with them, at their return, to Southampton, as change of air might be of fervice to me. Lady Sommerville feconded her and Lord Arne’s entreaties; and my uncle urged me to accept of their obliging invitation. I told them I fhould be happy to attend them; and accordingly we agreed to fet off fome time next week. They are to pafs a couple of
days here, after their return from London,
previous
WHAT YOU WILL.
21
previous to our little excurfion, I find my health forfaking me every day.
Methinks I hear you call me an infenfible mortal, for having fo long delayed to mention my pleafure at Sir Charles’s kind enquiry for me. Indeed, I am flattered by if, and rejoice to hear he is well. I fear he will be fo much engrofled by his London acquaintances, (Lord Budenall, Lord Seymour, Mr. Montague, and his other companions, f mean,) that he will not think of his country friends: though he will be often with your brother, of courfe muft fometimes fee you, and then he muft, naturally, beftow a thought on Louifa.—-No words can exprefs my friend-Jhip for him -friendfbip only, my Julia.
Your faithful
Louisa Sydney
C 4
Ta
^2
M ASQ^UE RaDE S; or
fo Lady Louisa Sydney.
Portman-Squarea
Yefterday evening received your letters.— Yes, it is indeed very true, that Lenox
is falfe......My Louifa knows, I have ever
made it a rule to hear every part of a depreciating ftory, before I condemned the perfon of whom it was told. Judging of others by my own heart (which, I can aver, never did an injury to any-one), I have been willing to fuppofe that Malice difeharged all her venom on an innocent objedt, through the mouths of a few envious wretches, whofe foie pleafure lies in being cenforious: but how eafy a dupe I have been made, and how cruelly I have been treated, you will foon perceive from the inconteftable proofs I am about to give.
Laft night, as I told you was our intention, we went to the play. The houfe was in every other part fo remarkably full, that it made an empty box, oppolice to ours, confpicuous: a fervant was in it to keep places, in a livery which I thought I knew, but I could not recolledt to whom it belonged.
WHAT YOU .WILL.
^3
longed. In the middle of the third a(ft, when the audience was abforbed in contemplation of the performers, I was rouzed by one of the box-keepers calling out, very audibly, you may imagine, “ Mr, Lenox's fervant /” and immediately he entered, leading in Mrs. Dorrell and another lady.
I was aftonilhed to fee him in London; and could fcarcely credit my eyes, till confirmed in the truth they told me by Lady Pemberton’s afking, if that was not Mr* Lenox ?
His attention to Mrs. Dorrell, during the whole performance, attradted the obfervation of numbers *, and, whether it was the effedb of my mortified fancy, I cannot fay, but I thought there were many of my acquaintance who feemed to view me with looks of curiofity, while compaflion appeared predominant in the countenances of others.' His fenfes were fo wholly engrofled by the cne object, that he could take notice of nothing elfe.
Lord Pemberton went round to fpeak to Lady Caroline Denley, who happened to fit near them, and perceived, for the firfl time, Mr. Lenox.
“ Ha 1 Lenox !” cried my brother, this is an agreeable furprize ! Why did you keep
P 5
3+
MAS Q^U ERADES; or
The
us ignorant of your being in town other ftarted,
“ tleavens, my Lord! who could have apprehended your being here! —This is a
happinefs -....an unexpedled......faith,
Pemberton, I rejoice to fee you !”
This is extraordinary enough,” exclaimed my brother. ‘‘Why pray, Sir, is it fo unuftial a thing with me to vifit the play-houfe, that you exprefs fo much wonder at feeing me in it
“ No,” replied Mr. Lenox, “ but I fup-pofed that you had attended Lady Pemberton

’s aflembly: I heard Ihe was

to Lady F
there; is Ihe not, my Lord ?
He was exceedingly confufed when my brother gave a negative to his qneftion.
Lord Pemberton was fo aftonilhed at his manner and embarralTed way of fpeaking
that he related what pafled, to my mother and me, at his return to our box.
At the end of the play, Mr. Lenox came to us. Ah, how mean does guilt make a perfon appear ! His eyes were fixed on the ground: he had no longer that nnreftrftned, elegant air, which imprefled people in his favour; he was ftiff, and formal, and feemed
to fuffer greatly
I do aJffure you I was di-
vefted
5?
WHAT YOU WILL.
vefted of malke, and felt fincerely for him r I would have willingly faved him further Gonfufion, by forbearing to qutftion. him about his unexpected arrival in London but Sir James Weftbrook was determined to torture him.. He alked, “ To what extraordinary lucky eireumftance are we indebted for this pleafure, Mr. Lenox ? Little lefe than a miracle could have prevailed on one of your tendernefs to leave your excellent father an hour fooner yhan you at firft pro-pofed. Was the lady you have been in com^ pany with handfome, 1 Ihould fufpeCl m caufe ;■ but fhe is fo curfed ugly,, that, in-Head of attracting a man from his duty, he would adhere the more clofely to it, if it could be a means of avoiding fuch a majier-piece of deformity. What then- are we to thank for it ?”
He anfwered, that he was impatient'to return to us, as Lord Lenox v^as better; and had called in Portman-Square, but hearing that Lady Pemberton was gone to the play, (obferve, Louifa, to my brother it was to Lady F'----’s,) he refolved^ to follow her,
“ Why, as it is fo full a houfe,” returned Sir James, with a fneer,. “ I think you were right in alfo calling on Mrs..Dorrell—(thaTs
C 6	■
36
MASQ.UERADES; or
ti
f
her name, isn’t it ?)—and getting a feat in her box."
The gentlemen laughed much at what "Weftbrook faid, t^nd enjoyed the poor culprit's confufion ; yl^t he pretended to join in the laugh, though his countenance plainly demonftrated that it came not from his heart. He alked me, in ^ low voice, whether I would honour him witffdialf an hour’s converfation the next morning ? I anfwered. With pleafure. Sir.” He bowed, and returned to his party ; but alTumed a very different mode of behaviour, fcarcely fpeaking to Mrs. Dorrell, and conftantly fixing his eyes on our box.
I muft confefs my fituation was not a very eafy one: we feldom know, my Louifa, how dear an objeCt is to us, till we are on the verge of being deprived of it. I could not conceive, before laft night, that Lenox had committed fuch devaftation in my heart, as the occurrences that then happened, and which touched me fo fenfibly, made me con-feious of. How little did I profit of the opportunity I had of feeing fo excellent a play fo excellently performed! Even Mrs. Barry was not capable of withdrawing your Julia’s attention from the magnet that attracted all her thoughts,;
w
YOU W
37
I muft not, however, be fb far taken up ivith my own anxieties, as to omit telling you, that Sir Charles Montague is, by this time, far on his way towards Sommerville-Houfe. He faid, as we were about to leave Covent-Garden, that he intended Jetting out at five o'clock this morning, and would he happy to have a welcome reception enfured him, by being the bearer of a letter from me to Lady Louifa. I told him there was a great deal of vanity couched under that compliment. “How fo, Lady Julia ?”	“ Why becaufe you want
me to repeat what you are well convinced of,—that Sir Charles Montague requires no aid to make his company highly acceptable to thofe he chufes to honour with it; particularly to a family who prides itfelf on the favour of his friendfhip, and who thinks
every moment an age till it congratulates him on his return to England.”
He bowed, and blufhed. “ Upon my v/ord, ma belle Julie, I did not mean to have extorted fo flattering a fpeech from you :— but I muft return to my requeft —Will you honour me with the charge of a letter to Lady Louifa Sydney ?”	“ Indeed, Sir
Charles, I would trouble you with one with pleafure, but that 1 cannot polTibly fit up to
write
38
MASCLUERADES; oR
write a long epiftle to my friend; and no other can I fend her.” He very gallantly faid, he would wait my hour in the morning “ and that, let me tell you,” added he, is. a favour that you, and only you, fliould command for my impatience to pay my devoirs to the dear inhabitants of Sommerville-Houfe, is not to be defcribed.”
Mournies is juft come to inform me that Mr. Lenox begs leave to attend me in the little drawing-room.—I have difpatched her with my compliments, and to fay that I will wait on him immediately.
And now, my Louifa, what is to be the confequence of this meeting ? My foreboding heart tells me, an everlafting breach between your Julia and the man whom yefterday morning fhe looked upon as her deftined huflDand! Ah ! may I be able to acquit myfelf with generofity, with candour, and yet — with firmncfs! If matters are really circumftanced as I apprehend, I fhall have need of a great deal of the latter to
fupport me.......But I will not add to his
anxiety, by keeping him longer in fufpenfe.. Oh, how has he deceived us !—Down I go. —My deareft Louifa, it will be charity to>
write foon to your
Julia Herbert,
WHAT YOB WILL.
fo Lady Julia Herbert,
Sommerville-Houfe*
F the prefent agitation of my mind will _ permit me, I will give you a defcriptioa of an agreeable furprife I had this morning;, which has occafioned me more fpirits tjian I have had ever fince I parted with you.
I was fitting in deep itudy, the inimitable Pope the fubjeCl of my meditations, whea Clairon came running into my clofer, in her ^ hurrying way, which you and I have fa
often laughed at her for
“ Mon Dieu ! Madame,” cried Ihe, “ ii eft entre ce moment, dans la cour du chateau, un jeune homme, de la plus char-mante figure du monde: je fuis fur qu’il eft Franfois; ou du moins qu’il ne fait que d’arriver de France.”
Her extreme admiration of this cavalier^ excited an amazing curiofity in me to fee him; but I determined not to make my appearance till I was fent for. Clairon advifed me to difregard that ufelefs piece of ceremony,, and to go down.-—I was deaf to her recommendation, and refumed my book:—however.
40
MASQ^U ERADES; or,'
ever, I waited not long for a meffenger ; i fummons from Sir George gave me an opportunity of feeing the divine unknown. Judge, Julia, what were my emotions, aten* tering the room, to behold Sir Charles Montague ! 1 could fcarcely fpeak, my joy was fo great.—“ Dear Lady Louifa,” faid he “ my happinefs can be equalled by nothing but my impatience for this long-wiflied-for moment.—Your indifpofition, ©f which 1 was informed by your lovely friend. Lady Julia, has occafioned me a good deal of uneafinefs—Ihe told me I muft cxpeCl to find you much altered from it—how pleafingly disappointed am I!”
“ I find, Sir Charles, you have not left the art of flattery behind you I am rejoiced
to fee you fo well.
efo
lution of refiding amongft u
“ My refidence in England, Sir George cried he, “ depends on one circumftance."
Sommerville,
5F
Lady
who lets nothing
baulk her curiofity, immediately alked what that was ? He begged to be excufed impart-
tfc
that fhe
“ 1 fuppofe,” cried Sir George,

your
heart
w
YOU W
M
heart has taken a manfion in fome pretty foreigner’s breaft, and, according as fhe treats it in your abfence, you mean to return, and either fix it firm, or recal it back again. Women, Montague, are hard to truft; and the ocean which divides you proves a general remedy for love.”
“ Your are much miftaken. Sir George, in
That my heart is ftolen muft own ; but I have
your conjectures ! from my breaft, I
been robbed by no foreigner: I left it in
and am come back to
what would
my native country, claim a reftoration of it, or, make me much happier, endeavour to acquire another in its room—I am willing to make that bargain,—but tremble left I
ihould be called prefumptuous.”----------
“ There is no fear of that. Sir Charles,” returned my uncle. “ Heaven fend you fuc-cefs in your intended undertaking !—Yet I muft exprefs much furprife at your con-ftancy amidft the dangers you have been ex-pofed to in your travels, efpecially amongft the French women, who zxtplaugy fafcinating.”
The other allowed they are charming, but would not admit them to be equal to the Englifh, whofe genuine beauty far furpaifed
their
4*
MAS(LUER ADES; or.
He gave us 3
their artificial allurements, long account of his tour, in that elegant language, that delightful turn of cxpreflion, which ever was fo peculiar to him.
Is he not returned, my Julia, if pofiible, more captivating than he was at the hour he bid us adieu I—I wilh Sir George had alked the object’s name, who could boaft of fuch
though upon re-fleClion I am glad he did not—1 would not for the world have had him feem fo curi-
I feel the tendereft friendflii'p for
a treafure as his heart,
ous

Sir Charles, from finding him ftiil the fame

kind, amiable, and polite. Was my heart likely to be again enfnared, I do not know where its danger would be fo great as with Sir Charles Montague---------but Mr. Mel-
moth has given me a forfeit of love, and, as a fortunate guard towards the fecurity of my peace, this dangerous agreeable has declared his affeCUons to be already engaged. Bleff-ings attend him through every change of condition ! The greateft this life can afford will be the portion of the happy woman who calls this moft amiable of his fex hers.
Yet does not your Louifa, fenfible
as (he is of the value of fuch a treafufe.
wifh to poffefs it.
My
w
YOU W
43
My intended excurfion to Southampton was talked of: Sir Charles told me he would certainly vifit it during my flay there. He Ihortly after took his leave, and retraced part of the road
again
to arrive at Bagfhot, where his uncle. Lord Beaumont, pafTes nine months out of the twelve. So fond is he of the elegant feat he has there.-rMy next letter to you will be from Southampton: till then adieu, dear Julia.
L.	Sydney.


44
MASQ.U ERADES; oS

Lady LoOisa Sydney.
1 my Louifa
Portman-Squart,
fo-much-dreaded confliCl is over?
----How powerful is the
force of innocence when confronted by guilt!—Your fympathifing heart muft beat quick with impatience to know the refult of our conference—I will haften to gratify you.
I attended Mr. Lenox’s fummons. On my entering, he approached me, and in a re-fpeCtful manner led me tp a fofa—he drew a chair near me, and, feating himfelf, told me it was needlefs to enquire after my health, for that my looks demonftrated I was perfectly well.
There appeared fo much ferenity in his countenance and addrefs, that I could not help repeating to myfelf, “ Who knows but this man may yet be innocent!—-if not, he is an adept at dilTembling.”
“ My impatience to fee the moft, charming of women, as I told your Ladylhip laft night, made me haften to throw myfelf at your feet, and pour out the effufions of a
heart
what you will.
45
heart wholly attached to my Julia, and which has fuffered more than words can exprefs, at the cruel feparation that my father’s .untimely illnefs occafioned,.—^—I hoped on my arrival in town to have found you at home, and, on being difappointed, determined to follow you; but, calling at Mrs. Johnfon’s, I met Mrs. Dorrell, who was juft going to the play—Ihe invited ms to a feat in her box, which I accepted of, as Ihe had no beau to attend her; and it happened well, for yours was too much crowded to have admitted another perfon.”
“I dare fay. Sir, we could have contrived to have made room for you, had you been diftrelTed for a place ! but 1 am glad, for your own fake, that you were fo much more
agreeably accomrnodated.”-----He feem.ed
abalhed—
“ What do you mean. Lady Julia ?
91
Why fufpeCt any particular meaning in what I faid, Mr. Lenox ?—Was the anfvver fo extraordinary a one ?”
“ Your Ladyfhip fpoke as if you had p. defign to conftrue an incident, that was the mere effeCt of chance, into an error in* tentionally committed.”
‘‘ If you are not eonfcious, Sir, of deferv*
ing
46
MASQ,UERADES; or.
Ing that I fhould, and know yourfelf free from meriting cenfure, you cannot be much alarmed at my fufpicionsbefides, what error could there have been, in your attending the lady, fuppofing it had even been the rejult of choice, inftead of the mere effeti pf chance f"
“ Pray explain to me what fault I am ac-cufed of?”
“ I will—it is but right that you Ihould be allowed to juftify yourfelf—or, if that canot be done, to retrieve my good opinion by dealing generoufly with me, while it is yet in your power. I lhall aCf with you, Mr. Lenox, as I would wifti to be aCted by—only let me implore you to anfwer my candid behaviour by the utmoft fincerity on your part.”—1 took out your firft letter, relative to his meeting with Mrs. Dorrell—He changed colour as he received it—I did not wi(h to diftrefs him, by the Jieady flare of a fcrutinizing eye, and withdrew to the window while he perufed the letter—I could not help falling into fome moral reflections on the inftability of human profpeCls, which, like fleeting fhadows, elude the eager grafp, when we think we are on the verge of pof-fefiing our deareft wilhes, I was in a deep
reverie.
WHAT YOU WILL.
47

reverie, when Mr. Lenox came to me with your letter.
My lovely Julia, how your delicate fen-libility charms me ! He muft be a wretch indeed, utterly void of judgment and tafte, who could fuffer a thought of fuch a woman as Mrs. Dorrell to enter a heart devoted to perfection like yours !—But he were the worft of villains that would attempt to deceive one, in whom innocence and goodnefs are fo fweetly blended with every accomp-lilhment of perfon 1”
He kiffed my hand, and (hall I tell you, Louifa, that I then thought, and am now perfuaded, it was to hide the confufion which was but too vifibly painted in his countenance. How very much did his looks con? tradiCt what he averred !—He went on “ But why will Lady Louifa take fuch pains to drive me entirely from a bofom, which, I muft be allowed to fay, never felt more for me than the cool regard ,pf a friend, and never was backward in .erpidking any report to my difadvantage r”-—! reddened at thefe words, and was' gojng to reply with the proper fpirlt he fitferyedbut, as I knew my own heartp and how apt he would be to cat.cfi .eyery ftraw, compalfion made
m
every title to her regard
4$ MAS Q,U ERADES; o r,
■»	V
ijie willing to allow him this trifling advantage—I fuffered him therefore to proceed. “It, furely, was unkind of her to the laft degree! I once flattered myfelf fhe was my friend-— but now I am convinced that”—— “ Hold, Sir!-—Lady Louifa was your greateft friend, till your behaviour caufed you to forfeit
----You fee, fhe
does not too haftily condemn you, or fhe vrould have altered her opinion of you, as foon as the report of your attachment to another had reached her ears, and not waited for ocular proof of your infidelity to the
friend of her heart.----1 do not mean.
Sir, to make you any reproaches; I am fuperior to the thought of performing fo mean a part—nor would I chufe to enquire into your condud any further than it concerns myfelf. This, you will more clearly fee, by reading Lady Louifa’s laft letter, and, I hope, will do me the juftice to believe, that no jealous motive induces me to ad in this manner.”
His agitation was vifible, in fpight of his endeavour^ to conceal it—He read it—and with a countenance that made me feel for
him.
Ah ! my Louifa! why will we fuf-
fer frailty to efface the good imprefiions
which
WHAT YOU WILL:
49
which Nature has engraven on our hearts,— particularly when there is nothing fafci-naring that compels us to err againft our reafon ! As 1 viewed the objeCt before me,
I was not fo much amazed, that a Voltaire’s, or a RoufTeau’s tenets, fhould a;ain credence amongft profligates; and inftruCl them to think, that the human mind is much more prone to evil than to virtue *, and that we find within our breafls a vicious impulfe, which irrefiftibly aCluates us to fwerve from what is right.--Heaven forbid 1 fhould believe that afl'ertion!—1 hope we are born with greater propenfity to good in our inclinations—-and am fatisfied, if Mr. Lenox had been even tempted to deviate from honour, there was reafon and reClitude of fentiment fufficient in his bofom (had he pleafed to exert them) to prevent his yielding to the vile infligations of his viler genius: the commifTion was voluntary—therefore, in my opinion, never to be forgiven.
When Mr. Lenox came to that part of your letter, where you fay that I Jh all find the man has injured me beyond the power of recompence, he turned pale as death--repeat-ed the fentence aloud, and let the paper fall from his hands.
\
VoL. I.
D
V' Lady

M A S Q_U E RA D E S ; or
>
c<
Lady Julia !
99
more he would have
faid, but-his voice for a few moments failed him—at laft he exclaimed—
€i
99
Ah 1 Lady Julia I—your friend has probed me to the foul !—Culpable as I acknowledge my late behaviour to have been, it is not, I hope,—altogether irreparable.
“ Good Heaven ! Mr. Lenox, you cannot
conceive it poffible”-----
“ Wretch as I am. Madam, I will not add diffimulation to a crime that now, and only now, ftrikes me as one: believe me, had I been eonfcious of the fault I committed, I had fooner died than have perfifted in it. But, ere I attempt to juftify myfelf,
hear me, Lady Julia !----my ingenuity,----
my fincerity—will, perhaps, induce you to
—Behold before you a man more criminal than even that letter makes him:
forgive.
—who came this morning with an intention of abufing your gentle, unfufpeCling heart, by offering vows contaminated by the tongue
that would have uttered them.------In is really
true that I have paid an attention of a particular kind, to Mrs, Dorrell. Caught by the vifible notice ffie diftinguifiied me with, and willing to let the world fee it was in my power t» poffsfs her perfon on any terms,
and
WHAT YOU WILL;
5^
and her fortune, if I pleafed, by marriage, I acknowledge 1 fuffered my vanity to mif-guide me; and, after dangling attendance on her for a-while, grew tired of the fcene, and wiflied to return to that fhrine where the moft faithful adorations were always offered. I withdrew my vifits from Mrs. Dorrell, but found it not fo eafy a matter to get rid of her: letter after letter did (he fend me ; and I was at laft obliged to tell her, that, whilft my heart was fo wholly devoted to another, I could not think of further connexion with
her.
I fupplicated her pardon for my un-
I grievoufly la-
generous conduct, which mented, and offered her any compenfatiori fhe thought it in my power to make, ex-
clufive of my hand and affeClions.....1 here
is no dcfcribing her fury -all the virulence of an enraged woman did fhe pour upon me; --and at laft vowed fhe would make no fcruple of expofxng herfelf to you, to render me odious in your fight, judging (as fhe faid) that a female of fuch refined delicacy, as fhe heard you poffeffed, would inftantly difeard a man who had committed a flagrant breach of fidelity, whiljt engaged to another. This threat really alarmed me ; and, to keep from your ear what I was afraid you would
D 2	deem
t. V
52
MAS Q_U ERADES: or
deem a capital tranfgreflion, I ftrove to pacify her; but could not effeCl it in any other way than by relapftng into the fault i wifhed to conceal from you. Thus, Madam, have I been made a wretch, through a defire of gratifying the moft defpicable fort of vanity; -—a vanity that draws on me the contempt
of thofe I regard.-----No friend would open
my eyes, when firft I ftrayed ;—no one was kind enough to remonftrate on the dangerous fteps I purfucd all who profeffed an efteem for me ftood aloofand, as if my deftruClion was impatiently hoped for, they filently beheld me working my own ruin.^----Lady Julia ! in this humble atti-
tude let me entreat your pity !—Do not condemn a man, more weak than vile ; lefs guilty than unfortunate ! -- Guided by your reclaiming hand, 1 henceforth ftiall follow that road alone which Virtue points at, — which leads to happinefs and you.—Forgive-—ah,
firft, this only error ! Never, never fhall I wander more!”
forgive this
The next poft fhall convey to yon, dear Louifa, an account of the reft of (I muft call it) inrerefting converfation. the mean time believe me,
Yours moft faithfully.
my
this
In

Julia Herbert.

WHAT YOU WILL.
53
fo the Marquis of Osmond.
St, fames's-Place,
OU are, I doubt not, dear Ofinond, all
impatience to have a curiofity gratified, which is ufually allowed to be the prerogative of the fair-fcx, but which we, in general, I think, are equally addicfed to. —- You ex-pcCl me to be very circumftantial in my account of every-thing that has happened to me du ing the few weeks of our feparation:
I wilh my pen
and
may
tion,
pleafure.
give you
Nothing material
Paris
anfwer to my inclina-the mofl fatisfaClory
occurred till I got to
\
there I gave your letters as you de-1
fired). I immediately went to our good
friend the Count de C---------, and the next
morning made my obetfance at Court. You have feen the Qiieen, Ofmond ; and, if I remember right, think her handfome. After this important affair was over, I was introduced to the reft of the Royal Family a fe-cond time, having paid my devoirs to each individual of it when I was laft in Paris. I then enlifted amongft our old friends, Ro-felle, Dobterre, Morbion, and Pelties: we
D z	were
54
MASQUERADES; or
were very joyous; though we often lamented your abfence. At the end of a fortnight I thought of departing.
The French women are certainly, in general, not handfome; ftiil they have fomething that infatuates very much : they are agreeable, and render themfelves pleafing by throwing off fome of that conftraint which our beautiful countrywomen give too much into :--yet, on reflection, they are much lefs fettered by it now than they were a few years ago—for v/hich many an unfortunate huiband curfes his fate, and our intercourfe with our neighbours on the continent. I am not married, and, confequently, well content.
I embarked from Calais, and landed in four hours at Dover; from whence I proceeded poft to London. The fpires of that great metropolis, as I approached it, caufed emotions in my breaft that I had long been a ftranger to: I felt a pleafure, as I entered it, which cannot be exprefled. “ This city,” cried I, “ probably contains all that my foul holds dear!”—I repaired to Low’s Hotel immediately, and was too much fatigued to think of going any-where till the next morn-—I went to Lord Pemberton’s as foon as
mg
1 was
WHAT YOU WILL.
ss
1 was dreffed the following day. What fenfations did not the fight of that houfe awaken in my foul! Every pleafing moment I had fpent in it with my Louifa and her charming friend occurred to my remembrance, and made my heart dance with rapture! Oh, Ofmond, what fools does this love make of us! Would one believe that, when I entered London, I had every reafon to think that Lady Louifa was married to a Mr. Melmoth, who addreffed her when I was laft in England ? I had, indeedyet I would never give credit to any fuggeftions of the fort, V/hich muft fo infallibly have deftroyed my peace. It happened that I was right; for, to my inexpreflible joy, the affair is off, and fhe will, I hope, yet be mine. —Such inconfiftency does the paflion fub-jeCt us to,—-to fo much mifery, fometimes, -—I could with juftice moralize on all its foil ies, and caution the friend of my foul againft its dangerous allurements, did 1 not think that the man, who, in charaCler of a friend, pretends to preach what he is con-fcious he cannot praCtife, does but expofe himfelf to ridicule. Senfible as Heaven has formed your heart, it amazes me, Ofmond, how you have contrived to keep it fo well
D 4	fortified

MASQ.UERADE$j or
Now
vens
fortified againft the beauteous enemy; for, though frequent the attacks that have been made on it, you ftiil have refifted, I fancy, every one of them. I did fufpeCl you once ---not to Violante-—of having	;
but you denied if; and I believed you. to my own hiftory.
I found Lady Pemberton, and her divine daughter, feared in the mufic-parlour. Hea-! what blooming beauty appeared in the countenance of the latter, as fhe arofe from her harpfichord to receive me, which fhe did with the greateft affability and friendfhip, mixed with that native elegance which conftantly attends even the moft trifling motion of hers. Compliments having paffed bn both Tides, we fpoke of the Sommervilles: the dear Louifa was our next fubjeCt. I had the mortification to hear that fhe was in the country, and had been confined there, fince the fpring, by a feries of ill health. My countenance, through all rny diflimulation, muft vifibly have betrayed the emotions of my heart. I afked with eagernefs what had occafioned it ? Lady Pemberton told me that her indifpofition was chiefly owing to the fatigue and anxiety fhe muft naturally
fuffer from her conftant attendance on Sir
George
WHAT YOU WILL*
SI
George Sommerville, whofe whole happinefs was centered in his lovely niece. She dropped the fubjedl too foon. I aflced L*ady Julia if (he had feen her friend lately ? No, fhe anfwered, which was a grievous mortification to her, as jhe would be exceedingly happy if they were never to be feparated.
I devoured every word ihe fpoke ; and thought fhe never looked more charmingly than when her coral lips opened to pronounce the name of Louifa Sydney. How did fhe expatiate on the merit of her friend I LIow exprefs her wifhes for her welfare I —and with a warmth which none but a foul, great as her own, and feelingly alive to every fentiment of friendfhip, could have experienced.
This amiable girl is, by moft people, reckoned much fuperior, in point of beauty, to Lady Louifa: fhe'certainly claims the advantage of her in perfon, and may be juftly called a Venus, while my Louifa is but a little Hebe.....Lady Julia Herbert, I fancy, Of-
mond, would boaft a fpeedy conqueft over that \\\dcoi;XX.o invulnerable heart of thine: her whole figure is juft fuited to your tafte. I know you to be one of thofe fharp-fighted fellows who eafily difcover a miftrefs’s de-
D 5	feds;
sS
MASQ.tJ ERADES: or
feds; now, to find ont the leaft blemilli, either in the mind or perfon of this admirable creature, would baffle the penetration of an Argus.
I determined to feize the firft: opportunity of going down to Sommerville-Houfe; accordingly, the third day after my arrival in town, I got into my chaife, and repaired thither; where I found Lady Louifa, all lovely as I had left her !—-nay, if poffible, improved; for ill health had occafioned a languor in her beautiful eyes, which gave them an irrefiftible fofenefs. It requires a more deferiptive pen than mine to do juftice to the perfedions of Lady Louifa Sydney, She received me with a fenfibility delightfully flattering;—and yet fuch only, perhaps, as fhe would feel at the return of any other efteemed friend, who had
months abfent. Ah, Ofmond !
in that light me regarcis me brighteft profpeds are blafted !
You know your Montague’s heart, and have often condemned it for
fhe regards
been many if it is but alas, my
harbouring I have
It
fentiments of pride, which as yet never been able to eradicate: I cannot conquer my refolution never to feem attached
whilft there lies a doubt of my meeting with
a re-
w
YOU W
59
a reciprocal return ; yet fhould I defpife, as much as you could do, the woman who would make the	advances:—but ftiil,
there are moments when a foul replete with fenfibility will difcover its emotions, without ading by any means inconfiftently with that delicacy which fhould be the firft rule of a woman’s condud. A man, when pofTefifedl of a pure and ardent paflion, before he ab-folutely declares it to the lady, will, by a particular mode of behaviour, make her in fome meafure fenfible of it. Vanity (a foible which I doubt not but the moft perfed female owns in fome degree) will not fuffer her to be long blind to it. If the qbjed is fuch as may deferve attention, fhe will na-turallv confult her inclinations, and fee how they ftand affeded towards a connedion with him. If, upon a thorough examination, fhe finds them inclined to favour him, fhe will, though in trifles, fhew that partiality which a bofom attached cannot conceal. Take my word for it, Ofmond, (fo much do I know of the fex,) when once a female doubts whether fhe can love a man or not, fhe is loft to all but him who occafions her to afk her heart the queftion. A fenfible woman will let merit be her firft view, in the
D 6	choice
\
6o
M AS dU E R'A'D E S: or
an objed who can
ch' ice of a hnfband :
boaft of poffefling that, may, by the means of a conftant attention, hope to obtain the af-feflions he wifhes for; and, if once he make an impteftion, he cannot long be ignorant of his happinefs. The very precaiuions which thefe delicate creatures take to dif-uifc their fentiments, are generally the cir-cumftances which difcover them. I fhould, therefore, upon recolledion, (was I not fearful of flattering myfelf with ideas that may be too charming, perhaps, ever to be realized,) conclude, from fome trifling appearances, that I am not totally regarded by Lady Louifa as a mere friend. Sir George rallied me on the probability of my having left my heart with fome black-ey’d, witty foreigner; and, on my foul, Ofmond, a bluib overfpread her cheek. The thought tranfported me:—I too readily gave into the flattering illufion; and my vanity fug-gefted to me that I was happy....I argue with myfelf againft the likelihood of her pre* ferring me to the many fuperior fuitors fhe has had ;—-nay, I that have never exprefled my paflion to her—how is it poffible !—So far my reafon fays,—bur, alas ! there is no reafuning with a heart in love.
I had
{
WHAT YOU WILL.
61
T had repeated foilicitations to make my ftay longer at Sommerville-Hoiife.--Indif-
penfable bufinefs called me to my uncle’s, and I bid adieu to the dear Louifa with a reludance that I could not conceal. She fuffered me to kifs her hand, on my taking leave: it was with difficulty I reftrained myfelf--I fnatched it to my heart—preffed it
with my lips
my whole foul was in my
eyes,—whilft ffie, with a compofure that deftroyed my air-built hopes, fmiled at my earneftnefs, and wifhed me a pleafant journey.’ Ofmond, permit me to repeat, that I adore her! She is the only woman upon earth I will ever marry—at leaft, it is my prefent refolution—and I think I ffiall keep it.
It is time to clofe my letter, as I muft
drefs. I am to dine with the
prepare to Duke of D
e, and every man puts
on his moft attradive air, and ftudies every minutia of drefs, to appear well in the eyes of his charming wife though, by the bye, we may as well fpare our pains, for ffie be-ftows little attention on any of us her Grace is one of the few who has not benefited enough by the French modes to create fufpicion in her Lord’s breaft.
1 wonder you are not impatient to return.
Surely,
62
MASQ.UERADESJ or.
Surely, your father would not objed to it. Come when you will, all England is prepared to behold with admiration “ the ac-compliflied, handfome Ofmond.”—Faith I do not jell! Thofe two appellations are always given you.
The Duke of Weftmorland did me the honor of a vifit this morning. He alked many quellions concerning you, and faid he heard that you made many women's hearts ach : he fuppofed that yours endured fome part of ihe pain, but he would be befi pleafed to know that your fufferings were injiidled by feveral, and not by any one particular objeSi, left dan-
Upon the whole, no man can be
ger might follow from it. he was very entertaining: more fo, when be pleafes.
You’ll excufe
me.
It is with reludanCe, dear Ofmond, that I bid you farewel,—I am, much yours,
Charles Montague»

WHAT YOU WILL.
63r
fo Lady Louisa Sydney.
Portman-Square,
Fatigue had overcome me, when I
finifhed my laft epiftle to my friend. That, and a fad head-ach, determined me to difpatch what I had written, and fend what more I had to write by this day’s poft. Without further preamble I refume my narrative; —may I not call it fo, Louifa ?
Mr. Lenox had thrown himfelf on , his knees during the latter part of his fpeech: he waited with feeming anxiety for my anfwer.
“ You have been certainly culpable, Mr.' Lenox—very, very culpable—but yon appear to have fo proper a notion of your error, that to recapitulate your fault, would be ungenerous of me to the laft degree Befides, you are entitled not only to my for-givenefs, but to my fincereft thanks, for having fo candidly informed me of what has pafled.—I Ihudder to refled how miferable a wretch I fhould have been, had I learnt all this when bey 6nd red refs !—I beg you, Sir, to rife, and once more aflure you of my pardon, and wifhes for your happinefs.”
“ Ex-
$4 mas q_u e r a D E S j or;
“ Exalted goodnefs!—Ah, my Julia ! I thought it impollible to love you better than I did; but the love I feel for you now is like that we owe to a fupernatural being'— from hencefvirwards I can view you in no
•r-Tou pardon Moft ador-
Where
other light.—
ed of my foul! how can I thank you !—-in what words!—Ah, Julia! this gentle fweet-nefs makes me but the more defpife myfelf! How, how could 1 ever prove unworthy of fuch an angel!-—I never, furely, can fall again !—Mrs. Dorrell!—oh ! what vitiated tafte could bear you for an inftant ? were my fenfes, Heaven !—Curfed be the moment that led me to her ! and doubly curfed the words that melted her to become the
willing vidim of my folly----Julia ! my
much-loved—my deareft Julia! be convinced you never more fhall have caufe to
complain of your Lenox.”----
“ As a friend. Sir, I dare fay I never fhall ; but in a nearer connedion, I muft not— will not-—venture to anfwer for the continuance of your prefent good purpofes.”
“ What I can you doubt my perfeverin love -Could you now view that lovely form—could you know in how facred a light I hold that fpotlefs foul—your fufpicions
would
what you will.
65
would inftantly bediflipated.-------Whilft you
arc an angel, can I, in a union with you, be*
come a demon Be generous, be kind, my charming Julia L--Do not be merciful by halves; nor, while you fay you forgive his fault, rcfufe your hand to the fincereft penitent that ever breathed a vow of”------
“ Impofliblc! Mr. Lenox,” cried I, interrupting him. “Do not blame me, Sir, for re-ftiiing the love you proffer	to
you, as well as to myfelf, I proteft, in the moft folemn manner, that no confideration whatever fhall force me to enter into an engagement with you that muft be indifiblu-ble ; an engagement that fhould be entered into with the Ifrideft confidence on both Tides . ... no diftruft—no fear, ought to be carried to the altar.---'The man who pofiefies
my hand, fhall have my whole heart; and that (I muft be ingenuous enough to tell you) cannot be the cafe, where I have had reafon to be wounded in the tendereft; part :>•-iny fenfibility Sir --oh ! how have you made
it fuffi r I — indeed it was cruel.”-1 could
nor f ipprcfs my tears—.my heart was overcharged with anxiety, a^d would relieve itfelf that way— one or two unluckily fell on his hand as he held mine.
“ Great
66
' MAS Q^U ERADES; or,
“ Great God I to what a fate am I born ! To draw tears from the eyes of the objedl on earth on whom my foul moil doats !”—He dropped on one knee: “Forgive the wretched caufe of thofe heavenly drops that fall from eyes which but to look on was wont to
give me life! ....... Never did man
adore a woman as I do you—none can love
you better—few as well.....Ah ! had I
but been fenfible of it at the moment I firft coft a pang to that dear bofom, I fhould have thought my life too fmall a facrifice to have expiated the injury !—But no more— I do not mean to diftrefs you, Madam,” feeing me much affedled. “ In this pofture I implore your pity ; and, as I cannot give up the hope of calling you mine, beg you to mention fome method by which 1 may regain your confidence—There is no torment I will not patiently endure with that prcfpeifl in view.—I cannot. Madam, I will not leave you, ’till you alter the fatal refolution you juft now pronounced.”
“ After all I have faid, Mr. Lenox, can you fuppofe I fhall ever alter it ? .... I feel more for you on this occafion than you perhaps imagine. If you really merit my com-pafiion, you poflefs it all;—but, fure, you
need
w
YOU W
67
need it not!—it is yet in your power to be
happy
99
He interrupted me
“ For Heaven’s fake, name the condition ! —I will fly with wings of impatience to”—
“ You mJftake me. Sir—I cannot deceive you for a moment: my word is paji, and no earthly confideration, as I faid before, ftiall
make me break it........You thought Mrs.
Dorrell not unworthy your notice—Her cha-radler was fair, till your particular attention gave the cenforious a foundation for difgraee-able conftruftions, which it is incumbent on you to remove. Her attachment to you, poor woman ! muft have been great—Can a man of your feeling fupport the idea of an amiable perfon’s becoming the moft wretched of mortals on his account?— Ah 1 Mr. Lenox, fummon your reafon at this crifis; it will inftrudt you, that you have a very ferious affair in hand, and muft con-du6t it in a way that will atone for a crime in the fio-ht of God, of which it is evident you think too lightly.—It is to her you are in truth engaged—She knows it well—The malice of the world will be difappointed in finding that you ratify that engagement.— Not one reproach fhall attend your behaviour, if you will yet purfue the matter—
Yam
68
MASQUERADES; or
J am the perfon moft concerned, and you may depend on my managing what has pafiecd beiween us in fuch a way as will redound to your honour.”
“ Heaven and earth ! do you then hold me in foabjeeft: a colour —Can you conceive fb meanly of me, as to fuppofe I would ever think of a union with that defpicable woman?-—I am under no engagement to her— When (be confenced to an unlawful intercourfe, (he was well convinced that at the time
^ \
my heart was yours entirely. I gloried in it, and made it even to her my boaft, that I hoped to call you fhorcly by my own name, --Let me tell you. Lady Jufa, and forgive my plainnefs—the prefent cafe demands it: Mrs. Dorrell thought her virtue no facrifice, nor did fhe ever feel one remorfeful pang at having yielded it-T ufed no arts for the purpofe—no dilTimulation— required-^ it was a voluntary offering of her own,—and for fuch a woman-*-am I to become thus miferable 1”
“ You muft have given her fome reafon to believe that you loved her —elfe I cannot imagine any woman could be fo abandoned— At beft,, poor creature ! Ihe has been guilty
and is unfortunate.—But your attention at
firfl
neither were
WHAT YOU WILL.
69
firfl: was fufficient to induce her to think you felt fome attachment for her.—Indeed, Mr. Lenox, trifling as your fex makes of fuch behaviour, it is one of the moft barbarous pieces of cruelty you can commit. You in-finuate yourfelves into our affe<!tions by a thoufand endearing gallantries, which in pradice carry much weight, but in deferip-tion appear as nothing—without once declaring yourfelves lovers, you render us in-jfatuated to you—and perhaps find the unfuf-pebling heart in an unguarded hour; when you take advantage of its weaknefs, and then hold it in the contempt you now do Mrs. Dorreli’s. You change the objeft as foon as inclination prompts you to do fo and leave us even without the liberty of
complaining.----Unhappy Mrs. Dorrell ! I
confefs you are too juftiy defpifed. —I cannot perfuade you, Mr. Lenox, to marry her; —but this I know,- I will not be any obfta-cle to your doing it. She certainly judged properly of my fentiments!”
“May curfes keen as the pangs I now feel, blaft her !--
hap
J?
May ihe never know
“ Hulh 1 for Heaven’s fake. Sir—^^Your imprecations on her cannot make me think
more
70
MASQUERADES; or.
cc
more favourably of you.—Be fatisfied with the friendlhip I offer, which I dare aver will be permanent, becaufe no diffidence of you will accompany it; but never flatter yourfelf with the moft diftant idea of poffeffing more than my friendjhip."
You feem fo cooly refolute!-—Oh, Lady Julia 1 allow me but the moft diftant hope—drive me not into immediate de*
fpair!”—
“ I cannot, Mr. Lenox, allow you the leaft hope—I have not been taught to de* ceive; nor can I prevail on myfelf to fhew you profpedls you muft never expe6l to reach.”
Colonel Elliot and Lord Pemberton then
came in firft
opportunely I thought; and, the moment that permitted, I flipped up ftairs to my dreffing-room, and heard Mr. Lenox wifh my brother a good day as I was on the flair-cafe.
Lord Pemberton foon after fent Mournies to beg I would allow him to attend me for a quarter of an hour*--You may fuppofe he did not long wait for admiffion*—When he entered he thus addreffed me :
“ I have been anxious, Julia, to know the
reafon of this piuzzling behaviour of Lenox’s
WHAT YOU WILL.
71
fiox’s, and have waited moft part of the morning with impatience to fpeak to you— ^ Hearing he was with you, I remained in my ftudy, unwilling to intrude, ’till I found it growing late; and my curiofity was really fo much upon the rack, that I could keep myfelf no longer out of the room. Forgive, then, my difturbing you, dear Julia, fince my fincere affeblion for you occafioned k; and let me befeech you, by the fraternal friendlliip I have endeavoured to fhew you,
to keep me no longer in the dark.-------Nay !
my fifter—things muft be bad indeed when you are in tears !—Can Lenox be a villain ? Does he prefume to trifle with my fifter ? with Julia Herbert! not !—
By Heaven, he durft
—From whence
Am I
—Speak, I charge you— proceed thofe tears ^—Speak, Julia ! unworthy your confidence ?”
“ My dear brother ! can you be furprifed •at my tears ?—Your attention to my happinefs melts my foul with gratitude ;—they are the overflowings of a heart replete with
the wartHeft fenfe of your kindnefs.--1 will
not be fo much my own enemy as to let efcape any opportunity of ftriving to deferve your regard ; and my firft ftep towards meriting
72
MASQUERADES; or
riting it fhall be by opening my whole foul to you.”
“ Indeed, .you would wrong me much, were you to conceal from me what may have caufed an inflant’s uneafinefs in your bofom. Never had brother more amiable fif-ters, never were lifters more beloved by a brother.—My life—my fortune—are devoted to their happinefs, and neither (did occafion require) fhould be fpared to procure it^—Be as good as your word, Julia,—and tell me what occafioned your embarraffment laft night ?”
44
Embarraffment, my Lord !”
“No duplicity, Julia,—give me not reafon to think lefs favourably of you now than I have hitherto done.”
“ You wilh to find me culpable, brother, or why fo unkindly mifeonftrue my words I Give me leave to explain my meaning, before you haftily accufe me of a quality I defpife.—If I was embarraffed, it was no wonder, when every eye feemed fixed with attention on me, to try whether they could difcover the truth of a very filly report that had been propagated concerning Mrs. Dor-rell and Mr. Lenox. A perfon who profefles more confidence than 1 do, would have felt
auk ward
WHAT YOU WILL.
J
73
aukward in fuch a fituation—I confefs that I did—but flattered myfdf that my countenance did not betray the emotions of my heart,”
“ They are adluated, I abfolutely belieye, by the fame organs; no face fo plainly reveals each thought--*Bt it your misfortune or your happinefs, I know not, but you cannot difl'emble without detediion*—vour feelings, exquifite as they are, are inftantly delineated on your features^————Tell me of Lenox—there are odd conjedures circulating refpeding him and Mrs. Dorrell— Sir Charles Montague took me afide laft ni^ht after the play, to mention fome of
n	■
them that h

Joh
nyon, which he thought his friendfhip for me called upon him to repeat, and did it with that gentleiman’s confcnt->-Montague told me they neither of them gave much credit to fuch malicious reports, but judged it hard that I alone fhould be unacquainted with them. I leave you to guefs my furprife— 1 cannot think Lenox difhonourable—yet I
chufe to know from what foundation this cenfure could arife that is caft upon him, and muft infift, Julia, on your informing me of the plan you and l.enox are, upon.”
VoL. I.	E	“In-
74
QU
0 R
Finding the time
“ Indeed, my Lord, if there is any thing amifs on either fide, I am more in fault than Mr. Lenox, whofe behaviour has been fo generous to me as to affed me a good deal this morning. You may remember how ftrenuoufly you and my mother recommended Mr. Lenox to me: firft, as your friend, I regarded him ; and afterwards tried to love him, for his own fake, draw near that is to lay me under irrevocable ties, my refradory heart forebodes a thoufand anxieties:—it tells me, that the paffion I entertain for him is no more than friendfhip; and that I fhall make neither him nor myfelf happy in the connedion.... i wifh to break with Mr. Lenox — till I ac-complifh that point, I can know no peace, and you will ever fee the brow of your Julia clouded with fadnefs. Something has paffed between us juft now relative to it; and I hope to manage fo as to efcape uncenfured by him and the world, and yet free nhyfelf from this unlucky, this horrible engagement !”
Juli
of Lenox’s perfidy that you have firmed
this fcheme!”
Have no fuch apprehenfion, brother j
and

WHAT YOU WILL.
75
p’
and let me intreat that you will not interfere in the matter : rny delicacy will fuffer much, if you do. Depend upon it, 1 will get off very honourably, without affjtance." I faid this with a fmile. He looked attentively at me.
“ Julia, have a care that you behave in-genuoufly with me! Think you I can believe -----however, I will rely on you.”
He looked at his watch, and, furprifed to find it fo late, haftily retired to drefs.
How bleffed, my Louifa, do I think myfelf in my clofe confanguinity to Pemberton ! How excellent a man does he prove himfelf on every occafion ! How eminently confpicuous have his virtues ftood forth, even at that early period of life when youth and inexperience would have pleaded for the want of them ! But the noble Frederick merited the regard of all, by an exemplary behaviour, and a conftant exertion of cheer-fulnefs and affability. No haughty, imperious looks, that added confequential dignity to pompous words, befpoke the mighty Lord; to all beneath him
“ As gentle
As Zephyrs blowing below the violet^ Not wagging his fweet head,’'
E 2
When
76
M A S QU ERADES; or
When chofen to fill the higheft pofl:, what courage, what magnanimity ffionc forth, and difplayed the difincerdled, faithful fubjed, to the adm ring eyes of a furrounding multitude ! Is it not firange, that, in a kingdom filled with dificntions, as ours unhappily is at prclent. Lord Pemberton is equally the friend of all parties ? A confcioufnd's of the integrity of his honefi, amiable heart, makes every one defirous of deferving his good opinion. Were I to attempt defcribing his private charadter—to paint him in the different lights of a fon, a brother, a friend, a maffer, how much would my pen fall fhort of his deferts !*-—But whither is it running? Pardon, my Louifa, the eulogiums a filler beftows on an amiable brotherthe vein for praifing him was upon me, nor could I ffoD it.
JL
Lord and Lady Pcrcival, Mrs. and Mifs Pelham’s, Sir James Weftbrook, and Sir John Benyon, were affembled in the drawing-room when I went down. Lord Pemberton feemed in excellent fpirits, and fatif-fied with wh;t I had faid to him ; yet, from a hint that efcapcd his lips juft before he
left my do
>lct
I was uneafy. How manv
bitter refteclions occurred to my tortured
imagination I
WHAT YOU" WILL*
77
iitlagination !
“ All-powerful Heaven!” would 1 often fay, “ fhould the life of a beloved brother be put to any rifk on my account, what would become of me !” Mirth feemed to reign in every breaft but mine; fituated as I was, no wonder, dear Louifa, that fadnefs prefided in its room.
The company fpent the evening in Portman-Square, and I had not an opportunity of relating to my mother the tranfidlions of the day till llie retired to her chamber: I attended her thither, and, while flie was un-

dreffing.
begge
Ot5
d h
er
to difcharge
o
Mrs.
I Iiad the good for-
Thornton,’as I would fupply her place. She did fo, and liftened very attentively to the particulars I gave her. tune to meet with her approbation of my condufl; and, on my exprefting my fears concerning Lord Pemberton’s engaging in any rencontre with Mr. Lenox, received more confolation than I could have hoped for: fhe reprefented his prudence and real courage in fo advantageous a light, that I retired to my apartment much compofed.
I flaould have mentioned that I received
in
the evening
O
a letter from Mr. Lenox, filled with proteftations of the fincereft penitence. He deferibes his mifery at the re-
E 3	fleflion
78
MASQUERADES; or.
fledion of my cruel behaviour in the morning ; but cannot, he fays, relinquifh all hopes of my treating him with more humanity, when he procures Lady and Lord Pemberton to be his advocates. It would have been to no purpofe to return any anfwer to a man v/ho would not accept of my obfti-nate refufal; I therefore made him none, but left it to his own invention to try what rhetoric would be moft prevalent with Lord and Lady Pemberton, determining, in my own breaft, not to retracft from the refolution I had taken.
, As foon as I awoke the next morning, I enquired of Mournies for my brother, and was informed by her that he had gone out very early. “ What on foot!”	“ Yes, my
Lady.”-----Oh, Louifa, what were then
my fenfations!—Never, never may I again experience fuch!—I ftarted up, hurried on my cloaths, and went to my mother’s room : I cold her my fears,—my mifery. Poftefted as (he ever is of the fineft prefence of mind, fhe endeavoured to quiet my perturbed foul •, yet I perceived how greatly her bofom was agitated by alarms of the moft dreadful fort, in fpite of her vigilance to conceal them from me.
After
WHAT YOU WILL.
79
After waiting fome time in all the horrors of agonizing fufpenfe, difpatching fervants we fcarcely knew whither, and wilhing, yet dreading to hear tidings of my brother, his well-known rap occafioned almoft as bad an effed:, by the fudden tranfition we experienced from torture to joy, as the former had nearly produced. I am convinced that another half-hour’s fuffering, equal to what we had endured, would have deprived us of reafon, at leaft. We reproached Lord Pemberton for the (hocking condition he had put us into. When we were fufficiently recovered, he informed us that he had written the evening before to Mr.Lenox, purporting that he had fomething of importance to fay to him ; and defired he would be at home, and ready to receive him, at eight o’clock the next morning. He accordingly went, and infifted upon Lenox’s fatisfying him refpedting the reports that had reached his ear ;—he told him he hoped he was fenfible that his ftfier was not to he jejied with ; and faid a great deal to that effed, which I cannot remember fo particularly as to write down.
Mr. Lenox behaved extremely well on the occafion. He honeftly related to my brother all that had pafled between us the
E 4	preceding
8o
MASQUERADES; or
preceding day, acknowledged himfelf culpable in yielding to the advances of Mrs. Dorrell, and that he was amply punifhed for it in his own refleclions. Lie complained to Lord Pemberton of my rigour, and fwore no confideration upon earth fhould make him give me up : he entreated him to reprefent to me his mifery, and urge me to feal his pardon.
I am forry to fay, Louifa, that my brother treated his fault very lightly, and declared Mrs. Dorrell was, in .his opinion, the criminal, and not Lenox, whom he fuppofed I would not torture, becaufe her principles were diabolical.
Thefe men !—thefe men 1—-how readily do they throw reproach from themfelves on the weaker part of the creation! I do not vindicate Mrs. Dorrell:—indeed, fhe has acled fo vile a part, as to call forth a blufli on every virtuous cheek; yet I will maintain that Lenox was quite as guilty—nay more, perhaps. Were his fentiments as good as I once thought them, he would have abhorred a woman of fuch morals; and, inftead of becoming a partner of her crime, have for ever fled an objeft who caft. a reflection on the whole fex.—My brother, I thought, was at liberty to indulge his own notions refpeCling the diftin(5tions of propriety; but
Mr.
WHAT YOU WILL
8
Mr. Lenox had been tried and condemned in my heart, from whence I would fuffer no appeal.
Lord Pemberton affured his friend he would make up our brouillerie, and appointed him to fpend the evening in Portman-Square.
• Lord and Lady Pemberton gave general orders to be refufed to every one but Mr. Lenox *, who came about eight o’clock. I was in my clofet, employed with my pen, when he entered the houfe. He was (hewn into my mother’s dreffing-room, where my
I was fummoned to
Lord and Lady were.
I endeavoured to
appear fufficient to affift im
collect

fpirits in the conflid I was
about to endure :--it was a hard one, you will allow.-—The imploring fubmiffions of a man whom, but a week before, I expeCled to have called by the deareft epithet in the world, in little more than a month —the entreaties of my brother — and the paf-five behaviour of Lady Pemberton, who, I knew, would not interfere, but fiill wiffied for a reconciliation— all, all required much firmnefs to withffand : but the alternative was dreadful—To marry a man who had forfeited my good opinion, was a thing not
£
5
to
82
MAS QU ERADES; or
to be done by any means; and I worked m>felf up to a pitch of refolution that was unconquerable, when I entered the drefling-room.—As foon as 1 appeared, Mr. Lenox came up with great eagernefs to me, and feized my hand. “ Pardon, Madam, my prefumption in attending you, after yoyr cruel filence to my letter. I cannot—cannot fuffer you ftiil to refufe ray addreffes, for a fault fo fincerely repented of. Pity and forgive a man whom vanity, it is true, has led aftray, but who fees his fault—who owns it—who condemns and hates it. Let the ardent proteftations I yefterday made in' writing have fome weight:—be not inexorable, my Julia!—ftiil you are mine. My Lord has promifed to ufe his influence; Lady Pemberton, too, deigns to be my advocate : will not fuch a mother—fuch a brother—perfuade you to receive into favour the moft unhappy of men

What can I fay ?
Nothing is more irk-
99
fome, Mr. Lenox, to a fenfible heart, than to give a denial : mine you have fubjeCted to that painful fenfation too often within thefe two days—and to what end !
“ Julia,” faid Lord Pemberton, “ be generous ; permit me to plead for Mr. Lenox.”
“ Indeed,
/
WHAT YOU WILL.
S3
“ Indeed, my Lord, I have a friendffiip
for Mr. Lenox that” ------
“ Well, Sir,” exclaimed my brother.
iC


Julia has gone a good way towards re-ftoring you to your ancient rights and privileges in her affeClions; for you know that Friendfhip with woman is fifter to love. Lenox, I congratulate you ; and thank you, my fifter.—Now all is forgotten, and Mrs. Dorrell may go to the devil.”
Lenox’s eyes fparkled with joy: — he threw himfelf at my feet, and was about to fpeak ; but I interrupted him, and, turning to Lord Pemberton, with as grave an air as I could affume, expreffed my aftoniftiment at his conduct, and aflced, whether he could conceive that my refolution was to he fhaken ?
Yes, upon my foul!” he replied.

I
hope you intend to give afpecimen that it is impofiible for fo foft, fo gentle a bofom to contain refentment.”
“ Call me not refentful, I befeech you,’ for aCling in this manner : in juftice to Mr. Lenox, as well as to myfelf, 1 do it. With you. Sir,” turning to Mr. Lenox, “ I muft be explicit; and once more affure you that I can never be yours. Were we to be connected, a thoufand doubts would make me
E 6	wretched.
84
MAS QU ERADES; oa
wretched. How often fhould I think, that the man who could forfake me for no worthy objehf, in the days of courtfhip, would find it (from the general perverfenefs of human nature) a much harder point to keep his affections fixed to one he was Jhackkd to for life. Your even flirting with another, fhewed an inftability of attachment that, in my opinion, paid a poor compliment to the woman you were engaged to. 1 never fliould fee you look grave, but my heart would fug-geft to me that I was no longer loved *, and I could not but reproach myfelf with having deferved it, by entering intC> an union with you, after the proof you gave me of your infidelity, however flight you and my Lord may think it. Bur, if 1 am to fuppofe that vanity was your ruling motive with the lady, why may I not fufpeCt that it might again influence you to extend your conquefts ? If, under the dominion of that foible, (to give it no harfher a term,) it is certain you could never be contented .with the Angle pofTeflion of your wife’s heart. You muff be convinced, Mr. Lenox, that, with thefe fentiments, you would be as miferable as myfelf, were I to give you my hand ; and ought to blefs Providence, that, knowing
each
w
YOU W
85
etch other fo well, we are not to be united,
1 fay nothing of, the obligations you are under to marry Mrs. Dorrell, fince (he is capable of wilhing it —I fpeak of my own feelings you muft aCl as you pleafe refpeCl- < ing her.—You cannot fufpedl me of mean-
I forgive you, from the bottom of my foul, every moment’s uneafinefs I have fuffered; and only intended to Ihew you how impoffible it is to think of a further connection than what at prefent fub-
fifts between us.”--
bled for Lenox!
ing to recriminate.
O
Louifa, how my heart
“ Ah, Lady Julia!” cried he, “ be notfo fevere ! I would rather die than urge you to do a thing that would render you wretched 5 but, if your happinefs can depend on my behaviour, never, never, my Julia, fhall a painful idea difturb your peace.”
Lady Pemberton told me that I was too refined in my notions; yet her countenance did not indicate that (he thought me fo. My brother faid 1 was a feptaTe '^lxotte, and made a lamentable matter of a frolick that every man was guilty of, who had an opportunity fo put in Jfs way. My mother reproved him for fpeaking with fo much le-
1 was vexed, but made him no an-
vity
fwer J
86
M A S QU E R A D E S J or,
fwer i and, though cenfured by all, ftiil continued fteady in my determination.
I have, no doubt, my amiable friend, fufficiently exhaufted your patience: I will not, therefore, give you any longer detail of our converfation, but only fay, that Mr. Lenox alleged all that man could do, to induce me to retraCl my word. He was feconded (but not fo ftrenuoufly latterly) by Lord Pemberton. At length he took his leave, in a condition that called forth every fentiment of compaflion. I have received feveral letters from him ; and, at his earneft follicita-tion, have confented to two or three vifits— but in vain ! He declares, that, fince I am fo inflexible, he muft tear himfelf from me, and is refolved to fet out for Paris to-mbr* row, with Mr. Stepney.
Mr. Lenox wifhed to take leave of me, but my fpirits have been fo much agitated of late that I could not bear it, and have entreated my brother to diflliade him from urging any further a requeft fo oppofite to my inclinations. With difficulty he at laft effected it; fo I am fpared the difagreeable talk of hearing the adieus of a man whofe unhappinefs 1 cannot fee with indifference. .May every good angel attend and guard
him I
• « •
WHAT YOU WILL.
87
him ! and may he find fome more deferving woman, who fhall caufe him to blefs the hour that I was obdurate to his applications!
......And now, my Louifa, look back with
me, and view, with aftonifhment, the work of one fhort fortnight!
“ Oh, ’tis amazement all!
9f
Providence, I hope, has difpofed of everything for the beft. If you but tell me that I have conduced myfelf properly, I will endeavour, when painful ideas arife, (as I fear they fometimes will,) to find confolation in the reClitude of my own heart, and think, with the charming poet, that
“ Whatever is—is right.
99
I am, my dear Louifa, ever yours.
Julia Herbert.’
To
S3
MASQUERADES; or
fo Sir Charles Montague.
Paris.
Nable to fupport Italy after my friend’s departure, I wrote to my father, and defired his permiffion to return to England, begging him at the fame time to direCt his letter to this place, where I fliall wait his commands. I fhould hold myfelf very unwor-
-	m
thy, were I to fuffer a fufpicion to crofs my thoughts of the Duke’s keeping me abroad by way of punifhment! I am perfuaded no
fuch motive can adtuate him--------Yet I am
ftrangely puzzled for a caufe, why for fix years I have been made an alien to my country and my friends, as if I was an out-caff from them, and a whom I owe my birth —What tho’ I am fupplied with more money than I can fpend ! —what tho’ my equipage, my attedants, my garb, are more fuited to a prince of the blood than your Henry !—they give me no pleafure ; and I would rather be a plain cornet in one of the regiments in England, than the Marquis of Ofmond, with the fuperb appendages which belong to that title, in Italy or France. Montague, if my father
was
difgrace to the man to

WHAT YOU WILL.
S9
was fenfible of the mifery a refufal to my
-his heart could
requeft would infliCt on me avoid feelins: fome
at leaft I
not avoid tee J ing lome pangs think fo. —Oh, my friend ! how little do you know the anxiety that is planted in my breaft!—Moft feverely have I fuffered for my imprudence in going oppofite to the commands of the Duke, by accompanyin
that has
blighted all my You muft underftand
you on a tour hopes of happinefs I from what I have faid, that my attending you to Paris, after my father’s writing to forbid it, was the unfortunate period from
whence I date my wretchednefs.------
You exprefs aftonifhment at my preferving my heart free from the fofteft attachments.— Ah ! Montague ! have I done fo Alas, no! •I fee you ftart, but blame ,not my want of
confidence in you—My adventure bore the femblance of romance—admit not of the poflibility of love at firft fight—at leaft a lafting one and I was never in a humour to bear your raillery or contradiClion, which I could not evade, from my total ignorance of the name and refidence of the objeCl. Both are yet unknown to me, but at this diftance you will be more indulgent to what you may term my folly, and may fpare
your
9®
MASQUERADES; or,
y»iir ridicule; therefore my foul fhall be laid open to you. You hint, in the letter before me, your remembrance of the change that appeared in my fpirits during the latter part of our ftay in this metropolis—you were uneafy at it, and wiflied to haften our return to Italy.—How often have I reproached myfelf for treating you ungeneroufly ! when, in the moft fupplicaring accents, you have hefought me to repofe my inquietude in a bofom that Ifhould ever find true to its truft. Could you conceive the confiiCls that tore my foul in pieces, you would forgive a filence that was painful to me beyond defeription.——I have been on the brink of a difeovery—my lips have often involuntarily opend at your call to reveal the fecret, when a timidity injurious to friendfhip has again fealed them, and forced it back to canker on my heart.
Say not that this is fome puerile affair, which abfence or time will adminifter afure remedy for-~confider, it is near three years fince we were together at Paris, and I am as much devoted now to my beauteous incognita as
at the firft inftant I faw her.--
It is true, no one was gayer than your Ofmond, or a more general admirer of beauty. I facrificed at its fhrine, and was diftin-
guifhed
WHAT YOU WILL.
91
guiflied for gallantry, amongft the moft gallant—yet my heart always came off conque-
I even the lovely
ror
Ah how changed
Violante had loft all her charms with me on my return, and I yielded up, without a murmur, the tide of her cecifbeo to the Count de Alsforza.—Now, my dear Charles, I will give you the particulars of this matter, from the ftrangenefs and perplexity of which you may form fome judgment of my embarraffed fituation.
The evening prior to our departure from Milan, you may recolleCt, we paffed at the Marquis de Felechini’s palace: at parting, his amiable Lady put into my hand a letter, which fhe begged I would deliver myfelf adding it would introduce me to the acquaintance of a lady of diftinClion, whofe company I fliould find agreeable, and to whom fhe had the honour of being related. It was addreffed, “ A Madame la Princcffe De *	^ Superieure de la convent de
* ^ * * * * *^ a Paris.” I bowed, and affured the charming Marchionefs of my utmoft diligence in prefenting the packet fhe did me the honour of committing to my charge.
, On my arrival in Paris, my firfl: attention was to execute my prornife. Nocompofition
of

M ASQU ERADES; or,
of Cicero’s ever produced greater effcCls, tho’ in different ways, than the amiable Fe-lichini’s letter did—I confider it as the epoch of my fate ; for it introduced riie to a place which contained an objeCl that was created, I fear, to embitter my days. I need not tell you, who have a flight acquaintance v/ith the Princefs, how much I found her furpaffing her friend’s defcription in point of fenfe, vivacity, &c. but will haften to my narrative.
One morning in my way to the Due de ^*’****^^, I called upon the Superieure to give her le bon jour. As I entered the faloon, I faw {landing by her, with a letter in her hand, the moft beautiful girl idea ever had a conception of tali and elegantly formed—1 muft try to deferibe her;—Her hair was of a dark auburn, unfullied by powder, black eyes that fparkled radiant through the ambient fluid, and conveyed, with one glance, more expreffion to the foul than fhe eloquent tongues of a M*^***ld or a B**ke could do in a day : never did 1 meet with
O
Her figure was
She had large
any half fo beautifully piercing, yet tempered with a foftnefs fo exquifite, that they claimed your gentleft feelings the moment
they
WHAT YOU W
93
they beheld you: they were fringed with long, glofly eye-lafheL Her mouth—heavens, how lovely !-'*the idea of a rofe-bud, half difclofed, and not entirely freed fr-oni the dew of the morning, occurred to me, from the freffinefs of it : methinks I fee it opening to give a paiTage to the words fhe addreffed to the Princefs; butj when fhe fmiled,
“ A dartino; glory Teem’d to blaze abroad.
That rny defiring eyes were never weary.
But hung upon the obje£l.”
Her coral lips enclofed a fet of the moft even and the whiteft teeth that ever were placed in the head of a mortal; they furpaffed infinitely Violante’s. Her nofe was an exaCt Grecian. The lower part of her face was turned with the moff perfeCl fymmetry. Her fkin was of a dazzling whitenefs. Ten thoufand blue veins meandered about her forehead (which, I fhould have mentioned, was not inferior to the other features I have defcribed in beauty), her temples, and her chin. Add to this the mofl: animated, the mofl blooming complexion that ever adorned a Hebe, and you may form a poor, im-
perfed notion of the countenance of this
fweet
94-
MAS QU ERADES; or
fweet girl. Her neck refembled a fwan’s in length and whitenefs: the fall from it to her Ihoulders was beyond the art of
an
/	w
Apelles to imitate—In fliort,fo was the whole figure : and fo inadequate am I to the re-prefentation, that I leave you to finilh, in your imagination, her matchlefs form. I have brought her back to my own recolledion moft warmly, and you will pardon my rapture in exclaiming, with the poet, fhe was, furely,
“ Fram’d in the very pride and boaft of Nature, So perfed, that the gods who form’d her, wonder’d as
Their own (kill, and cried, A lucky hit has mended Our defign ! Their envy hinder’d, elfe She had been immortal, and a pattern when Heaven Would work for oftentation fake, to copy Out again.”
The angelic creature feemed fcarcely more than fifteen, but there was nothing childifh in her appearance. So charming at that tender age—what, oh! Montague, what muft fhe be now!
She would have withdrawn on my entrance, but the Princefs detained her hand. “ No, my dear, finifh the letter, and then deliver your fentiments to me upon it. That
gentleman
WHAT YOU WILL.
95
gentleman is an intimate friend of mine, and will be fo obliging as to excnfe us for a few minutes, when he knows that the letter is of importance, and requires immediate perufal.”
The fweet maid looked at me with a blufli, and, CLirtfying, refumed the paper. I begged 1 might not be an interruption, and faid I had only made ufe of her Highnefs’s per-mifTion to afk her, how fhe did, and, findino: her well, would take my leave.
“ By no means,” fhe anfwered; “ my fair charge will foon have done, and then I fhall attend you. I have been a whole week without receiving your devoirs, and cannot think of lofing the prefent opportunity to chide you for your negleCr, in fo fadly fulfilling the Marchionefs’s injunctions. I therefore entreat you to ftay.
1 withdrew to a window, that they might purfue their converfation without reftraint; and there had time to contemplate an angel’s form, which has been ever fince riveted on my imagination.
When they had fettled the bufinefs that ingroffed their attention, the lovely girl advanced towards me with a dignity that animated every feature, and, in the moft polite, gentle manner, begged I would pardon her
for
39
g6
MAS QU ERADES; or
>
when it
.J
for occupying Madame's attention, might have been fo much more pleafingly taken up by me: then, elegantly curtfying, quitted the room, and left me abforbed in wonder and delight.
“ The fyrens taught her voice their melody !”
The harmonious mufic of hers operated as fenfibly on my ears, as her divine perfon, and the irrefiftible graces which adorned it, had done on my eyes. I knew not whether what I had feen was a vifion, created by a delirious fancy, or reality, till awakened from my ftupor by the Princefs’s enquiring if I ailed any thing ? I tried to raiiy my fcattere'd fpirits *, but it muft have been vifible that I was ftruck to the heart, from
the many quellions I afked relative to this beautiful girl. All I could learn from her was, that fhe was an, Engltfh lady, put under her particular care.
Does fhe mean to take the veil?” cried I.
“ That is uncertain,” replied the Princefs. “ Her name. Madam ! for God’s fake, inform me of it! There can be no harm, furely, in gratifying fo trifling a requeft I Let me implore you, Madam !’’
Madame’s evading
((
Your
\
WHAT YOU WILL.
97
/
“ Your eagernefs, Sir, forbids ir. That fweet girl is dearer to me than words can exprefs. I will acquit myfelf as I ought concerning the precious truft, and give no hold for difquiet to any party. I have the higheft opinion of Mr. Cholmondeley, (the name, you muft remember, that I affumed on quitting Italy, to avoid my father’s deteClion,) and, permit me to add, regard for him; and, were I to gratify my inclinations, they would lead .me to comply with your foilicitations: but to do fo would be improper, and on your honour, your gratitude, 1 depend, for making no further enquiry about her.”
Her words were explicit, and her air Hill more determined. 1 withdrew, abafhed, confounded, curling my own folly, that would not fuffer me to diffemble the emotions of my too eager heart. Had I appeared indifferent, I might now have been bleffed; for, could I but have difcovered her name, and bars," nay, death fhould have been encountered, rather than not have fought an opportunity of telling her what devaftation fhe had, in a few minutes, committed on a heart determined to be hers alone. Ah, Montague ! could I have done fo, I Ihould have been in a lefs unhappy fituation, at the worft. Vox., I,	F	than
oS
MAS QU ERADES; or
than I now am •, for, if fhe rejeCled my paffion, a certainty of my miferable fate would have been preferable to this torturing ftate of fufpenfe and apprehenfion.
In vain did I employ Souville’s diligence to tamper with the fervants (for the firft time in my life I acted meanly) ; they were not to be corrupted.—How often have I repeated my vifits to the Superieure, in hopes of catching a lucky moment when her too vigilant care might have been lulled to fteep! but to no purpofe. The only intelligence I received from her was an aftlirance of her friendfhip, as long as I continued to deferve it; but, at the fame time, it was made known to me, ,that to drop my vifits would be con-fidered as a favour conferred on her High-nefs. I forbore, with fad reluClance, to torment her; but night after night have fpent in folitary walks under the convent walls. I found it impoffible to gain any thing by my nocturnal excurfions. So well regulated was this monaftery, that I was driven to defpair, and felt the lefs reluCtance to go back with you to Rome. In ten months after, I returned to Paris, but was equally unfortunate in my fearch during the few weeks that 1 remained here.
Again
WHAT YOU WILL.
99
Again have I been afliduous to trace the I have the additional mortification to
lady, know
though
obftinate
I have feen
that my amiable, friend, the Superieure, is dead, fome of the nuns, but can get no informa-
from them. The
feem
from
to think, intend much harm
religious of this my enquiries, and thofe who
non houfe that 1
can tell me fomething of my fair one, fancy they have merit in keeping her concealed. —Montague, what is to be done.^ What hardfhips would I not encounter to have the fatisfaClion of once more beholding her!— of telling her how exquificejy dear Ihe is to
me I ------If file is returned to England, I
have every-thing to fear; for it is next to impoffible that beauty like hers fiipuld remain unconnected amidft thoufands of a-dorers:—and yet, I think, if ffie was ftiil here, I muft: have difcovered her in fome of the various ftratagems I have ufed for that purpofe fince my arrival.
Thus, my friend, I have at length acquainted you with the reafon of the change that has been fo vifible in me fince that fatal excurfion of ours. Never ffiall I appear otherwife, if this charming unknown
I ffiall eo to
is not reftored to my fight.
* 2
England

100
MASQUERADES; or,
England with a fixed refolution of fearching each corner of it, and difcover her, or die in
the attempt. To complete the meafure of my misfortunes, I know my father meditates a match between Lady Henrietta March-mont and your Ofmond: it has been his point of view from my earlieft infancy. But let him not propofe it to me, if he cxpeCts my obedience on all occafions. In every other refpeCt, I will try to pleafe him :---in this point, he may as foon expeCt to behold generofity in a ufurer, as compliance in Ofmond.
You muft mention no more any lady to
me, as a future.
I am alhamed to fay it.
but will acknowledge my perverfenefs --I am already prejudiced againft Lady Julia Herbert, becaufe a connexion between us, it is fuppofed here, will take place when I go over.- Colonel Weft told me yefterday, he would venture to lay any wager it would be Jo; for he thought we were formed for each other. What an arrogant, prophetic way of
And, let me tell you, Monta-
“ ftie
or I
fpeakin
your thinking
gue
might boaft a fpeedy conqueft over my heart,” ihews but little penetration on your fide. No more of
I knew her brother
at
it, therefore, prithee!
W H A T Y O U VvT I L L.
101
at Bologna-an amiable young man,-—reckoned dangeroujly handfome and agreeable amongft the ladies, but diftinguifhed by our fex for being remarkably fenfible and clever. Lord Pemberton was not liked in the Count de Palimo’s party, (to which I was introduced,) becaufe he was much in the Marquis Bellarini’s, who was their enemy, from fome family quarrel, that was handed down from the fecond or third generation to the prefent one.
Can you forgive my remaining fo long filenr on fuch a fubjeCl as the fair Louifa ? Your defcription of her is charming. There is no doubt of your being well received; and, fhould it be your lot to marry her, may fhe prove deferving of my Montague, and you muft be happy !
If I had not already fpun cut this letter to an immoderate length, I would afk a few queftions of “ Who’s in ? Who’s out?” and what you are all doing to occafion fuch commotions, as even to make Frenchmen all attention, and wait with impatience for the ne plus ultra of your tranfaflions ? I might, with fome reafon, begin to think myfdf an exile to thy country ; yet I find neither dif-tance nor abfence has wrought any change
F 3
in
102
QU
0 a
in my patriotic feelings; and I am as much interefted in the fate of England, as the moft zealous of her fubjeCls can be.
Charles has intreated me to permit him to go over to fee his mother, whom he has been feparated from ever fince I left England. A good fervant deferves every gratification : I lhall give him this packet, with directions to deliver it to you himfelf. I will not entertain a thought of going back to Italy, and have therefore defired him to return, and wait at Dover for my arrival, as I lhall leave this place in two days after I set the Duke’s letter.
Adieu, dear Montague! — Believe me, with fincerity.
Your moft faithful and devoted

OSM0NI>i

TH
WHAT YOU WILL.

To Lady Louisa Sydney.
Portman- Square,
That my behaviour fliould be ap
proved of by you, makes me happy^ Now let the bufy world look on, and either acquit or condemn your Julia—I am prepared to meet its fmiles—or frowns. If liiy fenfible, amiable friend, applauds my conduCt, I am fatisfied ; and fhall behold with intrepidity the affeCled whifper and fteady flare, ever ready to meet an objeCl who has unluckily
afforded converfation for the public......
And has the tranfa(5lion of Portman-Square already reached Southampton ? Your letter that tells me of your arrival there, informs me that it has.—Ah! my Louifa, it is impoffible to diveft a delicate mind of a certain pundlilio given furely for its torment.
Excellent Colonel Worthley! I revere him for his juft admiration of my friend!—— Endeavour to diffipate your thoughts, dear Louifa; fuffer nothing but tranquillity to
* This Letter does not appear,
F +
approacli
IGA
MASQUERADES; or,
approach your bofom, and your health will, 1 doubt not, foon be eftablifhed.
You have probably heard that my fifter ‘axrived three nights ago, perfeCUy well, and handfomer than ever. In her way from Dover, ihe pafled a week with her great friend Lady Sophia Nevill, whofe whole happinefs appears as much wrapped up in Almeria’s affeClion as Almeria’s is in hers. I need not deferibe our joy at meeting ; your feelings will better paint it than my pen.
Laft night we really had an elegante nter-tainment; our company, tho’feleCt, very numerous.
Almeria and I had fuch a variety of part* ners, that it would be impoffible almoft to remember them all. I only recolleCl that flie began with Lord W-----------a, and con-
cluded with the fmart Col. Elliot. 1 danced
the two firft dances with the Duke of D------
and the two laft with the fine S —-----r.
I think Col. Elliot begins to admire Almeria with more partiality than mere friend-
fliip infpires
It is early, you will fay, to
pronounce him a lover,—yet, in my opinion, he proves that a perfon may be caught at the ffirft or fecond interview-at Laft his be-
haviour to her is like that of a man in love.
We
\
WHAT YOU WILL.
105
We did not break up till five this morning.
I may own to you that my fifier received the adulation (he deferves: her elegant figure Ihone confpicuous in a minuet (he danced
after fupper with Lord C-------e, Two fuch
forms, and fuch adepts in that graceful movement, could not fail of attracting the atten-
tion of every beholder.
Every one feem-
ed happy: if they were not, their counte nances difiTembled well.
In the courfe of the evening, Capt. Walpole (Lenox’s intimate friend) approached
me
“ Lady Julia” cried he, “ permit me to remind you of the poor wanderer, who is now perhaps furmounting difficulties with a heart but ill adapted to meet additional
uneafinefs-----Will you not beftow one com-
paffionate thought on Lenox ?----------Such a
letter as I have received from him would melt a breaft of adamant.”
“ Indeed, Sir, your friend is often in my thoughts. If he is unhappy, he pofiefies all my compaffion: but time, diftance, and a variety of objeCls, will foon eradicate every impreffion that could be hurtful to him. On
that fuppofition I confole myfdf; for, be-
F 5	lieve
ic6
MASQUERADES; or.
lieve rne, when I affure you, that the idea of IT aking any one unhappy, would darken my brightell profpeds.” He told me that fuch a femment was peculiar to the goodnefs of my heart', that, although Lenox confejfed himfelf wretched, he applauded the generofity and candour of my behaviour, and believed it to be in ihe power <f Heaven alone to reward a foul in which firmnefs feemed blended with the ten-dereji humanity.
I curtefied, and would gladly have withdrawn from him ; but he put his friend’s letter in my hand, and endeavoured to make me prornife to read it—1 begged to be- ex-cufed, and returned it with a peremptory look —He received it bowing, and exclaimed,
“ Oh thofe eyes !
They will be underftood, and conquer In their caufe: —he muft not be a man That can refift them.”
I was fortunately afked by Mr. H-----
dance a cotillon before I could reply.
But, was it not extremely wrong, my deaf Louifa, to remind me of Mr. Lenox Determined as I am, there is no good in prefenting him to my imagination.—And why read his letter ? Perhaps, it is fuppofed I am
one, who wifhes to aCt a theatric part, and
who.
n to
WHAT YOU WILL.
toy
who, after raifing my own admiration at the heroifrn of my performance, will finiih the fcene by rewarding Lenox’s mock repentance, I am angry to my heart with Captain Walpole—Did I really think there was duplicity in his intention, I fliould quickly withdraw every favourable thought from him
and his friend too----but I will hope that
compaflion, and nothing more, ftimulated him to lofe fight of his accuftomed delicacy —and in that cafe he ought, furely, to be forgiven for the goodnefs of his motive. I am interrupted
*
%
*
%


*



9^


*


I was fummoned, my Louifa, to attend Lady Pemberton, who put into my hand a letter fhe had received from Lord Seymour, fupplicating her influence with me to receive his addreffes. He endeavours to dazzle us with large fettlements-—his amiable character is a far greater incentive—and, had I a thought of entering into a connection at prefent, Lord Seymour would likely be the man of my choice.—But I have at this time an invincible averfion to the idea of marry-
F 6	ing,
V.
io8
MASQUERADES; or.
ing, which, fhould it continue, will indn* bitably fubjeCt me to the appellation lb univerfally dreaded by our fex.*—But I am yet very young, Louifa, and, after the efcape I fo lately met with, think it moft prudent not to get into any engagement in a hurry. I told Lady Pemberton the impoflibility of
my liftening to Lord Seymour’s fui
I
She,
with her ufual goodnefs, affented to my importunity, that he fhould be difmiffed as a lover, and joined me in wifhing to retain him as a friend-----Her Ladyfhip is at this mo-
ment employed in writing to him to this purpofe. Why would he not receive a refufal from me the other night -Thus to fub-jeCt himfelf to this fecond mortification !--I have no patience with him !—and, to fay the truth, my Louifa,—I am juft now out of conceit with all mankind.—
Do not imagine that any difappointment I have had occafions this prefent chagrin---Do not believe either that Mr. Lenox ftiil holds my heart, and makes me fretful Oh no !—whatl have done in refpeeft to him has been upon deliberation, and was the re-fult of my own free will—Were it to go over again,.I would aCl in the fame manner—Heaven take him into its protection 1 Show'er up-
■	"	on
WHAT YOU WILL.
109
on him thy choicefl: bleffings, O thou Omnipotent Being!
And now, my Louifa, friend of my foul! let him never more be the fubjeCt of chy pen—and here I refolve never again to name him, either in my letters or my converfation.—^^Were I to conclude fo ferioufly, nothing would convince you that I was not affeded with melancholy,—yet for once you would bemuch miftaken. SirCharles Montague told meiaftnightthatheintendsfet-ting out to-morrow for Lord Beaumont’s at Bagfhot, wherehepropofesto fpend two days: from thence he goes on a hunting party to Broadlands, and then proceeds to Southampton. It is eafy to guefs what magnet attracts Sir Charles fo often into Hampfhire he abfolutely makes himfelf ridiculous about you—a perfect Oroondates in love, I vow ! - - -—Would you believe that no intreaties
could induce him to dance ? He fat down foberly to quadrille with two Dowagers and a married Lady ;
antiquated ; and, after paffmg an hour in that amtifmg manner, pinned himfelf to my fleeve for the remainder of the night (except when I danced), and withftood with admirable fortitude the innumerable darts that were levelled at him
from Mifs Walpole’s bright eyes,^——And
yet,
iio
MASQUERADES; or
yet, Louifa, it is ftrange, he never once men* tioned your name, nor even laid hold of an opportunity that was in his way of fpeaking of you ; for, in his hearing, Colonel Cecil alked me whether you had found any benefit
from changing the air ?---Now, do not be
alarmed, and fuppofe that he was offering in-cenfezt my Jhrine. No, believe me, he was very fatirical on many of the company,—very general at other times in his fubjeCls,—very complaifant—and very—ftupid. He was a dead weight on my hands *, out of fpirits, becaufe you were abfent, I fuppofe--Indeed
I could have fympathized with him for the fame reafon. He has promifed to fpend this evening in Portman -Square, and I Iball then give him a hundred meflages to you. Another fine opening, Louifa: if the man is not a fimpleton he will furely feize it, and beftow a few encomiums where they are fo defervedly due, knowing, too, how foon they will travel to Southampton, His re-ferve to me, in what relates to you, dif-pleafes me : however, I will not aCt as the generality of his acquaintance do, who are eternally mentioning your name before him, in hopes of extorting a word, or blufli, that
----1
may gratify their .defpicable curiofity.
will
w
YOU W
III
will always a(5l as delicately for my friend as I would for myfelf. I can tell you the world has already paired you, which fhews it has judgment in matching fo meritorious an object as " Louifa Sydney with one very little inferior to her. By'the length of this letter, you will fcarcely conceive that I feel at this inftant harraffed and fatigued almoft to death, and yet the faCt is fo;—but indeed I know nothing that can fo foon alleviate any fuffering I endure, as writing to, or converfing v/ith you. Adieu, my Louifa! Believe me happy when I can convince you how much I am
Your affectionate

Julia Herbert.
T0
112
MASQUERADES; or.
To Lady Julia Herbert.
Was
Southampton.
abruptly in my lait, to attend Colonel Worthley, who, with his ufual kindnefs, had called to pay his morning devoirs to us. I had fcarcely anfwered his polite enquiries after my health, before we heard a carriage flop, and a very loud rapping at the door befpoke the approach of fome other vifitor. You may imagine how agreeably furprifed I
hear Sir Charles Montague an-
was to
nounced—He entered the drawing-room with that peculiar grace which you know
of his. I
accompanies every movement think I never faw him look fo
He has,
well
he
as
with their the French and
agree-
did' that mornino;.
O
fafiiions, acquired enough of waniere to render him elegant able, without running into the extremes of ridiculous foppery, which make many of our nobility return from Paris true emblems of the monkey who went abroad to fee the world. He feems to have adhered fl:ri(511y to the plan which he fet out with ; a refolution of travelling merely to acquire a perfect
w
YOU W

feCt knowledge of the world, and to em-bellilh his mind. He always pofTefled that native politenefs which fcarce Paris could improve;—nor has he thought it neceffary to dived himfelf of that genuine noblenefs of fentiment which is the charaCteriftic of a true Englifhman.
Sir Charles complimented me on the recovery of my looks.—How dangerous, ju-lia, is flattery from his lips ! Tho’ well convinced his expreflions of praife to me are nothing more,—ftiil they pleafe, and occafion my heart to palpitate with joy.-----
His voice—his eyes—fecond his words, and make the whole objeCt but too captivating.
“ Sir Charles” cried Lady Arne, “ our feeing you in the country fo foon after your arrival, is an unexpected pleafure : it was natural to fear that London would have monopolized you at this time.
a
99
Why, Southampton,” cried I, “ in this dreary feafon, muft wear a dull afpeCl to one juft arrived from Gallia's metropolis, where nothing reigns but gaiety and mirth
He legged my pardon, and could almoji, he faid, find m his heart to reproach me, for fuppofing him pojfejfed of fo little tafie, as not to
prefer
114
QU
prefer the place where I was, to every other. This was repeated in no ferious manner, fo as to carry the appearance of attachment with it—but in a ftrain of gallantry. He added, “ I told your Ladyfhip that I fhould undoubtedly be led to take this road, foon after you had fixed your refidence here— I was not without a hope of being able to attend Lady and Lord Arne and your Ladyfhip hither; but Col. Hinchinbrook claimed an engagement I was under to accompany him, his lifter, and aunt, on a little tour,^—You know Mifs Hinchinbrook, Lady Louifa: fhe is juft arrived from Paris, where I faw her often—A fine girl I think 1” I anfwered in the affirmative.—Col. Worthley (who, it feems, was acquainted with Sir Charles at Modena) afked, “ May we hope for the pleafure of your company' in this country for any time, Sir Charles i’ I fear not, as t fuppofe you came down on a party of pleafure.”--The other anfwered, “My ftay will be uncertain—the happinefs of meeting you will be a ftrong inducement to me to prolong it.—I have been on a flying vifit to Ormfby—paid a fhorter one at Broadlands, and, to be as good as my word, came on to Southampton, accompanied by Budenall, Mr.
Dacre.
WHAT YOU WILL.
115
Dacre, and Frederic Montague, who fpeak of returning to town in two days, and are importunate with me to go with them.”
“ Why, if I am not a little out in my calculation, SirCharles,” cried Lord Arne; “ I believe you will find this place rather dull, if you truft to its amufements, and mean to
time here, which I am felfifh hope you will-------but 1 know
fpend any enough to
enough of your prudence to be convinced that you ford’aw this, and have guarded properly againft it, by felecting in your imagination fome beateous objeCt, who will, from the dearth of entertainments here, be at leifure to liften to fuch foft tales, as muft
Eh ! Lady Louifa !
has been
flow from your lipS' what do you think always
—Now, that old
It
love cannot
my opinion, be totally forgotten—xhc'.xtioxe I guefs the perfon.—However, be that as it may, we are not the lefs fenfible of the honour you do us.”
Was not Lord Arne very unkind, Julia ? He will never debar himfelf of a moment’s gratification by fparing his jeft. His amiable wife, ever delicate, ever confiderate of another’s feelings, afked Sir Charles, “ Whether Mifs Hinchinbrook intended vifiting
Southampton ?”
Ii6
MAS QU E RA D E S ; o s.
i
Southampton ?” and fmiled as ffie fpoke. He returned a negative to her queftion, and Lord Arne was juft about to convince us, he did not mean her, when his Lady prevented him, by giving a quick turn to the converfation.
It was filly of me to feel embarraffed. Had I been ignorant of the female Lord Arne alluded to, I ffiould not have been the leaft affedled—bur, you know, he was always laughing at me about Sir Charles before he went abroad, and firmly believes we
have JUll a partiality to each other,--How
ridiculous of him to entertain fuch a notion, feeing fo little caufe for it!
I had now an opportunity of afking Sir Charles concerning myfweet friend..—He gave me a defcription of your ball, which he faid was fuperb.—I cannot pretend to exprefs his encomiums on my Julia.—Upon my word, had Mifs Hinchinbrook heard the profufion of praifes he beftowed on you—ffie muft have poffeffed more heroifrn than our fex generally do on thefe occafions, to have kept the green-eyed monjler, at that moment, in proper fubjedtion. He admires Almeria much, but could not help acknowledging that the divine Julia (to ufe his own term) reigned triumphant ^een that night.
Sir
WHAT YOU WILL:
117
Sir Charles had pafled near an hour with us, when a fervant entered,, and prefented me with a letter. I looked at the fuperfcrip-tion, and joy vifibly overfpread my countenance at beholding your writing. Lady Arne congratulated me on a pleafure which, tho' fo repeatedly received, feemed each time to bring an added value with it. Sir Charles entreated me to ufe no ceremony—but to read my packet— for my features too evidently betrayed that much I wifhed to do fo—and exclaimed,
“ How happy muft the objeCt be, who occafions fuch pleafino; fenfations in your breaft !”
“ I affure you, Sir,” replied I “ it is one who is entitled to every tender fentiment it
contains.”
He certainly muft have known that that objedt was my Julia Herbert; he could not have fuppofed it another: and I was fo pre-poffefleci with this opinion, that I never thought of mentioning your name till he was gone; and I then recolledted it would have been better to have confirmed his furmife that the letter came from you.
Sir Charles goes this evening to a ball given by Lord Fitzofborne, at which I am en*
gaged
ii8
MASQUERADES; or
gaged to dance with Col. Worthley. Sir Charles did not afk me—I wonder at it— Perhaps he imagines my being an invalid will prevent my joining in the fet—and probably means to keep me in countenance by not dancing himfelf-—and, at the fame time, my vanity tells me, he hopes to have a tete-d-tete now and then, when the young part of the company are engaged in this gay diver-
fion, and the old at cards
or perhaps he
knows that my hand is to be Col. Worthley’s for the night!—-Yet how fo ^—In fhort, I will not perplex myfdf, but wait the refult. ----How arrogant thefe conjedlures are, Julia ! Indeed, you muft allow them to be fo— and I cannot vindicate them.
I was not forry when Sir Charles and Col, Worthley departed, that 1 might perufe your letter.
And here let me congratulate you on the fweet Almeria’s arrival.—Much do I to embrace her--amiable girl ! What an age does the time appear to me fince I had laft that happinefs !
I am amazed at Capt. Walpole, Julia! How could he aCl with fo much impropriety I—As for Lord Seymour, I do think he behaved indelicately in applying to Lady
Pern-
long
WHAT YOU WILL.
irg
Pemberton, after giving him a pofitive
refufal----How can a man be happy in the
poffeffion of a hand that he owes to compul-fion, and not the voluntary choice of the heart ? It is an jenigma to me—Luckily Lady Pemberton is one that will neither compel, nor perfuade, you to a match you diflike— but my Lord Seymour proved, in his application to her, that he did not think as worthily of her as ffie deferved.—Yet, he has refined notions on mofl: occafions!—It is certain, this ridiculous love makes fools even of fenfible men ! My Lord is certainly amiable, tho’ not formed to be con needed
with you.—We are all apt to foar high in our expeedations, and vanity is as predominant over reafon in one fex, as in the other, —I dare anfwer, when he addreffed you, he had not a doubt of fucceeding.
“ None without hope e’er lov’d the brighteft fair. But love will hope where reafon would defpair.”
Sir Charles told me of the agreeable Col. Elliot’sattention to Almeria, If I judge right, that connexion will never be approved of by Lady Pemberton and your brother. Let her look well to her heart, left it become a fugitive—-fo elegant a perfon as
Elliot’s*
120
MASQ^UERADES; or
Elliot’s, fo fenfible, and withal fo worthy as he is—he will raife fuch powerful advo^ cates in his favour, as muft require much philofophy on her part to withftand—and yet the match would be fo unequal,
It
fhould not be thought of.
1 muft leave you : the hour for dreffing is come,-—To-morrow you (hall receive a full account of this evenine’s entertainments



















9it






%
%

*

Wednefday Morning.,
I am now feated to perform my promife» tho’ the fatigue, which is the confequence of dancing, renders the tafk rather arduous.
After fpending the requifite time at my toilet, and ornamenting my perfon with unufual care, I entered the drawing-room.— Col. Worthley and fome gentlemen were ^waiting to efcort us—We got into our carriages, and proceeded to Lord Fitzofborne’s. —I was hardly feated in the ball-room, before I was taken out to dance a minuet,— That ceremony performed, and I returned tp
my
WHAT YOU W
i2r
• Charles Mon-Heavens ! whae were my emotions! I think I never faw a
my place, I
tague enter the room
more captivating figure in my life—He was drelfed molt fuperbly-^^-'—Every per-fon’s attention feemed fixed on him the inftant he appeared*—He faluted each lady that he knew as he walked up the room* but looked with an inquifitive eye amongft: them for fome particular objed.——My vanity, ever too prefumptuous, told me that objebi was Louifa Sydney—Alas! my Julia, it was no other than Mifs Stephenfon, She foon caught his eye, and he was ri-vetted to her fide ’till we ftood up to dance. He then ftepped to me^ and, holding one end of my fan, cried,
“ Lady Louifa, it is almoft dangerous to look at you !—-you even outvie, if it be pofiible, yotvr former felf.”—“ In uglinefs. Sir Charles, you mean, no doubt“ Heavens ! what a thought!” and he quitted me to claim his partner, as every gentleman was taking his place in the row.*—I need not fay that Mifs Stephenfon danced with him ---She really looked very pretty.
J refufed to go down the third country
VoL. I.	G	dance*

122
MASQUERADES; or.
dance, pleading as an excufe my ill-health, and unfortunately placed myfelf near Lady Mary Athill, who, by her trifling converfation, endeavoured to draw my attention from much more pleafing objetls. Her drefs, however, could not efcape my notice, the lingularity of which attrafted cve-ij-ont's gaze. She wore a yellow fattin Italian night-gown, trimmed with filver gauze; purple ribbands laced with filven Her hair drefied in curls, or rather diffievelled, which feemed to be intentionally done. Three large feathers, a purple, a yellow, and a white one, nodded over the fuperftrufture that was enormous on her head. One firag-gling lock of hair hung down the left fide of her neck, which was meant to appear carelefs, and be the harbouraRC of a hun-
o
cred Cupids—but qnluckily it had received too much pomatum for that purpofe-, for it looked as if it had been plaiftered down : this favourite lock (fuch I fuppofe it to be) was by no means indebted to nature for the mofl: trifling twift.—Figure to younei.f, Julia, the perfon of Lady Mary Ati ’d thus attired I—-yet, believe me, tbo’ many opportunities offered for indulging a vein
‘ of
WHAT YOU WILL.
123
of raillery, I did not once amufe myfelf at the expence of this antiquated maiden. Had 1 given her the leaft encouragement, (he would have entertained me with an account of the genealogy, age, and demerits, of every individual in the room.
Lord Arne came up to her, and addreffed her in the following words:
“Lady Mary,I am alhamedof having beerl fo long in the room without paying my devoirs to the moft charming woman in it—
I have wilhcd to kifs your hand, but could not obtain one moment in which I fliould not have been thought an intruder. How naturally do the bees flock where the fweets are! Your Ladyfhip has been fo furrounded, as if each gentleman was anxious to convince the world that he was by no means deficient in point of tafte.”
“ Oh dear, my Lord,” returned Lady Mary, “you are a great flatterer! We fhould really be abforbed in vanity, were we to pay too much attention to what you fay.
“ Pardon me, my Lady—few of your fex afford that field for our admiration to work upon, which, you may juftly boaft.
of.”
9>
G2

Oh
124
MASQUERADES; or
“ Oh dear, my Lord !—be filent, I entreat you, on this fubjebt. Confider how fatal a one it is to expatiate too long upon--we are fo apt to be led away by fuch pleafing difcourfe !—and was your Lordlhip a fingle man .with fo much judgment, I abfolutely would not liften to you.”
“ My judgment, my Lady, never dif-covers itfelf but in its diftindion of the
moft
perfed charmin
of
women—-More cruelly this night than ever!*—Upon ray word, Lady Mary, you have an immenfe deal to anfwer for I What mifchief has not: this beautiful lock (pointing to the little Itraggler) done !—What temptation is here for the fatal Jheers A*—have been fo petitioned to do a defperate ad, that I would advife you to remove it, or the confequen-ces cannot be told.”
“ Heaven forbid, my I.ord I That would be unpardonable indeed! recompence the lofs—Tho’ trifling it might appear, I fhould be tempted to exclaim with Belinda,
For ever curs’d be that detefted day. Which ftole my beft, my favourite curl away!”
How trivial to you would be the lofs,
com*
Nothing could

>
WHAT YOU WILL.
125
eompared to the acquifition of him who gained it!.”
Can I deferibe to you, my Julia, the diftrefs I was in to keep my countenance during this converfation.? Impoffible!— Tho* it was carried on in a low voice on both fides, Lord Arne contrived to let me, and the Lady who. fat on Lady Mary’s right hand (Mrs. Nelfon), overhear it. I could bear it no longer; and was glad to accept of Col. Worthley’s offer, to make up a cotillon fet. 1 accordingly left Lord Arne to purfue his amufement with Lady Mary, who deferves no compaffion, as fbe brings this ridicule upon herfelf by her intolerable vanity and levity ; foibles iil-fuited to a perfon turned fame years of fixty.
Until laft night, Julia, I believed myfelf difinterefted about Sir Charles any further than a friend fhould be—I'he diftrefs I felt at feeing him fingle out Mifs Ste-phenfon convinced me in a moment that I
loved him-------Yes, Julia,—I repeat it—
I love him, and am deftined to be attached to one who has no heart to give me. Mifs
----and
■Stephenfon poffdfes Montague’s :
GS
126
MASQUERADES; or
J
mere frienclffiip a6luated Sir Charles’s behaviour to mer—He has been unkind, I think, to flievv fo much partiality in his manner
-----------^—But I will not complain,—
neither muft I remain where he is--My return to Somerville-Houfe lhall be fpeedy— I reafoned with myfelf a length of time, and tried to fancy that my	friend-
ly efteem—was hurt at his not paying me the accuftomed attention ; but that notion Kx>n vanilhed, wlien I fuffered pain on his beftowing encomiums on Mifs Stephen fon.—I was not little enough to envy her for her perfonal perfedlions-—that you will eafily believe—yet I could not yield to her a prediledion in his favour without horror—I wifhed every-one elfe to admire her. 1 confefs I fhould have received pleafure at hearing Sir Charles find fome defeat
in her.------Bui fuch meannefs was my
bofom fraught with, that I fought for opportunities of extolling Mifs Stephenfon to him, as if .afraid of being fufpeded of the truth—I was defervedly punifhed for this abjeftnefs of foul, by the praifes he lavifhed
on her—*—~
My dear Julia
,fpife
WHAT YOU WILL.
127
fpife myfelf! Add not your contempt to
my own humiliating reflc(5lions !----------In
vain I fearch my own heart, and lament that our minds Ihould be fo differently
formed,------1 am not able to difcover in
niy breaft one of thofe noble, generous fentiments, with which your bofom is fo
replete.
They fay confeffion of a fault.
is commencing the road to amendment *, I wifh to experience this truth. At prefenr, chagrin and mortification exert their dominion very powerfully over me—
*
*

*



>3^

%









How infuking, Julia, was it of Sir Charles, when out of Mifs Stephenfon’s hearing, to apologize to me for not having afued the favour of my hand!—I forget what reafon he gave for not doing it.—Sure, he did not perceive I was difappointed ! I thought I had concealed my feelings extremely well but, upon his fpeaking thus to me, my delicacy took the Harm—I told him he honoured me much by his intention ; which I could not have profited of, as my prornife to
G4	danci
l:t8
MAS Q U ERADES; or
%
His excufing himfelf to
dance ‘ with Colonel Worthley had been of a Hry long flanding,— me was very odd! I had no right certainly to expeft a preference to Mifs Stephenfon, or to any other lady; and an apology where it is not required, I rather think a reflection upon the Underftanding of thofe to whom we make it, by fuppofing them pleafed v/ith what we are eonfcious is not their due.
.Colonel Worthley feldom quitted me. They told me his behaviour was confpicuous. tie accufed me of beingout of fpirits;
, I imputed it to an ill matured head-ach. Sir Charles, in an interval between the dances, feated himfelf by me, and rallied me on
the Colonets attention----1 fancy he is no
favourite of his; for he did not fpeak of him in the warm teyms of recommendation that every one elfe does; yet faid nothing to his difadvantage. I do not believe he could.—In anfwer, I expatiated on the amiable charafter Col. Worthley bore, and extolled him as he deferved. He turned to me with a penetrating look, and, figh-ing, faid,
“ I wilh you thought as well of a particular
WHAT YOU W I L L.
i2<)
lar friend of mine !” He paufed-—and iheri aflced, “Pray, Lady Louifa, did you knor/ I.ord Ofmond, either before he left England, or in France ?”
“ No, Sir, I never had that pleafure—I dare fay, if he is your friend, his acquaintance muft be a valuable circumftance—yet my good opinion, I have not the vanity to think, can do him any fervice.”
“ He is not the friend 1 meant, my Lady--tho’ I wifti him as well as I do— myfdf—and prefume to claim his friendlliip
in the very higheft degree.---‘The picture
you drew of Col. Worthley bore too great a iimilitude to Ofmond to efcape my notice ---as to fentiments of honour obferve; for Ofmond’s perfon is the moft perfect that ever Nature finifhed, and called a man. His heart and fenfe are
equal to his form. It is rather uncommon to hear one man founding the praifes of his friend in an en-thufiaftic manner—I beg pardon—-but it is a fubject I often indulge myfelf on, and feel as much pleafure from it, as you would do from hearing encomiums pafled on Lady Julia Herbert.—Col, Worthley, I fancy, would be in a dangerous way, was Of-
G 5	mond
IJO
MASQUERADES; or.
/
mond ^here. What a couple would ye make !”—He did me too'much honour, 1 faid, in naming me with fuch an objedt. But at the moment I fe«t an inexpreflible indignation, at hh appearing, tho’ indiredly, to wifh us united; and why, Julia, fliould I have done fo ?—I am fure I cannot tell-—he intended, no doubt, to pay me a compliment, —As he was about to reply, Mifs Stephenfon pafled us.
Is not that a prodigious fine woman, Lady Louifa ?”	’
“ She is indeed. Sir, and reckoned fenfl-ble and amiable.”
“ Your Ladyfliip is acquainted with her —pray is flie addrefled by any particular gentleman ?”
“ I believe not—Ihe is univerfally admired—and I think whoever calls her his, will ftand a chance of being much envied.”
“ Why, upon my word, I do not think be will ftand in need of any pity.—I muft nor, though, be deficient in myxefpedt to her. My long abfence will bring a tax on my politenefs ; and I muft, though with the utmoft reluctance, fteal from a pleafure that
WHAT YOU WILL.
131
7T
ra aangerous.” As , he ended, he flew to ^oin his fair partner, and left me to exert what philofophy I could on the occafion. He foon returned, and begged me to difeard ihe indifpojiticn which preyed fo apparently on my Jpirits—M.zny females took un*r common pains to ponvince him that I was remarkably grave during the night. I thought the anxiety he exprefled for me rather exulting. Confeious of my own ridiculous fituation, I imagined he divined it of courfe, and meant to aCt ungeneroufly. Were
?
fon gain a victory over this rebel heart 1 I am convinced that Sir Charles intends to recommend me to Lord Ofmond— He faid that he expeCted him over very foon—and, I dare fay, will be zealous ta unite tua friends that he hoafts of efieem-
ing fo much.------1 will now conclude this
painful topic—I am afhamed of having been engrofled fo long by it.
I fhall give you comfort, I am fure,; my Julia, by informing you that I find a
amendment in mv health
pano-
J ^	J
• Surely not-—Why will not my rea-
daily amenament in my once more eftablifhed, I will flatter my-
G 6
122
MASQ^UERADES; or,
felf, that my fpirits muft gain ftrength, and teach me (with the help of your excellent counfel) to fubdue this invading paffion.—Since I have written to you, I find my mind more tranquil.—Adieu, my dear Julia, let not your affeCtion fuffer any
diminution towards
w
Your
Louisa SyDNEY,
Tp
WHAT YOU WILL.
133
To Lady Louisa Sydney,
Portman-S quare.
ACH day brings with it additional regret, my Louifa, that we cannot now go down to Pemberton Caftle.- Fond as I am of that delightful manfion, its prefent chief charm with me is its being fo near the fpot that at this time holds my amiable friend. Unfavourable as the feafon is for travelling, could I follow my inclinations, I would foon be in Hampftiire ; for
“ Tho’ the fields have loft their lovely die j No chearful azure decks the Sky ;
Yet ftiil I’d blefs the louring day :
———Louifa’s there, and all is gay.
My mother would certainly not refufe me,' were I to alk her permiffion to go down to
you •, but then----1 know ffie would-be
uneafy at my abfence, and even in your arms, Louifa, I could have no pleafure, whilft her bofom was corroded by an anxious thought.
I am aftoniffied at Sir Charles Monta-gue’s method of proceeding—He certainly
imagines^
99
/
*34
MASQUERADES; or
f
imagines, as Mr. Melmoth (the principal ob-ftacle in his way) is removed, that he may keep your hopes znd fears alive, by flirting at one time with a lovely young woman like Mifs Stephenfon, and at another (fearing your heart would break) withdrawing his attention totally from her, and wholly offering it to you-~then, left you fliould be raifed to too great a height of happinefs and grow prefumptuous, he deferts you, to diftinguilli fome other objedl, and returns again when inclination or vanity prompts him to do fo. How little do we value our own felicity, when we veil the Lords of the
—It is
them
Creation with power to deftroy it !-evident, that the moft perfedl of fliould be kept ignorant, till the marriage-day, of the paffion they infpire, when, for example, even a Montague makes an ungenerous ufe of the knowledge he has derived from fo
prying
a
penetration. That he has difcovered the preference you give him, is beyond a doubt. The men, Louifa, charge us with vanity to a mon-
but fearch their
ftrous degree-—let them
own breafts, and if they do not find that it reigns more powerfully with them, I am
muck

WHAT YOU WILL.
135
much miftaken. Never do one of the fex
w
fail of putting the moft flattering interpretation on an infignificant look, or word, which generally in itfelf means nothing; and they moft commonly coqftrue a fevere fentence, didated by the heart, the reverfe to what was intended.
quite
The
and.
mofl deformed, the moft aukward, moft of all, the moft filly, are affuredly under the defpotifm of vanity: What then muft the handfome, the elegant, the clever ? influenced, we find, by motives of felf-adoration, pardonable in a weak fex, that calls for every allowance, but which cannot be vindicated by any excufe whatever in exalted fouls, that receive every aid from much fuperior educations than are thought proper to be given to females.
Why, my beft Louifa, accufe yourfelf fo unmercifully ? Be comforted, my fair friend, and reft affured that I admire your ingenuous behaviour more than I can deferibe—Your feelings were all natural—» Few in fo embarraffed a fituation could have aded fo well.— -I am really fhocked at Sir Charles’s cruel condud—If you do not blame him—I will. I am privileged to do
it
13^
MAS QU ERADES; or
it from being an eye-witnefs, before he left England, of his very particular attention to you—He muft exped no generofity from me equal to that he meets with from Louifa Sydney.—Your letters—his manner-—and report, convince me, that he purfued his ufual mode towards you until the night of the ball. What can he mean by his warm mention of Lord Qfmond to you ? If he really intends this behaviour as a trial, it will leflen him, 1 muft acknowledge, in my opinion. To give pain to a heart that is vifibly attached, merely for the pleafure of rendering its partiality more confpicuous, {hews an ill-natured way of thinking.--1 will not fuffer my pen to exprefs any further refentment till I hear more—It will be a difficult matter to make me give up my good opinion of Sir Charles; but it will be the infallible confequence of his perftfting in fo inconfiftent a condud,
Methinks I am impatient for the arrival of this much-talked-of Lord Ofmond : his charader is always uffiered with praifes, that flow fpontaneoufly from the mouths of thofe who have feen and been acquainted with him. He was fpoken of with enthn-
fiafm
%vhaT you Will.
H7
fiafm at the drawing-room yefterday. Lord S**'*'^-'*‘*t called him a Phcsnix —there was not his fellow to he found in a century, he
faid.------Upon my w'ord, I think you had
better take Sir Charles’s hint, Louifa, and refsrve your heart for this incomparable creature. I have heard it is an obfervation of Lady Mary A thill’s, (whofe fame has gone abroad,) “ that there is more pleafure in vexing than in rewarding a lover.” Sup-pofe you were to try ! that Southampton has not proved as dull as I at firft thought it would at this feafon.
1 am glad to find
tD
though I will fay in its favour, that I believe no town is happier in a colledion of inhabitants. I faw in the papers, that the officers quartered there have very politely inftituted a fubfcription aflembly during Lady Arne’s and your refidence among them. Your account of Lady Mary has given me much laughter. Lord Arne is very wicked—pray tell him that I fay fo;
and believe me,
Much yours.
Julia Herbert.
Tq
I3S
MASQUERADES; or.
To Lady Julia Herbert.
H, my Julia! how are awakened !—How
Southampton.
feelings
my
is my delicacy wounded by your confirmation of my fears! You think, then, Sir Charles has really difcovered my weaknefs for him I—-How poor a mortal did that minute make me in his eyes !—Alas 1 I have acquired none of that diflimulation which is the ufual prerogative of our fex. For the firfl: time in my life I know the want of it;—and heartily wifii myfelf a fhare of what, I till now, thanked Heaven for having formed me without
of.........How fhall I look at
a
fpark
him when next we meet! how fupprefs the difagreeable fenfations that will naturally arife from refletflion !-1 blufh at my fol-
ly--and muft only endeavour, by a ftri6l guard on my behaviour in future, to convince him that his vanity led him to fornri very erroneous conje<5lures.—My pride is hurt; it will be my afliftant, and fave my delicacy from being further alarmed.— This ridiculous attachment cannot long
con-
WHAT YOU WILL.
*39
continue—Sir Charles will prevent it by his manner pf ailing :---lbon are a few virtues weighed down, when put into the fcalc with arrogance and felf-conceit!—Unkind Montague! I think you have not reaped much advantage from your fecond tour to Italy.-—The ladies of that country have filled your head with chimerical notions of vanity, by the adulation they paid you. Even fenfe like yours could not withftand their admiration—it has fallen a vi6lim to their praifes.
Since my laft letter to you, Sir Charles has fhewn great attention to us. He called yefterday with Mifs Stephenfon and her aunt. They had heard I was indifpofed with a head-ach, and agreed to come and fit an hour with me (the very reafon why they Ihould have kept away.) I affured them I was fenfible of the favour they did me, and my behaviour by no means contradided that affercion. Sir Charles appeared in great fpirits; Mifs Stephenfon in no lefs gay a humour. The bon-mots paffed very rapidly to and from each other—I was rather at a lofs to determine which of the two pof-
fefled moft cle vernefs. Mifs Stephenfon, 1 believe.
140
MASQUERADES; Or,
ftronger on the
lieve, thought jhe was entitled to the palm; I, after much difficulty, decided (in my own mind) that Sir Charles was vi6lor. I have no doubt, though, but that my partiality was
occafion than my judgment.
Before they left us. Col. Worthley came in, and, according to cuftom, feated himfelf near rne. 1 took notice that Mifs Stephenfon looked a good deal confufed at the diftinftion he paid me-—A blufli overfpread her face-—and, notwithfianding Sir Charles was at her elbow, endeavouring to make himfelf agreeable to her by a thoufand little douceurs, flie had fight and hearing for no one but Worthley; and, for the firft time fince I became acquainted with her, I had reafon to think there was foundation for a report that prevails here of her being attached to him.—I faw a confli(5t in her heart that excited my tendereft corr.pafliori —It was evident that Col. Worthley’s behaviour to me caufed her no fmall emotion.—I tried as much as poffible to feem inattentive to what he faid ; and, with the utmoft fervour, wiffied to have diredted his affiduity another way. I loved the girl at
the
WHAT YOU WILL.
141
the inftant I thought her foul labouring under thofe tumults which mine cannot contend with—I could almoft have reproached myfelf for being inftrumental to her fuffer-
yet I was innocently fo.------Every
unkind thought of her, which arofe in my breaft the night of the ball, was quickly withdrawn, and feverely did I condemn
incr
it for ever having harboured them.
Sir
Charles took an opportunity of alking me Whether Col, Worthley had ever paid his ad-> drejjes to Mifs Stephenfon? I told him I really did not know.
“ There feems, entre nous. Lady Louifa”, cried he “ a penchant on her fide towards Worthley.”
“ Not in the leaft. Sir Charles.*—I rather fufpediCol. Worthley’s heart to be the one attached.—Did he think as you do of her partiality for him, I believe he would foon put it to the teft, by making the earlieft offer of his hand to her.”
He caught hold of my fingers unawares to me, and fuddenly prefled them with a. rapturous air to his lips.
“ Generous Louifa ! how unlike the generality of your fex I Col? Worphley does
indeed
r42
MASQUERADES; or,
\
indeed wear the bondage of love—but Mifs Stephenfon inflifts it not.
I drew my hand haftily away, and with a look of difpleafure (or it fpoke not the language of my heart) replied,
“ Sir, I am furprifed at this liberty,-— it is one that no sentleman is entitled to take with me.”
“ Forgiveme, Madam; I meant not to offend.—My admiration tranfported me to ufe a freedom of which I cannot repent— but fay, do you really think that Worthley is attached to Mifs Stephenfon
“ I make no doubt but a man of his judgment muft admire merit and beauty in any objedt ;--and, fureF, they are eminently blended in Mifs Stephenfon.”
“ Amiable fweetnefs! How feldom do we find one female exprefs herfelf fo deli-^cately of another !”
I am never flattered, Sir Charles, by receiving a compliment at the expence of my fex.”—He would have replied, but I would not hear him, and, turning to Col. Worthley, called another fubjefi.—I perceived that I had difpleafed Sir Charles—
He coloured, and looked vexed-----------His
eyes

WHAT YOU WILL.
*43
eyes fparkled too with anger, I remember. He was no doubt difappointed—He imagined I was acquainted with the fituation of Mifs Stephenfon’s affedtions, and ex-pedled by his flattery to draw from me whether they were really engaged ; if fo, that he might give over the purfuit, and not fuffer the mortification of a refufal. I am malicious enough to hope he may addrefs her.—Rejedted he will be; for I don’t fuppofe fhe can give her hand to one man, whilft another is in pofTeflion of her heart. And I think fo flight a punifhment he is entitled to, from his arc in wilhing me to betray a confidence, fuppofing it were repofed
Heaven knows how much Sir is miftaken in the intimacy he concludes fubflfts between Mifs Stephenfon and your Louifa—My acquaintance with her is very flight.
Col. Worthley afked Sir Charles where Lord Ofmond was ?
in me. Charles
“ In Paris, Sir,” replied Montague, “ he was, when I laft heard from him. It is difficult to fay exadlly where he is now; I expedt him momently in England.” “ I am glad of
it,” returned the other. “Every creature who
has




H4-
MASQUERADES ; or,
has the happinefs of knowing him, mgft be follicitous to fee him.” Sir Charles bowed to this fpeech of the Colonel’s.—Lord ! Julia, they muft be very intimate indeed, when they receive compliments to each other, as if paid diredlly to themfelves ! I fuppofe Lord Ofmond would Jink his head upon his breaji for any civil thing you faid to him of Sir Charles.—Lord Arne came into the room, while Col. Worthley was fpeaking, and defired to know who he was fo follicitous to fee ? Sir Charles anfwered,
“ We were fpeaking, my Lord, of an intimate friend of mine, Lord Ofmond--! dare fay your Lordfhip has heard of him.” “ Yes, I have, Sir, and ^ moft exalted charader he bears.”
Worthley
“ Juft what he me-
“ And do you exped him fhoitly, Montague ?” faid Lord Arne.
“ I know apt my Lord,” returned the other, “ whether he may not be in Lon • don at this moment.”
“ The Duke of Weftmorland,” cried Lord Arne, “ intends him as a hufband for Lady Henrietta Marchmont!”
“ God knows, my Lord 1
there
I think
WHAT YOU WILL.
*45
there need be no hurry to provide for
him.”

Why, he is an only child, and the fooner he is mars ied the bt tter. It would be a terrible thing to have no heir for that noble fortune and title ; and, if he chance to die unmarried, it will be the cafe. How old is Ofmond, Sir Charles.?”
“ Four-and-twenty, I think, my Lord, I heard his father fay a few weeks ago.”
He waved all further converfation, I plainly perceived, relative to Lord Ofmond with Lord Arne ; but, turning to me, faid, “ Lady Louifa, 1 hope to have fome merit in your eyes from my choice of a friend ;
he does honour to that appellation.--------
I have a prefentiment, that a very uncommon circumftance will be unravelled, when he is introduced to one of our moft beautiful and accompliftied toafts." He looked
“ Your words are
fignificantly at me.
Sir Charles 1”
myfterio'us, Sir Charles!”	“ Are they,
my Lady .?—Well, do me the honour to remember them, and you will find them in a little while fully explained—if not, Ofmond fhall tell you their meaning.” The latter part of this anfwer was fpoke in a
VoL. I*	H	laughin
146
MASQUERADES; or
r
laughing way. The ladies propofed to retire, as the hour for the toilet drew near. Mifs Stephenfon locked a wifti that Col. Worthley would attend her (as they walked, the day being fine) ; but he either did not. or would not underftand it—the
former I hope : they left us, attended by Sir Charles only. Col. Worthley made his exit, in a quarter of an hour afterwards, and I dire(5lly came up to drefs, for which purpofe I muft throw down my pen. I did intend to have deferred writing till evening; bur, when I entered my clofet, the writing implements lay fo temptingly, that I fat down, and have fcribbled*—an hour I declare.

*
*
*

*
*



%



9^





What you read in the papers is true-—the officers here have very obligingly fet on foot the fubfcription-aiTemblies you mentioned.
Apropos—fpeaking of news-papers reminds me of the following paragraph I faw in one yefterday :	We may aflure our read-
ers^ from undoubted authority, that a treaty
of
WHAT YOU WILL.
*47
of marriage is now in agitation between the Right Hon. Lord Seymour and Lady Julia Herbert, fecond filter to the Earl of Pemberton.”
I arn called away
*
*
*
The amiable Mr. Norton was in the drawing-room, and I was fummoned to attend him when I juft now quitted you.—The pleafure I felt at feeing him was quickly deftroyed, by his informing me, that he intended leaving England immediately, “ But I could not depart,” faid he, “without once more embracing my dear Louifa, and re ceiving her commands .to Lord Clermont— to whom I fuppofe you have many mef-fages to fend.” Mr. Norton brought me a letter from Sir George Sommerville, who will not hear of my returning home till my health is quite reftored. I lhall feize the opportunity of my good friend’s going to Bologna to write by him to my brother, and inform him that I have entirely dif-carded Mr. Melmoth.-r-I have often owned to you that Lord Clermont was never fond of the connedUon, though he was but too
H 2	cautious
148
MAS QU ERADES: or
cautious in telling his fentiments, as he believed me more attached to him than I
fuppofed.
really was.
Mr. Norton
turned from a. year, he fhould find Louifa Sydney metamor-pbofed into Lady Louifa Montague.
I alked, what reafon he had for fuch a conjediure? “ A more fubftandal one,” replied he, “ than mere report.” My curiolity was excited—Not to have exprefled a -wilh to be acquainted with what he alluded to, would have appeared unnatural, and have carried too great an air of affectation to a man who knew every movement of my foul. He fpoke enigmatically, I told him, and wifhed he would unfold his mean-
He anfwered, “ 1 will, Louifa. You are confeious I have always behaved inge-nuoully with you. The confidence your arriefs, unfufpeCting heart ever repofed in me, deferved to meet on my fide the utmoft fincerity. I profeffed to you the af-feClion of a brother--In that 1 deviated from candour—a much ftronger attachment filled my breaft than the one which we give the fraternal name to—loved you
CO
wg.
w
YOU W
146
to diftraCtion, and was obliged to fmothef mjy paflion. You, unfortunately for my peace,—honoured me with your confidence at the commencement of the late affair between you and Mr. Melmoth.— heard frequently from your own lips, that you gave him a preference to every man. My hopes were at once biafted—nay more 1 the ungrateful bufinefs of aflifting his love was im pofed on me at a time that I wiflied to plead for myfelf.—He begged my friend-fliip, which I could not in honour refufe, as 1 then thought him deferving of you. Having no profpe<5i: myfelf of gaining youf affeClion, why fliould I, I refleded, be fa ungenerous as to hinder his fucceeding ?•— It is true, he will, by marrying Louifa, deprive me of what I value more than life: but then—he will make her happy,—and I fliall be contented in that idea. Thus I reafoned—-and refolved to conceal the love
I had for you
Ah ! what conflids did
I endure, when I perceived your determination was fixed on marrying Melmoth, and that his diflipated life was become the fub-jed of every tongue! And is this dear girl, cried I, to be thus facrificed !—For-

bid
ISO
bid
QU
O R,
it, friendfhip.—I flew to Mr. Melmoth, and made one in his noClurnal revels, hoping to fhew him, by degrees, the vicious plan he was purfuing. I remon-ftrated—He anfwered with a laugh, and pufhed the bottle about with more eagernefs. Inebriated with pernicious liquor, no wonder that he 'hefitated not at the com-miflion of other crimes !—He was deaf to reafon.—I could not long bear to be a partaker of his riots, when it anfwered no effect ; neither could I, circumftanced as I was, from a punClilio of delicacy, recommend to you to break with this unfortunate man.—Your guardian-angel interfered, and faved you from the precipice on which you flood.—You are referved for happinefs, Louifa,-^for Sir Charles Montague. As your friend, he afked me, juft before he left London, Whether you Jiill retained any affedUon for Mr. Melmoth? 1 told him, If you did, there would have been no abfolute necejfity for your difcarding him: your doing fo was a voluntary adi. He further afked. If I thought he flood any chance cf being accepted, provided he was to prefume to addrefs you ? 1 replied, It was a quef-
iion
WHAT YOU WILL.
ici
ilon 1 could not by any means pretend to anfwer \ but that it was my opinion, few men could fo foon fucceed in gaining the affedlions of any Lady as himfelf.—Did I fpeak properly to Sir Charles, Louifa ?—Why .are
You do not blame me, fu re-
no more than I can
you affeCled .? ly, for loving you
you for thinking of him more favourably !
He is far better entitled to you than I am—though he cannot regard you in a
----You were certainly in-

greater degree.--
dined to like him, (though partly engaged to Melmoth,) when he was laft in England *, and I eafily perceived, that, if you were at liberty to eled a lover—in fhort, if Melmoth had not been encouraged, Sir Charles would have been the man.—Confi-der me no further, dear Louifa, than as a friend warmly attached to your intereft.
Ah, Julia! how was my heart affeded during this long fpeech of Mr. Norton’s ! I could only exprefs my feelings by my
tears—He took my hand--------“ Why this
emotion, my Louifa ?
Ah, Sir,” cried I, “ how does the idea of having been, though unknowingly, the caufe of pain to fuch a heart as yours,
H 4	diftrefs
99
(C
r
*52
MASQUERADES; or.
diftrefs me !—Where muft merit look for its recompence, if you are wretched !---And does it depend on me to make you otherwife, and lhall I refufe it ?—No, no;
it muft not. cannot be !
If mv hand
and fortune, with my unwearied affiduity to pleafe, can give you happinefs—can be confidered by the beft of men as an adequate return for fuch matchlefs goodnefs-— they lhall be yours 1—You lhall not longer remain without my heart—Allow it but a little time—-juft to ffiake off its prefent
I will not deceive you—you
and then,
weaknefs-
have gueffed the fituation of it I dare anfwer, it will for ever after be devoted to you alone. It is from fuch a foul as yours that I can expect felicity.—Receive the offer I do not blufh to make you, dear Sir !-—you beft deferve it.
99
No, my Louifa,” replied he, “ I will not fuffer the generofity which has hitherto guidec Tie to forfake me now.—To take advantage of the compaffion I have excited in your gentle bofom, would make me def-picableto myfelf.------Great as the tempta-
tion is,—I will withftand it.-—Be happy,
dear Louifa !--give me your friendfhip, and
let
WHAT YOU WILL
*53
let this converfation be buried in oblivion.” He burft into tears, and left the room abruptly—but returned in a few minutes, quite compofed.
“ I have many apologies,” faid he, “ to make to I.ouifa for acting this unmanly part.------1 muft go to Italy ; with
all my .heroifrn, I cannot ftay and fee you married. When that event is over, I will return, and be contented with my fate.— You muft write to me frequently, and tell me all that concerns you.”
I affured Mr. Norton, that he was certainly wrong in imagining that Sir Charles intended to make propofals to me. To convince him that he was, 1 related to him how he had behaved to me fince he came to South-
ampton. “ Depend upon ir,” he anfwered, “ he only meant to try your affeflion—I acknowledge it is an unkind method of ailing with women of fenfibility, and too commonly praftifed.—Our feelings are not fo refined as yours ; we are more felfiih, and confider not the impropriety,--Mon-
tague’s notions are in fome refpedls (befides) particular.—Perhaps he wanted to find whether you had not a leaning towards
H 5	Worth-
154
MASQUERADES; or
Worthley, whofe affiduity I have heard of; and thought his expedient a good one.” Mr. Norton then joined Lord and Lady Arne, to give me time to compofe my agitated mind.—I foon went to them, and did not again quit my excellent friend, till the difagreeable fummons was given for his departure, by his being informed that his fervants were ready. Our parting was attended with many tears on both fides. After I faw his chaife drive off, what were my emotions ! You can beft judge of them, who have fo feeling a heart.—I cannot ex-
Mr. Norton’s merit—there
and
on
patiate
could be no bounds to the fubjefl
He might have had, till he
but Ihe
it is time to fend this enormous packet away.
In fpite of all that Mr. Norton faid, I ampofitive Sir Charles has not a thought of your Louifa-faw Mifs Stephenfon—but ihe ftepped acrofs me, and has robbed me of my captive. I begin to feel very eafy about it.— How bleffed ffiould Lbe to fee my Julia ! Too flattering idea ! You muft not be encouraged. On this topic I did not dare truft my pen till I had almoft got to the
end
WHAT YOU WILL.
*55
end of my paper, left my unavailing willies for a circumftance fo very unlikely to take place, fliould have thrown me into the horrors. -- For worlds I would not have you do any thing that could give Lady Pemberton a moment’s uneafinefs.—Adieu, dear girl !
I am ever
Moft truly your
Louisa Sydney.
H 6
5-y'*.

\
156
MASQUERADES: or
To Lady Louisa Sydney.
Portman-Square.
OR Heaven’s fake, my amiable friend I was Mr. Norton’s paffion for you any thing new .?—Certainly no circumftance was ever plainer ! — Ah ! how deferving is he of your friendfhip !—So lively, yet lb polite ! So fenfible, yet fo diffident! —Why, Louifa,
cannot-----But I have done—Your heart is
engaged, and all the virtues we are charmed with in Mr. Norton, have alfo centered, with accumulated luftre, in the perfon of Sir Charles Montague.—How go you on ?—Surely, after what has paffed, you are no longer the Have of anxiety !---Depend upon it. Sir Charles will very foon make you acquainted with the preference he gives you. Be alfo convinced, that he is furniffi-cd with reafons he holds good for having fo long kept you in fufpenfe. That a worthy man (in the full force of that appel-Wion) fhould a6l inconfiftently with that charafter in the moft trivial point, has ever appeared a paradox to me: therefore, I
cannot
WHAT YOU WILL.
*57
cannot form a notion of the uncertainty of
his declaration,--However, be fpeedy in
informing me of your tranfa^lions.
Lady Percival tells me, that it is ftrong-ly rumoured amongft feveral of her acquaintances, that I am Ihortly to marry Lord Seymour; whilft others pretend to more knowledge, and fay, that I have dif-mifltd him., and liften to Lord Budenall.—
“ Let them fay what they will, dear Lady Percival,” cried I; “ the world will talk, and, if it prevents, for ever fo fhort a time, more cenforious converfation, is welcome to make conncdlions for me I never thought of.” Lord Seymour tries by perfeverance to gain my favour—“ Give yourfelf no more trouble, my Lord—My good opinion you have ever had j my graceful efteem you will always command •, but to make yourfelf mafter of my affections, is an im-poffibility, and without them I will never beftow my hand.” This 1 have faid often to him—Hefighs—and anfwers-—“Ah! Lady Julia!—you love fame happy obje6l—it is that which caufes you to be thus infenfible to my mifery.”—It is in vain to proteft that my heart is free—He looks with a fufpicious eye on each man that approaches me:—
nay,
*58
MASQUERADES; or
nay, this
prefumed
had difcovered tht poffeffed my heart, and had fo well barricaded each avenue to it, that no rival could gain accefs. 1 turned from him, with a very vexed air I believe, and made him no anfwer.—He followed, and repeated what he had faid. I replied, he was welcome to make what conjedlures he pleafed: as they did not
AFFECT ME, they could not OFFEND ME. Hc
looked in a paffion, and fat fullen the reft of the evening.
What an infatuation muft there be in cards, that they can chain people to them for fo many hours together!—How agitated have I feen a beautiful countenance at the falling of a duce, a knave, &c. &c.— and after all, for what ?—Why, for the defpicable hope of gaining, or fear of lofing,
a few paltry pieces of ore.-1 was drawn
into many crofs refleflions on this fubjeCl, by being obliged to fit a tedious while at whift; and ffiould have remained much longer at it, had not Mr. Montague (Sir Charles’s firft coufin) obligingly taken my cards at my requeft.—But with this averfion, how terrible a figure would your friend make in the beau monde, did ffie
not
WHAT YOU WILL.
*59
not endeavour to conceal it!—I certainly Ihould be expelled the fociety of our modern beaux and belles—-ht called “ a perfedi hyena,"—and flared at as fomething horrible when I appeared in public. What a tyrant is cuflom ! It fubjeCls us to mix with characters not fuited to our tafte, and to adopt
To appear fingular
“ fhews
foibles we defpife.
CC
99
(as a much-celebrated author fays) fomething amifs either in the heart or head to avoid which, we muft accord to times and modes, provided our principles
ftart not at them.-----Good night, dear
Louifa !
*
*
*
*


Tuefday, Three o'clock.
We have been amufing ourfelves all the morning with feeing the gentlemen fkait on the canal in Kenftngton Gardens, Lady Pemberton, Lady Percival, Almeria and myfelf, agreed to walk there, and return in the coach: my brother. Col. Elliot, Sir James Weftbrook, and Mr. Montague, attended us. Several gentlemen had appoint* ed to meet us at the canal, provided the froft continued as impenetrable as it then
was. Accordingly, on our arrival, moft of
them
1^0
MASQUERADES} or.
them were Jhewing-off all the airs and attitudes fo graceful an exercife admits of. Was my heart to be caught by external perfection only, it v/ould indubitably be in danger of falling a victim to a handfome figure in the inimitable movement of fkait-ing. This idea ftruck me on beholding my brother. You cannot think how charmingly he looked !—You may laugh, Louifa, at my vanity,—but I affure you, I was not fingular in my admiration of him.—-Lady Walpole, Mifs Pelham, and Mifs Edg-cumb came to us, as they had promifed to do. My heart felt for the latter, whofe eyes fpoke unutterable love for Lord Pemberton : fhe could obferve no one but him. Finding it very cold; I laid hold of Mifs Edgcumb’s arm, and we ftrolled at a fmall diftance from the reft, to put a little warmth into our limbs; which we complained had loft all feeling, from remaining fo long without ftirring. Lord Pemberton took off his fkaits, and, running between us, vowed he would interrupt a tete-a-tete. “ Will you not permit me, my charming Mifs Edgcumb cried he. “ Your Lordfhip will make us very happy by giv-
mg
WHAT YOU WILL:
i6r
mg us your company, girl. She feemed fo confufed
anfvvered the fweet
fo pleafed.
and devoured with fo greedy an ear the compliments he paid her, that I fhould foon have difcovered, had I not done it before, which way her choice turned in wifhing for an
adorer.------My affeCtion for this excellent
girl makes me defirous fhe would transfer her inclinations to fome other deferving ob-jeCl; for I am fure my brother will never marry any but Sophia Nevill, his firft coufin. Lord Pemberton w'hilft a child (they fay) was always unhappy when from her : the attachment was reciprocal, and has continued inviolable and unabated to this
day. I am
She is exactly ten months older than her perfon is exquifitely handfome-, fhe is fenfible ; and her heart is one of the belt that ever was created *, her temper all
gentlenefs and fweetnefs.
Judge by this
defcription, if they are not formed for each other!
The Duke of Northington could not bear the thought of fending Sophia abroad when my mother carried us —He had but juft loft his wife *, fhe was his only child, and to part with all the comfort he had, was too much. At laft, finding it necefifary to
com-


162
M A S QU E R A D E S ; or.
complete her education, he fummoned up refolution, and carried her over to Paris fome little time before Lady Pemberton left it; which is the reafon you were not acquainted, as you quitted the convent above two years before my fifter Caroline and I did. The places my uncle held in England prevented a longer abfence from thence than two or three months, or I believe he would have fettled as near her as poffible. My mother returned at the time ffie allotted, after having voluntarily baniffied herfelf five years, that her daughters might doubly benefit by the advantage of foreign improvements received under the immediate infpeClion of her own eye. taken in Paris for herfelf, carried us over, and put us under the tuition of her very particular friend, our much-loved Superior. She vifited us daily, taking us out now and then, as you may remember, to fpend a week or fortnight with her, by which means we had an opportunity of knowing the beft company that inhabit, and conftantly refort to, that charming city. Caroline and I were happy to attend Lady Pemberton to England; but Almeria was like one frantick it the idea of leaving her friend
behind
She had an elegant chateau
w
YOU WILL.
163
behind—nor was the foul of Sophia lefs agitated. My uncle prevailed on his amiable filler to let Almeria ftay a year longer, which Ihe the more readily agreed to, as my fifter was extremely young. Lady Pemberton would have remained herfelf, but for the indilpenfable engagement Ihe was under to Lord Mortimer, to bring my fifter to England the year after he had feen and made propofals for her at Paris.
Two months ago the Duke went over, and brought his daughter and niece to England. He has a fine feat between Dover and Canterbury, where the late Duchefs’s
Sophia is now with her at this place, and there Almeria (as I told you) pafled a week in her way to London. I apprehend my brother will have the nuptials compleated as foon as poflible. I already love Lady Sophia with the affection due to a lifter.
I will conclude this with a wilh that my fenfations this night at Covent-Garden
■	be
mother is fond of refiding.
play-houfe thofe I
exactly
there.
may
experienced the laft time I am, my Louifa, your faithful
oppofite to
I
was
Julia Herbert.
164
MASQUERADES} oa.
To Sir Edward Fitzwilliams.
Clarges-Street.
OME, my frienJ, and exult!—Come and behold your once lively Elliot, who defied the power of female charms, fallen an humble viClim at the fhrine of beauty, and fighing at the feet of the mofi: obdurate woman in England—Yes, Ficz-williams,-----
“ The haughty, gallant, gay Lothario”—
is totally metamorphofed—No more docs one of thofe epithets more muft you fly to me for counfel application came at the worft nick of time. ——What, tho’your Sophia defpifes you—-I could lay ten to one that her lover is not more fcorned than Almeria Herbert’s.
3 cannot fay, “ Forget her, Fitzwilliams !” —My own heart bears witnefs that I fhould recommend an impoflibility to you.
Too confident of my infenfibility, and laughing at love (at leaft in the romantic fenfe of the word), I thought to have flirted
belongr to me
no Your
with Lady Almeria,
and quitted her when
tired
WHAT YOU WILL.
165
tired of the amufement (the way with us all); but how have I miftaken my own ftrength, and her merit !—You have never feen Lady Almeria—take a fhort fketch of her beautiful perfon :
She has the moft delightful dark blue eyes I ever beheld-—at one moment they are all fofenefs and trembling fenfibility— at another, replete with fire and vivacity; long filken eye-lafhes infringe them-—Her nofe is very handfome-—Her lips the vivid colour of Vermillion ; ten thoufand dimples and little Cupids ambufti about them: when they open, they difcover two rows of the fineft pearl fet in coral—Her Ikin is white as the lily--Her cheeks are tinged with a lovely red—Her face is well turned, inclining rather to a round than an oval—Her hair is a light brown: art cannot confine it; feveral locks curl about the prettieft forehead in the world—She has a dimple in the center of her chin, that would, without any other beauty, captivate hearts by dozens— Her ftature is tali; every limb feems turned with the jufteft fymmetry ; her figure is
really elegant beyond defcription.-What
Iball I fay of her mind ,?--a mind formed
by
i66
MAS QU ERADESj or
f
by Minerva, and improved by the Mufes I fhould injure her in attempting to dili-neate it j for no words can do it juftice. Lady Almeria is miftrefs of every accom-plifhment: fhe excels in each, more particularly in dancing and mufick fhe fings like an angel, and is always ready to oblige, when called upon. ,
I have inevitably loft my heart, Fitzwilliams.—The truant will never more re-
I was by fome acci
turn to its mafter.—— dent left alone with the fweet Almeria the other morning—By an irrefiftible impulfe I dropped on one knee, feized her hand, and prefumptuoufly Hammered out “I love you I”—She blufhed indeed—but it was with indignation ; and, having affured me (in a manner mortifyingly indifferent) that my gallantry was loft on her, with the utmoft compofure afked How I liked the new opera? I know not what anfwer I made, bur, hurt to the foul, I haftily arofe, and wifhed her a good morning -*I endeavoured to affume an air of fang froid.---1 met Lord Pem-
berton on the ftairs. I am fure he muft have obferved my confufion, though he was
delicate enough to take no notice of it.—
Laft
WHAT YOU WILL.
167
Laft night I faw Lady Pemberton, her
Lady Percival, and fome
at the Feftino.—I
two paragons, others of the
party.
thought Lady Almeria never looked fo divinely.—I afked her to dance : fhe thanked me ; jhe was engaged to Sir John Benyon He, happy man ! was her partner for the
—had leave to whifper in her ear,—-to take her fnowy hand !—Ah ! Fitzwilliams! does hell afford greater pangs than I en* dured laft night!—Once I perceived a feat
night
vacant by her; I flew to it----“ Lady Al-
meria,” cried I, “ deign to hear me •, vouch-fafe to look with pity on the wretched Elliot;—fuffer me to paint mv love mifery 1”
me She
laughed
paint my love—my and exclaimed, “ What ftiil that melancholy face ! Why, your looks are enough to infpire me with ennui.----If love puts on fuch a counte-
nance, Heaven defend me from it! —For God’s fake, refume the agreeable—you do not know hoW much better it becomes you.”—“ Charming vivacity !” returned I; “ but do not jeft thus, dear Lady Almeria,
with a heart oppreffed.
99
“ I wifh you
would follow my example,” faid fhe, “ and
jeji too; then I fhould like to liften to you,
as
i68
MASQUERADES; or
but now !—you are fo fe-
' As fhe
as I ufed to do
rious!—and I hate ferious people, ended, fhe gave her hand to the exulting Benyon, who waited for her to rejoin the dance. She loves him, my friend ! Her eyes, her expreflive eyes confefs it; and I am doomed to wretchednefs !—Once, as I ftood near them, 1 heard him fay, Ah ! Lady Almeria, none loves like me !” She fmiled on Benyon—the happy Benyon !
with benignity and fweetnefs.-----On my
foul, my Edward, I curfed and envied him.
I am not fo blinded by my paflion, as not to wiih, if Sir John Benyon is the man fhe prefers, that he may make her bleffed — But oh ! can I bear to fee her give herfelf to another ! It will be a dreadful cumftance.----
cir-
Yet how felfifh, how romantic are my notions ! My fortune fo fmall-—I never wifhed it greater till I knew Lady Almeria. And would I fubjeCt the woman I doat on, to undergo a thoufand little inconveniences that from the fplen-dour of her fituation fhe has hitherto been a ftranger to ! Perifh the thought!
then, Fitzwilliams, 1
Well
will take the hardy
refolu-
WHAT YOU WILL.
169
refolution of abandoning her*,—no more ffiall her ear be tormented with my
reluctance) to a
have the
T
JL
love—1 yield it (with worthier objed ; no more ffiall rapturous enjoyment of leading her in the dance—of liftening to the harmonious accents of her voice ;->no more ffiall I fit behind her at the opera, and obferve, with tranfport, the admiring eyes of each beholder fattened on her.—--'—* I will quit my A-ffiieria,—and the only confolation left me will be in going over again in idea the happy moments I have paffed in her company, and in beftowing a few fighs on the manes of my departed joys.
I have a good opportunity of putting my refolution in force—this minute have I heard, that my regiment is ordered immediately to America. There, if my prophetic fpirit fays true,——I ffiall either acquire fame and fortune enough to mftce me more deferving of Lady Almeria, or at once be releafed from the mifery that corrodes the breaft of,
Your faithful friend,
Charles Elliot.
VOL. I.	I	P. S.
lyo
MASQUERADES ; or
P. S. I know you will call me a madman-—but, if it faves me from abfolute defpair, let me enjoy my infanity. I hope to fee you ere I leave London ; in the meaa time, adieu !
To Lady Julia Herbert,
Southampton, Monday
AST Thurfday evening a large par-
ty flipped with us, after our having danced cotillons from nine o’clock till
twelve.

Sir Charles offered me his hand
for the firft dance. He was particularly attentive to me all the night, though 1 was not happy enough to have him conftantly for my partner. His eyes fpoke to your Louifa a language that his tongue has never ufed:—they told me^ that his heart was
devoted to	mine palpitated !-----
Ah, my Julia! Sir Charles followed this plan once before.—1 muft not be a fecond time deceived by les yeux doux, and
preflbres
what you WILL.
*7t
preflures of the hand :—and yet!—ah! Julia 1 he is dear—very dear to me !


*
*
*



It was propofed, and immediately agreed
to, that we fhould make an excurfion to
to-morrow. We fhall be a large
affemblage; not lefs than feventeen or
eighteen in number. Lord Arne piques
himfelf on his choice of agreeable perfons
in compofing a party i this, he boafts, will
be very feleCt. Entre nous, I feldom found
the expectation anfwered, when much raifedi
on fuch occafions; but I hope my good
I.iOrd will meet no difappointment to his.
I.ord and Lady Arne, Mifs Wrottefley,
Mr. Bilhop, Sir Charles and myfelf, are to
ride to B*^***y ; the reft go in chaifes*
I am informed that Col. Worthley is be-
¥
low, and that I am wanted at the card-table.





*•

Tuefday Morning,
We are preparing to fet out: tlie morning is beautiful,, and every thing promifes well for our pafling an agreeable day-----
So! Mifs Wrottefley has 'Changed her
12	mind,
172
1
MASQUERADES; or
md begs to he ex cufed from rtdin.
mina, ana t?egs to ve e, fhe is no very good horje-woman, and will on ly terrify us with her fears-, therefore chufe to accompany Mrs. Nelfon in her chaife. Mi Biiliop, too, has fent an apology : fudde
calls him to London.—Nay,
,. niy
good Lord Arne! do not fret; we lhall do very well without him-—.Sir Charles waits to put me on my horfe.—I mull leave you, my fpirits are not in the highejl order for a party; but no matter.
%
%
%
-V

%
%
%
We are juft returned—you will be furprifed at what I am going to relate*-—Judge 'after you have read ir, whether 1 am at peace or not.
. Sir Charles’s horfe and mine, being rather more fpirited, were unwilling to keep the pace of Lord and Lady Arne’s.----------1 be-
lieve that Montague put his on his mettie intentionally ; my Caro, he knew, would get into as fwifc a canter. After a few minutes we threw Lord and Lady Arne far behind us; then, llackening our pace, admired the country of wood and abounds.
—the beautiful profpcCls water, &c. with which it
Sir
WHAT YOU WILL.
*7l
Sir Charles aflced me if ever 1 had hee'di at B***’^^*y ? Once, I told him, with Lady Pemberton and you^ before I went abroad, and J was fuch a child then, I could not remember any thing of the place. He begged to know if I did not leave the Convent'of ---------- fome time before you did ? I anfvvered in the affirmative. He replied, “ I knew the Superioiir—file was amazingly clever, and altogether as amiable, I believe. She died before your friend left Paris, Lady Louifa ?”	“ No, Sir, but foon
after.”--“Indeed!”—then paufed,as if full of thought.—“Ic is very odd
What 1=:,
I beg your La material-
sir Charles, very odd ?"	“
dyfhip’s pardon—nothing material-"-! juft recollected a trivial circumftance which happened whilft 1 was at Paris, not worthy of engaging your attention a moment.” You have forbid me, my Julia, to mention to you the name of a certain perfon -, elfe I would tell you how warmly Sir Charles commended your delicacy—your fpirit in rejedling him. He beftowed more encomiums on your fenfe, your temper, your form, than you would chufe to hear repeated, He concluded his panegyric, by
I 3
alking,
s.
*74
MAS Q U ERADES; or,
alking, If I imagined Lord Seymour would he poffeffor of fo inefiimahle a treafure as Julia Herbert ? I faid, 1 was convinced not; that you had already difcarded him; and that you feldom wavered in your refolutions. Thus he replied:
“ It is aftonilhing what objection Lady Julia can make to that young nobleman. He has worth, title, birth, perfon, and fortune, to recommend him.'—Surely, Lady Louifa, the world will think your friend is ^tached to fome fortunate objeCt, whom wt have not yet difcovered I” He pretended to fay this jocularly—but, if you will believe me, he looked moft inquifttively for my anfwer. Y"ou can guefs what that was. Sir Charles declared you were very cruel, and hoped I was not determined to follow your example in that point. I faid, I wifhed to copy fo good a one in every refpedl.
“ And you really, then, Lady Louifa, are refolved to aCt-like the fair Julia, and give no attention to our fex on a fubjeCl
—You have both
fo eflential to our felicity I— vowed never to liften to us !”
“ We have
no determination concerning your fex. Sir Charles, We .are both very young, and
in
WHAT YOU WILL.
*75
in no hurry to part with certain, for .very uncertain happinefs.”
“ Report informed me, my Lady, that, foon after my arrival in England, I was to addrefs you by another name—that Sydney was no more to be remembered.”
“ Reports are not always to be believed, you find. Sir Charles.”
“ That blufh—thofe downcaft eyes, Loiiifa, are traitors to your inclination— they inform againft your wilhes, and tell me your heart is attached.”
“ You
are
right—it is attached—-at-
o	*
tached to many amiable perfons.”
“ Cruel Lady .Louifa !—Do not trifle when my happinefs is at ftake, L.et me feize this”---
“ Obferve, Sir Charles, how far behind Lord and Lady Arne are; we muft wait for them a few minutes.” I ftopped my horfe—Julia, how my heart fluttered !
“ Lady Louifa, you muft proceed—my impatient foul will no longer brook delay— For Heaven’s fake, oblige me !”
“ You are in a very uncommon mood.
Sir Charles----1 muft pofitively ftay for
Lady Arne—I have been fufficiently rude
14	to
t2C>
MASQUERADES; or,
to her already.—The morning is remarkably# fine I What a charming point of view that fpire forms!”—You wall fay this was a low fpecies of art, and as common as it is low
Admitted; yet, I could not help it
weak—and I believe
my fpirits were fhould have behaved
ridiculouflv, had
fo
I
I
permitted him to enter, upon lo important a hibjed: fo abruptly. Our amiable pair joined us, and I never quitted Lady Arne during the remainder of our ride. Sir Charles became on the fudden
grave. We reached aflembled-
very
-our party they were all talkative and loud, except Sir Charles, whofe melancholy continued throughout the day, and was noticed
by each perfon.-----My bofom throbbed
with alarms.—How diftreffing were my re-fieClions ! They told me my behaviour to Montague had been chtldijhly flippant, and had difgufted him. If fo, what would be my fate, but exquifite wretchednefs I I endeavoured to atone by being attentive to him.—Still, I know, there muft have appeared fo much conftraint in that attention, as defeated the purpofe for which it was offered, At dinner he avoided fining next
to
WHAT YOU WILL.
*77

to me—He fhunned every occafion that prefented of fpeaking with me afterwards, but, with his eyes bent on the ground, and his arms folded, was re^ardlcfs cf eve-ry creature, and each circumftance that pafled. Tea and coffee over, the chaifes were ordered—Lord Arne and Sir Charles returned in my Lord’s; Lady Arne and myfelf in mine—the reft of the -company as they came.
“ Dear Louifa,” faid my friend, as we
¥ ^
drove off, “ what is the matter with Sir Charles ? L threw rny arms round her neck, and burft into tears, “I have loft him. Madam—-loft him for ever.”
“ Good Heaven! Is Mifs Stephenfon
then”---- .
“ Ah, no! nny ov/n folly has been the occafion.” As foon as my voice became articulate enough, i reprefented to her what had palfed between Montague and myfdf.
■ endeavoured to confole me bv aflu-
Sh
ranees that Sir Charles could net think un-juftly of me ; which, fee faid, he muji do, if he took my behaviour in any other light than that occafioned by timidity and delicacy*
Lord Arne protefted, on our return to
I 5	hb
*7
MASQUERADES; or,

his houfe, that none of the party ffiould fepnrate till after fupper. Sir Charles begged to be excufed. “ Lady Louifi, come
,” laid my Lord.—I went. He took
hithe
Montasfue
cannot be deaf to your entreaties—befeech him not to leave us, and to affume more fpirits than he has worn ail day.” He put my hand into Sir Charles’s, then turned off, and left him to liften to my foilicitations,
----“What
a word, my Lady I—If! — \¥ho has fo much with me?—Let me think you defire me near you but for one inftant, and I am the moft bleffed of men.”----You will
“ If I-have any influence. Sir”
ftay, Sir Charles ?” dam.”—“ And be in better fpirits ?”
“ Undoubtedly, Ma-
“That
muft abfolutely depend upon your Lady-
ffiip.
m
If I am defpifed by you, you will
not condemn me for fuffering my countenance to correfpond with the naifery of my heart—I cannot diffemble.”-—“ Is it poflible to imagine I can dejpife one I have ever reg;arded fo much!”—“Say that regard continues.” “ It does indeed.”—“ I onuftyetbe more nnrealbnable, and alk another favour—Permit me to attend
you
to-morrow evening, and refume the fubjeCt
you
WHAT YOU WILL.
*79
you fo unkindly prevented my fpeaking on
9>
“ Blefs me. Sir Cnarles I
this morning.
—What can you have fo pardcu”
“ When you refleCl on the confequence to our fex of knowing your merit, you can eafily judge what the fubjeCl of my converfation will be.—-You do not refufe me—-Ten thoufand thanks, my Louifa!”—and in a hurrying manner he was about to leave me, left I fliould put a negative on his requeft.—“Sir Charles!”—“Dear Lady Louifa, no more!—Mv Lord, vour fair advo-cate comes off conqueror in every caufe (lie undertakes^——I am at your Lordfliip’s devotion.”
Mufick is called for—I begged Lady Arne to give me one half hour.—She affented ; and the more readily, ffie told me, as ffie perceived my countenance brightened, and knew that I wiffied to convey the pleafing intelligence of my being happy to my fweet Julia, I left the drawingroom in a ffiort time after my conference with Sir Charles.
How much obliged to Lord Arne, am I! —but for him, what dreadful moments ffiould I pafs this night! My Lord is yet
16'	a ftranger
i8o
MASQUERADES; or
dancing this hour.
a ftranger, I believe, to the manner in which Sir Charles and I were circumftanced,—un-kfs Montague told him in their way home I If fo, how delicately did he bring about an opportunity for an explanation !—I am interrupted—Lady Arne is in rny clofet, (lie complains that I have doubled the portion of time allowed me—they have been
What room have I for further pleafure? To fend my thoughts from the tranfaClions of this day, will be to banifh them from happinefs.—But is not Montague below ? Yet the unaccountable referve I feel when I fpeak to him (fince the latter part of his converfation this morning) in fome meafure damps the joy of a heart replete with affeClion for him. — Why fhould it be fo ?—’Tis right; nature infpires it to aid the virgin delicacy, fo defervedly the admiration of all perfons in every age.—— *
Dear Lady Arne, I attend you.
••iV

*






Such a change as I
IVednefday Noon.
found in Sir Charles’s
fpirits, when I returned to the company laft
He was all
night, is not to be defcribed.
We did not break up till
three
gaiety and life.
WHAT YOU WILL.
iSi
three o’clock this morning.’—Ah ! my Julia ! that this evening was well over ! i dread its approach. How’’ ffiall I behave ! Adieu till to-morrow.
*


















\
Thurfday Morning,
About eight o’clock Sir Charles came,’ Lord Arne was engaged to a party at Sir William Wrottefley’s. In half an hour after Montague entered my Lord took his leave; and Lady Arne begged our excufe for a little while, fayingwas under a ne-
When ffie retired,
----1 am
^	"	A
cejfity of writing a letter,
I thought I ffiould have fainted, certain Sir Charles perceived it *, for as he drew his chair near mine, he uttered, in a low voice, “ Surely, Lady Louifa can be under no anxiety at the honour ffie confers on one fo much devoted to her as I am I”, He threw down his eyes, and gave me time to gain more confidence; which I the fooner did, from his amiable behaviour.
All declarations of Love, I believe, are exprefled in much the fame words, and on-
h

MASOUERAOES; or
/
ly differ in the manner of delivering them. Some do it aukwardly, as if ailiamed of the paflion with which they are infpired; whilft other men feem to glory in it, and fpeak without conftraint the fentiments of their hearts, at the fame time keeping the ftricteft delicacy always in view. I need not fay that Sir Charles purfued this latter mode^—To tell you more, will be to tire you with a repetition of what has, been fo often fpoken to yourfelf by different people. When he finifiied what he had to fay, I replied:
“ I Ihould think myfelf very unworthy of the fentiments you profefs for me, Sir, were 1 capable of aCling with difguife. To affeCl an indifterence I do not feel, for no other motive than to give pain to an amiable heart, is beneath me. Your diftinCtion reflects the higheft honour on me; and I will confefs myfelf flattered at it.---Still I muft not accept of the preference you offer, without the approbation of one, whofe confanguinity, whofe fraternal tendernefs, give him a right to interpofe in every circumftance 'of my life, and without whofe fanClion I never will beftow my hand.
If
99
iC
WHAT YOtr WILL.
1
“ If that is the only obftade to my wilhes,” cried he, “ I am the bappieft of men !—Lord Clermont is no ftranger to my attachment to your Ladylhip ; I acquainted him with it juft before I left Italy, and that I hoped I had his confenc to addrefs you—He made me vain, by faying, he knew no man he would fooner give his Louifa to——but feared my application was to no purpofe; for he thought it probable I Ihould find you in the arms of another, on my arrival in England.—My better deftiny interfered and faved you—I truft, to blefs me .'-Forgive, my dear Madam, this late avowal—To have fpoken fooner was my wilh, but I did not think it would have been adhering to the etiquette of delicacy to have done it fo immediately on the difimifiion of an unfortunate man : befides, a juft diffidence of myfelf made me fearful of being rejed:ed—and fufpenfe for a little while (in my opinion) is better than a dreadful certainty,—This very night, I will have the honour of writing to my Lord, and of making fuch propofals as, I believe, he will not difapprove of.”
There is no reafon, Sir Charles, that
you
184
MASQUERADES; oR,
you ffiould be fo precipitate—my brother will foon be over, and then”------“ For-
give me, dear Louifa, if I diflent from you there—there is great reafon—My impatience will not let this night pafs over my head without informing. Clermont what
has been the refult of it.”
/
Sir George Sommerville has always
CC
59
aCted the parent’s part
“ My dear Madam ! do you fuppofe that I could have any intention of folliciting the honour of your hand, without meaning to pay your uncle every compliment due to him ? I will lofe no time in writing to him, and ffiall be happy to confult him on what ■ he will think proper to have done for his ‘—and, futrer me now to fay, my Louifa. I have had ftrong proofs of Sir George’s friendlliip. I truft that I may yet .depend upon it, efpecially in the moft important circumftance of my life !—And thus let me, fwCet Louifa,” dropping on his knee, and killing my hand, “ thank you for the favour you have ffiewa me—My tongue is a bad herald to my heart—it cannot tell its feelings”
Lady Arne foon after came in, and Sir
Charles
WHAT YOU WILL.
185

Charles in a quarter of an hour excufed himfelf to her for not accepting her invitation to fupper, and retired.
Ah, rny Julia! how do I deferve the happinefs that awaits me in a union with fo amiable a man!—-Make me worthy of him, gracious Heaven! or take me from the fu-preme felicity of calling him mine !— I can give up life to prevent his being miferable --but without him life would be now a torment, and could not be long endured by
t
Your ever afFeClionate
Louisa SyDNEv,
r&
i86
MASQUERADES; or,
To Lady Louisa Sydney.
Portman-Squai'e,
Congratulate you, my much-loved friend, on the accomplifiiment of your wilhes. I truft you will, fome years hence, commemorate the tranfaClions of the paft week, with the fame fatisfaClion that is excited in my bolbni by the defcription of your happinefs ! felf ?
May you prove de-
—Why are you diffident of your-1 am difpleafed at it, and think, oh Montague ! thy fate has been a propitious one, in gaining the affeClions of fuch a girl as Louifa Sydney ! — ferving of them !—I doubt not that you will ! In that cafe my fair friend has every felicity to hope for.—I muft prepare to attend Lady Pemberton and my filler to a ball given by Lady Danvers. I am defired to put on my befi airs, and to fummon all the Graces to my aid that will liften to my invocation.—You will guefs that my brother gives me thefe injunctions, yet he af-figns no reafon for them. —I fuppofe that lie meditates a fcheme of having Lord Ofmond
WHAT YOU WILL, 187
mond for a hr other-in-law, who arrived a few days ago (I am informed), and will in all probability be amongft the numerous throng in Grofvenor-Square this night. I am impatient to fee this nonpareil—Do you never fmile, Louifa, at the fears, which fo lately molefted you, of Sir Charles’s meaning to promote a connedion between you and my Lord ?—Report fays, that the Duke of Weftmorland intends him for Lady Henrietta Marchmont; an amiable young woman I believe, but not at all indebted to the capricious Goddefs of Beauty for any perfonal attraClion ; which deficiency For-
was determined to make up for, and has diftinguifiied Lady Henrietta as one of her firft favourites, by granting her the un-confcicnable fum of one hundred and fifty thoufand pounds, with the addition of an cftate of fifteen hundred a year, that was purchafed with fome of the fupcrflmus rupees that Lord Davenport brought with him from the Eaft Indies, and fettled on her when flie was ten years old. Son Pere, toujours genereux, has been ever fince accumulating the principle and intereft of it for her, which he declares is to be paid,
with
tune
i88
MAS QU ERADES; or
with the capital I before mentioned, to Lord Ofmond on the day of marriage. The Duke of Wefl!rjO’‘land is confidently faid to be a pafilonate admirer of the dirty pelf fo much fought after by thoufands. If we are to judge, as an Italian author does, who lays, “ That children generally inherit the particular virtue or vice of the parent,” we fhall conclude that the Lord Ofmond makes Pluto the deity to whom he facri-fices, as well as his father. Avarice is a detefiable thing in age--then what muft it be in youth ?—The more fhocking for being unnatural.—But take notice, Julia, as yet you know not that this young nobleman is tainted with the fault you declaim a-gainft !”—You are right, Louifa,—and I have done.
You will be forry to hear that the agreeable Colonel Elliot leaves London to-morrow for Portfmouth; from whence he is to embark for America.—We fliall meet this night, perhaps for the laft time.—Poor Colonel Elliot !—The fubjeCt is painfuL-To lofe an amiable friend, like him, muft: caufe melancholy to diffufe itfelf over the hearts of fuch as have fenfibility enough
to
WHAT YOU WILL.
189
to feel fo great a lofs.*—What adds to my concern is, that he goes away miferable-— his attachment to my filter is no longer concealed.
Adieu, my befi Louifa,
Julia Herbert
t’ •
%
fo Sir Charles Montague.
Wrote to you, my dear Montague, immediately on my arrival in London; but, only time to give a pofitive charge, that you fliould not leave your Louifa a minute fooner than you propofed doing before you heard of my being in London. Great as my impatience is to fee you, I now enforce that command.—I know but too well what tranfports muft attend the fweet fociety of the woman we love, to wish to rob you a moment of fiach a happinefs.---Befides, it is the height of my ambition to make myfelf pleafing to Lady Louifa, and
certainly
IQO
MASQUERADES; or
certainly it would be acting inconfiftently with that defire, to deprive her of you, even for a day ! Therefore do not ftir, I infift.
My father received me with tendernefs —more indeed than I expected, from the reluctance with which \vt. feemed to confent to my returning.-------How is it to be ac-
counted for, that he fhould prefer my refiding abroad, at a time, when moft fathers
are anxious
-------------------But no more—it proceeds not from averfion i hope, and I will pry no further.
The Duke thinks (and very juftly) that he kas a right to engrofs my company entirely for the firft fortnight after our meeting. He declares he has many things to fay to me. One particular fubjedt feems to hover on his lips, but has never yet paffed their limits.---Oh ! that it never may !
You will of courfe know that I have been no where in public-—An engagement 1 had to attend my father to Windfor, prevented my obeying Lady Danvers’s invitation to a ballthe night before laft--Our friend Belfielde (who, I told you in my laft, accompanied me from Paris) was at it—he is
charmed—
WHAT YOU WILL:
ch armed—delighted
191
-and in ecftafy, when he fpeaks of the beauties that were affern-bled there. Obferve what he told me of a lady, who, he faid, “ is the beauty of the world”—Thus he worded his account:
“ Soon after I went into the great dancing-room, I was ftruck with a view of the moft lovely young creature I ever beheld :
“ She look’d a Goddefs, and fhe mov’d a Queen.”
I gazed with rapture on her, and, turning to Budenali, begged him to inform me of her name. He replied, It is one of the Lady Herbert’s, a fifter of Pemberton’s.” I perceived a genteel cavalier (whom I afterwards found to be Lord Seymour) very attentive to her; and once, as I drew near, overheard him fay, “ Unlefs you mean, adorable Lady Julia! to make me the happieft of my fex, fpeak not to me in this flattering, kind mannerand fome time after he
again exclaimed, “ Ah, Lady Julia ! now you are altogether as cruel!—but I will not complain.” Immediately as this was fpoken, Budenall went to her, and prefented his hand. She inftantly put hers into it, and joined the dancers. I fought out Pemberton, and upbraided him for not introducing
me
IQZ
MAS QU ERADES; or
f
me to his delightful family. He led me to Lady Pemberton, and Lady Almeria Herbert, who were in the cotillon room, the latter juft preparing to exhibit her elegant figure in a cotillon. She is a charming, beautiful girl, but not fo much in my ftyle of beauty as her fifter is. When Lady Julia had finiftied her dance, her brother prefented me to her. 1 told her in French, that I was very follicitous to join in the general admiration that fo much lovelinefs infpired: and, turning rather afide to Pemberton, faid in Italian, “She is the moft divine girl I ever faw !—Imagination cannot pi(5ture fo beautiful a creature!”—-Upon my foul, Ofmond, I meant not that Ihe ffiould have un-
derftood me-—I obferved ffie bluffied ex-
%
ceedingly, and that Seymour, Budenall, and Mr. Montague, who were ftanding by, threw their eyes upon her, as if they felt for the confufion my unguarded fpeech muft have excited in her fair bofom. Pemberton anfwered in Italian—You will make my fifter vain, my Lord!”—I begged her pardon—She muft have feen that I was deviliftily embarrafled myfelf.”
Well, Montague! what think you of this
gallant
WHAT YOU WILL.
I93K
gallant Count ? He has already forgotten the dames of Italy and France, and will, I believe, throw them au defefpoir, by
au aejejpotr, endeavouring to carry over Lady Julia Madame la Comptejfe de Belfielde. You will fuppofe his rapturous manner of fpeaking of her is highly diverting. I could wifh to have been by, when he was fo feverely firtick with one of the blind urchin’s weapons : I fufpedt, that, to evince his love, like Foigard’s French Count, “ he danced, and
he laughed, and he fang,” &c.----
Does not this trifling manner of writing befpeak a heart at eafe ?—Have you not already formed an expectation of my having, from change of fcene and objeCts, in fome meafure loft the pangs that tore my breaft in pieces?—If you have, you know but little of me!—Never was man fo attached—never was man fo determined upon any point as I am how to a£t in this
cafe.---1 forefee it will occafion a breach
between my father and me; but I cannot give up my own happinefs unreafonably No tie can warrant that—
all I dread incurring
His difpleafure is his fortune I value
not.—I am convinced that you think me
VoL. I.	K	a......!.

194
MASQUERADES; or
ftrangely out of the way, as I have heard people lay of delirious patients; nor can I quarrel with you for it—but, when you behold the objeCl of my defire, your afto-niflinient will ceafe, and my tafte be applauded.-------But where, Montague, am I
to find her ?—Oh, my better ftars, direCt me !—I muft quit this fubjeCt, and abruptly bid you farewel.
Osmond.
To
WHAT YOU WILL.
*95
To Lady Julia Herbert.
Southampton.
OUR Loiiila’s heart, my Julia, is re-
plete with every fentiment of gratitude for the intereft you always take in her happinefs.—To ftudy to deferve your affeCHon, will be the beft means to enfure it.
I am defirous to hear your defcription of Lord Ofmond—mv once much-dreaded
lover!
my
I do indeed laugh at the anxieties which invaded me on his account. Sir Charles is never more delighted than when expatiating on the merit of Ofmond—Not a word efcapes him relative to the connection you fpeak ofper-
Montasfue’s in-
ha ps
It IS mere report. __________
to have flown to his friend
fention was, immediately on his arrival; but he had pofitive orders from him not to leave Southampton. I know not why, but my curiofity was exceedingly excited to fee the letter Sir Charles received from him yefterday. He read the firft paragraph of it to n)e, in which I was fpoken of, and not a
196
mas QU E R ADES; or
fyllable more. I would not for the nni-verfe have appeared anxious, to know further of the contents,—therefore could not alk any queftions ; but I dare fay Lord Ofmond had the honour of your hand for part of the night at Lady Danvers’s. 1 depend on your writing me, whether he is the fuperlative handfome creature that eve-
he
ry
one fays I will
IS.
-—Dear Julia, I wifh not tell you what—left you Ihould turn up your rofy lip at it.
Sir Charles is determined to go up to •town the day after to-morrow ; his impatience to fee bis Ofmond will brook no longer delay. How can I part with him !— 1 here is no defcribing to you the agreeable manner in which we pafs our time : amufements that were hateful to me a fortnight ago, are now delightfully pleafing.—This is'^eafily accounted for. We are preparin
to fide. Adieu, my ever deareft Julia!
Your faithful
Louisa Sydney.
To
w
YOU W
197
To Lady Louisa Sydney-
Portman- Square.
E had a fuperb ball at Lady Danvers’s—the company very numerous, yet well chofen—I believe every handfome woman of diftinClion in London was at rt^—I never faw a greater difplay of beautiful faces in my life. The whole fuite of rooms were appropriated for different dances, and for refrelhments: they were illuminated, and adorned moft fump-tuoufly.'—The fupper and attendants were ill character with the rdt, all equally magnificent.
I danced a great deal, and with a variety of partners. Almeria, who (without partiality) excels in this accomplilhment, is very fond of it; fhe therefore was not the firfl that gave over dancing.
I was introduced to one of the gallant Frenchmen (I believe he is a fon of Gallia) that ever I met with. Lady Mary Athill would be charmed, Louifa, with the Count de Belfielde, his compliments are fo
very
V,
K3
198
QU
very correfpondent to her tafte. I now guefs the reafon of my brother’s follicicude about our drefs : he wiflied us to appear well in the eyes of this foreigner, to whom he pays great attention. His figure and manner are elegant enough. I cannot fay I admire him much; he is too forward and affured, I think—however, I ought not to fay this, having feen fo little of him.—Sir Charles Montague knows him certainly, for I heard the Count make honorable mention of him to Lord Pemberton.
Some time after I entered the great room. Lord Seymour came up to me, and told me. If he might prefame to judge by my countenance, I poffeffed better fpirits then than I had a few nights before* I anfwered, they were in general very even, but that it^ was
ment
fi
ifed
an effedf than the fight of his Lordfhip ; a pleafure I had been deprived of for feveral days. Poor Lord Seymour was pinned to my fleeve, Louifa, for the reft of the night. But who do you think he difcovered to be the lord of my affeClions ?—Mr. Montague.
ife to fuch
He
WHAT YOU WILL.
19a
He begged my pardon for his free method of fpeaking the other night, and owned envy had urged him to believe that I could not liften to Mr. Montague's melting converfation, or attend to the language of his eyes, which evidently tell the objedi of their wifhes, without feeling an emotion for him that would make him the happiefi of men; and added, “ his intrinfic worth, and the attraCliona of his perfon, muft make him a formidable rival.” You may imagine that I diflipated his fears of Mr. Montague’s ever being connected with me and at the fame time affured Lord Seymour, that I meant not to give HIM the'flight eft encouragement to fpeak on a fubjedi very difagreeable to me.—1 alfo entreated he would not be unkind enough to hinder me from converfing with him as a friend; a circumftance that muft unavoidably happen, if he refumed the old topick. He replied, / was very cruel, but he would not complain* I really regard this amiable young man fincerely,—but cannot bring myfelf to do it in the way he wilhes.
I looked inceflantly for that “ earth-treading fiar," Lord Ofmond, and expeCted in every tolerable new face that approached
K4
the
4oo
MASQUERADES; ok,
the room where I was, to behold
liftened after every rap, hoping to have heard him announced.-----At laft my pa-
tience was quite exhaufted; and I alked Lord Budenall if he was there ? He faid no. I wondered at it. The reply was, “ I fuppofe Lord Ofmond does not chufe to go much into public till he has been at Court, where he has not yet made his appearance. I really do not know the exaCt reafon of his abfence from fuch an alfem-bly, but it is natural to form that con-jedure.”—My curiofity was fadly difap-pointed I
Lord and Lady Mortimer arrived in town three days ago.—She was at Lady Danvers’s ; but is become fo fine, as to diflike dancing herfelf, of courfe was only a looker-on. I told her it was egregious affectation.—Apropos, Lady Henrietta Marchmont was in Grofvenor-Square ; but I faw no follicitude in her countenance for the entrance of her Marquis. She no doubt was apprifed that he would not be there, and of the caufe that hindered him. I was exceedingly provoked at my ungracious coufin Sir James Weftbrook. He danced with
Lord
WHAT YOU WILL.
201
Lord Ofmond’s miftrefs fome time, and I found him afterwards making the greateft ridicule of poor Lady Henrietta, to my brother, Lord Seymour, and Mr. Montague ; who, I am forry to fay, encouraged him, by laughing heartily at what he thought wit. I reproached Sir James for it; this was his clever reply:
“ Now, Lady Julia, you are only angry becaufe you cannot find out what the jeft is; but I will be hanged if I inform you. Perhaps a kifs may extort it from Seymour; fuppofe you try! though, fhould he tell it you, Pemberton muft cut his throat: fo you had better not urge the poor fellow to tempt his fare. I am fure my fair partner is obliged to you, for being fa much interefted in what fhe fays and does \ I thank you for her, and will acquaint her .with your kindnefs.”—You may imagine t was angry with Weftbrook; 1 told him fo, and that I would not fpeak to him again this month.—What an unfortunate fex is ours I Lady Henrietta, 1 dare fay, faid fomething very innocently, v/hich her ungenerous partner put a wrong conftruClion upon, and will make it a ftandins mark of
Ks
ridicule
202
MASQUERADES; or.
ven
ridicule agaiiift her for ever. Good Hea-! how jfhould every word be weighed before we fuffer it to drop from our lips! elfe we muft be in the power of a fee of creatures tliat are devoid of compaffion, and endeavour to think as ill of us, as if they were to reap advantage from our depravity I
Pray, dear Louifa, are you fo felfifh as not to allow Sir Charles to come up to his Ofmond for even a few hours ? or has his adoration of you eradicated thofe impref-fions of friendfliip that he profeffed to be fo indelibly marked on his heart ?—I did hope that we fliould have been gratified with a fight of the Baronet on the arrival of my Lord, thinking it impoffible that this modern Pylades and Orejtes could be long in the fame land without meeting. But 1 fee every other paflion yields to the more powerful one of love.
I flatter myfelf that this day’s poft will bring me a packet from Southampton. In that hope 1 bid you adieu 1
Julia Herbert,
WHAT YOU WILL.
^0%
To Lady Julia Herbert.
Southampton.
IR Charles has taken leave of me He promifes to return in a week; but what an age will that time appear to your Louifa I—I feel fo aukward,—-the town
looks deferted 1----1 endeavoured a few
minutes ago to laugh with Lady Arne, as if rny heart was gay, and a tear trickled from each eye—What folly!—I was alhamed' of it, and have retired to my room till I can behave with lefs emotion.—Only gone for one week, and all this uneafinefs—again I repeat. What folly !
1 received, a few days ago, a letter from Sir George Sommerville, filled with encomiums on this amiable man.—He tells me, that, to beftow my hand on SirCharles, will give peace to his heart in his laft moments, and let him defcend into the grave without a pang for my happinefs after his dififoludon.
What felicity is min
K 6
pleafure
3U34
M ASQ.UERADES; or
pleafure to thofe I love, by following the immediate impulfe of my own inclinaiion !
Sir Charles told me he intended to make Petersncld his road to London, and to pafs an hour at Sommerville-Houfe, there to fettle every preliminary to our union according to Sir George’s approbation. I fear, Julia, he thinks of making great fettle-mekts *, I have written to my uncle to intreat that he will not fuffer it—Never was paffion more difinterefted than mine is. I am fure I may with juft propriety fay,
(i
I love him for himfelf alone.
99
My ftay at Southampton will not be much longer. I have informed Lady Sommer-vilfe that my health is eftabliffied—and that I wilh to have an opportunity of kiff-ing her hand-----—
Your letter is juft brought me—I am
rejoiced to hear you had fo pleafant an evening in Grofvenor-Square, but lament your difappointment in not feeing Lord Ofmond.
Why did you not mention Col. Elliot ? Is he gone I My heart is fenfible of the agonies another’s muft endure who loves
hope-
.R..
WHAT YOU WILL.
2®5
hopelefsly.
Ah, Julia! may we nei-
ther of us ever experience fuch milery 1 You fee how miftaken you were in fuppofing me felfifti, or that Sir Charles had forgotten his friend.—Thus it ever is to
0
form conjediures in a hurry 1
1	am going with Lady Arne to pay fome morning-vifits, after which I muft attend my toilet with much attention, as we dine four miles off, where we are to meet moft of the principal inhabitants of this neighbourhood—but what pleafure can I have in adorning my perfon, when the only object, in whofe eyes I am follicitous to appear well, every hour is carrying further and further from me!—Yet ought I not to juftify his choice as much as poffible in the opinion of others ? Certainly —Farewel till to-morrow.
*

*

4
Julia
Merning.
man felicity !—Where are now the gay prof-pc6ts that gilded yefterday?—Fled!—and in their ftead a rueful train of horrors fill
your Louifa’s imagination.
I was
2o6
QU
OR>
I was this morning at the drawing-room window, when I obferved a chaife and four -driving furioufly into town. As it drew nearer I difcovered Sir Charles’s liveries, and foon recolledted the face of one of his footmen, who preceded the carriage.—I knew not what to conclude from fo fudden a return, and could hardly credit my fight, till I faw Sir Charles himfelf alight from the chaife.—What words can paint my grief, at being informed that my dear uncle’s illnefs occafioned Montague’s coming back to Southampton! He arrived at Sommerville-Houfe as they were about to difpatch an exprefs to me, and, apprehending the' fiiock it muft give my fpirits to be fo abruptly alarmed, begged (painful as the office would be) to be the bearer of the melancholy tidings. He broke it to me in the gentlefi; manner.
How does afflidtion meliorate the heart! Dear as Sir Charles is always to me, methinks he is twenty times more fo in the charadler he now reprefents of the tender,
—I look up to him for
conloling friend, comfort like one bereft.
uncle ! if I lofo you I cannot bear it.
Ah, my dear Dreadful thought I
I write
WHAT YOU WILL;
20/
I write while the carriage is preparing.— Lady Arne and her amiable hufband are already waiting to undertake the journey with us to Sommerville-Houfe.—My next letter will be from thence. Should one arrive this poft from Portman-Square, Clairon will' bring it with her to-morrow.—The coach is at the door—I -am at all times, and in all fituations, my beloved-Julia,
Your faithful
Louisa Sydney
fo
2oS
MASQUERADES; oR
t
To the Same,
o
Sommerville-Houfe,
NCE more do I refume my corref-pondence from this place. We arrived here about fix o’clock, and though we travelled as faft..as the horfes could put their feet to the ground, yet my anxious fears made the journey infupportably tedious. A thoufand fevere reproaches did I throw on myfdf, for having fuffered any confideration to detain me fo long from my uncle in his prefent infirm date; and really thought the painful alarm which called me fo fuddenly a juft punifhment for my un-kindnefs,
1 was met at the great hall-door by Lady Sommerville: flie embraced me with cordiality, while her fpeech was intercepted by tears!—Again did my obfervation occur, that diftrefs bends the mind, and foftens our fentiments.—Her Ladyfliip never before gave me great an iaftance of tendernefs. I enquired eagerly for Sir George, and was informed he was ftiil very ill. I
flew
WHAT YOU WILL.
209
flew immediately to his room, where I beheld a fpedacle that fhocked me to the
foul.
J
what ravages
have
been made on Sir George within thefe few months ! I approached the fofa on which he was reclined, and, throwing myfelf on
my knees, burft into tears.
On hearing
my fobs (I could not fupprefs them) he turned, and, reaching out his arms to me, exclaimed,
“ And is my Louifa come in time to clofe my eyes, and take my laft bleffing, ere my lips are ftopped with duft 1”
“ Oh, what an expreffion, my uncle !
Speak not to me thus—I cannot bear it!”
“Not bear to hear me fpeak of death, Louifa !—^You would then diveft me of
comfort.
poor girl, this inftant.
Was it not on your account, my I fhould wifh to encounter it
But oh ! — how muft I leave
you unprotected!—Would to Heaven I had not granted your brother’s requeft of remaining a year longer in Italy I —hn exprefs fhall be fent off to him to-morrow, if ] am in as much danger as I am at prefenr.
Are you quite recovered, Louifa ?” I faid
1 was
%
210
MASQUERADES: or
/ was. He bowed his head as if to exprefs the pleafure it gave him—complained of being exhaufted from having fpoken fo much, and waved his hand for me to retire •, which his attendants obliged me re-luCtantly to do, as they faid the fight of me affeded Sir George. As 1 ddcended
the ftairs I met Dr. J
and Sir Charles
going up to my uncle, accompanied by Lady Sommerville. 1 went into the mufick parlour, which you know is next the ftair-cafe : there I thought v/ithout inter-ruption I might have indulged my grief, I was abforbed in it, v/hen 1 found my hand clafped in another’s. I looked up, and faw Sir Charles kneeling before me. “Whence is it that my Louifa,” cried he, “fuffers herfelf to become a prey to unhappinefs, at
the time that Dr. J------ begins to have
hopes of her uncle’s getting the better of this laft attack ?- For Heaven’s fake re-affume your fpirits, and prepare to fee Sir George, who alks for you ! Compofe yourfdf, dear Louifa, and let me attend you to him.”
Elis voice
his expreftions—foothed my
foul:
WHAT YOU WILL.
211
foul; I gave him niy hand,—and we both re-entered my uncle’s room.
“ Sir George,” cried Montague, “ I have been chiding our Louifa: fhe makes her-lelf miferable about you, when we have all fo much reafon to rejoice at your being greatly recovered.” He led me to a chair near Sir George, and retired.
O'
“ And may I hope my dear uncle will yet live to biefs his Louifa —or does Sir
Charles fljitter me ?”---
The change 1 find in myfelf within this hour is very great.—I afcribe it chiefly to the pleafure of feeing you, Louifa— Be that as it may, the paroxyfm of my prefent diforder is paffed--! have new fpirits, and life itfelf feels renovated ; therefore be comforted.
“ Merciful Heaven, receive my thanks ! exclaimed I; and I embraced him.
“ I want to have fome converfation with you, Louifa, about Sir Charles Montague; but it cannot be now. He has honour, worth, alliance—-every thing that can make a woman of fenfe and delicacy happy. All that I defire life for, is to fee you married to him; and, as your brother is not in
England,
99
99
SI2
MASQUERADES; or,
England, it would be an unlucky cffcufrl-ftance to lofe me before the indifEluble knot is tied.—But no more of the fubjeCl at this time.”—
Dr. J
entered, and gave
me very comfortable affurances of my uncle’s doing well for a good while. On his
o	o
quitting the room, Sir George related to me feveral little matters that had paffed in the family way during my abfence, and feemed'more chearful than I could have expeCled from the weak ftate he was in. About nine o’clock I took leave of Sir George for the night, and returned to company with better fpirits than 1 went up poffeffed of.
My amiable Sir Charles fought an opportunity of entreating, that, Jhould the worji happen to my uncle that 1 could dread, in his abfence, I would exert a proper fortitude on the occafion, and fupport myfelf for the fake of the man who hoped to call me his, and whofe whole felicity depended on me. He lamented his being obliged to part from me at fuch a time !—and added, he was fo prefumptuous as to be very impatient to introduce Lord Ofmond to the Lady whom he ex-pedled very ffjortly to be connedled with by the
deareft
w
YOU W
213
deareft of all ties\ thereft
. . .
his friend to Sommerville-Houfe. I told Sir Charles, he was an encroacher ; that in my opinion he had no reafon to believe himfelf on fo fure a foot, till 1 had heard from Lord Clermont \ and that I thought him to blame in touching on fuch a. fubjedi at a momtnt when my whole attention muft be wholly en-grojfed by one melancholy circumftance,
“ You hurt me much, Lady Louifa!” replied he—^^Not on a fure foot!-—Sir George Sommerville’s approbation is obtained your brother’s 1 had before I parted from him.—Good God !—how cruel you are ! But I will not be anfwered in this way Before I leave this place, thofe lips muft pronounce me fecurc of this hand',—it fhall be mine—you lhall not quit me, upon my foul, till you prornife that it fhall Speak my Louifa, will you not confent to blefs me with it ? “ To be thus compelled. Sir Charles”-----No. Madam
Great as I hold the value of it, 1 would not owe it to cornpulfon—Make it a voluntary gift—and I am unexceptionably the happieft of men.” “ Well, Sir,” cried I,
“ it
214
MASQUERADES; or.
and with it a heart that fhall
I think it is ridiculous to deferibe a
It IS yours
be all follicitude to make it deferving of you.”—
lover’s rapture on fuch occafions. A like-nefs, no doubt, runs through all; and, if they do not really feel wiiat they would have us believe they do, they have brought art to refembie nature fo ftrongly, that there is no perceiving the difference. He told me, that in a few days 1 muJi expedi to fee him here again, and in the mean while hoped I would not refufe him the fatisfadiion of my cor-refpondence. “I cannot longer,” faid he, “de^ lay going up to Ofmond.*-He is not fo agreeably fituated in fome points as I could wifh; and muft be anxious for at leaft the confolation of a friend—elfe, how could I prevail on myfelf to leave my Louifa I” Sir Charles bid us adieu when we re-
f
tired. He means to fet off very early to-
Heaven grant my un-
—Before I con-
- A
morrow morning, cle a good night’s repofe ! elude, I muft mention our worthy friends, Lord and Lady Arne—-Their kindnefs to me has been as unwearied as it was great. They will not be prevailed on to ftay longer than Wednefday. From hence they go
wp
WHAT YOU WILL.
21$
up to London for a few weeks—You will fee them, my Julia, and repeat to them the grateful fenfe I have of their goodnefs. No words can tell you properly how much I regard them.
I have fcribbled this half hour: it is paft one o’clock, and yet no heavinefs ap-
proaches my eyes.
Malgre I will bid
you farewel, and implore the benevolence of the fleepy god.
Yours ever,
Louisa Sydney*

2i6
MASQUERADES; or.
To Lady Louisa Sydney.
Portman-Square.
HAT I fuffered for you, my Louifa, on receiving your laft letter from Southampton, is eafier conceived than defcribed :---one of your quick fenfibility is a fadobjedt to meet with fuch dreadful alarms! —I am to thank you for fo foon difpelling my fears on your uncle’s account. Few women, diflreffed on one fide by the dangerous illnefs of a beloved parent, (fuch. have you ever found Sir George,) and en-groffed on the other by a lover that is more than charming, would have beftowed half an hour to relieve the anxious mind of even a friend; but you are an exception to moft of the fex - therefore I am not furprifed i and with that fentence I conclude my encomiums.
Though Sir Charles has been in town fix days, I have not yet beheld him. How unlucky ! He called here yefterday morning, and Lord Ofmond with him. My mother and Almeria faw them, I had gone with
Lady
w
YOU W
2lJ
Lady Percival and my brother to ride out,' and was doubly mortified when I heard what a pleafure I had loft. Lady Pemberton and my fifter join the multitude in admiring my Lord •, they fay, he is captivating,—but they will not raife my expedla-tions too high!—I muft tell you a circumftance that furprized them—yet remember you are not to repeat it to Sir Charles. My mother was alone in the little drawingroom when they were announced. Soon after, Almeria came in, and on her entrance Lord Ofmond turned very pale : when ffie fpoke, he feemed in the greateft confufion, and forgot himfelf fo far as to exclaim, “ My God ! Montague, can it be!
this
Sir Charles
upon
and enquired if he was ill? berton and my fifter were alarmed foon recovered himfelf, made many apo-
approached him.
Lady Pem-
but he
ifcribed
ufed.
fubjedi
toffed for many hours in the veffel that brought him from Calais. He ridiculed it amazingly, and diverted them and himfelf at his own expence in the moft agreeable man-
VoL. I.	L	neri
MASQUERADES; or,
sner; in fpite of which my mother declares his indifpofition feemed more the effeCt of aftonifhment than a conftitutional failing,.

Jhe had ever feen Not to her knowledge, fhe re-
plied. (Louifa, I hope there is no fpice of snadnefs in my Lord’s difpofition !) After a vifit of little lefs than an hour they made their haifemains. Sir Charles returns to Sommerville-Houfe to-morrow—I w'fh I could fee him before he goes !—but he is fo taken up with this Ofmond !—Would to Heaven he were again in Italy ] It is well Sir Chalks is not my lover; or it would mortify me to think how much he will be monopolized by him.	^
Next Monday we are to go to a mafque-fade at Carlifle-Houfe. I lhall not tell you what our drefies will be. Pray prevail on Sir Charles to come up to London time enough to go with us,- If he is in our train, none^ of the party will have any occafion, you know., to dread the ariifites of a Sir Hargrave Poilexfen; therefore, in pity to us dtfeneelefs damjels, let us have a Sii' Charles of the group.
May my next letter from Sommerville-
‘	Houfe
WHAT YOU will;
i
2m
Houfe give me the pleafing intelligence of Sir George that I defire ! and may every good angel have niy Louifa in their keep-
I	'

prays her
A'
Julia Herbert^
aa
To Lady Julia Herbert;
Bommervine-Houfe.,
EJOICE with me, my amiable Julia,’ that Sir George is much better ! Dr. has left us, and repeated again to me, juft before his departure, that my uncle is yet at fome diftance from fetting out on that dreadful journey which we ail foon or late muft undertake.
This morning Sir George told me, he was ready to enter upon the converfation he hinted at to me the firft night of my arrival •, and, previous to it, put into my
hands Sir Charles Montague’s letter to him.
L 2	from
220
MASQUERADES; or
from Southampton. I need not deferibe to you the flattering manner in which he fpeaks of your Louifa.—Lady Sommerville came in; but feeing us engaged, offered to withdraw. I took her hand, and legged Jhe would allow me to think her interefted in what concerned me bejought her to attend to the fubjedi of our difcourfe. Sir George nodded to her to ftay; and fhe, with much fatisfadion in her countenance, feated herfelf. Thus he began:
“ It would be very needlefs for me, Louifa, to expatiate on the advantages that muft attend your connection with Montague : —you know the high opinion 1 have of him, and how much I love him ; therefore, muft conclude that the day which will give you to him, 1 fhall mark as one of the happieft of my life !-----But I muft de-
mand one queftion---How are you circumftanced in regard of Mr. Melmoth ? Anfwer with your ufual fincerity.”
I told him, that no engagement fubfifted
between Mr, Melmoth and me :—that for a time my girliflo vanity was flattered by the diftindlioM he fhewed me, and I imagined myfelf bound in gratitude to think favourably of
hiniy
WHAT YOU WILL.
22 ff
him, which I conftrued into love; but when the addition of eighteen months paffed over my head, and gave greater force to my reafon^ I was fhocked at the choice I had made, and was wretched till I had revoked every encouragement 1 had given that gentleman. I affured my uncle, that he was made acquainted with my refolution of never becoming his, and had yielded to my entreaties of troubling me no more with his addreffes. He replied, “ In that point only have you ever erred,—the affair was kept a fecret from me”-—“ And from
me too,” cried Lady Sommerville, or I ffiould have advifed”—“ You rightly judged,” faid Sir George, interrupting her, “ ic never would have met with my approbation: —but ftiil my fenfes could not be confined, tho’ your fentiments were—-I heard and faw enough to wound my peace yet, finding you determined to place no confidence in me, I refolved not to extort it from you. I knew full well the danger that would attend throwing a conftraint on a young lady’s inclinations—We are all perverfe, more or lefs—Yours was a romantic age, and, if I had made, ufe of any authority on the occafion, I fhould have'been thought tyran-
L 2	nica^
V

0^
4£i
22
M A S Q U E R A D E S; or.
nical ; which would have been the inevA table means ot heightening Mr. Melmoth in your opinion, and fo of converting what was perhaps only a temporary liking into a lafting paffion.-—Thus did I argue with myfelf; and, tho’ I fiwyou in danger,, concluded it beft to leave you to the workings of your reafon,. which I trufted would difcover your error fooner, and plainer, than any other method I could ftrike on.— Thank Heaven, it has anfwered ! and I will never again mention a fubjeC; fo dif
agreeable to us both, but to add, that, had I been difappointed in my expedations of you, and you had abfolutely fixed your af-fedions on fo unworthy an objed, I ffiould then have aded my part, and, hindered you from throwing yourfelf away. My mortal difpleafure would have ' attended your marrying him—this ffiould have been told you : and I am fure my Louifa could never have borne that calamity; therefore, would not have brought it upon herfelf.
Upon the death of my firft wife, having loft my poor boy ^nd girl, I determined to fubftkute you and your brother, my children, in their ftead, I fettled the greateft
part

WHAT YOU WILL;
\
part of my eftate in Hampftiire on- Cler< moot, and put it out of my own power tO" take it from him. I alfo made my will, and left you twenty thoufand pounds, meaning; on the day of your marriage to give your hufband twenty thoufand, exclufive of my legacy.' If I lived not to fee that defirable” event, you were to have been, at the age of twenty-one, miftrefs of forty thoufand
pound

After thus providing for both

[ thought myfelf'entitled to marry ; there-
offered my hand to Mifs Meadows,, which fhe did are the honour of receiving.-Had heaven bleffed us with an offspring, my fortune would have been enough., after" the dedudions made out of it (that I have mentioned), to fatisfy their ambition. It has not; and your brother will be mafter of what I poffefs, which,, added to his own eftate, will bring him in fourteen thoufand a year, befides the twelve hundred per annum which he will pay Lady Sommer-
ville during her life.
W
1 have done nothing
further for you, Louifa, than I did on the eve of my marriage. I leave it to Cler-
L- 4.,	mont;,;
224
MASQUERADES; or
mont, to make any addition he will think proper to your forty thoufand pounds.
And now, my amiable girl, that we have finifhed with money-matters, we will return to a fubjeCt more interefting. Let me advife you to weigh well the ftep you are going to take. Partial as I am to Monta-
gue
I wifli you not to marry him, unlefs
you do it with every impulfe of affeCtion : though I hold him the worthieft of his fex, you may not view him in the fame prejudiced light;—if fo, ad an honourable
99
part, and fay fo at once.
I knevv not at firft how to anfwer my uncle; the contending paflions of gratitude, apprehenfion (left he thought me ftiil attached to Mr. Melmoth), and love, were at war in my breaft, and almoft convulfed me. Sir George rung for a glafs of water before it came, I was relieved by a ihower of tears; which when Lady Som-meryille perceived, fhe exclaimed to her hufband, “ This agony of grief bodes Sir Charles no good ! Lady Louifa muft certainly be attached to fome one elfe !—it is
k will put an end to
the
beft to own it at once
WHAT YOU WILL.
225
the affair, and there will be no harm done. I confefs it appears not altogether feafible, that another fhould lb foon fupply Mr. Melmoth’s place in her affedions ! Urge Montague’s fuic no further. Sir George” My uncle gave her one of his ftern looks, which never fails to filence her *, and which, to fay a truth, fhe very often requires. I turned to Lady Sommerville—“ Why will you be fo cruel, Madam ?—What have I
to merit a fufpicion of my ufing in a cafe wherein my whole is concerned ?-----1 love no
Sir Charles Montague is
ever done, duplicity happinefs one elfe,-
dearer to my heart than all the world ! yes, my uncle, dearer than you are,—dearer than Julia Herbert is !—Can I fay more to evince my attachment to him, fince I love not myfelf fo well as I love you both ? •—Thefe tears ■ flow from gratitude I glory in them; they (hew you the feelings of my heart, which no words can da juftice to.”—Lady Sommerville reddened her lip, by biting it unmercifully and looked as if fhe would fay, were my uncle not by, “ Fine heroics!” He was affeded. I told him, / had abfolutely accepted of Sir
Charles's
226 M A S QU ERADES; o Ry
Charles's propofals, to whom I made no fecreP of my affediion. When I related the manner in which I fpoke to him the night before he left this place. Lady Sommerville' opened her eyes, and affumed a- counte--nance of perfeCt aftonilhm.ent.. Dear Julia^ how fhe vexed me during the whole converfation! Sir George applauded me-, anff told me, that, fincq the fentiments I expreffed for Montague, were the real didiates of my heart, his joy fell very little fhort of what Sir‘ Charles's muft be-,, at the profpedl' of our union*-He feemed fatigued, and 1 retired to my-dreffing-room, where I have remained writhing ever fince..






Thurfday, Two o'Clocki.
Is it poffible, my Julia,, that you can; have patience with my continuing fo long-the inexhauftible fubjeCt of my paffion for Sir Charles ? I was juff ready to inform you how happy I was made yefterday by as. /letter from him, when that reflection occurred:--but indeed, dear girl, if I muft not:
write; of; him, 1 cannot write at all* Bear
■	' witff
Wlf AT YOU W r LL,
with my weaknefs,- and be afliired, that,, when you have beftowed your heart upon ibme worthy objeCt (and a fuperlatlvely happy one he will be), I fhall encourage you to pour forth your admiration of him—
minute, that you love him beyond expreffion. Never can I forget the tranfport my heart feels now,
at being allowed the fame privileges.--------
Blefs me !-—whom have we here ? An ele-
to tell me tv/enty times in
gant phaeton and four, with three attend
ants, are flying up- the avenue *, their appearance befpeaks fomething great. The carriage approaches—-it wheels round the ring—-a fingle O is cyphered under a coronet.------If my*eyes do not deceive me,.
or my palpitating heart flatter, Sir Charles Montague is one of the gentlemen.
It is he, my Julia! and with him Lord Ofmond'----
Now for a fight of this Adonis I:
i
1 am fummoned
Well,
Thurfday Night, Twelve o'Clock, fair
my rair friend! I have feem this irrefiftible man. “ And what fort of a creature is he?—-does he anfwer your ex.-peCtation ?•—I dare believe not,^—thougfh
228
MASQUERADES; or
perhaps he exceeds it!”--------1 fancy, Ju-
lia, there is as great a fhare of curiofity in your compofition, as you fufpeded there was of parfimony in my Lord’s.—I am a-fraid of frightening you with this fimilitude of Vulcan. He was, I think, the uglieft and moft deformed of the Heathen mythology ; and yet he fell to the lot of a Venus. —The Lord prefer ve yqu from Ofmond ! ——I fee furprize painted in your face.— Suppofe I now reprefent an objeCt exadly
—the contraft
oppofite to the hideous God !-will but do him juftice.—Yet
what
tafk
am I about to undertake ! A pen like mine muft fail extremely in an attempt to draw fo enchanting a form as my Lord Ofmond’s. To pleafe you, I will try for it.
Firft, let me tell you, he is tall, .and the moft elegant figure I ever beheld. I had no idea of a handfome leg and foot, I find, till I faw Ofmond’s. ' His
eyes are very large, black, and penetrating *, yet they fpeak the fofteft language in the world— fo expreflive!—Ah Julia! what cannot they exprefs to a beloved objeCt! You are not eafily caught by beauty, but with a heart difengaged, if you withftand the eyes of
Ofmond*
WHAT YOU WILL.
229
Ofmond, you are “ more or lefs than woman."—His nofe is rather inclining to an acqulline, juft enough to give him a very fenfible look. His mouth—mercy on me ! how ffiall I deferibe it! Indeed, Julia, I cannot poflibly do it: I will only fay that it furpafles his other features, which, but for the comparifon, would appear perfeift. The rednefs of his lips fets off the beautiful whitenefs of his teeth. The lily and rofe are blended in his complexion, without giving him any effeminate look;—on the contrary, he has a fine manly appearance. His hair is dark, and extremely thick. His addrefs is the moft finiffied you can imagine. He does not ftir, but a thoufand graces play about him. You will be aftoniffied when I fay, that Sir Charles Mon-
almoft auk-
tague appeared nothing—nay, ward, when near Lord Ofmond
fo total-
ly was he eclipfed by his friend’s fuperior brightnefs.
From the portrait I have drawn, and the truth I have jujt allowed to fall from my pen, do you not fear my ftability in Montague’s favour ? You need not, dear Julia t It is true, I viewed Lord Ofmond with admiration
MASQUERADE'S; or,
■miration but then it was only an admiration that I Ihould feel at feeing a well-executed piece of painting. My heart at the very moment was wholly Montague’s, and to have been forced to change Sir ‘Charles even for Ofmond, would have been confidered by me as the bitterefl: ftroke that fortune could infliCl.
You have often told me, that I am a true phyfiognomift ; if fo, 1 read in Lord Ofmond’s countenance a fettled melancholy—yet let me not arrogate too much merit to myfelf from this penetration : perhaps I never fhould have made the ob-iervation, if Sir Charles had not told me that h's fituation is not a happy one. Good Heaven ! what can render it otherwife ? His very looks muft command his wilhes: I dare anfwer his heart never formed one, fhat was not diClated by virtue and reafon. None but the foul of a tyger or,tygrefs could have infiidtedmisfortunes on him. On my entering the room, Sir Charles prefented him to me as the dear Ofmond of whom J had fo often heard him fpeak. He then turned to him, and fpoke in a complimentary manner of me. My Lord bowed to
your
WHAT YOU WILL.
*3'
. \
your Louifa, and faid fome very gallant things. I made the beft return I could. My aftoniftiment at feeing fo fuperlatively handfome a creature almoft deprived me of utterance. We talked much c»f Paris, and of Italy. His converfation is fenfible, and naturally inclined to be very lively I am fure, was not his vivacity damped by the diftrefs “ his heart wrings at.” My harpfichord lay open. Sir Charles allied, if I had been pradifing ? 1 faid no, “ Ofmond,” cried he, “ is an admirer of, as well as a very great proficient in, mufic; will your Ladyfhip oblige him with your favourite air out cf Armida ?” My Lord feconded his requeft ftrenuoufly; and I went to the harpfichord. He feemed to feel the tender fentiments he fighed once or twice.
I fung, for
I fancy, Julia, Lady Henrietta Marchmont is not the principal, objebt of his affections. I think it more probable, that he fhould be attached to fome Italian Lady. He once touched the keys after 1 had difcontinued from playin defifted.
cr :
-juft founded a dozen notes, and
I begged him to go on. He en freated my excufe, and I forbore to urge
him.
/
132 MAS QU E R A D E S j &c.
him, left it ffiould be difagreeable. Had
I repeated the requeft a fecond'time, his politenefs would not have allowed him to refufe me.
Very foon after, my Lord took his leave ;
he pleaded, as an apology to Sir George,
for his not ftaying to dinner, an engage-
ment he was under to be at Sir tiarry Bel-
lingley’s this night; and added, that he
had been fo happy, (looking at his watch,)
that he had ftolen more time than he had al-
lotted, in paying his dexfoirs at Sommerville-
Houfe, He goes up to London the day after to-morrow. Sir Charles remains with
us a fortnight
every moment ffiews him
to more advantage in the eyes of
Your
Louisa Sydney

*1
\
i'
ND or VOL. I


n/" /
> -
A
• /
A
n % •
•f •

/
y

N

7
-ft

\ .
\	* I
'* -'*-'5^ V
>*
I
«»

>/
. - \
A ,
• V, t
<.k.

r J
' \

« *
ft V

"r :k
.
9^

.-V'
.'t >
' i
\
s

J -
*
t- «
V- •
A'
<
. - I
\. —
■
>
- -I-.
t.. .
'.	7
''V^V -CV;
\
;-v. Y"	
	
-i ^ LV.	
	<. -.— .-
	
	

. r
>
A'-' \ -.
>
A
■ ■ '■A
I •
/
\
\ .
V* . . \ ^
f'

\-*\'' cV*.
-\
‘ 4
/a
■ I-
t \
\ \
\ \ /
A
/
/
s
f'~:ry
\
' A ^
: A^-'-,V . :: ;.
•V \


/•
, \
\ -
V ..
X ;"•


V-X>.
-o.
- ^ ■ . :^-
I f.
J

^ «4‘
ft

\y
f
./

\ '
\
*	T
f
\ .
•Ni

.V**
% >
/ •	‘'-V
‘	^	’I* '
. X -	- i
V
C A s .•: ; •-L *1-'

ft
\ •/■

i
\
> i
, .1

\
A
V •
\
Vv

/ \
A 7

» ‘
A
I 7 TO



A


• 1

• >
s
/

/
^ i
I.
V\

k
I V

■C.
-
, to.

••• v,-r •
/
\

/

/
X
MASQUERADES^
o R
WHAT YOU WILL.
BY THE
AUTHOR OF ELIZA WARWICK, Scci
IN FOUR VOLUMES.
VOL. II.
LONDON!
Printed for J. B E W, In Pater-NoUcr-Rovr.
MOQChXXXt

ASQUERADES
9

w
To Sir Charles Montague.
St. fames's Square*
OW can I compofe my fpirits enough to tell you that I again live !
Oh,. Montague! fympathize in my joy.—-The laft happy fix hours fhall be for ever
held aufpicious.
Thou trembling pen !
be lefs agitated, and inform my Charles-this.long loft, heavenly fair one is—-found. —My tranfported heart will let me fay no more!

*
%



*
VoL. II,
B
Tuefa
2
MASQUERADES; or
V	_
Tuefday Morning, , i o o'clock,
1 have been in bed two hours, but not a wink of deep approached my eyes.—Such exct’fs of joy is hardly to be fupported.
CC
Blifs goes but to a certain bound j
Beyond, ’tis agony.
29
I will try to calm my fpirits by a recital of what has happened fince yefterday morning.
I delivered your meftage to Frederick Montague, and we both went on your various commiflions, which employed us till it was time to drefs. At the half-hour after four we met at Bingley’s; where we found Rainsford, Seymour, and'Meadows. Champagne and Burgundy fo freely circulated, that each man was infpired with a aiety of heart that made him Ipeak his fentiments. When libations are offered to Bacchus, the Cyprian Qiieen is generally prefent at the facrifice. We m.ade love our topick, and named many objeds that might rival the daughter of Jove in beauty. Seymour fpoke like an enthufiaft, and plainly demonftrated, he beft could paint the paf-fion, who was under its immediate influence.
W H A T Y O U WILL.
3
ence. No words ccruld do juftice to my feedings on fuch a fubjed; therefore I faid but little. My filence was conftrued into an indifference for the fex—I vindicated
¥
ferve ft
iffured
“ No, by Heaven !” cried Rainsford' “ but to you, all women have been fuch eafy conquefts, that you forefee no trouble ia fecuring the moft charming.” I anfwered, he was mijiaken,—With a fixed fmile, which bordered on a fneer, he continued his fatire;
“ Amorous and yielding as you found the girls on the continent, you may difcover a little difficulty, Ofmond, in prevailino* on thofe that are here to liften to you : they are not of fuch combuftible textures ia England as in a warmer climate.”
“ There,” replied I, “you certainly are in an error. It is true I have not refided in this country for fome years, yet I well knov/ the women of it have given no ftrone* proofs in general of an impenetrable vi^ tue, notwit.hftanding your high opinion of them,—which indeed may be founded oa ill fuccefs.”
B 2

4 MAS QU ERADES; or,
He grew warm, and I, perceiving him heated with wine, let drop the argument. Meadows alked, if / had feen Pemberton's JjJtcrs? and immediately launched into rapturous eulogiums on thcjr beauty : nor was Lady Louila Sydney forgotten ; each man envied you.—About ten o'clock we parted, and I came home to put on a drefs that would make me fit to join the motley crew
Be fol-
ia Soho-Square.

1 had completed
/
my difguife, Montague entered, equipped for the fiime place, and propofed our calling in Grofvenor-Square for a quarter of an hour. I agreed, and we went to Lady X)——’s, where a crowd of maiks were
aiTembled, About one we entered Carlifle-Houfe, and there by confent feparated. In little more than an hour I was pretty well tired of the nonfenfe I fpoke, and that was addreffed to me, to keep up the fpirit of the thing; and meditated making my retreat. I was dtLending the flairs with that intent, when Belfielde and Frederick Montague met me with their maiks off.* — I informed them that I was going ; they w'ondered at it, faying they never faw more larilliant company than were then afforted.
—I
WHAT YOU WILL.
5
--I pleaded fatigue—Belfielde declared fuch an excufe inadmiffible, and defired me to ui'e my diligence in helping him to difcover Lady Julia Herbert.
“ You may imagine how clever a Mercury you employ,” replied I: “ I never faw her in my life!”	“ Never faw her /” re-
peated the Count, with a look of the utmoft aftonifhment.—In England fo long, and not to have beheld that wonder of the creation !” and he turned from me with a look of contempt. I joined Frederick in laughing at him, but he v*?ouId take no further notice of me, and I purfued my way. Montague thoughtlefsly called after me, “ You had beft return, Ofmond !” It made me known fo feveral, amongft whom
^	O
was Rainsford. He came up to me, and laid hold of my arm. He could not difguife his voice, though his face was hid.
“ Well, Ofmond,” cried he, “ Is there not an aflemblage here of as handfome women as any in Italy
“Faith, my Lord,” returned I, “I have given myfelf no trouble to draw compari-fons: I leave that for one of your nice
judgment to do.
59

B3

r
cc
B MASQUERADES; or.
What!—you are prejudiced againft them, becaufe they have yet paid no adulation to your fine perfon !—They have not as much tafte here as at Milan.—Let me tell you, my I.ord, the Lady who figna-lized you with fo great a preference—who
your Violante-—
-is but a
kept you fo long abroad handfome as I once thought her foil to”-------
Ci
long ft
N
fhip may forget my chara<Rer; elfe you would know, that I never fail to refent any language that borders upon impertinence, 1 am ignorant what right you have to mark me as an obje<ft that will put up with it— I am equally ignorant of the right you have to penetrate into my motives for ftaying at any place.”
“You fpeak in a very high manner, Ofmond !”
“ You deferve that I Jhould do fo, my Lord.”
4C
No—^^by no means
mm
I meant not to
offend, and beg your pardon, if I have been fo unfortunate.”
“ Dear Rainsford, what a reproach to my warmth!—I muft entreat forgivenefs for ifuppofing it your intention,”
He
WHAT YOU WILL.

He infifted on my ftaying half an hour longer. After this little fracas I would not refufe him ; fo we went together into the
cotillon-rpom very good friends.-----Rainf-
ford is difagreeable when the leaft inebriated, and, after his farcafm at Bingley’s, I could not fo readily pafs by his affured manner of fpeaking, as I perhaps ought to have done. —He owes me a fpite for happening to be more in Violante’s good graces than he was, foon after we met at Milan. However, after a little exertion of fpirit, I found him docile and pleafant enough.
On entering the cotillon-room, I beheld an inexpreffibly elegant form, drelfed as a pilgrim.—I was inftantly ftruck with a notion that it was the very identical one I
had met at the Convent of --------------- in
Paris. I went up and fpoke to her. Her voice confirmed my fufpicions. I never quitted her, but could not make any difeovery of her face, or who Ihe ftas, tho’ I invoked her in the words of Shakefpeare’s Ferdinand,
“ I do befeech you,
(Chiefly that I might fet It in my prayers,)
What is your name
B 4	I alked
MASQUERADES; or,
1 alked her to dance. She confented. Heavens ! what grace did fhe difplay ! I told her, I would give millions to fee her face. “That I will endeavour to prevent,” re-
lell: it Ihould deprive me of the conqueft you fay my figure has made.” I affured her, fhe was no ftranger to me. Very probably,” Ihe anfwered ; “ but to fay the truth, 1 never faw you before
Who are excited.” “ have
plied Ihe,
at leaft to my knowledge.
pray My curiofity is
’ cried I,
you,
“ And can you, Madam, fo little confcience as to afk my name, after this minute declaring you will endeavour to conceal yourfelf from me ?—You defire to know me that you may more effedtuallydo it.—-Come, come, I pofitively muft be gratified in beholding the lovely features which that malk hides !”
“ Indeed, Sir, you have a very falfe idea of my countenance. My portion of vanity is immoderate; it bids me not deftroy the favourable imprellion I have been lucky enough to make under this piece of filk, —But where did you ever fee me before ?” “ In Paris.” “ Aye ! I thought you were
miftaken

and Ihe turned to leave me.
N
“ Indeed
WHAT YOU WILL.
9
Indeed I am notmy imagination has continually dwelt on this ceidtial image fince I gazed with rapture on it in the convent of ----------at Paris. Do you for-
get your amiable friend the Princelfe de -------?”"-“Good God ! who are you?”
fure you are my
I withdrew my maik, “ Have you never feen any refemblance to this face before ?”
“ Never-----but 1 am
Lord Ofmond !”
“ And who are you, you angelic creature?-Keep rne no longer in lufpenfe-— I came over with an intention of finding;
t>
you out.-*-Had not fuccefs crowneo my wilhes, I muft have died of defpair.-—Phis meeting is propitious !—By bieaven I will not lofe the advantage of ic, nor quit yon
till”---—“ Lady Henrietta Marchmont
comes to free me from the gallantry of her captive---Ha ha ha !”
“ What have I to do with Lady Henriet ta ?-—No, liften to the vows I breathe on this
ceieftial hand, never to love another.”--
“ My Lord, you forget you have not feen my face—and this hand I muft withdraw.
“ Not till you tell me who you are.” “ I am of charader and family, my Lord, and,
as
Act
79
B$

.A,
10
MASQUERADES; or,
as fuch, I am fure- you will confider the delicacy due to me.”
“ When I forget it, Madam, to any of your adorable fex, but more efpecially to you, may I be abandoned by you !• — the greateft curfe that can fall on me.
I refigned her hand, as fhe grew uneafy; but, whilft I was in pofTeflion of it, what tumultuous throbs of joy agitated my foul! Montague, can the libertine’s moft fenfual gratification yield the hundredth part of enjoyment that is afforded us by the flight-eft favour from the virtuous objed of our love .^--Ah ! that fome of our friends, who are plunged in vice, could draw the comparifon ! Libertinifmin their breafts would exift no longer.
I again entreated my fair pilgrim to dance.' She whifpered a lady in a domino, on whofe arm fhe conftantly leaned; and, when fhe had received her anfwer, a fecond time bleffed me with her hand. After we had finifiied, a gentleman came to her, and engaged her for the next cotillon.—How I envied him, when I heard her confent to his requeft!—As fhe was preparing for the
dance, a perfon (that I was not unacquainted
with.
WHAT YOU WILL.
II
with, tho’ I could not recoiled his name, nor where I had feen him) in a lilac domino told her, Jhe muji find it very inconvenient from the heat to dance with a majk on. She replied, Jhe did not mind it. He uttered fome further objedion, which the lady I mentioned joined in*—and fhe immediately dropped the envious covering which had hindered a multitude from feaftinor their
fight on the
“ moft repleniftied fvveet
Work of Nature which from the Prime Creation e'er file framed.”
4 '
/
Ah, Montague! what were my emotions at viewing the very face I faw at Paris! I gazed with rapture on her, and for fome minutes could not fpeak. She looked at me with a blufti, and exclaimed,
“ Henceforward, my Lord, be more cautious how you raife your expedations.”
She flew with Colonel Cecil (for he was the happy man), and I ftood as near as poffible, adoring even the ground ihe beat with her pretty, well-managed feet. The dance being done, I attended her, back to her
B 6
/
12
MAS Q.U ERADES; or
party. I found them all unmaffied, and that the lady in the domino was Lady Pemberton, who diredly introduced me to Lord Pemberton, and afterwards prefented this lovely girl, who has been fo long a foe to my reft—whofe name I have hitherto thought of with a prejudice bordering on
difguft
whom I have vowed to fearch every
this admirable
corner of the globe for Lady did Ihe prefent to me under the title
-----And now,
Montague, I cannot in reafon but allow
of Lady Julia Herbert.
ymu to laugh at my ablurdides refpeding this firft of women.—My heart is fo dilated with extacy, that I could follow your example.
Under mafks there was nothing extraordinary in the. declaration I had made Lady Julia. It might pafs as a mafquerade converfation ;^-“but the difguife once removed, I dared not continue to addrefs her in the fame ftyle, though fhe muft have plainly feen my heart wiffied to be allowed fuch happinefs. Our acquaintance was too fhort certainly for it to be proper. I afked Lady Almeria to dance. She is too much like her fifter not to be a lovely objed.
They
WHAT YOU WILL.
*3
They were both habited exadly the fame, and appeared divinities, though in terreftrial characters.
Belfeilde joined us, and feemed con-fumedly in love!
Lady Henrietta Marchmont and her aunt came up to Lady Pemberton and her charming daughter as I was ftand ing by the latter. Lady Julia looked at me and fmiled-*-! took no further notice of the ladies than to-bow to them. Rainsford and Frederick rallied me on changing my mind, and congratulated me on finding my relijh for the mafquerade return fo furprijingly, Belfielde alked me how I approved of his choice ? and whether I did not think Jhe would eclipfe all the heauHes of the French court when he carried her over?—-What an opiniated puppy ! I hate the blockhead for his prefumption.
When Lady Pemberton gave the word to depart, and was informed her carriage wmted, as I was next to Lady Julia 1 offered her my hand. Seymour endeavoured to anticipate me: I fhewed him the prize I had obtained, and bowed. He drew a
I was not fo loft in my own happinefs as not to feel his difappoint-
figh and retreated.
ment.
H
MASQUERADES
OR
ment.—I was vain enough to hope that I might difcover fome approbation in Lady Julia’s countenance. My afpiring impertinence was puniihed ;—fhe behaved with an equal affability to all, that mortified me, tho’ I Hmired her prudence the more for it. She muff have perceived the conqueft fhe had made, and moft girls would have Ihewn a fort of joyful levity, very flattering to a man’s expectation. Here it was different.—But Lady Julia Herbert is too well accuftomed to captivate, to view it in any other light than a thing of courfe, which muft happen when fuch tranfcendent beauty appears.
Lord Pemberton hoped I was informed
that he,had left his name at my door.-1
will immediately drefs, wait upon the Duke of Weftmorland, whom I have not feen thefe five days; and if I can get away from him in any tolerable time, will pay my re-fpects in Portman-Square—If not this
morning.
the evening muft be allotted to that purpofe; for my heart pants with impatience once more to behold my Julia. Ah, Montague ! what an extatic thought! May fhe be mine !—Unite with me in praying
WHAT YOU WILL;
15
ing for the realization of it, and I fliall be the happieft of men.
Kifs Lady Louifa’s hand for
Your faithful
Osmond
X
To Lady Louisa Sydney.
Portman-Square,
N fpite of your aflertions to the contrary, I cannot help thinking your defcription of “ Henry, Marquis of Ofmond,” has in it an air of rapture very dangerous to the peace of Sir Charles Montague.— You may be angry, l.ouifa, but 1 declare it as my opinion, that, if you mean to aCt honourably, you ought to keep up no further acquaintance with this blazing comet, who came over with no other intention, I aiftually believe, than to deftroy the hearts of all the Engliih women.
I have
%6 MASQUERADES;
I have feen my Lord—Yes, he is certainly handfome—I allow ic—but he is yet more agreeable — Such vivacity, --- fuch brilliancy of wir, >— fuch delicacy in his converfation to our fex,— fuch an addrefs, —fuch!-—in fhort, Louifa, 1 am determined to follow the advice I give vou, and fee
him no more.
give you,
Prepared as I was by your prognoftications, how could I do otherwife than be charmed! You half perfuaded me into a paflion for Lord Ofmond before 1 beheld him — cruel girl!— yet you knew him to be engaged^
Weil, my Louifa, to leave this nonfenfl-cal ftiie, 1 do think Sir Charles’s friend, fans badine, comes up to your defcription : he is a moft delightful objeCt,-—but furely not fo infallible a one at captivating as you
My curiofity has been fully gratified fince I receiveti your letter. Laft Monday I was introduced to Lord Ofmond at the mafquerade. I danced with him once or twice in the courfe of the night. Before we unmafked, I happened to fall in his way, and he accofted me with the gallantry (adapted to the place) of a Frenchman. He was habited as a Mercury: I
never
imagine
O
WHAT YOU WILL.
27
never faw fo becoming a drefs, or one fo w'ell calculated to fhew to perfection his elegant form — but indeed fuch a perfon muft adorn any garb *, and the tinfel and feathers he appeared in on Monday borrowed the greateft part of their luftre from the beauty of the wearer. In doing juftice to the handfome Henry, you aje not to caft a farcaftic fmile on this paragraph, Louifa. .... I can admire charms, as well in man as woman, without being in love. I think I fliall never fall a victim to that paflion.
Yefterday evening Lord Ofmond came to Portman-Square. We, had company; a good part of which furrounded the card-tables, whilft others were engaged in little parties. Lady Mortimer, Mifs Edgcumb, Sir James Weftbrook, and myfelf, had formed one at the lower end of the room. Wc were repeating over the occurrences of the mafquerade. Lord Oftnond Jiroiled towards us, and took a feat next to me: he was in admirable fpirits, and gave life to the converfation. An hour and a half flew away before we imagined the third part of the time was elapftd; and it was
witli
l8
MASQUERADES: or
ing a lover of hers, nance to conceal fo much artifice !
with infinite reluClance we faw him ileal out of the room.
But, dear Louifa, where is the melancholy you perceived depiCted in his countenance? I fee none of it. But I am not the phyriognomiil you are : and f am glad of it in this cafe; for, though a ftranger to me, I ihould be grieved to behold To amiable a man a prey to wretchednefs. I jefted with him (under a maik, obferve) about Lady Henrietta: he denied his be-
So honeft a counte-
Fie,
my Lord!-------Sophia Neville arrived in
town this evening: ihe fpends the next fortnight with us, during my uncle’s tour into Devonihire. Judge how happy my Lord Pemberton is!
The day after to-morrow we are all to go down to Lord Mortimer’s feat at Windfor, where we ihall ftay four days, A hundred beaux are to be of the party; Lord Ofmond will be one of them. Every day is to be fpent in a diverfity of amufements.
■.. Oh that you were Lady Louifa Mon-
Until you are, we ihall never have you amongft us. For my fake, be expedi-
tague!
tious
WHAT YOU WILL.
*9
tious in changing your name you know not with what impatience I wait for the moment that will give you once more to
\
Julia Herbert.
I heard a week ago that Colonel Elliot had embarked : may Heaven proted him 1 Commend me properly to Sir Charles.

20
MASQUERADES; or
i
To Sir Charles Montague
N
Wlndfaf,
AM, by an invitation from Mortimer'^ at this place, with his family and Lady Pemberton’s, in which I include Lady Sophia Neville : the reft of the lovely fex are too numerous to particularife. The men confift of nine or ten of your moft intimate friends, that belong to our club. You can form no idea of the happinefs I enjoy in the fweet Julia’s company. How complete would ic be rendered could I but hope for the flighteft partiality from her in my favour! But, alas I Montague, I fee not the remoteft appearance of it; nor is there the leaft difference in her behaviour to me and to Budenall, Frederick Montague, and Seymour, who live each of them on her fmiles. I might have added Weftbrook to the lift, who adores her, and {hews it moft: by the pains he is at to conceal it. Yet furely their paffions for her
ace not to be compared to mine !.......But
how unreafonable an animal I am! Is it not a greater felicity than I once hoped
for.
WHAT YOU WILL.
21
for, to gaze on her,--to converfe, —to ride,—-and dance with her ? Afluredly it is; and the farne benevolent genius that led me to a difeovery of the objeCt of my wilhes, may yet guide me to the pofleflion of her. In that dear hope I will give myfelf up to my prefent blifs, nor fuffer another fear to taint the joys which gild the few days that are fpent at Windfor.
Can you, my Charles, account for the inconfillency of my heart, which, though it loves to diffraction, will not permit my tongue, in any of the favourable opportunities that offer, to tell its feelings to
Lady Julia?..........Yet, on reflection, I
find the caufe : there is a divinity about her, which infpires a reverential awe, and brings conftantly to my fenfe the idea that
no man is worthy of her.-------And again—.
fhould I be rejected—-Oh horrible! horrible To be divefted of hope—diftraClion muft follow.------Farewel!
Yours ever,
Osmond
To
22
QU
To Lady Louisa Sydney,
'	Portman-Square,
E returned this morning from Lord Mortimer’s, delighted with our ex-curfion. Where a vaft deal of pleafure is looked for before-hand, in parties of this fort, (as you obferved in a former letter,) people generally come back difappointed. Our expeClations on this occafion were greatly raifed, and fully anfwered. Every perfon’s endeavour was exerted to render the time agreeable. The ladies were conftantly dreffed in fmiles: the gentlemen were gallant and affidupus, and ftrove to deferve them. We danced, rode, viewed the caftle and adjacent feats •,—-in fhort, not a fingle minute hung heavy on any of us. Lady Mortimer feems determined to infpire us all with her gaiety. She has formed parties for everyday and evening during a fortnight, and means to conclude the round of diflipation by giving a grand ball. Almeria (who is exadly on her model) is in raptures. Thank Heaven, as yet this racketting life feems to agree with Lady
Pemberton j
WHAT YOU WILL.
23
Pemberton! I never faw her look better. But my ftupid difpofition hinders me from enjoying it to fo high a degree as others do. Talready feel tired to death, and know not how I am to manage to keep pace with them in the whirl I am drawn into: and yet the four lafl: days will appear days of rejt to thofe I am to encounter.
l am now drefied for the opera, and hear a fummons to quit my pen. Do not, dear Louifa, expect me to write again till my fenfes are a little compofed.--^1 muft in-
form ymu that Lord Budenall has done me the honour of offering me his hand, which, you may fuppofe, 1 rejected, but with all the delicacy 1 could affume proper for the occafion.—— I come, dear Caroline; and am, my Louifa, your
Julia Herbert
9
Ta
24
M A S QU ERADES} or
To Sir Charles Montague.
moft
plan
Windfor,
AS Lady Louifa out of the queftion, dear Montague, I fhould murmur vehemently at your changing your of coming up to town about this time.} but, as floe is the objeCt who detains you, I cannot-find in my foul to complain, though 1 never wifhed more for your prefence than I do now. However, I muft (as you tell me) be contented to let another three weeks pafs over ere I can ' fee you }--but I cannot avoid hoping that
lenethen vour ftav in the
you may not lengtnen your country beyond that period.
Pemberton and I are become very intimate. I find him what report fpeaks him, amiable, fenfible, and elegant but there is a trait in his charaCler that particularly attracts mv admiration and efteem : it is; an exquifite delicacy of feeling and fentiment, which on every occafion fiiines forth in'the moft exalted light. In a few weeks hence he prefents his coufin to the world as Lady Pemberton. I cannot teil how I ligh when I behold the happinefs he en-
joy§
WHAT YOU WILL.
29
joys with his Sophia!—You muft judge what my reflections are at fuch times I Were you not, dear Charles, an amator, I fhould fear that my pen perfecutes you with dwelling for ever on my Julia but you are under the dominion of the fame paflion that agitates my foul, though the objects are different} and fympathy will teach you to feel my fituation, and be rather pleafed than otherwife with the' in-exhauflible theme.
Yefterday Lady Mortimer and the two Lady Herbert’s were riding in the Park, which was very full, when Frederick Montague and 1 met and joined them. We had not proceeded a hundred yards before an impertinent fcoundrel, on a fudden, rufhed with amazing rapidity by Lady Julia’s horfe, with a view of alarming her. His vile intention fucceeded. She was on a beautiful creature of her brother’s that fhe alway chufes to ride, which having a good deal of fpirit, and finding himfelf curbed from getting into a race, pranced and reared fo violently, that, with all her fkill, fhe could not keep her feat, and I difmounted but juft time enough to catch her in my
VoL. II.	C	arms

26
MASQUERADES; or
arms from being thrown to the ground : fhe was near fainting • a crowd aflembled, which added to her diftrefs; and it was with difficulty I could fupport her, trembling, to Lady Mortimer’s coach, that waited at the bar. After putting the ladies in, Frederick and 1 went in purfuit of the rafcal,who was making off at feeing us return ; but 1 overtook him, and gave him the chaftifement he fo richly deferved. He called himfelf a gentleman,and fwore he would have fatisfac-tion. 1 believed notafyilableof theformeraf-fertion,from his behaviour to a woman; and, as to the latter, was in fome perplexity to know how that could be brought about, as, in my opinion, nothing could fatisfy a man who had fubmitted to the contamination of the cane or whip : however, I ordered my groom to tell him who I was, and where to be found, which he did in my hearing. After this I went to Portman Square, and there was informed that Lady Julia was greatly indifpofed from the terroriffie had endured. I was quite confufed at the
and and
was quite
profufion of acknowdedgemenis Lord Lady Pemberton poured upon me, was about to fly from them, when the heavenly
WHAT YOU WILL.
27
venly girl came down to add her thanks to theirs. She hoped I received no hurt in extricating her from fo dangerous a fall as her's muji have proved, but for my humane af-ftjiance. I he beautiful languor which overfpread her face,—the melting accents of her voice,—tranfported my foul to extacy ! —I could not fbrbear to fnatch her hand to my lips;—nor was (he difpleafed at my temerity :—the rofes, indeed, flew back for a minute to her cheeks, and then quitted again their ufual habitation. She appeared a real invalid ; and I, fearful of intruding, took my leave : however, fhe is now fo much better, that I am in hopes of finding her prefently, with her mother, &c, at Drury lane Play-houfe.—Adieu! and know me always
Your faithful
Osmond.
C 2
Ta
28
MASQUERADES; or,
To Lady Louisa Sydney.
Portman-Square,
An unlucky accident which happened
yefterday morning gives me the leifure of an hour to write to my dear Louifa. As I am able to ufe my pen, you will not be much alarmed when I tell you that accident was a fall from my horfe. It would inevitably'have been fatal, from the manner in which I was thrown, if my Lord Of-,mond had not, with a miraculous agility, j(as they tell me, for, you may believe, I had no fenfes at the time to oblerve any thing,) fprnng from his horfe, and come in time to, fave me from the fate which awaited me. The fright I was in was the chief inconvenience 1 felt: indeed, my fpirits have been fadly deranged ever fince. Mr. A* * 1* bled me laft night, which has been of fervice.
. I know not, dear Louifa, how to ex-
prefs to you the gratitude my heart is filled with towards Lord Ofmond for his kind follicitude at the moment of my diftrefs, exclufive of what 1 pvve him for my pre-
^	fervation
WHAT YOU WILL.
^9
fervation.—Such humanity and tendernefs as appeared in his countenance !—So eager to fave me from the curiofity of the gathering crowd!—So delicate and refpeCtful in his manner!—I do fay with you, indeed, “ How happy will that woman be who poflcffes his affeCtions!” I think I am from hence bound to efteem him with the
K
utmoft friendfliip.
My modier, Lady Mortimer, and Aline-ria, are gone to the play ; I begged to be left' at home, pleading that I w'as not fufficiently recovered to go into public. Lady Pemberton was fo good as to hold my excufe admiftible, and grant my requeft.
When do you intend to give your hand to Sir Charles ^ That event once over, if I d V not fee you, I fhali at leaft have the
of hearing from you again, I truft :
1 V
pieaiu
—at prefent it appears to me as if you Were entirely loft to every objeCl but the One you are fo foon to call yours. Confider the length of time which has elapfed fince the date of your laft letter, and then blame me, if you can, for this obfervation.
-----And yet, how unreafonable 1 am, not
to make allowances for your fituation!
c 3
Pardon
30
MASQUERADES; or,
Pardon me, my Louifa; I fee—and hate myf elf for my petulancy.
I fuppofe, after Sir Charles enters the matrimonial lift, his friend will very foon fdllow his example. Bleffings attend him ! —But indeed, my Louifa, 1 cannot think Lady Henrietta fo adequate a match as he deferves in any refped; but fortune ; and, furely, that is the meaneft of all conficiera-
tions! Lord Ofmond feems not to like
%
' her;—but are we not taught to believe that men are compofitions of artifice ? and is it not natural to conclude tliat they always drefs their thoughts in mafquerade ? How ftrange!
I ffiall be.accufed of vanity, if two letters running tell you in each of a new lover —-I muft run the rifk but ah, Louifa I you know but little of the difpofition of my heart, if you fufpeCl fuch lovers can give me an idea of triumph.
The Count de Belfielde has made his ad-dreffes to me in form: I need not add that I anfwered him as I did Lord Budenall— but there is no getting rid of him; he ftiil perfeveres to torment me. What abfur-
dity!—as if that would induce me to change
my
w
YOU WILL.
31
my refolution !------•! cannot paint to you
my chagrin the other night, at the opera, when he anticipated Lord Ofmond in leading me to the carriage.
O	O	^
To-morrow my lifter gives her ball: I believe it will be very fuperb. After that. Lady Percival’s is to be given ; and then my mother follows their lead.—I never was more tired of diflipation than at prelent. I figh for a few tranquil hours to recover the ferenity of mind which this buftling life has deprived me of.—Good Heaven ! what an idle purfuit is that of pleafure ! I can fafely avow it is not to be found in a crowd of fplendid people, nor in the pageantry anti , mummery of fpeclacles. I am happy to think that a couple of months will fee us in the country a change I wilh for' with impatience. Would the time were now come ! —Ah, my Louifa! how this abominable fall has deprefled my fpirits J — I will write no more, left my letter fhould have the fame effeCl on yours.—I muft juft add, that my uncle is returned to London, and has taken Sophia home; but fhe is ftiil in all our
parties
Ever your affe<5tionate
C 4
Julia Herbert
3^
MASQUERADES; or
To Lady Julia Herbert.
letter have I from you !
me
Sommerville-Houfe.
t
H, my Julia !—my friend !—what a
Firft let
repeat my thanks to Heaven for your efcape, and again beg eternal rewards on Ofmond for his timely protection!—But fpr him, what a wretch might I be at this moment! My blood ftagnates at the idea. And next fuffer me to clear myfelf from the injuftice of your unkind fufpicion, by informing you that my filence proceeded from a total inability to ufe a pen. In attempting to open one of the fwivcls of my watch-chain, I was obliged to ufe a knife, which flipped and cut my right hand fo terribly, that I could neither write nor work
till this morning that the furgeon allowed me to do both. Do not be uneafy; for it is no longer of any confequence. I was fearful of alarming you, or you fliould have been acquainted with the accident
foon after it happened.
/
But
w
YOU WILL.
33
But what, my Julia, is the matter ?—Never did I know in my life more even fpirits than yours. “ JDiffpation dijlurb the ferenity of your mind I" Oh! no, no, no! ------Some other caufe has done that mifchief—Tour fall?—Wffiy it might at the time, and for a few hours after; but it goes againft my creed to afcribe fo great a change to a temporary Ihock, attended (Heaven be praifed !) by no injury. Can a little terror make you quarrel with amufements you took delight in a few weeks ago ?—Can that account for your being fo fuddenly fa-tiated with them as to defire to leave London, avifi figh for the moment that will carry
you from it ?
1 will not, dear Julia, in-
trude upon you my conjectures—Let me on-ly beg you will fearch in your own bofom for the fource of this alarming perplexity and then be as candid as you have ever been in acquainting me with it. I am interrupted----—
*



%

%
%
%
%


%
%
---Sir Charles—my dear Sir Charles! could not leave me at the expiration of the fort-
C5	night:

34
MASQUERADES; or.
night: he agreed to blefs us three weeks longer with his company. Ten days of the time have already flipped away : at the end of it he will go up to London for a week, to fee that every thing is in readinefs againft he carries to your gay metropolis the hap-py woman who will call him hers--1 have promifed to give him my hand at the altar very foon after his return.—Julia, how near the awful moment approaches, in which the name of Sydney will be funk into that of Montague!—Shall I, think you, always find him the fame amiable objeCl that he now appears ?—Will not the lordly hufband, the defpotic ruler, fucceed the tender, gentle, infinuating lover ?—Unjuft furmife!—’Tis profanation to entertain a doubt of my Montague !—As much fo as to fuf-pe6t him of infincerity, or throw a reflection on his fidelity. The happy funfhine that breaks upon my fate has renovated Sir George’s health and fpirits: he fees company; nay, ventures to go out to air in his chaife !--Thereftof us (you know we have an excellent neighbourhood) make parties, vifit, dance, have concerts, and
are antidotes to dulnefs and chagrin.—But
there
WHAT YOU WILL.
33
there my pen ran into an egregious mif-take. Immerfed as I am in fo much gaiety, a few pangs have found their way to my heart fince I received your lail letter. Should my Julia be a prey to melancholy, how will my felicity be embittered !—Felicity I—I cannot know an idea that comes near the word, whilft you are unhappy. —No more on this fubjeCt for your fake and my own till I receive your next, which will either diffipate my doubts, or confirm my fears.
Sir Charles commiffioned Lord Ofmond when he went up to take him a houfe (which we both like) in Cumberland-Street. The inftant he propofed it to me, I approved of it, for its near fituation to Portman-Square •, and I was not difpleafed at being informed that it was the houfe which Lady Caroline Denley and her niece refided in when I was with you in town. The elegancy of it, you may remember, we both extolled.
Was Mifs Edgcumb with you at Wind*’-for Poor girl!—This queftion leads to a topic I am much interefted in, Lord Pemberton’s marriage. May he and his Sophia
C 6	experience
36
QU
O R
experience every blifs that attends the ftate they are fo foon to enter ! If my prophetic foul does not, err, they will be a very happy couple. I hope we lhall meet, dear Julia, before you go into the country—-It certainly muft happen; for I have already been debarred too long of the pleafure I hold moft dear upon earth.
Lord Ofmond is a conftant correfpondent of Sir Charles’s. 1 Ihould like to know the fubjeCt of his letters-—I am fure Lady Henrietta is not—But his friend is very fecret, and, you may fuppofe, I do not even caft a curious look at him, when he fpeaks of hearing from his Henry.
Laft night Sir Charles again exprefled to me his regret that you are fo difficult to pleafe in your choice, and faid, he would give a great deal to know, if there was a man in the world for whom y ou had a prediledlion, Hiseyes wereftedfaftly fixed in my face while he fpoke. I enquired his motive—He made no other anfwer, but “ Ah, Louifa, I wifli” “ tVhat ?”----------I muft not tell”------
“ I will be as referved. Sir Charles.
59
He
was going to reply, when I was called to the quadrille-table. ,What can he mean ?
Surely-
N
WHAT YOU WILL.
37
Surely, Julia, his inquifitivenefs muft in fome meafure be on Ofmond’s account!-------------
If fo, I join him in his

ijh
99
The converfation after fupper turned on the beauties who adorn our Court. I enquired if Lady Henrietta might be clafied amongft them ? “ No indeed !” anfwered Col.Bingley. “ Is fhe fenfible, SirCharles?” Faith I am ignorant of it if flie is; but I have a very flight acquaintance with her.” “ That is aftonilhing, as (he is fo foon to be your friend’s wife !” Ady friend's wife! Lady Louifa.”—He paufed-—“ When fhe is introduced to me by that title, I fhall then be privileged to a nearer intimacy, and will inform you.”
Sly creature I—What am I to think?
Jul
poffefs half the heart (the other half is Montague’s) of your
Louisa Sydney.'
Ta
38
MAS QU ERADES; or

To Sir Charles Montague.
St. James's-Square,
OU will be forry to hear of the em-^ barrafled and diftreffed fituation I have been in for many days paflr. The morning after Lady Pemberton’s ball, I drove to
to attend him ta
I obferved a
na he
my father’s, meaning Court. At faluting him, ftern nefs in his afpeCl that boded me good. He was very filent; and, when had finifhed his toilet, we ftepped into his chariot; but, before we left the door, he defired, if I was not very particularly engaged, I would difmifs my vis-d-vis, and return^ in his carriage with him to dinner, and confent to fpend the evening in the manner he Jhculd appoint, I afiented to his firft pro-pofal, but declared myfelf engaged at eight o'clock. I ordered my fervants to go home, and return at that hour. We drove off^. and, after a fhort paufe, his Grace began with the following enquiry: “ Pray, my Lord, may I be permitted to afk what is to be done at eight o’clock, that you are then fo indifpenfably obliged to leave me ?” “ I
am
WHAT YOU WILL.
39
A
am engaged, my Lord, to be of Lady Pemberton’s party to a private concert/ and from thence to attend her to the Feftino.”
CC
(C
Always in Lady Pemberton’s fuite !” Certainly your Grace can find no objection to that;—a woman fo univerfally admired, that it is the greateft advantages young man can wifli for to be admitted to her acquaintance.” — “I admire yoiir en-thufiafm on the fubjeCl; but perhaps your fentiments and mine differ on this head. However, you can write an excufe from
You muft be of my
party this evening.” confider”------------
Grofvenor-Square.
CC
I beg your Grace
to conlider"---------	“ Well, I will—
Since the order of nature is to be reverfed, —the fon to command, and'the parent obey,—1 have nothing to do but to fubmit --Purfue your engagement ;—but remember, Harry, that you dine with me again to-morrow, and I expeCl to have the evening from you.” I bowed obedience, happy to have been fo well excufed ; and flattered myfelf the gathering ftorm which appeared upon his brow would be diffipated ere frefh matter could arife for further altercation. He did not condefcend to
fpeak
40
MASQUERADES; or
fpeak another fyllable to me during fhe time we were confined together in the chariot. What were my reflections, are beft kept to my owa bofom : they were not to my father’s honour,— nor perhaps to my own credit.
Lord and' Lady Pemberton, the two Lady Herbert’s, Lord and Lady Mortimer, were at the drawing-room, which was a very full one. I direCtly joined the Herbert’s ; and, calling my eyes fome minutes after on the Duke, perceived him looking at me with the utmoft indignation and paflion blended in his countenance. Soon after came in Mrs. Aubrey, and her niece Lady Henrietta Marchmont ; the latter lb loaded with jewels, that fhe feemed to totter under their weight, and was a thoufand times more confpicuoully ugly from their glare. I turned my eyes with horror from this hideous objeCt, and rewarded them for tho penance they had undergone, by feafting them on my angel Julia, who appeared infinitely handfomer from fuch a contrail. She was elegantly drelfed, without extravagancv either of fafhion or ex-pence; her beauty added charms to, in-
'	ftead
w
Y O U W
41
ftead of borrowing them from, her attire : every one was fixed in contemplation of her; even my father looked at her with fpiteful admiration, and, I believe, could with truth have repeated,
s
\
---“ Even /, who hate her.
With a malignant joy behold fuch beauty, And, while f curfe, defire it.”
However, he with difficulty left gazing on her, and turned his attention to Lady Henrietta, to whom he paid fo much refpeCl:, that one lefs in theYecret than I am would be convinced he intended her to be my mother, inftead of his daughter.
When the drawing-room broke up, and we were feated once more in the chariot, I aflked his opinion of Lady Julia and Lady Almeria Herbert.
“ They are very handfome certainly,” he replied. “ It is a pity they have not better fortunesbut ‘ they can fcarcely hope to marry men on a foot with themfelves in point of family.” “ Good Heaven ! why not ? earneft ?”
Is your Grace really in “ Afifuredly I am ! Ten thoufand pounds, which is the utmoft they are
each
42
MASQUERADES: or
f
each entitled to by their father’s will, fs no object in this age ; and our nobility have more prudence than to marry women merely becaufe they have pretty faces.”— “ If 1 may judge from my own fentiments, my Lord, their notions are not fo illiberal,—-
they would”------	“ I have no doubt but
your notions are thoroughly romantic,—and beg you will fpare me from hearing the abl'urdity of them.” “ I beg your Grace’s pardon -, 1 meant notAo trouble you with my converfation.” I was filent; fo was he. When we got to his houfe, by his defire, I followed him to his library. After we Vv-ere feated, without much preamble, he informed me that it was his intention to bring about a match between Lady Henrietta and me. He recapitulated the many obligations I owe him \---his not marrying a fecond time, left it might hurt my fortune ',—his trying to gratify every requeft I made him \-—the expenftve manner in which he allowed me to live \—and, to complete all, the regard he teftified for my happinefs, in providing fo eligible a connedHon for me, againft my return from abroad:-- I could have no objedtion to it:—every advantage
confpired
WHAT YOU WILL.
43
%
confpired to make it a delightful one:--title, fortune, and merit, centered in Lady Henrietta. After a full half-hour’s panegyric on fo defirable an acquifition, he concluded with telling me, that, unlefs I confented to obey his commands, I never fhould poflefs a {hilling of his. I did not once interrupt him whilft be fpoke, but when want of breath obliged him to ftop, I feized the opportunity, and replied—“ As to your threat, my Lord, it has no fort of effe^ on my difpofition ; for I regard money fo little, that your Grace is welcome to difpofe of your fortune to any objeCl you think more deferving of it: I fliall never murmur. But the refiedion that your difpleafure will follow my refufing to marry Lady Henrietta, indeed* affliCls me,—penetrates me to the heart:—yet I muft encounter fuch a misfortune, fince honour to the perfon you approve of, as well as regard to myfelf, direCl me to Ihun fo horrible an union. Some other man, my Lord, may do juftice to the lady’s worth—I am infenfible to it; and, fo far from viewing her in the favourable light you do, confefs fhe is the
He was
moft difgufling female 1 ever beheld.

/
4^
MASQUERADES; os,
was outrageous—Having par malheur caufed it, I was bound to bear it. He/ze;^r^ hy Heaven, he would abandon me •, and added, “ In fpite of your contempt for money, thou ridiculous blockhead ! you will in a fhort time know its value, when you are deflitute of the means to fupply yourfelf with the common fuflenance of nature then you may too late curfe your rafhnefs, and regret the forfeiture you now make of
my benevolence and tendernef
As you
have been educated to fill the department of a very fine gentleman, I know of no other way you have to avoid for a while the gripes of penury, but by
-Oh, Monta-would with
purfe, or loading the dice.”
taking a
gue!
What
language
I
I
pleafure have facrificed a limb at the moment, to have had the confanguinity dif-folved, that I might convince him, that
“ Tho’ I am not fplenetive and rafh. Yet have 1 in me fomething dangerous. Which fhould his wifdom fear.’'
But nothing could break the tie---he was
jiill my father
With difficulty
my
WHAT YOU WILL.
45
Oh good God ! why were
my impetuous fpirit, and remained filent. He paufed, becaufe articulation was denied him—when it returned, he went on thus :
“ The expence, the enormous expence I was at during your ftay abroad, is well rewarded, my good Marquis, is it not ?— Thus it is, to pafs whole years in planning future felicity for a fon, who proves a difgrace to me-----
you not fo kind as to ordain, that the fame moment which faw his mother expire, fiiould allb witnefs his death ?” — I could bear no moref; the recollection of his behaviour to that dear departed excellence, fired mv foul—
“ I fincerely wifh it had, my Lord,” exclaimed I. “ I muft be allowed to fay, I have had caufe to blame Providence for not taking me with that amiable, but moft ill-fated woman, ever fince I loft her. That event was the unhappieft of my life—it was,
my Lord, the moft joyful of yours.----------
I have always known that you would not have another wifti ungratified, had the fame burial ferved us both. It was the will of Heaven that it fiiould not; and my-mother’s fufferings have been avenged by my
living.
46
MASQUERADES; or.
living. However, my L.ora, in my own vindication, I muft prefurne to contradiCl your afl'ertion. As yet I have been no dilgrace to you; and never, I beg you, fay fo again, till I am aClually deteCled ftealing a purfe, or loading the dice. The obligation between parent and child is mutual—After the words you have fpoken, I look upon mine as greatly cancelled.—I will take this unworthy wretch from your prefence, my Lord •, —you fhall never more be troubled with him,—Well as I may be taught'to know the value of money, I will not fupplicate a farthing from you—and may every other of your wifhes that can encreafe your happinefs attend you!”t—With an enlarged voice he cried, “ Thou rafli 1 —thou pafBonate boy ! quit not the houfe.
Perhaps you mean to build your future profpeCts on one of the Herbert’s fcanty fortune! but I am friend enough to tell you, that Pemberton will not give his fifter to a titled beggar.”
Good God ! what a villain, a dark-
that
Lord,
4;
hearted villain am I thought!—Oh !
language was delivered from any
tongue
fuch
WHAT YOU WILL.
47
tongue but a parent’s!—but here it ends.” I motioned towards the door.
“ Do not offer to leave my houfe. To retire will be well, that recollection may teach you the impropriety of fuch in-folence to that parent.”
“ I mean not to be infoient, my Lord ; but whilft I remember what I owe you as a fon—I cannot forget what is due to myfelf as a man."
“ Well, my heroic youth,” with a curfed contemptible fneer, “ you cannot better fhew your confideration oiyourjelf, than by entering into this alliance—You fhall marry Lady Henrietta.” “ I cannot, my Lord.” “Determined indeed!—Come, come, Harry, leave your attitudes for the Edgar’s, the Alonzo’s, the Oreftes’s of the theatres;— we are performing no fcene in a play—fit
down and inform me”--------=—
“ Suffer me to retire my Lord, or I fhall again be called infoient.” “You may, Ofmond.” “ For ever, my Lord---we fhall meet no more !—Think better of me in a calmer moment than you do, and you will not be unjuft.” I precipitately withdrew, and heard him ring the bell furioufly.
/
48
ouflv.
MAS QU ERADESj or,
I met feveral fervants running with
confternation towards the room
; they en-“ Do not be
“ your
is well, but rather impatient.” I
quired of me the matter, alarmed, my friends,” replied I:
Lord
made the beft of my way towards the hall; but as every-thing is of moment when one is agitated with hurry to get free, I muft mention, that, in crofting the faloon, I found a difficulty in turning the lock of the door that led out of it; it detained me fome fecond s •, and I, not'"knowing what impertinent roughnefs 1 might experience, from feven or eight fellows, hired to obey the defpotic will of a furious mafter, all of whom I heard coming towards the apartment I was in, drew my fword—bur, making another effort, I burft open the lock juft as they appeared at the other end of the room, and gained the ftreet-door unmolefted, before the porter was informed that it was his Lord’s intention that it ffiould be barred againft my departure.
Was there ever a more ridiculous fituation ?—For a few minutes I was in doubt whether my father did not miftake my fex, and imagine me his daughter inftead of
his


WHAT YOU WILL.
49
his fon. I got into a chair as foon as poffible, and was brought home, too much difturbed, you may believe, to know what ftep to take, or where to fly for confolation. The torments of the damned exceed not what I endured at the idea that my Julia muft never be mine.—-So far was my father from judging properly of my fentiments, that, had Lord Pemberton prefented her to me«—nay ! had Ihe herfelf made me a voluntary offer of her hand, I fhould have
-affeCcion enough, to ----But ah ! what
had honour enough have refufed either.
a
trial was I on the verge of encountering!
to bid an eternal adieu to the woman, on whom my foul fo fondly doated, that life would be worfe than death after the pain-
ful feparation commenced !
You know.
my friend, how much I love, and can conceive what were the ftruggles of my heart at the time.
I was determined to fee Lady Julia before 1 left L.ondon, When the hour arrived for the concert, I ordered my carriage and drove to Berkeley-Square ; there I met Lady Pemberton and her group—After the concert was over I attended them to
VoL. II.
D
the
50
MAS QU ERADESj or
the Feftino. Once, as I was fitting next to Lady Julia, fhe afked, If 1 was indifpofed? adding, fhe thought I was out of fpirits. There was fuch a melodious harmony in her voice, and fo touching a foftnefs in her manner, when fine alked the queftion, that I could fcarce refrain from pouring out my foul to her—from telling her of my paffion and my defpair. Whether my fancy was all delufion, or that the weak mind under affliction feeks to catch at comfort from every appearance which might afford it, I know not—but I imagined the lovely girl difcovered a greater attention to my converfation, there beamed forth more complacency from every beautiful feature when Ihe fpoke to me, than ever I experienced from her before. I begged her to dance--She recommended to me not to attempt it, as it might increafe my indifpofition. I told her, if I had not the honour of being her partner, fome happier man would enjoy that pleafure, and that 1 fhould fuffer more from the envy that circumfiance muji excite in my breaft, than 1 could do from the moft violent fatigue.
How can you be always fuch a flatterer, mv Lord ?”	“ Indeed 1 am not a flatterer
J	kU	-
—1 fpeak
WHAT YOU WILL.
5*
by all your friends
—I fpeak the real fentiments of my heart —Suffer me to lead you to the fet that is forming for a cotillon.” “ I would not on any account be inftrumental to your Lordftiip’s illnefs: I fliould be execrated
-------------------------One lady in particular would think on me with horror.” I perfifted in my requeft—or at leaft entreated a better reafon for not being blefled with her hand. To fatisfy me, fhe pleaded that fhe was not fufficiently recovered from her late indifpofition, to dance. I had the gratification of hearing her refufe feveral gen-
tlemen. The joy 1 felt at this little mark
of preference could only be equalled by the torture of reflecting that I fliould probably never behold her after that night.— IVly blood now ftagnates at the idea of what I endured at the time. Lady Pemberton propofed going to Randagh the next evening, and defired me to be one of her beaus.....Every thing combined to heigh-
ten my anguifh L—I know not how we happened to fpeak of Elliot, but Lady Julia expatiated to me on his worth, and lamented his abfence. She afked me whether I did not join in her fentiments of him ? I
D 2	anfwered
5'2
MAS QU ERADES; or
I anfwered that I did indeed! and compaf-Jionated his fufferings more than it was in the poffibility of words to exprefs; for I believed few miferies could equal his. “ What am I to underftand by that, my Lord !—I hope Col. Elliot is not fo very unhappy as you think him !” “Surely he is, Lady Julia: to love fuch an objeCl as your lifter, and to know ftie never will be his, is bitterncfs of forrow not to be borne—there is not that curfe upon earth which comes up to loving paffionately and without hope.” 1 fpoke unguardedly—and as unguardedly clafped
my hands precipitately—and fighed.------
1 recollected myfelf, and dared to look up to Lady Julia. The colour had left her cheeks; her eyes were fixed on me with aftonifhment. “ Is not fuch a man entitled to pity, my Lady ?”	“ The fubjeCl is
a melancholy one, my Lord; we will change it. Senfibility is a quality not to be encouraged in fuch a place, our modern fine people think—but it is only at prefent I wifli to banifli it, as my fpirits have not yet arrived at their ufual height: they have been moft miferably deprelTed fince the day you afforded me fuch kind alfiftance, and the
admit-
WHAT YOU WILL.
53
admittance of fo painful a gueft would make them as bad as ever.”
When the dreadful moment arrived that announced their departure, 1 was petrified yet I collected ftrength enough to take Lady Julia’s hand. I found fhe had refigned her place in the coach to Lady Sophia Nevill, and that (lie and Lady Mortimer went in their chairs. The two ladies, therefore, Sir James Weftbrook, and myfelf, fe[‘iaraced from the reft to go out by anpther way. As I put Lady Julia in, I flipped down her glove, arid preffed her fnowy wrift to my lips with ardour, once or twice. I clafped her hand to my heart whilft I took a laji view of her heavenly face—Something I faid in excufe for my freedom—what it was, I know not—then threw myfelf into my carriage, and played the boy—Had I not been relieved in that
manner, I muft have been fuffocated.-----
Never more to breathe was the fincere wifh of my foul.
My determination was to have gone off with Captain Audley to Portfmouth, and to have embarked with him as a volunteer againft the Americans. He is an intimate

friend
54
MAS QU ERADES; or
44
My Lor, been here defi

friend of mine, and I knew I could command him. I intended, after I got home, to undrefsj go to his lodgings, and lay my cafe before him—No time was to be loft --I purpofed leaving London (and for ever) in four hours after.
On alighting, Souville met me with bufinefs in his countenance
Monfieiir Freebourne has two tree times, fin you
hab been gone.....he fay”—I defired him
to have a little patience till 1 got to my Jtudy, and then tell me what he faid. I did not chufe that my footmen, &c. Ihould be privy to my father’s and my quarrel, though I had no doubt but it was well known to every fervant of the Duke’s, When Souville’s tongue was at liberty, he told me in his own language, (finding he could make, no way in Engliih, though he is fond of Ihewing the proficiency he thinks he gains
diftreJTed at find.
father
me: he fufpedied for a long time that I was at home, and hadffiven orders to he denied to him. He waited till two o'clock, and then declaring that his Grace would he difir a died,
called
WHAT YOU WILL.
55
called for pen, ink, ffie. and, having written and carefully fealed a letter, put it into his hands, conjuring him, as he valued my happinefs, to delay not a minute to deliver it to me at my return. I tore it open, and found it enclofed one from the Duke. The contents amazed me. 1 perufed it three times before I could prevail on myfelf to believe £ was awake.—"So different a ftyle from what I expected
ee
IS not being
Surely, thought I, the Dul
fome new method of
inventing yet more cruel! tained accufations of himfelf.
His letter cori-
He did not (it laid) deferve my forgivenefs of his con-dudl \ the barbarity of which ftruck him with remorfe the inftant I quitted him. He was anxious for me to return, that he might teil me fo, and beg my pardon ; therefore fent his fervants to prevent my departure. As he took this method of informing me of his motive for caufing them to behave in all appearance to me fo infolentJy, he hoped 1 would forgive it, and of my own accord go to him the in-Jiant I had read his letter: that, from any other man, he would defpair of obtaining the requeft, after fuch vile provocation as was given in the morning % hut when he thought
D4
on
5b
MASQUERADES; oR
fi

'■jured me; efpecially as that heart was fo much attached to
me
fhould
tention of going on any hazardous employment, {which he feared might be my purpofe,) it would furely break ; and he was perfuaded I ■could not enjoy peace when I recolledted that 1 had fhortened his days. He concludes with bemoaning his unhappy temper, which carries him into fuch improprieties that he is not fit to live.
Unfortunate man ! at the time I condemn, I pity him !—Strict as our friend-iliip has ever been, dear Montague, I have always veiled, as much as poffible, this failing of my father’s to you. You often queftioned me about it from your own fuf-
The whole truth could not be con-
■yet, as well as / could, I fcreened
picions cealed
him from cenfure, and, though I deceived you, thought myfelf jullified from the motive. It is to no purpofe to carry on the mafk any longer, and I will referve nothing from your fympathizing bofom. As foon as I confidered a little on my father’s letter,
I re-
WHAT YOU WILL.
57
\
1 refolved to attend him the moment he would be vifible in the morning—But I doubted his proteftations: I fuppofed the greateft advantage I fhould reap from them, w'ould be a fix months change of conduCl. During that time I fhould be at liberty to go where 1 pleafed without controul, or enter into any pleafures my heart approved—,buc then—yet to proceed---------
Honeft Freebourne’s letter was to this purpofe: After apologizing for the liberty, &c. &c. he fays,
That he muji give me a piece of information which concerned me nearly. Two years ago, the Duke mentioned to him, in ftridi confidence, that my mother's fijier. Lady Anne Skefley, left me at her death two thoufand a year which 1 was to he put in poffeffion of at the age of one and twenty, and to hold it entirely independent of my father, whofe name fhe execrated for not having been the tendereji of hufbands to the mofi deferving of women.
As my father always had it in his view to form a connediion between Lady Henrietta and me, he judged it proper to conceal from me this- circumftance ; left a knowledge of my having refources, exclufive of what centered in
D 5	his
MASQ.UERADES; OE,
w
h/s for tune,might lead me to be refradiory to his will; to effect which, he thought it fteceffary to keep me abroad, till on the very eve of the
fhould
fearing, amongft n generofity of Lady Anne in my favour, fhould, in fpite of his vigilance, become public, and, through feme blunder or officioufnefs of their, in converfation, reach my ear prematurely The fecret, he adds, fhould never have efcapec him, had he not dreaded that I fhould be per funded to marry ,
harjh
of b
fufed
or, if I
ref oh
enough to rejedi the unnatural authority, he trembled wiih horror to imagine, that in all probability I might put myfelf in the way of danger, and be in hajie to quit a world that I was injtrudied to think contained nothing hut dependence and poverty for me. His timely breach of confidence he hopes will fave
from either ft

my father
fears I behaved with more impatience to him than / ought to have fhewn’, and pours forth
thro’
VtoC. • iV ^
/
s
WHAT YOU WILL.
59
thro’ the whole fuch a warmth of affeClion, as fofteUed me more, a million of times, than my father’s fubmijfive, artfulXttxtxi artful I fear, is the juft term.
Many a time has Freebourne Hiked being, turned out of my father’s employ, left “ hs
He has been my monitor and mv confoler—In
Jhould fpoil meP —my champion—ana my fhort, I have experienced more tendernefs from him in one hour, than I ever did in whole life from the man who
was
And let me own.
my
author of my birth, my Montague, there was a time, which, memory will never permit me to lofe fight of, that he was far the dearer to me of the two. Once (when lix years old) I incurred his Grace’s difpleafure moft feverely, by faying, in the innocent frank nefs of my
“ I wilh mv Lord vou had fome
heart, other fon bourne’s !
you
and I was Free-
my
in my ftead,
I fhould dwell at his houfe below the weftward copfe, and go as plainly clad as a fhepherd’s boy. I would lie awake whole nights ftudying how to give him pleafure: he would be fo kind to me, no one would ever fee me cry, my Lord, as long as he lived—I fhould be the happieft
D 6	boy

6o
MASQUERADES; or
boy in the world.” After being chaftifed for teftifying io groveling a difpofition, and fo little gratitude for his fondnefs', I was dragged from my mother’s arms, where I had fought refuge from his fternnefs, and banilhed her prefence for fome days. Pardon this puerile anecdote : ’tis meant to give you a fpecimen of the man, on whom, Heaven be praifed, I no longer hold myfelf abfolutely dependent.
When my unfortunate mother died
Oh, my heart!—how frefhly do the wounds hiked which that horrid incident firft
caufed !
When I had received her laft
choaked with fobs.
kifs, wetted her cold hand with my tears and heard her laft fervent recommendation of me to Heaven—when I once more clafped my arms about her neck,and, with a voice
implored her not to Jeave me to my unkind father’s care, but itill to live and guard me from him— in that agonizing moment I heard her groan—I called her—Ail the reply flie made was “ Ah, my unhappy child !” Again I called on her—She could not .anfwer—the breath fled with another heart-rending
Such a fcene was too dread-
groan
ful
WHAT YOU WILL.
6i
ful for a boy of nine years of age to contend with, who had no fortitude to fupport him, whofe difpofition was fenfibility and gentlenefs combined, which was naturally inherited from, and ftrengthened by, the example of the beft mother that ever exifted—In the ftiocking inftant that (he expired, I flirieked and fainted. When I recovered, I found myfelf in my apartment in Freebourne’s arms, who wept with me who comforted me—who, in Ihort, fuppli-ed her place to me till 1 was fent abroad.
■Excufe this digreffion ; my tears will yet fall at this difmal recolleCtion.

*
*
*
*


You will wonder how a man, fo much my friend, Ihould be chofen my father’s confident.----His long refidence in the family,
which occafions his being treated more as a companion than a fervant—his aftonilhing worth and tried honour, unite to make him a refpeCtable perfon in every one’s opinion. My father loves him, I am perfuaded, the beft of any creature breathing ; therefore your admiration will ceafe at the
Duke’s
62
MASQUERADES; oa
Duke’s lodging fuch a fecret in his breaft, when thefe circumftances are confidered.
I bleflfed my good fortune for giving me a few more opportunities of converfing with my lovely Julia—Her condefcending behaviour was thought on with tranfport-r-My enraptured imagination fabricated a hundred airy ftruclures in confequence of it^—and this exclamation frequently pafled my lips:	If fhe loves me but well
enough to give up more fplendid offers, and be fatisfied with an humble two thoufand a year, how fupremely blefled fhall I be !” In this pleafing train of thought, inftead of going to Audley’s, I went—to bed------
About the time that I thought the Duke would be up, I repaired to Grofvenor-Square. As foon as I entered the hall, Freebourne met me with joy fparkling in his eyes. “ Now, my Lord, you aCl like yourfelf—Bleffings on your amiable, noble heart! We fhall all be happy yet, and no curfed Lady Henrietta prevent it.—I am fure it will be needlefs to caution Lord Ofmond againft faying a word of the information
WHAT YOU WILL.

mation that I
at leaft, that / was
clafping his hand.
gave ;
the perfon you received it from.
Sufpeft me not, dear Freebourne,’*
“ of turning the obligation I owe you, to your difadvantage—depend upon me !—^—All that I fear myfelf in, is in never being able to convince you properly of my gratitude and affeClion.” We reached the Duke’s apartment before he could anfwer. My father embraced me cordially; and I, without giving him time to fpeak, thanked him for his condefcend^ ing letter, ^nd entreated him to overlook whatever errors I committed the preceding day. He feemed confufed, and generoufly exclaimed, “ You have no errors, m amiable boy—I never treated you well—repentance fills my foul. I knew not how dear you were to me till on the brink of lo-ling you. From hence I will fubdue my faults, and be more worthy of the happinefs I poflefs in fuch a fon.” Again he threw his arms around me, and defired the paft unhappy quarrel might never recur in our future convcrfations. I bowed afifent, and we changed the topic.
After breakfaft he ordered his chariot,
purpofing
$A
MASQUERADES; dR,
purpofing to pay fome vifits, and then attend the Houfe. “ Where do you dine, Harry ?”	“ Your Grace forgets that I arn
engaged to you.” He fmiled. “ 1 am glad you remember it; but I fear you will have no one to meet you.” J paid him the common compliment, that I defired no other company than his. As I went with him out he aficed, if he Jhould fet me down ? I thanked and refufed him.
him in the evening to pay a vifit; adding, will not deceive you—’tis to a lady.’^ ftarted.
At parting he told me, / muft oblige him fo far, as to go with
“I
tis to a lady." I Nay, I cannot make you niarry her, Harry, if you are determined againft it 5—but I think there will be no vtry great matter in gratifying me fo far as juft to accompany me on a common vifit.”----‘‘On a
common vifit, my Lord, I will attend you there.” He feemed raiher inclined to be agitated; but, catching himfelf, turned it off in a jeft, faying, “Upon myfaith you are afraid to truft yourfelf with women ! I fufpeCt that you have found them too fond of you hitherto.” He got into his carriage and
and I oroceeded to the
drove off,
of earth that
proceeded to the fpot I moft venerate—Portman-
Square.
WHAT YOU WILL.
b3
fington Gardens.
Square. I felt lefs pleafure than ufual when I rapped at Lady Pemberton’s door, as I went to excufe myfelf from meeting her in the evening at Ranelagh.
I found the two Lady Herbert’s waiting for Lady Percival and Mifs Edgcumb, who were to accompany them in a walk in Ken-
On my entrance, a deep blufh diffufed itfelf over Lady Julia’s cheeks.—My timid foul (where flie is concerned) fuggefted it fprang from anger at the liberty I had taken the night before — She was referved to me—Lady Almeria expreffed concern that I was not to be of their party, and alked “ what could hinder it ?” Her fifter told her, I muft think her very curious ! ‘ fo unjuft ?”
“ Why fhould Lady Julia be “ It is natural for your Lordlhip to draw that conclufion from the freedom of my fifter’s queftion.” I begged her pardon, and anfwered Lady Almeria, that I was indifpenfably obliged to attend my father on a vifit. The converfation turned on mu-Jfic. I fpoke of Lady Louifa Sydney’s performance with the praifes ic deferves: her friend’s eyes beamed with pleafure, and fhe again fmiled on me j but, recollecting
herfelf
66
Q U
herfelf fuddenly, drew up her pretty mouth, and refumed her gravity. Lady Almeria propofed fpending the time they had to wait for the ladies in the mufic-room: my Iweet Julia affented, and thither we repaired. I will not expatiate upon the execution of thefe two charming girls—you have heard them,- and are a competent
I could not prevail on : her fifter favoured me
judge of mufic. La:dy Julia to fins
at the firft entreaty ; yet I hear mia cariffi-ma is not inferior to the obliging Almeria
tD O
in that excellent accomplifhmenc—fuperior I do not believe it poffible for her to be. Lady Almeria went up to her clofet to bring me a fong that fhe adnaired much, which Sir John Benyon had that morning given her. I feized the moment of her abfence to entreat to know the caufe of Lady Julia’s ferioufnefs. Sheblufiied. “If, Madam, I unfortunately incurred your difpleafure by the liberty I prefumed to take laft night, I fhall be the mofl: miferable of men; yet fuffer me to fay in my vindication, that, at the moment I yielded to the temptation of faluting your hand, I meant nothing but the higheft refpeCt to you.
Perhaps
WHAT YOU WILL.
67
Perhaps, were you fenfible of the fituation of my heart at the inftant, inftead of being thought to meric your difpleafure, which I cannot endure, I Ihould meet with compaflion from the moft benevolent fijul that ever inhabited a human form.” Her confufion encreafed. “ You meant not to of-
fend,
dam
you fay, my Heaven is my witnefs would be the greateft torment that could
be inflicted on me;—a man who”^--------------
“ Well, my Lord, there is an end of it
—for the fu-
Lord.
No, Ma-
Your anger
ture you will be lefs fo.
I own I thought you too free
’	“ And do you
prornife cordially to forgive me ?”	“ Cer-
tainly.” “ Nay! it muft be fealed by a permiffion of the very aCt for which I have been condemned, or I ffiall think you ftiil continue offended.” And I carried her hand
happinefs) to my lips. ibne Diuinea a deeper red than ever, haftily withdrew her hand, but, fmiling, called me “ a ftrange creature !”-- What a critical fituation was I in ! Had not Lady Almeria at that moment entered, I Ihould have made a full avowal
(no curfed glove to intercept my
She blufhed
68
MAS QU ERADES; ak,
of my paffion, which I have reafon to hope would not have been difguftful to her.
Soon after, the ladies came in, and by their invitation I accompanied them to the
Lady Jul ia’s fpirits returned, and her manner towards me was all conde-
g-arciens.
fcenfion.
Montague, if I do not flatter
myfelf, I perceive a dawning tendernefs;
yet, what an arrogant wretch perhaps I am, in giving way to the delightful con-jeClure !—All I can fay is-----If I am in-
deed fo fuperlatively bieffed—if Lady Julia does beftow on me a favourable diftiric-
fate
let it dif-
tion-"—I alk no more or pofe of me as it will;—and, tho’ loaded with every calamity that human nature can fupport, I would not exchange conditions with an Emperor.
I returned to St. James’s Square juft time enough to drefs, and be with my father by his hour of dining. He had brought Budenall home with him. Belfielde and Montague were there before me; fo inftead of a dull tete-a-tete, as he taught me to expeCt, we paflTed an agreeable day.
When they left us we ftepped into my Vis-a*
Vis,
WHAT YOU WILL.
69
Vis, and drove to Mrs. Aubrey’s : (he, as well as her niece, were in expectation of us lam fure.
I endeavoured to be polite, but very diftant to Lady Henrietta. The converfation was general: we went over all the chit-chat that is worn thread-bare by fo much ufe. The aunt directed her difcourfe entirely to the Duke, leaving me to entertain Lady Henrietta, who, to fay the truth, gave me fo much encouragement, as, were 1 inclined that way, would have made me very happy. It is a delicate fubjeCl we get upon, when we venture to arraign a lady’s conduct—but I will whifper to you—and you alone, that her advances were very plain, -—-There appeared not the leaft of that fweet modeft diffidence in her behaviour which is woman’s moft captivating recommendation ; and which is fo refplendent in every ,mrn, in every look of my divine Julia’s—And what gave the finilhing ftroke to my prejudice againft Lady Henrietta, was a fort of contented air ffie affumed, as much as to fay, “ I am fure of you; you muft either marry rne, or become indi-
gent
5 9
Indelicate, hateful creature !—-how
rejoiced
70
MASQUERADES; or
rejoiced I am, that I hefitated not to declare my fentiments of her to my father!
Amongft many other queftions ridiculous enough, (lie aficed, If I was not very fond of dancing? “No,” I anfwered ; “Ivery feldom found amufement in it.” She was furprifed', for fhe always obferved that I danced at every public place, which could hardly be the cafe, unlefs 1 liked it. “ When one can obtain, my Lady, the happinefs of an Almeria’s, or a Julia’s hand, it makes a ^reat difference : then a diverfion, which is rather unpleafant than the reverfe to me, becomes delightful—and a whole night with fuch a partner appears but a fhort hour. “What, you are an admirer of the I.a-
“ I am indeed
59
dy Herbert’s, my Lord !
95
England muft glory in producing fuch
Does not your Ladyfhip admire ---“ I think them very well—but
women, them .^”-
furely not fo exquifitely fafcinating as you and a few more of your fex fuppofe them. It would be better if Lady Julia did not laugh fo wide to fhew her teeth : it diverts me, when I fee her, I confefs.” “ Is that all you can lay to her charge Happyjulia I But, Lady Henrietta, were you of our fex,
you
WHAT YO U WILL.
71
we are.
99
you would not fail to experience the effeCts of fuch beauty as the three fitters poflefs, particularly the two youngeft. Ladies cannot be as good judges of female charms as
We were interrupted by Sophia Nevill and Her father’s appearance. I rejoiced at the relief, and changed my feat to one nearer the fair vifitor. After fpending fome minutes in rallery on a trifling jeft that had paffed between her and Sir James Weftbrook, I afleed her wfa Jhe was not at Ranelagh f and faid, the fight of her in fuch a dull Jet as I was found in was as great a happinefs to me as it was unexpedled, I forget what anfwTr fhe made, but flie gave me the moft penetrating look I ever beheld ; and fhortly after exclaimed, “ Surely, my Lord, you will never more be angry at our mentioning Lady Henrietta as your future”—“ What do you mean, dear Lady Sophia!” “Nay, this is too palpable a diffimulation!—you cannot throw a veil over my eyes, though you made us deaf to reports •,—but methinks fo much fecrecy on the occafion is paying a bad compliment to your adorable /” and fhe laughed heartily. How de-
vilifhly
72
MASQUERADES; or
\
vilifhly vexed I was at my aukward fituation ! Lady Sophia, turnirrg to the ladies, (whofe curious eyes feemed to wonder at and not much relifli our fpeaking apart,) joined in their converfation, and left me to brood over my reflections, which were not the moft agreeable in the world, I thought my father would never have quitted the theme he had got upon (politics) with the Duke of Northington (whom by the bye he hates heartily); but, when my patience was entirely exhaufted, he at laft made his bow, and 1 with rapture left a houfe I folemnly vowed not to enter again foon.
The Duke took it into his head to look in at the new farce at Drury Lane. I was obliged to attend him, and, after fetting him down at home, I went to Ranelagh. It was paft one o’clock when I got there. In vain did I fearch for Lady Pemberton’s party. At laft I met Seymour, who told me he had jujt that minute put Lady Almeria into her coach; but that I fhould find Lady Mortimer and Mifs Edgcumb waiting for the former’s carriage in the outward room. I flew to the place, and related to the laughing Caroline my difappointment. She
faid,
WHAT YOU WILL.
faid, I deferved it, for not giving up t engagements to make one in fo chearful as theirs was.
73
“ And have you pafled a very agreeable' evening ?”
“ Oh, exceedingly fo ! in every eye but Lord Seymour’s,
I W011I4 advife
pleafure danced
who at
the inftant joined us. you, my Lord,” in a half whifper, loud enough for him to hear, “ never to be in love—you cannot think how it fpoils a
young man !-------What a lively agreeable
w’as this, till he received a hurt from coral lips and black eyes !—now, he is fo melancholy—I have not patience with him. Do pray give him fome remedy for his difeafe ;
perhaps travelling makes the heart callous !	^
Does it, my Lord ?
Seymour caught hold of one hand, I of the other.—“ Stop,” cried he; “ pity, but do
not ridicule me;------1 am very unfortu-
nate.
“ No, indeed you are not,” fhe replied; a man of your perfon, underftanding, and degagee manner, to give himfelf up thus, becaufe a capricious girl is blind to merit that would engage the hearts of a VoL. II.	E	thoufand
74
MASQUERADES; or
thoufand of our other young women, not inferior to her in beauty or fenfe !-Lord !”
fie, my
Mortimer and Budenall returning, the Ladies got up. I led Lady Mortimer out, and whifpered in her ear, “ I underftand your fatire; you have difcovered that I love;
but if the amiable objeCt is equally infenfible to all, what will becorrie of me “Travel again, my Lord—good night!” —“Cruel Lady Mortimer I” and ftie got into the coach.
I had no further inducement to ftay at Ranelagh, and agreed to fup with Budenall and Seymour at Jenkins’s club.
I called yefterday in Portman-Square, but was not admitted. Pemberton will be married in a few days, I am told.
I expeCt to fee you very Ihortly now in Ycu will judge this letter to be more
I add no more*
town, than {'
ufficiently long, it
than that I am,
Faithfully yours.
Osmond,
WHAT YOU WILL.
75
To Lady Louisa Sydney.'
Portman-Square*
OU will condemn me for not anfwer-
>
ing your letter fooner—I condemn myfelf for it—but my candour fhall claim your forgivenefs, and you are too humane
to refufe it.--.-That letter, my friend—
what truths has it revealed to me 1—It fliould have been acknowledged long ago, but for a backwardnefs I felt to confefs a weaknefs which you have difcovered.— Yes, Louifa, 1 love :---unfortunately as nay laft attachment turned out, I have dared to
-----Le-
give place to another in my bofom---
nox’s name is no longer prohibited your utterance-talk of him—reprefent his fufferings to me;—bring back to my recollection, with all its force, the time when I was on the brink of being united to him by indiflbluble bands.—Paint his agonies at quitting me for ever—my own diftrefs at being obliged to infliCt thofe forrows which
E2
1 could
t6
MAS Q U ERADES; or
I could not relieve.----------------
fpeak not, write not of him : be 11 njlift------what I now
Ah, no!
I muft not
endure, convinces me that I never loved him :—and to
my better
genius
O
I am thankful, who
fnatched me from an alliance on which my foul looks back with horror. Again I fay-write not of Lenox—but let a better fubjeCl guide your pen ; and, if you wifti to gratify my heart, fuffer the name of Ofmond to appear in every fentence of your letter. Blame me not, Louifa ;---if it is my fate to adore one whom I never fhall be entitled to call mine, I ftand in need of the fympathizing figh of friendfhip to confole me. To be a frequent witnefs to fo accompliftied a perfon ; to liften to fuch amiable fentiments; to be daily informed of fome refplendent trait in fo exalted a charaCler; to obferve a thoufand unfpeakable tender attentions in his manner to me-—what elfe could happen ?-----^Yes, Louifa, I fee
my mifery in its fulleft extent;—I fee that I ardently love Lord Ofmond, and---that he is deftined for another.
%








r.-
• k*
WHAT YOU WILL.
77
And yet I furely received marks of a predL ledion from the Marquis, that might eafily have been fuppofed to originate from a more fubftantiai caufe than mere gallantry!—I was conftantly diftinguifhed by him—his addrefs fpoke the language of paffion—the fofteft paffion in the world. Several times has he feemed ready
I
to pronounce, “ love you to diftraCtion, Julia ! but, from an apparent timidity, the expreftion has died away upon his tongue before*he could give it fufficient utterance to reach my ear. Is it poffible that my vanity could have fo far mifted my fenfes as only to have fuppofed this S—1 fear it did.
Many nights ago we were at the Feftino—Lord Ofmond appeared dejecled—
He never left my fide.
he was indifpofed. but his converfation
was quite general.
Undoubtedly fome happy foreigner is in poffeffton of his heart!-—Perhaps his diftinc-tion of me proceeds from a flight refemblance I Year her I—or, perhaps, as I am
of my lifters, or Sophia Nevill, and fitter to attend to a perfon of a melancholy difpofition, he may prefer my converfation to theirs.
E 3	. But
of a graver turn than either
78
MASQUER AD E S; or.
But this I know, that, until that evening, I never difcovered the gloom on my Lord’s countenance, which ftruck you fo imme-
e
diately on your firft: meeting. Once h exclaimed, with warmth and inadvertency.
“ There is furely no torment equal to that of loving paffionately and without hope!” » - My God ! can Ofmond love without hope !—I looked at him involuntarily : furprize muft: have been in my countenance— difmay and horror were in my heart.—His hands I faw were clafped •, tears ftood in his eyes. He caught my looks—and recovered himfelf. What amazed me moft was, that, as he led me to my chair, he was agitated, and in a tremor.——We were obliged to ftop near the door for a minute, from the numerous crowd that furrounded us; he flipped my glove almoft off my hand, and kiffed my arm with fervor : at the fame moment exclaimed,
“ Heaven preferve the lovelieft of its works ! and infpire my Julia with compaffion for the moft ardent and unfortunate of lovers ! Pardon the liberty I have taken .—Oh, Madam ! how thankful ffiould I be, were this inftant to be the laft of my exift-
ence 1”
w
YOU W
79
ence !” As he ended, he put me into the chair and difappeared.——I looked for him with impatience whilft there was a poftibi-lity of my feeing him—he was not to be feen—then burft into tears, and was overwhelmed with a grief equal to his, from whatever caufe ic fprang. The terror I was in all night is not to be told—I felt as if J was not to behold Lord Ofmond any more-—Good God ! what a time I paffed ! The diftrefs of my foul muft.have been
9
difcovered, had I not complained the next morning of fuffering from a head-ach,—■ But judge what a joyful tranfition there was in my bofom from grief to happinefs, when, as I v/as fitting with Almeria, in expeflation of Lady Percival and Mifs Edgcumb, (who had engaged us to walk with them,) I heard Lord Ofmond announced. I fe lt my cheeks glow as he entered; 1 hardly knew how to behave.—As anxiety fled, refentment took its place for the liberty he
had taken the preceding
night; and I held ic incumbent on me to let him fee that I was difpleafed.
He came to apologize for not meeting us at Ranelagh. An i
E 4	. ^ment
difpenfahle
8o
MASQUERADES; or.
ment prevented it. We agreed to go into the concert-room, and while away the minutes we waited for the ladies, at the harp-lichord.—I fear that I appeared perverfe and difobliging in refufing to fing; but indeed, Louifa, I dared not truft my voice, wdiich I apprehended would too plainly reveal the fluttering emotions of my heart. What an admirable proficient in mufic is my Lord ! Every touch of his finger produces harmony itfelf.
My fifter left us for a few minutes, and Lord Ofmond entrerged me to pardon the freedom he had ufed the night before, which, it was evident, he faid, iiad drawn on him my difpleafure—-He offered fome excufes—but, to fay the truth, I was fo confufed as to be incapable of paying much attention to them.
It certainly would have been ridiculous to have made a ferious matter of a circumftance fo trifling, that, once apologized for, became of no further confequence.—He accompanied us to Kenftngton Gardens ; and never appeared more agreeable or in better fpirits.
few hours before!
Strange contraft to what he was a
We have feen Lord Ofmond
WHAT YOU WILL
8f
mond frequently fincehave made many parties with him, and he has been- cacti time more charming. This evening he is-to fup in Portman-Square, with his friend
Mr
for the prefent I
Adieu

*

*

JCT






*•

*•
Mornin
\
And now, dear Louifa, lam indeed inex-preflibly wretched [---credulous—arrogant fool that I was, to- fuffer an idea of Lord Ofmond’s giving rne a preference to make its way to my imagination !—Good God, how amazed at myfelf I am !—No, my friend—it is to Lady Henrietta he fighs in? private 1—-his inattention to her in public is the effeCf of artifice—1 am the deluded creature with whom he trifles before a crowd—-whofe happinefs he wifhes to make a facrifice to his vanity—Perhaps he perceives that he fucceeds to his moft fanguine hopes-—exults with his Henrietta at his trf-
umph, and laughs at my weaknefs----------
Cruel--iingenerous Ofmond I
£5
As
8z
MAS QU ERADES; or
As Sophia and I were fitting together on a fofa, Lord Ofmond came to us, and defired to divide us.—He was uncommonly vivacious—She enquired, in a very farcaftic manner. Where Lady Henrietta was ? He threw down his eyes and blufhed.
(4
What is the meaning, my Lord, that you take fo little notice of her in company ? Julia, you never faw any-one play the lover better than Lord Ofmond does!”	“ I
dare fay his Lordlhip acquits himfelf well in every charadler.” “ He does indeed moft particularly well in ttat line. I had an inftanceof it, more than a fortnight ago, at Mrs. Aubrey’s. My father and I paid that lady a vifit rather mal-d-propos one night: as we entered the room, I perceived Lord Ofmond feated at a diftant part of it next his Cara, to whom, no doubt, he had been faying ten thoufand fiac things ;—but,
us, he left his place, and approached me with no little confufion in his looks; and the firft fpeech he made was to enquire why J was not at Ranelagh with Lady Pemberton and her family ?"	“ Dear
on
feeing
Lady Sophia, lery fo far ?
how can you carry your rail-
Lady Hearietta is the moft
ia«»
WHAT YOU WILL:
infupportable of’
“Hufh ! my Lord

you a.^ay remember I told you, that I hoped you would no longer deny your attachment to her after that night.—Upon ray word, Julia, what I tell you is a fadl. fliould never have mentioned this circumftance to my Lord Ofmond; or jefted at: all with him upon the topic; had he not taken fuch unwearied and unneceftary pains to con\4nce us there was nothing in a report fo common in every mouth.—But why make this genigma of it, my Lord ? The Duke of Weftmorland’s frequent and familiar whifpcrs with Mrs. Aubrey irs
the aitention you pay her niece— at home,-.—all declare that we lhall foon offer our congratulations to Henrietta
publi
our congratulations Marchionefs of Ofmond.—
Surely, as I re-
ill
an
minded you that night, you pay compliment to your miftrefs in ufing fo much Lcrefy !—She is well entitled to your adoration, amiable—accoraplilbed—talkative—very rich—not handfome indeed, but what then !: You know
“ It is not a fet of features, or
tion, the Tindture of a Ikin”
E 6
I
84
MASQUERADES; or
I do believe you will be the envy of our Britifh youths,” My fifter Caroline joined
For heaven’s fake, my Lord, what
have thefe girls been faying to embarrafs you fo much ?” My coufin was beginning to repeat what had paflTed, when I, hurt at the ungenerous Ofmond’s confufion, prevented her: “ Stop, my Sophia, —you are always delicate and good ;—do not deviate”----“ I have told
reafon, Julia; Lord Ofmond
you my deferves
not to be fpared :—my friendlhip for his future wife leads me to condemn his conduct to her, in fo much ambiguity. . Lady Mortimer, fend Julia to comfort Lord Seymour,—or one of her many lovyers now in the room and 1 will repeat the whole to you.”
“ Go, Julia—Sir James, my fifter has a party to propofe to you, for the exhibition to-morrow.” Weftbrook took my hand, and endeavoured to draw me away. “ Be quiet, Sir James !—I will not leave my place, if it is to give an opportunity for inflicting a momentary diftrefs on any-one. My Lord, why do you not filence them ?
¥	*	J
One retort to the perfon who has fhewn you
lo

WHAT YOU WILL.
85
fo little mercy, will, in an inftant, make her dumb.” “ Thank you, Julia !” cried Sophia, and walked off. “ Now, my Lord, that I have rid you of one tormentor, I will leave you to manage the other—and I joined Sophia, who was looking over Almeria’s cards. Lord Ofmond and my fifter had a long converfation : what their topic was I am ignorant. My mother and the Duke are bufied about this approaching marriage;—they were in clofe conference together moft part of the evening before fupper. Sophia went to cards at another table from Almeria’s ; and I had no other amufement, than fixing my eyes-alternately on my knotting, and on Lord Ofmond and my fifter;—feveral times I caught them looking at me with attention v
and fmiles adorned
Lady
and the
complacency
Mortimer’s really handfome face fire of her eyes yielded to the foft beam of compaffion. What could they have
been fpeaking of 1
My brother came home

enough to meet us
going down
t) O
but juft time
the
to
eating-room. An engagement, that he could not put off, had carried him abroad.
Our
86
MAS QU ERADES; or
Our company did nor fepir ?te lili three o’clock this
d e 1: g h j
nioft of ihem
fpent —I
y
morning;
thought the time confefs 1 was not of tnc number—thorns were planted in my breaft, and 1 longed with impatience for the hour, when, reclined on my pillow, J might give vent to my fighs and tears, without caufing fufpicion or anxiety in any bofom.
So far, my Louifa, all is well. I have not been imprudent in giving,to Lord Ofmond much encouragement —though more than ever i beftowed on any man in my life. At firft. I feared he was no ftranger to my partiality towards him ;—but, ail things calmly confidered, 1 find it impoffible he fhould have ever made a difeovery fo flattering to him,—fo degrading to me..—I am to thank Providence for opening my e5*es in time, that 1 might be difereet enough to hinder the world from diving into this fecret,, v/hich it concerns my pride to keep inviolable from all but you.--Vet, Oh my
Louifa! whilft I ftand unimpeached in the opinion of this world;—a world I defpife beyond every thing ;—how—in what manner fhali I conceal from my/e/f the agonies
of
WHAT YOU WILL, 87
of my foul ?—^When Lord Ofmond has paid his vows at the altar to another, and put it out of my power (without deeming it criminal) to love him as I now do*, where am I to find confolation ?—To meet Henrietta, the wife of a man who commands every wilh of my heart;—to behold him paying her ftridb attention, authorized by duty to do fo I—Agonizing reflexions !--why do ye haunt me !----
My tears blot my paper;—pardon this weaknefs!

*
*
*fr


*
From hence, I give up every flattering profpeX—each gay hope ;—thofe that I once formed,—involuntarily formed, feem to me- reverfed :—^ali the happinefs that awaited me has ^

CC
dilTolv’d, and, like
The bafelefs fabric of a vifion, left Not a wreck behind !”
Ah, my God •'—how unfortunate I am ? but I fhould not murmur:—if 1 recal
to
88
MAS QU ERADES; or..
to my remembrance all that has palled within thefe five or fix months, I muft find that I have much reafon to lay the blame of my prefent uneafinefs to my own im-
No one elfe can I
prudence.
condemn.
one eiie can i in juftice Lord Ofmond never profefled himfelf my lover;—I was warned, from every voice, that he came over, as the deftined hufband of Lady Henrietta :—he was fo univerfally regarcied in that light, that his compliments excited no jealoufy in the breaft of Lord Seymour; his conftantly dancing with me did not make Lord Budenall changecolour, or become pecvifh ; his particular notice drew on me
Count
no re-
proaches from the demonftration that
how plain a
his
they were fure of Yet I, blinded by his vague -denials of tne fad,—and ready to believe
wifhed
engagement!
might be true, to an infatuated
cre-
what I too ardently gave up my reafon dulity, which has for ever deftroyed my peace. His flattering diftinXion gratified my vanity ;—and I forgot that he was juft arrived from a court, where a man im-prelTes favourable fentiments on all, by the moft finuhed gallantry he can difplay. He
CO u Id
w
YO U W
S9
cauld not then of a fudden throw afide a character that cuftom had rendered fo familiar to him,—and which, no doubt, had made him the idol of a fet of women entirely devoted to coquetry. What difmal effcXs has it produced on an ardefs, un-fufpeXing heart ! Certainly he deemed his afliduities nothing but what were becoming un gal ant homme, who meant no ferious confequences fhould accrue to himfelf from them ;—and I, poor filly girl! ought to have regarded them in the proper point of view.—1 will not fee Lord Ofmond :—■ it fhall be my ftudy to avoid him: I will go no more into public ;—when he comes to the houfe, I will frame excufes to keep my apartments.—How ridiculous!—Oh, Heaven !—fhall error always lead me by the hand !—Who will not form fufpicions from fuch an alteration —Who can fail of difcovering the right caufe !—Yes, yes !
I muft behold him •,—but it fhall be with fo much caution,—I will afford him fo few opportunities of converfing with me particularly, that he fhali have reafon to think, were it his fate to change the ob-jea of his love, and, inftead of kneeling at
Lady
oo
MASQUERADES; or
Lady Henrietta’s feet, pfoftrate himfelf and figh at mine, I would difeard him without hefitation, and recommend to him to feek an humbler miftrefs. My haughty foul tells me, that I owe fuch behaviour to my fentiments and education.—This pride may be arrogant to many, who would throw re-fledions on the fcanty provifion my father
allow me.—Illiberal
thought
proper to
creatures !—It is true, I have not the twentieth part of Lady Henrietta’s fortune but that confideration does not lower me in the leaft. I defpife all who plume themfelves on a quantity of fhining metal, which induftry can as foon put the mechanic in pofleffion of, as places, penfions, or tin-felled honors can the peer. You know me enough to be affured, that 1 have never once regretted that it was my father’s pleafure to circumferibe the portions of his daughters
I knew his reafon, and ap
plauded it.
44
Never,” would he Ly—I was too
young when him
we loft him, to remember but my mother has often repeated his fentiment to us—“ never will 1 make my girls fortunes objects for the other fex
to
w
YOU W
ai
to court them. With beauty they will at-traX,—their merit muft fecure conquefts, and their birth will be an incentive for
their connexion being
fought
after by
men cf rank: therefore, by giving them a genteel competency, and no more, 1 leave them a better chance for happinefs •, fince
—muft
the men who marry them them from love alone, berton carried this
My
notion fo
marry Lord Pern-far, as to
make my brother liable (by drawing and
for the

figning inftruments of writing, prop the purpofe, and depofiting them in hands of the L'^^'d C^'*^***^**) to the forfeiture of two thirds of his fortune, if he added a fhilling more to the fum he allotted us.—In his laft moments he informed my mother and Lord Herbert of the difpofition of his will.—They remonftrated —entreated of him to recal what they termed an injuftice to his girls vain !—mv father was abfolute :
—It was in ; and for
the firft time regarded them with fternnefs, and inftded, that his mandate Jhould be obeyed; and he not dijturbed in his dying hour, P'hey were filent.------In a few minutes after he
enquired him.-----1
for
us
we were brought to
cannot dwell upon the fcene
he
92 MAS QU ERADES; or
the
he died, and left a wife fondefl: hufband :---------
to regret
children, to —and fer-
weep for the tendereft parent vants, to lament the kindeft mafter in the world.—This irreparable lofs was occafioned by the working-out of a ball, which had entered fome where in my Lord’s cheft, at an engagement in the laft war.—
We will leave this melancholy part of the fubjeX.
If you fhould arraign my father for that one circumftance of not doing more for us ;—turn back to the motive which actuated him, and he will ftand acquitted in your opinion.—You will rejoice with me at the interference of Providence, by con-fidering, that, had it been otherwife, how much more miferable would have been my fate. Lord Pemberton, from his immenfe pofTeftions, and quantity of ready money, might have left his three daughters fixty thoufand pounds apiece (it was expeXed that he would do fo). Such a fum would have been a great objeX for even an a-
varicious young man.
Perhaps Lord

Ofmond might have facrificed a few thoufands, and given up Lady Henrietta to a greater gratification of his fancy !—Perhaps,
from
WHAT YOU WILL.
91
it proves him unworthy of my yet, unhappy as that attach-
this reflexion brings
from his notice of me,-—I fliould have been the perfon he chofe to offer his hand to: it would have been accepted without hefita-tion ;—nor would a fufpicion, that, had I lefs money, I could not have been his choice, corrode my breaft. My poverty is the touchftone— attachment; ment makes me,
comfort with it. I fear he is very confined in his fentiments. With the expeXation of a fortune of thirty thoufand pounds a year, to think himfelf obliged to accumulate it, by marrying merely from lucrative views ! —Unworthy Ofmond !
Almeria faid laft night, “ I am fure, Julia, the Marquis loves you *, but will not declare it, becaufe you are deftitute of money equal to his defires.”—^How I glory in my fituation !—Do you not perceive the good effeXs that fpring from my dear father’s judicious forefight?—Indeed, Louifa, I do not wifh to be richer than I am;—my moft: ambitious wants are fatisfied, and I have it in my power to relieve in a moderate degree thofe of others. What more can I defire ?
In
94
MASQUERADES; or
In the mood I am, I think, were I to fee my Lord Ofmond, I fhould regard him
with contempt;—his invaaing me compliments, I would hold to be officious arrogance;—any particular diftinXion muft be deemed infoient prefumption ;—his fixing his eyes on me with the tendernefs he always affumes, would be conftrued into incorrigible familiarity.—-Ah, Louifa ! what is become of your Julia !—Is this unhappy paffion to alter her difpofition ? The Duke of Northington for ever tells me, that my greateft merit with him is gentlenefs. He will tell me fo no more !—Were he to behold what I have written, he would blufh as much for his niece, as fhe does for herfelf. As a puniffiment for a fault my heart already difclaims,--! will expofe it to you. —-But Oh, Louifa !--pity and forgive me ! With that fupplication 1 conclude ; firft hoping you are at this moment in the enjoyment of fuch reft as my pillow no longer affords me.
with
^
ik
^ ik ^
ik
*	* ik * ik *	*


« ^ *
WHAT YOU WILL.
9S
Friday Morning,
I am fure you will rejoice at being told, what I am juft made acquainted with, that next Tuefday is the day fixed on for my brother’s wedding: may ic be ever held an aufpicious one by the happy pair !
Fiom St. George’s church, (my uncle will ad nit of no fpecial licence, though Lord Pemberton is almoft ready to murmur at his refufal,) the bride and bridegroom, Lady Pembercon, the Duke, Almeria, and Sir James Weftbrook, go down to my brother’s feat in Herifordftiire. Weftbrook whifpered rne, that he would he beft pleafed not to be of the party, which he fore-faw would be ftupid enough ; and that he had fome thoughts of being indifpofed on Tuef-day. I declared I had a mind to inform them how much obliged to him they were. —He turned it off in a jeft, but I believe he was a good deal in earneft at firft. The Mortimer’s cannot leave town, and have entreated my mother to allow me to ftay with them during the fortnight they will be abfentmy mother, all goodnefs, has confented.—1 ftiall not be miffed from the
party.
N
96 party
MASQUERADES; or, . and it is a great gratification to me
to be left for a while with my fweet amiable Caroline, whofe worth you know as well I do.
Lady Pemberton fend^ to defire I will attend her to pay fome vifits.—Adieu, my ever-deareft—my much-loved Louifa !—In
9
thy orifons fail not to fupplicate the pity Heaven for the unhappy
Julia Herbert.
\ '
r.
1
WHAT YOU WILL.
97
To Sir Charles Montague.
St. James’s Square.
Y heaven, Montague, i am undone ! Curfe on my prefumption, that led me to hope I faw a dawning partiality in the eyes of Lady Julia !—Curfe on my vanity, that fubjeXed me to her fcorn ! and ten thoufand curfes on the day that brought me to the fight of fo unparagon’d —and fo infenfible a beauty ! — Oh, for breath to vent a million more of curfes 1 Had you been witnefs to her treatment of me for the paft week,—you muft have condemned her haughty conduX ;—you muft have hated------whom?—Julia Her-
bert !—Ah ! no—you could not have a-voided admiring—nay, adoring 1 er as I do.
Whence comes it that flie is thus fuperlatively lovely—thus amiable.—thus fenfible —and thus cruel ?—Is it pofiible that ftie is a ftranger to the. fofteft of paftions ? Indeed, angel as lbe is, ftie feems formed for love. And does a perfon, feen but to captivate, imbibe none cf the tender im-
Vol.1L	F	prdficns
o8
MASQUERADES; or
prcffions ffie infpires ? it. Yes ffie loves—
1 cannot believe
certainly ffie loves! but of this 1 am fure, that it is not one of the many declared lovers who daily throng
around her.------1 am apt to think my af-
fiduities muft have made fome way-to her heart, vyere it not prepoflefied in favour of a happier man !—Heaven and earth ! who can he be ?—Ha ! Montague, have I not heard, that Ladyjulia was once engaged to a gentleman abroad ?

Too furely I hav
but my deluded foul would never fuffer me to pay any attention to a report fo repugnant to my inclination. A^^wthe ffiock-ing truth ftrikes on my imagination;—on my foul, to him her affeXions are devoted, and my doom of wretchednefs is fealed. May furies blaft him 1 involve him
may deftrnXion
keen
and make him feel pangs as as thofe I at this moment endure!
I muft By direXly to Lady Mortimer, and know more of the matter.
I am fo agita-
O
ted with contending paffions, I am not my felf—Unkind, lovely—infatuated Julia —Oh Charles!——
*

^ ^ ^


^ ^ ^ ^

I am

WHAT YOU WILL.
99
I am juft come from Dover-flreet, more compofed than when I left my pen.—From Lady Mortimer’s lips I am affured that Mr. I enox v;as rejcXed by the moft incomparable of women for an indelicacy of behaviour which totally difgufted her.— The whole affair, flie tells me, you are acquainted with. If there was room in my breaft for further admiratfon of Lady Julia, her conduX on the occafion would ex-
cite It.
You will ftart at my application to Lady Mortimer for this intelligence but ceafe your wonder when I make known to you that fhe is my confident. Ten nights ago, at Lady Pemberton’s, 1 was moft unmercifully rallied by the young Lady Pemberton, before the charming Julia, for being met by her, in one of my ambiguous vifits (as file phrafed it) at Mrs. Aubrey’s. Some plaguy Demo.n infpired me to put on an embarraffed air, which I could not, in fpite of my endeavours, fffake off*. She would have perfifted in torturing me, aided by Lady Mortimer, (who joined in the latter part of the converfation,) if the amiable Lady Julia had not inteifercd, and refcued
F 2	me
loo MASQUERADES; or,
rne from them. The furmifes which Sophia’s exaggerated anecdote muft occafion in the breafts of the fifters, I knew would be prejudicial to my hopes ; I therefore feized the moment of Lady Mortimer’s being feparated from the reft, to explain the whole affair to her.—I difcovered to her my ardent paffion for Julia;—related how, when, and where it Commenced informed her of my father’s views for me, and the manner in which 1 was circumftanced with him. Bur, left I fiiould be thought prefumptuous in daring to hope for Lady Julia’s hand in my prefent fituation, I extorted a prornife from her, mot to reveal, fill I authorized it, a fyllable of what 1 had uttered, excepting juft as much as fhe thought was proper to exculpate me in her fifter’s opinion from the blame that Lady Pemberton’s relation muft have thrown upon me; and even in that refpeX I begged her to aX as appeared to her beft for my interejleither to fpeak in my vindication if neceffary, or to be filenr. She liftened to me with pleafure, and affured me, nothing would make her fo happy as to fee Lady Julia my wife;—to facilitate which fhe would fpare no pains.
After
WHAT YOU WILL.
101
%
After that night Lady Julia gave me no room to flatter myfelf that I was in the leaft diftinguifiied in her favour from the herd of gentlemen that fwell her train, and offer adulation to her charms; nay, file treated me with more diftance than any of them. In company (and only then could I fee her) fhe feldom fpoke to me;—1 could never lead her to her carriage ; — always found her converfation addrefled to another if I approached her ear:—and yet all this Ihe made coincide fo exaXly with the ftriX-cft politenefs, that I had it not in my power, were I ever fo well inclined her civility.-—-But there was a fort of Jub-
throughout the v/hole.

to
arraioca
o
dued haughtinefs very perceptible to the penetrating eye of a lover.
On Pemberton’s wedding, the amiable Caroline propofed to her to remain, and to Lady Pemberton to leave her in London. Ic was affented to. My intimacy for many years abroad with Mortimer, gives me a fanXion to be frequently in Dover-ftreet: I did not, you may imagine, fiacken my vifits on the arrival of their beautiful gueft;— but ihe continued to avoid me. I called
F 3	a few
102
QU
OR
a
few
and found her on
mornings ago my entrance putting a letter in her pocket-book :—Ihe appeared confufed, and, on examining her countenance, I perceived that file had been in tears.—I was fiiocked, and checked myfelf from renewing her diftrefs, and adding to her embarraftment, by enquiring the caufe of her uneafinefs, which was the firft impulfe of my foul. What felicity is his, that is worth peayly drops from thofe ftarry orbs I She inftantly rang to acquaint her fifter that I was below, who came down immediately v/ith Mifs Edgcumb; and Lady Julia foon after retired under a pretenc
of writing.
O
liaft night at Almack’s i afked the lovely girl to dance:	thanked me, but pleaded
an engagement to the Duke of Suffolk, who is lately arrived in England, Is there a man on earth, whom I could fo foon dread as a rival ?—Infinuating—amiable—hand-
fofne !—If indeed fhe looks on him with-in-
¥
difference,-—it is beyond a doubt that fhe has beftowed her heart already. She had fcarcely fpoken, when he appeared before her, dazzling in his figure,—ftiil more cap-
livating in his addrefs.
•* •• 4
His eyes paid her
the
WHAT YOU WILL.
103
the homage that is the tribute of a ftricken heart, and due to fo enchanting a creature.
-----He gazed on her with rapture*,—he
fpoke to her in the voice of love:—fhe anfwered him with the thrilling tone of a fyren.—I could have called him out,— and was ready to difpute fuch a prize with him;—but Reafon for once exerted her do-
They ftood up. “ Heavens ! what a divine couple 1 ” re-echoed from every part of the room :—they were furrounded by a crowd of admirers, who tliought they could never fee enough of them.
‘ I
Be
minion over me.
rtimer,
(i
“ Now,”faidIto Lady am loft!” “ Not quite," ffie replied, not fo diffident. Who's afraid?" “ Ah, Madam !” “ Indeed your apprehenfions are ridiculous*,—take my. word for it, Julia is not fo eafily caught:—any other woman, I will allow, might give you caufe to tremble.” I have no right to hope any-thing from ftranger as ffie is what may I not fear ?” “
44
her:
to
my paffion, Well, if vou ;
re
refolved to be uneafy, I cannot help it; but, furely, I ffiould know the girl’s difpofi-tion.”
F 4
I hovered
104
Q.U
o R,
I hovered near the envied Suffolk and his bewitching partnerI liftened to them, and heard him make abfolute love to Julia : fhe anfwered him with the cooleft referve; checked his ecftacy,—and reftored a momentary peace to my bofom. f came home fatisfied that Suffolk w^as not the man whom fhe at that time preferred;
but altogether as miferable at the idea of
fome perfon being the barrier to his and my fuccefs, that I little fufpeXed.
Julia is thus attached, I am perfuaded, though her fifter does not believe it.-^Ic
-.t
.Lady
cannot be to Lenox
^•1
I would facrifice
tormenting girl!
more than I can mention, to know who the bleft fellow is! Lady Julia did not appear this morning whilft 1 was in Dover-fttreet :
—I could almoft rail at her!---Would fhe but afford me a quarter of an hour of her converfation, 1 fhould no longer hefitate to reveal to her the fituation of my heart, fince “ to know the worft is fome degree of eafe.” And I cannot be more wretched than 1 am, unlefs I were to fee her in the arms ofanother.-^------Infup-
thought!
It makes me mad !-
Every ray of hope is baffled, as foon ,as
formed.
/
WHAT YOU WILL.
105
formed, by her fhunning me fo unaccountably. This very night, I will depolit the fame truft in Mortimer’s breaft that I have already done in his wife’s: he will advife me how to aX, and poflibly find an opportunity of indulging me with a conference with the lovelieft of women.
On Saturday I Ihall hope to fee you: ifi the mean while, I am, much yours,
Osmond.
F
5
To
\

MAS QU ERADES; or,
To Lady Louisa Sydney,
Dover-Street,
HE agitation of my mind receives no alloy, my beft Louifa, by concealing from every breaft but yours the circumftance which caufes it.-----1 wear a placid
countenance,—I go into public,—I afieX a gaiety foreign to my heart; all accumulate to render the fuppreftion of my grief more poignantand when I am alone, and at liberty to refleX on my wretched infatuation,-—the inundation of diftrefs that pours from the recefles of my foul, fo long choaked up, overwhelm, and almoft deftsoy me.
Is it not dreadful to be neceflitated to
ufe diffimulation ?
Is it not a trial to be
for ever in the fight of the beloved objeX who is the origin of it ?--an objeX that
I ought to ffiun,—and would,--could I purfue my inclinations.
Oh merciful Heaven ! fure, I am the weakeft of creatures, to continue my attachment to a man fo unworthy of it!----------
_	....	^	W
JHow
•V i ' ^
what you will.
107
How much reafon has Lady Henrietta to dread a connexion with Lord Ofmond, who can aX fo falfely to her, when within a few weeks of their marriage ! Had you-been a witnefs, my Louifa, to his behaviour to me ever fince the fatal
pen!----
ah, my mif-
guided pen!-------i\\t fortunate	that
Sophia fo openly difcovered the duplicity of his carriage, --you would have lamented the fate of his future bride, and trembled for my danger------1 cannot, I dare not recur to
paft feenes;—to deferibe the laft will be ne-celTary,—and, as it was the moft eflential one, will be fufficient.
1 am juft returned from Ranelagh-,----
Lord Mortimer, his wife, and myfelf, took Mifs Edgcumb up, about eight o’clock, in our way thither.—We had made but two turns about the Rotunda, when Lord Ofmond and Sir John Benyon came in, and joined us. I perceived that the too charming Henry fought for an occafion to walk next to me, which I avoided, by feeming accidentally to get in between my fifter and Mifs Edgcumb; and 1 continued in that fituation till we procured a box to take tea in. Sir John gave his hand to Lady .
F 6	Mortimer,
io8
MASQUERADES; or
Mortimer, on entering, and placed himfelf next to her; Lord Ofmond prefented his to me, and divided ,ns; my brother led Mifs Edgcumb, and took his feat between her and me. —-—Whether the Mortimer’s did ic through intention, or whether chance direXed ir, I know not;—but they kept at a diftance from me, and engaged the at-
tention, one of Sir John, the other cf Mifs Edgcumb, fo effeXually, that Lord Ofmond had full opportunity to attach his converfation to me without conftraint; a circumftance which I had ftudioufly avoided for many days. I was both provoked —and pleafed. Good God,—how captivating he appeared !---------He fixed his
eyes on me attentively for fome, minutes; then, throwing them down with a diffident air, fpoke as follows:
“ Whence corr.es it, Lady Julia, that I have for this age been treated with fo much cruelty ? 1 cannot but imagine that fome part of my conduX has drawn on me the difpleafure of the moft adorable of her fex;—what agonies does it excite in my breaft !—You are above caprice,—and, I am convinced, have caufe for the change
of
WHAT YOU WILL.
I ©9
of behaviour I fo unfortunately experi-.........But as you are juft,--I am fure,
ence
Madam, you will he merciful;—and, when I entreat to be informed of my fault, you will not withhold it longer from my know-
ledge.
O
For God’s fake acquaint me in what I have been fo miferable as to offend 1”
“ You atnaze me, my Lord!—My behaviour muft indeed have been reprehenfi* ble, if it taught your Lordfhip to fuppofe
me offended.-------1 have no right to arraign
you of any fault *,—and you jeft, when you tell me of ^ra^//jy,*--when you call on me
to be merciful.
1 beg, my Lord, you
will not think of amufing your moments thus, at my expence.”
Can
Nay,—this is too much !
it be amufing, Madam, to one who feels more than he can exprefs,—to deferibe pangs hardly to be borne, the confequence of your nnjuft difpleafure ?-for, firice you wrill
not account Yor it,-1 muft be allowed to
term it unjuft. You little know the fidelity, the ardour of that heart you hold in fo much contempt.—Believe me, when I fwear by all that is facred, that ip is devoted

it.
110
MASQUERADES; or
vpted to you by the ftrongefl: ties of love. You only—hear me. Lady Julia,”— “ I
/
will not hear you, Lord Ofmond; miftake.
fad 1 y
-you
miftake the objeX you
throw away fo many pains upon.----1 am
not accuftomed, my Lord, to receive the adulation, or liften to the vows, of a man contraXed to another.—I take it to be as great an infuit to offer them, fo circumftanced, to any bi.t the woman you mean to call yours, as if you were lawfully her hufband, and to aX that part.”
“ Contra died to another!—-By heaven, Madam, I am as free from engagements with any”—--------“ You have often faid
J
fo, my Lordthe truth you beft know yourfelf;—:—but let me infift that you addrefs me no farther on this topick: there is no end to be anfwered by it;—-and it muft inevitably hurt you in my opinion. May you have every happinefs I wifh you, whether married, or unconneXed !—Your friendfhip will give me pleafure.”
“ 1 fee, Ladyjulia, that you have fixed my unhappy doom;—but, after all my pro-, teftations that my hand is abfolutely
that there is not a woman in the world I
- love
free

WHAT YOU WILL.
III
love befides yourfelf, dited?—
-may I not be cre-My father indeed wifhes”— “ No
more, my Lord, I beg!
an explanation
is unneceffary—'—If ycu are engaged, fure
there is no crime in it!.nor in your
chuling to conceal it, as long as you do not deceive any - one into an error that may make them unhappy by your ambiguity.—Be perfuaded that ic is a matter in which I have no curiofityLady Henrietta is a girl of worth;—fhe is fpoken of exceedingly well*, and, if you marry her, your choice will be applauded.—I defire to remain ignorant of your fituation refpeX-ing her;—! am by no means interefted in it, further than to wilh your felicity complete !
Too plainly, Madam, do you convince me of your contempt!— ['00 plainly am I made acquainted with your indifference about what concerns me!—Yet, re-
99
44
jeXed,-’-defpifed as I am,
I muft pre-
fume to implore one favour of you think it not impertinent;—and Oh! for pity’s fake, exert your humanity, and grant it through mere compaffion!
“ What is it, my Lord ?”
Cc
t You

112
QU
OR
“ You muft condefcend to prornife firfl:, that it ffiall not be refufed:—as a man of honour I fwear, if you will repofe in me the generous confidence I afk, no ill confequences ffiall accrue from it.-^To a
defpairing wretch, Madam,—abandoned to deltrnXion, afford the fmall relief I
beg.
-—As a friend,'—if it mull be fo, I implore it j—it is but to anfwer faithfully a iingle queftion.”
“ I will, my Lord, comply with the entreaty of a friend: what have you 4:0 demand V'
a
cc
On your honour, you will be fincere.” Sincerity is my charaXerifiic:— de-
pend upon it.
“ Ahi divine Julia !—bXore I make the aweful interrogatory,—be prepared not to call me infoient. Is not your heart engaged to fome happier man ?”
“ Your queftion is indeed a ftrange, and rather an out-of-the-way one ;-but my word is paffed. No, upon my honour, my Lord ;
the man does not exift to whofe merit I am more fenfible,—or whom I feel more for.
than I do for you.
Still, you remem
her what I have faid; if you again repeat
this
WHAT YOU WILL.
113
this fubjeX to me, I will never forgive it.” Great God !—what a deftiny is mine ! Can no confideration plead in that (to all but me) gentle boforn?—Your heart
not I —Are
at your own difpofal,—why may offer myfelf a candidate for it?— Budenall, Seymour, and a hundred others,
under the fame reftriXion ?----They love
not with the ardour, the conff ancy that I do, ^
■ ■ ..-1 have undergone a probation of three
abfent from you almoft the whole
the
your image never left me;
years time
firft moment my raviftied eyes beheld you, decided you the arbitrefs of my fate ;—abfolutely unknown to me, I ceafed not to idolize the moft charming woman in the univerle my unwearied affiduity to difcover you,—the fervency with which”--------
“ Now, my Lord, you fpeak in myfteries far above my comprehenfion, and ic is
----Mr.
CC
time to have done with the topic.-
Montague,” who juft then entered the box, fhall I give yuu Tome tea ?”
The converfation became general whilft we were feated :—my Lord Ofmond, indeed, did not join in it;—Se looked fhocked,—agitated,—and as unhappy as—I felt. Can men be really fuch diffemblers, my
Louifa!
SI4 MASQUERADES; or,
Louifa !—Oh ! wherefore Ihould this too charming creature take fuch trouble to
---Whether or no he
wound my peace !-----
loves Henrietta, is what I cannot determine. The world fays he is to marry her
very Ihortly;---my brother’s wife faw
enough to convince her, that it is his intention to do fo;—and fliould I not aX difho-nourably and ridiculoufly to allow of his addreffes?—The queftion anfwers itfelf.
I fhould be bleffed far beyond the limits of-a mortal, was the fafcinating Henry deftitute of title and fortune, and in that fituation to chufe me the partner of his heart. To be banifhed for ever to the deferts of Lybia, or to any other defolatc place, with fuch ahu-fband, could be no punifhment, nor excite the leaft horror in my breaft.-But he will never—ah ! never be mine; and I have made up my mind to endure wretchednefs.
Immediately as we quitted the box, I miffed Lord Ofmond, and faw him no more. I leave you to judge how well I re-lifhed the fcene of amufement I was engaged in after his departure. Lord Mortimer, I believe, gueffed that fomething made me
uneafy; for he afked me feveral times, why
I
w
YOU WILL.

I looked dejedled, and was fo ferious ? I have rather an unfortunate countenance at dif-cDvering the emotions of my heart, as my brother fays; though I have of late taught
it a little to diffemble.--It is full time to
take fome reft; fo adieu, my Louifa.
*
*







*




*


T^uefday Afternoon^
This racketting life is not calculated to make me very healthy :—I am aXually more indifpofed than ever I remember to have been in my life; but, as Imogen fays,
“ So fick I am not, yet I am not well.
But not fo citizen a wanton, as
To feem to die, ere fick:
99
therefore 1 ihall not make Caroline un.-eafy by complaining:—indeed I know not what to complain of,- -and ihould be puzzled for an anfwer, if aiked where my dif-
order lay.
home till
We are to remain p to-morrow evening;
a longer
ipell
ii6
MAS Q^U ERADES; or
fpell of reft than I have.had for fome time. But is it not aftonilhing, that I Ihould be fo much difturbed by the fame fatigue that Lady Mortimer goes through without feeling — My conftitution is by no means more delicate than hers; — her peace of mind receives no wounds ;--it is always free from agitation, and fne has better fpirits to fupport the rota of diflipation Ihe enters into with fuch avidity. Alas, my Louifa ! why is it not my cafe The eternal anxiety I labour under, unnerves me, and renders me incapable of enduring corporal inconveniences even at this moment what tortures wring my heart, at not having feen or heard of Lord Ofmond lince laft night! —Foolifh—inconfiftent, fond girl!—would to Heaven thou hadft never feen him !

#
^ *



Tuefday, Nine o'clock.
How intolerably weak ! —But am I for ever to entertain you with the imbecillity of
my heart?------It is in vain to direX my
pen to any other fubjeX at prefent: I am immediately under the defpotifm of folly
and
WHAT YOU WILL.
irt
and error
-—Lord Ofmond is below; and my fifter has fent Mournies to inform me of it.—Lmuft go down ;—my knees tremble—Ah, Louifa ! pity the moft op-prefled bofom in the world !
%

* #
* «
*

#
*
^ . # • ^


Thurfday Morning,
I did not chufe to play laft night at Lady Percival’s aflembly after my fifter was feated at cards, Mifs Edgcumb and I went into the room where the company entered, and placed ourfelves near the door, that we might fee them come in; Lord Ofmond followed us. After fome time Mrs Aubrey and her niece were announced. I did not look at my Lord, from motives of delicacy. They curtfied to us in pafling he nightly bowed, and continued fpeaking to me of Venice. I was at liberty to obferve Henrietta’s countenance, as fhe did not remove for half an hour . to any great diftance from us.—Her eyes were conftantly on her too fickle Plenry : at laft fhe followed her aunt to another appartment
very
ii8
MASQUERADES; or
very foon after Lord Ofmond left us, and
difappeared.------Good heaven !—how I
fuffered at the idea of his then addreffing her in a language he is fo thoroughly a mafter of,—and which ihe may liften to,
and anfwer him in without a fault!-----
I had not a doubt but he purfued her to atone for the little notice he had taken of her when fhe was in our view. The pen of a Cicero could not convey to you the pain thefe ideas excited in my breaft ; but I acquired deceit enough for a while to feem compofed. “ I wonder where Lord

Ofmond is gone, Julia !”	“ Are you un-
eafy, my dear, about Lord Ofmond ? ” “Poh! not I indeed.”— “ Then, my good Emily, I may venture to remind you that Lady Elenrictta Marchmont is in one of thofe
Oh!
55 CC
roomsand now do you wonder ? no, I had forgot.” Her ready coincidence with my conjeXure, that they were together,—gave me a new pang. So liable am I to the moft painful of all fcnfibilities! The Duke of Suffolk took the feat that had been juft vacated by a more irrefiftable objeX : he made me many complaints cf tbs codnefi with which / regarded his paf-
fiori'.

WHAT YOU WILL.
119
fion \ begged I would not be deaf to his pro-feffions, or think them injincere. He ended not here, but my attention did ;—for I was ignorant (though he had my ear) of every thing elfe he faid, fo engaged was I in looking for the Marquis’s return, and fancying, at a diftance, every man I faw of his height, with a coloured coat fimilar to the one he wore, to be him.—The illufion of my fenfes ran to an extreme indeed, when, a-mongft the many my erring eyes raifed to a refemblance of him, appeared fome very aukward figures, that, as they drew near, fhocked me for my comparifon. The hand-fomeft man there, or I believe in Europe, thought like Lord Ofmond, muft be flattered. I was at laft drawn from my reverie, (if it may be called one,) by the a-larm I received in hearing the Duke beg my permiflion to offer propofals to my mother and Lord Pemberton -the thing upon earth I moft dreaded, from a con-viXion that I fhould not be allowed by either of them to refufe fuch a man. A chillinefs came over me ;--he looked at me with tendernefs, and impatient for my fwer.-For a few minutes I could make him
none;
an-
120
MAS QU ERADES; or
none ;-my teeth chattered,—I (huddered— At laft I cried, “ For God’s fake—if your Grace has the fentiments of humanity you are proclaimed to poflefs-----if, my Lord,
you regard the unhappy objeX”—My eyes grew dim!—I could only utter, “ I am very
ill—where is Caroline?--My fifter!”—
and 1 fainted on Mifs Edgcumb’s fhoulder. I was reftored by volatiles; but what was my confufion at feeing fuch a crowd around me, the L^uke (landing on one fide, bending over my chair, and Lord Ofmond before me, with both my hands in his. I withdrew them inftantly, and whifpered Caroline to let us depart On looking up, I faw Lady Henrietta regarding me with fcrutiny, and laughing heartily with her aunt. How inhuman fhe appeared f “ Mind her not, my love,” cried Mifs Edgcumb, who was equally Ihocked at her mirth.
The mere effeX of envy!—111 as you are at this moment, fhe would give worlds
r	^
to wear your form, and exchange places with you,” “ Truth by heaven!” exclaimed a gentleman who was near, and whom I am unacquainted with. Lady Henrietta turned the colour of fcarlet; her features

WHAT YOU WILL.
121
tures fwelled with paflion. She advanced towards Mifs Edgcumb, and was about to make her fome reply, when her aunt fpoke low, and led her off.—What a wife for Ofmond!—“ A curfed fool!” cried the Puke, and offered his hand to lead me to the carriage, which one of the fervants pronounced ready: at the fame inftant Lord Ofmond prefented his.—I was dif-trefled which to accept, and about to obey the impulfe of my inclination, when I re-colleXed, that, if I did fo, I fhould probably give my rival fome further uneafinefs, and doubted not but fhe was chagrined fufficiently at her lover’s affiduity about me a few minutes before. I therefore fuffered the Duke to be my efcort; in confequence of which, I obferved feveral angry looks flafti upon him from my Lord Ofmond’s eyes. He followed me to the flairs, and, as I ftopped to give Lady Mortimer the pas, whifpered, “ Ah, Lady Julia! how miferable have I been !—I did not think fo much
tyranny dwelt in He waited not for my anfwer, but folded his arms, and returned to
your foul!
the apartment I had quitted “ .II	G
and proba-
Wy

122
MASQUERADES; or
bly joined his indelicate miftrefs in laughing at an accident, that by her behaviour fhe muft have fuppofed abfolute affeXation. His duplicity of conduX draws on him my contempt;—would I could fay my averfion!—I have forbidden him to addrefs me on a certain fubjeX;—in pofitive terms forbidden it, on pain of my lafting difpleafure.--1 am convinced, from evGry au-
thority, that he is to become foon the hufband of Lady Henrietta.—I have mentioned this before,—but I am ftiil further af-
fured of ic V
when
and notwithfianding,— he is abfent I am wretched' in the higheft extreme.—At the found of a carriage ftop-ing at the door, my heart palpitates:—if he does not appear, I am cruelly difappointed ; if he enters, my fpirits fink, and I wilh him gone;—I fly the room, and fancy 1 fliould regain my former quiet, was I never to fee him more.
*
*
*
*
*

Lady Mortimer was miferable at my in-difpofidon,—and was urgent to fend for a phyftcian.—I, who never was ill enough
to
WHAT YOU WILL. 125
to be in the hands of one, became alarmed at the mention ;—and entreated fhe would at lead wait till morning, and, in cafe I was not quite well, promifed to comply then with her defire. When Lord Mortimer (who had been at Boodle’s) came home, and heard of my unlucky fainting, he feemed terrified, and imputed it to the right caufe (though I would not allow it, left Caroline fhould reproach herfelf, as being inftrumental to it). He faid, he was con-
I fuffered fi
O	^	y	’
My fifter anfwered.
dancing fo inceffantly.
Jhe was afraid, he fpoke jufily, and that we muji be more domeftic for fome days. I cat! affure you this refolution of hers does not difpleafe me;—though I am perfeXly well at prefent.
I received a letter yefterday from my mother ;—they are all joy and happinefs in Hertfordfliire. On Tuefday the whole party are to be in London. My brother and his wife are to be Lady Pemberton’s guefts in Portman Square, as their'houfe in Grafton-ftrcec is not quite ready for their reception. At the end of ten days we
all go down to Lord Mortimer’s at Wind-
G 2	for
X24 MASQUERADES; or,
for for two months:—there is to be every fort of amufement inftituted there, to entertain us, plays, maiks, balls, concerts, &c. &c. &c. Then we are to ramble about,firft to my brother’s in Hertfordfliire, next to my uncle’s in Kent, and I fuppofe finifh our fummer at my mother’s in jHampfbire. I dare anfwer that we fhall be fo happy as to have you and Sir Charles with us in a (hort time after our refidence at Wind-
for.
I
Heaven grant it!— jfhould embrace in London firft
did hope we ;—but you
keep Montague fo long dangling after you as a lover, that you have crufhed the pro-fpeXs I had raifed.—I am fummoned below. This impertinent indifpofition brings many who call themfelves my friends, to enquire after me. Obferve that denomination is confined entirely to the male fex; my own are contented with the etiquette of fending to know how I do. Lady Henrietta has not forgotten that piece of ceremony, 1 affure you.—^What a burlefque to keep up fuch a mere appearance !


*
*
*
*
*
*
*


Sunday
WHAT YOU WILL.
125
Sunday Noon,
You think me to blame, dear Louifa, in not mentioning how Emily Edgcumb bore my brother’s marriage.—Why, well —very well: her good fenfe operated properly on the occafion. I believe the bare idea of yielding him to another, was at firft worfe than death ;—but by degrees fhe reconciled herfelf to her fate, knowing that inevitable evils muft be fubmitted to: and, as reafon never refufes its aid when fincerely invoked, it has fo far aflifted her, that fhe fees and talks of Pemberton and Sophia with compofure and efteem. What an example for me !—*Why cannot I follow it ?—1 have fome reafon to hope, that in a little while Sir James Weft brook’s aflidni-ty will make him, what my brother was to her,—very dear.—— nies
How now, Mour-

Ihip.
A gentleman begs to fee your Lady-’
44
A gentleman begs to fee me / this gentleman ?” .
Sir Charles Montague.’*
Who is
G3
Sir.
. ft
126
MASQUERADES; or,
“ Sir Charles Montague I—I am impatient to fee him !”
*





%



%





I
Yes indeed I am delighted at this long-wifhed-for pleafure; yet 1 could almoft reproach you for not making him the bearer of a letter :—but I recolieX ;—the moments prior to your parting were of too much importance to have been devoted out of his prefence.-—I no longer blame you. He tells ipe that he left you well. For my fake, Louifa, expedite his and your happinefs, and let me partake of felicity in the fecondary inftance, by thinking that you enjoy it in the fulleft extent.
Sir Charles is to meet his friend here at dinner. I muft repair to my toilette-—not with any delign againft him, believe me: and, having made this a tolerable, or rather
intolerable long letter, conclude myfelf
%
V
Your ever faithful
Julia Herbert;
N. B.
WHAT YOU WILL.
127
N. B. A letter, in anfwer to this, from Lady Louifa Sydney, is omitted asunne-ceflary; and another alfo from Lady Julia Herbert, before fiie left London, for the fame reafon.
/
To Sir Charles Mqntague.
St. James's Square.
Regret inceflantly, my dear Montague, your fudden departure from town, and the melancholy event that called you from it. A heart excellent as yours muft fuf-
tain greater
grief at the imminent danger
of your worthy uncle, than any joy one of our libertine young men of faftiion would feel on their near pofTeflion of fo noble a fortune as you will inherit by the calamity that threatens you. To be abruptly fummoned to attend him on fo awful and unexpeXed an occaflon, was doubly fliock-
ing
! This day’s poft will bring me a letter from , you, I truft, to fay that he is out of
danger.
G 4
The

The Herbert’s, you know, I think they left London the
I am too fen-
X28 MASQUERADES; or.
The latter end of next week, I go down by invitation to Mortimer’s for a fortnight or three weeks ' are there■
day before you quitted it. fibly affeXed with your prefent affliXion to bend my thoughts on any other fubjeX, whilft addreffing you. To tell you they are julways occupied by your prefent diftrefs, wouldinlincere,—there is one, and only one, \v%o ffi ares them with you; but I fympathize in your forrow as much as man can do.—It is too painful a fubjeX to detain my pen longer on, ftnce, if the worft I dread has happened to my Lord Beaumont, a melancholy letter can afford you no confolation ; and if (as I fincerely hope) he is better, it will only carry you back to the dreadful refleXions you experienced, when you imagined him near his laft hour. Adieu then, dear Charles ! and believe me, in every fituation.
Your faithful and affcXionate
Osmond,
To
WHAT YOU will;

Tp Lady Louisa Sydney,
rf^
W
Wnd/oA '
E arrived here this day fe’nnight,' and are preparing for the reception of much company ;—much indeed will it take to fill this noble manfion, not an apartment of which is to be unoccupied in a few days. The recolleXion of the bleffed moments I paffed here not many months ago, endears the place to me :—not a room —not a walk—not a ride in or about it, is there, that has not witncffed fome happy fcene, which are all brought back to “ my my mind’s eye” with accumulated charms, from being now beyond my reach. Ah, Ofmond ! origin of all
I
mifery
my pleafure and but for you, the lhades of Wind-
for would never have been fo delightful^ -—but for you, I could now wander thro®” them with as much gaiety of heart as I was wont to feel in traverling the woods of
G
5.
Hamp-
ip
QU
O R
Hampffiire or Hertford !—alike indifferent to all places.
When I parted from him, Louifa, I behaved with fortitude ;—1 evaded the opportunities he fought of fpeaking to me :— but when he bid us adieu—when I faw the door ftuu him out,—and heard the carriage roll off,—convinced that I had feen him for the laft time an unmarried man,—-judge—
Oh, my Louifa ! judge what I endured 1 I flew to my clofet;—I was almoft deli-
I applied to him, who alone could
nous
give me power to fupport fo fevere a trial On my knees I preferred the requeft; —and it was granted. I returned to the
O
drawing-room compofed 1 played a rubber of whift; it attraXed my attention out of myfelf: I was not once accufed by my partner of heedleffnefs to the game ; a reproof I never before failed of incurring. Was there not fome fupernatural afliftance that (heltered me from the form of Of-mond at the time ?—-Ah ! would to heaven at this moment, it would lend its benevolent aid,—and, pouring in the balm
of infenfibility to my foul, , fave me from
the

WHAT YOU WILL;
131
the torturing remembrance of the bleffed days I have known, which “ are gone, never—ah never! to return.” Sweet oblivion ! to you I bend;—you I implore to relieve a poor fuffering wretch !—Put forth your lenient h^nd, and fcatter on the molt faithful votary you ever heard utter a wifh for your dominion—rhfe power of forgetfulnefs 1 Alas, my Louifa ! how 1 wander from my fubjeX !—That tranquillity I now invoke, continued the whole evening. I cannot fay it was a pleafant one, (though a heaven to what I fuffered prior to its vifit,) for I felt like a perfon in a ftate of ftupe-faXion: 1 mechanically did every thing that I was bid.;—liftened, and anfwered properly;—but had no fenfes that feemed to originate from myfelf. I believed a poniard through my heart would have given me no pain any kind.
i got above fufferings of
The next morning,—my fituation dwindled to mere mortality with the day my
agonies
returned,—and
brought
in the
ftrongeft light to view all my miferies.—-About eleven o’clock we left town.
G 6
To

MASOUE'RADES; or
9
To complete the meafure of my woes,;;-the Duke of Suffolk has propofed to my mother and Lord Pemberton for my hand: —they are as flrenuous for the match as I
expeXed. clofet
Lady Pemberton came into my
two mornings ago, and acquainted
me with his generous offers.---1 implored
my mother to let me hear no more or him. —vS he looked grave: “What, Julia!”— “ I befeech you, Madam, to oblige me— On my knees I beg the Duke may be inftantly informed that I can never love him, —that he muft: never again addrefs me on” “ Julia, you aftonifh me inexpreffibly I —“ If my dear mother confults the happinefs of her child •,—if, Madam, I deferve the indulgence 1 always experience from you—you will immediately difmifs my Lord
Duke’s pretenfions.
93
“ I do confult my
Julia’s happinefs ;—ffie is every vvay deferving of my indulgencebut indeed I cannot fo haftily impart your prefent fentiments to his Grace,-—fentiments that muft be given up, after allowing your reafon to ponder on the advantages that will attend fuch an alliance:—nay, I will be
be
w
YOU W
*33
candid;—I am in fome doubt whether I can ever prevail on myfelf to fuffer your refufal of his add relies, unlefs you allege to me a fufficient motive why I Ihould do fo ; as I lhall be criminal in my own opinion, if I permit you to trifle away your felicity
thus unaccountably.
You are fatisfied.
Julia, that I am not of the number who imagine happinefs centers in a high title, or monftrous fortune; I proved that, when 1 confented to Mr. Lenox’s overtures, who, at the death of his father, will
fcarcely four thoufand a year
and
poflefs his worth
was my principal objeX, and made me zealous for the match. You never loved him enough, that his image Ihould Iteel your heart againft a fecond attachment. In a few days after the affair was broken off, you were as gay as ever;—I faw no traces of anxiety concealed under your behaviour.—Lord Seymour propofed ;—he
was inftantly rejeXed.-----Lord Budenall
lhared the fame fate___I he Count de Bel-
fielde, a man of the firft diftinXion at the court of--------, befought your hand;
you would not hear his name mentioned 5
yov*
*34
QU
O Rj
you were indulged in all your caprice^ and not a queftion alked, why one of thefe men (each of them a defirable objeX) Ihould not call you his.—Of late, you ap-
gout for
pear diftrefled amufements
you have no
-you fly as much as poflible fociety ;—you conceal your grief.—Well! I will not prefs to know what it is; this
is foreign to rny fubjeX.---The Duke of
Suftbik, of all the young men I ever beheld, or was acquainted with,”--(ah, Louifa ! did not my mother make a mental refer-vation of one? Undoubtedly !)—“ is certainly moft calculated for you. Is he not amiable, polite, and fenfible ? Anfwer me, Julia.” “ I believe, my Lady, he is all that you faybur, alas! I am unable to do juftice to his merit •,—though I admire, I cannot love the Duke.” “ I have no fear of your remaining Jong infenlible to, fo agreeable a perfon, if you will but confent to let him plead for himfelf. My God, what fault can you offer againft Suffolk !
Beware, Julia, of fuffering perverfenefs to make its way into your difpofition. Oblige me lb far as to allow the Duke to
pay

WHAT YOU WILL.
*3S
pay us a vifit at Windfor.” Ah, my mother!—I perceive that I am deftined to wretchednefsbut be ic fo,—difpofe of me, Madam, as you pleafe •,—-I will, at your command, become the wife of Suffolk and, oh, merciful God !—if that miferable
9J
44
fate awaits me,--let me not endure.it long!
No, Julia, you fhall not complain of your mother’s forcing your inclinations !-— Heaven forbid I—but prornife me to behold the Duke with chearfulnefs.-—If, after giving him an opportunity of attaching you to him, your difguft; continues invincible, we muft then adopt meafures agreeable to your will.—Yet, if you can conquer your diflike, let me affure you, that nothing can afford me fo rnuch delight, as to fee a union
•My
tears prevented my thanking her Ladyfhip, and I withdrew.
Several times during this converfation I endeavoured to fummon up courage enough to tell Lady Pemberton how unhappily and improperly my heart was already beftowed;—but even to the beft: of mothers I was too great a coward to give
the
take place between you and him.
35
* * Jr
r •*>
‘V .V
ip
MASQUERADES^ or
the unfortunate fecret utterance.—My bro^ ther was 'lefs gentle on the fame topic that had fo much diftrefled me with Lady Pemberton, than ever he was in his life. It is evident that this dreadful attachment will deprive me of the affedion of all my friends. The Duke of Suffolk is expeXed down amongft a concourfe of guefts in a few days hence. Lord Ofmond is not one of them, I am convinced *,—his name is fcarcely ever mentioned.—-Ah, my God ! I fhall fee him no more till he is married—Louifa, withhold your fympathy—I love you too well to defire that you fhould participate of my uneafinefs.
*



*

*
*
*

if?
Sunday Evening*
I do not think I told you that Mifs
you know not what girl fhe is. This me on the terrace I was walking: Ihe her to join me; I kid her arm within
Edgcumb is with us : an amiable engaging morning fhe followed next the river, where begged me to permit readily affented. She
mine
what you will.
*37
mine. “ I believe, Julia, fomething hangs upon your fpirits!—You appear more melancholy than ufual.—Indeed I obferved an alteration in you in London; but the caufe I afljgned for it was, the fatigue that muft confquently enfue from the hurrying life you led for the laft three or four months of your refidence there.—i flattered myfelf, when you came into the country,
of
and was reftored to reft.
you would
“ And fo
courfe be reftored to vivacity.”
I lhall, dear Emily.” “ Then why do I not find at leaft a beginning ?—It is full time for it!—I hope, dear Lady Julia, nothing has induced your thoughts to crofs the Channel;—forgive me,—bjut I almoft fear”
Fear nothing of the fort, my fweet friend !—Mr. Lenox has no intereft in my thoughts:—whole days pafs by, without once bringing him back to my memory.” “ Come, if you are generous, you lhall treat me with confidence;—for I will reveal an affair to you, that I would hardly truft myfelf with the knowledge of, for a long while.” “ Not with an expeXation of my repaying the fecret, my amiable Emily
1 am a bankrupt,—I have no”
No matter^
138
MASQUERADES; or
and jfhe un-
matter, you ihall hear me folded to me the paffion for my brother, with which her gentle bofom had been oppreffed for near two years;—but calling reafon to her aid, it ffiewed her the impof-libility of his being hers,—and inftruded her to vanquiffi the mercilefs tormentor that imbittered her hours. She owned to
me, that fioe felt for Sir James Weftbrook the tendereft fentiments; who, on his firjl addreffing her, (which happened twa months ago,) informed her, that he offered her a heart juft weaned from a ftrong attachment, which would have continued during his exift-ence, had he not combatted with his inclinations by force,—and reprefenting- to himfelf, that the objed would never return it. He added, he could not fo well have fucceeded in his attempt, had not his good fortune introduced him to an intimacy with her, which effedual-ly accomplifhed the work he had undertaken : that, as a man of honour he thought this a-vowal neceffary, and, if fhe defired it, would give up the Lady's name-, but confeffed he had rather (for a time) be excufed doing that* I admired her good fenfe; congratulated
myfelf on the near acquifition of fo charm-
ino"
WHAT YOU WILL.
*39
ing a relation *, affured her of the high opinion weall entertained of Sir James’s worth; and thanked her for the proof ihe had given me of her friendlliip.—But I did not dare to expofe to her my infatuation ; certainly there was illiberality of fentiment in my filence!—I have fo long “ backward trod thofe paths I fought to ffiun,” and am fo habituated to aX wrong, that I can only now caft a defpairing figh on every freih error I commit.
if



*
ik
ik
if

Sunday Night, Eleven,
So !—every incident that can poflibly, does happen to give new perturbation to my mind. At fupper, my brother faid, he fuppofed that fix weeks more would add Lord Ofmond to the lift of married men. My fifter Caroline contradiXed him, and declared, fhe was very fure, that, when Ofmond did marry, it would not be Lady Henrietta:— that it was very odd people Jhould run away with fuch a notion!—To her certain knowledge, my Lord was refolved not to facrifice his happinefs to accumulate greater riches than
hi
140
MASQUERADES; or.
he pojfejjed,
fo
■elfe he would aver.
fume to difpute % that the Duke of Weftmorland days after his return from Hertfordjhire, that his fon would very fhortly, he expeded, follow his example in becoming a Benedic, He turned to me; “ Julia, you had many conferences with the Marquis, and I dare believe you are informed of his intentions; if you may divulge them, tell what they are.” “ Indeed, my Lord, I am ignorance itfelf of them ;—but, if I may judge from what every-one fays, your Lordihip’s conjeXures arc right;—I believe Lady Mortimer thinks too favourably of Lord Ofmond.”
“ You are a wrong perfon to apply to in this cafe,” cried Caroline: “ you are prejudiced againft the Marquis ; therefore” “ Prejudiced againji him !" repeated my brother. “ He has given us no caufe--why Ihould Ihe be prejudiced ?" “ Nay, 1 know not; fex.”.
but 1 believe Ihe is againft your whole
Mortimer
the converfation, which in my heart I fincerely thanked him for. He fpoke of a fuperb pavilion he had ereXed to ferve for a theatre, where he means to have plays enaXed
as
WHAT YOU WILL.
141
as foon as his vifitors arrive. He intends to caft parts amongft fuch of them as will like the propofition; and entreated we would accompany him to-morrow to fee whether we approve of the building and decorations.
When we retired for the night. Lady Mortimer followed me to my apartment; and, after giving full fcope to her vivacity on different topics for fome time, fent Mournies out on an errand to her womans She thus began :
“ Julia, it is neceffary you jfhould know, that it is agreed you are to appear in the firft play that will be reprefented.
her in left, and
pofed
* I fup-
humoured her.
<(
me

Very well adapted to my I can have no objeXion’
Pray what charaXer is allotted “ Statira.” “ difpofition!
“ Objedion ! no certainly ;—if you had,— it would direXly fubfide, when informed who your Alexander is to be.” “ Pray tell me !”—“ I do not believe I will fo readily as youexpeX;—yet I pity your impatience 1 Well, fuppofe I fay Budenall.
“ I will not have him.” “
Nor him.”
33
‘ Seymour !’*
44
You
.
142 MAS Q.U ERADESj or,
“ You fliall not then ;—but you muft not be fo laconic when I name the foft, infinuating, charming Suffolk :—he will become the hero admirably ! will glory in appearing as the world, conquered by
Oh, how he conqueror of !—What
you
fpirit will be feen in his performance !”
“ Cruel,—inhuman Caroline !—Were you in my fituation, Ihould I thus fport with your diftrefs ?” “ What, refufe to be Suffolk’s Statira ?—Amazing!—Well, if you are fo barbarous to him,—-my poor friend the man vou defoife and hate the
moft in the the graceful-
you
world.
defpife
----the handfome—
the elegant Ofmond, fpite of his bewitching addrefs, can ftand no chance of being nominated to the character.”--1 felt my face glow,—I fat down.
You rejeX him alfo, Julia, no doubt P* I have no intention, fifter, of undertaking the partI have not abilities for it and, if I had, Statira is the one of all others I would laft appear in—-But, was I obliged to perform it (I fpeak of a thing that can never happen), 1 fhould prefer playing with Lord Ofmond to either of the three you have mentioned : they have ferioufly addreffed me,—and, as I do not mean to accept
WHAT YOU WILL
*43
cept of Lord Budenall,—Lord Seymour,--or the Duke of Suffolk, it would be highly improper to give them any encouragement :—I look upon Lord Ofmond as a married man,—and that makes an effential difference.”
“ Then you would prefer (hewing the Marquis a predileXion, my fweet girl!” “ As Lord Ofmond cannot be mine, lifter,
’----“ And why may he n’ot be
my dear ?—What obftade can pre-
the world
yours,
vent it, if you but confent to his happinefs ?” “ Dear Lady Mortimer, how you fpeak ?— What my brother affirmed a few hours ago is not to be doubted j—he is foon to become the hufband of Lady Henrietta: Ofmond deceives you if he denies it.-—But fuppofing, after an engagement with her, he fhould have levity enough to declare a paffion for me,—would you not defpife him for it, Caroline ?—Could you diink him a man of honour ?”	“ No certainly, if he
was engaged:—but, my dear Julia, do not entertain that idea,—^depend upon if, he is as free from any ties to Henrietta, as I am at this moment bound by the moft folemn to my excellent Lord Mortimer.” “ On what proof, my Caroline, do you ground
this
*44
MASQUERADES; or
this afl'ertion ? She paufed—“ On his af. furances.” “ Oh, my fifter ! “ Men's vows are womens traitors!" Do not, my dear Lady Mortimer, place fo unlimited a confidence in what Lord Ofmond fays;—he has frequently attempted to impofe in the fame manner on my credulity.—Believe me, from all I have heard of him, from what I have feen, he is a compound of deceit—
But what then ......It concerns not you
—or me, Caroline: fo let us fay no more of him.”—Mournies returned, and my After took her leave, as I will of you, my Louifa, for the night.
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
Monday Noon,
Upon reflexion, I wifh I had told Caroline what paflTed between the Marquis and me at Ranelagh. She looks on him in a favourable light,—and would put a lefs cenforious interpretation on his behaviour, than my mother. Lord Pemberton, or Almeria, would do, were I to inform them of it.—I cannot bear to lower him in their
opinions j and, though I can freely condemn
him
w
YOU W

him myfelf, it would hurt me in the higheft degree to hear any-one elfe do fo.
We have been to fee Lord Mortimer’s magnificent ftruXure it is really a noble building, admirably adapted for the purpofe he intends it.--He has had this fcheme of amufement in view thefe two years paft it feems *, in which time people have been conftantly employed, and have now completely finifhed the pavilion, as they call it,’ entirely to the fatisfaXion of ail who behold if. I never aim at defcriptions of this fort j therefore, will only tell you, that, like the Opera-houfe, it can be throvyn into a number of beautiful apart ments *,—otherwife it is a very neat theatre, calculated for the advantage of the per-ormers, and the convenience of the audience : it is fituated on one fide of my Lord’s park, and is about two miles from the houfe. Mortimer is bufy in ordering and difpofing of neceffary furniture in the dreff-ing-rooms and green-room -proper perfons are already arrived to fnperintend, and give direXions about dreffes, which are not to be entirely compleated till each gentleman and lady fix on their charaXers,
VoL. II.	H	and
occafionally
f,
/
146
MASQUERADES; or
and they can be made to fit exaXly. They are now employed in preparing the following : the drefs of Elizabeth, in the Earl of "Warwick, for Sophia ; Margaret’s of Anjou for Almeria, and Warwick’s for my brother. It will be the firfl play reprefented : the next I believe is to be the Provoked Hufband. Lord Mortimer will do juftice to Lord Townley. We tell Caroline it fuits him better than any that could have been
0
thought of; for he will walk in his own linebut to render the thing complete, Ihe mufl; certainly do Lady Townlev. We feldom gain any good by playing with her at her own weapons; fhe foon filenced us: --however, fhe declares off the part; for though fine knows fhe could merit great applaufe by performing it, yet there is, fhe allows, too great a fimilarity in her own charaXer and that of the diffipated fine woman’s of quality,—to undertake it; and fhe has no inclination to be called Lady Townley for life. I am as ignorant as you are, how the other parts of each play will be filled, and muft remain fo, till the ex-peXed guefts affcmble. I am very wary, left they fiiould take me in but I am refolved
WHAT YOU WILL.
*47
folved not to be a performer, unlefs my mother abfolutely infills upon it;—and that I think fhe will not be unkind enough to do.—I fee a carriage on one fide the lawn: .—whofe is it I wonder !—Lord and Lady
Percival’s liveries.----They are come, my
Louifa, and I muft haften to welcome them :—they are, no doubt, replete with news from London. Adieu 1

*
•3t
*


Monday Night, Twelve o’Ckck,
The evening was infupportably hot,— and for the benefit of the air I ftrolled out:—they were all amufing themfelves differently; fome playing at cards,—others in an adjoining room on mufical inftruments ;—the reft were engaged in converfation, (for a good deal of company came to dinner,) and I, fearful of interrupting any perfon, retired alone. I walked into a wildernefs on the fouth fide of the park, which is a heavenly fpot the hand of Nature has been lavifh to it beyond expreffion in her donations, and, with the affift-
H 2
ance
148
MAS QU ERADES; or.
ance of art, has rendered it perfeXly a pa-radife : the eye is delighted; every zephyr wafts fweets equal to thofe breathed in A-rabia Felix ;--the melody of birds forms more enchanting harmony, than we are invited to hear, in a high-arched refplendent dome, from the voices of our moft capital lingers. The evening was beautiful, and I continued my walk through the labyrinth upwards of two hours.
A.
9
“ There uvas room for meditation even to Madnefs, ’till the mind burft with thinking.”
J grew tired, and feated myfelf in an alcove : a few obtruftve tears had ftrayed down my cheeks, which I was wiping away when Lord Mortimer fuddenly entered He ftarted, and exclaimed,
“ Ha, Julia!—How is this ?—Good heaven ! what difeompofes you thus i—-Speak, 1 befeech you—So unhappy, my fifter !” “ No, my Lord !—Why Ihould I ?
I beg—^^ptay take no notice of this weak-nefs^—1 cannot account”——“ Oh !—this
muft
WHAT YOU WILL.
149
muft be accounted for.” He fat by me, and took my hand.
“ Inform me, my dear Julia, what occafions your diftrefs;—impart it to the fympathizing breaft of friendfhip.—^^If it can be removed (and fureiy it might), you fhall find my affiduity unwearied to effeX
It;
do not deny me your confidence. My tears gufhed forth a-freih;—I could fpeak.'
not
44
Is it the idea of your mother’s and Pemberton’s urging you to marry Suffolk ? —Be at reft, they will not perfuade you againft your inclinations.—No,-you are not deftined for Suffolk.—Ah, that I could impute thefe tears to another caufe !—How foon fhould I dry them !
“ What do you mean, my Lord ?” '
“ You ffiall know •,—but you muft be
:—no evafions to a
33
very candid with me— queftion I firft ihall alk; mife this ?”
will you pro-
“ It is but of late my fincerity has been ever doubted;—what have I done to be fo funk in your opinion, my Lord ?”
“ No one thinks more highly of you, my Julia, than I do;—yet for reafons you
H
3
may
ISO
QU
OR
may hold good, it is not improbable (without laying the flighteft reproach on you), to fuppofe you might ufe a little referve: but in this cafe yon muft prornife to banifli it entirely, before you are cntrufted with a fecret that concerns you.” His fenfible eyes feemed to penetrate my thoughts;—> I imagi»ned he looked feverely on me.
My God ! why am I to be terrified thus ?—What myftery is there that needs this prelude ?—My heart cannot long bear the confliXs it has of late fuffered, and ftiil endures.——
44
—■—Yes, my Lord, I will anfwer with truth whatever you propofe to me, be the confequences what they may;—I am indifferent to them,—or what becomes of the ill-fated Julia.” He embraced me tenderly.
“ You are unkind, my fifter—■'Think you I come to alarm—or take an improper advantage of the confidence I follicit ? No, Julia;—I have no motive for claiming your fincerity, but from the hope of relieving the diftrefs which feems to overwhelm you.—If you fuppofe it beyond the reach of my endeavours or abilities to accomplifh, if it gives you pain to reveal the fecret
to
WHAT YOU WILL.
15*
to a very faithful bofom,—be filent:—I will not tear it from you;—ntir ffiall even Caroline know that I have the mortification of fufpeXing you to be unhappy. Dry yours eyes:—what has already paffed in this fhort time ffiall from henceforward be mentioned no more.”
“ Forgive me, my deaieff brother,—my bed friend !—I would rather die than offend you:—Your goodnefs ftrikes on my foul, and I am all acknowledgment for ir.
—Pardon my petulancy, and demand what queftions you pleafe;——I will be truth ic-felf.”
“ Then tell me why you fo pofitively re-fufed the offer of Ofmond’s heart !” “ Ah, my Lord !------did you over-hear the”
at
“ I heard not a fyllable but from himfelf the day after his declaration to you Ranelagh ; when, in agonies not to be defcribed, he related to me the cruel return you made to his ardent profeffio.ns. Nes^'er was there a couple created, fince the time of our firft parents, fo formed for each other as Julia Herbert and Lord Ofmond: I think it wonderful that you can find one objedtion to him. Good heaven ! how
H 4
plainly
152
MASQUERADES; or
plainly does it demonflrate, that erring mortals feldom fail to dafli from their lips the cup of happinefs prefented to them !— Where, my fifter, will you again behold one to compare with the amiable Ofmond ?”
CC
Take him but for all in all.
}>
no-
where my Lord ;—his equal in many great virtues,—in every charm, does not exift.— Ah ! my God, am I infenfible to them ! You, who know every fentiment,—every movement of my heart, can beft judge how much it is devoted to him !—Thefe tears you behold, my brother, are witnefles of the intereft I take in the fate of Ofmond;
my life is fo embittered by my unhappy attachment, that 1 look forward with impatience to the time that will rid me of the burden.”
“ You (hall not thus -make yourfdf wretched.—Admitting you aXed rafhly, in difmiffing him inconfiderately, all may yet be well;—my Lord will again fupplicate your pity, 1 dare aver, and”-----—
“ Again be rejeXed with fcorn and indignation.
it
33
Why how the devil !t~You blow hot
and
WHAT YOU WILL.
*53
What am I
and cold in the fame breath! to underftand by all this
“I fliould hold it, as I did thatnightatRa-nelagh, the greateft infolence to addrefs me, when he is undoubtedly the property of another.-At the moment he is ordering preparations for his marriage with Lady Henrietta Marchmont, to prefume to make me the ob-jeX of a licentious paflion !—I cannot re-
fleX on it with patience.
---------------------------------His behaviour to his real miftrefs, which plainly evinces his infidelity, and his defire of deceiving me, are great, but, I am convinced, the only blemiflies in his charaXer;—and where is that mortal upon earth who is perfeX ?—No, we have all fomething to be forgiven for.—Miferable as I am on his account, yet I can pity my rival;—Lord Oflnond loves her not; in that cafe what a
s
fituation will hers be ?
53
c\
Good God, Julia,—how
am
you injure Ofmond ! Make you the objed of a licentious paffion?—What an error!—Hark!—I
called^—Pemberton’s voice---1 have not
time to fay more than this, to-morrow morning early, I will entreat my wife to find an opportunity of converfing with you
H 5	alone:
154 MASQUERADES; or,
alone: Ihe lhall fet your doubts of my friend at reft, by informing you of what he told us both at different times concerning yourfelf and the Lady you have juft, mentioned -,—the manner in which he is fituated. I would chufe you fhould receive this intelligence from her.—Farewel! be corhpofed—and all will turn out to your fatisfaXion.”-— By this time Lord Pemberton appeared in fight: he flew to him, and turned his fteps another way, to prevent his difcovering the traces of the tears-that I believe remained very vifibly on my
countenance.
What will to-morrow produce I—Tomorrow !—This morning I mean, for it is near two o’clock.—I am loft in expeXa-
tion—in	doubt'-and	hope.^	-Adieu, my dear
Louifa.	•		
*	* * »		* *
*	* ^ *	3ft ^	3ft 3ft
	3ft * ^	* 3ft	*
jV. B. In the few following pages fome repetitions are obliged to be made ; bur, as they give a more conneXed detail, and
of
WHAT YOU WILL.
*5S
of courfe let the reader better into the ftory, they may not be found tedious.
*
3ft

3ft
3ft



have been the only
nay, I
Monday Noon.
No more do I chaunt forth doleful la-mentions !—My note is tuned to livelier ftrains ! The intermediate fpace between this and eight o’clock,— hours of my life worth recording ;
never lived before!------------My Louifa,
with what extafy do I tell you, that I am at liberty to liften to tlie impaffioned founds of my Henry’s love !—No one has fo good a right to his heart, as your tranfported Julia !-----Take the matter briefly,
as related by him to Lady Mortimer and her excellent Lord en confidence', but firft I muft repeat my fifter’s prelude to her information.
“ I cannot but condemn Mortimer, for making me rather over-ftep the limits prefcribed us by the Marquis, in revealing, without his knowledge, the following little piece of private hiftory :—but, as my Lord has faid fo much to you prefatory to
H 6	the


MASQUERADES; or
the difeovery of a fecret;—as'he has promifed to inform you what an exclamation of his alluded to;—and as he has infilled on my keeping you no longer ignorant of the fubjeX of fome convcrfations Lord Ofmond has held with us both ; I certainly cannot avoid making you acquainted with it.—And it will be as well, after all;—foq 1 fuppofe, if I do not rell you, Lord Mortimer will.—But I have given a proof that a vwoman can keep a fecret;—elfe you would not at this moment require the knowledge of what I am about to impart.
I could have excufed her wafting fo many .words, before Ihe gave me the intelligence my heart panted for. The fubftance of it ran thus :
The Duke of Weftmorland determined from the time that his fon was twelve years old to endeavour to effeX a match between him and Lady Henrietta,—whofe extraordinary large fortune was the chief inducement to his Grace’s
99
connexion for the Marquis.
feeking the A refo-
lution once taken by him, no earthly motive can cornpel or perfuade him to give up ;—more efpecially when it regards the
“ lucre
w
YOU W
*57
cc
kingdom
Earl)
lucre of gain." He propofed the affair to Lord Davenport, who readily agreed to give his daughter to one whofe veins boaft-ed of fome of the moft noble blood in the
;—to one, who would in a courfe of years be an Engliih Duke (a principal charm in the eyes of a late-created Irilh
and one who promifed to be fo completely perfeX in manners and perfon, as Lord Ofmond. Every thing corroborating to the v/ifhes of the avaricious Weftmorland, he haftened his fon, at the age of eighteen, from Oxford, to fend him abroad, that he might the fooner return, and crown his father’s hopes, by confummating the defired marriage. In two years after Lord Ofmond’s departure, his aunt died, and left him two thoufand a year, at his own difpofal, from the age of one-and-twenty. The Duke, perceiving that the uglinefs of Henrietta encreafed with her years, and that Ihe had not wit or addrefs to compen-fate for it, began to fear that his fon, whom he always called a romantic boy, would not come into his plan fo eafily as he at firft flattered himfelf with the expeXation of.—He thought, Ihould the young Henry
know

158
MASQ^U ERADES; or,
know he was independent of his father, it would render the talk Itill iiiore difficult: -----he therefore omitted to inform him
of Lady Anne Skedey’s bequeft, and concealed It as much as poffibie from the v/orld. Moreover, as we are always timid and fufpicious, when embarked in a wrong undertaking, the Duke was apprehenlive that Ofmond might by Ibme n cans arrive prematurely at the information fo ftudioufly kept f om his knowledge, if fuffered to come over before it was tim'e to celebrate the union his father’s heart was fet on ; wherefore, and left he fhould meet with a too communicative acquaintance nearer home,
----he was ordered to remain entirely,
for the four laft years of his refidence abroad, in Italy.
ft
Lady Anne had, for a great while before her death, refided at Abergavenny, for the benefit of her health.*—So far remote from all her connexions, ffie was (as is generally the cafe) foon forgotten by them.—That it Ihould be the confequence,—was her defire ;--for, after the death of a tender and amiable hufband, and a much-loved filter, flie grew difgufted with the world, and
kept
w
YOU W
*59
kept up no intercourfe with any-one. Her liberality to the Marquis was unexpected j —-Ihe had quarrelled with his father, and for that reafon would not condefcend ta fee his fon, though the child of her lamented filter.---In Wales flie died little or
no mention was made of her ; fo that the Duke had every circumftance in his favour to aid hjs concealment of her laft gift ta Ofmond.
The Marquis, at the end of two years after this injunction of his father’s, tired of the place,—-hurt at the conftraint im-pofed on him,-and unwilling to part with his friend Sir Charles Montague, who was going for a few weeks to Paris, refolved to accompany him under a liXitious title. Both the gentlemen were introduced by letters (from an Italian Lady, who was the confidente of Ofmond’s intention) to our arniable Superieure ;-they vifited her often. And now, Louifa, let me allc, whether you remember, that one day I returned to our apartment quite enchanted with a very handfome young Cavalier I had feen in Madame’s JalonCaroline recolleXs it,-— and what a fright you and Ihe put me into
i6o
MASQUERADES; or
to, by threatening to tell the Nun Soeur Terefa, who had the particular care of us, that I \iadx fallen in love an expreffion that fhocked me then, as much as it would have done her, had you repeated it to her. This circumftance never dwelt further on my mind :—nor ffiould I the next hour have remembered the perfon who had excited fo much admiration in my bofom for a few minutes; much lefs could I have fufpeX-ed, when 1 faw Lord Ofmond at the Mafquerade, that he was the fame beautiful
I had beheld at Paris. Left the filly adventure ffiould not occur, I will affift your memory by mentioning the confequences of that meeting. P
The next day my mother was informed by the Princefs, that a gentleman (and ffie mentioned the borrowed name he went by; —a name Lady Pemberton was a ftranger to) had been urgent with her to difcover who I was, and feemed much captivated with me. God knows for what! On
objeX
re-
ceiving this intelligence, my mother carried Lady Mortimer and me twenty leagues Into the country; and we were feparated from you for three months. We little
WHAT YOU WILL.
i6i
tie fufpeXed the caufe ;—indeed it was right to keep fuch an affair from me ;—it would have turned a young brain of not quite fixteen. — Yet I doubt whether 1 Ihould not have hated him for being the' means of my abfence from my Louifa :— certain it is, I looked on it, as the firft misfortune that ever happened to me But my ill ftars have pretty well accuftomed me to repetitions of the fame malheur. To return,-—this accounts for the words he uttered in the latter-part of our converfation at Ranelagh,-—words fo inexplicable to me at the time ; which for ever recur to my imagination. Lord Ofmond wearied the Superieure with his enquiries, and was at laft intreated by her to drop his vifitswith difficulty he prevailed on himfelf to go back to Italy.——He could bear no longer to remain abroad, after Sir Charles Montague’s departure,—and writ to beg his father’s permiffion to come to England ; which, through the interpofition
of his friend, was obtained.--Some time
after his arrrival here, the Duke made known to him his purppfe of connecting him to Lady Henrietta. The Mar-
qu is
i62
MASQUERADES; or
quis pofitively refufed to think of her as a wife.—His father was violently enraged with him, and my Lord was at laft obliged to quit his houfe,—with an intention of feeing him no more,—and, as he was ignorant of the fortune in his own power at the time, determined to fet out with a friend of his the next morning, and embark as a volunteer for America. The night after this fracas happened, was the one I gave you the particulars of, at the Feftino, where I told you he feemed much indifpofed, and, as 1 thought, behaved ftrangely when leading me to my chair.
At Lord Ofmond’s return home he received a letter from his father, apologizing for his conduX in the morning*,, and begging to fee the injured Henry (as he acknowledged him to be) the next day. His fummons was readily obeyed;—and the Duke met my Lord with an embrace of cordiality, which immediately diflipated all unkind remembrances, and reftored each to their priftine ferenity.
Weftmorland engaged his fon to dinner, and to vifit with him in the evening*,—-that very evening he had promifed the
night
WHAT YOU WILL.
163
night before, if it was in his power, to attend my mother’s party to Ranelagh—He came to make her his excufes, as foon as he parted from his father.
I.ouifa, what followed him with refentment.-
You know, my that I received
Oh ! had I been
informed of what I now am !
how dif-
But no matter
ferent a reception !---
to proceed.
The place the Duke wiflied Lord Ofmond to accompany him to, was Mrs. Aubrey’s. After reiterated requefts of the Duke, all made with gentlenefs,—he con-confented,-—firft prcmifing that the vifit
Ihould be looked on by all parties as a mere common one of ceremony; it was the only one he determined ever to "make the Ladies. This point being fettled, they repaired to Burlington-ftreet. The aunt and father fought opportunities to leave the Marquis and Henrietta to entertain each other;—my Lord addreflfed her with as' much diftance as it was in the power of a. man to do, who could not be abfolutely impolite to any of the fex. Mrs. Aubrey called the Duke to the lower end of the appartment, to view a beautiful commode that had been prefented that morning by
Lord
i64 MASQUERADES; or,
Lord iDavenport to his daughter:—whilft they were thus engaged, and the embarraffed Henry, for politenefs fake, was ftiil fitting by Lady Henrietta, the Duke of Northington and Sophia entered the room. T heir prefence was doubly welcome to Ofmond he flew to a chair near Lady Pemberton \—his thoughts, ever wandering after the Portman-Square family,' prompted his queftion to her \—nor did he feel difconcerted at her fight, from the confeious integrity of his intentions, till fhe ralied him on the fufpicious appearance his PART IE Qjs Akkk ma de: even then—he forefaw not the unfortu-Ttate confequences that might accrue from it; —which, when they did really happen, almoft diftraded him :—they were the inferences drawn by Sophia from this vifit, which fhe imparted in his prefence to me (as I related to you) ; and it was no longer to be wondered at, that he fhould difcover fo much confufion at finding appearances,—-looks,—and words, fo totally changed from their true colours to thofe of the mofi fallacious hue;—yet he could not condemn Sophia for uttering what fhe thought fads:—if he prefumed to contradid her, and vindicate himfelf, would fhe or I believe him ?—No certainly Jhould naturally
WHAT YOU WILL.
165
turally fuppofe the fame artful deceiver, who prevailed on us to be deaf to the report of his addreffing Lady Henrietta, was again fpe-^ cioufly employing his diffembling talents, to glofs over fo glaring a proof of his intended connedion with the Lady.
Thus did he argue, and nearly Ipoke in. thofe words to my lifter.
When we left him at liberty that even-' ing, he unbofomed his foul to Caroline, but defired her, in the moft fervent manner, not to divulge what he had depojited in her breaji, without his coincidence with it \—lefi / Jhould fhun {as a juji punifhment) the prefence of one, whofe prefumption and temerity muft appear great, in daring to look up to me without a fortune adequate to what 1 was entitled to. He intreated her pardon for detaining her attention fo long :—it was a relief to him, to make her acquainted with his fituation ; to receive her confolation,—and behold her fympathy.—Further he mufl yet lean on her indulgence, he added, and beg that Jhe would endeavour to remove the prejudices I could not but have imbibed againji him, from what I had heard Lady Sophia repeat a few hours before with fo much plaujibility 5—that
0oe
166
MASQUERADES; or
Jhe would affure me (if jhe thought it right) he was entirely free from any engagement;— .^nd he was fatisfied that what Caroline a-VERRED, hmujl BELIEVE. He douhtcd whether there was not a degree of madnejs in the re-
queji :---inconfiftency and ahfurdity there
certainly were •,—~fcr, as he could entertain fo little profpedl of my band, what purpofe would it anfwer to fet me right in my furmifes ?-— 7'et, it was worfe than the moft malignant tortures, to be for a Jingle infant lowered in the opinion of a beloved objedt.
Lady Mortimer encouraged him to expeCt much from his merit and my fenfibility; and told him, fhe was convinced, that, with a man 1 loved, I fhould think myfdf happier in partaking of a very fmall fortune, than in poffeffing millions with the poignant refiedtion that they were the gift of a perfon indifferent or hateful to me. He kiffed her
■ I well remem-it furprized.
hand with tranfport.------
ber that circumftance; — as much as it perplexed me to afcribe the caufe;—but I believe I never told you, nor can I now, how great was my amazement at obferving the Marquis’s more than ufual chearfulnefs at fupper —the fummons
WHAT YOU WILL.
167
mons to which put an end to their tete-a
tete.
€C
\
I fhould,” cried Lady Mortimer, “ have exculpated Lord Ofmond, according to his defire, from the cenfure Lady Pemberton threw on his fincerity by the defcription fhe gave 'X t ieir interview at Mrs. Aubrey’s, had you given me an opening for itbut you were referved, Julia,—and I had no mind to be afked, what it was to you how he behaved?"
Some weeks after this converfation with my fifter, the Marquis fpoke to Lord Mortimer in the fame ftrain,, with this difference, that 1 treated him fo cruelly, he was in defpair;—things could not be more defperate,-—and 'it would free him from all obtrud-
folved
fr
Mortimer to furnifh
declare his fentiments to me, and know the worji at once.
Thus, my Louifa, have I accounted for many circumftances, that, had I known before, would have fpared me many mifera-blc hours.
My dear brother!
my admirable
Lord
i68
MASQUERADES; or
I.ord Mortimer! — what effufions of gratitude overwhelm my heart, for this proof of friendlhip! How have you relieved the
Caro-
diftreffed foul of your Julia ! line too !
My
—my acknowledgments to both
are not to be told.^-Oh, Louifa! can it be
poffible ?—Dare I credit my fenfes ?--Is
it reality that I am the beloved,—the only entitled female to the affeClions of Ofmond? the moft amiable—the lovelieft of mea ! It is!--it is! and lam the happieft of women.
*
3ft
*
*


*
*-
3ft
3ft
*
3ft
3ft
3ft
3ft


3ft
I faw Lord Mortimer but during breakfaft immediately after he rode out with Lord Percival and my brother, and I was obliged to attend Lady Percival, my mother, and Mifs Edgcumb, in an airing, from which as foon as I returned, I fat down to naake you a partaker of my joy. I will now go and try to exprefs my thanks to my Lord for the favour he has beftowed on me*,—and at the fame time beg him to difpatch this packet with his letters to the
poft-
w
YOU W
169
poft-office at Windfor, after addreffing ic to my Louifa, and embelliffiing it with his title. A ftrange medley, it is certain, you will receiveI have rung the changes of grief and felicity in truth.—No matter; that the latter has entire dominion over the breaft of your Julia, will amply repay you, 1 am fure, for the “ tears you have been beguiled of,” by the diftrefs and anxiety which you have known to difturb hitherto the repofe of.
Your ever faithful,
J. Herbert.
P. S. Lord Budenall, Mr. Montague, Sir James Weftbrook, and Sir John Benyon, are expeXed down this evening.
VoL. II.
I
To Lady


170
QU
O R
To Lady Julia Herbert.

!L
Sommerville-Houfe,
Yes, my much-loved Julia !—you have
indeed “ oft beguiled me of my tears.”
How have I commiferated your fad-fated
0
attachment !—What nights have 1 paffed in grief furpaffing yours if poffible !—Oh, how have I wearied heaven with my prayers to extricate you from what 1 deemed the moft ill-placed paffion that ever invaded a human breaft!—nav,—I have been im-
ft '
pious enough to arraign its decrees, in af-fiiXing fo greatly its beft work ; and have been fhocked to think what little encouragement human nature had to be good and virtuous, when the model of perfeXion,- — the moft amiable of mortals, was given up a prey to anguifh and mifery. I own myfelf reprehenfible beyond the power of expreffion, ever to have admitted fuch un-chriftian-iike refleXions to intrude on my imagination but fpare your chidings,— and be fatisfied in knowing that I have been
fufficiently
WHAT YOU WILL.
*7r
fufficiently puniffied in my own reproaches. ——At the time I fuffered fo much on your account, I received your laft letter the beginning of it added to my uneafinefs the more I read my diftrefs encreafed, until I came to the part dated “ Mon-
day Noon.
33
Judge of my tranfports at
mg
what followed!—judge of them by your own feelings; for my pen is not equal to a defcription."I congratulate you, my charm-Julia, on your felicity.—Well does Lord Mortimer think, that “ there never was a couple created fo formed for each other, as my fweet friend and her incomparable Ofmond." How clearly now do I underftand the meaning of Sir Charles’s queftions and ambiguous manner, whenever you were the fubjed: of our difcourfe 1—Artful creature !
Had he been more candid,-—perhaps his Henry at this moment would be much happier than in all probability he is. What would I not give to know whether Lord Ofmond is to be one of your guefts i —I cannot doubt it—Haften to me every information :—your fituation becomes critical,—and it will be impoffible to be too
minute in your accounts.
I z
Yet, fo engaged
as
172
MASQUERADES; or
as you are by this time, is it not unreafonable to defire it ?—Ah, no !—my Julia is fenfible how interefted I am in what concerns her, and will not repine at affording me one half-hour in each day.
Sir Charles Montague is at my Beaumont’s, who is dangeroufiy ill: he left him for one day to fee me. He told me that you are handfomer than ever, but not fo chearful as you ufed to be, he thinks.—
he would
Lord
"Was he to behold you now,
I
I hear
foon revoke his opinion, I hope, from him every day which is the only means he can find to make his abfence fupportable. I bear it fo ill, that I confented to his and my uncle’s importunity of fixing a day for our union. Laft Tuefday month will be the important one. You will tell me I adopt the ftyle of romance, if I fay my heart forebodes fome difafter, --fome unforefeencalamity.—But away, all
painful ideas!
Julia
will not fuffer your intrufions at prelent.
1 cannot dear girl write more; Lady Sommerville torments me with her continual prefence.-----She is grown aftonifh-
ingly fond of me within thefe few months;
nay

WHAT YOU WILL.
173
nay, moft unnaturally fo.-----What can it
portend ?—Nothing favourable, I fear. This ftrange tendernefs gives her fufficient reafon, llie fuppofes, to invade my retire-
ment
for without the flighteft notice
fhe is in my drelfing-room, and hurries me to accompany her to Mrs. Waulmfley’s—
Ridiculous, vain woman!
I have no pa-
tience
Adieu, my beft Julia.
Louisa Sydney.
P. S.
I admire Mifs Edgcumb’s charaXer more than ever.—I am fure 1 fhould not have had firmnefs enough to have aXed
flie has donebut the
as
fenfibly
as
more I confider my own weaknefs and folly, the lefs right I have to name myfelf in the fame fentence with fo exalted a girl.
13
•to
174 MASQUERADES; or
9
To Lady Louisa Sydney.
Windfor.^ Wednefday Evening,
tINCE my deareft Louifa fo juftly condemns the very great fault her extreme partiality led her to commita partiality that caufes you to regard my imper-feXions in a falfe light;—I will, as you defire, “ fpare my chidings,” and only entreat my amiable friend never to fall again into a like error. I deferve more—
much more, than thofe flight fufferings, which rny weaknefs magnified to fuch a height as to appear infupportable-even for the impatience 1 fhewed under fo fhort a probation. But remember in future, my much-loved Louifa, that, when you fee a worthy objeX labouring with afiiiXion, (I am entirely out of the queftion,) Providence is not to be cenfured by (hort-figiit-ed mortals for its difpenfations; and the hand which “ chaftifeth thofe it moft loveth here,” will amply recompence them with exquifite and lafting happinefs for what is
fcarcely
WHAT YOU WILL.

fcarcely regarded as uneafinefs by a better world.------1 anticipate your exclamation.
_	A
C4
Wh
yet to take.—
can deliver !—Were you fo moral, Julia,
when your heart wrung at difirels ?--Or
have you been contemplating fome of Seneca’s leaves, to enable you to bear your turn of good fortune with philofophy and moderation ?”
God knows what “ turn my fortune" is
At prefent its profpeX is not ibvery brilliant as when I wrote laft;—but I do not complain,—all is tolerably well.
1 am fincerely glad that you have at laft fixed Sir Charles’s day; I wifh to God you had done it many weeks—aye, months ago. You would now be of the Windfor party,
which is really a numerous one.----You
muft indeed give me leave to laugh at your foreboded misfortunes,—Why, in the name of wonder, my Louifa, will you feek for wretchednefs fo unaccountably —Summon your extraordinary good fenfe from the nap you have permitted ic to take ;-enjoy your happinefs, and, not only for the prefent," but for ever, banifh all obtruding, anxious, and unneceftary fears. It would indeed be
I4
ftrange.
176
MASQUERADES; or.
ftrange, were I to think any requeft of yours unreafonable ; much lefs one that will give Inch infinite pleafure as complying with imur laft muft do.—I will appropriate, not half an hour,—but many half-hours at dif*-ferent times in each day to my pen,—and be as minute as you can wifti me. A fort of bafhful timidity hindered me from afking Lady Mortimer whether Lord Ofmond was expeXed at Windfor ? —Your curiofity on this head was very inferior to mine ; ftiil I could not conquer the punXilio that kept me filent, and I underwent the moft
difagreeable of fituations,---that of fuf-
pcnce.
I think I told you that Sir John Benyon, Lord Budenali, Sir James Weftbrook, and Mr. Montague, were expeXed laft Monday evening. Between eight or nine o’clock, as we were all feated in the faloon, a rattling of carriages and galloping of horfes were heard* “ They are come!” exclaimed Mortimer, and ran out to meet his friends, for whofe arrival he had feemed impatient fome hours. After feveral minutes had elapfed, he returned following fix gentlemen. The firft that appeared was a tall elegant figure,
whofe

tinguifh plainly the objeXs :
WHAT YOU WILL. 177
whofe height and air refembled the Duke of Suffolk’s. I was convinced it muft be he, and my fpirits funk,—but were quickly revived by hearing my mother cry, “ My Lord, I am rejoiced to fee you !-—How does your Lordfhip ?” As it was dufk, and I placed at a great diftance from the door at which they entered, I could not dif-
but when I
obferved the inimitable grace with which he addrefted my mother, and heard his voice,—my Lord Ofmond could no longer be miftaken.—The other gentlemen were the four I mentioned, and Mr. Bifhop. As the Marquis approached the place where I fat, which he did as he made his bow to the ladies in turn, I thought 1 fhould have fainted—^My heart throbbed,—my knees trembled,—and I could hardly ftand while our vifitors paid us their compliments. I was glad the lights did not appear direXly, elfe my confufion muft have been but too perceptible. My Lord took no particular notice of me; he was all vivacity. I overheard him tell Lady Mortimer,, that Jhe had much to anfwer for. She afked he meant? “ In diftreffin
1
many hearts by
5
178 MASQUERADES; oR,
your own and fifter’s abfence fo fuddenly from London,” he replied. “ Suddenly I why I am fure you knew of our intention.” “ True,—but poor Fermor, Belfielde, and Conway, were quite ignorant of ir, and mofl: probably have hanged themfelves by this time.” At fupper, my Lord Ofmond fat oppofite to me. My brother aflc-ed him for Lady Henrietta, “ She is well, —I faw her laft Friday at Ranelagh,” was his anfwer.—His eyes w'ere fixed on me, as he fpoke. I bluflied,—and he threw them down. Lord Mortimer mentioned his theatre, and intention of becoming manager of a play-houfe.-— They all approved the fcheme; and Ofmond told him, he defired he would make what’ufe he pleafed of him in aflifting any of the performances:—the reft followed his example, which gratifies my good brother not a little. The next day, the gentlemen dined with Mr. Eflee-man, a neighbour of ours; and the Ladies were taken up in getting their parts: Almeria and Sophia were particularly engaged in that province, as their play (the Earl of Warwick) will be performed to-morrow night. A Mifs Johnfon does Clifford;
Sir
WHAT YOU WILL.
*79
James Weftbrook
the other Mr. Mon-
Sir John
At night when the gentlemen returned,' they were in high good humour, and endeavoured to render themfelves perfeXly agreeable. They were foon followed by the Duke of Suffolk, and Mr, Ainfley,’ who arrived from London ; and to dinner this day, came, from the fame place, Mrs.' and the two Mils Pelham’s *,—the former is
an abfolute fine Lady,—'her daughters two pleafing young women.—Hark !
call
3
[ muft go to her.
-Sophia
%
%




%
%
%
%


%

%

Never was man fo changed in his car-
riage as Lord Ofinond is to me!
no long-
er afliduous to engage my converfation •, no apprehenfions nowoi my beftowing that heart on another he once fo earneftly folll-cited.—He convinces me, that lie can be happy, though I refufed him.—Where are all his vows,—-his ardent affurances of not furviving my indifference, fo frequently re-
I 6	peated
i8o MAS QU ERADESj or,
peated to Lady Mortimer ?—Forgotten! and I have the misfortune of experiencing, that the woman who depends on the con-ftancy of a man, leans on a broken reed.— ITaid, in the beginning of my letter, all was tolerably Well: I obferved Lord Ofmond’s nonchalance,—but flattered myfelf he afleX-ed ir, to convince me he was piqued at my behaviour;—that he would foon drop it,—-and, in fpite of my prohibition, feek an opportunity to addrefs me once more on a fubjeX I had reafon to believe very near his heart.—I muft confefs, at the moment I formed fuch a hope,—I trembled at the idea of fuch a converfation, and rather a-voided an occaflon for ic;—but was be the
fame tender Ofmond I left
he
m town,
would, notwith ftand ing my referve, have found a time to renew the topic. Surely, Louifa, there is no deviation from delicacy in what I write !—I was prevailing on myfelf to be fatisfied with his behaviour, and wait patiently the dencument of it all day;
and Ihould be in the fame difpofition now,—but for what I am going to mention, which has convinced me my Lord has
con-
WHAT YOU WILL.
i8i
attending them
O
conquered his paffion as fuddenly as he
formed it.
Sophia called to me, to defire I would accompany Lady Percival, Mifs Edgcumb, Mifs Pelham’s, Almeria, and herfelf, to fee a grotto in the hermitage. For a great while the Ladies were averfe to any beaux
i—however, five of them wuld prefume for once to difregard their commands, fince they cUJhed fo violently with their happinefs, and, fnatching up their hats, went out with us.—The five gentlemen were, the Duke of Suffolk, Lord Mortimer, Lord Ofmond, Mr. Biffiop, and Mr. Montague. As we quitted the hall. Lord Ofmond prefented one arm to Lady Pemberton, the other to Almeria:—the Duke of Suffolk walked at my fide;—but my hands were tpo well employed in car-
Bijou, and holding my hat, to follow the example of the other Ladies in leaning on their efcorts. His Grace intreated me to let him take the dog;—but you may fuppofe I did not confent for many reafons. As Lord Ofmond followed clofe with my two fifters, I overheard him fay to one, “ Hift !—-you go too faft 1—I believe we
muft:
ryino-
i82
MASQUERADES; or,
muft keep a greater diftance, or we may interrupt the iete d-ttte\—and that would be very cruel, you know, to both pa»‘ties,— more efpecially to Suffolk.” I h.dtily turned, and beckoned to Mifs Edgcumb, who came to me direXly —
hand
through
After putting her
I
looked at my and with
tion.
my arm,
fifters and their companion, ana witn a fmile thanked them aloud/Ijr their confidera-
I lliouid have bleffed you for it, Ofmond,” cried the Duke, “ had you ex-preflld it lower.” 1 thought the Marquis feemed angry,—he reddened,— his eyes fparkled,—and he bit his lips. Suffolk’s countenance reproached me alfo ; but that
I little regarded.---Lord Ofmond and I
took no further notice of each other du-ring our walk;—and I gave his Grace not a minute of my converfation unattended by a third perfon.—Is it not ftrange that Ofmond fhould be fo zealous to furnifh a profeffed rival with an opportunity of declaring to me the fame fentiments I fo lately heard
from his own lips?-----The Duke is a man
very capable of infpiring the moft tender inclinations, and I obferve his particular diftinbiion of me often makes two of my
d friends
to

WHAT YOU WI LI..
183
to dirpel, by convincing thenf he is not
You mufl:
more efteemed than they are. know, that I mean Lords Budenall
and
Seymour:—Belfielde cannot be ferious; his love, though teazing to the objeX, will never, I think, be prejudicial to himfelf. The gay, laughing Henry appears as much compofed as if Suffolk was a difgufting creature, from whom he had nothing to apprehend;—or, rather, as if he took no intereft in the difpofalofmy hand,--which
is certainly the cafe.
I might ftill hope
this mode of conduX is affumed to try me, did he fhew a preference to any female in my fight;—but fo far from it,'—that it is impoffible to fay which Lady he is moft gallant to.
When we returned, and were affembled in the faloon. Lord Ofmond ftepped to a feat next me. “ I muft beg your forgivenefs, Lady Julia,” cried he, “ for the unfortunate interruption I was the caufe of giving your ferviteur now ;—I was un-
----“ I
lucky——but my meaning good.”-------“
eafily pardon it, my Lord ;--our converfation was not fo important as to make either” “ Oh !-—1 do not prefume to enquire ■what it was,--though it may be eafily gueffed ;
isi.
MAS Q.U ERADESj or.
1
ed;----nq^man can fpeak to you, without
mechanically making love the fubjeX j— fuch exquifite beauty infpires even the lowed of our fex j-—and when the caufe is confidered, their arrogance fhould be pitied
at the time it is condemned.--But I muft
compenfate for the mifchief I have done; Suffolk comes this way he fliall have my place. Sure my generofity excites your admiration !—What a pleafure 1 do refign !— Happy Suffolk !—Muft I go, Lady Julia ?” “ As your Lordfhip pleafes,” replied I, rather haughtily I believe. “ I will gratify your Ladyfhip j” and away he flew. The Duke did take his place, and with all the ardour imagihable painted his love, and hopes of being one day entitled to call me his. Do you think, my Louifa, I was not diftrefled ?
-—...Indeed I was -----1 could fcarcely re-
ftrain my tears. Ofmond’s cruelty in giving me up fo palpably fhocked me feverely : —yet 1 deferved it.—I had no right to treat him with the little compaflion he experienced from me, when his foul fpoke to me in the bitternefs of anguifh.—But, my God ! did I not aX from honourable principles Be it as it may, he is amply revenged !—The only man with whom I could be happy,
thinks
WHaT you will.
185
thinks me capricious,—no longer worthy of his affeXions,—and has for ever banifhed me from them :—he will never—-ah, never, my T.ouifa, touch upon the grateful theme, that could allow me to convince him how erroneoufly I judged a few weeks ago;—he abandons me,—and 1 have little, very little comfort left!

*
3ft
3ft
3ft
3ft
3ft
3ft
*
*
3ft
3ft
I foon difengaged myfelf from the Duke, and went into the mufic-parlour with Almeria, Lady Percival, and two or three
Moft of the company fur-
gentlemen, rounded the
card-tables, fome playing.
others looking on.
“ Come, dear Julia,” cried Lady Percival, after my lifter Jiad obliged Lord Budenall with her finger and voice; me, fweet girl, my favourite fong, out of II Bacio."—“ I will play for you, my Lady, but I forget how to fing.” “ 1 cannot excufe
Lord
give
you Seymour
be as good as you ufed to be.
and here is Lord Mortimer too”
he juft then entered—“ lhall accompany
you
186
MASQUERADESj oR,
you on the flute, and Mr. Montague on the violin.”—They took up the inftruments, and I fat down to the Piano Force. From the time my fifter began to play, the room filled; —as foon as I finifhed, 1 heard thefe
words from a mouth clofe to my ear.
4C
Oh,
thou inimitable, lovely creature ! with what rapture do 1 gaze on you,—with what extafy hear you !—Why do you feek to deftroy the peace of fo many ?” On turning my head fuddenly to fee who fpoke, my lips
touched Lord Ofmond’s ;------1 blufhed.
“ Blefled accident!—what a reward !—Oh,
_
my J ulia, were you lefs cruel Lord,

offend
you
Say no more.
I beg, my 1 will not
but you know not the heart you
defpife,—you have fo contemptuoufly re-
jeXed.
59
He retired from my chair, and.
to avoid being particular, I was obliged to continue playing and finging for fome time longer.
At fupper,—I faw not the Marquis till then,—he again was diftant to me, and chearful with every one elfe.
This evening Lady Caroline Denley, Mrs. Afhley, and a profufion of beaux, arrived
/
WHAT YOU WILL.
iSf
rived here.
_______------To enumerate their names
would take up too much of my time and
paper

*
*
*
*
*


Thurfday Afternoon.
I have been juft down to welcome the Duke of Northinoton. Sir Thomas and
T 1	^	^
Lady Walpole, Captain and Mifs Walpole, to Windfor.—You know them all, my Louifa, and what an acquifition they are to our agreeable fociety. I have been bufy moft part of the day in aflifting Sophia and Almeria in preparations for their appearance prefently : their timidity encreafes as the time draws near j—I have ftrove to dif-flpate it, for there is no doubt but that they will acquit themfelves well.
The audience each night will be a fmall one;—on that condition only, the Ladies confented to play: and though my Lord Mortimer has been fadly teazed for tickets, —he has had the addrefs to refufe all a-bove his fixed number without affronting one creature. He will not inform us how •many are to be admitted. Every inhabitant
i88
MASQUERADES; or
tant of the houfe is regarded as a privileged perfon to be a fpeXator, but not entitled to introduce a foul into the theatre;--! in-cliioe domeftics, as well as their fuperiors. All my Lord’s trades-people about this feat, his tenants, their wives, grown-up fons and daughters, have leave to fill the pit and gallery, and are prefented with tickets for every night that the company performs. Such as gain admittance to the boxes, are blue,— to the other parts of the houfe, yellow; both forts are fealed with Mortimer’s arms, and marked with his own fignature. I am told feveral perfons have travelled fome miles, in expeXation of	ridiculous
an amufementand hoped their trouble would have been repaid, by Beading food for laughter in that they would be difappointed ; for our tragedians are very decent performers, to fpeak. in the ftyle of the Morning-Loft. If their curiofity does not really take its rife from fo illiberal a motive, I am forry it cannot be gratified: though I think my brother very right in fuffering no innovation on the fettled plan *, that once to happen, adieu to all decorum, and regularity
WHAT YOU WILL.
189
rity in conducing the affair:—befides,, it would indeed be aXing for the public.
After the play, we are to have the Rival Candidates: Almeria and Lady Percival fupport the women’s charaXers j the men’s as follow:
Byron by my brotherGeneral Worry,
Sir
Mr. Dacre Sir Harry Muff, Weftbrook; and Spy, by Mr.
James Bilhop.
There is a delightful band for the orchef-tra from London; and you cannot imagine any thing fo pretty as the fcenery, or more fuperb and elegant than the drefies are.. My fifters wait for Mifs Johnfon, to repair with them to the theatre, and there robe themfelves in all their pageant attire. “ Our Clifford of to-night" is the daughter of a very worthy clergyman, who lives two miles from hence. My mother accompanies the Ladies to their drelling-rooms, to direct them in placing their ornaments :-you know what an excellent judge of drefs (he is. She will meet us in the box (which holds twelve people) before the play begins : Lady Mortimer’s accommodates the reft of our party, that are no performers.
I am fummoned to coffee;—in an hour the
carriages
190
MAS QU ERADESj or
carriages will fet off.
Johnfon
come,-..--and I fee the coach driving up
to the door that is to convey them to the theatre.—Ah, poor fouls!—how I pity ye !



*
#

#
*


*

to obferve delight and admiration
Thurfday Night, halfpaji Eleven o'Clock.
We are this moment returned.—No, it is impoffible, — I cannot attempt defcribing Lord Mortimer’s happinefs at the extraordinary fuccefs of his favourite projeX; to fee every-thing managed with fuch propriety,—
painted on every countenance,—to liflen to the plaudits beftowed on the juftly-deferv-
----------------------------he is in raptures,^—and it will require fome days to inure him to his prefent felicity, ere we can hope to find him a little compofed.— To fay the truth, he has reafon to plume himfelf on his cle verm fs and tafteno performance could go off better.
My mother’s coach carried Lady Percival, Lord Olmond, Captain Walpole, and myfelf, to the theatre (I am ignorant how
the
ing aXors and aXreffes:
O
WHAT YOU WILL.
IQI
the reft were marfliailed). On alighting, we delivered our tickets to two ftewards, who were appointed to receive at the front door thofe for the boxes. We then proceeded through a long lobby to a lide-box, which was called for in Lady Pemberton’s name, a box-keeper conduXing us to it:
I really thought myfelf at Drury-lane. On entering we found Mifs Edgcumb, Mrs, and Mifs Pelham’s, Lady Pemberton, the Duke of Suffolk, and Mr. Temple, already feated. We were ftruck with the profufion and difpofition of the lights, which formed
—but there were twice the
a fine coup d'ail \
fhould
number of people I imagined we meet, which accounts for Lord Mortimer’s not telling us how many tickets he had given out. I he Marquis, with great adroif-nefs, placed himfelf direXly behind me, and bore much refemblance in his behaviour to what Lord Ofmond was in London, when we have been engaged on fimilar parties. After we had been feated ten minutes, the curtain drew up. Almeria and Mifs Johnfon appeared exceedingly confufed: the latter repeated the firft fpeech fo low, that we could hardly catch a words—but,
by
§92
MASOUERADESj or,
#
by the time (he had finifiied it,—my fifter recovered herfelf fufficiently to go through hers with fpirit,---and was aftonifhingly great in the charaXer;- her pronunciation very clear,-^her aXion juft, and graceful to perfeXion: fhe worked up the paffions the author meant to excite very admirably. Mifs Johnfon difcarded her fright, and acquitted herfelf to fatisfaXion. Sophia difcovered no apprehenfion,'and excelled in her line. Lady Pemberton and Almeria looked like angels, and had abundant homage paid them. Mifs Johnfon is genteel, but not handfome. The gentlemen performed
delightfully; ----a prettier Edward, or
handfomer Warwick, I do not believe was ever feen.—
—I queftion whether the real Monarch (who you know was remarkable for his charms) was fo lovely as our fiXi-tious King. Sir John Benyon, Lord Budenall, kfic.kfic. had but little opportunity of difplaying their talents, as their charaXers were rather trifling;—however, they made the moft of them,—and were graceful and eafy. When Mr. Montague gave out the Provoked Hufband for next Monday, I imagined the houfe would have fallen, it
fhook
w
YOU W
*93
fhook fo violently with acclamations. But how fliall I exprefs to you the excellent performance of the farce !—or convey to you an idea of the humour with which each perfon entered into their part !— Clever as they all were, Mr. Bilhop, in Spy, furpaifed them we thought the fpirit of poor Wefton was fuffered to tread the ft;; with all its human drollery, to affifl: Lord Mortimer’s wifhes. Every creature bore the marks of pleafure on their countenance during the whole reprefentation.—On Saturday next we are to have a ball.
3ft

3ft
3ft



3ft
*
3ft

3ft




4?
When

(for the Ladies were not fine enough to plead fatigue, after the exertion they had undergone, as an excufe for their not appearing at table), Lord Mortimer mentioned that Tancred and Sigifmunda was to be the
VoL, II.
K
third
(4
33
194 MASQUERADES; or,
third play ; and, addreffing himfelf to the Marquis,
“ You know, Ofmond, I told you two days ago, that you are to perfonate the young Sicilian hero.” He gracefully bowed, You did, my E.ord j and I have made fome proficiency in my lejfon.
He turned to my fifter, “ Is Lady Almeria preparing her part, to be my Sigifmunda ?” “ Oh! no, my Lord ;—I have already done my part." “ Not entirely I hope. —Then, Mortimer, who mWplay the heroine? —which of thefe Ladies.” Lord Mortimer direXed his eyes to me; “ Our Julia muft undertake it.” “ Certainly !” cried the Duke of Suffolk. “ Certainly !” echoed every voice, but my good Caroline’s and Ofmond’s.—I wou’d not hear the pro-pqfal. “ Nay,” faid Sophia, “ if my fifter will not oblige us, ffie tacitly condemns us all who have performed.” “ By no means, anfwered I: “ if I owned talents for the purpofe,—I ffiould not hefitate to comply with the requeft: but, deftitute as I am of them, furely my friends will not wiffi me to expofe myfelf!” They paid me the compliment they could not without being
impolite
33
WHAT YOU WILL.
*95
44
impolite refufe to a perfon who expreffed any diffidence of their powers. Lord Pemberton declared, it would be cruel to refufe them. The Marquis interrupted fomething he was going to add, by the following enquiry : “ Is your filler’s difpofition a ct'uel one, Pemberton?—I am inclined to believe you miftaken, if you imagine fo.” “ I never thought fo till now," replied my brother. “ But I fee plainly that it is,—-elfe ffie would not deny us a favour our hearts are fet on.”
My Lords and Gentlemen^ cried Ofmond, in a ludicrous tone, and aXing as he fpoke, “ hence let me watjn you never to truft to appearances.—Behold this example—who would imagine cruelty could be concealed
under fo fair a maik?----Yet you hear
her brother has confeffed it,—and I hold his veracity too highly to entertain a doubt of
Though you beftow your ridicule on me, faid I to Lord Ofmond in a low voice, “ I will readily forgive, aye thank you for it, fince it changes a fubjeX that pains me exceedingly.” “ Not fo, my Lady ;—it was far from my intention—Think you / am not the moft anxious of any for your
K 2	performing ?
it.”'—
44
33
iq6
QU
performing i
?
«
Certainly I am !—I may
then, under the femblance of fiXion, be permitted to utter the real fentiments I fed, which I am fo pofitively forbidden to breathe in earneft :--nay, under the fame difguife, I (hall have a return of paffion ex-
preffed-----How delicious will the found
be !—Would to heaven the illufion could laft for ever!”
“ We will fay no more of the play, my
Lord and then”------------“ What then?”
demanded he eagerly. Louifa, my delicacy was alarmed—1 could not for my life have compleated the fentence my heart firft dictated, and which an unlucky-—I muft call it unlucky paufe, prevented me from fpeaking. ! wifhed to have faid, “ And then you ihall not find me fo tyrannical as you think me.”—But to utter it, was impoffible.— “ What then ?” repeated he ftill
more
impatiently, with the moft imploring eyes I ever beheld, yet illumined by joy, fixed on my face.
i ffiall think myfelf much obliged to you.”—Oh Louifa !—what a reproachful look he gave me !-!—He raifed his voice,
4C
and, turning from me, exclaimed,
44
Oh,
WHAT YOU WILL.
197
Oh, your Ladyfliip muft pardon me, for difobeying you.—Lord Mortimer— Lord Pemberton —do you let this matter reft.?—Muft not Lady Julia perform Sigifmunda ? I was again overwhelmed with entreaties:—at hft, i..ord Budenall declared, he lojked upon rny confenting as a thing of courfe; and propofed that it Jhould be the fourth play, injtead of the third,
foon. This was readily
as 1 might
not be prepared fo foon. agreed to, and the fubjeX concluded by Lady Caroline Denley’s and my uncle’s telling me they were determined I Jhould comply, and there was no more to be faid.
I make myfelf eafy about the matter, becaufe I know Lady Mortimer will be fo indulgent as to undertake the part for me. Sleep weighs down my eye-lids,-^1 nuift drop my pen.
Hs *
3ft
3ft
3ft
3ft

^ ^ ^ ^
%
*

%

%
As foon as I was dreftthis morning, I went into my mother^s apartment to make my enquiries after her health^: flie fnatched the
K 3
opportunity
iq8
QU
O R
opportunity of fpeaking warmly in the Duke of Suffolk’s favour,—I ftarted at the ungrateful theme, and begged her to expatiate no further on it.--Ah! with what
a ftern look did flie regard your poor Julia! —I did not think Lady Pemberton could look fo ftern ly.
“ Romantic,—nonfenlical girl!” “ Forgive me. Madamhow have 1 offended,?— Have you not taught me to be ingenuous? -—I diflike the Diike—I cannot conceal it.”
“ Ingenuous!" repeated my mother vvith a milder afpeX; you will prove that when ycu declare the obftacles that prevent Suffolk’s fucceeding.” Let me befeech you, my Lady, to grant me a few weeks refpite from encouraging the Duke’s folicitations;
but a few weeks and then, if I do not urge reafpns that muft fatisfy you I ought not to give him tny hand 5- if, after hearing them, you continue to perfuade me thus cruelly,—a method far furer of gaining a
----1 will,
as I have done all my life, yield obedience to your wifhes,—and become the moft unhappy of beings to gratify you, fince my mother can have pleafure in my mifery.”
Could
point than harflily commanding*.
<
WHAT YOU WILL.
199
Could I have fpoken more to the heart, my Louifa?-“Lady Pemberton.paufed;—I threw myfelf on my knees and embraced her, “ Only a few weeks, my mother!’’
She caught me in her arms, and killed my forehead.
“ Be it fo, thou dear, irrefiftible girl !—
I am contented, and will wait your leifure to hear the motives that at prelent aXuate
obftinacy refpeXing Suffolk.----------I
till then
your will not
interfere -nor do I
defire to lay any conftraint on you during this Ihort fpace that is devoted to joy and happinefs—your portion of both lhall not
'----but remember, at our
be interrupted
departure from hence, I expeX to find my daughter as reafonable, and as confiderate of her mother’s felicity as fhe has ever been. We will call another fubjeX. Why, Julia, do you refufe to play Sigifmunda?—Is not' our excellent Mortimer entitled to every gratification you or any of the family can afford him ?—-Donot the entreaties you received from all laft night, deferve a con-cefiion ?—What motive can you have, more than your fifter, or the other Ladies, for denying to perform ?
K
4
I pleaded the old
excufe.
200
MASQUERADES; or
excufe, incapacity and timidity. My mother laid the excufe was ridiculous, and muji make me appear very conceited. I defended myfelf a few minutes to no purpofe Die filenced my objeXions, and bid me remark ' the delicacy of Lord Mortimer, in chuf-ing for Tancred no lover of mine, but one who was known to be engaged a very dif-
FIow my heart reproached me!—I grew cold,—I could not anfwer.
you are not refolved
lerent way
Well, my'dear gir
1 i
to put a negative on every folicitation I make, it is to be hoped !-—Grant me the favour of undertaking the part.” “ You are the only perfon. Madam, for whom I would undertake it.—-Hard as the talk is, I readily confent to yoijr defire.” She was well pleafed; and after embracing me, I left her, to go in purfuit of Lady Mortimer.
I complained to her, in the bitternefs of my heart, of Lord Ofmond’s behaviour;— my lifter owned herfelf offended and afto-nifhed at it,—She was extremely hurt at my mother’s perfeverance in the Duke’s favour; and fuffered the tear of fympathy to adorn her cheek, as I related Lady Pemberton’s and my converfation. We then recurred
WHAT TQU W
20t
cried
fhe.
curred again to the former topic, Lord Oft mond’s ftrange carriage towards me.
We muft be patient, my Julia,”
“ Not doubting but that you retain the fame prejudices againft him,—he affumes this indifference before you with a hope of piqueing your pride, which once humbled, he flatters himfelf,. will render the fortrefs of your heart lefs impregnable ; —and it muft be confeffed, that you treated him barbarouflv in London-------------fatal
error
I
33
“ Fatal indeed, my After!—Was my Lord to reveal to me what he has done to you and my brother, I would not fail to inform Lady Pemberton of it, and of my unchangeable partiality ;—then would fhe, I am fure, defift from perfecuting me aboutSuffolk, and at once confent to the Marquis’s addreffes. To tell her now how 1 am, fituated, would draw her averfion, perhaps, on Ofmond, and cenfure on me for entertaining what fh would indubitably call a romantic paflion, fince, to appearance, the Marquis is endeavouring to conquer his.—She has already called me a romantic ghIhope I do noc deferve the appellation.
K
e
If my Lord a-
5
am
202 MAS Q^U ERADES; or,
r*
gain avows his love to me fhortly,—I have nothing to fear; it would be injuring my mother’s tendernefs to doubt of her con-
r-
currence v/ith our wifhes:—but, fhould he perfift in this perplexing conduX,—I forefee the mofl horrible misfortunes from it.—— What is to be done ? Though Lady Pemberton may be filent, the Duke will not and if I abfolutely rejeX him (the thing I moft ardently wifh to do), fhall I not be difobedient to my mother.?—And to evade a pofitive refufal, is to encourage him. My God, inftruX me how to aX ! I would iather die than marry Suffolk ; and I would prefer even marrying him to difobliging my mother. But I once thought, Caroline, fhe would never be fo urgent with a child of hers to marry any objeX they had the fhadow of a diflike to,” Lady Mortimer bid me not be uneafy ; fhe was fure, fhe faid,
well. God
every thing would turn out
it!—But I have much to apprehend.
“ before
faid I,
grant
“ Tell me, my fifter, ycu leave me,, is there any one of the ladies now in the houfe, that you think feems
attached to Lord Ofmond ?”

Cer-
WHAT YOU WILL.
203
CC
Am I wrong ?”
&* 33
Certainly 1” replied ffie ; “ I think you are, Julia.
“ Well, do 1 am out of the cafe.
“ Indeed, then, my dear, I do ;—I never faw any woman more captivated in my life than the youngeil Mifs Pelham is. You muft perceive it, by afking the queftion. ] am aXually affiamed for her, when ffie flares at Ofmond for a length of time, and
then
efcape him.
draws fuch deep fighs
as cannot I wonder her fifter does not fpeak to her of it! She is a fenfible girl, and more likely to obferve the impropriety of it than the mother, who is really filly enough.”—What think you, Louifa, of this circumftance.? Charlotte Pelham is pretty, and 1 imagine I do not injure her in faying fhe is artful. The latter, you muft know, is dangerous to the unlafpcct-
yet I cannot believe the Marcjuis wil be caught by her allurements; he feems indifferent to her.—She is not. I fancy, the fort of woman he likes •,—but it is difficult to pronounce v/hattime and gratitude may ef fed.—However, I am not uneafy about her I affure you,
mg


K 6



2&4
MASQUERADES; or
9
*

*

*
3ft


*
3ft
3ft
*

3ft
3ft
*
Friday Night, Eleven*
Ah, this cruel, artful, infinuating Ofmond !—Why, my Louifa, cannot he fet my mind in fome degree at peace, by ceaf-ing to difturb me with his inconfiftencies ?
If indeed he gives me up entirely—why not let me imagine fo, by being uniformly indifferent on every occafion ?■—DiffrelT-ing as fuch a certainty muft be, how preferable to this fufpenfe !.—But, if I am ftill dear to him,—as I have reafon fometimes
—oh !,—
to think-trial more ?
why not afford himfelf one
After dinner this day, before the Ladies*
¥ ^
retired, as I was engaged attentively in difcourfe with Mr. Dacre, I did not obferve a. wafp that fixed upon my neck, till alarmed by hearing my mother fcream, who fat oppofite to me. Every one was in motion, and called to me not to ftir : terrified as I was, I had prefence of mind enough to
Lord Ofmond,
obey them, ning, anticipated the reft
quick as light-By fome means
which
w
YO U WILL.
205
which I cannot divine, he got the wafp into his hand, and faved me from its venom by receiving the fling himfelf I was forry to be freed from it at,fuch an expence; —his fore-finger, that fuflained the injury, became violently fwelled,—and fliortly after his whole hand :—he made light of it, and, when preffed to apply fome fpecific to the affeXed part, turned it off in a jeft, by faying, he could not blame the infebi for revenging the mifchief he had done it in depriving it of fo charming an abode as the one it had chcfe\. ^ and therefore patiently bore Jo trifling an in-conveniency as a juft punifloment from a wafp of fuch exquifite tafte, “ The lead you can do, Julia,” cried my brother, “ is to infift on adminiftering a cure for the wound you have occafioned,—Ofmond will noc deny permitting a Lady to become his phyfician.” He put a proper remedy into my hand, and defired me to apply it to the Marquis’s.—Ofmond led me a litde apart

from the company
You hear, Madam,
you are defired
by your brother to apply a cure to the
wound you have occafioned-will you not obey him ?”
With

206
MASQUERADES; or
prefented it.
“ With the greateft pleafure, my Lord. —I am very unfortunate to have been the
caufebetter I had fuffered myfelf!------
Give me leave to look at your hand.” He
----and, whilft I bound the
ribband (v/hich he fought fifty excufes to place—-and replace, that he might detain me the longer), he continued fpeaking low to me.
“ Every fuffering that I could fcreen you from, by enduring myfelf, would be confidered by me as lb many bleffings :----
yet I make an exception -there is one,— and only one, which I wifh you to fympa-tbize with me in.” “ What T nrrl
w---- ---- ---- -	^	^ J------
“ Is it fo difficult to guefs, my Lady ?— You have promifed to adminifter relief to the pain you have given the anguifh lies noc in my finger—(ftay, Lady Julia,—a pin might fupply the place of this knot)—but it could be eafily found in my heart.—You are filent-will you never compaffionate your poor Ofmond ?-------Well, at leaft per-
mit me to kifs thefe lovely hands, for the charitable office they have performed. —I could wifli to be ftung by twenty wafps every day, if after each dart 1 was to be thus
amply
WHAT YOU WILL.
207
amply recompenced.”-------He fighed, and
preffed my hand tenderly as he led me back to the company.
“ You are a happy man, Olmond,” exclaimed the Duke of Suffolk, “ in a double fenfe ; firft to have been able to refcue Lady Julia from the fell weapon of her enemy, and next in being rewarded fo highly for your fervice.—Were you not an engaged man, I fhould be devilifhly apprehenfive ; —but, regarding you in that light, I can allow you to have deferved the favours you juft now received, and am far better pleafed you are the man, than a few I could name, now prefent.” “ Perhaps, Suffolk, you mean to queftion me in what manner my engagements really ftand “ Not I ’tis very well known ;—and, as you are a man of nice honour, 1 can have no fufpicions.”
Lord Ofmond (whofe colour heightened at the Duke’s firft fpeech) darted at him a look of fiery contempt, and repeated “ No fufpicions!" I caught Lord Mortimer fhak-ing his head at the Marquis, as much as to fay, “ If you proceed, our plot is difconcerted.’’ 1 believe Ofinond underftood
him,
208
MASQUERADES; or
f
him in fome fuch fenfe.—-He immediately recovered himfelf, and anfwered, “Your Grace is the happy man you juft now called me:—my gratification was a temporary one,—yours will be the moft lafting felicity,—and, by your manner of fpeaking,— feems built on a fure foundation.” I could plainly difcover irony in this reply—but no one elfe did :—the Duke took it for a compliment,- and reared his head up an inch higher than ufual. It was againft my nature to fit tamely by, and hear the man whom my foul moft abhorred, alfumin to himfelf a privilege to which he had no title. As foon as Suffolk’s and Cfmond’s fhort dialogue ended, I addreffed Lord Seymour audibly in the following manner :■ “ Pray, my Lord, why do not you ^nd Lord	your fufpiciom f You
have juft as good a right to do fo as the Duke of Suffolk.—I may, without an imputation of vanity, call on you in this manner ;'f,r there is no one prefent who has not heard his Grace, your Lordfhip, and L< rd Budenall, do me the unmerited honour of declaring yourfelves my lovers; and it is proper to mention, after what I
have
WHAT YOU WI L L.
200
have juft attended to, that his Grace has received no encouragement which can give him any authority to fpeak in the affured manner he has done-”
The Duke bit his lips, and traverfed the room in agitation : Lord Seymour anfwered diffidently,—but very gallantly ; my brother whifpered in rny ear, “ Perverfe haughty—impolite girl!—yon muft make the Duke an apology.” No indeed,” was my anfwer.—I feared to look at my mother ;—-I knew what reproach I fhould find in her countenance.—1 threw my eyes on Caroline and Mifs Edgcumb, and faw
Lord
they were fupreffing a laugh. Mortimer’s features demonftrated
amazement and joy. Sophia and Almeria borrowed their looks from Lady Pember-
I
ton and my brother, caft a glance at the
took courage and Marquis. His eyes were fixed on the floor; one hand (the poor maimed cne) in his bofom, the other engaged in playing with his watch-chain. In fpite of his effort to conceal what paffed in his heart, 1 plainly faw pleafure illumine his heavenly eyes, when he reared them
and perceived fimiles play
about
from the ground
210
MAS QU ERADES; or,
about his mouth. “Good heaven, how cruel you are !” cried Ofmond: “ Poor Suffolk !” Oh, that I may be able to puniih you for this! faid I to myfelf. I turned my head away inftantly, and obferved Sir James Weftbrook leaning over my chair. “ Ha, ha! you are a girl of fpirit faith,” cried he; I did not think it was in you I—Upon my foul, I am in love with you from henceforward :—now everv one will be at reft;
You have no-
—now every one I mean of your idolators. thing to do, but tell them 1 intend you for myfelf; and you muft endeavour to bear your felicity with moderate joy—I have a few pangs at the idea of what two Ducheffes, fix Counteffes, and a hundred women of rather inferior diftindion, will fuffer—Poor little Emily too,--fhe wiffbreak her heart but no matterI am determined to reward you for your fpirited behaviour juft now.
I was vexed at his trifling levity at fuch a moment, and left him with a peevifh air, after complimenting him with “ how ridiculous you are. Sir James !”
I fidled towards my mother, and ftood behind* her. “ I am offended with you, Julia,” faid fhe, in a low voice. “ I declared
33
what you will.
2tl
ed my concern at it, but vindicated what I had fpoken to the Duke.—Lady Pemberton paffed it over, and made me no more reproaches.
After tea, as T was fitting between Lord Ofmond and Mr. Temple, the Duke of Suffolk, leaning on my brother’s fhoulder, approached, and flood before me.
“ I have brought Pemberton, Lady Julia,” cried he, to be my interceffor—at his requeft, you will not refufe to pardon the inadvertency of mine (which you con-flrued into arrogance), that has drawn on me your difpleafure. As you puhlkly accufed me of tranfgrefling,—I publicly fue for forgivenefsand down he dropped on one knee, throwing himfelf at the fame time into a moft becoming pofition. He certainly looked handfome at the moment, —even / could not help thinking fo. My brother, in a farcaftic manner, afked if my heart was adamant ? The humbled Suffolk would not rife, till I affured him that I was reconciled',—and, as a proof it, I offered him my hand, which he kiffed with an air of rapture. Lord Ofmond ftarted from bis feat, and left the room, but foon returned
and
212
MASQUERADES; or,
and found the Duke fitting next to me.
I had fo much of the woman in me, as to appear more affable with him in the Marquis’s prefence than ufual; and could not avoid feeling fome fatisfaXion at feeing the late laughing, gay, indifferent Henry, mortified and difconcerted in his turn. When a man will defcend to coquetry, Louifa, (a mean quality I ever defpifed in one of our fex), I can pardon an objeX for tormenting him with his own weapons;—therefore my behaviour refts excufed to myfelf.
Juft before we retired,—as Mifs Edgcumb and 1 Were ftanding together near a window, Lord Ofmond pretended that fhe had dropped fomething, and ftooped to re-ftore it to her :—fhe faid^^ was mijlaken,— it did not belong to her,—He offered it to me 1 examined what he held in his hand
as he prefented it, without attempting to receive it, and faw it was a fealed paper.
I immediately difclaimed it.
He perfift-
ed that it was my property, and preffed me, in the moft fervent terms (which carried a double meaning, and were interpreted by Mifs Edgcumb and myfelf very differently I dare believe), to take what 1 knew in my
Joul
WHAT YOU WILL.
213
foul no one had fo good a title to as my Ladyfhip. I pofitively refufed the paper. Our altercation drew Sir James Weftbrook and Lord Pemberton to the fpot. They enquired wftat occafioned it? “ Thefe Ladies,” replied the artful Marquis, “ have dropped a billet-doux ;—each of them, fearful of a difeovery, by exciting a little curiofity not quite fo convenient to either of them to anfwer, refufe to accept of it,—thinking, as the feal is whole, they cannot be accufed of knowing the contents,—-qx gueffing at the courageous youth.-—Bnt^y, my Lord, their timidity conquers their wifhes, and leaves
“ Give it to
me mafter of the fpoil." Ofmond !” cried Pemberton.
jeX to,
me,
“ That I ob-exclaimed Weftbrook	you—a
Benedic, have no bufinefs with fuch things now. “ Thou, poor wretch ! art paji 'em."— But, dear Ofmond, I conjure you, by all the hopes you have of fucceeding in your favourite wifh with your favourite miftrefs, to commit that (didbiHet-doux to my hands!” Your conjurement ads on me as a fpell,” replies the Marquis: “ it is powerful, and requires fome fort of charm on my
Then, as I
CC
fide to oppofe its influence.
hope

214
MASQUERADES; ©r
hope to convince that much-loved haughty one you have named, of the fincerity and ardour of my paflion her with a mutual return,
as I hope to infpire
and one day -I will not.-—
be bleffed in her pofTeffion I muft reap the advantage of thefe Ladies perverfenefs.-—If jycK are the author of the writing I now put into my pocket (which there is much reafon to fufped, Weftbrook, though 1 am at a lofs to determine whether your coufin was the objeX in point, or Mifs Edgcumb), you can have no occafion fure to re-perufe \t \—I will keep your fecret, never fear.—I give you credit, however, for playing off very well fo artful a piece of diffimulation.—As to you, my Lord—I think highly improper that you fhould have any thing to fay to the paper.—A married
and a billet-doux fhould never be
it
man
mentioned in the fame fentence.
When
enter into the ftate which you adorn—and, I flatter myfelf, the time is not very diftant—I will not fail to praXife what I now advife.” The three gentlemen turned off to' the lower end of the room laughing-and, in a few minutes after, the Ladies repaired to their apartments.—I am ftrangely puzzled
to
WHAT YOU WILL.
215
to know jvhat that letter could contain.— I think it was meant for me ;—he made only a flight offer of it to Mifs Edgcumb,— and that merely to cover his defign.
It was filly of me not to take it \-Yet 1
am glad that I did not;—there was too much the appearance of a clandeftine procedure in the manner of giving it.
I have no deep in my eyes,—and, though it is late, I will write on.
Lord Budenall affured me, he very plainly fees, from what pajfes continually, that my friends wifh to falute me Duchefs of Suffolk.', “ but remember,” added he, with his ufual impetuoflty, “ that event fhall never happen, whilft this hand can draw a trigger,— or this wrift make ,a lounge.--I will not re-fign you to any man upon earth—except-
that I have fixed
ing one
on in my own mind;—and he is fo worthy of you, that, ardently as I love you, I,cannot be unjuft enough to prevent a union, which, I aXually fee. Providence intended from
your births.----Your diflike to the Duke
is eafily difcovered by metherefore, I am paflive elfe your mother’s—your bro-
’—I ftopped
him
ther’s—your fifter’s folicitude
2i6
MAS QU ERADESj or
him fhort, by declaring I would hear no more j—and reproached him feverely for his violence. I afked him, What entitled him to difpute the will of thofe whom it was my
greateft happinefs to obey ?
If they were
fond of the match, did it not evince their tendernefs and love of me, in forbearing to injiji on my facrificing my inclinations to my duty?—a facrifice I would indubitably make, were they to command it—He interrupted me in his turn, and was fo extravagant in his expreffions, that I told him, 1 was almoji refolved never more to admit even of the friendly intercourfe which 1 confented to make the fubftitute of a fof ter one. He became compofed, and our quarrel ended, know niy fentiments of Lord Budenall, and will fuppofe it would mortify me not a little to lofe his acquaintance. Senfible, generous, and humane, are epithets as juftly his, as handfome, graceful, and captivating, are Lord Ofmond’s.------Now could I
draw comparifons,-'-and condemn the'frail-ty of human nature, which never fails to
You
be caught with the glare of fuperficial excellencies j----whilft the more admirable
ones, the excellencies of the heart, are
coldly
WHAT YOU WILL.
217
coldly praifed,—but always neglebled.——— Ah !—How malicious !—how inconfiftent I am !—Does not the beloved Henry poffefs the fame good qualities that I commend in Lord Budenall ?--Sure he doesl
and in forming the moft perfed—the moft enchanting perfon in the world,—the hand of Heaven did not fail to make the
Befides, maf-

foul worthy of its habitation, have I not always allowed him to b ter of every virtue ?—Odd inconfiftency I repeat,—thus to have changed my note, and inftruX you to believe Lord Ofmond’s
inferior to Lord Budenall’s !---------What
ftrange caprices fail from my pen now that my heart is become the flave of an ardent
paffion
You have the painful tafk, my
Louifa, of reconciling the many contrarieties it* pours forth, of expreffion,—of fentiment,-—
of feeling

an I poflibly in-fiiX a greater puniffiment on you r—But to return. Who is this worthy man whom Budenali has appointed to be my hufband ? -Not Lord Ofmond certainly oh, no! for there is not one in the houfe who fufpeXs
How re-—ah!
me to be the objeX of his love.— ioiced I am, that I again fufpeX ic: VoL. II.	L
was
/
2i8
QU
O R
was my brother to do as much !—Indeed I think Lord Pemberton changed j—I donot find him fo gentle with me as he was formerly. When a young man marries, he imagines his confequence doubled:—his having a wife to govern, gives him the bint to exert an authority over fifters,^—nieces,—fervants, in Ihort, wherever he can be allowed to do fo. My Lord was, and is, an exception to this almoft general folly. I hope, when the novelty of being a hujband is over, Lord Pemberton will re-aflume his natural charaXer, and be once more the amiable, tenet, affedionate brother.-------But I repre-
fent him, perhaps, more altered than he really is •,—yet you can judge, from knowing the kind manner in which I was conftantly
how
ufed
by him, how very ftriking the leaft (difference in his behaviour muft be to me. From any other brother,—his prefent treatment would be called gentle and fond j from Lord Pemberton, it is morofe and indifferent.——Sometimes I think, that my apprehenfion of—I know not what—caufes me to fancy all this, without having any true foundation for it.
After

WHAT YOU WILL.
219
After to-morrow I fhall be entirely taken up in ftudying and rehearfing the part of Sigifmunda j you muft therefore excufe hearing from me, till that difagreeable affair is over.—I believe I fhall want courage ; —but the idea of appearing very aukward without fome degree of it, will infpire it. —Sure there is the found of mufic !—It
m
approaches—-it is under my windows:— how extraordinary !—Certainly there is nothing fo awfully pleafing as harmony at ths late hour!—Our beaux are inftituting at Windfor the cuftoms of the Spaniards in ferenading their ladies.—Strange animal I am !-—An unufual chill ftrikes through my whole frame—why this terror ?—Ridiculous fool!—I cannot reafon it away.— Were I as fond of indulging the gift of augury as you are,—I would expatiate an hour on the melancholy prefages of my heart j— a feries of calamities which feem-The in-
ftruments are hufhed—a loud talking—my God ! I cannot go on—I muft call Mournies to fit with me, whilft I get into bed ; yet, poor creature ! I difmifTed her long i—ffie is buried in the arms of fleep, and my filly fears lhall not difturb her.
L 2	The
ago
220
MAS QU ERADESj or,
\
The mufic begins again,—my fpirits revive—Heavens, what a charming voice !— I muft liften j—’tis Ofmond’s, Louifa—’tis my Ofmond’s !-------They have left my win-
dow—The words he fung I well remember to have admired long before I heard them from his lips.
“ When firft I faw thee graceful move,
Ah, me ! what meant my throbbing breaft !
Say, foft confufion, art thou Jove ?
— If love thou art—then farewel reft !
With gentle fmiles afiuage the pain Thofe gentle fmiles did firfl create.
And, if thou canft not love again,
—■ fn pity, ah ! —forbear to hate.”
I am. afhamed of having been fo weak as to expofe fuch caufelefs terror to you j—I cannot account for it any other way, than by having written myfelf into the horrors, which made me liable to every fearful im-prefficn :—yet that mufic, fo much my delight, fliould give rife to any, is ftrange! I will take my leave, left I fhould next imagine that fome genii may enter my apartment, and tranfport me through the air, a
thou-
V/HAT YOU W
221
thoufand leagues off, to an enchanted ifle ;
or fome evil goblin appear and defcend with me to a fubterraneous cave, the habi-tation of demons, or monfters, either of which methinks not more abfurd than my firfl apprehenfions were.

A>

\
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
Saturday Noon.
We were curious to know to which of the cavaliers our acknowledgments fhould
be direXed, for having been fo gallant this
------they would not fatisfy us.
morning
I thanked Lord Ofmond f^r the pleafure I received, in hearing a very delightful voice, that I plainly diftinguifhed to be his. He was all amazement I—fure I miftook ! —I could not have formed fuch a conjeblure !—he never fling / and repeated many of the like exclamations, which only tended to convince that I was very right in fixing on him my fufpicions,—and that he deviated fropi truth in denying the charge.
About an hour ago, the Marquis begged
1 expreff-
ed
me
to dance with me this evening.
D 3
222 MAS QU ERADESj or,
ed my mortification at being engaged to the Duke of Suffolk. He threw uncommon meaning into his eyes j and was turning from me as if in high difcontent—
“ If, my Lord, the other Ladies change partners, which it is moft probable to think they will,—I fhall hope, in the courfe of the night, to profit of the favour you now offer me.”
" My wifhes for your gratification are fo abftraXed from all intereftednefs, that I am hardly felfifh enough to defire it might be the cafe j—I muft think it will pain you, my Lady, to yield the Duke to another, even in a dance.”
“ I cannot pretend to controul your opinion, Lord Ofmond ;—but it may err fometimes !”
Does it on this occafion, my adorable.
44
Lady Julia ?” and he fnatched my hand, while joy dilated his countenance.
“ You do not deferve I fhould anfwer youj” and I left him.
3ft
*
3ft
3ft
3ft

*

3ft

3ft
3ft
3ft
*
*
*
Saturday
what you will.
223
Saturday, Half paji Eight,
The bail is begun ;—I have little pleafure in the thought of entering amongft the
o	00
fplendid throng, and have not yet made my
The firft objeX that ftrikes
I know will be Lord
appearance
my eyes on going in,
Ofinond, feated next to, or ftanding near, the envied Lady who is to be miftrefs of his hand for the
night.
“Perhaps that
----Per-
Lady—may be Charlotte Pelham !------
haps her clevernefs will teach his heart to become congenial with hers !------His va-
nity—or gratitude may favour her wilhes —and I ftiall be as much defpifed by him as Lady Henrietta Marchmont is.—Dift agreeable ideas!—Hated Suffolk, that is ever more the barrier to my happinefs!— Be quiet, Mournies I —I will not be thus teazed !—She is tormenting me to death to go down.—Aye, you may look crofs, I care not.—She thinks that (he is always to have me under the fame command that fhe had me when I was a child I
But muft I not be funk very low in my own opinion, if I can entertain a thought of being defpifed by any man ? “It was indeed,” you cry, “ a flip of your pen, to
L 4
exprefs
224
MASQUE RADESj or.
exprefs one fo little correfpondent with the pride of the Herbert's!"—Well, Louifa, though I take the reproof (for you always told me I was a proud girl), I fhall not behave to Lord Ofmond as if I fuppofed it in
his power to think meanly of me-----1 will
preferve in my own perfon the female dignity that every woman of virtue ought to
affume.-----So!—my heart reproaches me
now for my peevifnnefs to poor Mournies ! -----“ Why, my good friend, are you impatient for my going down ?”-------“ The
minuets will be over, and your Ladyfhip will not dance one.” “ Dear Mournies, what lignifies my minuet 1—-Lady Mortimer likes to do things in a particular way, elfe we fhould have had no minuets till theball was nearly finiffied, and there would have been fewer performed, which I think
befi.”-------“ Certainly ! unlefs they are
well performed.—Bray, my Lady, go down !” — “ 1 will not refufe you but is Mifs
Edgcumb ready ?-------We agreed to go in
together.---Ah ! ffie appears; and means
to do great execution, no doubt, from the elegancy of her habit.—How handfome ffie is! —Poor Sir James!

¥
WHAT YOU WILL.
225
%
t •'
3ft
3ft
3ft
3ft
3ft
3ft
3ft
3ft
3ft
*
3ft
3ft
3ft
3ft
Sunday Morning, Three 0’Clock,
For the fake of decency, perhaps, you think I ought to fupprefs this date, as ic too plainly tells we have fuffered the Sabbath to fhine upon our revels. The French make no account of fuch encroachments;
nay, their balls, plays, &c. are in preference given on Sundays;—and, from my having lived fome years amongft them, I am fo far reconciled to the cuftom, as to imagine there can be no harm in enjoying on that day innocent amufements. I am by no means fingular in the opinion; for every dancer was infpired with more life and fpirit after twelve, than before,—and teftified no fcruples in indulging themfelves in their recreation.
On going through a long gallery which leads to the ball-room from our apartments, (and which was magnificently illuminated for the occafion, and thrown open as foon as the minuets were ended,) Mifs Edgcumb and I met Lord Ofmond return-
L "
ing
O

t\
226 MAS Q.U ERADESj o r,
ing through it. He looked remarkably handfome ; my companion made the obfer-yation as he approached us:—his drefs was becoming, fuited to the hot feafon, and the diverfion which he intended to engage in. “Youare very late. Ladies !” cried the Marquis.	The fluttering beaux affembled
in that room, mourn your abfence j—but you have well employed the time,—you will teach the torches to burn bright?' He returned with ns to the door, and, feeing us met there by the Duke of Suffolk and Mr. Montague, retired as was his firft purpofe, while the gentlemen led us to our places. We were hardly feated, when Mr. Bifhop (one of the mailers of the ceremonies) informed me, my minuet muft be next, as the Duke of Suffolk had entreated that he may he allotted to dance it with me, and that the rules of precedency fooulcL be difregarded con-
cerning him for that reafon. “ However, added he, “ we fhould not have fo punctually obeyed his Grace, had you entered earlier.” He offered me his hand j bur, as we advanced half way up the room, the Duke of Suffolk met us, and with a certain air of gallantry (which never fails to excite
admira-

exceeding fine one.
WHAT YOU WILL. 227
admiration and encomiums from the Ladies), took my hand from Mr. Biffiop, and led me to the top of the room, I dare fay there was not a female prefent, exclufive of my family, and one or two intimate friends, who did not think me the happieft girl in the world. I am generally loath to expatiate on Suffolk’s praifes,—but common juftice demands it of me here:—his minuet was an
--------------------1 do not know whether impartial judges would not even yield to him thG palm, in preference to Lord Ofmond ;—1 cannot,—for there is in my opinion more eafe in the Marquis’s movement.; Though the Duke’s elegant figure premifed how well he muft dance, (I fpeak only of minuets ; other dances I had feen him excel in before,) I confefs 1 was ftruck at his performance ; and exerted myfelf that I might not abfolutely difgrace him. As we finiffied, I faw Lord Ofmond ftanding at no great diftance, oppofite to me:—his face was fluffied with indignation I thought, and my anxious fears inftantly fuggefted that fome fracas or ’other had happened. As we paffeci him in returning'to my place, I afked what was the matter ?—He made me no
L 6
reply.
/
228
MASQUERADES: or
reply. Soon after I direXed my eyes to the upper part of the room, and perceived him -leading Lady Maria Harley to the fpot I
My fears of Charlotte Pel-
—a far more formi-
had quitted, ham direXly vanifhed dable rival flood forth to difpute with me the heart of Ofmond.—Good heaven, what did I not fuffer !	1 thought her beautiful,
and that he gazed on her with eyes of tran-iport- -My jealoufy fixed her to be the perfon to whom his hand would be dedicated for
the night. “ Delightful figure! rable movement!”—
>3
Admi-
“ What grace !”

What elegance he difplays !”—Thefe exclamations refounded in my ears. Ah ! thought I, how felicitous he is to pleafe his
’—Did he ever take fuch
partner when he danced with me ?
pains I was difturb-
ed from this refleXion, by hearing Sir James Weftbrook fay, now on the floor
44
A very pretty couple and well matched—do
not you think fo, Lady Julia A wretch ! How I detefted him !—I pretended deaf-
and efcaped the “ Yes.” Af-
nefs to what he Lid mortification of pronouncing ter the Marquis led her ro her feat, he ftood fome time by her. Numberlefs vieix les yeux
doux
WHAT YOU WILL.
229
doux that paffed between them; and frequently were white teeth difplayed by the reciprocal fmiles they beftowed on each other.—At length Ofmond ftooped low, and whifpered fomething in her ear.—I watched the motion of his lips*,—they feemed to fa}q “ I wifh you to be my partner!” God knows what anfwer fhe made,—but he looked delighted and bowed.-—In fome minutes
after, he left her.--He approached the
place where I fat*,—Lord Budenall offici-oufly refigned his feat to him, pretending to go in queft of Weftbrook, and point out to him fome flight inadvertency he had committed in his department (a mafter of ceremonies). Ofmond bleffed the occafion that afforded him an opportunity of being fo near me; and, exchanging a look of expreffion with Budenall, took his place. “ Your Ladyfliip fpoke to me juft now ;—I was rather perplexed—>-and,—and—too much
----^Wiil Lady Julia repeat what flie fo
condefcendingly faid ?”
“ It was of no confequence, my Lord ; fcarcely remembered by me.—The minuets are juft ended. I fee Mr. Bifhop leading up Almeria j hers, if I guefs right, will
be
2ZQ MASQUERADES; or,
be the laft. As fifter to the miftrefs of the ball, I was not privileged to dance fo foon j I am indebted to you, my Lord Duke, for that diftinXion.” Suffolk, who was at my left hand, returned me a rapturous complimentary reply, which was for the firft time agreeable to me, becaufe Lord Ofmond heard it.----Coquetry !—oh !—
deteftable !—but I was fadly grieved,—and full of refentment.—He led the way,—and I have already faid reprifals on that head are juftifiable. Lord Ofmond feemed thun-
derftruck,----TheDuke was called afide
by forne one.—After a minute’s paufe, the Marquis recovered his fpeech. “ Lady Julia, what am 1 to think of fuch tyrannic —fuch horrible treatment ?”	“ JPretend
not to think at all of me, my Lord •,—my behaviour cannot affeX you.”—“ By heaven. Madam, it is no longer to be borne !—The minion vihothmplumes himfelf on your preference, lhall be humbled to the duft !•—I have endured it too long.”--“ Does
your Lordlhip fpeak with the intention of terrifying* me ?”	“ Ha !—is this bewitch-
ing Suffolk fo dear to you then .?” “ I hold you all in an equally indifferent light.-"^—^
But
WHAT YOU WILL.
I	.
But let me tell you, Lord Ofmond, the man
who feeks a quarrel on my account will make himfelf fo hateful to me, that I fhall ever after fhun him as my worft enemy, and will fooner encounter death than his prefence.”—“ I have done :--but let me implore that fome time this night—I may fay a few words in private to you for mercy’s fake, my dear Julia?' (the charming appellation ftill vibrates on my ear,) “ grant me this!”	What do you afk ?—The menacing
tone you juft now afTumed tent behaviour
your inconfif-
No, my Lord,—indeed I
cannot.” “ Good heaven ! how difagreeable to you I muft be !—But is there any impropriety in what I ajk ?"—Before I had time to anfwer, Suffolk returned, and took my hand to lead me to my place. As I arofe, I enquired of the Marquis, who was his partner? He replied, “ The firft Lady that wants one,—though I have little inclination to offer myfelf.” However, he did not feem fo totally infenfible on the occafion ; —for within four couple of me flood Lord Ofmond with Lady Maria Harleyand, ftrange as it may found after what had palled,--he played the lover to as much perfeXion
232
MASQUERADES; or
feXion to her, as he had done to me, though in a livelier manner.—Indeed I onlyjudged from appearances, for not a fyllable did I hear of any part of their converfation.
Sir John Benyon engaged me for the two following dances;—as, at my requeft, Lady Mortimer propofed there might be a conftant change of partners at the end of every fecond dance.
As Mr. Montague was leading me out of the cotillon-room, we were haftily followed by Lord Ofmond. He held Lady Maria’s hand (for they made the oppofite couple to Mr. Montague and me in the dance we had juft finiOied). “ i.ady Julia,” cried the Marquis, “ do you recolleX your prornife ?” “ None that 1 ever made your
“ Indeed !—I will remind you
——Ladies do adapt
Lordfhip.” of one in a min me. their memories fo much to their inclinations !—Pardon me,—but I cannot help”
——— “ Oh ! pray fay no more f—it is natural that you Ihould find nothing but foibles in our compofition each individual of your fex is fo juftly thought by us a Jian-dard of human excellence, that I am only a-raazed how you can condefcend to converfe
with
WHAT YOU WILL.
233
“ Thank you for this fe-in an inftant I will attend
with a female,” vere farcafm ; — you.” He and his fair companion paffed us, and entered the apartment thrown open for refrefhments. My proud heart defpifed him at the moment.—What! fhall I waithere in patient expeXation of his coming half an hour hence, to chear my drooping fpirits with a few kind words, already hackneyed in his application of them to Lady MariaShall 1 wait the minute he can beft fpare from her to devote to me Ah, never!—forbid it, pride !—This paffed in my breaft.—“ Mr. Montague, let us go into the gallery, and feek Mifs Edgcumb and my fifters; I believe they are there. My mother whifpered me, that (he was going to cards;—in that room the dancers have no bufinefs.” He caught my hand as if to detain me. “ Lord Ofmond faid he would be back immediately ;—he will be at a lofs to find us.” “ No matter;—he will confole himfelf;—and I would rather find my fifter and Emily,--than that his Lordlliip fhould find us.” “ Indeed, Lady julia, you in a great meafure deferve the charaXer that you have, of being very barbarous!~-----
Good
«34
MASQUERADES; or
Good God ! how much is that man curfed, who is fo miferable as to love you !” “ You
fpeak not with your ufual kindnefsbut, greatly as your opinion wrongs me,—I forgive you—*—
-*—one proof at leaft, that I am not that inhuman favage my good friends judge me to be.”—I need not tell you what polite fpeieches the gentle Frederick made me afterwards, to compenfate for his uncivil one. We turned into the gallery, and beheld in one corner of it a very joyous group: thofe who compofed it were Lady Percival, Almeria, and the eldeft Mifs Pelham; the Count de Belfielde, Sir John Benyon, Mr. Bifhop, and that laughter-loving creature Sir James Weftbrook. We feated ourfelves amongft them, and joined in their converfation : they told us Lady Pemberton and Mifs Edgcumb were dancing. Some little time after 1 faw Lord Ofmond enter the gallery ; curiofity and anxiety painted on his features. He begged Sir James to make room for him on the fofa where Weftbrook and I fat, and made a Qight attempt to get between us. “ Ah, dell quelle harbare /” exclaimed the Baronet, drawing
clofe to me. “ Who could have conceived
it?
WHAT YOU WILL.
23s
it ?—No, no, good Lord Ofmond ;-be fatif-fied, and let other men enjoy fome gratifications as well as yourfelf.—belle confine would never forgive me, if I refigned my place to you.—Poor girl!—I have often reprefented to her the inconveniency that might attend fhewing fo much fondnefs but, alas! there is no helping it, lbe fays. ——■What will you do, dear Julia, if 1 am foon fent to America ? Government thinks it a pity that fuch an officer ffiould not be employed at fo critical a junXure;—therefore it is not improbable but that I ffiall embark in a few weeks for the continent.”
i(
James; but it appears very improbable that you ffiould be fent to America.”-------“ Ah! you flatter yourfelf.
Pray why fo ?
Becaufe they no longer admit exiles there from hence;— and 1 believe you will go in no other capacity.”—The laugh was againft him for a minute j—but he did not fpare me for it,— and I ffiould have been obliged to quit the party in compaffion to my temper, which his monkey-like tricks began to fret, if Mifs Edgcumb had not appeared, and freed me
from
236
MASQUERADES} or
I
from, bis ridiculous wit. He flew to her, and the Marquis took his feat.
“ Well, Madam,” cried he, “ now I will remind you, that you were fo gracious as to fay I fhould have the honour of your hand in the courfe of the ball: how unkind of you, fweet Lady Julia, not to confent, two hours ago, to make me another prornife, yet more eflential to my happinefs!----Let me again prefs that fubjeX;
—favour me after fupper when the company enter into the full enjoyment of dancings and are too much engrolTed to attend to any thing but their own diverfion, favourme then —in the prefence of Lady Mortimer--with your company for half an hour in this gal-Jery.—My ever amiable—my moft dear Julia, refufe not your Henry !—I can no longer linger on a life thus clouded with fuf-pence!—Anfwer me, Madam;—may I hope for your concurrence?”
“ I am much at a lofs, my Lord, what to If I deny you, I am immediately
—cru el-
fay.
charged with the titles of barbarous and tyrannical; —I am thought perverfe. How unjuftiy I meric I’uch appellations.
Heaven that knows my heart can tell!
But,
WHAT YOU WI LL.
237
But, to be fincere, I do not fee why I fhould confent to this private converfation.—Your behaviour perplexes me—-what can you have to fay fo important ?” “ Ah, Lady Julia, !--------Do you forget one particular
night at Ranelagh“ No certainly but I cannot think it poffible that you mean to renew that fubjeX:—your conduX ever lince you came to Windfor has fo direXly
contradiXed”-----Louifa, I had faid too
much—-I trembled--my face felt hot from the blufh that overfpread it; as red a one diffufed itfelf over the Marquis’s—He attempted to catch my hand*,—I withdrew it from his effort ;--joy notwithfianding fparkled in his eyes.
“ My adorable Lady Julia! hefitation ?---Ah. Madam ! I
this
why
-Ah, Madam ! I can eafily
This is not an
vindicate my behaviour-----
opportunity for italready are we obferv- ^ ed.—Let me have the felicity I have begged '
for after fupper; and”----Ere he had time
to proceed,—or I to anfwer, Suffolk pinned himfelf to my fleeve : and Lord Ofmond, finding there was no probability of getting rid of him, left us. To fay the truth, Loui- , fa, I was not forry for the interruption ’
my
238 M A S QU E R A D E S ; or,
my heart murmured againft the Marquis’s apparent levity, in fpice of his affurances “ to vindicate it,”---He alfo pleaded warmly for my agreeing to his requeft.——Thus agitated between confliXing anger and af-feXion, I knew not how to aX.—Befides, after the unguarded words that efcaped me, I dreaded confirming too plainly to him the intereft he had in my breaft, by confenting to the meeting. His vanity, no doubt, led him to interpret in the moft grateful fenfe what I had faid; and can there be any-thing under heaven more mortifying than to difcover a paflion for a man, whofe felf-fuf-ficiency would fuggeft to him to take advantage of it, and wound me, by (hewing his confequence in the eyes of another, whom his demeanour had already taught me to regard in the light of a rival ?
A few minutes elapfed and I took my refolutionit was, to affume a nonchalance X.o Lord Ofmond., which could not fail to contradiX any flattering imprefiions my heedlefs words might have caufed on his vanity; and, if he again preffed for an interview, abfolutely to deny him. Thus haughtinefs and, regard to my own delicacy
(which
\
WHAT YOU WILL.
239
(which I thought injured) determined ;-a fofter advocate attempted to plead in op-pofition to the harlh decree, but was inftantly rebuked, and filenced.—We went to fupper;—I looked for Lord Ofmond not feeing him, I concluded he had taken his place at another table in another appartment.—The next perfon my eyes fought
after, was Lady Maria Harley:
-they
found her not, and there was no remaining doubt of her being feated at the fide of the fluttering, inconftant Ofmond-----------1 recal
that laft epithet;
•he was conftant—as a
partner,—though by no means fo as a lover. Singular enough appeared the couple ;-con-trary to the prefcribed rule, they danced always together before fupper, and, once more I repeat,—feemed too happy with each o-ther for my peace. I am prolixlet your defire that 1Jhould he minute excufe it, if I tire you.
After we had rifen from table, the Marquis once more joined me:—I engaged Emily Edgcumb in the converfation, and, notwithfianding his reproachful looks, gave him no opportunity of faying a fyllable to me unheard by her. In his prefence Mr.
Temple
24-0
QU
O R
»
Temple begged me to dance the next cotillon and the two following country-dances with him. “ Ladyjulia,” exclaimed Ofmond, “ is it neceflary to bring again to your remembrance that I am privileged to have the pleafure of your hand from your own confent?—Surely Mr. Temple will be refufed !” “I hope not, my Lord ; -you are not more ambitious than I am of the happinefs I afpire to:—Lady Julia will determine,
“ If Lord Ofmond bad fpoken in time, I certainly fhould as readily have danced with his Lordfhip as with any other partner.—I have obferved the rule, and changed as regularly as I was defired. has now anticipated you, my Lord ; and though I am really fatigued, and thought to dance no more,—I cannot refufe the honour you offer me, Sir.”—The impetuous Henry abruptly left us;—and 1 overheard him utter, “ Death and confufion I—Belfielde fays rightly, every woman is a co-
Mr. Temple
quette.'"—When the cotillon finifiied, Lord Ofmond (who was a looker-on) and Lady Maria Harley ftepped forth in an allemande, which was very well performed. I overheard
Lady
WHAT YOU WILL:
i±t
Walpole
“ If Lord Of-
99
i youth at the time of Mr-Stanhope’s refidence abroad, Lord Chefter-field muft have had him in his thoughts as a pattern, when he fo conftantly recommended to his fon to facrifice to the Graces After the allemande. Lord Ofmond refigned Lady Maria to fome other beau, and took Almeria for his partner. Whenever I met him in the dance, his looks were averted *,—if he chanced to hold my hand in turning, &c. &c. he ceafed to prefs it:—in fhort, cool indifference poffeffed every feature, and, as Lady Maria was no longer the objeX of my jealoufy, I began to fear I had gone a little too far. I gave over dancing, heartily wearied of it, but infinitely more of the agitations that had formed a chaos in my bofom the whole
1 caught a few minutes, when
night.
Mortimer
the
crowd, to tell her what had paffed. After liftening attentively, fhe laughed,.—yet with a vexed countenance, however paradoxical that may found ; and anfwered, “ You take pains to bring on the perplexities of which you complain yet, as VoL. II.	M	they
242
QU
they proceed from fuch virgin delicacy, I ifnuft not pretend to condemn you I fup-pofe. Hark ye, Julia, as fure as
my
ye, ju ita, as lure as you qu will refine away your happinefs life for it, Ofmond never more
Ma
troubles you with his paffion—Lady tia Harley will be a tolerable fubftitute: if ffie is not lb cnchantingly lovely as you are, ft»e is lefs proud. I fpeak the fentiments of Lord Ofmond, depend upon it, and now leave you to your refleXions.” “ When I want a confoler, Caroline, you lhall not be the perfon I fix on. Good
Heaven, how unkind! Upbraid me as you
I cannot think mvfelf wrrmrr_jf \
may, l cannot think myfelf wrong do lofe the Marquis’^s affeXions, I
ffiall
imagine there is more blame to be aferibed to my unlucky fate,, thaa to my own con-
■	■ ¥*	^	I	W'	A .	_	^
duX.
thofe
fieblions you confign me over to ; mean to obey you, fhall retire to my clu-fet, and there give fcope to them.” She would have replied, but I haftened from her, to conceal the emotions I did not wifh fhe fhould be witnefs of.
On retiring through the gallery, I paffed
Lady Maria. “ Wc
✓ ^ Lady
WHAT YOU WILL. 243
Ladyjulia, I hope!” Ihe faid. I know not what anfwer I made : L intended it ihould be polite, and think it was ; but my heart felt no very warm impreflTibns in her favour at the moment.^This, for ths fake of ingenuoufnefs, muft be confelTed. After a little while, I reafoned myfelf into great compofure, and took up my pen but a recapitulation of the paft feenes has entirely deftroyed it. I will not
you with my chagrin. Two hours have I fpent
delightful
lu writing. A more morning never bleffed the univerfe it gives me au inclination to enjoy it in d
walk-------Yet I require reft, and believe I
fhall find it more beneficial to go to bed. That prudent plan every creature elfe has followed ; for the houfe is very quiet.


#
^ ^ ^
t
Or Clock*
Heaven
to
knows whither he is gone pay his devoirs to Lady Maria Harleyi who lives ten miles from Windfor.
M
-i.
244
MASQUERADES; or
On Lady Pemberton’s afking for him. Sir James faid, that he faw him from hi% window mount his horfe about eight o'clock* I turned to Caroline, and wondered where Lord Mortimer was ?	“ He
liged,” Ihe faid, on bufinefs; but
was ob-‘ to go a little way off would foon be back.” So you fee, Louifa, they are not together.
as I at firft hoped.
Well, no matter !
I muft bear what is to happen, and that without complaining. Be it ever fo bad, it cannot be more dreadful than this ftate of perpetual anxiety and fufpence.
To-morrow prefents us with the Provoked Hufband—Since I have forfworn lamenting
the lofs of my faithlefs
Corydon, which
and as 1
I could fill quires in doing; ana as dare not make any thing ferious my fubjeX, left 1 forget the pious refolution; I will employ a few moments which lie upon my bands, in telling you how the characters are caft of our next play.
Lady Percival performs Lady Townley ; Mifs Edgcumb, Lady Grace; Mifs Pelham, Lady Wronghead •, Mifs Walpole, Mifs Jenny; Mrs. Afhley and Mrs. Stanley (a neighbour of Lady Mortimer’s)
conde-
WHAT YOU WILL.
«4|
condefcend to the other two female parts,* Lord Mortimer, I before mentioned, undertakes Lord Townley, the Duke of Suffolk, Mr. Manley j Sir James Weftbrook, Count Baffec (I tell him he will never lofe the title); Lord Percival, Sir Francis Wronghead ; Mr. Bifhop, Squire Richard ; Captain Walpole, John Moody. The Farce will be the Deferter: Skirmilb, by Sir James ; Louifa, by Mifs Charlotte Pelham; and Henry, by Lord Seymour^ I forget who are to be the other perfor-
mers.
On Tuefday we dine at Lady Maria Harley’s, vifit!
What delight (hall I take in the
On
My fituation will be enviable / Wednefday we are to have a Fete Cham-fetre, at which every one feems much pleafed. Poor Lord Mortimer I what trouble he gives himfelf to gratify his guefts! On Thurfday, Caroline treats us with her appearance in Lady Betty Modifh: Lord Pemberton is to play Sir Charles Eafy ; Mils Edgcumb, Lady Eafy ; Sir John Benyon, Lord Morelove; and Sir James, Lord Feppington—The creature is really a good fupporn: to mv brother’s

MASQUERADES; or
ftage, and does incomparably well ; particularly in the Coxcomb’s province: but then he takes lb much merit to himfelf in confequence of his theatrical abilities, that there is no end to Ir when he begins his own eulogium, which is not feldom.' You will find a difference in my manner of writing of this coufin of mine. I have not forgiven him for many of his volatile fpeeches within thefe few days ; and my pen cannot avoid venting a little of my acrimony.
I have already told yon, dear Louifa, that it will not be in my power m write to you again till after to-morrow fe’nnight Moft mornings in the in termed iare fc
will be taken up in rehearfals ; and every moment I can fpare muft be dedicated to
the unfortunate Sigifmunda.----My own
fituation will caufe me to fed hers but too fenfibly, I wifh Lord Ofmond was not to
be Tancred-----and yet I fhould not be
pleafed either, were it otherwife—In fhort, I know not what to defire- but certain it is, I lhall not find performing the part of one who feels the paflion of love in its fulleft force, and that for an objeX who
W H AT YOU WILL.
247
ileds it by an equal return, a fpecifi^ for my infatuation—but, ah ! when that charming hero is reprefented by the very man whom I love to diftraXion, every tender word he addreffes to me will make an impreffion
----1 fhall forget they come
from Tancred, and only remember they proceed from the lips of the incomparable Henry. Fleeting indeed will be my hap* pinefs •, yet it muft ferve, after fo ridiculous a mummery, to make me the more re gret that this dear Ofmond will in reality repeat thofe profeffions to another, to which I was but a fhadow.—I fee I cannot avoid running into the difmal ftylebut I will quit it in fpite of inclination-My eyes deceive me, or certain perceive Lord Ofmond and Lord Mortimer by the Temple of Apollo !—-Sure
do not miftake !----They are loft to my
fight by fome fhrubs—ic cannot be—I am. in an error -----and vet L am not.—for
I
It
now they appear again more plain, is they, my Louifa !—indeed it is 1—Cruel Caroline—could you think it of her, my fweet friend ?—
-Hope revives
they
have, perhaps, made me part of their converfation
248
QU
&Ci
verfadon.—Adieu, Louifa ! the bufinefs of dreffing calls me --—I will be more ftu-dious in that point this day than ever—I will confult mv glafs with
uncommon
all cold
my giais
affiduity—banifli all pride referve from my bofom—and if, by any delicate effort, I can make one gralp at happinefs, I will fecure it.
Ever yours,
Julia Herbert,
N. B. A letter is here omitted from Sir Charles Montague, which informs the Marquis that Lord Beaumont is out of danger, but not well enough to admit of
his
from Beaumont-Hall
departure
which makes him uneafy, as he is im-
to revifit Sommerville-Houfe.
patient A letter Louifa Sydney
is alfo omitted from Lady
END OF VOL. IL

X
q i
i •I
<•
**
X
/
a-



\


s
\
\
\
S.

/
V .
\
MASQUERADES;
o R,
WHAT YOU WILL,
BY THE
AUTHOR OF ELIZA WARWICK, to
€
IN FOUR VOLUMES.
VOL. Ill

LONDON*
Printed for J. B E W, in Pater-Nofter.Raw;
4
MDCCLXXX,
\
MASQUERADES,
V5>

To Sir Charles Montague,
Have not had a minute before this prefent one to inform you how I go on :—a longer filence will draw bn me your execrations. My fpirits are too much difcompof-ed to write with any fort of method ; yet make the beft of what i fend you, and be thankful that I ufe an effort to gratify your impatience.
On alighting from my chaife laft Monday evening, Mortimer met me with open arms, and a countenance on which pleafure d anced.
voL. in.
B
(t
Thefe
2
QU
O R
((
Thefe happy features, dear Mortimer, befpeak fome comfort to your friend ! Dare I truft my fenfes? You have fympathized in mv mifery ; perhaps you have now caufe '	'	" -Is your
“1 rejoice, Ofmond, to tell you (if I can judge from appearances), that Julia is not fo indifferent as you
For a while be cautious
to do fo from a contrary effeX.
fair fifter lefs cruel ?”
and I imagined.
not to give room for fufpicion that you are her lover. The Duke of Suffolk is hourly expeXed here :--her family feem determined to encourage his addreffes*,—could they
fuppofe you ftood in
?3
“ By heaven ! I
would have all the world fuppofe I will difpute fo valuable a treafure with him.— Shall I look tamely on, and fee him rob me of the woman I doat on to madnefs ?— My Lord, I me fo abjeX.
not believe you thought
(4
99
Be patient, dear Ofmond, and hear
me.
“ You reafon
coolly, who know not what I fuffer.—“ Suffolk expeded hourly f and her family feem determined to encourage his addreffes!"—Do I not know, then, what I have to expeX—Is not Lady
Juli
con^
WHAT YOU WILL. 3
«
condefcenfion to her friends ?-No, my
Lord ;—the union fliall never be! So far from difguiflng my fentiments, I will, the firfl moment that offers, affert my prior claim; and, if it is rejeded,—Suffolk fhall feel my vengeance!”
“ Purfue your plan;—go and proclaim
hold vour fword to the
your paffion;-Duke’s breaft;
your
fee what advantages you will reap from fo prudent a conduX ! Julia will be favourably difpofed towards a man who poffeffes fuch noble warmth of temper; who will render her fame popular by a duel 1 The Duke of Weftmorland, too, will be compelled to authorize your attachment, when, in defiance of his commands, you openly affert your love for an objeX hedif-approves of; indeed, from mercenary motives alone J But, to complete the whole, how readily will Lady Pemberton and her
fon give my fifter to you after fo”-----
“ No more, Mortimer, no more !—Pardon my haftinefs—I blufh at it!—Tell me how I fhall aX;—I will be guided implicitly by your counfels.”
“ Only thus—Be careful, for a time, to conceal your paffion from the prying eyes
B 2	that
4
MASQUERADES; or
that will furround you ; nay, to blind them the more effeXually, countenance the report of yoUr marriage with Lady Henrietta; it will be the beft fecurity. Truft to Julia a little, in refpeX of the Duke ; Ihe likes him not. When her mother and Pemberton find how infurmountable her a-verfion to him is, he muft be difmiffed. You will next propofe to them :—you will reprefent your fituation,^—your father’s unkind nefs, fweet girl,
your long attachment to the your mifery without her;
in
fhort, the whole catalogue of fpeeches pertinent to the occafion, which your feducing manner muft affuredly render fufficiently prevalent:—they confent to her becoming Lady Ofinond in the country?'
you *• marry ana fettle So conc\uAe%your novel.
Is it not well hid out, and far m.ore likely to fucceed than your cutting of throats?"
“ Ah, Mortimer, what a fcene of delight do you open to my view !—-Heaven grant her to me! and it is all I have to afk.” “ Courage, my friend !—but, as you value your happinefs, be cautious.”
After thefe reftridlions, I was obliged to be very circumfpeX in my behaviour to
Lady
WHAT YOU W
5
Lady Julia, fearing to incur the fufpicions
Mortimer dreaded, and which I plainly faw might have been fatal to the expedations we hid juft raifed. Flattered by them, and the hope he gave me of her not being fo indifferent as 1 imagined, and anxious to be convinced of the certainty of it, 1 refolved
I fup preffed my kept a guard on my eyes,—^made a
—and threw afide
to puffue your advice, fighs,
prifoner of my tongu" every tinge tliat bordered on the penfertfo ;
I feemed'che happieft fellow in the world. As the greateft proof I can give of my obedience to your injunXions, I even went fo far as to allow Suffolk opportunities of pleading his fuit-but that was too great an effort to be 5fren repeated more efpecially as I began to think her averfion to him not quite fo infurmountable as my Lord Mortimer fuppofed it.—Thus did 1 y:eld to a more experienced general; and what has it availed me ?—Vile prophet!—“ Lady Julia attached!—She conceals a paffion for me, which, in fpite of her vigilance, you difcovered when you were in London /”—Vile prophet !-----^My Arabian Syphax would
make as good an oracle as thou doft.----------
Oh ! curfe my feif-fufficiency and arrogance,
B 3	which
6
M A S QU ERADES; or
which caufed me to lend an ear to the dear illufion that you adorned with fuch elegant
fophiftry !—What a difappointment !---
Many inftances could I bring to your view, that would put you out of conceit with your penetration ; but the devilifh remembrance of them wounds me more than a knowledge of them could your vanity : I will, therefore, fpare you and myfelf fome pain, by forbearing an explanation.—One kifs—one charming kifs 1 obtained, partly by accident, partly ftratagem.—7\he extafy I feel at refieXing on the blifs that happy moment befto'-’, is not to be told.—Mon-
tague, that kifs has ferved me to live on many days.—Sweet girl!—the man who calls you his, will poffefs joys fo near thofe that heaven promifes to give, that he will forget he is a mortal; and, when wakened from his delirium by the divifion of foul and body, only beg of Providence to make him as bleffed in the next world as he has been in this.—That mait—fxaW !
—By heaven—by every thing moft facred I fwear it!—If flie will not be mine with her own confent,—if ihe ftill rejeds me,-J muft carry her off; and, when once in my power, Ihe will rejoice to accept of thofe ttrms ffie
has
e
1 lii
ond !
WHAT YOU WILL.
7
has fo haughtily defpHed.—Never was there a more obdurate girl. She has a foul fo proud, that one would v/onder how Nature could commit fuch a blot in a work every
---Here, as 3’oa
way elfe mofl: perfeX.--
have done before, you will try to convince me of my miftake;—you will repeat what you faid in London, “ She is as gentle as the breath of fpring.”—So Ihe is, I grant you, to ail but her lovers.”—As ypu have never walked in that line, allow ms to tell
you, fhe is tyranny itfelf.
Diana (by
the Poets report) difdained not the fex more than Lady Julia does that part of it which
afpires to her affeXions.------It was my
fond hope to conciliate them. I once thought I would even refufe her offered hand, if I was not affured Ihe gave me her heart with it.—Convinced now that 1 can-
----ftill adoring her beyond
not obtain it,----
every earthly good,—and grown lefs delicate in my notions, from her unconquerable haughtinefs,—I am refolved not to be completely difappointed, but endeavour to be as happy as I can, by making myfelf mafter of her perfon ;—-and, perhaps, in a
B 4	little
8
MAS QU ERADES} or.
been dancing all
little time, fhe may not think her fate wretched in becoming the wife of Ofmond —for I harbour not an idea againft her immaculate virtue. One fortnight more, thou dear angel! I devote to affiduity, to fighs, and fupplications ;—if at the end thou art ftill inexorable, —why, then, an unlooked-
for fcene awaits thee.----To fay the truth,
my thoughts are raiher deranged 1 have
night,---not with Lady Julia, which is one fource of difturbance. On my begging for that honour, I was anfwered that ffe was engaged to the Duke of Suffolk} but, if the Ladies changed partners, fhe would readily give me her hand for part of the night. This being the cafe, I refolved on playing the politician, and on not engaging her till after fupper, when I intended to detain her as my partner during the reft of the ball. It could not appear particular then, efpecially as I made it a point to dance conftantly before with Lady Maria Harley. But the Devil, who owes me a grutch for not enlifting under his banners, fruftrated my hopes. I did not dare let Lady Julia know my purpofe, I have already dwelled
WHAT YOU WILL.
9
f
ed pretty long on her difdain and cruelty: call; your eye over that paragraph, and you will eafily guefs my reafon. However, iti fome meafure to fecure her, I implored that (he would after fupper favour me with a private interview in the prefence of Lady Mortimer, with whom I had concerted the plan ; and determined, if the fair-one consented, to feize the opportunity of painting a fecond time the fervency of my paffion, and, in fpite of her command “ to be for ever filent on the fiibjed?’ lo uxgt it with all the eloquence proper for the occafion.— She denied
me, Montague,—aXually denied me!—yet I fiiould not have given up my requeft to the lafi; moment, if Ihe had not, in my hearing, and with an intention to aggravate the mortification Ihe had infiiXeJ, afiented to become Temple’s partner, tho’, when he offered, I put in my prior claim to that honour. I was difregarded. She prefented him her hand, faying, fhe had thought to dance no more; however, fatigued as fioe was, fhe could not refufe him. 1 al-moft curfed the whole fex as I turned from her abruptly. My fteps mechanically moved towards the cotillon-room, where Ih
B 5
e was
foon

10 MASQUERADES; OR,
icon to difplay the graces of her beautiful figure 'With the preferred Temple. I found Lady Mortimer there, who, feeing me much difturbed, alked the caufe ? I evaded a reply, till being urged to fpeak, I anfwered,
“ i have no right to complain, my Lady. The man who fulfers the illufion of a paffion to conquer his reafon, and becomes a voluntary flave, deferves to be treated as
ft	^
the abjeX wretch he makes himfelf.”
“ I fuppofe Julia has refufed your pro-pofal, and our fcheme falls to the ground !
Well, be not difcompofed-—I have almoft a mind to give you ample revenge, by divulging a converfation that paffed between ■«s one morning before you came down to
Windfor.”----“ 1 entreat your Ladyfhip
would fpare me ;—I am heartily wearied of any fubjeX which treats of love.”
“ I beg pardon, my Lord. Believe me I am glad to be faved a difagreeable bufinefs, which nothing but my opinion of you, and your fupplications, fhould have induced me to undertake. Only permit me to remind you, my Lord, that I never fought to make Julia the topic of our difcourle •,
you
WHAT YOU WILL
II
you always led to it:—and here break we off for ever, on a fubjeX of which you are fo tired. However, I admire my fifter’s pe netration and
fpirit.”
She was going
from me with great calmnefs, but I caught her hand. “ Stay, dear Lady Mortimer ! leave not in defpair a miferable madman. Do but hear me,—hear how Lady Julia^ that mercilefs tormentor, has ufed me ; and, inftead of difpleafure, I lhall have your pity.” She fmiled, and condefcended to liften while I related what 1 have already done
in this fheet regarding Lady Julia.----------
When I finiftied, fhe replied, “ One Jiory is good till we hear the other. After I am informed of my fifter’s motive for behaving as you have mentioned, I lhall be able to give judgment, and probably to deliver it in the
Much Notwithftand-
words of Sir Roger de Coverley,
faid
ing her jocularity, I did not efcape receiving a very fmart leXure from her Ladyfhip,
fuffering a paffion ate difpcjii
'ey ov flight
reafon
and fued to be made acquainted with the converfation Ihe had alluded to ; but
B 6
Jhe (boje
ii
MASQUERADES; or
/
ibofe to deny me, as a punijhment, fhe faid, for my impetuoflty .—A could not help fhewing an affeXed indifference to Lady Julia, which, by the bye, I believe fhe hardly took notice of. I was alfo rather gallant to my firft partner, hoping to excite her jealoufy; but the.heart that is infenfible to love, cannot admit any vifits from jealoufy : of courfe I gained nothing from my attention to faadiy Maria Harley, fince neither love nor jealoufy occupied the bofom of Lady Julia.—------Negligent as I appeared, I
never loft fi^ht of mia diletta. I obferved
%
her whifper Lady Mortimer ; and, in a few minutes after, as fhe paffed me, heard her figh, and faw her eyes fwimming in tears, J would have forfeited mine to have known the caufe. She immediately retired, and returned no more.—Though I have watched for opportunities of converfing alone with Mortimer, I never could obtain any : he has ftiidied to avoid me. You can eafier imagine, than I deferibe, my folicitude to know what he meant, the night I arrived here, in faying, if he might judge from appearances, Julia is not fo indifferent as we imagined* Would I could tell what ground he
had
WHAT YOU WILL.
n
had for his conjeXures! Faith, I have been ready enough to adopt the opinion myfelf at times, when I have feen that fpecious, infinuating fellow, Suffolk, on his knees to her. I have found fome difficulty on fuch occafions to curb my pajfionate difpofition, according to Lady Mortimer. P’or example,—when I faw them dance a minuet together not many hours ago, her admiration of him Was plain: fhe threw out all her attraXions (and no woman ever pofTeff-
him ;—fhe looked As he led her
ed fo many) to pleafi and danced ^ mofi; divinely, to her feat, I heard him call her an angel* Think you I could not with pleafure have ftabbed him to the heart ?
Inftead of feeking repofe, I ftiall direXly drefs myfelf, order my horfis, and, tho* it may be thought cruel to rouze Mortimer from his bed, where he has fcarce lain an hour, fummon him to accompany me in a ride *,—then demand of him the queftions he muft refolve, and take his advice how to proceed.—For once, in compaffion to my fufferings, F will be felfifti:—there is no enduring longer this life of uncertainty and mifery.
H
MASQUERADES} or.


%

#


#
^ #



Sunday, Three o'clock,
I am returned, my dear Charles, fomething eafier than when I laid down my pen. 1 have opened my whole foul to Morci-I reproached him for his unkind
mer diftance ;
I conjured him no longer to
delay acquainting me with the reafon he had for reviving my hopes at our meeting, and expreffed great apprehenfion that his wifhes for my fuccefs had made him too fanguine, and view things in a falfe light. Thus he replied:
“ I fhould never have flattered myfelf, or you, into a belief of happinefs, unlefs I had fubftantial proofs to fupport it. What thofe proofs are, I cannot reveal;—nor will you again afk me, when you are told that the confidence of another muft be betrayed ere you can come at the knowledge you defire.—I certainly have evaded a the-d-the with you, becaufe I wanted to elude the very interrogation you have juft nov/ made; and had great hopes that your pe-
netra-
WHAT YOU WILL.

netration and affiduity would have rendered it unneceftary to feek an anfwer from me,
-----You complain of Julia’s treatment;
—are you fure, Ofmond, there is no fault on your fide ? You have never been explicit with her fince you faw her in London, you fay—was that well ? Should you not have caught the firfl: moment that offered, after my hint to you that I believed her not indifferent, to have difcovered whether my judgment was erroneous, or you were really the happy man I thought you ? In my opinion, fuch tardinefs, fuch nonchalance, befpeaks no very great depth of affection.”
“ What could I do, dear Mortimer, when ffie would afford me no opportunity of making fuch a difeovery ? If 1 hinted my attachment, fhe filenced me with fcorn, or flew my prefence. Laft night I folicited an interview ; in the moft arbitrary manner Ihe refufed”'---
4C
44
On my foul, I do not condemn her !’* How, my Lord !”
I do not indeed : your gallantry to Lady Maria Harley was fo warm, that it feemed paft a jeft; and, faith, you muft
have

MASQUERADES} gr
have had good courage to expeX a favourable anfwer from Julia to a requeft of the fort, at the time you were making downright love to another in fo public manner, 1 have not exchanged fix words with
o
Lady Ju)ia fince we met at dinner yefterday ; therefore am (upon my honour) ignorant whether (he took notice of it: but your attention to your partner was fo glaring, that I held it certain your affeXions were transferred to her, and never expeXed to have heard further from you on our prefent tiieme.”
“ Did not your Lordfliip, on my alighting from my chaife laft Monday, recommend to me to conceal my attachment to your fifter ? Did you not inforce the injunc-//(?» with the moft folemn affurance that my happinefs with her depend upon it ? I could not engage Lady Julia’s ear amidft a throng, without going in oppofition to your advice ; and only aXed conformably to it, in blinding all around me by an affeXed affiduity towards Lady Maria. - Her perfon, every one thought, made an impreffion on me; or, at any rate, your family and my rivals will, in confequence of my particularity laft
night.
WHAT YOU WILL.
17
99
night, imagine, that I pay homage to beauty where ever I find it, and he the lefs fufpicious, if they obferve in future my attention to Lady Julia Herbert.
“In recommending caution to you, I only meant that you fhould ufe it vvith thofe around you ; and was certain Julia would have been made acquainted by fome method, that, however inconfiftent it might feem with your deportment, your heart was ftill hers. Had that been the cafe, I fhould have applauded your conduX laft night; but, if fhe does love you, it muft have been terrible to her amiable foul to have been a ftranger to the true fituation of yours, and have feen you lavifh thofe douceurs on another you once afiured her fhe only was en-
----However, fuffer me
titled to from you. once more, Ofmond, to advife—it is thus: if you think you can attach yourfelf without much violence to 'Lady Maria Harley, purfue her:—fhe is handfome, well defended, accompliftied; her fortune is three times fuperior to Julia’s; and, as you are refolved againft the match your father propofes, her alliance will (in proportion to her money)
be
i8
MASQUERADES: or

be more agreeable to the Duke than my fifter’s.”
You are not generous, Lord Mortimer, thus to infuit an unhappy man !—Good heaven ! what unaccountable prejudices!
Could a little ridiculous levity with a filly girl, in which not a mention of love was made, caufe you to judge fo unworthily of the ftability of my paffion for Lady Julia?—But 1 underftand you, my Lord ;
you are but too ready to join the Pemberton’s in defiring Suffolk’s connedion!
to his more powerful addrefs you wilh to facrifice me.”
“ I am injured, Ofmond, by the fufpicion. I know your excellence ; and, if you ftill love Julia as ardently as ever, 1 would fooner fee her yours than married to an Emperor.-—Depend upon my friendfhip; and, as a proof of ir, I will this evening contrive a method that you fhall fpeak to her in private; and I will fo warmly be your advocate, and fet matters on a right foot, that I dare pronounce you will go to reft with a lighter heart than you now are mafter of.”
Here the fubjeX ended.-We took along
ride
WHAT YOU WILL;
19
ride to vifit a little family which the Mortimer’s raifed from poverty and diftrefs to competency and happinefs. It confifts of father, mother, and three daughters. The father was out on his farming-bufinefs; the mother was ftielling peafe, in which (he was (in an odd fort of a way ) ajjijied by the youngeft girl; a fweet little monkey, four years old, v.^ho was more ftudious to fcatter the work of her hands on the floor, than to accumulate the (lore her good mother was providing. The little urchin’s carefiTes, after the firft half hour, delighted me fomuch, that I could fcarcely leave her behind rne.
The eldeft daughter was working fome beautiful embroidery for Lady Mortimer, who was at the pains of inftructing her herfelf in an employment which will enfure her independency, when fhe has the misfortune of lofing her parentswhen finiftied, it is to be purchafed by her Ladyfliip with a valuable gratuity. The fecond fifter was exercifing her needle on houfhold linen. Every thing in and about the houfe feemed admirably clean, and rufticly elegant.
1 cannot paint to you the grateful joy that glowed on each feature at th: fight of
their
20 MASQUERADES} or,
their benefaXor, who, on his parr, treated them with that refpeXful affability which fhould ever be tne tribute from us to the very lowefl: virtuous female. There was alfo a paternal tendernefs blended in his manner, that proved he was interefted in their happinefs.
We got fome breakfaft prepared in an inftant, and, afrer remaining a couple of hours at Welby-Farm, were about to return, when Jenny (the little cherub I have mentioned) caught hold of my hand, and defired 1 would not go till fhe had brought me fome rofes. She foon came back loaden with the fragrant burthen: the moft beautiful amongft them were inferior to the blooming tints of her cheeks. I preffed her in my arms, and afked her to go home Vs?ith me. “ That I will!” fhe replied, turning up her pretty mouth to give me a kifs. But my invitation coft poor Jenny much uneafinefs *, for, when her mother interfered, and fhe found fhe could not accompany me, fhe cried and fobbed fo pite-oufly, that I was quite diftreffed: however, I at laft pacified her, by leaving with her a trinket from my watch} and promifing fo
fee
\
w
YO U W
21
fee her very foon.—I am determined to take the charge of this child upon myfelf: I will have her well educated, and fix her in the world to advantage at a proper age. What pleafure fhall I know in drawing from obfcurity a beautiful flower, which
elfe
Would
y i
and, by tranfplanting it to a more cultivated foil, render it an honour to fociety. Mr. and Mrs. Perrot are defcended from good families; but a feries- of misfortunes reduced them to the lowed ebb of aflliXion, which they muft have funk under, but for the godlike humanity of Mortimer, who extricated them from ruin, and has placed them by their own choice in the flation they now are. Their ftory is melancholy, and 1 have not time to give it—’tis near four o’clock, and I am but half drefied.
Montague';
what
But away with de-
—Ah, this evening !
will ic produce ?---
fponc-ency !•--
My bofom’s lord fits lightly on his throne, And an unaccuftom’d fpirit lifts me above The ground with chearful thoughts.”-L—
♦
m
22
MASQUERADES; or,
%				%				*
	*				ih			*
			ih'					
Seven o'Clock,
I faw Lady Julia a few minutes before we affembled at dinner. She looked more an angel, if poffible, than ufual: her eyes beamed with a bewitching foftnefs; lier cheeks were animated with a vermillion that glowed uncommonly refplendent, and fet off the fnowy whitenefs of her fkin ; her teeth,—her lips,—pearls and coral wore their refemblance. She was robed in white lutefiring. Such genuine beauty, grace, and elegance, never were fo perfeXly blended in any objeX as in her!—I gazed with rapture-on her; and could have done fo for hours, if her confeious eye had not met mine, and her lovely blufhes chid my
too eager admiration.--------She feemed a
mountain nymph, encircled with the ceftus of Venus.
The Ladies demanded of me, where I had fpent the morning ? Mortimer, without allowing me time, anfwered, “ Part of it
at
WHAT YOU WILL.
23
at Mr. Perrot’s.” His Lady, in a gay manner, reproached him for carrying me thither; and bid me not think of flirting with her favourite Kitty, who was too good a girl to be made unhappy: adding, “ I know fo accomplifhed a cavalier as you are, can eafily make an impreffion on an artlefs girl of fourteen.”
“ I am ignorant,” returned Mortimer, “ what effeX his vifit had on Kitty; but, I am fure, in the courfe of our abfence, he gave not a few pangs to the heart of a very pretty female, from whom he received the utmoft encouragement that man could defire.—Ofmond, keep your own fecret, I infift. Mum's the word; I never blab." They were very anxious to know the perfon ; and^ receiving no fatisfaXion from their hoft, turned to me, and overwhelmed me with a volubility of queftions. “ I will never forgive you, Ofmond, if you tell,” cried the perplexing peer. To humour him, and to give a little more fubjeX for female curiofity to work upon, I rallied the pretty creatures, and evaded anfwering to the purpofe, Dacre enquired whether Lady Maria Harley lived between this and IVdby-Farm ?
“ She

24
QU
“ She does,” replied Mortimer, with a fa-gacious look at me, which comprehended
Then, Ladies, you need
’ exclaimed Pern-
much meaning, interrogate no further ! berton.
I pity Lady Henry Marchmont extremely!” faid Mifs Charlotte Pelham. After a few farcaftic fmiles, and as many witticifms, (which, as they were direXed to me, I could have fpared,) they dropped the topic. However, I fhall at fupper explain the riddle ; and, to fave Lady Maria from any ill-natured cenfures,put an end to Mortimer’s fecret, and inform them it was no other, than my little Jenny who obliged me with fuch diftinguifhed marks of favour. 1 muft obferve that Lady Julia feemed not at all defirous to know who the objeX was : fhe uttered not a word, and was wholly engaged in contemplating a miniature on her arm. Did I not know it to be her mother’s, I fhould have been devilifhly uneafy.
I am waiting for a
timer: he is to obferve Lady Julia, and, the firft moment he fees her alone, accompany me to her prefence. May he find iiich a propitious one!
I am
fignal from Mor-
WHAT YOU WILL.
25
I am uneafy at fome marks of preference I have been honoured with from a Lady here, who, as fhe is every way deferving, merits a better fate than to beftow her affeXions on a man who cannot return them
Ha!—the fignal is given 1
----More
of this fubjeX another time'—I go,—and
may fuccefs attend me i throbbing heart!
Be ftill, thou
ih ^	^	^ ih

^ ^ ^ ^




^ ^

ih ^
Twelve o'clock.
Attend, Montague, whilft I impart to you the refult of Lord Mortimer’s laft office of friendftiip. On joining him, I learned that Lady Julia, a quarter of an hour before, had left the company, and w'alked
quite alone towards the wildernefs.
fteps we purfued her route
eager
With
, but
found our hafte impeded by a fmall gate over a canal, which was locked and deprived of its key ; flie, fweet foul ! no doubt, refting aflured that ftie had fecured herfelf from moleftation.—Who would not wade thro*
Yol. IIL
c
the
26
MAS QU ERADESj or
the Hellefpont, though the fate of Leander fwam before his eyes, to gain the fight of a fairer miftrefs than ever his Hero was ? 'However, we had no occafion to rifle a fi-niilar cataftrophej fince leaping could conquer the barrier to our accefs. The feat .was inftantly performed -and an hundred yards brought us to an alcove where Lady
Her elbows refted on a
Julia was feated. fmall ornamental table
her hands, which
fupported her head, were clafped over her eyes; fo that fhe faw us not, till the very near approach of fteps difturbed her from her pofition.—She looked up—fuddenly ftarted on beholding us at her fide, and was precipitately retiring, when Mortimer caught her by the hand.
“No, Julia —though you may fly with impunity from my companion, you muft not from your brother. Here I detain you prifoner; nor ftiall you efcape till we have fome converiation with you.”
“ Ah, my Lord !—is this well done of you—thus to fteal on my privacy “ Pardon, Madam, my temerity !
I, calling myfelf at her feet: “ the fpair you have thrown me into has caufed
it.

cried de-

WHAT YOU WILL.
if
it.—I come, dear Lady Julia, to exprefs my love—my adoration of you once more, and, if you ftill continue fo inflexibly cruel,—to remove for ever from your fight, after this final interview, an obnoxious lover. —Your treatment is almoft a conviXion that you hold me deferving of the appellation. Ah ! think what the idea cofts me !”— She appeared exceedingly embarraffed,
frequently panted for refpiration ;------her
colour went and came;—ftie could only articulate,
—do not—pray do
99
44
Rife, my Lord ! not kneel—I beg you.
“ 1 cannot rife. Madam, till I obtain an acknowledgment of pity for what you have made me endure fince I firft dared to inform you of my unalterable paflion—till I
Stop,” faid Mortimer, “ and allow
44
me to fpeak.”-—“ Not a word, my Lord, unlefs Lord Ofmond quits his pofture.”
I obeyed her,—bowed,—and threw myfelf againft a ftatue for fupport, almoft as life-lefs with fear and expeXation as the ftone on which I leaned.
You were in an error, my dear fifter,
Mortimer,
44
3^
proceeded
44
C 2
concerning my
friend.
28 MASQUERADESjor,
friend, when he declared his afFeXion for you :—you thought him engaged to Lady Henrietta, and dilhonourable in addreffing another. Since you left London, you have been undeceived, and are pofitively affured he was at liberty to offer you thofe vows which you believed wounded your delicacy to liften to. Now that the enigma is ended, attend once more to a repetition of them. If your heart knows no prior attachment, let me become an advocate for Ofmond. Imagine not that I,mean he ffiould owe your favour to my folicitations ! Far from it: my intention is only to prove to you, that he mufl be deferving of it, when I pretend to intereft myfdf in his fuit, and anfwer for the fervency and conflancy of his love.—If you admit to a place in your heart a man whofe worth equals yours, your mother and Pemberton will gladly make you both happy by confenting to his propofals; and Caroline and I ffiall rejoice in feeing you united. I am fatisfied my Julia will rife fuperior to female artifice, and will deal openly and without referve to a man of honour, who muft the more adore her for her candour.”
I re-
WHAT YOU WILL.
20
I refumed my place at her feet,—grafp-ed her cold paffive hand,—implored her com-paffion,—and, if her heart was free, that fhe would beftow it on one whofe exiftence depended on the poffeffion of fuch a treafure,
“ You are too kind, my Lord,” replied the dear girl, “ in this flattering protefta-tion of regard for me ;—but fuffer me to fay, 1 cannot think you quite fo fincere as my brother does.—Why fhould I confent to your folicitadonsYour father wifhes you 'ConneXed to another. It would be culpable in me to encourage your addreffes, when they are in oppofition to his defines— indeed, my Lord, you are wrong to afk it of me.”,
I reprefented my father’s unreafonable command in the moft touching manner— his little affeXion toward me. I regretted, for her fake, that my fortune, independent of him,- was fo inconfiderable ; and honeftly confeffed, that I built on no expeXa-tions from the Duke, unlefs I married the
Lady he chofe.
Yet,
as he
’ added I, “ plainly teftifies no view to my felicity in the horrible union he wants to force me into, I hold myfdf free, by the law of Nature, to
C 3	feek
/

MAS QU ERADESj or.
feek for it in a connedion with the only woman upon earth I will ever marry.—Be affured, Madam, I fhould think no mortal under heaven fo happy as the one before
could
you
I,
at the expence of all the
—If I can be
Duke’s wealth, call you mine.— fo bleffed as to gain your affeXions—ah, Lady Julia !—a very little will fatisfy us; and what is wanting of the fuperfluities of life, will be more than compenfated for
by the fervency of love.
I am ungenerous in this propofal! interefted perhaps !—-Why fhould
Yet, Madam, —too felf-
I at-
tempt to be the invader of your heart, when a more diftinguifhed rival, on whom beauty and fenfe have been lavifh,—-who offers yon a princely fortune,—has the power of rendering you more completely happy ? Forgive me, Lady Julia,—Suffolk
—Ah,
I cannot bear it—No ! excel-he muft not rob me of my ----You are fdent—-foeak I
great Ged! lent as he is^ deareft hopes, conjure you—
“ Did I not fay, my l;ord,
Ihe, “ that I fufpeXed the fincerity of your profeffions—I will be candid. I believe fomething of this very fubjeX was hinted to
a par-
—fpeak
and let me know mv fate.”
-0
returned
WHAT YOU WILL.
31
a particular objeX laft night j—and, by what I can judge, was repeated this morning.”
“ Good Heaven! what do you mean, dear Lady Julia ?”
“ I.ady Maria,” cried ftie,” would never have beftowed fo much encouragement on one of your fex, if fhe had noc a foundation in your behaviour for it.”
Mortimer immediately underftood that file alluded to what he had mentioned at dinner. In a few words he cleared up the matter; and informed her of the reftriXions he had laid me under in regard of my conduX towards her on the night of my arrival. He infinuated that my attention to my'part-ner was an artifice of his directing, for which he had many good reafons to offer, if the time permitted *, but, as ic did noc, begged fhe would be fatisfied in knowing that fhe fhould one day be informed and approve of them.
“ And how, Lady Julia,” cried vour me with your fentiments ?—Am I to be the happieft,—or moft miferable of men ? —Like a trembling culprit—I wait the awful decifton of my lovely arbitrefs.
c 4
44
fa-
te

Thus*
3» MASQUERADES; or,
“ Thus then I anfwer,” replied fhe:
“ I am above difguife,—and will freely own,—that the Duke of Suffolk’s title, fortune, and accomplifhments, make no other impreffion on me than of difguffj—and that, if my mother and Pemberton confent, —I lhall prefer even poverty with you to affluence and grandeur with another.”
I was fo agitated with tranfport, that fpeech was denied me for a few minutesI could only reft my head on the fnowy hand
I held.
“ Jul ia,” faid Mortimer, “ how noble is this!—Thou art dearer to me, my admirable fifter, than ever!”—What, Ofmond,— quite dumb I”
“ Oh!” exclaimed I, “ I am blefled beyond the power of utterance 1 deareft—
moft generous of women !
Ever-be ftill
kinder, and fancy thofe acknowledgments fo due are paid you in my heart, which, overcharged with gratitude—with joy,— cannot render me eloquent.”
“And now, my Lord,—I beg you will leave me,” cried the angel.
“ Not yet, my Julia !” replied I ; “ not command it—My fenfes are confufed;
and
do
WHAT YOU WILL.
and I can hardly credit the reality of what has pafled.—Once more ftrike my ravifhed ear with the melody of that voice;—once more repeat you are not indifferent to youF Ofmond !”
“ How can I more plainly convince you of it than I do ?—
No,, my Lord,—indeed I And now leave me.”
53^
or
mg.
jj
am not—
“ Not till you have ratified this affurancCy returned Mortimer, “ of which I have been a witnefs,, by granting an embrace I infift on it, elfe I fhall not think it bind-
I ftretched forth my arms, and prefP cd to my boffom the blufhing, reluXant fair-one—from her lips I obtained a kifs.^— Oh, fuch a moment!—Montague,, even-you muft have envied me..
Mortimer and I retired.—I poured out my thanks to him for being the chief in-ftrument cf my felicity, and eafily difcovered that his frjendiy foul fympathized in- my joy, though he refufed the fentiments of gratitude 1 expreffed.
I whifpered Lady.Mortimer that I wa^ the happiefi of my fex.
“ I dare fay my officious Lord has been acceffary to it!” cried fhe.
C 5

34 MASQUERADES; or,
“ He has indeed !” I anfwered. “ To
am I indebted for more than life.”
“ And I will affuredly chide him for it,” replied her fprightly Ladyfhip. “ By giving you more than life, he has deprived me of more than mirth. I was in expeXation of feeing many humorous freaks from the nonfenfical perplexities of two lovers, who feared to declare their paffion for each other, and were endeavouring to hide it, when they both wanted to difclofe ir.—Indeed, my Lord, you have behaved like a very — ■ ■ fenfible nobleman !”—Lady Julia was rather grave all the evening; yet I am a bad phyfiognomift, if fhe was not happy. My extafy I could hardly reftrain ; but I apprehended adding to her fweet confufion, by paying her more than common attention,—therefore avoided it.
I am now going to bed,—not to fleep ; for joy will as effeXually banifh it from my eyes, as a contrary emotion has done for many nights back.—Can ic be poffible, my dear Charles, that, after all my anxiety, torture, and defpair, I fhould be fo amply rewarded ?—Am I in my fenfes, and find it
a truth that I am the eleXed of Lady Julia’s
choice ?
WHAT YOU WILL.
3S
choice?—Both are faXs,—She would prefer poverty with me, to affluence and grandeur with another !—T\ioie: were the enchanting
words.----1 had her covered with blufhes
in mv arms—I kiffed her—That feal of
conflancy was mutally given. refleXions !—
—Delightful Under the canopy of heaven there exifls not at this moment fo bleffed a mortal as your Henry.




*



*
*

ih
*
ih ih


ih

Monday, Twelve o'Clock,
I never told you that we aX plays here, and have had our firft reprefentation very
well performed.------—I cannot now enter
into a circumftantial account of the theatre, fcenery, dreffes, or players ; all of vvhicli are far better than you can conceive. Lafl Thurfday it was determined mia carifflma fliould next Monday night appear in Sigifmunda, and I in Tancred: this information is analogous to what I am about to fpeak of prefently.
Lady Julia appeared not this morning till moft of the company had afTeriibled to
C 6	breakfaft
36 MAS QU ERADESj © r,
breakfaft (for the greater number of the party chufe a regular table, in preference to having tea, chocolate, ific. ific. without method in the coffee-room, or their own. apartments). She entered leaning on Mils Edgcumb’s arm. Sir Thomas Walpole told
he.T/he looked like the goddefs of love. “ My Julia has had pleafant dreams,” faid Pemberton: “ chearfulnefs once more plays upon her features.” “ How happy was the objeX of thofe dreams!'” cried Suffolk* — “ Happy indeed 1” re-echoed feveral voices.
“ I am ignorant what thofe dreams ■were,” replied Mifs Edgcumb; “ but I believe Lady Julia liked them not, for fhs has been up a long time. She came into my apartment ;•-difturbed me earlier than I approved of;—and has teazed me with hearing her repeat the firft part of Sigifmunda fo frequently, that I lhall be able to fpeak in no other language all day. I may be apt to exclaim, every now and then; involuntarily,
“ Ah, woods! where tirft: my artlefs bofom learn.’d The fighs of love”-----
and, perhaps, again forget myfelf; and;,
without
WHAT YOU WILL.
without knowing a fubjeX for it, run intc? this eulogium,
“ If virtue were to wear a human form.
To light it with her dignity and flame,
Then, foffning, mix her fmiles and tended
graces j
Oh, Ihe would chufe the perfon of my Tancred !
T7
Julia feemed to feel fo well what Che^ expreffed, that the impreffion it made on me cannot be forgotten.”
The divine girl was confufed; and anfwered Mifs Edgcumb, that jhe would get another teacher in future to fay her lefjons ta, ftnce Jhe had very little patience, and expofed her folly in fo public a manner. I propofed rehearfing after breakfaft;—ffie blufhed, and declared herfelf not perfed enough for that yet.
If (as I have reafon to think) our yeftcr-diay'seclai rcijfement has effeXed this alteration in Ladyjulia, ean any thing be fo grateful to my heart?----Sweet angel!—how I
adore her!—The youngeft Mifs Pelham defired to take a ride, as the morning, fhe faid,. was pleafant and cool; and bid me propofe
a party for it, provided 1 was one of ic my-
felL
3^
MASQUERADESj
R
felf. J confented direXly, you may fuppofe; and told Mifs Charlotte that I doubted not but Lady Julia, who was fond of the exercife, would accompany us. “ No, no,” cried fhe, “ we will not difturb her from her ftudy: her Ladyfhip is feldom in the humour for beftowing any time on her play, and we’ll not be acceffary to her negleXing of it.”—^Lady Julia fmiled, and, with a little meaning I am fure, replied, “ Do not be afraid *,—I lhall not go. Since one memorable day, that, but for Lord Ofmond, I fhould have been killed by a fall from my horfe, my courage has entirely forfaken me; and it will be one while ere I can prevail
“ Well, I will
‘on myfelf to ride again.”—“ fupply your place, Julia,” cried Mifs Edgcumb but, as I am very timorous, and Lord Ofmond very expert at freeing dif-'trejfed damfeh from perilous difafters, I put myfelf under his protection.—My Lord, you will be my beau.?” I bowed and promifed to be more, watchful of her, than the Hefperian dragon of the golden fruit.
The l.adies retired to equip themfelves; and I to fcratch a few lines.
WHAT YOU WILL,
4

*
*


*
*
*

*
*
^ *
Hs

Two dClock, Tuefday Morning,
I have had no opportunity of fpeaking to Lady Julia, but in the prefence of a third
perfon.-----did hope to have taken my
feat behind her at the play we faw enaXed a few hours ago; but, whilft I was alTifting Lady Caroline Denley into the firft row of the box (who has the misfortune to be a little lame from a fprained ancle,—an event that happened fome years back), Seymour anticipated me, and took the place I had defigned for myfelf when I handed in Lady Julia.'—You can guefs at my difappoint-ment. I had looked on it as certain that
I
I fhould engaged Lady Julia’s attention during a good part of the performance; but the fellow croffed me like my evil genius. I endeavoured by a look to convince her of my mortificationfhe was cruel enough to laugh at it.. The feat I had been robbed of was well worth any effort I could make to regain it—I went be-hind the feenes, and found Sir James.
u Weftbrook,
MASQUER ABES; or,
Weftbrook, it would be humorous ’ cried ^	“
enough.
1,
to inveigle Seymour from the fituation where he has fo adroitly fixed himfelf; in which he is exulting moft unmercifully over his brethren who wifii to approach the Nonpareil he adores.” “ I took notice,” replied he, “ that he was grinning with pleafure like a monkey, and bowing twenty times in a minute to Lady Julia, when I caft a glance into the box
-------buc--a—prithee, my Lord, why not
let the poor devil be gratified? It is fo feldom that he is I beg pardon.
XD
though, perhaps—a -Lord Ofmond thinks he
could with more ardour breathe impaflion-
lia,
dt
your Lordfhip has a billet-doux
J
or probably
----or-----
a copy of verfes to deliver fecretly!—Ah, file is a fad perverfe girl—(he fometimes refufes to read,—or even to accept of either ; as you and 1 can teflify from ocular demonftration, you know,, my Lord.— “ A truce with your rallery, my good Weftbrook, and get Seymour away,”
“ Let me fee,—-how can it be done ?— Do you go back,—I will, make out fomething to fay, and (end for him.”
Ip
WHAT YOU WILL.
41
In a few minutes after I entered the box, one of the attendants appeared, and faid, he came with an entreaty from Sir James, that Lord Seymour would allow him to fpeak with his Lordfhip for five moments. His reply was, “ Do my baife-mains to his Honour, and tell him—I value my place too highly to quit it, was even his happinefs dependent on feeing me juft now; and I know him fufficientiy to fufpeX, that he means no more than to make me relinquifh it.**
-----The fervant retired;—he turned to
me, “ Have I not anfwered him well, Ofmond

*
*
*
*
*•
*
*
%
One o'clock,
I am juft come from rehearfing with Lady Juliaon my foul, Montague, (he is more than mortal!—In every feature,—in every movement,—-in every word,—there is a fomething ceieftial breaks forth, which no daughter of Eve ever before poftefted. “ The mere rhapfody of an infatuated
lover! ’* you cry...- If fo, every fpeXator
this
42
MAS QU ERADES: or.
this morning was an infatuated lover; for their fentiments tended to the fame point,
though exprefled differently.-------1 muft
for the hundredth time repeat,-What a form is hers!—What graces play about her !—-What a fweetnefs of voice!—Yet with me thefe are fecondary objeXs :---her foul is fpotlefs as the new-fallen fnow;---her temper milder than the vernal breeze-her heart a faithful reprefentative of the great benevolent Being’s who created her,—merciful to all that ftand in need of it,—yet firm as adamant where firmnefs is a virtue.
■------1 was ftruck at the firft fight with
her beauty, and fighed to poflTefs it*,--but an intimate acquaintance with this lovelieft work of heaven, has rendered me, not more indifferent to her external perfeXion, but fo much captivated vvith thofe excellencies of the mind which fhe owns, that, were fhe even to lofe the firft, and become as plain as (he is now charming, I would ftill pant with defire unfpeakable to call her mine.
Lady Caroline Denley has imparted to me a tale concerning this admirable girl, which 1 will give you.
Lady Pemberton carried abroad with her
the
WHAT YOU WILL.
43
the daughter of a poor tenant of my Lord’s in Hampftiire, who had a numerous family. She took great pains with the girl, which fhe thought well rewarded; for, to all appearance, Fanny had imbibed very fully thofe ielTons of reXitude and piety that her good Lady had given both by precept and example. On their return to England, the family went down to Pemberton’s feat near Southampton, where, in fix weeks after. Lady Pemberton difcovered that this girl had an intrigue with the fteward, who was a married man, and who had till then preferved a fair charaXer. The vile wretch was immediately difeharged from his employ, and Fanny fent home to her parent’s, with an account of the criminality of her conduX, and a deftre that fae might never more prefume to approach perfons whofe kindnefs to her fhe had recompenced fo ill.—Her Ladyfhip’s difpleafure extended to the whole family.—There you and I mufl think her very blameable; but there are many that would find it eafy to excufe the effeX of fuch a fiiock on one, whofe affeXion for the girl was great, and who felt keenly the difappointment of beholding her in her true
colour.
44
MAS QU ERADES
OR
colour, the reverfe of what fhe thought her. When Lady Pemberton’s wrath feenned a little appeafed. Lady Julia interceded with her mother, not to abandon a miferable family, rendered yet more wretched by this worft of all calamities. She commanded her to be filent on the fubjeX ; and, as an example to her other dependents, declared Jhe would never heflpw the leaft notice on Fanny or her connedions.
Lady Julia went privately to the farmer’s, and found the girl an objeX of real companion. She remonftrated with her in a foothing manner ;—exhorted her to repentance;—and convinced her of the atro-cioufnefs of her fault, which, with tears of remorfe, on her knees, the poor creature abjured for ever. Lady Julia imparted her mother’s determination to them as gently as poflible. She recommended to the old people to remove from a place, where unluckily the melancholy tale had become too public; and advifed their going into Lin-colnfliire, where Lord Mortimer has a noble eftate, whom fhe promifed to prevail on to write to his fteward to let the farmer become one of his Lordfhip’s tenants, at
■	as
W H AT YOU WILL.
45
as eafy a rate as w^ould be neceflary for his limited circumftances. She gave them fifty guineas, to enable them to undertake with courage their long journey, and to fettle themfelves with comfort in a new habitation. She bid them not to defpond, or treat with harfiinefs the unhappy Fanny, whofe feelings amply revenged on herfelf her unfortunate tranfgreflion. She promifed to fupply them half-yearly with the fame fum out of her own private allowance, till Lady Pemberton fhould be affured, by the exemplary life Fanny would in future lead, that her foul was become as alienated from vice as it had been from innocence.—They were profufe in bleffings on their lovely young benefaXrefsFanny fell at her feet;—with inarticulate words implored of heaven, to let her never ftand in need of any part of that comfort fhe fo fweetly adminijlered to an almoji broken heart!— She begged that it would alfo reward adequately her charming Indy's unparalleledgood-^ nefsl—Sht funk on the ground,—and fainted.
The parents, who had till this fatal mif-demeanor tenderly loved their daughter,
feared
a6
MAS QU ERADES; or,
feared they would never bring her back to
life.
Julia
and left them not, till fhe had made the father and mother vow, that no reproach, no unkind look, fliould ever be thrown on Fanny;—till fhe had feen her cordially embraced by both;—and a melancholy compofure take place, on the countenance of the latter, of that horror and defpair which marked her features at her entrance.
Lady Julia entreated Lord Mortimer, who came down the day after, to write into Lincolnfhire, that a very honeft old man (whofe family was large) wifhed to become his tenant; and begged him to give orders that his fteward would befriend him as much as poffible. Mortimer was happy to oblige her, and did as fhe defired immediately. The farmer, his wife, and children, arrived in Lincolnfhire, where they found the fteward ready to do them every good office. They procured a tenement fuitable to their circumftances ; and lived with convenience, in a moft edifying manner, on Lady Julia’s generous donations. By induftry the old
man acquired an equivalent fum to her firft
fix
WHAT YOU WILL.
47
fix months payment, and very fliortly he trebled his income. When his young pa-tronefs went down, on her filler’s marriage, to Mortimer-Hall, fhe contrived to fee the family, and exprefs her approbation at their conduX. The farmer told her that their Jiory was quite unknown in the neighbourhood; -—that they were rejpeded by all,—and to her were indebted for the happinefs they enjoyed. He alfo informed her, that a young man, of an excellent charader, had taken a liking to Fanny, and afked his confent to marry her, “ And what did you fay to him, my good friend cried Lady Julia. “ Why, my Lady, I evaded giving my confent; for I think my poor girl ought to live fingle. I therefore anfwered, that I did not know whether my daughter would chufe to marry, Jince fhe was well convinced how little her mother and myfelf, with fuch a charge of children, could fpare her fervices. He immediately applied to Fanny: her reply was, fhe could not leave her parents in their narrow fituation and, as Jhe was a help to them, was refolved never to gain new connedions, but to fpend her life in rendering them every tender office in her power. She thanked the farmer
for
48
MASQUERADES; or
X
for his good-will towards her, hut begged him to feek fome woman worthier of him than Jhe was, and to be fatisfied with her determination?' “ And was he fatisfied with it ?” “ Oh no, my Lady !—he was very miferable ; nay, he is juft as much fo now ; he ftill continues to follow Fanny ;—and, troth, it grieves my heart to hear him fetch fuch deep fighs, and fee him look fo wretched.” Lady Julia applauded the delicacy of their notions; and afked the girl, if [he liked the farmer? “Ah, my Lady!” returned fhe, “ I will not deny, that—if I were ftill innocent—I would be very happy in chufing fuch a hufband.” Lady Julia told her, If fhe had an affeXion for him, and he was fo much attached to her, fhe thought her beft way would be to fummon up courage, and tell her ftory plainly and honeftly to the young man, and then let him judge whether he could be fatisfied to receive her hand fo circumftanced as fhe was. She bid Fanny to confider well firft, how critical fuch a proceeding would be. jfhe was a man of honour, though he declined marrying her, he would hold himfelf bound to keep the confidence fhe repofed in him
invio-

W H A T Y O a tv ILL.
49
inviolable ; but whether he was fo, was the point. And next (he mull weigh well iii her own bread, whether fhe loved him fufficiently to expofe fuch a fecret to his knowledge.-^——She recommended to her; repeatedly, to deliberate on the matter very thoroughly before ffie took any ftep 5 and to refleX, alfo, if he Ihould be hurried away by his paffion, and after fuch a depoftt take her for his wife, whether ffie could bear, in any ill-tempered mood; to be reproached by him for the very fault ffie had fo ingenuoufly confeffed before the ceremony :——a circumftance that probably would not happen ; yet, in her opinion, fhe mufl look on the dark fide in fo important a confiiX, and judge if her nature could endure the worfl that might befal her. But, at any rate, ffie told Fanny, fhe muft noc entertain an idea of deceiving the farmer by marrying him without firft relating the whole affair to him, be the confequence what it might.
The girl, after confuldng her heart, refolved to divulge the fecret to her lover. He admired her principles, and liked her
the more tor her candour.—No objeXions
VoL. III.	D	re-
so
MASQUERADES; or
A	'
remained ;—they married,—and Lady Julia prefented them with a hundred pounds, and promifed, by debarring herfelf of fome trifling expences, to fend them as much more at the end of the winter. She was as good as her word. Lady Caroline Denley went into Lincolnfhire early in the fpring, for a fortnight or three weeks *, and Fanny received the fum from the hands of Lady Caroline’s woman, who was enjoined fecrecy by the generous donor in delivering ir, but was ignorant of the caufe.
Fanny was agitated at this frefh proof of her amiable young Lady’s remembrance ;
and, as Mrs. Payne was about to depart, fhe took her hand, and begged to be heard, whilft Jhe repeated a little hiftory which would demonjlrate that the foul of Lady Julia was as beautiful as her perfon. The good do-meftic liftened with attention, whillt fhe related the preceding narrative, and joined her tears of admiration to Fanny’s at fuch lincommon humanity.—Mrs. Payne begged to be allowed to reveal what ffie had uttered to her Lady. “ By all means !” ffie anfwered. “ Add, alfo, if you pleafe, Madam, that Fanny and her hufband are as happy a
couple
WHAT YOU WILL.
5^
couple as ever were united ; and implore Lady Caroline to join your and my prayers to the Almighty, that he may blefs, here and hereafter, the mod virtuous,—the moft gentle,—the moft compaffionate of her fex !
fuch is Lady Julia Herbert.”
Well, Charles! is not this a corroborating proof that I am not miftaken in the mind of my fair rniftrefs.?—But I leave you to draw your own comments on the above recital, fatisfied that they muft be very much in her favour.
1 gave you a hint of my being fo unfortunate, I will call it, as to be highly by a female gueft of my Lady Mortimer’s. You will excufe my divulging her
,—nor muft your creative imagination
diftinguiffied
name
, endeavour to fupply one; for you would undoubtedly be wrong, as the Lady is unknown to you :—you never even heard of her, I am fure. She contrived, fome hours ago, to put a billet into my hand, unfeen by any creature, which I here cranfcribe.
“ Can the fenfible heart of the gallant Lord Ofmond be ignorant of the impreffion
he has made on the foul of------. Ah; my
Lord 1 violent indeed muft be that love,
D 2	which
5®
M A S QU ERADES; o r
which caufes me thus to overftep the bounds of modefty, and leave myfelf at your mercy !—But you are a man of nice honour— Fame loudly Ipeaks it—and are fuperior, I am convinced, to the meannefs of triumphing over mifery which you have occafioned.
.— Yes, my Lord, I love.~Lady Henrietta Marchmont----ah, how that name
grates my ear!—will fhe be your wife, my Lord ?—Forbid it, heaven !—Your heart cannot incline to her—but a father’s harfh command may be equally fatal to my hopes. —I am in defpair—Keep me not in fuf-penfe, my Lord ;—and oh I—if you have the leaft humanity in your nature,—let me not fee you particular in your attention this day to Maria Harley.
Flattered as I muft be by this unmerited partiality, I had been more delighted, had fhe made me the confident of her paffion for one of my free companions.—With what pleafure would I have ferved her! —As it is,- I am fadly embarraffed 1—a painful tafk indeed, to tell one of the lovely fex that her affeXions are beftowed on a man who cannot return them I—My compaffion is greatly excited for the fair objeX
99

WHAT YOU WILL.
S3
jeX to whom I am fo much obliged; but my honour is concerned to put her out of doubt. I will take art opportunity of informing her, that I am under an engagement that binds me as firmly to another, as if the nuptial tie had paffed between us:—I will not fa;,^ to whom ; but leave her to imagine that Lady Henrietta is the perfon.. Things are* not ripe yet for a difclofure; and I would as foon trufl a bird with a cat, as this jealous woman with the knowledge of my loving in fecret Lady Julia.—Writing mufl prevent much confufion, and fave a multitude of queftions,- not fo convenient to be anfwered at prefent!—^To it then I



I have written, and will wait a favourable moment to prefent my letter. I have an aukward affair to go through, faith ! and, I will anfwer for it, you are enjoying a hearty laugh at my perplexed fituation.-^-— Ha, Souville!—I am late, do you fay.? Indeed fo I am !—
We are all to dine
I muft drefs direXly.
and, forgetting the diftance of Boughton,-
D
3
Grange,,
54 M A S QU E R A D E S; or,
Grange, or that fuch a place was '6n the globe,fliould have continued writing much longer, but for his neceffary interruption. That you may not be ignorant of my happinefs, I will feal my packet, afnd difpatch it direXly,
Adieu, dear Montague!—If this finds you at Somerville-Houfe, tell your Louifa in your own method, that I admire her much.
Surely I fhall catch one lucky moment this day to renew the fubjeX neareft my heart, to rny much-loved Julia!—Since lafl Sunday I have been through compuifion filent on it—Adieu again I
Osmond,

WHAT YOU WILL.
55
To Lady Louisa Sydney.

Windfor,
UT little ffiould I deferve the friend-ffiip of my Louifa, did I longer defer acquainting her, that my Lord Oftiond, laft Sunday evening, accompanied by lord Mortimer, ftole upon me very unexpeXedly, and cleared up all paft: inconfiftencies fo well, that I confented to look upon him as a lover.-—Ah, Louifa, could you have feen him at the time--with what ardour—tendernefs--^and fubmiffion—he pleaded his paffion—could you have feen the defpair and love his eyes expreffed—and the conflicting emotions that overpowered his whole form —you muft have been abforbed in compaffion—in admiration !-------Yes, my friend.
Lord Ofmond is tlie accepted lover of your Julia.—I know no happinefs equal to what
; for it proves, I muft be convinced that his foul is worthy of its habitation, or, alluring as the latter is,---and charmed as i confefs 1 am with it,—I
, D 4	would
that thought affords me
56 MASQUERADES; o-r,
would not be the wife of Ofmond on any ac-. count. Louifa, I boaft not of more heroifrn than I could have exerted :—nay, my paft refufal of him (though I loved him beyond,
, when I fuppofed he aXed un-wori , verifies the aflertion.—1 write in
a hurry, as I promifed to be a performer prefently in the concert-room.
We are juft returned from Boughton-Grange, where we paffed a moft agreeable day. Lady Maria was lively and pleafing ; —but I obferved that Lord Ofmond took lefs notice of her than ufual—I was forry for it, fearing he thought my temper jealous, and that I Ihould be hurt at his gal-
lantry towards her. Charlotte Pelham watcl> ed every movement of his eyes—they feemed to avoid hers: however, once at dinner they met, and a deep blufli overfpread his cheeks. A looked at her, and perceived the fame fuffufion on hers.;—-Poor girl! I hope, for her own fake, fhe will not forget the delicacy of the fex, and lower herfelf by any advances in the Marquis’s opinion.—-I fear nothing on his fide;—he is all truth, gene-reflty, and fidelity.
Whilft we were in the garden after tea,
kady
W H AT YOU WI LL.
57'
Eady Mortimer, Lord Ofmond,and myfelf,, made a trio, and feparated from thereft^ who were all forming parties of a fimilar fort. We turned, by Caroline’s defire, into a large kind of labyrinth that fhe admired much. He took my hand, and kiffed it. “ Shall I reproach my Julia,” cried he, “ for having with defign avoided me. thefe two
days ?--Indeed, it was cruel!-—1 had fo-
little time allowed me laft Sunday to exprefs my love—my happinefs—my> thanks—that 1 have, looked with impatience for'each-, coming minute, hoping it would prove more fortunate than the paft;, but fiow^ great my difappointment, when it arrived^ and brought with it new obftruXions to the felicitv I
ii
felicity I fighed for!—Have you not purpofely contrived it.?—Pray tell me!” No, my Lord.” “ Amiable Lady Ju--iia ! how foothing to m.y heart is that an--fwer ! Your kind condefcenfion. Madam,, is beftowed on a man who would hold you-dearer to his foul—who would refpeX you-in a fuperior degree for it, but my paffion
rived, at. the utmoft height—and a.purer,,
D 5,	• or.
were it poffible cannot encreafe—it is ar

/
58
MASQUERADES: or
or more lafting one, never filled the breaft of mortal 1”
44
Never filled the breaji of

re-
peated Caroline; “ that is faying a great deal! Why now, was not Petrarch’s paffion fomething beyond yours, think you, my Lord r”
44
By all that is facred, no !” returned he.
Petrarch worded the defcription of his in a manner that I dare not hope even to imitate-, but his Laura was not more adored than Ofmond’s Julia.-------So far I will al-
low we differ :—he expreffed content at feeing the woman he felt fo much for, the wife of another; and his writings give us to underftand, that he wiffied for no other happinefs than what he poffeffed in beholding—in hearing—in being near her. I cannot refine fo far upon the paffion—I would not live to fee this hand (and he again preffed it to his lips) the property of any man but the one who is now thus bleffed; and fweaf to you the ultimity of my wifhes is to receive it with my fweet miftrefs’s vow of mutual attachment at the altar.”
“ Julia, why do you not fpeak ?” cried
fire.

WHAT YOU W ILL.
5
b
fhe. “ Lord, how oddly you take,your fwain's
----Pffia !-
proteftations ?•
iflrly !-fions—
—blufhing lb fool Thank him in nice-chofen expref
A long, well-turned period of ac
will be more


knowledgment to him than thofe”
acceptable Lord Ofmond in-
terrupted her, and declared fhe w^as inhuman.
“ I beg you will be quiet,” anfwered Carol ine. “ Tou have made me as fubfer-vient to your prefent purpofe, as the monkey did the cat; and fhall I not reward myfelf for the difagreeable fituation I am in ? —Come, Julia, I wait your anfwer with great impatience. It muft be an adnfirable one after ftudying ic fo long !—
My Lord
Ofmond cannot blufh, I believe ; or I would endeavour to add as much rouge to his natural complexion, as I have done to yours. Ah, Heaven be praifed ! here comes Weftbrook ; and he fhall relieve me from the embarraffment of being fpeXator to a love-feene.”
Sir James drew near—I was rejoiced at it; for my. fifter’s rallery ferved but to render me more aukward. “ Lady Mortimer,” faid he, “ come this way with me 1 have a
D 6	curious
6o MAS QU ERADES; or,
curious anecdote to tell you, which I have this moment made myfelf mafter of—Oh fuch a dhcoveryLet me hear it alfo, 1 beg I” exclaimed I. “ You muft pardon me,Lady Julia,” replied he: “ your curiofity is abfolutely intolerable I—God help the poor man whofe luck it may be to call himfelf your hufband. The deuce a fecret muft he expeX to keep from your knowledge!—Could you believe, my Lord, that one night, at a ball, fhe was very near drawing half a fcore of us into a quarrel with her brother, by feeking to know a jeft not fo proper for a female ear to liften to ?—and the artful way fhe chofe to be informed of it, was to pretend to vindicate Lady Hen^
rietta Mar”—------
“ Who, Sir ?” demanded Ofmond with feigned impatience.—The other, aftumed an affeXed terror--
“ Lady Henrietta Mar-—garitta—WiU helmina—Carolina—a—I reallv forget her
—Poor Julia often complains that her memory is bad—fhe forgets them too, no doubt 1—don’t you, my
making me figns at the
other names, my Lord
amiable coufin ? time not to fpeak.
Sir
• V	^
WHAT YOU WILL.
Cn
Sir James, my dear Louifa, is certainly rro ftranger to Lord Ofmond’s inclinations. He led my fifter fome yards before us, and gave him an opportunity of renewing the topic he feemed anxious to be upon, without any conftraint. I was lefs confufed after Caroline left me ; buf do not you fuppofe that I was too .unreferved in my an-iwers to the Marquis, from having no witnefs to what I uttered. Our walk was con-linued for near an hour, in which fpace we confulted on the beft method of imparting; to Lady Pemberton and the Duke of Weftmorland (for that I infifted on) the fituation of our hearts : but we came to no abfolute determination how the tafk fhould be performed. As the time I mentioned expired, we heard voices approaching us. Sir James and Caroline ftopped; and when Sophia, Charlotte Pelham, the Duke of Suffolk, and feveral others, were in fight, my fifter had hold of my arm, Weftbrook was at my fide, and Lord Ofmond at hers; fo there can be no doubt but that Sir James is in the fecret. I am glad of it: he is fenfi-blc—has much affeXion for me I am fure; and his conduX proves that he thinks
Lord
<52
MASQUERADES; oR,
Lord Ofmond capable of making me happy. He faid not a word to me of the Marquis—^he has really delicacy ; and, what is uncommon in fo lively a genius, can deprive himfelf of a laugh to avoid giving pain to another. ' Did he not think me attached to the amiable Henry, he would have been very teazingabout the appearance things wore.;—-And now I mufl; obey the fummons that Mournies brings
I
me.
Adieu, my excellent friend !
./
Julia Herbert.
\
To
w
YOU W
64
To Sir Charles Montague.'
Windfor, Friday,
Have never pretended to give you an exaX journal of the paftimes that each day produces here. I write of thofe circumftances only which immediately happen during the courfe of ray letter ; and, that you may know in fome meafure how we go on, keep it open for three or four days. T his was the method I think I obferved in my laft, and mean to continue it whilft my correfpondence exifts from hence. How long that may be is uncertain ; for my Dul-cinea fpeaks of hurrying me to town to afk my father’s confent to addrefs her :—a confent I fhall never obtain.-----No matter;
(he muft be mine without it.-------If I was
not lazy, I fhould prefent you with a full account of a fate champetre we had laft Wednefday. 1 will only tell you that it was in charaXer with the elegancy, the fuperbnefs of Mortimer’s tafte ; that the weather was delightful; the drefies moftly well chofen;
the
64
MASQUERADES;, oa
the company wonderfully pleafed:—thaty by his and my agreement, Weftbrook danced with Lady Julia,—I with Mifs Edgcumb' —and the confequences anfwered the wilhes of both—he frequently engaged my partner-in converfation—-1 was not backward in aft iiduity to his;—fo that, in faX,. without having the appearance of particularity, I .was juft as happy as if mia bella Julia had. engaged to give me her hand for the night.. Yfitpartie quaree was never afunder—What a delicious evening!—Llhall ever remember -it. with ddight.-
I have difcovered the ft'ate of my heart to Weftbrook.: my confidence gave him* pleafure. He affured me he had long feen* my paffion,, and hoped no obftade would prevent my union with his charming coufin. .
“ Allow me to tell you, Lord Ofmond,” cried, he,. “ that in Julia Herbert,you will poffefs a treafure more valuable than I can find words to exprefs it-—you, and you alone,” he flatteringly faid “ deferve her.. And now I ffiall
Eor
years—nay, meaning of the word
be as fincere with you. , before I wdl knew the-
girl
I loved the angelic ffie was dear to me- as the vital blood
that
w
YOU WI
fing her was torture.
that warmed my heart; and the idea of lOr
I faw plainly Ihe beheld me only with efteem—-cold efteem! I did not dare to tell her of my fufferings I was even afraid, to betray them to her—, but under an affumed gaiety concealed the anguifh of my foul. I attended my aunt to England, and revived with Colonel Elliot the intimacy that had fubfifted between us at Rome. Almeria remained in Paris— he knew her not—and was then no lover. He difcovered my attachment, and que-. ftioned me about it—I acknowledged the juftnefs of his penetration. He reafoned with me on the abfurdity of cherifhing a paflion for one, whom I averred I had not the remoteft expeXation of ever being nearer allied to. He frequently repeated his leXures, and admonifhed me to wean myfelf from her—to exert my philofophy— and fink the whining, infatuated boy, into
the reafonable man.----1 left her for three
months, and, when I was to behold her after that tedious abfence, prepared my heart to meet her as one who in a fhort while would become the wife of Lenox; for in that fpace of time fhe had confented
to
66
MASQUERADES; or
to the perfuafions of her brother and uncle, and engaged to give him her hand,—Angels fought in her behalf, and faved her from a fellow not worthy of her, and one whom lam fatisfied ffie never loved.—Ah!
Ofmond, how fpiritedly did ffie behave on his dif niffion!——But I digrefs -After that awful interview my mind became every day eafier—I had almoft conquered my weaknefs ( if to love a beautiful, virtuous girl is one), when, to compleat tiie viXory, 1 cultivated an acquaintance with the amiable Mifs Edgcumb, who, by engroffing my friendfhip entirely, obliterated my paffion for one objeX, and made me fenfible that I could love another. Pemberton feels not more fraternal affeXion for Julia than I do ---•her felicity is dear to me ; and I ffiall think it fecured, my Lord, in your arms.” I begged him to inform me wffiiat he i tia-gined * would be* jthe fentiments of Lady Pemberton and her fun, when they were told that I was the lover of Lady Julia He paufed—“ Speak, my dear Weftbrook,” cried I : “ they wiffi for Suffolk’s connection I well know—have I not much to apprehend
“ We
WHAT YOU WILL.
67
(4
99
€4
replied he,
I ne-
Biit,
We will not be un by fur mi ling difagreeable events, ver could anticipate misfortunes in my life ; nor will I begin on this occafion.
o
were 1 Lord Ofmond, I fhould be in no hurry to give up, or encreafe, my prefent happinefs—I fliould be fatisfied for a few weeks, in the fociety of my miftrefs, and
I was beloved by her—I
in knowing chat
would employ my time in improving her tendernefs fo far, as to create in it a powerful advocate for me, if things Ihould grow defperate, and I find it expedient to prd-pofe to her a precipitate flight northwards. This plan would I piirfue : if you have a better, inform me of it ; and in whatever refpeX I can be ferviceable to your Lordfhip, you fhall find me at your devotion.” I exprefled my obligation to him——declared he fpoke like an oracle, and in a manner quite confonant to my inclinations*, but that my following the line he marked out, would depend entirely upon Julia, fince, if I faw, her diftrefled at the concealment of my addreffes from her mother or my father, I muft put an end to ir, by immediately avowing my paflion to them both.
You
68
MAS QU ERADES; os
You may be defirous to hear the refult of my letter to the kind fair one I mentioned in my laft. I had^no opportunity of giving it till, the evening, when all the com-
aflembled in the garden, I
placed
pany
myfelf at her elbow—(he dropped behind, knowing my intention ; and, as foon I could take the liberty unperceived, I raifed her hand to my lips,—put into it the paper,— and thanked her for the honour file had conferred on a man whofe gratitude was adequate to the favour he had received, but whofe deftiny had prevented him from forming the leaft idea of profiting of the happinefs (he generoufly offered him. I begged her to think me worthy of her friendlhip, though I was not entitled to her love—to think me fenfible of the obligation I owed her—and to think that 1 fuffered inexpreffibly at being neceflitated to fpeak in that ftiie to one, whom, was my heart free, and my hand not engaged, I Ihould deem myfelf fortunate to call mine. If deceit is ever excufable, dear Montague, it muft be in fuch a cafe aslhis.-—The Lady I fpoke to (though very worthy) could sjot have been my choice, had I never feen
my
w
YOU W
6^
my much-loved Julia; yet I thought it incumbent on me to foften a repulfe by every method that could poflibly be devifed. “ But that paper, Madam,” added I, “ will anfwer you more fully than I have either courage or ability to do perfonally—yet, ere I go, let me entreat that I may never again be fo much diftrefled as I have been this day, by hearing further of a fubjeX that makes me very wretched. Fortune, Madam, has provided better for you; and will beftow you on a man, who has it in his power to render you happier than I could do.”—I bowed refpeXfully to her, and was about to retire—(he caught hold of
my arm— “ Stop! eyes, “
99
cried (he, with anger in her ftop and inform me what right you have to alk any favour of me—you who can be fo cruel to a fond-loving, weak girl ?---If your letter is to the fame pur-
port as what you have fpoken,—1 defire not to read it.”
“ It is. Madam, indeed; but you muft
retain the packet—it encloles your condefcending billet, which in honour I muft re-poflefs you of,
I
99

44

70
€4
MASQUERADES; or,
I want it not—take this (hocking pack-
et back again
----You will not, my Lord ?
Thus then”—and flic threw it on the
ground—“ the firfl perfon that walks this way (hall know my folly, and of how cold a texture your heart is compofed.—It is a punifhment 1 owe myfelf for placing my affeXions on one, who values the advantages Nature has fo liberally lavifhed on him, too highly, to think any mortal wor-
-------And are you
mean enough to be fatisfied with Henrietta
thy of his attention.
Marchmont—that mailer piece of deformity !—for a wife, becaufe fhe has a plentiful quantity of gold.?---^Ofmond, how
I defpife you 1”
“ I will noc ftay to.fee that pretty mouth
again disfigured by fuch epithets.”--She
feized my hand : “ You fliall not leave me yet—you do well to jeft ac my unhappinefs it is in charaXer, and only what can be
—infen-
pefled from fo unfeeling a foul fible, low-minded wretch	—With an in-
tent of alarming her prudence a little,- I threw my arm around her in rather a free manner, “ Have a care. Madam ! with an earneft countenance ;
J
faid I, “ it is a dan-
gerous
WHAT YOU WILL.
ft
(4
gerous fign when ladies in fuch cafes defcend to inveXive^—to abufive appellations! Had you not a feeling foul to deal with-— were he not a man of honour whofe mercy you are at—who fcorns to take advantage of your prefent unguarded condition—you would perceive that it was by no means a lucky one—-with fome reafon you might have caufe to load him with afperfions / merit not—you would lament when too late the rifk you expofed yourfelf to-^——But from me,”—-and I withdrew my arm,— you have nothing to fear—I value your peace of mind fo highly, as to wifh, that you may ever, in a like critical fituation, find your companion as infenfible as you fuppofe me to be.—Think juftly of my fentiments—prornife to receive your own lines I will take them out, and tear the writing in which they are enclofed to pieces. You (hail not read it—you are already acquainted how I am circumftanced. Will you, Madam, oblige me fo far as to put yourfelf out of my power
“ Would to God - I could, my Lord !” and fhe hid her face in my bofom. “ Happy is the woman v/ho poireffes thofe affeXions
you
MASQUERADES; or;
you are determined to deny rne a (hare in i She cannot idolize you to the degree that I do—my paliion tranfports me beyond all bounds; and my indifcretion, which you fo cruelly blame, evinces the ftrength of it.
But you defpife an eafy conqueft--you devote your inclinations to one fo governed by felfifh principles, as to make your happinefs merely a fecondary objeX,—who had fooner render you miferable than incur the fmalleft cenfure of mankind by purfuing fuch fteps as I have taken,—Would Maria Harley do as much to prove her attachment ?—Ah ! I now believe you can love 1 —-fhe is the perfon, I have no doubt—unkind-inflexible—dear Ofmond !-Say,
my Lord, can you not endeavour to be grateful to a creature who doats on you more than life ?-Your filence anfwers
the queftion. that I
99
She ftarted from me. “ Oh,
held in as much con*
may fee you tempt by her whom you prefer—as I am fcorned by you.? Then will you experience the mifery—the heart-rending mifery I now endure.--But begone !-you fhall not triumph over thefe unavailing tears, which, in fpite of rny pride, will fall—-Begone !
WHAT YOU WILL.
73
gone! I fay,—and, ah ! that it could be forever!” She applied her handkerchief to her eyes-—I was grieved more than [ can exprefs, but obeyed her command, and precipitately left her, well affured, however, that ffie would not hold her refolution of letting the packet lie a tell-tale “ to the
firft perfon who walked that way.”
Her eyes are continually averted from me—paffion fwells on her features—-and when ffie fpeaks to me (which is not often) affeXed fatire breaks from her lips.—-Ah! Charles, how can women be fo blind to their own advantage, as ever to affume a certain fierte, that inftantly deprives them of every lovely attraXion. “ A compofition of ceieftial pafte is the delightful fex;” and nothing of the diabolical ffiould approach, to difturb irs oeconorny.
We are all going to a fubfcription-ball fourteen miles off—I am to dance, with Lady Julia.
% % % %	%		^ ^
* * *	%		* ^ H-
Hs % %	%	%	^ Hs
VoL. IIL	E		Saturday
74 M A S QU ERADES; g r,
Saturday Morning, Six o'Clock,
}
When 1 was dreffed, Souville informed me t!)e carriages were driving round, and
/
vey himfelf and his partner to
every-one aiTembled in the laloon ready to ftep into them. 1 went down, and found Mortimer marllialling the company. “Each gentleman’s chaife,” cried he, “ lhall con-
-------, and
back again.”
“ i objeX to it!” exclaimed Suffolk.
“ Your Grace has no'hope of dancing Vvith any Lady here, I prefume, my Lord! ’ '' faid Budenall. “ I am to have the honour of Mifs Charlotte Pelham’s hand,” replied the Duke.
“ Then,” anfwered Montague, “ your Grace has fo.me excellent reafon to give.
no doubt, for oppofing this admirable motion of Mortimer’s, which will reconcile to M ifs Charlotte fo unpolite an expreffion as
the one you uttered.”
¥
“ I cannot have a better, Sir, than the true one. It is well known where my affeXions are lodged; and any other than Lady Julia Herbert, will find me very ftupid in a teie-d-tete\ fo, for the fair Charlotte’s fake, I wifh the party better difpofed.
I like your candour exceedingly, my
Lord
WHAT YOU WILL.
75
Lord Duke,” cried Mifs Charlotte Peiliam;
you are an uncommonly fincere lover, and, I really think, ought to be indulged in having Lady Julia to grace your carriage this evening—I will be no hindrance to your mutual pleafure—her Ladyfhip and I mufl change efcorts, though I am ignorant who
was deftined to be hers!”----The Duke
looked at her with acknowledgment,--at Lady Julia with tranfporr.
“ Shall ic be as Mifs Pelham propofes, Julia ?” demanded Pemberton. “ Will you go with his Grace?”—I was juft; ftepping forth, with no little indignation, to affert to the haughty Suffolk my prerogative, when Weftbrook, unperceived by any, twitched me by the arm. Pemberton repeated his queftion. “ Pofitively no, my Lord,” anfwered Lady Julia, with her lovely complexion heightened.
Your Ladyfhip would not be fo peremptory in your negative on my requeft,” cried Suffolk, in a low voice, “ but for the fake of one who appears to you but too charming—you chufe to go with Ofmond
44
the feducing Ofmond !
the happy—
“ It is of little confequence whom I go
E 2	with,
J
6
MASQUERADES; or
with, my Lord, fo it is not the Duke of Suffolk, who gives all around me room to think that I fliould not be a^^erfe to a tbte-d-with his Grace.—Mr/Montague, will you take me under your proteXion ? He kiffed her hand: “ How happy would fo fweet a companion make me !—yet I muft acknowledge that it is fair your partner Ihould be preferred.” “ Well, Lord Budenall ! you will not refufe me a place in your chaife I hope ?	“ Indeed, my adorable
Ladv Julia. I muft,” he anfwered ; “ and
for the fame reafon that Montague alleges.” “ Budenall,” faid the Duke, “ have you no fears of trufting your miftrefs with the
j—you who are in general fojea-“ h Ofmond then to be her partner
Marqu lous ?”
cried he—“ Difturb yourfdf no further.
my Lord ; for I am fatisfied.
“ What a piece of work is here,” exclaimed Weftbrook, “ with your jealou-fies ! Is not Lord Ofmond foon to become a wedded man .?—Speak, my Lord; pour conviXion into their ears, and quiet my liOrd Duke’s apprehenfions---------his fufpi-
cions.”
replied I. “ I am
“ I value no one’s fufpicions,
WHAT YOU WILL
77
lia’s hand-
I am entitled to the general privilege of efcorting my partner—I fhall not be paf-live becaufe the Duke of Suffolk entertains jealoujies, nor give up a favour I have a right to, left his Grace fhould be uneafy* Is the rule to be obferved. Lord Mbrti-mer—every man to convey his partner ?”
“ It.is--it is,” was the anfwer from all but the diffenting Peer. I took Lady Ju-
“ Stop, dear Ofmond,” cried Sir James •,—“ not to gratify the Duke’s caprice, but to fatisfy my own curiofity let me beg of you to tell me, Are not— (fpeak it publicly)—are not your hand and vows plighted to the woman you love ?
Is it poflible for you to addrefs another in the foft language with fincerity ?”
“ Such queftions would come better at another time, Weftbrook—The Ladies a-round will think ftrangely of me !—However, you fhall have your wifh; and hear me atteft, in full affembly, that my heart— my hand--my vows--are already engaged
3

and that I can never change the objeX of
my love.”
CC
X thank your Lordfhip
this is aXing honeftly!—my coufin Julia is warned how far to truft you, if, in the-
L 3	/ courf
e

78
MAS QU ERADES; or,
courfe of your tete-d-tete, you fhould be tempted (as I have fometimes been, without meaning it) to make love to her.—-Lord Budenall, you have had no doubts of the Marquis’s attachment, have you “ Not one, upon my honour!” “ mour, what fay you ?” “ That Lady Julia will not deign to think of me;—and, of courfe, it makes no difference in mty heart,
the objeX-------whom elfe fhe
Sey-
And, miy Lord Duke,
as to
tinguifhes.”
“ Oh, Sir,—“if in Lady Julia’s prtfence Lord Ofmond confeffes hirnfdf plighted to another, I am fatisfied.” “ Bravo i” exclaimed the Baronet. “ This gii l and her lovers occafion us-and me in particular—a curfed deal of trouble.—Come, Emily !”
You wil! judge of my rapture at handing my beloved to my chaife—I cannot tell you how happy I was all the way to ——We paffed the time at the ball in a manner correfpondent to our journey thither; and, when it was time to return, came back in the fame order that we went.
Soon after our chaife drove from the af-fembly-room, I renewed the fubjeX neareft my heart, and which 1 always find an inex-
hauflible
WHAT YOU WILL.
79
hauftible one. I expreffed myfelf with much warmth—Lady Julia anfwered me by lament-
<0
ing the clandeftine way in which we wer fituated. She expatiated on the mean light (he could not avoid holding it in, and implored me to go up to London on Tuefday or Wednefday, and inform my father of my having offered her my hand. She faid, when I left Windfor, fhe would unfold to Lady Pemberton her attachment.
“ And, if fhe fhould be averfe to my happinefs,—what muft 1 expeX ?”
“ Ah, my Lord !--I cannot think of it.” “ Ic muft be thought of, mv dear Julia • the worft is to be provided againft. Saouui fhe fay, I difapprove of the man you have honoured with your affedion—you muji wed Suffolkwill become of the miferable Ofmond ?—Muft I be thrown from your heart, and given over to a wretched ex-iftence ?”
CC
love
a
Ah, never—never fhall I
ceafe to
99
My better angel! let us infure our felicity--confent to make yourfelf mine--Lady Pemberton will eafily forgive what
fhe can at firft but term a rafh ftep
E 4
and,
So
MASQUERADES; or.
and, .once the wife of your Henry, what
earthly power can tear you from me ?
“ Is it thus Lord Ofmond advifes the woman he means to make his wife ?—Ah, you know me not!—Can you, my Lord, urge me to aX fo unworthily of myfelf?-—! deferve not this !”—She withdrew her hand which I held.
“ How have I offended ?—Would I induce the beloved of my foul to aX in any way that could leffen her in her own opinion?—Ah, no, my amiable Julia !--fuf-peX me not of it—your delicacy is mine— and fuch a proof of your attachment muff lay me under an additional obligation,, never to be forgotten.--According to my idea, no deviation from propriety can be alleged by fuch a meafure ♦, but, flattering as it would be to me, I do not afk you to take it, till you have tried Lady Pemberton—till you find her inexorable—which I much fear her partiality to the Duke will render her—Then mufl thefe arms fcreen my Julia from a hated rival—then mufl Scotland be the place, where we will feek a fure afylum from the dreaded calamity of your becoming Suffolk’s wretched wife,
and
s
WHAT YOU WILL;
and I a felf-deftroyer. If you agree not to this point—the one only left us for a dernier' rejfort—what can I think ?—That my Julias, could profefs to love, but not aX confift:-ently with the diXates of that paflion—-Even the very fhadow of affeXion is loft, if fhe* expofes herfelf to the danger that awaits her.—Very foon after will fhe,, in compliance to the barbarous mandates of a parent,, fcatter her affurances of truth and confancY to the winds, devote her Ofmond to perdition, and ally herfelf to the man fhe at prefent moft abhors.—Ah, my God I—ca® Julia fupport fuch refleXions !”
“ Never, my Lord, will I confent to be^ come yours in a way derogatory to my own* notions of reXitude—nor have I given youi a heart fb frail, fo much the flave of paft lion, as to be rendered' by it infenfible to the admonitions of reafon. No! I will endeavour to prove myfelf worthy of being, your wife.—Pray hear me, my Lord—1 have dreadful ideas of a marriage that commences m reproaches—How can I carry with me to the altar a mother’s difpleafure !—How can that God, who has ever proteXed mCs^ look with complacency on a union, where
E 5	a muftr
Sa
QQ

a multitude of errors, in confequence of it# rife up againft me, and make me culpable in his light! Shall I be an example, my Lord, of difobedience-—of temerity, to my lifter? Can I bear to have my name cited by many young women, as a rule for going off with fuch men as they chufe to give a preference to,—who will forget the objed that feduced me from duty, and remember only the fanXion they borrow from me ?
I would fubmit to any misfortune firft !— And then, the very refleXion of having made an elopement (abflraXed from all other con-fiderations) would be an eternal fource of difquiet to me. I fliould think it a tefli-mony in the opinions of others, and moft of all in yours, that much effrontery belongs to my nature-much of that faife courage which women have no bufinefs with *, and I Ihould deferve to lofe your efteem ever after—nay, I ought to do fo now, if I could entertain a remote wifh to become your wife at fo dear an expence.”
“ Pardon me, my Julia; but our fentiments on this head differ widely. In committing yourfelf to my proteXion, you will convince me of the high truft you place in
the

WHAT YOU WILL.
83
the honour of your Ofmond ; and depend, my love, I am noc fo defpicable a brute, as to be lefs attached to you for fuch a proof of your affedion and confidence,—**Your of)-jedions fhall be done away immediately •, and, firft, as to the dreadful ideas you have of a marriage that commences in reproaches, I will convince you”------—
“ I muft interrupt you, my Lord
y 0 u
J
cannot remove my prejudices againft a meafure to which I have the ftrongefl: repugnance. I have often fhuddered at hearing of my acquaintances embarking in fimilar enterprizes, that promifed nothing but contempt and mifery during life. Will you fuffer me to beg an i.nftance of your tendernefs, my Lord ?”
“ Soul of my foul, and end of all my zvfhes ! I live but to oblige you—Speak, and judge of my paffion by my ready obedience.”
“ The favour I beg, rny Lord,, is—never again to mention this hateful fcheme !” “ Unkind Julia !—An, how little fenfible is your heart to love !
“ Indeed, my Lord, it is equally fo with —your own.—Do you affentto what I aOc ?”
£ 6	Co:.»
84 mas qu ERADES; or,
“ Conditionally. I will not again urge a propofal fo difagreeable to you, unlefs the near danger of lofing you makes it neceflary. If fuch a misfortune threatens, I muft afllire you, that no reafon you can have to allege will fatisfy me ; and, tho’' every infernal demon Ihould be leagued againft me, I fhall furmount all oppofition,, and, as furely as we exift, fly with you to the North. There fhall the prieft give a wife more valuable,more loved, than ever female was, to the arms of the faithfuileft, the fondefl: hufoand, whofe whole felicity will confift in fludying her happinefs--who will prove himfelf her lover—her friend— her protedor—nor fhall an anxious thought approach her dear bofom, which hrs affi-duity and vigilance can fcreen her from.”‘ “ Ah, my Lord I —ray dear Ofmond ! never, never muft 1 be yours on fuch terms !’ Render me not miferable by infifting on this unpardonable ftep !—Let circumftances be at the worft—I cannot—
5>.
will not agree to
It.
“ How, Lady Julia !—are yon ferious 1' Great heaven, how unexpeded is this
ftroke!:
WHAT YOU WILL.
8'S
%
ftroke I—Then I have only been in a happy illufion 1—Why, Madam, was I flattered! with the affurance of your love ?—I perceive the caufe—it was merely ro make my torments feverer when you thought proper to difeard me.—But I fhould have beefi fufficiently wretched—your pride would have found triumph enough, had you ingenuoufly confeffed your fentiments, and faid, Ofmond you excite my compaffion-— but I feel nothing more for yoit—I cannot give you my hand; it is defined by my family— and myfelf, for another—Ungenerous girl I your heart is far indeed from being x\itjlav& cf paffion /”—--I paufed—She looked at me with gentle reproach—I threw my arms a-round her, and leaned my head upon her fhoulder—She inffantly difengaged me from her. “ Thus it is,” cried fhe, “ I have always heard, with your fex *,—let you know your power, and you ufe it to the mofl tyrannical purpofe. I never experienced the* jufbnefs of that obfervation before, my Lord but I am glad to have a fpecimen of it in thefe early days—However, be perfuaded, that neither entreaties rior violence can fway
me
1
86 M A S QUER A	ofti
me from what I think a right mode of conduX.”
“ Your Ladylhip now finds it convenient, I fee, to put ah end to my afpiring hopes Affure yourfdf, the facrifice you wilh lhall be complete---! will not# through my exulting rival’s heart, pierce yours—No !--for your fake he fliall be fpared--My death will fatisfy your cruelty* and rid me of the agonies that knowing he poffeffes you muft infliX—perhaps it may add tranfport to your joys !—I lhall perfecute you no further —I will leave you contented, whiift I become the prey of defpair and horror.”
She wept—I was penetrated at her tears -—I threw myfdf on my knees, and again clafped my arms about.her.
“ Pardon, my Julia, this impetuoflty ! —Already it is fincerely repented of—Be kind and impute it all to love. When I think of lofing you, I am deprived of reafon.—Say, my deareft Julia, that I am for-
given

The moon is extremely bright, my Lord. If the poftilions look back—if any of the fervants ride by, and fee you on your
knees.
what you will* 8f
« ,	/
knees, what mufl: they think of me ?—*1 beg your Lordlhip will cenfure.”
not fubjed me to
a
Am I pardoned ?—Dear Lady Julia,
pronounce that I am.
99
44
Your Lordlhip mufl excufe my an-fwering till you rife.”—I refumed niy feat< “ Now, Madam, tell me that you no longer hold me in difpleafure. Confider the origin of my fault—think, my angelic girl, with what fervency I adore you--and then judge whether my breaft muft not be a chaos of deftruXive paffions !—As yet I know not whether I am to be blefled with my Julia—or, in giving her up, bid an eternal adieu to every comfort—to every happinefs,”
Indeed, my Lord, I am not difpleafed with you. I thought your expreffions unkind. I deferved them not—that you muft know-—but they ffiall be forgotten.
99
<4
I cannot thank you fufficiently for this goodnefs—And now allow me to alk, were it poffible that obe dience fhould make you yield to become Suffolk’s wife, in violation to the wilhes of your heart, do you fuppofe fuch a facrifice could be grateful in the fight
of
z
:r
)
h S Q U E R A D E S ; o k.
But, oh 1—if you abandbinf
unabated conftancy
of heaver
the objeft who has fo long ioved you witb
—who has fought foT you with unwearied affiduity-*—who has never had you out of his-thoughts ftom the firft moment he beheld you-—who has,, you; fay, been fo foftunate as to conciliate your af-
--will no pangs approach your heart at the refleXion of his long fufferings-—at his untimely fate.?—for never—ah, my Ju-! never will 1 behold the day that makes-the deteftable Suffok lord of my angel her whom the Almighty decreed, I thought a few hours ago, to be my bride! tears fell on my hand, which enclofed one of hers—ffiy eyes Ihed drops of fympathy, “ Why are you filenr, my Julia ? have almoft baniffied hope from my bofom your mother will nev^er confent to our union, whilft ffie has a profpeX of allying you to the Duke—I am deftitute of the means of offering fettlements equal to my wiffies, or her expeXations—my will deprive me of you.^—Julia ! life of my foul! not one word of comfort to beftow
on your Henry !”• from my embrace
She withdrew herfelf
4^4
You
WHAT YOU WILL.
89
“ You are too free, my Lord. I beg yoii %vill confider, that I cannot allow of liberties even from you, who are dearer to me than all the world. My refolution of not going off with you is unalterable •, yet believe me, when I affure you, that, if I am not united to my Ofmond, no other lhall claim my vows. You are a ftranger to the firmnefs of my foul—no perfuafions--no threats—no hardfhips lhall induce me to
fwerve from this prornife.-------1 cannot be
lefs unhappy than yourfelf, if it is my de
ftiny to be feparated from you.
Why
Ihould I be confufed at owning it, or that 1 love you beyond expreffion ^ You are well entitled to the acknowledgement of both faXs. Your fentiments and my own are
na
correfpondent in point of marrying whom we diflike; and I had fooner die than be guilty of perjury in the light of God. Be fatisfied with this; and let us not imagine. Lady Pemberton, -who has hitherto proved herfelf the moft indulgent of mothers, will be tyrannical where the felicity of her child is depending. You will go up. to London on Tuefday or Wednefday This duplicity towards my friends is Ihock-
iu
90
MAS QU ERADES; or.
ing—To preferve it many days longer muft tnake me criminal in my own eyes. You will fee, and aX ingenuoufly with the Duke of Weftmorland. You fay he is cruel— he has ever fhewn an indifference towards my Ofmond. As your father, he ought to be informed of your intentions. Be his anfwer what it may, I fhall ftill be devoted to you, and ready to give you my hand on Lady Pemberton’s confenting—You owe him not the obligations that I do my amiable mother. The time of your abfence fhall be employed in bringing her over to our wiflies—in difmiffing Suffolk’s addreffes.
and in reconciling my brother to my rejeX-
fuppofe ----and
Be at reft, my Lord
ing of him.
not Lady Pemberton fo inflexible know me incapable of loving any other.”— In fpite of her reproof, I clafped her to my bofom------1 dried her eyes with my hand-
kerchief—and promifed to be all fhe wifhed me.
You fee, Montague, I can have no further room to hope that (he will marry me
clandeftinely
By heaven, fhe is right!
I venerate—I refpeX her for it beyond meafure—though I fhould be made happier,
were
WHAT Y OU WILL.
Of
Were her notions of propriety lefs ftriX. Would I could read my fate in the book of futurity ! Should I be deprived of fuch a woman through the abominable principles of ambition, or rather of avarice, there could not exift under the canopy of heaven* an objeX fo miferable as myfelf! Though I am fatisfied of her love, I am not of the firmnefs of which fhe boafts, where her mother’s difpleafure is in queftion—-—on any other occafion I could truft to it.—Good God 1 is it not the height of abfurdity to imagine the Pemberton’s wall liften to my propofals ? Suppofing I offer to fettle all the fortune I can call my own upon Lady Julia, they will naturally afk me what is to become of her children ? I have little to plead with them in my favour
—a noble,
impartial way of thinking is become in a. great meafure obfolete; and, irritated as they are againft my father, they can fcarcely avoid confounding my fentiments with his.——Ah ! that father Montague I— the unnatural Weftmorland could, if he pleafed, make every*thing eafy—he might render my alliance a more defirable objeX Yor her than Suffolk’s—but he would firft
fee
92
MAS QU ERADES; or
fee me dragged to a wretched receptacle for maniacs—and becaufe I dare; to aim at happinefs, he will deprive me of every fhilling
of my patrimony.------1 know him well—
avaricious, unfeeling, and implacable"——-Can I build on expeXations from fuch a man ^ —Of this be convinced, however, that Suffolk muff fight well ere he robs me of my prize.
I fhould be glad to meet you in London when I go up, that we may confult on the befi; method of breaking to my father this important affair. You fay that you have bufinefs to complete previous to your nuptials, which Lord Beaumont’s illnefs obliged you to leave uftfinifhed in town. You muft make it convenient to be there on Fri-
day: till then I hope to protraXmy ftay at
—	---A	_

%







m	*
*

Saturday Nighty Twelve Clock.
We have been on a very agreeable party fome miles down the river. Mortimer^ determined that we fhould not want for variety
WHAT Y O- U
WILL.
93
riety of.amufements, had, unknown to any of the company, prepared every-thing in ample order for this entertainment, and after breakfaft aiked if we Ihould make a lit-
• "	4
.	I
tie excuriioD by water? The propofal was univerfally liked-the carriages were ordered, and they conveyed us to the river-fide, where we were a good deal furprifed at feeing three or four fmall beautiful yachts ready to receive us. Several of the neighbouring Ladies and Gentlemen, whom my Lord had invited to join us, were on board before we arrived. We put off from the fhore, and were followed by three bands of
mufic, in three feparate boats.-------It was
elyfium !——The finenefs of the day—— the magnificence of the veffels, which, like Cleopatra’s galley, had ftreamers of various-coloured filks (the regal
moft illuftrious) fluttering in
purple the wind
the exquifite found of the inftruments played on by mafterly performers— the unexpeXednefs of the fcene—and, above all, the lovely form of Lady Julia—whofe countenance was more blooming than Hebe’s whofe fmiles I enjoyed—all ferved to enrapture my foul and tranfport my fenfes.
The
H
MASQUERADES; or,
Suffolk fat on
The pleafure was diffufive. the right hand of my beloved ; 1 was placed on her left. He thought he was as much in her good graces, as I in reality knew myfelf to be. Weftbrook and Mifs Edgcumb were fenfible to the fatisfaXion that lovers feel on fuch occafions ; as were Colonel Melvin and the eldeft Mifs Pelham, and fome others, whom I cannot take the trouble of mentioning. Sir John Benyon endeavoured to make Lady Almeria fenfible of his paflion ; but the laughter-loving girl jefted at his follicitude to pleafe, and in a way even diverting to him. She is fomething of a coquet. I pity his attachment to her^—fhe will never reward it! If all were not alike happy, they at leaft feemed amuft ed, which is a great point gained where fo nuiffierous a fet is affembled. We ftopped and dined at the Caftle at Richmond—I fliall always wifti it to flourifti from the precious minutes I fpent there this day ! In the evening we went over to Hampton Court; took a curfory view of the palace, time not admitting of more; ordered tea and coffee at the Toy; and returned by water and the pale light of the moon to Windfor, the
fame
WHAT YOU WILL.
95
0
fame mufic accompanying us all the vvay
back.
On Tuefday next we are to have a mafquerade, to which upwards of three hundred people are invited, I tell Mortimer he certainly holds cpnfultatjons with for-cerers. He has fhewn me the plan of this entertainment; and the appearance there will be of enchantment, muft create many fufpicions of the fort in the bofoms of his guefts—Not fuch fort of enchantment do I mean, as Mrs. Cornelly advertifes perfons to expeX at her manfion on particular nights—but of a far fuperior order, which will have the better effeX, from none of the Itrangers being apprized of the feenes which will be exhibited to them. He manages ceedffigly well; for not the leaft buftle appears in preparations—no one is difturbed with the noife of mechanics, the hurry of domeftics, or the bufy importance of an opiniated direXor; as you and I have been harraffed to death at obferving, on like occafions, in the houfe of the Barone Della Santuville.—Had Mortimer exifted in the time of Charles the Second, he would have been a firft favourite with that diflipated
monarch
/

MASQUERADES; or.
monarch—-not that his principles have the leaft tendency to immorality ; but that he is fo aftonifhingly clever in finding out, and putting happily into execution, the moft refined diverfions. He, at the fame time, gratifies the benevolence of his heart, by giving bread to a number of artificers, that blefs the generous Lord who employs, and pays them munificently. His fortune is large, and he lives up to it in a manner that does him honour.—Lady Julia told me fhe would appear in the drefs of Per-dita: I begged leave to be her Florizel, to which, with a fmile, Ihe immediately affented.
And now I will retire to bed, where I have not been thefe two nights—yet I regret each moment that is loij in dull forgetfulnefs at Windfor. .

*
*


*



*







Mornin
Your letter is juft brought me*, which tells me that you are in London, and all
* It does not appear.
i mp a-
WHAT YOU WILL.
97
impatience to return and call Louifa yours lb you have prevailed on her to cut off a few days of the allotted time, and give you her hand the morning after your arrival in Hampfhire.------All this is well, and I re-
joice at it, though it will carry me to town a day fooner than I intended.—Bur, dear Montague, think you, that your friend in Lincoln’s-Inn-Fields will be as expeditious as you hope for ? Your impatience and his pen can keep no proportion I fear. Thofe lawyers are plaguy tedious fellows! as many an anxious lover has pronounced. We are entirely at their mercy ; and, like defpots, they exert their privilege - without remorfe. Let me know certainly how long you muft ftay in London, and I will take my meafures accordingly; but I abfolutely cannot ftir before Wednefday, coute qui coute. Make what ufe you pleafe of my houfe—think it yours, for I do. Your fervant lhall carry you this packet; fo farewel !
Osmond
VoL. III.
F

8
MASQUERADES; or
To Lady Julia Hersert^
Sommerville-Houfe, Monday Night,
Few lines I will addrefs to my Julia, juft to fay that my amiable JVlonta-ue is gone up to London, and that direX-fy on his return (which ho fuppofed would be next Thurfday) I am to part with the name of Sydney for ever!—I know not why he was fo urgent for anticipating the ceremony. The third day in the next week, which was the time allotted for its celebration, will arrive foon enough, and it was fcarcely wordi changing the day: however, his wifhing to have it fo, w'as fufficient with me to give up my own will on the occafion.
This night you are immerfed in all the
may your fate bear
woes of .Sigifrnunda— no refemblance to her wretched one! and may I fhortly embrace my fair friend the 'bride of her beloved and admirable hero!
I am a good deal indifpofed with a cold, which has caufed me to be feverifh; and,
as
3 *
\ 0 — • •
WHAT YOU WILL.
99
as it lies chiefly in my head, gives me much pain, and renders me unfit for writing.— Adieu, my fweet Julia 1 We fhall fhortly meet—what happinefs is in the thought I
%
Louisa Sydney,
To the Marquis ^/Osmond.'
o
St, James's Square.
H ! Ofmond, what pangs will your fympathizing heart experience at reading the inclofed!—Perufe it now-and then join me in bemoaning that heaven ever created fo unfortunate a being as the undone Montague I
F
T<$

toe
MASQUERADES; or

To Sir Charles Montague.

THE fubjeX of my letter will certainly be no lefs furprifing, than it will be painful to you. Sir! I'he voice of friendlhip loudly calls upon me to fave two perfons, who lhare my warmeft efteem, from the gaping gulph of mifery which lies before them, and into which they will inevitably plunge, if my extricating hand does noc preferve them.
Fluftied as you are with happinefs,—anticipating thofe ideal joys that muft never be realized,—1 take upon me the unpleafing talk of awaking you from your flattering illufions, and pointing out to you the path of honour, which 1 am fure you will purfue. Let me inform you, Sir Charles, that a connexion with Lady Louifa Sydney will be the bane of your felicity. Beautiful and virtuous as Ihe is-—does not this affertion appear paradoxical?—-Too foon will 1 clear the myftery !
Mr* Melmoth, whofe libertine charaXer

yovi
V ;v
WHAT YOU WILL.
l&i
you mufl: be acquainted with, more than two years ago, propofed to Sir George Sommerville for Lady Louifa. He was rejeXed, but had found means to make himfelf an advocate in her breaft, that almoft ftiflcd every impreffion of duty, and filenced each leafonable plea that her uncle could offer againft him. To be fhort, her meetings with Melmoth were frequent—her corrcft pondence with him more fo—-Sir George difcovered both, and vowed to Lady Louifa, that, if fhe held any further intercourfe with fo profligate a creature, he would caft her off as an alien to bis affeXion and fortune. Her gentle nature was overcome by his menaces, and fhe wrote to her lover a letter of Sir George’s diXating, which put a total end to his courtlhip. It feems Mr. Melnioth’s vindiXive fpirit to this hour refents it; and,, ignorant of Lady Louifa’s-having executed it through compuifion, vows vengence on her.
When you arrived, Sir George,forefeeing; that you meditated addreffing his Niece, partly by perfuafion, and partly by threats, made her vow to accept of your hand, if you offered it. Dependent as Lady Louifa
^ I

102 MASQUERADES; or,
is upon her uncle, what could flie do, but bend her timid inclination to the ftern yoke of his tyrannic will? She fulfilled her pro-mife, and is now the devoted viXim of an unkind uncle’s caprice. I am fatisfied he means well, and thinks to enfure her happinefs 1>y a connexion with a man of fo exalt-ed'a charaXer as yours; but, alas ! he forms an improper judgment in filch a cafe, where
the uncontrolled choice fhould
She

certainly
be permitted to determine its objeX. is at this moment ill in bed—a feverifticom-
f
plaint, that attacks her head, difcovers truths which in her fenies ftie would wifh to have buried in oblivion. Mr. Melmoth is the perfon who occupies her thoughts--fhe raves of him--and execrates the hour that was witnefs to his difmiftion. Let me afk you, Sir,—can a man of your humanity, who pofiefies fo much tendernefs for Lady Louila, wifli to entail lafting mifery on her Impoffible [ felf—Would you be fatisfied to take to your arms a woman who muft wifti that Melmoth fupplied your place-—who muft affume your name with horror—and whofe
fraudulent endearments muft be as difguft-
ful
and now demand of your-
WHAT YOU WILL.
10*3
ful to her to praXife, as they would be delightful to you to receive, were they the
genuine diXatesof her heart?------Ymu can\
fcarcely believe me juft in entertaining iuch ideas of her whom you imagined fincerely attached to you—you almoft blame me for infeXing you with them—yet I have given YOU no more than the real eharaXei Louifa after fne becomes your vvife.-Leave this purfuit, Sir Charles---
C
or
----liften to*
the admonitions of friendfhip, or you will too late repent your rafhnefs.. I am ignorant how you can break off the affair with honour to each party--your good fenfe, your
delicacy muft inftruX you. If Sir Gerorgo did but guefs that you were acquainted widi the circumftances of his Niece’s fituation, the confequences would be dreadful to her
That hint is enough to guide you.-----
The melancholy way Lady Louifa is in urged me to this ungrateful office. I am fure I have every thing to expeX from your amiable heart—therefore d-ii'pel all appre-henfion of fuffering from the confidence I repofe in you. Left my letter ffiould undergo the afperfion that anonymous epiftle^ in general deferve, I fign my name, at once
F 4	to
104 mas qu ERADES; or,
to convince you of the veracity of its contents, and of the opinion I have of your honour. I am alfo with truth, dear Sir,
Your real friend, and well-wilher,
M. Sommerville.
H	H ^
* *
*
What have I done to deferve fo cruel a difappointment!—Ungenerous Louifa !— One word—one fingle word fhould have made me ceafe to moleft you—unhappy as it muft have rendered me, I could not have condemned, but pitied you !—beautiful-adorable—artful girl!—Oh 1 my Ofmond, what feenes does recolleXion bring back to my view !—how plainly now do I perceive the difguft that laboured in her bofom !— Heaven and earth ! what an expreffion !— difgujl!—and am I then dijguftful to my Louifa ?—My Louifa!—Fond pen—whither doft thou lead me ?—I muft teach thee another language.-----
*
*
*
H-
*
* *■
I have
WHAT YOU WILT.
I have heard of this Melmoth—this in-
By heaven ! he never
I will find him, and de—
vader of my right, fhall call her his. mand fatisfaXion for the wrongs he haS' done me—my fword ftiall revenge them— and ftiew him what it is to ufurp the affections of-----------------Oh, Ofiliond I
--->N0—I will not
feek his death—ftie loves him—curfe on the fentence !—and I love her too welT, to make myfelf yet-more hateful in her eyes! ■-------'•^Fraudulent endearments F——
Melmoth in my place !"
wijh
?
Damnation !•
Ah! had fhe bat known my fentiments—had* Ihe known that without her heart her perfon could have no charms for me—much' diffimulation might have been fpared:—Let Melmoth.enjoy both—Ihe will foon repent.
----^-------------------------How well dO'
L remember, the emotions that invaded her breaft when I firft declared my paffion I She would not liften -to me, till recolleXionr: brought back the vow ffie had made Sir-George—and then what reluXance appeared* in her countenance, when ffie hefitatingly. confented to regard me as her lover !-— Fool that 1 was! I thought it- virgin ddL*
F 5.	cacw


How
jo6 M ASQU ERADESj
cacy—and idolized her for it-
to apppeafe this tempeft in my breaft f—
What meafures to purfue !-1 will not be
a tame, fawning wretch--1 have been
ufed abominably ill.—Let me think how I muft aX.
*

*




I have it-—I will immediately , order my chaife, and go down to Sommerville-Houfe —there will I reproach her in the bittereft terms for her Xtifice—her perfidy—I will bid her rife from the bed of ficknefs which my unhappy addreffes have caft her on I will affure her that fhe need never henceforward fuffer even an anxious thought to intrude from the expeXation of a connexion with me—that the difeovery of her falfehood has entirely cured me—and that fhe is at libeKy to difpofe of her hand to the man who has fo long been in poftefllon of her affeXions.---------------Oh! I
cannot be fo contemptible a villain as to* diftrefs her tender nature I---Can fhe ac-
count for the impulfes of her heart!—and. furely fire is fufficiently punifhed in being
hindered
WBAT YOU WILL*.
Kindered from following its dictates f*
am in honour bound to fcreen her from Sir
» *
George’s difpleafure, by concealing the fecret,. and taking upon myfelf the whole:^
blame of this unexpeXed breach.^—*---------*
Ofmond, had you feen with how affectionate an air (he bade me adieu,—wicffi what officious tendernefs ffie followed me to the hall door !---
ftood trembling in her eyes
The inftant 1 ftepped^
into my carriage,. I looked ac her—tears^
they feemedt tears of forrow at my departure—No doubt they fell in- abundance when the chaife drove pff,. at the idea of its being fo foon= to convey her from the neighbourhood of'
her lover!--------Perhaps Lady Sommer-
That is im-'
ville is miftaken-poffible k“Has not Louifa’s perturbed mind^ brought on an alarming illnefs ? not rave of Melmoth ?
Doesffie'
1
Lady Sommerville was aXuated merely by compaffion in the meafure ffie took—to me ffie always^ exprefled the warmeft regard for her niece-ffie felt her fufferings, and ftrove to* re-* lieve them------* ——Oh, Louifa Sydney B
F

iSi^'


MASQUERADES; or
r
/




*



* #




My fpirits are much compofed.
"What a folly it is to fink under an irremediable misfortune !----Though fhe is fa
clofely linked to my heart,, that, to feparate her from it,, muft rend the tendereft half away—it fhall be done. L will relblutely urn dertake the tafk, and be again an unfettered, indifferent fellow., T will learn to def pife all poor wretches who are under the influence of petticoated hypocritesjr—who can forget the dignity of men, and become winders, of filk,—connoiffeurs in aprons,--who receive leflbns ho.w the needle fhould be direXed to flourifh gold on cloth,- who make themfelves Ijpaniels to obtain a look, 3 fmile, from one of the deceitful fex —— Forgive me. Heaven ! fuch a tame block-bead have I been !-----but there is an everlafting end of it!-----1 have written

ta Lady Louil^, and Here tranfcribe my letter. l am pleafed with it;—-it will give ber room to fuppofe that 1 can ftifle my
,, if not immediately conquer it-and
that

WHAT YOU WILL
9^
liOgi
that I can refrain from tormenting, her withi compkintS' and reproaches.
To Lady Lou fsa Sydney.-
-A
ESC END’, Madam, to*'read the apo^ logics of a man penetrated with confufioni. andmvercome by diftrefs for having (tho’ innocently) been the caufe of your enduring fo much uneafinefs. Defpel your anxieties % and from henceforward be convinced, that a* lady, were fhe even loved by me" to diff traXion, has very little to fear from my perfecution* when once L know that her heart is biafled towards another objeX.—To yours I refer you for an explanation.
I implore your pardon for the conftraint I-have laid you under; at the fame time entreat you to remember, as a pa*liiation o£ my error, that, when I prefumed to beg the honour of your hand, provided you could give it in unifon with your affeXions, you anfwered, They were entirely difengaged.
.i
It is far from my
intention to
hint

*10 MAS' Q.cr E R A D’ ET S'J 0%
%
0
bint at making your Ladylhip fingle re^
-No—dear as it muft coft me to?
proaclr
it lhall be done without a
of you.—May you be
renounce you, murmur to—or BlelTed!—may the happy man who is to^ call you his, prove the beft and tendereft hufband 10 the world —and may you. Madam, never experience a pang from the recolleXioo of what he fuftains who gives* you up for ever
When my fpirits are calmer, I will write* to Sir George-perhaps by this conveyance ;, and make out fome plea for abandoning; Sommerville-houfe.—It will be beft that Lady Louifa Ihould take no notice of hav--ing heard from me.
I have the honour to be, with much fin**
i
Your Ladylhip’s moft- obedient
/
Humble fervant.


.'f'


HAT YOU
ILL.

•	^	t	^
Did I ever love her ardently, my mond ? I think not. I could not be lb foon compofed enough to write wkh fuch non-ehalance* I have been deceived in myi'elf all this while. Your boyifh, romantic ftulF infeXed me!'—^—^^Away then, Louifa!— root you from my bread !— “ all my fond love thus do I blow to heaven^—’tis gone I’®* Fly wkh thofe fafcinating charms to your
Melmoth’s arms------Perdition feize him!
Shall he lead her to the altar—there receive her vows of eternal fidelity and love —gaze on her form till his fenfes are ab-forbed in delight ?--1 behold his raptures*
Ihe partakes of them I damn him !.
Oh, damn;
^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^



^ ^ ^ ^
*
Friendlhip can yet impart comfort wOrtfr living for 1—I juft now obferved Stanley carry out my piftols-r~he little fufpeXs the eaufe of his unhappy mailer’s agitation
to be as terrible as it is.--1 did not re-^
cal them—heaven has renovated my foul --and I defpife fq cowardly an aX as that
oi
JI« M. A. s; Q;U E R A B E S j: o nj'
I
of fuieide. I will leave London,, and bury*
myfelf in the unfrequented haunts of EL-
wellyn..—-1 expeX to- fee you this night
—•to-morrow I will afford you all the affiftance in my power wkh your father in. the important point you have fo much at heart, and then bid a long, farewel to London.- That I may be faved the trouble ■—the agony of a perfonal relation of this, curfed event--that you may be prepared for the fituation you will find me in—I have, taken up the pen—The greateft part of the-
night has been fpent in writing
Juft as
letter was brought to me.
1 was getting into bed. Lady Sommerville’s
It banilhed fleep from my eyes,, and planted anguifh in my breaft—never will it depart from thence I •---T muft- make out a few lines to» Sir
George Sommerville, Before I feal my packet I will write,—and enclbfe you a-copy..
Farewel, my dear Ofmond ! Never may? the calamity approach your heart, that, bears a Iimilitude. to .what I.endure ! .
Charles MoNTAauE.
Wednefday ■'Morning, 4 0' Closk c
WHAT YOU WILL.
113
To Sir George Sommerville

N what light. Sir, muft lappear to you, when you have done me the favour of pe-rufing this letter!—Let me find an advocate in your fenfibility, that will induce you to compaffionate, though you muft condemn, the moft unfortunate of men. The ftings of my own confcience will but too feverely chaftife the imprudence of my conduX ! Without keeping you longer in fufpence, know that—I am unworthy of Lady Louifa
Sydney.-----What tortures do I not fuffer
in this avowal!—Oh, Sir George ! you who know her excellence-how dear Ihe is to my heart—judge of my diftrefs Laft night I was drawn into deep play at Stapleton’s—before three o’clock this morning, 1 arofe from the gaming-table, deftitute of the laft guinea I owned on earth*
•------1 will not ally that amiable woman
to poverty—my foul is above the idea-and have fworn never to be hers. I muft the kingdom direXly ; and, and as an
addU
114 MASQUERADES; or,
additional puniffiment, conceal myfelf frora> all my friends, whofe fociety would be too high a gratification for fo loft a wretch as I am to experience.
. Dear Sir George, fupply to- Lady Louir fa the part I intended to have aXed—make her blefted as mortal can be—and the fureft way to obliterate me from her heart (for I had reafon to be flattered with the
e of being loved) is to prevail on her to make choice of fome more fortunate man ; and do you fmile upon their union.. Break my fituation to Lady Louifa in the way you judge moft proper—I cannot write to her—and aflure her my whole foul is at this moment poured forth in prayers-for her.
Adieu, Sir,-—think
one
much attached to you; and pity the mi
Charles Montagus
London, Wednesday Morning
WHAT YOU WILL. 115
To Sir Charles Montague.
Windfor, Wednefday Morning
11 o'clock*
OU will be furprifed, my good friend, at receiving a letter from me, inftead
of one from Ofmond.-------Your fervant has
brought your packer, who faid it was of the utmoft confequence that it ftiould be delivered immediately into the hands of the Marquis.—I am fhocked to tell you, dear Montague, that Ofmond is by this time many miles diftant from Windfor. As matters are circumftanced, it is beft he fhould be fo.—He had a rencontre with the Duke of Suffolk about two o’clock this morning. His adverfary’s bufinefs he has done moft effeXually I believe. Suffolk, it is thought, cannot live many hours.
The unfortunate Ofmond is fled, but whither I am ignorant.—-There are many under this roof irritated beyond defcription at our unhappy friend—none more fo than Lady Pemberton and her fon.—Caroline has faL
len under her mother’s difpleafure, for the
zealous
ii6
MASQUERADES; or
zealous warmth with which Ihe undertook his and her lifter’s caufe—But what lhall I fay of the wretched Julia?—Ah, Montague, her fate is marked with woe ! and what may be the end I tremble to think. It is impofiible for me to ftir from hence at prefent, or I would be the bearer to you of thefe unwelcome tidings.
I condemn myfelf for having been inftrumental to fuch a fcene of diftrefs. My wilhes to render my friends happy, have proved the very means of infliXing mifery
on them.------Your fervant is impatient to
return—I wall not detain him—This is no place to invite you to.—In the evening I lhall fend you the particulars of this affair —I fcarcely know what I write.—Dear Sir Charles, I am.
Much yours.
Mortimer.

WHAT YOU WILL.
iijr
To Sir Charles Montague.

Windfor, Wednefday Afternoon.
I Now fit down, dear Montague, to give you the account I promifed ; firft fay-by way of preface, that, as you mufl: be acquainted with your friend’s paflion for Lady Julia, and of her reciprocal return to it, there is no occafion for my detaining you from the knowledge of the laft dreadful fcene, by a repetition of circumftances too prolix for the prefent occafion.
We gave a mafked ball lafl: night.
At ten o’clock the apartments were almoft filled; when Lady Percival, Mifs Edgcumb, and Lady Julia, entered the principal room, with the laft group of mafks that had arrived. Lady Julia was drefied as Perdita; the two others, 'as attendant fhepherdefles. I could only fufpeX the firft-raentioned to be my fifter from her fhape and air, being totally ignorant of thfe habit fhe intend-ed to affume. I will confefs I was ftruck vyith tjhe lovelinefs of her whole appearance,
and

ji8
MAS Q.U E RA D E S} or
and drew near to difcover whether it was Lady Julia. An elegant Florizel approached j he claimed her with much ardor as his partner foh the night. Fie addrefled her in the words of Shakefpeare : {he anfwered him in the fame flyle, A large circle formed around them. The roof echoed with founds of admiration. The men wiflied themfelves Florizel; the women envied Perdita. Charlotte Pelham came up to me-^“ Is not that Jhepherd, think you, Lord Ofmond?” cried (he.
“ No,” I anfwered : if you want Lord Ofmond, child, to make you the like pro-feflions that amorous fwain has done to his pretty fhepherdefs, you will find him there f* —and I pointed to Pemberton, whofe height is much about Ofmond’s, you know. He wore a domino wrapt clofe about him, which would I thought conceal the difference of perfon, even from the perfpicuoiis eye of an enamoured woman; for fuch the infernal Charlotte is—and I, aware of her paffion for the excellent Henry, guarded myfelf in my anfwer.
“ Do you know me, pray, Lord Mor-Simer demanded fhe
“ Cer
WHAT YOU WILL.
no
Certainly !” I replied : you are Lady Maria Harley. Lord Ofmond’s attachment to you is no fecret; and I am glad to find you are not indifferent to him!” I turned from her; and told Pemberton, if he wiflied for'an adventure, to pafs himfelf on the Lady I marked out to him as Lord Ofinond.
her away.
He inftantly followed, and led I met Weftbrook.

Mortimer,” faid he.
u
I fear all will not go well.
I
I am very un-
As I

dear
happy !—
paffed Suffolk, I overheard him venting paffionate exclamations to his mean follower Jack Ainfley ; and too furely he fufpeXs Ofmond to be Julia’s lover 1”
You fear without caufe, my James;” exclaimed I. “ Be not alarmed ‘—Do you put the Duke on a wrong fcenr, as I have already done Charlotte Pelham —they will be kept apart from our fhep-herd and fliepherdels, and be no further obfervers of their particular behaviour to each other, which, on my foul, it would be cruel to prevent!—Nay, we could not prevent it!—-they are loft in contemplation of each other—they are tranfported with love, and unmindful of the confequences.”
What
fio
MASQUERADES; or
99
What you advife (hall be done,” returned he: “I will watch his haughty Grace with the attention of an Argus !
In fome time after I paffed by Ofmond and his Julia. They were fequeftered from the throng, and feated in a retired corner of the room; he talking earneftly to her, in an attitude the fineft that can be imagined—I never beheld a more animated, a more impaffioned figure. She fat in a reclining pofition, giving a gready ear to all he uttered.—Montague, what a fubjeX juft then would they have made for the pencil of Sir Jofhua Reynolds!—I hovered near them, that I might feem to make a third in the converfation, if any unwelcome perfon approached.—He faw and beckoned to me.
“ Mortimer,” cried he, “ you muft affift in obtaining for me the favour I follicit.” “ Name it,” exclaimed I.
“ lam urging my angelic girl,” he replied, “ to let me poffefs a lock of thefe beautiful trefles.” “ Surely fhe does not refufe you !
Oh, fhe does indeed ! and alleges fuch reafons as never before were thought of. I fwear I cannot fee where the impropriety of
her
99

•» *•
WHAT YOU WILL:
i2i
her afTenting would reft.—I am to leave her to-morrow—perhaps for years—nay, it may be—fo cruel is flie in her inflexible refolu-
tion
that we ftiall never meet again !
a nature
and yet ftie refufes me the only comfort I could have after our feparation.” “ Infenfible Julia !—She loves you not, my dear Ofmond—ftie would fain perfuade herfelf that fhe does-, but her heart is of too frigid
—abandon her without regret!—a more md\x]gtnt fair-one—one who will not ftand upon fuch punXilious, empty forms, when the happinefs of the man fhe boafts to love is at ftake—is ready to oblige you in every wifh fhe can gratify——Charlotte Pelham would be tranfported, did you make her fuch a requeft—fhe would dare to do much more for her Ofmond Her. Ofmond, Lord Mortimer !” cried Julia.
No, my dear love,” exclaimed the
tfc
Marquis; “ fhe cannot give me that title !
Never whilft I exift lhall any woman have a right to it but my Julia; and may I be eternally abhorred by you, if for a fingle moment I forget the vows of fidelity I have made you!”
“ You do not doubt my tendernefs, my
VoL; III.	G	Lord,
*
%
122
MASQUERADES; or

Lord, though my brother does !
99
(C
He
muft doubt it,” faid I, “ unlefs you immediately give him what he requefts!” . “ Ic is not your fufpicion, I.ord Mortimer, that induces'me to confent; but that my Lord afks it as k proof of my affedion.” “ Well, dear Julia, I am pleafed to hear you fay fo,” returned I; “ and now I no longer diftruft
your
lery
love.
Retire with me into this- gal-
O
no one has entered it yet—and Of-
mond fhall take the lock from the pretty neck which it at prefent helps to adorn.”— We all three entered the gallery—they unmafked—he feated her, unrolled a curl that hung carelefsly upon her neck, and cut off part of it—He preffed it to his lips ic in his bofom.
cried he.
CC
—he put And now^ my Julia,” as I mean to depart when this
as 1 lhall
happy night’s revel breaks up-have no other opportunity, let me fnatch the prXent one of taking my leave in the manner I wiffi—our mutual friend has been already witnefs to the folemn dedication I have made you of my heart—-again, in his prefence, I fwear, by all my hopes of happinefs, that no misfortune, no diftance of place or time, ffiall ever weaken the ardour
of
w
Y O U W
123
/
of my paflion, or fhake my conftancy. You will ever be prefent to my thoughts—for you will I fupport life—and in you center
all my defires.---If my father only refufes
his fanXion to my addreffes, remember your pro nife—But, if Lady Pemberton ffiould be alike barbarous,—if my Julia perfeveres in her dreadful determination of not flying with me,—I can have no profpeX of feeing her again ffiortfr—muft not the pangs of abfence be mitigated by our correlponding ?—-You will not refufe to receive and anfwer my letters?”
What can I fay ?” replied fhe—
I will conffder of ir. If refleXion difcovers any error in my doing fo, I will inform you of it, in my return to your firft letter, which will acquaint me more fully how we are to conduX ourfelves.-----Though that inter-
courfe fhould be fuppreflfed, never doubt my attachment—and that I will fooner die, my Lord, than ceafe to love you with the utmoft tendernefs.” “ I am but half fatisfied, dear Julia I” he cried. “ However, we will talk further of this in the courfe of
\
CC
CC
But
the night
and I will not lofe the precious
He em-
minute of bidding you adieu.
G a
9%
braced
124
MASQUERADES; or
braced her two or three times—(he wept be was himfelf equally affeXed. I heard perfons approaching the gallery—I advifed
them to put on their maflcs haftily, and
They obeyed, and
The unfor-
ieave the apartment.
we returned to the company, tunate couple rejoined the dance. I fought out Weftbrook, and alked him whether his -apprehenfions were diflipated ^ “ No, faith,” cried he; “ I have followed Suffolk with unwearied affiduity, and perceive there are negotiations pafling between him and Charlotte Pelham. I overheard her fay, Tour Grace may he affured that they are together, and that Lord Mortimer is in the fecret. She then fpoke fo low, that I could only catch a word here and there. At length he exclaimed, “ By Heaven, I will be fatisfied ! —The artful, diffembling Ofmond lhall Hand confefied in open day-light a villain, —and learn that I will not be injured with
impunity.”....I then fent Emily Edgcumb
to interrupt their converfation—fhe has never fince left his fide, nor do I chufe to be very diftant from them, left, provoked as he muft be at her detaining him from the fearch he wifhes to make, his violent temper
WHAT YOU WILL.
12?
per fhould break forth towards her in terms not confonant with politenefs—and, to fay a truth, I Ihould not be forry for a flight motive to revenge on him the mifery he is the occafion of to Ofmond.” I implored Weftbrook, for Lady Mortimer’s and my fake, to avoid any quarrel with him; and reprefented the difagreeable circumfiances which muft attend a thing of the fort happening amongft our guefts. I fiid the Duke’s fufpicions were of litttle confequence, as Ofmond would in a few hours leave Windfor, and the affair muft fo foon become public ;—^that to keep them afunder for the night was the only matter to be attended to. “
he will be outrageous.
But when every-one unmafits, and he finds that the Marquis and Julia have really been together all the evening,
—I am ignorant of any method that could be ufed to hinder bad effeXs—Lady Mortimer, to prevent intruders, mentioned, in her cards of invitation, that every-one was to throw afide their mafk at fupper—as it turns out, it was devilifhly unlucky 1—Were I to afk Ofmond to change his drefs, I muft tell him my reafon ; and that would at once deter-
G
3
mine
126 MASQUERADES; or
mine him not to- comply, done i‘"	“
What is to be
/
do not know however, we As we parted
On my
“ Upon my foul 1 your apprehenfion is juft : muft leave ail to fortune !”-Pemberton took me by the arm : word,” cried he, “ I never had fuch ftrong love made to me by any woman, as by Charlotte Pelham. She is a downright Eloifa ! She told me Ihe would convince me of the fcrvidity of her paffion, by offering to become mine on my own conditions—that ffie would refign the form of marriage to thofe who knew not what it wa,s to love with the tranfport that ffie did. She reproached me for giving back her letter, and denying to beftow on her the leaft mark of tendernefs—and added that ffie had difcovered, it. was neither Henrietta March-
er Maria Harley, I died for—but
She advifed me
monf,
Julia Herbert. She advifed me to drop that purfuit, and be kind to her wiffies, threatening elfe to lay a fcene of horror and confufion. What think you, Mortimer?
The amorous Jezebel muft have caufe for this conjeXure—Is Ofmond attached to Julia ?”	“ A jealous woman’s aflertion,
replied I> “ I ffiould never pin my faith
upon
99
55 a
I

the knovvledge of-
WHAT YOU WILL. 127
upon—But what anfwer made you? affured her, that, though fhe had miftaken me for another, fhe fhould find - me not undefervins of the fecret I had got to
—I lamented the hard man fire efteumed; and advifed her, as a friend, not to let her attachment carry her fo far as to breath in his ear an offer like the one that, in an unguarded moment,, I heard efcape her lips,——She feemed frightened; knd,
“ Lord Pemberton’s voice!’*
heart
o
the
e
exclaiming
flew from me.---If Ofmond loves Julia,
I can well account for her cruelty to Suffolk ! Do you believe that he does ?” “ It is evident that ycu believe fo.—But fhould it
’ “ You
are wrong;
1 admire and regard him
be the cafe, you cannot be forry !” “
I fhould be extremely forry.
; but his father
would difapprove of the alliance—and my
fifter fhall enter into no conneXipn, where
¥
every part of the lover’s family do not zea-loufiy wifli for the union.—Have we not been told of the farcaftic manner in which Weftmorland fpeaks of us ?—But, putting that out of the cafe, there are deformities in his charader of fo atrocious a die, as
G 4	muft
128
MASQUERADES; or
\
muft make,us abhor the thought of feeing a fifter become his daughter.” “ Pemberton, your terms are too ftrong !—Deformities of fo atrocious a die!"—“ I know not what you may do ; but I clafs under thofe words, his having broken the heart of the moft amiable, the moft beautiful woman that it is faid Europe ever produced, who was forced by relentlefs parents to give him
her hand—his having”'----“ Well, well!
we need enter into no difcuffion of his faults let his confcience anfwer them. Bur, though you may be juftly prejudiced againft the Duke, certainly your good fenfe will not allow you to be fo againft Ofmond ! It would be very illiberal to inflid on a fon an undcferved mifery, becaufe his father is a v/retch ! You know Ofmond to be altogether as amiable as Weftmorland is the reverfe--fuppofe Julia loves him!” “ How!” ‘ Nay, I only make the fuppofition !” “ Then hear me—were fhe to love him to diftradion—never-never would I give her to him. Suffolk is the man I have, as well as her mother, deftined her for—but, if flie chufes to bid us all defiance, and enter into a family that will defpife her, becaufe fhe
has
I ibori
WHAT YOU WILL. 129
has not fortune fuitabk to its avaricious
/	s
willies—1 will no more behold her, or think
mvfrlf hcT brother.”---1 was exceedingly
fhocked—tie left me, and my fird thought was, how LO fupply that unjuft deficiency of iortune, which would, I feared, be thsk caoie of poor ]ulia’s unhappinefs, ftruck upon a plan, and refolved to pro^ pofe it when matters were riper.
As we fat down to fupper, the rule was obferved—evety one took off their mafk, I fiw Suffolk, the inllantthat Ofmond dropped his, go up and -whifper fomething i« his ear. I'he other bowed, and anfwered with a fmile, “ Your Grace is very much in the right f you may depend it fhall be as you defire,” I could not fufped, from the countenance of either, that a challenge was iven and imagined that Suffolk had difr carded nis doubts.
The iil-f lied pair feemed infpired with 3 defire of making the mofl of the tranfient
9
blifs they then erjoyed—
Ofmond forgot ta
the
preferve appearaimes, and Julia was portrait of felicity. Pleafure fparkled irs their eyes—love glowed on their cheeks and fmiles revelled on their lips. We
G 5
y V
130 ' MASQUERADES; or,
from table, and after a fhort while T miffed Ofmond, and faw Julia walking arm in arm with Mifs Edgcumb, Budenall and
99
“ He left us a fhe replied;

Frederic Montague with tl of my fifter for her partner quarter of an hour ago “ and faid he would return immediately.
■----1 was alarmed; and, without divulg-
ing it, quitted them to go in queft of the Marquis. - I traverfed many apartments without difcovering him;—at length the found of voices brought me-to a room, wherein I found Suffolk, Ofmond, Sit James Weftbrook, and Jack Ainfley. Suffolk was making furious paffes at our friend, who did little more than defend himfelf; and, before I had time to reach the fpot where they fought, Suffolk, in the violence of his wrath, aiming to put a period to the life of his adverfary, ruflied on the fword of Ofmond, which entered his right fide. He fell, and called for Lord Pemberton. The noife of the rencontre reached the company, and in a minute the apartment was filled with gentlemen. Of-
mond’s fituation was diftreffing
he gave
the Duke ail poffible affiftance—he lamented
w

YOU W
iir
ed Suffolk’s rafhnefs-—and declared he was forry for the provocation his Grace had obliged .him to refent. The Duke received his condefcending words as infults offered him, and entreated that his lafl moments might not be difturbed by the fight of an exulting happy rival, whom to his lateft breath he muft hate and envy. The Marquis affured him, that he injured his feelings in thinking him happy, when he beheld the fituation his unfortunate hand had reduced him to; that he flattered himfelf with hopes of his recovery, and, though relunXantly, would leave his Grace till he judged more kindly of him—He retired— a furgeon appeared, and, whilft he was employed about Suffolk, I took Weftbrook afide, and enquired of him the particulars of the affair—In the following words he gave them :
“ I overheard Suffolk fay to Ofmond, juft as they were preparing to fit down to fupper, “ I am no longer to be deceived, my Lord; you are the man who feduces from me Lady Julia’s affedions^—I expeX you will meet me two hours hence in the
Artois-room
1 infift upon it!
G 6
1 fhall carry
132
MASQUERADES; or
ry my fword thither fame
you muft do the
and give me the fatisfaXion I require By Heaven and Earth I will no longer be a dupe!” The Marquis anfwered “ Your Grace is right—depend it ftiall be as you defire.” I went up to Ofmond, and told him I had been attentive to the Duke’s fpeech, and his reply—that it was incumbent upon me to make both known, and prevent their meeting. “ Dear Weftbrook,” cried he, “ it is mere nonfenfe !— For the fake of your charming coufin, I will not fight him, if I can confiftently with honour help it—But if the thing muft happen, .why not as well prefently as at another time -He is very arrogant—nay impertinent—and I fhould not be averfe to the tafk of humbling him a little,—Yet I once more fwear to you, that, as far as a man of courage can go, I will, to avoid it; and for this reafon, that I know what pangs a duel on her account will give this fair creature,” looking at Jufia. “ She muft not have an idea of the appointment
fable of if,
I conjure you by our friendfhip.” “
Ikid I. “ If
he has juft made—fay not a
you let me accompany you r
Suffolk
w
YOU W
^33
Suffolk is infoient, by all that is good I
i
will nut afk you to with-hold your as 'n Grant me but this.” “ Be it fo 1”
n
he re-
plied ; “ and I am the be’-'er pleafed, becaufe you will convince Juiic, that nothin but ftrong neceflity could urge the combat, if a combat does er lue.” I left him, and, as foon as the Duke difappeaied, he came and took me by the arm--------
“ Weftbrook,” cried he, “ I am authorized to carry a friend with me; for Jack Ainfley has attended Suffolk out,” d'he gentlemen were in the apartment of aflig-nation when we entered.
4tf
I am here, my Lord Duke,” faid the
Marq
tfc
to know your Grace’s will ?
99
99
it is already known to you, my Lord, returned Suffolk : “ one of us muft drop— our fwords fhall decide which.”
“ Mine fhall not quit its fcabbard, until I am informed why it fhould encounter yours,” cried Ofmond.
“ Can you, my Lord,” replied the Duke prefume to carry diflimulation fo far ? Have you not dared, in a fecrer manner in violation to all lawsof honour—r-have you
BOt dared to rob me of the heart of Lady

134 MASQUERADES; or,
Julia Herbert ? To throw a veil over the eyes of her family—to fcreen yourfelf from my wrath, you have, with vile meannefs, reported, that your hand is deftined for another.”
You know but little of me, my Lord ! —To fcreen myfelf from your wrath I lured, I hold it in contempt. Never was the heart of Ofmond appalled by any being that wears a weapon mighty Suffolk
be af-
no, not even by the
“ You are merry. Lord Ofmond. Flufh-ed with hope of calling her yours whom I have long loved, you judge it beneath you even to affume a gravity proper for this fubjeX ; but your gaiety will not laft, truft me. Confefs direXly—are you not the lover of Lady Julia ?”
“ I pray you how long is it fince you have arrogated the privilege of enquiring into the ftate of my^heart ? Liften, my Lord
were
I indifferent to Lady Julia, I fliould chufe to punifh your turbulent curiofity by abfolutely refufing to fatisfy it: but, as I am not folicitous to blind her family, nor to fcreen myfelf from your terrific wrath, I will profefs, with the utmoft fincerity, to
you
WHAT YOU WILL.

you and all the world, that I do love her beyond every-thing that is held moft dear —I adored her before your Grace knew her ; and fhall continue to do fo long—very long, after your acquaintance with her ceafes.”
“ Damnation !—dare you fpeak thus to Suffolk!”
“ Indeed, I dare-—or to a more tremcn-
39
C4
44
5>
dous man—and yet have no ague fir.
Another word before we engage. Lord Ofmond—Have you not declared your attachment to her ?—Does Ihe not confent to reward it ?” and he trembled with pafiion.
Thofe quellions might come properly from her brother : from your Grace they are unneceffary—nor will 1 refolve them.
“ Methinks, Lord Ofmond,” faid Jack Ainfley, “ the leaft you can do, is to put out of fufpenfe an unhappy lover.
“ 1 pity all unhappy lovers, Sir-—perhaps I am one myfelf !--But I ffiall make no further refponfes to the Duke’s interrogations.
O
93
99
“ You need not, Ofmond,” replied his Grace. “ I am well convinced that Lady Julia has eleXed you the partner of her fate —but my arm fliall prevent it.”
44
With
336 MAS Q U ERADESj o r
\
“ Without fearing your wrath, my Lord, I will decline this combat—at leaft for th
w
prefent. I owe Lord and Lady Mortimer too much refpeX to make their houfe the fcene of broils and bloodftied—another time may fettle the matter as well—I do not wifh to plunge you into eternity,—Prithee live, and feek fome kinder miftrefs !”
“ And do you add rallery to infolence ? You have got the cant of prieftcraft. It is not long, poor boy ! fince your father dif-
leftbns to get by heart
carded the parfon who fet you fermons as
—I fuppofe ^ye alfo chaunted pfalms together as ye travelled. You have an excellent voice, and it ought never to be tuned to profaner notes.—Did he not often warn you to beware of the allurements of women ? Pity you did not obferve his admonitions on that head as ftriXly as you feem inclined to follow hk doXrine in refpeX of fighting •
“ It is you, my Lord, who are now jocular; and’faith I am glad ofic. In fpite of your farcafm, I own that I am no friend to duelling ; and certainly have imbibed fo much morality as to believe that the re-fieXion of being a murderer muft be a terrible one,”
“ Oh I
W 00	^
99
WHAT YOU WILL.
137
“ Oh ! this is paft jefting.—I did imagine that your aftoniffiing compofure fprang from fomething not right, and would at laft dwindle into, mere pufillanimity. By Heaven, the advice you gave fliall be re-
—-Julia Herbert fhall be metamorphofed into that kind miftrefs you bade me
feek-----Her difguft to you henceforward
will work the change, and be the confequence cf fuch palpable cowardice. I will exercife this weapon—
venged !
at
—not in pointing it your breaft—but in giving you the chaftifement we infliX on thofe beneath us. Then fliall my Julia be informed what a valiant protedor flie had erroneoufly made choice of,—thou deceitful, cowardly boy!”—A little before he ended his fpeech, the Marquis unfheathed his fword ; and as the Duke was advancing to execute his curfed threat, he exclaimed,
“ Dare not, for your foul, Suffolk, attempt it—or, by that Heaven you named, 1 will inftantly lay you a corpfe at my feet I” The Duke, as it were, mechanically retreated a few paces back—There was an
energy in Ofmond’s voice
a majefty in his
de-
138
QU
OR-
deportment, fufficient to ftrike awe into
the moft intrepid by-ftander.
“ Now, Weftbrook,” cried he, “ I call on you to fay, whether I have not, to the utmoft of my power, evaded a rencontre ? Were I, after this infolence, to with-hold my arm, 1 ffiould merit the brutal difgrace he has dared even to menace Ofmond with. —Still I wiffi not,” turning to the Duke, “ to take your life—Be more compofed, or you lofe all chance of ever again breathing an affront towards any man.
99
They en-
gaged, and juft as their duel approached the period, you entered.”
I chid Weftbrook for not having informed me of the appointment: he vindicated himfelf, and rejoiced moft fincerely that the Marquis was not in the Duke’s condition.
When Suffolk was put to bed, and all the company that was invited to this unlucky entertainment had departed (which happened very foon after the fray became public), we went to the Ladies—The firft objeX that ftruck my eyes was Charlotte Pelham on her knees to Lady Mortimer. I approached my wife, and alked the caufe.
“I really
/
WHAT Y OU WILL. 139
‘'I really know not,” ffie anfwered, “ why ffie ffiould be in that pofition, unlefs ffie affumes it with a defign to keep me from my mother, whom ffie is afraid I ffiall prevail on to be reconciled to the Marquis—But, if my fufpicion injures her, ffie muft be dif-traXed; for ffie calls on me to implore Lord Ofmond to pity, and not abandon her.—She it was who firft gave intelligence of the duel—alarmed Julia in a cruel manner—and has by fome means violently irritated my mother againft her. Raife her, my Lord, and perfuade her to difgrace her fex no further—I muft give my attention to perfons for whom I am nearly concerned. She paffed on to the upper end of the room; and, when I had feated the mifehievous girl, and given her to the care of fome female domeftics, I followed Caroline to the place where Lady Pemberton and the reft were aflembled. I perceived that her Ladyfhip was violently agitated. The Duke of Northington fat near her, to whom ffie addrefled her converfation in a low voice. Ofmond was walking backwards and for-
-his
39
wards the apartment with hafty fteps— arms folded—his countenance pale, and
marked
140 MAS QU ERADES; or,
marked with defpair and horror. Julia was feated in a remote corner of the room: Lady Caroline Denley’s arms were thrown around her, and on her compaffionate bo-fom refted the beautiful face of the affiift-ed creature, whilft Emily Edgcumb held one of her hands, which fhe bathed with tears. I approached Lady Pemberton, and begged to know why fhe fhould be fo exceedingly affeXed at a cataftrophe which Suffolk brought upon himfelf, and but too well merited ?	“ What gives me moft
wretchednefs at prefent, my Lord,” cried fhe, “ is finding that Julia, whom I always thought the moft amiable of mortals, has thrown afide duty and difcretion—fhe has, by giving clandeftine encouragement to a man I will have no alliance with, rendered herfelf worthy only of contempt—fhe has caufed him to imbrue his hands in the blood of the admirable Suffolk •, an objeX beloved by her brother and me—the hufband, Ihe well knew, we had allotted for her.”
“ How injurioufiy.does your Ladyfhip fpeak of her !—Ah, Madam, fhe is the very amiable being you always thought her 1 -—On my foul, ike was ignorant of the
quarrel
WHAT YOU WILL.
141
quarrel—Suffolk has been wholly to blame on the occafion—he behaved like a ruffian, and gave fuch provocation, as was inconfiftent vvith a man of honour not to refent.” Suppofing fhe was ignorant that a fray would enfue between the Duke and her favourite Ofmond, can you, my Lord, exculpate her for liftening to the love he uttered without my fanXion ?—It is impoffible !—Say no more-—Julia has deceived
—I left Caroline to ulead her
me.
fifter’s caufe with the angry mother, and went to Julia. I took the hand that Mifs Edgcumb held; 1 befought her to look up —to fpeak to me; and faid fomething of comfort.—She raifed her head—“ Ah, my brother !” cried fhe, “ what comfort can you afford me ? I have loft every profpeX of it entirely !—my mother is offended—ffie will never pardon me !”	“ Then ffie muft
be the moft unreafonable of women! Do not be uneafy; this filly affair will be of no confequence—you ffiall yet be happy with, your Ofmond.” “ Call him not mine—he is guilty—he has fent an unprepared creature to anfwer at the tribunal of juftice for crimes imthought of—Ah, my Lord, in how culpable
142
M A S QQ E R A D E S i or
J
pable a light has he been painted to me!” “ Perdition feize the wretch who was fo officious ! For God’s fake, my deareft Julia, do not fuppofe him guilty—He was urged to the defence he made by the moft illiberal language that ever tongue uttered—On your account he refrained from drawing, till his* gallant fpirit could bear no more infuit with impunity—Suffolk yet lives ; but, was it otherwife, the Marquis could not be arraigned, fince the Duke, In aiming to put a period to the life of his rival, loft his own, though warned againft the danger by his generous antagonift.—If you have any charity in your nature, any love for Ofmond, I conjure you not to add to his diftrefs by thinking unworthily of him 1—At a leifure moment you (hall hear the whole; in the mean while, take it upon my honour
that he is innocent.”----“ Ah, my poor
Ofmond!” fhe exclaimed, and again funk
upon Lady Cfroline Denley’s bofom.’.....
I went to the Marquis : “ How is it, my beft friend ?” demanded I. He anfwered, “ It is with me, as with a man plunging into hell, deftitute of hope, and tailing the
-Oh! would
beginning torments of the damned

WHAT YOU WILL. 143
would to God I had received the. fatal thruft in Suffolk’s ftead !

99
“ Exert your fortitude, my dear Ofmond,” cried I; “ make one effort. I will accompany you to Lady Pemberton—the ftorm of paflion in her breaft fhall be appeafed—-we will af-fail her with prayers—The Duke of North-ington’s influence muft gain her to our party —he is fond of Julia, and will fupplicate in her caufe—She will confent, and yield my fifter to your arms.
“ I have already tried to vindicate my conduX,” returned he; “ fhe will not hear me—Julia has alfo caft me off, and now hates me for deftroying the infoient fellow who urged the combat.”
“ Ah, Ofmond, pity the unhappy girl! —If fhe has fhewn you difpleafure, know that it was becaufe fome poifonous tongue accufed you of being the foie aggreffor. Julia is undeceived, and ready to be yours, if Lady Pemberton acquiefces. To her you fhall again pour forth entreaties—you have many advocates !”—He advanced towards her Ladyfhip, and, throwing himfelf on one knee, grafped her hand—he entreated
t
144 mas qu ERADES; or,
treated her to forgive him for what, if he had not aXed, fhe mull have defpifed him. He begged her to refleX on the mifery that would attend her daughter in a union with one whom fhe was averfe to. He defcribed his paffion for Julia in the livelieft colours, and began from its commencement at the convent. He took upon himfelf the whole blame of her having concealed his declaration of it, and gave his reafons. He painted his father’s avaricious turn of mind, which would not be fatisfied with lefs fortune than Lady Henrietta’s——* his apprehenfion of Lady Pemberton’s contemning him as a match for Julia, v»?hen put in comparifon with the more eligible Suffolk—yet he implored her to confider, that a hoard of treafure could not give relief to a wounded heart—and that Lady Julia, whofe foul was fenfible, and moft truly delicate, would feel a load of mifery under a load of jewels, in the idea of her wearing them at the expence of a man fhe hated. He faid, a variety of fuperb dwellings—a number of fplendid carriages,—
and a throng of tinfell’d attendants, might
gratify
WHAT YOU WILL.
HS
gratify the ambition of a lefs refined woman than Lady Julia—but that he was enough acquainted with her excellence, to pronounce, that, though furrounded by the moft gaudy pageantry, peace would be a ftranger to her breaft; and, he was well convinced, (he would look forward with impatience to her gaining pofiTeflion of that little fpace ,of earth, where her lovely form would lie at reft, till the laft trumpet called it forth.-——I cannot give you half the particulars of his difcourfe; but he fpoke in fo amiable, fo touching a manner, that Lady Pemberton liftened attentively, and viewed him with complacency. I thought the moment not unfavourable; and, flying towards Julia, I led her trembling to the fpot where her lover fuppliantly' knelt—there we both afiTumed his attitude—Ofmond caught her hand, and conjured Lady Pemberton to beftow it on him—
—Julia befought her for-I entreated her to make them both happy. Caroline was not an idle
givenefs
and
fpeXatrefs
Weftbrook, Lady Caroline
Denley, Emily Edgcumb, and even Budenall, joined their voices in my fupplication. The Duke of Northington, contrary to my yoL.lII.	H	’hopes.
146
MASQUERADES; or
hopes, was filent; but I believe we Ihould have fucceeded, had not the incenfed Pemberton entered at the inftant. He came from Suffolk’s apartment, full of refent-
ment towards Julit towards Ofmond. exclaimed, “
indignation and hatred As he drew near, he Your Ladyfhip is furrounded by petitioners—you muft be pained—for what is more irkfome than to be implored a favour that cannot poflibly be granted ? 1 will free you, at leaft, from one of them
“ In-
^uman brother!
s
s he carried
and he fnatched up Julia in his arms;
” fhe cried, her off, “ will you not let me obtain my mother’s pardon ?” “ To-morrow you will have leifure enough for it,” he anfwered. He defired his wife and Almeria to fee her
99
conveyed to her chamber. “ Pemberton, faid Ofmond, “ why is fo much barbarity cxerdfed on fo gentle an objeX ?—Inhuman brother indeed I” “ If your Lordfhip chufes a tilting-bout with me alfo, you will find me much at your fervice—I am fomewhat of a fwordfman, though not near fo expert a one as the Lord Ofmond ; yet fortune may for once be propitious, and render me more fucccfsful than Suffolk was—if not,
1 fhall
WHAT YOU WILL.
H7
I fliall be contented to die in revenging the caufe of my friend.”
“ My Lord,” exclaimed the Marquis, never will I raife my arm againft Lady
> brother—fo far from menacing, be-
Julia’s brother-hold me an humble
fuppliant—to
you.
Lord Pemberton! am I a fuppliant—Give
to one who
your
fifter
Julia
confiders the promotion of her happinefs as
—to a man whofe whole life
how to
CC
his chief good
Ihall be employed in ftudying make her blefled—who will with
“ by Heaven you fliall not call her yours—at leaft with my confent. The filly girl would be equally averfe to the union, did flie but know that the fcantinefs of her fortune, after it
No,” replied the other;
be
had taken place, would caufe her to fpurned at by the Duke of Weftmorland Your notions, I believe, are fomething more
ftiir------« I ■' ■
generous
_	will interrupt
you in turn, Pemberton,” cried I: “ I have a propofal to offer, which muft render all matters eafy. It is no fecret that you are tied down, and cannot make as ampie provifion for your fifters, as your wifhes would prompt you to do—1 am under no fuch
H 2
ii8 MASQUERADES; or
3	«•
tyrannic reftridtion—confent to her marriage with the Marquis, and, to fatisfy his father, I will this inftant bind myfelf to pay on the joyful day that fees them united, into Ofmond’s hands, the ten thoufand pounds 1 received with Caroline, and to that fum rwill add ten thoufand pounds.” “ It lhall not ftop there, my dear Mortimer,” faid Weftbrook: “ in the fame hour, Ofmond fliall have from me ten thoufand pounds more. My coufin’s happinefs is at ftake, and we can well afford it. The Duke can then have no wifh but for the connec-
- r
tion—By ail that is facred, Pemberton, they muft not be fevered !”
Ofmond Clafped his hands—“ My generous friends, what acknowledgments can I exprefs, that will fhew the gratitude of my heart!—-Never were there greater proofs of regard!—But it mufl: noc be—I cannot confent to fo kind a propofal.—If Lord Pemberton will do me the honour of beftowing his lovely filler on me, my father Ihall never approach her. My circumftances, independent of him, are certainly very circuiiifcribed; yet 1 may fafely aver,
they will fatisfy my Julia. RefleX a little,
my
WHAT YOU WILL.
\
149
19
my Lord, and your objeXions may fubfide Dear Lady Pemberton, what do you fay ? She looked at her fon, and, perceiving in his countenance averfion to the noble youth, anfwered, “ I recommend to your Lordfhip to drop the affair—it is impofiible for me ever to comply !”—“ I have already pronounced my determination,” cried Pemberton *, “ and nothing fhall make-me alter it.”---“ Oh, that my poor father was
alive 1” exclaimed Caroline. “ And whar if he was ?” demanded her brother. “ Why then he would more mildly ufe that authority as a parent, which you have arrogated to yourfelf as a brother.” He was highly difpleafed. “ I fee the confquences,” cried Lady Pemberton, “ that will happen from this girj’s imprudence—my family, that has hitherto been one of harmony, will get into parties—nothing but diffentions fhall I be witnefs of.”
4C
When your Ladyfhip,” replied Caroline, “ centers you affeXion folely in your fon,- and, to pleafe his unjuft caprices, will devote your daughters to wretchednefs, it muft be fo.—Great God be praifed, that I got out of his power before this change,
H 3	tiiis
150 MASQUERADES; or,
this monftrous change in his difpofition hap pened !—How comes it, Pemberton? You were once foft, and benevolent—has your wife ufed any arts proper for the end to fet you at variance with your fifters?— Poor man ! if fo, I pity you.” The Duke of Northington faid fomething in vindication of his abfent daughter, and was about to reprove her, when (he interrupted him “ I entreat your Grace’s pardon—but this is no time for leXures foreign to the prefent
—You have
been very filent, my
If
purpofe
Lord, on the fubjeX near our hearts, you join not in our fupplication, pray create no greater obftacles to its fuccefs!”—I never faw any one look more vexed and mortified than Pemberton did at the conclufion of the fpeech fhe addrefifed to him.—■ She turned to her mother, with a fweet en-thufiafm fell at her feet, clafped her knees, and, raifing up her eyes, exclaimed, “ Dear Madam, be ftill our parent—fuffer not that feeling, tender heart of yours to be warped by the example of others inhumanity—fuffer it to plead in our behalf !—Make our amiable Julia bleffed, and you will beftow
felicity unfpeakable on Almeria, my hufband.
WHAT YOU WILL.
151
band, Weftbrook,- and your Caroline Think, my mother, how many will become unhappy, if the moody humour of your
fon is to be gratified!-----My generous
Mortimer, my kind coufin, have found an expedient that will remove all difficulties----As you wifh not to behold
my poor Julia an objeX of compaflion, I conjure you to grant me the favour I alk ! —Say that you do, and let me run to rejoice her with the tidings !’* “ Rife, Lady Mortimer,” fhe coldly replied: “ I am not to be diXated to—Shall I reward the man who deprives of life a perfon whom I warmly regard; and that, the minute after he has committed the crime—even now when juftice fliould be in purfuit of him 1—Affure yourfelf,, I will not be fo weak.—You have fpoken too freely to me •, I fhall not readily pardon it.” She arofe and left the room. Caroline and Pemberton were warm in altercation, till Ofmond, begged he might no longer give rife to it. He defired Pemberton to look on him as his prifoner; the other refufed it, and abruptly quitted him. The miferable Ofmond threw himfelf on the floor, and feemed totally infenfible to all
H 4	around
152
MASQUERADES; or
y
around him. Lady Mortimer retired to Julia’s apartment, to obferve how fhe was fituated, after promifing me, that, if fhe was capable of it, fhe would prevail on her to write him a line of tendernefs, and beg of him to avoid being taken by thofe who would endeavour to revenge on him the Duke’s fate. I went to my wretched friend, whom Budenall and Montague were trying to awaken from the trance into which he had fallen. 1 aflifted, but no arts we could life had any effeX. At length. Lady Mortimer returned; and, as fhe approached him, he fixed his eyes on her with eagernefs—called her his Julia.—and befought her to fly with him direXly. She wept bitterly at the melancholy condition (he faw him in—he perceived it, and exclaimed, “ Is this propofal ever ro be the caufe of tears ?—Ah, my dear love, you know their powder!—I cannot bear to fee you affliXed —•Come, no more, my Julia!—we will look forward to brighter profpeXs. When Lady Pemberton and the Duke fent to reward our love, where fhall we fpend the firft fortnight of our marriage! —My father will expeX us to vifit him in
Hamp-
con-

WHAT YOU WILL.
/ *
HampfLire-—you will prefer pafTing it ac yoiif mother’s—you fhall be gratified-—
Lady Pemberton muft receive us------Or
ftay—fuppofe we fettle it thus—Mortimer and Caroline will be anxious to have us<
---What ftiill
with them till your houfe in-
weeping, my deareft Julia !—Ah, how you make me fuffer 1” He paufed for fome minutes; then fuddenly ftarting on his elbow, again went on : “ Faith we are thankful to Weftbrook for this fweet opportunity—no, to Mortimer,.! believe-—! know not which—my ideas- are confufed—Suffolk, pufhed hard to have my beloved in his. chaife—How curfed fall the fellows drive they will too foon put an end to the felicity-' I enjoy 1^—Nay, I will no more be reproved. —one kifs—^^one dear kifs!—why do 'yous chide me—this is prudery, fweet girl--;-Ah I they already ftop, my Julia !--Ave muff: part—oh mifery!” He grew odtragebus,, and uttered the moft incoherent madnefs* imaginable. Frederick Montague propofedi that a furgeon fliould take fome blood, from; his arm :• with difficulty he bri^afhed a vein^, and, after the lofs of many ounces,,, he came himfelf. Ic was then ftrongly moved;
He
1. >
154
MASQUERADES; or
that he fhould direXly leave Windfor, let out for one of the neareft ports, and from thence embark for France, where he fhould remain till the affair was in fome meafure hulhed. He was totally averfe to it—afked what bufinefs he had with life ? and whether it would not be better that he fhould yield it up to the law, than to be expiring for years, harraffed with anguifh excruciating, and beyond a martyr’s fuffering ?” “ How equal we are,” cried I, “ to any calamity, whilft we have no dread of its reaching us 1 Did I not, Ofmond, hear you, a few hours ago, fwear to Julia, that no misfortune Ihould fhake your conftancy--that for her
“ You put a
you would fupport life ?
wrong conftruXion on my words-1 alluded to my attachment—To live divefted of hope, of ever again beholding her, is above mortal -ability.” “ Read there, my good
friend,” cried Lady Mortimer, prefenting him with a billet, “ and then judge if you are at liberty to deftroy an exiftence on which another depends.” The writing had more effeX on him than would the pleading of an hundred tongues, though each was fuperior to a Cicerok. Weftbrook,
who
w
YOU W
0
who had withdrawn to prepare himfelf, and to order a carriage,^entered, and propofed that Lord Ofmond fhould change his drefs,,
and fet out immediately—'He hefitated-— for the fifth or fixth time perufed his billet: —‘kiffed it as> often—whifpered fomething to Caroline—and then; turning to us, faid, he was ready to do whatever his excellent: friends recommended. “ Budenall,” cried he, “
“ though my rival, you have compaffion on my fufferings—you have long difcovered my affeXion for Lady Julia—ysour difinterefted, generous foul never laid one barrier in my way, or uttered a fufpicior^ to any one— Let me prefume to afk. a. continuance of your regard !”	“ If you fox-
get, my Lord,”'replied Budenall, “ /never can, the obligation I am under to* you—-Mortimer, Montague, have you not often
heard me declare, that to the Marquis I. arn indebted for preferving my life ?—Was* it noc for him, I Ihould One night, at Florence have fallen a viXim to two affaftins,, who, ic afterwards appeared, miftook me for Lord Rainsford—I was nearly overpowered by themj when Ofmond, chancing: to* pals that way, diftinguifhed the. voice of
H 6	a per**
156 MASQUERADES; or,
a perfon calling for help—He came to my refcue, defperately wounded one of the viK lains, and put the other to flight—yet this aXion he treats as of no confequence—he calls me difinterefted—-generous.—Ah, my God! could I do too much to make him happy !—Believe me, my dear Ofmond, I ceafed to be your competitor from the moment I perceived what bent your inclinations had taken—I efteemed, I admired your virtues from my earlieft acquaintance with you—you alone I think deferving of the amiable woman we both prefer—-and to you alone would I ever have refigned her,.
ratitude entirely out of the quef-
life
putting tion.
Look on me during
as* your
friend—a fympathizing one I fhall ever be —-Would it were in my power to prevail cn Lady Julia to be the companion of your prefent flight !--but perhaps it is beft that it fhould not be fo—Keep up your fpirits--be careful of yourfelf as you value her happinefs—and reft aflured, that you will yet. be happy in the pofTeflion cf her—If I. can in any fhape whatever be of ufe to you, do me the pleafure of commanding mco” mond embraced and thanked him ; then
3

!►
WHAT YOU WILL.
U7
retired to change his drefs, and give fome orders to Souville. Weftbrook and Montague determined to accompany him. There was more of caution in cur Urging Ofmond’s abfence, than any abfolute neccflity there was for it. If Suffolk dies, and he flands his trial, he muff, I tiftnk, on the oaths of Weftbrook, Jack AInftey, and myfelf, be acquitted—however, his departure from hence was a circumftance moft proper in-his fituation.
As we with I.ord Ofmond were croflinsr the faloon to get to the carriage, Charlotte Pelham rufhed in—-fell at the Marquis’s feet, and, encircling his knees with her arms, declared, if he left her, Ihe would expire on the fpot. He begged her tq confider the impropriety of fo condefcending a behaviour—^-aflured her that he would always think gratefully of the flattering diftinXion fhe honoured him with; and implored her not to render the obligations he owed her more painful to him than they already were, by perfifting in a partiality that it was plain he was not deferving of,
“ Ah, my Lord !” exclaimed.flie, “ you little know to what lengths my ungovernable
158 MAS QU ERADES; o Ry
able love has hurried me!—It was I-—the flighted Charlotte Pelham, who plunged you into a fea of woe .'--Ofmond, can you pardon me ?—It was I who infpired Suffolk with jealoufy—who urged him to call you out!—Dear Ofmond, be patient, whilft I add,, that it was I who informed Lady Julia of the duel—that you fought it!—who-almoft killed her, and rejoiced at the profpeX—I was the incendiary who exafperated Lady Pemberton with you both—I told her of clandeftine meetings which you never had—I told her, that, to get rid of Suffolk’s addreffes,, ftie incited you to rob him of life—that I overheard your converfation—and that after fupper was the time fixed on—all this 1 mentioned when I informed her chat you and Suffolk had fought !* —My motive was revenge—revenge on you for your cruelty—on Lady Julia for depriving me of your hearts—But when you entered the room, and 1 beheld your grief, deep* repentance filled my breaft—The avowal I have made is a proof of it-Do not execrate me—however culpable, I have this exciile-to offer, that -my paliion for you impelled, me to undertake fo unworthy a part.—You
WHAT. YOU WILL.
IS9
cried
<e
99
are about to fly—you hold me in contempt! Dear Ofmond, pity—and forgive me 1” He had often attempted to raife her, but in vain—I was fearful that his arm might bleed, and begged him to defift—He was overcome, and threw himfelf on Budenall’s fhoulder—“ I pardon you, Madamy” he-
but you muft leave me.
“ Ofmond, can you be fo inhuman ! Leave you !—Ah, my beloved Lord, you cannot pardon, and enjoin fuch a command at the fame time 1—Forgivenels appears not under that fentence—Let it come from your heart; and fuffer me, dear Ofmond, —fuffer me to attend you in your flight 1’*“ “ Death and confufion!—do I hear a-right!—You utter madnefs furely !” and he precipitately motioned towards the door_ She followed, and again clafped his knees* I difengaged her hold, and, lifting her ia my arras, was conveying her to the apartment of her mother, when meeting her fifter, who was come in fearch of her, I recommended to her to prevent the girl from expofing herfelf in fuch a manner. Mifs Pelham was in tears, and exprefled infinite concern for ail the difturbanee Charlotte had occafioned—*fhe ftrove to compole her,
but
t6o
MASQUERADES; an
P
but no lionefs, robbed of her young, was ever more furious. I left her to give vent to her virulence, and was returning to my friend, when Lady Mortimer called to me from herdrefling-room. “ Here,my Lord,” faid flie, “ give this to Lord Ofmond—’tis a miniature of Julia—the refemblance is flriking. Tell him. that with it I prefent him my beft wiffies, but that I cannot undergo the pain of bidding him adieu.” I enibraced her, praifed her fenfibility, and flew with the welcome gift to Ofmond. I found him in the coach. I had juft time to deliver my commiflion, and bade him farewel. He was unable to fpeak, and only grafped my hand ; but I can eafily imagine what paflTed in his breaft. The excellent Mifs Edgcumb entreated Sir James not to leave him, till he has acquired fortitude enough to bear the calamities that furround him with moderation. He is accompanied by two worthy and feeling friends— -may their attention and delicacy infpire him with comfort! You will,, perhaps, be furprifed at my telling you, that, in the hurry and' confufion wc were in to get the diabolical Charlotte away, 1 failed to enquire, and ffiey to inform me, whither their rout was
deftined
WHAT YOU WILL.
i6i
deftined—but in a few hours hence I hope to receive an exprefs from Weftbrook, When the carriage was out of fight, I
repaired to the apartment of Julia-they
had put her to bed. As I entered, I faw Mournies on her knees—-her elbows refted on a chair—her hands fupported her head —tears ftreamed faft down her cheeks. I fpoke to her, and enquired for her Lady* “ Ah, my Lord,” cried (he in French,— for Ihe does not fpeak Engiifti fluently,—-“ the poor child is very ill!-—ever fince her fifter perfuaded her to write a few lines, fhe has neither wept, exprefled a word, or taken notice of any thing.” “ Has fhe been worfe Jince, than (he was when (he firft: entered her room ?”	“ I really do not
know—fhe did not feem fo entirely ftupe-fied—fhe fpoke a little wijdly to young Lady Pemberton, and fainted two of three times—fhe appeared exceedingly difturbed at the fight of her—Once fhe called me, and whifpered a fear, that Ihe fhould fay fomething wrong, which her brother would hear of, and begged me, if poflible, to prevent her—I was forely grieved—I advifed the ladies to retire, and let her try to fleep. They went out; which my Lady obferving
beckoned
162
MASQUERADES; or
beckoned me to her—threw her arms round
called me her good and faithful then fighing faid, fhe fhould
’------She got into fuch
my neck Mournies
not trouble me long! a fit of crying, as not to be capable of articulating another word. I advanced to the infide of the bed, and faw Caroline fitting by her pillow, and Mifs Edgcumb at her feet. “ Here is our dear Mortimer, my
’ exclaimed Caroline;
Julia,” to him.”
“ pray fpeak She opened her eyes, and ftretched forth her hand
€4
Well, my brother, is he gone ?

“ He is, ray dear Julia ; and, for your fake, will be careful of himfelf. He charged me with a thoufand tender things to you to blefs you for him, for that kind billet which brought him back to life and reafon and to tell you that he exifts only on the hope of being yet yours.”
“ He is gone, my Lord 1—Ah, Ofmond, thou art gone for ever!—never fhall thefe eyes again behold you—never fhall 1 liften to you more !—What a heart is mine that does not break
It
at the idea !—I thank heaven that you retain in your generous bofom the deceiver hope !—it will preferve you to thofe who know, and value your
amazin
WHAT YOU WILL.
i6«
but from hence—you are
amazing worth loft to the miferable Julia!”
I endeavoured to confole her on her to banifli fuch a thought.
to prevail I begged
her to be compofed, and emulate the example of her lover, who confidered it as unfuitable with his great foul to defpair,
1 am compofed,you fee !—notone tear” rubbing her cheeks alternately with her
“ not even a fingle tear fails
Caro-
fnowy hand
as a
tribute to this feparation
ft) does Emily
line fheds many
can they
feel more for Ofmond than his Julia?”
“ For a few minutes flie was filent; then, catching my hand with both of hers, exclaimed,—•“ But tell me, my brother— you are the only one I acknowledge—^teil me, was it not cruel to force me away from him., before I could pronounce the heartrending word Farewel ?
—Lord Mortimer! in fuch a fituation as I was, 1 fliould have pitied the pooreft creature—aye, though Ihe had ftained the honour of her family I fliould have commiferated the pangs Ihe
endured----and have fuffered her to fay
Farewel!”—Again fhe paufed—and then
proceeded
((
But,
j64
MASQUERADES; or.
CC
But, God be praifed ! my condud has never been culpable. In loving Ofmond, I loved the moft amiable of mankind. If I was fo publicly to be expelled the prefence of all I held dear, why was not Caroline, or Emily, permitted to accompany me ?■—It would have been too merciful—I was committed prifoner to one, who would not fail to repeat to her enraged huiband the leaft unguarded expreftion that wretchednefs rnight extort from my lips Where is Mournies, my Lord
She appeared before her—an aftonilhing wildnefs became vifible in Julia’s eyes—Ihe began to utter her words with and her breath grew fhort.
I want to know, my dear Mournies,” faid Ihe, “ whether I exprefled any-thing faulty for which I fhall be condemned by Lady Pemberton—by her fon ?—My head was giddy—but I meant no offence to anyone—I have no animofity in my breaft, Heaven can tell. Anfwer, Mournies.”
“ Alas, my deareft young Lady ! who can be offended with fuch fweetnefs ?”
Why every-one can but Lord and Lady Mortimer—but he—whom I lhall never
WHAT YOU WILL.
165

44
ver fee again !—Think you, my friend, that all are as partial to me as you are ?” You faid nothing, my excellent Lady, but what was gende as is your own heart.” “ That was well!—and now call Caroline to me.”
“ 1 am here, my dear Julia what would you fay ?”
“ In truth I forgot—and all the little fenfe I have left, is juft enough to know that you-my brother—and Emily, want reft
- I pray ye all to feek it.
It was in vain to think of it, whilft it was to her a ftranger.—I-ufed every means to make her weep :—it was to no purpofe; Ihe was very feverifh, and became abfolutely delirious. Lady Mortimer and Mifs Edgcumb nev^er left her bed’s fide; nor did I, till a fummons obliged me to quit her apartment, it was, from Mrs. Pelham, who was about to leave Windfor, and who defired to fee me, that fhe might apologize for the confufion her daughter had created. I did not behold Charlotte, and moft arr-dently hope that my eyes may never be mortified with the fight of fo curfed an obr jeX. I pity Mifs Pelham, whofe grief for
whac
K66
MASQUERADES; or
what had happened was great. She is an amiable girl.
Emily Edgcumb juft now informed me, that, as Ihe and Julia were walking up and down the great room, waiting for their partner’s return, they heard a prodigious murmur, and faw a great buftle amongft the company. Perplexity and horror appeared in almoft every countenance. Julia enquired the occafion, of the perfon Ihe lirft met, who unluckily proved to be Charlotte Pelham.
“ Good God !” cried Ihe, “ I am afto-niftied that your Ladylhip of all people fhould alk fuch a queftion.” “ Why fo ?” demanded Julia. “ Becaufe you cannot poflibly be ignorant of the duel that has been fought on your account.”
“ A duel—and on my account /—For mercy-fake, dear Madam, let me comprehend you !”
“ Your Ladylhip,” replied the malignant girl, “ is certainly the firft aXrefs in the yrotld !—you reprefent Nature to perfeXion -—So I faid when you played Sigifmunda Lord Ofmond equals you in the fame line
not a foul but could have fworn Tancred
was
WHAT YOU WILL.
167
was the real diftraXed lover, in his own perfon, of Ladyjulia Herbert—=not a foul but could have fworn, that Sigifmunda, divefted of her borrowed charaXer, was the fond maid (he pretended- that fhe knew no attachment—that Ihe breathed not a
wifh but for Lord Ofmond”----
“ What means this untimely rallery ?”— “ Now, who but myfelf, that “ know the arts of wilful woman labouring for her
” could imagine this terror affeX-
purpofe, cd ?—Who
but
the bottom of
myfelf would penetrate to this weil-aXed curiofity ?
Who elfe could be convinced that you are too well acquainted with the horrid affair— that you have been the inftrument of a fatal quarrel, which has deprived the moft unparagon’d of his fex of life, and caufed an amiable man either to fly his country, or to fubmit to a violent fate ?”
Who Julia
99
cried the trem-
99
44
Your Ladyfhip is confcience flricken! —By your infligations Lord Ofmond challenged the Duke of Suffolk—For the firft time Lord Ofmond committed a fault—but,
circumftances weighed, it ought in a great
meafure
168
MAS QU ERADES: or.

meafure to be excufed, and the blame be thrown on her in whom it originated—In a word (fince you will have me repeat the affair;, the Marquis very brutally provoked the Duke to go out with him—they fought, and” —------
She had not time to finifti her barbarous fentence—Julia fainted—all flew to her relief, and in fome minutes brought her back to life. When that was accompliflbed, Mifs Edgcumb took notice that Charlotte faften-cd herfelf to Lady Pemberton’s ear, as Mil-ton’s devil did to Eve’s, and it is evident with a no lefs mifehievous intent. The amiable Julia, meaning to feek comfort from her mother, drew near to her; bur, inftead of it, (he met the (harped rebukes. She reproached her with diflimulation—imprudence bid -her leave her, and never to expeX that Ihe Ihould have any further confidence in her.—A fecond time (lie fainted—her mother beheld it without emotion ■—Lady Caroline Denley fupplied the place of one—almoft every female was bufied in recovering and aifftting her. They had fcarcely effeXed it, when Lord Ofmond entered—at the fight of him fhe hid her
face
WHAT YOU WILL.
169
face in Lady Caroline’s bofom—“ Ah, Madam,” whifpered Ihe, “ he lives !—thank Heaven he lives!—But he is now a murderer—let me not behold him—ungrateful Ofmond!—what reafon had he to make
himfelf thus unworthy of”-----Lord Of-
mond came up to her: he took one of her hands, which fhe immediately withdrew---her eyes fhe kept averted from him. He fpoke with tendernefs inconceivable—fhe waved her hand, and defired him inftantly to quit her. He begged only to be allowed to vindicate his conduX—fhe repeated her command ; and he, with the utmoft reluctance, was forced to obey. He then addreffed Lady Pemberton, who would not hear him, as I before mentioned. In fome time after Weftbrook and I came in—you know^ the reft.
Every-one left Windfor this mo-ming, excepting the Herbert family, Lady Caroline Denley, Mifs Edgcumb, Suffolk, and Jack Ainfley.—The Duke lives; but that is all —we have no hopes of him. H-’- ■ 'S and
A------r, whb were fent for, arrived about
ten o’clock. On examining his wounds, they confirmed our fears rtfpeXing him,
Yol. hi.	I	Another
I
xyo
MASQUERADES; or
Another viXim the mercilefs grave feems to gape for—you will fliudder when 1 name Julia Herbert to be the one. She is, in iny opinion, dangeroufly ill. A moft fevere fever has attacked her; and fhe continues in the delirious way I mentioned, with this difference, that fhe has not a moment’s interval of reafon. Her mother, juft now, hearing of the piteous condition fhe has been in all the day, confented to fee her. The appearance of her muft have brought remorfe to her heart for the tranf-aXions of a few paft hours. She fpoke tenderly to Julia, who was at the time as ignorant of its being Lady Pemberton, as fhe would have been of a perfon fhe never beheld.
Her Ladyfhip reported to her fon the melancholy fituation fhe was in—this was his kind reply: “ The mere artifice of a plotting girl to gain her point! Julia is wonderfully clever I God forbid fhe fhould be as ill as your Ladyfhip thinks her 1 Believe it on ray word, fhe will fhortly recover, if there is no notice taken of her delirium.”
In this manner does he perfift to judge
of
\
w
YOU W
173
of one fuperior to contrivance or finelTe* Ere he awakens from his error, perhaps— but I will not anticipate the worft of evils! Should fhe die, fome there are who would be juftly punifhed in their own feelings for their barbarity—The lovely girl.would be releafed from a load of mifery, which, if fhe recovers, muft be horrible to fupport OfmOnd, I think, can never be hers; and I am fatisfied, death, in all his terrific forms, they would each prefer to fuch a certainty. Thofe moft to be compaffion-ated are the perfons who know her excellence—who endeavoured to make her happy—and who will, in a fudden manner al-
" I am un-
moft, weep
her corpfe.
eafy about Caroline, whofe condition renders her a very improper objeX to undergo fuch acute diftrefs as fhe is liable to experience.
No tidings have yet arrived from Weftbrook. With the hope of giving you further information of our friend, I have kept my letter open to the laft moment-—it is now nine o’clock. There is fome confolation in the thought of Ofinond’s being ignorant of
" ” is in—a mife-
Julia
I 2
rable
172 MASQUERADES} or
rable pair they are indeed!
I know not
how the Duke will behave on hearing the particulars of his fon’s condud. You had beft, dear Montague, take upon yourfelf the difagreeable talk of imparting to him what you think requifite of the late proceeding. You are well acquainted with his Grace; and no one is fo well qualified for fuch an office.
line from you to fay in what manner he bears it.—To-morrow I will write again.
I am, with much fincerity.
Your affedionate friend.
I ffiall be glad to receive a
i




'ih.
\
To


WHAT YOU WILL.
*73
0
To Sir Charles Montague.
A
Windfor, Thurfday Evening.
N exprefs has brought me a letter from Weftbrook, which I fhall en-ciofe, as you will beft judge of the fituation of Lord Ofmond. H-------------s and
A--------r find no change in Suffolk i bur,
from his holding out fo much longer than they expeded, they begin to have a glimmering of hope that he may recover. From appearances i fhould fuppofe it impoffible. Fie is in ficiiful hands; and, if it is in nature to fave him, the two gentlemen I have named well effed it.
Laft night,'after I had difpatched George with my packet, I joined Lady Caroline Denley, Lord Pemberton, his mother, and wife. I found Lady Caroline reafoning with him on the abfurdity of his notion concerning Julia—He obftinately maintained the opinion he had before exprefled, that her illnefs was all a feint to excite pity, and caufe the Marquis to be recalled. La-
.1
3

\
174
MASQUERADES; or
dy Caroline told him it was incumbent on him to prove the ftrength of his fufpicion, by vifiting her apartment—A valuable life would probably be loft for want of care*, and then to allege that he thought her diforder affeded, would be a mean excufe indeed ! I adored her for the generous warmth with which fhe fpoke: Pemberton confented to follow her advice; and we accompanied him to Julia’s chamber—He .advanced towards the bed, and, feating himfelf on it, thus addreffed her :
“ Come, my dear Julia-—allow me now to beg, that you will exert your good fenfe, and confider the impropriety of giving way to fuch unavailing grief-—Your mother no longer remembers the foible fhe reproached you for—I come to folicit your pardon for my haftinefs—you will forgive me, 1 arn fure, dear Julia.”
“ Who calls ?” cried fhe; “ Sir James ! —You gave my letter to Louifa—-fhe muft tell Sir Charles with caution that his friend is murdered—he cannot bear it as I do ! Oh ! niy coufin, why did you not flop Suffolk’s inhuman hand ?”---
Pembertoh touched her arm;
<C
My God!”
WHAT YOU WILL.
i7S
God!
exclaimed he,” how fbe burns I She has a violent fever”—•“ Not at all,” cried Caroline,—“ 'tis all artifice—\eave her to herfelf, and her fufferings both of mind
She burft
and body will foon be over 1”
I too juftly deferve that re-
“ 1 be-
into tears
tl 4
tort, Lady Mortimer,” he replied ; haved unkindly—but do not add to my mortification.”—He again fpoke to Julia; fhe paid him no attention, but continued to wander in the fame ftrain.
“ A troop of ceieftial fpirits, robed in white garments, furround him cinths, violets, and
----hya-
rofes in their hands
they compofe a wreath of orange-flowers they crown him with it—Ofmond ! tho*
in heaven, forget me not—Ah, my Lord,
you look on me with contempt! bandon me for ever-
bated Suffolk
—you a-you know I always Ob, Ofmond 1—I canfnoc
bear it.”—For a few minutes Ihe was filent —but every feature gave evidence that her heart laboured under a mighty confiiX— at length, fhe exclaimed,
I have difcovered the
which contains my Ofmond
him.....Oh torment!------
I
4
place on earth —I have found diftradtbn to my
fenfes
176
MASQUERADES; or
fenfes——I have found him—but found him the hufband of Charlotte Pelham !—Was it your choice, my Lord ?—You need not I know your love—your conftancy too well!—it was the Duke of Weftmorland
----We fhall never meet
obliged you to it
Dear Ofmond I farewel ever !------------------
fare-
fweet
again
It grows
again----
tD
wel for
Hark ! what divine Lunds ftrike my ear!
more ravifhingly my new friends are trying to foothe my anguifh—ah, what goodnefs !-— Are the forrows of a poor infignificant girl worthy of being thought on by the great God of worlds I—Does he deign to make his EleX tune their cymbals—and warble forth melodiousbotes, to comfort the heart
I will not lofe a
of Julia Herbert!--
found—Poor Ofmond !
but hufh I
55
She feemed to liften for fome time'
and then returned to her former rambling method of fpeaking. Pemberton’s breaft
was forely penetrated-----He immediately
fent a courier for Doctor W--------, whofe
affiftance I fhould have demanded earlier, but that Lord Pemberton, when I propofed it to him, befought me not to aid the girl’s
farce
WHAT YOU WILL.
farce fo egregiouflyr I did not chufe to be* thought officious, and left him to do as he:
When WL arrived, which was not
fix o’clock this morning, he found his pa--
tient in a deplorable way—He addrefled her
with that gentlenefs for which he is famed
—he begged her to inform him where her
?
’ flie anfwered—“ I
pain
Once I was fick, fainted—There is a perfon think 'it,. Lord Budenall ?—-there is a per-
would you
in
But you are not

5?'
fon who delights in furprifing ing my wretched head Lord Budenall^—nor Sir lames—nor are you that hateful creature the Duke of Suffolk—who-are you pray ?—a friend of Suffolk’s ?----1 beg you to retire—your ap-
pearance affliXs me.
He affured her he was a ftranger to- the: Duke—and one interefted in her recovery,, which he hoped fhe would permit him t®» itate.
I believe,” cried flie,. “ that you are BO friend of Suffolk’s---you look humane
44
draw near then,., and let me There is a perfon who torments^ ni
■ i 5
1
TjS
MASOUERADESj or
5
to death—once he made me faint at Ranelagh—when I recovered, I faw at my feet a
man that refembled---well, no matter!—
he. Sir, was gentle and kind—aye, he loved the poor Julia, till the cruel creature I told you of murdered him—--and now 1 lhall never fee him more !”
DoXor W. ftrove to confole her
(lie
interrupted him*
“ He ftabbed him. Sir between them------
I threw myfelf
his fword went through
O
my heart, and pierced my beloved Henry’s ——Ah, look there ! hold the gaping wounds ?
Ihriek—again I hear him fliriek !—not that
do you not be-
I hear his
—again I hear him fhriek! he is rnurdered—but that his Julia is now left defencelefs 1”
She funk upon her pillow, with clafped hands—the perfon to whom fhe fpoke was much affeXed. In a few feconds fhe ftart* ed up again.
An angel now at my elbow bids me
claim

your
very good fnatch the
prornife—dear Sir, you feem; be the friend of my Henry !
weapon yet reeking with his blood, and plant it in my breaft—
I want to be wkh my Lord
Suffolk
1 pray you

WHAT YOU WILL
Suffolk only tortured me—Heaven muft: reward you for fo benevolent an aXion>-yoUi will fave me from a dreadful marriage you will be the means of uniting me in better world to him whom my foul loves.
“ I hope to be the means of uniting yoit here, dear Lady, to your Henry—Do noi& terrify yourfelf with thefe horrible imagi nations—He, whom you lament as dead lives to- blefs you—Dear Lady Julia,, make him not fuffer, for a real ealamity, thole pangs that rend your bofom for a fanciedi affliXion—Think, if you d ie„ what muft be the fate of your Henry ?

99
“ And do you fay. Sir,, that he lives 1-Ah, now I difcover the artifice--He iivesl!
Impoffible ! Did 1 not fee him.expire?-^ Dear Ofmond !. I will not be deceived—nay,, do not doubt my tendernefs I—They fhall never perfuade me to marry. Suffolk*. You, my dear Lord,, firft taught my heart to love—you are the only one whom it
ever love.----The maik. of humanity you
have afllimed, Sir, is feen through-are leagued againft me—begone and trou bis.; me no more 1”
I 6


I
i8<s
MASQUERADES; or
She turned from him, and he, unwilling to agitate her further, retired from the bed, DoXor W. pronounces her in a moft alarming fituation, and fears that no medicine can reach her difeafe—The continual terror fhe is in—the immenfe exertion of her
fpirits--and the rhapfodies of madnefs
ftie utters, muft exhauft her greatly. The violence of her fever is not to be imagined,
Mifs Edgcumb taps at my door------Dr,
W. declares that bleeding her muft no
all day he has been anxious to have the operation performed;, but it could not be effeXed from the rcft-leflhefs of her pofitions—I. am apprehea-
longer be deferred
fiye they will find it impofiible fcn'ce is defired.
My pre


*

# #



#
#

5^
’	Eight o'Cloth*.
I am juft returned from Julia’s apartment—Mr. A. was preparing the apparatus for bleeding when I entered. Lady Pen> berton was inducing her to fubmit to the
necellity
\
WHAT YOU WILL.
i8if
neceflity of it; (he underflood her not. roline wa> trying to make her fenfible how requifite the operation was. Pemberton ftood looking on with folded arms^—a mixture of fear and grief fat on his countenance—Mis wife and Almeria were in tears at the bottom of the room. DoXor W.
r
was imparting his apprehenfion of his par tient, I believe, ro Lady Caroline Denley ; for Ihe wept exceedingly at what he laid r and Emily Edgcumb was exerting her powers to confole Mournies,. whofe lobs at length obliged her to quit the apartment. Good God, what a melancholv aflemblage of people did it contain !------DoXor W.
and Mr„ A- approached the bed fide.
“ Come,, my dear Julia !” cried Lady Pemberton, “ I will remove your fleeve”' and fhe held her arm,, which Mr. A. took. Julia'ftruggled to difengage it.
“ For mercy’s fake, Madam,” faid Ihe, addrefling her mother,—“ for the lake of that God, who difrlaims all violence, do not oblige me to this horrible marriage. You cannot wifh,	turning to Mr. A.
to join two people who muft be miferable. —Oh, Ofmorici!—my clear Ofmond !—why
did 1 not hearken to what you ad.vifed ?—
I	.	1 am
4.4
182
MASQUERADES; or
mg torture
I am loft—for fee ! Lord Pemberton—the
tyrannic difpofer of my fate—comes to pronounce curfes on my head—my mother follows his example, if I dare to refufe Suffolk—Suffolk who has already been the deftroyer of my peace.—God of compaflion 1 —will you look on, and fee your creature forced to become a perjurer!—heart-break-
Behold where Ofmond ftands 1 his eyes reproach me for my falfehood— he turns from me—fly not, I befeech you —the vows i made you are imprefled with indelible charaXers on my foul—never will I fwerve from them—doubt not my firmnefs !-—Unhand me, thou moft inhuman of men !—Now, Suffolk 1-now I defpife you !” She wrenched her hand from Mr. A. You can eafily imagine the feelings of thofe around her. “ It is in vain,” faid Lady Pemberton, “ to urge it further !—My child muft die—and under a belief that her near-
eft connexions are barbarians.
99
Her for-
row was infupportable—Pemberton fcreened himfelf from Julia’s fight-*I went to the bed, and, feating myfelf behind her pillow,, raifed her in my arms, “ Julia,” cried
ray deareft fifter !■-do you not know
me ?” “ By that foothing appellation,” (he
replied^
C4
WHAT YOU WILL
9
iSi
ireplied, “ I am fure I do,—you are Lord Mortimer.”
“ Yes, my much-loved girl—your brother—your friend, and our Ofmond*s--Yoii are not well, -and 1 come to beg of you to let that gentleman, Mr. A. draw a little
blood from your arm
The operation is
not
Julia j
You will oblige me, dear Was Ofmond here, he would
requeft it; and, furely, you could not refufe him ! RefleX how much his life depends upon your fafety.” She fmiled, and fhook. her head. “ Ah, dear delufion !— But do what you pleafe.” I kiffed her cheek : “ Sweet girl I what an obligation you confer on me I” Mr. A. again took her hand.
“ Surely, my Lord,” faid fhe with eagernefs, “ he will not unite me to the Dukef;
Remember—remember your honour is concerned as well as mine, that he fhould not.” I quieted her fears—He bled her till fhe fainted-—fhe lay five minutes without the leaft motion or refpiration. By DoXor W.’s defire, a cordial was poured thro’ her
lips, which inftantly revived her; and, when
1^4
MASQUERADES; or
I left hti, fhe feeaieti a litcle more eompofedv Adieu,- dear Montague. 1 am.
mofl devoted friend,
Mortimer.
To Lord Mortimer (enclofed)
•S'
Slttingbourne*
E have travelled as expeditioufiy as-poffible to this place,, which we reached an hour ago. The portrait that you, my good Lord, ga-ve our diftreffed Ofmond, was a comfort to him unfpealc-able. He would hold it in his hand—fix his eyes upon it—many obtrufive tears would roll down his pale cheeks. He would prefs it to his lips ; then lodge it for a few minutes in his bofom—-quickly it would he recalled, and the fame pleafing melancholy fcene pafs over again. Thus was. he fupported,, till we drew near our
prefent
s
WHAT YOU WILL. 185
prefent quarters, when, I believe, the idea of leaving Julia fo far behind occurred, and tortured his foul. There is no defcribing to what a height his agonies arofe during the laft ten miles that we travelled. When we ftopped for a relay, I propofed to him to quit the carriage, and feek repofe for a couple of hours. Frederick feconded me. He was glad of any pretence to protraX his ftay in England, and confented. We accompanied him to an apartment for the purpofe; and, whilft Souville was giving him fome attendance, he exprefled a fear that this delay might be of bad confequence to his Lord. Ofmond rebuked him for his timidity, and aferibed the poor devil’s impatience wholly to felfifhnefs.
“ A defire,” cried he, “ of vifiting the dirty city where you firft breathed, renders you unmindful of every confideration elfe, and that what you think elyfium is to others
hell”'---Souville begged the Marquis’s
pardon for having offended him ; and declared he preferred being with him, even in a prifon, to living with all poflible affluence in the capital his Lordfhip thought him fo greatly attached to, fevered from his
fervice.
i86
fervice.
MASQUERADES; or
Ofmond was too much engaged with his own melancholy ideas to liften to what he faid ; and feveral times did a pro-pol'al to return hover on his lips—Once he exclaimed,
“ It is not credible
that
my father Undoubted-
fhould be void of tendernefs ly, were he to fee ine, he would compaf* fionate the anguifli I endure.”
Frederick entreated him not to tantalize
himfelf with fuch a notion. “ my dear Ofmond,” faid he “
You know, better than any man, the temper of the Duke. Re-fieX only a minute, and you muft be certain, that you have no ground for one flattering hope refpeXing him at prefent. His refentment is now ftrong againft you,
it would break
appear.
Wait
itfelf
Were you to through all bounds, tience till it fpends Nature operate in your weeks—but a few weeks ! well.”
then with pa-till the ties of behalf. A few and all will be
Ofmond clafped his hands, and, like one in defpair, fell on the bed. Souville drew the curtains round him, placed himfelf within hearing of his Lord—and we left
the
WHAT YOUWILL.
187
the room, hoping, that; when he found it quiet, fleep might fteal on his weary eye-lids. I truft he will be enabled by it to proceed on his rout prefently.
We are anxious to know the fituation of poor Julia, yet cannot expeX it on this fide of the water. Be fo good as to write to me, and direX at the common place Monfieur Deflein’s at Calais, where we will remain till 1 get a letter from you.—Suppofe your Lordfhip was to prevail on Julia to enclofe a few lines to Ofmond ? She ought to know the confolation it would afford him.-- I am afraid Lady Mortimer has fuffered from the
feenes fhe was in
late difagreeable ill calculated, indeed, for one in her condition !
I will not fpeak of the Pemberton’s further than to fay, that they have hearts of adamant—As for Suffolk, if no one wilhes more for his recovery than I do—he has not a friend upon earth.
Ah, Mortimer ! had I been Ofmond, I would have taken glorious revenge on that devil incarnate Charlotte Pelham—I would have gratified her inclination certainly ! She might have accompanied me as far as
Dover 5
i88 MASQUERADES; or,
Dover; but there fhe fhould receive my conge, and be left to make the beft of her way up to l.ondon, or wherever fhe pleafed, whilft I purfued my voyage with the exulting idea of having prevented her ad-miffion in future to the circles of women of charaXer.
I muft fend a fhort letter to my generous Emily, and that to thank her for the friendly offices fhe permits me to adminifter to the unfortunate Ofmond.
Frederick joins me in haifemains to Lady Mortimer. I am, my Lord, with much warmth, your Lordfhip’s
%
Moft faithful
And affeXionate
James Westbrook.
V	^
WHAT YOU WILL.
i8q
To Lord Mortimer.
St. James's-Square, Thurfday Afternoon,
YOU, my Lord, who are acquainted
with my attachment to the moft excellent of men, can readily judge of the diftrefs 1
reading your known where I fhould, my
experienced on Lordfhip’s packet. Had I to have found Ofmond,
Lord, on the receipt of your firft letter, have flown to him, and offered all the affiftance in my power to fupport him under the affliXion with which he is oppreffed—But 1 am fatisfied in the reflection of his having two companions, who, pofTefllng hearts at eafe, can better fupply comfort to his forrows, than the unfortunate man that now addreffes your Lordfliip.
I went this morning to Grofvenor-fquare. I am at a lofs to fay, whether the Duke of Weftmorland was a ftranger to the melancholy proceedings that happened laft Wednefday, (for he arrived late
laft
X90 mas qu ERADESj ORr,
laft night from Peterborough,) or whether, being informed of the matter, he delighted in the notion of having got rid of a young man whom he never loved; but certain it is, he wore, on my entrance, an uncommonly cheerful afpeX, and his eyes difplayed a vivacity that is generally the refult of having heard agreeable tidings. As foon as I could obtain an opportunity by his filence, I began the bufinefs your Lordfliip commiflioned me to treat on. I firjft imparted to him the paflion that his fon felt for Lady Julia Herbert, and defcribed it with all the pathetic I was mafter of—His face grew red—hisdip quivered—-anger difturbed the whole oeconorny of his frame.—I next mentioned the duel *, and related, in your own words, my Lord, what pafled between Suffolk and Ofmond the occafion. When I ended, he
then
on
ex-
teil
paufed for a minute or two; claimed, “ Give me leave. Sir, to you, that I fliould not be forry, if your obftinate friend had paid with his life the forfeiture of his obedience.”
“ Good God, my Lord, is it poflible ! His deftiny would indeed have been hard,
if
WHAT YOU WILL.
IQI
if the infolence of his antagonift had gone unpuniQied 1-—Heaven was too juft, and chaftifed the man who deferved it. No one can pity Suffolk, that hears the ftory. He was meanly jealous of Lord Ofmond’s
fuperior virtues
his fuperior qualities.
He knew the impreffion they muft make on Lady Julia’s heart—he fought the life of his rival—and, forgetting the confequence—the innate worth of the perfon, who was to be his adverfary, dared to let fall threats which the Marquis could not away with—He drew, but, wifhing no harm to Suffolk, ftood merely on his defence. The Duke’s want of fltill—his violence—or fome caufe that originated in himfelf, folely robbed him of life Lord Ofmond—And yet”-------—
not
“ Say no more. Sir, I beg. It would be very extraordinary, if you did not reprefent the matter in the light moft favourable to your friend. But, 1 am thoroughly acquainted with the turbulence of his ciilpo-fition—with his hot-headed rafhnefs. He had no right tp endeavour to alienate the affeXions of the girl whom Suffolk meant to make his wife. The quarrel, I am
fatisfied.
j§2 MAS Q_U ERADES; or,
fatisfied, was of his feeking. Would to God he had fallen, and never plagued me ■ further!”—“ Merciful Heaven, how cruel! So amiable a youth to be thus caluminated 1 He who declined, as far as honour would permit him, the combat, to be called the
aggreffor!---to be wifhed dead by the
man who gave him exiftence!-------Un-
guardedly you dropped the expreffion, my JLord—prithee recal ic, and I will for ever blot it from my memory !”
“ Retain it there. Sir, if you pleafe, till you impart it to Lord Ofmond; and let this meffage be its companion, that, as foon as he chufes, he is at liberty to fet out for America, for France, Holland, the Eaft-Indies—in fhort, what place he thinks beft. Affure him that I fhall \ytite no more fubmiffive notes; fend my fervants no more to fit up at his houfe, till he returns from the habitation of witchcraft which he frequents, where he momently curfes my tedious lingering in a world that wants me not—they fliall no more, I fay, Sir, fpend the night at his hotel, looking with impatience for the young hero's return, to fupplicate in my name his forgivenefs
_ . w .	* ^ m M A ^	. ..
Fwill never againbelbold him !
(4
Let
WHAT YOU WILL.
m
CC
Let me intreat your Grace to think a little before fo iiarfn a fentence is
nounced to him !
pro-
If it does appear in
55
your eyes that Lord Ofmond is to blame, attribute his fault to the levity natural to a young man, and pardon it.
“ No, Sir, I will never pardon him. He knew how greatly I difapproved of an alliance with the Herbert family—I cautioned him againft the fubtle poifon that lurked beneath the beauty of thofe artful girls I bid him to beware of the fnares they would lay to catch his amorous heart—In open rebellion to my will, he attached himfelf more than ever to them. 1 informed him cf the engagement I was under to Davenport, that a marriage fiiould take place between him and L.ady Henrietta—-I folicited him to gratify my wifhes—He abfolutely refufed to do fo ; and fpurned at the provifion my tender care had made for him. He left me in wrath, vowinac
doors
again.
That
never to enter my threat fubdued my pride, and I was all the father—1 threw afide my refentment, and pleaded for a reconciliation. He then flew to Lady Pemberton’s—paid his addreffes
yoLiiii.	K	to
/
defpicable an objeX !
M A S QU ERADES;' or,
ito the ;girl he was thoroughly convinced I liked not—^^fought a duel on her account— wounded dangeroufly a perfon of confequence to the kingdom, who is no doubt by this time dead—and has the prefumption ■to expeX, that I will hufh the affair, fupplicate the hand of his beggarly miftrefs for him, give them up my eftates, retire to fome obfcure corner of the globe, and there fpin out the remainder of my days on
Toots, or bread and water---fit food for fo
----But Lord Of-
fnond is miftaken in me—I cannot be reproached by mankind for abandoning him to the fevereft turns of fortune, after the recent inftance he has given of his liberti-r»ifm,. My friends muft certainly applaud me, for avoiding any meafure that would continue in my country fo dangerous a member to fot iety.
“ Ah, my Lord ! I now fee, that, but for a fear of the cenfures of the world, he ■would have been abandoned long ago by your Grace.”
He looked confufed, and was about to ipeak, but faultered
99
LS
u...
Depend upon it, my Lord, that the
unhappy
what you will.
195
unhappy rencontre will not clear you of the imputation of having a6led with brutal inhumanity towards your fon, when this matter is talked over, even by the enemy of Lord Ofmond—if fuch a one exifts His conduX cannot be condemned'—the unnatural father muft be execrated—Ofmond’s worth will be fet in contraft—how unfavourable the comparifon to you, my
Lord !-----Ah, to be looked contemptibly
on by the world, requires more humility to fupport, than, I am perfuaded, either your Grace or I could attain on fuch an occafion !”
“ You are in an error as to my.fentiments, Sir—nor is it worth my while to explain them to you.——Had your friend confented to marry Lady Henrietta Marchmont—had he fhewn a wiUingnefs to oblige
O	tn
me	in	that	affair—he might	have	fourtd
that no father could have regarded a fon more tenderly.”
“ So, my Lord, if he had rendered himfelf the moft wretched of mortals, you would have ftruggled with your nature, and tried to have efteemed him!^------He
I
would	have	been adequately recompenfed,
K 2	no

f
196
M AS QU ERADES; or
•Bur, in the name of Hea-
have
no doubt!
ven, how could your Grace ever thought of conneding fo elegant a fellow with fo miferable a creature ?—I declare to you, my Lord, I fhould defpife my valet, were h
c
99
44
even to entertain an idea of polfef-fing her money, at the woeful expence of alfo poffefling her perfon. Was Lady Henrietta to offer him her hand, if he did not refufe it, I fliould think him beftial.
I fuppofe. Sir, you have often fold my fon the fame !”
“ Not I, my Lord !—This, indeed, I have told him, that I held it impoffible for your Grace to intend ferioufly fo prepojterous a union : andfit muft be confeffed, that no on,e in their fenfes could have a notion of making the charming, accomplifhed Ofmond, huiband to a being fcarcely human.
But we have wandered far from the purpofe. For God’s fake, my Lord Duke, know the value of yogr fon I Confider the bleffing you own in him. Put it not in the power of futurity to compel you to curfe your prefent barbarity. No longer be inflexible, I conjure you ; but aX as a parent ought, and promote his happ nefs!”
“Ah,
WHAT YOU WILL.
197
one.
Ah, Sir Charles, your device is a bad I am not to learn that Lord Ofmond has fent you on this errand. You have promifed to be his panegyrift—to beftow praifes on a worthlefs fubjeX—That falling, I am by predidions to be terrified into compliance.”
“ I fwear to you, my Lord, I have neither feen, nor received a line from the Marquis fince this unlucky circumftance happened, on which you build your anger. I am abfolutely ignorant where he is •, but be it where it will, chat fpot contains the
moft unhappy mortal that exifts !”
“ He deferves to be fo ; and if the difpleafure of a parent can add to his mifery,
has
pray haften to inform him, that he mine in its fulleft extent ; that I will no^ interfere in his behalf, though I fee him led to execution; that from hence I will not fupply him with a fingle farthing ; and, that he may noc tire Heaven with prayers for my death, in the hope of profiting by it, it is my firm refolve to cut him off from ever poflcffing a ftiver of my fortune—in fliort, that 1 wifh never to hear more of
him*
K 3
IgS MASQUERADES; or,
#
him, and from this hour I will forget that I have a fon.”
“ Well, my Lord, I muft acknowledge that you are a fingular father in truth ! Believe me, you are not the perfon whom Lord Ofmond would folicit benefits from : though his life was at ftake, he could not expeX that would ufe the leaft trouble tp preferve it, fo thoroughly fenfible is he of your paternal tendernefs. But I have the comfort of knowing, what probably will affliX your Grace, that it is not in any fort of danger, as, from the teftimony of fome refpeXable men of quality, it will appear plain, that he was in no manner culpable.
A few words more, my Lord—If your Grace chufes to with-hold from him your wealth, why it muft be fo ; there is not
a fyllable to be faid
however, you will
pleafe to recolleX that he has a provifion in
your hands, which you”-----------
“ What do you mean. Sir ?”
“ Only this, my Lord—that we are noc as ignorant, as you would have us, of Lady Anne Skefley’s generofity. Your Grace muft give up the eftate immediately, and
prepare
AT YOU WILL
prepare to reimburfe the arrears, or we will take fuch meafures as fhall oblige you: to it, and in every fefpeX mark you to the world for the extraordinary anA benevolent father that you are,—1 have the honour to wifli your Grace a good morning.”
There is no defcribing how pale he turned at the mention of Lady Anne—he^ was fhocked,. and looked as- much confounded as men in general do, when de-teXed in a mean aXion.—Your- Lordflirp knows but little of Wfeftmorland ; aiiow me to give you a fketch of his charaXer, which is fo totally oppofite to our friend’s, that, was not the late Duchefs fpoken of as a model of perfedlion,. I fhould fufpeX her. of having played the Duke faife, and made* a worthier man the father of Ofmond.
Weftmorland is outrageous in his paf-fions ;
tion
he gave
; avaricious, and yet beyond concep-fond of fplendor and parade. To this may be aferibed the liberal education:
his fon—the expenfive way in which he permited him to live. It was-his ambition to have it faid, “ What a-i magnificent man is the Duke!' Not aa
•K 4	noblemam
200
OU
O R
nobleman in the world underftands well how to fpend money properiy. ferve
Lord Ofmond in an Emperor ! his low
the generous
fo
Ob-
manner he fupports -Oh, he has the fpirit of -Such phrafes gratified vanity; and, to gain them, he even parted with a quantity of the metal he adored. Now is he rejoiced to the foul, at finding a plea to efcape cenfure, and with-hold from the Marquis his darling gold. Never did one fpark of natural affeXion for thofe allied to him
enter his breaft
he is felfifh beyond de-fo artful and defigning.
/
fcription—yet that he can pretend to feel moft fenfibly, if it fuits his purpofe or intereft to do fo. What an example of it had our unhappy Ofmond in that affair he told your Lordfhip of, when on the verge of leaving England, rendered defperate by his father’s inhumanity ! The Duke refleXed, that, when the caufe of his fon’s emigration was known—the horrible language he ufed to liini made public—he would be held in the defpicable light that fo infamous a behaviour deferved, by every creature. He
jud
ged
WHAT YOU WILL.
20f
judged it moft to his advantage to make up the breach ; and, in effecting it, difplayed a mafter-piece of hypocrify, feigning the utmoft concern for what had paffed, and promifing an amendment of conduX that
he never defigned to fulfil.
His unguard-
ed expreffion to me this morning, plainly difcovered the fpring which aXuated his brutal heart. Kfear of the world’s opinion will yet befriend the Marquis, I truft. I have hopes that the fpirited way I addreffed him in, juft before 1 left him, will intimidate, and caufe him to be lefs rigorous than he threatened towards Ofmond. If not, he is paft feelings of every kind; and the unfortunate youth muft content himfelf with the little he poffeffes in his own right.
i fhall fuffer the Duke to think quietly on what I faid for a day or two. if in that time I do noc hear from him, I fhali defire another interview.
I am well affured that Ofmond will receive no difappointment from the Duke’s determination. He has experienced fo many hardfhips from his farouche temper,
K 5	that
\
2©2
MASQUERADES; or
that this inftance of his hatred cannot appear extraordinary ; though it is but lately that the Marquis has ever uttered a complaint of him even to me. I have been long acquainted with Weftmorland, and am well fkilled in all the movements of his heart. Circumftanced as I am, I Ihould not remain another hour in this city, but-for the hope of ferving Ofmond with his father, for whofe fake I endure with wonderful patience the torture of mixing, in fociety that I cannot avoid here,.
It is impoffible to paint the emotions of tny foul at your Lordftiip’s account of the beautiful Lady, Julia. May Heaven re-ftore her ! In that ejaculation I include the happinefs of Ofmond. If llie dies— but, indeed, the moment, in which-he hears-, it, will be hisftaft,.^.
And now, my dear Mortimer, permit roe
you, that Louifa Sydney and I? can never be united.—You will defpife me when you know the caufe; and yet what man ever ftood more in need of pity !—My fortune is ruined by my own folly ; and I love her too artfently., to ally
het:
to in
WHAT YOU WILL.
‘5
her fate to a wretch’s, who has been thee author, cf his own woes.—-Spare me further * on the fubjeX—I cannot bear it<! > Still L muft beg that the packet I now returni you, which contains the dreadful recital,., may remain in your cuftody a while. When you think Lord Ofmond enougliJ compofed to read it,, then difpatch it to him wherever he is. He has at this time no occafion for my prefence: the aniiablee Weftbrook. and Frederick will not leave: him till his mind has acquired a fufficient-: ferenity. Ferhaps. he. might accompany, them to England—at beft,. my griefs can* but.add.to his-r-and I would fpare him the.-daily fight o£an objeX, who from hencec muft be a .fpeXacle oft mifery..
Before. 1 leave London, F will write again to acquaint your Lordlhip,. whether the Duke forgives his fon, and .confencs to > his addreffing Lady Julia, or not. Both, , or neither,, is my, condiriom I-wait with, the moft eager impatience for the letter you . were fo obliging as to prornife me. this day. . 1 truft. in Heaven that it will give me ea Letter account o£ the lovely Julia.. God; forbid .you fhould have any caufe to. fufferr
E.	^ 1


204
QU
O R
in regard of Lady Mortimer’s anxiety about her friends !—1 am, my Lord, with the higheft efteem,
\
Your Loidfliip’s
Moft devoted fervant,
\
Charles Montague.
To Sir Charles Montague
Windfor, Friday,
OUR letter, my dear Sir Charles, at once furprized and diftrefled me. What new fcene of horrid wonder are we yet to experience
f
1 can fcarce give credit
to your aflertion--^ Louifa Sydney and I can never be united !”—Aftonifhing indeed !
You are to blame, my good friend, in yielding yourfelf a voluntary prey to defpair, when it might fo eafily be in the power of another to render you ftill happy.
1 would
WHAT YOU WILL.
205
I would not for the univerfe wound your delicacy ; but give rne leave to fay, that I have never valued the fortune I poflefs, only as it enabled me to be a minifter of peace to worthy bofoms. Methinks, were I reduced by any calamitous ftroke, or ftraightened in my circumftances, I fhould feel a fort of fatisfaXion in the thought of affording a friend, whofe attachment I could not doubt, the felicity of aflifting me—Let me beg the favour of you to con-
fer fuch an obligation on nie.
A long
minority enabled my guardians to hoard up a quantity of treafure, which I have had no occafion to encroach upon, and which is at prefent ufelefs to me. Any part, or the whole of it, is at your fervice for what length of time you pleafe. Your two eftates are fine ones ; and, in the courfe of fome years, might, without your feeling the leaft inconveniency, re-imburfe a ve^y large moiety—but that, 1 give you my honour, I Ihould never confider, if ic was not with an idea of its making you lefs reluXant to employ me in the manner I wilh. fhe pleafure of extricating a friend fliall be my intereft for the loan of
the
M:A SQU E R A D E S; or;.
/
the rnoney.; and your note, payable many . years hence,, my fecurity.
Do not, my dear Montague, beftow on me the mortification of thinking that you fuppofe me too prefuming or officious; which L muft do,, if. you refufe to oblige me. Should that, be the cafe, I could, more eafily forgive your pride, was yourc happinefs alone at; ftake—But when you refleX on the dagger this terrible infraXion muft ftrike to the breaft of, Louifa Sydney, yoU; will be convinced that honour leaves you without an option.. Dear Sir Charles,, afford me the luxury of, making one amiable couple happy,. I ftiall be much, hurt, if you fuffer. any other to anticipate me in the pleafure of doing you a fervice.. An anfwer. I fhall impatiently wait for however, as I, cannot doubt your regard, Ii will fend, by the fellow vvho carries this, orders to Mr.,------------to have my ftock.
in readinefs againft I demand it.
Lady Julia is ftill in clanger, though Dr.. W. has more hopes of her than he had.. About two hours ago ffie was fenfible, and: entreated her mother to pardon the faults ffie. had committed. “ Xet,” added ftie,.
“ if
WHAT YOU WILL
Z
^ if to love Lord Ofmond is one, I cannot:
He is amiable—tenderly at-
renounce it tached to me heart—
—I could not command my it owned him for its lord—and can; never know another—But, if he is hateful; to you. Madam, I will not marry him-— Let
me depend on youT urging^ me. no^ further to become Suffolk’s !”
She got into a violent flood of; tears, which were the firft lbe had fbed fince-three o’clock on Wednefday niQrningo Some time after; fhe complained of her.-head, and fuddenly. fell afleep—That re-frefhment of Nature has been a ftranger to her during her illnefs,,her fever noLhaving permitted its approach for one fingle minute. DoXor W. was greatly delighted his affiduity has been; unwearied.. Pem-berton’sjoy was vifible. Lady.Pemberton’s tears- again, flowed *,-, but from a happy, caufe. When Julia awoke,, her; delirium returned *, yet, upon the whole, fhe feems more compofed;—Lady Pemberton and my wife are entirely reconciled..
Would to God I knew in what fituation poor Ofmond is! Weftbrook’s letter makes me very uneafy about him. Some?
times
208
MAS QUERAD ES; or

times I wifh that he had returned to Lon-J don—nothing lefs than an honourable acquittal can be the confequence of his trial Yet 1 think his abfence from a kingdom where he has undergone fo much, the beft meafure,of reftcring him to tranquillity^ efpecially as he would not be allowed to fee Julia, did he remain in it. I am convinced that fhe will not marry him without Lady Pemberton’s approbation, and that can never be obtained •, for, ill as her daughter was yefterday, at my propofing to fend for Ofmond, (he hinted a difguft at the mention of his name, and laid, it would make little difference to her, whether Julia died or married him.
Can'it be poflible for Heaven to fuffer excellence like Ofmond’s to be fo cruelly oppreffed, and gratify the inhuman wilhes of a tyrannic father!—Montague, what a favage is Weftmorland 1—1 cannot form to my imagination bow he purpofes to aX after difinheriting his fon. He muft not expeX to live a great while ; and who is the cbieX he means fhould benefit bv his
J	✓
diffolution ?—-Strange perverfenefs !—The portrait of fuch a father ought to be held
op
w
YOU W
209
Up to public view, and, by ftriking the beholders with horror, remedy a fault to common in many parents, that of difliking their fons for no other reafon, but becaufe they look on them as rivals, who are to fucceed to the fortunes they poffefs, when death prevents their enjoying them further.
Suffolk has been thought worfe thefe twelve hours paft, than he has been yet. I fuppofed it not in nature. Every moment is expeXed to be his laft. He has been perfeXly in his fenfes, but never teftified the leaft remorfe for the untirnely fate he has brought on himfelf. He alked to fee Lady Julia, and, on being told her life was dcfpaired of, exclaimed, with more ftrength than I imagined him capable of,
“ Ah, it is Ofmond’s abfence has occafioned it!—By Heaven I am fatisfied !— lbe will not furvive me—what a difappointment to his triumph !—My aih^s lhall reft
I feared they would be difturbed
I fhould have
in peace
by his attaining
a
felicity
enjoyed but for his curfed hand !”
Let me own to you, that I commit a violence on my inclinations, when 1 enter
his
2 to
M ASQU E R A DE S; or,
his apartment; but the laws of hofpitality Require that attention often from me, and I
dare not infringe upon therm Jack Ainfley never quits him., Pemberton’s time is divided between his fifter and the Duke.
Lady Caroline I>enley is obliged to leave us to-morrow: (he juft now received a letter, which earneftly demands her pre-fence in Kent,. She very kindly propofed that Emily Ihould remain with us.
Farewel!. and believe Charles
me, dear
Sic
>>

Your (incere friend,,
And nioft obedient fervant;
Mortimer^

WHAT YOU WILL.
%it
To Lord Mortimer.
o
a
St. James's-Square, Saturday, Twelve o'Cloc},,
H, that it were poffible, my excel--ient Lord Mortimer, to convey to^
you the true diXates of rny heart 1-------to
(hew you how fenfible it is of your kindnefs, and how vaft a fund of gratitude it contains!—Be affured there is no perfon to whom i would owe a favour like the one you offer, fo foon as your Lordfliip Think me not proud—Ah, my Lord ! to your generous bofom I will confide fecret more painful to me than words can exprefs——But, dear Mortimer, I cannot attempt to trace charaXers that unftring every nerve—that deprive me of reafon and caufe me to feefi with double poignancy; the curfe of being undeceived Break the feal of Ofmond’s packer, my Lord, and there learn that money ha? no part in the fad ftory—.Confine it in your breaft, and help, me to exculpate the infatuated Louila,^ by cafting the whole
blame
212
QU
i
blame of the affair on him, who in all fituations muft be your Lordihip’s

Much-attached, and for-ever-obliged,
n
A
Charles Montague.

P. S:
I
I am juft going to Weftmorland’^.
the Duke of
V ‘
' s'
To Lord Mortimer.'
My Lord,
St. James's Square,
Will not give youV Lordfhip particulars of the converfation that paffed between Weftmorland and me—to do fo would foil my paper with inveXives and whirlwind
He tells me that Lord Ofmond
paftions. fhall have th
fortune his aunt left him—
but not a ftiver of his own money. The Duke means to marry, and'indulges a profpeX of having a fecond fon, who may prove more worthy than his firft.
I ihall leave London in two hours—you alone know where I jntend to direX my
courfe.
WHAT YOU WILL.
2l3
/
courfe.-----1 once more beg of your Lord-
lhip to forward my packet to Ofmond when you think proper.
I wilh I could carry with me an alTu-rance that the divine Julia is out of danger ! —But I hope much from her youth, and the goodnefs of her conftitution. When fhe is able to bear the fubjeX, tell her not to forget htr vows to her abfent Henry— that r know his ardent attachment to her to be incapable of change ; and that he is the only man on earth who deferv'^es her.—Yet, perhaps, it would be beft to fay nothing to her from Montague. If fhe is ignorant of the real fituation of her friend’s heart, file will deteft the thought of me.—Prefent my beft, my affeXionate refpeXs to Lady Mortimer ; and think me ever, with the
the higheft regard, my Lord,
Your Lordfhip’s
Moft devoted, and obedient fervant,
Charles Montague.
fa
Pii4
MASQUERADES; or

To Lady Caroline Denley.
Windfor, Tuefday Morning,
S you defired. Madam, I take up the pen to acquaint your Ladylhip that. Lady Julia gives us all great hopes of her recovery. She was this morning three hours without the leaft degree of fever, and of courfe perfeXly fenfible. But never did I fee fo many tears fall, as there did in that time from her eyes. She uttered not the name of Ofmond ; bur, calling me to her, begged I would write to Lady Louifa Sydney, and inform her of the occurrences of the paft week—ihe paufed “ Yet, Emily,” cried (he, “ you had beft defer it for a few days longer: we will not difturb her wedding with the found of wretchednefs. Louifa thinks me happy; let her remain in that notion as long as poffible.---'Emily, you ftiall not write for a
while i”
Lady Pemberton begged to know whom jQie would have me write to ?
44
To
WHAT YOU WILL.
2iS
“To Louifa Sydney—Montague, now I fliould fay: to her only. Madam, I do allure you.”
She wept moft piteoufly, and Lady Pemberton feemed concerned that lbe had alked the queftion. I cannot bear to fee her grief; yet DoXor W. fays it muft be encouraged. Lord Pemberton afked, during the interval that Ihe had, if fhe Ihould be forry to hear the Duke of Suffolk was likely to recover ?
“ Ah, my God,” Ihe exclaimed, “ what an interrogation !—No, my Lord, I fliould rejoice at it. You little imagine the many reafons I have to wifh that he may live; but never, if I can help it, will I fee him more !”
Could your Ladyfliip believe, that, not-withftanding the fituation Ihe is in, he appeared difpleafed with her anfwer ? He did indeed ; and turned from her with a peevilh air. However, he commanded hirnfelf fo far, as to make no reply; and left the a-partment.
You obferved, my dear aunt, how beautifully Lady Julia looked during the height of her delirium. Had you beheld her this
morning.
2i6
MASOUERADESj or
morning, you would have repeated the remark. The palenefs of her cheeks, the languor of her eyes, Ibftened yet more by the tears ffie ffied, gave me an idea of delicate lovelinefs that I never had before. Ah, what an angel in perfon and mind is deftined to unhappinefs! About noon ffie became again very ill, and has continued fo ever lince ; but, as the fever intermits, her phyfician thinks he ffiall very fhortly entirely banifh it. Suffolk will live to torment her. I almoft regret it. This day the people who attend him, found a furprizing change for the better in his fituation. By the countenances of Lady Pemberton and her fon, I am perfuaded they ftill mean to give my fweet friend to him. A letter is juft brought from the pdft-office for Lady Julia, which Lady Pemberton has opened -r—-ffie calls me——




ft ^

*



*

0ft



At >my requefty her Ladyfliip has allowed me to tranfcribe the letter. It will convince ypu^ my dear aunt, that evils accumulate,
and
/
w
YOU W
217
and fall without reftraint on the head of the ineftixnable Julia.'
To Lady Julia Herbert.

r
Dear Madam,
AS I am no ftranger to your Ladyfhip’s friendfhip for Lady Louifa Sydney, I take the liberty of entreating you to come
down direXly to Sommerville-Houfe, as ftie is very dangeroufly ill. I fear fome dreadful account from Sir Charles Montague has reached her, as Sir George Sommerville, lam informed, received a letter from him to give reafons why he muft drop his addreffes. Lady Sommerville is my author
I dread the confe-
C'f this intelligence.
ItVOL. III.

L
fjuences
siS
Q.U
quenccs to our poor Louifa !—Haften, dear Lady Julia,, to your friend, and -pour the balm of comfort on her affliXed foul I No one but you can do it.
Sir George is alfo much indifpofed, and confined to his bed. Good Heaven, what a melancholy dwelling is this become ! I ftopped here with my Lord in our way from London, and intended to have proceeded home to-morrow ; but until I hear from you, I fhall not ftir.
With every good wifh for Lady Pemberton, Lady Mortimer, and all under her roof, I am, dear Madam,
Your Ladyfbip’s
AffeXionate and obedient fervant.
M. Arne.
Sommerville-Houfe, Monday Night,
/
A

V
WHAT YOU WILL;
2if
Lady Pemberton knows not how to
aX.
She is fearful of communicating this
information to Lady Julia in her next interval. If fhe does, I think it will effec-' tually cure her of all diftrefs ! She is now writing to acquaint Lady Arne of her daughter’s illnefs.—Adieu, my dear Ma-
(
I am,
Your Ladyfliip’s
Moft dutifully affeXionate
Amelia Edgcumb.
L z

MASQUERADES: or

To Lady Caroline Denley.
Windfor,' Saturday.
Have the happinefs to tell ynur Lady
fhip that Lady Julia is able to quit her bed, though fo v.:eak and emaciated as to be obliged hill to confine herfelf to her apartment. She has entirely loft her fever, and DoXor Vf. declares that his attendance is no longer neceffary. Would to God I could inform you, that the painful gueft which fhe harbours in her breaft, feems alfo about to depart! but, alas ! her afifiXion is yet exceffive—the fource from whence her ev-es flow is Inexhauftible, and the
ft	^
torrents of tears fhe now drops, fall in lieu of thofe that refufed to come when their aid was fo much wifhed for. I know not in what manner ftie can demonftrate an additional forrow; for, ah ! my Lady, additional forrow yet awaits her. Her mother
an anfwer to her letter it to acquaint her, Sommerville died laft
juft now received
from Lady Arne: chat Sir George
T hurfday
WHAT YOU WILL
or*
Thurfday night. The unfortunate ILouifi’ was too ill to be informed of a catahrophe fo fhocking when Lady Arne wrote. Good God, what will be the end of all this calamity ! But the omnipotent Being judges; beft how to difpofe of the creatures his hand has formed, and will furely make the prefent miferies tend to the benefit of the moft:;
perfeX of his works, though it might not be given us to difcern in what manner. If Sir Charles Montague has (like the generality of his fex, when they have no longer difficulties to combat with) grown.weary of the affeXions of an amiable, beautiful objeX, and by his perfidy brought her to the ftate fhe is in—ife by his ingratitude to her, he has fhortened the exiftence of a worthy,, venerable perfon,—great Heaven, how will his account ftand at the laft day ! The man who in a heat of paffion-who in a moment of intoxication---takes the life of another from whom perhaps he has-received injuries,. is condemned to death ; but we hava no law which punifhes, as he deferva^s, the wretch that robs an innocent woman ©f peace, and: occafions her to execrate each. moment that ffie endures a life more tor-
^3
men ting.
222 MAS Qir ERADES; or,
menting than the moft cruel death that even a IsTero could devife. It would have been kinder of him to have prefented a poniard to Sir George’s bofom—to have adminifter-ed a dofe of poifon to him—than to have killed him with grief! The crime is juft the fame in rhe eye of heaven, though made of no confequence by mankind, elfe we fhould not find fo many infiances happen of its commiflion amongft our acquaintances. It is impoflible to name three perfons fo amiable, fenfible, and charming, as Lady Julia, Lady Louifa, and Lord Ofmond—it is as much impoflible to name three perfons fo miferable as they are 1 Heaven grant them comfort, and me to fee them yet as bleffed
as I wifh them !
Montag

in one night, loft at hazard more than his whole fortune was capable of paying. Mr. Ainfley, who is acquainted with every body’s affairs, with all that is done or faid —who is ever impatient to be the firft to tell any remarkable piece of news,—a little while ago, gave me this information ; but, on my queftioning the matter pretty clofely, I found he could noc authenticate the intelligence
WHAT YOU WILL.
Ifgence by any one circumftance—No; no! Sir Charles has loft no money; but he has withdrawn his affeXions from the lovely Louifa, and has caft them? on fome very inferior objeX, May lbe experience the torment of forfeiting a heart (he has inveigled from an amiable girl whofe right it is! Not that I think, the purchafe of fuch a one at all defirable, or a deprivation of it in faX to be regretted •, but we cannot eafily reafon away the fad affliXion of difcovering the man on whom, we have placed our tendereft affeXions to be unworthy of them, as our difappointment lerves only to embitter the anguifti of being feparated from the perfon at once beloved and delpifed. Paradoxical as this may found, it is I am allured but too often the cafe ; and a female thus fituated is a creature truly pitiable!
The Duke of Suffolk is in a fair way of doing well. Lady Julia’s relations have been lo humane as not to mention his name to her, fince I wrote laft. You may be certain fhe (tudiouijy avoids every fubjeX that refpeXs him..
The good Mournies has received new life fince her fweet young Lady has beene pronQunced, out of danger. Her attachment
L
4
m
y
224 MAS QU ERADESj o r,.
is well accounted for. She lived in the family before my amiable friend was born: when that event happened, fhe took charge of her immediately, and they have never been feparated a week together fince. Mournies is. the daughter of a reputable Bourgeois who refided in Dijon. By a feries of misfortunes, himfelf, his wife, and four girls, were reduced to extreme poverty. The late Lord Pemberton and his Lady, in making a tour of the middle provinces of France, remained at Dijon a few days; fome lucky accident brought them acquainted with the miferable group, whom they bountifully relieved, and, at the mother’s requeft, Lady Pemberton took her eldeft daughter, then about nineteen, into her fervice. Her Ladyfhip found her tolerably accomplifhed for one of her ftarion, of excellent principles, and well calculated, in fpite ofLer youth, to attend on growing
perfon
V #
She proved herfelf more worthy
every day of Lady Pemberton’s kindnefs, and demonftrated the higheft fentiments of gratitude. On the Ladies quitting the convent where they were educated, Mournies became the maid only of Lady Julia, who Fas the moft tender affeXion for her. At
WHAT YOU’ WILL. 225
prefent this. amiable creature is in wrath with Mr. Ainfley. Unhappily for; the little animal, he chofe this morning to diftinguiih a very favourite lap-dog of La-• dy Julia’s by fome marks of attention ; the* dog, in a playful way, not uncommon,, fnatched rather rudely at his hand •, Mr,'-Ainfley (who of the two owned leaft fa-gacity) fancied: Bijou mad, and,, without^ hcfitadon, or refpeX to punXilios of'Ceremony, (hot him dead on the fpot. Mour- -nies, on hearing the- dreadful fate of her Lady’s (and of courfe her own) much-loved' Bijou, ffl*w to Lady Pemberton; and, ia* the forrow of her heart, .complained bitterly of his inhumanity. When Lady Julia-t was told o£ if, fhe very calmly faid, tha Mr. Ainftey.aXed very well, if be had caufo for his fufpicion, and bid Mournies not ta-regret what could not poflibly be remedied.. Your Ladyflfip would regard Mournies as*, much as I do, did you fee her afliduoufly: endeavouring to divert Lady Julia’s atren--tion from melancholy fubjeXs. The me
f*-• V
thod (he generally, takes, is, to remind he-i» of the pleafantries that Lady and Xady Louifa,,were for ever praXifm^j
226 MASQUERADES; OR,
on her and Clairon, when they were all in the convent at Paris.

*
*

57?
*
Good God, my dear Madam! what 3 a requeft has Lady Julia this inftant made me! It is to write Lady Louifa an account of the quarrel between Lord Ofmond and the Duke; to deferibe the fad confequences. that enfued from it —A hard talk indeed 1 but Ihe fhall be obeyed—Perhaps the hand of death may clofe the eyes of her friend before my letter can reach Sommerville-Houfe. Should ir arrive at an improper feafon, Lady Arne will not fuffer it to be given to her—there is fome comfort in that
thought.---Again L^ady Julia fummons.
me-------









She will write a few lines herfelf to her friend, fhe fays, to prevent her entertaining; caufelefs apprehenfion i “
for, my dear Emily,” added (he, “ if you-tell her I have* been dangeroufly ill, fhe will fuppofe me
ftil
iW.
w > »>
w
YOU W
in that condition, unlefs (he fees mjp
©wn writing.. I will therefore fcratch a few-lines, and enclofe your melancholy detail^ which I prornife you I fhall not give myfel the torment of perufing
putting her hands on her heart,. “ in fuch indelible charaXers as no time can ever obliterate, or render lefs poignant to my feelings!—But
yet the horrid
faXs are lettered here,”


fhall fee that I do not; feek any means of
prefenting afrefh to my fancy the -images of that fatal night.. Write freely then,.my? Emily : I will not read your letter.


I
I need not mention to your. Ladyfhip that a violent flood of grief followed thefe words: you know what fhe fufiers,. and muft fuppofe it..
Adieu, my dear Madam !* I will imme^-diately fet about the moft painful employ^ ment that ever 1 engaged in.. With dutiful fentiment,. 1 am^ your Ladyfhip’s.
V
affeXionate niece
Amelia

/t
MASQUERADES? oi
9
To Lady Louisa Sydney.
what I' have gone through
NCE more do I addrefs my amiable friend. It is again given me to de-dare the warm feelings of a heart, which, in every ftate, whether of happinefs or mifery, beats refpondent to the lively affection that yours is replete with for your poor Julia —Ah, my Louifa ! what have I not endured fince my pen was laft employed in this manner!—You will compaffionate my wretchednefs, when you are informed of
—You will fympathize more deeply than I wifti you to do» in the fad reverfe of my fortune !-—I have entreated: Emily Edgcumb to give you thofe particulars which my weak hand dares not tranfcribe—fhe will alfo tell you that i. have been indifpofed—but am now almoft recovered^ I enquired yefterday of Lady Pemberton whether you was married ? She-anfwered no*, but could not afcribe the reafon. I afk of you, my Louifa, why delay ? No letter from you has reach-.
ed

WHAT YOU WILL. $2^
ed me for an age. , Ah, do not keep me thus ignorant of your fituation ! I can but ill bear the pain of fufpence juft now. Per--haps you are very ill !-Pity me, my God— and let me not have that affliXion added: to my fufferings 1—Farewel, dear LiOuifa k I fliall foon have ftrength. to write, to yauv
more fully. I am,
#
Ever yours,.
HerrertL
/
Tt
-W '-A*

MASQUERADES;
■»
To Lady Caroline Denlet^
Windfor, Thurfday Morning,
ADY Pemberton found, a little while ago, my deaf Madam, that Lady Julia feemed remarkably diftreffed. She attributed it to the filence of her friend, and, fuppofing that her fears concerning Louifa were raifed to a proper height, to prepare her for the melancholy accounts fhe had ta* tell, informed her with ail poffible cautioa
She was.
of what Lady Arne had written, inexpreffibly fhocked and, as foon as fpeech was afforded her, 'entreated her mother to let her fet out direXly for Sommerville-Houfe.
the propofal.
Lady Pemberton ftarted at She afked how in her ema-
ciated ftate fhe could think of undertaking fuch a journey ? How fhe could have a defire to be prefent at affiiXing feenes that. muft be deftruXive to the fmall ftock of fpirits that fo fevere an illnefs had left her I “ Ah, Madam,” anfwered Lady Julia, “ the fatigue of travelling cannot harm- me. Remaining;
WHAT YOU WILL.
tnainmg at a diftance from my unhappy Louifa,. when the fight of me would calnT; her difturbed mind, muft do it much more-effeXually. I have never been felfifli e-nough to wifii to avoid a fpeXacle of woe,, if my prefence could be a confolation ta any poor fufferer—fhall I be now afraid of it, when Louifa Sydney is the objeX of compafiion I Oh, my mother! let me haften to her. In adminiftering comfort to*
, her griefs, I ihall learn to forget my own.n Dear Madam, refufe me not every thing that concerns ray peace 1” “ Every thing,. Julia!” faid Lady Pemberton with an air of dirpleafure; “ I never refufe your wifhes but in matters that, you ought to be fenfible, would make you miferable, were I to grant them.”
And is it the cafe now, my Lady ?”
“ It is, 1 ihould be mad, was I to fuffer your departure from me at fuch a-, time.”
“ Unfortunate girl!” exclaimed Lady Julia: “ 1 have indeed loft your confidence, Madam f you make me feel it very fenfibly—Ah, my Louifa!^—you be the viXim of my mother’s fears.”
She wept bitterly. Lady Mortimer afk-
ed
y
232 MASQUER AI>E Sj or;
ed’why fhe would feek to diftrefs herfelf fo unreafonably ? What fears her mother, could have, excepting fuch as refpeXed her health ?
“ Far other fears.
my mother’s bofom !
replied fhe —Dear
tf
occupy Madam, be pleafed to anfwer me with candour,” addreff-ing Lady Pemberton : “ Are you not afraid that I fnall fee Lord Ofmond—that; F fhall
correfpond with him when from under your eye ?—You are filent,, my. mother—ah,- L read your thoughts too plainly !——You. think I have already aXcd with difguife, and may do fo again—but be. convinced,., that I will take no ftep which can draw on. me your cenfure. Without your approba-r tion, my eyes fliall never behold Lord Oft mond. I will fhun every fpot where there:
No let-
is a probability of his appearing, ter from him fhall be received by me ; nor will I ever make him mafter of aline of my writing, unlefs I have your leave for it* I will bind myfelf by the moft folemn vows in each article, fo you will but .let me try to fave my Louifa.—Dear Madam, if you doubt my affurances, appoint fome vigilant perfon, whom you. can truft, tOi yard my. conduX-r—to watch over every
aXion.
W H AT YOU WILL.
231
aXion—I lhall think it no hardfhip—and
let that perfon b merville-Houfe.
my companion to Som-Yet, Madam, I will give you an inftance of my fincerity, by declaring, even in the moment when moft of all I dread your difpleafure—when I moft apprehend its being a barrier to the favour I folicit, that, though I marry noc Lord Ofmond, his image will be ever prefent to my thoughts. I have made him a prornife of not uniting myfelf to any other, and I will keep it as inviolably as I do my faith in heaven—^nay more ! I fhall thank any of my friends to inform him of the obligations I am confined under, and that obedience, but not inclination, conftrains me to adopt fuch a carriage.—^1 have difclofed the fituation of my heart to you—I have vowed to do no more than continue to love Lord Ofmond.—I fee your Ladylhip is angry the moft rigid duty cannot exaX a further facrifice than what I have made. And now, my dear mother, on the conditions I propofe, permit me to vifit my Louifa !—My heart feels forely oppreffed’; do not add to weight it endures by keeping me from her, I conjure you !
234 MAS QU ERADESj or Lady Pemberton, obferving
a
grew paler every inftant, that her eyes affumed a languor rather alarming, and that fhe breathed fhort. feemed terrified.
“ Compofe yourfelf, my dear girl!” faid fhe; “ you exhauft your fpirits. I will confider on what you demand; and, if my reafon does not abfolutely oppofe it, I will indulge you,”
Lady Julia clafped her hands with meek fervour: “ Bur, my dear Madam, every moment is precious—pardon my prefumption—when, my mother, lhall I know your determination ^
“ In an hour,” faid Lady Pemberton,! and left the room. We begged her to re-pofe a while on a fofa.
“ My dear Caroline—my kind Emily,**' cried fhe, “ J can tafte no repofe.”—She ordered Mournies to pack up immediately a few cloaths. “ I know not,” faid fhe, “ whether fome other perfon may not be appointed to attend on me—I fear you will be left behind.” “ If I do not go with you,” anfwered fhe in French, “ I will certainly follow you ; therefore, I may at the
jm	M	M	A	/	^

99
cloaths

WHAT YOU WILL.
23s
“ Well, make hafte, my good Mournies ; let us not be acceffary to the delay of this journey.” Mournies departed to execute her charge.
“ And now, Caroline,” faid the fweet Julia, “ tell me whether you know a being who has more reafon for grief than I have
I have incurred ;
—and for
My mother’s difpleafure her countenance plainly reveals it what ?
Why, for loving a man fhe is unhappily prejudiced againft—a man whofe perfeXion makes him the boaft of human nature. I cannot help regarding him beyond every other of his fex—indeed, was my heart capable of change in this refpeX, I fhould be the moft defpicable of creatures Yet I have obeyed the injunXions of du-i I have promifed to hold no communi-
cation with him hard facrifice!
never to marry him and ftill it weighs very little with Lady Pemberton ; her affeXions are alienated from me; fhe is diffident of
my honour, mond—
Separated for ever from Of-
—confeious of the pangs he fuffers, which penetrate my bofom with double woe—held unworthy of my mother’s confidence—^nd perhaps at this moment robbed of the friend who was dearer to tne than
life

236 MASQUERADES; or
i
life —in what fhape, my Caroline, can fur-* ther diftrefs approach me ?”
Her fifter wiped away the tears that fell on her cheeks^—her own eyes were not dry.
Let me not imagine, ray dear Julia,”" file replied, “ that your piety fled with your happinefs. It lias hitherto been your bright^ eft charm-; and the Almighty chufes to try the ftrength of it, by fending you affliXions. If you fuftain them vvith proper refignation, how pleafing in his eyes will you render; yoiirfelf,^—and what an example to your fex! I really cannot blame Lady Pemberton for objeXing to your departure from, her at fuch a time : fhe has no fufpicions
fentiments, and only
If, in confequence
injurious to your fears for your health, of your prefent removal, you fhould re-lapfe into the dangerous illnefs from which you are fcarcely recovered
if Lady Pemberton fhould be deprived of her daughter —Ihe muft eternally reproach herfelf for confenting to fo improper a requeft.”
“ Ah, Caroline! Lady Pemberton no longer retains that warm tendernefs for her; Julia that always made me fo happy. My death would be an affliXion foon forgotten !
V	^	O
but there is no probability of its happen-
ing-
WHAT YOU WILL.
237
ing from my vifiting Louifa. Say nothing more to diflTuade me from it. Haften to my mother, and urge her to let me depart immediately.” Lady Mortimer faw it vyas impoflible to refufe her, and went in pur-fnit of Lady Pemberton. Wliat they have refolved, I know not; but they are both clofetted vvith Lord Pemberton and his wife, I left Lady Almeria with her After, whofe pale, emaciated form, and ftrearning eyes, affeXed me too vifibly to allow of my remaining in her prefence.
Hr
*
at
*





Eleven o'clock.
It is at length determined that Lady Julia is to leave vis. The carriage is preparing to cany her away from Windfor— my heart finks at the thought. Lord Pemberton is to be her efcort.
Lady Julia is all gratitude for her mother’s kindnefs in permitting her departure. She certainly aXs from the impulfes of her heart, not in conformity to her judgment; for file fears, as I do, that the journey will be prejudicial to her daughter, but cannot prevail on herfelf to put a negative on a re-
quefl:

MASQUERADES; or
queft fo ardently made to her. Lord Pemberton’s poft-coach conveys them to Som-luerville-Houfe—I fee it driving round—I muft bid adieu to my angel friend—Ah, how painful is the idea of parting with her I






#
%




I fourid Lady Julia in her mother’s a-partment on her knees, begging to be admitted to the fame place Ihe had ever held in her affeXions—What a beautiful figure for the pencil of fome artift would fhe have made at the time ! Lady Pemberton raifed, and preffed her to her bofom. She affured her that there was no alteration in her fentiments concerning her; begged her not to attribute her refufing to give her to Lord Ofmond, to caprice, or a change in her re-
I and added, that fhe would, in feme future day, think the difguft fhe fhewed to the match very reafonable—and that her happinefs, when the firft intoxication of paffion was over, would certainly be the viXim of fuch a union. Lady Julia liftened with melancholy attention whilft her mother fpoke. When fhe finifhed, file again repeated her affurances of not
devi-
gard
what you will.
^39
deviating in the fmalleft point from the prornife (he had made her Ladylhip. She told her, that, as it would be a great confolation to her to remain a few months with Louifa, (if it pleafed heaven to fpare her to her,) fhe fhould take it as a particular favour, if her Ladyfhip would allow her to do fo. Her mother faid. That, though flie muft lament her abfence, and be impatient for her return, yet fhe fhould be entirely miftrefs of her own time, and fpend it where fhe chofe.—Some one rapped at the door. Lady Pemberton fuppofed it to be her fon, and bid the perfon enter. How aftoniflied was Lady Julia to fee Mr. Ainfley appear !
it was the firft time of their meetino- fincethat
* . . • , ^
dreadful night which witneffed fo much confufion. She trembled, and threw herfelf into a chair almoft fainting.
“ Pardon, Madam, this intrufion,” cried he to Lady Pemberton; but I come an humble fuppliant to Lady Julia from my Lord Duke.”
“ Good God, Sir!—what—what can he have to afk of the woman who owes all her wretchednefs to him?—Tell him to forget me—that to be freed from any importunity he could make, I would drag this feeble
form

*24®
MASQUERADES; or
form over the whole world, and be welt fatisfied, could it be a means of my avoiding him.”
“ How fhall I bear fuch an anfwer to the unfortunate Duke ! Dear Madam, be more kind! RefleX on his agonies in knowing that you are about to leave Windfor—that he is hateful to you !—A man who loves fo defperately as he does, who profeifes”- *--
“ I will liften to none of his profeffions tell him fo.”
“ He fears, your meeting with the vile Ofmond, when from under Lady Pemberton’s fanXion, might caufe”----------“ The
vile only can call Lord Ofmond vile ! Leave my prefence inftantly, Mr.
Good God," is this a time!
99
Ain-
lley—Good God," is this a time!—Madam, do you authorize Mr. Ainfley’s freedom ?”
“ I do not wifh Julia to fee you made uneafy ; but ftiil, my dear, you fhould hear what he has to impart from the Duke.
I will fay it in a few words: he begs to have the honour of feeing Lady Julia, before fhe goes, for five minutes.” “ No Sir; never, never with my own confent, ihall I approach him ! As a fellow-creature, 1 wifh him well j but, if he is defirous of
obliginff

w
YOU W
241
obliging me, he will banifh himfelf from my fight for ever.—Emily, you fay the coach waits—why do I thus loiter ?” Lord Mortimer came in : fhe gave him her hand, and he led her out of the apartment.
In croffing a parlour, a little Italian greyhound of Lord Ofmond’s, which he was remarkably fond of, and which I imagine he forgot in his confufion to take with him, ran towards the beloved of his Lord ; it appeared overjoyed to fee her, and fawned upon her with extafy. She took him in her arms, and with many tears returned the careffes he gave her. “ Carry him with
— ------ “ Carry
” cried Lord Mortimer.
Ah,
What
you, Julia,
no !” fhe replied; “ I dare not. will Lord Pemberton fay ? It may be looked on as a violation partly of the promifes I have made, to take with me any thing Lord Ofmond is fo much attached to—it may look as if I meant to renew the intelligence we fo lately held, by afibrding him an opportunity of feeing or writing to me, either of wffiich he mult do, to ciaim his Fidele.” ‘‘ And think you,” faid my Lord, “ he will only on Fidele’s account feek to fee or write to you ?—unjuft girl!” “ Here
VoL. Ill,	M	comes
^12
MASQUERADES; or
c
comes a fecond time, my brother, the deteftable friend of Suffolk—I will hold no further converfe with him ; let me fly !
My fweet Fidele, never more ftiall I behold you, or the dear objeX to whom you belong !—Horrible refleXion !” She put down the dog, and went towards th coach with fpeed enough to avoid Mr. Ainfle}', who no doubt came to enforce the jequeft he had before with unparalleled effrontery made to her. Fidele feemed unwilling to be again deprived of her, and leaped into the carriage afer her. As Lord Pemberton entered it, 1 law him ftroke the little animal ; fo I fuppofe he had no ob-jeXion to its attendance on his fair companion.
I feel ftrangely melancholy now that I have left Lady Julia. Ah, who can know her and not be grieved at her abfence ! Lady Pemberton will remain here till her fon returns, and then fhe goes with him, his wife, and Lady Almeria, to my Lord’s feat in Hertfordfliire, for a few weeks. They are urgent with me to accompany them thither; but I fhall ftay with Lady
mer, till your Ladyfhip gives us the
pleafure
WHAT YOU W
243
pleafure of feeing you at Windfor, and then I am, you know, at your difpofal.
The Duke of Suffolk, Lord Mortimer tells me, is outrageous at Lady Julia’s departure. He judges that fhe has contrived
it merely to meet Ofmond--------he curfes
vehemently his inability to follow, and prevent their happinefs.—I have often heard love called an exalted paffion : ic refines ignoble fentiments, but I am fure it can alfo debale good ones. I will quote the Duke as an inftance. Nothing could be more amiable than he was, till he loved ardently Lady Julia—till jealoufy aXed on his mind like a venomous ferpent; and now, rather than fee her bleffed with ano-
ther, he would gladly hear that ihe
I hate him in his prefent di
no
r
longer lived.— polition with all my heart.
Mr. Ainfley (the Morning-poft of Windfor) fays he received a letter yefterday, which mentions that Lady Henrietta Marchmont and her aunt are at Bright-
O
helmftone. They went down with the Duke of Weftmorland fix days ago. His Grace’s attention to her Ladyfliip appears
M2	to

244 MASQUERADES; or,
to exceed the bounds of friendfhip ; and, it is confidently faid, he means to become a fuitor for thofe affeXions his fon would not accept of. Methinks 1 fliould like to fee in what manner the airs and graces of a lover fit on the old Duke. Sure, had he beheld how inimitably his Ofmond adorn-, ed that charaXer, he never could have been prepoflerous enough, afterwards, to figure in the fame line, however different the objeXs of their choice are ! I do not fuppofe that Lady Henrietta will accept of the Luke : fhe is a great admirer of beauty, and never was woman more paffionately in love than fhe was, three months ago, with Lord Olmond. But time will difcover all !
Lady Mortimer bids me fay, that it will be very kind of your Ladyfhip to haften back to Windfor—
and that fhe
—that her fpirits are fled will ftand in need of fo
confblatory a friend as you are, when her mother and the reft are gone, to cheer her gloomy thoughts. She adds, alfo, that I only cry and fob in concert with her ; that her Lord has no inclination to comfort her,
for
WHAT YOU WILL.
245
for that he is equally unhappy with herfelf at the mournful fituation of their friends and, more than all, fhe wants your Ladyfhip to afiift her in planning feme means or other to reftore thofe friends to that heighc of happinefs from whence they are fallen. That you may be able to accomplifh fo difficult an undertaking, is the fincere wiih of, my dear Madam,
Your Ladyffiip’s
Mofl dutifully affeXionate
Amelia Edgcumb,

i	* *
M 3
Tt
246 MASQUERADESj or
«
To Lady Dowager Pemberton,
O U made me prornife, dear Madam, to write to you very particularly rdpeXing Julia-—I will obey your Lady-ffiip ; and am extremely well inclined to the employment, as fleep is banifhed from
my eyes by the melancholy that furrounds me.
Julia was fo much fatisfied with the idea of vifiting her friend, that, uf)on the whole, I thought her more compofed than I had known her, fince the departure of the man Ihe is unhappily attached to. This compofure lafted for the three firfl; hours of our journey. She fpoke warmly of your-Ladyfhip’s tendernefs—of the pleafure you feemed to feel in Aimeria’s being fo greatly efteemed and admired. She then expatiated on the felicity I enjoyed with a charming companion, like my Sophia, and next mentioned the Mortimer’s. Her dear Caroline, fhe faid, after the much-dreaded
trial
WHAT YOU WILL.
247
trial (he muft expeX is over, would be more cheerful than ever- “ When 1 return to town, my Lord, I fliall find great amufement in mv new relation!
plied,
look
t hat-
gay
my new relation ! ' I re-if we could but again fee her we might boaPc of being as
CD	^	O
happy a family as any in the univerfe,” She bowed ; thanked me with tears; and anfwered, ftie fliould be a moft ungrateful creature, if (he did not derive happinefs from knowing that thofe fhe fo highly regarded poflefled it.
I admired a little greyhound which reclined on her lap, and obferved, that I had feen Lord Budenali carefs it. I afked whether it was his prefent ? She trembled turned red, and replied :

It is no prefent, my Lord; nor have I
the dog
a right to bring it from Windfor belongs to Lord Ofmond the coach after me.” I looked graver than I now wifh I did.
it jumped into
“ This dog,
I believe, is efteemed only
on his Lord’s account; and I muft think”
Ci
If it offends your Lordfhip thar 1
M 4
fliould
248 MASQUERADES; or,
\
fhould keep it, you can carry it back to Windfor.”
“ Is ic for Lord Ofmond’s fake that you thus cherifh it, Julia; or is ic becaufe you admire the beauty of the greyhound ?”
“ There is no neceflity for my anfwering the queftion brother—^you can carry him back, if you pleafe.”
“ Say you only admire the beauty of the dog—you have no other motive for being fond of the animal, and 1 vs^ill not deprive you of him.”
“ If you take the dog, you will certainly, my Lord, deprive me of a very great pleafure ; but I fliall not keep it at the ex-
pence of an untruth
the dog
IS
very
pretty ; yet I fliould fcarcely have regarded ir, had it not been a favourite of Lord Of-mond’s, and confequently dear to me.”
“ I do not, Julia, much lik6 this avowal
however, it is an honeft one---1 would
truft you in the company of Ofmond, if I had your word that you would noc liften to him—fo high a dependence can be placed
As to the animal,
Fidele
on you I am convinced, we are not in the age of fairies.
cannot
w
YOU W
24a
cannot fpeak: he has it not in his power to plead his mafter’s paflion ; he is not gifted with any of that fafcinating oratory, which the feducing Ofmond ufed when he made
his way fo artfully to your heart------You
fhall therefore keep the dog.”
Seducing Ofmond /” fhe repeated ; “ would to god, my Lord, you knew his worth”
“ As well as you do! you would fay, Julia.”
“ Aye, my Lord, if you will have it fo! or as well as every unprejudiced perfon does.”
“ Why, it is not your fex alone that he feduces to chink well of him *, but the unwary alfo df his own—to them he appears a model of perfeXion.”
ft
CC
Well, my Lord !—you, who are
wary aflumes
who fee through the difguife
he
—pray give me to underftand what are thofe faults for which you arraign him ? Hitherto you have condemned him in general terms only. Has the Duke of Suffolk told you of fome vicious tendency that he hasor did your penetration de-
M 5
y
'1
25© MAS QU E R A D E S; o R,
teX him in the praXice of any immorality ?”
“Ha ! upon my foul, Caroline has given you leffons ; you fpeak wkh warmth, Julia!”
“ Pardon me, my Lord •, I mean not to offend, but to know whether it is out of fraternal tendernefs you feparate me from the only man I ever did, or ever will love ; or whether it is to fatisfy the rancorous malice of the hateful Suffolk ?”
“ Have a care, Julia ! It is rather poignant to have a friend fpoken of with fuch
unreafonable bitternefs”------
“ And how much more poignant, my Lord, to hear the man in whom ail my love centers loaded with afperfions he merits not ?—-Believe this, and tell it to
your friend----Lord Ofmond feduced not
my affeXions: they were fixed on him long before I imagined that I was dear to him. It is unkind of you to renew my affliXion on his account, when I am about to encounter an aimoff infupportable lhare iii beholding the wretched fituation of my poor Louifa !	1 make not Lord Ofmond
my
WHAT Y O U W I L L
251
my topic •, I do not tire the ears of any-one with the fubjeX. In pity, therefore, my Lord, let his name reft ; let it be forgotten by all but her—who muft ceafe to think, ere fhe can ceafe to think of him.”
She was violently affeXed—I repented
from my foul all that I had faid
re
I wifhed
the cur at the devil for giving rife to fuch a converfation. Mournies looked at me as if I was more void of fenfibility than the quadruped itfelf. I threw my arms round Julia; I begged her to forgive me —ever foft and amiable, flie exchanged the words with me, and accufed herfelf of petulance. She tried to regain her ferenity? but it was impoffible..
When we were within fixteen miles of
So m m er v i 1 le- Hou fe,
alarmed.
file
grew extremely She would frequently catch me by the hand, and exclaim,
Lord, we find her dead !”
her fearsbut
Suppofe, my I endeavoured
to quiet lier tearsOut they abted fo powerfully on me, as to make me almoft a coward.
I
We ftopped to change horfes :: her to alight and take fome
urged freftnnent,. “ Oh, no,”
M
re
fhe cried, “it would
6

ZS2
MASQUERADES: or
be wafting time! I ftepped out, and brought her to the carriage a glafs of weak negus. I'o oblige me, fhe put it to her lips, but declared fhe was incapable of
I heard her afk one of the
of the “ Yes ” Sir
fwallowing.
thing
the perfon anfwered.
people, if they knew any family at Sommerville-Houfe ?
“ the worthy George Sommerville died this day week ; and I heard the day before yefterday, that his niece Lady Louifa Sydney was danger-oufly ill.” “ And have you received no intelligence concerning her fince r” cried the terrified Julia, “ No, my Lady,” was the reply. I really trembled left we fhould find Louifa no more : fuch a fhock would, I was well convinced, put an end to my fifter at once. I went into the ftable-yard, and, beckoning to one of the footmen, bid him ride as faft as pofiible to Sommerville Houfe—if the worft I dreaded had happened, to meet the carriage, and fay, he had juft been informed by a tenant of the late Sir George’s, of whom he had enquired for Lady Louifa, that Lady Arne, unwilling fhe fhould be in the houfe at the time they were about to inter her unde’s
remains.
WHAT YOU WILL.
253
remains, had carried her to Southampton that very morning. I took neceflary precautions to make the poftilions keep a flow pace; and was determined, if the fellow repeated the words I put in his mouth, to bring Julia back to the inn we had juft left, where I found the people fufficiently ignorant for my purpofe of the fate of Lady Louifa.
By this time night had approached— it
—an inundation of
was uncommonly dark
fell from the heavens
rain
whittled the tolling of diftant bells
the
from every corner. We
wina heard a univerfal hor-
ror feemed to overfpread us. Julia, cold
threw herfelf
and trembling, fom, as if for refuge. “
“ I have
into my bo-Ah, my Louifa,” Ihe exclaimed, “ I have loft you 1 The very heavens compaffionate, and fympathize in, my forrows!—Montague, can it be that I owe fuch a misfortune to you ? —Dear brother, who knows but fhe wiflied to fee me—to breathe her laft in my arms !
She had no mother to watch over her to foothe her foul in its agony with maternal tendernefs—no fifters near to officiate in fuch kind offices, as relieve the heart
when
254
MASQUERADES; or
pain: aban-
when overcharged with grief and remote from evefy dear connexion— doned by the man who was to have blended each affeXionate title in one—left to the
V
care of an ill-natured aunt, and unfeeling
fervants, Ihe died.----Oh how flight muft
fhe have thought my regard for her f”
I blamed her for fuppofing a circumftance, which I faw no reafon to apprehend had happened; and afked her, if fhe reckoned it as nothing for her Louifa to have Lady Anne with her? I reprefented vchat a terrible effeX it might have on the poor invalid, to behold the perfon, who came with an intention of giving her comfort, fo deprefled, fo much herfelf an objeX of affliXion, by harbouring imaginary fears, as to ftand more in need of confolation than the friend whofe deftiny flie deplored. I ufed every art I was mafter of to prevail on her to let us return to the inn, and remain there till to-morrow, when fhe would be properly compofed to meet her friend. I propofed difpatching a fervant immediately to Sommerville-Houfe, to fay the Ladies might expeX us in the morning. I could noc by any means gain.
her
\
WHAT YOU WILL.
25S
her confent: (he begged, as a teft of my
fondnefs, that 1 would ftart no impediment to the completion of our journey as
"There was fomething fo
foon as poffible. touching in her manner made with fuch ardour, fifted
in
would have
diftliading her from
been cruel.
her entreaty was that to have per-
going on.
CC
We were within fix miles of the houfe, when Edward (the fellow I had fent) rode clofe by the window. I put down the lafs, and afked if he wanted any thing ? Yes, my Lord,” he anfwered, to tell you that I have juft heard Lady Louifa Sydney is better than fhe was, and that there are ftrong hopes of her recovery.” Julia uttered fome ejaculations of gratitude to Heaven—the poftilions were ordered to make hafte; and we compenfated by the fpeed with which we flew, for the time we had loft before.
As we entered the gi’eat gates that enclofe the coach-road up to the houfe, and which is of confiderable length, we faw a prodigious light advancing towards us. As we each approached, we perceived a great number of men on horfeback, bearing
icijL^6 MASQUERADES; or,
ing torches in their hands, and moving flowly in proceflion. We were not at a lofs to know, that it was Sir George Som-merville’s body they were conduXing to its laft melancholy habitation. We were obliged to ftop until the difmal pageant pafled. I bitterly regretted their chuftng to render the fcene more affeXing, by per-fomiing the ceremony of burial in the night, on my fifter’s account, whofe fpirits did not ftand in need of fuch an additional
fhock as this muft have
given
them.
Thirty or forty men on horfeback riding in pairs carried torches ; after them followed the herfe, with twelve perfons on each fide, walking, with torches in their hands alfo: they were fucceeded by tvvelve mourning coaches, with two fervants behind each, holding flambeaux, and the proceflion clofed with the like number of men as preceded the corpfe, difpofed in the fame manner. You muft imagine that we were detained a great while ere the whole cavalcade paflTed us. When we drove up to the hall-door, too fervants appeared, whofe mourning habits were fuitable to the faces of forrow they wore, Julia was unable to
fpeak
WHAT YOU WILL.
257
recovering her.
fpeak—fhe feemed fainting, and I fupported her weak frame into an apartment they had thrown open for us. I placed her on a
and applied volatiles. Lady Arne ran in, and aflifted Mournies and myfelf in
After we had accomplifli-ed it, (he exclaimed, “ Ah, Madam ! what are my feelings at beholding fo much diftrefs, to thofe of Louifa, who is immediately engaged in it!—How is fhe. Madam ?—Let me fly to my deareft”------
“ Stop, Lady Julia !” faid Lady Arne, “ you are not in a condition to approach your friend—have fome compaflion on yourfelf—on Louifa !
53
“ Your Ladyfhip is very confiderate and kind—■! would not for the univerfe furprize her: but pray prepare her to expeX me foon ; I am all impatience to convince her of the part I take in her affliXions.”
“ Lady Louifa,” anfwered fhe, “ is ftill very ill j yet fhe has paffed the crifis of her diforder, and we have reafon to truft that Ihe will do well,”
Lady Arne ordered in refrefhments-—— fhe endeavoured to divert my fifter’s attention from the purpofed vifit; but it
was
258 MAS QU ERADES; or,
was in vain—no difcourfe could render Julia forgetful of her friend, and that the only motive of her journey was to confole her. Lady Arne retired to obferve whether her patient could bear an interview with Julia. In half an hour fhe came back, and informed us that Lady Louifa waited with the utmoft anxiety to fee my fifter. She begged me to accompany Julia and herfelf to Louifa’s apartment. 1 prefented her my hand, and we followed the eager fleps of Julia.
The invalid was on a fofa, fupported by pillows, emaciated, pale, and agitated. My fifter funk into her arms,, which were opened ready to receive her. They fpoke not a fyllable—but fuch filence was fufii-ciently eloquent, and plainly told the con-ftidting paftions that filled the bofoms of both.
CC
What, dear Louifa,” cried I, unwilling to let them continue in a ftate fo hurtful, “ am I then totally difregarded by you !—-not even a look of welcome after a tedious abfence to an old friend !” She reached forth her hand, and permitted me to embrace her,
“ Thank
WHAT YOU WILL.
259
“ Thank Heaven, my Lord, that I am
allowed to have fo great a bleffing !----1
thank my excellent Lady Pemberton for fparing her to me ; and I thank you alfo, for bringing her to a poor creature, whom I ffiould have pronounced, a few hours ago, but for Lady Arne’s kindnefs, neg-leXed by all the world.”
“ From a number of accidents too tire-fome now to mention, Julia heard not of your indifpolition till this morning—You fee, my dear Louifa, with what hafte we have flown to you—judge by that of our love, and endeavour to get well, if you value our happinefs.”
I cannot. Lord Pemberton,
cannot, my gratitude ! you think it ?
exprefs
----Ah, my Julia ! could
Sir George has never once
vifited me fince”
“ You muft not fpeak much, my dear,’ cried Lady Arne: “ your uncle is fearful of getting the fever you have had—we all diffuade him from approaching you.”
“ Very true. Madam! I am unreafonable and felfifh-----But, fureiy, my eyes de-
ceive me, or you are much changed, dear Julia, fince we laft parted.—Your hurry-
in
26o
QU
O Rj
ing life has been of no advantage to your health, I fear : you are become thin and pale.”
“ Fatigue caufes the alteration, Louifa,” anfwered my fifter: “ mind not my looks
I am very well.
But you have not
fatisfied my folicitude by faying how you are ?”
“ I am free from pain juft now, excepting that which admits of no remedy.
Lady Arne tells me, that in the height of my illnefs Ihe wrote to beg of you to come down-—ftie then mentioned the cruel
----but I am not able to fay
treatment
more—retire, my Julia, and feek fome re-pofe—your countenance fpeaks the want of it. The knowledge of having you under the fame roof with me, will enfure me a quiet night.”
We left her apartment, fearful of ex-haufting her too much. Lady Arne and I conduXed Julia to her chamber, and, taking leave of her there, returned to the drawing-room. She then informed me, that Lady Louifa, about three weeks ago, had taken a cold, which was attended by a
In
fever, and confined her to her bed
the
WHAT YOU WILL.
261
the midft of it, ffie received a letter from Sir Charles Montague, that affeXed her deeply: the confequence was, her fever encreafed ; it attacked her nerves to the higheft degree, and at laft brought her into a moft dangerous fituation. Yefterday, the phyfician (vvho had been called in) declared, would determine her fate— if file out-lived it, flie might recover.
“ She is ignorant, you find,” added her Ladylhip, “ of Sir George’s death. To have told her of it, or even that he was more indifpofed than ufual, would have deftroyed her.”
I enquired for Lady Sommerville.
“ Oh, my Lord, ffie preferves all the forms of forrow generally worn on thefe occafions; but, take my word for it, ffie is a fecond Lady Kitty Crocodile !”
“ Does ffie not feem to compaffionate the condition of Lady Louifa ?”
“ I will give your Lordfhip a fpecimen how far ffie does it. I thought decency required that 1 ffiould this morning attend her. She was buried in affliXion, and anfwered the queftions I aficed concerning her health only with groans, fighs, and fobs.
When
2t62
MASQUERADES; or
When in fome meafure appeafed, fhe demanded whether Lady Louifa had left her apartment yet ?—if fhe was at all concerned at her Uncle’s death ?—or teftified marks of pleafure on the occafion ? I exprefled my aftonifhment at fuch interrogations, as Ihe could be no ftranger to the alarming illnefs of Louifa; and faid I thought it by no means fafe to make her acquainted with a circumftance that muft at leaft render her wretched—not to fay a word of the difmal effeXs it might produce on her at fuch a time, and cried, “ admiration !-
She fneered malicioufty. Oh, fhe has aXed her part to -but there is'no further necef-fity for pretending fo much affeXion—Sir George has left her more than ever fhe expeXed to gain by her art—i am now deprived of him in whom all my happinefs centered through her means.”
Madam !
exclaimed I, “ of what you fay !—Through her means?' “Yes, Lady Arne, I repeat the words—through her means—It was owing to her mifconduX that fhe loft Sir Charles Montague’s affeXions.—He thought
o
How,
for Heaven’s fake be careful,”
ijirefi
He
WHAT YOU WILL;
263
He gave Sir George Sommerville fuch cogent reafons for withdrawing his addreffes, as at once broke his heart—-He could not outlive the knowledge of his niece’s dif-honour—Sir George, poor Man ! would never regulate himftlf by my advice—I fore-faw what mult happen very plainly.”—I declared my indignation at her vile aliufion *, and told her how much fhe would fuffer in the opinion of a world, well confirmed in a belief thar Ladv Louifa’s virtue is imma-dilate, if fhe continued to fpeak of her in fo unjuft a manner. “ Immaculate /” She iterated with a drawl immaculate !—Mr.
; “ yes, truly, very Melmoth was glad at laft to fhake her off—her fondnefs became
naufeous to his palled appetite—Oh, fiie would have broken her heart at his defer-tion, had not Sir Charles ftepped in, and fupplied his place—But her amorous nature could not reftrain itfelf—She became his miftrefs, as I before hinted; and in that name loft every title to an honourable union with him.—Your Ladyfhip ftares !—Take it on my word the girl you fo warmly patronize—who wears fo naturally the illufory mafli of innocence, is in truth a moft unworthy
264.
MASQUERADES; or
\
worthy being r----What!—do you think
it is in my difpofition to injure her?—Oh no!—I would even hide her crimes, were they not too fhocking for concealment nay ! after what 1 am acquainted with, were I to let her friends remain ignorant of the viper they cherifh in their bolbms, I fhould hold myfelf culpable in the fight of God. I arn anxious, Lady Arne, that fhe fhould acknowledge herfelf in health, that I might bid her depart from a houfe, which fhall no more be an afylum for vice. Her uncle, poor Sir George !.”—and here fhe affeXed
to weep
99
defired I would infift on her re-
tiring from the world, and hiding herfhame in a remote corner of Scotland, where, amongft the reft, he has left her an old manfion. In that place,” cried he, “ the criminal girl will be fequeftered from mankind—-fhe will have time to contemplate on the mifery that in a future ftate muft be the lot of thofe whi> fubdue not their paffions ; who, inftead of facrificing to Virtue, trample her laws under feet, and feoff at fo fair an appearance—there fhe will be mortified—be humbled
and, 1 truft, at laft
be penitent. I charge you, Lady Sommerville*
A
w
YOU W
265
ville, to repeat thefe words to her—fay, that with my dying voice I lay this injunction on her, to avoid of all things beholding Sir Charles more. Tell her that (he has crufhed the flattering heights of happinefs my fond ideas had raifed for her*, and that the greateft mifery which can be endured I experience in my lateft moments
but I forgive and pity her.
99
“ How was it pofiible. Lady Sommerville,” exclaimed I, “ for Sir George to take at once Sir Charles Montague’s evidence againft his niece ? It was unnatural,
—it is not feafible. His ears were
I will an-
unjuft-
inhumanly poifoned, no doubt, fwer for the virtue of Lady Louifa Sydney !”	“ You are one of thofe pre-deter-
mined people. Lady Arne, who can never be reafoned out of an opinion they have once formed *, and, rather than have it thought your judgment could err in the choice of a friend, will fhut your fenfes to the conviXion of the moft flagrant faults that might appear in their conduX.” “ You are at liberty. Madam, to fuppofe juft what you pleafe of me,” replied I *, “ it is of no confequence: but of this be aflured, that there is a perfon
Vol.IIL	N	who
266
QU
O R,
who will not tamely fuffer Lady Louifa’s charaXer to be falfely reproached—Lord Clermont will trace the matter to the bottom. If Sir Charles has been the author of fuch mean lies (which I own to you I cannot believe), he muft anfwer for them to her brother with his life.” Lady Sommerville changed colour, and was proceeding to inveXive when I quitted her apartment.
/
I expreffed my aftoniftiment at the abominable principles that muft fway l.ady Sommerville’s conduX. “ Surely, Madam,
.exclaimed I, “ Louifa!”
flie fpeaks injurioufly of
it.
if the flighteft circumftance of her charge can be proved juft,” replied Lady
‘ I will be content to forfeit my ex-I am fatisfied that there is not a
Arne, iftence.
word of truth in the whole relation. Ah, my Lord, let us beware of aflifting this vile woman’s fcheme by imbibing the noxious errors fhe feduloufly tempts us with ! Louifa is virtuous—there is no doubt of it! A young beautiful creature deprived of parents—left to herfelf in a cenforious age, without the countenance of any refpeXable
female
\
WHAT YOU WILL.
female charaXer
267
—mufl: be liable to great barbarity from the multitude of flanderers that pefter the earth—from the envious of her own fex, and from the libertines of yours. To reduce Louifa to fuch a fituation is Lady Sommerville’s aim. By tar-nifliing her reputation, Ihe hopes to prevent her finding any fanXion among thofe the opprcfifed girl looks on as friends. "What fource this hatred fprings from I know not; but Lady Sommerville fhall be difappointed in a great meafure. J will take the amiable Louifa to my houfe, as foon as her ftrength can admit of her removal ; and whilft my Lord and I live, (he ftiall never feel the want of parents.”
^ I commended her Ladyfiiip’s benevolence. I faid I was convinced that no malevolent attack could reach Louifa’s fame, if under the patronage of one, whofe excellent qualities were well known all over the kingdom; and that my family and felf fliould hold the injured girl dearer than ever. We feparated, and I will bid your Ladyfliip adieu for the prefent.
N 2

268
MASQUERADES; or.
«
*

*
»


*


•*

»
*

Friday Morning,
Julia has loffered no other inconveniency from her journey than fatigue; the natural confequence even to people in health of travelling poll. She looks better than Ihe has done lince her illnefs.	/
Lady Louifa has had a very good night’s reft : Ihe has not near fo great a degree of fever, and I dare fay will foon regain her health. She and Julia diftrefs me with their acknowledgments for the part I had in bringing them together. I'he meeting delights me almoft as much as it does them, fince I perceive the advantages that have accrued from it.—If Louifa continues on the recovery, Julia will to-morrow acquaint her with Sir George’s death.
I have fent my refpeXs to the fair Ephe-ftan, and begged permiflion to make my compliments of enquiry and condolence in perfon—I wait the anfwer. The forrowing dame has not left her apartments fince the
pQor
WHAT YOU WILL.
269
poor Baronet’s death—Faith, (he grieves too vehennently !
Does not an inftant’s recolIeXion bring back to your Ladylhip’s idea Sir George Sommerville making his addreffes to Mifs Meadows ?---The ridiculous circumftance happened not quite two years ago. Sir George was favourably received on account of his fortune—Mifs Meadows had not a doir, and his age and infirmities were difregarded, till one unlucky evening that fhe met Montague at your houfe. He thought her pretty, and, whilft Louifa Sydney was engaged at cards, paid her fome attention. The Lady^s conftitution being of the amorous fort, at fight of Sir Charles was affeXed—
tion with the hope of his becoming Sir
his notice foon fired her imagina-
George’s rival; and, for feveral days after, fhe behaved fo haughtily to her old lover, as would have caufed an everlafting breach, had he not been abfurd on the occafion beyond expreftion. She waited a month in the flattering notion of Montague’s profefling himfelf an humble fuitor, fparing no pains to afford him an opportunity of making,
the much-wifhed-for declaration. At the
N3
end
270
MAS QU ERADES;or
end of it, finding her expeXation difappointed, fhe held it wifeft to embrace the occafion that then offered of efcaping from poverty, judicioully fuppofing that a girl of five-and-twenty could difcover “ ways and means" enough of engroffing many of the pleafures of life which money might procure, even with a difagreeable companion.—In fine, lbe married him, and, if report fays true. Sir George often wifhed the paffion of love had been confined to the demons of hell, before his bofom had felt the pangs which caufed him to follicit the union—But he is dead, and, in fpite of Madam’s tears, I believe fhe is content ! ———Now, I have a ftrange idea that the Lady’s unjuft charaXer of Louifa proceeds from no other motive, than the fatisfying of an envious, revengeful temper, which hates her for being beloved by the man whom fhe would willingly have exchanged Sir George for.—pi am fummoned to her apartment------
*
*

*
*
*
What a fpecious hypocrite is this 1 How
well
w
YOU W
271
well fkilled in the low art of deceit!—On my entrance to her private drawing-room, fhe advanced feveral paces to meet me. Her black flowing robes, and white handkerchief, gave her the mournful dignity of a tragedy-queen, whilft an attendant ftood behind her, habited alfo in the appendages of woe, with a fmelling-bottle in her hand, which frequently was applied to the difcon-folate fair-one’s nofe. Have I not heard it faid, Madam, that women of a particular Caft find comfort in the death of a hufband, from the recolleXion of the becoming air their fables, will give? My life for it, Lady Sommerville took a degree of pleafure in her fpoufc’s laft moments from the thought! Her-drefs was ftudkd, it fitted her flaape to admiration ; the black fet off her fkin and complexion; and altogether! never faw her perfon appear to fo much advantage. She accepted of my hand, which I offered to conduX her back to her feat; and, after the poignancy of her affliXion was a little abated, fhe found a multiplicity cf words to pour forth her doleful lamentations on the lofs fhe had fuftained in a man, whofe foul was the congenial partner of her own
. N
a man
4
tn
/
272
MASQUERADES; or
in whom her Ufe was fo wrapped up, that fhe was convinced Jhe could not long furvive him— and from that reflexion fhe derived confolation, I cannot tell your Ladylhip the hundredth part of the laughable ftuff (he uttered—At length (be introduced the fnbjeX of Louifa and Montague : almoft verbatim
was
I obliged to liften to the account that
I believe fhe was
was given Lady Arne, vexed at the compofure with which I did fo. I fixed my eyes fteadily on her, during the whole relation. She imagined that I faw through the falfehood which fhe fpoke —confeious guilt fiufhed her cheeks—fhe hefitated in her delivery with an aukward embarraffment. In fhort, had I before any doubts, her manner was fufficient to have convinced me, that fhe was only a vile calumniator of perfeX innocence, As you make this ftory, Madam,” cried I, “ very common, you can furely have no objeXion to entruft me with Montague’s letter to Sir George, Which you fay revealed to him his niece’s niifcondiiX. generous of my friend Montague, to pub-lifh the indulgence he obtained of a lady, —But pray let me read the letter.” She turned pale,
“ Would
It was not altogether
WHAT YOU WILL
273
“ Would it were in my power, my Lord, to gratify you !” replied fbe. “ My dear Sir George, juft before he died, made me commit it to the flames. It was owing to that fatal letter that I am now left to bewail his death!”
“ What was his motive, Madam, for having ic deftroyed
“ That it might not be a teftimony of her ihame.”
“ Good God, how vou aftonifh me 1 I fuppofed, that, by way of wreaking vengeance on bis unfortunate niece, he had enjoined you to fpread the tale abroad ; and I believed, that the violence of your affedtion for him compelled you, againft charity againft compaflion, to obey fo readily his laft commands, which you were careful to fulfil, even in the fmalleft point, by fpeaking freely of this infamous ftory before your very fervants.”
“ He made no requeft to me of fecrefy, my Lord •, and I do not chufe to have my charaXer called in queftion, by harbouring an abandoned creature in my houfe.”
“ Ah, Madam, have a care that your prefent grief is not a burlefque an the me-
N
5
mory
274 MASQUERADES; or,
iTiory of a man whofe virtues demand tears that come fpontaneoufly from the heart! Had you the affeXion you fo ftrenuoufly declare, every thing that was dear to him would be equally fo to you—you would have kept this recital (in which I muft be bold enough to fay there is not the leaft probability of truth) from the world—Sir George’s niece in you would find a tender proieXrcfs, inftead of a mercilefs perfe-cutor.”
Here I unhappily brought on a terrible ftorm. The afflided Lady thought herfelf ill ufed in my daring to doubt the fincerity of her grief. She called me an unfeeling favage—an impertinent wretch!—afked, if fuch were the compliments I had in view to make her, when I fent the mock meffage of refpeX ? She defired me to quit her houfe immediately, and to take with me the fweet, amiable Louifa, who, fhe muft venture to affert, would have no objeXion to me, or any of my fex, that would fupply the place of Sir Charles Montague. After this, ihe fell into a violent hyfteric Hr, from whence I left her woman to recover her as foon as it was judged proper.
To
WHAT YOU WILL.
275
To be fure, my fituation is rather embar-rafling. To remain in the houfe of a perfon to whom I wifh to be under no obligation, and who has peremptorily defired my abfence from it, is infupportable I—but to remove Louifa, who is yet unacquainted with her uncle’s death, is a thing not to be done. My pride muft be humbled, and her Ladyfhip a little further troubled vvith my refidence in “ her
houfe
Curfedly
mortifying!—However, I cannot leave my three amiable companions to become the viXims of fuch a fury. *

*



*
»


Friday Evening,
I prefume Lady Sommerville was firuclc with fome fentiments of fhame for what/ had happened, when her paflion was abated. She fent for me two hours ago, and, with a very ftately air, condefcended to apologize for the harfh epithets fhe had ufed in her agony of mind, as fhe termed it—flattered herfelf I would pardon them, and honour her houfe fl) far as to make fome ftay in it. She faid, fhe was juft told that my fifter
N 6	had
276
QU
OR
had done her the favour of a vifit: fhe hoped to be able to colleX ftrength enough to entertain her in a few days—though Lady Julia could not expeX much amufement in the fociety of one fo loft to pleafure as fhe was, and muft ever be, thus feparated from Sir George—but her gratitude was warmly excited towards Lady Julia for the charitable aX fbe had done, in coming to her at fuch a time* I thanked her for her politenefs, and declared it would not be in our power to accept of her invitation, as we only waited for Lady Louifa’s being in a condition to travel, to attend her from Sommerville-Houfe to Lady Arne’s.
To Lady Arne’s!” exclaimed fhe: “ what! will Lady Arne be hardy enough to undertake the charge of her, after the caution my good-nature prompted me to give !—
place her uncle appointed her to repent in 1 I will go this minute, and deliver his laft
—I will omit in no

J	i	1	i	—
However, Lord Arne’s is not the
if fhe
meffage to Lady Louifa article to mark out her duty to her fails in obeying, I am not amenable to heaven—I muft acquit my confcience !” She was flying haftily towards the door.
when 1 caught hold of her
CC
Stop,
WHAT YOU W
iC
99
Stop, Madam 1” cried. I: “ you forget that you cannot immediately fummon ftrength to leave your apartment—a few days hence will fcarcely afford it to you 1 Oh, what a rage fhe was in I—She at* tempted to ftrike me as I drew her towards her feat—never did I fee one of the fex appear fo mafculine as fhe did at the time. I waited patiently after 1 had replaced her, till fhe had vented her indignation •, determined, if fhe fhould be attacked with another fit, not to ftir till fhe had gone thro* the whole procefs, and I had in fome meafure brought her out of her tranfports. The moment of tolerable compofure at laft arrived, and fhe alked me how it happened, that 1 teftified fo little regard for my fifter’s honour, as to let her be the companion of a creature loft to every principle of virtue r—If, my Lord,” added fhe, “ Lady Pemberton was informed of thofe cir-
cumftances I have mentioned to you, fhe would not efteem Lady Julia’s affociating with a wretch like Louila, fuch a matter of indifference—But young men, like your Lordfhip, make light of thefe affairs !’* “ Too much, dear Madam, has been air
ready
278
masque R A D E S • OR
ready faid on this filly fubjeX. My fiftbr’s honour is the fame with me as my own—it will receive no prejudice from the fociety of Lady Louifa. We will accept of the kind offer you make us of your houfe for a few days ; in that time our patient may be better, and we will trouble you no longer.
She burft into a terrible flood of tears, which was the only paffage her fpite could have, and I retired.*
»»
*

*

*


*
*
I have been confulting with Lady Arne and Julia aboiu informing Louifa of her uncle’s death—they agree with me in thinking it beft not to poftpone the difagreeable intelligence till to-morrow, left Lady Sommerville fhould anticipate us, whofe rude difeovery of fuch a calamity would certainly be produXive of bad confequences. Was it to effeX her deftruXion, I am perfuaded Lady Sommerville would be delighted.
It is refolved, that my fifter fhali direXly prepare her to expeX the worft, by frying that Sir George is very ill —Julia is gone to Louifa’s apartment for the purpofe—I fincerely pity them both 1
w
YOU W
279
It is not poflible to deferibe how uneafy Julia was when I related to her and Lady Arne all that pafled between Lady Sommerville and me. I thought it right to conceal nothing from her. She wept exceedingly, and, putting her arm through mine, exclaimed, “ My deareft brother, what obligations you lay me under, for thus befriending a poor orphan who is fo
! Ah, my Lord, again you are all goodnefs, all tendernefs to your Ju-
crueily afperfed
lia !

And now let me aflure your La-
dylhip, that I am convinced my fifter’s engaging in feenes of the fort, however diftreffing, is beneficial to her in one relpeX: they carry her refleXions from herfelf, and leave her not a moment to think of Ofmond. Time, the great deftroyer of all attachments, and abfence, its twin-brother will, I truft, finifh the
work,
y
and
great
wholly eradicate him from her breaft.
It much puzzles me to conjeXure from what caufe Sir Charles Montague’s behaviour has proceeded. I he more I refleX on the motive which it is faid induced him to wave the connexion he was on the point of making, the more frivolous does
it
zBo
M ASQU ERADESj or,
it feem in my eyes. He always appeared too prudent to be drawn into deep play ? and why his difpofition fliould fo fuddenly change, and he forget his ufual difcretion, more efpecially on the eve of his nuptials, I cannot conceive 1 If he was addiXed to gaming, he indulged himfelf in it fo fecretly, as to leave no clue by which his moft intimate friends could guefs at his paflion. He has ever been thought a man of the ftriXcft honour. Some reafon unfathomable has caufed this rupture—the hazard-table I believe is innocent of the charge laid againft it. What muft we conclude

that Louifa is in fault ?
fible 1
No ! it is impof* Purity and virtue are imprefled on her countenance—delicacy and modefty are marked in every word—in every turn. A devil in human fhape, then, has worked rt.
Lady Sommerville—ah ! might (he not have beep too bufy !—The mifchief is done, and whether the evil perpetrator will ever ftand confefled. Heaven only knows ! Clermont cannot, I fuppofe, be paflive. I wonder he comes not over—he has been long exp Xed.—Upon the whole, the un-happy girl has been ill ufed by Sir Charles,
and
WHAT YOU WILL.
288
and the matter fliould be narrowly feminized.
I fliall attend my Lady Arne, and Julia, to an exceeding pretty feat my Lord has in the New Foreft, where he waits to receive her Ladyfliip and their new charge. I^ady Arne is ail politenefs: fhe treats Julia with rhe tendernefs of a mother, and has befought her in the mofl; earneft manner to fpend fome months with her and the affliXed Louifa. As foon as I fee them fettled at Wallingbrook-Abbey, 1 will return to Windfor, and, with your Ladyfliip’s permiffion, proceed with you, my wife, and Almeria, to Hertfordfliire, where bufinefs calls me at this moment.
I hope Caroline goes on well.—I do not think fhe has heartily forgiven me for a few certain incidents that paffed lately !—I beg you will be fo good as to plead with her for me.

*
Hi
*
Hi
Hi
Hi
Friday Night*
The painful tale is told! When Julia informed Lady Louifa that Sir George was
much
282
MASQUERADES; or
much indifpofed, fhe exclaimed, this prelude ?—-Tell me—fpeak tell me that mv uncle—
46
Why
me
no longer lives!
It at once my uncie—my dear uncle Your countenance—Ju-
lia, he is gone !—I have loft my only pro-teXor—my friend—my parent!” My fifter endeavoured to compofe her, and exhorted her to refleX on the fortitude we are obliged to exert as chriftiaas on fuch trying occafions. Her affliXion was very poignant. I will not excite your melancholy by entering into particulars*, but the fhock was too rough for her at fuch a time, though it had approached her under the gentleft form that could be given it. She had not received the intelligence two hours, when Lady Sommerville made her appearance : Julia and Lady Arne vyere adminiftering confolation to the wretched girl at the moment. It was the firft time fhe had deigned to vifit Louifa’s apartment fince her illnefs, and then fhe came fraught with bane-
Her mourning-habit, added to the unexpeXed fight of her, affeXed Louifa violently, and flie fainted. Happy was it that her fenfes forfook her when they
did,
ful purpofes.
\
WHAT YOU WILL.
283
did, elfe Lady Sommerville’s addrefs muft, I think, have deprived her of reafon for ever.
(C
So, Lady Louifa !” cried Ihe, “ you take fine ftate upon you after having murdered your unfortunate uncle —Sir Charles Montague, Madam, has publifhed your infamy *,—and to the lofs of your honour you certainly muft attribute his defertion I am left a miferable widow through
• I	•	^
your means------Have done wiin this hypo-
crify, and liften to what I am about to fay !”
Julia whifpered an attendant to find me, and defire my immediate prefence-, then, taking Lady Sommerville by the arm, ffie led her to a remote part of the room, and there implored her with tears to Ipare her unhappy friend further anguifli. 1 entered before ffie had an opportunity of replying, and without any ceremony lifted the fury in my arms, and, in fpite of ftrug-
blows, a powerful quantity of virulence and abufe, conveyed her to another apartment. A reproached her with great harffinefs for her Cruelty and fwore, if ffie
offered
284 MASQUERADES; os,.
offered to take the leaft meafure to annoy the peace of Lady Louifa, during the fliort remainder of her abode at Sommerville-Houfe, I would find an eafy way of making her feverely repent it. She looked terrified, and I left her. I wifh to God we could go from hence ! Every moment is an age that we ftay under the roof of this female Dio-nyfius.
*
He

«
He
He
*
*
*
*
He
He
Saturday Morning,
Contrary to our expeXations, Louifa has had tolerable repofe—The phyfician pronounces his patient in a fair way. As I am fo follicitous to quit this place, he thinks Ihe might (with great caution) be removed on Monday morning, provided no change for the worfe happens in the intermediate fpace. Lady Arne and my fifter have made it a point never to leave her apartment together, fearful of another invafion from
Lady Sommerville,
Adieu,
WHAT YOU WILL.
28s
Adieu, dear Madam! I will no longer keep you anxious about Julia.—A few lines muft accompany this letter to my wife. For the fake of expedition one of my fervants fhall be difpatched with both,—Embrace all with you, for your Ladyfhip’s
• Moft refpeXfully devoted.
And affeXionate
Pemberton.
To Lady Dowager Pemberton.
Winchejier,
E have, dear Madam, by eafy ftages, removed Louifa from Sommerville-Houfe to this place. She has borne travelling
w
3tS6
QU
ling very well, and the variety of feenes ferves to check her grief. With much difficulty we prevented a meeting between her and Lady Sommerville-, they were both ftrenu-ous for it, from very different motives, AXual force was ufed to detain the latter from burfting into the prefence of the invalid and flie often alked whether we meant to make a prifoner of her in her own houfe ?—a favourite expreffion of the Lady’s, which fhews, that, had Fortune not been very, very blind, (he would not have been licenfed to ufe it with propriety. Louifa, in the tendereft manner, befought our permiffion to take leave of her unhappy aunt, and to condole with her on their common lofs. However ill-natured it might feem, it was held right to refufe her.
Julia is employed in offices of friendfhip. Her countenance wears a melancholy caft : whether it takes its colour from the affliXions of Louila, or whether what
I can-
nor determine
nefs has entiiely forfaken her gentlenefs—all follicitude to pleafe appears totally deprived of every-thing that
^	borders
(he terms her own are predominant,
certain it is, her chearful-
She is all
but

w
YOU W
iPj
borders on happinefs. If the caufe is as I fufpeX, I cannot but be provoked, that, through romantic ideas, (he renders herfelf completely miferable. However, the perverfenefs of girls dirpofitions is fuch, that to prefs one of them to think well of a man, whom in a moment of caprice (he has vowed never to marry—let that man be ever fo perfeX—only rivets her refolution the fafter, and (he fuppofes (he proves an heroic virtue in combating the oppofition her inclination meets with. We muft therefore fay nothing of Suffolk yet. When Julia finds that we have ceafed to be urgent on the fubjeX, (he may fuppofe he has given up the purfuit—her vanity will be hurt—?fhe will look back with regret on the alliance (he might have made —Ofmond will be forgotten—and fhe will gladly put herfelf in the way of djfcovering
—then
whether Suffolk’s paffion has cooled he will play his part in his fuccefs.
and we (hall rejoice
will effeX !—I
Ail this I hope a little rime
received a letter yefterday from the Duke. I am inexpreffibly glad that he is again capable of writing.
To-morrow we proceed on our journey,
and
m
MASQUERADES; &c.
and expeX to reach Wallingbrook-Abbevr
on Saturday evening. I cannot refufe an mviration I have had from my Lord Arne
r	preffing 'ones
from my Lady, to fpend at leaft a few days with them. ^ I mean to bid adieu to the amiable pair early on Wednefday, and hope to have the honour of kiftlng your hand on that night. If any alteration fliould happen in Louifa, your Ladyfhip
will be troubled with another letter from dear Madam.	*
%
Your ever obedient,
And moft affeXionate
Pewiber-TON.
end of VOL. 111.
■r/
J
/

3
X,

I
. -A- •
■v..
’t
V y y I
*1	'tt.
Al
\j
<
?
c*
fe
/
/
9
\
\
\

MASQUERADES;
O R
V
WHAT YOU WILL.
BY THE
AUTHOR OF ELIZA WARWICK, &c

IN FOUR VOLUMES.
V O L. IV.
LONDON:
«
J’rintcd for J. B E W, in Pater*Nofter*Rovir*
MDCCLXXX.
« .
i

i;
A
r.*
•s.


%


MASQUERADES
f
c*
\
To Lady Julia Herbert.'
Windfor,
E L, my beloved girl! at length am I at liberty to write to you from the uninterrupted calm which pre-fides over your fituation. Your fears are no longer excited on our Louifa’s account •You are no longer perfecuted with the name of Suffolk, or his more odious ad-dreffes—You have efcaped from Seymour from Belfielde—from all who laid fiege
You are now
to your heart unfuccefsfully. at leifure to find fatisfaXion in
VoL, lY.
B
a letter from

MASQUERADES; or
from me, and to let me experience the joy of converfing with you, though at the diftance of many miles.—Bur, alas, Julia ! my fubjeXs muft all run in the melancholy ftrain. I have no fpirits now that you are gone from me. The romantic lhades of Windfor—thofe lhades we ufed to wander through with fuch exquifite delight, loft their charms in every one’s opinion when they loft you. Our favoiuite haunts—the Hermitage—the Wildernefs—the foot-
----all, all wore a
path to the Pavilion-------
different afped from that moment; and, when we viewed the change, flew frorn
them with afflicl;cdprecipitation,difcouraged
from re-tracing them again.—Reftore the pleafure you have robbed us of, my dear lifter, by coming fpeedily to us. Bring with you Louifa Sydney, and we will join you in ftriving to render her once more cheerful.
In two days after my brother arrived bere, he fet off with my mother, his wife, and Almeria, for Hertfordfliire. We are entirely deferted by all but Lady Caroline Denley and Emily, who have promifed to remain with us dll we go up to London
icr
N
w
YOU WI

for the winter. I am refolved not to quit Windfor, in fpice of all the entreaties I received from the party that the Duke ex-peXs to entertain at his feat near Canterbury, the latter end of next month. My Lord refufes to go without me. I like none of the group, not-1! I almoft detefh the Peer who has the honour of-being my uncle *, and I am not a jot more cordial towards his daughter, who ftyles herfelf my fifter.—Good Heaven! how aXuated by pique is human nature !—Lady Sophia cannot forgive a perfon, whofe name it is needlefs to mention, for once faying that Jhe was very inferior in point of beauty ta Lady Julia Herbert. If fhe had as faithful fpies in every company where a comparifon between the two happens to be ftarted, fhe would certainly hate and defpife all the world in a fhort time ! But I did not imagine her difpleafure at fuch a trifle could have been attended with malice in the extreme degree it has. The old Duke’s averfion to that fame unfortunate perfon took its rife from a very fevere farcafm his father threw on him in a warm debate in
the Houfe of Lords many years ago
B 2
it

QU
was too keen—nay, perhaps, tcojuft, ever to be pardoned from the heart, though their fentiments accorded fo exaXly vvith the Stanhopean fyftem, that they kept up the forms of civility, whilft enmity towards each other cankered in their breafts. My good uncle has extended his refentment to the fon, trying as far as in him lies to “ vifit the fins of the father upon the third and fourth gXeration,” &c.—In conformity with this tenet, he fnatched the opportunity of exercifing his wrath, and cut off, by baleful advice, which had too great weight with Lady Pemberton, the happinefs of an already .perfecuted amiable fon. But moft devoutly do I pray that his'vindiXive temper, his daughter’s vanity, and my brother’s pride, may be humbled by their being obliged to call that very perfon by the names of nephew and brother !
So far dees my malice go, and no further -Yet God knows I am in faX only fupplicating Providence to beftow an honour on them, that they are unworthy of! Keep up your fpirits, dear Julia, and rely that all will be well. The bldied ' days you have experien ed, muft again take
their
w
YOU WILL.'
S
that
their turn, and the prefent gloom predominates foon give way to a bright fun-(hine. You want fome of my courage. Did you poflefs what my friends I fuppofe
to think I could fpare, you now be in P’rance, the wife and
—— your heart fliould be
en-
f />
1^5
affliXing
are pleafed would
companion of-------------
will fupply the blank. I gaged in a glorious fcene of altercation, were any of our wife ones to fee this letter ; but they are far enough away, and there is no fear of the poll-boy’s rniftaking Hert-fordfhire for Hampfliire!
I have a piece of news to tell which
exifts!—An exprefs my Lord received this morning, mentions him’amongft the killed in the laft battle our forces had with the Americans,—I know not whether Almeria
I think fhe muft at leaft' be fenfibly Ibocked at hearing of his fate Yet fhe has a happy method of reconciling misfortunes to her mind—She will fay, that,'though he had never feen her his deftiny would have been the fame, ftnce he could not refufe to obey orders, and
you.
Col. Elliot no longer
will regret him
9
follow his regiment,-1^0 the continent
"" S
She
6
MASQUERAUES: or
She will forget that his paflion for her caufed him to embrace the opportunity of fignalizing himfelf with avidity, and moft probably urged him on, in the hazardous enterprife which cofl; him his life.—Poor Elliot !•—I am one of the many who fincerely lament your untimely fall !—But to dwell on this theme cannot benefit him, and will only throw you and myfelf into the horrors.
You can but ill imagine how much on the rack of curiofity I am to learn tha reafon of Montague’s extraordinary behaviour to Louifa.... the one that Lady
Sommerville alleges, is abominable, and can gain no credit with any of us.—By the by, Julia, I mufl: mention (take it which way you will) that I could not help laughing heartily at fome of my brother’s de-
fcriptions of that Lady-----
enjoyed many of her freaks But to return,—Louifa, I
I fhould have wonderfully ! think, cannot
but form conjeXures why he conduced himfelf fo oddly. As appearances ftand, he deferves to be hanged—I am forry he has forfeited my good opinion—he is a fmart,
agreeable creature, and was a great favourite
WHAT YOU WILL.
i
rite of mine.—I hope Louifa wiil not aX
like a fool, and pine to death on the defertion of a worthlefs animal!—-Good God*
what cheats the men are !
■Was
9
already tied to one of the deceitful wretches, I would revenge Louifa’s difappointment by forfwearing the whole fex, and inculcate the pofition in every fair maiden’s bofom that would liften to me. Suppofe, my dear Julia, you were to undertake the caufe ! Hide yourfelf from mankind ; never refleX on an individual amongft them but with contempt and averfion. Your coral lips will attraX as numerous a fe£b as ever furrounded a Whitfield, a Madan, or a Weftley. No old women, who, having tired the world and themfelves with profligacy, and incapable of continuing their vicious courfe, take it in their heads to be-
can dare to intrude on your —No; beautiful, innocent
come pious, community
damfels will compofe your flock, all emulous to learn your precepts, and copy your example. How glorioufly will the wily arts of deftruXive man be fubverted ! How glorioufly will you avenge on the whole race the mifery that one of it has
B
4
givea
/
s
MASQU ERADES; or
given to Louifa!—A charming opportu-' nity, indeed, awaits you, of putting your friendlhip to the teft.
I know I difpleafe you by this levity, at the inftant I exercife it with a defign to make you fmile—but, for Heaven’s fake, let us have no more tears !	1 vow I never
looked at you of late, but it worked the fame effeX on me, as an hour’s abode in Trophonius’s cave would have done.
Crying, my dear girl, will tend to no other purpofe than that of fpoiling your beauty; and I cannot imagine you have given up all relilh for viewing a fine ima
in your glafs,—Be advifed by me ; and as
you have found no advantage from in-celfant weeping, try now the efficacy of incelTant laughing. I hated Lord Cheller-field from the minute I difcovered that he prohibited that charming evolution of the features, and I have fet it down in my idea that he had not a tooth in his head ; or, if he had any, that they were fo black, he thought it right to conceal them—therefore tried to render it the cuftom not to go
Well!” vou crv. “ and
beyond a fmile. he fucceeded
you cry, none but Bores laugh now.’*
—We
WHAT YOU WILL
•We will reverfe the Julia—none but Bores fhall look grave Sure, we are of confequence enough to in-ftruX people how to wear their features^ as well as his Lordfhip !

.*
*
*
*
He

He

He
He
%

*

*
He

Weftbrook is arrived, my deareft fiflerol He left our friend in Paris with Mr»-Montague, from which place they intend-* ed to fet off the next day for S witzerland^ The Marquis, he fays, is a piXure of love and defpondency *, but hia health is. as good as a perfon’s can be, who labours-under diftrefs of the acuteft fort. 1 enclofe a letter which Weftbrook was bid t& convey with great care to your hands.. A lover will fpeak his own paflion beftfo. I refer you to him. He was urgent to-come over to England with Sir James,/andl aXually intended it, had he not received-a letter from Lord Mortimer the day before they propofed quilting Paris o-n their return, which ftrongly recommended
hiixt to remain abroad fome months,
Bs
10
MASQUERADES: or


part of your family could be foftened towards him, by the meafures that ffiould be taken for the purpofe by the other part. With infinite reluXance he obeyed, as h will no doubt tell you ; and made choice of one of the Cantons, as a place he could beft lament fo cruel a feparation in.
Sir James met Mr. Norton at Calais: they came over in the fame veflel, and,, through the perfuafions ofWeftbrook, he honoured us fo far as to accompany him to
Windfor.-----Mr. Norton came -to take
pofTeflion of an eftate left him by a coufin of his, elfe he did not mean to leave Italy fo foon. We knew very little of him, which was to our difadvantage: few people .'improve more on acquaintance than he
. He is fenfible and clever, and there is an ingenuity in his manner that 1 like extremely.
Clermont.
I queftioned him about Lord
He told me he is yet at Rome, and hinted, that a native of that capital
detains him there fo long: “ However,’* added Mr. Norton, “ he afllired me, that I ffiould fee him in this kingdom in two months after my arrival.’*
Embrace the amiable Louiffi for me,
and
■,i
>
N
WHAT YDU WILE?.

and fail not to prefent my thanks tO' Lord! and Lady Arne for their kindnefs to you^ Adieu, my deareft Julia ! May youi
receive the joy that I wiih you from the enclofed packet! prays.
Your ever affeXionate

V
Ta Lady Mort i mer

HAT a
Wdlinghyoole-Ahldsy^
temptation thrown in my way !
have
-Ah, Garo»r line, my dear fifter, could you. not have; laved me this GonftiX! Gould you: not;: have faid, Lord Ofmond has fent you an letter, bur, knowing that your word is pledged not to read it, I fpare you the-tsorment of viewing ihe fuperfcription
with-hold. it-?

I fhould^ have thanke
B. 6j
•12
MASQUERADES: or
your friendfhip, though it might have appeared a cruel one. But oh, Lady Mortimer ! you either forget, or affeX to do fa, the reftriXions I voluntarily laid myfelf under—Is it to try me ?—Alas! I require no more trials, and fhould expeX them laft from yon.------Enclofed the letter is returned to you—I dare not break the feal.-------
The mortification—that is too cold a word the mifery I endure on the occafion is inexpreflible. Keep it till thofe better days you expeX, and I defpair of, come then fhall 1 look back with pleafure on th is piece of felf-denial, which my honour calls upon me to exert; and think my happinefs without allay, in the refleXion of having by no aX contrary to integrity attained the end of all my wifhes. I forebode the evils that may follow from my not reading this dear letter—-yes, Caroline, they crowd upon my imagination, and make me wretched. Qfmond, my amiable Ofmond, will naturally fuppofe that I have iven him tip ; that, terrified by my mother’s—my brother’s anger, I have fponged him from my heart, and fubftituted in
his room their minion Suffolk. He will
defpife
\
WHAT YOU WILL.
I?
jdefpife my inftability------fuch weaknefs
muft cure him-------he will feek a more de-
ferving miftrefs,. and abandon his unfortunate Julia to the heart-breaking anguifh of deploring his loft affeXions! This fate awaits me—yet I am refolved not to evade it, by any breach of prornife, more efpecially one made to a parent.
Receive mv thanks for the account
(however fhort) you gave me of him. I rejoice that he is well; and though 1 wilh him not to be quite eafy at a diftance from me, ftill I fhould be glad to know that his mind was more compofed, and I no lefs dear to him than ever—Now, I muft ihortly expeX to learn that his fpirits are once more gay ; but that I am abhorred by him
as an example of infidelity--How affi I
to fupport it 1—Lady Mortimer, no words can do juftice to my love—judge then of the confequences—'This fubjeX draws fa many tears on my paper as will fcarcely leave a veftige of what I write—it is impoffible to change it—I muft difpatch the dangerous enticement which lies before me, and anfwer the other material para-
graph
f	t- ,	‘
s4
QU
OR
graph of your letter to-morrow, blefs my deareft lifter!
Julia
To Lady Mortimer.
Wiliinghrook-Ahhen
otr
gave me an opportunity, dear fifter, of diffufing a ray of joy' on the clouded brow of Louifa—flie is^ pleafed at hearing of Mr. Norton’s return; to England fooner than fhe expeXed.
I will fatisfy your curiofity relative tor Sir Charles Montague as far as i am able ? though when I teil you all that Louifa and I know, you wiil ftill find it as perplexing an affair as we do*. 1 enclofe yoir the. letter fhe received from Sir Charles Mon-
* Lady Julia here gives her filler an account of the manner in which Lady Louifa was taken ill, &c, much in the fame way that Lady Arne gave it to-Lord Pemberton,.
WHAT YOU WILL.
H
tague, at her own requeft : return it the next time that you write. I am
in great
hopes, that, when flic recovers, the effeds of the fhock that this cruel bufinefs has given, fhe will accuftom her mind to refleX on the author of it with contempt. She reafons very fenfibly upon it, and fays, if Sir Charles broke off the match from, any capricious motive, the lofs of him ought nor to be regretted :—if from liften-ing to the tales that Mr. Melmoth (whom fhe fufpeXs) might have fabricated for the purpofe of interrupting their union, he is; unworthy of a figh for placing a confidence in him, and not fuffering her to vindicate herfelf by laying his charge before her At any rate he has behaved ungeneroufly;. and fhe thinks it her duty, in every fenfe, to endeavour to hold him with indifference. She is ignorant, you may fuppofe, of Lady Sommerville’s barbarous afperfions—they may make a trifling prejudice on vulgar fouls againft her; but, I am fure, they can have no effeX on any of my family, who all know her worth. However, to convince you of the falfehood of what fhe faid eoneerning Mr. Melmoth, I fend you, by
the
i6
MASQUERADES; or
the fpecial hand that conveys this to you, the key of my ecritoir, which I left at Windfor. In it you will find all Louifa’s letters. One of them, dated foon after your marriage, mentions her having difcarded him, arid in it is enclofed a letter from Mr. Melmoth, which accompanied back all thofe ffie had written to him.. Her cpiftles will plainly demonftrate the; reXitude and purity of her fentiments
fentiments incompatible with fo licentious a conduX as the wicked Lady Sommerville; reprefented.
Poor Colonel Elliot f—Dear Caroline, I
cannot deferibe how concerned I am at his
%
----My God ! not tea
little thinking;
O'
fad cataftrophe !---
months ago, we law him enjoying the great career of the beau monde, how foon he would be fnatched from the gay fcene—And now where is he.fe What you fay of Almeria. is juft ; but it is better ffie ffiould think in that manner for her own fake.
all
kindnefs—-they ufe every method to foothe the forrows of Louifa—they tell her theit bappinefs is wrapped in hers—that lire is
Lord and Lady Arne are
-- — V
WHAT YOU WILL.
n
now their child, and the only command they expeX her to obey is to be cheerful. I am often reproached by them for feeding her melancholy, by being fo rnyfelf—Ah I Lady Mortimer, have I not caufe for it ?
This morning Lady Arne told us that we lead too folitary lives; and, if we had no objeXion, flie would carry us to her houfe at Southampton, where we fliould fee company, and have an opportunity of partaking in the amufements of the place. “ Befides,” added fhe, “ I want people to envy me the charge of two fuch girls !’* Louifa affented immediately—it was death, to me to think of it—Yet I have no idea of making others fubfcribe to my inclinations, when I can avoid it by giving up to theirs—But, my amiable Caroline 1 what will become of me, if through coniplaifance
I mufl hurry into fociety and revels !--1
cannot do it. Should I find myfelf fo difagreeably circumflanced, I will feek refuge with you and my dear brother. When Louifa takes pleafure in affembiies, concerts, &c. &c. flie can require my prefence no longer—it will be an antidote to mirth! Do not imagine that I am infenfible to your
tendernefs
^ *
\
iS
MASQUERADES; oR
tendernefs in wiffiing me with you'—was I to follow my inclination, I ffiould foon be in your arms ; but my motive in this vifit, was to endeavour to reftore JLouifa’s bofom to its once tranquil ftate. To leave her juft now, would render the tafk I have undertaken imperfeX; and for her to leave Lady Arne, muft feem ungrateful—however, I truft, I ffiall foon be at liberty to return.
It is impoffible to mention the fatisfaXion I ffiould have in feeing my excellent friend Sir James.—Say nothing of it to him—his good-nature will prompt him, if you do, to come dov/n direXly, and it may be thought, that he comes with difpatches from him who is dearer to me than life.
You muft allow me to chide you for the freedom you ufed, in your letter, with many perfons whom you ought to regard in a fairer light.
Embrace Lady Caroline and Emily for aflure them of the grateful fenfe I
me
entertain of their goodnefs, and convince Weftbrook that I regard him warmly. .Heaven preferve my dear fifter i
WHAT YOU WILL.

all that is tender to my Lord, for his
and
Your truly affeXionate
Julia Herbert^
To Lady Julia Herbert.
Wlndfori
Have received both your letters—it is unkind of you, Julia, to accufe me of throwing painful trials in your way, when you muft know that my aflbXion—my tendernefs for you, would fcreen you from a moment’s uneafinefs, could I compafs it by any method in the world. Your notions of honour are much to be admired; yet I believe there are few inftances in life of fuch ftriX adherence to it, as you have exemplified on this late occafion. Far be it from me to encourage you to invade the limits you have marked—No,my dear girl.
80
MASQUERADES; ok
•v'
you are right.-—I pity you—I pity Ofmond and hope heaven will reward the facrifice you make to duty, by turning all to your mutual advantage.
1 gave your firft letter to my Lord—he perufed it twice with great attention, and put it into his pocket. I aficed him for
It
et
“ I muft keep it, Caroline, cried he; it may be of confequence 1”
“ I entreated to know how ?
“ Be fatisfied,” replied he, “ that T mean it fhould anfwer a particular point. For your fake—for Julia’s, enquire no further.” ‘
Like a good wife I obeyed, convinced that whatever he intended to do with it, would turn out well.
I thank you for the pleafure you afforded me in reading Louifa’s packets—I required no fuch proof of her innocence.—I took the liberty of fhewing them to Lord Mortimer, who often fpeaks of her, and fays, he is perfuaded that Sir Charles Montague has been impofed on by the contrivance of fome deceitful wretch. I am
delighted to think that fhe wiilexert a proper

h I
WHAT YOU WILL
it
per fpirit, and defpife fo falfe a creature.’ We know not how we ffiall behave under particular affliXions till we are immerged in them. She fays, in one of her letters. Life without Sir Charles would be a torment.
Since his defertion ffie idea, and very juftly declares “ he ought
and could not long be endured.”
has changed her
not to be regretted.
99
him for having
A fenfible woman will always aX thus. When we difcover our miftake, and find a man difpolfdTed of the good qualities which we blindly loved
in the name of wonder what continues our attachment? We can
*	4.
no longer afcribe it to his merit certainly! and any other motive is too low to occupy a refined breaft.
Mr. Norton left us yefterday under a prornife of returning tomorrow-night. He expeXed to have heard, on enquiring for Lady Louifa, that ffie was married, and exprefled much wonder at our anfwers to his queftions, which common fame authorized us to give, afleed where Sir Charles was ? My replied, he believed in W-Vics. Mr. Norton looked very grave the remainder of the
time
were only fuch’ as
He Lord
4
'22
MASQUERADES; or
time we were together, and was remarkably filent. From what I have fince difcovered in a packet of Louifa’s, I account for the alteration in him. Upon my word, Julia, 1 think, after all, the beft thing ihe can do, is to marry Mr. Norton—Un-iefs he turns out a moft egregious cheat (which, after Montaguo'sgallant behaviour, I would not fwear againft), the chances are a hundred to one that he would make her very happy—I have no doubt but he meditates propofing to her.
Weftbrook v/enc three days ago to join
his regiment at

Fie has con-
ted here.
trived fo well as to engage Emily’s prornife to marry him in fix weeks, or two months at fartheft. Their nuptials will be edebra-
Mifs Edgcumb and her aunt ftill keep their kind refolution of ftaying with me till I go up to London, which we agreed laft night Ihould not be till the feventh of January. My Lord chufes to keep his Chriftmas in the country—I am
I (hall not be obliged' to carry him to town fooner ; and there will be full time enough to make prepaiations for Emily’s introdudion at court as Lady Weftbrook,
glad that
O
WHAT YOU WILL.
22
\y
brook, previous to the birth-day—God help your poor Caroline ! DireXly on my arrival in the gay metropolis, I ffiall be immured like a prifoner, for fome weeks. Sir James will be at Windfor as often as
his dury from-------can admit of it—
this happens to be a bufy time with him. I look with impatience for your return j and, for her own fake as well as mine, wiffi Louifa may very fhortly be able to fpare yon^—1 am fure it would be more a-greeable to you to be here. Not one of the party but knows how you are fituated, and each would go through a great deal to cffeX your happinefs and Lord Ofmond’s.
I muft tell you it is aXually afierted, that the Duke of Weftmorland has made his addrdfes in form to Lady Henrietta Marchmont—Lord Davenport was charmed at it, and laid his commands for the firft time of her life on his daughter to accept him as a lover. Her Ladylhip did not much like fuch a one, and remonftrated—It was to no purpofe—
—the father would have his way, and the union will foon take place. All my hope is, that ffie will break her huf-band’s heart in a month after—ffie has
fpirit

MAS QU ERADES; or.
fpirit enough to do it thank heaven ! When you refleX on whac pafled between the old inonfter and Sir Charles (which'in anfwer to fome queftion you aficed the day before you left us, my Lord related to you), can you blame me for praying that every thing bad may befal him ? If you can, I hold fuch apathy, as you no doubt plume yourfelf upon, in contempt, and prize my warm aXive fpirit, which is ever ready to execrate an enemy, and to “ wear in my heart’s core,—aye, in my heart of heart,”
rolls friend.
a gene-The Marchmonts and his
Grace are ftill at Brighthelmftone.
Now that I am on the connubial topic, I muft not fail to inform you, that Mifs Pelham became the wife of Colonel Melvin laft week ; Ihe is an amiable young woman, and deferves to be happy.—I tremble for the conduX of Charlotte Pelham, now that fhe is left to herfelf—The mother is fo Ally, fo vain, and fo indolent!—She can regard nothing but her perfon~and the unfortunate girl, with ftrong paflions, has not a grain of difcretion to lave her from the dire effeXs of yielding to them.
Hi
WHAT YOU WILL.
as
*
*
*

Friday Night,
Mr. Norton is here, and in clofe conference with my Lord. I take it, fome important bufinefs relative to Louifa is tranf-aXing between them. We have difcovered, by the letter 1 have already alluded to, the ftriX confidence (he ever placed in him, and I fuppofe my Lord judges it right to lay before him the fcandalous lies that have been propagated by Lady Sommerville. He is Louifa’s fincere friend as well as lover he will take proper fteps on the occafion, which his intimacy with Lord Clermont
warrants------My Lord enters—I hope he
will enable me to tell you the tenor of their difcourfe!



«
Hi
*
4
*
Heavens! Julia, what a requeft has he made !—Good God, I know not what to
do!-----He entreats me to give him all
Louifa’s letters for Mr. Norton’s perufal He fays that they may be the means of reftoring her to happinefs—that you can have no objeXion, when you make that con-
ypL. lY,	C	fideracion.
26
MASQUERADES; or
fideration. He urges many arguments that appear forcible-—but that may be from my thinking him incapable of doing wrong!— I have' begged ten minutes to ponder on the matter*---1 know not yet what to de-
termine, and the time is nearly elapfed
-----—Mortimer !—my dear hufband !
how, perplexed a fituation have you rendered mine !



*
*
*

Mi
Julia, I am afraid to inform you that he
You will chide—you will
■---your fecrets as
has got them !
think me ungenerous-well as Louifa’s, you will fay, are betray-
ed -----'Ab, my dear filler, not fo!-----
No creature will fee them but he who is a real friend to both.--
----If I have erred,
refleX on the motive which biafled me, and pardon me. The flutter my fpirits are thrown ’into by this unexpeXed demand, quiie difcbmpofes me—I will retire to bed.


*
*







Salur4aj^
WHAT YOU WILL.
27
Saturday Morning,
Lord Mortimer, my dear Sifter, has acquainted me with a circumftance I never had fufpicion of before. He confents to my imparting it to you, on condition that you do not reveal a fyllable of the affair to Louifa, till he gives you leave.
He has a packet in his poftefllon for Lord Ofmond from Sir Charles Montague, with a letter to himfelf commiflioning him to read the former. That packet difcovers to us the whole perfidy which was praXifed againft your friend.—Montague was fo eafily duped by a filly woman, that I think he deferves to be punifhed,—and yet more for having no confidence in Louifa Sydney. The packet, with my Lord’s letter from Sir Charles *, fliall be fent to you by one of our fervants, who Ihall alfo be the bearer of this.
You will be furprifed at my Lord’s detaining the packet fo long from the Marquis—I was—and afked him the caufe ? He replied in thefe words :
* S
ee Sir Charles Montague’s letter to Lord Ofmond, Vol. HI. page 99, and his letter to Lord Mortimer, page 211.
C a	You
i8 MASQUERADES; or,
“ You fee it was left at my option to with-hold it as long as I thought proper— Lord Ofmond was ih no condition for the firft few weeks after his departure, to have his forrows aggravated—1, therefore, in a letter to him, warned him not to be aftonifh-cd at Montague’s filence, as he was occupied in attending Lord Beaumont from place to place, who had lately had a fevere illnefs, and continual travelling was prefcribed by his phyficians as the only remedy to keep off another attack, which would in air probability be fatal—This reafon, and Sir George Sommerville’s death, I added, obliged him to poftpone his marriage ; and that he had commiffioned me, in his ftead, to become his Lordihip’s correfpondent, as j could give him better information refpeXing Julia. I told him that Louifa had been indifpofed, and that Julia had been with ber at Lady Arne’s, to whofe houfe Ihe had been carried on her uncle’s deceafe.
“ Soon after my writing in this manner, Pemberton returned from Hampfhire, and, by his account of whaf paffed at Sommerville-Houfe, I plainly difcovered the whole mifehievous plot, and then kept Sir
kept Charles’s
WHAT YOU WILL.

Charles’s packet with a motive of flievving it to Lord Clermont, who was every day expeXed to arrive in this kingdom. I could not properly ftir in the affair, having no connexion, and very little acquaintance with Lady Louifa. To have written Montague all that Pemberton related to me of L.ady Sommerville’s calumny might noc have anfwered—he was liable, I found, to be milled in a cafe where he was fo nice Lady Sommerville would, on his application to her, be artful enough to make things worfe—and, if he addreffed Louifa on the fubjeX, it was natural to fuppofe Ihe would bid him never fee her more. I therefore remained quiet, hoping Clermont would manage matters in fuch a way, as to punifh Lady Sommerville, and to facilitate his lifter’s and Montague’s happinefs.
I was at length wearied with waiting I refolved to fend Ofmond his packet, and the particulars I had gathered of the ftory; apprehending at the fame time, that he would gladly catch at the plea of ferving his friend to come over to England. I was about to execute this intention, when you moft fortunately gave me the perufal of
C 3	Louifa’s
30
MAS QU ERADESj or
Louifa’s letters. I dropped my purpofe, and impatiently looked for Mr. Norton’s return to Windfor, who, I found, was as proper a perfon to engage in the bufinefs, as any I could have wifhed for.”
Mr. Norton and my Lord fpent great part of laft night in confulting on the moft probable means to recover Sir Charles from his error. Mortimer communicated to him every light he could give. Fie laid before him Montague’s letters—Louifa Sydney’s to- you—and Mr. Melmoth’s farewel one to her. He repeated to him the converfa-tions my brother had held with Lady Sommerville J and ventured to hint a fufpicion of her being attached herfelf to Sir Charles. Mr. Norton told my Lord, that it was his refolution to fet off in the morning for Sommerville-Houfe, and colleX all the circumftances he could from the Lady of that
concerning the intrigue that fhe exifted between Melmoth and From thence he will go to Mel-
maniion
declares
Louifa.
moth’s, and defire in Lord Clermont’s name, to have fatisfaXion for the infolence that Lady Sommerville accufes him of being guilty of towards his fifter. If he denies
WHAT YOUWI LL.
31
nies the' imputation, he will confront him with Lady Sommerville, and fettle the matter, he trufts, happily : if he dares to coincide in her infamous tale, he muft either give incontrovertible proofs of the truth of it, or anfwer fur the blemiffi caft on Louifa’s honour with his life., From this plan you will readily fuppofe that Mr. Norton means to put himfelf in the way of much danger, and of courfe that it is abfolutely neceflary our friend fhould not have a diftant fufpicion of what pafles, till the whole affair is finifhed.—Mr. Norton left windfor early this morning, and has carried with him your letters but, at my Lord’s defire, he will make no ufe of them, till be can be informed whether he has your leave to do fo.
John waits for his difpatches—you muft: not detain him long, my dear Julia, as your anfwer is material in the grand bufinefs that the excellent Mr. Norton is engaged in, and as I am impatient to know that you are not angry with me for the meafure I have taken.—Farewel, my amiable girl. Believe me always
Yours affeXion a tely,
Caroline Mortimer.
%9
c 4

32 MASQUERADES; or
To Ladv Mortimer
Wailinghro ok-Abbey.
Am miferable, my dear fifter, at your fuffering the leaft difquiet in aXing for me as you would for yourfelf—If the letters are to be of advantage to Louifa, furely I cannot have a wifh but to employ them for the purpofe! Reft fatisfied, then, in knowing, that, had I been on the fpot, I Ihould have given them up immediately.——As to my fecrets being difcovered—I care not—I am indifferent who is acquainted with my attachment to Lord Ofmond—and that is the only fecret you can allude to—Had I important ones that concerned myfelf alone, and fuch as would pain me to reveal—I hope I Ihould not hefitate to facrifice them, to relieve an unfortunate charaXer from the obloquy caft: on it.
Your fervant will leave Wallingbrook-
Abbey
WHAT YOU WILL.
31
Abbey by to-morrow’s dawn.—I have had no opportunity of reading Sir Charles’s packet—I received it in the prefence of Louifa^ and am glad'that chance direXed me not to open it till I had perufed your letter—the fight of Montague’s writing, would have affeXed her-------1 will devote
4
the prefent moments to it„
Hi
0
^ Hi

#
^ Hi 0
%
Hi Hk
Hi
Hi
Unmerciful Lady Sommerville !— my God, is it in nature for a woman to own fuch principles ! I compaffionate Sir^ Charles extremely—his faults from too great diffidence of himftlf, and over-much delicacy in avoiding, the fight of a miffrefs’ whom' he thought he was; hateful to.—We cannot entertain a doubt of his affeXion for Louifa—and from hence I avow myfelf his advocate—a ftrenuous. one he lhall find me, when occafion ripens for it.
But, my dear Lady Mortimer, 1 an® terrified about Mr. Norton I—If a ren-
5'
contre
34
MAS QU ERADES; or
centre enfues, and his life becomes the viXim of perpetrated iniquity, how dreadful will it be.——Heaven aflift me !—-—I tremble at the word rencontre !—Ah, may I never hear of another !	' ^
Farewel, my much-loved friend, deareft fifter !
my
Each day adds new luftre to Lord Mortimer’s charaXer—he is continually engaged in fome fcheme to benefit his fellow-creatures—-How happy are you I That you may be long fo in each other, is the ardent prayer of
■	'	Your

■£»	k
Julia Herbert.

To
} i
^13 n

WHAT YOU WILL.
39
To Lord Mortimer.'
Petersjiefd,
OU are no doubt, my Lord, very
/ r
impatient to receive a me—I am equally fo, to convince your Lordlhip, that I have not been inaXive 'iii the meafures I had the honour of confult- ‘ ing you upon before I left Windforf Your friendfhip, my Lord, for Lady Louifa Sydney, which yoju fay ffie'-has a right to from her opprelfed 'ftate———mine alfo for her, which proceeds from' many other motives, make her caufe an intereft-ing one to both—and to re-eftabHffi heir good name is our mutual wiffi.'-
On my entering Sommervilie-Houfe, 1 was lliewn into Xi apartment that Was full of company. Lady Sommerville received me very gracioufly, arid preffed me to pafs' the evening there. I complied, and waited with eagernefs till ffie was alone. As foon ' as that happened, I affeXed a furprife ac
C 6	Louifa’s

J
56 MASQUERADES; or,
I
Louifa’s abfence. This brought on the recapitulation I Ibught for; and Ihe by no means fpared her dear, lamented Sir George’s niece. I dwelled on the part of her hiftory relating to Melmoth.
For Heaven’s fake,” cried I, “ is it poflible that I could have been exceedi-idgly miftaken in this girl’s morals!— any lips but yours. Lady Sommerville, ic •would coft me Ibme pains to acquire faith enough to credit what I have heard—But prithee give me an inftance of her dilTo-lutenefs 1”

Pfhaw !” replied Ihe, “ were I to mention the many that I have it in my power to recite, you would be heartily tired of the dilgufting fubjeX—In one-word, fhe is abandoned !”
“ And was it Mr. Melmoth who feduced her ?” demanded I.
It is difficult to fay which party was feduced,” anfwered fhe “ however, I am charitable enough to hope, that Ihe might be innocent now, but for the artN fices he ufed to corrupt her.”
In this way Ihc continued to fpeak the
remainder
WHAT YOU WILL. 37
remainder of the time we were together; On my getting up to depart, Ihe apologized for not offering me a bed in her houfe ; but flattered herfelf I would excufe it—th& world was cenforious, and it behoved her (who was a very young woman) to a3 with even more difcretion than-females of virtue, ufually pradifk, I thanked her, and replied, that, forefeeing her delicate fcruples„ I had ordered an apartment at this inn for the night. She infifted on my breakfaft-ing with her the next morning. I affented,. and took my leave.
When I attended her invitation, (he of her own accord renewed the topic we hadi been upon the preceding evening.
I hope, Mr. Norton,” faid ftie,. ** yout are now inftruXed to be upon your guard againft the diflimulation which the bad part of my fex can affume when they pleafe. Under the feigned blufh of modefty, you fee they conceal brutal inclinations. I have fufpeXed, lince you left me, that you were enfnared by Lady
Louifa’s wiles*—furely you no longer love her r*
“ Ilf
38 MASQUERADES; PR,
% • •
‘‘ It is impoffible, Madam,” cried I, “ to love the objeX we have ceafed to refpeX—Such a difeovery as yours would cure the ftrongeft paffion that ever inhabited a mortal bofom !”
CC
99
I am glad to hear you fpeak fo fen-libly,” returned ffie; “ and now I will reveal an inftance of her ignominy.
One morning I left my bed earlier than common, and, going through a paffage contiguous to Lady Louifa’s apartment, I faw a man coming out of it, whom I direXly knew to be Mr. Melmoth. He retired back on feeing me, thinking he
had efcaped my notice, fluttered, and haftily
I was a good deal returned to my
dreffing-room. My woman was alarmed at the palenefs of my countenance, and enquired the caufe of it—I thoughtlefsly told her. “ Oh, my Lady,” ffie exclaimed, “ there is nothing extraordinary in that—you may fee him every morning, at the fame hour, leave Lady Louifa’s bedchamber, if your Ladyfhip will get up time enough for it.” I defired her to go in, and fearch every corner of Lady Louifa’s

w
YOU W
3f
fa’s apartments—^to fay (he faw him enter them, and would not leave the place
not
without beholding him.
I charged her, when Mr. Melmoth appeared, to tell him that (he was fhocked at fuch fcandalous
and determined, if ever he came near the houfe again, to make me
acquainted with the whole, ed
my orders very faithfully, hioth lay concealed, fhe
clofet.
Walker obey-Mr. Mel-
, m an Lady Louifa and hef vile French woman were clamorous at
her intrufion
% *
her
they would not confent to the clofet—but luckily
appro
fhe proved too ftrong for both, and, rufh-ing by themf forced ic open, juft as Mr, Melmoth was endeavouring to make his way out through a window. Perceiving that he was known, he thought it needlefs to rifk his life by fo precipitate a retreat, and imagined a bribe might anfwer his purpofe much better—He offered Walker twenty guineas, which flie refufed ; but-told Louifa and Clairon, (who were meta-: morphofed from furies into Niobes,) that fhe fhould be more tender of their reputa-'
■ tions
40
MASQUERADES; or
tions than they were themfelves, in pre^ venting Mr, Melmoth from being caught again in fuch a place—and that her fecrefy on the paft ftiamefut fcene might be depended on, provided they held no further communication with him. Many gratifications were preffed upon her by all parties—She would accept of none—and,, after feeing Mr. Melmoth out of the houfe,, fhe returned to tell me the fuccefs of her embaffy,
I had many conffiXs whether or not I fhould inform Sir George of what had happened ; but the apprehenfion of lofing him, from the effeX fuch a horrid affmr muft produce on his weak frame,, kept me fdent.
Lady Louifa, on being reftriXed froms any intercourfe with Mr. Melmoth, grew wonderfully dejeXed^—1 found that fhe
ufed means to recal him ; but he, judging, the enterprize would be of danger to him,, and, 1 believe,, glad to the foul of an excufe to forfake her, difregarded her appoint-
She almoft pined to death—Lady Arne carried her to Southampton—She faw
Sir Charles Montague—fhe inveigled hin®
ments
WHAT YOU WILL. 41
by her apparent modefty to make love to
her”-------1 interrupted her.
And to allow him favours alfo ! oh abominable !”
“ 1 cannot fay for a faX, Mr. Norton,
that fhe has been his miftrefs---1 had no
teftimony of it—but there was time and opportunity for it enough.
Your Lordfhip will take notice difficult it is for a falfe narrator to preferve
confiftency----the night before, Lady
Sommerville had, in the beginning of our converfation, abfolutely pronounced Louifa
99
how
guilty with Montague
Perhaps, after I
was gone, fhe recolleXed the intimacy that had fubfifted between SirCharles and me, and fuppofed the matter would be talked over by us both when we met. However, this refleXion did not occur to me then.
“ You told me laft night, Madam,
99
What I now repeat. Sir, that I aXually do imagine fhe was as compliant to Sir Charles’s wifhes, as fhe was to Mr. Mel-
good authority It. The reafon that Sir Charles gave hufband
moth’s, though I have not for
my
broke his heart.”
for avoiding the marriage
ii
Pray
42
MASQUERADES; or
€(
Pray let me know it. Madam !”
“ Indeed, I am not exaXly acquainted with it.—Sir George was too ill to think of fhewing me the letter, or alking my opinion—which he never failed doing before, on the mofl: trifling occafion.—Poor Sir George was very partial to me—he had a better notion of my indgmenc than it deferved !”
I am afraid, my Lord, that I fhall fuffer in your Lordfhip’s idea, from the confeffion I am going ro make—but, notwith-ftanding the proofs I faw 'and heard of Lady Sommerville’s treacheroufnefs, I had fo much fallibility about me, as to be lefs fixed in my belief of Louifa’s innocence The mention fhe made of Melmoth’s having been deteXed in her apartments, wore, from her method of telling it, a plaufible appearance-—her manner feemed artlefs—and what ftaggered me more ;-than all, was, her knowing that Mr. Melmoth lived at no great diftance from Sommerville-Houfe—that I was familiar with him, and had it at my option to interrogate him concerning the affair.—She acknowledged to Lord Pemberton that fhe had
burnt
WHAT YOU WILL.
43
burnt Sir Charles’s letter—to me, that fhe had never feen it—-.how was that to be re-
conciled ?—Why, fettled it thus—
my weak imagination
—that fhe rnight not have chofen to give an inftance to his Lordfhip of Louifa’s criminality vvith Melmoth, left he fhould have arraigned her for concealing the matter from Sir George ; and fhe therefore held it more eligible to reft the charge againft her honour on Montague’s letter—fhe owned to me the truth, as to a perfon who was of little confequence, and whofe good opinion it was not material for her to conciliate—I thought her undifguifed in faying fhe had nq other ground than fuppofition for Louifa’s having been infamous with Sir Charles, which originated from a conviXiqn of her having loft her virtue to Mr. Melmoth—I trembled at the poflibility that our conjeXures of Lady
Sommerville were miftaken ones------and
that an honeft motive might have ftimu-
o
rated her writing to Montague, to prevent his marrying nothing better than a profti-tute.
There are moments, my Lord, when the mind is liable to imbecillity—mine was in that'ftate juft then—what I have written
entered
44 MASQUERADES; or,
entered it at the time, and overwhelms me now with confufion, for having given ad-miflion to ideas fo difparaging to a woman who is “as chafte as unfunn’dfnow.”
“ Does Mrs. Walker
ftill. Madam ?
99
you
cc
Yes, fhe does
—fuch benevolence
She is a woman of
and, in
fuch principle fhort, fo excellent a creature, that I would not part with her for worlds.”
When I left Sommerville-Houfe, I
really in a perplexed fituation
was
-If
Louifa, thought I, is thus loft, why give myfelf further trouble about her ? She deferves to feel every punifhment in life! But vet. why could I not have heard
1
this relation laft night ?	1 begged one
proof of Lady Louifa’s profligatenefs— Lady Sommerville anfwered me in general, that (he had it in her power to give feveral This morning fhe waited not to be again afked—fhe unfolded to me a horrible anec* dote that fhewed her in a damn’d light. Might not Ihe and Mrs. Walker have contrived the ftory between them ? No doubt of it !-—I will go through the matter, and either clear injured innocence, or expofe an artful girl habituated to vice.
I went
WHAT YOU WILL.
4S
I went to Mr. Melmoth’s houfe—I found him alone. Never did I behold fuch a change in a human appearance ! * He looked the fpeXre of the man I once knew by his -name—his countenance wore a pallid hue—a difficulty of refpiration molefted him; a frequent heXic cough prevented his converfing with eafe.
“ You fee in me, Norton,” cried he, after our falutations were over, “ the curfed effeXs of a libertine life. I am making a rapid progrefs out of a world, whofe pleafures I valued far too highly ; and I have this refleXion for my chaftifement, that, was I to begin the career of life
with the knowledge I now have, I would prefer the ftate of a handicraftfman to that of any other which might throw me into the vicious way I have trod. I purfued the phantom Pleafure—in every Ihape Ihe affumed 1 purfued------but never over-
took her!”
1 exprefled my concern at finding him fo much indifpofed; and told him, there was, perhaps, leifure enough for him to commence a new road, which would
again
affuredly bring him to happinefs.
«In
9^
What do you
46 . MASQUERADES; or,
“ In another world you muft mean, Norton,” replied he: “ my thread is juft fpun out—I have neither time nor fpirits to make further trials here.”
“ I am forry, Melmoth,” cried I, “ for the bufinefs I am obliged to enter upon— which I fincerely wilh may not lay me under the neceflity of cutting that thread in a few hours—or add to your prefent horror by charging your confcience with my death!”
He looked amazed—“ mean, Mr. Norton
“ That Lady Louifa Sydney’s charaXer has been bafely afperfed. Lady Sommerville gives out that you feduced her—fhe propagates things of her that I am convinced are falfe”——--
“ Aye, falfer than hell! if they tend to what you have already faid.—You have no doubts of my courage, Mr. Norton your prefence it has been tried alfure you, that, in this caufe, no fighting fliall enfue—Louifa Sydney—the cruel Louifa ! I have always found a paragon of virtue *, and, was all the univerfe combined ih depreciating her chaftity, 1 would ftill
believe
in
yet let me
w
YOU W
47
believe it inviolate-particulars alleged
againft
/
But give me the her
ingenu-
oufly.
I did fo. He attended with great cool-nefs to me, and, when I had finilhed, replied,
“ You have been the reciprocal friend
of Lady Louifa and me—ac leaft I ever
thought fo !—You may remember how
vehemently I regretted the lofs of her—
She was right in referving herfelf for a
better man.—DifTipated, rakifli, as I have
been, I cannot fax my confcience with a
fingle aX of diflionour towards any one;
and fliould fcarcely begin by ufing the
flighteft means <o prevent her union with
the man of her choice—much further from
my principles would ic be to caft a blemilh
on her reputation. Lady Sommerville
would not have been fo daring in her alle-• • • ^
gation, did fhe not think that I was gone abroad, and that you would have no opportunity of clearing the matter. I took leave of her and the reft of my neighbours laft week, with an intent to quit England. When I arrived at- Dover, I was taken extremely ill, and, had I embarked, muft
have
48
MASQUERADES; or
have expired before I could reach Calais. I remained at Dover a few days, and then, finding myfelf better, and thinking that the little time I had to live, would be fpent more comfortably at my own dwelling, than in travelling under innumerable difad-vantages through a foreign country, I changed my purpofe, and fet out on my return home, which I reached laft night. Lady Sommerville, Sir, has been ever envious of Louifa—fhe detefts her for being much handfomer, more accompliftied, and
better defcended than herfelf”--...
“ She loves Sir Charles, I dare fay, exclaimed I; “ and is weak enough to imagine Ihe may fupplant Lady Louifa.” Nothing fo probable,” returned Mel? moth ; “ and a letter I will ftiew you, muft rivet your conjeXure. I received it from Lady Sommerville, foon after Lady Louifa’s arrival from Southampton,’*
He went out,, and immediately came back with the following lines in his hand, which he prefented to me.

99
T»
WHAT YOU WILL.

V
To George Melmoth, Efq.
Is it poffible that you can quietly yield Louifa Sydney to Sir Charles Mon-tague ? If you can, I muft think you never loved
—For (hame, Melmoth !----RefleX
what tranfports you felt when you expeXed to call her yours—refleX what tranfports await him, who, without your interference, will fliortly become her envied bridegroom. Was I you, my paffion fliould urge me to do fomething to interrupt his felicity. You are but lately difcarded, and ic is out of ,the queftion to fuppofe another miftrefs already poflTeflTes your heart.—Fighting is
not the method I would take--no, that
can never anfwer your purpofe.—Give me encouragement, by faying you will follow ray advice, and I will ftrike out a glorious plan that fliall enfure her yours. I think you deferving of her, and wifli you happy, Farewel!
M.	Sommerville.
Vol; IV;
D
X
so
MAS Q.U ERADES; oK,
99
99
a
99
I begged to know what was his anfwer to this curious fcroll ?
“ None,” he replied ; “ I held her in too contemptible a light to make any •, and her fufpeXing me to be a villain, fliould have been properly chaftifed, but for her fex, which fcreened her from my refentment.
“ I am glad, my dear Melmoth,” cried I, “ that you did not deftroy this letter it may be of eflential lervice to Louifa, whom I am fure you are fo generous as to defire to fee happy with Montague !
Emaciated-----difpirited as I am,
anfwered he, “ barbarous as Ihe has been, Mr. Norton-—I ftill love her^—I therefore cannot defire to behold her happinefs with
another—to hear of it 1 do*--------But
come, my heart is on the wing to repair the injuries fhe has received—-What is to be done ?”
“ Accompany me to Sommerville-Houfe, and there confront the diabolical author of thofe injuries.”
“ With all my foul—your chaife waits let us lofe no time.”
We got into it, and drove to Sommerville.
/
w
YOU W
51^
ville-Houfe. Lady Sommerville, I believe,’ did not expeX nie—however, Ihe ran out with great pleafure to meet me in the hall but what pen can adequately deferibe the change her countenance underwent at feeing Melmoth follow me ! She trembled, and was ready to faint—ftie turned from us to go into a parlour—we purfued her fteps unbidden, and, feating ourfelves near her, obferved the tranfition of her paffions. After a while, fhe became more compofed, and thought it her dernier reffort to brave
us by effrontery.
“ Well, Mr. Melmoth,
99
faid fhe,
CC
I
will confefs that I was a good deal fhocked at feeing you fo uncxpeXedly—I am afraid you have been much worfe fince you left Hampfhire.—You are furprifingly altered within a few days.—My fpirits are weak— and no wonder after going through fuch affliXion !—The leaft alarm throws me into a pitiable condition.”
“ For the love of Heaven, Madam,” exclaimed he, “ let us have none of this curfed hypocrify !—
Your terror of being
O
deteXed in malicious falfehood has reduced you to this condition—not concern for my health.”	D 2	“ You
1 J

42
M A S QU E R A D E S J or,
“ You aftonifh me, Sir, by your brutality !—What terror can I poflibly have ? what falfehood do you fpeak of?”
“ Are you not afraid that your perfidy will be unravelled ?—Louifa Sydney !—^-at that name you muft fhudder.”
“ I fcorn your words. Sir!—Never prefume to enter this houfe again !”—-and flie haftened towards the door. He prevented her retiring, and led her back to her place.
CC

cc
Not lb, my excellent Lady Sommerville !—Come, repeat to me what you have done to Mr. Norton-—repeat that Lady Louifa is deftitute of virtue—that I feduced her!
I never faid you feduced her—the charge is falfe—fhe feduced you—I have neither inclination nor leifure to trouble myfelf with either her or your affairs—-Unhand me. Sir!”
“ But why not indulge me with a repetition of the marvellous incidents that have •entertained fo many from your lips ? filent!—nay, this rage fuffices nothing.— Well then, Norton, I call on you, fince Lady Sommerville is dumb on the fudden, p teil every fyllable fhe has uttered againft
the
Still
WHAT YOU WILL.
5%
the honour of Lidy Louifa Sydney—By heaven and earth. Madam, you fhall not ftir!” and throwing his arm round her waift, he held her on her feat—he fixed his eyes with fternnefs on her face, and continued to do fo during the whole narration that I gave, exaXly in the way fhe had delivered it to me. When I ended, he exclaimed. Now, Lady Sommerville, I conjure yon, by the prefence of that God to whom, you mull render a ftriX account at the laft dreadful day, to declare whether there is a word of truth in all this ?”
“ It is all truth!” replied flie.
“ Ha !-

perjury you add to your other crimes, Madam, do you?—Have a care 1 —Our legiilature has provided a fevere punifhment for that fort of wickednefs—ic may fhock your delicacy even to hear ic named, and will caufe you to repent more than once of your evil conduX, fince the apprehenfion of hereafter has no effeX on -depend I will put the law in force.” I admire your affurance, Sir, in talking fo religionfiy, who have ever turned your back upon that God you folemnly adjure me by !-—I have always obferved tis
you
D
3
com-
54
MAS QU ERADES; or
commandments—you never have—Who is moft likely to be accufed of perjury—I, in declaring your criminality with Louifa Sydney—or you, in denying it with a thoufand oaths
Under a mafic of fanXity, Madam, you conceal vices, that, libertine as I have been (remember I am no longer one), I wouid not have committed

heart’s deareft treafure
(C
to gain my Read your own writing, and let it make you blufh with lhame, with remorfe.”—She attempted to tear it;, but I rcfcued it from her fury— Well,” faid ihe, and what is there in that writing to fpeak againft me ?—I endeavoured to deftroy it, that innocent words might not be perverted to a mifehievous fenfe—I thought better of you than you deferved—had you chofen it—I would have
argued with Lady Louifa”----
No more incongruity, Lady Sommerville,” cried I: “ docs your writing in fuch a ftyle to Melmoth correfpond with what you told me? If you believed him tired of her favours, how could you have expeXed that he would make her his wife?” ‘ I fuppofed him a man of honour.”
“ Had

C
w
YOU W
55
Had you known of his intimacy with your niece, would your letter have been worded in thefe terms
“ Certainly ! becaufe it was my plan to feem ignorant to him, of what I was but too well informed I"
“ Then allow me to allc, if Lady Louifa was fo miferable at his defertion, why argue with her ? Sure, after what had paffed, ihe would have more than met him half
way
CC
I
33
Lady Louifa, Sir, appeared fo well pleafed with her new lover, that 1 imagined ic would not be her choice to part with him for her former one—1 judged it proper to hinder the confequences that 1 fore-faw from Sir Charles’s affiduity, and thought I aXed the chnftian’s part, in attempting to get her married to the man with whom fhe had held a criminal commerce; and, to fay the truth. Sir Charles Montague merited a better fate, than to marry Mr. Melmoth’s caft-off miftrefs !—To have you both. Gentlemen, determined againft all I fay, is hard !—You arc refolved to make out Louifa innocent—you wifti it, Mr. Norton—and Melmoth (from what motive
D 4	he
56 MASQUERADES; or,
he could beft tell) thinks it fafeft to do fa but he knows in his foul that Ihe is
guilty

I am very ill-treated—yet I
may find a proteXor to avenge fuch infults !”
She burft into tears—her grief foftened me—again my doubts returned—I began to fancy I difcovered confufion in Melmoth’s face—I walked backwards and forwards in great agitation—Melmoth followed me.
^ “ I fee, Mr. Norton, that this vile woman’s artifice fucceeds; but, as I hope to be forgiven in my laft moments—I am innocent of her accufation !”
“ Then, Mr. Melmoth,” exclaimed fhe, “ you will die as you have lived, under the wrath of God!—To convince you, Mr. Norton, once for all, that you have not been deceived. Walker fhall appear—her evidence will fatisfy you.
Pleafure fparkled in her eyes from the inftant that fhe fufpeXed me of giving credit to what file affirmed—fhe tripped to the bell with an affured air, and ringing it three diftinX times, in as many fecends Mrs. Walker entered.
I want
55
w
YOU W
57
<(
I
want you, my good Walker,” fakl the Lady, “ to atteft the truth of what I have been telling Mr. Norton concerning Lady Louifa Sydney—You know her to be an infamous creature.”
“ You are rather hafty. Madam—you anticipate Mrs. Walker,” cried Melmoth,
CC
and inftruX her in what (he ftiould fay
I fear fhe is already too well prepared ! Mr. Norton, to you it belongs to queftiou this woman.”
CC
I muft beg of you, Mrs. Walker,*’ faid I, “ to let me know all that you are acquainted with refpeXing Lady Louifa Sydney—have the reXitude of a chriftian before your eyes, and then fpeak fairly.”
“ Aye, Walker,” exclaimed Lady Sommerville ; “ fpeak openly all you have to allege againft: her, and be apprehenftve of nothing !”
“ Your Ladyfhip may depend,” returned the woman, “ that no threats-—no low-minded fear of confequences to myfelf, accruing from v/hat I utter, fliall ftimulate me to hide any thing of her that it is in my power to difclofe.”
“ That is right, my worthy creature !
D s
58
MASQUERADES: or.
My proteXion you fliall always have, let thefe gentlemen do what they will.”
“ Is not this downright bribery ?” demanded Melmoth ? “ Am I to be held difhonourable, Mr. Norton, from the evidence of a mercenary wretch ?”
Mrs. Walker affeXed not to hear him.
“ And now, my Lady,” cried flie, “ I
----Were I, Sir,
at the great tribunal, to which we muft ail
1 could not have mv . heart more
lhall obey Mr, Norton:
come
thoroughlyjaid open, than it fliall be now
to you.
“ If modefty
if virtue daily praXifed, in
the fulleft extent of the word, deferve the epithet of infamous—I certainlydo not know a more infamous creature in the world than Lady Louifa Sydney—if they deferve a contrary phrafe, it is affuredly hers ! moft difereet conduX, from the moment I firft faw her, to the laft of her refidence in this houfe, guided all her aXions—flie
The
ne-

ver gave the flighteft room for the breath of ftander to approach her—unjuft calumny there is no ftiield can proteX us from 1”
“ Impertinent wretch !” vociferated her Lady: “ do you dare thus change your note after’ ___
“ After
WHAT YOU WILL.
^‘xAfterthe coftly prefents 1 have received not to alter it ?—Alas, Madam, yes 1-—I waited for a favourable moment to unravel to Sir Charles Montague the hiftory that your Ladyfliip obliged me to bear a part in—I undercook to help your ftratagem, left you fliould employ a low, venal creature, who, influenced by the promifes you, made, might under your direXion have effeXually deftroyed the charaXer of one of the fwceN eft Ladies breathing—To explain it to Sir Charles Montague’s, or Lady Louifa’s friends, will do as well.
“ My Lady, gentlemen, before Sir George’s death, often hinted to me her diflike to his niece. She faid, the good education my father (who was a clergymen) gave me, placed me above the ftandard of fervants; and as fhe believed me faithful, I fhould have her confidence. She told me, that Sir Charles Montague was a man beloved by herfelf, and fhe would leave np arts untried to break his attachment to Lady Louifa, mentioning, at the fame time, that, was her hufband under ground, fhe had no doubt of fecuring him. About
D 6	three
. }
6o
MAS QU ERADES; or
three months ago, fhe wrote to Sir Charles. Upon the receipt of her letter, he withdrew his addreffes from Lady Louifa—the reafon he aferibed for it, will be feen in this letter from him to Sir George which my Lady, the very morning he died, took from his waiflcoat pocket in my prefence.
Walker,” faid fhe, “ we muft deftroy this paper—it will mar the fcheme I have in view of blafting Louifa’s fame^—^read
It
and afterwards do not fail to burn it
My firft plot has been attended with double fuccefs—I did not dare hope it would have fo happily rid me of this old
fright.
as
welt as Louifa of her charming lover—I have encouragement enough furely to go on fcheming, till I attain the fummit I aim at!”
“ The acquifition of this letter, gentle? men, delighted rne exceedingly, as it would be the beft means of defeating my Lady’s cruel purpofe relative to Lady Louifa—a purpofe fhe adopted with this motive, that none of her friends might receive or take notice of her, and of courfe fhe would not

See Vc4. III. p, 113.
be
#
WHAT YOU W
6i
be in the way of Sir Charles, as explanations between them was what my Lady moft dreaded.	• ,
“ To encourage my good behaviour, as fhe called it, (be gave me this bank-bill of a hundred pounds, and this promiffory note of a thoufand, payable on Sir Charles’s firft vifit as a lover. I give them both up to you, Mr. Norton, either to return them to my Lady this minute, or to. make any ufe of them that you think may be of advantage to Lady Louifa.”
“ The hundred pounds, Mrs. Walker,” cried I, “ we will reftore to Lady Sommerville—the note I will keep for Montague’s perufal,, and then fend it to the honourable perfon who drew if, to difpofe of as fhe
—the letter I
pleafes
and
will preferve to fhew Lord Pemberton r the
Lady Arne, former was told, it was diXated in far different terms •, the other, that her own pretty fingers had committed it to the flames.” “Aye, Sir, fo they were !--My Lady mentioned to me, that Lord Pemberton’s fine penetrating eyes had very nearly made her betray herfelf.—Laft night, whiift I un-drelTed her, flie fabricated the ftory that
•	was
/.
62 MAS QU ERADES; or,
was related of you this morning, Mr. Melmoth : it was frequently recited to me, that I might (in cafe I was called for) corroborate what fhe faid, and add other things that fhe inftruXed me to deliver. Her invention was not ready enough laft night for Mr. Norton’s queftion; and, that you might have an linjiance of Lady Louifa's Ii-centioufnefs before you left Hampfhire, Sir, you were invited to breakfaft. Often did my Lady rejoice, that fortune had befriended her in removing Mr. Melmoth out of the kingdom ; and exulted at the little probability there was of your deteXing the impofition.
“ I fhall only add on this fubjeX, that Lady Louifa is idolized by every fervant in the family—they all hold her fo dear, as to undertake to ferve her in any way however dangerous. I had no opportunity of fpeaking apart to Lord Pemberton or the Ladies, as I was continually in attendance on my Lady—befides, things were not ripe for a difclofure—I had not then the pro-miflbry note, which is the chief proof againft her Ladyfhip.
“ And now, gentlemen, that I have exculpated
WHAT YOU WILL. 63
CLilpated the innocent, it is but juftice to expofe the guilty—My Lady is that very abandoned perfon you have heard her call her niece. During the laft fix months of Sir George’s life, ftie kept up a criminal commerce with Mr. Weftern, and has perhaps been enabled by a like behaviour of her own to------my Lady faints !—I am
forry for the part I am form !”
obliged to per-
We carried her into the air, and with the help of volatiles and drops Ihe revived —but oh! what execrations did fhe not pour upon Mrs. Walker! She acculpd her of falfehood in what ftie dared to fay of Mr, Weftern ; defied mankind to taint her fair name, and ran on unmercifully, till Mrs. Walker begged us to believe that ftie fpoke nothing but the faX, as Lady Louifa’s woman, Clairon, had it at her option to tef-tify. I told Lady Sommerville, it was nothing to me how llie conduXed herfelf that we were fatisfied of all we wanted to know. Melmoth interrupted me
“ No, Norton ! I will learn more of the affair—Ihe deferves the utmoft dilgrace, and to be mortified imcif^e higheft degree
What
4
64
MASQUERADES; or
What does Clairon know of her, Mrs, Walker ?”
99
“ Stop,” cried I, “ we already are acquainted with enough to ruin this Lady in the opinion of every one—however, unlefs (he confents this minute to give me an acknowledgment in writing that all fhe has faid of Lady Louifa, as well as what (he wrote to Sir Charles, is falfe, we will hear what Mrs. Walker is enabled to reveal, and make it as public as the air.
“ I am rendered defperate, and care not what I do,” exclaimed Lady Sommerville —“ Yes, I will write what you pleafe—I am tormented to death —Get out of my
(ight, you mean-----ingrateful hireling !
turning to Mrs. Walker, who waited not for a repetition of the command. “ It is hard, Mr. Norton, to be afperfed unjuft-ly!
“ You did not confider that. Madam,” faid Melmoth, “ when you fo unfeelingly injured Louifa! Have you for a truth, my Lady, always obferved the commandments of God ?—Who now may be conviXed of
perjury—you or I ?----Poor Melmoth !—
you are to die, ;^i^you have lived, under
the
99
99
WHAT YOU WILL.
65
the wrath of God—is it not fo, Madam ?— Sweet Louifa ! how have you been reviled !”
“ Would to heaven you and Louifa were both dead at my feet this inftant!—My reputation is gone !—Weftern •'—’lis falfe I affure you—let me implore you not to believe it!”
Implements of writing were called for, and I made her give a folemn revocation with her own pen of all that had been fpread to the difhonour of Louifa—it is fufficient-ly fatisfaXory, I think, to open Montague’s eyes, and convince him of his error.
We were as glad to take leave of Lady Sommerville as fhe could have been to fee us out of her houfe—Before we left it, we begged to fpeak with Mrs. Walker—we thanked her for her generofity to Lady Louifa, and affured her (he ffiould lofe nothing by it; then, putting a trifie into her hand, entreated her to accept of it as an earneft of our acknowledgment, which we would make in a proper manner as foon as the bufinefs we were engaged in was fettled, and we could find out a way of ferving her to her wiffies.
“ You
/
66 MAS QU ERADES; or,
“ You are to blame, gentlemen,” cried fhe, “ in fuppofing my behaviour generous towards Lady Louifa—I have done no more than my duty ; and muft beg of you to take back your prefent. On this occafion it looks like a gratification, and tha: I cannot think of receiving for performing only the upright, juft part.” ,
We urged her with warmth not to refufe us; but fhe was refolute.
C4
I
houfe, it !—
am going immediately from this faid fhe; “ I am no longer fafe in -If I can be of further ufe to you, gentlemen, I fhall be found at my brother’s, who is a mercer in Bond-ftreet---With him 1 fhall remain, till I can get into a Lady’s fervice fuitable to mv inclinations. The
ft
fteward has promifed to remit me the wages due from Lady Sommerville, whom it agrees neither with my fecurity nor defire to fee again.”
She curtfied modeftly, wifhed us all happinefs, and retired. Melmoth and I got into the chaife, and went back to his houfe, from whence he would not let me depart till this morning.
He is, in fpite of his bad health, ftill an
enter-
\
w
YOU W
67
entertaining companion -—He avoided as much as poffible to mention Lady Louifa, or Sir Charles, after our return from Sommerville-Houfe.--The topic is unpleafing; for he yet loves her, I am fure. He told me, that his phyficians recommend to him to drink the waters at Barege, and to go over as foon as poflible for that purpofe. “ 1 was on my rout to Bigorre,” cried he, “ when I fo luckily (I mufl: ever think it, however painful the caufe) was prevented from proceeding—You fee, Norton, I am already reduced to the lafl; ftate-the Faculty are ignorant what further to do with me —and wifli to fend me from them to die in a ftrange country.”
“ You are defpondency itfelf!” replied : “ thofe waters are very famous: purfue, Melmoth, their advice without lofs of time, and if it can be of comfort to you to have the fociety of an old friend, depend that I will be with you foon after you are fixed in Bigorre. I would accompany you thither; but you know how 1 am circumftanced, and with others bufinefs, and my own, it may be a month or fix weeks before I can leave England—too long a delay for you
CO
I
68 MASQUERADES; OR,
to make certainly.—Yes, you lhall try the waters of Barege—I will recommend you to the friendlhip of a very refpeXable family that lives near Bagniers, whom you muft like extremely—If that place anfwers not, let us then fee what Naples can do.— Entertain no doubt of your recovery—the Almighty has thought fit to rouze your reafon by (hewing you, in a near light, the awful image of death—you have thrown off your bad habits—and with returning health will afilime quite oppofite ones—Away with fear !—think only of getting health—you and I (hall yet experience a happy old-
I”
Oh, Norton 1” cried he, clafping my hand, “ you renovate the fprings of expiring nature ! And is it poffible that you will come over to a poor miferable invalid !— But you always proved the only true friend I owned.—Had I been guided by yon, I Ihould now be in perfeX health, and blefled, perhaps, with Louifa Sydney.—Of that no more—fome good has been produced by my fuffering—•! have had opportunity enough to look into myfelf, and to mend
my heart—Norton, 1 have fofteoed it—I
am
age
WHAT YOU WILL.
69,
am no longer that haughty mafter my fervants ufed to find me—1 can bear contra-didtion without being ready to take the perfon by the throat who prefumed to oppofe me.....Adverfity is the, only fchool on
earth for your proud, turbulent difpofitions! -—But, dear Norton, I can fcarcely think you in earneft—What, leave England, which you are but juft returned to—leave your friends !
Upon my foul, I will go to you as foon as I have it in my power—England can have few charms for one fituated as 1

am.
The poor man was much pleafed, and determined to fet out in two days. This evening I fhall begin my journey towards Wales—may I be as fuccefsful in that tour, as I have been in this! Your Lordfhip, I fure, will be fatisfied at my not calling bn you—I fhould lofe time by it—and when we next meet, it will afford me double pleafure to tell you that our friends are reftored to felicity.
I am much indebted to Lady Julia Herbert for her bene/olent permiffion to make the letters fubfervient to any purpofe I
pleafe—
70
MASQUERADES; or
pleafe—(fuch were the words your Lordfhip ufed) : they will tend to one eflential point,—that of convincing Sir Charles he is moft tenderly beloved by his fair Miftrefs I wiil let your Lordfhip know as foon as poflible the refult of my vifit to him ; and am with great refpeX, my Lord,
Your Lordfliip’s moft obedient
And faithful fervant,
William Norton.
To Lady Julia Herbert.
%
(Enclojing ihe preceding letter,)
t
Windfor.
I ANTICIPATE your joy, my deareft Julia at difcovering that Louifa is cleared from the abominable calumny of Lady Sommerville
WHAT YOU WILL.
71
ville—that the vile creature’s guilt is deteXed—and that (he now ftands with all juftice in the debafed light fhe placed your innocent friend!—But I forget whom I am writ-
’	“ No,” you cry ;
ing to
“ I cannot re-
joice at the latter part of your intelligence 1 am rather forry for it.” Well, my dear, be forry ;—but allow me to be very glad—at leaft that her wickednefs is expofed—Oh, that Melmoth had perfifted in his enquiry after thofe circumftances againft her that Walker and Clairon could prove! —I w'ould fhew her no mercy—Do, Julia, as you regard my happinefs, queftion Clairon about them, and let not a fyllable efcape your pen when you write to me—What a fine column in the Morning-Poft will they
tak
up
!
Mr. B— will be made glorioufly happy in fuch an opportunity of obliging the public—and that he may be happy in the extreme, take care to charge her in the recital to leave out no fcandalous—
indelicate trait.
-nay.
Should Clairon think the
account too bad for you to hear—or me to read, let her write it herfelf, and addrefs it to him where his paper direXs.—So that Lady Sommerville is held up to mankind
in
*•2
1
MAS QU ERADES; or.
in the colour (he deferves, I yield the point of being made acquainted with the incidents of her (hame.
My opinion is, that Louifa had beft remain in her prefent ftate of ignorance till we get Mr. Norton’s next letter, which (hall be difpatched to you as foon as we have read it.
Surely, my dear Julia, the happy way your friend is in, of having her ill fortune reverfed, muft make you chearful! Let this example urge you to hope as great a change in yours------
Adieu ! I write in hafte, and can only fay that I am
/
Your affeXionate
Caroline Mortimer

WHAT YOU WILL.
It
To Ladv Mortimer..’
WaUinghrool-Abhey*
Am indeed, my dear fifter, rejoiced at the iflue of Mr. Norton’s friendly journey into Hampfliire t May the one he is now undertaking be (as he fays) attended with equal fucCefs ! Depend that I Ihall be as filent as the grave, concerning what you fo kindly and expeditioufly impart, till I receive your commands to fpeak—but I think you had beft not keep Louifa too long in the dark, left a fudden and unexpeXed fight of Sir Charles fhould hurry her fpirits more than you would like—It'is not improbable but he may come to her as fooa as he knows what Mr. Norton has to unfold.
Pardon me. Lady Mortimer, for refufing
\
your requeft Clairon
will put no queftions to Lady Sommerville is truly mortified—and, however culpable, it does not in my opinion, juftify thofe in whofe power Ihe is for bearing too hard upon her—Mer-yoL. IV. . E	cy
^4
MASQUERADES; ol
9
Might not
€f is a godlike attribute—and Mr. Norton behaved with generofity—with delicacy, in feeking to know no more of her fecrets chan were fufficient in the meritorious caufe he engaged in, of defending oppreffed virtue.
Befides, may not the judicious forbearance of exalted .minds, lead her to draw a comparifon between them and her own ? What a contraft will fhe find !— remorfe follow—^and then amendment? For pity’s fake, my dear fifter, let her reft and think no more of herl My Lord Arne has had ,a flight fit of the gout which detains us here; but, as he is on the recovery, we expeX foon to remove CO Southampton. He and his Lady have begged of me to complete a partie quarree to Bath in November, a vifit to which place jny Lord judges neceffary for his diforder Without confulting Lady Pemberton, I have excufed myfelf-—I will now wait the refult of Mr. Norton’s explanation, and when Sir Charles and Louifa are reconciled (if that ever happens) go back to Windfor.
I am furprized at the daily change, that appears in her-.-.-I may fafely pronounce, Xsc, Ihoyld Montague never return, her
former

WHAT YOU WILL?
75
fince his flattering
former health and chearfulnefs will. She never mentions him—and endeavours by a thoufand ways to diffipate her thoughts. The harpfichord is a great enemy of his fhe draws me into play—and from the con* ftant praXice 1 have, you will find me improved, I fancy, when you hear me: Lord and Lady Arne are fond of mufic almofi: to a fault—it is the principal pleafure Louifa has—I have liked it better than ever, fince I difcovered how great a proficient in it Lord Ofmond is encouragement induced me to purfue that charming fcience—every thing then combines to make me pafs moft of my time at fome inftrument.
I wifh to God, Caroline, the Duke of Weftmorland had been employed as I was laft night—I fpent two hours in gaining inftruXion from that admirable work of a writer, whofe name muft in all ages do honour to his country—The fubjeX of my attention was the third volume of Johnfon’s Rambler: in it I met with a papX marked No. 148, which (if any thing in nature could) muft have afilXed the tyrannical father.
£ z
MASQUERADES; os
9
Adieu, my amiable fifter—I have fo little to entertain you with, that to write long letters would be a fad tax on your lively genius—Commend me properly to your coterie, and think me
affeXionate
Julia Herbert^
To Lord Mortimer^
Saturday Morning..
Got ;CO Carnarvon, my Lord, on Sunday night, after a very long and fatiguing journey. I wrote a note to Sir Charles Montague, telling him of my arrival in this country, and that I intended myfelf the pleafure of'waiting on him the next day; and, leaving orders wkh the people of the |nn to fend it early in the morning to El-
When I awoke.
wipliya Caftle, I went to bed.
WHAT YOU WILL.
r;
swoke, my fellow delivered me an anfwef couched in the following words:
“ What can have brought my dear William into Carnarvon (hire ? Let the motive be what it may—I rejoice at it, as it gives me an opportunity of once more feeing you ! But allow me to warn you, my good friend, to fay nothing fo me of Lady Louifa. Sydney—The papers have informed me of Sir George Sommerville^s death—I dread hearing that fhe is married—I have forfeited all title to- her favour, and ought to be difinterefted enough to wifh her virtues were rewarded in the arms of fome deferving man—but I have not yet fufficiently conquered this' proud, afpiring heart! I will be with you in a little while—obferve the caution I give, and believe me,
Your faithful
Charles Montague.
I drefied in hafte, went into a parlour, and was juft about to breakfaft, when a phaeton aiul four drove to my window, turned into
E 3	th®'
■js
MASQUERADES; or
the yard, and I heard fome voices fay, “ Sir Charles Montague!” I flew to the door, and faw the very man defcending from it. 1 need not reprefent to your Lordfliip the joy that muft attend the meeting of too very particular friends, after feveral months feparation.
Sir Charles defired to know by bufinefs in Wales ? I faid, to fee him—then enquired what bufinefs kept him remote from all his acquaintances, immured in the old caftle of El wellyn ?
Your queftion hurts me, Norton !’* cried he. “ Do you not know that I have nothing of my fortune left ?’*
!—how
iC
can that ?-----Me-
What, Montague be, and in pofTeflion of Elwellyn thinks an eftate of fix thoufand not to be accounted nothing I" looked confufed.
‘‘ It is true, I have the ufe of the houfe to fhelter my unhappy head from the inclemency of the weather^—but the eftate is mortgaged for more than its value.”
“ And how do you contrive to live, my dear Montague ?—The fight of your land, trees, and fails of water, cannot fuftain nature.
ty H AT YOU W

lore, I prefume.—Perhaps* you have brought yourfelf to exift on the dews of the earth !—-It is lucky that you are fuf-ceptive of fuch aliment!—but it is a mon-ftrous change, from feafting on ortolans and quaffing claret and champaign
“ Pfhaw! what does it fignify how I live t ■You have not loft your old cuftom of prefting me to death with difagreeable in-
—I have faved
59
terrogatories!—Say no more two hundred a year out of the wreck, and kt that fuffice.”
“ Oh Lord, oh Lord ! what an excellens oeConomi-ft you muft be to make fo fmall s fum go iuch lengths I A new phaeton highly finiftied—four beautiAil bays—-two fellows 'Well mounted, well apparelled, whofe countenances fpeak opulence,, content, and
cc
chea-
35
You. are devilifhly teafing, Norton f Come, order your fervants to convey your chaife and baggage to Elwellyn now that I have you, you fhall not leave me foon !”
I got into his carriage, and he drove m‘e to the caftle.—I have been here before, and well knew what a romantic place he
E 4	h ad
So
MASQUERADES; or
had made choice of to indulge his melancholy in. The habitation is built in a Gothic ftyle, very awful, very magnificent There are high hills that almoft kifs the clouds, which form an amphitheatre from the back view of the houfe—They are covered with trees, that have been held in great veneration by Sir Charles’s anceftors; fo muchfo, as to have thought k a kind of facrilege to fend an axe amongft them. They look to have
axe amongft been the haunts
of
Druids, and the refidence of Hamadryads. A large body of water rufhes from a ftu-pendous height, which, from being frequently interrupted in its progrefs by a
number of rocks, forms a cafcade more
/
noble than it is in the power of fancy to paint, and falls into a rapid river, that ferpentines for many miles through the
eftate-----From the front of the caftle
you command rich vallies, fine lakes.
The fituation of Elwellyn muft be exquifite to a love-fick imagination. In this folitude Sir Charles has poured out his foft complaints, and found his paflion fed by the feenes around him.
I ob-
and diftant buildings.
WHAT YOU WILL.
I obeyed his injunXion of not mentioning Lady Louifa to him—yet I omitted no opportunity of rallying him on the motive he alleged,, for retiring to the romantic mountains of Carnarvonfhire—Sometimes he would look vexed—at others, he could not refrain from laughing. But thougb he put the beft face on to me,, it was perceptible enough that his mind was ill at eafe. I plainly law that he often wiftied I ftiould talk of Louifa in fpite of his prohibition—I was determined not to be the firft to erwer on the topic, ta mortify him fo^ his referve,
After fupper laft Wednefday,. and after taking two thirds- of a Bottle of Burgundy he ventured , to afk where Lady Louifa was ? '	,	•	■
I have not feen, nor heard from- her

fince my arrival,” was my anfwer.
Ah,, Norton,” cried he, “ your evafion tells me all I am anxious to learn I——She is manied i”
“ Not yet, I believe.”' '
Oh gracious Heaven !—then fhe is be fhortly ?”
To fay the truths I am ignorant of it
Ej
CC

MASQUERADES; or
But as you: introduce the fubjeX, I
fell you whac is my views-----You muft
know, Montague, that I have long loved Lady Louifa—As I heard from your own iips of your attachment to her, I could not. in honour reveal my paffion—You fooa after became an accepted lover—I retired from England till I could bring myfelf to behold vour mutual hapninefe without
your
emotion—with fuch fentiments alone, as friendfhip to both of you ought to poflefs.. I, now find that you have withdrawn your addreifes—honour no longer interferes—I am free^ certainly, to endeavour to obtain her heart!”
Montague clafped his hands, fixed them ©n the table, and refted bis> head upon^ them.
, continued I, “ I fhould not hefitate a minute about the matter, but that I hear fhe is infatuated to a fellow., who, L fufpeX, proves himfelf very unworthy of hen” He ftarted from his pofition.
" Oh Norton—dear Norton ! that ia the caufe of my milery—fondly thought myfelf beloved—fhe conftrained her heart $0 pretend fb—whilft.”--------
CC.
WKAT YOU WILL?
She is an artlefs girl,!,
Did fhe indeed affe3- a paflion' you ?—It is ftrange !— and I fhould fcarcely believe her capable of
diffembling I-----However, that her hea?£:
was fixed at the very time on the worthlefe» objeX I fpeak of, is undoubted Julia Herbert has given me fome letters' from Louifa, that demonftrate very to what an unfortunate degree fhe loved^ him.”
“ Have you thofe letters
I brought them with me for the puf] pofe of confulting you upon them—to afk. your advice whether I had not beft ftep^ between the ungrateful wretch, who little: knows her value, and the
CC
value,
Louifa—If he marries her, mable jewel lhall I lofe ! the letters ?”
mifguidedl what an inefti-
Will you read’i
“ No, no^—feek not to revive the keei^i anguifh T endured at difcovering her falfe— hood !■—She is yet too dear to me !•—heir image is ever before my eyes; it embitters^
cGnnnuahwifh is,, that:
my nours— Lhad never
and my beheld
her
No,- Norton,. Ii dare not look on the proofs of fo - much).
charaXer^,,
to- peruie- ner.
E. 6-
uwn
whichi
Si
MASQ.U ERADES; o».
CC
Cc
which were 'wont to make my heart leap with joy—now muft diftraX me !”
Well, 1 will not urge you—Then I fuppofe, you judge it beft for me to try to efface the impreffion my undeferving rival has made on her ?”
“ You apply to a very improper perfon, on fuch an occafion, to direX you
how to aX, Mr. Norton------I begged you
not to name her to me.”
Nay ! recolleX Montague, who began the converfation—Candour is what I boaft of—I wifhed firft to tell you of my
intentions.”------—
“ But how can you poflibly expeX fue-cefs ? You have fufficient faXs of her loving another; it is no longer a fecret that Mr, Melmoth is her choice.”
“ Aye, fo I have heard. But that fhall not prevent me from going to Lady Louifa* and learning it from herfelf—No other evidence ought I to credit in fuch a cafe Though every relation fhe had on earth were to found in my ears that Melmoth that you was beloved by her ; nay, though I faw letters figned with her own name*
.which afferted it, I would doubt all, till
her
59
±
WHAT YOU WILL;
tier own voice confirmed it. Relatioiis may lie from felfifti motives, and letters may be forged!
He feemed agitated.
“ Suppofing you were I’eceived favoured lover—we will go fo far as to fuppofe you were on the eve of marriage, and was told her inclinations were done violence to, that fhe hated you, and idolized another, how would you then aX ?”
“ You fuppofe, that I was told £b by herfelf
No, no-—that a very intimate friend, one of refpeXable charaXer, wrote to you to this efifeX, out of friendlhip to each party.”
Why then I would carry the letter to Louifa, and entreat To know, honeftly, whether the contents were true ?
would be doubly incumbent on me, at fuch a crifis, to behave in that manner for, was the friend a falfe one, fuch as we have many inftances of—and I a credulous blockhead to take fright at what he, or Ihe wrote, how many wretched hours might I
whofe foul
m ight
mnocent

MAS QUERAD £ Sr or?
♦*
might in truth know no other than what llie received from me !”
“ Norton, you fpeak in a very harlh■ manner! I am not accuftomed to the
'Epithets of credulous”^---
“ How, my dearfriend ! of you ?
who thought
IJhould
we
I was faying,
in fuch a cafe—-but this topic difeompofes you, I will never enter on it more will feparate, the hour is late.”
I got up with an air of calmnels, and rung the bell—he was fadly difturbed, but. 1 knew how to manage the heart, and'left him to brood over what had pafled^
After I was undrelTed, he entered my room—I found an. excufe to detain my fes-vanr, to hinder a further difcuffion on the: head we had been upon
“ Norton,” cried Montague, with rather a filly countenance, “ I come to beg a fight of the letters—Ihave not power to* refift them 1”
“ Try, my dear Montague!—confider what ill confequences they muft produce— at leaft take a day or two to fortify your
fpirits; perhaps, by that time, you may be
' '' ■	■ '	ld&-
WHAT YOU WILL
teft eager to read them—and poflibly may not defire it.”
“ Tvjo days /—two centuries !—No, no: dear William, entruft them to ]
no.
hands-'I die with impatience!”
“ The efi’eXs be on your own head !—— Was I to aX the proper part, I do not know but that I fhould refufe them to you '—however, if they coft you the pangs I expeX they will, your feelings, your re-
•	A ^	^	m	A	-	^	^	M
them
good

He grafped the packet with trembling hands, bowed to me, and'darted out of the room.
I leave your Lordfhip to imagine how different were the operations of thofe letters^ from what he apprehended ; and yet, 1 think, his mind mnft have endured a> great deal at the rctrofpeX of his paft precipitate conduX. You wiil' be aftonifhed^, my Lord, to hear that I have had no converfation with him upon the fubjeX fincej but I have ftudioufly avoided it. In* the firft place, he deferves to be punifhed for
the unhappinefs he has given an amiable

in the next. Heave him time to pon*-
deis
ss
MASQUERADES; oit.

marns
der an the folly of hrs behaviour, to fe^i his error in a clear light. Should he ftill doubt Louifa’s affeXion, I lhall be pro^ voiced, it muft be owned ; but, for her fake, I will convince him of his abfurdity, by producing the other papers in my poffeffion. I will ufe the power while it re-
with me, tQi make him fuffer. Louifa’s readinefs to pardon him an the firft Gonceflion, cannot be queftioned ; and a temporary fufpenfe will give a higher re-liQi to the joy he muft experience on their meeting.
I arofe early on Thurfday morning, and took a long ramble. I did not return till
O	^	-
it was time to drefs for dinner. I came home with a mock indifpofition, which was to prevent my being good fociety. Luckily to help my defigni, I found Lord Beaumont at the caftle, who had arrived
an hour before 'me. He travelled all tha
/
way from Bagfliot to fee his nephew, and to enquire into the trutn of the ftrange rumour fo induftrioully propagated of Sir Charles’s ruin,' which, hov/ever, never reached his ears till about a fortnight ago*
Montague had taken no notice of his
WHAT YOU WILL.
tCf
Lordfliip, from the time that he gave up Lady Louifa ; and the poor old man, who was ignorant of his abode to the moment he was informed of it by the fame tongue that announced the deftrnXion of his fortune, came very well fraught with chidings. I dare fay my Lady Mortimer will foon guefs that this intelligencer extraordinary was no other than Jack Ainfley, the celebrated Marplot of the age; but Where, or how he difcovered Sir Charles’s retreat, I cannot conjeXure. Lord Beaumont and Montague had made up matters before I appeared, which was on a fummons to dinner. Sir Charles introduced me to my Lord—he is very agreeable—his affability with young men takes off t hac awe w;hicb his reverend figure at firft infpiies; and, without lofing his refpeX, he them to be unconftrained and happy inliis company. He tells anecdotes of old times with fuch life, deferibes his charaXers and, feenes in fo eloquent a manner, that, far from tiring, it is the greateft amufement in nature to liften to him. One thing he ftriXly obferves, I find, which is never ta tell the lame ftory twice.. Montague treats
him
\

masquerades:; on
him with more refpeX and attention the prime minifter of France does his Monarch.- Lord Beaumont’s behaviour to Sir Charles, is juft what it ought to be never too familiar—yet always friendly andi eafy—he feldom fpeaks but in a jefting way, which is full of humour, and highly entertaining.
O
Montague’s features betrayed perplexity and uncertainty—he looked frequently at me, as if to reproach me for my deceit for my fevere fentiments of him—and for avoiding him as I had done all the morning : however, at times he would feem enraptured— thing Lord Beaumont or F might chance to —and then his countenance would ba
laugh from his heart at fome-
fay—
again overfpread with confliXin Lord Beaumont is
doubts.
by no means an enemy to fmall hours : he refufed to break up fooner than two o’clock. When we took leave, I failed not to complain of the
n I had provided for my pur-
pofe.
Norton,” cried Montague afide, will k incommode you, if I pafs half an hour
in your apartment
^ YeSo,

WHAT YOUWI LL.
OI
Yes, my good friend ; I am ill dif* pofed to enter upon bufinefs 1”
He thought me unkind I am fure; but I was indifferent as to that. We feparated I ordered Gordon to be careful that Iwas not difturbed, and not to enter my chamber before I rung. I did not quit it till I knew that Lord Beaumont and Sir Charles were together. Montague’s behaviour to me fince has been very ftiff—the title of Mr, was punXually made to precede my name when he pronounced it; but his manner caufed no alteration in mine to-
r
wards him. Some Gentlemen of Carnarvon came by invitation to dinner yefterday ; they did not depart till late. Montague appeared to find very little fatilfaC-tion in the mirth that every one elfe participated of. He preffed no further to fpeak to me, and I affeXed not to fee his chagrin or diftance.
This morning, at breakfaft, my Lord hinted an intention of fpending three weeks at Elwellyn, and afked-Sir Charles if he had not engaged me to make fome ftay with him ? Montague replied, hia
wifb waa never to part with meand re-
^2
M ASQU'ERADES; or.
jpiced that I had fo good an inducement as his Lordfhip’s company not to abandon Carnarvonfhire in a hurry—when he was gone, he hoped charity would urge me to remain with him.
“ Oh,” faid Lord Beaumont, I am
determined that neither of you fhall remain here without me. You muft accompany me home, and I will find fome fports to-amufe you. I meditate inviting a feleX party of agreeable young fellows to meet you; you fhall be at liberty to do juft what you pleafe.”
I lamented my misfortune in being obliged to quit Elwellyn in a few days but aflbred my Lord, that I would endeavour fhortly to exprefs my acknowledgments at his. own houfe, for the honour he did me.
“ Obliged to quit Elwellyn in a few days^ Mr, Norton f”
“ I am fo unlucky. Sir Charles.”
He caft his eyes on the ground, and was filent. I foon retired under the excufe of writing.

'W
YOU W
n
m
He
ik ik *	*
Hi

Hi
iXL^
Saturday Night,
After dinner, when the cloth was removed, the fervants withdrawn, and the bottle pulhed about, Lord Beaumont defired he might be confidered by Sir Charles and myfelf as a young companion of ours, who was in all our fecrets—who would join us in the diverlions of a fox^chace, a mafquerade, a riot—in fkort, any vagary that wild, diflipated heads could think of entering into, “ You look furprized,” added be—“ Well, do not be afraid, left age ffiould forget its confequence in me, and I bring a ridicule on it.—But view me in the light 1 fpeak of; throw afide all referve, and let me know, Charles, what occafions this froideur in your manner towards Norton. I have heard you talk oi him as the friend after Ofmond you moft loved——You are loth to tell me !— Come, Norton, though I have not as g.oo*'d ,a right to your confidence as I have to this young man’s, there is an ingenuity .about you that convinces me you will not let me afk you the queftion in vain.”
^ Indeed

I
^4 MAS QU ERADES; or.
Indeed, my Lord,” cried I, know not why it fhould be, unlefs that
I
99
Sir Charles regards me as a rival.
“ A rival J" exclaimed he ; “ that is a
terrific word—are you in truth one ?
99
CC
I will give your Lordfhip
up my fecret at once to I ardently love Lady
liOuifa Sydney ; but fhe is attached to one
totally infenfible of her merit.”----------
“ Stop,” cried Sir Charles, you go too far—infinitely too far!”—I have difcovered that it is not Melmoth you allude to—it is I whom you call the infenfible, the unworthy, the credulous blockhead fpeak, is it not ?”
In plain words. Sir Charles, I had and
CC
you, ana you alone, in my thoughts, when I ufed thofe expreffions.”
However grating to my ear, however repugnant to my feelings they were, I confefs, from what I have feen in my Louifa’s own writing, I mented them but too welL —Ah, Norton, how criiel have you been in fo long refufing to hear me make this acknowledgment!”
“ Bravo I” exclaimed Lord Beaumont: £ this is the way to do bufinefs—you will
find
WHAT YOU WILL.

End it more eligible, I can tell you, young men, than fullen filence, or forced compliments of ceremony—and I fhall be enabled to come at the origin of this intricate affair^ You told me, on my arrival, Montague, .that your fortune was not impaired, but that, difgufted with the world, you had .abandoned it—and alleged the reafon fo common in every mouth, to be freed from the fociety of a fet of people you defpifed, whom you conceived juftly enough ol to be afiured, that, under the influence of poverty, they would ceafe to moleft you. I airged to know what kad difgufted you? You entreated me to-excufe your fpeaking further on the fubjeX. Now 1 wifi excufe you no longer. Let me be acquainted with the caufe of your burying yourfelf in this folitary dwelling
Sir Charles was confufed ; but, after a little while, colleXed fpirits fufficient to through the recital that he gave Lord Ofmond in the letter now in your Lord-
When he ended his
's pofTeflion. narrative, “ I am convinced, my Lord,” added he, “ that I have been much to blame in fo haftily giving implicit faith to
Lady,

Q0
Lady Sommerville’s affirmation; but Heaven, is my witnefs, that, to avoid troubling Louifa with the fight of a man, who I believed had occafioned her too much unea-finefs, was the only motive that aXuated my conduX on the occafion; and to be perfuaded that I am as dear to her, as I once thought, would make me fuperlatively happy.”
Lord Beaumont condemned his raffi behaviour—-he fpoke very fenfibly—-very keenly. Montague had but little to fay In his vindication.
Will you not call me your guardian * cried L if 1
angel.
give you incon-teftible proofs of her fidelity ?”
You have alr-eady done that, my dear William. I no longer doubt that ffie did love me, when I in fo daftardiy a manner gratified Lady Sommerville’s malice*, but that ffie does fo ftill, requires authority from Heaven to make me believe it—No, Lady L.ouifa muft defpife, muft execrate
mel”
I cannot think fo,” returned 15 but i am ignorant how you will bear to be in-;formed of the dreadful circumftances that
^	followed
WHAT YOU WILL.
97
followed your abandoning her. She had not that to lament alone; but the unex-peXed death of Sir George Sommerville, which happened in a few days after his receiving the letter you wrote, declaring your inability to wed his niece. The poor old man, revived by the hope of feeing her yours, ftruggled viXorioully againft the grave for many months; but the prop
which fupported him taken away--------no
wonder he fhould fall immediately.—Yet
there is fomething ftill worfe----fhe has
been vilely traduced.”
Montague was fixed torpid to his feai feveral minutes elapfed before he could articulate —“ I the occafion of her uncle’s ^jeath !—Louifa vilely traduced !—Ah, my Lord, I never was completely wretched till this inftant!—Norton, approach me not!—Good men muft be feized with horror at holding any intercourfe with fuch a
villain.”
“ Could you not make reparation,'
for thefe misfortunes, I would never have
ample reparation my dear Montague, mentioned them to you. compofed *, poflefs yourfelf,
Vol. IV.	F
Be a man ; be I have declared
^8
MASQUERADES; or
dared the bad ; the good comes next to be
related. Lady Sommerville is punifhed—
Lady Louifa cleared. Let us go through
the whole affair this evening;—and my
worthy Lord will affift us with his conn-
0
fel how to proceed next !”
Lord Beaumont was deeply affeXed at his nephew’s fituation—J withdraw for the papers I had to fhew them—On my return, I gave, from the beginning, a detail of Lady Sommerville’s v/hole plot; her convcrfations with Lady Arne and Lord Pemberton; her inhuman treatment of her niece; my confuicaiion with your Lordfhip ; my journey into Hampfhire, and the incidents that followed,—which, I told Sir Charles, plainly demonllrated that Lady Sommerville was the foie origin of every calamity that had happened—that it was incumbent on him to fet his mind at refi:^ and look forward to the means of rewarding Louifa for all fhe had endured. Sir Charles faid, his blind jealoufy had made him as culpable as Lady Sommerville ; and that to renew his addreffes was out of the qneftion. “ It wouid be prefumption unparalleled, Norton!” added
he;
WHAT YOU WILL.
99
he: “ you are the perfon to whom llie muft be given; you have evinced your paffion you have cleared her injured reputation ; you have fuffered no artful inftigator to work upon your fenfes; you have been an affiduous friend, an ardent lover; you alone are worthy of her—and I am loft !”
CC
I fwear to you, Montague,” replied I, “ that, was I as deferving of her as you fay, and Ihe was to confent to become mine—tenderly as I love her, I would noc marry her. My notions are delicate: I would not be content with the fecond place in her heart; and am fatisfied, gratitude only could compel her to beftow her hand on me. Think of me no more in this cafe,: pardon my trial of your affeXion for her laft Wednefday ; pardon my keeping you in fufpenfe—I meant to puniffi you— already repent of it—And now look on me, as one vvho fympathizes in your diftrefs, who will leave nothing undone to accomplifli your union !”
Lord Beaumont fnatched my hand, and thanked me for what he termed my generofity to his dear Charles, ‘‘ And now, my
F 2	boys,”
loo MASQUERADES; OR,
boys,” cried be, “ what do you think of our ferting out for Lord Arne’s to-morrow? We will tear up the earth with our hafte, and for once in our lives fpare neither drivers nor horfes—^You fancy me dilatory;
-nay, vi^ith you !
if you will go off this minute, have
I am young again, and ima-
it might
gine it is my own miftrels that I am hurrying to, on the wings of the wind.”
I begged his Lordfhip to moderate his impatient extacies a little. I hinted that
be very neceffary that Lady Louifa Ihould be firft informed of the tranf-adtions which had paffed at Sommerville-lioufe, as 1 was convinced that (he knew nothing of them yet.
Pfhaw !” exclaimed Lord Beaumont; “ the fight of Montague will afford an agreeable furprize to her—I hate your dull delays !”
Sir Charles implored his uncle guided by me.
“ Our good Norton, my reafon for this caution, no doubt! eager heart with rapture anticipates mu-eting; and yet I cann.it fuppofe fh fn\ s .0 fee me—She never wiL be mi
to be
Lord, has
My
our
de-
V
1 pio
WHAT YOU WILL. loi
I propofed difpatching this letter to your Lordfhip by exprefs—it was readily afiented to. I am fure. Lady Mortimer will lofe no time in preparing Lady Louifa to expeX a return of her penitent.
We intend leaving Elwellyn Caftle on Thurfday morning; and fo far from tearing up the earth which lies between this and Wallingbrook-Abbey, and dejiroying drivers and horfes, we fhall take the journey very leifurely, left we fhould arrive prematurely.
I have nothing more to add, than my good wifhes for your Lordfliip, and my beft refpeXs to Lady Mortimer, and her two amiable companions. I have the honour to be, my Lord,
Your Lordfhip’s moft faithful. And obliged humble fervant.
W. Norton.
F 3

102 MASQUERADES; or.
To Lady Julia Herbert (enslojing fh
preceding Letter),
Windfor,
E A D Mr. Norton’s letter from EI-wcllyn, my dear girl, and then, in beft manner you are able acquaint Louifa with all the mifchief that was prac-tifed againft her. I prefurne you are at Southampton; fo there will not be as much danger, as Norton apprehends, of a furprize. I begin to pity Montague, and wifh his fighs may be foon at a period. I have a foolifti good-natured heart, that readily foftens when a perfon acknowledges a fault. Do, dear Julia, if the marriage is fpeedily fblemnized, prefs the happy
Lord Beaumont, your kind hoft and
We
pair
hoft,eft, to pay us a vifit at Windfor. expeX Norton here, before that event
takes place; Gentlemen
but my Lord will write the I the Ladies invitations, as foon as you inform us that you are bleffediy
en tram.
WHAT YOU WILL.
103
en train. Lord and Lady Arne can as well go from hence to Bath.
I fuppofe you hear regularly from my mother and her party, and know that they have been upwards of three weeks in Kent.
The Duke of Weftmorland and his cara are in London, bufied in miking up cloaths, equipages, &c. Xc. &c. againft the approacKing joyful occafion.
And now bear it with patience, when I
tell you that you have loft a captive...—
Lord Seymour was married on Monday to
Walpole Weftbrook,
us
bids me
affure you of his love, and that he longs to fee you. The time draws very near for his becoming a grave, important married man. I truft the ceremony will not have the fame bad effect on his temper, that ic
produced on my brother’s.
(indeed his
choice is a preferable one !)---However,
let me tell you, fome few hints I gave Pemberton on that head, feemed to make an impreffion on him ; though I muft do him the juflice to fay, that he received them with a very ill grace. You have
F 4	much
104 MAS QU ERADES; or,
_ ird Sir James; believe he would go any lengths to render you happy
Julia
Ever yours,
Caroline Mortimer,
S
To Lady Mortimer
Southampton, Monday Night,
E came here two days ago, my dear fifter, and have been already vifited by the moft falhionable inhabitants of this city. Amongft thofe who immediately paid us that compliment were Colonel Worthley and his Lady, He was
in the beginning of the laft winter a lover of Louifa’s, but, on her rejeXing of him, he turned his thoughts on Mifs Stevenfon,
who
w
YOU W
105
who very gladly accepted the heart that Louifa refufed. He is fmart, degage ; fhe is very pretty, and very lively.
I received your difpatches this afternoon Louifa was in her dreffing-room, employed in trimming a facque for Lady Arne, with fome of her own work. I was reading to her Ladyfliip in the drawingroom when your fervant arrived ; fo that I had a lucky opportunity of difclofing to her the part Mr. Norton had performed at Sommerville-Houfe, and at Elwellyn and what we were to expeX from it. I need
not
tidings
expatiate on her.
the pleafure my
^ gave ner. She went to acquaint my Lord of what fhe had juft heard; and I repaired to Louifa’s apartment.
My poor friend was deeply affeXed at my recital, and much fhocked at Lady Sommerville’s conduX; but ffie. uttered no reproaches, and only lamented the degeneracy of her principles. She was penetrated at Mr. Norton’s goodnefs Lord Mortimer’s humanity, in being chiefly inftrumental to the benefit ffie had received. She mentioned Lady Arne’s and my brother’s tendernefs, in paying no
at my
F5
rc
io6
MASQUERADES; or
79
regard to the report which was made to her difhonour, with acknowledgment. She ffied tears of forrow for Mr. Melmoth’s ill health, and for her having judged fo raffily—fo unworthily of him, as to fufpeX he had been the author of her mifery. As to Sir Charles, ffie was filent. 1 entreated to know whether ffie did not com-paffionate him ? She fhook her head “ Read there, Louifa,” cried 1, giving her Mr. Norton’s lafl letter to my Lord : decide whether your noble friend did not revenge you on him fufficiently. If the leaft advocate for the man you once fo tenderly loved remains in your-breaft, ftifle not its pleadings—in every wandering of the fenfes during this unlucky affair, how dreadfully has he fuffered ! For God’s fake, let the examples of generofity which that paper contains, operate on you! Inftead of the difdainful miftrefs Sir Charles expeXs to behold, allow him to find his gentle, forgiving Louifa!
Depend upon it, Julia, that I will be as generous as I can—I determined, on the receipt of Sir Charles Montague’s laft, inhuman letter, never to marry—1 revoke
the
99
\

WHAT YOU WI L L;
107
the refolution—I will marry—Mr. Norton lhall be the huiband of my eleXion.”
“ That would be ridiculous indeed 1 but read what you have in your hand •, and learn, that, though you Ihould be abfurd enough to perfevere in fuch an intention, Mr. Norton has too much fenfe, too refined a way of thinking, to receive a wife with fentiments of gratitude for him, inftead of fentiments of love.”
She perufed the letter with infinite com-
pofure—Ihe folded it up deliberately, and gave it back to me with this apoftrophe, “ Excellent Norton !”
“ You are very unkind, dear Louifa,” cried I, “ thus to keep me in fufpenfe by your referve !—Do you not pardon Mon-
99
tague ?”
“ Yes, Julia.
“ And will you not reinftate him in
9)
your affeXions ?
“ I have had a very great ftruggle to caft him from them—1 think whac 1 have endured was a punifhment 1 deferved from Heaven, for permitting my foul to doat with fo much fondnefs on any created thing—In that light I viewed my mis-
F 6
fortune


io8
MASQUERADES; or
fortune, in being deprived firft of him, and then of mv dear uncle-
will I
again give heart he once held.
him
■No, never that place
never
in
my
1 have brought myfelf, I truft, to refleX on him with indifference; I hope I Ihould look on him without emotion. If I can prevent feeing him, I will do it; if I cannot, the difagreeable circumftance muft be fubmitted to with patience.” “ All this is very fine, Louifa !—But I regard matters now in a reverfe way. Perhaps Heaven was offended at the height of your love for SirCharles (which by the bye I cannot believe): it tried your fortitude in bereaving you of him for a while—you acquitted yourfelf under that calamity as became a chriftian; and it rewards your refignation to its decrees, by giving him back to you.—Ah, my God ! confider what af-fiiXion he endures.”
“Confider what affliXion I endured, when planning fchemes of future happinefs—-when, inmomently expeXation of his coming who was the fource of every bleffing I fondly hoped--I received a letter--a cruel, infult-ing letter, to fay, we fhould never meet a-
gain.—I was told to bok into my heart for
the
WHAT YOU WILL.
100
the caufe—I did look into it-—and found nothing there, but an ungovernable paflion, that would not be inftantly quelled by fuch an outrage from the contemptible objeX of it.. What torments equalled mine I—A help-lefs, weak, wretched girl!—To give implicit credit to Lady Sommerville—to forget, the moment ihe fpoke, all that I had done to prove my love !—Julia, he either was glad of the pretence to leave me—^or is of fo jealous, fo fufpicious a nature, as wiil render the woman miferable whom he mar-
ries
you
!—Mention him no more, I conjure , but let us avoid him—Give me a
new proof of friendlhip, dear Julia—accompany me to Windfor—we will elude this vifit!”
l objeXedj and, on her again urging it, told her if (he wifhed to avoid him, Windfor would not be the place, for that you and my Lord were warmly his defenders, and that there was no doubt but he would be glad to find her Iheltered there. She wept bitterly, and propofed our going Into Kent to my mother. I faid, if Ihe was refolved on it, I would certainly attend her; but that it muft appear very odd, and as if
Ihe
>•
no
MASQUERADES; oR
fhe was afraid to trufl: herfelf with a fight of Sir Charles. That fettled the point direXly: Ihe declared, fo far from it, that fhe would ftay and convince him of her firmnefs.—1 left Lord and Lady Arne pleading for the unhappy Montague.—In fpite of what fhe fays, I am perfuaded fhe is as ardently attached to him as ever; and, however ftrange, I had a contrary opinion till this evening. Refentment appears to her imagination in the form of hatred; but it is no more than a cloud over her love, which the approach, the forrow, the rhc-torick of Sir Charles, will remove. If fo totally indifferent, why care whether fhe fees him or not?—If fhe ftill loves, yet determined not to marry him, why care whac his thoughts may be of her flight? She would let him think as he pleafed, be attentive alone to her own fecurity, and effeX it by the only feafible plan left her.— Hence I conclude that fhe is neither indifferent—nor abfolutely bent on being cruel.
Mr. Norton’s letter was difpatched from Elwellyn yefterday week—the gentlemen were to fee out laft Thurfday—Well, many days will not elapfe before we fee them,
and know the refult I am fo anxious for.
» *
\
WHAT YOU WILL.
Ilf


*
*
*

*
*
. Tuefday Evening,
Wfe are to pay a vifit this evening to Mrs. Worthley, and accompany her to the ball. Once more, my dear fifter, much againft my will do I enter into public—The laft time I danced—ah, good God!—Caroline, what ideas crowd upon my brain! Think not I will profane my hand by giving it to any other partner than the one it was yielded to on'that memorable night— How infipid, how defpicable now, are all diverfions to me!


*
*
* *
Twelve o'Clock,
I am more than ever convinced, that, in defiance of all Louifa’s boafted tranquillity, fhe adores Montague. I never faw her poffefs better fpirits than fhe has done all day: her features were brightened, her complexion vivid. She danced with Colonel VVorthley. Once as fhe paffed us in a cotillon. Lord Arne whifpered me.

Her
1I2
MAS QU ERADESj or
If it had
Her heart is not much oppreffed—the expeXation of feeing Montague has taken a prodigious weight off it. Lady Julia! Yes, yes, the thing will do f”
“ When do you fuppofe he will be here, my Lord
“ I look for him momently, not been for that tedious dog Norton, all would be over by this time—but he muft wait, forfooh, till fhe was apprized,- Curfed nonfenfe !	1 fwear to you. Lady Julia, I
am at a lofs what to think of the young men of this age *, they know not what it is to be in love; they had rather fail in vifiting their miftreffes, than in confulting their glaffes—Was there ever any thing fo infenfible as Sir Charles, to aid Norton in begging his uncle to poftpone their journey?— Ah ! in our days, Beaumont and I were
Had you feen with
—there (he
very different lovers, what ardour I woo’d my dame! fits—
—I made a riot every night under her window, to let her know that 1 paffed all my time in thinking of her—determined
within myfelf, that fhe fhould not reft till
%
fhe had made me happy—But, faith, I was obliged to drop that noXurnal recreation;
for
WHAT YOU WILL.
113
for it was hinted that a coufin of mine, who hoped to get my fortune, meditated obtaining a ftatute of lunacy againft me Aye, aye, we were very oppofite lovers indeed !
Would to God, my dear Caroline, that Louifa may not trifle away her happinefs romanticly, as my mother once told me on a diftrcfling occaflon ! For my own fake, as well as hers, I wifh her married to Sir Charles, that I may leave this place. One of my misfortunes of late is, always to think that I fliall be eafier in any fpot than that which contains me. At Windfor I muft in reality be fo—I fhall have every fatisfaCtion in your fociety, and your amiable coni-* panion’s. Indeed, 1 have nothing to quarrel with here, but the continual difturbance of a new vifiter—and that, in my opinion, is enough of all confcience I


*

Wedmfdi
Louifi’s face wears the contrary marks of uneafinefs and happinefs. One minute Ihe is in tears, and hopes Sir Charles has fo
juft
114
QU
O R
joft an idea of her, as to be aflured of her contempt, and that he will fpare himfelf the mortification of being told that he merits nothing more from her—The next flie
fmiles, and inadvertently rejoices that he has difcovered how unworthily he treated a heart which was fo wholly his.—Ah, what inconfiftency !---She goes often to the window ; fancies her motive for doing fo, is mifconftriied ; that I fufpeX her of looking for Sir Charles—vindicates herfelf, though I have not opened rny lips—I laugh; fhe bluflies, and is vexed.
*

*

*

Thurfday Night,
After tea Lord Arne informed me, in a low voice, that his friends from Elwellyn were arrived at the George ; that he had juft received a note from Mr. Norton to fay, that they had been at Wallingbrook-Abbey, and, finding the family removed from thence, had followed to Southampton i that the trio only waited permiflion to pay therr refpeXs to him and Lady Arne, “ I am going,” faid my Lord, “ to conduX
what you will.
II5
6uX them hither. Dear Lady Julia, let a kind welcome from a certain favourite of yours await the poor wo-begone baronet!” I beckoned Louifa to accompany me to Lady Arne^ dreffing-room (for there were Itrangers with us), and when we got there I told her what I. had juil heard. I never
faw her fo agitated. “ Julia,” cried ffie, I cannot fee him- -indeed I cannot! I was courageous till now—now I am the verieft coward I”
“ Wh)% my dear Louifa, there is no great exertion of courage requifite on this occafion. You are extremely miftaken in imagining that Sir Charles is not ftill dear to you. Believe me, human nature has miferies enough to encounter, without our endeavouring to find more in our own caprices—Tell him you forgive him, and are as willing as he can be to draw the veil of oblivion on paft errors.
“Never—never, Julia!”
Well, Louifa, you know beft; but I ffiould do fo in your cafe.”
“ You was not fo complacent to Mr. Lenox, Julia!”
“ My
95

ii6
QU
OR
C(
My God, what a comparifon !—In the firft place Mr. Lenox committed an unpardonable crime in my opinion—in the next I never loved him. And, after all, what has Montague done ? He has been too diffident—been too delicate.”
“ You have not fck as poignantly my fufferings on his account, as 1 Ihould have felt yours on any interefting fubjeX; elfe you would think his behaviour ought not to be gloffed over by fuch phrafes.
t>
99
“ As I know your prefent confliXs, I can readily give no attention to this unkind-nefs. You will judge otherwife of me when you are calm.”
She threw her arms round my neck, and wept moft piteoufly—At the moment Mr. Norton entered—Ihe gotup, and flew towards him with precipitation—fhe would have fab len at his feet, had he not prevented her. He faluted her with tendernefs, and, after enquiring about her health, begged to be allowed to introduce to her the moft repen* taht*^the moft ardent of lovers.
I difown every lover,” replied ffie,
P but him whq is cruel enough to rejeX
me
WHAT YOU WILL. 1x7
me—he fays I lhall never be his wife—never will I be any other’s !”
Mr. Norton feemed confufed.
“ My dear Louifa,” returned he, “ I have one very particular requeft to make you, which, if you deny me, might make my life moft wretched—fay that you will not ?”

“ I already, my generous friend, owo you more than life—the horrid ftain you have taken off my charaXer”----
“ No more, no more, Louifa !—yon diftrefs me—What I have to fupplicate is, that, in the prefence of Lady Julia, youwiil pro-mife from this minute not to tempt my prudence by an offer of your hand—I doubt
—If I have not fortitude fuffi-
my ftrength cient to withftand it
I lhall be miferable
even with you miferable !—Prornife this; or I am gone immediately from your light, perhaps for ever!”
She hid her face in my bofom.
“ You hear him, Julia—what inhumanity 1—He has proved his affeXion for m^e in a manner that no language can exprefs— he has attached me to him by every tie
xny heart is now devoud to him alone—a id
m
Ii8 MASQUERADES; or,
/
in a cruel inftant he blafts all my hopes by bidding me not dare to afpire to fo much worth.”
Norton’s eyes fparkled—he was about to prefs her hand to his lips—to pour forth his tranfports—but fuddenly checking himfelf—in the third part of a fecond, his, whole form affumed another appearance. He dropped her hand: “ Prornife what I afk, Louifa--or farewel!” He got up— Stay,” cried ftie : fince you are fo barbarous as to defire it—fince I am no longer dear to you—fince without this pro-mife I am never to fee you more—my pro-tedor—my beft friend—-the beloved “ Oh, Louifa, this is too much !” exclaimed he ; “ for God’s fake fpare me !—
I cannot be a man and—Lady Julia, adieu ! —Reftore your friend to reafon when 1 am gone—and tell her that this is nothing more than an illufion of the fenfes—I am not the beloved of her foul—the refleXion of a cool moment will convince her that I am not.” “ Do not go, Mr. Norton,” cried Louifa; “ 1 implore you not to leave me, and I folemnly prornife to torment you no fur-tfier—1 have done, Sir—you lhall hear nothing
99
99
WHAT YOU WILL.
119
thing nnore of my attachment—it difgiifts you—and I will comfort myfelf in the hope of your finding with another that felicity you confefs I cannot give you !”
He was much affeXed—I compaffionated. him fincerely—I knew the facrifice he made was to honour—to delicacy—He would not interfere with Montague’s happinefs—he would not be fatisfied with a heart, he fufpeXed, given to him merely through punc-
tilios of gratitude.
I fliould have thought
O
her in a hazardous fituation with any other man—1 believe there is not another who could have withftood the temptation—fuch an offer would have been gladly accepted by any lover of Louifa’s but himfelf. Her imagination,confufed by the impulfes which aXuated her, would never have been able to analyze the motive—to abftraX gratitude from love*-She would have married, as flie fuppofed, the objeX of her affeXions, and in a little time have found out the miftakes of her precipitate heart. Whilft Mr. Norton was endeavouring to convince her of this, Lord Arne entered, followed by Sir Charles Montague—his perfon ftrongly teftified the melancholy he was abforbed in
He
120
MASQUERADES: or
—He approached flowly, with his hands in his bofom, and his eyes bent on the ground, the fofa we were feated on, Louifa in a minute colleXed all her firmnefs, and with a compofure infinitely diftrefling to him, returned a ceremonious curtfy, with a very ftately air, to his humble bow. He bluflied, was for the firft time aukward, and feemed unable to addrefs her.
“ Come, my dear Montague,” faid Mr. Norton, “ take my place, and become your own advocate with this cruel girl.”
“ Norton, that chilling air— thinefs—the keen anguifli I feel
my unwor--Lady
Louifa, your countenance commands me from your prefence—it arraigns the friends I have about me, for fuffering me to tafte the blefling of again beholding you—You will not deign to fpeak to me-At your feet, let me befeech you to fay, whether there is any fevere punifhment that can be infliXed on the credulous,—miferable Montague, which might render him lefs hateful in your eyes?—Name it, Madam—and then judge of my remorfe, by the avidity with which I will embrace it.”
“ Indeed, Sir, I wilh to puniih no one!
T hefe
WHAT YOU WILL. i2i
Thefe rhapfodies are not pleafing releafed from them.”
I beg

to b ed to retire.
No, by my faith!
She attempc-
* cried Lord Arne,' you muft not leave the room—you fhall hear all that Sir Charles has to offer in his vindication—I intereft myfelf too nearly in your happinefs not to wifh him fuccefs.—-Mr. Norton, this curfed gout has prevented my being an agreeable dangler at a young Lady’s fide—I know the time vyhen I Would have officiated in that department better than any fpark of you all—but that’s of no coni'equence now ! Attend Lady Julia into my wife, who defires to fpeak with her.—Give me your hand, Louifa—here, Montague, take it—and if you part with it till you receive a vow from her to make you another before the parfon-I ihall think defpicably of your oratorical powers.”

Julia,” exclaimed Louifa,
CC
fince I
aiti condemned to liften to Sir Charles, X infift 0!i your ftaying with rne !”
“ Lady Arne wants me, you hear. Awe, aye, fo ftie does I"
99
CC
C
ried
Lord; and
ha

111
f;ot icm
Vol. IV.

mg out 'With
gave Ills
unlu
G
ky hurt
my us he which made
122 .MAS Q.U ERADESj or,
made him vociferous for two minutes, and in that fpace he uttered two hundred oaths.
On entering the dravv'ing-room, we found no one in it but my Lord Beaumont and Lady Arne. The old Lord is a moft face-tims, engaging creature.
An hour had elapfed when Sir Charles joined us in a fituation that ftruck me with' horror,
“ Oh, great God,” he exclaimed, “ this is too much !—Oh, my Lord, why did I come to Southampton ?—To renew all my agonies-—to render myfelf a thoufand times more wretched—to love her if poflible beyond what I did before---and to hear from her own mouth that fne never will be minej —Let us leave this place—I cannot bear it 1”	.	^
“ So I ” cried Lord Arne, “ Lady Louifa
is inexorable 1”
Sir Charles had throwm himfelf into a chair, and was incapable of anfwering— Lord Beaumont looked perplexed and very uneafy—.— Lord Arne and I returned to Louifa, whom we found in a violent flood of tears.
“In the name of heaven, my dear child,”
cried
WHAT YOU WILL.
it%
cried he, what is all this for ?-—Can there be any thing fo abominably ridiculous ! Tell me, in one word, are you refolved not to marry Sir Charles Montague ?”
“ Yes, my Lord, i am.
Very well—you will repent of it, affure yourfdf—he is on the verge of leaving Southampion—and when you hear of his death, you may look back with forrow on the conftraint you put upon your inclinations to make him fuffer.”
She attempted to vindicate her conduX. “ Oh,” faid my Lord, “ give yourfelf no trouble !”-r-You cannot convince me that you aX properly--You are fatisfied that you do--dt is fufficient—I will teafe you no more---you will hear nothing further from Sir Charles—he is perfuaded that what you and he term his offence, ought not to be pardoned—when he is in fome meafure recovered from the deplorable condition I left him in, Lord Beaumont and Mr. Norton will remove him from you for ever.
She was terrified, and funk upon my Iboulder. Lord Arne went out, but in a few minutes came back : “ Lady Louifa,” Qfkd he, “ 1 am fent againft my will to
G z	entreat
99

s24
MASQUERADES; or
entreat that you will allow Sir Charles Montague to bid you once more farewel. I remonftrated with him—I ftrove to convince him that it would only add torture to what he already felt: for my dear friend,” faid I, “ are you ignorant, that, in this age, a young Lady’s charaXeriftic is pertinaciouihefs ? What an impeachment of good fenfe would follow a relaxation of her determination !—and take my word for it, that, though ftie loves to diftraXion, yet the happinefs of breaking a lover’s
1 will tell him to begone, fhall 1
heart is a triumph Oie muft give to her va-
•	t	*11	111*	1
nity— not ?”
“ You are very cruel, my Lord,” replied Louifa—“ Julia, what is to be done?”
CC
99
Oh, fee him by all means 1” anfwered I ; “ but not to repeat what you have already faid.
“ Then I cannot fee him,” Ihe exclaimed.
“ That is right, my dear girl!” cried Lord Arne-—“ don’t retraX for the honour of the fex !	1 will defire him not to
think of it”—and away he hobbled.

ilow provoking, Julia!” faid Ihc'
i


WHAT YOU WILL
12$
99
“ he has no feeling—no refinement!—Why could not Lady Arne have brought the meffage ?”
“ Do not be uneafy, Louifa—-I wiil go-out and fay, that 1 have prevailed on you to confent to the wilhes of Sir Charles.
—I will not marry him—you know I refolved not.” True—but I allb know that rafh-—imprudent refolulions are better broken than kept—However, I mean nothing of the fort—but to fee him once more—Unhappy
“ Good heaven, his wifhes!
Montagu
R' t w •
99
“Oh, Julia!”—
“ He wiil be gone, ray dear, and you will have time enough to weep after he de-
parts.
Before
fhe had
opportunity to reply,.
.Sir Charles, entered with Lady Arne. He threw himfelf at Louifa’s feet—he clafped her hands, and bathed them with his tears.
“ I come. Madam,” cried he, to bid you a long farewel—to implore you to think with compaffion on a man whofe fault is adequately chaftifed by an eternal feparation-from you—add not your hatred to fuch a.
G S
126
MAS QU E R A D E S J or,
/
99
He was interrupted by the appearance of the two old Lords and Mr, Norton—Lord Beaumont dropped on his knees, and fupplicated his nephew’s pardon.
“ Louifa,” faid Mr. Norton, “ I demand, as an inftance of your friendfhip, that you forgive my amiable Montague—elfe I fhall never forgive myfelf for what 1 made him fuffer at Elwellyn.
“ I conjure you,” cried I, “ by the love xvhich has fubfifted between us, to forget from this minute the caufe of your quarrel i” “ I beg you,” faid Lady Arne, “ not to gratify Lady Sommerville fo far as to crown with fuccefs her iniquitous plot. She defired to feparate you.”
And I befeech you,” exclaimed Lord Arne, “ to perfevere in your heroics !—-for ihe honour of the fex, do not reirad!	'
We looked with amazement at him.
“ Come,” faid he, “ a fecond time give me your hand he put it into Montague’s “ Now i command you, with the amho-riry of a parent, to accept of SirCharles for your hufband—there take her, and heaven make you happy ! We have witnefies enough to fwear, that Lady Louifa Sydney
would
CC
WHAT YOU WILL.
127
would never have married Montague, would never have yielded a point offemale perverfenefs, but for the tyrannic compullion of that old fool, who calls himfelf her father. This matter will be canvaffed by a council of Ladies—you will be acquitted with honour. You are more indebted than you are apprized of, to my arbitrary method of fettling the affair !”,
“ Ah, my Lord ! muft not be conftrained
—my Louifa fhe alfents not 1”
“ I do. Sir Charles, alfenc—not from the motive Lord Arne fuppofes—but becaufe I find it impoflible to refufe fuch powerful interceffors.”
' “ And to their influence alone do I ow
S
fuch a blefling
Not entirely !” replied flie wich a fmile “ I perceive 1 cannot fo eafily part w;th you as I fuppofed.”
“ Oh that Lady Sommerville could at this inftant look in upon us 1” cried Lord Arne.
You will beft judge of the immediate change which' appeared in every countenance excepting Mr. Norton’s, who, though he had been fo aXive in facilitating this re-
G 4	con*
128 MASQUERADES; or,
conciliation, was not a whit lefs fenfible of the prize he gave up to Montague.
“ Another thing I have determined on,” cried Lord Arne, “ is this—not to have any more delays !—Sir Charles, 1 will have my Louifa married direXly----what fay you, fhali it be co-morrow-night
Sir Charles with tranfport returned an affirmative. Lord. Beaumont rubbed his hands, and paid his brother peer many com-
pliments for the propolal. ed againft ir.

Louila proteft-Lady Arne faid ffie ought to be allov/ed a few days, at lead, to look about ber.
There’s for you now !” exclaimed her Lord. “My Lady, did 1 afk you to fay a word about the matter ^ Had 1 fuffered you to have been the bearer juft now as you defired, of Montague’s meffage ; he would have been half way to Elwellyn by this time !
Well, fince you—and your young Lady there—have fuch objeXions—the ceremony ffiall be deferred till Tuefday night; but I fwear to you, Louifa, no longer time ffiall be allowed you to play off your defpotic
To-morrow we will go back to Wal-
airs.
lingbrook-Abbey, where my friend Mr,
BenQey
WHAT YOU WILL.
BenQey Ihall on the day appointed, faftem the Gordian knot.
Louifa declared fhe was unwilling.to cron^ vince Sir Charles, by fo much hafte: ta« confirm him hers,.that fhe was afraid totruffe: him further. He preffed her in the tender^*' eft manner not to delay his happinefs, “ Eve**-ry thing is prepared for our nuptials, my Louifa; the writings are ready for figning

(C
they will arrive from London before Tuef day. What can excufe a procraftination ?” Louifa,” cried Mr. Norton, “ confent: with a good grace at once. Lam obliged! to be at.Windfor by dinner-time to-morrow,, and ihould be forry to depart without hear


ing a fhort day fixed for your marriage Let it be Tuefday,”
Lord Beaumont, ftrenuoufly befought her^ to comply.
taking
“ Come, my Lady,” cried Lord Arne,.
her affeXionately by the hand,.
what do you fay? Do you think well oL Tuefday?”
“ Oh, I am obliged to you truly,” re°-plied Lady Arne, with affeXed difpleafure,s for. allowing me to fay a word, about the:

matterij
120
QU
matter! Great condefcenfion in you really I However, I think very well of it,
I was filent; for though I wifhed the nuptials foon to take place, yet 1 thought they precipitated her too much : but they carried the point, and next Tuefday will fee her Montague’s.
I (hall ufe the opportunity of Mr. Norton’s going to Windfor to fend this. He is lo take an early breakfaft with us. There needs no great ftudy to difcover what hurries him away—he can,not ftay and behold the preparations for Louifa’s marriage. I fhould have told yon that Sir Charles was very warm in his acknowledgments to this excellent friend, for the generous fervices he rendered him. He dwelt fo feelingly on the fubjeX, as to diftrefs him, and affeX us. Once when Mr. Norton’s back was turned, Lord Beaumont faid he could noc have conceived it poflible, on fo fliort an acquaintance, for him to have refpeXed— to have efteemed any man to the degree he
does Mr. Norton.
1
I have fpent two hours at my pen, arid
am unable to anfwer fome paflages in your
laft
w
YOU W

Jaft letter at prefent. Farewel, my dear Caroline. May every bleffing attend you
James
fee him foon—that pleafure wiil be
to lee him loon—that pleafure will heightened in finding him the huiband of my amiable Emily. Fail not to embrace her—and to prefent to Lady Caroline Denley the affeXionate refpeXs of
0
Your fincerely attached
Julia Herbert^
I return you Sir Charles’s packet, as my Lord may now chufe to fend it to the Marquis; and give him at once to know the late diftrefs of his friend, and the occurrences of the paft night.
G 6
Ts

Otr
To Mortimer.
JVallinghrook-Abbey, Thurfday Evening,
OUISA no more owns the name o£ Sydney, but boafts that of Montague. Laft Tuefday night fhe was married to a man, who I believe will leave no art untried to make her happy. She muft think ic an obligation due to his merit-incumbent on her affeXion, to render him equally fo. Lord Arne rejoices mightily at their union. He propofes twenty times a day to. pay a vifit to Lady Sommerville. No entreaties we could make hindered him from
V
writing her a letter laft night,demand her congratulations on an- event that he well knew Jhe has long earneftly wifhedfhould happen.
This day after dinner, he declared Sir Charles fhould not make fo ill a return for the bleffing he had conferred on him,,.as to deprive his Lady and himfelf of the fweeteft companion they ever had. Lord.Beaumont did not feem well pleafed, as he expeXed
Sir Charles and his. fair bride, would gOi
with.
WHAT YOU WILL.
13 3’
with him for a little while to Bagfliot. He told Lord Arne fo, and begged he would not difappoint him of the pleafure he had' hoped for, but to accompany them. “ Lady Arne,” added he, “ and my charming, Julia, I am fure, will gratify me in honour*-ing my houfe with their abode !.” ,
“ Free enough,” you will fay,., “ thiS' ftranger is become with you.” I like it of all things—he has fo friendly a method of
(C
ufing thofe appellations, there is fomething' fo noble in his manner at the time, and; withal his< refpeXable form infpires mC' with fo much veneration for him, that II
am delighted to imagine he thinks me. wor*-thy of his notice;
l am forry, my Lord,” cried I, “ that: I am obliged to quit this agreeable party;, but I am expeXed by my fifter in-a few days: nay more,. I muft prefume to interfere with your Lordfhip’s fcheme. Lady* Mortimer has commiflioned me to entreat: the favour of every individual,in this room, to accompany me to Windfor. As foon-as they know that Sir Charles and Lady Louifa are united, you will receive invitations from herfelf and my Lord Mortimer.
955
“i’u:
5 34
MASQUERADES; or
I’ll tell your Lordlhip how we had beft fettle the matter,” faid Lord Arne. “ This plaguy gout forces me to Bath in a few weeks—we will have the honour of attending ,Lady Mortimer’s invitation,—fpend three weeks at Windfor, from whence we will proceed to Bath for a couple of months —attend this joyous pair to London—fee them prefented—I hate London, therefore cannot ftay long in it—Old Darby and Joan will come back to Southampton for the remainder of the cold feafon, and meet Sir Charles, his wife, and Lady Julia, at your Lordlhip’s favourite feat, early in the fum-
mer.
39
“ Excellent!” cried Lord Beaumont. Lady Arne, Louifa, and Sir Charles, declared their approbation of the propofal— I thanked them in my brother’s name and yours for the honour they intended you. “ But our dear Julia, my Lord,” cried Lady Arne, “ will totally fpoil our projeX for Ihe perlifts in her refolutian of not going to Bath with us.
“ Indeed, my Lady, but Ihe ftiall break it though,” replied Lord Arne : “ I have no idea of young girls being pofitive—I
laid
f ^
r V '3^
what you will.
535
laid my commands upon one daughter to marry the man of—her choice ; and I will fee if my other daughter is lefs dutiful, when I command her not to rob me of her fociety!”
“ Would to heaven,” exclaimed Lord Beaumont, “ that I w^as a young handfome fellow !—I would petition hard for a repeal
of that determination, I am, what can 1 do the harlh decree 1”
Lady Julia—but as more than deplore
“ Oh faith, faid Lord Arne, that lily bofom !
I give
44
a tolerable guefs,” all is not right within Where is the
IS tne happy I fincerely wifh he was
do not turn
youth. Lady Julia ? prefent at this moment—nay fo pale!”
I was filly enough to be difcompofcd. Sir Charles immediately afked Lord Arne a queftion that quite turned the topic; and I reco/ered from my embarralTment.—-Is it pofiible, dear Caroline, that my attachment fhould not be well known to Lord Arne ? Has it not been the fubjeX of the very papers ? On the night that I faw Lord Ofmond for the laft time, what confufion reigned throughout the houfe ! How ma-
MASQUERADES; or,
A
ny eyes were extended on me! how many ears devoured the tale as it was buzzed
amidft the crowd !
The duel
---tnat
ftiocking duel was made as public as the; fun !----Every one muft have been folli-
citous to learn the caufe—every one muft have heard that the Duke was jealous of: my Ofmond.—Ah, Lady Mortimer, how'
—How
many people enjoyed the recital!
Perhaps.
was their curiolity gratified !• they laughed at it—whiift the miferable
themfelves
parties wretchednefs
were unutterable !
abforbed I am
in
fure
Lord Arne muft be either ignorant of the affair, or have forgotten it; for though he has not thofe nice notions of fenfibility which polifh the foul, yet he would not, E am convinced, be indelicate. Lord Beaumont was filent he looked at me with-
compaffion. I
caught
his eyes *, he in-
ftantly turned them from me,, and laid; fomething to Lady Arne-
After tea. Sir Charles begged I would allow him occafionally to fpeak to me of bis admirable friend without conftraint. I affured him, that his doing fo would give me infinite pleafure*.

WHAT YOU WILL.
137
CC
I know,” cried he, “ I fliall incur your cenfure, by confeffing that he has not received a line from me fince he left W^ind-for. You will think me unkind ; but the only fubjeX 1 could write on, was my unhappy fituation. I was ignorant what to fay about you *, therefore, for his fake, thought I had bell; reftrain my pen, confident at the time that Mortimer would not negleX him. He has written to you lately, Ladyjulia?”
“ Two months ago, Sir Charles, a letter was fent to me frorn Lord Ofmond, which I was bound in honour not to read. I re-turned ic to my fifter. Since that time, I have not heard of him.”
Montague exprefled amazement at my not perufing it. I told him how I circumftanced—he lamented my fate, and Lord Ofmond’s ftill more. He enquired where he was ? I faid, in Switzerland, blit was ignorant which of the Cantons ha had made choice of. “ Mortimer certainly knows. Lady Julia!”	“ I fuppofe fo.
Sir !” He declared he would write immediately to the Marquis, and get it forwarded from Windfor. He entreated me*
to
was
13S MASQUERADES; or,
to make Ofmond fo happy, .as to add a poftfcript to his letter; and ufed many arguments to convince me that I might do it without the leaft breach of my word ; but none of them were forcible enough to fway me over to his mode of thinking. I affured SirCharles I durft not; but begged he wquld perfuade Lord Ofmond to believe me not lefs attached to him than I was when we parted, and that I muft ceafe to live ere my affeXion could abate.
Ah, Lady Mortimer, how little cffeX can all this have when delivered by any pen but my own ! My mother knows not the mifery fhe infliXs on her child my brother is too proud, too unforgiving !
But 1 will fpare myfelf from the after-reproaches of my own heart, by fparing him.
I wifh, my dear fifter, you could tell me of my lofing another captive, and that the Duke of Suffolk was the one ! My ardent prayer is, that he might forget me, and eleX another in my ftead.
My dear fifter, what do I not feel in the refleXion, that it is on my account alone the Duke of. Weftmorland cafts his fon
' from

WHAT YOU WILL.
139
from the inheritance nature intended him ! Could 1 find any method of preventing it, how gladly wouid I do it!—Perhaps, was I to write the Duke a prornife never to become Lord Ofmond’s, it might anfwer ;
a dreadful condition !----yet I am not
worth purchafing at fo dear a rate, as by the lofs of fuch a fortune as he forfeits for my fake. If my mother does not reienr, if my brother does not become more placable, I never lhall be his ; and to give up his expeXations from the Duke, without attaining the purpofe for which he makes the facrifice, muft render me, if poffible, more wretched.—After all, my dear Caroline, it is folly to entertain an idea of their fentiments ever changing !—
O	-
may regret their cruelty when it is too late when this anxious heart has ceafed to beat, and this flattered form is. mouldering
in the grave !----^Confider what I have
propofed to you, and we will confult on the meafures beft to be adopted when I have the pleafure of feeing you.
Fine wel, my deareft fifter.
They
yours
J
"j. Q
t±Q
MASQUERADES; or
%

To Mortimer
TValltnghrooU- Abbey,
ADY Arne and Louifa are writing to
s
you—-^the G|ntlemen to my Lord, to fay how gladly they accept you invitation. We ffiall leave this place on Tuefday. With what 'pleafure, my deareft fifter, ffiall I embrace you, and my no lefs dear brother I The few months we have been feparated, appear to me a great while—But I fear I ffi; 1! not be fuffered to remain as long at Windfor as you do.. In a letter I received yefterday from my mother, ffie expreffes an impatience to have me with her. I am apprehenftve that ffie thinks me wanting in affeXion ; for ffie fuppofes me much happier (ffie fays) with my prefent party, than 1 ffiould be with my family at Nevill. Ic is unkind to fancy fo ! Lady Pemberton judges erroneoufly of ray heart in imagining that I can be happy any where. I have a no-
WHAT YOUWI LL.
141
tion that Suffolk is with them. If fo, I cer|;^inly ffiall confefs to her, that 1 am very unwilling to join her party.
To-morrow, you tell me, will be Emily’s bridal day-her and the
leaven ffiower bleffinos
O
on
Ci f i
able par ner ffie has chofen!
I will make my own congratulations when we meet.
Adieu, my dear Caroline ! I am always
Your affeXionate
Julia Herbert*
To Sir Charles Montague.

Berne.
T would be abfurd, my dear Montague, to attempt defcribing the Tatis-faXion I have in knowing thar you are happy. May you coniinue blelied with Louila as long as it is given the race of
mortals
142 M AS QU £ R AD K'S; OR,
mortals to tread this globe with convcr niency *, and may you both, in a comfortable old-age, drop together into a peaceful grave !—I am fure that laft wifh merits your mutual thanks; for, putting afide infidelity and ingratitude, every mifery fails beneath that of furviving a beloved objeX.
I will not hurt you by expatiating on the fubjeX of your letter that delineates much anguifh * : I am very glad it never reached
but in company of another, that me fo much happier tidings. You were lucky iri obtaining Lady Louifa’s pardon—had it been otherwife, I fhould have fympathized in your forrow, but could not have blamed her—and now an end to the topic.—But, what pafled between you and my father was juft in charaXer. You aXed a warm, a zealous part for your friend : he aXed that of an
me,
brought
* Sir Charles’s letter, Vol. Ill, p. 99. His letters to Lord Mortimer ccncerning his meetings with the Luke, pp. 189 and 212, were fent by my Lord to the Marquis, in the fame cover in which he enclofed Sir Charles’s letter to him from Walljii|; brook-Abbey.
unfeeling
WHAT YOU WILL.
Hi
unfeeling parent, who never was governed by a fingle tie of nature. I fincerely forgive him ; and hope his heart may make him no reproaches in his laft hours—or his torture muft be infupportable.
Yes, Montague, ic is but too true I Lady Julia will noc read my letters •, much lefs can I expeX even a poftfcript from her. However, Mortimer, the generous Mortimer! has in a great meafure obviated the defpair I ftiould be overwhelmed in on the occafion, by lending me a letter of hers to his wife, in which mine that Weftbrook carried to England was returned. It convinces me that I am better
am
Yet I am not me as I wilh.
loved by her than any man contented—Did Ihe love nothing Ihould reftriX her from making me chofe alTuranccs with her own pen nothing would prevent her from becoming
—But I am exorbitant in my defires. To you her conduX is right—fo ic would appear to me, did I not idolize her with an enthuliafm that puts prudence—reafon —every thing to flight wheiever Ihe' is concerned.
Hi
mine.
MASQUERADES; or






^ *
Mortimer, Weftbrook, Frederick Montague, combine, and detain me here in
fpite of my inclination 11a—no fixed time for
So far from Ju-
—how
ean I bear it!—ino, ^naries, it is impoflible to be longer abfent—Suflblk may do much mifchief—I will be near at leaft
-I fcarcely
my return— No, Charles, it is
wrongs
to avenge my know what 1 write
I am infinitely
difturbed at a letter I have this inftant received from Mortimer-----------What do you
think, Montague ? He fays Lady Julia propofes making my father a folemn pro-mife never to give me her hand on condition he revocates his purpofe of difinheriting me—Very difinterefted of her! as fhe no doubt fuppofes—But it wears a different
afpeX
in my eyes
it is confirmation
ftrong, that her paflion is much on the wane, and that another month will erafe me totally from her remembrance. After this noble proof of her exalted way of thinking, intended for my benefit, I can have no
further
w
YOU W
US
further right to claim the preference in her heart (he with fuch apparent fincerity, fuch fyren fweetnefs, vowed I ihould ever maintain—No; Jhe aded for my advantage —and, iheltered under that idea, will go without remorfe to the altar, and there fwear eternal love and conftancy to my
damn’d rival---Suffolk at length lhall
were women made.
conquer
■Why
fo iisht, fo
yielding to And whv. dear
good Plea ven, _ every turn of fortune ! And why, Montague, fliould my happinefs be fo entirely dependent on a female!—I am almoft forgotten by her ; yet have not the power to think of her with more indifference than I felt, when her brother bore her in his arms from my eager fight—curfed, curfed Pemberton !--------
Lady Julia narrowly. If you fufpeX her of the alteration I do, acquaint me with, it direXly. Flatter me not; but declare the truth, however horrible its Ihape. Fifty times in an hour 1 refolve to go to England with Frederick Montague, who is fuddenly called thither. What Ihould I do here ?
I beg of you to obferve
And yet to return
Yol; IY.
--
to be denied the
fisht
•w.y.
146 MASQUERADES; or
9
It of Lady Julia her-----
perhaps fpurned at
I cannot bear the thought
by
You will accufe me of injuftice: you will tell me that thefe fufpicions are in-
■---Where
to Lady Julia
the
\
fuking
man who loves to the degree that I do whom fuch a fpace divides—who knows that his letters will not be received—who knows what a powerful rival he has to dread, and v/hat a prornife his miftrefs propofes making to an inhuman father ?
Where is the riian that can, thus fituated, difeard doubts and reft fecure ?-----Mon-
tague, it is impofiible that fuch a one can be found throughout the univerfe !—The
o
feelings that at prefent occupy my breaft, may be declaimed againft by phlegmatic fouls incapable of loving with ardour, and fuch I defpife ; but men, not deftitute of tendernefs, would be fenfible of the anxiety I endure—with me affirm, that fear, diffidence, and follicitude, can never be ab-llraXed from a fervent paffion.
Be as expeditious as you can (confiftent-
the charge I have given you) in
ly with
your anfwer.
If you think Lady Julia’s heart is as
much
•IP
IVHAT YOU WILL.
H7
much mine as my friends fay, tell heri I conjure her, by thofe vows Ihe uttered at Windfor, to abandon her projeX—to hold no communication with my father.—If Ihc proceeds in her intention, never fhall fhe, or you.
again behold
O
The miferable
Osmond.
To Lord Osmond.
Bath;
REDERICK came immediately to
Windfor on his arrival in England,
my dear Ofmond, with your letter-------1
knew how unneceffary your fears of Lady Julia were ; however, obeyed your command, and watched each turn of her foul.
I fwear to you, by every thing facred, I believe her heart is wholly yours. In all her convcrfations with me, fhe profelfed
H 2	the

I4B
QU
the warmeft attachment. Her eyes ac-knowleged fatisfaXion when you were our fubjeX *, and frequently have I feen them deluged in tears at a retrofpeX of what you endured on her account. I told her of your impatience under fo long an abfence. 1 urged her to aiiow me to recal you ; and added, if fhe w'ould accompany us to this city, it would be very eafy for you to meet often, without the knowledge of any but a few friends, devoted to her and your
and
jntei'L'it,
fecret.
your return might be kept She ftarted at the mention : and
faid, ftae apprehended fhe muft be funk confiderably in rny opinion, elfe I would not name to her a propofal fo highly derogatory to honour and to duty. I durft not prefs it further; and let me affure you, this firft of women proves herfelf more deferv-ing of you by an adherence to fuch ftriX principles, than you do of her by condemning her prudence, and arraigning her love.
Mortimer (whom I thought it neceffary to confult, though in the height of your phrenzy you forgot that etiquette) was unwilling that Lady Julia fhould know of his
havin
WHAT YOU WILL. 149
having informed you of her intention of writing to your father. He told me, that Lady Mortimer and himfelf had almoft diiTuaded her from it : I therelqi*e fup-prefled your meftage to her, and beg of you to confider, were ftie to addrefs him in the ftyle you dread, how little effeX ic would produce^—nothing can alter his purpofe. Reft fatisfied then, dear Ofmond ; and let your fweet innocent miftrefs aX as fhe thinks proper.
If yon wiih for a teftimony of her affection, I will give you a painful one—Her health is impaired from the continual anxiety of her mind—the rofes are fading
on her cheeks
(he grows
thin
but
never, never did I fee fo divine an invalid I There is fomething incxpreflibly touching in her appearance, that, added to her native beauty, which it is beyond the power of ficknefs to deftroy, renders it almoft im-pofiible to gaze on her, without fancying her an inhabitant of a higher world, who has condefcended to pafs a little while on this grofs earth.
I really cannot perceive the objeXion to your coming over, or why you Ihould be
H 3	confined
150 MAS Q_U ERADES; or,
confined to pafs your time fo tedioufly in Switzerland. For many reafons I would have you return; but let it be incog. ’ I will meet you at whatever fea-port in this kingdom you chufe to land. Our flay in this place fhall depend on you. If you diflike Bath, Louifa, your old friend Lord Beaumont, and I, will accompany you to Bagfhot, where I believe you may remain
---1 know
private as long as you pleafe. you will prefer being in London
but
there, your arrival cannot, I am afraid, be kept fecret—you will not ftep out of the door without beholding fome acquaintance; and, fliould the Pemberton’s learn ir, they would be doubly follicitous with Lady Julia to become Suffolk’s bride.
X.ady Pemberton goes up to town, I hear, in a fortnight, for the winter *, the Mortimer’s will Ihortly follow with your Julia.-*-The hour is nigh for the amiable Caroline’s commencing a mother. Heaven fpare her to her worthy hufband I who feems more apprehenftve on the occafion than fhe does.
Lady Julia will, on her arrival, be taken
home tQ Portman-Square; fo that you
muft
WHAT YOU WILL
fsl
muft not flatter yourfelf with an idea of feeing her, at leaft for fome time.
' We left Windfor a few days ago, after fpending a month there, in the pleafanteft way imaginable. Weftbrook informed you of his happinefs. the very morning on which he was united to Emily. I think he told me fo.—He is a generous youth; and Ihe is thoroughly amiable. They are well matched, and, I am fatisfied, will do honour to the nuptial ftate.
You have already heard, my dear Ofmond, that the Duke of Weftmorland means once more to affume connubial fetters. His impatience for the ceremony to be over fhews much gallantry on his fide : however, Henrietta, with foft pleading tendernefs, prevailed on Lord Davenport to poftpone the marriage for two months, promifing by the expiration of that time to conquer her averfion to fo un-
equal an alliance, plagues to each
—May they be mutual other! and mav the
of DoXors
may Commons
mighty powers fhortly put afunder the ridiculous pair that the Parfon will yoke together!
H 4	Lofo
15* MAS QU ERAD£S;or.
Lofe no time in will come over, and you ?
faying
where
whether yon I fhall meet
I am, my deareft Ofmond,
Your moft faithful
Charles Montague
A
To Lady Louisa Montague,
Windfor.
%
Letter I received yefterday from Almeria informs me of a circumftance which will furprize you.
She confented about ten days ago to take an airing with Lady Percival in her phaeton. They chofe to vifit Dover, and on entering the town fometh-ing frightened the horfes. Lady Percival had not power over them—they fet off in a full gallop through the narrow abominable ftreets of that place, and would certainly, at the
next
w
YOU W
553
next turning, have overfet the vehicle, and deprived them both of life, had not Prer* vidence intervened.
A Gentleman from the window of an inn faw the fituation they were in. He flew after the carriage, attended by a fervant. They both feemed regardkfs of their fafety ; and, inftead of fuffering the apprehenfion of being trodden to pieces by the horfes, to operate on them, as it had done on the many in ihe ftreets, who were terrified only at their own danger, and flying they fcarcely knew whither to avoid it, ruftied forwards on each fide, feized the reins, and obliged the animals to fiacken their fpeed, till others, finding they ran little or no rifk, ventured to approach, and entirely ftopped them. Almeria fainted, and Lady Percival was ai-moft wild with horror. He lifted my fifter out of the phaeton, whilft his fervant did the fame with Lady Percival. By that time their attendants came up, and helped to convey them to the inn the humane ftranger had juft quitted. When they recovered, they begged to know to whom
H 5
they
154
MAS QU ERADES; or.
they were fo much obliged ? Guefs their aftoniftiment at hearing this anfwer :
“ I am called Clermont-----It is not an
hour ftnce I fet my foot on Britifli ground. I fhall eftem the moment of my arrival the luckieft of my life, as it brought me time enough to affift two fuch Ladies. I am going immediately to London, where, if I can do you any fervice,, I lhall be extreme-
ly happy in the execution of it.”
They feared that his bufinefs might be deftruXive to their joint wifh of introducing him at Nevill, to a number of friends, who would be anxious to make him their acknowledgments for the obligation he had laid them under; but entreated, if he could fpare them a little of his time, that he would favour them with his company to the Duke of Northing-ton’s. At the mention of his title he looked furprized, and faid, he prefumed he had the honour of fpeaking to part of Lord Pemberton’s family. Lady Percival and rny fifter direXly made themfelves known, and repeated their requeft, to which he politely affented. A chaife was
WHAT YOU WILI

HS.
ordered for the Ladies, an J Lord Clermont, in fpite of their remonftrances to the contrary, afcended the phaeton, and efcorted them back, to Nevill, where he ftaid as long as my mother and her family did, andi then made one in the party up to town. They arrived there two days ago. I re-> joice with you, my dear Louifa, on Lord Clermont’s return ; a circumftance you: have a great while been impatient for, and which, I am fure, will make you very happy.—Almeria deferibes him to be very lively. She fays he refembles. you ftrongly. You will foon fee him at Bath.
Another piece of news my lifter’s letter contains, that makes me not a little glad. Mr. Lenox is married—An Italian Lady was captivated with him, and contrived to make him fenfible of it. He difcovered that flie was of fome family, very rich, and well accompliflied. She had been married young, from mercenary views, to a man Ihe difliked. At the end of four years he-died, and Ihe found herfelf at liberty to chufe an objeX more agreeable to her inclination than the one flie had beem
compelled to
one
give her hand
H 6
to;' Mr..
X>.eno2^,
156 M A S QU E R A D E S or,
Lenox, flie thought,calculated to make hetf happy, and him flie eleXed. Lord Clermont fpent an evening with them juft, before he left Rome, and lays they feemed very well pleafed with each other. She is defirous of vifiting England,, and they are to come over next Spring.
Lord Mortimer heard laft week
from Mr. Norton. He
his
s
way bene-
was on
May Heaven reward hi volent heart by granting all its wiflies ! I am convinced it cannot form any, but fuch as do honour to human nature, To-rnorrow, my excellent friend, I leave Windfor—perhaps for eWer ! Should any accident happen to my deareft fifter, which of her family will bear to look ac this fweet place ! I am fure I fliall not
But the fubjeX affeXs me too
nearly I
My brother and Sophia are fixed in Grafton-ftreet. .f
taken
a houfe in St. James’s Place, When may we expeX to fee you in Cum* berland-ftreet ? I have been fo accuftomed of late to your fociety, that I bear the
lofs of it worfe than ever I did. We are
all
James Weftbrook
St.
what you WILL.
557
all to dine in Portman-fquare to-morrow, and at night I lhall take leave of my prelent amiable companions, with no fmall fhare of regret.
Dear Louifa, with what difagreeable reflexions do I look forward to the manner in which the enfuing five or fix months will be fpent [—Now begins the hurry ad buftle of modern high life—Laft winter
ah, my Lord Ofmond !
---------But
how unavailing are regrets !——Every one will be as happy this feafon as they were the laft, excepting your Julia !
Ornit not, dear Louifa, my grateful remembrances to Lord and Lady Arne. Tell them I Ihould be a moft unworthy creature, did I not love them tenderly. Prefent my refpeXs to Lord Beaumont; and aflure Sir Charles, that he poflefles, in a high degree, the friendlliip of
Your
Julia Herbert


MASQUERADES; or
%
To Sir Charles Montague,
Berne.
ES, I will go over—What daggers have-you planted in my heart !—My Julia’s health declining, and I not near her !'
Oh, Montague, fhould I lofe her—fhould death, the meagre fiend, rob me of all I hold dear on earth-—what—great heaven ! what could equal fuch a moment as that would be to me !
I infift on your not leaving Lady Louifa I will go to Bath for a few days—you know I can depend on Souville and Charles —I will be more wary of difeovery than if I had committed treafon—murder or fa-crilege—More than my life—the life of my foul is at ftake!—Fear not, then, that my imprudence may be acceffary to Suffolk’s happinefs-—But to refide out of London I cannot brook—I will find fome place to be concealed in, yet not debar myfelf from: hearing of—and perhaps fome times be-
holding my Julia
i care
w
Y O U W
I care not whether or whom my father marries—all other confiderations give way
ta the important one of my beloved’s illnefs.
i fhall foon follow this.—Farewel, and think me always
Your fincere friend,
OsMONDfe,
#
To Lady Julia Herbert
Bath;
ANY thanks for your welcome ti-JL dings of my brother’s arrival! He certainly means to furprize me, or is moft intolerably lazy; for I have neither heard from, nor feen him. It adds to the joy his return gives me, that he was fo lucky as to
be ferviceable to Almeria and Lady Per-civaL
i6o
MASQUERADES; or
Julia, I well knew, thar, if Lenox did
he would unite himfelf only
Thank hea-
not marry you, to one with a great fortune, ven you efcaped him !
A gentleman came to Bath laft night whom Sir Charles has been fome time acquainted with. His name is Sedley. He faw Lord Ofmond at Berne, and was commiflioned by him to charge Sir Charles to plead with you to allow him to return. The only motive he has for defiring it, is to fee you—if that point cannot be obtained, he may as well remain in Switzerland. He is fo completely wretched at the painful feparation he endures, that it is impoffible he can fupport it long *, and nothing but the fear of incurring your difpleafure, hinders his immediate appearance in England, to fupplicate your compaflion for what he fuffers from the cruel inflexibility of your relations, and to perfuade you to become his.---------Do, dear Tulia, relax
little of your feverity; recal the unhappy exile, and confent to fee him. I wait your fpeedy anfwer; for Mr. Sedley is all eagernefs to trailfmit the extatic news of your
granting this requeft to bis friend.—Can
Sedley

WHAT YOU WILL.
i6f
Sedley be more anxious for Ofrnond’s felicity than Julia? Put the queftion to your
heart, and by your reply its fituation.
I ffiall judge of
You muft permit me to mention the difagreeable name of Charlotte Pelham, whom 1 found with her mother at this place when 1 came down. You will ffiudder at my telling you that ffie has rendered herlelf an objeX of contempt by her familiarity with a married man. His wife is much pitied : ffie is reckoned amiable and handfome; and they were remarkably happy, till this ill-fated girl came acrofs them. She was taken with ,Mr. Belmont’s figure and addrefs, which are elegant enough. She foon forgot how far fuperior were thofe charms in Lord Ofmond *, and, by a thoufand wiles, known only to the unprincipled of our fex, engaged his attention, and robbed poor Mrs. Belmont of a heart that had been herS for many years. They are now feparated. He has taken Charlotte home to his houfe, and, bidding defiance to all ffiame,' goes into public with her hanging on his arm whilft file demonftrates more tendernefs in her carriage towards him, than would be
war
i62
MASQUERADES; or
warrantable before fpeXators, were fhe actually conneXed to him ih an honourable way. Mrs. Belmont is gone to her mother, who refides in Devon (hire. Mrs. Pelham has left Bath. Happily for her, fhe has very little feeling, elfe fuch a ftroke would for ever ruin her peace. If any thing can awaken Mr. Belmont from the
error he is in, I fhould think
fhocking
the public
fcorn he meets, muft do it. No one acknowledges his acquaintance: even men, whofe morals may, in faX, be on the fame foot with his, by the example fet them in others, are deterred from admitting of his fociety. This would be well, my dear Julia, were it to continue •, but a very few months will cafl the fhade of night over Mr. Belmont’s crime—people will be tired of the diftance they now preferve—his company will be lefs avoided-—and by degrees once more be fought after,
I am forry to find, by a letter from Lady Weftbrook, that fhe and Sir James , in a few weeks, to go into Kent, with Lady Caroline Denley, for a couple of months. Pray tell them it is very ftrange they Ihould think of quitting London,
when
mean
WHAT YOU WILL.
163
when every creature elfe is flocking to it. We Ihall go up in a fortnight.
Adieu, my deareft Julia! Lord and Lady Arne aflure you they regard you more than you can do them. Lord Beaumont pro-fefles himfelf your warm admirer; and Sir Charles embraces you with the cordiality of a fincere friend. I am,
i
Much yours,
Louisa Montague..
To Lady Louisa Montague.'
Portman Square,
R. Sedley muft be a very particular friend indeed of Lord Ofmond and Sir Charles, my dear Louifa, if the former could entruft him with a meftage of fuch importance to the latter.-—! cannot be offended
164
MAS QtJ ERADES; or
fended at Lord Ofmond’s return; perhaps I wiffi for it as ardently as he does : but, if he only comes witfean intention to fee me, alas, it will be to no effeX! I am refolved, in oppofition to inclination—to the pleadings of love, not to confent to ir, without Lady Pemberton’s leave. I am ignorant how you will, determine, after this avowal, on the fituation of my heart. If you think meanly of my attachment to L.ord Ofmond, you err extremely; and I truft he will be more generous than to impute the ftriXncfs of my ccnduX, to a caufe I hold injurious to his merit, and my nature. But, dear Lcuifa, let not Sir Charles’s zeal in his
blind your reafon. Be on your guard; and in fuch a cafe retain an opinion of your own. Allow me to afk, were you ftill Louifa Sydney, would you incite me to fee clandeftinely an objed 1 have vowed never to behold without a parent’s fanXion ? I am fure you would not. I will perfevere in my refolution;— and, in fpite of what this wretched heart endures, commiflion you in turn to tell Mr. Sedley, that, though Lord Ofmond’s felicity is diimated by me far more than ic
can
friend’s gratification,
WHAT YOU WILL.
165
can be by him,I dare not give life to it at the expence of duty and of honour. Tell him, alfo, that, by my fteady adherence to the prornife I have made a mother, he will judge how inviolate I keep the one I made to his friend.
N
You muft perceive what little room I have to hope that Lady Pemberton would grant me permiflion to fee Lord Ofmond, was I to alk it, when I inform you, that lbe has gone fo far, as to command me to give up all thoughts of him on pain of her difpleafure-----There is no obeying im-
all
thoughts
of
poflibilities. Give up marrying him I do; but to avoid refleX-ihg on his virtues—-on his amiable man-—on the tendernefs he feels for your
ners
Julia
No,
my dear Louifa, nothing can erafe his image from my heart—^nothing can ever make me love him lefs. Is it noc wonderful, that my mother, fo kind in every other inftance, fliould be fo cruel in this moft eflential one ? On my arrival in town, fhe ftarted at the alteration in my looks—Ihe was fen* fibly affliXed at it, and the next day a train of medical profeflbrs attended in Portman-
Square
s
i66
QU
R
Square, purfuant to her defire. They felt my pulfe—examined my countenance—a fide of paper was fcratched over^—they promifed to reftore me fliortly to health—received their fees, and departed. A bafket-ful of naufeous medicines were arranged in my apartment; I fwallowed them. One of the faculty, DoXor F
----, went thro*
the fame ceremony every fucceeding day ; and the like number of bitter potions have pafled my lips—yet I find myfelf as far from being recovered, as when the phyficians firft fettled me on their lifts of patients. They recommend diffipation—Dif-fipation /-k^Can my thoughts be diflipated from my Ofmond ! I fliould defpife myfelf, if they could—but it would be as eafy to divert the needle from its faithful direXion, as to withdraw his loved form from my idea.
I had not been two days in town, before the Duke of Suffolk was ufliered into the room where I farat work with my mother, Sophia, and Almeria. My dear Louifa, how was I fliocked at his appearance! I haftily arofe, and retired to my drdfing-rooni. My mother followed me foon after,
and chid me for doing fo. She queftioned
me
w
YOU W I L L.
167
me about the tears flie faw I had been (bedding. I faid, I thought I was unkindly-treated, in being obliged to fee a man fo hateful to my imagination. Lady Pemberton replied, that k would be hard indeed, my family fliould be under a neceiTity of giving up a friend, becaufe it pleafed my capricious fancy to take a diflike to him. I was filent, well knowing that what I fliould fay, would make my mother ftill more angry. She left me, and I compofed my fpirits in the beft manner I was able.
About a week ago we were one evening at my brother’s. Several perfons were prefent. The Duke of Suffolk came in—I could not avoid him. He addreffed me with as much eafe, as if he had never given me reafoff for the leaft difturbance. I curtfied to him, but paid little attention to the compliments he uttered. He drew a chair near mine, and was preparing, I believe, to reproach me for flying him as I had done, when SirJamesWeftbrook, who was at cards, exclaimed, “ Lady Julia, you promifed to hold my cards; will you take them now ?” I readily affented, as I knew Weftbrook’s good-natured motive. He leaned over my
chair
It
.0
e68 mas qu ERADES; or,
chair all the time I played, and, though Suffolk was at my fide, did not afford him a moment to fpeak to me. My brother could fcarcely refrain ffrom paffion. He took Sir James up very fhortly once or twice; but my confiderate friend beftowed no attention to what he faid.
The next day the Duke dined with us. I was as referved as poffible towards him, and, after the cloth was removed, rofe from table, ordered my chair, and went to Lady Mortimer, with whom I fat till eleven o’clock. On my return home, I faw that my mother was much difpleafed with me.
Three nights ftnce we'were at Lady Per-cival’s affembly. The rooms were full. As I paffed a fofa on which two or three perfons were feated, fome one feized my hand, and kiffed it. I haftily withdrew it; and, cafting my eyes on the objeX who had been thus prefuming, difcovered it to be no other than Suffolk. In a few minutes after, he followed me to another apartment. He feemed eager to embrace the opportunity that then offered to plead his paflion. From the fituation I was unluckily placed in, I perceived no probability of efcaping the
odious

WHAT YOU WILL. 169
©dieiis topic, and made up my mind ta anfwer him in a way that muft have diftreff* ed him, had he an atom of humanity. Lord Budenall obferved my embarraffment; and, furmounting the obftacles that confined me prifoner to the Duke, came up
to me,
CC
Lady Julia,” cried he, “ I know you hate tete-d'ietes. You never allowed me any, when I had a right to put in my claim to your heart; and I am fure you are noc lefs reluXant to a private conference with the Duke of Suffolk, who muft be well informed that it is not now to be difpofed of.”
“ Lord Budenall,” replied the Duke, in a very impatient tone, “ I cannot bear trifling ac prefent-—-nor do I comprehend your meaning.”
“ Really, my Lord,” anfwered Budenall, “ I am ignorant of the difpofition of your Grace’s temper at this inftant; nor is there a neceflity for my ftudying it. My meaning is this: your Grace and / are'alike unfortunate—
—Lady Julia cannot beftow her affeXions on either of us—fhe is attached
to a man every way worthy of her,
Vol. IV,	I
Since
I am
170 MASQUERADES} or,
I am not fo happy as to gain her love, I ■will afpire to her friendlhip. Let us, my Lord, mutually endeavour to afford her all the peace we can. It is not in our power to give her to the objeX of her choice; but it is in our power to refrain from molefting her by declarations that muft difpleafe her.” “ And do you fuppofe,” cried the Duke, that I will refign my hopes in favour of a villain ?”
“ What an expreffion !” exclaimed Budenall : “ whom can your Grace diftinguifti ■with that epithet ?”
“ The curfed, diffembling Ofmond !” Lord Budenali offered me his hand

c;
J
99
faid he, “ allow me to
lead you from one, who dares to infuit you, by fpeaking thus of the man heaven has allotted for your partner. 1 will fupply his place in this inftance, and proteX your delicate feelings from further outrage—And let me warn you, my Lord Duke, to be cautions in future before me, of joining fuch vile words to a name I refpeX and efteem. Ofmond is my friend ; and to de* fend him I am always ready.”
Suffolk fnatched my hand from Lord
Budenall,

WHAT YOU WILL.
Ht
Budenali, and fwore he fhould not carry me from him in fuch triumph. He uttered fomething of vengeance on Budenall.
“ Have a care 1” exclaimed the other very coolly I may do the work more ef-fcdually than the Marquis did. I have not motives, which he had, to aX merely on the defenfive.'—But be lefs turbulent, my Lord. Are you for ever to be a fource of mifery to Lady Julia—always to make her the fubjeX of public attention ?—You can never compenfate for thus terrifying her!
He led me back to the room I had quitted ; and, placing himfelf near me, apologized for his warmth. I was really frightened—another rencontre I dreaded—-and had much reafon to apprehend would be the confequence of this quarrel. The Duke of Suffolk fpoke with a loud voice. I never faw mortal in fuch a rage. How hideous did it render his features! Many gentlemen crowded about us, and heard the greateft part of the converfation. I was almoft petrified, and incapable of opening my lips.
Some time after the Duke entered the apartment where we were, which was not
12	lefs
X72 MAS Q.U ERADES; or,
lefs full of company than the others. Several perfons followed, whofe curiofity no doubt made them wifh for a fimilar fcene. He approached me—begged me to pardon his violence, v/hich he was penitent for. I bowed to him, but anfwered nor. He turned to Lord Budenall, and entreated him to
Budenall replied in a polite, though rather diftant manner—
cufe the offence he had given him.
meeting in
—however, my fears of their a hoftile
way were quieted. My brother, I fuppofe, had advifed his friend to this mode of conduX; for Suf-fpik’s haughty fpirit but ill brooks humiliation.
•	1	7
As foon as we got into the coach to return home, Almeria condemned the Duke’s rafn behaviour in warm terms. Lady Pemberton was at cards at the time, and could only hear a confufed murmur of what had paffed, which ran through the apartments very expeditioufiy. She defired to have the particulars—Almeria gave them. My mother faid Lord Budenall was very much, jn fauk-—that he hid no right to irritate Suffolk by mentioning Lord Ofmond.
- ‘‘ Indeed, Madam,” cried I, “ I had
beft

WHAT YOU WILL.
beft remain always at home—to do fo agrees with my inclination. When I am abroad, if Lord Ofmond chances to be talked of, I miift endure ill treatment from the Duke however, it cannot fail drawing contempt on himfelf from many. It is true, he has held me up to the public in colours not much to my credit. I fear, I am regarded as a vain, dangerous girl, who delights in fomenting quarrels, and glories ia occafioning bloodflied.”——>
Almeria declared fuch cenfure would be unreafonable : that it could not be fuppofed I ftiould marry the Duke, to prevent his fighting with every man who fpoke to me.
One good attends thefe difpntes,” faid I; they convince the world that be is obnoxious to me, elfe there would be no
CC
neceflity for his giving rife to them.”
Lady Pemberton, in an angry tone, aOc-ed Almeria, if ffie had been brought over to Ofmond’s party ?	“ I am of no party.
Madam,” replied ffie: “ I wiffi my fifter happy, and will confefs to your Ladyffiip, that of late I have thought Suffolk wants delicacy to make her fo-^buc I by no
V
1
3
means
^ ..
174 MASQUERADES; or,
means conclude that a fon of Weftmor

land’s can do it.”
My mother excufed Suffolk, and faid file would reproach him for the difturbance he had caufed the firft time they met.
“ I beg you will not, Madam,” exclaimed I: “ to what purpofe? If my family thinks nightly of fuch infolence, I affure you I can bear it patiently—he will not long have it at his option to exercife it.”
The carriage ftopped, and the difcourle ended.
Yefterday morning, whilft we were at breakfaft, Suffolk and Lord Pemberton came in. When the^things were removed, I was retiring to my clofet—my brother followed and led me back.
“ Upon my foul, Julia, you lhall ftay.”
“ Why, my Lord ?”
“ You muft hear Suffolk;” and he held my hands to detain me.
“ Do not oblige rne to contradiX you peremptorily 1”
“ That you muft not do, Julia,” cried Lady Pemberton; “for / infift that you ftay.”
I curt-
w
YOU WILL,
175
I curtfied to her, and refumed my fear. They left me with the Duke, who placed himfelf near me. He attempted to take my hand—I with-held it from his touch in a manner that evinced my difpleafure, and put him out of countenance. However, I was condemned to liften to the re-petition of a fubjeX, which had but too often created much uneafinefs in my breaft.
I told him that it was impoffible for any man of fenfibility to perfevere in addreffing a woman, who had on every occafion given him the ftrongeft teftimony of her difapprobation. If his Grace really felt the difinterefted love he profefled, he would aX very differently—he would pay a litcle regard to my happinefs, and ceafe to difturb it by a continuance of afliduities that were highly difguftful. 1 faid, I fhould be forry to treat him unpolitely *, but, as I had more than once declared my inability to reward his paflion, and he ftill prefented me with the theme, I would tell him very plainly that my heart was aXually devoted to another, and that it was my fixed determination never to marry any but my Lord
I 4	Ofmond
i}6
MASQUERADES; or
((
to
me give
your rage cannot make -whilft I have life, he
Ofmond; apiece of information that I hoped his good fenfe would confider rightly of, and free me from further importunity. He feemed ready to fiy out. He got up with much emotion, walked haftily to the win* dow, and as haftily returned to his feat his countenance was Dale with anger.
“ It is in vain, my Lord,” cried I, alter my refolution
him up! will never be lefs dear to me.”
My brother came in, and the Duke fas if he wiflied to draw on me his difpleafure) repeated what I had faid. “ Then, Julia,” exclaimed Lord Pemberton, “ you fhall never marry !”
“lam well apprized of that, my Lord,” replied I: “ but fince I am debarred of the man I love, I beg I may not be tormented by the man I am averfe to. Obferve, my Lord Duke, you have my full anfwer. Prefume not to mention this topic to me again ; but avoid me as ftudioufly as I will vou.”
ft
He' reproached me for my cruelty—de-Bianded if I had no pity for his fufferings ?
and
rV®
w
YOU WIL L.
177
and appealed to my brother whether he had not demonftrated his attachment by the moft convincing proofs ?
“ Your Grace muft allow me to fay,” cried I, “ on that head, you had beft be filent. The methods you ufed to demonftrate ir, are dreadful to my imagination. You fought the deftruXion of Lord Ofmond—you expofed my charaXer to the cenfure of illiberal people, by making me the occafion of your duel—in all companies you render me the fubjeX of difienticn, and the innocent difturber of harmony—thefe are the only proofs you have given of your attachment, my Lord never be revived !—■
be
you may in earneft, I muft defire
and they had better In your prefence, that affured I am
thoroughly
my brother to trouble me no further refpeXing you, left I might be tempted to lament my coo fcru-pulous adherence to his will. The fad reward I meet, may create fome regrets i.n my breaft, for having paid fo high a regard to duty ; and it is not improbable, blit that I lhall wifh myfelf away from rny family, Iheltered in the proteXio n of hnn who prefers my happinefs to his own.”
I
5
CC
Tout
178
MASQUERADES; or
“ Tour too fcrupulous Julia?"
my Lord
Yes,
in not confenting to
meafures which would have prevented my being fo unkindly perfecuted.”
My brother feemed thunderftruck with what I had faid ; and, far from difcovering any wrath, which I expeXed, appeared foftened by the tears I could noc refrain from Ihedding.—I was going np to my a-partment, when I met Lady Pemberton. She defired me to return ; and, after hearing a very fair relation from Lord Pemberton of all that 1 had faid, laid her commands on me (as I have already told you) to banifii Lord Ofmond from my thoughts. The Duke looked tranfported ; and hoped I would pardon him for fwearing that he would not take my refufal—but that the exulting Ofmond Ihould have his heart’s blood ere he obtained me. My countenance, I believe, was exprefiive of the contempt I held him in. I replied not, but left the room.
My brother is fuddenly called into Hertford (hire on bufinefs that will detain him
there a fortnight. He leaves town to-morrow.
WHAT YOU WILL. 179
*
row. In his abrence, I will endeavour to prevail on my mother to put a period to Suffolk’s addreffes—Lord Pemberton influences her too much. Surely, Louifa, it will be but juft to grant my defire, fince Ihe has nothing to reproach me with in my conduX towards Lord Ofmond!
I cannot deferibe my concern for the unhappy Charlotte Pelham’s connexions. I never thought her principles fo bad. All the malice I bear her is to wilh Ihe may foon be fenfible of her guilt, and make all the atonement in her power, by reftoring to the unfortunate woman (he has injured Mr. Belmont’s affeXions.——
This inftant we are informed that my deareft Caroline is taken ill—
berton is hurrying to her
—Lady Pem-I can write no
more—I can only^mplore the Almighty, of
his infinite mercy, to fpare her to us mv admirable Caroline !
Oh.
*
Hi
%


*
After having put a negative on your requeft, I almoft tremble for the fate of my poor fetter—however, the laft paragraph
1 6	ihall
i8o MASQUERADES; or,
fhall proteX it from becoming the viXim of your difpleafure, for I think you will
perufe it with joy-Lady Pemberton has
juft fent to acquaint Almeria and me, that my fifter is fafe, and the mother of a fine
boy
r
I an., dear Louifa,
Moft affeXionately yonrs,
Julia Herbert
To Lady Dowager^emeert:on
HE morning on which I left London, my dear Madam, Lord Clermont all ed u pon me. I was furprized at fo early a vifit, and yet more at the embarrafied air he wore. After fome little hefitation,
he avowed a paffion for Almeria > and defired
1
4
WHAT YOU WILL.
i8|
fired to know whether he had my approbation to propofe to your Ladyfhip for her ? 1 told him that he had, and hinted a fuppofition that he was affured of being well received by my fifter, previous to his taking fuch a ftep. He anfwered, that he had addreffed her, and, though not abfolutely accepted as a lover, he flattered himfelf that under your fanXion he might have hopes of conciliating her affeXions. He fpoke to me of a fettlement which was noble; and added, that, when I returned, his rental fhould be laid open for my in-fpeXion. If I thought his fortune admitted of a more ample provifion for Almeria than he had mentioned, he would moft readily agree to make any addition 1 pleafed.
I replied that the fettlement he offered was infinitely beyond what her fortune entitled us to expeX—he interrupted me______
“ I do not, my Lord, regard her fortune* I wifh to provide for her as my wife !”
1 admired his generofity—his Candour ; but begged him to be perfuaded, we were not lefs liberal in our notions, and Ihould
fee


i8£
MAS QU ERADES; or
fet great limits to his difinterefted pro-
pofal.
I like him much fo is his temper.
his morals are good. He is fenfible, lively, elegant, and well defcended. I do not fee one objeXion to him—but your Ladyfhip and Almeria can beft determine, whether he is to be encouraged or not.
Would to God there was a probability of Julia’s being difpofed of to the man we both recommend to her!—It is in vain to hope for it!—-So invincible an averfion as fhe has to him, never before prepoflefTcd the heart of woman !—I really feel moft fenfibly her melancholy fituation, be it ow-ing to perverfenefs, or whatever motive. The confequence I fear will be pajnful, and we fliall foon have her lofs to deplore.-— An amiable, charming girl, to be fuddenly fnatched from connexions equally and tenderly attached to her, and who have yet the power to ward off fo fatal a calamity,—calls for many ferious refleXions— Had Weftmorland lefs pride—would he feek the alliance for his fon, and receive
Jul
why we might
w
YOU W
183
might be prevailed upon to give her to Ofmond, fince it is plain her happinefs depends entirely upon him.—Ten thoufand daggers are planted in my bread, when I look forward to the mifery wc lhall be overwhelmed in by her death ; yet the diabolical Weftmorland is fo haughty—fo overbearing—it is madnefs to entertain a notion of his doing what alone could make her wife to the man Ihe loves!
I fpent the evening prior to my leaving town tete-a-tete with Mortimer, and was infinitely delighted at hearing from him many inftances of Julia’s conduX, (whilft feparated from us, and wholly at her own difpofal,) that excited my admiration of her probity—her fortitude, and her fenfe of duty. I will communicate them to you when I have the honour of feeing you. Mortimer, Caroline, and Sir Charles Montague, you will deem wrong in many parts of my recital—yet, as their behaviour was the engine which now difcovers Julia in the brilliant light Ihe ftands, I muft befpeak your Ladylhip’s indulgence towards them.
I told Suffolk he would do well to drop
his
1§4 MASQUERADES; OR
his fuit for a while, as Julia is really in a condition which requires that her mind fliould be kept compofed ; and, if wepalTive-ly admitted of its being made otherwife, the imputation of barbarity would very juftly reft with us. He was difpleafed with me, and declared he was incapable of filence on a topic fo interefting to him. This evinces a cruel felfifhnefs I his nature.
thought remote from However, his fituation de-
mands many allowances; and I am perfuaded, could fhe be prevailed on to marry him, he would render her felicity complete. We cannot fufficiently regret her ever feeing Ofmond—ftill he is a man, that, ab-ftraXed from prejudice, no one can find a blemifli in !—His deftiny is unhappy—the rigour with which he is treated by his vile father, merits compaffion. I forgive the trouble he has occafioned us, when I refleX how feverely he has fuffered from it, in every point.
I hope Caroline and her little one go on well! Farewel, my dear Madam. I be kept here a week or ten days longer than I expeXed, which by no means accords
W H A T V O WILL.
cords with my inclination. Embrace your coterie for your Ladylhip’s
Moll refpeXfully affeXionate
And devoted fervant,
Pemberton.
To Lady Westbrook
e
Portmetn-Squan.
YOU indulged me greatly, my amiable
friend, when you defired me to write to you frequently. Your tendernefs I have often experienced-your fympathy has as often foothed my fpirits, when they have been fadly agitated—and the intereft you fo kindly take in all that concerns me, excites every fentiment of gratitude, and entitles you to my full confidence. I momently
lament
i86
MASQUERADES; or.
lament your departure from London; but I admire the motive which carried you and Sir James from the gay feenes that it now exhibits. It muft have been very melancholy for Lady Caroline to have pafled two tedious months in the country at this dreary feafon, deprived of her fweet companion, whofe lofs fhe could not have fupplied. Pray tell her that I entreat fhe may not fuffer the difagreeable bufinefs which called her away, to detain her in Kent beyond the limited time.
You will no doubt remember, my dear Lady Weftbrook, a wifli I more than once exprefled in your prefence to Caroline, of makingtheDukeof Weftmorland a prornife, that I thought would be to the advantage of Lord Ofmond. You both endeavoured to difluade me from fuch a prornife: I faw it was in vain to contend the matter, and dropped it for the prefent. On my arrival in London, I found my mother and Lord Pemberton as inflexibly determined as ever to have no alliance with the Marquis—She forbad me to think more of him. I found the time approaching faft for the Duke’s fo-lernhizing a marriage, that was to be deftruXive
w
YOU W
187
ftruXive to my Ofmond’s future hopes,
I found (by far the leaft painful part) that I was haflrening to the grave. Again 1 con-fuked Caroline, and begged, if Ike could allege any good reafon, why I fhould not execute my fcheme, to do ic without hefi-tation. She had none to offer that did not
app
ear
futile—ftill by fome method or
other, (he detained me from adopting the neceffary meafures much longer than I liked. A few days ago I formed my refolution I confidered every point deliberately—and, after revolving in my mind the fteps proper to be taken, I went to my mother, and told her what I meditated doing. She was aftonilhed at the courage of fuch a proceeding, but feemed at a lofs how to anfwer me.
“ Your Ladylhip,” cried I, “ cannot let your averfion arrive at fo great a length, as to wilh that Lord Ofmond Ihould be rendered unfortune in each fenfe that wretchednefs can approach him, on my account. By vowing to the Duke never to marry his fon, the only colour of difpleafure he has againft him, muft be removed His Grace will perhaps break off his own
match
i88
MASQUERADES; oR,
match—Lord Ofmond will be reftored to his juft expeXations-*-your Ladyfhip and my brother will be fatisfied that I have put it out of my own power to become the wife of a man you both hold in fo much abhorrence—and I fhall be more at reft in the refleXion of not having injured him in every refpeX.” My mother defired I would let her fee the letter before it was fent. I well knew the motive—fhe was apprehen-five I fhould hurt the family pride by ufing too humiliating terms. I wrote as follows:
To the Duke of Westmorland.
My Lord,
T is with every fentiment of difguft that the world beholds your treatment of Lord Ofmond—It is with every emotion of grief I in particular am conftrained to view fuch unparalleled inhumanity, fince I have been, in a chief meafure, the innocent caufe of its exertion on an amiable and noble heart.
I love
WHAT YOU WILL.
I love Lord Ofmond, my Lord
my Lord
friends difapprove of his alliance Ofmond returns perhaps too warmly the tendernefs I feel.—You have expreffed your hatred to fuch a connexion—you have driven him from your fight, and withdrawn from him the bleffings of a father—you fwear to deprive him of his native inheritance, and all becaufe he has dared to love 1 What agg
OO
avates the fault—he has prefumed to eltX an object out of a family that your Grace (allow me to think from no juft caufe) has taken an averfion to Love, my Lord, is involuntary. Had he married indeed without your confent, you might have had a fhade of reafon for fuch a conduX; but, alas ! you cannot even allege that offence, to excufe a want of paternal feeling.
Recal the Marquis to your arms, my Lord—
fmil
es
reftore him to the favour of your ■difpoffefs him not of the opulent fortune his birth and his merit claim-— Grant me a prornife to this effeX, and your Grace fhall receive from me in return a folemn abjuration of my hopes—I will vow never to wed him without the mutual ap-
probatioq
1^0
au
OR
probation of his, and of my family—I will vow to become a voluntary facrifice for his benefit.
Believe me, my Lord, fuch a mode of aXing will re-inflate you in the good opinion .of mankind, will confirm to you the duty and affeXion of Lord Ofmond—will, above all, reconcile you to your own heart, which furely is the firft of motives—and will for ever oblige,
My Lord,
I	,
Your Grace’s
Moft obedient,
Humble fervant, Julia Herbert
When I had finifhed my letter, I carried It to Lady Pemberton. She perufed it two or three times; then faid, fhe wifhed 1 would make my mind eafy, and poftpone fending of it till my brother came to town.
I fhould
WHAT YOUV
0
1 fliould not wait long.
r T
1 L L.
191
as (he expeXed him in two or three days. I could do nothing but acquiefce, though inwa^XlyreluX-anr, that he was to be diXator on the occafion ; judging of the probability there was from thence, of its not being fent at all. Lord Pemberton did not arrive in London before laft night, and this morning breakfafted with us. My mother gave him the letter. After reading it attentively, he affied whether I really meant to aX up to the contents of it ? I replied, moft undoubtedly I ftiould.
“ Then,” cried my Lord, “ if it will give you the leaft fatisfaXion that Weftmorland ftiould receive it, let it be difpatch-
• • • ^
ed to him immediately. Who knows. Madam,” addrelTing my mother, “ what effeX it may produce !”
I was aftonilhed—I knew not what my brother could fuppofe. Lady Pemberton was filent. The fervant who carried the letter to Grofvenor-Square, found his Grace ,at home; and, after being detained half an hour, was told, “ It required no anfwer.” My brother had waited the footman’s return: he bore this piece of unpo-
litenefs
%Q2
MASQUERADES; or
95
litenefs with more moderation than I could have expeXed—he looked at me, I thought, with com^ '’flion.
“ Julia may yet have an anfwer,” cried Lady Pemberton; “ he requires time to deliberate.”
“ I don’t believe fhe will, Madam,” replied my brother. “ Weftmorland is a contemptible wretch, and you fliould defpife him, Julia. You have a fpecimen of the infolence, with which you would have been treated, had you become his daughter.
“ I fliould not have been in his power, my Lord ; and I am well affured Ofmond is incapable of treating any creature ill.”
“ Why faith I fancy fo too—but encourage not a hope of him: it will avail nothing.” Here the fubjeX refted.
Lady Mortimer is once more at liberty to go abroad : however, ftieufes that privilege with moderation. My mother this night receives maiks, previous to their appearance at Almack’s.—No entreaties could prevail on Caroline to come to us. Her Lord is as domeftic as fhe is. They are equally delighted with their fon, and feem
th; happieft people in the world.
I will
WHAT YOU WILL.
*93
I will keep my letter open two or three days, hoping in that time the Duke of Weftmorland will anfwer my requeft, and I may be able to acquaint you of the fuccefs of my projeX.
*


*
*
Thurfday
orntng.
Between ten and eleven laft night, our apartments were thronged—I was conver-fiiig with Sir Charles Montague, when one in a hermit’s drefs approached me, and in a feigned voice, which 1 could not once catch off its guard, chid me for fuffering my heart to be fo much attached to the alluring pleafures of the town, I heard him a longtime without interrupting’ him: he painted the frivolity of fuch amufements, and bad me ftrive to wean
CC
myfelf from them.
Your opinion of me is erroneous, my good father,” exclaimed I: “ fuch pleafures as you call alluring, I defpife.”
He ftiook his head......
Can you be really fincere Some hgppy fellow then engages you to meet Vol. IV.	K	him
CC
194 M A S QU ERADESj or, him in the round of diflipation which you
tread with unwearied fleps !”
I appealed to Sir Charles j but, on turning my head, perceived he had left my fide. I cleared myfelf of the accufation,
3 faid, that, when my mother infifled on iny attendance in public, I certainly had jiooption——“ But,” added I, “fuppofing I was at my own difpofal, to refrain from joining her and my fifters in the common diverfions of the place, muft appear very particular, and the height of afledlation in jnu. What would you have me do ? It is from fuch as dedicate themfelves to holy contemplation—who view difpaflionately the calamities and lucky incidents of bufy life, we children of the world may hope to learn the do'Xrine of wifdom. Inflfuft me in this point how to aX.”
“ Pevote your thoughts to love, fair daughter,” replied he: “fly from this metropolis—fly to the arms of an ardent lover, who gives up all for your fake—who teceivt s no”—-------
“ Tour courfei is pernicicys!” returned I: “ you all'ume that habit to be lefs
fufpeXed, and to feduce more eafily. Jt
WHAT YOU WILL.
195
is rfot the office of a Hermit to advife children to fwerve from duty.
I was about to leave him
—he trembled whilft he held it
he caught
my hand—
“ Pardon me.
55
faid he: “ your notions
are too rigid. The intereft I' take in my friend’s misfortunes, accounts for the advice I give. Did he participate of your amufements, I could not objeX to your enjoying the gay feenes of London ; but I fear in his abfence they only dazzle your ■fenfes, and leave him but little room in your thoughts. Befides, fome fluttering, brilliant coxcomb, with nothing to recommend him but what he derives from the appendages of a handfome figure, and a high title, might make his way good to that gende breaft !” .
“ You muft be an utter ftranger to me
judging thus of my fentiments j therefore I forgive you.----But when you re-
turn to your hermitage, learn to diveft yourfelf of prejudice, and believe that it; is not incompatible with the nature of a worn3n^ to look beyond tlie charms of
perfon and precedence in her choice of a lover.”
K 2
A
196 M A S QU E R A D E S} OR,
‘ A fhepherd came up to us, whom* I knew to be Suffolk.
“ Father,” cried he, “ yon have not forfworn every gratification I perceive you ftill delight in viewing a beautiful ob-ieX. I beg of your charity to inform this fair maid, how abominable a crime it is to be cruel—convince her of the charge fhe
lies under to Heaven, for the pangs ffie
gives Its creatures
O
a charge ffie muft one
day anfwer—and then ffie will fordy grieve
for having been guilty of my death in particular.”
“ Ah, my daughter,” exclaimed the Anchorite, “ beware of cruelty ! This fine form, thefe lovely features, muft all undergo a change unheeded by you in this blooming age, jBeauty'was noc given you for the purpofe of breaking hearts I”
“ The mean fliare 1 have, father, was given me for the purpofe of rewarding one tender, faithful heart, and no more ‘
D
was It
P”

not r
“ Indifputably !”
Well, the perfon who poffeffes that heart, and mine alfo, is far—very far from Portman-fquare juft now 1 Charity could
no
WHAT YOU WILL.
197
no longer be a commendable virtue, did it oblige me to adminifter to another’s happinefs with the total privation of my own. Prevail therefore on this mafl^ to accompany you back to your folitude—there inftruX him on the refinements that ever attend a fincere paffion—-—and then he will blufh ac founding in my ears a fubjeX he has long known I am not at liberty to liften to, and which is repugnant to my inclinations.”
He was about to anfwer, when Fidele ran into the room, and, almoft bounding into the Hermit’s arms, teftified fuch joy and tranfport as I am unable to deferibe. I was furprifed at ic; and ftill more at hearing the maik exclaim, “ Poor Fideie 1” However, ic corroborated rny conjeXure,. that rhe fiX.tious reclufe was no other than Mr. Montague, who recog-
nifed the little greyhound.--------Do you
know, I was half jealous of the animal’s be-ftov/ing careffes on any but his Lord and myfeif? I took him from the mafic—I
9
kiiTed his head, and inveigled him not to
be fo eager to return to tlie ftranger
but
be regained him from my arms
K 3
he preffed
P
198
MAS QU ERADESj or
Fidele to his bofom
he was extrava-
gant in his fondnefs of him
CC
How exclaimed.
CC
happy is this creature i” he
CC
I
Happy indeed !” echoed Suffolk : often wifh to be Fidele.”
“ Would you not confent to part with him. Madam,” demanded the Hermit, “ to one who will idolize him on your account ?”
J trembled at the queftion---
CC
No, Sir,” replied I j ■ ‘ I would not part with him for worlds !---------No con-
fideration could tempt me to it.”
The mafk fnatched my hand, and eagerly preffed it——I was fo apprehenfive of lofing Fidele, that the firft moment which offered I took him from the Iltrmir, and carried him to my clofer, where 1 mil ted
com-
him to the ftriX care of Mour-
nies.
Soon after I returned, I aficed Sir Charles (whom I faw fpeak for fome minutes with the mafk) to inform me of hi's name.
“ It is not in my power,” anfw’ertd he “ but 1 believe it is Sedley.
“ How fhculd Mr. Sedley know Fidele.?”
cried
55
WHAT YOU WILL.'
*99

cried I—and I mentioned the circumftance I have juft related.
“ Oh, he was acquainted with your little favourite,” replied he, “ before you faw himj and Fidele is not fine enough to aim at the appearance of lofing his memory.”
In a Ihort time the company difperfed, and I faw no more of the hermit.
To-morrow-night Lady Louifa Montague gives a mafked ball. Neither the Mortimer’s, my brother, nor his wife, mean to be at it. Lord Pemberton is prevented by a cold, and Sophia will not go without him. I did hope for the Duke of Suffolk’s abfence alfo—but Louifa tells me he in a
TJL- ^
♦ %
j . A. . i
jocular manner riinteu to aerDiT u>.ipaic of receiving an invitation •, and begged t<3 know, whether he ffiould much offend her, if without one lie prefumed to intrude ’ bimfelf amongft her guefts ? She was obliged, through politenefs, to fend him a card the next day.



%

%


*
%
Hf
K4
Satur-^
200
M A S QU ERADESj or
Saturday,
I will recite diftinXly the occurrences of laft: night, and leave you to determine whether I have caufe or not to be perplexed*
Almeria and I, habited as girls of Patinos, attended Lady Pemberton to Cum-berland-ftreet. We had fcarcely entered the fird apartment, when two maflcs feized a hand of each. One was a harlequin, whom my fifter, no doubt, knew to be Lord Clermont; the other was a fcolding old woman, that was very vociferous in ac-cufing me of coquetry. I had neither fpirits nor inclination to anfwer, and, taking my mother’s arm, broke from the difguft:-
T r
o
iiguic
to pet free
3ft
“joweverj X luuMu !i niipohible the old woman followed, and addreffed me in a manner that diverted Lady Pemberton, who alked me why I appeared as miferable at fuch a feftive fcene, as if I was following a corpfe.? She told me the humorous mafk was Mr. Bilhop, and begged me to join my lifter, whilft fhe endeavoured to find out the Duke of Northington, to whom Ihe had a meffage from
I obeyed; and difcovered
Almena
my broxher.
WHAT YOU WILL. 2dc
place where I ftood.
Almeria ftanding with her partner amongft the dancers in the great room. The dil'a-greeable old woman purfued me thither; and was growing wonderfully troublefome, when a magician interfered, and bade Mr. Ainfley direX his wit at an objeX who might admire ic more than I feemed to do. He returned an anfwer bordering on infolence, and attempted to throw his arm round my waift. The magician caught him by the fhoulder, and, giving him a fudden whirl, caufed him to ftagger many yards from the
Mr. Ainfley (for be I fuppofe it was) precipitately retreated from the fhouts of laughter that refounded through the apartment. We faw no more of the hideous figure, i thanked the magician for his good-natured and timely relief.
“ I perceived, by the power of rny aft,” cried he, ‘b what paffed in your foul, and in your tormentor’s. You was diftreffed ac the impertinent nonfenfe fhe uttered : fbe was forming a fcheme of bringing you into the faffiionable paper of the morning, in a manner not greatly to your fatisfaXion. There is no exertion of Ikill required to filence fuch old women. I ffiould be happy
K 5	^	to
202 MASQUERADES; OR,
to employ my talents in a far higher caufe. I will convene all the loves—the foft defires—and extatic tranfports around you I will thaw that bofom, as cold and as fpot-lefs as the new-fallen fnow—I will oblige it to melt at the earneft foilicitations of the moft ardent lover that ever breathed a figh
99
“ Are you not the Duke of Suffolk If that name is hateful to you—no.
I know you too well, my Lord ; and am ingenuous enough to confefs, that you are the laft man in the world I would receive the flighteft fervice from—however, I thank you once more for ridding me of Mr Ain-
fley.”
I was haftening from him after me^-----
he ftepped
r
“ By heaven I am not Suffolk !”
“ Well, may be fo ! but, as long as I retain the leaft fufpicion that you are, your converfation muft be fhunned by me.”
(C
Stay, fweet Julia!
fuppofe—fup-
pofe this mafk dropped—and you difcovered the features of Ofmond—fay—-would you pardon his temerity ?”
He feemed agitated—he prefled my hand
to
V/HAT YOU WILL.
203
to his bofom—I ftarted—how can I tell you the various fenfations that poftefted my hearc in the courfe of one moment! At leftgth I recolleXed that this was an artifice—an inhuman artifice of the Duke’s, to deceive me into a belief that he Was Ofmond—to find on what foot we were—and to be treat-
t «
ed very differently by me under that charaXer, than he would be in his owii. I* withdrew my hand haftily.
“ Was I miftaken before, this laft inde-licate, illufory interrogation, would be fufficient to prove you no other than the Duke of Suffolk. Away, my Lord I and be
till you bring your fentiments to be fomething fimilar to Lord Ofmond’s, not to difgrace his name by borrowing it.’* I quitted him immediately, and had the fatisfaXion, in a quarter of an hour, to fee him retire from the apartments. I fat
CC
from the apartments, a good while in converfation with Lady Percival, my mothet, and Lord Budenall, when a gentleman, in the drefs of Murphy’s Hamet, afked me to dance a minuet. I refufed. Lady Pemberton defired him to perfevere in his entreaty till 1 confented. There was no more to be faid. I arofe.
I 6
and
/
204
QU
O R
and he led me to the room appropriated to minuets. As we entered, Sir Charles Montague met me.
“ Whom have you got there ?” whifpered he.
“ Indeed, I do not know,” anfwered I.
“ You are not engaged to him for the night I hope.”
1 replied in the negative.
“ That is well—let no follicitation induce you to give your hand to any partner, but the one I have provided for you.”
It was time to begin before 1 could aik whom he referved for me ? As foon as the minuet ended, he approached me, followed by as elegant a figure as my eyes ever beheld, in the habit of Jachimo. Sir Charles introduced him to me with this
fentence:
“ Honour by your notice Lord Ofmond’s and my very particular friend—in diftin-guifhing Mr. Sedley you will oblige us both I”
Never, Lady Weftbrook, did I fee fo
ftrong a refemblance as his perfon bore to the Marquis’s-—his manner—his addrefs, were ftrongly reprefented in this ftranger’s
his
WHAT YOU WILL.
205
his voice indeed differed^—but I thought it affeded—-and the thicknefs with which he fpoke managed by a trifling ftratagem. I felt fick. the room
forced to fit down.
I complained of the heat of took off my mafk—and was
Sir Charles and Mr.
I
am to call him, they tell
The latter threw
Sedley (for fo me) were all attention, open a fafh near me—he procured fome volatiles, and held them to my nofe. His benevolence was very amiable, and rendered him yet more like my Lord. In a few minutes I was as vvell as ever.
retired a few
I
Mr. Sedley could not avoid
paces
whifpering Sir Charles,
“ Sure it is Ofmond’s felf!”
He laughed “ Entertain that notion, and you will pafs fome hours agreeably. To help the illufion, he fhall not unmafk: for, were
fee his face, you would fcarcely
to
it is as rough
»
you
compare him to Ofmond and uncouth as his figure is elegant.
“ I wonder he did not withdraw his mafk, Sir Charles, when you prefented him to me !
99
“ Oh, the fellow has vanity ! I will lay any wager that he conceals his features
from
u
206 MASQUERADES; or,
from you as long as he can—but I muft flatter him, by mentioning the refemblance you difcover.”
Sir Charles waited not my reply—he joined Mr. Sedley, and appeared highly diverted whilft he communicated fomething to him. They both came up to me, and Mr. Sedley entreated I would noc deny him the honour of being my partner. I pleaded want of health, and declared my incen-cion was to avoid dancing.
If you do,” faid Montague, “ your fituation muft be moft unpleafant—-Suffolk will be continually at your elbow.”
“ Oh, no !” exclaimed I, “ he is gone I (hall fee no more of him this night, I truft !”
Sir Charles was called afide. Mr. Sedley afked, if I really meant not to dance? X anfwered that I could not poflibly, for the reafon I had alleged. He faid it was fo important a one, that he would not for the world prefs me to alter my refolution. He feated himfelf near me, and feemed defirous of entering into converfation ; but it was not to be effeXed from the continual interruption that we had. A Lady in the drefs
of a Paifanne approached Mr. Sedley
“ Good
WHAT YOU WILL.
207
Good God,” cried fhe, “ is it aXually true that you are returned ! How long has your Lordfliip been in England ?”
He affured her that fhe miftook him.
4C
No,” replied Ihe; “ that I certainly do not—it is impoffible to miftake Lord Ofmond.”
“ Lord Ofmond is in Switzerland,” faid he ; “ but we have been often addreffed for each other!”
“ Lord Ofmond never did exift, if you are not he !” fhe anfwered :—“ perhaps you have a motive for wifhing to be concealed—Well I am enough your friend and Lady Julia’s, to keep the fecret! Do noc be afraid of finding in me a fecond Charlotte Pelham.”
%
She turned from us. I was amazingly embarraffed, and began a fecond time to think it was indeed the Marquis. I arofe inftantly to go in fearch of Louifa: I had not advanced ten yards before my hand was feized by Sir Charles Montague.
“ What have you done with Sedley, Lady Julia ?”
“ With Sedley !” repeated I: “ can I be fo eafily impofed upon, do you think ?”
tl Why
>5
2o8 mas qu ERADES; or,
»»
“ Why what do you fuppofe ?”
“ That you have deceived me. Sir Charles.
\
He blufhed, and haftily drew afide. I was afraid that I had offended him: however, I proceeded, and after much trouble found Louifa. I conjured her to tell me whether my fufpieions were not well grounded ? She affumed an air of aftonifhment, and then laughed at me. I informed her that I was not fingular in my conjeXure, and related what had paffed between the friend of Sir Charles and the Paifanne.
“ I do not deny, my dear,” cried fhe, “ that there is a fimilitude in Mr. Sedley’s perfon to Lord Ofmond’s, but furely not fo great a one as you fay 1—I will let you into a fecret, Julia—Mr. Sedley is an illegitimate fon of Weftmorland’s; fo there is nothing extraordinary in the-likenefs you perceive.—But pray difeard thefe doubts ; they are abfurd beyond meafure; and if they continue, 1 fhall believe you have loft your fenfes !”
I blufhed at my weaknefs, and began to fancy I had already given her and Sir Charles room for the idea. As 1 returned
to
^V H AT YOU WIL L.
209
€i
to the principal apartment, I met Mr. Sedley and the Paifanne together. She ran up to me, took hold of my arm, and led me afide—
Pardon me, Lady Julia,” faid Ihe, “ for diftrefling you as 1 did involuntarily. I really thought yon -Jachimo was Lord Ofmond : however, I am convinced of my error—I made him unmafk—and I am perfuaded there is not another man in the world who can .fhew fuch a face !”
“ What is it fo fi ightful ?”
“ If you wifii not to be fiiocked, avoid gratifying your curiofity.”
She hurried away, and Mr. Sedley joined me.
“ Tiie Paifanne is at length fatisfied of her miftake, Sir,” cried I.
“ Oh yes,” replied he, “ at the expence of beholding a very ugly countenance. The; agreeable Paifanne is Lady Maria Harley, I find.”
A perfon in the drefs of a Haduke drew
near.

I would give a thoufand guineas,” ex--claimed he to Mr, Sedley, “ to be better
acquainted with you
I like your fpirit. I
heard
2i6
MASQUERADES; oR
heard you anfwer the Turk who fuppofed you to be Lord Ofmond, in a manner that
does
you honour. Prithee, my Jachimo, let me fee whether in the tawny complexion you refembie your countrymen !”
Mr. Sedley feemed to take no notice of this familiar addrefs, but continued to fpeak to me of the Paifanne* The maik would not be difregarded-—he laid his hand upon Mr. Sedley’s fhoulder.
“ If you wiffi to attain happinefs with this young creature, who furpalfes Shake-fpear’s Imogen in beauty, I will inform you of a fecure method to gain her, provided I know whom I ffiall oblige. She is not deaf to perfuafion”
“ Do you hint. Sir,” cried Sedley, “ that you have experienced hov Jlexibiliiy P'
“ By no nieans—charming as ffie is, I never gave myfdf the trouble to a flail her, But view thofe eyes—thofe lips -—thole cheeks—are. they not the animated features
ft
of fnfceptibility ? They clearly prove that ffie can, not only give, happinefs to,—but receive it from a lover.—Come, come, allow me to fee your face !”
I will
good
w
YOU W
2|?f
iC
55
I will certainly fliew it to you,” re plied Sedley, “if you make it neceffary. Stand off. Sir ! and offend ^this Lady and me no further with your difcourfe.
“ Upon my foul,” exclaimed the Haduke, “ I believe you are Lord Ofmond.” “ Suppofe 1 am. Sir—Did you, or any man, ever difcover Ofmond backward in chaftifing impertinence ?—Have a care ! 1 may be found very like him in that re-fpedd.”	-	/	:
The mafk turned away muttering, J told Mr. Sedley he was too hafty
“ Not at all,” anfwered he.
I faw
53
CC
CC
ff
him and Suffolk in clofe conference—the Duke aficed me one or two unreafonable queftions—and, diffatisfied at not being able to find out who I am, difpatched this puppy on that errand.
1 thought the Duke was gone.
He has changed his drefs, I fuppofe He now appears as a Turk, and is unmafk-ed—there he ftands—obferve the embarraffment piXured on his countenance'—lie fancies I am the Marquis.
Some minutes after Mr, Montague j
cd us.
55
Sedley,”
2X2 MAS QU ERADES; or,

CC
“ Sedley,” cried he, “ if Jack Ainfley
had a fpark of courage, he would acknowledge that you have affronted hirn. He is in a defperate rage, and I overheard him making a complaint to the Duke of your ill-breeding. His Grace bid him refent it No, he anfwered ; fuch a fellow was only worthy of contempt-—befides, your language was merely unpolite, not infoient.” They both laughed heartily—my mother beckoned to me : I went up to her.
Who is that gentleman, Julia?”
An abfolute ftranger to me. Madam his name is Sedley.”
She feemed contented, and, no doubt, fet the Duke’s mind at eafe ; for he never once approached me, or Mr. Sedley, who left my fide very feldom. He fpoke much of his friend—defcribed bis paffion with an energy that I imagined could only flow from the lips of my dear Lord. I told him that he was certainly himfelf a lover,
“ I am, indeed !” replied he. “ I have felt ail the agonies of fufpenfe—of feparation—and fometimes the tranfport of being admitted to the prefence of her I adore. Ah, Lady Julia, did you love in,the hundredth
WHAT YOU WILL.
215
_	it
dredth degree that Ofmond and I do, you would fuffer him to unite every affeXionate title to you in that of hufband! Inftead of feafting his eyes on an inanimate piece of painting—inftead of clafping it to his heart, and committing a thoufand extravagances—you would allow him to beftow thofe careffes on an objeX dearer to him than it is in the poffibility of words to tell,” “ If Lord Ofmond,” cried 1, “ confidered the affair properly, he could not think that I betrayed a want of attachment to him, in refufing to deviate from the duty I owe my mother. The daughter who lofes fight of the moral obligations a parent exaXs, may juftly be fufpe<Xed of paying no regard to the vows fhe makes her hufband—But I do not rightly underftand you: what piece of painting do you mean He took my hand ;
Sweet arguer! your gentle manner of
determining every claim i make, to”------
I thought him too free—withdrew my my hand—and repeated my queftion. He anfwered haftily,
“ The piXure I wear next my, heart.”
♦f How 1” exclaimed 15 “ Lord Ofmond
has

QU
OR
Sure he is
has nothing to do with that l fiot become your rival i”
He hefitated.
“ I beg pardon—-did you not afk what bit of painting I wore
“ Good heaven, Sir, no! I am ignorant of your having any miniature; nor fhould I be fo curious.
The Marquis, Madam, is happy e-tiough to poflefs your piXvrre—can you be forry for it ? It is the greateft confolation a lover can have in the abfence of his miftrefs I ”
“ I'believe^ Sir, you muft be miftaken I never gave him”—
■ “ No—you were notfo kind; but your amiable fifter was.
gret it
“ Indeed I do not
Tell me, do you re-
—I am pleafed he has any-thing to remind him of his Julia. You may imagine, Mr. Sedley, that I am blame-able in owning my affeXion for the Mar-tjuis fo unrefervedly; but his merit jufti-|ies my choice—and- I would make it known, that to no other man will I ever
give my hand, convinced at the fame
time
WHAT YOU WILL. 215
time that I fliall never have it in my power to prefent it to him.”
Mr. Sedley was agitated-—he left me abruptly—but in a few minutes returned “ The intereft I take in Ofmond’s happinefs, Lady Julia,” cried he, muft account to you for the feelings I cannot help teftifying-*-yet furely you are too obftinate —fome fcruples might be facrificed to fo faithful, fo fincere a lover. Heaven demands not of us to become”--*-—
“ I muft not hear you on this head; your fophiftry may add to my wretchednefs, but cannot change my refolution.’’
Sir Charles Montague, Lord Beaumont, and Lord Budenall, interrupted us; and I had very little converfation further with Mr. Sedley,^ who ftill hovered near me. I afked Sir Charles if he was angry with me ? He fmiled—r-
“ Notin the leaft-r^you muft be fure by this time, that you injured me in the thought you exprefled.”-—*-We had no formal fupper, but fide-boards furnilhed with every delicacy that could be fancied*
Mr* Sedley begged to hold my gloves whilft
1 tafted
2i6
MASQUERADES; or.
I tafted fome fruit. Soon after I demanded them : he pretended to look for them made me many apologies for his careleflhefs and hoped I was provided with another I alTured him I was not. “ How
pair.
unlucky !” cried he, been ftolen from me.”
cc
they have certainly He affeXed to be ex-
tremely follicitous to find them ; but without fuccefs. When the moment arrived for our departure, he took my hand. We were following Lady Pemberton and Lord Budenall out of the apartments, when Mr.
Montague ftopped us. Mr. Sedley from
He had a meffage Lady Louifa; and Lord Clermont and
to Mr. Sedley whilft he delivered it,
Almeria paffed by—in fhort, before Mr. Montague could receive an anfwer, I was left feveral yards behind my mother and fifter. As we defcended the ftair-cafe, Mr, Sedley preffed my hand to his bofom—he fighed, and attempted under the curtain of his mafk to kifs it. I fnatched it from him —and evinced my difpleafure. That availed nothing; in fpite of my refift'ance, he again feized it, and carried it to his lips.
‘f You do not know me, Sir,” cried L
“ Thefe
WHAT YOU WILL.
217
^ Thefe liberties—you forget your friend you forget” —
“ Ah, my Julia—my ever-deareft Julia I” exclaimed he, in the natural voice of Of-
mond.
I in 1
Dear Emily, what a fituation was Time admitted no more—
ftant I found myfelf in the coach

■in an in-^ I faw him
difappear—I knew not what to imagine.
Upon my word, Julia,” faid Almeria, as we drove off, “ you have the luck of attraXing alU the elegants!—Why this ftranger is enchanting !—I wifh he had beftowed the attention on me, that he paid to you—you were infenfible to it; I fhould have been delighted—Oh Lord, I am in
44
44
>
don’t you think
love with Mr. Sedley !”
I was too much diftreffed to anfwer her rallery.
He is amazingly like Lord Ofmond,” cried Lady Pemberton ; he is, Julia ?”
“ So much fo. Madam,” anfwered I, “that at this minute I can hardly believe it is any other than the Marquis.”
“ -Indeed !” returned my mother—ftie paufed—“ Your ingenuity ispraife-worthy !
VoL. IV.	L	—But

MASQUERADES: or
But, my dear, if the perfon you fufpeX was really Ofmond, he certainly would have difcovered himfelf to you. Give up that idea, Julia-, for Maria Harley told me fhe faw his face, and it is a horrible

one.
Oh,
Almeria
then I am cured I” exclaimed
“ I wifh 1 had known it fooner; 1 ffiould not have treated Lord Clermont fo ill.”
I am ftrangely perplexed. Lady Weftbrook. One moment I am perfuaded that I have converfed with Ofmond ; the next I refleX on the many circumftances that happened, which exterminate that belief. 1 faw Sir Charles and Louifa this morning: I mentioned the incident that paffed as Mr. Sedley led me to the car-ge, and infifted on their informing me whether Lord Ofmond did not borrow that name. They turned my queflion into fuch ridicule, that I repented having put it to them. I beg of you, my amiable Emily, to tell me whether the Marquis is in
if he is. I am fure you and Sir
I have been thus
na
England
James muft know it. particular, to convince you that my fur-
tnifes
WHAT YOU WILL.
arai
mifes are at leaft formed from ftriking appearances.
I have received no anfwer from the Duke of Weftmorland ; and from thence I lofe all hope of his aXing with juftice towards his fon.
Adieu, my dear Lady Weftbrook.’ Write foon, and think me
Your affeXionate
Julia Herbert*
To 5/r James Westbrook.
Cumber Jan d- Street,
ES, Weftbrook, I have indeed feen and converfed with my charming Julia: I have obtained proofs of her attachment beyond expreffion grateful, whilft
h 2	Ihe
■il20
ou
-ihe imagined me very diftant from her. You think my fcheme romantic, you fay. •It may be fo; but ic affords me a large
lhare of happinefs,-------1 would not for
worlds create the leaft anxiety in Julia’s
breaft.-----“ Should you be known, her
ffamily muft fuppofe her acceffary to your concealment. Should (he hear of
I
yogr
return, fhe will avoid you. I condemn your meafures, and fear you may have
reafon to repent of them.”----No, dear
Weftbrook;
give
No,
for
noc room ror apprehenfions of the fort. It is impoflible the Pemberton’s fhould difcover me ; and, if Julia only fufpeXs that Sedley is Ofmond, her heart will not allow her to fhun him. Befldes, the opportunities I have of fpeaking to her are fo very few, that there is no danger of her coming to the truth. Two, and but two, delicious nights flnce my arrival have I fpent in prefence of the angel —each time I was in mafquerade—I wore a habit to Portman-fqnare that put it beyond the power of mortal to fufpeX who I was. For, the ball given by Lady Louifa, I provided one that rendered my appearance iomething gayer than a Hermit’s:
Montague
WHAT YOU WILL.
2lt
Montague faw it, and rallied me egre-giouQy on my vanity, which he fiid would indubitably fubjeX me to deteXion. Lord Beaumont called at the moment, and I fubmitted the point to his decifion : he gave ic againft me, and I was doomed to become a magician.
Unfortunately, Lady Julia took me for Suffolk—it was in vain to prevail on her to give up that opinion ; and, to prevent my being avoided by her, I was obliged to affume the drefs Sir Charles had objeXed to.
When Montague introduced me to her under my fictitious appellation, fhe was embarraffed what to think ; declared my
r
refemblance to—myfelf was ftrange ! I at firft enjoyed her perplexity. She unmafked for the benefit of freer refpiration —the colour had fled her cheeks—her bofom heaved—and fhe feemed near fainting. I grew uneafy, and more than once regretted the furprife I had occafioned her. However, flie was perfuaded out of her reafon, and regarded me as the friend of her lover.
L 3
Several
222
QU
Several addrefled me by the title I have thrown aflde, I was foon fenfible that I ran a great hazard of being difcovered ; and forced to be very much on my guard —nay, I was difcovered by one perfon ! Lady Maria Harley declared pofitively that I was Lord Ofmond. 1 followed her, and by twenty artifices fought to remove the conjeXure.
Come,” faid fhe, “ let me fee your
CC
face, arid that will decide at once.
99
You may be fure I evaded fuch an ex-
amination.
“ Well!” fhe exclaimed, you will not, I prefume, refufe your hand to a Lady—give me leave to look on it—nay, it is natural to prefent the one next to me your left hand I want.”
I offered it to her.
“ Indeed, my Lord, you are fo diffident of me (knowing who I am), that you deferve no mercy. Do you yet deny that this is Lord Ofmond’s hand ?”
“ Moft certainly I do.”
“ Your fubterfuge is, that it is Julia Herbert’s.”
“ Whilft
* ^
\
WHAT YOU WILL.
223
C(
Whilft you keep your features concealed from me, I riiuft wifli that Ihe
There is
temptation enough about her to make me willingly become Ofmond’s rival!—-But,
me,
would confider ic in that light.
as report fays (he is very cruel, deftroy the effeX of her charms by withdrawing that unkind maik, and fix me yours at once. Much have I heard of Lady Maria Harley’s beauty, and
“ The fraudulency of that fpeech will not anfwer—Ha!—this ring, my Lord—-the hair is the exaX colour of Lady Julia’s I think——and the cyphers which thefe
jewels compofe are J. H.----What tafte
the little ornament difplays I—It is very handfome indeed-—done in Paris I fuppofe. Pray who is your Lordihip’s jeweller there r”
I ftrove to perfuade her that Ihe had miftaken the initials *, and hoped to make her filent, by hinting, that the Marquis muft be a happy man, to engage fo much of her attention.
“ I declare,
It was all to no purpofe ” cried fhe, “ if you will let me fee your face, you fhall find me ferviceable in aflifting to carry on the deception
L 4	to
t
224
MASQUERADES; oR,
to others :—if not, I will tell Lady Julia who you really are, which I know fhe is anxious to learn, by a queftion I overheard her afk Sir Charles. It is for fome weighty reafon I find that you impofe upon her dread then the mifchief I have it in my power to occafion !”
I led her afide, and unmaficed.
Now,
CC
exclaimed I, catching her in my arms, 1 muft be rewarded, for gratifying as infatiable curiofity as ever female poflefifed !”
I imagined her Ladyfhip did not mean I fhould uncoVer-my face without obliging her to do the fame. She difengaged herfelf from me—-----
“ No infidelity to your Julia, my Lord I You can have no pleafure in faluting any Lady but her. I am the laft in the world who would monopolize the flighteft of thofe endearments fhe alone is entitled to from you. I efteem her excellence ; I admire her beauty ; and wifh you both happy. Receive my thanks for this proof of
confidence, which, depend, is not ill beftowed,”
We

/•
what you WILL;
225
We returned to the company, and I re-
joined the beloved of my foul interrupted------
1 am






#
#




. How will you exult at what I have juft been told !—Between the hours of one and two this morning, Lady Henrietta March-rnont left her father’s houfe, with a fmart young Cornet, whole fame is rendered fomething popular for dealing largely in fcandal. Need I add his appellation ?
Take it then-----Jack AinQey. BudenaU,.
an hour ago, looked in upon me, and gave the following intelligence:
“ Some evenings lince, Frederick Montague and I were at the Cocoa*Tree, where Jack foon joined us. His; heart laboured; with an important difeovery. We appeared totally unmindful of his hints, lignili-cant flirugs, and meaning looks——till at laft he was provoked to tell us, without be ing interrogated, that he received the u' moft encouragement from L.ady,Henriet to become her lover. We both ftarer
^5	.	*
226
ou
and he, with an air of exultation, vowed, it was a pity fhe happened to be fo damn’d ugly, elfe he might be prevailed on to take her as a companion to Scotland •, and ihould be glad, by fuch a ftroke, to break the chain of llavifh dependence which Suffolk bound him fo tightly in, “ Unfortunately I owe him fix thoufand pounds,” added he, ‘‘ and muft fubmit to his
99
ift
capricea
“ Frederick declared, if her Ladyfhip gave him fuch a preference, he would make no objeXions to her perfon, as he ihould deem it madnefs for one of his narrow fortune to let flip fo glorious an opportunity of enfuring happinefs to himfelf.” You are right, Frederick,” exclaimed 1J “ and was fate fo propitious to you, you would not have much time to fpare—a few days over, and fhe will be Duchefs of Weftmorland. I really compaffionate the amiable Henrietta. It is incredible what romantic nonfenfe fills the heads of our young men. To me fhe does not appear fo plain; Ihe is well enough, I am fure, for a wife. Could I hope to fucceed, I
would moft gladly rival his Grace.
99
44
Your
WHAT YOU WILL. 227
“ Your Lordfliip might do that without much trouble,” cried Frederick;
but to rival Mr. Ainfley, would be a difficult tafk indeed.”
“ Jack fmiled, bowed, and fwallowed
CC
the bait greedily.”
“ One circumftance,” replied he, “ deters me. My notions are too refined I Should the Duke marry Lady Henrietta, great part of her fortune at his death will devolve to his fon—at leaft I fuppofe fo —I would not be an enemy to Lord Ofmond’s intereft.”
We could hardly refrain from laughing at fo abfurd an anfwer, which was meant to infpire us with a high opinion of his generofity. We obviated his delicate fcruples, and he took leave of us to attend an appointment he had with her Ladyfhip.
Harkye, Ainfley,” cried Frederick, as he was retiring, “ if you do not carry her off, I fliall fufpeX the veracity of what you told us.”
“ He anfwered with a thoufand oaths that it was a faX.
I am incredulity itfelf,
((
4C
44
Montague:
' returned pruve it in the manner I L 6	have
228
O U
44
have mentioned, and when I pay my compliments of congratulation to Lady Henrietta Ainfley, 1 will demand your pardon for now doubting your atteftation.”
Laft night he informed Frederick, that the matter was fettled : fhe was to be ready at a fixed moment to go off with him, accompanied by a maid who indifputably was agent in the whole fcheme. Montague and I were follicitous for the event, and kept ourfelves concealed near the fpot where the carriage waited. In half an hour after we had taken our ftand, we had the fatisfaXion of feeing Lady Henrietta, her attendant, and Jack, ftep into the chaife, and drive off at a furious rate.
“ This morning about eleven o’clock I called in Grofvenor-Square. The houfe was in great confufion—Lord Davenport had juft fent to inform the Duke of his daughter’s elopement, and the fervant who carried the fatal intelligence, had given the alarm to his Grace’s domeftics. On
i
feeing a chaife drive to the door whilft I waited for admiflion, I afked the porter if my Lord Duke intended leaving London ?
The fellow anfwered in the affirmative,
adding.
WHAT YOU WILL.
229
adding, he [uppofed his Grace was going after Lady Henrietta Marchmont, who had run away from her friends. I affeXed great aftonifhment, and enquired who went with her, and [which way . Ihe was gone ? The man very communicatively replied, Only her woman; that fome of the maids beard Lady Henrietta’s Abigail fay yefterday; morning, in a jefting manner, that fbe hoped to become a great traveller, and fee Scotland foon ; from whence it was conjeXured that her Lady and felf had taken that road.
“ On entering the Duke’s apartment, I perceived that he was much difcompofed r however, he faid not a fyllable of the affair to me, but in a few minutes apologized for being obliged to fend me away, pleading in excufe fudden bufinefs with Lord Daven-port.
“ Or with his daughter rather, my Lord !” cried I laughing, and made my bow. From Grofvenor-Square I came hither, to receive your thanks for the part I had in fpiriting Ainfley to do you fuch an effential fervice.”
Sir Charles and Frederick joined us—we laughed at the ftratagem, and unanimoufly hoped that Jack would make fure of his
'	miftrefs
Mo
MASQUERADES} or.
miftrefs before my father croffes the Tweed, It would be horribly difagreeable to her to return with her old, inftead of her young lover. I wonder what Suffolk will think of this coup d'eclat of Jack’s. I wifti the low pride that can delight in tyrannizing over a dependent, may meet with inceflanc mortifications!
Fail not to kifs my worthy Lady Caroline’s hand as my reprefentative—tell Lady Weftbrook I prefume to love her tenderly. Adieu, my dear Sir James! I can never lofe fight of the favours I owe you, and ihall ever be,
/
Your moft grateful.
And affeXionate friend,
Osmond,

WHAT Vou WILL.

To Sir Charles Montague;
Honoured Sir,
Write, by my Lord Duke’s orders, to inform you, that, as we were between Eaton and Buckden, the darknefs of the night hindered us from obferving that the linch pin of one of the hind wheels of his Grace’s chaife had dropped out, and, the poftilions turning fhortly, the wheel flew off, and the carriage o /erfet. Unfortunately, my Lord Duke’s right leg was broken—he remained fo long in torture before we could procure a vehicle to convey him with any degree of eafe to Buckden, (where we thought he would be better accommodated than at Eaton,) that by the time he reached it, he was fpeechlefs; however, with the afliftance of proper remedies, we recovered him. A furgeon from Huntingdon attempted to fet the bone—whether he has fucceeded I know not—the leg is dreadfully fwelled, and my Lord complains of agonizing pain* His Grace was very impatient at being kept at


MASQUERADES} or,
an inn, and infifted on our removing him this morning to his feat, which is a mile within Peterborough. He would not liften to remonftrance, and we were forced to obey. A litter was got, on'which we laid him, and with all imaginable caution brought him home; but we were hardly arrived, when he perceived fympcoms of the gout flying about his ftomach—he has a high fever, and is, upon the whole, in a
moft alarming; fituation.
O
I difpatched an exprefs from Buckden to
Mr. A----, defiring his attendance as foon
as poffible—the one I now fend with this to your honour, carries a letter to the fame purport to DoXor W-----.
My Lord conjures you, by every thing you hold dear, to pardoti paft ariimofities, and allow him to fee you—he has much to fay, and tranfaX, and fears he has but little time for cither. He will be much 0
obliged to you to call on his lawyer, Mr.
------, and beg of him to accompany
you to Belfont. I muft mention, that Lord Davenport, who was iri the chaife wich bis Grace, received no injury from the accident, and, after feeing my Lord Duke put
to
w
YOU W

to bed, proceeded with great hafte on his journey to Scotland. We heard on the road that Lady Henrietta was attended
by a young officer *,' which intelligence added much to the two noblemen’s confterna-
, »
tion, and accelerated their fpeed to overtake them.
Where is my young Lord, Sir Charles ? In what ftrange land is he concealed at fuch a junXure? The Duke feems afraid to repeat his name—yet I think he is ap-prehenfive of dying without making him atonement. For God’s fake. Sir, lofe not a moment! i.ord Oimond’s intereft is at
■	I will trouble you no longer, but beg leave to fubfcribe myfelf, with great refpeX,
■	Honoured Sir,
.	.	9	•	—
Your moft dutiful,
*
And obedient humble fervant.
/*
John Freebourne*


^34
MASQUERADES} or
To Lord Osmond.
ASTEN to your father, my dear friend, who is impatient to be rccon-
in one cordial em-
biiry
and
to hear from vour
¥
If ever man was he clafps his hands
ciled to you—to brace all injuries, lips that he is forgiven, repentant, the Duke is-in an agony of defpair; he weeps, and execrates his late criminal conduX—he fays you mufl: inceffantly pour curfes on his guilty head, and that eternity has prepared tortures to compleat the vengeance you demand on him. He views the calamity he has met with, as a chaftifement from heaven for the unjuft part he was aXing towards you ; and declares the pains he feels are nothing to thofe he ftiall encounter after death, fide.
What would I not give Sir Charles, cried he, “ to fee my fon arms! forth
Juft now he called me to his

to expire in his But I am unworthy of that com-Death will have finiftied my miferable
WHAT YOUWI L L.
235
rable courfe, ere the arniable boy can be informed of my condition.”
I told him you were in London, and would immediately obey his fummons.
In London do you fay—is he fo near?
•-------------And now my coward heart
fails at the thought of beholding him---
(4
Oh, Sir Charles! when I muft be quickly hurried hence to account for the murder of a wife, how can I bear to meet the gentle reproaches of that wife, in the face of her Harry ?—His eyes, fo like my ill fated Laura’s, will dart ten thoufand poniards to my foul—they will upbraid me with the cruelty fhe experienced from me—they will upbraid me with ftretching my inhumanity towards her beyond the grave, in alienating my affeXions from her fon—in abandoning him to the calamities of the world—nay, in feeking to deprive him of the little Ihad
no right to keep from him
Plungin
or
t3
into futurity, all my crimes ftand confeffed to my fight:—my Laura’s fufferings—the unnatural part I have aXed in refpeX of my child—my only child, lie heavy on my confcience—and the remembrance of my brutal converfation. Sir Charles, the laft
time

MASQUERADES; or
/
time I faw you, fills up the meafure of my
I can have no confolation—Let
defpair
hell gape ac once and fwallow me —I will not fee Ofmond
I can-
not
difclaims me I
55
he certainly
I endeavoured to compofe him—I afked if he had ever found you of a vindiXive turn ? He interrupted me
I have always found him generous and noble ; but he has now fuch repeated injuries to look back on, that I dare not hope for his pardon. You beft know his difpofition—with lhame I own, that I was ever uneafy in his prefence, and kept him fun-dered from me as much as poflible. His countenance fo ftrongly reprefents his fainted mother’s, that it continually reminded me of my bafe treatment of her.”
I offered many arguments to obviate his objeXion, and begged him to allow me to fend for you. Freebourne, who was by, fell on his knees---
“ For the love of God, my Lord,
“ do
9)
ex-
claimed he with energy, “do not deny yourfelf the happinefs of feeing the Marquis !
turn me that minute from your
fervice.
proach
_ -----^ ^ _ __ ---------^
If his features exprefs the leaft re-
WHAT YOU WILL.
337
Send direXly, Sir
fervice, loaden wich every indignity that can be thought of. Your Grace muft be indeed a ftranger to him, if you fufpeX his tendernefs!”
“ I wiffi more than I can mention to fee my fon, but I am afraid of him. Sir Charles and you fay I have no reafon, from his benevolence—I will then throw afide my ap-prehenfions, and give myfelf up to the pleafure of expeXing him.
Charles ; and tell him, as be hopes to fee me alive, to make hafte to Belfont—I to clafp him in my arms—to let loofe my forrow, my repentance on his bofom.”
You may judge, my deareft Ofmond, with what joy I retired to obey him.-—The Duke is dangeroufly ill *, the gout has attacked his ftomach, and his leg was fo vilely mifmanaged, as not to have been fet till
A------- did it, which from the violent fwell-
ing was a moft difficult talk to effeX, and an operation painful enough, I think, to have killed him in his prefent fituation,
I hope that you make yourfelf no further reproaches—How were you acceffary to the misfortune? You knew nothing of
the
238
MASQUERADES; or.
the matter, till after the Duke left town ; and if Budenall and Frederick fought to promote your intereft, can you be blamed whilft you were ignorant of the meafures they adopted for that purpofe ? I will be be hanged, if either of them have a fcruple on the occafion. They will tell you, your father had no bufinefs to make himfelf ridiculous, by purfuing a young girl who evinced fuch an averfion to him—that they meant to do him a fervice, and prevent his head from refembling AXson’s—and a hundred other reafons that I think not bad. —Let things go as they wiil, you are rid of a mother-in-law for the prefent. Lord Davenport arrived too late in Scot*-land to hinder the validity of his daughter’s marriage—He returned direXly, pafled half an hour at Belfont, in which time he deplored his fate moft ruefully. He merits the trick (he played him for conftraining her to aX fo oppofitely to her inclinations. He has juft driven from the gate, and you may probably meet him, as he does not return with fo much expedition as he came down.
I muft
WHAT YOU WILL.
239
ft*
I muft write two lines to my Louifa, and the exprefs waits. I am, my dear Ofmond,
Truly yours,
Charles Montague#
To Lady Westbrook.
w
Wednefday, two o'clock,
HEN you have read the two enclofed letters which; by Lord )fmond’s defire, and Sir Charles Monta-ue’s, I fend for your. Lady Caroline’s, and Sir James’s perufal, you will not be furprifed, dear Emily, at hearing that the Marquis has juft fet out for Peterborough, On receiving his friend’s fummons, he ordered his chaife.—He was much affiiXed at
* The two preceding letters
Che
24G
M A S QU ERAD ESj; or
the Duke’s fituation. When he bade me adieu,
“ I never knew till within thefe three days, Lady Lquifa,” cried he, “ how dear he is to me-----My unhappy father 1—-I re-
gret my paft: impatience towards you mofl; felnfibly.”
Ah, what has not the Duke lofl, by depriving himfelf of the fociety of this unparagon’d young man !
Lady Mortimer, and Julia, have promifed to occupy places in my box this evening at Drury-Lane. ^ Almeria is confined by a flight indifpofition, and Lady Pemberton flays at home wich her. I am to call on our fweet friend, and #rry her to the play-houfe.
As foon as I hear from Belfont, I will write again. In the mean while, believe me. dear Ladv Weftbrook.
Much yours,
Louisa Montague.

X	\

WHAT YOU WILL.
241
To Lady Westbrook.
A quarter after twelvei
SLEEP is baniffied from my eyes, and I muft bnfy myfelf in making you a partaker of my happinefs—I went early to Portman-Square; and, defirous of enquiring after Almeria, left my carriage, and was ffiewn into the eating-room, where I found only Lady Pemberton and her two daughters. I perceived they were acquaint-ed with the accident which had befallen the Duke, and with his dangerous fituation, but ignorant of Sir Charles’s having been fent for. I mentioned nothing of it even to Julia.
how to aX, and I thought it would make no difference, if ffie remained in the dark a few hours—befides, to fay a truth, I was afraid to truft myfelf on the fubjeX, left by fome unguarded word I might let drop a hint that the Marquis was in England; and J dreaded nothing fo much, well knowing what commotion I ffiould raife in her breaft.
Sir Charles had given me no direXions
Vol. IV,
M
and
ft
242
MASQUERADES; or
and how feverely I ffiould be chid for my duplicity with her.'
We were ftepping into the coach, when Lord Pemberton and Mr. Montague walked to the door.
“ Where is Sir Charles, Lady Louifa cried my Lord.
“ He left town a few days ago,” replied I* Iffiat is curfedly unlucky 1”
“ Do you want him, my Lord ?”
I was in hopes he would have gone to Peterborough, and prevailed on Weftmorland to be reconciled to his fon— Ofmond is unfortunate—I fear the Duke will keep hjs word.”
“ No doubt of it!—why ffiould he not exemplify as much firmnefs in his refolutions as you do? Inflexibility is one of your virtues, Lord Pemberton—here is an inftance of the fame ffiining quality in another; pray admire it!—If pity is foreign to the Duke’s nature, Sir Charles’s rhetoric would be loft on him.
He looked abaffied, but tried to turn my words into ridicule. The gentlemen entered the houfe, and we proceeded to the theatre. During our drive, Julia con-denined herfelf inceffantly for not admitting
3>
WHAT YOU WILL. 243
ting of Lord Ofmond’s return, when he fupplicated that favour
His prefence at fuch a feafon might be very neceffary,” cried	but with the
beft intentions in the world, I am always wrong!”
' I faid, I was convinced the Duke would do nothing contrary to the intereft cf Lord Ofmond. She wept and replied, it would have been happy for him, had they never met.
Lady Mortimer and Lady Seymour were in the box, when we entered it. Lord Seymour and Mr. Bifhop came to us foon after, and placed themfelves on each fide of me. As I fat immediately behind Lady Mortimer, I had an opportunity of telling her, in a fhort whifper, that Ofmond was gone down to Belfont, at his father’s requeft.
“ ThankGod !”exclaimed fhe : “I fuppofe, then. Sir Charles will be back immediately— hear”------
this night perhaps—I long to
‘I obferved that Julia looked at us with a penetrating eye—I drew off, and prevented further difcourfe on the fubjeX. Lady
M 2	Mortimer
244
MASQUERADES; or
Mortimer took the hint—1 heard her fay, in a low voice to Julia,
' “ What! a doleful countenance fiill ?
You perceive fome of my wiflies concerning the Duke have at length happily taken effeX—may you not naturally conclude that the others I have formed will be crowned with equal fuccefs r”
At the end of the third aX the door opened—judge of my furprize at feeing Sir Charles Montague flep into the box—I am fure, if thofe around took notice of my face, they mufl have fuppofed that he deteXed me in fomething not right. I could not help faying, “ Good God I what is the matter ?” He flole his finger to his mouth,
I underftood the fign, and was filent. Lady Mortimer, no doubt, was anxious to fpeak with him; but, left fhe fhould alarm her .Tiller, afllimed an air of compofure, and endeavoured to carry her attention to the oppofite boxes, by fome remarks fhe made. Sir Charles caught an inftant without being overheard, to tell me not to be uneafy—
- that he had delightful news for me—and enquired if my friend knew of his journey to Belfonp f I replied in the negative.
Two
\
WHAT YOU WI LL.
HS
%
Two minutes after, Julia laid, the pleafure of feeing him was unexpeXed—that I had informed her he was abfent from London.
I am but juft returned to it,” anfwei-ed he.->“ This is fad weather for the country, my Lord,” addreffing himfelf to Seymour :	“ even Surry looks miferably as
you travel through it !”
Sir Charles took his feat behind me, and, on Lord Seymour’s leaving the box (tojoin fome Ladies with whom he remained till the play was nearly over), leaned his head pretty clofe to my ear, and fpoke as follows :
“ SoPiie hours after I had fent av/ay the exprefs to Olmond, 1 perceived that the Duke became very wretched. He at one time avowed great apprehenfion of his fon’s refufing to approach him—he bewailed the occafion he had given him for doing fO, and worked himfelf into an agony that I really thought wouid terminate his exift-ence* From this notion, he fell into another that difturbed him equally. He declared Ofmond was too humane to rejeX
M 3	the
246
MASQUERADES; or
the fummons of a dying parent, however vile that parent’s conduX had been—
he,
“ Yes he will come. Sir Charles,
C4
cried
to him ?
but in what manner (hall I look up
The innumerable wrongs I have
heaped upon him will rulh through brain—thev will
my
opprefs my heart, and, before I can pronounce a petition for pardon—I fhali be no more.-------Oh, muft:
not Ofmond think that I am only frightened at the horrors of death—that, were life lent me a little longer, I fhould again re-lapfe —Montague, you know not all the cruelty I have praXifed towards him—you know not what caufe he has to defpife me nor how juftly I defpair of conciliating his affeXion in my laft moments !”
“ I ftrove to appeafe his mind. All I urged had no effeX—his confliXs were infup-portable.
“ Could I compenfate m any fhape. Sir Charles, for what is paft, I would convince him how fincere is my repentance—then fhould I without torture behold my fon—but ic is not in my power, and I muft fubmit to
the moft dreadful fate a man can brook—I
mufl:
WHAT YOU WILL.
m
muft fee him, whom I have injured, trying through mere charity to adminifter eonfo-latibn to me—-I muft receive that favour at his hands, and be debarred the fatisfaXion
Can leaving
of repaying his goodnefs---
him my eftates demonftrate any tendernefs
Weft-make
Will not Ofmond fay, “ Unworthy morland !—the fortune you could no further ufe of—rather than beftow it on fome wretched foundling, you bequeathed to your fon”—he will marry the angel Julia, and carry to his bridal bed this refleXion from my unnatural father’s diflToludon
fprings my happinefs!
Oh, Ofmond!
that you could read what pafles this moment in that father’s heart 1”
“ He turned away his head, and I from the b_ed*~ In dOout a couple of hours rie called me to him, “ Montague, the Almighty, in compaflion, has infpired me with a thought that affords comfort—‘Perhaps, if I make conceffiuns to the Pemberton’s if I humbly entreat them to beftow Lady Julia on my Henry, they will forget the feuds which have fubfifted between us, and affent to my requeft!” “ Indeed, my Lord,” cried 1, “ 1 think it very probable
M 4	"“try
24$
od
i	.	.
. •• try at leaft. If your Grace fucceeds, you
will more than recompenfe the Marquis for ail he has endured. Had he pafled years of llavery—had he gone through the fe-vereft hardftiips this life is fubjeX to, and at length obtained fuch a creature as Julia Herbert, he would poflfefs a treafure equivalent to his fufferings.”
“ I am too fen Able, Montague,” replied he, “ of the infuit I gave her in permitting the generous, difinterefted letter ihe
o
fent
me
to go unnoticed
O
Oh, that her family may fuffer me to atone for it !”
“ I was aftoniilaed, and begged him to explain himfelf—He defired Freebourne to
bring him his pocket-book—The Duke opened ir, cinA put a letter (which I have about me, and will ftiew you ar
venient time)into my hands. The characters were Julia’s. I read it with a good deal of furprize, and faid I wifhed to be allowed to keep it a few days for your perufal—he anfwered 1 was at liberty to do fo.
“ Is not fuch a girl,” demanded his Grace, “ who can facrifice her paffion for the welfare of the man ftie loves, deferving of happinefs.^—What a brute have I been !
Mon-
WHAT YOU WILL. 249
—Montague, I might yet die in peace, CQuld I fee her the wife of Ofmond—to
—inftead of
• i
have my children in my arms—
to receive their thanks
Great
reproaches,
God! what a change fliould I experience from my prefent feelings !—Sweet Julia I in form and mind you are unparalleled in truth—
and only Ofmond is entitled to call
55

you his !
He ordered implements for writing to be brought to him, and with great difficulty he penned a letter to Lady Dowager Pemberton, When he had finifhed,
cried
“ Now, Sir Charles,
55
he,
(<
give
me an inftance of your friendfhip—fet off
direXly for London—if you meet Ofmond, infift on his returning with you—tell him I
command him not come to Belfont, till I
can bear his prefence with fome degree of compofure—affure him that my whole
heart is his—but that, unlefs he brings with
him an angel of peace, who fliall be my in-
terceffor, his approach muft be dreadful to
me
Tender this letter to Lady Pem-
berton—exert all your influence with her
to read it, and to grant me the bleffing I follicit—affaii her humanity, my friend, wish
Ms
fuppli;
\
2SO
MASQUERADE Si or
fupplications—conjure her to refleX how neceflary to her daughter’s felicity it is, that (he fliould yield to your perfuafion^— Convince Lord Pemberton that I would write to entreat his concurrence alfo—but that I am exhaufted from the effort I have made in addrefling Lady Pemberton—Defire Harry to plead his own caufe—-If they objeX to having the nuptial ceremony performed without previoufly determining about fettlements, and executing marriage-deeds ; let Ofmond leave with them carte blanche, to be filled Pemberton pleafes
as
a
Lord
up
They may think it right to have my fignature as well as my fon’s at the bottom, fiiPDofing 1
bottom, fuppofing -that Doint ftiall
might
recover—tnat point inaii produce no delay.”
“ Again the Duke took up a pen, and wrote his name on a fheet of paper—he prefented it to me—
“ Give this to Harry—it may help to aflure him that my repentance is fincere. On you, my kind, compaflionate friend, I depend for comfort. Montague, fuffer me to embrace my fon and daughter in cight-and-forty hours^-J can allow you no
more
what YOU WILt;
more time .-—— and yet hosy can I expeX it 1—The hour is unfeafonable for travelling—Freebourne, what o’clock is it ?” . “ He anfwered, Someibing after two,
“ Ah!” cried the Duke, “ I have already interfered greatly with yourfiepofe retire to reft. Sir Charles, for the prefentj, and go on your charitable errand to gratify a dying old man at eight or nine o’clock.
I will, as fervently as I can, befeech Heaven to prolong my exiftence till you
return.
5>
I told him I did not require reft, and would depart immediately, if I could geE poft-horfcs from the town*
“ Freebourne faid there would be much time loft before it could be done—that he would recommend to me to go to bed» promifing that my chaife fliould be ready -by feven o’clock*
“ I went into DoXor W—’s apartment, and, after fome apologies for difturbing him, begged he would inform me whether he thought the Duke could live three days ?
“ He alTured me, that, though he was fa ill as to leave him in doubt of bis recovery,
M 6	he

aji MASQ_UERADESi on,
he faw no immediate danger of death; but rather fuppofed, from the natural ftrength. of his conftitution, that his complaints would find fubjeX to work upon for many days. “ Was his mind lefs agitated. Sir Charles,” cried he, “ I fhould have hopes of him ; but, torn as he is by tumultuous affeXions, all remedies lofe their power, and his diforder is irritated.”
“ Freebourne was faithful to his word: at the appointed hour my chaife was ready. Before I left Belfont I entered the Duke’s chamber; Dr. W. had juft quitted it. His Grace reached out his hand to me. “ I find myfelf refreftied, dear Montague, faid he, “ I have had fome fleep. W.
99
fleep.
thinks my fever lefs violent; and I prefume to truft: that I fhall fee my children
to-morrow night
Dear Sir Charles, let
me not be difappointed. Again I repeat, all my reliance is on your friendfhip,”
“ I told him I would do all that man could to accomplifh his defire ; and entreated he would keep his fpirits compofed, and reft fatisfied in the idea of enjoying for many years the fociety of Ofmond and his Julia. 1 bade him adieu-
ftepped
w
Y O U W
253
ftepped into the carriage, and began my
journey.
“ I met Ofmond near Hatfield.
You
may fuppofe he paid implicit obedience to his father’s commands, and returned to town with me on the commiffion we were fent, without mudi reluXance. We drove to Cumberland-ftreet, and changed our
apparel
The fervants fold us you were
----Ofmond and I
juft gone to the play-----
iagreed, that it: would be beft: he fiiould remain at our houfe, till I difcovered what fuccefs our enterprize would have. He was apprehenfive only of giving Julia occafion to regret his unexpeXed appearance, fliould her friends continue inexorable ; as it would ferve to renew all her fufferings, and might reduce her to the fituation (he was in at Windfor. Hence you will know, that we were ignorant of her being of your party.
, “ I luckily found Lord Pemberton in
_	^	f
Portman-fquare, and no ftranger prefent (I cannot call Frederick Montague one), I delivered my embaffy, and was beyond my hopes mofl: gracioufly received. I
could
5154
MASQUERADES; or
could fcarcely credit my fenfes, when I heard Pemberton exclaim.
By Heaven I am rejoiced! ihall yet be happy!” He follicited his mother in my friend’s behalf with an energy that furpaifed mine. Lady Pemberton faid, as the Duke was fo fuppliant—Julia fo much attached to the Marquis—and he really fo every way deferving of her, Ihe could offer no further objeXion to their union. Pemberton afked where Lord Ofmond was ?
At my houfe,” faid I, “ waiting in all the torture of fufpence.”
“ Let us haften to him,” cried he; “ but I muft give orders. Madam, that your Ladyfhip fhould be denied to every one who comes—Suffolk—the unfortunate Suffolk; will probably be at your door
CC
CC
this evening.
Pray inform me. Sir Charles,” laid Lady Pemberton, “ who was the maik that attended my daughter fo clofely on the night of your ball
“ Lord Ofmond, Madam,” replied I: “ Lady Julia, believed him a ftr^anger to her.”
“ Perhaps
WHAT YOU WILL.
255
“ Perhaps fhe was not fo credulous as you imagined !’* exclaimed her Ladyfhip laughing: “ you and I, my friend, have a long account to fettle when we arc more at leifure—but haften, Pemberton, to the Marquis, and conduX him hither.”
“ A few minutes carried us to Cumber-land-ftreet—We found Ofmond with Lord
Beaumont, whether
who had called
to enquire
you had received any tidings from me, and was endeavouring to infpire his companion with confidence; for our friend had acquainted him with the manner in which he was circumftanced.
“ I congratulate you,” cried my Lord, on our entrance: “ I forefee good news here is the brother of your Julia I”
“ Pemberton flew to Ofmond, and embraced him—he begged he would pardon his late behaviour, and grant him his friendfhip as frankly as he witb pleafure gave Julia to his arms. Never did I behold any one more am,azed than the Marquis—he feemed torpid for fome feconds at laft, recovering himfelf, he expreffed many acknowledgments to Lord Pemberton for fuch a proof of efteem, gnd aflure.d
hini
25^
MASQUERADES; or
him he Ihould ever find him zealous to promote Lady Julia’s happinefs, and de-
of his Lordfhip’s regard. He
ferving
afked if he might not be permitted to attend Lady Julia ^
“ You muft check your inmatience a little,” replied Pemberton : “ fne is gone to the play with Lady Louifa Montague; but my mother is anxious to embrace your Lordfhip.”
“My uncle aiccompanied us back to Port-
man-fquare
Lady Pemberton met Ofmond with the tendernefs due to one who is foon to become her fon.—She entreated him to impute her paft refufal of his alliance to the ridiculous pique that fubfifted between the Duke and her family, which’ from his Grace’s example fhe blufhed to refleX on. The Marquis poured forth an effufton of gratitude for her kindnefs, that affeXed her not a little.
You have all aXed,’ to the Duke’s fatisfaXion part.
and his fair bride to-morrow night laft; words to me were, “ Montague, let me not be difappointed.” Lady Pemberton
cried T, “ much -now comes my H is Grace hopes to behold Ofmond
—his
w
YOU W
257
r	'	'	*
ton—my Lord-—^-do you not wifh that he fliould lee his fon in his dying moments ? And yet he will deny himfelf that comfort, unlefs he fees a daughter at the fame time. Is it neceffary, that to wait the tedious cuftom of making new cloaths, new furniture, befpeaking jewels, equipages, and a catalogue of nonfenfical vanities, a man’s laft hour fliould be rendered miferable
“ By no means, they faid—they would do whatever lay in their power to gratify the Duke.
“ Ofmond thanked them gracefully*, and, prefenting the paper his father and himfelf had figned to Pemberton, told him, thar,
drawing marriage-articles would require more time than could be given on fo prefting an occafion, he muft beg the favour of his Lordlhip to have that paper fillcd-lB-a manaer confonant to Lady Julia’s intereft, and only implored he wouid keep in remembrance that his father poffeffed a very large fortune. When he returned to London, he meant, in the formal method.
to have
writings
executed which ftiould
ratify the terms his name ftood to.
“Lord Pemberton alked his mother to
allow
\
Sj8
MASQUERADES} ett

allow him to tranfaX that bufinefs according to his inclination ?
Certainly !” (he anfwered.
“ Pardon me, my Lord,
“ for what I do—.....but thus I
CC
52
cried
the paper”—and he threw it into the fire. “ There is nothing that might not be left to the honour of a man, who would willingly have given up fuch a fortune as the Duke’s to have gained Julia—No more on this head—make in your own time what fettlement you pleafe 1”
“ Your generofity, dear Pemberton,” exclaimed Ofinond, “ is very noble : and I (hall certainly demonftrate my affeXion lor Lady Julia in a way that her friends muft approve—Will your Ladyfhip then permit me to hope (with her confent) that I (hall introduce her to my father as his
>5
daughter to-morrow night ?”
“ Moft readily, my Lord I
—He kiffed her hand
anfwered
Lady Pemberton—
“ Return, dear Madam, the fame reply to another fupplication, and my happinefs will furpafs a mortal’s—Prevail on Julia to let the ceremony be performed this evening
i
w
YOU W
mg
a
jy
a licence can be procured, and Clergyman in waiting, againft (he returns.
“ Oh, thou unconfcionable creature!” exclaimed Lady Pemberton.
muft perceive the
perceive we can fet out
Your Ladyfhip neceflity of my requeft early to-morrow for Belfont ; otherwife our journey will be greatly delayed
Pemberton, is the Bilhop of W-----
town ? I am fure he will gladly attend on
Lord
in
Will
fo joyful an occaflon pany me to him
“ With all my heart,” replied Pemberton: “ I faw him this very day, and hope we fhall find him at home.” Ofmond fnatched up his hat, and was eager to be gone: but Lady Pemberton interfered, and declared that nine o’clock to-morrow morning would be time enough for the performance of the ceremony—they might fet out immediately afterwards, and reach Belfont with great eafe at night, travelling poft, and making no delay on the road.
“ Ofmond afked, if he might prefume to; beg of her Ladyfhip and Lady Almeria to go down with them ? She regretted that it was not in their power, alleging that iU-
meria
26o
MASQUERADE S; dR
meria was too much indifpofed to leave home, and fhe could not quit her. He expreffed infinite concern at being deprived of fuch a pleafure, and at the occafion of it. He turned to Pemberton, and made him the like entreaty: he anfwered, he would have the honour to attend him. “ My good Lord Beaumont,” cried the Marquis, you have often fought to alarm me, by owning yourfelf my rival—yet I am bold enough to wifh that your Lordihip’s regard for Lady Julia may never de-creafe—and that I may find her power Efficient to induce you to accompany us to Peterborough.”
“ You are a fine fellow truly !
Lord Beaumont: “
’ replied and fo you defire that I fhould die with envy !—
I mufl; be excufed—take
No, no, Ofmond, her from me at
once, or you may have caufe to dread the effeXs of fo ardent, fo
of fo ardent, fo youthful a paflion as mine.”
“ On Ofmond’s urging his petition, he told him ferioufly, he could not be fo happy, as he was obliged' on Friday to go down to Bagfhot for a week.
“ My deareft Frederick,” faid the Marquis,
WHAT YOU WILL.
261
quls, taking his hand, “ you were my companion in affliXion—never fhall I forget the trouble I gave you—nor your humanity let me hope that you will alfo be a witnefs of my joy, and make one in our party tomorrow.”
“ I will fee you married, my Lord,” cried Frederick; “ that gratification I muft have —but you know how I am circumftanced, and that it is impoffible for me to leave town at prefent.”
“ Pemberton and Ofmond propofed departing in queft of the Bilhop, and a licence.
/
“ We (hall find you here on our return, Montaguecried Pemberton.
“ Not unlefs you ftay a great while,” faid I.
“ We mail take a hackney-coach,” anfwered he, “ and make the fellow drive as if he was efcaping from the devil. I would not have Julia come in our abfence for a thoufand pounds. Should fhe dofo, I implore that no perfon may inform her of what has happened. She thinks I have behaved cruelly in this affair—let me embrace the opportunity to re-inftate myfelf in her affeXions
N
262 MASQUERADES; or,
feXions, by furprizing her with the felicity
that awaits her-But where are you
To join the Ladies “ There it is !—
39
going. Sir Charles “ at the play,” replied I. you will deftroy my fcheme.
“ Not I—I fliall tell her nothing—allow
me however to acquaint my wife”----—
“ Aye, and fhe will acquaint Julia.”
“ You are miftaken—ftie can keep a fecret.”
. “ Swear, then, upon your honour, that Julia fliall not through your means arrive at the leaft knowledge of Ofmond’s being in London, or of our having confented to their marriage.”
“ I did as he defired; and we fallied forth on our different errands, leaving Lady Pemberton, Almeria, Lord Beaumont, and Frederick, fitting down to whift.”
The fourth aX was nearly over when Sir Charles finifhed—At the conclufion of it. Lady Mortimer leaned back, and with a farcaftic countenance afked him what he thought of the performance he had been fpeXator to ? He laughed—“ I hope the dencument will be happy. Sir Charles ?”
cried fhe, “ I cherifh that hope, my Ladv,”
«
/
WHAT YOU WILL. 263
dy,” he anfwered : “ I called in Portman-fquare an hour ago, and my Lady Pemberton defired I would beg the favour of your Ladyfhip to return with Lady Julia and my wife to fupper there.”
“1 cannot, indeed {” faid fhe—“my Lord expeXs three gentlemen to fpend the evening with him, and he will be difappointed, if I do not affift to entertain them— mifed not to wait the farce.”
I pro-
The play was no fooner ended, than one of her fervants announced ac the box-door, that her chair was ready#, Mr, Bifhop prefented his hand, and led her out. As fhe pafled us, I overheard Sir Charles tell her, not to retire early, for he would vifit her and Lord Mortimer before he refted.—I was very impatient to be gone; and felt much fatisfaXion when Lady Seymour declared, that there was fuch confufion in getting away from Drury-Lane on a full night, that Ihe never ftaid till the houfe broke up. Lord Seymour went out to fee for their carriage mine had been ordered very foon, and I afked Julia if fhe was extremely follicitous to fee the Wedding-Ring ?—elfe we would
retire
264 M A S QU E R A D E S J o R,
retire then. She affured me, that flie was willing to attend me whenever I pleafed.
As we were returning, Julia enquired of Sir Charles, whether he had heard any account of the Duke ?
“ Only that he is dangeroufly ill,” cried he: “ his fituation muft be deplorable I
think!”
He waved the fubjeX—which I dare fay furprized, and mortified her. When the coach ftopped in Portman-fquare, how was I agitated U—The door opened, and Lord Pemberton flew to hand us out.
“ Have you fucceeded, my Lord demanded Sir Charles.
“ To my heart’s content!” replied Pemberton: “ I am not ten minutes arrived.”
“ Is any thing the matter brother?” cried Julia.
4C
No, my dear.”
As we entered the hall, fhe exclaimed,
“ I am convinced that fome ftrange affair has happened !—Why did you run out of the houfe fo precipitately to meet us ?— Perhaps my mother—or Almeria”—Be
at reft, they are both well
I was eager to
inform
WHAT YOU WILL. 265
99
44
5>
inform you that-----Mournies has eloped
with a countryman of hers.—Let us go up ftairs; Lady Pemberton will give you the whole ftory.
Lord, brother, how abfurd I “ You Will be peevilh, Julia,” cried he,i as we afcended, no doubt, when you perceive who is impatiently waiting for you in the drawing-room.
99
44
The Duke of Suffolk, I fuppofe !
44
but I lhall preferve my temper by avoiding him.”
Upon my foul, you fhall not!—call me tyrannical—unfeeling—what you pleafe —I have been ufed to thofe epithets from you—and will hear them once more. After this night, I fhall moleft you no further.
99
She was making to her apartment led her back----
but he
“ Do noc be perverfe, Julia—I fwear by all that is facred, I will conduX your lover to your dreffing-room, if you fly thither!”
She blufhed wich anger, and told him, he was certainly very cruel!
“ Aye, aye, I knew it”—he threw open
“ and now for the
the drawing-room door yoL. IV.	N
Vb   ---■. ■
reftj

I
266 M A S QU E R A D E S J OR,
reft, harbarcus, tyrannical"-She liftened
not to him—her attention was engrofled by another objeX.—Emily, what pen can deferibe her appearance when (he faw Ofmond at her feet!—mine muft fail in the attempt—Aftoniftiment-—joy—fear, were blended in her countenance, and, beautifully as I have feen her look, (he was then
.1	emotions
more charming than ever, of her foul were too violent
(he fainted
and gave us great caufe to think that the jeft had been carried far enough to turn our delight into grief—it was fo difficult a tafle to recover her, that at one time I really imagined her breath had flown for ever. Lady Pemberton was dreadfully alarmed— Lord Pemberton execrated his ridiculous folly—and Ofmond feemed within one degree only of diftraXion—The reft of us were flying backwards and forwards to get volatiles, drops, &c. &c. &c. fcarcely knowing what we ordered, or brought for her
relief---Confufion never reigned more
triumphantly than it did this evening in Portman-fquare for more than a quarter of an hour. At length we were reftored to peace—ftie opened her eyes, and, on finding
WHAT YOU WILL. j.67
ing herfelf in the arms of her Henry ex-
claimed,	^ ’
“ My friends are implacable—your father has my prornife—Emily writes that Sedley is no afTiimed name—Sedley then is a falfe friend !—trufl: him no more, my deareft Ofmond !”
Sir Charles forced the Marquis to retire with him, that fhe might have time to calm her fpirits, and be informed of their happinefs—and that he might regain a fhare of compofure, for he was exceedingly affeXed. In a few minutes fhe became tranquil, and Lord Pemberton cautioufly acquainted her with the circumftances that
—fhe raifed herfelf from the
had happened fofa on which fhe was reclined
—fhe clafped
her hands, and with an edifying fervour returned thanks to Heaven.
On Lord Ofmond’s entrance, ihe ftood up with ineffable grace to receive him He preffed her to his bofom. “ I have betrayed great weaknefs, my Lord,” cried fhe •, “ but I have been indifpofed—I am eafily overcome”—He interrupted her, and begged ftie would not by apologies deftroy
N 2	the
368
MASQUERADES; or
the happinefs he felt in thinking that her agitation arofe from affeXion.
Lord Pemberton told her there was no delaying the ceremony that was to confirm her Ofmond’s beyond the next morning. She looked fhocked—“ Surely, not to-, morrow, my Lord!” exclaimed fhe;—“ you cannot mean it ffiould be performed tomorrow !”
“ To-morrow indeed, my Julia !” cried the Marquis—” For Heaven’s fake do not refufe ! Confider the condition my father
—de-
ls in—every moment how precious !-ny not the dying requeft of my father ! His unfortunate fituation,
55
affeXs me fenfibly
my Lord, but do not let us ffied
tears of forrow on our marriage^—A wedding and a funeral ffiould never be paired !
Tell the Duke we cannot think of bap., pinefs whilft he is in mifery—that reafon jBuft be grateful to himl”
“ The prefent hours are propitious—if we do not profit of them, we may never again find fuch—Should my father live (and I fincerely hope he will), he may once
more be cruel—You know he is-capricious
and
I

WHAT YOU WILL.
26^
^and having a petition he fo humbly, fo ardently implores, rejeXed, muft offend him it will probably dilpofe him to revoke his prefent good intentions/*
She faid ffie had no fears of the fort, and appealed to Lady Pemberton whether it would not be better to wait a month oe two ?—Ofmond fhewed fome impatience he exclaimed, “ Good God, Lady Julia, a month or two!" He feemed afraid of Lady Pemberton’s anfwer; however, Ihe foon relieved him.
CC
CC
My dear,” cried her Ladyfliip, •- you are yet to learn, that, unlefs you accompany your friend to Belfont, his father will not fee him ; which is an indifputable argument for your compliance—But, were you exempt from this obligation, fure ic would be the height of barbarity noc to gratify a dying perfon who wilhes to have the comfort of atoning for a fault 1—I will mention another reafon, that, no doubt, mull carry fufficient weight with you—If your nuptials are poftponed, the unhappy Suffolk, on finding that Lord Ofmond is returned, will be outrageous—^Much diftrefs will he occafion you—We fhall hear every
N
3
day
M.ASQU ERADESj or,
day of fome new quarrel, till at length that one of them has dropped—When you are Lady Ofmond, he can have no further hopes, and will through neceffity then be at reft.”
\
This had a better effeX on her than any —She Was filent--- ,
thing
CC
Indeed, my fweet Julia,” faid Lord Beaumonf, ” you deviate a little from your own fenfible charaXer in making one
oblige the
objeXion—Why reluXant to man you love, and whofe tried attachment to you demands every requital you can beftow ?”
We
55
exclaimed
her brother, “ to prevail on her to confent with pleafure—confent fhe pofitively muft He is in poffeffion of the licence, and the Bifhop of W. has promifed to be here at nine o’clock to-morrow morning. Let ns go down ftairs where a collation is wait-
If they clnife fupper, they will join
mg
us i but when I was a lover, 1 had fcarcely any appetite;”
We repaired to the eating-room—dumb waiters were placed, and the fervants dift miffed. Lady Pemberton regretted her
brother’s
WHAT YOU WILL;
271
borough.
O
brother’s abfence from London at this crifis# I blefled the circumftance, as a favour ordained by Providence, though I durft not fay fo. Her Ladyfliip alfo regretted, that file was unable to attend Julia to Peter-
“ To own the truth, I have always been taught to look on the Duke as fo terrible a man,” cried Almeria, “ that, if I was vvell enough to accompany my fifter, I believe I fhould imagine myfelf carried to the houfe of a great giant—and ftiould expeX to be devoured every inftant —1 can never—never be cordial to him !’*
I
“ This is the misfortune of an early prejudice !” cried Lady Pemberton. ” You muft conquer it; or 1 fliall appear culpable in my own eyes, for having given rife to ic.—I am diitrefled about my poor Julia— to go down without a female companion
“ Louifa,” faid Almeria, ” you are not afraid of the Duke; I beg you will pay him a vifit Vv^ith Julia !”
9
I anfwered that I would very readily; but Sir Charles declared, he was apprehenfive of my travelling fo far with the expedition they would be obliged to ufe—to fay nothing of the difagreeable fcene that per-
N
4
haps
M2
MASQUERADES; oR,
I
haps awaited them at Belfont.
C4
The
i’»
Duke’s death/’ added Sir Charles, “ might afford a fpeXacle I could wilh Louifa to avoid in her prefent fituation.”
“ The fame reafon holds good in refpeX of my wife,” returned Lord Pemberton: “ there is no neceffity that either of them fhould be expofed to danger—I am fure my fifter would not defire it!”
“ That I am convinced of,” replied Lady Pemberton. “ Perhaps Caroline will
“ What, leave her little William, Madam ?—Oh no 1 if fhe does, fhe will prove her affeXion for Julia to be great indeed !”
In lefs than half an hour Lord Ofmond came down with a much happier countenance than ever I faw him wear.
“ Well,” cried Pemberton, ” have yqu prevailed ?”
”, To-morrow makes me bleft !” he ex-
0
claimed.
\ _________________
“ And where is Julia ?”
” Retired to her apartment-- I have with difficulty detained her even this ffiort while from ir.”
I left the table, and went up to her. I
found
w
YOU W
Mt
found her giving Mournies orders for their
^	O	O	V
journey.
“ And is it true, Ledy Louife,”^ pried fhe, “ dat we are going to de Due de
.Weftmorlond’s ?”
“ Aye,” faid I ; “ your Lady will be married to-morrow to Lord Ofmond—to the man, Mournies, who has eaufed fo much difturbance to this family—who was
\
wat ftrange rrews I
ry
held in abhorrence yefterday by Lord and Lady Pemberton I “ Saint jofeph!
hear—Pauvre my Lor Due de Suffolk ! wat you get by your fighting, I wonder Why, I believe, you are difappointed that Ihe is not to wed Suffolk,, inftead of Ofmond!
• ” Oh, mon Dieu, Madame, no f—Der^ is good caufe wy I no like de Due”'—She turned to Julia; ” Come,, come, wat for ^ —you cry becaufe you no marry my Lor Ofmond—^fure you don’t cry now becaufe you do marry him !—Well, I am ver glad. —he is, un brave cavalier, and. ver pretty too!”
Julia could not help fmiling—I would have engaged her in difcourfe (which fs the
N. 5
274
MASQUERADES; or
delight of my heart) for fome time, but Julia bade her difpatch the direXions fhe had given her, and fhe went into the next room.—My amiable friend and I had a great deal of converfation during the fhort time I ftaid with her. She did not fail to reproach me for impofing Lord Ofmond on her as Mr. Sedley. I at firft affeXed furprize at her accufation ; but perceiving that Ofmond had difcovered the cheat, I could no longer deny the charge, and defended myfelf as well as I could. You did not efcape fome degree of cenfure for the equivocal anfwer you made to her letter. I took my leave, promifing to be with her between eight and nine in the morning. It wanted but a few minutes of twelve when we wifhed Lady Pemberton a good night. Lord Ofmond and Sir Charles fet .me down at home, and then drove to Dover-ftreet. You will find by the date of my letter, that I took up my pen immediately to give you the above account, which has employed me two hours. 7 hey returned juft now, and Sir Charles tells me, that, at the Marquis’s firft entreaty, the Mortimer’s confented to accompany him and his fair miftrefs
WHAT YOU WILLS
Mi
trefs to Belfont. Their little boy is to be left with Lady Dowager Pemberton, du* ring their abfence from London,
m
*


0
*
I was in Portman-fquare before the ap*^ pointed time this morning. I flew to Julia’s apartment, and found ber drefled in a mofl: elegant dejhabille, calculated at once for her nuptials, and her journey. She really looked a ceieftial creature! She was writing.
“ So foon ready, Julia !” cried I: “you have had but little reft I fear.”
“ Why, not much,” replied Ihe: “ it is a difagreeable thing, Louifa, to be fo hurried on an awful occafion I”—” Right,” faid I; “ but you would have been glad fome months ago to think that you fliould give your hand to Lord Ofmond, even in this hafty manner.”
She fighed.
“ Can it indeed be true, Julia, that man nature is fo perverfe as to contenin the value of a bleffing when in our power, which we are miferable to obtain whilft we
N 6
regard

M A S QU E R A D E Sj o R,
regard it as entirely out of our relch ? Are you become indifferent to my Lord fince laft night ?”
“ What have I done that requires fuch an obfervation—fuch a. queftion ? Surely, it is natural that I fliould wilh for more time! It gives you no room to fufpeX that I am infenfible of my happinefs. Believe me, Louifa, each moment that I am with the Marquis, affords encreafe to my affeXion
fhock
writing to would to heaven I could fee
but 1 have hardly recovered the I received on beholding him fo un-expeXedly. I look back on what pafled :ds an illufion, and can fcarcely think I am awake. I have been Weftbrook her, and my two other friends!—I received a note from my Lord as foon as I was up, to fay, that Mortimer and Caroline have agreed to go down wkh us to Peterborough, What an inftance of tendernefs in Ofmond to obtain me that fatisfaXion ! What an inftance of goodnefs in them, to leave their infant, of whom they are lb doatingly fond, and confent at fuch fliort warningto a journey of the fort ?—I wilh, Louila, you could with lafety be of our party—but it is not
*	to
WHAT YOU WILL;
^11
to be thought of. It happens unluckily that my mother and Almeria cannot leave town. I would have all that I love go with me I believe; for I tremble at the idea of being thrown amongft ftrangers This childilh folly is ridiculous!—ftill— do you imagine, Louifa, I might never have caufe to remember my brother’s pre-diXion—Might not Weftmorland, if he recovers, treat me in a manner different from what I have been accuftomed to from the kindeft relations a young creature was ever bleffed with ?”
“ Now,” faid I, “ your doubts of Lord Ofmond are evident! He will never fuffer his Julia”----
She laid her hand over my mouth,-—-“ Hufh I—1 know he will not-I am fenfible already of my weaknefs, and that he is de^ ferving of a better partner—I blulh for what I have uttered.—My mother told me that Sophia would be here”—She looked at her watch—“GoodGod, how late it grows !
and how foon fliall I be carried from moft of thofe friends whom I ufed to imagine I
o
would gladly be feparated from for my Lord Ofmond’s fake!”
To argue her out of this confiiX I found
would
.278
MASQUERADES; or
would not anfwer ; T therefore foothed her with every hope of the Marquis’s kindnefs, and aflured her fhe would yet blefs the exchange Ihe made from their to his proteXion.
“ You have no caufe, Julia,” added I, to harbour one uneafy thought. Take a retrofpeX of the paft—Have you not made .the duty of a child your firft point of view ^ You obeyed its harfh diXates, though inclination fought to lhake your.conftancy you refufed to marry Qfmond clandeftinely —-you refufed to read his letters—to write to him—to fee him. Many of his friends and yours ftrove to reafon away your pious objeXions to each article- -^they could not fucceed—-and ftill you loved him fervently —there lies the merit!—and behold how the Almighty hath rewarded you! He gives you to him with the confent of your family and through the fupplication of his father -—and, what is yet more, Ofmond receives you imprefled with the higheft idea of your virtue—your difcretion—and your attacb-rnent I Here is an excellent moral that will be of fervice to fome unmarried ladies who may know your ftory.”
I begged not to interrupt her writing
9


r ft- .V

WHAT YOU WILL.
m
She finiftied her letter, whilft:
with fome
any longer,
I ftood at a window, viewing,
fenfations of melancholy, the expedition with which Lord Ofmond’s and Lady Pemberton’s fervants were fixing trunks, caravans, &c. &c. on a coach and chaife that were to convey the two female attendants and the valets to Peterborough. I could not refrain from dropping a tear at the notion of parting with my gentle, amiable friend, though for a fhort time.—Lord Ofmond’s chaife drove to the door, out of which got Lord Mortimer and himfelf,
_ M	A	-	_ A	..A	_
I
J ulia
I
alternately—I really Mortimer <
She grew pale and red felt for her. Lord
he
her drefiing-rbom— caught her in his arms—he congratulated her in the warmeft terms, and was as much tranfported, as if it was his bridal-day. “ Oh that Weftbrook was here !” exclaim-

ed he. “ And Emily and Lady Caroline,” added Julia.
“ You will fee them when you return to town, my dear,” cried I; “ when your mind is more "compofed—when you can without allay join in the univerfal joy this happy
event infpires your friends with.” Lord
Pen>-

28a MASQUERADES; or;
Pemberton, Lord Beaumont, the Bilhop oif
W----, and Mr. Montague, ftepped from
Lord Pemberton’s carriage, and in a few minutes after Lord Mortimer’s travellinsc
o
coach brought Caroline, Lady Pemberton, Sir Charles, the nurfe, and child. Mortimer went down to pay his compliments, and Lady D. Pemberton entered. She encouraged Julia to dilpel her fears, and was endeavouring to rally her out of them,
Mournies appeared in a
addreffed herfelf
when
buftle. She Pemberton—
to
X
great
Lady
“ Madame, you have no idea wat my Lor have de cruelty to defire 1—dat I will go away dis inftant.”
To be Hire, Mournies F”
laid her
Ladylhip ; “ it is right to do fo.”
“ Wat go away, and no fee my young-Lady marry ,!—Ah fie, Madame !—fi my Lor Pemberton have no humanite, you
have,, my Ledy!
1 entreated that Ihe might ftay took her hand—
“ Pray, Madam, let her be'obliged !' Yes, Mournies—my mother confents
Julia
made
Heir
WHAT YOU WILL,
2S1
*
Her countenance brightened up •, ffie ftroaked Julia’s hand, and viewed her with the fame delight as if ffie was her daughter, “ My Lor Ofmond have unc Belle Femme, Lady Louife; n’eft ce pas vray ?” Mournies called I.ady Pemberton afide, to confult with her about fomething relating to my friend’s apparel—they left the room together, and in a few minutes Ofmond tapped at the door. On his ad-miffion he threw himfelf at Julia’s feet--he gazed on her with admiration—with rapture—and told her, that, before the celebration of the rite which made her his, he muft in that pofture fwear, that every aX of his life ffiould refult from his wiffi to pleafe her-—and if her happinefs depended upon his affeXion, fidelity, and attention-— that he would render it complete. Julia feemed to forget all anxiety the moment file beheld him; and fuch another man I believe no woman ever beheld. He looked exquifitely handfome; and it was a moot point, which objeX in their different ftyle was moft beautiful. He tried the ring upon her finger. “ Allow me to fee,”
cried he, “ whether it anfwers the meafure
1 took
2S2 MASQUERADES; or, I took laft: night.” It did exaXly.
kiftfed it—^—
He
CC
What
golden circle! Soon will it deftroy the exiftence of Julia Herbert, and give life to Julia Ofmond !”
I alked her, if I Ihould feal the letter (he had written; for I fuppofed (he would have little leifure to do it herfelf ? She anfwered, I fhould have time enough after her departure. However, I feized the opportunity to retire to her clofet, not doubting but the abfence of a third perfon would be moft agreeable to Lord Ofmond.
In a little while ftie called to me—Lord Pemberton came to tell them that every one was ready, and waited for their appearance. He offered Julia his hand ; Lord Ofmond prefented his to me ; and we repaired to the drawing-room. As we went in, Lord Pemberton perceived Mournies and Souville——
“ What here ftill !” exclaimed he; “ did I not defire you an hour fince to be gone
“It
^ T
w
YOUWILL.
2S3
Ihe.
It is ver true, my Lor,” replied
And why was I not obeyed ?”
. “ Becaule I muft ftay to fee my Ledy marry. Monfieur Souville defire de fame ting; after dat, we will go in one petit moment—have lite patience!”
He faw it was in vain to contend the matter; therefore gave it up. She treats them all without much ceremony, as fhe cannot diveft herfeJf of a notion, that they are mere children to her.
The Bifhop, on Lord Pemberton’s bowing to him, began the fervice. Julia’s apprehenfions returned—her varying cheek, and trembling form, denoted that they did : however, fhe went through the office better than I expeXed. As foon as the Bifhop pronounced the nuptial benediXion, and gave them joy, Lord Ofmond with a bent knee kiffed her hand, and uttered acknowledgments for her condefcending goodnefs in agreeing on fuch fhort notice to bids him, and make his father’s laft moments eafy. He wifhed the inftant in which he ever forgot it, might be his laft. Every one faluted her, and made their
con*
284
MASQUERADES} or
9
congratulations to both.
O
Lady Pemberton
embraced them, and prayed for
tneir
“ Now,” cried the reverend Lord, “ I may boaft of having joined the lovelieft couple in the world !”
Lady Mortimer’s fine eyes fparkled—
“ Dear Madam,” addreffing her mother, “ deign to acknowledge, in full affembly, that you forgive fuch of us as aflifted Ofmond to obtain that prudijb girl I”
“ Forgive yc, my dear! Indeed I repent of having oppofed your meafures-and his happinefs fo long ! And I declare, with the utmoft fincerity, that 1 am now delighted at Julia’s choice.”
When we had breakfafted. Sir Charles
fetting out. We arofe—
propoieci letting our. we aroie—Julia with tearful eyes threw herfelf into her mother’s arms—She bid Almeria and So-
She turned to me: “ Louifa
phia adieu—
my dear Louifa, farewel 1
I
The moft
joyful circumftances, I find, have their alloy.” .
I wept and could make her no anfwer.
The reft of the party embraced us. Mr.
Montague took Lady Ofmond’s hand, and
led
WHAT YOU WILL.
285
\
led her down. He put her in the chaile. Lord Ofmond ftepped in, and Fidele leaped after. They drove off; and Lady Mortimer’s carriage fucceeded theirs, into which Sir Charles handed her, and then followed, as did her brother and her hufband. They were all out of fight in a minute, and carried my heart along with them.—You cannot imagine with what
we regarded each other. For my part, I felt as if I was abandoned by every one I loved. My Lord Bifhop and Mr. Montague wifhed us a good morning, promifing to dine in Portman-fquare. We prevailed on Lady Pemberton to take an
Lord Beaiirnont and I
emm
airing,
attend
her. As we were
offering to to the
going
coach, we met my brother, who I fuppofe contrived to difpel the gloom that was vifible on the countenances of the fifters we had juft left.
After pafling two hours in the Park, I came home, and muft now prepare to
drefs-.. Lady Pemberton infifted on my
joining at dinner fuch of the party of this
morning as remain in London. Lord Clermont will be with us*
V,	--
I wonder
m
MASQUERADES: or.
I wonder how Suffolk will behave on hearing that Ofmond is in poffeffion of Julia. You abhor him, becaufe he has been a fource of mifery to our charming friends; but as he can no longer interfere with their happinefs, and as he muft feel his difappointment very keenly, I am fure you will allow me to pity him.
I eafily fancy your pleafure on receiving this account—it can only be equalled by my own, in tranfmitting it to you.
Commend me to Lady Caroline, and Sir James; and be convinced that I am, dear Lady Weftbrook,
Your moft affeXionate
Louisa Montague
\

•A'
WHAT YOU WILL.
A
To Lady Westbrook,
N
Belfont, paJl nine o'clock.
Have left my huiband to flirt with Julia Lord Ofmond is penning a letter of
high-flown acknowledgments (1 prefume)
to my mother—Sir Charles is lamenting to Louifa his abfence from her—Lord Pemberton, like a dutiful fon, is recounting to my mother alfo the reception we have met with at this noble dwelling—and I, emulous to copy “ fuch attention to one's friends, in writing the inftant one arrives from a long hurrying journey,(though/i2/z^^/^(i to death,) have determined to addrefs you, and give a fpecimen that I am as little deficient iri point of politenefs as the elegants I have mentioned.” Is not this Mrs. Pelham’s ftyle ?
Louifa aflfured me that you fhould hear from her very fully by this night’s poft ; fo that i need not give you a fecond view
of the fcene in London.
Ofmond

iSS
MASQUERADES; or.
Ofmond was apprehenfive that Julia’s health and mine would fuffer by travelling with fo much fpeed, and without refrelh-
We ftopped for frefti horfes at He
ment. Baldock.
three
confulted with my companions, whether we had not better alight for an hour at Bigglefwade ? They approved the motion; and he told one of the footmen to get on, and overtake the fervant (whofe office it was to prepare relays), and defire him to befpeak as good a dinner as could be procured in fo fhort a time. We found every-thing ready and in tolerable order when we got there, which
about four o’clock. Julia feemed well, and her fpirits compofed. This delay impeded the progrefs we expeXed on leaving town to make in our journey, con-
was
fiderably
favourable for travelling
Dark, cold evenings are un-
We did not
reach Belfont till between eight and nine. On our entering the hall, we found it thronged with domeftics, who were no doubt anxious to regain a fight of their young Lord, and catch a view of his bride. To the Marquis’s eager enquiry about
his
WHAT YOU WILL.
(C
2S9
He is
his father, many voices anfwered, better, my Lord.” We were conduXed to a large apartment adjoining the hall, and were fcarcely feated, when a venerable-looking man approached us ; and, with a joy I cannot deferibe, welcomed Ofmond, who feized his hand, and expreffed infinite fatisfaXion at feeing of him. He introduced him to' Julia as a valued friend of his. You will judge in that charaXer how gracioufly file received Freebourne ! Sir Charles retired with him to the Duke’s chamber. In a fhort fpace he returned, and faid his Grace waited impatiently to behold Lord and Lady Ofmond—“ He entreats that your Ladyfhip,” added Sir Charles, addreffing himfelf to me, “ Mortimer, and Pemberton, will alfo honour him with your prefence.” fled.
Julia’s colour Ofmond, attentive to every minute circumftance that
concerns her, preffed her hand to his bofom, and befought her not to be alarmed.
“ The Duke,” cried he, “ is totally meta morphofed-—ffie compofed, my love—I dare aver that you wiil like him after this interview I”
Vol. IV.
O
We
290 MAS QU ER AD E Sj or.
We afcended the ftair-cafe. Poor Julia’s limbs trembled I believe—I am fure mine did; and I would very gladly have dif-penfed with the favour of feeing his Grace.
fek
DoXor W. met us at the door of a magnificent apartment. He faid he was impatient to pay his refpeXs to us. I was lb terrified, I could only curtfy to him.
“ Where is Ofmond ?” cried the Duke, with an anxious tone.
7'he Marquis led my fifter towards the bed—they both dropped on their knees— and Ofmond muttered fomething which 1 could not diftinXly hear.
Oh my fon !” exclaimed the Duke— my children—my dear children !—may
Heaven blefs you both----------and
jcoe !
44
<4
pardon
He kiffed Julia—he held her in his arms more than a minute, and then embraced Ofmond with the fame fondnefs—He fobbed audibly, and was dreadfully agitated. At length he became ferene—he entreated they would forgive his paft criminal behaviour, fince he had atoned for it as far as he was able.
They
WHAT YOU WILL.
291
They affured him that they remembered nothing but his kindnefs—-he had rendered them the happieft of mortals, for which their gratitude was unutterable.
The Duke praifed their generofity, in affording him the comfort of fuch an avowal. He declared the remaining part of his exiftence fliould be laid out in ftriving to oblige them, and in proving himfelf a tender and affeXionate parent.
His Grace begged of us to draw near.' He faluted my hand, and thanked me for rny goodnefs in accompanying Julia and his fon to Belfont. “ You have faved that lovely creature. Madam,” cried he, from a fituation not calculated for one of her delicacy. Had fhe been left to the fociety of men only, in a ftrange habitation, circumftanced as (he is, I fhould have fdc for her extremely. By this inftance of humanity to her, your Ladyfliip has conferred an obligation on me, which I fliall never forget.”
The Duke acknowledged in warm terms his high fenfe of the favours Lord Pemberton and my mother had done him, in accepting of his concefllons, and in granting
O 2	his
i<yi
MASQUERADES; or,
»>
ad-
his requeft; “ a -requeft, my Lord, ded he, “ on which my life depended. All former animofities fhall be buried in oblivion* From hence let us be on a foot of intimacy-let us have but one family. 'I’hat boy and girl have tied a knot of friendfhip between our hoiifes,which I truft will never be difunited ! I fwear, in the prefence of Heaven, and of you all, to become a different man !”
• You know Pemberton’s difpofition, my good Emily ; that he is gentle as zephyr to ail who are humbled by calamity, or a convidlion of their errors. You will therefore fuppofe the polite, affeXionate man-in which he anfwered his Grace.
The Duke took my Lord Mortimer’s
ner
hand
\
You are attached to Harry, my Lord for his lake, then, endeavour to efteem
his father.
I am grateful for the honour
your Lordfhip does us in this vifit !-
Montague—my dear Montague—inftruX
me how to thank you fufficiently”------
“ Not a word, my Lord, I beg, in that ftyle !” cried Sir Charles. “ My ardent wiffies are gratified, and hours of felicity
await
WHAT YOU WILL.
293
poft

await ns all !——Certainly DoXor W. thinks your Grace is in need of fome re-
after this exertion !----Suffer us to
retire.”
DoXor W. feconded the propofal.
“ A few words more—and I confent Freebourne, bring me the packet 1 committed to your charge this evening.”
He was obeyed in an inftant.
“ Sir Charles,” faid the Duke, I made Mr.---------------work hard in your
abfence.” Fie delivered the, parcel into Julia’s hands, “ Receiv^e thefe papers, my ilear Lidy Ofmond, in requiral for the infolence with which 1 created your amiable letter—and, when you give them to your huflnand, tell him to make his acknOw-
chey are your prefent to
ledgmems to vou
o
him, not mine. At my death 1 wiil beftow on him a fimilar one.”
Julia kifitd his band—My Lord, your kindnefs to rne—fuch unmerited obliga-
—I cannot
tions—they quite opprefs me— tell vou”---and Oie burft into tears.
“ I do not wifh you to do it, my child
it is all he
try to love your father afks.”
O 3
He
294
QU
O R
He again embraced her tenderly. Ofmond threw himfelf on his knees, and with energy expreffed his gratitude.
“ I teil you, Harry, I have done nothing
for you—here your tribute is due”---------
And he put Julia’s hand into her Lord’s. With the other fhe prefented him the packet, but was unable to fpeak. He clafped her to his bofom, and affured the Duke that the follicitude he had demon-ft rated to make them happy, was fenfibly felt by both ; and to evince themfelves deferving of it, would be their united ftudy.
His Grace took leave of us for the night, and defired Julia to be careful that her guefts were well entertained.
Dear Emily, what ftings of confcience did I endure on quitting his apartment, for the wicked petitions I formerly offered up refpeXing him !—I am in love with the Duke—I plainly perceive it is not entirely from his mother Ofmond inherits that fafcinating addrefs which many women’s peace have fallen a viXim to. When his father pleafes, he can exert the fame talent, 1 find, though in an inferior degree
—but
WHAT YOU WILL.
295
but Ofmond, with this faculty, owns every virtue and amiable quality.
On our return to the parlour, the Marquis, at Sir Charles’s requeft, unfealed the packet. On the infide of the cover was written, in the Duke’s own charaXers, the following lines :
“ Enclofed is a Deed of Afiignment to my fon Henry Rivers, Marquis of Ofmond, of my DorfetHiire and of my Berklliire eftates. When I die, my Wdl pofleffes him of all I at prefent own in the world, excepting a few trifling legacies to my principal lervants. This method I take to convince my dear Harry, that my penitence for whac cannot be recalled is aXual ; and I truft his generofity will noc allow him to harbour an idea, that my purpofes of amendment will vanifh with my illnefs. Another reafon I have for making over to him the above eftates is, that his bridal joys may not be imperfeX from the apprehenfion of his dependence on me for the fupport of his admirable
^ A	m	^	^	_
Julia
O 4
accuftomed.
29^
MASQUERADES; or
accuftomed, and to which ftie is efititied by every qualification.
“ The houfe in Sr. James’-Square is Ofmond’s. If he and Lady Ofmond chufe to refide in it, it lhall be new furniftied at my coft, direXly, in the completeft manner if not, they are at liberty to fell it; and any other they approve of, I will have finniftied equally.
“ Jewels I mean to prefent my daughter with; but not to deter my fon from doing the fame, by mentioning this article.
“ Notes for two thoufand pounds are alfo enclofed, to defray his immediate expences.
Westmorland.”
Judge, my dear Emily, how penetrated the Marquis was at fuch an inftance of the Duke’s munificence.—He carried the paper to Julia
“ Now is every anxiety baniftied from my breaft !” cried he ; “ for my own fake, I defpife wealth *, but ready as you have ever been to accommodate your wiffies to my fcanty fortune, I muft have been continually diftrefled at feeing you debarred of
many
WHAT YOU WILL. 297
many gratifications, which, from our converfation this day, I dence would have
perceive, your prii-deemed fuperfiuous.
Montague, Julia and I had determined never to make an app/lication to my father for pecuniary affiftance.”
DoXor- W. appeared highly delighted at beholding our amiable couple. He reminded my fifter of her illnefs at Windfor; and told her that he had often promifed her happinefs with ber Henry, when fhe was incapable of knowing who fpoke to her. He afilires us the Duke will do v/ell; and fays, that, if he perfeveres to ftiakeoff his diforder in the manner he has done within the laft twenty-four hours, he might (with infinite caution) be removed to London in about a fortnight, to which place his Grace is very Ibllicitoiis to gee. This intelli
ence
makes me very happy, as it will reftore Julia and her Lord to their friends fooner than I expeXed.
DoXor W. is called to town. He fets out early in the morning, and has been fo obliging as to offer to take our letters with him. ‘Mine he is to difpatch to you by the poft on his arrival.
Lord
\
298 MASQUERADES; or;
I.ord Ofonond has entreated, that he may have the honour of feeing a perfon to whom he is fo much indebted, whenever the DoXor can beftow a leifure hour on
him
declaring.
that to cultivate his fur-
ther acquaintance, is an objeX he has much at heart. DoXor W. bowed, and anfwered him in a very complimentary ftrain.
Great as my affeXion is for my fifter and Ofmond, I cannot think of ftaying with them more than a week. I have a thoufand anxieties about my poor little William, though I am fatisfied that he experiences as much tendernefs where he is, as he could do from me. My mother is all goodnefs —ftill I wifh to be with him.—My brother, Sir Charles, and my Lord, will leave Belfont at the fame time.
I told Almeria, when I bade her adieu, that fhe certainly had a prefentiibent of this wedding, and affumed a convenient indifpofition to avoid a few days feparation from Lord Clermont.
I
She looked highly offended ; and I flew from her indignation, which I dare fay fhe was unj uftenough to make him ieel the
firft
w
YOU W
299
firft moment they met. However, flie has in truth had a flia-hr fever, that I truft we fhall find her perfeXly recovered of.
I hope, to meet you, Sir James, and Lady Caroline, in London, when I arrive.
1 am called to fupper—fo farewel, my dear Emily. lam.
Your moft affeXionate
Caroline Mortimer.'
FINIS
4
/

BOOKS printed for J. B E W,
No, 28, Pater-Noster Row.
I.
1 HE HTSTCRY of EL'ZA WARWICK.
In Tvvo Volumes fmail Odavo, Price cs. fewed, or-
cs. bound.
‘‘ Vaulting Ambition, that o’erleaps itfelf.
And falls on t’ other fide.”

“ This IS an emercaining tale, related in eafy and agreeable, and, where the occallon requires, irr pathetic language: it is calculated to touch the fprinos of tender fympathy ; and, notwitbftanding its diftreffing cataftrophe, is better adapted to produce a good moral effed, than many of thofe agreeable Rories in which virtue is made at lafe triumphant. We bear this teftimony to the merit of Eliza Warwick, not becauie the writer has refpedfully foli-cited merej, but htc-Awftjujike requires it.”
See Monthly Revievj, May, 1778,
2,	THE GENEROUS SISTER a Novel, By
a La.dy. In Two Pocket Volumes, Price 5;. fewed, and 6s. bound.
3.	FRIENDSHIP IN A NUNNERY; or. The
American f ugitive. Containing a full Defcription of the Mode of Education and Living in Convent Schools, both on the low and high Penfion ; the M anners and Charadeis of the Nuns ; the Arts pradifed on young Minds; and their baneful Effeds on Society at large. By a Lady, In Two Volumes, Twelves, Price 5s. fevved, or 6s. bound.
Thofe who to Convents fly, will fadly find.
That danger, vice, and woe of every kind.
Are furely met •xvith there, not lejt behiuffi
4. LET-
Books printed for J. Bew.'
4* LETTERS fuppofed to have been written by YORJC^ and E? IZ.A. Neatly printed on a fine Paper, rt) Two Pocket Volumes. The fame Size as Stei'uc’s other Works. Price 5s. few'ed, or 6s# bound.
'	.....Th^t facred fenfe of woe.
Which none but Friends and Lovers know.*
Akenside.
>
The Editors of the Critical Revie-vj for July 1779, after giving copious cxt.adls from thefe entertaining volumes, begin and conclude their remarks as follow: ‘‘ The ftyle and manner of thefe Letters bear fo ftrong a refemblance to thofe of the fame title which were the genuine produfHon of Mr, Sterne,that, were we not told by the Editor, that they were only imitations, they might with great appearance ot juftice be aferibed to that w-riter.”
“ The author of thefe Letters has taken up the fubjeft where the Letters between Y nick and Eliza ended, and, to preferve the greater appearance of originality, has adopted the circumftances which governed the mutual and lingular attachment of thofe perfonages. Thefe Letters, in general, have a moral tendency, and abound in fuch fentiments as are calculated to improve the heart.”
5. BRITISH REMAINS ; or, A Colleaion of antiquities relating to the BRITONS: Comprehending, i. A concU'e Hiftory of the Lords Marchers; their Origin, Power, and Conquefts in Wales,
\
11
The
Books printed for J. Bew.
ii.	The Arms of the Ancient Nobility and Gentry of North-Wales.
iii.	A Letter of Dr. Lloyd, Bifhop of St. ^faph’s, concerning Jeffrey of Monmouth’s Hiftory,
iv.	An Account of the Difeovery of America, by the Welch, more than 300 Years before the Voyage of Columbus.
' V. A celebrated Poem of Taliefin, tranflated into Sapphic Verfe.
The whole felefted from Original MSS. and other authentic Records.
To which are alfo added, MEMOIRS of EDWARD LLWYD, Antiquary, tranferibed from a Manufeript in the Mufeum, Oxford. By the Rev,
N.	OWEN, jim. A. M. “ Sparfa Price 3s.
coegi
[To PARENTS in general, and all thofe who are intruiled with the EDUCATION of the BRITISH YOUTH.]
6.	THE HISTORICAL MIRROR; or, BIOGRAPHICAL MISCELLANY : For the Jnftruc-
tion and Entertainment of Youth.----In which are
exhibited the moft finking Sentiments and Examples upon thofe, and only thofe. Branches of Duty ia which they are more particularly interefted, viz,
-r^	•	* ri____
Religion,
Filial Duty,
Love to Brethren,
1 ^
Temperance,
And a modeft and
Humanity, Benevolence, Patience.
Veracity,
Juftice,
induftry,
fubmiffive Refpefl to their Elders, and particularly to their Teachers, and thofe who have the Care of their Education,
The
Books printed for J. Bew.
The whole improved and enlivened, at p'roper intervals, with feveral admired Converfation-Pieces, on the'Tmportant fubjefts above-mentioned, from the Wiitings of the amiable Xenophon. Handfbme-ly printed in one Volume, Duodecimo. Price 3s. neatly bound.—Good Allowance to Schoolmafters, &e.
t ‘
7.	DIRECTIONS for the MANAGEMENT
of CHILDREN, from the Time of their Birth to the Age of Seven Years; and a plain and full Ac-count of every Diforder to which they are fubjedt, as well as of thofe peculiar to the Female Sex ; with variety of efficacious and eafy Remedies for each Difeafe, feledled from the bdl: Authors j whereby any Woman may be enabled to prefcribe, fafely and fuccefsfully, for herfelf, Children, or Acquaintance; with Inllrudtions for improving the Complexion, preferving and ftrengthening the Sight and Hearing, and rendering the Teeth beautifully white and found, to extreme old-age; and variety of ufeful, innocent, and approved Cofmetics of every kind.
By M. A. CLARKE, M. D.
And Profeffor of Midwifery. Price is. 6d.
8.	EVERY MAN HTS OWN PHYSICIAN. By JOHN THEOBALD, M. D. The Sixth Edition, with conliderable Additions. Pike 2S.
9.	KISSES. A Poetical Tran(lation of the BA-» SIA of JOANNES SECUNDUS NICOLAHJS. With the Original Latin, and an Effay on his Life
and
Books printed for J. Bew.
»nd Writings. And the Epithalamium newly tranflated. The THIRD ED1TICN_, with confiderable Additions. Elegantly printed in Royal v^ ldtavo. Price ps. fewed, or los. 6d. bound ; and embtllifiied with a moft beautiful Frontifpiece, reprefenting the Origin of Kifles, defigned by Mortimer, and a Portrait of Secundus, from a Painting of Scorellius, both engraved by Bartolozzi, with lirlt Imprefiions of the Plates.
Alfo, a Second Edition of the above Work, neatly printed in Crown Odlavo, price 5;s. bound, with good Impreffions of the fame Frontifpiece.
10.	[By the fame Tranflator] SONNETS and ODES, tranftated from the Italian of FE FRARCFI ; with the original Text, and fome Account of his Life. Handfomely printed on a fine Paper, price 3s. fewed.
11.	MEMOIRS of the LIFE and W RITINGS of SAMUEL FOOTE, Efq. the Englifii Arifiopbanes. To which are added, the Jokes, Raparrees, Bon-Mots, Puns, and Good Things faid by that g'^eat Wit and excenti'ica) Genius. A new Edition (vvith veiy confiderable Additions of Jokes, Puns, Bon-. Mors, &c &c. &.C.) price is, 6d.
Where be your gibes now ? your gambols ? your flafties of merriment, that were wont to fet the table in a roar ?	Shakespeare.
The Editor afiures the Public, that no Jokes, &c. Szc, are introduced into the above Colleftion but what are really Mr. Foote’s, or have been generally aferibed to him.



I
c

rfti
4'>' 1
s
' - ft ■'- g f '"j ■*
‘	* It	«i	».'
■>
I
V.
■J
A
■<
1

A. »
' I*
< * • -
/
I




fL
\0-
-tpftfAA

SI

r--.5.
jvar.jf2:
i*«rt'
TTiJ
•/
=y? I:,..
• I^r r
V

m
rja




Wi
-w
.i


-•'t:




ii


[m
Kv,
K
IV -

^2P
L^.
iV

»- Aa
• r
I

Tt.,




A



m

>9


2*
t*’.‘'^»3n

P
w.wr





fAlSi
;\!

'i' A:
*v. i,’•-u,,jiiT-'J3‘->i- -': • '
■ fe-'
.kt


-»*»•	• •-->•,••, K'—'- ;• *■• 7‘.-.'V*^ ’ ,'^.->^ T‘
-T *!'•-'••.	.L' - 9
.'■'"I’-,- 'V'-
?'k x;\-L.kV* :^-

L -^;v ■ -.»-■f--A ■•?. ..
^333'
'-s '- •-
' .‘.y-n ,
"■~3l -
3J:
f\ .:. ::'('■

b: -’ I .' -.-

? V V \
-►	V--
- I ,

. yS- V ^
-.'’^itii'i'E'LS
.■-,>^v'.;' .--s
,■".' k J-





h 33
vta*:-
^4.
*_v
■\i-
•jffi
JV/j




IG
rtV^Si

> .

