
.^; N. .-i >T ■
h**i 1

KARI BOOK COI l.f-XIIOM
LIBRARY
GMiVERSlTYo/^
PENNSYLVANIA

r\
■. y.-
-. 1L-.
,<v
A d




yih-
V*\-
n\ ■
\
A-. '/
•• • ; • .>•
¥
*\
Tn^M
!3 V. in \
A
N
.J.
THE
GODFREY F. SINGER MEMORIAL PRESENTED BY
MR. AND MRS. JACOB SINGER
.1 ;


V
N
■f.	■-

rSi ,
,' \
A

t
-N
•'j ■
% f.
Il


M.
m
L.f^'.i


. ^ . i .
Lb IV \-A^
H	-v.. .^r^,*;
AI
‘ ,IV'

. '-•3":- ‘'/ .C'“>. '■■
^
V'
, J-


«v
T H E	/
MISTAKES OF THE HEART:
o R,
MEMOIRS
OF	\
Lady Carolina Pelham
A‘. N D
»
Lady Victoria Nevil.
I'N A SERIES OF LETTERS.
PUBLI8HEDEY
M. TREYSSAC de VERGY, '
m
Counfellor in the Parliaments of Paris and Bourdeaux.
At feeling hearts 1flings nor ever mifs the game.
Prior.
*
IN THREE VOLUMES.
VOL. I.
«
DUBLIN:
Printed for James Potts, and Thomas Walker,
Bookfellers, in Dame-freet.
MDCCLXX.
o. of Pa. Library


\

f
./
R
F
A Book without a preface, like
a fine w.Dman in a modest drefs, will hardly pleaSe in this age oS refinement. Wit and
f
on
beauty the staves of ridiculous! Give me a girl of eighteen, graced with her own charms; give me a ClariSIa, and my heart and my eyes will feel and enjoy. What need have I
of fictitious ornaments ?---------to
heighten my deftres i PShaw ! Talk not of art when youth and Guriofity pant but for nature.
I have, a copy of the Venus of Medicis, fays one to me. ——Have you ? Let me fee it
----and I hurry him to his do-
, Fie stops in the first room,
and
\\
\
PREFACE.
;
and attempts a deScrlption—
a description!-A preface and
the graces of the toilet are just that	defcription-—damn
them all.
— t
The AUTHOR
p
J
DEDI G A TION.
To M. J. J. Rousseau, Citizen of Geneva.
ADI choSen to dedicate ray novel to a man oS rank, hundreds had I eastly Sound weak enough to thank me Sor pralfes, the more welcome the leSs they are deServed ; but their’s had been the honour, mine the dif-
grace
take.
I was too proud to mif-I looked for a man whole
esteem Should be my glory. You are the man my ambition
out to me------the man
whofe virtues, talents and delicacy.
A

•V*
^ dedication.
cacy, called aloud for my public
homage. Deign, Sir, to accept
It as the tribute of my refpe'(R and admiration.
The author.
*
London, March, 1769,
- r ’ < f
The editor.
%
I)ear Father and Mother, I have likewife curtailed the correspondence of my favourite Vidloria—was I right? 1 know not.
If faults againji language occur—-wonder there are fo few—the author is a foreigner.
* *
* * * *■ * *
La critique ejl aiJeCy et h art ejt difficile.
#


K- .f:


, I
TREYSSAC DE VERGY

*♦- '
*•	' •- %	r
BSB, y	' ■' .9	«»t -	-3? .'■
' •	•'	•' A . •. ■ ,
^^V''	^ . ’ ■ ■■
C '( ■ .> ‘	, .	.-A ' " : / '
, '- ' i'	'-; • C	.
- ■ ^ - ■ .,-- ' -
(
Ar ■: -■ ■	" «y
- ' < - -
- • >,•'> ' - T •-' . -^- • ~ . . •, '	<■ • ?
:• • •• -a- -i
THE
#
EDITOR
TO THE
PUBLIC.
E real merit of thefe memoirs^ not my regard for their author^ has induced me to puhlijh them>
Friendjhip jhall never hiafs my judgmenty
/
when 1 may forf nt the public ejieem by obeying her calls.
)
1	wifo the author had been as cha/le in
9
fome of his pifluresy as he has been delicate in Ms fentiments, happy in his converfationsy Jkilled in the human heart t hut was he wrong *	■	• to
I

/
The E. D I T O R
to follow nature, to write what be fell, to
s
represent mankind as they are ft—/ cannot, mil not, fay he was;
I have read this novel, Sometimes with the
coolFye of a crhic, f^iFetimes with the inflam-
\
ed foul of a lover, Reafon now and. then ob-jefled, hut paffion was ever pleafed.
JVhat fhall I fay of the fprightlinefs of
Carolina^—of the ingenuity of
of
\
the wanderings of Lady Belmour and Sir JohnModish }—PVhat fhall I fay !—Te crK
ties.
ce!—They have pleafed me. Every impartial bel-eSprit,. every feeling heart,, will
echo
CC
they have pleafed me I*
fhere were feveral letters of Lord Pelham
ifully
the fc
nap as the. Journals of Pamela Andrews to her
Dear

M
E
M
O
I
R
S
O F
Lady Carolina Pelham
AND
/
Lady Victoria Nevil

»-
L E T T E R I.
/ . ^
Lady Victoria Nevil to Lady Carolina
Pelham.
Here has been a meteor, Carolina ; a meteor
which shone So bright, and radiant, that our eyes were almost dazzled with it. It came from London, and stopped for a fortnight in Cumberland : its moSions were So iquick and rapid, that it feemed in twenty places at once. Very likely, what was fo new, and So,peculiarly striking to us, is quite familiar to you: London furnishes more than one of thefe phenomenons ; and Sir John Modijh is not the only man who has exchanged nature for art, and fenfe for wit.—How we looked and stared at the embroidered stuttering
beau !---How people crowded about him when
B	he
I 2 ]
lie appeared in public !-----Neither Lord B**e,
nor the illustrious Orator P***^ nor even the Spirited W*^*es. have ever attracted the attention of the
—	X
fools of England in So eminent a degree.—TheSe are not Such unparalleled oddities in politics, as
Sir "John is really in civil Society.-We were, I
believe, the ssrss; who were favoured with a fight of the delicate, elegant, and chearful creature. He waited on us at Brenton-half and complimented me with a courtly bow, and a conScious air of his dear Self-importance. His tongue was So ready for flattery, and his lips for Smiling approbation, that I durst hardly venture a word, or steal a look at him. He begged the favour of my hand at our next ball at Carlijle ; but assuring him, it was engaged to Mr. Frojby^ he, on a Sudden, hummed a tune — danced his disappointment away———and took his leave.—To have Sir John for a partner ! Could any thing be more inviting, more glorious, more d propos to raife
the vanity of a country girl!---------Why did I
keep my word, and reriife the high honour Sir John deigned to confer upon me ? Since I have disregarded this uncommon opportunity, I am afraid I shall ever be the thoughtlefs Vidioria^ who knows not how to ridicule modefiy in a man’s behaviour, and esteem and commdid foppery and impertinence. ’Tis very lucky, Carolina.^ I am at fuch a distance from London., where, indulged in my unfashionable prejudices, I am at liberty to detest vice and folly, without the fear of Satire and contempt. Let not a Soul know of my existence : let me live only for my Car oil-tia and Frojby. Adieu.
Brent-on-half Feb. 7, 176-.
LETTER
r 3 1
LETTER II.
Lady Carolina Pelham to Lady Victoria Nevil.

HO W came you, dear Ftbtoria, not to be
most agreeably entertained with Sir yohrfs lively conversation, and preSer to him the modest, and plain Mr. Frojhy P Have you neither vanity, nor Self-love ? Is not my Vidioria ashamed to glory in a virtuous lover, when in oppoli-tion to a courtier. So highly celebrated for his taste and brilliancy of wit ? You dare openly to declare, that decency and morals are the only amiable and essential qualities in a man, when the whole world rife in defence of gallantry, intrigue and
perfidy !--------How Lady Prejion, and Lady
Coquet will exclaim against Such a novelty ! How they will Sneer when I shall whiSper them that Sir yohn is not to be praiSed for being young, handfome, rich—and the very pink of coxcombs ! — I am at a lofs, Vibioria^ how to justify Such an. extraordinary proceeding. What can I fay ?
Come—let me See.—^I could—No: it won’t do
-—This will do better—better ! How !-------I’ll lb
rack my brains—Have we no instance of a petit-mattre left off for—for what ?—The charader is fo old,—-or So new,—that there is hardly an expression to— O ! I’ll find it out.—Yes, yes, I have it; for a man of fenfe. Is not this a pretty
word, Victoria ?----How frightful woulst be the
found of it in a polite drum ! — How exquifitely odious to a fashionable lady!—Well, have we no Such instance to produce in your ladyship’s
favour ?---Where shall I look for it ?—At court
?—In the city ?— Where foall I look for it, Victoria ?—Had you really this particular way of
thinking, loving, and behaving,—-----how jealous
I should be [ The delightful thing, to be Spoken
B 3	of
[ 4 ]
■»
of in the drawing-room, and at every rout.y as a
yet unfeen piece of nature !----------to fix upon
one’s Self every eye and every tongue !------(Dh !
let the manner be ever fo out of the way, it must be above the expedlations of the proudest
heart.-------Who could refist the temptation,
when attended with So much glory !----------But—
but-----How many buts against the thirsty foul
panting after fame and distinction !—Had you wifdom, talents, and beauty, united to the most refined, enchanting degree—Were you unrivalled for grace and wit—Could you with a word, or . a fmile force all men to your feet, and throw them
into raptures-----even then, Vidioria^ you should
be the objeCl of malice and discontent—Even then, you should be railed at by your most Sanguine admirers.
His not in our borrowed existence to applaud virtues we are deprived of: far from being inclined to acknowledge a Superiority, which humbles our pride, we are always ready to reprefent it in an odious and defpicable light. Slander, Vic^ toria^ is a weapon trusted in our hands, by fashion and pleafure, to oppofe the bold Spirits that re fume to lead us into the Solitary paths of honour and decency. The reaSon of a few individuals shas been, is, and ever shall be, drowned amidst the clamours of the multitude. The general cry being for the folly in fashion, whoever disregards it, is treated as a common enemy, and dangerous innovator.
How happy is a private station in life . How happy that pofition in which we are free from the lash of mode and criticiSm !—What do I fay ! Is there any happineSs where it is not felt ? Is there any poignancy of taste, when obstacles interfere nQt between pfstions and the objeCl: we eagerly Seek after ?—To be compelled to. wander
over
[si
over bushes and thorris, beSore we shelter in the bewitching arbour of peace and voluptuouSnefs !
—Killing thought, Victoria I-Adieu ! adieu I
Continue to love Frofoy—to laugh at fashion—and to believe me yours for ever.
London, February 176-.
Carolina.
M
LETTER III.
U S T I be eternally tormented by Lord
Charles Fan fly
that Lord Charles,
>
Fidforia, who is the fnost steadily tedious, and provoking man upon earth ! No change, though ever So trifling, appears irr his understanding ; and to-morrow he will do me the favour of the fame impertinent conversation, with which he has daily vexed me to death, ever fince I have been acquainted with bis cringing, unthinking lordship. Ishis is the man whom my father ordered me to love, and to refpe£l, tho’ my reaibn tells me he deferves to be hated, and defpiled.
Was I of a coquettish difpofltion, the man would do well enough tor a hulband, of whom, no more is now required than titles, riches, and indifference : but as I intend to have one who will chat, fret, and rave in a lively strain, and whom I can prattle into fondnefs ; I want a more witty companion to wait upon me to the temple of Hymen. I don’t mean, dear Vidioria, to be paflionately in love, and to turn mad upon my hushand’s Smiles : no ! no ! 1 do not pretend to that Supreme bliSs ; a lower rank in the terrestrial happineis will Satisfy my ambition.
I have always obferved, dear Vicloria, that nothing tempts a lady more into Society, than the
; that want is the principal caufe of the many falSe steps, passions,
B 3	and
having no amufements at home
[ 6 ]
and littlenesses which distracst, and ruin a family. What can one do with a fool, - who will neither divert, nor be diverted ; who will (without mercy) tell you over, and over again, the childish tales h? has learnt from his nurfe, or from his even lef^ rational governor j who will be continually fpeak-ing about horfes, dogs, and his follies at Newmarket and White's ?—Is not our head vapourish-ly affedled by the unwelcome repetition ; and are not we justly enticed to order the coach, and ga -lop away to a friend for pleafure and comfort ?
My father loved me to excefs ! and he could be So unjust as to command I should marry the fon of his intimate friend Lord Fanfly.^ or forfeit thirty thoufand pounds, which he left to my brother, in cafe I oppofed his v/ill !—He did not Surely intend I ihould be the wretchedest of women.—Could a father——>■—No ! no ! it would be a crime to obey, when my fubmiffion would plunge me into
the deepest railery.----He thought I should love,
and that Lord Fan fly deferved to enter into his family, otherwifehe would not have entailed upon his daughter the horrors, and vexations attending a forced, and detessed engagement.----------I’ll
never be Lady Fanfly.-------What have I not to
hope from the tenderest of mothers, and from a
brother who has So high a friendship for me ?-----
I would hate, next to deformity, to blush for a man who should have been my choice, to the e-
verlalling dishonour of my taste and delicacy.----
Poor Charles ! He loves me So heartilyd—Then he
looks fo !-----Were his foul as Sublime, and his
tongue as eloquent as his eyes are expressive 1---
Adieu.
London. Feb. 17b-.
LETTER
[ 7 1
LETTER IV.
AS I a man, dear Fi^oria, I would kneel, kifs your hands, and tell you devoutly, I adore you :—I would kneel, kifs, and adore a-gain, and again.—What a charming creature I Slow lincere ! how ingenuous I—What man deserves fo much innocence and virtue I—Does the happy Frojbyy who made you ling his praifes; who first taught you to love, and to exprefs it, know all the value of your charms, and the fenSibility of your heart ?—Can he fee, and hear you, without the utmost complacency, and delight ? Is he not lost in the contemplation of fo much excellence ? and are not his eyes the feat of love,, and enchanting
confufion ?•-------^How aweful is the prefence
of beauty ! *---What troubles does ,it not caufe
in a lover’s breast when indifferent,.---what
raptures when pleafed !
As often as I confider the many loving thoughts, which a retirement in the country infpires us with, as often do I feel a half regret to have been three whole years drudging at St. Jamefs^ for the mere
ambition of attradting applaule, regards and admiration.
Had I never been out of Pelham-half I should ha ve had my Frojby, my birds, my bed of tulips, and my parrot.—What bewitching amufements I Frojby would have told me fine things, and taught them to the parrot, that I might be constantly entertained with love and flattery. “ How hand-
“ Some ! how witty ! how graceful ! ”---would
have attended every vifit, and, perhaps, every period ---And then, Frojby the next day----—and
always Frojby—at dinner, in the garden, at cards; —-to be fure 1 should have been perpetually fighing when alone, and Smiling, and enchanted when with him -charming life ! But as she converlk-
B 4	tion
[ 8 3
tion of a young lady, out of a fashionable circle, is generally limited within a very narrow compafs, I do not conceive how Frofiy.^ let him have ever So Sprightly an imagination, could have helped betraying me at last into a perfect: indifference, if not a total dissike.
'I have always taken a difgust to my most favourite tunes when played three times over-------Why
should it not be the fame with refpedl to the melodious words, “ I love you, nobody walks, talks, dances, fings, and does any thing So Sweetly, and ravishingly as you —Is my heart better difpofed
for Sentiment than my ear for harmony ?--------How
could I afcertain the Superiority of an Handef and 'a Frojhyy if neither a Pinciniy nor a Lord Fanfly ever came in my way to enhance their value, by the striking dissimilitude of their merit and talents ?
When oiir heads are heated with a pleassng idea, we delight in deluding ourfelves ; and I am not furprifed, dear Vidiorfay that your heart should be fo far deceived, ssnce nobody has yet shewn you the profpe£t of a new, and more lively paffion.-— I could lay my life, that your heart is at rest though you feel it in a flame.—How are you Sure you love,
having never had an opportunity to hate ?------
Even from your infancy, has not every one been anxious to pleafe you ? Had you ever a dessre which was not applauded, and gr.itified ? With tender parents, and indulgent friends, how could you be acquainted with pride, envy, jealoufy, and the other foibles inseparable from Society, and a worldly education ?—Were Sir 'John Moclijh, and Mr. Frojhyy in the drawing-room, and every di-stinHion confined to the former-------vanity, vani-
ty, my Sweet and modest Viriorid, would add a beautiful rofe to your blooming citeeks, and enlighten you on the mistakes of your heart. I do
not
/

r 9 ]
not fay you would love Sir John, but ten to one tlie flighted Frojby would Sink in your esteem.
e do not know ourfelves till interest and passion Sorce us to the enquiry. Led in a peaceful country life, by custom and habit, we love as we at, ssng, and walk : a partridge there, no more than a lover, can hardly create an unfelt fenfation.
■----You will laugh at my incredulity, Victoria ;
and Frojby shall be the better loved for my not
thinking him fo.-----—With all my heart : but—
have a care not to put it in my power to recriminate.. Adieu.
London, Feb. 176-.
» •
LETTER V.
/
Lady Coquet and I went yesterday to the Green-Park, where we had not been ten minutes, before we met with Sir Iohn Modijh, in a riding drefs.
“ He had just dismounted’ to have a glance at the Ladies, and was tired,, almost, to annihilation."
Have you had any news stom Cumberland, Lady Carolina How does the heavenly Victoria do ?
. She is very well,. Sir. John..
And then, forgetting’ he was over-fatigued, lie chatted with Such velocity, and fire, inpraife or the beloved girl, that being afraid he should drop down at our feet. Lady Coquet prefented him witn her Salts. I could not help laughing, to hear. Sir John fwear by his ViQoria, that they couldnot come more d propoi,. for his strength wonderfully decayed whenever he Spoke of the Beauty who had en-ssaved him.—He Said it was a downright murder, that a young lady of your rank and merit should be. buried in Cumberland, when she might be a toast
B 5.	in
W
[ 10 J
in Town. He complained of Lord Nevi!, who Sacrificed his most amiable daughter.
Sacrifice i Sir John—Is not Mrs. Brentorfs im-menfe fortune a fatisfaifiory compensation for Lady Vidiorid.s attendance upon her aunt ?—•
Certainly it would be fo, was not Lady Victoria left entirely to the will, and difpofal ofM^rs. Breti-ton : But pray. Lady Carolina^ confider what a lofs to the court, if she ever—Surely, Frcjby cannot be the man.—
Why not ? Is not Mr. Frojby of an illustrious family, and a man of chara<fier ?—
Of charafter! Of character. Lady Carolina! A man who has no interest at court, a man of charadler ! A man whofe name is hardly mention^ ed twenty miles out of his own manor, a man of character I Has lie once posted to Newmarket, or taken a trip to France, and Italy P Who ever Saw him at AlmacFs or Soho f And that man. Lady Carolina !—that man, a man of character ^—I commend an honest citizen, who goes now and then to lavish his profits in the beau monde at Paris., but a Frojhy, who never falhioned his clothes, his table, his countenance, in the modern taste, Jur mon honneur, un tel hornme ejl pitdiable.—
Lady Coquet afked whether his rival —
My rival, Coquet ! my rival !—
I beg pardon,. Sir John—Do you believe Mr. Frojhy has already infpired Lady Vidioria with a tender prepoSfestion.—
I am not yet determined what to think of it. Lady Coquet ; for tho’ 1 have the most exalted idea of Lady Vidioria’s delicacy, I am fometimes forced into a belief of an intimacy between them. Lady Vidtoria imbibed both her reafon, and inclinations at Brenton-hall., The neighbourhood allowing Frojhy’s vifits, afociety was formed — That love ha§ intruded unawares upon their hearts,
iiinder
;
There is no concluding, there was
I J
under the name-and San61:ion of friendship, is wha^
I fufpedl ■ ■.—and what I will not believe.--------
At the last ball at Carlijle., I ashed her hand ; but to my unfpeakable chagrin, it had been promifed. Frofby was her partner; and, as I learnt, he always was fo.— love in her choice.
Neither must you conclude there was none. Said Lady Coquet., that is in the claSs of probabilities : belides, I imagine there was a neceiSity for Lady Victoria to difpofe of her heart, to embellish the horrors of het wildernefs. "What would have become of her had she no lover to trifle away with the many tedious hours that lay upon her hands \
she had neither a Ranelagh, nor a Play-houfe:------
Could she always read, meditate, walk, fing, and pray ? Her heart, furely, wanted as much diverfi-on as her head j and Frojhy being the only man, who fighed, courted, and flattered, who had in-ceflant opportunities to amufe and to pleafe, how should their attachment to. each other be a prodigy ?—
A very great one; Lady Coquet, one of the most marvellous kind. .Dis the unconstrained familiarity of their viflts, which: prompts me. to think, that, unknown to themfelves, they are captivated by the delustons of fentiment, and fubjecl to the
fafeinations of fancy,----Expreffions of fondnefs,,
like Smart repartee,, may inchant by their novelty—< but how quickly do their charms vanish when they are frequently repeated !:
Were one of you,.. Ladies;, and a fine gentleman, to break in upon Lady Widforia and Mr., Fhjhy, they might poffibly, for a week or two, humour the deception, from habit or vanity ; but believe me,, the first fortnight over, our lovers would neceffarily awake to the ambition, or pleasure of conquering a new heart..
Lady

r >2 i
Lady Coquet.y inSisting on his not loving yoU;,.. Since he was .not jealous, he Swore, by the Sacred name of Libertyj that he loved you more fincerely than Fitt ever loved a peerage.
“ It is his immenfe reSpefS for Lac^ Victoria^ that hinders him from fearing a competitor like’ you may gueSs whom.
The man had Such a fund of Self-love !—he is
^ !
really handSome, and truly elegant-—but Such g, pride !—Were his heart as miSchievous as it is bold,
what would not my Vidforia have to dread !-----------
That the fame power which formed thee equally virtuous, fenfible, and fair, may still protefS thee, is the daily wish of thy Carolim. Adieu.
London.^
6-.
L E T T E R VI.

I Cannot conceive,^ dear Victoria, how it happens, but I am So penfive to-day, and So ab-fent------Is it from the weather, my natural tem-
per, or the conversation of my visttors, that my Ipirits are thus oppressed ?—What can be the caufe of my being So very different from mySelf ?
The gay, the "chearful Carolina, thoughtful, without knowing the “ Why !” and the “ How !” Lord Charles ? — he did not Speak.—Sir ‘James f he Sung well.—The day is fine—I am well—what’s the matter with me then ?
I went last night to the Sufpicious Hujland---
there was, in the adjoining box—What then ?— does my melancholy proceed from that box ? — Could a comely stranger, though ever So engaging, give me a moment’s uneafineis ?—He looked—he
Spoke—was delicate - artlefsly graceful----How
could all that take my gaiety away ?—If it is not that, what is it then ; Cannot you help me, dear Victoria	-—You, who are So ufed to -igh,
and

V
E 13 1
and to love
■and to love and to tell, cannot you guefs, whether there is any Symptom of your rapturous fenfibility in me f
Carolina in love !■—With whom, pray ?—With a man she never Saw before, whom she may chance never to fee again !—Incredible, incredible—I’ll take my guitar and play that thought away.
Lady Prejian^ who accompanied me to the play, infisted, the whole night,, that my eyes had been oftener upon that box, than upon the incomparable	—Foolish girl!—How weak we are,
Vibforia !—Who could imagine that our hearts, should thus pant, and flutter at a first fight !— Garrick played Ranger, and I forgot he did!— Oh ! my guitar, my guitar—
My guitar is as rn«ch out of order as my head— My fingers and my voice have lost their wonted
vivacity.
“ Se mne amor, cFe dunque quel ih'h fento f
None of your laughs, fweet Victoria,, none of your laughs : pity your Carolina, and if you can tell her what ails her—do it—do it immediately.
Tell me not of love—Of love did I fay ?—Let not the bewitcliing found reach and pleafe the ear of the indifferent, happy Carolina.—Could it be in any man’s power—No : often as I have yielded to the delufive calls of fancy,, I could withstand, reality—fight it, and conquer. Conquer !—how ea~ lilyfaid !—how difficult to be done !
I am afraid, Victoria, the conflidl would prove too hard for me. How often have I not fighed in Secret for a gown of the newest taste,, for a diamond of a brighter water than my own, or for the opening of a ball ! Is not a man a more tormenting trifle to a lady’s brain, than a piece of fillc, a diamond, or the honour of a first minuet ?“ -Am I not mad to afk that question of the ingenuous Vic^
toria.
. H 1
toria, who never Swerved Srom nature, or wished
but for Frojby f
Fashion has given an existence to So many temptations unknown to my Plbtoria---Oh.! my heart, my heart !—Adieu,
London
176'
LETTER VII
O W ! Frojhy already uneaSy ! For what
______pray, dear Kidforia ? Had you not let him
into the Secret of your heart, I should not be Surprized at it ; but he knows you love him, and he is uneaSy !—he has hardly a rival, and he is fearful and fuSpicious ! Had he an hundred, ought he to mishust the fincerity of my Vidforia f
Fear that Fidioria may change !—Surely you are mistaken, you have had too many proofs of Mr. Frojhfs love and refpedt, not to doubt Such a monstrous metamorphofis.
How could he love and not esteem you r-
• .	•	_____ .	1	•	1	.
No, it is not in his power to have a thought injurious to my VidioFm : Once again, you are mistaken.
hdistaken ! You tell me, he was two days abSent from Brenton-haU"	^
Tv/odays !
“ coming the third, he made no apology : and
^nd he loves you !-~-That
upon your obligingly enquiring after his health, by a Sweet, How d’ye do ? he Sullenly anSwered, Very well, and then fell a criticifing the flowers you had just been drawing.
“ At dinner, he did not once offer to help you he found fault with the flavor of a hare you had ventured to commend—and even refuSed to ling. —Before and after tea, Mr, Frojhy was neither with you, nor with any body elSe, but kept constantly at the harpflcord—Only ten minutes before
he
[ 15 I
he took leave, he began to tell how the country would revive upon Sir Iohn Modi/ffs arrival You then happening to Smile, the gentleman made faces, and went away.”
Well—all that,—notwithstanding the mighty charge—yes-nAll that is nothing at all—or Something indeed.
What did the man mean ? Let us lay our heads together, and we will guefs it right—or wrong. Wrong would be more to the purpofe ; for in a Situation like yours, truth is generally an impertinent intruder.
Frojby-i by his abfence, intended either to enhance the pleafure of feeing you, or to know hov/

Worfe and worfe,
he should be regreted. rolina /”
Would you have him love Some body elfe, or not be in his right fenfes ?—
“ How cruel you are, Carolina /”—
Some men are apt to realife what strikes their fancy ; Frojhy,^ perhaps, has had a dream, in which he did not a£f the first part—who knows but Sir John was happier than he in that dream ? The vexing Creature !
Well—Mr. Frojby had a fit of pride—of folly of —I know not what—Where can I find the idea of what is not ? How can I fufpe6f there is not a perpetual incenfe and adoration, when Vidiorin is the deity ?—I will not believe—-beSieve !—no : I will not believe—And I tell you again and again, you are mistaken. Adieu.

London — 176
LETTER VIII
TH E world may fay what they pleaSe
will never alter my opinion : it shall
unchangeable as the eternal laws of Nature#
They be as
Is

/
r i6 ]
Is it not provoking, Vidforia, that tnen should wantonly indulge themfelves in every violation of their duty . that they Ihould even pride themfelves in it, whilst the least frailty, the least omission in
one of oui iex^ is cried down as an outrage to hu-manity, manners and Society ?
Are there two natures, two laws ? and can women only offend, though the vv^eakest, and the most powerfully tempted ?
If, in .efpedt to religion, virtue and vice are^ equally rewaided and punished, why do we differ in our notions of honour and, infamy ? Is there any ■ other good, any other evil, than what the laws of morality enjoin or prohibit ? Can the fame crime he, and not be ?—If men are at liberty to be unjust
and perfidious, whence that liberty ?______Whence
the judgment gainst us for imitating them ?
If people will believe there is no religion, when priests live as if there was none, is it not to be feared, that justice and probity, should be looked upon as precarious and abfurd, v\[hen, far from be-
mg in esteem, they are ridiculed by the wifest part of mankind ?	-.
I do not intend, Vidforia^ to apologiie for the foibles of my lex Instances of depravity will never justify it in the heart of your Carolina : but let me pity the unfortunate women, whom an abufed virtue, and too unguarded fenSibility, have brought
to ruin and contempt ; though from that ruin, and that contempt, men draw both their fame and glory.
How ridiculous, how preposterous the opinion, that condemns in us thofe very adfions, which it not only applauds in men, but even Sets in an. honourable light! Are we to Support the dignity of
rational beings, while they fport with, it f--------
Is it upon us alone, tliat she Safety and welfare of
mankind
[ V 'l
mankind depend ? How stupidly unjust, infolent, and tyrannical!
I have been led to theSe reflexions, by a Scandalous report raiSed against Lady Wyndham : how well-founded it is, none can tell ; however, every bodyfneers, cenfures, and defames.
Lady Wyndham has every quality to pleafe, and make a man happy; but Lord Wyndham^ after four months marriage, changing on a fuddeij, his flattering behaviour into a mortifying indifference, she at length launched into Society, and most: likely was courted into a revenge.
Lady Wyndham has been Seen twice in a landau, with Sir Henry Mulgrave^ in Windfor-park— And from that circumstance comes the mighty clamor against her reputation, ——Lord Wyndham., to be fure, is not in the wrong, and has had no hand in the feeming mifconduX of his lady : he aXed a& a gentleman : was he to be faithful to an amiable woman who was his wife ? No, no, he is not to be blamed ; and Lady Wyndham, is justly fcanda-lifed, for having youth, beauty, and a feeling
heart.-------Sir Henry triumphs, and Lady Wynd-
ham-----1 am really in a passion at hearing fo many
impertinences-------What is equally stupid, and
infinitely more infufferable, our ladies at court, who should defend the unhappy fair, are the most
diligent promoters of her difgrace.-----^How can
they forget they already are, or foon may be, in need of a greater indulgence themfelves I But there must be fools every where, and upon every stage — I except Brenton-hall, where lives my generous, fenfible ViSioria. Adieu.
London
176
LL T-
[ *8 J
LETTER IX.
WHY do I Seek for retreat, when all the world
pants after joy and diffipation ? Why this
throbbing lieart ?--Whence fo many fighs ?—
Peace, Content, amiable Indifference, ye faithful attendants of my former days, have you forfaken
me ?-----Difmal thought!—Wretched Carolina ! s
An unufual emotion glows through my veins -------1 think, and shudder-------Can nothing afford relief to my dejedled foul ?-Where shall
I look for comfort ?—Mufic, books, fociety, have
lost all their charms, all their illuSion-Pleafure
has fled from my looking-glafs, from my toilet,
from the language of my admirers----fled from
whatever was adiverfion, or a delight to me.-
Lady Prejlon I -----It was you, who inticing
me to the play—No—you were the blind minister of fate—It tempted you, led the, way, and love compleated my mifery.
"What troubles, what anxieties, have I not felt
from that fatal day !----A stranger-------A man
whole birth, manners, fortune, are still unknown
to me------And my heart dares to throb at the
dear remembrance—My mind to dwell upon his
graceful features—Oh ! Victoria ! Victoria !--
Is not my heart
Donst i complain fweetly ?----
ravishingly torn by the imperious and distracting paliion ? Was Victoria ever fo deeply affe6ted as her Carolina? Had she ever a raving minute ? Mercilels Frofby.^ who never raifed your fpirits, by real whims, or apparent inconstancy 1
I hate the man, for not having made you display the over-ruling eloquence inherent to disappointment, jealoufy, fury, and defpair.------Hovr
pleaflng to have feen you v/alk, and lit, and walk
again-----Fetch broken Sighs—Lift your eyes to
heaven, and call for vengeance,, or relief, in Some
noble.,

[ 19 ]
noble, pathetic Soliloquy !—How full of dignity, terror, tendernefs, and Sorrow, each step, each look, each word, each tear !
Nature, Vidioria., formed you to charm under every shape ; how ungenerous then the lover who keeps you from the knowledge of your hidden
charrns !----How few men would deny themfelves
the pleafure of So many expreffive changes, and the yet more inviting temptation of raifing storms in your loving breast, to enjoy a tear, and the extacy of a reconciliation !
Were I inlove—Were I! ’Xis prettily faid, indeed : Well, had I a lover, I would torment him to the utmost ; I would Search into the temper of the man—How could that be done without inspiring him with instantaneous, fierce, and con-tradidtory passions ?
The Secure lover, ever degenerates into—a huf-band. How can his lady, living in a more brilliant, and indulgent Society, help being followed if handSorne, admired if witty, loved if tender, tempted if in her bloom ? Must she dreSs unfashionably, move aukwardly, talk ridiculousty, to pleaSe her Sovereign lord, who begins to be uneaSy, fretful and perplexed ? Must she cast her virtues away, to whirl from folly to folly ? —Had the man’s temper appeared whilst a lover, a fenssble lady would either have denied him her hand, or he would have reformed by the palpability of his abSurdity and impertinence.
Marriage, dear ViAoria^ is So important a bufi-
nefs—Is it not extravagant to treat it with CareleiT-
neis, whilst we are So nice and attentive in the ^ *
choice of an head-dreSs, the colour of a ribbon, or the make of a shoe ?—I doubt whether reaSon is not an empty, name—Whither am I running I— Lord, what a letter I Why does my VAtoria defire her foolish Carolina to write f Lend her thy
pen.
r 20 j
pen, or bid her be filent—“ Anything upon nothing, and nothing upon any thing, rather than nothing at alh”—fiuch were your commands— I obey : So forgive. Adieu.
London
176
LETTER X.
I Was very buSy at my toilet this morning prac»-tiling a new Smile, and improving upon a courtly attitude, when Sir John Modijh Sent his name up. Unwilling to be helped in my deep study by So great an adept, I ordered him to the drawing- room, where I prefently went to receive him.
How ! hardly noon, and So fresh and blooming I I fwear, no woman can boast of fo many native charms as Lady Carolina.
And she man was going to kifs iny hand.
Have you fo ealily forgot Lady Kibforia.^ Sir John., the unrivalled Vidloria P
Would you have me for sher fake be unjust l:o-the accomplished Carolina ?—■
I begged of him to lit down.
When do you propofe to Set off for Cutnler-land K----
in a few days. My Lady. I am come to take my leave and befeech your interest.—You cannot refufe it me.—Tell me. Dear Madam, would you refufe it me ?
My interest !-----Is there any need of it when
Sir John Modijh is the lover }—Only Frojhy in the way, and you call for help !—
1 will unbofom myfelf to you, Madam. When I conlider the charadler, the education, the principles of Lady Vidioria, I do Sincerely mistruft my-feif, and am all apprehenston—Be your amazement
[ 3
ment ever So great, it really is So, and I do not e* ven blush for it—no, not even blush for it.
I could affe(st every quality and .every virtue. Lady Victoria may esteem : I could put on an air of referve and candour, but it would be a deceit, and I difdain it. She must fee me as I am, and there being fo little affinity between us, how can I pleafe ^ how can I be refpefted ?—The thought distradis me. Why am I caressed in London^ and
negleded in Cumberland ?---------Are our manners
here fo opposste to good order as to frighten the artlefs offspring of nature ?—But few women could entertain fo extraordinary a prejudice—^Ought Lady Vidioria to be one of them ?—How hard this ! —Is it not yery hard. Madam ?—
Lady Vidloria, Sir John, knows mankind are, and must be, fubjefl to many foibles : she will as readily praife you for your virtues, as she will pity you for your errors.
Amiable creature !—Would she but fmile upon me! —To be reduced to the point of fearing Frof-by leSs than myfelf! How strange, and unaccountable !—	h
Was there the least shadow of honour in dif-
t
guissng my temper fo as not to be fufpe6led for Sir yohn Modijhy 1 would attempt it——-I would top my part to a miracle.-------How many pre-
tenders to virtue would not Scruple to take advantage of her ingenuity to gain her heart, that their whole life might be a perpetual fcene of joy and happinefs ?—No—let me be ever fo hated I will be like myfelf. If my love, my refpeft for the virtues of Lady Vidioria cannot change me, no pretext whatever shall force me to wear a perfidious
mash.—----She shall never reproach me with the
intention of betraying her into a mistake.—
Pity me, Lady Carolina j and if friendship can allow you to write to her of a man, though un-
worshy
r 22 ]
r
i^orthy of her attention, pray write—Let me b€g the favour on my knee.—
Be pleafed to keep your feat. Sir.—
Proud man! How meek and humble !
He had Such an air of lincerity and concern, that I was really moved—Words flow with fuch
a grace from his lips---He Spoke in fuch a noble
and disinterested mariner—--------What failings
has he that most people of fashion have not ? With this difference, Vidioria, that if folly could decent-ly play on any one’s features, he is almost the only man who could adorn it.
The feed of every virtue is In his foul, and his Jove for thee, will make it Spring up. ’Tis by La-l^oria, fays my mother, with whom Sir John is a great favourite, that he will be made confci-ous, he was not born merely to be a beau : to her he will be indebted for the difcovery of his hidden qualities.
Lord PelhamVidloria^ is a judge of men : fince he esteems Sir John^ notwithstanding his frivolity and dissipation, he must deferve his good o-pinion, and that opinion is an honour and a praife.—
He made me promife I would write : and the man, in the first tranfports 'of his gratitude, clafp-
ed me fo eagerly in his arms*--------How could
I avoid it ?—A kifs was given—yes, a kifs.-----
Was I to thunder?—to thunder for a kifs ! No, no, I wished him a good journey, and fuccefs—and fuccefs, Vidforia !—He went away thanking me
thanking me I-------Surely the man was half mad.
Adieu.
N
London
176
L E T-
- ‘ \'


t 23 1
L E T T E R XI.	•
Lady Victoria Nevil to Lady Carolina
Pelham.
Carolina ! Barest thou thus profane the Sacred language of love ?—Beware, indiscreet girl, of the tender exprestioni—Imitate not the flights of a passion whofe name is terrible
to the most intrepid-----Suffer not thy heart to
heave—Sigh not out a minute in the deceits of thy imagination.—Beware, Carolina^ beware of the bewitching fenfations ever infeparable from the thought of love—-Quickly do they engage the foul with alluring and unrelenting raptures—C^ickly do they warn it of its native deflres ; Once in that delirious Seat of feelings and delussons, prudence struggles in vain—Indifference dies away amidst the fond temptations.
What heart will not run into wild extravagance when the head is possessed with a relistlefs passion ! —Trifle not—Ceafe to trifle, Carolina.^ with mighty Love, lest the Spiteful deity force upon thee the reality of a mimicked flame—Make not thyfelf the fport of a delussve fancy.—Still be thou ignorant of the wretched, restlefs hours that wait on haplefs love—Dread to number the minutes of thy existence by never-dying troubles and anxieties.
Oh, Carolina ! If even the certainty of being loved atones not for the Smallest injustice in the lover : if that injustice is torture to an enamoured foul, to what height of agony might nota hopelefs passion carry thy extreme fenfibility!
A stranger !—Fatal was the day when thy eyes were struck with the lovely youth !—When thy ears listened to his graceful accents ! When thy fond heart by infeblious Sympathy led thee to
gaze.
A
r 24 3
igaze, and applaud I—But—thou lovest him not, Carolina.—Though thy mind is bussed with his charms, thy Soul is yet unacquainted with sseeplefe nights, and perplexing reveries—Thou hast had but a faint fit of love—indulge it not with reflection, or thou art undone—for ever undone.
Thou knowest not the treachery of love—Roufe not the innate wishes of thy foul—Lay not thyfelf
at the mercy of nature--—Forbear to think, to
dream, to talk, to write of love—---Stop thy
straying fancy——Whither would it not wander ?----
You tell me of Sir "John Modifh’——-’ ■ - Can diere be a more convincing proof you love not ?—
Of Sir- John !----Oh, Carolina ! never tell me
but of Frojby. Adieu.
Brent on-half—176---
LETTER XII.
Lady Carolina Pelham to Lady Victoria
Nevil.
«
Lady Pelham and I were just stepping out of the parlour for Soho, when a thundering rap announced a visst. My mother, having forgot she was not to be at home, Lord George Pelerjion was
introduced.
Judge of niy furprife, Vidloria, when I beheld the lovely youth whofe charming image, my heart had, in fpite of prudence, So constantly retained. It was So unforeseen, fo unexpedied a rencontre, that my astonishment would have certainly appeared in an hundred shapes, had I not immediately called to my aid my fan, and my reafon. Our eyes instantly met, arid his confusson, though carefully dissembled, was notlefs vissbie than mine.
Since I came from my travels, faid he to my mother, with a faultering accent, I have been lo much in the country that it was not in my power
to pay your Ladyship my refpedls Sooner-,
But
[ 25 i
i
But, laches, you are going out-----------------I will not
have you stay a minute longer. Lady Carolina would not forgive me, was I to deprive her of her pleastires.
Indeed, my lord, as-it is a^mere chance, whether I shall get or lofe, any pleafure, by staying or going. I’ll willingly venture a few mi-mutes, if my lady thinks we are too foon for Mrs. Comely's------
Mrs. Cornely's.^ Madam-------r-’Tis hardly eight
o’clock.—
We all fat down.
Are you just from Francey My Lord ?—~
Yes, My Lady.---------
All life in Parris ?---
In London we think fo, and never was there a more glaring mistake. No people can excel the
French 'mtho. appearance of happinefs-----------none
are lefs fo in reality.
Idlenefs, pride, and luxury difplay a brilliant show : ’tis.the general Spirit of the nation, though each individual is weighed down with taxes, arbitrary laws, the stupidity of their priests, and the defpotirm of their ministers. Was it not for the noble and Spirited rcststance of their parliaments against the impertinent authority of the pope, and the unjust and ambitious deSigns of the few wicked courtiers who are at the helm of administration, France would be in as abjedt stavery as Venice or VUr key —
You must own, My Lord, that their education is better than ours.-----
If the Frenchy My Lady, postested more virtue, talents, valour, and patriotiiin, than vve, I should be of your opinion, but as the contrary is palpable —-
What notions you have got, Lord Pelerjfon / How came you to think that virtue a necessary part of modern education ?--------In what univerfi-
C

L ]
ty, or academy, is that either thought of or prac-tiled ?---
If generofity, courage, learning, and equity, are to be met with in England., they are the effe<its of liberty, which produces emulation, and leads to grandeur and beroifm, or cf a dilpolition in our Organs, better adapted to rteeive an imprelhon of thcRreat, noble, or Sublime. iThis is an acciden-tal ashantage we owe to n; lure. My Lord, or to the wifdom of our constitution, and fufficient only to form a patriot, a general, an orator, or a man of fenfe ; but for the accomplishments which constitute a fine gentleman, it is unreafonable not to acknowledge we receive them from Prance.
Are not almost all our people of rank and fortune educated in Paris?---------1 s not our vying
here with each sother who shall best mimic the French., and turn common fenfe into buffoonery, an unanswerable argument against you ?-—
That only proves, we have but few good heads amongst us. Madam, and I am heartily forry for it,'--
Few ! when the whole nation------
The whole nation, My Lady I I hope no\t.—
Yes, the whole nation. Are not the people of quality the whole nation? Do not both the to'wti and country take their fastiions and manners from us, and we from France ? Don’t we import from our neighbours our countenances and complexi-i>ns, as well as our Silks, laces, and cambrics ?
Does not that confirm that there are very few good heads amongst us ? What will become of our manufadlurcrs. Madam, our artists, our merchants, our-------
Are we to trouble ourfelves about them ? Is it not for oqrfelves we drefs, dance, and uf« costly furniture ? Must we look frightful, and live mife-, that a few thousands ©f our own country-
mea
rabl¥:
r ^7 1
men may not starve ? Can they dt> any thing for us with taste ? What matters it that thofe unborn plebeians are loaded with wretchednefs, fo long as we flutter at St. JamefSj with gaiety, elegance,
and fplendour ?—---------What is the welfare of
our country, what are the lives oi thoufands, when oppofed by falhion ?—■
I wish. My Lady, the parliament would lay a tax upon every Englijhman^ who shalHearch for his manners out of England^ and not be pleafed with its produce.—
You are too much of a gentleman. My Lord, not to except the ladies in your motion for a pe-^ nalty.—
Are not our ladies endued with beauty, delicacy, and fenfe ? What need of foreign art when fo much favoured by nature ? Were they to value what we have at home, and Set the example of patriotism, who would not follow it ? Who would not be the first to display his love and impartiality for an ingenious and reSpe<stable nation ?—What an-----
How do you like the French ladies. My Lord ?
T'hey have Some charms—
Have they ? Well, that is Something at least France can boast of.—Some charms !
T'he French., Madam, have great parts, great qualities, and perliaps Some advantages over us But I wish the Englijb—
Pray, Sir, give me leave to afk you what art thofe advantages over us ?—
indeed. My Lady, you are So warm an advocate for the French that I could not help complying—
How ! Lord Pelerjlon knows how to flatter, and -comply against his own Sentiments 1 Is not that a French way ?
It will be the way of all the world when Lady
Pelham------
/
C 2
WbrScI
[ 28 ]
"Worfe, and worst, My Lord.
1 think. My Lady, Lord Pelerjton is to be
commended for his iincerity,
You think So, Carolina t—
Do proie6l me, \j?Ay Carolina.—
. You have no need ol her interest, Sir, a nobleman of your principles is an honour to his country : I was in jest, and you have pleastd me mightily. 1 am glad you deferve the good opinion which the public entertains of you.
How agreeably undeceived did Lord George appear ! How gratefully he thanked my mother !— How unwillingly, Vicloria., how unwillingly he took his leave!
When he was gone. Lady P.elh<wi told me (lie
wished fuch a hushand for her Carolina.—Carolina %
fmiled, kissed her hand, tript to the coach, and
fiewto Soho.--------Five o’clock!--------The day
l^reaking upon me 1-----Adieu.
London —176—
LETTER XIII.
Fhe fame to the fame.
I Wish, Vicloria., you would fend me the recipe of your art of pleating, that it might be Spread through she three kingdoms for the honour and advantage of our fex.
Lady Prefon fays there is no li ving with .me, I Set fuch a value upon you, at the expence of everr
Other individual--She whifpers now and then,
that I have lost stveral admirers I might have kept in my chains, had I not unfeafonably fpoke of my amiable friend.
If I am not more loved and refpe61:ed for com<* mending beauty and modesty, what will help me to love and admiration ? And if men wish for the ®bje<st of my praists, am I not amply rewarded by
she
[ 29 ]
4
the assurance that virtue aud delicacy have not yet forfaken them ?—
Would you appear but a week in London------------
But no—stay at brenton-haU, Sor though Carolina has the most exalted friendihip for her Ltdloria^ she has too her share of vanity ; and vanity, in fome circumstances, is not always a rational quality.
I verily believe I could fuffer you to enjoy an u-niverfal empire over mankind : But was your reig® to begin, v^^hether I should not be weak enough to enter the lists to claim it, is really doubtful.
Who can flatter themfelves to be great, noble, and without envy in every sttuation of life ? Being neither a fool, nor an enthustast, I will not pretend to heavenly virtues with a mortal frame.—
A LtxxtxAi'om Cumberland !
, Vhat have you written, Victoria !—What have
I read !----Am I not deceived ?---------Is it then
true that Frojhy was jealous ? Jealous !--------—
The purest heart is not free, in the polite world, from the fufpicion of inconstancy : but Vidoria^ a stranger to art, dissimulation, and flattery—The ingenuous ViCIoriay who never fpoke but truth who never afted but with reafon !—how guilty the man who dares to call her ssneerity in question ! -----How ridiculouily profane !
If ViCloria is not happy in the man she loves, who can expedl to be fo ? Are all men fo unjust and ungenerous, or is it a difeafe peculiar to a few ?—
“ Frojhy c^me, and falling at . your feet, declared his fears—ventured a doubt”—Ah 1 T/r-ioriny had he had to do with Carolina—^^And you, fweet creature, did condefeend “ to listen—and to forgive.”——-I have no patience—I hate you heartily.
London—176
c 3
L E T-
[ 30 I
LETTER Xrv.
Sir John Modish to Lord Pelham.
F T E R three days hard travelling through dirt and Snow, I readied at last my native vdthout vapours or broken bones.
Must Inot be immenfely in love, Fredetdck, thus to have braved the weather under its most hideous Shapes? And it is the roving Sir John., who willingly expofed his delicate frame to the mercileft inclemencies of a tempestuous feafon for a girl of eighteen 1—
How you would laugh at me, was not the in-chanting ViFiOria' the objed of fo much heroifm !
-------She excuSes and justifies all, the heavenly
maid !—More rationally might a man turn knight-errant in the defence ot her charms, than a commoner lofe his popularity and virtue for the miserable honour of a place, or a title.--What are
grandeur, riches, and distinction, to the unSpeak-able pleafure of wandering over rocks and mountains, through valleys and forests, to assert the Superiority of the most exquifite beauty, the most exalted charadler that heaven ever formed ?
What greater encouragement to forget the wliole world, than to hear her voice, and gaze on her lovely figure ?—A fenfible being can never v/ilh
never dream of a more Satisfactory fenfation--
a more engaging blifs.—Far from me the idea of any other happinefs—All my defices are centered in the fight of my Fibioria, and the- flattering hope of pleafmg her.
Were you to behold Vi Aorta, no longer, Frede^
rUiy would you defy the allurements of love.---
How quickly undone by the bewitching illufions furrounding her !—how fuddenly changed into a wiy lover I—ho’/v delighted with the new emotion I
how
/
[ 31 1
-------how vexed not to have Selt it Sooner ! Th^
greater your wifdom, parts, and delicacy, the more rapid would her triumph be, and your defeat.
She has hundreds of refiftlefs charms to force her
t
empire into the proudest heart.-----Innumerable
graces constantly wait upon her, and call for our homage. Who could behold—who could listen, and not Submit, not adore !—Impossible—impof-fible.
II o’clock.
The gay, the fluttering Sir "John Modijh, who never once ferioufly pronounced “ I love you”-— who never courted pleafures, which were not graced by pride, fashion, or infpiredshy the enthu-fiafm of youthful blood—who would hazard both life and fortune to be fung, celebrated, and talked of—Oh, Frederick / cannot you restore me to the
identity of that vain, noify, carelefs fellow ?-1
look for him in myfelf—but where is he ?
If no longer Sir yohn Modi/}}—what am I—Am I not really that very Sir Lohn who could deny rea-fon, laugh at morality, admire Hobbes.^ applaud Bolingbrokey and Soberly indulge in every folly ? Love Surely has not fuch a power, and were I once more in the airy regions of St. James’Sj I should recover from this fall.
There is a Talifman in thefe mountains, fo powerfully opposste to vice and modern taste—fo forcibly attrailive to- honour, religion and virtue —Why came I hither after an abfence of fifteen years r—Curiofity, my Lord, curiofity—Mow Severely am I punished for it!
Lady Carolinay the lovely Lady Carolinay never ceafed to praile her Victoria —“ She had every qua,'fication, every beauty, every virtue, that €0”id nossibly be wiflied for.”
C 4	It

[ 32 3
r It was So'new to me, to hear one handfome woman fpeak So favourably of another, that 1 longed to know if there could be Such a treafure hidden in Cumberland.—I came, Frederick., and Saw the terressrial angel.—1 knew not which was most to be commended, Lady Carolina for doing justice to her friend, or Lacly tddoria for deferving her encomiums So well.—How generous Lady Carolina ! but how fatal hvrgeneroSity tome >
Awed by the facred afpedf of virgin decency— confeious of my own unworthinefs, I addressed at a distance my homage to the deity ; but the fame of my follies being between her and me, I was compelled to love—ssgh—and adore in sslence.
Dejeifed almost to distra£i:ion, not daring to fpeak, to look, to offer my incenfe, I left the country in a moment of defpair, and ssed for relief to London.
I tried, I abufed every pleafure----Spite of my
most fertile imagination, the idea of Victoria still intruded, and damped the brilliant wanderings of my reafon.'--------No days without thinking--------
Dead to What a Si-
no nights without dreaming of her pleafure, though eager to enjoy it-tuation, my Lord, what a wretched Situation !
At last, certain of being a stave—adefpifed stave, I came back to find fault with Victoria—to rebel— to break my chains.
I o’clock.
On Monday last I went to Brenton-hall.—FrF derick^ how ssiall 1 tell thee of my ffame ?—How weak, how difconcerted in the prefence of beauty, when virtue, imprinted on every feature, gives life to the angelic form, and commands our re-
fpecst; and admiration !--The intrepid Sir John
paid his devoirs to the ingenuous Victoria with a
faltering voice
a trembling leg-
- a fhaking kanci-----
[ 33 1
hand------a lively red on his cheek—a stupid con-
fuSion in his eyes—Could you have believed it, my Lord ?—Could you have thought it possible From fuch an height funk fo low !—Heavens ! and I have out- lived the oilgraceful minute.
By good luck, Mrs. Brenton attributed rny un-maniy carriage to theintenfe coldnefs of the day.
You look not fo well as you did. Sir John------
This climate will not agree with the foftnefs of a courtier’s complexion—Sit near the fire—-I drew fo near it—
Not fo near neither, you may endanger your health by fo rapid a tranfition from cold to extreme heat.——
Dear Madam-----------1 am better-----
And I fat next to Vibloria.
What do they fayin	^'w john?—
I think. Madam, it would be more a propcs to tell you what they do not fay—
Why fo ?------
They are fo unnecessarily taken up with mighty
trifles, fo bufy about nothing------
How was Lady Carolina.^ Sir John ?------
Then, Frederick^ I became an orator, and, thanks to your charming fister, was listened to with complacency and attention, •
How I longto fee her, Sir\Ji?A/ But the dear girl delights too much in London: (he will not
leave it for Brenton-hall---There is no life here
for my Carolina.----
The converfation having lasted half an hour, to the great comfort of your distressed friend, Mrs. Brenton dessred I would fpend the day with them^ y ou may be fure I gave her not the trouble of another invitation.
I shall be back in two minutes, faid Mrs. Bren-ton^ and sherofe to go out of the room,
C 5	,,
« T'here
[ 34 J
- «c xiiere is a fine opportunity for you. Sir Johffi^ You think fo, my Lord : but there is no Such thing with Lady Victoria. , When I tell you there is no Such thing, you may believe me : no body would have more readily Seized it, and Since I did
not, depend upon it there was none-----no, none,
even for the word of Love.
How can you prefer this retreat, my I>ady, to Londoti ?—this retreat to this Society of your Carolina -------rWhy So Solitary when So eminently
formed to be Seen-------admi------
I know Carolina has the highest friendfiiip for me ; but she has a noble heart, John. 1 should forfeit her esteem was I to leave Mrs. Brentony whilst my prefence can contribute to her happineSs.
Gratitude is in the heart of Carolina-—but what, virtues has not my diScreet and Senfible friend ?
Am I alone with So many duties to difeharge, with an aunt for whom I feel the love and reSpedt of a daughter ? Would you think yourSelf alone. Sir,, with a tender parent'? -—r—
What would you have me anSwer to that question, Frederick i Y es or N o ?—
“ Neither of them. Sir John.”
Very right, my Lord, the No was fo impertinent a lie, the Yes Such an unSeaSonable truth—
. Your notions are So refined. Madam, that few people upon earth——
Refined ! are they not in nature and reafon ? Yes, my Lady : but they are So little attended to in a world where opinion and convenience favour she contrary Sentiments, that it Seems to be tacitly agreed not to mind them at all : of courfe, there are very few Carolinas—very few Victorias.— and still fewer men who deServe them,—
Your remark is too Severe, Sir John the world is not-fo bad—’tis a real misfortune to believe it So ’Tis an outrage bosh to Society and ourfelves.
Principles,
[ 35 ]
Principles, my Lady, contradisted by pleafui^ or felf-interest, "have no effe6l on men fwayed by every blast of pastion, every caprice of the age : the distemper being almost univerfal, shame no longer difgraces thofe who labour under it.
Virtue has few votaries, and reafon is led and intoxicated by the most trifling whim or delire. Fastiion and luxury have driven men from every hold of honour, and honesty ; and no pretext is left untried to justify the delirious flights of our heads and hearts. Modesty is called auhwardnefs, innocence stupidity—---------
Stop, Sir Johny stop. What an odious and defpicable character you give me of mankind ! Is it poffible that men should have deviated fo far from the dignity of their nature, as to relist the Sacred voice of reafon, and coolly fpurn at morality
whofe precepts are ingrafted in our hearts ?----------
Will not the negleif of thefe Supreme laws, fill Society with the utmost diforder, and diffufe a general contempt of friendship, justice, and probity ? ———‘There may be men, indeed, whom a mean education has caufed to err, and diflionour humanity—
Alas ! my Lady, ’tis not of them I Speak. They are generally obedient to the laws, and attached tO religion. Their vices are as inlignificant as their virtues, being Soon punished if guilty, and never rewarded though truly deferving. Tis the men
of rank, and fashion-------his the learned I have
charafterifed.'----.Thofe only who enjoy wealth,
credit and power, poiflelling innumerable means to be vicious with impunity, readily gratifying their passions, and—	&
Mrs. Brentm coming in with FroIby^ I rofe up — Lady Vidloria received him with a chearful look and a half Smile—......-
Mr,
[ 36 ]
f Mr. Frojhy is tall, and v»?ell-shaped, and has a noble air ; was he more degagie.^ and lively in his countenance, he might cut a handfome figure a Lady A-La-ModFs rout, he talks well, and fenfi-bly at Brenton-baU—hui would hardly be intelligible any where elfe. T he man would do to perfection for the pulpit—he—But why of	when
my heart is full of Vibloria !
Dear Frederick .f How fhe has compofed my restlefs fpirits by her affability ! Divine creature !
How fweet tempered, though virtuous 1------how
gay, though difcreet !—How the day flipped a-way !—I came refolved to hate, and to be free !-— What a monstrous letter!—Forgive, Frederick^ the tranfports of a lover, who could write for ever of the beauty he adores. Adieu.
^	Modijh-hall—1/6
LETTER XV.
Lady Carolina Pelham to L dy Victoria
Nevil.
though she “ don’t them was she
VI C T O R I A forgives li,er Carolina., and
though my expreffions are pretty ievere
know but Frojhy might deferve to coniult reaion in her judgment
against him.”
Well I knevv, Vibloria, that love could neither annihilate, in your heart, the holy ties of friendship, nor render you unjust towards Carolina. I had no need t#any new proofs of the foiidity of your principles, and greatnefs of foul ; I wrote to Vidloria^ and was certain she would have challenged my fincerity, had I not fpoke what I really
thought.
How then could I not condemn !
But as you have forgot the past injuries, and Frof-hy has pVomifed never to renew them, I am Silent.
Sir
[ 37 ]	«
Sir John has made his appearance at Brentotr hall.- “ He was polite and fubmiflive to a fcruple to ■ Mrs. Brenton : he kissed her cat—played with
her lap-dog-----fed her birds-----Sung whende-
fired—and lost his money at piquet.”
He must undoubtedly take with the old lady, or I am prodigioussy deceived : thefe trifles are of the greatest moment when done with grace, and a becoming fpirit.
“ He did her the honour of the virtues So conspicuous in my Vidloria.”
. How he flattered her pride !
“ And Mrs.	was heard to fay. This ii
£ man indeed !”
Was it a fneer or a compliment ?
Is it for
being like no body of her acquaintance, that he has pleafed or difpleafed her fancy ?—You Should have given me a Sketch of her looks, and manner of her pronouncing the words.
“ Sir John was gay, thoughtlefs, witty---------
and neither noiSy nor troublefome,-—He was cold but complaifant to Frojby—decent and refpe6fful to yidloria—and (he has not to complain of one look, or expression.—
You are amazed, that “ a man can fo eafily Skip from the extremes of libertinifm to thofe of decency, and you question whether he is not all falsehood and perfidy. Since fuch a change can only be the work of time, or the fear of univerfal defertion and contempt.”
Your observation, Vidloria, may be just with rcfpe(st to men naturally vicious, or hardened m corruption through idlenefs, habit, or stupidity : but they who, like Sir John., have been Solely led astray by fashion, youth, and caprice, are quickly recalled to the paths of honour, discretion, and
virtue.----There are always hopes of a man of
parts, Spirit, and ingenuity.-----1 could give you
many
S 3M
many instances of people of rank, who are universally esteemed, though they—But to what pur-pole should I justify ?)\xJohn? You have no intention to take him for a lover—cannot he do for an acquaintance ?—If he Seems what he really is not, why be offended at him So long as he is not himfelf ?
Sir John is to be commended for waiting upon Vidioria with the badges of as many good qualities as he can poshbly adorn himfelf with. His an homage he pays her virtues, and an evident acknowledgment of her Superiority over him.——— Adieu, be happy, and no longer complain of my Silence.
“ I will not forgive it, Carolina^—
You must, Vidloriny you must—I have nothing material to write—No, nothing material.—
“ Carolina^ Carolina! and Lord Pelerjlon V Will you not believe me, Vidloria ? Adieu.
London— 176
LETTER XVI.
L})e fame to the fame.
Lady Pelham has just lent an invitation to Lord Pelerfon to dine with us to-morrow. , Men, Said she to me, cannot be perfeilly known but by a familiar communication ; one hour of friendly converfe, of unaffeiled tittle-tattle, brings them more effedlually to our knowledge, than ten years of formal vistts. '
If Lord Pelerfon bears examination, and de-ferves my daughter’s good opinion, he will be welcome at any time, without the necessity of a compliment-card.—I beg my Carolina will always ipeak to her mother with the opennefs of a friend, and nevC^ distinguish her from the amiable Vte-
toria.
[ 39 ]
iorla.—IS any thing of moment—if any preference for Lord Pelerjion—
And she cast on me fuch a piercing look, Vidloria !
I imagine, Carolina, that my fulsticions were not
fo ill founded—
Dear My Lady—
And I stopped, undetermined what to anfwer, fo furprifed was I at the unexpedled djfcovery.
Can Carolina hefitate to difclofe to me the Secrets »f her heart!—Does she question my love for her And tenderly throwing her arm round my neck
What does my Carolina think, ?-----Has Lord
Pelerjion made any impression on my lovely daughter ?—If it were fo, is Carolina to be ashamed of her passion ?—Is not Lord Pelerjion the man ? Such a good mother, Victoria!
I leaned my head upon her bofom, to hide a lilush, but was betrayed by a trickling tear.—
Speak, my love. Speak : I am thy friend.----^
How is it with thee ?—
Indeed, Madam, I am this moment more af-fe<sted by your extreme generofity, than any regard I entertain for Lord Pelerjion,—
But at any other moment, how does he affe£t you ?
I neither lo—ve, nor hate him.
Hate him I Why should you ? you hate him, Carolina.—Come—
—I wonst have fit down,-----
nearer me—nearer still.—Now tell me all—I’ll keep thy Secret: depend on me.
Thea, then, Vidloria, 1 knew not how to begin—what to tell.
’Tis fo trifling, dear mother—fuch nonfenSe.—.
Well, let me have that nonfenSe.—Cannot you grace it ?—Let me fee how eloquent and feeling my Carolina is.—
I Smiled, and taking both her hands in mine
I accidentally faw Lord Pelerjion at the play-
houSe

[ 40 ]
houfe—he was in the next box-------he talked with.
o much Senfe------So much wit, that I could not
help listening—and being pleafed.—No man ever fixed like him the eyes, and attention of your
Carolina -r-
I kissed her hand.
When I came home. Lady Prejlon, who had been with me to the play, obferved I was abfent and perplexed, tho’ I did all in my power to humour her lively temper.--------You yourfelf, my
Lady, remarked my being unufually grave and
thoughtSuL-----------1 own I liked to call back the
voice, the features of the unknown man, and to,
mufe upon him.—--------•! knew not his name, nor
did I fee him again till his visst to you,—
You have feen him lince :----he has been here
often—Is he fenfible of my Carolina's worth ?— Were there any ssncerity in a man’s eyes, and expressions, I would make no doubt of his affection.—
Has he declared himfelf ?
No. But he looks—^—
he fpeaks fo much to he is fo assiduous—fo refpe6tful^— fo full of meaning when sslent---One day this
the purpofe
week, as we fat down to cards, he stole behind my
chair and Softly whifpered----fo Softly !-----^—
“ Happy the man who shall pleafe the amiable Ca-
rdinaP------ Is this a fign he loves your Carolina-^
dear mother ?------
And you neither lo-ve, nor hate him ?
Spare your daughter.----Spare your Carolina
And 1 fell at her feet.
I ought to refent your unfriendly discretion, Carolina.—But—but^-------
She pressed me to her bofom Thy choice is thy forgivenefs,-
May Pi-
lerjion know all thy value, and deferve thee !
And Lord Fanjly^ dear mother, Lord Panjiy^
that
I 41 J
that man So lavish of his stupidity ! —So preSum-ingiy tedious !—
,A fine encomium, Carolina, a fine encomium indeed 1—
So teazing! ous !----
So plaguing !—So extremely odi-
Why don’t you keep to your clofet, take a book, or have a head-ach, when he comes ? —
Then must I be for ever fick or alone.—When is he not here ?—
A hard cafe upon my word for a young Lady of your beauty and Spirits !-Why don’t you mar-
ry Lord Charles to get rid of him ?—
Dear mother—
Come, don’t be uneafy—I’ll fee what is to be done : go and get ready for the opera.
As I was going----
4 Hear me, Carolina-----Be Sure to leave at your
toilet, that loving face of yours.—^-1 will not
^	1	*	\	f	7 ♦
be deprived of my gay Carolina.
Remember,
let me not Seek for you when you are with me.
Are you not in love with Lady Pelham, dear VibJoria, for being fo good to her Carolina f—the excellent mother !—
What’s the matter, Lucy ?--------
My Lady waits for
A light, quickly, a light, I must Seal this letter.
Scold me no more, fweet Victoria, for not having written to, you Sooner about Lord Pelerjion: I had----- ,
%
Come, Lucy, fold this, and I’ll to the looking-glafs----Have 1 no flowers ?
Here they are, my Lady.—.....
Adieu, Fidiotria, adieu.
London 176
♦ > ' •
^	^^ V
LET-
[ 4^ J
i
LETTER XVII.
Sir John Modish to Lord Pelham.
TA I S death to doubt, but worfe than death to-
know we have a rival—a rival favoured by
ViAor i--------Killing certainty !-
Alas ! Why ha^^e 1 not the infeniibility of a stoic ? Why did nature give me a foul fo paffionate Spirits fo inflammable?—Fatal prefent!--
What ________________—................—
an'happy rival, when our hearts are filled and' torn by love, the fiercest of all passions !
Is it not cowardice rather than magnanimity,
that prompts me to forgive ?---Could virtue hold
my arm, and triumph over my thirst of revenge ?
—---------An. happy rival!-----Oh, Frederick !
Keep me from yielding to an ungenerous thought •—preferve my tortured foul from the abyfs of de-fpair—let me not be unworthy of thy friendship.—
O love! thou lively and bewitching passion, how we doat upon thee !—How charmingly thou en-
terest our hearts I—--—how grateful thou art
to otir fenfes !—how willingly we obey whatever
thou Gommandest !—An happy rival 1------ and my
hands are not yet imbrued with the last drop of his blood !—my eyes have not yet been feasted with the fight of him inanimate at my feet !—He Survives my fury !—he is happy, and neither of us is annihilated !—Rage and madnefs, come and prey
upon my effeminate Spirits.----fet them all on
fire, and diffufe over them the oblivion of honour and humanity. Let both the lovers share in my unhappinefs, and plunge with me to the bottomlefs pit of everlasting mifery.—Must I fee infulting joy Sparkle in their eyes, content fmile in their faces, and pleaSure enliven every feature ? Oh, Frederick !
\
[ 43 I
the image is too let me call for
fid I My virtue forSakes me striking—the wound too deep
ries and distraction.---
Reafon, reafon !—Can reaSon oppofe pastion— argue with a delirious lover, and make him obey
her dictates ?------Thou shield of infenstbility,
away !—Encounter not the violent storms to which
my foul is a fport ! ----:,Away !-----Whatcanst
thou avail me ?—Frojby shall die !—What have I Said ? Frojby shall die I —^—What crime has he committed, which I would not be guilty of ? Must Frojby die for enjoying the Supreme blifs of pleafing Victoria f—Has he stolen it from me ? Was he not the first,—the fortunate first, who Saw, and
adored ?-----Have they injured me in loving each
other ?—What right have 1 to trouble them ——> to rob them of their felicity ?—If I love ViSlorta^ ought I not to revere her choice, to Sacrifice nay existence to her happineSs ?—What a Selfish monster am I I—To have a defire that is not in favour of Victoria—that is not in favour of Frojby • ■ Wretched and unjust Sir John^ and thou thinkest
thyfelf humane and generous !-----Alas !- let them
love—let them be happy—let me not cloud the days of Vidtoria with Sorrow and distreSs !—Inforce the virtuous reSolution, Frederick -—let not thy
friend err, reafon him into benevolence.'--------
Adieu, ril endeavour to compofe mySelf, and to entertain no thought unjustifiable by honour, Dt-derick and Viktoria.
Modijio-hall—176—-
LETTER
XVIII.
Lady
Carolina Pelham to Lady Victoria
Nevil.
I Had just stepped to my clofet from breakfast,
when Lord Pelham came to pay me his morning vifit.
What

[ 44 J
/
What news, brother ?—
People running mad about the stamp-acst !
The ftarnp-a6t !—That’s no news at all, my Lord.—
Ho w ! No news !—
No. Can an v thing be right, and not be wrong in London ? How could we live without parties and contradictions ? Is not halS the nation diffe-
rently organ! fed from the other ?
Nothing
more necessary to keep life and fpirits amongst us. There would be as much faid and written about my ssipper, as about Lord	and his enemies,
was I to Set it in opposstion to that of the accom-plifhed Lady Harriet St***'^*e. Political and religious controversy have their native feat in England^ and as our temper greatly partakes of the mutability of our climate, we are always ready to
engage for or against--------no matter which. So
we may but quarrel, ssander, or defame. Were it not for this charming amufement, we ,should be devoured by the fpleen—life w'ould be a vexation, a real evil.—
You are very merry, ssster.—
Why should I not be So ? Am I to concern my-Self about what I cannot do, or honourably repeal
when it is done ?------Was not Garrick unufually
great in Macbeth on Tuefday ?----
He was not, Carolina. Ever feeling, natural,, and fublime Garrick is immutably himfelf.—
How did you like the opera last night, was k not immensely well performed ?—	'
It had been So—but for the words and the mu-lic.—
What do you mean, my Lord ; the words and the mussc ! Is not that the whole opera ?
The whole opera I YooMh Carolina. Does it naakeany part of it to an EngliJ}) audience ?—Is it
not
f 45 I
«i6t ror the dances, decorations, macliinery, and Ihe honour of England alone, that we annually
monopolize the best muficians of Europe?'---------
Who ever thought, orfaid, if in their fenfes, that an unmeaning found could pleafe ?—What are all Italian ojpev3iS but difcordtoan Englijh earr What fatisfailion can foreign mustc, fet to foreign words, ive me ? It may afford inexpressible raptures at
otne., Venice^ or Florence., but in London--
How you talk, my Lord, when all the world is
inchanted, ravilhed with the melody of------
I am glad,	you are fo mighty fond of
it : As for me, I would rather hear Artaxerxes., and a Handef than Falentiniano, and all the Cafa-rellFs of Italy.—	/
Oh the barbarian, the b rbarian 1 A Peer of
England not a virtuofo ! And my brother !---------
Shame, shame, for Carolina—You dare to fmilc Out of my clofet, out of my clofet, or this moment recant—yes—you must recant—
Are you mad, Carolina ?—
Thank you, my Lord—But tell me, my very wife brother, why, fpite of the hon-ton^ you dare to think well of tht Englijh f Can they ling, dance, or perform like the fpnghtly iishabitants of the South ? Were not this reallv the cafe, should we
^	m	^
•be fuch fools as to pay twenty times as much for diverlions we can find at home r—What have you to anfwer ?—Are we shdeed fuch fools ? Pray fpeak, my l ,ord—
We are, Carolina.
We are !------And you are not yet out of my
fight!—
You are not then of my opinion, lister ?-----
Of your opinion !—Since you will not favour me with an immediate retreat, PH take a book, and fpeak no more.-----
W hence
I will
r 46 i
Whence that contempt, Carolina, when lately you had So high an opinion of our Englijl) performances ?—
I, my Lord?—you mistake—A Lady of taste
and fafhion I—
So, with a Splendid fortune, you would employ «o native ?—
No—in no way whatever.—
I thought that once Lady Fanfly—
Lady Fanfly /—7'his is not to be borne play and Sing my favourite air Fate la Carita, if you do not march off.----
Well, do: I’ll listen with the greatest plea-stjre.—
Will you really ?—
I will indeed.-—
And you think to betray me to your opinion by m fawning compliment ?—
My opinion ! I never believed you differed from «ie.----
Such another word, and I am to the iiarpfi-♦ord. —«
Let me lead you to it—
And you would have me play ?—
Certainly.
I’ll pleafe you then, my Lord.——Pray-
what tune ?-Where’s your colle£Iion of
ione and l^auxhall Songs ?—Which of them.
His Lordship could stand it no longer, he burst into laughter, and retired crying. What a girl ! what a girl !—Remember your commands.
LETTER XIX.
The fame to the fame.
Most of she company had already come
when Lord Pelerfon entered the room. I beheld him, Victoria, without a Swimming head, or an aching heart. He prefented me with a rofe :
1 Smiled^
r +7 5
I fmited, made a fine curtfey, and put it in my* bofom.
Had you Seen how the man’s eyes Sparkled with joy at the distinguished honour 1 paid his flower, how he looked whenever I Smelt it, you would have complimented me for making Such a noble ufe of Ji tn fle.
Why should we nor Set off a nothing to its best advantage when it may fill a lover’s breast with pleafure, without discovering our real Sentiment f
“ Carolina! Lovers are So eager after the least
shadow of a promising possibility watchful of a motion or alook”-
So diligendy
Well, Fibforia^ what then ?
“ Only that Lord Fekrjhn eafily read in youf countenance how generous you was, and that’s a bagatelle you know. What could he infer from your peculiar attention to his flower ? Nothing at all, to be fure, men are fo modest, fo unwilling to be agreeably deceived, fo averfe to their own happinefs”-----
And fo, VUloria.) you think Lord Pelerjion Said to himfelf, “ this girl loves me,” and that to his rofe heis indebted for the daring thought.— I am afraid you are right, for. Lady Prejion stealing k out of my bofom, I inconfiderately ran after, and recovered it with an emotion I could not fupprefs. Lord Peletjlon darted at me fuch a grateful ey«
----------and then coming to me-..
How kind you are. Lady Carolina!—
W as not the man very indifereet, Vicloria F Oh ! my Lord, 1 am fo fond of a rofe: it looks fo gay at this feafon of the year----
And then, turning to my feat, I left him to confider whether he had not mistaken me.
I was not a little startled at his Lordship’s pre-fumption, and concluding that the paost infigni-
ikant
t 4« ]
^cant prefent, naturally, becomes of confequcnce, when given by a lover, I instantly gave myfelf the look ot indifference.
At dinner we had words for reafon, and stander for wit: None outihone in that eminent French accomplishment my Lady Courtly., and Lord Fanjiy.
1 congratulated his Lordship upon his unufual fprightlinefs, and obligingly complained he had never bestre favoured me with fo many bon mots. .
How ftverc, my Lady ! Was I ever different from myfdf? How came I to pleafe to-day ?—r— Is it in compliment to Lady Courtly you are fo
enfto me r-—--------
In compliment to me! cryed her Ladyship with a sheer—To yourfelf my Lord, to yourfelf you are indebted for Lady Carolina’^ encomiums on your brilli.int vivacitd, and the delicate choix of your expressions—--------
Madame,vous avez bien de la bonte. ’Tis true I have made the tour of Europe—
KJi un belle chofe,, my Lord, que de vc'iager. How we improve by it 1 We talk, move, think fo wretchedly before we fet off, but when we return, qu^on eji charmant, aimable, & fiegant!—Was you crer at Venice, Lord Felerjion ?
Yes, my Lady---------
Delighful Spot! I cannot conceive how a young nobleman can think of retiring to the trijle, en-me, iff abominable London, after having once enjoyed les plaiftrs du Carnaval. This I stand is the most shocking corner of the globe. Is it not
So, Lord Fanjiy ?-----—
be fure, my Lady, to be Sure.
You have been a Cicijbeo in Genoa, Lord Pe-lerjlon?—
Nf), Madam : I never had that honour.
Not
[ 49 3
Not
a Cidjheo ! unfortunate indeed t—How could you possibly Spend your time ?j
I was very bufy, my Lady-------—
Bufy 1 a votre age., my Lord! Bufy in Italy
--------Cela me pajfe.---Pray what was you So
bufy about ?—
The study of manners, policy------
And it was for the manners and policy of a people you had no concern with, that you left England, and was not a Cicijheo ! Prodigious upon my honour. Was the study of mankind of greater moment than the waiting as a gallant fer~ viteur upon a fine lady in Italy ?—Did you study mankind. Lord Fanjiy ?—
Mankind, my Lady ! Not I indeed—-
I thought fo.-----What is that study good for.
Lord Pelhatn ?—Mankind !—
It is a very necessary and ufeful study, my Lady------
Necessary, my Lord !—Pray no more of it; ssnce it is necelSary, it must not be agreeable to
be explained.—Is it not So, Lord Vanfly f----
To be Sure, my Lady, to be Sure.
Lord Pelerflon, your fnuffbox has Something peculiarly striking : will you give me leave to look
at it ?-------how curioussy defigned !—;—how
admirably executed !—how charmingly inlaid ! Each part is a beauty—Venfemhle eji parfait. Bought in Paris., no doubt ?—
No, my Lady, 1 had it made in London—■
In London!—well—I believe it—Strange how abfent 1 was!—This Cupid and this arrow want proportion—no fineJLe in Venuds Smile—the garland is extravagantly loaded—what confuSion in the colouring !—no part is finished—/’ enfemble e(l detejiable—(hall we go to cards. Lady Pelham ?
A s you pleafe, my ,Lady-----
f thought, laid Lord Pelerjlon^ as he led me
D	out
r
y
l so ] ■
I
out of the dining-room, that frivolity and imper-tinence'should never have difgraced the quality of
England-----Unhappy land, where honour ai d
difcretion are no longer esteemed but by a few !— And you could efcape the fatal contagion, amiable Carolina !—You could glory in reafon and virtue, though graced with wit and beauty—
Lefs partiality, my Lord.—Believe me, though opinion commands the manners of ladies of fashion, it has no influence on their hearts— Generous Lady Carolina!—How worthy of being admired !—How—how I love you !-------
Come, Carolina^ faid Lady Frejlon.^ let us have Some mufic.—
With all my heart.—
Lady Pelham that minute calling Lord Peler-Jion^ Carolina tript to her clofet, followed by the “ how I love you 1”
I fat diredfly to the harpfichord, but the “ how I love you 1”
How you play, Carolina ! are you not ashamed ? Come—to it again—you don’t accompany me I cannot flng.—
Could I help it Victoria ! did he not fay, “ how I love you !”—Bewitching words !—Prejlon am I right ?—
Not quite—So So—now you are—What is the matter with you, Carolina?—wrong again.—
Ah I Did he not fay “ how 1 love you !”— London.^ 176—
LETTER XX.
Lady Victoria Nevil to Lady Carolina
Pelham.
THough every line of yours, Carolina.^ should
be for the future filled with invedfives against Mr. Frojhy, rely on my forgivenefs. I will Smile at the lively strokes, and admire your wit.
N ever ■
[ 51 1	^
Never tire when you tell me, I must ceafe to love him—must ceafe !—It is already done, Caro-^ Una., believe me, I love him no more.
Why should 1 ?—Has he not invited me to hate him?—has he not befpoke my contempt by his behaviour ?—has he not wantonly trifled with my peace, by forcing into my heart passions I never knew before ?—What had I to do with anger and hatred, when fo charmed with his love and my own?—Was he to infpire me with them, Carolina, and to be their first objecst ? Could not he bepleafed without rendering me miferable?—
1 am fuch a stranger to the new guests which have intruded into my heart, that I fincerely wish they would depart. Their language is quite unintelligible to me.—Alas! was I to learn it from Frojhy ?—from Frojby !—Ah, Carolina, could you have thought it ?
How often has he not fworn at my feet, he would love me for ever!—Nay, even yesterday he nad the very look, the very countenance, as the first day in which he declared his passion. He was cautious of difpleaSmg, and fearful to offend. —modesty, love and difcretion, were beautifully blended in his air and manners.—Never was he fo loving, fo amiable, fo delicately attentive.—I gloried in my lover, happy in his virtues, confci-ous of his love, and my power over him I—^It was a dream, Carolina—a dream from which he
tliis morning awaked me.--------—How I hate
him !---------Why did he draw off the veil that
concealed^him from me, when the full view was to be So unfavourable and destructive I—Never would I have attempted to have freed myfelf from the eiichanting error, fo charmingly was I entertained
with it.----Delightful deception ! and Frojhy has
destroyed it!—How I hate him I
D 2	I never

r
[ 52 ]
I
1 never thought Frofoy could be unjust—Is not injustice a vice, and the character of a bale foul ? Oh, Carolina ! My pen drops from my fingers I must take breath.
Frofby unjust !——fo low and contemptible !— and I love him! —No, no, Carolina^ 1 love him no more,—I will have no foible which reafon can upbraid me with.
Fatal knowledge ! dreds.---
...... One vice is linked to hun-
When we blush not for one, are not
others ready to follow at the first call of pafSion ? —One step from virtue—my head fwims heart is torn—I will write no more.
my
I have wandered by myfelf through the garden and the little park, and though I carefully avoided every place that could recall the idea of Frjboy., I Said, here he stole a kifs, and was forgiven—there he prefented me a flower which he would himfelf have put in my bofom, had I not Snatched it from him—in this place he fpoke of love, and I listened
to him----in that, I anlwered his Sighs, and told
I loved.-----Oh, Carolina! Then—then, he
was worthy of me.--------
---1 ever listened.—
“I will forget he ever
Alas ! how pain-
fpoke----
I can neither Sit nor walk.
ful to hate!-----Was my heart, my tender heart
to feel that torment!-------Vidloria., to hate!-----
Frojhy lo be hated!------—I am destraCted 1--------
Detest love, Carolina., detest it, never think of it, fear the mifchievous God : the pains he caufes
are unfpeakabie and not to be borne. -------Avoid,
mistrust, listen not to Lord Pelerjlon----like Prof-
by^ he may talk deceit------look foftnefs-----liniie
thy foul into the belief he loves thee-----Solitude
adds to my dejeCfion, and enlivens my Sorrow—
Yesterday, fo happy----------to-day, fo wretched!
What
[ 53 1
What a fad change in a few hours !—-------Unjust,
ungrateful Frojhy ! -	—How great his remorfe.
if he love and repents!
How miferable has his
fighed a
indifcretion made me!—How many tears! Can
he ever expiate for them 1—in what esteem I held
him !—Oh ! I love him no more--------1 hate him.
• ______
If he loves and repents !—Carolina, I’ll relent '•—I’ll pity. hiiU'-^if he feels but the half of my vexation, he must be pitied.—How could he fup-port the horrors which will follow his return to
reafon-----his return to love—his convidlion of
having offended.—Shall I be mercilefs?—I merci-lefs ?—-Oh ! Carolina, Carolina !—
I was reading your last letter when Frojby came in.
A letter from Lady Carolina P Yes, Sir.—
Will you favour me with a perufal of it?
I was furprifed at his curioSity, and negative.
1 am very likely concerned in it.—-You are not. Sir.—
If fo, would you refufe to shew it me ?—
Does Mr. trojby doubt my word ?—
My L'jdy—can you have any fecrets which I may not know ? —
My fecrets are yours—would you have me betray thofe of Lady Carolina F—
Mighty fecrets, to be fure, stnce I am not to be trusted with them !—And you prefer your friend to me, my Lady ?—
Would not you defpife me, Sir, were 1 to fa-crifice my honour to your curiofty ?
Could you hefitate, did I require it ?—Anfli to ho,d the fecond rank in your heart—Lady Carolina to have the first I—Convince me she has it not by delivering me that letter.—
Da	I refufed
X

r 54 ]
I refufed—he inSisted, till at last, vexed to the foul, I reproached him with his indiscretion. Then, Carolina^ he turned pale with anger, and flung out of the room exclaiming, “ And 1 thought flie loved me! great God ! and I thought (he loved me !”-^Is not Such behaviour monstrous ?— And I would love him!—No, no* I love him no more—I hate him. Adieu.
cc
Brenton-hall
^116
LETTER XXL
Lady Carolina Pelham to Lady Victoria Nevil.
N
O T HI N G could be more welcome to me, than to hear of Frojhy\ caprice : Surely the man has read my wishes, and I thank him for his feafonable impertinence.
What a difference between your first letters and the last ! Should I have perufed it five times over, but for the unexpe6led vivacity and paflion with which it is written?—Thy anger against	is
quite a rarity to me.
“ Can you jest, Carolina., when I am fo dif-
“ trefled I”
Test ! to be Sure. Why art thou fo diverting in thy Sorrow, fo lively in thy exprelSion of it ?— My compliments to Mr. Fro/by : tell him he is my favourite, and that if he continues fo charmingly Smart, I shall certainly take a trip to Cum-herland, to enlist him under my colours.
You love him no more ?—Did you not write loved him no more ?—Well, out of friend-Ihip, ril take him from you—It were a pity his
heart should not be engaged.----Give him a hint
of my good will, Victoria, and fail not to be
steady in your “ I love him no more
'iy

Carolina J


[ 55 ]
Carolina ! have you not already Lord Fanfly.^ ^
“ and Lord	? What need of
Never mind it, Fibloria, I’ll manage them all. -And then, is it nothing to Sree my Vibforia Srom a troublefome lover ? What would you-think, were I to refufe my assistance when So necessary to your peace and happinefs ?—No more compliments, Vitoria., no more compliments, force Frojby from Brenton-hall by a carelefs look, and a witty conversation, and fend him to me—if you cannot wait my coming for him myfelf..
“ I am afraid, Carolina, you would have too “ much upon your hands.”-
You are afraid!—and fo you will keep him, though “ you love him no more.” Have 1 lost my Victoria ?—my Victoria, who once wrote to me,
“ how unjust to perfuade a man he is loved when “ we love him not 1 how bafe the pride that glo-
ries in deceit!”-------You fmile fweet
ria, then this is not your cafe, and by your wordr,
“ 1 love him no more,” I must understand he is
dearer and dearer to you.-----
“ Hov^ foolishly you talk, Carolina /”
Is it thus Victoria shows her gratitude Carolina !—How foolishly I talk ! Must I share in your difpleafure against Frojly ? return, indeed, for my generous offer to take him
off your hands !----1 dare fay you would have me
write, that Frojly was very indifcreet to afk a light of my letter, and were I to add, he was a fool to inSist on what you would not grant, and to leave the room with, “ and I thought she loved “ me ! great God 1 and I thought she loved me !” Why the foolish Carolina, would no doubt be complimented with, “ what an amiable creature!”
I will not be that amiable creature, first, for tiif pleafure your letter gave me.
to her have a A fine

Very odd, Carolina, very odd.’*
D 4


[ 56 ]
Be it So. Secondly, for the kindnefs of Frojby , In favouring you with an opportunity of knowing him.
When fo Severe upon the foibles of men you “ love not,” why fo unconcerned about thofe of the only man you “ do love ?” Is not my Vidlo-rids happinefs to depend upon Frojhf'% character ? Must my fenfible friend difcard reafon, and obey but love ? Is Frojby to be ail perfection ? Would he were, Virioriay but he is a man—hisi curioSity is an infignilicant whim, though it has caufed you fo much forrow.—.--But as it may be a beginning to more important difcovcries, let it not be flighted : Vibforia has too much difcern-ment not to make a proper ufe of it."---
Let not your judgment be guided by your heart, •when you think of Frojhy^ but let it be always fo when you write to Carolina, Adieu.
London—-i y6-----
LETTER XXII.
Lady Carolina Pelham to Lady Victoria
Nevil.'
HAT degree of folly may a man be brought to by a woman whom he loves
-------by whom he is detested ? l.ord Charles is
the man 1 intend to raife to that height of honour, if he still perSists in tormenting me.
Tired of telling him he could never pleafe me, I yesterday assured him, twenty times that 1 hated him. The wretch laughed, turned upon his heel, mimicked my anger, went away, came back, confidently fwore he loved—and was abfolutely re-folved not to believe me, after a ssde glance he had Ventured to the glafs.
Upon my feverely reflecting on the ridicule of his pride, he had the impertinence to-protest f '	should
w
[ 57 1
ssiould be his, Since no man would ever be tempted to love me—rWill you know, Vidioria., the rea-
Son he gave ?------Why--------“ 1 was haughty, im-
“ perious, and too fond of being courted, "though “ I hated the lover.”
Lord Charles trusts to my father’s will, and my Seeming indifference ! 'Though he has often met Lord Pelerjlon here, it never yet entered his head, 1 had a heart, and that his Lordfhip might deferve it!
I really think I could love Lord Felerjlm out of fpite, was I not already inclined to love him for himlelf. Two rivals, of difposttions fo different, must needs strike, one with pleafurc, the other
—- No fenfations can ever be fo ra-
with difgust pidly felt
Oh, Viiloria! that fool, that fool.
what shall I do with him ?-------
I was alone yesterday in the library, reclined on a fopha, and muling upOn a book, when Lord Pelerjlon Came in——How iny heart did beat! Rife not, my Lady How Soft was his voice!
Am 1 not to fear my company will deprive
you of a more agreeable amufement ?------You was
reading-----must I go ?-----may I stay ?----:---
I am glad to fee you, my Lord, and Lady Pelham will be here prefently-^----
Charming Carolina----------
How passionately he looked!------
Ido-------
Was your lordship at court this morning ?—— I broke off the “ I do,” it fo frightened me. No, my Lady. I knew you v/as not there, and-----
Tiien, Fifloria the unwelcome Lord Fanjiy-
. rushed in-—Oh! that fool, that fool, what shall I do with him ?
Lam don—176
Ds
LET T ER

r-
[ 58 ]
LETTER XXIII.
Sir John Modish to Lord Pelham.
t
I Had been ten minutes on my way to IVidte-haven., on a business' of importance, when the trusty Duval, riding full fpeed, called the postilions to ■ stop, flev/ to me, and with an exulting air, whiSpered that Frojby had not been feen yef-tcrday at Brenton-haU, and that Lady Victoria appeared uneafy and chagrined. Ever ready to catch at the Smallest hope of a rupture between Viiloria Frojby, and love being the most important buSmefs of my life, S instantly ordered the horfes back, and drove to BrentonAall.
I am glad to/ee you. Baronet, Said Mrs. Em;-presenting me her hand> We were quite:
alone : your company is a-favour.----
You make me happy, Madam, in esteeming it So—Would Lady ViAoria not think it difagreea-^-
ble------
Why should 1, when my aunt is pleafedv with-
It?------
No more ceremonies :.let,us fit down.--
How does Mr. Frojhy, Madam ?
Was I not very ungenerous, Frederich?-
A half figh efcaped the charming creature.
You know not, Frederick., how engaging a beautiful woman is when languor and anxiety are diffufed over her countenance,. , and with whatfen-fibility a tender heart partakes of her Sorrow. I could hardly, at that figh,.. refrain from exclaim* ing against the wretch who caufed it.. How • it went to my foul, to fee my	abfent and. dis-
turbed !—I was fo. moved,. that. though Mrs, Brenton was, at dinner, equally gay and entertaining, I had it not in.my povyer to put on a chear-ful look.
Wher«
'.1
if
[ 59 J
?
Where has Sir Iohn leSt his vivacity i Forgive me. Madam, but—I am not happy How filly, liow imprudent my anfwer, Frederick ! But blunders are the wit of lovers.
Thefe words Teemed to Surprize and awake Lady Vidlcria. She cast on me a compassionate eye, and Mrs. Brenton helped me to a bumper.
Drink, Sir yohn., drink your melancholy away j it does not become your age.—
From that instant. Lady Fidtoria Seemed leSs penssve and dejedfed : but. Spite of her endeavours to dissemble her inward vexation, a blussi now and then informed me she thought, felt, and was unhappy.
How far was she from discovering the true cauSe of my concern ! What would I not have given for the prefence of Frojhy., to have her restored to her former tranquility !—I wished for that man, Frederick., I wished for that man, though every ex-preffion of his—though every look of hers had pierced my heart. I. detested myfelf for having come in hopes of a quarrel between the lovers, and would with pleafure, have laid down my life at the feet of Vihoria., \o expiate the criminal expectation,.
10 o’clock,.
What errors, Frederick., was I not led into by youth and folly, when I took appetite for love,
and caprice for Sentiment!------How different the
passion that now chains my fierce tranfports, and makes me shudder, at the thought of having been unjust to the amiable and virtuous object of my
adoration !----Heavenly girl ! never will I offend
thee more—She must not know, Frederick., how much I love her—it would be a torment to her to fee me miserable—let me Save her generofity the feeling of my pains—What a hard talk.! —How
to
r 6o ]
ir
dilTemfcie!
------Shall imperious love remain;
tamely on my tongue!—I tarn afraid, Fredericky my heart will break in the conflict—but, fo the peace of my Victoria be undisturbed, it matters not what becomes of mine.
You (hall fee my tulips. Sir "JohUy (aid Mrs.. Brentofiy as she left the dining room ; their variety will divert you.
Flowers are my favourite amufement.----------Can
a courtier think there is any pleafure in cultivating them, and that a country life may be enlivened by
the innocent diverfion ?-----
Life, Madam, is only enjoyed in the country I really believe we vegetate in town.—
Already in the fpleen ! fure you are not in sarnest ?----
I am, my Lady, I am indeed.. High life is a brilliant Stage profuSely decorated with costly toys, where vanity, interest, and folly play the first parts at the expence of reafon and nature. Our heads only are at work, in Search of novelty and variety, while our hearts feel the horrors of vacuity in the midst of dilTipation.---
Few plealures, and no real happineSs, are to
be met with in a fashionable life---'.['here. I never
found the agreeable liours-1 have fpcnr at Brenton-hall -But, dear ivladam, let us goto the tulips.— Mrs. Brenton Smiled, and shaking her head, Sir yohn i Sir John !
Pray, Madam, let us go to the tulips, and offering my hand I led her to the garden, not daring, to steal a glance at \jzdrj ViFiQria.
Did I not fay too much, Frederick ? I was a-shamtd of my indilcretion though of no moment My heart was fo fust—how could 1 keep stlent ?
I o’clock.
No flowers pasted unobferved: every one was
anal y fed
[ ]
analyfed and commended by Mrs. Brenton.^ and both Ladies were not a little diverted atiny repeated blunders—for truly I knew nothing of tulips.
Lady Vidloria laughed So heartily, that Seizing her hand—
I’ll be revenged, my Lady—and I printed my lips upon it. Sweet kifs'—let me not remember it, or I am undone.
As 1 knew Mrs. Brenton was extremely fond of muSic, I propofed to fend for Lady Vidiorids harp, and retire to the bower at the end of the parterre,
A good thought. Sir yohn.---Send for your
harp, Fidtoria.-
The harp was brought. We went to the bower, and fitting oppolite to Firlotria^ for I would enjoy •very poffible charm, I was infpired by her divine touch, and the melodious found, with all the ten-dernefs with which I fung the cantata of Apollo and Daphne.
Lady Victoria fo . feelingly expressed the complaints of the God, that lost in raptures, I ailed my part—I forgot myfelf—Excufe, Frederick. To me the most trifling word, or ailion of ViForia^ is a fource of delights. Let me expatiate upon •ach grace, each fmile, each motion.— Oh ! had I no love to combat—Help me, Frederick.^ to conquer my inclination----Inclination !---how
weak the word !—^---Set my passion in its true
light—Tell me his impossible to pleafe—tell me that Frojhy—.no—be filent. Adieu.
Modijh-hall—176— •
LETTER XXIV.
Lady Carolina Pelham to Lady Victoria
Nevil.
This day looked fo ravishingly tempting, after a week of rainy weather, that Lady
Pelham
> y
f <52 J
Pelham was eafily perSuaded by Lord PeUrJlon., and,, S)\r yumes Parker., to take an airing in Kenfington Gardens. Our conversation was at first general, but upon my expreffing a curiofity to know an exotick shrub, and Lord Pelerjlon offering to Satisfy it, we were left a few steps behind.
This shrub. Madam, grows between the tro-
picks; it-------amiable Carolina, let me not lofe
this opportunity of confirming to you what my eyes, my behaviour, my faultering words, and broken fighs, have fo often told you.—No man ever loved with equal paffion and fincerity.
Your most humble fervant, my Lord.—
And I dropped a low courtly.
Is this your analysts of the shrub ?—I thank you for your complaifance, and am no longer curious.—
Stay, my Lady, stay—forgive my telling I love, you—his the first time I have felt the power of beauty—none but Lady Carolina^—
And fo you fancy, my Lord, that Lady Carolina deferves to be complimented with your first raillery ?
Make me not the most miferable of men^----------
talk me not into a hatred of myfelf. disdainful look.—
Spare the
f
How shall I look, my Lord ? Must I Smile, and receive- your gallantry with a grateful fenfibility ? Speak—I will not have you, be, the most miferable, ®f men.—
Cruel Carolina:l
Cruel,., when I defire you to. command my aif. and countenance !—Cruel, when fo generous !-— How dear I pay for having Seen you j-—To love,, and to be defpifed !—Wretched Pelerjion !—
Upon my word you a<st charmingly, my Lord,, and of aU things Hike the “ Wretched Pelerjlon W' —As a party is now forming among the beau monde'.. to perform a few plays, I wish you. would join.
them.
[ 6j 1
them.—.Dis unkind, my Lord, to bury Such con* fpicuous talents : I fhould not be the last to adi-mire, and do you justice.--------
And the pains I endure are x Subje6t of mirtst to lady Carolina! Ihe can delight in adding to them by an inhuman Sneer !-—ibhe laughs at the vexations Qie caufes !
Pray go on, my Lord,. I am: Ig fond of the pathetic—a fev/ more moving exclamations,, and-— oil enchant me.—
So unmercifully gay 1^—
So artfully dejected !-—
Artfully dejeiSted, Lady CaroUtm!—Can you think that perfidy is in. my heart—that my tongue ean dissemble ?
No, no, my Lord. You are fincere, to be fur e. —
I have just a notion^—your irony is- feigned,, you love me.—
I love you ! That’’s a good thought, my Lord, against being the most miserable of men.”^— How happy you are in your ideas ! 1 am glad, however, you found it not Sooner,, for then j should have been deprived of the “ wretched P^-“	/” that affected me So much.—I thank
you for the Seafonable diScovery,—I wa'S at Such a lofs how to conSole you.-------
Be good, charming Carolina; ceafe to banter, and frankly own you love me..—
What need of it, my Lord ?—Will your imagination fail for a word I---Can’t it help you to=
the idea^ I pronounced it ?
Can you refufe me your heart,. Lady Cara-lina P---------
How should I, when you afk for it ?
Could you have a heart, and not give it to th« enamoured Pelerjion F
No, no, to be Sure.
And
I (

[ 64 i
* And we joined Lady Pelham.
Pretty indeed, was 1 obliged to return Ilgh for figh, and love for love, to every daring, idle-fel-lov/, who is pleafed to honour me with a declaration ; and prettier still, was I to lingle out one, and difcard all the rest !
To prefume I must “ love him” becaufe he “ loves me !” But will not the fame reafon do for his rivals ? And stiall yoxxx Carolina be unjust to twenty, or love them all at once ?—The man is furely out of his fenfes, or has a mighty opinion of himfelf.
“ He loves me vdth fuch a passion.” Did I defire him to do fo ?——“ Carolina has a heart.” —What then I Muss it Surrender at the first fum-mons of his Lordship ?
----Did you ever hear of
fuch asturance, Vidioria P—
“ How could the loving Carolina be fo extreme-ly politic, and unfincere ? —
Experience, fweet girl, has taught me to mif-trust my eyes, my ears, and even the approbation of my heart. If we lofe fight of reafon, paf-iion will take the lead, and,hurry us into every extravagance prepossession is prone to. To let a man in high life know our affedlion for him, is vifibly the genuine offspring of folly. I will therefore keep behind the veil of Seeming indifference, that I may not err in my judgment of the man who shall have the power of making me happy or
miserable.
So many unfortunate examples at Court, in London^ all over England^ warn me to be prudent. Sincerity with a Frcjhy ma, occafion no grief, but in this depraved Spot, we cannot take too much precaution against the vanity of men, and the inSidious foibles of our hearts.—
^	*	T'
And my Carolina thinks,, she will keep Such
a stridl
4C

r «5 ]	,
a stricst guard on herfelf as not to be understood ? **-■• ■
Understood I that is a trifle, Victoria. I give Lord Pelerjion leave to understand me, but let him never be certain he does, till I am pleafed to convince him oS it.—
“ If at last Lord Pelerjion proves undeferving of my Carolina., or out of defpair carries his “ incenfe-to another shrine.—
Well, Virioria^ HI Seek for another lover— that’s all.-
And Carolina’s reafon will have fuch a power over her inclinations
Self-love, Virioria, felf-iove will come to my aid, and my heart shall be free. My rank procures me innumerable refources against a too fe-rious engagement. So many diverlions employ both my head and my heart, that I cannot possibly fix long upon the fame thought.
Carolina is not to be chained by a look, or a declaration.—She will prepare against the storm, and provide for every contingency. Adieu.
London—176-—
LETTER XXV.
Lady Victoria Nevil to Lady Carolina
Pelham.
Tell thee, Carolina, thou lovest not.
Thy
foul, though tender by nature, and animated by fancy, is not tuned to the moving notes of love. —Cold as deformity, there are no raptures in thy words, no fire on thy tongue, no pantings in thy bofom.—Lord Pelerfon is the choice of thy taste—> not of t'hy heart—Him thou preferrest to thy other admirers, as we do wit to stupidity, and modesty to assurance—He is not the man nature formed for
f
thee
[ 66 ]
thee—Thou canst reafon !—I tell thee, Carolimf thou lovest not.
Ah!—Would I were as indifferent I—What an evil is Senlibility, that fatal Spring of our mife-ries, when exquifitely affe(sted by passion!
A nothing is a torment to a lover-A doubt
may make us languish under all the racks of fear and defpair, and a thoughtlefs fmile on a rival drive us to madnefs. Many times have I fuffered the extremity of Sorrow for a look, which expressed not an anfwer to my feelings—Oh, Carolina !— thou dresseft to pleafe—thou talked to be admired —thou art still gay and eafy—Itell tliee, thou Invest not. Adieu.-------
Brent on- hall— 17 6—	x
LETTER XXVI.
Lady Carolina Pklham to Lady Victoria
Nevil.
Throw away any thing that you may be
bufy about, Victoria., and should even FroL by be on his knee recanting, and crying for mercy, do not Spare him : turn him out 1 fay, and listen to me.
Lord Fanfly had been above twenty minutes in my clofet, without my having taken the least notice of him, and I was barbarousty playing, and fingingthe Babes of the Wood, to force him out of my fight—
■ Can you be So intent upon your harpfichord, Lady Carolina., while I am here ?—
My Lord, you are not fond of mufic this morning; but, may be, I play ill. Do I ?—
I do not fay fo neither : you play well enough. Well enough, Victoria: !
I beg. your Lordship will give me a tune or two,
that
f 67 ]
that I may improve, for I am ambitious of attaining perSeistion.
You stand in no need of me for that. Lady
Carolina.—
For what then, my Lord, do I stand in need of you ?—
You astonish me : did I fay you did ?—
Pray, my Lord, be not over polite: tell me wherein I fail j which is the fault I must mend ?
You will make me mad. Lady Carolina.—
Then he rofe up, and took fuch long, noify strides, that I destred him to fit down, for he made my head ache.—
' His very, odd that I cannot pleafe you.—
You think it very odd, my Lord ?
To be Sure my Lady. After two years constant attendance, i>ot to be more advanced than I am in your affe<stion, is not that very odd \
What qualities did you rely upon to pleafe me, i»y Lord I---------
What qualities, madam !—What qualities !—
He reddened, and his eyes flashed with indignation.—
Are you in earnest ?•—Am I to incur your contempt for loving you ? Where is my crime ?— “ What qualities !” That’s very strange—Had I neither natural nor acquired ones, must I be def-pifed and ridiculed for the want of them ?—-I thought Lady Carolina chofe fitter objeds for her mirth.—
My Lord, as you have shewn feme fenfe in your anfwer, I wish you would never put yourfelf any more to the fame trouble on my account. Ceafe to plague me with your love, and you no longer shall complain of my Satire.—
Plague you I what an expreffion !
Is it new to you, my Lord I—Must I tell you again, and again, that I hate you ? Is there fuch a
plcafure
#
[ 68 i
f
expoft
#
pleafure in being told fo, that you will yourfelf every day to the repetition of it ?—
And you really hate me ?—
How you talk, my Lord ! Did you ever doubt it ?-------
The tendered lover !—^ d'he mod tedious!—
Could I fufpeci I had a rivab What then, my Lord ?—
He darted up in a passion, and daring wildly at me—
I would rather die an hundred deaths than let —no : no body fo long as I live shall possefs— Carolina, Carolina! do not make me frantic-— throw me not into defpair. Forgive, forgive if I have offended—forbid me not to love you—fay but you do not hate me —
And the man, Vitoria, was at my feet, pref-fmg my hands, and bathing them with tears.'
This Situation, my Lord, does not become you j rife, be compofed, and let me have no more of thefe new fits of passion, it you would not have me avoid you for ever.—
So coolly infulting I ——
Sit down, lord Charles, and let us reafon. Did I ever give you any hopes of pleafmg me ? Did I deceitfully encourage you to love me ? If no% what have you to reproach me with r Why do you perssSt in loving, wlien convinced of my unalterable indifference ?
Oh, Carolina! how little are you acquainted with the fenssbility of my heart, and the violence
of the passion you infpire !-----
Though fure, Carolina, beyond all doubt, of your hatred and contempt, could pride conquer the enchanting delight of loving you ?—I do not wish it might.—let me love you, let me wear for ever the chains you gave—-deprive me not of that
fatisfaffion—
f 69 ]
fatisfa^fion-— det me hope your heart may still lie mine.—	-
How eloquent love rendered him, Vidlona ! He had Such a dejedled countenance, Such an air of defpondency, that I felt Some pity ; and had it not been bafe to dissemble my dissike, I should have left him in his pleassng error.—
My heart cannot be yours, my Lord ? accuSc me not of cruelty, and strive to forget me.—
To forget you. Lady Carolina /—
Yes : let me intreat you to forget me, and to Seek for happinefs where it may be bestowed upon you. How many ladies, more deierying of you, would lif-sten to your vows, and reward your constancy !
Talk not to me of another love, dear Carolina. —Send me not in purfuit of an imaginary bliSs, when the reality is only to be found with you.— Why that obstinacy, when you know 1 can never love you ? Do not deceive yourfelf, my Lord : I tell you, ssneerely, I can never love you. Change, my Lord, change—call me unjust, and ungrateful ; feek in fociety a diversson to your love; fly my very steps; fee me with horror; hate me, and be no longer a stave to a blind and hopeleft passion.—
How cruel )^our counfel, Lady Carolina / how miferable it makes me ! My heart bleeds at the thought of it—Abufe not the empire my passion has given you over me—To change !—to hate !— to be restored to my liberty!—How is it possible, when I even delight in my fufferings ? Aik not that facristce, dear Carolina,, or alk my life with it.—Your indifference must fubfide one day—^ my pains will melt you into foftnefs—
No, never: depend on ir, my Lord.—Tear me from your heart, fupprefs your passion, and fee me no more.—Rob me not of my tranquillity
by
X
[ 70 J
»
by your declarations, your complaints, and your hopes.------
Lady Prejlm coming in that minute, I was happily relieved.
Are you not Surprised, Vitoria, at the infatuation of a man, and his manner of exprelTing him-
felf ?—How shall I keep him from me ?---Can
love elevate an ordinary foul and infpire it with fuch uncommon fire r—Did he not fpeak with delicacy, and threaten with fiercenefs ?—His passion begins to terrify me—Dear Victoria,, what shall I do ? Advife, charming girl, advifc—Should he fufpest Lord FelerJhn-—\ will not think of it.
London—176—
LETTER XXVII.
'The fame to the fame.
E not afraid, Vidioria^ that your Carolina will __ turn a coquet. Of all the ridiculous characters which women attempt to assume, that fure-ly is the least adapted to reafon, and delicacy of fentiment. Though I treat with fo much levity the man I love, accufe me not of a real propenSity to be unjust and unfincere.
You do not approve of my referve to Lord Pe-■lerfon: “ it may betray him into the belief I am ‘‘ falfe and ungenerous, or humble hini into the “ certainty, that I have a very flight opinion of “ his morals and chara<ster.”
Your ingenuity, Vidioria^ though admired by me, would do no honour to your difcernment, was you living any where but at Brenton-hall. Judging of every heart by your own, you w^ould be expofed to perpetual mistakes. Every hour of the day would bring a new occafion for wonder, and the fexclamations, “is it fo !—is it possible!” And at last my Vidioria, unwilling to difgrace her-
felf
[ 71 I
Self by a borrowed air, would return to Cumber--land, or fashion her expreffions and countenance, were she to stay in London.
Gallantry having stolen the look and garb of love, and chafed him from polite circles, every man thinks it inconfistent with manners, and good breeding, not to compliment a Lady with the tender of his heart j and to fuch perfedfion is carried the “ mimicked fenlibility,” that it can hardly be distinguished from a real one.
o
Rank, discretion, and virtue, cannot free us Srom thefe unfeeling adlors of sentiment ; they wait upon us with a tender look, an unwearied attention, and an air of fadnefs, infeparable /from a true passion : but as they only aft, the de-lufion vanishes long before their part isdver.
Some there are So flushed with pride and ambition, as to difdain to attack, but where the strong-■cst relistance is to be expedfed. They feign So admirably, they are fuch masterly adepts in the art of pleaSing, that a young lady, unlefs guarded by the fear of a mistake, and a firm prepof-feflion against them, might very eafily be deceived by the artful infpirers.
Virtue, dear Kidioria., virtue would make a very poor defence against a cool and Ikilful lover, ever watching over his prey, and ready to feize ' upon the least advantage, which a ra jid emotiony .an eye Jwimming vAth languory the fudden eolouring of a cheeky the unufual panting of a bofomy a faint repulfey or a faltering voice can furnijh him withy had she no fufpicion of the tempter’s fal fehood and perfidy.
How dangerous to believe!—how imprudent not to fly!
The dangers attending ingenuity are too great not to frighten a woman’s weak and tender foul; that amiable quality may appear amongst friends,
'	but
o
.[ n 1
'.but must always be difcarded in the prefence of ^ lover.	,
Vivacity and carelefsnefs are better arms, and oftener crowned with fuccefs. A man, uncertain of the imprellion he has made, keeps within the limits of decency and refpedl : the fear of difpleaf-ing, fets bounds to his knavHh flatteries, and wished-for familiarity: he is a stave, fettered by an indifferent mein, and feeming negledl, when a loving look would, at once, give him both liberty and power over his mistrefs.
I believe Lord Pelerjion has honour and humanity.----What then t Have not all mankind the
fame character in appearance ? who dares openly to deviate from the air of probity ?—Who can fee into the inmost recesses of the heart ?—
How dexteroufly intriguing—how boldly unprincipled are the generality of our modern lovers ! What laws do they not violate for the enjoyment of their criminal dessres! What considerations do they not laugh at, and defpife 1—How many too credulous women------Write no more of ingenui-
ty, Victoria. Keep that phantom at Brenton-hally raife alters to its honour, and may you never repent of the homage you pay it!
London— 17 6--------
LETTER XXVIII.
Sir John Modish to Lord Pelham.
YO U wonder how I can languish away my days in fruitlefs ssghs, when Pleafure, the generous friend of youth and beauty, would Smile on my wound, and heal it, infallibly heal it, in
Loudon! Ceafe to wonder, Frederick-----Hove.—
Let thefe words, “ I love” justify metothyrea-fon—to thy reafonl Canst thou understand the language of my heart, and not call impertinence
the
[ 73 1

She charming Sallies of nature ?—Unhappy man f I pity thee, and Scorn thy haughty reaSon !
d'hy apathy is poifon to thy life—thou art in a perpetual death, though thou numberest thy days
----l .anguid as a modern play<, thy Soul has not
one flight which I can admire, or extol.
All my fenfes, enlivened by passion, are lost in
the delights of a bewitching error, and thine--
To be born !—and not feel !—What malignant Spirit curled thee with that fatal indifference ?—«— Thou art free from the pains of fenflbility !—Does that advantage compensate for pleafures thou enjoy est not ?
The fight of Lady Vidloria^ for ten minutes, Frederick—for five minutes only, chafes Sorrow from my heart, melts me into raptures, and gives life to the tedious hours I paSs without her. When (he talks, I Interpret her civility into regard, her expression into Sentiment, the ■ Softnefs of her voice into love—I argue every motion in my favour; and if I touch her hand. Smell tlie Same flov/er, water her favourite tulip, or ling a Song she likes, I laugh at thee, Frojly., at all the world I am then wholly wrapt up in happineSs and the oblivion of my miSery. —Shouldst thou afie what charms Such fenSations can have, I anfwer thee hve-i for too faint is the tongue of man to attempt the description of them.
Modijh -hall— I y 6—
LETTER XXIX.
Lady Carolina Pelham to Lady Victoria
Nevil.
IN Spite of all my precautions to avoid a fete a tete with Lord Pelerjhn,^ he Seized a critical minute, in which I had no company but my Canary bird, fie trod So cloSe on the steps of Lucy,
E

r
C 74 1
that I had no time to contrive a pretext Sor not receiving him.
To be revenged, however, of his too hasty appearance, I assumed a half-diScontented a r.—
I See, my Lord, you have attained a great proficiency in the French manners, by being at once both a vifiter and your own introdubleur,—
I shall plead guilty, iS love that made me an intruder, obtains not my pardon from Lady Carolina, Don’t justify one indifcretion by another, my Lord; the attempt would be ridiculous and vain: am I to forgive, when the excufe adds to the Sauk ?—
’Tis not in me that the fault lies. Madam : I fee it in your eyes; ’tis from them it proceeds. Had you lefs beauty to Subdue— lefs wit to attract, you would not complain of me.—
And ’tis extempore you make theSe pretty compliments, my Lord! ’Tis a pity to lole them upon me, for they are really charming. I beg you will referve your vivacity, and eloquence, for more important occafions—Are you for the court, or the oppofition. Lord Pelerjion ?—
How he stared, Vidioria, at the unexpected question! —■
I am for neither, my Lady : So long as we are ruled by the best of Princes, there will be no rea-fon for a difference of interest.—
What then is meant by an oppofition ?—
Very little more than—
But would not the world laugh, were they to know I am Speaking of politics to the amiable Carolina!—How ridiculous should I appear!—^ The happiest moments of my life confecrated to any thing elfe, but Lady Carolina !—And I am in
love!—And I adore you 1-------
Nobly expressed, upon my word. I admire
your
[ 75 ]
your facility and prefenee you by it, my Lord ?
I’ll tell you, my Lady.
of mind. How came

He rofe up, and taking my hand, led me to a pier-glafs.
How ! is it to that glafs, my Lord, you are indebted for your amazing fprightlinefs ?——
’Tis not to the glafs, but to thofe features, that shape, thofe lovely eyes, and that graceful countenance, which you fee in yourfelf---------
Mighty pretty indeed.------Well, I should never
have guessed that. Tell me, my Lord, is this gallantry your own, or an importation from the continent ? If your own, I beg you will put it in fashion—ithe manner is fo new—Why did not you
favour me with it before?------
1 could almost wish. Madam, I had never been
forced to difcover it.------
Since you repent, my Lord, the benefit is yours again ; take it back, 1 will forget I ever had it.—
Lady Carolina.^ cannot you be Serious ?------
Would you have me ferious when you do your utmost to divert me ? I am not ungrateful, my Lord ; my gaiety is a proper acknowledgment for
your efforts to amufe me.------
I have wandered over France^ Italy and Spaiti;
I have Seen, I have converfed with witty and beautiful women—never was I tempted to love.—I fee Lady Carolina zt the play, and my heart, my, till then, faithful heart leaves me, and I am unhappy. O ! Carolina I Carolina I----—:—
Do not mind me, my Lord; go on wish your Soliloquy.-----
How pleaSing your chearfulnefs, Lady Carolina, were I free!—How much more delightful now, if tlie effedl of a mutual, unreferved inclination !
Of all the men, who do Lady Pelham and me she honour of a vifit, none is more entertain-
E 2	ing,
r
[ 76 ]
ing, or more welcome, than Lord PeJerJion.—No thanks, my Lord, I am Sincere: but I wish you would now and then give your conversation another turn. Raillery, however excellent, ceafes to pleafe when we don’t know how, and where to drop it.---------
Raillery !—Why mistrust my honour ? Is Lady Carolina to be entertained with Sentiments she does not inSpire ? Are not her rank and virtue a deSence against SalSehood and gallantry ? Is not her beauty a Sure arm against hypocriSy ? Who could
tell her oS love, and not feel it ?-You are ab-
fent, charming Carolina—out of a generous pity
listen—tell me I may hope------
Yes, my Lord, you may hope—not to difpleafe by discontinuing a diScourSe I chuSe not to hear.—^ Was not my reply very heroic, Victoria., when my heart beat So Strongly in his favour, that I could hardly disteirible its indifcreet motion ? ssoor Lord Pelerjion ! how chagrined and dejedted !—A tear
started----1 law it.----how dangerous that tear,
ViStoria / I turned my head, and rifing up, went to the window, and trusted to the wind a Smothered stgh."— ----Then refuming my former Spirits,
I came back to my chair.
Lord Pelerjion Seemed lost in thought, but starting as I drew near him—
1 should be very Sorry, was my passion to give any uneastneSs to Lady Carolina.—Forget I Spoke —I will Speak no more.—You will not forbid me
to See you, my Lady ?--------
I am not Such an enemy to myfelf, my Lord, as to wish to be deprived of your company. My Lady Pelham honours and esteems you.—
Oh ! would Carolina but return my love, how happy should I be in Lady Pelham’s regard! It vyere my utmost ambition to be esteemed by her, rmd Lord Pelham.
This
[ Vd	y
T'his declaration, Victoria, I thought worthy or a reward. So throwing carelefsly my hand between our two chairs, I gave him an opportunity to lay hold of it, and raife it to his mouth.—
Pray, my Lord--------
Always Severe, Carolina!
Always forgetful, my Lord !
How I adore you 1—
And he fell on his knees.—
By all that is dear to me, I adore you.---r;—
Have you not, just now, given me your word, my Lord.----------
I am with You, can I remember it ?—
Fearing that my filly heart would at last Soften me into attention, I changed the conversation, and kept it on fo many different topics, that notwithstanding all his endeavours to get it back on the favourite one, I heard no more of the foolish god of love.
Lord Peberjlon Saw well enough he did not dif-pleafe, and I dare fay went home pretty well Satisfied that the gay Carolina was not inSenfible.
I will never encourage a tHc a tete. An hundrea ideas, which disturb us not in company, crowd into our heads when alone with a lover, and may re-verfe the firmest refolution. The necessity of giving a lie to one’s heart, is a constraint not to be endured. Add to this the indifcreet attention, and the yet more indifcreet fighs, troubles, and agitations, of a man we love—That Lucy, how I will fcold her!
London 176
E 3
LET TER

[ 78 ]
LETTER XXX.
Sir John Modish to Lord Pelham.
w
HEN thou Speakest, Frederick., in the
houfe, I admire thee :-----when in the
benevolence of thy heart, thou helpest the friend-lefs man of honour, I commend thee : but wlien thy pen writes of love, as thou art then no longer my fenfible Frederick, I heartily laugh at the shadow thou offerest me of thyfelf. Thou art in love what Alexander was in painting—a mere dunce to be ridiculed by a feeling boy of fifteen.
Thou wouldst have me, fince I chufe not to leave Cumberland, Spirit away my palTion for Vidloria, with the lively Mifs Ellifon.—Wilt thou never remember that I love, and that a great beauty without as great virtues, cannot affeS my heart ?-----
The hand of Mifs Ellifon I wish not—her ruin I will not attempt.-------1 shan’t have the ill-na-
ture to impofe a figh, a fond expression upon her. •—I abhor the fashionable fport of undoing virtuous maids—curfes on him who betrays shem into infamy.—
Court not, fayest thou, court not Lady Bel-mour, for ’tis a most villainous fin to Succeed a fool in the arms of a lady.—Thou art Surely a wondrous delicate fellow, Frederick : was this lav/ of thine stridlly obferved by mankind, women would not thank thee for having established it.
Lord Belmour is a fool, ’tis true; but do’st thou know what a tempting creature his lady is ? Do’st thou know, she is all youth, charms, and fenfibility ; and would fm.le thee, even thee, Fre-' dertek, into fierce dessres ? Do’st thou know she is
the life of Cumberland, and that I would question
[ 79 ]
tion my passion for Kibforid, were I not dead to the fediKstion of her Smiles ? She only could rival
Fibforia—(he does not---Frederick, keep to thy
indifference, but let me love. Adieu.
LETTER XXXI.
Lady Carolina Pelham to Lady Victoria
Nkvil.
I Will write to you, Vidforia, with my uSual fin* cerity : expert no mercy from me when thy head rules thy heart, or this takes a flight from the former. Thou hast been by turns, thefe few days, the stave of each, but though it flatters my pride to find my Victoria is not faultlefs., I will furnish thee with an antidote against it.
Passions have their degrees, let fools fay what they will, unleSs we are totally deprived of he faculty of reafoning, by steep, stupidity, or madnefs. Love and hatred rife, by stow progressions, tothe fummit of infatuation, and either of thefe passions may be rooted from our hearts, when leafon is warned of their existence by feeling and reflexion.
Let a Sentiment be ever So pleassng, it is hourly contradiXed by pride, or Self interest,, which constantly point to us diSgrace and forrow, the natural effeXs of a Salfe step, and a blind prepossession. To fay that thefe misfortunes are not inherent to every Sentiment, and that mutual love is exempt frorn them, is to contradiX expe-perience. This proves that We are formed of con-tradiXions ; that no passion whatever keeps long in its meridian ; and that it is both possible, and probable, we are often deluded by not stridtly Searching our hearts, and granting too much to nature, and not enough to reafon,
E 4	I know

t So ]
%
S know how agreeable it is to be deceived. De-lufion is the liSe of a Senlible lover ; it takes up his time, his thoughts, and its charms, almost realized by imagination, are always welcome to his raptured heart. Hence the many overfights and the erroneous credulity which lead to difappointment and regret.
Human wifdom, Victoria., has feldomer checked Sentiment than Submitted to it: ’tis our Sate to te Sometimes lulled by nature into a forgetfulneSs of the means which essentially tend to our own happineSs. When reaSon is thrown into confufi-on by the tumultuous Spirits forcing their way to the head, to fill it only with the idea of a favourable bliSs, it helps not to extinguish the fermenting st;e, and deliver the Soul from the violent gales of a tempestuous passion.
KappineSs is not to be attained by giving a loofe to prejudice. Let us not endeavourto enhance the value of a SenSation, and add t our Security by a falSe esteem ofthe ebjeefs beforeus, lest we (houldssndthe rea'ity fall short of our Sanguine expe(Slation, and be forced into a contempt of ourSelves.
The pleaSure of being beloved, is the highest a mortal can enjoy; but as it is not^at all times to be Secured, through the inconstancy ingrafted in our tempers, I wish we could feel it moderately, that we might not be in olved in the afflidiion following an irreparable lofs. In possessing we should be ever ready to be deprived, and prepare againss making ourSelves miserable for what is not to be retrieved. '
2	o’clock.
Thou, my ViActria., thou Surely feeless that thefe resseclions are truly adapted to thy own Situation, and that I have Set in their true light the dangers impending on thy paffion for Frofby.
Soothed

t Si ]
Soothed in the calm of a full assurance of his love, you will not lofe one thought about his in-dilcretion ; and though he be unjust and unreasonable, he must have no failings, fince their principle is his tenderneSs for you. Unfufpefting girl I You frighten me. Your candour and ingenuity will lead you into an imprudent tranquillity of mind, from wrhich if one day forced to aroufe, it will be to pafs immediately to the most exquiSite confuston and anxiety. You will defpife and hat yourfelf for having trusted So much to your heart, and the Seeming good qualities of your lover.
Nobody would have mankind more perfe(st than I : but as it is not in my power to adorn every individual with my Vidf aria's virtues, why should she be a viclim to her generolity ? See men as they are, not as you wish them to be, and dare to examine the heart of trojby.
Constder, Fidtoria., how naturally men flight what comes with eaSe, that the difficulties of pleaf-ing make them languish in unSpeakable ddiresi T'liey delight in obstacles, and to remain in SuS-
pence.-----1 tell thee, art and indifference will
command their adoration, whilst ingenuity and tenderneSs are shunned and uncourted. It is a foible we inherit from nature, zndFroJby has it in his heart as much as any man in the creation.
Sir John ModiJFs remark, that he would reckon it a prodigy were you both as deeply in love now as you were Some years ago, is- not So abSurd. How can we anSwer we Ihall be neither unjust nor ungrateful? —
You make love, Vidloria.^ the study of every day, the buSmeSs of every hour, when it fliould only be a diverflon : you exert your utmost Senfibi-lityto embellish it with the gayest colours, and never once reflebf it is the work of your imagination. Awake not, Sweet girl, from the agreeable dream :
E 5	continue

r
- r 82 ]
continue in the loving fit : be for ever lost to every other idea than that of being beloved.
5	o’clock.
Does love, once Settled in the heart, grow too powerful for restraint ? Can it not be erafed without tearing a part of it ? Are we unable to overcome, and are the efforts of reafon vain ? No, Vidloriny they are not vain, though attended with mighty difficulties. What are we to aim at but our own felicity ? Shall we be Satisfied with the shadow, when we can attain the reality ? What is an hour of rapturous delufion to years of happi-nefs ? Are we not strengthened by this confiderati-on, and enabled to triumph, and difpel the cloud which intercepts the light, and obfcures our understanding ?———
To love, and to be always loved ! fine talk, indeed ! Set that apart, Vidloria^ for your dreaming minutes, but let it not be listened to, when awake : never flatter yourfelf that Projhyd.-^s no fault, be-caufe he appears to your faScinated eyes to have none. He has his share of weaknefs and depravity inseparable from humanity. Trust not, Victoria., to the outward form of a man.—I am difpleafed at FroJbKs proceedings : they feem too strongly tainted with injustice, and tyranny. Be emboldened to judge his behaviour, and the charms that Surrounds thee will dissolve. Lov6him more and more, if he delerves thee, but hate him in proportion as he may have deceived thee.
Courage, dear girl, shake off the yoke of prepossession, and let Carolina no longer reproach thee with a Single failing. I hate for having made me difcover one : yes, thy partiality for him is one, and a very great one.—Poor Sir ^ohn I— So partial an obServer against him !—Indeed thou defervest not the love he has for thee. Adieu.
LandoTi'-^i 76-^^-—
LETTER
f 8j ]
LETTER XXXIL

Lady Victoria Nevil to Lady Carolina
Pelham.
1
Gruel friend ! Severe Carolina ! Spare thy refledlions So long as my heart is pieafed in being deceived.----Why do’ft thou force thy reason on Vidioria----on Fidloria, unwilling to listen
to thee ?
4
Too few are the days of happinefs—too manj
the days of mifery.-----Let me then, Cardin
let me enjoy the flattering illuSion—let me be deat to reafon, that mortal enemy to love and ima''

gi nation.
To think ! to doubt.1 to compare! Were it not a folly to put to that test the pleal'ures of love pleasures which annihilate every other fenfation, and entertain the foul with perpetual raptures ? Felicity is to be felt, not defcribed-it is lost when we
think.—-Carolina! never fay shat Frojhy may pof-
fibly prove unworthy of me.-----He loves—he has
no fault when he talks of love.—my memory is then dead to all past injuries.. If he offends, I
rave myfelf into hatred of the man-----if 1 lee
Sorrow in his looks, he no longer is guilty—I and love again.
o
Brent on Hall—176
LETTER XXXIIf,
Lady Carolina Pelham to Lady VictoRiA
Nevil.
F came, ViSloria ! he came witli conquest ______inhislooks! he fluttered. Smiled, and courted, and it was not Carolina,, who animated his foul, enlivened his eyes, and .graced his countenance ! Will you believe it ? but why would you
not?

I I i > '
: I
: t
I •
• I	i
. >	;
1 '
![!
f ' ■ '
5 ’
J
< 1
1 .
11
t I
J '
! .
: V
; i
‘ i
• i
1 i
t (
1
' V I *
i 1
. I
11
C4
t 84 i
;
not ? Is there any other event but Fro/hy's ingratitude that could furprize, and render you incredulous ? Yes, yes: you will believe the wounds I give are not incurable, and that I may lofe the liaves my charms have fettered—you will, Fibfo-ria f And you dread not my difpleafure ! You will dare to humble my pride—a v^^oman’s pfide
her darling passion ! How prefuming ?---------Can
friendship be fo truly dissnterested as to forgive when one’s beauty, and power are called in quef-tion ! Lofe a conquest !—and I shall be told it is
possible!----Such a conquest ’------Have a care,
Fidforia.
Who is the audacious mortal who has fled “ from my Carolina? Lord Felerjion ?
No.
Lord Fan fly ?”
Yes : he himielf is the run away stave ; he who was to “ turn frantic, to defpair at every frown of the charming jdarolinaf’ has forfaken her, and balked in another’s fmiles.
It wa§ not enough for him to have mortified me by an uhexpedfed defertion, he yesterday paid his devoirs to a young, beautiful widow, the idol of She court, and the glory of the age. I had the diiinai light of his attention to her, at Lady Fref-
ictris,-----
Lord Fanfly had the most Sanguine hopes, for he out-did himfelf in being Ids than ufuaL jy tedious and impertinent. He leldom trusted himfelf out of a monofyliable, and his great and affedfing eloquence was all in assidui-ity, a dying look, and a perpetual fmile of ap-piobation. He played a few rubbers with Lady Walgrave, and fat next to iier at Supper. Had the man made choice of a lefs accomplished l.;dy in his ambitious attempt to interest my vanity, I should have rejoiced at his Seeming inconstancy : but by
hi«
[ 8s ]
i
I lost all hopes of
his applying to Lady Walgrave, being delivered from him.
Lady Walgrave is the Scourge of fools, and her company the best chofen in London. I never Saw wit more happily united with beauty, candour play with a better grace than in her lovely eye. How could Lord Panfly flatter himfelf with Lady JValgravfs countenance to raife my jealoufy ? Would she condescend to Seign a pleaSure which she feels not ? how foolish his plot when he imagined 1 should regret him ! I laughed at his uncommon prefumption, though heartily vexed he had not Angled out a lady, wdio, prompted by interest, OP the honour of a title, would have endeavoured to free me by Securing him to herfelf. The man must be naturally formed to be wrong with the best intention of being right, Ance, even in his revenge, he has not the art of chuSing a proper and infallible vveagon.
A letter----from Lord Fanfliy----Is not a pen
in the hands of a fool a Satire upon reafon, Vic-toria f—What can he write ?—Would it weree his letter of Conge!—I’ll fee.
To Lady Carolina Pelham.
In vain have I Searched this fortnight for a beauty I could love.—A heart which has once Surrendered to Lady Carolitia.y has no feelings for another—she alone can charm, enliven tedious uniformity, and Anile away the troubles of a domestic life. How hard my fate !—dear Carolina., will you still continue infenfible—still deaf to my fufferings ?—
I will adore you witli unremitting constancy----
I will love with fuch fervour, that you shall not have one minute to think on an indifferent objedf ■—you shall hear but of love—of your beauty——*
of my transports. My fancy will wander but to divert and pleafe you. Delay not my happinefs, oh tliou my Carolina—fay but thou wilt not hate
and
Ili
U:
• « :
1 i
I
“ *
ii •
L'
i:
! 1
i
r
* f
; I
C	•'	[ 86
' and I am at thy' feet Swearing eternal love—Oht Carol na ! my heart will be in an agony till thou condefcendest to write I am no longer indifferent to thee.—Say but the word, and I am happy.
Fanfly.
Is not this a pretty billet, ViSioria?-written
by Lord Fanjiy! I am amazed—'How came he by the lively expression ?—Certainly there must be
two Souls in that man—he talks—he writes----a
wondrous reverfe this—his tongue gave me a dif-like to love—his pen—Lord Pelsrjion is coming I hear him—away with Fanjiy. Adieu.
End of the First Volume
t ■

THE
MISTAKES OF THE HEART:
O R,
M
M
O F
Lady Carolina Pelham
AND
Lady Victoria Nevil.
IN A SERIES OF LETTERS.
PUBLISHED 3y
M. TRETSSAC de VERGY,
Counfellor in the Parliaments of Paris and Bourdeaux. At feeling hearts 1fiingi nor e^er eni/s :he game.
Prior,
IN THREE VOLUMES.
VOL. II.
DUBLIN:
Printed for James Potts, and Thomas Walker,
Bookfellers, in Dame-Jlreet.
M DCC LXX.
A
. \
, I
i I
!'l
! >
{' !
Si :
• I

f \ I i t •
I 1
‘ I
; I > ; I <
1' !

!ri
• I
< i
^!i 1
i;
5 r
ii

/

•M
M
E
M
O
I
R
’I
s
O F
Lady Carolina Pelham
AND
Lady Victoria Nevil.

LETTER I.
Lady Carolina Pelham to Lady Victoria
Nevil.

Lord Fnnfy was an hour with Lady Pelham yesterday-—an hour Soliciting on his knee, that I might ablior the day in which 1 was born. How elfe could it be that he obtained my mother’s conSent ! a mother to whofe will I would tall a voluntary vidfim rather than difpleaSe, rather than make her unhappy. Believe me, Vibioria^ I would, readily forfeit my own existence could it Save her but a tear; I would Spurn the struggles of nature, hasten to annihilation, and Smile away the Suffer-ings of my heart.
Did you know but half the obligations I owe to Lady Pelham^ your furprife would ceaSe, Vidioria ;
you
y
/
,	.	[ 9° ]
you would even wonder at the weakneSs of my ex* preffion.—I should be a monster were I to harbour a shought, an affecstion, which she would not both approve and delight in.
Knov/ that in the bloom of her days, when youth, rank, and beauty difplayed all their enticements, and ravishingly pointed to gaiety and
dissipation:----when love and pleafure followed
every step, applauded every grace, indulged every dessre;—when the most amiable men courted her Smiles, and gloried in her esteem;—when all who thought, looked, or Spoke, tempted her into a compliance with the foibles of nature and fashion —know, that Lord Pelham and his ssster, the happy Carolina,) were the Sole objects of her care ■—she forgot she was young and handSome, to remember folely she was a mother.
Ho w many Sacrifices necessarily made to her tenderneSs for us !—how many troubles generoussy overlooked to help our heedlefs infancy, correct vitiated nature, and perfecst our education!——
The night in which my father died------a night,
Viftcida., never to be rooted out of my memory he Sent for Lady Pelham^ who, lost in Sorrow at his having Seemingly breathed his last, had just left his room. Struck with the unexpeded message, ssie started up. Seized my hand, and stew to him.
What a Sight, Victoria!---------Though but ten
years of age, my heart, grown old in filial love,
felt all the agonies of the distressful Scene.-My
mother with a wild eye, unsteady step, and grief
in every feature, funk upon the bed.*—----------
Revived by the warmth of her tears, he raifed
her hand to his lips.------
Death draws near, Iulia—I already feel it To die!—and I was So happy in thee—So happy in my children!—-Thy defpondency is torment—I
know all thy worth, Julia
and I must leave thee!—
Lady
[ 9^ 1
A *
Lady Pelham, dead to all emotions but thofe.of certain miSery, opened her lips—the words expired on her chilled tongue.
I have but a few moments to remain with thee, Julia—Thou, my Carolina.-----------
Then a cold fit invaded every nerve—I thought, Vidioria, I had lost the best of fathers.
Death, refumed he with a feeble voice, and struggling with the faintnefs of his Spirits—Death longs for his prey—Julia, I hardly fee thee—foon will 1 fee thee no more.
He shed a few tears, fighed, and pressed her hand to his heart,
Julia, by my will the fate of Carolina is fixed.
■—Lord Fanjiy is the hushand destined for her— she must be his—my word is given—promife it shall be kept.---
Promife ! exclaimed my mother, starting at the
unforeseen request, promife !—Ah, Pelham!-----
What have you Said ?—What have you done ?
Depend on my love for thee to fee Carolina happy—ril diredt her heart agreeable to thy choice— but will lay it under no constraint—Why should she be a stave when 1 owed thee to my liberty ?—
My father Seemed to confider, to relent—^his eyes, melted with tendernefs, were Successively fixed on my mother and me.—He strove to Smile,
to tender us his hand—to utter a recantation--
vain efforts, VidJoria, my father was no more.
Judge now' of Lady Pelham's charatSter : reflefl: on the circumstances, and fix, if you dare, the degree of love and gratitude my generous and tender mother ought to infpire me with.
London—-in ()

t E.D
[92 1

LETTER II.
Sir John Modish to Lord Pelham.
WHAT alterations, dear Frederick^ does
not love caiife in our manners and principles, when the obje£l that inspires it rules over a feeling heart! What vices, what virtues, are not fucceilively esteemed or neglected according to the noble or ungenerous temper of the woman we adore!
Nature confidently launclies into every contradiction, and alTumes, as her own, the genuine features of honour or di(honesty :---------strenuous
aflertor of her primitive rights, she reafons, combats and ever comes off with fuccefs.
A man’s foul is dissolved into that qf his mif-trefs ; he eagerly adopts her fentiments, her passions, and her character, ’ i'is a delirium not to be —
cured by reafon-----there is no accounting for our
implicit obedience to the call of beauty : it overwhelms the understanding. Seizes on every organ, and allows neither time nor power to question its autiicrity.
J hardly have a look, a thought, a deSire, which are not in open defiance to my own heart, whenever I vifit at Brenton-hall. Each word, each motion of FiAoria., heightening the charm of her beauty, and adding to the native lustre of her virtues, iny eyes and my tongue are at perpetual enmity^-----.at a perpetual loSs for an expression adapt-
ed to my love and her dignity. The Sport of paS-(ion, pride, fear, or delicacy, I am by turns under their empire, Subjected to their laws, or in
rebellion against them.
o
I have attentively watched for a fault in her ihape, for an error in her mind, for a vice in her
Soul
. «
L
)/
I
.
V
V
‘I
f
[ 93 3
1
Soul.—'I have not one reaSon to exclaim againsh Jove, not one motive Sor wishing to be free.
Were Vibloria imperious or difdainful, I would
v/ithstand the utmost power of her beauty--------1
would-----but the difcreet girl gives her lovers no
temptation to injure her virtue: she erafes the
least propensity to evil from their hearts.-------
How artlefsly does she compel defire to die upon my lips, to fly from my countenance! Her raodef-ty—how engaging must that quality be which can betray me into a diffidence of my own merit. Soften the fiercenefs of my unruly Spirit, and So highly prepoflefs me in favour of her fex !
Must I then reafon Solely after the mode of Pie--
toria—wait for thinking till she has thought------
fall in with her peculiar humour ?----Is not this
flavery the most grievous in nature ?—Shall I exclude myfelf wholly from my own being—give the
fie to my opinion of evil and good-------differ in
nothing from another’s j udgnient!-----May I not
claim from my owii deferts a right to her esteem, to her love !----Must I expert it as a favour !■—»
mL
and I Can still Submit and a lore!----Oh, Frede^
rick, what a shame, Avha? a shame i------
How happy is it for the honour of humanity that the mistrelSes of kings, popes, and mighty conquerors, were never tempted into the Sublime folly of being the founders of new religions !
What impertinent tenets might have prevailed, bad not a Roxatia, a Morazia^ or a Pompadour^ disdained to impoSe on men, and cheat them of their reaSon ?•----
What So perSuafive gs beauty ? Who can long oppoSe its eloquence, or refist its entreaties ? W here is the man who would not prevent the most Secret wish of the woman he loves ? Are not her delights • his Sole and Supreme happineSs ~—her diSpleafure his most excruciating pain—her tears——Who
would

* »
K
'■ I
ii
I * 1
I ( . !
i f
I
1
1 1
: I
C 94 1
would not melt into all the tendernefs of love, at the Sight of a tear trickling from the lovely eye— Who would not immediately stop it with a “ Com-“ mand—I obey.”
Were my authority for a few months acknowledged, how grateful to mankind would be my passion for Victoria ! Each fmile should didiate an
edidf in favour of liberty-----each kifs dissufe a
general content—all would partake of my joy and be happy in my love.
Medifi-half
17
6
LETTER III.
Lady Victoria Nevil to Lady Carolina
Pelham.
TH E counfels of friendship do but glance on
a fafcinated fancy, whilst the moss trivial circumssance gives reafon its natural ssrength, and deprives passion of its ufurped authority. When the foul is not befet with its wonted dessres, the Senfes are no longer fuffered to teach, to delude and to didlate.
I ordered on Thurfday lass Some patterns of Silk to be brought me. Mr. Frojhy admired one, pro-tessed that the dessgn was entirely new, and that the colour would fuit my face to a miracle. I was inclined to believe him when Sir yohn looked at it, then at me, then at Frojby^ then sslently fat down.
This he likes not. Said I to myfelf, and 1 gazed on thofe that were upon the table.
None of them, my Lady, faid M.r. Frojly, comes
near the beauty of the former--,
I made no anSwer, and continued to gaze.
Sir John carelefsly took up a pattern, laid it on my shoulder, as to judge of its effedf, and with a Smile placed it before me.
This
[ 95 J
This is his choice, thought I-------it shall be
mine, and I prefently fixed upon it.
I whifpered my choice to Sophy^ and to-day have I appeared in the Silk the Smile of. Sir John had pointed out to me.
I put it on with uncommon alacrity, and for the first time took a delight in -dressing.
Sophy told me I looked more charming than ever
-----That gown, added she, is an honour to Sir
Johffs taste.
Confeious I had encouraged her to fay So, I had not the heart to chide her, though a blush made its way to my cheek.
On entering the drawing-room, Mr. Frojby was struck mute at the fight of my drels—Sir John faw but me—his eyes Spoke of love, not of gratitude.
He took no notice of my drefs, Carolina-----How
he would have difconcerted me had he ventured one glance expressive of the favour I had done him I •------How his discretion pleafed me V.....
Mr. Frojby was abfolutely out of humour. The fawnings of my lap-dog were no longer agreeable
—---------he darted a look of anger at the glafs
which reflected me to Sir John^ and could not patiently hear the rustling of the filk.
In the evening, Mr. Frojby prefented me ah handful of flowers. Sir John a Angle violet: I placed this in my hair, and negligently threw the others upon a marble stab.
Mr. Frojby propofed whist—I had the headache—Tea minutes after Sir John propofed a
game at quadrille------1 accepted it. Fidele was
very nigh falling a vi<Sfim to the difpleaSure of Mr, Frojby. The poor creature leaping on his knee at the very instant I rofe up to go to cards, he flung him almost breathlefs on the floor. I shrieked— Sir John flew to Fideley and taking him in his
arms.
/
i
, I
, I f

t i
M
I !
1 i'
ii
i <
[ 96 i
arms, by the tenderest caresses brought him life again.
Senssble of his fault, Mr. Frojby made an apo* Jogy—and ssyly congratulated me on my recovery.
1 was difpleafed---Spare thy comments.
Brent on-hall—176—
*
L E P T E R IV.
Lady Carolina Pelham to Lady Victoria
Nevil.
TT
JlI
W exquisste is an unexpected happincfs!
__ Never talk of pleafures offering them-
i^ves at our first call—thefe are hardly fenfations
thefe can hardly Sweeten the bitter draught
of life.
It was but nine this morning, when the trampling of horfes, and the noife of Servants, announced the arrival of Ivord Pelham from New -market. Uneafy at at fo early and Sudden a return, I immediately flipped on a gown, and ringing for Lucy.) hurried to my dressing-room.
Carolina I Carolina /—Whereare you, Carolina?— Here I am, dear brother
And stepping towards him-------
So unexpectedly, and at nine! you frighten me, brother—are you well ?—
And I offer’d him my cheek.
On thy account only, Carolina., am I come to town Sooner than I intended. I w'ould not keep from thee an hour the knowledge of what I have done to make thee perfectly eaSy and happy.
Had I been acquainted with thy anxiety, long ago, Carolina^ had I freed thee from it—long ago had Lord Fanfly ceaSed to diSquiet thee— fister, hast thou to fear his persecutions.—
Seen him—he knows thou art free, and
hand shall be only bdloveed by thy heart.
no more, have that thy
T
1
Brother!
C 97 ]
■i
Brother!
’Twas all I could Say, and I Saintly leaned my head upon his boSom.
My eagernefs to pleafe thee, Carolina.^ has defeated my prudence.--------Friendship has betrayed
me into indifcretion-—forgive ------
How can I repay fo inuch gocdnefs and genero-Sity
By never mentioning it, Carolina.—This morning Lady Pelham and 1 will fettle thy fortune, and put it into thy own hands, that no unforefeen event may cheat thee of thy natural right to the difpofal of thyfelf.—I hate constraint on a noble heart—be free, stster, be free as thou defervest.
To Lady Pelham we are both indebted, thou for the end of thy troubles, I for the pleafure of
----This letter I received at Neiu-
obligin
thee.
market.
Frederick.
Lord Fanfly has followed you to the races. His intention is to afk your conlent, and stx the day of his marriage with your Sister. Believe me, your confent will be death to Carolina.
JuL. Pelham.
Affront not thy mother and me, Carolina., and he laid his hand on my lips, with unnecessary thanks—We know thy fenSibility.
Fie then begged a dish of chocolate in my own apartmeiit, and turned the conversation on thee and Sir ^ohn Modifl).
Though vexed at thy indifference for Sir yohriy he is extremely pleafed with the effedl: it has upon him. He commends his diffidence as the greatest effort of human virtue, and almost thanks thee for thy love to Fro/by, which has So nobly difplayed the charadler of his friend.
F	We
[ 98 ]
We had not dwelt long on the praifes of Sir ''John.^ when word was brought that Lord Fanfj was with Lady Pelham.
His love for thee, Carolina., justifies the prepof-terous behaviour.—Had he entirely relied on my
denial----had he not made a fecond attempt to
obtain thee, far from deferving the pity I cannot refufe his disappointment, he would have funk, below my contempt-----Stop the tear of gratitude,
Carolina—though it be an honour to thy heart, it is an infult to my virtue,-
I never doubted your friendship, brother--
but in this age Such uncommon goodnefs--fuch
uncommon excellence when fouls are fo degene'-rated----Don’t frown upon me.----1 am Silent.
Soon after Lady Pelham came to partake of the joy she had caufed—Why tell thee, Vifioria^ what
she did----wh'^t she laid—have I not already told
thee she is a mother ?
London
>7
6
LETTER V.
Sir John Modish to Lord Pelham.
Frederick, i—no: thouwouidst fayi
am again turned fool. Thy reafon--------the
devil take thy reafon----it difconcerts me—Why
made I thee the confident of my passion for / rV-
torla? 1 was aiTuredly bev/itched---there flroukl
have been no correj'pondence between thy cool head and my enflamed heart—their language is absolutely the reverfe of each other—Thou readeft the charadfers of love, but knowest thou how to
exprefs them ? To thee they are folly------to me
kuie and wit.-----Come hither, Frederick------—
Fidc^in
[ 99 ]
FlFioria will teach thee to Seel; in the Sunshine of
her fmiles thou wilt become a man------------she will
look at thee--------then, Frederick.^ shalt thou un-
derstand me.
■1
LETTER VI.
Lady Victoria Nevil, to Lady Carolina
Pelham,
I’ Know not, Carolina., how it is with the hearts ; of men, but Surely none was ever more ob-Scure and intricate than that of your Victoria.
I am afraid our fex are too heedlefs-too
fanguine---too full of airy notions, to poffefs
the foul polite and enamoured men have complimented us with—What affinity can that foul have with the foolish work we perpetually Set it upon ? How can it participate of paffions r --An
heavenly Substance stave to the circulation of the
blood!—------Nature, Carolina., fo Simple in her
operations, never thought of the many diiSerent and contradidfory attributes, which we are told uecestarily enter into our composition—and men no
more than women have to boast.
Be that as it
will, I will unfeignedly open to you that part of mine they call a heart, which they have made the feat of feelings as well as the reposttory of our fe-crets, though I am Sure it is the most talkative, ia-difereet and inconststent of all confidents.
Mrs. Brenton, to divert me from a gravity, which she remarked fat very unb me, propofed fending an invitation to Several ladies and gentlemen of the neighbourhood.
Chufe your company, Vidioria^ and write the cards in my name.
I fat down—I began.
Don’t forg’et Sir John Modi/b^
F 2	Sir
ecoming upon


I ,
I
f
K ^
£ 100 ]
Sir John I
His name was already written, Carolina----—■
Xhouglitlefs ViAoria! laid I to myfelf—and I tore the card.------
Vv"hy ssiould we remember a man we have not
Seen thefe five days r----
Five davs ! — must he benegleOed Sor an abfence of lb e days?
So fo, laid I again, c in I have nothing in my heart, but it must directly fly to my tongue ?
Seeing my aunt remained Silent, 1 went on and finiflied tlie cards.
Mrs. Brent on looking on them—
Then you are not for a concert, Vidloria?— Undoubtedly I am, dear Madam. How came
you to think 1 was not?----
By your not inviting the only performer ‘I'he onlv performer !—His name, dear aunt and I
/
Wliy Sir John Modifi.—Without him what a poor concert!
Poor, indeed !—dared I to repeat after her.
J am glad we agree, Victoria.^-----
I wrote—the cards were fent. ‘
Ali Carolina., all promifed, to come, but Sir John, who “ had it npt in his power to wait up-
“ on us.”------Not in his power, Carolina!----
Mrs. Brent on was greatly difplea fed—Ihe was certain the concert would come to nothing.
Mils Eltijon, Mr. Frojly, and I, dear aunt, will do our utmost to pleafe you.
Ellif.n!—Frojhy	—-------
And llie Snrugged up her Ihoulder with a fmile kordei ing on contempt.—In the name of heaven, never mention Ellifon and Frojly, whilst we have a Sir John Modijb.
I hope, refumed she after fome minutes reflection, no body has given Sir John any diflike to
Brenton-
[ lOI ]
Brenton-hall.—Though they Say he has been, and still is, a daily finner, we are no faints, Vidioria. Detradfion, which never Scruples to add to thefrail-ilties of men, and Seldom relpe6ts the purest innocence, is riSen to Such audacity, that 1 always distrust the ill Spoke against any individual, whoSc outward behaviour has never deviated from that of a man of honour.
Let not thy ear listen to stander, Vidiorin
disbelieve tSioIe that would nreSume to defame in
1
thy preSence the man who never dealt dishonestly with thee. It is the language of the baSe.—Has my Fieloria any objections to the viftts of Sir
yohn ^-----------
Far be from me the tliought of flighting the man
my aunt reSpeCts.-------
Perhaps Mr. Frojhy thinks him troubleSoine.—• On what right ?------
What right, Vibioria f------Does he dot love
thee?—Is Sir yohn So ntignificant as not to frighten a lover?—Had his preSence and assiduity rendered Mr. Frojhy miferable, had lie required thee not to fee, or converSe with Sir John—few, very few, Victoria., could So plaussbly colour their SenSe-leSs jealouSy.-^------
Had Frofiy been So unjust—but lie never was— Would you have punished him, Victoria., for having aCted in character ?
Who ever acknowledged the propriety of an infult ?-------
Who ever Saw an inSult where none was offered ?•-------
Are the wanderings of the heart of So Sacred a nature as to brave an appeal to reafon ?

Love, Vibfona-, hates reafoning:—it is in its own cauSe both judge and party.—If reaSon meddles in the quarrel, love is no more. --
I hope not, ssghed I, turning to the window.
F 3	Carolina !
1.

f
r



L
■
^*4

[ 102 ]

Carolina ! what do you think of your Victoria f How dangerous to our Sex is vanity !—why
cannot we coldly Suffer neg]e£I, though So often
wished for ?—
Brenton-hall—176—------
LETTER VII.
Sir John Modish to Lord Pelham
I V E days, Frederick., have I been Secreted from the eye of the despotic Victoria
live days weighing, with the Scale of Self-intereft, my love, and her indifference—five days allowing my fancy to riot on each charm of Lady Behnour------yet am I still adoring the virtues of
Victoria, extolling her beauty, ready to prostrate though certain to be rejedled.
Far from ab 'ting the stre of pastion. Solitude either renews the flame, or adds to its fury. Ne-ceffarily centered in the beloved thought by the absence of other objeds, does not its illufion naturally encreaSe and feed the luxuriant destre ? What advantages do not the ladies gain by the reveries of their lovers ? Safely may they intrust our
-----what more
imagination with their concerns -
powerful protedtor could they have than the \ery creator of their charms, and she pleaSures they procure r---------
Yes—I am determined :—I will not eo. ’Tis
rashnefs, not bravery, heedleSsly to expoSe one’s Self to . n infallible danger, when we may retreat
with honour.------1 will not go. ~0 Love ! envy
not Spite this triumph over thee 1--------1 will
not go
I have just Sent Mrs. Brenton an apology as polite as w'it and carelefsnefs could contrive.--^1
■wonder how my heart happened not to dictate—
Prudence
[ J03 ]
“i/
Prudence held the pen
wrote----Prudence t
•/j
----1 might have fpent a whole evening with Lady ViAoria——a whole evening !---Du I alrea-
dy repent ?
Modijh-Hall 176------
LETTER VIIL
Lady Carolina Pelham to Lady Victoria
Nevil.
'B' O R D Fanfly^ my most palTionate lover
MB	«	...	Y’T'a _ *
LA ,
proudly, widiout one tear even reproaching me with my
without
' /' /' >
eniiDiiity.
He is gone to Faris^ there to be stnistied, i prefume, in the glorious endowment of veding his ignorance and stupidity under the bragging air oS feif-fufficiency.
Greatly is Lord Fanjiy in need of being perfedl-ed by the courtiers of V erfaiiles, and the beaux of Parity in the art of wearing a (hameiefs countenance.—————
When he comes back, he will confidently talk, offer advice, and give his opinion—he will glory in his cook and his taylor, laugh at religion, dii-dain his country, never fmile, always laugh—and may-be, excel his very masters.
But for this Ipecious outfide, how many or our
great men------of our fine ladies, would die away
their fenfelefs existence ! S^orthis alone, how many women are admired, how many men extolled, whom Nature, had foiely protiuced for fitting, walking, talking, or dreffing unnoticed!-----
How deferteci, VidloFm., our f dhionable levees, v/ere minions obliged to praife but the genuine qualities of their worthlefs protectors !
F 4	Who


are no wants, no passions, no Self-love
[ 104 ]
Who amongst them would tell one courtier he is-a tool, another he is a knave, this he bafely fold his country, that he daily brings it to contempt, by preferring his own dastardly creatures to the
first posts of their state?--None furdy but th
free, none but patriots, would dare to pull off the dignified robes, under which they mysterioufly lie, a.s Safe from our vain indignation as the rotten bones of a canonized rogue in his gilded
ihrine.----None but the free !—where ^are they?
Name me a climate, Fidtoria, under which there
----’Under
which fools poffefs not the highest places of truss and honour------under which'the dear French assu-
rance does not defy our Sagacity, and impofe on our understanding---- Name me that climate, Vic-
toria., then—Shall I always obey the prefent calls
of fancy?-----Why did i mention Lord Fanji^
but to beg your condolence ? Have I not acted as a true woman ?-----If fo, torgive.
12 o’clock.
I must rest contented, it Seems, v/ith Lord Pe-
■krfton----Mighty agreeable this !—T'hanks tothe
incfficacy of my charms, he is the only man I have now at command.-------He is, no doubt, extreme-
ly happy in being alone.—But was he to abat« of
his atfedfion for me, was he-^----Fll step to the
glafs.
I am disheartened, though encouraged, by the
obliging counsellor.-----—Franstent beauty !—
I should hate Lord Felerjion had he been captivated by an allurement I owe to Nacu&e and not to myfclf.—What are the charms that may vanilh the hour after they have been admired and caufed the
most enchanting illufion?----.Have I not neglefl-
ed the improvement of my mind ?-------fiave i not
been too carelefs of the only accomplishments
which
f J
?i
■which will leave a lover no regret Sor the lofs of


tt
his liberty :
Vibloria will readily agree with her Carolina that beauty is oftener a misfortune than an advantage. We are commonly fo haughty. So stupid, when are handfome, that I wonder we don’t lofe by our fpeech and behaviour what we gain by our looks.
It is widi a beauty as witli a tyrant. Can (he hear but flattery? Do not staves watch heriioJ, ready to guefs—still readier to obey ?—^How Ihouid not Ihe be intoxicated with vanity, regardlefs of true merit, and trust her fate to her charms, and the extreme feniibility of the numbers who throng to obtain a glance of her eye, and be made happy in her fmiles r— Eafily—too eafily, VicloAa., do we confide in- the lovely features, the delicate fliape, the graceful carriage, and the melodious voice :
■—too eatily do w'e receive the incenfe, delight in the offerings, and glory—and (hare in the extafy of our adorers.---------
How can a beauty question the refistlefs power which nature has made infeparable from her, when men inceflantly heighten her certainty of it?—Is
file not every where entertained with fighs, de-fires, and traiifportS'?'Does any man hefitate to gaze—to pray—any woman to cenfure, or burn with envy ?
Will (he in the midst of her greatnefs—in the full enjoyment of undifputed empire, think fhe is hourly on the verge of difgrace ?—Few, Fifiorta^ but few will reflect on the certain end of their glory, and damp their prefent joy with the fears of a futurity tiiey perhaps may never fee.
Let us, Viieloria., afcribe to lucky circumstances, and the tender attention of our parents, the preference we have given to the qualities of the mind over thofe of nature.—Had we not been constantly told how inestimable the first are,' how precarious
F 5	the
i
[ io6
*T
J
j »
r i
J ,
, I
^ i
i!
f * t •	•
! i
I i ,
i
the latter, we should now perhaps have been wrapt
up in igsiu'ance, vanity and folly.--A d greffion
again !—-and you will bear patiently with the wandering Carolina !—I .est I should ramble once more, 1 abruptly fubfcribe myfelf your
London—176—	Carolina.
L E T T E E IX.
Lady Victoria Nevil to Lady Carolina
Pelham.
O W preposterous, Carolina.^ if, from a few flights of my vanity, you should infer that Sir Iohn has stolen into my heart! Though I m ght forgive it for your extreme partiality to him, be filent, lest repenting of my flneerity, I should refrain from diSclofing to you my unexpeded thoughts, and unufua! feelings.—But why should I mind your opinion ?—1 love not Sir ‘J;ohn—Well then, Carolina., indulge your fancy, and determine at your pleafure how' it is, or how it is not, with your fiCioria,
I give thee full power to ramble at discretion, to think, write, and judge as l idiculoufly as thou wilt.
That thou may’st not be at a lofs to Support the opinion thy unerring Sagacity shall be pleated to favour, I will tell thee all that has within theSe few weeks happened to me—I will lay my heart before thee.—Then, Carolina., then perhaps thou wilt know as little, be as uncertain—but no matter for 'that.------
I will ingenuoufly confeSs, that the behaviour of Sir John being constantly polite, reSpedlful, and obliging to Mr. Dv_/2y and me, my prejudices Subsided—1 Saw him with plcaSure—and at last Set a value on his endeavours to deferve my esteem.
Believe that my certainty of his love, and his generofity in fllencing it, operated not a little to
instate
i
*
ii:
S ray ];
mstate him in my favour—believe it, Carolina,^ and 1 will not be offended.
S'ew, faid I often, reffedfing on his accomplishments, few would fear to render me unhappy by their perfecutions—none perhaps would fcruple to declare, to hope, and even to question my taste in my love for Frojby.
Tids refined behaviour of Sir ‘John flattered me the more, as 1 expected lefs delicacy from him. It was fo manifestly the reverfe of his principles, that looking on it as my own work, I could not help thanking him in my heart, for the glorious con-defcenston I had forced him to.
I. /


Was It my virtue or my priae whicii was fo fen-fibly affedted with tlie pleaSmg contrast?—This, Carolina.^ I leave to thee to examine and to relolve-, as being a more profound adept in the arc of distin guishing passion from fentirnent, and the feelings of the heart from the fallies of imagination.—To me it belongs to relate, to thee to analyfe, compare and decide.
Though Sir Jolm’s referve encreafed at every viiit, he was not lefs amiable, lefs entertainin*’-,
r j /
lefs happy in the amufements he procured us. His travels were an inexhaustible topic—His aistion is noble, eafy, instnuating, and admirably fets oif the charms of his elocution.—He (peaks—not to fpeak, but to pleafe.—ever fuccefsful is his attempt Glance, Carolina., over the word attempt, for—• let me not tell thee the why.-----
Mufic afforded; him perpetual opportunitie difplay an unwearied complaifance in complying with the repeated encores of my enchanted aunt.—• Never was she tired with listening, never was he tired with gratifying her humour.
TVednefday ii o’Clock.
Often, when, alone with Sir Johity has he, on a
fijddcii
s to
0
[ 108 ]

fudden, taken my hand—stolen it half way to his-lips—let it go immediately, and begun a lively converfation on fubjeets which he knew I liked, or was tolerably verfed in.
I am a stranger to the art he employed ; this you must discover, Carolina.^ but 1 had always a better opinion of my own wit and taste after having conversed with him
My aunt daily compliments me on the improvement I have made, thefe five weeks, in knowledge of the world, and applauds the elegance of my didfion, the pmpriety of my remarks, and the ac-'’uracy^ of my defigns.—She whifpers alfo, but very Cftly, that my Ihape is more free, my currfies lefs confufed, and my Sighs, mind this, CaroUnay and my stghs lefs frequent.
Frojhy complains of my coldnefs.—He fays that fince Sir Iohn has vistted familiarly at Brenton-hally I receive him not with the fame Smiles as before.— Twice has he haughtily required me to tell him my true motive for continuing ot late fo long in the library.—He thought I once attended more carefully to my drefs, and has often taken a real pique at my favouring Sir yohn with a tune, a nolegay or a walk, in the garden.
Should not i be very amiable, Carolinay were I ignorant, impertinent, and ill-natured ? Don’t you think that vanity rnoie than love is concerned in his difpleafure r Would not he otherwife be more careful of my glory ?—To pride in Sir John being a witnefs of my inclination for him !—Is not this both indelicate and ungenerous ?—Can he wistt to make himfelf liappy by another’s pain ?-—Had Sir John the fame thouglu ! —did he dare to exprefs it! -----How Surprising his moderation, yet how commendable ! Can a man of fo fiery a difpofition— and he loves me, you fay !>—I am glad you were deceived, Carolina.
One day—one day, do I fay!—every day, Carolina.
r
1
[109 ]	V
TGlina^ I read in the looks of Sir yohn.^ Vidloria !
“ were I certain you loved not FroKy^ and that “ my homage would not be thought unworthy,
“ how happy P’—Then, Carolina.^ I turn my eyes Srom him, and will read no more.
I o’clock.
0
How I gradually came to rejoice in the prefcnce of Sir John, and to mifs him when he was gone, you must inquire in your conjuring book, Carolina.
I will not tell thee, lest I (hould too powerfully add to the virtue of thy magical wand, that more than once I could not help eclioing Mrs. Brenton in her praifes of Sir 'john., and that I often thought were his morals as unquestionable as his wit and good-nature, it might prove dangerous to fee him. Whence that restedfion arofe, 1 have not examined, and as I will not recolledl: the time and circumstances which caufed it, for fear of an emotion my prudence bids me avoid, great as thy fkill is, thou wilt be unable, 1 doubt, infallibly to assign its genuine origin.
1 had fo well habituated myfeif to the vistts of Sir John, and fo pleating was his converfation, that I w'as fome times tempted to think the day lost in which 1 had not feen him. Not that i had been without agreeable company, or Frofly had been lefs courteous, lefs refined, in his endeavours to, fix my attention, but then—I	hate thefe	thens”
—I’ll write them no more.----
I have Said courteous and refined,”	why	not
“ loving and ingenuous?”—endeavours!”—Ca-
o	o
/ do I know what I write ?
r
fortnight ago, two days pasted without our heai'-ing from Sir —the trfird, my harpsschord was untunable—my ear—I had no, ear—I fat to draw the paper was wasted—I took up Popd& Essay on Man----fenfelefs ! exclaimed I, and it drop-
ped on the floor.
Next I unfolded fome of Frojby’s
letters
$

i I
t
r '
1 i
r’
[ 1
]etters~how tedious, Carolina !—my heart beat quick,—Certainly, laid I, all is not right within— Unwilling, however to inquire into the extraordinary agitation oS my fpirits, I attempted to shake off the anxious thought, by Successively varying the objedis and the fcene of my diverssons 1 was not abfolutely unfuccefsful—but that heart—that
foolish heart of mine, Carolina—-----
Frojby came~how palpable was his indifcretion!
___He began by an unkind air of amazement at
the careieSsnefs of my drefs, and the gravity ot my countenance.
I hope, my lady, ’fis not to your health I muss impute the gloom which hangs upon youi love,y features—that negligee—thefe looks—the fight is
fo extraordinary----you did not exj>ea Sir John
ModiJ})—othtrmk you would hardly have ventured to appear fo different from yourfelf—----
Venture !—^Had I known. Sir, I was in need of ornaments not to frighten Sir John away, I would undoubtedly have had the precaution to drefs.— But it is not late—Sir John may come—i’i] go and borrow from my toilet the charms you obligingly fay I want to pleafe him.----
And dropping a curtly, I was retiring----
Pray stop, my Lady--------Tell me plainly, had
you thought Sir John was to come, would you not
have Set off your graces to more advantage t---
Not possibly on his account, Sir, aS till now, I
knew not the necessity of it.— ----;
How fevere you are. Lady Victoria f-----
Tell me how I am fo, Mr. hrojly.-----------
Through my fault—dear Victoria^ I was wrong
I own it.
I forgave, fat down, liStened, fpoke, walked,
played, shng—still was the evening very ioii still was I abfent, and uneafy.
The next day, worfe.
O
The
[ III ]	V
‘4
The fifths my refllennefs grew more fenfible^ and in order to diSpel it, a concert was ordered.
3	o’clock.
Though I told you in my last, Carolina^ how I a£Ied with regard to the invitations 1 ieiit by the command of Mrs, Brenton. and mv converfation with her relating to Sir John and Mr. Frojbx.) I left you to guefs what my thoughts were on Sir John’s “ not having it in his power” to wait upon us.
Not to anticipate your judgment of them, I will not enter into the nature of the restedtions I made, and explain the emotions I felt.— Strive to guefs— and not to mistake.—
The company was numerous—the men auk-^ ward, affected or impertinent—the women either gaping or whifpering—all the performers full of confidence, loudly warbling what they were going to perform.---------
I mistrust that Self-Sufficiency, whifpered my
aunt—real merit is not fo prefuming------Oh, Sir
John! Kixjohn! he only could have pleafed—Go, Vidtoria’, go to thy harpfichord, remember I’H listen but to thee.
We began—then we began again.---------Twice a
string of the first violin breaking, twice there was a general stop—feveral from the first to the very last stroke of the bow went naturally out of tune-^ one turning hastily a leaf of his mufic book mif-took an allegro for an amorofo, and perceiving not his error, played it on with the utmoSt unconcern. —An unlucky cougstfeizing on Mifs ElliJ’onzs fho was finging. La Buona Figliuola was thrown afide, and we had a folo on the german flute.
How Mrs. Brenton fuffered !—how her fenfible ears were grated !—how she longed for the end of shat folo!—It was, however, applauded, admired and honoured with a general clap.
Noble
I ,
i '•
t I
' f
II
I I 1
i !
I
I
I V
t .
1 t I
i i
[ 112 ]
r
Noble Lord B elm our ! how willingly he aScribed to his taste the compliments paid to his (^(uality !—
I inwardly fmiled at the mistake.
Is it not very convenient to be a Lord ? Said f to Frojby. Had Lord Belmour been but a commoner, should we have indulged him in his folly?—win,
Sir have not you a coronet r-------
d'hank you, my lady.
And Sor noife and confuSion we prepared again. Mrs. Brenton had the misfortune not to be undeceived in her opinion of the concert: it was as mi-ferably performed as her fears had prefaged.
Was I in the wrong, Vidtoria., faid stie to me,
when w'e had done Scraping_________Would 1 had
been fo, but that fatisfadtion was denied me. I hope the fupper will make amends—flow they have added to my esteem for Sir 'John ! how great his Superiority !—I blushed, Victoria^ for feeing thee amongst them, though, I will not stat er thee, thou amazingly negledfedst thyfelst
Is not my aunt, Carolina., too attentive to my
motions------- too partial to Sir John f------
He stngs.—Well — is she to infer from thence that he defervcs her esteem ? Can talents whicli, at best, are only agreeable, compensate for the absence of virtue?—sterhaps I am too rigid, CaroUnOi. Whence my aunt’s constant praiSes of Sir John?.
-----Are they not inconsistent with her friendlhip
iox Frofiy ?—It Seems she takes a delight to open my eyes, strike my ear, fill all my fenfes with the image of the man who, she fays, is muSic and melody all over.---
Was I not retain she loves and refpedls Frojby Surely she don’t believe it unfafe for me to listen •to echo the eulogiums Sne lavishes upon Sir John otherwise she would refrain.—Did you ever know any body fo rapturousty fond of mustc as Mrs. Brenton ? I must advife FroJjy to improve in it as much as possible.—His genius is excellent, and to
oblige
[ 113 1
oblige him to emulate Sir John., I’ll tell him what!—What shall I tell him ?
Adieu.
Brentcn-hall—176—
mV
4
Nothing.
LETTER X.
Sir JoHR Modish to Lord Pelham.
HOUGH / wears So exulting]y the Sea-
__ tures of an happy lover that my heart often
beats ten times in a minute for revenge, yet, Frederick, I cannot take upon me to refent his perpetual
attacks upon my pride.--Victoria is his guardian
angel----her love for him triumphs over my an-
ger, and foftens it into concern—nay into friendship.—I ride, hunt, . drink with that man—he talks of the lovely maid—he talks with rapture of
her beauty----expatiates on her tendernefs for
him—and no look, no motion of mine expresses that his conversation is torment, his happineSs death to mel—Curfe on his tongue—curfe on his Smiling countenance which overwhelms me with forrovv i—If I thought he knew how much I love '—how much I Suffer by hearing him—no: he knows it not; his good nature could not triumph in my grief.—’Tis I who for ever start the murdering topic—who infpire Frojly with the fond enthu-ssalin by my incessant praifes of Victoria—her name is.constantly on my lips—I forget tliat ’ds to my rival I fpeak, if I can but Speak of her.—Two hours ago he came here : instead of “ how do you “ do. Sir ?” I ashed “ how does Lady Victoria V His eyes thanked me as if her health had been
his----as if he had been indifferent to all but her
■---Frederick ! of myfelf, not of him must I com-
plain.—Myfelf alone will I detest—Oh, my heart,
my heart, how st is torn !-
Modijh-hall--- —
LET-
n-.
I -
t 1
il
ip
i : .
i-;
1
■ T
i! > ♦
!l
I ,
I

Lady
[ 114]
L E T T E R XL
Carolina Pelham to Lady Victoria
N kvil.
T has pleafed my Sweet Lord FeleiKlon to favour
___ me with a short tit of jealoufy, that I might be
in no doubt of his extreme regard for me.
He probably thought, Vibloria., that I wanted this proof of his attachment, and his generofity could not allow him to retufe it. How nicely prudent in the choice of his means to take off from me the least tendency to mistrust my power over him !—Is it not very kind in him to feize the first opportunity to convince me that, though nobody has yet offered to corapenfate for the abfence of Lord Fanfly., he relies not. So far on his deferts as to think himfelf in no danger of lofing me ?
Jealous men are amiable creatures. How they flatter our vanity by questioning their own importance !—How Sagacious in their difcoveries—dif-creet in their affairs—just in their reproaches—diverting in their anger !—What abilities are rcquifite
not to mistake the capricious charadter-----Don’t
laugh, Kidioria.^ ’tis not fo eafy a matter to be impertinent without offending, and troublefome without difgusting.
I Speak not of thofe frantics who fcem to love but to hate, to talk but to affront, to move but to frighten, to Smile but to kill.—Heaven guard’ us from theSe fiery monsters—my blood chills at the very thought of them—Lord Pclcrfon is a more tractable animal,
“ 11 p Alarme alPtmut et f' aphaife de merne."
10 ©’Clock.
Lady Prefion and her younger brother having
dined
[ iH 1
dined with us, we took in the aSternoon an airiiig,«< to Clapham. At our return, Lord Pelerjfon., who had waited for me haif an hour in the drawing-room, approached my ear-----------
To the country!—without me!—how barbarous 1—Barbarous indeed I anfwered I Smiling, the more So, as we had charming weather, and were extremely happy----------
Happy, my Lady !
And he cast an eye on Mr. Prejlon.
Mr. Prejlonf Vidlot'ia^ is a diScreet youth, blest with the lively bloom of eighteen. Lately come from the Universtty, he left behind him the garb of a pedant to assume that of a fine gentleman.
His manners are free, eafy, and decent, fpite of the contagious air of the classic world. One would fay he has been educated by men of fenfe, fo great is his modesty, his referve, his taste for polite company, his refped: for the Social duties.
Come, are we to be grave now after fo much gaiety ?
It shan’t be my fault if we are fo,^ Said Mr, Prejlon Smiling.
I take your word. Sir—you have too much wit to Suffer dulnefs to intrude v»/here you are.—I own I have Seldom Spent lb agreeable an afternoon.—
How kind, my Lady !
Kind ! fay True, Sir.
What a flatterer !—

sir
on denying yourSelf juf

Will you inlist, tice ?—
Did you, Madam, neglecf to pleaSe ?
Shall I believe I was fuccefsful ?—
Did we appear tired. Sir P^—had You the vapours, Lady Prejlon f
As it is not me my brother intended to pleaSe, he will excuSe my thanks,,—r-
Wdl
I*
I
I
I
'll
n ‘ *
;
, :
: (
[I
f :
ill: ■
!:r i
> I
!’ ) ** I
. I
i .	1
‘.P

[ ii6 ]
Well Said, Sister, keep thy gratitude to thyfelf ■—his enough that Lady Carolina regrets not the
few hours 1 have pasted with her. --------
Is Lord Pelerjion determined not to favour us
with one word? afked Lady Frejion.-----------
I was afraid, Madam, to interrupt thefe effustons of the heart—Is not my difcretion very commend-
able, Lady Carolina? Effustons of the heart !-
difcretion !—I’ll punifh
whatever you do is
Li ,	\
him, faid I to myfelf.
Very much Ib, my Lord a propos.---------
And turning to Mr. Prejion—I hope, Sir, you have no longer any doubts of the pleaSure your company has afforded me—
They fubstst no longer, my Lady : I’ll indulge my vanity with the fancy.
And the lovely youth kissed my hand.
Lord Pelerjion rofe up, endeavouring to hide an uneafy look.
Surely, thought I, the man is mad—What does he mean by that look ?—Diipleafed for a jest! disturbed for a kifs !—how i joli'h !—I must plague him.
Then I listened to the Sprightly trifler, excited his mirth, and Supported it with Smiles, lively an-fwers, and taps of my fan.
2 o’clock.
Mr. Prejion behaved as if he iiad read my mind'. He fell in So heartily with my project, that he displayed to admiration all the graces peculiar to ingenuity, humour and vivacity: his eyes (hone with an uncommon stre, and his countenance, enlivened by the latisfadlion he enjoyed, v/as feelingly beautiful.
So apparent was my partiality for the young gentleman,
C 117 ]
tleman, that Lord Peletjion grew at last abSolute***^
ly fulpicious.
Having ventured a few words I pretended not to hear, he instantly mimicked my indifference, and racked his imagination to keep it up,
I am aSraid, laid I to Lady Prejlon^ our con-verfation is too childish for his Lordship. I beg you will start a fubjedt more adapted to his taste, that he may be releafed from fo Severe a filence.^— Start it yourfelf. Madam, for I hate to be designedly grave. I will not prefer ferioufnefs to gaiety—the choice is abSurd—
Then, my Lord, you must yourfelf give the fubjedt, for noneshf us, it Seems, are abst to find it ------
The attack, though fierce, proved inefiediual. The good Lord, in whofe breast Sorrow was never a welcome guest, thought proper to remove the odious fenfation, and to look Sweetly on his Carolina.
lam Sorry, Ladies, my Silence should have given you room to Sufpedt my judgment.- - What tonic more agreeable than love !
J	D
Dear itiy Lady (and he drew to my ear) pity niy weaknefs—your charms and my unworthi-neSs have made me offend—forgive—forget—
And addressing Lady Prejion and her brother— Goon, my Lady—go on, Sir—purfue the favourite theme—lil praile with you the most amiable, the most enchanting of all passions—the only one that can endear life—I’U extol all the shapes w^liich the benevolent deity chuSes, or is forced to aSihme.
—Let us celebrate the rapturous illufion---
Stop, delirious man, cried Lady Prejion., stop your raving fancy—encreaSe not, by your eiithu-liafm, the fiercenefs of a passion already too lively ■—Spare our ears the fond expression—remember
we
}

[ ii8 ]
' we are profane, and unwilling to be initiated in the mysteries of So tremendous a god.—
’Were I to tell you I was vexed at I/ord Peler^ Jlorfs uneaSinefs, would you believe me, Victoria f —“No”—well then, adieu.
London—176

1
I i
LETTER XII.
Lady Victoria Nevjl to Lady Carolina
Pklham.
W1 T, affability, and good manners, Carolina, were ablolutely excluded from Supper. Our party of pleafure was transformed into a downright meeting of the County. Never were my ears stunned with fo much stander and impertinence. The ladies were as Sanguine in their defence of patriots or ministers as if they had been emulating one another in drefs and wit, or caballing for a favourite adfor. I had Scarce ten minutes of tolerable entertainment---So many peo-
ple of rank, and hardly one of common fenfe and
breeding!—I was fick, stck to the heart-- -.
twenty times did my watch tell the hour that they
might gp----Oh! Carolina, I will not be fad a-
gain—I have no encouragement—the remedy is infinitely woj'fe than the disorder.
So disagreeable was our company, that imprudently comparing their behaviour with that of Sir Iohn Modijh, I could not help esteeming him in proportion as he differed from them.—I wilhed him preSent to fee in my eye the justice I did him. It had pleaSed me to give liim that proof of my impartiality—I would have displayed the utmoft complacency—my Sorrow would have vanished for amid fo many fools, how engaging a man of parts!
I am
t
[ 119 ]
(t|


I an afraid, Carolina^ I should have badly fupi^ ported the character ot mistrefs of the ceremonies had he been with us—I would have looked, talked, listened-----Surely there would have been more
diforder and confiiston.
Never was Frojhy more evidently negle£l:ful than at that very time when he might So eastly have a-mufed me—fo eaSily have fixed my thoughts to himfelf alone.
Perpetual whifpers were exchanged between Mils Ellifon and him—he looked penfive and perplexed, and twice coloured at furprifing my eyes upon him—
I faw Mifs Ellifon flip, with the greatest privacy, a paper into his hand. 1 nconfiderately fluttered at jt
1 instantly made a step towards them------“ It may
be a fong.” I went back to my chair.—“ How foolish I was!” Said I as I fat down, “ what are their concerns to me ?”—And no longer did I re-fledf upon them.
Mrs. Brenton had been a more stri<st obferver.— Some words Frojhy had, in her hearing. Spoke to Mifs Ellifon^ awaking her curiofity, she earnestly applied herfelf to watch his looks, follow his morions, penetrate his thoughts. Her Scrutiny, however was vain----^Frojhy efcaped her fagacity, and
she was at a lofs what to think, what to refolve.
10 o’clock.
%
Imagining that my dejedion might proceed from Some difference between Frojhy and me, Mrs. Brenton Sent for me next morning after breakfast to her clofet.------
Thou art fo uncommonly grave, ViAoria, fo indifierent about the objecsts of thy daily amufe-ment, without a reafon.—If it is in the power of friendship, love, or fortune to make thee happy,
Sp eak,

w
[ 120 ]
fpeak, and happinefs shall instantly wait upon
thee—Show a delire, and it shall be gratified.--------
i\re we not often, dear aunt, unreafonably un-eafy ?—Can we always account for a change of temper ? Are we not liable to perpetual deceptions on the nature of our thoughts and feelings ?—
So you know not yet the caufe of your Sorrow —Shall I guefs for you —
I heedlefsly blushed, Carolina.^ and dcSired my aunt to Spare herfelf a fruitlefs enquiry, for I really knew not any thing to disturb my peace, but what
absolutely related to her happinefs.------
And stis not in the power of Frojby to disturb
it!------
I hope
! 1

Frojby !—1 have not to complain of him Mr. Frojby will never difquiet me,—
Never will, ViAoFw!—Is he fo indifferent to thee, that even his infidelity would not vex thee?— How you construe my words, dear aunt!— Thy words, Victoria !—1 only believe thy expression of them.—Wouldst thou retradl thy voice and manner ?—Shall I think Frojby could astiidthee
by ceaiing to fmile upon thee ?----
Cannot I esteem Mr. Frojioy., without running the danger of fo hard a fate ? —
Esteem !—yes: you may by esteeming him only but if you love, as I think you do You think I do ?—
Am I mistaken, Vibforia ?—Have I alfo mifcon-strued the declarations you made me of your affection for him?—You love him not, Vidioria?— Not to the degree of being made helplefsly wretched through his incorstancy.—
To what degree then might it affedl thy fenfibi-bility ?—
What degreee!—Ash me no questions, dear Madam.—My heart know not what degree to fix •what anfwer to dictate-----
Does
: I
P
\ i
[ I2I 1
Does Frofby Sufpedl the doubts of thy heart ? Possibly he may--------
Can he really ?------V/hom could he impeach
for the possibility, Victoria ?-------
Whom !—you certainly jest, dear aunt—whom could he ?----i
But if he cannot, how is it possible he may ?
He may through modesty—through delicacy— When you faid “ possibly he may” did you think of his modesty and delicacy, Victoria P Did you, dear aunt, give me more than time to fpeak ?—What a trial !~what a judge !—how fe-
verely examined !-----Will not my aunt fave her
Vibloria any more questions ?—
I will, Victoria.---
And she ssmpered at my unguarded ingenuity.
I am glad, you are not fo strongly attached tO
Frofby----‘
And she sheered, Carolina------
Were I not certain of this I would not venture to tell thee my thoughts on his behaviour of yesterday-------Since I can fafely--------but, Vidloria.,
conssder once more before 1 fpeak---------perhaps
you are impofed on by Some pique, fome fudden
caprice----1 will not have thee to upbraid me with
having vexed thee-----------
Have you any thing fo heavy against him that I
may not hear it without emotion i------Has he be.<-
trayed me ?-----
Suppofe he has------
Suppofe !----lie has not, dear aunt------
)

I have but conjectures, I own, and that is a
trifle----
A trifle !-----
1 declare, Carolina., I was not at all pleafed with that “ trifle”, and my blood flushed my face with
mdignation.-----------Would you know the reafon?
look for it in the n ttural refileststefs of our heart;
G
there.
ri ‘I.
■1	»
h
t	i:
- I
:'f	•
.■j	! ■
’■ i.
'Vi'
I

S 1:
I
ll

I
I' t
hi ^ * • }
ft'
[ 122 ]
there, you will find it furrounded by vanity, felf-love, and an unbounded passion for power and preeminence.—What a frail creature is woman ! how amazing that we are not oftener the dupes of our own inconsssstncy ! Were we always to obey rea-Son, what perplexities ssiould w'e constantly be in-'volved in ! Who would not trembling receive an impression, venture a word, listen to a delire, walk,
fit, look, or fmile ?---In what rank of beings
should our fex be classed, w'cre we not necessarily tossed about by love, pride and folly?—No more will I apologize, Carolina.^ for the flights either of
my heart or head-----1 am guilty of none, ssnee
uninvited they strike my nerves, leize on my brain, and imperioully difpofe of my tenlibility.
I will not fall a voluntary vidtim to the opinions of mankind, fo long as 1 can unite virtue, decency, and happinefs.—Were the, whole world certain I loved Frojhy.^ if my heart ceafed to prefer him before every other man, I would not keep conssant through a falfe delicacy, and lacrissce she happinefs of my life to compliments paid to the feem-ing infallibility of my taste and judgment.
To keep constant! would virtue allow me to impofe indifference on a man who expedls an adequate return of love ?------
V/ere it not a ,most heinous perjury to give my hand, to fwear for my heart ?—Carolina., the minute 1 perceive I have been mistaken in my fenti-ments of Frofiy-----the minute 1 cannot, with honour to mylelf, accept his homage--------that minute will 1 refufe to listen--filence his ssghs, and
avoid the preposterous language.
.2 o’clock.
My Vidloria wstll not then agree v/ith herfelf,
faid Mrs. Brenton, with the foftest harmony in her ,
voice, the most ienfible concern in her looks—■ j
You
[ 123 ]
You love not Frojby—--------yet when.I mention, 4
but conjectures against him, thy heart immediately beats the alarm, thy foul starts up with indignation.----—
I wish, dear aunt, my heart lay open before you, that you might know all the hidden fprings of its
contradictory motions----1 am really unable to
difcover the Secret chain by which they are linked.—
How should I not err on the nature of fenfati-ons, of which I am not the author ? But, dear aunt, mind not my involuntary exclamation—tell me of Frojby.------
Did not you often obferve him yesterday privately difcourfing with Mifs Ellifon
I did.—You don’t imagine from this that Mifs
Ellifon^—
1 will not fo far affront thee, ViJIoria^ as to entertain a fufpicion she is thy rival—thou hast no-^ thing to dread from her charms—I only fear therC is fome intrigue mysterioully carried on between Frojby and fome lady to whom Mifs Ellifon is .A confident—I heard him fay, I beg you will keep her from raving and writing to Lady Vidforiaf’--I was fo struck with the unexpected expression that I could hear no more.—
Thefe words, Carolina., and the paper I Saw Frojby receive from Mifs Ellifon, were very ssror^ temptations to conclude him guilty.—Many lovers have been coudemtied upon lefs evidence—I could not, however, take upon me to arraign his probity.
Frojby, dear Madam, has too much honour even to think of a bafe aClion. His proceedings
were ever noble----iris behaviour might defy the
eye of envy—fo long as he continues to talk to me of love, becertaiti he will never talk of it to another. 1 alone engage his thoughts, poffefs his
G 2	heart,
^ i
K '
I ^
ll'
: »
. * i t
i '
i ‘
t ^
11
1
I
d
I
i!
j
• ' * 1'
f ■
r
{
[ '124 ]
heart, flatter his imagination—from me alone does he with for happinefs.
Frofiy has honour, religion and humanity: he "glories in the charadier of an honeli man, and delights in difcharging its duties.----Whole favou-
rite or benefactor is he not i—Is he not the father ^^of the orphan, the protector of the unfortunate?
■ .---Are-not icllends, mifery and defpair removed
-from every place where he is master ? Who ever ■incouraged industry, or rewarded merit, with fo
much generoSity ?------No: I will not harbour a
thought against his integrity—he- may be indifcreei, but not criminal.—I will not judge him on inug-nificant words, and brotid over lecrets, which by his Silence, must be of,no moment to us.
Can a man fo univerfally refpeCled, dear .aunt, •create either hatred, or jealoufy, in the brealt of your Victoria P—Would not you defpife the niece you fo tenderly love, was she capable of debating herfelf fo far .as to difregard the w orthy object of the public esteem ?—
I commend thy generoSity, Vitoria—I honour the benevolence of thy heart, but Prudence bids .thee look more attentively to thyfelf—
..How! shall I not fcorn the man 1 mistrust?---
If over I fuffer fufpicion to enter my heart, my refpeCl, my love for Frofby shall be no more.—Never shut from full oonviction of my wrongs, will I admit the injurious thought—till then PH dilbe-
lieve the poITibility.--
ril watch for thee, FiFaria—■
Why has Sir yohn fled from us, Carolina? W^here is he ?—What can he be about ?—No news yet from him—almost a fortnight !—I hear a coach—’tis not he, Carolina,^ it is not he.— Brenton-hall—
L E T-
.1 : 1
i 1
D T2 5 ]’

>
LETTER Xin.
Carolina Pelham to Lady Victoria
Nevil.
A.! had ha ! I must laugh, ViAoria; how can I help it!
FroJbyAovQS—he has no fault when he. talks of love.” Ha! ha! ha!— “ IS he offends, I rave myfelf into hatred of the man—if I fee for-rowin his looks,, he no longer is guilty—I stgh and
love again.”----Ha! ha! ha! Now Frcjby may
hang or shoot himfelf, if he pleaSes—is it not fo,-Vidlor ia F
Long is it finc e I compofed the oraifon funebrt of thy passion for Frojly. ’Tis fo charniing a piece! what a pity thou hast never read it !—Thou shalt fee how curioully I unfolded the mistakes of thy heart—with, what Sagacity I foretold that Sir John —blush not, Victoria—thou hast Said enough to perfuade me Sir John Modifh is posstively the man who will make thee “ ssgh and love again.”—Thou assumest thy Severe airs, Victoria / why then I will wait thy leave to write thou lovest liim. Ha ! ha 1 ha!
London—i r6
LETTER XIV.
Sir John Modish to Lord Pelham.
V
Issipation, I implore thy friendly aid. Thou alone canSt infuSe pleaSure into my heart— revive drooping dessre—awake my Soul, and give life to my existence^
Too long have I neglected thy enchanting re. medy—now I must—will Submit to thee, and
G 3	drown
1 t
: I • *
•»
[ 126 ]
drown my enamoured Spirits in the deluding cup of tranfitoryjoy.—No longer will I ligh away the bloom of a life too precious not to be Spent in. continual raptures.
Let thoSe whom frozen blood, or a stupid diffidence engage to constancy, kneel at their idol’s feet, adore their impertinence, deify their caprice, and tamely wait for the uncertain hour of bJifs—• far from my youthful veins be the languid circulation—let the wound I received from the lovely eyes of Victoria be ever So deep, i will undauntedly bear with the pain, and heal it on the feeling bo-fom of a kinder mistrefs.
Certain that to blunt the keen edge of pastion, it is not reaSon, but pastion we must employ, I will fally from my retreat, invite the ladies of the County to a ball, and, with the triumph of a Sultan, gaze, admire, feel--------------and be happy.
Mistake me not, Frederick., I am not fo diSpleaf-ed as to imagine Lady Victoria has her equal a-monest them*-------------No: I cannot oppofe their
beauty to her form, their levity to her discretion, their art to her ingenuity----------------but what hopes
do I not entertain from that art, and that levity!
Are not the transports theSe infpire as fierce, as delicious, as thofe of mutual love ?—at my age, invilible-----infenstble is the difference.
Who can restst the tempting languor of a fond
eye
an inviting Smile—an attitude voluptuoufly
ventured ?
What emotior fight of a Sprightly dancer! Mark the rapidity 0 the movements—
the bending and railing of the
the
the
animated shape—the wantormeSs of the feet-fire of the eye—the Squeezes of the handtrembling of the iips—the elasticity of the bofom
the——often--------how often, Frederick.^ have
the
I
I
f
! !
r 127 ■]
the cares that perplexed my heart been lost in thofe parties where youth and beauty contend Sor our love and admiration!
Oh, hzdy Behnour !--to thee, as to the Su-
preme relief which my benign star paints to my
fancy under the most enchanting colours-to
thee I fly-----1 fly^----no longer will I d«-
lay.
Modijh hall—I 76
LETTER XV.
Lady Carolina Pelham ta Lady Victo
RiA Nevil.
A N G all lovers !
N ature assuredly
was
compelled to create, right or wrong, when she gave life to the odious beings ; would she otherwife have formed them of impertinence and folly ^ Hang them all!
Lord Pelerjlon dares to put on an angry look if I laugh and tell him not why. All my thoughts, it feems, should be centered in one, and that one incessantly upon him ; I should have no other fenfe but that of feeling his worth.
He follows my eyes, watches my features for an extraordinary beating of my heart, counts every fmile, envies every whifper, startles at every step. If I turn to the left, I fee him : if to the right,
him again.—His behaviour is intolerable-------too
fevere a trial to my forgiving temper—1 cannot, will not let it pafs—I will refent it.
I really believe the man fancies himfelf already a hushand, fo ungenerous are his fentiments of me.—I alarm him ! he shall fuffer for his ground-
lefs fufpicions.—He loves as one would hate.------
His mistrust is downright contempt—a downright infult to my virtue.—So many fymptcms of jea-loufy—^and all ridiculous—all the work of his rest<-
G 4	lefs


\ ■
iiii ‘ ■
[ 128 1
lefs brain !—not one juft caufe—I’ll give him fome I will be revenged.
He who talked fo true -he was all art.—=—He lulled my heart into a deep calm—I never once thought it was in his nature to deceive, So v/ell did he conceal his jealous clifpoSition—1 Siiall infallibly detest him. With Such characlers life must be a perpetual torment.—Oh, Lord Pelerftcn! {Tovoke
me not—I have not yet Said I love---still I may
hate you.
London—i y6 —
LETTER XVI.
Lady Victoria Nevil to Lady Carolina
Pelham.
I Have Seen him, Carolina^ I have Seen him—
Sir John came this morning----tne lovely day
increased in beauty---joy titillated my heart--
enlivened every SenSe, and restored them to their
wonted harmony.---------Carolina! Sir John was
not the man I have known theSe Sour months past 1 will not attempt to reprelent the oatfide he wore to-day :—the change Scorns all defcription.
Whence the careleSsneSs of his carriage, the levity of his conversation —is indifference the caufe.?
His love, impatient of contempt, cou d not last long—how happy he is to have Subdued the hope-
leSs passion !--had you any noticn he could fo
eaSily have triumplted over it ?---
Guard, Carol na., guard against writing any
more that Sir John loves me----W ert thou here,
how thou wouidst blufh for thy perpetual blunders! What an unfeeling heart is thine ! I'houknow-
eft nothing of love—it is yet a Secret to thee-
The art of assigning their proper value to a look, an expression, an air, is above thy Skill, my dear
Carolina. Why do I Scold?-------^'J'hy mistakes
are
[ 129 ]
41
3re of no confeqnence to me-------Can’t I coldly
Smile at them, and even coinp iment thee on thy ignorance ? Art thou not happier with jt, thou my gay Carolina ? Would not a figh, a reverie, a languilhing mein, disfigure thy beauty, and frighten thy graces away ?
Lord Pelerjlon may tell you the contrary; "believe him not, unlefs, from an extreme dillike to an impertinent world, you chufe to bury yourfelf in a dreadful wildernefs.
Who can long endure the prefence of lovers ? -Did you ever behold the odious feene, Caro-
* ^
Una., without instantly meditating a precipitate retreat r-----Is not their joy a puniihment—their
foie attention to themfelves a vexation---their
whifpers a torment-
— their, fmiles
believe
not Lord Pelerjlon^., or bid adieu to thy charms, thy amiable vivacity, and the admiration of thy acquaintance : , if thou dost, I te-lL thee.thou, fhait . be negledted.
To the unfortunate, how hateful the . fpedfacle. of another’s happinefs ! Few men would fee a kifs stolen from thy bloomy lip, without envying the. invader, and,.in, their heart, wishing for a share in his theft.
Expedt fenfibility, not generoSity, from mankind; for ’tis mi ore natural to pant after a good,, than to .endeavour to deferve.it,.
3 o’clock..
But for his ufual politenefs and decency, Sir= ^ohn would have had no remains of himfelf.
Willshg to conceal my observation, lest he should indulge his vanity with a comment upon it, my gaiety was nearly equal, if not Superior, to his.
I received his compliment, paid him Some, and even told him his “ not having had it in his power
Gs	to
[
130
1
! I
‘
» (
'!!■ .
id':
r ’
lol !
u
:li
:i‘ L
(C
to make one at o; r ejncert” had been a fenfible" difapointment to us.
He replied with a provoking fprightline;'s, “ he “ had been unhappy ever fince that d y, as ours was the only company that could give him real “ fatisfaition.
“ The accounts of his sseward, the cares of a large, family, were heavy burdens, and took up thoSe hours he-wished could be wholly devoted to pleafure.”
He had a mirul “ out of mere chanty to him-felf to share thefe mighty troubles with an agreeable Lady/’
But where shall I find one who will dare to engage with me for life?—Would not the chance run ssrongiy against her ?—Don’t you think, my Lady, it will be extremely prudent to keep my heart?—Who would welcome, and ufe it in a, triendly manner ?------
I am quite of your opinion, Sir John: in thr uncertainty of the reception your heart may meet with, it would be inconstderate to venture the offering of it—you might expofe yourfelf to be hum-r bled------
May not I hope for a better fate than I am a-, ware ?-----
diffidence. Sir John-----
of fears-----
Ml
Away then with your dosht tell us of prudence,
Oh ! that they were not fo well founded I—r-Donst you difgrace your charadler by fo much modesty ? I thought a courtier was naturally prefuming—never out of conceit with himfelf.--—
Your notion is very just, my Lady : I have not the afSurance to contradidt it. Courtiers are fd-dom men of fenfe. As they have no need of it to pleafe, to be refpedted and promoted, wonder not at their vanity, infolence, and stupidity.
How
1
-I-1 !
[ HI 1
How coine you to differ Srom them ?—	• *
Only by accident, Aladam. Discretion Break* upon us by fits, as frolics upon men of judgment —they are mere or lefs frequent according to circumstances.—
What are thefe circumstances. Sir John?
An excellent education which teaches us moderation and the love of our country—felf-interest which assumes every (hape to gratify its' wants the ambition of being esteemed By people of merit
Have you none of thetff at court f---
Many in appearance—few in reality.
But among the ladies. Sir John ?.—
The ladies, Madam!—Were the men worthy of them, no nation upon earth would be So great, fo happy as ours.—Nature feems to delight in favouring them, and negle£ling us.—What kingdom can boast of more accomplished ladies than England I—What court is adorned with a Harriet S-----— a Carolina Pelham^ an Ahneria C
an A‘
r. a
G

r
At the first and every A—Sir John ha4 my name on his tongue—Was it not very kind in him not to mention it ? I think he is the only man whole compliments I should at preSent distike to hear— should I not betray too vifible a concern .?—
What is your real state ? ashed I fmiling.
None, Madam- A .medley of nature, art, virtue, and felff interest, it is impossible to fix on that
to which I particularly belong.----
If your heart is a compound of fo many ingredients, how Sagacious, Sir John., must that lady be, who shall attempt to distinguish your love from caprice, vanity, ambition, or avarice f—. I am fure, she must be exadly framed on the fame principle to Succeed,—Is there fuch a lady in Cum-^ hirland,
There

, t
: i
: t
0 »<
!ii
: 11
♦ !
!«
ii
n
!( I
I
iiU
. •
[ 132 ]
There is one, my Lady, to whom my h cart free from allay, would Sincerely open itfelt—’.ut as I don’t fee you difpofed to pity me, were I to declare my passion, and prove unfucceisful, I will not
name her.------------
You apprehend I would betray you—
Though ever fo certain of your generossty, Madam, I would still decline naming the lady, unlels assured of all your interest in my behalf.
Am I fo iwtimately acquainted with her as to be
able to ferve you ?-------
You are.’-----—
And he looked earnestly upon me.
1 promife you nothing, Sxrjohn.--------
ril'keep my fecret, my I .ady.
Your chearful countenance, faid Mrs. Brentori.,
countermands the interest you folicit.--A lover
Seldom befpeaks our favour with an air ot indifference.—Why don’t you dissemble, that you may engage Vidloria to befriend you ?——
Had you at first, Madam, generoussy whifpered me that advice—but now it were vain to put on a vapourifh face, and a weeping eye.-—How could L fo unfeafonably forget I was a lover r-
6	o’clock.
. Sir yehn., after having agreeably jested on th^ part he ought to have played, deSired our company to a ball and fupper he propoles to give next Fhurf-day to the principal people of the county.
“ I would not, faid he, alk any body, not even the woman I love, till I knew whether Mrs. Bren-> ton would deign to accept the invitation.”
My aunt having promifed,. he turned to me—
You have already denied me one favour-------
Will the granting of this compenfate for it ?
He took my hand, fmothered a ssgh iYou will come, my Lady ?--------
I will,


.V
\ V
I t
[ 133 ]
I will, Sir—
And away he went.
You perhaps imagine, Carolina, that the heart had a great (hare in this converfation—tliat Some parts of it were fpoken with the accent of love, and that undoubtedly Sir John and 1 underhand one
another extremely well.-Nothing,of what you
may imagine has happened. Passion never once appeared in his voice and action—no, not once.
‘‘ Did he tliink as negligently as he talked ?”—
I believe not —
“ Had he an equal right to, conjecture the fame of thee, Victoria .F’-
1 believe he had ----
Could he.from this conje6ture hazard a Smile drop a word ?”—
No, no, Carolina, he could not.---•.
Don’t assc me why 1 refufed him my interest with the lady—I fhould be. at a lofs for an anSwer—I really know not one that could Screen me from thy ridicule, and by no means do I chuSe to be humbled .
Let Sir John, and Sir John alone, diScuSs the denial every way—If there is one of any advantage to him, trust to his vanity for the difcovery—and then it will be nothing to me, ssnce Surely I did help him to it.—I fee thee fmile—fmile again—=■ Obstinate girl, wilt thou always have thy own way ?---
Br.enton-hall—176—
LETTER XVir.
Lady Carolina Pelham to Lady Victoria
Nevil..
WHEN the foul is, on a Sudden, forced
into a fretful mood, flattery is not more welcome to a coquet than—~—what a coward I
am !




r
%
1 !

< 5 •
ill
i;;
I <
' u
'Of
1 ;
H
I
i ' I: »
■ i:
I i I i A ■ t
• ?
,h i
f

■}:i
I •	1
■ f. ]
■ ,:!i
» ’:
■
f «
IP
- .‘I
:i!
,!•*
1 •»'
'1 f,
U !
i t
f I
t I
^ I
/
[ H4 1
am! the word is dead on my lip.—Vibforia, is it not very hard, that we w'ornen Snould, in a minute of impatience, feel an expression rife from our heart to our tongue, and not dare to give it life ?— down again, mult it retreat—’ds murder.—Decency ! to obey thee is Sometimes provoking.—I can’t help it—I will—“ Idle deuce take him” !—’Tis So trissing—yet how it allays one’s Istite !—once more—The deuce take him i now. Decency! refume thy rights : 1 am myfelf again.
Here is a letter from Lord Fanfly ; if af'er thou hast read it, thou refufest to join with me in a
“ Deuce take him,” I’ll hate thee<
hearty
To Lady Carolina Pelham.
Madaiti,
Defpife me not when I assure you that, confiding in my love, and the honesty of my heart, I thought I deferved your hand, and was capable of making your Ladyship happy.
What I v.^anted in eloquence, I had in fenfibilh ty.—Never myfelf when I beheld you, I was naturally awed into filence or confusson—1 couid not but admire and adore,-----
Many talk of love—few know it. Studied
words-----prefence of mind------flattery---thefe
are not the colours it delights in.—I pra<5filedno arts to wheedle your ladyship into attention—never was I guilty of a borrowed glance, of a falle tear, of an unfelt Sorrow.—I Said, “ I love you, Caro-“ lind’-----then again—“I love you.” The ex-
pression of thefe words was all the wit I boasted : —any other had wronged your charms.—Alas, Carolina! had You loved, my confusson- had been fenfe—my blunders vivacity—my charader an honour to the age.
Diffident of my own abilities, I Seldom o an osher’s opinion.—I could not tell a iarcaSne

t y i * V '
V .f

[ 135 1
ryf-Iaugh a lady into the knowledge of her folly,' •or’hy a fupercilious look, affedl a contempt of
Hence my stupidity—hence your distike.— Had I amufed you, I had been formed of every 'excellence — my faults—I would have had no faults Oh I Carolina, Carolina I you hated me for my very virtues—but forgive—’tis not you I should
upbraid with the odious injustice-----it fprung.
from your father’s will—that will alone has caul-ed my unhappineis.
In me you law a hushand—you had no choice to make—the consti aint was too great, you hated me even before you felt what it was to love—that constraint justisted your prepolSefston—you could not but hate.
Why did Lord Pelham, who knew So well that Love Ipurns compulsion, lay his commands upon
you !----- why were you ordered for my wife 1
—his friendship has undone me.
Carolina I the generoSity of your brother has made you free—now your partiality will fubstde
no longei can you be prejudiced against me.----
you are free—then 1 am a new man—a man you
never faw—a man you never Spoke to----------my
love itfelfwill be a novelty to you---Oh ! Ca-
rolina, Suffer me in the croud of your admirers
If one among them has more merit------—is more
worthy of you------1 shuli be eternally miserable
no matter—I will pray for your happmeSs.
Parii—June—176—	Fanfly.
Men, Vibfcna, are Surely very impertinent creatures. Does Lord Fanfly mean I am a fool ?
I mistook his charadler !—wronged his parts !—
never knew his merit!--------What assurance —
had none but mySelf Seen or heard him—why then
----possibly—one might-----No—still would not
---Am I not a judge of what
is
he be in the right
\

[ 136 ]



Cs pleafing or hateful?-----He appeared at every
place of diverfioii-never miffed a drawing-room
day—no party in which he did not intrude—how could he avoid being known and laughed at ?• Already fo foppilh, and not above one month in Paris ! how eaSily he grows ridiculous !
Though the good or bad opinion of Lor'l Fan^ fly be of no moment, yet I cannot bear his doubts of my judgment.—Self-love has drawn up the
accufation—no matter----’tis an attack on my fa-
gacity—You will think me very lilly, Vibloria— but I fincerely wifh to be esteemed, even by a fop..
Shall I believe I really wronged his Lordship—
was really impofed on by my prejudice---really
blind to his virtues ?---Oh ! Vidioria—what a
fall! - how it would humble me !
Lord Fanfly would infallibly have a Superiority
over me.-----ms iignt—tne iignt or a man we
have injured must be intolerable.-----How my
heart would pant! it would break, ViAoria-, were 1 designedly guilty of an injustice—I could not forgive myfelf—no ; I never could.
My contempt of Lord Fanfly has perhaps influenced others.------The thought is torment—had'
he deferved that contempt, my pity should have
Spared him--------it was ungenerous to turn his
misfortune to my glory—How weak. I,have been! my distike is not an excufe—I was wrong.,^— When I was in Paris I heard of a Marquis de Grimaldi, a knight of Malta, who having money and no wit, kept an abbot to compofe his letters. Has not Fanfly, like the marquis, a chaplain to help him to fenfe and delicacy ?—'This question,. Vidfot ta, L put to my brother. He fmiled. Saluted me, and left the room.
A Ishile! a Salute I—I will not take them for an anfwer—they are too. expreffive—fs it poflible I could have been deceived ?—How stupid we
are
T H7 1
are when prejudiced !--I’ll compel my brother
to Speak—ViAoria! if I have injured Lord Fanfly —though I hate him, I’ll do justice to his character, and own my folly.—He afks leave to re»^ew his“ vifits—as a friend I’ll grant, as a lover I’ll deny it. If I write or fay, “ my Lord, I was a fool when I thought you had no fenfe,” Surely the man must be Satisfied,
London—176—
LETTER XVIII.
Sir John Modish to Lord Pelham.
ON my honour, my Lord, of all fublunary trifles I like women best—next to them your
good fenSe—next to that a puppet-Ihow-next
to that—next to that-what elfe is not a pup-
pet-Show ?
If reaSon was not lavished away on man, that indiScreet animal, I might-but I hate to de-
monstrate.-—
Does not the taking of Snuff, my Lord, dif-play to advantage, a white, round, well turned arm, and add to the graceful opening of a lady’s fingers ?—What think you of a gauze handkerchief carelelly laid on a youthful and panting bo-
fom—of a Sparkling eye ?---
1 once gathered a rofe: a delightful perfume t exclaimed I, what can be thecauSe of it ?—A fairy pasted by, and fighed upon it. Said a young and Sprightly lady.
Laugh not, Frederick., at that eye, that handkerchief, that pinch of Snuff, that roSe, and that fairy,—they are So many emblems—But, hulh !— my company is coming.—
Thursday 5 o’Clock.
(^ickly lend me thy ear, Frederick-1 have
but a minute to whifper thee, that though the ladies
it
■' I
u!
:• I
h I
O'!
t L ,
)
; It •
in!
L' 1
1 ’ M
i
, «
IL
iC
Cl
it
5
• t
. i:
' t ■
' 1 . ■ :
! » !
■ f •
• I •	.
, , ' t
if
I f .
ob--
I £
* I
i
‘;
I < ^ f)
Ml > i
1th
!■
\ 11
i*'
‘!d|
tiii
I i' I
Cl!'
ii I: •
i!"
■ 1
I .'t
S|i
’ V
' T‘
St;!
■' i ;
1'
i
If ’

m
■ I
:»hd I
, i-f. it,.
; i *. .
t:

tl!
1
,.ii
1^.
]
dies have Surpassed themfelves inelegance of drefs, propriety of colours, and the art of conveying a delire from every feature, they are all edipied, all excelled, in the very charms they h ve to boast.
It is not to the elaborate art of the 'Foilet, that Lady Vibloria is indebted for her fuperiority : no she is in her native beauty—Nature alone has she to thank—have we to commend.—
43 minutes past 5 o’CIock.
Four minutes more with thee, Frederick.
I have not difpofed of my hand, iafi Lady fic-toria to me just now. I depend on you,t Sir John^ for providing me with a partner.—
(jrenerous Lady FibioKia.^ I will not abufe the
trust you deign to commit to my care.---1 should
be unworthy of the favour, did I apply it to my own advantage.
I went immediately to Frojhy^ and prefenting
him to Lady Vidforin'------—
This is the gentleman. Madam, I beg you will
accept.
the Sacrifice was vifibly too
Both were furprized-
great—I would have hated myfelf bad I been incapable of making it.
The confeioufnefs of having had in my power the possession of the ear of Lady Vitoria., for the whole night, is Such an abatement to Frojlfs fatis-fabtion, that I rather look on him with pity, than with envy.
Imagination ! thou the benefablrefs of mankind, wrap me in the veil of perpetual iilufion !
The amiable condefeenfion-of Lady Victoria was remarked.
Men, indeed, are unaccountable creatures, faid Lady Bslmour. Sir ^ohn loves, and he cannot only refign to his rival a hand he was complimented with, but dares to appear elated with the lofs— Had I fuch a lover--------
What
[' H9 1
what


what then. Sir John?—Why I would detest him in proportion to his generoSity—To yield me fo eaSily to the man he should hate ! and he would talk of love to me.^—
My Lady ! my Lady ! Were you Vidloria— Were I FroJl)y^ how differently you w'ould think,
how differently you w'ould talk -----------Would
you forgive the intruder on your pleafures ?-------
would you have him indifereetly feize a favour your heart had not intended for him ?—I'o bel eve that the gratification of vanity can fuperfede the feelings
of love !------monstrous, my Lady, monstrous
indeed ?-----
Patience, I’ll come back prefently, Frederick,
Half an hour after fix o’Clock.
How came You then. Sir John, to difregard that mighty love, and prefer Frojly to yourfelf ?
Is it eafier for you to conquer than for us ?
You love not. Sir yohn^ elfe would you eagerly
difpute the vicstory.--love bears the first Sway in
our hearts—it gives laws, and will Submit to none..
•---Regardlefs of the happinefs of others, its own
delight is the center to which all its defires areincef-fantly directed.—Generofity, Sir 'John., is the mark of an indifferent foul, a certain proof of the ab-fence ofpafficn—you a(st with indifference, though you think youadt with magnanimity.
This fally of Lady Belmour, joined to the vivacity with which she delivered it----1 don’t fpeak
to thee of her eyes, Frederick.^ of her eyes-—what wantonnefs in her eyes !----has made fuch an im-
pression upon me, that I am fully refolved on pur-
and very clofely too, an attack I formerly made upon her.
7	o’clock.
Lady Belmour is not one of thofe beauties that fompei you to stop, to gaze, to exclaim “ how
beautiful
luing.

) ’ ■ 1
:iii^
ji!
ill
i!'!
M !u
t I !
1/1
'■I •
ii
1!
»»<
dnii
ii
’ 11
[ M» }
^ beautiful she is !” she passion ssie infpires carries instantly with it love, dessre, and impatience to expire in her arms. Her inviting eye, Frederick^ leaves no time to admire the finene s of her complexion, the degage of her gait, and the charms of her a£fion.—You fed yourielf more forcibly in-
ticed to enjoy, than to talk--to devour each part
with inflamed kisses, than to praife its delicacy— to feed' greedily on the rapturous banquet, than to think of the power to do it honour.—Pleafure colours her lips. Softens her voice, winds round her neck, enlivens her steps, and triumphantly fits on. her ivory bofom.—She talks—no matter what she fays—’tis not the words but she opening of her' mouth that conveys the fedu6tion.—What a brilliant Set of teeth !—what freshnefs !•—what a luxuriant humidity!—
This pidlure destined to Frederick., the difereet Frederick., by the lover of the virtuous Lady Vidlo-ria.—^No, my Lord : I am.notthe lover of Lady DV-doria.—Spite of my heart, I renounce, the title, fmee J defpair to reap the benefit of it.
20 Minutes past 7 o’Clock..
When ^ ytidy \Belmour listens, br ecus nek, she fpealcs-to your heart.—What advantages has not a feem-ing artlefs coquetry over the timoro js countenance of genuine decency !. it invades with an irrefistible authority, and at will difarms reafon, the defence-lefs bulwark we ever oppofe to pleafure, its unconquerable enemy.
Would I infallibly know how a heart feels.— How the fight, the fight alone, of beauty heightens the velocity of the blood through each vein —gives fenfationto every nerve—rand life to every organ 1—
Whether I fought to delude myfelf, Frederick^ or really felt what I have expressed, I heartily gav*e
my foul up to the flattering profpe6t of happinels.
il have
I have
I 141 ]
•and will have no arms a2:ainst wit
snd beauty, faid I to Lady Belmour. Freely I yield to you the victory.—Had I not heard you, I would Still have remained in my former error—your beauty began the difcovery—your eloquence has per-fedted it.—Certain I loved not, I doubt no longer I adore you.
I hate a compliment paid to my vanity at the cxpence of my judgment : it fuppofes a foible in iny mind, and that fuppoSition—
Is only, my Lady, the work of a mistaken delicacy------Let your charms anfwer for my ve-
lacity.---
Had not Lady Vibforia in a more eminent degree the fame guard against your inconstancy ?—
You have convinced me she had it not.
You areobferved. Sir yohn : Lady Victoria keeps a watchful eye upon you.—
Let her fee your triumph, my Lady. Pride in it, and I am happy.—Still do you question my fincerity ?
Is it not curiolity rather than love ?—
This is no new deception—’tis love, love itfelf —the very love I fwore to you—“ remember the fatal Sneeze.”—*
At the word “ Sneeze,” Lady Belmour looked confufed, and played with her fan.
Are you for cards, or a dance. Sir yohn }—
'or either of them, both, or none, at your pleafure.—
If, like Lady Vidioria, I should leave to you the difpofal of my hand.—
I would not part with it—no other shall enjoy the fenfual touch—lead the lively step—exult at your mufical voice—delight in the loving Smile-think of the coming blifs.--
Words, mere words, the effedS of domineering youth, of palfionate Spirits.
* See the tenth letter of the third. Yolum
If
r
1
I
' I
t !
I I
,1 ■ I <

;i!
> > Ml
• I
i I
;
:> I
i ;
I 1

IS So
142 3
-how naturally deceitful is their fire1
May it as charmingly from my lips pafs into thy
heart, dear Bebnour !—
^ \
What have you Said ?—
She hastily rofe up, and cried out, “ when thea “ shall we dance?—”—
8	o’clock.
The evening goes on, Frederick,, in a continued found of pleafure. To render it more extenfive, I ordered, an hour ago, that all the apartments, adjoining to the gallery where we dance, should be laid open, that every body might ramble without deSign, or retiring on purpofe.
Though I concealed my intention under the convenient pretext of keeping cooler, I Soon perceived it had been understood.
One couple drew near, and went back—another ventured—a third followed—in lefs than twenty minutes each lover had to thank me for a stolen
kifs he owed to my taste and humanity------Had
Victoria to thank me ?---1 know not, Frederick,,
but ashing her, when she came to the gallery again, how she hked the pi6tures I brought from Italy, her anfwer was, “ I Saw none.”
A glowing envy Sparkled on my countenance— Oh, bieforia!—•—bidforia! muttered I. Then
turning quickly to the gay Lady Belmour-----(he
looked—she talked, Vidloria was forgot—Frojby was forgiven.
The facility of withdrawing, whiSpered Lady Belmour, is a very happy addition to the pleafures of the evening—How came you not to think of it Sooner ?—had you any objedlion to the gratitude of your friends, or did you reServe for a few of them the freedom ol thofe retreats ?—Have you made them public, only when their privacy was no longer required ?—Tell me. Sir John, whom have YOU favoured with them ?----
You
)
[ 143 1
t
You alone, dear Belmour.^ had a right to their* fecrecy—you alone my heart wi(hed to fee in them —you alone had rendered thefe ihinutes the happiest of my life.—
You alone, ‘FvcIohn., was capable of fo indif-
creet a defire------of fo gallantly denying my
curiofity.----------
Ah ! Belmour t you love me not fince you don’t believe me.—
Love you, ?>\rJohn ! who ever told you I did ?
Your foul too honest to diffemble—^too expref-Sive to want words, has communicated the fecret to mine—both have exchanged it—both—
And my foul told it you ?—
It did----it a(fiually does---but for this plaqe,
both—

leave me thou too amiable, ----------let me not be
ril fly—I must fly— too powerful tempter guested.—
• I obeyed, lest our trouble should betray the too lively feeling.—
Not love, but its Supreme madnefs, raged in my blood.—I fat down, ready to faint under the prefl'ure of pleafure.—Frederick., let me fix on the past extacy.—
Half an hour past 9 o’Clock.
Awake, thou creator of tender emotions, awake, or I lofe thee.’—Avery eye is dying 'with the pleasure that animates thy face-----awake, or i lofe
thee.
Grateful to my ear was the rapturous- voice— every avenue to my heart epened to the benevolent expreliion—Oh ! telmour—she walked—I dared not to foilovv.
By all the charms of mutual enjoyment she fliall be mine !—i his, 7 rederick, vas the Solemn oath resulting from three minutes refledtion--she shall
V	*	%	1	*	*	*
be mine, echoed my fiery imagination
My Senses
i,
Lt '•
•: I I . [
•i..
■I *
' 1 .
■I ■ ■
I i
rh ••
[hr;
Th
bit r,1
Slfst
i; b':
L r 1 ' ,
;;rt
d' n‘
■I) M
I •
:m'1»
ilN!
■ f I
ii:;:'
' r ■ 1 ,
M.
hC;
■ij'T
b" 1
': i
f
u

;!!
> i!
c;
i I :
\i » :■!!
i1
> )
V‘ i
'ib
lit. 1 *
. .
.* I
ii
b f
!‘t »'
111
I i I
»i
• I '
1 > t
Ii
il
>;
I..
? t ' '»
i'
[ 144 ]
fes trembled with delight---my foul started up for
immediate reality.—
Let impotency rail at the Sublime activity of youthful Ipirits—fneer at the noble flights of nature-envy and defpair, its perpetual attendants, will amply revenge the feeling, happy lovers.
Often has a word of t idloria damped"fny pantings after a fenfuality Ihe was not to procure—often has ssie from my lips expelled the two forward foul,
and forced ddire to retreat into my heart---often
•---too often, alas ! has flie glorioufly triumph-
ed over my inchanted fenfes.—Heavenly maid !—
Vibioria! Fidtor'ui!---but 1 love thee not—this
day is Lady BelmouFs.
ly Minutes past lo o’Clock.-
I'aking counfel of my deSires, I looked for the Speediest way of gratifying them. Could 1 not unperceived steal ten minutes from fo many hours we still had to be together, and make her accelSary to the theft ?—This plan was the eaflest of execution—was it poITible !
My hopes, Frederick^ were not fo Sanguine as to rob me of my political abilities.—I thought fur-prize, and an unexpected attack would infallibly
enfure me fuccefs----how and when I was to fall
on the unfufpedfing prey, 1 left not to fortune, but to my assurance of vidlory.
In matters of fuch great concern, a cool head, I own, will draw from the most inssgniflcant opportunity both the merit and reality of a triumph.— But then, can a cool head be Supremely blest with the genuine poignancy^of the intoxicating laurel ?
----What are the enjoyments of vanity to the
extatic pantings of the heart f-----What is that
defire, which can wholly Submit to refledfion, and dildain the unforefeen, critical minute for the laboured Scheme}
My
't
(
C H5 ]
My eagernefs missed me into twenty fruItlcSs ex- * pestations. In vain did I forcibly increafe my attention : my heart oppofed the endeavour—adiion, astion was the perpetual cry of my longing Spirits. Aftion, action 1 ssghed I, when ssialt thou enebri-
ate every fenfe! Rapturous was each attempt---
fainter each ressftance.-Once, Frederick., once
I caught the friendly confent glance on her animated features—I flew to fix it—1—“ How handfome
“ he looks !”---By heavens ! it was the voice of
Victoria—I turned about—Supper is Served-
(fli
to my
next, Frederick., to my next

Half past 11 o’clock. Modijh hall--
LETTER XIX.
\
Lady Carolina Pelham to Lady Victoria
Nevil.
FY upon the naughty man ! he makes me weary—impatient of his company.----------Was lie
half fo expert at pleaflng me, as he is at tormenting himfelf, my heart would burst with love as it does now with fpite.
I will have none of thofe refined tempers-—their extreme fenfibility is death to love and thepleafures of life.—A fly that rests on my neck—a pinch of
fnuff from Mr. Prejiori’s box-the shadow of a
coxcomb I chance to walk upon—an a(stor I look at, or applaud, are fufficient to alarm lord Peler-Jloriy and fret him into nonfenfe.—He will tell me an hour of that “ pinch,’’ of that “ shadow.’*
of that---Lord Fanfiy was but a novice in the
art of teizing. I could command him out of my
apartment with one glance----But this Lord Pe~
lerjlon----there is no fuch thing with him. He
braves my frowns—nay infolently attempts to banter me out of them.-----
H
Sure
r ^
n
lii
<1
: t
li
h ’* t ■
ii
Mi f
■■''M
M
jiiJi
i*ii
hii i
i-A *
< t «
i '
h I
„S
!i' I I
i:;: ;
I I
♦ ; •'
i|ii'
I-
b'i ■ *’1
'1 ! t
•t
i
•f J
d .1 a
'I	1
i| !
I	I
it'! I Iff
ii
1
I
i
[ 146 ]
Sure you are not angry. Says he to me, with an infidious air ; you are n ot angry—are you ? and he steals a kifs of my hand, I turn from him— then will he take hold of my ruffles, gown or
fall at my feet, drop a tear, ligh, fwear,
apron, implore my pardon
1 forgive
the fcene
renews—T here is no bearing this. Let me fee— Do I love him ?—This minute I do not.—Well, ITl wait till I am cool to put the question again,—
If I can then fay-----coldly fay, I do not, avay
.for ever with his whims, no longer fflall I fuffer them.
Lord Fanfly.^ or his chaplain for him, fays that
a lover cannot be witty.---Were this tru^, Lord
Pelerjion is ...not a .lover, for no man gives his thoughts a more elegant, expressive turn.—His -words are exadfly the pidfure of his fentiments—
tender, if loving—impertinent, if jealous--His
imagination—1 will not praife that imagination
which vexes me fo much------But here he is—■
heigh ho!
-No
done.-
2 o’clock.
: you could never guefs what that man has -Are you a conjurer, ViFtoriat—No.'’ Then attempt not to guefs it.
The prettiest exploit that ever could be achiev--cd1——^his lordship is not formed of .common materials, I warrant ye, Vitoria ----- his fancy—
what .a-fancy ! not one Italian in a hundred can boast the fame.—-Hear and marvel.
Lord jPelerJion Had a large roll of I knew not what in his left hand when he entered the room.
Here, here, my Lady, and he pointed to it with his fore finger, whilst triumph brightened every feature, here they are—I have fearched every place 3 I have shem all. No longer shall they
attrad
ui
C H7 1
attrast the staring eye of the impertinent multitude.------
What is it. mv Lord ?--
The liberty this people enjoys is turned into downright licentioufnefs, my Lady; they have no refpest for beauty—they dare to draw, to fell-----
What
A pidlure which I will perpetually gaze upon when I am not with you—a picsture which was ab-folutely profaned by being expofed to public view.—
Whole is it. Sir
Your’s, dear Carolina.
And he unrolled the noble purehafe.
I Ihrugged up my shoulders, and, forcing a imile—
The print-fellers are undoubtedly very much obliged to your lordship—what a quantity !—they furely thought you had large orders from the country.—Did you pay the full price, my Lord ?—
How unfeafonable your jest, Carolina I is it thus you repay my delicacy—-my Solicitude for your glory ?—Would not this mezzotinto have been in every hand.?—Would not every body have had st in his power to look on this feature—-on that— to be lost in the charm of thefe eyes—the bloom of thefe lips ?—Oh ! Carofma—this neck—this bofom—what agony when I think of the pleafure this pidture had given to a warm imagination!—-
This is downright impertinence, exclaimed I, stepping into the drawing-room. Follow me not, Sir—and I shut the do;.)r.
Carolina!— Carolina !—
Not a word.—I was ready to cry with vexation. My heart was oppressed—my face glowed with anger—I bit my lips—stainped with my foot
—tore my fan—
Carolina J—
fl 2	I stoI«
It'
1.1


1 1 !b
'*1
Hi
ili
ill
f
iL
i:
f
I
I
.»I
! I
11 O’
It
ii
i!
.1
if
Cl ■ ' la i
i' :
• f 1
Va
,' t
te-i:;;;
r
>li
iHi
ill 1,
1' "
ill'
hi'a
i-li lllir i
! 1
I
II
)i i

!
I «
i I
I!
- r
[ H8 ]
I stole through the oppolite door, and flew down stairs to my mother.
5 o’clock.
Wha girl ? - -

What vexes
my
That man, my Lady, that Lord Pelerjion-------
And a tear Sell on her hand.
Some new whim, I Swear, Said Lord Pelham— Very new, brother. He Saw my picture at a
print-ihop----grew immediately jealous oS every
man who pasted by, and has brought me the whole
impression.---Heexpedted my thanks Sor hisSol-
Jy, nay wondered I did not applaud the heroic deed.'--------
Ha, ha, ha! this is new indeed, stster.—Why he took the only method to make thy pidSure common : they’ll indulge his Solly, I promiSe thee-
Have I not a curious lover, dear Madam He does love thee, Carolina—his caprice there-Sore must be Sorgot. Sit down, be not troubled for a trifle—is Lord Pelerjion gone ? if not, bring him hither, Frederick^ and we will make their peace.----
Stay, my Lord; his preSence would now be in-
Sufferab e---1 am------oh! brother, that man!
his jealouSy pierces me—1 fear him—he will make me unhappy.—My l.ady, can he love yet perfe-cute me So t—Since I liften to him, can he think
that another man—the thought is inSult----what
an opinion has he of your Carolina when he can SuSpedt her of coquetry ?
■ Injustice and love, Carolina^ often go together.
■The stronger the passion, the greater the fear of
lossng its object.—Fear reaSons not—pity then,
and forgive Lord Pelerjion----
Alas I my Lady—Ipite of mySelf—I love him.-
Ring
[M9]
Ring the bell, Frederick, compofe thyfelf, Car«-^»
Una---
A Servant came—Lord Pelerjim was gone.
I am fad, very fad.—Adieu.
London, 176—
LETTER XX.
Lady Victoria Nevil to Lady Carolina
Pelham.
WHEN thou hast read this letter, Carolina,
I know thou wilt immediately pafs thy judgment on the lituation of my heart. I know it; no matter ; I warn thee that I obje<st to thy tribunal, and v.'ill Submit to none.
I enjoin thee, on pain of my utmost difpleafure, to believe thy inability of deciding between likelihood and reality, till I have repeatedly Sent thee my own opinion of myfelf.—Shouldst thou murmur at my commands, 1----
“ QruQlVibforia/”
I hear thee, Carolina, I hear thee, I ilncerely own I was both unjust and imprudent.—d'hat I may not, by forbidding thee to write, entice thee to take up the pen, and by tempting thee, Snare in thy disobedience, I Subject thee to no pjena'ty, and lay no constraint upon thee—
Sedudtions are laid for me wherever I tread— love lies in ambulh wherever I move—d'o what place stall I fly for Security ?—Frofl-y, who should protest me, Frojby Sides with my enemy!—he gives my heart no diverSion, and leaves me defenceless against the attempts of my fancy.—It' Seems he diSdains a conquest which never was disputed— he rests after his vistory, and indifferently llecps upon his laurels.
Oh! my vanity, keep still—be not offended at Frojly’s neglcst—^justify not my wanderings with
H i. ■	the.


.1

.( !
d i
') '
b‘
ii ‘
,' 1 1
I !
i 4:
\\r
i'
■-b
* *
fio

l.'C.
lO:
'i,!
:;!i
,•1 ‘
f !
i .
,	.'.I
s
li ij- :
='!! ■ ■ J1
I
stb
•1^! •».1
1
b; T
»>• :i:
i
a .
}'j *
*' I

n
r
II
: t
il
k r
I >
j ;
^ ; I : i «
» ' > I
llli
n

! • n
i 150 ]
**the Specious pretext of his wrongs against thee !—1 will iisterv—I will yield but to love and equity.
I formerly rcrnplained of the injustice of Frojiy
------1 was difpleafed with his doubts, his fears,
Many times have I been tortured
his curioSity.
to the foul with his indifcretion.—Was it not, Carolina, to that perpetual agitation in which my heart was kept up—to that fucceffion of different emotions which furnished fancy with no other ob-je6l: than Frojby, that he was indebted for my extreme partiality ?
Is he not now unfeafonably eafy ?—Why does he give me leafure to reflect t—So well acquainted
with the restleffnefs of human nature—with our natural aptnefs to change,' fliou'.d not he keep me constantly feeling and deluded ?
Is not an implicit compliance with our defires as fatal to a lover, as an eternal refiScance to them ? —Has he lefs to fear from our indifference than our diflike ?
In fociety the complaifant’ are feldom agreeable —this you have often remarked, Carolina. In love why should it not be the fame ?—Alas ! why don’t we value a good, but in proportion to the difficulty of obtaining it? Why is a “ Yes,” when feldom or never attended with a “ No”, generally odious ?
I must attempt to increafe my inclination for Frofby, by calling to mind his virtues, and all the realons 1 have to esteem and love him.—Attempt! fo quickly do I forget how to write ? Must I learn after having naturally been fuch an adept ?
How shall I know I love, Since I am afraid I love not PdoJbj ? M dy I not labour under the fame Symptoms, be equally infenfible of the difference, and mistake again?—Nay, this very instant, ami certain love lies not dormant in my heart, ready to rife at the voice of Frojhy	Carolina,
decifive
r i
[ '51 ]
decisive indeed must the circumstances be, which Ihall eradicate every doubt.

Friday i o’Clock.
We went yesterday to Modijh-hall. I will not Speak to’ thee of the elegance and Splendour of the entertainment—that you expedf not from me. Thy curiofity pants only after novelty—thou wilt hear but from my heart—I’ll pleafe thee; but, Carolina^. if I chufe to-forget any thing, neither guefs nor mention it.
Confident he had an uncontrouled right to dance with me, Frojby thought it very needlefs to Solicit my hand : to shew him, however, that his pretenfions might be questioned, I left the difpofal of it to Sir 'John.
I told him, with a Smile, I trusted to his choice for a partner. He appeared fenfibly delighted with my feeming generoSity :—he bowed, talked, heli-tated, took my hand-—then bestowed it on Frojby. - -Surely, thought I, the man is either very indifferent, or very refined in his love and delicacy.— As for Frojby,, he dilated his fine large black eyes, and stared.
Pray, my Lady, how came Sir John by fuch a power?—
By me. Sir—
And I curtfied.
By you!—
And he mumbled—
What did you mean?-—
Mean, Sir!—I turned to my feat and left him
to stare.
“ What did you mean?”-'—Was the question So impertinent, Carolina?,-“ What did you
mean” ?---Having not before clearly understood
what I meant, Frojly re6lified my judgment, and loon could no longer plead ignorance,
H 4	What
.dl

it
U!
i!)
I
i .ill
:di;
i!’:
hS
M I .
Ifd,
chi
iMi
y'ri
I..
hi i
ilhl
sli!
ih:
licr
i dist ! *:r-
:ci!d
r
. i
I <
• i ' ■
tl
lii
‘I
iiic
: i
*
5 • ■ 1.1
'•1: iii‘:

1
, ,r
I'
sti
St:
'if,
u ' M '
I .
lli!

die
:1
. ■•I'*I
cl!
i;i i (
I •
!' :

{|‘l I •
1
1!
I: '
iC
l i
t I
r »
; I
I . < •
I .

i t
r ;
1 i
; I
i t


$
‘I i
! i
I: I i
I '
r H2 ]
^ »
What did you me: And he fat by me. To dance. Sir------

With
I made no reply.
With Sir yohnf
I Suppressed a blush, and looked difpleafed.
If with me, should I have owed the obligation to Sir yohn f Would not you have fpared my vanity the gratitude he has forced upon me?
I got up, and stepped to Mrs. Brent on.
3 o’clock.
Were it not, laid,I to myfelf, for the indiscretion of Frojhy., I should not know^ how it is I was interested in my complaiSance for Sir yohn. — How Serviceable is jealouSy to let us into the Secret of ourfelves!—“ jealouSy !” read, caprice, Carolina-y for Frojhy^ a few minutes after looked guilty, repentant, and upon my kindly looking upon him,
was as tranquil, as happy-------will nothing force
him out of his lethargy ? — Is he in no danger Since he foreSees none ?
Whilst I was ressedfing on the late diScevery, my eyes were rambling about in Search or—of Sir yohn.—I wall not anfwer Carolina., for the rambling of my eyes—That is Surely as involuntary as thought, Senfation, or the frolics of thy lap-dog ? Dost thou imagine I could distindtly and at the Same time, think of Frojby and look for Sir yohn f —No matter what thou imaginest.—What is thy opinion to me if I am pleaSed to diSregard it ?
Sir yohn Vv'as in a very clofe conversation with I>ady Belmour—both—I’ll tell you what I gueSfed
from the lovely motion of their lips, and the expressive cast of their eyes—they were talking, not
of \os Q., Caro Lina y for the pidfure was too enlivened, but of gallantry and pleaSure.
Whv
L 153 ]•
■4
Why does Sir 'John, w'honever believed in the conScancy of women, chufe to compliment me with a quality he has not once met with r Who has affured him I deferve to be fo eminently distinguish-
<0^
ed, or that I value an honour which 1 cannot en joy but at the expence of my Sex ? What has induced him to think I postefs a virtue he ever thought a chimera I*—Is it not amazing, that psf-fion, which generally lessens every obstacle, should magnify his fears, fo as to blind his understand-
Efiire nous., Carolina, what is constan-
ing:
cy but infenssbility, or a trarissent ecshacy of tlie foul ?—As this is not an enlightened characler w'e owe to reafon, but the mere estedl of chance, Itow foolish to perfuade one’s felf of its permanency !
Why is Sir John fo confdous. I will never
change—fo confeious of my love for I rofiyd.------1
hate that ssngularity----Plow extravagant to tor-
ment himfelf from an uncertain apprelicnsson of
tormenting me!
Can. a difereet man create him
felf terrors, and yield without examination, to the flight appearance of danger ?
Sir john will keep from me out of refpecl!
He will attempt to pleafe Lady B elm cur !--------He
will attempt to recover his liberty^ —to welcome dive rfions of which I partake not 1 Have I any need
of fo much refpfctst, Carolina?------------Have my
looks threatened him with an immediate dil-
miffion, if he prefumes to conjecture I love not Frojly ? My eyes, dear Carolina, my eyes, you may believe me, have never expressed fuch a menace.----Where has he srot the unluckv notion ?
'Not from me I am Sure.
But for this preposterous blunder of his reafon, would he delight in fmiles I do not return, in words I do not Speak, in a shape I. do not animate, in fen^ fations I do not caufe ?—I think not, Carolina. I
, H 5	have

' ' ’ll ,0
'i*
‘Hi
f
m

I
i
C ‘54 ]
*»have convened with his heart in Spite of all hi* efforts to conceal it from me.
Prudence and delicacy have st.ppreffed, but not annihilated his feelings, i.ove intrudes in every glance, in every step, in every motion : it lives in his voice, breathes on his features, embellHhes his manners__________So steadily diffident ;---1 don’t
understand that
I had no idea of it.
You mistook, the man, Carolina, Surely you rail-took him.
5 o’clock.
Is not their behaviour a difgrace to decency This I was inconsiderately going to a(k Mrs. Bren-ton, when recollecting_l had often been beguiled about the real Spring of,my thoughts, I flenccd this, lest Spite rattier than virtue had inSpired it.
If virtue, argued I with mySelS, can So readily impeach, cenSure, debate, in what does it dilfer from malice and Self-interest ? Since So apt to fnd fault, am I not the stave of a Secret pastion, and indulging a. vice, rather than favouring a virtue i' — 1 blustred, Carolina, at my intended'indiscretion : but was my heart leSs affed'ted with the mirth of Sir John—with the mirth of Lady Belmcur ?—■ No ; it was not.
“ Who will Sir John dance with r” was the next question I trusted to my heart, and I went in quest of the lady I was to envy. The astiduity of Kwjohn clearly pointing to me Lady Belmour, I preiently played against her charms the indiicreet eye, and the still more indiScreet wit, of an injured rival.
Soon was I stlenced, Carolina. Lady Belmouf
is all beauty and accomplilhment.—--------1 had not
the affurance to be unjust—Satire died on my tongue -------1 applauded. Sighed—applauded and Sighed
Thy
[ 155 J
Thy eyes, fiStoria^ would betray nie into a, contradi6tory knowledge oS thy heart, were I to realize whatever they feem to exprefs. Thou art not jealous, I hope------art thou, Victoria ?•
m
Jealous, dear aunt!
A half blush glanced on my cheek.
Cannot I undefigningly look on lady Behnour!
—Jealous of Lady Behnour I-------------what con->
cern have I with her ?—Has Mr. Frojby.------
Frojby !-■--------
Ok w •
And she maliciouily fimpered upon m
Half past 6. o’clock.
Why, Carolina., have I negledfed thy instruffionst against ingenuity ? How necelTary w'ould it now be to look gay and indifferent, though my heart is full and uneafy ! I’ll read thy letter again, that I may beware of the man whom I----------i—find the
word, Carolina—thzt I may beware of Mrs. Bren-ton----beware of all wsho, .tempted by love or
friendship,, will vex me with their: conjeclares;.,or their jealoufy;..
1 will banish nature out of my countenance, and
alTume the garb of a courtier-------1 will----what
a shame was itfufpedted I fear to be understood !
----Humble, me ; not, Carolina-----------w'rite me
not a word about Frojhy-------about Sir 'John-------
unravel not the perplexities of my heart.
My aunt’s obfervation made me diffident of my air, the too faithful mirror of what passed in my heart. I (hook off the powerful fenfibility, and dffpossessing my eyes of all their foftnefs, hearkened to Frojhy.
Frojby had the humanity, by his constant attendance, to help me out of myfelf. I know not what caufed him to be more than ordinary chearful and entertaining; but he had almost (kill enough to dissipate my thoughts, and.remove Sir John and Lady Behnour from my mind..
After.
'fli
il'
ill
'I'
*ii
^i!
1

I:.
<.'
■ ( • I
ti I
• .T

l * 1
U I I " !
'I .
I t
t^'
!i •
k:
i;^ ■'
ii
I
i ■
lib i
•
^fl:;
'“i '
U\
4i I I
•«' I
1 . ‘ J ii:;
i f
,'ri ■ >l! i l;
•	i '»
•	> .■ >
•I , :
■> '
h :il
• t-..;
lb
»: .1 hS
•b »
:i
i'li
; !
IT
liM
hi
l!
i;
‘
s •
I' '
lie
if:
ilii;
[ 156 ]
ASter a country dance, in which, by his fpright-lineSs, he had added to the natural vivacity of my Spirits, we stepped to the next room to breathe the fresh air. My fan fell—we both instantly stooped
■----in getting up, our lips met—I’H tell thee no
more.'---------Write me, Carolina^ why I did
not exclaim against the accident—why I was not difpleafed—why Frojly rvas agreeable to my eye— anfwer thefe queries, if thou canll.
8 o’clock.
Shad hardly come back to the company when
Sir John afked me how I liked his pictures------
His pidiures ! I had leen none.
The rooms are full of them—fee none--------
He contradtdd his brow------stammered out my
name, and with an angry look turned about, I think, on ihy lionour, provoked and Swearing at me.-----------
Is the mart fo mighty fond of his pidlures that
he must necessarily be difpleafed witli me ror not having obferved them ? No : Sir John is not fach
a coxcomb-------Some other reafon—i looked for it
in his heart, and there 1 read in love’s charadters — “ Had it not been for the prefence and conversation of Frojby., Kidloria had zealoussy paid her homage to Raphael Corregio.”
What would it avail me to dissemble the Satisfaction I felt at the Secret intelligence ?-That thou
mayest not exceed the bounds of probability, Ca-rolinny and be more intent on the marvellous than the natural, I declare to thee I was pleafed.
“ Pleafed, VidisKiaK—
Well, then, I was delighted.------------Restrain
thy fancy, unlefs thou chufest to affix an impropriety to the fenfation which ssid into my breast— i was delighted with the Sally of Sir Johriy and ap-plaKcled his anger,
I promised
I i<
[ >S7 i
I promifed myfelf, Frojhy should meet with no more accidents, and even grudged the advantage
he had got in the last.------1 will plainly tell thee
all, but banter me not--------1 rubbed my lips in
order to (weep away the kifs, as if by that adtion I could forget it had been staled upon them.
“ How childish !”
Explain to me, my most reafonable Carolina,, how it is childish, when the reSistlefs ■ emotion fprings from nature, love, and pleafure ?
9	o’clock.
Frojhy, having been fuperlatively charming, had at last overdone himstlf.—But for a few fparks of love and imagination, which now and then graced his tongue, and shone in his carriage, one would have faid he liad never felt, thought, or fpoke.
Not far from him fat thy Victoria, feemingly as tired and stupid, but in reality loving, stnfible, and happy.
Our hearts, Carolina, are on all lides invested
by powerful enemies—precipices Surround us-----------
Prudence faintly pointing out the almost invifibie path we might estape through, we- naturally Set forwards, and blindly plunge into tiie dreadful abyfs.
Imprudence is our lot.—Who will convince me it is not a duty to Sacrifice common fcnst to the firfl: impertinent emotion which Seizes upon us I Were not folly inherent to extreme fufceptibility, fliould we fo often renounce reaion, and Swerve from a necessary law ?
There are objedSs which at once affedl and rule the foul j ill vain would we attempt to reSist an impression that comes to invade, to conquer, and not
to parley.------—The attack, too fudden, and too
fierce, roots out the very defire of preparing, or guarding against it—then must we Submit—fo did
I
\
iTi
i-
11 1

y ;
r-t
:< i
i):
,
ii:i
i! t
{ L
1 I
f ]
I—Fortune alone will I gratefully thank for not having been furprifed, and totally vanquished.
n o’clock.
Certain that the heart of Sir yohn gave no af-fent to whatever his imagination might welcome, and his tongue pronounce, I ceafed to perplex my-feif with the temporary honours of Lady Belmour., and had the courage to dart perpetual looks at
them.—I grew familiar with the fight------1 never
dreamed, Carolina., it was fo full of dangers.:—
Pleafure which adds to the beauty of an. hand-forne woman, produced the fame effedl Sir
Iohn______His eyes blazed a fubtle poifon, which
imperceptibly entered every vein, and like an indelible dye penetrated my inmost foul.—I—he—I know not, Carolina.^ how to make thee fenfible of the rapturous diforder he caufed in my bofom how to explain the real fenfe of my feelings.-“ How handfome he looks !” exclaimed I aloud.
-----Mrs. Erenton trod on my foot, and Sir Johti^
who was near us, immediately wheeled about.
So deluSive was the incentive which had forced thefe words from me, that I did not think of them,
even after they had been uttered--------^The pain
of my toe, and the motion of Sir John^ quickly Set me to right
How Severely was I punished, Carolina., for not having believed in thee ! Had I renounced ingenuity as thou advifedst me, should 1 have been fo nigh falling a vi<stim to an ihdifcreet impulfe of nature ? I did not foon enough recover my countenance— the loving and overjoyed eye of Sir John encreaf-
ed my trouble--------1 Saw I was detedSed—what
to do ? I thought of Frojby^ and prefently darted upon him the remains of a confufion he had not
infpired. The deceit—-why was it necessary !-----
the deceit Succeeded to a miracle.
Too
s.
E H9 ]

<1*
Too generous to Sufpe6I: me oS hypocriSy, Sit* looked vexed, and his cheek reddened with
all the pride of felf-love.----Pleafure no longer
played on his features—fpite made him walk from
me—fpite brought him back.-------“ None, faid he,.
but the prepoffelSed Lady ViAoria.^ would have hazarded fo preposterous an exclamation.------Frojhy
handfome !” and the audacious man stew away to Lady Belmour.
Will this man never fhow his love but ifi.,a st^C
of anger ?----My Smiles, I am certain, told him
not to be vexed—had I Spoke, my language could .
not have been more plain and expressive------how
could he mistake them fur contempt. He has the finest eyes I ever Saw, yet knows not how to ufe them. I have heard of men who have no ears for the unhappy, but never of one who loved, and would not fee he was loved again. Sir 'John is that original; his reafon, like gold in the hands of a miler, is of no Service to his happinefs. UnleSs I fay expressively I love him, he will not believe it, nay then, perhaps, will think I banter.—Hear what 1 was compelled to do, and how little he um derstood me.
12 at Night.
Having left the gallery, alter a few minutes conversation with Lady Belmour., fhe came to me.— At the time of my extreme fondnefs for Frojly., I
.had not the tenderneSs of her looks.---------Her
bofom panted fo—I was confounded. She complained of the heat, and walked to the rooms ; my heart would not Suffer me to let her 20 alone : I followed, and joined her in the furthest.
There is no breathing in the gallery, faid she, with an unaffefted fmile, I wish a window or two were open.
Let us stay here, Madam, I’ll open one.
I had



i i;
f I
US
(C
[ i6o ]
m
I had hardly thrown up a fash-window, when coming behind the curtain—“ Speak not, Victoria., my jealous lord is in fearch of me. Let us Secretly
enjoy his ravings.”-----
He prefently appeared, and feeing not his Lady, imagined she had entered a room whofe door was shut. Thither he stepped—“ There she is,” cried he with a curfe. Hearing a noife he listened— They ligh,” and another curfe. His Lordship grew extravagant, and exclaimed aloud, “ Now “ I am a cuckold i” The door would have been broke open, had not Lady Belmour left her retreat, and upbraided him with his impertinent fufpicions. He inSisted, however, on looking behind the cur-
"	^	vC-'
tain, and was not a little Surprized to find me there instead of her gallant.
Whilst she was Scolding, and he begging pardon, I could not help thinking a rendezvous had been concerted.
Sir John ! Sir John! stghed I, I must encourage thee to Speak, thy love, ox Belmour wi d tear me from thy heart.
He came, darted at me an. equivocal look of love and anger, took her ladyship’s hand, and vowing she should not leave “ her partner for her huf-band,” led her in triumph to the gallery. The audacity of the man, though astonishing, was still lefs fo than the pastivenefs of Lord Belmour. The injury he had done his wife by his idle exclamation, had absolutely taken from him the power of refenting the familiar behaviour of Sir John, and the yet more familiar compliance of her Ladyship. Had I not been interested in their amour, I would have laughed at the stupid figure he made. Lord Belmour feems to love his Lady only to have a plaufible pretext to make her unhappy.. Love ex-cufes all, they fay, I afshre thee his Lordship enjoys this privilege in its full extent.
As
C i6i ]
As they walked, and Lord Belmour and I followed, Some whifpers between them made me un-eafy. I mended my pace, and just as they exchanged a very expressive Smile, forgetting I was clofe to Sir John^ I trod on his heel. The quicknefs of his motion prevented my retreat. His head difordered my toupee, and his mouth glanced on my cheek. He thought he had a right to my lips, but whilst I defended them, my bofom, unguarded,
became his prey.------He kifSed it. My first im-
pulfe was difpleafure—the Second forgivenefs. He appeared delighted with his theft—His looks pleaf-ed me. Had I returned the anfwer they Seemed to

beg, I believe he had fallen at my feet, and dissipated all my fears of a rival. I dared not, Carolina— Love made me forgive, but modesty commanded my countenance; no anfwer was given.
I o’clock.
----we fat
The country dance was not finished---------
down to wait for the next. There was a chair next
Lady Belmour., but Sir yohn looking as if he de-fired a feat between us, and her Ladyship affeisting not to comprehend that language, he stood before us, till a Lady by my fide getting up, I took her chair and gave him mine.
’Tis kind---------very kind. You read my wish,
my Lady.
Better than you do mine. Sir John.— This, Carolina, was my mental anfwer verbal w^s nothing. What elfe are words of fentiment ?
my
Mrs. Bathurjl, my good old friend Mrs. Ba-thurjl, passed by us, stopped, and taking Sir John’s hand and mine in hers--------
How fine a couple I what a pity thefe hands are not to be joined! —
I heard, and heard not, Carolina*
I deferve not that happinefs. Madam—
Still
ii
II
i!

jlii^
I.Ill
i’h;
stii

ih
' K
liii
m
m
[ 162 ]
Still did I chufeto be abfent. Very few men do. Sir John. And putting my hand in his Would they were never to b Thanhyou, Madam.

.11' 1
1 fmiled, and very faintly drew'my hand back. The eyes of Sir John brightened with love.
Is it possible ?—are you in earnest ? —--You.
thank her!-----------
And he trembled with joy.
Are you mad. Sir John ? Said Lady Belmoufy laughing. Would you have Lady Vidloria anfwer
one jest but with another ?---------
Is it fo. Lady ViAoria ?---------
Could I fay no, Carolina ?
It is, mumbled I.—-------
Fool that I am ! how could I mistake it!
He did not fay that Carolina., but expressed it in his manner of leaving his chair.
Believe me, my “ it is” was as good an “ it
is not” as ever was pronounced------He took it
for a banter.
He stooped to m.y ear.
The defpair of plea ling you. is enough, add not to it your contempt.—
And v/ithout waiting, for my anfwer he mixed with Lady Belmour in the dance.
His “ defpair of pleaSmg” joined to the defpo-tic voice of modesty, which, in defpite of my heart, commands my obedience, will at last, I fear, prove mortal to my happinefs. Could I fpeak, look, behave, more purpofely to make him fufpedt I love not Frojby. Did not all this together tell him,
Sir John., you may talk---------if you do, I’ll
listen ”-----A great deal more could he have added to this--but he chofe to be deaf, blind,
and sslent.
Thi

I !'
iii
[ 1^3 ]
The whole evening Sir ^ohn divided his assiduity between Lady Belmour and me. To her he was
passionate—to me reSpediful.------1 wilhed him to
missake------ he did not. Never till then did he
dart Such Sullen looks at Frojhy: often did he avoid Speaking to him, even to affediation—Sir Iohn loves me—yet will not exprefs what he feels! .Dis provoking.
Brenton-hall, 176—
LETTER XXL
Sir John Modish to Lord Pelham.
By heavens, it was unfair!—but for her ingenuity which I adore, though injurious in the highest degree, I would remember her virtue, only to exert all my powers against it.—-What transport to have that virtue panting in my arms after
its own destrudlion-----Seeking for lile in its own
death i —Was not mv foul
not my loul Sufficiently racked by the certainty of her passion for Frojhy^ that it still wanted the odious exclamation, “ how handfome he looks !” added to its exquisste Sufferings ?
“ How handfome he looks 1” 1 turned So Sud-
denly, that Lady Victoria having not had time to remove from her eyes the complacency natural to the Sentimental expression, I was tempted—yes, Frederick.^ tempted to think myfelf its only objedl. Her intent look, her Sudden blulh—my eagernefs to believe, could not but deceive me.-PleaSure
too hastily told her modesty the deceit I welcomed. It gave too Sudden life to my motions—she Saw it—^ was troubled—and immediately deshoyed that deceit by stepping to Frojhy. What an inSult to mv
pride and the delicacy of my feelings ! Shame Succeeded the imprudent joy———O, Vidioria ! too
defencelcfs




[ 164 i
defenceleSs am I against thy beauty—too readily do I yield to. the fmalleft hope of pleafingthee !
The more flattering my mistake had been, the more fenSibly did 1 feel its folly. Enraged at the fond distinction conferred upon Frojhy., I approached Lady Fic,oria.— I hough by her countenance
fhe befpoke my refpe<£t-----though every feature
deadened my indignation-----1 dared to arraign her
judgment—to reproach—Let me draw a veil, Fn-derick, over what is pasted—I will read Boileads Satire on women, and detest them—detest them!
don’t you laugh at the impertinent refolve ? Detest women ! ah 1 let N ature first blunt the finenefs of the organs she gave, or totally deprive me of
every want!-----detest the only delight we enjoy in
life—be a stranger to the bewitching fenfations they caufe 1 How shall I atone for the profane thought t Well should I deferve to be the fcorn of the fair, were I any longer to entertain the perverfe defire!
I o’clock.
A few words with Lady VhtJoiAa had wrapt up my whole countenance in a gloom—my foul was funk in grief—pleafure had forfaken my veins and vanished from my heart.
But five minutes out of my fight, Said Lady Belmour, Smiling, and Sir John fo wonderfully altered !—whence the amazing change ?—
The new ideas which had intruded into my mind, rendering me abfolutely impastible to her allurements I yawned an unintelligible anfwer, and cast a stupid look upon her.
Amazing change indeed !
Is it you, Belmour?------
thou restlefs tormentor;
----and I awaked.—Stop,
stop, have mercy on me. mitate not the Gods who delight in infpiring frutlefs defires—be generous, not unrelenting as they. My fadnefs, dear Bchnour^ is thy work; ceafe to pleafe—to heighten the imprestion of thy
charms,
[ 1^5 ]
charms, or Suffer illufion to yield to reality.---
My Soul is on the wing----let it fly---fix on
thy lips----play on thy boSom, and revel in thy
arms.———
Ml
. I rouSed thee not to lull my virtue afleep.—Thy voice is an enchantreSs I cannot help listening to think not of me.—
Not think of thee ! may that minute be mr
laft!-----
Well, think but Speak not.—There is a poiSon in thy words which charms every SenSe, and calls my Soul up to thee.—Nor look, for I fee in thy eyes but the raptures of fin.—Heigh-ho !—
1 welcomed the heigh-ho—in return breathed an
inflamed one upon her breast, and gave it Such life, as thy imagination, Frederick,, can never comprehend. Its instant elasticity warned me that her Scruples were Silenced.
Her modeSty winked at my inviting eye—consent was on her lips, defire in every motion, transport in every Step. I whiSpered the Scene of bliSs— Ihe anSwered with a half-Smile, and whole-complying blulh.
It had been written, Frederick., above, below, or round me, in the book of unfeelhig fate, that happineSs fliould for ever keep in my viev\-, and I for ever balked of its enjoyment.
If at any time a rational man believes in de> mons and other fantaShc beings, it must certainly happen when his body and Soul are both struck with the eledtric fire of love. Thus circumstan-
ced, folly is reafon.—Frederick., am I tempted to think that Some bufy-brain of an he or She Spirit is hovering over my head, intent on miSchief, and happy in tormenting me.—Ethereal rogues ! would i could See and finger you ! how I would reward you for your officiouSneSs.
5 o’clock.


;i
i!
■•I
i (
h:
H
[ 166 ]
5 o’clock.
I was flipping out with the discretion of a devotee going to a rendezvous. Sometimes carelefsly, Sometimes on tip-toe. Sometimes turning my head through fear of Spies, when a letter upon the floor attra6ted my attention.
It was directed to Frojby. My first impulfe was to give it to him, but as he was at the further end of the gallery, and I would, by no means, lofe the progrefs I had made towards the door, I put it in my pocket.
At the end of the long range of rooms that were laid open is a falloon which my father of libertine memory, had called The Salloon of the Gods, whofe amours were represented in all that luxuri-ancy of passion, which their godships alone could feel and inSpire. The floor and ceiling he inlaid with glaSs, that by the inverfion of the figures he might revive his imagination with a glance at the charms of his female vifitors. Thither he led the unfuSpe£bng virgins ungeneroufly to Smile at the blush his eager look and their SurpriSe naturally cauSed : thither I flew through a back stair to enjoy a more Substantial bliSs.
Three, four, five minutes elapSed—no fignal was given. I peeped through the key hole. Saw
nobody------drew my ear to it, heard but thenoiSe
of the dancers----came back to m , feat.
Happening to recolledl: Frojby’s letter—we are not at all times generous, Frederick !—I opened it, and feeing the name of Emily Cranmer------honour va-
nished, man prevailed—^I read it.
7 o’clock.
Under what Sign of the heavens have I been bQrn, when I am compelled to think that the
fevereft
[ 1^7 3
Severest misfortune, which I should welcome as the most favourable event!
>4
I have it in my power to root my rival from the heart of Lady Victoria, and I abhor the thought.
How could she Support the knowledge of his perfidy ? -how guilty is Frojly! how defervedly contemptible!—Far is VidJeria from fuSpedingthe daily falsehoods he imposts upon her I----Read
the curstd letter, Frederick \ read it, and fay, if thou darest, that most men of charader are not more than rakes the enemies of virtue. I
march publicly Surrounded with dangers; my defigns are trumpeted before me, eafily may woman guard a-gainst them : but w'hat arms has she against him v^ho talks of peace, and lies in ambulh to attack unawares in the dark ?
To Richard Frosby, ,Efq.
Why, dear Richard, do you require from me a promist I sm not able to keep how can I Jove you and not dread the charms of Lady Victoria f Can I be Sure of a heart you daily expost to her beauty? Richard! neither my fenfibility nor thy praists have yet rendered me unjust, or Sillily vain ; i/idtoria is, and will be, a most formidable enemy to me.—Of all pallions, I know but love—of all defires, that alone of making thee happy—of all fentiments, the fear of lofing thee.—1 wish and breathe but for thee.
Thou hast taught me love— by thee was I to be taught Sorrow ! — Thy tenderest exprestions Soften it not—it withstands the luxuriant kifs.—How often, Richard., how often has it damped thost very moments in which our fouls lavishly iighed every thought away 1	_ ^
I repent rot of the Sacrifices I have made thee; they were my free gifts.—Could I in the critical hour when betrayed by Mifs ****-» ^ ^, thou
stoleft


[ i68 ]
, ftolest into the place where I bathed—when by her left alone with thee—could I talk of the church ? No: thee only I thought of—for thee I defpifed my glory, and filenced my virtue.—In thy eyes I faw—in thy tranfports I found, the reward of the offering I made thee. Each concession of my modesty was a, step to my happinefs :—thy triumph was mine.—Then thou fworest but love—but love! what other allurement couldst thou have tempted me with ?—But love! what w'ould thy hand have availed me without thy heart ?
Have I ever in thofe hours when I received and lavished delights—when panting in my arms thou hadst nothing to refufe, but all to grant—have I ever by an artful refistance, by a falfe hear, fondly
wheedled thee into marriage ?----Richard! dear
Richard ! I trusted my honour to thy love, not to thy generossty.—Wert thou the only amiable man upon earth, I would difdain to be indebted for thy hand to thy honesty.
Thy love, dear Richard, is the only equivalent
for my facrifices to thee---the only equivalent
which will Satisfy my honour.
Oh ! approach not Lady Victoria ; fly from her -------pity my fond, my timid foul---------it
think of the lovely maid. Though
thou lovest her not, fly from her--her ssght may
at length prove fatal to thy paffionate Emily.-
Tell me not to be compofed, or Seek for pleafure but with me.
Emily Cranmer.
For once, Frederick, thou wilt conceive my feelings.------Thy honesty needs not my love to fire
thee with indignation----^thy virtue has already
darted the bolt of contempt—thou hast thought of Vidioria, and Frojby's, crime lias struck thee with all its horrors,—Hast thou ever heard of a rake So resolutely

r 169 ]
I
folutely wicked as the virtuous Froftyf No : mo-“* dern men oS honour alone can, under the Sandtioil
of an ufurped reputation, thus refine upon vice, and unmoved indulge it in all its deformity. The wretch talks of love to Vidloria, and enjoys all its raptures in the arms of Cranmer ! Bold perjurer ! yet they all unite to praife him--------his failings
are not detected, hence he has none ! O, Virtue! I will hate thee—thou art more dangerous than
vice: fandiified knaves gave thee an innocent look
the better to betray.
Shall Frojiy’s guilt be concealed from Fidloria ^ —No ; she (hall know all.—I must—but will she
believe me w'hen paffion pleads for the criminal ?
—Can file read and doubt?---Unprepared for
the fatal news how her heart will bleed !—Though
only indebted to chance for the Secret of Fniily Cranmer, does not humanity oblige me to fkreen her from infamy ?—Who knows but both may be guiltlefs, and the letter defignedly written and dropped by the hand of an enemy !—Frojhy loves not Victoria!---------Credulous Emily! she possesses his
heart, whilst thou art only the fancy of his youth, the amufement of shis leifure ; he carries to thee the fire he receives from her, and quenches it oil thy bofom.
10	o'clock.
Abforbed in thought, my ears were abfolutely beggared of their faculty of hearing. Whether the three gentle knocks had been given by Lady helmour, or her modesty had, in my abfence talked its curfed language, I was cheated of my hap-pinefs.
“ 'Sdeath ! what’s become of them !---------1 Saw
her this way.”
It was Lord BeimruFs voice. My fenfes imme-iiately recovered. 1 arofe and tip-toed to th«
I	door
1!
li
I
[
ICO
]
0-
r
/
door. I peeped, and Saw his I^ordship with .liis arms acrols, and his eyes fixed on the falloon.— “ Poor Belmourf'-—exclaimed he. “ Now indeed art thou a cuckold”'—and he rubbed his forehead.
Not yet,, my Lord, faid Lady Belmour stepping from behind a window curtain ; not yet: but had you come one minute later, you certainly would.—
What assurance!------
It IS the. only anfwer to your Sufpicions.
I’ll d;o to tlrat curtain.
o
Have a care, my Lord j your courage will cooi at the fight of the happyanan—^your heart was not formed for fuch encounters.----
What!—Victoria !-----------
Lsteard no more, IredericL My hopes being at an end, I decamped through the back stair, and returned to the gallery. Seeirig none of them, 1 went to the rooms.
W'hat! already tired, .ladies'!-come. Madam, and I took-Lady Belmour by the hand, you won’t Surely leave your partner for your hushand.
No, no. Sir John., I’ll .follow you with all my heart.—
.:And away we tript.
shady Belmour pressing my hand in hers—
When thou art abfent, B\r John, I'defy‘thee : thou canst conquer .but by furprife,; 1 will prepare my virtue against its
And I Belmour, will humble that virtue, elfe I
deferve thee not.--------
Wicked man !-------
And she fmiled “ I love thee.”
W icked when I arm thee against myfelf I And I returned her iinile.
At that very minute Lady Vidloria trod upon my left heel. I turned upon my right, and lightly touched her cheek. I was tco near, Frederick, not to attempt her lips. 1 fought my way to them j
[ 17^ 1
Hie difputed it with a “ Sir Johnb Sir ychn /’’ and a ,, Sail of her head backwards. In that fituation the bofotn captivating my eyes, I gave a kifs to each of the w'hitest roundest breasts I ever lelt or beheld. She instantly blustied out her indignation at my temerity, and reproached me, but faintly, as if (he had feared to think or talk of a kifs 5 whilst Lady Bdmour pulled my hand to her to warn me I robbed her of her due.
That kifs—that breast—1 assure thee, Frederick.^

they restored me to virtue.
I cannot repent, Lady Victoria.—
I led her hand to my heart which beat all the
transports ot love, and threw my fenfations on my looks.—She loves Frojby-cmk \x^^on him! Had
Ihe but fmiled—Ihe would not fmile.— '
Were 1 still the coxcomb thou hast know'n me, I might, from a few circumssaiices which occurred that night, infer she has no dissike to me—nay pof-fibly think I am not indifferent to her. She fome-
times betrayed fo much concern at my assiduity to Lady Belmour—stamxnered luch feeling monofylla-bles, that though she Suddenly reverfed their meaning I—I will not entertain the thought—Self love bids me rejedt it. Adieu.
Modijh-half i'6—
LETTER XXII.

Lady Carolina Pelham to Lady Victoria
Nevil.
N the name of modesty, VidtoFm., canst thou be angry, if now I fay Sir Johnxs the man thou bvest ? No : affedtation is not in thy nature, thou
• t
wilt not be angry.
Sweet creature, thou lovest then arid Sir John
r T • r% *	^
nn is the man who has convinced thee shou
I 2	-svert
0f'
r
[ i 7 -i 1
^ wert deceived, who has chaced frojby from thy heart.
Thy mistakes are no novelty to me. Long ago have I discovered thy indifference through the raving expreffions thou coveredst it with.
Born with exquilite feelings, ever in want of being amufed or affedled, thou obeyedst thy natural tendency to love, whilst thy deluded fancy pointed to t'rojly as the caufe of thy emotion. Thou couldst have as eaSily been furprifed into an inclination for a hird^ a fong,, or a piAurt. As pride delights in the most distant homage, fo does extreme Senfibility in trifles , or things of tlie greatest moment.
Thou lovedst not Trojiy., as now thou dost Sir "John \ nor hadst thou ever removed the veil with which thy prepoffeflSon for the former had intangicd thy understanding, but for the fuperiority of the latter which forced thee to shake it off, to fee with
thy own eyes., to judge with thy own reafon.-------
T he burning torch he has put in thy bofom, has difpelled the gloom that encompaffed ihy foul, and restored it to the exertion of its native rights.—Too Jong had thefe been invaded by the delicacy of thy organs—too long had thy imagination Swayed thy Senfes, heightened their illuSion, and favoured Frojhy.
Thou art not the first, Vtcforia^ that has erred with the full belief of being in the right. T'lioufands daily object to reafon for the judge of their fenfati-
ons.------’Tis the unavoidable effefl of fenSibility
and perhaps the greatest advantage one can poflefs.
6 o’clock.
Write, talk, dream as thou wilt
thou must acknowledge for thy vidtor.
Sir 'John
To that
new
C m )
<9
/
new cciety wilt thou dedicate a temple in thy heart—to him devote thy thoughts, and each minute oSthe day.—Happy votary,, whole Sighs shall be ever gracioussy received—who shall never be ex-
pofed to a frown----shall never be denied by the
benevolent God !
Now., and now only, FiAoria, mayest thou
think thyfelf fortunate. Since thou hast reafoned thy heart into love, and art certain of Sir 'John’s affection-----But what will that affedfion avail thee, if
convinced of thy constancy to Frojbyy he has, and will have,, no notion he can ever pleafe thee ? What children thefe men are !-------^Hardly have
they adopted an. opinion, though ever fo falfe, when they are unhappy till they perfuade them-felves its truth cannot possibly be questioned. Thus do errors of every kind fwarm over the globe
thus do we Seldom meet but with fools in every station.-- Did their extravagance hurt but them-
felves, one might probably laugh at, or pity them
but when their folly endangers our peace.
and oppofes our pleafures, laughter or pity were ridiculous.
8 o’clock.
Awake Sir Johhy Vibloria^ compel him to renounce the idle conceit he is infatuated with, lest time should render it too powerful. An old dif-temper yields not to common remedies; ’ds in its very beginning that a Skilful hand must administer the infallible medicine. Sir John to be the patient 1 how, weak and dastai'dly are at times the most
undaunted men !
One look, one of thy languishing looks, Vidio-
ridy will luffice for his recovery.--Could he be
fo unreasonable as to reSist a look !—If fo—venture
—His ob»
a finile, and I warrant him at thy feet.-stinacy could not withstand thy fmile—with this,
I 3	vi6fory
[ 174 1
Vl£lory is thine. No longer ssiaJI he then believe in Frojly’s happinefs—no longer contend with thee but in interrupted Sighs, melting glances, fond ex-
prelSions.—\Vould I were near thee when---but
hush ! the light might be dangerous.—My heart is already too tender—it would be imprudent to give Lord Pelerjion fo great an advantage.
Thou wilt neither look; nor fmilc, Victoria-1
forefee it--thou wilt not be furpaffed in caprice
by Sir yohn. Heroic emulation !—! almost repent having offered thee my advice—it is fo ingenuous. How could 1 forget we live according to the
wife laws of Opinion, not the abfurd ones of Nature !
I will rank my jealous Lord Peletjion with thee
and Sir John.----He begs, earnestly begs, I will
pronounce the decilive words “ I love you.” Till then, he fays he cannot be fure of me—every beau frightens hina into madnefs.—How stupid !—:ue we not happier when we wish and hope than when W'e postefs ? I will comply with his request when he again offends—1 will fay “ I love you, my Lord.” Vidloria, I will look for no other punishment— for no other revenge. Adieu.
Land on y 176
The End of the Second Volu.me;
THE
£>
OF THE HEART;
O R,
M

M
O F
Lady CarolinaPelham
AND
Victoria NEvil.
IN. A SERIES dF LETTERS.
PUB LISHED BY
M. TREYSSAC de VERGY,
Gounfeilor in the Parliaments of Paris and liourdeaux At feeling hearts 1fing, nor ever *nifs the game.
Prior.
IN THREE VOLUMES.
V O L. III.
it
J
DUBLIN;
Printed for J AMES Potts, and Thomas Walker,
Bookfellers, in Dame-freet.
M DCC LXX.
-IvJ
-: - V-V^P •'
^' : c' "^. vc- -.
. o .-ii'- -.	- .-/' '' >??'N''-*t‘< A.C
.#'^. . -	•	^ .	■*	■■ t rii-.*r
.V
*:.•	r' -	'
. '. l-N-
V

v^;.'	•-> ' »' y-t
•\ -' -	- ■ t-
■- _ V
^ '
^s.
"S •
?r:.-:-v:	V" .

^sie?;
A
V	•

■^■- fitrc

*	<*9.~
A r:
« I
> .
;■ A
»'<2L .',^
N ^
. -c 1-
* ."' ' '
^ SC b v >-'nN>'-,.'cvr.;'^": -- - -
...<•->5-LrA N. ’i-
.-v? -vX"N?-^	-	>f^-‘
-	•, .r-. -d. ri < i
.;. ^'T.-f -SSir •:
.
'	■\-».r
•C r'

■' S
\NCc '♦ ' •_ •

:-t
.?W_ . ,;^-
f
—r.


i'f
/-•
b k:-*J
tt--:
•.	* .V
V-

o
^ I
-* *
riA;	r
- rk|%’ '	
/
.1
■ -iX.

V
t
^ 1/ #	•	*5

■-iS




4 *
r i
fri
^ -V*
A '
■<■■?. ■ *
■ •	•? vA ^
C* v: .'S’
- .-^ A'
f'^, ■ -
. >..•
f
> ~ ri
•^A -t •■■^.•>r S'* ^
-t


.	1« •	• ■-.•- -", '	.'---. 'Ji <
.^	.	V- •	••	-*■	.'■: ■•-
s • ■■C' •' .	- ■	^
. '.*•
•V ^
r
- •



• . "... • • **.> ^ ■■ ’T V.'* V •-

/-f
'ji ^A’"'-'	■ T^t-*


c *♦

.^-*r
.A >' -

-.ti.-

• f
4 *

c
e

^’■VcCSCC, .-,	.
&Si. ..■	r'v ,.;■	/, _-v
' ■ -	■' b >'
, ' r>-, 'a'


F ■' -•
-■ >
. -f
> J
i^s.. • . N
' c..-.’., ■'.j ■■:	S*"Vi!-':—-C.

' f.

r
r.	■'
' "It •	. ^
.'> w't	y I

•'
4 r
.■«’• - '
•	, ->T<
« *
' 'Jf >*SW« f
J
,b
V H.
CJi. '•.
♦ * *'
V
\ ^
i, "-:
i:^' iN	k--
■>'.^.	. •	• -i*." ..'.•■ ■
s». — > • . r TX r •
.CCv,'.::V-c u
.. M • ^
:
.* -.-ir'V
■ • . J1..	< *'«iw'.. . - LC' :.

■r':
*. j"

•‘ v~
r-T .	..,
; «*
v.^
-T O
C-.D T-: L N- - -S.C
~ ■' A. • .
« " • ^

I ,
f ‘
(£>'
T'
r

A • *
‘/r:>
T'
W-1
F*'
■X
-A'
-•4'
k>
ifN
f
. • '.f y --y ■ ■ J /: •
- *•
Sfe-v i.,«fS:.^-<.;/„;.• -

. ' • V.
». V
.-r--
I

M
E
M
O

I
R
S
to

J
F
Lady Carolina Pelham
AND
Lady Victoria Nevii

L E T T E R I.
Sir John Modish to Lord Pelham.
TH E more I confider, Frederick., the lefs dif-tinffly do I perceive what is right or wrong.. My head is the feat of perplexity and confuSion—■ a throng of thoughts rush into it at once—as quick ly vanish, and leave not the Smallest trace behind.
A minister is not more dreadfully distrained when the abettors of his defpotifm, obeying the voice of felf-prefervation, give him up, on afudden to the revenge of an injured people.—Though different the objeils, our anxiety is the fame :: m’y concern, for the happinefs of Lady I 'tdioria yields not to his thirst after riches and command.—Shall I tell her. of Frojhy's guilt, that, by a timely contempt of the snan, she may avoid the impending dilgrace ?
15	Will
S
¥ < .
178 ]
I canna*
Will not the news be death to her ? think oS it without horror.
If I Speak, will she not question my veracity, or mistake my pity for infult?—Will sh^ not, in the excefs of her grief, charge me with being the vile contriver ?—My honour to be stnpedled ! rather —What shall 1 do, Frederick.^ what shall 1 do ? Were I indifferent, how would I fly to undeceive VldioT'ia !—Friendship would clr’m her ear— she would listen—and though her Idtil should be wrapt up in Sorrow, dead to comfort,, her blood would naturally rife, and Sparkle hatred and diS-dain upon the perfidious Frojhy.
Why did not Mrs. Brenton find the curSed letter! What an overSight in the favour Fortune intended
^	\	Q
tor Lady Victoria!------Unfortunate girl! shall I
doom thee to mifery ?—Since this must be thy lot, why should I anticipate it ?—No; I will leave thee in thy ignorance—1 will not draw aSide the veil which lies between thee and the fatal truth.—Let others strike the deadly blow from me thou Ihak not have cauSe for one tear, a pretext for one lighu
Nine o’CIock.
I thought, Frederick.^ that deceit and villany had
their Sole abode in courts—that courts alone could
%
produce shameleSs offenders, and daring impostors that every where elSe vice was restrained by tear Silenced by humanity—or conquered by religion. I fee that Self-love reigns in every place—dictates to every heart—justifies every adtion—blunts the stings of conscience, and the yet stronger impulSes of honour—All men are alike—different only is the stage on which they adf.—No dread of punishment, no hope cf reward, will enable a foul to Sacrifice its native longings after pleafure—stis an evil beyond remedy, — An evil! — let me not revile Nature

u
1179 ]
ture by questioning her wifJom, and accustng her'^ of error.
Frederick! I will not have the prefumption to judge Frojhy—still lefs to condemn him.—He may have been placed in fuch a circumstance—feen fuch an attitude—caufed fuch a blulh—felt fucn an emo-
tion
Thou knowest not the inchanting confu-
fion of a Surprize ;—this alone might intoxicate his
fenfes—compel him to infidelity.-----Who gazes
on beauty, and is not lost } who welcomes not the fupreme delight, and yields not to nature ?
Why do we not always esteem thofe.whofe errors we justify and forgive? Cannot Sentiment be as-unbiafSed as reafon ? Whence do I defpife a man
whom 1 may, envy, nay furpafs.in. guilt ?------ He
is loved !---This, Frederick., changes the amia-
ble transtreffion into an odious one.—How could Ehojby lavish on Emily Cranmer- an incenfe he had
devoteshto VdAoria----lavish the facred exprelSions
of love,., and impofe on his heart to gratify his fenfes ?
A Sudden, an involuntary deviation from con-' stancy, I excufe; but fedudtion proves an equal want of love and honour. Is not the repetition of a fault a certainty we freely indulge it ? Can our pastlon -be lincere when we wish for raptures in rhe arms of another?—No, Frederick, that deSire is mere libertinifm.—But when we are loved—loved by a fidloria, how criminal the man who will delight in kisses not ravished from her lips !---
Events I am not yet acquainted with, which ppflibly may clear Frojby, forbid me to determine against liim.—May he.be innocent!—Oh, ViAo-ria! for thy fake may he be innocent!—Let him be ever fo guilty, I will not be his accufer.—Thou that liest in my fight to tempt me to bafenefs, letter of Emily Cranmer^ .away \~--FroJby shall have it
again
./
/
7

►
It

[ i8o I
again■ —What a Sacrifice !—the only proof No matter-—’Tis Sent, Frederick. My virtue is Safe.
Modifi-half— 17 6
LETTER H.
Lady Victoria Nevil, to Lady Carolina
Pelham.
m
An D So, Carolina^.in difobedience to my commands, you liave preSumed to write that “ Sir 'John is the man I love,”—You' have difeo-vered from my last, that my heart no longer beats for Frojhy,—I admire thee!—Thou art certainly a
non-fuch for diicernment!------Pray, how long
wert thou in fettling that point i
“ Only ’till I had done with thy letter, Vieforia.’^ So long .i*-
Why, I had riot glanced over the first page, when I faid, thou lovest cir John."
So Soon, Carolina?------
“ Sooner still;—even before I had broke the feal.”
You was posttively determined then to believe
in your own conceit i---
“ Not fo neither, Fidioria.—From that “ filk “ the Smile of Sir John pointed to thee” I formed my judgment. I had no need, I affure thee, of thy “ how handfom* he looks!”
Poor Lord Felerjhn ! I pity him.-----
“ Why pity him, Victoria?
Thou may’st as well construe his delicacy into
jealoufy, as my esteem for Sir John into love.-
If fc—poor Lord Pelerjlon 1 fay !—Thou delightest Surely in being wrong, Carolina.^ fo ready art thou
to mistake.—Thou waste born to blunder.------I
love Sir John ! ha ! ha I ha !--
Thou dost, Victoria A
I do!
[ i8r ]
I do! HI convince thee I do not.
Though Lady Belmour be all beauty, all Soft-nefs, all temptation, mark this, Carolina., I am not jealous. 1 deep well, eat hearty, have no op-preilion at heart, no dissike to the prefence of Frojl.y., breathe no impertinent lighs, and can an-fwer a “ Yes” or a “ No” to the purpofe.—^— Now art thou convinced I love not ^\xdohnf “ Thou dost, Victoria^’
Still incredulous !-
-''I

Proud gid !-
Brent on-hall —176
LETTER III.
Lady Carolina Pelham to Lady Victoria
Nevil.
Here is a new Scene for thee, ViAoria.-___
Learn from me how to humble haughty man, and behold him, with difdain, creeping at thy feet.
From a review of his follies, I had worked my-felf into a momentary indifference for Lord Peler-Jlon, when led by his evil genius, he chofe that very minute to vilit me.
The wretch had on his brow the anxiety of a mifer; his eyes, at one glance, Surveyed every cor-• ner of my cloSet in quest of a rival, and .his tongue half with, half without motion, liSped “ How do. you do. Madam ?”
His amazing that people of So brilliant a fancy as your Lordship have not yet done with that old way of opening a co-nveifation. Why don’t you leave the “ how do you do” to a dotstor ? The found of thefe words is enough to give one the vapours for a whole day ;-it forces an apprehenfi-
on one is not well.—But, my Lord, what are you
So intent upon ?-----
How do you, Carolina?
And
N 0-thing—nothing.
.0
J
> »


L '82 ]
«
" And Ills eyes devoured the paper which lay on the table.
You look So wildly that way, my Lord, do you
take that letter for a fantom ?---
Not I indeed. Madam.—Why should I be troubled for a letter ?—That letter don’t vex me.— Will you be pleafed, Sir, to fit, walk, or go
down to Lady Pelham P-------
We may as well fit or walk here.--
And taking my hand he led me to a fopha, and Seated himSelf on a chair befide me.
Every day, my Lady, I blefs the minute in which I Saw you ;—my heart had never known the delights it now enjoys.—Oh ! how it beats when I am with you !—With what pleafure or defpon-dency it riles or falls, as you Smile or frown!—A
beauty should ever Smile.-----
And his eyes again on the letter.-—
Dear Carolina—you hate me I----
I do not, my Lord.----
I fee you do.----Shall I always appear guilty,
tho’ incapable to offend ?—Will not my paffion be an excufe for my fears?-—Were you not. fi>. lovely, I —----
What, my Lord ? I-d—that—letter-
That letter don’t vex you—does it ? That letter—(he kiffed my band) -is it ?--
Lord Fanjif&
Whofe
Lord Fanjiy^ .i —Does he corefpond with you ? —He—he once loved you.—Oh, Carolina!—a letter from him ?—
Why not. My Lord ?—------
Why not I—Death 1—The question is murder.
Ahd he loves you still ?----
He does. Sir.------
And you are pleafed he does ?
I am.
Right
\
[ 183 ]
#
Right woman I
And he put on all the features of Spite.
Not one in a thoufand will fay No, tho’ they hate the coxcomb, when a Yes will plague or mortify a lover.—You love Lord Fanfly., very likely 1
Very likely I do.^--
Right again, on my honour!—Well, I don’t
believe it.----
The reafon, pray ?—
You—you have liftened to me.—
Ha I ha! ha !—have ) ou no better authority ?—
Indeed—I ever feared it was a poor orie.-
You grow rude, my Lord.—
Then you love me.—Sweet reproof!—rYou lov® me—that’s certain.—
r
.	f
<y o’clock.
Evident was the confequence. My indiscretion put me fo absolutely off my guard, that had he Ikiltully turned my confuSion to his advantage, I really think I had not made h.m v/ait long for the “ I love you.His impertinent attention to Lord Fanflfs letter, not only gave me time to recover, but even power to laugh at him,—The fool, faid I to myfelf, how could he flip the opportunity !
Is it not very hot, my Lord'—
And I moved on my tip-toe to the window. Very hot, my Lady,—i-And he walked to the table.
Sir ?----
%
Madam f--------
Not a step further, I beg.--—
And I drew up the window for air.
Lord Pelerjion continued with his eyes fixed on the letter uncertain what to do. My bofom heaved—I fat down.
Shall I prefume to alk your Lordship whether you intend to honour me with your conversation ?
Honour



L 1S4 ]
Honour you !—How you talk, my Lady converfe with you is the highest Satisfaction for it I ssiould be miserable.—
And he made two steps towards me.
Will it rain to-day, my Lord ?—
Yes—I think not—it may happen.-------
Yes—I think not—it m.iy happen.— immensely witty this morning—
Confulion I—Bantered when my heart is
T®
but
You
arc
ready
Oh,
to break with Sorrow! Is that generous ?
Carolina !--
And he laid his hand on his breast.
You know not what pain I have here—how I
Suffer—how unhappy you make me.------
1 made no anSwer—got up—and took ray Man-
dolina.—
Who could imagine that Lord Fanfiy had been So. bale—So cowardly baSe as to love, after the repeated proofs of contempt you have heaped upon him!—From that man you condeScend to receive, a letter—to read it—to be pleaSed with it!—You almost declare you love him!—Ah I
And he gnashed his teeth, claSped his hands to^ selher, shook his head, and threw himSelf on thd
o	^
Soph a.
How passion deforms, Vibtaria! Lord Peler-Jlon, whofe fweetneSs of features had attraCled my attention—betrayed my heart into love, looked then So ugly, that it frightened me to the very-
foul.
That monster my lover I
I blushed at the thought—I quakedr—my legs, almost flipped from under me—my Mandolina dropped from my hand—I felt a tear of indignation— leaned a minute upon the table—took up the letter—and making a curteSy as I passed by his Lord-
ship
Your humble Servant, my Lord.
Then

k*
1 i8s 1
Then bravely forcing a ha ! ha ! ha ! I stepped to the door.
Curfe on love and fenfibility !--
Amen, Sir, if they have no other attendants but vexation and Solly.—
Is it Carolina who thus mistakes the charaifer of love for folly ?—who thus upbraids me with vexing her ?—You hate me.—Your hatred is ever the interpreter’ of my a6lions.—How should I not perpetually be wrong!—^—Oh, Carolina /
He stghed, and reclined his head on the arm of the fopha.
You have put me, my Lord, out of conceit with lovers.—I will difcardthem all.—
Will you really?—Enchanting refolution I------
How you delight my heart!—Speak the words a-gain—they are life!—Carolina.^ will you really ?—
And three leaps of joy brought him at my feet.
To shew you, my Lord, lam determined—I
begimwith your Lordship,
How he looked, Vidloria !
None have given me fuch a Surfeit of love—— you have excelled in the art of making it odious—
I loathe its very name.
Not unlike the wretch hearing the fatal decree which condemns him to instant death. Lord krjlon remained motionlefs on his knee—his lips half difclofed to let out a complaint, or a stgh—-his eyes down in all the fadnefs of defpair.
I had the heart, Cidloria^ to enjoy his Sorrow— to triumph in his confuston—to dart upon him a glance of contempt—I even felt a fpark of hatred (trike my heart—call my foul up.—I turned from him, and opening the door-----
Well may you stare, my Lord, at what I have laid.—Little did you dream of my just difplea-fure.—You have heard me.—Never will I i£-ceive the homage of a man who breathes but to
dilplcaf*

'4
(►

When
[ ]
difpleafe—who loves but to offend, you have learned to esteem me, 1 may pollibly
learn to forgive you.-------
And I strut the door after me..
Lord, Fanfly to be the caufe of a rapture between-
Lord Felerjion and me !--From what an infig-
nistcant'fpriag !-No matter—his absolutely a
rupture for----- Another Such Scene, Vidiotia^ and.
adieu to, love I London—176*—
LETTER
Sir John Modish to Lord Pelham.
WH O. would not laugh at the ridiculous
casualties proceeding from love, gallantry, and the whole train of pastions ? They are Such, Frederick., that a man of fenfe, in his Sober> hours,' cannot have the least idea of them.
We know noLthe twentieth part of the follies-we may fucceffively be entertained or vexed with. ----What a diverstty !'--how extenstve the circle in which they are cohtained!—One whinr produces a thoufand.—None but a Newton in-morals could afcribe to our thoughts their just limits, and discover their flow, ebb and attrabfion. T hey come Separate, or in crouds, to hasten or\ retard the tide of destre :—fubjedf to no rule, impatient of command, they daringly intrude, and. as confidently fway.
Surely, Frederick., the organs of a rational being-liave no conformity with thofe of a fenfelefs fage who will tell us in a lofty, diicourfe, we must,- on his word, believe Nature the stave of the Will,
though file Supremely difpofes of our fenfes.-Is
not the fubjedting the creator to the created a mighty judicious proof of our. power of acting and
thinking ?
■ !
■aS
[ aS? ]
thinking ? How strange and inconsistent Such Ian guage !—how still more impertinent our credulity '
Could I lord it over my thoughts would I no^ immediately remove the intolerable Scruple which preys upon my mind ? Would I heiitate to sty to
the arms of Lady Belmour ‘r---Would 1 stop on
the very verge of pleafure, and balk my fancy of a rapturous and certain enjoyment ?
How came I all of a hidden, to grow conscientious ? Is not that delicacy very unteaSonable, irr-derick., stnce it is at enmity with prudence, which bids me renounce the odious guest ? Had I my-Self only to upbraid for the folly, would not you think me a notorious offender against reaSon and Self-interest ? Who would pity me for fufferings I choSe to be loaded with ?
1 have not been guilty, Frederick^ of fo inconstde-rate a blunder.—The fentiment, unfelt, entered my heart with the idea of Lady Vidforia^ and imperceptibly united itfelf fo cloSely with my passion for her, that to this minute it has braved my utmost endeavours, and infolently kept inseparable from it.
Had I any hopes of pleastng, my delicacy might be overlooked, and appear lefs abfurd; but 1 have none, and can yet Sacrifice a prefent joy to the chimerical honour of being constant and virtuous to
^ o
no purpoSe!—How ridiculous !
. Had 1 outlived the SeaSon of feeling, a remorfe or two might be convenient to enliven the dying Spirits,——Befides, foolilhneSs as well as wifdom ought to have its day.—I would not grudge it:— but at my age!—As nothing is of continuance, and we must for a time be the Sport of the reigning caprice, I will patiently wait till the fit is over.
----Scruple! on my word, Frederick^ I never
dreamt I could welcome the hateful fenfation. How 1 came by the word is no lefs astonishing—it was
not
- <• I
d
. i
A
[	i88 J
not in the Courtier’s Diffionary I ain Sure.—I never thought it could exiSt where ib much evil is
daily committed.-----O, ViForia! thy eyes have
taught me what is not in the power of lawyers to feel, or bishops to demonstrate.,
AdodiJIo ball —1/6
L E T T E R V.,
Lady Victoria Nevil, to Lady Carolina.
Pelham.
T would Seem, dear Carolina^ that they liave-all united to torment me------yes, all; 1 ex-
cept none, not even Mrs. Brenton.
The methods they have taken are still more unr-Sufferable than the vexation itfelL.
Irojhy befets me with an encreafe of love, flattery and attention.
Mrs. Brenton with an inquilitive eye, and unrelenting curioiity.
ohn with So unaffected a gaiety. So natural'' an indifference, as if his heart was-abfolutely free.
I have no fears ioxFroJhy---no tongue for Mrs.
Brenton-----no patience for Sir J'ohn—^—I am dif-
pleafed at them all..
I have just told Sophy I am not well, and'choofe to be alone.—I don’t like the looks of Sophy—they betray a fufpicion—dart a destre to Search into my
heart—follow my steps—watch my motions.----------
She had the indiicretion. this, morning, to venture a fear I was not happy, as I had, last night breathed many a stgh—Spoke broken words.—Now has she alarmed Mrs. Brenton—they come—here they are—Soolilh Sophy ! ---;—
Sir?
Eleven o’Clocfc.
What ails thee, Victoria?-
ened me—thou art not Sick, I hope.
Sophy has fright
Never
r
[ 189 ]
Never was I bctter, Madam.
Why then dost thou defire to be alone?—Seldom is folitude a friend, Vidloria.—Will not my 'Company be more acceptable ?--------
It will, dear Aunt.-----
Sophy was ordered out, and Mrs. Brenton taking me in her arms—
Thy heart, ViSloria., indulges itfelf too often on thy features; its Secrets are written in thy eyes; they pierce through the veil of thy modesty, through the difcretion of thy words, through thy most infignificant Smiles I hive even feen them play in the very looks thou astumedst to hide them. —Thou lovest, Victoria—that is the caufe of thy anxiety. Is it not ?----
Jt is—and 1 fighed.
Sir John may make thee happy, Victoria:—but are not thy hopes of being So better founded on the temper and virtues of hrofyF—Shall a flight acquaintance of a few months prevail over So many years of mutual friendstiip^ confidence and love ?
I think it will—
Remember Frofby loves thee—remember thou hast tacitly entered into an engngement with him, by receiving his vows, and encouraging his ad-drestes.—Shouldfl thou now give way to a new flame, would not thy delicacy Suffer ?—■
It would not.—Fv'jight not T hear of love, talk
I \
of it, and still be a dupe to my fancy ?
Thy change will be taken for levity.
If I loved not, where is the levity ?
My all, Vidloria^ would I Sacrifice to free thee from the least uneafinefs.-—From my tendernefs expeil an implicit compliance with thy defires— —that thou may^st always command;—whether thou determinest for Sir John ModiJioQX Frojby, my confent is thine.—But, dear Victoria, remember Frojiy loves thee—remember he had the fandlion
of


[ 190 1
of thy parents—of thy aunt—of thyfelf.—Reflet on his merit—confider what the world will fay— though thy heart should be blamelefs—though nothing could be objected to thy choice of Sir 'John,, Hander, envy and malice may raife their voice, and
bitterly exclaim against thee.-
If you love and esteem your niece, ’tis enough.— Sir John has many enemies—Frofby has none.—. Sir yohn knows not of thy inclination for him— by still doubting it, he even feems averfe to know it.—He never openly either talked or a<3;ed as a
lover.—Did he privately ?—-----
No--------
Art thou not afraid then, ViHoria., to yield to a paffion which thou art not certain of having inspired ?------
Is it my aunt—my dear aunt, I hear?----
And tears forced their way down my cheek. What have I faid that can vex my ViAoria?
Have 1 not left thee at full liberty ?-
At full liberty when you So strongly declare for Frojby^ and expatiate on my indifcretion; when you draw fo frightful a pidSure of dangers I dreaded not, as the natural confequence of what you term “ my levity ;—at full liberty !—By faying “ Sir yohn has many enemies, and Frojhy none’* don’t you point out the m: n you have fixed on for your Victoria P—Am I at full liberty when you prefer Frojby ?'-------
When Frojhy and I exchanged assurances of eternal love, did not we Silently agree that that eternity should last' no longer than our iliufion?—Did v.ie mutually promife we should never meet, he with a handfomer woman, I with a more amiable man ?—How could we then engage for what neither of us forefaw ?—Had it been in our power, Snould I now be in need of an apology ? — which is most justly to be reproached with infidelity ?—
he
[ >9> 3
he for having ceafed to pleaSe-«eafed to love ?-------
N

ror I, for having
Cl
Haft thou So ftridlly enquired into thy heairt, Victoria., as To be perfedlly convinced of the change ?------
I have been So often Surprrfed into different e~
motions-------been by turns Such a stave of every
one, that 1 am not yet able to know which has the greatest: effe6l on my fenstbility.—.But, dear Aunt, my irrefolution is against Frojhy.—Since I hesttate, I love him not.-------------
What quality in Sir John
.None
all together have favoured him.
D
Is Ff-ojly inferior to Sir John in birth, riches,
wit or merit ?----Are not his excellent parts fuf-
stcientjy heightened by the beauty of his perfon ?—^ If impartiality could point out a fenstble difference between them, would you expect lefs equity
from friendship-----
Or love, Fidioria f-----
•Or love, dear .Aunt ? What accomplishments have not both nature and education bestowed on
'^Sir John!----lyike fo many darts they strike to
the very, heart, and leave no other fenfation but
that of the wound they give--------
What canst.thou promife thyfelf from a passion he is a stranger to ?--
He is not :—he loves.—I'o his generostty af-
•cribe his stlence.----He thinks 1 love—ever will
love, Frojby.—Refpect ties his tongue. — Oh ! how he would talk had he your fagacity and could read as well!——
How little does Frojby fufpe6t thy inconstancy !
-----fo long an inclination !--------fo ludden an
•indifference!------
It was a mistake of my heart, a deceit of my imagination. Carolina.^ who ever thought it would -at last prove fo, often inveighed against my fupini-
/
[ 102 ]
ty, and advifed ine to listen to reafon. did—nor would—
I
never
nor believed it possible till Sir ‘Fohn forced me to refleft—then Frojhy
Lost all the interest he had got in thy heart. 1 fear he did.-—-
Thou fearest he did ?-----------
I do-
ts there a greater torment than to be indifferent to the object we love?------
How excellent my Victoria., would her pity guard her against a new passion, and engage her
to make Frojhy happy ?-----------
I Ihook my head.
Would it were possible, dear Madam !-------
It is—tiiy virtue proves it-----doubt not thy
power, Victoria.-----
My heart tells me I have it not.
But one attempt—and thy heart will tell thee thou hast it,------
It throbs with too much pleafure at the thought of Sir yAm —You fee I am unable to conceal its emotion.—A new life is Sprung up in me. ’.Ds
not Frojhy who gave it.
Wouldst thou listen to thy generossty give way to the benevolence of thy foul—I know that FroJ-
by’s mifery shall be agony to thee----thou never
could’st look on a wretch without partaking of his Sorrow.—Oh, Vidloria!—
I will endeavour to command my Sentiments — Expedi me not to Succeed, or even to entertain long a dessre to conquer.—Nature cannot be kept under.—I will avoid the fight of Sir John—will
fee but Frojhy,---Say but you are happy, and I
shall not repme at being made miferable.---
Mrs. Brenton walked. Seemingly disturbed, and twice exclaimed “ Poor FroJlyK—A tear ran down her cheek.—I was moved.
DiSpoSe of your niece, dear Madam : my gratitude assures you of my obedience.
No,

C 193 1
No, Viaoria.^-----—
And she pressed me to her bofom.
Though I should be happy to fee thee feel agreeable to my wishes, I will not force them upon thee# My esteem for Frojby shall ever yield to my tender-
nefs for thee.----1 will forget, if possible, that he
loves thee, that he was favoured with thy affections—favoured with my interest------that he never
gave thee a reafon for thy change.—Thou know-est my late fufpicions of him were groundlefs ; fpite of all my enquiry no difcovery has been made.— Pdor Frofby ! What will he not fuffer for the loSs of thee!—My heart bleeds for him—fo does thine, Viaoria—that, tear betrays thee—hide it not, ’tis a praife to thy virtue—an honour to thy fenssbi-lity.—-.......
I will fay with you poor Frojby /”—But what is pity to a man we cannot love ?—-----
It fufcens the cruelty of his sstuatiort.—Undeceive not BroJhy—\Qt. him still continue in his illu-
sson.----Thy concern will look like tenderhefs,
let him be happy as long as possible.—Grow cold by degrees ; thy indifference, well managed, may
possibly have no effe£f upon him.-----His attacli-
ment deferves this from thee.—Tell me not that honour bids thee avoid his declarations—true honour is to be just and humane.-------
I know no arts : he will immediately guefs me. you taught me to be true—to shudder at a lie. —My confusson will fpeak—he will feel I think
hi
not what I fay.
Frojby will fee no art in thee----If he does he
loves thee not.—That art, if it should be difcover-ed, will turn to thy glory:—’tis a virtue when
pracstifed to do good. ----- i
A chariot entering the court-yard, Mrs. Brenton stepped to she window.
K ■	.Dis
/

r
[ 194 ]
*.DsSiryj/^«, VlSforia.
And she obferved my countenance. I Smiled.
Now for thy heart.—
And she laid her hand upon it.
How it beats I—The emotion is too pleafing to deprive thee of it--
And she hugged me in her arms.
But, Vidloria,, you will not fee Sir not you fay you would fee nobody ?---
I did not think he would come.
And I kissed her hand.
How ingenuous I—I believe thee.
She gently patted me on the shoulder, and went to receive Sir John.
Tlie converfation wish my aunt having thrown my fpirits into a flutter, I remained in my clofet
to compofe myfelf.----The fight of the letter I
had begun tempted me. I fat down—wrote— now and then stopped to remember Sir John was below —Tofe up—took the pen again—told thee all—
but Sir John—I must to him.-----Had he longed
to fee me he had been up before now—not a word
of impatience has been fent to me----oh! that’s
bad, very bad.—More company!—I am glad of it; it will help me out of myfelf.—Whom is it I
hear tripping about in the next room ?--Hush !
he talks to Sophy.—’Tis Sir John’s voice—no, his Frojhfs.—I’ll Aide through the back-stairs.
I o’clock.
I will not cast back one thought on Sir John Mociifh.—All the lenfibilities of that man keep unmoved at my ssght;----not one Spark of unufual
joy appears in his eyes;—he makes a bow with his head half turned to another lady, and hardly, after five minutes, distinguishes me in the circle. Then he deigns to nod over his shoulder, as great men do to thofe they protecst, or want to deceive.
“I
t
« t
C 195 ]
I See you,” is the expression of that nod. —Impertinent !—Don’t I deferve, Carolina, more than than one distant “ I fee you	—One ssgh
—and ril to the company again.
Twelve minutes past One.
In entering the room I made a falfe step, and
fprained my ancle------1 shrieked—then, indeed.
Sir John flew to me.-----How I liked his looks I
—how full of tendernefs and anxiety !----Had it
not been for pain, which destroyed the illust; n, I should have thought it was himSelf who Suffered. -----Alas ! exclaimed I—I wanted the “ alas” to

a
excufe a blush.
Sir John, too much affe£ied to talk, contented
himfelf to look, and tender me his arm.----------
Could he poffibly be more eloquent ? —He Supported me, and with two more “ AlaSes!” I limp* ed to a chair.
My aunt, Frojhy, all were instantly on the wing to relieve me.—The sslent, but Sentimental Sir John dared to lay a finger on my andle.
Ay, there it pains, Said I, turning my eye from the new-fashioned do6i:or.
Is there any Swelling, Sir John, aSked MiSs FJlifon ?
I hope not, MiSs.—-
I’ll tell you that immediately, Said Frojhy, kneeling, and advancing his hand^Arvith the Solemnity of a quack.
Touch it not, Sir, you will Smart it.—
And I drew my foot under the chair.
Ladies, I am much better-----------at first the
pain was intolerable : it fub.fided.------Pray fit
down.------
%	f
Sir John, trusting to this, shook off the con-tern he had betrayed, reSumed his coldnefs, and went to MiSs Ellifon.-----1 had a mind to shriek
again
K 2
Knowing

[ ^9^ ]
_ > Knowing that he alone had Hungary water, I
alked Sor Some. How exquifite his organs! how rapid his motions ! his bottle was in my hand before I had half uttered my want of it.
I Smelt the water---bathed my temples with it
—Said it did me good—gave the bottle back.-----
fmiled my thanks.------He prattles So agreeably
with every body, why, with me, has he no tongue ? »—He was going from me—
Sir, will you Spare me a fe\y drops ?
And I looked for my handkerchief.
’Tis at your command. Madam.—
Nobody, has his accent, Carolina. .Dis So foft, fo tender, fo expressive, even when indifferent.— Would he talk of love—my harp would have no string I could tune to it.—
I unfolded the handkerchief.
Shall I—
And he held the bottle over it. if you pleafe. Sir.—
His hand was unsteady-----he looked at me—
then poured Some drops------then looking at me
again, miffed my handkerchief, and fpilt it on my ruffles.
^ivjohn!—
He half blushed, half Smiled, half opened his lips—the bottle ssid from his fingers—dewn upon -me ran the Hungary water.
I instantly shook my apron at him—not angrily, believe me.
Now, Sir, we are even, flnce I have given you a (hare in the jest you intended upon me.—
I intended none.—
I knew it as well as he, Carolina. However, as no feature contradidted what he faid—
Then, Sir, I am Sorry.—
And taking the dry part of my apron, I offered to wipe the wet part of his coat.
I ow’e

>r
[ 197 1
I owe to you this Satisfaflion, Sir John I give it with pleafure.—
He stammered “ Madam”—held my arm, apo-logifed for his blunder, and bowing^reSpe^lfulIy, stepped back to his feat.—
If Kivjohn had not been obferved, Carolina.^ he would not have stammered “ Madam,” but fpoke out what my heart had welcomed.—I could not mistake his countenance—there the compliment he would have paid me was written : I eafily read every word.—T hat language is not to be uttered, ’fis certainly peculiar to lovers.
Mrs. Breriton whifpering that fo much perfume would infallibly give me a headache, I retired to put on another drefs, and tell thee of Sir John.— The clock strikes three—I hear Sophy—they wait for me.—Adieu.
Brent on-half 176
L E T T E R VI.
Sir John Modish to Lord Pelham.
ARE you in earriest, Frederick., when you be-TjL lieve that “ Mils Cranmer., must have monopolized every charm, fmce (he has robbed I/ady Victoria of FroJby'’s heartCan any conrecjiicnce be drawn from the most blind and fantastic of jiaf-
_	k
fions ? Does fenSibility reafon with the powers by which it is fwayed, and coldly turn the stale to tb.e fide of merit or beauty ? Love' thinks not of the advanta zation
judges not agreeable to thy principles : lie dreams of no virtues, wistres for no pieafures, but thost vvlstch his favourite objedl postestes or infpires.
Instead of Love., XfsA Imagination—I know no difference between them.
K 3	After

ages he may either lost or gain ; his organic differing totally from that of indifference, he
•«	V	A	A	-Am	..	«

[ 1981
After.the numberlefs instances the world you live in daily affords you, ’tis amazing you should entertain So chimerical a notion. Don’t you fee men of every rank forfake the lovely partners of their bed for women fo void of honour and delicacy that I would blush to throw one look or compliment upon them
Mifs Cranmer-y Frederick., may talk as she feels —possefs fuch features as would have called for the whole genius of an Appelles, yet not, like Lady VidJoria., delight the heart, and ravish the imagination.
Lady Vidloria is the darling of Nature—a peculiar instance of the utmost stretch of her creating
power. When you gaze upon her------------when you
listen to her voice---’tis not your eyes----’tis not
your ears that are struck with the lovely features,, the mustcal expression, but your foul which, inss-nuating itfelf into every fibre of thefe -organs, looks, hears, enjoys the fupreme extafy.
Mifs Cranmer may furprife, throw the fenfes into a fever of burning defires, hut will her taste. and understanding equally pleafe and enchant ? In our passion for Vidforia,, Frederick, love and judgment assist one another, and would even outlive her beauty.
Nine o’clock.
Duval, expert as he is at difcoveries, has not yet been able to have more than one glance of Mifs Cranmer, and to give me just now the following information.
Mifs Cranmer is a young lady of great fortune, who, by the untimely death of her parents, falling under the guardianship of an uncle, a devotee to the Roinish religion, was Sent over to France to be brought up in a nunnery, whence she came back a twelvemonth ago on the news of her uncle being Suddenly attacked with the palfy.
M r.
C 199 1
Mr. Cranrner is still indiSpofed.
Emily keeps him constant company-------Seldom
goes out—reqeives a few friends, amongst whom are Mr. Frojby and Mils Ellifon.
Mifs Cranmer is finely made, of exquifite beauty, extremely good natured, tender, compassionate.
She employs two thirds of her income in ads of generolity and beneficence.—Never was want unfatisfied at her gate.
Reading is lier favourite amufement.—Now and then she argues with the vicar of the parish, and when he is likely to turn victor in reafoning, which, however, is very feldom the cafe, she Silences him with a bon mot^ and with a iinile, pre»' fently transforms his learning into nonfenfe.
This, Frederick., is a stighc fketchof the character of Mifs Cranmer.
Duvaf who knowip.g not why I Sent him For that intelligence, imagines a fudden inclination may be the caufe of it, was profufe in his praifes of the young lady. He was very nigli making an odious comparifon, when I interpofed by his
Vi
enough
be gone.
Here he is—A letter !
The bearer rode away as foon as he had delivered it.
Some mystery I warrant ye, FredeKck------------let
me fee.
To Sir John Modijl).
“ Isforrowfo entertaining, or the indifference of L/ady V'ulorla So grateful, that no woman can divert 'S'vcjohn from the first, or remove the latter from his heart?—Will nothing revive his taste for pleafure, and fnatch his languid foul' from its mortal lethargy ?
You pleafe not. Sir John., and can tamely bear with contempt, tamely cringe at the feet of an imperious beauty !——Shall JFro/by be elated at your
K 4	difgrace?
[ 200 ]
tiiSgrace?—Must, you add to his glory, by stili wearing the fetters his	chained you with !
How welcome to his pride are her averlion, and your fuccefslefs love r—How ridiculous you
appear in his prefence!---—-You can tamely bear
with Such indignities, and I neither abhor, nor defpife you I
Alas! Sir yohn, why did I See you unhappy ! —why did I pity you !—.Dill that fatal day, my life passed in delightful tranquillity—1 never dreamt of love-—my heart was free from trouble, and my eyes never shed a tear, but of joy and pleafure.
We both love—By what strange fate do we mutually love where we are mutually dissiked !—HV-Uria ! Frofoy ! How fortunate in their passions J— how rapturous the hours they pafs together!— Had we fuch hours—far from envying, how we should be envied!
Often have my looks fpoke the feelings of my foul—often did it sty to my lips, and yet—Oh, Sir yohn I what an enemy has your prepossession been to our peace and felicity ! how many days, lost in vexation and tears, had been enlivened by love end fenfibility ! How carefully had I cherished the illuSK-n !
Thou hast Seen me—distinguished me with thy esteem—more than once whifpered in my ear— and still thou knowest not the foul thou hast inflamed !—Seek for me among thofe thou visstest —among thofe whom thou hast praifed, and, in an innocent frolic, furprifed with a kifs.—Which of them blushed at the touch of thy lips, and trembling received the Salute ?--Am I still a stranger to
thee ?—If fo no longer, guard the fecret from thy tongue—trust it not to thy eye—keep it from thy
tvhole countenance.
I should die with confuSion,
shouldst
should ft thou thee !—
C 201 ]
Oh, Sir John! how I love

*
*
*
What fire in
Who is this lady ? What a style !— her expression !—
“ Which of them blushed at the touch of thy bps, and trembling received thy Salute ?—Wiiic’i of them ?—I will not conssder, Frederick.^ lest by the knowledge of the lady I should encreafe my mi-fery by her disappointment.—My courage would fail me under the additional grief—Let me for ev^er be ignorant of a remedilefs evil—to know it were intolerable.
How come they all to think I love ?—^I never told it.—Is it Frofoy who thus Spreads my shame and his glory ?—Whence could he SuSpedl me for a rival ? —Where? When?—Vain questions! Does not my heart daily betray itSelf at the Sight of ViFioria —at the very found of her name r—How acute the eye of a lover! how quickly he judges our motions, and ailigns the real caufe!
Am I then a child in dissimulation, that I am So eassly unmafked ?—They pity me ! Curfe on their pity !—Was it not the fear of a repulfe—my pride, not my generossty, that kept the painful Secret from my lips, yet am I deprived of the advantages which ought to have refulted from my Silence I lie undifguiSed before them all—I Suffer for having entertained a dissidence of mySelf-for not
having had the bafeneSs to perplex two lovers, and oppofe their happineSs !—Confusson !—I must either Speak—baldly Speak—delight in miSchief, or by giving my fenfes up to- lady Belmour., tear my heart from Vibtoria.-^lSh&y pity me ! Infamous, by heavens !—■	'	'
Modijh'hally—176—— ;
K 5;	L E T-
f, 5
[
202
1
LETTER VIE
Lady Carolina Pelham to Lady Victoria
Nevil.
ADI ill my feet the velocity of a beau’s tongue. Swift as a beam of the fun would rHyVo thee every day, were it but for half an hour. —No more could frienddiip possibly steal from love and pleafure—but in ha'f an hour many are the Sentiments, many the words, we could feel and utter.
Let me See.—----Three minutes to praiSes, and
five to c mplaints of our lovers---ten to the
Secret wiSnes of our hearts--two to Sighs----
four to stander, and fix to dreSs.-What other
topics could we fall upon--what elSe dream of ?'
•—ril tell thee what^----it has just entered my
head.-----Instead of three minutes in favour of our
lovers, let us employ them in a plot against them.
“ Against our lovers, Carolina Yes, against them. Who knows but they are all errant rogues ! When love inSolentiy Silences reaSon, is it not next to a miracle if we mistake not vice for virtue, and wiSdom for folly r—
I am vexed to the foul, Victoria.^ when I think that the power of our pretty faces Shall hardly outlive the first transports of a hustand.
I was about fixteen, when a ChineSe Gold Phea-fant, the first I had ever Seen, was prefented me. As tame in reality, as a new admirer in appearance, it became my Sole delight. So fond was I of the lovely creature, that 1 negledfed dreSs, aS-femblies, and the whole train of youthful pleasures. For a whole month it rested on my lap, stept on my toilet, was fed w'ith my own hand, and had all the ccmpliments, careSSes and kiSles I could procure or bestov/.—Mark the end, Victoria. I had imperceptibly overstrained my fenfibility.—
I had
[ 203 ]
I had gazed on every feature, admii ed every shade’
oS the colours.—Novelty vanished-----1 grev^ cold
----—tired—T'he Pheafant was Sent to the coun>
try.—Never lince have-1 wished for it.—Only one month !—On my word there is no comfort in the thought.—The Pheafant was as beautiful as ever, —All faidfo.—Oh ! Nature, Nature !—Does nop novelty constitute three parts of what the world ' calls constancy ?—-
“ I-am afraid it does,Ci:;v//W.”
Why then, his high time to difcard our FroJbySy M-odi/hes-f Felerjions., and form a new fet.—
What think you of an elopement with the first tempting fpark fortune (hall throw in your way ? This, of all modern follies, I Ihould like belt : ten to one, chance would treat us more favourably than our own judgment.
I have yet heard but of one couple that repented of a trip to Scotlandy whilst moll of thole married in London v/ear the features of difgust and Sorrow.—I’ll give you the reafon. Marriage, like religion,, wants free votaries. As perfecu'don produces enthufiafm, love fubfists through oppofition.
-----You start, Victoria y'^oxxx heart objedts to my
propofal.----Tliank not thy virtue for it. Were
thy relations the reverfe of what they are, foost would thy fancy relilh it.——Troubles and difficulties are noble enticements to indifcretion.—We cannot know in a calm how we fiiould behave' in a storm. I have heard a very fenfible man protest, that the judge who Sentences a wretch to death, would himfelf commit the fame crime, were he in the fame circumstances. If So, Vi'ha'i
art thou, human wifdom ?-------Lord I do I not
Speak fenSe?—Oh, Vidloria ! ’tis Lord. PekrJioFs fault. Chearfully would 1 vmte thee a few fond impertinences. I am not always ambitious to think
when I ean feel.—Of late I am .grown fo dull —
Shave
^	[ 204 1
" I have not, this fortnight, had one pleafing reverie—my nights are the lively picture of the day’s
Sorrow.—What dreams!---------1 always fee Lord
Felerjlon ready to offend, and, what is still worfe, Vibioria., always graceful and handfome.----De-
ceitful hearts should not be fo agreeably lodged. Heigh ho ! how long shall I refufe his viftts ? H© exafperated me fo, when last I Saw him, that he has had no opportunity Since to fay he repents— to hear I forgive.—He has written, he has looked,
he has stghed----no anfwer, no look, ro stgh has
been returned. ---Were I certain he never would
difpleafe, quickly would I love shim again; but what hopes, if jealoufy is part of his life ? Shall a weak woman be more powerful than nature I Though beauty might lull a few Symptoms asteep,
the disorder would still SubSist.-Jealoufy ! what
a poifon art thou, that no antidote can be found against thee !
Lmdon—j 76
*
% % * % %
' P. S. Befet with fo many dangers, I am astonished, Fibtoria., at thy tranquillity. What! not one fear of Lady Belmour—Lady Beltnour., the only woman I w'ould not venture Lord Pekrjion with! I will not tell thee of the numberlefs good
qualities v/hich must endear her to a lover.----
^'Fis enough for thee to know that her reputation being unfpotted, her overthrow is the most distinguished honour a man can destre.—Sir John may be inflamed with a burning impatience to obtain that honour.——Vanity—the necestity of diverting thee from his thoughts—curiostty—How many enemies hast thou to apprehend ! Rely not on his love for thee, Vidioria—conSider he believes thee infatuated vtixhFroJby—From this foolish credulity
of his hast thou more to fear, than from his paf-
Adieu.
L E r-
(Son to hope.
f'
[ 20.5 ]
LETTER VIII.
Sir John Modish to Lord Pelham.
OF all legistators, Fredericky none has excelled
Mahomet in knowledge of the human heart, made laws more adapted to our nature, better calculated for univerfal compliance.—None—but no more of Mahomet.
No matter what name men give to their failings. The necessity of their existence will ever baffle the attempts of thofe who would reafon us into a perfection which we are fated never to know. Since they have a tongue to fpeak as a stomach to digest, let us not imitate their folly by prefcribing what they must either eat or believe.
1 will receive no law but from my wants; as thefe call for the immediate recovery of my liberty,
I will welcome any remedy that may procure it. In vain shall I hope for a perfeCl cure, fo long as I refufe the benevolent aid of pleafure, and oppofe not dissipation to love : in vain shall I argue myfelf into indifference :—weak are words to triumph 0-ver passion.
Begone, thou timorous voice of Scruple, begone !
•—Ceafe to perfecute me, to tear my heart with thy unmanly language I—Begone ! thou art but deceit and shlly!
To thee, O Pleafure !—forgive if 1 hadforfaken —to thee I devote my future days, and intrust my happinefs. Strike me with thy most poignant tranfports; purify my blood from every particle of love; let me not receive an impression, delight in a thought, feel a fenfation but what is thine. Invite all thy raptures, forget none capable to intoxicate and delude, that Surrounded by thy magic veil, the charms of Lady Victoria may but play upon my heart.—
«	I long
C 206 j
I lofig SoF the fight of Lady Bdmour—for a look of my fair Incognita. My impatient imagination flies to meet them, quickens their steps, forms their features of defire and modesty, makes them talk, anfwers them, fees their bofoms heave, hears their Sighs, creates every motion, opens their arms, graces their fall, enlivens the happy minute —Eegone, thou timorous voice of fcruple !—No longer will I listen, to thy impertinent delicacy— begone!
- ModiJh-haU.—1 ni
LETTER IX.
Lady Victoria Nevil to
Pelham.
Lady Carolina
URELY Mifs EUifon believes-1 am not in the least concerned in the behaviour of Sir John.^ fince vdth a Smiling countenance, she has represented him to me as the vilest of men.
She was abfolutely out of charadfer, for though she now and then indulges her fpleen against her neighbours, I never knew her fevere in her ex-preffion, or expatiate long on the difagreeable theme. She has lavished her abufe with Inch un-uSual Spirit, that one w'ould think Some real interest warmed her breast, and sharpened her wit..
Sir John may be fiery in his temper, impatient of constraint, faulty in his morals, not over-fcru-pulous in the choice of his pleafures, but has be no merit to plead for indulgence—no good quality to blunt the keen arrows of malice or envy ? How unreasonable, Carolina.^ to weigh the vices only of a man in the stale of reputation 1 Shall a few errors obliterate every virtue .Dis ungenerous to astribe to refiedlion the wanderings of the stnfes! This diredi violation of the rules of equity and
common fenfe may perhaps be fashionable in the
polite
I 207 J
polite circle to fill up a tedious Sunday evenings But for this inexhaustible fpring of conversation, how many heads without ideas I how many tongues' without meaning I
Mifs Ellifon.,. 1 am afraid, has in her last journey to London too freely complied with the tea-table, chat of the modern fine ladies, elfe would she yield to her wonted good-nature, excufe rather than impeach, commend rather than defpife, forgive rather than condemn.
t
Seven o’Clock.

Sir John Modijh is, “ in her humble opinion, a most defpicable fellow.”—She knows, for certain, that under the mein of apparent carelelTnefs his heart is ever studious of deceit and mifchief.—He has Such a pliant temper that he can modify it into as many different shapes as he has interests to
promote.-----Opportunities are at his command,
and they are the more fuccefsful as they are never forefeen.—Then he grows fo intolerable a tyrant over the innocent vidtim he has wheedled to-destruction, that hatred naturally fucceeding to her love, a rupture follo ws, the whole blame of which.
is thus artfully forced upon her.-By this means
he has the add refs to pafs for a man of honour a-mong thofe whom the charms of his wit and figure
infpire with a prepoffestion in his favour.”--
Who gave you, Mils, fo minute a detail of the
adlions and character of Sir 'John f—-----
Who, Mifs!—why, every body in London^ e-
very body in the country.----
And you implicitly believe what every body told you?------
It is too extraordinary, I confefs, to be eafily credited : but why mistrust people who had no motive to impofe on my credulity ?
How
C 208 1
How came you to find everybody So unconcerned, and yet So ready to defame him ? Did they all know him? Had they all studied his temper, watched his connexions, shared in his pleafures ?— Lord ! my lady, people need not fo intimate an acquaintance with a man to know what he is. His public behaviour is an unerring thermometer of his' worth: by it our esteem or contempt rifes or falls. How could we attain a greater certainty of his cha-raXer? Who would be conviXed, were we to judge of the guilty upon the Sole testimony of our eyes ? Fine indeed, were we to trust to that fenfe alone for our opinion of men ! It would be high time, truly, to oppofe an attack when we fee victory in the looks of the enemy, and our heart is half difpofed to fubmit.—You may fparp your fust picions, my Lady, and generousty mistrust what I was told, and tell you of Sir John’s chyaXer.— Think not, however, I have magnified it; I gave
it you in miniature.------
You are mighty charitable, Mifs.—The piXurc is finely coloured—there wants but—^the like*
nefs.----—— .	. ^	, 1	5
You don’t think it finished tnen r—------
I do not.
How averfe we are to believe any thing that may
prejudice a lover!
A lover, Mifs !-------
Yes, my Lady, a lover. Does not Sir John
love you ?----- ,, ,	,
Love me 1 Have you been told that too by every body ?-----
Can you affirm he does not r-------
How can 1 affirm or deny what I am not certain
of?-------
Thou art a mysterious girl, Fidtoria. thou hast done with thy fincerity .?
Have I not anfwered you ?-
And fo

■i
Are
[ 209 I Arc words an anSwer, Vibioria P
SuppoSe Sir John loves me, or loves me not. What then ?---------
I did not afk thee a Supposition, Victoria.
I cannot give you any thing more pofitive. Would you have a certainty, put the questic Sir John.
How she coloured, Carolina!
Shall I do it in thy name, Vidloria f And she Sneered.
I have no curiolity, Mifs. do it in your own.
As you have; pray
Friendship is ever wrong when its language a-grees not with our inclinations.—I have made the remark twenty times in my life, and yet I could Speak !—Had I known, Fibforia, thou wast So attached to Sir John, I had been filent.—.Dis folly to attempt the cure of a heart that loathes the remedy.——
I fear, Ellifon, this is your cafe.
I don’t understand you, Victoria.--....—
And she looked disturbed.
You are not youdelS, MiSs. I know not my difcreet friend in the abustve Ellifon.—What has perplexed you ?—
Perplexed me ! exclaimed she immediately with an astedled Smile. Why, thy intolerable incredulity—thy morti'ying diffidence oS me—thy imputing to ielS-interest motives which only flow from
my friendship for thee.--------
How can I believe your account of Sir John, when you believe it not yourSelf ?—
This is a riddle indeed it, Victoria?------
How will you explain
By telling you that, being absolutely ignorant of his love and demerits, you intended to banter, not convince me of either—that you are too juft to be partial, too generous to offend.
Ti
IS

t 210 ]
’Tis a hard talk to perSuade her who will not believe.—I will leave off a topic So odious to thy heart. I talked as a friend—thou Ihalt not upbraid me it thy infatuation be one day fatal to thee.-----—'
Eleven o’CIock.
Didst tliou ever hear, Carolina,, of an opiniofi fo obstinately defended, of a curiostty fo indifereet-ly inquifitive, of a calumny fo openly purfued ? Whence this extraordinary proceeding ?—A caufe must be found.—Shall 1 look for it in love, hatred or indifference ?
Indifference is not injurious—Love ! can love vilify, or even fuppofe a defedl in the favourite ob-je£l ?—Hatred !—has Sir d.ohn offended Mifs EU
lifon ?---Both were here on Monday.—Both—
far from appearing his enemy, I thought her behaviour came nearer familiarity than referve.
She Suffered him to Smell a nofegay she wore at her bofom. Smiled at his eager look, and started not at a Sudden touch of bis lips.—Was not the man very bold, Carolina f Ellifon blushed not—I did—Oh I Sir Iohn,, it was not right.—My heart ceafed to beat---1 thought I should faint.
He admired her ring—she immediately put it on his finger, protested it never appeared to greater advantage, and moved that finger every way to fee the play of the brilliants. Her wantonnefs pleafed
him—he grew lefs SenSible of my prefence----he
kissed her hand—I hated her.
She praifed his taste in drefs, made him twice relate a foreign anecdote, and twice shewed the fame delight at hearing it.—At last she whifpered me ‘‘ None, Vidioria, affedl lefs wit than Sir yobn^ yet who difeovers fo much !” Two days ago he
washer idol, to-day he is her fcorn !-----lam
amazed.
Hill
[ 2'I ]
’Till now Mils Ellifon never attempted to talk me into a diflike of Sir Lohn ; oSten has she comt mended his parts, oftener still made me obferve the dignity of liis gait, the gracefulneSs of his motion. What can To loon have incenfed her?
When Sir John first came into the country, people making very free with his manners and cha-ra£fer, Mifs Ellifon alone dared to rife in his defence, and glance at frailties she afcribed to the politenefs of the age.
“ Sirjohnf’ faid she often,. “ is gay, intriguing, faithlefs. Wonder not at that any more than at the ignorance of a Bishop, or the effrontory of Doctor	They are all in chara6ter.”
Can any glaring foible of his unknown to thee, Carolina^ have come to her ear ? Was not his con-dudf thoroughly Scrutinized at his first appearance amongst us ? I will not believe it, fo anxious were they for difcoveries, fo happy, as they termed it, in their intelligence, and fo well difpofed to debafe
him.
Sir John vifits every where elfe as a courtier--
here only as a friend. With others he counts the minutes——with us he forgets the hours.—Is not this, Carolina.^ his greatest crime, the crime that cannot be forgiven ? Would not he be faultlefs in the eyes of Mifs Ellifon could she, like thy Vidlortay command the attendance, and fix the levity of Sir John ? Does not her pride grudge me an advantage Ihe wishes to enjoy ? Is not her contempt of him a-relief to her fpite ?
She told me of Lady Belmour^ of Sir John— what did she not tell me ?—Were I to believe but the half, CaroUtia., of all her strokes this was the keenest. It went to my very foul. My heart flew to my eyes to melt into tears—my breath was quick—how intent were her looks! how she would have known what pasted within me!—*-A few tears
warned.


Dear EUifony
[ 212 J
warned me of my indifcretion.------
exclaimed I, Spare thyWirtuethe criminal narration : let me hear no more: it becomes us not to dwell on Such topics.
Why a tear, Kibioria., Since thou haft no concern
with Sir ^ohn and Lady Belmour f------------
i efteemed her Ladyssiip—---------you tell me of
her fall------Can you be Surprized at my Sem
MiSs Ellifcn laughed, w'ent on, but Said So much that I thought it both foolish and indecent to give ear to her.
Certain, Carolina, that thy friendship forme is as Sincere as thy virtue, thee alone will 1 truss; for Sir	charafter; by thee alone shall my opi-
nion be ruled.
Brent on-Hall, 176
LETTER X.
I.
Sir John Modish to Lord Pelham.
\
* *
AS rapid in my amours, Frederick, as Cafar in his wars, 1 loved, attacked and conquered. The honour of my former viflories I partook
with fortune; this is mine alone.-------Of all my
triumphs, this is the nobleft ; 1 glory in no other.
My fenfes have been gratified with the moss lively transports, the moss; rapturous blifs. The banquet was moss; luxurioussy inviting—I feasted on the bofom of Lady Belmour, forgot every Scruple on her lips, and loft Victoria in her arms.
Love and justice conSpired against Lord Belmour. He himfelf, Frederick, by throwing numberlefs obstacles in my way. Solicited me to the delights I have enjoyed. He, more attractively than his lady’s beauty and virtue, heightened my defires, inflamed my imagination. He run before his fate to
meet
1213 ]
meet the punishment due to tyrannical hushands, '• and from me, as the minister predestined to execute the irrevocable decree, has he received it. How, when and where thou shalt know.—Thou rebuk-est me, Frederick, For once I will make an apo-logy—take this Iketch of the man’s private life.
Educated in all the infolence of birth, richer and power. Lord Belmour thinks himfelf the center round which men ought to move in Search of fortune and happinefs.
His ambition and profligacy keep even pace, nor is it eafy to distinguish which is grown most familiar to his heart.
His contempt of honour can only be equalled by the bafenefs of his foul : never was a man of his rank lefs enamoured of virtue, and more lavish of its facred language.
That tyranny which he now exerts over men of genius, he once exerted over his amiable lady. In the infancy of their marriage, he prefuraed that, in his hands, flie should, like wax, be modified to his fancy ; he would have had her perpetually Sympathize with his follies, never fluctuate between his inclination and her own judgment. He furnished her library, prefided at her toilet, chofeher mufic, prescribed her amufernents, formed her Society. He carried his authority fo far as to order her motions, and dictate the degree of wit she was to difplay at home or abroad.
Lady Belmour^ whom her pious mother had carefully brought up in the reafonable fear of devils being ready to Seize upon her at the first deviation from her conjugal duty, and hourly tutored on the facred prerogative of her lord, for a long while Smothered her complaints, and concealed her tears.
So long as file Saw the devils, and trembled in the dark, flie remained passively obedient. But Sir Henry Ravenfory her brother, returning from
his
C 214 ]
his travels, the infernal band vanished------nature
mutinied------called aloud for liberty, and threaten-
ed Lord Eelmour with an open rebellion.
Six o’C ock.
Sir Henry loved his Sister too tenderly not to perceive she was unhappy, and attempt to procure her a life more Suitable to her age, rank and fortune.
The difficulty was incredible, the fuccefs doubtful. He had to combat bigotry, ever most obstinate in the pradice of Superficial duties, when religion orders them not, and the ferocity of a man born with an innate hatred to benevolence.
For two months Lady	continued deaf
to his folicitations. Her love for him, not reaSon, at length convinced her that the Solitude in which her daughter was buried, was not only an attack upon her liberty, but a temptation to her virtue.
Lord Eelmour was more intractable. As he loved but himfelf, his mind was dead to perfuafion, as his heart to generofity. He could not patiently think of a diminution of his power, much lefs an impeachment of his wifdom. He Swore that So unufual a request betrayed in Lady Eelmour a heart already corrupted, or ripe for corruption. He would listen to no mediator, damned the thoughts of one, and would, in his fury, have forbid Sir Henry his houfe, had not -his cowardice warned him to be prudent.
As neither virtue nor reaSon could work Lord Eelmour out of his Savage obstinacy. Sir Henry vowed his lister should no longer be the Sport of his ridiculous caprice, and infisted on immediately carrying her to Lady Ravenjor^ unleSs- he would allow her all the privileges inherent to a woman of quality, and free her from his odious tyranny.
A wed
{ 2H 1
Awed by his firmneSs, Lord Belmour^ aSter < itiumbling a number of unintelligible curfes, fat down penfive, perplexed, irrefolute, when his Lady entered the room with a modest, but assured countenance.
I have heard all, my Lord, and ssnce my brother has fo generoussy taken upon him the protection of his unhappy Sister—
Unhappy!—What do I hear?—
The language of truth, my Lord. My fuffer-ings have been too great. Still ssiould they be unknown, had you been humane enough to ref-ped: the delicacy of my fex, and not mistrust my virtue.------
Stranger still ! Had you once oppofed my intreaties, i---but you always readily yielded to them.
Was it against your inclination that you preferred the retired fcenes of Bramptott-Park to the noify abode of Grofvenor-Square ?—
My Lord, you never gave me a choice to make, but a command to obey.
The conversation, Frederick., was continued with the fame Spirit, till Lord Belmour., distraded by the fear of lofing an immenfe fortune, reludantly Submitted.
From that day Lady Belmour enlarged the circle of her acquaintance, pasted her winters in London^ and vissted Bath and Tunbridge whenever she had a mind to add to, or share in their pleafures.
The freedom she enjoyed was a torment to his Lordship—her happinefs his death. To embitter it, he fet every engine at work which imagination, animated by malice, could fuggesh
He deferted her bed for that of an abandoned prostitute, he—and the wretch talks of a divorce. —Lord Belmour of a divorce J
How astonishing that in England, where the women are fo amiable, fo worthy of adoration, that
there
[ 216 ]
there are hushands publickly drowned in debauch that thefe very hulbands will talk of a divorce ! Tdeath! and our wife Senate will not make a law to Screen a defencelefs Sex from the vile attempts of their daring, though guilty persecutors !
Ten o’clock.
Can a woman be guilty whoSe hulband h'as taught her to defpife her duty by first throwing himfelfinto the paths oflibertinifm ? Can he complain of her vices who first razed every virtue from her heart ? Would a general arraign the bravery of his troops if, fending them armlefs against a powerful enemy, they were Subdued and taken ? No : Their defeat would diSgrace but himSelf.
I have Seldom heard of a woman whom her huf-band has not first tempted into gallantry, and never of a hulband who would acknowledge the necessity of her infidelity. O man, man, how vain, how inConfistent thou art!
When I met Lady Belmour in London^ I had been fo lately engaged with Mrs. Howard that, though I thought it a most meritorious a6f to chaf-tife her Lord, I could not possibly abandon a woman, still in the firli fervency of her love for me. I gave, however, a few hints of my intention, and as Soon as 1 was at liberty to pay my devoirs to her, without hurting my honour and generofity, flew to Grojvenor-fquare.
I found in Lady Belmour all the qualities I had long wilhed for in a mistreSs, and ever deSpaired to find. A graceful form, unaffedted wit, charming vivacity, delicate Sentiment, attractive ingenuity, the look of love, the voice of pleafure, the Smile of defire, were ail blended, ail united, all either exacting homage, or calling for a kiSs.
Whether Lady Belmour really virtuous, was otherwise engaged, or her hour of loving'was not
yet
C 217 3
yet come, my attacks, for Some weeks, proved un-lucceSsful. In vain had I Set all the batteries of nature and art in play against her, had not her huf-band forced her to capitulate by depriving her of all means of defence.
He once heightened her indignation to Such a degree, that falling on fuddenly when anger Suppressed her ufual valour, I instantly took possession of the out-works, Seized every avenue, stormed, was almost master of the place, when a Sneeze announcing the presence of the governor I was compelled to retire, just time enough to recover myin-offenssve look. Oh, Frederick ! favoured by victory, yet to lofe the day ! how I raved and curSed !
A favourable opportunity in love, as in war, once lost is Seldom regained. The next day Lord and Lady Belntour Set off for Bath.
Time, abSence, new intrigues, chafed her from my heart, still coming hither on the v/ings of love and curiossty. Fortune threw me in her way, and revived the almost extinguished flame.
No neck was ever formed more purpoSely for the fight, no breast for the touch, no lips for the kifs, no arms to incircle the happy lover, no tongue
to warm him with all the enthuflaSm of love.----
Her motions—Oh, Frederick, not blood, but an heavenly Spirit gives each limb its proper a6i;ivity—•
she moves but to enjoy.------—Could you See the
languor of her eye-----could you. heave with
pantings in the minute she pen drops.
Modijh-hall, 176
My hand shakes
her
the
L
LET-

C 2I8 J
LETTER XI
Lady Carolina Pelham to Lady Victoria
Nevil.
Must contrive, Victoria, to have my inclination oppofed : that is the only way to make me inSenlible to the bad qualities of Lord Pe~
lerjlon.
Our love has no poignancy in it. A flowery path grows at length difgustful ; a lonely rock, and a steep hill, are often more pleafing to the eye. My head is too cool, Victoria F\ fee, hear and judge as if I had no heart. No foible, no impertinence of Lord Pelerjion efcapes me : I could almost Prig his faults and my indifference. My rea-jon carries it too clear against paffion—’tis plain I love him not.
I/udy Pelham and my brother openly take his pan, laugh at my uneaflnefs, justify his indifcre-tions; from thefe attempts in his favour I shall certainly hate him.
i detested Fanjly becaufe I was ordered to love him—what is the difference between leave and
----1 am
command? For my part, I fee none.---------
fure I should diflike to walk, did not the weather Sometimes turn bad and oppofe my inclination.
Men fay they know us------why then do they
a£l: as if they knew us not ? We are certainly of value enough to deferve the pains of being won ; they are convinced of it, and yet they foolishly mistake the means. They teafe us with tempting flghs, fruitlefs deflres, attradl every fenfe, amufe each, and fix none. Had a lover in the purluit of a heart the Sagacity he shows in that of a place or penston, poor woman ! would I exclaim: and really, ViAoria^ how should we relist ?
The
a
C 319]
ii
The unfldlfulnefs of men befriends us more than* our virtue. Whole fault is it ? not mine. Adieu.
r"
One word more. Sweet girl.
I have Sorgiven Lord Pelerjlon^ and admitted him to the honour of helping me on with my glove—• but what will it avail him to be in favour again if he knows not how to deServe it ? His jealouly will not do, for the more he is afraid of lofing me, the lefs do I care for him. Are not his apprehen-lions a certainty I am necessary to his happinefs ? On my word, I am not generous enough to give
myfelf up to him for that alone----------1 will have
my Share in his happinefs, or from me he shall have none. When he is at my feet looking, talking, ssghing, to be fure he has great advantages. I refletSt not then on his faults ; but he is hardly out of the room, when 1 Sing, dance, play and forget him. He is, by turns, every filing and nothing to me : I cannot help it.
The gentleman having Solemnly vowed to renounce his former follies has, with them lost his fprightlinefs, is dwindled into a downright dotard of fixty, and will now talk nothing but grave nonfenfe. If I gape or yawn he don’t mind it. —He has feen me do the fame at a Charity-Sermon, and very likely imagines ’tis a compliment I pay him ; for it matters not, with fome men, what fenfations they give us, if they are but pleafed with themfelves.
When not alone with me he is stupid, and even then have I with myfelf a few exclamations of wonder how I can love him.-------1 must give him leave
to be impertinent again. Under that form he has Sallies which may amufe me ; but this he now af-fumesis as inconssstent with wit or humour, Vi£ienia^ as affe6tion would be with thy beauty.
L 2	I Spoiled


r 220 ]
I spoiled my pretty face this morning with Some patches, a toupee ten inches high, and a load of powder to put him out of conceit with it, or at least have an half hour’s quarrel. I looked So frightful, Vitoria, I durst not cast a glance at the glaSs. I was ashamed of the ridiculous fancy
I was wrong, for my Lord assured me that the patches and toupee gave my features a charming je ne fcais quoi he had never discovered before. I burst into laughter, turned him out, rang for Lu-' cy., Sat down to my toilet, and in ten minutes was myfelf again.
An undisputed Sway is the most diSagreeable advantage one can posseSs; ’tis instant death to the flattering certainty we deServe it. I Scorn Such power. If modesty blushes at a praife Truth gives her, what must she not Suffer when Flattery bestows it!
At the rate Lord Pelerjlon goes on I’ll outrun him ; he shall not catch me.—Another courSe must he take, or he shall ssgh, eternally ssgh, without the poor comfort of a Smile. ’Tis his fault; why does he not know better ? Were he to fay to him-Self, “ Fool that I am ! instead of feeding her vanity, let me alarm it -—let my assiduity, by
degrees, ssnk into neglecst-let her be jealous
of me, not I of her.”---———Were he to fay
So, Vitoria,-----and to a<Si: accordingly, then
indeed—the odds would be against me.
London^ 176
L £ T

[ 221 ]
LETTER Xir.
Sir John Modish to Lord Pelham.
T was one o’clock—-That I may be more __certain, Sor in thefe important events I am exact to a Second, let me take a peep at my Journal of Intrigues. I was wrong. Just eleven minutes past one, last	as 1 was driving furioully
through a narrow lane, I run against a chariot with Such amazing velocity, that it unluckily overturned, and one of the wheels Split in pieces. T'he accident was So Sudden, that neither horSes nor postilions had time or thought to prevent it. I heard a shriek, and knowing Lord Belmoufs livery, immediately alighted and flew to the relief of Lady Belmour.
“ Lady Belmour., Sir John /”
Yes, Lady Belmour, Frederick, v/ith all her Smiles and graces.
How I hate my Self, iny Lady !—
And my looks, Frederick, absolutely told her the contrary.
I don’t believe you. Sir John. You are too fond of conquest not to rejoice in my fall.
Happy omen ! whiSpered I.—But are you not hurt ?—
Not in the least.—
I presented my hand, and helped her out of the chariot.
Could I not have the pleafure of your company, Sir John, but by running the rifk of my life ?— And stie Smiled.
The Servants coming up I made no anfwer. Where was you going, my Lady -------------
To Brent on-hall.
So was h—
L 3
Hwas
•. [ 222 ]
’Twas a lie. Start not, Frederick. Falsehood
^ \
and curiofity are the most Samiliar Sins of women and lovers—no pleafure without them.
If So, I will ride in your coach.---i-And she chearfully stepped in, directing Some of her people to follow, and the rest to go home.
Is not this a droll accident. Sir yohn? How could Lord Belmour prevent this tete a tete with you and in your own coach ?—
Fortune, dear Belmourdelights in defeating the foreSight of jealous hushands, and complimenting youth and beauty with the power of revenge.—-And I ravished a kifs.
Fy, Sir Iohn ! steal a kifs bn the high way !— Well, take it back, let me not have it on my
conscience.-’-------
And I returned it on her lips.
Did you not purpofely overturn my chariot, you
mischievous man ?—-------
Had not the accident nearly proved tragical, I would glory in having cauSed it,----You are wor-
thy to inSpire So happy aa invention, still worthier
to reap the benefit of it,----
And then—--------—
No Sneezer to fear, dear Belmour'
And then—--------
Ate you mad. Sir John ? How prefuming I our people-------^—
I'he blinds were pulled up-----then down-------
then-----/rank and Tom drove So furiousty—What
to do ? how diSpoSe of one’s Self, Frederick., in a damned flying coach Surrounded by four Servants, in broad day-light ?
Shall your Lord’s Genius still prevail over mine ? ------
She gave me a gentle pat on the cheek.
He wall conquer. Sir John^ I fee you are unlucky.—
^	m	«
The
[ 223 3
The jest w'as keen, Frederick^ though Softened by a figh.
I’ll punish thee, Beltnour.------
And then------
Stop, thou unSeafonable tormentor, stop. Sir yehn!------in this coach !-----What wilt thou at-
tempt !---
hand —that blind
Preposterous!
Keep off thy roving
Wliat will the fervants think ?
----Hold—Receive this, and this, and tltis, and
this, as a certainty of thy triumph over Behnour.— She blessed me with three kisses.
Exact no more—ipai e my delicacy the fear of a furprife.---
jf thou lovest me, Beltnour,--
. Is not thy vidtory over my modesty a certain
pledge of my love for thee?---
’Tis not compleat, fortune favours me but by
halves—thy Lord is still the conqueror.---—
Is he fo. Sir John.^ v.iien my virtue has fuffer-
ed thee in my arms ?---
Ah, B elm our ! let us equal his punishment to thy wrongs.—Remember how guilty—how undeferv-
ing the pleafures thou canst give.-Will fuch an
opportunity offer again ?—1
s
he not thy shadow ? —Enjoy, dear Behnour,, enjoy all the delights ot love. Since thou art curled with all tiie miferies of wedlock.---------
She approached my lips, and Sighing upon them-------
Have I not told thee thou halt my heart. Sir
John r---------
I hear thee, Beltnour. Prepare thy foul for the exquisste raptures of love and revenge.
Calling immediately to the postillions —
My Lady wants Some rest, stop at the Wheat-sheaf.
Tliis is an inn of which we were within fifty paces.
L 4	How
r 224 ]
¥
^ How that .order has alarmed my fenfes ! Recall it. Sir John, do, recall it.-----
I pressed her hand, and we rode into the yard.
Lady Belmour faying that her accident had made her extremely faint, the landlady ushered us into a parlour, whence stepping to a back bed-room with her Ladyship, she officiousty insssted on undressing her.
My Lady declined her offer, as she propofed to rest but a few minutes, and dessred a glafs of wine.
Whilst the good woman went to fetch it, I shewed wyfelf to the Servants, and Spoke a word to my trusty Duval.
Seeing the landlady approach, I ordered Some refreshment to the parlour, and thither I went.
Five o’clock.
I was no Sooner alone than I ssipt into the back room.
Alas, traiterous heart!—how inviting thy impulse ! Sir John! thou my amiable deluder, come not near me—be my proteclor against my Self.-------
What a charming confusson she was in, Frede-
rick !
Come not near------
And she opened her arms to receive me.
Thy touch is life to my foul-------death to ray
virtue-------Oh 1 leave me---------
Slie pressed me to her boSom.
My li})s had hardly been voluptuousty fixed, when the cracking of a whip forced my foul from its enchantment. In the first dawn of delight, Fre--denck., how provoking I
What noiSe do I hear ? Is it my hushand ? exclaimed the frighted Lady Belmour.
My happineSs shall be Sacrificed to thy reputation.-----Feign to steep; thou hast nothing to ap-
prehend.
[ 225 ]
prehend.
-Sweeping a kiSs, I stole back to
the parlour, panting with rage and pleaSure.
I peeped through the window and Saw-—whom do you think ?—How my heart fluttered! A cold Sweat instantly covered my face—never was criminal more confounded at the afpedt of his judge my head hung down in all the horror of guilt. What have I done ? right. Said Difcretion—wrong cried, still louder. Love.—Though my confufion' had been quicker than thought, the debate was short: felf-interest parted the fray—I curfed love, and retired to the darkest corner of the parlour.
Lady Vitoria, Mifs Ellifon, Frojby, and Some gentlemen, all on horfeback, at a hundred yards
from the houfe.-------Surely, Frederick, fuch a
shape as that of Vidforia gzvQ the first idea of a
riding-drefs and brought it into fashion----The
hat and feather give fo rebellious an air to the whole countenance, that it tempts one to attack and conquer.—Add to this the inexpressible charm of innocence.-----That fight, not my virtue, disturb-
ed me : this has not over me the power of Lady
No more—’tis finful to think or talk of
her.
Though I had provided against a difeovery, fuf-picion might have entered their hearts.—Frederick! I never yet expofed her who made me happy. —I will ever lofe the glory of a conquest, rather than difgrace the generous author of my triumph : her reputation is dearer to me than my own—his the most Sacred charge that can be committed to the trust of man.
To tell thee I wished the noble cavalcade an hundred fathom in the bowels of the earth, is a pofl-tive truth; except Lady Fidtoria, however, whom to punish for her untimely appearance I would have placed on the very bed with Lady Belmour.
L 5	The
[ 226 ]
The image was too luxurious—it was more than tnortal could possibly hope for, or posseSs.
An hand-gallop Soon brought them within hearing—every limb quaked---Soon they were out of fight—every fenfe revived.
After having remanded my Sentinel to his duty. Secured the doors, gulped down a glafs of wine, and indulged my foul with a momentary recollection of the beauties it was to enjoy, I hurried to Lady Belmour.
' Thanks to my stars, Belmour^ this was but a panic terror.—But what do I fee?—In tears !— Thou hast caufed them. Sir John: they are tears of love—the last struggles of expiring virtue—the forerunners of thy joy.—Be generous—be fatisfi-ed with the certainty of having no rival in my heart. —What fire in thy eye!—Look not—that kifs —oh!------Thou wilt not hear me------	* *
!jk^!j^	*^*	***
* * * *
Blefs me, ye gods, with hours like this, and I envy not your glory !..
This exclamation was not very orthodox, Fre-derkky but 1 took myfelf for Adonis in the arms of Vmus.
Decency, which I always obey when I write to thee, permits me not to mention the fighs ending in a kifs—the words in—I must tell thee nothing.
To preclude alT possibility of fufpicion, I got unperceived into the fields, and appeared not till the minute I Spied the Servants in quest of me.
How is Lady Belmour f-....—
Being anfwer’d Ihe was well, and impatient to Set off for Brenton-half I quickened my pace and was presently with her.
She was at the gate.
Why did you not tell your people where you was going. Sir John f I have been ready this half hour.—Come, lofe no time in framing an apology
C 227- 3
I ought mySelf to a()ologife for having kept you So long in this lonely place.—
And without waiting for my anfwer she tripped to the coach, I after her, and away we drove.
Eleven at night.
Lady Bslmour took my hand, and carrying it to her lips with an animated blush—
Sir John !----
Weil, dear Belmour.—-Sir John /—
And a tear betrayed the inward emotion.-— How weak I have been!—
The tear, Frederickand the tone of her voice went to my heart. I threw my arm round her, and pressing her to my bofom—
Dost thou regret my happinefs ?—
Had I yielded to thy love, I would triumph in my defeat—thy pleafure should be my glory.— Thou hast only given me thy imagination; thy heart was a gift thou couldst not prefent me with. — Thy looks, thy language, thy mein, thy transports, are the very expressions, the very features,-the Speaking picture of love.—Thou hast his breath, his touch, his fury and his impatience.
—Thou attackest armed with all his illulions____
faint is- ressstance against thee—eassly dost thou wheedle the heart, intoxicate the head.—But thou
mighty feducer.----------
She drew nearer to my breast, and fixed her ro-fy lips on my left eye.
To thy fiery nature, not real passion, have I to day Sacrificed a virtue,. which the constant injuries of a detested hushand bad not thefe five years been capable to weaken.—
Too much delicacy, Belmour^ is the bane of pleafure, the certain poifon of happinefs. Let us not starch into the nature of our fenfations.-—I
fwear
- [ 228 3
Hvear to thee, and I am this minute as true as thou art lovely, that my heart is folely thine.—
. Thou art still, Sir ‘John,, in the first heat of thy
gratitude----but foon Lady Vidloria------
I shuddered at the name.
Tell me not of her— does she not love Frofby f— Dost thou love her the lefs for that ?—■—
Canst thou fuppofe me So weak ?
She has beauty with all the charms of innocence, thou hast a heart—I knew thy affecstion for her—'
I knew it. Sir John, and yet----Oh ! hate me not
though I have yielded to thee.—
Thou mercilefs felf-tormentor, postefs the present, trouble not the delightful ferenity of our fouls by unfeafonable fears.—Chain me to thy arms by inexhaustible joys—Let me fear to lofe and forever will I adore thee.—-If thou thinkest I love Lady Victoria, add a new poignancy to every charm —Awake every day a new beauty—divert my paf-fion with a variety of characters—unite every contrast—fet up by turns for a prude and a coquette^— refufe, grant, heighten my defires, perpetuate my emotions, and watchful as the virgins confecrated to Ve/ia, keep , thy fire eternally burning in my heart.—-
How Lady Behnour looked. Smiled, talked
how—how--------We lived more, Frederick, in ten
minutes, than thou hast done in ten years. What are the wanderings of nature, if imagination grace them not ?
As we entered the grand avenue which leads to Brenton-hall, L)uval told us Lord Behnour was Seen half a mile behind on the common.
His too late for him. Sir John, to oppoSe thy viftory when thou hast carried the honours of the
stay.----How he now raves at an accident he could
not forefeel----how happy he did not !•—------
And
[ 229 3
And thou wouldst have me not love the charming prattler, Frederick f-Pray tell me So again
that thou mayest keep my imagination alive. I will thank thee for it.
We had hardly paid our compliments to the la^r dies when his Lordship entered the room.
You have made great haste, my Lord: you Surely thought I was dying, no other concern could have prevented your journey to Penrith. Well, be comforted—'the fall was not dangerous : I never
was better in my life.^--
. And she immediately related the danger she had been in.
How sternly the man looked while she facetiouf-ly told her adventure] The company, however, gradually cleared his brow; he grew polite enough to return an acknowledgment to the congratulations made him on my Lady’s efcape.
W ouldst thou believe that Lady Victoria looked into my countenance for more than Lady Belmour related ?—What! does the girl grow curious ?— ril think of it. Adieu.
Modifh-hall, 176
LETTER XIII.
Lady Victoria Nevil to Lady Carolina
Pelham.
I Have loft the heart of Sir John, Carolina: no ^ longer can I believe my fancy, which still would paint him tender and adoring.—My hopes are vanished, he loves me no more.—My indifference was an offence his pride could not brook—O Modesty ! why didst thou compel me to dissemble ! One word or look would have captivated '$>\xIohn.
'—Is there any crime in a look or a word ?—Virtue tells me No.—Would I had confulted that a-lone, and declined the vifits of Frojly! His assiduity
*’ [ 230 ]
ity which, in obedience to Mrs. Brenton., I daily Suffered, has undone me.—I am the victim of my
refpe<st for my aunt, of my esteem for Frojby.--
Sir John has deferted me!—How should he have loved when his rival feemed to poffefs my ear, when I feemed happy in his passion ?
An event has convinced me of Sir 'John's indifference. It was, I fear, his own work—he was himfelf the caufe of it.—*—What torment in the thought!
Lady Belmour was on her way to Brenton-hall last Tuefday, when Sir John overturning her chariot, she was obliged to take a place in his coach. This was not all, Carolina. They stopped about two hours at a lonely inn a few miles from hence. —Two hours!—alone with Sir John I—I must not think of thefe two hours.—When they arrived, and she related the fright she had been in, I Saw but pleafure in her looks, but life in her expression.—Her hair was in the utmost confusson—-her handkerchief, her apron rumpled.—I left the room, and retired to my clofet, to excite my virtue to a contempt of the perfidious man. But how weak my anger ! Whilst I taught my tongue the language of indignation, my heart contradidfed it, and beat in his defence. The injury dwindled into love. I blamed my falfe delicacy alone for the defertion of Sir John., and was even more difpleaf-ed with his new amour, than offended at his guilt.
Once 1 tried to diferedit that handkerchief, that apron—but Lady Belmour could not fo foon assume the countenance of vice; her features betrayed the happinefs of Sir John.—She never before failed in her duty, how could she feigji ?
The fullennefs of Mifs Ellifon was astonishing. Had she been robbed of her only delight, her filence or her motions could not have been more
expressive of difeontent.
<c
Vi Gloria.

[ 231 ]
“ Vi^oriaf* Said she to me, there fits the bafeshof men !” and she pointed to Sir John.
I affedled the utmost amazement.
What has he done, Mifs ?----------
Is it not plain in his eyes?—In them do you not fee the defeat of Lady	and the profligacy
of his heart ?—
I do not understand their language, Mifs.-----
She bit her lips, and turned from me.
Poor Mifs Ellifon !—She loves him, Carolina : her difpleafure is a proof of her feelings.—A new rival!—I am miferable.
Ten o’clock.
I was this morning in a Solitary alley of the garden, arguing in favour of Frojhy against Sir John^ when the former came to strengthen my reafons with his prefence.
So penfive, dear my Lady !--------
And he kissed my hand.
You, Sir, was the objedl of my reverie.—-! fear I love you not.
Talk not thus, or I shall die with Sorrow.
Whence the cruel doubt ? what fault of mine has infpired it ?—It is not furely welcome to thy heart, Victoria.-------
Would it were not!—once I was certain of my
inclination for you—now I am not fo.-----------
Vibloria f Spare my ears the accent of indifference; look upon me with thy wonted foftnefs.—I am the man thou hast promifed to make happy. Cast thy eyes around—thou shalt fee witnesses of thy vows to me ;—could they fpeak thou shouldst hear but of thy love and mine—Tell me thou lovest me, Fiblona; be our mutual passion our favourite theme.
-----Thou fighest, and turnest thy head--------thou
makest me a wretch indeed !--------1 shan’t outlive
thy coldnefs.-----Revive with a fmile my finking
foul.
•*%
f 232 ]
foul,——^Behold thy Frojby^ ever fond of thee, behold him with the eyes of Sympathy and plea'fure.--------
His dejedlion, Carolina., kindled a Spark of my old flame. I could not unmoved fee and hear the man I once passionately loved : I wished for thofe
deluflve hours.---That dessre almost melted my
doubts j I grew tender.—
And you love me. Sir Love you !•---1 fwear
Swear not, Frojhy., if you will have me believe you: an oath is the last refuge of the man whofe honour is lost.—
My heart is your’s, ViCioria: it never heaved but for you. I was born to be infenfible to the charms of every other woman-to adore you.-
born purpofely
He gently pressed my hand to his lips.
Where could I have found a beauty who, like you, had pleafed both my reafon and fancy ?
Your vissts to Mifs Cranmer, have of late been
very frequent—to me very rare------1 Seldom fee
you.—Who is that young lady who of all men receives but you, who, though invited, never came
to Brenton-Hall f—Why that blush ?----And you
love me !-—
Long before Mifs Cranmer came hither, my Lady, I was a constant vifitor of her uncle. 'Ishe days I cannot give to love, I give to friendship.— Has not your time been partially difpofed of?— Mr. CranmeFs bad state of health has oftner, I own, called me to his houfe, but my heart always invited me here.—
Was it not Mifs Cranmer v'	‘
Mifs Cranmer ! No, never.
I am forry she did not.
Sorry!—
And up he started.
Sorry I
[ 233 3
Sorry ! have I heard well ?—My Vidioria wishes for my change !------No : ’tis impossible, thy
heart could not Support it.---Such another word
and I am mad.—
How pleastng his transports, Carolina.^ had I loved him ! The intruding idea of Sir John blunted all their charms ; they had no effe<st but upon my pity. I fat on a bench ; he fell before me on his knee.	-
Thus will I remain, ViAoria, till words give a lie to your countenance. Had my happinefs no more reality than a coxcomb’s dream ? Were you not true ?—
I wa«, Sir.—
Since you were, you are still the fame, I am happy.—
And quicker than thought he threw both his hands round my waist, and fixed me to his lips. At that very moment I heard a noife, and as instantly I faw Sir John. His amazement equalled my confuSion, I shrieked, he vanished. Frojhy
dared to exult----“ Wretch 1” exclaimed I with
“ have you no refpe<fi: for me ?—I hate you."—And turning the next alley, I went to the houfe.
I found Sir John in the hall, taking leave of Mrs. Brenton.
Sir John came to dine with us, Victor la. A bu-finefs he had forgot obliges him to return to Mo--
dijh-hall; in vain have 1 entreated him to stay--
he will not perhaps deny thee.—
My influence is too Small, Madam, to hope for his compliance.—
I courtefied and advancing to him.—
Defpife me not, Sir, my heart had no share in Mr. Frojhy’s indiicretion.----
I trembled as I fpoke.
Never will I entertain a fuSpicion injurious to
Lady
<»
anger
V
[ 234 1
Lady	—Befides, continued he, with a
falSe Smile, lovers have privileges I have no right to question. Your apology is as neediest as your forgivenest for my impertinent appearance is necessary. —
Will you believe that Mr. Frojby has none of tste privileges you mention ?-
A falfe hnile again, Carolina^ and no anfwer.
I was difconcerted.—If he loved me, I had certainly been understood.—Modesty bid me be ss-lent. I assumed a gayer look, and carelefsiy begged the favour of his company.
He would, and would not; at last on feeing Frof-hy.y he coloured, bowed and went away.
An odd man this, Carolina. He was vexed— a true Symptom of love I and yet, when I hint that Frojly is not my lover, he mistrusts his ears
and will not believe me.---’Tis decreed I must
be uiihappy.—^^Were I certain of his love, would that be a Security for his morals ?—I am frightened to death when I think of the two hours passed at
the Wheatsheaf----a man who loved me would not
have been there two hours with Lady Belmour— how could he talk of love to her if he feels it but for me?—Can the fenfes be gratified when the heart partakes not in their extacy ?—Youth is not
an excufe for the want of delicacy-Sir Iohn is
doubly criminal—I rave—pity me.
Brenton Half 176
LETTER XIV.
/
Sir John Modish to Lord Pelham.
r t H E fight of Lady ViFloria is more dread-
i fill to me than the gallows to a murderer; it fills my heart with more dastardly terrors than
that wretch can ever feel. Her prefence Sinks me below
. f
••
C 235 J
«*
i
•Virtue under her *
low the bafest of mankind.-^ shape is the most Sormidable enemy one can encounter. Her eyes are at prefent death to vice—
she talks; and we abhor our enjoyments.-----
I’en fidforias, in London would, from the most debauched, turn it to the most virtuous city of the world. Their fmiles, better than Sermons, would teach us every duty.—■—’Sdeath ! do Ipraife them! CurSe on this flight of my honesty! Know, Frederick., that 1 detest Lady Vidipria as much as thou lovest thy king and thy country—I detest her even to a pain of joy—my hatred is now my delight—I am perfeistly happy with it.
Had I written thee a few days ago, thou wouldst have immediately Sent me an Efculapius,
or voted me to Bedlam.---1 am calmer ; Fll tell
thee why I hate.
One thought of Lady Vidforia robbed Lady Belmour of half her charms, and deadened the pleasures she had lavished on me. My SenSes helping me not against it, I yielded to the irrefistible call of her beauty, and ventured last Saturday to Brenton-Hall.
Vidioria's prefence. Said I to mySelf, will force
repentance on my heart----what fignifles it ? I
will See her. Then, Frederick., I fancied no other bliSs,—Damn the hour I was tempted to go !—In stead of an angel. I found—a woman.—Wretched disappointment !
Being told that Lady Vidloria was in the garden, thither I stepped. Turning an alley—what a fight! Vidforialntht arms of Fro/by—enjoying life on her lips.—~ Paint to thySelf the astonishment of a noble Lord on the news of the birth of a Son
Some happier man has begot----the miSery of an
old dotard at the elopement of his young wife with
'	her
[ 236 ]
her gallant—thy imagination will fall short of my agony. The light was intolerable—It was but a kifs—i-vv'as it not returned ? Damnation is in the doubt.—Her trouble at my appearance was exquifite—her looks told me she was not guilty— the looks of a woman ?—had 1 at that moment been armed—thou shouldst hear now of VidloFia., of Frojby., of Sir Johriy but to know they had lived.—I hastily left the garden, and pretending bufinefs required my immediate return, was taking my leave of Mrs. Brenton^ when ViAoria £ntered the hall with an open but dejedted countenance.— Not the fmallest impreflion of hypocrify in her eyes, Frederick----an angel again in every feature.
She came to me, and “ begged I would not defpife her: her heart had no share in Frojhy's indiscretion.” I was confounded at the unexpe<sted condefcenSion. Why an apology ?—What is my ef-teem or difpleafure to her ? Since she loves Frojly^ she was innocent. I told her of the “ privileges of lovers.”——She anfwered “ Frojby had none.” Good creature! she faw my love in my confuston, and out of generoSity lessened the advantages of Frojby. Her goodnefs assented me—I ssghed, took her hand.—
Stay, and dine with us, Sir John. not stay ? —
Her voice, Frederick^ will ever give new life to the man who hears it. I faid Yes, I fald No, then Yes, when beholding Frojby in the garden, jea-loufy fired my blood, I Said No, and ssew from the hall. I muss not think of her, or my hatred will melt away—my foul will feel—my pen write
—but of love.-------ViFioria in his arms-----—his
lips——torturing remembrance !—A letter from thee, Frederick,
*
Will you
3I6?	^
W	VT	^	~
Thou
[ 237 1
Thou man of little faith, trust not to thy reason, but believe me when I tell thee that I did not Speak a word to Lady Belmour which was not dictated by my heart.
I have tv/o hearts within me whoSe passions and SenSibility differ as much as French politejje and English genecossty. That on which is engraved the Sacred image of Vldloria reigns in a calm.— The other, like a vessel on a tempestuous Sea toS-Sed about by winds and waves, is the perpetual Sport of my Spirits, rifes. Swims, ssnks at their pleasure, and was on duty at the Whea^t-sheaf.
Twas this that, raging at the luxurious proS-pe61; of rapturous joys, was carried off by a storm of fierce defires, and fighed, and talked, and Swore, and possessed.
Modify-half—17 6’—
LETTER XV.
Lady Carolina Pelham to Lady Victoria
Nevil.
TO another tune must I dance now^ VidloKta"
As I was always out of time to that of jea-loufy, my Sweet Pelerjion has invented one—■ his absolutely his own compofition. Never before has it been Set for a girl of twenty. I fear I shall be but a bad Scholar, iocapKmofi are both the mu-fic and fidler. Refrain thy curiofity, for I cannot at prefent Satisfy it. Lord Pelham is coming. Always writing, La'^olina !
When friendstiip dictates the hand is never tired.---
You are too good. Sister, to tell me whom you write to.—
Whom is it to, my Lord ?
To Xj'sA'j Vidloria.—
^ I’ll kifs you for the happy thought, brother.
I got
►	1 got up aim iti #VAVXijr _
Have you any objedion, Carolina.^ to an airing in Hyde-Park f—
What! tbte d tete with me, brother ?
Yes, with you alone.—
It will be So grave—let us call en pafLant at Lady Prejion’s.—
He mumbled a No, and fighed.
My brother lighs! Prodigious indeed ! Am I not mistaken ? was it a ligh oS love, my Lord, or of distrefs ?—
Of love, dear Carolina,—
And he fighed again.
W hat! So far gone, and I knew nothing of it ! ’T'is ungenerous, brother.
I feared thy raillery, Sister. I always talked against love.—
And you love really ?
I do ; and thy friend Lady Prejlon is the woman. Lady Prejlon! I’ll teaze you with caresses for the good news.—Now 1 have a brother. Your indifference made me often think you was not fo. Does Lady PreJlGn return your fighs ? Have you told your paffion ?—
I have not.—
r
S© you would have me declare it for you ? Would you not, my Lord ?—
Tell me, Carolina., has she discovered it ? She would not, I am Sure, keep the Secret from thee.-----
%
On my word she has no certainty of your
affection.-----Your extreme reServe favours not
curiofity. You never had the look of a lover— had you ?—
Undoubtedly, Carolina.
You mistake, my Lord. I know not how you look when asseep, but awake, nothing is more cold and infenfible.
Lady
^1.1

[ 239 1
Lady Prejion may See with other eyes. Sister.—
True, my Lord.-------But are you in earnest ?
Tell me again and again you love her. As this is a miracle, and I believe none, forgive my incredulity.
Is not my character a Security ?
A man of character, my Lord, will fometimes banter.
Well, lister, I love her as much as thou dost Pelerjion.----
Ha, ha, ha ! I thought your mighty love would at last dwindle into wit.—
Don’t you love Lord Pelerjion ?—
Now I anfwer no, to-morrow I may fay yes. l am Sorry I did not wait till to-morrow to make
a confident of thee.----
And he fmiled.
T'ell me without fimile, or mental reservation, do you love Lady Prejion f—
I do, fincerely do.----
Then you are an happy man.
Happy !------
She loves you, brother.
Loves me !
And for ten minutes my wife brother was absolutely mad with joy.—“ Loves me !”--------And he
leaped and whilked about to the no Small terror of my lap-dog and Canary bird. The noife of a China bafon, which he elbowed on the floor, at length brought him to his fenfes.
She loves me, Carolina f—
And he fat by me.
I’ll Say (he does not, unleSs you behave more diScreetly, and kiSs my lap-dog, who is frightened out of his wits.----
He took him in his arms. She loves me I—
Yes,

Yes, she does.
[ 240 3
Keep still!—Beggar me not
of my china in your fits of joy.
He kilSed my forehead.
She loves me !—
Let us go to Hyde-park^ my Lord.
Tell me she loves me.—
Hear the dear words from her own lips, and not
from mine.----A lister cannot exprefs them to a
brother.——Go to her.------
I dare not. filence.—
Fear not:
If I Speak, she will laugh me into
you
go, look, talk, and she will believe She has Seen you too often to be indiffe-
rent.—A man of your merit is too precious a treasure not to be coveted by a modest woman. Go, brother, she will welcome the tender of your heart; be as blessed with the possession of her’s, and Ca~ roUna shall be happy.—
Lord Pelham could not help shedding a few tears, embracing his dear Carolina^ and straining her to his bofom. He took his ring and put it upon my finger----1 took off mine and put it upon
his. We Smiled, Saluted.—He is gone.
Thou shalt hear of their wedding in a few days, for I am certain they will not, like Sir Iohn and thee, delay their happinefs through a mistaken delicacy.—A propos of Sir ‘John—he adores thee, deferves thee—I will tell thee no more.—A card ! Lord Fanjly is come, Victoria.
Lord Fanflf% most refpedlful compliments to Lady Carolina Pelham. Is just alighted from Prance^ will do himfelf the honour to wait upon her tomorrow.”-----Tsha! I have no patience. The
deuce take him for his impertinent civility.
London-----176

LET-
[ 241 ]
LETTER XVI.
%
Sir John Modish to Lord Pelham.
NE W incidents in liSe unravel the nature
of man better than philoSophy and our cor-refpondence with all the puppets, male and Semale, which fwatm round St. James’s.
Who knows his heart, and the innumerable wants of the foul, till he meets with the circumstances destined to call forth their latent principle Afk a virtuous maid, whofe lover, having routed every fenfe, and lulled difcretion asseep, has unawares invaded her bloom.
Aik Belmour how Ihe came into my coach, and from my coach into the Wheat-sheaf.
Aik Cornelia how she loved a man she had hardly distinguished as a friend, on her hulband pointing him out to her as the objecl of his jea-loufy.
Aik Fatima., how, after she had nobly reststed her lover, and her own destres, being furprifed in a flutter of Spirits by a daring beau, she—What man, what woman, in every rank of life, would not anfwer you, “ Only to circumstances, my Lord, am I indebted for my foibles or my virtues !”
I love, lincerely love Vidloria, yet I not only delight in my intrigue with Lady Belmour^ but am
even impatient to begin another.-Whence this
thirst of novelty ? Is it from nature or education ?
----Education ! no : this can but explain the fen-
fations the former gives.—Nature 1 I will not ar-

gue with thee
I will honour thee by yielding
to the fenfibility thou hast endowed me with.
Read this letter, Frederick., and if in thy wifdom thou tellest me, I could have relisted the temptation------take my anfwer, I have not thy wifdom.
M	To
bo
Will the drowfy foul of ^ir'John never awake? Will he still pine for a beauty who doats on his unworthy rival : What! fhall	Fid!oria boast,
that th« loveliest of men is the most indifferent to
her—------that (he has at her command the idol
of her fex, and difdains him ! In what does the haughty favourite of-love at prefent differ from the generality of -mankind ; Since, like them, he bafe-
ly caresses the chain that fetters him ?-1 almost
hate thee for thy puSillanimity.
Shall the hero, whofe attacks were ever crowned with fuccefs, fink under a first defeat, and not repair the difgrace by gathering new laurels ? What is one overthrow to many vidtories I Was not A-pollo denied by Daphne ? Imitate the god : reign over a heart more fenssble of thy parts, more im-■ partial to thy virtues.
Awake, Sir John; blush for the preposterous streams of thy bewildered foul.—A heart, a tender
-heart, shall welcome thy liberty.---Think of the
triumph that waits thee, and be free.
When Nature has exprefsly formed for thee a Jheart whofe fondnefs is adequate thy fenssbility, wilt thou hefitate?
Thinkest thou I wantdharmsto pleafe, or vir-4ues to engage; or fearest thou that thy fearch for me among fo many handfome women will prove ineffectual ? Has not Love a mien distinCt from every other ? Who can assume his looks, his voice, his ingenuity ?
This afternoon I-shall beat Mrs. Ellifon’s vt’iXh three agreeable ladies.—Never fay thou hast loved, if coming thou knowest me not.


#
#
*

Fidforial B^lmourl names dear to my foul, shat
curiofity
C 243 1
it shall. Plea-
euriofity conquer you ? It must Sure, lead the way, I follow thee.
Four o’clock. Afternoon.
Just fix o’clock when I got to Mrs. Ellifonbs, It being a fultry day the ladies had retired to a fummer-houfe, on the fide of a large piece of water between the park and the garden. Thither I hastened with the pace of an ufurer going to meet a fpendthrift, or of an old maid coming back from church with her bridegroom of twenty.
I entered the room. ------What a fight prefent-
ed itfelf!----A woman on a fofa, the very picture
of Pfyche fiumbering in the abfence of Cupid. I will not draw her posture, Frederick,^ lest my heart should catch the fire of my imagination. It were dangerous to defcribe her left leg, which, by its fitu-ation expofed all the beauties of the right, and invited a wanton eye to a profpedl still more delightful-----—her bofom fo luxuriousty restlefs------still
more dangerous to tell thee of the voluptuoufnefs of her breath
Attradled by the fair steeper, I Softly drew near, and almost motionlefs, for fear of waking her, gazed, gazed, and gazed again. I glanced a kifs
on hsr breast, a few kififes on her lips.---1 must
sty or I shall be impertinent, faid I to myfelf, and I immediately retired, but not without often turning my head towards the bewitching Scene of blifs.
As I went out through the door which led to the canal, I perceived Mifs Ellifon and two ladies in a grove adjoining to it. Each step created a new furprife.
Where am I, Mifs Ellifon I exclaimed I. Where have fo many beauties been hitherto concealed ? Is this reality or inchantment, she work of a benevolent genius, who deigns to favour me with the transporting view ?
M 2	.. Is
I 244 ]
►
Is it lb extraordinary, Sir John ?
* It is, Madam. I never was before incTulged with it.-—Who are theSe ladies ? —
The Mifs Boltons of Durham ; they are on a vilitto Mifs Granmer —
Mifs Cranmer !-------—
You are amazed. Sir John P Do you know Mifs Cranmer ?------
Is Ihe not in the Summer houfe ?
She is.—
I had been told of her charms, Mifs, but justice has not been done to them.—
Never beat with indignation itFro/hy^ Said I to my heart; he cannot be guilty.
I had indulged a hope that the lady I had first Seen might be my unknown tempter; but at the name of Mifs Cranmer., I fucceflively cast a glance at the other three, and could not find a more fenlible difference than an air of concern in the eye of Mifs EUiJ'on, which feemed to tell me, “ I fear my heart is thine.”
Surely, thought I, Mifs Ellifon is not the anonymous author of the letters I have received, fmee her first rendezvous is fo preposterousty concerted, i———— A woman defirous of conquering a heart expofes it not to fuperior charms.-----At that in-
stant Mifs Cranmer entered the grove. On feeing her, I Softly repeated thefe lines of Vohaire :■
Imagines de Flore la jrunefse.
La taille et fair de la Kimphe des Bois,
Et de Venus la grace enchant^ejje,
Et de VAmour leLduifant mihois.
Happy Frojby I fighed I, how lavish has Fortune been to thee! Loved by Victoria, favoured by Cranmer, does not thy foul enjoy more exquiiite delights shan genius, glory and empire can procure ?
Nne o’clock.
MiSs
C 245 ]
<»
.4
I
Mils Ellifon presenting me to Mifs Cranmer^ adclfessed her with a devotion as fervent as that of the fuperstitious in France to the holy reliques which crafty priests expofe to their veneration. What refpedl; does beauty infpire!--------—What fe-
rocity will it not assuage—what infenssbility not inflame ? Is there in nature an object more moving,
more rapturous, than woman-------------woman ! who
can give to each organ the fame perpetuity of poignant delights, or relieve our hearts from that languor into which the insspidity of every other amufe-ment necessarily finks them ?
I was too complaifant to the three strangers not to be thought guilty of partiality by Mifs
What would not l-jzdy Vidioria fear, 'SirJohUy
/rom your admiration of thefe ladies ?-------
As her ladylhip, Madam, is neither concerned in my fenfations, nor infatuated with her own beauty—
You think not furely that Vidiorta is to be com-pared to Mifs Cranmer or her friends.
I do, Mifs
Strangi on my word!
Stranger still, were I not to give her the preference.
,Are you in earnest ?
I am.------
*
^How confident a lover !——^
How unjust a rival >----------Difgrace not thy
pretty face, Ellifon^ by unfeafonable fpite —thy love is no longer a Secret to me,—
1 his was not Spoke, Frederick: it v,?as only thought by me, and guessed by Mifs Ellifon., who, blustiing, turned on her heel, joined the company, and prefided at the tea-table.
Mifs Ellifony hoviever agreeable, interesting .neither my licart nor my imagination, I refolved to
M 3	take
r 246 ]
take no further notice of her' palTion, and from that minute was polite, gallant, but infenlible, She was vexed : I Saw it : what could I do ? Had she gained as much as she had lost by the choice she had imprudently made of her company, my adorations would pofSibly have been addressed to her ;
but as it was, she hardly affedted my fenfes----------
and tilde I never gratify but when they are fairly intoxicated.
I difpenfe with thee, Frederick., from commending my moderation, Since it is the effedf of my indifference. I boast not of thofe actions which proceed more from temper than reafon, and will ever laugh at the pretended virtue of men, whofe fouls, dead to passion, are alike incapable of wifdom or folly.
Eleven o’Clock.
Mifs Crantner has the eye of pleafure, the gait of dessre. She Smiles to Seduce, and talks to inflame. The e.fe of her motions has a charm the feeling only can enjoy. Each limb is formed for
tranfport------the Symmetry of her shape is as per-
fedbas thatof Victoria., nor does she yield to h,er
in the tempting littlenefs of her foot.---------In this
they are alike, in every other refpedt absolutely the reverfe. Mifs Cranmer calls for wanton loves, Victoria discards them--------Had Crai men the viva-
city of Belmour., and this the languor of the former, you might grope in the dark for one of them., be deceived, yet infenlible of the mistake. Your hands and lips would fay in their language, thefe
are the charms of Belmour though Lranmefs,------------
thofe of Cranmer dcio’ BelmouFs.
T'he Mifs	Spoke little, but was I there-
fore to hold them stupid ? I know his the fashion to conSider modesty and wit as incompatible, but I like to reafon now and then, and renounce the opinions of the people of hon-ton.
Mifs
o
[ 247 ]
Mifs" £7/^’/: thought proper to assure me that * “• though the girls looked like fools, they wanted not understanding.”
This was an attack, on my judgment and revengefully expressed. I felt it.
’TSis true, added (he, with an air of Superiority, they have not been brought up in the polite worldj and even blulh not at a double etittndre
I Seized the opportunity^
Your invedtive, Mifs, is their encomium. A biufh betrays the knowledge of what is wrong, and is often the confciouSnefs of a fault. The (ereni-ty of their countenance proves the innocence of their hearts. As to their ignorance of the modern' accomplishments, it is an advantage, ssnce good SenSe, virtue,, and ingenuity are undoubtedly preferable to precarious charms, and better calculated to make them loved, reSpedted and happy.
Welst I protest Such fine Sentiments from the lips of Sir John'McdiJh-zvQ a novelty tome.—Lud ! what an oddity! what a metamorphofis !—a beau turned preacher 1 ha ! ha ! ha !—
And she stung from me with all the airs of contempt she could afSume.
My blood ran high--------she looked then more
tempting,- Frederick—I’H be revenged, exclaimed
I.-------I was going to Swear it, when an unex-
pested event threw us into confuSion, and diverted her from my thoughts.
One o’clock.
MiSs Cranmer and her two friends had stepped into a shady walk whilst I converSed with Mifs Elli~ fofu We had been parted but a few minutes when the youngest MiSs Bolton came in, in a hurry, to tell her ihit Mi.s Cranmer had fainted in the arms of her lister. I stew to them, and turning an alley perceived, at Some distance, Kiri. Brenton-t Kiriona^ 'Awd FroJl?y.
M 4	Unhicky
[ 248 ]
Unlucky meeting I exclaimed Mifs ElUfon.
Frojby.^ who had discovered the condition Mifs Cranmer was in, was mending his pace towards us, when Mifs Ellifon., vissbly perplexed, delired the ladies to help their friend to the Summer houfe, while she went to receive the company, and prevent their approach.
The Mifs Boltons being unable to Support her, I took her in my arms, and carried her to the Sofa.
Leaving her to the care of her friends, I hurried to the canal for Some water, fil'ed both my hands with it, and Sprinkling it on my lovely charge, foon restored her to her bloom.
Fearing my prefence might be troublefome when no longer necessary, 1 was stealing to the door.
Fray stop. Sir John.
And she tendered me her hand.
*/
Confcious by what I knew, by what I had Seen, of the topic she would fall upon, 1 hesstated to comply.
You will not stay ?--------
Too plaintive was the tone of her voice, too
moving the tear she shed--------1 had not tlie heart
to refufe. I approached, bowed, and killed her hand.
Permit me, dear ladies, to Speak a word to Sir
John. —----—
They retired to a window. Then fitting on a chair by her fide.-----
What has the charming
me ?'
c\
Sir John., may I intrust a Secret to your ho-
hour r------------Will you engage to anSwer a
question with Sincerity, however painful for m to knovr ?
Y our
.
[ 249 ]

61
Your fecret, Mifs, shall inviolably remain in my breast.—But why intrust it with a man who has it not in his power to Serve you ? —
You have, Sir 'John—you have indeed.---------
Will not Mils	better than 1.
She started up.
Talk not of Ellifon---She has undone me.------
Shall I expedt relief from the caufe of my misfortunes ? No.^------From your shumanity will I receive it.---------
She fobbed, and was unable to Speak.
Her distrefs affeSfed me.---So young. So love-
ly,. yet a prey to Sorrow ' It went to my heart. She Saw her own anxiety in my eyes.—
You feel for me----how generous !------
•I took her hand, rested my head upon it, stlent —fearing to hear.
Your concern is happineSs—you. will refolve my
doubts—i See you v\iii-----
I dare not.—
You dare not!-----have you already understood.
me ?-------that word has doomed me to wretclied-
neSs-------“You dare not!” ’tis death—you knew.
my fate—
The “ dare not” FredeKuk.,^ had been involuntary : it efcaped from my Soul which lhared in all her deSpondency.
Hew should J, Mifs ? —
I reddened as I Spoke.
You have not understood me! why then not dare to tell me the truth ?-—-DiSguiSe it not. Sir John. be as honest as that blush you could not fuppfefs
.—it tells me 1 am miferable----— ,
She grew pale, faint^—I Supported her. O FroL by ! Frojby ! exclaimed I,
She opened her eyes-----and casting a wild look.
at me --------—
• M 5:
ErOjQ)^PV
J- J.

[ 250 3
FroPy !—what of him ?—Sir ‘^john! your pity kills me—your grief is more expressive than words
—I fee I have lost the heart of Frojhy.---—
You have not.—He still loves, can love, but you.----- ‘
She looked for truth in mv countenance.
Your tongue agrees not with your features-----
thefe cannot deceive me.—Judge of my agony by
thefe throbs.------
And fhe strained my hand to her heart.
I ssiall not outlive the stiame of my credulity
life would be a torment------
Be compofed.
Be compofed !----Oh, Sir JohnJ I have just
Seen them like lovers-^hand in hand —atm in arm — my heart failed me ria?-------
Do you love Lady ViAo-
I do.-----
Are you loved by her ?-------
I am not.---------
IShtn Frofoy—you hav'^e faid enouo;li—my mife-ry is compleat.—Perfidious wretch \-----—•
She fell lifclefs into rny arms.
Three o’Clock.
Unable any longer to endure her distrefs which I could not without deceit, alleviate, I withdrew from the falloon as Mifs Ellifon entered it.
Vexation could ealily be traced on her features. Casting a look on Mifs Cranmer who was just then coming to herfelf--------
'I'he heat has been fo great, ladies, that it is no w'onder a delicate constitution should fink under it '—I am myfelf almost overpowered by it.—You will find Lady ViFtoria^ Sir Johriy near the statue ^ ’ ''nerva.-—An^shecurtefied “ begone, wretch!” I was riot to be duped by her Seeming ingenuity. Her .exclamation at the fight of Lady Vibioriny her double at the uncommon eagerneSs of Idojlyy her
attention
[ 251 ]
attention to prevent their appearance amongfl us,, convinced me she was the confident oSthtir amour, and had Some particular interest to ferve by concealing it Srom her ladylhip.
1 have often heard her commend Frojby.^ and attempt to make shis good qualities confpicuous to Lady Victoria. How' could she, with honour, reconcile her praists with the knowledge of his perfidy t Is she not- as guilty as the man vyhofe de-figns upon the two unfufpecsting ladies she Secretly favours ? She is at once a friend to Crnnmcr zwdi Vidforia., and both are unacquainted with the dan.-gers that threaten them !
Is it probable that Kids Ellifdn should be indiffe^ rent to Mifs Cranmef% difgrace by the infidelity oS Frofby if she thought it real ?—Is it not still leSs^. probable that Frojhy should forfake a woman whofe. love, fortune, and accomplishments are undoubtedly adequate to his most Sanguine expedfations.— Whence then can the Silence of Mils Ellifon.^ and, the inconstancy of Frofby proceed ?—
She loves me—has not my certainty of VidIorid.&~ attachment to Frofby., by Silencing my paffion, given-Mil's ElUfon to hope I would devote myfelf to her ?. —In this cafe his distiinulation—but would Frofby. confpire with her, feign an inclination he is a-stranger to, and wantonly play with the .happinefs-of Lady Vidforia ? Could his hatred be more fatal
to her?----It must be Ellifon who betrayed Mifa
Cranmer when bathing—13id Frofiy refign to her his honour in exchange for the opportunity ? Was his affiduity to Vidioria the reward she inlisted-on ? —^No: neither of them can. have fo far deviated from virtue and humanity—What then is the caufe
of his guilty behaviour—of her guilty filence ?-
—I will unravel the mystery.—Too long, have I been withheld by a.mistaken delicacy^—I will know, the guilty, and Save the innocent from, destrudfion,.
Such,.

► [ 252 ]'*
gs Such, Frederick^ were my reflections in my way to the ladies.
Six o’clock.
'To obferve, unperceived, the countenance oS Frofby,, 1 stole i'oftly behind the trees, which fur-rounded the statue of Minerva,^ and removing a few leaves had a full view of them all.
They fat on different beds of turf.
Lady Vidloria had her eyes cast down, and was caressing a fpaniel with one hand, whilst her head reclined on the other.—Now and then her bofoni heaved, and a ssgh could be guessed from' the involuntary difcioiing of her lips.
Frofby looked apparently on the sstiekl of MiJi/r-va, but in reality towards the opening of an oppo-sste walk, as if in expectation of foine interesting, difeovery. Once he naturally moved forward, and as naturally stepped back. Every motion betrayed an uneafy foul. Twice at a glance of Fibioria., his. colour rofe and fell—he attempted to fpeak and could not find words.
Mrs, Brentod.s phySiognomy was too full of life to know exactly what feniation affected her mofr.
They crowded on her features with fuch rapidity as to defy my difeerninent. One notified her doubts of Frojbf^ honour—another her esteem for hi.m.—She felt every paffion, expreSSed each, and favoured none.
I quitted my hiding place, and taking a by-path, got into the alley which led direCtly to them.
At the noife I made, they all started,—quick, very quick, was the change of their countenances. Curiossty difplayed itlelf in the movements -of Mrs, Brenton^ whilst my prefence feemed to heighten the confufion of Frojhy^ and awaken a concern in the breast of ViFcria.
F or
[ 253 ]
For the first time, Frederick^ I lovingly took htV hand, and piested it to my'Ups. She was furprized,-but withdrew it not. Her looks emboldened me ;
I fat down on tire fame bed of turf.
Is Mifs Crafimer recovered. Sir "John?------
She is, my Lady.-------But her heart—’tis in her
heart the dilorderhes. She bewails the lofs of an ingrate fhe lo/es.
At thefe words her hand Ihook-------she coloured,
and looked at Frojly.
Curfe on my indifcretion 1
And 1 rofe up.—A Irnile telling me I might have mistaken, 1 lat down again.
Poor Mil's Cranmer !—
Your foul, my Lady^ would have melted with
the exprelSion of her forrow.-------Her youth, her
beauty-----
Who is the wretch who makes her unhappy ? Are you acquainted with him, Mr. Frojly I Whence your perplexity .r' W hy lb disturbeu ?—' 'Your heart bleeds for the unfortunate Mifs Cran-
perhaps for a friend whofe inconStancy you cannot justify----
For both, my Lady.--------
i^nd he shed a tear.

Your concern is very commendable—that tear is generous—you have an excellent heart, Mr.
d"he tear, Frederick.^ confirmed my fufpicicn. He loves, and loves but Cranmer.) faiu I to inyfelf.
■----Indifference knows not the charm of shedding
a fear.—The tranquillity of Lady TLLrL kindled ideas S durst-not before entertain—it diffufed Such rays of light on her behaviour to me that I was almost ashamed not to have understood it fooner. It was evident Frofty was not the man she loved
What a Stupid fellov/ have I been?”exclaimed I.
■)
i i i€
•	r 254 ]
•'The meaning of this was in my looks, and my Squeeze of her hand.
What a variety of forms you have at command,'. Sir yohn ! You came to us with an air of the utmost despondency, and now-------
Mind not her words, Frederick. While she talked, a Sudden throb of her boSom, which her liandkerchief could not conceal, and her eyes, fixed on mine, told, me, “ I am glad you are no longer that stupid fellow.”
t he Scene changed as Soon as I Saw you, my Lady. SadneSs vanilhes at the fight of beauty : pleaSure is the only SenSation we feel near you.
Ever polite and flattering.-----
No, never.——
What then?-------
Sincere and loving.-----
Sir John I-----
And, on my honour, Frederick, she Smiled up-
on me.
11X •
She pauSed, then turned to Mrs. Brenton^ then to t'rojhy—then------
Don’t you compliment me. Madam, on the declaration I have just been honoured with ?—Will not you, Mr. Frojhy,, do Sir John or me the favour of ,a jealous fit f----Shall your concern for
MiSs Cranmer totally deprive me of your attention ?^--------
My Lady, little do I know how to distemble.
Dist'emble, Sir !—— ■
She hastily aroSe, and stepping to him Explain the mysterious words.
He fighed, and turned his head from her.
She took his hand.
Why So dejedfed ? Is MiSs Cranmer or I the cauSe of it?—I am ViAoria—your friend—1 can-
not bear to See you unhappy.
Heavenly
.A’
[ 255 ]
^0
eyes:
Heavenly girl! your goodneft conSounds me-#*
I deferve it not---believe me, I deferve it not.—
What do I hear?—Oh! dear aunt.---------
She fobbed, and went to Mrs. Brenton. ConfuSion! thought [, on feeing her cheeks bedewed with tears.—How many damned blunders do I commit! —She loves him—his, plain. Curie upon love, which thus ridiculoully deludes me I, What is your crime ? refumed Lady Vibioria. What have you done ?—You have not forfeited
your honour ?—------Forgive the question- ’tis an
infult to us both.—No : 1 will not think < f it.— You are worthy o: my esteem, though you had no claim to my love,----
Frederick! this was the language, of indifference. —I began to breathe.
What generoSity !—and I could offend 1 — Oh, Vidloria / you render me contemptible in my own
----your good opinion Sinks me into a hatred
of myfelf.—’Tis intolerable.------
Frojlyl-—You are still my friend—are you not? —You never injured me.—Had vou ever a wish
r	^	'
that was not tor my happineis ?----
Destrudtive palfions, how you Sport with a fen-fible heart ?—What virtue can long relist you ?—
You loved me not, Victoria.---—•
How he delighted my ear, Frederick /
You loved me not—I have not that remorfe to
torture me.-------
John !-----
Lady Victoria leaned her head on the bofom of
m/
Mrs. Brenton.
T'riumph, Sir 1 No : I will not exult at the errors of others. A rational man is always indulgent : he knows the power of the paffions, and how difficult it is to oppofe them. Your repentance is far more glorious than your fault was
bl.imeable.----The man who never failed is not
, half
What a triumph for you. Sir
*	[ 256 ]
balf So praife-worthy as he who has the magnanimity to confefs he did.—If there is any other cauSe
for my triumph, pray conceal it not.---
Frojby ! —
T00 injured Vibloria !-—
And he kneeled before her*
Injured!—In what ? Tell me of an injustice —
I can fuipedf none from you.----
IsAiisCranmer—an oath—a dreadful oath—no— I cannot fpeak.—
And he stew away from us.
Eight o’clock.
The fudden departure of Frofry struck Lady Victoria with amazement. She stlently followed him with her eyes till he was out of fight, then abfolutely forgot I was prefent.
O man, man! exclaimed she. Flow imprudent to trust thee !—
And she walked, abforbed in thought, to the feat he had left.
He loved Mifs Cranmer., yet every da) talked of love to me!—Frojby could deceive ! —
IMrs. Brenrion., roufed by her doleful accents, stepped to her. I refpecled her grief, and remained where I was.
Dear aunt, Frofoy was a perjurer.—Since his heart was Mifs CranmeFs., why did he continue to tell me of his palSion ? ’Twas ungenerous.—One of us he bafely betrayed.—This behaviour from Frojlyl—A heart I thouglit untainted with the
vices of the age---
She put her handkerchief to her eye.
My foul was in a dreadful agitation, Frederiek. An oath!—What can he have Sworn?—To pretend an inclination he had not ?—Mifs Cranmer could net command this—her heart had rebelled
Such an order.—Whom elfe had he to o-
against



12571
bey?—Would we could justify him 1 For though'* I—loved not, ’tis torment to defpife the man we esteemed.----
The “ loved not” was mumbled, but I heard it.
Mrs, Brenton whifpered her, and after exchanging a few words, Vitoria feemed in fome meafure to refume her ufual ferenity.
Their looks inviting me, I arofe and joined them.
Who, my Lady, would not glory in poffeffing a heart fo feeling and fo virtuous ?—Frojby never ■knew its worth.----
She stifled a figh.
Did he not fay you loved him not, and appear glad it was fo ?—
He did.—
She turned her head, and threw her arm round ihe neck of Mrs. Brenton.
You love him not?—
He faid fo.—
$
$
And you do not ? —
You are too gay for being my confident.—
Oh ! tell me, my l.ady, tell me you love not Frojhy.—
Are you fo much Frofly’s friend as to delight in my indifference for him ?—If fo, tell him 1 love him not, that he may not be unhappy through the fear I do.—
4
You love him not! Is it possible ! How grateful to my heart the affurance you give!—You love him not!—
’Tis not for Frojly but for yourstlf I welcome the pleaSing news with the most fenfible joy.— Thrice happy the day in which I am told you love not Frojby ! What misfortunes, dear my Lady, have you not avoided! How I dreaded for the peace of your life ! ,How could you have endured
the
>’
f 258 ]
she infidelity of the man you loved ? Mifs Cranmer he adores.—His long fince I knew the fatal fecret.
"	o	^
—Never would I have revealed it, lest you mould have been overcome by derpai*", if chance or Idof-hy had not brought it to light.—It 1 kept it from you, my Lady, conSider, I thought you loved him.—Pity my delicacy : I would have died an hundred deaths rather than accufe
How astonifhed Mrs. Brenton! How affested-, Lady ViAorta !	,
You have added to my regard for you, faid the former, though indeed. Sir John^ I thought that
impossible.-----	»
I kissed her hand.
The latter Spoke not,, but how expressive and. gratefur were her looks !
I fell at her feet.
Frederick! ,how virtuous woulst men be were
«
tlie esteem of a beautiful- and worthy woman the prize!
I had just fallen on my knee when Ellifon Surprifed me in the delightful posture.
Lley;^ o’clock.
Am I awake ? Sir ^dhn- at your feet, my Lady !
■....-This, Frederick-, h'gr countenance clearly ex-
pressed .
WhaPs the matter with Mr; Frcjhy^ Vidioria P He came to us So strangely agitated he would not stop one minute, but went immediately off with Mifs Cranmer and her friends.—
Has he not told you, Mifs, of his extreme con-.cern for Mifs CYanmer?—
Not lie indeed. ? What concern can he have
* <%
with that lady?.-----
Mutual love. Madam. He could not dissemble : her accident almost betrayed him into a confession of his passion for her —
His passion for her !. Mutual love!—Immenfely
fine
. %
[ 259 1
t	'	’	^	*
fine this on rhy honour! Ha! hal ha!-------Do
you jest, my Lady ?—
I do not.—
And she related most of what had pasted.
A charming fcene, Vidloria ! I am vexed I was not prefent. Did hea£l well ?—
To the very life, faid I, with a sheer.—
I don’t doubt if. Next to you. Sir John^ he is the best mimic L ever knew.—But you was acting when I e.,she.—Is it the Second a£f.? Since I lost the first', pray go on, let me not lofe this. Come, my Lady, you was there, and you. Sir,
here——on your knee^----------You won’t oblige
me ? How unkind I—
Is not my Silence the greatest condefcenlion I can shew you, Mifs ? ■
How Severe, Sir Johri! faid Lady . Vidior'iny wondering at my expression^ Mifs Ellifon laughed, lyord ! what dignity in your language, when I only require the futility of a buffoon ? Ha ! ha 1 ha I are you afraid of being eclipfed by Frojhy.y that you dare not to perform after him ? 1 ake courage. Sir John : we shall certainly applaud
you.----	* i
Are you as certain, MilS, not to Suffer by my performance i—	•
I am. Sir : but as you are fo.averfe to afford us that pleashre I will entreat you no longer. Be af-fured, my Lady, that Mr. Fhojly has a very flight
knowledge of Mifs Cranmer------that he imitates
^or the beaux of the age in their tranfitory amours -—that his heart is wholly yours.—Is it probable that a man of . his understanding would have So foolishly talked himfelf int^ difgrace ? From his careleffnefs you may infer hb>is innocent. Were he a man of fashionable life, indeed he might love, change, and boast of it : but he is not a Duke
or a Kir john Modijh.---That frown is unfeaSo-
■ nabJe,
ns
[ 2 '5o ]
‘liable. Sir, you would be difpleafed not to deferve this eulogium.—
Your larcafms are too fprightly-, Mifs, not to be forgiven. But if I admire your wit, I am forry
I cannot pay the fame compliment to your ssn-cerity.—
Perhaps Sir yohn has faith in thofe things only
his Self-love is interested to believe.---Had you
lefs partiality. Sir, you would think me more credible.—
And Ihefpoke with fuch an air of ingenuity and indifference about Cranmer and Frojby.^ that had I not been convinced of their amour, I should have been a dupe to her apparent candour.
The imposture was fo artfully fupported by her natural elocution that I caught in the looks of Mrs. Brenton a deSire to credit her, blended with a temptation not to mistrust my word^
We must own, faid Lady Vitoria Smiling, that Mr. Frojby could not have a more fldlshl apologist for the flights of his gopd nature ; but I really doubt, Mifs, whether he will thank you for the attempt. Too genuine were his Sorrow and repentance, too deciflve the words he uttered, too unaf-fetfied the tears he flied. ’Twas no farce, Mifs : Art, however ingenious, has not the flexibility of Nature. May not Mr. Frojby have fecrets unknown to you ?
He may have hundreds for aught I know, but this could be ho Secret. Mifs CranmeFs friendship for me, and Mr. Frojbjs. public homage to you, prove unanswerably the impoflibility of an intrigue between them, and of it being hidden from me. The accufation is abfurd.
Two in the Morning.
Are you not astonished, Frederick^ at the unshaken confidence of Mifs Ellifon.^ and the dexterity with vvhich she interpreted the behaviour of
FroJ>y ?
[ 26i ]
(»
to me, to how dar-defended
FroJl)y ? At what political School has she attained So linl'peakable a mastery over herfelS?
How naturally she shewed a distike give my oppoSition an - air oS revenge ! iiigly she provoked my anger, and Frojhy !
This is a'new plot, Said I to myfelf, just laid to invalidate the imprudent declarations of Frcjby ; and fo far has it already Succeeded as to raife adoubt in his favour, fkreen her from being thought accef-fary to his guilt, and render my evidence equivocal.------Had Frojhy^ her head, or could he, with^
a native hypocrify, a<£f the part she shall allot him, it would ste difficult to convidf them. Thanks to fortune I have not to work on a prejudiced mind. Lady VidiOria loves not Frojhyher reafon is at full liberty to judge-"—I shall conquer.
The night coming on, Mrs. Brenton took her leave, Mifs Fllifon infisting on feeing them to their coach ; we all walked to the houfe. '
I will remove your doubts, whifpe ed I to Lady Vitoria.	»
Neediest, Sir John., Since 1 love not A4r. Frojhy.— She loves him not! Partake in my joy, Frederick^ partake in my joy 1 She loves him not | Dost thou conceive all the charm of thefe words ? Infenfible creature, shalt thou never meet with a Vidforia f Pray for that happinest—^—fervently pray—think
of no other prayer, Frederick------If fuccestful, no
longer shalt thou have a wish to form.
Modijh- hall,— 17 6-----
END OF THE THIRD VOLUME
s-Y - -- .
\	*			;.*.V
			• A ' rf	
	' ii* . V					k»/.;
'•‘M

■
V .	,	'.'x I, ' ;t i'
. -D'h-TV- •

'	^ .y .
< _•
• ■ V '.A
r 7 '
rc
		X* ' W
-••• ■'.•A.v . V # * * !' . ' , ‘		
		, ■-'■ CA' -N/ '.-ro
! ' • •- '. .	. • ■	

V.v
>.■

I
A'
•iff
O *

. V

t
ki
- •'	■ V .1
' ,’.1‘ : •.*'
^ NN , ,i_;-•- ■•■■'«■
. 'V-.
■ ■’-
vAV '
V
'V.'.
^ h ’

•>	*.4 .
sd'.-' ;-t'‘;'-0 ■■■* . C-. I
. . ' ,1 «■■• ■*
* '■•
i .
V V
*■$
' . » 1 ; <■ '	4 * P ’
	V
- . * A- f - -	■ >.
	
- • ■ ■ r . ' •* . ' ' 1 • 'i	■■
■^. • *'A	
* . ■ .' *♦•. ‘	• . ** ' •
“ . ^ ' 4'	■
m ^ . * » » * *	f
♦ ' '- *	■H s
**'**»' V • -4^ ■	wfe
	. "Jfi
	
C'y .. ^ ^ ^ y . »:« V	
	“ ^ • ,r... .i •
' ■ K *■ ’	^ 'r^
. • ,y r'^ ^	' ^
•* •
‘ •• /f
•.
i/*
• Hi t
, ------------ ^
.1 .'	'».L ^ • •
■■ ' ' ' \:v Ih>yd: •'.•'■ '■?-*•'•'••*•'	■.	; ‘	' d V	• '
. .	',	^ n: ...	. T
A’-'
'	<S^C.	• ' ■>■•• ^^■-•' ■3''-'	■ '■'	'•	"	•'	'.	v<'
• . .«
■ 't-.-f

. 1*1
i-;c
ri''
, s .
A ■
• \ ,1 '. *’.' »'
■'/,
.'•■’• .'	.* • ^‘r-
' 'H' • h .*
■•,i>;-'.',* -P.
» ,-•/-- ,
» ' ,r k . 1 A	A ' ^		
	h f '•* i		i
' 4 *.*	#-T':		,%
\ ..
• N
'Ftl ftl ^

T v <»	• f
•	^	.	I
s	T;	’,	■	•	»
^	. L '	.'V	•	' I	•	/


w »	*	»
■,
V ,.'
Vr
>ri
••"■ ,1,
:■■• ' • V-
./•
,W
V.
•”W



- X
%' ?■' ■ . ■
••	V/'
- V--

k - r
;	.	■ . ■	' •	•	■■-	,vv,..-vv	■	•
"••c •.'	-Ab v-'^	•	,: ■ 's' -
-■:	',	.•'/-‘■A-	V '	‘
\ . *'^'VAIA-
hAA^d---' ’:<A’MAA .
^ \ VV' ■ L
• ■	» M ,. -V^C'	* ■•'; i' *-f
i2(-
•A
, . '■ C ’\-,	•' rT
' '*/S A,V'b --
^ . A.	'' ' /' ‘.. ' 1 ,•	
.;. • ■ A* ♦ '	.k > ! C	. I'
	, 1 • ‘ . i »	i • k*
vV ■, '*1	r.,	_S; -yA
■ , • '	r	
•H-p- .


I
^ <

// V
•tiri >
■U'
j,«r • r.iA’
••■c Av,/h,tii'‘
L? k. . .■•^.v jl“.
>

*^*
■ ‘A V- • ..

•A
♦
v« •
iK''- .
> •
i ■*
« 4
V>v,
'ifT:
$		'i?..	
%	•		•
■ j • r			\
• .>	i /	K\\	
' A			
f*-		/	1
Dr		.... ' ■ *‘.V. .
	« •‘‘‘D ' ■	■■^ 4*. • ,/ , • . -
		‘ . i.'
V		.N ■ y,.. • • , *
( .' * %		. k
J	v.'ki	%
««?.
4^

j» •.
I
. • ' ' >T '•’.	' ' ■
.	1 t'	' •
,*•.* '•

VUj
yr
■« •->.■, ^ t
*i '
s.-.
\
		*
t		■ >'.■
• •»,	•	
' 1		'* i ^ \
' '*		
		y.
1'		'i-,
*-2,-	.• ^	" *.' L
\		11.'.
		L'fb '
-•; .. V' . ‘-V '	C'*'	>w<-^’'r.’-y:vco. • ■>•;• .	'
Ayyri ^^n-mrrFrry
■ : A?#’
.,	•, ,	. ■',	^.f'	■•	__.	/	■ I kAI •
‘ ^ y. ■ V • 'V... > •' '	
)j * ‘/•'•.V	,
*H . ;v . ^	
		
■ ,D'■•	■A •vX
. 4'


i«..|
-C*
.0-
, 4'

/t

\i’ ■.
... Arid\	». 4	, * 1
-V .	4—	V •. * '
		- 0
■« 0 . '. . C '		, y/
• '	t	
	.v,C »'	
.•^- >		■ ■■ f '?'
'• • r	• • '	
.		
.^ v>	t	
f.
f ■ .:
■c^ \
, t
.J.y
.	.' t .<

n'
• ...4 ^ ^	, .'••	fc.*	.,	*	^	'	. . i
r -■■‘-A
' ..../	y.C ■..	.	. .Cr'i
1 A
' ^-N.'		/ . » *
	y* *	■' A iV
		
		i‘ I::fL
tf-

: •' I
^ f
•U
y ‘.
'■:■•: rv
C'3:^^ ri-.riA .Ay u- s *	.	■•
w
.C‘
f- ■
• t
''A V-;vL;T’y >f.'"	■ ■
‘ H ■ ,'. . A	• ••,,*•<
■	•-. :.v. ,;■ .	. • ■ ,	/ ■	■•

	• • f ,	’Ss. ■ . ’ • » • . '	k ■	
■ .>.	^ •	•1* ■ ■ ■'■• ■		’ .'♦
•		:.D. ) te,	• '• t	•\ 4
* •			s	k * ^ '
	•'		' ¥• A,	* r N
< • ^
s ,■
t. L
C-'
>v ‘
r^)
V
■*tr ■■ ;		<
»/ ,:.		
•	*7^. ■	
		
■ r j
'r '• '
' •
•k r
>■
' \
I * *

^ ■
■>
r ' •
‘\
_c
& o
Q ^
^ p

• !«?•: ■
■ 4"-‘-d

y • '
j
e ,'	■ cdy
-A
I	1 - j_ ■ ■	''j-	> 11-.
.'■hi »J^ y .'« . tkj—
■■ fr


t,
.1
:v,,:
\*
-.*t
■■ :•■?

a</
f,
Ar'
<•',
■ '*■> V-
t*:
. * C%:-.--
'AVd
■ '
_'*V:
#*•/
J** ‘ <	i.- *‘'‘-
•V iii>. "1*
iU'-'
.	y.1
< .	' y
/	^ •
•/'5\ V	r‘
'..y	'iS^kA


:.vV

, I
>**'

✓
•1
• **A

"^■,''V
»’t'.
■	'j- k'»'T.
V:	•
“
«
• ^
-r.
,• /	4
y-
t
. I '


" V ■ 4 . ' '

. f«
'-^ . • * ft
; I r

.'1 'a\ty.
■; • , . *
-. > V >
. .y '
'V L.'..
I,'. ♦'•*.>
.' ■' I
■■■ '/'fi.-'
}*.
m... .' i' ‘ .'
- '* ♦,
. I
Li. . . ,.•' . •	*’’■ •• :
-■■.■•■ .A
^	'	' ‘ "' . ' *r ! ‘
'■"'■.'LTi,/;;
■	* {^ >
.A.-Ar.
- ■ ' V A
•___Vy?

/

r>
\
'-S' * i :v	
. ■	TnW
vS' ' - '■'	AA-'C
	•/. V • ' ' " “

-
• .
■ -j'
r «
i ;•
S' • tl
V
.	H-
■'•r

A
“i'Wi
.-V*. * V
- 1
't d
Vff

y
%
»* ♦ << ■ *'?' •>
>
'■19.
' •
•v>
♦ *
\

' ‘f '•: X.


r
:■ ' V

N:
V\
A
* V '.
■' '^'- ;
« . >
■ V
' N
. i
-•» •.
■N'T a"
>	4 < ,
V '

sv
' * *1'
)
) T
'> :
7.A; -f T v
N.
•N
r
V-
■ >• j
I
fi
\ '^.
I
\ '
-
V £
^4 •«'
T T T

/ .


.. /
i

1
s
r 'i ;
V
y
♦ -
■ \ •*
\
• i
1.
V-
\
f>. ' ¥
' /
'^j. •■	^
t' ■
•N4^-T	^.r'-
V'-*
\
r

-.- r ..	r ^i^j.: 'A- -••.tn	-
-■; ■	/	^:T ‘: ■■ / :-■/
V-- - ^ V-
-■ -A ^'Fry f Uf rty ■-.'■. ,-.•	K^-^V;v.:c
-■	vc-aV.- 4':*••>■ •
A^rf/T^.Tv-V'v^vC'-V.T.i^

' V > -t '	' •-* •••'.*•■•':'	' .	. ' ^ '
•■'••■ ■' . --•> -•• • • •'■... •■” ''^.. 1' ■ ■ -•-•. ■.- - 1 ..-A -■••	-N •■- -^-v- _.
V- ^


y-F-
"A’-'-'

r
.)
"N \ '
t .


/
/
\
■f
/ - 1	*	/	1		=.
		■	•		-
TSv-'■ c/^	ife

:' "rA
AAFAM.^ ■ --
< •
-.-T

•vs--SANa’ '-T Tdffr.-' T;-'
•■ L '	. :
■ r
!t ^	■ ■ ■
4 A^

* t
A
•••rr^'V
A; 'i

-.r’ - •
■- r*



i' ,
_-C •
~ /: CV:.. ^.----
■tC-	s . •	.-—
9E
cy
fee.
: /

—-	■ r -1#!?
• *- •.
AVAmV - ■
* I-:-^'^* -'
r .
/
/'■
y
N
,-s» >•' • r»f ..

■•i' ■	■ r


:n-'
1 V	A - ^' .' P«v'<'■’’ ■■■
	
>:	!v;^>vN' ,. V. < -
- ‘ii- 'j. ' r, . r '-T ‘-'	'. '■ - *■ • * - '\. '-■- ■ ** r
	, 0^. , . • * • • • - - # vs^--6 1 • - . • ^
* ^
r
/
J t
\
i.
T,
/ -
■(
•f
. i
>
> -
\
• N-


(
V-
• - .A
'X
■7:-
i-' -■A-
C'-r.* *-\
N T--r>
t
tjr-
r- .■

\

y
/
. .)

./
/
r.
te'..

• N
: N.

r
. *
-*$ -Vr*

. -'N"
:n
:b
>■'
7
j.
7
Vr
>. ■ »

1'
^ -\,
-.tr
«> i

:-^7 -■>
;	■■_,■ ■ "I -


“ t; --
• r -
■ \'
■K ■ ' > .• •
-1
• r,r 'P'-.	% ■ ■*
•% • 1* 1	% V
■ i ■‘'	


■rs.

? ^

-c .f “ ‘ ^ H
y - . *
»
A:F
.-ii/'-o ---


\
K'V;:
CiSf.'’;-	.
S'-- V.
: :. " ■
J <“. *
. • • . ^ -•
^5.

.7
■ V -. • t
*'" ,-‘e
• 4 Jdiirr • ,f
■—■ . • .. ..-.•>lii\ ■>(

. t.
A‘
V
; ■


*v‘- ■:;
1.^

^ • #-

. .%*-■•■
PS
p.-fe

fc- (-• --X
Ew • <	’	* 'jT' 7’*	L* T> -
B.-*.^--. JTi	. ,- ^rjr '
V'
Jsfas^l^sN-V* • ■'^■^	'-'.
r.r^c.; ■ . jt t;:--
. iT
^4
\
V,
-K

jT-;

t
ri
-'f ■■^' ■
S'.: „,..
:P<«
' r « 5
C-.
>
t

>7

ct
I '■*“
•'* ii* ^

r«=’ « . Tj^..	■ '.V ,* »«'
	•• ' ►
- ^ ^ V	i* '
J"' • ■	V . - A J
n - kj.	ii
	

--. 'F^-c
Z>*:<

■ V
«
h
:■ *. . ...,
s
■•-Kli ■-•- ■
i!»5fTy. V •<►-.
-
•a

.i -="-
..Of


^ - •' 'V
.\... ■

'S 7.

^
/"V
V
V- U"
• *
■;,N^
X ■
S'
p
t-.' ri ' j
if
. i-

V
''i^-
V
\	o
I.	.
'•
C ■
i
^. '
: '■■ ' /fe
)
V 1
\
\ ...
	
. /V ■	
V *	
	"*s- ;•.;. r. ..•■.• :v
-.J	:• ' ■•Ah ;;-v-
> i1

■-U
i 1



y-yrr

i -.t


lU

- • va.* -.• ♦»*.I



i