J
THE
GODFREY F. SINGER MEMORIAL PRESENTED BY
MR. AND MRS. JAOOB SINGER
■r	'
r
\
*
«
THE
4
history
* ^
V
■\
OF
«
Mifs Harriot Montague.
/
/
THE
I
HISTORY
,	f
O F
/	i
\
%
Mifs Harriot Montague.
«
In two volumes.
A
V O L. I.
<
V
LONDON:
Printed for J. Roson, No. 54, St, Martin’s-
Lc Grand, near Newgate-Street.
M DCC LX,
«
^X>- ... » , ■ '^i
•m'i n I	........ ■■■■■ ,i..,»,, ,^^| ,  ^mm^nnm wrnnjmm m    ■ n
/
I
9
THE
»
»
*
H I S TO R A
O F
i
Mifs H A R R I O T MO N T A G U E..
iT
IT
IN that delightful feaSon of the year, when nature throws forth all her hoard of charms, and puts to shame the weak efforts of art; when the groves were adorned with verdure, the meads and gardens enamelled with fiowerSi when the little Warbling choriffers of the woods begin to make their nests in the thick-Set branches of the shady bowers. In the reign of our late Sovereign George the istj there came to letdc VoL. I.	B	at
a The HISTORY of
4
at a Small village near Plymouth, a French gentleman and his lady, whoSe names were Le Montague, they left France, their native country, upon account of their religion. Monfieur Le Montague had been master of a veS-• fel, with which, making many prof-, perous voyages, he had gained a pretty fortune; and was now refolved to pafs the remainder of his days in .a country of liberty, where he might enjoy his religion without molestation, having diSpofed of ail his cffeDs in France, and remitted the money by bills to England, into the hands of one of his correspondents at Plymouth, where he choSe to fettle ; he having '.Some acquaintance with the most: considerable merchants, with whom he had traded. Fie had been in England Several times before, and was perfedly Skilled in our language,; he put part of his money into the public funds, and with the rest purchafed a houSe and Some lands, on which he lived with his wife and a few Servants,
/
Mifs Harriot Montagu£> 3
as happily as any man-cm earth could do ; nothing was Avantlng shut chil -dren to makeshlm completely Ste.. He had been married eight years, ana no .proSped: of having any; however, he had not lived in this healthful country 'above 18 months-, when his lady with niuch joy acquainted him She was wjth child, at which news he was much transported, and returned thanks to heaven. She was at the expiration of her time happily delivered of a child, which proved a girl, whofe life in the Subject of this history being full of Such strange misfortunes and wonderful adventures, that it well deferves the notice of the public : ’they gave ' ■ her the name of her fond mother, which was Harriot; the child was So beautiful, every, body that faw her admired her.
It is neediest to tell you that Mo.n-fieur Le Montague and his lady bred" her up with all the care and terider-ueSs imaginable; but it pleated heaven to deprive this little crea-
B 2	tu;e
\
4	The H I ST O R Y of
ture of her mother before fhe was three years old, for Madam Le Montague fell lick of a fever, and died, after lingering under that terrible disorder eight months: she was well re-fpeded by all her neighbours, which made her greatly lamented, eSpecially by the poor, to them flie was very kind. Poor Harriot was left to the care of her father, who was deeply
concerned for the death of his loving
/ -
wife, looking upon the child as the dear pledge of which was left him, of their mutual affection: he was fo doatingly fond of her, that he was reSolved never to marry again, but to make it the bufineSs of his life to instruct and provide for her on the mosh advantageous manner he was
able.
Nor was his good intentions frustrated, for Harriot as she encreafed in years shewed fo great a capacity, and So quick an apprehenfion in all she went about, that he had reaSon to expect great things from her; nor were
his
. ' *
«
MiSs Harriot Montague. r
bis expectations without Soundation t for before she was twelve years old she could play on the lute and harpfichord> dance finely. Speak French and Italian perfectly, Sung delightfully, writ delicately, and uSed her needle with So hiuch art and skill, as if Pallas had been her governeSs. Monfieur Le Montague offered praiSes to heaven hourly for her, and was more fond of her than he ought to have been, fancying he could not outlive the lofs of her: she in return for his exceffive fondneSs, was So obedient to his will, that his commands were always punctually obeyed; flie never offended him. But man is a frail creature, and there are unlucky hours in life, which, if not carefully armed against, give us opportunities of being undone. A merchant of London, in whoSe hands Monfieur Le Montague had a great Sum of money, died, and he was obliged to make a journey to town on purpoSe to look after it, and get it out of the executrix’s hands
B 3	who
6 The HISTORY or
who was loopked upon to be no very honest woman. He would not venture to take Harriot with him,, for fear of the Small-|)ox, which at that time was very outrageous in London : he leSt her with a gentlewoman,, whom he had taken into his houSe fince the death of his wife, as a houSe-
•	■	s	_
keeper, to manage the Servants and wait on his daughter : he Set out for London as Soon as he had provided every .thing neceSfary for the journey, and took up his refidence at a friend’s houSe in the city, where he was joyfully received. When he had tranS-adted the bufinefs he came upon, he was refolved to stay a few days to enjoy the pleafures of the town, where. he had not been for many years : he went to court and the play-houfes. His friend and he being together one evening at the play, two very hand-Some vvell-dreifed ladies came into the pit and fat down before themi, one of theSe ladies was very beautiful
and genteel, the other Seemed to be
her
MiSs Harriot Montague. 7
her companion. Monfieur Le Montague felt a strange .alteration in him-felf, at the fight of this v/oman 3 he fell into difcourSe v/ith her, aud presented Some oranges and Sweetmeats to her j h« found her conversation as bewitching as her fiice and mein : his friend kindly cautioned him, but in vain. In fine, the phy being done, he prevailed on the ladies to be admitted to See them home, and aficed his friend to accompany him, which he, after great perfuafions, unwillingly consented to: they ushered the ladies into a coach, the ladies bid the coachman drive to a street in Piccadilly, where being come they alighted, and the gentlemen were invited into a houfe furnished very genteely. They staid Supper, which was Served up by two maid Servants, consisting of cold meat, tarts, and wine.
Supper being over, they entered into a free rnanner of conversation j the lady, who appeared to be the
B 4	mistreSs
♦
V
8 The HISTORY op
mistreSs' of the houfe, was tliO' youngest and handSomest, told thenv (he was a widow, and had buried her husband about two years before, who was'a country gentleman j he had. kft her a moderate fortune, and died without iffue. She finding the country too melancholy for her, had come to London with this lady her aunt, who was a widow alfb; but having had an ill husband, was not fo well provided for, as one of her birth and iortune deferved: they had taken a houfe in that part of the town, as most airy and retired, and had but few vi-fitors: then She excuSed herSelFwitk a charming air of modesty, for having admitted, thefe strangers to this freedom, which indeed Monsteur Le Alontague had defired with great importunity. They Spent the remainder of the evening in a very agreeable conversation, and then refpedffully took leave, after having obtained of the two. ladies permission to. repeati
their
/
MiSs Harriot Montague. 9
V
their vifits, and continue the acquaintance chance had fb happily begun. The Servant having called a coach, Monfieur Le Montague gave her half a crown, and entered into it with his friend, over head and ears in love with his charming widow; his friend plea-fantly ridiculed him all the way home, telling him thefe ladies were doubtlefs kept-women or jilts, but Monfieur Le Montague was So inflamed with love for the young widow, that he was deaf to all he Said, yet Seemed to hearken to him, and turn the adventures into a jest, Saying,, he did nof intend to vifit them any more.
When he got home he was very defirous of going to bed, but the thoughts of his charming widowTo deprived him of rest, that he lay aWake all night, thinking on nothing but her. He vifited her the next day, and was entertained with So much modesty and wit, that he lost all confideration, and reSolved, if pofiible, to gain her for his wife. And now it is fit that we
B '5	Should
10 Tlia H I S T 0 R Y
-Should know who She was, and that we relate this fair one’s life, whoSe true name is Melinda.
She was the younger daughter of a country gentleman, of a good family and estate, and though well educated, and very witty, and accomplished:, yet being wantonly inclined^ she at the age of fifteen fell in love with a young officer of the guards, who carne to the town her father lived in to vifit Some relations. This gay young rake, who had a wife and two children in London, made love' Secretly to this young lovely une?.> perienced girl, and having prevailed on her maid to let him meet her in a grove behind her father’s houSe, where he pretended honourable love to her, and promised to marry her. In fine, having gained her afFedfions and ruined her, fearing her father would revenge the injury he had done his daughter, if he came to the knowledge, of it, he one evening took leave of her to go for London, pretending it
was
I
/
MiSs Harriot Montague, n
was to defire his Sriends to get him a better post, as he was at that time but an enfign; then he would write to his relations to move his Suit to her father. But alas ! the deluded Malin-da, young asxfhewas, too well discerned her lover’s baSe defign, and was distradSed with Sliame, love, and revenge; Slie reproached him (letting fall a Shower of tears) in words fo tender and fo moving, that had he not been a hardened wretch, and one of thofe heroick rakes that have been well verfed in every vice, that this famous city can instrudl youth in, ffie would have relented; but he was a complete gentleman, and had the tongue of a lawyer; was as deceitful as a courtier, had no more religion than honesty, was handfome, lewd, and in--constant; yet he pretended to be much concerned at leaving her, and made a thoufand protestations of his fidelity to her. He fet out for London the next morning before day, and ^
left the poor undone Melinda; in the
B 6	utmost
12 The HISTORY OF
utmost deSpair; fhe was afraid to drC' cloSe her grief to any but her treacherous maid, who had been the confident of their amour i Some months past without one line from him, whicte convinced her of being more unfortunate than She at first imagined; she found herSelf with child, which put a-thoufand dreadful defigns into her head, Sometimes she was reSolved to^^ put an end to her wretched life, and> prevent her shame, but then refiedf-ing on the miserable state her foul must be in for ever,, thofe thoughts made her defist from her difmal pur-pofe ; but finding it imposhble to conceal her misfortune much longer, she was refolved to go to London infearch of the wretch> the author of her miseries.
In order tO’ this- she got what mo-iiey she could together, and one evening, having before acquainted her treacherous confident with her de-stgn, she packed up her deaths tyidi what riilgs and other things she, had;
of
/
. *
MiSs Harriot MoNTAGtJE.
of value. At midnight the maid got two of the men Servants habits, which they put on, and So diSguiSed them-felves, each carrying a bundle, they went away from her father’s honfe by break of day; the maid having ordered her brother, to whom she had told her defign, to meet them a little way from the houfe with horSes, on which they mounted ; he being the guide, went with them twenty miles, which was near half way to London. There they parted with him, well rewarded him for his trouble, and he took thchorfes back, after bribing him well to be fecret j but they did not fear . he would make any difcovery; he being fo much concerned in affisting,
them in their flight*
They lay at the inn that night which he had carried them to, from whence a stage coach went every other day to London, and was to Set out from thence the next morning, sti which they went, having changed their cloaths at a bye ale-houfh oh the
road
14 The HISTORY OF
road before they came to the inn, and gave their men’s habits to their con-dudtor, they appeared to be really what they were; and Melinda’s beauty madeaconquest of an old Superannuated captain, who with his nephew, a youth about twelve years of age, was in the coachHe Soon entered into diScourSe with her. She wanted not wit, her youth and fine habit She had on, informed him She was a perfon of no mean degree. He asked her many questions, and made her large offers of his Service, and She was nobly treated by the old gentleman at dinner.
. They being now within a few miles of London, the unfortunate Melinda, who knew not where to look for a lodging, nor how to find out the bafe author of her miSeries, ventured to tell the old gentleman that Ihe was a stranger in town, and Should be highly obliged to him if he could help her to a lodging in Some private houSe of good reputation, and a fight of Frederick, whom fhe fuppoSed he might
have
' 'I
MISsHarriot Montagus. 15
have Some knowledge of, being an officer.' The old gentleman was indeed no stranger to him nor his vices, and immediately guested the condition of the unhappy Melinda by her blushes : he joyfully told her, that he was well acquainted with him, and belonged to the fame regiment, and that he would introduce her into the houSe of a lady who was his relation, who would study to make her as happy as she could destre. The unfortunate Melinda joyfully accepted his generous offer, looked on this as Providence, and him as her only friend. But alas, stiS was greatly deceived, for it was Only a forerunner of greater misfortunes which proved her entire ruin; for the captain believing her now entirely ruined, had his own fatisfac-tion in view, and pitying her condition, knowing the villainous Frederick was already married, thought it would be a deed of charity in him to keep her for himSelf, In order to which, as Soon as the stage came to
the
id The HISTORY or
the inn, he hired a hackney eoach, into* which he put his nephew and a Servant that be had with him, who rid up one 0'S his horSes ; Sent them home to hi& own houSe; and went with the lady and her maid to a houSe in Piccadillyy where dwelt a uSeful lady, in plain English, a private quality bawd, who' uSed to lodge a mistreSs Sor him often. This private procureSs was well bred, and a Saint in appearance, she lived in Ib private a manner, that her neighbours was unacquainted with her pro-feshon. She passed for a married lady, and gave out that her husband waa first lieutenant of a man of war, and that he was at the East Indies, where the ship was stationed, and that she let her lodgings to people of fashion ; she kept a maid Servant, and always had a handSome attendant or two which pasted for relations, who came to vifit her out of the country. She was called aunt by one, and coufin by another, as she directed the poor creatures to
stile her. The houSe was neatly furnished.
*
MiSs Harriot Montague. 17
nished, and there was no young creature in it at that time but our unSor-tunate traveller, and a lady whoSc name was Lucinda, a young girl a-bout eighteen years of age,, who had been trapanned there, and ruined by a nobleman at that time famous for fuCh villainous adions; this was-the perfon that was with her at the play, when Monfieur Le Montague law themv The captain prefented the unfortunate Melinda to this good lady, giving her particular charge to be careful
and kind to her ; but the old infinuat-
^ /
ing bawd had no occafion to be told of that, for feeing her So young, hand-Some, and So well dressed, was well pleaSed with her company, and was determined to pradliSe all her arts to gain her esteem and friendship, hoping in time she would prove a good bargain to her. Supper was foon provided, and our unfortunate traveller eat very heartily. Being a little fatigued with her journey. She drank two or three glasses of wine, which made her
for
i8 .The HISTORY
for the preSent forget all her misfortunes. He pressed her to know her eircumstanees, she freely told him.
- that the baSe Frederick had promiSed her marriage and ruined her, but she would not tell him her true name, nor from whence she came, but with tears intreated him to bring the bafe Frederick to her, which he promiSed . to dp the next morning. , He then took his leave of her, much charmed with his valuable prize, hoping he should foon obtain his deSires, but in his heart he could but condemn his friend’s villainy, as he knew that he was already married.
He went to his own home to his wil^j, for he had one, a very amiable good Sort of a woman ; he had likewise two children, but had never shewn a parental regard for neither, nor a fincere love for his wife, but ufed her very ill. The poor unfortunate Melinda was condudfed withsher maid to a handshme chamber, the maid undressed herfelf and was foon asseep,
but
Miff Harriot Montague. 19
but the miserable Melinda could not cloSe her eyes, She refledled on her own adions. It is impofiible to deScribe the uneafinefs,or more properly Speaking, the agonies Ihe underwent, when-She confidered that She had left her tender parents, blasted the reputable family She belonged to, fince none could but help guesting the cauSe of her Sudden flight ; that she was now a stranger in the place, in the hands of tshoSe she knew nothing of; that in cafe Frederick, from whom she had little caufe to exped any good, refufed to marry and take care of her, she was ruined to all intents and purpofes; Vv^as Scarce Sixteen years of age, in a strange place, and lay open to all the frauds that are pradifed in London, and amongst strangers that she was not the least acquainted with. She could not return to her friends, nor had with her but a fmall matter which could not long keep her from starving; and how was she to provide for the poor helplefs infant she was then big
with ?
20 The HI S TO R Y or
I
with ? This thought almost broke her heart; she shed a flood of tears^ and thought death a great happineSs if she could be bleffed with it; thus she pasted the night without clofe-ingsher eyes; thus by one imprudent adlion we then ruin the peace and quiet of our lives for ever, by one falfe and imprudent step undo ourSelves. Would mankind but refledl how barbarous a deed it is, how much below a man, nay, how like the devil it is to debauch a young experienced virgin, and expofe to ruin aird an endlefs train of miSeries the perfon whom hia perfuafions hath drawn to gratify his beastly lust, to oblige him at the expence of her own peace and honour to gratify his defire. It certain that if our laws be just that punish a man with death who kills another, lie certainly merits that or Something worS^ that ruins an innocent helpleSs virgin, unacquainted with the frauds of mankind. What an abominable detested villain is he who betrays a
foolish
$
• ^
MiSs Harriot Montague. 21
fholiSh maid, that credits his falSe oaths, vows, and curSed deceitful tongue, and at last abandons her to Shame and miSery ? Is he not worSe than a Savage, nay, the Savage has more humanity. And if women were not infatuated, doubtlefs every maid would look on the man that propofes Such a question to her as her mortal enemy, and from that morhent de-fpiSe him. Forgive this digrestion, our unfortunate girls condition and wrongs must inspire every generous mind with fome concern and refentment against the greatest part of mankind.
The captain, who dreamed of h^ all night, and was on fire to poffefs her. Sent for his friend Frederick in the morning to a tavern, told him of his adventure, and asked him what he meant to do with her, and who she was : but to this last question he was dumb, well knowing that the wretched Melinda was the captain’s own niece, being his fister’s daughter. He laid Ihe was a country fquire’s daughter
.22 The HISTORY 01^
ter in another town, that he could do nothing for her, but give her a purSe of money, and remove her to a cheap lodging, and Send her back to her father’s when fhe was up again. The captain reproved him, and Said he would himfelf pay her lodging, and contribute Something towards provid-, ing for her: nay, in Short, that if he would quit her company he would keep her. But Frederick was start* led at this propofal, fearing he would difeover who She was, and that it would be a quarrel betwixt them, and his ruin. He deSired Some time to confider of that, and concluded to go immediately with himto her. They found her up, her eyes Swoln with weeping: at the moment Frederick entered the chamber, She Swooned j his love revived, he catched her in his arms; the captain, disordered with this fight, went down stairs, and left them alone with none but the maid, who Shutting the door, left them together, ’Tis needlefs to relate what
pafiionate
MiSs.Harriot Montague. 23
f>a-fiionate exprellions pasted on her Side, and excuSes on his. In fine, he told her She was in an ill houSe, that the captain had bad defigns upon -her, and that he would that evening fetch her away and take care of her ; that She Should not diScover who She was, as She valued her own peace and his life. In fine, poor Melinda, born to be deceived, gave credit to all he Said, and followed his diredfions. The captain and he went away together; and in the evening Frederick, having gone to an obScure midwife’s near ChelSea, and took a lodging for her, fetched her away and carried her thither, pretending great fondnefs. Here She continued Some time, never stirring
out of doors. Hceontinually visited her, and told the captain Ihe had Sent her into the country. At last she was delivered of a dead child, and lay long ill of a fever ,; and Frederick, being -quite tired with the expence, propoSed to her to return home. She urged
his promises and vows to marry her,
till
24 The HISTORY
till he was obliged to diSclofc the fatal Secret to her, that he was married already. What words can expreSs her reSentments and diSorder at that instant.? In short, he left her in this distraction, and that evening Sent her a letter to call on him in a coach alone at a tavern he appointed, faying he had thought of a means to make her eaSy. She imprudently went, there he had hired two bailiffs to arrest her with a falfe action. She was by them carried to a fpunging houfe, and there kept while he fold his post, and with his family went into the country j having the night he trepanned her took away from the midwife’s her deaths, money, and jewels, and discharged the maid; who not daring to return to her friends or mistreSs’s father’s, went down to an aunt she had in another shire; when Frederick had dispatched his bufineSs and was gone, the officers told her he had releaSed her, and she might go where she pleaSed, She was So weak she could Scarce
walk
MiSs Harriot Montague. 25
walk, nor knew one step of the way, or the name of the place stiewas in.' 'One of theSe fellows was So moved with her complaints, that he led her to the midwife’s houSe as She di-'^rected, having learned the name of the street during her abode with her. The midwife, who knew nothing of what fhe had Suffered, received her with amazement, and Soon gave her an account how Frederick had taken away all her clothes, and Sent away her maid, which So affiidted Melinda, that she went half dead to bed. In the 'morning, not knowing what otha '■courfe to take, having neither clothes nor money, and the midwife being poor, giving her to understand (he could not long entertain her, she re-Solved to Seek out the generous cap-tain. In order to which she defired the midwife to go with her in a coach to the lady’s houfe at Westminster, to which he had at first carried her: they went, found the houSe, and were •received by Mrs.------- with rhuch
VoL, I.	C	civilirv
j
s
£6 The HISTORY of
civility and kindneSs, The colonel was fent for, and came before dinner ; he took her in his anm.with tranSport, protested never to part, but take care of her tist death. Sh^ related to him Frederick's bafe uSdge of her. Tie told her he had fold ^is P9st? and
left the town. And in Short, the mid-wife, bdng treated and rt Awarded for bringing her thither, took leave. The best rooins in the houfe were ordered for Melinda, and the captain did that night steep in her arms : thus her first misfortune involved her in a worfe. Some months She lived in this manner, being richly clothed and bravely maintained by her gallant, who doated upon her. In this time She contracted a great friendship with a young woman in the houfe, Lucinda, who was very handSome, good-natured, and about the age of twenty : they were continually together, and lay in one bed when the captain did not come to lie there. By this means they became So intimate, that Lucinda gave
her
\
MiSs Harriot Montague. 27
her an account who She was, and how She came There.
She told her Slie v/as the daughter of an eminent divine, who had le-ven children, and very good preferment in the country ; but living very high, and breeding his children up at a great rate, provided no fortunes for them ; So that dying before they were^ placed out in the world, th«y were left to Shift; and fiie being one of the
^	o	^
youngest, being then about thirteen,' was taken by a lady to wait on a little* daughter stie had about Seven years old, and with the family brought up to town; that in a year’s time her master, who was a young 'gentleman, ruined her ; and fearing her lady Should discover the intrigue, perfuad-ed her to quit her Service, pretending stcknefs, and that London did not, agree with her; and take leave of her lady to return to her mother, who kept a boarding-School in the country to maintain herSelf and the children, two of the boys being yet at
'■C 2	School,
28 The HISTORY OP
School, and two girls at home. But she went not to her mother as She pretended, but into a lodging her master had provided for her. In this houSe, he for two years maintained and kept her company; but at last growing weary, gave her a fmall allowance; So that by the bawd’s perSuafions, She admitted others to her embraces, and was at this time maintained by a merchant in the city,. and concluded her story with many tears; Saying, She did not like this courfe of life, and wish’d she could find a way to leave it; but that the bav/d always kept her bare of money by borrowing and wheedling it out of her, and that they were always poor and wanting money, living, as she Saw, very high in diet; that she had had Several children, but had but one alive, and that was at niiiste at CheiSea, being a lit-tie girl, about three years old, which she had by a young lord, who took care of it. Melinda promiSed to Serve her in all She v/as able.
Now
V
Mifs Harriot Montague.. 29.
Now a strange turn happened in her affairs : the captain’s brother-in-law, Melinda’s father, having made all the inquiry after his daughter that was postible in the country, and offered a reward to any that should inform him what was become of her, was at last acquainted with the manner of her going to London by the maid’s brother who had procured the horfes for thein. On which news he came away for London in fearch of her; he arrived at his brother’s, the captain’s houfe, tells him his bufineSs, and begs his affistance to find her ouC knowing nothing who had debauched her at first, nor why she fled tho’ he too rightly guested that must be the occafion of her withdrawing herlelst The captain, who had never feen his niece Melinda in the country, having not been at his brother’s houSe for many years pash was a little furprized at the circumstances of time and place where he met with this young woman, and longed to get to her to quef-
C ^	tioii
30 -The H raTO R Y OP
ti n her about it. It was night when,: hi s brother arriv’d. So he was oblig’d to delay Sativsfying his curiofity till the . morriing; then he went, to Melinda, and teliins her tbetreaSon of his coni-ing, and that her father was , come; She Swooned, and by that too well convinc’d him, that he had lain with his own niece, and not only commitr ted a great fin,, but dishonoured his family. He at this moment felt the flings of guilt and bitter repentance; he reSolv’d never more to commit the like ; and now from an amorous lover, who ufed.to teach her vice, he became a wife monitor, and preach’d up virtue and repentance.; and told her, he would that day remove, her from that ill houfc and place her in the country, give her a maintenance to live honestly, and if poSlible., diSpoSe of her to advantage ; that he would.endeavour to reconcile her to her father, provide cd she would never difcloSe what had paSs’d between them,. She gladly a? greed to all: and here providence was
fo.».
Mifs Harriot Montague. 31
So merciful as to give her an opportunity to be happy again; but, alas, youth once vitiated is rarely reform’d; and woman, who whilst virtuous is an angel, ruin’d and abandon’d by the man Ihe loves, becomes a devil. The bawd had prevented all thefe good defigns from coming to effedt, by in-. troducing a young nobleman into her cornpany, the most gay agreeable man in the world, who was very liberal to the procurefs, and made Melinda fuck large prefents, and uSed Such isheto-rick, that she could not refist his Solicitations, but yeilded to his defires. She was for this. cauSe deaf to reafon, and acquainted Lucinda and Mrs.— what had passed between her uncle and her: So it was agreed that She Sliould go where her uncle defired ; get what Ihe could, and return to them. In the evening.the captain came and took her and her clothes away, and carried her to ChelSea to a widow gentlewoman’s houSe that was hisTriend, The next morning he re-
C 4	turned
32 The HISTORY OF
turned with her father, having tolci Ifim, that Frederick had ruined her;; and that having fled to London, Slie had found a lady of his acquaintance out, where flie had been taken care of for four days past, having been abandoned and ill uled by Frederick tliat he had heard of it from this lady but the day before his arrival, and counfelled him to forgive her, and take her home again, or continue her with this good lady to live privately,, and allow her fomething. This was what the captain had contrived, and taught Melinda to fay. The father lieard this with great grief, andfwore to take revenge upon Frederick j but that heaven pievented, for they had news of his death Soon after ; being tiii-own from ofl' his horfe as he was hunting, and killed on the fpot, in, which- hraven’s justice was greatly manifested.
Now doatingupon the unfortunate Melinda, he cordented to fee and provide
Mifs Harriot Montague. 3-3;
vide for her, but not to carry her home to his wife and other daughters,, lest it Should publiSh his misfortune more; but refolved to- allow her a convenient maintenance to live with-this gentlewoman, and at his return to fay, that She was run away with, and married to a perfon much below what he expedted, belonging to the Sea; andsthat he had done what he thought fit for her, and left her in town., This, he thp^ught, would fi-lence his neighbours* and affii-ded wife, who had been long indifpofed with the grief stie had fallen into: on her account.
’Tis needleSs to relate what paffed between the father and daughter at their first meeting;i the. dishrder both were in was extraordinaTybut having promifed. to allow her thirtyr pounds a year, on condition She lived, feberly and retired in this- gentlewoman’s liouSe, and . difpatched Some other affairs that he had to-do iotown,, he: returned home;- and She remained
C 5	fom.©
34 The HISTORY or-
Some'day,s in this place, her uncle vir-Siting, and frequently admonishing her to live well and repent of her foL iies. But she could not. bear this confinement,, but longed to fee her young lover and,friend Lucinda again.: in short, she watched her opportunity one morning, when the gentlewoman went out to a friend that lay fick, who had Sent for her ; and packed up her clothes,, called a boat, and left a letter on the table for her uncle, to tell him she was gone' to town to live, at the houfe where, he had placed her in before,.. where she should be glad to fee him ; and fo went away to Mrs*—
v/here Siie was joyfully received. The
captain Soon received the news of her iiightV and the letter;, went to her,
and.- ufed all arguments to perfuade
her thence, but to no pnrpofe; fo she continued there,' and had. variety of lovers; learning all the baSe arts of that vile profession; till at lash ha-. vmg, been fo cunning as to liave laid up a thoufand pounds, befides a great
stocic.
MiSs Harriot Montague. 3,5^
stock of rich clothes, a watch, necklace, rings, and Some plate, having liv’d in Several lodgings, and been . kept by Several men of faShion,Tie took Lucinda and furnifiied a houSe, kept two maid-Servants,and Lucinda’s pretty girl, and liv’d genteelly, being vifited by none but fuch lovers as could pay well for their entertainment. TheSe were Melinda’s adventures past, and the circumstance in which Mon-lieur Le Montague found her; he vifited her every day, and could not think of- leaving London without ^ Melinda. She wifely confidering with herSelf how precarious the way of life She followed was, refolved to marry him, but cunningly delayed ,it in order to encreafe his pastion; pretending that She could not marry So Soon after the death of her first huS band, being but two years a widow, Monfieur i.e Montague confested his defign of marrying her to his friend ; and though he was much averfe to h, yet having no particular
' ' ■	C 6	know-.
The HISTORY OF
knowledge of sher, he could not aL ledge any thing to deter him from it, but his own conjedfures. In fine, Mon-fieur Le Montague in two months-time got her eonfent,, and taking his friend along with him, one fatal morning went to her houSe,. from, whence She,, accompanied wdth her friend and confident Lucinda, went with them to St. Martin’s ehurch,, where the knot was tied,, and the unfortunate Le Montague Sealed his» ruin. They returned to. her houfe, where they dined merrily,, and Mon-ileur Le Montague lay that night. In^ a fevvT days after their marriage, he.-importuned her to go home with him^ into the- country,, which She w'as no-w^ays averSe to; becaufe She feared the • vissts of her customers, fome of whom . could not be well denied admittance-by reafon.of their quality and power . over iier,. would,' difcover all to him.. He w^as- much pleafed at her-appearing fo ready to comply with his defirecy and, now they prepared fcv
'goin.?,..
\
MifS Harriot Montague. 37
I
going At her request, he eonfented to give Lucinda the best part of the furniture in the houfe, which stie de-figned to continue in, and follow the unhappy trade She had So^ long been verSed iii; though in reality stie was* much averfe to it, and wifhed from the bottom of her Soul, th at She could meet with Some honest man that wouldmarry her; to whom fhe would be true and virtuous, being no waysi addided to vice, but reduced to it by misfortune and necessity^
And now Melinda thought to go privately to her uncle the captain, ta-acquaint him with her good fortune,, in hopes he ■ would now appear to-credit her. She pretended to him; great repentance for her past follies,, and he gladly received her,vifited her husband, and owned li€;r for her niece Sent down word to her parents, who--were over-joyed toSshear She was reclaimed^ and fo well dif-pofed of. Her mother came to tov/n to. fee her long lost child, And now,
had
3^ The H I STORY OF
had Slie had the least Spark of virtue;^ She had been truly happy. Monfieur Le Montague at last. Garried her home in the stage-coach, having Sent her cloaths, plate, and what elSe they thought fit by the waggon, and returned five hundred pounds, which She had called in from the goldfmith’s where She had placed it, by bills to Bristol. They arrived Safe, and She was welcomed /by all his, friends, and treated handSomely. She pretended to be charmed with Harriot his beautiful daughter; and for Some months they lived very happily.
You may naturally imagine that a virtuous life and the quiet country were ihingsthatdid notrelilh well with a woman who had lived a town life, and enjoyed its pleaSuie in the highest luxury. Melinda wanted pleaSure, and Soon fixed her wanton eyes upon a young Sea-captain who uSed to vifit at Monfieur Le Montague’s. This young gentleman had been exchanged with a merchant’s Son in France, who
was
Mist Harriot Montague. 3,9
was related to Monfieur Le Montague, and So became intimate with him, and many French captains of Ships and merchants. He was very handSomc and loved his pleaSures, a lover of a fine girl, and a true friend to
a bottle Melinda Soon made herfelf
^ /
understood by him, and he as Soon fulfilled her defires, and made Mon-steur Le Montague the faShionablb thing, a cuckold. She grew big with child, and was delivered of a daughter, which Monfieur Le Montague,who had for Some time past fuSpedled Something of her intrigue with the young captain,, who we (ball call Du Pre, did not look on this child with the fame tendernefs as he did on Harriot;, for which reafon (he now beheld Harriot with much indignation and diS-like: though Ihe concealed her ma;-iice and Seemed fond of her. Harriot did all she was able to pleafe her ; but now having got a child of her own, Melinda wilhcd her out of the world;, and her little darling Diana
growing
40 TBe HISTORY o?
growing every day more lovely in? her eyes, and her husband Seeming more reServed to her, and to take little notice of the child. So enraged her, that She reSoived to get Harriot out of her way if poffible, that Diana might inherit all the fortune. Captain Du Pre went a voyage or two to France and Holland ; and returning, when he came back to vifit her. She made known her wicked defign to^^ him, and in fine, gained him to afiiSh her in it. They contrived to fend her beyond Sea by Some captain of his acquaintance, and he pitched upon a French Adaster of a Ship, who was. ufed to trade to Virginia and the Le-w^rd islands. This captain was of a cruel and avaricious difpofition, that he would do any thing for money
his name wasMonfieur Le Merchant,,
Du Pre expefled him hourly in that port. Mrs. Le Montague, and her husband, and Plarriot, had often.gone together on. board Ships to be treated by merchants and mafters, her huf-
band’si
Mils Harriot Montague. 4I'
band’s acquaintance, and Sometimes, without herhusbaiid, with Some other friends, and particularly Du Pre. Captain Le Merchant being arrived at. Bristol with his fhip, which was bound to Virginia, Du Pre acquainted him. with their defign on Harriot, and offered him Such a bribe as eafily prevailed with the covetous Frenchman to undertake to effed: it. It was agreed on betwixt them. So Soon as h.e was ready to Sail to give them notice ; and now the fiital day was come when the innocent lovely virgin, who was in the thirteenth year of her age, was to be deprived of her dear father and friends, and expoSed to all the dangers of the Seas, and betrayed into the hands of cruel relent-leSs men. Monfieur Le Montague, the evening that the fhip was to fail,, which was about two days after they had agreed with the captain in this barbarous and unnatural projed, went to take a walk with a neighbouring
* gentleman. Captain Du Pre came with
tlie
42 The HIS TORY of
the French captain to invite Mrs. Le Montague and Harriot on boardflie in obedience to her mother-in-law’s de-fires, went with her in the captain’‘s boat, little thinking that fhe Should make So long a continuance; and being come on board they were highly treated, and Something being put into Some wine that was given to Harriot, She was So bereft of her Senfes, that they put her on the captain’s bed, and left her SenSeleSs, whilst they took leave of him and went on shore in a chance-boat, which they called pasting by the Ship, which weighed anchor and Set Sail immediately. And now Mrs. Le Montague,, as they had contrived. So Soon as they were on shore, began to wring her hands and cry like one distraiied, pretending Harriot was drowned : she alarmed all the people as she went along, faying, that she fell over the fide of the boat into the Sea, and no help being near, was drowned: none could contradict her, becauSe no body could
tell
MiSs Harriot Montague. 43
tell what boat they came in from the Ship; the boat being gone off before She made the out-cry. Being come afide, she threw herSelf upon her bed; and her husband being informed of this fad news by the laments of the Servants at his entering into his houfe, and going up to her, asking a him.- , died questions of the manner of it; She fo rarely aded her part, that he believed she was really grievedj and Harriot certainly drowned ; which fo Struck him to the heart, that he was Seized with a deep melancholy, and Spent most part of his days in his cloSet shut up. from company; and the mornings and evenings walking alone in Some retired place, or by the Seashore. Melinda, being highly pleaSed that she had aded her part So well in having got rid of the obstacle that gave her fo much difgust, and that her husband took the lofs of his Harriot fo much at heart, flattered herSelfthat she should Soon be a widow, and re-t’^rn to her dear London, and enjoy
she
44 The HISTORY of
the company oS her dear Du Pre v/ith-> out molestation.
It is neceffary that we leave them Sor the preSent to- enquire after the innocent Harriot, who waking about, midnight, was quite amazed to find Lerfelf on a bed no bigger than a couch. Shut up in a nasty filthy cloSet,. and hearing the Seamens voices, Soon discovered the fatal Secret, and knew that She was in the Ship. She got up, knocked loudly at the cabin door„ upon which a young gentleman opened it, a youth of excellent Shape and features, in a fine habit; he had a candle in his hand, and Seemed tO‘ view her with admiration. ‘ Lovely ‘ maid, (Said he) ^ what would you
^ pleafe to have, for I am bound to obey
‘ you, and would willingly lofe mylife in defence of yours ?’ ‘ I beg to know ‘ Sir, (Said stie) ^ where my mother and; ‘ captain Du Pre are, and why I am ^ left here alone ?’ He remained Si-lent a moment, and bowing, anfwer-ed, ‘madam, lam Sorry that I must
be
MiSs Harriot Montague, 45
^ be So unfortunate as to acquaint you with ill news the first time that I
m
have the honour to Speak to you.: ^ they are gone ashore, and by what ^ I can learn of the matter Sold you to ‘ the captain. I am a passenger in this ship, and shall, ihope, be the ^ instrument of your deliverance out
*	of his cruel hands, which I will do ‘ or loSe my life; I was on shore ‘ when you were left here, but hav-‘ ing Seen you come on board, I made
haste back, and finding the ship ‘ just under fail, upon my entrance ^ into it ashed where you was. On ‘ which he told me with joy, that ** he had you Safe in his cabin, having
*	received a good Sum to carry you with us to Virginia. I love you, my dear Harriot (if I may be per-
’* mitted to call you So) with the ‘ greatest finceriiy, and will lofe my
*	life in your defence, both to Secure ^ your virtue and and your liberty:
is not the first time I have Seen ^ you,’ At thefe words he fat down -by her, pressed her hand, and kissed
her.
4^6 The HISTORY of
her. But what words Can expreSs her confufion and grieS when she found in what manner she was betrayed by her cruel mother-in-law; she fetched a great figh and fainted : at which the young gentleman ran and fetched fome cordial-water from his chest, and gave her ; when reviving, she fell into a tranSport of Sorrow, calling to heaven to help and deliver her. She defired to fee the captain, and made uSe of all the intreaties she was mistrefs of, to return with her; telling him her father would give him treble the fum if he would restore her to him; but the hardened wretch faid that he had receiv’d his orders, and was determined they stiould be punctually complied with ; the poor undone Harriot, finding nothing would avail, gave way to her Sorrow, and refufed every thing they gave her. Leander, for that was the youth’s name, waited till her paSlion was a little mitigated, and then began to reaSon with and comfort her ; telling her, she must Submit to the Almighty’s will, and
tha
MiSs Harriot Montague.' 47
that file Should look upon his being in that ship as an earnest of God’s favour to take care of her: that he v^as in circumstances that rendered him capable of Serving her; that his name was Leander, and that his father and hers had been intimate friends, being a merchant who lived at Barba-does, but had been dead about a twelvemonth, having left him and one daughter in guardians hands, he not being yet of age: that thefe guar-dians uSed him and his fister ill, having put her into a monastery against her will, she being engaged to a young gentleman whom they would not let, her marry, pretending that he was not a Suitable match in fortune, and that she was too young, being but fourteen, to difpofeof herfelf; which they did with no other defign, as he SuppoSed, but to keep her fortune in their hands as long as they could, in hopes that both he and she might ' die fingle, and leave all in their power, being his uncle’s by his fathers fide,
and
4B The HISTORY ot
and heirs to the fortune which was very confiderstble, in cafe they died without iffue. That his father hav-ing effefls to a great value in Virginia in the hands of a gentleman who was ^brother by his mother’s fide, She was likewise dead, he was going to afk this uncle to take poffeffion, and to afk his affistance to deal with his guardians, v/hom he had left, becauSe he had Some reaSon to fear that they designed to poiSon him; having been informed, by a trusty Servant who had lived with his father, long, and now left in his houSe at Barbadoes, that he had over-heard them contriving his ■death; that he had taken with him a good Sum of money, and Some merchandize to trade with in Virginia. And thus Leander having acquainted Harriot with his circumstances, concluded with many promiSes to take ■care of her in the voyage, get her out of the captain’s hands, and would make her his lawful wife v/hen he came to Virginia. She heard him
atten-
MiSs Harriot Montague. 49
■attentively, and anSwered with great modesty, that if he did protedfc her from being injured by others, and adfed in delivering her as he pretended, both She and her father, if they lived to meet again, would endeavour to be grateful to him: that She had now restgn’d herfelf to God, and was re-lolved to fubmit to what he pleafed to permit her to fuffer, and to prefer death to dishonour. He embraced her on his knees, and vowed to preferve her virtue, and never Suffer her to be wronged or taken from him whilst he had a drop of blood left in his veins, but to merit her favour by all that man could do, which he as nobly .performed as freely promifed. And now poor Harriot had none but him to comfort her; and tho’ she strove all she was able, yet grief fo weakened her, that in a few days she was confined to her bed. Tis neediest to relate all that the tender lover did to render himfelf dear to the mistrest of his heart; he tended and watched “with
VoL. I.	B	he
■JO The H I S TO R Y OF
her many nights. Sat on sher bed-fide, and told the tedious hours, alarmed with every change of her distemper, which was an intermitting fever: he fee’d the furgeoTi largely to Save her, and at last had the fatisfadtion to fee her recovering; youth and medicines both uniting, restored the charming -maid ‘to health, and Leander to his repofe of mind ; who now Seeing the ship not many leagues from the ddir-cd port, ^flattered himSelf that she should be his. But, alas, fate had otherwise determined ; their faith and virtue was to meet with greater trials yet, and the time was far off before they should be happy.
Harriot being now a little uSed to her new way of life, began to recover ; little her drooping Spirits, by being continually entertained with the company of Leander, for whom by this iime she had no Small esteem ; they were continually together except when decency required them to be afunder. One evening as they were
both
MfSs Harriot Mont ague, i;*!
both walking the quarter deck with the captain, treating with him about her ranshm, the weather being excef-five clear, not a cloud to be Seen, a man at the mast- head cried out a fail, which was bearing down to them with full Speed, and in half an hour’s time they could perceive that She was a ship of force, which they feared, as it certainly was, a pirate. She came up with them in forty-five degrees of latitude, bearing English colours, she mounted thirty guns, well manned; and they Soon discovered who they were by their firing at them and putting up a bloody stag, bidding them Surrender, diredfly lay to, and poured in a broad-fide. The French captain Du Pre, did on this occafion all that a brave man could, nor did Leander fail to shew his courage, but fought both for his mist refs and liberty till he was wounded in many places, and retiring into the cabin to have his wounds dressed, there he found the affrighted Ilarriot lying in a Swoon on
D 2	the
i
52 The HISTORY o?*
the floor : at this fight he forgot him-felf, and catching her up in his arms, fell back with her, and having lost much blood, he fainted ; mean time the villain Du Pre was killed on the deck, and the pirates gave a great fhout as Soon as they Saw him falh threw out their graplings, and entering the ship, Soon mastered the few that were left to oppoSe them, and coming into the cabin. Saw the fair Harriot and her lover holding her clapSed in his arms, as if rcSolved in ' death not to part with her. The pirates, who had taken the ship, being English, French, and Irishmen, belonging to the crew at MadagaScar, were moved at this fight; particularly a deSperate young man that command^ ed the pirate ship; he was charmed with the face of the reviving Harriot, who lifting lip her bright eyes ravished his Ssul; he raiSed her up in his arms, forcing Leander’s hands to let her go, he being still fenSeleSs; she looked upon him with much amazement, but was Silent with fear. The
pirate-
MiSs Harriot Montague. 55
pirate-captain comforted her 'with tender words, then She Sell at his feet, and entreated him to pity her companion, Leander. He preSently ordered Some wine to be given him, had him laid on the bed, and his wounds dreffed; then left her with, him, whilst he gave orders how to diSpoSe of the goods and men that were left alive in the Ship, commanding the richest merchandize, Some provisions, and the guns and powder in it, to be carried aboard' his own ship, and. the men and merchant-ship to be diSmiffed with what he thought fuffi-eient to Support them till they reached Barbadoes or Virginia, excepting no perSon but the fair virgin and her lover. Whilst he Saw thefe things done, and Searched the ship, Harriot had time to bewail her fad state and her lovers, who was now fo overwhelm’d with grief and pain, that he coulcS Scarce utter his thoughts in thefe moving expreffions: ‘ My dear Har-riot, stis our hard fate to be now
^	‘ 'left
54 The HISTORY OP
‘ left here alone in the hands of meti
*	whoSe obdurate hearts are inSenSible
*	to pity> from whom we can expect ‘ nothing but ill ufage, did not your ‘ angelick face too well convince ms ‘ that they will Spare your life. Oh!
‘ could 1 find a way to Secure your
‘ virtue, tho, with the loSs of my life, • ‘ 1 (hould die with pleaSure: but;
alas, you must be Sacrificed, and I ‘ be left the most unhappy wretch on ^ earth, if providence does not pre-/ vent it by Some miracle or by death.
‘ Say, my angel, what can we do?* Harriot, stiedding a flood of tears, replied, ‘ My dear preferver, rny ‘ only hope on earth, all a weak vir^-‘ gin can do to*" preferve her honour,
‘ i will do, and only death Shall part ‘ US; but let me caution you to Say ‘ you are my brother, for the pirate ‘ captain Seems to look on me with
*	Some concern ; 1 fear affection : and ‘ if fo. Should he difeover ours to one ‘ another, it might ruin us, and caufe
‘ the villain to destroy you to poflTefs
‘ me ,
Mifs Harriot Monta.gue. 55
*■ me, who being left in his hands-‘ when you are gone, Sliall be forced ‘ to'wltat-my Soul abhors more than death.’ What, do I Say forced? no I never will be, for here is a friend which I Vvdll always carry about me (pulling out a dagger) that will defend me from the brutality of a villain that would do Such an adt of abhorrence.
*
My dear Leander, I will die before I will yield up my virtue. Leander, pressing her hand, replied, Alas,
‘ there needed only that dreadful ‘ thought to end me f and So fainted: her shrieks brought the pirate-captain, who was an Irish gentleman, (wh story we shall'relate hereafter) down to the cabin-door, who Seeing he^ wringing her hands over the pale young inan who lay fenfelefs, began to fufpedt he was her lover, and wa^ fired with jealoufy: however, he r-*
. to her, and lifting her up in his arms ashed her, who this per Son was ft whom she was fo greatly concerned she anfwcred, he was her brother
D 4	that
$6 The HISTORY OF
shat they were going from France t©. Virginia to a rich uncle, having been, cheated by. their guardians of their fortune in France. And then She felL on her knees, and befoughthim with tears to land them on that coast, or put them into the next Ship he met with bound to that place or near it. Appeafed with hearing he was her brother,, the doubtful of the truth, he embraced her, and promifed to do v/hat she defired; commanding his furgeon and crew to do all that was necessary to Save the young man’s life and recover him. Cordials being given him, and his wounds carefully dressed, he got strength daily. Mean time the captain, who was deeply fmitten with the lovely Harriot, en-. tertained great fnfpicions ofLeander,. had them carefully watched to dif-. cover whether he was her brother or not, reshlving to get rid of him if his rival: but Harriot being on her guard, fo well behaved herSelS, that
he could get no fatisfaction for fome
time..
MiSs Harri©t Montague. 57
time. He daily importuned her with his passion for her in LeandeCs prefence, on whom She was continually attending; and told her. If she would eonfent to marry him when they V come ashore at the issand of Providence, which was at that time the pirate’s place of rendezvous, he would make her the richest lady in Christendom, and give her brother a fortune, having Such immenSe treaSures bury-ed there in the earth, of je.wels and gold, as would purchaSe them a retreat, and all things elSe they could defire in this world. To all thefe offers she gave little anfwer, but modestly excuSed herSelf from making any promiSes, faying she was too young to marry yet, and would con-fider farther of it when they came ashore, yet thanked him for his generous treatment of them, Thefe delays still more inflamed him; he grew every day more earnest and im-importunate, and often proceeded to kifs her in Leander’s preSence, whole
D 4	inward
58 The HISTORY OF
inward grief can hardly be defcribed, which his face often betrayed by turning pale, whilst his enraged Soul Sparkled in his fiery eyes when he Saw his mistrfs rudely folded in the arms of a villain, who was not wor* thy to wipe her shoes. One day Harriot, willing to change the diff-courSe of love, begged the pirate-captain to inform her who he was, and how he came to follow this unhappy courfe of life;i perhaps, shid she, being convinced you^are well defcended^ as your gentlemen-like treatment of us inclines me to believe, I shall esteem you more.- Glad to oblige her, he began the story of his life in this manner.
I was born in Ireland, divine Harriot, of a noble and loyal family, who fighting for King James II. were undone; my father fell with honour in the field, our estate was afterwards confiscated, and my poor mother, a lord’s daughter, left with three help-lefs children, of whom, I w'as the
eldest.
MiSs Harriot Montague,
eldest, expoSed to want. I was then eighteen,, and had ai Soul that could not bear misfortunes, or endure to See my mother’s conditionSo I took my young lister,, who was- then but ten years old, and fair as-an angel, and leaving my mother, and my brother, but an infant,, at a relation’s houfe, who> charitably took them in, efcaped from my ruined country and' friends to France, hoping to get Some honourable post there, under that hoSpita-ble generous king who had* received my prince. When we arrived at St. Germains, having Spent what little our kind friends had given us at our first Setting out from home, we were received but coHty. My lister, indeed, was by a French lady taken to be a companion for her eldest daughter, Something So- like a Servant, that my Soul burned with indignation. I waited long to get preferment, living on charity, that is, eating at other tables. At last I fell in company with Some defperate young, gentle-
D 6	meiij
\
6o The HISTORY OF
men, who, like me, were tired with this uncertain courSe of life, fome of whom had been bred to Sea; we agreed to go Separately to Brest, and iieze in the night Some Small vefiSel-ready viDualled and equipped for a voyage, fome of us having first gone aboard as pastengers. This defign-we executed, with fo good Succefs, that finding a Small merchant-ship bound for Martinieo, we Sent five of our companions, being in all fourteen, as passengers,, on board with our trunks of clothes; and pretending to take leave of them, all followed, staying till night, drinking healths with the French captain,, who fuf-peCted nothing, and had but eight hands aboard of twenty fix that belonged to the ship, which was de-figned to weigh anchor, and Set fail, the next day: we Seized upon him first, and then on his men, Singing ■ fo loud that they were not hearei to dispute by the ships, who were lying-near us in the harbour; wc bound
and i
t
MiSs Harriot Montague. 6i
and put them all under hatches, and Set fail immediately, reSolving to make for the istand of Jamaica, where we hoped to fell the merchandize we had in the fhip, which was laden with, rich goods; and having n>ade our fortunes there, to go for Holland, and fettle ourSelves as merchants, or look out for Some other way to make our-felves eaSy, and gain Some Settlement in the world. When we were got to Sea, we fetched the captain up, and told him partly our defign : he begged, to be Set aShore with his men, at Some port of France; pleading he had a wife and Seven clildren, and was undone if we carried him thence im that manner. So we contented to his-defire, and at break of day gave him one of the boats, and fix of the m'en to carry him to land, which I fup-poSe he got Safely to, having heard nothing more of him.
And now we put out all the fail we could, and had a profperous voyage,. lill we came near Jamaica; there.
we^
6-2 The HISTORY 0¥
we met a pirate fioop welLmann’i and armed, carrying French colours we were now most of us fick, and i; great want of frefh water and provi lions. They gave us a fignal to 11 by, and we fuppofing them to b friends, obeyed, joyful to meet a Ihi to assist us: but they Soon made u fenfible of our mistake, fending thei boat’s crew on board, who feized u and our ship, and carried us all fet tered to' the istand of Providence where, in short, we grew intimat with thefeand other pirates, and con fented to purfue the fame courfe o life. They did not trust us in on ship together, but dividing us,- tool us out with them. Ten of us hav already lost our lives bravely ; thre are married, and command ships lik< me ; we have vast treafures, and livi like princes- on the Spoils of others Tis true, stis no Safe employment, fo we are continually in danger of death hanging or drowning are what we ar( to expect; but we are So daring anc
hardenet
>
Mils Harriot Montague. 6^3
hardened by custom, that we regard it as nothing. For my own part, I am often stung with remorSe, and on refledion wish to quit this courfe of life: 1 am ashamed to think of the brutish adions I have done, and the innocent blood I have Spilt, makes me uneaSy, and apprehenfive of death.
And now. Sweet Harriot, I have told you my unhappy story, his in , your power to reclaim and make me happy: promife then to be mine, and I will marry you, and take all the treasure I am master of, and with your brother fail for Virginia; from thence well go to England as paffen-gers. You (hall acquaint your uncle that we have been taken by pirate?, and left on that place ; for my ship shall in the night make off, and the boat having landed us, shall return to it; So that we and our wealth shall be left without fear of difcovery. Then he addreffed himSelf to Lean-der, faying, * Sir, I have-treated you,
“ for your Sister’s fak^ kindly and
* gene-
64 The HISTORY of
‘ generoufly; I expect you fhoul ^ lay your commands upon her t ‘ conSent to my request: I would nc ‘ be obliged to ufe the methods I ca ^ take to procure what I now Sue for ‘ but if I am constrained to uSe forc( V it will be your own faults.* A theSe words he went, out of the cabi much disordered, and left them i great perplexity; a death-like pale nefs overfpread their faces, and the fat filent for Some moments : The Leander fetching a deep figh, castin his eyes up to heaven, Said, ‘ Nov^ ‘ my God, manifest thy goodnefs t ‘ us, and deliver us from the hand ^ of this abominable villain that woul ‘ rob me of life, and my lively Hai ‘ riot of her virtue.’ Harriot woul have Spoke, the tears streaming dow her pale cheeks, but he stopped he from declaring her Sad thoughts, Say ing. Softly, ‘ Hulh, my angel, we ar * watched, betray not the fatal fecre that will bring death to me, an f ruin you.’ They compofed thei
look
%
f	.
«
ft
Mifs Harriot Montague. 65:
looks as much as possible; and three days passed, in which the pirate-captain grew So importunate 'with Harriot, that She was forced :o declare herSelf in Some manner, and told him she was engaged to a gen-man in France. Finding that his importunities v/ere in vain,, he grew enraged, and told her, he was too well acquainted with the reaSon of her coldneSs towards him ; and Since fair means would not do, he would try other methods. At thefe words Le-. ander started up and Seized him by . the throat, cried villain it is out of thy power, for thou cannot nor shall not whilst I live; but though Lean-der was a great deal stronger than the pirate, it was a very imprudent thing, for he was Soon overpowered, after having lain three dead at his feet they Seized him, put him in irons, and carried him down into the hold. Harriot transported with grief at this difmal fight, threw herSelf at the -pirate’s feet, and told him, ‘ ’Tis in
‘ vain,
ft
66 The HI S T O R Y of
*	vain, cruel man, that you endea*”
*	vour to Sorce me to conSent to yoiff ‘ defires, I have a Soul that Scorns tte *' yield to threats; nay, death shall ‘ not fright me into a compliance
with your unjust request r I have ' already given my heart and faith to ^ anothei;, and am now reSolved ne=-ver to eat or drink again, till you
*	releaSe my hushandi, for Such he is ' by plighted vows and promifes;
*	which I will never break : no, I will be equally deaf to prayers and
' ® threats; and if you ufe force, death *' fhall free me. This is my last re» ‘ Solve, do as you pleaSe." At theSe words She roSe and left him, and fat down with st look So- reSolute and calm, that his foul shook: he fat down by her, and reafoned with her: ‘ Lovely Harriot, faid he, wshy ‘ do you force m.e to be cruel ? I love ‘ you pashonately, and cannot live
*	without you, nothing should have
*	forced me to this adfc of barbarity, ‘ but my paffion for you,- Heaven
^ will
Mist Harriot Montague. 67
\
*	will absolve you from the vows you ‘ have made, Since you shall break ‘ them by neceffity, not choice; that ‘ fin I Iliall be anfwerable for: my
*	paffion makes me as deaf to reaSon^
*	as you are to pity: I beg you would
*	confider e’er it is too late, apct I am ‘ drove to uSe the last extremity to ‘ gain you.. Your lover’s life is fii
*	my power: be kind and he may ‘ live, and be happy with Some other
*	maid; if you refufe my offers, he . ‘ shall Surely die : I give you this
*	night to refolve; therefore it is in ‘ your power to preServe his life or ® destroy it.’ At theSe words he left her. Setting a watch at the cabin door, and taking every thing from her that could harm her. He went to the quarter-deck, and called for Leander, who was brought up to him loaded with irons, he uSed threats, intreaties, and all he could think of, to make him conSent to part with Harriot,' and affist him to gain her;, all which he rejected with Scorn
*	and
68. TheHL&TORYoF
‘S^’-
and disdain. At last he was So enraged, that he canSed Leander to she stripped, and lastied in a cruel manner, who bravely stifled his groans, and would not once complain, lest Harriot Should hear him, and be driven to deSp^r. But the pirate’s rage did not end here; he had him carried
down and Shewn to her, the blood
\ ^
running down his tender back and arms ; he ordered him to be gaged, that he might not Speak to sher: but She, doubtlefs, inspired with courage from above; Supported this dreadful fight with great constancy and calm-neSs, fpoke to Leander in theSe words: ‘ Tis the will of ^ heaven, ‘ faid she, my dear Leander that we
*	should fuffer thus: Be constant, as
*	I will be, God- will deliver us by ‘ death or miracle.’ The pirate ordered him back to the hold. Some brandy being given him; to drink, which he refuSed. And now he re-folved to gratify his flame, by enjoying Harriot at midnight by force; in or-
dei
MiSs HA R RIOT Mon t a gue . 6f
•der to which he left her under a /guard, and returned not to her till the, dead of night, when, being lain on the bed in her cabin, weeping and praying, almost Spent with extream grief and abstinence, he stole gently to her, having put on Leander’s coat, in hopes to deceive her the more ea-fily; then laying his cheek to hers, he wiSpered, ‘ Charming Harriot,
‘ fee your glad lover loofened from ‘ his chains, flies to your arms.’ She, as oneawakenedfrom a horrid dream,
- trembling, and in Sufpence, lifted up her eyes amazed, and thought hiin to be Leander j when he, impatient to accomplish his baSe defign, proceeding to further freedoms beyond modesty, discovered to her the deceit, which she, infpired by her good angel, Seemed not to know: but taking the dagger from her bofom which she always kept there, unperceived by any, and stabbed him in the belly So dangeroufiy, that he fell SenSeleSs on the bed. At this instant a Sailor cry-
cd
\
70 The HISTORY of
ed out, * a Sail, a Sail; 'where's ou: '	‘ captai n ?’ This alarmed all the crew
and the gunner running to the grea cabin-door, which the captain hat Socked when he went in, knockec and called j but only Harriot anSwer-ed, he was coming. Mean time tht Ship they had Seen coming up, gave them Such a broad-fide, as made the whole crew run to their arms: t bloody fight enSued, and Harriot consulting what to do, believing the pirate captain dead, and being well affured the Ship that fought with that She was in, must be Some man ol war or frigate come in purfuit of the pirates, becaufe She first attacked them, rcfolved to diSguiSe herSelf, and go out of the cabin to fee the event, hoping the danger they were In would make them free her dear Leander. She catched up a cloak that lay in the cabin, and a hat, and So diSguiSed opened the door; but Seeing a horrid fight between the ships
crew aud the Spaniards, who had
now
4
Mist Harriot Montague, yt
410w boarded her, (for it was a Spanish man of war, who was Sent out to fcour the pirates in thofe parts, and having met the French Ship out of which Harriot had been taken, and by them got intelligence of this pirate Ship, was come in ipurfuit of them) she did riot dare to venture farther than the door. Mean time the pirate-captain, recovering from his fwcon, got up, fo wounded and faint with lost of blood, that he could Scarce crawl to the door, from which he pushed Harriot, whom he did not at that instant know; he called for help, but Seeing the enemy driving his men back upon him. Sword in hand, he endeavoured to take down a outlast that was .near him, and fell down. The pirates feeing their commander fall, were put in the greatest diforder; the Spaniards Soon mastered them, having made a dreadful staughter, putting all to the Sword that Came in their way,, what fe w that efcaped Secured them-
felves
The HIS T O RY of
Selves in the hold, until Such times their fury was abated; the Spanish captain, |who was not only a brave^ but a most accomplished young gentleman, with Some of his officers, entered the great cabiOj in which Harriot, and the half dead pirate were: she immediately cast off her diSguiSe, and threw herSelf at his feet, begging him in the French tongue, to pity and protedl her, and a young gentleman whom the pirate had bound in irons, under the hatches, whoSe life she valued above her own. He gazed upon her with admiration: her beauty and youth were Such advocates, as a gallant Spaniard could not refuSe any thing she asked: he took her up in his arms, promiSed her all she defired, and commanded the young gentleman should be immediately looked for, and, if living, fet at liberty. Leander had heard the guns and noiSe, and none but a brave man can be SenSible of what he felt, to behold himSelf lay bound hand and
fool;
V
MiSs Harriot Montasub. 73
foot, whilst his mistreSs’s distreSs arid ■ liberty were diSputed, he was ready to tear his limbs off to get fiee from his fetters; but heaven preferved his life by keeping him thus confined, who elSe had been expoSed to all the dangers of the flight. The Spaniards Soon found and freed him, bringing him up to the cabin, where Harriot
received him with transport; and the Spanish captain, and his friends, gave him joy of his freedom. The pirate captain, at her intreaty, was taken care of by the Surgeon, his wound dreffed, and put to bed, being al-moSl; SenfeleSs, and in great danger of death. And now a Sufficient number of men, with a lieutenant, being left on board the pirate Ship, Leander and Harriot, having all that belonged to them restored by the brave Spaniard, went on board his strip, where they were highly treated, and might in Safety blefs God, and enjoy Some repoSe.
Once more they were again agree-
Fol. I.	E	ably
4
V
74 The HI STORY OF
ably entertained with each other’ company, when they little expedfet ever to enjoy that happineSs again The Spanish ship was bound for th( ifiand of St. Domingo, from whenc< our lovers hoped to get paffage to Vir ginia, little expedting what changes o fortune they were to meet with in th( ifiand they were going to. Then was on board the SpaniSli ship a youn^ ventleman named Don Carlos, th<
O
Son of the eovernor of St. Domingo who went, attended by two Servants as a volunteer, to Ihew his courage and for pleaSure. He was very hand-Some, and of a daring and impatien temper, ambitious and refolute, tho refpedted by all that knew him, hi; father’s darling, and, in Sliort, a mar who could bear no contradidfion. He was So charmed with Harriot, that he was uneaSy when out of her fight: he muStered up all his refolution at firstto check his pashon, as knowing she was promifed to Leander, yet, in Spight ol all his resolutions it daily increafed j
he
MiSs Harriot Montague. 75
he began to hate him as his rival, and meditate how to take her from him. It is the nature of the Spaniards, we all know, to be clofe and very fubtle in their defigns, very amorous, and very revengeful: this Cavalier wifely concealed his paffion from her, and contrived to get his ends fo well, that he effedled it without appearing criminal. In their paffage to St; Domingo, they met a Small French merchant-ship bound to Virginia, whofe captain was acquainted with the affair: they faluted, and the French captain came on board; where, feeing Leander, he appeared very joyful. ‘ Sir, faid he, I have-a lady ‘ on board, who has left France to ‘ follow you, the charming Mada-moifelle .Damiila, your guardian’s ‘ daughter, who, fenfible of the inju-
‘ lies her father had done you, and ^ constant in her affeOdon to you, is ‘ a passenger in my ship : I will go ‘ fetch her.’ Leander stood like one thunder-struck at this news, and Liar-
E 2	4-jot
•76 The H 1ST O R Y of
riot looked upon him with diSdalQ and fhame .j whilst joy glowed in Don •Carlos’s face. And now <tis fit that we should :know the unfortunate •maid’s story, who thus followed him
:that fled from her.
You have been already informer
that this young lady was Leander’i guardian’s daughter, and by confe-quence bis first coufm; they hac been bred up together and defignec for one another; she was fair, wiS and virtuous, but yet could no charm Leander’s heart, though he di< her’s; she loved him before she wa fenSible what love was, and her pal fion encreafed with her years: he father, wsho had his own interest moi in view than his daughter’s welfare approved her choice, becaufe it st cured the estate to the family; an Leander treated her always with gret refpect and tendernefs as his kinfwt man and a lady of great merit, bi never made any promiSes of mai viap-e; she was but. little young-
®	tilt
\
MiSs- HAR^stlOT MonTaulte.
%ail himSelf, and had refuSed many advantageous offers, declaring she vt^as pre-ingaged-. She was much concerned at her father’s wicked de-figns against him, and though she too well' perceived he did not love her as a lover ought, which indeed her father hated him for, yet stre fo doted on him, that she reSolved to ferve- and follow him- to death, flattering her-felf, that finee she could not difcover Be loved any ether peiSoii, time and her constancy would gain her his affecstion. When he left France to go for Virginia, she refolved to follow him fo Soon as she could get an opportunity; in order to which she got what money she could together, and went difguifed like a man on board this French stsip, where she made her-Self known to the captain, having left a letter Sor her Sather to acquaint him where she was gone. She Soon came a-board the Spanish ship, and
Seeing Leander, who coiild not posti-
bly receive her uncivilly, she ran to
£ 3	hini^
7B The H I S T O R x of
bim with a traiiSport that too w'ell manifested her aifedtion for him. Are Vv'e agadn. met. Said Ihe, and has* Heaven heard my vows? Nothing but death Shall Separate me from you anymore. Madam, Said he, extremely diiOistered, I am Sorry that you have rifkcd your life and honour So greatly "for a perfon wffio is unable to make you the grateful returns you merit; my friendship shall ever Speak my gratitude; but here is a lady to whom my faith is engaged. Too constant GamiMa, how is my Soul divided between love and gratitude ? At theSe words Harriot, who was inflamed with jealouSy and distrust, feeing how beautiSul her rival was, and reflecting that they had been long acquainted and bred up together, that it was his interest to marry the French lady, ad-tireffed herfelf to Camilla in this manner, ^ Madam, your plea and title to ‘‘ Leander’s heart is of much older V date tlian mine; stisjust he should " be your’s; and that I. may convince
...	you
mils OARRIOT iVlONTAGUE.
‘ you that my Soul is generous and ‘ noble, I will Save him the confufion ‘ of making apologies to me, and re-‘ tign my right in him.’ Leander would have Spoken, but Harriot interrupted him with the following words, * Yes, bafe, ungenerous Lean-
*	der, who Have deceived me, return ‘ to your duty, ] will no more listen ‘ to your oaths and vows, leave me
*	to the providence of God; i ash ‘ no other favour of you and this ‘ lady, but to astist me to get a paS-‘ Sage home to England.’ Leander was So confounded, he knew not what to do; he strove all he could to convince Harriot of his fincerity, and at the fame time was found to Speak in Such a manner, not quite to drive a lady to deSpair for whom he-had a tender regard. Camilla, too Senfible that he did not love her, and distraded to See her rival So adored,' and herSelS So flighted and expoSed,;^ did all She was able to augment her sival’s, uneafineSs; and now Leandec
E 4	was
8o The HISTORY of
/
was So watched and teized by both, that he was near distradled; he defired to go into the French ship with the two ladies to go Sor Virginia, but Don Carlos Secretly oppoSed it, reSolving to take Harriet from him; in order to-which he got the Spanish captain to get Leander to go on boai d the French
ship to be merry. Leander entertained
not the least SuSpicion of its being
a contrivance, readily went, leaving the two ladies Setting together in the great cabin. Some time after, the Spanish captain, stepping out of the room, goes into his boat, and returning to his ovv^n ship, wbiSpers Camilla, whom Dob Carlos and he had ac-epainted v/ith their defign, who wih lingly agreed to rid her Self of her rival, to go on board the Frewch ship immediately, which she did. In the mean time Leander, miffing the captain, asked for him, and was tolc he was gone to his own ship, ai which he was Surprized; but wher he Saw the boat comeback with on(
womar
MiSs Harriot Montague. Sv
woman only, his- colour changed, and knowing Camilla wshen she came nearer, he began to lufpedt Some treachery ; he gave her his hand to come-into tlie ship. Saying, v/here is Harriot,why did you notbringsherwithyou, what is the reaSon that vou are come alone? I have brought your trunks and things. Said Slie.; she is coming, on board when the. boat returns. Whilst they were talking the boat made off, the trunks being handed
up. He then too plainly discovered the
Stratagem,he stormed like a madman,
calling for theTrench captain’s boat:.
mean time the Spanish Ship made off'
with all her Sails, being a ship of war '
and a good Sailor; the. little merchant
ship, which was heavy loaden, could
not pretend to overtake hen. Havinc 1
thus lost the divine Harriot, whom he loved as much as man could love,
he lost all patience, reproaching Camilla in the most cruel terms, nay even curfing her as the caufe of his rt..rrtiand death;■ she endeavoured to
E 5.	appeaf-
82:. The HLS T ORT OF*
appeaSe him with all the tender Soft: expreilioas imaginable,, pretending, that She was innocent and knew no-' thing of the. Spaniard’s defign; and in return- vented her reproaches against him in the following: words. ‘ Ah !
O
‘ cruel Leander, (Said she) do not repay my asheftion with Such iin-‘ kind treatment; have I not follow-ed you, left my native country,
‘ aid all that was dear to me, expo-‘ fing myfelf to all the dangers of the ‘ Seas and various ficknesses incident ‘ to change of climate: in fine, what ' I have left undone to merit your-esteem? Are theSe the returns you. « make me? Must a stranger rob me of yonr lieart? Confider what this uSuage may reduce m.e to do: if ' fate tOi punish you, has taken ‘ her from you, must I bear the 'Tlarne ? ’Tis just heaven, that in. ‘ pity to my Sufferings decrees your ‘ Separation; and if you caimot love ‘ me, yet ’tis the least you can do to
< life me. civilly and fend me back to^
‘my
Mils-Harriot Montague. 53
^ my home, that I may retire to Some ‘ convent, and Spend my unhappy ‘ life in prayers for you, for I will
*	pray for and love you to death.’ At thefe words fine fainted, and fell down at his feet. Leander, touched with this moving fight, almost forgot his own griefs, and laying her on his bed in his cabin, revived her with wine and" cordials; and feeing her open her eyes, he took her kindly by the hand, faying, ‘ Charming Camilla,
‘ forgive me the ralh exprestions I
*	have ufed : urged by my defpair I ‘ knew not what I did or faid; I own. ' the obligation I have to you, and ‘ have all the grateful fenfe of it that ‘ you can wiSh ; you are dear to me ‘ as the ties of blood and friendship ‘ can make you, and though fate has
*	permitted me to give my heart to ‘ another, yet you shall ever be the ^ next to her in my esteem.’ Thefe tender fpeeches, ,with many others of the fame kind, in fome fort comforted the astiided Camilla^ who con-
E h	eluded!
*
84 The HISTORY or
eluded in herSelf that she should iti time, having got rid of her rival, get his, affeCtion; in order to which she behaved herSelf So towards him, anst treated him with Such reSpedl and tendernefs, that he was obliged to conceal his grief for Harriot’s lofs, and appear tolerably Satisfied : yet he was almost distraded in reality, and determined to go in Search .of her fo Soon as he could get ashore at Virginia, and find a ship to carry him to the illand of St. Domingo, to which he knew the Spanish ship was hound,, defigning. to leave Camilla with liis uncle. Thus reSolved he Seemed pacified, and in a few days they got into the defi'red port, and were received by his uncle with much joy.; who promised, upom hearing his nephew’s story, to affist him in all he was able, to oblige his guardians in France to do him and his fister justice.
And now Leander’s whole bufinefs
was to get a bark to carry him to the
iilhnd where he fuppoled his mistreSs,
to
Mifs' Harriot Montague. 85;
to be; but the inward grief of his mind, and the constraint he had put • upon himfelf, had fo impaired his health, that he fell stck of a fever, wshich brought him fo low that he was ten months before he was able to go out of his chamber, his illnefs being much increafed by the vexation, of his mind ; all which time Camilla waited on and attended him with Such extraordinary care and tendernefs, that she much injured her own constitution, and fell into a confumption, at which Leander w'as much con--cerned. In this time he contracted, a great friendship with a young gentleman, his uncle’s only fon, a young man of extraordinary parts and good-nefs, handfome and ingenious; his name was Lewis Dumarefq, which was the name of Leander’s mother’s family: he was about twenty-two years old, and had travelled most parts of Europe. To him Leander made known all his Secret thoughts, and dcSign of going to St. Domingo in^
Search*
86 The HISTORY of
Search of Harriot, offered to acconi^ pany him thither, and to affist him ii ail he was able. Here we must leav< Leander to recover his health, and re late what befel Harriot, who was Id in Don Carlos's hands and power.
As Soon as Harriot found the Shij under fail, and discovered that fii was betrayed and robbed of her dea Leander, She retired to her cabin cast herSelf on her bed, and abandon ed herfelf to grief. ‘ My God, far
*	She, lifting up her delicate hand ‘ and watry eyes, for what am I rc
ferv'ed ? What farther misfortune must I Suffer? No fooner did th ‘ Providence provide me a friend t ‘ comfort me in my distrefs, and de
*	livered me out of the mercile: ‘ hands of pirates, but it has agai ‘ expofed me helplefs and alone t
*	strangers. Men who are more vie «■ lent and revengeful in their natun
than any I have yet met v/itha
^ Perhaps poor Leander is ahead
drowned in the mercilefs Sea by tl.
cru
4
/
Mifs Harriot Montague. 8y
® cruel Carlos, to whom, unleSs thy ‘ goodneSs again delivers me, I must' ‘ be a Sacrifice..’ Whilst she was thus _ expostulating with heaven, the amorous Spaniard came to. her cabin-door, and gently opening it. Sat down on the bed by her, and Seeing her drowned in tears, was for Some moments Silent; at last, taking her hand he kissed it passionately, and Said, ‘ Too charming lovely maid,
‘ why do you thus abandon yourSelf * to paSfion ? Give me leave to con-‘ vince you that you have no just ‘ caufe of grief, and that I have done ‘ nothing baSe or dishonourable; your:
‘ lover had ungratefully left a lady ‘ to whom he had been engaged from his infancy, one who highly deServ-‘ ed his esteem, and fo loved him ‘ that you fee she has centered her ^ life and fame to follow him : to you he was a stranger, and being ‘ falfe to her he had known fo long,. ^ ycu have all the reaSon in the world to doubt his constancy to you. Your
rival.
f8 The'HISTORY or
- rival had reSolved to rid herSelf c you, and you were hourly in dar < aer of death whilst She was wit ‘ you. Believe me, Harriot, the fe.
of lofing you, whom my Souladon « made me take Such meaSures to I t cure your life> and restoie to h * lady her faithleSs lover. I am d c engaged, and have a fortune wort o your acceptance'. This day, ti ‘ hour, if you’ll conSent, Til mai
‘ you to Secure you from aU fears ‘ being ruined or abandoned by rr ‘ and till you permit me to be h:
t py, guard and wait on' you w
‘ Such leSped and affiduity, that^ r	beTt last constrained to o
« that 1 do merit to be loved, and v « that lovely mouth confirm me h t py.’ She anSwered him with m reServe, wifely confidering in her.
that if She treated him with too m rigor, he might be provoked to other means to gratify his paiii
that She was wholly in his power,
un
L
MiSs Harriot Montague. 89
^nable to deliver herSelf out of hia hands. In fine, Some days passed, in which Slie was So altered with grief, that her lover was under great con-^ cern, he treated her with all the gallantry and tender regard that a man could life to gain a lady’s heart; he let nothing be wanting, but preSented her with wines, Sweetmeats, and every thing the ship afforded, offering her gold and rings, and at length pereeiv-ed that she grew more chearful and obliging, at which he was even transported. The weather had till now been very favourable, but as they were failing near the Summer-Istands, a dreadful storm or hurricane arofe, and drove them with Such fury for a day and a night, that the ship at last struck against one of the Smallest of them, and stuck So fast on the shore that they could not get her off, which obliged them to get the boats out and lighten the ship of the guns and. heaviest things, in doing which they discovered that the ship had Sprung a,
leak,;;.
90	1 ne H 1 o 1 u IV I of
leak; this made them under a ne-ceility of staying on this istand for Some days to repair the damage. "I ne captain, Harriot, Don Carlos, and all the ship’s crew went oil shore; they found it was one of thoSe istands that was uninhabited, fo they refolved to go from thence as foon as they could to
Bermudas; butProvidence had decreed their stay therefor fome time. The time they landed was about midnight, the shy darkened extremely, and fuch a storm of lightning and thunder followed, that the ship took fire, and was confumed with all that was left in it; the affrighted Harriot, who had iio other covering to defend her but the tents they had made of the tarpaulins and fails, now thought her misfortunes and life were at an end ; her lover and all the rest recommended themfelves to God, not expedfing to Survive that dreadful night. Some of the ship’s crew venturing to look out after the ship, were lost, being, blown into the Sea, and the morning
shewed
MiSs Harriot Montagub. 91
shewed the difmal proTpeO: of their ssaming ship, v/hich lay burning on the shore almost intirely confumed. All the hope they now had left, was, that Some boats or baishs would come to their relief from the adjacent islands. The storm being over towards evening, after baviiig taken Some refreshment of Vv^hat provifions and drink they had left, which they had brought on shore, they ventured to vv^alk about the istand, on which was plenty of fowl and trees. Don Carlos leading Harriot, they wandered to a place where they Saw' Some trees growing very clofe together, in the midst of which they perceived a Sort of hut or cottage made of a few boards and branches of trees, and coming up to it Saw a door standing open made of a hurdle of canes ; and concluding this place was inhabited by forneshody, curiofity induced them to look into it. There, stretched on an old mattreSs, lay a man wdio appeared to be of a middle age, pale as
death.
4)2 The H I STORY of
• dieath, and So meagre and motionreSs,, that they doubted whether he was-living or dead,, his habit was all torm and ragged, yet there appeared Something So lovely and majestic in his-even dying, look, that it nearly touched their Soulsk Don Carlos going into this poor hut, took him by the: hand, and finding he was not dead,, Spoke to him, asking if he could rife: and eat, who he was,, and other questions, to all which he. made no an--Sever, but looked earnestly upon him,. Mean time Harriot ran and fetched a-bottle of rum, returning with Sucte incredible Ipeed, that only that ardent charity that inflamed' her generous foul could have, enabled her to do 4 Don Carlos-poured Some of this rum. into his mouth, but it was Some time before the poor creature could Swallow it; at last he Seemed a little re-vived,. and Said in, French, God preserve you who have relieved me ; he could Say no more, but fainted : Don
Caidos, repeating his charitable office,
gave.
MiSs Harriot Montague. 9-;
I
§:ave him more rum, whilst Harriot fetched Some bread and meat; he fwallowed a mouthful or two, but could eat no more. By this time the captain and other officers came up, x and were equally Surprized at So fad an objedl; two of the Seamen were ordered to*stay with him that night; and the next morning Harriot and the rest returned to vifit him, impatient to know who he was, and how he came in that condition. He was come a little to himfelf, and received them in fo courtly a manner, though he was unable to rife up upon his feet, his weakneSs was So great, that they concluded he was Some man of quality ; and after Some civilities had paSTed, Don Carlos begged to know wsho he was. I will. Said he, if I am able, oblige you with the recital of a story So full of wonders, that it will merit a place in your memories all the days of your lives; you feem to be gentlemen, and that young lady’s curiofity ffiall be gratified. Don
Carlos
94 The HI STORY OF
Garlos bowing. Seated Harriot and himSelf on the ground by him, the captain and the rest stood before the cottage door, and the stranger having taken a piece of bisket and a glaSs of wine, being very faint, began the narrative of his life in the following manner.
‘ I was born in France at St. Maloes, ‘ my father was a rich merchant in ‘ that place, his name was Le Mon-tague, I was the youngest of two ^ fons which he had, and being ‘ grown up to man’s estate, my father ‘ was mightly follicitous to fee me ^ difpoSed .of advantageously, hopin ’ I Sbould marry Such a fortune as might provide for me without lef-^ femng his own. So that my elder
*	brother might be advanced to a ti-‘ tie which he defigned to purchafe ‘ for him, or Some great employ. J This he w^as continually Sounding in ‘ my ears. But, alas, my foul was averSe
*	to his commands, for I had already ^ engaged my affections to a young
^ lady
cl.
MiSs Harriot Montague. 95
*	lady whom I had unfortunately Seen ^ when 1 was but fifteen, at a monaf-‘ tery to which I had been Sent by ‘ my father, to See a kinfwoman who
*	was a professed nun there ; vifiting
*	her, I Saw this fair young penfioner, ‘ who was then about fifteen years ‘ old; She was beautiful as an angel, ‘ and I found her conversation as
*	charming as her face; her name ‘ was Clementina ; and the monaf-‘ tery being at a village not above ten ‘ miles distant from St, Maloes, I ‘ ufed Secretly to vifit her at least once
*	or twice a week. So that I got her ‘ promife to marry me fo Soon as I / was fettled in the world. She told ‘ me fhe was the only daughter of an ‘ old widow lady who lived fifty miles ‘ distant, w^as extreme rich, and had
*	placed her there, becaufe the abbeSs ‘ was her mother’s fister; that her ‘ fortune was left her at her mother’s ^ difpofal. This was her circum-
*	stance, which obliged me, being a younger brother, to defer marrying
‘ her
.96 The HISTORY OF
<	her till I had got Some way of pro-« viding for her, that I might venture ‘ to take her without asking our pa-« rents conSent: this delay was our ‘ undoing; for when I was twenty,
<	an old widow-lady came to my fa-‘ ther’s on Some money-affairs, and ' was dodged at our houSe, where ‘ lire took Such a fancy to me, that « fbe boldly Sollicited my father tc ‘ lay his commands upon me tc « marry her, which offer he leadiiy
e accepted ; and having laid all tht
*	advantages of this rich match besort
( rne, concluded with injoining m(
« with the firidtest injunaions t<
*	marry her forthwith. I pleaded ii ‘ vain that I was pre-ingaged to an
<	other. He told me in a lage, I mul ‘ take mv choice, eithei to content 0 « go out of his doors immediately
<	protesting he would never give rn ( groat, and difowti me if I was di(
<	obedient to his commands. Br
<	when I proceeded in the humble!
*	manner to make known wb
‘ th
t
Mifs Harriot Montague. 97
*	the perSon was to whom I was ‘ preingaged. Good heaven! how
*	was I furorized to find it was this
jl
lady’s daughter } And now the Sa-
*	tah Secret being known, Clemen-‘ tina was in a few days removed out ^ of my fight and knowledge, being
*	taken away from the monastery, and ^ Sent I know not whither. Some ^ months past in which I bussed my-^ Self in making inquiry after her, ^ but all in vain; at last, quite wearied ‘ out with my father’s threats and the
*	widow’s importunities, I conSented ^ to be wretched, and married her, ^ whom in my Soul I loathed and
*	hated ; nor had I done it, but in ^ hopes to get to the knowledge of ‘ the place where my dear Clemen-^ tina was concealed from me, re-‘ Solving never to conSummate my ‘ marriage with her mother: which ‘ way of proceeding So enraged her, ‘ that we lived at continual variance :
*	yet fhame withheld her from de-® daring this Secret to the world ; to-
¥ol. I,	F	Sgether
9^ The H I S T O R Y OF
*	gether with Spite, becauSe She
*	would continue to plague me by ‘ living with me. At last, by the
*	means oS one of the Servants, whom
*	I bribed, (having now all her for-
*	tune at command, which I took
*	care to manage So well, that I laid ‘ by a great Sum of money to provide
*	for me and Clementina, with
*	whom I refolved to sty from France
*	So foon as I could find her) I got
*	knowledge that Ihe was locked up
*	in a convent near Calais; on which
*	I converted all my money fecretly
*	into gold and bills of exchange, re-‘ Solving to Set out for England with
*	her fo foon as we could get off,
*	having there an unde at Bristol, my
*	father’s brother.’ At theSe words Harriot looked earnestly upon him. Surprized to find he was her coufin-german. But he continued his diScourfe thus: ‘ But now I was
*	in a great dilemma how to get to ‘s, the Speech of her to inform her of ‘ my defign, as likewife how to get
‘ away
Mffs Harriot Montague. 99
‘ away Srom my wife, who was con-continually hanging upon me, and following of me, fearing She should ‘ discover whither I was going, be-ing certain she would remove Cle-‘ mentina from the convent. I there-‘ fore picked a quarrel one evening ‘ with my wife about a trifle on pur-^ pofe, and the next morning took horfe by break of day, attended ‘ with only one fervant in whom I could confide, and fet out for St. * Malos, were being arrived, I hired a vefi'el to carry me to Calais, fear-‘ ing to be followed if I had gone by ■* land ; the wind was contrary for Some days, So that my revengeful ‘ wife had time to fend for Clemen-■* tina from the convent. At my ar-‘ rival there, I had the mortification ‘ to find her gone, but none could, ‘ or indeed would, inform me whi-^ ther she was carried; this So exaS-‘ perated me against my wife, that I reSolved not to return home any ‘ more : So I went directly to my fa-
F 2	‘ father’s,
#
JCO The H I s T O R Y oP
I
‘ tber’s, and staid there a month, ® pretending bustneSs with So^me ma-« sters oS ships that were expedfed to « come into that port. Mean time
<	my wife got intelligence where I
<	wajs, and came to me: I received
*	her civily before my father; but at
*	night, when we were in bed, we
*	fell into a warm difpute, which
*	ended in a refolutiori on my fide to ‘ leave her for ever, with which I ac-
quainted her ; but then she fell to intreaties, and in the foftest terms
*	laid before me my ingratitude to
*	her, and how wicked my defign was
<	upon her daughter ; pleading, that
*	as she was my wife, She had all the
‘ reaSon in the world to keep me from
‘ the converfation of a perfon whom
‘ I loved better than herfelf; that she
‘ had made me master of a plentiful
5	fortune, and concealed from the
‘ world the high affront I had put
‘ upon her, in refufing to perform the
« duties of a husband to her. To
‘ all v/hich I anfwered, That as for the
‘ cere-
<
I
MiSs Harriot Mon tag u e . i o r
\
*■ ceremony of our marriage, I looked ' upon it as nothing, fince I v/as ‘ compelled to it; that I had denied ‘ mySelf all converfe with her as a ‘ wife, becaufe I would not commit ‘ a fin, by breaking my Solemn vows. ‘ and engagements with her daugh-‘ ter, whom I had made choice of be-‘ fore I Saw her ; and fince there ' was no other way left to free me, ‘ I reSolved to declare all to the world, ‘ and annul our marriage, and restore ‘ what mouey and estate I had re-‘ maining in my hands to her. At ‘ theSe words She stew into a violent ‘ pastion. Well then (Said stie^ fince ‘ you' will thus expofe me, i’ll do ^ myfelfthis justice, to remove Cle-
*	mentina. from your fight for ever;
‘ be astured you shall never fee her ‘ more in this world. She that moc
‘ ment leaped out of bed, called for-‘ her Servant, and put on her clothes;
*	and though I ufed many intreaties ‘ to deter her, nay proceeded to
threats, yet she perfisted in her re-
E 3	folutioa.
102 The H I S T O R Y OF
‘ Solution, and going down to my Sather, acquainted him wnth all that ‘ had paffed between us, defiring him ‘	* to prevent me Srom following her,
*	which he, being highly incenSed ‘ against me, too w^ell performed : for ‘ he came up to my chamber, where ‘ I was dressing in order to follow ‘ her, but he kept me there in diS-
courSe whilst She took coach and ^ was gone I knew not whither, nor ^ could I for Some days hear any ‘ nev/s of her. Mean time my fa-‘ tber and brother continually perSe-‘ cuted me on her account, bidding
*	me go home and live like a ChriS-
*	tian ; nay they employed Several ‘ priests and the bishop of the place ‘ to talk to me. So that I was now ‘ looked on with much distike ; and
*	being weary of this Schooling, I ‘ Set out for home, where 1 found ‘ my wife fick, which indeed So ‘ touched me, that I repented of hav-
*	ing uSed her So unkindly, and re-»
Solved to treat her more reSpedfully
‘ for
MiSs Harriot Montague. 103
‘ for the time to come. A whole
*	year past, all which time she lan-‘ guished of a lingering fever and in-‘ ward decay, grief having doubtlefs ‘ feized her Spirits. I ufed her with
*	as much tenderneSs as if I had been ‘ her Son ; we never bedded together, ^ but kept two apartments. In fine, ‘ she died, and on her death-bed,
‘ Some hours before she expired, took
‘ me by the hand as I Sat on her bed-‘ fide, and Said theSe words to me.
y *
^ which are still fresh in my memory; ‘ Mr. Le Montague, I am now going ‘ to leave you, and I hope to be at
*	rest; I have loved you as tenderly ‘ and paffionately as ever wife did a ' husband ; .anshjthough I committed ^ a great folly in marrying a perfon ^ who was fo much younger than ‘ mySelf, and pre-ingaged, yet no ‘ vitious inclinations induced me to ‘ it, as my behaviour to you fince ^ must convince you. I flatter my-‘ Self, that gratitude and my beha-
*	viour towards you, would have
F 4	‘gained
J04 The HI STO R Y of
‘ gained your love, but vras deceiv-‘ ed. I have never been to blame in ‘ all my condudl towards you, but to ‘ my child I have been cruel and un-‘ kind; for fearing a criminal con-‘ verfation between you if you came ‘ together, I uSed all my endeavours ‘ to keep you aSunder, and finding
‘ that even the convents could not Sc-
/
*	cure her, provoked by your ill ‘ ufage, at last I reSolved to fend her
*	out of France, which I effedled by ‘ means of a captain of a Ship which ‘ w^as bound to Canada; who took ‘ her with him with a Sum of mo-‘ ney, promifing to See her there diS-‘ poSed of in marriage to Some mer-‘ chant or officer in thoSe parts, ‘ which we doubted not bi^t she ‘ would readily confent to, finding ‘ herfelf among strangers, and bereft ‘ of all hopes of Seeing you any more. ‘ I have never heard of her fince. ‘ This adlion I heartily repent of,
‘ and to expiate my fault, I shall
*	leave you. all my fortune, with a
stridi
.	r
Mifs'HARRioT Montague. 105-
' stridt injunction, as you hope for ‘ everlasting happineSs hereaSter, to ‘ go in Search of her, and employ it ‘ in endeavouring to find her; and if
*	she be marrieT give her part to
‘ make her happy: and may that God,
‘ WhoSe merciful forgiveneSs and par-‘ don I now implore, direct and pro-‘ Sper you, and bring you Safe toge-‘ ther, if fhe be yet finglc. I can. ‘ do no more, but ask you to accept
*	of this my iaft ation as an atone-^ ment for all the trouble I have oc-‘ cafioned you, and not hate my ‘ memory.. I was fo struck with ‘ hearing Clementina was Sent So far
o	^
‘ offy and fo diSarmed of my reSent-‘ meats by the fight of my wife’s ‘ condition, who was now struggling , ‘ with death, that the tears poured. ‘' down my face, and my Soul was So • ‘ oppressed, that I Swooned ; which -‘ So disturbed her, that her confessor,
‘ who was preSent at tliis diScourSe,
‘ ordered me to be carried out of the y room.’. Here he feemed faint, and.
F 5	F^on ;
io6 The HISTORY OP
Don Carlos gave him Some wine; after which he continued his relation in this manner. ‘ Recovering Srom my ‘ Swoon, I Soon discovered by the ‘ outcries and lamentations of the ^ Servants that my wife was dead. I ‘ behaved mySelf with all the decency ‘ and prudence I was able on this
*	occafion, and buried her Suitable to
*	her birth and fortune ; after which
*	I thought of nothing but my voyage
*	to Canada, having informed myfelf ' of the ship and captain’s name,
*■ who carried away Clementina j ‘ which was not returned, or expedt-
ed back to France m three years,
‘ being gone a trading .voyage for ‘ Some merchants at Dieppe. I left'
*	my father to take care of the estate,
A	J
' who Sent my brother to refide there;
‘ made my •will, and having provid-ed mySelf with money, bills of ex-
*	change, and all other neceSTaries, L
‘ went aboard a merchantship called"
‘ the Venturous, bound for thofe ‘ parts to trade, not doubting but that
* we. -
%
I
4
Mifs Harriot Montague. 107
^ we Should meet with the captaia
*	there v/ho had conveyed Clemen-‘ tina thither, and then there was no ‘ question but I Ihould, make him con-‘ feSs where he had left her. We had ‘ a prosperous voyage for fome weeks,,
< but coming near Newfoundland,*
‘ we unfortunately met a pirate Ship,
^ who boarded and took us after a ‘ fierce difpute which lasted three ‘ hours, in which our strip was fo ‘ fhattered, that She Sunk as they « were rifling her; in which accident ‘ Several of the pirates periShed, and i ‘ all the pafTengers and Sailors belong-‘ ing to our Ship, except my unfor-
*	tunate Self and Surgeon, who were:
‘ taken up by ropes into the pirate .
‘ Ship, where we were put in irons :
‘ into the hold, I fuppofe becauSe ‘ they were in an ill humour at the:
*	lofs of their- companions andi the.
‘ strip. Some days past before we:
had the favour of being brought up^
*	upon the deck, and our irons taken "‘off. We were both very fick;-,
E 6j>	‘ 'aso
io8 The HISTORY OF
«
‘ as Sor my part, I was So afflidfed at ‘ being prevented from going my in-‘ tended voyage, that I was eareleSs
‘ of what became of me. There was
*	amongst the pirates fome that look-‘ cd like gentlemen, but they all ‘ talked and behaved themfelves like ' defperate villains, oaths and curfes ‘ were as common as in a gaming-‘ houfe, they drank like Germans,
‘ and diScourfed like atheists, and li-‘ bertines; they asked us many nuef-‘ tions, who and what we were, to
,	‘ all which we anfwered cautioufiy.
‘ 1 told them, if they w^ould Set me ‘ on any Shore thereabouts, from « whence I might travel by land, or get Shipping to Canada, I would ‘ promife if I lived to return to ‘ France, to remit a thoufand pif-‘ toles to any part of the world, or ‘ perSon they Should name; they took
*	little notice of my offers, but let us
*	have the liberty of walking in the
‘ day-time on the decks, and at •
*	night they put us under, hatches.
‘At;
«
MiSsHarriot Montague. 109
*	At last we arrived at the ifland of • * Providence, where they were re-
‘ ceived by their companions with < much joy. We remained in this ‘ wretched place ten whole months.
^ in which time they uSed us like ‘ staves, with many others whom
*	they could not prevail with to take ' ‘ up their deSperate manner of liv-
*	ing. At last, wearied with this ^ way of life, we defired to go out in ‘ one of their Ships, defiring them to ‘ treat us as She should deServe by ‘ our bravery and good behaviour:
‘ they contented; and now all my ‘ hopes were that 1 should meet a ‘ welcome death to free me from the
*	miteries cf life, or find feme way to-‘ eScape from them. There were
*	befide mytelf and friend, fix gen-
*	tlemen, three of whom were Spa-‘ nlards, and the other three Enp-lish^
‘ who, like us, went with them shro’
*	necefiity ; the ship was a frigate of ‘ 30 guns, and carried 140 hands-L they defigned to cruize near the
‘ Havanna,
no The HISTORY OF
‘ Havanna, in hopes to catch Some of ‘ the Spanish ships coming out thence; ‘ as we lay cruizing at Some distance, ‘ a dreadful storm arofe, which at last ‘ tore our ship in pieces near this ‘ issand where we now are j every ‘ man was obliged to shift for him-‘ felf; I catched hold of a plank,
‘ floating on which, it pleaSed Provi-‘ dence to caufe the winds and waves ‘ to cast me on this place much bruiS-‘ ed ; here I have been three weeks.
‘ I made this hut with Some old ‘ planks and what I found on the ‘ shore, to fecure me from the cold
*	and storms; this old mattrafs and coat *^1 alSo found; all my food has been ‘ the eggs of fea-fowls and birds,
‘ which I have daily gathered up on ‘ the Sands and in holes in the rocks ‘ and hollow trees; but the anguish ‘ of my mind, with the bruifes I re-
*	ceived in my stomach in the ship-
*	wreck, had at last reduced me to ‘ Such weakneSs, that I could no lon-‘ ger rife on my feet to Seek for food;
‘ and
MiSs Harriot Montague, hi
‘ and when divine Providence brought ' you here to my relief, I had been ‘ three whole days without tasting ‘ any Sustenance, and had by this been ‘ freed from my miferies.’ Then he fetched a deep figh, concluding his story with thefe words.: ‘Yet lam ‘in duty bound to thank God and ‘ you, and hope, fince he has pro-‘ longed my stay on earth a little lon-* ger, that he will make life fupport-‘ able, by furnishing me with means ‘ to find her out, without whom I ‘ must be ever wretched.
t
As Soon as the unfortunate Le Montague had made an end of his story, the compaffionate Harriot, touched to-the heart with the misfortunes of her coufin which So equalled her own, acquainted him who she was, and in few words of the manner of her coming to that place; at which he was. filled with admiration : but he was. fo amazed when he heard that Lean-der and Camilla had left Istanee in Such a, manner, that , he could Scarce.
credi.
t	H
112 The HISTORY OF
credit it, they being his intimate friends; yet Slie in the relation made no* mention of Don Carlos’s treachery or Lestnder’s love to her. Saying only he was gone to Virginia in a French ship. The conversation now turning to be general,- every per Son Spoke their Sentiments of Le Montague’s adventures ; Some days pasted with much anxiety, provifions were husbanded, and their fears of wanting daily in-creaSed ; Monfieur Le Montague Soon ■ mended, and company rendered their Solitary way of living in this defolate place more Supportable; they were hourly in expectation of feeing Some ship paSs by to the adjacent istands, having placed a white cloth on the top of a stick on the most eminent part of the istand, to give notice of their distreSs : thus they Spent three whole w'eeks, in which time most of the victuals they had Saved were , Spent, the dreadful apprehenfions of famine appeared in every face, and every one walked about looking
what.
MiSs Harriot Montague. 113
what they could find to eat, in hcpes to Satisfy nature without diminilhing the Small stock of provifions they had left. Don Carlos, who was one of the most vigilant in Searching out Something to give Harriot fit for her to eat, went one morning to the farthest part of the istand, which was about Seven miles over, and there aS-cending a high rock, stood looking on the Sea, and perceived a boat fastened in, a little cliff of the rock, out of which cliff a black came, and launching out the boat, put off to fea, making towards another istand. Don Carlos concluded this perSon lived Somewhere in this rock, and refolved to Search about it in hopes to difcover Some perSons there, by whom he might be astisted and his friends, to get from this difmal istand, or at least to wait the man’s return, or find out his abode, in order to return thither that evening. He found it very dangerous to defcend on that fide of the rock next the fea, and was long eter
he
II4 The HISTORY OF
he could find the place out of which he Saw the man come forth; but at last^ he perceived a Sort of a door, which feemed to shut in a place that was the entrance of a cavern in the rock : but it was fast locked, and he could not difcern through the keyhole any thing but a glimmering light, yet he heard a human voice like a woman’s, talking to a child, but he understood but little of it, becaufe it was a language he could not Speak much of, being English ; he waited fome hours, and finding the man did not return, he went away, and hastened to Harriot with the glad tidings that he had found.a boat, and perSons on the issand. Both she and the whole company were agreeably Surprized with this news; and the captain, Monfieur Le-Montague;, Don Carlos, and Harriot, all refolved to make their evening’s walk to this place.
In the morning Harriot and the rest walked to the rock in the'evening, and getting up to the top of it. Saw from
thence
MiSs Harriot Montague. 215
thence the black man standing at the entrance of his cave, with a white woman who Seemed to be very young and very handfome; she had a Ma-lotta child in her arms about a year old, her gown and petticoat was made of a fine filk. Don Carlos called to them in French, at which the man looked up; and Harriot Spoke in English to the woman, defiring her to come up and Spbak to her ; on which the blackamoor pushed the woman in, and returning no anSwer, shut the door upon himSelf and her. Don Carlos and the rest concluded that they feared being discovered; So they all descended the rock and went, to the door, reSolving to Sorce it open if they could not gain entrance otherwife, and remove tneir fears by Speaking gently to them, and acquainting them with their distrefs. They knocked and called at the door for Some time ; but hearing a noife within, and no anfwer, they broke open the door with mnch difficulty, and entering,
went
/
ti6 The HISTORY OF
went through a narrow passage in the rock. So strait that but one perSon could go a-breast; . at the end of which they came into Some strange rooms fastiioned by nature, thougte cleanSed of moSs and looSe stones by labour: into theSe, light entered by the holes that were in Some places open through the top of the rocks; but Some part of the caves, or caverns, for they were Scarce fit to be called rooms, were very dark. In the biggest room was a lamp burning, and here they Saw two chests locked, and, bn a fhelf Some platters and bowls made of calibasti-Shells, with two or three wooden Spits; and Some stickswere burning in a corner of the room, in a place made with stones piled round, and opening in the front like a furnace, on which stood a pot, wherein Something was boiling. There likewise hung up Some fishing-tackle and a gun with a powder-horn, as alSo a bow with a quiver of arrows. In a place which was shut with a door,
like
• ./
MiSs Harriot Montague. 117
like a cupboard, stood bread and flower, and' on the table (for there was a very odd one, and stools, which which Seemed to be of the negro’s making) stood a basket with Some clean linen for a child, and Some canvas cut out for Slaves jackets and drawers. In another room they Saw a quilt and coverlids lying on Some rushes on the fioor; but they could find no living creature, at which they were much amazed. They called, and Spoke in the Softest terms, defir-ing them to come forth, if hid there, promising to do them no harm ; but in vain. At last they heard a child cry, and following the found of the voice, went through a narrow turning on she right hand, which brought them to a place where a door was shut, before which lay a terrible bear : Don Carlos, who was the foremost, carrying the lamp in one hand, and his Sword in she other, being prefently more apprehenfive of Harriot’s danger than his own; the
being
ii8 The HISTORY ot
being next behind him, ran at the bear, defigning to kill it, if poffible, before it could rife ; but was stopped by the Sound of a human voice which came from that beast, faying, ‘ For ‘ heaven’s fake, fpare my life, and * I’ll do all you’ll have me.’ At thefe words the negro came out of the bear’s fkin, and threw himfelSat Don Carlos’s feet, who took him up ; anti Harriot bid him fear nothing, they . being perSons in distrefs, that wanted bis assistance, and would pay him nobly for ferving them. Then he •opened the door he had lain before in the beast’s skin, and brought forth the young woman and child, whom Harriot embraced, whilst the poor creature wept for joy to fee a Qhristian white woman. Now they were all cbearful, and the negro being told,that they wanted his assistance, to carry one of them to any of the adjacent issands that was inhabited to get them fome provifions, and hire a vessel to carry them to the istand of St. Domingo,
I
iviiis riARRioT Montague, rin
niingo, he readily promiSed to d© it:
*	My boat, lays he, will carry no great
*	weight, being a Small canoe which
*	ImademySeff; but it will carry me ‘ and one more, with Some Small
‘ quantity of provisions." They were
all impatient to know how this beautiful woman and black man came to this place; which they found she feemed not willing to declare whilst the negro was prefent; and therefore Harriot begged that she might accompany her whilst, he brought the boat round to the other fide of the istand, to take in one of the Sailors ; ijot thinking it Safe to trust Don Carlos, or one of the gentlemen with him in fo flight a vestel. This the negro did not feem to be pleafed withal, but yet dared not refufe it. He ufed to drag his boat up out of the w^ater into a cleft, where it was impoffible to be Seen. And now the transported woman, with her tauny child, accompanied Harriot to her tent, and
in
j2o The HISTORY of
in the way recounted her Sad story in theSe words;
‘ My name is Leonora: I am the daughter of a planter in Virginia, who has a great plantation there, is ex» tremely rich ; and having no more daughters than mySelf, bred me up in the best manner, Sending me to England for education, from whence I returned at thirteen years old. I was courted by Several, and by one in par-I ticular whom I liked, and my father did not disapprove of; but it was my unhappy fate to be miSerably disappointed of all my hopes. Amongst a great many negro staves whom my father had t© work in our plantation, he you Saw was one, who appearing to be bred above the rest, and more capable of being Serviceable in the houfe, was taken into it. He was ■about twenty years old, handfome and witty, could read and write, having (as he pretends) been a prince in his ov/n country and taught Several
Ian-
/
A
'MiSs .Harriot Montague. 121
languages and arts by a Romifh priest, who was cast ashore at Angola, from whence he came. He behaved him-felf So well, that he gained my father’s favour, and ufed often to wait on me when I walked out in an evening or rid out, running by my horfe’s fide; in short, he was ever ready to do me Service. We had a pleafure-boat, having a city-houfe at James-Town ; and when I was there, I ufed often, with my companions, to go on the water in the evenings for pleafure, and then he ufed to steer the boat. He made liimfelf the little boat you fawhere, on pretence to go out a fishing for me, vshich mucli pleafed my father, the faSliion and ufefulnefs of it being extraordin.uy for it fails fwift, and bears a rough Sea beyond any thing we had ever feen. Fie ufed to catch fish very dex-terouSly, as he did every thing he went about: he coiild paint, understood navigation, the mathematics;
VoLj, I. G	and,
-	s
122 The HISTORY OP
and, in short, was So beloved by my father, that he would have freed him, had he not feared lofing of him. And now Domingo, for that is his name, became enamoured with me, and lift up his aSpiring eyes to my unhappy face: his paffion increaSed with time, and at last, he reSolved to poffeSs me, or die in the attempt. Had he but once given me the least intimation of his paffion, I should have acquainted my father with his infolence, and his death would have prevented my ruin : but this he knew, and therefore fo well kept the fecret to himfelf, that no body fufpedled it. He had taken care to provide fome bread and money, by Selling Some tobacco, ahd little mathematical instruments and pictures he had made; my father, having given him a little piece of ground to plant, to buy him linen, allowing him to go finer drest than other staves. He permitted him, when we went to the town, to Sell trifles that he made.
In
Mifs Harriot Montague. 127
In fine, he waited only an opportunity to get me into his little boat, which he thus effedfed: one evening, the Sea being very calm, he Sat in the boat a fiShing, having hid the bread and money in it; I walking down with my maid, to See what he had caught for my Supper, he per-fuaded me to step into the boat, and fit down. ‘ Now, Madam (Said he) ‘ you (hall See Sport.’ He was pulling in a little net ; I Sat down, and the maid stood on the shore. He, in dragging the net, looSed the boat from the Shore, which beginning to drive out to Sea, Surpriz’d me; but he bad me fit still, and fear nothing I Sat very patient for Some tirne, till at last Seeing him hoist the Sail, and go farther from land, I began to be frightened ; he pretended to be So too, and perfuaded me he could not help it, that the wind and stream drove the boat against his will. He pulled a little compafs out of his pocket, by
C 2	which
«
X24 The H I S T O R Y of
which he steer’d. We were two nights and days thus Sailing, in which ’ time we paSs’d by Some ifiands, on ^ which he pretended he could not
land, becauSe, as I Since discover’d, he knew they were inhabited, and had beSore mark’d out this deSolate piace to carry me to. At last he brought me hither half dead with the fright, and faint, having eat only a little of the bread, and drank out of the bottle of wine which he had in the boat,, in which he had put his tools for making mathematical instruments, and colours for painting. When we were landed, he Seemed mighty fol-licitous where to find a place for m© to lie down, and food for me; and brought me into the cavern in the rock: there being Seated on his jacket, on the ground, we eat what fiSh he had in the boat, broiled on a fire he made wdth sticks, having a tinder-bjox in his pocket. After we had eat
he told me his defign. My dear
kdy
/
Mifs Harriot MontagVe. i2’5
*	lady. Said he, I love you to mad-
*	neSs, and was reSolved to poffefs you ‘ or die : though my out-fide is black,.
‘ and diStastcful, I fear, to your'
*	eyes, yet my Soul is as noble and
*	lovely as your own. I was born a ^ prince, and free; and tho’ chance ^ made me a stave, and the barbarous
*	Christians bought and fold me, yet
*	my mind they never could fubdue.^
*	I adore you, and have long defigned
*	what I have now effe(5ed. No ‘ human creature dwells here bestdes ‘ ourfelves, and from this place you
*	never must expect to return/ Here he proceeded to kifs me, my distraction was fuch, that I Swooned; he took the advantage of thofe unhappy minutes, when I was unable to refist; and, in fine, has kept me here two whole years, maintaining me by carrying what he makes to the adjacent islands; wshere he fells his ingenious work to the inhabitants,, and brings back provifions and cloathes for us:
G 3	from
126 The HISTORY OF
from thence he brought all you fee in our miferable habitation ; and to employ me, he brings work from thefe people. I make clothes for the Slaves, and by this means, and his , fishing and shooting, we have food enough. I had a pearl necklace, and fome rings in my ears, and on my fingers, of value, when he brought me here; which he Sold, and traded with the money. I have had but this child by him, v/hich he doats on. He is a Christian, and would gladly marry me, , He is So jealous, that whenever he discovers any body landed on the ifland, he always locks me up, if he goes out; he lives in continual fear, lest my father should make any diScovery where we are,, and fend Some to take me from him; in caSe of which I believe he would certainly kill me. He tolst me of your being here Some days fince, and warned me not to venture forth ; which
indeed I longed to do, in hopes to
meet
I
MilS'HARRioT Montague. I2'/
meet with Somebody to eonverSe withai, being weary of living Such a Solitary miserable life. When he-foimd you were refolved to enter our being, which he thought Secure, he put me into the room you faw me in, and placed himSelf before it in the bear’s skin ; a stratagem he had invented long before, fuppoSing no body would venture to Search farther, when they Saw So terrible a creature in So diSmal a place. He had stuffed the legs, feet and head of the beast j So that placing himSelf in the belly of it, it appeared alive, eSpccially in So dark a place. The two large chests you Saw, he found on the shore Some months fince, in which there are much rich clothes, linen and treasure, the Spoils of Some unhappy ship that was doutleSs shipwrecked on this coast..
‘ And now I hare acquainted you ^ with all my unhappy story, and ^ must implore your astistance to- '
O 4-	‘‘ per-
128 The HISTORY OF
perSuade Domingo to leave, this-place, and take us with you, or elfe help me to eScape. from him ;■ ‘ though I would now willingly con-fen t to be his v/ife, having treafure IiiSlicient to purchaSe us a good fet-tlement in any place. If he be ever found by any body from Virginia, ‘ my father will furely put him to ‘ death, but Domingo will kill me fi,rst ; and to live thus is worfe than ‘ death.’ Here she wept, and Harriot embracing her, promifed never to part v/ith her. ‘ No, my dear ‘ Leonora, faid she, we will part no ‘ more.; Domingo shall be carried hence to the place we are bound to,
‘ where he may fafelyand lawfully ‘ pofiefs you ; fince you now love, as ‘ I perceive, and have forgiven him ‘ his crime in getting you, we will ‘ assist him to be happy. The fel-‘ ling human creatures is a crime ‘ my foul abhors; and wealth fo got, never thrives. Though he is black,
‘ yet
Mif&'Harriot MontagiIe. 129
® yet the Almighty made him as welS ‘ as us, and Christianity never taughr-‘ us cruelty : we ought to vifit thoSe ‘ countries to convert,, not buy our-'
‘ fellow-creatures, nor to enstaveand ‘ ufe them as if they were devils, or ‘ they not men.’ Don Carlos joined with her in opinion; and the cap--tain and all agreed to have them married, and take them along with them. And now being come to their tent, they fat down to eat; poor Leonora^ being fo transported with Such charm--. ing eonverSation, that Harriot could not refrain praifing God in her heart, for fending her Such a fweet companion.
In the evening Domingo returned with the failor, with the joyful tidings
of there being a Spanish Ship at the-
illand they had been , at, and the captain had promised to come the next morning in hislong-boat to fetch them’ away, his name being Don Ema-nual,., a particular friend of Don Car-i
G 5.	los’’
I
1.30 The H I STORY OF
los and our Spanish captain, This^ news revived them ail, and now Harriot talked to Domingo, offering him^ to take him and Leonora to St. Do-, mrngo, and See them married in the Spanish ship the next day: and Don Carlos promised that the governor his' father should permit them to fettle-there; and then, Said he, Leonora may, if you think fit, write to her father,, and let him know where she is.
Domingo gladly accepted of this pro-
poSal, being So overjoyed to hear that Leonora conSented to marry him, he fell prostrate on the ground, and returned thanks to God in So paffionate a manner, that it moved all the company. But Harriot, being still deeply Concerned for the loSs of her dear Leander, feeing herfelf going to be carried to a place where she should be no longer able to refist Don Carlos’s defires, where his father commanded every thing, and from whence there was no peshbiiity to efcape without
MiSs ISarrtot Montague. 13'r
out his knowledge; a; place where She must either yield to be Carlos’s-mistreSs, or wife, and should be ne-cestitated to break her vows and faith given to Leander ; reSolved to try the force of eloquence and power over Don Carlos, to prevail with him to land her at Virginia, or at least give her his faithful promife to fend her thither by the first ship that went from St. Domingo. In order to this, she ashed him to walk with her alone a little way that evening, which he gladly did; there she began to break her mind to him in the most shft and moving terms imaginable : * Though
*	we are not of one religion. Said she,, ‘ yet we are both Christians1 have *■ given my faith tO' another, how can ® I be yours without a crime ? I have ‘ all the grateful fenSe that I ought ^ of your civilities towards me,, and ‘ wish my heart had not been pre-
engaged, that I might have beem
*	yoursbut lince I cannot break
G 6	‘ through
4
I
J72 Ttie HISTORY OP
V
‘ through my engagements with hinv ‘ permit rr.e to be just, and be affur-‘ ed that! wd 11 ever love and esteem ‘ you next himSelf whilst Hive. . He ' will undoubtedly come to St. Do^
' mingo to look after me; and with
*	what conSuSion stiall. I fee him,
' when married to you ? Eefides,
your father and family will abhor
*	me as beneath you ; . it is altogether ‘ unfit for you to mary a poor EngC ' lifh maid, whoSe family and edu-' cation you are a stranger to, and ‘ who has no fortune to recommend
her to the. honour of being your t wife,; fo that Should I confent, we: ‘ must be wretched.’ Don Carlos returned this anSwer ‘ Lovely Harriot,
. ‘ on v/hom I have placed aU my love, , ‘ and in whom my whole, happinefs ‘ in this life confists,. I can.no more ‘ confent to part with you than with ^ my hopes- of future happinefs or '• my-Saitli. It is impostible forme ^ todive without you j .Deander me—
rit.s.
0
MiSs Harriot Montague. 133;
rits not your love, he is Salfe to *’ another,, and with him you must expedt a curSe: befides, stis in vain ‘ to diSpute, I am reSolved never to ‘ part with you: I have a father who ® is So tender of me, and So generous ‘ and good in his nature, that he will be glad to fee me happy, and ‘ be fond of you, becaufe you are. mine ; my family will follow his-
*	example ; I have a filler fair and ‘ wife as yourfelf, fire loves me dear^-‘ ly, and shall be your companio^i
*	and friend: your virtue is a porti-‘ on, and. I have wealth enough to
*	make us happy 3 and, to remove all. obstacles, you shall not fet yoiM*
*	foot out of the ship we are defign-
*	ed to go on board of to-morrow ‘ morning, till I have wedded and ‘ bedded you; which if yomconSent ^ not to, I must first bed, and then « marry you, for you are in my ‘ power, you must and shall be mine;,
and,by this gentle compulsion. I’ll
‘ remove.
V.
I
134 The H IS TORT OR
remove your Scruples, and acquit * you of your promiSes to the trea-' cherous Leander, my now hated ri-‘ val.’ At thele words he let go her hand in a kind of diSorder, and walked. hastily back towards the tenn She followed, much distradted in her thoughts; he stayed till She overtook, him, but went along with her home without fpeaking another word. After Supper, Harriot retiring to bed, could not dofe hep eyes all night ;; and having in that time well weighed and confidereT all he Said, refolved
V	^
to conSent to mkrry him, chufing rather to yield tc^be his with honour^ than reduce him to treat her in a manner She dreaded worSe than death. Camilla’s following Leander, and his negligence, as She construed it, in going into the French Ship, and leaving her behind, had a little piqu’d her; and her circumstances, being in Don Carlos’s hands, obliged her to agree to be his y nor did fhe distike him,
he;
MiSs Harriot Montagite, r jer
lie was beautiful, had a great for-^
tune, was nobly born,, and finely
bred. She rofe, determined to com-
poSe her thoughts, and, if poffible,,
banish the pashon she had for Lean-
der out of her Soulbut that waS' impoffible.
Don Carlos next morning appeared with an imuSual gravity in his looks ; the long-boat Ibon arrived with the Spanish eaptain, and all the gentlemen he had on board, and was re— "eeived very joyfully; all things wortte carrying .away v/ere already packed up> by the diligent Sailors, and foon lent a-board; and the boat returning sh. the evening, Don Carlos, Harriot, Leonora, Monf. Le Montague, Domingo, the Spanish Captain, and all the rest went into it, bidding adieut to the defolate istand, and arrived Safe to the ship, where they were welcomed with the guns and good wine. The next morning they weighed anchor,, and she ship Set Sail 'for the istand of
The H ISTORY of
St. Domingo • then Don Carlos earn--estly Sollicitcd Harriot to marry him, and was Seconded by her coufin, and the good father who was chaplain tO' the Sliip, a friar whoSe name was Ignatius, to whom he had declared his reafons and refolutions j at last She yielded, and was that day married, as was alfo Leonora to her amorous Moor, who on this occafion behaved himSelf So handSomely, and expreffed Such Satisfadion and transport, that every body was charmed with him. In a few hours they reached the istand, and Harriot was Gonduded by Don Carlos, to his father’s castle, where she was Surprized at the great attendance and Sumptuous furniture ; the governor received his Son with great joy and affedion, and when he presented Harriot to him, begging his bleshng and pardon for marrying without his eonSent, he took her up and embraced her. faying^ ‘ If She be as vir-
* ' tuous
Wtm
I
MiSs Harriot Montague. 137
* tuous as fair, which I doubt not,
‘ Since you have made her your wife,
‘ and be a catholic, I not only give ‘ you my blefiing, but will do all ‘ all that is neceffary to make you ‘ great and happy.’ Here Harriot was Surprized, being a protestant, and was ready to fink; but Don Carlos, Squeezing her by the hand to give her a hint to conceal her disorder, replied brifkly, ‘ Honoured fir,
‘ She is all you can defire, virtuous,
‘ wiSe, pious, and will I am certain ‘ be anhonour and comfortto usboth.’ Don Carlos’s Sister, the charming La-vinia, a most accomplish’d young lady, coming into the preSence-chamber, welcomed her brother and new Sister, to whom She made a preSent of Some very rich jewels stie had on ; and now all the court (for So the governor’s palace was justly called, for he was there as great, and lived like' a king) was Soon crouded with all the principal gentlemen and mer-
chantSi^
i
♦
9
138 The HISTORY OF
chants in the town; a mighty treat was got ready,, the bells Were Set a ringing, and after Supper there was a great ball ; Harriot was So com pie-mented and caressed, and her friend Leonora, who accompanied her as a companion or attendant, her circumstance not being mentioned, that She was astonissied j and being So young,, and unuSed to Such greatnefs, no doubt but she at this instant forgot Leander, and was transported at her good fortune in getting fo noble a husband as Don Carlos,
The ball ended, she was by her husband conduced to a most Splerir-did apartment, attendedshy her father-in-law, fister, and all the eornpany. Here being again complemented, the company took leave, and an old lady with two waiting women, waited on her and Leonora into a dreffing-room,, into which none but Leonora entered with them; the old lady undressed her, the strvants put her on a rich
laced
>
MiSs Harriot Montague,
laced Suit of night-cloaths, a delicate fine Shift, night-gown and petticoats all which Lavinia furniShed for her
St
new fister, whoSe beauty she much admired, and highly reSpedted her brother. Leonora had a fine Suit off night-clothes, night-gown and petticoats given her alSo, and a chamber prepared next Harriot’s to lie. in. Harriot was condudted by Lavinia to-a bed-chamber, where the bed was a rich brocade, the hangings arras, and every thing magnificent beyond any thing she had ever Seen in her life. So Soon as she was in bed, Lavinia and the rest took leave; then Don
Cartos came in at another door in his
night-gown, and went to bed to her ; mean time the governor diSmiffed the-
company, and ' retired to his apartment.
Now it is fit that we inform our-. Selves where the Spanish captain aind-the rest of the passengers were dish poSed of; he, Domingo, and the osh
fice.rsi
140 The HISTORY or
■ ficers belonging to the Ship, stayed on board to See the ship cleared and lain up in the harbour. But Don Carloshaving thought it proper the Moor Should not appear with Leonora, till he had acquainted his father with their story; therefore it was reSolved that he Should come to the governor’^ the next morning with the captain, who was obliged to wait on him, and give an account of his voyage every time he returned from Sea ; Domingo’s two chests, in which was all his wealth, were to be likev^iSe brought to the castle: the Moor, who was mnich inclined to jealouly, pasted the night very ill, and thought the time long till the rifing fun appeared; he had his little boy in bed with him, whom he hugged and kissed all night; and rifing at day break, took a rich habit out of one of his chests, and dressed him-felt like a petty-prince, as he really was by birth in his own country ; he
likewise.
MiSs Harriot Montague. 141
likewise put a rich cloak on little Domingo, which Leonora had made him with Some Scarlet Cloth and filver lace, the Moor had brought her for that purpoSe from the issands he ufed to trade to. Thus he waited, ' ready to attend the captain and Mon-fieur Le Montague to the caStle, to which they went about ten o’clock, by which time Don Carlos was rifen, and had acquainted his father with Leonora’s story and Monfieur Le Montague; the governor welcomed them ail, Domingo he embraced, and and promised him hk protedion and favour. Don Carlos conducted him to Leonora and Harriot, who were together in their apartment entertaining a great many ladies, who were come to pay their compliments and breakfast with them. And now nothing but feasting and joy were thought on by all but thefe two ladies, who having been both bred Protestants, were in a great consternation
I
142 The HISTORY op
nation how they Should behave them-Selves. Harriot had reaSqned that morning with her Lord on this Sub-jedf, and he had convinced her that She was under a neceSIity of diSTem-bling her religion; for if his father and family discovered She was a Protestant, She must expedl to be hated and flighted, nay, that he Should be ruined, and perhaps parted from her, Thefe thoughts almost distradled her, and She had communicated them Se-
9
cretly to Leonora, when She came into her chamber^in the morning; they both wept, and found too late they must be of their husband’s religion, or be wretched. Harriot eveh repented her breach of faith with Leander, and began to apprehend the misfortunes that the change which she had made would bring upon her ; but file concealed her thoughts, they went to mafs every day, which made them highly caressed by the whole court, and much obliged their hufi-bands,
Domingo,
MiSs Harriot Montague. 143
Domingo, who was impatient to retire with his wiSe, being very un-eaSy at the liberties the gentlemen
took in looking on and talking to her,
follicited Don Carlos to procure him Some little Seat in the country, and had it forthwith granted; for the governor fent him to a little market town about twenty miles from the city, to a houfe of pleafure which he had there 3 and here he found a little paradife, a houfe fo neat and richly furnilhed. Such lovely gardens, fiSh ponds, fountains, fields and groves, that his imagination could not have formed a more beautiful retreat. Having viewed it, and got all things ready, that is, two fervants, and the room aired, he came back to the castle to fetch his wife, and return thanks for his fine being. But when Leonora took leave of Harriot, they both wept, and • Harriot promifed to go every Summer and pafs her time there. Here Domingo and his little
family
\
144 The HISTORY of
family lived happily the remainder of their days, having many children, and Leonora by his perSuafions, became a true Roman Catholic. But Harriot continued Some time a Protestant in her heart; yet at last She was truly happy in her own thoughts, and pleafed Ihe was Don Carlos’s wife ; for She had all that mortal could wiSh for, a noble fortune, lovely children, and a husband who loved her beyond exprestion, and denied her nothing.
And now to return to the pirate captain, who was Safely landed on this issand, and cured of his wounds; the pirate ship which the Spanish captain had taken and fent away before, with the pirates he had taken aboard of it, being arrived at St. Domingo before his own ship : this gentleman, who was kept a prifoner in the town, hearing of Don Carlos’s marriage
with Harriot, fent her a letter to ask
““ •
her pardon for what was past, protesting he v/as truly penitent, and that
.he
-i'
MiSs Harriot Montague. 145
he honoured her virtue as much as he had loved her perSon; and begged Ihe would procure his enlargement from that difmal place. This letter She Shewed not her lord; but without relating what had passed between her and the pirate. Spoke in his behalf; and told him he was a Catholic, and a man nobly born, and forced against his will to become a pirate, and that Ihe begged the favour of him to releaSe him, and Some way provide for him in the Fleet prifon. This Don Carlos readily granted, and after Speaking to his father, went to the prifon and releaSed him and two other p-entle-
O
men whom he pleaded for, shying they were his countrymen and friends, and not guilty of any crimes but what they had been forced to. The common Sailors of the pirates were ordered on board the Spanish galleons, and thefe three gentlemen followed their benefadlor to the VoL. I. ' H	castle.
X
14.6 The HISTORY OF
castle, to return their thanks to die governor. Don Carlos preSenting them to his wife and father, Harriot ■looked on the pirate captain with Some disorder; but he addreffed himSelf to her in theSe words, ‘mak-ing a profound bow, ‘ Madam, I ‘ am doubly indebted to you both ‘ for my liberty and reformation ; I
*	am by your reproofs and generofity ' freed from both the means and •
inclinations to fin, and now refolve ‘ to live So, that my adlions may
*	witnefs my love to God, and gra-‘ titude to you. I will henceforth < endeavour to be an honour to my ‘ country and religion.’ This Speech much pleaSed her, who perfedfly understood his meaning; and in a stiort time after, the governor gave him a commission of a captain who died in the garriSon, and he married a mercbanfs widow in the town, who brought him a great fortune. His twQ companions, according to the
custom
MiSs Harriot Montague. 147
custom of the IriSh, made their fortunes there alSo, and Settled in that ifland.
Monfieur Le Montague being highly careffed by Don Carlos, and all his friends, as being Harriot's near kinfman, foon obtained money and a Ihip to go to Canada in learch oS Clementina, promifing to stop at
that ifland in his return, beSore he went home to France.
But to return to the unfortunate Leander whom we left at Virginia, much indifpofed, which prevented him from coming to St. Domingo for fome time.
Leander, after ten month’s fick-neSs, being recovered, employed his kinSman Lewis Dumarefque to hire a
baric Secretly to carry them to the ifland of St. Domingo, fearintr Camilla Sliould get knowledge of his defign, and again follow him; be-fides, he knew her pastion would be fo violent, that he stiould Scarce be
H 2	able
•ft
>
148 The H I S T O R Y of
able to leave tier. She was now
r
in a deep consumption, and had ' been So kind to him, that he was obiiged to withdraw himSelS with great reluctance; and had he known Harriot was ciiSpoSed of, no doubt but he would have married this unfortunate lady, who now dearly paid for her parting him from her rival; for She had like to have died with grief after he left her. His kinSman got a bark, and acquainted his father with their defigns, who, to forward it, having nothing to objeCt against it. Since Leander and the lady were contracted, as he af-lured him they were, took Madam , Camilla with him to a lady’s, who was related to him, and had a fine plantation not far from his, per-Suading her it would be good for her health to Slay there a few days. Leander promised to fetch her home fpon, and taking leave of her, found himfelf in So great diforder, that he
w^s
* '
t
MiSs Harriot Montague. 14^
\
was like to Swoon, conScious that he defigred to See her no more; and stung with a SenSe of his ingratitude to her who So pastionateiy loved him, he was in the utmost diSorder. She likewise, as if apprehenfive of
her misfortune, let fall a shower of tears: thus parted, never to meet again, as he fuppoSed. He went aboard with his kinfman, and Set fail for the istand, where he was to meet with greater misfortunes thai. he ever yet met with. So Soon as the ship was gone off the coast, Mon-er Dumarefque, Leander’s uncle, who was a widower, and was fallen in love with Camilla, glad of this opportunity (as he hoped) to cure her of her pashon for his nephew, rid over to his kinfwoman’s, where he had two days before left her, to acquaint her with his being gone, aggravating the bafenefs of his leaving her thus treachcroussy,, and vile in-gratitude to her: but she, as one
H 3 thunder-
350 The HI STO R V of
thunderstruck, made little reply; hut casting up her eyes to heaven,, with a deep figh cried, his just, my God, I am the criminal, and he is innocent; astetflion cannot be forced : I vainly strove against thy decrees, and ask no more but to be forgiven, and to die. She fainted away, and was carried to her chamber, where the lady' of the houfc endeavoured all she was able to comfort her ; and to her She related all her story, not concealing the Subtile stratagem she had made uSe of to get Leander from her rival, faying, his but just that I should fuffer for my crime and folly in perfevering to love him, who cannot return it as he ought. She So abandoned herSelf to thefe fad thoughts, that her ficknefs daily increafed, and they despaired of her continuing long alive. She was very fenfible of her own condition, and feemed much pleaSed with the thoughts
of
I
Mils bl'A st’R So T M0N V AG U'E. 15 I
of death';, for befides the loSs of the luati She So exceSTively loved, the shnSe she hast of her own folly, and the deSperatenefs- of her circumstances, being left in ^ stranger’s eare, with- whom indeed Leander had left money to- provide for, and carry her home ,to France ; but thither Slie was ashamed to return ; befides, it might be long e’er her health would permit h^r to take Such a voyage. All theSc Slid rdledions overwhelmed her, and bad doubt-
leSs killed her, had not Providence mercifully prolonged her life to be happy, Monfieur Dumarefqueshew-cd the greatest concern and affection for her that a man could pofiibly make appear; profefiing he defired
no greater happineSs on earth than the continuance of her life, and would give all his fortune to Save her. All the phyficians of note in the place were made uSe of, and at last, art and nature joined together, raifed
H 4	her
152 The K I S T C R Y of
her from her fick bed ; and then reafon took place over fancy, and ihe hearkened to DumareSque’s pro-pofal, wlioSe generofity put in the balance tvith Leander’s ingratitude, and the impoShbility of her being his, prevailed with her to accept of his oii er. Thus fhe w'as happily pro- ^ vided for, and Leander lost great part of his uncle’s fortune which he had dehgned to give him, never defigning to marry again, till he Saw this young lady, by whom he had many fine children to inherit what lie could fettle on them, without injuring his eldest fon, which was very confiderable.
In few days after his departure, Leander arrived fafely with his kinf-man at the iSland of St, Domingo , and being a stranger there, got the captain of the bark, who v/as ufed to trade there, to take them a lodging, thinking it most prudent not to appear too openly in a place where
his
MiSs Harriot Montague,
his rival’s father was governor, till ‘ he had got information how Harriot was drSpoSed of; which he Soon learned to his inexpressible grief: for his kinSman making inquiry after her of the captain of the ship that brought her thither, whom he met with at a coffee-houfe to; which he was diredted; he told him of her marriage and good fortune-as he termed it. And, indeed. So it was, had her lover never come to ruin her peace. Leander was quite distradled with this news ; his kinSman wiSely adviSed him to return to Virginia, and never lee her. She cannot be blamed. Said he, Ihe wasi left in your rival’s power, and has wiSely choSe rather to marry, and be his wife with honour, than to be his mistreSs by compulfion, and be ruined; and now it would be cruel and ungenerous to revive her grief by Seeing her: befidcvS, Should her
husband be infurmed of your Speak-
H 5	ing
/
154 The H 1 STORY of
A ^ <
ing to her, it might make her miserable all the rest of her days; and this would be an ill proof of your love to her. This, and a thoufand things more, he faid to perfuade him to be gone; but all to no pur-pofe : he was deaf as the winds, and behaved himSelf like a madman. At last he refolvcd to go to the church she ufed on festival days, difguiSed in a Spanish habit, which the captain of the bark procured him, and have a fight of her, pro-mifing not to attempt to fpeak to her. It was the cathedral church and the Sunday following, Leander, who had not stirred out of his lodging from the day of his arrival,, which was on the Wednefday before, went with his kinfman to the. high-mafs, where he Saw his lovely Harriot, who was great with, child, standing by her husband and father-in-law near the altar, and the lovely Lavinia by her, four crimfoa
velvet.
MiSs Harriot Montague, t55
velvet chairs being placed within the rails on a rich carpet for them. She was dreffed in a Spanifii dreSs, rich as art could make it, and had Store of jewels in her hair and on her breast ; thus adorned, he thought her more beautiSul than ever, and felt Such tortures in his foul, that he could not govern his pafiion, but dropt downdn a Swoon,: which oc-cafioned Some diSorder among the people; the crowd was So great, that he could not be carried out, but was unfortunately brought near the rails : Harriot turning her head. Soon knew his face, gave a great Shriek, and Swooned, falling back into one of the chairs. Don Carlos’s jealouly was preSently awakened, and he too truly guested who was in the church.; but Leander’s kinSman very prudently, fearing a discovery, got him carried out into the air, and muffling his fac:e up in his cloak, led him home to
H. 6	thcic
%
JS6 Tlie HISTORY OP
!
their lodging, being come to him Self So Soon as he came into the open air,. ' Harriot fainting, was SuppoSed to be occafioned by her being Surprized at the noiSe in the church, or with heat, being with child; this past with all but her lord, who, upon her recovering, led her to his coach, and went home with her, being impatient to question her what She Saw: that So much disordered her; fhe Said she thought the Spaniard that fainted, was So like Leander,. that being: Surprized, she could not but be So diScompofed. He deiired her to go no more into public assemblies till She was up again ; reSolving in him-ielf to Set Such Spies at work, that if Leander was arrived there, he. should Soon be Sent farther off, or dispatched. She promiSed do do whatever he would have her, and" he Seemed contented. But his foul was So inflamed wdth jealouSy, that he could rest no more till he was Satisfied.
MiSs Harriot Montague. 157
tisfied of the truth, and had Secured his rival. It was not many hours before thoSe he Set at work to discover who this perSon was that had occafioned this diSorder in the church, informed him, that two gentlemen were arrived in a ship from Virginia, and lodged privately in the town ; that one of them made inquiry after Harriot, meeting the Spanish captain at the coffee-houfe. In fine, his lufpicions were now confirmed, and he perSuaded Harriot to go to Domingo’s in the country, to paSs a month with Leonora, faying, it would be better for her to be in a place where she would be freed from receiving ceremonious vifits, and could better in- ' dulge herfelf in that fweet retirement ; and that she should continue there till she was near her time, if she pleaSed. She willingly consented, being now deeply melancholy,, .and. glad of an opportunity to be
alone
158 The HISTORY or
alone with her dear friend Leonora; to whom She could unboSom her thoughts. He carried her thither, and leSt her,, pretending he had bu-fincSs that obliged him to return to his father; concluding in his own thoughts, that Leander, who no doubt was impatient to fpeak with her, would Soon learn where She was, follow her, and venture to pay her a vifit, he being abfent; The old lady or governefs, who attended her, was his creature, and he left her a Spy on all her atstions. He took his leave as ufual, with all the tendernefs and concern imagin able; Saying, he Should think each day a year till he returned, to her. All things were tranladted as he foresaw ; Leander learning he was ab-fent, and Harriot at the country-houSe, went with, bis friend dif-guifed in their Spanish dreffes, to the village where she was, and took a lodging in a peaSanCs houfe, where
diey.
MiSs Harriot Montague. 150
they kept very private Sor two days; then his friend and kinSman, who ventured abroad for intelligence, being certain that he was not known by Don Carlos, having Seen her walking, in the garden with Leonora, informed him of it; fo they consulted what to do : and Leander, fearing to Surprize her a Second time, reSolved to write a letter to her, and Sent it by his friend : the contents of which were as follow.
Sill charming tho’ perjur’d Harriot®,
* After a tedious ficknefs, occa-fioned by my grief for the loSs of you, which long confined me to my bed, and brought me almost to the: grave, I am come to this iStand,. where I have learned the cruel news^ that you are now another’s. I shall make you no reproaches,, nor ask any thing but the honour of one hour’s converfation with you, after which you shall never, more be importuned'
i6a The HISTORY of
portuned or disordered with the fight oS me. I love you as pafiio-nately as ever, and only defire to prove it by dying at your feet. Let it be Soon, lest grief deprive me of that fatisfaDion ; for my foul is fo tranfported with defpair, that only the hope of feeing you once more, keeps me alive. My angel, name: the place and time to my friend, and. for the last time oblige
Your constant undone
j
Leander.,
%
/
/
/
j
1 hia
/
MiSs Harriot Montague. i6i
Ishis letter was delivered into Harriot’s hand by DumareSqne the next morning : for he ventured to go iiitp the gardens before day over the Stone-wall, and there hid himSelf in a Summer-houSe till Harriot came into the garden to walk with her friend Leonora alone. He took this, as he tfiought, lucky opportunity, and at their coming into the Summer-houSe to fit down, presented himlelf and the letter to her. She
s
was a little startled, but believing Leander was not gone from the issand. She expedled to hear from or See him, concluding he would by Some means or other find a way to fend or come to her; fo fhe immediately guested who he came from. She read the moving lines, and Shedding a stood of tears. Said, ‘ Sir, ‘ tell the unfortunate Leander it ‘ was his misfortune, not my fault, ‘ that we are Separated ; his leaving ^ me, put me under a fatal necestity
‘ of
\
1^2 The H I S T O R Y or,
‘ of giving myfelf to him in whole ‘ power 1 was left. I am now dish
*	pofed of to a noble husband,, ‘ whom I am bound to love and ‘ honour. It is altogether improper
*	for me to admit of a vifit from the ‘ man whom I have loved, and still ‘ have too much inclination for;
‘ befides, it is inconfistent with myr ‘ honour, and may be both our ‘ ruin. I make it my last request ‘ to him therefore to leave this ‘ issand immediately, and' conjure
*	him, as he values his, own life, or my peace, not to attempt Seeing;
‘ me, or to stay here a day longer^
■ My husband is already alarmed,^
‘ and has, I fear, brought me to ‘ this place with defign to betray ‘ him. For heaven’s fake perSuade.
‘ him to fly hence, and not render ‘ me intirely miferable.. Tell him,
*	I beg him to remember me no’
‘ more, but in his prayers, and to
^ Submit with a, Christian refigna^
‘ tioiT
^'
MiSs Harriot Montague. 163
t
‘ tion to the .will of heaven. This ‘ is all I can Say to him, and my ‘ final anSwer.’
At theSe words she roSe, and went out oS the Summer-houSe, leaving Leonora to let him out at the back gate with a key which she always carried in her pocket, to let them into a grove, which was behind the garden. Leonora hastened him a-way, intreating him never more to return. Harriot retired to her clo-fet, and there gave way to her paS-fion ; her love to Leander was now revived, and she had the most dreadful apprehenfions oS his danger that can be conceived. She peruSed the dear lines he had Sent her a hundred tiines over, and washed them pale with her tears. Whilst she was thus employed, Don Carlos, who had laid all the time in the village, and had received information of the stranger’s lodging at the peafant’s, and of Dumarefque’s being in the
gardsa
164 The HISTORY or
\
garden (Harriot having been watched by the old Dovegna) knocked at the cloSet-door : She asked who was there ; and hearing his voice, dapt the letter into her boSorn, and opened the door in Such a diSorder that her lord would have been much Surprized at, if he had not known the cauSe of it before. He took her in his arms with a forced air of af-fedion, but his eyes fiaShed with rage; he trembled, and Spoke in So distraded a manner, that She too well perceived he was informed of what had past, and was So overcome with grief, that she fainted in his arms: he laid her gently on the couch, and took the letter out of her bofom, read it and putting it there again, called the old governeSs who waited without, and preSently fetched cordials to bring her to her-Self; but they tried all means in vain So long, that he thought her dead, and indeed began to abandon
himSelst
>
*
I
ivills rlARRIOT MONTAGirE. lOC
hirriSdf to passion: Leonora, who had retired into her chamber, Seeing Don Carlos go into the apartment as Ihe was going to give Harriot an account that the gentleman was gone away in SaSety, shearing his complaints, came in, and alSo thought her dead: the phyficians were called, and by their aid She was brought to liSe, but immediately fell in labour, being Seven months gone with child. This cauSed a great deal of confufion in the family, where nothing was prepared for her lying-in, it being dessgned to be in the castle with the utmost magnificence. At three in the afternoon She was delivered of a Son, who lived but a few hours, and was therefore by the phyficians advice bap-tifed So foon as it was born. Don Carlos was highly aSBidled at his own imprudence in Surprizing her, and strewed the utmost tendernefs and concern for her, kneeling by
her
V
I
\
i66 The HISTORY OF
her bed-fide on the floor, kissing her hands, professing that he loved and valued her above all earthly things, and could not live without her ; till at last the phyficians in-treated him to quit the room, and leave her to repoSe : So the chamber being darkened, and none but nurSes ^ left to attend her, poor Harriot was delivered up to her own Sad thoughts, which Soon threw her into a fever that had like to have ended her life. And now Don Carlos was ten times more enraged against Leander than before,- looking upon him as the caufe of his child’s death, and perhaps of his beloved Harriot, for which he now refolved to be revenged of him. In order to this, he immediately Set four bravoes, whom he had before hired, and placed ready to Seize him, to watch his lodgings: they were all difguifed, and hid thcmfelves in a field behind
the peasant’s houSe; towards the
' dusk
4
Mifs Harriot Montague. 167
vfiusk oS the evening they perceived Leander and his friend go forth, and take the way to Domingo’s ; they followed, and So foon as they faw them enter the grove, feized them, 'His kinSman bad diffuaded him from this attempt all he was able, but he was determined to fee Harriot or die ; and fince his friend had So eafily got to the Speech of her, flattered himfelf he fhouid have the fame good fortune: but when he found himfelf Seized by villains, gagged and bound with his generous friend, who was like to be made a facrifice by his folly, he bitterly repented his raShnefs. They were thrown a-crofs a horfe, like calves, their legs and hands being fastened with a cord under the horfe’s belly, a fumpter-horfe-cloth was thrown over them, and thus they were carried all night, guarded by the four bravoes, who were well armed, and had a paSs from the governor’s
i68 The H I S TO RY OF
vernor’s Son, So that none offered to stop them. By break of day they arrived at an old castle, well fortified, on the north-fide of the ifiand, where an officer and twelve Soldiers were in garriSon, who had received orders before what to do with theSe unfortunate gentlemen, whom he was to keep Secure in the castle-dungeon, being pirates, deSperate villains, and reServed to make diScovcries by the rack, if they would not do it voluntarily. Don Carlos confirmed all this to the officer by a letter he Sent him Some days before : into the dungeon they were accordingly carried, put in irons, and left to live upon the allowance the officer was ordered to give them, which was very Sufficient: for Don Carlos was not willing to load his conscience with the guilt of murdering them, but only defired to Secure his own repoSe and his wife’s honour, and would willingly have Sent them
to
' \
%
MiSs Harriot Montague. i6o-
to any place, and Set them at liberty, could he but liave been Secured from their ever returnine to St Do-mingo. To Leander’s friend he had .no prejudice 5 nay, he rather had an esteem for him, for the generous ■ friendship he had shewn in rishing his life for his friend. ThcSe gen- > tlemen thus Secured, the bravoes went back to Don Carlos, who on this news was more at eafe, and applied his whole thoughts about Harriot’s indifpofition. She was many days light-headed, calling often upon Leander, which stabbed him to the heart.' It Was more than fix months before she was able to go out of her chamber. In this time she often aSiced Leonora if she could hear pothin'g of him. Sometimes she flattered herfelf that he had prudently took her advice, and left the ifland ; yet inwardly reproached him with want of astedfion: tiien reflecting bn his daring temper and VoL, L	I	con-
%
170 The HISTORY of
constancy, which his venturing thither after her did evidence, She concluded he had heard of her illneSs,
«
and lay still concealed there : then She trembled with the thoughts of his being discovered, or ruining himSelf and her by venturing to Speak to her; another while She feared he was murdered. So Soon as'tShe
e
was able, Don Carlos carried her to the castle, where his father received her with much joy, and all the ladies paid her viSits, congratulating her recovery. The Ship that brought Leander, Set Sail, having waited two months, and returned to Virginia, at which his uncle and Camilla was much Surprised; but concluded that (mad with his disappointment) he was gone home to ‘France j and they were much concerned at young pumareSque’s not returning or writing ; but were fain to rest Satisfied, expecting to hear from them.
When
/
f
MiSs Harriot Montagut^ 171.
When the wretched Leander faw himSelf and his friend in this diStnal place, no words can exprefs the,tortures or his mind ; and indeed it was a providence he was at that time fettered, ur elfe his defpair might have drove-him to destroy himSelf; he Sighed deeply, and the big drops ran Scalding down his cheeks; grief had fo benumbed his faculties, that his tongue could not utter one word; fo that he remained filent, with his eyes fixed on his friend, who bore his afflictions calmly; for he had not love and defpair to combat, had lost no mistrefs, loved his friend, and had a Soul fo generous, that he was even glad, fiiice it was his fate to be thus confined, that he was a partner of his fortune, and reServed to comfort him in that fad place. Why, Said he to the afflicted Leander, ‘ My dear friend, do you thus * abandon yourfelf to grief, and are ‘ fo cast down at an accidental mif-
I 2	« for-
172 The H IS T O R Y of
^ Sortune ? Could you exped leSs
*	than this from an incenSed huS-‘ band ? Is it not a mercy youarestill ‘ alive?. When we went from our ‘ lodgings, we were determiund to ^ run all riSques, and are you Ihock-‘ ed at a thing you had before arm-‘ ed against? Your jealous rival's ‘ rage will in time diminish ; and ‘ when he comes to reflect on this ‘ action, he will dohbtleSs repent, ‘ and permit yon to depart this
^ island : if he perfists in his re-‘ venge, death is the utmost we can ‘ fear; and can there be a place
*	more fit to prepare for it in, than ‘ this ? Here we may live free from
*	the temptations of the world, and ‘ learn the state of our own fouls;
*	nay, converfe with our Maker ‘ by contemplation, and enjoy that ‘ peace of mind, that we werestran-‘ gers to whilst we lived at large.
*	Confider how many brave men
‘ have perished for want abroad,
‘ and
MiSs Harriot Montague. 173
' and how many pious perSons have ‘ retreated to diSmal caves ?and de- -i Sarts, and left all the delights of ‘ this life, to enjoy that quiet and ‘ repoSe which vve may here poC ‘ fds. Harriot has already, doubt-‘ leSs, Suffered for your imprudence ;
‘ and in purSuing her, you offended ‘ heaven, who having thus punifii-
*	ed you, on your fnbmifiion will, I ‘ doubt not, free you hence. As for ‘ my own part, I am So far from ‘ repenting I accompanied you, that ‘ I rejoice that God has been pleated;
‘ to preServe m.e, and bring me to
*	this place to comfort you; nor ‘ would 1 leave you, though I were
‘ freed.’ Leander having been very'' attentive to all he Said, replied,
‘ Was ever generofity like this .i*
‘ What a miserable wretch am I,
‘ that by my follies have ruined the ‘ peace of her I loved, and fubjedl-‘ ed my faithful generous friend to
*	fetters and a dungeon ? I merit
I 3	‘ all
4
174 The HI S T O R Y of
all that I can Suffer ; but your
prefence puts me on the rack, yet
I will hope. My God, thy ways ‘ are marvellous j in thee I’ll trust, * and strive to bring my stubborn ‘ will to Submit to thine.’ The first transports of his pastion being thus conquered, he began to be refigned ; and now food and wine being brought to them, they eat thankfully what was provided, and for Some days converted and prayed together, like men prepared for all
events; but the damp unwholfome vapours in the dungeon threw them both into Such an illnefs, taking away the ufe of their limbs, that the commanding officer, who was a Frenchman, Sent to Don Carlos, to know what he should do with them; affuring him they would die, if not Soon removed: on which he tent orders to him, to remove them to an apartment on the top of the castle, where they might walk on the battlements
MiSs Harriet MonTaQ’Ue. 175
tlements and take the air,, have a bed, and chambers to walk about, and their fetters taken osti His conscience touched him, and he would willingly have ficeii Leander’s kinSman, but that he feared he would make a clamour about his friend. Tiiefe orders were puudtually obeyed by the officer, aud the priSoners , Soon recovered: and he Sometimes paid them avifuvand So became informed of the true cauSc of their being brought thither,, and pitied their condition. At last he contradfed So great a friendship with them, that he Said he would willingly free them, could he be affured he Should not loSe his eommiffion by it: but it would not be long, he SuppoSed, before he ffiould be relieved by another officer and band of Soldiers, it being customary for the gariSon to be changed every fix months; and then he would furniffi them with ropes to- let themSelves down from the
1 4	battle-
\
176 The H I S T O R Y or
battlements, on that' fide of the caf-tle near the Sea, vs^hich beat against the wails; and that they, need not (ear drowning, tSie water being Slaal-low at ebb. ‘ Tlrence, fays he, vyou may get to the Shore, and dif-\V)	two Soldier’s coats,
‘ which I will give you ; hide ycHir-Selves m the adjacent wood’.. This you must do in the night, and
./	O''
get o'ff the island, if postible, as * Soon as da.y breaks, for Sear of being taken ; for Search will doubt-Icis be made for you So Soon as ‘ you are miffed. A^ou mayeffed: this by Seizing the first fishing-‘ boat you find on the Shore, of ‘ which there are many, plenty of ‘ huts being in theSe parts on the ‘ coast; where fistiermen dwell dur-'* ing this fummer-feaSon ; and you ‘ will find their bpats, wshich are ‘ every night hauled up on the ‘ shore. This is all I dare do to ‘ Serve you, and this perhaps will
cost
MiSs Harriot Montague, i 77
‘ cost me my life, if discovered. They not only thanked, him in the most expressive terms, but promised if they ever lived to reach Virginia again, to shew their gratitude: and he promiSed to give- them intel- : ligence of whatever befel Harriot, by the- captain who brought them thither, whom they refolved to fend to that issand yearly, he giving them a diredSion where they Should always inquire for him. This concluded on, Leander and his kinf-man grew chearful.
O
At last orders coming for the off ficer to' depart thence, he faithfully performed all he had promiSed, leaving them ropes and red coats; nay,, when he took his leave, which he did with much affedlion, he presented Leander with a good purfe of gold, which he had much ado to make him accept ol. But . indeed it was necessary they should not want money, of which they had no ,
I 5	great
t
178 The H I STORY fo
\
great store about them, having left allj their clothes and money at the lodgings in which the captain of the Ship had placed them at their landing in the town; for they brought nothing to the peaSant’s houSe in the village, but Some linen and about twenty pistoles in gold, and Some Spanisti ducatoons in stiver, in their pockets.
The very night aSter the captain wa» gone they made their eScape, young DumareSque’^s kinSman venturing down first from the battlements, having Sworn his friend Ihould not venture till he had tried the danger > for it was a vast height from whence, they defcended, and had the rope broke he had run a great rifque of lostng his life. They fastened two ropes to the top of one of the battlements, and putting their gloves on,, stid down one after the other into the fea, which, then was fo high, it being young stood,, that it almo^.
took
t
\
'MSs HaRRIOT Montague. 179
took them up to their breasts, and the waves beat So strong, that they had much ado to reach the shore ; from whence they fled to the wood,, and pasted through it to the other fide : there sheltered by the trees from the view of the garriSon, they stood a while to See what boats lay on the shore; and chufing Such a one as they thought they were able to manage, and launch into the Sea without help, they dragged it intO' it, hoisted Sail,, and put off. But.
, alas! their condition was worSe than ever, they knew not well how to steer the boat, and were So v/eak and tired before, that' they could Scarce row or guide it. They had-no provilion aboard but a little biS-ket and Salt meat, that they found stowed in the fisherman’s locker in
I
his egbin, with a bottle of rack, and a Small barrel of fresh water.
I
And all their hopes were to reach Some istand not belonging to the.
I ^	Spat-
1
%
jSo The H I ST O KY OP
Spaniards; they steered for Jamaira,.
from vrhence they were certain they could get a passage to Virginia, where Leander relolved to remain with his uncle and friend till Harriot was dead, or a widow; and never to return to France again without her, whilst she was living. They were in fight of Jamaica, v/hen the wind began to blow and the waters foam: then a terrible storm began, which drove them for four nights- and days quite out of their Smowledge; in which time their provisions were Spent, and their strength fo decayed, that they were forced to lie down, and leave them-felves to Providence. But nothing assiivsted them fo much as thirstall their fresh water was gone, and drinking fait, fo increafed their drought, that they feared to repent It. Thus they continued for three days more drove by the winds and waves : iu thefe three days hunger
fo
M iSs Ha r r roT Mo n t a cue . i 8 ^
.So prest them, that they ranSacked every corner oS the boat to find a morSel to eat, and devoured every bit of mouldy bisket they could find : but, alas! that was So little, it only tantalized, not Satisfied their craving stomachs. And now they began to reflect, that it had been better for them to have-continued prisoners, than have expoSed them-felves to Such miSeries. Thus experience tells us, that when we have obtained our own wishes, not eaSy in the state Providence has placed us in, we are more unhappy than we were before. Ishe generous Montandre begged his kinSman to kill him, and preServe his own life, by Seeding on his warm flesh, and Sucking his blood. Saying, ‘ We must now both inevitably perish, ‘ unleSs one Supply the other’s ‘ wants*’ Leander was So shocked at this propoSal, that his very Soul shivered. ‘No, (Says he) before I
‘ would
r
The HI S TOR Y or
would destroy you, I Mould eat ® my own flesh: no, we will live ® and die together: we have this ‘ night pasted over many banks of ^ Sand, and are doubtleSs near Some ‘ Shore; now pluck up your Spirit, - and let us redouble onr importu-‘ nity to God to Send us a deliver-‘ ance.’ Before the words were out of his mouth, a wave tosted a large dolphin into the boat, which they killed with the oars, and fell to eating. Sucking the warni blood and raw fleSh more greedily than ever they had done the most delicious food prepared for them. This greatly refreshed them, and towards Sun-Setting the wind abating, they laid by their oars, and fell to eating more of the raw fifh, but Sparingly, not knowing how long they hast to live upon it. Whilst they were at this strange Supper they Spied land, on which they applied themSelves afresti to their oars, and about midnight:
reached:
MISsHa.Rriot Montaghe.
. reached the shore; but not knowing where they were, dragged the boat up on the Sand, and lay in it till day-break, having been driven in by the tide with fuch violence,, that they could not stop her before fhe struck on the Sands. When day appeared they found they had entered into the gulph of Mexico, between the illes of Cuba and Juca-tan, and were landed on that coast:
where the Spaniards were masters r
they thought it best to pretend they were Frenchmen, who, being cash away in a Ship, had efcaped death by getting into that fishing-boat, which the wind had (as they fup-pofed) drove out to fea from the Havanna, near which they pretended the ship they were in perished for though they had Soldier’s coats, on, yet their Spanish habits shewed they were gentlemen, and their behaviour shewed their breeding. The Spaniards received them kindly, and
a mer-
/
«
184 The HISTORY or
a merchant took them into his houSe, where he entertained them very ge-neroufiy, and invited them to continue there till they could find means to go to Virginia, telling them it was their best way to do So by Some trading veffel, which he SuppoSed they must wait Some time for. This merchant had a bark ready to fail with goods for Carolina, from whence it would not be very difficnlt for them, to go by land to Virginia : he offered them a paf-fage in this strip, which they gladly accepted of ; and in few days went aboard, and got Safe to Carolina. They hired a guide to condudl them through the country to Virginia; but pasting by the Apalatteau mountains, a party of Indians came down upon them, and carrying them away over the mountains, plundered them of their money and clothes.
Amongst thefe Indians they continued in the greatest miSery, being
obliged
9
V
MiSs Harriot Montague. 185
obliged to live after their barbarous fashion as staves; till going out with a party to cut fuel in the thick woods, they took their opportunity to make their eScape, being defpe-rate, and hid themfelves in a cave in the night, chufing rather to venture being devoured by wild beasts, ■ than Spend their lives in stavery. They lay concealed in this place till tlie Indians were gone farther on; tlien, destitute of food, and in their staves dreSs, they sted towards one of the Spanish forts, which they could never have reached, had they not met with an old hermit, who lived in a poor cottage near a wood : he was standing at his door, and feeing two poor staves, who -looked like death, come towards him, fup-pofed they were in want and Chrif-tians. So invited them in, to their great Surprize, and gave them bread and drink, ashing where they were going. They gave him the account,
that
• ^
s
♦
i86 The HISTORY of
0
that they were cast away in a stiip^ Saved in a fistiing-boat near the Ha-vanna, driven on the coast of Ju- ' cattan ; from thence went in a bark to Carolina, and going acroSs the countries for Virginia, were taken and made staves; and wearied with the miferies they endured, were now endeavouring to eSeape to Fort-Philip. He told them, he would conduct them thither in Safety the next morning. They staid with him ■ all night, lying on straw (as he did) with warm coverlids: and being: very importunate to know the rea-fons of his living this Solitary life,
he told them his story in thefe
words.
%
I am, laid he, by birth a Frenchman ; I was the younger fon of a eounfelloF,, who had a great estate, and was put in a good post under my father So Soon as I was able to understand bufinefs, having a clerk’s place in the Salt-office. Here being
fronv
4	V
MiSs Harriot Montague. t8t
from under my father’i eye, I con-traded an intimacy with a young gentlewoman who lived with her aunt, a perSon who, tho’ v/ell-born, was fallen to decay, and they maintained themSelves by their needles, and Some Small income the aunt had left, very genteely, but with much difficulty. It was my fortune to fee this young woman at church, flie was very beautiful and genteel, I followed her home, made love ta her, and was well received. I pretended an honourable affedion j but, alas, had no other defign in mw wicked heart but to debauch her. Their circumstances made them willingly receive the preSents and treats 1 gave them, not thinking it
dishonourable, fince I pretended
maariage; glad was the innocent creature to be provided for: their conversation was charming, and their condud So referved and modest, that I was a great while before
.I could
t
i88 The HISTORY OF
*
I could venture to make any attempt upon her virtue; but then I was re-pulfed with Such Scorn and reproofs, that I almost defpaired of efedting my bafe defign; but knowing that it would be my ruin if I married her, and being now fo much in love, that I knew not how to live without her, I still perfisted in my vifits and importunities, and though refufed the fight of her frequently, and always received with reproaches, yet I could not defist; and finding all my attempts were in vain, and that I could not Seduce her to my will, at last I consented to marry her privately, on condition that fhe Should keep it a Secret. This She gladly confented to, and fo we were married by a Cordelier who was her confessor: and then I was made happy in the possession of my dear Flavia, who was the most virtuous - and most charming woman breathing. He h^ fhed Some tears, and
could
MiSs Harriot Montague. 189
could Scarce go on; but recovering, he condnued his diScourSe . thus : and now, gentlemenj I am going to relata a part of my life, that fills my Soul with horror, and will, I hope, deter all that hear it from committing fuch crimes: we past Some months as happily as we could wiSli, and stie grew great with child ; but my expences increafing, and a pro-SpedS of more charges coming on, made me grow Something uneafy; to add to which, my father began to prefs me about a marriage that wss propofed to him much to my advantage. Tins put anxious thoughts into my head, and made me^refiedf how imprudent I had been : my eager defires were Satisfied, my love diminished, as my ambition and avarice were encreaSed ; and in fine, I wished her dead, and meditated on nothing but how to get rid of her. Thus my difobedience in marrying without my father’s knowledge
loO The H I S f O R Y OF
ledge and conSent, drew-down heaven’s anger upon me, and the devil tempted me oh to proceed to luore liagrant crimes. I did not vifit my
wife So often as uSual, but humoured my father in vifiting the young lady propofed to me, who was every way agreeable, and had the most prevailing argument on her fide to engage man’s inconstant heart, that is, a great fortune: fhe was the only daughter of a rich banker, had taken a fancy to me, and her parents doat-ing on her, refolved not to crofs her, for which reaSon they made the propofal to my father: Such advances were made on their fide, that I could find no pretence to delay the marriage longer. And now I foreSaw that I must either incur my father’s hatred, and be ruined, (for he was a man of an implacable temper, and would, I knew, abandon me, if he discovered my marriage) or elSe that I must rid myfelf of
Flavia
Mifs Harriot Montague, ipi
Fkvia forthwith, and then 1 might be great, and, as I vainly flattered myfelf, happy.This v/icked thought I indulged, and long revolved in my mind, till at last I reshlved to put it in execution; and though I was grievoufly tormented in my conscience, yet I perSevered in this wicked defign, and bought poiSon, which I made an infufion of in wine, and putting it into a vial in my pocket, I went to my virtuous wife to lie all night: fhe received me with open arms; I appeared more chear-ful and kind than ufual; we Supped, and after fupper, I pretended I was not well, and defired we might have fome burnt wine, which her aunt prefently got: I Slily pour- -ed the poifon into the cup, which I prefented to my dear wiSe, pretending She and her aunt must drink with me; they readily complied, always studying to oblige me : but
when I Saw Flavia Swallow it, mv
Soul
o
t
192 The HISTORY OF
Soul Slfivered, my conScience flew in my Sace; and when Slie came and kissed me as I was going to bed,
I felt tortures not to be expressed, or indeed conceived, but by Such - wretches as mySelf. She had not lain long in my arms, but convul-lions Seized her nerves, and I called her aunt and Servant up, shewing the greatest concern ; but neither of them fufpedfed what was the matter, nor need I counterfeit, for at that instant I was filled with Such horrors, that I would have given the whole world to Save her. From this moment my peace was broke, and I became the most miferable man breathing. She expired in my ’arms before day, with the dear murdered infant in her; faying the kindest things to me, and praying •for me even in the last agonies ot death. The innocent Flavia thus ^ dispatched, I took leave, giving money to her aunt (who was almost distracted with grief) to bury her.
. They
\
w
Mils Harriot Montastji. 192
They had kept a maid-Servant ever Since my marriage, and I left them in the houSe, and excuSed mySeif irom being preSent at her burial, lest my father Should hear of it; promising the aunt to be always kind to her. Having left thefe melancholy objeds, I went to the tavern, drank a quart of wine to revive my Spirits, and then went home to my father’s. And now my whole buSi-neSs was to divert my thoughts as much as possible ; I went abroad every day, drank, danced, went to the play, and So lulled myfelf with variety of pleafure, that the terrors of my conscience were Something Silenced. The fad impressions of Flavia’s murder wore off, and I was married; but the bridal night I was no Sooner in bed, and the candles extingnistied, than, as I was going to take my bride in my arms, the curtain at my bed’s-head was drawn back; and turning my head, I ima-VoL, I,	K	gined
IP4 The H I S T O R Y OF
gined I Saw the fae Flavia standing by my fide, big with child, and the fatal vial in her hand, which she Seemed to shake, and looked upon - me with a look that struck quite through my Soul; the -cold Sweat trickled down my face, and the bed Shook Under me; every nerve shivered as if the agonies of death had Seized me. Thus 1 lay with my eyes shut, not daring to lift up my eye-lids, till the day-break had freed me from this dreadful vifion, which made Such an imprefiion on my foul, that I fancied her ever in my fight, and eould not relish nor take any Satisfaction in any thing I pofiefied. I concealed this from the world, and did all that was poffible to oblige my new wife, who was doatingly fond of me, and had brought me So great a fortune, that we wanted nothing that wealth could purchase, to make us happy in a moderate way of life. But
wealth
«
I
MiSs Harriot Montague, igj
wealth could not cure my wounded conscience, I had a load of guilt upon my Soul, and was continually upon the rackthis Soon destroyed my health, andffo afstidted her, that She was almost as unhappy as my-felf. Being through great weak-neSs, attended with an intermitting -fever, confined .to my bed, L fc-riousty prepared for death, and con-fested mySelf to a I'rancifcan, a man of great wiSdom and piety, who So eloquently laid before me the enormity of my crime, the terrors of eternal punishment, and the infinite mercies of God, on a fincere repentance, that I heartily lamented my Sins, and endeavoured to reconcile mySelf to God; on which he was ' pleaSed to raiSe me up again, and prolong my life. My wife was now great with child, and had never had the Small-pox, which she unfortunately caught by going to an opera, where she Saw a perSon
K 2	newly
196 The HISTORY or
newly recovered; and at her coming home was taken ill, and died of them. Being now left a widov/er, the thoughts I had had in my late fickneSs, came a-freSh into my mind, and I reSolved to retire from the world; but my father and friends much oppoSed it, being defirous I ’ Should marry again, becaufe my elder brother was consumptive, and, though married Seven years, had no child. The proSpedl of having all my father’s fortune prevailed with me not to enter into the church or any religious communitybut being Sfill uneaSy in my mind, thinking I ought to do Something to atone for my fins, I reSolved to retire to Some reinote part of the world to do penance for them by fasting, and prayers, and alms-deeds. I therefore put all my estate into my confessor’s hands, to distribute the income of it every year to the poor,
and return me forty pounds a year
tjti
4
Mist Harriot Montague, x^'
to this place by the hands oS a gentleman who is an- officer in Fort-Philip, to which you are defigned to go; with him I came to this part of the world, being my intimate friend and near relation : he receives my income, and when I want provifions or money, I repair to him. My poverty and manner, of living makes the Indians never molest me, nay, they dove me, and Supply me with any thing I want: befides I am a kind of phyfician amongst them; for having took delight in studying phyfic, I am arrived to Some knowledge in it, and well acquainted with the nature and life of ail the medicinal herbs that grow in-theSe parts. I am alSo part of a Surgeon, and dreSs their wounds'and fores, and by this means have many opportunities of Saving the bodies and fouls, by instructing them in the Christian Saith. I Speak their languages, and often procure the free-
K 3	dom
X9S The HISTORY of
dom oS thoSe Christians who like you have unfortunately fallen into their hands. Thus I have lived for thefe eight years, and am now fo inured to this Solitary way of living, .and So latisfied with this poor retreat,, that I do not think ever to return to h ranee again, or venture into'the world any more ; and hoping I have made my peace with God, I wait my death as a man who places his hopes on an eternal state.
Thus he concluded his story, Leander, who during this dif-Gourfe was filled with admiration, yet never interrupted him, now broke fiience: Monfieur Dc Liste, fa id he, ‘ What transport can * equal mine to find you here ? I ‘ have news to tell you will recall ‘ you Soon to France. I Shall tell ‘ you wonders.’ “ Is not your name “ Leander, (Said the amazed sher-mit) “ and have I the happineSs to meet with and entertain the youth
‘‘ whom
4
MiSs Harriot Montague. 199
“ whom I So dearly loved‘ Yes,
Said Leander, ‘ I am that man * whom you were pleaSed to honour ‘ with your Sriendflfip in So pecu-‘ liar a manner; and to convince ‘you that the Almighty hasaceept-‘ ed your repentance and alms-deeds,
‘ am doubtleSs Sent to this place to ‘ Set your mind at eaSe, and restore ‘ that peace of conScience that you ‘ have been So long a stranger to.
‘ Flavia is, I hope, still living; She ‘ was in perScct health fix years a*
‘ gone when I left France.’ “ Fla-“ via living! (Said the henBit}amaz-“ ing wonder 1 my raviSh’d Soul can “ Scarce credit the strange report,
“ though my best loved friend,
“ Speak, tell me the manner how ' “ She was preServed from death,
“ whilst my listening wounded Soul « is healed with the Soft found of “ your Sweet Speech,” ‘ I will make ‘ haste (Said Leander) to Satisfy you,
‘ So Soon as you had left the houfci
K 4	Flavia’s
N
200 The HI STORY or
^ Ilavia’s aunt, who had been be-‘ Sore informed of all your adfions,
‘ knew your courtlhip to your new
*	mistrefs, and frequent vifits there,
‘ had marked your coldnefs to and
negledt of Flavia, and made ob-fervations on your behaviour that ‘ ratal night, her Sudden illnefs and ‘ Surprizing death ; the minute you ‘ turned your back, ran to the con- ’
^ vent, which you know was not a ‘ stone’s throw from the houfe; and ‘- called upon the honest cordelier,
‘ who had married you, .a man who *- was a good phyfician as well as a
‘ divine, and told him with tears
0
*	the strange manner of Flavians
‘ death, which he immediately fuf- ' ‘ peded to be the effedt of poifon;
‘ and taking Some strong emeticks ‘ with him, ran to the houfe as fast ‘ as his legs could carry him, and ‘ finding her body warm and pliant,
‘ poured enough down her throat
*	to effect his good defign; for it So
‘ wrought.
MiSs Harriot Montague. 20
*	wrought, that it Soon brought up ^ the baneful drug, and with more ' proper application, at last restored
*	her opprest faculties to their ufe, ‘ and her to life and health, with the ‘ innocent child, fo that both were ‘ preferved, and»She perfedlly re-‘ covered in a few days; which they ‘ kept a Secret by his advice. Since ‘ your cruel husband (Said he) has ^ this time failed of executing his ‘ wicked purpofe, he will no doubt ‘ repeat the attempt, and may ‘ at last Succeed; to avoid which, ‘ you Shall retire to a convent of ‘ our order, where niy Sister is ah-‘ befs, there care Shall be taken of ‘ you and the child. Let him Suffer ‘ by the remorSe of his own con~
‘ Science, and Smart for his fin, nor ^ be freed from his torments by
*	knowing you are Saved. When he ‘ dies, I will do justice to the child ‘ if it lives, and Seize the estate.
‘ Mean time you Shall know how
‘ he
V-
202 The HISTORY OF
*	he fares with his new choice, and ‘ be freed from thoSe fears which his ‘ knowledge of your being alive will ‘ fubjedl you to. She conSented, and ‘ has continued in this convent ever ‘ fince, with her fon, who was born
'	* there. All this I was informed of
*	by her aunt, my near kinSwoman,
*	who had made me privy to your ‘ marriage, and engaged me not to
*	diSclofe it j but now it ought to be
*	no longer a fecret to you, fince ‘ you are truly penitent.’ The hermit fell on his knees, and with a stood of tears returned thanks to God, in fuch moving exprestions, as drew tears from Leander and his kinf-man’s eyes. Then they relate d the particulars of their adventures ; and rifing as foon as day appeared, fet out together for Fort-Philip, reSolv-
to go to Virginia by the first opportunity, whence De Lille might eafily get pafiage to France, being
impatient to fee and afk pardon of
bit
MIfs Harriot Montague. 20%
his injured Flavia. Being arrived at Fort-Philid, they were kindly entertained by tke Hermit^s friend, furnifhed them with clothes, and a guide, with Some Soldiers to guard them to Virginia, and protect them from the Indians. This officer being acquainted with his friend’s story and Leander’s, gave them money to defray their charges on the way to Virginia, from whence Leander promised to furniSh De Lifle with all neceffaries for his return to France.
And here we shall leave theSe gentlemen, to inquire what is become of Monfieur Le Montague Harriot’s kinSman, whom she met with in the cottage on the deSolate ifland, and brought with her to the istand of St. Domingo, from whence he went in a bark to Canada in Search of Clementina. He arrived Safe at Quebeck, where he was informed
204 The H I S T O K Y oy
formed the French captainshad been to trade, but here he could get no news oS her ; he vifited all the coast in vain, till he came to find out a French merchant, who alTured him^ the Iship was gone to Newfoundland to trade; he immediately went a-board his bark, and Set Sail for that place, and here he got intelligence: that Clementina had been Seen there very much indifpoSed, and that the captain had carried her thence with defign to retiirn to- France. Mon-fieur Le Montague was overjoyed* at this news; and returning to the* island of St. Domingo with the bark, acquainted Dbn Carlos and Harriot with this good news, and reSolved to go for France, hoping to* find her there before him. An opportunity for this he quickly found, and got Safe thither in a French merchant-Ship. At his arrival he found hia eldest brother dead, and
tock
$
MiSs Harriot MontAGun. 205
took poffeffion of his estate again, and would have Sat down in repoSe, had Clementina been there; but no other news could be got of her, but ' that the Ship She was in was taken by the Algerine pirates, and none returned to France to give any account of what was become of her and the other perSons on board of it. He well knew it was in vain for him to attempt a farther Search for her, and therefore-retired to a little feat in the country, where he gave him-felf up to contemplation, and lived the life of a man that had quitted the world ; whilst poor Clementina being niade a stave, was fold by the Algerine pirate to the bay of Tunis; whoSe steward, a Moor, that ufed to purchaSe the handSome European virgins for his master, bought her, and carried her home to his Seraglio. The French captain had done all that he was able to debauch her
4
him*
*c6 The HISTORY or
«
himSelf, but in vain; he was So in-amoured, that he could not part with her, though an old man, and having carried her from place to place to no purpoSe, reSolved at last to bring her back to France, and restore her to her friends; condemning her mother’s proceedings and himSelf for being instrumental in fo wicked a defign. But now he was alfo a stave, and puniShed for his crime. The virtuous Clementina thus lodged in the Seraglio, with others as unhappy as herfelS, being
a lady of an heroic Spirit and consummate virtue, bravely reSolved to die, rather than stabmit to a Mahometan ; and thus determined, began to constder what to do to deliver her-felf; in order to which (he thought it best to apply herSelf to one of thoSe unfortunate beauties, who fcemed well acquainted with that place and life, appearing to have
£omc
Mifs Harriot Montague. 207
Some command there. This proved to be a Venetian lady, to whom She addrefled herSelf with tears. Saying, * Madam, your face Speaks^ you ‘ a Christian as I am, I beg that ‘ you would inform me what I am ‘ to be done withal, in this strange ‘ place.’ ‘ Alas, fweet creature, Said She, ‘ you are destined to be ruin-‘ ed, and deprived of your liberty ‘ during your life. I have lived ‘ here theSe four years, and never
*	hope to See the outfide of thefe ‘ walls again.’ Then (he took her by the hand, and led her into her chamber, faying, ‘ We shall be ob-
*	ferved, let us shut the door and ^ talk alone,* Being feated in this room, which was richly furnished, the Seraglio being the finest in the whole city, in which there was apartments for twenty women and their attendants, with fine gardens to walk in, inclofed with walls of
a great
ao8 The HIST O R Y, &c.
a great height, Clementina told her the whole story of her life and misfortunes, which drew tears from the lovely Mariana’s eyes; for So the 'Venetian lady was named. She-related her life in this manner,
N
» •
mD QF THE FIRST VOLUME.
t	.
J
K	•
9
t'	-	■	^
\
•	I
4
%
S
' \
/
• •
t
\
THE
HISTORY
\
I
O F
->
4
D Mifs Harriot Montague.
>
V
m
%
I
T H E
history
♦
O F
Mifs Harriot Montague,
f
IN TWO VOLUMES,
»
N ^L. II.
♦
I
r
L O N D O N:
ated for J. Roson, No. 54, St. MaitinV Iu€ wraHu^ near Newgate^'Street*
MDCGLXX. "
I ^ •
»•
V	.	^	f
# ^ ♦
•	*	4
\
^ ' / ’ ’
%
4	%
THE
HIS TORY
I
K	s
OF
\
MifsHarriot Montague,
s •
I A M the daughter of a noble . Venetian, my brother is a knight of Malta, my name is Mariana^
I was placed in a monastery as a pen-fioner, being but twelve years old; there a young gentleman courted me Secretly, the younger fbn of a noble family, who was a captain in the fer-vice of the state, and had no other for-tunebut his commistion, which indeed was Sufficient to fupportshim nobly, but ' VoL. II.	B	was
K 2- The HISTO'RV OF
was not confiderable enough to an-fwer that great fortune my fatlier defign’d me, or to anSwer his and my brother’s ambitious expectations, I being an only daughter. This gen-\ tieman’s perSon and SenSe gain d my affection. So that I preSer’d him in my heart before all others, gave him my hand and promiSe to be his; but it was not long e’er it was diScoverd that Some conversation had paSs’d between us, and I was Sent for home
and question’d, but confefs’d nothing. This distracted my lover, and he was impatient at' my being kept from him: So that at last he made ufe of a stratagem to get me, which he thus effected : He fent me a letter by a fer-vant to my father’s, which he doubted not would be intercepted ; in which he acquainted me, after abundance of pastionate asturances, that he would ever love me ; that fearing I foster’d much constraint and unea-stnefs on his account, he was refolv d
to fell his post, and go for Spain, hav-
Mifs Harriot Montague. J
ing Some great relations there by his mother’s fide, who was a SpaniSh lady, by whoSe interest he doubted not to get a better post; and this was the most generous proof he could give me of his affections, being refolv’d to make himfel^ miferable to render me happy. My father, who broke open this letter, was very glad, and had me narrowly watch’d, till he faw that he did what he pretended, which he quickly did; for he fold his post, and took leave of his friends, and went aboard a stiip for Spain, as he pretended. Then I was fent back to the monastery, where I Soon receiv’d a letter from him by means of another penlioner who was our confident; in which he inform’d me, that he lay conceal’d at a village hard by, and that he conjur’d me to get away with the first opportunity, and come to him* This I did the next evening at the clofe of the day, and got fafe to his friend’s houfe where he was conceal’d.
Here he receiv’d me with open arms,
B 2,	and
I
4 The HISTORY gp
and his friend’s chaplain married US that night. We Went away thence before day the next morning, in his iGoach, which carry’d us to the port where the Ship’s boat lay ready to receive us, he having hir’d the veSSel on purpoSe. We went aboard, weigh’d anchor, and Set fail for Barcelona; but before w© could reach that port,
* we were urifortunately taken by an Algerine pirate, and brought to this dlfmal place, where I was parted from him, and fold to this vile infidel, to whofe curs’d bed I have been forc’d, and have had the misfortune to be lik’d. He has been abfent thefe four months, being gone to his country-feat to pafs the Summer-feafon, where he has other wretched women to divert him; he is to return hither in tliree days, and then you must be a vidlim to his lust no question.
- Here stie let fall a stood of tears, and Clementina bore her company. ‘ You have, faid She, told me a story . ‘ more unhappy than my own, fince
‘ I have
W
^ %
Mifs Harriot Montague. 5
I have still preServ’d my virtue, and ^ am now reSolved rather to die than ‘ yield, fince providence grants me ‘ three days for my efcape. I’ll ufe ‘ that time, and bravely venture to ‘ get hence, or die in the attempt; if ‘ you will venture with me, fpeak, I’ll ‘ lead the way, death is preferable to ‘ fuch a life as this.’ “ You fay you “ are a Christian, heroick maid, faid ' “ Alariana, would you commit felf* murder ? Is no other way left to free us, or must we kill each other ?”
‘ Far be that dreadful thought, faid
*	Clementina, from my foul; no, I ‘ have thought of other means in the ‘ Short time I have been here. I have ‘ obferv’d a MooriSh sta\^ whom I ‘ faw enter the garden?-^ 9ith a key at
*	a door that leads to the fea, as near ' as I can guefs; that key I am re-‘ folved to purchafe by his death. Do ‘ you contrive fome strange diSguife
to cover us, and pack your jewels ‘ up, or what you have of value elfe, ready to carry out with us, and I
B 3	“ will
6	The HISTORY OF
will meet him at the gate when he enters at the break of day, as I fnp« pofe his custom is, and stab him with a penknife I have hid about me. Could we get the habit of an eunuch for each of us, it would be the ‘ fafest difguife we could put on ; the ‘ Bey being abfent, few of his fer-‘ vants left here, and thofe left on
*	their guard, and more negligent ‘ than when he is prefent, it will not
*	be fo difficult to. get away as at ano-
'	* ther time.^ I can procure Such
“ habits, faid Mariana, and doubt not ‘‘ though our apartment is lock’d up every night, yet the windows are not fo high, but we may ealily ven-ture dowm, tying the Sheets of our beds togv er, by which we may flip down iiito the garden, where “ in a chamber on one fide the Se-raglio door, two white eunuchs lie “ to guard it; next this chamber is the' ‘‘ wardrobe: if one of us can but get in at the window of this place, and
they not. hear ys, we may have
‘‘ clothes
Mifs Harriot Montague. 7
clothes of any kind, - and jewels^ ‘‘ too.” ‘ I will attempt it, Said Cle-‘ mentina, and would prefer all darr-‘ gers, and even death, to infamy and * fiavery.’ And So will I, Said Ala-‘ riana. Being thus refolv’d, they waited till night came on, when hearing all things still, Clementina crept to her friend’s chamber, who had bundled up her jewels and Some linen : they got down from the window, and then went to the wa rdrobe, the moon Shining very bright, and were Some time before they could get in at the window, it being very high; but at last Clemeritina’s wit, which 'exceeded her Sex (tho’ women ever were esteem’d more quick and Subtile than mankind at cunning plots and quick contrivances) Soon found the way to enter ; She got on Mariana’s fhoulders, and went in there trembling ; fhe got two rich vests, two turbants, two pair of Turkifh boots, and a box, whofe rich outfivde and weight, though fmall, made her be-
B 4	lieve
« The HISTORY OF
lieve it worth the carrying away j theSe She bundled up, and threw out of the window to her friend : but then She was at a mighty lofs how to get out again, which She in vain attempted, it being impofiSible for her to get np to the window from whence She had dropt down into the room: no way was left but to pafs through the eunuchs chamber, and this neceSfity prevail’d with her to do. She took down two rich fcymiters that hung up in fine embroider’d belts, and having drawn one, pafs’d through the chamber where the eunuchs lay fast asteep, refolving if they stirr’d, to kill them, or to die by their hands. Upon the table there stood a stiver bowl half full of wine, of which no doubt they had took their fill, although their prophet does forbid st them; for fewMuf-felmen refufe to drink it in private: this bowl She took, with a bunch of
^ keys which lay by it; and going to the door found the key in it, fo She gently unlock’d it, and putting it to after her,
went
/
Alifs Harriot Montague. 9
went out Safely to her friend, who stood trembling and almost dead with fear. Clementina fhew’d her the keys, one of which stie fancy’d would open the garden-gate, to which they hasted, and to their great fatisfacftion found it fo : being got out of the gate,' which they lock’d after them, they stood to confider which vyay to go, and refolv’d to get away from the town to. the next wood or rush’d building they could meet with ; they had not gone above two miles, when they enter’d a grove, at the farther end of which they found an old ruin’d mofque, which they went into with great fear, lest fome old Turkilh Brahmen or Saintoin Should live there ; but hear-shg no creature stir but bats and Screech-owls, and Such vermin as live in unfrequented places, they took courage, and the day beginning to break, they laid down their bundles, and changing their clothes, put on ' their Turkifb habits, which instead of being mean, fuch as staves wear, be--
B r	long’d
/
10 The HISTORY or
long’d to the Bey himSelf, being both cloth of gold, the buttons of the one was rubies, and the other emeralds; the turbants were fuitably rich, and full of diamonds, pearls, and other jewels; So that they had an immenfe treafure, had they known how to dif-pofe of it. But at this time they would willingly have parted with it all for fome poor habit to conceal them, fearing they Should be piirfu’d and taken, not knowing where to hide themfelves: They were weary, faint, and had no food, and Search’d every corner of this ruinous place to hide themfelves ; at last they found a door which Seem’d to lead down Some stairs into a vault, where they Suppos’d the dead were bury’d, and that they Should meet with nothing there but skulls and bones and noiSom vapours; yet had they had a light, they would gladly have gone into it to hide themfelves, nay liv’d, and choSe to steep and eat amongst the dead, rather than to live luxuriousty with infidels. They fat
down
Mifs Harriot Montague, n
'	f
down upon the stairs however to rest their tiVd limbs; So that iS any Should paSs by, they might Shut the door upon them. As they Sat thus Con-Suiting what to do, they heard a noiSe, and Saw a man enter the mofque with a dark lanthorri in his hand and a loaf under his arm, with Some Scraps of meat, and fiSh in a little basket; he had a long coarfe frize garment on, his face and hands were tawny, he had only Sandals on his feet, and a strange faShioffd straw-hat upon his head; he fat down his basket and. bread, and opening his lanthorn, turning the light fide towards them, came to the door, and was going down stairs, when Mariana giving a great stiriek, fell into a Swoon upon Clementina, and had like to have beat her down the stairs. It is impostible to expreSs her thoughts at this instant; for though She was a woman of grea t , Courage, and had a dauntlefs foul, yet stie was fhock’d at the instant, as whs alfo the stranger. He look'd upon
them
»
12 The HISTORY OF
«
them with amazement; the beauty of their Saces, the Splendor oS their habits, and the strange place he found them in, astoniSh’d him. Clementina at last recovering herfelf, view’d him attentively, and reaSon’d with herSelf that he was but a man unarm’d, and in all probability as much in distrefs as themfelves; mean time he concluded they were women diSguis’d, and doubtlefs fled thither for Shelter; that they must be Europeans, and perfons of birth by their beauty, delicate hands. Shape and complexions. He faid thus in French to Clementina, ‘ In the name of God what are you, and ‘ from whence came you } Speak, if ^ you understand me, tell me if you ^ are in distrefs, that Imayhelp youd We are by birth Europeans,, and 5‘ profefs the Christian faith, faid She, as,I doubt not you do, fince you Speak my native language; we are fled from ruin, infamy and stavery, and got into this difmal place to
Screen ourfelves from the fury of . ;	"	“ the
«	I
MiSs Harriot Montague. i|
the Infidels whom we this morning “ fled from. Aflist us to eScape their ‘‘ hands, and find us means to get ‘‘ hence, and all the riches we have about us fhall be yours.” At thefe words the man Shedding Some tears,, took her by the hand with an air that Spoke him a gentleman. ‘ Fair crea-‘ ture. Said he, I will aflist and de-‘ fend you, and that lovely friend ' that you fupport, with my life; fear ‘ not to defcend with me into the ‘ vault, where I have lived above ‘ three tedious years,- and where we ‘ may without fear of difcovery talk ‘ our misfortunes over.’ He took the loaf and Mariana being now- fome-thing recover’d from her fwoon, made Way for him to go down before them with the light; at the bottom of the stairs they found a room all of stone clean though difmal, in which wer@ three doors which open’d into thre© -dther rooms like that; in one of thefq lay a great quantity of bones and
ikulls, which this poor hermit had
clear’d
14 The HISTORY OF
clear’d the other rooms of; in that he liv’d in, wa§ a bed made of straw and ruShes, into which he tifed to creep, covering himSelf with nothing elSe but an old mantle, in which he ufed to wrap himfelf in winter : near this his miserable bed, there lay two Square stones, one about a foot higher than the other; the highest was his table to eat upon, the other his feat to fit upon; this with a poor lamp was all his furniture, except two earthen difhes, and a stone bottle that us’d to keep water for him to drink. And now defiring his guests to fit down, lighting his lamp, he pull’d a Small bottle of arrack out of his pocket, de^ firing them to drink, which they did. The lamp burning clear they could with p-reat Satisfaction view each other,
o
the hermit view’d Mariana more attentively, he leap’d up and catched her in his arms with fuch transports, that Clementina was amazed and terrify’d, fearing he had Some ill defign upon them; but ihc was quickly undeceived.
MiSs Harriot Montague,
deceived, for he cry’d out, ‘ my Ma-‘ riana ! my angel! have I liv’d to ‘ embrace you again? is it pofifible? ‘ and do I hold in my arms my wife ? ‘ It is too much : fuch joy is infup-‘ portable.’ At thefe words being extreme weak, he fainted, for he was even starved with this poor way of life, and grown a perfedl: skeleton. Mariana was fo furpriz’d. She could not utter one word ; but Clementina pour’d fome of the arrack into his mouth, which foOn revived him ; the most pastionate difcourfe pasted between him and Mariana that can be imagined: for what joy could exceed hers to meet her dear hushand again ? She begM to know how he came to live in that place; and all that had pasted fince they were parted, which he related in thefe words, kisting her hands, and gazing upon her all the while, as if his glad foul, which Seemed to fparkle in his eager eyes,
would feast itfelf on that delightful object.
My
16 The HISTORY OF
My life. Said be, the fhtalday tha we were parted, and you were SoL to the cnrSed Bey oS Tunis, who ha no doubt enjoy’d that lovely perSo (then he figh’d deeply, and fhe we I was diSpoSed of for a stave to an ol Jew, who drove me home into th country before him, with my arrr pinion’d. Being come to his houst he put me into the garden to worl there I was made draw water, di^ and labour hard all day, at nigl chained like a dog in a hole unde his fummer-houfe on straw ; my foo and labour were fo hard, that in few days I fell fick of an ague an fever; fo that fearing I stiould di( he took me into the houfe, makin me wait at table, whet the knive go on errands, and Such trivial things but my weaknefs encreafing, I wt , at last confin’d to my bed. Th frightened him fo, that he told mi (finding I was a gentleman, and unJ for Service) if I would write to m friends, and procure a tolerable rai
fon
i	•
Mils Harriot Montague, ly
fom, he would let me go. Then I told him that there was a young gentlewoman who was taken with me in the Same Ship, and that if he could get me intelligence where She was, and find on what terms She might be freed, then I would fend to Spain to my friends for a ranfom for both, though they were but in mean circumstances ; for I dar’d fay no other, becaufe the villain would have been extravagant in his demands ; and I told him unlefs he could do this, I did not think it worth my while to write, or care what became of me. This vex’d him horribly. In Short, I lay ill So long, that had not his daughter, a handfome JewiSh maid, privately Supply’d me with Some rich wines and good food, I had furely dy’d : for though a kind of a doctor he employed, gave me fome medicines that conquer d my difeafe, yet I had never recovered strength enough to get away without her help; but being able to walk about, and little notice being
taken
/
The HISTORY of
taken, of me by the Servants, I lefi the houSe one evening, and refolved t6 get back near Tunis, where 1 hop’d to get Some news of you. Thi? Jew’s country-houfe was fifteen milef off it, and I was two days and nighu a crawling to this minous place, intc which I entered, to rest myfelf, being quite fpent. I had a bottle o’ wine, and Some bread and meat ty’c up in a cloth in this little basket, ir which I us’d to gather fruit for the table. After I hast eat and stept here I began to confider what to do ; if i enter’d the city, I Should run the risl< of being taken up perhaps and examined, and So be Sent to prifon for i runaway, or Sent back to my master
which was almost as bad: fo a though
A ' ^
came into my head, that if I coulc find means to fubfist and live concealed in this place, I might have Some fortunate opportunity of finding where you were. Then I began to view the place more narrowly, and found thi; door : I defcended into the vault, bu
i
4
MiSs Harriot Montague, io
It was So dark I could not diScern wliat was in it, but groping about, I thought I heard a groan, and turning my head, diScernM the glimmering oS a lamp in one of the inner rooms : I entered it, though in Some disorder, and there I Saw'one of the most difmal objects that ever eyes beheld, it was an aged man drested in this coarfe coat that I have on, his beard reached to his waste, his bones appeared ready to start through his parched Shriveled skin, his eyes were Sunk, his voice failed, and he Seemed to be in the last agonies of death, as indeed he was. I could hardly recoL-lect my Spirits, I was So moved at this dreadful fight. He fixed his eyes upon-me, and feemed defirous to fpeak to me. In the name of JeSus, Said I,, what are you that are thus come to dwell amongst the dead ? That name,
■ faid he, is Sweet indeed; fpeak it again, dear Christian, and comfort my departing foul. At thefe words-
charity made me haste to give him
fome
The HISTORY o f
Some of my wine, oS which he Swallowed but a little with much diffi-culty ; yet that a little revived hirn, and I begged of him to get down Some more. In fine, he was So refreShedv that I hop’d I fiiould have Saved his life, but was deceived.-
I know. Said he, your curiofity is great to know who I am, and the strange adventures that have brought me to this diSmal place and end ; and I will endeavour to reward your kind-nefs, if I am able, with the story of my life; I was the eldest Son of a noble family in Spain, it was my fortune to fall in love with a young lady, the daughter of a Grandee r I got her father’s permistion to court her, but was received but coldly ; in fine, I found I had Some rival who Supplanted me in her affection, and made it my whole study to difcover who he was ; and it was not long e’er I was Satisfy’d that a young Cavalier ufed to be admitted through the gardens fre-quenttyj in the dead time of the
•<4	w	^	^
-nightj
/
MiSs Harriot Montague, zt
night, to her apartment. I paf-fionately loved her, and this difco-very So enraged me, that I reSoIved to kill him. In fhort, I lay in ambuSh with three of my Servants, in a grove behind the gardens, and Saw him enter, leaving his horSe and one Servant to wait his coming out, which wtts not till the break of day. I advanced at the head of my Servants, and Shot him dead, and made off immediately without discovery, being mask’d ; my coach waited about two miles off the place ; So I quitted my horfe, and went into it, reaching my own home in the city before it was broad day : by noon the news was Spread all over the city that Don Ferdinand de Juan my coufin-german was kill’d, but none could difcover by whom. I concealed my thoughts, appearing much concerned for his death, and being unable to live at quiet without Ravina, I prefled for our marriage So earnestly, that her father conSented, and vye were joined
f y
4
22 The HISTORY OF
by the Sacred rites, not to be happy
but wretched; for She was So fincere
% ^
in her affection to her murder’d lover, that She. could never be happy with another ; and having too well con^ vinced myfelf the first night, that my bride was no virgin, I grew furiousty jealous and unkind to her. This ufage put her upon meafures to be revenged ; and her charms Soon procured me Such a rival, that I knew not how to cope withal; a duke made me that modiSh thing a cuckold, and to prevent my having any opportunity of being revenged, not only came always well attended to my houSe, but procured me a great post in the army, which obliged me to be •abfent from home most part of the year ; yet niy wife lost no time but curfed me with a child every year. So that I began to look on her as a vile strumpet, and the children as vipers and ferpents produced by her lust and my difhonour. At last 1
plotted the destruction of her and
them;
✓
MiSs Harriot Montague. 23
them, and having contrived this villainy to destroy them, and ruin my own peace and Soul, laid all things ready to eScape from justice, I came home, and at one fatal fupper in my wife’s apartment, poifoned her and her three children. At midnight I took horfe, and reached the next , fearport by day-break, where a bark lay which I had hired to carry me to England, having remitted a vast fum of money thither in order to provide for me there, knowing I must never return to Spain again. I went on board, met with a great storm which drove us towards the straits, where an Algerine pirate met with and took us; being brought to Tunis, I was fold for a stave to a Basta, who kept . me in extreme mifery feven years; he being kill’d in the wars, I fell into the hands of his fon, who was an officer of the guard to the King of Fez and Morocco; with him I travelled many thouland leagues, carrying burdens, and running by his horfe’s fide.
All
H The HISTORY of -
'	♦	'	V
All this I looked upon as a just punishment inflicted upon me by divine ' justice for my enormous fins, and
must confeSs the horrors of that guilt that loads my foul, were always more grievous to me than the bodily pains I Suffered, though they were almost inSupportable. At last, quite wearied out and defperate, I fled over the mountains, and after wandering about in the difguife of a poor dervife, which ■ is the habit I have on, by means of
which I pafTed undifcovered to this place, in which I chofe to refide, and have lived five whole years unmolested, I got my bread by begging in‘ " . the adjacent city and Suburbs, being
held in great veneration by the common people, by reafon of my drefs, ^ which made me pafs for a religious
mahometan. All this time I have been labouring to make my peace with God by prayers and tears, hoping to wasti away my stains, and purify my confcience ; tliis I hope, through the merits of my Saviour. I have’ ;	.	done:
3_.
U K ,
1^ I'	*■	I
*	' y'
Mils Harriot Montague. 25
‘done ; It is about ten days fince, coming to my diSmal cell, I Saw two perSons struggling as if one was going to rob or kill the other, and step->ping in between them, one oS them, wliich I SiippoSe to be the thief, stab’d me into the thigh with a poiSoned IcniSe, as I fince conclude, and then fled; the perSon I had refcued. Seemed very thankful, and defirous to know who I was, to reward me; but I was Shy of that. So he gave me a purfe of gold and left me. I hasted home to dreSs my wound with Some Salve I
had by me, but the next morning I could not rife ; I have lain here ever Since in extream torment, have had no food theSe three days past, and believe my thigh is mortified. He related all this, often faltering in his Speech, and groaning, nay fainting Several times; but I Spare to make particular mention of theSe things. He concluded thus: And now, Said he, I Shall die by a violent death as thoSe I murdered did ; may God ac-
VoL. II.	C	cept
\
26 The HISTORY OF
cept of thefe my Sufferings and Repentance here, in compensation of the ills I have done, and then I Shall be happy. I kept him alive with the wine that night, but the mortification ended his unhappy life the next morning. I drag’d nis body into the next room, and Shut up the door as clofe as I could, to avoid the stench of it, and concluded to live here, putting on his old coat as a fure difguife : I took the purfe of gold alSo, which was a great help to me, and having dy’d my face and hands with the juice of an herb to make me look thus tawny, have lived undiscovered all this time. I learned at my Jew-master’s to make straw-hats, and baskets for to gather fruit in; thefe I make here in the heat of the day and fell for bread and meat, which if I get none ready drefs’d I broil upon Some coals, making a fire of sticks in the mofque, in one corner of which I have made myfelf a kind of fire-place with stones ; then I bring down Some of the hot coals upon
Mifs Harriot Montaohe. -27
on a tile into this place to warm and dry it, elSe I Should die with the dampneSs of it. I am So well acquainted with the country now, that I am confident I could find out Some more commodious place to live in: but fearing to go farther off the city, and be leSs likely to hear news of you, made me continue here; but fince providence has been fo merciful to bring you hither, you Shall take up with this fad being Some few days, till I can procure Such a difguiSe for each of you as I have on, and colour your faces like mine, which will waSh off again; and then I will provide Some better place near the fea-fide for us to dwell in, till God is pleaSed to fend fome Ship to carry us off from this fad place. The rich vests and turbants you have on would Surely betray us ; we will take the jewels off, and hide them in the vault among the dead bones, where none will feek them, and to-morrow I will buy two coats, and boots, with flannel to make you
C 2	long
2S The HISTORY Of
long tunicks to your heels, to keep you warm, and hide your fine linen underneath; your heads Shall be covered with flannel-hoods, like cowls, with straw-hats. This reSolved on, they Sat down, and eat thankfully of the Scraps he had brought home. Thus with a good conScience, men may live contented, nay be even happy in the most miferable circumstances. A charnel-houfe now entertains theSe two ladies, who are better pleaSed to eat Scraps, and lie on straw and the cold stones, than dwell in a fine palace, and steep on beds of down with infamy. After this poor repast, they prayed, and laid them'down to rest, Mariana’s huf-band having fastened the door of the vault within-fide as he ufed to do, to prevent wild beasts from entring there. The next morning he went to the city, and bought what they wanted, yet not at one place, but at feveral, for fear of fufpicion, and returned foon ; then they fat down to work,
and
Mifs Harriot Montague. 29
and made the flannel tunicks and hoods, as he diredied them; he had brought meat, and drefled it in the moSque above, whilst they worked in the vault below: by night they had
finished their diSguiSes; and he, impatient to remove them from that dif* mal place, went out after they had dined, and fearching along the Shore, found an old ruinous cottage on the fide of a rock, fo built in the cleft of the rock, that it was well fcreened from the bleak winds or parching fun, and fo Shadowed with trees that grew round about and over it, that it was not eafily feen. No body lived in this place but an old fisherman and his wife. Don Alonzo told them he was a poor dervife whofe cottage was tumbled down, and if they would quit this for him and two more hermits to live in, he would pay them to their content; the poor devout peasants, reverencing his facred perfon and profefldon, gladly confented : fo he paid them a Small matter,
C 3,	though
3^ The HISTORY OF
though to them it was a great shirr,, and they quitted the place, retiring to another cottage at a little distance rom it; theSe poor people he employed to buy two quilts. Some coverlids, and what elfe was wanting, to make this place a convenient cell for
^ him and his two friends; and in three
days time, all being ready, they removed in the dusk of the evening from their distnal vault to this clean
wholeshme cottage, where they lived
for fome monthsVery happily/hS
their rich jewels and clothes in a hole m the rock : the poor fisherman and his wife werevery ferviceable to them,, fetching what they wanted, and fup-plying them with fish; and having a good strong boat, they hoped by his means -to get to fome ship, he havshg promifed to go on board the first European ship he could get fight of at
fea, for which fervice Don Alonzo ashired him, he would give them ten pieces of gold. During the time of ©nr female hermits abode in this place,
they
/
Mifs Harriot Montague. 31
they never went into the town; but Don Alonzo neglected not to go frequently to fell his straw baskets and, hats, which the ladies learned to make with great dexterity ; fo that they made enough to fupply them with bread and meat in way of exchange. And now he thought it would not be improper to convert fome of the jewels into ready money, which might stand them in stead, in cafe they found caufe to remove or means to get off. In order to this, he carry’d fome of the jewels Clementina had brought away in the fine box fhe took out of the Bey’s wardrobe, which they had broke open, and found to be full of jewels and gold ; a few of thefe he went with to a Jew-merchant in the city, whom he told that he had found a box with thefe jewels, and Some other things of value in it, on the Lands, as he was walking on the Sea-Shore, and fuppofed to be part of fome Shipwreck: the Jew did not
much trouble him with questions, but
C 4	finding
i
32 The HISTORY OF
finding he Should have them a good pennyworth, cared not how he came by them, and bid him a thoufand pieces of gold, but Don Alonzo in-fisted upon two thouSand, to which the Jew at last agreed, and paid him down the money, the jewels being no doubt worth twice as much; but this Sum was Sufficient for our hermits. And now Don Alonzo could boldly go to him, and buy what they wanted, without fearing to give oc-cafion of fulpicion,, stnce the Jew would not wonder how he came by money. All the diverfion the hermits took, was to walk on the fea-fhore in the evenings and early in the mornings, in hopes to difcover fbme fhip to get off. One morning, a dreadful storm having blown in the night, they went out to fee what mifchief was: done ; and Clementina b -.ing foremost, perceived Something floating on the fea ; ffie stood still to obferve it, and Soon Saw it was a man, with his hands fast clenched on a chest, his.-
habit:
MiSs Harriot Montague. 33
habit was lac’d with stiver : She cry’d out to Don Alonzo to come to help this poor wretch: he ran, and stepping up to his middle in the water,
' caught hold of the chest and drag’d it to fhore. Then they took the man up, who appeared to be dead, but Don Alonzo holding him up by the heels, the water poured out of his mouth in great quantity, after which Some stgns of life appeared; they carried him homt^ to their cottage, gave him rack, and put him into a: warm bed, and So brought him to life ; he was, a very handfome gentleman, and his linen and clothes Spoke him a man of no mean quality. Don Alonzo left liim with the Ladies,, whilst he called the stfherman to help bring the chest to the cottage, fup-postng it to contain fomething worth Saving. The stranger viewed the ladies with wonder, their strange habits and tawny complexions ill agreeing with the fweetnefs of their features,, and delicate hands and limbs : he
C 5„	thought
^ .M. M. KJ A.	KJ £
thought he knew one of them, yet was in doubt. Mean time they were very bufy in tending him, giving him. burnt wine, and talking in French to^ one another, a language he was no flrangCr to, for he was a French gentleman by birth. At last he addrested himfelfto Clementina in this manner.*: Madam, if my eyes do not deceive ‘ me I have the honour to know you, is not your name Clementina ? the unfortunate daughter of a mother ‘ who barbarousty Sent you out of France. Speak, are you a stranger * to Monfieur Le Montague ?’ At this difcourfe She changed colour, and. fhedding fome tears, reply’d, ‘ l am ‘ indeed the unfortunate Clementina,
' and too well know that name, fince ‘ I am never like to fee, or if I did,.
‘ can never postefs what I fo dearly ' loved.’ ‘‘ Yes, Said he, you will I doubt not do both, for he is Safely arrived in France, and a widower, having fouglit for you all over Ca-
nada and the West-Indies; he came
^ home
IVlllSnAKKlUT IVIUIMTACjUJb:. 35
home a little before I left France.” Here he told her all the story of her mother’s death, and the manner of their living together ; that he was now postested of a vast estate, and retired from the world on her account. By this time Don Alonzo and the fistier-man brought in the chest, and Clementina proceeded to ask the stranger who he was, not being still able to recollect. He told her immediately that his name was Montelion. Good , heavens ! faid She, are you that charming gay young captain who ufed to vifit and court my dear friend madam Cleora, when we were penfioners in the monastery together Yes, faid he, I am that unfortunate man, who have married and brought that lovely maid from France to lofe her life I fear, and it had been well for me to have perifhed with her; if She is dead, life will be a hell to me. I beg you therefore to add to the charitable office you have done in Saving me, by Searching
all tire coast hereabouts carefully, for
She
O'	^	JL V.-T XVI V/ u
fhe was holding fast on the chest, when my fenSes forfook me, and then^ we were not far from the stiore :
hope therefore that She may still be
alive; if I do not find her, grief will-
perhaps finish that life that'you have
rH)w restored' me to. T Saw a boat-noar us when I fainted; and conclude-if She had been drowned, She would* have kept her hold on. the chest, as’ people generally do; for this reafon I flatter myfelf the fifher-boat took her up, and negledled me, whom^ they might conclude dead^ or' that' Some wave might drive me out of their -reach. Don Alonzo fent the old fisherman to make inquiry, who was acquainted with all the others on that coast, the stranger being fb weak he* could not' rife. They intreated him* to tell them his adventures, and the manner of his coming to that’coast;
which he related in- thefe words. -After you fair Clementina Ibft France, I confined my addrestes to
Cleora, Tvhpfe. brother Leander, foom
after'-
Mils flARRIOT iVlONTAGUE.
after you were gone, went away for Virginia, beiug highly diSgusted with his guardians, refolving to apply him-Self to an uncle he has there, wha had cofiderable effects of his in his hands, he perSuaded himSelf would affist him against his other unclesr Camilla followed him, no I news of them has come to France fince they left it. Cleora was Soon removed' from St. Malos to Calais, and I following, She was Sent to the convent' of Auo;ustine nuns at Paris. Mean
o
time my elder brother dying, I became master of a* fortune fufficicnt to anfwer hers : fo I applied myfelf not only to her obdurate uncles, but to the biShop and principal merchants who importuned them to confent to our marriage, but to no purpofe, for they were refolved never to part with her and her fortune, tho’ I proceeded So far, that I offered to divide it with-them, btit this they rejected with a pretended Scorn. In stne, I Saw all I dki. was to no purpofe, So I refolved’
to steal her away, and sty to Virginia to her brother, who being now come of age, might greatly astist me, as I will him. I Set out for Paris with this destgn, but was strangely diSap-^ pointed when I came there, for She was removed thence to a houSe of her guardians (an old stone building, strong as a little fort) in a village in p Normandy. Here they placed her
under a kind of guard, for they put an old hag in the chamber with her, who never let her stir out but on the leads (for it was the uppermost room in the houfe; ) two stout Surly fellows lived below, and took care of the gate. ^ I took a private lodging in this village, difguifed like a mean perfon, leaving my Servants at a market town three miles off; and pretended to the old farmer where I lodged, that I had been stck, and was come to that place for my health, being a tradefman at Coutance; this pasted very well with the country people.
The houfe .. my dear Cleora was kept
in,
i
iVlllb	j:vxv^xn
4
in, was moated round and bad a draw-bridge, which was Seldom let down but when any of the Servants went out or in. I walked round it Several days to confider what eourSe to take, and there I had the pleaSure or rather torment, of feeing my dear Cleora walking with the old hag upon th e leads. I did not dare to make any. fign to discover my Self to her, and being convinced that- it was impoflible to get at her by fair means, I refolved to life force; in order to which, I Sent the old farmer’s man to the market-town, with a letter to my valet-de-chambre, whom I had left with two footmen and four horfes, to come to me next morning, which they accordingly did. I took them to a place in fight of the prifon where my mifirefs was, and we staid concealed under
^	i
the Shelter of fome trees, till we faw one of the men-fervants come out, the bridge being let down : we rode up with pistols in our hands, Seized on the bridge, which my two Servants
kept
%
/
40 Ihe HIbTOKY of
kept, whilst my valet-de-chambr and I forced the Servants at the gat to give us entrance; for I caught hir by the throat, and .clapping my piste to his breast, bid him bring me to hi young mistrefs, or I would kill him He begged for mercy, and I held hin by the arm, and afeended the stair „	with him to the room where fhe was
y	You may believe fhe was extremeh
Surprized at Seeing a man enter th room thus rudely, but fhe quickli recovered her fright at the fight o me. The old hag Screamed anc roared like one distradled, but that j
little regarded ; So I bid my mistress
follow me, arid we ran down stairs 1 mounted her upon my horSe behind me, on which I had purpofely put a pillion, and my men breaking down the draw-bridge, threw it into the moat, and So prevented our beino' purfued for Some hoursin which time we made off to a curate’s houfe crofs the country, about twenty miles farther: Here we were married, and
lay
4
Mifs-Harriot Montagtje. 4t
lay concealed Sor above a month, in which time the Search made aSter us was over, and they concluded w^e were gome out oS the kingdom. Then having diSguifed her in man’s clothes, and a Ship and money, with bills of exchange, being got ready for us at Diepe, we Set out from the curate’s, attended by two- Servants, and got Safe off.
We then thought ourfelves happy, and had a prosperous voyage, till we came through the Straits, when a dreadful storm arofe, driving us on this coast; and our fhip (which was^ but Small) striking upon a rock, bulged ; we had no way to Save ourSelves but by getting into the long-boat: my dear wife was my chief care, I got her one of the first in, and the captain and Several Sailors and pastengers leaped after in Such diforder (all being willing to Save their lives) that they over-fet the boat, and we were all thrown into the mercilefs Sea. I
eatched hold of my dear wife, and
feeing
The HISTORY of
feeing a chest floating, and that w( , were not far from the Shore, I caugh hold of it, bidding her throw herfel upon it: Thus we remained, till mi strength was So Spent, that I could nt longer Sustain the waves beating a gainst me, and fainted at the momen I faw a fiShing-boat making toward: us; and now all my hope is, that Sh( was taken into in
Soon after he had ended his relation, the old fisherman entered, witi the good news, that a flShcrmai standing on the Shore, faw the ladi taken up by the boat, from whenc< they threw a rope, which She catcher hold of; and that the man on th< chest was carried off towards tht Shore by the waves. He faid tht
woman rung her hands, and feemec to call after him; but that the boa made away out of his fight, from the Shore. Montelion lifting up his hands. cryM, ‘ My God, I thank thee with * my foul, that her life is preServed f Let thy angels keep her Safe, and
dire^
Mifs Harriot Montague. 45
‘ direct me to her : Strengthen my ‘ confidence in thee, that the impro-‘ liability of our meeting again may * not drive me to defpair.*^
The hermits did all they could to comfort him, and procured a habit like theirs for him : They refolved to be gone the first opportunity, but he could shot be perfuaded to leave the place without his lady ; nay, his impatience was Such, that he often ventured out in a morning early, and would go many miles along the fea-fhore, making inquiry of the fifher-men: but alas ! he was deceived in looking for her there, for ^ She was otherwise diSpofed of. Some months pasted in this manner, fo that he began to defpair of finding her, or they of getting thence; but providence, whofe ways are unfearchable, and always tend to our good, detained them there for the preservation of the virtuous Cleora.
Don Alonzo one morning goings out very early alone to the city to fell
his
ft
44 The HISTORt OF
his straw-ware, and buy provilioni as uSnal, pasting by a wood, heard tht voice of a woman making great lamentations in the French tongue : ht turned afide to See if he could diScovei where stie' was, and following the voice, entered a great way into the wood, in the thickest part of which he perceived a woman fitting on the ground ; flie had a Turkifb habit or was very young and beautiful; She held her hands upon one of her legs, which was much fwoln; her face was pale as death, her eyes funk with weeping and famine; She looked upon him as a perfbn refigned to death, and uttered not one word. He fpoke to her in French, faying, Nfadam, w'^hat ails you how came ‘ you to this place I am a Christian,
*	and can help you. Alas ! (faid fhe) ‘ I fear all help comes too late; I have •* been here three days with my leg ‘ broke, and have had neither food ‘ nor help, fo am not able to rtiove,
*	or follow you 5 I lied from ruin and
‘ infamy^.
MiSs Harriot Montague. 45
^ infamy, aud have met death: I was ^ Saved from the mercilefs Seas, to ‘ perifh on the more inhoSpitable * Shore.* ‘ Is not your name Cleora ?
^ Said he. Yes, Said She, but---—
Here fhe Swooned, he was troubled that he had nothing to give her, but was forced to run back to the fiSher-maffs cottage, which way half a mile, yet nearer than his own: here he got Some brandy^ and made him follow him with a blanket:: they ran all the was, and found her lying as dead, with her teeth clinched; he had much ado to get fome of the brandy down her throat, but at last She began to breathe and move: Then they put her into the blanket, and carried her betwixt them home to Don Alonzo, where the tranSporred Montelion was So divided betwixt grief and joy, that he Scarce knew what he Said or did. The ladies got her into bed, and gave her hot fpoon-meat; but when they came to look upon her leg, they Ihrunk back amazed, for Ihe had
broke
46 The HISTORY OP
broke it Short at the instep, the bone being Split, came through ; her leg and foot was So .Swelled, that had the best bone-Setter in the world beer there, he could not have Set it at that instant, Clementina Tad Some skill She prefently made a fomentation with herbs and wine, and applyed stdups dipped therein to it, which gave the poor lady great relief in fome hours ; what to do they knew not; they did not dare to fend for a Mahometan Surgeon, there was no Christians of that profestion, and they all feared a mortification, Montelion was almost distracted. At last Don Alonzo went to the Jew, and told him he had occafion for a Surgeon, and defired his aSststance. He told him, a friend of his had bought a Christian stave of that profefiTion, who had been Surgeon to a French Ship ;
he would direct and recommend him
to that friend. He went with a letter from this Jew to the other, who freely lent him his stave 5 and they went
toge-
\
MiSs Harriot Montague. 47
together, Don Alonzo talking with him by the way, found he was Surgeon to the Ship which brought Clementina from Canada. He acqu-.inted
him with her being in his houfe, and his own story, not fearing to be discovered by a Christian, who he offered to redeem from stavery of the Jew; an offer the other gladly accepted of no question; for though we often live as ill as heathens, who profeSs ourfelves Christians, and whilst we live together are often at variance ; yet none but fuch as have experienced it, can tell the joy and comfort poor Christians find, in meeting and con-verfing together when in stavery amongst turks and heathens; then true charity glows in their breasts, and they gladly afifist one another to. the utmost of their power.
This furgeon was careffed by all, but especially by Clementina, who^ knew him to be a very honest gentleman. He drested the poor lady, and miraculousty restored her leg to
Such
4? The HISTORY OF
«
Such a state, that in fix weeks fhie could walk with a crutch, though never able to go upright, but was ever lame, it being impofifible to cure it otherwise, having lain So long without help. Clementina asked him what was become of the captain; he told her he was dead, he believed of the wounds he received in the fight; a just reward for his crimes in ufing her as he had done. Now Gleora
being pretty well recovered, acquainted them how She came into this condition, and the occafion of her flying to the wood where Don Alonzo found her.
Being pulled into the boat (Said She) by means of the rope they threw out to me, I expedled them (having Ihewn So much charity to me) to have made after you (addresting herSelf to her hushand) but they Seemed deaf to my intreaties, neither did they under-stand me, I beleive, becauSe they were strangers to my language. They
made away for Tunis, to which they
were
*
Miff Harriot Montague. 49
Were going, it being a fiShing boat belonging to a Bafhaw who lives there and Sent them out the day before to get fiSh for his table, as his custom was. They certainly imagined they had got a prize in me, feeing me young and tolerably handfome. When they had brought me to Shore, they led me directly to the BaShaw’s (their masters) houSe, where I was delivered to a black, who Seemed mighty glad, and viewed me So curiousty, that my face was overfpread with bluShes. By him I was led to a fine Apartment, where an old maid fer-vant, who fpoke French, came to me; the grief and Surprize I was unden made me glad to meet with Somebody to inform me what I was to be done with : I aSked her many questions, and was anfwered, that I Was to be mif-trefs to one of the handfomest and most powerful men in the place, that he was his princes chief favourite ; in Short, She praifed him up to the shies. I told her I was already married, and VoL. II.	D	would
50 The HISTORY of
would rather die, than admit of a no tiler’s embraces. She laughed at that and taking off my wet clothes, brough me up a TurkiSli drefs. Thus I re mained many days confined in thi place, being furniShed with all ne ceffaries of food, habit and lodging in which time walking in the gardem I faw and converfed with fbme c thofe unfortunate women who hai been purchafed for his pleafures, Ei ropeans, now made staves to the ir folent Mahometan, who was at thi time at a country-houfe about tw miles distant from the wood in whic Doii Alonzo found me, fo that it wa fome months before that I was expc fed to the Infidel’s view* During m abode in this place I made fome a tempts to efcape, but could neve effect it, for the staves fo narrow! watched us, that there was no hope of getting away. And now bein quite overwhelmed with forrow, I at plied myfelf to God to deliver mt Indeed I wondered that I continue
1
I
Mifs Harriot Montague,
fo long without Seeing this tyrannical Ateerine ; but' at last I learned the ■ reaSon, she was lick oS astertian ague and fever all that time; as Soon as she recovered he ordered me to be brought to him, to his country-houfe, having had Such an advantagious cha- , racter given him of me, that he was impatient to fee me. I had contracted a kind of friendship with a young creature, who had been brought there at ten years old ; her name was Emilia, an English gentleman’s daughter of great fortune; She was goddaughter to a lady, whofe hulband was a rich Merchant, and went to fettle in the West-Indies with his family, She took this beautiful girl along with her, and the Ship being unfortunately taken, and brought into Tunis, She was fold to this BaShaw, whofe mistrefs She had been five years when I came to that unhappy place. She was fair as an angel, witty, and highly fenfible of her mif-
fortune» She had brought him a
D	daugh-
«
52 The HISTORY OP
daughter, which was carried away from her Soon after it was born. She pity’d me extremely, and afiSured me that it was almost impostible to efcape thence. She Seemed refigned to her misfortunes, and faid, fince God has been pleafed to Suffer her to be reduced to fuch a way of life, where She could have no opportunity of pradfifing her religion, or avoiding the Infidel’s embraces, stie hoped he would not lay any thing to her charge as a crime, fince it was compulfion, not choice. But all her arguments Seemed weak to me, and I refolved on death rather than to yield. At last, one morning the old French woman entered my chamber, and bid me prepare mySelf to go to the great man, whofe favourite I was to be. She brought me a rich habit and linen, and drested me to all the advantao*e fuch a pagan habit could be put on
with, whilst I stood weeping, careJefs of what stie did, and meditating what
to do. At last stie threw a vail over
*
me.
MiSs Harriot Montague. 5^
me, and led me through the garden to a kind oS horSe-litter, into which the black stave put me. I perceived that there were Seven or eight ill-looking staves to guard me. So that it was in vain to restsh I was about three hours upon the road, and had reSuSed to eat any thing before I Set out, that I was So faint when they came to take me out, that two of them were fain to lead me into the houfe, which was a kind of earthly paradife, adorned with fine paintings, and fuch furniture, that I Was furpri-zed. Being condutsted to a delicate chamber, where there was a bed made after the European fafhion, and velvet stools and chairs, things very uncom-inon in thefe parts of the world ; they left me, and in a few morients after a gentleman, in a rich night-gown and turban, entered : he was tall, stender, and delicately Shaped, his eyes were black and Shining, his skin moderately fair, his air and mein fo Soft and engaging, that I stood con-
D 3	founded.
* •
54 The HISTORY of
I
founded. At thefe words Montelioti reddened; She perceiving it, with a fmile Said, my dear don’t be jealous, for his beauty and my perfuafions did him no further Service with me, but to raifemy pity; for I Soon perceived he was an European, and had bought his greatnefs here by renouncing his faith. He bowed, and flood looking upon me for Some time without fpeak-ino*; then, like a man awakened
O ^	^
from a pleafant dream to Substantial joy, he catched me in his arms, and faid in French, ‘ fame has done you ‘ wrong, fweet creature ; you are ‘ fairer than fancy could conceive; ‘ take to your arms a man that adores ‘ you, and knows how to value Such ‘ a treaSure ; no Barbarian or fierce ‘ Moor, but one who was born in the ‘ politest part of the world: I am an ‘ Italian, whom injuries drove hither; ‘ who being ruined by my fellow-. ‘ Christians, have fled for Succour to ‘ barbarians, who have advanced ‘ and made me great enough to make
‘ you
Mifs Harriot Montague. 55
*	you as happy as the world can make ‘ you.’ My Soul was filled with horror at theSe words. ‘ Have you re-‘ nounced your Saviour, Said I, and ‘ do you think a Christian can look ' upon you without abhorrence ? my ‘ religion and honour are So dear to ‘ me, that I will die for either ; and
*	though I am in your power (as you ‘ imagine) whilst I remain firm in this ‘ resolution I am Safe, and your at-‘ tempts are vain.’ He uSed all the
perfuafions postible to gain me, nay, stooped to beg and pray ; but finding me inflexible, and growing faint, be-ing still weak with hiS.lateillneSs, he called for wine, Iherbet, and Sweetmeats, courting me to eat and drink, but I refufed. Then he asked me if I defigned to be my own murderer, and damn myfelf? I anfwered no, but I did not think it Safe to eat and drink with a perfon who had bafe defigns upon my virtue, and might, perhaps, deprive me of my reafon by Some stupifying drug, and ruin me :
D 4	there-
1
^6 The HISTORY of
therefore I would abstain from eating till providence fupplyed me with Some wholefome bread and water, or any thing that might Satisfy hunger without danger. He Seemed furprifed at my being fo refolutCj and no doubt but his conscience pricked him when lie Saw me So well perform my duty, which he had by cowardice and ambition acted contrary to. At last he took leave, bidding me reflect, that no human power could free me from him; that I must at last yield to his defires; that he would much rather gain me by courtfhip, than force; but if I continued obstinate, he must be obliged to constrain me to be kind; then he left me, a stave keeping the door. This civility, I believe, was owing to his weaknefs ; but being now left alone, I fat down in a chair, and fell into a Serious confideration of my wretched condition: I had no weapon to defend myfelf, or harm him; the doors were guarded; then I viewed the windows, and they were
fo
MiSs Harriot Montague. 57
So high, that a leap Srom thence Seemed to threaten certain death; 1 diSputed in my conScience the lawfulness of fuch an action. Thus I fat till evening, being often interrupted by his officious staves, who brought me choice wines and prefents from him, all which I refufed ; yet at last fearing want of fustenance would render me unable to refist him if he offered force, or faintnefs feize my Spirits, and deprive me of my reafon, I made the stave that brought in the wine, drink a glafs of it before me, and then I took two glastes full my-felf, and eat Some bread. When it grew dark they urged me to go to bed, but I refufed. They brought in two wax lights, and retired. Shutting the door ; and now I trembled, fearing what followed. About midnight the apostate Bafhaw entered the chain ber, and fastening the door, came to me, ufing all the Softest perfuafions and intreaties : in ffiort, finding me
deaf to all his follicitation?, he pro-
D c	needed
■■
58 The HISTORY of
ceeded to uSe Sorce ; but then Some kind angel Sure aflisted me, for I grew strong, he Soon tired, and renewed his intreaties. At last he fwooned at my feet, and then being distracted with my fears, I refolved to life thofe happy moments; fo without standing to deliberate, I catched the rich faSh off that ty’d his night-gown, and fastening one end to one of the bars of the windows, stid down ; but that not being above three yards long, I fell down from a great height, and lay for fome time quite stun’d ; but recovering, found I had not broke my bones, and rifing on my feet, fled towards the next wood, it being a very moon-light night: I thought it riot fo far off as it proved, for it was near two miles, as I guefs, and I had hardly strength left to reach it, but fear drove me on- When I entered the wood I was filled with more dreadful apprehensions, and fancied the wild beasts would devour me; to avoid which I got up into a tree,
whofc
MiSs Harriot Montague. 59
whoSe trunk being old and hollow, I eafily climbed : There I Seated mySeiS and palTed the remainder of the night till day-break ? but then I feared to deScend, lest I Should be purfued; nor did I know where to go. Whilst, I was thus mufing Sleep prevailed over thought, and I fell into a dumber, and drop’d down from the tree, which fall broke my leg. What I endured for three days that I lay there, you may imagine: I expectednothingbi.it death, as ^ I had reafon to do; but providence preferved and relieved me by your means, for which I will be thankful whilst I live.
All the company joined in praifes to God, and were filled with admira-tion : they pasted the time very a-greeably, till the good old fiSherman, • whom they had converted to the chrif-tian faith, together with his wife, acquainted them, that he had that morning met at Sea with a Spanisti Ship, had been aboard it, and informed the
captain of their being there ; that he
had
6o The HISTORY OF
had promised to Send his long-boat that night to a creek behind the rock to fetch them. It is. Said he, a fiiip of good force, and fears no pirate, being well armM and mann’d. Don Alonzo, on this news, went away to Tunis, and gave his friend the Surgeon notice, who went back with him. The ladies in the mean time packed up their jewels, money, and Some linen, and all being ready, they went away to the creek in the dufk, and waited the boat’s coming. They offered to take the fifherman and his wife along with them, but they chofe to end their lives in their own country, pleading their age : So they left them all their furniture, and twenty pieces of gold, a fufiicient provilion Tor them. The Ship’s boat came about eleven o’clock at night, and carried them off Safely to the Ship, Don Alonzo promifing to affifl Clementina and the furgeon to return to . France by land, and he and Mariana
doubted not of a good reception from
his
%
MiSs Harriot Montague. 6i
his friends at Madrid. , Belides, the two ladies had brought Such a treafure in jewels from the Bey’s feraglio, that that being divided was fufficient to provide for them all. Montelion and his lady were prefented with a part of them, and his chest having been faved, was a provifion for them, they were prevailed upon to defist from their intended voyage to Virginia, Clementina promifing, that Monfieur le Montague Should stand by them against her unjust guardians, fo they determined to go home to France with her. The Spanifh captain received them with tranfport, and- they had leifure to entertain him with an account of all their strange adventures.
They arrived at Barcelona in good health, fold part of their jewels there, highly rewarded the captain, and Don Alonzo’s friends provided nobly for him and Mariana, who writ to her parents at Venice an account of all her fnfferings, and fafe return to
Europe. The S'rench ladies and gentlemen
6a The HISTORY OF
tlemen stayed Some days to recover themSelves of the fatigue of their voyage, and then fet out for France, pro-mifing never to forget the civilities they had received, and the friendship they had all contracted with one ano-, ther in their mifery. And now his fit that we leave the barbarous Algerines, and return to Leander and his kinf-man, whom we left travelling to Virginia through Carolina.
Leander and his generous kinfman with the hermit Mofieur de Liste, came fafe to Virginia, where they were gladly receivedshy the old gentleman and his nevt^ wife. Leander was much pleafed that fhe was now his aunt, and young Dumarefque liked her well enough for a mother in law; yet fhe could not look upon her nephew without bluShes and Some kind of diforder; this was obferved by her hushand, and he began to wifh his kinfman thence. He well knew that She married him in a pique, not out of affection. In Short, having been in-
formxd
Mifs Harriot Montague. 6^
formed of all that had befallen him and his fen in their voyage to the ifland of St. Domingo, he calmly advifed him to return to France, having honourably accounted with him for all the monies and effedfs left in his hands, and made him a handfome prefent of fug ars, tobacco, and other commodities which that country produces, to a great value; faying, ‘ Nephew I al-‘ ways deligned you Something, and ‘ though I have now a profpedi; of ‘ more children, yet I will do what ‘ I Intended; you are now of age, ‘ and your guardians can no longer ® detain you from your own, it is time
*	you Should fettle in the world, and ' the young woman you liked being
*	difpofed of to another, you must ufe ‘ your reafon ; conquer that pastion ‘ which is now unlawful and injurious ' to your repofe, and look out for a ^ wife in your own nation, to bring ® posterity to keep up your name,
*	and be comforts to you in your de-^ dining years.’ Leandcr thank’d him
irnr
64 The HISTORY OF
for his good advice and preSent, bui was determined not to follow his coun-fel, though Monfieur de Lifie preflec him extreamly to go with him tc France, but Lcander would not con-fent to leave Harriot behind. Younc Dumarefque likewife Spurred him or to let him go back to the ifiand to in quire after her ; but alas ! he hac another defign than that only in view he had Seen the charming Lavinia Don Carlos’s fister, and her brigh image So filled his Soul, that he coulc not rest. -We eafily confent to wha we defire. Leander deals with th( captain that carried them thither bc' fore, to go back again with his kinf man. Mean time he finding his uncle look cold upon him, invited Mon fieur de Lifie, no Ship being at tha time ready to go for France, to gc with him to fee another plantation o: his uncle’s and view the country The Ship goes off with DumareSque much against his father’s will; but he arrived Safe at the ifiand, and refolved
t€
Mifs Harriot Montague. 6^
to lie on board the fhip every night> and not taking a lodging on Shore, Sor Sear of diScovery ; in the day he ventured to walk about the town, and went to the great church to maSs on the next Sunday after his arrival, there he Saw the charming Harriot, with her little Son and daughter standing by the governor her father-in-law, drested in a widow’s drefs, and Lavi-nia in deep mourning. This was a very agreeable fight no doubt to him; he did not dare to venture to Speak to her, but was fain to wait for an opportunity Some other time, which he fuppofed would not be extreme difficult, now Don Carlos was no more; but he was mistaken, for he had engaged his father on his death-bed to prevent, if pofifible, her ever feeing Leander again. ‘ My dear lord and ‘ father. Said he, he is the caufe of ‘ my death, he ^ruined my repofe, ‘ and if he returns, will rob my dear ‘ children of their mother; her af-
f Sections are still inclined to him. I
have
66 The HISTORY or
* have brought her to the catholick ‘ faith, he is a Hugonot, and will ‘ Seduce her from her religion and ‘ child! 'en ; do not let my fortune ‘ Serve to enrich my hated rival, nor ‘ my children be wronged.’ He like-wife charged Harriot, as She valued his foul’s repofe, not to. marry him, or leave that istand and his children. Thus the revengeful Spaniard, even in death, continued to hate his brave rival, who had a prior right to her heart, and endeavoured to prevent his happinefs, even when he could no longer enjoy her himfelf. For thefe reafons the governor, who was inconfolable for the lofs of his fon, defired Harriot to live in the castle with him, where fhe was refpected as a queen, and had all the reafon in . the world to be contented. Lavinia, who was courted by the greatest per-fons in the istand, kept her company, and there was the greatest friendship imaginable between them. Lavinia had not as yet felt Cupid’s Tyranny;-
She
MiSs Harriot Montague. 6y
-o
t	>
She Seemed invincible to love. Young Dumarefque having waited Some days in vain Sor an opportunity to Speak to Harriot, grew weary, and reSolved to give her a letter in publiek. He thought in hi^ielf. She is now a widow, and Sree to chooSe whom stie pleaSes; why Should I fear to remind her of her vows and engagements with my friend ? He drefSed himfelf very fine the next festival-day, and went to maSs earlier than before, and there waited till they all came ; then he went boldly up to Harriot, and with a profouild bow, prefented the letter to her ; this he did with Such a grace and mein, that Lavinia locking upon him, was Seized with Such an
unuSual liking to him, and So disordered, that She could Scarce conceal it; love at this fatal moment entered her breast. He withdrew to the other fide of the altar So foon as he had delivered the letter, and there placed himfelf on his knees right against ^hem, with defign to obferve Har-
—	^	•	9
not 8
/
68 The HISTORY OP
riot’s countenance, by whjch he hoped to judge oS her Sentiments in relation to his friend, as iikewiSe to have the pleafure oS looking often upon the charming Lavifiia, to whom his eager glances fpoko his paflion, whilst her unguarded looks and bluSh* €S astured him he was taken notice of. Mean while the governor obferved him, and watched Harriot, who hav^ ing looked on the fuperfcription of the letter, guested that it brought news of Leander, and remembered young Dumarefque’s face. This threw her into a mighty diforder; stie put the letter into her pocket, not daring to
perufe it in fo publick a place: but the distraction of her mind caufed her in a few minutes to faint. This confirmed the governor in his fufpicions, and he whifpered one of his gentlemen, whom he beckoned to him, to take care that gentleman was Secured as he went out of the church, and kept mnder a guard till he examined him. Prayers being ended,
h@
#
V
MiSs Harriot Montague. 69
he gave Harriot his hand to lead her to the coach. So that She had lio opportunity to Speak to young Duma-reSque. A young Cavalier, who courted Lavinia, did the Same by her, inflamed with jealouSy at her behaviour towards the stranger, who imprudently Sollowed them, in hopes to Speak to one of the ladies ; but he was Seized at the church-door as they were going into the coach, he struggled,- and demanded a reaSon of the foldiers and gentlemen that laid hands upon him, but could get no other an-fwer but that it was the governor’s order: So he was carried to the room in the castle, and kept till the governor, having conducted the ladies to their chamber, came and examined him, asking him what the letter contained that he had given his daughter-in-law, whence he came, and who Sent him: To all which he anfwered boldly, and told the truth, faying; ‘ My lord, 1 do not think that I ‘ have done any thing but my duty.
She
70 The HISTORY OF
She is a widow, was promiSed -i ‘ my kinSman before, and forced ui ^ justly from him ? he is her equa
*	and her first choice, and I cann' ^ imagine why you stiould detain h(
*	from him.' “ Your friend replie the governor fiercely, by his in
“ prudent coming hither ruined rr foms peace, and broke his hear' he begged me with his dying brea' never to let him fee her more,^ rob his children of her prefenc whom I will never let her can “ hence; and he has bound her t " the strictest Injunctions never ■ marry again ; and to be brief wi’ you, lam determined, if ever 1 fets foot on this ifland again, to tal fuch meafures to Secure him, th . ‘Mt Shall never be in his power
disturb her or me any more. 0 “ for you, I will try whether a pi
fqn can cannot hold you, and if yc efcape hence again it stiall be n: fault." At thefe words he left.tl room, and young Dumarefque w;
hurric
MiSs Harriot Montague,
Lurried away that night under a guard to a strong priSon into which they uSed to put criminals of state, ten miles from the town, where he was lodged in all appearance for life.
Harriot, fo foon as her father-in-law left her with Lavinia, opened the letter and read it aloud to her; stie could not conceal her joy to hear her dear Leander was alive and constant. Ah !
*	my dear lister, faid stie, throwing
*	her arms about her neck, why did ^ your revengeful brother lay me ^' under fuch cruel obligations not to
. ^ marry this dear man, to whom my ‘ faith and heart was given before ? ‘ He forced me from him. Is it just, ‘ that having been a faithful wife to ‘ him, I fhould not be at liberty to ‘ difpofe of myfelf to him to whom I ‘ do of right belong now he is dead ?
*	Your generous foul, though yet a ® stranger to love, is fenlible of pity, ‘ and cannot but compastionate my ® distrefs, myfoul being divided be-‘ twixt duty to my dead lord, and
‘ affection
72 The HISTORY OF
‘ affection to my living.' Lavinia em bracing her with tears, replied, " alaj my filler, I participate of your .grief and fear that I am born to be nn happy too, I love his generou “ friend; his perfon, and nobh friendship to Leander charms me and if I am not deceteed, I am no “ indifferent to him. I will do al " that I am able to afiist you, but i “ fear mv father will undo us both " I law his furious looks, and fear th( *' effect of his refentments: just a?
we entered the coach, I faw the " people gather in a croud, and fear “ fome mifchief.’^ As they were talking, Lavinia’s woman, Claudio, eritered as pale as death: madam, faici She, there is a strange gentleman Seized, and brought under a guard into the castle, I faw him carried along just now up the great fquare. This news extremely alarmed them, and confirmed their fears ; they employed Claudio, not daring to be too inqui-sttive themfelves, to get intelligence,
for
Mi/s Harriot Montagce. yj
for fhe was mistrefs to Claudio the
/
governor’s gentleman, who had the charge oS young Dumarefque; but he Setting out with him that night for the priSon to fee him Secured there, fhe could get no account of him till the next morning, when fhe got the Secret out of Claudio where he was. This news overwhelmed the ladies with grief, and Harriot grew fo incenSed, that She quarrelled with her father-in-law, complaining that Ihe was not treated as fhe ought to be, and if the gentleman was not freed, fhe would complain to the King of Spain, that fhe had been taken away from Leander by fraud, and compelled to marry Don Carlos; that fhe was a Subject of England, though his daughter-in-law ; that he had no power to command or restrain her from going off the istand, and marrying whom She pleafed. This So enraged the governor, that he told her, fince he found that fhe had fo little fenfe of her honour, and refpect for heir hushand’s VoL. II, E	memory
\
74 The HISTORY OF
memory and her children’s good, of his dying commands, he. would take care to keep her to her duty, and prevent her difgrace; that Leander was of too mean a rank to be received in the place of that noble Spaniard his dear fon, who was defcended from an illustrious family, and had demeaned himfelf in marrying her; he had hitherto treated her for his fake with too much indulgence, which he perceived She had no grateful fenfe of; that young Dumarefque though a good friend to Leander, yet was a venturous fool to return thither on So vile an errand, as to bring love-letters to another man’s wife, that he began to doubt whether his fon had died fairly, or not, and to fufpect She had ^ by Some cur fed stow poifon destroyed
him, elfe they could not have known the time when it was fit to come to her, and knew She was a widow: in Short, he loaded her with bitter reproaches and taunts, and confined her
to her apartment under a guard. Suffering
MiSs Harriot Montague. 7^
lering none to go near her but Lavinia and Some Sew of her relations, who teazed her continually with the refpect Ihe owed her dead hushand, and how She ought never to marry another inferior to him. The governor little fuSpected his daughter was any ways concerned in young Durnarefqiie’s welfare ; but alas, She was as much afflicted as Harriot, and ventured to' fend Clara with a purfe of gold to him. He would have fent a letter back but was denied pen, ink and paper. Clara lent him her table-book, in which he wrote a most past lionate letter to Lavinia, declaring his love, and begging her to let the captain who brought him thither, be informed of what had happened to him, and fent back to Leander to warn him not to come thither. On the receipt of this letter, Lavinia difpatched Clara to the captain, who prefently weighed anchor, and fet fail for, Virginia, to carry thefe joyful and fad tidings to Leander first that Harriot was a
E 2	widow.
76 The HISTORY ®E
widow, and next that his kinSman was in priSon, and stie under a guard on his account. Leander in a Short time was inSormed oS all, the Ship coming faSe to Virginia ; and no perfuafion of his uncle, aunt and friends could detef him from going over to the ifland, to demand his lady, and releafe his friend : but the captain of the Ship re» fufed to go back, faying he was fure he stiould be imprifoned and lofe his Ship. It was fome months before he could get a veflel to carry him ; during which the governor was informed by his fpies of Clara’s vilits to young Dumareftjue in the prifon. He caufed him to be fecretly removed to the old castle where he had been before a prifoner ; there the commanding officer had fuch a strict charge given him to take care of him, that he was Secured from any poflibility of an ef*
. cape, not being ever permitted to go on the battlements, but confined to a chamber with two centinels at the door night and day, being relieved every
four
s
Mifs Harriot Monta^ve. 77
four hours. The haughty governor having thus Secured him, laid wait to catch Leander, not doubting but he would Soon Sollow his Sriend, when he heard the news Srom the Virginia captain, oS whoSe departure out of the port he had had intelligence and would have stopped the fhlp, which he had a good pretence for, it being a time of war between the Englifh, French and Spaniards; but only he concluded it best to let it go to fetch Leander.
Harriot fell stck, and Lavinia grew very melancholy and much altered; no news could be got of young Du-mareSque. At length stie fell dange-rousty ill, infomuch that her life was in danger, and being light-headed, called perpetually on her lover. This opened the governor’s eyes, who finding She loved this stranger, lost all patience. She was now his only child, and all his ambitious hopes were coinprehended in her being nobly difpofed of. The noblest and wealthiest gentlemen in the place made their addrestes to her,
E 3	and
7S The HISTORY or
and would have been proud of having her: but She was attached to a man whoSe father was only a merchant, married to a Second wife, by whom he had younger children to jenen his fortune ; befides he was a protestant, and that alone was enough to make him reject the match; in fine, he was at his wits end; the phyficians told him medicines could do no good, he must refign her to death, or bring the perfon to her whom She loved. This expedient was death to him, yet he could not confent to lofe his darling, the lovely Lavinia ; at last he Sent for young Dumarefque, who was brought pinioned under a guard like a criminal, and expected nothing but death; he had been fick a confiderable time ®f an ague and fever, which was turned to a yellow jaundice. So that he was So altered, that his friends would Scarce have known him. Being brought tp the castle, and carried up into a room, the governor came to him with looks that exprested the inward distraction
of
Mifs Harriet Montague. 7^
of his mind. Stranger, Said He, what would you do to gaiit .your freedom ? nothing, he replyed fiercely, that -Should be injurious to my honour or confcience: I am now indifferent to. life, and would not thank Shat man who, having injured me. Should ask me pardon and releafe me; you may ufe me as you pleaSe, you have treated me fo ill already, that I expected neither justice nor favour from you. The governor could not but admire young Dumarefque’s bravery in Secret, but yet Seemed angry; and anSwered, fir, do you confider whom you Speak to, and that your life is at my difpofal ? yes I do, fir. Said DumareSque, and. have Spoke my thoughts. Well fir, faid the governor, I acknowledge I have uSed you Somewhat roughly ; but had you lost Such a Son as I have, killed by your friend’s raSh attempt, 'which has broke my fon’s heart and Harriot's peace, you would doubtlefs have acted like me; but I have nowbut one daughter (here he wiped off the falling tears^
E 4	do
«0 The HI ST OR Y OF
do you refpect her ? young Duma-reSque alarmed at theSe words, an-fwered hastily, yes, and honour her above the world, nay dare to tell you that I love her, and that it is my greatest ambition to die at her feet, if fate would permit me; nor is there a thing on earth for which I would wiSh to live befide herSelf. For her fake anfwered the governor, you Shall not only live, but be freed. At thefe words he took him by the hand, and calling in a fer-vant, who unbound him, he led him to Lavinia’s chamber, who was fo weak that fhe had been many days confined to her bed. Here my dear child, faid the governor, is the gentleman you fo much refpect ; I Shall leave you together. He was So disordered, being forced to stifle his refentments and con-, strain his pride, that he immediately withdrew. Lavinia lifting up her eyes, viewed young Dumarefque with much concern, unable to Speak, his altered face too well informed her of the treat-^ment he had met withal j whilst he
feeing
Mifs Harriot Montaoi;e. Si
feeing her, whom he So dearly prized, in a condition So unlikely to recover, fetched a deep figh, and falling on his knees by the bed, catched her hand, and raifing it to his lips. Said with a low voice, ‘ Muft we then meet to part ‘ So Soon again, and must death de-‘ prive us of that happineSs we might * now posteSs? Speak, divine creature, ‘ what hopes ? “ If, Said She, there is “ a cordial to restore me to my health again, it is the fight of you, a blef-“ fing I defpaired of. Say, does my “ cruel fither relent, will he confent “ to make us happy ? and has he granted you your liberty If So, I “ will endeavour to live,” At thefe words, he fell into a great tranfport ; and the governor entering, faid a great many obliging things to him. In fine, Lavinia in a Short time recovered, and was married to DumareSque, on his promifing to refide there, and not return to Virginia to live. But poor Harriot, tho glad of her lister’s good fortune, and pleafed to converfe with
E 5 Dumarefque
4
S5 The HISTORY OF
DumareSque, of whom stie learned all that had befallen the unfortunate Leander, yet could get no Satisfaction, or find means to go to him, the governor having took Such meafures that no perfon could enter or go out of the Seaports without his knowledge. Duma-refquc could not as yet propofe going to Virginia, but fuppofed his friend would Shortly arrive, and that his dear Lavinia^s interest and his, with his father-in-law, was Sufficient to procure his content to the unfortunate Leander’s marriage with Harriot. Thus they stattered themfelves ; but a Spaniard's revenge must be gratified ; and they never, or very rarely forgive an injury. Leander having procured a Vestel to carry him, and taking a considerable fum of money from his uncle. Set fail from Virginia, and arrived at the island of St. Domingo about a month after his kinfman'^s marriage. He no Sooner fet his foot upon the Shore, filled with expectations of teeing his dear Harriot^ but he was Seized
by
I
Mifs Harriot Montague. 83
by ruffians, bound band and foot, and carried aboard another strip, where he was put in irons, and Sailed the next morning, he knew not whither. The fame night that he was Seized, the captain of the Ship that brought him, received a mestage from the governor to depart the ifland that moment, or expect to be treated as an enemy, and his Ship to be feized. He obeyed immediately, finding that neither threats nor intreaties could avail him. This news never reached Harriot’s ear; and poor Leander, overwhelmed with dest pair, was carried up the great river Oroonoko, and fet on stiore amongst the favages, being carried in a boat up to the river Paria, where he expected nothing but to be murdered, and eaten by the barbarous Indians, who dwelt in huts, and are under no civil government. Theyfpeak no language, but a jargon that no European understands. The cruel Spaniards unbound him, gave him a fword, a gun, and a horn of powder, with a pouch full of
bullets
84 The HISTORY OF
bullet and fhot; telling him if he offered to make the least attempt to follow them, they would kill him on the fpot. He little regarded what they Said, being bothXveak and over-whelmed with the dreadful profpect he had before him of being left in a strange place, from whence there was no probability of efcaping; a place which we Europeans are little acquainted withal amongst Savages, whofe language and customs, he was an entire stranger to, that he fat down upon the ground, and casting his eyes round wept bitterly : then looking up to heaven, beSought God to look upon him, and deliver him from the miferies of life. Whilst he was thus employed, the villains retreating to their boat were Set upon by a party of favages, about a hundred in number, many of whom fell by the Spaniard’s fhot, who discharged their guns and pistols at them, which obliged the Indians to give back. The Spaniards being but €%ht in number, and Some af them
woun-
/
Mifs Harriot Mo ntagve.
Wounded, retired towards the fhore to get into their boat; but, to their great furpriSe, found it gone; for their companions that were left to take care of it, being Shot at with arrows by the Savages, who from the rocks Shot down upon them, concluded their companions dead, made off to their fhip with all the fpeed they were able. The cruel Spaniards now too late repented the wicked deed they had done, and feeing death at hand, trembled at future punifhments; defpair urged them on, and they turned back and purfued their enemies, who fled before them to the place where poor Leander, roufed with the noife of their guns and Swords, was standing as a man who was prepared for death, and unconcerned at whatever happened : but when they called to him to help them, crying forgive and join with us ; Christianity, and the gene-rofity of his great foul, made him forget the injuries they had done him; and like a lion roufed from his den,
faU
#
S6 The HISTORY OB
fall on the Savages till they had all left the place. Then thinking it iinSafe to pnrSue them further, he adviSed the Spaniards to retreat towards the river under the covert of Some rock; they consented, and hasted thither, there they found a great cavern in the fide of a rock, into which they entered with joy, and being quite Spent, and three of them dangerousty wounded, they fat down on the ground to rest, destitute of food or any necestaries. That night the three wounded men expired ; a fad admonition to the rest, who were conScious they deferved no lefs. They were now Sincerely peni* tent, and conSnlted with Leander, whom they reSolved to obey in all things, what was best to be done; they knew they could not live without provifion, and though they hoped the boat would return to fetch them, yet that being uncertain, they must find fome means to Subfish At last they reSolved to go out of this diSmal place
before it was broad day, and if pof-
fible
Mifs Harriot Montague,
lible Seize upon one of the huts of the Savages, and Secure them, and So keep them as hostages, fending one at a time to fetch food for-them, and by stgns threaten to kill the rest if ne failed to return. They charged their fire-arms, and crept along the Shore till they came to a hut, into which they entered, and found two Savages, a woman, three children, and an European man, as his complexion Shewed, asteep; they Seized the Savages, but for the white man, who appeared to be of a great age, he aroSe and embraced them, crosting himSelf; and lifting up his hands as a man overjoy’d, he Spake to them in the Latin tongue, deliring to know who they were and whence they came. T he Spaniards afraid to Speak the true cauSe coming thither. Said they were come on fhore in their boat in Search * ©f water, and being Set upon by the Savages, had been detained there whilst the boat went off; thoSe they
left in it being as they Suppofed frighted
\
} • •
18 The HISTORY OF
cd away by the noiSe of their guns. The old man Spoke to the Indians in their tongue, and they immediately fell at the Spaniard’s feet, killing them, and bowing down their heads in token of obedience. The old man told Leander that he had lived twenty years in that country ; that he was a Benedictine monk, born at Valladolid in Spain, and thence Sent to Peru, from whence he had travelled to this place by land; that he had learned the language of thefc Savages, and living amongst them, gained their esteem, and converted many to chrif-tianity ; that theSe poor Savages were fome of them, with whom he choSe to live, being very honest people; that he would undertake they Should Supply all their wants, and be very ferviceable to them; that the Savages they had fought with were the enemies of the prince that governed that part of the country, and ufed frequently to invade him, and carry off feme of his people, whom they eat,
as
Mifs Harriot Montaovi.
3is his Subjects did them; but that now he had perfuaded a great many from , doing it, and pretty well broke them of thoSe barbarous customs. He then defired the Spaniards to fit down with him, and take fome refreshment without fear. After which he Said he would conduct them to a place where they might live Securely, till he could find means to procure their return to theistand of St. Domingo or Virginia, offering to be their guide to Cartha-gena, from whence they iiiight get fhipping to either place. Leander returned him a thoufand acknowledgments, and in liis foul greatly admired the providence of God, but wanted an opportunity to inform him of the Spa-nisti villainy in bringing him thither, and to warn him not to be too free in discovering any fecret retreat to them, which he was defirous to conceal, though his countrymen; for though they appeared fincerely penitent, yet he feared to trust himSelf with them
return to the istand of St, Domingo,
refolv-
90 The HISTORY ©F
refblving to go to Virginia, and not venture to go there any more ; concluding in himSelf, that if Harriot’s affection for hina continued fincere, She would, now being a widow, find means to get away and come to him thither; and that if at his return to Virginia, he could hear nothing of her nor his dear friend, he would apply to the SpaniSh Vice-Roy at Mexico for justice; and being a native of France, he doubted not of obtaining it, stnce France and Spain were at peace. He and the rest fat down with the good monk; the poor Savages, who were by profestion fishermen, fet bread and cold drested fiSh before them, with Some meat and broth which they had boiled the day before for the humble priest and themfelves ; this they had warmed over a fire which they made in the hut with a few stones Set in form of a hearth, with a hole made in the ground, fetting the pot on the stones,
and making a fire underneath: they
gave
MiSs Harriot Montague. 91
gave them alSo drink and rum, which greatly refreShed them.
Leander whispered the monk that he wanted to Speak with him alone ; he took the hint, and after eating, adviSed the Spaniard’s to lie down on the clean straw which the poor Savages had laid for them in one corner of the hut, the only bed he and they had ufed to lie upon ; there, Said he, " you may repofe yonrfelves,. wshilfi your leader and I difcourfe. They readily complied glad to take fome rest. Whilst he and Leander walked over the hill, they defcended into a fine valley, at the bottom of which was a little kind of copfe or thicket, compofed of stately tall trees and clofe quickfet hedges. By the way Leander told him his story; the monk detesting their bafenefs, told him he fhould return no more to them, but abide with thofe that he had placed in that little cell to which he was going to carry him : there you will find. Said
he, a gentleman and lady whofe con-
verfa-
• *
4
92 The HISTORY OF
verfation will make you think the timi no way tedious whilst you stay here it is a month fince they were cal away upon this Shore, and by m means, through the mercy of God pfeServed as you have been. I bean a dreadful storm in the dead of th night, and walking out on the fhor fo foon as day»break to fee what mil chief that fad night had done, dil cerned at fome distance two women one richly drested, the other like he Servant, wringing their hands, an( lamenting over a perfon who lay oj the fands, as I fuppofed, dead; th lady exprested the most extravagan concern that ever I beheld. I madi what haste I could to their astistance and at my approaching her was ex tremely furprifed; She was young anc fair as an angel, her hair was hanging loofe, and wet as was her habit, bu She had a necklace and pendants o diamonds, with a stomacher tha dazled my eyes; She was drested ir
a. Spanim drefs, her vest was blad
velvet
MIfs Harriot Montaguk.
Velvet, her petticoat gold tifTue, bracelets of pearl; and in fine, I never Saw a perSon of greater beauty, or who appeared more like a woman of quality than the distreffed Ravina, for that is her name; the man that lay at her feet as dead, appeared her equal in all kinds; he was young, handfome, richly drefled, and feemed just drowned. I staid not to deliberate, but list-ted him up, faying in Spanifh, which I fuppofed She fpoke, God comfort and help you, fweet lady, has this gentleman been here in this condition any time? Oh no. Said She, he is just Cast upon the Shore. Then Said I, there is hopes ; I immediately turned his head downwards, and a great deal of water poured out of his mouth, he strewed Some Signs of life. Having thus given his stomach Some relief by this discharge of water, I Set him upright on the ground, chafed his temples, and taking a little bottle of rack, which I always carried about me, poured Some down his throat; in fine,
I brought
y
#
^4 The HISTORY OF
I brought him to life, and She ai the maid, her Servant, aflisting, v brought him into this little wood which we are going, a place whicl had choSen to make me a little orato in, and had cauSed my converted S vages to build with Some boarc making me a kind of little chapf with an altar, and a chamber or dc mitory behind it to repoSe in, in t heat of the day. Here I uSed to pt form the holy duties of my office, baptize, and give the blcfled euch riff, having under the altar a way in a little vault, where I keep poor ve: ments and what elSe belcngs to t] altar. I brought them to this plac fearing the jewels She had on, ai her beauty, might tempt the Savag to Some wickehnefs; for Should tl favage prince Manca, who gover this part of this barbarous countr hear of or get fight of this fair E ropean, he would have her for 1 brntiSh pleafure in Spite of all intre: ties or refistance j therefore 1 Secure
h
t
Mifs Harriot Mont AGUE,
tier here, where file has remained a whole month concealed. Her adventures, and the brave Bellarlo her huff band*s, you Shall know from them-felves: in this place and company I will leave you, and at my return to your companions, tell them a wild beast came out of a wood and devoured )^ou, fo fend them away by the first opportunity, and I will dif-gnife and conduct you, Ravinia, her hushand and fervant, to Carthagena, from whence we will go together for Europe, or where you pleafe; for i am weary with living amongst Savages, and having but a little time more to live in the world, am defiroiis to Spend it in my convent amongst my countrymen and friends, who may lay me to rest when dead amongst my ancestors. The harci-Ihips I have endured for twenty years in this place, have fo broke my con-‘stitution, that I am not able to hold it much longer. By this time they were come to the wood, and ending
their
A^6 The HISTORY Of
their diScourfe, the monk preSentci Leander to the gentleman and hi lady, who being acquainted with hi adventures, embraced and welcome( him to their poor habitation, overjoy ed that they fhould have Such cempa ny, and promiSed to go with him t Virginia, and procure him all the Sa tisSa<5iion he could defire oS the gc vernor of the ifland of St. Domingc Ravina being the Vice-Roy's daugh ter. But words cannot exprefs Lean der's furprife at the first fight of thef strangers; he thought Ravina fo beau tiful, that She excelled all her fex her air, her Shape, drefs and face and the gloominefs of the place fh' was in, filled him with an unufua veneration and refpe<5i for her. Bel lario was tall, finely fhaped, and ha( a majestick fweetnefs in his look tha commanded the refpect and gainet the love of all that Saw him. Thei Servant was a young Italian maid who though of an olive complexion
was very agreeable, well fhaped, ant
hac
Mifs Harriot Montague. 9^
had eyes So black and Shining, that it was dangerous to look upon them. The monk uSed to Send them pro-vifions by this girl, whoSe name was Philinda,. having been christened by Ravina who took her when a child, and had brought her up. Philinda went every morning to the hut to fetch Such poor food as the monk could procure for them ; they drank water from an adjacent Spring, had Some poultry that they kept in the wood to Supply them with flefh and eggs, there being plenty of fowl in ■ thofe parts, as iikewife roots: the country being not very well peopled, they lay on straw ; and there growing very good grapes in the valleys, they had hung fome up to dry in the fun Upon the hedges, and Squeezing the juice out of others, drank of it instead of wine." Thus li^fe great people, who had been ufed to all the delicacies in nature, and had never stept but upon down, and ufed to have the finest clean linen every day, were now
VoL, II,	F	con-
9S The HISTORY OF
content to live in the poorest manner, and Sound that it was postible to live without all thoSe things that a plentiful Sortune SurniShes. The monk having thus introduced Leander, and stayed Some time with them, took leave ; and then Leander being in-treated, entertained them with a more particular account of his life and adventures. After which Bellario returned the favour with the relation of his and Ravina, being Seated under a fine Spreading tree near the door of their cottage, it being now the clofe of the day, and a fine evening, Phi-linda being very near them milking two tame Ihe-goats which the monk had Sent thither, and were of great Service to them.
They being all Seated commanding on the leSt fide a fine view of the river Oroonoko, which discharged itfelf into the Sea fronting them, and on the right, a fine range of cedar trees : in this delightful place Bellario began his relation in thefe words: I stiould first relate
my
Mist Harriot Montague. 9a
my dear Ravinast birth, and Speak of her family. She was the only daughter of the marquis of Castile, who is descended of one of noblest families in Italy, though born a Spaniard: her mother was daughter of Don Lorenzo, lord of Placentia, a Castilian lord of great merit and fortune. The marquis being a great favourite to the king of Spain, was appointed vice-roy of the Indies in the year 1692, at which time Ravina was thirteen years of age. He arrived Safely at Mexico the Same year with all his family, and has refided there ever fince, which is now ten years, I am the Son of Don Alvares de Mendoza, an Arragonian lord, a man of equal birth and fortune with Ra-vina’s father; but there was a mortal hatred between our two families, by reaSonof a fatal accident thathappened in my infancy: my father had a lister, who was esteemed one of the fairest and most accomplished young ladies in Spain; She was but fifteen when my
father brought her to court; there a
F 2	young
100 The HISTORY OF
young Castilian cavalier, who was a co« lonel of the guards, and nephew toRa-vina’s father, faw and fell in love with my aunt, who was already promifed to a lord of the first quality and fortune in Arragon : he courted her privately by means of a Servant, who was in his interest; and having gained my aunds affection, at length obtained the last favour. It was not long after this unhappy converfe had been between them, before the lord to whom She was promifed arrived, and She was constrained to marry him: he fufpecting her virtue, being fenfible She was no virgin, became furioufiy jealous; yet concealed his thoughts from her and all the world, refolving to stay till he had difcovered the happy rival that had been before-. hand with him, before he let his refent-ments break forth: for thefe reafons he gave her opportunities of feeing her lover, carrying her down to a country-feat not far from Madrid, which he had Fought fince his marriage, under pretence of obliging her, but indeed with
defign
‘ MiSs Harriot Montague, ioi
defign to discover the fatal Secret. Here he often left her for a night or ^vo, whilst he went and stayed at Madrid ' with the king; the unfortunate Don Lorenzo (her lover) failed not to Supply his place in her arms, going difguifed to a peafant’s houfe at a village near, from whence (attended only by one Servant) he entered the gardens, and went into her apartment by a ladder of ropes, which She ufed to fasten for him on a balcony that opened into her chamber. Her lord (the incenfed Ar-ragonian)foon difcovered all by means of a page whom he had employed to watch; and one night he concealed himfelf in a fummer-houfe in the garden, having only this page with him, both well armed; and the moon Shining very bright, faw Don Lorenzo go into her chamber by the ladder, which he left hanging in order to his retreat, as ufual. He stayed till he fuppofed he was undrest and gone to bed; then he mounted the ladder, followed by his page, and coming into the chamber,
F 3	where
102 Tlie HISTORY OF
where a wax-light was burning on the table, approached the bed Ibftly. Don Lorenzo havingheard Some little noiScj was started up, and Sat upright in the bed : This gave the enraged hushand a fair opportunity for his revenge, he stabbed him to the heart with his dagger ; the poor lady Shrieking out, he tore her out of bed by the hair, cut out her tongue, and difcharging one of his pistols in her face, which he had loaded with fmall bird-Shot on purpoSe, left her on the bed blind, her eyes and face being in a most dreadful condition, all tore to pieces, and full of the stiot. Never was a more tragick Scene than this chamber appeared; She looked like the wronged Calistst, and the unfortunate Lorenzo lay weltering in his blood, expiring on the floor.
Thus one imprudent flnfui action Gceafioned the riin of three noble ac-complistted pershns ; nay, involved their families in the greatest misfortunes, and have intailed them upon their posterity; the first ground of
which
MIfs Harriot Montague. 103
V.
which was the ladies parents, who not consulting her inclination, matched her against her will; want of a firm virtue in her made her yield to another, when She was pre-ingaged by them * and an unchristian Spirit of revenge governed her hushand, and made him commit two dreadful murders, and incur the anger of heaven, and the justice of the laws : which though he eScaped by flight and his prince’s favour, yet it ruined his peace and fortune. I hope it will be a war^-ning to all who hear this diSmal story, to avoid the like crimes. The diS-tracted hushand having thus difchar--ged his fury, thought of his own Safety ; and taking Some gold and his wife’s jewels out of a cabine, in that room, defcended the ladder, and attended by his page, went out of another gate than that by which his rival had entered; and mounting his horfe, which he had left therewith his page, they rode away as Swift as postible to a place twenty miles farther, where
F 4	he
• '
104 The HISTORY of
he took flielter in a. convent of Be-nedidhne monks. Don Lorenzo’s gentleman finding his master stayed longer than ufual, grew nneaSy, and quitting his horfe ventured up the ladder, thinking he rnight be afleep; but entering the room, he was filled with Such horror and amazement, that he alarmed all the Servants with the outcries he made. The poor lady was not dead ; She was fuch an objecst as would have excited compastion in the heart of a barbarian. It was eafy to guefs the caufe of all thefe dreadful deeds, had the gentleman not revealed them by his lamentations over his dead lord ; but he concealed nothing in his pastion, but too well explained the ladies crime and his master’s.
e
Not to detain you longer on So fad a fubjedt, a Surgeon being fetched, the
poor lady was put into bed, and her face drested, but there being little ap^ pearance of her recovery, which indeed would have been a greater mif-
fortune
s
MiSs Harriot Montague. 105
fortune to her than death, her confefibr was Sent for, who prayed for her, and gave her all the Spiritual comfort he was able; and though She could not fpeak, yet by figns She testified her repentance. He stayed with her many hours, till finding the anguiSh of her wounds and lofs of blood took away her SenSes by a strong fever, he left her to the care of her Servants, and aSIisted Don Lorenzo’s gentleman to remove his master’s body into a hearSe the Servants had brought to carry him to his own houfe at Madrid. Then he returned to the lady, to whom he administered the last rites of the church, and about four in the morning She expired.
I need, not tell you how enraged my father, and all our family, was ' against the cruel Alvares, when this story was known ; nor were Don Lorenzo ’s friends lefs afflicted : but Alvares’s family did ail that was pof-Sible to obtain his pardon of the king, pleading the enormity of her crime,
"p r-	q nf"!
}o6 The HISTORY OF
and the justice of bis procedure; and that he could do no lefs than Sacrifice both her and her paramour to repair his honour ; that the injury was unpar-^ donable in both ; that the cruelty he had exercifed on his lady was excufa-blo, confidering the greatnefs of the provocation. In fine, they fald all they could in his defence, whilst her family and Don Lorenzo’s ufed all their interest against him, and were fo potent, that though the king was inclined .to forgive and only banifh him, yet he deferred to declare him-felf, and fo gave him time to get off with much wealth, having fold off Secretly and made conveyances of his estate, before a procefs could be got out against him : however, he was^ fried and condemned, when he was got out of the reach of the laws. My grandmother broke her heart for her unfortunate daughter. Ravina’^s father and family, and mine, though they joined in profecuting Don Alvarez, yet conceived a mortal averfion to one
anor-
MiSs Harriot Montague, 107
another, and much blood was Spilt on both fides by duels and rencounters ; fo that Some few years after the king honoured her father with this great post in the Indies, to prevent a farther effufion of blood and quarrels. I was too young at this fatal jundiure, when thefe misfortunes happened; but Ra-vina and I growing older, my foul was charmed with her beauty ; and though I could fee no hopes of ever gaining her’s or her father’s confent, yet I could not forbear loving, or defist from purfuing her : my quality and fortune made way, and having nothing to urge against me but a family difference, the charming Ravina confulting reafon and religion, faw the folly and injustice of that procedure, and gave ear ta my perfuafions: At last She ge-laeroufly confested a pafifion for me, and promifed to he mine provided I could gain her father^s confent. I then applied to my father, who acquainted the king with our mutual affection,
and pleading that this was the only
way
f
108 The HISTORY©?
way to reconcile the two Samilies, and put an end to that fatal strife that had been of fuch ill confequences to both, prevailed With his majesty to propofe it to Elvira’s father; but he delaying to give a pofitive anfwer, having before obtained the viceroystiip, went off without it, and fo obliged me to follow him. I obtained a letter from the king, in which he even commanded him to give me Ravina, and let our marriage be forthwith confummated my family and hers all joined in this, and I departed Spain with a whole packet full of letters to this effedf. I was certain of not being refufed now, stnce he did not dare to difoblige or difobey the king. I arrived Safely at Mexico, and was well received according to my expedSation, and Soon after married to my dear Raviiia : and now being completely happy, we studied how to divert ourfelves, and take all the innocent diverfions the land and fea afforded; being at a plea-
.litre-hotife of the governor’s on the
'' lake.
MiSs Harriot Montague, ioo
lake, we went aboard a yatch one evening to take the air upon the Sea, it being fine weather, and reSolved to Spend the night in nrirth and pleaSure. We had Several ladids and gentlemen with ns, with mufick. We Supped, danced, and were very merry; but about midnight a terrible storm blew, after having been tosted about many days and nights, not knowing where we were, we were driven upon a bank of fand near this Shore. Here we lay bulging till Such time as the yatch w^as torn to pieces, then every one Shifted for himfelf: Ravina and our friends were got into the boat, I placed myfelf near to her, refolving to bear her to. shore, if postible, on my back, in cafe the boat should not hold out the f orm to the shore, as it happened, for it was Soon Swallowed up in the waves l I catched fast hold of her, bidding her throw her arms about my neck; and it being now day, I made for the shore which I Saw before me ; but my strength being almost Spent before I
could
»
t
no The HISTORY Of
could reach it, just as I Selt the lane under my Sect I fainted; Ihe laying hold of me, pulled me up and Savec me. Philena having got hold of t plank that was floating, being part o: the sti’p, to which fhe clung very fast was by the providence of God Saved and the wind blowing diredlly to the Shore, She was thrown upon the fand; before us, and feeing my distrefs and Ravina’s, ran to her astistance, whe had otherwife periShed with me. The) dragged me on Shore out of the read of the waves, which would have washed us away ; there the good fathei came to our relief. Thus the divine providence has preferved our live? and yours in a miraculous manner, and will, I hope, furnish us with means to return to our homes in health and
Safety.
Thus don Bellaries ended his relation, and they pasted a few days as agreeably as the difmalnefs of their abode would permit, the monk vifited shem every day, when the Savages
were
MiSs Harriot Montague, iir
were gone a fifhing. One evening the monk returning home. Saw Some white men, who appeared to be Europeans by their habit, fitting round a fire boiling a pot on the Shore; their fire-arms being muSkets, lay by them. He Saw that a pinnace lay on the Shore, and diScerned the strip lying at anchor about halS a league off: he made figns to them to permit him to come near; they anSwered, and he hasted to them, and found they were come from the istand of St. Christopher’s, and bound to Spain: He told them of the Spaniards that he had faved, and prevailed with them to take them orr board their Ship; he went and called them, and they were overjoyed to get thence,, and meet with fuch a lucky opportunity; and the monk thanked God that he was rid of them, being uneafy whilst they were on that Shore, lest they Should discover his concealed friends whom he dearly esteemed, but thefe he ab-horred, as being villains,. They went
2.WZS
II2 The HISTORY OF
away that night, returning man thanks to him, and Seeming vei Sorry that Leander was not still alh to go with them; but hoping in then Selves, as it afterwards proved, th whensthey got to the istand of St. D mingo, the revengeful governor wou reward them highly, defigning tell him that they had difpofed him in the woods, where he h: been devoured by the wild beaf The glad monk carried the good net of their departure to his friends t next morning. Now they confult about getting to Carthagena ; by lai it was very dangerous, and by I very difficult; for they had the Sa\ ges to fear as they travelled, a: dreadful mountains and woods to p; through; no boat of strength fuffi ent to carry them, and not provifi enough for a voyage of fo many ds at fea; and what was worfe, no pi to guide the vestel, if they had h one. In fine, they knew not wl courfe to take : at last they refolv
Mifs Harriot Montague. 113
to venture to croSs the great river Oroonoko in the Savages fiShing-boat. This being reSolved, trusting to providence, they .prepared to go; but the night before they were to depart, they Saw a man running down the adjacerit hill, purSued by a fierce tyger: he had a drawn Sword in his hand, and a strange-faShioned coat made of beasts Ikins : he had no Shoes or stockings, but pieces of bears fkins tied about his legs with twigs; his head had a strange fur cap on; his face they could Scarce distinguish, till coming into the wood, he climbed up a tree, and the beast purfuing him to the foot of it, Lean-der, who had fetched a gun, Shot it dead, having perceived the man was a white, and his countenance no Indian. No fooner was the beast killed, but the man leaped down from the tree, and ran to embrace his benefactor, whofe furprife cannot be exprest when he faw his face, and heard him call him by his name, and knew it
was the honest captain of the Ship
who
II4 The HISTORY of
who lived at Virginia, and had carried him and his friend Dumarefquc to the ifland of St. Domingo. Elvira
and her dear Bellario, who were retired at the strangeCs approach, hearing them talk, came forth, and invited him in, being together in the hermitage, for that was properly the name of their cell: they alked him to eat, a favour he gladly accepted of; Phrlena fet what proviiions they had before him, as cold fowl, goats milk, bread, dryed grapes, and water, and wine made of their juice ; a noble feast to a man who had lived for above five weeks on roots and fruits. Such as the woods produced, and had not tasted any drest food, neither bread, meat nor fiSh. Being much refrefhed, he related to them the manner of his coming thither.
I was going on a voyage for Some merchants, faid he, to Barbadoes about fix weeks ago, my Ship being heavy laden with goods for that place, at which I was to unload, and take in
others
Mifs Harriot Montague,
bthers Sor other ifiands : I had a Sair gale of wind and good voyage, till I came near the Summer-Iflands; then a storm aroSe and drove the Ship up this river, where it was daShed to pieces against Some rocks, amongst Some unknown, and I SuppoSe uninhabited istands. I had but eight men and a boy aboard, two of whom were blown off the Shrouds into the Sea: ihoSe that were left got out the boat, and we quitted the Shattered vestel, which was full of water above the first deck, and committed ourSelves to the mercy of God. The night was dark as pitch, and we knew not which way to steer. At last the boat, unable to hold out against the dreadful waves that bore her up to the Skies one moment, and then opening. Seemed to fink her into the bottomlefs deep, the wreck being filled with water by a great Sea that waShed over her, funk; and then we gave ourSelves over for lost, and were ail Separated, never to
meet again in this world, I fear. Nature
J
ii6 The HISTORY OF
ture taught me, though hopeleSs, to If^uggle for life; and it being jufi break of day, I difeerned the Shore, and made for it; the wind fitting fair, helped me greatly. At last I reached it half dead, and fitting down on the fide of a rock to recover myfelf, looked round to fee where I was, and foon found that I was cast on this in-hofpitable Shore, where I must expest to be devoured either by men or beasts ; this made me almost repent that I had eScaped drowning. I had no arms nor food, and my foul being full of horrible apprehenfions of the , Cannibal-Savages, I fought for a place
to hide myfelf in, and looking about, crept into a hole in a great rock, not far from that on which I fat down ; and being quite fpent with the fatigue of the past night, I fell into a profound steep, out of which I was awakened fome hours after by two Savages, who were stripping me, and had already gpt my fhoes and stockings ; but going to pull off my coat and waistcoat,
which
Mifs Harriot Montague,
which they could not do without lifting me up, I awakened, and looking up, caught one of them by the throat; and wrenching this Sword out of his hand, he broke from me, carrying away my clothes, which he held fo fast that he tore my coat and waistcoat off as he broke from me, and they both fled wdth incredible celerity.
I was now left almost naked, and fearing they would return wdth more Savages, and fall upon me, I fled up into the woods, not knowing where elSe to hide myfelf, but amongst the trees and buShes. And now being ready to faint with hunger, I fearched about for wild fruits and roots, and eat whatever 1 could find, which, alas! instead of fatisfying my hungry ,^ stomach, made me fick. I fat in a .
y	>* T*
tree all that night, and the next day fo foon as it was light, crept down to the Shore, to fee if I. could efpy a boat, or any of my stiilors who might have efcaped like me to the Shore; and there, to my great furprife, I faw
my
11^ ^The HISTORY Of
my boat lying on the Sands, and was fanSported to find her there, thinking I might get off with her the next tide, and reach Some oS our ifiands. So Soon as the wa ter stowed, and the Sea com-ing in, fet her astoat; I ran down, and leaping into her, steered her by the rudder along the fhore, but Sound I was not able to govern her at Sea: I wanted strength and more hands, had neither oars nor Sails, yet I Seared to loSe her; and finding I could not venture out with her, I reSolved, if postible, to Secure her in Some place where the Savages fhould not find her, in hopes that I might meet with Some Christians here whom chance had broiight, like me, to this Barbarous land, who would be glad to eScape hence, and astfist me to get away in her. I brough the boat accordingly . along the fhore, till I came to a kind -of a creek. So covered with trees, that it was almost impostible to perceive any thing that lay there. I brought hex into this creek, at the end
of
MiSs Harriot Montague, iio
oS which was a very thick wood ; and having hailed her on stiore, broke down a great many of the green branches of the trees, and made a kind of bower over it, fo that it lies quite covered ; I have lain aboard it every night fince: I have every day ranged about for foocl, and lived chiefly on the eggs of the fea-fowl and turtles, which I found in the rocks and OH the Sands, nor did I dare attempt to make a fire to drefs any thing, for fear of difcovery, fo I fustained life by fucking them, and eating turtles raw, laying the flelh in the fun till it was hot, and then I eat it as favorily as if it had been the greatest dainty in the world. I knew not what to do for clothes, but one day finding two bears cubs in a wood, I killed and stead them, hanging their steins on the hedges to dry, thefe I made into the strange fafhioned coat I have on : I killed fome young goats alfo, and eating the stefh, made me a cap and fpatterdaShes with the fkins, as you fee.
But
no The HISTORY of
But I must now acquaint you with the most Surprifing accident that ever befel any man living. One morning roaming about a wood, I met with a young woman fair as Venus, but pale as death ; She was wrapped in a piece of Sailcloth, having nothing under but a fine Holland stiift, a white dimity petticoat and waistcoat, and no headclothes, but her hair, which was the finest light brown, hung in curls down to her waist; but all this was hid under her canvas wrapper ; she Seemed half famished, and was fo fur-prifed at the fight of me, fuppofing me a Savage, that she ran away from me as fast as she was able. I followed her till she ran into a cave, into which I entered, and getting hold ofher,fpoke in English, ashing her who she was, and of what nation. She Seemed Surprifed to the last degree, and Said, pray do not kill or be rude with me ; I am a poorimfortunate maid, Said she,whoby cruel guardians was trepanned and Sent away for Jamaica; but our ship being
drove
Mil^ Harriot Montague. 121
drove on this coast, was lost, and I with one young man, who was the captain’s kinSman, were Saved on this unhappy coast: here we lived together for three days, but the fourth, going out of the cave as uSual to feek for food, he never returned, and is I fear murdered. I have lived in this difmal place two months, all alone, under the most dreadful appre-henfions imaginable, almost famifhed and pinched with cold and damps; not daring to go far from my cave for fear of meeting the Savages, I was charmed with her tears, and pierced to the foul with her condition. I told her my story, and begg’d her to go along with me, and live in the boat, promifing to protect her with my life, and provide her with Such food as I coiild get; nay more, that I would offer no rude-neSs to her. She, with fome difficulty, yielded to my request, fb I conducted her to my bower, and we VoL. II.	G	have
1
;i^ 2 The HISTORY OF
have liv’d together three weeks, I left her there about two hours fince, when going out for food, I met with the ravenous beast you kill’d, and fear’d to retreat towards my boat least he should foljow and fright her^ or having got the feent of food,
, Some bones and remains of turtle which we could not eat, being Scatter’d up and down. Surprize her ia my absence; for thefe reafons I drove him over the hill, led by the providence of God doubtlefs to this place. Ahd now with your leave, I will . haste and fetch my dear Polly, whom 1 have promis’d to make my wife fo foon as I reach a Christian Shore: She is in pain for my return, I am certain. You fhall make your promife good to her. Said Le-ander, to-morrow morning; we have here a worthy Christian priest who Shall marry you ; and Since you have a boat able to carry us all, he
Shall ftirnish us with provisions fuffi-
A
cient
S
MiSs Harriot Montaoue. 123
«
dent for a voyage to one of the Summer islands, from whence we may get a Ship to carry us to Virginia, and thence to what other place we think fit. The captain hasted to fetch the lady, who in leSs than an . hour reach’d the Hermitage, and was joyfully receiv’d by Bellario, Leander, and Ravina; who never Saw Such a figure as She appear’d, wrapp’d in her canvas stiroud, for Such it feem’d j a habit which very ill fuited her beautiful face and charming mien. After eating together with thankful hearts, as - much transported at this meeting as if they had forgot their misfortunes, they laid them down to steep on straw, having recommended themfelves to God ; and rested fweetly, having no load of guilt upon their confciences, biit minds re-fign’d to the Supreme Difpofer of all things. Next morning the monk vifited them, and was entertain’d
. '	G 2	with
/
J24 The H I S T O R y of
with the history of theSe new guests, whom he immediately marry’d; faying, My children, it is not fit that you Should live in fin ; and Since the necestity of your condition obliged you to live together, and a too near intimacy has I find enfiSd, it is fit that you Should be join’d by the holy bonds of matrimony, that none amongst us may incur God’s anger, but that bleSstngs may attend us. And now they thought of nothing but preparing for their departure from this place. The monk inform’d the honest Savages, whom he offer’d to take along with them, and they executed his commands with Such alacrity, that he was Surpriz’d. In three days they got out the boat and vidluard her, carrying aboard boil’d fowls, Salted fiSh, and store of ' , bread, with freSh'water in jars. The Savage and his Son made oars, well understanding the management
O	O
of a boat, and fasten’d their own
fifher-boat
MiSs Harriot Montague. 12^
fiSher-boat to her loaded with pro-vhions; they were perfedfly Skiird in all the turnings and rocks in this great river, knowing every iSland and bank of Sand ; but when out at Sea, the Virginia captain must direct them. All things being ready, our joyful Christians went on board, and the three w'ornen and children lay down in the boat, being cover’d over with Some boughs of trees; the monk, Leander, the captain, and and favages rowed and steered the boat, having made fails of what
'	O	^ V
the pocr favages procured. They pasted Safely out ot the river; and being at Sea, steered for Barbadoes, which they reached in a few days, having a fair wind and fine weather: they were well received by a merchant there, who was the captain’s friend, and Soon got a pastage to Virginia ; Bellario, and Ravina, with their maid Philena, going with them,
beeauSe they could get no Ship to
G 3	carry
%
126 The HI S TO R y OP
carry them to Mexico by reaSon of the war. When they arrived at Virginia, Leander had the agreea-' ble news, that his kinSman had in his abfence Sent a bark with letters for him from himSelf and Harriot, to ac-<]uaint him that the Governor was dead, and that they defigned to Sell off all their effcdts in the iffand of St, Domingo, and come for Virginia, leaving only Harriot’s two children behind, whom her hushand’s friends would not part with. He w,asSo transported with this news that he could
hardly be perSuaded to wait her coming, but would fain have gone to fetch her; but four days after hisarrival, she and Lavinia, with his faithful friend, arrived with an immenSe treafure. Never was amore moving fight than the meeting of thefe three perSons; Leander, clafping his dear Harriot, in his arms, stood motionlefs, as if he meant to die in that posture, and that his ravished Soul would make
its,
I
MiSs-HarPvIot Montagite. i2'7
ks way out ot his panting bofom info hers. His eyes Seemed, fixed on her Sace, the big drops eScapiug. them, whilst fiery love Sparkled in his eye-balls, as if the raging flame within Sent forth thofe chrystal drops: She hung upon his neck, and cry’d, ‘ Do Hive, and again See ‘ Leandei! Blest God, it is enough.*' Mean time DumarcSqne waked them from this biiSsSnl dreamy Saying,.
‘ My fiiend,.my kinSman, have you-
*	forgot me.? And must Lnot claim ‘ a Second embrace after Harriot has received your first.?’ At theSe words Leander,- turned,, and catched him in his arms; faying, ‘ My deareft ‘ friend, next to mv dear Harriot
*	yon are dear to me : the gbliga-‘ tions rhave to you are So great,.
*	that words cannot; e^preSs the ' grateful SenSe 1 have of them, nor ‘ my whole life Suffice to make re-‘ turns to you and her, tho’ wholly ^ employed in your'Service.’ Lean-
G 4;.	der’S'
4
'128 The HISTORY of
,der’s uncle and his lady interrupted them, or doubtleSs they had never known when to leave off this tender conversation. Leander was So irn-patient to lecure his happineSs; that he never gave over importuning Harriot till She conSented to marry him that very night; and the monk accordingly wedded them, and they were mutually plealed : Sor what greater SatisSadtion can mortals attain in this life, than to poffeSs the perSon they ardently love, eSpecially when they have So long languished Sor one another, and been So long feparated.f* this IS a pleaSure none but lovers can have a true notion of. Eternal bliSs ■is comprehended in this one thing. Viz. to poilcts all we defire, or is worthy our afSecstion ; and whilst we are mortal, and on this fide the grave, nothing can equal the pleasure oSpostesting the perSon we love. Bellario and Ravina were Sliarers of their friends good fortune, and were
dcfi rolls
MiSsJflARRieT Montague. 129
defirous to continue with them Some months, with the monk, who re-Solved to go with Leander and his dear Harriot to France ; they offering to provide Sorhim So long as he pleaSed to stay there.
During their refidence at Virginia, they-^ast the time very agreeably together : Leander’s uncle and his lady, who still retained an affeSfion for Leander, entertained them very nobly; and Harriot, who was now a Sincere Roman Catholick, prevailed with the monk to be her chaplain, and to promiSe to continue with her the rest of his days: they took all the diverfions the place afforded, walking, riding, dancing, and feasting One evenin.q; Harriot in-treated the monk to relate the ad-ventures of his life : certainly. Said She, they must be very extraordinary, fince you have pasted thro’ So many countries. He, Smiling, anSwered, Yes, Madam, I have met with many
G 5	strange
130 The H I ST ORY OF
strange accidents, and am ready to
oblige you and the company with the relation of them ; nay, I will own my weaknestes, and give yon the story of my youthful follies. They all fat down under the Shade of Some trees on the banks ofa little rivulet by which they were walking ; and being all filent, he began his narrative thus.	,
I was born in Valladolid in Spain, my father was a grandee of a noble family, but having been refufed a a post at court, to which he believed himSclf to shave a right, he too freely Spoke his thoughts, and gave his enemies an opportunity to traduce him to the kin^, whoSe favour he lost, and So retired in diScontent to hia own feat at Valladolid. I was all the children he had, and defigned to be the heir of his honours and fortune. I was a student at a col-lege about fixteen, when it was my
misfortune to. See a farmer’s daughter,.
%
MiSs* Ha rrtot Mo nta o it£ . 131
ter, whoSe beauty made me her captive. Lstole out alone into the fields behind her Sather’s houfe
t
every evening fora month together ' before I Spoke to her; and there Saw her playing with the lambs, and i feeding the young goats; her plain drefs and innocent behaviour, made . her look more charming in my eyes •
than gold and diamonds; her beauty' and modesty were irrefistible, and-T loved' her' to ■ distraction.. 1st'
y
fine, 1 Spoke to her; told her my/ pastion, and found her wit and ap-prehenfion exceeded her face and years.. I Succeeded according to my wishes; gained her love, and reSol-ved to marry her; but being note old enough to be master of my Self,, and having no fortune in my power,.. Lwas'forced to defer doing it till I!
was of age, and had got Some fet-
tlement in the world : for thefe rea-fons I purSned my studies with grei tt application, reviving to be a phyfi-
G 6^	oian^
332 The HISTORY of
cian or lawyer, that I might Soon be able to provide for mySelf, In the mean time I promifed my dear Alicia to maintain her as my wife, and accordingly paid her father the half of the penfion, my father allowed me, for her board ; bought her filk petticoats, ribbons and laces ; So that I half starved myfelf, and grew very penurious in my own expences to provide for her; and stie foon grew to be So fine, and So like a lady in her air and behaviour, that the farmers daughters, and other country maids envied her, talked loudly of this strange alteration ; which, with my continual vifits at her father’s, tho’ I thought none obferved me, confirmed their fuSpicions of her being a mistreSs to me. This report foon reached the principal of the college’s ear, and he had me watched, and Sent my father word, who immediately Sent for me home, and Scolded me Sharply, commanding
MiSs Harriot Montague. 13
ing; me to declare the truth; on which I ingenuoussy confened my engagements with Alicia, and declared boldly, that I would marry her or die. This So enraged my Sa-ther, to See his ambitious hopes thus crofled in me alSo, that he proceeded to threats: in Short, he was very Severe with me, put me into the hands oS a rigid tutor, who kept me as a prisoner ever in his fight. I was now eighteen, and Sancy’d mySelf a man Sufficient to manage mySelf. Alicia’s father was threatened, and turned out of his farm and livelihood by my father’s instigation, who was a true Spaniard in his refentments. Poor Alicia, who was now looked on as the ruin of her family, w^as drove to defpair; she Sent many letters to me, but none came to my hands; my father intercepted them all. She and her poor father and mother were retired to a village
twenty miles further, and had there
got
134 TKe, HTST O R Y m-.‘
■"n
got into a; little farm where theyc could'|ust get bread» I Sell lick with the distraDion of my mind, and was like to die ; but youth; and medicines recovered me, or rather the providence of God; which reServed-me for other nSes. So Soon as L was able to creep abroad, I went into the fields with my cruel tutor, and're--Solved to try to make my efcape, let the confequence be what it would ; -but knowing that without money L Should be no ways helpful to Alicia,, or be able to travel far without discovery, L consulted what courSe to-take, and at last concluded to rob my cruel ambitious fatheiy wh'ofe strong box was never without a good Sum of gold in it, stood in a clofet in his chamber, and it was impostlble for me to get at it but by going in at the ■ window from the garden. I revolved in my mind many days what to do, before I could find whatcourfe.. to take 5. at last Lthought of an expedient;
f
MlSs Harriot Montaogr.
pedient, which was this: my tutor [ay with me, I plyed him with wine at Supper, So I roSe in the night when^ he was fast asteep, clapped a. gag in his mouth, tied his hands and feet-with my garters, tho’ not without: much struggling and Some noife; . for tho’ I had made all ready before I went to bed,’'and fastened his hands
^ A. i
Co the bed-post before he stirred, yet when I went to lie his feet, he waked, and opening his mouth to Speak, L clapp’d the gag, which was a piece of hard wood,, between his teeth^. stretching his jaws fufficiently, yet: he roared strangely, till I threatened to kill him with my pen-knife, which ' filenced him, for he was a great coward : then I got down from my chamber-window by a vine that' grew against the wall; and finding,; a ladder which the gardener always-left in a green houSe, the door of which I broke open, I Set it against my father^s clofet-window, and"
went
136 The HISTORY OP
went in, taking the strong box, which was not above two Soot and a half Square, but very heavy. I hasted down with it, and Set the ladder against the garden-wall, which I got over, and stood Some minutes conSuIting which way to go ; and confidered that if I was taken, my father would not hurt me farther than to chide and lock ms up : I was but weak, and could not go far. So I made towards a river, where there uSed to be a ferry-boat constantly, thinking to offer the old ferryman, who knew me, a piece of gold if he would carry me over, and convey my box for me to Some town where I might get a diSguife, and a horSe to carry me to Alicia's father’s, whoSe removal to the poor village I knew nothing of. It was about two o'clock in the morning wdien I left ' my father’s, nor was it above three miles to the ferry; but I was Ib
weak^
Y
0
MiSs Harriot Montague. 137
weak, and the box So heavy, that I was three hours before I reached it, I found the old man just launching his boat ; he lift up his hands at the fight of me, I knew it was in vain to diffemblewith him, So told him my story: the good old man’s heart melted with my fad tale ; he condemned my father, pityed me, and offered to Serve me faithfully on my promise not to let my father' ever know oS it; and I have made it my obfervation, that there is more com-pafiSion and true friendship amongst the vulgar (faid the good father) than amongst the great; for they are So engaged in their own private interests and defigns, and fo much at eafe, and unacquainted with mif-fortunes, that they have very little fenSe of other people’s, and forget that they may at one time or other stand in need of a friend themfelves; whereas the meaner people, who are
fenfiblc of the miferies of a low condition..
Tfie H I S T O K, Y or
dition, and dally meet with. diSap-pcintments, have a great* deal oS compailion, and readily affist others,. This good old man wept at my story,, carried me over,, and leaving^ his-boat in his Son’s care, went with me to a fisherman’s cottage, where he drested me in old boots, the maffa> old coat, thrum cap and worsted; mittins like a poor fiIher»boy ; them he engaged the man to go along with me wherever I pleaSed, fearing his
going with me himfelSwould diScovet;
me.. Now I began to think of rewarding him j„I knew not how to open the box^, and: had no money aibout me befides,, carrying the box was the ready ways to betray me :: L therefore reSblved to break it open, andi empty, it,, and throw it into the river, which I. accordingly, did ; and; was- greatly Surprized to. find two thouSand,, pistoles; and many gold and filver pieces of, foreign coin and-medals in it, befidesmy dead mother’s
jewels,
%
MiSs Harriot Montague.
jewels, with her picture Set round with brilliant diamonds, and the chief deeds of my Sather’s estate; in fine, enough to make Alicia and me completely happy in an humble retreat. I paid my old ferry-maa to his content, diSpoSed of the money and other things about me. Sewing the jewels and writings into my cloths, and posted away with my guide to the town where I had left Alicia ; there I w^as informed of what had befallen her father, and where they were gone to live. I hasted thither, and discharged my guide before I went to the houSe, lending him back with the horSes, he had hired to bring us; and then entered the poor cottage where She was, in fb great a tranfport of joy,, that running to her as she was fit-ing in a chair at work, I fell down, in a fwoon at her feet; She had nop time to know me before I fell, but yet did not sty from me, but lifting
c
I
&
140 The HIST O RY or
up my head to help me, Saw my face, and giving a great shriek, ^ fainted. Her mother coming in at the door, law us both lying on the floor, and crying out, waked me from my trance; T rofe and embraced her and my reviving miftreSs* I told them in few words how I got from my father’s, and what I had brought; that my defign was never to leave Alicia any more, but to live and die with her. The good man being called, we all rejoiced at our happy meeting, and coniulted what was next to be done ; it was altogether improper for me to stay there but a day, for there my father would be Sure to look for me, and where elfe to go or how to part with Alicia on any account, I could not reSolve j at last the good man pro-poled to me to go to a benedictine monk who was his confestbr, and trust him with the whole affair, and aSk his advice and ashstance:
he
MiSs Harriot Montague. 141
he was a man of fingular integrity and vast experience, a perfon of noble birfli and great years, I consented to this propofai, we went to him, he received us kindly in his cell; and after giving me Some gentle reprehensions for my undutiful-neSs to my father, finding me reSo-lute, and determined to marry Alicia; and fearing, I Suppofe, that if he refuSed to do that office for us, we might live together in a finful state, he at last conSented to my de-fires, and promifed to ferve us in all he was able, *He Sent me to a widow lady’s houfe five miles from thence near Soria, who was his aunt, and Sent Alicia’s father to fetch her thither alfo. In the evening he came to us, and that night I was made poffestbr of that lovely virtuous maid, whom I at his request Suffered to return home with her father the next morning, on condition
4
142 The H I S T O R Y OP
tion that fhe should return to me at night : this we did with defign that if my father Sent,' they should find her there, which would induce them to believe that I was not yet arrived, and would divert their pursuit of me for Some days, and give us time to get over the Pyrenian mountains into France, whither wc were refolved to retire. All things Succeeded as we expected : about noon officers came to fearch my father-in-law’s houfe, examined him, Alicia, her mother, and their man and maid, who all pretended ignorance; and finding they could get no Satisfaction or intelligence where I was, they went away: this Alicia gave me an account of at night. Father Dominic, the good benedictine, provided us horSes and a guide for the next morning, and gave me letters of recommendation to Several priests and perSons of quality in GaScoigne,
advifii)g
\ .
'MISsHarriotMontague. 143
Tdvifing me to fettle at or near Bearn. My dear Alicia and I, returning a thousand thanks to him and the lady, took leave; I prelented the father with twenty pistoles as a preSent for his convent, gave three amongst the lady’s Servants; and being both drested in metes clothes like Servants in livery-coats, being Some of the lady’s Servants clothes, we departed. I haa given Alicia’s father a hundred pistoles, and agreed that he and her mother Should come to us fo fbon as Alicia and I had taken ahoufe, and were Settled; we had very fine weather and a fafe journey, tho’ much fatigued in paf-fing the Pyrenean mountains : and having preSented my letters to the pershns to whom they were directed,
I was received by them with Such civility, and lb treated, that I was amazed, and no ways repented my leaving Spain : the gentry and clergy Seemed to vie who should be
kindest
V
144 The H I S TO RY OF *
kindest to us j the ladies courted and treated Alicia So highly, that fhe Soon became as free and unaS-fedted as they were, and So improved, that I thought her every day more charming. So fbon as we arrived in France, I Sent back my guide and horSes, with letters to the good old father, the lady, and my father and mother-in-law. On the receipt of which. Father Dominic writ to my own father, acquainting him that I was married to Alicia, and gone out of the kingdom ; that I was extremely Sorry he had constrained me to leave him in Such a manner, and was willing to return to him, if he would forgive me. and receive my wife into favour. In fine, he urged all he could think of to reconcile us, and received an anSwer, by which he found my father was implacable, and So incenSed against me, that it was in vain to hope for
any accommodation between us, at
least
I
4
MiSs Harriot Montague. 145
least for Some time. My father and mother-in-law came to us, and having taken a pretty houfe and Some lands, he managed our little estate, and my wife and I kept the best company in the province, and lived at eafe; it did not pleafe God to bleSs our marriage with any chil-■drenj but every thing elSe profpered with us. I writ often to father Dominic, fending him preSents of what 1 thought might be acceptable, particularly wine, of which I had enough, having now bought a little vineyard : he fent to my father to let him know that i was well, and longed to vifit him, but for ieven whole years could never perceive*by his anfwers that his difpleafure was abated. All this while he never acquainted him where I w^as; at last my father falling fick, relented, and Sent to him to Send for me, and that I Should bring my wife along with m,c. I no fooner received tkfs VoL. II. H . joyful
>46 The HISTORY OF
m
joyful news, but I made ready to go to him ; and leaving all to the care of my honest father-in-law, my wife and I, attended by two Servants, Set out for Valadolid, where we Soon arrived, and were received by my father with much tenderneSs. But alas, my overfight had drawn him into another* during my ab-lence, he had taken a young hand-Ibme kinfwoman into the houfe and debauched her ; this was a Secret could not be long hid from me; She was Saucy and inSolent to my wife^ which I refented, and defired my father’s leave to return to France^ he defired me not to leave him any more, and would know the caufe of my ■ difgust, and who had offended me: at last I modestly told him, our pert kinSwaman took too much upon her; he coloured, and faid it Sliould be remedied; but, as I afterwards discovered, he had two Sons by her, and knew not how to get
rid
Mist Ha RRioT Montague.
rid of her * this made her inSolent, and finding I had made my complaint to my father of her, she was fired with revenge, and refolved to destroy my wife, who was now to my inexpreshble joy with child; she diSguiSed her thoughts, feemed Sorry for what she had done, and fo be-haved herSelf, that Alicia, who was all goodnefs, forgot what was past, and grew kind to her ; but the viper ill returned it; for drinking chocolate one morning together, she put poishn into my dear Alicia’s cup, of which she languished about a month, and then died; the phyfi-cians were of ©pinion that she was ooiSoned, and when she was dead, I lad her opened, and was too well convinced of it: my affliction was fo great, that I was inconSolable. I SulpeCted my father, and could not believe his strumpet dared to have committed Such a deed without his knowledge and conSent. I Seized
H 2	her,
0
148 Tlie HISTORY ot
her, and had her examined before a magistrate, but she denyed all, and I had no proof of the fail; So I took leave of my father, having had fome sharp words with him, and returned to France the most difconfolate man living. Now I had time to rested: on all the adions of my past life, and too late became fenfible that my diSobedience.to my father first drew Ood’s anger upon me, who had accordingly punished me in bereaving me of her who had been the occafion of my fin, and was in fom.e kind culpable herSelf, tho’ more ex-cufable than I, yet had paid her life for her fault; that mv father, who had been too fevere, and ought to have had more indulgence Tor my youth, and lefs ambition, was punished by the divine justice in being permitted to become a .stave in his age to a vile pashon, no ways Dust or honourable like mine, and blasted his fame. TheSe confidefa-
tions
i
%
;
MiSs Ha RRioT Montague. 149-
rions inclined rne to quit the worlds, and dedicate the remainder of mv
^	off
life to God, being then but twenty nine years old. I accordlogiy fettled my affairs in France, leaving my father and mother-in-law in pofe feffion of my estate there, taking only for my own Support a thoafend pistoles and my mother’s jewels, which I had still refcrved, and ordered my estate to go to a convent in the town where it lay near, after their deceafe; and taking my mother’s picture, and the writings I took from my father. Set out for the benedictine convent where father Dominic lived. I acquainted hi n with my defign, he approved of it, and I waited on my father to obtain his leave and bleffing. There I found my father’s mistreSs, had been her own executioner, havdng gone distracted with the rembrSe of her conscience, and So hadcat her throat, having in fjer madneSs discovered
H 3	all
^50 The HISTORY of
all the circumstances of the murder . She had committed on Alicia. My
father was So struck with the manner of her death, and stiame, his crime with her being now made public, that he feldom went out of his chamber. Our meeting was at this time very different from our parting ; I fell at his feet with the greatest Submistion, and with tears begged pardon for the follies I had committed in my youth ; he wept over me, and lifting me up, embraced me, unable to utter one word: then his countenance ex-preffed the confufion of his thoughts; he biufhed at. his own-weaknefs, and could not look me in the face: at last he Said, my Son, we have both offended God, but I more grievousty; God pardon me, as I do you. A tender converSation enfued, and we pasted Some days together in pious difcourSes, I hope much to our advantage. I begged him“ to, make
fQm.ec
MiSs'Harriot Montague, i ft
•	4
fbme provifion for the two unfortunate children he had had by this ill woman, and fettle his affairs, as I had mine ; he told me he would be wholly diredled by me. In few days he fell fick, and continued ilF for fix months : having in that time fettled his affairs, by my defire the estate was given to his nephew, a worthy young gentleman, with Several legacies to his poor relations and the church j he expired in my arms with great piety and refigna-tion ; I bury’d him nobly, a'ni retired into the convent^ where I lived many years, being received into that fraternity: at forty years old I was choSen by our Superior to to- be Sent to Peru, and froni thence \v^ent amongst the people-, wdieie you found me, amongst whom I in-dured great hardships, it being long before I could acquaint my!cU with their language and barbarous ciiS-toms ; yet the austere life, and
Hq	good
i5a The HISTORY or
good I did them in curing their Sicknels and wounds, with my dif— courSes of God and Christ, So' wrought upon theSefavages, that they listened to me and revered me. I WdS feveral times taken prifoner by different parties of thele barbarians,
. who are ever at variance with one another ; but they still Ijpared me,, having a notion that I was a holy perSon : thole I converted to Christianity were very hard of apprehen-ffon, and yet very devout when once-instruded. I have lived Seven years, with the poor fisherman and his fa-mily, wshom we have brought with us, and w^as doubtlels preServed by providence to be the means of your deliverance: and now I hope to fpend the remainder of my days in that pleaSant country where I was-once happy with my dear Alicia, whom I might still perhaps have enjoyed, had we never left it; but it
was Heaven’s will that I should,,
b-S'
Mist Harriot Montague. 153
be what I am, and therefore won t
^	A
repine. Here he ended his relation with a deep figh, all the company-being much pleafed with the manner of his relatino; it, and the
C) *
strangenels of his adventures; admiring the wifdom of God which had preserved him amongst Savages, and placed him where he was the means of their preservation.
Bellario and Ravina with Philena^ their faithful stave, having hired the bark to stay, that brought Harriot and her dear friend, and fister, to Virginia, to carry them to the istand of St. Domingo, and from thence to> Mexico, having made Leander and Harriot prefents of two rich jewels, partof thofeDumarefqueliadonwhen stie was cast on the barbarous stiore, making great acknowledgments for all the favours received, took leave,, promifing to continue their friend-
ihip by a constant intercourse of letters j, and if they ever returned to
H 5	* Spai'p>
1K4 The HISTORY orr
Spain, they would make a tour France on purpofe to. See them,: Harriot and Lavinia had contradfed fo great a.friendship, that the latter had made her hushand promiSe to gp lettle in France, his religion being no hindrance, bccauSe he.was a Subr jedt of England, being born in Virr ginia, and therefore, had nothing to fear. As for Leander, he was petr fuaded by his wife and the monk to be a Roman Catholic, which he had been bred at first. Bellario and Ravina returned thanks to Leanderls uncle, his lady, the captain, and Lucy, and all that had vifited, and treated them, , offering to ferve them all in ‘trade, or. otherwife,,^ whatever was in her father’s power, they departed with a fair wind, and arrived Safe at Mexico, as- they were aSterr wards informed-by letters from them^ a-iid confi.derable preSents which they received Some months aStcr, by tlic lame bark that carried them»,
*	No Wv
s
t
MiSs Harriot Montague. 155 Now young DuniareSque, who had
received a great Sortune with Lavinia, agreed with his Sather, who had children by his young wife, to take a certain Sum of money to be remitted in goods to France, as his fortune ; they began to prepare for going thither, where Leander and Harriot longed to be. The poor Savages were Settled in old Duma-reSque’s plantation, he having given them a little houSe and ground to live on, at his Son’s and the good monk’s request. A Ship being got ready, and loaded with their effeCcs, Harriot and Lavinia with their huS-bands, went on board, where they took leave of the good old gentleman Leander’s uncle and his lady^ with the honest captain, and Lucy, the fair maid, whom he had made-Kis wife, and who hearing part of Harriot’s story, had concealed her thoughts to this moment; when going to take leave of Harriot, after a*
H 6	Eohct.
/
156 The fl IS TO RI'
noble entertainment, which Leanv der and his kinSman had given them, on board the ship, threw her arms about Harriot’s neck. Saying, ‘ I-^ cannot part with you, madam, be-‘ fore I reveal a Secret to you that ^ nearly concerns you : are not you'
‘ the daughter of Monfienr Le ‘ Montague who lived near Bristol,-® and married a Second wife from
*	London, by whom he had a-‘ Daughter narUed Diana ? and
*	were you not trepanned to Virgi-
*	nia by that mother-in-law ?’ ‘ ‘Yes,
y j-
aniwered Harriot much furprizedy ‘ lam the daughter of thatT.:„for-_ ® tiinate gentleman, and was by that ‘ Wicked woman betrayed and ex-‘ pofed to a thoiiiand misfortunes.-‘ Bm who are yon? for lam impa-ticnt to know.’ ‘ l am Said She,-‘ that daughter Lucretia, and your ‘ Sister by the father’s fide, by the ■
*	justice of God tor my mother’s-
*	fins, doubtkfs,, expofed on the Seas,
and*
\
i
9
Mifs Harriot Montagub. 157
* and more barbarous lands; but by ‘ his mercy Saved, and honestly diS-‘ poSed of to this generous man,’ turning towards the captain her huS-band. All the company, but especially Harriot, were impatient to learn her story ; being all Seated, She in few words related.
“My unjust mother. Said She, having got rid of you, whom she made my father and the world believe were drown’d coming back from the ship with her and captain Du Pre, apply’d herSelf wholly to amaSs a Sum of money to provide for me and herSelte refolving to return to I^ondon, and purSue the Same unhappy courSe of life she had before followed, which I am too much confuSed at the mentioning of to explain farther for her shame is in Some meafure mine ; tho’ I blefs God I have never been guilty, but ever had an aver-fion to all wicked addons. In order t o accomplish this defign, she took
up
*•
V5§ The H r S T O R Y Of'
up clothes and money of every body that would trust her ; and in a Short time my father was perSecuted on every hand, and unable to raiSe money fast enough to anSwer his creditors demands. You may imagine that this cauSed a great many quarrels between my father and mother.r but She minded nothing he Said, continued her extravagancies So longj that at last he was arrested by captain Du Pre, who pretended that She owed him a. hundred pounds by a note under her hand; and having before mortgaged his estate, it was not eafy for him to get bail immediately. The night he was taken to. the officer s houfe in hold, mv mother packed up the plate and1inen„ and all that was worth carrying away and taking me,, went aboard a hoy.
bound to London,, which Da Pre Had provided, and left him,. What: is became , of my poor father iince, Iknow not j hut I fear he is.
(iff
I
MiSs Harriot Montague., i§^
SiS alive) in very bad circumstances.
At thefe words the tender Harriot wept; and her hushand wiping away her tears, kisted her, and Said,.
* Come, my dear, be chearSul; you ‘ and I will Setch him from Eng-‘ land, and take care of him, If ‘ he is dead, being a good man, \ ‘ doubtleSs he is happy, and does ‘ not need onr help/ Lucretia continued her diScourSe thus : Being:
O
arrived at London, my mother went diredflyt® Westminster, to her.friend Lucinda’s, but found her gone from the houSe, and well married to a Sea captain, with whom She lived very happily and honestly at Portsmouth, as the old bawd informed her, , to whom she v>?ent for information she took a. lodging in the: bawd’s houSe, and Soon got a rich gallant, an old mercliant in the city : for though hshe was Still very handfome, and had very rich clothes,
yet she was now in years, and not
q.£
i6o The HIS TOR Tor
of an age to attradl the young fops and rakes. I Was about eight years ©Id when She went for London ♦ and, doubtlcSs, She defigned to advance me to be Some great persona's mistreSs, or Some rich fool’s^ wife. She had robbed my father of near two thoufand pounds; but Du Pre pealed her of a good deal of it. She kept me very fine, carried me to the parks, the plays, and had me taught to dance, fi>ng, and play on the fpinnet: in fine. She took pains to* make me agreeable, but none to instruct me in virtue and goodneSs yet God had given me the grace ta abhor her way of living ; and I often wept for her fins in fecret, and wished myfelf in priSon with my good father,, or if he was poor and at liberty, that I might beg for him, rather than be a mistrefs *. in short, in about two years time, my mother had broke two or three merchants and a linen-draper, Slie was
struck
\
/
Mifs Harriot Montague. i6't
«
struck with fickneSs, and the rheu-matifni took away the uSe of her limbs. So that fhe lay a long time unable to help hcrSelf; She broke out into boils all over : in Short, She became full of i^Icers, and died in a most miserable condition, to my great grief, I fear little fenfible of her fins, and destitute of all fpiritual helps, having only the vile old bawd about her, and the people in the houSe where we lodged. Being dead,, every one plundered Something; and . my mother having made a will, tho*' no widow, which was left in a tally-man’s hand, who was her old acquaintance, and together with Du Pre, were her executors and my guardians ; the tally-man came' and buryed her privately, and indeed poorly, and carryed me home to his houfe, Du Pre being gone on a voyage to Ireland with his strip. 1 know not what my mother left me, but believe it was confiderable, be-
cauSe-
\
f
The HISTORY or
cauSe She had ofien told me she coulcf^ give me a handSome portion. I was but meanly treated at this vile tally-man’s y and being ready to-break my heart, begged day and night to be Sent down to Bristol to-my father: but that was not his,-nor Du Pres interest ; for they well. knew my father would call them to an account for my mother’s effects. Old Gripe told me, as Soon as Dm Pre arrived; they would confult" what to do with me ; accordingly they pretended to fend me to my father, but putting me into a waggon,. Sent me to North Wales, to a place where I could hear nothing but Welsh, and lived four years, mifer-ably ; all which time I could not tell how to eScape to Bristol, having^ not a penny of money, nor any but poor ignorant people to talk too, who could not help me. At last being now fourteen, I applied my-shif to the minister of the parish, and.
told
V
MiSslHarriot Montague.
told him my story. He was a very good man, and writ up to London to a friend, whom he ordered to find out the tally-man, and threaten him,; and try to find what they defigned to do with me, and what
my mother had leSt me. This gentleman did So, and Gripe laid all the fault on Du Pre, and promifed to Send for me up to London; which he immediately did. At my arrival, he treated me kindly.. Then Du Pre and he contrived to get rid of me for good and all ; So they feemed mighty ready to fend me to my father, in order to which they went with me on board a strip that lay in the river, bound, as they pretended, for Bristol, and ready to fail. They had,bought me new clothes, and given me my mother’s watch and being young and ignorant, I did not fufpedt their villany. Du Pre pretended he would go along with me, and the talh^-
mam
164 The HISTORY OF
I
iman gave me a broad piece at parting, and went Srom ns at Greenwich : but Du Pre went with me as far as Sheernefs ; but there pretend-^ ing to go on shore about Some bufi-nefs^ left me, and I never faw hini more. I knew it was a great way to Bristol by Sea, yet was every hour ashing when we should get thither, snQ how far we were got, A youno*
man, who-was the captain’s nephew,-and a very honest youth, taking ' pity of me, told me, ^ that I was. ‘ not going thither, but tojamaica :
*	that he heard his cruel uncle bar-gain with my curSed guardians to. carry me thither : they have. Said he, payed your pastage, and he has promifed not to Sell you, but
*	to get you a good Service; but he
*	will strip you of all your clothes So Soon as he does reach Port-Royal,
‘ and fell you for a stave.’ I thought I should have died at shis news, but she young man begged me to take
no
MiSs Harriot Montague. i6j
no notice of his discovering this Secret to me ; * for if you do, faid he,
*	I am undone, my whole depen-dance being upon my uncle, and
*	he will discard me.’ I told him that in return teS the obligation he had laid upon me in trusting me, I would conceal it, and trust him.
Then I told him all my story, and of the fortune I had, of which theSe villains wronged me, and that if he could find means to get me aShore -any where in England, and would go with me to my father, I would give him part of my fortune he Should
defire in reaSon, when it was reco-
«
vered, as it would Soon be. He anSwered, that he had other terms to propoSe, which was, that I would promife to marry him in cafe he delivered me, and then he would tree me out oS his hands, tho’ I went to Jamaica, which he feared I ' must do now, becaufe we were past the land, and out at Sea : ^ for fo
foon
(
r
nU The HISTORY oT
*	Soon as wc land. Said he, I will
*	go to the governor. Swear that you ‘ were trepaned thither, and tell ‘ shim all the circumstance. I have ‘ an uncle there, who, I am Sure,
‘ will take my part in Such a caSe:
‘ befides, iS you will marry me So
*	Soon as 1 can get you afshore, he cannot Sell you.* I readily consented to his propoSals, thinking any honoiirable way to eScape the miseries I was like to fall into ought to be accepted of: befides, I Was very , fenfible, that if I refuSed this honest offer, I Should certainly be ruinest on the istand by Some villain, who would doubtleSs buy me for that vile ufe, and force me to comply with his wicked defires. After this Du Pre, for that was his name, studied how to oblige me, and took Such care of me, that tho’ there were two wild young men, a merchant’s Son and a mercer’s aboard the strip, fent by their fathers for no
good
MiSs Harriot Montague, i6y >
-good, doubtleSs, yet he engaged a -very honest gentlewoman, a pasten« •^ger, to keep me always in her company j So that I went very Safe : and being near Jamaica, onr Ship was drove up the river Oroonoko, andt.Shipwrecked, as you have before heard related ; there this unfortunate young man has, I fear^ met with his death from the Barba-Tians hands, whoSe virtue and piety deServed a better fate ; though as for my part, I have made a choice much more to my liking in my dear husband, turning herfelf to the captain,
Harriot ran and embraced her, faying, " Dear lister, our fates have ‘ So much refemblance, that I am
astonished at the Almighty’s ju-
*	stice. Be assured if I live to fee Kngland again, I will fee justice
‘ done both to you and our dear
*	father.’ At thefe words the old captain bowed, and Saluted Harriet
and
%
T'-
i68 The HISTORY or
and Leander, Saying, ‘ I think my-^ ‘ Self very happy to have Such wor-" thy relations, and doubt not but ‘ you \vill afiSist my wife in all things ’i her virtue I am convinced of; and as I took her without theproSped: ' of a fortune, Shall value her no leSs, though Slie never has any.’ They all perfuaded him to take his wife, and go along with Harriot for France and England ; but the good man being in years, and having a plentiful fortune in Virginia, did not care to run any more hazards; fo they took leave, and went aShore with old Dumarefque, his lady, and the other friends who came with them on board^ and the Ship fet Sail the next morning ; and in ten weeks fafely arrived at St. Maloes, where ^Leander was agreeably fur-prized wtth the news of his guardian’s death, and alfo that Clemen-Tina and his lister, with her hushand, were all fafely arrived in France by
the
. J
*
\
s
MiSs Harriot Montague. 169
the way of Spairi j that Clementina was in health with MonSieur Le Montague ; that De LeSle, who shad long before left Virginia, was now living with his dear reconciled Fla-via. Harriot’s arrival and his was Soon Spread abroad; and it was not many days before they and all their
friends Sent or came to congratulate them, and to invite them to their Seats. In few days tliefe now most happy relations and friends met'all together at Leander’s houSe, who was now pofieSs’d of his estate. * his' Sister IiavingTecelv’d her’'s before his -arrival, entertain’d them nobly ; and they entertained one another with an account of the strange adventures they had every one met withal. Monfieur Le Montague, who had retired to his country Seat in deSpait of ever feeing his dear Clemsntiaa', recounted the manner of their meeting thus:	" I was. Said he, lining
^ by a fountain in my garden, when
VoL, II I ‘ g Servant
4k
lyo The HISTORY of
‘ a lervant came and told me, that ‘ there were two ladies and two ‘ gentlemen, who expreffed their
*	most eager defire of feeing me
*	immediately; but, fays he, upon *- my telling them, as you, fir, had
ordered me, that you was engaged
*	and could not be feen, one of the ^ ladies Swooned away; and, when ‘ she recovered, fa'd fiie must fee
*	yon though you w'ere dying. As ‘ Soon as I heard tbefe last words,
*	I hastened to fee them, but figure
*	to yonrSelves my great Surprize ‘ when the first object I bcfield,
‘ was my dear Clementina ! I gazed ^ on her with delight, and embraced ‘ her with the most ardent affection;
‘ while she, on her part, was ut-‘ terly difabled from Smothering the ‘ real Sentiments of her heart. To ‘ com pi eat the Scene, we were for ‘ tome time lost in each other’s em-‘ braces, in dumb but expressive rap-^ tures, to the no Smad diversion of
‘ the
M'iSs Harriot Montague. 171
the company, who all laughed: but ‘ at last Clementina reminded me ‘ of our friends, and I welcomed ‘ them in few words; nay I was So ' distraffed to know Clementina’s ^ adventures, that I hindered her from steeping by my impertinent ^ questions half the night.’
Just as he Spoke theSe words, Monfieur De Leste and Flavia entered the room ; Leander and Harriot Saluted her : dear kinfwoman. Said he, I Sent your wanderer home to bleSs you with his prefence, and repair the injuries he did you. Indeed, Said fhe, when he came (p the grates of the convent to ash fo.t me, I could Scarcely credit my eyes, he was So changed: but I Soon threw afide my veil, and fled to his arms with as much affection as at the first months of our marriage. You are, Said he, in Some confufion, all goodneSs, and I beg you would make no more mention of my crime,
12	lince
172 The HISTORY or
fince I hope God and you have forgiven.it. Where is your Son.? Said Leander ; at home. Said Mon-fieur De' LeSle, \\ell, and Such a one as merits a better father than I: he will be here by and by to wait on you. Many days pall: in vifits and entertainments, too tedious to recite the particulars of; but after ibme months .were past, Harriot being big with child, and Madam DumareSque near her time, Harriot continually importuned her hushand to go with her to England, it being the Year of the peace which w^as made with France; but he was afraid of venturing her upon the Sea in that condition, and offered to go himSelf: Madam DumareSque alfo would not part with her before Ihe was brought to bed. My dear lister. Said She, will you leave me in this condition.? Have I come So far with you out of affedtion, and leSt my relations arid country for yon, and
can
t
\
Mifs Harriot Mont AGUE. 173
can you content to go from me at this lime ? In fliort Lavinia was delivered of a daughter, and Harriot of a Son two months afterward, and and not able to go to fca for two months more; at last being recovered of her lying-in, file and Leaoder went, over to England from Calais,
ZD	*
and Landed Safely at Dover, from whence they hired horfes at Bristol. There were few in the place who knew Harriot; but from them Ihe learned the Sad nev/s that her ancient father was in prifon, and had lain there five years; his wife’s, debts, which She had wickedly contraSfed, having intirely ruined him; stie would not stay a moment after this information, but flew to the priSon winged with filial piety and tender affe^ion : She aSked for him So earnestly, that the goalcr was startled; but clapping half a crown in his hand, he let her in ; stie quickly faw her dejedted Sather,
13	who
J74 The HISTORY oe
K
vvlio was creeping along the place clothed in nothing but rags, his wliite beard was grown down to the leathern thong which girded his poor coat about him; he lifted up his eyes v/hich were before fixed on the ground, at the Sound of her voice, when She Said, fir, let me lijeak with you; and Seeing a fine lady and gentleman, put out his vcliite withered hand, cxpeding alms, but had not the least remembrance of, her face, or notion of her being alive, as indeed it w^as im-poffible he Should. She was in Ib 'great diSorder, that Leander fearing she would Swoon, wxnt to draw her / -afide. The tc ars streamed down her face, and her voice faltered, So that Slie could utter no more, but clafping her arms about the old ■ man’s neck, Said, My dear father, and fainted. Thctc words cauSed Such a tumult in his foul, that he Seemed like a man waked Srom a
frightful
MiSs Harr lOT MontAouE. 175:
frigbtSul dream; he trembled, held her fast, and gazed upon her, without Speaking one word. Leander was So moved with this fight, he could Scarce restrain his tears ; but he taking hold of him gently. Said, fir, be not Surprized, God can do wonders, there is a mystery in my wife’s words, which if you will recollect your Spirits a little, we will inform you of. The old gentleman staring on him, cried out. It cannot be I ’tis all wonder, ’tis my child’s face, ’tis her voice, and yet
m
—At thefe words he dropped down. Leander called for Soma help, two or three priSoners came, vvbofe meagre faces and poor habit Spoke their miSeries ; they astisted him to lift Monfieur Le Montague into a poor room, where his bed lay on the floor, and Leander carried Harriot in his arms, who by this time recovered : he called for
“	9
wine, of which he gave Some to
14	the
i7<5 The HISTORY or
the old n-emlenian ; after which liiey talked and wept together: Harriot deferred to tell him the particulars of her adventures, till they were out of that fad place. Sending the goaler to fetch his creditors j but that being a work of time, fire depofited into a merchant’s hands the whole fum her
iather was charged withal, which was but three hundred pounds, he having paid as long as he had any thing left, and took him out with ‘
iicr, the merchant giving the goaler
his bond to indemnify him : they went home with this merchant, where they refreshed, and new c'lothcd and shaved the old gentle-rnan, who Still wTpt for joy, and praifed God with his whole heart and tongue in Such a manner, that every stander-by Seemed to participate of his joy, and being warmed with his zeal, wept with him : nor could he be lefs moved, who had
in
Mifs Harriot Montague. 177
in one moment received Such a miraculous deliverance from the miferies of a priSon, the greatest trial this life can Subject us to, and < Such a child, who was restored to him even from the grave. This to a man who had outlived hope, and had not the least profpedf of any deliverance but by death, was enough to revive all his faculties, and fill his foul with the most ex-quifite transports of joy, and highest Senfe of gratitude to God. He entered a clean bed at night with more joy than he had ever done in his prosperity; the next morning he appeared fo revived and altered Sor the better, that Harriot could do nothing hut look upon him with the greatest pleaSure, His creditors came, and pretended to be Sorry for what they had done ; but he and Slie treated them with Such Scorn and reoroaches as their unchristian
A '	^
treatment of him delervcd. And
I N	new
HP	«
178 The HISTORY of
now all his old Sriends and acquain*-tance, who many of them had left him in his distreSs, Game to vifit and. congratulate him, and See Harriot; she treated them all very civilly, but’ thofe who had relieved him in the prifoii, fhe carefled and entertained Splendidly: lastly She Sent to the goal; and freed thofe poor wretches who had been his companions and fellow-lufferers ■ in that dreadful place; which were but five perSons, people of mean condition, whoSe debts amounted to 120/. a noble gift from her, by which fine obtained their pryeis and blestlngs, which were better worth than the money ; and having furnhhcd herfeif and father with whatever stie wanted from England, she, he, and Leander returned in the fame vest'd that brought them to St. Maloes; the old gentleman being under no ap-prehenfions of any troubles about Dis religion, being now So very
ancieiiL
^
MiSs Harriot Montague. 179
antient, and. So long abScnt thence* that none but his tstiends and relations could remember him; but he reishlved, if he was any ways molested, to remove to the ifiand ©f Jer-fey or GuernSey, Srom whence he could pay or receive a vifit from his daughter once or twice a-year. Clementina gave them an account of all the strange adventures She had met with in. Barbary, which filled them; with admiration.
One morning (a French ship having come into the port in the night) an old man in very poor habit came to young Monfieur Le Montague's houSc, and defired to be admitted to Speak with Clementina. She was at breakfast with her hushand, and bid the Servants admit him ; but was extremely Surprized when fhc Saw his face, and knew that he was the old French captain who had carried her to Canada. ‘ Madam Said.
** he, I a.n come to beg your pardon.
X d	beSoi...^
i8o The HISTORY of
*	beiore I die : God has been pleashd by a Severe Slavery to punish my fin, oS which I had before a true fenie ; and at last in his mercy has
‘ brought me back to my native country. But I could not live or / die in peace till I knew what was become of you, which having learned last night when I landed^ ‘ and went home to my houSe, I
*	hasted to your preSence to obtain ‘ your pardon, and beg your fa-^ vour in the behalfoftwo Christian ‘ strangers, who efcaped with me ‘ ifom I unis ; they are a g'entlemaii ® and lady who have been Slaves,,
*	and have nothing to Support them ^ when landed, or to carry them do
*	their homed Monfieur Le Montague and Cicmentina told him, they were glad he had efcaped, and Aould be ready to affist the strangers in any thing. Le Montague Said, ‘ f ‘ tan hardly forgive yon what you
*	have done to my wife, but as a
‘ Christian
MiSs Harriot Mon TAGVE. i8i
*	Christian I won’t reSent it: bring
*	the innocent strangers, and we will ‘ do Something for them.’ The Captain took leave, and about an hour after returned with the gentleman and lady: She was very handSome, her fhape, stature, and mien were delicate and engaging. The gentleman was tall. Header, and had a face fo lovely and majestic, that he Seemed the offspring of Mars and Venus. Their dreSs was as mean as their psrfons were noble, being Such as charity had , furrststied them withal. Clementina Saluted aad welcomed her to France, not knowing whether She understood her or not. Monfieur Le Montague anfwered the gentleman’s civilities in the Same manner, Vvho thus addreffed himSelf to Clementina. ‘ Madam, you doubt-
‘ ieSs wonder why my wife and I ‘ have preSumed to vifit and apply
*	ourfelves to you, before any other
‘ perlon.
r8z The H r S T O R Y of
‘‘ perfon, at my arrival in France : ^ but when I tell you that her name ‘ is Elvira De SpinoSa,. who was ‘ your companion in the convent,. ' and was in a particular manner ‘ honoured with your friendship ;
‘ you will not be Surprized that she ‘ conics to ash the protediion of her ‘ friend.’ At thefe words Clemen-tina ran and embraced her ; and Monfieur Le Montague faid ‘ Then
*	you are my dear fchool-fellow
*	Charles du Bois: My God! where ‘ have you been this age, and what ‘ providence has preferved yon,
^ whofe death I have mourned for
*	fo pashonately Come, fitdown,
‘ and tell, us all your story, for we
*	must not part again; my houfe is ‘ at your fervice, and my fortune..
‘	shall be proud to procure
*	your happinefs in all things, to ‘ the utmost of our power.’ Clementina was the mean wdiile weeping wish Elvira, being both fo transported'
Mist Harriot Montague. i8j
Sported with joy, that they knev/ not how to contain or utter their thoughts. At last Monfieur du Bois took upon him to relate their strange adventures.
You know, laid he, that my father dying whilst we were Schoolfellows, I was left in the hands of the two rich east India merchants, Monfieur Dandin and Monfieur du FreSne : Dandin had but one daughter, who was as deformed as ESop, and as ill-natured as stie was proud and ugly. My fortune was very confiderabSe, and his whole aim-was to match me to Magdelairi, and fa Secure it to his posterity. I was but thirteen, and he wheedled me into figning a contract with her; and She being twenty, was not a little pleaSest to have Such a fine young husband. She took much upon her, and So tutored and Schooled me upon every occafion, that my aycrfion'daily increaSed towards her.
I was.
4
184 The HISTORY 01
I was fain to hand her about to every place she was pleafed to gad to ; and at last it was my fortune to go with her to a Chapel near the monastery where you and my dear Elvira were penfioners; there I faw you and her together : you I knew, becauSe my friend MonSicur le Montague had Shewed you to me; for students always tell their amours to one another, and I am younger than he, fo that he had a mistrefs before me. I was fo charmed with her, that had not my fury been along with me, I had followed you to the convent: but I foon found an opportunity to go thither, and found you gone. I got to the fj:eech of her, and in fome time gained my* charmer’s conSent to marry me Secretly, She, you know, was an orphan, whoN being related to the abbefs your aunt, was bred, there with defign (having but a Small fortune) to be made a nun. Being
but
4
Mifs Harriot Montague. 185
blit a joenfioner, it was no difficulc thing Sor her to come to me j but my keeping my marriage a Secret till I was of age, was a hard thing to be done. My guardians did not keep me fiiort of money, So that I fancied I could eafily maintain her if I could but get fome faithful friend for her to live withal privately in the houfe with his wife and family, or elfe a private lodging. This last I thought most Secure, and accordingly took a chamber in a widow woman’s honfe in a village. Having thus provided a retreat, and engaged my confeffor to marry us, I gave her notice, and She got out the next morning with another penfioner, on pretence of going to church to the chapel.I had Seen her at : I waited for her in a coach near the chapel, and coming out in the croud. She flipped from her corppanion, and turning back into the church went out at another door, \S^here I took her
into
iS6 The HISTORY or
into the coach, and drove away with her to the fryars cell, where we were married. Thence we went aw’^ay to the village, to our lodging, where I had provided a dinner and all things Sor our reception. The widow’s daughter, a very modest young maid I had hired to wait on her.. Here I staid all night, having, pretended to old Dandin,my guardian,
that I was to go out oS town with a young gentleman whom I kept company withal, and whom I had trusted with my Secret, and engaged to afk me to go. with him before my guardian and Magdelain, nay crooked rib that was to be. la fine, I kept my dear Elvira here Some months, tho’ a great Search was made after her, being veiy cautious in my vi-fi:s. She was that time with child, but mifearried. She never stirred out of doors without a maSk, or when I fetched her out in a coach but finding it was inconvenient to
have
#
MiSs Harriot Montague, 187
have her So far off, I removed her to St. Mate’s, and took a lodging for her at a widow’s houfe in a back Street, in a very private place, with a garden, and back- door into the fields. In this garden, Elvira uSed to walk, and venture Sometimes to look out of her windows into it.
■ A young lord who often pasted by that way. Saw and fell in love with her: he Soon enquired who kept the hduSe, and learned that it was a widow who had a young gentlewoman and her Servant lodged with her. He, emboldened by his quality and fortune,, went to the houfe in a chair, richly dreffed, and alked to fee the lady, the young gentlewoman that lodged there : the woman feeing his attendance and habit, was daunted. He afked no leave, but going by her, went up stairs, and found Elvira fitting in her chamber reading: She was doubt-lefs Surprized, but he told her his
bufinefs.
iSS The HISTORY OF
bufinefs was love, and in fine would take no denial, or be gone. He fnppoSed her a mist refs by the place fhe refided in, being So mean and obfcnre, and reSolved to poffeSs her whatever it cost. She told him she was married, but he turned that into ridicule : before he went he presented her with a fine diamond ring, whidi she reSufing, he left it upon the table. He went not awav till midnight; the next morning I found her in tears, she toldme whatamiS-fortiine had befallen her. I was
' now but Seventeen, and the expence of maimaining her and a Servant, So Sunk my allowance, that I had no money by me • and being Something indebted to the widow, I knew not how at preSent to remove her. In fine, this young nobleman, who was mad in love.with her, continued frequently to vifit her, and Set fpys to diScover who kept her, who quickly got knowledge
of
■■ •
Mifs Harriot Montague. i8^
of the Secret. This young lord, who was one of the most powerful perSons and had the greatest fortune of any nobleman in the place, knew my guardian, and Sent privately for him, telling him, as out of friendship, the matter. Mon-fieiir Dandin, fays he, yon have a young heir who is contracted to your daughter, who will be ruined; he keeps a mistreSs. in Such a place, his your duty and interest to put an end to Such an intrigue, and Save the youth from being undone. My guardian promiSed never to reveal who told him, and returned him a thoufand thanks; he came home and took no notice to me, but watched me the next time I went out, and dogged me to Elvira’s lodging, at my return home he told me I must make the tour of Europe, or marry his daughter next week. I was ready to go distraCfed before, but now I was quite overwhelmed.
I found
tgo The Ul STORY OF
1 found I was watched, and dared not go to Elvira. One morning when I was in bed, he entered my chamber, Searched, my pockets, took away all the money I had left, with my watch, and addrefled himfelf to me in the following manner, young gentleman, I am informed you keep a mistrefs, your allowance Shall be fhortned; you are like to prove a good man and an excellent husband, that begin So Soon. I was So enraged, I lost all patience; I told him I would never marry his daughter, and that So Soon as I was of age I would call him to an account. I know not what I Said, but we quarrelled to that degree, that I roSe and went out of the houSe, protesting that I would never Set foot in it again,
I went directly to Elvira, but cannot exprels the tranSport of for-row I was in when I came there, and found the poor widow and the .maid in fears, who told me, that at
twelve
%
MiSs Harriot Montague. 191
twelve o’clock the preceding night, fomebody knocking foStly at the door, they InppoSed it to be me ; the • maid rifing, and going to it, afked, who was thereSomebody an-fvvered, it is I, du Bois; at theSe words She opened the door, a man in a vizard caught hold of her, clapping a pistol to her breast, telling her if Ihe made the least noiSe he would Shoot her, three more riifhed in, all mafked, and ran up stairs, dragging Elvira out of bed; She faw them ■bring her mistrefs down bound hand and toot, and put her into a chair;
' one man Staid till the chair was gone, as She fuppoSed, a good way; then he bid her Shut the door and make no noiSe, for if She did, he would come back and kill her. The poor creature was So frighted, She had not power to stir for Some time; at last she went up to the widow, and acquainted her with what had happened. This was all I could
learn.
192 The HISTORY of
learn, and enough to make me deS*-perate. I returned to my guardian like an enraged lion, demanded my wife, declaring my marriage : this made him as furious as I; he threatened to Sue me for the contradf with his daughter; I applyed mySelf to Several of my relations and friends to afiSist me against him, but nobody cared to meddle ; for he was known to be very rich and a very cunning man ; I then challenged the young lord, charging him with stealing her. but he only laughed at and ridiculed me. At last being unable to get any news of her, I refolved to travel, believing they had murdered her. I was deeply melancholy ; and my guardian, who indeed knew not what was become of Elvira, was willing to be rid of me, and readily agreed to my going to travel. I defigned to go first to Rome, and from thence to make the tour of Europe, and return to France So Soon as I was of age, to
be
MiSs Harriot Montague.
fee revenged oS my guardian. He agreed to make me a handSome allowance, and gave me five hundred pistoles to defray my extraordinary expences, being willing to be reconciled to me before the day of r^kon-
ing came. Attended by a Servant^ I Set out on my journey, and reached Rome, having viewed all ^at was curious in my way thither thro’ Spain. I reSolved to stay there Some time, and took a lodging for that purpoSe, One morning my Servant waked me. Saying there was. a youth, who Said he was come post from France to me. - I bad him call him up; when he entered my chamber, he made a fign with his hand that I Should fend away the Servant; I did So, he then ran to me
' and catched me in his arms: but
*
good Heavens ! how was I at that moment transported when I Saw it was my dear Elvira. I strut the chamber door, and then She told me, that being (as I knew She was) pretty
VoL. II. K	far
\ *
194 The HISTORY o^f
far gone with child, the Sright had thrown her into Such a’condition, that when the villains, v/ho had carried her away, came to take her out of the chair, She Seemed half deaTj they carried her up stairs into a chamber richly furniShed, and laid her upon a bed, and So left her; the young lord came to her immediately, and told her that She must now confent to his defires, that he would never part from her again ; it was in vain to refist, or call out for help : in fine, nothing but the condition stie was in preServed her ; for telling him She was in. labour, and Should die if he did not call Somebody to herastistance, begging him with tears to pity her condition, stie prevailed with him to defer the tcxecution of his brutiSh defign, and he called an old woman, and her daughter to her. She had no other help but thefe women ; and falling into a fever, lay lick in her bed three months^ unable to rife ; all
which
t
MiSs Harriot Montague. 195
which time the young lord continually visited her, bringing a phyfi-cian Several times: at last recovering So as to be able to walk about her chamber. She began to confider how to make her eScape. By this time, as She afterwards learned, I having declared our marriage, the young lord refrained from vifiting her Some days.
One afternoon-he came, and being alone with her, he faid thus to her, * I am come to ash your par-
*	don for the injuries I have done ‘ you ; I thought you a mistrefs, ndt ‘ a wife, and my paSSiQn for you was
*	So exceSIive, that it blinded my ^ reafon. I believed you ruin’d by ‘ a man who was pre-ingaged to ‘ another, and was not naif fo well ‘ able to take care of you as myfelf:
‘ had you been a virgin, I would ‘ have married you, but finding , you are virtuous, and Monfieur ‘du Bois’s wife, l am heartily Sorry ‘ for what is past, and ready to re-
K 2	‘ store
196 The HISTORY of
^ store you to him. He is gone to
*	Rome in discontent. So Soon as ^ you are able to travel, I will fur-
*	niSh yon with money, and a Ser-‘ vant to wait on you thither. Be-
*	lieve me, Elvira, I love you no ^ longer with an unlawSul passion, ^ but with a tender affedlion as a ^ fifter. I will, So Soon as your huS-^ band is of age, assist him to the ‘ uttermost of my power against
*	Monfieur Dandin, who has Been ‘ the cauSe of all this miSchieS.’ Here he diicovercd to her what had past between him and Dandin, and how they had contrived together that he should steal her away, and carry her to this his country-houfe, where the Servants were at their devotion, who SuppoSed she was Some young lady whom their master had got with child, none dared incjuire Sarther than by Supposition : in fine. So Soon as my wiSe found herSelf able to Sit a hoiSe,
'	I
she by his advice put on a man’s
habit.
Mi Ss H A R B. IOT Mon t a g u . i gy
habit, and having received a thousand pistoles from him. Set out for Rome, attended by one of his Servants. Nothing could be more welcome than She was to me, and I concluded that the dilguife Ihe had on was the best in the world to conceal her till I was of age, and farther misfortunes, which her beauty in a female drefs might again oc-cafion. I now wanted but a year and half of being of age, and had no mind to return to France till that time was elaps’d ; So we removed to a lodging Some miles from Rome, where Elvira, who paSs’d for my kinSman, lived with me 5 we pasted the day very agreeably: at last we embarked aboard a veffel ' bound for MarSailles, and Set fail with a fair wind ; but in few hours a terrible storm drove us out to Sea, and we were driven for eight and forty hours before the wind, iri which time our Ship was fo disabled, that she Sprung a-leak, and
R 3	had
I.
% ^
19S TheAHIS.TORY ur
had not a ship come up, we had all periSlied in "the mercilefs Seas : but ' alas, it had been better for many of us that we had done So ; for' it proved to be a corSiiT of Tunis belonging to 2 great BaSTa there, we'
, were all put into irons and carried thither. How inexprefiSible my concern was for my dear Elvira, you may eafily imagine. At our cominn on shore we were carried to
' o
this Balia’s houfe, who reviewing hd prisoners, made choice of her and me for staves, fuppofing we were prifoners of birth, and that he Should have a laro;e ranfom for
O
us. He examin’d what nation we ^ \ were of: I anfwered that we were natives of France, and brothers, that we had been at Rome, to
p
which our father, a private gentleman, had Sent us, and were returning homie. He Teemed Satisfied, and ufed us gently, making us write, or attend him into the coiin-y, riding by the fide of hk litter;
but
Mils Harriot Montague. 199
but! Soon perceived he had a wicked defign on Elvira, whom he dreS-Sed in a fine Turkilh dreSs, and treated with great indulgence, I was Seized with Such dreadful ap-prehenfions at this procedurej that I reSolved to run all hazards to eS-cape his hands. This put us on a projedl which we happily effected; the French captain, who brought us home, was at that time Ills stave, he had been So to his Sather, who was a general; and had treated him
very cruelly: by his death he fell
into this Barbarian’s hands, who
* '
was a good naturedman ; and finding him fkilled in Sea-affairs, had made him master of a very neat pleaSarc-boat he uSed to goiout to Sea in for his diverfion; he Ijkev/iSe trusted us to go out in her with other staves, natives of Tunis, to fistr for him. The French captain was generally thus employed in the fumiuer Seiiibn, and was much in his favour; I was aften lent aboard
K 4-	with
200 The HISTORY of
with himj but Elvira never. I con-tradfed a friendship with him, and we contrived our eScape thence in this manner; he had got knowledge of the Christian fisherman and his Vvdfe, where you had lived ; he directed ine thither, and we agreed that Elvira and I should retire to that place, which was not very dif- ' ficult for us to do, fince we had the liberty of walking the town, that he should fend Some of the staves on shore, and bring the pleasure boat about in the dufk of the evening, and take us in. All our . hope was to get to Malta in this .flight veflel, a very dangerous undertaking ; but our condition made ns refolve to trust to Providence, and venture all rifques to get out of the infidel’s hands. There was a lovely maid who had been Sold to thisBasta Some months before, whofe name was Rofietta; she was a farmer’s daughter at Poictou; who was in qualityof a Servant with- a
R 5	lady
MiS^ Harriot Montague. 2ot
lady that was going with her Saniily to her husband, a merchant, who was Settled in the West Indies; and the Ship being taken by a pirate of Tunis, fhe was made a stave, and So fell into this pirate’s hands. With this maid the captain was fallen in love, he Sent her along with us to the fffherman’s. All things being ready, and the Baffa abSent, being Sent for to the court, we got away, as agreed, and the captain came according to appointment; and it plcaSed God that we arrived Safely at Malta in four days time, the the Algerine staves not in the least fufpe<5ting our defign till they faw the vefTel enter the Port; they were but five in number, and unarmed. So that we had not any thing to fear from them, being on our guard. Hence we were received as became Christians, and furnished with clothes: we got a pastage in a French Ship that put in there. And now Providence having brought us back to
ous
2®2 The HISTORY of
V
, _ ^ --©ur own native country, we beg, your affifiance to get Dandln to deliver up my fortune. That, Said Moijfieur, is eafy, for he is long. Since dead, and his daughter is married to a very honest gentleman, w.lio I dare.promife will gladly restore to you all that is your due,. Clementina .entertained them hobly,, and the French captain, having maiTied Roffetta, brought her to •v/ait on her. In a few days jS/lonfieurr Te Montague, having managed the’ affair, procured an agreement between Monfieur du Bois and Mag-delain’s husband, who honourably paid him what money Dandin had^ in his hands of his; Monfieur du Bois entered into pofTeffion of alL his fortune. Thus divine Providence having by various trials and strange vicifiitudes of fortune, proved the faith and patience of theSe heroic Christians, whom neither
- ilavery, nor the fear of death could
prevail with to forfake their faith,
*
or.'
....	!	. t	•
MiSs Harriot Montagub. 26j
• ^ • *
or distrust thefir God, they were all happily preServed and delivered out of their troubles, and at last brought home to their own native lands. Harriot, whoSe filial piety and extraordinary virtues make her justly claim the .first place in our esteem, as well as in this history, had the SatisSaction of Seeing her . ' dear father die in peace in a good . old age ; She was blest with an excellent husband, and many children fair and virtuous as herfelf: nor was her profperity interrupted by any misfortune. The virtuous La-vinia and Clementina, and all the rest were blest with all earthly happinefs. Thefe examples Ihould convince us, how postible it is for us to behave ourfelves as we ought in our conditions, fince ladies, whole fex and tender manner of breeding, render them much lefs able than men to Support Such hardships, bravely endured shipwrecks, want, cold, and stavery, and every-
ili
204 The HISTORY OP
f
ill that human nature eould be tried withal ; yet we, who never feel the inclemency of Soreign climates, that never Saw the face of barbarous pirates, or Savages, are impatient even at a fit of fickneSs, or a disappointment, shake at a storm, and are brave in nothing but in daring Heaven’s judgements. Let us blush when we read Such histories as theSe, aud imitating theSe great examples, render ourSelves worthy to have our names like theirs> recorded posterity.
•v ^
FINIS.
V
N
«
BOOKS lately pririted Sof, and to
be had of J. Roson, BookSeller and Stationer, at No. 54, in St. Martin’S“Ie-Grand.
HI R L E Y’s Sermons, and
odes, price as. 6d, bound.
The Scripture Sufficiency
demonstrated, wherein the Substance of Scripture, reSpectino" doarine, worShip, and manners^ is reduced to their proper heads. To which is added. Dr, Clarke’s Promises of Scripture, recommended by Dr. Watts, and now corretsted^ with many improvements. The Second Edition,
price IS. 6d.
h
Modern Gallantry, or the
new art of love, by a Lady, well known for her literary acquifi-tionsand amorous intrigues. To which is added, a modern Town Eclogue, between Smilletta and
Patty,
BOOKS printed Sor J. Roson.
I
Patty, two milliners. The Second Edition, price is.
’^Genuine Memoirs of the life and adventures of the celebrated Mifs Ann Elliot, written by a Gentleman intimately acquainted with her, and to whom She commu-, nicated the most interesting paf-fages of her life. Several fadts are alSo taken from her own letters. The Second Edition, price 2s. 6d. fewed;
\
The Reward of Virtue, or the history of Mifs Polly Graham, intermixed with Several curious and interesting incidents, in the lives of Several perfons of
both fexes, remarkable for the stngular adventures which befel them. To which is added, a
brief description of Bounty-Hall,
arid
%
^OOKS printed Sor J. Roso n.. and its inhabitants. Price as, 6d.
fewed.
I
Forty Select Poems, by the late
Earl of H	n, a vols. price
4s. Sewed.
I
The. Accountant’s 'Companion ; or Schoolmaster’s New
Assistant to practical
^ Arithmetic. Wherein the
Rudiments of Common Arithme^ tic. Vulgar Decimal FraSH-ofit, are delivered in a new and more concife Method than hitherto published. Wherein the vulgar Error of confounding Principles together, and the diverfi-fying them into Several Rules when they are built on the fame
Reafon is carefully avoided ,* with .a Sufficient variety of Examples, operated in the neatest an4 most
approved Methods. Alfo the
Ext radii on
3
\
BOOKS printed for J. Roson.
• ^ ^
/
EatraSiion and life of tire Square and Cube Roots, See. With their Application to various Branches of the Mathematics. Duodecimals proved by PraShce, See, and applied to Work performed by Joiners, Painters, Glaziers,. Pa-viors, &c. To which is added,
' ■ ACourJe of BocLkeeping by fingie
Entry ; very necefSary in facilitating the Acquiiition of the Italian Method, and is extremely
uSeful for many kinds of BufineSs in which the latter is not materially wanted. The whole adapted to the Ufe of Merchants, wholesale and retail Dealers in every Branch of BufineSs. By J. SEAL-LEY, Author of the Universal Tutor, or, New English Spell-, ing Book and Expofitor, &c. and Master of the Academy in Bridge Water-Square, Barbican, London, price zs., 6d, bound.