THE
%
mutability
O P
HUMAN LIFE,
iSc.
VOL I.
THE
MU TABILITY
O P
HUMAN LIFE;
»
O R
MEMOIRS
OF
ADELAIDE, Marchionefs of Melville .
By a lady.
IN TWO VOLUMES.
^	V O L. I.
(
%
\
D U B L I nd
A * ^
PRiNTtD FOR S. Price, W. Sleater, W. Whitbstone, W. Watson, D. Cham-jberlaine, J.Hoey, J. Williams, J. Potts, W.Colles, G. Burnet, T. Wal-RE ;, C Jenkin, E. Cross, L. White, J. ExShaw, J Beatty.
M,DCC,l>XXVli.
\ ^ — ■
$
>
\
R,
« *
4
y
$
s *
/
4
i
S
X
4
$
I
%
... #
4	♦
»*
4
*
•»)
■ .«(■	'ss.-sr %
\
THE
MU T ABILI-T i
%
O F
HUMAN LIFE, &c.
#
Howard to Mtfs Meynel.'
Laurel Grovel
Wh E N will the conducting ange
guide me to the realms of peace, when ;. forrow no more tortures the victim of op pression ! Oh, when will that happj ^3 period arrive, when Time, with me, shal ^ be no more ! My enemy—but alas !	]
P will not retort his cruel wishes—My in-I nocence gleams a Satisfaction which, witi ^ all his power, his confeious gu'lt must
certainly deny.--Yet do not thefe fen-
t timents allude to a desire of revenge, v/hich a Christian should not harbour?
^ VoL. I,	B	Ah!
A cr ^
/
THE MUTABILITY OF
All l ‘Harriot, ‘at preient I am aimott qualified to be a straw-crowned rqajesty.
From the above introduction you may imagine I am left at the difpofal of the fickle goddefs Fortune for my future fub-fistcnce. What a weary pilgrimage have Lin view.— Aks! I cannot proceed.
I
A fortnight has elapSed since my fate has been determined : I can fcarce yet be calm.-—My friends are all sted—they condemn me.--------1 wonder not, appearances
are feverely against me: perhaps in affluence I have myfelf joined in condemning the innocent; for how liable are we mortals to error ; it is our tremendous Judge only who can fathom hearts, and difcover
virtue or vice in them--------to each other
we are unjust.
** Birds feed on birds, beads on each other prey.
But favage man alone doss man betray j “ Prefs’d by necefllty, they kill for food, y Man undoes man to do hiinfelSno good.’*
I dropped my pen, that I might, if possible, assume more fortitude to continue my epistle------what I had written
Seemed the effusions of a distempered brain. Ah! philofophy, religion, be
my
I
HUMAN life. 3
my guides, laid 1; teach me to bear lofs of reputation, and loSs of fortune, with more moderation : yet, reputation, when thou art sted, never, ah ! never, canst thou be regained!—1 went down to the parlour, and was there informed my noble relations were gone out in the carriage; upon which, taking up a lute, I retired to the garden : words Suitable to my distressed mind accompanied the instrument, a shower of tears fell, which in Some meaSure relieved the extreme oppression I felt at heart, and I am returned with more compofure to re-affume my pen.
The Earl and CounteSs of N-------------
insist on my leaving their houSe to-morrow-------they can no longer with de-
corum harbour me.” Was I really the infamous creature they believe me to be, would not their unkind behaviour and want of benevolence precipitate me still deeper into perdition ? ThoughtleSs people ! How many unhappy prostitutes that traverSe the streets hourly imprecate the wrath of Heaven on their obdurate friends, for unkindly and inhumanly con-signing them to fuch rhifery for perhaps one falSe step ! Some of them, undoubtedly, whilst heart-felt agonies and the deepest Sorrow and repentance were urging
B 2,	them
✓
THE MUTABILITY OF
them on to the path of virtue, by the cruelty and obduracy of thofc friends in repulsing their efforts of return to rectitude, occasioned by keen Senfations, have been driven back to irremediable vice. Thofe ilbnamed friends have much to an-ifwer for. Ala#! poor wretches, con-Tcience must condemn them, and point -out that they might have faved a fellow-creature from ruin, whom they consigned to infamsy and everlasting perdition. What Iiorror in Such whiSpers Srom the heart! But let us bid adieu to theSe melancholy ideas, and Surrender the objects to the mercy of that Being who has promilcd to listen to the petitions of repentant sinners.
Thou art now my Hariot, the only friend I have remaining. How canst thou dare befriend one the whole world condemns ? I shall hasten to thee foon : in the mean time, try all in thy power to promote the fcheme I mentioned in my
last---find out fome old lady who will
receive me as a companion ; the more immerSed -she is in Solitude the better; company is not Suitable for my preSent or future Situation. Never must I again appear in the world ; its cenSure has driven me from it. I prefer dependance to busi-nefs ; pride urges it; have I not been a Marchionefs ? Servitude, alSo, would diS-
grace
HUMAN L 1 F E. 5
grace my relations too much; tho’ what the lofty term a toad-eater is not preferable in my opinion, and barely a genteel state of fervitude. However, my dearest Harriot, my plan is fixed ; Such is my intention, if possible to procure the situation*
I mentioneti.
✓
Lady N--------has just been to take her
final leave of me. There being a stranger below, I flipped in my chamber.
“ Here, faid her Ladyship, presenting me with a hundred-pound note, is the last favour or notice you must ever expect from
me.-----We desire never, to See your Sace
again, except we hear you: amend your conduct.”—,‘Adicui”'added she Scornfully, and bounced out of the room.
Such a farewcl was what I expected. I curtSyedTubmission to her Ladyship, and wiped away the tears her reproaches had
eauSed.----Yet wshv do I blame her or
the world. My perfidious Melville is the-viper that has destroyed my good name. —Alas!—but I must not arraign Providence.----Adieu to complaints.—From
henceforward receive me as MiSs Silcna How'ard ; my fecond feigned appellation. The Marquis has stained my real one,
B ^	therefore
THE MUTABILITY OF
therefore for the future I must wrap my-Self in a cloud of oblivion.—In London I will not be vijible. Ireland ! thou at present to me an unknown Spot, may’st thou be more propitious !—May I at least find a peaceful Solitary retreat in thee! But, oh! my Harriot, let me not converSe on the author of my ruin—on him who should have been my protector. Let all thoughts of him be banished from my memory ; thinking will only add to my pain ; it will never assist me to conquer it. Unconnected as I am with any one but you, I must consider the characters I meet with in life as puppets in a show, and laugh at their ab-furdity; tho’ fatire is So dangerous and unlaudable an adherent, that I almost fear adopting it, lest it should prove my maS-ter, and never quit me.
, Adieu ! my uncommon friend. Happiness, eternal happineSs, attend you !
SiLENA Howard;
f
9
Lori
%
\
H U M A N LIFE; )
Lori ViLLARs to Duncan Paris^
I AM doom’d, Duncan, to be the victim of woman My wretchedness increafcs. You know I left London to avoid my faithless wife, whofe criminality I fuppofe will Soon be made public. My uncle has undertaken to free me by the laws of the land,—Proofs will shon appear against her. —She is too abandoned for me to attempt shielding a reputation she has long convinced the world she has lost. I never loved her, but I pitied her inattention to. lierfelf.
Banished London by Sliame for her guilty conduct, I ranged the country,, and in this ferious mood arrived at the Earl of
H--------’s, in Yorkshire, almost forfwearr
ing all the fex.
Lord and Lady N-^---------, .she Servants
informed me,, were gone to take an airing ; therefore I strolled into the garden. Hearing at a distance the found of a lute tuning, I purSued it till I arrived behind an arbour which in a manner hung over a pond of gold fish. , On the rising bank sst a young lady, uncommonly beautiful:,
B 4,	attired-
THE MUTABILITY OF
attired in deep mourning. A melancholy was diffuSed over her lovely countenance. After playing the fymphony, she fung the following words:
O Death I why—why doll thou fly the wretched ?
Approach, and teruiinate my woes. Approach, O Death !
Then (hall my innocence appear; I lhall triumph —(hall triumph o’er my foes :
Slander (hall be vaiiquKhcd—the guilty (hall tremble.
O Death! why, &c.
While she Sung, the pearly drops ran
down her cheek.—She finished.------------Her
melting notes still dwelt upon my ear.— I longed to approach her, biit I feared to
offend.------1 dared not interrupt her diss
treSs. Putting down the instrument, she burst into an agony of grief, and extended herSelf on the grafs for about the fpace
of ten minutes ;--------then, raising herSelf,
“ True, faid she, thou noble maximist; past and future evils are easily fubdued, but the prefent claims too large a portion of philofophy for feeble woman to fustain. Why, ah! why cannot I prove Such he-roifm ?
My Soul, to loftier regions take thy flight,
Entomb thy Sorrows in the veil of Night j
Oh!
\
HUMAN LIFE. j
©h ! let my mind above the vulgar Soar,
Calmly religa’d, dill Providence adorc.”^
- s
J
She Sat for fome moments with her-i hands folded and her charming eyes lifted-
towards Heaven.-------At last, feemingly
more compofed, she arofe, and, taking up the lute, returned, with a majestic air, to the houle. There, Duncan, I lost her,
I fear, forever;. Her beauty—her afiSect** ing nutiner—is past description	In short,
Chaiies, I find. mySelS'very unhappy on her account.—I wish to know who she is —I wish to relieve her. distreSs—but no trace of her can I find
That night I promiSed myfelf the hap-pineus of her company,—but no fair one
appeared.L After fupper Lady N-----------
withdrew, and in lefs than ten minutes returned again.
“ How did she receive it.^*” faid h ' Lordship.,
“ Properly,’* returned she, with a toSs of her head, which signified “ Say no more’*
Not able to contain myfelf any longer within bounds, I hope, Madam, faid I, your Ladyship has not made a stranger of me, or that I have been the means of preventing any friend of yours from ap-
B 5	pearing
) THE MUTABILITY OF
pearing at Supper, I think, added I care lefsly, a lady was walking in the garden when I first arrived; Surely she did not abfent herfelf on my account.
^ Lady N--------coloured. By no means,
my Lord, returned she; that perfon is not well, and chufes to remain in her chamber.
I bowed, and foon after retired to mine.
Two days passed, Duncan, in which I hoped for a glimpSe of the fair unknown.—My hopes were vain. Out of patience, I ventured to attack Lord N —, ' ar^ enquire after her health.
She is better, and at London by this time, I fuppofe, returned he.
The sternness with which he anSwered me obliged me to drop the fubject. I then questioned Dumont, my valet, about the family, and with a negligent air Said I wondered who the lady was I had Seen in the garden.
Why I can gain very little account about her, pleaSe your Lordship, Said he, tho’ my curiosity was awakened by your Lordship’s description of her; and, finding she did not appear at fupper, I asked Mr, Trim bush. He faid as how she had
been here thefe two months, and that his
Lord
\
HUMANLIKE. 11
Lord and Lady called her MiSs Avelini. The fervants fuppofe she is an Italian, for they always talked -in that language, he faid ;—that she was very melancholy, and^ never appeared before company ; and the-day after our arrival a post-chaife and four came early in the morning, and she went away in it. Lady N———>’a maid cried aftersher, and faid she was a fweet youngs lady, tho’ she did not know who she was, —but that for certain she was a foreigner, for MiSs herfelf told her So :—and that’s all I know about her,- pleaSe your Lordship,’* concluded hci
Humph! Said I Smiling, his rather a' mysterious history. Don’t the Servants, know where she is gone .?
No, ray Lord, they only imagine to fome friends at London; as she’hinted So to Mrs. Kitty; and by this time she mush be got there, as she went post.
Dismissing Dumont, I re-assumed my reflections. They were displeasing ones.’ I was acting contrary to the rules of honour, at least my own rules; for the fashionable ones, you know, Charles, I diScard. My wife’s infidelities have long been the diScourfe of the polite world. I knew she deferved its cenSure, but proofs of’her guilt I could not obtain. Since my departure
\
V
I
J THE MUTABILITY OF
ture she has been lefs on her guard ; Capt.
F ....— frequently passes the night with
her; therefore in all probability we Shall Soon be disunited. Tho* I never lov’d her, nay, never even esteemed her, yet I cannot help allowing her Some pity. Perhaps I feel more for her than she does for herfelf. Yet shrely, when thoroughly awakened from the abyfs of pleafiire by the torch of divine truth, who will difplay her crime unveiled to an unpitying world, happy when they find a fort of justice in cenfure. She will repent; for her own Sake I hope she will Spend the remainder of her days in penitence and retirement. Situated, therefore, as I am—a hujband—till that tye is dissolved I cannot with honour purSue, or make any further enquiry after, the charming Avelini. I find Love a tyrant; it combats with me against reafon. Let me tell thee, Duncan, I never imagined that it could diforder the mind of man as it does mine at preSent.—Yet genuine love is a refined passion, it dwells not in lewd minds—it Seeks the welfare of the object, and leads to virtue, honour, every noble fentiment —But I rave.—— Soon I hope to have it in my power, with decorum, to enquire of Lord N—— after mv charming enOaver, Two divorces
have
%
human life.
have taken place lately, mine will be the third.—Proofs of the gallantry of this age —melancholy proofs ! Had I loved Lady Villars as I adore Avelini, what a wretched being must I have languished out the remainder of my days ! But innocence is difplayed in she countenance of my lovely maid. I am certain, notwithstanding Dumontss account, by the words I heard her utter, she is an Englishwoman, or has been here ever since her infancy.
I am confident, alSo, she has every virtue that can ennoble the foul.—Vet she is unhappy—feems persecuted shy fortune. To prove the lucky wight to fet her free from misfortune’s power shall be my wish and ambition. Soon again thou shalt hear froiB
ViLLARSi
->4
Mifs Howard to Mtfs MiynelS
London]
I FEAR my long silence has given you various opinions conceining ^me, my dear Harriot; but I am certain none of them were to my disadvantage Your ideas of friendship are too refined to distrust the
continuance
k.
%
14 THE MUTABILITY OF
continuance of hers, whofe esteem, was it formed by the common tyes of thofe we frequently'meet with, must feemingly continue to strengthen her own interest, lost as She is to all the world beside. But our hearts were cemented in our early years, never but by the king of terrors to be disunited. How often lately have I invoked his aid ! Perhaps I am referved for greater troubles.---Yet why Should I re-
pine ? Alas! I fear ’fis pride that bends my stubborn foul, and overpowers me. BaSe passion, avaunt ! Are not the poor and rich equally the fons and daughters of the Almighty .? , While we are in possession of virtue, let us fmile with contempt
on the riches or this fublunary world.--
Slaves, perhaps, in one hour, the next > enjoying immortal blifs. We may compare ourfclves to travellers; cannot we learn, then, to bear a few inSults on the road, when our journey is to be fo foon terminated Alas ! the theory is eafy, but the practice difficult indeed.
A few hours after finishing my last letter I left Laurel Grove, and, arriving fafe at York, determined to be conveyed to London in the Fly, as the most eligible manner, having now no fervants to attend me. In this vehicle I found a lady, about five and thirty years of age, of a very
agreeable
HUMAN LIFE. 15
agreeable aSpect' and interesting addreSs. She endeavoured to dissipate the gloom which appeared too visible on miy countenance; told diverting tales; and for a few moments made me almost forget my afflictions. Thus familiarized, she asked mje to what part of London I was going; I anSwered, to my lodgings at Mrs.
More’s, in B-------Street. Ah ! faid she,
with a pleasing furprize in her looks, Mrs. More is a very worthy woman ; I live in the fame street, and shall be very happy, MiSs, if you will often favour me with the pleaSure of your company.
Returning her thanks, I anfwered I should be proud of her friendship, and would Sometimes trouble her while at Mrs. More’s, but my stay there would not be of long duration I believed.
We infenfibly became more agreeable to each other, my dear Harriot, and at the end of our journey parted with reluctance. She insisted upon my dining with her the next day. I eagerly enquired her character of Mrs. More, who informed me she was a lady of good family, and much caressed by her friends, who were all people in high life; that her fortune was but moderate, ■ but, being generally beloved by her friends and relations, she passed very
little
6 THE MUTABILITY OF
little of her time at home: This news was far from displeasing to me, as I had flattered myfelf she would ferve me if in her power.
I had given her as yet no account of-myfelf, tho' Isherceived her curiosity was awakened; but her politeness withheld her from interrogatories. It was necessary I should Say Somethings Generous Senti-^ ments aroSe on the SurSaee, and almost determined me to make a stranger acquainted with my real misfortunes ; but powerful reflection Soon returned, , and made me reject that determination. Would a stranger believe me innocent when Such strong proofs appeared of my guilt.? Alas! I could fcarce disapprove her want of faith, which might be the conSequence. My history So uncommon a one, would she not imagine me an adventurer ? Fiction, dissimulation, I concluded, must be my resource.
I went according to promile. She received me with open arms. We dined. She offered me her friendship in the most obliging manner. I informed her that a near relation, with whom T had lived, having died not long since without providing for me, I was left in a manner destitute, and obliged to Seek Some means of
livelihood j
HUMAN LIFE. 17
livelihood ; that, as I had been always in genteel life, I determined, if possible, to find fome lady to whom I might be companion, on. which plan I was going to Ireland. I further informed her where a dear and valuable friend was endeavouring to procure a place Suitable for me.
My new friend promiSed her endeavours Should not be wanting for my w'el-fare, and wished me fuceefs and happi-nefs.-—Other difcourfe enSued, and at last I took my leave, promising to wait on her the next day to tea.
The time arrived. When I entered, she took me by the hand. Will you pardon the liberty I have taken, MiSs, Said she; there are So many imposing adventurers in the world, that, notwithstanding your outward appearance was fo prepossessing, I could Scarce trust it. I knew Mrs. More to be a woman of veracity, therefore Sent for her this morning to enquire particulars concerning you. She fatisfied my Scruples, by aS^ Suring me you w'as recommended to her
by Lady N-------, from whofe houSe you
are just returned. No doubt therefore remaining, I must implore your pardon for daring to take So great a liberty, and inform you that it was occasioned by
having
; THE MUTABILITY OF
having a fettlcment in view, which I thought you might approve. In justice to my friends, I could not introduce to them a perfon whofe character I was not certain would bear ferutiny; and fup-
poSe, should they require it. Lady N-----
would not be against writing a line in your favour.
Heavens! my dear Harriot, till then I recollected not that difadvantage,—I blushed, not knowing what anSwer to give ; however, I at last stammered out.
Lady N-------, Madam, would perhaps
honour me fo far, but fuch a request would be an impertinence of which I had much rather not be guilty.——— MiSs Meynell, who resides with her aunt. Lady Lorton, will thoroughly Satisfy the lady concerning me. She was my fchool-fellow-----
I mean not, ray amiable friend, interrupted vshe, impertinently to catechize you. I have heard Sufficient to be Satisfied concerning you. WaS it mySelf, I should not trouble any perSon, neither do I think my friends will, when L write
them particulars-----She then informed
me, that Mr. Villars was the youngest brother of a late Lord of the fame name ; that his father had intended him for the arpny, which he, being* of a studious turn,
did
HUMAN LIFE. 19
did not approve. Lord Villars, a month or two before he intended to purchaSe a commission for his Son, accidentally became acquainted with Mr. Davies, a Welsh gentleman of great fortune. Mr. Davies had a daughter, who was foie heirefs to his estate. Lord Villars thought Inch an opportunity was not to be missed, and proposed a match between Mr. Vii-lars and the young lady. Mr. Davies readily conSented, as it gratified his pride to marry his daughter into So noble a family. Mr. Villars was commanded to pay his addresses to MiSs Davies. He expostulated on the cruelty of compelling him to marry a woman almost void of natural understanding,—a woman totally different from his taste, and whom he could never love. But his arguments were in vain. My Lord fwore he should either marry her, or be alienated from his family. Finding all remonstrances disregarded, Mr. Villars was forced to comply, rather than fubmit to beggary. When the nuptial knot was tied, he conveyed his bride to ElySium-Place, and they have remained ever since in that Solitary retreat, where they now reside. Mr. Davies died in a few months after their marriage. A cousin of Mrs. Villars, having little or no fortune, resided with
them
> THE MUTABILITY OF
them as a companion, but died lately r upon which Mr. Villars applied to Mrs.. Gordon to recommend one to fupply her place. “ If you think, concluded She, MiSs Howard, you can be content with lb retired and confined a situation, Speak, and. I will immediately write to Mr. Villars.’*’
“ Such a Soliuide is my utmost ambition, Madam, if they can- approve of me from MiSs Meynell’s recommenda^
tion—Lady N------”—I burst into tears,.
unable to proceed.
“ You have been ill treated by her, I fee plainly, my dear MiSs Howard, returned she. Mr. Villars shall take you. from my recommendation alone—I am Sensible you will never give 'me reaSon to repent it.”
‘‘ I will not—indeed I will not, Madam,” was all I was able to utter for fome moments. She endeavoured to footff me by Saying the virtuous were always the peculiar care of Providence., 1 am Sensible of it Madam, returned I at last you are one of its instruments fent to comfort me, and I hope Some time hence will find it is not on an ungrateful or very unworthy object.
She fat down to write immediately, and I took up a book to divert my melancholy reflections while she was employed
HUMAN LIFE. ai
ployed. 1 nave oeen witri' her every day since, and find her fo very amiable, that it is with difficulty I can conceal from her my genuine misfortunes. She expects an anfwer from Mr. Villars every day; but, as you will be impatient to hear from me, I will wait no longer for it. Do you think I may venture to unbofom myfelf to my new friend Mrs, Gordon ? If you coincide with my inclination, which is strongly bent on ex-plicitneSs, Send me the letters I wrote to you from Montpelier, &c. as they will Save me the trouble of a recital which will too fenSibly affect me. Write an immediate anfwer, my dear Harriot, to
Your ever ^ectionate
SiLENA Howards
4
Mif$
2 THE MUTABILITY OF
t
Mifs Howard to Mifs Meynel.
Elyfum-Flace.
1 ES, I am arrived hither, my dearest Harriot. The day following that on which I diSpatched my letter to you, Mrs. Gordon received one from Mr. Villars, approving her recommendation, and adding, that his friend and neighbour, Mr. Shenkin, was in town, with his female appurtenances, which he thought a fortunate event, as he hoped they would afford me a corner of their coach to ElySium-Place. He had written to Mr. Shenkin on the fulyect, who was to inform Mrs. Gordon if he had no objection.
While I was Sitting with my friend that very evening Mr. Shenkin was announced. He is esteemed a worthy, friendly man, but unhappily has a gro-tefque appearance. He is short and fat, with fmall eyes, and a face fo red and carbuncled, that the beholder must infer from it the poffeffor is frequently guilty of inebriety; tho’ appearances often deceive us.
Your
n U M A N L I F E. 25
lour larvant, iviatam, laia ne, as ne entered the room ; I was determined to take the first hopportunity to shew my friendship for Mr. Pillars; and, as I was dreffed for Ranelagh, my daughter Win-ny faid I had better shew myfelf to the best advantage, as you was a stranger.— She understands decorum, I assure you, Matam.
I don’t in the least doubt it, Sir, returned Mrs. Gordon ; but I am happy t® fee my friends in any dreSs.
The Servant put forward a chair for him.
You Lontoners, Matam,> are all courtiers, faid he ; Cot plefs me, this is the youngdaddy I fuppofe I am to take charge of to nebbour Pillars.
I curtefyed an affirmative. Mrs. Gordon could with difficulty retain her countenance, but intreated him to be Seated.
To be Sure, laddys, Said he, (after trying feveral times to sit down without breaking his fword;) thefe warlike accoutrements are not calculated for peace or us country shentlemen.
True, Sir, returned Mrs. Gordon.’
He with a little warmth strove to extricate his fword from the chair, and Snapped the blade in the middle.
Wounds!
9
4 THE MUTABILITY OF
Wounds! laid he, this is the conic-quence of wearing troublefome pur tenances one is not accustomed to. I’ll have an iron one rhade——what matters it fo the sheath hides it, and there is a decent hilt; for certain I could not break that, and shall pleaSe my poor girl Winny by being dressed, as she fays, like a shentle-
man."-------But you must excufe me,
laddys—plague take this thing—you must excufe me—I must haste home, and fend
for another-------No time is to be lost.
-------1 will call again to-morrow, and
talk concerning our travels,—Your far-vant, faid he, bovnshg in a hurry, and departed.
Thus, my dear Harriot, ended our first interview with Mr. Shenkin. It will let you a little into his character, and perhaps divert you. Before misfortunes were heaped So fast upon me, I should mySelf have laughed at his Singularity ; nay, I must confeSs on the road he frequently revived my long dormant risibility, which I was obliged to assign to other caufes than him-felf and family.
The day after his first visit to Mrs. Gordon he paid a fecond, and introduced his beloved daughter and her mother. As I know you are fond of characters,
I Will
human life. 25
I will endeavour to deScribe them, tho*
I have very little skill ip that art. It is proper to bgin first with Mrs. Shenkin.
She is about sixty years of age, very short, and almost of a breadth equal to her height. Her face, as well as Mr. Shenkin’s is unfortunately very red, and full of pimples. As her daughter . is extravagantly fond of fashion, she has perfiiaded her to have a wig, So enor-mouSly widened wdth wool and hair, that the beholder who has Sensibility must be in continual anxiety when she moves her head, lest the load should fail and difplay her baldness. She is good-natured, but has Some share of pride, and is a genealogist. She boasts much of her knowledge in cookery, and has herSelf had the ingenuity to invent Several made-dishes.
MiSs Shenkin is the floating piece of her Sather and mother, who feldom or never contradict her. She is about’ thirty years of age, tall, thin, hard-featured, and naturally pale; but the latter defect she remedies by a good quantity of rouge, which she alledges no people of fashion fail making uSeof;shay, that it is abfo-lutely as neceSTary as powder. I had a longing desire to tell her they put it on
VoL. I.	C	m.orc
26 THE MUTABILITY OF
more juaiciouiiy men, tor i really was ashamed to be Seen ,with her on the road, she was fo bedaubed. She has likewiSe been improving herSelf in Italian, in which language Slie w'ould frequently -converSe with me, and laugh at her parents rusticity. The worst of a state of dependance is the not being at liberty to reprove ourfuperiors for their follies. MiSs Shenkin, like all Spoiled children, is of a violent disposition, but very aflhble while you coincide with her opinion. I only anSwered, that Mr. and Mrs. Shen-kin made amends for their rusticity by the ;goodneSs of their hearts. “ True, Howard, returned she, but it is impossible to forbear laughing at their extreme simplicity.” In short, Harriot, to conclude this -lady’s character, she is girlish, fantastical, and coquetish.
But let me return to my worthy friend Mrs. Gordon.
A week after the Shenkins were introduced to us, they fixed a time for our departure. We Saw it arrive with regret.— My new Friend oSten shed tears at the thoughts of our feparation.'—I was moved
likewife.-^--My ingratitude would have
been unpardonable if I had not, obligated as I am to her for an aSyliim, and by chance
conducted
HUMAN LIFE, 27
conducted to her friendship, which makes her benevolence still rife luperior to common acts.
Your kind letter came timely to recruit my fpirits--------You agree that I
should intrust this amiable woman with my history. 1 have therefore promiSed her, that when your packet comes to , hand, I will forward it by the fiist opportunity, and give a conciSe account of mySelf, which time would not then permit.
MiSs Shenkin pouted a little at leaving London, but her father telling her it w^as better for her health, and she should return next winter, a more pleaSant humour Succeeded.
We alighted the third evening at an inn on the borders of Wales. After tea MiSs Shenkin intreated me to walk with her. In my situation it would have been impertinent to reSuSe. The evening was
very warm.—At a distance we perceived a shady grove.
Heavens! Said she, my dear Howard, let us hasten to that delightful retreat— perhaps the charming Zephyr loiters there, and will afford us a gentle breeze.
Why, Madam, as we are alone, it is not fo proper to venture, for”——r—
C 2	“ O, for
»
sS THE MUTABILITY OF
“ O, for pity’s Sake, stop, ma bella Si-lena, Said she ; you need not fear,—here are no beaus to tempt us.”
“ As to beaus, according to the strict propriety of that word, returned I, I readily allow there would belittle danger: —Love is centered in themSelves—they wish only to difplay their fine deaths and genteel addreSs.—But, instead of them, we may meet with robbers---or rude country ’Squires, who”------
“ Well, J am in Spirits, Said she, to run the hazard ; it would only be an adventure.”------
“ An adventure !” echoed your Sriend. “ Aye, come along,” Said she, taking me under the arm.—We Soon arrived at the grove.
------—Ob! kind retreat.
To fliield one from the fultry heat,”
repeated she, Sealing herSelf at the foot of a tree, and desiring me to sit by her.
Night approached—---------no creature
was to be Seen-------1 began to be alarmed.------------------f
“ For Heaven’s Sake, Silena, enchant
me with your delightSul voice—Echo resides here—she will anSwer you.”
“ Oh!
' HUMAN LIFE. 29
“ Oh! by no means, Ma’am, at present; let us, I conjure, return to the inn.
-----1 canst bear the gloom of this place—
it reminds me of the for rows I have met with in life.”----
If you will not sing, I must, with my discordant Sounds, Said Slie, and began with
\
“ Che faro Senz-i Eurldice,” &c.
A gentleman rushed Srom behind the tree. -----Enchanting creature, Said he, catching her in his arms, thy tones would move the dead by their hideouSneSs, but the charms of thy perSon make ample recom-
pence.—-----Another came Sorward, but,,
perceiving by my countenance that I was in extreme terror, heshowed reSpectfully, and Said, I hope, Madam, you will ex-cuSe my friend’s behaviour--------he is mistaken-----------------------------be not alarmed, we will con-
duct you back Safe to the inn. Then going to fpeak to his companion, he
started,.	Good God !-------------MiSs
Shenkin !------1 hope your worthy father is-
well.’'
“ We left him fojust now, Sir,” returned she, with affectation.
My neighbourst daughter, my Lord.”
His
w
o THE MUTABILITY OF
His friend begged pardon for his rude behaviour, and was introduced as Lord Clandon.
MiSs Shenkin likewiSe found an opportunity to inform me her nighbour was Mr. Clairville, who- had about five years before bought an estate in their neighbourhood.
The gentlemen conducted us with the greatest civility and politenefs back to the inn : but, if we had been strangers, Lord Ciandon’s first addreSs Seemed to threaten different, and diSagreeable treatment, which I endeavoured afterwards to make MiSs Shenkin apprehend ; but she would not allow that she had deviated from rectitude.	'CS
At our return her father was very glad to meet Mr. Clairville. Lord Clandon was introduced to him. They foon got fociable over a bottle, and all was harmony.
MiSs Shenkin fixed her attention on Lord Clandon, as she flattered herSelf Slie bad made a conquest. His Lordship ob-ferved, with a leer to Mr. Clairville and mylelf, that he never beheld (o blooming a complection ; then joined in intreating a Song of me, as he had heard MiSs Shen-kinst request in the grove. The old folks
Seconded
HUMAN LIFE. 31
skconded them, and desired their daughter to usher forth her new guittar for me to* accompany a long with.------It was produ-
ced. Tho’ my Spirits were reduced to. the lowest ebb, not to appear obstinate and ill-natured, I complied. Their politeneSa made them paSs encomiums on my performance beyond its delert.
" The gentlemen accompanied us to Shen-kin-Hall. Mr. Clairville treated me wdth the greatest reSpeCst. Lord Clandon, when he had an opportunity, professed a passion for me. Such a declaration afforded me
great pain-----1 could only reject him by
alledging the difference of our situation in life ; but I fuppofe his designs are not honourable, tho’ he believes me unmarried.----Few men chuSe to take a partner
for life without fortune, especially thoSe of So gay a turn as Lord Clandon. The diS-siculty of a married woman’s being admitted into a family made me chufe a maiden appellation ; tho’ it will, I begin to fear,, precipitate me into many diSagreeable situations. There is Something extremely shocking in being addressed, confeious as I am my real situation will not admit of it, tho’ deferred by my hushand, Good God !' how cruelly am I plunged into distreSs !—■ I must not dwell orf this dreadful Subject,
it
2 THE MUTABILITY OF
it tears my heart, and almost overpowers ray fenSes.
Mr. Villars did me the honour to come hinifelf in his carriage to convey me to Elysium-Place. He received me in a polite friendly manner. I was much affected, and trembled exceedingly, at my introduction to him, from reflecting upon the way of life I was entering into, and doubting whether I should be capable of pleasing Mrs. Villars. At last I made shift to utter that I hoped his lady would not be diSpleaSed with me, and that I v/ould uSe my best endeavours to make my Self agreeable to her.
Be compofed, MiSs, returned Mr. Villars, kindly taking hold of my hand, I make no doubt of her being very happy in your friendship, from your own appearance, and the recommendation of our worthy friend Mrs. Gordon, besides the applauSes of this family.
I could fcarce forbear shedding tears, my dear Harriot; but my strong efforts against them happily prevailed, yet I could only curtefy thanks to Mr. Villars for his compliment.
I have been too short a time with Mrs.
Villars
H U M A N L I F E. 52
Villars to judge of her thoroughly, my dear friencl.' Hitherto she appears of an eaSy difposition, but very weak intellects. She laughs- incessantly, either at trifles or nothing. Mr. Villars is very polite and kind to her, but stis easily perceived that proceeds from the goodness of his heart, not his love for her, Tho’ I really do not think her a difagree-. able woman as to perSon, yet, to a man of his refined, fentiments and excellent understanding, fuch a wife must at first have occasioned many an unhappy hour, as she was not capable of enjoying the amufements in which he delighted. He is extremely fond ol music, and plays-admirably on feveral instruments. She has no taste for music, or improvement of the mind by reading. Mr. Villars, finding the latter amufement agreeable to me, is So obliging as to read to us often when we are at work. His lady frequently elopes from us, especially since he has been reading. BeliSarius, which she laughs at, and fays it is a fad, dull,, stupid story; She happened to be present at the conclusion of it, which you know runs thus: “ Bust alas! he did “ not furvive long enough for . the good of mankind in general, and the glory of his rpaster. The Emperor, quite
C 5	‘‘ enSeebled
I THE MUTABH.TTV OF
“ enfeebled and diSpirited, in the eve of “ life, paid the tribute of a tear to the “ memory of his departed hero, and “with that'ssiort regret all the good
councils of Belifarius passed away, and “ left no trace behind.”
Mrs. Villars burst out a laughing immoderately, Saying, “ I’m Sure the Emperor w^as much in the right of it—I am quite of his opinion—What signifies
remembering fuch a pack of stuff?------
I declare I have forgot every fyllable Fve heard.” Such is the woman I am going to paSs my days with, my dear friend. It is time for me to think of concluding this long epistle.
I shall Qxpect foon to receive your-packet of letters, that I may fulfil my promiSe to my worthy Mrs. Gordon. How thankSul ouoht I to be to Providence for conducting me to this folitude.—The situation of it is delightful.—Yet, alas ! my misfortunes. Spite of all efforts against it, will ariSe to my remembrance.. The ocean, when calm, recals to my mind happier days, when a tender father and affectionate hushand foothed my hours in peace and . love—but when the billows foam, 1 am all perturbation and distraction with it—I foreSee the gloomi-
neSs and miSery of my future days, almost
HUMAN LIFE. st
most forget the resignation and duty i owe to that omnipotent Being who formed me, and blush at my owm weakneSs. Such is the state of human nature, willing to do what is right, yet actingssiero-gatory to thaf will. How frail is mortality!—^—But I forget that I had flattered you with hopes of a conclusion to this weariSome epistle, and that it is high-time to Sign mySelf
Yours most affectionately,
Silena Howard:.
«
.'A
IT
%
Mifs H0WA.RD to Mifs Meynel.
1
Elyfim-Place.
X TAKE the earliest opportunity, my
dear friend, of returning you thanks for the packet, which I received very fafe, and have forwarded to Mrs. Gordon. The introductory part, w’liich it was necessary to prefix, afforded me great pain in the recital.
When,
; THE MUTABILITY OF
When, oh ! when shall I re-affume my
accustomed chearfulnefs! The recollec-
✓
tion of being almost a vagrant on earth almost overpowers me at times.
I feel much for Mrs. Villars’s want of SenSe : she will laugh as much at an affecting story as at a mirthful one. Mr. Villars, though accustomed to her manner, visibly receives a great shock from it before company. How unSuitably are they paired! But joy complete is not the lot of humanity, and for the best of pur-pofes it is fo appointed. This life is only a state of probation. Temporal good is too apt to leffen our dependance upon the great Author of our existence, relax our endeavours to pleafe him, and endanger our eternal felicity. Resignation and patience in afflictions, therefore, are very neceffary to promote our happiness both here and hereafter.
I loSe a great deal of diversion, I imagine, by not understanding the language of this country. The principal farmers wives (let not the idea of English ones enter your head) have fometimes the honour of sipping tea with us. Mr. Villars feems entertained with their simplicity, and recitals of news, while your .
friend, like a fooL is obliged to be silent,
and
HUMAN LIFE. jy
0
\
and gains nothing by her attention.—-Adieu! my Harriot.
Yours Sincerely,
Silena HowardS
Mifs Howard to Mrs. GordonS
Elyfuim-Placr.
Jn the midSl of my afflictions, whaS conSolation was it to meet with a friend whofe heart was governed by the dictates of humanity, and' who, unprejudiced by the maxims of the world, dared to take an intire stranger under her protection !—-Such a one I found in you Madam ; the remembrance of it will never be erafed from my heart, was I to live for ages.—• My gratitude and friendship for my dear Mrs. Gordon will never ceaSe, till I ceaSe to breathe. She has fent me to an aSy-lum of peace, at least as much tranquility as my foul is capable of receiving, til! time has in fome meafure worn off the recollection of my late forrows. Mrs. Villars is exceedingly kind to me;
Mr.
.■r
1 THE MUTABILITY OP
Mr. Villars treats me with the affection of a parent. How can I be better Situated ?
Must I awake So tender a heart to woe as that of my ever-dear, my amiable friend ? Why did you desire it.? I wish for both our fakes the task was cornpleated. I begin, Madam.
My father was--------alas! already my
tears begin to flow. Did that dear parent still exist, Melville dared not have blasted a reputation that-----Pardon my incohe-
rence, dear Mrs. Gordon ; I will, if possible, SuppreSs the torrent that rushes forth,
and well nigh overwhelms me.---------But
refolutions are fooner formed than preserved.
My father was the third Son of the Earl of Walters, his name Belmont. He had just attained his one and twentieth year, when my grandfather died, leaving him lOjOool. He was then an ensign in the guards, but foon after marrying, MiSs Nai-lor, he Sold out, and they Settled in a houSe afiew’- miles Srom London.
My mother was sister to Lady N---------.
They both had very Small fortunes, tho* great connections, and were first-cousins
to the Duke of----------. I w'as the only
child my parents ever had, undoubtedly therefore was treated with the greater ten-dernefs, and when of a proper age was put
into
HUMAN LIFE. sr
into one of the-greatest fchools (or at least one that bore the greatest name) in London. There I met with my dear Harriot
Meynel------there we formed a friendship
in our infant years which has continued to a maturer age.
Mr. Meynel was a clergyman, who had a fmall living in Berkshire. MiSs Murray and her sister, on a visit in that neighbourhood, became acquainted with him. They were of a good family, but their father lost his fortune by gaming : he had been lucky enough, however, to procure a place under government, which Supported them gentcely, nay, elegantly ; but no provision was made for their Subsistence after his death. He hoped, that, as they were handfome women, they would make their fortunes by marriage ; a very precarious chance. At that period, indeed, he had Some reaSon for this hope, as the Eari of Lorton was then paying his addresses to the elder MiSs Murray. Love prevented the other from making her fortune according to his wishes. She and Mr. Meynel exchanged affections. Her sister, who always had high ideas, and a great deal of pride, reproved her for being fo mean-fpirited—Her father stormed—But all was to no purpofe. The lovers choSc to embrace a limited income tosether, rather
V-/	7
than
3 THE MUTABILITY OF
than be Separated : they married. Her sister from thenceforward cast ossS all regard for her, and Soon after gave her hand to the Earl of Lorton.
Mi'S. Meynel, neglected by her father and Sister, was, notwithstanding, very happy with her hushand, and frequently indulged with the company of her dear friend Mrs. Moreton. About four years after their, marriage Harriot was born. Mrs. Moreton, who was indefatigable in their favour, made interest and procured Mr. Meynel a living about that time, of fix hundred a year.
Mr. Murray died wdthout feeing Mrs. Meynel, and left fcarely a fufficiency to pay his debts.
Mr. Meynelst income being increaSed; at a proper age. they fent their beloved daughter to the fchool where I found her, from whence she often ufed to visit Mrs. Moreton. Before we left fchool Mrs. Meynel died. At length Harriot returned to her father. He fell ill. He had faved shut a few hundreds. What was to become of his darling.? She was beautiful to excess ; but beauty is only a Snare to betray its possessor. > He trembled Sor her fate, and was in great anxiety on her account, when he received the following note from
Mrs.
HUMAN LIFE. 41
Mrs^ Moreton, who was at London, and had heard of his dangerous illneSs.
LET not care for vour child embit-:
J
ter your last moments, my dear Sir. My esteem for you, and regard for my ever-arCiiable and departed friend Mrs. Meynel, will make me endeavour all my weak efforts can for the welfare of their Harriot.
1 will strive to make Lord and Lady Lorton fenSible of what they ought to do for her. Should they remain obdurate, she' shall be my adopted child. Calmly resign her, therefore, to me, while your diSem-bodicd foul takes its flight to that Elysium where all Sublunary afflictions are buried in oblivion. Adieu.
M. Moreton.”
%
Mrs. Moreton’s letter had the desired effect. The good man, trusting in her and Providence, resigned his Soul to its Maker.
This worthy woman, being apprized of his death, immediately came and conveyed MiSs Meynel to London. Lord and Lady Lorton were then in Ireland. She wrote them word in the most affecting manner of Harriot’s loSs. They were not quite proof against her eloquence, and anfwered, that when they came to London they perhaps
might
> THE MUTABILITY OF
might fee her. Their only Son, whom they doated on, was then going on his travels, and was to Set out from Dublin at
“t
the fame time they should fet out for Loi> don,
Mrs. Moretonss health declined daily. Lady Lorton at last arrived. Mrs. Moreton Sent to inform her of her ill health and inability to wait on her, with the most Soothing intercession for her young friend Harriot. Lady Lorton honoured them with a visit, and complimented my friend on her beauty, withal advising her to make a better uSe of it than her mother had done, and promised to give her an opportunity by introducing her into public.
The worthy, the friendly Mrs. Moreton died, and left Harriot under the protection of her aunt. Mifs Meynel shed many tears for the lofs of her best friend. Lady Lorton’s haughtineSs at times diS-quieted my amiable Harriot, notv/ith-standing her vivacity, of which she has a-great share. In public she was exceedingly admired, in private had many good offers; but, fortunately, no title making application, her aunt was not fo much dif-pleafed at her refusing them. She took her to Dublin with the family, where they will continue till next winter. Lord and Lady Lorton, she finds, intend then to
leave
N
HUMAN LIFE. 43
leave her behind with an intimate friend in high life, to fee if she can make her fortune there, or at least till their fon, who next winter is to return from his travels, is properly married, lest her beauty should enSnare him. Thus at prefent rests the Situation of my beloved Harriot Meynel..
After making you acquainted with my friend’s history, it is time to return to my own. At sixteen I was taken from fchool; half a year after which my tender and affectionate mother died—a lofs irreparable. My father was almost inconlblable : and foon after, to heighten bis affliction, he lost his whole fortune by the bankruptcy of a merchant in whofe hands he had lodged it, till he should purchaSe a landed estate which he had in view. His heart was almost broke at this Second shock: Folding me in his arms, he would often exclaim, .Dis for thee, my dear Adelaide, I weep.; as Sor mylelf, I shall not long
want it now my Almeria is gone----------but
for thee to be left a prey to inhuman strangers, without a parent to guide thee, or fortune to shield thee from the frowns of an unpitying world, alas !--------
Ah ! my dear, my honoured father, interrupted I, the virtuous precepts you have taught me v/ill never be obliterated from my memory,—I hope you will live long
to
1 THE MUTABILITY OF
to guide me; but, should that blessing be denied, Providence, I trust, will direct and protect me. • The Almighty never forfakes the innocent: he has promiSed to become a father to the orphan, a friend to the distressed, if they invoke his fuc-cour.
My darling child, anSwered this tender parent, your Sentiments afford me un-Speakable pleaSure. May you always continue to cherish them !
He wrote to the Earl his brother, who, tho’ he had not been an affectionate relation, then took compassion on us, Settled 400I. a year on my Sather during life, and promiSed to take care of me alter his dc-ceale.
A heart formed like ray father’s, you may be fure, expressed his gratitude in the strongest terVns,
Some months after, his health declin-ing, by the physician’s advice he consented ho go to Montpelier Sor its recovery. It amended a little. I corresponded with Mifs Meynel, and gave her an account of every particular that passed ; therefore will now refer you to my letters to her, as they contain my fentuments at the time they were written, and will Save me many a Severe pang, by relieving me from a Sresh recital of my past misfortunes.
Mifs
HUMAN LIFE. 45
Mifs Belmont to Mfs Meynel.
Montpelier,
Al HE amendment of my father’s health makes me quite happy. We have been together at a delightful concert, performed at Madame D’Ancour st ; and Such
a youth was there, my dear Harriot!-----
the ladies all doaton him, “ he is fo char-^ mant f' in short, the Marquis'of Melville . has gained the appellation of the bei An-glois. My heart is still cold as ice, tho’ I have received many douceurs from him; my dear girl. I think you would have retired with the lofs of yours, as he has a great deal of vivacity, and is just what you admire. We have had a ball too, my Harriot, and he did me the honour to dance with me : but he hasstn earnestneSs in his expression, a kind of fury and fire in his deportment, that is to me disagreeable. My father admires him, therefore I am Silent. It matters not, as an acquaintance, what he is. The reaSon of his being here is to attend a rich old uncle, v/ho was recommended to this place to.prolong his life.
>	I was
.6 THIS MUTABILITY OF
0 ■ ^ .
I was interrupted from my pen by a visit from the Marquis of Melville. Being alone, he made uSe of the opportunity feriouSly to declare a passion for me, which I returned as raillery, thinking it really fo ; but he affured me with the utmost earnest-nefs he could not live without me. Oh!
what an Oroondates!------quite a romance
hero.” His language made it very difficult for me to fupprefs laughter. 1 told his Lordship I found he had been Some time in France by his very gallant address. My father’s entrance relieved me, and I withdrew to inform you of my new lover. What do you think of my being a Marchionefs ? Heaven forbid!------at least that I
should become Melville’s wife. His hasty temper would keep me in a continual terror and tremor. He has too much fpirit for my taste. Adieu! my dear Harriot, Continue to love your very affectionate
Adelaide Belmont.
V
From
XX VJ iri rx IX j-< i A
f rom the Same to the Same.
Montpelier.
►*
f
>
V
A-;
. Ik »
H! my dear friend, my fatherfs re-
lapSed. I am very uneaSy-1 fear much
that he will never recover. This Mafquis, too, torments me past description; she is either with or writing to me continually. My Sather Seems to favour his addresses ; that adds to my affliction, for to be Serious with you, my dear Harriot, the Mar-ejuis really has a violence of temper which would intirely prevent my loving him as a huSband ; I should rather fear him ajj a ty-jant.—My father fends for me to attend him,
I am undone!--1 informed you of the
Marquis’s hasty temper.-He has artfully gained my father’s conlent-A
private marriage too !—-Good God ! what
will
3 THF MUTABILITY OF
will become of me Must I diSobey my father—let him retire with lorrow to his grave, by denying what I fear is his last ' request? Ah! no—I must not. Alas! he hourly declines : his the height of his affection makes him exhort me to it.
“ My Adelaide, faid he, receive the Marquis when he next comes, as your huf-
band.-----He has my confent.------But for
'both your fakes the ceremony must be performed in private, as his uncle, on whom he depends for six thouSand a year, would disinherit hihi, was he to know of it. He is in an ill state of health, as well as mySelf, therefore you will not long be obliged to preServe the Secret. The Marquis is handSome and' amiable; you have no prepoffession, therefore cannot reject him. Confent, my dear Adelaide, to let your marriage take place the day after to-morrow. I cannot furvive many days, and it will make me die contented, as I shall then be certain of your being provided for. As to my brother, tho’ he has kindly bestowed his bounty upon me, I cannot be fure he will on you after my de-
ceaSe.------1 have not confidence in him
concerning you.------Will you confent,
Adelaide?”
Ah ! Harriot, gueSs if you can the horror of my foul at fuch a request—the request
A
H U M A N n 1 B li. 49
queii or auying ratner. i nat uica iiiciuc
me immediately comply, “ I confent. Sir, faid I, if-that will make you happy.’^ He thanked me, and I retired to weep. Yes, Harriot, I will facrisice myfelf for the Satisfaction of the tenderest of parents : but, alas ! I cannot love the man destined to be my huSband.
I have Seen tlie Marquis, who is in raptures at my conSent. Oh ! the vanity of his Sex ! He imagines ifiy coolneSs to him proceeds from the being shocked at my dear parent’s approaching end. Undoubtedly I am feverely fo; but, if otherwife, I should behave the fame to him.’ Tomorrow—alas ! to-morrow lam to become a bride !—a mournful one, indeed. The worthy and Rev. Mr. Blake, who is going to leave this place, is to unite us. This is the last time, therefore, your unfortunate friend will have a right to SubScribe herfelf
Adelaide Belmont.
't
t
\
VoL. I,	.D	From
I
J
THE MUTABILITY GF
\
From the Same to the Same.
Montpelier.
M Y father Seems to acquire strength
and health, which enables me to bear with the greater fortitude my having been three days the wife of Melville. If the ladies of this place were acquainted with the fe-cret, what an object of envy Should I become } They are all enchanted with the Marquis, who has no eyes for any one but me. Indeed he is tender and affectionate, —^I ought now to have a reciprocal affection.------1 must, I will, bring myfelf to
esteem him.—^But he has fomething in
his manner that terrifies me------1 cannot
•without restraJ*"^ 'Acquaint him with my Sentiments.—He has not that foStnefs and delicacy in his manner which I should have looked for in a hushand : but, as my fate is fixed, I must make the best of it. He has given me a title—He has received me to his arms without a fortune—Where is my gratitude.? Alas! my Harriot, I reprove myfelf for the want of it in this point. How many would rgoice in my
Situation .J*
HUMAN Lib L. 51
iKuanon r vaniiy^ muu wuiucu aucnuant ss the female breast, whither art thou fled ? Hither sty and lull mine to repoSe. Ah ! my friend, in vain I invoke her aid, having hitherto rejected her. Reflection taught me to deSpiSe the transitory honours of
this variable world--------My wishes were
placed on folitude and calm repole.
I am charmed with the History of NouS-chirvan the Great, King of Persia. The instription he caufed to be put on his diadem shews a great fortitude of foul---------It
runs thus:
‘ What is long life, or what a glorious reign,
‘‘ Since our fucceflbrs quick upon us tread !
My fathers left this crown J that royal train “ Myfelf inuft clofe, and mingle with the dead.”
t
I was obliged to lay aside my pen, as the Marquis came to remind me it was time to attend Madame D’Oran’s private concert. My father, tho’ not able to go himfesh insisted upon my going; and the Marquis conducted me. His kind attention excited the whishers of the company, who imagine me still Mifs Belmont. Some t^entured to compliment me on the conquest I had made, which I only anSwered by a Sinile. MademoiSelle Albe added, I,
D 2	was
;:2 THE MUTABILITY OF
was very fortunate, for she thought him the handlbmest creature existing. She fpoke itwith fuch earnestneSs, that I have since beheld him with more attention, to find it out. IS manly beauty alone could captivate, he certainly claims the prize of all hearts. When publicly acknowledged as his wife, I undoubtedly shall be much envied, which I am not ambitious of: but that is more easily borne than a pitiable condition, as it argues that the object must be happy. Adieu! my Harriot.
Prom the Same to the Same.
Montpelier:
I Begin to esteem the Marquis, and with
lefs reluctance admit his endeavours to pleaSe me. He-abferves it, and is more assiduous than ever. But, alas! pleafure is never unalloyed by pain.—^My father is relapfed, and I fear for him beyond expression. .Ditetally Speaking, I fear for mySelf. He is advancing to happineSs, and, as he Says, to meet his beloved Almeria, never more to be Separated. I am going to ex-‘ perience the most inexpressibly cutting Sorrow by the loSs of him. He is constantly returning me thanks for my dutiful be*
haviour,
human life. 53
haviour, as he terms it, in receiving the Marquis for my huSband, as it makes him meet his end with compoSure and content, perfectly fatisfied with leaving me under the protection of So .tender and affectionate a hushand.
Alas! my dear Harriot, my father draws very near his end. The physicians. Say he cannot live above two days longer. My dear Melville is continually confoling me, and endeavouring to alleviate my affliction. I begin to love him. My father feems quite pleafed, tho’ in pain, by oh,.* Serving his kindneSs to me. Gratitude awakens love in my heart; for my father’s skke I repeat I love him.
The dreadful moment is passed. I have lost the best, the tenderest of fathers. Grief is best indicated by silence.—Adieu 1
I cannot hold my pen. Pity your distressed-
s
Adelaide.
§
A
Fronfr
y
4 THE MUTABILITY OF
From the Same to the Same.
Montpelier.
A S Soon as I regained Sufficient Spirits
to write, I acquainted my friends in England of the lofs I had fustainbd. Lady N-------was fo kind as immediately to an-
fwer my letter, and affure me of a welcome reception at her houSe, withal advising me to stay as short a time as possible in a place where I must remain my own mistreSs, for that a young woman without a protector was in a dangerous and improper situation.
How affedtionate, how kind, how thoughful, is her Ladyship for my welfare! Indeed, my dear .Darriot, her letter made me shed tears of thanks and gratitude. It was greatly beyond my expecta-fion, or my poor departed father’s, that after his deceaSe she would make fuch an offer; otherwife I believe he would not have desired me to marry the Marquis, or I have consented, as f did not then esteem him : but my regard Sor him now daily increases, he is So exceedingly tender and affectionate, dedicating to me all the time he can possibly Spare without creating SuSpicion.
I shewed him Lady N---------—-st letter.—
He caugsht me in his arms, and earnestly
intreated
HUMAN LIFE. 55
intreated me not to leave him, but to make fome excufe to her Ladyship, Such as an indifferent Slate of health, which would render it necessary for me to stay telling me, at the fame time, he was fure his uncle (not that he wished his death) could not furvive many weeks longer, and then he should have the happineSs of publicly acknowledging me for his wife; which would thoroughly remove all Lady
N------st Sufpicions to my prejudice, should
she harbour any before that period : he added, that it would be running too great hazard to acquaint her with the fecret before his uncle’s death, as our letters miglit mifcarry, or fall into strange hands, as well as for various other obvious reaSons and he was certain, he faid,^py father, if living, would be of his opishon.	;
I readily aquieSced, and wrote to Lady
N------, informing her-that my health was
sh indisterent, I could not quit Montpelier till it was in fome degree re-established, and I shad got the better of the shock occa^ Sioned by the lofs of my tender father ; but that I should then with the greatest pleasure throw mySelf at her feet, and return her thanks perfonally for her very kind and affedtionate attention to me.
I hope foon to hear, my dear Harriot, that, among the train of lovers you meet»
Vf^ith-
6 THE MUTABILITY OF
with at Lady Lortonst, you have fixed on and made yourfelf happy with one. Wait not for what rommantic youth calls
love,' my Harriot------it is mere folly. I
now love the Marquis as much as it is possible 1 believe for a woman to love her huSband. That fear of him with which I was once possessed is almost conquered. Parents and friends are, doubtleSs, the best judges of what will conduce to our felicity. ThoSe violent passions we So frequently read of are very feldom, if ev’^er, found in real life. Girls, by reading fuch romances, imbibe notions which they never eradicate.— Love at first sight, as it is called by fome giddy females, is more frequently attracted by the deaths than the man ; and the generality of the Sex are So blinded, that they do not till it is too late (I mean after marriage) perceive their error. But that will never be the cafe of my Harriot. When She does fix her affection, I am certain it will be on an object for whom she will never have caufe to blush. AVith this civil conclusion I remain, my ever-loved friend,
N
Yours most faithfully,
'	Adelaide.'
i
Prop
\
HUMAN LIFE. 57
y
From the Same to the Same.
Montpelier]
• %
AdemoiSelle Albe is become my tormentor. Notwithstanding my frequent denials and excufes of ill health, she is perpetually haunting , me, and launching out into almost indecent encomiums on the Marquis. When he is prefent, she ogles, flirts, and practices all her arts, to gain his attention. He deSpifes her grimace, and urges me to behave rudely to her, in order to free myfelf from her folly. The only excufe I can form for her is, she knows not that we are united beyond a power of Separation; but under this Supposition her conduct is highly Genfurable. Is not the woman chargeable with groSs treachery who exerts all her charms and art to Seduce the affection of an amiable lover from the perSbn for. whom she pretends to have a friendship f But she is a coquette unworthy my attention. Yet I am fometimes tempted to pity her, and almost imagine she hast a sincere ungovernable passion for' the Marquis,, which urges her, though in So imprudent a manner, to discover it to him,
L 5	in
8 THE MUTABILITY OF
in hopes of moving his eompassion, and, by ripening that Sentiment into love, of bringing about a marriage between them. Poor MademoiSelle Albe, if Such really be the caSe, pity is indeed thy due!
Mr. Ancram, Melville’s uncle, is now much better, and Sometimes ventures out. I have Seen him at Madame D’O-ran’s, and endeavoured to make mySelf jpleasing to him hitherto to no purpofe. He has an aversion to women in general, but Madame D’Oran is rather a favourite, therefore I hope through her means to become one too,
Madame Hermond is the most agreeable lady, to my taste, that I have met with here. She is perfectly amiable, having a fine perfon and addreSs, accompanied with a brilliant wit and a pleasing modesty. It is a Sort of wit, which, when displayed, hurts not thole with whom she converSes ; not that bon ton or pert vivacity which shocks a feeling mind by its rudeneSs, Madame Her^ mondst witticifms are refined, being the reSult of a clear head and an honest and liberal heart. But, alas ! engaging as she is beyond defcription, she is a miferable victim to wealth. Her guardians compelled her to marry MonS. Hermond, a
man
\
HUMAN LIFE. 59
man many years her Senior, a Sot, and a fool ; a man who has Spent all his days, and still continues to Spend them, in dei-bauchery ; and who, by being accustomed to converSe and cohabit with the vilest of wo nen. thinks there is no difference in the conduct of the fex. Hence he is continually fuSpicious of his own and his wife’s honour; and when in company, if any gentlemen happen to be prefent, she must, not laugh, fmile or converSe but in a laconick way; thus concealing the fenSe Heaven has fo bountifully bestowed upon her. In short, Harriot, to defcribe the. wretched life she leads is beyond the power of my pen. In order to have the pleafure of her company, before him I appear grave, referved and prim, to a ridiculous degree, whence he concludes I am a tolerably decent young woman, and therefore gives her free leave to Spend .as much of her time as she pleafes with me. Few men besides the Marquis visit me, and him MonS. Hermond imagines to be my assured lover. Madame Hermond avails herSelf of her hushand’s permission, and we frequently read and work alternately together. How deferving is this lady of a better fate !
Your
\
o THE MUTABILITY'.DF
Your heart is still your own, you avow, and thank Heaven your aunt leaves you free, as you are in no hurry to become a wife ; but that you Sincerely congratulate me on my happineSs in having fo amiable a huSband, and that you long for a peep at us both. Curiosity excites you to wish to view Melville, and love, friendship, every tender fentiment, make you long to fee his Adelaide again. Ah ! my dear Harriot, when I return to England as Melville’s wife, Lady Lorton must resign you to me, to complete my happineSs. You must make my dv/elling yours till a Sovereign commander Snatches you from me ; then indeed, I must yield, though reluctantly. Adieu! my dear, my amiable friend.
N
J
From the Same to the Same.
Montpelier.
E are frequently Surprized at the conduct of others, becauSe we know not the motives of their acting in fuch a manner as to our apprehension appears ridiculous. I was led to this reflection
by a feene that occurred yesterday at my
houSe
HUMAN LIFE. 6i
houSe. Madame Hermond came to tea. We had Scarce commenced the ceremony, when her hushand was announced. I gueffed he came as a Spy, tp be convinced all was Safe ; and therefore was very glad we were alone, and that not even the Marquis was with us : but my joy was of short duration ; for Melville Soon after entered with Monf. D.Dran. D’Oran is very gay and fprightly ; he is hushand to the lady I mentioned in a former letter. I made a ftiff curtefy, and formally inquired after his lady. He burst out into an immoderate laughter. (Poor Madame Hermond coloured, SenSible of the reafon of my reserve, and dreading a storhn.) Monf. Her-raond stared at D.Dran. Melville, who knew Hermond’s jealous difposition, bid his friend sit down, and apologized for him to MonS. Hermond by Saying he had just met with a droll adventure in the street, which he SuppoSed still kept up his risibility.
Hermond Seemed dissatisfied with that excufe, and SuSpicious of he knew not what; and his wife’s changing colour (thro’ fear) was another alarm to him.
D.Dran looked exceedingly furprized at us all, never having found me in So referved a humour before. At last, recovering his fpeechi he exclaimed, “ Mais mon
Dieu!
st THE MUTABILITY OF
Dieu! MiSs Belmont!”------1 found my
amiable friend was in great distreSs, lest his vivacity should occasion a diSagreeable return from her hushand, and thereSore I endeavoured to stop his proceeding by Saying, with a prudish air, “ Let me beg, Sir, you will not Speak So loud, for my head aches exceedingly—I believe you fat too long after dinner to day, for you are in prodigious fpirits.” He was, notwithstanding, going to exclaim again, when I gave Melville a nod, who under pretence of bufinefs took him away. Before he departed, however, he insisted upon my waiting on Madame D’Oran as to-day ; “ and my dear Madame Hermond you must come too,” added he in his thoughtleSs way. Melville then forced him from us at a fortunate moment, for he was on the point of feconding his request by kissing the lady’s hand, which would have driven Monf Hermond almost beside himfelf'; as it was, he was very much diSpleaSed, and fwore by his good faith that D’Oran was a very impertinent fellow to dare to take Such liberties with his wife as to call her his dear, that it was with difficulty he had restrained himfelf from kicking the puppy out of the room, &c. but on my account he would not cauSe a disturbance. As for Melville, he appeared to be a worthy young
gentleman,
human life. 62
gentleman, but wondered he would countenance fuch a fellow, who knew not how to behave in modest women’s company, or my decent behaviour would have kept him in awe.
I alledged, in D’Oran’s defence, that he was in liquor, and laid the blame on the Marquis for introducing him in that condition : but the converfation was not to drop fo. MonS. Hermond began to wrangle with his unhappy wife ; he fwore she should never more viSit Madame D’Oran, for he did not doubt that she would be very ready to engage in an intrigue with that fellow, if it had not commenced before. -----She must have given him encouragement, or he would never have dared to address her in that free manner; with a great deal more provoking nonfenSe much to the fame purpofe ; which his poor wife anfwered only by tears. I took the liberty, notwithstanding his fury, to harangue in her favour. By degrees his rage fub-Sided, and I brought him to own, with reluctance, that if D’Oran was intoxicated, it rendered his behaviour lefs culpable ; but he insisted, nevertheless, his wife Sliould desist from visiting Madame D’Oran. As for me, 1 was a decent, prudent young woman, and, provided I would promise not to admit that impudent fellow
into
#
k THE MUTABILITY OF
into company when his wife was prefent, she might continue my acquaintance. So faying, he repaired to his iiSual companions. Poor Madame Hermond’s Spirits were exceedingly depressed, and I could not perfuade her to stay fupper
The Marquis and Monf. D’Oran returnr ed when they found the oddity was gone. The latter entered with an obfequious bow, and “ I hope I have the honour to See Mifs Belm.ont well,” was uttered with an air, of gravity at which it was my turn to laugh.
“ I am practising propriety of behaviour, faid he, in cafe I should fall into company with MonS Hermond again. My God! I could not conceive what you would be at with your preciSenefs and formality^ Indeed, I had heard the wretch was jealous of his wife to deSperation, and that his Sentiments were particular on every point, but I had no idea of his being here, as he never attends Such good company, neither had I any conception mirth was a crime. You cannot form in your imagination, my dear MiSs Belmont, hov; Surprized I was at your behaviour and Melville’s. Bon Dieu! O the wretch ! he deServes the most Severe punishment for thus torturing So amiable a woman!’’
Certainly
/
/
HUMAN L I F E. .	65
Certainly my poor friend’s fate is to be lamented ; but our most unbounded pity cannot redreSs her misfortune. To be continually Suffering the SuSpicioh of her huSband for the worst of crimes, which she is innocent of, requires fortitude, patience, and a confidence in God, who is the obferver of her hard endurance. She is possessed of thefe virtues, but at the fame time her SenSibility of his ill treatment caufes her infinite pain.
I
I have received another kind letter
from Lady N--------, who urges me to come
to her as foon as my health will permit. I must continue to deceive her, as it as impossible for me to quit the Marquis,
\
I am extremely shocked, my dear Harriot, at the dreadful news which has just arrived; a certain account that the ship which the worthy Mr. Blake failed in for Leghorn was wrecked very near the def-tined port. One man only efcaped, who Saw all the rest perish. We have now no witness left of our marriage, only a certificate remains which that unfortunate man left with me. Yet it is not from felfishnefs that I bemoan his lofs.' I have no reafon to distrust my dear Mel-
villest
56 THE MUTABILITY OF
villest honour. Mr. Blake’s lofs will be Severely felt by many. He was a father to,the friendless—He cherished the dif-
treffed—He was------but, alas I he is now
no more. Tears fucceed each other fo fast I cannot write.—Adieu!
From the Same to the Same.
Montpelier.
Mr. Ancram, diSgusted with Made-
moifelle Albe for behaving with her accustomed ridiculous fond-ness to the Marquis, has forbidden his nephew to fpeak to her, and Seems diSpoSed to be rather favourable to me. Melville is highly delighted at it, and conceives hopes beyond my expectation. That they may be happily fulfilled is my constant and ardent wish, for I fear Slander with her envenomed tongue will aid fuS-picion, and openly calumniate my intimacy with the Marquis, and his attentions to me.
I canst help complaining to you, my amiable Harriot, of this private marriage—^it wounds my delicacy. Though I love Melville, and he is the tenderest of
hushands,
HUMAN LIFE. 67
hushands, I am distreffed. To be obliged to fee him privately—to give the world an opportunity of misjudging my conduct —to conceal my situation from my
affectionate aunt-----thefe circumstances,
I Say, distress me much. I comfort myfelf, however, with Melville’s hope that the neceffary period of thefe fufferings will be but short.
That wretch Hermond will not let me See his amiable wife fo often as uSual, I miss her agreeable company exceedingly, and am obliged to Supply her place with Madame D’Oran. She is an agreeable woman, but she has not the Sprightly wit of Madame Hermond ;—the difference between them is great indeed,— Adieu ! my dearest friend.
from the Same to the Same.
Montpelier.
Our hopes are blasted, my dear Harriot. I shall not now have an opportunity of ingratiating myfelf into Mr. fVncramss favour. His health amends fo Slowly, that the physicians have ad-viSed him to go to Nice, thinking that
air
68 THE MUTABILITY OF
air will be more beneficial to him. As-the Marquis must attend him, he is extremely grieved at the thoughts of parting with me. Indeed, he would fain perfuade me to follow him to that place, and live incog at fome houfe under a feigned name. I have argued on the impropriety of Such a conduct-; and he at last, unwillingly, has confented to leave me behind. He will not permit me by any means to go to England, as I shall be nearer him here. lam very low fpi-rited at the thoughts of his departure, but must fubmit, as it is unavoidable.
Mademoiielle Albe has been dange-roufly ill,, and. was So imprudent as to entreat an interview with the Marquis, who returned a polite refuSal. She then fent for me. Upon being informed of her Situation, I immediately complied with:her request. She complained much of Melville’s treatment; and declaring, with a vehemence that indicated distraction, how much she adored him, notwithstanding his cruelty to her; begged me to intercede with him in her behalf, So far as at least to treat her with common humanity—to visit her once—to Say he wished her health—to------
I prevented her proceeding by asking if the Marquis had ever given her reafon to imagine he loved her.
H U M A N L I F E. 69
She started. No, returned she, I canst fay he ever did ; but perhaps he might
if you had never come to this place.----------
Destruction to my peace of mind!- he loves only you, and I adore him in vain. Ah! happy woman, you will fome time hence become his v/ife; while I—racks and tortures !— while I must end -my days in miSery.
A deliriKm Succeeded, she talked wildly, and in rage. I ,was affrighted, but ■ unwilling to leave her in that state. In half an hour’s time she became more calm. I then reafoned with her on the folly and indifcretion of giving way to her passions, which she ought to endeavour to Subdue; and, being obliged to dissemble, told her she was mistaken in thinking the Marquis had fixed his affection on me ; but that I believed he was engaged to a young lady in England "who bore Some reSemblance to my perSon, which made him covet my company. I hoped she would reflect upon the impropriety of her conduct, and, fince it was impossible to force the regard of Melville, endeavour to forget him by avoiding his prefence, as abSence was generally found the best means of relief by thofe unfortunate pershns who entertained a hopeless passion.
‘‘ A hope-
. )
70 THF MUTABILITY OF
A hopeieSs passion ! Madam, returned (he with a countenance full of agony.—“ A hopeless passion ! Do you Speak of me with fuch contempt? Her delirium returned, and I was forced to quit, the room, extremely shocked at her condition.
In a few days after, the fever having left her, and her health amending, she fent for me again : the refult of which was, her Submissively begging my pardon, and blaming herSelf highly Sor her want of temiper to fo kind a friend. She owned, that on reflection she was Sensible that I had given her Salutary advice ; and, being convinced of her past misconduct, she hoped for the future not to act in fo reprehensible a manner ; and, to prevent her relapsing, she added, she was going to bid adieu to Montpelier, and the too dear object of her affection, as foon as her health would permit; for an aunt of hers, who resided at Paris, having long wished to fee her, she should on the prefent occasion fulfil her desires by going to that gay city ; and, concluded she, with a fmile, perhaps I may find a new lover there who may make me amends for all I have fuffered on account of the Marquis.
I sin-
HUMAN LIFE. 71
I sincerely wish you may, returned I; nothing is more probable. Nature has been bountiful to your perSon, and where the heart is not pre-engaged you must conquer.
Ah ! MiSs Belmont, you flatter.—--------
Alas ! there are few men to be met with comparable to the Marquis.—I shall never love any other, faid she, sighing, how
then can lever be happy f------But, added
she, starting from her feat in a fprigbtly manner, I will revenge myfelf on the perfidious Sex, at least thofe 1 can enthral:— To uSe them with cruelty, and exert my power, shall be my diversion.
I could not refrain from laughing, my dear Harriot, at the drollery with which she recited her intention; but I returned her no anSwer, and Soon after took my leave.
This unhappy woman’s situation would affect me more, did I not imagine that the amufements of Paris, and the gallantry always in vogue there, will foon Set her heart at eafe. She is a perfect coquette. The Marquis’s inattention piqued her ambition, vanity, and Self-love. There are few beaus here, therefore he is the more confpicuous. I don’t doubt but she will foon forget him. But I must lofe him, Harriot—He will be compelled to leave
me
i.
THE MUTABILITY OF
me foon. If it could be done without an ' apparent breach of decorum, with what pleaSure should I attend him! How great will be my anxiety and regret at parting with him ! Ah ! Harriot, perhaps we may
never meet again.------Who can tell what
will happen? Adieu! During my existence I shall ever remain
i
Your truly affectionate
Adelaide.
r
from the Same to the Same.
9
Montpelier.
X HE Marquis was iil fuch exceSs of grief at leaving me, that it almost overpowered my fenSes to fee him in So melancholy a condition. It was past delcription. My resolution drooped, and had he preS-Sed me then to follow him I should have confented. His tenderness excites my warmest gratitude. It is Scarcely conceivable in real liSe. < He expresses, and indeed Seems to feel, all the warmth of a lover in romance.—I pity him, as I think
it
HUMANLIKE. 73
It must render him unhappy to be 10 lul-ceptible. He has my esteem, and all the love I am capable of feeling. Dear Melville! how wilt thou fupport this feparation ? I am very unhappy on thy account.
Monf. and Madame D’Oran will not Suffer me to be alone, tho’ they know not of our union. They imagine the Mar- -quis my lover, and kindly endeavour all in their power to divert me in his absence.
My aunt will think strangely of my long stay here, and difobedience. She writes me word all my friends are Surprized at my remaining here, But it must, be fo. The Marquis’s uncertain stay at Nice disturbs me ; many diSagreeable events may refult from it. I am low-fpirited, my dear friend, and must lay aside my pen. Adieu !
- / i
Marquis of Melville to Mifs Bblmont.
4
Nice
Istraction rends my brain, adorable Adelaide ! I cannot live—I cannot breathe —without you. Cruel woman! you VoL. I.	E	know
V—
74 THE MUTABILITY OF
Rnow not wnat love is, or you could neve* exist without your faithful Melville. I traverfe my chamber with hasty steps, and wring my hands in agony of grief; nay, even the prefence of my uncle cannot command tranquility. He asks the reaSon of my perturbation. lam ready to forego all his wealth and affection, and exclaim stis the absence of my angelic wife, miS-treSs, friend, every name that is dear and valuable. When you read of my miSery
-----my distreSs—can you be calm I Will
you not fly to me, my darling Adelaide.? Oh ! haste hither; let us run the hazard of Mr. Ancram’s anger and delertion—■ be fatisfied with a moderate fortune—rather than be thus miferable. Write to me immediately, let me know my doom, whether it is to be life or death: I have told you I canst live without you. Do you hate your Melville, who adores you ? Observe, I intreat as a lover, and uSe no authority as a huSband; for stis to love alone
1 would owe your obedience.---------Thou
all-enchanting Adelaide, adieu!
M/s
>
HUMAN LIFE. 75
Mifs Bslmont to Marquis of Melville.'
Montpelier.
I Must: Indeed, my dear Melville, be dead to all fenfibility, and a proper inhabitant for the frigid zone, did I not return you gratitude and love for thofe SenSations you So feelingly deScribe, If wiishes could transport me to Nice, I would this moment put a period to your anxiety, and, like PySche, Surrender myfelf to Zephyr to be conveyed to my huSbandst prefence. But, alas ! I am no Pagan, and the whole machinery of Homer’s gods and goddesses cannot assist me. Yet the idea of my beloved Melville is ever with me. A regard for your interest prevented my accompa-nying you at first ; but Since it is your ardent desire------since you will hazard the
diSpleafure of the sickle goddefs Fortune
for my Sake------be assured I will as foon as
possible comply with your request. A few days I intend to wait in hopes of meeting company, of which should I be disappointed, not to render you further unhappy, I will fet out with only Annette and Jaques to attend me. In the mean time, my dear
. E 2	Melville,
• ^
76 THE MUTABILITY OF
Melville, let me conjure you to be more compofed, to be convinced by this letter of my unalterable eftccm and love, and to wait for my arrival (which Shall be as
foon as possible) with^patience. Adieu!
t
Mifs Belmont to Mfs Meynel.
(•With the t‘Wo foregoing Letters inclofedi)
/
Nice.
i J O E S not the place of date SurpriSe you, my dear Harriot ? It was for that purpofe I postponed writing till I arrived here. The Marquis’s letter (which I Send you, with my anSwer) precluded all other fears but that of rendering him more un-happy, and, perhaps, plunging him from his great anxiety of mind into a fit of ill-nefs, Monf. D’Oran, who is indefatigable in the fcrvice of his friends, ran about three days to find out company for me to travel with ; for I informed him and his lady with the fecret whither 1 was going. They SuSpect, I believe, how the Marquis and myfelf are situated. Monf. D’Oran was fuccefsful in his researches, and found
an
HUMAN LIFE. 77
an old man and woman, of limited circumstances, whofe residence is at this place, returning hither. They w^ere happy in having company as well as mySelf, and promised to accommodate me and my fervants at their houfe; of which I apprized my dear Melville by another letter, that he might not engage any other residence for me. We had a tolerable journey hither. You may gueSs with what joy the Marquis received me. Mr. An- 1 cram is still in a declining state. Though I shut myfelf up as clofe as I can, people know a stranger lives at Monf. Bemontst; and call me “ the English Reclufe.” Thus am I situated at preSent. Write me foon, my dear Harriot. Adieu ! '
From the Same to the Same.
t
Nice:..
HAT danger would await the man whofe real Situation should be that wherein 1 at preSent appear to be! Hovr earnestly do men endeavour still further to betraiy into deeper ruin thofe of our unfortunate
/
78 THE MUTABILITY OF
tunate lex whom tney luipect to nave already fwerved from the path of virtue; It is an adopted maxim with them
N
** That thofe who once have milTed the right way The further they do go the further they do (tray f As thofe who having palTed dread Pluto’s ihore,
To life, to friends, to earth, return no more.
Too generally, I fear, my dear Harriot, a perSeverance in vice is the conSequence of a deSertion of virtue ; but there is no rule without exception, We have heard of many who by different modes have been feduced, and for a time lost to virtue, but in whom its ray being rekindled, a future uniform conduct has crazed the remembrance of their crime from the memory of perfons poffessing the Sentiments of candour, generosity, and charity. But forry am I to fay, 1 fear few are bleSSed with thofe laudable fentiments; for it is remarkable that our fellow-creatures failings and misfortunes live longer in remembrance than their good qualities; and this is likely to be the cafe till the dissolution of this globe, becauSe, fclf-love being too generally our predominant paf-Sion, we imagine foolishly, that in proportion as other peoples characters are blackened, pur own is made to fiiine with the greater lustre.
The
«
J
HUMAN LIFE, 79
1 he Hon. Mr, Nugent is tne cauie or my reflection in the beginning of this letter, my dear Harriot. Having caSually drank tea two or three times in my company at Monf. Bemont’s, it feems he fancied there was fomething desirable in my perSon. This led him to obfervation. He found I lived in a private manner, and that the Marquis’s visits were very frequent ; from whence he concluded that I must be Melville’s mistrefs. Full of this idea, he made it his business to find me alone, when with much explicitness and freedom he declared his passion, hinting that if I would deSert the Marquis, and attach myfelf to him, I Should find my account in it. Ah 1 my Harriot, to deScribe the different emotions which Seized me is impossible ; but reSentment was So predominant over all, as Scarcely to leave me the power of utterance, With the steadiest tone I could command I expressed myfelf thus in return “ You are unworthy any anfwer Sir, yet I cannot help telling you that I am an Englishwoman of family, and have friends who may perhaps call you to account for this inSult.---Particular reaSons
oblige me to remain here in private fome
time.------The Marquis is connected with
my friends.——^But why should 1 account
b
k
9
So THE MUTABILITY OF
to you for my Situation r----Was I p®or
and fricndleSs, might I not be possessed of
innocence and virtue ?----Might 1 not be
visited by the Marquis without any improper connection SubSisting between us ?--
I insist. Sir, not only that you offend me no more by language of this Sort, but that you avoid my preSence for the future.”
“ Well, Madam, Said he, bowing, I will leave you to consider of it: but I hope my charmer will be lefs cruel when next we meet. Reflection, perhaps, may interest you in my favour.”—So Saying, he departed, and left me filled with cruel Senfations. Such are the confcquences of private marriages. But I was not long left to my difagreeable reverie.- Melville came, who by his kindness and affection allayed the storm in my breast which the infamous Nugent had raifed. I dared not inform him of what had passed, lest he Sliould be excited by his natural warmth of temper to call him to an account for it, the event of which might have been fatal.
A few days after I received a letter from my honourable lover, which I returned unopened. Thus the matter remains at prefent.
Ah!
HUMAN LIFE. St
Ah ! my friend, when shall I See thee when shall I return to England ?—when shall I be proclaimed a wife to the world, and be rendered less liable to future in-fult ?—When thefe things are fulfilled^, •nd not before, shall I be
Your truly happy
Adelaide^’,
t
i
s
From the Same to the Samer
9
Nice.
Ancram has kept his chamber ;-ever since he . has been here, and is now extremely ill. Nothing but his clofe confinement could have prevented his hearing of my being at this place; where my name is well known. Annette tells . me people arc very inquisitive, queftion-ing her and Jaques much about me, but they do not fatisfy their curioSity. I much doubt whether they fay the truth. I fancy they gratify the enquirers as far as they are able. Servants, and common people in general, love to make themfelves of
confequence which they think they do
E 5	when
la THE MUTABILITY OF
when they have it in their power to anfwer Such Sort of questions. The Marquis has cautioned all his fervants not to in-form Mr. Ancram of my being here, and the physicians likewife, who pronounce that all their art cannot fave their patient from death one week longer. Poor man! if his appointed period is arrived, may the Almighty grant him fupport in his last agonies, and his Soul find an eafy feparation Srom the mafs of clay which now encumbers it! How awful is death, even to thofe who have passed their days in virtue ; but how dreadful, how inSup-portably dreadful, must it be to the wicked!
I have received a letter from Madame D’Oran, who informs me, that just before she Sat down to write, she was fur-prized with a visit from Mademoifelle i\.lbe, whom we all imagined to be at Paris, The young lady, she fays, still talks of going thither, but businefs has hitherto wutheld her. She enquired much after me, it feems, and was very anxious to know v:here I was gone; but Madame D’Oran did not Satisfy her curioSity,
The
V
HUMAN LIFE. ,	83
1 he amiable iviaciame riermond is gone with her hushand to Amiens. Some of his relations reside there. They intend to remain there fome months.
Inclofed in my friend’s letter was one from my aunt, which arrived at Montpelier since my departure. She upbraids, me much with my long silence, and absence from her—wonders how I can like to live in a strange country, fo far distant from my relations, running the hazard of losing my reputation for want of a protector—fays that I shall find a very affectionate friend in her, for her departed sister’s fake—and asses,, since I have received no fupply from my uncle, how I can therefore lubSist ? She concludes her very kind epistle v/ith intreating an immediate anfwer.
Her concern for me; indeed, deServes one; but I must wait a few days to fee the event of Dr. ■——’s prognostication; Should it prove true, I shall have it in my power to remove all her fears, and gladden her heart, by a communication of my marriage to her, for she doats on grandeur, and will be proud to hear her niece is a Marchionefs. - Oh, what folly ! grandeur and riches are far from consti. tuting happinefs. But I must think of concluding—yet cannot without first informing
A THE MUTABILITY OF
forming you that Nugent is become exceedingly troublefome and importunate ; he pesters me with letters innumerable, which I order the fervants not to receive, but he contrives to fend them by different people, and gets them directed by various hands, fo that I am often deceived and open them. They contain propoSals which I Should shudder to listen to.— All the contempt or revenge I can shew him is to return them in a blank cover.
"—I hope Soon he will know me in my proper character, which Surely will cauSe him to discontinue his impertinences. I am Sometimes, my dear Harriot, much alarmed at his persisting in his inSolence, fearing dreadful conSequences, should it come to the knowledge of Melville, whofe impetuous temper would not brook the least inSult to his wife. You may guefs how miserable I am when this Suggestion ariSes; but the flatterer, Hope, steps in to my aid and I am calm again. Adieu! my beloved friend.
From
4
HUMAN LIFE.
From the Same to the Same.
Nice.
It is better to go to the houfe of mourning than to the houfe of feasting, for the living will take it to his heart.’*
np
X HE text prepares you for the event, my dear Harriot. Mr. Ancram is no more. Notwithstanding I reap great advantage from his death, and he was So little known to me, I cannot help being much affected. Perhaps it proceeds from viewing his dead remains. There is Something past delcription Solemn in the chamber of death : the Preacher wifely remarks, “ the living will take it to his heart.” We cannot well behold a mask of clay, once in a state of animation like ourfelves, without being struck with the reflection, that it is a change we ourfelves must undergo, and we know not how foon : unexpectedly, perhaps in the midst of all our errors and imperfections. How incumbent a duty is it, therefore, my dear friend, for us frequently to contemplate and prepare for this dissolution! When the Spiritual essence quits its earthly
56 THE MUTABILITY OF
ly tabernacle, how ghastly the corSe that
is left behind! What a fit fubject of contemplation it is to curb the vanity, pride, and variety of passions, to which by nature we are fubject, and which too frequently triumph over the best of us. The most innocent is not ' free from guilt-----
*3	*	^
I was interrupted by the Marquis, who; having overlooked what I had written, laughed at my fermon, as he was pleaSed to term it. Alas ! my dear Harriot, he is, what is too common in thefe days, a free-thinker. It would be in vain for me to endeavour to change his principles. I have for fome time lamented his infidelity. Had my dear father lived perhaps his powerful arguments might have had Ibme influence over him, but I have no hope of fuccceding. The punishment of evil is an article which Melville admits not into his creed. He told me, on this occasion, that it is inconsistent with the goodnefs and justice of the God who formed us.
“ Why should it be inconsistent, returned I; has he not pointed out to us the road to happiness; and implanted in
our
human life, gy
our breasts a monitor, which we call con-fcience, to denote to us our deviation from right, and distinguish.as clearly between, virtue and vice, as fenSe does between pleaSure and pain ? and if to this we add the unequal distribution of good and evil in this life”——•
‘‘ Stop, my dearest Adelaide, interrupted he ; my principles arc too firmly rooted ever to be shaken; yours, undoubtedly, are the fame.—It is the only Subject upon which we can difagree; let us, therefore, never, reSume it.” ^
He fpoke hastily, and rather in diSplea* Sure.—It affected me, and Some involuiii-tary tears eScaped.
“ My angelic creature. Said he, catching me in his arms, forgive me.-—I love
you, I adore you.--------What more can
you desire?’*
It wase necessary to Submit, my dear Harriot. I returned him thanks for bis kind and tender affection, and have never Since dared to fpeak on the fubject.
Immediately on Mr. Ancram’s death
I wrote to Lady N---------, informing her
of every particular concerning my marriage, and apologizing for having concealed it, by assuring her it was by the Marquisst desire. He alSo wrote in confirmation of what I had Said. We both
likev/iSe
8 THE MUTABILITY OF
likewife wrote to my uncle Walters, de-firing the anfwers might be directed to Montpelier, whither we are going as foon as possible.
Monf. Bemont informs me, that Nugent, now convinced of my quality and virtue, is fo heartily ashamed of his past conduct, that he dares not appear abroad, lest he should fee me,, and declares he could not e^en fummon refolution to ask my pardon. Poor wretch ! I wish it may deter him from similar attempts, efpecially if he should meet with any young creature in reality fo circumstanced as he imagined me to be.
I have now a number of attendants; and have removed my lodgings, that I may appear in character. What folly is there in parade ? Happinefs does not consist in riches ; they, indeed, certainly create refpect ; but the refpect that awaits virtuous actions, independent of pomp or title, is most pleasing to an ingenuous minsh I wish to return to England, that you, my amiable friend, may complete my felicity by your dear company ; for, till you become a wife, you must constantly reside with
Your truly affectionate
Adelaide Melville.
Marchionefs
HUMAN LIFE. 89
Marchionefs of Melville to Mifs
Meynel.
Montpelier.
T
X HE news of our marriage arrived here long before us. MonS. D.Dran, (to whom the Marquis had written) took care to circulate it; therefere we had a number of congratulations upon our arrival. MademoiSelle Albe, it feems, was just fetting off for Paris when the news arrived, and, willing to be fatisfied of the truth before she departed, ran to Madame D.Dran, who affured her of it ; whereupon she flew into a great rage, abuSed the Marquis and me, threatened revenge fooner or later, and vented the bitterest curSes against us.
I forget to inform you that an anonymous letter, diredted to Mr. Ancram, arrived the day after his death, which Melville opened. It was full of fevere reflections, and adviSed Mr. Ancram to beware that his nephew was not enSnared into a marriage with MiSs Belmont, who had followed him to Nice, &c. &c.
As It fortunately came too late to have, its intended effect, we threw it into the
fire
e
)0 THE MUTABILITY OF
fire without taking very particular notice of it, but now imagine it must have been Sent by the malicious MademoiSelle Albe.
Of what avail are her furious imprecations .? She cannot gain the Marquis’s affection, or diSunite us. Poor unhappy woman, her anger recoils upon and punishes herfelf.
I have heard from Lady N-----------my
dear friend. According to my expectation she is rejoiced beyond expression at the news of my marriage, and informs
me she has adviSed the Duke of-------------
and all ostr relations of it. The Earl of Walters is at Paris, but she has furthered our letters to him,
Melville is determined to stay here a fortnight .longer, that we may enjoy more of MonS. and Madame D’Oransk company, who have been our very kind friends; after which we are to go to Paris, to view that celebrated city, before we return to England. The Marquis obligingly does it to gratify my curioSity, as he heard me express a desire of Seeing it. I daily find mySelf, my dear Harriot, under more obligation to this affectionate hushand. How frequently do I wissi my dear father was but alive to behold the happinefs he compelled me to accept, for you know the Marquis was not my own choice. Yet I
fometimes
HUMAN LIFE. 91
lometimes lament his natural warmth or temper, which often caufes unhappinefs to' himfelf, and terrifies me ; but there is no pleaSure in this world without Some alloy ; therefore I ought to be, nay, am, fatisfied with the state in which Providence has placed me, and the blessings bountifully bestowed upon me. Indeed, I indulge the hope, that, as Melville is endow^ed with a great share of fenfe, he wdil make uSe of it to get the better of his hasty disposition, which (as I Said before) frequently occasions an interruption to his own, and, consequently, my felicity. Adieu ! You shall hear from me again as foon as I arrive at Paris; till when, and always, I shall be
Your assured friend, Adelaide Melville.
t
\
from the Same to the Same,
from London, this great city appears a
new world to me j but I prefer the former
><
in
2 THE MUTABILITY OF
in a high degree. This partiality, perhaps, ariSes from its being the place of my nativity ; a circumstance which generally attracts one to a particular fpot: nevertheless, to fpeak with all candour, London, in my opinion, has many advam tages over this dirty metropolis.
From the Earl of Walter’s banker, we gained intelligence where he resided, and fent to inform him of our arrival. He was fo very kind as to wait on us immediately, and is fo much pleafed with'the Marquis, that he is Seldom from our cornpany. He -has introduced us to his friends, fo that I have Icarce a moment I can call my own but that X take repoSe in. Lady Walters is likewife very obliging. They are desirous,, moreover, of introducing ms at Court; but, as Mr. Ancram’s death is fo recent, the Marquis declines that honour, efpecially as he thinks it will be more proper for us first to attend the Court of our own Monarch.
The Marquis intends our prefent stay shall be short; but next year we propoSe to make Some months abode at this city. You will not be Surprized to hear I admire their operas here, as you know I am fo doatingly fond of music. But I am greatly difpleafed with the French gallantry to married women. I have disputed on the
fubject
HUMAN LIFE. 93
siibject with feveral ladies, natives of this place. They shrug up their shoulders, and e^tclaim, “ Ah! charmante Madame Melville, was you but to reside here one year, we are fure you would acquire fo ^ much efprit as to be convinced of the propriety of our manners. Are we not formed for adoration ? Is not the love of admiration innate ? Becaufe we are told we are lovely, must v/e necessarily part with our virtue.? No, no, Madame; stis nothing but pastime. We listen with pleaSure to
find ourSelves worthy notice-----Our huS-
bands approve it, shecauSe it applauds their choice and taste. We have few real
lovers, but numberless pretenders----------
Mere bagatelle !—Ah ! Madame, we have in reality as many virtuous women here ’as you shave in England, but from mtgaieV de cmr many are thought to be engaged in une petite affaire, who are as ' free from crim. con, as an infant; and, in veritef Madame, cela ejl tout. You English ladies are for the most part prudes ; shut, pardon our obfervation, prudes are not always virtuous.’*
Thefe, my dear Harriot, were the general anfwers I always received : to which I returned,, that I could never be perSuad-cd there was not a very great indelicacy in the conduct of the French ladies, let
them
H THF MUTABILITY OF
them be ever fo virtuous ; but further arguments on both sides were to no purpofe, each party being very tenacious of opinion.
The Marquis is going to the opera tonight without me, as, Lady Walters being indiSpoSed I have promiSed to sit with
her. It is high time for me to attend ; fo, my Harriot, I must bid you adieu for the prefent.
Adelaide Melville, From the Same to the Same,
V
Pans.
J[ FI A V E been for Some time Silent,
my dear Harriot, in hopes that a cloud of uneasineSs, which has since my last arisen, would dissipate ; but I can no longer forbear un burthen ing mySelf to you by disclosing the Subject of my trouble, which (unexpected as it may be) is no other than the Marquis’s lofs of assSection for me: Ah!, my Harriot, he is strangely altered within this month. His tenderness is all fled. He avoids my prefence, and alfo shat of Lord and Lady Walters, who gently reproach
9
HUMAN LIFE. 95
proach him for this conduct. The first: two or three evenings of his deferring our company, I very innocently, and without meaning to offend, assced what had occasioned his abfence. He flew into a violent rage directly, telling me I was become a vtife indeed, but he would shev/ himfelf a hujband too, and threatened me at the peril of his everlasting diSpleafure ever to question him again. You may be certain I have fubmitted.
Ah! Harriot, when a hushand or wife has referves, adieu to all happinefs. When at home, Melville fcarce Speaks to me ; nay, within thefe three days, he Seems to behold me with diSgust. Some Frenchwoman, I fear, has captivated him, and I am doomed to experience a too common fate, that of a deferted wife. What is to be done ? Nothing. There is nothing I can have recourfe to but patience and hope, thofe balms and comforts of the distressed. Let me endeavour to confole myfelf, with the latter, imagining, that time may restore to me the Marquis’s affection. Expostulations or reproaches would only irritate, and drive him from me for ever. I must perfevere in appearing blind to his change of behaviour ; and if that conduct will not regain him, nothing will. A hushand is a petty tyrant, and ill
brooks
«
§5 THE MUTABILITY OF
/
brooks to have his ways Scrutinized—A. wife must be (like an enssaved fubject) Submissive and obedient; a dupe to his will, and blind to his infidelities.
What a fad gloomy picture have I drawn of matrimony, my dear friend. Alas ! I fear stis too generally the caSe. Men are too much given to inconstancy. Neverthelefs, it is not to be denied, nay, I will maintain, that when two rational people are united by love founded on esteem, and ufe reciprocal endeavours to pleaSe each other, it may be a state of the greatest felicity we can be blessed with in this world. That this may be your late, ray dear friend, is the very Sincere wish of your
Vw	W
i
/
Adelaide Melville. From the Same to the Same.
Paris:
X HE Count de St. Lou is foremost amongst the herd of fops who would fain
entertain me with witticifms and commendation
HUMAN LIFE. 97
dations of accomplishments I am not poS-fessed of. He is more importunate and troublefome than the rest, and unavoidably compels me to hear him. It is in vain I tell him that I am a gloomy Englishwoman, and, from a natural partiality to the manners of my country, cannot think of French gallantry but with horror, accounting it criminal beyond anypleaofexcu.sk in married perfons. He still perSeveres in it notwithstanding: and, to add to my uneasineSs, the Marquis, I am Sensible, perceives it, yet, instead of being diSplea-fed, Seems to further St. Lou’s opportunities by leaving us together, if the Count happens to come in when he is at home.
Oh! Melville, Melville, is it not
enough to deprive me of thy love !------
Would’st thou have me difgrace both thee and myfelf by placing my affection on another ? Perhaps thou thinkest it v:ould palliate thy unkindnels. Cruel
man ! thou knowest me not,—--------thou
woundest my heart more than thou dost imagine.
I have given strict orders that the Count should never be admitted when I am alone; but he frequently comes to breakfast with the Marquis, who foon after; like a French hushand retires.
VoL. 1.	F	It
✓
)$ THE MUTABILITY OF
It is to no purpofe to complain to any One here. When I acquaint my uncle and aunt with my aversion to the Count St: Lou’s behaviour, they Seem diSpleaSed, and call me prudish, for being offended •at his agreeable gallant manner, as they term it; adding, that it is proper to coincide a little with the manners of a country one happens to be in——that the Count means no affront—nothing but pour pajjfer
h tefM.
Very fine, indeed! Little did I expect Such near relations to Spirit me up to intrigue. What a W'orld -do we live in, Harriot! I Sear it is too just.a remark, that the frequent trips of our nobility to this gay city, where they imbibe a taste for French manners, prove the Source of the divorces now fo common in England ; for English hushands in general, not being naturally of fo volatile a turn as the French, cannot, whatever gallantry they themfelves engage in, be poltroons enough to connive at their -wives intriguing, but she for a Separation as the best means of avenging their injured honour.
The Marquis Says nothing of going to London, and I dare not interrogate him concerning it; So God only knows when we shall leave this place. He frequently
comes
HUMAN LIFE, gg
comes in to drefs just berore dinner-----
Sighs bitterly---throws himSelf down on
the couch—and in lefs than two minutes hastily jumps off it, and walks across the room as if inSensible of what he did. He no longer has any confidence in me. We feem feparate beings, indeed. I have the unhappinefs to find that a violent passion cannot be durable. His was too raging to last. The prefent otyectof his attention will Soon, like me, become neglected. Melville, poor man ! is his own tormentor. But reflections are vain. It is time to clofe my letter, adieu!
From the Same to the Same. .
t
r
Paris.
_
np
X H E Count de St. Lou continuing to persecute me with his inSolent passion, I forbad him my houfe. He behaves with fuch art and moderation before Lord and Lady Walters, that they blame me much for treatingshim fo harshly, alledging that it is only accustomary civility he pays me,
F 2	and
\
too THE MUTABILITY OF
and that, since my hushand will not now attend me himfelf to public places, a gallant is very necessary, efpecially So respectable a one.
I would willingly excufe my noble relations. The Count most certainly does not expreSs himSelf with Such warmth in their preSence ; and, as they have Spent fo much of their life in France, they are reconciled to the foibles of the country ; but, in my own opinion, a married woman of the least delicacy must be shocked at a man’s continually repeating to her,
“ that he lives but in her fm'iles-----that
in her abSence there Seems a void in ail
nature-----that he adores her, and hopes
her heart will beat in uniSon with his, and her hushand be no longer the object of her fond passion,” &c. &c. A woman who can patiently listen to fuch flattery, forgetting all laws both human and divine, must have an unlimited share of vanity, which will in all probability render her an eafy prey to her Seducer.
When I express mySelf to Lady Walters and others in this manner ; they tell me I judge too rigidly, and have little idea of the force and power of love, which, while it stimulates its votaries to the eager purSuit of the object of their affection, blinds them as to the propriety of the
means
H U M A N L I F E. loi
means of attainment.—Then may I ever continue free from it, fay I, if it fo intoxicates the fenfes!
But why do I dwell fo long on this fiib-
ject ? Let me Speak of my Melville-------
Mine!—No, Harriot,.—he is lost to me, I fear, for ever.
Yesterday, as he was walking up and down the room with a wild step, I fat down on the window with a book in miy hand, leemingly intent on it. He with apparent distraction Sfruck his hand croSs his forehead, and uttered to himfelf, “ Angelic
Violetta!-----—Tortures to my bleeding
heart !----1 have undone myfelf!—I am
married —Never can be thine.”
I was fo overpowered with what I heard, the book fell out of my hand, my head reclined against the window, and tears began to stov/.
The noife of the book falling, and ray Sobs, rouzed the Marquis from his reverie. Not being quite lost to humanity, “ Adelaide, faid he, in a kinder tone than of late he has uSed to me, what is the matter with you i* you look pale.”
Fearing his anger, I knew not what to
anfwer.'—It was neceSTary to fpeak.--At
last, I faid, the lofs of your esteem, my Lord, is infupportable to me!-----Alas !
you
02 THE MUTABILITY OF
you no longer love me, and I must be miferable.
“I will not dissemble, Adelaide; I
adore another. Perhaps-------but you are
too much affected at prefent, dry up your
tears----there may be means of making
us both happy.—I will unfold my mean-' ing another opportunity. Adieu! Lady Melville; compofe yourfelf, and endeavour to hate me.”
“ Endeavour to hate him !” Oh, Harriot, what strange advice from a huSband! i made powerful endeavours to love him, having, as I acquainted you, married him even with reluctance, in obedience to my father’s command. His extreme tenderness made me strive to be grateful; duty urged me on to return his affection, which was then violent. After all the pains I have taken to esteem him, behold the reward ! I must now, by his own desire, undo all I have done, and return to the indifference with which I first received him. Cruel command! ungrateful Me!ville!— To keep up appearances, I go into company as ufual; but, to a heart Ib ill-difpofed for the gaiety of this city as mine is at prefent, this task is very painful. Adieu ! my Harriot.
From
r
HUMAN LIFE. 103
t
/
From the Same to the Same.
\
Parisi
\
rr*^
X HE Marquis has unfolded the pro-
pofal he intimated.------Shocking beyond
meafure!------But let me, if possible com-
municate it in his own words.
f
Two mornings ago he addressed me as fallows: “ Adelaide, from the regard I find you have for me, and the nobleneSs of foul I have obServed in you, I flatter mySelf you will pay attention^o my request,
and gratiSy it.---1 adore another ; there*
fore you and I can never again live together on tolerable terms.—I am miferable that I have it not in my power to offer my hand to. the charmer who now engrosses my attention, since her virtue will not admit of her gratifying my passion without the raatrimonal ceremony’s taking place; You have it in your power, Lady Mei-ville, to make me happy.”
“ Impossible ! my Lord. How can I further your happinefs but by dishonourable means ?
“ Renounce:
9
04 THE MUTABILI TY OF
“ Renounce me, Adelaide ; you knovr our marriage, being a private one, cannot
be proved-----Acknowledge with me our
cohabitation was only an illicit amour, and I ^jll Settle on you whatever annual stipend you can demand within reaSon. The Count de St, Lou will re-establish your reputation by marrying you, as from the violence of his passion he will overlook your SuppoSed misconduct, eSpecially as you are of fo tioble a family. By complying, you have a proSpect of happinefs; by not complying, certain miSery.”
For Some time astonishment deprived me of Speech, my dear Harriot.-—Good Heaven! avow mySelf a prostitute to gratify his unruly passion!
As Soon as 1 had a little recovered the uSe of my tongue, 1 asked him from what circumstance of my conduct it could ever, enter his thoughts that 1 should be capable of complying with fuch an infamous desire ?
He stew into a rage, and vowed he would be the death of me if I dared impart to any one what had passed between us, I have not Seen him since, nor any visitor but Lady Walters, to whom I alleged a fevere head-ach as an excuSe for staying at home alone. I am distressed exceed-ibgly.™—-
, Lady
human L I F E. 105
Lady Walters was my interruption; She came to intreat me to appear in public again, as it was rumoureci that a fit of jealouSy confined me, which would render me an object of ridicule. She Said, , was it really the cafe, she should be Sorry, for’ me, but that generally fuch Sort of fancy was Soon diSpelled ; and, as v/e should be going to England Soon, she hoped the Marquis would banish from his heart Signora Guadicci.
“ Who is this Signora Guadicci, Madam ?” returned I, (being ignorant who his prefent idol was);.
“ Indeed, Lady Melville, I know nothing of her, anfwered she, but that she h , a rich Italian widow, whom the world fays the Marquis at preSent sighs for.—TheSe things are So common, my dear niece, that I hope you will take my advice, and not make yourSelf unhappy at what cannot at preSent be remedied. Appear as uSual with me, and flatter yourSelf that time will restore Melvilless love to you again.”
I returned her thanks Sor her advice, and promised to Spend the evening at her houSe.
The Situation I am in reminds me of
I
MademoiSelle Albe. Her bitter wishes
F 5	are
o6 THE MUTABILITY 017
are in part come to pafs. I wonder whether she really is in this city ;—have reaSon to imagine not, as I have not Seen her in any public place since my arrival here. Neither her art nor beauty could make the Marquis inconstant; how attractive, then, must this Violetta, or Signora Guadicci, be!
It is time Sor me to conclude, or I shal! weary you with my complaints. Adieu!
%
V
I
from the Same to the Same.
Paris:
^ H E Marquis’s behaviour alienates my affection from him. I shall, I believe, boast to you of my indifference. But, alas! it must neceffarily be a work of time before I accomplish it. I certainly cannot esteem a man of fuch loofe and wicked principles : yet there is fomething in the character of hushand that claims attention, be he ever fo abandoned. 3 cannot hate the Marquis, as he enjoined me ; but I endeavour not to make myfelf unhappy' at his infidelity, which is all I ought to do.
I have
/
' 1
H U M A N life; 107
I have Seen the enchantreSs who has. deprived me of my bafe huSband’a heart,. Lady Walters perfuaded me to attend her and fome more company to the opera. We had not been long there before Melville entered an opposite box with hio Violetta. He did not perceive us, as'all his attention,was fixed on her the whole time. He feemed to gaze at her with a Silent rapture. I felt a violent emotion and trembling all over me, but endeavoured by all possible means to conceal it. Mr. Smith, an English gentleman of our party, who stood near me, obferved my change of countenance, and took advantage of the first opportunity that prefented itfelf to stand and intercept my viewv of the Marquis; He recited; Some drolf e-vents with great humour, at which it was almost impossible to help laughing; tho* I was fo oppreffed with lorrow and agony of heart. I. had before oblerved much humanity im this gentleman, and was now obliged by his kind intention; and.strove as much as possible to* conquer my chagrin, for I was become an object of general attention. St. Lou Seemed to think that by his gallantry he could make amends for the Marquis’s unkindnefs, but it only tended to bring on a relapfe
of
0
)8 THE MUTABILITY OF
of grief, and 1 availed myfelf of Mr: Smith’s interference to avoid him.
When the opera was over, Lady Walters insisted upon my flipping at her houfe, there being a great deal oS company expected. I was but ill difpoSed for ir, yet I confented, in hopes of diverting my uneasineSs of minsh Innocent amufement.s are laudable: we should en-
I
deavour to fupport, without repining, the misfortunes which cannot be avoided. Retirement and indulgence of my grief could not bring back the Marquis’s aS Section, and musing and heightening it by unavailing complaints would have been little better than upbraiding the Supreme DiSpoSer of all Things, by whofe permission the affliction had come upon me.
When we arrived at Lady Walters’, the company formed themSelves intoSrhall parties. Mr. Smith happened to be Seated next me. “ Your fortitude is worthy admiration, amiable Lady Melville, faid be, and the Marquis’s neglect and miSconduct tinpardonable—But it is impossible it can be of long duration—The artful Guadicci must yield ycur just right over him—He will foon perceive her defects, and your Superior merit. Excufe the liberty I take in noticing hisunw’orthy treatment of your
Ladyship, I sincerely wish you happi
neSs,
HUMAN LIFE. loc
neSs, Madam. My motives are disinterested. My heart is unalterably fixed oil one of the most amiable of women ; and were you and she acquainted with each other, I am certain you would exchange friendships, as there is So great a similarity in vour fentiments. But, alas ! she is far distant, and unfortunate,” added he, sighing, and pausing ; after which he begged, that, if it was in his power to be in any reSpects ferviceable to me, I would be frank enough to command him.
I returned him thanks for his obliging offer and good wishes.—We were Sum'* moned to Supper, and were Separated.
A melancholy is diffuSed over this gen-tleman’s features; from whence I infer that the object of his wishes is not to be obtained.
You will, undoubtedly, my dear Har* riot, wish fora defcription of this Violetta, who is the caufe of the injury done to me by the Marquis. How improper a perSon am I to gratify you in this point.? Even in ordinary cafes, can a w^oman depict her rival in an amiable light ? Yet, to Satisfy you,. I will do it as impartially as I am able. She has a dazzling complection, but is not regularly featured—Her eyes are brilliant, and their fire denotes a tyrannic difposition.—«-I can fay no more of
her,
i	!
lo THE MUTABILITY OF
her, my dear friend. I am low-fpirited, and unfit for writing. Adieu !
From the Same to the Same.
*	Paris.
T vQRD and Lady Walters are going to
England; and the Marquis, who, I believe, detests the sight of me, has given orders to me to attend them. He fays he will follow Soon. In the mean time, I am to hire a houfe proper Sor. us to reside in. He Spoke in a peremptory manner, therefore I must comply, and leave the exulting Violetta in quiet possession of his com-pany.
Ah ! Harriot, my friend and comforter; unluckily fled from London; Oh! that you had not followed your aunt to Ireland!, —Yet—alas! I am sick at heart—my foul is depressed beyond conception. You shall hear from me again wshen I arrive at London. Adieu!
Annette
i
HUMAN LIFE. iii
J
Annette, the Marchionefs of M.’s.L'viLhK's
TVoman, to Mifs Meynel.
I
Madam,	Paris.
%
jS/{y Lady has been ill, very ill indeed. She had a violent fever,, which she bids me tell you in the best manner I am able, as file is still too weak to write herfelf. The Doctors faid she would die of this inflaming fever, but my Lady Walters told me privately the Doctors of this country were ignorant fools. To be fure she is in the right. My Lord Marquis uSed to walk in and out twenty times a day, arid ask if her Ladyship was alive, but I from ray heart believe he wished to fee the end of her. Poor lady ! Every body fays his unkindnefs made her So bad. And I have Something to tell you. Madam ; but I beg you will not mention it, for my Lady knows nothing of it. You must know a Mr. Smith and my Lord had liked to have killed each other. My master was walking in the Thuilleries with SomeSnora Guacchi, and Mr. Smith meeting them told my master a great deal about his ill-treatment of my Lady, and rated the
Snora .
4
(ta THE MUTABILITY OF
Snora much about her wicked conduct ; upon which the Marquis drew his Sword, and I don’t know how it was, but, however, they was parted—the lady pretended to faint—and fo it ended. I am very glad to tell you, Madam, that my Lady is So much better, and has been out once in a carriage, and she will write foon herSelf. So I have discharged my duty. Hoping you wiliexcuSe this Scrawl, I remain.
Madam,
Your faithful
And obedient humble Servant,
Annette Lac ham,
'McifcUonefs of Melville to Mtf
Meynel,
Paris.
It
Ordered Annette, my dear Harriot, to inform you of my illnefs, and recovery, that you might not wonder at my long Silence. The day I wrote last to you I was Seized witii a violent fever, occasioned I believe, by the uneasinefs of mind I had endeavoured So long to conceal: but I will Speak no more of it, turning itiy
thoughts
H U M A N L I F E. 113
thoughts to a pleafanter Subject.---The
Marquis is kinder to me, my Harriot, and will accompany us to London in a few days. We are to be at my uncle Walters’ till we Settle in a houSe of our own; and then I hope, my amiable friend, to have your dear company. The Marquis will, perhaps, forget Violetta, and I shall be again at peace. Should, however, further trouble await me, I truSc my confidence will rest unshaken in the goodnefs ' of Providence, whofe diSpenSations, though fometimes Seemingly Severe, being founded in infinite wiSdom, claim, therefore, the implicit and cheatSul acquiescence of fallible mortals.
I met the Count de St. Lou yesterday
morning at the CounteSs de B.----------Is
He very gallantly congratulated me on my recovery, and whispered Something about unhappineSs at not being So vrell received by me as Mr. Smith was—that he should be happy to protect me—and Some incoherent stuff I could make nothing of: therefore desired him to be Silent.
I beg you to put an end to all your im-easiness concerning me, my dearest Sriend, as I am perfectly recovered.
Lady N-------- is still at Laurel-Grove,
my Lord being confined by a fit of the gout; So that I shall not have the pleaSure
of
[14 THE MUTABILITY OF
of Seeing them Some time; but I hear from her often. Adieu ! my dear Harriot ; I am going to a concert at the Coun-tefs de B----------'s.
r
A
I cannot diSpatch my letter without informing you I have been exceedingly entertained. The Countess de B-------------has a
great fund of wit and humour, which she difplayed to-night to the utter confusion of Monf. Vilmar, a coxcomb who is fo excessively conceited of his own charms, that he thinks no woman can resist them. It feems he took it into his head to inform Mademoifelle Salens (a very amiable young lady, arid a friend of the Countess’s) that he did her the honour to admire her. She was ready to laugh in his face, and with a mixture of indifference and difdain, stanci-ing with her hands folded, she anfwered, “ No, never.” To mortify his unbounded vanity the CounteSs compoSed a Song on the occasion, and Set it to a liidicrous tune. MonS, Vilmar came to the concert, angry with the young lady Sor overlooking his imaginary qualifications, inlb-much that he affected to take no notice of her. But judge of his chagrin when the
Countess,
4
t
1
H U* M A N L I F E. 115
CounteSs, coming to sing, with the greatest humour performed the fong she had prepared for Monf Vilmarss reception, the
words of which were as follow ;
*
\
Nymph divine, liften,
Oh I lillen to my voice,
Nor let me fue in vain,
But on me fix your choice.
She. No, never J
N
Never, Goddefs bright,
Is too long a date j •
Do not thus opprefs One you do not hate.
/
She, Yes. ever!
«. -
(Sung in anger)
Haughty Nymph, then know Thee I can defpife ;
A time may come that thou May’ft figh for thefe bright eyes.
She. No, never [
Senfelefs Nymph, adieu!
In fpite of all thy art,
Thy fpells, thy charms, are vain,
I’m mafter of my heart.
She ‘with difdain, laughing.
Poor Swain, adieu!
The
ii6 THE MUTABILITY OF
The lady’s reSponSes were fung in the manner of Ariel’s echo to Ferdinand in the Tempest, and had a very droll effect. A general mirth enfued, and Monf. Vilmar decamped in a great passion. But it is time for repoSe-—three in the morning, Adieu!
♦ ^
P
From tU Same to the Same.
London.
■"'BT
Vv^ R arrived here Safe a fortnight since ; but the Marquis has not yet met with a houfe to his liking. The Duke of ------— and all my relations have fa-
voured us with their company, and Seem to approve Melville much,: yet he was apparently confuSed, and received their compliments with a Sort of reluctance. Perhaps the confciouSnefs of his ill-treatment of me at Paris was the realbn of it, I fear he has not forgot Violetta. He is very polite to me before my friends, but cool and Sullen when alone. Indeed, 1 ought not to be Surprized at it; a passion So violent as that he had for her cannot be
Suppressed
%
HUMAN LIFE. 117
Supprclled inltantaneouiiy. 1 muit wait with patience for the gradual return of his assection. Adieu! my dear Harriot; be affured you shall Soon again hear from me; when I hope to fend you a Summons to come hither to a new habitation, which 1 wish we may Speedily meet with.
From the Same to the Same.
t
London.
iN what w'ords shall I defcribe my mi-, fery ?.——Oh ! I cannot---------Horror, dis-
traction, Seizes me—A cold Sweat enSues —I am-----------
A fainting'fit happily deprived me of fenSation—I no longer felt my wretched-neSs. Why did I return to life In vain I call on Death for relief; the fpectre sties the wretched.
Bafe, inhuman, abandoned Melville ! the stings of confcience and remorfe will
purSue
f
ii8 THE MUTABILITY OF
purSue thee even in the arms of Violetta, on whofe account thou hast thus barbar-ousty treated me. Oh! Harriot, I am ruined, undone—my reputation is lost for ever.
The night that his cruel plot was put in execution, being exceeding Sleepy, I went to bed at twelve, and told Annette to retire, as I should Soon be asseep. So it happened : but Twas Soon awaked to a new Icene of woe, A violent altercation and fioiSe rouzed me. I started up in bed, and found the curtains undrawn. Lord Walters, his gentleman, Melville, and his valet, stood at the feet of the bed, and Count de St. Lou in his shirt was endeavouring to difengage himfelf from them. Amazed and terrified at the sight, I demanded an explanation.
It is in vain to affert your innocence, faid ray uncle : guilt is too plainly proved upon you. The Count was caught escaping from your bed—thou vile prostitute! .—Difgrace to thy family !—A fine effect this of prudery !—You, forfooth, coujd not endure-common civilities from the Count; behold the contrast----in England too!
‘‘ If I knew the count was in London, or have dishonoured the Marquis’s bed, may”"--------
CeaSe
HUMANLIKE. 119
CeaSe your asseverations, Adelaide, Said Melville, and add not to your guilt by a denial. Then, turning to Lord Walters, with a Soothing artSul air, I am Sorry, my Lord, (Said he,) a woman related to So noble a family should fo far forget herfelf, and disgrace, her blood : but I must now inSorra you of a truth, which, if she had continued faithful, I would ever have concealed-——She is not my wife.
^ “ Not your wife,” echoed the Earl-while astonishment struck me dumb.
She is not, my Lord, continued Melville, but willingly became lUy rnistrefs ; after which, as a recompence for her feem-ing affection and constancy, and out of consideration to her family, I permitted her to take my name : but now I difcard her, and -am free. I need not assert fuch
0	s	)
a thing, you are fenSible, shy Lord, if it was not fact, as I should now have it in my power, was she really my wife, to obtain a divorce.
Good Heaven! difplay my innocence, exclaimed I in agony—Count St. Lou, will you fay that I encouraged you to come hither ?--------
He shook his head, but anfwered nothing.
Oh! Melville, tell me, cried I, in the name of all that is facred, have you fiiffer-
ed
120 THE MUTABILITY OF
ed me to be polluted ?—x\m I really undone .?--------
“ That is strange language, Madam, to make ufe of to me and the preSent company—You must know best the degree of your guilt.—But we have no further buSi-neSs here now—You are at liberty, Madam, to purSue your intrigues—I bid you adieu for ever,”
Count St, Lou went; Lord Walters and his Servant retired; the Marquis and his valet likewdSe : but Melville returned al* most instantly, while 1 was in agonies unspeakable.
- Adelaide, wliiSpered he, Sor your private Satisfaction, I Swear, in the most Solemn manner, that I leave you unpolluted. The Count was but just put into your chamber, when I arrived at it with Man* ville; your uncle Sollowcd. I loved another, and could not exist without her. Take my last advice; accept of St. Lou, he will marry you, and make you happier than I was capable of. I have left you virtuous. Adieu!
• Annette, being awaked by the confusion and noife this affair cauSed in the houfe, came and found me in a state of insensibility, just after the Marquis departed. She gave me Some drops, and endeavoured to rouze me. I burst into a stood of
tears
HUMAN LIFE. 121
9
tears and laughed alternately, then Sunk into Saintings. The good-natured girl lamented over me, and went to inform Lady Walters I was dying ; who did not think,proper to rife, but fent for a physician. Being delirious, I fell into violent ravings before him, cryfng out, my huS-band had cauSed me to be ravished—that Mr. Foster’s ghost would appear to assert
my innocence------that Melville had run a
penknife into my heart, which gave me great pain—with other incoherent expref-fions of horror and distreSs.
t
Doctor Opium told Annette that my disorder Seemed to proceed from affliction; on' which she, with her natural frankneSs, related what had happened. He shook his head, and faid he feared I had been hardly uSed—that he did not know what to make of the story. He, however, fent Some medicines, which compoSed and relieved me by morning.. Lady Walters then came, and enquired aSter my health; when, finding me better, she ventured to Speak of the night-Scene. I assured her I was innocent, but to no purpofe ; she would not believe me, and insisted that i should leave her houSe when I was recovered, since I had behaved in So obstinate and ridiculous a manner; and, preposterous as
VoL. I.	G	it
122 T H E M U T ABI LI T Y 0 F
it may Seem, she hinted, that, if I had really been married to the Marquis, my amour with St.^ Lou would, not have been disgraceful.
Two days after, ! informed Lady N—r, by letter, with the particulars of my unfortunate situation. The Marquis told me before the completion of his villainy, that . lie had accidentally destroyed the certificate of our marriage.; but little did I Suf-pect his'diabolical,project. I'begged La-. dy N—— to pity me, at'least not totally to condemn me, till the confirmation of my valuable friend Mr. Foster’s death should put it out of my power to prove'my marriage with the Marquis; for, iS that could be proved, I hoped to find means,
. through the. goodness of Providence, to clear ,up my innocence in regard to St. Lou.
;
Being of a more humane disposition than Lady Walters, she wrote to a Mrs.
More, in E---------street, to receive me at
her lodgings, till I had conSulted fome eminent lawyer, to whom she bid me apply, and'give directions, if Mr. Forster should be living ; after which I might come to Laurel-Grove : but she did not chufe it should be known that she countenanced me
at preSent; on this account I must call my-
Self
H U M A N L I F E. 123
Self Mifs Avelini, and pafs for an Italian, under which name she had by letter recommended me to Mrs. More.
•	P
%
#
I was obliged my dear Harriot, to la^ aside my pen, as I found my ufual faint-neSs almost overpowering me. I have not yet recovered the shock of the last stroke upon my honour, though a whole month
has since elapSed. I could not------dared
not-----write fooner to you, as I had not
strength to, go through the task of reciting ray misfortunes. I continued a week at Lady Walter’s ; the Earl was fo irritated, that he would not fee me. I Sent Annette to most of my relations, to assure them of my innocence, and that the charge was a plot of the Marquis to get rid of me, as I could not prove my marriage: They all persisted in the fame anfwer, that they believed me guilty, and would never again fee me. Annette wept with me. To deScribe the agonies I endured, and, indeed, at all times, still endure, is impossible.
I Sent Several letters to the Marquis, written in as affecting a manner as I could
G %	pen
124 T HE M UT A BILIT Y OT
pen them; but he returned me verbal
messages that he would have ndthing more to Say to me.
To heighten my affliction, one evening Annette came and informed me, alady, who Said she was an intimate friend of mine, desired earneSily to fpeak to me. A fmall ray of hope that it might be my Harriot, gave me joy for a moment. 1 ordered Annette to bring her to me. She -did, and retired.
I was exceedingly mortified at my disappointment in Seeing assrariger, but desired her to be Seated on a couch opposite to that whereon I was reclined.
“ Do you not know me, Madam ?” Said she, falling at my feet. Ah ! Harriot, guefs if you can my furprize and horror at discovering the pretended Jhe to be the Count de St. Lou.
“ Wretch !-—-I could utter no more —Surprize and terror struck me dumb— 1 could not even call for relief.
My silence gave him an opportunity of telling me, that the violent passion he had for me prompted him to agree to the Mar-quisss request, in hopes that I would at
last yield to his wishes-.-that he adored
me more than ever------pitied my prefent
illneSs and distreSs——and that, Sooner
than
✓
HUMAN LIFE. 125
than lofe me, though I had been Melville’s rnistrefs, he would make me his wife, and reScue my reputation from the aSperSions by which it was now ob-fcured. ‘
I trembled exceedingly, and with difficulty rung the bell.
Lady Walters entered with Annette.
It feems. Lady Walters’ woman having informed her that a stranger was ad mitted into my apartment, her Ladyship had gone into the next room to listen.
She was gratified--------She heard every
thing.
Rife, my Lord, Said she, (he alwaytr had been a favourite of. hers;) the diSguiSe you have put on, and the Sentiments 1 have heard you avow, convince me of the Sincerity and ardency of your passion for my unhappy niece. Surely, Adelaide, you cannot refuSe to lend an ear to fuch generous propofals, and, avoid being further disgraceful to your friends, by obliterating your past miSconduct by a compliance with the Count's honourable defires.
A Sew tears came Sealbnably to my re--.lief. Ah ! Madam, anSwered I, would you have me incur the guilt of bigamy
-----—However the Marquis may diSown
and condemn me, I am really his v/ife,
ancL
26 THE MUTABILITY OF
and while he lives I never can become
another’s.
Upon this her Ladyship flew into a violent rage with me for So obstinately persisting in that wicked assertion. The Count renewed his Solicitations; and,' my Spirits being quite overpowered, I fainted.
%
When I returned to my SenSes, I Sound mySelf accompanied by Annette only. In about an hour after, she was fent Sor by the Earl and and his Lady, and brought back word that they would neither of them ever Speak To me shore, except I would receive Count St. Lou’s addresses, and regain my reputation by becoming his wife.
With Annette’s assistance I repaired to their preSence, and, falling upon my knees, in the most Solemn manner I aS-fured them of my innocence, declaring I was married in my father’s preSence.—But I might as well have Spoken to the wind —they were immoveably fixed in the belief of my guilt, and insisted on my feek-ing an aSylum elfewhere as foon as my strength would permit.
Cut ,to the heart with this inhuman treatrnent, Surely, my Lord, faid I, you
will not permit your own brother’s daughter
H C M A N L I F E. izj
ter to become a vagabond—a fuppliant to strangers for a morfel of breast, to fupport'-that life she wishes at an end,- but mush not shorten.
Hence ! faid tlie Earl, stamping his foot' in a passion ; you have other fecret lovers
to fupply you----Dare not infult me wntli
your hypocritical, cant, and pretence oS virtue.
I-retired almost in a state of distraction to my chamber. Ah ! Harriot, I have nocomfort under this m'ostgrievous affliction: but that derived from the poshession of a heart confeious of integrity, and en-. tirely clear of the accufations urged againsh me.
I endeavoured to calm my mind; but^ I found that v/ould be impossible while I remained in that place of abode. In fpite of my earnest intreaties, Count St. Loiu was forced into my company, with hopes* that he would at last interest me in his favour.
As I, was to go to Mrs. More’s under a-« fictitious name, it was neceSTary to leave Earl Walters’ privately, and without tak-. ing Annette with me ; and therefore I-feized an opportunity one evening, whem almost all the family were our, to pack up, my cloaths, and, stepping foftly to the door, called a.hackney-coach (you know
there..
i
!28 THE MUTABILITY OF
tnere is a stand in the street;) then, having by the cgachmanss affistance fecured my trunks in the coach, I unpereeived stepped into it, and drove to Mrs. More’s, who, having expected me fome time, was prepared to receive me. .
I left in my apartment a letter Sor Lord and Lady Walters. I returned them thanks Sor past Savours, and obServed, that, lince they would not be convinced of my innocence, and I was become So hate-Sul to them, it was unnecessary to inform them-where I v/as gone. But I intreated Lady .Walters, out oS companion to Annette, who was a good faithful Servant, to bestosv a character on her, and, if poS-Sible, get her a place, as I could not pretend to keep a maid longer, and in all probability should be obliged to deScend to Servitude mySelf Sor Subsist-, ence.
I wrote to the poor girl likewiSe, to thank her for her affectionate care of me; encloSed her v/ages, and a Small preSent
besides.----—Annette will still continue
in the station she has always been uSed to; whilst I, perhaps, shall she degraded to--Hold, my troubled Spirit; SuppreSs the Suggestions of deSpair.—Indeed, I am angry with mySelf Sor not Submitting to my lufferings with more patience ; as if I believed
HUMAN L I F E. izg
heved not, that “all things work together for good to them that love God.”
Avoiding reflections on this fad event as much as possible, I have recited every thing with all the brevity and precilion in my power.
Letters are difpatched to Leghorn, and to Mr. Foster’s relations in different parts; the anfwers to which will alcert'ain rov-doom. If he really has perished, I shall be lost for ever, unable as I shall then be to prove any thing against the inhuman Melville.
In the mean time I shall go to Laurel-
Grove : Lady N—----------’s cshaife wdll meet
me. at Hatfield, Remember my-name is now Avelini : direct to me under that appellation at Lady N—---------’s houfe.
Refignation under misfortunes like mine is not tlie eafiest of taskSi The masse of dissimulation is fo artfully put on, and Vice So frequently imposts upon the world in the difguife of Virtue, that it is very difficult to difeern the truly honest character, which often in distress fails to meet with its deferved regard and fupport.—-Happy are thofe young females who have ‘ parents to protect them from the hand of violence and the tongue of calumny ! May you, my ever amiable friend, never by a villain be deprived pf reputation (that
G 5	jewel
30 THE MUTABILITY OF
jewel which to our fex is inestimable), nor experience any other of the woes of
I
The wretched
% /
Adelaide Melville^
$
%
\
. In Continuation, to Mrs. Gordon.
JP H E history of my misfortunes, Madam, is drawing to a period. I wrote a few letters to MiSs Meynel, from Laurel-Grove, which she has mistaid : they chiefly consisted, however, of unavailing complaints. It remains Surther to be related,
that Lady N—;---------received from Lady
Walters inSormation of my flight, and (as it was termed) imprudent reSuSal of the Count St. Lou, who was almost distracted at the loSs oS me ; and that Lady Walters had taken Annette into her Service.
In three months time letters arrived to compleat my miSery, inSorming that the veSSel in which Mr. Foster Sailed was certainly wrecked, and every one on board
perished.
• \
H U M A N L I F E. 131
perished. All his relations, too, confirmed it.
Lady —— accufed me of art and difi fimulation ; it was very plain, she faid, I knew of Mr. Foster’s death, and had had. recourfe to an unwarranted ufe of his. name to give probability to my story that I was too abandoned for her to protect me, and therefore I rnust quit her houfe, and return- to my favourite mode of life. She would not permit me to fpeak: in my own defence.
Thus cruelly-treated, my dear Madam, and thus fituated, was I, when we met. You have endeavoured to procure me happiness, and conducted me to a fafe^ harbour. I wish never to change my fitu-ation, as I am fure. I cannot meet with a i better among strangers.
You are now acquainted, my dear Mrs. Gordon, with the particulars of a story much talked of in the beau monde, by whom I am accounted guilty. The Marquis is married to Violetta, and, I find, is bringing her to England. I think she must have done violence to her conscience, though no doubt the Marquis' is principally the guilty perfon.
Ah ! Mademoifelle Albe, .1 should now be an otyect of thy compashon, were we to
WQuldst recal thy bitter
wishes
m
4
52 THE MUTABILITY OF
wishes—wouldSl weep with me—for thy heart is not void of compassion!
But complaints are fruitlefs, my dear Mrs. Gordon ; neverthelefs, I have confidence in Divine Providence, who, by your means, has-conducted me to my prelent happy afylum. Various, are the evils of life, and, confidering my years, of which the twentieth is not yet eompleat-ed, I think I have experienced many.
Adieu ! Madam. Be affured your kindness and charity will ever be in my grateful remembranee, and I sha!l always remain, your very affectionate
And obliged humble Servant
Silena Howard,
y	.
m
s
• ^
%
Mfs Howard to Mifs Meynel.
w
Ehfium-Place.
M R. Villars’s benevolence and humanity make him almost adored by the poor peafants here. He relieves their distresses, and makes life comfortable to them as far as he is able. Indeed, poor wretches,
they
human life. 135
they {land in need of assistance. The hovels they inhabit are formed with clay, and in my opinion are fitter Sor dogs than the human Species in this bleak country. Some oS them are Scattered on mountains, miles apart from each other, and in winter are attacked by tremendous biaSts, which would strike with horror a being not accustomed, to them. The poor women Suffer inexprestible hardships, (it is our lot to fuster,) especially in childbirth; —they put themfelves under the care of the most ignorant and hard-hearted wretches, mifnamed midwives, who have no other method of bringing the poor child into the world, than almost shaking its unhappy mother out of it. They take the poor agonized creature by the legs, with her head hanging downward, and shake her unmercifully, till at last perhaps she is happily deprived of fenfation. Thus not a few are facrificed : many, however, through strength of constitution, aqd the mercy of Providence, efcape with life, and Nature at last works its way.
There are particular customs amongst the plebeians of every country.* When a couple are married here, they are attended, perhaps, by two or three hundred people; the men drop a shilling a-piece, the v7omen fixpence, for the bride and bridegroom
34 THE MUTABILITY OF
groom to begin the cares of life with. They are regaled for it with bread and butter, milk, oat-bread, and Soiiietimes bread and ale.
What I have mentioned is the common food oS this country. Ule makes them contented and happy with it while bleffed with health. SickneSs and poverty are hard endurance every where. In general, from my own obfervation, and the fuperi-or judgment of Mr. Villars, I must mark the Welsh as a lazy fet of people—they are afflicted with what the phyficians term fomnolenna continua ; you may perceive it even by their gait of walking. There is one county, indeed, whofe inhabitants are naturally blessSed with more penetration and vivacity than the others, for which reafon they are overlooked by thefe leaden mortals as children of folly. Genius is ever envied.
Mr. Villars tells me he has frequently obferved, in thefe parts, that on evenings, in families where a number of fervants are collected together, after the business of the day is cornpleated, instead of amusing themSelves, they sit in circles fast asteep ; in the cottages the fame. The harp will fometimes allure them to the exercife of dancing; but in general Som-
niis reigns. Till within thefe few yeaM
----- most
HUMAN LIFE. 1.35
most part ot this country was as barren
as Scotland ; the natural indolence and
* /
ignorance of the farmers witheld them from cultivating their lands ; but the land? lords beginning.to raiSe their rents, neceS-lity rouzed them from their error, and they are now convinced that industry, will perform miracles.
Mrs. Villars difcovers nothing to contradict my. former account of her : she continues very friendly andJdnd to me, and-laughs as ufual..
Mr. Shenkin’s. family, often vifft us: Mifs talks much of a Lady Di Horton she correfponds with, who is a great wit according to her report, and has promifed to grace Shenkin-Hall with her, prefence fome time or other She is a widow, I find.
Lord Clandon and. Mr. Clairville come frequently alfo. The latter behaves to me with great refpect; but his Lordship is too frequently making ufe of language not proper for me to attend to. I check his impertinence as'much as poshble by my fevere looks, but he is not eafily diS-countenanced. He has apparently a fcri-ous defign on Mifs Shenkin, or rather her fortune, but would prefer me for his rnistrefs I fuppofe. Mr. Villars fays he is a great libertine, However, I am fuffi-
ciently
136 THE MUTABILITY OF
ciently fafe tinder the protection of my worthy friends, who would not admit him to their houfe, were they not ignorant of. his behaviour to me.
Mr. Villars’s Spirits are exhilarated by the hopes of leeing his beloved nephew. Lord Villars, in a few days, who is repre-fented as one of the moil amiable men existing, both in perfon and morals. He has been very unfortunate in marriage, his father (fince dead) having compelled him to wed against his liking ; but he is now releafed from the bonds of matrimony by that too fashionable method, a divorce. She was Lady Mary T-^-----------, and, ac-
cording to common report, a very abandoned woman, I hope, as he is fo worthy a better fate, that if he does venture upon marriage again, he may meet with a lady who will make him amends for the unhappinefs he experienced in his first connubial connection.
. It gives me great pleafure to contemplate the romantic beauties about this place. I feel a calm tranquility stealing on my mind, and hope foon, my dear Harriot, to be able to inform you, with truth, that I have forgot all my misfortunes in this peaceful retreat, in conduct* ing me to which the mercy of Providence is manifest, and I hope 1 shall never ceafe . to adore it.	You
HUMAN LIFE. 137
You gave me fome intimation in your last concerning your going to a mafque-rade. Inform me, I pray you, how you approved it. Revive me a little. I shall foon, I hope, be able to regain my ufual vivacity, which I have long had reafon to banish. I now feem fettled for life ; and, to be quite happy, I have only to forget that I ever hacl any other friends than you and my kind beneSactors here. Adieu !
I
•	A
m
Mifs Mevnil to Mfs Howard.
Diilrml
0
“ EVIVE you,” Silena, who are happily got into ElySium 1 v/hat a requell! When you quitted Laurel Grove, could you imagine you were about to make lb agreeable an exchange ! But, as you are a good girl, and tolerably contented, I will not chide : a truce, then, Silena, with Surther complaints. I am liSler to the Sage PangloSs, and, folding my hands, cry, “ Every thing is Sor the best it is not for us short-Sighted mortals to arraign the
diSpen-
38 THE MUTABILITY.DF
, difpenfations of infinite wifdom. You are a dear, good creature, I muSt confess, and miSlrefs of fo much refignation and: patience, that it is actually injustice to ac-cufe you of want of it, even in raillery. Indulge mirth, my dear girl ; laugh at the-follieS'Of the rustic Tquires around you— any thing to divert feflectioh: but I cannot advife youTo be So very giddy as your Harriot; becauSe, .then, perhaps,, you might justly incur censhre.
You must, it Seems, have' an account of the maSquerade. Here it comes, then Silena ; though I’m aSraid you’ll think
my description inSipid ,:
Lady Bell M.' was dreffed in the character of CalypSo; her three Sisters and Some ladies asattendant nymphs; mySelf cloSe to her fide as a girl of Patmos; Lord M------as Mercury ; and Some other gen-
tlemen in various dreSTes.
After we had been at thi-s Scene oS con-fufion near an hour, I grew tired. Instead of wit, I heard nothing-but “ Do you know me	“ I know you”—“ A di-
vine creature !” and Such stuff. As I was leaning on Lady Bell’s arm, complaining oS the dulneSs of. the place, the finest figure I ever beheld, entered, dreffed as the Clown in the TwelSth Night. Coming up to us, Fair, maid,” Said he^ “ will
you
HUMAN LIFE. isg
9
you anfwer a fool ? You are arrived in a
land of them------Tho’ I have the honesty
openly to appear as one, yet, like other fools, I think myfelf a wife man-----Self-
conceit blinds the whole world----We fee
\ ’
not our own follies-----To the old tune,
then-------Can you fpeak our language ?
-----Have you been long imported from
Patmos ?
“ Just long enough to wish myfelf back again,” faid I, with a figh. “ My histo-’ ry, good Mr. Fool, is as follows : a violent storm which dashed a veSfel to pieces against our shore, threw on land an Eng- . lishman, the only one who efcaped with life. This Englishman pretended to love me, and, according to the manner of his countrymen, endeavoured by falfe oaths to enfnare me. My virtue being proof against his flattery, he took the first opportunity to eScape, and cruelly left me. I prayed To Jupiter, intreating that he would permit me once more to behold the perfidious wretch, to upbraid him with the theft of
my affection. My prayer was heard--------
Mercury instantly appeared, and conducted me through the air to this motley af-fembly, telling me at the fame time,that my own language had been conveyed from me into the third Heaven with (Orlandoss wits, and in its room was fubstituted the
English
140 THE MUTABILITY OF
English one. I found my lover, and ac-cufed him—bested; fince which, having regained my liberty, d am impatiently expecting Mercury to restore me to my native home and language.”
“ Thanks, fair maid, for your expli-citnefs. Will you accept the Service of a
Fool while you”—-------
Lord B-------came up, faying, “ Be-
gone, Mr. Fool, you. are notsht company, for thefe fair maids.’*
He made a most graceful bow, and fung in character,, 1 am gone, and anon, Sir,” &c. then tripped away, while a large group was listening to and admiring him.
Lady Bess' sthding it very warm, we retired to a fmall room to cool ourfelves.
“ Who can this clown be faid Hie; there is fomething enchanting in his
manner.------What a fine story, too, you
formed!”
While she was fpeaking, the Fool entered with a guittar—We were unmasked—“ Heavens!” cried he, and started. We clapped on our masks hastily again.
What now, good Mr. Foolfaid her Ladyfhip. He anfwered not, but fung to the guittar, “ Come away, Death,” &c. then tripped off as before.
Caiypfo,-
/
HUMAN L I F E. 141
Calypfo, leaving two of her nymphs with me, returned to the aSSembly. The room we were in began to fill, and my chattering friends were laughing away with the Montagues, when a gentleman in a domino entered, whom by his very attractive air, Silena, I guelSed to be my flirting fwain, and - was not mistaken. Turning his back to the company, and addreliing himfelf to me, ‘‘ Fair maid,” laid he, “ I have now aSTumed a drefs more fuitable to my real characterst’ and, drawing afide his mask, which concealed a beautiful face void of esteminancy, was proceeding, I admire you beyond my power of expression, and”——“ Hold,” faid I, “ you know I am prejudiced against dll your conn try men^—1 include you with them—-I will not accept your friendship— never again listen to a stranger—Leave me, then. Sir, to my destiny.” A murmur of “ It certainly is he” was uttered by the Montagues-------He started at the
words, -and exclaiming “ Cruel fate he •sted.
To confess the truth, I was vexed at his 'Sudden departure; but Soon recollecting mySelf, “ and who is he.?” faid I.
“ Why the gentleman in the character
of Tancred, who followed the domino
out
142 THE MUTABILITY OF
out of the room, is the Hon. Mr. V----
a most charming fellow !”
“ Oh, hideous I” cried I, at my frelh difappointment. Lady Bell foon after joined us; bur, finding my fwain had been frightened away, I grew weary, told her I was* fatisfied with the amuSement as she called it, and was defirous of retiring. Lord M——- handed me to my chair, and home came your Harriot very fafe.
Now, was I one of your melting fouls, I should most undoubtedly have got an account to give you, that 1 had a Sleeplefs morning (night being past,) and that the form of this enchanting unknown still hovered -in my fight. To tell the truth, I stept well, but he was the first perfon I thought of when I ’waked. However, I shall drive him away from my memory. What! fall in love at first fight !——
Ridiculous !---—-Quite in the romance
way, indeed.-----A creature I may never
fee again, too.—-------Oh! it must not
be. Adieu! Monfieur Fool; adieufor ever !
i Lord and Lady Lorton are foon going to London, and poor I am to be left with Mrs. Murray feeking adventures, lest my lucklefs form should deprive my coufin of
his heart. He is to leave Paris in three
months
HUMAN LIFE. 14J
months I find, and captivate the English
ladies with his accomplishments, which my uncle has heard are now abfolutely ir-reSiftible. Before I faw this Fool, I wished
to fee my coufin, but now-----------Pshaw ! I
have no patience with rhyfelf to fancy a stranger fo——a will o’sh’wifp----------a phan-
tom never more to be found. Positively I must lay aside-my pen, Silena, till I have overcome this folly, for I shall tire you as well as myfelf. My dear girl, think of all the chearful things you can ; never indulge Sfadnefs; and continue xo love
y
J	^
♦ ^ . .
#
"Your very Sincere friend,
*
0
4
%
y
Harriot Meynell.
/V
0
Mtfs
0
• •
144 the MUTABILiTY; of
i
Mifs Howard to Mifs Meynel.
Elyfum-Place,
0 *
Mm
J_>ET me hope, my amiable Harriot, you will yourfelf make uSe of the advice your last letter to me concludes with. It is very neceffary for one in your apparent sttuation. From the natural liveliness of your disposition, together with the variety of company you Sail into, and the good SenSe you are mistreSs oS, I flatter mySelf that you will be able Soon to eraSe from your tender thoughts the idea oS a stranger whom you may never more meet with, or who, if you should See him again, is perhaps unworthy oS your attention. Be guided by theSe prudential dictates, my dear Sriend, and let. me have the pleaSing SatisSaction of a Sincere affurance from you, that Mr. Fool never ariSes in your memory but in common with the other
circumstances attending your adventure at
the maSquerade.
Mifs
.J
H U M A N L I F E. 145
Mife Shenkin interrupted me. She is quite in raptures with Lord Villars, who is juft arrived. “ I muSl infallibly lofe my heart,” fays she, “ he is fo angelic.” I shook my head, ashiring her it was very fafe, fpite of all his charms. “ Impoffi-ble,” returned she—but you have not yet feen him. Allons. Silena; come,
come, make haste--------Mrs. Villars delires
you will repair to the Temple of Flora, to make tea, as my Lord feems to admire it, and the day is fo warm. But, adieu ! Til not waste time with you ; depechez vousV So faying, away she stew. I must follow, my dearest Harriot; for I am not rnistrefs of my time.
When I defcended to the parlour, Davy informed me that his rnistrefs and company were gone to the garden, had fent my lute there, and defired I would bring the music of Acis and Galatea. I obeyed ; Mr. Villars and my Lord meeting me before I arrived at the temple. Lord Villars treated me with as much tenderness and refpect as if he had been acquainted with my misfortunes and birth. Methonght, neverthelefs, there was a mixture of confusion in his manner; but poffibly this
VoL. I.	H	imagi-
.r4b THE MUTABILITY OF
•»
miagination proceeaea omy trom my tears of being known.
H is Lordship is really blest with the finest form I ever beheld, even much Superior to the cruel author oS my mifery, though I once thought that was impossible; Sor, whatever the inhuman Melville’s faults are, his perSon is certainly admirable : but on Lord Villars’s countenance is impressed a benignity and goodneSs which leem the reSuit oS innate virtue. When he Speaks, a Soothing peissuaSion dwells on his accents which in a manner Sorces at-
t
tention. Lady Villars must certainly have been lost to virtue beSore she became his ^ wife, or she could never have flighted a man altogether o Sormed to pleaSe. Poor woman! her repentance now cannot regain him—r---------she is tree to range———-
is lofl. But you defired me not to be grave, thereSore 1 must defist Srom Surther reflection.
ASter tea, MiSs Shenkin played Several tunes, and exerted herSelf in Singing; it was then my turn ; after which his Lord-ship Savoured us with Several Savourite airs, and perSormed to admiration: the .instrument Seemed poSTeSTed of founds Si-perior to what was ever heard Srom it beSore. Excels of pleaSure made us mute
dor Some minutes after he had done. Mrs.
Villars
HUMAN LIFE. 147
Villars was the first wlio broke silence * “ I vow, my Lord,” faid she laughing,
“ you sing delightSully--------Lord! how
could Lady Villars ever be tired of hearing you ? 1 declare, nephew, I think you make as good an Orphus as any god that Mr. Villars reads of Ha! ha ! ha ! Don’t you think fo, Mifs Shenkin ?”
“ I,protest, Mrs. Villars, you have made a very judicious remark; my Lord certainly plays and sings to admiration.”
His Lordship bowed tO their compliments. Mr. Villars and your friend returned him thanks fortee delight he had afforded us. After walking for an hour or two, we returned to the houfe. Mifs Shenkin with great reluctance took her leave, but has promifed to be with us again tO-raorrow, The night is far advanced, my dear Harriot; therefore I must conclude with wishing you health and a restoration of your former ferenity
of mind.
\
\ .
)
/
Silena Howard:
H 2
148 THE MUTABILITY OF
I
D(?r^/Villars to Duncan Paris
Elyjium-Place.
HERE art tboii, Duncan ? Three letters, and no return ! They were carried to the different poSl-houfes by various hands indeed ; but they certainly were put in : yet I know not what to think oS it. Thou haft not received them I mull stip-pofe, or filence would Icarce fo long have prevailed ; therefore I muSl give thee an abridgment of the contents : they recited to thee a confirmation of rny having gained a bill oS divorcement againSl Mary, my wife ;—my journey to Lord N——’s, and enquiry aSter the charming Avelini;
-----a refuSal to my requeft, with an a-
vowabthat he did not know where she was gone. In hopes of gaining inSormation, I acquainted him with the Situation oS my heart. He Seemed Surprized, and confuSed ; but at last, to eafe my pain, as he declared, inSormed me I could nor gain her—She was engaged to another, therefore could never think of me. No, no,
Said
HUMAN LIFE. 149
faid he, as if fpeaking to himfelf with regret, it can never be. His words made me unhappy ; and, to endeavour to relieve my anxiety, I determined to come hither, where, by the force of reafon, and the powerful arguments of my. uncle, (whom I intended making my confident)
I hoped to regain my liberty, and be re-stored to tranquility, as the fair caufe of m.y unhappineSs was in honour bound to another. Hither I came, Duncan, and found with Mr. and Mrs. Villars a Welsh girl who endeavours to affect the bon ton, and is abfolately ridiculous. My uncle was elevated at the fight of me, and immediately conducted me to the garden, wdiere numberlefs improvements have been made fince my last vifit. Finding me pleafed with a new pavilion,, called the Temple of Flora, he ordered tea to be brought there, and, as I was fond of mafic, bid the fervant tell Mifs Howard she must come there to make tea, and bring a mufic-book with her. This Mifs Howard, he inSormed me, was companion to-his wiSe; an amiable, accornplished young woman, who had met with misfortunes . which reduced her to that capacity. From his recommendation I expected to meet with an agreeable woman; when, observing
50 THE MUTABILITY OF
ferving her at a diSlance, he faid, we will walk to meet her if you arc not tired, Harry.
You cannot expect me to express what I felt, Duncan, when I difcovered, MiSs Howard and the charming Avelini to be the fame perfon. It was with the greatest difficulty imaginable I concealed my fen-fations. After making tea, which she did with a grace peculiar, to herfelf, and MiSs Shenkin had fqualled us almost deaf, the lovely maid favoured us with a few fongs. At the found of her angelic voice it was with difficulty, Charles, I could forbear throwing myfelf at her feet, and declaring how much I adored her. I was obliged in turn to perform, though not to my own Satisfaction; the company, however, honoured me with their commendations. Mifs Howard was polite and pleafing, without a femblanceof flattery. She has that eafe and politeneSs of behaviour which ever distinguishes ladies of the first fashion. But, in fpite of the height to which my passion is raifed, I am determined to be on my guard, and find out her private history before I acquaint her with my fentiments: for which reafon I behave to her with refpect only, and am certain she has no idea of my foster feelings. We pafs our time agreeably : she is a woman
of
HUMAN LIFE. 151
0
of refined fenfe, but was an intire stranger to my unde before she was recommended here. Now, I am very anxious to difcover what her engagement is, and
why Lord -------difowned knowing where
she was. I took an opportuniry this rnorning of naming him before her : she blushed exceedingly. . I canst believe she has any engagement; yet what could be
her connection at Lord -----------’s ; he
mush know her affairs.. Sometimes I am almost determined to inform her . that L faw her there. I know not what to do, and dare not now/advife with my uncle. This Welsh plague,:.. Mifs Shenkin, attends our steps fo, that 1 cannot find my charmer one moment alone. Then, Duncan, Lord Clandon..is here too, with your old companion Clairville, who both feem convinced ofstistr powerful attractions ; fo that I am,-obliged to conceal my pailion with the greatest care, and watch my every action with vigilance. She behaves to Claifyille, I think, with attention and refpect, but vifibly avoids Clandon as shuch as poffible. A melancholy is still imprest fed on her beautiful features----She frequently fighs too----------------Ah I Duncan, there-
is fome mystery----1 must feek it out; for
Lfind I shall be miferable without her; she •
, isv ■
ISZ THE MUTABILITY OF
^ “* _____________
^is lo uncommon a woman--------lo voia or
affectation---and has fuch folidity of
judgment, for one fo young!------But the
more I think, the more I am bewildered. —Surely I cannot be deceived in her. Write to me, Charies; inform me if thou dost still exist, and be free with advice to thy fdend
Villars,
Mtfs Howard to Mifs Meynel.
%
Place,
X FEAR you do not deal stncerely with me, my dear Harriot, when you declare the idea of the stranger is banished from , your heart. Spite of your endeavours a-gainst it, a languidnefs I never before obferved appears throughout your letter, and convinces me all is not right. Ah my friend, to deceive me is nothing, but deceive not yourfelf: reflect on the dangerous confequence of foftering the thoughts
of an entire stranger in your breast ; think
how
HUMAN LIFE. 153
how it may-------nay, must, if you perfist
in it-----imbitter your whole life. The
more indulgence you give to reflection on this phantom, the more agreeable he will be to your imagination. His firSt appearance w^as engaging in a feene of gaiety— He continues charming, becaufe you had not an opportunity by fubfequent interviews to perceive his faults, and how very unworthy of your affection in reality he may be. I hope my amiable Harriot will listen to her Silena; the SincereSt friendship ever felt dictates my pen. Avoid folitude, the nurfe of love, and Strive by various amufements and objects to overcome a fentiment which, if cherished, must render you unhappy. I drop the fubject, my dear friend, with wifliing that the difquiet which I am afraid at prefent invades your bolbm, may foon give place to your accustomed eafe and fprightli-nefs.
Lord Villars, by a further acquaintance, prove’s still more worthy one’s good opinion. His merit rifes fuperior to any man’s I ever met with. It is well my dess tiny was fixed before I faw him, or perhaps I might foolishly have bellowed my heart where there would have been no probability of a return, His tafie is very refined, and I don’t think he feems likely
H 5	to.
54. the mutability of
to fix his regard with precipitation. I fancy he will be difficult in his choice ; Sew women will Suit him. His Sather compelled him to marry Lady Mary T--------------,
thereSore his own choice has not yet been discovered. I Srequently wish his Lord-ship and you were known to each other, and that your mutual happineSs might be
the conSequence.------But perhaps it would
not prove So ; we mortals Seldom Sorm right Judgment as to the happineSs or mifery oSSuturity: I oSten reflect on the great pleaSure my marriage afforded my dear father in his laSl moments; yet how contrary to his kind expectations did it prove ! -----^But let me wave that dreadSul Sub-
Poor MiSs Shenkin Speaks to me in confidence frequently of Lord Villars. According to her method of delivering her Sentiments, “ he is charming pall description”-----“ his power is irreSiftible”
——and there is “ no withstanding his alluring manner.” But, as she has no hopes oS a conqueSl over him, she yields to Lord Clandon’s flattery, and would not be averSe to receive his hand. I have a-voided this Lord’s company as much as poff] ble,
Laft night Mr. Clairville, finding me alone in the drawing-room, embraced the
opportunity
HUMAN LIFE. i5<
opportunity to declare his affection for me' in a manner I could not be offended at, as he thought me at liberty to receive ad-dreSfes from his fex. I returned him-thanks for his obliging opinion of me, but intreated him at the fame time to de-fiSt from thinking of w^hat could never' come to pafs: that I was fatisfied with my prefent lituation, and if Mr, Villars and' his Lady would permit me to remain with them all my life, I should esteem myfelf
happy to continue unmarried :-----and if
I should be fo unfortunate as to difpleafe-them, I doubted not, from the mercy of Providence, that fome other friends would arife. In shorty I told him that I had been witness to fo many unhappy marriages, that I had. taken ia final refolution not to enter into that state. He pleaded hard, but I remained inexorable, and infist-ed upon his never mentioning the fub--ject to me again. > He grew melancholy, and, feeing Lord Clandon approach, re--tired.
His Lordship, finding me in h reverie, -, began at first to rally me concerning his • friend. When I feriouSly aSfured him he was mistaken, he in a rapture fell at my feet, and imprinted feveral skiSTes on my
hand before I could withdraw it—fwore.
he
V
56 THE MUTABILITY OF
he adored me—and fince I had refufcd Clairville, it gave him hopes I would listen •to him ; “ for, furely, my angelic Silena, faid he, you dont imagine that charming form, fo moulded for adoration, was created only to be viewed,” “ and in virgin gloom your future days be fpent.”
“ You are become infolent, my Lord,” faid I, with warmth, endeavouring to fnatch my hand from him. “ My fcne-fadors will not permit me to be infulted,
though only their dependant.-----Unhand
me—I will be releafed.”
As thefe words were pronouncing. Lord Villars and Mr. Clairville entered. The latter call an angry look at Lord Clandon ; the former feemed furprized.
My infolent fuitor let go my hand, and arofe.
Alarmed left Lord Villars should imbibe an unworthy opinion of me, and impart it to his uncle, I could not conceal my fenfations—I burst into tears.
“ Good God ! Mifs Howard,” faid his Lordship, “ what is the matter ?—I hope
our entrance did not disturb you.’’
“ No, my Lord ; it was a pleafing interruption to me. Lord Clandon, vain of his rank, thinks he may infult me with
irnpunity becaufe I am fo unfortunate as to
be
HUMANLIFE. 157
be dependant in life : but, alas!—yet let me intreat your pardon, my Lord; fuch an infignificant creature as I am is not worthy your attention—I will weep alone.’’ -----1 withdrew.
Lord Villars’ accustomary humanity was vifible ; he feemed willing to detain me, but fearful of offending.
It was only to the next room I retired, where I could hear every word that paSTed. Lord Villars rebuked his fellow-peer for his behaviour, difplayed how unworthy his rank it was to inSult any young lady, however fituated in life, eSpecially when innocence and virtue were her only portion-----It was moreover an affront to Mr,
and Mrs. Villars, whofe protection I was
under------That he hoped never to meet
with the like complaint again, or his un-. cle must be informed of it, who he was certain would never entertain any man who was impertinent to Mifs Howard, a young lady he esteemed much, and who claimed the refpect due to her fex from every one.
“ ’Pon my foul, Villars, I do refpect her; have I not been paying my adorations.?” faid Lord Clandon, endeavouring to pafs it off by raillery.
Clairville alfo very warmly attacked him; but at last a peace was concluded
and
THE MUTABILITY OF
and his Lordship promifed never more to-offend.
My fpirits were overpowered ; I fat weeping near an hour. Reflection convinced me my conduct was' blameable ; I had acted in a childish unthinking manner. Why did I not filently retire, instead of urging complaints ? My Solly might' have drawn Lord Villars and Mr. Clairville, who are two worthy men, intov diSagreeable and alarming conSequences. Oh ! Harriot, I was diSpleaSed with my-Selfiand the whole world almost. Thus it is when vexations oppreSs us. But a Summons to dinner rouzed me from myi reverie, and I endeavoured to recover myfelf, that I might not appear ridicu--10115.	> -
Mr. Villars, who is as kindly attentive to me as a parent, obferved the alteration -of my countenance, and rednefs of my eyes. He drew the afide, the company not being feated, and asked the occaiion of it. In return to his kind enquiries, I alledged a fevere head-ach. He feemed to doubt—looked at his nephew—^but faid no more. Luckily Mifs Shenkin happened not to be prefent, and I eScaped her in-quifitivenefs. Lord Clandon appeared rather confufed. Mr. Clairville looked grave,
fighed
HUMANLIFE. 15^
figlied much, and was very affiduous in helping me to any thing I wanted at table. Lord Villars often beheld me with looks that denoted pity, and behaved with his uSual politenels to every one but Lord Clandon, whom he Seemed still diSpleaSed? with.
The day being v/arm, Mrs. Villars. choSe to repoSe after dinner; and there being no ladies, I took a book, and retired to the Temple of Flora.
■It was in vain I attempted to read ; the morning’s adventure was too deeply im-preSSed on my memory. I Seemed to have behaved like a thoughtleSs giddy girl,. Why should Lord Clandon’s inSolence at that period particularly affect my Spirits ? Yet it now occurred to my reflection, that, if I had not inSormed Lord Villars, but filently retired, he might have imagined I' Savoured the addressfes of ray libertine lover; thereSore my conduct was not So blameable as I had beSore deemed it. But what meaSures should I take to prevent further importunities from Lord Clandon and Mr. Clairville. The latter claimed my pity, as his intentions were honourable. . This led me to ruminate on my unhappy fate, in being obliged to conceal my marriage, and to fuster a worthy
m an
/
[6o THE MUTABILITY OF
man to continue in the error of believing me at liberty to be addrelSed. My misfortunes all recurred to my imagination, and I fat Stupefied with woe.
Lord Villars paSSed, and, feeing me in the Temple, entered. It was fome moments before I could recollect myfelf and arife.
“ I fear, Mifs Howard, faid his Lord-ship, lam an intruder, and stouze you from a reverie, which, perhaps, you would chufe to remain in ; a retroSpect of what has been agreeable is pleafing.”
“ It is fo, my Lord,” returned I, with a figh; “ but a very fmall share of that has been my lot.”
I am very forry, Mifs Howard, faid his Lordship,'' one So young should have reafon to fay fo.”
“ I find no realbn to'complain now,, my Lord,” faid I, v/ith a faint fmile, ‘‘ Under the protection of Mr. and Mrs, Villars one cannot be unhap-py.”
“ And yet under their protection I find Lord Clandon dared infult you. Madam ; but let me beg, that, if he should offer further impertinence, you will acquaint ray uncle or myfelf, and he shall be expelled this houfe for ever,—but-1 forget
HUMAN L I F E. i6i
my errand, Mifs Howard,’ added he, hesitating and changing colour.—“ It is a difagreeable task to meddle in love-affairs, (fmiling,) but poor Clairville has informed me of his ill fuccefs this morning
-----He is very unhappy, and intreated
me to plead in his behalf. Having urged me fo much, I could not forbear taking compaffion on him. He is a worthy man, has a handfome fortune, and I think would make a tender affectionate hushand Pardon my interfering, amiable Mifs Howard, but I fmcerely pity him ; and, if you have no engagement, what can be your objection
“ The motives which guide your Lordship’s actions are, I doubt nor, always laudable,” returned I; “ they prompt to the welfare of your friends and mankind in general. As fo near a relation to Mr. Villars, you are certainly intitled to interfere, therefore apologies are unnecefiary, my Lord. I am well convinced Mr. Clairville has great merit, and does me honour
by his offer----But, faid I, hefitating, I
have taken a final determination never to marry—no offers or allurements can make me break it.^—It is not a fickle fancy, but a fixed refolution, which no inducement can make me depart from. I fmcerely
wish
i62 the MUTABILITY of
wish and hope that Mr. Clairville may foon meet with one more worthy his attention, and be > completely happy, for 1 think him highly deServin-g,”
“ You furprize me exceedingly, faid his Lordship, by fpeaking fo favourably of my Sriend, and yet reSuSing him ; Surely he may hope that time will work wonders, MiSs Howard,” added he, with a , Smile.
“ Never, my Lord,” Said I, with firm-neSs. “ I never vary my opinion in religion or love, (fmiling at the word lovr)
■—My Sate is fixed.” The laft words eScaped me unintentionally.
His Lordfliip, looking at me attentively, and rather moved, Said, with a figh ‘‘ Poor Clairville then has applied too late, I find.
—Oh! MiSs Howard !”------------
. The Sound oS voices pretty near made-him Stop. He haftily quitted the temple, and immediately shet ’Squires Davies and Jones, who were coming in Search oShim. They Seemed willing to come Sorwards to the place I was in, but he drew them off another way, I SuppoSe to prevent their Seeing me, that I might eScape their indelicate raillery.
Mrs. Villars found herSelf not well, wherefore I kept her cornpany in her
chamber
4
H U M A N LIFE. i63
chamber the remainder of the day. But, my dear Harriot, it is' high rime to clofe my letter, wdiich is quite a pacquet: be-fides, the poll is going off; fo that I must: bid my beloved friend adieu!
Silena Howard.
Lord Villars to Dorrf Duncan Paris.
Elyfum-Place.
r
EVER tell me, Duncan, of fixing my happinefs at once, as 1 have it in my power to make a fpeedy declaration. Thou art a fine fellow to give advice, who art unacquainted with the paffion which has gained ssich dominion over my foul. Can 1 command reciprocal affection} Ah ! Charles, Charles, 1 fear thy friend is doomed to Spend the remainder of his days in
mifery.-----They must be fpent in wretch-
edneSs without Silena Howard. Her mental qualifications charm me more and more : but I have continued upon my guard tolerably well; I don’t thinic she yet
fufpects
✓
[64 THE MUTABILITY OF
fufpects how much I adore her; and, to prevent fufpicion, I undertook the fevere task of pleading for ray rival Clairville. I confess, Duncan, I knew before-hand she was refolved to refufe him, and I wanted to know her reafon. She alledged that her final refolution w^as never to marry, which determination nothing could remove
-----(then I began to tremble for myfelf;)
and afterwards, with a figh^ Charles, she faid, her fate was fixed. I was ready to
shrink with horror-------Lord N-------—st
converfation recurred to my memory ; her words coincided with what he faid. I fighed, and uttered fomething as if in pity to my rival, when my own heart was rent. It was then, Duncan, I determined no longer to conceal my fentiments, but declare how greatly I eSteemed her. I began, according to the fituation of my mind, in the pathetic, with “ Oh ! MiSs Howard,” when at that critical juncture two Stupid Seilows interrupted me. I ran out oS the Temple oS Flora, where I was with my charmer, that she might eScape their inhuman raillery, Sor Welshmen in general have very little idea of delicacy; which is not much to be wondered at, as they cloud the Sliare of understanding allotted them by Providence with inebriety,
which
HUMAN L I F E. 165
which levels them almoit with brutes. I am furprized that Mr. Brydone, who mentions hofpitality and inebriety to be the characteristics of the SwiSs, the Scotch, and the Irish, should exclude, or rather forget, the Welsh, who have always been fo famed for both.
A'**’
By heaven, the charmer of my foul is '
gone out to walk-----------alone too. I will
purfiie her, Duncan---------inform her, as if
accidentally, that I faw her at Lord N—st; from whence, perhaps, I may gain an in-fight into her history.
I foon overtook the lovely Silena, and, walking on with her, we dilcussfed Several fiibjects. I longed to come to the point, Charles, but could not fettle in what manner I should do it. At last I turned she converfation on the different counties in England, and asked how she liked Yorkshire. She anfwered, Very well, and blushed. Not feeming to obferve her change of countenance, I continued my difcourfe, faying, when 1 first was introduced to her
here,
«
i66 THE MUTABILITY OF
here, 1 thought ihe was not an intire stranger to me; and it had lince occurred to me that I faw her at Laurel-Grove the day before she quitted it.
Before I quitted it,” repeated ssie, turning pale as death. “ Did Lady
------ inform you I was there, my
Lord
To tell the truth, Duncan I was almost in as great palpitation as her dear felf, but was determined, if poffible, to compleat the task I had begun, and therefore anfwered, “ She told me of your departure, Madam.”
“ You then know, Sir, who I am.” faid she, weeping; “ and, knowing me, how could you attempt interceding for Mr. Clairville ?”
Though I detested my own artifice, Charles, I could not at that period prevent mySelf from purfuing it, however unlaudable. In love, you know, allowances are made for thefe things. But let me proceed with my account, Duncan. Her last fpeech feemed derived from a nobleness of foul, though it was to me in a manner unintelligible. I fuppofed it alluded to what Lord N---------- had in-
formed me of—an irrevocable engagement she had. “ Pardon me, Madam, if I erred,” was my anfwer.
She
H u M A N n 1 T n. 107
0^ V	Y * t	V	% •
VY\3^L V ^	^ i i ^ • A. mL LWiXi	iil
vain for fome time to aSSuage her grief. In short, Charles, I was almost as much affected as herfelf—her tears pierced my very foul. She obferved it.
“ Your humanity does you honour, ray Lord. Mine are very uncommon misfortunes,” continued she ; then throwing herSelf at my feet, “ but O, my Lord, let me intreat you, by that unbounded companion which you extend to all objects around you, that you will p/eServe an inviolable fecrecy both as to my misfortunes and name”------
I would not permit her to proceed without rifing off the ground—The lovely mourner rent my heart.----“ForHea-
ven’s fake, amiable Mils Avelini, faid I, •arife:”
The started — paufed — then, fighing,
uttered, “Cruel Lady N-------!”-------
“What did she fay of me, my Lord?” purfued she. .
“ It was Lord N--------, Madam, in-
formed me jou was gone to London.”
Did he fay for what purpofe, my
Lord.?—Did he tell you my name and place of birth.?”
“ I learned, Madam, that your name was Avelini, and Italy your country.”
Pardon
i58 THE MUTABILITY OF
“ rardon tne impertinence or my enquiry, my Lord ; was that the extent of yoii’r knowledge ?” faid she, blushing.
I found her fo very unhappy, Charles, that my diffimulation began to fubfide—. “ I was acquainted with nothing further, Madam,” anfwered I.
“ You are acquainted with too much, my lord,” faid she ; “ but let me repeat my intreaties that you will conceal having
feen me at Lord N-------’s from your uncle
and every one elSe^—Will your Lordship promiSe me to be Silent ?”
“ Receive my most Solemn assiirances of Secrecy as to that point, my worthy Mifs Howard, (fince that is the name you chufe now^ to retain); and, iS you will Savour me with a recital oS thoSe misSortunes you mention, be affured the Secret shall remain confined to my own boSom. IS they are oS a nature to be remedied, I Solemnly declare all the power I am maSler oS shall be exerted to do it.”
“ Ah ! my lord,” returned file, ‘‘ I am very well convinced both oS yours and Mr. Villars* humanity and benevolence.
-----i!f my woes could be redreffed, I
should long since have applied to your kind uncle Sor relieS—But they are irremediable, and Time only can be my friend, by enabling me to forget them.”
“ Since
M U MAN LIFE. 169
“ Since I have taken the liberty, ’ faid I, “ to enter fo far into your concerns, my amiable friend, refolve me one thing feri-oufly ; What is your real motive for refu-fing Mr. Clairville V*
She blushed, and was Ibme time Silent.
“■ My friendship for yon. Madam,” refumed I, “ makes me anxious for your happinefs : be aSTured that question arofe not from impertinent curiofity.”
“ I must beg your fecrecy ^gain, my lord,” anfwered she, “ and intreat you will dishiade that gentleman from purfuing his addressfes to me. My word is given to another,” added she, with a
sigli.
“ I understand you, Madam,” faid I, almost overpowered by her last words ; “it is.from the inability of being at prefent united with the object: of your choice that you are fo unhappy.--------If my in-
terest, or fortune, can be of any fervicc to your lover, command it, MiSs Howard ; he must be worthy my attention, as he is fo clofely connected with you.”
“ It is not fortune he wants,” faid she, in tears—You must excufe my explaining myfelf farther, my lord. I return you my most grateful thanks for your VoL. I	I	friendly
1)0 1 H st M U 1 AHl L 1 1 X, U h
incijuiy uiicrb-----nave uuuiing more
to bestow but prayers for your happinefs.” So faying, fhe begged I would permit her to return to the houfe alone. The least defire from thofe we love is a command, d need not tell thee, Duncan, I complied.
Various are my reflections on the pall , feene ; but they all end in dooming me to mifery. I cannot help concluding her confession to be true, as to her engagement; but then 1 am not pleafed at her fpeaking fo favourably of Clairville. She feems, indeed, to entertain a higher opinion of me than I deferve, and owns a friendship for me fo void of affectation, that it charms me. But to what purpofe is her Sriendship only ? Yet her Sriendship is dearer to me than the love oS any other
woman.-------^—How hard is my Sate,
■Charles!	"
To love, and love in vain, oh ! dreadful (late,
Her fniiles ftlll adding to the pain I feel j iPerhaps ’twere better to endure her hate,
I then might urge her heart more hard than fteel Unworthy mine—Her pride, difdain,
Would fet me free, would end my pain :
But friendly kindnefs aggravates the Smart,
And, like a cruel foe, ftill deeper wounds the heart.
May
HUMAN LIFE. 171
May you bav'e a fafe voyage to your native country, Charles, and be happier in love than your friend
Villars.
Mifs Howard to Mifs Meynel.
'	*	Elyfum-PJace.
I HAVE undergone great anxiety of mind, my dear Harriot, fince I wrote last, and almost betrayed myfelf from fear of being known. Ah! my amiable friend, how neceffary it is to be always on one’s guard.
Walking a few days fince with lord Villars, he informed me that he recollected having feen me at Laurel-Grove the day before I bid adieu to it. You may imagine I was struck with exceeding Surprize and affliction at the news; and, finding
Lord N-----had told him F was gone to
London, my unhappinefs increafed. thinking he knew my whole history. On my knees I befought him to conceal it, but
I 2	had
372 the mutability of
naa not time to nniin my ipeecn, berore he raifed me by the name of Avelini, I started, for it then occurred to -me how circumstances stood ; and I was not deceived. I found, by further converfation, he shought Avelini was my real name, and that I was an Italian, which 1 judged prudent filently to confent to, but continued to intreat he would not mention having
feen me at Lord N-------------st, which he
good-naturedly promifed. His humanity was conspicuous as uSual—^He wept with me, and asked if it was in his power to remedy the misSortunes I complained of. ^Having thanked him, and anSwered in the negative, he intreated to know why I refilled Mr. Clairville.- To put a period to his lordshipst wonder, 1 anSwered that I was engaged to another. He then made Sresh offers of compleating my happinefs with the otyect of my affection, if fortune was the effential. I told himdt was not; and by flight, my dear friend, put a period to a diffimulation I could with difficulty retain. It is very mortifying do be obliged to make ufe of it to fo worthy a friend as lord Villars, but my fituation requires it. Ah! Harriot, how my days are fpent in affliction !
It
\
0
human life. 175
It gives m.e pleafure, however, to find your vivacity is returned. May you long, enjoy peace of mind, my dear Sriend !
I hear lady Di Horton is juft arrived at Shenkin-Hall. They have been fome time very bufy in preparing for her reception. Mifs Shenkin has talked of nothing but her ladyship, and told lord Villars he muft infallibly lofe his heart, with So charming a creature. If she is worthy of him, 1 shall wish him fuccefs.^., Adieu!
Lady Di Horton to Madame St. Clare, .
Shenkin-HalL .
J V O W, my dear St. Clare, I am not* in , the * least: furprized that you should be fo astonished at my journey to this, hideous part of the globe, among hills, dales, rocks, valleys, goats, ’fquires (who may pafs under the denomination of brutes,) and a jumble of the Lord knows what. I don’t fuppoSe a woman of my fashion ever was in this remote and almost unknown country, except just en paffant to Ibme politer
74 THE MUTABILITY OF
liter place in her travels, though I believe this does not lead to any other country.— I canst tell—for I ever abhorred distracting my brains with geography.—But a frolic brought me here, St. Clare, and hopes of fubduing one man gave me courage to fupport the fatigue of travelling over the horrid mountains, and caufing a denfe cloud to hang over the lean monde by my abfence. Winny Shenkin fent me word that dear creature Lord Villars was here. Having feen him once, I ever fince doated on him to diftraction ; but, as he was flying from place to place, could never catch him. Now, I was quite in raptures to find that he intended Some Slay at his uncle’s, being the moSl: fortunate opportunity imaginable for making him my Slave, as my charms muSf appear in their full luSlre a-mong a parcel of awkward frights !——
mere Hottentots 1^---fo I immediately re^
paired hither. The good folks here, too, are fo happy at the honour I do them ; and Mrs. Shenkin exerts herfplf much at her skill in cookery and confectionary. LaSt night she honoured us with a new invention, which was introduced inthede-fert. In the middle was placed a boy in the 1 action of letting off fquibs; another fat below with a fmall wax taper, which
being
I
/
HUMAN LIFE. 175
being ligntea atcer nxed on tne table, let the i^uibs reporting. The ’fquires, being in their ufual ftate, drunk, began to take offence at the alarm, till that fweet creature Villars fet them right as to the intention of the thing. Their hideous roars of laughter then abfolutely Slunned one, and. the contriver w^quite happy in the ap-plaufe she met with.
Such a parcel of ’fcjuires and their wives repair here from forty miles round to compliment me, or rather to fee what a , fine lady is, that I am abfolutely weary of bending my knees to them; Such figures you never beheld in your days ! Oh! they are attired frightful beyond your conception ; and sh voracious for news, that I really am obliged to make lies for to get into favour with them: The only tolerable creature I have met with, , befide Shenkin, is a girl. called Mifs Howard, who is a heel-treader; or companion, to Villarsst aunt. Now the girl apparently mull have had a good education, for her behaviour shews it. I could not find out her origin from the men, fo applied to Mrs. Villars, who is almoSl an ideot. She told me, . ‘‘ the good girl was a Creole by birth, and had been reduced by the lofs of a relation > on whom she depended.” Lilcely.enough I
176 THE MUTABILITY OF
10 let It rest. She is grave and ieniible» ’ which is proper for one of her preSent station. But my adorable Villars as yet treats me only with a refpect; due to my quality, yet I think I can perceive him to figh a little. W hy should I doubt the effect oS my charms, when I have no rival. Clandon is here, but he is not a fit object to flirt with. Then poor Clairville is Sighing aSter Howard-------She’s welcome to the
insipid creature. 1 am going with Winny Shenkin to pay a visit at a Small town,
called-----------, Sor a few days ; when I
return, thou shalt have an account of its inhabitants Srom
Thine heartily,
Diana Horton.
y
P. S. Let me hear how yon proceed
with Silvio.
\
Lord
\
H TI M A N L I F E. ihf
)
Lord ViLLAKS to Lord Duncajt.
Elylium-Place.
I A M more unhappy than ever, Charles; the lovely Silena adheres ftill clofer to my.
heart. But lire is lost to me---never can
be mine—and the idea drives me to dif-traction.
Lady Di Horton is arrived at-Shenkin-Hall, and is fpreading her net for me; but her flirting ladyship is mistaken, and. will be exceedingly difappointed. She affects a fondness for my adorable Silena, that she may have, a proper excufe for coming here; but I perceive Mifs Howard Seems. not very defirous of her friendship.
Her ladyship v/as laughing the other day at the little attention the ladies of this country pay to drefs, that very.important article, efpecially the married worn en, “ What do you think of it, Howard Said she;, “ are they not the frightSullest dowdies you ever beheld Such heads ! -----Oh ! mon Dieu !'■
I 5	My
THR MITT ABTT.TT V nr?
My fweet girl laughed at lady Dist manner of expreffing herfelf, but made a very juft remark in her anfwer.' She allowed that “ lady Di was in the right, for that it was very abfurd for women to neglect drefs intirely after marriage. They should then be decently in the fashion, she faid, as well as when fingle. If they had ft tidied drefs to gain a hushand, they should perfevere in it to preferve his affection. Men in general, she added, were apt to be fickle, and defpife their wives, therefore they ought to endeavour their utmost to avert the evil. That when a man faw other women fet off to advantage, and his wife an awkward antique figure among them, it muft fenfibly wound both his pride and Jove to find her rather an object of contempt. This being repeated, by degrees alienates his affection from her. The ladies, she added, might perhaps urge ceconomy in their excufe; but it made very little difference in expence, ex-cept fashion was carried to the height, and that was out of the queftion. That old ‘ ladies were excepted, as to appear clean and decent, according to their age and ftation in life, was all to be required of them.”
■ r;	^
Bravo
HUMANLIFE. 179
“ Bravo, Mifs Howard,” cried her fprightly ladyship, “ I vow you have fpoke my very fentiments.”
But now, Duncan, I mull recite to thee.; a difcourfe I overheard between them, which has made an impreshon upon me : though whatever the charming Silena fays always does fo.
They were walking together in a covered walk in the garden at Mr. Shen-kinst, when lady Di, being tired, fat down, and defired her companion to do the fame. I was not far behind them ; but the trees being interwoven, they could not perceive me. Lady> Di began wdth, “ Howard, don’t you think Villars the most enchanting creature in the world I—
I vow I never beheld fo handfome a fellow Speak, Howard, now, don’t you really think him fo
“ My humble fituation, my lady,” faid she, fmiling, “ keeps me on my guard, and preferves me from the enchantments of thofe fo much above me.”
“ Well, but—phoo!—nonfence !■------
Do you think him handibme, Howard, is what I ask you
“ I have feen as handfome,” faid she, with a figh, “ but lord Villars has certainly
i	‘
go THE MUTABILITY OF
tainly altogether a fine noble form—His mental qualifications, too, render him very admirable.—His generofity, benevolence, and humanity, deferve to be more copied in the great world!” (there was applaufe enough to make me vain, Charles.)
“ Well faid, Howard; you have made it out fomehow; are you heart-whole, my dear girl
“ Truly fo as to lord Villars my Lady.”
“ In troth, Howard, I don’t think you would reSufe him, was he to offer: could you fay nay to his captivating address ?”
0
“ Oh ! with great eafe, my lady’----------
You frequently tell me I have fmgular ideas, therefore I shall not much furprize you when I affirm that I don’t think his Lordship at liberty to address any lady.”
I Started, Duncan, as much as lady Di Horton,
“ Lard ! Howard,” faid her ladyship,' “ I vow you do furprife me—Why who retains his liberty ?’*
Lady Villars.”
“ Ah! but, child, you know they are divorced.’’
!! They
HUMAN LIFE. i8i
** They are feparated by human laws ; but, according to my opinion, not by divine.”
“ How fo?”
“ Firft, my lady, ©n account of the folemn oath they are bound by at, the altar, v/hen they become man and wife, which expressly fays, “ as long as they both fljallUveP and, again, “ n// death doth them part with other fentences your ladyship could not be a Slranger to, when you palled through the cerem.ony with Mr, Horton. There are many places likewife in Scripture-—-the New Testament I mean--------which mentions the
unlawSulness of marrying a divorced perSon ; thereSore it is in my calendar of crimes, my lady, and I view it in the light oS adultery.”
“ Ha! ha! ha! Why, Howard, thou art So given to the GoSpel, it is a great misfortune to the world thou wert not of the other Sex—What an excellent preacher thou wouldst; have made 1”
“ I knew your ladyship’s mirth would be excited by my declaration, but it is actually my faith,” Said she, with lirm-neSs.
“ Oh ! I believe you, Howard, without that Serious face, for I verily think
you
82 THE MUTABILITY OF
you are a good Chriftian ; but you must allow me to confess my faith fashionable, and that I should not make the leaSl fcru-ple of marrying his lordship”
“ Certainly, my lady ; I don’t pretend to bias other people’s opinions.”
The fubject: then dropped, Charles, and I proceeded on my walk. I have debated lince that in my own mind what my charming Silena alleged againft my my marrying, and own to thee I almost think her right. Oh I I repeat to thee again, Duncan, I adore her more than ever, and am v/retched. Adieu!
Yours, &c.
Villars,
t
N
\
0
%
Lai]
HUMANLIFE. i8j
Lady siV. Horton to Madams St. Clare.
Shenkin-Hath
B /id I promife thee, St. Clare ?—Yes, I did! Well, I vow, I canst tell how to begin a defcription of thefe people, except I can recollect; their uncommonly fim-pie converfation. Imagine them, like all inhabitants of country towns, fond of cards
and fcandal-----No-----that will not do.
____-Well, to pleafe thee, who lovefl novelty, and mortify myfelf by a recital^ here it comes.
To begin, then; thefe creatures are like a parcel of frightful owls, under the denomination of old maids and widows: I don’t make oath, though, they are in-titled to the former appellation. We were received by Mrs. Cadwallader with a hearty welcome ; for, to do the infenfi-bles of this country justice, hofpitality is one of their greatest virtues, St. Clare.
“ Got plefs me ! Mifs Shenkin come at last!—Inteed, I thought you had quite forfaken us.	Well—and how does Mr.
Shenkin and Mrs. Shenkin, and Mrs.
Notable^
8a the MUTABILITY of
Notable, your houfekeeper — upon my word”------
“ This is Lady Di Horton, Mrs. Cadwallader.”
I
“ Oh ! Got plefs me, I am very proud to fee your Ladyship—Pray be feated— What shall I offer to your ladyship after your journey
The good woman then made offers of every thing her houfe afforded, fill I was weary of anfwcring her. At last, however, we furmounted it, and fat down.
“ Your mamma has a very valuable fervant, inteed, in Mrs. Notable ; though, to be fure, she is fo good a manager herfelf, that she does-not Trand in need of her. Mrs. Jones ds going to pait with her fervants, and Mrs. Williams with her cook and houfe-maid : then Mr. Davies, again, is going to make a thorough
change-----Got plefs me! they have a
deal of trouble----1 pity them. Oh la !
I tliought I had Some news to tell you—• Well I What do you think, MiSs Shenkin ?— * What for Mifs Davis, of-------,,
who is going to be married to Mr Jones,
of--------dee, with his three children—
Got
♦ A peculiar method of talking among goffips ia Wales.
t
✓
4
HUMANLIFE. 185
Got plefs me! how can the girl be fo fool* iSh as to think of him?—But they fay
it will certainly be fo'------Then Mr.
Powel, of------, rode very hard through
here yesterday with his fervant—.Dis thought his uncle is dying, or be is going to offer himfelf to MiSs Taffy---To
be Sure it W'ould be a good match--------
They Say for certain one oS theSe things must be the conSequence oS his travelling in Such haste—You know he must have Some reaSon, and that’s very likely--It must be So 1”
Art thou not shrprized at my patience, St. Clare f I listened thus Sar, and burst out a-laughing at her definition of Mr.
Powel’s ride-----TheSe people preSently
prove there is no effect; without a cauSe—• But, Smoothing my features, I apologized for my rifibility.
The following day company came to tea, before the time rational creatures breakfast in London. I had fet myfelf off a little, and they gazed, poor wretches, till they almost lost their eye-fight. The antiquities fet themfelves down to cards with great earnestness; but the younger fort feemed more willing to contemplate my drefs ; nay, ventured to question me on fashions. The old ones, being fettled at cards, began with news;
Oh I
85 THE MUTABILITY OF
(Jh ! dear Mfs. Lewis, was not vou mocked to hear of the accident Mrs. Taffy met with.?”
“ Oh! Lord, what.?—Pray tell me, for I have not heard it.”
“ Got plefs me, you have not! Why you know, poor woman she is apt to take a little too much—you understand me—•
and fo she tumbled down stairs, and broke her arm.”
“ Poor woman ! Well, I hope it will
make her refrain for the future.-Clubs
is trumps.”
Then fays another, ‘‘ Who are you
talking of, ladies?”
“ Mrs. Tasty,” anfwered they.
“ Oh ! I affure you, ladies, there is not a word of truth in ip; for ray hushand had a letter from Mrs. Taffy just now on bufinefs—She is in perfect health.”
“ Well, I declare it’s a shocking thing people will invent fuch lies I Mrs. —
told me Mr. -----told her, who had it
from Mr.---------; he had it from Mifs
----, and she had it from Mr. O------*,
who had it from Mrs. E------.”
I believe she would have gone on till now, if they had not all exclaimed, “Oh! shocking lies !—fcandalous inteed, whoever invented it !”	>
“ Well
V
HUMANLIFE. i§7
wen, ladies, laid another, with an air of authority, what do you think of Mifs Morgan, who is with child by her father’s groom.”
“ Ah ! fo they fay. Abandoned crea-:ure! to put up with fo low a fellow! I pity the poor father and mother much.”
“ You may fufpend your compaffion, adies,” faid Mifs Shenkin; “for, ’pon honour, I can assure you it is a very great iilfity, and the propagators of fuch fcan-lal ought to be feverely punished.”
“ Very true, Mifs Shenkin,” faid an )ld parfon in company ; “ people too fel-lom confider the evil confequence of flan-ler, and I muss make a very rough com-iliment, which is; you ladies in general ire too apt to indulge yourfelves in it, lOLir inclinations are prone that way, at east in this country ; I can’t pretend to peak of others, as I have not fcieen much ' )Ut of my native place. What does your ' adyship think
“ Oh ! I vow, Doctor, I join fenti-nents with you as to the ill confequence if flander in general. A man’s honour, r a woman’s reputation, is never Safe I'ith the devotees of the goddeSs Detrac-ion, and what is a man without honour,
T a woman without reputation ? that is,
in ,
I
9
88 THE mutability OF
' \
in report ; the victims of her wrath are in reality, perhaps poSTelSed of both, though obfcured bv malice. The mur-derers of reputtition generally prove the moft guilty.”
My fpeech, St Clare, essablished my reputation of wit with the old Doctor, and he was my humble fervant for the whole evening. However, our'refledtions did not prevent their continuing Such anecdotes the refidiie of that visit; which, ’pon honour, St. Clare, did not furprize me, as I found it was the only conversation they were capable of joining in ; they had no idea of any other. At laft, a letter v/as produced from a young lady, that is to fay, a maiden lady upwards of forty. She was allowed by them all to have a great fund of fenfe, which she exemplified in writing. That thou may’ll: be a judge whether she is or not, I made Shenkin get me a copy : it runs as follows, St. Clare :
“ Fo Mrs, Ap-rice;
My dear Mrs: Ap-Rice,
According to your desire I write, but inteed I have very little news to tell.
I got
HUMANLIFE. 189
1 got to iviHtard m very goot time ; wno Should I meet but Sally Davies behind Jack Thomas, and Pritchard attending them. They had paSSed me, as it w-as dark, beSore I minded who they were; however, I thought it should not go off fo, therefore I called to Pritchard, and asked where they were going ; he Said they talked oS going to Bristol, but were to stop
that night at Mr. Davies, oS----------•
Now I canst imaggine what they are going to Bristol Sor. It is very odd of Miss Sally to travel So with Mr. Jack Thomas, and only a man-Servant with her; I wish Something mayn’t come of it: but we shall
See----(you find, St. Clare, fJoe confoks her-
felf with hopes of mifchief.)—Then what
Sor Mrs. Morgan, oS----------; they Say
Sor certain Capt. Powel was Seen one evening coming out of her bed-chamber. Poor MiSs Jenny Jones, who is going to be
married to ------, is to be pitied; I hope
she won’t have him. Then poor Mrs.
Davies, of--------, is very bad, Srom a
Sright: one of the maids Sweethearts, in the night, by mistake, came to her bed : he Soon ran away when he found his mistake ; but poor Mrs. Davies Sell in violent fits. T wo of Mr. Ap-Tudor’s maids are with child, they Say, by him. Lord,
what
[00 THE MUTABILITY OF
what doings! but the world mull be pep-pled. Our cows are fick too : Davy fays that Rice knows very well they are bewitched by the old v/oman of the mountain. Now I canst tell what to think of it< but my mother fays it may be true, for old Jane has a strange muttering way, and fhe recollects there was a great storm the night the hanimels were taken bad. She thought fomething unlucky would happen, as she fpilled fome fair, and broke a glafs, that night too. .Dear heart! I am very forry I have fo little news, but you must take the will for the deed, my dear Mrs. Ap-Rice, and Ib I remain
Your affectionate humble fervant.
'	7
“ Alice Powel.”
Some passages in this mighty wife epif-tle were contradicted ; however, the obligation they were under to the writer for news was the fame. 1 fuppofe, St. Clare, thou art laughing at the fellow’s mistake
in* going to the mistress’s bed-------Ha!
ha I ha ! ’pon honour, it was droll. But thou must know, among the commonality,
this
HUMAN LIFE. loi
1 ^
%
this is the land or liberty tor love. The country girls and fervants all receive adorations in bed at night, therefore it is no wonder an alteration of shape is fo frequently the cafe, I fuppofe thofe in a higher Sphere do the fame, but conceal it better. Many of them who are prudes in public, and reflect fo bitterly on female errors, I doubt not, act per contra in private : I always fufpect a prude, St, Clare; they judge from their own hearts of others conduct.
Poor Howard was most; feverely han-died by thefe old harridans : fome faid she was a cast-off rnistrefs; others that she was a tripe-man’s daughter, and had been feen at her father’s shop at Wapping ; with numerous other ridiculous fuppoSi-tions.
But I am most heartily weary of this preamble, and not in excellent fpirits.-— Villars is not fo coming as I wish ; but I will leave no means unemployed to gain his heart. Adieu ! St. Clare.
Thine affuredly,
Diana Horton*
A
Mifs
%
92 THE MUTABILITY OF
4
Mifs Howard to Mifs Meynel.
Elyfum-Place.
)
J y A D Y Di Horton affects the hon ton much. She docs me the honour to give me much of her company, my dear Harriot; but I can with eafe perceive her friendship for me proceeds from her de-fign on lord Villarsst heart. Mr. Villars rallies him on the conquest:, while I take the liberty gently to chide my benefactor for endeavouring to make his nephew vain.
Lady Di, in her lively manner, fetsthis country in a strange light. She paffed a few days with her friend Mifs Shenkin at a fmall town not far from hence, called -------: the ladies of that place underwent her feverest fatire; tho’ Mr. Villars allows there is great room for ir. I endeavoured to vindicate them, by alledgjng that thofe her ladyship had Seen perhaps were always confined to their own country,
HUMAN LIFE. 195
try, and and fo had no opportunity of improving their manners or enlarging their ideas of things, which extended no further than to copy what they faw or heard.
Her lively ladyship laughed exceedingly at my compaffion for the poor wretches, as she termed them, and granted their ideas were very limited indeed, wholly dedicated to fcandal; which occafioned many to attend prayers for the fake at the fame time of hearing anecdotes of their neighbours.
It Vv^as to no purpofe to contend wdth her ladyship. The people that are inhabitants of that place, it feems, are famed for the above vice, and pafs judgment on the reputation of every perfon in the country : but here are numbers of very amiable ladies who have never quitted the principality. Now, indeed, moSt young ladies are fent to England for education ; though I think it is very unneceSTary, if they are to pafs their lives in Wales, as it gives them rather adiSlafte to their own country.
I am glad to hear your coufin is arrived in England, and hope he will not long be the means of detaining you from your friends at London, my dear Harriot, as
VoL. I.	K	you
rp4 THE MUTABILITY OF
you wnii lo oe mere, i rrequenuy near from iny kind friend Mrs. Gordon, whom I shall ever gratefully preServe in my memory, She has returned me your letters.
-----Ah! Harriot, the Marquis—but you
have heard it, perhaps------is at London
with Violetta, who has uSurped my title and—The Subject is too affectintr; I muft drop it.
Finding my Spirits much depreSfed, my 'dear Sriend, I took a walk to Shenkin-Hall: Mr. Villars and his nephew attended me. There 1 was in hopes of having them raiSed by lady Di; but, alas ! she unknowingly added to my pain. By way of diverting lord Villars, she read aloud fome fentences of a letter she had juft received from an intimate friend: one was that my perfidious Melville and his lady had been introduced at Court. Think what a trial the hearing fuch news, with their remarks on it, was to my afflicted heart. Lord Villars faid “ there was fomething very fingular in the Marquis’s affair with Mifs Belmont; it was Surprizing a young lady cfher birth, fine accom-pirshments, and apparent modesty, should
act
/
HUMANLIFE. 195
act fo.----He had heard her very favourably reported of------Many thought her
innocent as to the affair of Count St. Lou------It was very furprifing altogether-----There feemed a mystery in it certainly.”-^	■
Lady Di affured him “ Mifs Belmont was guilty ; that she had it from good authority ; but tsiat she stncerely pitied her, on account of her family ; they had acted very cruel in furrendering her up to poverty and^ infamy.-----Now, indeed, nobody
knew where she was, but imagined ' at France, as Count de St. Lou w^as gone there after her,”
Little did any of them imagine the unhappy object was before them. My palpitation was fo great I could fcarce conceal it, and was ready to faint; but, having a hat on, and fortunately being by a window, which I leaned out of, I efcaped their notice.
Lady Di and Mifs Shenkin returned with us to dinner. As we were fitting down to table, a cold fweat feized me, with a faintness, which obliged me to retire to the next room. Lord Villars, finding I stopped there, came to me : I waved rny hand for him to return, and take no notice, but he exclaimed, “ Good God ! my dear,
K 2	my
96 THE MUTABILITY OF
my lovely Mils Howard, what is the matter?” applying fom.e drops as he fpoke
-----“ You are very ill-----let me call for
help.”
.1 grew better in a Sew minutes, and defired him to return, telling him I would Soon Sollow ; but I could not perSuade him to leave me, thereSore returned to the room with him. He informed them he had Sound me not well. Mr. Villars kindly excuSed my Sitting at table, and his lordship handed me Some hartshorn-jelly from the deSert. They luckily attributed my illneSs to walking So much, the day being warm.
Lady Di rather Spitefully rallied me on his Lordshipst Singular attention and anxi--ety. I anfwered her Ladyship Serioufly, that she was unacquainted with his humanity, whence alone it proceeded.
Lord Villars offering to attend them home in the coach, lady Di Said peevishly.
No, no, we won’t deprive your Lorsh ship of your new employment, for Howard will want her nurSe.”
Instead ot renewing his offer he gave her a look of contempt, and Suffered his uncle to hand her to the carriage.
After
HUMAN LIFE. 197
After she was gone, he feemed in a reverie, out of which I drew him by faying, lady Di gave her wit full fcope, without meaning to offend; that, for my part I forgave her, and hoped he would do the fame.
“ Ah! Mifs Howard,” returned he,, “ your heavenly difpofition is well known to me : I can eafily forgive her as to myfelf, but I canst bear she should treat you-with inSolence ; I always Suffer more Sor my friends than rny Self.”
Mr. Villars entered Smiling. “ Welli nephew, can you bear exiSlence under the dilpleaSure of lady Di ? MiSs Howard, I shall be very angry with you, in turn, if you derogate from the opinion I have held of you, and endeavour, to inveigle lord Villars.”
“ Ah! be ashired, my worthy, kind benefactor,” returned I, “ that I would' fooner die than be guilty of fuch treachery, had I beauty to encourage me to attempt it. I hope you have a better opinion of me.”
“ You don’t vindlcate^yourfelf, Harry faid he in raillery.
“ There is no occafion, my dear uncle. I am certain you will never alter your opinion of Mifs Howard, or myfelf, from
any
/
p8 THE MUTABILITY OF
any thing her Ladyship may insinuate, or . I would quit the place immediately, fooner than So worthy an object; should be deprived of your protection.”
Mr. Villars, with tears of pleafure in his eyes, faid, “ i am not forry, my dear Villars, lady Di has difplayed her Solly, since she has been the means of your uttering fuch fentiments ; and I am fure Silena forgives her.”
To continue in the friendship of thofe we esteem is very pleasing. I forgot my affliction, and Soon recovered.
The night is far advanced, and Cynthia with her pallid rays has silvered o’er the ocean. How beautiSul does the distant Scene appear! The silence that reigns creates a Solemnity in the imagination. A star darting from its orbit reminds one of immortality, when the fpark divine which animates us shoots from a weight of op-preffion to peace, tranquility, and joy. But, adieu ! tired Nature requires repoSe ; it is in vain to contend against it: life cannot be continued without refreshment by steep, and how like groveling infects are most of our lives fpent.
Silena Howard.
I
Lady
HUMAN LIFE. 159
Lady Di Horton to Madame St. Clare:-
I
Ely fium-Place ..
Onfufion feize her! May the fmall-pox make her horrible to view, and her temper more four than a neglected old maid ! May all the plagues that can befal woman attend her, till Ihe awaken my pity, and that will not be while I eJtift ! Shall fuch a stupid, inanimate thing as Howard rival lady Di Horton I Oh ! let it not be faid, St. Clare; the idea drives me to distraction—A wretch unworthy notice, that I extended the favour of my Seeming Sriendship to; and truly, becaufe she was Singled out by a woman oS fashion, she must take it into her head to attempt* being a fine lady—could not possibly undergo a short walk without immense fatigue
-----must be fainting,-in order to have
Villars prefs her hand,- and figli over her. Oh, revenge! revenge! come with thy dire train, and gratify my vengeance on her! Assist me, dear St. Clare, for paffion
overclouds
i
30 THE MUTABILITY OF
/
overcloqds my genius. So fudden and unexpected a discovery of Villars’ passion Sor Howard made it difficult for me to rein-in the tempest of my Soul, and I Said Some things, St, Clare, I now wish unSaid : but dissimulation and art shall be my guides for the future ; my words shall be as oil or honey, while I prepare a storm shall overwhelm her. As for that angel Villars,, whom I detest mySelf Sor still adoring, I must endeavour to get into his favour again, which will I SuppoSe take time to accomplish, Sor I put the dear creature out oS humour with me by calling him Howard’s nurSe. To be Sure, he deServed it. But, adieu ! St. Clare, I must not waste my time in writing, but in meditating miSchief on the devoted Silena. Assist, with thy advice, thy faithful Sriend
t
Diana Howard.
P
. /
Mfs
%
HUMAN LIFE. 201
Mifs Meynel to Mifs Howard.
DubliE-
A	4
Fortunate planet prefides over me at' thisjuncture : Silena, pray Heaven it may continue its influence till I arrive fafe at; London. Yes, my dear girl, joy to my foul! I am recalled from baniflimenf, thanks to the lickly ftate of poor coufin st heart. It feems he has fallen in love with fome Donna or Signora abroad, therefore lord and lady Lorton judge that my weaker charms may make their appearance, and prattle Sometimes rouze him from his fighing reveries ; for their darling, according to the intelligence we have received, Sighs bitterly—walks with his arms folded in each other—Shakes his head at Seeling a void where there should be a heart—and is guilty of all the diffractions which unhappy lovers fall into. Now I am from my very foul forry for him and them : you. know I have not a flinty heart; but I am fure I shall laugh at his dumb show. J am
K 5	quite
thr mutability or
quite charmed with your friend Villars ; if he had not offered. to fettle you with two other lovers, I should have nominated him a little bit more than friend; for there are few men if any, Silena, that are fond of your Platonic fchetlies. Don’t be 0ngry • to {peak as I think is my motto.
______Tho’ I am partial to lively beings, I
have not patience with lady Di, becaufe she is of a malevolent caSl. Chearfulnefs and innocence ever should be joined, fays your moft affectionate
/
Harriot Meynell.
1
V.
/
Lord
\
human life. 20S
¥ .
4
Villars to Lord'Du'iitckit.
0
' Elyjium-Place]
I AM amazed at my own flupidity,
Charles, in having been fo long exploring what might eafily ha*^ie occurred long fince, and what all circumftances combine together to prove pall a doubt, which is, that the lovely Howard is in reality the unfortunate Marchionefs of Melville. Re-pe-
rufe fome of ray former letters-------obferve
her fear of being known, and her owning an irrevocable engagement ; to which add my having juSl now learnt that Mifs Belmont is niece to Lady N--------------, (which
particulars correfpond well with Such a fuppofition,) and I think you will coincide with me in a firm perfuafion of it. Lovely, angelic creature! Uncommon misfortunes, indeed, fhe has experienced; no wonder she lamented her fate fo bitterly at Laurel-Grove, when juft become a victim to fuch a plot of villainy. It is to me amazing that she has brought her mind to
fuch
/
K
f
►A THE MUTABILITY OF
fuch compofure as it appears at prefent to enjoy. What fortitude she mull: be mif-trefsof to fink fo calmly into a dependent State, and what barbarians muSt her relations be to Suffer it! Where is the reafon in Supposing her guilty} Would an object So lovely, insthe bloom oS life, withdraw herfelf from admiration, and the man she was thought to intrigue with, if she was not innocent, Duncan} Oh! no, it is a-gainll all conclufiosts to imagine it. But, as she appeared fo very unhappy when she thought 1 knew her, I will ftill appear ignorant, to fave her pain, and tell no one but thee, Charles, of it. Oh! that I had power to reftore the reputation and honour of her my foul adores! With what rapture would I fly to the extremity of the univerfe to compleat it! What a confummate villain muft Melville be to take advantage of a private marriage, and ufe with cruelty fo charming a creature ! Oh ! Charles, I cannot tell thee how my heart bleeds for her ! how great my diftrefs is, at finding she can never be mine! and how unre-folved and unwilling I am to leave this
place !—I cannot quit it’---What, forego
all opportunities of gazing at her lovely form, and liftening to her heavenly voice! ——But, oh 1 my Duncan, I must leave
her—
HUMAN LIFE,
her—it is criminal to flay adoring her as I do—another’s wife! Love Sliall not overpower my principles of honour, which you fwear I carry to a romantic height. I muft depart—If there is a chance of conquering, abfence muft effect it ; for while I gaze, ftill deeper finks the dart. However, you may write to me again before I leave Elyfium-Place, and adminifter balm, if you can, Duncan, to the afflicted mincl of your friend
Villars*
/
%
P. S. It would be to no purpofe to im«
part my difcovery to my uncle, as Slie would accept of nothing. I’m fure, inde^
pendent of her attending Mrs. Villars.
m
t
%
/
t
M/s
36 THE MUTABILITY OF
I	\
/
Mifs Howard to Mifs Meynel.'
Ik
Ely(ium~Place.
I	' ■ ..
HAVE been waiting two ports, my deareft Harriot, in hopes of hearing you were fafe arrived in Berkeiey-Square, and flatter myfelf that before I conclude this epistle I Shall not meet with a third difappointment. Your fafety, my dearest: friend, is now nearest my heart: a continuance of happineSs and that vivacity which is interwoven in your difpofition, and is admirable becaufe it is joined with the best of hearts, is my constant wish.
Lady Di is fo very condefcending and humble to Lord Villars and myfelf fince the behaviour I mentioned, that I know not what to make of it. His lordship is very much altered too, and I think Seems in the Same Situation you deScribe your coufin, though he conceals it before Mr. Villars, but when alone with me he Scarce Speaks, He writes often, and has received many letters lately. Indeed I should pity him much, iS I knew he was
unSucceSsful
HUMANLIFE. fio-r
unfuccefsful in love, as I think him deferving of happinefs.—I wish he would confide in me, for fpeaking of the object of his affection might alleviate the pangs of abfence a little.
At laft, my dear friend, a letter frorri you is arrived, which has, as you judged, furprized me much. It has afforded me both pleafure and pain to find your coufin is the perfon who has left a tender imprdlion on your heart ever fince the maSquerade—Pleafure to hear there is a mutual affection, and pain ^ I fear you have both much anxiety and trouble to undergo before you can arrive at the completion of your wishes. It is faid women in general believe in fate, efpecially. with refpect to marriage ; thofe who are pre-deftinarians would not fcruple to affert that a match will certainly take place between you and your coufin ; for though Lord and Lady Lorton had been very careful to divide you, yet a frolic brought your coufin in fecret with a friend to Dublin, where in diSgniSe he became a captive
to your charms------afterwards blinded
his parents by a feigned paffion, by which
means
o8 THE MUTARrr.ITV np
means you was brought to his defirlng eyes again. Upon my word, Harriot, it
forms a pretty ftory------1 muft rally you
a little----yet I Shall ftill be in pain for
you. If you both act not with great dif-cretion, you muSl infallibly be feparated.
-----Be prudent and wife, my dearest
friend.
Lady Di and Mrs. Villars have been exhausting their mirth on me; however, I had the gentlemen on my fide. You must know they caught me reading the Lessons for the day. Her ladyship asking me what I was poring over that old book for, I .aniwefed^it was my constant cusi
torn.-----She laughed immoderately.---------
They forced me dov/n stairs with them, and Lady Di related my folly, as she termed it, to the gentlemen. I faid, with a ferious accent, that I never should be ashamed of doing what I ought, for I thought it a duty incumbent on every one, if they did not attend daily prayers at church : even then we were too forgetful of what Scripture contained ; for if we would but guide ourfelves by the inestimable rules therein laid before us, we should not have fo many follies to anfwer for.
“ Lard! child, what nonfenfe!” exclaimed her ladyship.
“ If
HUMAN LIFE. 209
“ If it is nonfenfe, my lady, weaknels. is more pardonable than vice, and you are welcome to condemn me for my folly.”
Lord Villars and his uncle agreed my arguments were juft.
Mrs. Villars faid, “To be fure, as Howard fays, you know there is no harm in it—Is there, Mr. Villars .?~Ha 1 ha!' ha ! ”
Lady Di, finding herfelf not fupported in her ill-timed mirth, though she did not feem fatisfied, deliSled from further raillery.
Ah ! my dear Harriot, it is for want of a more frequent perufal of Holy Writ that our modern fine ladies fo often err. They allege, when they are willing to excufe their neglect, that time is wanting. They Should blush ftill more at that excufe, when So much of their time is dedicated to pleaSure and folly, and they will not allow one halS hour to reflect on a future ftate, and improve tlioSe morals which PleaSure So vitiates. Devoted to that alluring goddeSs, their eager purSuit oS her encreaSes, till unhappily plunged into vices, at firft little thought of, all morality quits them, and they avoid reflection, and are loft.
My
#
\
lo THE MUTABILITY OF
My ever-dear parents (hail to their revered memory!) early taught me the cuSlom I ftill obferve, and a confidence in God ; whereby I have been enabled to undergo, with I hope tolerable refignation, the misfortunes which have befallen me : and the comfort I have frequently experiehced from paSSages of Scripture convinced me of the utility and profitable-nefs of my practice.
Reading and mufic divide moft of our time, efpecially on evenings when free from company. Lord Villars fays he shall leave this place with regret, as he never fpent his time Ib much to his fatisfaction; which lean perceive affords Mr, Villars no fmall pleashre.
Inform me of your procedures, my dear Harriot.
Yours affectionately,
SiL'ENA> Howard.
t.
Lord.
HUMANLIFE. zit
/
Lord Villars to Lord Duncan.
Elyfium-Place.
V*
J. OUR history furprized me much, Charles: by the account you give of your coufin, She is worthy of your regard. May you both enjoy many years oS happineSs together! Sor I make no doubt of lord and lady Lorton’s beftowing felicity on their only fon; they never will deny him the woman of his choice, efpecially fo near a relation. You are too timid, Duncan, and let your fears counterbalance all probability. Oh! that the adorable
Silena was fo near my hopes!-------But I,
alas, am cut off for ever !
My uncle infills upon my making longer Slay. I have confented, Charles. It is with readiness we comply with what coincides with our wishes. , But I muSl inform thee of a short converfation that I have juft had with the charmer of my foul.
It happened, that I was sitting alone, sh abforbed in my own melancholy ideas that
I con-
. A
t2 THE MUTABILITY OF
I continued filent fome time, and perhaps I might give vent to lighs unknown to myfelf, She awaked me from this fitiSation by her ever-enchanting voice: “ Mr. Villars informs me,” faid fhe gracefully, “ it was with difficulty he perfuaded your -Lordship to prolong your Stay here ; 1 am fure if he thought compliance to his wishes afforded you pain, he would be Sar Srom deliring ir. Your thoughifulneSs oS late makes me think your inclination is elSe-wshere : excuSe the liberty I take with your Lordship ; but, indeed, iS you place confidence in Mr. Villars, it would alleviate that uneafineSs of mind which Seems to have taken poffeffion oS you.”
“ It would only afford him a participation of my anxiety, ” anfwered I, “ without his being able to alleviate it in the leaSt, my dear Mifs Howard ; for which reafon I chufe to remain filent.”
Your Lordship is the beSl judge,” skid she, modeStly showing her head; “ I Sincerely wish you happiness.”
“ Amiable Miss Howard !-------1 wish it
was in your power to bellow it-------But
you cannot------and, Spite of your indul-
gence, I mull be wretched,” Said I, with a Sigh.
“ Wretched !’*
1—
HUMAN LIFE. 213
“ Wretched I” returned she, growing pale.
“ Yes, Mifs Howard, wretched!
-----Can you think------But I muSl be li-
lent.”
“ My Lord,” exclaimed she, with a look of the greatest consternation, pity, and, I may almoSl Say, tenderneSs. Oh ! Duncan, perhaps vanity may be now too predominant, but I think—yes, I am certain—she does not hate me.
We both remained Silent. My eyes Spoke fentiments which my heart condemned them for, without being able to repel them. In this critical juncture Mrs. Villars entered, and I retired to write to thee.
If I should find reafon to flatter myfelf, that MiSs Howard would return my love, were it not Sor the principles by which she is actuated, it would only add to my pain : on the other hand, was she a perSon of looSer Sentiments, my regard Sor her would ceaSe; Since, though her beauty attracts my admiration, it is her virtue rivets my affection.
I know not how to depart Srom this place, nor how to Slay in it, torn as I am by contending paflions. Ten thouSand platonic Schemes ariSe, which reaSon discountenances,
0
14 THE MUTABILITY OF
countenances. She is another’s wife I—
Ah ! there lies the horrid reflection.---1
muft fly-----it is only by flight I can pre-
ferve propriety, and avoid betraying how very dear flie is to me. My will is to act as a man of honour, but—Oh ! Charles, I am bewildered.
Clandon and Clairville, who have been abfent on a vifit Some, time, are just returned. Poor Clairville! how I pity him ! His difappointment vifibly hurts him.
A certain work ^ I have been lately pe-rufing, exalts instinct above reafon ; which notion, commonly adopted, would foon indeed level us with brutee. The author fays it Should be “ the immediately impelling principle of action.” Now, it is certain, by obeying this impelling principle, and discarding reaSon, many enormous crimes have been committed ; which is a strong proof th^t instinct Should not be our guide but when accompanied by reaSon.
Was I to Sollow the impulSe of instinct, I Should immediately fly to the arms of
my
* A Comparitste View of the State and Faculties of Man with thofe of the Brute Creation, By
Dr.---------
1
HUMAN LIFE. 215
my adorable Silena ; but reafon checks that impulfe, and tells me I Should err. Oh! Duncan, a month lince you experienced the torments of a hopeleSs paffion, thereSore know how to pity the unSortu-nate
\
Vi l l a rs.
/
Lady Di HortoM to Madame St. Clare,
Shenkin Hall.
W HEN laft I wrote, St. Clare, my
boSom was Similar to the tremendous ocean, whoSe foaming billows when enraged would Sain dalli againft the atmoff phere. I imprecated every thing around ^
me------upbraided Heaven itSelS—and, to
conceal my tempeft from observing eyes, was tortured paft description. For fome days I plotted, contrived, reSolved, and unreSolved, unnumbered plans. My intention was to make Clandon a co-partner, but he was abSent then. At laft I foothed
Silena
1(5 THE MUTABILITY OF
Silena and that charming fellow Villars admirably, Joy to my heart, St. Clare, I now have no need of forcing him to love
me—The bufinefs is done----------He comes
here frequently without the family, and
yesterday called me his dear Lady Di--------
Oh ! how my heart rebounded, and joy fparkled in my eyes! I hav'e attentively viewed his behaviour to Howard; he fpeaks to her as ufual, but I really believe, St Clare, what the girl faid was true, “ Compaffion only excited his attention to her” the day I was diffracted with jea-loufy. She is a poor, unmeaning, en-tbufiaffic creature ; how could I ever fear her!
I now give a loofe to my mirth on the folly and stupidity of the objects around., Mrs. Shenkin is the premier. Yesterday file introduced me to a coufin of the feventh generation, There were another two whofe great great-grandfathers were first-coufins. Poor woman ! her standard for •a man of lenfe is, that he understands genealogy better than any man in the country.
AM Then a Mrs. Fliiellen (a neighbour, who iis reckoned an artful woman in the line of intelligence) comes in, St. Clare, shrugging her shoulders as if she had virtues to
reform
HUMAN LIFE. Z17
rerorm the age, and in a lolemn tone, anci with an artful leer of her eyes (which upon thefe occafions she turns to the very corners,) cries, Well! I have been at
Mrs. A—-------st, and having heard, you '
know, about her niece, I hinted at the imprudence of the young women of thefe days—what a fad thing it was they turned fo gay, and fo forth. At laft she faid her
niece was well at Mr. W-------st, and sh®
was furprized people took liberties by mentioning her name in a way they should not: upon which, you know, (shrugging up her shoulders) I faid, Ah ! the world v/ould
often blaze falSe reports.---You know it
was no buSrneSs of mine, fince she faid nothing.-----1 wonder she can think peo-
ple are ftupid and blind—But I never fay any thing when folks are fo shy. Lord plefs me ! (lifting up her eyes) how can people actfo imprudent!”
Now, you muft know, St. Clare, this bit of fcandal was all a falSity. TheSe old devils, who have been intriguing in their younger days, with their hypocritical fandtification, won’t let the real virtuous a-lone, or maintain the character they merit ; which I vow, St. Clare, is a great liardSliip.
VoL. I.	L ‘	, She
i8 THE MUTABILITY OF
Slie was talking of the frailty of a young couple the other day, when to provoke her, I asked, If envying their joys made sher publish them though perhaps she had beStowed intimacies the parties themfelves ■were unacquainted with.
She coloured. “ Indeed, my Lady, (drawing up her head) I repeat only what 1 am told.”
Howard was prefent. “ Aye, but, Mrs. Fluellen, we should not always believe W'hat we are told, if it is to the prejudice of the party,” faid Mrs. Piety.
Ah 1 Mifs, young people are apt to be incredulous, becaufe they are unacquainted with the wickedness of the world : when you have lived longer, and are older, you will know better.”
“■ I hope not,” returned Piety ; I should be forry to incrcafe in gloom and diflike to my fellow-creatures : if we have an ill opinion of the world in general, we never can be tolerably eafy while in it. I would never have a woman accufed of a deviation from virtue, till there are very convincing proofs of it; a biassed character is hard to be retrieved.”
“ Aye, Mifs, but you are young—you will know better.—Aye, aye,” returned Wifdom again.
In
HUMAN L I F E. aiS
t
In the midSt of this edifying confab, enters a ’fquire or two half drunk; “ Zounds! you women are always talking fcandal; canst you let the poor girls alohe to follow inftinfl f * Nature points it out to them----D—n it, I’ll lay a bot-
tle of claret, three parts out of four you have been Saying are abominable lyes.
-----My head achs confoundedly—How
many quarts of ale do you think I drank
laft night ?•-Eight, faith-----But Dick
was drunk in a trice.—^I’m d—n*d dry—• do order me fome negus, my dear Mrs. Shenkin.”
“ Lord!” faid Mrs. Fluellen, what an unquenchable thirSl you men have f
----Ough !------Fie upon you!-------But
for women to drink, Oh ! it is abominable. There is Mifs O--------drinks four
glaSTes of W'ine Sometimes after fupper—-Oh ! shocking!” (shrugging up her shoulders.)
“ Dear Mrs. Fluellen, don’t fet me
down for a beallly creature---but, ’pon
honour, I can drink five when I am a la mort, and go free from elevation to bed,’' faid I.
h 2	Lord!
I
* The brutal part of mankind adopt Dr.»—-st principle.
i
lO THE MUTABILITY OF
“ Lord! Lady Di, Your Ladyship
jokes.”
“ Zounds! what a pother you make !” faid the’fquire ; “ why,'Mrs. Fluellen, ni lay odds in your favour, for I’U be— if I don’t think you a hypocrite.”
I don’t know,” faid she, colouring, “ what should give you fuch an opinion of
me. Cot plefs me!—drink!—-------------
O------------^^h!”
The oh ! she gave was a!moIl: an hour long, St. Clare; and the gentlemen gave ssuch hideous yells of laughter, that 1 was abfolutely obliged to ftop my ears.
“ Got plefs me I” (an expreshon much in ufe in this country) faid Mrs, Shenkin, “ you wrong Mrs. Fluellen, for I never can get her to drink one glass, she is fo ab-ilemous.”
“ Ah ! Cot forbid I should be other-wife.—^No, no ; its a fign he does not knew me.”
“ Well, .zounds [ to make it up, old genius, I’ll tell thee news: One of my bell hounds died this morning ; and another thing is, Mrs Toby is at laft going to be married to the old parlbn.”
“ Well, really you furprize me !”
“ Nay, don’t mourn for poor Rover, we shall all follow.’’
. J, •
HUMAN LIFE. 221
“ Aye, aye, but Mrs. Toby going to be married—^Got plefs me!”
“ Nay, wonders will never ceafe,” faid
he, “ for-----what was it I v/as going to
fay----Oh—ay—humph !”
“ Got plefs me, what,. Mr. Morgan
“ Why, that you are going to be married to John Jones, lord Gwynst ft e ward.”
“ Lord plefs me, how can people talk fo fcandaloufly of one—Surely they dare not fay fuch a thing of me !”
“ Of you l” Zounds I why shouldi you efcape .? you won’t let others alone.”
“ Got plefs me! O-------h !” faid she,
with a ftiriLg and quakerish groan of the fpirit, quitting the room,-
Morgan fet up. what with juftice may.' be termed a horfe-laugh,. “-Wounds!” faid he, “ L thought I wmld give the old
goshp a rebound.-----Now for a glafs of
brandy,, and vve’H away to Price’s, where we are to dine. Come, Dick.”
Dick was of a bashSul difpofition, St. Clare, and could only laugh, and fay “ Yes” or “ No.” But, adieu ! there’s enough of country conversation, wshich differs as much from that of the polite world as the fun in its moft tranfcendent glory from
c an die>«
22 THE MUTABILITY OF
candle in a turnip-; there is a Welchfimi-le for you.
As for old Shenkin, his forte lies in forcing bumpers down the throats of his male vifitants ; and he is what is here termed an honell fellow, becaufe he fwal-lows half-pints without being fuffbcated. Here is plenty of fuch honeSl fellows ; if thou art for one, St, Clare, doubt not of a good recommendation from thy moil fin-cere friend
Diana Hortoh.
>«»
• •
%
from
%
HUMAN LIFE. 223
From the Same to the Same.
\
Shenkin Hall.
_ _
i ON honour, St. Clare, this dame' Fluellen is an original. She would form an admirable character, was she but known to our modern AriSlophanes. She abfolutely affords me much diverfion, and is continually here ; fo I am not at a lofs for amufement. Fortunately she is not acquainted with the fabulous hiflory of gods and goddeSSes, or I vow, St. Glare, I firmly believe she would fancy herfelf Minerva, fo excellent an opinion has she of her own wifdom and iagacity. But novels, child, and pretty love-fcenes, which are
light reading, she doats on------They fuit
her taSle—She feafts on them in private
-----They fiiev/ the way of life fo, and
are fo edifying!”-------Edifying!” St.
Clare: ha! ha! inflaming the passions of a woman of feventy-four. Edifying !— Ha! ha ! ha ! She’s droll, ’pon honour. Then she enters into the fpirit of them,,
and
14 THE MUTABILITY OF
♦	t
and bemoans the fate of the heroine, who is undoubtedly a proyligy of virtue; crying with a figh, “ Poor thing, fhe went thro’ a great deal: it’s very natural, is’nst it, lady Di ?”	“ Oh, yes, very inftractive.”
1 mean, St. Clare, in the art oS love, they jshevv young ladies how to proceed with their lovers. Then to it she Sits again vfith more eagerneSs than many a girl of fifteen, and treble the attention she bellows on her prayers.
I abfolutely think, St. Clare, Nature designed this hag for a tutorefs, for she idolizes the power of commanding. If any one is going out at a door the fame time as herfelf, she fays, with a Spiteful authoritative leer and half whifper, (pushing them at the fame time as a hind would a
pig out of a ftye,) Go!—go along!-------as
if no one knew how to walk without bidding but herfelf. I turned short round the other day, and in a childish tone faid,
May 1 go now, Madam?” She was rather confufed, but “ the leopard cannot change its shots.” Then at breakfaSl: she tells Miss Shenkin to take the napkin on
her lap-----to fit nearer the table---and
‘‘ take care, Mifs Shenkin, you had better cut that toaSl in two, you will find it
handier to put to your mouth.” Abfolutely
HUMAN LIFE.
lately fact, St. Clare. Upon which Shen»-kin, who is a good-natured creature, burSfs out a laughing, and tells her fhe was taught all that twenty years ago. “ Oh, I only fpoke, becaufe I thought you would greaSe yourfelf,” fays Wifdom, toffing her head. Her manner of fpeaking makes it fo laughable and ridiculous, together with her little eyes, which are turned to the corners in a manner prollitutes Seek for prey, and are continually emitting fpleen; She is frequently talking of days of yore, when Ihe was at London, what was going forward among people of fashion—hovr careful lord and lady Columbus, whom
she was with, were of her-------She never
walked the Streets alone, not she, fuch care was taken of her ; and she went here, and she went there—At laSl, St. Clare, ’pon honour, Mrs. Shenkin toH me, as a fe-cret, Fluellen had been Abigail to lady Columbus. - Ridiculous fool, to boaft fo. As my flay here will not belong, I-will not loSe. diversion, by offending her, in contradicting her own report of greatness. Let the wretch boaft on. Every now and then she is in a fit of feigned grief, v/hich shme widows are liable to—bemoaning the lofs of her friend, her dear friend—Oh 1 she can never be happy-------She fufferesh
L 5	^ ah!
\
A/rTUi: 1V/f TIT* A t> TT T’T'V r\
^	■■ ■■	w	9mm ^ •* tmirnm ^ mm*0 ••	9mm	^90	^
I
/
ah ! file fuffered what no one ever did—. Oh ! her dear friend, she could have wished to have died with him. For fome time I thought it was an old lover, and asked her who he was, what was his name ?
Oh! my dear Mr. Flnellen, to be lure ; do you think I could lament the lofs of any body elfe fo }—No, God knows.” Now, really, St Clare; I think she has been a woman of intrigue, from that very ctrcumStance of beftowing the title of friend fo lavishly on her hushand, as if she was ashamed of the latter appellation. A male friend conveys an extenfive idea, generally made ufe of by miftreSSes, but Seldom by wives., When she takes it into her head to be forrowful, she commends herfelf exceedingly for her attention to him in bis laft moments, as if no woman but herfelf ever bore affection to a hushand, and yielded him all the comfort he was capable of at that period. Her manner marie me doubt the truth of her assertion. Upon enquiry, I found that she had fpent very little time with him, and what she had he thought too much, as she had given him fufficient caufe to diflike her be* fore his laft ficknefs.—The very fight of her was hateful to him, poor man ! she is really a genius in bypocrify, St, Clare, and
a de-
human L I F E. 227
a delightful retailer of news, therefore fit to live in this country. There is not a day passes but fhe brings information of maids being with child, or marriages of her own inventing, fomebodyst mortality, or goats breaking their necks by falls from the mountains ; fo that you may imagine fhe keeps us in continual amaze. What a delightful companion in the country 1 Then we have charming diverfion with Morgan and her, for the Tquire has taken it into his head to contradict and torment; her, which fets her a-grinning, and leering, for she always does fo when angry ; a fure fign of malevolence within, St. Clare. Yesserday Shenkin and myfelf found it impossible to conceal our rifibility at a Icene that paffed between them. Mrs. Fluellen came firSl, and related Several anecdotes while we Sat at work : aSter which Morgan entered; and inSormed us he had juSl parted with old Mrs. Jones, who defired her compliments to us.
Oh,” Says Fluellen, “ Mrs. Jones>
of --------” (nodding her head at us
by way of rebuke to him for faying
old.)
“ Why, zounds,” skid he, “ she’s as old as you; and it’s time to call her fo,'
that-
*
t	•'
8 THE MUTABTT.TTY OF
that fhe may be diSlinguished from her daughter-in-law.
“ O Lord ! aye, aye; as to myfelf, \ acknowledge myfelf old, but it’s vulgar
to diftinguish ladies in that manner.—----
Aye, aye, as to myfelf, God knows, I’m
old enough---------Yes, I’m old,” leering
at us.
“ ’Sblood,” faid he, do you fet up for a reformer of manners} What a pother you make about old-age by G.—;d I be-liev’’e you have a willing inclination to be young, which makes you fo envious and given to fcandal; but I mull tell you, old Dutchefs, that you Shall not have me in
your lift of victims without fmarting for it
-----Zounds, Madam,. I’ll profecute you
for fcandal.”^
“ I defy you!-----------1 defy you !^
faid she, grinning, and edging on her feat, t
D------mn your grins and your de-
fiance,” faid he, ftill more provoked at her, “ How dare you fay I have defigns
on my friend Jack Green’s wife--------that
file fuffers me to take liberties, and if Jack died I should marry her ? Zounds, Madam, it’s an infult on my honour to fuppofe I would attempt debauching my friend’s wife, and a blaft on her virtue
whic\v
HUMAN LIFE. 225
which time may never retrieve, befides the ill confequence attending its coming to her hushand’s ears, if he was not well convinced of my integrity, and acquainted with the author of the vile detraction.”
He happened to be fober, St. Clare, which made him talk fo well; but while haranguing took a glafs or two of wine from the fide-board.
She all the time held her fore-finger up to his face, and grinning uttered, wish the moSl malicious countenance ever feen, ‘‘ I defy you!—I defy you !” •
Shenkin and I burft out a-laiigbing,' and Howard, who had entered in the beginning of the fray, exclaimed, Good
God!” with a fort of horror.
“ Zounds, the woman’s mad,” returned Morgan. “ Defy me ! Will you defy the law I for, fince you provoke
me, rU profecute you, by----------. Mrs.
Davies fays she is willing to make oath you told her every fyllable I have now mentioned.”
Fluellen changed colour when he named his author, but ftill teazed him with her
_	4
favourite words.
Howard fat as if upon thorns, but continued filent,
Fluellenst
>
on THE MtlTA PHT.TTV 017
Fluellenst irritating manner provoked Morgan exceedingly. “ Sblood, you old harridan, you may defy your friend the devil, if you will,” faid he, “ but I’ll make you 'for the future not fo fond of retailing made news.” So faying, he bowed to us, and retired.
She retained the fame words till he departed, St. Clare, and then burft into a loud hollow laugh.
I was refolved not to let it drop So, therefore began with “ Well, Mrs, Fluellen, what will you do.?
“ Ha! ha! ha! I defy him, my lady.” Ah, but my dear Mrs. Fluellen, if you faid what he asserted, ’pon honour he may give you a little trouble;”
“ Well, never mind, my lady—^—I fcorn him : aye, aye, he can do me no harm.** So faying, she took herfelf away laughing, and we have not feen her Since.
Howard fat in amaze at her, and feemed Shocked to meet with fuch a character, in life.
My fweet Villars then entered with more company, and another converfation enfued. Villars is very attentive to me, and I am happy. Oh, I forgot to tell thee, St. Clare, that Lord Clandon
has
/
HUMAN L I F E. 23!
has made propofals for Shenkin (or rather her fortune, which he Stands much in need oS) : the old folks are mightily pleaSed at it, and Shenkin is quite elevated with the idea of being a Lady, but (till flirts with all that comes in her way.
Clandon’s defign on Howard Seems not extindl, but what Scheme he has in train I know not. Clairville fighs like a Sorlorn lover, and tells me he intends leaving this country with Lord Clandon,' as he cannot prevail on the charming MiSs Howard to liften to him. Thus is
the world here fituated, St. Clares
I am quite tired with Scribbling, there^
fore for the prefent adieu !
✓
A
,Th ine fineerely,
9
i
Di HoRTOsh
Miff
•f
THR lUTTT ABH.TTV OR
/
0
0
Mifs Howard' to Mifs Meynel.
Elyfium-Place.
1%
AM extremely depreSfed. in fpirits, my ddar Harriot, from an incident that has happened in this neighbourhood, which muSl hurt every feeling mind. What .evils fpring from Detraction ! MoSl of the ladies of this country are votaries to that goddefs, and continually bow to her fway. They affect piety, and repeat holy ejaculations, at the very time they are offending the Deity, by ssandering their neighbours, and depriving them of reputation, happinefs, nay, almoSt life. It is a ferious. and melancholy con fide ration, and the divines here fhould frequently expole this-vice, with all its horrid consequences.
But let me inform you, my dear friend, of the caufe of this ferious reflection. There often vifits at Mrs. Shenkinst an old lady, named Mrs, Fluellen, who is esteemed a happy retailer of news, and has cunning to fathom fecrets. From
this
HUMAN L I F E.
this quality she is called a fenfible, artful woman. Lady Di has drawn a droll caricatiira of her, wish she following motto :
Tis fecret trutlisl fadioin with my eyes.
And guilt unknown to others I funnife,”
I muft confess, Harriot, she had fomething in her manner that at the firft inter-view gave me a difguft to her; and, without being skilled in phyfiognomy, I foon read her character. She is overbearing ia company, from her skncied fuperior wifdom, stho at the fame time ftie will shrug up her shoulders, and pretend to be very humble. Every nov/ and shen she broaches a French word, wish I remember they ufed to fay fo when I was at London ; giving herSelf numerous airs about her grandeur when she was there. Mr. Villars inform-ed me, when I mentioned it, that she had been waiting v/oman to fome people of fashion. Now. no honeft employment is to be defpifed ; many gentlewomen of good families have been reduced to it, and treated with refpect in their places ; but it is, a very great folly for people to affect to be greater than they are. Had she been filent, we, perhaps, should have been ignorant
\
0
34 THE MUTABILITY OF
norant of her fervitude. For fome years fhe had been in this country, fully employed in reciting new^s, and frequently inventing it.
In this neighbourhood likewife refide a couple who were happy. Mr. Green is a very agreeable man, but, like his countrymen, rather too fond of his bottle. Mrs. Green is a very amiable, fenfible young woman, of an extreme delicate constitution, and remarkably fond of her huSband. Her filler, Mifs Smith, refides with them. This Mr. Green had a very intimate friend, named Morgan, from whom he was fcarce a day divided. Out of assection to her hufband, Mrs. Green paid all possible attention to his friend, which Mr. Green feemed much pleafed with, till Mrs. Fluellen, like a malevolent fiend, came and blasted all their joys. She formed ideas of her own what might be, and then went and imparted them to Mrs. Davies as facts, whofe houfe she was just leaving when Mr. Green entered it. He faid he had fome private bufinefs with her, and defired he might go home with her. She complied, it feems. Mr. Green then told her he had just overheard her mention fomething about Morgan and his wife, and infisted upon knowing particulars. She
hemmed,
HUMAN LIFE. 135
hemmed, and laughed; then acknowledged She had heard that Mrs. Green and the ’fquire were very friendly together, with Some more hints, which drove the poor man almoSl diffracted, though he -concealed his perturbation of mind before her. The fame day, jiiSl after this happened, I met her at Mr. Shenkinst, where was Mr. Morgan, threatening her, for daring to utter fuch fcandal, which was the firSl I heard of it; and shall never as long as I breathe forget Mrs. Flueilen’s diabolical countenance. She w'ould have afforded an artist an excellent reprefenta-tion of Spleen. Her manner was irritating beyond defcription, and ftruek me with horror.
But let me return to Mr. Green.
Mifs Smith fays he was gloomy, fullen, and in an uncommon agitation, all day. Her fiSler was very unhappy, as she had never feen him in that way before. They filently retired to their refpective chambers.
When Mifs Smith came down in the morning, she faw Mr. Green on horfe-back, quitting the place, wdth a fervant and portmanteau. Surprized exceedingly, she went to Mrs. Green’s chamber, where she found the unhappy lady fenfelefs on the
floor.
?6 THE MUTABILITY OF
floor. She immediately called affiSlance, and difpatched a Servant for a phyfician. He arrived; and at laSl, by bleeding her, and forcing down medicines, reSlored her to her fenSes. She then informed her fif-ter that Mr. Green had accufed her of criminality with Mr. Morgan, and had vowed he W'ould never more live with, or ever fee her again ; that She had wept and fainted, in turns, all night; and that, feeing him quit the place, her fenfes were again quite overpowered. The Doctor and Mifs Smith endeavoured to comfort her, but in vain; Ihe relapfed into freShagonies, now lies delirious in a violent fever, and stis feared cannot recover, if Mr. Green does not fpeedily return.
Mr. Morgan, who, ’bating his foible of drinking, is a good fort of man, is in the greatefb anxiety imaginable, and is gone in fearch of his friend, hoping, if he can meet him, to bring him to reafon. Mr. Shenkin has made Mrs. Fluellen pri-foner in his houfe, and fwears She shall not efcape till Mr. Green returns, when fhe shall on her oath anfwer the qiieftions put to her by him. This makes great diversion for the neighbours. She cries she defies him, and threatens him at his peril to detain her. He anfwers, he heeds
her
HUMAN LIFE, 237
her words as wind, and leaves her locked up.
Such, my deareSl Harriot, is the fatal confequence of people indulging themC felves in defaming others. Can Mrs, Fluellen be deemed lefs than a murderer if the amiable Mrs. Green dies.? A v/oman of her years, too, who Should be hourly expecting a call from hence. How Shocking the idea! No wonder she diflikes the appellation of old: it is guilt that makes age dreadful.
# %
!
I have been just: now informed that poor Mrs. Green, for about the Space of five minutes, regained her SenSes, when recollection oS her misfortunes made her relapfe, and the Doctor fears there is no 0-ther alternative than madnefs or death.
Mr. Villars tells me this is not the first couple Mrs. Fluellen has made miferable by her wicked stiggestions; that he knows a very worthy woman, who happened not to have fuoh keen fenfibility as Mrs. Green, that from Such an account Suffered many years ill-uSage Trom her hushand, though he did not leave her, but was continually SuSpicious, which rendered the
poor
>
3$ THE MUTABILITY OF
poor woman’s life unhappy beyond expression.
I am exceedingly affected at MrS. Green’s deplorable fate, and by Mrs. Villars’s permission have been Several times to fee her, though it gave me great pain to behold her melancholy condition. I was in hopes to find her SenSes restored, that I might administer all the comSort and con-folation I could ; but, alas! I was disappointed.
Lord Villars is gone with Servants in quest of Mr. Green. I hope they will be So Sortunate as to find him beSore the unhappy victirn expires. Adieu ! my
Harriot.
Silena Howard.
W
I
0
A
From
HUMANLIFE. 23s
9
From the Same to the Same.
N
Elyfium-Place.
J HAVE the pleaSing fatisfaction of
informing you, my dear Harriot, that Mr. Green is returned, and his wife {fill lives. Lord Villars was fo fortunate as to trace him to Bristol, where he found him at an inn. The unhappy man could not avoid his Lordship, and listened to his perfua-five eloquence, v/hich at last made him confent to return. In the interim Mr. Morgan arrived, and protested his innocence of the fact charged against him, his integrity, and friendship for Mr. Green. Lord Villars faid the feene became very affecting. Mr. Green intreated his friend’s pardon for having wronged him in idea, and listened to the calumny of a wretch unworthy to live. He wept exceedingly at hearing the melancholy account of his* wife ; and after they had all taken refreshment, they fet out as fast as poffible for GreemHall. I was there when they
arrived,
V
s	0
THE MUTABILITY OF
arrived. Mrs. Green was in a delirious ftate, and we knew not whether to introduce her hushand or not; but the Doctor faid it perhaps might be the only means of recalling her from that Slate. Mr. Green was in unfpeakable ^gony from the thoughts of being the caufe of her defpe-rate fituation. He entered ; she immediately knew him, gave a violent shriek, and fell into faintings which lasted two hours. The Doctor then gave her fomething to compofe her ; she stept a little, and waked more tranquil, but fpoke fo low as fcarcely to be heard. She asked us if
Mr. Green was not come------she thought
she had feen him. By degrees we acknowledged he was in the houSe, and he ventured up stairs again, where he on his knees intreated her pardon. She begged he would mention it no more, as, if he was convinced of her innocence, she was happy. After feeing her thus restored to peace of mind/1 took my leave, and lord Villars attended me home.
The following day Mr. Shenkin infisted on Mr. Green’s coming before him to question Mrs. Fluellen; but that gentleman would not comply, as the fight of her, he (aid, would be horrible to him. However, Mr. Morgan went, and, with Mr.
Shenkin,
HUMAN L I F E. 241
Shenkin, infilled upon her producing the author of her intelligence. They threatened her w^ith a profecution, and at laft Co alarmed her with the fear of it, that Slie conScSTed it was only her own SuSpicion gave birth to that infamous insinuation. Mr. Shenkin then inSifted She Should give a written acknowledgment that the whole fhe had Said oS Mr. Morgan and Mrs. Green was a SalSity of her own invention, that their characters might be cleared to the world. She reSiiled at firft, and Said She would not make herSelf appear fo black for all the foolish Justices in Wales.: Mr. Shenkin was enraged, and threatened her for daring to infult a man of his confequence and dignity. Morgan then begged justice Shenkin to compofe himfelsh and let the wretch go; for he would profecute her, and make her produce what hundreds she had, to pay for defamashn. This made her lower her note again. She agreed to write what they defired, and declared she v/ould leave the vile country for ever. At last she was releafed, and is actually removing her furniture to Ibme other part of the world. Mrs. Green is still in a very languid state, but is out of danger they think, and stis faid that Mifs Smith and Mr, Morgan are to be united, VoL. I.	M	which
»
[Z THE MUTABILITY OF
which I am glad to hear, as it will be an additional fecurity to that gentleman’s and Mr. Green’s friendship.
Lord Clandon is now By the conSent of her parents addressing Mifs Shenkin; yet still he has the effrontery, when a convenient opportunity offers, to continue in-fulting me. ,As I hope it will be but for a short duration, my utmost endeavours are exerted to bear it as patiently as I can, and avoid as much as possible affording him opportunities.
My Spirits are much oppreSSed lately; I find not the tranquility I expected here: but time, I hope, will restore it, my beloved Harriot, and grant you the felicity you deferve. Many happy years may
you be blessfcd, whatever is the fate of
'Your unalterable friendj
i
Silena Howard. .
Lady Di Horton to Madame St. Clar»,
Shenkin Hall.
O N honour, St. Clare, old Fluellen
hris been in a dreadful ferape, by letting
her
HUMANLIFE. 24^
her tongue run too glib on people She had' no manner of bufinefs with. From it, a Mr. Green here grew jealous of his wish
-----left her-^--and the poor woman had
abfolutely like to have died ; the conSequence of which was, Shenkin, like a ninny, to Shew his authority, confined the old forcerefs, as he called her ; and moSt charming entertainment had I with theiri altercation. Fluellen was with us when news came Mrs. Green was expiring; (from fome fcandal that had been imparted to her hushand concerning her, he had
left her)-----There it stopped ; for Mr.
Shenkin had jush heard it from Morgan,, and entered in a delightful rage, Sn Clare.
There, Mrs. Fluellen !-------there------
(listing up his hands);;---Fine doings of
yours------fine doings by Got. I thought
what would come of your prattling and tattling, and now- it’s poor Mrs. Green you’ve killed with it.”'
“ I killed her !—I !-^----Got pleSs me,
Mr. Shenkin, I* wonder to hear you talk
So !-----1!------Ha ! ha ! ha -------Poor
man !”
“ Pore man ! How dare you apuSe me ' So.? I’ll convince you, tho’, I’m a Justice of the Peas, and FU detain you in my houSe Safe, for I Swear you shall be tucked-
M z	up
H THE MUTABILITY OF
up if poor Mrs, Green dies by your wicked diabolical tongue. Oh ! it’s an evil member with you !”
Detain n.v, at your peril, Mr. Justice.
Ha! ha I ha!-------Me !—Wshat can you
do to me.?—I defy you !”
“ By Got, Madam, you shall not defy
me with impunity------So in——in,” faid
he, pushing her into MiSs Shenkin’s bedchamber.
She cried, grinning, “ Unhand me, Mr. Justice—You know I can proSecutc you for detaining me prisoner.”
“ Aye, aye, Mrs. Make-lies,” Said he, locking her in, and taking the key; “ you may now repent of your fins at leiSure—-DeSy me, do you.?”
“ Yes, I do, Mr. Justice,” Said she, laughing, and bawling through the keyhole, in a hollow tone ; “ Detain me if you dare.”
We defcended to the parlour, St. Clare, and he followed.
I am tired of repeating the story, but must inform thee Mrs. Green is better—
her hushand returned------Fluellen made
concession, and is gone, we hear, with her goods and chattels, to Ludlow. Now really her lies were abominable, becaufe they anfwered no, end ; mere malice pre-
penfe. A creature to steal a lover from
one.
n u ivx rx IN ju i r Ci. 2:45
1	^	1
KJll\0y yjk C*lJJf	V71 W11C4U x\m/1 lJi40
excufe to plead, you know, St. Clare ; but I have no patience with the old harridan,. for garrulity’s fake, to forge idle news to disturb the tranquility of an ,innocent couple. I was going to drink oblivion to her memory, but, ’pon honour, I should then deprive myfelf of much mirth by frequently recalling her to mind.
Clandon is retailing, his whole stock of fine Speeches on Shenkin, v/ho gives herfelf a multitude of airs; and Howard is
confined to the houfe by a cold,-----But i
fee my dear Villars approaching, there-' fore must bid thee a hearty adieu, my dear St. Clare.
V
Tour’s, ^c.’
Di Horton.
Lord Villars to Lord Duncan.
HE purfuit of happinefs, which is,’ according to Pope, “ our being’s end and aim,” lures us on through life: our expectations of it in the region we at prefent are, varies at different periods of
M s	our
.6 THE MUTABILITY OF
our existence, and orten when we imagine ourfelves approaching it, the phantom is in reality farthest from us.
I thought, Duncan, fome months fince, that a total feparation from Lady Villars would lay the foundation of my felicity, but the event has destroyed that illufive hope; I became a captive to the lovely Silena before I had regained my liberty, and there are fo many infiiperable obstacles at prefent to my polfession of her, on which my happinefs depends, that it is at a very distant day, if ever, that I can flatter myfelf with that event.
To lull that flirt lady Di Horton’s fufpicions of my passion for the adorable Mifs Howard, 1 have lately become very obfequious to her ladyship, but v/ithout avowing any particular esteem for her. It is very eafy, Duncan, to make a woman of her stamp imagine that you have defigns on her without feigning a passion—• -Her own vanity betrays her; and for the fliorttime she or I shall remain here, she may be eafily deceived. I do it to preferve my charmer from the mifehief her dadyship’s revenge might otherwife bring on her, Dumont, who is very gallant with Lady Di’s wonsan, informed me fome time fince, through that channel of her ladyfliip’s dilpofition,
Mifs
K
HUMAN LIFE. 247
.Ik r* r* TTT	'	1	1	.	1*..l	I lf
iVJUio 1-JU^vvaiv* liao	«.	cuiu y
being cauglit in a heavy Shower one'day coming from a neighbour’s, but I hope no fever will enfue—She sky’s she is well—-
40
Lovers fear the worst.
We were fitting alone yesterday evening, when I intreated her to take fomething warm at night: file was much depreSfed in Spirits, and anSwered with a figh and tear, that she was obliged to me for my kind advice, but it was of very little lignification what became oS her. Then, rifing Srom her Seat, she walked up and down the room in Seeming anxiety of mind.
I v/ent and Seized her lovely hand, Duncan ; “ Ah! my dear, my amiable Miss Ho ward, rend not my heart by So bitter a reflection,” Said I; “ my existence is interwoven in yours, and whatever afflictions you have I must partake of : impart them to your Villars, he will strive all in his power to alleviate your distreSs. My esteem, my reSpect, my regard, for you, is more than I can expreSs ; but your Sriendship is all I demand in return—it is all I can hope for.”
She withdrevr her hand, and Surveyed me with the keenest penetration.
“ Oh ! Sorgive me my amiable Sriend,’* continued I; “ never more will I offend by a Sarther acknowledgement oS my hopeless paffion—It was involuntary—Say'you will
shot
/
.8 THE MUTABILITY OF
not retute your rrienciimp to nim wno would forfeit his life to preferve yours.”
“ I muft own, my lord, you have exceedingly furprized me by Such a declaration, but the idea I have imbibed of your rectitude of fentiment makes me hope you will banifh every fenfation but thofe of friendship for me, from your breast, when I confess, what I must intreat you to conceal, that I am already a wife. Misfortunes compelled me to be feparated from my hushand—but that is not to my prefent purpofe ; all I wish, and mean, by this declaration, is, to convince your lordship that a further purfuit of the unhappy object before you will be criminal, and oblige her to Seek shelter elSewhere.”
Ah! Charles, I dared not avow that I before knew her condition, or had any o-ther notion oS her misfortunes than what she herfelf pleafed to hint.—For fome time I remained fpeechlefs and immoveable. I obferved her steal looks of pity at me, and heave heart-felt fighs. At laft I with difficulty made shift to utter, “■ Yes, madam, your will shall be obeyed, I will forget I ever had any fentiment but friendship for you—but will you not permit me to alleviate your prefent anxiety
“ It was only a retrofpect of the past gave
me a Slight return of forrow, my lord-----
But,”
HUMANLIFE. 249
But,” faid she, by way of putting an end to the converfation, “ vyill your lordship favour me I© far as to read‘ a few poems out of this new book which Mr. Villars has juft received from London * I took it with reverence from her hand, and luckily or unluckily opened it, and read as follows:
ELEGY.
What torture In the breafl is pent,	’
When Hope withdraws her pleafing fway j Reafon, her fubftitute, in vain is fent
To refcue from Defpair its deftined prey.
Death will o’ercome w’hat living V/as my foe* Vanquilh all pain, and triumph o’er defire ?
Kind Atropos, approach, and end my woe.
Subdue the tyrant Love—expel his
The lovely Delia o’er rny filent grave
May then with friendly tears lament my fate ; Lament the vi‘5tiin that (lie could not fave,
Or mitigate in life his wretched ftate.”
I could not avoid reading it with a peculiar emphaSis, as it was So Suitable to my state oS mind at that juncture. My agitation made it difficult Sor me to proceed. MiSs Howard obServed it; and, rising hastily, skid Mrs. Villars called, and immediately quitted the room.
My reflections were very gloomy ones; they turned on the villainy of Melville,
who
oTHE MUTABILITY OF
who could deprive lo angelic a creature or liberty, ruin her fame, then intirely neglect her, without hope of redress, or profpect of happier days, except death should fnatch him hence, and fet her free; but, alas ! that hope muft be diftant, as he is fo young a man.
It is impossible for me to remain here and not oftendsher—I cannot conceal my fentiments.—I muft fly, and devote myfelf to mifery. Oh ! Duncan, you muft comfort your almoft defpairing friend
Villars.
Mifs Hov/ard ta Mifs Meynel.
Pmmawr,
VV E have been thele three weeks returning vifits. The country is in many parts worthy the attention of a land-
fcape-painter----the variety of profpects
beautiful indeed. We found a fincere welcome and affectionate reception every
where------Hofpitality is a pleafing virtue
with its help-mate Difcretion; without that guide it frequently proves the ruin of
many. I have met with fo much civility
in
H TT M A M T. T F F. orr
in this country, it would be ungrateful in me to di (com mend it. Lady Di Horton will carry a very unfavourable idea of its inhabitants with her to England, as She will not be perfuaded but all the ladies are actuated by the fame principles as thofe fhe met at the town She viSited^ To condemn the people of a whole country for the Sake of a very Sew individuals is ungenerous and narrow-minded; but her Ladyship will not be convinced, and Strikes me Silent by Some flighty Speech,
The gentleman and lady of this mansion are a very amiable couple: Mr,
Price has great genius and tafte Sor improving his estate, which affords him both
amufement and profit. Wc ictuiii liuiiic
in two days, my dear Harriot. Great preparations are making for MiSs Shen-kin’s wedding. Lord Villars intends quitting this country before the consummation of it, which Lady Di Horton is mudi difpleafed at. I hope—yet I must be filent at prefent.
The winter is approaching very fast— the fallen leaves are fcatered around, and convey gloomy ideas to a mind already too much attuned to melancholy obferva-tions. Oh ! my Harriot, forgive me; I cannot erafe my misfortunes from remembrance-----they occur frequently, when
with
h a falliner tear I fiuhiner whisher to mv-
felf, Alas ! how tedious is life to the unhappy !
In our way hither we dined at a gentleman’s who is a celebrated antiloquift. He was at war with every fentence that was jttered. Lord Villars admired the fituati-jn of his houfe; he immediately replied,
‘ it was the worSl in the whole country.” His Lordship faid he could not help dif-isring in opinion from him: ‘‘ O, your Lordship is no judge then,” anfwered he rudely. Lord Villars bowed. It feems to De that man’s only happinefs to contradict. -Very perfon he meets with. What a Irange-miScraBte <^i/poSition ! and what a
rrmst hlR wife lead !
I forgot, my deareft Harriot, in my aft, to congratulate you on your intimacy vith the worthy Mrs. Gordon. I knew you vould think yourSelS happy in her friend-.
hip^ and she in yours. Adieu !
• 0
\
Silena Howard.
J
I
END OF THE FIRST VOLUME. <
%
-..0 Cy.	■	.	-V-	•	».•	—L-;
-55-	.	d*	■'	- ■
^	. y'^	i^'S	■	'	■* '	■”	■'^r- -‘..U’. ' -
st	A.	■	.	.	,	.	*	.
• sh. V	v,>‘
... . .■*
CAA
* . ^ -■>
a.rA .-- '	\
-	:0'.Xst.stJ-
r’-'-Jr.-'-	,."H^
■•' “-c st'T;-:-'~v
THE ■	'■
_ - T-J
M U T A B I L I T Y
*r
O F
HUMAN LIFE,
/ . ,;-st .
f
B*“W*	•	^
0^:“.
■:	*	.ir*-
"* n.
? '	VO L. IL
A
p jA-	^
f /	eFA..,: ^..^v
f A	r*''	■ ■■-.i...
C JF	\	^■'J
F\'A
■	■	X	'	-
>A; — ■'->*	.	\	-	-
^’v-
: ^ . ''
•*	■•■'..	'I J .«	■
;	' '-/’•• •'■	', ■.!	'-V..	•
.	■ - N ■	'	^	■	■
y i'"	^	-?	•	'-
: ^	.- '\ V!v^'* *
d.0 ’
9
^	c- .	•	. ■ : ^ *
'	,	•	1	•	V
’
U	'	.	^
THE
MU T ABILITY
O F
HUMAN LIFE;
OR
MEMOIRS
OP
AD EL AIDE, Marchionefs of Melville:
By a lady.
i
VOL. II.
DUBLIN;
Printed for S. Price, W. Slea1"er, W. Whitestone, W. Watson, D.Cham-
BERLAINE, J. HoEY, J. WiLLIAMS, J.
Potts,W. Colles,G. Burnet,T. Walker, C. Jenkin, E. Cross, L. White, J. Exshaw, j Beatty.
M,DCC,LXX VJI.
9
I
4
THE
MUTA B ILITY
O F
HUMAN LIFE, &c.
«
^    ^   -«—:r
Mifs Howard D ATiyi Meynel.'
Elyfium-Pldci
jM[y pen trembles in my hand, Har riot— I am going to confess my involun tary guilt. Oh ! were it not in my opi nion a breach in that friendship whicl has ever fubfifted between us, I wouh
y	0
fooner die than avow what muft humi i liate me in your eyes, and what make! me defpicable in my own. Lord Villan ——Can you not guesk the reft, Har ^ riot, and Spare me the pain of a recital : :	VoL. II.	B	—
-r
0'
THE MUTABILITY OF
•—I eSleem him too much—Ah ! Harriot, it was more than friendship made me fo much admire his virtues, but it
-/	J
was his amiable qualifications, firft caufed it. . His tendernefs—his friendship for
me-------Ah I why was I fo long blind to
his and my own mifery I—I should at firft have quitted Elyfium Place—but how coqld I before I perceived the danger-? When Mr. Clairville and others made offers of love, I heard them with horror, knowing myfelf a wife; but my guilty heart received with pleafure every assiduity of Lord Villar?, without re-ilecting on the criminality, till by broken hints he avowed more than friendfiiip— then beheld the pi cci[.'Ice before me, and, to cut him off from hope, told him 1 v/as already married. .He feemed not much furprifed at the news; but, in great anxiety of mind, promifed never more tooffendbya further declaration. His behaviour encreafed my unfortunate ef-teem. While we were on our little tour he kept his word, though to appearance fie was very unhappy. We returned, and he refolved to leave us. Had he jiot taken this refolution, I was deter-
'*	-V
mined .to quit Mrs. Villars, though I might not eafily find another retreat fo fuitable, independent af iiis Lordship.
It
HUMAN LIFE. 5
If he returns next fummer, I must; sty, let what will be the confequence ; abfence is the only remedy for us both. Ah ! Harriot, the night before his departure, when'we were left alone, with •what delicacy and tendernefs did he bid me a final adieu ! *‘I am going to lea\e you. Madam,” faid he, “ becaufe I am convinced it gives pain to your generous and feeling heart to behold the unhappinefs you cannot prevent ; your friendship is all I can ever expect or defire, and that I hope you will not deny me at a distance from you ; it will be my only confolation in the dreary vale of affliction which my future days must be fpent in—A fentiment ib pure .cannot-offend heaven. Let me intreat likewife. Madam, that if my fervice or interest can at any future period be of ufe to you, or any friend of yours, you will command them.—Will you not grant me your pity and friendship.^” faid he, in the most affecting accents.
Oh! my dear Harriot, how extremely wretched was your friend ! It was with the greatest: difficulty imaginable I made any anfwer. Cruel duty impofed feveri-ty, blit we were going to part for ever; might it not relax a little fhen 1
“ Alas ! ray Lord,” returned I, “ if
B z	my
THE MUTABILITY OF
my pity and friendship are of any avail, you have them. My fincere wishes and prayers will be for a restoration of that peace of mind you .fay is fled. I doubt not but time., and the numerous fuperior objects you will meet with in polite •circles, will intirely eradicate the flight impression you received in your rural vifit, and leave only a friendship, which I shall,be honoured by.”
“ .Ah'! Madam,” faid he, “ you are ■ignorant of your power ; it is the charms of your mind I .admire , fimilar ones I cannot meet with.amidst folly .and dissipation.—Exterior charms, heightened by art, cannot feduce me ; stis Nature I ad-:mire, and a foul replete with virtue and -goodnefs*—An efteem founded on thefe ,can never be diminilhed.”
The melancholy air which he delivered his .fentiments in, unguarded me; fpite ■of all caution., I shed tears, and intreated him to forget ,me.
“ Amiable friend,” faid he, taking my hand, Nin.'that I must difobey you.”
At that crifis Lady Di Horton and Mifs Shenkin enteresh Her Ladyship rallied him on his ferious looks, and invited him to visit her in Grofvenor-Street.
1 faw him not the enfuing morning, as I determined to Ipare him and myfelf
the
HUMAN LIFE. 5
the embarraffment of taking leave before Mr. and Mrs. Villars, who might • easily have perceived our distress.
It is with greater horror that I now reflect on my union with the Marquis; but yet there would have been another infurmountable bar, for you know my opinion concerning divorces, my dear Harriot: therefore, while Lady Villars lives, were I Sree, I would not accept of
his Lordship’s hand.
But why do I reafon in this criminal manner Am I not Melville’s wife ? and shall I, like him, persidiousiy tranf-fer my love to another.?—Oh ! Harriot, niy bofom is in a perpetual warfare—I am constantly on my knees imploring offended Heaven for peace cf mind ; for refolution to banish from my thoughts the object wiiich at preSent has an undue share in them.—Pity me, Harriot Sorgive me.'—I strive against a passion my
reaSon condemns, what can I do more ^ —Oh! I am wretched; all my misSor^ tunes, reviving, croud upon my mind, and almost overwhelm me ! If Melville had proved constant, my esteem would have continued Sor him, and this affliction would never have overtaken me.
Ah! no, I palliate in vain , I vvas a stranger to love till I knew Lord Villars;
B 3	my
THE MUTABIT.TTY OP'
my regard for Melville fprung only from a dutiful and grateful friendship.—! what a wretch am I upon the-earth !— D ivine, omnipotent Power, preferve my fenfes; pardon my murmuring ; let not an infignificant mortal repine at thy dif-penSations, but endue me with patience and fortitude to fubmit to them, till, in thy good time, it shall feem fit to thee to end my mifery and life together.— Oh ! Flarriot, how fenfibly the least deviation from the path of rectitude must affect a heart unwilling to err !■—It wounds, indeed, very deeply, that of your agonized, Self-condemned
Silena Howard.
Howard to Mfs Meynel.
Elyfium-Place.
Jl he violent perturbation of mind under which I wrote last to you, my dear Harriot, (thanks to that Being who listens to the ardent petitions of contrite mortals,) has almost fubfided to a calm. Neverthelefs, I must confess, there still remains too much tendej concern annexed to the remembrance of Lord Villars. Ah! Harriot, I can never, I fear, wholly annihilate it: but one thing I must, intreat

HUMANLIFE.	7
t
treat you to comply with ; that is, never to mention him in your letters to me. As you fay he is the intimate friend of your cousin, I have reafon to fear feeing his name often, left it should prove a means of increasing ray unhappinefs and guilt. I hear of him too frequently as it is, from Mr. Villars; but I am determined to avoid that, or thinking of him, as much as in my power lies. Was I to give way to reflection on his many amiable qualities, I Sliould only be working my ov/n miSery during existence, as I must never See him more.
I have been boasting of a calm, my dear Sriend; but a very Small indulgence oS this Sort would again hurry me into distraction. This is the last letter you shall receive on a Subject which yields nothing but uneasineSs, and renders me culpable in mine own eyes. However, you will yourSelf See Lord Villars, and find li ow worthy he is oS every perSonst esteem—You will tell me-—ah ! no— you must not tell me any thing—you must not mention him to me. Alas ! how incoherent I am } Pity me, Harriot. Why does not ReaSon re-affume her Sv/ay .?—Cruel destiny !—But I must lay afide my pen ; Sor at preSent I find,
B 4	in
’-rxj T7 Tv/TTtnra-DTT t'T'v r\ XL
mm	^	-sh ^ ^ ^	^^40 mmm »	^
in fpite of me, it will be employed on no other fubject. Oh ! Harriot--------
Mifs Shenkin’s fet dements are almost finished, and Lord Clandon has the affurance to tell me he marries her fifteen-hundred a year. A friend of his Lord-ship is expected to attend the wedding Lady Di Horton wants it over much. I perceive that she is now tired of the country. Pier partiality for me is much lessened : but Mifs Shenkin wants me to quit Mrs. Villars to live with her. You may be certain, for many reafons, my dear friend, I denied her.
Mrs. Green is now almost recovered, and w'e have had the furprifing news that Mrs. Fluellen is married to a young curate at the place she went to. The account of it she wrote herfelf to a cousin in this country. She will now, I fupi-pore, be heartily punished for her iniquities.
Adieu ! my dearest Harriot. It is my constant vdsh that Lord and Lady Lorton may be convinced how worthy you are to fix their Son’s happineSs. I should imagine, that iS he ventured to ask their conient he would not meet with a refuSal—But you must both be better
j udges
T4 TT :cf A M T. 1 T7 F._	n
judges of the cafe, as you are on tlie fpot, and well acquainted with their dispositions.—May the fun of blifs ever attend you, unobfcured by thofe clouds which, with very few intervals, have been constantly pouring down woes on
the devoted head of
Silena Howard !
Lady Di Horton /o Madame St. Cl are.'
Sbenkin-HalL
T>
HE account of your amour wdth Silvio came in good time; for, ’pon honour, I was quite a la mon. The lovely Villars is fled to the beau monde, and I' vow I was almost tempted to infringe the laws decorum has prefcribed to our fex, and fly with him—But Shenkin’s confounded wedding was another impediment. You know, as it is to be con-fummated So Soon, it would have been very ill-bred to depart. Villars quitted me with great reSpect, and promifed to visit me at London as Soon as he should hear of my arrival there ; but I have still Some SuSpicion, St. Clare, of his liking Howard. She, too, has been quite in the dumps since his departure. Yet, . why did he leave her, if that was the
B5.;	caSe.?-
•«1
o THE MUTABILITV OP
*
cafe?—I vow, St. Clare, 1 know not what to think of it —If I was convinced it was really fo, moft certainly I would contrive fome method of dif-placing her : but perhaps that might be worfe; for now she will be far enough from him for fome months, and 1 shall have an opportunity of compleating my
triumph.—If I am disappointed in my deSign, I will not Sail to Send Some knight-errant to wreak my revenge on her. Don’t you think that will be the. best plan, St. Clare? Yet, as you Said in a Sormer letter, I can’t think Such an inSipid can have gained advantage over my Superior and brilliant charms. No, no; my vanity and friendly mirror coii-vince me you are right.'
I have had two or three ’Squires here dying Cox my Ladyfhip, and Clandon begins to be very gallant but he is a Scol, and I should loSe my reputation by flirting with him. He tells me a very intimate friend of his will arrive Soon to See him shackled, and that he is an elegant,
SenSible young Sellow ; So I have Some chance of keeping up my Spirits with him during my Slay in this hideous place. The wind blows—horrible Storms Succeed. I vow, St. Clare, I would not remain here the winter to become miftreSs
of
HUMAN LIFE. ii
of the principality, and receive due homage, as fovereign, for ever.—Oh ! I could never forego the delights of the enchanting metropolis ; the constant attendance of Boreas, and the continual wrath of Neptune, during the winter months, would make one always anticipating death; and who would think of that fpectre in the bloom of youth and beauty ?
. Apropos ; it is the cuftom among the vulgar hottentots of this country—the cottagers I mean—when they imagine any of their kindred of friends expiring (which by their ignorance may often be fuppofed when not really fo)—to turn them upon their left fide, in order to fend them the easier out of the world, as they define it ; and, hastily jerking away the pillow or bolster, they let the dying perfon’s head fall Suddenly and forcibly on the bedstead; by which means the fick folks make their exit a little fooner perhaps than Nature intended : a rare-expedient, St. Clare, for a young fellow to fend on old one out of the world whom he is to become heir to.
What do you think I Old Fluellen has fastened on fome young curate for life. Only think of being tied to fuch a harridan till death doth them part for I vow, St. Clare, I believe she will
live
f	•
1 THE MUTABILITY OF
A
live to reckon a hundred. To be fure there was fafcination in his eyes that made her forget to weep after “ her dear friend.” I told you, St. Clare, she was fonder of novels than prayer-books: behold the confequence ! But the vulgar adage is, marriage and hanging are controlled by deSliny.
Shenkin paints herfelf higher than an Italian Singer ; but Clandon wants her fortune ; fo I fuppofe, let her act as she will, he will not Sue for a divorce.
I had a letter from town not long since, which mentioned that Melville begins to difagree with his prefent Lady, who turns out a virago. You are fo full of Silvio, that you told me no news in you laft.
Adieu ! St. Clare. In my next you will find an account of the wedding, and Something of our removal towards you. Till when, and ever, I remain
Yourss
Di Horton.
*	S
mjs
J
H TT M A N T. T F F. is
✓
Mifs Howard to Mifs Meynel.
Ely fum- Place.
W„ r. dear Harriot, will you
write to me of Lord Villars, when you know how neceffary it is I should forget him i*—^But you tell me “ it is only this time you intend doing it, as you thought I should expect your opinion of him— That you will acquit me from blame in not being able to withold my friendship from fo worthy an object ’’ If we were both at liberty, indeed, it would be ex-cufable ; but, as it is, my dear friend, the idea of him is not to be cherished without my contracting a fenfe of guilt. Oh! do not encourage me to think myfelf innocent. You cannot—you will not—you know it is criminaf;—only at prefent Slrive to foothe my mind to peace. Kind friend ! May your wishes prevail! But, ah ! Harriot, I fear it is not here they will be accomplished—I too frequently hear of the amiable Lord, from his uncle Mr. Villars, to be able to forget him; his darling nephew is his con-ftant topic. Think what I muft fuffer ; indeed; fometimes, Hear that to recover
my
0
. THE MUTABILITY OF
\
my tranquility I muft leave this friendly manfioh, and feek it in another country.
I have heard from Lady Di that the Marquis and Violetta begin to be un-happy^ and that she is ftriving for the mastery. She will find herfelf mistaken. The Marquis, should he once diflike her, will not easily be regained : he will not, I am fure, by capricious tyranny ; tho’ this takes effect: on fome violent tempers fooner than a milder conduct. She may, perhaps, be brought to repent of the injury she has done me. But what then ! I can draw no ray of hope from it. The Marquis has plunged me too deep in infamy ever to extricate me without dishonouring himfelf. Ah ! Melville, she who was the occasion of thy cruelty to me, may now prove a tormentor to thyfelf; and in fome unhappy moments thou mayft perhaps wish for the gentle Adelaide again, whom thou haft taken fuch pains to dilcard, and render miferable. Providence often orders it fo, that what we imagine will make for our good here, often proves our greateft bane. Melville thought he could not exist without Violetta : he poffeffed her, and now she proves a plague to that ex-iftence. How jnst the punishment for
his
W TT M A NT T. T T7 F
his iifage of me !—But I forgive him— I pity his infatuation-.—
I was fent for by Mrs. Villars, who informed me that we muft drefs to go and dine at Mr. Shenkin’s, in honour of the ftranger who is to pay his compliments as groomfman futuriis. The poll will be going off in my abfence; for which reafon I will clofe my letter, wishing you a fpeedy attainment of happinefs with your Duncan.
Silena Howard.
Mifs Howard to Mifs Meynel. -
EJyfum-Place.
E N we arrived at Shenkin-Hall, Mr. Clairville flew to assift us in alighting from the carriage, and conducted us to the drawing room. “ Ah! Mifs Howard,” faid he, “ this ftranger muft infallibly fall a victim to your charms ; perhaps, too, from his fuperior merit, he may be more fuccefsful than myfelf.”
“ Time will convince you. Sir, of your mistake in both points,” returned I.
We could fay no more before Mrs.
Villars
i THE MIT.DABTT.TTY OT7
Villars entered the room, and we followed.
A gentleman fprung forwards—Oh ! Harriot, what was my furprife and horror at feeing the very Mr. Nugent who had infulted me at Nice.
“ By Heaven,” exclaimed he, “ my adorable Mifs Bel”^---Howard,” in-
terrupted I, to prevent, if possible, his mentioning my maiden name.
He took the hint, imagining there was fome mySlery, and rejoined, “ How long have you been in this country^ my lovely Mifs————Howard
Lady Di Horton obferved what passed, and looked astonished, as did Mr. Clairville. I was in great agitation of mind, expecting every moment he would be-^ tray me. He continued obfequious, and feated himfelf by me.
“ You feem to be old acquaintance,” faid her Ladyship ironically—“ ’Pon honour, it was lucky you met here.”
“ I fwear, my Lady,” returned he, “ I esteem it a very great happinefs : . but Mifs------Mifs Howard will, per-
haps, refufe the acknowledgment of a. former acquaintance.”
» By no means, Sir ; old Sriends always retain the place with me they ever liadj and you will be still intitled to the
Same
HUMAN LIFE. in
fame reception I gave you when I w’as happy in having my friend alive to protect me.” I looked at him, at the fame time, with a meaning, that he might , learn, from what faid, that I would not accept of any address from him, though I feared provoking him, left he should difcover me.
He bowed thanks, and whifpered Lord Clandon, wdio foon after propofed walking before dinner. His Lordship efcorted Lady Di, Mr. Clairville Miss Shenkin, and Mr. Nugent fell to my lot.
They w’alked before us, and Lord Clandon and Mifs Shenkin drawing their companions attention from Mr. Nugent and myfelf, the latter began with, “ I defired my friend, if possible, to indulge, me with a private converfation with you, my charming Mifs Belmont, that 1 might receive instructions how to proceed, during my flay here, in anSwering the interrogations which will be put to me concerning our Sormer acquaintance ; Sor I find they are ignorant oS your affair with the Marquis. Ah! MiSs Belmont, how could you uSe me with Such Severity and cruelty !—But let me hope you will now relax, and make your adorer happy—
My
; THE MUTABILITY OF
My purfe shall be at your command—I
will prefent you a carte blanche”-
“ Permit me, Sir, to interrupt your proceeding ; I am ftill virtuous ; the pof-fession of empires should never allure me to the vicious flep you propofe; but I canst now fo much blame you for your unworthy fentiments of me, as I am de-ferted by my hushand, family, and friends. A ftate of dependance is what I am now obliged to fubmit to, and were I known to be the perfon who claims Melville,as her hushand, I should be deprived even of that, should be difcountenanced every where, should become a prey to want. In the moft folemn manner, appealing to Heaven, I vow that I am the real and lawful wife of the Marquis of Melville, and that I am as unpolluted by the Count de St. Lou as yourfelf. If you would take time for reflection, Mr. Nugent, you muft be convinced of my innocence.—My relations know not where I am—Was my mind difpofed for intrigue, I am young undoubtedly, and therefore need not be at a lofs for an abode with fome lover who would maintain me according to my wishes—But I prefer virtue, poverty, or fervitude, to Splendid vice.” Isthen informed him in what manner I was introduced to the
Villars*
HUMAN LIFE. lO
Villars’ family, and of their kind treatment of me. “ I have found a fafe afylum, Sir,” continued I, “ but you have it in your power, by broaching the fecrets I wish to be concealed, to effect my discharge, and to fmk me into fresh troubles: notwithstanding which, be affured, Mr. Nugent, I shall never liften to your addrelfes, or any other man’s, while the Marquis lives. And if you intend to revenge my rejection' of your criminal propofal, do it forthwith, that I may fpeedily know the worft.”
“ Ah ! Mifs Belmont,” returned he, “ you are fenfible of your power over me: I fwear I pity you extremely, and affure you, however violent my passion, I will never betray you, my fweet creature—even should you continue inflexi*^ bly unkind.”
By this time Lady Di was quite out of patience; flie had marked Nugent as her victim, and would no longer be withheld from him. She approached to ask his opinion of the place. Mr. Clairville likewife feemed unhappy, and ess caped to me from Mifs Shenkin. “ My prognostication was true, Mifs Howard,’* faid he ; “ Mr. Nugent has the advantage of me by a prior acquaintance—^
But
) THE MUTABILITY OF
But if your happinefs is the confequence I ought not to remonSlrate.”
Be affured, Sir,” returned' I, “ you are exceedingly deceived. My . friendship for you is fuperior to that I have for Mr.- Nugent. Our acquaintance, in the days of my profperity, w^as very Slight ; only his manner of expressing himSelf makes an obferver imagine more then in reality fubfists.”
“ There is no other alternative tham for me to believe you, Madam ; but”— (he paufed)—Howard was not your name when he knew you.”
' “ It was not, Sir,” returned I, blush-' ing. “To avoid difgracing my rela~ tiohs, when I was reduced to my prefent fituation, I thought it proper to take another name.”
He bowed, faying, ‘‘ Oh! that you would permit a man who loves you beyond expression once more to change your name, and place you in a more elevated fituation,. though not equal to your merit.”
“ Let me intreat you, Mr. Clairville,” faid I, “ to defift from importuning what I cannot grant—what I muft ever deny. Why will you perfevere in making yourfelf and me unhappy ?”
^^h I
HUMAN LIFE. 21
“ Oh ! MiSs Howard,” Said he, Sighing, “ must I then ever Sue in vain ?”
Nugent turned round, and joined us, to the visible diSpleaSure oS Lady Di. We returned to the houSe, where; aSter tea, vve Sormed a concert to conclude the evening. There was one wanting to make it harmonious. Oh ! my Harriot, you may gueSs whom I mean. IS I had -not observed it, Mrs. Villars would have reminded me, by Saying her nephew .Diphiir was wanting ; to which she Subjoined, as uSual, a laugh.
Mr. .Nugent aSiced iS Mr. -Orphus was near/af hand, and could be Sent Sor.
“ Ah! Lord, no,” returned she; “ha! ha ! ha! I v/ish he was ; but poor Lord 'Villars is as far off as Smoky London.— Ha ! ha ! I call him Orphus becauSe you know the god called So, uSed to excel every one.”
“ Oh! I beg pardon, Madam,” Said he. Sneering at her gravely—‘‘ I did not know where Orpheus resided.”
The wedding is to be celebrated in a week’s time; Soon after which all the visitants will take their departure. I hope Mr. Nugent will leave the country -without betraying me, as it will not be
eaSy
2 THE MUTABILITY OF
eafy for me to gain fuch another afylum without a Strong recommendation.
I remain.
My dear Harriot,
Your moSl fincere friend,
Silena Howard.
\
ikSyr Howard to Meynel.
Elyfium-Place.
j\^R. Nugent continues to be troublefome, notwithstanding the fixed difdain with which I have rejected his libidinous fuit. Ah ! my Harriot, how ob-ftinate the heart that premeditates mifehief.? There is no ppssibiliLy of turning it from its purpofe. To heighten my iineafinefs, Nugent declares, that, if I will not comply with his wishes, he will iio longer conceal my hiflory, but entertain Lady Di with a difclofure of it, who is very defirous to know who I am. Not to be under obligations to an infamous fellow, who fo anxioufly endeavours to plunge me in guilt, I told him that he was at liberty to act in that refpect as he pleafed, and should Mrs Villars difmifs me, upon hearing his Slory, I should Slill have the confolation of bofom virtue to accompany me, while
peace
\
HUMAN LIFE. 23
peace of mind and Providence shall be my guide. His anfwer was well adapted to the libertinistn and UcentioufneSs of his charadler. Should revenge urge him to fulfil what he threatened, I don’t imagine Mr. Villars would gratify him fo far as to defert me. His great humanity would make him reflect on my miS-fortunes, and, I think, reflection would foon perfuade fo humane a perfon of my innocence ; but if otherwife, I muft fubmit. Indeed, it will not now be fo great a hardship, as I wish to banish the amiable Lord Villars from my remembrance. ‘But this is a Subject in which I muft not indulge myfelf, my dear friend. Improper ideas should be hastily expelled. They are fatal.
We hear that the unhappy Mrs. Fluellen is at the point of death: her hufband has deferted her, and conveyed her fortune with him no one knows whither. May affliction bring on repentance, and cauSe her to propitiate that offended Power to whom the fecrets of all hearts are known.
Next week Mifs Shenkin’s wedding is to be celebrated. She is full of friendly professions to me, and urges me much to attend her to London. Alas! she .knows not the misfortunes I have there
already
u THE MUTABILITY OF
already experienced, or how unfit I am for company. She is too much attached to gallantry to be long fatisfied with the attendance of one who would be continually passing cenfure on what Jhe terras innocent amufement. She knows not the horror in which I hold her principles. Situated as I am, I have no bufinefs to meddle with her actions—^I muft: not fay any thing, Harriot—But, by Nugent’s account of her, she is unworthy being even Lord Clandon’s wife.
I find warm altercations continue between Violetta and Melville. They fay she is jealous of him to defperation, and vows revenge. He tells her, she had beft reft at peace, or he will totally difcard her. Poor Melville! Perhaps he may now wish he had been faithful to his once beloved Adelaide.—But it cannot be—His own honour will never permit him to difavow Violetta. Ah I Harriot, I muft remain a fugitive, and expect only to find repofe in the filent grave. There the wicked ceafe from troubling—there are the weary at reft.
Adieu!
Silena Howard.
Lady
HUMAN LIFE. 25
Lady Di. Horton to Madame St. Clare.
Shenkin-Hall.
I VOW, St. Clare, you provoke me exceedingly with your furmiSes. Why should you imagine my filence proceeds from being engaged in fome agreeable adventure, when you know the delight of my foul, my charming Villars, is far diSlant ?
I have' been immerfed in perplexities and troubles.—Confound this fyren Howard, she makes my fuperior charms of no effect. Oh ! I could tear her piece-meal. This Nugent is a charming fellow, but a mere blank in comparifon with Villars. He would do very well for a chaperon in my lovely fellow’s abfence—a tolerable figure for a dangler—and for fuch fmall purpofe I had fixed him in my idea; but this creature, this Howard, it feems,
was an old acquaintance. He was in
&
raptures at the unexpected fight of her, and had like to have betrayed her hiSlory, which, fpite of all my alluring arts, I have not yet been able to extract from him. In the interim. Patch, received a 'Ttter from George, a fellow belonging • i-Villars, acquainting her his Lordship std been extremely ill on the road, but
C	ha d
0
S THE MUTABILITY OF
had given ftrict orders that it should be concealed from his uncle ; and that they all knew he was in love with Mifs Howard, which was the caufe of his illnefs. You muft know I compelled Patch (whofe pride was above a footman) to liften to this fellow’s addreffes, and correfpond with him that I might hear of my adorable Villars : with great promifes of reward for making her undergo fuch indignity, flie complied. ’Pon honour, St. Clare, I am angry, with myfelf for ftill harbouring fuch favourable fentiments of a man who Slights my charms r but Villars is—Oh ! he is engaging beyond defcription. I have this morning been tampering with Nugent, and liften-cd to his passion for Howard—advifed him to difplay her fecret hiftory, as perhaps Mrs. Villars might difmifs her, and she might be eafily entrapped into a share of his—a thoufand expedients might be formed to put her into his power, &c.— (Oh ] for revenge on her, St. Clare.)— He feemed to liften with attention, and I purfued my advice ; that, to avoid offending her intentionally, he should communicate it fome evening before company, feigning to be drunk. He fwore, if she \vould not be more favourable to him, he would comply with my advice ;
bur
HUMAN LIFE. vj.
but I could not perfuade him to let my curiofity into her hillory. It fignifies, indeed, not much to me, if I could but get her removed from the knowledge of my Villars^—My Villars—-Confufion to her, he is her Villars, I think. It is a great myftery to me, too—-Why don’t he
marry her ?—Why don’t he------------} I
vow, St. Clare, it’s paft my divination, and I am almoft diftracted at the difappoint-ment of my wishes. ’Pon honour, I am on the wing to quit this place; for the days get very short, the wind roars, and with impetuous blafts frequently threatens the demolition of this Welch caftle. The waves at a fmall diftance dash against the rugged rocks, and fill one with horror and the fpleen. Reallyq St. Clare, were it not for the numerous objects which are continually filling the houfe, I should, be annihilated, or deeply abforbed in the vapours ; and, with the addition of my unfortunate passion, should be almoft tempted, like Sappho, to precipitate myfelf from fome Stupendous mountain into the main. I need not travel far in this country to execute fuch a purpofe. I was fome time fince vifit-ing a family, St. Clare, whofe dwelling-houfe was fituate in a valley furrounded by mountaixus, moftly barren ; but a few
^	C z	acres
9
D 'T'tTrT? A/rTTnr«AT)TT T'T'V r\ T.
acres feparated the houfe from the mountains. How thofe poor wretches can live there throughout the winter, in fo confined and dreadful a place, is to me allo-nishing. I am certain one dreary month would totally demolish me. No draw'-ing-room, no opera, no Pantheon, &c. The idea is infupportable-: Horrible, horrible, moft horrible !’■
As for the men of this country, they may as well breathe here as in any other place. From dinner to different hours at night, according as they are able to bear it, they dedicate to brutal Bacchus, and are conveyed to bed by their fervants, a difgrace to human nature, and the blindness of Fortune, that can shower favours on Such a crew. But why do I devote my pen in the leaft to thefe inanimates,* when Villars claims all my attention ? Patch has received another letter from her admirer, which fays my charming fellow is tolerably recovered, and now in London. Do, my dear St. Clare, find means to inform me concerning him; but you muft be expeditious, for my Slay here will be fiiort. I muft execute revenge, tho’, on Howard, before I depart, to put her otit of Vil-
lars’s
«
H H M AN T. T F F. za
lars’s way: Nugent shall be my inftru-ment. Adieu I
Yours, &c.
DrHoRToK.
9
*
%
Mi/i Howard to Mifs Mleynel,
Elyjium-Place.
X Ellerday, my dear Harriot, Mifs Shenkin was made happy, by being put in possession of the legal title of “ your Ladyship,” and Lord Clandon, by enjoying in idea her future fortune, for at prefent she has only nine thoufand pounds. I believe a more indifferent couple never met each other at the altar. Strange infatuation ! May they never have reafon to repent it. The evening was concluded with a bail, which is to be repeated again to-night. We are to attend. Mr, Nugent, v:ith whom I was obliged to dance, behaved witli fuch infolence, that I was on the brink of applying to Mr, Villars for redrefs ; but the reflection that I must foon then be difplayed as Adelaide Belmont by him, in revenge, made me re*-main filent; and, as a few days v/ill take him from me, I practifed the philofophy of necessity, and determined to bear it.. Lady Di feemed pleafed at detecting my
C 3	distress.
V THE MUTABILITY OF
diftrefs, and feveral times wished me joy of my conqueft ; provoked at which, I anfwered, he was too infignificant, and too difagreeable, to occaiion joy ; that difdain and abhorrence where the fentiments he excited in me, for of all earthly creatures a coxcomb was moft my aversion.
“■ Oh Heavens!” Said, the new-made Lady Clandon, “■ is it possible that you can be difpleafed with the tendernefs of the love-in Spiring Nugent ? Ah ! no*— you deceive us—en veriih, Silena, il ejl impoffibleV
“ Indeed, my Lady, it is not impof-Sibie« but veritable,” returned I.
“ Ah ! Howard, you ftill diffemble—? Come, come, conSeSs to us his powerSul charms have shbdued you. II Pen Jaura rien : we will be your faithful confidents.”
“ I can only repeat, what I before averred, Madam, that he is, according to my tafte, a diSgufting man, and that I shall See him depart with pleaSure.”
We were interrupted by Some of the company, who called us to join the dancers; and thus a period was put to our little conteft.
Mr. Shenkin and all the Welch gentlemen were So intoxicated upon this oc-caSion, that Some of the ladies cloaths
received
HUMAN LIFE. st
\ '
received the effects of their inebriety, which caufed great murmuring. The fmell of tobacco was likewife intolerable.
I hope never to be at fo difagreeable a wedding again.
But I am ordered to attend Mrs. Villars to this feene of difagreeable confusion again ; therefore, for the prefent, adieu! my dear friend.
%
Ah ! my dear Harriot, how vain the boaft of philofophy and fortitude! Mif-fortunes, repeated misfortunes, make the pliantom fly far away, and resign us wholly to pusillanimous dejection. Mr. Nugent has enjoyed his full meafure of revenge on your unhappy friend, and made her a fubject for the fport of the company : but you will be anxious to hear particulars, and you .ftiall be gratified.
A numerous company were affembled,-very few of the genrlemen attended the tea-table, and Mr. Nugent was one of thofe who remained drinking in the parlour. The siali began ; Mr. Clairville was my partner; it was a difagreeable feene of confufion, similar to the preceding. day. Mr. Clairvilless remarks
C 4	were
2 THE MUTABTI.ITY OP
were fenfible and delicate, as ufual. At laSt fupper was announced *, we repaired to it, each gentleman feated by his partner. We had been about half an hour at table, when Mr. Nugent entered, extremely intoxicated. Mr. Shenkin and ail that had Stayed below feemed in the fame fituation. Mr. Nugent Staggered up to me. Saying, “ Ton my Soul, my lovely MarchioneSs, I can keep your
council no longer------So—So leave theSe
mountaineers, and return—return to my embraces. Why should you ftill bemoan the loSs oS Melville I for—Sor, my dear creature, I Swear I will maintain you as well as he did; and you was not So coy
to me at Nice—my charmer.”----------Oh |
consider-----The greatest astonishment
imaginable was imprinted on the countenance of every one preSent—their eyes were all fixed on me—when Lady Di interrupted him, by faying, “Heavens! Mr. Nugent, is it possible } Is she really the miSnamed MarchioneSs of Melville, the real MiSs Belmont I”
“ Ton my veracity, Lady Di, the very Same ; and a Sweet creature she is—-Nobody shall affront her—I will protect.
her-----She has been—aye—and still—f
ftill shall be mine.---As for Count de
St. Lou, he grew fickle, and forSook her,
with
H UM AN LIFE.
with the Marquis—but I will—pos—I will be constant for ever.”
During this harangue, theconflidt within my poor tortured bofom prevented utterance—-No friendly tears came to my relief—I was the very Statue of Woe.
Various passions feemed to take poffeffion of Mr. Clairville by turns. “ Is it poffible!” exclaimed he. Then again llarting up in rage, “ Sir,” faid he, “ you muft juftify your afperfions on this lady at a proper time.”
“ Ton my veracity, Clairville, I’m ready to do it, if the fweet creature denies what I fay to be truth.”
I at that moment refumed courage, and, rifing from my feat, faid, “ Let me intreat you, Mr. Clairville, that fo unfortunate a wretch as I may not be the means of difpute or animosity. I will not, gentlemen and ladies, attempt to deny I was once the happy Adelaide Belmont, fupported by tender parents, and a noble family. The Marquis of Melville, at Montpelier; would take no denial to his fuit; but, his uncle being then fur viving, he intreated the marriage ceremony might be performed in private. My dying father,” faid I, weeping, “ faw our hands joinecl. I folemnly affert, before all-righteous Heaven, that I am his lawful wife, and
C 5	innocent
. THE MUTABII.ITY OK
innocent of the crimes laid to my charge. As for Mr. Nugent, chance conducted him to Nice, where he shocked me with propofals which I refufed with horror.-^ Chance conducted him here again, where, being enraged at me for refusing his infamous d.Dires, he has, I fuppofe, determined on this revenge, in hopes, my valuable benefactors, to prevail with you to withdraw your protection, and leave me a prey to poverty.”—
I could fay no more—my voice faulteredo—-I was on the brink of fainting—when Mr.'Clairville fnatched Lady Di’s fmel-ling-bottle, and Mr. Villars bid me refume courage, that he wouM protect me.
- Moft of the company let down my conduct to the account of female art; and, as peoples virtues in general are lefs frequently liftened to than their vices, I feemed to be chiefly given over, efpecially by the ladies. Oh ! it was impossible all my friends would have deferted me, if my guilt had not been atrocious; they could therefore no longer with decorum countenance me -they were forry a woman of fo good family should difgrace it.” You may imagine, my dear Harriot, there were mnny bitter reflections at my expence. Mrs. Shenkin and fome other ladies
HUMAN LIFE. 35
dies faid, “ They mull beg to be excufed receiving me, as they could never think of taking up the caufe of a woman who was openly abandoned by her whole family.”
“ By Heaven!” faid Mr. Clairville, ‘‘ she has more virtue and more goodnefs than all you ladies can boast of poss festing among you. Do you think, if she was actuated by fuch abandoned principles, that she would have been the humble companion of any infolent lady ? No! She might at any time enjoy fplen-dor and infamy—Her lovely form”—
“ I fwear, Clairville,” interrupted Nugent, “ you are a noble fellow for thus— This vindication of my fweet girl reflects honour upon your generofity.”
“ Sir,” faid Mr. Villars, “ at prefent she is under my protection, and shall not be infulted. If she has been guilty, she is to be commended for her reformation, and if innocent, unfortunate indeed Her refufal of Mr. Clairville shews a nobleness of foul, and is a proof of her innocence. Many women by private marriages have been made miserable, by uniting with villains*—she may be a victim—^her family may be extremely blameable in deferring her, as they have done, and obliging her to a life of dependence—therefore, since she
has
? THE MUTABILITY OP
has no friends lefr, I fliall think it my duty, as a Chriftian, to protect her, fpite of the cenfure of misjudging people.” Then turning to a fervant, “ Be fo obliging as to order my carriage,” faid he; “ she shall no longer intrude on a company who in her profperity would have thought themfelves honoured by receiving her.”
Mr. Villars’ fpeech ftruck an awe opon all prefent, and for a few moments fi-lenced their feverity ; but we could hear Lady Clandon and a few others, before we departed, faying, “ Pretty innocent, indeed !—The old fellow’s miftrefs, I fuppofe.” We were informed the carriage was ready, when Mr. Clairville conducted Mrs. Villars, and Mr. Villars your friend, into it, the former gentleman wishing us a good night. A total filence prevailed till we entered the parlour here.^ I passTed she interval in tears. Mrs. Villars broke filence with “ Well, I declare, Silena, this is a ftrange ftory; upon my word, it’s very comical that I should have a Marchionefs for my companion.”
“ Ceafe ! ceafe tormenting her,” cried .Mr. Villars, rousing himfelf from a reverie.—“ 1 wish, Mifs Belmont, you had not fo carefully concealed your ftory from
my
HUMAN LIFE.	sT
my knowledge. I muft believe you innocent, from the virtuous fentiments you have difplayed fince your arrival here. —’Tis ftrange !—Deferted by all your family !”
I recollected, my dear Harriot, that fortunately your packet of letters was (till with me. I therefore proffered them for his perufal, and acquainted him with my accidentally meeting Mrs. Gordon. He accepted them, affured me he would ftill protect me, and begged I would endeavour* to reft after the new perturbation my fpirits had undergone,
Mrs. Villars faid, “ Aye, do, poor thing ; they have teizcd you fadly.”
I retired tp my folitary chamber, and have paffed the night hitherto in reciting the fresh mortification I have undergone Yet how thankful I should be to Providence that my benefadtofs do not condemn me! I have a fafe aSylum ftill, let that encourage me not to deSpond, nor to despair—rather let it incite a ray oS hope to illumine my dejected heart, and diSpel the grief that is now too predominant upon it. Afflictions are mef-fengers fent from Heaven to wean us from indulging too much the joys of the world. I will endeavour to think them fuch.
•	V
As
8 THE MUTABILITY OF
As the poSl Lets off early in the morning, I shall clofe my letter, and very foon write to you again; till when, my dear friend, and at all times, 1 am your affectionate
SiLBNA Howard.
LadyDjk Horton to Madame St. Clare.
Shenkin-Hall
MOST delightful execution, ’pon ho%iir, St. Clare—The fair hypocrite is difplayed in the very light I could wish—* She proves to be the identical mock Marchionefs who made fuch eclat at Paris, and was difgraced at London—-Mifs Belmont I mean, St. Clare. I played ray cards well with Nugent, and, by 'diftributing hopes and fears to him, at laft, for his imaginary benefit, made him fubmit to my defire. The time oS his departure drawing nigh, he reSolved, as the only means of getting her into his power, to difgrace her here: therefore, pretending to be drunk, at the time that he was in Sact Sober, he entered in the midft oS the ftrange concourSe of beings affembled on account of Clandon’s wedding, and addreffed her by her title. I muft own, St, Clare, it Surprised even
me
HTTM A N LIFE.
»
me a little to find who she was, and the whole circle of females pronounced her guilty immediately ; but did Villars took compassion on her, and made her withdraw : after which fentence was paffed on her for being his miftrefs. But, however, St. Clare, I am happy ; as I know the charming Villars, with his refined fentiments, will now, if poffible, banish her from his love-fick heart. Besides, there are other fchemes forming to make him hate her: but adieu! St. Clare ; in a week’s time we shall meet; then thou shalt know all the fecret purpofes of
Your
Di ANA Horton,
s
*
♦
0
X-
Mifs
»
• »
•»
I
THF MTTT A BIT TTV Orr
>
Mifs Howard to Mifs Meynel.
Elyfum-Place.
HP
X HE morning fucceeding the conclusion of my laft letter to,you, I went early into the parlour, where I found Mr. Villars alone, with my packet of letters lying on the table by him. He arofe, and prefented them to me: “ I am convinced of your innocence, Madam,” faid he; “ thefe papers are the effusions of virtuous fentiments, and I cannot express how Strong my wishes are that you had met with a happier fate.” “We muft resign to the will of Heaven, Sir,” returned I. “ If you and Mrs. Villars continue your approbation, it is all I can now hope.”
“ Can nothing be done for yon. Madam i*-—Suppofe I write to Lady N—
on the Earl of Walters}”------
“ Ah! kind Sir, think not of it— attempt it not”—faid I, weeping— “ their hearts are againft me.”
“ S^ange !—-ftrange !”-—repeated he. “ Something should be attempted.”
Mrs. Villars entered. “ Well ! how, are you to-day, my poor girl .•‘—Muft I
call
HUMAN LIFE. 41
<
call you Silena, Mifs Belmont, or my Lady —Indeed, I think you should have the latter title, as it is your right— Should not she, Mr. Villars ?”
“ No, no, my dear,” faid he haftily ; “ I will give you the reafon why, when vve are alone, and I have time to explain it to you.” He then rang the bell for the fervants to attend breakfaft, and defired her not before them to reSume that fubject.
In the midft of breakfaft, a fervant entered with great marks of terror. Mr. Villars demanded the reafon.
“ Oh! Lord, Sir, fad doings! Owen the ploughman is juft come in, and fays one of Mr. Clairville’s people told him that as how his mafter had fought with Mr. Nugent this morning, and thaf one of them or both were dead; and he fays. Madam, (nodding his head at me) you was the cauSe.”
“ Good God grant it may not be true!” uttered I, with inexpressible terror, and fell into violent tremblings.
Mr. Villars begged me not to be alarmed; and Mrs. Villars gave me her Smelling-bottle, when the door opened, and Mr. Clairville entered.
“ I am
0
THE MUTABILITY OF
^ I am extremely happy to See you at this juncture,” Said Mr. Villars, “ as we have juft received news which alarmed us on your account.—Was it true I Did you encounter Mr. Nugent this morning V
“We did meet, my dear Sir, but were interrupted before any thing happened. His inSolence and malevolence againft this lady, who is So delerving of a happier fortune, provoked me beyond meafure; but I was not permitted to chaftife him as he deferved. I have inSifted upon his quitting my houfe for ever. The day-after to-morrow, it feems, shey all fet off for London.’’
“ I should have been very unhappy, indeed,” skid I, curtfying, “ if any mif-fortune, Sir, had happened to you on my account—doubly So, as I look on duelling as premeditated murder. Life is the gift of Heaven, and the duellift, by deftroying his own or the perfon he encounters, offends Heaven highly. The confequen'ce enfuing is too dreadful to reflect on.”
“ In pity, fpare me,” interrupted Mr. dairville. “I always myfelf abhorred that practice; but Nugent’s villainous afperfions againft virtue in diftrefs over-powered all former objections.—I wished
to
H TT M A TsJ T. T F F. a
to chaftife him: we met; he irritated me ftill more; and, while on the brink of fate, Lord Clandon and his fervant in ter pofed ”
I returned him thanks for his friendship, and told him I hoped his passion would never get dominion over his rea-shn again, and incite him to commit, fo rash an action.
A week has now elapfed lince this affair happened. Lord Clandon, his Lady, &c. &c. are gone out of the country without taking leave of Mr. Villars, Mrs. Villars, indeed, would go to Shen-kin-Hall to bid adieu to Lady Clandon, and fulfilled her intention without acquainting Mr. Villars, or he would not have permitted her, as he Said their behaviour to me was an affront to him, fince he chofe to protect me. I can perceive great alteration in Mrs. Villarsss behaviour to me fince that vifit. I hope file will foon return to her former goodnature, otherwife I am determined not to remain here. Adieu! my dearest Harriot.
4
Mifs
1.4. the mutability of
Mfs Howard to Afi/5 Meynel.
’ #
Vlyjium-Place.
A
TjLlAS ! my beloved Harriot, the evil deiliny which has of late attended your friend ftill perfecutes and compels her to quit this once agreeable retreat!—-Where, or with whom, will she next find a shelter ? Cruel, cruel friends!—why will you permit me thus continually to be the Sport of SortuneAh! Harriot, I am unhappy—very unhappy indeed !— but I muft not, will not, repine : time Vi ill reconcile me to my Sate.
Mr. ViHarsss humanity and Sriendship for me prompted him to write a letter to his nephew full of encomiums on my behaviour fince I had been in his family, and in Strong colours painted my innocence. This letter he ordered- Lord Vil-
A
lafs to shew Lady N------, and uSe the
moft powerSul arguments to reftore me to her Savour, or to allow an annual fti-pend to preServe a woman oS ray Samily, her own Sifter’s child, Srom a ftate of dependency. IS his Lordship could not move her compassion, Mr. Villars deSired he would go to Lord Walters, and See what could be done with him.
Lord
H TT M A NT T. T F F	av
Lord Villars readily complied with his iincle’s requell, but they all agreed in the fame anfwer, and, enraged, Said, “ I had chofen infamy and a dependent state, therefore might enjoy it; for they would give themfelves no further trouble about me—They did not doubt but in time ^Mr. Villars would difcover my hypo-crify.” Thus am I still deferted. Mr. Villars, when he received Lord \illars’ letter, communicated the contents to me. I had fcarce returned ‘him thanks for his kind endeavours of furthering my happinefs, when Mrs. Villars rushed into the room, “ Fine doings !—fine doings! indeed, Mr. Villars I—A man of your years to keep a miftrefs under the fame roof with your wife!—Fie ! Mr. Villars—-Yes, Lady Di told me it was fo, and Mrs. Jones, and Mrs. Davies, and Mrs Morgan, and Mrs. Owen, and Mrs. Ellis; aye, and I believe it to be true, cruel, cruel manl otherwife you would never 'let a woman ftay here who has been fo infamous, and her own relations defpife her for her wickedness.—Here nobody will come and fee me on her account, and fo I muft live at home as if I was as guilty a wretch as herfelf—Fie ! Mr. %hllars!—fie! fie upon it!”
Mr.
{.6 THE MUTABILITY OF
Mr. Villars furveyed her with the greateSl furprize imaginable, and afterwards informed me he never knew her re-fem any thing before, and was very forry on my account.—But to return :
I fell at her feet weeping, for though I knew she had been inSligated by others to this behaviour,—-knew her fimplicity, yet the epithet she bellowed on me was So shocking I could not avoid being ,Sen-fibly wounded. “ Let me intreat, worthy madam,” Said I, “ you will be calm : the many favours I have received from you I acknowledge, and it will never be in shy power to repay them -yet you wrong Mr. Villars,-—you wrong me; I Solemnly vow to Heaven 1 am as Sree Srom the charge brought againft me as yourSelf.—What can I fay ?—I am one of the moft unfortunate of women—I have no home,—no afylum—no friends! Mr. Clairville addreffes me, but I am a wife, the Marquis of Melville’s wife, therefore am not at liberty. Was I the infamous creature you believe me, Madam, I might refide with him ; but I burn with indignation at the thought.-—I will quit your houfe this moment. Madam, if it will afford you eafe-—Indeed I will.”--“ O Lord ! no, by no means,—no, no, by no means; you may ftay a few days.
Are
H TT M A M T. T F F
Are you really innocent—Well! I do’nt know, it’s very comical; but indeed Lady Di, Mrs. Owen, and I canst tell how many, told me you was too great with Mr. Villars ;—-but, however, if you are innocent, you know I ca’nt live like a hermitefs, for . they think you guilty and will not fee you.”
“ Very true, Madam,” returned I; “ a few days will drive me from your fight for ever.”
“ I am amazed, Mrs. Villars, to fee you act in this manner” faid he; “ where is your ufual good nature f—where your accuftomed humanity?—You have furprifed me beyond meafure, by your barbarous behaviour to Mifs Howard, while”——
“ Let me beg, my kind benefactor,’^ interrupted I, “ that a Slop may be put to any difagreement on my account. Mrs. Villars’ opinion of me is that of the world in general,—-she is not to blame. I will depart, with per million, in a few days. May I, Madam, (to Mrs. Villars) Stay three or Sour days ?”
“ Ah ! child,” faid she laughing, “ as many weeks if you will. Lordl Mr. Villars, I don’t mind; but indeed people talk : ha, ha, ha, (looking at him) indeed
people talk, Mr. Villars.”—
I with*^
Ak THR MITT A BIT.TTY OF
I withdrew to my chamber, and left them together. At dinner she behaved as ufual, and foon after retired.
Mr. Villars then addressfed'me, “ Since the gentry around had taken fuch an unfavourable opinion of me, he would confent to my departure, as he thought it would conduce more to my peace of mind,” then generously oftered to fettle one hundred a year on me, that I might refide in fome place till my friends could be perfuaded oS my innocence, or till Some event proved more Savourable. You may be Sure, my dear Harriot, I reSuSed this noble offer; in fny critical Situation it could not conSiSlently be accepted. I gave my reaSons: be granted they were good^ but entreated, that iS at any time I was distreffed Sor money, I would command his purSe. He then laid the Sollow-ing plan, which is to be adopted.
At Bath reSides a gentlewoman, who was Sormerly houSekeeper to his Sather: being advanced in years, w ith the help of her Sriends she Settled herSelS in a houSe, and gets a comfortable livelihood by taking boarders. As she has a great reSpect Sor Mr. Villars, and is happy to oblige him, he adviSes me to go to her with his recommendation, and remain
.with
\	I
f
I
H TT lU A N I. IF R.
with her till I get a fuitable place ; as she has an extensive acquaintance, he doubts not but she will procure me one foon. He has written to her, my dear Harriot, and defired she would fend a chaife to meet me at-——by the turnpike, to which place he intends himfelf to conduct me, thereby to prevent his fervants having any opportunity of asking questions of the hired postilions, or any one know • ing where I arn going; a caution very neceffary that I may not be further ex-pofed. He likewife has advifed me to change my name again, as many from this country come to Bath, and perhaps might prevent my advancement in any family. This fcreening myfelf under fictitious names carries fiich an air of guilt, it wounds me fenfibly; but my unhappy, my melancholy fituation requires it, for if known, who would -receive me. Avelini, the name I bore with
Lady N -------is the one I have nov/ fix*>
ed on, and which Mrs. White is to receive me by. To-morrow I quit this place-'i Mrs. Villars feems rather in fpirits at my departure. I find every one but Mr. Villars and Mr. Clairville Still think me guilty. I have desired the former not to inform the latter where I am going; the reafon is obvious. He is a vxrthv man,
D	?. n d
0
o THE MUTABILITY OK
t
and I fmcerely wish him happy. The kind Mrs. Gordon will bellow a recommendation on me when 1 need it. I have wrote a full account to her ; Mr. Villars has done the fame. My fpirits are exceedingly depreffed.
Ah, my friend, when shall I be at peace! ,Cruel Melville! I am fometimes almost tempted to sty to London, and at his feet implore him, at leash, to shield me from the dependance on a cruel unfeeling world, and to allow ,me Some trifle to wear away my days in folitude; but that idea is quickly difpelled, after thinking on the barbarity he has practifed on me : he would only add to it, and fp.urn me from him. Oh! my dear Harriot! ho w do I perfecute you v:ith a tedious recital of my misfortunes,— why would you participate them ? Why should I wound fo fufceptible a heart.? Alas! I am every way unhappy. — I must, lay aSide my pen to relieve both you and your unfortunate —— &c.
Mj/s AvtuNi to Mifs Meynel.
✓
i
Bath.
I
J HAVE been here a week, my dear Harriot, and am quite charmed with Mrs.
White’s
HUMAN LIFE.
Whitest tender and affectionate behaviour. She fpeaks with great warmth In Mr. Villarsst praife, who was chiefly the means of Settling her here. ' Finding me much dejected on my arrival, she Strove with the moSt courteous ossicioufnefs to amufe me. Efforts fo laudable deferved reward : I endeavoured to appear compofed. Her houfe was quite empty, but laSt night there arrived a lady called Mrs. Colmore, with a man and maid fervants ; she has taken a houfe in this neighbourhood, to which she intends going foon : her health being very indifferent, she has fent previously to have it properly aired. She has been a widow, it feems, three years, and, though a middle-aged woman, has given herfelf up to retirement ever Since the death of her hushand. Mrs. White, who is very anxious to ferve me, fpoke to her in my behalf in hopes she might recommend me to fome of her friends. She faid she was not fond of admitting Strangers, but she would be glad of my company to tea, with Mrs. White phis afternoon, then she should be a judge whether I honoured her recorTirridr»-darion. VSe are.going to her, my dear friend, therefore will postpone concluding this epistle, till I can inform you the refult of the vifit.
-P s	I return.
I
fe THE MITTABTT TTY OF
I return, much pleafed with Mrs. Colmore, my Harriot. She is a woman of elegant appearance, about five and thirty^ but has the looks oS an invalid. She did me the honour to approve, and faid she would make it her buSinefs to enquire out an agreeable eftablishment forme; likewife intreated ! would give her my company constantly,while at Mrs. Whitest, for that, being affected with lownefs of fpirits, she did not chufe to be quite,alone if she could avoid it. She blamed herfelf much for rebelling So against Providence, in giving way to grieSfor a misfortune which was unavoidable, but she hoped time would restore her to reafon and religion. •— I am very forry to find, my dear Harriot, that Lord Lorton propofes Lady
Emma L---------- for your coufin, but you
need be under no apprehensions about a change in his heart ; the object he is attached to is too amiable ever to be eradicated from thence. Perhaps in the end it may be a means of your Unclest confent-ing to your union, efpecially when he finds how strongly I^ord Duncan is attached to
you.
04
«
HUMAN life;
you. That fuch may be the confequence will be the constant prayer of your
Louisa Avelini.
Mifs Avelini to Mifs Meynel.
Burton-HilL
V
i OU will be furprifed at the date, my dear Harriot; but I am now happily fettled with Mrs. Colmore. I was constantly with her at Mrs. Whitest. A day or two before we left Bath, she invited me to refide with her, declaring, she had thoughts of it from the first time she faw me, but was willing to be better acquainted before she made propofals ; — that a further acquaintance had improved her approbation into real friendship, and she should think herfelf happy if I would comply. I offered to give her a direction to Mrs. Gordon, but she fmiled, and faid a character was unneceffary ; that I niould have one of her, if -I chofe to write for it. You may be fure I declined it for fear of offending ; but yet I should be glad to be acquainted with her family, for she is quite a stranger to Mrs. White. . However, I am not in a fituation to be
D 3	nice,
«
I THF M HT A RTT.TT V HP
nice, and her manner befpeaks her a woman of birth and breeding.
Burton-Hill is fituated about five or six miles from Bath. Mrs, Colmore feldom ventures out but in a carriage, and then quite ihut up, for Slie fancies every breeze - brings death with it. Poor woman ! it is from her extreme fenfibility she is thus fufceptible oS a foftneSs even uiibccoming a vvcrnan. She frequently weeps, and recites anecdotes of her dear Mr. Colmore, till she is in hyflericks. It is a great nstsSortune thus to loSe the command of reaSon ; yet one cannot help beholding Such marks of her tenderneSs with admiration. When in tolerable Spirits file is extremely agreeable, and naturally of a lively disposition. I Sincerely wish she may Soon get the better oS her grieSs. Adieu, my dear Sriend ; I hope to hear more pleasing news Srom you Soon,
Yours,
Louisa Avelini.
I
Lord
H TT M A N T. T F K. rr
%
Ijord Villars to Lord Duncan.
Bath.
0	H ! I could execrate all womankind, Duncan. There is no cure for my difappointment and affliction. — I have been deceived by a phantom that took the form of virtue to allure me, and now my eyes are open to her perfidy. ——- Strange feelings! ftrange infatuation ! Oh, Charles! from henceforward life will be more intolerable, more infuppdrtable than ever.—
1	shall never meet with a woman who can put on the femblance of an angel as she did, or jri reality have the charms she parentlfpoKtKcd. —^^Why did I credit her I '— How coiildi imagine her friends would all defert her, if she vvas not iinworthv their countenance? Why were my fenfes fo easily captivated by her beauteous form, and thofe refined Sentiments which delicacy itSelS appeared to inSpire ? Lady Di Horton attacked my heart without diS-guiSe, but her known levity made it dif-claim her : I reSuSed to visit her in London, though she by repeated meSSages requested it. My Soul was abSorbed by the deceitSul, too lovely Silena, — Avelini, or whatever appellation she chuSes now to
D 4	take,
5 THE MUTABILITY OF
take; for she changes her name as often as her abode. To be the dupe of an infamous woman !-------Oh! Charles, I shall
go distracted.-^My Uncle too.was fo egre-giouSly deceived in her, he recommended her to the v/orthy Mrs. White at this ace, and under the feal of fecrecy informed me of it. Willing again to behold the idol of my heart, immediately on re-Cfipt of his letter I repaired hither, reSolv-ing to take care, when she heard of a proper place, to enquire minutely into the character of the family, &c. I came to Mrs. V/hite’s, who, poor good woman! with joy informed me, the amiable Mifs Avelini was happily fettled with a lady at Burton-Hill. That Mrs. Colmore
4
had lodged with her, by which means they became acquainted, and were as intimate as if known to each other a hundred years. She thought they muft have been a little acquainted before too, she faid, though neither would own it. Mifs had talked much of being careful to whom she went, but neither she or Mrs. Colmore enquired after each others character (well planned you fee, Charles): they foon went off to Burton Hill, and the dear young Lady, she faid, was very grateful to her, for her kindnefs, as she rerrned k.
I found
U TT h/f A XT T T rr F	rh
I found Mrs. Colmore was an entire ftranger in the neighbourhood, and determined to pay them a visit next day en paffant, with a melfage from Mrs, Gordon, that I might reconnoitre a little, and learn fomething of this ftrangerst family.
I returned to the inn, where I heard voices next room to me. Liftening, I could hear thefe expressions ; Lovely creature! after fo many months abfence I shall be hardly able to command my fenfes at the sight.” Then fomething followed I could not hear: after which, “ Be fure, faid he, thofe fellows have the .carriage ready at half paft ten ; she promifed faithfully not to difappoint me, and without fail would be at the garden-gate by eleven.—My dear Ver-neule, order fupper immediately.' How little did I expect fuch happinefs—I thought every moment an age in cruel abfence!” Verneule'departed, and all was silent.
I imagined it was fome happy loveir arrived at the period of his wishes. My different fate, condemned to drag on through life a hopeless passion, introduced gloomy reflexions; and I retired to bed not at all difpofed for fleep. When Dumont attended me in the
D' ^	morrsinnt.
? THE MITTABTTssTY OF
morning,^ I enquired if he knew who had been in poffeffion shf the next room to that in which I flipped the preceding evening.
He anfwered he was ignorant who it was.	-
Curiofity was rather predominant; I ordered him to bid the Landlord attend me, that 1 might gain information.
My commands were obeyed; my landlord entered. I began my interrogations, and was almoft petrified with the account he gave. It run thus. Count St. Lou was the perfon I overheard.-7-Mrs. Colmore is a woman of ill-fame, whom Nugent confented to maintain jas a woman of faSliion in retirement, to countenance Mifs Avelini, who would not otherwife risk the lofs of her reputation, but was willing privately to be his Miftrefs; therefore he was to pafs for Colmore’s nephew : but Count St. Lou coming to Ba til, fome letters paffed, and she confented to go off with him. They actually did go last night, and left her companion and lover enraged at being thus deferted.* So ended his detail of this infamous affair. The fame news was communicated to Mrs. White ; and Nugent, out of revenge, has published that Mifs Avelini ^as no other than the feigned Marchionefs
rr TT TV/r A KT T 1 n F	ro
ncfs of Melville, and has eScaped Srom him
to her old love.
InSamous beyond belieS as I find her to be, I cannot eradicate her Srom my heart. How powerSul is genuine love ! PhiloSophy cannot Subdue, ReaSon cannot repel it.
I abhor her vices, but adore her in the Similitude she appeared firSl to my Soon-wondering eyes. Let me hear Srom-you, my Sriend. Happy Duncan ! the woman of your choice is deServing of it. You need never blush Sor conSessing your paS-fion. She has beauty, SenSe,, and virtue. Never fear, Charles; your father muSt own the Solidity oS your judgment in a partner Sor liSe—no trivial afskir, my' friend, in' this dissipated age, which is haftily advancing to the luxurious ftate that proved the downSall oS Rome. But the preSent agitated Situation of my mind disqualifies me Sor moralizing. I can only-add, I am
Your unSortunate
. /
Villars.
4
From
4
I
io THE MUTABILITY OF
Prom the Same to the Same.
Bath,
I’ri	f
WAS extremely difpleafed, my dear Charles, at your levity in the beginning of your laft concerning the charming Avelini, thinking you was ferioufly advising me to gain her for a miftrefs—the more fo, as you are well acquainted with my fentiments : but a ray oS hope dawned when you informed me of your Harriot’s diftrefs upon the news in town of her Adelaide’s elopement, and further, the note she honoured me with in favour of her friend.-'-But then I refledted that she might have impofed on your lovely cousin, and was ftill miferable. To be thoroughly convinced, I refolved to take your advice, and, if possible, bribe the truth from Colmore. Nugent is gone to London ; Mrs. Colmore is to follow in a few days ; I therefore waited on her, told her my name ; Said, Sor particular reafons, 1 should be glad to know how long she had known Mifs Avelini, &c. then, putting on a gay air, offered to reward her for her intelligence.
“ Why, my Lord, as to that part of the ftory,” faid she, “ it’s of little purpofe > but, if you wish to fee her, I can
inform
HUMAN LIFE. fit
Inform you where she now is,”
“ Where ?”
“ Oh ! the premium—the premium, my Lord.”
“ What is your demand ?”
“ Why, Nugent has ufed my rather feurvily, therefore I’ve done with him— Let me fee—Excufe me now, my Lord,
I muSl confider a little.--To-morrow
morning I shall be at Bath, and without fail will call and fettle this affair with your Lordship—You may be affured I will not difappoint you, for my own fake.”
I depended on her word, and am now, Duncan, in immediate expectation of her arrival.
\
Colmore difappointed me, and fent me word particular bufmefs prevented her—that she could not find time to fpeak to me for three days. I fuppofed she had fent to confult her agent, therefore went to Burton Hill, but she positively would not fee me. She has now fent word that she will come in half an hour. She is better than her word—She is arrived.
I am
THE MUTA-RTT.ITY of
i
I am happy and miferable by turns— I muft immediately fly to cth^f^IieS of my angelic Adelaide-~What a devil is
Lady Di ?------But I Ishi So incoherent,
Charles, thou w^ilt think me mad. Let me write methodically, if I can.
Colmore entered, with a letter in her hand, and anger in her contenance. “ Nugent has flung me finely, indeed,” Said she; “ but I will be revenged on hirn. For fifty pieces, my Lord, I will inform you of every thing concerning Mifs Avelini.”
“ Why, if is uncertain whether I shall gain by your information ; twenty is all I will give,” faid I, carelessly.
She agreed to it, and proceeded.
“ T- think I may depend on your honour, my Lord, for payment; thereSore I will begin—The hiftory oS my liSe, or connections, beSore this affair with Mr. Nugent, will not anSwer the preSent purpoSe to recite. He came to me about the time MiSs Avelini firft went to Bath, and, laying out the plan which has beeri put into practice, deSiied I would execute it, to get her into his power, whom otherwise he could not make comply
w'ith
H TT M A NT T. T F R.
i
!
with his wishes. As I had been an ac-
s
trefs, I could perfonate any character, therefore he fixed on me for an assiftant, and if I/ishcceeded would give me two hundred pounds. I agreed to it; Burton-Hill was taken, and I prepared to fet out, when I received a note from a lady of fashion, a frierid pf Nugent, defiring to fpeak to me before I went. Much furprized at the invitation, I immediately complied with it. She received me with a friendly shake by the hand.
‘ I am acquainted with the bufinefs you
are going upon, my dear Mrs.—------------,*
faid she ; ‘ but may I place confidence in you, for I have a favour to lequeSl .V “ You may certainly command any thing, Madam,” faid I, “ not inconsistent with my friend Nugent’s arrangement.”
‘ Mankind deceive us, my dear Mrs.
-----faid she, with a fmile, ‘ and vve
should, in turn, deceive them. Will you—will you,’ repeated she, looking at me fbedfaSlly, ‘ enter into my plan — May ! place confidence in you.?—You shall not go unrewarded, and the nobleman in whofe cauSe I would engage your fervices, I’m fure, is very generous.”
“ Oh! Madam, you may depend on my fecrefy and obedience,” returned I.
“ In
4 THE MUTABILITY OF
“ In short, my Lord, after a few more promifes of compliance, she unbofomed herSelf. Her fcheme was to the following effect:
“ Being unaquainted herfelf with Coriiit St. Lou, and wanting, for particular reafons, to put Mifs Avelini into his power again, who had once been has miftrefs, she begged I would wait on him with an information of the fcheme Nugent had in train, and tell him, if he ftill wished for the poffession of Mifs Belmont, to be at or near Bath in readiness, where, for a handfome gratuity, I would furrender her up to him.
“ I waited on the Count, who was in raptures when I informed him of my kind intention, and promiSed to reward me. Returning, with dn account of my fuccefs to the lady, she prefented me a hundred pound note, and intreated I would conceal her knowledg of this affair from every one. You know the manner I got her into my power. Count St Lou was at a loss for a houfe in fome
N
retired place to convey her to: on en-' quiry, I found that——Park was not at too great a diftance, and had been uninhabited many years on account of an idle report of its being visited by apparitions. I perfuaded him to desire the
loan
HUMAN LIFE. SF
loan of it from the owner, viho would with great pleafure furrender it for a time, in hopes of its regaining credit. He happily fucceeded, my Lord, and
fent fervants there to wait his arrival.
• %
In the mean time, he remained at Bath incog, two or three days before Nugent’s arrival at Burton Hill. I talked to Mifs Belmont of a nephew I expected, of whom my pretended Mr. Colmore was very fond. She happened to be in my .dressing-room when he came, and I fent for her down. The agony she experienced at fight of him was visible, but I overlooked it; and he, feemingly to carry on the deceit, addreffed her as an in-, tire ftranger. She foon found means to withdraw. I followed her to her chamber, and found her in tears. Counterfeiting furprize, I demanded the reafon; she would not anfwer; when, affecting to be moved with her diSlrefs, I on my knees intreated her pardon ; owned that I had long had an illicit amour with Mr. Nugent, and was fubfervient to his plea-fures; that to oblige him I had got her into my power, but that her amiable manner and innocence had made me repent of it; therefore, if she would ab-folve me in the eyes of Mr. Nugent from being privy to her efcape, 1 would
that
f^f, THF. MTTTABTr.TTY OF
that night fet her free. She returned me thanks with tears of joy and a thouSand blessings. I then told her I would writ* to Bath, and order a poft-chaiSe to be at the garden-gate at eleven at night to convey her to Mrs. Whitest. It is impossible to expreSs what gratitude she displayed. I then wrote to Count St. Lou, who came at the appointed period, but rode at a diftance on horSeback till he Sliould find a convenient opportunity to enter the chaiSe aSter she was in it I made her write a note, as iS to me, and leave it on her table, inSorming me she had decyphered my character, and happily Sound means to eScape Srom mint and Mr. Nugen,tst power. Accordingly the next morning, when Mr. Nugent anc I had got to the parlour Sor brcakSast a Servant was Sent to MiSs Avelinist room wfio returned, afferting she was not there I then made my colleague go up wit! me, and we found the note on the table which he read, to his very great mortifi cation. He Stamped, raved, and blamec me for not taking greater care. New came Srom Some country-fellows the] faw Mifs Avelini go off with Count St Lou from Burton'Hill. Some of th Count’s fervants, in parting from the inn had divulged it, and thus it became pub
lie
HUMAN LIFE. 67
lie. Out of revenge for his difappointment, Nugent expofed her as much as poffible. Giving me a hundred-ponnd note, he left me, fwearing, that, as has fcheme had mifearried, he would pay me no more. You came; I then wrote to know if he would pay the other hundred. He politively refufed ; therefore, for his mean behaviour, I was determined to gratify your Lordship.” Thus ended this infamous woman’s narration.
“ Pray, Mrs: Colmore, was not this lady of fashion Lady Di Horton ?” Said I.
“ Oh ! my Lord,” Said she, “ I mull not expoSe a lady of quality—she bound me to SecreSy—But my hopes Srom her are at an end—It was her Ladyship, indeed.” “ Diabolical woman !” exclaimed I.
“ Ha ! ha ! ha” Said she ; “ a little innocent Sriendship for St. Lou, and perhaps too great a tendrejje for Nugent.“
“ Very true,” returned I, Seeming to credit her. “ I am obliged to you, Mrs. Colmore, for information.—You think, then, I may certainly find MiSs Belmont
at-----Park.”
“ MoSl certainly,” Said she.
ASter paying her the deftined Sum, she departed, to purSue her infamous practices, and I fat down to write to thee, Charies. I have ordered my carriage
and
68 THE MUTABILITY OF
4
and fervants to be ready. If possible, I will in difguife fee the lovely Adelaide, and know Srom her own lips if she will trull herfelf under my protection back to Mrs. Whitest.—'I have ten thoufand unfpeakable anxieties concerning her— Wlio knows^------But, adieu 1
Yours,
Villars.
jt/yr Avelini to Mifs Meynel.
Bath,
r
sh T is irnppffible to exprefs my fenfibility ' of your kindneSs to me, my dear Harriot. Your interpositions in/^my favout to the Vv'orthy Lord Villars have had the deSired effect, and I am reSlored in my innocence to Mrs. White again. I have Suffered much for putting mySelS under the protection oS a Stranger ; it will make me more cautious for the Suture., The inSamous Colmore acted her part with Such adroitneSs, that I had no SuSpicion of her not being the perSon she pretended. Befides, I had no idea that any man would give himSelf So much trouble and expence to ruin the innocence oS an
unfortunate
4
M a M A N LI FE. 6o
V
.infortunate young woman. Before Mr. Nugent arrived, she talked of a nephew,
)f whom she was in daily expectation. Good God! my Harriot,how greatly was [ shocked when it proved to be Nugent! ft^rtfully pretending to conceal his knowledge of me from Colmore, he addreffed me as a ftranger. I trembled exceedingly, and withdrew to my chamber; ,there I burft into a flood of tears, and concluded that ,my protection from Mrs. Colmore was at an end. In the midft of my anxiety she entered—feemed furprized at ^ finding me weeping—then changed her tone, and at my feet demanded pardon for having inveigled me. With well-feigned tears she lamented having become a victim to her unhappy passion for Mr. Nugent,; owned that, rather than bear the unfpeakable mifery of losing sight of him for ever, she had fo far debafed herfelf as to be the pander of his intrigues wish others ; but that my artless and innocent manner ftruck her fo much, she would run the hazard of difpleafing her dear Nugent for ever, should it come to his
knowledge, rather than injure me.-------1
with eagerness feized hold of the firft hint of efcaping, and asked her if I could not .go that night. She faid, yes.; that she would write letters to Bath, and order a
chaife
^o THE MUTABILITY OF
chaife for me at eleven at night; but (he
had one favour to beg, which was, that I
would write a note, and leave it behind me.
importing I had found means to efcape,
and happily should be out of her power
before that reached her hands. Such a «
note would, she faid, exculpate her in the eyes of her darling Nugent. I complied, and wrote the billet. Night advanced: I was in great anxiety, left Nugent should detect us; but, with her^conSent, complaining oS a head-ach, I kept my room. Luckily I brought but a Sew cloths Srom Bath. She told me I might pack them in my portmanteau, and take them with me. At eleven o’clock we carried it. with us into the garden, and, going to the back-gate, Sound a chaiSe in waiting. She Sent one of the men to fetch my luggage Srom the garden : and a man wrapped up in a great coat, on horSe-baclc, came to her. It was So very dark, I could not distinguish his Features. He whiSpered her, and feemed to put fomething into her hand. She then turned to me, “ This is the tnan of the inn, who is owner of the chaife,” faid she; “ I could depend on him, therefore begged he would come to fee yoa fafe, in cafe you should be purfued.” “I am much obliged to both you and him,” returned 1; “ may you end your days in
virtue
HUMAN LIFE. 71
virtue and happinefs : you will find, Madam, there is no happinefs independent of virtue.” She thanked me, and, prelSing my hand, faid she would hasten back to Mr. Nugent, and keep him in converfation.—-Away she stew.
I got into the chaife. It was very difagreeable to travel alone on fo dark a night, but the Snortnefs of the way made' me difpel fear. The horfes feemed to fly: the time 1 thought must be elapfed that we might have got to Bath—I grew un-eafy—The chaife stopped in a bye-road, and a gentleman, defcending from a horfe, entered it—I cried out in terror—The postilions heeded not, but went on as hard as possible—I imagined it was Nugent, therefore began to upbraid him, and intreat that he would fet me free, when I immediately knew him to be Count St, Lou it almost overpowered my Senfes,
“ My ever-adorable AdelaideTelmont, recover your fear and furprife,” faid he;
it is not Nugent, it is your faithful St.’ Lou, who still adores you, and has by Colmore’s means refcued you from that
nian’s power.”
“ And whither are you conducting me, ray Lord ?” faid I.
“ To a faf^pl ace, my charmer, where I hope you will listen to roy vows—-
vows,
h2 THE MUTABILITY OF
vows, Adelaide, which are founded on eSleem and honour. You furely cannot condemn me, lovely Mifs Belmont; your friends approve my fuit; and, notwith-ftanding your affair with Melville, I am ftill willing to give you my name and
fortune.”
Being fo unhappily fituated, my dear Harriot, for once, contrary to my confcience, I endeavoured to make ufe of dissimulation. “ Why, my Lord,” returned I, “ did you not at Mrs. Whitest make me acquainted with the continuance of your favourable fentiments.? Did you imagine I could only be gained by force f Alas! you do not yet know me; I can never be compelled to give my hand: add not another wound to my fame; you only heighten my refentment. Time, and your endeavours when I was ray own miftrefs, might have performed wonders.”
“Ah! Madam, forgive me,” returned he; “I dare not truft you ; a few hours will convey us to our deftined abode, and there I hope to retrieve all; you will accept my hand and become Countefs St. Lou.—I dare not trust you from my fight; indeed, my angel, I dare not.”
“ Neither will I proceed further,” returned I, ftriving to open the chaife door.
He
HUMAN LIFE. 72
He prevented it, and held me fast:: I ftruggled, when fear, anxiety, and horror encreafing, I fainted.
As foon as I recovered my fenfes, it was day-light, and I found we were in a fmall park ; the chaife almost stew, and we arrived at a fmall castle, whoSe very looks denounced the miferiesof defpair : -—they assisted me out of the chaife, and we entered a hall of immenfe height and proportionate gloom, which conveyed an additional horror to the fouL We were received in a parlour not more calculated to chear the fpirits, by a woman who feemed to officiate as a houfe-keeper; she brought tea and coffee immediately, and faid she had prepared w'ell-aired beds. I infisted that I would not retire to any chamber — on my knees intreated the Count to let me depart, and faid I w'oiild then receive his vifits at Mrs. Whitest; I faid any thing, in short, that I might deliver myfelf from his power; but in vain. Being quite exhausted, he and the woman urged me to take Some refreshment. At last I complied, in hopes of keeping the family up, to eScape from hig preSence. I at length agreed to retire to a chamber, where, after locking myfelf in, I in my cloaths threw' mySelS on the bed to rest my wearied limbs. At' three
E	in
riA THE MUTABILITY'OF
in the afternoon the woman came to beg I would rife to dinner. I told her Istidnot chufe any, — she anfwered, that the Count infifted on my coming down, or he would come to my chamber, to avoid which, I was obliged to acquiefce. My foul was in agonies—-Could it be other-wife ? I was in the power of an infamous man, and had no means to extricate myfelf, nor any Sriend that I knew who was able to relieve me. i shed tears all the time he was dining, and though he tried all in his power to make me tafte Some of the delicacies he had provided, I took only a bit of bread and half a glaSs of wine, after which I begged leave to retire, but was not permitted. He then made uSe of the moft forcible arguments to perfuade me to accept his hand. I affured him, in the moft folemn manner, I could not beftovv myfelf on him, as I was wife to Melville. He faid, granting that to be the cafe, the Marquis had deferted me; —I could not prove my marriage, therefore it would be the wiSest method to accept his offer, as fuch a meafure bid fair for re-eftablishing ray character, and putting a period to ray misfortunes. Ah ! my dear friend, haw . poignantly did I fuffer while this conversation continued.-—At laft he grew impatient,
HUMAN LIFE.
patient, and faid he would make himfelf master of my perfon, if I would not conSent to be his wife ; adding, he could not live without me. My terror increafed,—I locked myfelf in my room at night, and, not daring to undrefs, I threw myfelf on the bed,, and paffed the night in prayers, tears, and mifery unspeakable. The days he forced me to ftay with him, and all means of eScaping were impossible. Often I iiSed to fit an hour at a time without anSwering him. Pen and ink one day being on the table, I marked down the following reflection, which then obtruded itSelf:
‘‘ Harkl the shrill trumpet Sounds! Our God appears triumphant, and his effulgence makes Nature shrink. Myriads of angelsdiover round his throne,— the elements in flames confefs his power ; •— the terreftrial globe diffolves, and Sinners Sain would flee Srom his dirpleafure. Warned by that faithful monitor, imperial conscience, they anticipate their doom, and trace with shame the retrofpect of their past; condudl^ The virtuous with extacy behold his glory, w'hiie he receives them to eternal blifs and never-fadingjoys. Why then should deceitful wicked plea-fures allure our hearts, and tempt them from the way that leads to happinefs and
E 2	Heaven ?
-76 THE MUTAETI.ITV OF
Heaven ? Oh ! why forego all heavenly hopes and wander thus aftray Though narrow is the path the virtuous tread, yet eafy the afcent to willing minds who will by grace and faith be led. To them who flrive for maStery, a calm tranquility fuc-ceeds, fpite of misfonunest dire train of woe. Happy earnest: of fublime eternal joys! Who then wmuld fink in earthly fading pleafure i Who grafp a momemst blifs Sor miSery eternal
I had wrojte thus Sar when the Count Snatched the paper from me. “ Pardon me, MiSs Belmont,” Said he, “ I must perufe the effects of your pen.”
“ The Subject is too Serious to claim YOU attention, my Lord,” returned
I
ASter having read it. “ Cm a woman of your fenfe, my lovely Mifs Belmont,” Said he gravely, ‘‘ be really fo fafcinated by priestcraft, and place faith on revealed religion ‘‘ Does your Lordship acknowledge the existence of a God?” returned I varmly.
“ Most certainly, Mifs Belmont; but a Superior Being who bestowed passions on us, would never punish us for making ufe cf thoSe pkaSures Nature points out.”
You
HITMAN T. T F F. n*7
m T
You had better made ufe of the word inftinfl, shy Lord; for vice levels mankind with brutes. Do you approve rapine and murder as pleafiires, which Nature (as you term it) points out to mankind
“ Oh! horrible, Madam! No, certainly, Nature never points that out; it is madnefs caufes the execution of it.”
‘‘ So the vices your Lordship has no tafte for, you term madnefs. Ah! my Lord, how you deceive yourfelf! The premeditated murderer proceeds as calmly on with his defign, as does your Lordship endeavour to effect my ruin.”
His opinion on revealed religion is too shocking to repeat, my dear Harriot, — I entreated him to drop the fubject ; it was with difficulty I could prevail: the infpired writings he rejected intirely, and called them tales to amufe children and weak minds. ^
Tasked him if he thought it inconfiftent with Omnipotence to perform the miracles contained in Scripture.
He agreed it was not, but that a Superior Being would not degrade himSelS So much, as to be Samiliar with man in his preSent ftate, and di Sallowed the divinity
E 3	of
t
%
^8 THE MITT A BILITY OF
<
of our Saviour; and likewife the whole Scripture.
I asked him, “ Why, as he believed in a God, he should think it inconfistent that power should reveal himfelf to man, and point out the means of adoring and pleafing him, with proper laws to bind Society ?”
“ Such a revelatioff’ he again faid, “ was unneceffary; that nature and in-flinct were undoubtedly designed our guides, and felf-prefervatton would make us convinced laws were rieceffary to general order.”
' “ Ah ! my Lord, but though felf-prefervation after the fall, might convince man laws were neceffary; yet, without fo divine a Law-giver, Such wife ones could not have been instituted.”
“ Well, well,” faid he, “ my lovely Mifs Belmont, you are rather hard on me; perhaps if you would receive my hand, you might gain a convert.” He purfued the hateful fubject of his passion. Thus in wretchednefs did I fpend my days at, ......park.
I had one evening retired to my chamber at ten o’clock, under a pretence of illnefs, and fat enjoying gloomy reflections, when Molly the chamber-maid entered
HUMAN LIFE. 70
(	i
tered v/ith joy in her countenance. Looking behind her, to be certain nobody was near, she exclaimed, “ Upon my word. Madam, there is a woman below can tell fortunes purely, — you canst think what things she has told me: I am to be very rich, and married in half a year ; and she begged me to tell you, that for a bit of filver she will tell you every thing that ever did or can happen to you. Do, Madam, try her; indeed she does it cleverly.
I could fcarce stetain my countenance at the girl’s earneSlneSs, and with a Smile told her, that I expected no promiSing futurity in this world; therefore would diSpenSe with the good woman’s attendance. Molly was disconcerted and retired, but Soon returned, and begged she might introduce the woman, who was very urgent to See me: As moSl of the Sirolling tribe are very artSul, and addicted to what they are pleaSed to call gallantry, and ftill more to that idol, gold, a ray oS hope entered my benighted heart, on , the Suggestion, that bribery might effect my eScape. ‘‘ Let her approach, Molly,” returned I with a Smile. “Yes, Madam” Said she, “ but you mull not be afeavd oS being alone with her, for she does not diScloSe her skill beSore any
E 4	witnesses.
f
£o THE mutability OF
witnesses. She muss: have you all to herfelf.” -
“ Oh ! very well,” returned I, “ but be fure to remain in the next room.”
The Sybil foon after appeared, Molly retiied, and an awkward courtefy fucceeded from the Oracle. I was furprifed to find she remained Silent, as thoSe people are very voluble, and thereSore began to queftion her how long she had purSued her preSent vocation. A voice, not altogether unknown to me, anSwered, “ Some time, Madam; but do you wish your preSent Situation to undergo an alteration ? Perhaps I may prognofticate Some diSagreeable events which lie concealed in the womb of time.—You wish not to be feparated from Count St. Lou — his views are honourablehe will marry you ?” “I cannot marry him, good woman” returned I, “as I am already married ; were I not, his principles and fentiments are not calculated to raife any efteem in my breaft.”
“ Ah! Madam,” faid she, “ will you permit me to difplay your future fate?”
' “ It is out of your power,” good woman,” returned I; “ the myfteries of futurity are hid from all human foresight! Shall feeble mortals then pretend to fa-
thorr
HUMAN LIFE. 8r
thorn them ? It was not for fuch a purpofe I permitted you to enter my apartment. I was well convinced your affo-ciates have art fufficient to delude weak minds.—I am an unwilling priSoner here,” faid I, weeping; “a longer ftay may be of fatal confecjuence, as I am in the hands of a man who diSregards all laws,, divine and human. ASlist me, dear good woman, in efcaping, and I will recom-pence you with ten guineas. What fay you V
“ Ah ! Madam,” returned ftie, “ my life shall Sbe fpent in your fervice — Forgive me;,— I am not what I feem.” “You are not,” faid I; —“ Who are you then ?” I ftared hard at her, and bringing the candle nearer, found, to my great furprize, it was Lord Villars.
“ Is it poffible!” exclaimed I in the greateft palpitation imaginable — “ Is it really Lord Villars I fee V
“ It is, Madam ; pardon my difguife; it was neceffary for me to intrude into your pre fence to be certain whether a releafe would be agreeable to you, and to concert means for your efcape. Mrs. White came to * ^	« with me, and is
there waiting at the Inn, to know the refult of my visit, and return back with
E 5	you
st
0.. T‘XJTrA/fTT*T'AT?TTTT‘'VrkC>
you to Bath if our Ilratagem fucceeds, as I thought a woman of reputation being with you Would he eligible. I have not time to difcloSe more at prefent,” added he. “ How shall we proceed, Madam I ”
“ My Lord” faid I, “ it is many miles from * * * * ; by what means did you reach me V
“ On hoisseback, Madam; Dumont waits with the horfes at the outfide of the gate now.”
‘‘ Is it impossible, my Lord, for me to go with you to-night” returned I} “ Molly’s credulity may be easily caught, and there is no one elfe to fear.”
We then concerted that Molly should be called, and desired fccretly to attend us to the end of the park, v/here we were to dig for a pot of money and jewels, which was to be divided among us.
The girl, wssio was quite as weak as we could wish, readily confented. At twelve o’clock, after locking my chamber, we defcended through a fubterraneoiis paffage attend ed by the girl to the park; — to carry on the farce, we took a fpade with us; it was extremely cold, but we walked fall, till at laft we faw’ Dumont
with
tTTTTV/TAXT T TTTT?
with the horfes. How our hearts bounded !
“ Now, Molly,” faid Lord Villars,
“ take your choice; you must either be left tied to this gate, or go behind this
man to-------, where you shall receive five
guineas for your trouble.’.’
“ Oh! Lord,” faid she, trembling,
“ for God’s fake let me go wdth you, for I shall be killed if I remain here.” Accordingly she was feated behind Dumont, and I behind Lord Villars ; we galloped as fast as possible to-------: Molly
begged to remain with me, and entered the houfe with Dumont, while my Lord threw afide his difguife.
Mrs. White received me with the greatest joy, and heartily congratulated me on ray efcape. Lord Villars then entered. We took fome refreshment, and retired to rest.
The next day we arrived at Bath. Words were inSussicient to exprefs my gratitude to Mrs. White and to Lord Villars, efpecially the latter, who behaved ' in a very delicate manner. Ah ! Harriot, it is neceffary for my peace of mind to be ever banished from his prefence. I in-treated, as a favour, he would vifit Mrs. ' White feldom as poffible while I remained there; as the w'orld had already too
rnnrfi
4 THE MUTABILITY OF
much apparent reafon to misjudge my conduct from my misfortunes. He affured me, however unhappy fuch an abfence muft make him, he would comply with it; and he keeps his word. How few of his fex are equal to fuch fevere trials of principle under similar circum-ftances !■—Surely it cannot be criminal in me to fay this!—I should be ungrateful not to acknowledge his merit; Mrs. White does all in her power to exculp>ate me from the feeming guilt of my flight with the Count. The people here divide in parties on my account; fome imagine me innocent, Some otherwife : but, as [ think it will be prejudicial to this worthy woman for me to remain with her, I am determined foon to quit Bath. My intention is to board for three or four months at fome farm, that I may if possible regain my tranquility. By that time, perhaps, Violetta and Melville may be parted : if So, I will throw myfelf at his feet, and intreat him to fave me for the future from dependence. If he will not listen to me, I must again feek for a fuitable retreat.
I intend, in this rural concealment, to take the name of Mont; it is part of my maiden name, therefore I have a right to it: and, as I have been unfortunate in
passing
H UM AN LIFE. 8c
for a fingle woman, J will acknowledge having a hushand abroad, who has left me rather diftreffed—a ftory similar to my real fate. Adieu! my beloved friend ; 1 will write foon again : at prefent I muft lay down the pen ; and I fuppofe you are weary of reading my long epiftlc, therefore again farewel.
Mifs Avelini to Mifs Meynel.
Bath.
Jl Omorrow, my ever-dear Harriot, I quit the kind, the tender Mrs. White; and half an hour since I took a final leave of the too amiable Lord Villars. My tears ftill flow'—pardon my guilty confession— they are the tears of friendship—the tears
of-----. Oh ! Harriot, it is neceffary,
highly neceffary, we Sliould part for ever— Abfence will alleviate our mutual diftrefs, and put a period to an efteem which interviews would heighten. I will write no more on the fubject—banish him my memory—never name him—and, left I should being grateful, become guilty of ingratitude. The folitary journey of life, which, if calculated by years, to me, who am but young, muft be of long duration, feems dreadful. Alas! Harriot, I muft
lay
86 THE MUTABILITY OF
lay aside my pen—Why will you claim a wretch’s correfpondence, who can only throw a gloom upon your happier deSliny!
I am going, my dear Harriot, to a friend of Mrs. White’s, who refides at
Howel-Wood, in--------shire. Her name
is Hall. Her hushand farms a fmall eS-tate of his own. She is a very amiable v/oman, lam told, and has often wished for an agreeable boarder, as company, the place being very folitary (the more fuitable to my wishes). Mrs. White wrote, to ask her if she continued in the fame mind, and fpoke in favour of me. She foon returned^an anfwer, that she should be very happy to receive me: Thither I am going» my dear friend, under the appellation of Mrs. Mont.
Perhaps it may be an improper fcheme to exhauft part of my very fmall remains; but next fummer I muft endeavour either to address the Marquis’s compassion, or through the inquiries of this family introduce myfelf fomewhere. What will become of me 1 My fpirits are oppressed beyoiad expression. When will my misfortunes arrive at a period ! Lord Villars’ complaints, too, have affected me much Though he derived no hopes from my friendship, he faid, he would cherish me
in his remembrance. Oh! ' let him be
happy
HUMANLIFE.	87
happy, righteous Heaven !—let him obliterate from his memory the unhappy wretch that at prefent is doomed to diS-turb his peace—let him believe me unworthy eSleem—any thing, fooner than be thus wretched ! Intreat Lord Duncan to ufe all the power he is maSter of to make his friend forget me. It is criminal for us not to ftrive againSl a passion that muSl offend Heaven. Oh ! I will tear him from my heart, or die in the attempt. Adieu!
Lori/Villars to Lori Duncan.
Bath.
JL H E lovely Adelaide has left me,
Duncan, almoSt in a Slate of diffraction. The more reaSon I find to admire her, the more miserable I am. She has ieSt me to drag on a miserable existence in endleSs banishment. BeSore her departure, I went to wish her happineSs. I could not command my paffion—I could not help ' uttering complaints at my unhappy Sate —I could not help Saying I adored her, hopeleSs as I knew it to be, and expected only in return a Sriendship, which the moft rigid virtue could not condemn—that my Sentiments Sor her were Sounded on the
purity
88 THE MUTABILITY OF
purity of her manners, and caufed an eS-teem never to be erafed.
“ Alas! my Lord,” anfwered she, blushing, and the tears Standing in her lovely eyes, “ why will you permit your reafon to be fo overpowered by a fentiment, which if encouraged, rauSt render you culpable I—Forget me, my Lord— my misfortunes have been fufficiently numerous already without undergoing Slill more—the reflection of a perfonst being unhappy on my account, to whom I am under fuch obligations, muft imbitter the little share of tranquility I might
otherwife enjoy-----Promife me that you
will obliterate from your memory her whofe prayers shall always be for your happinefs, it will afford me the greatest pleafure that 1 can in my prefent circumftances feel.”
My anfwer was, Charles, “ that I was forry she requested the only thing I found impossible to grant—-that I could not allow it a deviation from the path of rectitude to efteem one fo amiable—my friendship for her muft continue to the period of my cxiftence.”
She was extremely affected ; intreated me to leave her; and, if possible, comply with her requeft—her laft requeft. She hoped we should never meet more i
and
HUMANLIFE. 8o
and that abfence, and a more agreeable object, would fix ray happinefs. So faying, she haftily retired—she forfook me for ever.
The diftraction, the pangs, the horror; I experienced, imagine if you can, Charles Dreadful—Dreadful ! indeed !
lam going to London—Yet what shall I do there, Duncan ?—The hurry and difiipation going forwards there is hateful to me—I cannot plunge into ^folly. I come, Charles, to pour out my affliction in thy friendly bofom—to fometimes hear from your beloved Harriot the fituation and health of her too amiable and unfortunate friend. Adieu! In three days I shall fee you.
'	Villars.
Mrs. Mont to Mifs Meynel.
Howel-JVood.
X HIS houfe, my dear Harriot, is fo fituated, that it increafes the gloom which I was fondly perfuaded it would in fome meafure remove; yet peaceful minds might approve it. It ftands at the entrance of a wood feveral miles long; pleafant meadows, with a pretty rivulet, mix in the profpect; but Howel-Wood is
my
?o THE MUTABILITY OF
s,
my favourite walk—there I enjoy a lux* uiy of forrow—there I mieditate on the folly and guilt of not refigning mySelf
with Submission and chearSulneSs to the dispensation oS Providence. I hope the combat will end, as I wish, in a humble resignation to that Being who ordains all things Sor the wiSest purpoSes. How Stubborn is Srail nature ! how hard to be conquered by reaSon ! and how are our two wills conflantly at war with each other!
Mrs. Hall is a very agreeable SenSible woman ; and I think the time I shall Spend here will be passed as well as is conSiSlent with the painSul feelings I have upon me. The parSonage-houSe is about a mile off, which is their nearest; and chieS place of vistting. The clergyman, whoSe name is Wollar, is a very worthy man, and has a decent, good-natured, notable woman Sor his wife. At the SartheSl extent oS this wood refides, in the Summer, a Mrs. Mor-daunt: Report Says she is an old lady of excellent qualities. Mrs. Hall is much with her when Mrs. Mordaunt is there, and Says my additional company will, she is perSuaded, be very acceptable. If she proves as truly Sormed Sor Sriendship as my landlady Says she is, I should be very happy if we would receive me for a companion
\
\
HUMAN LIFE. pi
panion—But I mull shot foon entertain vain hopes—Time may, however, prove more favourable than I expect—my tranquility may be reSlored—though I muSt never flatter myfelf that I shall regain the full friendship and protection of my relations---a thing impoflible !——Hard
thought!—Adieu! Harriot.—When shall I ceafe tiring you with my complaints I
w
Mifs Meynel to Mrs. Mont.
London.
Shall I tell you news, my dear Ade-
laide.'* Lord Villars is arrived in town. The coquets all envy you, and would with pleafure, I believe) undergo your misfortunes to be poffeSTed of your beauty, I will add a little more: Count Dif-mallo, who was, it feems, almoft deprived of his adventuring fpirit by the grief he experienced at your efcape, at laft roufed himfelf, returned to Bath, and waited on good Mrs. White before your Quixotic Villars had taken his final leave of her. It is needlefs to tell you, my dear girl, what bribery, &c. &c. the Count endeavoured to make ufe of to overcome that worthy creaturest integrity, and learn whither you was gone. You may be as
certain
<?a THE MUTAMLITY OF
certain she was proof againSt all his offers. He called you all the charming creatures and endearing names he could collect together in the English language; faid he would do all in his power to reftore yotir reputation, for he refpected you more than ever, and really believed you the Marquis’s wife. Finding his inquiries vain, he came flying poft to London, where, as report ushers forth, he waited on your old friend Colmore—(don’t be angry—made her a handfome prefent, and from her got permission to make ufe of Lady Di Horton’s na'me as it deferved : after which he made it his bufinefs to attend feveral routs, where he made public how he became acquainted with you at Paris—the rebukes you gave him—the Marquis’s hnd assistance (as he then thought it) and friend-^ ship in ftriving to make you return his passion—the fcherne of bringing him into your bed-chamber at Lord Walters’s houfe—and the guilt of his entering into it from the flattering hope of becooiing in poffession of you afterwards—his being but just put into the room when Lord Walters and the Marquis arrived at it, the latter being determined you should not undergo real violation. In short, he has stated facts as they really w^ere, difplayed Nugent and Lady Di Horton’s illicit practice
HUMAN LIFE. o?
tice, with his laft treatment of you, and your efcape. The world is wondering— Several gentlemen have been to Col mote, who has fatisfied them of the uuth, and the part she acted, declaring she believed you Strictly virtuous; for which declaration Lord Villars has fecretly recompenced her fince. It is publickly known that he releafed you from St. Lou; and thofe ladies who admire him are jealous of you to defperation.
Lady Di Horton appears in public as ufual—Fler passion for Lord Villars is known. Notwithstanding her ashirance, she is enraged, and fighs in fecret for being thus expofed. Nugent is invisible at prefent—it is not known where he is.
The Marquis of Melville is highly in-cenfed against St. Lou, who, he fays, blinded by his passion for you, has been incited by your art to thus attack his character. Violetta is out of fpirits—The Marquis, it is faid, is tired of her, and flights her—She rages, storms, and vows revenge—file fears her—fmiles—they are reconciled: but she is enraged much a-^ainst St. Lou. Thus are things fituated at prefent.
Take courage, Adelaide; who Knows but P rovidence may be at work in your favour ? I protest all this bustle has put
94 THE MUTABILITY OF
me into fpirits, becaufe I find you have more friends than enemies, and hope that, ' fome of your relations may inquire into this affair. Villars has fo good a heart, I am charmed with him. But in the midft of this feeming levity, my dear Adelaide, my heart is not at eafe. My uncle torments Lord Duncan , concerning Lady Emma. To award the dreadful blow, he renews the excufe of a foreigner being miSlrefs of his affections. I fear Lord Lorton begins to fufpect his fonst partiality for me, Adelaide—I think I can perceive a storm impending. Oh folly ! folly! What fignifies the lofs of a lover another will foon fucceed him. But, then, his
merit—his uncommon merit!—Oh! ridi-
^ • '
culous!—What a filly creature I am.? May you, my dear creature, have more enlivening ideas in Howel-Wood. The first agreeable news stiall with pleafure be imparted by
Your affectionate
Harriot Meynel.
Lord
\
1
HUMAN LIFE. 95
'Lord Villars to Mrs, Mont.
♦
Madam,
Mr ..1..PP,	DP.P... hPipg I.
too much anxiety and affliction to attempt taking pen in hand, has requested me to inform you that he has loSl his beloved Harriot. He imagines Lord and Lady Lorton have had her privately conveyed from hence, but he can gain no knowledge where to, and is miferable. As he Sup-pofes that fhe will not be at liberty to write to you. Madam, he thought it was neceSfa-ry to acquaint you of her exile, that you might not be rendered perhaps more unea-fy by imbibing a notion that fhe flighted you. I feel much for them both, and am Shocked to find parents fo cruel as to feparate two lovers who appear formed for each other. But I will fay no more, as I am well convinced it will only increaSe the affliction of a heart fo compassionate as yours. Ah! Madam, may Heaven inter-pofe in yours and the amiable Mifs Mey-nelst favour! May you both be happy, whatever is the fate of
Your unalterable friend.
And refpectful humble fervant,
Villars.
Mifs
)6 HUMAN LIFE.
Meynel to Mrs, Mont,
JN^OST certainly I have been conveyed away in a clandeSline manner. But, alas! Adelaide, my adventure will make no figure in hiSlory, my ravifher and companion being an old woman. How mortifying to one’s vanity is it 1—A (hall not even
be envied-----and oh, cruel, no beautiful
fwain to keep up my Spirits, by putting me in remembrance of my all-powerful charms. O ! it was enough to plunge me in vapours and deSpair.
My wiSe uncle and aunt, God blefs them 1 (though I am a little in wrath againft them Sor Serving me So Scurvy a trick) at laft had the wonderful Sagacity to difcover their Son Charles was too Sond of their niece Harriot, which undoubtedly muft be the reafon oS his flighting Lady Emma :—a provocation beyond endurance ; therefore, while I was out one evening, had taken care to have my cloaths packed up. When I came home at ten, my dear Duncan being abSent, they pushed me into a coach and six, with an old woman and her maid, and away we stew as Sail as the horSes could carry us. Mark though. Lady Lorton ae:qnainted me in a few words, with her reaSons Sor thus Send-
ing
HUMAN LIFE. m
t
ing me into exile, and ashired me, foon as Lord Dunchn v/as married, She would receive me again to her affection. I murmured to no purpofe, and was fent off as 1 told you before.
This old damest name is Harpur : She lives in a frightful difmal houfe, furrounded by yews and wallows, whofe different forms recal Ovid’s Metamorphofes to my ideas, and make me fometimes ready to bemoan the fate of unhappy lovers on-verted into evergreens by the fuppofed en-chantrefs of this dreary manfion ;—a pleafant fancy to keep up my fpirits for a few moments : but where this place is fituated I can’t tell—what country, a fecret—neither Should have had an opportunity of informing you I Slill exiSt, if it had not been for a good natured old lady that is often here. She knew the reaSon of my being brought hither; therefore 1 complained of my extreme unhappy fituation, in being deprived of the correfpondence of an old friend, a fchoolfellow, v/ho would be much afflictgd at not hearing from me —that I w'ifhed . to inform her I was in health.
“ Well, vvcll! Mifs. Siid she, clapping her hand on mine, “ if you will fwear, mind; you must /wear, that you will not
^	. F	write
gS THE MUTABILITY OF
write any meSTage to your lover,—will forward it to your friensh”
I readily promifed her, Adelaide; for Since I am thus banished, I may as well try the extent of my fwainst constancy; though I fear a little, for men have fickle hearts. I then asked her if my friend might not return an anfwer to me, under cover to her.
“ No !” that could not be, she faid, as, "if I knew, or you did, what country 1 was in, my lover might be informed of it, but that you might direct to her, under cover, to Mrs. Blonde), at London, and I should have it fafe. For Heaven’s fake, write foon, Adelaide, (I inclofe a proper direction,) for I am almiofl melanchote, in a truly difmal fituation. I am continually watched or locked up, and Mrs. Harpur is a rank methodist, full of hymns and canting prayers ; a proper perfon for a per-fecutor. What a difgrace to religion is their fect !—in reality a pest to fociety^ as they difregard m.oral duties. Murder, theft, lying, are cancelled in their opinion by faith,^—a faith without repentance, \vhich v/ings their shght to Heaven.—— But, my dear friend, my own affairs had very near made me forget yours. ' The very night I was cruelly fnatched from my
Charles,—“ Oh! fool that lam”—Weil,
that
HUMAN LIFE.
that night I v/as informed Lady Di Horton had gained a new lover, a foreigner of title, who is exceedingly handfome, and whom Ihe is as much delighted with, as her once darling Villars ; an object of Such^ fuperior worth ! Several furmized it would be a match; but I could not gain his appellation, as the Adonis has not appeared much in public yet; but I doubt not he* will foon be well known, as she will compel him to attend her steps to gratify her vanity. Violetta and the Marquifs are in turn engaged at each other—^yet he has not the fpirit to difcard her, as it must cast fo dark a cloud over his character, though most people now think hini guilty. I flatter myfelf time will work wonders, and that your virtue and innocence will appear with redoubled lustre. It cannot be otherwii'e—She must weary him -out; at least a new object will arife, and caufe her to experience part of the torture she has inflicted on you.—He will grow weary of her arbitrary fway, and difcard her.
Nugent appears again, is defpifed by most people, and feems at a loSs which fide of the question to take. He is a coxcomb, and worthy the notice of none but thofe devoted to bon ton. A fweet animal truly!
The houfekeeper here is a queer old
F z	creature
ICO THE mutability OF
creature, that at prefent is to me unfathomable. She prays and fqueaks hymns with Mrs. Harpur, yet I think is not fincere in her professions of me-tliodifm. She is a new convert, I am told, Since She came to the family., which is very lately. J fancy flie wants to convert her SelS into the good graces oS her MiSlreSs;—She talks to me oS keeping the paffions in Subordination,—then adds, that even that will have no effect, if I have not Saving Saitb,—Sor faith, you muft know, Mist, the apoSlle Says, “covers a multitude of Sins.” “ Good Madam, let me correct you there ; it is charity he Speaks in Savour cS with thoSe words”, returns your provokingfriend.
You shall have a little more of them all in my next, Adelaide. By that time perhaps Charles may have a wife. Heigh-ho!
Yours Sincerely,
Harriot Meynel,
Mn
H TT M A N T. T F E. lot
MiX Mont to Mifs Meynel.
Howel-lV00 d.
Doubt not one moment, my dear
Harriot, of the unalterable affection of Lord Duncan : bis affliction was very great > when your efcape was difcovered;'and, not being able to write himfelfi he employed his friend as an amanuensis : a copy of whofe letter I enclofe you.
Ah! Harriot, the furprize and con-
Slernation into which I was thrown bv this
•• *
news is past; defcription. I wept in the sincerity of my foul at your iinhappy def-tiny : though I still flatter mySeiS it will be for a very short period. Lord and. Lady Lorton will foon be fenfible their fonst heart is too firmly fixed on bis cousin ever to be inconstant. Mrs. Gordon is in London, and I had the honour of hearing from her last night. She inforiTiS me Lord Duncan is quite melancholy, and, in defiance of his parents intreaties, takes not the least notice of Lady Emma
W
when she comes there, who is rather affected at it, his faid. He intreated our friend to request of me, if 1 heard from you, to inform hef, that at least he might hear of your liealth. She told him he must not
F 3	flatter
102 THE MUTABILITY OF
flatter himfelf that I would inform him . wssiere you v'as, if I was acquainted with the place. He faid it would liowever give him great pleafure fo find 1 knew the place of your relidence, as he w^as certain 1 would further his happinefs, and write in his favour, for that you and you only fhould be miftrefs of his heart.
With fuch proofs of his fidelity, my dear friend, I hope you will fummon refolution : and, notwithstanding your difagreeable Situation, which will undoubtedly be but ofi Short duration, I beSeech you to cherifli your accuftomed chearSulneSs—I pray for your releaSe. Ah ! my dear Harriot, you cannot doubt, I am Sure you cannot, doubt of the very Sincere friendship and inviolable affection of
Your own
Adelaide.
Mifs Meynel to Mrs. Mont.
Simpleton that I am, ever Since the receipt of your letter, I undergo continual anxiety, fearing my dear Charles will, by the force of his generous fympathy, bring himfelf into an ill ftate of health. Contrive fomehow to inform him I am well, constant in my esteem for him, and happy
R31 can poflibly be, abfent from him ; that
will
HITMAN T. I F K. ro
will at least relieve him for the prefent; though i cannot hope for happier days in store. I relapfe at periods tp a state of derpondencc, fancy I Shall hear of his being overcome by Lord and Lady LortonV arguments, and that he will be lost to me
for ever. Such is the state of abfent lo-
%
vers, Adelaide. Ridiculous!—Who would ever wish to be fo fituated ? The hopes, fears, and various turns, of that fame paffion called Love, are certainly very abfurd. I will weary you no more at prefent on that fubject.
Mrs. Burton, who is houfekeeper here, makes great and (according to her idea) laudable endeavours to make a convert of me. She informs me, that Mrs. Harpur, herfelf, and their holy' teacher, Brother Cantwell, are continually on their knees on my behalf, that I may become a partaker of the New Birth. My tongue being at all times too glib, I told her that a New Lover would be more acceptable, as I should then be in hopes of his releasing me from my prifon-houfe. ‘
“ OhJ Lord, Mifs,” faid she, shrugging up her shoulders, “ what profane-
nest!”	______.r:.,
“ Why, my deaf Turton,^ returned I, cajoling her, “ a woman of your fenfe, I
am F 4
lOA THE MUTABILITY OF
am certain, can never feriouSly imbibe the folly of fuch doctrine.”
'‘Folly, Mifs!—God blefs me S’ ' Nay, don’t crofs }ourfelf, dear Burton : though it would furprife me much to behold you in that attitude, for Me-thodifm is nearly allied to Popery.”
“ Aye, aye, Mifs, you may infult our hnppy Sect, and compare it to what you pleal'e,” retar-ried stje; but I would have you to know we fcorn to worship faints and images.”
o
“ Nay, ray dear Burton, do you not adore Cantwell, your living Saint, and worship the portrait of the ever-to-be*ia-mcnted Whitfield
“ 'We undoubtedly. Mist, revere The memory of that holy man, who was our introducer into the regions of blifs,” faid she, “ and shall ever pay honour to his doctrine, which affures us of unfpeakable happineSs.”-----
“ Independent of moral actions,” interrupted your pert friend.
‘‘ Lord ! Mifs, you muSl excufe my telling you that you talk 'very fimply, faid she—“ Moral actions ! Why moral
always follow the faith we
profefs.”
“ Is murder a moral action ?” returned
\
I, laughing at her affecled piety
W’hy
I
human life. IOC
K0’
“ Why, no, Mifs,” returned She, lowering her voice—“ but faith, you know”—--
“ I know jhat a fincere repentance, with faith, will obliterate crimes, Burton ; but ypst know the two prifoners at
refufed to repent, or confefs their crimes to the ministers who attended them, though the murder they committed was plainly proved. They even went to the gallows with a lie in their mouths, and anounced that they perceived Heaven’s gates open to them. Such is the baneful doctrine of predestination. The profestbrs of it rufh headlong into eternity, with all their imperfections on their heads, and a train of unrepented crimes which Heaven hath denounced vengeance against. Listen to me, Burton : Why, if Omnipotence refolved to form fome mortals to happt-nefs, others to eternal mifery (a thought injurious to his attribute of mercy), is vengeance denounced against fin ? If fome unhappy wretches are doomed to mifery, fpite of their virtue, where the reward of their combat against vice f for vice is inherent in us undoubtedly, and without combating against it, and invoking the grace oS God, it would certainly prevail. The Scripture assures us, that by our works we are to receive fentence from the
F 5	Book
o6 THE MUTABILITY OF
y
Book of Life, in that tremendous day when the fecrets of all hearts Shall be opened. Faith undoubtedly must be joined to our works, my dear Burton—^we muSt depend on neither alone.”
“ Aye, Mifs, but you know Paul fays, vefifels to honour and dishonour, &c.” “ Very true, Mrs. Burton ; but, if you recollect, St. Peter fays, in hisEpiSlle, that his Brother Paul wrote Some things hard to be understood, which they that are unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do the other Scriptures, to their own destruction.” “ Aye, aye, Mifs, it is you, who have not the true faving Saith, that wrest it to your own destruction—I am forry for you ‘ —I pity you”-----faid she, again shrugging up' her shoulders;-------“ but you
really are, I find, in a state of reprobation, my dear and worthy rnistrefs. Our holy brother Cantwell, and all our brethren on earth, can never, I fear, fave you from damnation”------
( “ What is that you are faying cried , Dame Harpur, entering the room.
“ She has only been pronouncing an anathema against me, Madam, and fending me to a strange region and country I have no desire of entering into,” Said I, laughing.
But
HUMANLIFE. i oy
Burton coloured, and recited what had passed with acrimony. '	,
“ Upon my word, Mifs Meynel-, you are much to blame,” faid the old dame.
“ Indeed, Madam, added I, “ instead of being in a state of reprobation, I think myfelf in a state of grace. I am born in fin, ’tis true—prone to errors—I acknowledge my faults to my Creator, and believe, by my repentance, through the mercy of God, he erafes them. Scripture convinces me fo. If you would give yourfelf the trouble, Mrs. Harpur, to ' infpect a little further into it, instead of the Journals, visions, &c. of your Saint Whitfield, I think you would be convinced your prefent opinion is falfely founded^’
“ Oh ! monstrous i” exclaimed they both together. /
In short, my dear Adelaide, they\both grew fo Vociferous, that I was necessitated to stop my ears, that I might hear no more of their reproaches for my free difcovery of the abhorrence 1 held their tenets in.
So very gloomily fituated, I took the " liberty to write to Lady Lorton,. intreating her to fend me fome books to alleviate the difmal hours she had allotted me'—that, being placed among fuch enthusiasts, without Some amufement I should become a prey to defpair. Since my commence-
men t
o8 THE MUTABILITY OF
0
ment of this epistle I have received one from her, written very affectionately. aS* fiiring rce nothing but her fon’s welfare Should make her ufe me with Such apparent cruelty. With this letter She Sent me a number of books, on various fub-jects, and a letter to Mrs. Harpur, defiring her not to perfecute me on account of religion ; at which that pious lady lifted up her eyes, and w'ondered at the profligacy of this age.
Adieu ! Adelaide ; be not filent, out of compassion to your dolefully-fituated
friend
Har RIOT Meynel.
Mj/s Meynel to Mrs. Mont.
Lucrati ve motives have difrobed Burton of her fanctity and enthufiafm. In a month’s rime She quits Dame Harpur. This miracle was caufed by a visit from
Mrs. A-----. Mrs. Harpur not being able
to walk, and I not permitted private converfation v/ith a Stranger, Burton was ordered to perambulate with her in the gardens, &c. At which time, by her skill in detraction, flie fo ingratiated herfelf in the
favour of Mrs. A-^---, that the faid lady
offered her double wages, and other rewards, if she would quit Mrs. Harpur, and
live
HUMANLIFE. i oQ
live wi:h her. They fettled it on the fpot, to both their fatisfactions, and entered the houfe again with the unwelcome news of their negociation to my duenna. Dreadful reproaches enfued—Mrs. A—— took her leave-—and Burton shrugging up her shoulders, thanks Heaven she is foon to follov/.
Hearing a ruflling noife in my dressing-room, I Started up, and ran thither, where I found Burton eagerly perusing a new novel Lady Lorton had fent me. By way of forcing her opinion, -‘‘Isn't that a delightful book, Burton ?” faid I; “youare welcome to the perufal of it.”
“ Thanks, Mifs,” returned she, with joy in her countenance; “ indeed, fromr what I have feen of it, I like it much; thefe-books are very entertaining-—very instructive.”
“ Equally fo with Whitfieldst Journals,” faid I, by way oS fathoming her, with an added fmile.
“ Why, to be fure, Mifs,” faid she, with her uSual shrug, “ Mrs. Harpur is too bigotted—She almost converted me.—Superiors, you know, have great influence over one. I oSten thought her WTong, but
i
no THE MUTABILITY OF
I Said nothing—No, I faid nothing,” faid She, turning her eyes to the corners, and leemingly applauding hen own diffimula-tion.
“ You have undergone a great many trials, Mrs. Burton, I SuppoSe, during your liSe,” Said I gravely, as if out of compassion to her.
“ Trials!, MiSs! aye, aye; but what fignifies boasting of them ? I have Seen a great deal indeed.”
“ Have you travelled much, Mrs. Burton ? I SuppoSe this country is not your native place.”
“ No ; it is not, MiSs. Wales was the place of my birth ; but marrying unfortunately at Ludlow, my perfidious hushand deferted me. Thus reduced, I was obliged to stoop to fervitude.”
She was prevented purfuing her narrative by a fummons from Mrs. Harpur, and left me in wonderful fufpenee; for by the defcription you gave of Fluellen, it must be she. However, the gratification of your curiofity must be fufpended till my next.
How is my dear Duncan’s health I Heigho !. Are we never to meet again Is Lady Emma triumphant ? Say fomething of him, however grating it may be to my vanity and continue to love your
Harriet Meynel.
Mrs.
t
HUMAN LIFE. Hi
40
Mrs. Mont to Mff Meynel.
\
Howel-IVlod
I AM very happy to find my amiable
friend, in the midft of her affliction, retains her vivacity. Heaven, my Harriot, will foon interpo.fe in your favour. A letter from the worthy Mrs. Gordon informs me, that your lover, impatient at his parents endeavours to tear your image from his memory, has himfelf informed Lady Emma he never will be facredly u-nited to any other woman than bis lovely coufin. He further informed Mrs, Gordon, his intention was to write and intreat the favour of me to know the place of your banishment. She folemnly affured him I was ignorant where it was. He then infilled uppn knowing where my letters to you were directed ; in that point she gratified his Lordship. I fuppofe Love will foon affiSl him to difcover the place of your retreat. It is unneceffary, I hope, my dear friend, to caution you againft a clandestine marriage, as your own generous fentiments, and obligations to Lady Lorton, will overthrow all his Lordshipst arguments in favour of fuch a proceeding. Perfeverance in your duty will in the end
reward
JI2 THE MUTABILITY OF
reward you, my dear friend ; and I cannot help flattering mystlf time will reconcile their fonst choice, and give you to him who is worthy of you.
If it proves in reality that Burton is the defpicable Fluellen, I Shall be happy to hear that She is removed from Mrs. Harpur. She is a dangerous invader of private peace, wherever She goes. Adieu to her.
More news for you, my dear Harriot: the day preceding that in which Mrs. Gordon wrote, Lady Di Horton was in-diffclubly tied to a Count Lanore, the man
mj	*
whofe name you could not remember.
Spring approaches, with her ufual love-lineSs. What grateful ideas to Providence does it not awake in one’s breaSl i It is impossible for a real atheiSI, I think toex-^iSl amidll fuch a duller of furrounding evidences of a kind, a benevolent, and a powerful Deity.
Let but the athelft Nature’s works explore.
Soon he’ll recant, in them a God adore.
'•	V ■ ■	.
Could blind Chance caufe fuch order and beauty Impossible!
The noSl is fetting out, and I mull bid you haftily adieu.
Adelaide.
Mj/s
HTTMANT T.TFK
Mifs Meynel to Mrs. Mont.
An exoptation of revenge is to derogate from humanity and the finer feelings, therefore it niall never be indulged in the brcaSl of your H irriot: but this old vixen Burton, or rather Fluellen, moft certainly Should receive a treatment similar to that fhe beftows on others. She has been difappointed in her hopes of attending Mrs.
A-----, therefore has vented her fpleen in
my disfavour to ingratiate herfelf again in the eSleem of Mrs. Harpur. Mrs. A——— by fome means had information of her behaviour in Wales, therefore wrote to inform her She Should forego all thoughts of her in the capacity She had before agreed to.
Burton enraged, complained vehemently to .Dame Harpur, and faid fhe was per-' fecuted on account of her perfeverance to the true Gofpel-faith, and that I had treated her very ill on the fame Score—offered her profane novels to read, and lipon her refuSal declared I would aSTert the contrary to her miftrefs; with a great deal more malevolence not worth repeating. Mrs. Harpur gave credit to her sifter in the Lord, and refufed to hear my defence:
but
MA THE MUTABILITY OF
to recompence the grief I underwent, your letter arrived. ' I coindde, my dear Adelaide, in your opinion of a clandestine marriage. The proofs of my Charlesst affection will enable me to undergo my tortures with more fortitude. But why do I mention tortures, and boast of fortitude, to you, who have fuch a fuperiority over me in that point. Have you not undergone, with the. most unexampled patience, afflictions which w'oiild deprive me- of rea-, fon }—I defpife myfelf fo: complaining.
Pray, if poffible, amufe me with a tlier account of the Countefs Lanore, who, from receiving fuch mortifying coolnefs from Lord Villars, threw herfelf, by way of confolation, into the arms
of this foreigner.
When, my dear Adelaide, Shall we embrace each other.? Alas! Destiny diverts herfelf at our expence, and toffss us
about in a ftrange manner.
J	,	'	.	•
•	i
’ «.	. f	■
y
Adieu!
'	i*-
' .1 »
Harriot Meynel.
.A	»
*
*	9	^	"
Mrs.
t	;
» . *	•
HUMAN LIFE. 115
\
Mrs. Gordon to Mifs Meynel.
London.
TRANCE events have happened, my dear Mifs Meynel. Your beloved friend is now acknowledged Marchionefs of Melville, and the poor unhappy Marquis expired laft night. Her relations now Surround her: but, notwith-ftanding their attention to her, and endeavours of arrtendment for their past cruelty, (he feels too fenfibly for her unnatural hushandst death. When capable of taking pen in hand, ftie will herfelf inform you of particulars, which I am certain will be much m.ore pleafing and fatisfactory to you than to hear it from me. I remain
My dear Mifs Mcynelst
•
moft affectionate
Sarah Gordon.
•?v.
ne
•4
i6 THE MUTABILITY OF
Fhe Marchionefs of Melville to Mfs
Meynel.
/
O W furprifing, how wonderful, are the difpenfations of Providence ! By fudden and melancholy effects it has re-ftored my loft famie, my fortune, and my fr’ends : yet, while paying the rightful tribute of gratitude to Heaven for this bounty, my heart melts with affliction for the early fate of my poor unfortunate Melville, who fell a victirn to his unhappy paffion for the abandoned Violetta. ThoSe who are unacquainted with my difpofition may perhaps laugh at the concern I cannot lielp vifibly shewing, and think me a hypocrite for mourning after a man who once ufed me fo ill: but repentance with me obliterates all unkindnefs; and I fin-cerely wiSli it had been in my power to prolong his life, that, by a longer repentance, he might have rendered himfelf ftill more acceptable to his Maker. He was my hushand —His tendernefs returned— I efteeraed him the fame.
I was rambling with Mrs. Hall in Howel-Wood, when a fervant on horfe-back approached us, and, alighting, delivered me a letter, Surprifed, I demanded
HUMAN LIFE.. ,,y
•r
manded to whom he belonged, w'hen he anfwered, “■ The Marquis of Melville.”
I was struck dumb with astonishment'— Mrs, Hall stared at remarking my confu-fion —when the fellow continued, “ the Marquis is dangerousty ill, Madam, as that letter will inform you.” His introduction gave me a great perturbation of fpirits, and -made me guefs fomething dreadSul was to Sollow. Mrs. HaH,* observing my Situation, preSented her Smelling-bottle ; after which I made shift to peruSe the letter, which was from my aunt Walters, as follows;
‘ ‘ Mas tres cbere Dame,
IT affords me grand plaijlr that I have again the happineSs of acknowledging you Sor my niece, and that your virtue and merit is rewarded, par jiiJHce, according to its deSert. _ Un trifle evene-ment has cauSed this alteration in the unSortunate Marquis, v/ho has already' acknowledged you' Sor his lawful wife, andpproduced the certificate, drawn by Mr. Foster, which he had not destroyed ; and fo, faire une compenfation, a will is now making, in cafe of his demife, to fettle on you, and your heirs, for ever, two thouiand a year and twenty thousand
ii8*TH.D MUTABILITY OF
fand pounds in caSh. I at the fame time condole and congratulate you. Annette will attend you in the Marquis’s carriage, and affure you of other particulars. I remain.
/
Ma tres chere niece,
I
“ Foujours a votre,
J. Walters.”
You perceive, by the above epistle, my dear Harriot, that my aunt has imbibed all the frippery of the French nation, and is an enemy to feeling and difmal fenfations. Her letter was not at all calculated to dissipate my afflictioH and furprize. To fave myfelf the trouble of unfolding the mystery to Mrs. Hall, I would have shewn her the letter, but the mixed language it was written in would have made it to her unintelligible ; therefore, in w'alking back to the honfe, I made shift to inform her who I really was. The good-natured creature, it feems, had heard my history, though she little imagined I was the perfon. She did ^all in her power to comfort me and raife my fpirits. Soon after we entered the houSe, Annette arrived, and shed tears of joy at the fight of me. “ Ah! my dear
lady,”
V-
HUMANLIFE. im
lady,” skid She, “ at laft you are found — Indeed I never more will part with you — Why did you cruelly forfake me,” continued she, and not permit me to follow you in every change of your fortune V
I returned her many thanks for her tenderness, but informed her in my wandering Slate it would not have been pof-
Sible.
“ Well, my dear lady,” faid she, “ no time is to be loft; my poor mafter is impatiently expecting you; therefore let me pack up what trifling things you want at prefent, and 1 will inform your Ladyship of particulars oh our journey.”
I followed her advice, but made her take fome refreshment firft. Mrs. Hall infifted upon my taking fome likewife before I departed. The tears fell on my taking leave : though she faid she hoped my happinefs was at hand.
Soon as we were feated 'in the chaife, Annette, gave me the'melancholy recital, and informed me, that the Marquis being in a violent diSpute with Violetta, that furious woman ran to a cloSet within her bedchamber, where a poignard, richly ornamented, belonging to her late hushand,
hung, and Snatching it off the hook, unr-
sheathed
120 THE MUTABILITY OF
fheathed it—She hastily returned, and, concealing the weapon, before he was a-ware, plunged it into his body, crying, “ Receive the recompence of your inSo-lence.” Her friend, Madame St. Clare,. being in the next room, heard the Marquis groan, and her last words; upon which stie immediately ran to them, and . found him dropped on the bed, fainting, and his blood istuing like a torrent from the wound. She shrieked out, and rung theshell—Servants came, and immediately fetched fome of the most e;minent furgeons, who examined his wound, and found it was mortal, and he could live but.a fetv days at most. When the victim returned to his fenfes, he defired that Violetta might. be fecured as his murderefs, confelTed to the furgeons and people prefent that she was not his lawful wiSe, for that Adelaidi Belmont only had a right to that ti tie, and defired my relations might beifent for, that he might clear my innocence, and acknowledge his own guilt, before his death, as fome recompence. Accordingly, Lord
and Lady Walters, the Duke of ---------,
and my other Friends, attended. Count St. Lou was likewife fent for, who decla* red the truth of having been put into my bedchamber, &c. Proper meafures were taken ro convince the world of my inno-
'cence
H ;T T M A M 1.1 F F . S 3 1
cence, and a will formed in my favour-; but he was very unhappy at not knowing where I was, that he might once more fee me, and intreat forgiveneSs. This ftrange news foon fpread, and arrived to the hearing of my worthy friend Mrs. Gordon, who immediately fent to inform Lady Walters of my addresk -She communicated the welcome inrelligence to my poor Melville, who inftantly fent for me. In the mean time, Violetta, finding her character destroyed, and her crime of murder detected, fwallowed a draught that foon put a period to her fife. Thus ended Annette’s dreadful intelligence.
We travelled hard, and I arrrived a-t London much fatigued, difpirited, and unfit for the fcene I was foon to undergo. Lady Walters I'eceived me, “ Ah! my dear niece,” faid ftie, “forgive me, forgive me!—I was deceived as to your fuppofed guilt; but take courage, the poor Marquis is dying. How fortunate it is he acknowledges, you in thefe folemn moments for his lawful wife—You will now be reft ored to every thing you wish—mon Dieu! how I run on, and forget it’s ne,-celfary for you to take fomething after your fatigue—Do, ma cbere Lady Melville,
G	be
122 THE MUTABILITY OF
be feated—By degrees we muft inform the Marquis of your arrival.”
Some'wine, cakes, &c. were handed to me, while I Sat aftoniftied at her ftrange inattention to fo melaneholy an event. I begged Annette not to leave me. At laid I was fummoned to my poor unfortunate Melville. To exprefs the grief Ifelt when I beheld him is impoflible.
“ Can you forgive me, fweet Adelaide, for my paft eruelty dnd injustice faid he, in a faint voiee.
“ My dear Melville,” returded I, kisi. sing his hand, and bathing it with my tears, “ term it not fo harshly—it was the ficklenefs of youth—moft sincerely do 1 forget every thing past, and wish you as fervently your health as I wish myfelf happinefs after my long fufferings.” •
“ You are too angelic,*’ faid he, embracing me—How cculd I ever forfake fuch goodnefs.?'—Oh ! I am all torture at the reflection that I could abandon you—
I have defervedly received my death from the wretch who Seduced me—.Dan you forgive me } Alas! Harriot, you must excufe my relating the partieulars of this dreadful interview, and the truly distressing ones that Succeeded.” My heart was torn past recording. He would embrace me, ask forgiveneSs, then fall into delirious faintings
_____________	.	4
11 ivi ^1 i.N 1^ 1 1	1^.
•V, •
ings which in two days clofed his poor unfortunate life.
/
Mrs. Gordon attended me both before his death and after it.—^My innocence is cleared—-my honour is reftored.
Madame St. Clare, the friend of Violetta, fent feveral times to enquire after my health, and hoped I would not take it amifs for being fo impertinent to trouble me at fuch a time, although She hadsheen once the friend of my enemy, but that She had a real eSleem for me, and hoped before (he quitted England I would permit her to wait on me, as She had fomething particular to communicate.
Such a message furprzied me much — My friends furrounded me, and endeavoured to foothe me — I became more compofed; and a few days fince, by the advice of my dear Mrs. Gordon, fent Madame St. Clare word that I would receive her whenever (he pleafed ; tho’ you may guefs the idea of receiving a perfon once a friend to the wicked Violetta! Her anfwer wa's,. that she would attend me, but intreated I would receive her alone. Such a requeft was very Singular ; I imparted it to Mrs. Gordon,
124 the MUTABILITY OF
who perfifted that I Should not, for She v/ould remain with me. I must own my ' fpirits were much depreffedI had fears myfelf concerning her intention. The .appointed time arrived. Mrs. Gordon with me, when the name of Madame St. Clare was announced ; a lady in deep mourning entered, and difplayed the well-known features of my old acquaintance and foe Mademoifelle Albe. — Her face was pale as death—her looks denoted horror and distraction.
“ Is it poffible} Do I really fee 'Mademoifelle Albe faid I.
“ You do, much-wronged friend,” returned fhe—-“ J will not further injure you—Will you not trust yourfelf alone with me?—Yet,	alas! I deferve the
most cruel fufpicions you can form of
rnci
“ This friend. Madam,” * faid I, “ is accjuainted witli all my concerns; but if you have -any thing relating to yourSelf to communicate, which you chuSe She Should not liear, I will intreat her to retire.”
“ Oh, no, no,” anSwered fhe, with wildneSs, “ it is time my guilt Should be displayed to the world in its proper colours. I am going to quit England, and
retire to ,a nunnery Sor life : but reSolved,
before
HUMAN LIFE.
before my departure, to acquaint you with my own and my infamous friend Violtitast- hiftory. That done — your forgivenefs beftowed on an unhappy wretch —I quit the world for ever.”
She feated herSelf on a couch by me, and began as follows:
“ A difpofition to coquetry is certainly peculiarly innate to Some more tham others *, at lead I judge So Srom mySelf, as I recollect that f was inclined to t’jat vice at a very early period. 1 was Sond' of admiration, and, alas !; unhappily became too Soon mv own miftrefs. Several'
* ^
lovers became staves tO’ my charms at Montpelier; I deluded them by turns' wirh hopes which 1 never intended to fulstll ; was gay, stuttering, and rnistrefs of my heart, till the Marquis of Melville arrived': to him Fate determined’! should furrender. P made ufe of all my arts to enfnare him ; common gallantry was all I received in return for my heart ; and your arrival put a period to the hope I had imbibed of being able in time to Subdue him. Flowever, my paffion for him being So violent, I determined to mifs no opportunity oS being in his dear company ; though it was- frequent stabs to my foul to perceive his assiduity to you. I torrhented you with my compa-
G s
26 THE MUTABILITY OF
ny, for the Marquis’s fake, tho’I knew it was difagreeable to you both. However, I kept my lovers as ufual, by way of cordial for the anxiety I underwent on the Marquis’s account. The news then W'as fpread of his intended departure for N ice, which drove me almoSl distracted, and from my extreme perturbation of mind caufed a fever, in which you know j was fo imprudent as to intreat him to attend me, which he, as I then thought, cruelly refufed. You came-—It is need-lefs to recite the converfation that enfued. My pride, jealoufy, &c. drove me to defperation almost, but in my cooler moments I could not help approving your advice of trying the effects of abfence, and the gay amufements of Paris, though 1 had very little hope of being the better for it. I could not refolve to go, and kept houfe till after your departure to Nice. I then went to Madame D’Oranst,
y	"
to endeavour to difcover where you was gone, but could not. However, chance brought me acquainted with it, and I wrote an anonymous tetter to Mr. Ancram, in hopes of his preventing the Marquis marrying you, but foon after had the extreme mortification to hear the old gentleman was dead, and your marriage confummated. I ran to Madame
‘	D’Oran’s,
HUMAN LIFE. ia7
/
D.Dranst, where I had the news confirmed, and in that moment of fury vowed revenge on you both, which I determined if possible to put in practice, as a com-penfation for the infult he had paid to my Slighted charms. I immediately went to Paris, and there got acquainted with Violetta. Her vivacity charmed me : we formed a friendship. She came in laughing one day, ‘ Albe, I have a rare fcheme of preferment for you,’ faid she, ‘ it has jusi entered my head—Will you venture to marry an old man, who I am certain, cannot live above half a year ^ and you then Will be miSlrefs of sooo louis d.ors a year for life.’ “ I should be mad to refufe fuch a fettlement,” faid I, “ if I could get it ; the only man I loved is married, therefore now I don’t care what fort of wuetch I have for a hushand, fo he has wealth.” * Charming girl!’ returned she ; ‘ quite to rny mind; for, faith, Albe, it is love un restrained I am for, not dull matrimonial flames—^A hushand is only of ufe to preferve one’s reputation. I lured Guadicci to marry me, for the fake of his wealth; after which I had lovers in plenty. Fie entertained them, and foon complaifantly took his departure to the territory of worms, to my inexpressible ioy; for I began, to be
G 4	heartily
28 THE MUTABILITY OF
heartily weary of dissembling assection for him. Here I have found none worthy of bartering my liberty for, therefore will range like the bee.---------But to the pur-
pofe, my dear Albe ; this old Monlieur St. Clare was hnshand tO' a hster of Gua-dicci’s, w}iom< he buried fome years since. He faw you at my houfe once, and feeras to admire you vastly. This morning he shoke of you in high terms, which made this thought pop into my head. He is near &o, therefore if you can endure him for a few months, do, my dear Albe, for your own fake; we may take our pleafure, and leave him to nap in the chimney corner.’’ “ The libertinistn She had difplayed in her conversation did not altogether pleaSe mc; though So inclined to coquetry and admiration, I was not in fact criminal. However, the offer fhe had made me eauSed me to drop Surther ressection on her conduct, and I readily entered into the Scheme she had planned for me oS becoming St. Clare’s wife. That very afternoon I was invited to meet him at her houSe, and by all the art I was mistreSs oS strove to heighten the assection he had begun to entertain Sor me. He departed very happy — He begged to visit me — I complied — In a week’s time we were married; a Sortnight aSter which
he
H TT M A M LIFE. i2Q
he was taken off in an apoplexy,-and left rnearich widow, and my liberty. Melville Still adhered to my heart — I refolved, if possible, to revenge myfelf on him and you. Soon after, you both arrived at Paris. Violetta inSormed me of it. To keep up appearances, I went not into public. She Said the Marquis v/as the most enchanting-creature she had ever feen, and that she would put herfelf in his way, if possible,, to have the glory of leading him in her chains, and mortiSying that wretch his wiSe,. with her trifling beauty. It was a charming opportunity, I thought, to execute my revenge ou you at leaSl, thereSore reSolved if possible to assift her on with her defign. My dear Violetta, returned 1; the very great obligation you have conferred on me, by putting foTplendida^ fortune in my poSfessiony, will make me always your friend: I have'had a flight acquaintance wnth the Marquis at Montpelier, as he‘ frequently' visited ■ a- family I did there, at the- time he was addressing Mifs Belmont. The way you muft engage him is by a feeming inattention to him-,, and affected? modesty. It was faid. that was -the fcheme she practifed to entrap him.” ‘Thanks, my dear St. Glare,* faid she;.; never fear my acting
G 5	mr
9V
THE MUTABILITY OF
my part w’ell. I had a fpy over him, and find he is to be at the opera to-night with fome of his countrymen. Lady Melville flays at home with her aunt, who is in-difpofed ; therefore I Shall have a good opportunity of displaying mySelF, Sor I have contrived it So as to Sit in the next box with Madame Larone.’ She Sollow-ed her concerted plan, and came to Sup with me in raptures of joy. *■ I have played my part well, St, Clare,’ Said She; ‘ I turned my eyes Srequently on Melville, with all the languidnefs I could possibly throw into them : upon his eyes meeting mine, I as haStily withdrew them, with a forced bluSh. He obServed it, and by help of one oS his Sriends got himSelS introduced to Madame Larone, who, not being averSe to gallantry, Saw what was going Sorward, and invited him, to ftay in her box. I Spoke little — but the dumb eloquence continued. He paid me Several compliments. Sighed much, and pressed my hand when he led me to my chair, at which I affected to be Surprised, and halS angry. Thus, my dear Sr. Clar«, ended our interview this evening. Oh i he is an enchanting creature, worth all the pains 1 take to gain him. ConSound that Syren his wiSeJ Had he not been married, I might have been the envy oS
the
HUMAN LITE.. lar
the world. But let me confider, St. Clare; you fay they were married privately — no witnesses — and the old parfon is dead -----’Fon honour
“ I found what She was about..—Aye, my dear Violetta, faid I, it may not be impossible to effect what you- are thinking of, if you perfevere in refiSlance to his
wishes.”-----‘'Very true,’’ returned she;
at least I’ll endeavour it, for he is worth fixing for life. The lofs of him would drive me to defperation—I could not fup' port it.’’ Thus encouraged, she fixed the refolution of striving toexecute her defign.
They met frequently at Madame L^" rone’s; after which he vifited her at her own houfe; but I took particular care always to retire before his arrival. You may, perhaps, wonder that I did not strive to gain him for myfelf—^I had found it itnpossible, and thought that by assisting him to gain Violetta I should in the end be astiired of his gratitiide and friendship, which might at Bast arife to defire. Such were my fentimenta then. -1 found, by her his passion loon arrived to a violent height; and, that he might not betray my past conduct to this i.nfamous woman,, fent for him one day to my houfe, as if unknown to her ; that I had fomething particular to
GommuniGate
32 THE MUTABILITY OF
communicate to him. He had often heard my new name from her, and she told him he was under obligation to me for fpeaking in his favour, therefore he immediately complied with my requeft, and was extremely astonished to find in Madame St. . Clare his old perSecutreSs. I told him that abSence had cured me oS a passion Sor him that was very ill Sounded, and, in recompence Sor the trouble I had given him,
I had done all in my power to make Violetta listen to his Suit, Sor which I hoped he would conceal the imprudent behaviour I had pradtiSed at Montpelier ; Sor as Madame Guadicci was strictly virtuous, if she knew 1 had acted So imprudently, she would Sorego my Sriendship; that I Sincerely wished them both happineSs,. and was Sorry it was now out oS his power to make himSelS So, as be could not marry my beautlSul Sriend, now he had owned his marriage to MiSs Belmontst relations.”
‘ Ah ! but my dear MiSs Albe—Madame Sr. Clare, I mean—I may diSown it.
----1 will See iS Adelaide——If not, stratagem must Succeed.’
“ Aye, you may try,” returned I; ‘‘ but donh betray my pall Solly.”
‘ No, my dear St. Clare; your preSent kindneSs obliterates it Srom my memory. Adorable Violetta! She must be mine.’
“ He
^ 4-
4
H TT iU A M T T F F'	t
kJ
‘‘ He departed, promifing not todifco-ver to Madame Guaddicci it vvas him f had been in love with. After that, he frequently called on me, and I met him at Violetta’s. He beha,ved as a friend ; told me of his hinting to you he loved another, and his propoSal, which you would not listen to. Since you would not conSent, he Said, he would concert a Scheme to put St. Lou in possession of you, iS he could get Violetta to promiSe to marry him when he diSengaged himSelS. With Seeming reluctance she complied, and you Suffered'the completion pS his helliSli plot in London. When freed from you, he married Violetta, I asked him iS he had permitted the Count to gratiSy his passion .? He changed colour, and Said, ‘ No, he hath taken care you should not be prostituted but by your own conSent., Upon v/hich I laughed ; Sor though I had not parted with my virtue, I thought but lightly of it then, as Violetta had instilled her principles into me. When they came to England, I came likewise, and hired a houSe Sor mySelf, striving all the time to make the Marquis in turn become captive to me. I got intimate with Lady Di Horton, whom I had Sormerly known at Montpelier. She Sell in love with Lord Villars, and finding he was gone to Wales purSued him there to
Mr.
lu THE MUTABILITY OF
Mr. Shenkinst : from thence Ihe informed
me of her fuccefs or difappointment. In the mean time, the violence of Violetta’s natural temper began to appear. She continued to doat on Melville, but was jealous of him to diftraction. By way of confolation, he ufed frequently to call to me, and complain of her injuflice and tyranny. I humoured him—pitied him—In fli ort, friendship made him at laSl diScover charms in me he had never obServed before. My houSe, when she knew he was SaSe in company, was his place of reSuge;. and, by yielding to his criminal defires, I became his fixed Sriend,-asl never upbraided him iS I Saw liim pay attention to any other woman ; Violetta had taught me skrt. I wrote to Lady Di that I had my love returned, but did not chuSe to discover his name on paper. She w'as disappointed oS her deSign on Villars, and came to London. I then entriifled her with the Secret ; and she, to conceal me Srom the wrath of Violetta, permitted us to meet at her houSe', that by that means Violetta might SuSpect her rather than me. The Marquis likewiSe would oSten commend her beauty beSore Violetta, to deceive her; and she would immediately curSe her in the moSl dreadSul manner. Lady DI concerted that Scheme which Nugent executed on
you
* H OMAN LIFE. i5<
you—rtlien, to make you appear more infamous, that Lord Villars might defpife you, put you into Count Sr. Lou’s power. Suddenly there appeared a Count Lanore, a handfome fellow, who paid his addressfes to her. She was charmed with him ; and, without enquiring into his character, was fo foolish as to marry him. I was a few days after fitting in Violetta’s dressing- ^ room, and She was in her bedchamber, when the Marquis, after paying his compliments, passed through to her room. They were continualiy difputing, and he was fo heartily weary of her, that he began to repent having facrificed you to her, as you would have borne his infidelities with patience. The report of your fuppofed innocence fpread, and enraged her Still more. But to return. ‘ Violetta,’ Said he, ‘ have you heard the news ?’—What i'’ Said file.—‘ Poor Lady Li Horton—Blast-the villain 1—An impostor has married her, and conveyed her by Sorce to a Seat, she has in Cornwall, where she must 'end her wretched days, iS Some lover does not relieve her—So charming a creature to be
Sacrificed’——
‘ D—mnation to her charms,* Said Violetta; ‘ it was my revenge cauSed her punishment. Dare she vie with me in beauty ?’
“Your
\
fS6 THE MUTABILITY OF
‘ Your punishment, then, Shall Succeed, inSamous woman,’ Said the Marquis. ‘My lawful wiSe, Adelaide Belmont, Shall put im her claim; a Sriend oS mine, who has the certificate oS our marriage, (hall Seek her out, and make her prove it. Her goodneSs will pardon me. Different from thee as Heaven Srom Hell.*
‘ Furies assift me I’ Said the enraged Italian ; ‘ Is this to-be borne ?* So Saying, She inftantly fled to her doSet, and hastily returned with a poignard, which she
plunged into his side. His groans alarmed me. When I entered, he was weltring in his blood. His condition Scarce gave me power to call Sor assistance, I was So terrified and afflicted Sor him. At laft the Servants attended. He defired he might be Secured, and Said in a low voice to me, ‘ It' is all over with me, St. Glare; repent;, you See Justice overtakes us. My Adelaide, that angel of light, Shall have her innocence cleared. Retire.*
“ I was going with heart-Selt agonies,, without taking Surther notice oS Violetta, who was now become an’object: oS horror to me by her cruelty, when fhe called me back : ‘ St. Clare,’ Said She, with rage still
strongly impressed on her countenance,. ‘ one moment turn back—hearken to the few words I have to utter. I SuppoSe theSe
fellows
HUMAN LIFE. in
fellows will permit me to fpeak to you in private before I am further tormented.*' They anfwered, Yes ; but they mull first inSpect the place, to fee there was no dangerous instrument.. Upon, finding, none, they permitted us to enter,, and left i-is alone.
“ 1 was Just going to- reprovesher for the rafh deed (he had been.guilty of, when She prevented me by Speaking first. ‘ I have cornpleated my revenge, St. Clare, as an affronted woman Should—at least an Italian—I boast and glory in the noble cuf-tom of our country. Yes, dear as Melville was to me once, his neglect of me lately intirely-^ distodged it; hatred fucceeded, and revenge likewife—^glorious
revenge !----1 have cornpleated it on that
forcerefs Lady Di Horton. To you, St.. Clare, I have often repeated my intrigues —The feigned Lanore was once ari object of my fondest wishes-—I gratified them— His wit and dexterity procured him the livelihood of a gentleman—By fools adventuring their patrimony on dice, he kept up appearances. My -love eradicated, a friendship fucceeded from his kind behaviour refisting upbraiding. I made him fo-veral handfome prefents while at Paris, to fupport him : he gratefully, returned me thanks for it, and was of fervice by getting
into
f
[^8 THE MUTABILITY OF
into company with Melville, and heightening his passion for me by an exaggeration of my charms. I told you not of him, as it was un necessary. When I perceived Mel ville’s love for me flacken, I watched the caufe, and found out his frequent visits to Lady Di. To remove her, and af-siss the feigned Lanore to a good fortune, I invited him hither. I knew that his beauty and alluring manner would Soon be able to overcome her indifference, and that his gratitude to me would make him comply with my desire, which was, if he got into poffeffion, that he would remove her to Cornv/all, and confine her for Isse. He promifed—came to England, and took the name of Lanore—-foon got acquainted with Lord B — at a gambiing-table, in whofe houfe hornet Lady Di Horton. She ■ became charmed whth him, and they were . married. Thus, St. Clare, you fee, I com-pleated my revenge on her and Melville. But his daring to infult me with recalling Iiis Adelaide cornpleated the feene—Himfelf is a facrifice—^May horrors blaSt him in his laft moments ! As for myfelf, I shall quit life with pleafure: a wife father taught rrie that fyftems of religion were only the bugbear of fools, Heaven and Hell a mere joke: it has been my firm perfuafion. I have purfued pleafure to have a free range.
For
HUMAN LIFE. 13^
For that purpofe I beftowed laudanum on my hated hushand Guadicci, and fent him out of pain to annihilation*—^By a more public manner I have revenged myfelf on Melville—But 1 am now weary of the farce of life--1 wish to be nothing.’
“ Good God!’ exclaimed I, notwithstanding my paft guilt, “isit possible fuch a wretch can exift !—Holy Virgin, defend me!”
‘ Wretch not me,’ returned she— ‘ Does not your religion teach you to af-fist the afflicted ?—But I fee ’tis myfelf that muft move for fuccour^—Oh! I shall faint.’---
“ So faying she reached a fmall vial from a drawer in a cabinet, and taking a water-glafs, with feme water in it, intire-]y emptied the drops.
‘ This will relieve my prefent preturba-tion,’ faid she.
“ I wiSli it may assift you to repent of your crimes,” faid I, “ which years of penitence can hardly expiate.”
‘ Fool r interrupted she, ‘ two hours is the utmoft I can exift. Did you think I would be the timid, liliy fool, to fuffer mySelS to be arraigned for murder i No— My confession was for thy benefit, to teach thee how to live, and how to die.-—Diftraction —Oh I I am on the rack.
I
140 THE MUTABILITY OF
“ I immediately rung the bell, and sk the next room had- fcare ftrength to tell what this infamous woman had done,— that assistance miglit be directly applied for,—When I returned to her she was in extreme agonies — the horrors of conscience aroSe—“ Ah !”■ Said she, quite Sran-tic, — “ truth beams iipom me in this dreadSul i'^stant—my father deceived me!'—Oh,, horror! mufti become the victim oS his Salfe principles.? DiSlraction!
—	stis you have kilkd me ! O tortures!
—	whither am I going, St. Clare ? — iliere is a hell—I Seel it ahead) .nark ! — Guadicci!—O Melville!’ She fell into-strong convulsions, and fainted. 1 retired, shocked beyond express]on, into the next room ; — in a Sew moments Sne ex-pi red.
The Marquis was on the bed in great agony and pain. My foul was in tortures. On my knees 1 entreated his pardon Sor alluring him to my arms, and being the means oS his becoming possTeskd of the woman who was his miurdereSs; he was So compassionate as to Seal my pardon, and perSuade me to paSs the remainder of my days in penitence, adding, he Sincerely pitied me.
“ I retired to my houSe with anguish inexpressible — immediately Sent for a
priest,
H II M A N T. I F F.. i/i-t
.priest, and confessed my guilty history, who told me the only way to make my peace with heaven, was to make restitution, if possible, to you, and devote the remainder of my life to penitence and prayer, taking the holy vow. His advice I approved, it was rational. Father P—^— is not one oS thoSe mercenary priests which our religion are too Srecpiently diSgraced by; I thereSore enquired after you under my ow.n -name, and at last obtained permission to acknowledge my crime, and intreat your SorgiveneSs: wilLyou Seal it, Madam, by accepting theSe papers,” Said Ihe, (in wdiich She 'prefented me halS her fortune.^ -Slie wept much at my refuSal — called me extremely cruel ; but I told her it would afford .; me greater pleafure, iS she would bestow it on MonSieur St. Clare’s relations, as I now had, tharilc God, Sufficient for mySelf; that I sincerely forgave her, and should be glad to hear from the Convent she went to, that her peace of mind was restored. As she had
none of thofe very dreadful crimes to an-
■ . *
Swer Sor, that Violetta was guilty of, I doubted not but repentance would conciliate her to h<=aven, as (hr was awake to her errors. She coii'jitne‘-	v eep exceed-
ingly,— at last d i i' tuiiie of the unhappy Marquj..j tet	diamonds,
from
IA2 THE MUTABILITY OF
from her pocket. “ At least. Madam,” faid fhe, “ receive this, if it is only to diminifh my guilt; as I am now going to be devoted to a holy fpoufe, alt remembrance of this once loved object muft be erafed, and your goodnefs prefent to my memory. If my prayers can prevail,-— if the prayers of fuch a wretch have any efficacy, you will be completely happy. Alas ! how unhappy was my fate to meet with Violetta, for tho’ stie could not, nor indeed did, much attempt to destroy my System of faith, yet fhe instilled a fpirit of libertinifm into me, which without knowing her I Should not have had, or thought of Surrendering my SelS to the Marquis aSter your marriage. But talking in vain. Adieu, worthy- Lady 'Melville; may coritinual blessings.attend you !” So Saying, She departed, and has promiSed do write to me Some time aSter her arrival af the Con-ventoS———.
Poor unhappy woman ! she is worthy bS pity; she was born with strong passions, and, at too early a period of liSe Sor one of her disposition, leSt to piirSue the bent of her inclination, which was admiration. It was a great mercy she did not immerge herSelf still deeper in guilt with Such a monitor as Violetta. The Marquis only was master of her heart and perSon,
HUMAN LIFE. ia?
fon, and tho’ (be must be condemned as guilty, it is not ours to judge too feverely,
I am by no means an advocate for a monastic life to thofe of the Romisti perSua-fion, but'I think for fuch as the unhappy Madame St. Clare, it is a comfortable aSylum, withdraws them from the Seduction of the world, and objects which might otherwife cauSe a relapSe more dreadful thanv a first error. It is not every one who has refolution alike* To ’ make ufe of reafon to prevent their again erring. Madame St. Clare at prefent' has continually in view the late horrible feene, of which fhe was witness; shie faw guilt and atlieifm its own punishment in the death of her miferable friend ; the "gloom of a. convent will keep it still longer dn remembrance, and, I doubt nor, create a per^ fect reformation. —-Lord N ——f is confined by the gout at Laurel Grove. ' My Aunt bath written feveral penitential letw ters, and intreats me to go therei to feal her pardon, as She calls it, for hfer eriiel treatment. The world fmiles on me ww, Harriot : fhould not that be my concltifion of her : offers.—However,- I fmcerely forgive her, and intend tb wait on her foon. .	■	,
S Lord
/
144 the mutability OF
Lord Duncan continues very unhappy on your account. Neither of us -can by any means overcome the woman’s integrity w'ith whom I depoSit ray letters to you, or by any method Sind out your dwelling-piace: He is at times almoft frantic; therefore, my dear Harriot need not be under any apprehension that he can indulge one inconstant, thought. To confeSs the truth, I am not •Sorry it proves So, as a meeting between 3'ou might overturn all your refolutions of •adhering to your duty. The powerful arguments of a favoured lover, frequently overcomes fuch refolutions as yours. I hope, my dear friend, you will not think me deficient in friendship for harbouring Such Sentiments; but I think perSeverance in your duty will, in the end, make Lord and Lady Lorton reconciled to your wishes. J should indeed have been glad to enjoy the happineSs oSyour company, and a few days Since waited on Lady Lorton,^ to beg she would grant that Savour, promising her I would retire with you to a diftant feat of mine, where I would give her the moft folemn affurance she should require, that I would keep you concealed from Lord Duncan, and that you Sliould not even correspond with him. Your Uncle and her Ladyship unkindly reSuSed
me
HUMAN LTFR. iac
me, which I feared indeed would be the cafe. But let not that difcourage you, my dear Harriot; bear yourfelf up with as much fortitude as you can, and write to me often, to amufe your lonely hours. Your many kind letters and congratulations, during my filence, claim my best thanks, dear Harriot; but you are fenfible it muft have afforded me the truest plea-fvre. If I have given you cruel advice concerning Lord Duncan, confider it is for your welfare, and it arifes from my wishes, that you should rife fuperior to the rest of your fex in conduct as well as in beauty : not that I doubt your propriety; but fo amiable a lover as Lord Duncan is almost too aliuring to be refufed, if reaSon is not upon guard.
Next week I intend Setting out for Laurel Grove. I have promiSed your lover, that when I return, I will again attempt a reconciliation comSormable to his wishes. He will not Speak to Lady Emma, and they Say she is melancholy on that account ; So you alone are not unhappy.
It is reported, that the fictitious Cuont Lanore, whoSe real appellation is Signior Florella, keeps Lady Di under stridf confinement. Madame St. Clare inSormed me, she gueffed it must be So, as she had
H	not
t
146 THE MUTABILITY OF
not heard from her. After fo tediosts a recital you will not be difpleafed at a refpite. Mrs. Gordon, w'ho is now with me, joins in the mofl affectionate wishes ; she likewife inclofes a letter in mine. Adieu, my very amiable friend.
/
^	A. Melville.
Mtfs Meynel to the Marchionefs of
Melville.
O you imagine, Adelaide, that your uncommon generous offer would be concealed from' my knowledge, but you v/as mistaken, my good friend. Lady Lorton herfelf wrote me word of the furprife she underwent, when, to infure my happinefs with Charles, you offered, as a fmall token of friendSliip for me, twenty thoufand pounds, which were five* •more than he was to have with Lady Emma. Tho’ she acknowledged that they both admired the nobleness of your proffered gift, and extent of affection for me, yet they could not confent that their niece should be under fuch great obligations to a stranger,—befides, it would prove them mercenary,—foriune was out of the question, their word had
long
HUMANLIFE. 1^*7
long been engaged to Lord A------- for
his daughter, and they could not,— would not retract it. She therefore wrote to acquaint me that they were pofitive in their refolution of marrying Lord Duncan to Lady Emma: he now indeed was become more reconciled to their commands, as he difcovered it was for his emolument, both as to fortune and intereSl. As all hopes therefore of their confent was entirely put a period to, and Lord Duncan become infenfible to his own intereft, it, would be vain for me to entertain any future hope of feducing him, should you, rny dear Adelaide, find means to acquaint me of your generous intention, and enable me to purchafe a hushand. Such * was the contents of her very unkind epiftle.
Mrs. Gordon fpoke of your unbounded friend ship for me as itdeferved, and informed me your reafon for not offering fuch a prefent to myfelf was, you knew a delicacy you acknowledged v/ould be juSl, would make me refufe it, as it would make me otherwife undergo the cenfure of the world, who would, with Lady Lorton, fay I purchased a hushand. In offering it to them it was different, there was more probability oS fucceding, as poverty was my crime, and they mercenary; but you find,
H 2	m y
lAk THE MUTABILITY OP
my generous friend, that even that would not do—pride interpofed. Your affection for me, and attention to my character and rectitude of manners, is, my dear Adelaide, adequate to your own conduct in general. I am furprifed, though, you retain fo firm a regard for a girl fo volatile and giddy as Harriot Meynel : I can only fay I am fenfible of your kindnefs, and wish it was in my power to return it.
This Burton is now no more attentive than ever to Mrs. Harpur, and, by her extreme diligence and attention to Cant-v/ell’s preachment, has been enabled to make a new convert of the Gardener, who is now become regenerate—a new man
—and a faint of the houshold. This has
\
raifed her credit with her Miftrefs, whom she has now almoft got the entire fway of. Positively, Adelaide,, is is very provoking that I cannot Subdue this rebellious Spirit oS mine, and teach it to diffemble a little; but when they altogetherjoin in thanks to the Lord Sor being choSen vell'els, I am almoft tempted to execrate them Sor their preSumptiom Burton is ftill Sull oS Spleen to me, being heartily vexed with herSelf for acknowledging her fentiments fo openly to me, when she was going to quit the old Dame. I must expect no indulgence
from
H TT ivr A M T. T F F.
from her; but fhe is now pretty well at eafe upon that store, as fhe is fo fixed in her MiStrefsss favour.
Heigh-ho! how ridiculous is it that I^-cannot obliterate Charles from my memory. He will foon, bleffed with Lady Emma, intirely erafe me from his-'——no, he will not; ftill, if possible, I will flatter myfelS that he retains the fame efteem for me.—I must: believe what you fay, Adelaide—I will.-—But you are not to be informed that I am a very inconfistent creature ; you have long known it. Forgive me, receive my grateful thanlis, and be as happy as my wishes can make you, and your merit deferves.
Harriot Mevnel.
'
4>
\
I *
H 3	sr&
f
m
..... 'T LT t? A/r T T nr d T? T r r *t v' rw?
1	• ■* •*• ^
(
Fhe Marchionefs of Mei.ville ro ikf^
WIeyhel.
.%
Laurel- Grove,
J T is now a month my d»ar Harriot,
fince I was received here with the warm-
^ %
eft affection, and the moft condefcend-ing apologies made by Lord and Lady Lorton, refpecting their former treatment of me. As I am. by no means of ' an irafcible difpofition, you may conclude we were Soon reconciled. Lady N—— amply repays me now by her extreme kindneSs. The only Subject flie diSpleaSes me upon, is the Severity She treats my poor Melvilless memory with. He unfortunately had ftrong passions, and gave way to the enjoyment oS them too much, by which at length he Sell a Sacrifice in the early part of HSe.—-He repented, and repaired, in Some degree, the injury he had done me, which denoted a generous diSpo-fition. Few, guilty of the Tame error, would So nobly have conSeiSed the Solly of their conduct, for fear of bringing a fort of odium on their memory; in private they might have repented, but not fo puh-lickly have acknowledged it. I cannot, indeed, my dear Harriot, bear to hear him
now
HUMAN LIFE. irr
now afperfed: nay, I am Arr-.gralitude bound to refpect him, for the care hCroolc, though late, to re-eftablish my character, ' and at the fame time fettling fo ample a " fortune to fupport the title he bestowed. You are fenfible thefe-must be my genuine fentiments. Or I fhould have no occa-
fipn to assert them to fo fincere a friend*
/ *
I do not pretend to fay that I am inconfo-iable for the lofs of him; that would be hypocrify,. he never having been the man of my choice : but I esteemed him while he treated me with affection, and fmcerely commiferate his unhappy fate. . As his widow, it is really indecent to permit his' memory to be reviled in my preSence, and it is wliat I will' always malt'e a point to
prevent. Lord and Lady N------------- infifl
upon my Slaying another month ; the former is Slill confined to the houfe by tlie gout, but the neighbouring gentry visit us, and, finding me affluent both in fortune and the, favour of my Aunt, treat me with great refpect; fuch are the maxims and policy of the world. Had I appeareds. among them' at the period of my difgrace, what a different treatment should I have . received. Oh! wcrld, world, worki) world !;
I hope, my dear Harriot, ycuhave o-vercome all SuSpicion prejudicial to Lord
H 4	Duncan
<2 THE MUT ABir.lTY OP
Duncan, I mean by believing him capable of infidelity. Believe no reports on that point, from Lady Lorton, or thofe who Surround you ; for, be assured by me, no man can more firmly eSleem any w^oman, than his Lordihip does you. 1 have had two letters fince my arrival here from him, with numerous tender enquiries concerning you, intreating me to Sorward a letter from him to you. This I dare not undertake till the interdiction is withdrawn.— Perfevere, however, and resign to your difagreeable fituation, as the means which will convince Lord and Lady Lorton they wrong you, and that the qualities of your mind are fuperior to the most fplendid fortune. In one refpect, they treat you with more tendernefs than their darling fon, which is, by not endeavouring to unite you to fome other man; at leaSl, it is tendernefs and pride incorporated. Lady Lorton thinks no one that cf late has addressed her niece worthy of her, as they had not a title equal to her ambition. Lord Duncan’s perfeverance will, I make no doubt, in time overpower their refolutions againSl his inclination ; they will perceive his unhappinefs increafc, and yield to his w'ifiies, YeSlerday I received a pressing invitation to Elysium Place, from my ever worthy and valuable friend, Mr. Villars, and a few
lines
HUMANLIFE. jr;<i
lines frorn his Lady to the fame purport. Though it would afford me very great pleafure to fee them, yet there are reafons which render unacceptable their kind re* queSl. My dear Mrs. Gordon talks of yielding to an invitation she has received from them, and tries to overcome my refolution ; nay, affects not tb be convinced of the neceSlity for my obstinacy on that point; but I am certain her heart acknowledges me in the right.
Mrs. Burton’s malignant difposttion is fo natural to her, that I cannot help (perhaps too harshly) judging it will end but with her life. She must have fome object to gratify her fpleen, but she varies her object often i therefore, in turn, you may hope to be relieved. Policy and dissimulation, her own weapons, might gain her favour : a concurrence with her opinion, and bowing to her imaginary fuperior wifdom, the only means of gaining the name of her friend—She would be favourable to you, becaufe you pleafed her vanity— Yet it is a conduct I cannot recommend to you, my dear Harriot; and I am well perSuaded you could never put it into practice.
1 am hastily fummoned to attend com-
H 5	pany
54 the mutability OT
pany-—am with reluctance obligecl to quit you. Adieu!
Yours affectionately,
Adedaide Melville.
/
Mifs Me Y N E L to. the Marchionefs of
Melville.
J^URTONss passion for detraction o-vercbmes her difembled fpirit of Methc-difm, and proves her not a faithful sifter of the Elect. Some fev/ days since ssie entered my apartment with a malevolent fmile. Unaccustomed to cheat fui looks from her lately, I was going to demand the caufe, when her eagerness to communicate prevented me.
“ Lord ! Miss, What do you think V’ faid she—“ What a wicked age we live in 1—But you must promife not to mention what I am going to tell yon, for it is not proper to be publickly acknowledged, as it would bsing a difgrace on the rest of our faithful brethren—But brother Cantwell—that very Cantv/ell who has been the means of laving fo <¥iany fouls—was last night .caught with farmer Brown’s wife, who, it is Said, is with child by him. The news was brought to me ui the kitchen about an hour since ; upon which that i	creature
human life. IF4
creature Molly (I have no patience with her) fainted. When fhe recovered, she wept bitterly at his infidelity, and owned she was herfelf in a thriving way by him —Fie upom her! My miftrefs called her to account for defaming that holy man,
but she fwore it was truth—Hush !---------
Lord ! Mrs. Harpur is in the next room,”' whifpered she.-—Aye,. Mifs,” faid she aloud, winking at me, ** did you bur know the comfort and confolation of fol- ' lowing the fruits of the fpirit—But talking is vain.”-——So faying she left me in the midft of a loud laugh I could not prevent on the occafion. 1 liftened attentively, and found Cantwell himfelf was in the next room with Dame Harpur. By their converfation 1 likewife found Molly had-agreed to fettle another father on her child, andthat farmer Brown had confented, for the fake of the Elect, to conceal' the injury he had fuftained from Cantwell, who defended his guilt to Mrs; Harpur, and convinced her that true faith was fufficient, independent of works—■ ^ that it was holy love for his dear sifters made him act as he had done, for to make them the means of bringing more fouls to falvation.” Positively, Adelaide, I have no patience to dwell longer on this fnb-ject. What a fet of infamous wretches,
to
rfi THK MITT A BTT.it Y n V
to make religion a pretence for the great-eft crimes!
My fpirits are much exhilerated by the account you give me of Charles’s conftant affection. Men in general are fuch a fet of fickle wretches, that it is dangerous to put our happinefs in their power, which we do when we ejleem one particularly. I have made ufe of a pretty delicate word, Adelaide, inftead of that grofs one, love—* Commend me for it. My vow witholds me from comforting my coufin by any mefSige, but I pleafe myfelf by thinking he from you is acquainted that 1 am in health, fpite of our feparation.
Oh I what pleafure—Oh! what pain—
\
In thinking of an abfent fwainj
Wliat a fet of ridiculous mortals are lovers! One moment by Doubt almoft plunged into Defpair, the next elevated by Hope. Different paffions alternately fucceed each other, and make them appear the children of Folly.
Bui ton gives me more of her company than ufual, becaufe I am the only peifon here she dares mention the frailty of Cantwell to. She is continually dwelling on that fubject, and is happy I agree with
her he is culpable. Perhaps it is the firfi:
time.
HUMAN LIFE. lO
time She has w'ith justice cenfured. However, she has reported me more favourably to Mrs. Harpur, for I am permitted to walk in the garden and adjoining labyrinth with her. We were walking in the latter place last night, when a very handfome young man, drelSed in taste, pasted us, with a book in his hand. He bowTd reSpectfully in passing. I asked Burton from whence he came—She fmiled —faid he was a man of note, but would refolve me no further. “ Peace go with him,” returned I, and tempted her no more to forego a fecret she feemed willing to retain.
I hope, my dear, generous, friendly Adelaide will let me very foon hear from her, which is the only pleafure at prefent can be experienced by her most affectionate
Harriot Meynel.
fhe Marchionefs- of Melville to Mifs^
Meynel.
Lord and Lady N----------are fo kind as
to infift that my stay here has been but of short duration, though it is three months fince my fiist arrival. I complied with my aunt’s request of continuing till his Lordship recovered, to dissipate her anxiety on his account, and if possible render
iier
ck THF; MTITABILTTY OF
her more chearful. That excufe is over,
Lord N------is perfectly well; and I have
an earnest deSire to paSs Some time at * Melville-Park, a place I have heard much admired. It would give me additional SatisSaction iS they would acccmpany me, but all my intreaties are not powerful enough they will not comply.
Mrs. Gordon, however, laid afide her intention of going to ElySium-Place, and= has proniiSed me the happineSs of her company to Melville-Park. Ah! my dearest Harriot, could Lady Lorton be perSuaded to intrust you to my care, what inexpreS-Sible pleaSure would it give me—but I must dwell no longer bn that Subject,, as you are convinced or beirg in possession of the first place in my Sriendship.
Lord and Lady Walters are gone tc France. I have had invitations to the
Summer refidences oS the Duke of---------,
Lord and Lady Lovemore, &c. &c. and returned as polite reSuSals as I could Srame.; I in reality chuSe to be more retired during my year of mourning than I possibly could be at their houSes. Next week I shall be at London Sor a Sew days, while Melville-Park is preparing Sor the reception of dear
* A (eat the Marqtiis had left her, fituate in’ H----(hire.
m
Mrs,
HUMAN LIFE. kq
Mrs. Gordon and myfelf. There, undoubtedly, J Shall See Lord Duncan, and be able to inform you of his health.
Adieu!;
A. Melville.
fhe Marchionefs of Melville^^ MiJF
Meynel	'
O'	. PalfMaW.
1 HE melancholy Scenes' which passed here Six months Since are more pow'erSully renewed to ray remembrance by being on the Spot, and determine me to Seek out another bouSe Sor my winter reSidence. This will occaSion my Slay in town a little longer than I intended. I am told Lady Myntor is inclined to part with hers in GroSvenor-Square, a Situation I much approve,. and hope it will be Surrendered to my wishes.
I have Seen Lord Dunean, my dear Harriot, who asked me more questions about you than I could reSoIve. He, like all abSent lovers, thinks each hour a month, each day a year.
“ Fear, Hope, Defpair, and Grief alternate reign^
Rack his fonss heart, and torture ev’ry vein.”
The ■
i6o THE MUTABILITY OF
The account you give of yourfelf in your last; epistle, my dear Harriot, avows fimilar fenfations, therefore you may the more readily credit my report.
Though I do not condemn Lord Duncan, I cannot help commiferating poor Lady Emma for being obliged to endure his fcorn and inattention—a treatment difagreeable to receive, and caufed by the folly of parents, who endeavour to force what will not be commanded. Lady Emma unfortunately had an attachment to your cousin ; the command of her father might heighten it; vidiich must render her wretched.. She finds herstlf Sighted by the very man stie wished most to pleafe, and, if posteSSed of generofity, must be still more miferable at the idea of caufing him ho much inquietude on her account, and the ressection that if sie is compelled to wed her she must experience the most cruel indifference from him, a^ another poffelfes his heart. .Make a comparifon, my dearHar-riot, between her unhappy fituation and yourown—it balances in your favour—you have reafon to rejoice in the affection of fo conftant a lover. My time will be taken up v/hile 1 remain in town with different affairs I have to tranfact, but from Mel-
viile*Paisk you Sliali have a further account
of
HUMANLIFE. ifii
of Lord Duncan. Adieu! my dear friend.
A. Melville.
Mrs, Gordon to Mifs Meynel.
PaHMall.
Dear Mifs Meynel,
Our amiable friend the Marchionefs, having many little affairs to adjust, as we leave town tomorrow, and finding I was a letter in arrear to you, desired me to fettle it at this period, as (he had not time herfelf to' inform you She has really taken Lady Myntorss houSe. I have Something to impart, likewiSe, concerning Lord Duncan ; but, alas! I fear it will rather diftrefs my dear Mifs Meynel.
Lord Villars this morning fent a note to my houfe in B— Street, purporting a defire of a private audience, to which I returned, I was ready to receive him. He came. The caufe of his visit was foon communicated. Lord Duncan had hinted to Lady Melville his design of an altercation with Lord and Lady Lorton, which Ihe had dissuaded him from. Lord Villars, it feems, had done the fame to no purpofe. He purSued his intention, but could by no means perfuade them to confent to his defires
. /T/. 'T TT T7 A/f T T^rAT?TT T'TV r\T'
fires. Finding their perfeverance, as he imagined, unconquerable, he took a rtfe-lution to go abroad, and, under pretence of visiting a friend in the country, packed up his cloaths, and immediately repajred to. Dover, from whence he wrote to Lord Villars an account of his iii' fuccefs, and resolution of quitting England Sor ever, unleSs they would agree to his marriage vvdth his lovely couSm. He likewiSe in-treated his Sriend, at the Same time, to conceal his place of reSidence Srom every one but yourSeff, Lady Melville, and your preSent correspondent—begged to hear from him Soon, that he WTuld direct his letter by another name, eneloSed to MonS. B-—at Rheims, acquainting him bow Lord and Lady Lorton underwent the lofs of him, &c.—That he could not avoid reflecting on himSelf Sor causing them So much trouble, but that, on So Serious a point as that oS happineSs or miSery for .life, she could not comply with their wishes.-—He concluded his letter to Lord Villars with inSorming him he was juft embarking Sor Calais, his heart occupied with the idea oS his dear Harriot, whom he hoped Lady Melville would assure ol his constancy and affection. She is juft entered, and Says She will write on a Sev/ lines,. I resign my pen.——
Lad]
HOMAN LIFE. 163
\
Lady Melville, to Mifs Meynel.
I FLATTER myfelf that m.y dear friend v/ill not afflict: herfelf for the departure of her worthy lover, becaufe it proves the extent of his affection for my amiable Harriot; and though I faid every thing I could to make him desist from proceeding to an open rupture with Lord and Lord and Lady Lorton, yet I cannot now be forry for it, as I retain fome hopes that the lofs of his company will affect their tendernefs for him, and in the end make them confent to your mutual happineSs. At any , rate you should not make yourfelf unhappy, my dear friend, as it frees him from a weariSome persecution. Let me hear Soon that you are reconciled to his departure. Time will not permit me to Say more.
A. Melville;.
f
•	V	/
Mrs. Gordon, in Continuation.
{
YOU defire to be informed, dear Mifs Meynel, concerning Lord Villars* conduct in regard to Lady Melville, and if She has had an interview with him Since the Marquis’s death. You gueSfed right indeed, wlien you imagined she would be diSpleaS-
ed.
6a the MUTABir.TTY OF
ed with you if you wrote to her on that fubject, for (he will not fuffer me to make ufe of his name but as an indifferent perfon. His LordShip, since his firft knowledge of her, has behaved with fuch refpect and propriety, notwithffanding his violent passion, that it has exceedingly furprized me, and I believe has heightened Lady Melville’s efteem for him. After the Marquis’s death, he fent compliments of condolence, and enquiry after her health, as a diftant friend would. She changed colour, and returned the common anfwer. There it dropped ; for he never attempted to vifit her before fhe went to Laurel-Grove, or fince her return: but Lord .Duncan informed me he was in continual doubts and fear«, left She Should reject him when the period arrived that he might address her. He talked of her to me this morning in rapture, and intreated me, for compassion’s fake, to inform him whether I was difagreeable to her ? or whether, when her year of mourning was expired, fhe would reject his addreffes ? It was neceffary to conceal what little knowledge I had of her fentiments of him ; therefore anfwered it was out of my power to o-blige him.
“ Alas I your friend defpifes me, then,” Said he. “ How wretched muss: I be!”
I
HUMANLIFE. 16-;
0 '
I intreated him not to cherilh fo unfavourable an opinion of himfelf, since I did not doubt but on his uncle’s account he was poffelfed of her good w-issies and friendship.
C She flattered me fo once, Mrs. Gordon,” returned he, v^ith a sigh; but friendship alone——Oh !”--------
“ Don’t indulge Defpair,” returned I, with a fmile; “ time will unravel Lady Melville’s fentiments. Take my advice, my Lord ; cherish Hope till you have reaSon for the contrary passion.”
He bowed, thanked me for my kindnefs, and foon after retired.
I ventured to cell Lady Melville that his Lordship had made numerous enquiries after her—fighed much—and wished to fee her, &c.—=—
“ Stop, my dear Mrs. Gordon,” faid she, interrupting me ; “ I am obliged to Lord Villars for his friendship, but muSl intreat you will fpeak of him to me only as of a common acquaintance. I have been, under great obligations to his worthy uncle i therefore, if at the expiration of my mourning he chufes to visit me on the footing of an acquaintance only, he is welcome; the world then cannot cenfure me. —I fee you fmile, my dear friend,” added flie i “ but you are miSlaken in my fentiments

ments. At prefent I will fay no more.”
Thus our converfation ended.
It gives me great pleafure to'reflect that rwo fuch amiable people will in time be united, as their valuable qualifications will make themfelves happy and all around them. Lady Melville has amply rewarded all thofe who treated her with humanity during her misfortunes, and Says fhe has nothing now to wifh for but the enjoyment of your company, which fhe has been fo long deprived of. You may be certain, dear Mifs Meynel, that my wishes to fee you are the fame, and that you are conftantly in our thoughts and converfation. None can have a fin-cerer friendship for you than
Sarah Gordon.
f
r
N
0
% - ' '	' ’ Si V V
>
Mifs
HUMAN T.TFP • .r
%
Mifs Meynell to the Marchionefs of Melville,.
So poor Charles is gone to feek adventures for the fake of his Dulcinea. He is undoubtedly a conftant fwain ; but I have ftill fome fears, Adelaide, left fome of the ladies at Rheims Should, entrap him with their wit and vivacity-i—Then adieu fidelity and Harriot. Lady Emma was Jiill ///^—contrary to his tafte—But what fignifies I If he gains a new love, I Shall regain my liberty.----Then again fome-
thing wbifpers, What fignifies liberty when the heart is tortured and enfiaved ?
—Very true, good Mr. Monitor.—Alas ! Adelaide, it is very provoking for fuch-a— lively fpirit as mine to be reduced to this —heigho !—fighing ftate. ^ However, according to your commands I conclude by hoping the beft.
I am continually wishing to fee you : but had I an opportunity to elope from hence and pay you a visit, it would be intirely withdrawing myfelf from Lady Lorton’s protection—She would never forgive me—She would abandon me for ever, and———No, Adelaide, she shall
not
X
*	i
J
bS THE MTIT ABIT.TTY OP
not have reafon to blame my conduct, however unkind fhe treats me.
Heavens bleSs my dear Charles ! May pleaSing reflections attend his Solitary hours, iS he has any, and yours likewiSe. Adieu i
■ Harrriot Meynel. Ld. Villars to Ld, Duncan iz/Rheims,
For TUNE begins to favour thee,
Charies. Lord A——-ss eyes are at laft enlightened, and by your flight he is Sufficiently convinced that you mean not to marry his daughter. This has rouSed his SenSibility : he is enraged with Lord Lorton, as well as yourSelf, for the flight Lady Emma’s charms undergo. The old Marquis of ———, at a convenient period, propofes for her LadyShip: Lord
A-----feems inclined to favour him ; but
l am told the poor Lady is not willing to become fuch a facrifice. As I visit his LordShip, though fo particular a friend of yours, I ventured to his houfe : he exclaimed much againft you, and queftion-ed me whether I thought his daughter fo very undeServing a young man’s regard. I, in my anfwer, did Lady Emma’s
charms
HUMAN L I F E. i fio
charms due juftice, and alledged in your defence, a prior engagement. I believe, Duncan, I may tell tell thee, without being guilty of vanity, that, had I offer‘d ed myfelf for a fon-in-law at that period, his Lordship would have favoured me as much as the Marquis of ——. I was united that evening to a rout at his houfe; which invitatien I accepted, on purpofe to fee how Lady Emma looked after your provoking infult to her beauty.
She coloured much at my firft addref-fing her ; but recovering laerfelf, You fee, my Lord,” faid she with a faint Smile, “ I ftill exift, though Lord Duncan has infulted and deferted me.”
I vindicated your conduct, and fet *it in its proper light."
“ Lord Villars’ eloquence always deferves attention,’” returned she, with an effected curtefy and manner I never before obferved her to make ufe of. “ Lord Duncanss rudeness, or inattention, as you plea^ to term it, was indeed very visible froth our first; acquaintance-—he certainly wa^^not guilty of much dissimulation, Tny Lbrd .; but it was very happy for me that nty heart was likewiSe engaged to an object more worthy rhy regard,'*’ Said Sne (blushing, with vexation, I ftippoS-, Charles)-—“ though, perhaps, there are
I	inSurmouiit
*7Q THE MTTTAETT V ni?
infurmountable difficulties between iir, which can never be got the better of.” So faying, fhe hurried from me to another part of the room. From her manner it is vifible her heart is wounded ; but I imagine she was defirous; through rriy means, you might have reafon to think your conduct gave her no pain. Poor girl 1 she is fin-cereiy to be pitied : but I should have admired her more, if we had not endeavoured to be guilty of diffirnulation.
Lord and Lady Lorton are mhch affected at your departure, Duncan. They fent for me, and made efforts to learn where you are gone; but, according to your defire, (tho* I pitied their anxiety,) I concealed my knowledge of it. We had a long converfation, in which I took the liberty to recommend your intereSl; and Mifs Meynelss. To roufe their fears, too, Charles, I pointed out what ill confequen-ces might enfue from their obStinacy; brought proofs of feveral young fellows in similar cafes, who, from shfappointments, gave themfelves up to defpair from not being permitted to enter into a virtuous connection with the women of their choice *—afterwards relapfed into the moft abandoned morals^ and led the moft: profligate and disgraceful lives. I dwelt on the fubject, in hopes of favouring your willies,
by
UrTTV/TAXT T TtTIT
mm	^	mk ^m»	w	^ m ■
3y awakening their fears. They did me he honour to liften to my harangue, and when I took my leave preffed me to vifit
them often, as ufual. Lord A-----------ss
ft-armth has rather incenfed your father, therefore I have hopes you will arrive at the completion of your wisshes.
The lovely Marchionefs is gone to Mel-dlle-Park, accompanied by that friendly, worthy woman, Mrs. Gordon, who hath promifed, at a proper period, to plead in my favour with the moft amiable of women. Three months ftill have I to wait, Duncan : how has my patience been put to the trial!—But could She then be perSuaded to listen to me, it would amply recompence for what I have endured. Should (he reject me——I muft not harbour the idea; it would overpower my reafon. At Elyfium-Place fhe Savoured me with her efteem and friendship; her eyes faid imre. But then that cruel converfation Ihe had with Lady Di Horton concerning divorces occurs to my memory. Should thofe be her real fentiments, I muft ftill be miferable—But, no, I will not think of it—it was only a transitory difpute to oppofe Lady Di. Lovers reafon like madmen, Charles. I will relieve thee.
Adieu!
ViLLARS.
T	crt ^
172 THE MUTABILITY OF
N
f
The .MarFbionefs ©S’ Melville to Mifs
Meynel.
f
Melville-Park.
OU guefs the situation of this place from the date of my letter: it ftands in a fmall park ; the .gardens are extensive., and well laid out, my dear Harriotbut, as I flatter myfelf you will foon be permitted to take a view of them, I Shall desist; from a further defcription.
Lord A-------and your uncle are at va-
riance, which gives your friends hope that your return home will be the coHfequence. Ah! my dearest Harriot, how happy will be our meeting after fo tedious an abfence! I can never fussiciently adore the ways of Providence for having restored me to affluence and eaSe. Toui; dear company v/ill compleat my felicity.
There are feveral agreeable families Surround me, who have honoured me with their company. Mrs. Gordon and your Adelaide frequently amufe themSelves by visiting the little cottages around. How pleasing is it, my dear friend, to encourage industry,! and how .charming to relieve the distreffes oS thofe
whom
HUMAN LIFE. 173
whom illnefs or misfortune has brought to inevitable want ! What a folid fatisfaction is vibrated on the heart that is thus employed ! How much better money and time fo expended, than fums lavished on what are generally called pleafures, but are in reality vanities and fripperies of life!
The Hon. Mr. and Mrs. C-------- have
4
favoured me with their company: their ftay is never long in this neighbourhood, I am told, as they are a very polite couple, and detell: folitude. They deSpsse my want of taSle, are amazed at my mean condefcention in conversing with a parcel of Hottentots, as they term the cottagers, and divert themfelves exceedingly at my vulgar amufement. Adieu! my dearest friend.
9
A. Melville.
Mifs Meynel to the Marchionefs of
Melville.
IcAN fcarce hold my pen for joy ! That dear, benevolent, friendly Adonis, Lord Villars has by his uncommon eloquence overcome Lord and Lady Lortonss objection against my union with Charles.———*“My aunt owns, in her letter, it was his just reafoning made them confent. J am every moment ex-
I 3	pecting
74 the MUTABILITY OF
pecting Thomas, who is to attend me to London. Lord Duncan has been written for to return home, but you undoubtedly have been informed oS it by the man who is moft wortliy your eSleem. Forgive me, Adelaide ; your year of mourning is juft at its expiration, and I have long Sorbore mentioning his name. Surely, when decency permits, you will give him leave to plead his cauSe; his merit deServes to be rewarded by the only woman wlio is ca-pal le of doing it. Has he not, notwith-Slanding the predominance oS his unbounded passion for you, while your Situation made it criminal Sor him to acknowledge it. Strove to conceal it,, and made it apparent only by die height of friendship and efteem ? What man, So fituated, could behave with Such propriety, except himfelf.? Indeed, Adelaide, iS by an ill-timed prudery you Sorego happineSs by joining with Such a mate, I muft Say you deServe miSery. Mrs. Gordon tells me you will not Suffer her to mention his name. What can you mean by meditating cruelty ? I shall inSift upon a ccnSession when we meet^ which I hope will be Soon. Conveniently I shall arrive, as ycur Sriend is o-shliged to leave you.
The young man I mentioned to you, that 1 met Some time Since, was the huSband
HUMAN LIFE. 175
band of Lady Di Horton, who came to this neighbourhood for a few days. She is in fafe confinement in Cornwall, where she is likely to terminate her days.
Thomas is arrived; and, thanks to Heaven, tomorrow I leave this dreary, folitary place, and the fociety of Croakers. Burton is wonderful civil, and Dame Harpur not Sorry to part with her reSractory charge. Adieu! my dear girl.
Harriot Meynel.
From the Same to the Same.
London.
Tlif
LVAY Amyntor is returned, and full of
joy at his parents goodneSs, and ecSlacy at hisSoreSeen happineSs—1 mean what he in hope foreSees. Lord and Lady Lorton, Since they have conSented to our union, are willing it Should be Soon, and all things are preparing. I intend, therefore, with my Suture guide, to paSs a Sew days at Meiville-Paiic, by which time your mourning will be laid aSide, and I shall inSist; upon your returning hither with us. Pot Sitively, Adelaide, you ought to countenance me by appearing at the altar, and fixing Lord Villars* happineSs. You are under many obligations to that Wur tliy
Sriend
76 THE MUTABILITY OF
friend of ours—you efteem, nay you love him—How ridiculous, then, it is to render him unhappy by a peculiar fancy of your own, formed only to imbitter both your lives. Ygu have paid fufficient refpect to the Marquis’o memoiy; and positively, Adelaide, if you continue obftinatein your ftrange whim, I Shall be almoft ready to forfwear your friendship, though 1 have been fo much obliged to you.
Lord Villars has feen Clairville, who is exceedingly dejected at your refusing him again, and is determined to make a trial whether fait water will extinguish his flame.
Fye, fye, Adelaide, you make flrange work among the men. Here is Lord M—^— often in the dumps, fighing after “ the adorable, infenfible Marchionefs,” as he terms you. 1 am fometimes almoft tempted to bring them with me to Melville-Park, where, if you continue obdurate, they may put a period to their raife-ry in your willow grove. If it should fo happen, a monument ftiall be raifed to their memory, recording their misfortunes, with the Sollowing epitaph :
Fair Adelaide was the cruel caufe We thus fijibvei ted Nature’s laws j Weary of the sffiidting pain Occafioned by her fad difdain,
We
HUMANLIFE., 177
We wandered here—and here you fee.
We found the means ourfelves to free.
Take warning, reader ; gaard your heart From hopelels love, and Cupid’s dart.
Notwithstanding my raillery, I (hall become ferious concerning Villars as he is not an object: to be trifled wdth ; fo prepare yourfelf for an altercation, if you don’t coincide with my opininion. Bleffings attend you, my dear friend ; forgive my freedom; and believe me always
Your affectionate
Harriot Meynel.
fhe Countefs of WALTERSIo the Marchig-
nefs of Melville.
Paris.
Ma chere niece,
I knew you were bigotted to the to the folly oS decorum, notwithstanding all Count St. Lou’s intreahes, I Sorebore writing to you in his favour Sooner, flattering mySelS that at what you term a proper period my recommendation would be more regarded. Vous favez, ma chere Lady Melville, que—but I forget English is most pleasing to you.—You know then, my dear niece, that the Count has a fine SoLtune, and long has doated on you to
distraction
78 THE MUTABILITY OF
distraction ; he bids me fay it was the force of that paffion made him culpable—But he has often told you fo, Lady Melville ; I need not repeat it.—You must be long since convinced of your power over him, and, I think, if you are rnistrefs of your fenfes, will not refufe fo poliShed a young , nobleman ; one whofe life will be fpent in endeavouring to form the happinefs of yours. Lord Walters joins with me in earnest wishes for the accomplishment of this union.—The count is flying on the W'ings of love to England, and I have desired him to deliver this himfelf to you. Adieu, ma chere file. Adieu.
J. Walters,
Q
The Marchionefs of Melville to Mrs.
Gordon, with the foregoing enclofed,
O U will find by the inclofed, my dear Mrs. Gordon, poor Lady Walters continues as volatile as ever. What a misfortune is it, that at her time of life she will not afford fome moments to reflection. The least attention at the time she wrote, must have pointed out to her the impropriety cf her recommendation.
No
HUMAN LIFE. 1)9
No one, I think, but herfelf, could have defired fuch a union.
Count St. Lou had really the audacity to bring the letter to Melville-Park. My fervants conducted him into a parlour, and informed me a gentleman from France defired to fee me,—he came from Lady Walters, and had a letter. Luckily Annette recollected there was a piece of mnS^ lin and other things left littering in the room the ftranger was in, and afked if She had not better remove them. 1 anfwered in the affirmative, and bid her remark whether she had ever feen the gentleman
a	»
before, v»/hen in Paris with me. She hasted to execute my commission, and returned in the utmoft ccnSlernation, exclaiming,
“ Count St. Lou, my Lady S’ I must own, his name affected me Sor a Sew mi-nntes, as it recalled Some diSagreeable circumstances; but recovering mySelf, I Sent Annette to hirn with my compliments, and that if he had a letter Srom Lady Walters, he must deliver it to her, Sor I never would Speak to him more, and intreated he would leave the houSe. Several messages past beSore he would take his departure, but at last finding me re-Sol ute, he was obliged to go. He has wrote to me since, which letter I would not have received had I knows its authors
but
3o THE MUTABILITY OF
but I have dwelled too long on fo difagreeable a fubjcct.
My dear Flarriot is here, all health and fpirits. Lord Duncan likewife. In a few days I shall attend them to town, to fee them united beyond the power of a feparation but by death. May they long enjoy the felicity they deferve ! As foon as they are married. Lord and Lady Lorton will fet off with them to Myrtle Hall. By that time I hope you will be able to come to London. Adieu, my amiable friend.
Yours, &c.
A. Melville. Marchionefs ^Melvflle to Mrs,
G O R DON..
Grofvenor-Square.
Mr deareft Harriot yefterday became
a wife : her friend, MiSs Archer, attended as bride-maid, and Lord Villars as groomfman ; Lord Lorton, his Lady, and myfelf, cornpleated the company. She gave her hand with pleafure and chearfulnefs, and Lord Duncan received it with inexpressible joy. The carriages were ready at the door to convey all the company but me to Myrtle Hail. I endured many reproaches
HUMAN LIFE. i8i
proaches for my obftinacy, but alas! my dear friend, you know it is necessary for my repofe. Since my arrival in town. Lord Villars in a manner but too well calculated to affect any woman’s heart, addressed me ; his refpectful pleafing manner encreafed that eSleem and regard for him which I have long involuntarily entertained. I candidly recited my reafons for refusing him, acknowledging at the fame time my friendship; and that, was he, according to my idea, at liberty to marry, he should have the preference. You may be affured, my deareft friend, he made ufe of the most; powerful arguments to confute my opinion, but in vain ; it is a point of confcience which the most learned in difputation can never eradicate from my breast; It caufes me great affliction to think I am the means of mak-ing fo worthy an object unhappy ; and to redrefs if possible his unhappinefs and my own, by avoiding his preSence, I am determined immediately to fet out to Laurel Grove from whence I have received fo many kind invitations—there I will continue for fome time. Alas!—I cannot exprefs my mifery, dear Mrs. Gordon,— but I must not marry Lord Villars, whatever may be my partiality for him,—my God forbids it,—I dare not difobey. People
82 THE MUTABILITY OF
pie frequently justify their ow'n miSconduct by the practice oS others. ^ The Sriends they were connected with perhaps erred: but is that any good reaSon Sor Sollowing a vicious example } But, my dear Sriend, we should never purSue a multitude to do evil. BecauSe divorces by legislative power are allowed lawSul, I am not to accept the opinion of thoSe who vindicate that law, and think So too. It is the fashion to keep miSfreSSes,—men appear in public with them, tho’ they have amiable deServing wives ; but its being a common practice and vice of the age, does not exculpate, but rather aggravate the guilt. Li-centiouSneSs is ftill a crime, tho’ the virtuous part oS mankind do not treat the perpetrators oSit in the manner they deServe. IS vices were more discountenanced, they would not be quite So common,; at leaft they would be more concealed, which would be advantageous, as ill example is frequently too prevalent.
As a Small token of my Sriendship Sor dear Harriot, I have preSented her a Set of jewels, not oS value equal to my wishes,. becauSe I knew she would not accept of what she would term too collly a preSent.
May
)
HUMANLIFE. 18?
0’-'
May She live long to enjoy them! As for me, Heaven only knows my fate.
Adieu,
A. Melville.
Lord Villars to the Marchionefs of
^Melville.
It was a fufficient pimiShment, most amiable Lady Melville, to be excluded from addreffing you, without being deprived of your prefence and friendship; but every action of yours caiiSes admiration, becauSe it proceeds Srom generosity and benevolence—you fled thinking it necessary Sor my repoSe. Alas! Madam, tranquility?' has long taken flight from my boSom, but your preSence as a
Sriend, and engaging conversation, would
preServe me Srom im,merging into deSpair. Why ! O why ! lovely Lady Melville, will you perSevere in So cruel a resolution } You insist that Scripture diSallows a divorced perSon to marry, and that you must be guided by that. Forgive me, Madam, iS I again allege to the contrary ; Srom Scripture I can prove it : but you will not .be convinced, a^nd I
dare
84. THE MUTABILITY OF
dare not offend you further, by dwelling upon a fubject; you fo often have commanded me to be filent on.—I will ceafe complaining to my friends—I will repair to fome dreary folitude, and pafs my days and nights in mifery.—Yet why do I, by reciting my unhappy ftate, affect fo humane a heart, which from the moft refined motives rejects me -I am torn by contending paffions, my amiable friend.
-----1 admire, I adore you more than
ever,—-1 renounce my own judgment, and adopt yours,—the next moment I difavow it:—in Short, that I am in a ftate of distraction, is almost certain. An obdurate farther compelled me to wed Lady Mary, whofe conduct I difdpproved before She became my wife.—Afterwards ftie be-camepublicly criminal:—my idea of happinefs was fixed in a family way, and there all hopes were put a'period to—we were feparated by the laws of God and man
-----But I again relapfe.—Oh ! Lady
Melville, you almoft deprive me of my reafon. If you have any compaffion for the wretch who writes to you, afford him one line of comfort to cheer his heart in the defponding ftate it at prefent experiences. Believe, worthy Lady Melville, that my continual wiflies
are
HUMAN LIFE. 185
4
are for your happinefs, and that while I exift, I Shall be
Your moft refpectful,
Affectionate humble Servant,,
Villars.
fhe Marchionefs of Melville to Lord
Villars.
LaUreIGrove,
My Lord,
{^EING of a difpofitshn that difdains to conceal its fentiments, you will not be furprifed if I am guilty of impropriety, in acknowledging that your letter occafioned great anxiety of mind, as I fmcerely commiferate your mif-fortunes. It w'as my efteem and friendship that prompted me to avoid you. I moft sincerely wiSh your Lordihip repoSe and happinefs : time, and the abfence oS her who new caufes your affliction, may effect it; it is the only means leSt in my power to re-eftablilh your peace of mind.
My conscience dictates theSe Sentiments, Srom which I dare not deviate. As this is the laft letter I Shall ever write upon the Subject, 1 will take the liberty
to
S6 THE MUTABILITY OF
V
to quote from Holy W^’rit the portions which have fixed an opinion I fhall never alter. In the tenth chapter of St. Mark, we read as follows :
“ And the Pharifees came to him, and asked him, Is ir lawful for a man to put away his wife .^ tempting him. And be anfwered and faid unto them. What did Mofes command you I And they faid, Mofes fuffered to write a bill of divorcement, and to put her away. And Jefiis anfwered and faid unto them, For the hardnefs of your hearts he wrote you this precept. But from the beginning of the creation God made thesh male and female, For this caufe shall a man leave his father and mother and cleave to his wdfe, and they twain shall be one flesh ; fo tlien they are no more twain, but one flesh. What therefore God hath joined together let no man put afunder. And in the houfe his difciples asked him again of the fame matter : and he faith unto them, Whofoever shall put away his wife and marry another, committetbadukrey againft her; and if a woman shall piit away her hushand and be married to another, she cojnmitteth adultery.”
Again, in the fixteenth chapter of St.
Luke: ‘‘Whofoever putteth away his wife and marrieth another, committeth
adultery;
HUMAN LIFE. 187
adultery; and whofoever marrieth her that is put away from her hushand, committeth adultery.”
Thefe, ray Lord, conjoined, are our Redeemer’s words, and are to me convincing. Such a command, I repeat, I dare not deviate from.
His Apostles preached his bleSTed doctrine. St. Paul fays, in the 7th Chapter of his Epistle to the Romans, “ The woman which hath an hushand is bound by the law to her hushand fo long as he liv-cth ; but if the hushand be dead, she is loofed from the law oS her hushand: So then, if while her hushand liveth she be married to another man, she shall be called an adultreSs; but if her hushand be dead, she is Sree Srom that law ; So that she is no adultreSs, though she be married to another man.”
This proves plainly, my Lord, we liiould be dead to the old law, that is, the law oS MoSes, concerning divorces, and, alive otherwise, be guided by the new law, viz. that of the Saviour oS the world, who came to give a law unto us, and redeem us.
St. Paul likewise, in his Epistles to the Corinthians, Says, The wiSe is bound by the law as long, as her hushand liveth j but
ir
88 THE MUTABILITY OF
I
if her hushand be dead, she is at liberty to be married.’’
J
TheSe, my Lord, are the weighty proofs which overthrow all your Lordship’s arguments, confequently thoSe of all the reft of my Sriends, orr this fubject. I muft therefore intreat to hear no more on a point wherein I am determined to remain inflexible. If it will afford you any relief, or Satisfaction, to think I will never marry another, be affured of it, as none but Lord Villars can ever be firmly poffeffed oS my utmost esteem and Sriendship.
When I return to GroSvenor-Square, I shall be proud to receive your Lordship, on public days, with the rest of my Sriends; but aSter what has paffed, must be excufed from admitting you, my Lord, when a-lone.
I am with true esteem,
Your Lordship’s obedient fervant,
A. Melville.
Lady Duncan to the Marchionefs of
Melville.
JL O confefs the truth, Adelaide, it is
with reluctance I of late lit down to write to you. The caufe is evident—My pen will always mark down the fentiments of my heart—My heart condemns your conduct
t
, HUMAN LIFE. iSg
duct to Lord Villars, and I cannot forbear continually chiding you—^It at the fame time reminds me that I am under the greateft obligations to you on many accounts, therefore it is the height of impertinence for me to be continually tormenting and reproving you—^But my gratitude and friendship, it again anfwers, require my interfering on a point which your happinefs is fo much concerned in. You are to be informed I always was a pert chit, therefore I cannot change Nature; besides, my dearee here is rather wroth about your cruelty to his inestimable friend, who is continually writing most lamentable epistles concerning his truly tragic state.—^Indeed, he is in a piteous plight. Positively your opinion on divorces is very unjust, Adelaide; for in^-stance, this poor man in question.-—His wife grew frisky, and dishonoured him—' Well, you grantdt proper he should gain a divorce from her—But then he must lead a folitary life, without a helpmate or companion, becaufe she has gone astray ,; fo that he is to fuffer all his Life for her crimes. Pray what justice can you allege in that, my obstinate friend } Lady Mary may live years, in which time Lord Villars and yourfelf may become victims to your
abfurd whimi Oh I fie, Adelaide; for
the
\
oo THE MUTABILITY OF
the love of us all, be more complying, for when we reflect; on the confequence that may enfiie from your adherence to a falfe principle, we tremble for ycur defliny. Villars adores you fo, that he is now, I believe, almoft perfuaded you are right*— But you have long fince deprived him of reafon. What a Syren you are I
You take Scripture for your guide, A-delaide; the 5th oS St. Matthew Says divorces were not lawSul except in caSes of Sornication : that is a ftrong proof a-gainft you, my dear perverSe one—^Reflect on it, and take compassion on poor Villars.
Archer has had a letter Srom her Sifter, who, it Seems, is in Lady Emma’s confidence. Poor Lady Emma has been dan-geroussy ill with a Sever, in which She was delirious, and raved inceffantly on Lord
Villars. Lord A--------, who doats on his
daughter, deSired Mifs Flora Archer to queftion her concerning his Lordihip, when fhe had intervals oS SenSe. He always imagined Ihe liked my Duncan, till then. She conSessied to Mifs Flora, that She had long loved Lord Villars, and had of late entertained hopes that fhe was not diSagreeable to him, but that the news of his being on the point of marriage with Lady Melville quite overpowered and reduced
HUMANLIFE. loi
duced hertoher prefent languid ftate. Mifs
Flora informed Lord A---------—, unknown
to Lady Emma, who, having heard of your refufal to Villars, has refolved to propofe his daughter for him. The Marquis of —'—- has been fome time discarded.
My .friend Archer’s lover, I find, is eldeft brother to the identical Capt. F-— whom Lady Villas was guilty oC crim. con. with. The Captain, it feems; is coming to England, but informs his brother he ftiall leave her Ladyfliip behind in Holland.
Lord Duncan desires his beft refpects to you, and bids me add, from him^ that you are a very unreafonable, cruel female. Forgive us, Adelaide, for the liberty we take in cenSuring your conduct;;
but positively we cannot avoid it, when
• ^
we reflect what an enemy you are to your own peace of mind and happinefs.
Before I conclude I must recite an anecdote concerning Lord Villars, which will increafe your regard of him as well as mine. My better half here recited it to me. When Lord Villars was at college, he was intimate with Mr. Wilde, and at a vacation complied with his intreaty
\
!Q2 THE MUTABILITY OF
treaty of fpending fome time with his friend. That young gentleman had only a mother living, with whom he resided. Mrs. Wilde lived always in the country, and ufed frequently to invite a Mifs Hall to pafs fome months with her, fhe being a lively girl, and entertaining company. Mifs Hall was the daughter of a neighbouring parfon, who had feveral other children, and, what is commonly the cafe, you know, Adelaide, had nothing to leave them at his deceafe. She was four or five years older than Mr. Wilde. A few days after Lord \ illars arrived at his friend’s, he perceived the young people were lovers, and rallied Wilde on the occasion, faying, at the fame time, he feared Mrs. Wilde would not approve of Mifs Hall on account of her want of
fortune.----“ Pshaw!—d-mn*d ftuff!”
replied Wilde; “ Why, you don’t think I would be fo mean Spirited as to marry fuch a girl ?—^No, no, I intend having her at a cheaper rate than that, Villars. She will foon, I hope, gratify my wishes, for she begins to be complying ; and, if you like her, will then turn her over to you.”
Villars, sh return, made a fpeech of an hour long on the villainy of fuch a conduct, and the crime of feducing innocence :
HUMAN LIFE. 193
cence: but his harangue was to no purpofe; Wilde faid he was determined to proceed as he had intended, and with an oath told his LordShip not to fpoil fport.
It was night when this converfation happened. The chaSle Lord Villars could not , Sleep; he was all night considering how he should preferve the poor girl from ruin.
He rofe very early, and went to the most retired walks in the garden. His reverie was of Short duration, as he heard voices which he foon found were Wilde’s and Mifs HalSs. Mr. Wilde convinced the poor girl, by the most artful manner, that at that period he could not marry her ; but if She would comply with his wishes, the next term he would contrive means of conveying her to London, and there marry her. She anfwered, in return, “ that she could not indeed yield her honour to him, becaufe probably afterwards he would be loth to marry her.” Adong difcourfe enfued, which ended in his victory—She promifed to admit him to her chamber that very night, and they parted.
Lord Villars was still more shodked at this feene: he revolved many fchemes to withdraw her immediately from Wilde’s power; at last he fixed on one, which w^as to inform Mr. Wilde’s aunt of it, wlio was a good religious woman, and lived
K	about
QA THE MUTABILITY OF
about eight miles off. He immediately Repaired there, and inSormed Mrs. Gill of it. The good lady was much affected at the news, and told Lord Villars She would go there to dinner, and bring MiSs Hall home with her that night, where she should remain till a plan could be Settled to withdraw her entirely from her nephew. As her reaSon to her Sifter Wilde, she would allege Sear that her nephew would marry MiSs Hall. Things being thus Settled, Lord Villars called on a gentleman, and brought him to Wilde’s to dinner; at which time Mrs. Gill arrived, as iS by accident, and took MiSs Hall with her, as concerted. The young lady was very loth to go, and Mr. Wilde quite in a passion at her depaiture. When alone with Lord Villars, he attacked him with being the contriver oS MiSs Hall’s being taken away. His Lordship did not totally deny it. Several words enSued : and Villars quitted the hoiiSe with a tranquil conscience Sor having done his duty in Saving a young creature Srom inSamy and ruin. He did not ftop there; he wrote to MiSs Hall, advising her, as a Sriend, to beware of the Suture Seduction oS Mr. Wilde, who was bent on her ruin. He displayed to her the miSery that must enSue aSter her
deviation Srom virtue, for that her Sediv-
cer
U TT A/T A M T T F F.
r
cer would never marry her; therefore affliction and mifery mull be the portion of her family as well as herfelf. It was Mrs. Gill that informed Duncan of this affair. She faid the girl was exceedingly affected at Lord Villars’ uncommon humanity and compaffion for a ftranger, and with tears of contrition (hewed his letter to her, intreating her aid to protect her from a man she owned she loved too well, notwith-ftanding his cruelty to her. Mrs. Gill pitied her much, and contrived to fend her to a worthy friend of hers, where Slie might remain fome months in fafety from the allurements of Mr. Wilde. There a gentleman of fmall fortune faw her-—admired her—and fome time after they were united; the confequence of v/hich was she foon defpifed her libertine lover as much as she once loved him. Thus ends my ftory, Adelaide; and high time it is
to lay aside my pen, when I have faid that I am
Yours moft affectionately,
i
H ARRioT Duncan.
K z	The
o6 THE MUTABILITY OF
The Marchionefs 0/ Melvilte to- Lady
Duncan.
V
Laurel Grove.
. / »
Cruel Harriot! Surely your affection
for me is leffened Since your marriage, or you could never So Slrenuoufly endeavour by various arguments to aggravate my affliction. You well know my eSleem for Lord Villars, and you know that I am but too well convinced of his merit; why, then. Should you Slrive to heighten that unfortunate affection by reciting anecdotes which muff, if poffible, add to my grief, by reflecting that i can never be the wife of a man who hath fo exalted a character.
My ideas on divorces, I ftill maintain, are not unjuft. I grant, that wssi^n a w'o-man is criminal, a divorce is neceffary, but then neither of the parties ought to'marry again; it Should only be a divorce from bed and board. You allege it is very hard u mail Sheuld fuffer for his wife’s guilt,
. and be prevented from taking a fecond companion. I grant, my Harriot, that fuch an unfortunate huSband is worthy of pity, shut I would not have him perjure himSelS by a Second marriage, becauSe his real wife injured him. He muft bear this
misSortune
HUMAN LIFE. 197
misfortune wdth resignation, as well as others that are met with in life; it is not, thank God, a common fititation. You have fo lately passTed through the marriage ceremony, my dear friend, that you cannot possibly forget the folemn reciprocal vow you both took ac the altar; it ex-pref&ly fays, “ till death do you part.”' The invisible Creator of the world is, we doubt nor, always prefent, but more particularly in places dedicated to his worship. The prieSf, in his awful prefence, joins your hands and fays, “Thofe whom God hath joined together, let no min put afunder.”
He afterv/ards, in the name of the Holy Trinity, pronounces vou man and wile. No claufe is inferted in the ceremony that you ever can be difunited daring your lives. It is, therefore, my fixed opinion, that no human law should overthrow the marriage-vow taken in the more immediate prefence of invisible Omnipotence. Indeed, my dear Harriot, they must give a pretty extenfive latitude to their confcience who admit the propriety of a fecond marriage in fuch a cafe.
The verfe you have fixed on is no point againft me, my dear Harriot. The Jews commonly divorced their'wives for the most trivial things ; that charm variety
K	was
oS THE MUTABILITY OF
was frequently the caufe. Our Saviour knew the hardnefs of their hearts: he came to eftabliSh new and purer laws a-mong them. By degrees he fpread his doctrine, that it might be the more effectually received. In the 19th Chapter of St. Matthew he informs his hearers, that God’s intention was to pair a male and female Sor life, and aSterwards proceeds to the verfe you quote. His diSciples then argue, that, iS the caSe oS a man were So with his wiSe, it was not good to marry: in anSwer to which, our Saviour recommends chaftity, but alleges, that, as every one cannot perSevere in it, marriage Was thereSore inSlitiited, to preServe men Srom Sin, (at leaSl it is the SenSe I receive thoSe w^ords in,) thereSore they ought to remain chafte, and not marry, notwithllanding their wives being guilty oS a crime which might Separate them Srom dwelling together. In the most: important articles of liSe, I think it neceffary to Salvation to strictly adhere to Scripture. We fhould endeavour to Sulfil our duty to God preSe-rable to that oS his creatures. IS Srom unavoidable uneaSineSs oS mind I Should devolve into an ill state oS health, which may put a period to my days, I should- die Satisfied with having done my duty in combating against an action which would
diSpleaSe
H OMAN LIFE. jgg
difpleafe my Maker—rely on his mercy— and hope for never-ending happinefs in a ' world free from mutability. 1 mull therefore, my beloved friend, intreat, that, for the future, you will dehfl; from defending an action I Shall ever efteem criminal. I never will marry Lord Villars while Lady Mary exifts.
Lord and Lady N--------- were great ad-
vocates Sor his Lordship, but finding me inflexible have dropped the Subject. Count Sr, Lou has had the rudeneSs to Write to me here. I am duly attended by; Lord
C-----: he is an amiable young man ;
but, oh ! how unlike the truly admirable Lord Villars 1 Adieu ! my ever-dear Harriot : remember me to your Lord, and tell him his regard for his friend make,s him condemn me witSiout reaSon, or reflecting.
Yours,
A, Melviitt,
■S
_ ^
K 4	.Lord.
io THE MUTABILITY OF
Lord Villars to Lord Duncan.
____	London.
A ME founded the trumpet of Truth, Charles, when it informed thee of the
propofal Lord A--------- made me. The
reaSon I mentioned it not in my lafl letter was becaufe I feared you might imagine I recited it for the gratification of my vanity though Heaven knows I am, not much governed by the dictates of that goddefs of folly. My gloomy difpofition at prefent rather relapfes me into a contempt of myfelf by the difappointment of my wishes. The cruel, though lovely Lady Melville j>eifeveres in making me wretched ; but the more I reflect on her virtue and goodnefs,- the more I adore her : nay, there are moments that 1 acknowledge the juflice of her fentiment in refufing me. In short, Duncan, I am more contented with only her eSleem and friendship, and enjoying the melancholy idea of being beloved by her, at a diSlance, than I Should be with the pcffeflion of the most beautiful w’oman in the cieation. She has beauty to excess, all beholders muSl acknowledge; but I adore her mind more than her perSoii-^that beams celef-
tiai
H U M AN LI F E. goi
tial virtue. Oh! Charles, hard, very hard, is my fate, to be approved, yet be thus v/retched.
I waited on Lord A——- by his own appointment, when he took an opportunity to tender me his daughter. My anfwer was foon given : I informed him of the fituation of my heart, which could never be withdrawn Srom tlie object which at prefent poffeffed it. He intreated me to vifit her, at least till she recovered; but, as that would be deceiving her, I begged to be excufed. A few days after Ihe was able to fit in her dressing-room; he intreated me to go only as a common acquaintance, to inquire aSter her health. ' With much peissuaSion Lcomplied. Being the victim oS what I may term a hopeleSs • passion my SeiS, she demanded my pity, V/e were Soon leSt alone.
“ My Sriend Flora Archer was over-, come by my Satherss intreaties, my Lord,” Said she,. “ to-recite to hirn the imaginary cauSe oS my illneSs, and. becaufe I avowed-a particular esteem and Sriendship Sor your Lordship, imagined Srom thence my complaint proceeded; the conSe--quence oS which w'as, my Sather’s tenderneSs Sor me obScuring my demerits,,, he offered you his daughter ; a circumi-stance, my Lord', that has much wounded
02 THE MUTABITHTY HP
ed my pride. Lord Duncan was never poffeffed of my affedtion—Your Lordship, before his arrival, had gained my friendship—But Lord Duncan was a man of merit, and the flight he put on me gave me pain, as it depreciated me in the eyes of the world. Your Lordship was, nay, still js^ poffeffed of my friendship, the confequence of knov/ing your merit ; but, my Lord,” faid she, with a disdainful look, “ I would not have you imagine that you have the power of life and death over me becaufe my father and Mifs Flora have imbibed a mistaken notion.”----
“ When I behave with infolence, Lady Emma,” faid I interrupting her, “ condemn me ;—vanity I was never accufed of:—your friendship was more than I believed myfelf poffeffed of till now, when yourSelf informs me of it. I imagined your heart Lord Duncan’s at the time you difavowed it to me, and most sincerely pitied you ; for, ala.s! I myfelf know too well the tortures of a hopelefs paffion. You acknowledge I was once poffdTed of your friendship, but your prefent manner proves it fled; therefore, my Lady, I will no longer weary you v\iih mv prestneev” So faymg, I arofe to quit the room.
‘‘ You
HUMAN LIFE. 203
“ You anfwer me as I deferve, my Lord,” faid She, weeping.—“ Alas ! I can no longer diSguiSe my Sentiments : illneSs has rendered me weak both in body and
mind------But tell me candidly, my Lord,
Do you hate me I Was Lady Melville out oS the question, Should 1 be a diSgitst-Suh object .?—Alas! I bluSh at my Solly —I retract my words—but I still esteem
you------Oh ! my Lord, I am an object
truly worthy oS your pity—1 condemn mySelf Sor want of modesty, but indeed my Situation is truly pitiable.—Cruel father ! Why did you give your Emma an opportunity of expoling herSelf,” faid she, still weeping.
If I must confefs the truth, Charles, it is, that 1 could fcarce forbear shedding tears with her. I endeavoured to conSole her—gratified the vanity she might have, by granting her poffelfed of every amiable quality—(I think, indeed, she has many). —and that nothing but a prior engagement could have made me behold her with indifference. She feemed pleafed, though not fatisfied—thus we parted. I called on her once fince, and we treated each other as acknowledged friends. She certainly is an amiable woman, when an Adelaide or Harriot is not in question. But I will bid thee adieu now, Charles,
a-s'
3ZL THE MUTABILITY OF
as in two days I fhall fee thee at Myrt-e Hall. My beft wiShes attend Lady Duncan.
V
Yours,
Villars.
Mademoifelle Barfleur	the Marchionefs
^Melville.
From the Convent of---
Madam,
. 0
Stranger addrelfes you, who has often lamented the impoffissility of ever being perfonally acquainted with a Lady, whofe compassionate and truly Chriftian disposition is evidently displayed by her SorgiveneSs to her Severest enemies.— Alas ! my Lady, I have a cruel task to perform, Sor it is oS the unfortunate Madame St. Clare I muft write.—-The prayers of all our Sisterhood are now united to relieve her poor Soul.—Ah! wortliy Lady Melville, Spite oSthe wrongs file did you, an account oS her death nvust afford a heart like your pain.—She fell a Sacrifice to grieS. At her Sirst arrival litre we exchanged SriendShip.—-She recited
HUMAN LIFE. 205
cited to me ail her errors, which I believe no woman could more fmcerely repent of-----She painted your Ladyship’s cha-
racter is fo very amiable a light, that I was almoft angry with her Sor having been the means oS almoft all your misSor • fortunes,—yet her .repentance and Self-ondemnation made me renounce the leaSt inclination that way. For Some months she, With exemplary piety, attended to the rules and duties oS a monastic liSe, but an inward grief preyed upon her Spirits. Alas ! all my efforts to eradicate it were in vain. Finding her health declining, two other Ladies and mySelf, who had a Sincere Sriendship Sor her, endeavoured to perSuade her, that the gloom oS our holy retreat was prejudicial to her health ; therefore she had better again enter into the world till it was re-eftabhshed,—we Should then with pleaSure receive her again. In return to which she anSwered, the date oS our lives W'as fixed by Heaven, consequently change of Situation could not prolong it. A brother of one oS theSe young ladies is a moft accomplished young nobleman— he had Seen Madame' St. Clare Several times with his hfler,—he Sell a captive to her charms, and made his paSiion known to her. One day reading a letter of his
beSore
o6 THE MUTABILITYOF
before me, fhe bluShed, and faid, “ Bar-fleur, my dear Barfleur, I muSl be candid with you ;—my vanity I find is not extinct:.—The attention of this young nobleman is pleafing to me, though I have not the leaft friendfiiip or regard for him ; a plain proof I am unfit again to truft myfelf in the world.-—I fhould perhaps again be overpowered by flattery, and abforbed in vanity ; again launch into the follies of life, though I fleered clear of pollution.—Alas ! repentance only can obliterate my past crimes.—let me still continue to implore mercy of offended Heaven,Alas! alas !” faid ftie weeping, “ my revengeful difpofition, and unfortunate attachment to Violetta, was the main caufe of the poor Marquis’s death ; I was. accessary to it.—My peace of mind, never, oh, never can return, Barfleur. I loved him it is true, but not as a lover lament him ; was he living, convinced as I am of my guilt, he Should be crazed from my memory with horror. But his untimely fate, alas ! owing intirely to ,me, I must ever lament. Cut off, with all his imperfections on his head —stis too much.” Ah ! Lady Melville, a heart poffeffed of the least fenfibility, could not avoid being affected with fuch felf accufations. I wept with hen
Much
HUMANLIFE. 207
Much about that period fhe received a letter from Lady Di Horton, uXizs Florello, her prefent legal appellation; it runs as follows :
•I
To Madame St. Glare.
%
M.
AY furies feize this fellow, and tear
*•	0	m
him piece-meal, for having thus duped me!—-Florelio i mean. Confinement makes me defperate without any hope of redreSs. I fuffer as much torture as the
N.
deceitful priests perfuade you fouls do in purgatory. But why do I complain to you of mifery?—to you, who, after all your avowed friendship, fled without endeavouring to relieve me. On you, St. Clare, I relied for aid—my liberty gained, I would have enfnared fome fellow to maintain me in luxury. This horrible dungeon, which I fcarce breathe in, is enough to drive any creature but myfelf into defpair. Ravens, owls, and all the hideous train of obnoxious creatures, are continually flapping against my w'indows—the clock, like a difmal passing bell, is near five minutes founding each stroke ; and this wretch, at times, has the confummate affurance to fay, this is the life he will continually inflict upon
me.
o8 THE MUTABILITY OF
me, as a facrifice to the manes of his dear Violetta. The fellow is handfome, but if he was to adore me to defperation, I could not endure folitude with him, or any one man, above a month. Sometimes he has moments of fondnefs, then I endeavour to allure him, but he Is never off his guard at thofe periods. Confufion feize him ! He fays he loves me too well to trust me in the world ; befides, he is determined I Shall not dishonour him, which certainly would be the cafe, were I at liberty; that he always approved the caution of Spaniards in regard to their wives—Ladies of the hon ton fhould certainly then be very strictly guarded. A vagrant! how Shall I execute revenge on him ?—Clandon never writes to me, never endeavours to fee me ; but it’s the way of the world in general, and She
is a vain proud fool----but for you, Sr.
Clare,-----you ! whom I really regarded,
to ferve me fo intolerably, is abominable. Ptifillanimous creature! becaufe fate struck off thy lover, must thou in the bloom of youth and beauty bid adieu to gallantry, and, instead of receiving adoration, pay it at the Shrine of a mortal woman like thyfelf. k absolutely, St. Clare, is very laughable, even in idea, to behold thee, with bended knee.s,
adoring
HUMAN LIFE. 209
adoring the old bones of what is nominated fome faint, though perhaps they belonged originally to fome heinous sinner. Positively I always imagined you had more fenfe than to be guilty of idolatry, and adore old wood, stones, bones, and Nicholas himfelf knows what;
a mere political bubble, child-----------for
Shame!-------return to your fenfes, quit
the old Abbefs and her whining children of folly———refcue me from torture, St. Clare, and let us return to mirth and pleafure. But if you are abfolutely determined to facrifice yourfelf to she memory of Melville, may you be as miferable as you deferve to be in the sisterhood of ideots! in which cafe, that you write not to me is the earnest defire of your once affecti-onate friend,
Diana ■ ■ -------- ■
I v/ill not add this Vagrant’s name. Oh! for revenge ! revenge ! Mere chance produced this opportUiUity of writing.
. *
•t
J
See here, Barfleur, faid the unhappy St. Clare wish a sigh, prefenting me the
fore-
«
o THE MUTABILITY OF
>
V
foregoing letter, what reafon I have to bliiSh at my choice of friends and former connections. I will oblige Lady Di by my filence. My prefent ideas would didlate advice to her in my anfwer, w'hicli she would, enraged, destroy before half read. Alas! I fear it will require greater affliction, than she has yet experienced, to V7ean her from the pleafures of this life. This dear Lady then clofed her fpeech with encomiums on your Ladyship’s different conduct ; and, as uSual, burst into a floed of tears. She frequently m.enti-oned to me her promife of writing to your Ladyship, hut added, she v/as willing her year of probation should first pafs, that, by taking the holy veil, she might have the pleafure of assuring you her repentance was fincere and lasting, which she knew would be acceptable news to fo real a phil- . anthropist as your Ladyship. Alas ! Madam, her health at laSc declined very fast, and she was for fome time confined to her chamber, where she devoted her time to prayer and meditation. A few days before she expired, she attempted to write to you, but extreme weakneSs overpowered, and compelled her to lay afide her pen. “ It is now too late for me to attempt Writing to Lady Melville, my dear
Barfleur,” faid she with a figh ; “ the lamp
of
HUMANLIFE. 211
of life but juft glimmers—muft rely on your friendship, and intreat, that, after ray death, you will acquaint her of the manner of it, with a candid account of my behaviour fince my arrival here,—tell her, that with my laft expiring figh, I wish her many long and happy years, and after death never ending felicity.—Inclofe her Lady Dist letter, it will inform her of that infamous woman’s prefent fentiments and situation, though alas! it will give her pain. This, my dear Barfleur, is my laSl requeft: I doubt not your performing it;—repentance I hope has obliterated my guilt.—I feel a calm tranquility steal over my mind, and sheet death with pleafure.” Alas! Madam, I faw this dear friend, for whom I had a fincere affection, breathe her last. She preffed my hand, and feemed to expire without pain. May every one who has been guilty of erroneous actions, as sincerely repent as this dear Lady, whofe memory I shall ever regard. Her last request I most religiousty obferve; if I have been prolix in my account, pardon it, Madam, it was my defire of fulfilling the wishes of the dead, and making her memory claim your pity. She has bestowed a Small donation on this Convent, and diSpoSed oS the remainder of her fortune among MonSieur St. Clare’s relations.
I
12 THE MUT ABILITY OF
I hope this account w'ill arrive unmolested to your Ladyship’s hands. Aline, acknowledging the recipt of it, would aS-ford LinSpeakable Satisfaction to
Madam,
Your Sincere Friend, tho’ unknown,
And obessient Servant,
C. Barfleur.
J
. I ■
The Marchionefs of Melville to Lady
Duncan.
V
Laurel- Grove.
T-
HE two letters I incloSe, my dear
Harriot, are not calculated to raiSe my de-
• - 0 \ ^
preffed Spirits. The unSortunate Madame St. Clare is at reft—peace to her ashes! I gueSs MademoiSelle Barfleur muSt be an amiable woman, Srom her pious and Sriend -ly attention to the penitent victim. I have acquieSced with her requeSl oS writing, to affirm her Savour came SaSe to to hand. Having wrote So lately, my dear Sriend, I have nothing to communicate. Remember me to your Lord, and tell his too a-greeable Sriend I am well. Adieu.
Tours, &c.
A. Metville.
Marchionefs
y'
HUMAN LIFE. 21?
Marchionefs of Melville to Mrs.
Cordon.
Laurel-Grove,
AlAS! my dear friend, it is with an
affliction that baffles all defcription I fit down to write. Philofophy, religion, or reafon, can never mafter our grief when real misSortunes attack us.—It is for Lord Villars that my heart Suffers this inexpreffi-ble anguish. Alas! while I am writing, he may perhaps be numbered with the millions of ihoSe who are no more.—My Sighs are wafted—my tears are shed in vain.
I was Sitting reading to Lady N-----in
her chamber, when her woman Smiling in> Sormed me, that a very handSome young gentleman enquired Sor me, and deSired to be admitted without delayfto my preSence. It excited my curioSity : I immediately repaired to the drawing room, where I Sound in the ftranger Lord Duncan.—He looked pale as death, and exhausted with Satigue. -—How is Harriot ? demanded I in haste. —Oh! she is Well, returned he—but my Sriend—Oh ! Lady Melville, poor Villars will Soon Sail the victim oS your barbarity. With tears he then inSormed me, that the
amiable
1
14. THE MUTABILITY OF
-amiable Lord Villars, fome few days fince, was feized with a violent fever at their houfe,—-it increafed, and the Doctors pronounced it was impossible he fhould live. —It was but at periods he retained his SenSes, in one oS which he gained the truth oS his fituation, and lamented much that he could not See me beSore he expired. Lord Duncan therefore having an unexampled Sriendship Sor him, immediately Set out Sor Laurel Grove, to intreat in the name of them all I would attend him thither, to receive the unSortunate Lord Villars’ laft Sigh. How can I Sustain Such a trial, my dear Mrs. Gordon ? My heart is ready to leave my boSom.—I cannot alas! even in idea, undergo it and retain my
SenSes.'---He is the only man I ever loved.
—I rejected him Srom the most delicate of objections—ilay still must do the Same, was I Sure to gain his precious liSe by a contrary conduct. It is better to die innocent than live guilty, though only in one’s own idea.—His virtues will procure him happineSs in a better state, and perhaps merciful Heaven will compassionately shorten my date,—we shall be united in a happier region. But a thouSand things now claim my attention—In a Sew hours we Set off Sor Myrtle Hall, and while we sty two hundred miles what a dreadful catastrophe
HUMAN LIFE. 215
taSlrophe may happen. An! my dear* ray amiable friend, pray for a fpeedy turn* and pity your truly diftreffed
A. Melville.
'Lady Duncan to Mrs. Gordon.
>•
Myrtle-HaU.
Go OD God 1 my dear Gordon, what
will become of Adelaide and poor Charles when they^ come hither, and find the amiable Lord Villars expired before their arrival ! I am abfolutely Stupefied with grief myfelf, and, to mend the matter, poor Ai'cher has undergone fuGcessive fainstings, which she is but juft recovered from. Dr.
C-----has given her a compofing miKture,
which I hope she will receive benefit from. The poor girl, it feemed, loved him to distraction, though she concealed it with fuch care, and Strove to promote his happinefs with Adelaide: but she is bleffed vwith an amiable difpofition; no wonder therefore she admired a man fo formed every way fo formed to pleafe,—r—You know his merit, fo i need nor dwell on it.
I had informed his Lordship of Charles’s departure and hopes of Lady Melville’s return with him. He attended to what I faid with pleafure; “Ah! Lady Duncan,”
faid
i6 THE MUTABILITY OF
faid he, “ fuch an idea recast me almoSl to life—but, alas! perhaps She will arrive too late to receive my laSl figh.”
Three hours after, .Nurfe came and informed me he had expired without her knowledge^—that fhe had been abfent from _ the bed half an hour, and yet he felt cold. Soon- after an exprefs came that Charles and my Adelaide would be here in a few hours. 1 am abfolutely at a lofs how to prepare them for the Shocking news—I wish you was here, Gordon to advife me. Poor unfortunate Villars!—What shall I do I—I hear the carriage coming—The palpitation I am In fo great, that even my teeth chatter.—Heavens ! what a feene I muSl pafs through !—-Alas! poor Adelaide, what muSt thou fuffer I
I am retrieved from my agitated ftate a little by my mistake, dear Gordon. It was riot thofe I expected, but our friend Mr. -----, the furgeon. He was much affected at the melancholy event, as he had not heard of Lord Villars’ illnefs. I recited the particulars of his diforder, as he feemed defirous to be informed of it, and how long it was fince he expired. He often wished he had arrived fooner, and eagerly
^ asked
HUMAN LIFE. 217
asked if Dr. C—— was with him at the time he died. He was not, 1 returned, but infpectied him after Nurfe’s alarm, and declared him irretrievably gone ; but that I. had not had the body moved, as I expected Charles every moment, who would rather give neceffary orders himfelf concerning his friend I imagined. With my leave he faid, he would take the laSl view pf fo valuable a nobleman. He is gone for that purpofe my dear Gordon. Poor Archer is ftill afleep. Oh ! fie, thefe melancholy fcenes are enough to affect one’s fpirits for a twelvemonth.—I muSl lay afide my pen.
4
Unfpeakable joy intoxicates my fenfes, Gordon. The darling of the fair, the charming \ illars, Slill lives. With this item you are undoubtedly on the rack to know particulars, and heartily rejoiced to find we did not bury the poor man alive.—* Patience, Gordon, and I will gratify thee, ill-capaciated as I am for relating events with propriety. To begin, then :—You miaft know, when Mr. ■—-■■■ was afcend-ing the stairs, in Slov/ paces, to the fuppo-skd chamber of Death’s" victim, he met Nurfe withststonifhment visible on hcran-
L	tique
THE MUTABILITY OF
tique features: “Lord! Sir,” faid Slie, “ come along—you are arrived in a pure moment, for as fure as day his Lordihip is not dead—Come along !—I wasjuSl going to tell my Lady that I am fure a Doctor could bring him to life.” ,
While she was delivering her tale, Mr.
-----hurried to his Lordshipst room, and
found that there certainly w^as life in him. ' i he whole houfe was prefently alarmed ; all pojssible. assistance was afforded him; and, to shorten my wondrous story, in an houist time, he returned to his fenfe«.again. Mr. —— haS'prefcrrbed medicines forhim^ .and gives us hopes that he will foon recover, as it was a fudden turn of his fever, which was for his benefit. Mr.--------
fays any of the Taculty might have known that he had life in him-: befides, his jaw never fell. .Had ,tke fimpleton of a nurfe imenticned that circumstance, it would have struck me : hut you know I am not Sond of admiring dead people, therefore I never -W’ent into his chamber after I was told he was dead. If my dear Charles had been here, he would have been wifer, and ‘poorNillars had affistance fooner. I have had the happy miracle revealed by degrees to Archer, who is greatly elevated at the mews, and fits by me at this prefent wri-iting. Alas! poor girl! she is in a pitiable
tuatioa
HUMANLIFE. 210
situation , but I hope She will have the refolution to overcome her prefent fenfation for the sick man, and we fhall all be happy. But that dear creature Adelaide will not compleacostr felicity—She is abfolutely very obstinate—What signifies her shewing herfelf to Villars, if She will not marry him ? If Lady Mary would but make her exit at this critical juncture, how delightful would it be, Gordon! but dorist you imagine, from the hint I have given, that I wish for fuch an event. No, no. Heaven forbid, giddy as I am, that I fhould wiSh for any perfon’s death; that is a crime of too black a die, Gordon,
r
George is arrived, and informs me his master and Lady Melville will be here in half an hour; therefore adieu, Gordon. You (hall foon again Ivear from eisher Ade* laide or your prefent cocrefpondent.
’ Harriot Duncan.
L z	Marchionefs
\
20 THE MUTABILITY OF
Marchionefs of M e l v i l l *e to Mrs,
G OR D O N,
Myrtle HaU.
HE fevere feelings I underwent in my
journey hither, m.y fatigue, ray terror, and my apprehension of the worSl affliction that
could befal me, are more than I can de-
\ *'
fcri be ; but the firft view of our dear Harriot gave me hopes my, fears were vain, ;and the amiable Lord Villars was out of danger. Shq informed me of every circumstance, and how .keenly ^touched She was at our mutual friendst SuppoSed diffo-lution. The recital affected me tosthe 'Very heart. Want of attention might have Been the means of our eternal lofs. How fortunate it was Mr. —^— arrived to Save a life So valuable f He now is able to fit in .company as uSual. What pleaSure does it afford me to view his returning health ! It was not till three days after my arrival here! was admitted to his chamber —then it had very near overpowered his w'eak frame. “ Is it possible Lady Melville- can have the goodneSs to travel So many miles to endeavour to Save the life of a man whofe hand she refufes Said he.
Ah] Madan>, pardon me.; you are all
virtue
HUMAN life:	22i
virtue, and all benevolence; you are the deareft friend I have on earth-^I must love, I must esteem you, while I exist. If there are in reality guardian fpirits, as fome have thought, my foul Should still hover around you, and protect: you Srom all miS-Sortunes, till the hour oS your dissolution,,, when I had liberty to conduct you to that biiSsSul region your virtues So justly deServe to enjoy.”—But the Speeches oS lovers, my dear Gordon are too SurSeiting—-too adulatory to be repeated~yet we con-^ Sider not how much our little merit is heightened when we listen to the man we love, becauSe we are pleaSed at every wordi he utters, and do not give ourSelves time to reftectit is flattery ; nay, if we did, even flattery Srom him is pleaSing. We would have him over-rate our merit, and be blind ' to our defects, by way oS inSuring his constancy. Yet to what purpoSe is all this, Since I cannot compleat his happineSs," and marry him .? Lord Duncan, too, will not permit my departure Sor Some time, lest his Sriend Should relapSe; but I hope poor Lord Villars will be quite reinstated in a Sortnight, and I in my liberty. MiSs Archer is. very much affected at having been thrown off her guard, and difcover-ing her affection for the too agreeable Lord ‘ Villars. She promifes to attend me to
L 3	Melvili©-'
22 THE MUTABILITY OF
Melville-Park. Indeed, She is a very a-miable girl, has refined fentiments, and a mild difpofition. I don’t know any one fo fuitable as Mr. Clairville to her difpofition. I hope She w»ll foon be happier.-----Were both their hearts at li-
berty, I think they wotild be mutually pleafed, and make a very happy couple. This may not be impracticable. He has begged for permission to vifit me. I Shall be at London before I go to Melville-Park. She will be with me. 1 fmcerely wish they may be struck with each other. But theSe fort of fenfations will not be forced, I find, alas! by experience—it makes me pity
her the more. Harriot is defirous to add
_ 0 _
her kindest wishes, before I conclude myfelf your ever affectionate
I
A. Melville.
I
Lady
♦
I
H IT M A N L I F E. 22:
Lady Melville to Mrs. Gordon.
Myrtle-Hall.
T	'
JL/ORD Villars not being even yet per--feCtly recovered, my dear friends here infill upon my lengthening my vifit. Do I act right by complying with this requell ? —Perhaps it may delay his final recovery.-They fay, the reverfe : on which pre-fumption I fubmit. When the tirne of our feparation arrives, how Shall we both fuffer.^ There is no remedy—We cannot, we must: not, be united—^But I trouble you too much, my dear Mrs. Gordon,, with thefe melancholy effhfions of a disk appointed heart, therefore will endeavour to relieve you.
We fpend our time with tolerable chearfulnefs at prefent, and have often the company oS Sir Harry Feniow and his lady, a very polite couple. Sir Harry does us the honour to admire us all in turn, and Lady Feniow ogles with our gentlemen; but as, unluckily for her, they had not any inclination to intrigue wdth her lively LadySnip, she began to be out of humour with them for their stupidity. Fortunately Lord Hazard arrived in good time to recruit her fpirits; nay,
L 4	makes
iA THK MTTTABTT.TTYOR
makes love to her before Sir Harry st face; to which he is politely deaf. In turn Sir Harry makes particular compliments ro poor Mifs Archer, who is out of 8^ patience at his infolence; but Harriot is properer to write on Such Subjects than me ; beSides, I ftill have a very great depression of Spirits. St. Lou persecutes me with ietters-^I wish he would return to his native country—>How could Lady V/alters give him encouragement to torment me So! Let me hear from you Soon, my dear friend,
Yours fmcerely,
A. Melville,
/
\
Lady
HUMAN LIFE. 525
Lady Duncan to Mrs. Gordon.
Myrtle-Hall.
S,R Harry and Lady Fenlow’s adherence to bon ton wounds the mind of my dear Adelaide, while I laugh heartily at their folly. I think it’s abSurd to do otherwife, as they chufe to make themfelves ridiculous. In the country one muSl visit people one defpifes, or live alone. You muft know, about two years ago this polite couple married for what they call love, Gordon, and retired to the country for three months, by which time they were heartily weary of each other. Their next determination was to take a tour through France and Italy, which cornpleated their imaginary politeffe.~-They returned the silly creatures we now find them.—Charming benefit and improvement they gained, really. Sir Harry' and Lord Hazard are professed friends, and gamblers; the former has lost; feve--ral thoufand pounds lately; The indulgence of this faid passion for gaming is a ■ dreadful practice—-In a few moments what numbers are rendered beggars by it ?•—Noble families ruined 1—-It makes them guilty of the meanest actions, and
L 5:	too
z6 THE MUTABILITY OF
too frequently ends in fuicide.—Heavens! Gordon, if I am not moralizing ; I believe I muSl inliSt under Lady Fenlow’s banner, or I fhall dwindle into a ftupid humdrum matron indeed—But we are going to dinner there, fo adieu!
V,
Sad doings, Gordon !—What misfortunes arife from people’s folly !—I was rather premature in my reflections—But for the event:
Lady Feniow was alone in the drawing-room when we arrived: “ Thefe men,” faid Ihe, “ are continually at dice —they have been at it in Hazard’s dref-fing-room all the morning—Surely, ladies, your company will allure them from it.” She then ordered a fervant to inform them we were come.
In about half an hour’s time Sir Harry rulhed into the room, pale as aShes, with his hair loofe, and in the greateft agitation imaginable. He looked at us with a wildnefs that furpaffed all defcription. Lord Hazard foon followed him, dreffed.
Dear Feniow,” Said the latter, “ don’t be So abominably rude to the company becaufe you have loft a few co-
rainders
HITMAN I. I F R.
rianders—Thefe fair ladies claim your attention.”
“ Perdition to my curfed fortune— you and the whole world !” faid he—“ Is
this a time to talk of gallantry ?-Lady
Fenlo, I’m undone—Lord Hazard has won my whole fortune.”
“ Lord ! Sir Harry,” faid She, cooly,
What is to become of me.?—^—My Lord you will take me in the bargain
A rapturous fpeech was then uttered by his Lordfliip, and an agreement to her request:.
“ Well, then, positively you Shall have me,” faid She.—Sir Harry, my Lord will get you a commission. I’m fure, by my defire, and you may retrieve your fortune in America.”
We ail imagined She was not bent on fo infamous a conduct, but it proved too true; flie certainly had intended to ■ go off with him before this event happened.
Sir Harry was almoft diftracted at his own folly, but under no concern for Lady * Fenlow’s deferting him.
Things being in fuch confufion, we were obliged to return home to dinner ;. but before we came away. Lord Villars and Duncan ft rove to make Sir Harry more compofed, but that was impossible.
He
:8 THE MUTABILITY OF
He has only two hundred a year left to fubfist; on, which I almoSl think is more than he deServes. I will not begin moralizing again, though there is Sufficient room for it here. Poor Adelaide and Archer fit fighing for Sir Harry, though . they acknowledge by his adventuring he deferved fuch a misfortune. As to her. She is one of the moSl infamous of w'c-men.
I am highly delighted, my dear Gordon, with part of a French author’s v/orks* I have juft been reading—Fie gives an account of the English, and paints the difpofition of our men I think very propeily (laying afide a few individuals we know). Then he compliments our fex fo, that he deferves to have a monument raifed to his memory. I think it runs thus in English :
-----“Happy as the French efteem
themfelves in the company of women, as much the English dread it : at leaft, if they are amorous, they only find in the fair what gratifies their passion, feldom what engages their mind. They prefer the pleaSure of drinking the healths of beauties in a tavern to that of entertaining them in a circle—treat them as a
0
4
* Lettres dstn Francoi?.
different
TI TT M A M T. T F F	->oa
different fort of being as w^ell as Sex—• and, in general, think them only fit to diffipate their chagrin, and Sweeten the fatigue of bufmeSs. ThoSe met with at Paris endeavour to juflify their countrymen by Saying women, in England are not So entertainig as in France; but, SuppoSrng that to be the caSe, is it not the fault of the men ? If wc find more pleafure in the converfation of French wmmen, it is not becaufe they have in reality more wit, but they difplay it more.
“ The prefence of a man in England creates taciturnity in a v/hole circle of Semaies.
“ At Paris, a petit maitre Scarce arrived to manhood, Suffices a dozen of our belles at a time to move that agreeable infliru-ment cf fpeech we call tongue. But we must; neither commend or blame the Eng-lifh ladies for their taciturnity, as their filence is occafioned by the embarrassiment they find in company. This embarraSL ment proceeds only from their being unaccustomed to it. It is lefs their fault than our fexst, who neglect them, and who, by the dangerous habit of drinking, destroy all refined Sentiments, v/ith
•r	“
perhaps the defire of -pleafing. Thefe who give themfelves up fo much to the fatal custom of drinking are not made for
the
30 THE MUTABILITY OF
the converfation of women—Seldom are they amorous—they are only libertines.
“ The English men lofe much pleafure by living fo little with a fex who have ther share of graces from Nature, whofe fociety has always charms, and a peculiar fweetnefs in their coriverSation which wc find not in our own fex.
“ Converfing with women foftens and polishes the manners ; by the habit of endeavouring to pleafe we contract: a tone equally agreeable to both fexes. Men with each other are too fupine; their converfation languishes, or turns to a warm dispute ; Sor to gain applaufe, they ftrive for a Superiority, and are mutually offended ; neither will acknowledge being in the v/rong ; and it finishes by hating him they could not vanquish.
“ With women we take a Surer method of gaining efteem—We Study to pleaSe them, and we Succeed. It is the ienSation one Sex naturally has ibr the other which inSpires the inSinuating tone and affecting manner that conSecrate true politeneSs; which habit we cannot contract but by the company of women. The cuftom of the Sexes living in this manner is truly eftirriable, and constitutes the de- '
light and happineSs our lives.
You
H TT M A M 't. T P F
“ You may^ eafily perceive, by the air as well as manner of drefs, theSe people are removed from the converfation of the fair fex. It is from this great negligence that the English have a je nePai qwi of filer cen efs which Strikes us So,
“ ThoSe who go to Paris with the advantage of Speaking our language with eaSe aStonifh us always with their embar-ralSed air, which they Seldom quit. The cauSe is evident. They no Sooner quit the univerSity . than their firft years arc passTed at London in Srequenting coffee-houfes and taverns, thofe places fo pernicious to youth, which they cannot frequent without hurting their fentiments.
“We perceive others Studying the manners oS strange countries before they are acquainted with their own. This is another inconvenience. We Should not travel but in fearch of knowledge. Thofe who have no idea of it are not calculated to find it. Most of the tutors thefe young men are configned to are not themfelves fit for travelling. They bring with them from college that pernicious cuftom and vice of fmoaking and drinking. How can the instruct their pupils in ,a politenefs they are unacquainted
with V——
I am
Z32 THE MUT ABILITY OF
1 am haftily called from abufing my
own dear countrymen, and, as the post
will Soon be going off, my dear Gordon, must bid you adieu I
Yours Sincerely,
H. Duncan.

HUMAN LIFE. 2?,
9
The Marchionefs 0/ Melville to Mrs.
(^RDON.
$
yiyrtle-HaU.
My dear Harriot has, I find, informed you of Sir Harry Feniow st folly, and his Lady’s moil unparalleled affurance— Infamous woman ! to defert her hushand at Such a period, even though he brought his misfortune on himfelf by his own indifcretion. If he had poffeffed the leaft regard Sor her, what additional affliction muft it have caufed him ?—‘But undoubt-
f
edly she was become an object of diSgust ^The name of wife to So fine a gentleman was enough to cauSe hatred—His purSuit was variety in his pleasures ; the common vice oS the times.
Lord Villars and Lord Duncan Sent the next day to enquire after his health. The Servant informed us Lady Feniow went off with Lord Hazard after dinner. The latter told Sir Harry he was welcome to remain there four or five months if he choSe it, till he could Settle himSelf. What a cruel mortification, my dear friend, to be told So!—A houSe which in the morning was his own 1 The Servant Said Sir
Harry
234 THS MUTABILITY OF
Harry was like a diftracted man, and continued fo.
Lord Villars was shocked at his mif-fortune, and went to condole with him; and offer his fervice or intereft; but he would not liften to his Lordship, and in-treated to be left alone.
Yefterday, however, he packed up his cloaths, and took his laft leave of a place that might ftill have been his own but for his unconquerable passion for gaming. What diftracting fenfations muft he carry wuth him I—doubly mortifying to a man sh abforbed in the purfuit of pleafure. Lady Feniow wiH, likewife, in turn, become a prey to defpair—Lord Hazard’s licentious passion will foon expire—She will, perhaps, be diftressied, even for fub-fiftence.---Such is the mifery entail-
ed on vice commonly in this world! —An indulgence of irregular passions reduces us ta mifery, poverty, and indigence.
Next week, my dear Mrs. Gordon, I Set out Sor Melville-Park, and hope that you will Soon be able to join me, for I shall {land much in need of your company. Adieu! adieu I
A. Melville.
The
HUMAN LIFE. 25c
1
The Marchionefs of Melville to Mrs.
Gordon.
9
Myrtle-HalL
I HAVE fiirprifing new's for my ami-
abe friend—news that will give your affectionate heart more pleafure than it has received a long time, as your amiable difpofition makes you trembling alive all ostr** to the misfortunes and happinefs of your friends. Harriot would have me keep you in fufpenee, to fet your curiofity ftill more afloat, and not inform yon what it is in this letter; but I cannot agree to fuch an unfeeling practice.
Lady Mary-------has been long numbered
with the dead. I do not exult over her afhes—May they reft in peace I—But it would be affectation to lament her, tho’ it would be barbarous to triumph.—^^Such a conduct would feem chargeable with the guilt of dissimulation. No, my dear friend, I will candidly confefs the thoughts of being united to Lord Villars gives me great pleafure—^He is a man of fuch uncommon merit—fo unlike the vulgar rake—I muft be happy with him. It is to Mr. Clairville I am indebted for the
above
f
56 THE MUTABILITY OF
above information. He is acquainted with
Capt. F----, who fome time lince arrived
in England, and has paid his addreffes to Lady Emma. Her LadyShip was too much engaged to attend him. This touched him I'enfibly. The news of Lord Vii-, lars’ dangerous illnefs made her ffill more referved to the Captain, being in the greateSl -anxiety concerning, his life. Gapt. F——^ obferved it, and complained to Mr. Clairville, who recited the common report which prevailed that Lord Villars*' diforder proceeded from his efteem for me^ who had refufed him on account of Lady -Maiyst being alive, &c. fo that he need not be under -any apprehenfion that Lord Villars would ever trar>sfer his affection to Tady Emma, or,any other woman. Glair-viile further Said, he fmcerely wiShed to fee me united to his Lordfliip, (Since I had refufed him,) as he hoped it would fix my happinefs, which would give him inexpret-fible pleaSure-^That he really was forry, extremely forry, I had taken fo uncommon a refolution to diSappoint his friend’s Se-Jicity,
Captain F- >— attended to him with the greateft SurpriSe^“ Is it poffible ?” be cried—“ Does Lady Melville actually reject Lord Villars for the caufe you mention
HUMAN LIFE.
tion ?” Mr. Clairville affured him it was So.
He paufed—then tasking Mr. Clairvillest hand with a changed countenance,—— “ Clairville, Said he, I injured Lord Villars; but I was likewise the means of releaSing him from an infamous woman. Our acquaintance was of a very short date before his Lordship procured a divorce. Novelty was the charm. She propofed going to France after she was at liberty, but altered her mind and determined to go incog, under a feigned name to
....... -shire ; that she might after a few
weeks go from thence to Calais, and, unknown, quit England, not chufmg her
friends should have any knowledge whither she was gone. Part of her plan was executed,'—We went to ---——shire, and both took her maiden appellation, passing for man and wife. A Sortnight after our being here she fell ill^—grew worfe, and I called in proper aid ; but she foon was past all human assistance. She was not in the least affected with the near profpect of her diffolution ; neither, 1 believe, did she in reality perceive her danger, for she Seemed inclined to intrigue with the Doctor who attended her.. About three hours^ however, before she expired, she faid she felt herfelf much v/orfe, and infisted upon
immediately
38 THE MUTABILITY OF
immediately making her will.—A lawyer came. She bequeathed me her whole fortune, which was four thoufand pounds: —She had it with her in notes and money, which fhe intended to fix in the funds abroad. This will being cornpleated, and every one withdrawn, She requested as a favour in return for her love, that, if she expired, I would conceal her death from Lord Villars, and the world in general, that they might not triumph over her me-rhory, and exulting fay. Vengeance had overtaken her ;—further, that 1 would take a tour fomewhere out of England, and when I returned back, fay I had leSt her abroad. “ This, my dear F---------con-
cluded she, it is all I defire of you ; a fmall requeft, and one with which I hope
you will comply.—Adieu, F'---------faid
she, “ I find myfelf fteepy, fend Nurfe hither.'” I retired. Nurfe came an hour after and informed me, her Mrftrefsst fleep-inefs was fucceeded by great agonies; that she feemed to have a great horror upon her, and could not fpeak ■ intelligibly. Difagreeable as fuch a feene was, I determined to attend her, as perhaps she might revoke her laft requeft, and wish to have her will cancelled. I held the will in my hand, and asked her if I should deftroy it? ‘She shook her head, and J could just
diftinguish
HUMAN LIFE. g
distinguifli fhe faid, “ No ;” but her feem-ing agonies were paft defcription. I then fent the Nurfe out, and asked her if She’ ftill defired I would conceal her death ? She anfwered very plain, “Yes, yes,” and nodded her head. Soon after she fell into Strong convulfions, and as I was quitting the room, expired.
“ Gay as I then was,” faid be to Mr. Clairville, ** the manner of her death shocked me. I foon after had her private- ‘
ly interred at ...... church, left the
place, and purfued my former pleafures. Every one imagined we quitted England together, and I did not contradict the report in my anSwers to my friends letters, strictly adhering to Lady Mary’s laft requeft : but the prefent occafion, I think, juftifies me.; by concealing -it I should render too amiable people wretched. Lord 'Villar^’s character claims the greateft refpect, Cl air vile. I should be proud to acquaint him every obstacle to his union with Lady Melville was removed ; but af-•ter what has paffed I have not the affurance to appear before him.—^Do you therefore inform him of the happy news, and if Lady Melville requires a more fatisfactory account of Lady Mary's death, it is only
writing to Mr. W----------, the attorney, at
•----, who will affure her of his attending
us
lo THE MUTABILITY OF
us at the time of her fall illnefs ; nay, indeed, the will which I now have in my poffeffion is fufficient proof; I Should imagine that will afford her Ladyfhip fufficient
fatisSactiion.”
%
Thefe, my dear Mrs. Gordon, are the particulars of Mr. Clairvillest account in k letter to Lord Duncan.
Harriot, overpowered with joy, after having read the letter, ran into the room
and faluted us all round. Lord Villars in
/
raillery returned her thanks for the honour she had done him, when she cried, “ Sit down, good folks, and let me read the happy recital; be Sure, though, you don’t lofe jour fenfes with joy, Villars.” She then with an audible voice read the letter, which you may be certain affected me not a little in feveral refpects. Poor Lady Mary’s inconsiderate end made a fmall im' preffion on his Lordship,-—he fighed at her frailty, but rifing joy foon fucceeded it. He demanded if I would ftill persist in refusing him, as he was now, according to my own way of thinking, at liberty. In return to which I anfwered. Seeing the will would convince me. I therefore wrote a line to Mr. Clairville, making an apology for my want of faith, and desiring my compliments to Captain F-------------, in-
forming him, if it was not inconvenient
and
HUMAN LIFE. 241
and improper, I Should be glad he would permit my friend, Mr. Probus, to infpect into it. My requeft was granted, and I was convinced. Still farther to fatisfy me, Lord Villars wrote to the perfon who made the will,-—likewife to the Doctor who attended her, &c. The anfwers were all
■fatisfactory according to Captain F----st
account.-r-They called her Mrs. ——.
No impediment thereSore remaining, my dear Gordon, I have no plea to postpone our marriage. Lady Mary has been dead two years ; no mourning is neceffary for her in Such a caSe. Lord Villarsst Spirits are beyond what I ever Saw them. No woman can have a profpect oS greater earthly happineSs than I have, my amiable Sriend. Bountiful Heaven amply rewards all my paSt Sufferings.—^Tomorrow Mil's Archer Sets off for London, with Lord Villars and mySelS. Harrioi aud Lord Duncan are Soon to follow, while we prepare Sor our Sacred engagement. MiSs Archer Seems with great pleaSuresto anticipate our happineSs ; and is delighted with the character oS Clairville : we all flatter ourSelves they will be charmed with each other. I am Sure they would not be unhappy in marriage, if they would venture, ther diS-poSitions are So perSectly amiable.
VoL. II.	M	' Wc
43 THE MUTABILITY OF
W
We have juft received a melancholy ac-xoiint of the infamous Nugent.—Purfuing hisjgailantry in Ireland, he infulted a married Lady of family—her brother demanded fatisfaction; they met; Nugent was mortally wounded, and furvived but a few hours. The gentleman was obliged to abfeond, and the poor Lady is very unhappy on account of her brother. What evils -continually fpring from a fpirit of imlicen-fed gallantry, and what they term fashionable intrigue. Void of any fenfe of religion, they deliver themfelves up to the embraces of Vice. Harriot drags me from you, my amiable friend, and tells me Lord 'Villars is impatient at my long abfence— positively I shall not fcribble any more— she will be obeyed, therefore, my dear friend, I muSl bid you adieu. Happinefs .attend you is the fincere wish of,
■your affectionate
A. Melville.
HUMAN LIFE. 24=
From the Same to the Same.
,	Grofvenor Square.
I HAVE had the honour of a moft extraordinary visit from a perfon I little expected. You will be furprized when I inform you it was Lady Clandon. I happened to be alone when She came.
She entered with her ufual gay air “ Ah! my dear Lady Melville, I am
charmed to fee you, after fuch an nge of abSence—“I came, out of pure friendship, to diffuade you from marrying Villars for Heaven’s fake don’t think of it-Miss trefs of yourfelf, and fo fine a fortune, don’t be fo mad as to barter them for a defpotic fullen tyrant—^He is fo faturnine a creature—Oh ! horrible to think on!
_____^Now, if you really are determined
to become a Slave, why there is Lord
]y[____a fprightly fellow, who will not
interfere in your conduct—I came purely out of friendship, to advife you~He certainly is the moft worthy object.”
“ I muft beg. Lady Clandon, you will be filent on a fubject that does not concern you,” returned I.
“ It certainly does not, Melville,” anfwered ftie: “ but then friendship urges:
M 2,	befide
AA THE MUTABH fTT OF
befides, I really fear Lord M--will go
diftracted if you marry Villars. What fignifies a handfome phiz ?—Pho!—that you will Soon be weary of. I remember reading a ftory very apropos in fome old
hVench book, but what book I cannot bur-
^ %
then my memory with—I fwear it’s not my own invention—-I thought it clever—I will tell it you—’Tis apropos
‘ A young gentleman befpoke of a certain painter a picture of Hymen—I will have it attended by the Graces, faid this passionate lover—Remember that Hymen must: be reprefented more beautiful than Adonis—^You must put it in his hand a torch brighter than Cupid’s—In fine, make a trial of your Skill, and I will pay you for it according to its goodneSs. The painter, know'ing his liberality, endeavoured to pleaSe him, and brought home the picture' the night before the gentleman’s marriage. The young lover was not Satisfied—There wants in this figure, Said he, a certain gay air—Some agremens—certain charms—In Short, it anlwers not the idea I have conceived of Hymen—You have made him but moderately beautiful—you fhall be but moderately paid.
‘ The painter had a great deal oS ready v;it, as well as genius Sor painting; he theieSoie immediately coincided with the
ger .leman’s
HUMAN LIFE. 245
gentleman’s opinion. You have reafon not to be contented with my picture, faid he; the face is hot yet dry—To fpeak freely, I lay my colours on in fuch a manner, that my pictures appear but indiffer ent when firft finished. I will bring" this picture again in a few months, and you shall pay me for it according to its beauty.
I am fure it will appear quite another thing. Adieu! Sir; I am not diftreffed for money.
‘ The painter took back his work. Our young lover was married next morning. Several months elapfed without the painter’s appearing. At laft he brought the -picture. The bridegroom was furprized to fee it. You have promifed well, faid he— How time has improved your picture— What a difference—I fcarce know it!—
I admire what effect time has upon thefe colours !—I admire ftill more your ingenuity .'—Neverthelefs, it cannot prevent my telling you the countenance is too gay—-the eyes a little too fprightly—They Snould not be fo bright as thofe cf the God of Love—Hymen ftiould appear graver— Befides the attitude of your figure is too airy—a little too free—and you have given it an air of wantonnefs, which the character should not have-—It is not the Hymen I v/ant after all.
M3	Very,
i6 THE MUTABILITY OF
‘ Very w'ell, Sir, faid the painter ; what I forefaw is come to pafs-”Hymen is now lefs beautiful in your idea than in my picture. It was quire the contrary tliree months ago. It is not my picture, but your idea is changed. You was a lover before--now you are a hushand.
‘ I understand yon, faid the gentleman —Lay it down—From what you fay I find the picture is according to my own fancy. —It is just you should be paid according to your skill—There is a purfe which contains double what you could hope for— Take it, Sir, and leave me the picture.
‘ No, Sir, replied the painter—No, I will not leave it—I will give you another, which shall pleafe both lovers and married men—it shall open the eyes of all painters. Accordingly, he painted another, which he finished with a great deal of art. Hy men, viewed at a diftance, feemed quite charming; but near, quite otherwife. This picture was placed in a fuperb gallery in a fort of alcove : to approach this alcove a fplendid glittering place charmed the beholder’s eyes; but when he arrived there—adieu all charms.’
“ Thus ends my ftory, dear Melville —It is really true enough—Marry for love, and you’U furely be miferable—jealous
HUMAN LIFE. 247
Ions of each other—»and, oh ! what horrible gloomy tete d tetes will enfue 1”
“ My refolution is fixed, Lady Clan--don,” returned I; “ I defire no other happinefs than the indulgence of my huf-band’s company. DomeSlic happinefs is the ambition of Lord Villars and myfelf, and I doubt not experiencing it. I am forry to affront any perfon who has once treated me with civility—bnt, as our dif-pofitions are fo diSferent and your LadyShip continues So gay, I muSt inform you, Madam, that my doors will not be open to you again,” Said I, rifing.
“ Surely, Melville,” returned she, “ you are not in earneSt—you cannot have the effrontery to turn me out of your houfe. What, I Suppofe you have heard of my innocent flirtation with Lord M------ are
jealous-—and in a Sit of defpair will marry
Villars---Aye, certainly the caSe>-——
You’ll repent it,—Depend on what I fay —-Mere friendship brought me, and! have been abufed for it—-Mighty civil, indeed, my Lady Marchionefs !•—Melville should have learnt you politeneSs and decorum before he gave you a title—Poor ignorant creature!” faid she, nfing, and v/alkingup and down the room in a violent rage,
I was almost: afraid of her, and rung the bell while she was fpeaking, when
my
(
l8 the mutability OF
my fervant came; “ Call up Lady Clan-. don’s carriage,” faid I, looking at her with haiightinefs.
“ Revenge shall enfue—vulgar ill-bred creature faid she. “ I \vill not gc>—No—1 will Slay to torment thee.” Luckily Lord Duncan entered. He faw me pale, and hef in a rage. “ Con-fuSi on!” faid he, “ What is the matter, dear Lady Melville V
“ Dear Lady Melville !—Oh ! then your pious Ladyship is not averfe to intrigue, though you can condemn me,” faid she, in a rage, looking at me “ But I will be politer than your inSolence deServes—I will leave you to enjoy your lover.” So Saying, she curteSy’d Scornfully, and took herfelf away.
What mad-woman is this faid his
/
Lordship, as she departed, for he did not recollect: her.
I informed him who she was, and W'hat had paffed between us. He commended me for treating her as she deferved, being a woman of fo loofe a character, that it was improper to vifit or have any connection with her. But it is ' high time to conclude. We are exceeding bufy in preparations for our folemn engagement. Flarriot will inform you,
my
\ ( '•
H TT M A N L T F E. oag
my dear friend, when it is cornpleated. Affure yourfelf I Ihall always be your affectionate
V*
A. Melvilli.
y
> .
Sffy
■L V	^	'■■ ;s'	■
fy-r 'V ■-■■■-■-v:.-;
V	- -~.S	N' V . .
■' S_ ■	--N'i	. '	■-	. A ■	■ '	-
_ - - . ■ 'ct—^ - ■
'■ N '-'	■ C-Tj ■ -	_ . ■
- ■ ■- - \
- - ' ’
\
h -1
i
Lady
i
50 THE MUTABILITYOF
Duncan to Mrs. Gordon.
Melville-Park.
Never was a fet of mortals happier
than we are here, Gordon. The me-ment after Adelaide was irrevocably united to Lord Villars, we poSled hither, where love and friendship divide our hours. The dear creature has received congratulations from all her friends on the occafion. Villars is fuch an amiable character, they could not object againft him. You perceive, my dear .Gordon, by this couple of lovers, that virtue is fometimes rewarded even in this world, where your thinking people will allow only wickedness and deceit to be met with. For my part, I cannot grant it fo—Good and evil are certainly blended—Many characters are worthy of immortal fame, fome meet with a reward here, fome not : but I am a creature of too volatile a mold for moralizing—^that bufinefs I leave to you and Adelaide.—-What an admirable philofophical pair will she and Villars make,—you will compleat the trio, and in time perhaps, when my hairs are filvered over with age, I may improve by your lectures, with a
young
HUMAN LIFE. 251
young brood around us. It will then be time to think.
Poor Archer’s chearfulnefs is affected— I often find her weeping when alone.-— Lord Villars Still adheres to her heart, but fhe will be compelled foon to go with her father to Scotland ; new objects, I hope, will rellore her tranquility, though, alas! a fincere love is hard to be eradicated. Clairville feems to have a friendship commencing for her, she allows his merit,—but as yet they both appear distant from the union we hoped for. Her fifter infoims her, Lady Emma has peremptorily refufed Captain F----------, and
Slill fighs out ViilaiV name ; all men are indifferent to her but him, therefore she is determined to gratify her vanity and
ambition. The old Marquis of...........——
has renewed his addreffes, and Flora Archer thinks ihc will accept him. Lady Clandon purSues her intrigues, which her Lord entirely overlooks. Adelaide has received a very affectionate letter Srom Mr. Villars. She and my Lord intend paying him a viSit in a few months. I have nev/s to infoim you oS, which eScaped my memory in my two laSl epiSlles. Fluellen, alias Burton, is numbered with the deash Mrs. Harpur accuSed her of Some miSconduct, at which she flew into
a violent
52 THE MUTABILITY OF
a violent paffion,—her rage continued,
and a few hours after She fell into a fit
\
which (he expired in. The Doctors imagined it proceeded from her perturbation of fpirits; a good warning, Gordon, for us to calm our paffions.
To make amends for this tragic account, I will inform you that Adelaide is in daily expectation of feeing her friend, Lady Connor. Now is your wit at work to know who this Lady Connor can be. I will relieve you, my dear creature. She was the amiable Madam Hermon, of whom our friend fpoke fo favourably. Sir Charles Connor is no other than the Mr. Smith who offered Adelaide his friendship at Paris, and had very near fought a duel with Melville for treating her fo unworthily. He at that time paid his addreffes to his prefent Lady, and had heard her often commend our friend, which increafed his eSleem, and made him intereft himfelf in her happinefs. Monlieur Hermond died fome time after. The title, in the interim, fell to Sir Charles, and at a proper time, the widow married him. They carhe to England, when she directly enquired for Lady Melville, (now Villars,) and wrote to her.—Adelaide was sincerely rejoiced to hear from her, and is promifed a visit,
when
\
XA	.T*	I.*	* X
when we Shall have an additional plea-fure.
Does your CouSin never intend to regain her health, that we may have you once more among us ? Politively, Gordon, it is quite unreafonable for her to confine you fo long, ahd deprive you of congratulating and rejoicing perfonally with your friend, on fo happy an event as her marriage with Villars. Make your efcape,
I charge you, and come to receive the friendly embraces of
Your
Harriot Duncan.
\
' f
/.
y
r I N I s.
»
\