
iriches
2 39.12 13.24 15.07
65.43
18.11
18.72
49.87
-4.34
■22.29
44.26
■13.80
22.85
55.56
9.82
■24.49
70.82
■33.43
-0.35
63.51
34.26
59.60
£ 39.92 11.81 -46.07
D50 llluminant, 2 (degree observer
Density
u "iir
52.24
48.55
18.51
				
10	11 (A)	12	13	14
97.06	92.02	87.34	82.14	72.06
-0.40	-0.60	-0.75	-1.06	-1.19
1.13	0.23	0.21	0.43	0.28
gi	Si	S' Si
n	^	3?
dMi p«r Mch
§1 Si
loiI I I I
500	200
600
700
0.04
0.09

■ '	‘	if‘' •
M.:,	.	1.
0.15
0.22
0.36
62.15
-1.07
0.19
0.51
300

tki^ad





'____________


rsj
<
tn
O)
CO
CO
n
5
D
CO

8.29
■0.81
0.19

‘i"'



to
CD
“D	
Q) OQ fD	m O
to	Q.
	O
O	c
O	to • •
otq' • •	

^•cwx^ccoc-x^^
i i

I CO I
i
to i
I


• •


IWV


limit.?
lllBvi
.....

:5::S

X;>:<-:!:-

r*5:5
x:?

.•xs»,
Jill

u>












l_J
I i §	^
V;::iX5::::::::*:*:5*:s*:! •* X &
i|iiil|iil»
:.<;:S:::9:::i:¥?:¥:::9::A9;.






• i*
m

' -y-K'

1
A
' »■ - '
. 'N,\
,	. irw I
5‘
d
‘--n ‘

I

:% ' . -:-,C‘>k'A...' ^'
-	■	7 '(T-
A
• <



■	<- .*:	'.-*7>-
■
M
:m

- «v-* . T^.'
- L^Si
•id .< ■


"i“	-
V .
V' - / •
Wt
•f
kV


#




\
/

A
«

/
/
THE
NEW CLARISSA



A
TRUE HISTORY
B Y
MADAME DEBEAUMON.D
VOLUME THE FIRST.
I

DUBLIN:
Printed for J. Exshaw and J. Potts, In Dam firtitt 2nd J. Wl L LIA M S in
M,DCC,LXIX.
> • -i

, «	• /	.-	. V . *., > '	I':^L-
	► .» •	1* «-. • L	■ f*i . * *-3, .. . *< — n* . .	. i i?
•D ■'	*• • w .*- - - : ■ i-		«\	'V
■*	'■■■■^ -	■ —	-	



./
■
	/. %•
	' > / • ‘“^ ■
	
- - n. -> -.	
	
	■ ^
	
	S^>v:S. '
Sii

-<•
A.	fv . :ir • ' ‘'I/'
> . ■' j	
AA	
	
	*•*->#* *.h . •. **-.
.	
• A --‘«f-*--rt
y. ;

*i
c/-
•..//.
’A^ >
•	"	' ^ ^	•	
F .	• -i '	T- o:>	's * . r ! * ^s*,. '	
^ -	: L-'-i -‘j-T.	S’'	;-R'-	
... .	V	— ;'	• V, : :. /•	

•■^ ‘ .	-	' « ■-	^ ‘ *'C"

\
• / '

4
/"
«t.r •<,-

' i“^.'

- 'iT
• »
••
f-
A ,' . ^
\ .


S^yKV ■■
frS -	.a-
"^ - • . -.'A • •.
> .	V,
V«d-..V-.,. •„ ■ ,.,, - .• ■ ■..•■4*. -.O > •'--,^* '■

Tr
rjz i- «
V
. V.r

• A J
:A.i

A ■■ ■

4..>.v	;.'i:-«
• .'!r .	^
’■j-^i- *.'»'»	.'<*^.>,> * -• v:*	'■•	'•
* ^ . »r . , •; V'V ^ I'v ’■	»■ * *' ’-^ .*■>'■'■*
r’-
.C
f -	.
^:jv..' rH-- • - ^
,4	*.«	'.’4 • u?’	•	5
	i	J*: .	C ~ -i	ft # , n *
rT'' sfee-.' ' ‘	
^'*^t' *	
.. .	
:C;. ’	
X* 4
f-'— : -,	••:	..	'
td F - ri ■'^L	■
- c
F
• 1.^ .
rS* -JCLN
VN>'

. •• -V- > "*• -A * -p •
I


X.
■■ >
w
y
'v f
>>*•
;>
■•-.V
r^' '!' -A

. >.

s
, •• v*>V- rS.-:-,NV';?^[;
-J
■ -■•>.^^ c\ LF
- Cc^*'•i-^.?-■ ■
f -.	■ "ti

•« ~~ - .c
'- s ■' •%.*
A: :*	h -
i.> ^ .

c:
•V 1
■>

^ <r*- *
•;> V

'vrv.^.»: vA	-'- .-	^
*•

•| -•■ ■*•• * V
■ /:

* ^

Af

T .
^ «


••
• 'I
- * S


.JN

■ J':;	-<■'
>> - -
r:.> .
.1 .
i*




# M M
'Cp fCp
fvK


C # M M M ^ M M * M ^■^■
T H E
TJ E W C L AR ISSAi
A
T R U E « 1ST O R Y
E E T T E R
•7
I.
■CZARdSSd. TO KADr HARRIFL
O lofe at the fame time an aunt
'I' whom I always regarded as the belt ^	^ of mothers, and a friend who might
have alTuaged my afflitlidns, by a lender fympathy with them, is more than your C’larilla is abie'^to fupport; and I am opprefleti to a degree that might be taken for infenfibility. I paffed the two days which followed my dear aunt’s death in a flupid Silence. Staring wildly'without feeing, liflening without hearing, VoL. I.	B	and
LETTERS.
and in a perfect indifference about what was going to become of me.
You know my parents were ftrangers to me:
I never was with them from three years old; and my father’s hatred for his refpe6lable Sifter, did not fufi'er him to keep up the fmalleft corref-pondence’ with her. My aunt often told me that I had a mother worthy of my utmoft tendernefs, and of a happier lot than fhe experienced ; fhe even affured me that her fifter-in-law had fubSifted purely by her bounty ; and not only So, but, that fhe was obliged to affift her in fecret ; that is to fay, under a falfe name. Thefe difcourfes often infpired me with a ftrong defire to be acquainted with my mother, and an apprehenfion yet more lively of falling into the power of a father who was painted to me in Such terrible colours. You have more than once been witnefs to my fentiments with refpeO: to thefe two points, and it was natural that they ftiould be felt with moft force in the moment when my deftres and fears were going to be realized. Grief, however, was able to abforb them.
Seated in Silence near the precious relicksof
my beloved aunt, the confufion which reigned
in her houfs was not fufficient to roufe me from
my
letters.
. 3
my lethargy. Officers of juftice, friends, dif-tant relations, were about me in crowds. The firft. Sealing up every thing, took the keys, and! gave the necelTary orders to haften the arrival of my father, and the dean of Colborne, to whom my aunt had intrufted her will; the Second did their utmofl: to recall my Spirits, and Served me in Some meaSure as a guard againfl the malice of the laft, who evidently looked upon me with fury, in the fear that my aunt might have considered my advantage at their expence ; for they could not perSuade themSelves but Ihe mufl; have excluded my father from the number of her heirs.
Lady Horton, who has always honoured me with So much friendfliip, made many uSelefs efforts to draw me from a Spedlacle which noil* rilhed my defpair. I Shrieked as often as they attempted to take me away; but the third day, my exhaufted Spirits had left me in a ftateof Such weakneSs, that they had little difficulty to make life of the opportunity to tranSport me to the houSe of that generous lady, who Soon Succeeded in rendering my grief more tranquil, without diminishing its force.
As
farily
my father is in Ireland, it muSl necef-be a considerable time before he can ar-
B 2
rivci
-4
L E T T E R S
five ; and in the interval, I receive great cem-. fort from the viSits of the dean of Colbome, who has made me afhamed of the excefs of my forrow, in fhewing me that 1 difhonoured the triumph of a perfon who had been fo dear to me, and who, from the height of heavep, where her eminent virtues no doubt have now placed her, might reproach me with the. little profit I had drawn from her wife leffons, upon the manner in which mortals ought to receive the ftrokes that come from God.
As Soon as he perceived me in a fiate to liften to what he had orders to tell me, he fpoke as follows: “ That which I owe,’* Said he, “ to the memory of your deceafed aunt, obliges me to jhftify to you her Lift difpoSitionts. If hate had caufed the diftance.in which fhe lived,
with regard to your father, and Ihe died in
»
fentiments fo little Chriftian, we ihould have nothing more to do than to mourn for her eternal lofs: but how far was fhe from Such a malignant fpirit.l---To make you fenfible of this,,
and to engage you to condudl yourfelf according to the views of her who was every thing to you,
I find myfelf obliged to Set before you Some things which preceded your birth : things which, indeed, I would willingly bury in oblivion.
L E T T E R S.
S'
%iony was k in my power; and I could do it without hurt or detriment to you.
I FLATTERED myfelf, my dear Harriet, that I fliould have Sufficient (Irength to finifli arecital, which will make you weep over the fate of your poor Clarifla; but it has made an impreffion upon me, which has froze my heart and my fenfes ; I am obliged, therefore, to deter the dreadful tale for the fubjedl of another letter.
8 5
LETTE
6
E T T E R
a
L E T T E R II.
CLARISSA TO LADT HARRIET.
Take up my pen in continuation, and am now going to tell you what I learned from the mouth of our good dean ; and as I have not had an opportunity to difpatch my former letter, I will fend this under the fame cover. The dean fpeaks.
Mr. Darby, your father, is born of an opulent family, which for a long time was apprehen-five of the extinfition of a very ancient name. Your late aunt was born the firfl: year of your grandfather’s marriage; and the difpleafure of having a daughter, was balanced only by the hope that a fecond birth would blefs him with a fon ; but eight years rolling away without that bleiringarriving,your grandfather conceived a vexation upon it, of which your aunt became the vie* lim : he had an averSion for her, the more fhock-ing, as in her then ftate of infa,ncy, fhe promifed 11 Ihe afterwards fulfilled in figure, underftand-ing and goodnefsof heart. It is true, that herrao-ther recompenced her, as far as Ihe could, for the flrange hatred of her father ; fhe loved her with lendernefs, and gave her all the marks of
it
4%
LETTERS.
7
it in her power; but, poor infant, the birth of your father, deprived her even of that comfort, and raviflied from her the affeS;ions of all the family. Your aunt, born with extreme fenSibi-lity, felt the alteration of behaviour towards her, and was fo affliSled by it, that the goodnefs of her conftitution could not Support her : fli« fell dangerously ill, and they did not fail to attribute it to envy and jealouly. Indeetl, they would have been So glad of an opportunity to l^ave all the wealth of the family to the new-born fon, that they abandoned his Sifter wholly to the care of nature; and it was probably the excellence of her temperament that Saved her life. To the great regret of her parents, the marriage contrafil: had fettled twenty thoufand pounds ftcrling upon younger children ; and your grandmother giving little hopes of future iflue, it was with pain they faw the inheritance of their adored fon likely to be diminished by the payment of fo considerable a portion. In order therefore, if polCble, to prevent what they considered as a misfortune, they Sent your aunt into France, where they put her in a convent; hoping, that, in time, flie would have an inclination to take the veil. Your aunt has herfelf often told me, that a religious life was the deareft obje61; of her defires, and the end of all her
B 4
prayers ;
L E T T E R S'
S
prayers: but they were put up in-vain; for as fl/e >vas in a Society of truly pious nuns, the hopes of the great Sum which her parents offered with her, could not engage them to deceive their young penSioner : on the contrary, they encouraged her to withftand all the threats and arguments which her friends ufed,. to make her for-fakethe world ; llie remained among them tilt She was Seventeen, and her parents informed her-that She mufl: expe6I to flay there till her brother was-Settled. As fhe was happy, it was an exile which She had little reluUance to Submit to, but it was not of So long a duration as- they had endeavoured to make her fear it would. Her father and mother died in a (hort Space, one after the other ; and, in the mean time, the brother, of the prioreSs, who had. brought hemp, arrived from the Indies; he was a man fifty-five years
old, who came into his own: country to enjoy an
1
immenfe fortune, the fruits- of his- induftry abroad : the guardians of your aunt called her -into England, and Mr. Harvey was intruded with the care of transporting her thither : it was in this fliort Space, that he conceived the deSign of making her his wife ; and as fh» found in him all the qualities which cpnftitute the honeft man and the good chriftian, the disproportion of ages had nothing to fright.e.n her youthful mind,, who
was-i
LETTERS.
a
was apprehenfive that her guardians, fome of whom were not Roman catholics,wouldforceher t-o marry a man of another religion than that which her anceftors profelTed, and Ihe herfelf had been educated in. Her relations made great difficulties about the conditions; and, under pretence that the affiiirs of the family were in diforder, demanded a certain time for the payment of the portion. Harvey was too much in love to Suffer that obllacle to delay his happinefs ; in Short, he married your aunt, and agreed to wait for her fortune till his wife Ihoutd be of age. The young man now began to fhevv a charader from which every thing was to be apprehended,. I Speak of your father, my dear Clariffa ; and my reSpedt for your juft delicacy, will make me fupprefs whatever is not abSolbtely neceffar}' for you to be acquainted with: let it Suffice to tell you' that he went abroad; and that, to a nature not well diSpoSed, he added the additional misfortune of falling into the hands of a governor who had no principles of religion, and during their tour alSociated only .vith men of his own caft ; his manners corresponded with his faith ; and at two and twenty years old he returned your fatherintoEngland, after havingdiffipated at leaf!: one half of his paternal fortune. This laft cir-cumftance, however, not being generally known,
Mr*
B 5
lO
LETTERS.
Mr. Darby pafTed for a considerable match; and Lord Afaph, who was but ill in his affairs, endeavoured at a marriage between him and his
er. Ah ! my dear Clariffa, how worthy was (he of a better choice ! in Spite of the brilliant figure of her intended huIlDand, the felt a difguft for him, which She combated in vain : and Ihe would have preferred death to his hand, if the eleftion had been left to herfelf; too timid, however, to refifi the defpotic orders of a father, whom Ihe had always Seen terrible to his children, Ihe Dvereoirae her repugnance. You were horn the firft yearof her nuptials, and her ten-dernefs for you was her only comfort. In the mean time, your aunt was become a widow. Mr. Harvey having left her confiderable poffef-fions, Ihe fignified to your father that Ihe would give him longer time for the payment of what he owed her; but this condefcenfion did in no fort diminiih the hate which he had for his filler, and he gave her proofs of it, as often as it was in his power. He had dragged after him into England an Irilh girl, whom he had run away with from, one of his friends, whofe miftrefs Ihe was. Ashe was feariul fuch a connedllon might be prejudicial to his eftablifhment, he kept it concealed till' after his marriage ; but Scarce was that concluded, when he propofed this woman to his lady as a
perfon
LETTERS.
II
perfoii proper to have the care of her houfe, of which file foon became the Scandal. Your mother faw herfelf reduced to receive from the hands of this wretch the fmallefl: neceffaries; and when She prefumed to remonllrate with her hulband, and fhew him the evil light which fuch a cond u6i: mull: put him in with all good people, he treated her with a cruelty that Sometimes put her life in danger. All her refource was in the friendihip of her Sifter-in-law. But her barbarous hufband Suffered her not long to enjoy that : as great partof his eftate was in Ireland, he informed her that Sne mufl: prepare to go with him there. You were then three years old, and your virtuous mother had the mortification to fee you confounded with two other children, which your father had by the creature he kept in his houfe. She Shuddered left your morals Should be corrupted by ill example; and this fear being forcible enough to engage her to deprive herfelf of the pleafure of bringing you up. She determined that your aunt ■ftiould perform that office in her fiend. Nothing more was neceffary to make your father refufe his confent : his wife and filler deSired it. Your worthy aunt, therefore, as I may fay, bought you of him : (he gave him an acquittance for the twenty thoufand pounds Ire owed her, in confequence of his ceding you to her for ever,
without
12
L E T T E R S.
without his having any future right to exert the authority of a parent, in. order to take you out of -her hands. On this condition the affair was-concluded : for fourteen years pad Mrs. Harvey omitted nothing which might make your father alter his condu61:, but in vain : twice (he paid confi-derable fums to extricate him out of difficulties-into, which his extravagance had plunged him. New extravagance was the only confequence and She w'as obliged to affiif the indigence ©f yoar unfortunate mother, in fecret,.if we can call that v/oman unfortunate, who was able to draw from.-the adverfiiies of life the inefHraable treafure. ©fi all the virtues.”'
Herr, my dear, is the horrible recital I have* had from our good dean, which has thrown nae* into inexpreffible perplexities.. The chief- is,, the neceffity under w'hich l at firfl: thought my-felf to hide from you the melancholy circum-flances to which your friend is reduced. Nothing fhould have prevailed on me to merit the curfe of Ham for expoSing a father ; and, I believe, this delicacy would have reftrained my pen. If the dean had not affured me that you were already acquainted with the misfortunes of my mother, whom Mr. Balfour, your hufband, had known in Ireland. Indeed I recolleded that,
imme-
letters.

hnmediately before yourdepartnre, the fear you-had of my falling into the hands of my father, was one of the motives for your prayers to Heaven for the prolongation of my aunt’s life. As your difcourfe was myflerioas, and I little capable of re'fle<5Uon, at a time when grief for loSing ymi chiefly occupied my thoughts, what you faid made but a flight and fhort impreffion upon mcr but, alas! the traces ar-e renewed by the Ihock-ing lights which the do£l;or has been forced to throw upon them ; and I rrow perceive^ that it was out of tendernefs for me you explained yourfelf by halves. But I take up too much of your time in talking of myfelf j and I ought to aflc of you,- with your advice, a circumftantial account of your new Situation-'; if you are as happy as you ought to be, my misfortunes can never be complete ; your felicity will be forae compenfation for my own fufferings. I do not know why my heart Ihould indulge fuch melancholy prefages would to Heaven I had nothing to apprehend but that poverty which I mufc necelTarily be reduced to, if my aunt has not taken fome care for my preservation. Thank God I can make ufe of my needle, and I Biall never confider myfelf unfortunate, while I can live by my labour the evils I have to fear are of a. blacker dye. I will not examine them too attentively j
H
LETTERS.
tentively; no, I will give you an example of that reliance on Providence, which I have So often recommended to your practice: it is the virtue proper to our fex j brought up in the bo-fom of a family where we are generally cherilhed, we are forced to tear ourfelves from it, to pafs under a ftrange yoke, without being able to forefee our fate. Men are not alhamed to defcend even to artifice, to deceive a poor victim, who Sacrifices to them all fhe has dear ; and they make her pay, during her whole life, for the re-ftraint in which they are kept for a few months. I am perfuaded, that even the mofl: reafonable men have momentary humours from which women fuffer much pain: and I affure you, like my dear auntj I would choofe a life of religious celibacy if God had left it to my choice. I have fomewhere read, that if a noviciate was permitted in matrimony, few would become pro-feflbrs: it is, notwithftanding, the ftate that God has allotted for the greateft number, and we ought, in the firfl: ftep towards it, to take every juftifiable method to render our burden as light as poflible. It is to this I exhort my dear Harriet : her exceflive vivacity has need of an exordium a little Serious. Your hufband pafles for one of the beft men in the world ; but they fay that he is of his country, and by no means belies
the
LETTERS.
15
the proverb, ‘‘ fierce as a Scotfman.” I own to you, of all faults, it is that I would fupport moft willingly in a hulband; becaufe a wife may avail herfelf of it on numberleSs occafions-; and there is nothing more eafy than to avoid its ill confe-
we need only reSpedf him who is fub-I know this word refpeQ: has always
quences ; je£b to it.
fhocked you. “ Love one’s hulband—agreed you have often faid. ‘‘ But by what right would thofe imperious creatures reduce us to a humiliating fubjefifion ?” No, my dear friend, fubmif-fion to a hulband derogates not from the glory of the firft woman in the world. In this cafe, re-
fpedt, fubmiffion, are of divine inftitution ; and we may be aflured that the more faithful we are in fulfilling our duty, the more we fhall be re-fpe£led in our turn; if I remember right, you were a little deaf to this leflbn the day we parted. It was in the time of your triumph, the mighty words were not yet pronounced j in a word, Mr, Balfour was but a lover. After the folemn Yes, the face of things changed. Have you ever made a remark which has not efcaped me ? I have feen few marriages, where the bridegroom, led by cuftom, has not given the right hand to the bride in conducting her to the altar. That mark of refpe<51: is no longer in feafon, the prieft puts things in tfieir proper order, and lets the
wife

LETTER S.
wife, know the nature of the compa£l into-whidi Ihe is going to enter, by making herchange Situation, and ftand at the left hand of. her hulband^-Stay there, my dear,, if you are willing to enjoy the privileges of a beloved companion ; women never firive to ufurp the right with impunity;, and, was I married, I fhould defpife. my huf-band, if he. was weak enough to* cede it.
t
Do not forget in your, anfwer to let me know in what ufeful and agreeable manner you pafs your time in the family, of which you now make a.part, among.a nation-which has adopted you for its own. Fear not to be too particular, left
r
you fhould be tirefome. All things that intereft. you (in themfelves however trifling) muft be of confequence to me, and I cannot.hear too much of them. As I am ignorant how long I fhalh fta.y here, pleafe to addrefs your anfwer to the. dean, who will fend it to me wherever Lam.
L E T>
L E T T E R S'
17
LETTER III.
LADT r-UKRIET TO CLARISSA'.
TEEI?, my dear Clarifla ; your tears are VV juft, and I will moft cordially mingle
mine with them. If you have loft an aunt who loved you with the tendernefs of a mother, I have loft a friend, a protedlrefs, to whom I owe the little I am. Let us honour her memory by following her counfels I confent; but do not go to pufh your heroifm fo far as ta be willing to Suffer from your family,, what fhe had the pati.-ence to bear from hers. I am perfuaded that my dear Mrs. Harvey would fhortly have taken meafures which you will be inftrudled in upon the opening of her will ; and Suffer not a filial piety, ill underftood, to make you difobey her. I would not write to you in this ftile,, had fhe not Said to me Several times,, that fhe hoped God’ would let her live long enough to fee you well married ; and that, for all the world, fhe would' not have you in the power of your father. A.fud-den death, which fhe had no reafon to.apprehend, has deprived her of the pleafure fhe wifhed for; and,, without doubt, prevented her telling your-felf what were her views, I wait with impatience for the opening of her will,, which will fix
the
i8
LETT' E R S.
the fate of my dear friend. I am not furprlfed' at the gloomy prefages that rife in your mind ; the forrowful fpe6l:acle you have lately Seen, the multitude of tears you have filed, has deje6bed your fpirits, and thrown you into a Situation, where every thing appears clouded. I find that your difpofition has been contagious: for four and twenty hours, after the receipt of your letter, I was loft in the blackeft melancholy. “ What’s the matter with you, my dear ?” faid Mr. Balfour, when he came into fupper. “ I left you at fix o’clock in good health, and, at ten, you have the countenance of one who has been Sick a fortnight.” I have received a letter. Sir. “ My God, you make me tremble! May I beg of you, without indifcretion, to communicate it?” No, Sir, I am not fool enough to provide you with arms againft myfelf. Clarifla makes a prodigious parade with her advice, but we muft pardon every thing in her woeful Situation. She has loft her aunt.
Those who read this little monologue, will accufe me of having a bad heart, and fmall feeling of our common lofs: they will deceive them-felves ; I am, without doing you injuftice, as much touched as you can be; but it is not in my nature to afflict myfelf in a Serious manner; my
heart
LETTERS.
19
heart does not govern my tongue, you have often told me fo : it is moved by theflighteft of all imaginations, without, if I may fo exprefs my-felf, my foul in the lead: interfering ; while that giddy tongue prattles without common fenfcj confidering the circumftances I am in, my heart goes its train ; and any one who could confront my difcourfe with my Sentiments, would be afto-nilhed at the contrail:.. This remark is yours> my dear ; fo you cannot fail of finding it juft : not becaufe you made it j but becaufe you never make any but fuch as are well founded : it is a rule which one may regard as certain. However, as there are few rules v/irhout exceptions, I will tell you, by one means or other, to put you in the rank of ordinary beings, that you are absolutely unreafonable, when you Speak upon the duties of women. My good hulband ! I am no longer unwilling to Ihew you miSs Clarifia’s letter, if you will be content to read what lam going to write myfelf, which is a counterpoifon. Indeed I am but a fimpleton, my lord and mafter will make a jeft of my exception, and take your Sermon for good and valid. Well, fo much the worSe for him, he had reaSon to expert my im-pertinencles, I apprized him of them, and if he thinks me capable of changing my Ikin, he will be miftaken.
Y0¥
20
L E T T E
S.
You Have done very well, to get the better of the Scruple, which would' have occalloned you to ufe referve with me about your father j I know him, as one may fay, Since, &c.
He was in the upper clafies, when my hufbanc! firfi: went to School, and he well remembers that Darby’s morning anfwered diredlly to what his day afterwards turned out. Indeed, his evil courfes are fo notorious, that there is no perfon within twenty miles of his efiate who does not regard your refpedlable mother as a martyr^-Come now, my dear, cry up gentlenefs in a wife: I doubt much, if your father had met one' of my eharadter, wJ.ether he would have pulhect his exceffes to Such extremities. I would Have Sent his doxy packing with well boxed ears, and thrown his baftards out of the window at the=
rifque of whatever might have happened. If
Heaven had'fern me into the world by means of
Such parents, or gkven you a head and heart like
mine, I vvould cry out to you to fuccour your
persecuted mother:- but Tknow her humour too-
well ; her I'effons would be pernicious to you.
Your foul, already humble and pliable, is but too
willing to lay itfeVf under the feet of oppreffion ;
especially, when:the persecutors are perSons whom.
duty has made it a.law. to reSpedt. I admire you;
but
L
E T T E R S.
Ihiit take care.left you make me admire you too much. Let us fpeak ferioufly, my dear j If you • could reafonably expe6t to be able t© comfort the Sorrows of your motlier, 1 would tell you -sthat it is your firft and moft facred devoir ; but you have no right to flatter yourfelf with Such hopes; you would only aggravate her miferies^ by adding yours to themSpare her, then, that ■new fpecies of torrhent, which might poftibly
be more infupportable than any file has yet ex-
jperienced.
•
You deSire t would give you Some defcripfion of the country where I am fettled. You are not in it, and that makes it terribly faulty in my
•eyes; they fay, however, that Edinburgh con-
*■ •
tains a number of .agreeable people ; and Such an
.aflertion is pardonable from tbofe -who have not
• •
Seen you ; but when they have lived as i have with the mafter-piece of the creation, they will ■do very well to follow the example of fome devout Mahometans, who, on turning their backs to Mecca, tear out their eyes, becauSe the world affords nothing beSides worthy to be looked at. Stay, I have a charming thought come into ray liead,; if the v/omen here take airs upon thera-felves, and join prefumption to middling qualities, if they dare to criticiSe my Sincerity, my
petu-
22
LETTERS.
petulance, I have a Sure means to rid myfelf of three parts in four of them. I will make Mr. Balfour go poll, and bring you down by the fame carriage ; and then, flap, plant you in the middle of one of their mofl; brilliant aflemblies. what poor figures will our goddefles make ! I cannot help laughing at them : this is the dagger which I keep in referve, to revenge myfelf if they have the misfortune tb‘ difpleafe me; you Ihall know it in my next letter ; for to-morrow I make my entry into the capital of Scotland: the preparations for that ceremony force me to abridge; and perhaps it would not have been a-mifs, had I thought on therri before, to fpare. you the pain of fo filly a letter: but to finifli> like rny uncle the baronet, “ the fox mull die in his Ikin.” I am incapable of change, efpecially in that perfefit friendlhip which I vow to you.
LET-
LETTERS.
23
LETTER IV.
CLARISSA TO LADT HARRIET.
O U are in the right, to put me in mind that your difcourfe is not the expreffion of your heart; without which, I fhould really have been (hocked at the levity of your letter: in (hort, one muft refolve to love you Such as you are; and, to fay the truth, the talk is nothing hard for thofe who know you as well as I. A grand Scene of new events has opened upon me fince my laft letter ; and, though you fhould fcold me, I cannot help telling you that I forefee Some happy conclufions; this father fo terrible, is, to me the moft tender in the world ; and, my mother regards as a miracle of paternal afFeffion the prodigious change that is wrought in him : but you are not Satisfied with a general idea of things; you muft have particulars: you fhall.
It was the third day after my lafi: letter, that I had the ineftimable happinefs of finding myfelf in the arms of my parents. Scarcely had I began to enjoy the pleafure of their embraces, when the dean called us into the great parlour, where
all the family was affembled; fhall I tell you? I
could

LETT
1,
R S.
c
could not help trembling when he broke t‘h-Seals of the will. I had received with tianfport the carefies of my father; had I not reafon to fear that the tendernefs he Iliewed me w.ould fuf-fer alteration, if my aunt Should have conSidered me with too much generofity to hi-s prejudice: In that inftant, I wiflied from the bottom of my heart to depend always upon him, to whom I ©wed my life ; and if I had been miftrefs of the fiital teftament, I believe, I Ihould have thrown it into the fire without reading it. I defired a copy from the dean, and I Send one to you ; that
is to fay, of thofe articles which regard me.
✓
I APPOINT for my univerSal heir, Cla-rifSa Darby, my niece ; and I will, that, on the day of my death. She Shall be put in poITeSfion of all my efFedts, jewels, ready money; and, in a word, of all my perSonal eftate. In reSpedS to rny eftates in houfes, lands, &c. I nominate the dean of Colborne for her guardian, to regulate and take care of the fame ; the entire difpofi-tion of which Shall be given up to my niece, the day She attains the age of one and twenty, compleat, unlefs Ihe Shall before that age marry a man who h, like herfelf, a Roman catholic ; at which time, her guardian Shall put her in poSTellion of all my titles to dtfpofe of as her
prudence
I> E T T E R S
25
prudence Ihia'U think fit ; excepting only, that "She fhall referve to herfeit one Sum of twenty-four 'thoufand pounds fterling, which fhe fhall not dif-pofe of during her life, and which fliall devolve to her children after her death. In cafe fhc fliould die without iffije, the faid Sum fhall be veiled in the hands of Six pcrfons whom the fhall siominate, to be employed in the foundation of working-fchools for poor Roman catholics. I permit her to charge ray other eBates with an annuity of five hundred pounds llerling for her father, and the fame fum in favour of her mother j which annuity fhall be revocable at her pleafure. 1 deSire that the faid Clariffa, my niece, may pafs her time, till her marriage, under the eyes of her virtuous mother.; but, for efTential reafons^ I charge, and command, that fhe fhall on no account put her foot into her father’s houfe
while he ftays in Ireland : if he will come and live at the feat where I fhall finifh my life, I allow him the ufe of it for the term of his, on condition that he fliall never bring any perfon into it of the female fex, born in Ireland; revoking the prefent donation to my niece, If fhe flays four and twenty hours under the roof with a woman of that nation, or in any other dwelling her father fhall choofe to inhabit ^ and in cafe of difo-hedience on her part to this exprefs condition, I give all I die pofl'efied of to the poor.
VolI.	C	letter
6
I .
i I
L E T T E R S. L E T T E R VI.
F/IDT HARKIR r FO CL ARISSA.
Gojd blefs our good dean, and give him
the courage he has need of, in order to moderate the virtues of my dear Clariffa. It i« not the work about which diredfors are generally employed. Faults are v/hat they have todellroy ; you have none, and are only to be cautioned a-gaind the extremity of your virtue. To judge of you by your letter, you would be taken for one of thofe foft louls, who do good through weaknefs; and, to deal plainly with you, that is the ide.a Mr. Balfour had of you: nay, before I could bring him to alter lus opinion, T was obliged to cite twenty fadls to prove, that the real temper of your mind was courage and resolution •, and, after all, I can fcarce flatter my-ielf with having fucceeded in his convidiion ; for thefe men think they degrade themfelves in con-fefling, in the prefence of their meaner moieties, that they have turned to -the left in their judg. ments. I ought, however, to do judice to my bed beloved : either heis lefs tainted than others, with the pride natural to his fex, or better knows how to difguife it; he hears reafon, and has not the ridiculous madnefs to believe, that
It
LET TER S.
.'2 7
iit cannot come out of a woman’s mouth. Do you know that I find myfelt a little difappointed with him ? They would force me to fubmit to a yoke, in fphe of my defire of independance ;. and not being permitted the pieafure of freedom,
I promifed myfelf fome litile recompence in putting my hufband out of temper, if I did not
find him a cornplaiSint obferver of all my capri-
/
cious humours. I have not been able yet to have this fatisfa£lion : indeed, my dear, I believe I love the man, and that love blinds me to all his faults; for, after all, he ought to have fome iiniflure of his fex, and I have not yet been able to difeover in his charadler any colour of it. I will fay more ; I abfolutely find myfelf in danger of being overcome by the foible into which I have unwillingly been feduced, ever fince I perceived with what vivacity my hufband inte-reflshimfelf in your welfare. It is a treafon againfl my majefly which I had not forefeeri ;*j. and if he continues it, my gratitude will become love. You will perceive that he has rendered himfelf worthy of thefe fentiments, when you have read his letter, which you are alfo to fuppofe fub-
feribedby me, for I a£fual!y believe tiie creature
has a fecret to read my heart, that he may pre-cifely tell you what I think and what I feel.
ft
When you hear his dcciSion, then you alfo
C 2	hear
28
LETTERS,
hear mine ; for which reafon I here flop fhort^ to give you the detail of my adventures, as you deSire.
I HAVE been walked about, drajiged, prefent-ed, examined, and, perhaps, criticized by everf body, that is not nobody, in Edinburgh ; firil in the Grofe, at the afTembJy which I told you of, and fince in every private houfe. 1 perfuaded myfelf that they would have fome pity for me at my firfl; -vifits, and that a card left at every door would do the bufinefs.: but by no means; I muft climb two hundred fteps, make a thoufand curt~ lies, and a like number of thofe compliments ■that fignify nothing. Oh ! it k'lis me ; and what’s tlill more Singular than all this, it is on account of confcience that they make me undergo thofe trials ; .that is to fay, they fwallow a cameb for fear.a nat fliould imperceptibly flick upon it. What good Chriflians would deny themfelves when they are at .home! would it not be a lie ..** It is impoflible to perfuade them that a lie implies deceit, and that there is no deception in refuSing to receive a viSit of ceremony. When it is agreed to fay, my lady is not at home, it is to fay, in other words, my lady is too polite to give you the trouble of coming up flairs. 1 am
fure you will take the part of thofe rigorous for-
malifls;
letters.
3^
malifts; however, I have this to comfort me, by the time I receive your reafons, my poor limbs may be pretty well recovered from the horrible fatigue, which, at prefent, will not fuB'er me to hear any thing in juflification of fuch falfe females. J fay falfe, and will not eat my words ; for the wretches told above an hundred lies, during the half quarter of an hour I pafled with every one of them ; for what but lies were thofe overftrained compliments with whic h they loaded me ? how could they have the face to fay that thev efteemed me ? fome of them even did not blulh to go as far as the word friendfliip • did they know me, to love me, to efteem met Here then are my fcrupulous ladies convi6ied of having Swallowed the camel, of having told lies, l am curious to fee in vvhat manner you will undertake their defence. I would believe you Scarcely dare do it, if I did not know by experience how much you excel in the talent of excuSing your neighbour. Do not alk me how I- like the women of this country, you knov/ I was in a bad humour, and when I am So, I never fee clearly. There is one, however, whom I- have diflringuifhed; but what is ridiculous enough, I cannot tell who Ihe is. I had notfuf. ficient retention to remember the name of every , and it would take me a year complete to
C 3	aflbrt
30
LETTER S.
aflbrt them properly together; expe6l to have them defcribed by the brown, tiie hlr, the talC the Ihort. You know I have a quick eye at finding out absurdities. Something of that kind will make a Sign-board for every perfon, and your delicacy will not be wounded, as no name will be written under it. Hold, however, there are two ladies I mufi; bring you acquainted with; fear not,, child; I have nothing to Say but in their praiSe. One is the ducheSs of Roxborough : I had often heard of her grace, and, if I may credit the public voice, the would be juft to your tafte : She is more than the mother of her children. She is their governaiite, and, when occafion Serves, their nurSe, which is as often as they have the. Slightest indifpofition. Since the death of my lord duke Site is become her Son’s Steward; and I found her at a bureau, where flie had twenty let-
ters to read and anSwer. She told me She had that amufement twice a week; and it is aSTured
f
that, by her prudent management. She has dou*' bled the young duke’s fortune. She preSented me to her family, which confifts of two Sons and tv/o daughters: I was in rapture : the two young lords are at School, yet takeoff their hats, and Salute with a good grace : they never put in their words impertinently, always anSwer with pro" priety, and. in a word, have the air of children
L E T T E R S.
31
diten of quality. The two daughters are extremely pretty; the elder alked nie very ferioufly if I did not think her Sifter was prettier than fhe,. You are both extremely handfome,. faid f, but why do you alk the queftion ? Becaufe, anfwered fhe, I would know whether you are of the fame opinion-1 am ; every body tells me I amhandfom.. er than my Sifter, and yet I like her face better than my own. Look at her eyes, madam j are they not very fine ? And you very modeft, my dear, faid I, embracing her. If this girl does-not alter as fhe grows up, I will fet her down as one of the few rare things I have feen. The fe-eond perfon that pleafes me here, is lady ——, O Lord I forget her name—but I know fhe is the younger Sifter of lord Brooke, or Warwick; flie is called Charlotte. I can fay no more of her; this young lady is extremely timid, but fhe has fomething in her manners amazingly charming.
Confess, my dear Clarifla, that this is one of the moft fingulaR letters that ever came from my pen : a general criticifm, long panegyrics; Oh, be aflured of it, I make prodigious ftrides towards reformation : we fhail fee how fo good a beginning will profper..
C4
Let
3-2
LETTERS.
Let us return to our afFairs: I am charmed with the ray o£ happinefs which breaks upon you ; Heaven continue it: but do you enjoy the pleasure without troubling yourfelS about its duration ? It will be permanent, if you follow the counfels of thofe who love you: place me at their head; you run no rifque of being unj^uft..
L E TTER
letters.
S3
letter VII.
ME BALFOUR TO CKJRISKA:
AM much indebted to the dean of Colborne for the good opinion he has of my probity j but I owe him yet more for the honour of a correspondence, which he has procured me, with a lady o^ your merit. I could exprefs myfelf in warmer terms, but my dear Harriet flops me with a decisive air. No panegyrics, Mr. Balfour : Clariffa is not fend of that flile. Your way of thinking, madam, T will venture to fay, is that of all who deferve a panegyric. I will endeavour^ therefore, to accomodate myfelf to it, in order not to difpleafe you; but you ought to be obliged to me for the violence I do myfel.*^, when I am brief on an article, where there is fo happy an occafion to be copious. But enough ; in obedience to your commands, I will give my Sentiments upon your fituation.
I KNOW it W'ill be neceflary, on this occafion, to manage your delicacy ; but my zeal for your interefl will not permit me to be fo referv-cd as you could wifh : I am not, madam, one of thofe, who think the time of miracles pafTed ; the arm .of God is not Shortened, he can multl-
C 5
tiply
34
L

IL. '
T
E R S.
tiply them at his pleafure ; arid the perfe6l: ef-teem, the lively intereft, which I lake in all that concerns you, makes m.e wilh that he may deign to work one in your favour; it will be urelefsfor me to enter into details, which might prove the nc'ceBity of a miracle, to render a per-fon, to whom you are ftrongly attached, fuch as he ought to be to make you happy. Permit me only to fay, that an apparition from the dead would iefs furpriae me. i cannot, therefore, but greatly applaud the wife precautions, which the- dean advifes you to take j and, if mine could add any weight to the counfels of fo prudent a man, I befeech you, madam, let what will at--rive, lake cafe how you deprive yourfelf of the means of mdependance. It is not upon a general acquaintance with the charadter of a certain-perfon, that ! ground the admonition I take the liberty to give you: it is founded on certitude
which cah admit of no doubt..
%
Your charming friend makes me a rival here of every man that fees her. lam not fure whether my quality of hufband will excufe what I am going to fay, but I know you love her as well as I do, and will be glad to hear that every day adds new beauties, to thofe fhe already pofleffes;
How great would be my happinefs, if I could
hope
LETT E R S
35
hope to join to the gift So rare of a wife, juft Such as I could wifh her ; that of a friend. So worthy of tbe.fe.ntiments with which you infpired me, the very firft moment I had the honour of ■being acquainted with you.
H A R R I E T in Continuation.
YOU hear him, my dear Clarifla ; I am th^ extraordinary woman, the excellent wife; but do not you go to make yourfelf any indire6t compliments now, in confequence of thofe praifes, by perfuading yourfelf that my exadlitude in pra^iSing your grave leflbns, has given me a right to them. No, my deareft, I am more petulant, more tefty, more giddy, more capricious, more whatever you pleafe, than ever ; and, in Spite of all thofe accomplilhments, which you dare to call faults, Mr. Balfour, who pafles for a man of admirable difcernment, Mr. Balfour, my mailer, my governor,, my judge, finds me perfedl. I defy you to objedl any thing to this. Are you confounded ? Well, I will take you out of your confuSion. Upon my honour, my huf-band is but a mere hypocrite ; he is; at this moment,. more a man than all mankind put together. It is a mere piece of art, to pique my honour, and engage me to realize what he has the
goodnefs
35
LETTERS.
goodnefs to imagine. I ought to fay malice ;• but, after all, the turn is not mal adroit, and li pardon him in favour of the invention.
In Ihort, I mull fpeak fincerely, and tell you, that I am convinced I have not the lead likenefs to the flattering pi6ture, which a too indulgent hufband has given you of his too imperfedt wife:
•	• •	r
but I am content thathis love for me fhould have impofed-upon him ; that he fhould be willing to engage me to become, what he has fuppofed I am. Mbfl: certainly I ought to applaud his mo*, lives, and I aflure you- my heart was out of his debt, the inftant he conferred the obligation: Twill even confefs to yon, that this kind of fen>-timental payment I think- of little value, and that I am determined to omit nothing till l ean pay him.-—For what, pray? For praifes given apropos. Heavens 1 how culpable are men, to endeavour to rule with a rod of iron creatures fo cafily governed, I married without love, becaufe my uncle defired me ; becaufe, he being forced to go to the Indies, I had no inclination to follow him, and, in his abfence, I had need of-a proteflor. This good uncle fwore to me, that Mr. Balfour was one of the honefteft men-in the world, that he-had known him for a long
time. For my part, I neither liked nor difliked
him .y
L E T TER S.
37
him; and, if the fame teftimony had been rendered in favour of Six. different men, I would have left the choice tamy uncle. Whoever had afked me, the day of our marriage,. Do you love him ? I could have anfwered with confidence. No, I fhall efteem him. They told me it.was neceflary to refpe, to obey him. Thefe two duties appeared to me incompatible with love, which is always wounded, by. an appearance of inequality. I do not know if the fagacity of Mr. Balfour was fufficient to give him a-pre-knowledge of my difpofition *, but of this I am fure, he has con-dudled himfelf as if he was from the firfl ac-q:Uainted with it. He has been able to hide from me the mafter, the chief: I have feen nothing in him but the lover : and that fubmiffion which. Llhould have difputed, if he had exadfed it, has no difficulty attending it ;.becaufe it is voluntary. It feems to me a prefen t which I make him ; and,, what flatters more than a power to give ? it is the noblefl: part we can a£l, which brings with it a fatisfaQion, and which can receive no augmentation, but from the pleafure the gift caufes in thofe who receive.-
MERCY on us, where have I been rambling this half hour ? It is her hulband’s writing, my Cla-rifla will cry out, on reading this page^ atleafi, .
It
SS
LETTERS.
it is a theme Bie has copied; her head could ne* ver give birth to fuch a rationaldifcourSe. You may think what you pleafe, mifs ; but moft certainly the words are my own : however, as one ought to be candid with one^s friends, I will confefs that my wit has had no part in this letter : it has been indited folely by my heart, and that heart is capable enough of feeling properly,, especially when ClarilTa is to be loved and &L-m tied.
E^E T T E R
letters
L E T T E R VIII.
CLARISSA rO L AD r HARRIET.
Y Situation, my dear Harriet, is fiich^ that ! cannot reaSonably rely upon its duration. Felicity, without a cloud, can never, be long the portion of poor mortals ; and mine-would be perfe6:, if this refledtion did not abate the inclination I have to think it permanent. I put in the rank with thofe bleffings, which I have-been for fome time in poffeSTion of,., the change in the humour of my ineftimablc friend ; not that it has furprifed me fo much as She may imagine .; I know her heart,, and I know that will fucceed in fubduing her Spirit: but, to tell the truth, I did not believe her converSion fo near : next to God, you owe the happy turn to your huSband ; it is a benefit to merit ten hearts, if you had them, your’s is not made to be ungrateful; mine cannot Suffice for all my fenti-ments of gratitude towards t he author of my felicity. I believed myfelf completely happy till the day when I loSl my refpedlable aunt: under the Shadow of her wings, the blaSls of adverfity could not reach me. When I examine my paft Situation with my prefent, I find in it a tirefocne
; fomething was wanting to me, and
it
40
LETTER S:
it was adverSity; a certain piquant; it is, me-thinks, the feafoning of happineSs; and thofe who have never Suffered, cannot, in my opinion, boafl: of having enjoyed. You may, perhaps, find this manner of thinking flrange ; I experience the truth of it, however; and, if I was not afraid of your being angry with me, I would tell you that I hope you will one day do the fame; But why philosophize, you will fay, upon fuch a fubje£f ? One ought to have a vaft dealof waffe time, to employ it in a manner fo ufelefst I-do not know whether your critieifm.would be }u{l: we hear all the world complain of the miferies with which the li'e of man is,, as it were. Sown ■; but they never refle£l that thofe accidental pains are the fait to their pleafures. You and I have always enjoyed perfedl health : we Scarce are fenfible of that advantage : while-poor James^ our gardener, is in tranfports of joy, approaching to madnefs, every time be makes ufe of his limbs,., which he was in danger of lofing ; he walks with a fort of ravifhment, merely to convince himfelf that he can walk-; he pays a vifit to his crutches ten times a day, and flops every body he meets, tofhew that he can walk without them, and to tell them, what little hopes he once had of ever being able to do fo. Count, if you
can, the pleafures which this poor man is pof»
fefleill
L E T T E R S.
41.
feffed of; they are all born of his Sufferings and his fears. Let us then no more infolently accufe the Divine Wifdom,. who is able to dra-w good from evil ; but abandon ourfelves entirely to his mercy. I refemble James: that which confti-tutes the exquiSite. in the happinefs I at prefent prove, are the little hopes there were of my ever
arriving at It. Mr. Balfour tells me,, itmuft be brought about by a miracle. Well, God has wrought it, and my deareft mother fheds tears of joy, in acknowledgment, every inflant. It is not the tendernefsof a daughter that, puts a fillet over my eyes; I plainly perceive how far my father has-erred ;'he wanted morals, and nothing could compensate for that fault; with regard to every thing elfe, no more can be defired in man : on
----In fine, my dear
the fide of wit and figure------
girl, you will love him, I am Sure; and judge the degree of my affection for him, at a lime whenhe makes his whole ftudy the happinefs of his v/ife and me.
Of my mother we may fay, without exaggeration, fhe is the phoenix, of her fex. You have fbmet'imes thought proper to praife the difpofition of my features ; be allured, that, in fpite of the,
advantages of youth, they will not bear any comparison with thofe of my mother. As for her
mindi

L E T T E R S'.
mind, I am reduced to .admire it ; all that I could fay to you about it, v.^oukl disfigure, without painting it. What virtue mail her’s have:' been, to fupport, for twenty years, the contempt of my father ? and to whom did he fa-erifice her ! I am told that Mrs. Colby has fmai! pretenSions to beauty, and that her underfranding is more' contemptible than her figure ; and this gives me an idea fufficiently difiiniSf of the vice. Good God ! how malignant muft its poifon her when it cancondudia reafonablc creature to fuch depravity.
The dean has triumphed through Mr.BalfourV letter: it would have been unjuft, if my little judgment had carried it from two perfons fo much my fuperior in every thing. However, I have obtained two thoufand pounds, which I deftine to pay my father's debts contrafiled in Ireland. This is mere juftice, my dear; what right fhould I have to affift the widow and the orphan, at the expence of a number of merchants and mechanics, who would fuffer in the very inftant, perhaps, becaufe they were not paid lor their goods, and the prices of their labour ?
My father’s diildren are arrived, and feem extremely grateful for my kinduefs in putting
them
LETTER S.
43
them out ; for my father has declared to them, the deSign and expence are entirely my own. I keep the girl near me, till an opportunity offers to fend her into France ; fome years in a convent are neceffary for her in(IruQ;ion, and to corredl fome faults which Hie has contracted
through a bad education
r
JL
at firft thought of
deSiring my mother to take charge of her, but a little reflection made me alter that deSign ; her father has. always fpoiled her, and might, perhaps, grow impatient to fee her contradiCIed under his eye. The boy goes this day to London : he has a propenfity to trade, and I put him with a merchant, who joins to a great knowledge in that way, a folid piety ; indeed my poor bro" ther has much need of inftruCtions relative to his religious duties ; neither he nor his filler know fo much as their catechifm,.
We live here, pretty nearly, as we did in my aunt’s life time : the fame fociety : 1 fufpeCted, it would be too grave for my father. He tells me often that we fhall be better at my houfe at Old Windfor, which is but two and twenty miles
^	J
from London. Do you know what has determined my mother to inlinuate to me, that I Ihould pleafe him much by fubmitting to him in this matter ? It is in the neighbourhood of my lady
Roxborough,^
44
L E T T E R S'.
Roxboroughj and another' lady of her friend% who lives at her feat with her. Perhaps, when we are fo near London, we fhalh be obliged to fpend a month or two there every year. My mother will decide in this, matter ; with fuch-a guide I am in no danger of going aftray; and I fhould be unworthy of the favours which Heaven fhowers upon me in fuch abundance, if I afpired to live in the independance which my aunt would never havedefjgned for me, but that file could not forefee all thofe happy events.
I BEG you will join to my letter to Mr. Balv four a thoufand acknowledgments for the goodr<*-nefs he has had in writing to
LETT E;H
n
E T T E R S,
• «
LETTER IX
ZADT HARRIET TO CLARISSA.
GO D hlefs philofophy and philofophcrs.,
and keep me from having any thing to do with either. The pretty imagination ! to regard broken limbs as a piece of good fortune, becaufe 'that one will afterwards tafle the pleafure of walking with greater faiisfa6lion! Take care, my good young lady, never to wifli me any fuch' happinefs; it is full enough not to drown onesfelf when one pafl'es the water : let us enjoy peaceably the pleafures which we poflefs, without impertinently enquiring into the caufes of them. 1 am not in the leaf! apprehenfive of that infipi-dity which you would make me apprehend from an uninterrupted courfe of happinefs. Thanks to thofe grains of folly v/hich I have in my eompoSition, new defires Succeed fo quickly with me, that I "have Scarcely time for Satiety. We are all pofTefled with a travelling devil, Mr. Balfour excepted, who determines to go to Paris, only becaufe he has important afSairs to -tranSadl there. However, as he continues the
diteft
ii ^
46
LETTERS,
politeftof hufbands, he hasaffurccl me, that if he had fufpedled ni) inclination was fo Brongiy for that voyage, he would have preferred France to Scotland ; and he now terminates an ahair in eight days, which he would not have finihied in fix months, but to oblige his Harriet, O! this hufband, child, is not made like others; and it to love one’s hufband is a foible, in truth, mine will be pardonable. I do not know why I put it off fo long, it is not fit that baflifulnefs fhould engage me to deceive my Clarifla, it’s all over, and love is come in fpite of me. I fwear it is a mofl amufing thing to love one’s hufband; I could not have uifpefiled : it is a certain preventative againft drowfinefs. Mr. Balfour is forced to dine in town : Harriet, who had a very good appetite, is no longer impatient lor dinner. Is fire at table ? Heaven help the cooks and the footmen ; this thing is too Sweet, another too fait, the meat is hard, the falad too old, the defert ill chofen; and file calls two or three times for drink. Is there a thundering knock at the door, fuch as anounces a perfon of confequence ? my lady throws away the napkin, overturns every thing in her paflage, and makes but three ftrides acrofs the diningroom, to fee by the window if it is not her dear, who has found a pretext to quit a place a few
minute
n E T T E IR S.
47
^minute's fooner, where he had good company; but company that tired him, becaufe the objedt .of his affections were not among them'. Is it •he? the countenance is chearfui, the appetite re-•turns, and not a difti goes away untaftcd. Is it a falfe alarm ? I return fadly to my place, call to take away, and my face is as long as my knife; vapours fucceed, and I am determined to fcold Mr. Balfour: the refolution holds two minutes, and then his prefence makes me forget all. I ’Ihould never finifh, if I was to defcribe to you ■the variety which a little love throws into life. Perhaps it is the novelty of thefe emotions that
me
pleafure. In this cafe, a woman of fpirit, as I am, will not want refources, I will beg of Mr. ..Balfour to make me jealous, and if he h.as not complacence enough, to comply with my reqnefl:, I will take care to make him fo. You can eaSdy conceive what a fund of variety that will fupply us with. O ! depend upon it, my dear, I will never go to deep, for want of fomething to keep .me waking.
As it will be iinpolSible for me to receive your anfwer here, I beg the favour of you toaddrefs it to —, where w'e.fhall embark.
In

48
n E T TER S
In a worv.1, in fpiteof my folly, I am capable of tailing what is good and eftimable ; I therefore applaud the a6l of juftice you have done, in paying your father’s debts. It is onthofe occa” fions, my dear, that one feels the pleafure of being rich.
b
LETTER
LETTERS

4a-
LETTER IX.
CLARISSA TO LADT HARRIED
T is from London I write to you, my dear : we arrived here two days ago; my houfe at Windfor wanted Some repairs, and my father cbofe that time for a little journey to the capital j I confented to it more willingly, as, at
4	'
prefent, there is Scarcely any one in town ; So
#
that I Ihall neither be obliged to pay, or receive vifits. I profit of this occaSion to fatisfy a wifli I long have had. I have been in pain for the poor figure my father and mother make ; mourn-ing has hitherto been an excufe for it, but that is almofl: at an end, and I take a true pleafure in making them tafte the fweets of that affluence t© which they were born, though for a long, time they have not enjoyed it. My mother wants every thing, and I do not think lefs than five hundred pounds will make a proper provifion for cloaths and linen. I have need of your advice upon this occafion, for I do not pique myfelf much upon being a connoilTeur in drefs ; but happily my woman has talle, and underftands oeconorny i it is to her care I leave this commif-fion.
i
:>
VOL. I.
D
I AM
I
(
• I I
H I H
L .
I' ;
|i;:
!':i
\ .:
t,	»
f i
$0
LETTERS.
I AM called to read a letter, which an exprefs has juft brought me.—O great and merciful ■God ! My dear Harriet, at informs me of the death of our excellent dean ; and what death ! and in what circumftances ! But my agitation will not permit me to finilh this -letter. I am obliged to lay down my pen.
«
I HAVE been in Such tr-ouble for thefe two days paft, that I have not had courage, to inform you of the new misfortunes that threaten me, of which the death of my dear friend and protestor is a woeful prefage. At prefent I find that a terror which has no fixed objeSI, is a thoufand times more painful than a certain misfortune. You may judge of the ftate lam in, by the letter I received from farmer Ryding, him whom
my aunt aflbciated with the dean in the care of my eftate.
LETTER
^ E T T E R S. L E T TER X.
31
MK RTBING TO MISS CLARISSA.
Your attachment to the dean of Colborne, will make yon but too fenSibie of his mif, fortune: he has been found in his clofet in an apoplexy ; and, notwithSranding the fpeedieft Succours were procured and admini^ered, he died in a few hours, without recovering the ufe of Speech, after having telbfied by figns his re-hgnaiion to the will of the Lord. He appeared to me to be -taken up with Something which greatly difquieted him, as he incefiantly pointed to the bureau, at which he had been writing
when his fit Surprised him. I went and Searched
■it with the clergyman, who was, at that time, praying by him ; and I found there a letter begun, but not finil'hed'; wliich he made Signs to me to put in niy pocket. I mentioned a number of my acquaintances, to know lor whom, the 'imperfedl Scroll was defigned ; and when I pronounced your name, he, by a lively motion, gave me to undertland it was for you : I Send it to you without lookingatthe contents. My dear •mifs, be nut under the lead uneafineSs about
D .3	your
4...	•	.
52
LETTERS.
f
your affairs; the -firfl: care of the dean, aftei having quit you, was to put them in order. ] have at prefent, in my hands, four thoufand pounds, being your half year’s rent, and I wai for your orders how to difpofe of it.
The dean’s Servants attribute his accident ts the viSit of a ftranger, with whom he had a lotij conference the evening before. It appeared ii trouble him extremely, and he neither flippy that night, nor breakfafted the next mornin| You are too good a chriflian, madam, notii accept this crofs f rom the hand of God: no dout our lofs in fuch a friend is great; but our He venly Father knows what is good for us, bettf than wee do ourfelves; and I hope that he wi fford you better comfort, than fuch a poor ij ;:':>rant as! am can be fuppofed capable of.

Lbe Letter begun by the Dean of ColbornEi
to Miss Clarissa.
'W HAT pain does it coft me, my dea: child, to trouble, with juft fears, the fw'eet peaCf .of which you believe yourfclf in lafting poflei fion. But, my God, how my head fwdms!-
Th
L E T IT L R S. 53
The journey to London hides defigns!—^I am not able to hold my pen—Let your mother watch the adions of-----
The reft of this letter, my dear Harriet, is written without any connedion, and in cha-raders almoft illegible. Alas, I doubt it not> his friendfhip for me occaSioned his death; but what could he learn capable of cauSing fuch a revolution ? The condud of my father, with regard to my mother, is unexceptionable: his friendfhip for me increafes every day. No matter, I will hurry the workmen, that my houfe may be in a condition to receive us 5 it is upon the journey to London, that the fears of our worthy friend feem founded, and I will leave it as foon as poflible.
r
I AM not fo occupied with the fear of wliat may happen to me, but that I have a lively fenfe of the lofs of him, who has guided my fteps from my eaiiieft infancy; and whofe fage advice has given my foul a love for virtue. But why weep for him ? Ought I to be more inte-refted in my own worldly affairs, than in his
eternal happinefs ? His days are full, and God has fpared him the miferies which he might have
D 3
tafted.
S4
LETTER S.
tailed, if-—but in vain I endeavour to upoB an obje€l wh^re my apprehenlibns may fall, mother is under the fa.me itrcertitiide,. fhe endeavours indeed to encourage and infpire me with a tranquillity, which, it is viSible, fhe does nett enjoy herfelL
f -
Th e circumllances attending the death of our dear dean, has juft been repeated to us by the Servant who attended him the laft time he wa* at my houfe. If we may believe this lad, the letter which has difturbed us So much, is nothing but the produdtion of our worthy friend’s dilbr* der : his fenfes had began to fail the evening bei-fore his death, and his Servant then adviSed him to Send for a phyfician. He fays, that the man taken for a ftranger, was a poor Roman catholic, who uSed to come every year to confefs to. the dean ; but, as he already felt his indifpolition. upon him, he was not then- able to hear him, but put him off till the next day. He had been troubled with violent vapours lince his laft return home; his mind was on the rack, left my father Ihould not perfevere in- the road of reformation. It is not then aftonifhing, that thofe ideas fliould haveaffedled him yet ftronger, when his reafon began to give way. My father appears-
LETTERS;
55
pears extremely Ihocked at the death of our friend, and has prevented my intentions, in begging me to take his fervant, who is now our butler. Commonly good mafters make good Servants ; and this, having lived four years with the dean, appears to me to be a man in wbona> one may confide without any rifq_ue..
D 4
LETTER

■ t
’ I
56 LETTERS;
I
L E T T E R XI.
LADT HARRIET TO CLARISSA.
OULD you believe it, my dear ClariiTa, for ten days paft Mr. Balfour has endeavoured to perfuade me, that my incomparable friend is not all perfedion ! and that one may-venture to accufe her of a little negligence? However, he does not think this, I am fure, but he has believed it prudent to put fuch a fancy into my head, in the place of thofe inquietudes, which your Silence has caufed. I was in my poft-chaife when I cried to our landlady, are you fure no letter has been brought for Lady Harriet Balfour ? We have had no letter for any one indeed, madam, laid the good woman. Send quickly to the poll then, cried I j and waiting for the return of a footman, and Mr. Balfour’s valet de chambre, who ran with all their fpeed, I fat at the door of our lodging, beating the bottom of the chaife with my feet, and faying every minute, but fure this poft-houfe is a prodigious way off, or thofe fellows creep like
At lafl: they came back, but no let-
ter ; and on the inftant my brain fet to work, to imagine an accident which might retard your an-fwer,
You
LETTERS.
57
Y ou may believe, my dear, that nothing.
She
pofTible to have happened, efcaped me. one is dead—Sick—her father—perhaps her coach has been overturned in the journey Ihe was to make. Thofe things engaged me fo deeply, that Mr. Balfour was an hour in the chaife v/ith me, before he could obtain a moment’s audience. In the end, however, he contrived to bring to my remembrance, that you had told me, you were going to change your place of reSidence; and that very probably you had been fo taken up in preparatives for it, you deferred writing to me one day, and miffing a Single day, was fufficient to hinder your letter from coming in time. He carried his complaifance fo far, as to fliew me, upon the book of polls, the route of the courier; and I really fee that you had but a few hours to read my letter, andanfwerit. However preffing our affairs might be, my hufband offered to flay at Edinburgh another poll. Indeed this man is adorable, but I would not abufc his goodnefs; and Tpart, my head in a Sick, without feeing where you are, and without being able to give the reins to my imagination, ,as I was accuflom-ed to do, on what might happen to you, from one letter to another. If I was great lady e-nough to keep expreffes always ready in my fer-vlcc, there ffiould not pafs a day, a fingle day,
which
D 5
S8
LETTERS.
which fhould not bring me news from my Cla-rilTa, and from me to her ; if I knew where yott are this moment, I would fend off this unfinifh-ed fcroll; but I mufi: wait with patience for your letter. I hope to receive it at Calais, and then! will put an end to this. But Mr. Balfour would infinuate to me, that the poft-boy, charged with your deSired letter, will not probably have wings; that confequently he mull wait the return of the packet-boat, in which we fhall go over, and fo-it cannot come to my hands before we get to Paris. Indeed, my dear hufband, I cannot wait, folong; I mull—O how negligent is my Clarifj-
fa !—This is my eternal burdem
/
Sure one mufl: have a prodigious- inclination to converfe with one’s friend, when ! write to you in my prefent condition. Do but liften to our tragi-comic entry into Calais. To tell you that in coming into the vefl'el, the fmell of the pitch made me lick at heart; thatj, in a moment after, my head began to turn round with the motion of the fea, and that t fufFered for five hours,, all that one fufFers from
the mofl: violent emetick ; would only be to give you the hiftory of all who for the firft time go to fea, who rarely fail to pay it that tribute. It is only with misfortunes particular to myfelf, that I v/ould willingly entertain
you,
L E T T E R S.
59
you.*—We embarked in the fined: weather imaginable : to Speak poetically, Eolus, who
winds fhut up, had let out a few who, with their breaths, juft curled
But all of a Sudden they
kept the zephyrs,
the Surface of the Sea. ------------
withdrew, and a dead calm left us immoveable in^ the middle 5f our paflage. Any one lefs impatient than your friend, would have ftaid with tranquillity with the reft of the paflengers. Wait but an hour, the wind would rife with the tide, and we Should enter the port. I Suffered horribly 5 that hour appeared to me an age; and I very willingly lent an ear to an invitation from th© people of a boat, which came by the fide of our veSTel. Mr. Balfour not having, courage to con-tradidi me, con Sen ted to go in with me ; and our pie, drew after it Some others. We
three leagues from France, but we had four ftout oars, and they promiled to land us in day light 5 for one of my reafons for quitting the Ship, was the fear of pafiing the night in it, or arriving at Calais after the gates were Shut: in which cafe,; they frightened me with-the neceftity I Should be under, of lying in a Suburb hovel, falfely called an inn, the only refource on fuch occa--
fions. We had Scarcely made half a league,, when a terrible black cloud threatened us with a Shower of rain,, which quickly began to pour in
fuck.
■ h ’ • \ ;
•. {
: ^
::■! ■
i I
i
!{
. I
a! ^ biil ^
si i
'.O' .
i'ii;
r;il
i
\ ^ * ;!i !li ■
i'll! '
1(1
»..
i '
1 >
bli(
r-.
;■ t
. '
<. ' 1
) I i 1
O 1
t.
I >1
0
t
[
ii.i
.DM
!r
'•I
i'-1 I '
i!
I i 1 '
6o
LETTERS
Such abundance, that in an Inftant we were wet to the jQcin. HoweVer, as the rain had abated the wind, which might have put us in danger, I confoled myfelf for being wet. But this calm was not long, and the pilot of our fkiff foretold a hurricane which would Scarce give time to put us afhore. He hoifted all his fails, and, I believe, if he had delayed a quarter of an hour, we fliould not have efcaped being wrecked, fo
violent was the tempeft. You know how I am frightened with thunder; imagine, my dear, that one clap Scarce waited for another ; and what thunder 1 I never in my life heard any thing, fo terrible. After all, we had at laft a league to walk over the Sands. I would not (Hr during the ftorm; beSides, the Sand was foToft, that I funk at every flep: if I had been as nimble, and as light as my Clarifla, our boatmen could have carried me alternately ; they offered it, but considering my Size, it was impoffible to attempt it. I was obftinate then to ftay on the fliore, till a carriage came up; but they made me take notice, that the tide, which began to rife, brought the Sea under our feet, and that I mull advance, or be drowned. You may imagine which I chofe. I advanced. Sometimes on Soot, Sometimes carried, Sometimes dragged. While I amufed myfelf with Scolding, Mr. Balfour took the wifeft
method.
t : ■ I

IT
LETTERS.
6i
method, which was, to fend one of the rowers to bring me the firft method of conveyance he could lay hold of, chaife, horfe, afs, wheelbarrow, barrow, cart---
----nothing was excepted.
One of our Servants went with this man, and it w’^as lucky he did fo, as you will fee by and by. Though they went as if they had wings to their heels, I had time to walk at lead half a league, and to arrive at a fort of bridge, where the tide could no longer incommode us. Here I was re-folved to fix, till Some fort of carriage was procured. When,lo! it appeared, I favv a kind of Sedan chair, and, with transports, went to fling myfelf into it, one of our Servants whifpered Something to Mr. Balfour, who begged I would not be fo precipitate, but that I would let them get me a barrow. I do not know, my dear, if you have any idea of the vehicles in which they carry dung; they are laths joined by four pieces of wood, in the form of a frame ; and two flicks. Something like thofe in our Sedan chairs, but much Shorter, Serve to bear them. It was upon this noble carriage that I went the refl of the road. Mr. Balfour walked before with my two maids, and thofe unfortunate paflen-gers whom I had, by my impatience, engaged in this difagreeable undertaking. Our Servants brought up the rear> But what do you think
your
L;'
62
L E T T E tC S.
!l
f
'I
•>i
' f . ;!, '' I' ’ !
H
I :
I .
I :
I ,
your filly friend was doing the reft of the way ? laughing ready to kill herfelf: and I doubt whether your grave lady Ihip would not have done the fame, had you feen our comical equipage. Imagine to yourfelf the women draggled, up to the waift, dripping water from all fides, Mr... Bdfour’s hair as ftrait as wax candles, all the perriwigs in the fame condition, and, myfelf efpe-cially, wet to the Ikin, and ftiook as no unfortunate being ever wasi Happily it was night wheui we arrived, or we ftiould certainly have railed; a mob. They had the complaifance to keep the gates open, fo we flepti in town, v/here they ■d^armed for me a very bad bed ; But it was im-poffible to make me ftay in it a quarter of an* hour ; I found myfelf quite refrefhed and hearty,, and would get up to fupper.. Here is my lamentable hiftory ; and, what makes it ftill more* lamentable, the packet boat arrived in the port as foon as we ; fo that, if we had ftaid in it, wc might have avoided all our pains and fatigues.-But you muft know, I was exceffively inquifitive: why my hufband made choice of fuch a carriage^ for me. He told me the reafon ; the chair they had brought, was that in which they carried the Sick to the hofpital'; and- it hadi Served the
very fame day, fora woman in a malignant fever.;
*
No w-
LETTERS.
63
Now do you not think, my dear, that Mr. Balfour had a fine occafion to regale me with a good fermon ; for it was againft his will that I ,drew him into this ill encountered boat ? I ex-pe<fled it, and really fhould have fubmitted to the humiliation in Silence, So much was I down in the mouth- However, he has been gracious, and I. have acknowledged the obligation ; nay, I have made a vow implicitly to obey him (during the whole voyage ;) I have not yet had power to extend it farther: how^ever,, the man will certainly fucceed in rendering me reafonable, however flight the appearance of fuch a miracle may be at prefent. But, after all, what would he have gained by reproaching me with my imprudence ?, I felt it as well as him ; all his lamentations w'ould not have dried a Angle drop of the water that had almofl: drowned us; and would have infallibly put me into a fury ; for it is insupportable to hear ones Self found fault with,when one is in the wrong t for my part, I think it is piore eafy to have patience under an unjufl: accu^ fation ; for then one is confcious of having the bell in the difpute.
Mr. Balfour refolved to flay, a day at Calais^ to let our people reft ; it is an adlof conlideration that pleafes me,, and we flept till eleven o’clock
in
h
r, P
' c
lii
11
0.
/ ; .
64
LETTERS.
in the morning, without lofing mafs : we went to that, for the officers of the garrifon and your friend ffied tears of joy there ; each part of the facrifice was ianounced by beat of drum ; at the elevation, the foldiers prefented their arms, and there was a general found of all themufic. In Short, I think with queen Elizabeth : they fay fhe loved ceremonies; certainly they areufeful to beings compofed of bodies and fouls ; they elevate the foul to God, and (hut the dooragainft diftrafitions, by filling it with an idea of his ma-jefty ; yet I confefs I was diflrafiled: but how ? regretting the misfortune of my poor countrymen) and burning with defire to fee them united with us in the fame faith. But, alas! it is with this inefti-mable gift as with health. Iremeraberyou tellme in one of your letters, that a perfon who always enjoys it, does not feel its value : in like manner, the French, who owe their faith to thehappinefs of their birth, are ignorant of its worth. For myfelf, I find this moment fo great a pleafure in being a catholic, that I firmly refolve no day of my life Shall pafs, without thanks being returned to God for fo great a blefling.
We
the day we have pafled here, will occafipn your letter to meet me in Paris.
LETTER
LETTER S.
^5
LETTER XII.
f
LADT HARRIET TO CLARISSA.
Y melancholy bodings are then verified,
they foretold me the death of our worthy friend, and the vexatious confequences of it to my dear Clarififa. I would willingly believe whit the dean’s fervant tells you about his mailer’s indifpoSition ; but Mr. Balfour will not give me leave ; either he has a wonderful knowledge of your father, or he is furioufly prejudiced againft him : he fufpefils every thing he does, and is greatly concerned that you took that fellow into your Service. When I alked him,v/hy ? he anfwered me limply, becaufe Mr. Darby recommended it; and he begs of me to infill upon your taking the firfl: opportunity to part with him ; or, at leaft, that you will be ftridly on your guard while he is in your houfe. He approves much of your retiring to your country-feat, and then there are moments when he believes you would be Safer in London. In fine, his lall resolution is, to difpatch his affairs as foon as polllble, return to England, and take up his refidence Somewhere near you. I cannot tell you how much I am obliged to him, for thefe inllances qf regard for you j but you
know
I-
* ■ .1
t:
I:	,

1 (
* »
. I I
». I
,D
jh
■i!p
ilHi
11' I
:r-
!h'
iii':
11
‘lb:
:ih'

il::| i
,,j I i
n i !
, I
L ■ ■
1, 1
I

II ■ I
{)h‘
j ; I '
M i
: • '
,i 111

i*ni
66
L E T T E R SS
know my heart, and I leave you to guefs ih. He intreats you to let us know exa£Uy every
thing that pafles in your family,, and he will
t
Gonduilvi; himfelf according to your letters. As thefe precautions feem to threaten you with fome approaching danger, he has made me eafy upon that head. You want three years of one and twenty, and, if you die before that age, your father will lofe all; fo that, for that time at leaft, his own interell will make him careful of you. However, my dear,, be pundlual in letting us hear from you: you may imagine what my terrors will be, fliould one pod pafs without bringing me a letter. If you have time for no more, write only on a Scrap of paper, them h mthingnevj*
LETTER
t.
ibi!'
1: !
LETTERS.
67
LETTER XII.
eiARISSA TO LADT HARRIET.
\ t
L A S, my dear friend, w'hat fatigues and difficulties have you gone through ; I fhould not know what to fay to you on the fub-je6l:, if you had not artfully thrown in an eulogy on the difcretion of Mr. Balfour, without doubt, to engage me to imitate it. Not a word then of your pad Sufferings ; I will content myfelf, with exhorting you, never to violate the vow of obedience which you have made to your hufband, I hope your deference for his advice, will extend farther than your travels : I am Sure his GGndn6l will deferve, that it Should be extended to everything, even though it was not your duty. But I will not dwell upon this article ; my Harriet hates to be preached to by any thing but her own heart; and it feems to me to acquit itfelf fo well, that fhe may venture to rely upon it.
We are fixed at Old Windfor, but your duchefs is yet in Scotland ; truly fhe flays too long there for my impatience I ought to fay, our impatience, for my mother burns with a defire to be acq^uaintcd with her. We are at
more
iiii
4 I
I i
} •
ill
• i;
II -
i!
i
« ,
I
; 1 ) 1
1 ?
68
LETTERS
more than a mile’s diftance from any neighbourhood, yet that does not prevent us from frequent
a^d
company: the proximity of the town, Windfor caflle, brings us Sufficient to Save us from abfoiute Solitude. My father continues to behave m Such a manner, as entirely deftroys
Mr. tlalfour’s Sulpicions. I Scarcely conceive.
how a man, accuftomed to a life of diffipation.
can be reduced to the uniformity in which we
paSc our time ; it is varied only by hunting panies which happen but Seldom, and little
tours to Vv^indSor, where he never flays above
four and twenty hours. He has told us, how-
ever, that, was his fortune leSs circumfcribed.
he Should like, now and then, a fhort vifit to
London, Put yourfelf in my place, my dear
Harriet, I have eight thouSand pounds a year.
could I hear Such an exprefllon drop from the
mouth of a father, without immediately telling
him, that it was doing me injuflice, if he did
not believe, every thing I poffefTed was at his
diSpoSal ? He anfwered me only, by claSping me in his arms, and I felt my face wet with his tears. In what abundance did mine flow ! I ne-
ver in my life experienced Such heart-felt pleasure. I (hould conSider mySelf as a monfter, if, liftening to injurious fuSpicions, I did not do my utmofl: to re-eflablifh the author of my birth in
the
, I I
i !:
' 11
, :I
LETTERS.
69
the opinion of the man I moftelteem. I know, and value Mr. Balfour’s motives when he endeavours to infpire me with a diffidence of my father. A difiblute youth has but given too good grounds for it: but riper age, great mif-fortunes, and, above all, grace, which, indeed,
I ought to have named firfl:; may not all thofe things create a change in the heart ? How can we tell but the prayers of my pious aunt, thofe of my refpeftable mother, for Ixount not much upon my own; how can we tell, I fay, but fuch prayers may have had efficacy fufficient to touch the father of mercies, in favour of my mifguided parent ? One may counterfeit for fome days, fome weeks; but I have lived in the houfe with my father fix months, and it is not probable that he Ihould be fo perfect a mafter of deceit for So long a time to cfcape my obfervation. My mother begins to have fome hopes ; and if fhe blamed the offer which I made my father, it is only, as fhe tells me, becaufe fhe is afraid, left ill company fhould overturn the good refolution he has fef up. He allows himfelf, that he has Spent his younger days in amoft deplorable manner ; he repents it, and even confeffes, that he has had fome difficulty to conquer bad habits; which confeifion is, methinks, a proof of his Sincerity. I took the liberty of doing a thing,
which
ii!'
ii
'I!i:
• <:
. 11 • , ' i
'iu.
•!|i.
.1:1
* , j i
t
I ;'
‘
■ t'
■ t,
•i ’
•1
ii:
ji-
b:
'T
'ii'
iM
il *»
i;' }• *
M;
l‘
r:
70
LETTERS.
I
which I did not think myfelf capable of; but it has fuccecded to my wilh. After Spending an hour in imploring the divine aSfiftance, I followed my father into the garden: (this was the evening of the day in which I offered him the difpofal of my eftate:) he turned into a Ihady walk, where he fat down, Seemingly funk in profound thought, fo that I was kneeling at his feet before he perceived me; I embraced his knees with tendernefs; my tears flowed So faff that they took away my power of Speaking. O father, my dear father, cried I, forgive your audacious daughter the liberty She is going to take ; permit her to open her heart to you ; it is charged with a burden that oppreffes, and will kill her, torn by the oppofition of contrary duties, equally dear and Sacred. My father took me in his arms, and forced me to rife. No, faid I, my pofture mufl: accord with my Sentiments of profound refpefil, in Some fort, to expiate the boldnefs of my tongue. Will my father permit me ?—All is permitted, dear daughter of my heart, cried he, whom I regard lefs as a child, than as a tender friend; doomed to make the happinefs of my latter days; and in vvhofe faithful breaft I may repofe the Secrets of my heart with confidence: fear not to open yours then; for, be affured, your happinefs is the firft objedf
of
lb
L E T T E R S.
7j
«of my v/ilhes. Encouraged by this mark of •bounty, I dared to tell him, that my refpedlfof the memory of my aunt, forced me, in fpite of tmyfelf, to a referve which was become my torment. Ah'! cried I, in a tranfport which I believe truly painted to him the fentiments of ray foul, if the fortune I enjoy was the fruit of ray labour and indullry, with what pleafure would I come to lay it at your feet; and receive from you, as a favour, whatever might beneceflaryforme : dependance on you would make my happinefs ^ and I cannot, without confuSion, recall the idea, TEhat, at my age, I am drawn out of thecommou order, by the will of an aunt, whom I ought to obey, becaufe you tranfmitted to her the authority you had over me. My aunt was virtuous ; why has flie deprived me of the felicity and merit of obedience, of which fhe herfelf So well knew the value ? Permit me to makeanend, added I, feeing my father ready to interrupt me, in refledting upon what has paffed during thefe fix months, that I have had the happinefs to live under your eye ; I believe, I have found an explication of her conduSl. Without doubt, ray
dear father, (he knew your heart; flic knew that it was capable of the greateft virtues, and that your errors, pardon me for naming them, were rather the vices of thofe, with whom certain
I
. I
• ; I.

};
t.
72
LETTERS.
tain circumftances had fatally conne£led you > Ihe knew how difficult it was to renounce fuch attachments; that long habitude even rendered them neceflary; and it was to lay you under the happy neceffity,. of doing yourfelf that violence, Ihe put your intereft into my hands; it is a depofit of which I ought to render a juft account, and this is what caufes my mifery. If I follow the motions of my affeCtiori, which carry me to deliver into your hands, both my perfon and fortune, I no longer accommodate myfelf to the intentions of my benefafirefs, and, by that means, forfeit my right to her favours; they belong to me no more ; it is a robbery, becaufe I enjoy them but upon certain conditions, which I violate ; and what misfortunes might be the caufe of my infidelity ? How could I anfwer it to my confcience, if an ill judging tendernefs fliould again precipitate my father—1 have not courage to go on, but you underftand me, I am fure; Spare your daughter, and put her in a way of accompliftiing her duty.
I DID myfelf fo great a violence by this free explanation, that I had like to faint away; my father raifed me with great concern and tendernefs, took out my fmelling bottle, and refufed to an. •''wer me, till he faw me entirely recovered; and
ftill
LETTERS.
/
n
illll demanding his pardon for my boldnefs. You have not offended me, cried he, ray dear daughter ; would to Heaven, that I had always been treated with fuch gentlenefs and good fenSe ; 1 ffiould not now blufh before you ; nor would you have juftreafon to fear following the motions of your tendernefs in my behalf. People have not known ray real charadter, they believed it might be curbed by outrageous feverity : accuf-toraed to excels of indulgence, from the only relations to whom I owed refpe^, I confidered the authority which my Sifter would ufurp over me, as an zSk of tyranny; her good intentions, (which I knew) were not Sufficient to juftify the tone in which (he made her remonftrances. I had determined to quit my miftrefs, the virtue of your mother had engaged me to make that Sacrifice ; but the haughtineSs with which your aunt exadled it, bound yet ftronger thofe tyes, which I was going to break ; I thought it would be Shameful to give way to her menaces. Here then was the unhappy Source of all my indiscretions : my miftrefs loved expence, fhe engaged me in it; I firft was obliged to mortgage my eS-tate, and afterwards Sell it. The cruelty of my lifter, which left me to Suffer extremities. Such asl cannot recall the memory of without horror j her cruelty, I fay, at length, threw me into VoL. i	E	deSpair;
74
L E T T E S.
.1
t
• I
defpair: fhc was very exack in fulfilling thofe duties, which religioil prefcribes; from whence I concluded, that religion was only proper to harden the heart; and this idea confirmed mein a difregard for religion, which, in my youth, I had too fatally been eflranged from. ’ My wife became the objefik of my averSion, becaufe I attributed to her complaints, the haughtinefs and cruelty of ray fifker. This was the difpofition of my mind, till the moment I fiiw you; nay, I was even determined to confound you with the obje6ks of my hate, but my heart refufed to fub-mit to the odious defign. I thought I difeovered in you. Sentiments very different from thofe» which had produced my difliketo perfons, who ought to have been dear to me. The good grace with which you left me mafter of all, which lial been given you to my prejudice, effaced the imprefllofts of diflike, which one naturally has
for thofe who ravifli from us our fortune. 1
>
thought I fhould always be mafter, while things were leftatthedifpofal of Such a daughter. Your eondudk has not contradidked the judgment! then made, of your duty and affedkion for me-You have paid my debts, provided againft my neceffities, with a generofity which 1 ftiould not have done myfelf. But, my dear child, it is hard, at my age, to live in dependance : his
true*
LETTERS.
75
true, mine is Supportable, while it is only upon you: your refpeft, your tendernefs. Softens and endears it. Yet I cannot be eaSy. You are at an age when one thinks of fettling, aiid I cannot Support th*e idea of a fon-in-law ; who knows but your generofity to me, might be difagree_ able to a hulband, who-Should think leSs nobly than yourfelf : who knows but you might he forced to abandon the interefis of a father, or alienate the heart of a huSband ? and, in either cafe. Should 1 not regard myftlf as the moft unfortunate of men? I know that, with the annuity which your aunt has permitted you'to give us, we could live in a fort of cafe; but I will Ipeak- with confidence to my friend ; there is a Superfluity, which cuflom has changed into ne-ceflity, and I feel that I have not courage to renounce it without pain. I hate the country, and Shall be Soon eaten up with melancholy, if I find my Self obliged to continue there always. Some months paffed at London would make a diversion which may prolong ray life: it is in you, my dear child, to-fix itsduration, by taking raeafures to put me in a Slate more agreeable, than that v/ith which I am at preSent threatened.
You Shall decide yourfelf. Said I, ouwhatis ncceSTary to your happineSs, refpe6tfully kiSTing
E 2	his
/ ^
LETTERS.
I / . »
I'
iij
his hand, which he had given me : at prefent I have no inclination for marriage; and, if wc can anfwer for our own refolutions, I dare pro-mife you, that I ftiall bound my happinefs, to live with you, and my dear mother, at leaft, for five or fix years. However, as nothing is more uncertain than the human will, I am ready to enter into any bond you pleafe, to double your annuity of a thoufand a year before I make any engagement; does that fum appear fufEci* ent ?,
YES, my dear daughter, cried my father, era* bracing me, and more fo, as you have already had the generofity to eftablifii my two children, who are his true your nearefl: relations, notwith* ftanding the misfortune of their birth. But I doubt whether you can execute what your good heart projefis ; you cannot difpofe of your eftates, which are fettled upon your children, or the poor. I do not believe your aunt left mucli ready money, and you have drained yourfelf to pay my debts; fo that I fhould be in a woeful plight indeed was I fo unfortunate as to lofe you. Be eafy on that head, faid I, I can every year put a confiderable fum apart; and, fuppofe I die before I have been able to Save any thing, my jewels will more than anfwer any duties that lie
upon
LETTERS.
11
wponme, independant of thofcimpofedby nature. The thoufand pounds a year, which you at pre-fent enjoy, is an allowance I make to the author of my being ; that which I fliall hereafter give you, is a prefent I make to my friend ; for you have honoured me with the name of friend ; and I hope you will permit me to fulfil thole obligations, which friendihip lays me under. But, dear fir. Said I, Smiling, (for my father’s manner of treating me, had opened my heart, and taken away all diffidence) will you Sometimes allow me the privilege of a friend ? I underfiand you, faid my father, prelfing me in his arms : you referve to yourfelf the right of preaching to me now and then ; obferve me, I am an old fin* ner, and may often give occafion for a fermon ; I will not promife you always to^rofit by it, biU I will promife you never to be angry.
We continued thus chatting together till it was quite dark ; and, in returning to the houfe, I begged my father’s leave to rejoice my mother with the recital of our conversation : he paufed for a moment, and then faid, it will be better to fay nothing to her of it; your mother is fufpici-
ous, and Seeks for a double meaning in a con-du<Sf the moft fimple : however, I wiil not prevent any thing that can give you pleafure, and
E 3	therefore
• I
78
LETTERS

therefore leave you to a6I in this matter as-you pleafe.
I HAVE been thus Gircumftantiai, my dear friemi, to juftify what i have done; I am fure your conduit would have been the fame, in mv fituation. As a chriftian, I have no right ta judge any man ; how then Hiall I dare to fufpeti:
my fath
er ?
Let us fuppole, (which, however, I
have no reafon to think) but let us fuppofe, I fay, that my father would take the advantage of my credulity,, to draw from me an allowance, which he does not want, but toabufe; I lhallat lead have the comfort to think, that I have been deceived by appearances extremely plauSible. I am well convinced, that my aunt was gentlenefs itfelf; and that sny father mnd l)e miftaken, when he fays, he was Shocked with the haughtinefs with which fhe treated him. But weigh all the circumftances well; my father had been brought up in abfolute dominion; his will was a law: his very caprices were facred ; and applaufe followed whatever he Said; nay, perhaps, the firft word of disapprobation he met with, came from his fifler; and, fuppoSing it was Softened ever So much, mud have appeared diflbnant to the ears of a man, who never ufed to be contradidled. What mud have been the effeil of that repre*
henfioa
LETTER S.
79
HenSion then, fuppoSng that zeal for his Safety, or indignation at his conciu61:, might have thrown into it ever fo little vivacity t In fine, here is my conclusion ; many attempts have been hitherto made,, to bring, my father back to virtue, by contempt, threats,, and hard treatment : friendfhip, gentienefs, and profperity, are now to be tried, to fee whether they will not. better anfwer the end propofed. Granting him to be the word of men, I repeat it, I am not authorized the more from that, to defpair of his converfion, or to Spare any pains to bring it about. Can I regret any Sums of money employed for Such apurpofe? 1, who would gladly give the lad drop of my blood, to procure him that, which I confider asi the only good ; and, in comparifon of which, crowns are lefs than atoms ?
Yet it appears as if my mother’s hopes were not equally drong with mine, though die endeavours to dilTemble her doubts : however. She approves my condufil in the affair, and I hope Mr. Balfour will follow her example : at lead, if he diould find any thing imprudent in it, I entreat the favour of him to keep it to himfelf as to find fault will be ufelefs, when the error cannot be retrafif^d; and I am at prefent in a fituatien perfefitly peaceful. I have a prodigious
E 4
curiofity
1 i •'
I !• i' b i. b'
8o
L E T T E R S.

tL I
curio(ity to.know fomething of the manners o? thofe people, among whom.you are going to pafs feme time: you.know I al ways lOved the French; let me know if there is not fome exaggeration ia the faults attributed to them and what virtuet counterbalanee thofe faults^ if they exift. Do not be afraid of prolixity, your memoirs will be the thing moil likely to entertain us in our country lolitude. As for James, the dean’s late fervant, be aflured, if he (lays in my fervice, hi mull: have acondufl that will bear a Il:ri6l: watchj and I will^ in this affair at leaf!, fiibmit m entirely to the determination of Mr. Balfour
■b
, I' I' I
u; ;
T
t'
) , , I I '
i I
I I
* t
LETTER

•l
#N
LETTERS
Si
♦ A . I
* .<** '•
LETTER XIV.
LJDr HARRIET TO CLARISSA.
M
A Y Heaven afllll a condu61: juftified, or, at leaft, excufed by motives fo noble, and fo chriftian ; it is the only anfwer I fhall make
j
to your laft letter ; and Mr. Balfour hopes, that his filence upon the fubje6l:, will encourage you to continue thofe informations about yourfelf, which we fo Sincerely wifh to be obliged with.
This is all he deSires of you •, and, as your grant-i»g his recjueft is eflential to my tranquillity, I hope you will be exafl: and fincere with us.
To tell you that the French ladles wear a malk, or, in other words, that rouge disfigures the moft beautiful faces; to tell you^ that the men referable butterflies, and that they are more frivolous than our coquettes in England ; would only be to fet down what thoufands have wrote before me. To add,-that among thofe frivolous men and daubed women, one finds knowledge and good fenfe, which would do honour to our philofophers, would be to add fomething to the
which is frequently done. To conclude with aflfuring you, that wifdom and virtue mingle with thofe contrarieties, that there are
E 5	a nura-
' I
Ci
1,1
l!i!!
iilli
I
■if'-
i}
ii’
'.' I 1 i j I
' I., : I
!i:
; :
^ t • . 'if ' ■
1, 11 i
■'Mi
■Hiil
'i • i
ih':,

iM
1 ^
iti-il ■
L i i ,
0;

1
: 11, I ''!: •; it:,
I i . , ‘
1 , ! !h‘ :
SI 1
hit '

1 • .
, (
I
Hi
111
,
>,
M

' .1
• I
• i I
82
L E T T E R S.
a number of people here, who, through principle, ful>je6t themfelves to the moft impertinent ceremonies; would be to tell you, what you will certainly have Some difficulty to believe : but I will go further, and fay, that among thofe butterflies are found perfons of the firft merit ^ provided you Search for them at certain hours. This has need of explanation.
There are in Paris diflerent focleties; in one houfe they play, in another they ffiew their wit j where alfo they criticize the wit of others, without being affiamed, when their judgments, which is commonly the cafe, are reverfed by the public j here they talk of religion, and charitably condemn all thofe, who are not of the fame opinion wdth themfelves; there they talk lefs of piety, and pradtife it more. In a word^ all the world aflbciate, and generally expofe themfelves. However, the truly wife avoid all this affectation, are chiefly mixed with focieties like themfelves, for whom they live three quar-ters of the day, and abandon the remainder to others, whofe extravagancies they Support ■with a patience, which they regard as a duty. Thefe are the philofophers without cloak, ftaff, or beard. Believe me, my dear, I have
found out Some of them by inftinCl: you
haye;

LETTERS.
83
have familiarized rae with that, wifdom, foft and complaifant, which yields to folly, and rejefls nothing hut malignity and vice. I would willingly enjoy, that fort of fpontaneous philofophy ; it warms Societies the moft fterile, and Some-times produces a flame fo bright, that it enlight-
a \	•..
ens thofe who Surround it, and brings them to I?af/:^n.: Thefeare all the remarks I am capable of making at prefent. I have not been in
^ i -	.	^
any public place, and, except a few friends, made in our voyage,, have Seen nobody. An
, which they attribute to the ftatc
©f woman, confines, me at prefent to my cham-: they endeavour to amufe me by procuring me pamphlets and Songs j but I have not patience Sufficient to read the firft, and my.morals are too
good to Suffer me; to learn the Second. -
• ^
B'u T let us <tnVt ^he tone of modefty, and Speak naturally,:do' you know, my dear, that there are authors fiereV.who Seem to have Under-
i .1	«	\ »	% .
taken to fihd'dut to what length the public folly will go? Fairytales, which have no merit but their obfcenity; Scandalous anecdotes ? TheSe are what fill all the books of the day. Indeed I regard it as a Sort of miracle, if a handSome French woman can keep herSelf prudent. To receive Such books from the hand of an agree-abk. man, who will know you have read them,
when
tfi
:ii
li ■ L
!il'-
. 11
', «•
;ll
I,	.'; I
;[L«1
• !i- h.:'
Mi ,I '1 ■
‘ jb■.f! I!* '
I'll-	; <
iib'F:-
■Ikh b
bl-
‘b'ii,;;:
: ■•iM- '■ ' .' ■. 1
f ' 1	' *' if
11 ''' ■ .
I ^ I ^ •	»
i;' ! '(' li, ' ■
!■ ‘ilibl '
i'
‘ . ' rU ' . .
i, i.';l|i" l-T !
ii'iii’b:-
' i' 1;	, ■
blcji L
ji
'	•-	" l‘
MCb! i!
lit tlH
tc'll.T
ii;j!:!p
ili'iMiji'i'
''t;
:b* r
iiCh il
. » H » * I I .
' I’
.1 )
i n J >
!, VI
J :
' 1
c '
'
'.. ■ i
11,:'" liii
;!i
■	I ■
■	•,
i I'
Mi
I
'M
!!b
!:bi!
! ^Mb !
iHt'!
'.1' >
ii . I ’	' -
hi; 'j! ^
!l fllji
IlL ', |l
ii i
i'i’iiii' i!'' iMi
i;ii '!l'P
M
'!!•, b’-
. M . * j
i, -' i !
3l" '• ^ '
Ii:. i'i'
lit	r-
iili'iVji,
$4
L E T T E R S
when you return them to him j is it not to confers to him,, that your heart is corrupted f that you dip--with pleafure into dirt and filthrnefs ? and willingly liften to thofe libertine difcourfes, with which fuch writings familiarize you ? I know, by hearfay, that Such kind of books find readers among our country women in but thofe who have a tafie iro depraved, bluih at and endeavour to* conceal it in privacy.^ You know, that,, with us, a woman iphb fhbuld take: Mie liberty of ufing double entendres in difcourfe
creature ? and that a.
would be regarded as a girl, who fhould'be licentious enough lo firig a loofe fong„ would: fihdi it iai difficult matter to get
a hufband. I fa id this, the other day,, to one
thofe uncloaked philofophers,, who had
♦
talk of fome Englilh girls, who, notwiihftand** ing public faults, had afterwards been well mar-^ ried; he found this indulgence, very contJa<^ di£tory to that contempt, which we women of a Free life. But, I hope, I was able| to prove to him, that this difference of condudli
was by no means incompatable.
... , . ^ - ' '
A FIRST, andonly,error in a.young perfon,is not always a proof of a vicious, heart ;* very often it is the confequence of a heart too con-, becaufe fhe finds herfelf incapable to
deceive:
l:’i i." M' ;
1 ’*
Cm
t, I».
' ? I
letter s.
$5
t
ticceive : It often proceeds from imprudence, in throwing herfelf in the way of dangerous opportunities j and it is not rare to fee a poor victim of her own credulity, return- for ever into the road of virtue, which (he confeffes, with Sorrow, (he had formerly made one ftep from ; but a licence in double entendres and loofe fongs, marks a depraved mind: they are pronounced in coM bloodand it is not poIEble that a female, who has contracted fuch a habit, can have preferved even the (hadow of modefty. Alas! what is a
without modefty ? and where is the man Sufficiently hardy, that dares hope to make her recover a quality, which is the greateft ornament
to her Sex ? I have heard fay, that the moft ex-
f
travagant rakes, love a (hew of modefty, in women that have no virtue. How then can men
< .
difpenfe with it in thofe, who are deftined to be the mothers of their children ?
Co n FESs, my dear, that 1 have made you read a very foolilh letter here, with my trite and general remarks.. Cannot yon guefs the reafon of k} do not you fee that you have put me into fetters? Write me this, do not write me that. Till you Set me at liberty, you muft ex-peCl nothing from me. but letters as colH
ice*

. I i I
' I )
h
' I
.Mi
;!ii
iii
i'lii
.ibl ill'*

lU .
< i « I i
iii'
\i<'-
I.. !•
•! I,
I I ; : ,
I f ■
f'
'' I ‘
I > ■ <
■' I i
-hllS’
‘ibl-
.u:ir
8S
L E T T E R S.
V y
* »
ice. I leave you the liberty to do what you plcate, provided you do not take from me the liberty of finding. Something in it-to talk upon. This lafl: paragraph is one too much, I took
the advantage of Mr. Balfour's abfence; to write it..
I; '■
Miilil ■
1 • C »
■ i!h
: ii|C
I! 'Ti '
f j I ' b j
]■•' ■
' b,'! .
; L T
'Itebt 1 ' ' :i!!
i;i; '
b[:
-!l;
111
i(
'ii
It
■ ;f 11
lli ' Ilf ■
ii!i'
I h* ‘
! • I
ist
:!'■
lit
«::ii
r.ir
;ji ;!l
•L-
1 Si::|
Ml ji,
u, i
I:i 'll
Ii: i
'111:
'!‘i'
inii
iiiii
III
( :
* h
st:
i I
I' I
Ii'

i ■ I ;
iib
I 1 ’
; I t ‘
'i'l
!i!
■1:1 ■ i
liili

'O
1

•, i
t I ♦ .
» . r '
I
«. *
/ «
X
~	• «u ^ .
f .|r
5 t
L E T T E R S.
S7
letter XV. CLARISSA TO LADT HARRIED
You are a ftrange creature^ my dear Harriet ; and where have you found, Ibefeech you, that I take from you the liberty of fpeak-i ing freely ? I begged quarter from Mr. Balfour, in a Single article, becaufe nothing he could have faid to me, would have been able to menct it. In every thing elfe, I have followed his counfels ; or, rather, I am determined to follow them. Pray do not reftrain yourfelf, let your pen run when you write to me. All that comes tO’ me from you, will it not be on the principle of friendihip ? and when you think proper to fcold me, fhall I not pardon it from So beautiful a caufe ? you confefs to me yourfelf, that Mr. Balfour may have conceived Some prejudices againft my.father v was it not my duty to endeavour to difabufe him ? and would you exadl of-m«, after prevention, crueland barbarous.beha-viour towards the author of my being ?;
Wt;
landed eftates being entailed ; the perfon whom I Set to copy the article out of the will ! fent you, n« doubt made a millake, and the notary
aa
h!
1- .i
. hi
I
|!
I 1	•' I
;; I
r :i
ill!'
!
I
, »
I *}	•; r
''-II'!;}:’
. ' i '	:< •
■It" hi I 111!;;-'!
' t: ;*!'
; r!!""
I T'di'
" h
biiii'''
I!. • •;.
• > • t ■
’ i I' i I' I'Mih
;'f ,
iii
' ■ 1.1' ■ •.'
;; Kii. • (', 1 :
i: 1!'
^' j h ’ N ■
;i l:":'
: :U' •;
:
ii' li'i:
I’c. '
' ■ C''';
h!' I • 11
• * > i I • ;
h i!i!
■'h:
I I * ’'
■i ,i.:i
A I • t n ,
|i! ;j!!' •|v|
• ih'u:
! ibi s
• f 1 ‘;
i'll
lii: Ih ! iiiiil'
'h;iV
1 I* '
i jiTh' ; ’ I) I. w I
:h!!i!: '
h! i! }■
I!
:i> if’
i'	:
:Ul; ■ r.
I.;.;; I
: 'f‘
I i
.’b ,:.M
iiihh’
-Ii
ib^
h'li! :
ii |i;i' '
83
LETTERS.
as grofs a one in reading it: they omitted both in one and the other Some eflential words, un/efs Jhe Jball otberways difpofe of them ; fo that I am miftrefs to difpofe of my eftates. I fent the other day for a copy of my aunt^s will; and this liberty which is left me, has prevented my felling, or pawning my jewels, to make my father the income I proroifed him, I muft dohim the juftice to fay, he oppofed my fending to London ; probably he thought me more attached to thofc baubles, than, thank Heaven, I am.
iLlIl
Our folitude will foon be enlivened by the arrival of a young Italian'hobleman, at whofe birth my father, in fome fort, aflifted, and whofe godfather he is; the marquis of Montalvo has writ to recommend to him his only fon, whofe governor is dead in Flanders ; and he charges my father to find him fuch a one as he has loflt, who, it feems, was the phoenix of his kind.
The arrival of our ftranger, forces me to interrupt my letter ; and the orders necelTary for lodging his retinue have fo taken me up, that I have been obliged to put it by till this morning. Certainly this Italian muft have a prodigious fortune, to draw after him fix perfons j
for
11 >
;
»

LETTERS.
89
for he has three footmen, a valet de chambre and an almoner, who replaces the governor. My houfe, which we call, very mal apropos, the callle, is exceeding fmatl, and I have found great difficulty to provide for the entertainment of So many people. The young marquis is about three and twenty years old ; though a certain air of gravity, common to the Italians, gives him the appearance of thirty: his features are regular, his figure charming; in a word, he is the handfomefl man I ever faw in my life. But draw no finifter confequences from thefe general remarks. A handfome man, a hand-fome flatue, have equal right to pleafe my eyes; and, till this day, they have made an equal im-preffion upon my heart J however, I will hot anfwer that it (hall be always thus; the day may arrive for touching my heart; and, to fpare you the pain of rafh judgments and ufelefs re-fearches, I give you my word, to let you into the fecret, as foon as my heart fhall be fen-fible of the flighteft Scratch. After this preamble, which I thought neceffary, I will go on with my remarks on the young marquis. He is aukward, and wears his cloaths with an ill grace; he wears a perriwig at his age, though, I have heard, the young people of his country generally preferve their hair ; perhapa Some diforder
has
!'l h
I
I,
Mi
. h»
^lii
(•; > '
i:|,


.;i1 : , .

M
:ji i';;!
.'p
ii;:!
• '; 1' -!! * <i ', .
' 'T''•b;

ii'ii;
; 1 .
L.
i'iibiM
!‘ti ';i ■ '■i;::l.i ■

-iMjjii;
' !i!’L
’I
'![: }
:'!r i
'•Hi'
I ‘
l’*i b i':i 1
I '
I'M!!!
il^
i >
, !.!l I li'fl
; . . . > I •
I'liiii
iiilil

ii 111
I
I i •
M h'|:
.-'{‘te ‘

I I
Ip':
'Ll hi!
:» ;; •'ll.'
Mb'!


II
it

iliii'

•!P
I'C H

\ i
‘ li !
|1' P
I; 1!! '
11} III
": I!
i ]iil
1;!



■ .1 1, . ■
■! i , i
I i;b
'M M
’•Pi
i .;>>
'n ■. J If' ‘
■ I. >.
b 1 -f

if
; t
• ; 'll I1 It:
‘i! :
; I t ; *
’ 'M
■ f .I
; <
}.(i
..M' I
1« ! • L « ' I'
M I
ih ;•
■ ! ,
•	I I
•	!' ;i! ti
I':
'll p [., »
90
E T T E R a
has obliged him to cut it ofF, for I-obferve he en^ deavours to impofe upon the tyc by a toupee ■which his-valet de chambre vainly endeavours to mix with the borrowed halts: this obftinate
toupee, in fpite of the pomatum with which it
;:ontinually on his forehead.
is charged, 'fans c And how long, will you fay, when you Snail
read this, how long has my Clarifla accuftorned
herfelf to pay Such attention to a gentleman’s figure, without paying any regard to his wit ? I have had an excellent reafon for it, my dear;, for, to tell you the truth, ihis-^ beautiful idol; never-Speaks, but for compliment j. there, indeed, he is prodigial !• and puts Six. words where one'Would fulfice. They fay it. is-timidity, and. that he has a creat deal of wit. Onemuft have
a ftrong faith to believe.it; men at his years are.
not generally fo fearful; yet it is true, that his
eyes are extremely lively...
Since my lafl:Tetter, ray father lias made a little tour to London, where he ftayed four days:
he is come back more gay,. more complaifant.
more amiable than ever. During his abfence our days paffed like moments. My mother has a fi^ne underllanding, cultivated with, the greatefl care; add fo this,, an.infinite fweetnefs of temper and Solid piety! Heavens! how blind mull a
man
LETTERS
5^1
rmn be, to prefer to her millrefs Cofby: that woman,, my dear^ is in the rank of the nioft indifferent. It is from my father’s mouth I write what I now fet down, and you may judge that I liflen to him with pleafure : he added, that his children formed the fule bond that attached him to her, and really they are amiable, and beliave extremely well in the houfes I have placed them. I have often endeavoured to engage my mother in a recital of her Sufferings from this creature* but her Scrupulous charity has not permitted her to Satisfy me: flte prays for her every day, and Says She is obliged to it„ becauSe She owes, to the
misfortimes Mrs. Cofby brought upon her, her
*
attachment and love to virtue. On this theme file would talk for ever.
I LIVED, Said fhe, in a great inSenfibillty for God, and a monftrous indifference for my Salvation ; my manners were indeed pure, I was an honell pagan, and I afpired to be no more; they married me young, my heart was void, your father amiable j and it Seemed natural, that he (hould pleaSe a young perfon, whoSe fortune he allured, for I had but a Small portion.. Not-withflanding I conceived an antipathy againft him, which I could not conquer, I was dragged to the altar like a vi6Um, while my only hope
was
M\\\\ ' ,ii 1
* .}■
! hi ■:
:;r , i
I! 11 • ■

r^ik
', ;
; M'lSt; •
; \
I ■ • t

II

» , '1 Ibh
i tel • ‘ !lb '
<t| :
, I *•	. I .
L>
|:t ''ii ■ -
il.; In

' ‘1ST
lii! J iSibi
'AT ‘Ti; i-
1 ii', i •

i I i • L 1
,;’:hi ;
)ii
Mb': ' 'I- • '
iiljTi -

i'Tii’ li!T:T Vi': '
I’i ii: .
•!’ LI ■,
f|;,!
1 li:‘ •
'I. Is *
:!iHs

■I i
1.1. iHi ■
lliiL:
II. I I ; ■ ■
i ' i

•111
: I
^‘1:1 ,'Hi I
i ilii
it!'.:;, bill i
i'l
!;i Cl:.
i’.'b.
I, i
'/i
I ll:-b
•,i	.
:. »
,fte
i • : 1
Lii-: •
MA: ■
:'I ’ b, > :
,; • 11; I
‘M hi

It. l:' , t
it ' "‘i
sitii'j I
lyi-U';
52
LETTERS
was a Sudden death, which I thought inevitabh from the violence offered me. The goodhefi of God, which permitted that I fhould be un« fortunate in this world, only to affure my felicity in the next, n^ade ufe of nniy fifter-in-law to open my eyes ; f|ie fhewed me that religion alone could Soften r/iy afFlidlions, and lighten the yoke which I imagined infupportable. Grace, while it affifled me to begin, bleffed my efforts; and I can affure you, that, for twenty years ! have fuffered, but never been unhappy : I have been content with my fate, becaufe God allotted it for me. Nay, if your father could realize your hopes and rny defires, I am almofi: fure that the mercy of God would find out fome other means to affli^ me; and, without daring
to put up fuch a prayer, I wifh it from my foul. The crofs is the life of a chriftian, or rather the love of the crofs; for an acquiefcence to bear that which God fends us, in Softening its rigour, makes it difappear.
ft	•	.	»
Here, faid I to my mother, is what I do not comprehend : I know that a chriftian may be re-figned under afflidtion ; but I have no idea how one can find happinefs in it. It is becaufe your faith is imperfedt, my dear Clariffa; happinefs is in God alone, the crofs approaches us to him,
and
LETTERS.
93
and he never gives It to be borne, but through an overflow of his mercy. You will be convinced of this, my dear, added fhe, tapping me on the Ihoulder; only wait his good time, he will know where to find my ClariflTa, to make her partake
the bread of the righteous. We are never nearer pain, than at the moment when our felicity
Seems at the higheft, and it is a mercy. Reft Satisfied with this momentary happinefs, and our <lefires after happinefs eternal, that only happi-neSs deferving the name, will fooh become cold and languilhing.
On reflecting upon this prediction of my mother, I examined carefully all the avenues to my Soul, to find by what road affliction could reach me; and I find myfelf inacceffible, except by the route of my heart: firm as a rock every where elfe, the wall on that fide is a mere cobweb; that is to fay, my dear, I am able to count the occaSions of misfortune, by the number of objects which at prefent conftitute my felicity. My Harriet then makes a great ingredient in the phyfic, which God prepares for me. But what is it I have to fear? Is it ficknefs, misfortune, or death ? No, furely, that would affliCt me, as my mother fays, without rendering me unhappy. This is an ill finilhing of my letter ;
but
i:i|l
Pi::
-i ji '
1 ‘ )/1 *
''.. 1,, •. • I •
ii:
iii 'iii ^
ill 1
|i i
i

:
■ ‘ HI- ^
‘CM.

If i• I.	'1 p

f.. 11
1. :
lliilll
I’S'l . s :bji
. .fjii •
'■ ; .Ci :
'i'b'iii
f 'I
'' ■ r . [
ir,;'.!!
i'.'lhb
li h‘i
1
111 ill 1
I ; T • . I '
jliil ’
l-LL'Il ' • 1. 11
,p
14.;•j I'
•hi.', ,T :• b
■	' p 1
• ’:. I (f
pin,:!.
lip ;|
|li|
Hbi'i
ftef
•*
■j.i b
C:l>'
iMi' i {■<•1
i'S
l;b
p. p i
lii: •
<
itbi
Ii; ji
ir ,it
: i'j
Vld :i i/>
I;«
10 : ill?
'i;U'
■iibi
■b'i
bilj
'!;b
1; v-l
Ii
ib‘‘!
fb.il H h
iib
ll'.jii
^itni
i;l ■>
b’, * ♦'
ii'i'i
b i i
!l
b
m-.
94
LETTERS.
but fufpend your judgment, I conjure you. Tb port, which is juft going out, does not permit me to enter into the juftification of opinions which appear haprd, but are not So, fince they are compatable with this truth, that nothing ij the world, without exception, is more dear of more tenderly beloved, than my dear Harriet b| her Clarifta.
LETT El
■nii'
II i .
^!:i.
f. E T T E R S,
9*5
LETTER XVI.
X AD r HARRIET TO CLARISSA.
IH A V E much to do with your explications, alter the fine compliment with which you Enilh your letter. O what folly to attach ones Self to a philofopher ! Thefe fort of people would
perfuade one, that fire does not burn : in fliort,
* »
philofophy will do what you will. But I am much
I
lefs anxious to examine the reafon, why fire penetrates me to the bone, as I may fay ; than to get out'the rednefs and Swelling which it leaves upon my dtiii. I have a great deal of refpe6l for your mother’s virtue, without ever hoping to arrive at it; if Heaven fends me cfoITes, I will endeavour to be refigned, and comfort myfelf in the hope to fee a calm Succeed the ftorm: but to have joy in them, to defire afBidlions, is only for the faints.; and l am too fenfible of my own imperfections, to afpire to that title. Attempt not, out of friendthip, to pray for afflidlions for your poor Harriet ; at prefent I Suffer only a -'little uneafinefs, which keeps me to my couch, and my Span of patience is almoft at an end. At lafi it is found out that I am breeding, and, in truth, it is no very amufing thing. I do not know whether I would not rather fufier a fever


L ' ' i ll: f I l!!'
■ rih
flii':
>!r I
!|hi’h -
, h •. { I }
i;:I’ '
II !■
ti :
St
■i:i!
!"ii'
I' ! :
•tlbl ' ■i*b •
I j
■lillj
• 4
:'b!P
St
(bill
' I; I ’ I
i(0:
I M
, ; * ■ ;
f. ;
I:'b
ll'i
'jJW
itbi '
!!ilh
!lni' ' •iiil • i
I 0 4
!!i;;
!u' ■
lb‘
Cl*
• C .
I t •
*!
; I ;
t' .r ■ , . * • .
■ i
; ii!
i :T '•'V
»'i, •
I M
bi:
:*L

ill
* I !
,
»
LI
f

ill •
Ilf:
I ' I : t
' * • • ,
L If •	'
I
: II-!' ’
L;i .
96
LETTER S.
of fifteen days, than this lamenefs, which never is over. Aye, but the fever will not finilh in bringing me a fon, and, perhaps, in fix months,
I fliall have the fatisfa^ion of holding one in my arms. Let us keep the big belly then, and let the fever alone. For the reft, though I fay a fon inftead of a daughter, it is not that I would pre* fer one to the other, but merely in condefcenfion to Mr. Balfour. Your friend is become extremely complaifant, and her hufband has yet fomething of the man in him. Thefe animals think that nature makes a miftake, when Ihe produces any fpecies but theirs. What vanity! Does not my Clarifla do more honour to her family, than half a dozen boys ? I allow it, fays Mr. Balfour, who reads this over my fhoulder; but all women are not Clariftas and Harriets. You are too gallant, fir; do not confound thefe two names, if you pleafe: your wife is modeft, and has not the pride to want to be compared •with the mafterpiece of womankind ; that may be faid of your daughter, if I bring you one ; for I will make her a prefent to my friend, who will communicate to her all her perfe6Uons; on condition, however, that fhe will let her believe that fire burns, water wets, and grief renders miferable.
You
:v t '
)<> -■ I
?L E T T TL R S.
97
Nou may, perhaps, believe, my dear, that your curious friend is ready to hang herfelf, on account of the impofllbility in which fhe finds herfelf, to gallop all over Paris. There is tiot a word of truth in this imagination. Moll: women with child are eat up with the vapours. Jn England, -I am fare, they muft be black ; •the lubtlety of the-air one breathes there fuffers -them not to take that colour. I am only laxy. But what vexes me moll:, my perfon is be-eome fuch an important concern among them, that they will not rifque it in a journey. I re--prefented to them, in vain, thofe peafants, who -discontinue not their moll laborious work, though they are with child. Thofe Soldiers wives, who, if I may ufe the expreflion, are brought 4o bed in the middle of the road, wrap their infants in their apron, and run to avertake the -waggon. They anfwer me, that, fropa a habitude of living hard, they are put into a Hate to Support thofe fatigues. Marry hang thofe ■ then who brought me up with *fo much delicacy and gave me-a body of glafs. Remember, Cia-rifla, you are to give my daughter a body of -iron : I will not expofe her to ftay nine months in Paris, while Ihe has a friend in England, who, I am Sure, will burn with defire to fee, to embrace, to watch, to lead, to quarrel with
VoL. I.	T	her
••II:; ■ M.;
(
I:
I ; ■ 1 ' '
iiib:
M l
■hi
ii ■
i'H
■ i! k <
n ii
b
!;!i -
, I
• ' . f ,
.; > 'll”
■	I ] ;
lie
■	i I
; I
=n:
lib
■;ii
f I
• IJ !i ii‘ ' ' '/(
!;li;
[hi
•Ci
M. 1
, I
I • r
' I * .! : I
11
f .
b:
i «
(
' . I • »
!'i ' > '
. i i

ll :
If 1
ii
I j I
h
a
; f
9S
L E T T E R S.
her even, if (he fhould give herfelf the airs to obey her.
■ntd
Mr. Balfouris acquainted v/ith'your marqiiis, and deSires me to afihre you, that he is not f« foolifli as his air Speaks him, unlefs he is pro4 gioufly changed within eight years. When mj hufband went lafl: to Italy, Mr. Darby chargei him with a commiflion from the father of thii
T
young lord ; he was enchanted with the whoki family, and cannot help wishing, that you majj
•	-M.	^
enter into one wihich refenihles it. Montalvoisi rich, his figure amiable. Mr. Balfour knows; nothing of his timidity, he had not that fault 3I fifteen years old : and;do you know the eoneb. fion he draws from it, -my dear ? that your firl glance difeouraged him, that he is in love ; an^ nothing gives fo auk ward an air to a man, who
loves for the firll; time. This is Mr. Balfour’s fir-ft concluhon. His Second, that you will love him. My dear, his figure pieafed you, but his underftanding was fufpedted; now he is that he has an excellent one, therefore
H'ls third conclufion, which will pleafeyouas •well as the other two, is, thatif Mr. Darbyen-courages this youngdord to addrefs you, my huf-•feand abjures all the fufpicions which he had conceived,
LETTER S.
99
ceiwed, forgets all bis reafons to continue them ; and firmly believes in the reality of your father’s conversion. This match, my dear Clariffa, is Suitable to you in every r€fpe61:: haggle not*then, but marry, if it he only to iranquilize your friends; and put in the firfi: article of your contrail:, after the titles of your hulband, ‘‘the Said lord alfo confents, promifes, and engages to fulfil the .oath which he has taken by the beautiful eyes of his wife, to conduit her to Paris, immediately after the celebration of their nuptials; there to regifter the wry faces of the right honourable and impatient lady Harriet, when Ihe raufl deliver up her prefent depofite ; and afterwards breath upon the new, born, as did the fairies of old; wifhing that it may hold from her mother, nothing but her friendflilp for Clarifla, who wiflies to be her godmother, and promifes to endow her with all her qualities, virtuous ner-feitions, &c. &c. <Sec.”
SiKCERiTY, if you pleafe ; it is a debt which you have indifcreetly enough engaged yourfelf to pay. You have no experience in this refpe<3:, and you do not know how much it colls, to fay, for the firll time, thofe big words—^^Ilove. Open as
you are, if the marquis pleafes you, you will tell it to him as frankly as you would to me, or any other female companion. In this refpedi: you
F 2	would
Ilf
!i!
i •
t! '
Ilk
h' ■
c!
ill :
il’
,1 •
I ,
; I
if
.)'
II'
;i| ■
I
Ih;

" I ; !T i
[/m
I :
I <
) \ ; I
il|i:
I I I ' '
!i‘
ik
Lll
k'l :
• '
i i
L' I j.i :
100
LETTER
S,
would never have the wit to coquette, to

your face with a fan ; in a word, tp play all
thofe monkey tricks in which the honour of a
girl is fuppofed to conSift ; though nobody is made the dupe of it. One would or one would
not marry a man ; if one would not, it is eafy
to tell him fo at firft, without amufing him ; if
one would, he ought not to be left in fufpenfe to
let him think there is Something to Sacrifice to him, fdme inclination to be rooted out. Mr*
Balfour infifts that I Ihould tell you the finean-
fv/er I made him, when he wasprefented to me
as a man, who afpired to the happinefs, or ill
luck, of being myhufband: for, indeed, mar-
riage is a lottery, in which there are a great ma-
ny more blanks than prizes: he pretends, that ! anfwered him, “ Sir, I have not the honour to
know you, therefore I flnould tell a falfchoodi
v/as I to fay, that I would have for you the ef-
teeai, refpedl and love, which a good wife owes
a hiifband ; however, I will not endeavour to
prevent them, if they are willing to come ; it is your part to take pains to poiTefs me with them-; and to examine yourfelf u'cli, in order to.kaow, whether you have in you what is able to produce them. I will efteem you, if you are ellimable ; I will refpedt you, if you are more virtuous than my Self; I will love you, if you have not more
faults
LETT
R S;
ICI
faults than your phyfiognorpy announces. The examination I would have you make, with regard to your difpoSition, is eflential for me, as well as
If my friends have deceived me in your charaQer, you will make me miferable. We fhall both play the fame game, I am infupporta-ble to all thofe I do not love ; Ttell you fo before hand, therefore take care of it.”
for-you.
I AM obliged to depend upon my deareft, for the truth of this harangue, which I had totally forgot;, but I have Some reafon to believe it real, becaufe I perfefily remember I had in my head a fong to the fame tune. I defire you will let me know immediately, what you would have faid in a like cafe. I conclude, from my forget-fulnefs, that I was lefs myfelf, in that moment, than I believed; but you know I trouble myfelf lefs than a certain perfon, becaufe I do not refledt fo much ; ftie would then be more troubled than I, upon fuch an occafion, and I (hould be forry to lofe her harangue.
F 3
LETTER
I I
I ,
102
L T T fe R
L E T T E R XVII.
CLARISSA 70 LdOr HARRIET.
F your uncle was to read j^our letters, hj would have a very good opportunity toem-ploy his old adage. The fox muji die in- his Jk'm. Do not take this for a reproach, my dear; change as much as you will, upon certain- articles, but preferve ftill your heart, and your amiable gaie-
ty. Tuis then is your tone, when you are lich and have the vapours; your peevilhnefs refem-bles the joy of others, like two drops of water, I .mull tell you, however, that I do not like your
indolence; it is a flate againft nature; (hake your*
»
Self, if the phySicians will give you leave; but at prefent you-are under their rod, and they ought to make you do penance for your hereSies againft phyflc. I Ihould be very forry that you were to have a daughter, inheriting nothing of her mother, but her friendfhip forme ; flie might love me, but I Ihould har.dly love her : I mull have a copy, abfolutely like the original; in. which cafe, there would be no occaSion for fairies; 1, very well perceive, that I am not one, efpeciall| when I write to you ; for, was I in poflcflion of a magic wand. Head of a pen, you flioulft have a viht, inllead ^f a letter.
WiH
LETTERS.
lOJ
Why do you Speak of regiftering grimaces ? you miftake the word, you Should fay jells ; for I am Sure you would dfaw Slrokes of pleafantrj from your pains, as well as Sroiu every thing elfe. It is becaufe marriage is a lottery, where there are but few prizes, that I am refolved, to think, at leall,, four times before I take a ticket: I do not love games of chance but rather thofe, where caution and good play may aflift fortune. This is nearly the anfwer I madej about two days ago, to my father, who folicited me in favour of his godibn : it is to tell you, irt other words, Mr. Balfour had nearly gueffed right: I fay nearly, for the romance is notperfedl; Snccj in thofe fort of works, love is almoft alwaysa furprife. Now, the marquis came here, ex.* prefsly to be in love ; his father charged him not to fail, and 1 was the governor, which be de-fired my father to procure for him.
But a. truce to raillery, I promifed you to be fincere, and I will keep my wmrd. The embar-raffment which the marquis feemed at firft under, has been, for fome time, W'orn off; and I am as well content with his underllanding, as his perfon : but this is not the effential point j his heart mud accord with the red,, and it is
cafy to malk it: I require more, religion ; a
s
F 4
piety
Mi
I ‘
Ml
I».
r
J >1
104
L E T T
E
R B.
II'
It t
■ t ,
If -
11 •.
V ' ' '
M !i
r ' »
i ;!
i" f
'I L
ii ti
h :;
: I
T'i
. ^	' I
1 • . •
A ‘ A
A n -

n :
n ;
T’l 1

; 1
ii. I
i ‘ ■ . ■, u.
iM
; '
(
I
I
I
•
ii
li
ri-:
,1 ■
(tl >
!l '
! : ' 1 • M| .
} I ' ■
I!' .1 .
:»1
'!ii:
piety, folid, and not ruperftitious: qualities very rare in an Italian. If, after a ftrid examina* tion, I can reafonably prefume, that he unites thefe qualities, I will marry him, in preference! to any other man. I do not confider exterior and i
I
brilliant qualities as abfolutely neceflary to the' happinefs of a wife ; but when.’they are found united with the more Solid ones,, it is a fuperflui* ty that hurts nothing. That is. not my queftion, cries Harriet, with vivacity ; one Single word, and that will be deciSive. Do you love him? To anfwer you, I muft. have more experience than I poflefs; but I will deferibe my fituation, and beg of you to decide yourfelf. I fee the mar« qiils with pleafure, quit him without pain; lara never tired of his company, but I never find inyfelf uneafy when he is abfent; I fleep my Seven hours, without interruption, and he never mixes himfelf with my dreams -y he caufes no diflradion in my prayers, nor even in my flu-dies ; I fhould he truly forry if any unlucky accident was to befall him; I could fee him pay his addreffes to another,, without inquietude. I will obey my parents, without repugnance, if they order me to marry him ; I will obey them without vexation, if they forbid me ever to think of him. Is this love, Harriet? No, anfwers fhe, Spitefully ; but you deceive us, or you deceive
\ :
I.Li'i'
i;i", Ii'
i 'ibi ' at';*
1:1
*•: ' • it
L E T T E R S;	105
celve yourfelf. Myfelf I may ; but, moft af-furedly, I do not deceive you : the end will juf-
tify me, if my proteftations are not Sufficient. My father will needs ffiew London to our guefl; it is a very unfavourable feafon, nobody being in town : however, he goes to fee the public edifices ; for which, two or three days will be fuf-ficient j and my' father was obliged to promife the marquis, ,he ffiould not be longer. They made me Some propofals to go with them, but I would not liften. Is this love ? I go to profit oI the folitude, which their departure affords me, to demand of God the grace to condudf mein this affair, in fuch a manner, as will be moft conducive t© his glory, and my Salvation. Methihis, I have only thefe two motives; and I affure you that I ffiall pray for the conclu-lion, or rupture of the affair, with fuch indifference, that its breaking off will not coll: me a figh. Montalvo, notwithfianding, is not indifferent to me ; I feel Something for him which I cannot explain : 1 wiffi hirh happinefs, I think he deferves it; but I could, without repugnance, fee him happy with another. Thefe are my laft words ; and I repeat it again, .1 do not. deceive you.
F 5
L E T TER
j
I" '
mI, ip I
.i' .
!i|:
> f •' i
I ;•
ijT' ji : iisl'
< I.
;u te
' : : ii:i
iV(i|
"it
'Ic
;
i( ii. 1
’T’f;
1 ! ii ■
^!P!I: !
u if'
!:ij:
i; >1
;;
'I 1
i ii;
ii

ill
• ••
ill

:ifl 1*1 •u !p! „!!!'
t! I

t I I
!
.1 !: i;i'
ro<5
LETTER S.
letter XVIIL
LADT HARRIET TO CLARISSA.
T7
in
not frighfened at the fight of this packet,, rny dear CfarifTa. Will you have the coU' rage to read this letter, or rather this volume? I accufe rnyfelf of indifcretion for fending it to you, and yet I will put it in the poll. If is. my way, you know, to be fenfible of the follies I am going to commit, and go through with them ? What hopes can I have that you will read my epillle, when, perhaps, you are bufy
a point, the mod Serious of youf life ? No matter ; what is written, is written j and, w'hat^s worfe, fliall go. What I have to jay, is too Singular to be kept in Silence, remember, my dear, without doubt, that I had a tafle for romance, which yoU took a good deal ,of pains to triumph over. I have broken the promife I made you, never to read any more; and it is your own fault; you recommended me to fubmit to the rod of the phydcians ; and the reading of thofe trifles, has been recommended to me by the fons of Hypocrates: add to their authority, that of my language mafler, whoaflures
me, tnere is no better way to perfect rnyfelf in
F rench;
L E T T E R S\
toy
French; and you will find me Sufficiently jufti-fied in my breach of faith. I had fenfe enough to trufl: Mr. Balfour to choofe me a novel, for I had not been able to read ten pages of the licentious pamphlets, which had been fo much praifed to me. He came back, three days ago, with five volumes, which he put upon my table ; and, at the fame time, he fixed hlS eyes upon me Smiling. I thought the Smile was Occa-lioned by the work which he offered me. I opened a volume; but judge of my furprife when
If therb
I read the fithy Letters from Clarijfa. bad not been five volumes, TIhould have Tma-gined they had taken the pains to print your letters, but you have not yet fulfilled ftich a laborious talk^ I ran over! I devoured! My^afio--nifliment grew at every line ! A Clariffa, whom, at firft, you refenrtbled feature for feature; I fay at firff,-for the-refemblance is riot fupporteci'; and fhe commits follies of whichyouare hica-pable : a mifs How; as giddy as-your Harrief, and almoft as' much attached to her Clariffa, as I am to mine. All of a Sudden l am taken with a fancVj to make an extradt of thefe books for you, which, moll affuredly, you would not have patience to read. It is, however. Sown with admirable maxims. The author is Englifh, a man-of worth, and loves' virtue; but he is
prolix
1 ’ 1
L
io8
L E T T E R Sj
;.l
I
» •
I	*
• 1 • •
‘ O .
I
* % ' ' 'V ' i
‘ bii
I i 'i' I : • 11 ■ • ■
' . I ‘
'	' c
!i’!' . ''1;
l ;	'■
-b :	'
»i. I ''
•C: ,r i,
ic' ■ '‘i' lih.i (jc
liijii C.
■);! ■ I 11
I j: >i.s I i‘-

tlli
S : i|
•I' t
■	' I ‘ • , i(L ■
■	h 'ih
' c |
I ■ i;	I
' » ■	I
I'.'I 'I
f
;(•! ••
! • 'b.i
» : i • b
■ib ‘
prolix to a dreadful degree ; and this fault is your averfion. To have a fancy, and Satisfy it, you know,, are two things, which follow imme* diately ; and it is to this bad habit, which, I conv fefs to youj as though you were ignorant of it, that you owe the drudgery I at prefent impofe upon you. I muft alfo have your opinion of my criti-cifm upon the work. Clarifla, all beautiful,, and all perfedt, is younger filler to. a brother and fifler, who refemble her in: nothing. Rough? nefs, impertinence, obftinacy, is the charadker of the brother ; folly, jealoufy,. a defire to reveng? herfelf on her filler who eclipfes her,, is the cha? jadler of the filler. Mr. Hariowe, the father, is defcribed as an honeft manj cruel towards his wife, who isfaid to be perfedl j, defpotic over his family, and, notwithllanding,. governed by his fon, Two uncles, who have the chara^er of the father ; an aunt, who refembles the mother, ,whofe filler Ihe is ;. Lovelace, who addrelTes the eldell of the mifa Harlowe’s by millake ; but, having found his error, makes her refufe him, and demands Clarifia, the younger, with, whom he is in. love. This Lovelace is one of thofe charadters,, which cannot be defined; in the firll volumes, through the moll frightful libertb nifm, one difcovers Some, rays of goodnefs^ which cannot accord , with what palTes at . the end
of
;, .11
'iT'
L E T T E R S;
I'D©
oS the work. The elder brother engages the father in an averSion he bad conceived againft Ivovelace, Since they, were at the univerSrty; and the family, decide, to get rid of him, by treaV ing him with rudenefs.. He Submits to it, however,, in consideration of Clarifla. But, at length,, they pufh things to extremity : Har-lowe, the fon,forces him to fight; is vanquifhed, receives his life from the conqueror, and 01?”
ClarilTa
]y becomes more enraged againft him. informs mifs Howe of albthefe accidents.
This
original, of which I am, in Some Sort, the copy, would make Clarifla confefs, that fhe loves
Lovelace,
Clarifla anfwers her, pretty nearly,
Qbferve, Clarifla’s
as you have done me. grandfather had left-ber. a. confiderable eflate, where fhe might live independant; She gives it up, to be difpofed of by her father,, and her friends quarrel with her Sor doing So. I would do as much,, but here is what I would not do. During the greateft embarrafTment-sof her friend, mifa Howe fills her letters- with ill placed jefts, at the expence of her mother,, and one Hinckf-raan,. her lover : .Ihe falls again upon the Har^ lowes, whom fhe turns into ridicule (with all my heart) and finifhes by a pidlure of poor HinckS-man, whom (he is refolved to burleSque at any
rate.
<
The
\
iU
i!
• i . t k •
no
LETTER S.
'■ rr
■ I '- i t
I ‘
I '■
^ • *■
t. • • 1/ if
:i!
'I . ■
• * *»
U *• •; , 1
■*
, III
,	, I : *
W ■■
» .■
, otbi ’ , 1..
r
:	' r <
I	•: •
J .
‘L
I ''
' 11 L,
• •'«
. 'fii
i • .

iils
ili ■ i
• L
hil
• j
4

The younger Harlo we propofes one Somes for a hufband -for his Sifter ClkrifTa ; he is extremely rich, nephew of an uncle, who got wealth by bafe meansand would have been the moH avaricious of all men, if his nephew had not been more So. Somes is a fbul of dirt, who con-fents to buy ClarilTa : all the family, even her mother, enter into the tonfpiracy. It is true, fire does it againft her will'; Ihe facrifices every thing to a love of peace, which Ihe cannot obtain from whence, mifs Howe concludes, that a wife, who is too fdbmifllve to an unreasonable hufband, aggravates his faults, and puts it in his power to abufe her good nature. This remark is Sufficiently to my tafte, but I doubt whether it is toyour’s : what fay you .I*
BEFORE the entire rapture with Lovelace,tlicy had ordered Clarifia to write, to him ;-I do rot know why : however. She continues the correspondence, ■ in order-to prevent her furious lover from taking vengeance on her family. Lovelace, piqued at their ill behaviour, undertakes to make himSelf mafter of ClarifTa in fpite of them ; for whiche purpoSe, he excites them to drive the girl to extremities, and even to ufd violence, in order to force her to marry the monfter, to whom they would facrifice her. TheiHarlowes fall into
the
• !■
LETTERS.
111
the Snare; ClaEriffa engages never to marry, if they will, neither Lovelace, nor any other per-
4
Son ; to give up an ellate; to depend upon the liberality of a father: but all is refufed, rejedled, and her mother has the barbarity to prcfs her to marry Somes, though, at the fame time,. Cla-rifla tells her, that both her prefent and eternal inefs, depend upon her refufal. Where
now, I befeech you, are the praifes whieh were bellowed upon this virtuous lady ? was She to be criminal, in order to pleafe her hulband ? and is it not a crime to uSe violence to a daughter, who made pFopoSalh So reasonable? Has the author a mind to fhew us the danger of an excefTive Soft and Submifllve temper ? I believe he might Spare himSelf the trouble ; thefe are: not commonly the faults of women;,, and if there are, here and there. Some to be found Subjedl to them, I appre»« hend it is an imperfedlion which will not Spread very far. Lovelace’s promife to ClarilTa, that he will not exterminate all her relations, draws a
promife from her, to continue unmarried, if Ihe cannot marry him. Afterwards he advifes her, to throw herSelf into the hands of lady Lawrence,
his aunt: She confents ; Changes her mind, and gives her word again,.in the fear that they fhould take the advantage of a fit to marry her; for Ihe knows that they have brought a minifter into the
houfe,
j
1'
• 'll.
, I
iN
.h,
V \	I '
I ♦ ' I ,
IM)
:h
1:' • I' •	(
i •'

I: I ;	. :[•
ili' 'N.'l

-' il
■[:'	i'-
;U ';[V
!p '':b!
h': : t.
'!i' ii'’ ••.
ijll -bte ' » ' I I I ,
1 ■
I
I
>;.

:ii'i
'■’ii'i
M''L;
i'Nihii,
»'	■' ‘r
.'!	J; .)!

iSi!:;;'
I ;
ill'"Si
■ I ' ; l I
S-il!p!:
. I' .'
'	'if'.
■;i bi
i ::
• ;
I ‘i:
h!
: i
t
Uj
r(i
r
S '11
It
h!)
il!
i‘b
ifi
!?■
I:
. > t'
Is '»
if
ti. !ll‘
r
lii
“i
I'is

of
i's
i »
} i
!'i
I I
. Li
•u,:j . he;:
C'ISI
. A \ I
■ '"i i'fli !i O'
1 ■
IT12
L E T T E R s:
houfe, little enough fcrupulous to aflld in fuel an action. However, Ihe contradicts herfel again; and • writes- to Mr. Loveliace, that llie has changed her mind. As he doubts it, h leaves the letter in the place, where.lhey were ufually depoSited; which forces Clarifla to come to a rendezvous fhe hadgiven him, in order to tell him positively that (he-could not quit her father’s houfe. While (he is talking with him, ihe hears a ery, and clalhing of fwords; believes that her relations are come to Surprize her; fears they will cut one another’s throats before her eyes, and fuffersherfelf to be dragged by Lovelace tor coach, which- waits for her. She is condudel to a farm-houfe ; and Lovelace, whofe firft de* Sign was, at leaft, to prove her virtue, forgets his perverfe refolutions, on feeing her, and offers
to marry her direCUy, She rejeCls this propofal
«
with difdain; declares that fhe will, if poffible, be reconciled? to her family, . and , continue unmarried if that depends upon.her. It is in con-fequence of thefe refolutions.; that Ihe refufes to go to Lovelace’s relations; defires that he will condudl. her to London,,,and leave her in a houfui which he fhall not approach. Here mifs Howe feems to a6t the part of a perfon of fenfe, and writes to her friend, that fhe has no choice left,
but to marry Lovelace j .that (he wilt be unfortunate .

letter S;
II5
tunate indeed, if Ilie is not able to reform his-manners; but 'that fhe has put herfell under the neceffity of becoming fo, becaufe it is better to be unfortunate than diflionoured.
Here is the great fault of this romance ; it is eertain that a girl, who has been forced to quit the houfe of her father, ought to> go off with a hulbandonly; we are accountable to God for our virtue, and to men for our reputation : the more the manners of Lovelace are known to be depraved, the lefs reafon Sae had to hope, that the world would imagine, he had refpeQed a girl, whom he loved, and had in his power y-the hope to reconcile herfelf to her parents was ridiculous, they could.no longer regard her, but as a daughter, whofe honour was loft. For me, was I in the cafe, to run away with a footman, I would rather be accufed of raeannefs in marrying, than, of vice in ftaying with him j. and it he could not immediately place me among people of honour, who might anfwer for my-eonduQ, he fhould be my hufband in four and twenty hours. I find nothing which is not preferable to the lofs of reputation,except the crime that may occafion it. Now there is no crime in a bafe alliance, and ftill lefs in fufh a one as Clarifla might have made. Her friend repeats
it
I
Hiilil
1.' p ‘
'■b:S i
■’I li;! J1

lii'T':'
bjr.
L 1
-H .
ipiii ■
iijijiiw i
l;
'i :
ilii'i
M' ‘
M i
U ‘I
ted :
I’iSi .
!!M I
iV !
i , ,
>P : I i
L.. I
•iPte
bb !
in
lii i
iiiite
• •»
|1;- . (I! ‘ ! I
. f
I i
li '
Rl
■ it *'
p
;ii b'l! '
111
'<I.
iH:
!
!
( \

!h
11 ■ ; t
I	,
II

•t; I
i;*
iJili
lll'l
te!
ri4
LETTERS.
It to her in every letter ; fne allows that her friend is in the right; Lovelace offers his hand twenty times; but, becaufe he is not prciTing enough, flie repulfes him, and, through want complaifance, throws him back into his natural Hate of perverfenels.
He cond'u6ts her to London, to a. bad houfe, the mihrefs of which pretends to be a woman of fafliion ; and, to make a long (lory (hort, he fstakes ufe of a potion, which deprives Clariffa of her fenfes. After this fhe gets away from.
him, and conftantly refufes the hand of Lovelace, though fhe is fuppltcated to accept it by all the family of that monfter ; and, at length, fhe dies, after receiving Several affronts, which are but epifodes to the fubjedf. Why, Since they make ufe of the name of a grrl. So perfedt as my Clariffa, do they not alSo give her a condudlas
peffedi ? What need had fhe of Lovelace to fave her ? Either fhe could have obeyed her parents, or her confcience oppoSed. In the fecond place, Ihe Should have fwore the peace againff her perfe-cutors; protelled before a magiftrate that file would not marry Somes ; that all marriages made otherwise than in the church, and publicly, would be forced on her Side; make the magiftrate the depofiteof the promife to continue a maiden;
and.
tfiC
ih!:i
L E T T E R S.
115
V
and, thus fheltered from the violence (lie feared, returned to her father’s houfe, and fubmitted to perfecution v/ith a good grace. It is true, that Lovelace had fufrotind-ed her with Spies, and that fhe might have fallen into hi's hands ; but then file would have been in the cafe of a girl run away with, who, after that, has no party to take but marrying her ravilher.
Here are my reflexions, my deaf; and, T flatter myfelf, they will be yours; if fo, have the goodnefs to confirm it to me. I know myfelf, all the good I have in me comes from you; and I amt diffident of opinions which appear mod jud to me, till you have put your Seal upon them. However, let me tell you, that Mr. Balfour is of my fide of the q.ueftion, and cites an epifode of a celebrated author, who thought the fame way. Count Roger was on the eve of efpoufing a lady he loved, and v/ho loved himfhe was
named Alice. The father of Alice dies, and makes his daughter promife to conclude her marriage ; but her mother oppofed it, becaufe ffie.-loved Roger; and, to afl'ure him to herfelf, Ihe makes the count de Martin carry od' her daughter. Alice, in fpite of her love for Roger, marries the ravifher, and believes that honour refutes Che Ihould do fo while the defpairing
and
Pii'i'!
II

ii .	')! 1
'!) I

!'i;
W.
liii -
’•ii •.
It!'
h.
r 1,
LjiT .s
Ifirl ■(!(
flth:
F - .
LLi'
^	''f
'if.'!-*' 'i!
' ‘I . .
i i:; i; Ji':
j'il* !i/ !' hr
I'l’
!i>i; i; :
‘ :iL
III"	'
;i!b: i,L .D Iji:;; N :
i'jj'i iliL ;| :
iiL ■'
I
■‘ill 'T
Nl'! "ii'"' i
:|i' i iit|LjJ • 'll't ll-ir',
•'iiii'iliC
"'I' i ■Pl
•O 1
I ii.i.
•I i '

v^i ■ '■’n i
■ v;,, ..t;,o rV.
Niriljc'!;
ii-ll; iwi' II ii!:: i
T'cl . ;
‘v<i* ■ jl|
ri 6

E T T E R S.
and afHi£led Roger approves the eondufiS hj which he lofes her.
And we alfo approve of your condufi, with
rcgardTo the marquis de Montalvowe^ paSi^ onately deSire, however, to fee you married, without being able to tell you • half the reafon? we have to wifh it. Confult God, nothing h more juft ; but reSign yourfelf to the commands he (hall manifeft, by a^hidden providence, under the appearance of events Seemingly fortuitous; he could not fend you an angel from Heaven, to declare bis will toypu in a manner more immcr
■hwjih' Ijo ;
li'rjri'ii'!
'■■li'liiliC '.11
'i'ji'lf'ii
pyiiif'';
i H '--I.
ib'S!''
i i
♦ !.
:>.i
LET TE R
■iL. E T T E R S.

* >'
LETTER XIX.
CLARISSA TO LADT HARRIET
Y
O U will never imagine, my dear, that your friend has fallen under a temptation to read the romance you mention, and in eight volumes ; for the Englilh author has been abridged by his tranflator into French., whom you have ftill found too long. I believe, the intention of the author, which is extremely good, has efcaped you. It is as much as to lay, even a girl as virtuous and perfcdl as my ^Harriet, has loft, through difobedience to her parents, her happinefs, her reputation, and her honour. Learn, young women, by her example, that'the firft fault againft the fubmiflion which you owe your parents, may condudl you from precipice to precipice ; that there are proceedings which 'leave nothing but a choice between two misfortunes ; to be in league with an immoral man, is, no doubt, a great one; but it is not without Tefource ; there is a hope to reform, or by patience to fandfify ones Self ; but reputation once loft, is never to be regained. You fay, that if you found yourfelf under the ne-vGeflity to fly with a footman, you would marry -him directly. The cafe is very delicate; one
mu ft
r'
C.
I
M- '!(l! •
' 5 ! ,V . .
T.Mi :
;!n’
:l
' h
1« '
: i . u !
I I '
I'fi
i ■
i ■:
' ,c .
'i! I
1 C '
llhl":
I Ij.’' '* ■
.jiih'iiii . -
: (il- ;h
,ti S'l'i
;MC, :.
iSjf :
iiiili:;'
hi
‘ iS:
‘:if|iii
blllfib }
I •
ill
iiC;
llinl
Ljitji
I!
(•.. ■!
IM'’ , (! T,
1':1 ;
h'.'!
I
r
P
f'l: it'
, t
i:l|
ii;i:
b'i
Ml V
• ^ ill'

if .
f y i
iijil
li-!
ii:^
V*
1.,^! I.'
■Sli
i:
* V «
V
I if
LETTERS.
mull fuppofe an abfolute impofllbility to find pro-fe£tion, or reroute. One rauft—O, one muftnot expofe ones felf to the neceflity ; and I fliall al-
i
ways have a bad opinion of a girl, who quits the houSe of her father, unlefs fhe does i-t to avwd the commiflion of a crime ; and how can flie find heri'df in that circumftance ? I think a poor girl much to be pitied in a parallel cafe, if it be pof« fible : there are few fathers who would Seek the ruin of their children. I conceive, however but away with thofe ideas, we (hall never have need of them ; and they are things which leave traces in the imagination, that produce nothing either good or ufeful.
I
After having refie6fed upon the match pro-pofed to me, I found no objedion, fufficicntly valid, againft it j I gave my confent with a good grace, to prevent the marquis from fufpeSing, that 1 did myfelf any violence, as you fay in one of your letters. I ratified it again with greater joy, when they were going to prepare the articles : the marquis de Montalvo, an only fon, could well difpenfe with a fortune with a wife: his father, of whom I have conceived the higheil:
idea, orders him, in a letter which accompanies
his confent, to content himfelf with a quarter of
my fortune, and give up the reft to my parents:
they
r
L
T T E R B.
119
they will have no child but you. Said he, and tt is not juH: that they Ihould have but a bare fub-Stftence, while you enjoy abundance. The joy with which the marquis fuhfcTibed to this article, tranfporled me to fueh a degree, that f could very willingly have embraced him ; and> atleafl:, I gave him the liberty to read in my eyes how much my friendihip for him was ia-creafed. I .fay my friendihip, Harriet: for affa-Tedly Lhave no more: the more 1 examine my->iel'f, the more I am perfuaded of it; and I have jiot concealed it from the marquis : he would have fomething of a warmer kind, but it is not in my power to give it. Perhaps I am not of a 'Conftitution for any thing but friendihip. Here ■ are the articles which we have agreed upon, and we are to fign the day after my marriage j for by marrying only I acquire a right to difpofe cf my eftate. My portion will amount to fifty tkoufand pounds fterling ; part in the bank of 'Genoa; the refi, in India bonds, the funds and ■the bank, fhall be diSpofed of, in paying the le-•gacies my aunt left behind her ; that is to fay, thofe which confifl; in life annuities, and part to purchafe an eftate, which fhall defcend to my heirs; but my father and mother fhall enjoy it for their lives. As my mother s inclinations agree entirely with mine, we will engage my father to
buy
■mt
Kill

‘ Mf' '(Mil
' I1 (l, •
.iilHIii I
■ . ' • I ‘ 11 , l , • . t I : » ■
I'
(''ll'
SC, 'i •1:,

S'!'*;;:..
L i'; i

» JI ' ‘	1
iVlli::
:’'fl
s ■ .i‘h
Ibi'S
;!ii| :
■ :; I 11
11 ■ '.III'
.I.I'l:.
M' I M[ • ■ •
lii.iiil!.
|iS5
iif
iilnikl!
CM*
:c‘l !l; :
C 11!:: I
iV'J
Id!
>i;
-M!
'!:C'
'f ,!l dT'!
-I ii;?
( T
Mli'.hl!
i!
I iMl'lt-l
i:
ii!;i

! t
Ij
l> i
ill
!i!
CL C'i !'

I .


it
' I
U ' >
.
ijti
ill
il:


U
3 20
LETTER
O •
•buy this eftate in Italy, that we may have the
pleafure of feeing one another: but, notwiiii-
•ftanding, every two years, we are to pafs feme months in England, to pay a vifit to my Harriet, and her hulband, on'condition that they will, h their turn^, pay us a viiit in Italy. There will
not be time to have your anfwer to this, before
the celebration of my marriage ; but there will
be time enough for you to receive this, and pray for me. I am fenSible how many virtues are ne-ceflary to enable a woman to fulfil the duties of a wife ; and this frightens me. You fee, Harriet,
that your incenfe has not intoxicated me. 1 haw
faid nothing to you hitherto of the exceffive flat
tery with which you fill your letters : I know
you too well, to hope to make you change your 'tone ; but thefe praifes will be no longer infea-fon. If my hulband infills upon my fliewing him the letters I write andreceive, which would be nothing extraordinary from an Italian ; if, I fay, he will fee your letters, he may fufped me for taking pleafure in a language which refera-bles adulation, but is, in faft, nothing but the effiedl of the friendlhip, a little blind, that you have for me. This may diminifh the efteem with which I would wifh to infpire him, and would flatter me more than thofe tender fenti-
rnents, which generally difappear after marriage.
L E_ T T E R
LETTER S.
I'Z r
LETTER XX.
eiARlSSA TO LADT Hd.VRIET.
w
ITH what a horrid tale am I going to wound your heart, my dear an4 tender friend ! Ho w will Mr. Balfour be fhocked, who yet appears to have forefeen it? Ought I not to reproach myfelf for my obflinacy, in perSiding in that fatal confidence which has undone me, wlien Such a man as he, had pointed out the precipice to which it condu6ted me. Yet was it not fhocking alfo to fufpedi a father of fuch vil-lany ? Ah, dear Harriet, when I writ to you in fuch fecurity, that I Ihould never be in the Situation imagined, by the author of the romance of Clarifla ; how far was I from thinking, that I was arrived at the moment, when I mufi: experience misfortunes a thoufand times more terrible ; at the moment, when I Ihould be obliged to quit my houfe, like a fugitive, to feek near you an afylum againfi: the perfon who ought to be my protedlor ? But, alas 1 even that refource Is ravifhed from me; and your poor Clarifia^—but what fhall I fay—It is from the obfeure chamber of a perfon unknown, to whofe probity die Is obliged to abandon herfelf; that Ihe implores the
pity of you and Mr. Balfour.
VoL. I.	.D
But I keep you
too
I
I
i!!
]i
■
li

in ijl!
'hibll;
fill'
'lii
bbthi ■
l:Sli!l ^
in
'' hi
li

rj *

•I
1
122
L E T T E R S.
too long in fLifpenfe ; let me take up the thread ol my unfortunate ftory, from the conclufionof my laft letter.
The fword hung over me by a thread, and I
0
v/as at cafe ; I waited, without the lead inquie-tilde, in regard to my fate, for the moment wliich was to unite me for ever, to a man,-whom I thought worthy of all my elleem. Who would not have been deceived ? The monfter affefled virtue, religion, with an hypocrify, to impofe even uponaperfon, vvhom long experience might have rendered more fufpicious ; and then the teSiimony which Mr. Balfour gave in favourof the Montalvo; was it not fufficient to prevent any doubt irosn ariSing in my mind? You know, tliat Since the adb of parliament, nobody is permitted to marry without a licence, nor any where but in their proper parifli, which is an extreme inconvenience to Roman catholics: fbine, after having been married by a prieft, have gone through the proteftant ceremony: others have gone into France, or other catholic countries, to be married, and avoided, by that means, an appearance before the minifler. They insinuated, that this ceremony was not neceflary with regard to me, as I was going to quit the kingdom j and that it was fufficient, if I wj*
married
■t :
r
t
I. E T T E R S.
123
married by the chaplain of an ambaffador, or envoy of fome Italian prince. Montalvo knew the chaplain of the grand duke of Tufcany ; he undertook to write to him, and he came on the day appointed. At Sirft he made a good deal‘of difficulty to marry us ; he expofecl himfelf to be tranfported for fourteen years, and it was natural that he fliould take every precaution to avoid fuch a misfortune. My fati'.er, however, cafed his fcruples, by difcovering to him a circum-fiance, which I forgot to tell you before. The treaty between the young marquis and me, was unknown to any body out of our houfe ; the do* meflics even were ignorant that the celebration of our nuptials was fo nigh, and it was an eafy matter to fend them out of the way. In confe-quence of this, two were fent to London, and two to Windfor, under a pretence of carrying letters of confequence, and buying provifions. My women went to bed be times, as, you may remember, I never had the cruelty to make them, wait for me, when I flayed up beyond a reafon-
able hour ; rather chohSmg to undrefs nvyfelf. We would only have kept up the houfe chaplain, and Montalvo’s, who, with my father and mother, made four witneffes ; but oneof thefe failed us; my chaplain was taken ill after dinner, and forced to go to bed ; bat he affiired me, that tfie
G a	three
illlil!!;
I iH.iSl i.
II >
. Mli'l

- ’ ‘I;---'
i '	'	' ' » . •
' , I, :li
‘ ;i' 'r...

.! !!, ■


•ilte'-l’':'
.» ' 1, ‘
n :S !' b • ' •!'' *
* t'
c;j|!bi'
Ill' ••
‘ ' Ii ■‘ ,

■I

III!!
I'i . 1 ■ ’
r'
!I M

I ‘”1
. <;l:>
111'. tei
iiliifi
’I'ilii:
B'lSlii I.
•'is p 1
!S'i
Ihli'l
/ V

1 iihil
Ijil
iif

'■•I

■‘IS


• I 1 <.
n ’
li'^‘
i‘;
\A',
|!il
Ilf
4!
If
‘.'I
it
•O'
I ;
c b
,. 11 ,
iil
li!i!

Ij :
I
r :
t !
124
LETTERS.
three remaining witnelTes were fiifRcient. Mj mother thought herfelf at the happieh period of her life ; (he clrefled me with her own hands.
and, in fpiteof my little regard for magnificence,
I was obliged to obey. A defcription of mydrefs
is neceflary, becaufe it produced an incident
which faved me, as you will prefently hear. I had a robe, with a rough ground of fiber,
wrought in polifhed Silver, powdered with tuffts of rofes, very elegant: my black hair wai
braided with pearl, you know my aunt hadi
great many of the moft beautiful ; as my dia
monds were not fet, I wore a collar and ear-
rings of amithyfts; and my dear mother madea
fprig of the largeft diamonds, to place at one fide of my head ^ lo that my jewels alone were
worth at leaf! feven thoufand pounds flerling, Poor vi£lim ! How did Montalvo devour with
his eyes thofe riches, which he thought hitrifelf
already in pofTeflion of. You know, my deaf, that I was always much attached to Fanny, my
waiting-maid, and her attachment to me merits that I fliould ; I could not make a fee ret to her
of my marriage, and I rifqued nothing bydifeo-vering it, as fhe was to go with me into Italy. The poor girl told me, that fhe fliould not be cafy, unlefs,fhe had the pleafure of feeing mein fny wedding cloaths, and I promifed to flip into
her
LETTERS.
125
her chamber, a moment before we fat down to table. They waited for fupper till all the fer-vants of the houfe were retired : you know there were but few remaining : thofe oI the marquis prepared our fupper in the village, and it w'as ferved at eleven o’clock at night. While they were occupied in fettling every thing, I pretended to have forgot Something in my chamber, and ran up, in order to keep my word with Fanny. I was furprized to find her out of bed* Seemingly in great confiernation. An unknown perfon. Said fhe, has given me a letter, and he Said, that it was of great importance to you to read it before you was married. I was furprized', that a ftranger fhould be So well acquainted, with a thing, that was a myftery to us all; and would feign have queftioned him a little ; but he would not ftay ; only recommended Secrecy toms, and dispatch in delivering it to you. I have had it in my pocket thefe three hours, not knowing how to get at you ; but if you had not come up now', I was going to ra fe a cry, under pretence of a fit of the cholic. I took the letter, trembling; and not being willing, contain what it would, that they Should fufpeil: the. girl had given it to me, I went down into the- fiudy ; but judge
what I became, as foon as I read the original of the copy which I here fend you.
G 3
MRS.
M
12<3
LETTERS.
-V r
MRS. COSBT to miss CLARISSA,
Madam,
1
IS
upon my knees I write to you the horrible confeffion of iny crimes. Grant, Heaven, that the firfl: good aO;ion of my life, in dilcovering to you the unnatural treafon, of which you are going to be made the victim; ’ grant. Heaven, I fay, that this good afiion may be loUowed by a Sincere repentance. Yefterday evening, on' your account, I, for the firft time in my life, felt remorfe ; till that moment, madam, I Swallowed iniquity like water, and I ■gloried in a projeQ:, which mull: have rendered you miserable ; when, of a hidden, it came into my mind, what injury has the Innocent Clariffa done you ? Was it not, on the contrary, Ihe who could not refolve to let you live in that ftate of necelTity, to which you were born ; who, out of her own immediate bounty, added a hundred pounds fterling to that penSion that was defired for you, and who has made herfelf the mother of your children ? I hardened not my heart againll this juft motion, but, fearing that the malignity of my nature might overcome the mercy of
God, I immediately -called for fuccour againft
my fell.
LETTERS.
12,7
myfelf. I am born a catholic, though Since the fourteenth year of my age I have totally negleQ:-ed my religion. I knew there vvas a zealous eccleSiaftic, who lived near me: I Sent to him to come to me, and I difcovered to him the diabolical Snare which was laid to deflroy you; he charged me to write you an account of it, and he v/ill truft no one but himfelf, to deliver it to the girl whom you honour witli your friendship, and whofe name I have told him.
You are upon the point^of marrying my Son, and perhaps your own brother : this wretched fruit of my crimes was taken from me by the marquis of Montalvo, who disputed with your father the right of paternity. Pioufly educated under the care of the marquis, who. Since hig marriage, has renounced the errors of his youth, my unfortunate child Seemed by his virtues to repair the crime of his birth; he entered into a religious order, very audere, and for Several years Seemed content with his Situation ; but I perceive, beyond a doubt, that he is the Son of Mr. Darby: the perverfenefs of his charadfer discovers the Source of his blood ; he, by degrees, grew cold in the duties of his profeffion which at length he abandoned, and, efcaping
from his monallery, came to me in London,
G 4
where

I'.T	‘
■''i	1
i	:
iH-
i'TiilC'
sir
‘ '	4 I
iii-Trir
.''■riSi:
' .'vlh'i:.* ■ •’! , '!'
■'l' '' ;,-v
b,- w li ;'i,
I, L h’*
I '(■
• -f*''
i'i ''ii’L '■ lib d"
,b|i' l| /:.:L :!
||li
V’ I' b’iil lii'
• {B/'l.-
' !. b:,;'
il'iii i:
‘ -t''	‘
i:.' ■	•
hi. S',
S-bli::
iiiliJh!'"
‘ S i-n"

!!i!’
• iM
;!i|!
.ili
iilij
-r.li
u\
i'.'
I'li
I	‘,i'
m
I'l;
l.i
llib
k ' ''
do

!!
!l;i
' i» ‘i'
»,'i	< !•
!lt‘
r 1
tfr
■!i:i
'll i
! )! i
I'i

iiii
!l 'Jill
i{ r.'
bii!
J I
f ^
i!!!: ,
!t|L
•.s
llll
::I1
ii
I

la
LETTERS.
where your father has Secretly brought rne. He hoped to engage you to live feme time there; your repugnance for this town increafed the hatred he bears you, for he cannot think, without horror, that you are in poffeHion of a fortune, which he confiders as his own right, and which he defigned for our children. He thought my fon Sufficiently depraved to enter into his defigm of vengeance ; he knew, that the marquis ol Montalvo, with whom he has been at variance for thefe two years, had Sent his fon into England for fix months, in order to learn the language. He found the circumllance favourable: the Sums of money you have fo generoufly given him, have Served to affifi; his cheat; and, in order to procure a proteSion, both he and my wretched Son have abjured the Roman catholic religion, before the biShop of London, who, imagining them Sincere, has conceived a great regard for them ; Mr, Darby has alSo promised to bring his wife and daughter into the pale of the church of England: he flatters not himSelf, however, with hopesof fuccefs; and here follows the reft of his frightful projedf. A considerable Sum of money gained over the attorney employed to take a copy of your aunt’s will. Had the poor dean of Colburn beenTuffered to live, he would have confounded all thoSe machinations; but the
monfter,
d
'♦1 :
'I .
I •,
'Hi
letters.
129
monfter, whom you have received into your houfe, his former fervant, found means to put him out of the way. Your father, in order to turn thefe crimes to account, found htmfelf under a neceflity of committing new ones. You mud be furprized into a marriage, with fome wretch, who, content with a fmall’part of your portion, would give the reft up to him. The falfe will, gives you a right to difpofe of your fortune, .when you marry; and,- .as your good heart was well known, it was not doubted but you would; with plekfure, come into any mea-fures, to infure the hdppinefs of your family. My fon is afterwards to take you into Germany, and endeavour, by love and aftiduity, to make you forget-the deceit put upon you; but you are never, to-know his double apoftacy. Tlie per-fon to marry you; is an apoftate monk, my fon’s companion ; for they would have your marriage as good as.poillble, in regard to law, in order -to fecure the validity: of-the follovi'ipg deed. There, is nothing more remains for me, madam, but to beg a thoufand pardons for the hand I -have had in .this black confpiracy : it is eafy for
you to punhli me,, by revealing the fecret of my intelligence. Your father will regard an additional crime as a trifle, and my death will, in foine.fort, feera a recornpenfe for the failure of
G 5
J
-his. ■■
I ;o
L E T T E R S.
his project : but, the truth is, you will gab nothing by fliewing my letter; the worthy clergyman, w'ho bears it, will copy it in his own hand, fo that I may deny it for mine : add, that, was the affair brought to a legal proof, it would condufl your father to the gallows; he merits to lofe his life, but it is not for his daughter to take it. After having read thefe horrors, you will not, I apprehend, find it difficult to feign a Sudden indifpoSition ; gain a day, take the advantage of it, and put yourfelf into a place of fecurity ; it is the only advice that can be given you by the criminal, but penitent
M. Cosby,
Clarissa in Continuation.
WAS not the reading of this fatal letter enough to kill me ? The defire of efeaping from the danger, alone fuffained my, fpirits, and I refolved to follow the coiinfel of this woman, whom ' the mercy of God made the inftru-ment of my prefervation. Heavens ! upon the ,point of being united for ever to a facri-legious monfter! My blood fror-e in my veins at the thought of it; and when I returned into the parlour, my mother Screamed, on feeing me totter as I walked, and my face covered
with
L E T T E R S. ^
Cl
with the fhades of death: flie ran to me, and took me in her arms ; at the moment my force failed me ; however, I did not fwoon aw'iv, and that w'as my misfortune. Montalvo approached to fupport me: but I cried out. Retire, monfter, whorn hell has vomited for my ruin. It is to this imprudence that I muft attribute all the miferies I have Since fuffered. A little difSimulation would have given me time to confult my mother and my—O ! I have no courage to pronounce that name, which had fuch charms for me, Mr. Darby, I fay, would have attributed my Situation to a phySical caufe ; and, having no reafon to fufpeiSi; my knowledge of his \vicked confpiracy, would have confented to a delay, which he would not have thought dangerous; but my horror for Adontalvo let him fee at once I was inftruaed in all; and, defpair-ing to deceive, he determined to force me. I am betrayed, cried he, in a tranfport; but I will not defcend to the unneceffary meannefs of a feint, to difpofe of a creature, whole artifices
« of my right. Approach, faid he to the clergyman, and inilantly marry thefe two perfons : and you, faid he to me, with a look wherein was painted the blackefl fury, make hafle to feiz^e the only means, to give you
back


m
i.


P

132
LETTERS.
back a father. I will forget all, if you will im-mediately become the wife of Montalvo.
^	r
This terrible dlfcourfe, which one would have thought enough to deflroy me, on the contrary, gave me new Brength. Hope not, anfweredi, with vivacity, to force from me a confent which outrages nature : take all I poflefs, I confent; but to avoid a death the mcfl: cruel, I will not lie
T J ;	'
obliged to commit the crime you have propofed to me; and you, faid I to the pried, who advanced towards me, remember that there is an avenging God, and fear, left his thunder fliould reduce you inftantly to powder, if you dare undertake to tye thofe criminal bonds, which I re-fufe to receive. At thefe words, my furious father threw himfelf upon me; and, without doubt, would have taken away my life, if my poor mother had not expofed her’s, to Save it; I little felt the ftrokes he had given me; but, 0 Heavens! how thofe he ftruck my mother, tore my bleeding heart! I threw myfelf at his feet,, .begging with cries, that he would take his proper viiSIim, and fpare his wife, who was not guilty of my rebellion to his will. Montalvo, fpite of his wickednefs, was touched at the dari-er in which he faw me, and forced me out of
his hands.
It was a long time before my father
would

LETTERS.
153
would liften to any one; at length, however, getting him to the other fide of the room, Montalvo fpoke to him, for fome time, with great feemhig animation. During this interval I threw myfelf at my mother’s feet, which I bathed with my tears, without being able to utter a fyllable j the aftonifhed prieft Handing without motior,, till Montalvo called him ; probably to fortify the advice he had given my father, to avoid a difcovery to the world of what might ruin him ; and endeavour to reduce me by gentler methods. Return thanks to love, faid Mr. Darby : I give you four and twenty hours to do, with a good grace, that which I require of you ; but hope not for a longer delay; you fhsll be the wife of: Montalvo, either willingly or by force. Follow me both of you. With thefe words, he accompanied me and my mother into an ob-fcure clofet, at the extremity of thehoufe,, which had but one window, or, rather, hole, near the top, which, even in the day time, fcarce admitted light. I made no refiflance; the comfortable thought of being alone with my mother, and at liberty to bewail myfelf, en-tirely took me up : hut in what a condition was I, when I knew the, in-tention of my perfecutors. They gagged my mother, to Hide her cries, and tore her from my dungeon ; while hands^ which
I fcarce
r F
i'
Il; si
'	• I
■f .■
f'f::
I
' i
. I,
N ' ' : ;
' i'
I
1 '♦ i'i
fi;i *•
I ‘ ' I
:;r: ■III':-
!'i:r
; I
T 1
!r
>ri‘ri
, ' I ‘ I
'■ j
rbi 'fi I
rl/
t'}
1.1* ?
l|ii;
t
•' *
..'M
iite
I'i!:

134
LETTERS.
I, Scarce refpefted, in the fitualion to which 1 was reduced, held me irhmoveable to my place. My cries, w'hich, in the parlour, might have alarmed the fervants, were ufelefs in a place where they were ftifled. I Screamed, however; I called Heaven to help me, and protect my mother; I endeavoured to difengage myfelf, to fly to her ailiflance. Vain efforts ! they dragged me away; and Mr. Darby, letting me go, daShed me with Such violence to the floor, that I was terribly bruiSed: he then went out and Shut the door after him. My firft attention was to fallen it within Side, with two bolts, placed there for that purpofe, and I refolved to die with hunger rather than open it. This, in Some meafure, tranquillized me ; and I knelt down to implore the alTiffance of God, with an ardour
which Surely reached Heaven, fince it gave me a defire and means to break my chains. I had every thing to fear for my mother’s life : Mr. Darby, in his rage, had let eScape the horrible defign to make her life depend upon my marriage. Ah ! if my own alone had been in danger, I could have braved death and torments; but an intereil more dear laid hold of my heart. While I was yet praying, I heard a key put in the door : as it turned round without effedl, and they perceived the obllacle that kept the door
from
LETTERS.
H5
from opening; t^ie odious Montalvo raifed his voice, and conjured me, out of regard to my own Safety, to condefcend to honour him with a quarter of an hour’s converfation. Had I lillened only to my indignation, I fliould have anfwered him with the juft reproaches his crimes deferved ; but I had conceived Some hopes of efcaping, and that reftrained me. I have four and twenty hours to fix my laft refolution, faid I to him ; hope not to fee me before that time, and remember that my determination depends on the treatment my mother meets. Ah, charming Clarifla, replied the monfter, would you could read my heart; however filled it may be with love for you, you would find more remorfe there than tendernefs. A criminal like me dares not call Heaven to witnefs his oaths: I confent, however, this moment, to receive the punifiiment it owes my crimes, if I am not fincere in my repentance ; if I have not made a vow to repair the injuries I have done you. For your own hike, feign to confent to your father’s defigns, you ftiall not be lefs miftrefs of your fate ; with my own life I will anfwer for that of your refpe6;able mother. We fhall fee to-morrow, faid I, howTar your repentance may be depended on ; and, till that time, I only defire you to let me be quiet.
How
'■’il
I'
i!
i ■■ ,
if-
JM
f|
»*
N
''■■b'ir iij, iJjii’liMli;
IP'!.
fi'
ii!
nj •• •;	1
!i,
L.* I ■
f
llEi
•T '■
!!|
1
hi'! il'
I I,
Ji'
Sj:
! .



■i l|i i I
L'
!:
!ij
ill
11
■I*'
i
ill

U '
ii
fb
I''
It!
ib
:lte
■IL
|i’
Ei:
■I
'L
136
LETTERS.
How eafy it is to impofe upon an innocent heart ! Tthough't I could perceive the tone of truth in the promifes of Montalvo. Is there a man ralli enough to invxike the vengeance of Heaven, at the time he provokes it by his trea-fons? If the promifes of that wretch were Sincere— but has he refpedled thofe he made to God, when he engaged himfelf in the Service of the altar? Can his'penitence fubfift with the criminal pallion with which he confefles yet to burn ? Heavens! I Iliould render myfelf an accomplice of his' crime, was I to confide in his oaths. Let me fly then, though at the rifque of my life : God, who only punifhes the will, knows that I abridge-not my days by choice.-
There was, in the place where I was Unit up, awery narrow chimney ; I did not defpair, how, ever, of being able to Squeeze up it, and arrive at> the top of the houfe. If you afk mei what I designed to do when I got there, I cannot tell; if - it was to go off, I had not conSidered whether the height would not be an obftacle to my enter-prize *, I recommended myfelf to God, before I attempted to mount this narrow pafl'age, and-more than once I was afraid I fliould flick by the way : at length, however, with the afliftance of ■ my hands and feet, I gained the top, where I •
was

i' ■
r
LETTERS.
137
was obliged to flay, for fome moments, to take my breath; afterwards,' by the pale light of the (lars, I call my eyes on all Sides, to fee if I could not difcover a place where the defcent was eafy : I knew there was a little building at the end of my houfe, much lower than it; and, if I could be happy enough to come at it; I might Aide without danger, from one roof to another, and arrive below ; I thought it would be eafy to come to the ground on the fide of the garden, where it was not above fifteen feet high ; but I had a long way to Scramble, and how fhould I avoid falling ? However, I had no choice, and re-Solved to hazard all, for all. On horfeback then, as I may fay, upon the ridge of the roof, one leg on one Side, and one on the other, T, with great aukwardnefs, pain and danger. Sometimes on my flomach. Sometimes by the help of my hands, at length reached the end. That moment, I heard Windfor clock flrike tw'elve, and it was well I had got to my journey’s end; the fky began to grow darker, the flars difappeared, every thing foretold a llorm, and I had Scarce gained the garden, when the little light, I till then had,
entirely failed : there was yet a wall to get over, not fo high as the buildings I had already dropped from, yet I found greater difficulties; I attempted to mount, but fell; my foot got under
mo

I3&
LETTER S.
me in fueh a manner, that, with the pain, I was above an hour before I could ftir from the place; however, my fall being on the ouifide of the garden, I was, in Some fort, happy; my fears of falling again into the hands of my perfecu-tors, gave me new ftrength ; and, as well as 1 was able to judge, I fet out towards Windfor: and, though a dreadful rain pierced me to the {kin, I advanced courageoully towards the place, where I hoped to find an afylum : I knew then were in the caftle Some ladies of rank, and I re-Solved to throw myfelf at the feet of the fiift to whom Providence fliould bring me, intreating her to hide me for a few days, till I fhould learn Some news of my mother, determining to let them believe what they would of my condition, rather than accufe him, notwithftanding his cruelty to me, whom it was my duty to refpe6I. But Heaven difpofed things "in a different manner. I had not walked above a quarrer of an hour, when th« anguifh of my foot began to relent. I made my advantage of it, and doubled my pace, fo that in three hours I had not gone lefs than feven miles acrofs the fields : I perceived that I had miffed my way, but it was in vain to think of regaining it, and I only thought of getting farther from Old Windfor; fo that, by break of day, I might arrive at fome place, where a carriage
LETTERS.
139
riage might be taken for London. My foot be-
gan again to grow uneafy ; when I heard the
clock ilrike four, and, carting my eyes toward the place from whence the found came, I faw
that I was betweeen two villages, to the neareft of which, I began to make all poilible harte, when I perceived, at a diflance. Something
I foon discovered that it
coming towards me.
was a woman, cairying a bafket. A fev/ mo-
ments before, I would gladly have afked her afSiflanee: but the found of the clock and the
view of the rteeple, denoted ,a considerable town.
where I hoped to find Some good inn ; I had mo-l
ney enough in my pocket, to procure a Ihort reception there, and a carriage, which was all I wanted. While I made thefe refle6tions, the
woman approached, and lifting up her hands and eyes in admiration : And from what pretty place did you come, my fine lady ? Said She bru-tifhly : I warrant you have ran away from Some good houfe, where the bullies would have drub-
She advanced to have a nearer view
bed you. of me.
but I crofl'ed the road; and, as foon as
I had lort fight of her, fear, lart curiofity rtiould make her turn back to infult me, made me
leap a ditch, and Scramble over a hedge, which
Separated a field of corn from the high road. I
crofled it, and faw, with pleafure, that it conduced
' I ’
I
I; •'

I 1
II
M
1
i i
i!

: 1 11 ': 1
iili

	•1 1;
i 1 'd	1 1 i
' 'i!	11 jt ,
ill Hlli!: 1 » H 1 •	I' s;
!iT-! Id lid-	■ii: hi
11- iij;	i:
!ji i'S' '!•■ .1	ili: s
’SiS.' i'ihCl I;,:: 'T! ''' i,,l
^!lliil'i|ji!:l|r
''iniiiiii'hS
jitiilliilJ.!,,.
t.;;
•V ii'; I
-Si
t f' >, I *I 'i,	' • I
hii :Vr;!-r
tl-T 1;! II
1» J
JT , ' 1
il'tM
ihi!'!
I.
Ml!
I
’i'l

'IKt
iiliiL.
iSil
i|.v!
I'il ii'fe'i.iwr
iiii
'll
Ui
:b
(!,' i
idl’ii
!!
i) •
.
iiilililij
ill
iste’lc

,r
! if
!iS
140
LETTERS.
dueled to a double hedge, In the middle of which there was a lane, which Teemed to lead totheplace ■where I wanted to be. The woman’s dilcourfe occasioned me to reFiecl upon the diforder of my drefs, which before I had not thought of; and judging that it would be imprudent to appear fo adorned, I fat down under a little tree to take off my diamonds and pearls. My defign was to tuck my robe into a white petticoat, which I wore under it, and to wrap myfelf up in a capuchin, which I had accidently put in my pocket oncoming from a walk in the garden the evening before. I thought rnyfelf, in the folitary place I then was, futficiently fheltered from curious eyes; but what was my aftonifhment, to fee, about twenty paces from me, a man, with a naked fword under his arm. At that inftant, every thing I had to fear the mofl terrible, offered itfelf to my imagination, already troubled and diftradted ; and feeing that there was no hopes of efcape, I arofe upon my knees, throwing my purfe at a little dillance from me: Have pity, faid I, upon an unhappy young woman, and take not advantage of the misfortunes, which put her into your power : there is my purfe, you have it with all my heart; take alfo thefe diamonds ; I only beg, in return, that you will
leave me at liberty to go where I pleafe, and to tell
me
■’Vii';

LETTERS.
141
‘\
It
L-
I t } .
me whether I may hope to find a carriage in the village which is before us. The man flopped on hearing my voice, and confidering me from head to foot, feemed at a lofs to imagine, by what accident a girl like me, could come into fuch a in a drefs fo unfuitable to my feeming cir-cumftances. After a fhort Silence, he faid to me, in broken Englifli, Take back your money and your diamonds, and tell me, if I can do you any fervice ? If you think you ought not to accept my offer, fay but the word and I will go away. I confefs, however, I Shall do it with regret; you may fall into bad hands; I fancy you are not of a rank to beg a flielter in a common inn; and, fora carriage, I afl'ure you^ you will not find one in all the village.
i
The countenance of this man was fo beautiful, the found of his voice fo moving, his air fo refpefilful, that, in an inflant, my fears, de-ferted me. You are not Englifh, fir, faid I to him. No, madam, anfwered he, lam French; and all the men of that nation, regard it as a duty incumbent on them, to devote themfelve» to the affiftance of the fair fex, when they are unfortunate. It was in French he made me this reply, as I Spoke to him in that language. May I alk you, faid I, of what religion you are ? Are
you
I '
' t)

\ I I
, I
I
iil
I I i
''Pli


■	I	\	\
■.'	I	I	If 1.,
•	c	•	■	:
d! ''b'S! !
iLi 1
l •	■
i T--:' :o
: ' ■ ' ' I ■, ?'l ; I

t'l
Ml.,
junhi.' .•	-,j i
L'Mi;.., . -I
I,-
MI'L
•II'

•' i,
S'!;-
•'•r ••
I' '**'	,ii.'
.	,'• ( LM;.-
' \ •, ''■i.ll;' I*


‘ ii; •	•.(;
I
I ,
I|,. ,!i	;
I'	, i
,ii Li' •	: ’
'III.- 1 TV' J1 , iHI--
iVNi-t , , 1' ‘ ’
I'lb'il'S •
Si'''
' i:
0.1

iji' '!■! i' ■
|fn........
I •'
I:'. *
iljfh
i •I*
'llI..........
M*,' ‘	•
iM' ■
if
,'iC

»Oh
i« '

‘If .
jl'l V';i' ■
• . 1:S;. \d.
‘	|[lr I (•
SiS'b.’ii .ijii • ;
ii''T
■ii .1
iib
'IT m !l:''h‘d'S!Sr)

IP!- ■
Sip
ii'Sii
'S i’l
[T'l.
t ' ,1
|l;!i ;■
ii.ihil'liliP '■
m *
ii
tll'


It:-’
:'':!iii‘
mV.
I ‘■''ll-''' Si
I ’.»! -.I- v' r; ,ii
S(
t
i'-h:;,!!;!
' ' t
1' illiiSi :
PL ! -•;
It'S’S.!)
hf|!
I 'h J
ctf' i
mi
i'l
ii,
liiili'iiiip'': liitiipjlis'!
il'i
1
iiji'f'
T !•' '
ti-u‘ 1. •	"

II
<1 ImS;.''
1^1 esc
•S‘1
''h:
1 .?M. C.';!!

jlOi'
lli
!|i-
hr,
« I •
iiif'
%
ill'!’
ill'
i-.C''
.T,' 0 i-M’c ■ 1 ■?' :■* ,
I; ’ -••111!, '
142
LETTERS.
you a French refugee? I do not know with what
deSign you alk the queftion, anfwered he, but
though it may poffibly diminilh that confidence
which you Seem willing to repofe in me, I will make no fcruple to confefs, that I have the ho-
nour and happinefs of being a Roman cathol^.
Great God, cried I, raifing my eyes to Hea
ven, have you Sent me a protector ? After this
Short exclamation, I laid to the young man, the
ingenuity with which you have declared your faith, without knowing mine, engages me to
truft you. Could you procure me a Safe harbour for fome hours, furnifh me with proper deaths,
^	r
and get me a carriage ? Nothing more eafy, fays
V	m
he, if you will accept of my poor lodging: I live with a mafter, a very honefi: man, and am
the only Servant in his houfe ; you may fliut
yourfelf up in my chamber till the evening, by which time, I will procure you a Safe conveyance to London, or where elfe you pleafe. I
had not yet taken notice of the drefs of him who fpoke to me; it difagreed with his figure; and the powder, with which his coat was filled, in-formed me that I Spoke to a perriwig-maker. What muft the politenefs of a French gentleman be,
when I find So much in a man of this clafs? You
will not oblige one ungrateful, replied I, rifing ;
it is in my power to make your fortune, and I
promiie
LETTERS.
H3
promlfe I will do it : indeed you fcem to be born
abo?e your prefent Bation. At theSe words, the young man bluftied exceedingly. I fhould be
m	—•
greatly concerned, faid he, to find myfelf fuf-
peSted of any bafe and interefted views, in the
little fervice I am willing to do you, I am poor.
’tis true ; but my poverty does not make meun-
t ■
happy, though I have reafon to blufii for the
caufe. With regard to my profeffion, I confefs
it is new to me; but it, in Some meafure, re-efta-
blilhes me in ray own efteem, as a defire to fulfil
- t
my duty holds me to it. My aftonilhment aug-
mented at every word he fpoke ; his refpedtful
n
and genteel carriage furprized me fiiil more.
l
\ i
My foot, which was extremely fwelled, began
! I
to give me more pain as it grew cold. The
■ i
ftranger perceived that I could Scarce walk ; but.
inftead of offering me his arm, he plucked a flake
from the hedge to Serve me for a flaff: his re* fpedlful modefty, on this occafion, ftrengthened
my good opinion of him So far, that I thought I ran no rifque in defiring leave to lean upon him.
i!
We fpoke little during the reft of the way, which
lay ftill between the hedges, till we came to the
£nd of a wall with two or three doors; my con-
dudlor opened one, and brought me into a little
chamber; after having Hrft croffed a garden, be-
longing to a fmall houSe, where it was the firft •	floor

■ {
i !'

• •! '^1

A\
!i.;'
\\i
II
hi;
'I'i
iw':';
i.i*n
'Vi iii!

it
L )
StV' :
i<J.^ .:*
'•I' 1 ll -i *' •
“''lib ,
Lti
Hll-
ML' M>f./
. . ' A 'V ‘
l!: V'i,.
lib:!'!;: iSi'it' ■
iS’lii"
i!;
iitfi' I
‘Mil
Iri
> : In

k
';.'r
tt.b: .
hh!
:• •••
li’
hi, L
I).
■ib
i
V
in !•.;
' I .
'i
I ■.
r

ii ;
p;! t ,
Ih.: ;
•Pf
a
(!i!
II
>. '
I M t
j:i :
ll;! I
^li! ■
;; i '
Hi!

M <■'
lb
it
te! ;
!i
f

I :
i ’
I ‘
[
i '
Ii*'-
,b •
I ii
! bp
Ot "
iilii:
:/!ii :
tl ' tui'-
l!'l
Slii;
iisi
^■;!l
'i!i, ’
Uli
tlfih
r
•‘if
!;!•! i
144
letters.
floor. This looks to the ftrcet, fays he ; and If yo« have any fufpicions of me, you may make your.
felf eafy in the thought, that you have nothing to do but call out. Saying thefe words, he fliewedme
the ftreet, which was broad, and the houfestolt.
rably handfome. You are here, laid he, in fc.
curity; here is the key of my room, which I
will enter no more, without your leave. Only permit me to knock now and then, to fee if you
Want any thing ; and if you think you owe me
any acknowledgment, condefcend to give me a
proof of it, by accepting a diih of chocolate, which I am now going to bring you. Sir, faid
I, I entertain not the leaft doubt of you, and willingly accept the refrelhment you offer,
which, indeed, I have great need of, being al-
moft overcome ; and, when your bufinefs will
permit, I can do nothing better than confult with you upon the Heps necelTary for me to take, Perhaps, my dear Harriet, you may think me too confiding ; but there are figures to whom we can refufe nothing; and till this moment that I write to you, I have no reafon to think I have trulled too far. My guide came back, with fome bifeuits and a dilh of chocolate, and told me,
he v/as then obliged to quit me, to open his (hop.
As the chamber was but low, and nothing but a Ample floor of planks, without plaillering, divided
LETT E R S.
Divided from the (hop, I could eaSily hear every word that was fpoke there ; and for that reafbn I fat down in a corner, not daring to ftir, for fear of difcovering myfelf. Prefently I heard a perfon talking, who was, without doubt, the mafter of the fliop : he faid to his man; You are come very early, my poor chevalier, I will lay my life you have not eat a bit fince yeherday evening, for you would rather come fadlngj than eat or drink with my lord’s fervants ; po-
verty and pride go ill together, my friend, and you ought to change your manners, I, who ani your mafter, eat with thofe people, and what right have you to defpife them ? I do not uefpifc them, replied my guide, but I was afraid you would want me ; beftdes, I was more fleepy than hungry. Ay, ay, faid the mafter, I know you ; however, you may have occafion for fome hours reft; fo go up, and throw yourfelf upon your bed, we (hall have nothing to do all day. As the mafter finifhed thefe words, I heard Several horfes in a hard gallop. Some of which (lopped before the (hop. I do not know why, I was feized with an involuntary horror but how w'ere niy fearsaugmen'ced,when I heard the voice of Mr. Darby, who a(ked, if they had not feen a young woman, dreflfed in fuch a manner, defcribing diredtly my deaths; there is a hundred guineas,
VoL. I.	H	faid
lil

(
I I
5 ;i
’ I i t
ri
.!( i»'
r-o «
1 S li
' ' I
II; :!
li i
ii: ...hn- ■
iNtijiil is

) ' *-L
: -iiu • •:
'T,
! M t '
i' O' l
!v!|
'it,:
jl
'i'i'llT; '
'■ J‘- t ' ■hSidi . yAjiloit* vA-.!. •
(	U
jlijiM!'" 'li'i'lS ■
t'fr'
US'
' I
Ifei! .
IMilllI r
vh lljte
.flit!
Mb'i
.<! i^i.
it;
ijirtli';
I r*, ^

Vi '
r* 1 '•
iji'i)
i
i: I-
LMl- :
fsi ■

Iii;n :
}!:V , -
M \
«ii'’
It:,
I ' ■: 1
m i
#.L‘ '■
;p
t
: I
1' I I
h
■itf'r-'
: ,
Isit: •
ill''- ' |l }j ,
liV ■
V'!l


' ! . C* • '
I i
, i !
;b
!S::
;-T
146
L E T T E R S
Said he, for thofe who will bring her back to her parents. A ftroke of thunder would not mote hav€ fhocked me. What a temptation fora young mail ! he had told me he was poor; will
he fcruple to gainTuch a fum of money with fo mucheafe? But I immediately reproached my. felf for the‘thought, as an a6t of ingratitude. The mafter replied, that he had but that moment opened his fhop, and that fuch a .perfoo might have pafled an huirdred times without his feeing her. I had better, luck, replied a woman, who was Sweeping the 116x1 door ; I met bet, juft at day-break, about three quarters of a mile from the town ? flie crofled the fields, and made as fall as Ihe could towards!London : If I had known what was to he got by it, I Should have made her Slacken her pace. Judge, of my fright, my dear: I,- literally Speaking, dared not breathe, left even my very breath Should be heard. But happily the horfemen no,Sooner underftood that! was gone for Londoni than>^they took that route at a full ftretch. G Providence I cried I to my-felf, what would have become of me, had not the meeting of that woman obliged me to quit the high-road ? but by what enchantment could they fofoon difeover my flight, and follow at my heels, and put themfelves-exadUy in my track ?
The arrival of my benefadlor interrupted myre-
.fledlions.
ji’: St i!qh '
! ■A-if :
t >
LETTERS.
147
fleSions. On entering the chamber, he put his finger upon his mouth, as much as to fay Silence ; and pointing to a door which opened into another room, he made Signs for me to go into it. We Ihould be over heard there. Said he. Setting me a chair. Ah, madam, how was I frightened for you juft now; ’ but, perhaps, you already know the Subje6k of my terrors j you muft certainly have heard—Alas I heard all. Said I j what obligations have I not to you, and what acknowledgments ! Talk not tomeof acknowledgments, anfweredhe, interrupting me, only let me know what is farther to be done, to Save you from the dangers which threaten you : who are your per-fecutors ? could you not apply to juftice againft them ? There is a magiftrate in the town, a very honeft gentleman ; (hall I demand of him an afylum for you, more proper than what I c*a offer ?
I MELTED into tears, and was a good while bt-fore I could anfwer him ; at length, I conquered myfelf fo far, as to tell ray protedlor, the cxcefs of my misfortune was fuch, that Lcould not hate my moft cruel enemy : it is my father. Said I; and I would die an hundred times, rather than do him an injury: I fly to avoid an odious marriage.: a mother, whom I love more than my-
II	Self,
HI t



148
L E T T. E R S.
lelf, is in danger of becoming the vi6Hrnof my refufal; my firfl, my only deSre, is to be re-united to her.

How many horfemen were after me ? Five, anfwered the young man. We had ISO more in the houfe, replied I, ah, fir, how fliould I blefs your goodnefs, if you had the courage to go to Old Windfor, to enquire for the houfe of mils Darby, and in that houfe for her chambermaid Fanny. If you could, by her means, draw my mother from the danger to -which Sne is expofed, and bring her to a place, where I may this night go to her,.my life would Scarcely fuffice to acquit the obligation. There are certain aaions, faid the young man, which carry their recompenfe along v/ith them, in the of an honell man: but we lofe time in talk-
eyes
ing;
I fly
life,
me
Old Windfor is but four miles from hence;
■But, madam, this is the moment of wj in which my poverty is mofl: vexatious to fome accident might happen to render money neceflary. I underlland you, faid I, presenting my purfe. Five guineas will be enough,
faid he ; reft quiet here, no one has a key to mj chamber but myfelf; and you will know, by my cracking the whip, when you Shall come to the door of the other room, in order to let me in.
•He
LETTERS.
149
He did not wait for my anfwer, but faluted me with a grace, Somewhat uncommon in a man of his rank He went down, and Said in the Shop, loud enough for me to hear him, I find my drowSinefs is gone off; and. Since you have no occafion for me, I will try to refrefli myfelf, by
taking the air a little on horfeback.
%
Clarissa in Continuation...
WHO would believe, that, in the midff of inquietude and perturbation, fleep Ihould for a moment be able to fufpend my fenfe of afUidfion ? What do I fay ? Alas, it feems to have fallen upon me only to augment my power of feeling, by re-eftablilbing my worn-out faculties. What frightful images have affailed my foul, during my dumber ! I thought I faw my prefervcr become that of my mother ; he was bringing her to me, when he met her cruel hufband ; the valiant young man endeavoured to defend her from five others, who would have ra-
viflied her from him; I faw him fall, covered with wounds. My mother who ftrove to Save his life at the expence of her own, fell by his fide. Their blood ran from them in a mingled ffream, and my protedfor cried, I am rejoiced to died it for ClarilTa. On a Sudden, the earth opened,
H 3	and

( 1 '
i»’
■ III
dr.
)
: ) ■ i.
1. ‘ t '.f

I >	> I
.}
‘Ill ,	-

;v! 'iii
r' '
( . t '
'■V- c

:iV
I ■ n-i'r .. I



ii'iwi .'1;, ■!.'


i.ibiijb.
ii'bipiiii
■•Mil',:,.
V\ Tf-‘’ i.-
i (‘ 111111 i,.' 1 ‘
i,l /:H'; . ' •
. '	,r
. ,1 ,L.. 1 ■ '
:.! ■Ilf r,r
:	I:. . I
' !•’ ‘ -;l- ■
h 'i
-II'

lA'
l*|l I ,

:
it-

(i I'l*!;

'illhlljl! f.'j
r ' ■ -	*
im.b-';!
’! k.TiMii
•••,< n|l •
..'-a.,'; .ilni
ii'' I
.) tth i|
■i r-i -I
I, ii'O i
ii"[h
Ipbi)*'’'
ifbbL St
' '.I-'}' 'i
i-iibbi;
llbtiii'b
LHi .
Ml -i'
!!
‘il bb''i!
iill-ilNl 'It
j: III lui
. II- L
,|, u : T

'■I-...
I I
■ I



'ill

SJ;I
At' o'..'
( ’ A'•
:ii. '■ ).

llib:
I -e 1 ,
* . Pi •- ‘
; ' .C-
i 'M'lL
i |il:
150
LETTERS.
and Swallowed my unfortunate father. Montalvo
fell at my feet, and joining my hand with that of
the expiring youth, I repair. Said he, the injuries
1 have done you. The whole disappeared, and
I Saw you at my fide ; but with So cold and di-
Slant an air, that I dare not exprefs the pleafurel
felt at the fight of you : Mr. Balfour took you fud.
cfenly by the arm, and cried, let us fly, let us fly.
I ran after, and endeavoured to hold you ; and the
anxiety I was in, awakened me in a cold Sweat,
and I was ready to faint. How weak is your
poor friend ! in vain do I Say to myfelf, this
dream is nothing, but the effedls of the dangers
I have gone through, during the laft twenty-four hours, and thofe which I yet fear. It leaves an impreflion of terror that I am not able to diilipate. What I will not Heaven grant to
my ardent prayers, the converSion of my wretched
father ? Mufl: he be an eternal vi6;im of the jull
anger of an avenging God ? Ah ! let him take
my life ; in fatisfadlion for his crimes, or let me
Suffer all the punifhmentis due to them here, fo that he mav be Saved hereafter. Terrible
may be Saved hereafter, as the image of my dying mother and friend appear, I ihould have nothing to fear, methinks, for their future welfare. My mother had filled the meafure of her virtues, and the gener ous youth thinks too nobly for vice ever to pervert him.
Inno-
LETTERS.
151
Innocence, candour, and gentlenefs. Seem printed on his face. May Heaven deign to be-his-recompenf e, and put it into my power not to die ungrateful. O, could he but unite me to my
tender mother ------Why will the author of my
days di(honour his rank, while a man, born, no doubt, in the obfcureft clafs, ,fliew Sentiments worthy-of a prince ?
A CURIOSITY whichlin vain reproachmyfcif’ with, obliges me to interrupt ray letter. Paper, feattered upon a table, may give me Some lights, as to the character of himj. into whofe power I‘ am obliged to put myfelf. - Heavens ! if his beautiful outSide fhould hide a heart wicked and corrupt ? Had not Montalvo, like him, a feducing •form? Who knows if this curiofity, which I combat and condemn, be not an infpiration from Heaven,-to warn me to fly a danger, equal to that from whence I have efcaped ? I give way to the temptation ; my intention, in Some mea-fure, jiiftifies an action, which, at any other time, and in any other circumftances I fhould account criminal.
If I was to conceal what my curiofity has discovered, you might imagine it disadvantageous to my proteftor. In the firft place then he is
H 4	called
1/
1'5'2
LETTER
S,
r<
i;
0
called Chevalier: that name is upon the addrdt of the letter, which can be for none but him, for his profeflion is fet down : I was not a little fur-prifed at the feal which was upon the cover, being the arms of nobility ; the hand a woman’s. Hooked at the letter, A perriwig-maker, thought r> has not ufually fuch correspondents. I found nothing, and l am not Sorry for it. I have nothing to fear from a mean man, the meannefs of his birth will prevent his lifting his eyes to me, and make me better able to defend myfelf againft a merit, which, unallayed, by that circumftance, would make too Ilrong imprelSions upon me. What have I Said, my dear Harriet ? Give me time to examine my heart.
Thank Heaven, I find myfelf incapable of forgetting the blood from whence I have fprung. My fentiments of gratitude were fo Ilrong, that I began to be afraid. Ought they to be other-wife No, I would tear my heart, if it was lefs fenSible. To what'dangers may this poor young man be now expofed for m.y fake, if the frightful dream Should become reality ? Let me turn from the dreadful thought, I cannot Support it.
There are a great many verfes among thefc papers, and they are by no means to be ranked
among
letters.
H3
among the indifFerent: If he is not a poet, he
loves poetry.---A tafte Singular enough, for a
man like him. His choice of Some pieces he has copied out, fhew his difcernment. O Heavens !
I hear the fignal which he gave me ! What, returned already ! I have hardly ftrength enough to go and open the door.
What things have I to tell you my dear! I ■ am loft ih confuSion I O fatal voyage I It was Heaven, which, in its anger againft me, laid you under a neceftity of leaving England. Yet will I not murmur. O my God, am I not your creature ; in duty bound to fubmittoyour decrees, however rigorous they may feem ? have you not ftiewed yourfelf my protestor, in favouring m.y efcape from the worft of evils ? You will finifti your work, you will cover with your wings the moft virtuous of women; you will re-ftore me to her arms, and thofe of my tender friend ; or, if you refufe me thefe blefllngs, of which I ara not worthy, you will give me ftrength to Support the affl 6tion, . Here follows the melancholy account brought by Chevalier, i
‘‘ Being arrived at an inn in Old Windfor, he was a long time before-he was able to attract the attention of the landlord, whom he aflced
H 5
for
t i
■■A-M
^ i
iri
154
LETTERS.

for Something to eat; and of the Servant, whom he deSired to put his horSe in the liable: every thing Seemed there in diSorder and confufion. At lad the landlady came in, crying out, No, they Shall never perfuade me, I will never believe that Madam Darby, or her daughter, have a£Ied in the lead contrary to their duty ; poor Fanny Says So; and the brute of a butler threatens her, as if it was a crime in the eyes of his mader, to aSTert that he has the bed wife, and mod virtuous daughter in the world. Why did you not Send for the poor girl here, replies the landlord? I have always had a bad opinion of this James, I do not think her over Safe with him. Run, call her, fays he to the maid, defire her to drink a difh of tea with us, the poor girl, I am certain, has not been able to breakfad. Then, perceiving Chevalier, who yet held the bridle of his horSe, I beg pardon, fir, for having made you wait; you fee us entirely in diforder, will you pleafe to breakfad with us ? With all my heart, replies Chevalier, I will willingly drink tea with you, provided you give me Something more Subdantial: give ms, if you pleafe a little meat, for 1 will not dop any more between this and-London. But may I take the li-herty of enquiring what has happened new in
this quarter ^
Truly,
LETTERS.
H5
Truly, fays the landlady, we know nothing more at prefent, than a flying report; but fee, Mrs. Fanny, the chambermaid of an excellent young lady that has been carried off, ihe will tell us every thing that happened.
Fanny's eyes were extremely red, and it was eafily feen fhe had wept much. She fhewed a great deal of prudence in every thing fhe faid. Her young miftrefs efcaped in the night; the track of her footfteps in the garden led to the wall; and the fame marks, on the other fide, fhewed the road fhe had taken. Mr. Darby, Montalvo, and three fervants, purfued her fomc hours after. . Montalvo and James returned to thehoufe ; the firft went to a private chamber, where Mrs. Darby was, and having forced the lock, James, who would have oppofed his entrance, was very much beat. After half an hour?s converfation, his miftrefs was forced into a poft chaife, which Montalvo efcorted onhorfe. back. The cries of James had alarmed the whole village; he cried out, that his mafter was betrayed ; that, after having ftole his daughter, they forcbily carried off his wife. But Mrs. Darby having faid foraething or other, every thing was quieted. She added, that the infamous James, threatened to put her in the hands
i<6
LETTERS.
ill

of juftice as a thief, becaufe fhe had allifted her young miftrefs in breaking open the drawers, to take out her diamonds. All the people of the houfe, and the neighbours, exclaimed greatly againft this bafenefs, andadvifed Fanny to go to Windfor, and fwear the peace againfl: this fer-vant^ and offered their Service to condufl her there.. No, fays Fanny, I will embarrafs no one in my affairs; provided a horfe can be found me, I fhall go very well alone to mako my depo-lition. Chevalier then took up the conversation. I have fome bufinefs at Windfor, faid he to her, and I can dine there as well as here ; I offer you to ride behind me; and, as I have the honour of being known to a neighbouring magiftrate, I have no doubt but he will do your young lady all imaginable juftice : I afk but one recompenfe for my Services; inform me to-morrow of the Sequel of this affair. I intereft myfelf in this lady’s fortune, and, if I was not obliged to be this day in London, on very urgent bufinefs, I would put off my journey.
Fanny bleffedathoufand times the gentleman who was fo kind and good-natured j and, before fhe quitted the houfe, emptied her pockets and ihook her petticoats, after having had them examined by Several women, to (hew that fhe carried

r
LETTERS.
1S7
ried nothing away. The landlord was generous enough to inSift upon Chevalier’s accepting of his breakfaft, but he would pay his reckoning, and threw a guinea upon the table, leaving five {hillings for his breakfaft and the dinner he had ordered ; which raifed him greatly in the people’s opinion, who took him for a man of confequence> for he had borrowed a great-coat in the village, which concealed his drefs.
Chevalier had not gotabove half a mile from the village, when he difcovered himfelf to my maid. The poor girl almoft fainted with joy, on hearing him mention my name; She would feign have been carried to me direftly; but the chevalier convinced her, that fhe might be more ufeful to me at Old Windfor, from whence fhe could give us daily notice of the meafures that were concerting, in order to difcover me. They agreed th|t the fteps fhe had hitherto taken* were abfolutely neceflary for her own Security. But as fhe v/as afraid, left I fhould be uneafy at Chevalier’s flay, fhe begged he would make all the hade to me he could, and flie returned her-felf on foot.—If the defire of information concerning my abandoned houfe and family did not detain me where I at prefent am, I have another firong reafon for not ftirring. James faid, that
1 fhould
i.M
i:*i!
,!l '
..HI ' ■!b‘ i: ■
li S!; 1
iV'' '
' • i ■I ' t
;;}'b <1:
■iiil:: ■
iiln
;;jb:
i: MI
A'\‘ IM' '
:hli /
. ,,r
• ' t .
‘bo

h;': ■
'!!!': ;l'
;i!S >
i • I

,1 < \
t i
ih ,
I
hill :
1
!th'
‘i'l
if
. I
!'i ! ill'
11-
I:
K'> ;

5 '
Vi I
III
ii;! '
i'l ' li: .
I:
I ;
1 '
I
!
i )
( •.

' I I

158
letters.
I (hould be in ray father’s power in four and twenty hours, for that I had been defcribed at all the turnpikes, and proper authority left to Seize me wherever I came. To what extremity am I reduced ! forced, in fpite of decorum, to pafs the night with an unknown man. In this, I am more to be pitied than the Clarifla of Mr. Richardfon, who was never left deftitute of female companions. Yet, on comparing our adventures, I find mine the more Supportable, if I could but be eafy about the fate of my dear mother. I cannot reproach myfelf with being the caufe of my own misfortunes, inevitable ne* tefSity juflifies my flight, 1 did not voluntarily put myfelf under the prote<9:ion of a man. This man is not, nor ever can be my lover ; and if I had been to choofe among all the human racc^ Mr. Balfour excepted, I do not believe I could
have found a perfon, with whom I might remain
in greater fecurity. The letter which you will
receive from me by next poll, will fhew you
that I fpeak this on good foundation ; and my
prefent Situation, excufes the indifereet favour I
am going to beg of you. I am as fafe at this
place, as I can be any where elfe; and as Fanny
js to come and flay with me, as foon as flie
ceafes to be ufeful to us at Old Windfor, I am
determined to keep here, till I fee the end of my
misfortunes,
LETTERS.
159
misfortunes, which I (hall think entirely pafl:.
the moment I have it in my power to throw my-felf into Mr. Balfour’s prote6tion, and go with him into France.
I know that, at my age, a daughter is Hill in the power of her father; mine may claim me, though I know, at the fame
time, the abjuration of his right, formally made
to my aunt, will, in Some meafure, weaken that
claim, and mitigate the power he received from
nature; but I will expofe myfelf to every thing.
rather than ftigmatize the author of my being.
He may forget that I am his daughter, but I
will never forget that he*is my father; and,with
the afliftance of Heaven, I will always a£l according to my duty in that quality. The bell
method then is, to fly my country, and abandon my poflelTions: my fortune is what he wifhes for, let him have it, and reftore me his affections ; and I hope Mr. Balfour, as foon as he fees this letter, will have the goodnefs to let out. It is with infinite pain I propofe fuch a parting in your prefent fltuation; but it is the only thing which can juflify my flight in the eyes of the public, as I cannot, nor will difclofe the true reafcns of it. His efpouSing my intereft, will be fufficient to convince the world, I have done
nothing wrong. It is prudence alone that makes
jne wait here till Mr. Balfour arrives, for Cheva-
lier



1
160
LETTERS.
lier offers to condu£t me Securely into France; and I Should have no Scruples to venture with
him, if all the world knew him as well as I fancy
I do; but Mr. Darby might, perhaps, take
Such an occafion to villify me ; and, if one
ought to Suffer with patience the lofs of repu
tation when God orders it, I regard a juft care for
its preservation, among the moft Sacred duties;
and I have always thefe words in my ear, Curfei
be thofe who are the caufe of fcandal, &c. Alas,I
am fallen into that misfortune; in my opinion,
the greateft of all; my only confolation is, the
resolution I have taken not to aggravate it. The poft obliges me to finifti. You (hall hear from
me again Speedily.
/
Letter


letters.
LETTER XXL
i6i
CLARISSA TO LADT HARRIET.
S I forefee, my dear Harriet, that I Ihall have a great many things to fay to you, I begin this letter a day before it can depart; and I take up the thread of my melancholy adventure at the place where the pofl forced me to
break it off.
Chevalier’s bufinefs obliged him to quit me, as foon as he had given an account of what he had heard and feen ; he had that attention for me, that he brought a cold fowl in his pocket, with every thing necelSary, to fupport a life> which, though threatened .with misfortunes, God commands me to preferve, I raifed myfelf then, and, in fpite of my defponding condition, took fome nourilhment ; which, I think, has
given vigour, to my fainting Spirits. But two things above the reft caufe me mortal inquietude; particularly my fears for my dear and worthy mother : yet I could not help recollefUng the promifes Montalvo had made me a little before my flight; and, perhaps, the firft eft'edl of his repentance. Said I to myfelf, will be his care to preferve the beft of women, from the fury of
a cruel
I
!iti

i! :
’ ’ \
j M ^

u
lb
i’!|	!
i
ili !
it!

i
il!
i
I
:.'i ■
i; ■ bi
'
h
t6-2
L E T T E R Sv
a cruel hulband : flie followed him willingly,, and, to engage her to do fo, he muft have dif. covered to her all the machinations againft us. Montalvo probably could conduct her only to his mother. The converSion of that poor woman was not equivocal ; fhe run a great rilk in
• \
writing the letter, which tended to my preferva-tion: Such beginnings carry one a great way, and I confider her as a Sinner, whom God has chofen for an example of his mercy : and, even fuppoflng her Ton’s intentions againft my mother were bad, when he bore her off, he might ftill take her to his mother ; not being inftrudled in the change God had wrought in her. How did I regret, at that moment, my not having waited for the effe6t of his promifes: perhaps, faid I to myfelf, had I done that, I fhould now be in the arms of my dear mother; but I Soon confidered again, that, in adting as I did, I had followed the rules of prudence ; that is the guide which God gives us for our adlions, and we are not rerponSible for their fuccefs: yet perhaps I have confided too much in mine, and God takes pleafure in rendering it abortive, to learn me henceforward to rely on his affiftance.
I HAVE quitted my pen a few moments, to run
over in my mind this laft refle6;icn ; in eft'eifl', I
have
jir
LETTERS.
i6j
have reckoned too much upon happinefs; I
I
imagined, what I promifed myfelf was rtiy own work j and I left, without perceiving it, that dependance upon God, which, for many years, I have been trained in dreadful confe* quences of profperity. I perceived, that for fome months paft, I was grown cooler in religious matters. This ftrange difgrace is, without doubt, a method ufed by the Father of mercies, to roufe me from the lethargy, into which I had fallen unawares : if he is pleafed again to reftore me, may he never Suffer me to relax into the fame error. I have been, for an hour pafl:, meditating upon a projeft, which may poffibly put an end to my afflictions; and the inclination I have to fee my mother at quiet, infpires me with it. What is it that oppofes the Sentiments of nature, in the heart of Mr. Darby ? Is it not the rancour he has conceived, on ac-
count of my aunt’s partiality in my favour ?
Can I efteem a fortune, which caufes me fuch
alofs? No, better give it up to him. Indigence
is but an imaginary evil; let him give me my mother, and take my wealth. Have we not a
thoufand times agreed,, that happinefs and riches
can hardly dwell together ? But there’s a tap at
my door j I fly to open it.
Sleep
, ,1
i
H

I'
M
ill
t .
hi
li'

1^4
LETTERS
b I
1

Sleep flies from my eyes, my dear Harriet., The flrange projett I was about to explain to you, when interrupted, prefents itfelf to rny imagination in the mofl: feducing forms; yet I have not courage, at prefent, to let you into it ; perhaps I may conquer that baflifuinefs before I finifh my letter: in the mean'while, ImuH
tell you what has p iifed from the time my pro-tedlor left me, to this, when I am again alone. One of my inquietudes was, the uneaSinefs I had at paflTing the night fo near a flrange man: however great the efleem with which his con-du6t has infpired me, I know, that diffidence is the guardian of virtue: he did not put me to the pain of explaining \yhat I felt upon thisoc-caSion; but told me, on entering, that he had been taking the necefl'ary ineafures to leave the chamber to myfelf that night, and that he had prevailed upon a friend to give him fliare of his bed ; but, fays he, I conflantly retire to my own room every evening, whilemy mafler paffes two or three hours at'a public houfe, and I take care to attend him with a light when he comes in. If I was to fail in this, he would be dif-pleafed,and perhaps might think meoutof order: and, in the lafl cafe, his regard for me is fuch, that I am fure he would not go to bed till he had looked after me, to fee if I wanted any thing;
by
Kl'^j i
letters.
16s
by which means our fecret might be discovered, lam then obliged, madam, to alkyourpermif-fion to wait in the adjoining chamber till my mader goes out ; and till h« comes back again I will Sit in the Iliop, leaving you free from any difturbance. At prefent, I thought it was bet-
ter to be troublefome to you, than give him any caufe of fufpicion ; I am come alio to receive
your commands. If you are forced, by Some
•i
unforefeen accident, to quit this afylum, you will have occaSion for cloaths plainer than thofe
you at prefent wear : you will want linen, and a thoufand other neceflaries.
If your woman is rot here to provide them for you, would it not be better to make a proviSion in time ?
I PRAISED t he care and attention of my guar-
dian ; and, as I had a great inclination to be
better acquainted with him, I took that opportunity to Satisfy myfelf. I perceive. Said I, that
you are fond of Solitude: it is very laudable in
fo young a man, for you don’t appear to be
more than twenty ; may I alk how you employ
yourfelf every evening ? I love reading, anfwer-
ed Chevalier, but the want of good authors has
been very irkfom.e to me, for near a twelve-
month, that I have been in England ; but for
a little time paft, my profeffion has procured rue
admit-
4
Mi
(C

I
• I
\ '
til
irl
bill
l-'C.
iili
I
Ml I .
' i *
' i b •'
><.
Uri ■

i:'!
.. t .
•hi I I
Ri

hiii»

{. J :
I
! 1
:!:ii:
!ii’‘

I ;
;-K! !
Ih!
1
ifl'L
ii'ii'
i‘t :
i
iiPP' i
>'M ;
b<
h!i
;:!! ■
cii V!! i
III ■
:t* !
I
!; 1
•'Uls ■
' k ’
- S‘'t 1
'>1;.
Uhlt
I
I
’•‘*1 •
'll

ir >
l!{|ll ■ :Ihi: .
2 66
LETTERS.
admittance Into Several good houfes, where {
have procured Englifh books. I begin to un-derftand them, and greatly regret that 1 have not had occaSion or opportunity to read them: there are Such a number of good works in your
language, that it is every man*s duty to be ac-
Excufe, madam, my ne-
quainted with them gleS, I Should have offered you my little library ; it had made your time, perhaps, Seem fhoru I never read romances. Said I. Have you
cr.
any books of another kind ? There are romances faid he, that may be read with pleafure; howe-
ver, I confefs, few Englifh authors have excelled
in that way. I prefer books which treat of morals and Science ; and, it mufl: be confeffed, that here we find an abundant Source of riches,
for thofe who are more curious of inftru61:ion
than entertainment. At prefent, I read the
great Newton ; and the hours I pafs with that author, glide away unperceived. I muftre-
peat to you, faid I, what I once faid to you al-
ready, you are not made for the ftation you arc
:n : Such Sentiments and education tranfpire every moment, as Speak a man not born in mean* nefs and obfeurity. I am young, replied Cheva-
lier, yet more than half my life has been pafled In a mediocrity, not far diftant from indigence. I have lived by the works of my hands, like our
firft
*r
let T E r s
i67
rfirft parents; and, the happinefs of relieving the wants of one, who ought to be dear to me,
kept me from feeling any thing in my Situation
capable of giving me pain. Happy day ! cried he, raiSing to Heaven his eyes, fwimming with tears, fome drops of which fell down his cheeks,
I have loft you without hopes of return, and the reft of my deplorable life will be but a feries of unremitting defpair. Pardon me, madam, faid he, I ought to reprefs thefe tranfports ; and if I had nothing to complain of but misfortunes, methinks I ftiould difdain to affli^ myfelf; but I weep for faults, not misfortunes ; and faults accompanied with remorfe, are evils, againft which courage is unable to opp6fe itfelf. There are few faults, faid I, which a lively penitence cannot obliterate. If you have abandoned a wife ora mother, is this evil irreparable ? I.apprehend, by the proofs which you have given me of your difintereftednefs, thatyour tears have a nobler caufe, than the poverty to which you are reduced x and would to .Deaven, that you had no other misfortunes to weep for, with what pleafure would I repair fortune’s injuftice to yoii: -you fhould make me fenfible of the pleafure of abundance.
ii
Gheva"
LETTERS


•!l	{
a t
Chevalier anfwered my profeflions by a profound inclination ; for I had forced him to fit down : after which, he faid, I have not hitherto engaged myfelf in indifloluble bands : it is not the duties of marriage I have betrayed, but thofe of nature : I have wrung the heart of the mod refpedlable of mothers : the generoSity with which fhe has pardoned my ingratitude, makes me feel, with double weight, the horror of my guilt. I hope one day to fee myfelf at her feet; but the return of tendernefs, which made her a month ago the foie obje<3: of my defires, does not prevent me, to the lafl: day of my life, from being the mofi: unfortunate of men. In a word madam, my misfortunes are of that nature, as to be finifhed only with my life ; nay, I defirc not to outlive them: but, once again, par. don me, madam, *tis troubling you too much about a wretched man, who at prefent looks for no happinefs, but to fee your vexations at an end, and whofe future pains will be foftened, fo far as he Ihall be confeious of having been of fer-vice to the mafter-piece of the creation.
Nothing could be more cautious than Chevalier’s .difeourfe ; but his eyes were lefs upon their guard, and fame looks efcaped them, which
the unworthy Montalvo firft taught me to ob-
ferve.
I. E T T E R S.
I 69
ferve I do not know whether he was fenSible of them himfelf, but I imagined fo, from his corre£l-ingthemfrom time to time, and from the promptitude with which he changed our difcourfe. We talked of French authors, I found that he had read all the good ones. At laft we heard the niafler go out of the Ihop, fhutting the door after him, and then Chevalier would get me fome tea ; after which, he afked me, what were my refolutions for the day following ? I have occafion for red; to-night, Siid I, in order to confult with myfclf. You muft not appear at Old Windfor to-morrow before ten o’clock, as you are fup-pofed to have been to London on bufinefs; and before that, I hope to have made fome determination able to reftore my quiet. At thefe words I arofe, and went towards a little cupboard, where be told me he had his books: T fa w,'with pleafure, among them, many books of devotion which gave me an opportunity of founding him upon the fuhje6t of religion, in which I found him fuperiorly inftrudted. I wifhed him joy. Ahj madam, replied he, with "a Sigh, how weak is the fupport of underllanding againfl the inclinations of the heart ! The little fenfe I have, only
ferves to aggravate my faults, and the deplorable forgetfulnefs of . my principles, during an entire year. Horrid days! that I would efface VoL. I.	I	the

C:-i: vr' •

r
s
.1 ; b.-'-
r:
170
LETTERS.
the remembrance of, at the expence of my lad drop of blood. I dare promife you forgivenefs, on the part of God, faid I to him, if to the forrows they caufe you, you have joined the fuccours which religion offers you in a like cafe : you will find at London ecclefiafticks of great piety ; you are, no doubt, already acquainted with forae. Yes, madam, replied he, God has not fo farchaf-tifed me in lus anger : the misfortunes ccnfequent to my fault, are become the remedy ; and I found
an angel, whofe charitable hand, has troubled
\
the poor in my favour. This worthy man lives in a neighbouring villagCj and near him niy miseries never fail to find new confolation. I have already had it once or twice in my head, to pro-pofe to you an interview with him. My mader fbmetimes fees him here, and though he is not ignorant of his profeflion, fees him with pleasure. How great was my fatisfadlion, to find that I could meet with an eccleSiaftick, in whom I might confide, and from whofe holy affiffance I might procure comfort. I begged Chevalier to procure me a viSil from him, for I v/as impatient to be blefled with Such a companion. The young man quitted me, as Soon as his maffer returned, and 1 would not delay giving you an account of our interefling conversation, which, for a fhort time, Suspended my fenfe of pain. I dare not alk
his
L E T T E R S.
h---r i ^
ra€
his ftory. He Seemed to by twice eluding my curioSuy : whatever may be the faults with which he reproaches himSelf, I believe it isratlierthe efledtof ciror than vice j his heart is made for virtue.
Cmtinuation and Conclujton of Clarissa’s
ter to Lady Harriet.
CHEVALIER is returned from Windfor,
and what dreadful news has he brought me I God give me ftrength to fupport the misfortunes I am yet to fuffer. It is from the landlady of the inn he had the following account. The moment Ihe faw him, Ihe cried out, Alas, my dear fir, if you had arrived a few hours Sooner, vou would have been witnefs to a fcenOj which would have melted your heart. The' -poor girl, whom you fiw here yeilerday, has been taken up as an accomplice with her mi-'ftrefies. Two wretches have fworn, that madam Darby, and her daughter, would have prevailed upon them to poifon Mr. Darby, becaufe he oppofed her marriage with the Italian, who paffed for a marquis, though he was but a vagabond. Thefervants (as they fay) received the poifon, left it fhould be offered to others lefs fcru-pulous, and put it yefterday evening into the hands
I .a	of
r i
( (
'• 172
L E T T E R
,
of Mr. Darby, who, unwilling that fuch j thing (hould take wind, contented himfelf with Shutting up his wife and daughter, in different places. His daughter efcapcd in the night; and
Montalvo, taking advantage of the father’s ab-
fence, took off the mother yeflerday morning. What confirms this evidence, is, tliat madam Darby feems to have gone off with the Italian \’ery willingly. For my part, added the woman, I do not know what to Ey : I could have fvvorn that the mother and daughter were faints: it is true, they are papifhes, and it is fome months fince the father quitted that religion; perhaps they might have done this out of ven--geance, and they fay thofe papifhes are capable of any thing. . I am Sure I never faw any ill by the poor gentlewoman in my life ; and I wilh, from the bottom of my heart, they may get clear. To be certain, they were the befl: neighbours,in the world, and the kindefi; to us; when they met me, it was. How do you do dame ? how are the children ? and fuch like. And do you believe, faid Chevalier, that the maid is guilty? Ever fiince I knew her, faid the hoftefs, Ihe has appeared a very good girl, and I believe fhe is only fufpe6ted ; but it is a cruel thing to be in prifon, fir ; it is but a little while fince they took her
away, and Ihe feemed to go with great refolution
But
L E T T E R S.
VS
But I beg pardon for not alldng you in before ; won’t you pleafe to take fomething ? No, faid Chevalier, I have a great way to go to-day ; but tell me, does Mr. Darby intend to arreft his wife and daughter ? He has got warrants againd them, laid flie ; but,, to tell you the truth, I believe, only with a deSign to frighten them,, and make them fiy. The daughter is as rich as a Jew, and perhaps the father has a mind for her wealth : but, after all, God is to judge them, and not I. Chevalier had no occafion to hear more, he returned hither as faft as his horfe could go ; and after having given me this melancholy information, fet out for a neighbouring village, to bring the prieft of whom he fpokc to me yefter-day.
Was there ever fuch a fituation as mine ? I have no choice between an infamous death formyfdf, and my honoured mother; or to be the means of bringing to the gallows, him to
whom I owe my life. O Heavens! Mr. Balfour can, from this moment, afford me but one fort of afiilbance, which I mud never think of but with horror. Could he grant a protection to a creature, under the moft infamous accufation, without jullifying her to the world? and at what price mud that judification be purchafed ! I mud
I 3	yield
I
!
hi
» ,
;
374
LETTERS.
yield wiih a good grace to the fate that purfues me. My refolution is taken ; you Ihall know what it is, after I have communicated it to the guide I now wait for, whofe council I willfol-low, as coming immediately from Heaven.
The fate of your friend is fixed, my dear Harriet, for ever ; and if I could hope again to be united to my dear mother, I confefs, with-out blulhing, I fhould think myfelf well recora-penced for what I lofe, by what I gain ; if he» v/ho generoully helped me, w^as born the laftof men, and Ideftined to a throne, my heart would have chofen, in the moment my reafon rejeQed him. I endeavoured to hide from myfelf the imprefSion he has made upon me, which I was going to confefs to you at the beginning of this letter. To repair that Iliort want of confidence, I wdl own to you, I loved him from the mo« raent I Saw him : nor can Heaven be offended at a palhon, wdiich has fufpended the effeQ.s of the mofl; cruel misfortunes, under which I mud otherwife have periSued.
But why name paffion, a fentiment fo immediately fupported by efleem and gratitude ! Can I otherwife repay a protector fo generous? I
might attribute my marriage to the necefSity I am
in,
h E T T E R S.
175
in, todifarm my father. I might juSdfy it by the difcoveries I have made flnce I refolved upon it. But I conSider Such difguifes as unworthy of me, and often five to a friend like you. I go then to give you a recital of events, in the order they happened ; you may find me culpable, , but fufpend your j udgment.
I mentioned to you, in the beginning of this : letter, the diftafte I had conceived againft the fortune which had brought upon me Such unhap-pinefs. When I am reduced to fell the diamonds which I have in my poflefllon, faid I, fhall I not draw from thence a fund Sufficient to pafs in cafe the reft of my life? It is true, I deprive my-felf of the hope of entering into an illuftrious family ; but what is there in title or wealth ? Do they merit that we ffiould expofe ourfelves to thofs evils, which the greater part of marriages^ made upon iuch terms, arecurfed with ? A great fortune is often a misfortune ; the love of the in_ herltance, ratlier than the pofTefTor, may engage a difhoneft man to feign an affe6Hon which he has not, in order to get into his net, the prey he wants to devour. At prefent, as I am poor, and no longer worth deceiving, I may, without fear of wounding decorums, which ought alw'ays to be lefpected, marry a man in a middling clafs,
I 4	■ where
I
Hi
tl
t*!l
.'U
iif!
i!
!i;i
!l
' !l'
liili
li Hjii " 1i
ii
. ‘iiii
; f'
! 'i i
oil
H|!
I' i
t«
ii.
CL
i i
t 4
ii I fb’i
!1:
;
176
LETTERS.
where one generally finds people of better moralsj than among thofe in more exalted ftations.
These considerationsfucceeded the following reflections. There is an order eftablifhed by Providence, which we are not permitted to depart from. A girl of my age, cannot, with decency, choofe a hufband for herfelf. A woman of illuflrious birth cannot mif-ally herfelf without fhocking modes and cufloms, which having nothing in them contrary to the law of God, ought to be refpeCled in marriage. I not only give myfelf a hufband, but a father to a family, which has a right to expeCt from me one equal to myfelf. My reafon was but fecond, in declaring in favour of my proteCtor ; my eyes directed their choice, and I have good reafon to believe, that they have not deluded me, in the favourable opinion they have given me of him. It is reputation that I am mofl: anxious about, and I fhall lofe it by a match fo little fuitable. My father gives out, that a defire to marry, had wrought upon me to attempt hislife ; a marriage So contrary to prudence, will give weight to that accufation : but I fhall be juftified fooner or later. God has an eye on the wicked ; and if I am forbid to with the chaftifement of my father, I am permitted to hope that, his accomplices may
be
LETTERS.
177
bepunlflied, who will then acquit me for the irregularity I now commit. I defpife the judgment of a blind crowd ;but what (hall give me
courage to hipport the contempt of my dear
Harriet, and her worthy hufband ? Shall ;I be able to furvive it ? Nay, does .not prudence direct me to wait the arrival of Mr. Balfour ? He
will fly to my aflfiftance on the receipt of my firft letten ! , Will he not have reafon to accufe me
precipitation,'Seemingly occafioned by a palTion,
the irregular motions of-which I had not power
toifupprefs ? If I am undet a necefTity of taking
a hulband, would it not be better to receive one
from the hands of my friend ? My father con-
fenting to give me< up the money I have in the
bank of Genoa, it will be fulhcient to procure me
a match'> that my friends and family will have no
occafin to blufh at. . May I notacquire a right todifpofe of my fortune, by entering a convent:
perhaps becoming a nun, will Suffice to difarm ray father ; at lead I Ihould determine on nothing till he has rGje(Sled that offer. ’ ,
On reading- the objedfions which I made to
myfelf againd my marriage, my dear Harriet,
may, perhaps, condemn, me tor adfing contrary
to them ; but thefe .objections were not unan-
swerable j and here are thole which my reafon
I 5
fuggeds
I I
1
' 1
;ii>
111



h
Hr
;
IT
‘H
;
; If
i'-l 11

I
ii
!ki
I
i
•i
ii!
I,
• I
I '
' «n *
j-i

c I
J
i
I \
I i
t-	^
»	t
178
LETTERS,
fuggefts; or, perhaps, my love. I am not of art age to difpofe of my hand, without my father’s confent; but, alas, what hopes liave 1 to obtain it! has he not fold, many years fince, the right nature gave him over me ? If that right be, as I am convinced it is, unalienable, does not the unworthy ufe for which he reclaims it, for ever bar him from it ? Thofe who fpring from illuf-trious blood, ought not meanly to i^lly them-felves : it is a prejudice to which we are bound, and how has that prejudice become facred ? be-caufe we ftippofe that high birth tranfmits, as an inheritance, the noble and virtuous fentiments which fir ft produced it ; becaufe we have reafon to hope that a man, who is Spurred by the great actions of his forefathers, and the good example of his immediate parents, will blulh to deviate from them. In fine, it is becaufe we fuppofe a good education infeparable from high defcent. Nobility then has no real merit, but what it derives from a greater capability of virtue. He then that is virtuous, is the true nobleman. With the wife, in giving a virtuous ally to my family, I fave it from the danger of being diftio-iioured by the fon of a peer. If Heaven had prolonged the life of lord Afaph, would not he have grieved, in fpite of his feverity, for the
misfortunes in which he has plunged my incomparable
LETTERS.
179
parable mother ? The Ihameful poverty to which vice has brought his fon-in law, would be a fufficient punifhment for his avarice and ambition. I loved him, whom I am going to make mafter of my fate, before I efteemed. Is then his gracious figure a crime for which he ought to be puniflaed ? His air, the regularity of his fta* tures, make a Smaller part of his beauty, than the gentlenefs, tendernefs, and evennefs of his mind, it is that mind which embellifhes his face. Can you think your ’Clariffa So weak, that flie would not Soon have been able to recover from a furprife of the Senfes, if the leaft bafenefs had difparaged the obje£t of her attradtion ? I knew him but little, you will fay ; but circumftances, critical like mine, for thefe two days paft, un-fold a charadter at a ftroke.; It is no longer a hundred pounds that my father offers to the per-fon who lhall difcover me 5 his deSire todeflroy me is fuch, tliat he goes as far as a thoufand. Can Chevalier expedf an equal recompence on my part ? This is no piece ot artifice to enhance hisdifiiiterefiednefs ; I myTelf read the advertisement in the public papers, figned witr. rrsy father’s name; I am deferibed as a parncide, who, by her artifices, had cheated her rather, and to that crime would yet add moreenormousones, through
fear, left the laft .will of a deceived aunt jftiould
be
. *
I
i

■
ii-l;
.A,\
i.;l,
;p
HIL
'r>'!
. .1
;i
I ■'
lHi;l
Ilk
!t!l
:I^r
irb
■-L' :
I
i
.•ii'
■iiip
;l!i.
I'
■:’l'
IS i ■
h»i
jif:!
'H
}, '
I,
>
j'l :
■I

i I
1 C/0
LETTER S.
be Set aSide. Chevalier then Seizing me, a creature profcrlbed, and perhaps culpable, who would blame him for delivering up a criminal ? and might he not eaSily have covered a defire to make his fortune, with an apparent zeal for juftice ? He offered to condu61: me into France • and that offer alone, is a certain fign that he had no particular hope, nor can T fuppofe he had. Twice interrogated upon his birth, he ehided my queftions; from whence I ought to conclude that it was bafe. People fuppofe they have a right to dignify their poverty by titles, when they have any pretenSions to them ; he fet up for none, therefore he had none *, he gave him-felfout for a mean workman j a perfon of that condition, could have no pretenSions to one of mine. He then had no hope of recompence in lieu of thofe, which he might have Secured to himfelf by betraying me ; and he impofed upon me a law to repair the wrong which his probity had done him,
O Heavens! new misfortunes are ready to fall upon the miferable Clariffa : in the middle of the night file is obliged to fly on foot, to avoid
the worft of fates. Groat God ! what will become of me ?
L £ T T E K
LETTERS.
i8i
LETTER XXL
CLARISSA TO LADT HARRIET.
On board a veIfel bound for Bourdeaux.
V O U mufl: have received a letter from me J. which makes me tremble, when I think
of it; but I had not lime to inform you of the in-
difpenSible necelTity I was under, to conclude it.
Alas, without doubt, I have loft your efteem
and friendihip ; the one cannot furvive the other.
If my conjeSures are well founded, you will not
deign to caft your eyes on the letter of an unfortunate creature, whom you blulh to have
loved. For God’s fake, dear Harriet, condemn
me not before you hear me. You have hitherto
regarded me with eyes, which your partiality
rendered bad judges. You have efteemed me too
much : fail not, I conjure you, into the other ex-
tremity, and defpife : no, my heart reproaches
me with nothing which ftiould occafion fuch a
change.
I'HASTEN to give you a recital of mymisfor« tunes-, my juftification goes hand in hand with fuch fatal circumftances as I could neither forefee nor avoid. I-am confcious but of one fault;
that
l.t
ri
hi
I .
hi
I;'
I i
u;
!‘-l
Ml
•‘i.
h
1i
Lii
I if
.
iii^!
};;■! I F.
• I.
■ 1: ■
ilu

i8
LETTERS.
that fault has had its principle in virtue, and how can I repent of it ?
In my laft, I gave you the reafons, which determined me, in fpiteof prejudice, tomarrymy prote<5tor ; T defpaired not to mahe Mr. Balfour fee the reaSonablenefs of the adlion, and had re-folved to remain where I was, till he fliould arrive, fuppoSing it could not be long till I had the pleafure of feeing him. ^ould I forefee that I fhould have but a few hours to remain in my afylum ? The priefl I C}^e6ted. And who is that but Mr. Baker, to whom I confided your lafl: letter for the pofl. This ecclefiaflic, I fay, being come, went up, as he was accuftomed to' do, into
the apartment of Chevalier, who, to leave me at liberty to entertain him, flaid in the firft chamber. I made no Scruple to trufl him with my afflidlions and deSigns; I conjured him not to refufe me his affiftance—my greatefl: inquietude was about my mother. I then put into Mr. Baker’s hand a letter, which I wrote to my father, and deSired to know’ whether he would advife me to fend it.—Here follows a copy.
CIM RISSA
LET T E R S.
183
CLARISSA TO MR.DARBE
OH! Sr, Ihut not your ears againfl: the voice of Nature, who cannot fail to call on you, in favour of an unfortunate daughter, un-confcious of a fingle thought that ought to offend you. Why make her fortune a crime ? A fortune fhe never defired, nor valued, but as flie might fhare it with you, which Ihe gave up (o you with pleafure, and which fhe is Bill willing you fhould poflefs. I know it may feem infolent in me to dictate conditions to him, whom nature has ordered 1 fliould be obedient to. But I know of no law at prefent, but love for my mother. The greateft of misfortunes has hindered her from partaking your tendernefs. I call Heaven towitnefs, that it is not from her complaints I-draw this knowledge, her refpedl for you would
*V
never fuffer her to murmur. Give me that worthy mother, and receive, in exchange, aB Ipoffefs. Marriage alone can give me a right to difpofe of my inheritance : I am determined to acquire that right by efpoufing an obfcure mans with whom I will go into a flrange country and live there, if neceiTary, by the labour of my
hands. I afk only a few days to fulfil my pro-mifes. They fhall be put in execution, as foon
as
I
w:
!'i.
.1
t '
184
LETTER
S.
'
!• '
li i
as you give your confent. I will depoSite the In-ftrument of my marriage and deed of gift, fealed up carefully, in the hands of the French am-baffador, who will deliver them te whoever you
fhall appoint to conduct my mother to his houfe. May Heaven vouchfafe to pour down his bleffings on you, in proportion to thofe I beg for myfelf. Hay Heaven hear the prayers I daily offer to re-ftore me the heart of a father, who fhall ever find from me all the obedience and refpedf, which he has a right to expedf from the moft dutiful of children, provided this obedience can be compatible with that fhe owes her God.
The unfortunate Clarissa Darby.
Mr. Baker approved of my letter, but fmlied at the paffage, where I mentioned to my father, that I was determined to marry an obfcure man.- I afked him what this emotion, meant, which had not efcaped my notice. If you , mean, replied he, by an obfcure man, one who . is deftitute of the gifts of fortune, your expref-fionisjuft; but if you intended this expreffion ! to Signify a man of mean extraifUon, it is improper. He who has had the happinefs of being the inftrumentof God, to fave you, is defcended 1
from-a very antient family j his barony might
have ;
letters.
185
have been erefted into a marquifate, under the
laft reign ; and had it not been for the modera-
tion and probity of his father, he would have been a rich lord. If he has not declared his
birth to you, it is owing to the confufion of
your Situation, and to a motive more flattering
to you. You would have had nothing to fear from the pretenfions of Chevalier, perhaps you would have found yourfelf in more danger from the baron de Lallic.
You are fenfible, my dear Harriet, that fuch
a difcovery was not likely to leflfen the good opi-
nion I entertained of this amiable young man
Mr. Baker undertook the trouble of acquainting
him with it, when it fhould be proper; and he
judged it proper to call him to aflTifl: us with his
advice, with refpe£l: to what we ought to do
about my mother and Fanny.
I WAS entirely ignorant of Mrs. Crofby’sad-
drefs, but bad hopes of finding it out, by means of a Roman catholic clergyman. Through her we
could trace her Son, and know what was become
of my mother. With refpedf to Fanny, there was no doubt of confoling her, and forcing her
to accept a fum of money: I had fifty guineas in
my purfe j I gave them to Mr. Baker, to defray
the

h ')!
Ml ; !

1
186
I
LETTERS.
the neceffary expences of my mother’s journey I propofeci to pledge one of rny diamonds; but my advifers remarked, that I oiaght not to think of it, Since it was very likely, that my father had difiributed hand-bills to flop them, if offered to Sale, I remained, therefore, with no more than five guineas. Chevalier, whom I ought no more to call So but by his name; the baron, I fay, having made ufe of the reft, to provide me a very plain drefs. Mr. Baker promifed me to fet out at day-break, and exhorted me to expefil fuccefs from his refearches.
\
It was tea-time, the baron went out to procure Some trifles he wanted, and was fo longab-fent, that his ftay began to give us uneaSinefs* He feemed much difturbed, when he returned; and behold the caufe of his inquietude.
Being of a benevolent dlfpoSition, Mr. de Laftic once had an opportunity of doing a piece' of fervice to the daughter of a cuftom-houfe officer, who was married in this village. 'I'his young woman, willing to fhew her gratitude^ had come to give him fome intelligence of con-fequence. Her father, with two of his companions, were juft coming, advice having been given to the cuftom-houfe officers, that a great
con-
< I >
LETTER S.
...
lo7
contraband trade was carried on in the villages adjacent to Windfor. They had received an order tomakeaflridl fearch in all houfes which were not inhabited by perfons of fafhion, and propofed to fearch his mailer’s houfe firll; for you know, my dear, all the French halr-drelTers furnifli the ladies they drefs, with lace and other French goods. She offered de Laftic to take his goodsj if he had any, home with her, and promifed him they Ihould remain there in fafety till the fearch was over. De Laftic, after returning her
thanks, and alfuring her he had nothing to fear,, made the utmoft hafte to acquaint us with this overwhelming news, which expedited all my re-folutions.
I MUST refolve to quit my afylum, and make my efcape in the middle of the night, under the prote6lion of the Baron. Had not my Harriet told me that the only flep a girl ought to take, on fiich an occaSion, was to make her efcape with a hulband ? But vvas 1 fare, that a man of quality would confent to ally himfelf with an acciifed girl, who could not give him certain proofs of her innocence ? This reflection flopped me fome moments. Forced to offer my hand, fliOLild I h ave the courage to fupport a refufal, without dying ? Neyertlielefs we mull determine
upon



i88
LETTERS.
upon Something, the houfe might be invefled this moment, and what would the world think to find a girl concealed in a man’s chamber ? Befides, this notice might be an artifice of my father, who, certain I had not entered London, fufpe£led I was Somewhere in the environs. The fear of falling into his hands, over-weighed every other consideration. Sir, fays I to the baron, if I had lefs opinion of your virtue, I Should not he-fitate a moment about the fteps I Ihould take:' my misfortune is Such, that I cannot juftify my-felf, but at the expence of a perfon’s honour, whom I ought, and wnoui I lhall, ever refpedt;
nothing remains, therefore, but to deliver my-felf up into his hands, and give him an opportunity to extinguish by my blood, the hatred I have had the misfortune to infpire him with. The mofl: cruel torments Should never force from me the confeffion of a crime, the thought ot which alone Strikes me with horror; but I can keep Silent; my judges will doubtlefs fay it is a tacit acknowledgment of the crime of which I am accufed, I lhall die ignominious: if I draw not my reSpeiflable mother into my misfortune, I Shall blefs my fate; and what will the opinion the world entertains of my memory Signify, if the juft judge, who examines all our aiSions, declares me innocent ? There is but one method
to
LETT E R S.
i8q
«
toefcape; I may fly, but cannot do it without
ConSider, if the fad condition I
an hufband.
am reduced to will permit you to accept this ofl'er, which polSibly, in other circumftances, might have been accompanied with Some advantages which are at prefent wanting, Since---
I WAS not permitted to fay more, de LafHc was at my feet; and, with a diforder more eloquent
than the mofl ftudied language, acquainted me,
with what rapture he received an offer, which he fliould have made himfelf a thoufand times if he
had dared. Mr. Baker interrupted us. It would.
perhaps, fays he to me, be dangerous to flay much longer: leave me only here to fpeak to
the mafler, and expeditioufly fet out for my
houfe; Twill meet you there prefently to com-
plete your union, and procure you immediately a more fafe retreat.
Happily, I was already drefled in the plain
deaths which had been brought me, and had
made my fack into a parcel, which the baron
took charge of. The night began to grow dark.
we efcaped through the garden, and took the
rout by which I came to this houfe, where I
expefted to fee your hufband. What words coiild
exprefs the Situation of my mind on fo critical an
occafion !
i
lii
d
I
i
I I
III i||,! ■
:r
iC
llli
!


i :
•t'
K-t ' !
i
fti I 'u ■ m ■
i! '
i\'
'Cl
liti
lUi I
1!
4\
» 1
lit!
ill I 11 »I
t
t
h !
i :
!i
1 I
li
ill,
i
190
letters.
occaSion ! was this the lot to which I was de-ftined ! Under what unhappy aufpices was this union formed, which muft fini-fli with my life only ! Ah, my dear aunt, exclaimed J, from the happy abodes where your virtues have doubt-lefs placed you, look down on your unfortunate Clarifla, and obtain for her from God fuc-cour and protection, equal to the danger to which file is expofed. Pardon me, my generous pro-te6Ior, I added, I cannot think v/ithout horror, that I (hall foon have only the fatal power of making you a partner in my misfortunes and poverty ; for, in (hort, Sir, I have no other means to Save my mother, than by giving to her hufband the fortune which has drawn on me his hatred; too happy, if, at the price of this facrifice, I could regain his heart. How little do you know mine, adorable ClarifTa, replied de Laftic, if you think the idea of your fortune can caufe a moment’s uneaSinefs, to a man whom you fnatch from the moft fatal deftiny. The firft moment I fawyou, I adored you. I dare appeal to yourfelf, with regard to the profound refpedl, which forced me to conceal thefe fentiments in the bottom of my heart* if the bufinefs had only been to offer to your eyes a train of illuftrious anceftors, I might have conceived Some hopes; but, miferable fport of the diftionefty of mankind, there remains nothing
Hi '
iih
S
a ^
letter s.
I9I
tbin.'jof all my fortune, but a field cultivated by my labour, and bedewed by the fweat of my brow. How could I have the temerity, in this fituation, to lift up my eyes towards the divine Clarifla ? How could I prefume to ofFer her my liiiiable cottage, who would adorn the palace of a king? It is true, my humble roof is inhabited by virtue ; a mother, worthy of a better fon, practifcs therein, every day, new virtues. What prefent more precious can I make her than fuch a daughter as you ? I am going to make her amends with ufury, for the torments with which I have rent her heart ! You do no*^ know, madam, how guilty he is whom you deign toacccpt, and how little he deferves fuch an hap-pinefs ? Though I am almoft afraid, that the con-felTion of my ill condudl, will leffen me in your
good opinion, yet I cannot find in my heart to diffemble my faults. Then---------1 will hear no-
thing, replied I, interrupting him ; I have already told you, that there can hardly be any crime which fuch a repentance would not efface* Suffer nre to abandon myfelf to the tranfport-ing thought, of feeing our refpe£lable mothers forget in our arms, both our faults and the rigours of lortune. A firft motion makes me re“ gret a fortune which I would have offered you ;
a fecond corifoles me for its lofs, becaufe
it

.Ml I
•ij I ,
I'
■i'
•11 i
1 I;
■| ■
i!'	{
;< ' u ' ^*1
ii-i
I ‘
192
LETTERS.
it teaches me to bleSs the misfortunes, which give mean opportunity of being acquainted with the noblenefs of your mind. We fhall live in the mediocrity which nourilhes virtue, preserves it, and produces happinefs. I lhal! per-petually remember the circumftances in which you have accepted my hand ; and you will be a-
ble to fay to yourfelf, it is not to thefe circumftan' ces that I owe ClariiTa. Decency, in another ft-tuation, would have obliged her to wait thecon-fent of thofe on whom Ihe depended, before flie declared her Sentiments ; but they were Such, that if file could not have obtained their confent in my favour. She would never have married any other perSon. De Laftic was not able to moderate his joy, on hearing So frank an avowal of the Sentiments he had infpired me with; he threw himSelf at my feet, without confidering how improper the place was for Such tranfports ; and, if I had not reminded him that we could not gain an afylum too Soon, he would absolutely have forgot the danger we were in by delaying our eScape. Mr. Baker had given us the key of a Small houSe where he lived alone, and recommended us to wait there for him, without any -light; where he very foon came to us, though loaded with the baron’s goods. My future huf-
band had acquainted me, in the interim, that he
did
LETTERS.
193
did not know how he could fettle with his maSer^ to whom he owed fifteen guineas.	His generous
friend gave his note for that futn ; and, as the departure of his fervant might embarrafs him, he gave him fifteen guineas more of my money, which I approved of. He^ told ns afterwards with what pretence he had difguifed the baron’s flight. He had there two valuable pieces of goods, which had been intruded to his care, to be fold, and he had juft learned that a fearch was immediately going to be made in your houfe. You need not be in the leaft une afy, he has left nothing that can bring you into trouble, and, in a few days you will hear of him, as foon as he has fecured his truft in a place of fafety,
I
You may imagine with what pleafure we received the happy turn he had given this affair. He interrupted our thanks, to make a fliort dif-courfe on thefacrament he was about to admi-niftertous. I know your difpoSit'ions, fays lie infinifhing ; you are worthy of each other, and I hope I fhall never have blefle’d a union more agreeable to the Lord : in a time of greater trar. quillity,. I ftiould have required more precaut -ons. You know I run a great rifque in marry_ ingyou,and thatyou would ruin me,if you madg ufeof the certificate I fhall give you. It is only VoL. I.	K	for
194
LETTERS.
for madam, your mother, fays he to the baron, when you get to her, and you cannot difpenfe with adding feme cererrionies to your marriag(| to render it conformable to the cuftom of the country in which you are going to live ; I (hall take care to write.to your archbilhop, by means of the apoftolic vicar, who will certify my being a prieft, and you will then follow the orders of your prelate,
Mr. Baker went out a moment, to call in two catholics on whom he could depend ; and, in their prefence, united me to the moft worthy and beft beloved of hulbands. The ceremony was hardly over, before he fays to us, I do not think you are Safe here ; who knows but this village may be one of thofe that are to be fearched ? you muft, therefore, refolve to depart diredly. My mother lives about nine miles hence, in a village far from the main road. I will write a line to her, to defire her to Secure you an afylum, in which I may acquaint you with the turn your affairs take : one of your witnefles will be your guide. I would, added he, procure you horfes, but I think it will be Safer for you to go on foot • though it is not likely that Mr. Darby has given a description of you, to the turnpikes on the north road, where you are going j yet the public paper*
LETTERS.
195
pers have, no doubt. Said enough of your flight to excite curiofity ; foot paflengers efcape notice more eafily than perfons on horfeback ; be-fides, they can travel, without being obliged to go through the turnpikes.
How happy am I, my dear! Our generous friend, Mr. Baker, fends me a letter, which was given him by the peruke-maker ! I remember the hand of my dear Harriet ; I kifs it a thou-fand times, and leave every thing to read it.
K s.
L E T T E R
i!.



LETTERS.
LETTER XXII.
LADT HARRIET TO CLARISSA.
TO what trials does God put my patience,
dear and unfortunate friend ! How haj your Harriet reftrained herfelf from fetting out dire6tly, on receipt of your letter, to refcue you from your cruel perfecutor ! Is this tlie only token I can give you of that lively fenfe, with which you have a right to expe6f that I fhould feel all your afBidtions ! If, inllead of myfelf, you only fee a letter from me, attribute it to the fear I am under of committing a crime-The recital of your misfortunes has made fuch an impreffion upon me, that I feel very ill effeds from it: however, the phySicians are of opinion that the hurt I have received is not incurable, if I confent to remain eight or ten days in bed; and during that interval, my unfortunate friend O Heavens ! I cannot fupport the dreadful ap-prehenSions that cloud my mind ^ and if I was not fure that Mr. Balfour would, on the firft intelligence, fet out to give you that afllftance which you hand in need of, I doubt whether my feeble virtue would be ftrong enough to keep me here.
By
letters.
197
By the greatefl misfortune in the world, Mr. Balfour was at Compeigne when I received the dreadful news of your Situation ; but an exprefs was immediately Sent off. I expe6l my hulband every moment, and you may beaffured that he will (lay at Paris no longer than is necelTary to read your letter. The poft-chaife is ready, and perhaps you may fee him before you hear of his departure. Poor CiariiTa, to what extremities have you been reduced! may God fhower down his bleffingson that lioneft man who is become your protefto'f; if I was a queen, he ihoutd Soon be a prince : praife him, love him, as much as you pleafe, you cannot love him more tlian I. My fortune, from this moment, is his: 1 will not fay, to diminilh my Senfe of gratitude, that he muft have been a barbarian to have a6fed by you in any other manner than lie has done ; yet> how few men, in his circumft mces, would have refufed fuch a fiirn, in exchange for their prolri-ty! But his delicate attention to you. Shews a Soul of the nobleft mould. No, my ClarifSa, that man is not what he appears to be ; he confefSed that he was poor, but has anfwered nothing on the article of his birth ; and, be afl'ured, it is not obfcure. But, fuppofing that my conjectures are wrong in this particular, and he Springs from an ignoble flock, he has enobied his race,
K 3	and
li
' • 1 I '
I >
:o
.. o 1' 1
I i

io8
L E T T E R a
I !
'./i I
.,' I
iJ ■:
>i I
ii‘
i!'
li
and has a right to refpe6t from all honeft pcS-pie. Add not to your misfortunes, my dear, that of tormenting yourfelf, on account of the fentiments with which he has infpired you ; your extreme delicacy renders you timid; and I know, by that warm intereft which I take in his affairs, what the moll grateful of hearts muft fed for him. I have always had a horror for mean alliances ; you know it; but if on any account I could excufe one, furely your prefent fituation would juflify it to me. Do not. believe that I would encourage that good difpofition which you ought to have towards him ; all the virtues have their excefs, which becomes vice, I would only de-fend you againft yourfelf; it would be excufa-ble to be tempted in fuch a cafe, and I fhould regard a vi6tory, in that temptation, as an heroic adt, of which, perhaps, there is no per-fon, but my Clarifia, capable: but if my fup-pofitions, with regard to this young man, are well grounded } if he is only indigent; if, at he has told you, he remains in his prefent low profeiHon but to fulfil a duty \ if, in fhort, one could be affured, that his birth is equal to yours, I fay to you fincerely, my dear friend, do not come alone, bring me your proteQor, we will verify his nobility, and accomplifh that part of your dream, in joining your hands, without that
monfler
LETTERS.
199
mofter Montalvo’s meddling.
hulband.
I hear my
He departs, my dear ClariflTa, he depai*ts with
this letter : I put it, however, in the poft ; the pod, perhaps, will make more diligence than he; if he arrives firft, well and good ; if this expreffion of my friendlhip arrives only an houf before him, my dear friend’s tranquillity will be an hour in 'advance.
/

K 4
letter

It
I f ;
!l
1^00
LETTERS.
LETTER XXIII.
CLARISSJ TO LADY HARRIET
Y misfortune is contagious, and catched by thofe who are moft dear to me ; Heaven grant that the effeQs may be lefs dreadful th an I have reafon to fear. Mr. Balfour’s departure afl'ures me, that he thought .you out of danger. The warmth of your friendfhip does not furprife me, any rhore than the addrefs with which you give me advice, that I am no longer in a ft ate to follow,.
We are now weighing an-
chor; the moment I arrive in France you ihall
hear from me. But why do I not leave the fhip
and return from whence I came, on being ap
prlfcd of Mr. Balfour’s kindnefs for me ? I beg of you to fufpend your judgment: I have only time to feal my letter. If you condefcend toan-fwer me at Boiirdeaux, to be left at the poft-
houfe, I Snail receive one of the greateft plea
fures which I am yet capable of enjoying.
L E T T E R
LETTERS.
201
L E T T E R XXIV.
MRS. DJRBT TO MISS CLARISSA.
EAR, amiable and virtuous daughter, you
would have found me on your landing', in-
t
(lead of this letter, was I not yet in the begin-
ning of an illnefs, which might be of tlie moft fatal confequence, was I not to nurfe it. Th trdent deSire I have to lee myfelf aeain in your


arms, engages me to take care of a life which
belongs to you, and every moment of which I
would employ, to teScify my gratitude for the
facrifices you have made me.
Lady Harriet in Continuation
TFIE phySicians have permitted your mother to write the few lines above, in order to
fatisfy her dear daughter. She is fnatched from
the jaws of death : but reft affured that the dan-
ger IS over. We have an account of your marriage ; we approved it, before we received
the letter, in which you conveyed us that agreeable news; and we admire the goodncis of Providence which has condudfed you lo happi-nefs by ways fo extraordinary. I will not bold
you till by and by, for your ill conceived fears of
K 5
OUT
i
%02
LETTERS.
our disapprobation of your conduct. I will not amufe you with my babbling, till you know by what happinefs we are in pofleffionof your other half ; of a woman, to fay all in a word, worthy of being the mother of Clarifla,
I told you in what manner I Sent my hufband to your afTidance. In fifteen hours Mr. Balfour was at Calais, and arrived before the poll: the only fervant he had with him run to the port, with orders to make a bargain with a captain to fail the next tide ; he was obliged to wait at Calais two hours; and though he had Scarcely taken any nourilhment on the road, he was angry at the delay, however necefiary forhimfelf, and his fervant as much fatigued. The man was but juft gone off, when his impatience perfuaded him that he loft a precious time, hoping, by means of an extraordinary recompence, to engage Some captain to put to fea half an hour Sooner. He left his chamber to follow his fervant. Judge of his furprife at the fight of Mrs. Cofby, who, at that moment, entered the inn. What Ihe had done for you, the light the could give with regard to you,.and your mother, made him Salute her by her name. The woman, who had heard from your mother, that you corresponded with us, gave a loud cry as Soon as he
fpokc
letters.
203
fpoke and (he knew him ; and, without making any anfwer, run to the door of a room, which opening, fhe cried, Mrs. Darby, here is Mr. Balfour. You may eaSily imagine, that my hufband was in the room before your mother could come out of it. His firfl: words were. Is mils Clarifla with you ? Your poor mother burft into tears, and falling upon her knees before Mr. Balfour could prevent her. Ah, fir, faid (he, I am going to Paris, to demand your proteflion for my unfortunate daughter; I know not what will become of her, only that the
fearch her father makes after her, affures me, that fhe Is not fallen into his hands- Recover yourfelf, madam, faid Mr. Balfour, railing her up; your charming daughter is in Safety, and I fly toreftore her to your arms ; I would fay, to revenge her of her perfecutor, did I not know that her Scrupulous virtue, content with the firfl fervice, would not permit the fecond. But read yourfelf the cruel extremities to which fhe has been reduced, and her Sentiments with regard to
you, and a man, whom 1 cannot call as he de-ferves.
Eager as your mother was to read what might inform her of your Situation, her tears and Sighs often obliged her to lay down the letters. I
will
li
h!

{i
4 ^
r
01
LETTERS.
.*	t
will not repeat to you her expreffions of grief and tendernefs; you know her heart is attached to you, and that knowledge will eafily convince you of her feelings upon this occaSion : thofe are things which defcription always enfeebles, be-caufe they are beyond expreffion. She would have informed Mr. Balfour, by what means Ihe efcaped ; but conSidering that every inftant employed in that narration, would be fo much time loft for your deliverance, fhe contentedher-felf with telling him, that fhe owed her’s to the Sincere repentance of Mrs. Cofby and Montalvo. Mr. Balfour, wholly occupied by your mother, had not taken notice of that young man, who, with an air of great humility, flood at Some diftance in a corner of the room. My huf-band reached him his hand, faying, luisforman to err, but he muft be a great man, fir, who repairs his faults as you have done yours. Any other time I would partake with you the happi-nefs of conducing Mrs. Darby to my houfe; but rnifs Clarifla’s intereft forcesme at prefent to leave it entirely to you ; yet pardon me one refiedtion, are you in Surety in France? The motives which bring me hither, replied Montalvo, makes me hope to find favour from ray Superiors; but if I prefume too far, I will willingly Submit to whatever ehaflifement they think proper to in-
flia,
letters.
2(»5
to punilh my apoftacy. Thefe are worthy fentiments, replied Mr. Balfour; however, let me intreat you to fufpend their efFedts; if Heaven favours my paflage, I hope to be in thirty hours at——, it will Scarce take more time to rcpafs the channel. This little interval will not be un-
ncceflary to reft thefe ladies. I beg of you then
to wait for me here : we will take the road for
Paris all together, and you fliall ftay at my houfe ‘ till you have made conditions with your fupe-riSrs. Mrs. Colby conjured your mother to
grant this favour to her Son, and ftie confented
with more willingnefs, as, by that means, fhe hoped to fee you a day or two Sooner. Mr. Balfour being told, that the vefTel which the
Servant had hired, was then in the port, waiting
for the tide, the wind being brilk and fair, be
went to it immediately ; but his return was not
fo fpeedy as he hoped. Here is what happened to him.
He never left the poft-chaife which he got in-
to at Dover, till he arrived at
; and having
enquired for the houfe of the Perriwig-maker, he got out at a little diftance from the fhop,
that
where he enquired for a young man worked there, named Chevalier. He has left
this houfe Some days, replied the man j and the
fifteen
* I-
lll
1 •
s t,: 1
; 1'. !
I ti,
’i
; I r I
11 I
\
ill
I .
!!
■: ti
• I
11
. I
;!i;! L
'! > I
I
H
2o6
LETTERS.
fifteen guineas he has fent me, by no mean* comforts me for his lofs; no, never (hall I meet fuch a brave lad again : fo Sober, fo diftint^reftedl
0	he was a treafure. Whatever pleafure my hulband took in hearing thus confirmed the praife you bellowed upon your guide, an intereft more prefling obliged him to interrupt it. And why is this excellent young man gone from your houfe ? laid he. It is a my fiery, replied the perriwig-maker, and I cannot tell you; but you,' fir, appear to be a man of diftinQiion; pardon my curiofity, if you are a cufiom-houfe officer,
1	can affure you, that I never knew my young man deal in Smuggled goods j he had enemies, with-out doubt, but he never I am Sure deferved them: indeed he was loved by every body hereabouts, and even thofe above him, nptwithftanding be was known to be a papifi. By his myfterious manner, my hufband thought him in the fecret.
I am no revenue officer, faid he, but a friend of the perfon who lived with you : he was a man of quality, and I am come to tell him, that his affairs in France are entirely fettled, and he may return there when he will. My name is Balfour, and you may depend on the truth of what I fay. Very likely, fir, replied the other; but as I do not know you, you will excufe my not faying more, efpeciaily as 1 tell you all I
know.
LETTERS.
207
know. The young man lived with me, I have
nothing but good to fay of him : if he was a perfon of quality, his air fpoke as much : farther I can anfwer for his not owing a penny in
the village; he went away, becaufe the roads are
free; I did not alk him where he was going, be-
caufe I never meddled with other people’s affairs.
Thus it isimpoflible for me to fay, where he i« though a member of parliament fhould alk me^
or the king himfelf, becaufe it is impoflible to tell what one does not know.
At any^ other time Mr. Balfour would have
admired this man’s fidelity, but now he could have wUhed him lefs difereet. You drive me to
defpair, faid he to the perriwig-maker; I tell you I am juft arrived from France, the poft-chaife-boy will tell you, alk him. At that in-Han t a young woman, in a genteel riding-habit, on horfeback, ftopped before the fhop, and afked if it was not there Mr. Chevalier lived ? Why, are you all mad ? replied the perriwig-maker : he was here, and he is here no longer; I kno w nothing of him, go about your bufinefs. You
are very rude, faid the girl; about -a fortnight
ago I faw him at Old Windfor; he rode, and
took me up behind him, his horfe was——Is your name Fanny ? faid my hulband. Yes, fir, re-
plied

I:. ')
'I '1
I I
; t : I' I’
: i
I I
I t

II

ir
ji:
i.
I .
ii
I '
I; I

i h
’ (
I I
• I
2o8
LETT
E
R S.
plied fhe, but to whom have I the honour to Speak ? My name is Balfour. The girl inftantly ejcclaimed, Ah, fir, what good fortune brings you here ? you certainly have heard of tny poor miftreSs, and what has happened j I thought to find her here, that Mr. Chevalier gave me his diredlion, and this is the place : So faying, Ihe drew out of her pocket a Small paper, folded up^ which fhe gave to the perriwig-maker. He drew out his fpedlacles, wiped them, fixed them upon his nofe, Ihook his head Several times, to try if they were fall, becaufe his nofe is like Mr. Lelby’s, which has fo often made us laugh. Mr. Balfour confeffed to me, that he had more than once an inclination to beat him, but that was not the way to unchain his tongue ; they were obliged to work fair and Softly, and be angry with patience. The good man turned the note, and returned it three or four times: he then faid to himfelf, here is a myftery which I cannot comprehend j here is one who aflcs for a young man that lives here no longer, and another that enquires for her miftrefs who never was here at all; but, notwithftanding, here is the
writing of poor Chevalier. Then, railing his voice. Sir, and young gentlewoman, faid he, yop will be pleafed to walk into my (hop, and
be So good as to wait here aninftant: if mifs
will
LETTERS.
200
will be pleafed to lend me her hoffe I Ihall return quicker. It was the only way that was to be taken, and’ Mr. Balfour made ho doubt that he was going with intelligence to the young man, whom, he imagined, had retired to Some diftant village. During his abfence, Fanny informed my hulband, that Ihe had found .Securities, and that the firfl: ufe Ihe made of her liberty,. was to come and look for her mlftrefs: Ihe informed him alfo that it was James, and one of the Servants of Montalvo, who had de-pofed againfl Mrs. and Mifs Darby, and who had even put into the hands of a juftice of peace,
the poifon which was to be the means of their perdition. With regard to Mr. Darby, he did not return to the hpufe for eight days, and was much furpriz.ed to find Old Riding, your guardian, who had Sealed up all your effects, and refufed him admittance. Fanny had wrote to that honeft farmer, who loft not a moment in flying to your alTiftance, and found her bail. He was ftopped at an inn, at the entry of the village, and waited, with impatience, till ftie had obtained permiftion for him to falute you, and receive your orders. His defign was to conduct you to London, there to put you under the |uardianfhip of my lord chancellor, and indi£t the two perjured villains who accufed you and
your
I!

•I ' iv
ill
; ii

t .
. f»
i I!
i( I
Ii ill''
I# •
t-
ii '
aio
LETTERS.
i >
,* I
'i;
't '
h 1
i!'i
1 I
V
r; 'i! ’
'•I’l ii ‘

i!ii
M I
'■ i
I; .
I

lib'
your mother. Have you, added Fanny, heard nothing of my lady’s mother ? do you believe flie is with my miftrefs ? Mr.'Balfour then told the poor girl, that Mrs. Darby was in Safety at Calais, and defired that flie would immediately go to the inn, and bid Old Riding come to him. That worthy creature was extremely comforted by the fight of my hulband, and promifcd him-felf, from the afllftance of his proteflion, to have the pleafure of foon feeing the two perjurers with their necks in the pillory. But Mr. Balfour much Surprized Him, when he informed him, that you were determined to commit your jollification to Providencd, and that you would rather be condemned as culpable, than permit an attack upon the life of your father. Excellent young lady, excellent young lady, repeated twice the good man; may God blefs her. I flop here, my dear; I make as much hade to write this letter, as if I was not well affured it would be a long time before it could come to your hands ; but I would rather it fhould Hay at the pofl-houfe, than you wait for it ; and when my fingers are a little refled, I will take up my pen again, and fend it off the firfl opportunity.
And now, my dear, I begin my narration, where I left off. The perriwig-maker at length
arrived*
IM
LETTERS.
Ill
atrivccl, and brought with him a very well look-
ing man, who deSired Mr. Balfour to go up with him into the chamber, which was over the
parlour. As we had not received your Second letter, the name of Baker excited no extraordi.
nary emotion in my hufband; but when he learned from that worthy creature the obliga-
tions you had to him, he embraced him with an ardour, fufficient to convince him of his attach-
he was now informed of your
ment to you
fecond flight with the Baron de Laflic, become your hufband. I addreffed them to my mother, who lives in a village in the next county, laid the good prieft j but God, whofe defigns accord
not always with ours, had permitted that (he fhould depart from thence Some hours before their arrival.
to vifit, at (ixty
miles diftance, one of my fifters, who was fick ;
and, as their letters prefled her to fet out on the moment, if (he wilhed to fee her alive, what
with her hurry and her trouble, (he waa not
The baron did
able to give me previous notice, not mention this to me in his letter, I heard it
from my mother in the firft I received from her; but he told me his wife was determined to go
to
where (he would And, in the
boufeof a gentleman farmer, her guardian, all the prote61ion fhe could defire; he told me, that they would not depart till the next day, becaufe
that
i,' !
I'l

Ili
. t!
!! 1" i ('"i
1 III
S
II
It !
»1 I' t;
: '1:

ll
i- k .
!; I
. M
i 1 (
, 1
> i
212
L E T T E R S.
that madam de Ladic was extremely fatigued;
but he proaiifed to write to me in a poft or two.
•••
I have heard nothing from them Since, and having myfelf writ to the farmer to make inquiries no anfwer is come from him ; however, I am more happy with regard to Mrs. Darby, who,
I know for a certainty, to have embarked for France, where flie mull:, ere this, be fafeiy arrived. My hulbarid confirmed this circum-flance to him, and Mr. Baker, defiring to know what meafiires he would take with Mr. Darby, my hufband told him, that, was he mailer of the affair, he would undoubtedly prpfecute him with the utmoft rigour, but that you had re-folved againfl any ftep that would in ought be prejudicial or uneafy to your father. Let her enjoy the glory of refignation to the will of
Heaven ; her refolution to abandon all to her
\
father, appears to me heroic, and I Ihould think I oppofed the decrees of God, if I endeavoured to diffuade her from it. Let us leave her to cultivate in obfcurity and retreat, virtues, which, perhaps, might be loft in a more brilliant Situation. Mr. Darby is old ; he cannot difpofe of the main fund, which muft, one day, return to Clariffa and her children : let him then enjoy the revenues for his life. Madam de Lallip
will be better able to fan^ify the ufe of themj
when
LETTERS.
213
when fhe (hall have feen, by a near view, how
precious riches may become to thofe who know how to employ them to the purpofes which Pro-
(i
vidence had, when he made them rich.
I ONLY give you an extraQ: of Mr. Baker*s
t
Mi
I
long difcourfe, which might be called a fermon ;
and alfo a panegyric, where your praifes and
iCi
your hulband’s were not forgotten, but I have
* t
the difcretion to pafs them over in filence. My
Clarifla loves not incenfe; though her head is too
ftrong to be aflfe^ed by it. Mr. Riding was called.
and it was agreed, that my hiilband fhould fee
Mr. Darby, and confirm all your promifes to
him, on condition that he would ceafe all pur-
fuit, and that he would put into the hands of a
juftice of peace a certificate, in which he fhould declare his convi6tion of the innocence of his
wife and daughter. This certificate, which
fhould be Sealed in his prefence, ajid not opened till after his death, fhould not be delivered but
in exchange for a due and proper aflignment of
I
!l
i'l
il
• j
■ t
your fortune to him, for the term of his natural
life.
-
It does not become me to criticize the de-
J ;
i

Mii!
cifion of fuch wife people, yet it appears to me a little hard, that the richeft heirefs in England
fhould
I II
‘ .1
•n
t h
‘I


1 V
I
1 :■
h f.

%
214
L E T T E R S.
fhould be reduced to narrow circumllances, while her immenfe fortune is poflefled by a Hold your tongue, Harriet, you will be fcoldcd. My Clarifla will perilh to kifs the hand that perfecutes her: this, however, comforts me, by the Sale of your diamonds, you may raife a Aim, which, in France, will be a confiderabls fortune; for to tell you that our fortune, fuchas it is, is yours, would be another thing for which I ftiould be infallibly Scolded. My hufbaad was ignorant that Mr. Baker was engaged for fifteen guineas to the honeft perriwig-maker, but thinking that Some acknowledgment was due to him, he begged of that worthy clergyman to give him the remainder of the Aim, which you had left in his hands, which was an infinite fatisfadlion to the poor man, without confoling him for the lofs of his Servant, whom he declared he would make his heir. They did not think it neceflary to trull: him with more than he already knew, which was only that Chevalier was a great nobleman ; and as they did not tell it to him as a Secret, he had been every where to tell this good news to all the people in the village, who heartily rejoiced at it. He ordered a very good din. ner from the inn, and my hulband, Mr. Baker, the good Riding, and Fanny, dined at his houfe, and obliged him to fit at table with them.
Imme-
'•"51
LETTERS.
215
Immediately after dinner, my hulband went to
Old Windfor, to fpeak to Mr. Darby, who at
firft feemed difcouraged at this vifit which he
received at the inn: afterwards, afluming his
ufual audacity, he endeavoured to perfuade my
hulband, that he could ruin you beyond re.
fource. My hulband did not fuflFer him to finilh.
but, afluming a haughtier tone. Thank, fays
he to him, the commands of your excellent
daughter, otherwife I would have Sacrificed my
fortune and life to have done her juftice, with
refpeO: to the horrible attempt which has been made againft her. Your James is not a novice in guilt; he mufl: not think that I am ignorant of the ftiare he had in tijic fudden death of the dean of Colborne ; and if he does not Seek Safety
by a Speedy flight, I will have him put into a
place, where he Ihall difcover more myfteries.
This menace rendered your father more tracta-
ble ; he (hewed my hulband the letter you had
wrote to him, and alked if you were determined
m
to abide by what you promifed : he added, with
an oath, that he defired nothing more than to
reftore you your mother; but that he would be buried alive, if he knew where the villain Mon-talvo had concealed her. His jade of’ a mother
had difappeared with him, and he wilhed to God that the devil had taken all three. Only mind
the
: I
' • i
II
iL-'i*
I;I
■'I'll
(I I
III.'
i't
■I'll
'It*
i !ni
t <*ti
■ i"i
t.:',
!ii
-'In

t »
it
t .1
•' 'M
* ' 4	^
ii'il
'■ \\
t - .
»• i :
,

11
' • I
'• 1*
I
:oi
I!'
lb
! .1
lit'
. M
b W

LETTERS.
the harm I would do my daughter. Said he, by making her marry a handfome young fellow,whom (he loved, I am certain of it. Since the flight of this wretch Colby, I have hardly any doubt, but it was her who caufed all this confuSion: it is the bigotry of my daughter, which throws us into this dilemma. Why not be of the religion of her country ? If fhe had been a Pro-teftant, fhe would have regarded the vows of this youth as null. I loved her, I would fettle
her------Do you not blulh to avow it ? faid my
hufband, interrupting him : ought not the uncertainty of his birth to have made you fear in-ceft ? None but Cofby could have told this cir-cumftance, faid Mr. Darby. I am almOfl: certain, that this lad is the fon of Montalvo, and the treachery he has been guilty of, is a proof of it; but, even if he was my fon, people like US', fir, are not fwayed by fcruples, which affed common people. Where fllould we have been, if Adam and Eve had paid a regard to them? Did not they marry their fons arid daughters ?
My hulband omitted nothing, to make Mr. Darby ajtiamed of the impious Sentiments he feerri'ed to take pleafure in displaying: but it was in vain, he turned into ridicule every thing that was faid; arid my hufband, considering
that
LETTER S.
217
that fuch a converSon was a miracle out of the
y
power of man to efSecf, he left him to the mercy cf the Lord, and inflfled only on his dropping his profecution againft Fanny. He difcharged the bail readily enough and my hulband v/as not deceived in thinking, I (hould fee with pleafure, a girl, who had Iliewn fuch an attachment to you. To this proof of his good-nefs he joined another, which haftcned my recovery; that was, to acquaint me, by a line, that he had reaped all the advantage he expefted from his voyage. I did not, at that time, doubt but I (hould fee the day that would rdlcre my ClariiTa to my arms ; and I waited for it w'ith an impatience equal to my tendernefs for her. He arrived in five days afterwards, having left the ladies in an apartment near mine. I cried out, as foon as I faw him. Where is Clarifia ? With the baron de Lafiic, her hulband, replied he; her marriage, and departure, preceded, for Some
days, my arrival in England : for want of her, I bring you another lady; Mrs. Darby defires permiHion to (hew you her gratitude, for the friendfliip of wdiSch you have given fuch great proofs to her dear Clarifia. But, my dear foul, permit me alfo to beg a favour of you : moderate your tranfports, you know not how far ex-troardinary emotions may hurt you at prefent, VoL. L,	L	Yes,
2i8
LETTERS.
Betty, alfour, defire
4
Yes, my dear, I will be moderate, quick, my robe : run, By, Mr. 1 her to come in, or I will go myfelf: in fact, if
c	^
me had not appeared, I believe, I mould have forgot that the robe I called for was not put on, and that flie would have found me naked on the flairs. I Ilretched out my arms to her; (he, clafped me in her’s; and, be it faid, without difpleafing you, I know not whether I (houlcl have received yourfelf more tenderly than her. After a number of unconnedlcd fentences, I was obliged to be a little quiet, -in order to learn what I burnt to know, and I did not give her time to tell me. Would you believe, that, never Comprehending that the baron de Lallk and poor Chevalier had any thing in common together, I interrupted Mr, Balfour, to fcold him, that he did not bring him with him ; yet I had Some fufpicion of his birth, and it is here I ought to make you my confedion.
Used to underfland you by lialf a word, I doubted not, cn reading your firft letter, that the invincible Ciarifia had met her vanquilher: lefs a philofopher than my friend, I own, I feared the excefs of her gratitude : had you given up three parts of your wealth to your proteclor, I Ihould not have mdririured ; of the gifts
you
LETTERS.
2tg
you could beftow him, there was but that of your hand, which appeared to me exceffive. I then recalled to mind the expre(Tion I had made ufe of, in blaming ClarilTa : if a young woman is unfortunate enough to quit her father’s houfe, (he ought to fly with no one but her hufband. At that time, I had in my head, the cafe of Clariflaonly ; little divining, that, in a few days, your fituation would be like hers. I had no care to make the exceptions, which I (hould o~ therwife hav^e fet againfl: that general rule. Was it not natural to fear, that you might dwell too much, according to the letter, on that, which I had written with too little reflection; and think it not an infufferable vanity in me, to believe, that a judgment like your’s, could be bialTed by fuggeftions like mine. The W'orft of councils
appear good, when they happen to chime with our fecret inclinations. But what a multitude ofufelefs words, half a page ! employed to tell, you, I faw you loved Chevalier; and I feared you would claim a right to marry him, from the impertinent Sentence I had unwittingly given in your favour. In fine, I would fain have en* gaged you, at leaft, to fufpend that refolution till the arrival of my hufband, fuppofing that feme accident might have retarded his voyage. But think not I difapprove of what you have
L 2	done.
I »
220
LETTERS.
done., Circumflances were become Such, after
your firft letter, that it was impoBible for you not to endeavour to extricate yourfelf at any hazard. I admire the ingenuity witli which you confefs, that your determination in this refpe^, preceded your knowledge of his real condition. But even there your humility deludes you. How Ihould Sentiments and education, fuch as had your guide, meet in a man Sprung from nothing.? It was impolTible to be miftafcen, it Spoke th

gentleman at once ; but I mufi; finifh a narration interrupted mal a propos.
WE had Scarce enjoyed the poffeffion of your mother, than we were in the molt cruel concern for fear of loling her; a malignant fever appeared with Symptoms fo terrible, that the phy-licians at firfl defpaired of her recovery. They urged my condition, to prevent my entering her chamber; but I proteSted in fo politive a manner, that the inquietude would make me mif-carry, that they left me to do as I would. You will Scarcely imagine who, next to myfelf, was the moll alSiduous of your mother’s nurfes; it was poor Mrs. Cofby. She confefled before (he went into her chamber, and prepared for her laft hour. In elFedf, Ihe catched your mother’s dib .order j the Seventh day took to her bed, and four
days
L E T T E Pv S.
22 f
days after was carried off. ’Tis dreadful to have lived like that woman, yet I dcfire no other grace of God, than to die like her. It was im-pofiible to hear her talk of her pafi; irregularities, the favours fhe had received from her Creator, and the confidence fhe had in his mercy, without being touched. Heaven has paid your debt, my dear Clariffa ; her holy and compofed difSo-lution, was a recompenfe for the fervice fhe had
/
done you. Montalvo was fo tbuched by her laft advice to him, that, inflead of returning into ' his antient order, he has retired among the Chartreux, and is now acflually commencing noviciate. Your mother is at preTent ignorant of Mrs. Cofby’s death, believing her to be in the country. For myfelf, I advance in a happy pregnancy, without fo much as a head-ach. I am to inform you of the motives which engaged Montalvo to fave your mother; but that, with the hiftory of their flight, I will remit to ano-^-th«r letter, this already making a volume. I find, by your laft, that you have had new difficulties to Surmount in your flight. I depend on you for an account of them the firft opportunity : let us know particularly in what part your hufband’s eftate lies, and If he cannot obtain permiffion from his mother to pay us a vifit aH’aris during my lying-in : you may believe,
1/ 3	tha
Hi
222 LETTER S.
that if I was in any other fituation, I fhculd not attend your coming, but lay hold of the happy
occallon to condudt your mother to your houfe j but, what v;ith Mr. Balfour’s law-fuit, and my difo’rder, I (hall not be able to quit this town for fix or feven months, which will appear to me fo many ages. Vtrs. Darby and my hufband charged me to embrace MonSieur le Baron for them, and I do it without Scruple ; I could do it no’ better if he was here, for me to render them that Service, otherwise than in idea ; for, upon my honour, I regard him paffionately j and, notwithftanding my high idea of my Clariffa, I firmly believe him worthy of her.
P. S. Attempt not, we conjure you, an ex-cefs of generclity for Mr. Darby. Hehascon-
fented to yield your money in the bank of Genoa : why Will you g've it him r
^ V. ■
V	^
letter

LETTERS.
223
LETTER XXV.
CLARISSA TO LADY HARRIEL
O W much am I indebted to you, my
dear friend; and how ought I to acknowledge the goodnefs of Providence during the reft of my life, in guarding you from thofe dangers which you run in attending her ! And you, Mr. Balfour, my generous proteftor, how fhall I aci;:nowdedge, how fliall I requite, the consideration you have had for me ! To quit a beloved wife in fuch circumftances, and then, to permit her to expofe herfelf as fhe has' done : it is too much, the multitude of your favours make me ungrateful. With the moft lively fentiments of acknowledgment, I find my fenfe of my obligations infinitely below their value. May God be your recompcnfcr: it is what I alk of him, upon my knees, every day I live. I alfo hope that he will repay poor Mrs. Coihy : Ihe entered late to work in the vineyard of the Lord j but that good mafter will pay thofe, who have, begun at the Sixth hour, as much as thofe who went through the fatigue of the day, provided they have worked with a good will. I will for ever return God thanks for his grace to that poor penitent, who drew me from the precipice
L 4	where
234
LETTER
S.
where I wss ready to fall. She will obtain for her fon the grace of perfeverance ; and if my feeble prayers can have any elhcacy, he will wipe out the ftains of his youth by a lincere repentance. That unfortunate young man had naturally good principles; and there was room to hope, that thofe virtuous feeds, which had been"^choaked up, as it were, by the tares of palTion, would, in the end, produce good fruit. Would to Heaven that I could purchafe, at the expence of my life, a like grace for my unfortunate father ! Curfed, curfed be they who corrupted his youth, and fpread in his foul the poifon of irreligion, the fource of all his faults. But, -alas ! as Mr. Balfour once obferved, there needs a miracle in order to obtain it. I would willingly devote myfelf to the mod extreme poverty : judge with what pleafure then I would laciifice the fuperfluous. I am determined not to claim any.part of my fortune; I would prov^ to my father the excellence of that religion which ■ he defpifes, more by my example than my words,
I aflc nothing in return for all I facrifice, but his affeflion, and permidion, from time to time, to give him proofs of mine. My hufband approves of my determination : his difinterefted-nefs is without example; and I may fafely fay,
that this is not the only virtue, in which he
furpaffes
LETTERS.
225
furpaffes other men ; every day, I difcover new perfedlions in him.
every hour. With Such
a partner what tan I wilh for j what can I regret ?
As I have been extremely fatigued by the fea, I am obliged to remain fome days at Bour-deaux, and I lay hold of this opportunity to finilh my adventures. ■.
Mr. Baker has already informed you of the accident which prevented our obtaining the afy-lum which he offered us at his mother’s. We
4
arrived at the village where fhe lives about five o’clock in the morning, and I was fo fatigued, that I was obiiged to repofe feme hours at a bad inn; the good woman, to whom we were ad-dreffed, being So poor, that fhe had no Servant; and, by cenfe .uence, had carried with her the key of her little iodg.iig. After having fiept a Ihcri time, it was necefiary to deliberate on the meafores proper to be taken : you know I had but .little money, and i found myfcif but ill able to go far on foot. ' My hrft defign was to get to farmer Riding’s, but he lived flxty miles frem the place we then were at; and after having paid our guide, we flaould not have money encughuto hire horfes. The honeft man who
L 5 j
accompanied
22,6
LETTER S.
accompanied us,. Seemed fenSible of our embar-raiTment, and we thought we might venture to open ourfelves to him. I have Some elFeds, Said my hulband, of confiderable value, but there are ftrong reafons that prevent my felling them; are you not acquainted with Some Jew in the neighbourhood hereabouts, who would advance money on Some rich toys I have, becaufe I Iliould be unwilling to put them into the hands of a goldfmith ? Our guide, after a Ihort conlidera-tion, faid, I am Sure Mr. Baker would not ov/n you for his friends, if you were not good people ; I will therefore venture to affift you. There is, about twelve miles from hence, a Jew whom I know : I once lived with him, he is extremely rich, and knows that I would not offer any thing ill come by; give me what you would ■willingly leave in pledge; I will carry it to him, if you choofe to truft me, and you may wait for me here till I come back; but, in my opinion, you had better come there yourfelvesj it will not take you much out of the way, and you will fee how far it is prudent to take what he offers. As the town was not upon the great road, and it advanced us nine miles in that we wifhed to take, we followed the man’s advice. We hired horfes, and fet out the next day.
I had a necklace of pearl, which was valued
at
LETTERS.
227
at fourteen hundred pounds, which we put into the hands of our guide, and he took it to his Jew. He faid that fome people, who were to fpend the fummer in the village next to his, finding themfelves in Avant of money, had truft-
ed him Avith fome effedls, and delired five hun-
> %
dred pounds on them for fix months. The Jew made no difficulty to lend that Sum upon what v/as worth twice as much ; and our guide returned with four hundred pounds in bank bills, and the reft in gold. My hufband deliA^ered them to me, and I immediately gave five guineas to the honeft countryman, who.paid it me back with a thoufand bleffings ; afterwards we hid our bank bills in the plaites of my robe, where we fewed them up ; and my hufband took the fame precaution with our money, which he fewed in different parts of his cloaths j becaufe, being obliged to take a crofs route, it was necef-fary to guard againft ill accidents. •. The reft of my diamonds were put in the corner of a chaife which we hired, and we made one half of our journey, without any accident. : Arrived at Stafford, we began to refpire j a day fufficed to conduct us to Mr. Riding’s, and we thought otir-felves almoft at the end of our troubles ; but I could almoft fay the. vexations .were yet to be endured. .
It
228
LETTERS.
It was on a Saturday, in the evening, that we arrived at Stafford, and I had a great defire to hear mafs before I fet out the next day. The hoftefs was very obliging: coming up to my chamber, to offer her fervices, I invited her to drink a difli of tea with me ; and as fhe feemed fenfible of my politenefs, I ventured to afk her if there were many catholics about that place ? Probably, madam, faid Ihe, you are one : and, to-morrow being Sunday, engages you to a(k that quefcion. I told her fhe gueffed right, and fhe embraced me tenderly ; then told me there was at Stafford, a certain number of Roman
9
catholics, who entertained a.prieft 5 and as they were quiet, harmlefs people, and in the late rebellion had fliewn much fidelity to the government, they left them the free exercife of their
She was called into the kitchen ; and haying vvifhed me a good evening, fhe left aie. It was nine o’clock : they gave us a morfel in our chamber, and I haftened fupper, in order to have fufficient time to juflify myfelf to you before I went to bed j when the woman returned, with all the marks of terror imprinted on her countenance. My dear lady, faid fhe, the moment I Saw you, I had a Secret inclination, which made me wifh you well j and nothing
- would
religion
LETTERS.
22a
would Block fne more, than your encountering any misfortune in my houfe: but deal fincerely with me ; is there any bad affair ?— Had I had an inclination to deny it, the Sudden palenefs that overfpread my countenance, would have made me declare the truth. Liften to me, faid fhe, I only defire to be of Service to you, and by no means believe you capable of the crime laid to your charge. When you came out of your carriage, there was a man at the door, who had juft arrived on horfeback, who exa-nirined you with much curioSity. When your eoachman came into the kitchen to Supper, the man v/as there, and aflced him, if you were not come from the London fide ? Why that quefti-on .i* faid the coachman. Becaufe, anfwered the other, I am very much miftaken, if fhe is not the young woman who has been advertifed in the papers fo lately ; fhe is Vv'orth ftopping, faid he j fhe is accufed of a defign to poifon her father. What’s that to me, faid the coachman ? fhe pays me well; and all thofe that pay me well, I take for honeft people. I am hot fo credulous, replied the other, but we will fee farther. Now, my dear lady, added the woman, confider whether you have any thing to fear, and reckon upon my difcretion. The Baron then took the
word.
230
LETTERS.
word. I will not hide from you, Said he to the woman, that a love-match has embroiled my wife whth a powerful family ; but you have
judged like a virtuous and honeft perfon, that Ihe is incapable of the crime with which that wretch dares to accufe her ; I will confefs, however, that the falling into the hands of her parents, before (lie was reconciled to them, would throw me into the deepeft defpair. Thus, madam, you will acquire an eternal right to our acknowledgments, if you w'ill allift us in efcap-ing from thofe, who would pofiibly do us a mif-chief. Nay, faid the woman, I muft tell you all the fellow faid to my hufband, when he had got a cup in his head : there was a thoufand pounds for him who Ihould flop you, and he fwore he would not lofe the reward, but he would examine you a little clofer in the morning, and then fend for a couple of conftables, who fhould take you up. His my advice then ' that you take advantage of the night, to make your efcape ; and, as my lady is a remarkable fio-ure, I think, it would be better if fhe dif-guifed her fex ; I have a fon about her Size and height, I will provide her With a fuit of his cloaths, and his great coat; quit the high road, . the moon is up, and you may crol's the fields : in keeping always to your left, the way is extremely ;
LETTERS.
231
tremely unfrequented, and there is no danger of their feeking you there. During all this con-verfation, your poor friend did nothing but (lied tears, which made thofe of our charitable hoft-efs run down her cheeks plentifully. My huf-band embraced me, conjuring me to take courage. Providence, faic he, declares for us, in infpiring this good woman with the generous de-fign to affifl: us ; and fo faying, he drew from his finger a pretty ring, which I had given him, of about ten guineas value, which he begged of her to accept, as a flight mark of our gratitude. At firft file made lome difficulty j I perceived, however, that this little prefent gave her zeal new ardour ; (he ran for her fon’s deaths, and dreffed me in them herfelf. The Baron would have given any thing in the world for a horfe, but it would have expofed us to more eafy purfuit. We thanked a thoufand times our kind hoftefs, who conducted u’s herfelf out of a back door, and even led us a quarter of a mile over a field; after which (he (hewed us, in the beft manner (he could, paths which would bring us near Flint, in the principality of Wales. The firft night only, faid (he, will be painful to you ; for, once diftant from this route about a dozen or fourteen miles, you will, wichout either danger or difficulty, find a horfe. When the woman
left
272
LETTERS.
left us, a thoufand mortifying ideas crowded upon me : Is it then, faid I, the grand-daughter of lord Afaph, the great heirefs, that finds herfelf, in the midfi of the night, expofed to fuch adventures! If thefe fort of thoughts were dif-couraguig, thofe that followed were equally comSning. W^hat gracious proteclion has Provide nee afforded me under my misfortunes! What would have become of me, 'had I fallen into the hands of a difhonefi: man ! He would have been already difeouraged by the dangers he had run, in endeavouring to fave me j and, perhaps, thebeft I had to hope frcin him, would be defertion in this lonely place, which, poflibly, his ill condudf might make me confider as a bielTing. The baron, my tender hufband, left me not long a prey to thofe devouring imaginations. How do I fuffer, my dear Clariffa, faid he, to fee you reduced to fuch an extremity! Under rhisfortunes, attended with circumfiances fo mortifying, will you have fufiicient hrength to fupport yourfelf under the fatigue you are going to encounter ? If you will permit me to eafe
you from ,time to time, I (hall feel lefs concern. I am in full ftrength, you are delicately and lightly made : I can fpare you a part of the fatigue, by carrying you : a burden fo precious,
will Sweeten to me the length of the way. This
excels
LETTERS.
233
excefs of tendernefs Seemed to infpire me with
new vigour. What do you propofe to me, my
dear ? faid I. Do you think my Sufferings can
be determined by an increafe of yours ? No, if
Heaven has decreed that I Should perilh, I would
rather die of fatigue, than of grief to fee you
*
fink under that which I had caufed. But why prefume fo ill of my courage or my ftrength ? In more happy times, I fhould have confidered the way, which I am now obliged to make on foot, as a walk ; I confefs that my misfortunes have, in feme fort, enfeebled me, but the happy confe-quences of my misfortunes have given me vigour; my prefent pains have produced all the happinefs of my life, and could I buy it too dearly ? The baron, not confidering where we were, catched me in his arms ; when we heard a fudden noife, within a little way of us, which made him put himfelf upon his defence ; for I fliould have told you, that he was provided with a pair of piftols. The moon gave fo little light, that we heard the noife fome minutes, before we could perceive by what it was caufed ; fo.that we found ourfelves clofe upon three men, of a Sufficient bad appearance, before we were aware of it, and who appeared to conceive no better opinion of us. We all remained immoveable, looking at one another from head to foot; when
one

234
LETTERS.
one of the men Said, in French, to his companions, What have W'e to fear ? they are but two, we (hall be the ftrongeft party. Have you never Seen a Scene in Moliere, where two poltroons meet in the night, who affect the courage to frighten one another, while the found of their voices betray their mutual cowardice ? We, at this time, made an excellent representation of that Scene; though I ought in juftice to Say, that among the actors there was no poltroon but mySelf. Indeed my hair ftood an end with horror. I at preSent make mySelf merry with an adventure which had like to kill me, after the manner of thoSe old Sailors, who, in their chimney corner, divert their families with the recital of a (hipwreck from whence they eScaped, and intereft them in proportion to the danger they had run. The baron, at firft, doubted the truth of this rencounter. The unhappy, whoSe misfortunes are alike, ought not to be alarmed at each other. You are French prisoners, gentlemen, and Seek, like us, to recover your loft liberty. You gueSs right. Said one of the three men, who had a voice So terrible, that it made me tremble ; let us (it down, and try if we cannot help one another in our defign. As I had walked for Some hours, and began to be tired, I accepted the propofition, The men informed us
diredly
LETTERS.
235
ilirecSlly who they were : one was the captain of a veffel, the other a lieutenant, and the other a furgeon. I was comforted at this, thinking that fome education might be expedled from people, of their rank. The captain told us, that they
had come from the caftle of------j that they had
already travelled four and twenty miles with a guide, who had left them at the beginning of the night, becaufe their money had failed : that their firft delign was to go to Briftol, where the furgeon had a friend that promifed to favour his efcape ; that the want of money reduced them to defpair, with the lofs of their guide ; as for nou-rilhment, added he, the fields are full of turneps and other roots, which would prevent our dying of hunger; a very happy circumftance, as we fpeak the language ill, fo that w'e dare not afk any perfon the way : there is alfo half a guinea promifed for every French prifoner, who is apprehended making his efcape; and the hopes of fuch a recompenfe would make us meet as many enemies as we met country fellows. I have a remedy for thefe inconveniencies, replied the baron ; and my little companion, having learned Eqglifh when he was very young, fpeaks it as perfectly as if he was born in this country : but he is of a delicate complexion, fo that I defpair of feeing him come to the end of our journey,
otherwise
236
LETT E R S.
otherwife we fhould be happy in your company, and glad to alTift you v./!th any thing in our power. If that is all that embarraffes you, replied the captain, make yourfelf eafy : we are four ; a few branches of trees will foon make us a machine, and when he can walk no fu''''her, we will carry the boy upon it j for that matter, I could carry’ him myfelfonmy fhoulders, hk ' a lamb • I only delire for a recompenfe, that he will ufe his tongue now and then to afk the road, if they do not deceive us, three nights w ll bring us to Briftol. During the day time, we will hide ourfelves in the woods, or under the hedges, as we have hitherto done. Our young mafter here fhall go into Briftol alone, and you may be af-fured, that the next day we fhall have a Ihip, ready to carry us where we defire. The offer of money you make us, my dear countryman, I accept, while we are on our way ; but it (hall only be a loan ; for, thank Heaven, we are not quite without means ; and, as foon as it is day, I will (hew you a letter of credit upon the Briftol merchant whom I have mentioned to you. Let us w alk on till then, the ftars will be our guides. In drawing towards the fouth eaft, we advance towards tliie fea, which is the term of our courfe. What do you think of it i my dear, faid the baron to me. Does this plan appear to
you
LETTERS.

vou reafonable ? In truth, I did not know what to anfwer. The furgeon obferving me hefitate, faid very politely, if the gentleman lands any difficulty, he is free to continue his journey a-
lon
c.
We do not pretend to incommode him ; we only defire to borrow a couple of guineas, for which we will give you an order to be paid in France ; and thefe I do not aSrC, gentlemen, but becaufe you were generous enough to offer it; and fhould you have changed your mind, and now refufe to lend it us,.we fhall quit you, without taking the leaf! offence. Sir, faid I, you
greatly mirtake me. Then, turning towards my hufband, I defired him to follow the gentlemen ; they appear to me honell people, let us trufl: our-felves with them, under the condufif of Provi-dence. ^Saying thefe words, I rofe ; and the captain and lieutenant, willing to fhew me that they were inclined to keep their words, crolTing their hands, and grappling together, made me fit down upon them ; in which manner they carried me above a mile, without appearing the leaf; fatigued. This greatly refrefhed me, and, as if I had acquired new force from the courage of my companions, I w^alked brifkly till day-break, which difcovered to us a village upon our right. They propofed that I fhould go there to afk the road, and my hufband would follow me. In this
cafe.
238
LETTERS.
cafe, I eaSily comprehended, that he would not be left the mafter. Fugitives are always diffident, they would have a hoftage for my return. I was obliged then to have refolution to attempt the adventure alone j and the perfuafion I was in, that I fhould rifque nothing from difcovery, in a place fo difiant, and under fuch a difguife, animated my courage, and I laughed at thofe fears which I had felt till that moment. My cloaths were tolerably decent, and they might take me for a boy of the better fort, who had run away from his friends. This was the word; they could think of me. My companions hid themfelves in a field of furze, and in order to make themfelves eafily found by me again, they fet up, near their hiding-place, a long flick, which had Served one of them for a can$. It be-ing harveft time, almoft all the inhabitants had left the village. I went into a well-looking farm-houfe,- where an old man fat before the kitchen door, in order to receive the firft rays of the fun : a girl was employed, at fome diflance from him, in feeding the poultry. God blefs you father, faid I : God blefs you, daughter, replied the old man. At thefe words, which made me tremble, the fervant-wench burfl into a loud fit of laughter. You are very knowing,
cried Ihe to the old man, if all the girls referable
this
LETTERS.
239
this youth, there would be a crowd of them indeed. Youth or maid, faid the old man, my bleffing is not loft, I am fure it was the voice of a girl: is there any thing for your fervice, my child ? My defign is for Briftol, replied I; but I loft my way, and have walked all night; could you not give me, on paying for it, a morfel to eat ? Yes, faid the old man, and a fup to drink too. If you are able to pay for it, fo much the better; if you cannot, God will pay for you. He will not fail to pay you, faid I, though you take my money ; I have more than is neceflary for my journey, and your good will, which he knows, will not go without a recompenfe. Heaven blefs thee, my child, faid the old man; Molly, give him aVup of ale : I never touch ftrong liquor, faid I; but I will willingly take a couple of eggs, and a little milk. I love eggs exceedingly; and if this girl will boil me a dozen hard,
I will very willingly charge myfelf with them. Molly made hafte to do what I defired her ; and during that time, the old man fpoke to me aS follows : You have undertaken a long journey, my child ; do you know that it is one hundred and forty miles to Briftol ? Can you go. fuch a long way on foot ? If i find a horfe to buy, which is not too dear, I will purchafe it, I could fell it again when I got to Briftol, for I only go there, in order to einbark for Holland. Why,
faid
24'0
LETTERS.
Said the old man, if you would accommodate yourfelf with a bad horfe, which we will fell you very cheap; I fay it is bad, becaufe it is, blind, but otherwife it goes firm, and will not tire its rider. As I appeared willing to make the bargain, they immediately brought the horfe, which indeed had but an indifferent appearance. They afked three guineas, and I gave it, in order to give a colour of truth to my appearance; and they threw into the bargain, a pair of horferaen’s bags, with two loaves of bread, a dozen of hard eggsi, a piece of fait beef and fome cheefe ; I could have wifhed for Some beer, but I had faid that I never drank any, and happily I was enabled to make a provifion of it, before I left the village.
THUS my firft trial was happy ; it encouraged me, and I rejoined my companions, who began to be uneafy at my flay. For my hufband, he was more dead than alive, and reproached him-felf for having let me go alone, as the greateft crime, though the village was not diftant above half a mile. After having diftributed my provisions, the baron faid to the prifoners, that he would rather deprive himfelf of their company, than be fubjeCted a Second time to the inquietude he hid juft now Suffered. This young man, faid he, has been trufted to my care by
his
L E T T E R S.
his parents; and I cannot again confent to Suffer himoutofiny fight. I thought I remarked in the eyes of the Surgeon Some looks which Spoke incredulity : this made me blufh prodigioufly, and I reSoIved with myfelf that we would get away from theSe people as Soon as they were afleep; a refreshment which they Seemed to have great occafion for ; but ai| unexpected accident prevented us, for I Seemed deftined to prove in this fatal voyage all manner of fufl'er-ings: on a Sudden my hufband changed colour, and immediately after fell in a Swoon. Imagine, if pofTible, the Shocking ideas that aSTailed me at this critical moment ; my hufband was become dearer to me than my life,; I couldmotat-tribute his accident to any thing but the uneaSi-neSs I had caufed him. What will become of me if heaven in its anger takes him from, me ? Indeed, it was a Stroke more violent than -I thought myfelf capable of Supporting ; the humanity of our companions furpafled what I could have expeiSted from people of their profelTion, for the Sea is apt torender the heart a little hard j but the Surgeon, in particular, endeavoured to bring him to himfelf, with a zeal which I never Shall forget. I had about me a chryflal bottle, which you made a preSent of to me on your marriage, the chain of which you know was of
VoL. I.	M	diamond.
242
LET T E R S.
diamond. This toy was fufficient to difcover us, but I never conlidered that, for I was quite be-fide myfelf; I immediately put it into the hands of Monfieur Dulac, the name the furgeon had taken, who, after rubbing the baron’s temples and nodriis, made him fwallow a certain tinSure he carried in his pocket, which quickly brought about the defired efFedl; a black bile, which the remedy forced him to throw up, gave him great eafe ; and Dulac affured me, that if he had not been alTided in time, he would have rifked an appoplexy. Good God ! In what a Situation fhould I have found myfelf had this accident happened two hours later, and in a place where I was only with him*,' but, as I faid, the abundant evacuation put him out of danger; though, as you may imagine, it left him extremely weak.' The captain and lieutenant now began to fnore like men, who, after a long journey and a fevere faff, haft eaten a good meat: Dulac was well inclined to follow their example ; but his deSire to tell me what he had in his head, was ftronger than his love of reft. It is difficult, faid he to us, to impofe upon men of my profeftion; the delicacy of this lady’s features immediately difeovered to me her Sex ; and the rich fmelling bottle fhe juft now gave me, tells me her condition : your mutual inquietudes, the love you
have
I. E T T £ R S.
243
have for one another, and the modedy which Ihines In her countenance, alTurcs me that you
JJC
are a married couple, or like to become So. not alarmed. Said he, I am not the only perfon who may make thefe remarks ; but certainly, DO perfon can make them with lefs danger for you than I and my companions: two years in prifon, have given me Sufficient time to know them ; and I leave you to judg'e of their probity, from the motives of their prefent efcape. This captain and lieutenant were taken before the declaration of war, as vvcll as myfelf j fo that we do not think ourfelves prifoners according to martial-law; however, we fliou'ld not attampt to efcape, had we not been afl'ured that the enemy would force us aboard velTels deftlned for the attack of Quebec. Thefe two men knew per-fe£Uy the river St. Laurence, and would rilk being hung at the mart-head, rather than not endeavour to fink the fliips they fhould conduT there; and what honert man would not rather be torn alive than introduce a foe into his country ? Now, when one is capable of Sacrificing one’s life to one’s duty, one cannot be fufpefled of a defign to dirtrefs the unfortunate. Follow; then the advice which I give you ; difeover yourfelf to my companions; I affure you, you have nothing to apprehend from them,
M2	and
244
LET T E R
<2
C?,
and your confidence will excite their zeal :’l know the captain ; he is a man fertile in expedients, and he told me, not an hour ago, that he would anfwer to make you go all over England at your eafe, and without danger, if you -would Sacrifice the Sum of twenty guineas.
We were at .thedifcretioii of thefe men; they s Seemed full of Sentiments of honour, and really were So. My hufband read in my looks my thoughts upon this, occafion ; and he anSwered ' the Surgeon, by drawing from his bofom a little pocket-book, in which was the certificate of our marriage; the reading of which, infirutSfing ‘ Dulac of our birth, redoubled his refpefil, and he aflured ^us we were not only Safe among them, but that he could anfwer for his comrades, as well as himfelf, who would rilk their lives in our Service, if it was necefSiry. After thefe proteftations, w'e gave way to that Sleep of which we had fo much need ; and it is aflonifh-ing, that, in the Situation we were, it lafted for near nine hours. My dear, that is to fay, we went to lleep about eight o’clock in the morning, and it was five in the evening when we awoke ; but, no doubt. Heaven afforded us this refrefh-ment, to prevent us finking under the laft trial which it would make us undergo. My hufband
had
L E T T E R S.
24-5
*j».<
\
hid no other complaint than a weaknefs, caufed by want of nourilhment. During our repaft, the captain, to whom they had declared my fex^ faid to us, I conjecture from what the old man told this lady, that we can eafily get to Shrewf-bory thisnight, after which flie > can eafily,-. (peaking Englilh, procure for each of us a de- ■ cent coat, our prefent drefs Serving only to > make us remarkable, and fubjeCtus to an arreft r ; ihe may then boldly hire a chaife for. herfelf and i her hufband : we will take horfes, and follow as' perfons in their fuitS, and no body will take us< for what we really are; however, for the greater fecurity, we muft be careful to flop at fuch pla-' ces as lie a little out of the way. In this man-' ner, I make no doubt I fhall be able to arrive at Briftol in Safety, and (hall not Scruple to go- -in perfon to the merchant’s houSe to whom I anv » directed. .
Notwithstanding what thecaptainfaidj; the project appeared to me very hazardous, nor had we at that time an opportunity of putting it in execution, as you will hear prefently ; however it fucceeded with us in part. When we came to the necefllty of attempting it, we waited for the night with great impatience, to putourfelves again in motion ; and as I feared that the baron might again be Seized with his illnefs, I pre-
M 3	tended



LETTER
S.
tended that I muft have fomebody to ride befor^ me on the horfe, to oblige him to mount. W
were all furprifed at the poor creature’s vigour, who carried us admirably ; happily we met one of thofe troughs, which are often in the road, where the poor beafl began to quench his thirft. This trough was at the door of a public houfe, and a fervant wench hearing a horfe drink at it, aiked if we would not alight. I an-fwered, No,” but begged her to fill me a bottle with ftrong beer, and to give a little oats to my horfe. Our companions, on the opening of the door, advanced a Tittle, and waited for us at the end of the village, with much depon-d.ence ; they confefled to us afterwards, that they thought we had laid hold of that opportuni* ty to quit their company, but never fufpeded that we would betray them.
You will, perhaps, be furprifed, that we
fhould continue to affociate ourfelves with the
#
prifoners, whom we could have left, only giving them a little money: but our reafon was this; the captain was provided with a pafs-port ; a thing, w'ithout which, in time of war, nobody
can embark in any of the ports. In fpite of mf
difguife, Mr. Darby haddeferibed me fo ftrongly,
that I never (hould have dared to prefent myfelf
to
LETTERS.
247
to thofe, who had commifTion to deliver them ; and my hufband Spoke bad EngliSh, which might have occasioned his being flopped as a de-ferter. Thus we were prifoners in England, without hopes of efcaping, otherwife than by means of the captain. We aflced the perfon, who gave the oats to the horfe, how far it was from thence to Shrewfbury. Judge of my mortification when he anfwered feventy-five miles,
I cxpedled to arrive there the day after to-morrow, fays I to him. You mufl travel a good pace then, replied the boy ; and your horfe does ■ not feem very ftrong: neverthelefs, as the weather is fine, if you get forward to day a few • miles, you may lie to-morrow night at Bridg- -north, which is about Sixteen miles off. I paid the lad ; and our • horfe, which had recovered firength, fet out fuch a pace as furprifed the Servant. Our companions began to be tired with waiting for us, and were charmed to fee us return. The ftrong beer which I broughty had the fame efiPeiS: on them, as the oats on the horfe; and they w'alked foftoutly, that the Surgeon, who had a wonderful Sagacity in guef-fing at the vicinity of towns by his fmell, af-fured us we were near Bridgnorth. It was Scarcely day-break, which w’e took the advantage of, to turn out of the main road, and con-
M 4	cealed
'48
E T T E R S.
cealed ourfelves in a thick^^tj which was at a fmail diftance. We fettled ourfelves there as well as we^coiild ; but had hardly been there above a quarter of anhour, before a courfing dog, .which belonged tofome fportfnaen, kept-barking round us. He at length difcovered us, and then retired with precipitation.. The.huntfmen being come up clofe to uSj . our• captain rofe up, and dellred them in his bad Englilh, not tp' injure perfons who had never done them harm. they were only two, and we were ftve in number, they feigned pity, and repeated feveral times,. “ Poor men !’* They then left us, but not long ; and while we were deliberating what to do, returned with a dozen country fellows, armed with fcythes and pitchforks, who threat-ned to kill the firft that offered to ftir. The baron’s firft motion was to throw himfelf on his
piftols : his fecond to put them in his pockets, for fear of bringing fome accident on me. The countrymen feized us, and condu61ed us to the town, where we were carried before a juftice of peace. He interrogated us very politely in his bed-chamber, for he was not yet flirting, which gave me an opportunity of concealing myfelf from his notice. Do not afk me all that paffed in fuch a long converfation ; I was fo abafhed, fo frightened, and fo humbled, to find myfelf
in
LETTER S.
249
inTuch circumftances, that I was incapable of paying the leaft attention to any thing. We were all fent to the town dungeon ; and, that this word may not fright jou, my dear, .what is called by this name in England, -has no connection with what that word Signifies in France. Imagine a little room about ten foot Square, or rather a box, for it was wainfcotted all round, and entirely unfurnilhed. I We begged for a little clean draw ; and; as we offered to pay for it, the gaoler brought it immediately, and obligingly offered us whatever we Should' have occafion for. r I ftretched. myfelf on the ftraw more dead than alive ; and my hufband, mixing his tears with mine, plainly Ihewed me how ill an end he expedied our adventure would have. Certain of i my innocence, he was: not lefs fo of my unihaken refolution to perilh rather than accufe my father. ' It was to be feared we Ihould be condu(9;ed to London ; ! and how could we efeape the. fight of Such an in finite ^ number of inquifitive perforts ! If bur. names were alked, on board what veflTel we were taken, what anfwer muff: we make? I was within a few. moments of beingknown; apd what would have been thought, of my marriage, flight, and being found in com-, pany with deferters ? indeed, I wonder I did Botlpfe ray fenfes on this occafion. My com-
M..5
pa^nons-
1)
2<0
L E 1‘ T E R S
panions in misfortune endeavoured to confole' me, and the captain, hurried away through cuf-tom, fwore heartily, he would perifh, or find a means to reftore me my liberty. Can you perform miracles, replied I, and is it poflible without, to efcape from this place, which has but one window, and that Secured with iron bars; and, befides, not wider than half a foot ? But, fays he, I do not pretend you (hall make your efcape through this window. Indeed, I muft brave greater dangers to efcape from this place of confinement ; however, only give me till after dinner, and look upon me as the greateft rogue in the world, if we do not make our efcapes before they receive any orders from the admiralty about us. The confidence with which Dulac and the lieutenant received thefe promifes, was not capable of infpiring me with any ; and if I appeared more tranquil, it was becaufe I oonfidered myfelf as in the hands of him who always difpofes of the fate of bis creatures with wifdom and goodnefs. My hufband, to whom I communicated this refled:ion, eagerly embraced it j and, in proportion as it took pofleffion of our minds, our refignation increafed, and dif-pofed us to wait, without murmuring, what
God fhould ordain coneerning our fate.
In
LETTERS.
251
- In about two hours, our gaoler returned to enquire, whether we chofe to dine ? We want air more than vi£luals, fays the captain : if you will be fo kind as to fu^er us to dine in the yard, we will pay you for our dinner, and Ihall be obliged to you for yoiur company. What are you willing to give ? replies the gaoler. A fhilling a head, excluSive of our drink, anfwered he. . You . feem, very honed: people, , returns the gaoler, . and. I am a good-natured man j make yourfelves eafy about half an hour^ and. you Ihall hear ..from me again. 1. He did not exadlly , keep*his word, in point of time, but, in about an hour^ let us into the prifon yard ; ..which was large, . and paved with great ftones ; where we found a table fet out. with feven pdates ; for the gaoler had a very ugly daughter, r. An indifferent dinner was . Served upj which our companions eat with as good an appetite, and as much chear-fulnefs, as if they had been at home. ; They had faid, I did not underrtand aword of Englifh ; and thus, I wasdifpenfed with from joining in the converfation which paft. i leaf, notwithftand-ing, out of complaifance to my hufband j and, if I had not been overwhelmed with afflidbon,
I fliould not have been able to have kept a fe-
rious

LETTER g.
rious countenance, to hear the encomiums they bellowed on the gaoler’s daughter. Dulac had the impudence to tell her fhe was very pretty ; and I was afraid fhe would have Scratched his eyes out, the irony was fo ftrong ; but what was my furprife, to fee the poor creature fwal-low greedily all his flattery ! What poor wretches we are 1 How open to the moft abfurd adulation ! In fuch cafes we are fo credulous, that there is no merit in deceiving us. Excufe this refledlion, it occurred of courfe.
While D’ulac cajoled the girl, and the lieutenant made the father drunk, the captain examined every part nicely j which circumftance did not efcape me. The walls of the yard were not very high, and if the gaoler would have fuflfered us to pafs the night in the yard, I ihould not have defpaired of being able to get over them ; hut this was a favour not to be expected. Towards the end of our meal, the gaoler told us we were at liberty todifpofe of our horfe.- We muft drink him, replies the captain; our hoft will foon find an opportunity to get rid of him ; for, blind as he is, he is worth his weight in gold. Stay a little, fays Dulac,
L.	had rather drink nothing but water, and buy
a good
LETTERS.
H3
a good horfeman’s coat. I’am alhamed to appear in Such a ragged condition, before fuch a charming young lady. Mifs fmiled, and undertook to procure him one. We were forced to re-enter our box : and the captain ordered a fucking pig for fupper, and a pudding to pleafe mifs. We were hardly fliut in, before the captain jumped with joy; or, rather, made a motion towards it, for his head touched the ceiling. Make yourfelf eafy, fair lady, fays he to me, the devil fhall be very cunning if we are here three days longer. To work my friends. 'At the fame time, they drew their knives; and, in truth, I could not conceive what they meant to do. Having removed the ftraw, they foon broke up a board of the floor ; and digging up the earth with their knives, removed it in their hats to the other ^de, and artfully laid it under the ftraw. I then began to comprehend a part of their deSign, without imagining it was poflTible to execute it. My hulband and I, neverthelefs, would partake of the labour ; and before night, they had made an hole four feet deep at leaft, and three feet in length on that fide next the yard. A large piece of timber, which they at laft found in their way, almoft diftradled them, becaufe it dire6tly croft the paffage they were opening, and pre-
ijented
2^4
LETTERS.
vented all pofiibility of efcaping that way. But of what are not minds capable, animated with the defire of recovering their liberty ! They undertook to faw this beam through with their wretched knives, and as it drew towards night, they dexteroufly replaced the board they had wrenched from the floor ; fo that nothing but the earth, which was concealed under the ftraw, could dilcover us. As foon as it was quite dark, we were releafed from our confinement, and were introduced into the gaoler’s houfe. I admired the confidence of this man, who had only a maid-fervant and his daughter in the houfe, yet trulled himfelf in the power of five men, who might have ufed him ill. It muft be acknowledged, the Englifh are not diftruftful, and do not fufpedt in others thofe crimes they are incapable of committing therafelves: another reflection which efcapes me, in favour of my
companions.
While fupper was getting ready, Dulac puflied on his affair with the daughter, and gave her to underftand, that he had an effate in his own country; but that he hardly wifhed ever to See it again, fince he had the happinefs of
I had one of thofe little hoop-
knowing her.
which cofl:. about thirty fliillings, and
w'hich
rings
letters:
255
which he begged of me, to make a prefent to his fweetheart. As he had no doubt of gaining her confidence, I made no Scruple of giving i^ him : I put it in my purfe, w'hich was crimfon and gold, along with twenty guineas. You fee us cloathed like beggars, fays Dulac to her: this was an artifice to conceal our flight; but. Since we are flopped, we could with to be die ft better, for, to tell you the truth, our deaths are full of a certain animal I Ihould be forry to mention. The girl having alTured him there was no difficulty in procuring us deaths; Dulac pulled out his purfe, and gave her a little lift of vrhat he wanted ; among which, he did not forget Some boots. I exped, fays he, we Ihall Soon travel towards London ; and, as we are in circumftances to procure us horfes, it would be difagreeable to ride without boots. He gave her twelve guineas, and at the fame time, begged her acceptance of the ring; pretending to be alhamed to offer her fo trifling a prefent. She made Some excufes, but at laft accepted it; and (hewing it to her father, told him, flie Saw by our behaviour that we were' gentlefolks; and added, that Dulac had a purfe full of gold ; and file thought fo, beeaufe the bottom of the purfe Was filled with ftiillings, wrapped in bits of
paper, to prevent their mixing among the gold.
The
2$S
Id. E T T E- R S;
The girl publilhed our riches all over the tow* the next morning j, and we had feveral vifits through our little window. Diilac entertained the laffes whocamethercj and told them, if the gaoler would give us leave, and they could procure him a violin, he would treat them with a dance in the prifon-yard. I heard-the girls fay, the French are very polite, and it is a great pity we are at war with them. Several of them prefled the gaoler fo much, that he promifed to let them have a dance in the evening; and this good man thought us fo well fettled with him, that he would have fworn not to have left Dulac a Single guinea, therefore had not the leaf: fuf. picion of ourdeflre to efcape out of his clutches. During thefe converfations through the bars of the window, the work went forward; and to gain time to finifli it, we pretended to be fleepy after dinner. Our companions had given their rags to the Servant, and had dreft themfelvesin their new cloaths, not forgetting their boots. How many vows did I make to Heaven for the fuccefs of our defign in the interval 1 We are very devout on fuch occafions, I aflure you; and at prefent, now I have reached the port, I can recolle6l the burlefque prayers of our Seamen without laughing: thefe people are fo accuflom-ed to fwear, that they interlard their prayers
with
1
•V 4
LETTERS.
257
with oaths. At lad, after havine: been wellfweat-
i	C-
cd, and having well curfed the hardnefs of this piece of timber, and having heartily prayed to God to afllft them in their work, they gained the better of it, and began to undermine gently the pavement of the yard. I was directed to feign myfelf lick after fupper; and I did Sot pretend ficknefs; the approach of the time of the execution of our defign, and the uncertainty of the confequences, threw me into a real fever.
They drank hard, to have an opportunity of retiring the earlier, and the gaoler, his daughter, and maid, were a good deal difguifed in liquor, when they rofe from table. They had, however, fenfe enough left, to lock us up clofely, and my rats, enough to get to work again. The hole being finilhed, and the clock having ftruck twelve, our bufinefs was to exert all our ftrength to lift up the ftone which clofed our tomb; 1 fay, improperly, our ftrength; for they entertained fo indifferent an opinion of mine, that they did not think it worthy of tryal. After a number of ineffe6i:ual attempts, the captain gained the vi£lory, and kept the ftone lifted up with his back, till Dulac had Squeezed himfelf through the opening, and Supported it with a piece of wood ; for they were afraid the noife it would
make, if thrown down, fliould betray us. Be-
ftdes»
258
LETTERS.
fides, they were deSirous -of leaving it in its place, in order to give us time to get at Some diftance. Dulac had invented another Ilrata-gem j the fuccefs of which I am ignorant of. He had wrote a letter in bad Englilh, and had laid it near the door of the dungeon. In this letter he proteftcd to his fair one, that the defire alone of being in a condition to alk her of her father had obliged him to'deceive her; that he hoped this consideration would induce her to conceal our efcape, at lead for two days, to give us time to reach Ipfwich, where a packet-boat waited for us; and gave her to undcrftand, he was of a much higher rank than he appeared to be; and that in return for the favour he begged, he would make her a great lady.
During dinner, the captain had taken notice of a ladder that was Set againft an apple-tree at the further end of th.e yard he acquainted us of it, and told my hulband, that it was cufto-mary in prifons for him who paid for the hole, to pafs through itfirft; and that, therefore, he offered us the ladder firft. This was not a time for politenefs. Having placed it firmly againft the wall, the baron held it faft for me to climb, and was almoft as Soon as myfelf on the top cf the wall; and my companions, by the help of
their
LETT E R 5.
259
their hands and feet were quickly there too ; and having jumped down on the other Side, I fat on the vvall, and Aid, down into the captain’s arms very luckily. There were three or four gardens enclofed with hedges, to clear, which we eaSily did, at the expence of fome fcratches. You guefs, perhaps, we direfitly took the road to Brillol: our captain was too experienced to commit fuch a miftake. We had pafled in Sight of a fine town in the middle of. the night which proved fo fatal to us; he dire6ted our courfe towards that part of the country ; for people could hardly imagine we would return back the fame way. We had nine miles to get there; and, as we intended to enter the town by day-light,, we did not hurry ourfelves. The captain and the two new horfemen’s coats went firft, and my hulband and I followed as their fervants> When we arrived at the inn, I entered firft, and enquired of the landlord, whether my mailer, could have room there ? Upon his fhewing au apartment, I held the door refpe(5tfully till hq and his two companions were entered. I after-wards ordered tea ; and I and my hulband waited on them in the moll refpedful manner in the world. I had been alked the name of my mafter in the kitchen ; and know., my dear, I had the impertinence to name your hufband;
and
26o
LETTER S.
and it was in his name that I hired two chaifes, , in which our gentlemen placed themfelves, and ' my hufband and T got up behind. I had paid generoufly, So that they had not the lead fufpi-cionj and as our horfes were excellent, wc arrived at Bridgnorth at Seven o’clock in the morning, an hour when the goaler and his daughter were certainly fall aflcep. You may well fuppofe, I did not perform this journey behind the chaife. Soon after we had got out of the towii, I called to the poftillion to ftop, be-cauSe I found myfelf very ill, and my pretended maAer being alone in his chaife, had Suffered me to ride within. I forgot to mention, alfo, that I had ordered a Spare horfe for my mafter; be-caufe he frequently chofe to get out and ride. The poftillion, who found himfelf embarraffed with this horfe, told my mafter So ; and I, by his orders, bid my hulband mount it: Such adls of humanity are not uncommon in England; and befides, I had told the poftillions, I had one of the beft mafters in the world, though he was of a, very melancholy difpofition, which rendered him Silent-whole days together, and
that he only travelled to relieve his lownefs of Spirits.
This



L E T T E R S.
261
THIS was the firfl: moment we had been at liberty to Speak to eachother without witnefsllnce >cur lafl: misfortune. I opened my lips to alk pardon of the baron for having made him apart->ner in my unhappinefs; at the very inftant, when he teftified the mofl; lively regret, at not
having it in his power to put an end to my
/
troubles, at the expence of his own life. If I may truft what I feel, they are drawing tow'ards ■a period; and I flatter my Self, the juftice of -God, Satisfied with a punilhment So Severe as I have undergone theSe fix days, v/ill forget my former illcondu6l:. You do not yet know your guilty hulband, my dear Clarifl'a, whom you com-.plain of having made a partner in your misfortunes. Alas! it is I who ought to tremble for having united you to a wretch, whom divine juftice has purSued theSe two years. The baron would then have begun to inform me of the events which had reduced him to the abje61: condition in which I found him : I refufed to hear him: he wanted reft, and I begged him to endeavour to procure it; and he the more willingly yielded to my requeft, as he knew I had .need of reft myfelf.
We made Such quick diSpatch, that we arrived at Briftol on the third day, without the
leaft
262
LETTERS.
lead unlucky accident: we had fetched fuch a compafs about in our journey, that it was night when we entered this city. I abridge a recital already too long. As an exception to the rule, the merchant, who w'as the captain’s friend, was the fon of a French refugee, and yet hated not his countrymen; and as we Teemed fur-prixed at it, he opened a drawer, out of which he took a handfome purfe, which to us feemed empty; and, in fa£f, it contained only a fmall piece of French money, value about a penny Englifh, and faid to us, I hope this piece will be preferved in my family from generation to generation. This is the only fortune my father poflefifed when he arrived in England, and he hardly left any thing more behind him in France, where he gained his living by the trade
of watchmaking. He got money at London by his induftry, put me apprentice to a merchant, and had the fatisfa^lion to fee me rich before he died. He frequently laughed with me at the folly of his companions. Moll part of them, faid he to me, were, like myfelf, born to wear wooden flioes, yet they are perpetually lamenting the fortunes they quitted in France. There was particularly a little toad of a tradefman, named V , whofe father left behind him in France nothing but the vermin which devoured his
flefb.
LETTERS.
263
flefh, and who now Is worth thirty thoufand pounds fterling. This little animal had Such an Hatred for France, that he was almoft out of his fenfes at the birth of the dauphin : I my-
felf heard him fay on this occafton, that he was in hopes the king would have had daughters only : and that a civil-war, on account of the fiiccelllon, would have fet the whole kingdom in flames. For my part, added my father, I fliall all my life love my nation and king. Louis XIV. whatever his.enemies may fay, was a good and great prince. Perfecutions were raifed under the fandlion of his name, but he never knew the excels to which they were carried, and we had given reafon for it. V/

. r ■
I
e are
republicans through principle, and have never known the bounds between what we owe to God and what we owe our mailers; I do not fay this becaufe he was the occafion of my making my fortune, but out of regard to truth.
Our lieutenant, who was a proteftant, was a little difpleafed with this difcourfe, and pro-teflied to the merchant, whofe name was Mar-tineau, that the king of France had no faith-fuller fubjefls than the Calvinills. You are right, with refpe6t to the prefent, who are as good Frenchmen as their fathers were bad, becaufe
264
LETTERS.
caufe they no more read the Satires and foolilh Sermons, which enthufiaftic medlers published towards the end of the laftage; therefore they are now regarded as good and faithful Subjeds, and have jullice done them.
Pardon me this anecdote, my dear; it is a teftimony (which I could not help mentioning) of the good underftanding of our deliverer ; he procured us palTports, and furnifhed the captain with money Sufficient to reimburSe me what I had advanced ; which I was obliged to accept, for fear of affronting this honefl man, who, notwitbftanding the rough behaviour attached to his profeffion, has a great deal of merit. Nothing can exceed the attention which he and his companions paid to us during our five weeks voyage. I was very ill the firfl: fix days, as well as the baron; fince this interval we have enjoyed a perfe6t ftate of health, and amufe ourfelves with the recital of the artifices which poor prifoners employ to recover their liberty ; it is not aftonifhing that they run all rifks to obtain it: they are treated with a barbarity that fliocks human nature, through the inSatiable avarice of inferior officers who are
t
cntrufted with their maintenance : it certainly is not the intention, of the government, which
fuppofet
L E T T E R S*.
265
fuppofes they are treated better. l am drawing up a memorial in their favour, which I fhail addrefs to the lords of the admiralty ; they will Ihudder, l am fure, at an account which feems almoft incredible, and yet, unhappily, has but too much reality.
m
We fet out in two days for Agen, a village, nine leagues diftant from Bourdeaux, where my mother-in-law refides, and where I defire you to diredi your anfwer. I expe£l, with impatience, an account of my mother’s efcape : be her Secretary, my dear Harriet, if her weaknefs does not permit her to write herfelf, I lhall fay no more about my gratitude. I repeat it again, you and your hufband have done fo much for me, that I can never have it in my power to make you both amends.
VoL. I
N
L E T T E%.
• a66
LETTER S
LETTER XXVI.
CLARISSA TO MRS. DARBF
XT
Jri
E A V E N then has reftored you to my wi(hes, my dear, my tender, and refpec-table mother! What an happinefs for me not to have learnt your danger till after your .recovery ! I do not think I fhould have been capable of Supporting the fear of lofing you for ever,
: together.with all my other misfortunes: consider them, my.dear mother ; or, rather ftrive to , forget them : fuch thoughts, are" only proper to rack a heart fenlible like yours. I muft own, there are moments in which the dangers I have undergone, are fo 'ftrongly painted on my imagination, that my hair.Hands upright with horror; a cold Sweat creeps over me; and, if I was left to myfelf in thefe dreadful moments, ri know not whether nature would not link un-
r
fider the terrible imprelTion of this recolledtion. My hulband, who perceives it, does not leave me an inftant; the fight of him throws me into Sentiments fo oppofite to thofe I have juft described,-that I am aftoniflied S have'ftrength to undergo this contraft. God has conducted me to the greateft happinefs, by ways Seemingly . very firange. I am not a woman blinded by
.her
LETTERS.
26
1
her paflion, who figures to herfelf imaginary virtues in the objedl of her tendernefs. I love, nay more, I loved my hufband from the fiifi: moment I beheld him ; but I dare prefume fuf-ficiently on myfelf to aflure you, that Ids exterior qualities would have caufed on me only a momentary impreffion, if he had poflefied them only : he poflefles not only thofe virtues which are commonly found in thofe who are called gentlemen, but he carries them to heroifm. I will give you two examples of this, which, if you pleafe, (hall be for yourfelf only; he has refpefted my delicacy. Though nothing efien-tial to our union is wanting, Mr. Baker in-
formed me, that fome formalities were neceflary in France; the moft effential of which, in my opinion, is' your.confent. I have not been able to confider>myfelf as truly married, till thefe formalities are complied with ; and he has con-fented to live with me in a manner agreeable to this opinion. Another proof of my hulband’s noble way of thinking, is, his infenfibility with refpedt to a misfortune that would have appeared the great eft in the world to a vulgar mind. I have obferved to you, that the fear of accidents, prevented my carrying, my diamonds about me in my journey from Stafford : we had unnailed the lining of the chaife, and hid them
;N a	.under-
LET T E R S.
underneath it So artfully, that it was impoffible to have perceived them ; you may readily imagine, that, in the confufion we Were in through fear of being hopped, it was eafy for Us not to think of thefe jewels; my huftand choofe rather to lofe them entirely, than leave me alone in the open country ; To that, by felling the pearls which I left in pawn at Stafford, 1 fhall Scarcely have two thoufand pounds fterling. I am only fenfible of this lofs, from its putting it out bf my power to procure independency for all that is dear to me. The baron reproaches me for my uneaSinefs, and thinks me. too rich by half; he maintains, that, ..moderate as you are, we have enough to provide abundantly for. all the heceffary wants of. life, and that more would only embarrafs us. Conceal this circumftance from our friends, I conjure you ; Mr. Balfour is not rich, and would confeiit to be lefs fo, if J could refolve to partake his fortune.
Providence declares itfelf, . it bfdaitts ,T lhould.be poor. I wrote to Mr. Baker when T embarked, and delired him to direft his anfwer to me at BourdeaUx: I have this moment received the letter, and the. contents of. it are as follow.
ext e r s.
269-
f
You know, my dear mama, that my worthy aunt was an Irifh woman, and that the greatell part of her eftates was lituated in Ireland : my father has claimed them as a Proteftant; and, as the law gives the inheritance to the neareft re-latlcn, in-prejudice even of children, if thefirft changes his religion, and the children remain • Catholics, he-has ftripped me of every thing from that quarter. I cheerfully reSign to him. • all he has taken from me j my whole fear is, that the remainder of. my fortune will not be confiderable enough to engage him to facrifice his ftrong deSire to have us confidered* as parrN cides: perhaps he will let the adbon he has brought againft 'us fubfiftj without profecuting or annulling the accufation, with a view of keeping,us perpetually abroad. . I have inform- -ed Mr. Baker, by a letter, that you had a confi-derable fum concealed in a private cheft of drawers.at Old Windfor, and delired him to charge fome trufty perfon to be attentive to v/hat paffes in that quarter. My father never liked the houfe ; he perhaps will felHt, and difpofe of the furniture; I begged of him, if this was the cafe, to buy this cheft of drawers, which I particularly defcribed to him, at any price. The Jew, to whom I pledged ray necklace, is become 3, bankrupt j and our witnefs, who had borrowed
N3
the
3
70
L E T T E R S.
the money in his own name, having declared himfelf a creditor, has received only two hundred guineas for 9000I. fifty of which he has expended in fearching after the carrier whom he procured for us at Stafford : this perfon came from London, and was not known at this tov/n. The baron mart be contented ; he thought my fortune was Hill too considerable : behold it reduced to 24000 French livres, for he will not Suffer me to part with fome valuable trinkets I have about me. I have equipped myfelf at Bourdeaux conformable to my prefent condition ; no laces, no filks ; my refpeffable mother-in-law wears none, and I fhould be forry to appear better dreft than her: he has confefled to me, that the little fortune on which (he lives, does not exceed twelve guineas a year; he is therefore right in faying we are rich with what I (lill have, fince this amounts to three times as much. God preferve me from greater misfortunes than that of being poor ; I have not occafion for a very ftrong dofe of resignation to Support poverty : fo little is wanting for the real neceffaries of life, when we are capable of annihilating imaginary wants.
However violent an inclination I have to embrace you, prudence commands me to reprefs
it.
i: E T T E R S.
27t
it. My hufband loves his mother infinitely j this feems to me a good prefage of hisjcharaQ:er. Notwithftanding his filial piety might deceive in this refpe6t, magnify his good qualities, and leflen his defe6Is, I know what duty dire6ts me to do in fuch a cafe ; I mufl: accommodate my humour to his j and, through the grace of God, I feel no repugnance in Submitting to thofe he has ordained my Superiors ; but, my dear manla^ I fliould feel an infinite deal to fee you Suffer in, the lead j you have only the duties of charity and of chriffian condefcenfibn to fulfil with regard to this lady, and thefe are much lefs ex-tenfive than mine; ftay then with my friend till you have determined whether you could live agreeably with us. The baron earneftly defired me to affure you of his affebfionate duty ; he af-fures me he has not the leaf! uneafinefs about the peace of our future Society ; but if it Should poffibly happen not to be perfeblly agreeable to you to live with your children^ he fliall be always ready to refign to you the income of my trifling fortune.
N4
letter:
272
LETTER S.
LETTER XXVII.
Lady HARRIET TO CLARISSA.
• •
A M ignorant how romances are compofed, my dear, fince I have never read but one; but, I am very certain, there can be none So afSedling or interelting as the hihory of your misfortunes. I have followed you in your ef-capes, and into your prifon ; I have felt myfelf alrnoft Suffocated in palling through the hole made with fuch difpatch and labour : in fliort, my dear, though your letter was dated from a place where you was in Safety, and that you had Set Sail the very moment it was diredled to me, I could not perSuade mySelf you had Surmounted all the obftacles which oppoSed your efcape. My dear, my charming Clarilla, paffing the night in the fields, hoiSled upon a bllnd-horSe, dragged into a dungeon, laid on ftraw, among three deS-peradoes ! For your Sailors, whom I would heartily embrace, if I had them here, were, nevertheless, rough unpolifhed men; w'itneSs the energy of their expreflions, which mufi: appear very Strange to the delicate ears of my incomparable friend. It would doubtleSs have been much worSe if they had been ignorant of your Sex 5 for I am perfuaded thefe good honeft Seamen,
LEV T E R S.
2ft
men, at prefent, pique themfelves upon the re-ferve and politenefs with which they behaved in your prefence. I would lay a good wager, from the knowledge I have of your difpofition, that you will accufe me of injuftice on reading this: you are accuftomed to fee people on the bright
and to forget whatever might leflen your good opinion of thena* • Qh 1 I do not oppofe this good -opinion/' Have not I told you, I would embrace them- heartily' ? Then, you know, that I embrace thofe only whom I love. Yet,
this good friendlhip fhall not prevent my thinkr
ing youi were not made for this fort of company; and arthe Second reading'of your letter, I could not help, laughing whenever you called them my companions^' A fine expreffion in the mouth of my Clarifla ! It coft me tears at firft, becaufe I was not thoroughly Satisfied you were efcaped from this priibn j four and twenty hours were neceffary to convince me of it, and fropi that infiant, I re-affumed all my former good humour. ■ I don’t know what would havebpjreup my fpirits againft tempefts and accidents, if yoq hid been forced to pafs the Streights pf Gibraltar. - I Should have perpetually fancied I faw you fall into the hands of Corfairs. - Jn the fout you took, you only run tfie rilk pf being a pri-
fcner of war in SVance: a trifling misfpttupe
■1
N-5
A
for
274
LETTERS.
for the wife of a Frenchman. At laft, you are happily arrived in your new country, with an hulband worthy of you. What extraordinary events lead thereto! Might it not.be Said, Heaven has preferved you, and would not leave to man the care of providing for you ? How happy are we, my dear Clariffa ! we have no need of a paffion which time diminifhes, to be enchanted with our lot, and reafon applauds our fentiments in favour of our hufbands. Affure yourfelf thefe two men render all others contemptible, in my mind, and that I find them a parcel of poor wretches : Some day I will amufe myfelf with pointing out to you the charafters of the greateft part I fee, and you will acknowledge that their poor ribs would be very excufeable in being jealous of our fate.
I MUST own to you, my dear, a foolifh thought which has come into my head. Could it be an effe6t of jealoufy ? It was in Speaking of this hideous paffion that I reeolleHed this extravagant thought. I have read over and over »-gain all the letters you have wrote me fince our fbparation ; I have weighed all your words, all your adions, to fee if I could not find out fome one, to which I might attribute fuch llrange mis-
fo.rtuae^i Lit Spite, at find,lhg you So Superior
to
LETTERS.
'm
to your poor Harriet, who Seeks to find you in fault, to raife herfelf at your expence ? Alas I if my pride had this fine idea without my knowledge, it has been paid for it according to its de-ferts. I have endeavoured to turn and twill you
W
every way; but I have- found you ■■ yourfelf in every thing, even in a very critical circumfiance. To explain myfelf, if I had been in a like fitua-tion,i I don’t* know whether I Ihould have had the courage -to Sacrifice a prejudice to my reputation; We have two forts . of it, my dear; that which.concerns-^-the morals, prudence and
; and j there i are. few. women of a cer-
tain rank, who, having been well educated, put themSelves in danger through their own fault of lofing this.: ouriother reputation is that of the mind, of our underftanding, of a certain haugh-tineSs of Sentiment,, which we - call noblenefs of Spirit y there is a great number of women who are ftill more jealous of this-fecond reputation than of the firft. .1 improve amazingly fince I am at Paris,, except in the art of writing intelligibly.; for Lvery much doubt your underftanding this nonSenSe : an. example will render it more intelligible ; we hardly dare to deSpife the miftreSs of a king ;; the noblenefs of herehoice jufiifies it. This woman, who does not blulh at the fliame-ful title, \yould have hid herfelf from the whole
world
i
I M.
276
LETTERS.
world if Ihe had married her footman, though he were the honefteft man in the world, and the moll capable of making her happy. Even though (he were under the greateft obligations to him, all thefe motives would not in the lead excufe her choice ; the moft favourable would fay, Ihe had a vulgar foul, and had been guilty of a meannefs: neverthclefs, in fa6t, it is better to be the wife of the lowed plebeian, than the midrefs of a king; we therefore fet more value on what is called greatnefs of foul, than on virtue. You have judged otherv/ife; you have preferred the reputation of a moded prudent girl, to that of a girl of noble fentiments : your virtue might perhaps have been fufpedled, if you had travelled about in company with an amiable young man j and you have rather chofe to be fufpeiled of poITeding fentiments lefs exalted than your birth : you are therefore an heroine, the Lucretia of the age, and the an-tient one does not deferve to be compared with you. I fhould not fay fo much, if you had thrown yourfelf into the danger, or if you had had any other means of elcaping the crime which your father endeavoured to force you to commit. Alfo God, who faw the purity of your motives, has madetife of your misfortunes
to elevate you to the height of good fortunes
he
L E T T' E R S.
277
he coudu^s you So viSibly, that I can no more find fault with the Intention in which you per^* fevere, with regard to your fortune: abandon it
to-----• Ihould I fay your father ? Yes j another
name, which was at my tongue’s end, would Ihock your delicacy. Set the world an example of moderation. Sandtify, ennoble a middling condition, a ftate of poverty if you will j we leave you at full liberty in this refpeft, provided you permit us to take all the precautions we think neceflary, to Secure -the fortune of your children.
You comprehend, by this difcourfe, that your mother has not judged it proper to keep the Secret you required of her; it is true, Ihe would not acquaint us with it but under very hard conditions ; we have fubfcribed thereto, do not complain in the lead. Juftice requires you Ihould, in this refpe<St, truft to the judgment and conduct of my lord, you to disinherit your children before their birth ? How do you fulfil the intentions of your dear aunt ? Did Ihe leave you her fortune to be dif-fipated in debauchery f I have at Jaft found out the foible of my Clarifla’s condu^ j Seduced by an apparent good, file has committed a real fault, I acknowkdge, few girls would have
been
What right have

278
L E T T E R~ Si
been capable of committing Such a fault; but it is^ one, notwithftanding, and muft be repaired. Hear what your mother fays on this fub-je6I; you have no right to miftruftiher counfel,
or to difobey her orders.
Mry. Darby lurdtes-, \
__	f
YES, my dear daughter, the virtues have bounds which we cannot exceed without falJing-into-criminal extremes. I Ihalbnever recollect-without Ihedding tears of tendernefs, that, to my fafety, my Clarifla has facrificed her immenfe fortune j that Ihe has joined to; this motive, fo worthy of admiration, that of healing an heart imbittered againft her^ by the preference; that has been given to her., Let my virtuous.daugh-s ter prove to her father, that he .owes to her filial duty only., the gift Ihe has made him. Eafy about my fate, let her not alter her firll refolu-tion, but confine herfelf to. the lofs of the income of her fortune, without giving up her property in it. In fpite of the law, • which gives it to your father, my dear Clariffa, Mr. Balfour .has an infallible method to oblig-e him to refign this property, and reftore it to you j this is an aft of juftice which you cannot oppofe, without becoming culpable., Do not imagine poverty ter-
ri^es
0 \
V
*A
V ». •
LETTERS.
2l9
rlfies me to my dear child and her pofterity ; if God gives her children worthy of her, they will always be rich enough ; if an earthquake, bankruptcies, or other accidents, which feem to come immediately from God, Ihould annihilate all your pofleffions, as the lofs could not be attributed to you, it would neither coft me a tear, or Gccaiion a tingle tigh. Leave providence to ftrip your children, if they put your fortune to an ill ufe j join your fincere prayers with mine to beg it of God, but do not in the lead: affift to deprive them of it yourfelf.
Do not upbraid me . with having difclofed your lituation to Mr. Balfour ; I firft obtained the mod inviolable promife from him not to endeavour to change it; but by fuch ways as cannot pofllbly call ablulh in your face. His word, more than the prefent date of his fortune, places bounds to his generofity ; and he will fuder you to enjoy the chridian pleafure of being poor, whatever it cods him : he requires, as a recom-pence for the violence he does himfelf in this re-Ijpe£l:, that I will not leave his wife during his journey to London about your affairs. I approve of your reflections concerning too precipitate a re-union. If unfqrturiately you may-
have reafon to think I Ihould not be able to
agree
28o
L E T T E R S
agree with your hulband’s mother, nothings Ihall prevent my fettling in your neighbourhood; and I had rather be accufed of oddity, for being fo near you, without living in your family, than run the rilk of difturbing your domeftic peace. . L fhall not even be under a neceffityof lefSening your poor pittance j Providence has provided for my fubfiftence. Poor Mrs. Cofby has thought it her duty to leave me what little Ihe had ; which, added to the Sale of my trinkets that I v/ore the day you was torn from my ’ arms, makes double the fum you poffefs. Whatever defire I have to embrace you, another mo- -tive ftill keeps me at Paris till next Spring. I f could not refufe the, intreaties of my Second -daughter. ' You are Surprised my dear Clarifia ! you do not know of any lifter : I flatter mySelf, , notwithftanding, that you will not disapprove the addition I have made to my family. You have taken the liberty to give me a Son, why , Ihould I refufe to accept a Second daughter ? I . have-done it the more willingly, as I am per- -fuaded you will cheerfully approve my adoption •. of your Harriet ; and what daughter^- excepting Clariffa, could have carried her affe^ion . for me farther ! Has Ihe not rilked her life to » preServe mine ? I Ihall not undertake to particularize her marks of tenderneSs 5 I tell you ;
air ;
LETTERS.
281
all, in faying, that you could not have done more than her. There is another account which you expe£t/rom me ; I am about to Satisfy you, and acquaint you with things which cannot fail of interefting you.
Lady Harriet continues.
YES, my dear Sifter, I have at laft the hap-plnefs of a mother, and I don’t know if I could poflibly have had more tendernefs and refpeft for her whom God deprived me of before I was of a Sufficient age to know her, than I have for her he has now given me. No jealoufy : if you pleafe, you (hall be the eldeft j I yield to you the firft place in her heart. I confent, Ihe loves you a little better than me, on condition you permit me to love her as well as you do your-felf; your lifter holds the pen, Clarifla j but it is your mother didates.
Recollect, my child, the pleafure with which I faw the time arrive, when your fate was to be fixed : you have only known the joy your marriage gave me ; you are ignorant how much it coft me to reconcile my Self to this eftabliftiment. I'he figure of Montalvo was amiable ; his mind
was cultivated
his heart Seemed excellent j he
was
282
LETT E R S.
age,

was of a great family, and his fortune furpalTed^ my utmoft wilhes ; yet in fpite of all thefe advantages, I felt at firft fight an antipathy for him, which I thought unjuft, becaufe it had no reafonable foundation. I therefore endeavoured
to combat, Surmount, orjuftifyit. I examined this man with the eyes of a mother, who fears for all that is dear to her; and, there were moments, when I fufpe6ted a myftery I could not, penetrate. I furprifed your lover in melancholy fits, which did not feem natural in a perfon of his whofe fituationwas entirely" agreeable ; the care he took to conceal his melancholly, as foon as he perceived my intention to examine him, increafed my fufpicions. I learned from himfelf (and the Sequel Ihews he Spoke the, truth) that he could not Succeed to quiet his remorfe. Montalvo had always been virtuous ; a want of vigilance, had occafioned his committing a ftrft fault j which, having thrown him into defpair, had obliged him to quit his ftate. He. wanted courage to confefs this to him, who had always the care of his confcience; and the fear of committing facrilege, had determined him to make his efcape. We advance a great pace in the road of guilt, when we have the misfortune to engage therein. The poiSonous dif-courfe of perfons, who were dear to him,
alSifted
LETTERS.
283
affifted to ftifle his confcience ; his faith grew weak, he thought it extind ; and flattered him-fclf he had ereded a wall of brafs, between him and his confcience ; and did not know he was miftaken, till the moment, the guilty union, which was to Secure his fortune and your un-happinefs, was propofed to him. He was (hocked to the lafl: degree, at this propofal; and you could not have refrained from tears, at the recital of the torments he endured. He went out of the houfe like a diftradted man ; and wan-
V
dered a long while about London ftreets, without knowing where he went. I am endeavouring to 'rccolledt the pidlure he drew of his fitua-tion 5 and to make ufe of his own terms.
t
After ha^^ing walked a great way, fays he to me, a numerous crowd forced me to flacken my pace. It was a holiday ; and, by the finging of priefts, I found I was near a chapel; and, that all thofe, who were near, waited for the finhh-ing of high-mafs, to enter. It was not pofli-blc for me to continue my rout; my trembling knees Shook under me; and I was forced to reft myfelf againft a wall, to prevent my falling down. How happy are thefe people I fays I, calling my eyes on this crowd : in a few minutes they go with joy, to unbofom their hearts at the
foot
LETTERS.
foot of the altar: and I, wretch that I am! have drove myfelffrom the fan8:uary of mercy. This refledHon threw me into a deep melancholy j I wept bitterly, and felt fuch an ex-ceflive uneafinefs of mind, as is impofiible to be exprelTed. I was well dreffed, and attraded the attention of a woman, who was near me.
I fancy. Sir, fays (lie, you are not well, the fum may increafe your diforder y follow me, and I will procure you entrance through the ambaf-fador’s houfe ; for you feem a ftranger, andy perhaps, don’t know the way. The voice of this woman feemed to me an order from Heaven, which I dared not refill ; I followed her with
tlie thoughts of a criminal, whom the officers
She fpoke
to the porter, and he opened a door, which led to the chapel by a private flair-cafe. When I had got to the top of the flairs, my terrors en-creafed to fuch a degree, that I had not courage
I fat down on a little bench in the
__-	y
of juftice condua before his judge.
to enter.
paffage in fight of the altar ; I ^
this obfcure place ; and abandoned myfeli wit
out reftraint to all the impetuofity of my emo tions. I hid my eyes with my hands, to conceal my face from my angry judge, abundance of tears ; and doubt not ut drew the attention of thoxe near me y or,
L E T T E R S.
285
I fobbed bitterly. I remained above a
quarter of an hour in this lituation, almofl: in-fenhble j I was as it were annihilated : 1, at length, by degrees, came to myfelf j and viewing the immenfe diftance which I had placed between God and me, I felt fo cutting an an-guifh, that I thought my heart would ha^^c broke. You may imagine, perhaps, thatthefe motions of grace worked my converlion ? You are miftaken. Alas ! how eafy it is to commit fin ! and how difficult to return to virtue ! It is certain I detefted mine, and would have facri-ficed my life at this moment to have annulled them; but yet, when I thought of the means to expiate them; I felt, as it were, tied, bent down, attached to the earth, without ftrength to alllft the violent impulfe, which caufed me to deteil them. Several perfons received the facra-Tuent. G my God ! I exclaimed, from the bottom of my heart, take my life ; let it end, if neceflary, in the moft cruel torments : fo that I have the happinefs to receive you once more, without committing Sacrilege. I palled about an hour in this lituation ; and full of indignation againft myfelf, I offered this prayer with an ardor, that I never in my life felt before ; Lord, give me ftrength to break my chains, or take my life. It is a terrible thing to fall into
the
$
286
LETTERS.
the hands of thy juftice 5 nevertheless, I deSire rather to deliver myfelf thereto, than continue to live in fin. I felt myfelf eafier after this ejaculation ; I fancied God had heard me favourably ; and I arofe with a firm refolution not to confent to the Sacrilegious union which was propofed to me. I was fo altered when I returned home to my mother’s, that fhe was frightened. Mr. Darby, whom I would have acquainted with the occafion of it, laughed at my Scruples; and told me, I muft refolve to attend him immediately after dinner. I fhall not repeat the impieties he uttered to fortify my ftaggered confcience j they did not make fo great an imprellion on me, as the dreadful pidure of my fituation, if I refufed to enter into his views. What would you do in your community ? fays he : for you muft either return there, or perifh with hunger in London. You will there meet with the worft ufage ; and when your apoftacy is thought Sufficiently expiated, and you are releafed from a tedious and clofe confinement you will find yourfelf without th» leaft confideration in your order, and without efteem. Your flight is a blot, which will be never effaced, unlefs you go to la Trappe *
* A Carthufian monaftery, which praflices the grcateft aufterities.
A couple
LETTERS.
287
A couple of years there will do your bufinefs ; and you will die a martyr to a ridiculous opinion ; a phantom decorated with a fine name, and which frightens women only, or thofe like them.
THIS frightful view weakened the Salutary impulses, which the mercy of God had excited in my foul. I Suffered myfelf to be drawn away, and the fight of the charming ClarilTa contributed toftifle them entirely. I expreffed myfelf badly ; my remorfe Seemed to gain new ftrength, in proportion as I endeavoured to overcome it ; and I frequently declared to my father, I Should
never have force to refift it : this induced him to haften the ceremony, which was to Seal my cri mes.
I HAVE much weakened, I am certain, the pathetic of Montalvo’s difeourSe. I fliall never forget the impreflion it made on me ; and I am fenfible I cannot put it to paper. His ftruggles with grace caufed thofe emotions in him, which did not efcape me, though I could not gueSs at their cauSe. Yet my dillike of him did not dimi-nifh, and I was angry with myfelf for it. I found him one day at the end of the garden, wrapped up in a profound reverie 5 I was,dofe
to
2^S
LETTERS.
to him before he perceived me ; and not having time to Iliut a book, which lay open near him ; he endeavoured to conceal it from my fight, by fitting upon it. I am not naturally curious j and I was allonilhed at my violent defire to fee what he endeavoured to hide. We were familiar enough, for him not to be offended at the trick I had a mind to play him. I let my fnuff-box fall, and, while he attempted to pick it up, I opened the book, and was furprifed to find it St. Auguftin’s Confefilons, which he had taken from the book-cafe. He blufhed at feeing the book in my hands ; and I, transported with joy, attributed this confufion to a laudable modefty ; on which I paid him a compliment. This accident having determined the fubjefit of our conversation, he talked of the happinefs of innocence, of the difficulty of recovering it when loft, like a man affedted with the truths of religion. From this inftant, my repugnance for him ceafed, and gave way to very oppofite fenti-ments. I looked upon your marriage with him as a fingular favour of Heaven. I flattered myfelf the friendfhip of Mr. Darby for the perfon who was to be his fon-in-law, would be the means, through God, of his converfion; and ever fince, I wifhed to haften your marriage with one whom I thought fo deferving of
efteem.
’ <

LETTER S.
289
-efteem. Judge my furprife, at your exclamation, when he approached to Support you, when you was ready to faint on entering the room. As I could not imagine what could have caufed Such an alteration in your ideas, within a quarter of an hour, I own I Vvas afraid you was a little disordered in your mind. The words of your father removed this idea. He complained of having been betrayed j there muft be then Some Secret which had came to your knowledge. I had not time to endeavour to guefs the nature of it j I could only tremble for my dear child. You Spoke to the minifter who came forward to marry you, with So majeftic an air, that you Seemed Something more than human : your menaces ftruck him motionlefs ; but Montalvo’s moment of mercy was come; he was affeffed by them in Such a manner, that he fancied a ftorm of lightning fuSpended over his head; and that a fixed resolution of repairing his crimes, could alone prevent the ftroke ^ he formed it, -and had Scarcely conceived the defign before he felt himfelf like a man freed from a heavy burden which opprefled him. His knowledge of your father’s Sentiments, forced him to diSfemble his own; and in the private dif-courfe they had together at the end of the room, he employed no other motive to engage him to Vql.I.	O	defift
2Q0
L E T T E R B.
. defifl: from ufing force, than the fear of making a noife. Your cries might awaken the . Servants, and he would be obliged either to abandon his defign, or afford you an infallible ’ opportunity to complain of the violence he offered you. To avoid this . inconvenience he condufted you to a place where your cries could not be heard; and to have nothing to fear from ray fide, he had the cruelty to flop my mouth ' ■with an handkerchief, and; drag me into adiftant room, where he faftened me ffrongly. -I fay, / he dragged me, and it literally was fo. I laid hold of every thing I met with in the way : I was furious as alionefs robbed of her whelps ;. , and having grafped a baniffer of the ftair-cafe, T held it fo faft, that Mr. Darby could not poflibly force me to quit my hold. Furious ; at my refiffance, he left me in the hands of Montalvo, and ran to fetch his fword with a • defign to run me through the body. For God’s fake, madam, fays this young man, pay fome regard to what I fay; yield to a violence which might have irreparable confequences. I call Heaven, the avenger of perjury, to witnefs . that I will find a way to deliver you and Clarifia too. I thought I discovered an air of truth in Montalvo’s oath, which forced me, to ufe the i.expreflion, to furrendermyfelf to his managements
£ T- X £	S,
291
ment; Heaven doubtlefs permitted it, for it was not natural I Ihould truft to his promifes in Such circumftances. He threw himfelf on Mr. Darby, who had drav;n his Sword to run me through; and my reliftance having ceaied, he chained me to the floor as I have already told you. Oh ! my dear child, what alTiftance from Heaven had I not occahon for in thefe dreadful circumftances, to prevent my falling a prey to defpair? I was under the moft dreadful appre-henfions for you j I gnawed my flelh j I ftrug-gled to break my bonds 5 I uttered ufelefs cries, fmce my mouth was flopped with an handkerchief. In Ihort, - I confider the prefervation of my life and reafon as a miracle. After feme hours were elapfed, my Spirits became a little more quiet; I had the happy thought of lifting up my eyes towards the ceieftial regions, and indeed from thence alone I could expe<5l affift-ance. I recolledted, with trembling, that by an uSeleSs refiftance, I might have made myfelf an accomplice of the homicide who was going to kill me. Ah ! what would have become of my Soul, if I had rendered it up to my Creator, in the midft of the dreadful tranfports with which I was agitated ? They were not voluntary, it is true ; but their violence declared, that this refignation to the will of God, which I flattered
O 2	myfelfi
’igi
L E T T E R S.
myfelf I poffelled, was very weak. I did not fiiffer myfelf to be call down with this humiliating refleilion; I was convinced of the imper-fecfion of my virtue, and made the greateft efforts to repair my weaknefs, by a courageous fubmifSion to what Gcd Ihould pleafe to ordain concerning us. I conlidered you under his immediate proteSlion, tho’ all human Succour was denied us; and my confidence began to revive. I endeavoured to ftrengthen mvfelf in this con-
o	^
fidence*, when I heard a difpute at my chamber door, and plainly diflinguifhed the voices of James and Montalvo. The firft kept the keys of my room, and refufed to deliver them to Montalvo, who inSifted on having them. This defire of opening my prifon doors, feemed to me a confequence of his oath ; atlaft, Montalvo lofing all patience, laid hold of a large piece of wood which he found near him, and with redoubled blows, attempted to break the door open. As this apartment was inhabited by this Servant only, its repair had been negle61;ed; and as it was old, the door Soon gave way. Montalvo fan to me, and whilft he cut the handkerchief off my face which almoft Suffocated me. Said, Madam, your daughter is in a place of Safety ; we muff get the ftart of Mr. Darby’s return, who has purSued her in vain, and follow
her.
L E T T E R S.
2'93
her. Do not deceive me, Montalvo, fays I, in a feeble voice: leave me to die here, if your intention is to feparate me from my child ; death' is near at hand to free me from your cruelty: in faSt, I found myfelf fo exhaufted, that I thought my laft hour was come. And what place could be fo proper to remove you from, your daughter as this ? replies he. All the fer-vants except James think: you have fled with her. It is not in the middle of the night, by flealth, that I mean to take you away j a poft-chaife waits at the door; choofe, to conduct: you, any perfon in the village whom you think ■ you can befl: truft; order him to carry you -where you pleafe in London. If my company is fufpicious, I will leave you alone ; though as I have fome fad fecrets to reveal, I hope you will fufSer me to join you there. I was aftiamed
of having diflrufted a man who a6ted with fuch opennefs ; and my fufpicions entirely va-nilhed, when I heard James exclaim that Montalvo had betrayed his mafter; he was in fuch
a rage, that I thought he would have fell into convuhions. I am relolved to accompany you, faid I to Montalvo; and at the fame time put to rights my deaths and head-drefs which were in diforder, and gave him my hand. I found the chaife,. furrounded by the whole village,
whom
ac>4-
LETTERS.
whom James excited to flop my pafl^ge, by claiming that I was a wicked woman, fince I willingly made my efcape with a ravilher. His endeavours were fruitlefs ; the people made way for me to get into the chaife, and I heard from every month, God blefs you, as well as madam Clariffa. I reaped the fruits of your beoefkenoe, my dear child ; and, notwithftand-ing the confufion and affliction I was in, the bleflings of thefe poor people, who loudly proclaimed the charities you had bellowed on them, agreeably flattered my ear.
iv
When we were out of the village, Montalvo requefled my orders a Second time; and as I knew nobody at London but the miftrefs of the houfe where we lodged fome time, I defired him to condudl me there. Our chaife went furprif-ingly fall j and I am perfuaded, we were not more than an hour and an half on our journey. I had counted the mile Hones, and wc were no more than five miles diftant from London, when we turned out of the main road towards the right. Do not be furprized, madam, fays Montalvo, that I quit the ufual road; we might meet Mr. Darby in the environs of London ; I am even perfuaded he waits at the turnpike to flop mifs ClarilTa, fo that I am
obliged
LETTERS.
295
He had eluded my
obliged to go a good deal round about to avoid him. Ah, Heavens ! cried I, have you not affured me my dear child was in Safety ? He does not know it, replies Montalvo, and thinks fhe has taken the road to the capital; but, madam, Suffer me to repeat the Savour I begged oS you, to fuSpend your curiofity till you arrive at the afylum you havechofe. queftions twenty times, and not being able to get him to anfw^r me, I had been Silent till now. If I had been capable of any uneafinefs about myfelf, I fhould perhaps liave fufpe<Sed my guide, for we pafled thro’ very bye places : at laft I perceived thefpiresof Weftminfter, and immediately entered the outfkirts, and foon arrived at the houfe I had mentioned ; I expected to hear of you there, at leaft. Montalvo begged me to permit him to leave me half an hour, and promifed to acquaint me afterwards with what I was fo defirous of knowing. Oh ! my poor child, how long did this half hour feem ! but my impatience was infupportable, when I found hours elapfe without hearing of Montalvo : he arrived at laft. Madam, fays he, accofting me, I would willingly have brought you more pofitive news ; but all I can aflure you is, that mifs Clarifla has efcaped her father’s purfuit, witnefs the rage in which I
found
2c6
LETTERS.
m
found him at Mrs. Colby’s. Mrs. Colby in^ London ! cried I. At thefe words, Montalvo, throwing himfelf at my feet, declared ev^ery thing that is contained in this letter, and ended thus : it was five o’clock in the morning, when mifs Clarifia’s footfteps were difcovered in the garden ; and, according to all appearance, file had efcaped Several hours before. I conceived, from your hulband’s difcourfe, that your life was not Safe ; yet, with a view of Screening his innocent daughter from his firft fury, I did not chooSe to loSe fight of him. There is not a village within fix miles round,'where we have not made an enquiry : one woman only told us, (he met mifs ClariSTa at day-break. We went to the next village, but could get no intelligence of her, whence I concluded She had luckily met with Some carriage. Mr. Darby thought the fame, and without considering fhe had the ftart of him by two hours, flattered himfelf he fhould overtake her with a horfe already jaded, and declared he would give a description of her to the turnpikes. I applauded a defign, which I could not hinder, and muft ac-knov/ledge I was not void of fear during the whole purfuit. I offered him to continue the Search myfelf, and flew to your Succour. We were to meet at my mother’s. I there met him,,
foaming

LETTERS.
297
foaming with rage, damning thofe who had made fuch a well-condudted project, and To near
a conclufion, prove abortive; and not being
able to imagine how it was difcovered, he told
Windfor
and put you to the torture, to find out whe-
ther you knew any thing of it, or where your
He was fcarcely gone.
daughter was gone, before my mother with tears deplored her mif-fortune, in being concerned in fuch odious pro-
jects, and threatened me with the wrath of
Heaven, if I did not rilk every thing to Save
you from the danger which threatened you. Her forrow Seemed fo natural, added Montalvo,
that I owned to her what I had juft done : (he
teftified fuch marks of joy at the hews, as tho-
roughly convinced me (he really detefted her
errors : and the caution (he advifed, clearly Ihewed how very defirous die was of repairing her faults. She provided a trufty perfon to watch Mr. Darby, and ordered him to ftay at the inn, and give us the earlieft intelligence of mifs Clarilfa. After the departure of this man, my mother acquainted me that Ihe was the perfon who informed this innocent young lady, of the Sacrilege She was on the point of
: She has the utmoft defire to throw
commitnng : herfelf at your feet, to beg pardon for all the
misfortunes
•*0
2q8
LETT E R S.
misfortunes fho has occafioned you. 7'hink,-madam, whether you can pardon two wretches,. who with joy would Spill the laft drop of their blood, to put an end to your unhappinefs ?
Ah ! every thing is pardoned and forgot, cried I j (he repays with ufury every thing I have done for her, Since (he has Saved my poor child." Alas ! what is become of this dear child ? Who willreftore her to her dhlraiSIed mother ? who will ftrengthen me againft the fear of., feeing her again, in the power of her barbarous tyrant ? After a thoufand other lamentations, wliich melted Montalvo, I defired him to conduct me to his mother’s ; he would not confent to it. Who knows, replied he, but Some unfortunate accident may bring your hulband back there. I was fenfible of the imprudence I was going to commit, and v/hen this penitent came to me, I would not permit her to mention any part cir-cumftances; and we bufied ourfelves only in confulting what fteps to take. She confirmed what I knew before too well, that your father is implacable in his hatred, and capable of tuning all rifks to Satisfy it. She convinced me, that Montalvo had every thing to fear from his refentmenr, and begged of me to permit him to partake of my afylum. You are fenfible, my
child^

LETTER S
299
5 child, I could not refufe them this favour j the repentance of thefe two criminals, had entirely effaced their faults in the eyes of God ; I hoped fo at leaft, and fhould I harbour the lead refent-ment againft them ? Alas ! my heart detefted the thought, and I could fay on the contrary,
: they were become dear to me. Neverthelefs, my uneafinefs about your fate increafed every moment. Montalvo at his return, told me a circumftance which quieted my fears a little. Mr. Darby had publi(bed a reward of an hundred guineas for any perfon who would difcover you :
' this promife had produced no effect j therefore, you had got to London, or perhaps were gone to France; you were fure of meeting with an afylum with your friend. I greedily fwallowed
4
this hope; one circumftance only prevented my being fatisfied entirely with it. I knew your ten-dernefs, and could hardly believe that you would have quitted England, without firft being acquainted with my fate. And it is the lively in-tereft fhe takes therein, fays Montalvo, which has hurried her departure. What could your tender daughter do for you, when her virtue obliges her to refpe<Sl: your common perfecutor ? Has fhe not judged you had need of a more powerful pro teSion; and, do you think fhe has ne-
gleded that ofa man who too well knows what
your
300
LETTERS.
your hufband is capable of, to be aftonifhed at the dreadful confidence Ihe muft be obliged to repofe in him ? Yes, madam, mifs Clarifla is either in France, or in Some family of honour, from whence Ihe will not fail writing to lady Harriet. The clergyman who was the infiru-ment of God to ftrengthen Mrs. Colby in her good refolutions, confirmed Montalvo’s conjectures, and advifed me to follow my daughter. If Ihe is in France, fays he to me, you will foon be re-united. If Ihe is ftill in England, Mr. Balfour will have the generofity to fly to her afliftance. Thefe confiderations ftaggered me ; ourexprefs, who returns to-morrow, will determine my resolution. It is certain Mr. Darby has had no news of you ; 1 therefore think you Saved from his purfuits, andifetout. You know the reft my dear child ; the goodnefs and atten-tention of my new children is beyond exprellion. Mr. Balfour leaves us in a few days; I Ihall not quit his wife, till Ihe is happily recovered from her lying,-in, and I have had the honour of Handing god-mother to the child, agreeable to her requeft.
E N D OF T H E F IR S T V 0 L U M E.
K’* r yr-
■ p-	-y '



• »
. r^.>-
V
t •
‘"Xt
• *


V -V

<»? • -
' ■' ‘*\ ■ ^
h f;<

'.O-'- •	■i' *
. t
SINGER
MKND^HALI.
COU..
IP/}

. ■ V

.i,-

iS
-f





-^'-K
•X..

'.-' *'r»


.D-x; w-x
. r» -	-
'A' ^ y
r .-<

A
y',

?
•f . ■
.- *r-<r	'	■•	“^~v 1-
-.Ati. '■

-N-:.'* A^-Sh'

*- J

'*» • .i -'

ff
V *»	/.•
*- ..-r _ V



-T . ','	' 3^'
' "	/ C.-, V2T'^
.-' r *fiVr	1
Pif/J-t----7
'■ NT..
... % ■
. /■"' '-•.
:«f;
.^o---S9^


•.V
^ :L - v- -^
^ ft



c- :-te	^ v'	'
■^ •. I
K • *
r: ‘S'.

5-'
W.J.
VjV. -■
i-L^y-r
L
m
!^N .
?*-
V
N i.
it.
* F •■':
\ ■*.' 'v.'
'fi-'.:/- .
'ItpS'CA
!^-'. /


;•• Vi:- * *, x'
tjif. - Vr^V
•



^-1

«. •
1 *

b *

-	
	
/L-- - ' A-	
	
> r-^	
• ■	#
	
•	
. ;
' s
» 'i

I
• V
V --V ■'
-Vi
				-•					'			• v** '	. * '**	1
		.			-	-		*		-		h T ■ «	-	' -
		V			-	“■			«		-	\ i>		•>
														1
i»V ..
a -.’V	•
•■■ t| ■ .-.
\.	'.	">-\ ■	•. V. »
I /
i N

-•',X ’
s.
k^'
%»#'
'. ^
.* •'
Vr '
r«i’ ■'
■.■''tf‘_>».- "j"* Tl.’ ■-'...	t'.-

Fjcrrs. *'


■M--rt r
7 'V	A i	-I - •
# .


\*r h
''-N' ■'X
"^'v ..-- j
•s=,._
- ■ 1^-
.•» cf.
-'.	-•; — i-
-	t'.	-.-
.Vi

.*? -
:• V -' *-• ■ i -
A' ■•’•—, V. .'"7". . •., ■ .rj:/. ..Jifc- -r-^'Sir:' >■
:»=
.'--.-fe.
i-'-'.r.

"•i*
■■fT;
■A
>

I
}
i-.-•
•t. ..•-

* -t '* V:
,	^•T'-	,



Jr-^L-iViv-a^feLlCr
«.V? .•*

/
THE
NEWCLARISS
A
WaAt

A
TRUE HISTORY.
B Y
MADAME DE BEAUMONT.
VOLUME THE SECOND.

DUBLIN:
Printed for J. Exshaw and J. Potts in Dame Jireety and J. Williams in Skinner-ro’vj.
M,DCC,LXIX.
/
#
M


'A
P^'\ -x - \ % - "

XC # M

1^
V/
A
A
V5<
w^D
ri^;>
jrw^
THE
NEW CLARISSA:
A
TRUE HISTORY.
LETTER XXIX. CLARISSA TO MRS. DARBT. My Dear Mamma,
Depend entirely on yours and Mr. ., j ^ Balfour’s prudence, with refpe6t to ^	what Ihall be judged proper to be done
about my fortune; and, I fend you a blank Signed, to fill up as you pleafe. I have not vanity enough to prefer my parts to thofe of my virtuous mother. She knows the whole extent of my duty as a daughter ; who has fo well fulfilled the duty of a wife, in much more difficult VoL. IL	B	clrcum.
1
LETTERS.
tauffht me
'O
circuTnftances than I am in at prefent. She has
that the faults of our fuperiors cannot authorife reprtfals; and, I run no rifk of being miftaken, when I take her for my guide.
I annex to this paper my marriage deed, and the baron’s confent, which authorizes me to difpofe of my whole fortune as I pleafe. The lawyers whom we confulted, having affured us both theTe deeds were necelTary to render valid the resignation I intend < to make; I think this a£Iion alone. Sufficient to convince you of the favour HeaA^en has beftowed on me, in granting me a noble Spirited, and difinterefted huffiand. Who, befides, in his place, would have refolved to make fo great a facrifice, and incumber hira-felF with Such a poor woman as I am become f
Tfje Baron contirMcs.
ALL who had eyes and an heart, madam. Is there any fortune, however brilliant, which one could condefcend to think of, after having had the happinefs of knowing your adorable daughter ? Is fhe not a treafure beyond all other
o
treafures ? It is not as a fond amorous hufband that I bear this teftimony in her favour; fhe has adorned my cottage but three weeks, and
has
LETTER S
i
lias already made all thofe, who have had the happinefs to fee her, my rivals. V/ithout dif-tindlion of age, rank, or fex, all admire, love, and refpe<Sl her. She enchants at firft fight ; and pleafes the mind and heart, if we have the advantage of converfing with her a few moments. With fuch a wife, my happinefs feems perfedf; yet, it is not fo, madam; I have another wifh to gratify; to fee, cherilh, ferve, and refpefi: you. My heart mufl: be infatiable, Surely, ^fince it prefumes to wifli for Something, in the centre of all blefiings. I pofiTefs a mother worthy of being compared with you; this is my Clarifia’s exprefilon; and, you are fenfible (he is a good judge. Had I another, I might boaft of harbouring under my humble roof three wonders. What an addition to my happinefs, if I could once teftify, otherwife than by letter, the refpeft and lively gratitude, v/hich the great qualities of the refpeftable couple, to whom we owe every thing, have infpired me with! Such an attachment and Services as we are obliged to Mr. Balfour and his lady for, are debts which leave thofe w'ho have contradled them, in an incapacity of payment; which would be an humiliating and difagreeable cir-cumftance ; if it were not for the confolation
of our benefaflor’s generofity,
B 2
Heaven grant,
they
4’
LETTERS.
they may never be in a fituation to found our ■ hearts, in this refpe£t; to fpeak for myfelf only (for my wife has no need of fecurity with thofe who know her.) I would chearfully fpill the laft drop of my blood, to prove to our illuftrious friends that they have not obliged an ungrateful perfon. My mother infifts I have not faid enough for her, and will fpeak for herfelf.
BARONESS DASTIE TO MRS. DARBT.
NO, madam, it was not poffible to exprefs the fentim'ents of my heart for your virtuous, and amiable daughter; Heaven in be-Rowing her on me, has completed my utmoft ■wifhes. I neither mean to pay you a compliment, nor do the honours of my fon; but, indeed, he does not in the lead: deferve your treasure. Not becaufe I have not long had reafon to admire the good inclinations which Heaven has placed in his mind; but, this virtue which I have endeavoured to cultivate in him, has Suffered a terrible eclipfe, and that of his wife is fpotlefs. The penitent holds my hand, and is almoft dead with fright, left, as he fays, I fhould do him too ftri£t juftice. Before making a general confeflion of his errors to you, he would have time to efface them by his repentance.
LETTERS.
5
t
tance. He is defirous you Ihould be witnefs of his converfion, that you may be difpofed to for-
He is afraid of alarming
give his pad faults, you about ClarilTa’s fate
He fays, if he fuf-
fers me to go on, I (hall tell you all, by proteft-ing I will, acquaint you with nothing. I will not deprive him of the merit of his confeflion by anticipating it.
I am perpetually making my dear daughter repeat all the circumftances of her terrible fitua-tion; and I fee, with admiration, that Ihe has ever afited as a perfon of confummate prudence and virtue, notwithftanding her youth. How was it poflible to hate a perfon fo perfe£l:! I touch a delicate point, madam, and I am obliged to do it. My dear ClarilTa was under a ne-ceffity of acquainting me with the origin of her misfortunes, to get me to approve the heroic facrifice Ihe is determined to make. From her Sentiments and yours, a perfeef condu6t may be formed. I approve of her purchaSing, if pof-lible, the return of her father’s love, by the prefent facrifice of her immenfe fortune; this would not be buying it too dear. I approve, that Ihe does not confound the rights of her children with her own. To preferve their right of inheritance is her facred duty. To facrifice her
B 3	per.*
6
L E T T

c
Oi
perSonal interefl: in it, to deprive herfelS of. the* annual income ariling' from it, is an acl ot virtue; which I (houid be forry Hie deprived herfeif of. The motives of her felf-denial will ennoble-her in the eyes of men; beSides the merit it will procure her in the fight of Gcd. An agreeable fight for Heaven; Clarifia becomes a farmer’s wdfe; (he who might ectipfe the moft opulent-families! This condition of life has its fweets,, madam ; they muft have been experienced ta^ find them out. If Heaven bellows on our children, the bleffing of the patriarchs, a numerous ©ffspring; they will bewail their pofierity, that a great inheritance will, without doubt, take tliem from the tranquil and innocent way of life, which they have themfelves enjoyed. My dear-Clarifia frequently makes this, obje<Tion; riches, feem to her an ufelefs incumbrance, fince (he-fees with her own eyes, how little is fufficient to Satisfy the real wants of nature. Thofe of charity are a little more extenfive ; neverthelefs-, (he perceives that, with what (he has, (he can provide for all j and regards the middling ftar tion of life, to which (he is reduced, as a blefiing which her children will want. Leave Provi-denee to difpoITefs them-: I'am obliged frequently to repeat to her after you, fhovidence
can eafily find means to. make them poor, with-.
out
LETTERS
7
oirt you : if this Rate is advantageous for them,, let us perpetually pray for this favour for them : Gcd is not uccuftorried to deny fuch favours, as are allied fo feldom. Heaven blelled me with parents as rich in virtue, as deftitute of the goods of fortune; the little edate I poflefs at prefent was all their patrimony. A marriage, I had no reafon to expect, forced me from our happy iiidigence, I found, in confequence of riches and grandeur, the chagrins, cares, and affli6Hons, which are almoft in.feparable from them: my father exhorted me continually to preferve my virtue; and told me, perhaps, in. joke, that he hoped to fee me poor. Heaven delayed fulfilling his defires in this refpedi; I enjoyed the whole of my fortune, when it deprived me of this good father. This lofs was followed by the death of my hulband. At the heels of thefe two- misfortunes, a number of unfortunate accidents followed, with a rapidity that fcarce left time- for breathing. Charged with the guardianihip of Hiy fon, I thought it my duty to defend his rights j I defended them without andmofity, without perturbation of mind; I faw them took away by force, without hatred for the ufurpers. But, to return to our dear daughter, jurtice obliges me to acquaint you with what. I frequently repeat to her j that, in-
B 4.
dependant
8
LETTERS.
dependant of her good qualities, Ihe will be a fortune to my fon, when Ihe is reduced to what Ihe has at prefent, the baron’s eftate not exceeding one fourth of her fortune. We are indeed rich, for this country, where true bleffings are found in abundance; becaufe, we have here few mouths for ‘provisions, and money is extremely Scarce. If I had a mind to compliment you, I Should tell you, madam, that our hamlet is not worthy of a perfon accuftomed to live in grandeur ; but, I am ignorant how to make my language and heart contradidl each other. I fay cn the contrary : come, madam, and adorn a riace inhabited by Simple honeft men, enemies to ail artifice; come into the abode of innocence and peace : here is your true territory; you will here find a perfon who will glory in giving you proofs, by her actions, of the tender and respectful fentiments, with which Ihe has the honour to be. See.

Sequel
\
L E T T E R S.
9
Mamma
and Lady Harriet.
Acknowledge, I am greatly indebted to God for the happy prejudice in my favour; which he has inftilled into the hearts of thofe I have fo great an intereft to pleafe. I (hall not in the lead: abufe this favour, and (hall make ufe of it to acquire the virtues I am fuppofed to poITefs.
Harriet infifts on an exa£l account of the pad and the prefent: be kind enough to inform yourfelf from her, if I do not favour you with any of the trifles, the recital of which v\?ould, doubtlefs, be tirefome to you. If by chance it amufed you, I (hould regard it as a proof of the lively intered, which maternal tendernefs and friendfhip, make you take in the fate of a poor little farmer’s wife, whofe only merit is her love for you.
% '
I wrote you my lad letter on my disembarkation. My hufband hadened to acquaint his mother of our arrival in the kingdom ; and, had the goodnefs to exaggerate greatly my trifling worth. This virtuous’woman was already ac-
B 5
quainted
10
LETTERS.
quainted with our marriage and flight, by Mr. Baker; though, he was not able to let her know what w^as become of uswhich had caufed her ftrange apprehenSions. Our letter having made her eafy, (he begged us not to hurry our departure; and to fettle our affairs at Bourdeaux,^ in fuch a manner as to have no oc-cafion to make another journey there. We-have, therefore, conlulted able lawyers, about the manner in which the deeds I fend you. ought to be drawn up.
band is not of age
During the whole courfe of this affair, I have-frequently been obliged to do myfelf violence,, not to exclaim. Oh age ! Oh manners! Madam, my mother-in-law, has had the gcodnefs to fend' us a power to conclude, both our marriage, and our patrimonial conditions; becaufe, my huL
When twenty-two thousand livres in money, and twelve thoufand livres in jewels were mentioned, the lawyers,. on w hom our drefs had made no great impref-lion, became very refpedlful; but, when the ceflion of more than three hundred thoufand livres, which I was defirous of making to my father,, came on the carpet, they were ready to fall on their knees before this fum^ for, in fa<ff,
their.
LETTER S.
It
their refpefts did out ia the lead regardThe duty I fulfilled.
After their firfl: aftoniifhment was over, they began to make representations. I can’t take upon me to repeat their whole difcourfe : it all amounted to thefe maxims; money conditutes our Supreme happinefsit gives honour, talents, virtue,- friendswe ought to facrifice every thing to get riches ;• therefore, it is folly to renounce our own. Miserable wretches! I died with envy to Say to them: will our appetite Serve to dine twice, when we have a great quan-^ tity of gold ? does gold give us the faculty of being nourhlied, cloathed,, or lodged doubly ? This, if you remember, is the language of Harlequin, in one of Marivaux comedies; but ridicule the third of gold ever Ib- much^ it will always be, Regina del Mondo,. Queen of the World. Our lawyers not being able'to prevail on us to bend under the yoke of this imperious Sovereign, the dedroyer of all virtues, drew up our writings ; but,, with lamentations, which were So comic, as to have excited my laughter, if pity for their dangerous prejudices had not prevailed..
12 LETTER S.
This bufinefs being concluded, the baron waited on our archbifhop. He received us as f erfons, who had been mentioned to him in a very favourable light j an obligation we owe to Mr. Baker j who, according to his promife, had obtained for us a ftrong recommendation from he apoftolic vicar at London. Our prelate was fatisned nothing was wanting to render our firft marriage a facrament; yet, as it was not conformable to the laws of the kingdom, to leave no room for chicanery or bafe defigns, he pub-lifhed the bans at Bourdeaux, and in the ba-ronefs’s parilh-church once; becaufe, the abode
of a minor is at his tutrefs’s houfe; and, having
% «
allowed a difpenfation for the Second and third time of publhhing them, he married us himfelf n his own chapel, and did us the honour of keeping us to dinner.
I was a little embarraffed about my bank notes ; but a merchant at Bourdeaux hath been k nd enough to take charge of this affair. Of all my jewels, only your pidture enriched with diamonds, my watch, and my dear Harriet’s fmeliing bottle,- are leftj they are valued at twelve thoufand livres, but are worth double ' hat funi. I would not Suffer them to infert in
the deed, a ring of two hundred guineas value,
which
LETTERS.

which I had made a prefent of to my hufband. This is the amount of all my treafures.
They are much augmented within this hour, my dear mamma: I have juft received a letter from honeft Riding, in which I find inclofed, a bill of exchange for one thoufand livres (a). He had this fum in his hands, when the eftate of my aunt was adjudged in favour of my father, and would not part with it. Oh ! fay no more, your Clariffa is poor ! In fadf, (he is immenfely rich for this country. He defires a receipt antedated ; I have done it, without knowing
Is not this a fraud; and is there any cafe, in which it is lawful to cheat At all events I (hall be able to reftore it; the money (hall not be made ufe of, till I am certain it is honeftly my property. But, to continue my narrative
w'hether I ought.
Notwithftanding the obliging letter, which, madam d’Aftie wrote me, I could not help being confufed at the thoughts of appearing before her : my misfortunes gave me a little the appearance of an adventurer j a quality which always prejudices a woman j becaufe, it is very
(a) He had only a thoufand livres in his hands, becaufe he had remitted Clariffa the four thoufand he had told her oh
feldom
14
L E T T E R S.
feldom Ihe has nothing to reproach herfelf with in fuch; a cafe.. The teftimony of rny confcience heartened me againft my own (corn; but it would not have- been Sufficient to make me efcape the* contempt of others; and, in fpite of the fine name of philofopher, which Harriet is pleafed to decorate me with Sometimes, I felt myfelf nothing leSs than inSenfible of the public opinion. I Should, nevertheless, have braved it, I believe, provided, my huSband’s mother had-been Satisfied of my innocence, with reSpect to the fieps I was absolutely forced to take. My fears were-removed the very firfl: moment I had
the honour to See her. Imagine-----------No,.
imagine nothing at all,, every thing you- could fancy would be below the truth. Beauty, no-blenefs, virtue, and the graces,, compofe the. countenance of my refpeflable mother-in-law :: affable, thougb very difereet and wary j gay without diffipatioUj grave without ftarchnefs;; for my Harriet often fays, that grave women are-formal, even tn the laft degree.. My hulbandi and I arrived at her houfe a day Sooner than-we promised, Ib that Ihe was agreeably Surprised to fee us at her feet: Ihe bedewed us with her tears, embracing and bleffing us, and^ I i mme-diately found myfelf as free with her, as I have been, withyouj my dear raamma i Ihe was making
cloth;
LETTER S..	15
eloth ; it was for me (he faid (he worked. I had travelled like an heroine irt a; romancer-more diamonds than Iliifts. This word diamonds made me recoIle£l my intention, of offering her my watch; I faftened it to her- apron, telling her, that, next to. the pleafure of offering it her, I could not receive a greater, than to lee her acccept it. 1 will receive Something more precious from my dear daughter, fhe replied'; her heart, her friendfhip, her confidence. Indeed, madam, I anfwered, I have nothing more of that kind to befto.w ; it is already done, without the lead merit in me; for all this efcaped me w:ithout my knowledge,, the inftant I had the happinefs to find myfelf at your feet and in your arms. She anfwered me by a tender embrace; and I confefs, this half hour fo ftrongly refem-bled that when? I had the happinefs to fee her firft, that the confufed remembiance made me think the aflertion falfe, that there is no true happinefs on earth. We palled thefe firfl hours in an amiable confufion^ which- entirely took up my thoughts, and it was the next day before I could examine my new dwelling. Indeed the baron fpoke of it toomodeftJy, when he called
W
it a cottage. The firft entrance is through a middling Sized yard, planted with Several rows of walnut-trees, which form four walks. Tlie
middle
i6
LETTERS.
middle of the yard is a grafs plat of about fifteen feet fquare, oppoSite to which is a Small flight of Iteps, which leads into a wainfcotted hall, fur-nifhed only with chairs with ttraw feats, two walnut-tree tables, and white linen window curtains. There is fuch a firong air of neatnefs in this apartment, that I fancy I breathe a purer air there, than in any other place I was ever in: it has the morning fun, but the vivacity of its rays is damped by a vine, which creeps about the outfide of the windows, and intercepts only the light which would dazzle the fight. On one fide of this hall is a Small kitchen, furnilhed only with bare neceflaries; and on the other fide a clofet, which contains a well chofen library. Three rooms on the firft floor compofe the reft of the apartments : not a bit of tapeftry, but the w'alls, of a beautiful white, are ornamented v/ith defigns painted in frefco. Surrounded with garlands of flowers, and a little paflage in the middle : this is the work of the baronnefs. Behind the houfe is a little pavilion, containing a handfome chamber for a gentleman, two lodging rooms for Servants, and a paved dairy fo bright, that one’s face may be Seen in it: the beds are callico, and the Sheets Smell delightfully Sweet. The houfe Seems a
little palace; but how Ihall I deScribe the garden,
LETTERS.

(Jen, and the little grove which terminates it ! The neatnefs and regularity feem to indicate the order which reigns in the miftrefs’s foul; it produces all necellaries in abundance. I was aftonifhed to fee no flowers there : my hufband and my mother-in-law looked at each other and fmiled. The baronnefs (hewing me a large fquare piece of ground in the middle of the garden, which was planted with all forts of kitchen fluff, this piece of ground, fays (he, fome years ago was planted with the finefl flowers ; my fon cultivated them with his own hands, with the more pleafure, becaufe he knew I was very fond of them. A refle6Uon turned this parterre into a kitchen garden. How many poor wretches might be relieved at the expence of the trifling pleafure we take ? fays I to my fon. There are feveral families in this village, who do not pof-fefs a Angle foot of ground, and are thereby deprived of a thoufand little comforts. Let us give up to them this little bit of ground, our income will not be leffened thereby, and we (hall have, by cultivating it, the delightful con-folation of working for Jefus Chrifl; it will not produce a Angle herb which will not be a flower of fweet odour to him who regards all the fervices we render the poor, as done to him-felf. Thefe words were the condemnation of
thefe
38
LETTER S.
thefe poor flowers ; my Son inftantly rooted them up ; another v/c«d may again give them^ their exiflence ; my dear daughter, this kitchen garden lhall again become a parterre of Rowers, if you defire it. I was flruck motionlefs with admiration. How ingenious is charity ! faid I to myfelf; I thought myfelf charitable till now ; I who have given to the poor only a fuperfluit;;,. which never caufed me the lead privation. As this refle61:ion had prevented my anfwer, my refpe6table mother-in-law thought Ihe had frightened me by giving me an idea of a virtue which denied itfelf every thing. My dear friend, fays Ihe, pleafures may be permitted at your age, which we ought to deny ourfelves at mine: that which you take in looking at flowers is a very innocent one, and it would be a real cruelty to deny a perfon this trifling fatisfa£Iion, whom the medio crity of our fortune reduces m much harder denials. Rely on the baron’s providing you a flov/er-garden as foon as the feafon permits. Heaven forbid,, replied I with vivacity : I fhould think I committed a facrilege, if I took from the poor this Small relief. Who am I to prefer my pleafures to their wants ? pardon me, madam, my Silence, was the effed of my confufion. I perceive, I am as yet but
in the alphabet of the chriflian life j, but if I
LETT E R S.
19
am incapable of finding out in my charity fuch ingenious refources for the poor, I IhalT at lead profit by your good examples, and will endeavour to imitate tliem. My mother-in-law an-fwered me by a tender embrace. This,, fhe, taking her fon’s hand, and placing it in mine, this is the daughter I begged of Heaven,, and whom I would have preferred to the richeR heirefs.
Obferve, my dear mother, that I did not arrive till evening, that not a word had been faid about my little fortune ; that my hulband,. who knew the difintereftednefs of his mother, had faid nothing of it in his letters; and that Mr. Baker, who thought me a vafi; deal richer^, was defirous of furprifing her agreeably : fhe had concluded, from the Silence of her fon, that I absolutely had nothing, or, at moft,. but a> trifle»^ The fight of my watch, it is true. Seemed to. fliew that, at leaft, I came from a rich family j, Ihe had been told I was a perfon of rank, and. had learnt by Mr. Baker’s letter, that religious, motives had occafioned my flight from m.y relations ; wherefore (he imagined I could have taken nothing with me-j for a, girl of my age could not be fuppofed to have any thing of her Qvvn, except her trifling jewels. Her laft ex-
prcfiloij
20
LETTERS.
preffion gave my huSband an opportunity to mention what had paffed in England. My dear Clarifla would be a fortune for a prince, if flie brought no other fortune than her valuable qualities ; but, madam, Ihe is befides a rich heirefs, with refpedl: to her fortune ; and if an heroic virtue did not compel her to difpoflefs herfelf, Ihe might pafs for one of the firft perfons in the kingdom. He then related to my mother-in-law all the circumftances of my life, and of my flight, and was interrupted only by the carefles fhe every moment bellowed on me. Heaven is witnefs, my dear child, fays Ihe, how much I defpife riches ; I would willingly give the whole world for one Angle a6l of virtue ; yet I rejoice that you have faved Something out of the Ihip-wreck; it would have coft you too much to have Submitted to the hard way of life, which long cuftom had rendered eafy to us, and I Ihall be charmed to fee you a little more at your eafe. Cannot I contract this habit alfo ? replied I. In ten years it will be as familiar to me as to you j you do me great injuftice, if you think me capable of accepting reliefs which you will not partake of. You Ihall learn to obey, daughter, fays my Second mother, giving me a little pat with her hand, which I almofl: devoured with kilTes. For inllance, we ought, according to
cuftom,
LETTERS.
21
cuftom, to have killed the fatted calf, for your hulband has Some refemblance with the prodigal fon j yet you muft be contented with half a lamb. The clock ftrikes twelve; it is dinner time: go in doors, I fee the guefts coming, and eat the little feaft which you fhould have had on your firll arrival, but for the agreeable trick you played me in coming late laft night. At the fame time the glafs door which looked into the garden, opened, and two clergymen advancing towards us, faluted me with a po-litenefs which I did not expe6l from country prieds. Our repaft was as gay as Sober; and my joy to find myfelf in fuch good company, hardly permitted me to take notice that we were ferved in earthen ware, and that our Spoons were pewter. When our guefts were departed, my mother-in-law afked me what I thought of them. I anfwered plainly, that they Seemed to me perSons of underftanding, very polite, and well acquainted with the world. Yoy would not fufpe6t them, fays Ihe, to be Saints; nevertheless few men deServe this title better. Indeed, madam, I anSwered, I entertained a different idea of Sanctity ; I thought a perfon who afpired thereto, Ihould have a pale meagre countenance, a grave and auftere mien: I faw nothing in theSe gentlemen which did not Ihew
them
\
; » I

LETTERS.
I i
11
I i
them to be good hcMieft men; bot then I observed nothing which denoted any extraordinary perfection ; in Ihort, it never entered my head tliey were perfons who afpired at canonization. Neither do they ever defire to be canonized, though they do every thing poflible to deferve it. ’ Our conversation was interrupted by a vifit we received from all the women and girls in the parifti, who chearfully rendered this homage to the virtues of my mother-in-law, though there were amongft them Several farmers wives much richer than her. She carefled them, and presented them to me one after another, defirihg me to embrace them, and always found Something advantageous to fay of each as they advanced. I made one remark which ftruck me, that not one of thefe women took too much liberty: notwithftanding the free gracious behaviour of the baronefs, I never faw more re-fpedful behaviour, I remarked my aftonilhment to my mother-in-law when they were gone. We obtain every thing, fays fhe, from thefe good people, when we require nothing; I have always behaved to them as you faw me to-day, neither familiarly nor haughtily : I have endeavoured to be ufeful to them ; they know I love them ; no • more is wanting to keep them in
their place: the poor never depart from theirs,
till
LETTERS.
23
5till the nobility quit their own place. The ba-ronefs had excited my currolity about our curate and vicar, for it was with them we dined ; Ihe began herfelf this chapter, and I am certain you will be charmed to hear their edifying hiftory: but every thing fhould have bounds; and this letter is already fo long, that I am forced to finilh, if it was only becaufe the poft-man waits ; and would not, I fancy, be troubled with the carriage of my letters for the future, if he guefSed their couterits; for, in fa6f, I lhall have only the trifling events of the farm to acquaint you %vith, and thefe not worthy of a great lady like you. It is to you I Speak, lady Harriet, I who am only a poor little farnrer’s wife.
letter
24
LETTERS.
LETTER XXX.
LADT HARRIET TO CLARISSA.
A
H ! thp poor little countrywoman is very impertinent with her great lady, and her, my lady. If I was not Sure my Clarifla was in joke, I fhould never forgive the latter part of her letter ; I acquaint her thefe jefts difpleafe me highly; there is no condition which de-bafes a woman like her ; there is none which Ihe would not ennoble. I think, indeed, I am foolifh, to take a joke in a ferious light; but, I was not miftrefs of my pen ; I was hurt by this expreffion. Take care, I befeech you, never to be wanting in refpe£I, for I Ihould never forgive you. While I am in a humour for quarrelling, I muft give you your Ihare, Mr. baron. You do not underhand badly the interefts of your felf-love; but, you neglect thofe of our curiofity. You will make your cohfeffion to your mother, fome years hence ? And we, therefore—Do you imagine we have not as great a defire as her, to be certain you have been a little libertine ? No delay, we muft have your hiftory well particularized, to join to that of your wife. Who knows, but it may tempt me to become an author ? This will not be very difficult ;
LETTERS.
^5
^Cult; nothing will be wanting, except to find the dates, or to Supply them ; for Clarifia and I are not accuftomed to mark any. This want repaired, behold, a new book, entirely finished j a book which will contain nothing but truth 5 and yet, nothing probable. This will not hin-^ der its Sale,, the world will read, no matter what, it is a falhion, a madneSs, What a pleasure for me to hear the different opinions of the author and his work ! For I propofe to keep incog; and the author will be Madam ***, I Shall be exafitly in the cafe of Apelles behind his picture. An impertinent petit maitre will fay, what a pitiful performance ! it is quite in-^ fipid ; yet, the author need only have feigned the baron a little lefs reSpCiftful; cr, if She would preferve the chara£terof this, Amadis Montalvo Was quite fit to rank with Lovelace, in the firft ClarilTa ; Some attempts on his fide would have enlivened the affair a little; and filled a few pages with the lamentations of the heroine. But, Heaven has made for her, men who in nothing refemble thofe of our times. Even Seafaring men, in the prefence of this young lady, acquire a modefty. Seldom found among monks. In anfwer to this queftion, if Clariffas were multiplied, men of fenfe W'ould be multiplied of themfelves. When men exceed the bounds of
C
VoL. II.
refpedi:
! .
! > ' J ^ !
!h
t t
I •
f >
i I 1
. . i
'•: > t
( '
t •
I f
0
Vi
■
<
<
I ,
r 1
I ;
I ,
I .
2
6
LETTER S.
refpeft in their company, it is almoft always the fault of the women. But this anSw er which would be a very good one, dees little honour to our fex ; therefore mufl: be Supprefied. I fhculd then tell him, that an author who refpetls the morals, if he writes a romance, fhould never fufSer thofe dangerous patticulars, with which ■ the ClarilSa and Pamela of Mr. Richardfon are
A
O
larded, to compofe a part of his work. H did not'know the human heart, if lie imaorined fuch accounts infpired a deteflation for vice j Lknow they have produced a different efFecii in many inftances. Hardly any but young perfons read romances ; the author therefore fhould have them in view ; and ,not fuffer a lingle wmrd to enter which may be likely to ex-oifc impure ideas : the author of both thefe works intended to infpire an hatred and detef-tation of vice, and did .not perceive he was giving lefTons of the very vice - he propofed to combat.
I ;
But only, mind where the defire of feeing your general confeffion has carried me, Mr. Baron; here is a ffupid page of difSertation, which you would have efcaped if you had in earneft fet' about acquainting us with your paif life.
It
L E "T T t R S
2?7
K
It Is to you I Speak, Clariflli, to make' ufe '•of your own-expreSion : 1 make an oath not to eat an hearty meal till you have engaged your ■.hufl)and to make this confeSilon ; and, to encourage him thereto, 1 am going to make mine. That thefe romances expunged from our libraries, at prefent cover my table ; that there are Several of them, the reading of which may be of Some ufe, and that great advantages might be reaped from them, if they were wrote as they ought. I know you are going to exclaim agai-nd: the loft time; in return, I v/iSn you a preg-mancy like mine to coniine you to your couch, and give you the vapours, black vapours especially : but no, condemn me, accufe me rather of frivoloufnefs, than experience a ftate like mine; it makes me ftupid ; you are fenlible of it by reading my letter. I have filled four Sides, and have not yet Said any thing worth being read. I muft fill another fide, to do
which I take the interval between tw'o vapours.
#
I hold my head, I believe, for fear I Should lofe it. What has happened to you Some time Since, is as like a misfortune, as two drops of water are like each other; and this apparent misfortune leads you to the moft tranquil -ftate that can be wiihed for in life, .a ftate that
C	vvoul d

*•
I;
(' .1 I.
ii
I'.
K-
' •.
ii;
, I,
»(<
i ’' ' 1' J'!
i!i
• j
k r
:i i
i);
I >»
' j , t - »
fl
Hi
!l >
f »
11 0 •
M ' 1 .
II

I I
f !
t :
I !
f ;
j ;
f
28
LETTERS.
would be envied by the pretended happy of the age, if they could have an idea of it. I conSider a young rich heirefs entering into the world, as a prey on which the greedy hunters call a wi(h-ful eye. What efforts do they make to get her into their toils ! The moll audacious become refpedtful, and even Servilely fubmiilive; they difguife themfelves and become reformed, thoroughly .determined to repair the time loll in their debaucheries : they fwear they are in love, and indeed they are fo, but it is then only ; and was the heirefs Separated from her ellate, they would be confoled for the lofs of her, by the poIfelTion of her fortune : but Scarcely are they mailers of it, before the fox refumes his fkin; the woman no longer finds a lover in her huf-band. Oh ! if this had been my misfortune, I would have got myfelf unmarried : I would have told the court, this is not the man whom I married, v^hom I fw'ore to love and refpeef; I do not know this perfon, and I will have nothing in common with him. But fuppofing one is fortunate enough to draw a prize in this lottery, an hufband like the generality of men, with a mixture of virtue and vices, that caufes an alternative of happy and infupportable moments. Fine felicity! In Ihort, (he who gains the higheft prize, that is to fay, an hufband
like

LETTERS.
29
like mine, is not for all that perfectly happy. Bufmefs and other avocations deprive her of his Company three parts of the day ; they (hare him between them, and leave his fad wife in a folitude, the more painful, in proportion as Ihe is fenfibleof the happinefs Ihe is deprived of. You have nothing of this kind to fear, your mediocrity frees you from thefe important nothings called decorums. No inattentions, no endeavours to make you conceal your mutual tendernefs; the innocent creatures among whom you live, far from being difgufted at it, would return thanks to God for it. Oh! that I was a Ihepherdefs with you, my dear Clarifla ! This revenue, which hardly fuffices for the wretched wants of luxury and cuftom, would then be a vaft deal more than enough. Since your letter, I dream of nothing but cottages, gardens without flowers, and flocks ; and when I wake and behold thefe fine hangings, beds of damalk, pier glafles, and my toilet, I am ready to throw my-felf out of window. Procure me at leaft agreeable dreams : I beg the journal of your life : and, if the poft grows tired of bringing me fuch pro-teious parcels, I will fend an exprefs for them.
I mull, among the bleffings I envy you fome-times, place in the firfi: rank your refpe£labl«
mother-in-law : wait fix months, and you (hall
C 3	fee
30
L E T T E R S:
nefs.
fee my lamentations on this article, at prefent a treafure which recompenfes the Vi^ant of yours. With refpect to me, cur common mother exceeds the utmofl ideas I formed of perfection, maternal tendernefs and the delights of friendfhip y and I alfo am not behind hand in Sentiments of the melt refpeCtful tender-
If my^hind is wearied, my heart has not time to partake its difquiet, I alTure you ; it has never been more bufy ; and, though divided a-mong three, you feem all placed there eafily e-nough. I muft however crowd you a little, to make room for the dear creature I (hall foon bring into the world; and then more room mull be made for your children, which will be as dear to me as my own ; for, in iny opinion, my dear, our two beings make but one, in which every thing is in common. You muft give your confent to the perfect community. My mother won’t permit me to fay any more on this article, and pretends this is contrary to the conditions fhe made us fubferibe, when fhe entrufted us with your fituation, which you wanted to conceal. I obey her, whatever it cofts me, but I hope my hulband’s journey will produce Some alteration in her fendments.
I
. ^ ^ ^
31
LETTER.
Krom Mn. DARBY to the Baronefs D'ASTIE.
Madam.
SHALL repeat your obliging words. If Heaven has granted you a daughi:er-in~Iaw5 fuch as you prayed for, it has given my dear Clariffa fuch a mother and hufband as I would have chofe for her, if Heaven had left' me the difpofai of her. I hope fhe will render herfelf worthy of your goodnefs-by her refpedl-ful obedience, and endeavour to follow you, at a diftance at lead, in the praflice of heroic vir-tuesi I expert impatiently the time of profitting by your good example; but, however violent my defire, I’cannot quit lady Harriet in her pre-fent fituation ; efpecially, confidering her hufband is gone to London upon my daughter’s bu-finefs only. If I was writing to a lefs difin-terefted lady, I fhould acquaint you- that I ex-pe6t to fecure ClarifSa a fortune more worthy of your fon. To render this difeourfe more fufferable, be kind enough to confider this increafe of fortune will enable you to Satisfy your benevolent difpofiiion, I flatter
C4
my
S2
letter s.
myfelf, my daughter will never entertain a Sentiment contrary to yours : I venture to affure you, that in this refpeil Ihe will want
to be curbed.
I am. Madam,
With the moft perfe<St efteem. Your very humble Servant,
LETTER
i!
ii
LETTERS.
33
LETTER XXXII
From MADAM DARBY to CLARISSA.
\
Lefled be God, a thoufand and a thoufand times, my dear Clarlfla; he has fulfilled the deareft of my wifhes. You are placed in the bofom of a virtuous family, under the eye of a worthy mother, who will be your guide, removed from the illufions of the great world, from opportunities of being corrupted, and are in a fair way of being fan6bfied. What can I defire more ? I pafled the fhort interval we were together, in founding your heart, and difcover-ing its inmoft recefiTes. I found nothing therein capable to alarm me, but I remained quite undetermined about the degree of perfedUon-which. God required of you. You had a great detef-tation of evil, a great attachment to your duties, and a mind juft enough to efteem your fortune, only as it put it in your power to relieve the wretched. This was already a great deal ; and generally God does not require a greater degree of perfedtion in thofe who are deftined to live in the great world : you feemed called thereto, and I did not oppofe your vocation. A fecret voice told me, notv/ithftanding, that fuch
C5
aa
L E T T E
RxS.
an happy difpolition muft condudl you Hill far--ther ; I left you. to Divine Providence ; my ex.* pedations were not deceived ; it has manifeftedt its deligns^. Ah ! how full of goodnefs are they for you !: It is very difficult to live in the midft, of the world,, without contradling its ftains. We muft. expedt to be generally reviled, if we live therein, like Chriftians. God Spares you thefe combats ; reflesSt frequently that you might not have had courage to maintain them, and leap for joy at the afylum he has procured you.. Submit yourfelf to the plan of perfedtion, which: God has laid down with refpedt to you. I fee by your letter you have not even an idea of what it confifts in. No, my dear, a pale complexion and an auftere countenance are not at all the attributes of holinefs : it excludes notan innocent mirth, and the fweets of friendfhip; or, rather, it is that alone which procures thefe-folid bleffings. You will learn, by experience,. I am Sure, that madam D’Aftie has found the.‘ way of approaching towards fandtity in the moft common ©ccurrence, and in a way of life, in-appearance, the moft ordinary. As a proof, think
of the parterre metamorphofed into a kitchen-
garden. This pnnftuality in corresponding with
the impulses of grace in trifling things, Shews
great virtue, I truft you to the care of this
wife
LETTER S.
35^
governefs ; her example will teach you more than nvy cold difcourfe. I join with my Second daughter, in requefting a journal of your actions 5 add to it a lill of your discoveries with refpe<9: to madam D’Aftie : I Ihall endeavour from henceforward to take her for a pattern,
Harriet and I have often wondered how She-could give her conSent to your marriage without a more particular knowledge of you. You allow yourfelf, you had a little the air of an adventurer. She thought you poor. Mr. Baker was not fufficiently acquainted with you to anfwer for your charaiSer and motals ; there muft therefore be, a Something which I don’t comprehend, an explanation of which I defire. We alfo are very defirous of knowing about the * two clergymen who dined with you.
lladf Yih.KKiY.'i continues, ■
MORE, the adventures of your worthy com-^
Our-mother would have
panions in prifon.
Something Solid ; (he is right.
I would from
time to time have Something amufing, becauSe I am (lill very giddy brained, and have got the vapours. Oh ! what a fine thing it is to have the vapours ! This diftemper is a general ex-
cufcv.,
X
,
:>,6	LETTER
cufe, and the woman who has the honour to be attacked by it, may be whatever Ihe likes. Is Ihe abfent, peevilh, impertinent, tirefome, or contradi6Hng, it is all placed to the account of the poor vapours ; they are my excufe for taking the liberty to interrupt a good difcourfe, for the fake of prating only.
i;
. [•
c
■ 1-

te -
■5
L
, ^:
0
■ r -

Mrs. Darby concludes.
0
I was only going to finilh, m.y dear; fhe did riot interrupt me in the leaft. I embrace yon and your dear hufband,
N.	B. You need not have the lead fcruple about Ryding’s bill of exchange ; it is what remained in his hands of your income; you have as great a right to this money as to any thing elfe whatever. Mr. Balfour maintains, that,, without deviating from your intentions, he will make you rich ; I praife his defign, but have a notion God will render them ufelefs ; he wills you fhould be poor, you will therefore remain ib, and I Ihall not make myfelf uneafy about it.
LETTER

LETTER S.
6/
LETTER
XXXIII.
CLARISSA TO MRS. DARBE
YO U impofe on me So great a talk,
dear mamma, that my Sifter Harriet mufl be contented with a word only, in this long letter. Not to lengthen it unnecefSarily, I begin. Proteftations of my Sentiments would be ufelefs,, you are convinced of them already.
9
The third day after my arrival here, I begged madam D’Aftie to permit me to join in her country employments, and after much difficulty She granted a part of my requefl. I am too weakly, fhe fays, to join in the employments fhe has habituated herfelf to by degrees, I muft do as fhe has done. As a beginning, fhe has made me overfeer of the cows and dairy; a Servant is under me who underftands the bufineSs,, but, fhe herfelf has none. There is in particular a black cow, which is the beafl of predilection; I have juft learnt the motives of it: this is the cow of the poor. I keep Seven for my own ufe, fays the baronefs; one more is no great expence or trouble. I confecrated to God a fine-heifer, whofe milk is diftributed to the poor, and her calves fold for their advantage. Moft
of
II
!
I r « i
' J
t '
38
LETTERS
of our women wean their children- at three or four months old, to take nurdings. Thefe poor little creatures, abandoned for a dranger, would many of them perilh j I mix this milk for them with barley-water, or Something elfe adapted to their date of health. I make of clay artificial nipples, and diew the mothers how. to make ufe of them. Once a day I vifit all the nurfes; I fuperintend the care, health, and cleanlinefs of thefe children, which has made our village famous for good nurfesi The principal merchants of Bourdeaux fend their children here,, which enables our peafants tO: live very com*, fortably; we have no real poor here, except the old and infirm ; and belides, they are relieved. About twelve years ago, added the baronefs, there were only lixty houfes in this paridi; this number is now trebled by marriages, drangers who have fettled here, and the old’ inhabitants, whom mifery and want had formerly drove away, and whom the hope of getting their bread has occafioned to return. But, madam, faid I, in a furprife, how was you. able to provide for the fubfidence of fo many perfons ? Your income is fo moderate, that I can hardly conceive how your maintain yourfelf; befides, the land can’t have increafed in proportion to its' inhabitants. No, replied the
baronefs,,
I .

L E T T E R S.
b-ironefs, but by better cultivation, it has produced threefold; ten times more inhabitants.
would not embarrafs us...
'I'his country is full of uncultivated lands;, here were immenfe tradls which produced only brambles, and were of no advantage to the proprietors. Mifery had broke the courage of the peafant; moil of them chofe rather to.go a begging than die of hunger. I came here at the fame time that the two clergymen you faw were, appointed, one curate, the other vicar of this-
village : they might have expedted a more con-fiderable benefice,, for this was only worth a' little more than 20 pounds a year; we had^ been friends a long time, and they were per-fuaded we might together do feme good, and Solicited this cure, vrhich was not very flrongly fought for, but in which they could live, be-caiife they had: a trifling fortune of their own. It may be Said, this diflridl offered to the fight,., the moft aftedfing pidture of human .mifery ; old decrepid parents abandoned by their children,, and buried in filth, almofl: ready to expire with hunger; naked, half-ftarved, wan children an entire ignorance of religion, which alone could alleviate their misfortunes; an habit of idlenefs, which prevented their even thinking
of
40
LETTERS.
<	I
t	I
of attempting to put an end to, or at leaf! to lelTen them. I fhould have been difcourag-ed at
o
the fight of thefe obftacles, if I had not been fuftained by the ardour of thefe zealous brethren. They began to labour indefatigably at the inftruflion of thefe poor creatures; they gained their hearts, by giving them a little relief; and at length made them comprehend, that lazinefs leads to hell, and is the mother of all vice. Our examples finifhed what their in-ftru£tions began. My fon, though yet very young, Submitted to labours proportioned to his ftrength. I placed myfelf at the head of fome women : thefe honefi; people knew we were not brought up to this, and were afhamed of their idlenefs. A family, confifting of a father, a rriother, and four children, was on the point of leaving its native home : the curate pur-chafed for 200 livres a piece of ground, which contained 20,000 toifes; he received thefe poor people into his own houfe till they had cleared this piece of ground. The' work was difficult. The roots of trees were to be grubbed up which had formerly grown there, and which were Spread very deep in the ground. The father, and the eldeft Son, who was fixteen years of age, undertook this work: the mother and her four young children rooted up the bulhes, which
had
L E r T E R ‘S.
41
/
had not taken Such deep root. In proportion as they cleared away thefe roots, they covered them with earth, and formed a kind of kilns. P'rom time to time, the curate hired people to help them ; fo that in lefs time than could have been expelled, the ground was entirely cleared, and well dug up. As the poor family knew this ground was to be the recompenfe of their labour, they worked with uncommon ardour: they afterwards fet fire to thefe kilns; and, a^ this was done in the beginning of autumn, the rains foon tempered the afhes, which were carefully fpread over the furface of the earth : one half of this land formed artificial meadows, whofe produce the firft year was beyond expedlation j the reft produced corn. FadlS are neceflary to convince country people : the greateft part had laughed at the undertaking j they now began to be more docile; there were few farmers who had not fuch pieces of ground ; they would willingly have performed the fame operation, but one reflediion flopped them fhort. This labour might become very advantageous to the proprietors, by increafine the value of uncultivated lands ; but the cultivator would receive no other benefit than railing the rent of his farm, and perhaps his taxes. To remedy both thefe in-tonveniencies, Mr. Duboc, the younger (the
name
{ ' ; I
j
I •
t
I i
i ,
I f
I t
,i ■
t »
I!
i ! i
I >
^ I • }
'.r
42
LETT
E R S.
name of our vicar) undertook to apply to all the* proprietaries, and obtained from them a deed,, whereby they gave up the profits of thefe pieces-of ground for hfteen years. Several of them furnifhed the farmers with money to buy cattle, on condition of being repaid again in fix years. For my part, I wrote to the intendant of the province, and obtained a promife from him, that the parifh (liould not be taxed at all higher,., on account of the riches the inhabitants acquired by their induftry.
Scarcely were thefe important articles fettled,, before an emulation was perceived,, which we were careful to maintain and encreafe. I had preferved at Bourdeaux Some connections with pious perfons devoted to good works ; they readily gave their affiftance towards this. Every week, prizes were propofed for fehofe who cleared the greateft quantity of gmund. This part of the country is naturally'dry and barren ; pits were funk to colleCt the rain-water, and trenches cut to conduct the water into the fields, while the low places where the water ftagnated, and. formed bogs, were infenfibly drained. Artificial meadovs^s were every where made, which afforded us an opportunity of maintaining a great quantity of cattle, and vie. foon had the
means.
i!
LETTERS.
43
means to Sertilize our lands from a plenty of tlung. More hands were wanting than we had to do this work; our worthy paftor and his brother procured them for us. They facrificed their little fortune, which they divided into two equal parts 5 eight thouiand livres were employed in pilrchafing uncultivated lands; the remainder was deftined to the maintenance of ftrangers, whom the hopes of bread allured tO' us. One thoufand toifes of ground cleared, were given as a falary to each family, that had laboured with, us a year: and, as our pallors had dill more at heart,, the falvation ofallthefe
poor people, than, their corporal, relief eflablilhed the following rules. They fet out to work at day-break; the rendezvous of the labourers was at church, where they joined in a Short prayer. At eleven they left off work, and went to church to attend divine fervice; then reded themfelves till three o’clock. T^hefe. four hours were not lod, our labourers commonly employed them in deep, and found themfelves refrefhed fo much thereby, as to be able to continue' working till night.. At fird we found Ibme difficulty to refrain the young people, who, after fnpper, would have employed part of the night in dancing, like the harved people.,
A, little, firmnefs, great piailes beHoived on
tiiofe
^4.
LETTER
thofe who abftained from it, fome trifling rewards, and familiar difcourfes from the pulpit# on the dan'ger of thefe nodlurnal diverfions, ridded us of them entirely.
9
While our labourers were employed in cultivating the land, our vicar and I endeavoured to inftruQ; ourfelves about every ’thing appertaining to agriculture. We learnt to diftinguilh different foils, and to mend them bv different manures. We learnt to underftand cattle, their difeafes, the neceffary precautions to preferve them in health, and the remedies proper for their diftempers. We afked advice of the men of learning, who devoted themfelves to this kind of ftudy, and were foon capable of inftrudling them by joining praffice to theory, I procured eight thoufand livres, from my friends, for our undertaking, without reckoning the cattle, advanced by particular perfons, who were payed for them towards the end of the fourth year.
Its diftance from any principal road, or con-fiderable town, (for it consequently could have but a fmall confumption for its produce) was what rendered this diftrifl extremely poor. The inhabitants could not think of fending it to Bour-
deaux:
LETTERS.
45
<!<?aux : what peafant would go fiSty miles to fell a few pounds of butter ? After long confidera-tion I invented the following fcheme.
A meeting was held of all thofe who had cattle; and I propofed to them to put their milk into a common flock, Tuefdays and Wed-nefdays were fixed to churn the butter; and, for this purpofe, fome women were chofe, who were difpenfed with from going to work in the fields. They were furnifhed with new invented churns, which fhortened their labour; .and two of them were appointed to fet out every Thurfday, to arrive at Bourdeaux on market days. The village was at the expence of a large cart, and they were allowed a man to drive it; and were to fell all the butter, and other pro-
They were to return on the Saturday 5 and on Sunday, after evening fervice, the curate, who received the money arifing from the fale, diftributed to each their (hare, according to their refpe6live pro-
This method produced great ad-We fold our goods much better in this great city, than at the neighbouring markets ; and, befides, our labourers were not ab-fent from their bufinefs; whilft before, each family was obliged to fend a perfon two or thre«
leagued
duce of the village.
portions.
vantages.
4h
LETTER
q
Oc
i ■
f
li '
ij
I
i
It
leagues ciiSrant, which was a day loft. An ac» cident furniftied us a new method, which proved amazingly advantageous. A diforder brok« out among the cattle, by which, one of our peafants loft fix cows in one week. All the reft w'ere terribly frightened at this, which in-fpired them with a docility, of which we took the advantage, to make one common ftock of all their cattle. The children had been employed in cleaning the lands of -ftintftones, of which they were full. Five large ftables were ereSted, or rather, five of the biggeft were enlarged ; and the walls partly conftru<Sted with thefe ftones. Every ftable had women enough to take care of it; and otae ftable was always kept empty, to Serve as an infirmary for the Sick beafts. In the fequel we were obliged to multiply thefe ftables. Their whole produce was fold for the common benefit, and the profit laid out in replacing the cattle which were loft by the diftemper ; but we loft very fewcleanlinefs ; the Separation of the fick cattle from the healthy, the choice and preparation of their nourishment, occafion-ed our avoiding the calamities which all France was afllidled with in this refpeQ;. I am fuper-intendant of thefe ftables, Mr. Dulac feconds me, and we are very attentive that thoSe do their duty who are intrufted with the care of
-them.
"LET T E Pv S.
47
ilhem. Our peafants fleep in quiet, becaufe ' they are feniible, nothing but a general mortality can ruin them. The dung is distributed in .proportion to the.number of beads which each . furnilhes to the flock, and all are content.
The Second year, Providence opened to us :«nother Source of plenty. This was the method 'of hatching chickens in dunghils and ovens.
It is true this produced but little the firfl year, ■we payed for our learning; but, inflrudled by ■ our Ioffes, the following years we were great gainers. The mulberry trees we planted the
third year, produced a quantity of leaves the
$
■fixth year; and was .another Source of riches which augmented every day. Every year the young people were married ; and, when the pa-'rents were quite poor (which is never the caSe at preSent) we gave them one hundred toifes of <land cleared; the whole .village contributed to Sow it, and to make them a preSent of two oxen and a cow. At preSent, the parents fland upon ■their honour, and would be very Sorry to be thought to have been Such bad oeconomifls, as ■'to be under a necefuty of having recourSe to the ■eemmunity. We have no poor, as I have already mentioned, except, the old, the infirm, and new inhabtants. Every day poor families ■
arrive.
I »
\	I
4^
LETTER S.
ii '
L '
':
. 1
; .j	■
! ; r-» 'v- c'''-- ■
II ■ -B
■I
r f ...
,'i ;
■^h
.i‘
I ' .--„• : ,i
. I ■
H .	[
i: ‘	’
I
It
I'M
'( >
1!^
{ ■ ■>
; r
arrive, whom we are not in a condition to fettle ; we relieve them, and expedt alliftance from Providence to provide for them further.
Madam D’Aftie might have fpoke much longer, without my thinking of interrupting her. I was in an extafy ; and knew not whether I Should truft my own eyes, or believe her an angel in human form. When She had ended her dif-' courfe, a mechanical motion threw me at her feet; and from my heart, rather than my mouth, proceeded thankfgivings to the Moft High, fct the favour he had bellowed, in granting me fuch a pattern. Oh ! how much did I defire to be rich at this moment! but, God can Supply my want of power; it is true, I had always devoted to him the greateft part of my poffeffions, if I had thought myfelf miftrefs to difpofe of them.
/
My mother-in-law raifed me up ; after having embraced me, a circumftance Ihe never omits. I entreated her to permit me to afk her Some queftions.
I enquired why her cows were not in th? common (lock, like thofe of the other inhabitants. I put them there at firft, fays Ihe, to encourage
L E T T E R S.

uourage others. When cur peafants were tho- . roughly convinced of the advantage of the community, I took my beads away ; we fhculd avoid giving thefe clownifh, illiterate people room to think we have our ov/n private jntereft in view, in things which arc edablHhed for the
V
general good. They fee plainly, I have not in the lead increafed my fortune thefe twelve years ; and are thoroughly convinced, when I propofe any thing new to them, that I have no felf-in -tereded motives ; on this their obedience is founded ; it is at prefent So great, that they receive my advice as an oracle, and are always difpofed to follow it. And in what are they employed in winter? There are but very few days, replied my mother, that they can’t find employment in the fields. Our men take this opportunity to cut down wood, and prepare props for the vines. We have carpenters who work on the larged trees, to repair our houfes, and build new ones ; our young lads, by affid-ing them, render themfelves fit to fucceed them. They mend their ragged cloaths, make new ditches to carry off the water, threfh the wheat; in a word, every one finds Some employm.ent or other. As the evenings are very long, the children are put to bed early j after which, they ademble to fpin in the old dables, which they VoL. II.	D	call
I!'
,C I
< '
' I .
Li!
» \ ‘
I •
! ! » ( .
(
;;i
I ’ i
: t
I • ‘
1; t
f, 1 t I
)
»1 '
’ » t
1:
,!U
d: !
1 L ■
'> '
t,
; f
hi
t )
! t
ii
* »
r! .
M,
; I
I
SI 1
I '
Ik
»I
I
t
S ! <
; ‘f
S9
L E T T E R S.
; call taverns, and we have tv/elve of thefe in the
•	village. The women Sit on one Side, and the men on the other j each family by turns fur-nilhes light a week ; the boys wind the thread. An old woman preildes over this afiembly, and takes care every thing is in order. I vifit them
. •every fifteen days; the curate and his brother do-tlie fame. But, fays I, thefe people do not work in filence ; does not this mixture of fexes abufe each other ? Is it poiTible, among thefe clownifii people, tliat no quarrels (hould arife, no oaths, no indecent words, nor lewd fongs be heard ?
Gcd has. bleffed the care of our pafiors, replied the baron : at prefent our peafants are
•	tolerably educated j affiduity in work, has made
•	them new creatures ; they no longer have time
yf
to fin, for we have taken away all opportunities of committing it; Such as dancing, alehoufes and the, murmurs of poverty. They no longer
I
learn bad fongs, hymns have been fiibfiituted in their room; when we go to their night rendezvous, we relate to them fome hiftories with-in the cempafs of their underftandjngs ; there ape Some fenfible perfons who know how to read, to whom, we have given the lives of the
faints, of the hermits, and fuch kind of books.
i I
> >
0
'{'
L E T T E R S.
5*
They divert themfelves with relating what they have read, and the others liften to them with pleafore. Among thofe who have returned to the village, after having been forced from it by mifery and want, there are fome, who, having been in the army or at fea, tell the others what they have feen in their travels, and this ■ takes up the whole attention of the reft. At ftrft They W'ere* guilty of fwearing, through cuftom' j -a penny forfeit for each oath began the reformation^ and it was compleated by baniftiing the guilty from thefe places for fome days. More--over, none are forced to come there, but they look upon
as recreations, and hardly any but the infirm mifs coming. A.t eleven o^clock, prayers are read, and the company retires. The curate reads prayers every morning at feven o’clock, and we have the pleafure to fee all our
hofieft people attend the fervice with piety
* • I
He makes the hour earlier,.
and mo
in proportion as the days lengthen, fo that they ..are always ready to go to work at day break.
But, fays I to the baronefs, if you take away dancing and other dangerous amufements from your peafants, they muft. be entirely without recreations ? We endeavour to procure tliem innocent ones, replied fhe. Every Sunda'^ and
.D :2	holiday^
I!
ri
' i
;
i}
i I
: i
i
t I
i (

; '
-
t ;

i )
I <
.

52
LETT E R
S.
holiday, after the fervice of the day, I aflerrible the women and girls iu a barn : in winter, we, play at ninepins and bowls ; in fummer, we ufe lefs violent diverfjons. Our pallors, on their fide, amufe the men with (liooting with the bow and arrow, and other diveriions proper to keep up and augment their ftrength : beSides, we have accuftomed them to give little entertainments. On mine and my fon’s birth-day, we regale the whole parhh with a collation. The
curate and his brother do the fame. Our pea-
fants imitate us. The fuperintendants of the
evening rendezvoufes never fail inviting all that
belong to their afSembly j we are conflantly at
tlvefe little entertainments, where every thing paffes, I aflure you, with as much decency as mirth.
Are you not ravllhed at this account, my dear Harriet ? We eredl Sratues to the dellroyers
of the human race, to conquerors : how' much
more precious to mankind, are thefe generous
benefadlors, whofe only care is' to procure the happinefs of a'l about them ! The ungrateful age forgets their Services : after aill, it would be
unable to repay them ; in Heaven only can they meet with a recompence v/orthy of them. My Second mother has taken me w th her to repay
the
: t i
£ E T T E R S.
53
✓
tfie viSits we received. I have been in each family, and am quite aftoniflied. We dined in a village on the road in our journey here: indeed, my ftomach turns whenever I think of the horrid filthinefs of the inhabitants of this village ;
and I am told, ail the reft refemble this. I no
% ^
longer wonder that difeafes depopulate countries.	Thefe-wretches breathe a poifonous air j
every door’is ornamented with , an infectious dunghill, or a kennel of ftagnant water, which exhales peftilential vapours ; their houfes are damp and unwholefomein general, without windows ; for a hole of a foot fquare cannot properly be called a window; fo that they receive light and air through the door only. If people are the real riches of a ftate, as the ba-ronefs fays in her memorial, how greatly ought thefe caufes to excite the attention of government ? But if pity for thefe poor wretches is not capable of exciting the generofity of the wealthy inhabitants of cities, their own inte-reft, at leaft, fhould make them join in their endeavours to remedy thefe inconveniencies. In thefe dungeons their children pafs the firft years of their life ; a, time, when nature is moft fufceptible of improvement or decay : they there imbibe the feeds of all-the difeafes that parents afterwards lind the inconveniencies of. I
D3
quote
T T E R
i '
I '

'' i
II
[
: 1 i!
\ i ? *
b !
I :

I
I •
iS
I ;
• M
•i i|!
♦ f F i
•: I'

; I
1 - ; I '.
.»! '
U '
iTi.
t
;	' I
t

I quote this motive only, becaufe it moft immediately afrecSts fathers and mothers; A fub-fcripticn in cities and great towns, for better lodging the peafants, would furnifh healthier children, without opprefling the citizens. Here, all the houfes are four feet above the level of the ftreet, and have at lead; two large**windows;, not ■ a Single kennel y- the village is careful! levelled, and drains are made to carry off the water. The dunghills are at a proper diftance, and all colledled together into four heaps. My mother-in-law told me, that, at firft, the neighbouring peafants ufed to take the dung away in the night; this inconvenience was put a Hop to, by enclofing them within an hedge, and guard-mg them with large dogs in the night. The in-fides of the houfes are clean, neat, and paved with pebble : the children bring them home in; little carts, and this accuftoms them to labour. If you faw how rejoiced thefe honeft people are when the baronefs comes among them, with what refpefSl they eagerly prefs to kifs her hand, you would think her fufficiently paid for what Ihe has done for them. If I had not abfolutely determined to be guided by her counfel,, I fhould have liberally befcowed what money I have to concur to this good work. She tells me, Imi-
Jing, that true chafrity is difcreet; that I am
cnlv
.. iil
} 1
n'
iii;;
C E 1" r E R l3.
5 3 ■
only a Spendthrift, that the poor (hould be pat in a W’ay to get tlieir living, bat we Hiould prevent their growing too rich. The bcld thing I can do, I believe, is to profit by the favour which God has behowed on me, in giving me fuch a guide; and the beft way to do this, is to abandon myScIf blindly to her discretion.
Every ftep I take here, furniffles new Subjects-of admiration. Being arrived at the end of the village, I perceived a large Space, covered with linen cloth, almofl bleached ; the women were employed in carrying it away. This is the fruit of the winter evenings : the cart will go twice next week to Bourdeaux to fell this linen.
At preSent, we have Six perSons in the villr who weave theSe cloths, one of whom only i^ mailer; the five others are boys, taken from the foundling hoSpital at Bourdeaux, at twelve years of age ; they were a year in Mr. Duboc’$ houSe for inftrudlion : the vicar being appointed fchoolmafter, taught them to write and read, and has inftilled into them Such Sentiments of piety, as to render them edifying to the whole parilh. At thirteen years of age they were put apprentices to the trade of weaving linen 3 they enter next week into their twentieth year, and .they will all five be married, together with Seven other
D 4
Jads,
li
! I
i'i • ! \
ib
. 1'

• ‘. *-i'
■ • ' i
1
' h:
r
i
! ;
» ;
:!i:
I h
Oi • 111
. l:
» '
I
.1

I ,

t

■ * ’ j :
i
' , I
k
r J
I
I i
li
■i;
b'l I
t ■
» !
liil
r ' ■
•lu ’ll'
Si,!!'
:5
6
h
V-
JLl/
T T E R
S.
lads, next week.;, their v/iv^es will bring tlieni' as a portion two cows from the common flock ; the'; will be maintained a whole year at their father’s-in-law : the maher weaver begins to pay them wages this year,, and their money will be laid out in furnilhing their little cottage.. You have Several empty then ? fays I to. the baronefs. No, child, replied She, but we ad in this ma-Lier on fueh occafions.
The whole parifh receives the Sacrament once
a month. The eve preceding the general com-
munion is called the Lords’s day, becaufe the
produce of this day’s work is confecrated to charity. Some cut down w'ood, others bring it home, Some w'ork it into girders and beams, others procure draw to cover the roof. The women lay ahde the thread they Spin this day, and make it into a piece of cloth. Which is fold to buy nails, lime,, and other materials. We have tv/o mafons who have been fettled'here
thefe Seven years, who prepare the ftone work, and are affifted by young perfons, who are called children of good will. This is a fraternity into which we admit thofe only in wdiom we remark
talents joined to an excellent and natural difpo-fition ; and it is a great honour to be admitted :
I will let you. fee the ftatutes of this i[raternity;
as
LETTER S.
57
ais fall as thefe materials are prepared, they are piled up in a warehoiife. The .i 6th of September is Ithe day fixed for weddings, and none are married except on that day ; that is, no young people ; for thofe who have been married before, if they have a mind to marry again, choofe any time that is mod convenient to them, The young people are prepared for this ceremony, by explaining to them, during a month before, the duties of a ‘married life. Thefe honeft people, whofe confidence I have, generally confult me about the marriage,of their children; and, as I know them perfeflly well, I Spare no trouble to match them properly.'. This day is a general holiday for the whole village. Tables are Spread under the trees ; and, not to put the families to too great an expence, every one, two days before, brings Something or other j Some fowls, others a lamb.. Their pallors and I Set an ex-ample.of this liberality., The married couples fit at the firft table, where my place always is : they paSs the remainder of the day in innocent diverfions ; and the next morning the children of good will, afiill the mafons in building the houSes of the new married couples. As the materials are ready, and the houSes, though Sufficiently Strong, are fimple and uniform, they are Soon finished, and have time to dry during
D 5	the
!i '
■| i
'il
.. > :; I
I:'
i. * f . 1
'!!:
, I
;iL
; ■ I
' I


. I ‘.
f I;
► :
' « .
'I;
■H
-h'l • ri Oi'
i''
I ‘'
'll;
i
1 '
i .
\-
It
f •
. i' >
•“5 '
h'‘ -
: 1 i
'' 1 L'f
I'i'^
; .r
h
' i*
> 115 .
i •!

! t
i > I
ilil
. I'
f!' 1
^ ‘ i' I I ’».
• ’h
i ■=' ■!te

i:'
''I-
58
LETTERS.
the whole winter. But, replied- I, you want doors, windows, locks, and a thoufand other things. Almoll every thing is to be met with in the village, anfwered my mother-in-law: every year we take five boys from the foundling hofpital: the hofpital for Several years has given a little premium to the mailer who takes them j fome are put to hulbandry. Some to Cartwrights, others to mafons, joiners, &c. and when in Spring the houfes w'ant to be finifhed, the great number of hands we employ foon finifli the work. With refpe£l to the lockfmith’s trade,^ we Ihould difdain to fallen our doors, were it not for Ilrangers. Our peafants have a detefla-tion for theft, even for Healing a trifle y therefore we only fallen oiir outer doors j and, as Angle lock is Sufficient for each houfe,. we buy it ready made at Bourdeaux. I Ihall never have done afking you qnellions, fays I to madam D’AIlie. How have you been able to bring all thefe people to comply with regulations, prudent indeed, but rather rigorous ?
The firfl years were very laborious and fa^^ tiguing, fays Ihej but religion, the confequence of inftru6lion. Surmounts all obllacies. We had-Swearers, drunkards, and perfons attached
to many other vices 3 moft of them are reformed 3

LET T E R S.
59
formed; foine are dead, two only having us, finding themfelves excluded from all fociety; for the incorrigible are banilhed from all our af-femblies. During our twelve years labour, all our young people have been brought up in oUr way; they fear God, and mutually love each ' other. • The whole village forms but one great
and I don’t believe one mortal fin is committed therein during a whole year. Our hbneft folks, always employed, have not leifure for temptations: if any diipUte arifes, the fUn does not fet while they are at variance; the difference is foon fettled. Our peafants are convinced we love them, and that we would not commit an unjuft adtion for the world j they regard us as their parents, the authors of their conveniencies of life, and therefore place a -
in us. •
I enquired of my mother-in-law what fub-je0:s were moft infifted on in their inftru(Sl:ions. We ftrongly inculcate thefe grand principles : be juft towards God and man ; do to others as you would be done by. We teach them, that, to be juft towards God, they fhould remember him in all their actions, and perform them in the manner moft proper to pleafe him. We mdine them to have an affedion for his Service,
by
?1
}
ii
In
Hi

il
in :■
i '
1 ‘ I
I
• ' I
H i
i'
I 1
i;
5lL !
'ii!
liii
!I i
1!' ' ill i
: i
I
t I
f
1» '
i!:
ii,
• I
i I
't I ‘
i 1 lit 1
6o
letter s.
by making them remark the ble/IIngs he Ihowers down on them, and compare their own Situation with that of the neighbouring peafants. The
old inform the young, of the difficulties and mi-
fery they experienced in their youth, and exhort them inceffiantly to blefs God, who has exempted them from their diftreiSes. You will here fee
no fad melancholy people, even among our lick j our fields refound with hymns and thankfgiv-ings ; in a word, it is here that happy men are to‘be found. To the ceremonies of our mar-
riages we join another, added my mother-in-law.,.
At firft, we received, new. inhabitants without

difficulty. Two circurnfiances have . rendered
us more circumfpefit. The firft was the difficulty of procuring them. fubSiftence.; we, are fur-
r
rounded with uncultivated lands, which would
come at a moderate price, but we can only buy a, little each year for want of money. The Se-
cond, whichTeemed moft important, was our-
fear left the new comers Should corrupt our peafants ; we have therefore, for the laft eight years, eftablilhed a kind of noviciate. We refufe.
work to none, and never give any other relief. We offer a pickaxe, or Some other working
tool, to beggars. The idle make off as faft as.
they
L E T T E R S
6i
they can, and we are rid of them ; Some endeavour to work, and thofe we encourage and in-ftru£i:: they are lodged in- a hable deftined for • this purpofe, but they keep among themfelves, and until they are entirely reconciled to labour, are not admitted to our affemblies and diver-lions. If they peifevere,,. at the end of.three months, they enter into their noviciate, in whicli Bate they remain nine months.;, and then, if we are Satisfied with their behaviour, we pro-mife to incorporate them.. Frequently whole families come, Sometimes boys ; we, endeavour to keep them in continual employment, and by that means corredl their vices. We (hall receive eleven families the enfuing day of marriages, and we hope Providence will afford us the means of efiablilhing them. Providence has found the
means. Half the Sum that honeft Ryder lent me fliall be devoted to this good work. I fay half, becaufe the whole, w'hich I would have chearfully given, was refufed. Next Sunday will be a meeting of the elders, to determine in what manner this Sum fhall be employed. I will give you an account of the refult of this meeting, and of our country diverfions, in my next letter..
My
w • %	•
I:
T ^
i ,
f I
i
< :
\
fl
I
n
'i
i! !l:
H,
j!

1.
u •
nr
yf
E X T E R S.
My huiband ccnTents to make the confelTion required by my dear Harriet. Your Surprize at the readinefs with which madam D’Aftie gave her confent to my marriage, will ceaSe when you have read the letter Mr. Baker Sent her j but to underftand it thoroughly, it ought to be preceded by my hulband’s hiftory: I Ihall there-, fore delay .Sending it till then. .
LETTER
L E T T E R S.
letter XXXIV
63
LADT HARRIET TO CLARISSA,
I Appeared So contemptible to myfelf, after reading your letter, that I had not courage to write to you for Some days. Be alTured, my Clarifla, that this letter has at once made me ten years older; and, that my way of thinking is So altered, that you would think I was metamor-phofed. You know me; I eafily give into extremes. If Mr. Balfour had been at Paris, I fliould have turned his brain, if he would not have obtained for me a place in your corporation. How! faid I to myfelf, are we poor with one thoufand five hundred pounds a year, and, does the refpeftable baronefs D’Aftie, with fifteen guineas a year only,, find the means of providing for all her neceflities, and pofiefs an overplus for charitable ufes ! Let us learn to be rich near her. We would only be happy : Since hap-pinefs can be purchafed at fo little expehce, let us-not be fuch fools as to lofe fo good a bargain. Our mother, my dear, has moderated my im-petuofity. She has obferved to me, that God wills that every ftatioh fliould be filled, and .that we do no good aflion, when we depart from the
place, inwhich Providence has fixed us. lam,
therefore.
I :' ;
»1 '
1|‘ '
,i; i
il >
I I
\ f
I r
: • t
I if,
i ; «
'; I
ill
DC
V '1
il'
». 1 I i
) ' I
li ■
:ii'
:!1;
J ! •
! i
’I •
iSi
(
!
if*
IT; 1 ! r; .

!| i'
I
■ I
!C '
'I' ‘
|!i
t ! !
‘ I
t
L .
i}:
fi
! * I
^ I
f!^
ii i
ib
ii •
,1: II, III 11.
64
LETTERS.
therefcre,. confined to live with babies j for al-women feem Such to me, compared with \T)urs.. When I fee them knotting, embroidering, fhuf-fling cards and drinking tea, I wilki to fay to them} Spin, ladies; work, rife early in the morning like my heroines, and you will no more have the vapours ; I fpeak from my own experience,, my dear, you have cured half of mine; induftry kills them. If you faw my chamber, you would take it for one of your fta-bles, which you call taverns. Our mother, my two w'oraen, and myfelf have fet up our diftaffs; the whole houfe is poflefl: with the demon, of induftry ; even the lacqueys are learning to knit in; the anti-chamber. I excite the laughter of the ladies who vifit me ; they can’t conceive, howl can patiently fubmit to fuch mean employment;. and I' fhan’t be able to comprehend foon, how they can pafs half the day in bed, the remainder at the toilet, cards, or in ufelefs vifits. You have reconciled me to the right path } and, if God has not found -me worthy to become le-giftator of a whole village, I am, at leaft, de^ termined to play this part in my family } and on my eftate when my affairs are finiftied. I have not yet any poSitive news about yours; myhuf-
band acquaints me all goes well, and no more.
/
l am in the Sixth month of my pregnancy, and
my
L. E T T E R S
>.r
65
my health is entirely recovered ; I ufe a great deal of exercife,. have a good appetite, and take only eight hours lleep ; in fhort, I am quite a new creature,., and fo well, that I (liould be capable of a journey to lie in at your terreftrial pa-radife, if oar affairs did not oblige us to flay at Paris another year. I am told this place is bed for me; Since God has placed me here, well and
good.
Our mother alTures me it is abfolutely necef-laiy I flaould be a faint; at thefe words I fet up. a cry of adonifhment and fright. You cannot think fo, madam; have I then the likenefs of any faint you ever heard of ? I would love God with all my heart, and believe I do fo. I hate evil ; my unhappy neighbour excites my pity and charity. It is true, that I love to divert my-felf with my neighbour’s, follies, when he is in eafy circumftances ; for, was he in diftrefs I would be blind even to his faults. Js it m,y fault that I cannot help feeing them.; does it lie in my bread not to be the Democritus of my age ? It is a diverfion which offends nobody. It diverts thofe who hear me. The patients whom I fhow in their natural fhape, are. either ignorant of it becaufe they are abfent, or have the complai.fan.ce to laugh at it with rue; I know Some who car-
11
I' '

i'l '
' I
: I' •
I ■ !
If
., i'
1 ’ <

1“; • I .
!l;:

!l I <1 ;
4!i
M i
‘1 '• i ■ ^
I '
I b
. 1
I h I
it!:!
Hi!-
II b ;i 't ■1 '
^ j :
I '
; i I I
; I l|
I ') i

id h
!:T( .
;. 11 ‘ t
,' U il i‘
If I '
‘.I '
•1 ' i
'! . I
{! b:
>'
* » 4
M
11
H
lb!
II
11!
• 1
i!i^
i
01 i
.iT. i
• • I
I
65
LETTER St
ry their goodnefs So far, as to take my irony for
praife, and fay they are obliged to me for it. You
fee a perfon muft be very precife'to take my gai-
ety in a wrong light. I love myfelf, the comforts of life, and my [)leafures. Is not this natural ?
Except Mr. Balfour, I don’t know a (ingle per-
fbn in the univerfe who takes greater care of felf than I doj and where’s the crimeThe world isTilly enough to efteem people only, according to their drefs, complexion, and a thoufand other trifles.
Is it a fin to comply with this folly ? I wifh it was the fafhion to wear a drefs, that doathed us from' head to foot, that could be put on in a minute; I would be the firft to fubmit
to the falhion, provided others were obliged to conform too ; for I would not be the only perfon in a fluttilh undrefs, among a company of ladies full dreft. You fee l am humble, Clarifia ; and
have abated fomething of the opinion I entertained of my charms; I no longer think drefs necelTary only for middling beauties, and abfo-
I fee here
lutely hurtful to perfedl beauties, many ordinary women, with whom I would ex-
But the
change faces, however regular mine is. ftiape, an EnglKh (liape ; I find mine of a lliff' nefs which cannot bear the eafy negligence of a French Snape, where all is eafe. Thefe rc-fiedions . would , never have entered into the head
of
ir .1-1
: M
}!.i


LETTERS.
■67
of a young faint, they Ell mine; therefore I
can’t become one: all thefe trifles, which are
not in themfelves criminal, are obftacles. I fay
thefe things are not in the leaft criminal; fori
have not vet met with a man who is not an
•/
hundred degrees inferiour to my hufband ; you muSt fuppofe,. that, feeing them in this light, I have no great defire to pleafe them. This, Cla-rifla, is the fine reafoning I have juft held with our mother, concerning my vocation to fanQ;i-ty. This was her anfwer.
If dear Harriet had vicious habits to corre^ v-iolent paflions to furmount, or wicked thoughts to purify, fhe ought not to think fandtity impof-fible; yet, I Ihoul'd pardon her trembling at the thought of the painful vidkories Ibe had to gain. Nature does not like to Suffer to reform; but fhe allows herfelf (he is prevented, by trifles only, which her reafon condemns, and for thefe trifles fhe refufes to fulfil the defiens of God on her.
No, I do not doubt but fhe will now
*•
thro’ chriftianity, at thofe faults which flie will hlufli at ten years hence-, through maturity. I pardon her felf-love, her tafte for drefs. Sic. provided—My mother flopped at this word, out of meet malice. She imagined I would prefs her to finifti, fhe even longed for it. Had fife been
any
.	*	I
'	J
^. i
I	»	•
'	\	'
I
1 »
i' !
T
' :l ■
. I
II
Hi-
■i*C
i.
I
I
I
'{
\ ' ,
«I :
:(
•|
<	< j
1
■; -• I
1 ‘ »
1 , ;
!T
• M:
• » ,1
: I ,
1 .
1 •
\ '
• '« '4. : T
1 • ^ SC'
!. i.;
r '
h's
t nI'. .
v.\
|0|
I
• -1' '
IL-i' ■
b I' • 1
i :> ‘
iH.
;i!
i; •
:}
'h' i.
;i'.: :•
'' ■ I ;
h’
■ .i I
f '
I
’ ' f ' .Ml
68
LETTER
S..
any other perfon, I Ihould have left her in pofi-feffion of her fecret, which was none to me;; her eyes had already told me what die pretended, to make fuch a difficulty of telling; but, (he has fuch an afcendency over me, that I can’t re-fifi; her defires ; fhe w-'as defirous I fhould afk her,., and I did. She defires'as lively a charity for fools, the prefumptuous, and ridiculous, as for the poor unfortunate : fhe pretends thefe lad merit lefs compaffion than the others ; becaufe, the diforders of the mind are infinitely more dangerous than the fufferings of the bodv. Certainly thefe two women have fecret intellh gence with each other. I mean Mrs. Darby,, and madam. D’Aftie ; they ever return to this precept, Do not to others what you would not have others do to you. What do you think will be the reffilt of all this ? I fhall become the moft infipid perfon that can poffibly be imagined. This fine work is already begun. Iproraifea company a pleafant ftory; our mother in the midft of my career, perceives that the jeft is to be at this poor neighbour’s expence, whom fhe loves fo generally, and darts at me a fuppliant glance, as if to beg mercy for him ; and, behold I become quite inlipid, and fit my auditors yawning, indead of making them laugh. An embrace, an approbation from this mother, con-
foles
L E T T E R S.
69
feles me for this misfortune. I don’t In the
•	leafl: merit Heaven thereby, I fay ; for, in truth, my only motive is to pleafe you. She would rperfuade me that I am miftaken, and that I have too good a heart not to delign to pleafe God, my benefactor, maher, and true father; fhe ends with telling me, (lie won’t examine my motives, ■which will be purified by degrees; and, that I
•	&m, at lead, a gainer, by corre6ling a bad habit,
TVhere are thefe people, who tempt us on Providence, by making.us remark thediforders which happen in the world? For my part, I fee God as an imperious mader, who Sports with the bad deSigns of the wicked, and makes them Serve as indruments of his adorable intentions. Mr. Darby, for many years, gave himfelf up to the perverfity of his heart. He makes a faint of our mother, who, with another huiband, would have had only common virtue. He would engage you in the Sacrilegious union, to pofTefs ypur fortune ; this is his intention; that of God, is to,.make uSe of this excefs, to awaken the consciences of the two accomplices, and bring them to repentance. He never ceafes purSuing you with an inconceivable averfion ; therefrom re-Suits to you the mod happy marriage, and both
I
for this life andJhe life to come, acourfe opens
for
!!:•
' i' ‘
r' i V
* i • .
; I
1 r » 1 \ *
•ii'i
I ■' .
j!i:i
1<'m
j.''
I ,
; •
JO
LETTERS
for heroic virtues, gncl into the bargain, a mother for me, who fulfils all the duties annexed to this relation, with a perfection, from which, I have already reaped the moft precious fruits. Serioufly, my dear, I will Spare nothing to pro-fit by this grace ; and, I every day feel my confidence and docility, encreafe for our worthy mother.
I hr . Tr'
i' )
■! 1
•: ‘ I I
t t
‘i -
;»
►
M '
T , ■
I ' 1
i •
I
J i
f
I.
i '
\ ■ '
Mr. Balfour writes me word, that the Englifh bifliops think: of perfecuting. Searches are made in all the countries to abolilh popery, and prevent the fecret cxercife of this religion. This news has juft been confirmed to me, by a fanatic, who, promises them Heaven as the reward of their zeal; I can hardly think, the.nation in general applauds it. The foundation of the reformation is liberty of confcience j every one, fay the reformers, receives the light of the holy Spirit to interpret the Scripture. Consequently all fen-fible perfons refpeCl and cherifti the catholics, who are honeft, and good Subjects. The quakers who reject baptifm inftituted by Jefus Chrift, are tolerated at London, and in all places under the Britifti government, and are Suffered to have public places of. worfhip. Why deny us our private chapels ? Would they reduce us to de-fpair? I don’t believe, it, the king is too good,
the
i;!'-1'!
LETTER S.
71
, the government too enlightened to enfringe, a-- gainll the catholics alone, the law, which per-vinits every one to.believe according to their owii way. My fanatic would have quoted the examples of the kings of France; but, I proved to " him, that the cafe v;as quite different. A whole ■kingdom follows a religion, with which it -is content, for upwards of one thoufand two him., di ed years; a fmall part of the nation v/ants to introduce another; thofe who are in poffeffion oppofe them, this is. natural. Don’t imagine T think them authorized to torment the new comers; no; religion forbids perfecution.; let them think wrong if they will, we are accountable for our thoughts, only to God ; the laws have a right over our a61ions alone, and-;may oppofe novelties which would difturb •fociety. The cafe is very different in England : the modern catholics, have been guilty of no innovations, they have antiquity to plead in their favour, and ought to be left unmolefted of courfe. Henry the Eighth found their ancef--tors in the fame fentiments they poflefs at pre-fent, let them be left in them. I will tell you iwhat I will do, fays I, to this gentleman, I won’t yield to any Englifhman, in love for my country; I lave my king, our laws, and liberties, and I will make ufe of mine. I will fettle
in

i:Th:
‘. ' 1; r ’
iil (I; i' ■
I,
I
!ii:
>'i -
} '! M '
Tli' I '■
I;
M r
ii;
« u.-
!!iCb
i: • . j K .
j:
\, * > 1
:h'i'
’r!b"
■ hr • c
f; rfj’:;
•	1	‘	' i
•	I 'I'-r : ; ■ r
■ icilci
!iil T ; 1
il C' M-
!iii T r
r . :
hbL;
' .t
•ciij';
Ii(i ■ i
* If l! ’
1 j I
t't •
:!;i;
< t J.
io:'
I,
irl' i
; th;
I.? f
•' !
!ii:
; .
^ M
fli !
L .ii
iir
I:'
' ?i;
f)'
H ;

h:
t.'
1 b" # :

ill

\'d
CO i r 1
: -J
■r'^ ;

’hi
i: • •
}»! ; /«. I
:! I
' 1
H
{ .
I ■
I i
; I I I
hr ;
'h
11
# I
I!
■ I
I !:
il - f
1 • ’
■1: f
I. -
II. I
I. Ii
tiiT
72
LETTERS.
in the diftrift of Bourdeaux, and will carry with
me my perfecuted brethren. This will depo^
pulate the kingdom ; for my example will be
followed; and the bifhops muft be thanked for this, who take the liberty to deprive us of the right, which every Englilhman has to be free. Luckily my fortune is in the public funds; I have wherewithal to form vaft colonies here.
It would, neverthelefs, coll me a great deal,
to banilh myfelf from my country, my dear;
why won’t they leave things on their former foot-
ing, we are content to be excluded from-all dignities, to pay double taxes, to be in danger of being deprived of the patrimony of our fathers in Ireland; becaufe a dillant relation, by changing his religion, Supplants the right heirs, the children of the deceafed. This, in my opinion, is Sufficient, and already too much. Prudence obliges thofe who are at the head of af-
fairs to flop here, unlefs they would force us to
fly our country.
LETTER
LETTERS.
73
LETTER XXXV.
MRS. DARBY TO CLARISSA.
f
i <.
Sincerely Ihare, my dear Clarilla, the admiration of my Second daughter; it retards my being alTociated with you in your good works ; but, God has Spared me one here, which I discharge with the greateft pleaSure in the world. Your Sifter Harriet has an excellent diSpofition, and only the fault of eighteen years of age. She does not deceive you, when Ihe Says, file is all of a Sudden become a new creature. Her huS-band will hardly know her at his return. He does not explain himSelf, about the means he proposes to make uSe of to fettle our affairs; but, he infifts he Ihall certainly Succeed. However you ought to be eafy; I have his word of honour that your intentions (hall be followed with refpea to your father; and, that he will refpea the orders of Providence, which Seem to have deftined you to be Sanaified through poverty. Harriet has given you a long account, .which dif-penfes me from a longer letter; I forefee that
the unravelling of our affairs, will give me oc-
cafion to write a much longer letter; and I Spaie myfelf for that. My humble reSpeds to the ba-VoL. II.	E	ronefe.
i
i :
I I
I .
!!
liii i
ih
(
1
!i:
i


it .

h
‘ O :
’! II 1
74
LETTER S.
ronefs. This is not a compliment without rea-
lity ; I fee no one who has a greater right to thofe of all mankind. I embrace my dear child, and her hufband, whom.'fhe does not deferve, if he refembles hi^ mother.
• I
■r ▼
t ? '
-	» j
' \
LETTEi

LETTER S.
75
. LETTER XXXVI. CLARiSSA TO MRS. T>AREY.
S
Triumph, I Ihall not keep a penny of the money I received ; I have pleaded the caufe of the poor, and God has rnade me eloquent. This is what I alledged in favour of our pea-fants. If my fortune was confined to what I pof-. fefs at prefent; it would be right to think about my children, if God gives me any: I could then,
I
, in conscience, confecrate to the poor only the money TSpared from my luxury and
es; but, have I not cohfented they Ihould labour to be benefited by my donation ? By adding what 1 poffefled when I came hereto your little fortune, which you had from poor Mrs. Colby, we fhall have about one hundred and forty pounds per annum, which is more than enough to bring up my family, especially, as I and the baron are refolved to make ufe of no mercenaries in their education. My pre-fent lituation will procure them an habit of moderation, a good ftate of health, pure morals, and will teach them to be fenfible of, to fliare, and to relieve, the di'ftrefles of the poor; I fhall very fincerely bewail them, when a great fortune Ihall Snatch them from all thefe bleffings,
E 2	and
'll,,; r I I > •
'. t ■ ;
I ’: • 1 '
I'T
I ■ h ’
I'l I • > •
In'
T I
II
? .
' ■
:i!
> I '
■ii;
ii-r
'Ii
hi
tl
:ib
I!
11
i I
ill
II:
i
lli
n '
iM

!l 'll
I
l!
'H
n,
i:l
bi.
b|:
ii.i:
‘iii
K<*
I i ‘
X
76
LETTERS.
)
• ,1
and afford them an opportunity to lofe them-, I have engaged, befides, to confine myfelf to this one Sacrifice, while my fortune remains in its prefent ftate. Madam D’Aftie will not confent to the pleafure I fhould take in augmenting her trifling income; it was with difficulty fhe consented to accept fifteen guineas for the year I am to paSs with her; which, fhe fays, will be Sufficient to defray all expences; I fhall, therefore, be reduced to hoard a treafure, which worms and ruft may deftroy, and robbers take from me j and, as a recom pence. She permits me to make this trifling Sacrifice. I have juft informed you that I have only this year to pafs with my refpe£table mother-in-law j this Sacrifice is the greateft that could have been propofed to me, but I muft obey. This order has been iSSued in confequence of the aflembly of our peaSants.
Notwithftanding the good that is done in our parifh, our paftors and their aflbciate have ftill more exalted views. It was neceffary, fay they, to humour the weaknefs of perfons whofe habits were already formed ; we therefore kept the meum and tuum, thofe fruitful Sources of all the misfortunes of the univerfe. They are de-firous of confecrating a place where thefe words
fhould
'll
i !>
t J

LETTERS.
7-7
fliould never enter, and of whofe happy Inhabitants, it might be Said as of the primitive chri-
, their goods were in common, -they had but one mind, one heart j and we are deflgned to be at the head of this community.
There is, about half a league diilance, an hill covered with bulhes; it has good Springs, and an excellent expofure. It may be purchafed at a very moderate price, for the proprietor reaps no advantage from it at prefent. At the foot of this hill we propofe to fettle Some of our inhabitants, and form a little hamlet. We have fifteen children of good will, and ten foundlingvS who are to be married next year; my hulband and three more who are married this year, in all make twenty-nine families for this hamlet, which will be called the Chrijiian Union. Mr. Duboc, the younger, goes with us, and undertakes to^ bring up the foundlings, and other children of the village, till their firft communion. My hufband founds this little college, for which purpofe he fells the ring I gave him. I'he fifteen children of good will, relinquilh to their families their right of fucceffion; their wives follow their example, and the three of this year give up whatever they have received, on condition their families affift us in clearing the land, ani building our houfes.
E 3	The
7.^
L E
T T E R S.
With
The great village undertakes to furnini us provisions, for which they are to be paid. AIL cur meals are to be love feafts j that is, in common, and in my favour the poornefs of the nou-rifliment is mitigated. .Die bread will, on my account, be lefs black; we fliall eat meat three times a week, the reft of the week garden fluff. A 1 arge hall w'ill contain us at meal times, during which, one of the fchool-boys will read to us. Some aged women,, of the other village, who are widows, have requefted leave to wait on us. Two are appointed for the kitchen, and the others are to take care of an. infirmary, which is to be placed at a diftance from our habitations, that we may breathe a pure and wholefome air.< This infirmary will ferve for the fick of the village, and thofe of the hamlet are to take care of them by turns. Ouf lands are to be Sown with the overplus that remains after purchafing the eftate; the corn neceffary for the fubfiftence of the colony, is to be furnifbed by the village, and is to be repaid out of our firft crop. The hamlet is never to contain above fixty families, who are to be chofen from the moft exemplary. Thofe children of the inhabitants, who, by marrying, fliall. return to the village,, are to be portioned at the expence of the hamlet. This
money fhall be taken from the box, into which
all.
LETTERS.	79
\
all the profits that arife from the wares and work of the inhabitants, (hall be depofited. With this money a quantity of huffs, linens and other neceffaries fliall be bought for the ufe
cf the colonifts. This warehoufe fhall be un-
/
der- the care of two widows., who (hall diflribute to each family the fixed habits, and (hall take the old ones back to mend; and when any child is born, fliall furni(h it with all kind of neceffaries.
If any colcnift is difgufted with this way of life, or behaves in fuch a manner as to be excluded, he (hall receive the value of what he
• $
loft by coming to the mountain; but if hg brought nothing at all, Something (liall be given him to enable him to fettle himfelf in the village or elfewhere.
The colonifts muft never forget, that they affembled together, to imitate the lives of the primitive chriftians, who had but one heart and mind, and whofe charity extended even to the heathens; much more Should they preferve an union with their parents, and the inhabitants of the parish whence they came,
E 4	As
1 ■ . )
II .y -■
1; ■
\:
.;'
i.:;'
ri: .t I
■!1
if
h'
j '• I
I.;
:' I
I
S)
:u|;
nib'
ill
• •?!
’ U
;bl
'1 It b
^iilS ,
h'd b
t I ■ ■
iji‘i !
I;
i • j ■
■ 1 r
‘ b'
.! 111 ■ ichi-
■
‘ i
' . t
bi
• 0 ‘
ill';
11.
1
■ ’ I'
I.
(» ;»

; i
5 •
b!;::
!T " i b :■ ?T-.
; r
f .
, 1
. I '
‘ti:'
!:l:
1:;
' • r •
; I i»
i I'
t 1.
I I
It .
O
I •
H
j I
j r
li
f •
, > t » I ■	■	'
I 'i i ■ I
» !: he »
So
LETTERS.
As often as time will permit, they are to go to the village to attend divine Service, and may dine with their relations and friends, remem' Bering, that great virtue, modefty and good nature is expeiSted from them. Only in-the evening, they mufl: afk permifTion of their pallor to flay in the village, on condition of returning at night to lie in the hamlet. If any misfortune fticuld happen to the village or hamlet, they are mutually to alHll each other to repair it; the colonifts especially, are never to forget the place from whence they came. And as they polfefs nothing of their own, if they become infirm, and are incapable ,of getting their livelihood by their indullry, they are to be maintained and provided for at the expence of the colony, in a place Set apart for the aged, and thofe in a (late of recovery from ficknefs.
In cafe of future contingencies, the colonies (hall alTemble, to determine what is bell to be done. The clergyman, for the time being, over them, fhall have two votes, and prefide at the aflembly. The Separation of the hamlet lhall not in the leaft withdraw it from the jurifdidion of the mother parilh, to which it lhall pundu-ally pay its tythes.
Alum
r
i ■ ■
LETTERS.
8i
A Sum of money (hall be hoarded up, not to •exceed three thoufand livres, as a fund for ex-, traordinaries, and to portion thofe who are defir: rous to return ro the village j but if any one is excluded for any Scandalous crime, he Ihall only have half the fum that is given to others. But if God Ihould blefs the colony fo far, as to have more than the above-named fum, and their fla-ted provifions j the remainder, at the end of the year. Shall be diftributed by the ourate to the poor of the parilh, or in the neighbourhood, and he (hall produce receipts from thofe to whom thefe alms have been given.
But if, by length of time, this hamlet (liould be diffolved, the lands purchafed by madam D’Aftie, whofe maiden name was Darby," Shall be fold, by order of the archbilhop, for the time being., and the produce employed in founding charity fchools in thofe places, where- he Shall judge them moft wanting.
Such, my dear mother, is the family at the bead of which they mean to place me, notwith-iftanding my Incapacity. Our hamlet might be considered as only one family. May God give his bleffing to this work; and, if he bleffes my marriage with many children, may he grant me
E s
one
liL’j ff

!il
'< i ■ i
fi, li ;■ I !i.i
I L > '
I
hi
t
• t
li
ib-i'
:j*’
:1:S N
ft ' l' . ' 1 ■ ‘
'iJlf ■ d li ■
•ti., j
I M

'!i*i ii :! :
. - t . 1
:? :ih
J.i’T
■ nd
L •
ih'idl..
* 1,1 • ' I
I ‘
t ‘
iHi;
’ • J! #
.{.Urt
. •
■ I '
, t.
' ' ! t ■ '
m
■ ; ' I i .	»
:
ijV-.:; ■ 'Tf I
- i:
d'i c‘
'll st'i'
i’Sh*.
illlir.: '’li.C- ■
i|'
‘djii'd
■ =Ul L.lh
1	•< '■I •
.1 •«
If
•f;
! Ill :-\v\irir.
d I’ ■
I.;
i t '»’{• U! h
A
iih : ■
bj!:'.
t I
hi; n •,:l
I
ii'L
iV'v
I
'di,
•	i * *
♦	* : C I
i'j'il.:;
‘	‘ I: .
■i ;i . f
,|i :L
iii|h
! ,|!r'
• M.mI
.It;!;
i'lli ■'
> :: ’ Sid ,
!>1|
4
cS:
VP. ■ 'i' li
ii':;:;. ■ Iti'’;'
-i ■ r
,ij:S
i,bi,,
ih i > hT
■ >T
82
LETTERS.
one willing to devote himfelfto;this work, in or* d'er to repair the faults I have committeduhere-in. I think I Ihould have been willing to fix myfelf here all my life, but I mufl: only ftay till things are thoroughly fettled upon the footing a-greed on, after which I fhair return to my mother-in-law, and we fhall content ourfelves with vifiting them from time to time.
I acquainted you that the curacy was worth little more than-twenty guineas a year, for Several years paft; it is at prefent worth'double that fum by the increafe of tithes ; thus our curate has found himfelf in a fituation to educate two young perfons, whom he intends^ to Succeed himSelf and his brother. Our archbifiiop having engaged his chapter, on whom this living depends, never to give it to any one who-has not been educated to the mlniftry, we are careful at prefent not to Suffer either priefls or monks for
the following reaSon.
All our young women are very pious^ and innocent. A good capuchin who preached one Advent in the parilh, cried up the advantages of celibacy foftrongly, and of a monaftic life, that half the parilh would no more hear of matrimony. Our paftors have a . great refpe(3t for the
■ ftate
LETTERS.
83
ftate extolled by St. Paul, but they are of opinion, that the vocation for a monaftic life is much rarer than is imagined, and therefore did not encourage this fervor. At the end of fix months, all thefe vocations disappeared ; for which they returned God thanks: we have great need of good mothers of families, and they are very Scarce. If we find real vocations we encourage
I
them ! For thefe two years there have been only three girls and two lads in whom a real vocation has been obferved. The boys are-brought up to the miniftry, as F have already told you, and are already in facred orders. The girls are put into the hofpital for the infirm.,
»	t
I confefs, my dear mother, I am as pafiion-ately fond of this projedf as if it was my own invention ; nevertheless, I (hould not have thought of it, if J had not reco]le<Sted a projefl: put in execution near St. Denis, in France, where a whole village lived as we propoSe to-do. T.he Superior of the convent of the., vifitatipn; at Rouen, wrote an account of it to my aunt : : I
was then ftrongly affected witli it; but my extreme youth effaced this pious inftitution from my mind : I recoiled it at prefent, and hope for fuGceSs, unlefs I Spoil the Scheme. I am going to turn this year to my advantage by gaining in-
ftrudion.
pipis:

Vil::-
I '
{ . I ■	-
r ■	• I '	.
bVs
N : • Si t.ii; ,
i'''
I!:	■
■ihi ■ ' '
t ;•
j'-i A
b- 1'
li'hr
S“':r !■ r;’ '
H *	, ♦
b .11
V' ■hbjj' TiJh
• * ■ b: ;
, I
'. \
r' 'll.
'■'b: : .
; ' i
I : '
•! i .,, •
'	1	' t'
' L;l •'!
I'.'t

T,;'''
■ I, i • i b
tlV' ‘ bh
tliii
, ft •
. I • •
I
b' '»•
» i C •	»

'•b
jlh':
I
! I H • II
L ! i' ' ■'j-ibi lr-*h ■,
I'	I
. I •
ft
!• f.-'
|i»l. , :
, I.	.
■ ■■
iv<
h
,L '
I
ll •
■'It
jhbSi:’'
K'Fi' • '
bb"
. I
ii ,, ■

i A\ ■
!i.
*. * *
\y<
!'. I * *
L ’ '
CL'
cbv:
:i:• I i-'b 'l il; '■"i
•! r.i ’ .D
■: bi '-J : te ';h
•'hb •;
1 • *: r
'ill' .1
• I' I
. I .	I
11

S4
LETTERS.
ftru£Hon, and fhall afterwards depend on tht help of God. The innocence of thefe young couplics will excite his blefling, and obtain me
his divine affiftance.
%
We yefterday finifhed our ceremonies j would to God people behaved in our churches with as much modefty as thefe poor people in their di-verlions; yet they are merry, and divert them-felves heartily. Induftry gives a relifti to recreation, I fee it clearly, and doubt not but my Harriet will experience it at the expence of her vapours : idlenefs and a luxurious way of living, produces, or rather maintains them; for your condition, it is faid, may occafion them. Yet all our peafants are ignorant of this diforder. Their pregnancy does not in the lead interrupt their labour, and frequently they have but juft time to return home before they are brought to bed. They are kept within doors as much as
poffible, towards the end of the ninth month;
\
buVeuftom renders repofe an unnatural ftate to


LETTER
i. iCi' :.
LETTERS,
LETTER XXXVII.
Ss
CLARISSA TO LADY HARRIET.
Give you joy, my dear Mer, on the new exigence you have acquired with our common mother; I always hoped for this happy change; but, I Ihall affiire you, with the frank-nefs which friendlhip requires, that I did not expeft it fo foon. You are right, in faying, our two mothers agree together j they go to the fame fchool, and muft, therefore, have the fame theme. The gofpel is their leflbn, Jefus their mafter. Then, this mafter is he who repeats to us, in a thoufand different ways. Learn of me, that am meek, and lowly of heart. Love me, love your neighbour ; behold the law and the prophets. In this confifts devotion and fandfity j every thing which does not conduce hereto is illufory. I know, my dear friend, that your heart is free from gall; and that, at the moment when your tongue pierces like a pointed arrow, you would be ready to tear yourfdf into pieces, to ferve this poor neighbour, whom you have juft afflidled. I have Sometimes feen children of a good difpofition, and extremely choleric, in the excefs of their little fury, beat their playfellows ; and, if thefe feemed in a humour to return their blows, the little dragon took fire,
and

'I
,U '» :1 !|
hi
h
1! ' li ;
:h,
J'
Ml.' .

ll!:
., 1' ii'fi
Ihi
i.h
!-h’
. ■»
t 1

ill'!
1!
.'lU

.!;i(
'I )» ; >
lllil i
I ‘ . I
U
r. ‘: ,ii '
'll •
ii< '
j}Mi ;
! L,,.
■ii! • : •

iff
* A * n
hij
In
' 1 AI» S'
F*'l C-i ibi 1!

;!h:
; I
ii ii':;
; I ii • i
* t; I
■if
i 1
t I
!'!
'i\
- i‘ ■ ■ '.i )ft ■ :?Nit
iiiih
Ti; •.
' li ‘
I ■ •
if;
t ■'
Sc
ilT :
.h);
■I'll
i'-'fi !


I!
!
li .
■ M •
Ifiili*!
tM ,1
Til hill u;f 11''
iib:
ii
hi
’I

11! ;
«.;0* .
f ! I

• 'I
i'i
’{ i

! :
f ‘ L
hhb , '|lh : .n '
.11,, h
hibi t
.Mil. '

0

111:

;ij'
V ;» .
1 I
lii i
C;il I *
' i
86
LETTER' S..
and would tear their very eyes out, if he could..
Had they, on-the contrary, ill treated a meek
fpirited timid child, who had no other means of
avenging himfelf than by his fears, the little
lion was immediately transformed into a lamb;.
would kifsdiis companion ; embrace him ; (hare
with him his play-things ; and, in a word, would not be eafy, till he faw him. confoled.for the blows he. had received.	>
This is exa6tly the cafe with my dear fifter
Ihe is almofl: in a ftate of defpair when (he has.
wounded ; but her repentance does not cure the
wound Ihe has made : if flie refledls ferioufly, as
Ihe has began to do, her good, hearts will refolve never to afflidi; any one. I live here in thecen* ter of charity, I alTure you; and yet I difcover every day I have need to correQ: a fault, which makes my inferiours Suffer.. Naturally abfent,! anfwer at thefe moments with, a Severe decifive
tone. Aik my poor Fanny, how.often at firll Ihe Suffered from this fault ? S-he hi)s even fuf-
fered,. when Ihe has been convinced, my heart
has had no Ihare in this tone; which I have
perceived, by her colouring, and fometimes by
her tears. I have even Ihed them myfelfonthis
occalion.; not with (landing, I have brought with
me here, this fevere.Iharp manner of fpeaking.
Mv
LETTERS;
87
mother-in-law,, whom, I had on my knees begged to acquaint me with my faults, has had the goodnefs to- make me fenfible of it Several times. Her example more than her dif-courfe will corredf me, I am Sure. It is impof-fible to be more confiderate than Ihe is ; (he has a particular way of Speaking for every one, and this way of Speaking is always adapted to their necefllties. Her fon affures. me this is not natural to her ; (he muft, therefore-, have taken infinite pains-to acquire this evennefs of temper^ which flies in a. paflion at nothing, and is always ready to excufe the adlion from-the intention. The woman (he has taken to look after the cattle, is almoft a Simpletonfor which very reafon, (he preferred her to others who fought the advantage of being in her Service. If this poor creature was fpoke to roughly, fays (he, (he would become quite ftupid ; whilft, by a little patience, (he may be made fit for another Service. She has already made feveral thorough Servants ; and when they are become fuch, fhe parts with them to others. This feems a trifle; yet, it is extremely toilfome; her meeknefs can only be compared with that of our paftors : what difficulties have they encountered to civilize their flocks ; I fay, civilize them, my dear ^
and I do, not fay too much I find here a com-
pleat


11 , t ;
i;. .»_
: I
a
•I •	’ ?
: L	: ■
• I
[;C -->>: ; '
■*l.
.'I'b!-
I •
i i;
■h
j:!
I ..
fCih' i
• .1 •.
■ i •
‘ . 0
; •* 1 '{
' ( I
.'Ljj ;
■ . iM ‘I
.1' ■< Iri.i
, t'
I !'.j ;■
'. <' iL
'.' I
'‘'■iV;.
,;i I.,
I,' •
'\ •[{!' '■> I'llh '
sltib-'
•i'll .
1 f’(‘L
in: {1 •
'll:
i;!i
•' t
! :ii
111
'pi
I'!'
I !' • .

':; M : .
iiiij;;,
.. o , ,
•'h i< '
;h
^{l

ibiv
■1
h'l:"; ■
fV;.
: i; r :

' t
'•'h.'l i ' '1';’ •
iii'l.'*''
1:| I i!|lL .
ril
I •
I'l II
i-Mi"
111!'--
’I I

■! p;i .
IP
!>
iiiip'

'!:i iiL:‘ ■ 1:1;. f:,!'
;■ I !’'h;
, t . I , '1	1; 1
■	I’lb
«8
LETTERS.
pleat proof of what I have read fomewhere,
that true politenefs is infeparable from a lively
charity. Apply yourfelf therefore to render
your words like the fentiments of your heart,
and then, my dear After will be perfed.
I don’t wonder at your envying the peaceable
and innocent life we here lead j we here fee
beautiful nature in every thing, and (he is ter*
I have, never-
ribly difguifed where you are. thelefs, heard fay, that there is not a city in the world where fo many virtuous a£tions are performed. Since God fixes you there for two years longer, you fliould endeavour to form a conne6kion with fome virtuous perfons, whofe Society may be at the fame time agreeable and
I recoMe(fI, that, in one of the firft letters you wrote me after your arrival, you extolled ‘greatly thofe philofophers without cloaks, who
This is
complied with every thing in Society, laudable to a certain degree. A magiftrate ought to preferve connexions with his bre-
thren, with his family : I fay as much of every
other ftation ; but, it is not neceflary he Should confine himfelf to this Society only j and, it is lawful to confort with thofe in whom we find a
conformity of tafte and Sentiment; provided, we do iJtiot attach ourfelves to them too ftrongly; for
I think
P'l.ilTi;
i ! i i
L'lpiii
! 'l l'
n
■ i ::
■Mi:.
LETTERS.
89
I think fingulahty always blameable. You have no connefilions in this country j therefore, may better than another allow yourfelf this Satisfaction. I think, I am rather filly to give you advice j it is like carrying water to a river, and gold to Peru. You are at the Spring head, and run no rifk in following in this as in every thing elfe, the counfels of our mother. The baron is at work for you, and feems to me to have wrote a great deal. Who would have imagined, that at his age- he had already experienced fo many viciffitudes of fortune t
LETTER
li!
' iiiii
t '’i. ;,i
I }
li

, I - I ! .

1 I
i '

'» I
Ite

iiite
i' r r .
»
ii
■L:
( • ! ■

te 'l'‘ •
lii
iiiillii
cbiii:
' . N i
r‘-ib
,i' .h'
I'itel’
I' I ■ I
hit
t.i
iMj (»

C!!i'
•hi: )
li •:
’ I' • ■
II I'i;!;
t Lv ’ ■

l!!il
i;
> I
UU:'
•I ' t'
f l b' !l ,'!;i
:
j<b •
iiiib
5 - ; !•
I'itiiii'
I .
; I .
Ihi,;
m.i
t
,1

i h.
:• t n
iiii
Ji M ■ I
'■ 1.1 -uc
, L h 'f

J t
I
tlibH
M ' t
.•hi'
i
I'
1' I
|]
h.
tsb'

11
’ M)' ■•• • rh;.'.
»‘lh!
I'llili
I I
i
•i
i‘t
tu:
1111:
I !
Ml
vV-st
M m!
•ii


’•i' IS
? 'UM
ill
(li
li

lb:


'111.
!'
.N !
fi'll'
go
LETTER S.
LETTER XXXVIII.
LADY HARRIET rO CLARISU,
E'HOLD ! here is* Something to pay you.
beSorehand, for- the large packet you have
made me expect. Mr. Balfour arrived yefter-day evening, and has brought us the beft news, in the v.?orId. I make ufe of your language, my dear filler; for, I can’t yet bring myfelf to
rejoice, at feeing you flript, and conligned to
your mountain. Hold, ClarilTai, your projed does not pleafe me at all.
Mrs. Darby continues.
I BEG my Second daughter’s pardon ; but, it is entirely to my tafte. It is certain that in all ages God relerves Some chofen fouls, whom
he Sets apart, to make ufe of the exprelTion:
behold the origin of monafteries.
The lirft
who Separated themfelves from' the Society of mankind, to live only for God,., conceived, that, notwithflanding their Separation-from the Society of mankind, nothing could difpenfe them
from the duties they owed Society. A love of God,
which extinguilhed charity for our fellow creatures, would be illufory; and a love for our neighbour, may be confidered as a rule by which
we may found our love for. our Creator. By the
ftream
LETTERS.
91
ftream we judge of the abundance of the Spring, ome, and by much the fmaliefi; number, confe-
c
c
crated themfelves to prayer ; they were Mofes’s, who, w'hile their brothers fought in the plain, obtained victory for them, by perpetually lifting up their pure hands to Heaven. The reft, to tliis duty of charity, added another ; and, while they prayed to God for the grace neceflary for the wants of the foul, employed their hands in labour, to afford them the means of relieving thofe of the body. Their fobriety rendered their alms plentiful, and they might be considered as doubly ufeful to Society. We read that this great number of anchorites,. Scattered over the defarts of the church,, met together in harveft time, and went in companies to hire themfelves as labourers. Work interrupted not their prayers, prayers hurt not their labour j they received a certain quantity of corn in payment, and Several veffels might be Seen in the port of Alexandria, loaded with corn, the fruit of their Sweat, which was diftributed amongft the poor. Thofe who would imitate in Europe, the Anthonians, and monks of the order of St. Hilaire and St. Pacome, never loft fight of thefe important points, prayer and labour. We fee in the rule of St.. Benedidt, how effen-tiaj he thought this article. Two circumftances
con-
1
•u.: ■('(
' I r t •''

r- b '
■'Sibil:
ii;l

i.

1 ; ''
'•)b ’ ■
I ' i
i ll
C'
• ' ' .. » •
I'..11'
I :
iC ,
u:
:'..
■ f.l •'
i»r.| I
iiMi
Si i
; :i'!i
bb!!'
'Ll;;
I
iii
iiil:'''
liib'

i:
'•!
i[j te,) i!!|- ite
■f iiil;
iSiliil
b .M
; n: •;! lihii-i' :
I
'ili'li;I:
O'	I' '
t ll, .I t	'
' 'v:;
jiV
'I
11
liu 1
i,
bib
ilS!;
iii - ^:
.iC'-'
. >
’Ml'l
-Ict
: t'VL .
.S -'H
f ■:
L ii I
iSih
h
i 'I i I
c
I
\ '
•ll*'
’ ‘ivb ! '

!i!
..H ■ 1*1
i 1	. I
bSii;
11 •: i;	>•
ll'ibb
' ’iii.i'i.
lib ■
'■'i' ‘
ite
bn
1 li I-,’!' '
! -Ilips
I'l' ll' •

njiiriii’

;L|i
'll •
ilSib:::
b!'iii i ,
b.Tn;! :
lliilii '
'iTlbi 1 l: Li
i I
I -i •
cilli.ii ■’
92
LETTERS.
concurred, to make labour of hands negleded
The barbarity of the ages brought on ignorance
and the religious only, devoted themfelves to
ftudy} a work doubtlefs as Salutary and more
painful than corporal labour. The feculars, to
Second the religious and encourage them to
ftudy, ridded them from temporal wants, bv bequeathing them confiderable eftates. The
firft ardor being abated, they abandoned thelt
ftudies, and returned not to labour. Parents
accuftomed themfelves to confider monafteries
as honourable provilions for their families
and placed their children there, without con-
fidering whether they had a vocation for this way of life. Many who had an averfion toufe-
ful employments through lazinefs, thought a
religious habit a Sufficient title to exempt them
from being ufeful to the ftate j and this mul
tiplied theSe idle people to Such a degree as to
prejudice population and agriculture, either by
diminifliing the number of married fubjeds; or
by their poffeffing the lands which ought tobethe
property of the fubjedls, and thereby reducingthe poor to the neceffity of a ftate of celibacy, through fear of increaling the number of wretches,
Hence the outcries againft religious orders, thofe odious appellations of idle drones, hornets, dead
members, &c,. and wilhes, to fee thefe religious
houfes
•a I
I I*

I i
i IV'CT :
LETTERS.
93
houfes dilTolved, which retain nothing of their primitive inftitution but the name. You have very juftly remarked, that real vocations for celibacy are very Scarce. Your parilh, in twelve years, has had but five inftances thereof j and, a great number of worthy fathers of families. I dare affirm convents would be reduced to a very Small number, if thofe only were admitted whom God calls to this (late. Piety and religion would be no lofers by this diminution of monks. There would be fewer religious, without there being fewer perfons devoted to God j thofe that remained would be the Sweet favour of chriftia-nity J and with the Superfluity of the revenue, annexed to thefe monks who have only the habit, I would have the fame done in all our provinces, which you have done in that where you live. I fhould like every village to have an hamlet of chriftian union, where thofe who were de-firous of praftifing the gofpel literally, might retire : thefe would be true monafteries ufeful to the ftate. Thefe people would furnifh an healthy numerous race, for fruitfulnefs and health are the confequence of labour and a Sober way of life. Their children, by entering into Society, would bring there virtues which would change the face of the earth ; our country places would become an heaven. A fine dream, my dear
child.


1 1.
'bliiif
11 '>>)*> bJ- :i:
01'
!!!
ilb
I 1 I
I t I
•uhiii'
Ll.) .|
I
A
» t'
h'ibli
rhlbi: 'V; lU
*1 •
ll'l 'L
L:!'
I. .
. . t M,i, I'l
, t'
t!' ‘
b h M'
< • I ’ M ;
il!
Li
iii
I (


if
I!
I'f'L
lii'i:

Lill
V:'l
■;i'
* 1''
i .1 •;
i \-,A
».' 1' I,
1 :i
h'l,
'.l-h
^ '!l' :

hhi-
" u '
I
IL
M ,1
s
' i.
ri ' I.
'• S h '•
-!ili 'Ijili'
;n
5 : ■
•)
a:
;l
iliCilii
b'i'iii
*f‘ i*.
he
'L ‘

II
ill'
•h
i'!!'l
• ‘
»1|| ij'.
;(;'i !'..*• .'hi' Cl
TL-.'; •i'ii'i. ■' c !■
'Ih
iL'
ijh!
N
■


Lil
■111'
•I'P
■ hh;
I	,| i
|h
trii}L II f! .Mitlil
94
LETTERS,
child, the divine goodnefs grant it may be rea^
lized ; it Seems difficult only at a diftance, anl
there wants only one lord of a diftrift, worthy
of being So, to realize it among his vaffals.
One of the regulations which pleafes me bellj is the leaving the colonifts at .liberty to return to the village. You will find but few who will take the advantage of it; all would have wilhed for it, had they been forced to continue their refi-dence at the hamlet.
•But, my dear child, there is one article among your rules to which I will never confent; and, I think I huve Sufficient reaSon. That which
fubjefts you to common nourilhment. God has made different conditions in life, and wills
that each Ihould live according to his ftation,
We have received, by Succeffion, leSs robull
bodies than peaSants; and, our employments do
not demand greater ftrength ; we have, in out
youth, contrasted an habit which cannot be destroyed, without riSquing our lives, God
forbid, I Ihould make my Self an advocate for
luxury and Superfluous wants ; no my child, 1
would only preServe the eftablilhed order. If
God defigned you for the flate of life, you have yourfelf chofe, he would have manifefted his will, by absolutely ffripping you of every thing;
and
LETTERS.
95
■and then, I Ihould have been the firfl; to have encouraged you to walk with joy in the ftation Providence-had pdaced you in : the contrary has happened ; all your fortune is Secured to you,
and it is your duty to ad! like a perfon who muft
» • /
one‘day re-enter into the Society of her equals. If you regard me, your table fhall be Separate j you Ihall Suffer nothing there which looks like luxury ; and, you fhall alfo not experience any of thoSe denials, which are the confequence of poverty. Your honeft people would not be offended at this, were they told, that Providence has bellowed on you great richer; and, that your way of living, though above theirs, is infinitely'below what you are in a condition to follow, if you were not willing to approach their condition. I hope, madam D’Aftie will not disapprove of my refledtions on this Subject; I think them juft. I flatter myfelf alfo fhe will herfelf relax Something of her moderation ; you would Suffer too much to be better treated than her. I reSpe61; her virtue infinitely; fhe has Submitted to the orders of Heaven in her poverty; ought fhe not to have the Same- Subftiifli6n, tin tlie change it has permitted her to experience ; -a change fhe neither wifhed, or fought for ?
Mr,
I ' ! '
' T'-
i I .
■■	.. L
I'll'

>- b!
s
.1 • c • •
/ i • 1 . • • ■ ‘'
« ; •	■. h
'" I
u •
•f.
' C.‘| 1
(c '
» I


I,	•
» ! ’ -
i:
m:. ;
96
LETTERS.
i|'.;
Mr. Baron, it is to you I recommend my
daughter; I have confented chearfully to the gift Ihe has made you of herfelf; but, it was on condition you fhould take care of our common treafure; if you leave her to herfelf, we Shall either lofe her foon, or have the unhappl-nefs to fee her drag on a languiftiing life, with a broken conftitution ; Ihe is not in the leaft fit to undergo the fatigues of a Carmelite.
Lady Harriet continues.


■j.
I I	,
f
I ll'	‘
} i	•'
'it 'ite“
.1 ■ . ■
•	.nit
■'I	-::i.
. i L
A A
«l,L
l/b;
1f *;i. • '• b'
h!l ;'.j;
.1 '1 i	I ' ■
‘ ■!; I.*;' i .
.CSC' I V'.
r
!j
I
tf'	'
i'
'[ .1 ‘1 'i' ,L
AT laft my turn is come, they have interrupted me only to come into my opinion. Remain in your defert, according to your new order : but no repafts like anchorites. My mother intreats, I threaten. Hear me, Mr. Baron ;Ih lift on your word of honour, that my Clari lhall be treated like a perfon of her condition; I don’t delire you to feed her with ortolans, though they are plenty where you are; but, al leaft, let her live as perfons of eafy circum-ftances do in town. Charity begins at home, we fay in Englilh. This is more than charity, it is but juftice, and I (hall cite you as an af-faflin before the tribunal of the whole univerfe, if you do not make ufe of your authority, to
force
1| Ji -til
I’’ 'If
LETTERS.
9?
force your wife to live in a proper manner. ■Perfuade, madam, your mother, that her ex-;ample will be the only means to engage ClariSfa to do fo j you are rich enough to afford thi? cxpence. I am going to be Mr. Balfour’s fc-cretary; or rather to Spare him the trouble of diStation, and give you an account of his voyage.
Some days before he left Paris, lie conceived the mod happy prognoSde of the fuccefs of his enterprize towards which, Pror idence fur-niflied him with unexpedfed helps. VCe have 'at Paris no more Servants than are absolutely ne-ceffary; fo in his firll voyage, Mr. Balfour was accompanied only by his valet de. chnmbro, and propofed to take him this journey. By tire greateft good luck in the world, this lad was fcized with a tertian ague ; and, notwithftand-ing his earned intreaties to go with his mader, my hud)and would not Suffer him to hazard in creasing his didemper. He was alfo as unwil-
W
ling to deprive me of the only Servant who Spok Englidi, and being a good deal embarraffed mentioned it to a countryman and acquaintance, whom he met at the coffee-houSe. I can eaffy' do without one of mine, Says his friend to liirn I fliall day about four months at Paris before S Set out for Italy j I have hired an EngliSanian,
VoL, XL	F	^Yho
f t !
I ;
|::i|
ir::
\ « , i
'•n.
!', f;
A
M^l •
cc
||i!i
■I'il , 11 •
h!
lil:
(>i 11
!iic
:ih ;
!;|i|
! I 1
•r. ! ;
1 •
‘I'ii ‘
ii'IS 'll!
li
> >
■It ! ■
ii
I


*1 i
i I ■
i I
t
.t ' '
L i; j
ibi'C bjlfi;
lli! I!
ii ‘
’i, I :
iKi ■
l!,:} !
llD '
'‘IT I '
:(! l|l '
' V ' ■
I’ib
Tl-
' : 1 :
I * T * '
I Juj I
te';:
'"iii:
q8
LETTERS.
who knows the three languages, and is abfu-lutely of no ufe to me while I remain here. IF you expe8: to return in a month, I will lend you him with all my heart; he is a fenSible fel-low, and has had a better education than people of his ftation generally have ; has always lived with perfons of fafhion, and has been feveral years in the family of a gentleman of diflin-guifhed piety and virtue. You will difoblig me very much, if you make any excufe about this matter.

It. was not natural for my hufband to'be curious about the name of the mailer, whom this man had Served fo long. Neverthelefs, a kind of Secret impulfe engaged him to afic it. Judge his furprife when he heard the name of the dean of Colborne, and discovered that the Servant who was offered him, was the infamous James. He knew his friend well enough to be fenfible he was incapable of making an ill ufe of the fe-cret he was about to impart to him ; he therefore frankly owned to him, that one of the principal motives of his journey was to Secure this wretch who was in his Service. He has been guilty of perjury, fays he, to charge with an horrible crime, two perfons whom I love and reaped
L "E T T E L S.
; they have been forced to fly their country, and one of them is now at my lioufe, where I cherilh her as my mother. It is ‘therefore neceflary to fecure this villain, and draw from him the neceflary difavowals for the juftification of imy friends. I can’t mention their names, out of refpefl: for their
persecutor j but....... I guefs, replied his friend.
You certainly mean Mrs. Darby and her daughter. James has entertained me with an account of their flight; but, the rafeal has taken care not to tell me the Share he himfelf had in this affair. Acquaint me with it, that I may be in a better condition to Serve you. Is it poflible theSe ladies are innocent ? My hufband eaflly convinced his friend, and did it with the utmofl tendernefs, with refpe£l to the father of Clarifla, by observing, that pofllbly Mr. Darby might have been terribly abuSed by a Servant, in whom <he put confidence. The bufineSs was to oblige the calumniator to retract his evidence ; and this, which Seemed mighty eaSy in Speculation, to them appeared very difficult in the execution, and the more So as Mr. Balfour was absolutely reSolved to Spare the reputation of the perfon who had Set James to work, which excluded the common ways of juftice. Befides, he was not certain he could make uSe of them in France,
F 2	againfl:
I
» k
' (
: ■ ' ’
*f •
('
‘
I' I
CS : .S'i'

lib I
;’bN
L •■ ,
• .,h:
‘te . • .‘Cii ' I
c!;S '
1 ''
.. I ■

. "1 >
»
,:li|
• t
ii iii
1;
,iL>, I
!i.i ii \
r '	\ I *
lOO
LETTERS.
againft a perfon who had done nothing contrary to the laws of the kingdom, where he then re-fided. It was poflible to gain him by promifes, or to intimidate him by menaces; but what weight would the retradlion of this wretch be of, if it was not obtained juridically ? We might be accufed of having forged it. My hufband quitted his friend quite undetermined how to adt i and, his uneafinefs prevented his clofing his eyes the whole night. He met his friend early ; the riext morning, according to appointment, at a coffee-houfe ; for James muft certainly know his name, and it was of confequence not to give him the leaft fufplci-on. They refolved to fend this villain on a meflage out of town ; and to employ the time of his abfence, in Searching his box for letters from Mr. Darby, that might Serve to prove their intelligence ; which Scheme was executed. They had looked over almoft all his deaths to no purpofe; when they found a pair of old {lockings rolled up, which felt fo weighty as to induce them to unroll them ; they contained one hundred and twenty guineas, two rings of value,
V*
and your diamond collar. They readily guelTed he had taken an advantage of the moment of your mother’s flight with Montalvo, to com-mit this robbery; and, that he had accufed her
of
. n
■ ■ I
!]► ) . »
* •
- .1
Ci- ..
LETTERS.
101
bf having broke open the cheft of drawers where thefe jewels were, which had fome appearance of probability. They thought they had enough to intimidate him ; and, Mr. Balfour waited for him with impatience in his friend’s ciofet. He did not know my hufband’s face ; but, trembled when he heard his name, after having taken notice that he locked the door. Then his mafter laying the diamonds on the table, my hulband told him, he claimed them, as the property of mifs Darby, from whom he had an authority to apprehend his Servant as a thief. The villain at firft behaved v/ith great effrontery, and faid thefe diamonds were given him by Mr. Darby, as a reward for his zeal in the purfuit of his daughter. It is not ufual to make fuch prefents to a Servant, replies Mr. Balfour fternly. Sir,
rs
fays he to his friend, ring for your Servant and order them to fetch a commiflary, and the man we apprehended lalf night, the w'orthy accomplice of this perjured rafeal, this poifoner; but he was not concerned in the dean of Col-borne’s death ; and i have proraifed him his life as a reward for the fincerity, with which he has confeiTed his crimes; this fellow Ihall pay for both. \ defire alfo you would fend your chaife to my houfe for Mrs. Cofioy, who has proofs of the dean’s being poifoned, which will prevent
F 3	his

i!T I
[t 0:j C
db' hi •
FTC ;


■ t ;
Il’tei;
t,
• '' i ■! i
:. H ;

i'B..,,
'Ill ■ 0

L
. (!' 'll
i sc ; b • i
11
' i
!i
t ■ M i
. I ^
I ' i I '
b i'

:l -t
' SM-
'Hi ImIC
'iL' •' •
: FI!
'■i; bi!


i.bb:! '
i l!lh
i; ii«, I I •
I Ltll.i.'
^-‘"1 ;s
i'li'
C!i I
:' :'f i,
i i :
1! .1 •
!!'!
I .,C ' ,

I'.f.nh: ■
•lb’ I'l.
1.. ,r
i'l'i ri.: ilv ii'i'i i

'iL'Hil i! '
'ij:) ■
yi' '
ijii
l-li!' I
i|' 'I c i
■v.\ ■'


Cl;
I •
bi!
ci>:, "hi ■ i

lir i^'i :
LU .
llliiiii;! U'

,(
■ i'
1

I)
ii
Ill'll'!!;


102
L E

T E R S.
his trial from hhinga great while, and the rack'
will, doubtlefs, difcover many other things.
James, audacious* as he was, was thundcr-
ftruck at thefe words : he fell on his knees, and
begged for mercy; and my hufband, after hav-
irtg long feeraed inexorable, at lait pretended to
yield with difficulty to the interpofition of his friend, who entreated him to be fevourable,
and not to expofe him. This wretch’s pardon
is in his own hands ; let him endeavour to fur-
nifh us with means to juftify Mrs. and mifs
Darby from the crimes they have been fo dif-
gracefully accufed of, arid I give my word of
honour to let him efcape the juftice of man;
but let him fear falling into the hands of the
juftice of God, which is infinitely more terrible.
A confeffion of his crimes is the firft ftep to-
wards obtaining the mercy of God,
Janies promifed the utmoft fincerity ; and to give a proof that he would keep his word, took
out of his pocket-book a bill for rooo pounds,, which Mr. Darby had given him on a banker
at Rome, on condition of his fettling in this capital of Italy. This w'as fomething ; but my
hulband was defirous of accumulating means
to induce Mr. Darby to. do whatever he required
of
TETTERS.
103
ot him, therefore propofed to James to make a confeffion of all thefe crimes to two ecclefiaftics, who (hoLild draw up a deed thereof, which he Ihould Sign, in prefence of a notary public : he was a long time before he confented to this; but after many repeated promifes, that what he did Ihould not at all be made ufe of againft him, he complied. Two ecclefiaftics and a notary public were Sent for. James wrote firft himfelf an exadt confeftion of. his crimes in Englifh ; after which the notary fw'ore him,- and wrote his deposition in French^ under the original. This deed was afterwards figned by the ecclefiaftics, and by Mr. Balfour’s friend ; my hulband himfelf did not choofe to fign his name. I don’t know whether fuch an adt would have been valid in law, but it was not intended to be produced in a court of juftice,. and my hulband’s defign was only to frighten Mr. Darby, and bring him into reafonable terms. They then told the criminal that he Ihould be kept prifoner in this clofet, and not permitted to go out till your father had publicly repaired your injured reputation. I know my dear filter muft Suffer infinitely by being acquainted with the violent fteps my hulband was obliged to take againft a per-fon to whom Ihe thinks fhe (till owes refpedt, ^id even loves; and that fhc would have facri-
F 4	ficed
1
i
iT : i

104
LETTERS
ficecl every thing to Spare him this pain. I applaud her attachment to her duty as a daughter; but I intreat her to conlider, that her duty to. wards her mother is as Sacred as the other. She has loft her reputation ; She is baniftied like a criminal; every thing that is done Sor her jufti-fication ought j:o,meet with Clarifia’s approbation : belides, the greateft good that can be done her persecutor, is, to force him to repair his injuftice. When this firft ftep is taken, his converSion will become more eaSy ; this firft proceeding is an a6i: which muft precede his repentance.
.Janies was aim oft diftrailed when he found his enlargement depended on Mr. Darby; he knew the difficulty of getting him to retradl his contrivances j and to oblige him to it, he de-Sired leave to write to him. This was what Mr. Balfour wanted, So he permitted him. I omit this letter, though an original, as I know it would afford you no amufement. I fhall only acquaint you, that, when my hulband had got it into his poffeffion, he no longer doubted the SucceSs of his undertaking. I had been very un-eafy about the anxiety I had obServed him labour under, which he had ineffedlually endeavoured to conceal from me, under pretence of
a flight
L E T T E R S.
105
a flight indifpoSition ; I was not lefs confounded at the prodigious change I remarked in his countenance, when he returned to dinner. He forefaw the queftions we Ihould afk liim on this head, and naturally told us his uneafinefs and joy had arofe from your affairs, defired us to fufpend our curiofity with regard to this matter, till his return, and that he could now alfure us, his journey would be fhort, and attended with all pofliblefuccefs. '
dear, my dear, fays I to myfelf, thank the prefence of my mother ; you Ihould not efcape with this declaration, if I was not afraid of the looks fhe gives me when I commit a folly.' Secrets for Harriet, for this dear half of himfelf, as he frequently calls me ! He
knows her but little, if he flatters himfelf
♦ '
to keep his, fecret till his departure. Doubt not, Clariffa, but I would get it put of him, were it but to convince him of the authority I have over him ; but our mother makes me pro-mife not to make any attempt to know it ; he will fet out in poffeflion of his Secret, and I
♦ ^ %
(han’t deceive you, when I acquaint you I am ignorant of the means he intends to employ, to Succeed in his enterprize.
F 5-
Indeed,

:ui i

I
I k
r .
I
'f ' t
. :li:
1 ■ '
' -r
Ml. I
!l
' IM »'

. 'I .1
■ I


i.r .il:
V '
"V'C



I 'L , ■
;•	.--i
’i'SiS
,L •	' a	♦

Hr;-''’:'-'
hi ’
V" O ■ ' Milk -i;
io6
LETTER S.
Indeed, the valet de chambre’s fever was a
favour of the Lord’s j I repeat it; it went off
^fter the third fit, exacSIly at the time he was
wanted j fo that he was able to accompany ray hufband. Mr. Darby had left Old Windfor, and they were two days in London before they could find him out. Mr. Balfour having dif-covered that he lodged at a bagnio,, went there, attended by his valet de chambre, and two other Servants. Thefe three attendants ftayed in the antichamber. Mr. Darby v>^as yet in his nightgown when my hufband entered his room, and
notwithftanding his endeavours to afiume a
chearful countenance,, it was eafy to perceive
that this vifit was not agreeable to him : he ne-verthelefs ran to embrace Mr. Balfour. You
are a man of your word, fays he to him; likely you bring my jade of a daughter’s^ refignation of her fortune in my favour; is The at laft married ? Whom has fhe marriedAt the bottom,
I fhould have loved her, if if had not been for
the trick lhe played me in making my lifter dif-
inherit me; but if Ihe chearfully repairs this fault, I will reftore her my tendernefs, and would
have allowed her fomething for her mainte-
nance, if the baggage had not already made a provision for that. Do you know the mother has carried off all her daughter’s jewels, with
an
LETTERS.
107
an intention to give them to her, doubtlefs ? With this Sum, and what Clarifla has got from the Sale of her pearls, they muft have enough to live decently, in Some corner; and the booby> who has married Clarifla, has reafon to be con-tented with his good fortune; for Ihe informs me he is a mean fellow, perhaps fome footman.
'A very fine match for a young lady of quality !
«
I have Suffered you to fay every thing you pleafed without interrupting you, replied Mr. Balfour ; may I expert the fame favour from you ? Firft, it is not true, that the perfon whom Clarifla has married is a mean fellow; fhe was determined to have even married beneath herfelf, if (he could have found no other match, to have had it in her power the Sooner to regain your heart by the cefTion of—-—
Oh 1 I have no further occafion for her con-fent, for the greatefl: part of her fortune, fays Mr. Darby, interrupting him ; the law has put me in pofleflion already of her eftate in Ireland. The bufinefs at prefent is only about her money in the funds, and two old houfes, which I don’t much care about; and if you had come a fortnight later, you would not have met with me, fbr I propofe taking, a journey to Ireland, and I
have
p'
- li
I
i©8
LETTERS.
i 1
I 1
, I
, -t
'■ T ' ‘) 1
s,
»•'
• 1 ‘:
I’
''! !'
■.'i!
-iilj..;:
iN.
',i.: ' n
:'!il
I ■>
I >1
'' :
*' I i I
Li
i.	"!
'■ 'ij»j ■ ■ ‘
li' r
-M
I
i.'L;
nn'n <' . '
have a proje6I thereon to communicate to you, You are the friend of my daughter and wife; I have known the time you were mine ; would it not be a mafterpiece of friendihip, to fettle every thing that is part to the content of all parties ? This is the motive of my journey, replied my hufband. Explain your views, and be affured, that your wife and daughter will agree to every thing you can propofe, confident with honour and religion.
Stuff! Mr. Balfour, honour and religion are fine words, which every one makes ufe of, and explains after his own way ; I have honour and religion, I myfelf; it is true^ mine don’t in the lead; refemble what my females call by this name, and perhaps is worth more ; but this is not the point in queftion. Apropos, you likely may know where fhe is ?
At my houfe. Sir, replied my hufband. Your virtuous daughter is gone with her hufband, the baron D’Aftie, to his mother’s, by whom fhe is adored; and to make you eafy at once about the fate of all who might intereft you, I fhall acquaint you, that Mrs. Cofby died, exprelTing the utmoft deteftation for her ill conduct, at my houfe, of a malignant fever, which carried
her
LETTERS.
lOQ
her off in Seven days, but left her time Sufficient
to discharge her conscience. She thought it her duty to make certain depolitions, the contents whereof I am ignorant of, which are in the hands of your wife ; She caught this diftemper by attending Mrs. Darby, who was in the ut-moft danger from the Same fever. Montalvo, after having cloSed his mother’s eyes, retired to the Chartreux, where he inceffantly implores God to turn your heart.
He has a great deal of goodnefs left, replied Mr. Darby. To do well, my wife Ihould die; her prayers in Heaven would have been more efficacious. Alas ! my friend, you know there never was an union leSs properly Suited, than mine wdth this bigot; She told me once, I made her life a purgatory to her ; and I can Say, She has made mine an hell to me; She can, if (he pleaSes, Set us both at liberty ; let her conSent to a divorce. I’ll Soon find out means to obtain it from the ecclefiaftical court. I have a mind to marry again. My daughter Shall renounce her whole fortune, and I’ll generoufiy allow her a few thouSands to live like a baroneSs.
Mr. Balfour could Scarce contain himfelf at this diScourfe j however, being defirous to found
this
' '-ilT
k
Lii .
' I •	.	‘
Lb .b .•
■ -i’ bl.l
* I ■ '
11
.}»., •
. 'I* -b|.
’ * * t
\ ' '♦
. ' I I » • I *
. 'l I .
iteh
t \ . *
C!
' I r
• I .
. 1 ■ • .
.n •
I
I ro
E. E T T E R S.
■'1

' i
!i
».* '

i •*..
,,.. > I

r.
i
' I ‘ >
! •
; < I
t! .
liS
'M> i m;:
:t/i,

■:ii
'I
ti:'
- -ILJ
hi
ihS '| i|i ; V; -.i’,
h • i
. T .1
bh-i ■
. r'
h''l,
.
bV: •
a
- ..I ■ .1'
. '*<
IS ^
i"
this myftery of bnlquity, . he reprefled his indignation, and afked Mr. Darby how he would afl:, . to procure a divorce. Nothing more eafy, replied Mr. Darby. A circumftance muft firft. be allowed, which can be difputed by fools only, that a prudent woman is a phoenix, which ought to be ranged among imaginary beings. This granted, I ought not to think-myfelf privileged beyond other hulbands. My wife has juft given a proof of the licentioufnefs of her conduct, by^ running away with a booby. I Ihall give this action its full weight, and by, the affiftance of a little money, Ihall by this means obtain a dilTo-lution of our marriage, a divorce in proper form. I fhall then have it in my power to marry again j. and my wift, quit of an hufband Ihe hates, will no longer be under a necedity to
have recourfe to poifon to--------Stop, Sir, fays.
Mr. Balfour,, whofe patience was quite ex-haufted j you will no more have the fame helps to calumniate the pureft virtue, as you have heretofore had i your accomplices are-=—but read James’s letter. At the farhe time he threw it on the table.- Mr. Darby feemed quite thun-derftruck; and, after having read the letter, curfed the traitor a thoufand times, and faid, he would find means to make him repent his impertinent epiftle. Believe me, Mr, Darby,
favs
. i
L E T T E R S.
Ill
fays my hulband, the beft thing you can do on this occaSion, is, to lend your helping hand to the efforts I fhall make to accommodate this affair. Here is a copy of a deed paffed in a judicial manner, which would throw you. into the utmoft embarraffment, if it was made public. The remains of friendfhip,. and the regard I have for your wife and virtuous daughter,-induced me to endeavour to get into my pofTeflion a writing which might ruin you. Profit by my good will, and be aflured, that, without the pofitive orders of the baronefs D’Aftie, you would not have come off at fo cheap a rate. As foon as he had done Speaking, he fhewed him the deed that had been obtained from James, which permitted him to utter only fome broken expreffions, that Seemed to indicate a fort of repentance. He concluded, by afking Mr. Balfour if he knew any method of efcaping the precipice on which he flood..
I have told you, replied Mr. Balfour, I have found means to get into my pofTeflion the original of this deed j I can cancel it, but it is on thefe conditions. Eirft, - the a6l muft be annulled, which has put you in pofTeffion of your daughter’s eftate in Ireland :. you muft make a deed of Sale of it to me,, and I will confent to
leave

» u
■iih/t:
iin:::'!
.	. li
■i'Mii
I
II2
LETTERS.
I »	. M
t ;; ■<i\
*h-
r. ^	■ i
I'vi'
V • I I
i^'Ol
‘ M I
’Hi:";:-
! ; ^
\ ,

Ilirli..
• • M. I , •
iljjh.i'
• I ■ • ■
J ■ I
!*',» ,
:1b- ■
•ill
■•te .) .1
■ I
J

b'V
bv?i ; iiS ■' >?: •
11^
;i!b
}\d.
11 ^
ihV;
}'hi|!
i;|i’

lii'ijiii •
* • f * ” *
fiiy'ti!
•i' i'•. I
■{[llfli!
' t
tfni'
ii
' I •
ibi,
vii
iiiili
ID
i i
i{b!_
H:
I •
, r
■i; i;i. l:i|| ■
r^'jli
i' 1 •
■ 'lili!
b;-
iil:]. .
I 'I
i.:,
•I *’
leave you the income thereof, during your life on condition it (hall revert to your grandchildren after your death. Nothing could oblige your virtuous daughter to give up the remainder of her fortune in England, and in the banh of Genoa; neverthelefs, Ihe is empowered by her huiband to leave you the income thereof during life, fo earneft is her defire to regain your heart. As to the condition I added to this celfion in my preceding journey, it is now a matter of indifference to me; I have in my pof-fefiion fufficient to oblige you to drop the pro-fecution you have commenced againft thefe two innocent perfons : I would fain think, that this villain, James, accufes you of having Suborned him to be guilty of perjuring, with a view of excufing himfelf; yet as he has a bill of yours for loool. this might give credit to the calumny. If you would be ruled by me, you would join in all the neceffary proceedings to perfuade the public, that it is to you, your wife and daughter owe their juftification. Go with me before a judge, and declare you have been impofed on by a rafcal, who, through remorfe, has confef-fed his calumny and perjury : James fhall write you in confequence a letter, that you fhall make public in the daily papers, and all the periodical works, and I will undertake to publifh it
in
' r i '
L'liiih
LETTERS.

in France, and wherever elfethe calumny has tran-fpired. If you confent to this, I will fuppreft the firft letter, and you (hall not be in the lead: accufed in the other: if you refufe to follow my advice, I (hall be under the diTagreeable neceffi-ty of printing the firft letter. You muft be fen-fible, it muft give me the utmoft concern, to be the means of bringing difgrace on an old friend, fo nearly related to ladies, for whom I have the greateft regard.
Mr. Balfour, you put me to a nonplus: are you not afraid ?—No, Sir, I fear nothing; I brought three perfons with me, who wait in the antichamber, and on the firft word will call a conftable to condudf us both before a magistrate. I would Save you; don’t through ob-ftinacy ruin yourfelf. I a£l with fuch fince-rity on this occafion, that you may immediately Secure the income of ClarifTa’s whole fortune to yourfelf, by the fame deed which Secures her ef-tate in Ireland to her children after your death. Send for your council. We won’t talk about the reparation of honour, till your interefts are properly Secured.
It was very likely that Mr. Darby was afraid my hufband would break his word, after having
S
i I
I :
k
Lvi!* :
S : !• ' / Mi'
'■ Mi,
' I'
I,'. :hl A.; ii,
I; -Mil
ICi'-hi
I '	< .t '	■
i •;• h;
: !-l 'i b li .*•
' . u
f 1,;
' H
ihii;
i VV
ihb!'-
; ••• 1 jj,. i ’ i*i'
! C'T •
' • ■ T
Aii^ ;
i 1 ‘ I
ici! '
ub‘l < ■
■ L'.' •
'S
I
b’h! '
. ? • I 'I

i.L'i: ■ iblc
• , -I'	!
•:i •':	(
I ' • ■ ■ • t

•Ii' ’■ Ml t,l
Ul;'; ' ir •
A" ■
i!! I-
"iS :
■I'Ui' :
i;a|:..
b’L'i'L ’
■ ‘ lI'C:
'i||i; 1h|i! :
.-C' i::
h-
ii '
L
I	,
II
i!;,
' J
f' I
n
fiili

11 i ■ .

;:i
) !h
I CI
114
LET T E R S.
got from him what he wanted ; for he had hardly propofed the execution of thefe deeds, before he fa d, I begin to think you mean fairly, Mr. Balfour: let us begin with the v/rkings, and diredtly rung the bell, and ordered one of his Servants to fetch Mr., B.—,. who uid his bufmefs immediately.
My heedlelTnefs made me forget to tell you, that my hufband was furnillaed with this fccond
which he promifed to make James
Now, fays he to Mr. Darby, that you
letter, write.
put confidence in my word, I will fiiew you the piece that will Serve to juftify you to the public. You wifi perceive thereby how dear your inte-refts are to me.
LE TTE Ryrr?;7i James, te Mr. Darby,
S I R,
A WRETCH tortured by remorfe, on his knees,, conjures you, to affift him. in. repairing his crimes. At the inftigation of a perfon, whofe name is of no confequence, I have Slandered two ladies, in whom I ever obferved the pureft virtue. It is a falfiiood that Mrs. and Mifs Darby ever foUcited me to attempt your lifey as I have
wickedly
LETTERS.
115
wickedly aflerted ; the poiSon which I produced before the magiftrate, was given me by a cruel enemy of thefe ladies. For my reward I was to have one thoufand pounds; I renounce this curfed fum, and humbly beg your pardon for having inftigated you to proSecute perfons fo dear to you. I entreat you would make this reparation public. I am preparing to go to the new world; but will not leave Europe, till I behold my recantation made as public as my calumny has been.
J A M E S.
You are a devil of a man,^ Mr. Balfour, and you have found the way to catch me like a rat in a trap. Behold the fine exclamation which Mr. Darby uttered, who, neverthelefs, got himfelf out of this hobble like a man of fpirit.. The moment he Saw the counfellor he had fent for, he run to him with open arms. Wi(hmejoy, my dear friend, fays he, this is the happieft day I have ever feen ; it hath difcovered the innocence of the perfons who are moft dear to me in the world. Read this letter, which Mr. Balfour has been kind enough to bring me : it is a fer-vice I Ihali never forget j this is true friend flfip iadeed, 1
Lideed.
I I

»*
i'
. •' I
;
■ I . ■
> • I
' i
. ‘.T’L
IS '
■I'l"
»
m6
LETTER
S.
‘ ' t:
Indeed, Sir, fays the counfellor, this James was a great rafcal! It is pity he has. not declared the name of the perfon who Set him onj I Ihbuld take a great pleafure in feeing fuch a villain hanged. Could not you perfuade him to copfefs who it was ? No, Sir, replied my huf-band j I made feveral vain attempts j and at lad I muft own I was fatisfied with the reafons he gave for concealing his abettor ; let us think only of returning thanks to God for this happy dif-covery j and do you lend us your affiftance, to feal the reconciliation of a family, whom this rafcal had fet at variance. Mifs Darby, at prefent the baronefs D’Allie, is married very advantageoully; and as fhe thereby poffefles a fufficient fortune to maintain her honourably, according to her rank, Ihe is empowered by her hulband, the baron D’Aftie, and by his mother, who is his guardian, to make over the produce of her whole fortune to Mr. Darby’s ufe, during his life; who, in return for his daughter’s kind-nefs, confents to execute a deed of fale and gift of his eftate in Ireland to me in truft, for the ufe of his faid daughter and her lawful heirs for ever, referving to himfelf the income thereof during his own life. Nothing can be more generous on the fide of the daughter, or more jull on the father’s, replied the counfellor. It is neceffary,
gentlemeni
C LM
> ,
■, I
LETTER
S.
Ill
gentlemen, to put in my hands the whole tiile deeds of madam D’Aftie and her aunt, and I will finilh the writings in two days. All my daughter’s title deeds are in her houfe at Old Windfor, fays Mr. Darby j as to the will, we
muft procure a copy of it from Mr.-------, the
notary public, but this will take up two or three days at lead. I will undertake to get a copy of the will, fays my hufband; while Mr. Darby puts the title deeds in order. Oh, my dear friend, replies your father, I am quite ignorant about bufinefs, and fhall want your judgment to unravel this chaos of papers. Will you undertake it, in concert with Mr.-----, while I
procure a copy of the will ? My hufband had his reafons for wanting to fee the original of this will; but he alfo had as ftrong, to go to your houfe; fo he accepted this laft propofal, and agreed to fet out after dining at his inn, along with Mr. Darby and the other gentleman. Mr. Darby condudled them to Windfor, and left them there to continue his route. My hufband had not forgot the defcription which Mrs. Darby had given him of the bureau, where fhe had de-pofited fhe eight or nine thoufand pounds which you had entrufted to her care; and while the counfellor was bufied about the writings, attempted to open the private drawer of this
bureau.
filJf'!
► ’ i
>1 t

iiS
LETTERS.
;
t
I,
t
■ L
■	' I
.1 U ; •
ii> ■
M
: ■ I.

■i r
S.Ul
!	4
r ' ♦
' L, ■ :
i;!
';: L' ■
I • ■
!'i, ■

I,:»»
.•i' • I
b:
fiC
I ft
L.r
! . ^
\ .
^ I
I;«'I
ji C'
ii'i'i
• :';J I
i;h :

pp
iPp:
Piv
! i .
[{'•%[ .
. \ i!
.
a
bureau, which, by good luck, was in the cham. ber where he was to lie. Notwithftandingthe inftru<5tions of your mother, it was a Jong while before he could fucceed. He found the fum the fame as you mentioned, and took care to depo-fite it in a place of fafety. Add to this fum, my dear ClarilTa, the value of your diamonds, which have been got out of James’s hands, and what you and your mamqia already have, and you will find you have almoft fevea hundred pounds per annum. But this is not all, Mr. Balfour could not digeft the lofs of your jewels which were hid in the chaife, and was abfolutely determined to recover them. Head-vertifed therefore, a reward of one hundred guineas, for the man who drove two perfons,
who were particularly defcribed, to----------, as a
recompenfe for the lofs of his time, and the uneafinefs their flight might have given him, There was room to fear this man’s fufpeding fome defign; therefore, every thing that could be thought of was added to this advertifement, in order to encourage him. This hackney man, who was fuppofed to live Somewhere in the north of England, dwelt at London, and lent the next morning one of his Servants to enquire about the affair, to the cofFee-houfe,
that had been mentioned in the advertifement.
The
I
E X TER S.
119
Themafter of this coflfee-houfe, who had lived with Mr. Balfour twenty years, affured the hackney man’s fervaiit, that he had nothing to fear from his old mailer, who was one of the worthiell men in the kingdom ; and, as the coun-fellor had put James’s recantation into all the news-papers the fame day, he related the whole affair to the mailer, who came himfelf, as foon
as he received his fervant’s anfwer. The mailer
\
of the colfee-houfe did not wait for this Second vifit, but immediately Sent an exprefs to Mr. Balfour, the moment he knew the coachman lived at London. Though Mr. Darby was ex-pedled that very day, my hulband did not think it right to delay this affair; and, having pro-mifed the counfellor to return the next day before dinner, took poll, and arrived at the coffee-houfe a few minutes after the hackney man was gone. This man had refufed to tell his name and place of abode; but he had been dogged; and, Mr. Balfour went to his houfe immediately, without giving himfelf time to pull off his boots. He was not yet returned j and, his wife Seemed frightned, when Ihe knew that the perfon who was with her was the author of the advertifoment, and a member of parliament. Mr. Balfour foon removed her fears, by telling her that you were So well pleafed with her hufband’s behaviour on
the
i!'l!
*} n
It
!fb t
•t
a
iiif hI
bii
!i:!
n'i
I < !
hii
!!
k

t
:' I
K.
I; N ii
ii’f
* M ' 'I
;mi{I
' !l
. • r
i
I
t '■
H , J 1
rl« .
ir
1 Hiib' ^
■I'Cb
* h. ;
.< I
I L ,
i'ili
. •	I
• iiC''
ill'l nt
! ''fC ‘
t ;i ';L,i •
M.j'fte'
i
■i, .L i
'» *
i'
>L 1 )
li'.

|:M L;
scii: i'lkili I Ci ib I iih|;b '
Ibcj
V?-]i
!'f|l|i
I

»;iu; i If
)■!'
»ib.
B f
l.i:
r"
b'
h
L )!|
Inl •
1!: h'
!hl>f
$ lb*
it!’.
j::‘ i *, ,1.
L;i! .
:^h •
''I I
hv ■
j-c
ill
\' ■' '
i M •
• I
i' ' I
c
M'l
r-*
V;i:
li!:
,'L
■J'
^ •
120
LETTERS.
the road, that you was defirous of making him a recompenfe. Indeed, Sir, fays this woman, it would have been cruel to have behaved ill to fo charming and affable a young lady. My hufband knew well enough there was fomething ftranee in her journey ; fhe feemed to him to
be afraid of being feen ; but, it is not his bu finefs to intermeddle with the affairs of people who employ him ; he is well payed for what he does ; and, at the inns they behaved like gentlefolks; that was all that concerned him. Has fhe acquainted you. Sir, that fhe left a parcel behind her ? I have taken great care of it, with an intention to return it, if fhe claimed it upon paying the chaife hire; for I am not a woman who makes ufe of tilings which don’t belong to me ; every body knows, thank God, that I am an honeft perfon. You may keep the parcel, fiys Mr. Balfour, I make you a prefent of it, befides the hundred guineas I pro-mifed your hufband. But tell me, good woman, has your hufband drove any body hereabouts? Yes, Sir, he has drove in this very chaife a citizen and his daughter, who went to fee one of her aunts. Apropos, about this chaife, fays Mr. Balfour, the young lady affured me, there was not an eafier carriage in England ; and, that your hufliand has alfo excellent horfes; I
pur-
LETTERS.
I2I
purpofe hiring it, during my flay here; and, if your hulband has a mind to fell it, I’ll buy it with all my heart, when I return to France: the young lady will be delighted to have the carriage which has done her fo much Service in aflifting her to efcape. I am perfuaded, fays the woman, my hulhand will do every thing in his power to oblige you, Sir; but, here he comes. As Soon as he entered the room, my hufband threw an hundred pound bank bill on the table, and faid, here is the reward I promifed the perfon who Saved mifs Clarifla; give me in a few words an account of your journey. Look ye, Sir, fays the hackney man, I have been told, you are a very honeft gentleman ; and, that you don’t Seek to overreach me. I know neither of the perfons I drove, I can eafdy prove it; for the-reft, they Seemed to me gentlefolks, only they did not pay me ; but that was not tlv^'ir fault. I opened the bundle that was left behind the chaife, and took an account of its contents, in prefence of the landlord, his wife, and Servants, who Signed their names to the paper; I
am
ready to deliver it up; and I don’t think I am any more to blame for having kept it, than I am for having let my chaife. One is not obliged, I fuppofe, to afk thofe one drives, who they are, and why they travel ? Certainly, replied Mr.
VoL. II.
G
Balfour
9
t)

MA
baTH'Vh.V

■i';'-' h ^.•:,, .-io	i-iT
^il^' t
rt® I
wm ii
i
,T.-	f*
,. I*;; Ii'i-	f-
f i J <
"«i
is

I.-
'V." ;! 1,^
if n t '■"■:xr I ■C,f b- ’ ■■

i
•A- j ..|i, * i.f .**'
I
i
il.M.Svv,! "•'
Vi
’VhV I.. I
.'i-.	|[.
S"
»; -1
T/Sii h
"'v V. 'i;
.- '•	ri';.'\,	^<!i
,-k': A; ^ i'
-t'-
./.?	-f
■^;i.lT“l I
.f i-fll L't

‘ ■ y
IHF
mi
f
md.
#14 kiM

o.-
I ■■
I?# mm mga-
■
>?!

122
L E T T E
R S.
I
Balfour, you are not to blame. As to tb bundle, I have given it to your wife, and the bank note is yours : and, while I have occafion for one of- your buSinefs in England, I willem. ploy you, depend upon it; I like obligim people, and you have been very much fo to the young lady, who will never forget it. Thank God, fays the hackney man, nobody has everyet had reafen to complain of me ; I always endeavour to give fatisfadlion to gentlefolks, by whom I get my living. James, fays his wife to him, the young lady v/ould like to buy the chaife, to put her in mind of her adventure ; I am certain you won’t refufe her this fatisfadlion. No, nor any thing elfe that was in my pow'er, fays her hufband. You are an honeft fellow, replies Mr. Balfour, fend it to my inn, and fix your price } to-morrow you, or one of your men, lhall drive me to Windfor; and, if it proves as eafy a carriage as Mifs Darby fays, I’ll buy it.
Tlie hackney man locked up the bank note in his-bureau ; and deSired Mr. Balfour to go with him to the place where he kept his car-riages, and (hewed him the potl-chaife you had rode in. Mr. Balfour, under pretence of examining it, got in, to feel whether it was well ftuffed, and at firft difeovered nothing. As a blind to
LETTERS.
123
get rid of the man, Mr. Balfour had laid his fnuff-box on the chimney-piece, behind a tea cup ; when he v/as in the chaife, he pretended to want a pinch of fnuff; and, having fumbled in all his pockets, fays to him, I have left my fnuff-box at your houfe ; I would not lofe it for the world, though it is not of any great value ; behind enough to ftep and look for it. If it is in my houfe, replied the hackney man, it is as Safe as in your own pocket; and immediately went home to Search for it. Mr. Balfour having felt every where in vain, loft ail patience, and with his knife cut the linina- of the chaife into pieces. Indeed your treafure was Safe; for it was impoftible to difcover it by feeling. He had fcarcely found it and put it into his pocket, before the rrsan returned, and feemed greatly furprized at what had been done in his abfence. I doubted, fays Mr. Balfour, this chaife was badly ftuffed j and, as I did not like the yellow lining, l ent it to look in the inSide. Here are fix. guineas for you j let it be better ftufTed with hair, and let a red biiiing be piit'in; and in two or three
days, rU look at it again. He then w^ent away, iminediateiy took poft, and arrived at Old Windfor in the evening; where he found Mr. Darby but juft dismounted. The next morning, the deeds were executed, according to
G 2
agree-

k
124
LETTERS.
I *
‘	, I
♦
t • ■
■■II ■ . r
agreement; and, Mr. Darby was So well pleaf. cd with the turn the affair had taken, that he generoully offered to fend you all your cloaths and linen, as well as thofe of your mother; which was accepted.
My hufband had determined to go to the notary, with whom the original of your aunt’s will had been depofitedj .and did not defer putting this ftep into execution, as foon as your affairs were entirely fettled. He had a long while entertained fufpicions, which he was defirous of clearing up. In the firft mention you made to us of your aunt’s will, you were not at liberty to difpofeof your eftate, even by marriage. You had acquainted us, that the perfon whp copied it had made a miftake: the omilTion of an article of fuch confequence, did not feem natural; and he imagined there was fome fecret at the bottom which it might be of confequence to difeover. He went to the notary’s, and told him fternly, that the will which made you heirefs was forged, that he had certain proof of it; and that he was going to affemble the perfons wlro were prefent at the firft reading this important deed, whole teftimenies would be evidence againft him. My hulband found he had not gueffed wrong, by the terror of the notary ; and continuing to talk
like
IHi
LETTERS.
125

like a perfon who went on Sure grounds in what he did, foon faw the notary at his feet, conjuring him to pity his family, and not be his ruin. He was Surprized at Such a ready con-
feffion of guilt ; becaufe he was ignorant that *
Mr. Darby had acquainted this perfon, that the principal author of the forgery was in cuftody; and he at firft thought my hufband knew more of the affair than he really did. Some words of imprecation againft the traitor, informed him of the motives of the notary’s conduQ:, who-offered to do every thing in his power to repair his fault. This was not poflible, the original will was burnt; and to endeavour to reftore it would have made a noife j and this did not Suit Mr. Balfour’s intentions. He therefore contented himfelf v/ith making this wretch refund; , five thoufand pounds, which he had received as the reward of his crime; and obtaining from him an acknowledgment in writing of his guilt. What ufe did my huthand intend to make of this writing? to remove the timid Clariffa’s fcruples about what has been done. Certainly the perfon who receives a gift, ought to Submit to the conditions the giver impofes. Then the intention of your virtuous aunt was, that her eflate fhould never go out of the hands of you and your children ; but to be employed in the inflruiStion and relief
G 3	of
T'liir
I
.: 1 i ‘




ml
I .■■ I
V'l , U

■1'C
WM
ijjlh*!

liim
'sfe;

J
1ft
*■ ^b."- f
- '' *y 1 ti'' V'
‘SU
It
liU-
Mna r
,r 'i-:' '
mf
AJ'»
I

.VI :l
Si?IV


Iff
bi.'f*
' I
•r>;t '
M

mi
=ii ti
i'.;;l ? V
VLl
fillO id* 1

'Li\
?
-?V:
/■ »i ?
'fHi
■lAi
cm

Ti

<> iLu .
■ i V ■', y
Hr
1^1^ i
iii
tlii
^Sll
iviW
i.bA
i -5 .
?■ r, I;

1 ■ ;•
-1 ki',
' ‘ i. ■
bit-

•tell

i
11
m.\
i'
126
LETTER S.
5
of the poor ; you were therefore obliged in conscience to force your father to give up your ef-tate, and there was no other way to procure his confent, except that which my hufband ha taken ; So my dear you ought not to be difplea-fed with what he has done : on the contrary, in
•r '
my opinion, lie lias managed this attair with the utmcfl difcretion.
My ClarifSa is then rich in Spite of herfelf; rich through Providence with all the merit of the poverty to which fhe has Submitted fo chear-fully ; for v/e have reckoned you pofftfs above eleven hundred pounds per annum; free to follow the impulfes of her generous and charitable heart, witliout encroaching on her own real wants. We (hall frequently refume this fubjedt, my dear friend, for it gives us great concern ; and we Snail not be eafy in this refpedf, till we have a pofitive promife from Madam d’Aftie, your hulband, and even your worthy paftors. I flatter myfelf, my dear, you will yield to our united entreaties. Vv^efball expeSfc your folemn promife w'ith the greateft impatience; and if you refufe it, notwithftand-ing my condition, I will come rnyfelf in perfon, and inlift on it.
L E T TER
LETTER S.
127
L E T 7' E R

Baronefs D’d.SFlE^s anfiver to'Mrs. D JRBT
and Lady HAR.R1ET,
%
Hope, ladies, you won’t imagine it owing to }our requefl;.;, that ] Snail take aH pofiible precautions to pre'erve the precious treafure, v hich oivine Ptovidence has entruhed me with.
■f
My tendernefs for her v/onld have made it my duty. Aik no. iomething Id's natural and more dilEcuk, i( you are deiirous to have a proof of ni' fuicere defire to oblige twm perfons whom I iniinitely refpeff. If I had the honour to be kn^wn to you, I (hould think I had a right to be offended at your fufpidons; yet, I acknowledge they were not without grounds; and, to cc/nfefs the truth, I fhould have been very forry if you had not entertained them. I muft explain to you this enigma, and the humiliation of our poor child.
When (he propofed to us the hamlet of chrif-tlan union, I own I was charmed with it, and clefired her to draw up the plan. I did not ex-pe6t (lie would have placed herfelf at the head of this undertakino:, and (bll lefs that (he would have propofed to fubmit to the common way of life of
Gr 4	the
'.i ' ■|h	. 1 1
}	‘I H!
•( ' 0	1

1 ^
' , ' :
D c:r 1 ‘' i ^.
; I •	‘
; *
. i- hi r 1 •
I
11 ■.. , 11
:c:!ir
f ‘I
*	. i	* »
i!.
• 1 • ■I '.,
'it
- } •
* •
'I I ; r» •
j I :>*(■“
• : i I C 1,i,i:
• I :i.
i|
I •: ; t
:i ‘"i

IL,,
f ' • .
: ' t
i'
; 1,'ht) •
. L . .1;
•' I u
'i;
'•t.
’■teif'd :•
"e’V'v.. <: •
ii!' ■
h':;b '
Ii ’ - :
t
' I-
* I .
■■
teiilL
)l' ■' U
Mj tii' .

■i , ■ ■
L' ■
■uii '
ii “i'ili ■: I
,!l '''I!"
.	. t
■ -i:.
I '
t	';
■
^ I iii ' ; •
128
LETTERS.
the inhabitants of the hamlet. I thought a jok« .would get me out of this Scrape with her. Mj dear ClarilTa, fays I, I have Seen feme diftrids in France, where the v;omen follow the plough; could we not introduce this cuftom: it would infallibly be edablifhed ; for, like a good legif. lator, you would fet an example of the performance of your law. Nothing, in my opinion, would be more affecting, than to fee you travelling three or four and twenty miles a day, a driving of oxen. The irony was too rtrongly marked not to be underftood ; our child at firll laughed heartily, and afterwards' told me the thing perhaps was not fo ridiculous as it feemed at firfl:; that in Several parts of America, the men had no other employment than hunting; and left to the women the care of agriculture as well as of the family. Our delicacy of conftitution arifes from our bad education. If from infancy we were accurtomed to laborious employments, we might expedl to become as vigorous as pea-fants. Should we become thereby more proper to fulfil the duties which God has immediately impofed on us? fays I. It is the fame with , country employments as with an army: a great number of hands are continually wanting; but they alone are not enough, an head is wanting;
if all would be heads or hands, the bufinefs could
not
o
■; » l| ) \
■:t
‘.'i:' I
LETTERS.
129
not go on ;
or would always go wrong
God points out to each the place he Ihould occupy, by the ftation in which he is born, or that whereto his Providence has condu<5ted him. In your firft condition, your vocation was to educate your children well, to edify your family, to Ihed your benefits on poor artizans, and to affifi: your vaflals in the country. In your Second vocation, your firft duties are the fame, with the addition of fome others. God has transplanted you with his own hand, to ufe the exprefifon, into the midft of the country, and has Seemed to remove you from the Society of your equals ; this was to confecrate you for the edification and inftrucftion of our poor people, to partake the blefilngs and misfortunes which are annexed to their condition. Thefe blefilngs are fimplicity, innocence and peace.: The evils (which I call fo only in conformity to cuftom,) are a hard life, an abridgment of the conveniencies of life, which are the portion of the rich, and which they may lawfully make ufe of to a certain degree, without being blameable. You ought, doubtlefs, to follow a lefs indulgent way of living than you would do at court. Such a life as moderate courtiers lead there, would be a fort of infult to the poor, among whom you live 5 but, it would be contrary to the order of Pro-
G 5
videncg

RinrShlCl
;‘!vf .• 1. s*l C:
t !•'{
■'ill.lib
•!V -I',
I
jl:
viLli
■'
'■
V:
I' •
tii
•	1}
,l!ij;‘ ij
• 1' 'd
;
4 > '

•b. '.
* »r.	'
iDbotl
iC
iVg ■.!: ' Chj .,;■ S'i
I h	,
: I t ,0.
j,,
■1.'^ rU I : ■■;{'
!;! V!''
V s'
. ; . 1 ' * • '
, i ’S-. '• '
< I , I. ■ ■
'.DMrM ■
.p '‘i;<

i.,. • •;
> p I , I i ■
' r ■'»
M '
. il'C
■hiii.li'
> ’vr J:'
Tib- T Litlil’ i -■i: !l! '■
CS''
s;‘i
bi'i
*:1
! !
,,)
li b
ir
ft,
i ■ t
'■'■‘iL
■ '» »i I i
•1 <■( •
„ f
i
o
<11 . • ** [ i-i.'i'
‘M.T-
i.-.i
I-
It

130
LETTERS.
vidence, to live as peafants do; God dees not
require this abridgment of you ; and he has not
been pleafed to give you the third vocation,
which he has granted me tw’elve years ago. He
called me to follow ftridlly a peafant’s life,
lince he permitted me to be almoft entirely ftript
of my fortune; I regarded this deprivation of
fortune as an abfolute order, and I chearfully
Submitted to it, becaufe it was his holy will,
I thought, without hefitation, that this kind of
life^ was beft for me, Since he had been
to reduce me thereto. He at prefent affords me
the means of living a little more plentifully; I
Ihall take the advantage of it as far as I can,
without prejudicing my conftitution. For fe-
veral years I have been accuflomed to a very
poor diet, and hard labour ; perhaps, too great
a change might diforder the good ftate of health
I enjoy at prefent. This, madam, is what I
represented to our child, without being able to
convince her; fhe perfuades herfelf a way of
life like mine would ftrengthen her conftitution,
without confidering that fhe is very delicate,
and I never was fo, die has been brought up in
cotton, to ufe the exprefSion, and I was ediL
cated in a much lefs tender manner. Yet, as
file is very docile, fhe has Submitted to the pro-
viflonal regulation I have fettled. I have fixed
our
3
' -U'
\'d-
LETT E' R S.
HI
ourtableatthreedifhes; two of which,atnoon, are to be butcher’s meat, and the other is to confift of garden fluff. At fupper, a difh of roafl meat, another of poultry, and a third of whatever fhe choofes ; with white bread, and the befl wine of the country, at the leafl three years old. I Suffer her to drefs as fhe likes ; a plain drefs keeps out the cold and heat, as well as one embroidered with gold ; but, I will have her well lodged of a night, though within curtains of linen in fum- -mer, and of warm common fluff in winter, and fhe fhall deep eight hours; this is a neceffary regimen at her age : fhe likes to rife early in the • morning, therefore mufl go to bed the Sooner. . For the decifion of the reft, I have allowed her to inform you of her proje<5ls ; and, I have foretold her you will diflike them ; and will have a very bad opinion of me and her hufband. Your letters, which have made me triumph, have rendered her very modefl, and fhe promifes o-bedience. She will go to the hamlet half the ’ year j I fhall accompany her in the Summer to watch over her; in the wdnter fhe returns to the village; this is the refult of our determination.
Perhaps theincreafe of her fortunewill induce you ladies to think it neceffary to add Something
more
	ill
	■ il
i'f	■|>
!* ■	*
'1 '■	H
I

1
A\ % * ;
I M )
! I
i;
■»
I j
I
:!"ia	,
■l1,j i|'
h' if:/
l.'l
■j; .u'
' (!
/; hi::/'
I
I .1 .
I'Siiji i:C ■
-/ ■LU S
1.-: I
! ;i i , ii<
» iL
i-' ilii'lji
- .'pi
s
iSi'illiL
i:|; '
'• ! (
lh>"
1 ‘-i
li '!.i)‘r-i
I ■■ I , 1	•
'i .■!!;!
I , ! V ' »i
i • ;j
I, 1- M ••

b : O
■ i'.;!:li ■'
I l .r .
■ it
I’Vl'ij
(
* •) •
If'
I. ' >
L
i • I •:
> •	> I * I ■
I

\i;‘pb!T
j'l 1
l; i bh • j"':
/bii!
^i'i!
‘i ■ ‘
ill
f ::
■r,t*
*:b’
'!
■ii'
r
^ V
i' !
‘(S
■‘b -■‘ht S
S(‘i ''il
ViM.
Cii
,'i ‘'
M,,
•i.	,T| •
ft'T'll l,ii :
I
ft
-t . .
’.i i
iiiii
'I'l! , II
fill
<’ I
;h
I
iu
’ilf
ii
'll
■1 ‘r i. I • i)'i.
M ,' •
! ’h
ihl-l’''
: i; ii. ’i'ijjki': 'i| ^ ‘
-ill
' ' .''.h ;,
iSi!
li'
Sli'f’:': .
132
LETTERS.
more to what has been determined upon. Khali Submit my judgment to yours ; though, to con< fefs my weaknefs, it will cofl: me Something. According to my Small underftanding, every thing ought to be allowed that is confident witk health j this, in my opinion, is already done; and a table more plentiful than ours is to be, is a magazine of indigeftcn and inlirmities for old age. If God Sends us grandchildren, they mud either be initiated to a luxurious way of living, which furnilhes pradtice for the phyficians and apothecaries; or be tantalized, by continually feeing difhes before them, proper to excite gluttony, without being fulfered to tafte them. Be-lides, the vidtuals which were left at our table in ragouts would be abfolutely loft ; I Should make a Scruple of poifoning our Servants and the lick. Now I mention Servants, we Ihall have but few, in order to be w'ell Served. A cook who, but little bufied in the kitchen, will have time to keep the houfe clean; a girl, whom we Ihall decorate with the title of chambermaid, who, after attending on my daughter-in-law, will have the care of the family linen ; a lad, who in the morning is valet de chambre to my Son, won’t be a-bove adling as gardener the reft of the day; and a dairy maid—very few for a lady of her fortune; but, ftie will have, in lieu of the pageantry of a
numerous
;ii
1	1
filC'i:
I',li 'K'll :	■
LETTERS.
H3
numerous retinue, the Sweet eonfolation of re-fieding, that She does not rob the Bate of men, who owe to it their labour j that Ihe will not have to anfwer before God, for the vices of a number of lazy people, who might have worked their falvation, by tilling the earth; and who damn themfelves in her Service, through idleness, the mother of all vice.
I repeat it, ladies, I Submit mine to your better judgment ; give your orders ; my heart tells me I Ihall not be contradidfed ; and this opinion has its Source, in the high opinion I entertain of your chriftianity and good fenSe.
I am,
LETTER

‘ 1 r> I • : ;
' •'hi
' ■ i-'!
1 'f '
I
■ii.- S;:
,• 'iiV ■1
4 I
cii
H4-
LETTERS.
LETTER XL.
‘i --j

I rt
. ‘hr "
ti*

.it ■
M . ,v
I
J <
:l','i
I
, I
*	• . I
■ <
.’•i.; :
If i- u
.i';'!':'!!
I *	'
. p '	11
. -I L,
• *	,j •
: i;Vi'-'!■ lb
.'jl'T'-
• M . ’ • ' L
-■ 'rjhll
ii
‘ l} ‘
•i h* • V
'• *« '-i.
b!ib
.:
•iijl:
■ jl ■(
' ib'
! *L» b,|. ' . Sf :
. '*< ,
, [i ■
' 'i > ' •
I •	' ’ I
• t
' ' t:
A ';!i .
, « • i I
' I •
• ‘ 1' . I ■ I
I '
b‘
Ft 'om ClariIfa to Mrs. Darby and Lady Harriet.
Muft fay amen to what has been decided, i lince I find nobody elfe of my opinion. Adieu the fine fchemes of poor Clarifla ; this is owing to the large fortune, which Mr. Balfour has taken fo much pains to procure me. I am fen-fible what I owe to his generous cares. He is one of thofe friends who would gladly force people to be guilty of ingratitude, through the impoflibility of requiting their benefits ; yet, I fhall not embrace this refolution ; I like to be under an obligation to a friend, and think, I cannot give him a more certain proof of the truth of my attachment. To oblige, to beftow, to ferve, is commonly thought the moft excellent, commodious, and eafieil part in friend-Ihip : I conceive this may be the cafe, when the matter concerns perfons with whom we have connections in fociety. in this article. We talk only of friencKhip, and no name is oftener proftituted ; it is given to all forts of unions ; and, among a thoufand, fcarce-jy one real friendihip is found. Some time or other, I will Ihow you a compleat diflertation
on every thing that is in our hearts j and this
will
We
.r
LETTER S.
H5
%
will be a pi6ture, or rather an original of per-fed friendlhip. And why defer doing it, fay my fecond mother and my hufband ? They would perfuade me, that nothing which has been hitherto wrote on the fubjed of friendfhip, has given them fatisfadion ; and have a mind to fee whether I (hall fucoeed better in what I fay on this excellent virtue ; which is, perhaps, the only real blelTing that poor mortals can enjoy in this valley of tears. If to be thoroughly fenfible of it, was fuihcient to write well on this fub-jed, alas ! I could do wonders; but, fenti-ment is widely different from exprelfion. However it does not fignify, I am refolved to obey; and, if I am millaken, I only rifk being fet right. I wrote fome years ago on this fubjed; to a lady of diftinguilhed merit; and, my letter, by fome accident or other, fell into the hands of an author, who inferted it in a magazine ; I don’t know whether you have read it in this work; but, I am certain it has never been yet publifhed in France ; and that you cannot procure it here. I therefore Ihall endeavour to recoiled; it.
LETTER
1K>
LETTERS.
'r. ;
Ih;, ' •
1-- 5
I' ••

!'iv
d‘A
it
1 i 1
I )
< t
u
. I niii ::
ifeaS s i ■I'V'ill'iiiS'

i


.!vr. ,J.;.
% i! I
>'ii!:':C s-: , r.
ISMbi: l|:
»i6 • -I 1 .	1
ilr
Letter from ClarilTa to the Marchionefs o/C---, Madam,
YOU requeft me to write on friend(hi[>.
Never,, perhaps, has any thing been more talked of; and, according to all appearance, been lefs underftood. To treat this fubjecSt properly, I ought to have a pen as delicate as yours; but, when you command, I cannot refufe ; and, the defire of convincing you of my obedience, makes me forget the indifference of my talents.
You diftingulfli, madam, three periods in friendfhip ; its beginning, height, and decline. You defire precepts for this third period ; they are ufelefs, in your opinion, in the two firft; Sentiment is then a fure guide. May I prefume to inform you, madam, that I entirely differ from you in this article ? I think, firfl, thatfen-timent Should have no concern in the beginning of friendfhip. Secondly, that friendfhip has no decline if real.
To this you will objedl your own experience; you have loved certain perfons very much, at prefent you like them lefs: you hence infer, that this third period of friendfhip too often ex-
ifts;
LETTERS.
H7
ills; but from this very circumftance I conclude, that, with an heart formed to infpire and feel the moft tender and lading friendihip, you hav« never yet known a real one.
f
0
Every age has its peculiar fentiments. Youth is the feafon of connexions, but not of friendihip. But you will fay, at what time of lif» then do you place the reign of this delicious Sentiment? No certain rules can be given on this head. I • am going to advance a propofitlon, which, at tirft feems a paradox. The more fit the heart is for friendihip, the later it talles its fweets.
c
l;
ufpend your judgment, madam, and do not condemn me, before you underftand what I mean.
By a heart formed for friendihip, I mean a tender, honed and conllant heart. Thefe qualities, in youth, are obllacles, and hindrances-
to friendihip. Such an heart has a vivacity which Spoils all: its noife impofes Silence on the mind : it would appear on the dage, before the proper time, to perform its part j and this puts the whole piece into confulion. This tender, and altogether honed heart, is incapable of fuf-pcding in others the dcfeSls it has not itfelf; and may be eaiily beguiled, and made to midake
tinfN
WS
I’ -i
I ,'Hl -
. -11
, ' • ‘ M - '
,i-ji -
' I i
» X
f,
-.D,.i-.
lir :i;
-■r- :
U '
1> I • I I 1.
M
!’i:
V; bl D.:
. T i:i D..

i' i i
1	' I''
» -S'
it
•1
fi-u !l!
r •
-i
Cl i: *H.. I^.
I I -A , U
r;;;;
liliiS'Hili
' -P'i ■■’ii;:
I . T =»i I " I * J
IL... •.'!!['!>.'T * .
hbi ijpb."! ''i'l U L'”- 'll
ifn jjt u !iir.. I
■ 'C
i ii|l
'i ' i" :M'ij iI •
C':|b -S'' iliRn‘ [^brr'T '' • 'h
lii’L)
\4%\
ilililh
. -I •.
lif!
" Ip' ni^ii’li! ! iii-
ll
bipip 'iiiiiiirarPiH!!'
liM'llisi
p'j I
tlfilriPM: ,] j[j
iii
138
LETTERS.
tinfel for folid gold ; it beftows itfelf on fuppo-fitions which cannot laft. At length the curtain rifes, it finds itfelf defpifed by the obje6l of its attachment, and fuffers infinitely to difengage itfelf, its conftancy becomes its puniihrnent. It is vexed to find that this phantom of friendlhip fometimes furvives efteem. This is what you call the decline of friendfhip, without reflecling that a decline muft fuppofe a beginning. You have, neverthelefs, felt fomething, was it friendfhip ? No. It was a fentiment, which, without being love, had all its faults. This fentiment, which is a real paffion, is a rock, which an heart formed for friendfliip, feldom efcapes at a certain age.
A young perfon, who poflefles a folid reafon, and an heart fuch as I have defcribed, finds hitn-felf in a painful Situation. The Second qualification renders him too fubjeft to love, the firft fhews him the danger and trouble of fuch an engagement. He would avoid this inconvenience, but what can be done with this tender heart, and its vaft abundance of fentiment ? He muft find means to rid himfelf of this infupportable burden. Friendship feems a refource. We think it proper to appeafe this thirft of loving which devours, we madly give ourfelves up to it, and,
to

LETTERS.
H9
to its profit, difpofe of all thofe riches of Sentiment with which our hearts abound. In this flate, if a Serious examination of the cbjeQ:, with which we are delirous to clofe the tye of friend-fhip is propofed ; our anfwer is, there is ho time to do it, we are in too much hurry. But after this firft immoderate defire is appealed, after thefe excefSive riches of Sentiment are difSipated, the heart, to ufe the expreffion, weakened by its exceffes, permits the underftanding to intermeddle in its affairs. Experience will have corre6l;ed the fault of j udging others by .ourfelves ; and we are convinced that the heart is blind, and incapable of making a proper choice. It will therefore be reduced to a perfedf neutrality, while reafon will be employed in a long and Severe examination of the perfon, whom we are willing to raife to the quality of a friend.
I
Befides, in youth, the heart is of a delicacy, and in an infantile date, which does not render it worthy of knowing friendfhip. It pouts at the lead fault; it would be flattered, careffed and courted. Real friendfhip is too Serious for it, and if viewed in its true light, would infpire it with a reSpedf, Something like terror. It fhould be left at liberty to enjoy itfelf according to its
fancy, till become more firm and Solid, it ha

ftrength


Pi-'Ai-a^bioo
i;
Hi,
Uo
‘b:Vb:
■byi’ hiL
I n! !l Si :
i:cil'!c
: N i: .•':! ■• '
.'bi» :
M:i C 'il'T
r I Hi ... ,*
l.lil
b>.’
i i: ' rL
•’ itS-
is 1-i
I d l.r.f :
^'S-i II; 1 :1 ;l'
ibni
»'L
.• ii!
.; I • ‘
'i!v‘
I'S]
t-l'l
:!i‘
!>:l!
ri-l
:;!!i!!ii
' .•• f,'
■r v i '■
bbii.,
l:L" Li l'*’ 'li '
r 'rfl- I'l’
h:
1
T-
l|Si !i
'A
'i

iHi
f . '-I»
ic;! Clii
' ! I
ir
lb
cii
*1
aJ
i
■ I
"■I
I ■'
iili
L
’' •' i
I 1 '«

I!
• 1 lb
]|b ll; •
'C|! ■ . () 1 .

!'< M
h'ii 1
'i
11'
i:
n L1 .
II iii,i
‘b
vn
1


rbSi.;v=i
ii'ii
‘I'ljiiiir'iC
I
1}'
1 I , T,
Oli"
ll <'■
ll

^	: I
Im!
7 It - -J
jiijliliiii
; h ' •’ ' b
bbv'
i I M * I '
n::!i|c
• I. •'
ilillbi
isiii.i'S'i

140
LETTERS.
ftrength to wean itfelf from Sentiment, which
are only delightful, and to fubftitute in their room, thofe that are more durable.
Alas ! you will fay, under what a form do
you represent friendfhip ? Where are its charms and delights ? You reprefent it fo Serious, that I could almort fancy it crabbed and difgufting. RecolIe6l:, madam, friendfhip, without foftnefs is tender j gay without wantonnefs.
lively
without caprice, conftant without paffion, dif-
creet without conftraint, delicate without being exacting and punifHlious, and is always equal;
for it has every thing it defires, every thing it
experts to have. This laft article is the great
point, and what diftinguifiies friendfhip from the connexions which are miftaken for it, and
from love.
When we form a connexion with a perfon,
who pleafes us at firft fight, and in whole favour we are Some how or other prepoflefled, we are
not Sufficiently cold, to difeufs and weigh properly the pleafure that is to be expe6ted from this union : we meafure it by our defires, which are immenfe, and find a vafi: difference between what we experience, and what we expeded.
This
LETTERS.
141
This miftake neceflarily produces difguft. Why ? Becaufe no kind of defect, no difguft was ever forefeen. The path we entered, feemed ftrewed with flowers, we find it filled with thorns. The heart, incenfed at being fcorned, forgets all the pleafures that are offered it, to dwell only on the afflifitions it did not expefit.
What is friendfhip then ? It is a Sentiment, which of two hearts forms but one, which makes all inequality difappear, and mixes all intereft, all happinefs. Conceive what importance it is of, to make a ftridl examination, before we con-fent to fuch an union. Thus perfedl friendfhip cannot fubfift but in two virtuous hearts. It does not fuppofe a conformity of tempers, un-derftanding and talents ; but, if it lowers the fuperiour with refpedl to underftanding and virtue, it exalts the mind of the perfon who is in-feriour. The firft eafily bears with all the defers of the other’s mind : the Second feels the full value of this protedlion, and recompenfes it by the livelinefs of his gratitude. The qualities of the heart are therefore effential to friendfhip : we ought to be lefs difficult about thofe of the mind. It is very agreeable to find amiable qualities in a friend, and yet we ought to give a friend ,credit
for
i'bh ^
'	’ I ^


*:i
f *	* I
•fi
it
iiSib
t;
• .O i

ki- ' ■'•
, Ml-: 5	,
r\l. '■■	•
\f
142
LETTERS.
for them, when they are Supplied by thofe de-Serving of our efteem ; yet I would never advife chooSing as a friend a perSon of too indifferent an underftanding ; Such kind of people have commonly narrow minds ; and, beSides, a friend is a counsellor, a confident of our moft Secret thoughts : we ought therefore to be perSuaded of the Solidity of his counfels, and have no rea-fon to fear his abufing our confidence through weaknefs or folly.
1.- ' : I • br '■
,1	• JH
i Sihi
HP
) I
r.
»' !
1;
’ii-:'

; I -
, >M I.' ' 141

, . 'T
2 •
. it I
/ -I',
I . d.
; ■ " I >
" > , ■ i ! I .
L' 1 ’* bllM. »‘
. I
),
>
’i ■ •
Friendship, between two perfons of different rank, can Seldom be real. The refpeft of convention, that is to fay, that which is not produced by virtue, chills and alienates it ; it is very Seldom that the fuperiour does not think he confers a favour in offering his friendfhip; and never will friendfhip, offered in this manner, enjoy the privilege of fecundity; it will never produce an equal paffion j it will produce gratitude, attachment, and zeal, but this is all. Nothing is more rare than friendfhip between perents and children ; becaufe it is Scarcely pof-fible to forget the inequality of rank, and the Superiority of the firft, curbs the Second. Friendfhip, in its foundation, is exempt from all in-tereft ; and this is one caufe which renders it fo
rare between fuperiours and inferiours 3 becaufe,
widi-

TV
I (
•.. t
LETTERS.
H3
without perceiving it, we regard as a protestor the perfon who Ihould appear as a friend only : but it will be faid, ought we to make a difficulty of being proteiSled and fuccoured by a friend ? No, certainly ; this is the touchlione of friend-Ihip. Whenever we are humiliated by a benefit, we may be affured we love but little the perfon from whom we have received it. A true friend, in this cafe, partakes the pleafure his friend has in obliging him, and receives his fer-vices with the fame joy he would feel himfelf in ferving his friend. Our pride is hurt at receiving from another, and not at all at the benefits we procure ourfelves ; then a real friend is another felf. Whenever we find ourfelves humiliated, or think we a6f a fine part, by ferving, obliging, or beftowing, it is a certain fign that the identity is not perfe6f, and that we remember we are two diStinif perfons.
This, madam, is my opinion concerning friendfhip ; perhaps I iiiay be mifiaken ; but I fpeak at a certainty, when I take the liberty to affure you, that I ihould regard as the greatefl happinefs, my being able to infpire you with the fentiments I have jufi; deferibed, and that
no perfon would deferve it more than myfelf, was it the reward of Uie moft refpeftful attachment, &c.	Behold
* • . •
J.
I
I'
I )
b:?i-
ijhte
rite'
fll’b
■I-;
t
!') t1
' • t ■ I.

Ifi
f;te
’ It
I
f

11'' r
I
I >'
144
LETTERS.
Behold then a formal dilTertation, and for what ? To make my dear Harriet and her huf. band comprehend, that I don’t feel myfelf in the lead: hurt by the excefs of their fervices; that I fincerely fhare the joy they feel at having rendered them ; that I would not wifli they had taken one fingle trouble lefs, becaufe thereby they would have been deprived of a pleafure. This is a proof of the mod perfect friendlhip. I have an heart naturally proud ; it would fuf-fer to owe any thing to indifferent perfons, and would receive no confolation, till it had repayed threefold the Service it had received; while I confider, without the lead repugnance, the impoflibility of making you a proper return, God keep me from having Such fervices to do to you, as you have done to me.
I have a mind to chide you Harriet. You have not Sufficiently Spared your friend in a certain affair. If you ever have any a6t of good-neSs to acquaint me with, of a perSon who ought to be dear to me, any hope of his return towards God j ah ! pray difpatch an exprefs, if you think an exprefs will arrive Sooner than th« pod. Over all the red of his ardions, throw, I conjure you, the thicked veil.
Whal

LETTERS.
145
What a parcel have I juft received 1 Do you know, I felt theutmoft indignation at the Sight of ail this equipage of luxury and magnificence ! The price of all thefe gewgaws, blonds, ribbands, and rich filks, would have maintained a whole village for a year. Our fervanis, in raptures at the fight of them, are almoft afraid 'to touch them. The people in the village fay,
I muft either be a princefs, or fome prefident’S daughter *. I would have concealed from them, this magnificence at which I blulh ; but they have thought differently from me: they pretend that my fimplicity will edify them the more, when they compare it with my former magnificence. I fay former, my dear; for indeed I would not for the whole world wear here the plaineft of thefe drefles; and I ftiould blulh to confecrate them to the Service of the altar, if I was not encouraged to have the boldnefs to prefume to offer to God things which I have made ufe of myfelf.
\
You know I am not naturally covetous, and that hitherto I have never valued riches much. I am very much altered, my dear Harriet, fince^ I jumped with joy, when you acquainted me
* In places near the parliaments, th-e peafants imagine, that, next to a prince, nobody is So great as a prefident.
VoL. II.	H	with
146
LETTER S.
k
'll

with the greatnefs of my fortune. I have form-ed, I affure you, Schemes to employ four times as much. I would not have a (ingle poor per-fon in the world; that is to fay, not a fmgle perfon, who might not get his livelihood by his labour. My defires, which were lively enough on this article, when I was in the great world, extended no farther when we lived together. At prefent there are other necefSities of human nature, which^begin to affe£l: me much more. My Second mother has thereon Such extenfive views, that (he can hardly talk, of-any thing elfe. Charity is -a devouring fire : this lire keeps her in a kind of uneafinefs, to ufe the ex-preflion, when fhe is not employed in doing good to her neighbour;- fo that there'' are few moments but fhe is bufied in their Service; and if fhe would, relate her dreams, I am perfuaded nothing pafSes in her mind when fhe is afleep, but the exercife.of fame new good works. It feems as if all her words were Sparks, which fet on fire whatever they come near ^ and when my hufband and - I leave her, ,.we find ourfelves entirely difpofed to devote the remainder of our lives, our fortunes, and even ourfelves, to the •xercife of good works.
I muft acquaint you candidly, my dear mother
LETTERS.
147
ther and tender Sifter, that I feel Such a violent difguft for the life that is led in the great world, that I Ihould confider my being obliged to return 40 it again, as the greateft punilhment. I expert, as well as you, to be a mother foon; I (hall, doubtlefe, (hare the fruitfulnefs of our women, and (hall then be told, that it is my duty to give my children an education fuitable to their birth and fortune. That to enter again into this world, which I deteft, will foon become a duty of my ftation. How I (liould lament, if I was forced to follow this advice'! Alas I can any thing be preferable to being happy in this world and the next ? Could I condu6t my children to the foot of a throne, had I the power to make them the favourites of monarchs, to treble their fortunes, and accumulate on their heads the greateft titles and honours; would all this recompenfe the lofs of the bleftings I at prefent enjoy, and which I expe<ft in future ? What happinefs, comparable to that of diftributing happinefs; of giving, to life the expreflion, a new exiftence to an infini(^^' hutnber of beings, who Seemed born only to vegetate in ignorance and mifery ? We range about, and are perpetually agitated in Search of pleafure in the great world; here we are Surrounded with it, and have only to reach out our hand* to polTefs and tafte it. The great aredefirous
H 2	of

s!| "
'11
:l *	' i
:l:
I
C -
I

• iV.')
'I C a ;<• - *
;»t-: ■
■■
h; |.fl *
::'% ■' ’'
Si hi:''
Is’
148
LETTERS.
of being refpe(5Ied and feared; here we are be-loved *. thofe who come near us, pour out be. tiedidbons on us; mothers teach their children to lifp out blellmgs with our names ; and the lah Sigh of thefe honed: people, is a thankfgi?, ing to the Almighty for the benefits thg have received from my worthy mother and her aSo. oiates. For my part, I can hardly conceive how
adHons, which afford fo pure an dp erfe 61; a plea-
Sure, can ftill merit an infinite glory hereafter. God mud; he very good to reward fo liberally in another life, works which he repays an hundred, fold in this. And fliall I deprive my
—	«r
of thefe ineftimable bleflings! Shall I go to teach them in the great world, to confider them. Selves as every thing, and the poor as nothing; to Sacrifice to imaginary wants, 'what might be. come the means of fubfifting fo great a of unhappy wretches! I will not hear of it, I fhould indeed be worfe than the wicked father mentioned in the gofpel, who gives .not a fer. pent to his children when they afk him for bread. My pen is Snatched from me, otherwise I fhould fill a rheam of paper without ex-preffing what I feel.
TSke Baron .D’Astie continues.
YESj ladies, my Clarilfa would never finlih;
fhe has devoted her children to march with us
through
LETTERS.
149
through France from village to village, iri order to fa^e the peafants from ignorance, poverty, mifery and guilt. We fhall fee her one of thefe days ftop palTengers on the high roads, and invite the poor to affemble together, and form new habitations. A modern Amphion; the fweetnefs of her voice will make arife from the earth, not walls to Surround cities, but humble cottage's, which harbour innocent and happy
She calculates, and finds, that, notwitli-ftanding her immenfe fortune, file fliall be hard put to it for all the good Schemes (he pro-jefts; what confoles her is, that her children will carry on what Ihe has begun. Don’t you accidentally know any of thefe philofophers who have discovered the art of making gold ? Be kind enough to fend them to usy- my Clarifia will procure them a ready vent for their merchandize. I mull relate to you one of her atchieve* meats.
Some months ago three ill-looking men, well armed, pafled through our village. My wife, who faw them at the window, invited them in to eat a bit of Something, and waited on them herfelf, like Sarah, though they had not the lead appearance of three angels. During break-faft, Ihe got acquainted with thefe honeft gen-
H 3	tleinen ;
s,' I
I

I :. .
i
,	‘ I
bii: i'l' :;
ILt
■S 'b
; 1 . >
"* '
' ’, r j', I I
. '. ’ L,,

!.. I ;
1:50
LETT
E R s:
tlemen; and,, as never Syren had a more enchanting voice. So well gained their confi. dence, that they immediately came to a confef. lion, and acknowledged they were fmugtglers. Good God! fays Ihe,, to what do you expofe yourfelves, my good people ? and immeditely preached to them an excellent Sermon on the necefSity of obedience to the laws and our prince: on the unhappineSs of a way of life, which mufl: always have in view a fcalfold, oc death in fin, fince Such people are always determined to kill or be killed, rather than be taken. To tell you fhe had the air of an angel when Ihe fpoke, would be faying nothing but what you would eafily comprehend j but to acquaint you that fhe was capable of Softening thefe hearts of adamant, that Ihe forced them to Ihed tears, muB feem aftonilhing* Inflamed by her fuccefs,. fhe added, and why not quit fo miserable and dangerous a profeflion, my dear friends ? The necelfity of maintaining our wives and children, obliges us to follow it, replied one of them. Alas! come here, my children, fays Ihe, you will here meet with a certain and quiet livelihood. Send your wives and children to us, and we will provide for them. The three men looked at one another; two of them accepted her propofal, and here were two
boarders
E E T TER S';
151
hoarders for our pallors. T he third was taken fifteen days after, and hanged the fame week. At this news, the two profelytes of my dear Clarifla fell at her feet, called her their angel, their deliverefs, vowed obedience to her: they haftened to bring their families, and the-widow and children of the unhappy wretch, who had defpifed her counfels: they are in their year of noviciate, and edify us by their ardour in labour, and their docility. The-en-ihufiafm with which my ClarilTa’s letter is tiC feci, has produced this good effedf : take care of yourfelves, ladies, it is a.contagious diflem-per; I give you warning: (he has catched it from my mother, and has been very.near communicating it to me; and I don’t know whether you are not in danger of getting it alfo, I warn you of it, to difcharge my confcience.
Clarissa concludes.
Heaven grant his predidbon mhy beaccom-plilhed; not with rerpedt to you, who would be a thoufand times-better than me, if you were in'my place ; but with refpedt to the great number of idle rich, who incumber the earth with the weight of their ufelefs felves, and devour the fubflance which lawfully belongs
H 4	only
152
LETTERS.
only to the man who is employed for the puB-lic good. I would willingly barter the poffeffor of the philofopher’s Bone, for half a dozen zealous perfons: it is not gold which we want moft; treafures are to be found in the earth, at the depth of three feet; the bufinefs is only to turn it up, and find perfons willing £0 become tlie foul of our labourers : the bar-■s’eft is great, but the labourers are few. Stop, Har riet, I am going to give you your miffion, Raife us recruits among your dolls of both lexes; propofe to them to exchange their toys and nicknacks, for difiaffs and fpades; con-jure them ; promife them that they will find, in employments like ours, a cure for their Spleen. Tell the learned, who make fuch excellent difcoveries for the advantage of agri> culture, to join theory to pradtice; and their example would produce an happy revoLuti.oa Cities would be defolated to the advantage d the provinces ; the rich and the nobility would drive from their antichambers three parts of the idle fellows whom they detain from labour; France would become the treafury, the magazine, the granary of Europe; not an inch of ground would be left uncultivated. Population would be doubled with labour, and produce for
the king a numerous people, hardened by labour,
r
LETTERS.
153
lour, fit for the fatigues of war. Plenty would take place- of poverty, always dreadful when it is the confequence of Iloth: in a word,, we Ihould become the firft nation in the uni-
*	r
verfe, without exciting the envy of our neighbours.. •
k J
- * »

5
LETTER
. 7	t,: H I
■'V
1'
. ■
t' . c
■ • • 1.
I
154
LETTERS.
LETTER XLI.
' •
' ‘ »
. . •
1 '
I.	^	,
I
' >
I ■
i.' 11 ’ I
I 1
s.-t
SNl : ":
I. I' i I I
L; 1
L
/'Mb' ''!
b- lb' /; .,! ,i '
I' I ■;!'
i, ■ ,, •' P
. t'l . ,
,i ' I'
1 'i ■ I
lADT HJRRIETTO CLARISSA.
ES truly! your diforder is contagious, my dear'ClarilTa, my amiable lifter; and if it was not unbecoming, for a woman with her belly up to her chin, to hold a diftatf, I Ihould not have quitted my Spinning-wheel. I begin by the moft eafy work, as you perceive; it is much eafier to Spin, than to prefide over country labours, and manage cattle. But, to talk feri-oufty, my dear; I refpefit your defigns; but, as your dear hufband has juftly remarked, they are rather enthufiaftic. Do you think it pof. fible to reclaim this vaft crowd of people, who have fo many years lived in an intoxicating ftate of idlenefs ? What ftratagems do beggars make ufe of, to elude the orders of a wife policy, which endeavours to confine them in hofpitals, where, by their moderate labour, they are fur-nilhed with the neceflaries of life ? But allowing this, which is impofllble, how could you find means to employ them ? Land would be wanting for the labourers. Befides, who would be a Soldier or a failor, if they had once tafted the fweets of the tranquil life you have planned?
Nothing can be more miferable than the lives of
our


,1 I ''I
LETTERS.
H5
our peafants, yet what will they not do to efcape ferving in the militia ? What defpair does the wretch experience, who is torn from his family ! what diftrefs, the unhappy parents ! The cafe would be much wurfe, if their native condition offered them real blellings to regret. Behold many objections, and there are an infinite number be-fides. A numerous retinue feems neceflary for' the great, to impofe on the vulgar,, and to fup-port their grandeur. Do they not diftribute among artifans, the money you would have them expend in the country ?. France, indeed, is not the granary of Europe,j but it is the ftore-houfe of fafhions, where all nations come to furnilh themfelves.. The Spaniards and Portu-gueze dig gold from the.bowels of the earth; and the Englifh cultivate agriculture and commerce, to purchafe from France the neceflary articles of luxury: The expences of a great king have been loudly exclaimed againft ; who, to ufe the .exprelTion,, made rife out of the earth thofe-fuperb edifices, thofe enchanted gardens, which - one would imagine owed their exifience to the touch of a fkilful enchanter’s wand. Let the expence be calculated, that.thefe mafter-pieces of art coflr, and the money that foreigners, who have come to admire them, have expended in. France 3 and, I am perfuaded, .the receipt
would
{I M ' L'
I '	‘
A ‘.
•1'
1	I *
I
* 'I
11 ■
I r
h .
I . I
;h
, ‘ I «
‘i! .

.<:! S' ■
.‘1.1 . • ■
Ll •! ;
Ate,;:-
aca: s [ii'l iij'jSsi:
i
I tr 1 t 1 - i
. 'L
Ali

1 ; !■ I M
' I •	''r

. .m'K
.{50
L
V
Xj
T T £ , K S-.
would over-biilance the coft. Sumptuary laws,, which are the prefervation of a Small ftate, would caufe the ruin and decay of a great kingdom. Every thing that promotes the circulation of money is there advantageous. Luxury
in England is carried as far as in France, tho’
✓ • #
it is of a different kind.; yet our fields do not Want hufba'ndmen. Nevertheless, what numbers of people does commerce take fiom agriculture ! Leave the French, therefore, theit numerous retinue; tlieir fiiuft boxes,- and bril-tbys. IShe number of idle cannot be put into competition, with the number of thofe who are employed ih a- way. uSeful to< themfelveSj, though 'd’Uite ufelefs and Superfluous for thofe who employ them. In morality, onefingleun* happy 'perfon caufcs a misfortune; in- phyfics: and politics, frecpuently great advantages arife
therefrom.-»'
Obferve, W'ord for word, what \vas Said to me by an honefl and able perfon, to whom I retailed your admonition, by way of beginning to the mifiion you have charged me with. Don’t however think 1 blindly adopt his ideas. It is. true, I remained mute as a fifli in his prefence; T could find nothing to anfwer; and, yet I was fenfible fome'thing might be Said, in anfwer to
what
. I :
LETTER S'.
157
what he alTerted. V7hen my vocation is improved like yours, I (hall likely poffefs fuperiour liglits, which will render me eloquent; till then, f defire your infl t u6Hon. After all, your fyftem has fomething in it, which Seduces, charms, and convinces me. FurniSh me with arms to defend it. I Surrender mySelf to you, body and foul, to fulfil my mifiron.
My letter will be fhort, I exp^£t every hour the fatal moment. Remember that I am to bring a girl into the world this time, who' Ihall refemble you; contrive, if you pleafe, in con-fequence, to give an hulband to this future
If yon are with child of a girl, I (hall never forgive you. We will next time make an. exchange I will have a boy, and you fhall have a girl. Thofe who hear me reafon thus, lift up their fhoulders. To defire a daughter when perfons are of a certain rank, is an extravagance they can have no conception of. And, what would become of this name, if we had boys only ? faid I, the other day, to an impertinent fellow, who prefumed to afiert, that a woman of quality who was brought to bed of a girl, had a mifearriage. Leave, replied he, to financers the care of furnifhing wives for our Sons; they labour to Support our nobility, our illuftriouf-
nefs.
.li'.niiiii"'
. I
i ■ , 1 r
*'|i!
,0
I.c

If ''til *‘L>i
'll H:	ri' I
"ihiij
'l-ull
'ill-'ll
■!!!
■': Jo I ; .
I
iiii !
' • t I ^!
, • |l ' I

l|t iji/ol;.!*’
fii
hilfA
ill t
''ill!' ■"
«li
;!i!
jl'iiii'f; 'I •<!
.’’I .1(1
T: :
:‘'!l
= l!
• I
:• 'I
S'.'t:
i^ii'iig i ii
! lln' ;
! I'l': .
''»
'i-‘V
|!i;
I'ioit ‘ihi'iiitl
’ ‘'I;
Lm
I
5
iiii
!;'fl hr 1
i,i
f
Ni-
h 1 r-l
lir
(!h
b'l S'! 11
i': *!
ii
!l'
ii!
: i
V 1.', t>.. 1
ii.!'
<11 L , i-'b'
ui'' •id..
;il(• I
,U i»t‘
‘lb*
.1 Mb'
li" ilili;'

lib!:
;'V
h. . t lif-M
LETTER S
nefs, by their great fortunes, which they wib Singly Sacrifice, to enter into a noble family. At prefent improper matches no longer frighten^ provided, a heap of. gold hides an obfcure origin * Add, that they faerifice thereto, the hap-pinefs of their daughters,, faid I; but, this is not the matter in queftion. A girl fuch as mine, though Ihe pofiefled only half the merit of her I have taken for my model, -would be worth more to the ftate, than twenty of thefe wrong-heads, who think themfelves. the clevereft peo* pie in the world, when they Succeed better than their coachmen, in raifing a cloud of duft on the ramparts. But it is talking to the deaf, my dear j come here, and teach them, by feeing you, to abate of the vanity which makes them think their fex fuperiour to ours in every thing..
LETTER
J i.:i I ■ i[. ■. •
h'!!: • 11::-;
LET T E R a.

LETTER XLII.
MRS. DARBY TO CLARISSA:
NO, my. dear, hay where you are; you will make a' better figure there than here. Reckon me, I conjure you, among your pro-felytes; and, if you cannot engage others to execute in great your good projecls, we will endeavour to offer models of them in miniature.
4
I will not obviate the anfwer, which my dear daughter Harriet defires of you ; but, in my opinion, no great genius is wanted to overturn the objeflions of her philofopher. One fingle per-fon fet in motion, at the beginning of this age, fixty thoufand artifans. I mean the indefati^ gable Mr. Languet, curate of St. Sulpice; a man to wliofe memory, ftatues ought to have been eredfed ; and, whom, his ungrateful countrymen would have made repent his ufeful labours, if he had not had in view a more folid glory, than their vain applaufe. It is true, his zeal was feconded, and he every year received immenfe Sums. I am perfuaded, if he had lived longer, he would have done three times as much good. Eftablifliments which coft a great deal to form, repay in the Sequel with ufury, what
has been expended at firff^ Befides, the fources
from
.. ‘	; j .	■ ■ i
« I	!	‘	'
'* I:
I
i < i
t . ‘ M

!


■	' I
: I -	' .	•
• i
I ' i;
!'‘ ' If 'iI*'' ;r j‘ ' ‘L-
■ I •
I.
’ i ‘ ^ '
I
■ i! ’'"Si ’
.4 ■■
. I ,
L| > ,
.. I ■.
1160
LETTERS.
from which he drew afliftance are not exhaulhd through his death j there is ftill a great number of good fouls, who, tho’ attached to the world by their condition of life, or incapable from want of talents to a6l themfelves, would defire nothing more than to have an opportunity of contribut. ing by their purfe to works, which would pro. duce fuch general good. One of the copies of the work, in which, your letter on friendfhip .was inferted, has juft fell into my hands 3 it contained fome remarks on hofpitals, whicli raifed in me a curiofity to vifit them. Alas! my dear, I am returned with a wounded heart. How much good rerriains to be done! How much is omitted or changed into evil, through -the fault of a neglefted management! I began with the General Hofpital. child.
It is a world, my I went there four different timeS) before I had examined all.
Whatever human mifery can offer moft affe6ting, is there to be met witk A crowd of unfortunate wretches, abandoned by their parents from their very birth, are heapr ;ed one oyer another in rooms which, though' of a prodigious fizej, are too Small to contain them. Their countenances fhow they breathe a poifonous air, infected-through the exhalations which proceed from their bodies. Hence, a great nmnber of them, perifh. The reft work,
~	indeed,
'M
LETTER S.
i.6i
, but with difguft, through conftraint,-and to avoid puJtilhmentand in their hearts devote themfelves to idlenefs, to recompense themfelves for the diSouSt which labour occa-
O
fions. I interrogated Several. Truly their minds
were ftill more negleSfced. than their bodies.
Nevertheless, they are inftrudted at particular hours : I even would believe thofe who are
charged therewith, a6S with zeal; yet they meet with but little SucceSs ; which mult be attributed,
in my opinion, to the vad disproportion there is between the number"oS inftrudtors, and of thoSe
who want indrudlion.
Why not increaSe the number of miScrelTes ? Why not uSe the utmoft care in chooSing them, and in educating the children ? This duty is conlidered, as but of little importance. Yet, in the Space of twenty years, above forty thouSand families might be procured, for the Slate, from this part alone. V/hat a reSource for population ! What a num-. ber of hands to augment the riches of the date! I know that theSe children are put out at lad :
yet, I venture to affirm, the date gains little thereby ; and, that but few good mothers of families come out of theSe kind of places. Perfons who have taken girls as Servants, or apprentices, out of this place, have alTured me, they have had a great deal of difficulty, before
Tf)2
L E T T E K S.
I
II
i I
I 1
tj	,
fore they could reap any advantage from them;, the faults of their firft education had taken fuch deep footing,. There is in Paris another houfe, better governed, called, Bel-Air, a very proper name for it. The children are there educated with lenity : yet, I think, there is an ef-fential fault in'their education; I interrogated feveral of the great girls, who liked the place, and whofe ambition extended no farther, than to remain there always, and I found that, la-zinefs has a great (hare in the attachment they have for this houfe, where they are fubjeft to no hard workv- I communicated this idea'to a gentleman, who could not allow the truth of it j becaufe, in fadf, thefe girls are employed. If they were fo, in a proper manner, the houfe would foon become very rich. A‘ mailer who employs workmen, maintains and pays them ; yet, Hill finds means to enrich him-felffrom their labour. Why does not the fame thing happen in thefe houfes, which want revenues, inftead of reaping an advantage from the induftry of the orphans ? The reafon is, becaufe this work is not performed with the fame zeal, which the necefiity of providing for the neceflaries of life infpires. Becaufe, r love of induftry has not been inculcated into
t-hefe. children 5- nor has care been taken to
make
«l'i
11 I
:i-i
I •*
LETTER S.
163
inake them fenfible, that their being employ-
ed ufefully, and for the public good, is in obedience to the divine law : Thou (halt eat thy bread with the Sweat of thy brow. This decree has been ilTued from the mouth of God himfelf; who Ihall dare to elude it ? Devotion, piety^ and chriftianity, ought to confift- in employing our time in a-Spirit of penitence, to obey God. Children who fucked in this maxim with
their milk, would make induftiious young wo-
men, would repay the ftate the expences it had advanced to bring them up in their early years ; and would, afford means of extending the good work. I Speak only of the girls,- my dear; for I have never made any observations on the management of the boys. I have obferved with pleafure, that the ftate ftudies how to reap an advantage from thefe children : and, that re-
wards are beftowed on the peafant, who will take
them-; which; nevertheless,, will not prevent
there remaining a Sufficient number to raife fine
recruits, and to repeople the depopulated pro-
vinces-.
The place where loofe and disorderly women
and girls are confined, is another part of the hofpital, which I carefully vifited. Oh ! what
a vaft field is there foe zealous perfons ! I was
perfuaded.
[i-i
‘ t ‘I
, ..h • • i
I ■
e !
!■
'I
; i.f
■ jif
I I'.i

ii
' i
I
•I'i
:‘i'i
ill
!il|:
' I'll
ii;
i .1
I M !!!
!
ill
IF
. 11
I; p I '. I I
; ■ I*'
L.,
|i!l
I'll '
Ii
r
;i*
' I
' '
: I
i '!
ipi
V •
; 00 ‘
11•
r '
IS'
ik
If
“lit
'‘K
|ii
164
LETTER S,
I
ki:
• Ni*
Hii
1^
• t
I

I ^ :
ri ■
['h. ;Vrl'
• ' 1
I 't' I' '
I 'I'l'. 1	'
' tt' : ■	,
iiiilr’:'i'
, :-'li:
I • ,•
. i I
perfuaded, at firft, that religion had Some (hare in the confinement of thefe women j and that endeavours were ufed to gain them over to God, by gentle methods. .Nothing at all of this kind, my dear; they go out worfe than when
they came in 5 the rigour which is ufed towards them, exasperates them, and they become thereby almofi: incorrigible. Alas ! our mifiionaries croSs the Seas, to convert idolaters to chrifHa-nity ; and the Servants of the faith are miferably neglefited. lam Senfible it would be improper for minifters of the lord to enter into this kind of hell, where thefe wretches,, by Swearing, recompense themSelves for the impoffibility of their doing worfe where they are, for Some months. Pious, truly charitable and zealous women, are the proper perfons to begin the cure of thefe poor abandoned wretches. Moft part of them have not the lead: idea of religion; they, therefore, fhould be inftrudled in its principles, and we Should begin, by making them love it. The magiftrate is charged only with the exteriour policy, it is the province of piety to change their hearts. We fee in this place women who have been there Several times before j and, in alt probability, will be brought there again : their confinement therefore anfwers no manner of
purpofe. As you, are a fcheming lady, build
us.
LETTERS.
fome caftles in the air, concerning this im-
The fincere converlion of half
portant matter, a dozen of thefe women a year, would do the
m
ftate more good, than the imprifonment of many thoufands of them for a Ihort time only. Thofe who have began thefe eftablifh-ments have been in too much hurry j the queftion at prefent is, how to bring them to their utmoft perfection. The converlion of
thefe poor creatures would be a great means
of population. They poifon the human fpe-
cies in its very fource.
If any body fhould happen to read our letters, they would laugh at our pretenfions. A fine
thing, for poor filly women to pretend to fet
themfelves up for reformers, in a kingdom go-
verned by fuch wife men, whofe policy raifes the
admiration of ftrangers. It is efpecially a piece
of impertinence, in two women, who are hard-
ly received among the number of citizens.
Impute it, if you pleafe, to the influence of
the climate; the air we breathe infpires us with
a love for it j and, I already find myfelf a
French woman, without forgeting, however,
Ah ! I feel, from the emo-
my native country.
lions of my heart, that I am a citizen of the
univerfe i

111'
i
r If
Ij..
I
«' ‘ I

I

u
ifi] i
b
J -..I	;■
L-'; -lb'.
I !.J	K.’.' ■•■
i|!l!

ft!
'hbh

► r-• P;f; “'i'l 'i*'
ibi'lilM
■Iv
5! ^

Ki;‘Ti
C.l
■IS''
Ilii-S'l' i’
i
tiHiHli-. N
i66
LETTER S.
univerfe; and all mankind, whatever they arc, are my brethren. Are we not all children of
the fame father ? How can thofe who are cold
to the duties of humanity, prefume to fay the Lord’s prayer.?
f 4 -
LETTER

L E T T E R S.
16?
LETTER XLIII.
CLARISSA TO LADT HARRIET.
%
Flatter myfelf you are brought to bed, my dear j -and, if I may- believe our good women, happily. They fay, that the more we .fuffer during pregnancy, the better we are in our lying-in; and you 'haYe Suffered a great deal. At this rate, I ought to tremble for myfelf. I don’t know what is become of that delicate con-
ftitution, of which, I ufed to complain formerly..; I grow jolly without lofing my agility in the leaft ; I .lleep i.well, and have an excellent fto-mach.
Between you and I, I think this happy change is owing to the regular life L lead here, and to exercife. You would laugh if you was to fee me eat of a morning, a Slice of bread, almoft half a yard long,.foaked in a.glafs of weak wine,and water. Tea and coffee quite
dried me, up, I affure you; I was forced to-wean myfelf from them, in my journey; and, I did not choofe to adopt again, -a cuftom which 1 had fo happily got rid of, and I find the benefit of In fadf, I was born for the kind of life
On refledling. a little.
If labour is the
It.
which I have adopted.
I am not at all Surprized at it. calling of all the children of Adam, God.muft
have
'i
ik
4
K'-
ui-
.r'
'I.

iS'
ir
'I'
r
■ I
j:
ir.
i'
i;t,
!i‘
;i
1^;

:.:*i
> (II
Hi'
: il
* h

, I ,
!'	" I'i’’
f!C I'"I; IS',
I • i"'


I *,
: L-
'■ t'S
. I'
I .

r.-„ .h
■■■■>.■	■ :ivj
•I ,
I '	■ , I'.
R f ./ .• R < •! ;l
>1 I ■	. H

i.:; .
■ )i'
*1'
r ■	;i.

:	'r :V:



,U)( L;;"
t -I ' .	‘
ih’: ".M:'
i; -
I.: i

•’M
li'' 'I '

• > •
1 ■ -1 ih I t' >
!'
c *

MM' i 'll ■
I'MI''.. ,•
■1 ;'• ■( .I
,hii ‘M I'
Ml ' > tj '

•il{l
i'il
|M
, tn>.
i 111 ' j'l. i‘ i


M >: iM ,:
mM" ■
!i' Jhi C
:	n* ^ Ml ;
I .1; t'l
Ij Ml. ! ,1*
‘ -1 ,
I . .1. 'L .
l|.J. !•:
. :m;
1 • ♦;

'll I , ‘
-A

.i •
"'ML,,;;'
I ....
ii.M'.
: M
'	- f
bil '
I'll
h-
.I
• '1. ' I,
Hlii;;..:.
i68
LETTER S.
have given them a body, proper for what he has deftined them to. Idlenefs (hortens our days, I am certain. We here fee vigorous old men, who no longer labour under diforders, fmce they have redoubled their labour. As to our young people, health fparkles in their eyes; and an hundred fuch villages as ours, would not
furnifli an apothecary with water to drink. The
women bring their children into the world with
a furprizing facility; they would abate nothin®
of their ufual labour, if my mother did not oblige them to ufe feme precautions. She extends her care of them till the tenth day after their delivery. Formerly, they went abroad after the fourth day, which occalioned the lofs of many, and made others become old, much earlier than they would, according to the common courfe of nature. At firft, my mother
had great difficulty to keep them within doors fo long j they alledged the neceffity of going to work. At laft, fhe has compaffed it j and
made them comprehend, that thefe ten days
confinement
more; by preferving them from the diforders,
which were the confequences of their former in-
difcretion. Thefe little circumftances feem trivial ; yet they procure us an healthy and robull offspring. As I fuppofe you will be in a condition
\n
h E T T E U S.
i6,f
dition to hear reading, when this letter fhall ar-
rive. I ana going to anfwer your obje^Hons,
my dear; I fay your objefUons, though you have acquainted me they were another’s. I
know your way, you thought of them yourfelf.
before they were mentioned to you
If you had been told, that it was diifficult to
induce perfons, accuftomed to idlenefs, to Submit
to the yoke of labour, Hhould have agreed with
Your philofopher pretends, that the
you
thing is impofliblej and brings, as a-proof of
his aflertion, the difficulty of ^making the poor
work, who are confined; and who, certainly, would not remain four minutes in the hofpitai,
if the doors were fet open. I hence conclude, that the management is wrong. Animals are.
managed by fear; men are vanquiflied by gen-
tle means, and kindnefs only. What ray mother acquainted me with, about the hofpitals fhc examined. Madam D’Aftie had already told me: in this refpedt, her experience may fafely he relied on. ’
The cuflom of feeing wretched creatures per-
petually, hardens hearts, which an ardent cha-
rity does not make relent. The poor are fo ig-
norant, brutifh, and unthankful; or rather.
Vot. IJ.
I
u nr rat


' > 'll
U!
I

Hi:
'I
I r
c;
I'i!
* I
N
f
'I
l:i
lil
. 11' Ul'
!1‘.
!!!!
t
!|i:
1!^
il.'
- F
170
LETTERS.
I f
\ ^
ff.-
J:
•	1.	I
.'1^
i%
•• t
' • i'.
M'i •-!
imgratefjul, that it requires a. very Sublime vir. tue, to preferve any degree of good nature in their Service. A zealous intendant. Sometime ago, begged my mother'.to communicate to him her Sentiments, on the police of an hofpital he intended to found. All depends on the people, replied (he. The charity that is exercifed on the body, ought to have, for its end, the good of the Soul. Tear may oblige the poor.to con-'
form to regulations, without their becoming the
better for it. 'If we would .fulfil the ends which chriftianity inSpires, we (hould make them love theSe regulations. Among thofe whom we confine, there are old men pad their labour; and there are others, ftill robull and ftrpng. We Should make an advantage oI theSe laft, for the purpofes of agriculture and population. The firft ftep towards this, is to gain their hearts and confidence; and, how much muft it coft the hofpital, before it can compafs this ? Inftru6tion muft follow. We muft endeavour to make them chriftians, and we (hall foon have men. Among the vaft number of poor, Some arelefs perverfe, andfif a better dif-pofition than others: we (liould begin, by gaining thefe, by rewarding their docility, with little preSents, praifes, and teftimonies of friendlhip.
There are few hearts which are not accelTiblc
on
’.1 '■
\
LETTERS
IT I
on this fide. While
work, fome charitable perfons fhould ftudy means to eftablifh them. The profpecSl of an happy and tranquil ftate, would Soften their confinement; and, by driving away defpair from their minds, would difpofe them to a ready compliance, with whatever was required of them.
In what hofpitals are thefe precautions taker
I
or this management made ufe of? If any fuch
exift, how few are they! BeSides, I repeat,it af-
ter my mother, thofe who are entrufted with thefe kinds of foundations, have too much work
to do it well, fuppofmg they were ever fo well
difpofed toit. Overloaded and fatigued with labour, they forget the motive which induced them to devote themfelves to the Service of the
poor; and works of the moft heroic charity be come, infenfibly, works of flavery.
It is not for private perfons to find, or rather
procure, a remedy for Such evils. But, you alk
me to build caftles in .the air, and I comply with
your requeft. As well amufe myfelf in that, as in knotting, or fhuffling a pack of cards. This is the anfwer I make beforehand to thofe who
I 2
pretend
I
ii

f
!i

.

i!


if
iF
I ' •
!i^


I


I
k
I!
I'l

i!i
V '


L E T T E R S.

ti ■
I I
pretend I lofe my time iti forming fyftems whliii will never be realized.
';j;S v'i'-
li • ■ • 1.3 •: 'i:
•	• M
I .	•	,
• ' ■■
'■C.','. : T :i . 'I,:
. I I V
I ^ •
I ; M

V ■.
. I

;	. . I	1.
:	, (i '
■ li"
: ! jSt.
■; ;ir ii»l
?'• ■ ,1b!.:
’"•'llii
ib'j'i Tt!i|[!
: l-i ,• 1, ’ :
: :
I	., •
iib!:' ■
I: !!: ■■ • ;
■■ ■■ 'i'tll

,1' i'l
■ I

,
Itlj I 1 .
!;i ill' , li b 1 id|i:
ii'i
ilSil iil-lb :
ilil ^
li!
fiM I t!'i ill I
I ilb:
h :I .
hiSU!:!;'
I
I
:v>' ;
■•te' ‘
i
.I '"c,''
' iwL':'' I -
■l-i il:; : b ! Sbii;
S'S'I ‘ibi. ' k lib'b
4 l-il-'iiri'
lilibiil'
ihC::;
'■W i
f;b ■
SNO-:.’
•, - • I ., h 11.
■b'lblT.i- : i
I'KH i.iiili-::'
; , f ; > ,',
ll.iitb :
ili'N
;f;i •	.,	I	-

I !-i'
I
sh’

If I poflefled power equal to my good will; or, if thofe who poITefs it would adopt my fyftem; I Ihould conSider that there were two things to be done: to cure or leffen the ills, which at prefent fubfift j and to prevent thofe which might happen hereafter. What are the evils moft contrary to the phyfical good of the ftate ? Depopulation; and a mifery which diflblves the cbnne61:ions, which ought to attach men to their country; and makes of them members, who, having no dependance on any thing, love nothing, nor concern themfelves about any thing. Such people de-Serve not the name of citizens. ,As they cannot be more miferable than they are, as they enjoy nothing but the air they breathe, and as the kingdom might be turned topfy turvy without their fuftaining the fmalleft lofs, they care not whether it profpers, or is utterly overthrown; their condition being fo bad, that it cannot become worfe, every change feems advantageous to them, from the hopes of filhing in troubled waters, and bettering their fiate. Thefe people are ever at the fervice of all turbulent minds, and even of enemies of the kingdom: they
would

L E T T E R S;
173
would behold a change of their mafter with a brutal indifference j all the ties which attach
men to their prince, either have never exifted
Such peo-
with them, or are broken through, pie are a charge to the government in time of peace, and very dangerous in time of war, efpecially cf civil inteftine broils: they want
The lofs of a million
only a licentious chief, at leaft of thefe people in a date, would occa-fion no vacancy j they are to a date, the fame as vermin to corn; ought they therefore to be loft? No; we diould endeavour to ^change them, to reconcile them to the date, and to
If the
attach them to it by the tye of love.
difficulty of remedying this prefent evil dif-courages, the eafe of preventing it in future.
ought to confole us. Let things be left to my
management, and in twenty years this race of
hornets (hall give place to citizens; who, look-
ing on themfelves as children of the date, will
love it with that love which 'every man has for
his family. The matter would be, to take from
all beggars and vagabonds, their children of
both fexes, that are more than Seven years of
age. This dep would forward Seven years the
promifed metamorphofis, thirteen years more ' only would be wanting..
13
People

-i'
t '
-H
1,
: . i. I
; j 11 11 <
' • 1 »,
1;
:k ’
■ I .11

!il!f

• !
I' ;
.he
■ p" 1
T'li:
li
I I ’
.1
i.r ■
.hi’;
;i
I'..
:u

ij{


rs
: '
»!,
!.l|
, I'r
• C
I i d.i'
' !’
'i!'


I, •
•’k
. d
u
liiCi
1';
jliiM 'I d 1'
n
I.
‘ *! I I.
'	: d i'
■ ' f. .
; f l|
fi-Sj
; ;
I
174
r
LETTER S.
People, inceflantly exclainii, that the revoca-tion of the ediffc of Nantes, has depopulated the ftate. If the fyftem that I propofe was adopted, means muft be fought to difcharge the too great overplus of inhabitants, by fettling colonics abroad. France, though fo large, could not
contain its fubjerSls. I fhall make a calculation of this new population, after having firft point. «d out its Sources.
The religious ftate is the perfe<3:ion of chriffi. anity. Jefus Chrift became the defender thereof v;hen he told Martha, that her lifter had chofen the better part, which could not be taken from her. Let us not fnatch. from the feet of Jefus, tiiofe who are attentive only to hear his word, ani meditate thereon : this, vocation is very excellent, but it is very rare, and the relaxation of their primitive inftitutes, makes the multiplication of regulars be conftdered as an ufelefs expence : to diminifh their number, nothing more is required than to oblige them to live according to their primitive rules ; the noviciates * would Soon become defert; and while la Trappe and the orders which, by coming near its .feverities, were peopled with worlhippers in Spirit and truth,
* Noviciates in monafteries, are places fet apart for the re-ception of young perfons, who intend takingthe religious habit.
the
• c

i
■ <
:l!i. .
L
«
LETTERS.
175
file other monafteries, by degrees, would fall to
decay, for want of inhabitants, efpecially if the
king fixed the time of taking the religious habit
to a maturer age, than at prefent is the cuftom ;
a time too near infancy, to be capable of the
reflexion which fuch a ftep requires, that if it
does not lead to the firft feats in Heaven, precipitates to the loweft hell. The time of life which has been wifely prefcribed for taking holy orders, ought, in my opinion, to he confidered as the
propereft age for taking Solemn vows.
What a refource to the ftate would this diminu-
tion of monks offer! The eftates which would be
comeufelefs to them, might be employed in the education of a vaft number of children, taken
away from beggars, or voluntarily given by poor
parents, who have too numerous a family; what Sources opened for population, agriculture, the army, marine, and manufaQ;urcs! What Sources of plenty and riches for the date I
Let us calculate at the loweft the number of
marriages which muft happen from putting theSe fchemes in execution. The foundling hoSpital
at Paris generally has between fix and 'Seven
thouSand children at nurSe; if thefe children
were better taken care of, one half of them, at
I 4
leaft.
It
‘ ‘I i
:*ff
,'L
'I
'■nS'!

Hi j !

t ■ s
• C.O
Mi'M
!i| ii:i

' •
»
.'f	i;.
-.h-' c
lii'.iM,'

H
iU
■lllstil'
'It ' r'
.
^ : V

i
n ,1'
m
m I,
w-
I

I'-T,
.M

in !


I Mi
'ill

tj-'. li

IS!
" f !
i.'iii'

C':!
r
.iii:
■}1tc ^

.a
■N ;.C'
■d Ci
. V'i
> i’
• M
?!
I
1.' 1 .
Tlh
I.
L !
‘ i '■
i'!l:

iii}' ■ ‘-! I

• »,
. I, • o .' :i
•. >'
ji'i,;';,!'j
‘ 'f
' 1 i i I s 1' j ^ 111
L,;:
j!rL:'|iii3.: ;; ■
! "HiiTi ;i ‘ij h'iS’ .(
0. V>('
!C;1
iiVii -•
if
it; -M
r	»
‘Ti.l !:
f .1
• I , ••!■
■ Ij- ; ; .t
:i	,
I	I,
:ii-
S' U. 'IS: ;‘p'
I ' '	* »'
. 11 ' •
H .

M ;|.	-1" ' .
' ' . ' 11	' 1 r
‘C... ■■ . !
”,	, -I •
I ‘l.r
.ii.iv;. '
;l

H f '
I' i- h'' '
r,‘
• «t	*.
■ i ';•! 'r-,;U
;l||
, ' ' (
1 b: I'. S S i'
!i'
i'l.-jh j! ;}i
t* ■.	•	‘
M ..
» I J .(Jt
b! ;,T ’li;''' •i
isi'h-:-;':;*'
C; V--	'
ij
(■	‘b|;
ifed
• M'- I
I
liSii'' %•
)i|:
1;., I
T I *
jlli : : ,
h.'i:. ....
h)’>
■■'1'
1: ii:ji!|
ilsl‘P
! ‘. II .
i r,;i;
■ '■ 'll
L I‘M*S '	"
’l-'I'S!
lil'i'ili s; '’i.
plililjii-iyi-:!
•:u ■ ' I" '

li '.I

.1 , .
'.i »i
;i b '	•
>■ ;.ii'	: i!
. »■ ''
"bji.:''!''--
' ' T1 ' J
■Sv':
I .	■ .
’ I
■ill
rlib
i'ii
li.'li
T'l',
•i ‘'b
I >	'	,	..'
■ii:: b
LETTERS.

leaft, would be Saved; who, when arrived at man’s eftate, would produce at leaft two thou. Lnd marriages a year. Reckon double the number for the other provinces, and certainly this would be underrating them vaftly; and the foundling children alone would furnilh each year fix thoufand marriages, which, in thirteen
78,000 families,
years, amounts to Add thereto ten
thoufand
marriages of the children of the ftate; that is to fay, of thofe who were taken from
m
vagabonds, &c.	----
10,00©
Young perfons who take religious orders through infancy, perfuaiion, force, la-tzinefs, and other fuch motives, in thirteen years, at
leaft —	-----
'This is for this laft clafs, no more than three thoufand marriages and a few over
f X
40,000
each year
Total 128000 families.
Here are then 128000 families more in the
kingdom, in only thirteen years ; which, at
four children for each family, would, in twenty
years,
■ II -
iJ ’ ’	’■ I
*'i .i|; I it!
J
< !i
I' ' ;!i' 1
■JH t
i '*
LET T E R S.
V1
years, produce 512000 inhabitants, capable of
If we had pro-
con trading frelh marriages, fited by this refource immediately after the re-
vocation of the edid, Ihould we not have re-
placed our Ioffes ? I am fenlible it may be ob-jeded, that all thofe who would contrad thefe
would not have lived in a ftate of
marriages,
celibacy, excepting thofe who became religious.-. To this I anfwer,
That the children- of beggars and vagabonds, far from being the riches of the ftate, are its
vermin j that -the greateft part - of the others, would not marry for fear of bringing into the world more wretches. - Therefore,: as I re-
marked at firft, -thofe who abfolutely do marry.
feldom make good- citizens; , they fhould be
made to have an affedion for < their country by benefits; let them eat coarfe breads and be be-
dewed with their fweatij this is according to the
common order of nature; but let them not
entirely want, it, Thus..^
How procure it for them?
I think the eftates, which the charity of the ■
faithful has confecrated to the Lord, -could not
without facrilege, be employed for profane ufes :
the number of monafteries being leffened, their
I5
revenues
.J
V I I
•I:
■w5|;
i:!'

I!
illliii
1.1’; 1:
hf’i
i'tii'i
t'l
iilh!
; ;!i
I; I';




; '^iil
ill
' li'i il I

; i'

i
I'.'lNi i|
’ IIt'
■ 111 '

r Irll
ll>
'ib

' i *i
I II;; I L

;*1'il
i:! k
Uibl!
/■V’ 'll i l
III.
Dll
ill '■
Il f< • I'l

II
lie
» ll


. I r
iiii
I'll
I
! iij
jif
[If
1
rhi

il
,'i 'lie-
. In
• T t
• Il ■ ih
. ;■	'■ K
'I.
’! ,,’i! •O’’':?
•ri .• 'ij, i,‘	.'ll.

j- :'
1 ;
'* ’I
i ,
' I
, ■ '■
S'K V'l-Sr
'll
1 .
t
I ' i ,
V *	\
i ii> ii '
r, ;
illi.!,:
'c: 1	•.
Si’c

'1,"’ < ' I
■ '	..i
;• '’S S ' J ■' *
(•
I ...
178
LETTERS.
revenues might be employed to fettle thefe new families, after having been applied to the edu.
, cation of thofe of whom they are to be compo-.fed. Shall they be educated in hofpitals ? No; hofpitals produce none but lazy people: they ought to be formed into colleges of hulbandmen,
■ who Ihould divide their time between robull country employments, and the ftudies lit to promote the progrefs of agriculture. There is no profeffion fo bad, but it will maintain the perfon who pradlifes it, we commonly fay, and with truth. If a private perfon can gain his expence, certainly thofe who live in common, and expend lefs, may fublift by their labour. From fifteen years of age thefe children, inftead .of being a charge, might gain fomething more than Sufficient for their maintenance, which, being put by till it amounted to a fum, might contribute to their eftablilhment. if agriculture was pulhed as far as it poffibly could be in France, it is certain the price of provifions would be lowered. The overplus of thefe children, who could not be employed in cultivating the ground, would furnilh hands for our manu-fadurers: being maintained at an eafier rate, ,the price of workmanlhip would be more moderate, which would turn to the advantage of the community in general, who might then furnilh
them-
>■ :..
II
!i!
i i-i
LETTER S.
179
themfelves with all kinds of necelTaries in greater
plenty. This advantage would be trifling in comparifon to what would ^arife from exportation; the French would become the purveyors of all Europe, becaufe they would be able to
Thefe new
afford their goods at a lower rate, citizens, who owed their exiftence to the ftatCj would have an afledlion for it. Labour would
lofe half its hard Blips, from a habit contra6led in infancy; thoroughly afFe£fed by the great principles of religion, they would fulfil the laborious duties of their ftation, with chearfulnefs and ardour. The certainty of an eternal recom-
penfe, which is the infallible confequence of a voluntary fubmiflion to our duties, would con-fole them for the Small advantage they reaped from it in this world, • Abfolute poverty would no longer be Seen, and with poverty all the vices which it caufes, would difappear.
But how muftwe manage to Succeed in the execution of this projedt ? I repeat it again, it
abfolutely depends on the care that is taken in the choice of the mafters and miftrefles who are
to Superintend thefe eftablifhments. A city which now contains twenty religious houfes, would hardly have two remaining, if they were obliged to keep flridly to their primitive regula-
tions.
ii
> d ll
1;
!l;i
It
|i- •


h'-.'h
M, S,i(
I
ib'lf'
0,1
hi
Ob'


I
■i:
•I
'i;:'


l|



I.'h'



'ill.
r«,i
C
bl

i
'i:i:
M ;•
: ii
i!:



fj!'-
•• ’;i
.0!'
I, iJ
'I 5; ’	:
(k't;

Ml

T'i.': 'lit' •, •
' : .I- '-'- • ;tr

j'	C:i	:^h
>|.\;	.	/
.	'	•
i	•	;<>	•	»
:i; '1:1'!!:'L
•■ .'I
i‘-'S
r:
.1	.’n-''
L '1-
■J • Sh '■!
'.'V
.‘•1 - '
). li, ' ,
•f	•. I


V’", :i'f iS'r. 'i/'
V. ■: I
'I '!
f.	,1	'
11: r < . ■ ' *' 1
'■	- i
i( S •

'I . '.1/ ' :
Mji''".
•’ 'O.'t'
'	. ' .'k
I ') :"r'; , ■ ■
1 . I ' ’1
:h ' 'V .i-l' ’■
ii"
''III. . Ih I 1
• 'i
TibSil i
,'!i'	•.
‘ I i I ‘ ! ’''' s I',■>;■!'! lili: I!
' ' . I ' ;L'	''
'• t '
■tl'F 'l’'i !’ b
■'ib ■ iii kih ■
m
ilivi
iEi'::
iiC'lli .
I . M i
''IIT;
'• i b
Ii
^, I
■!"J! !■
• f ,
■ ''I'-’	; ■
I, u t, T. 'vJ
', r. '	,
:!fi!
S'ID;
M li'iljirLSb '•
T I I • - •
V 'i:
'! ■' ; b,liii ‘; ii' •
• :i>
■v!
•Mi
I '
i'!
C. ■ ' •»	!
: -.11 •• • • ■
'. 1
•I.’ '< ' ■ ■•*.1 ’ If’ ''
• i’' 'I
' .l:t' ’
I I
I'U
Ii .'i, I',II ’
I So
Letters.
tions. In the room of thefe monafteries, which would fall to decay of themfelves, one fingle community of each fex in great cities fhould be formed, for the training up thefe mailers and miftrelTes: they Ihould be kept there Several years for the fake ofinIlru6lion, and only thofe fet apart for this purpofe, who gave proofs of a Solid enlightened piety, free from fuperllition. It would be necelTary for Some zealous ecclefiaf-tics to bellow their cares on them j and the per-fons fele£led for mailers and miftrelTes, Ihould be perfons of a mature age, who, having an inclination for a fingle life, would have no other view than to dedicate themfelves to the Lord, in the important miniftry which was entrulled to them : they Ihould be freed from all temporal cares, by a genteel provifion for their necelTary wants,, in health, ficknefs, and old' age: great good nature and mildnefs Ihould be required of them; it is the only method" of gaining hearts. I am fenfible they would have occafion for great firmnefs j but without relaxing the fixed regulations, they Ihould take the trouble to convince the poor children of the necelTity of thefe Jaws, which tended only to their advantage. It would be neceffary for thefe mailers and miftrelTes to have good underftandings and talents; their fltuation in life would require thefe quali-
licatiou^.

LETTERS.
j8t
ficatlons. Their ftate would be a middle one,
between a religious life, and the common way
of living in the world j and thofe who devoted
themfelves thereto, would have at leaft as many
opportunities of attaining perfeftion,' as in a
convent.
The Pagans were fenfible of the importance
of taking care of the education of children*
Minos, Lycurgus, and the antient Perfians,
reaped from it all the fruit that could be ex-^ pefted from the imperfedion of the methods which they made ufe of. What might we net exped from a chriftian education, where God grants the neceflary grace, to do what he commands ?
I anfwer, beforehand, an oBjedion that might
be made. General laws concerning education
are only proper for fmall dates, and it would
be fcarcely poflible to eftablifh them in a great
kingdom. Each province fhould Superintend the education of its poor. Thanks to the piety of our anceftors, there are but few where the

monks have not eftates which were bequeathed
to them, to be employed in relieving the poor.

To apply thefe eftates according to the inten-

kings
iii'i'ii
i:lU:li
i it
1'
• L i|, 1
»it
nil

■l‘I
"ill'

iii
il'l lil'l
!Si|! ill'iii
iii'li
• I'il
It!:!!!!
'• iill!
i“: iil
•I-:-!,!
I o'
i'-n
t :m
..'I'll
I M 1	'
:.ii lint
\,
■‘'•ti i


i;"''!i
!,	:|i
■M." ‘
■ i't„

ivM
hi

in!''
\V
■tii.r
■ -I; M


,Jii
ivT't
lilt V'
III

1 l>t •
L‘S
I
:i;P,
[01 IV'i '


■ ■€
< ii
'Ll’
I
ni»n
‘ t i. 1
’i'll'
''ifin'i
'' h

llltHi
till
II
i hit*''
Pi!!'
I •,	>•
iJjjli
Oi*
niilli
I.
ip!! i! '1
>■
1
b'l*
. ! >iii
liili
h:' h
ii



III
Iba

-ih, !:• 'i
;i'. .1 •	, • •'
'	I
T....
■'E 'I' 1
'ijliC h
f S :
■'T' -fl
s!’.. ■;:
• L} *• *
cifik /C :Vy:i
I ■'	'
U;..
-I-
. ^
•r H".
vc:- .•
■( '■
rid' •:
,p,i "I
• j h;'' •
r- ■ ' ■•'


i
, (.
, . ''I • ;i ■
‘ .1


•••fi*:’!
• ‘ • r *c
»	\	‘	'	. i
:• • .. '
'vi.i' ;■ ;
iii‘ '‘ilh: ,! i
m.ijT’ ‘t ; l! ;


F.'i J . iL i • •
S;i‘: ■Idh
I



' ■'•I' ’■ I

jV'.'-
ihi i f .
i
U l'
>.:t; -i;
■| ,■ V.:.‘

I
"hV’: ‘
't.'
ii : ■ •	;
' J.
I I ■ •.
il'ii-:.
ii JiJi'te
1 .1, 'i
: i‘.
' *

iL'i.-
ti ■'
,1. : '
t i'l'	•
iJ.j. I: .
'! .

\ ! ♦
I f
4 1
• 't : ^ ■ • •

11 '(

182
LETTERS.
king ; it might absolutely be done without lef-fening the number of monafteries. La Trappe, ■which has not an income of four hundred
pounds per annum, contains one hundred and fifty religious ; and diftributes plenty of alms, without reckoning the expence of entertaining vifitors. The labour of the monks Supplies the want of a revenue. What prevents others from imitating them ? We fee that an artificer maintains his wife and children by his labour;
why then could not a monk bring up a poor child ? But it will be faid, the monk is confined
to a long office * ; has hours Set apart for meditation and ftudy ; mull confefs people, preach, and fay mafs. Hie anfwer is eafy. The monk is lodged for nothing, the artificer is not: every monaftery has large gardens ; the true religious would there find half his fuftenance. It is true,
it would be a lefs delicate food than fifh; but
the poor who work as hard as the monks ought to do, are contented with vegetables, and make Shift without flefii meats, or filh. Ought
the voluntary poor to be more delicate ? No.
Have they made a Solemn vow of poverty only
to free themfelves from poverty, and that they
might want for nothing ? If they preach, they
are paid; if they compofe books, their works
* A part of the breviary.
produce
tt’i .. I
.L'
*'1
•: f\

I.l
LETTERS.
183
l»roduce them a revenue, w'hich far exceeds their wants : the retribution they receive for faying mafs, amounts to half as much as a poor handicraft man can earn in a whole day. .Do
thefe laft live fewer years than monks ? Have
they more diforders ?
Fo Mrs, Darby.
I HAVE obeyed you, my dear mother; this is what I would do, if God had granted me power equal to my good will. Heaven grant I neglect not the works which God has put into my hands. The time draws near when you are to
be reftored to me again. I (liall, fufpend my
refolutions till your arrival; they are in general
to realize my fchemes in miniature, to put to
this ufe .the overplus of my fortune, which our manner of living renders very confiderable.. If
any of the happy of the age (liould read the dis-
tribution of our hours, the frugality of our ta-
ble, and the fimplicity of our drefs, they would
pity us; and we, on our hde, cannot help entertaining a much more juftly founded compaffion for them. Peace, pleafure, tranquillity, health, and innocence, are blefiings which we abundantly enjoy. Who among them can boaft of poffeffing thefe invaluable treafures ?
Tell



: •;
!1:‘i

i!i
i; •
S n.
;
r • I
I '
iilli
liiiii
■''li V' 1

. I •
N .	'	' I '
if.l’j' ' fl'' 1 ■ I'l'r': 'Tb
:||Sb|:
■S;i; '■
\\ >i
:i
I'*' .•■
ii .'TS
h'i' b-;!
it ' I
D,i'
'T '
. *•,	*	I
iv b ■' ••
flC'r,'.. .
b/ .
* L 'b I
.b b
b ,/
i! ■''(‘bi	’•
•' >' I
tIj'.S'',''
!:';• . Ib'r L

II ■	'!!
ibivbj;
,t.	1
11
'T
i’biS -
iliL!
i' 'I
I! M i'|i|. • ;,
I'c illl.-H •Vh*'*:'. ( i' 11 ' c
SC'<* ';i »,.... ;■ . i< ’ ’I ■'	' 1
i; '-.'lii S''
b;s|ih’b
■b!ib


. . <
" ; f)
ir
lii'
i.i!: ■
!ir iHi'
;> J’ -
'' '!';!!,
iii'i'v!
f’i •L.
'll’ -	1^^
iii.j; liiiV'b ;'h
biU
t. I'

I'bbi ,' < 1
bhij
' .'III
,S ‘
ifeiii!:
, II,., . i.|<
W' 'b!
bb-i’i
O',	•
184
LETTER S.
Tell my dear Harriet, that my hulband has almoft finilhed his journal, and that Ihe lhall have it Soon. It would have been finilhed fooner, but our duties muft take place of our amufements. He Superintends the works at the hill, while madam D’Aftie and I prefide over the cookery of the labourers. How little is na. ture contented with ! One only of thofe Sumptuous dinners which I have formerly ordered, would have been Sufficient to feed two hundred of our workmen. When I think of it, I ftill blulh at our three dilhes; and am conSoled only by the pleafure of regaling thoSe who are recovering from fickneSs, I will not fay with the remains of our table; (for it would give me un-eafineSs to fend them a cold bit j) but a bit from our table. JeSus Chrift. is always Served, firft, as he .ought to be.
LETTER
LETTERS.
1S5
LETTER XLIV.
Lady HARRIEPs Anfwer to CLARISSA.
O D grant, my dear Clarifla, that the frugal life you lead, may preferve you from the horrid pains I have fuffered, as it has freed you from the inconveniencies of which I was the vidtim, during nine months. I make an oath> Jf I am ever in a way of being a mother again, to try your regimen. It is exadUy a month this day, lince I was brought to bed of a line boy. If you have managed in confe-quence of my firft refolutions, immediately make an alteration; and, remember that I want a lafs for this little angel. I (hall tell you, that you have robbed me j and, that I fhall confole myfelf for it only, through hopes of (haring our fortunes with each other, as well as hearts. I have attained the height of friendfhip. Cla-rilTa, your daughter (hall be a great lady, with my fon; and, I don’t at all confider the dif-proportion of thefe two children’s fortunes. It would be worfe ftill, if we were to lofe our law-fuit; we (liould then be very poor, and my fon wou’d be a very inconfiderable perfon ; without my lofing hopes of hearing him one day call you mother. He (hall be early accuftomed to call
you

1
•(1''
n

I.':
M !.
.•'■■Ti i
CH
li

t:«
ii

1
rBl sSl ;i iifi! i'c
SI A-
teici;!
i86
L E T T E R S:
you So ; and, whatever pleafure the light of him gives me, I will Sacrifice it to the advantage of having him brought up under your management, on condition you 'continue fubmifiive to your wife- dire61;refs. I like the plan of your little houfhold; and, without vanity, I had a mind to put ours on the fame footing. You thereby gain an inhabitant. I reftore to agriculture, one of my men Servants, and a maid who was employed under the cook. The cook, no longer bulled, in preparing fix and thirty different ragouts, can do without her. The retrenchment of our table, puts us in a condition to portion this couple ; three hundred livres Seemed to them a fortune ; and, they will employ this fum according to your diredion, You will render me covetous, Clariffa ; I ftudy every day to diftinguifh my real, from imaginary wants. I cannot, in the rank of life, wherein Heaven has placed me, reduce myfelf, like you, to a fluff gown ; but, I clearly perceive, that without making myfelf particular, by retrenching the expences of mere luxury and whim; fuch as perfumes, flowers, &c. I (hall be able to fettle fuch a family every year. This idea
makes me amends for the little violence T under-
%
go, in weaning myfelf from all thefe gewgaws.
You Iha’n’t be quit for one family; Mr. Balfour’s

LETTERS.
187
taking its Sweets.
Ibur’s valet de chambre is in love with your Fanny ; Ihe,, with the description you have given us oS your rural liSe, and is deSirous oS par-
I have tried her vocation, by telling her, that, accuftomed So long to a plentiful table, and eaSy employments, Ihe could not comply with a peaSant’s way of life, and would Sink under the fatigue : Ihe is vext, and alks me, whether Ihe can’t do what the baroneSs D’AlIie has done and what her dear miftreSs' does at preSent She Says, Ihe Shall be ufed to it by degrees; and that, if Ihe is not lit for hard labour, yet Ihe can teach the little children tp Spin cotton. By our mother’s advice, Ihe has been a month at the FiJles de, St. Thomas de ville neuve, at St. Germains en laye, where there is a large School of little fpinfters, founded by the deceaSed Mr. Languet. She is returned, enchanted with it. The little girls come in the morning, and bring in a baSket their breakfafts and dinner; and leave off work, only while they receive inftrudtion. At the end of the week,^ the cotton they have Spun is w^eighed, and they ■are paid : the leaft of all, overjoyed, carry home Some pence ; the biggeft have no more''; but, the remainder is laid-by, to cloath them every year, and the overplus is given to their parents.. By this means, the mothers, ridded oS
the
I . ‘It ' I
'h.'
Ir' )U V
>>{	1:
1
11;: K.LIi’ tr
11."
I [!!:;!:
|i1:
.1.; iii
iiS
il i

i!
'
ri' i:
[If;: ;,!l.: ivii si’i''
‘ ■ 'ih i'lj !■ hl'l
I'iii'■ n'A
! <- L •.
J.
-t.
Hu
ll'L'
il-: ‘S:
'Si*' '■!; hL
:ih
\ * ! .D ihC .0 IT
"'it
.'I.;,	1	,
i
'i' .'(•ll'.
,j'i .	• ■
! "<l I..	• " i,
M . -'.I
, ■ . ,
if . :
*. * \ c ' ' '
s 'f
. I ;
)'L '!! l!
''Sf-'”
.	1	, ,I
’.l'

i;!T' '
/ ;♦	I
i, clip I'i 'i T'
•1 :';1
I n..
-i;‘ *■
M
'S; lib

b'lll'- i!i':'
'iiiSiij- !|i; ‘

:i' ' .
'P'l
JC;!!.'' ■■ '!•'[ * ! 1 ■ 'i ■
I
•)i

I'
h
i ■
i;
tS'ipl
'f.;;b II
m ii iii
• U' ' L . ■
'i i'LlL
■i'i. 'IS: f'ifl;
Lihiif
Ii . !• n.
;i . ‘ i ,
i’r
iji;|i(fi > ii'.
hSi: 'iii
f I
ii.’N' '.'ll'
if
1." 7 ,•
I jlN!
■'■’ll 1iti:
''’‘I'
1 :i - ,'iL '1 • ■ •'
m,
'if'it ''
ifi.f ■
•ill ;; •
i88
LETTERS.
the trouble of their children the whole day, work themfelves j and theSe childreiL inftead of being a charge, are an advantage to them, after the hrft year ; for what they earn the firfl: year, belongs to the miftrefs, and ferves to pay for the cotton they Spoil at hrft.
You have Seen in the gallery at Windfor, a piiflure of a lockfmith, w'hotTi Love made a
painter; and, you fhiall fe in your village, a
flocking weaver, who owes his calling to the fame mafter. I mean the valet of Mr. Balfour, who has prefented to his mafter the firft fruits of his labour. He will weave the cotton which his wife Spins, and offers himfelf to inftruft Some foundlings. Here is a new branch of ma-nufadlure for you. I Ihould fee all thefe fet out with pleafure, if our mother was not refolved to accompany them herfelf. Ah ! Clariffa, I cannot reconcile to myfelf the idea of loimg her, in the leaft. Is it poflible you Ihould be amidft fuch plenty, while your poor Harriet is left
quite deftitute ? What will become of all my good refolutions, when I am deprived of her, who fuftained me in thofe moments, wherein it Seemed almoft impoflible to fulfil them ? Where is friendihip, Clariffa ? Ought it not to engage
yoM, to make an effort in my favour ? You
•would
i' 1Hi
LETTERS.
189
would have her the reft of her life; would a year be too much for me ? I am thoroughly fenfible of the indifcretion of my requeft ; befides, was I to obtain from your tendernefs this heroic fa-crilice, the firmnefs of our mother would render
it ufelefs ; (he thinks herfelf called where you are, and reproaches herfelf for all the moments (he lofes here. I Ihall not have to reproach my-felf, with having negledled one of thofe which remain for me to enjoy her, and dial 1 endeavour
to make a provifion to ferve me my whole life.
Finally, Fanny and her hufband, far from
being a charge to the village, undertake to provide furniture for their companion, who is not
fo rich as them ; they have three hundred guineas between them; and, flatter themfelves
they (hall be able, with this fum, to eftablifh a little ftocking manufactory; prepare fcholars for them. I entirely coincide with your opinion, about the means of peopling France with a new
race, who might be compared with the myrmidons, who, from ants become men, derived
from their firft origin, a great inclination for induftry. Thus the pofterity of thofe whom you have brought up, will never forget theirs. I am only permitted to fill four fides, and muft therefore finifh. Our mother continues.
Mrs,

iii,
!l
•!il
til''
i
;i<!
I
II

II
1
H!
• iiS
• I
ii
l;i I i
< I
i
.

I


m
ih
i’*
1:


n
I
1
ii!i

t;


..i-i.
fjii'
t’
'V:
n 1
ii
:.S!
•■r.m
»l :'. '■* 'I


ii'
i ;* j
ii*
m
•<L-
-ll.'Ti'.
0	' o’
1	-n
" ♦ '	* I
* ’ . *
i'V,• i'L'ii-l
h-'Sir'

i'- M'.
( Sjn-bilPi
)Sii
r'T|
d*
■'isio
..!1.
i'l;
ii|:
::|i
■ 111:
• j iM ■
h)
Sir

' M
;:li
. ilh--'
II

I
b'
«
I r. IL.

!!• I

» ’ ■
M !i sb' :
‘:iic
>'•
If
111
ir
vC. •I,i. ‘
b:i
O' ‘ * I •
2 go
letters.
Mrs. DARBY to CLARISSA.
Indeed, my dear, fhe has SufFered a great deal, and has bore it with a patience, that you know was not the effecSIof her natural conftitu-tion. My poor heart is almoft diftraded, when I think, that, in four months hence, you muft undergo a like trial; fee how imperfea I am! I am convinced, that fuffering is a bleffing; I even think I reap good myfelf, from thofe whii^h God fends me ; and yet, I cannot, with-out the utmoft terror, behold perfons fuffer,
whom I love. Without
my
dear, if I could have brought into the world lady Harriet’s child, and could do the fame by yours, I would do it, I think, if it was only that I might fuffer lefs. Our friend was in great danger for fifteen days ; and it Was this which prevented my writing to you. I neither would deceive you, nor make you uneafy. I had not an heart to conceal her fituation from her ; to have done it, in my opinion, would have been the greatefl: cruelty. Her attendants conjured me not to frighten her : they faid, it would certainly kill her. 1 raifed myfelf above all their fears ; I had promifed her to do fo, I kept my word, ufing every poffible precaution. She un-
derftood
■'ilbi
rib'
LETTER S.
IQT
3erftood me in a moment; and, with a con^ ftancy and resignation, very rare in a perfon of herage, fettled her Spiritual affairs. Some young ladies of her acquaintance^, were afraid of her falling into Such terrors, as they themfelves fhould have fell into, on fuch an occafion j I did not lofe this opportunity of remarking to them,, the advantage of having lived in innocence, when on a death bed. I hope the refledlions they made on this fubjedf, will produce a good effect:. Harriet promifes-to make them recoiled!, what they have Said to her about it Since her recovery, which has been very quick. She defired me not to let you know flie had been in danger ^ I don’t know what end this could have anfwered j for I am Satisfied that, my dear Clarifla is thoroughly perfuaded, that God has no need of a lying-in, or a diftemper, to finifh our days, when he thinks proper fo to do. I know file has accuf-tomed herfelf to confider every day as the laft of her life; and, that fhe thinks of it without dread. The fear of God is, without doubt, the beginning of wifdom ; but, I have always remarked with pleafure, that your confidence in him, So balanced this fear, that it neither troubled nor difcouraged you ; and, 1 have frequently returned thanks to his divine goodnefs, for having this way conduced you to himfelf.
Con-
iii.
hf
l|
PS:
Si,;,
It;,
'IS-
:f|
; !!:■;!! t)' *|!
F i !lj:i
• ? v-1 ' ;i -i '' •■•• -'1

■Jt
iiV:
• .!i
.?•!: i . !■' !
iiii'Ljh,
1-.
iCCi'C'-
•'i ■ |l ' ■
It',
if'i'fti
r-: •!'''
I S • L ite
iFJiiSi'
Li !m;
'L..'
te :..s:;:

I ,•	•
!•' I
!ii;i
ili';
i
I lit!':
SI
Hi
i
I
lihl
' f|
B 'c
|i|ti
lik
•iL,
iili
'(S r,‘ I.''
iii'k'i'-'
U-!'
r> 'i
il s
d il
i :
I'
b;
II'!
L •!. tj , I
M •
':;;i
hill


V‘tei;
• .i ! -M
i ''i ‘
illi
i! U

" f. I' ; ■ •
i ' IhI:,
I i‘i!;n
lii!!’-
i' ' Li . !■ Lfli’},
:■ ik'
'iCb
i
> *
: ■
W !’■
i
•i'
1''
' I
! I C ii
I , t

LETTER S.
Continue, my dear child, to conlider heaven as the only abode where you (hall be freed from the fear of fin, and the inevitable evils of this life ; Support this life, becaufe it puts you into a condition to labour for the other, which is eternal. This enduring of life, is all that can be required of a chriftian, whofe faith is lively.
I have read, with pleafure, your vifionary Schemes for encreafing population; would.to God, that thofe who have the power in their hands, would form fuch another, and put it in execution. But, as this is not to be expedled, do yourfelf in miniature, what you could wilh was done in great; perhaps, your good example will excite Some rich perfons to Second you. You have very properly obferved, that all depends on thofe who prefide over the work. If you do not form perfons, capable of Supporting this good work after your deceafe, avarice, and private intereft, will- Soon be the means of deftroying it: and, in an hundred years hence, no remains of it will be feen. Man is a clock, the weights are always tending to defcend; »and necefifarily require Some perfon to be attentive to wind them up. What renders this renovation more difficult, is becaufe we cannot expe£I to fuftain fuch like eftablifhments
by
I ■> . I
I'bi'.-
(t
L ,o
LETT E R S.

e
ly fine difcourfes, examples are w'anted. If th world could have a conception of the charms ox
the life to v/hich you have devoted yourfelS
fuch perfons as madam D’Aflie would be multi-
plied : unhappily, its charms are felt only by thofe who exercife it; and, your kind of life.
viewed at a diftance, will always feem infupport-
able to people who are in a condition to Second
you. I have been charmed with Fanny’s resolution of fettling with you ; this girl is quite fit to enter into all your views; it is to be hoped that God will infpire others with a defire to fe*
cond you; and, if he is gracioully pleafed to
grant you children to inherit your vocation, as well as fortune 5 you may flatter yourfeif, tht
good you do will Survive you.
There are two forts of people who may con-
The rich who are de-
tribute to your work, firous of working their Salvation, yet are attached from their circumfiances to the great
world, might aflifl: you with their fortunes: there are to be met with alfo, humane, ingenious
men; who, without being animated by the
fpirit of chriflianity, wmuld take a pleafure in affilling you with their overplus of fortune, thro’ a convidion alone, that your foundations mud procure the greateft advantages to the ftate, VoL. II.	K	Their
I

•It

. It,
}h'{'
'll.'
Ill
;!1

I )
1: • :. I). I
It
d
1 I
li


ii-
. 11
.'i


'i I't
>.l
il
I t
; Hii
; "1; T’',
»rii '( {
t ^	■ I
r ■
;' i
Ire,
III. ■
I \
' ^ .n:

■
■ ]
)
.1! b
I
IS,.

•'I	,
.1 . -!
I''
]■:
.1;	1 • ;
b| rL
hi I ' I, . li: N b
> : «
[fiT
i:
■ II
ll::
T' . !l
■ ll
!!.* ' t. At
“i'
It;
h
'r
C: ■'iirii
.1. }■ h’,:;
del
L L
I',;.;.
I
. I
!’ I.j' '
" -1:,
Ml, ’■
;iH
hei,
i' '• •
* I
■Cl' '
194
LETTERS.
1"heir motives ought not to be examined toe nicely; though Ids perfea than thofe of the former, they are laudable ^ to be a good citizen to love our country, is a virtue.	*
The fecond fort of people, who might aid the fuccefs of your enterprizes, are thofe who ■would pay with their perfons ; and, thefe are in. comparably the moft neceffary., By rigour au' thority might force the peafant to fubinit’to a part of the regulations which your people fol low, without reaping the fame benefit from it' whatever is done by force, cannot be of lonff duration. The eiTential point is to have perfons^ \vho, by their examples, would make thefe rules be loved. What numbers of poor nobility might find a refource by affiftingyour good intentions-and thereby emerge from the ftate of poverty, in which they live ! I fay, like you, child, I muft haften to finifli, for fear I fiiould never finilh there might be fo much faid on this important article.
I propofe fetting out very early in the fpring. We fhall travel commodioufly, though with great oeconomy. We have befpoke a cart, co* vered with oil fkin, with hampers underneath, well Huffed with hay, to keep our feet and legs
'wann.
'll
LETTER S.
^'9S
^liarm. We Iliall go in this carriage as far a« Beziers, with two horfes, which are to be bought here. If it is lead expenfive to go from Beziers by the canal, we (liall fell our horfes there ; if not, we (hall come, men and beafts
Mr. and Mrs. Balfour would have
together.
me take a coach; but I won’t liften to this pro-pofition. It would cofl: much more, and would only be fit to light fires with, when we arrived at your village; whilfl: our little cart will become your equipage, in your little journeys, from one fettlement to another ; and, at other times, will be of ufe to the community. Mr. Balfour’s fervant, who marries the kitchenraaid, is an
What
ner of travelling, fhalJ be devoted to charity; it
will etioble whatever feems mean and pitiful in.
«ur method of performing this journey.
V
K 2
LETTER
fi
i|
; I I
l'

!i'

i.r.
liiii
fi.i

;!li
II
10
• :
li
I'A
i



1!
I;
il.
i;;
,1 ' I
t‘ • I
t.ii !
: 1
.Hi
!l|>'
: -I i!

li,
'IS
Ihl
'ii '..
t
‘ r
-I
■ hi,/ !'

V',l!' ;■
’(• ' 'i M.; (i h'.f .	.
196
LETTER S.
LETTER XLV.
. I '■(,
* j s : h'
< j'l
•f » ■ •:
I: IN
o.i‘- ■■

■I
.1
.. ' i.|-I .•/
■N.
;.h."
' ' V.i'
. .V'V:.
I
: '.I .-bl ri;i'!'b;
I
'll
, f ' ■
Sj
; til.I'’’
;i '.I-
i 'ili’’
, ' I
' •	. I
I

fi ’
I' 11 • •;
L S ‘
fill


. ‘ '!'i; i'
,1 I.,,.

•', 'i

,1
iii; .•
From the Baronefs DAS FIE to Mrs. DARW.
Do not in the leaft, leave it to our child’s care, to give you an account of her adions; I diftrull the punduality of her pen, when (he is to Speak of herfelf j fhe would pafs over fads, with fuch a rapidity, as to leave them for you to guefs at. I never faw fo much adivity, info difcreet, regular, and'calm a mind. She does every thing with fuch coolnefs, as if .Ihe had nothing elfe to do j and fails not to multiply the objecls of her cares, in a manner that feems al-moft miraculous ; for, (he has undertaken herfelf, what would very well employ three perfons. As to the reft, (he does not deceive you about her health, (he is perfectly well; and, if her (hape, which every day lofes Something of its delicacy, did not (how her condition, it would never be fufpecled that (he was far gone in her pregnahcy. It is but juft that (he (hould (hare the advantages of our peafants, (ince (he fo chearfully joins in their Solicitude; not having been able to obtain permiflion to partake of their laborious employments, as (he wilhed.
(h
In this alone, (he has given me fome trouble;
and I was a great while, before I could make
her

I' '‘h;:
'I
LETTERS.
197
her underftand that God having placed her .at the head, to become feet and arms, would be an a6l of difobedience to his divine commands.
Notwitliftanding Ihe does not fail to employ
hers; her fpinning wheel is never from her fide.
except v/hen Ihe is writing, or at her meals;
(lie has excited an allbnilhing emulation among
our fpinftrefles ; and, the quantity of thread is
increafed a full fourth, fince fhe has been amongft
us.
Our women, after her example, Spin or
knit, as they go along ;■ even thofe who go to
Bourdeaux every week, work during the journey.
Gh! how powerful is the force of example !
and what might not be obtained from men, if.
inllead of multiplying precepts and fermons,
thofe who deliver them. Would execute them-
felves, what they recommend to others. I am
going to acquaint you vrith your daughter’s con^ quefts within this month.
She carefully informed herfelf of the characters of feveral gentlemen, who, in old ruinous
houfes, which they decorated vvith the name of
caftles, dragged on in ignorance a miferable life ; die had a mind to pay them a viut. We have
a great number of fuch families in the neighbourhood.
Fame, which enlarges every thing, had acquainted them with the marriage of my
L3
fon.
Li
I I
< I <
: r' i
li
IP
in
M.
'li

I
I 1
n'
‘.I I



i

'll
'.i
i!ii'
rl!
ii ■ I '
!l .
I- !|i'
t', .II I
ui I i’

i!l'
%
llli
:|;iji ‘oi
mA
!■ " I::'
Ml
hiiljbl'
ipi
, i-:• i‘!
'-'S
h'i
L ii

,.i i* ■ ' ~',r

. '1

|UJ.
’■if'lt
1;!;' ■! ijhb
nij-- •'
yy\-A
>' ''!< > .f * L|i
iM. I' I
•■'f
I ,1- ;i
: i- L. •• .:i'"
it:l!!|.l
(. Nl'jj n.Mlr
Cl!,'
hicii
iiltlll
ll.l' I
Jr
til;
i:^i“
l;:ir
{,' i'.
' C'ii
ji*
lii
h’i

;■

fi
!'•; :'•>
I ' •*
S'':;
:L'y
ii'' I
llil

Ih.f
.1 ;

;r;s
‘•:.L
19^
LETTER S.
Son, with an Englilh lady, richer than a prin-
ceSs, whofe cloaths were nothing but gold.
This account had excited in them, a great de-.
fire to be acquainted with her; but, the ftateli-
neSs of our poor neighbours, would have got
the better of their curioSity ; and, proud of their
old parchments, we mud irave exhibited ours to
prove, that our anceftors had quitted the plough
a few hours before theirs. Our child, above
thefe trifles, refolved to obviate them : it is true
her viflt was not difintereSced j Sne was defirous
of fearching in thefe ruins, to try whether (he
could not land Something fi; for her purpofe.
An afs, which flie makes ufe of, in her little ^ *
journies to the mountain and elfewhere, was the equipage. She employed laft week, to vifit the whole environs of this place. I had acquainted her beforehand with their manner of behaviour and cuftoms. The girls, with wooden Sboes on their feet, carefully preferved the old bits of tinfel, which belonged to their greatgrandmothers ; and oftentatioufly drefied them-felves out with them, on Sundays and holi-
Wce to the wealth:ell peafants, if he then prefumed to look them in the face, or not alute them in the tnofl refpeclful manner; the fathers and brothers would joyfully lay hold of
fuch an opportunity, to draw their rufly fwords,
to
days.
f
■il .1 I'l i
LETTERS.
199
tochaftife the fool-hardy wretch, who had dared
to (how fuch difrefpedt. My daughter carefully
collected together all the knicknacks, which (he bad considered as ufelefs to her ; viz. new ri-
bands, or which had been but little wore, pom-
poons, blond laces, artihcial fiov/ers, and
gauzes. She added to thefe rags, all her gowm,^ and petticoats, which die could not convert into ornaments for the church. You know (lie
Sacks of lui
taf-
had a very fine wardrobe, fety, pa nted filk, and printed linen, of which (he had twenty-two remaining, and alfo (bme night capos, trimmed with ordinary lace; which, for the future, were to be worn only on great holidays. She made them up into as many parcels as (lie had vifits to make ; obferving to put the trinkets on one fide, and the cioaths on the
other; for, (he was willing to Spare their pride.
The rumour of her intended vifit and of hef
prefents, outfcrlpped iier Speed, and had began to [often the vanity of our neighbours. The lead
haughty received us at the door of their houi'es ;
while the ladies, in a little paltry mean room’,
which they called a poarlour, were confidering about the punSlilios th-.y (hould obferve at our
firfl: meeting. My dauglitcr charmed them all
at (irft fight; and, by an eafy politetiefs free from
K 4
fervility
A
\ I
! i
I
111

1;
I:
ili

;•) I
i| I
; i I
!l
i!
li'li




: i'l
’ I Ji
'!i	' • f I
‘ I
H-i:
I.
i-i. id
ill!:
• lM
!ii
HTll
I ’
1;
’•t
1''}’

It
„ il'gi !
El! h ,il;d !
II
■d:
II-;'
200
LETTERS.

illi'iii
b: -MdS*' S'Mj P‘|!i
M ;(!/ j rt ■
(I-; of.} • ■
Af
1 iii#
i’l'
iJii, S:h ‘
4i|
ir^
.Ml
ii,
ill;
ili"!
ii;:: .1

K ■
!!i
i!i!^
ji'
ir
■ Mill
ip'i
11 If I i
rn

I
m
!<' 1
I*.' ' ii
llilL
MR
if f'i ! 1
•if’'
llii
I
i I
Mi'
ii
i'l
W
I'
9'
i
1:^; il,-
Hi*
,iii
•ii'
iii
ji
<n
ill
IF
>
‘ »
»t
1
tS'vi!
M:<i!
i :;i liib
1)1’
p-'; :!’h
iiiii iiljjL ij|
f
tii
i:'
¥
i
i

%\
Ji
111 \ ■
llji.J...

O :b:i I J' '■ 1 i r r. r» ' i
n. "
U'
'■ I'i'
ib'liblii 1 : ':;• 1 !
i' i’bi'
lerviiity or pride, made them ealily comprehend ihe was at lead born their equal. This firft 'vilit was fhort, (he had deligned twenty-four' hours for each family ; but, in two of them, fhe ftaid three whole days, for the following reafon, 7'fter the firfl night, fne aflted per-jniffion of the mothers to prefent the young ladies with a few Englilh trinkets j and, after Tome ceremony, the parcel of trinkets was opened, admired, prefented, and accepted. .She af-terv7ards rey;retted her havino; nothing: new.
o	o	o	r
to offer them for themfelves and adted if (lie might prefume to offer Something, which might Serve for furniture : and then, undid her fecond parcel. She did not take this liberty, except in the two houSes wlrere (lie had ftaid the longeft; in the otliers. Sue, under pretence of confulting the miflrefs of the family, .about the ufe fliei fhould put Several things to, which (he did not intend to wear any more. Spread out her goods, nd, watching their looks, laid hold of the hrfi: opportunity of offering them. A Single word, as, It is a great pity to make up into furniture fuch good cloaths as thefe, made her reply immediately, If they had been new, I fhculd have taken the liberty of offering them to thefe ladies; but, I did not dare to prefume
fo far. There then arofe a combat between
their
ry
LETTERS.
201
their avarice and pride ; and,, as fhe aiTtfted both
paffions, her offer w’as at laft accepted. B}
thefe means, Ihe has So gained the hearts of this
nobility, that (lie can make them do whatever
(he pleafes j and has already formed considerable
projedls on this head.
Our laft vifit was at a village about fix miles
diftant from us, where lived two gentlemen,
coufin germains, whofe wives had been fo fruit-
ful, that one of them had fourteen children.
and the other twelve, and of thefe twenty-fix
eighteen were girls. What pen can defcribe
* > «
the miferable life thefe unhappy people led ! They could Scarcely procure a bellyful of black, coarfe bread, fuch as dogs would refufe to eat, unlefs half famiflied. Neverthelefs, they made an effort to give ns a good reception. Some old fowls were killed, and white bread fent for from
a neighbouring town ; and the two coufins
joined purfes, to entertain us at their mutual
expence. Literally Speaking, the girls were cloathed in rags ; and, our propofal to make them a prefent of Some cloaths, w'as received with tranfport. Ladies, fays the eldeft of the coufins, with tears in his eyes, you would fcarcely believe, you have been in company with gentry, whofe nobility is as antient as the
Ks
time
Ml 1.

I!

I • • >
: i:i
II 4 .
hi
• I ; I I. j ,1 I,
i>,' >
I. 1
; t >' < I
:p.\>
1
,' i>
ill
■ihii
•'M Mi'll I ii'rl :''Ji'
ii| !	1
vC'
■ 1)1.1 ■
,. :hj!;. • - ;
c'
IL-
r ii:‘’ '‘r 1
iiy-
‘Ilf .
*• h
•>
:•!;
ii-ll ■
-I ’'
::M :
■»r;!i
, hltjS [
fiii!!’'
'Mi'!*!*
i
'I,	('
■ *1 , \'
It I
■ i
* .!( . iici::
I 'Ml li I;
'/	1' I
I'iO'ih'ji j
w
i!l
:}' I
i-hi ’ 1 *
: »1. i-'i'd!
if,
V !
I' '

U;i)> ,
iii! cu;.

kd* kdSi:
' I'
,'i.
Uh;i
tih
i* i #•
I'lfi
Ip:
1f'“'
ill
I
m;
( ‘
it!C ii
I:
li::iL \\
».	. I
;i-l' • :i ’
I' ,j :
iul'il
H
iC'
liliill
i:!"n
iid i-Mf'I
l!i^k I
!^P;i
R[i
s
il' !
■i ii :i!
;!'l. "i
'iiii:1
lliidl’i!
’:s. ’’te 'L;
' ' t ‘
202
LETTERS.
time of the earlied: cruSades. We have preferv-ed our blood free from mixture, at the expenct of all the conveniencies of life, which we have made a fhifr to do without; if we had had fewer children, we could have lived on our trifling income, if not in plenty, at leaif, in a decent way ; too great fruitfulnefs, by obliging us to divide, our morfel into too many bits, has rendered our condition very deplorable ; yet, how-ever great our diflrefs, we courageoufly refill the temptation of relieving ourfelves, by means unworthy of us. Some of our relations, lefs delicate, have made a fortune, at which, we blulh. Since they owe it to the finances; they ■ offered us the fame refource for our fons j but, we could not defcend fo low ; and the only favour we have afked of them, has been to place Some of our daughters in the royal abbeys, where young ladies are received, without paying any penfion. They have procured two vacancies for each of us, which will be fome little aflifiance; and, they have promifed, to get two of our boys into the Military Academy.
Ciarifia applauded every thing, even the ridiculous delicacy of thefe hcneft gentlemen j and, as foon as (he found an opportunity,
founded
I, M i-d
LETTERS.
203
founded the vocation of the four vicfbrns, who
were defigned for the cloifters. They had no
ot^er befides hunger; and one of them, told her with tears, that, if it had not been through fear of her father’s anger, fhe fhould have found means of ceafing to be a charge to him, by marrying the fon of a rich farmer, by whom (he was beloved; but, added fhe, he would kill me.
if he only knew I had ever thought of Such a thing. Therefore, I (hall obey him, whatever I fuffer ; for I deteh a convent; my only con-fclation will be, the hopes of foon finifhing
there a wretched life---She flopped at thefe
words, and ClarilTa hnifliecl the Sentence—-thro’
grief for the lofs of your lover. Bludi not to own it to me ; I will be your friend, and do you all the fervice in my power. She made much of
her, and learned from her, that her fider and her two coulins v.?ere in the fame fitualion; but, that
they would never forgive her, if they knew (he had betrayed them. Don’t be afraid, faid our child, only leave the mailagement of your affairs to me, and all will go w^ell. The very fame day, (lie tried to gain the . confidence of tlie parents, and invited them to return our vifit. She after-
wards faid to the gentlemen, your two eldefl daughters Seem to have very good underfland-ings, and will certainly Succeed, in whatever
ftaticn
! I ., I
lUii.i
1;:'
! i I
[•!
"i!
L I'
■ I >
I ■ . ■
■ I '.
il:'
)■ i .	;
J I I
.'1:

'il
{. ibl'
I.


' - ■ ■ •' I
jTvb
!ii,
1'!' :i
.	., I'

I.
' (
. I 'i
1	( I
' I • I
; I (
r
; |V'
.If-:
. I > ■
; -ii:


i ;
I >
: 'i|h ' i
t
'T
i ■ I
i'll
H !
MM:
I'i O'
Dill
I
: M.
fb
I ;
I'.'
I'b'b,
iiliCy!,
I!.' . . '
• I
II '
I..1.
11
''"ir IC'I:’ I:.
’SMin I
'i'l, :ll i I
*5;
!!:’ .rii
iii:i ■
C;!J:iii'':j <
:;^'ii^iii'')'i
W':
• *« *. •
IP.'
5-1

" • 'jill
•i 'i<
l:i!:l^
(hfil’i'■'
j‘ '1
;i
:n
p
^ii!
•'iS'i
ihih!
I* .. .
Tiili
}hs !ji!b
!!!ii

1 :
ti '
ii’viil?
i
■ '• I., i'‘
:i ,. -
ii'M ■
...i:! I
H ”

\*A.
Hi
liliHiiib I ‘
'	O’-	! it
iiwili:;'; J
: m ?
■iidi!''

bf'lii t iilfi
-iil ii:
irih'HH ‘
I I iHiiii ■

I' S'Ll#-
■VA'.Ah ■

if ■ iflllliol I
i i'.'Li-: . iMlUkh :

I
liiiiif;
■’ li'ijii:
l:i
m
I'i
H
1
i’tC^ •
■iilV
m
iiili
vv ll J'
u
\
f
I
ll!

•I! M:
• i' rrw
j!i^


il	:
1	•
■it;- !■
!3i:l
i
li'
i^i
fiiiiili! ■
'wHt
‘t*t,
ilili
M''» P' ibrUi,
iNb};li h-1
!;t!: H;!:-!
“ 1 t 4 *	.
iii:bS

!iil
Vk
11 'ivii'® |i|’l;S i;l!!| 1
-1 ’ - i <1 I


204
LETTERS.
%tion you place them in. Yet, I beg permif-Sion to make one remark. Speak, Madam, Said they. Your daughters, I repeat it, are charming; but, they are to enter into a fo-
ciety of nuns, brought up in the great world; and thefe young ladies are balhful; truft them
to madam D’Allie till their departure; they will
acquire with us a free eafy way; and will, on that account, be better looked on in the abbeys where you defign to place them. This propofal was accepted with thanks: mantua-makers were fent for to the neighbouring town, to fit the
linen facks to their fhapes; my daughter and I W'orked at their head drefies; and, in fa£t,
thefe poor girls were hardly to be known in their new drefs. Their parents were extremely thankful, and confented to accompany us, in our return, with their wives. Till my daughter’s arrival, I had madenonoife, except in our owm village, and thefe good people hardly knew my name. Clarifla’s deaths had caufed a rumour.
which fpread thirty miles round'about; they
could not comprehend the caufe of the Simplici-
ty of her drefs, and her choice of a village for
her refidcnce. They Vviere ftill more Surprized
at the plainnefsof our furniture; and concluded
therefrom, that our riches had been exaggerated.
As file had not faid a word of her birth; and, as
they
LET
T
E R S.
205
they thought it impoHible to be lilent on an article which Seemed to them of Such importance.
.when a perfon was really of a noble family; they concluded Ihe was the daughter of Some rich merchant, who had fell in love with my fon, and through complaifance to me, drelTed after my manner. They ventured to afk fome queftions on this head, and were quite aftonilhed, when they found ClarilTa was a young lady of family, and pofieiTed at prefent above eleven hundred pounds a year; and would have an immenfe fortune at her father’s death, who was a knight and baronet. She Surprized them ftill more, by telling them, tirat in England, a man was valued according to his aflions, and not according to his birth; that the fon of a lord, or a minifter of Hate, was not diOionoured by entering into commerce ; that a good honed farmer ranked with gentlemen, and was admitted to the tables of peers, though his family had not the lead pretenfions to nobility; in Short, that high nobility was revered there; but was not thought ftained, Vt^hen, to repair the accidents of fortune, thofe who poffeSTed it Submitted to fome profeffion, provided it was an ufeful one to the ftate, and they exercifed it honourably. Our gentlemen at firft thought thefe cuftoms
ftrange : and afterwards lamented the prejudice
that
I' I I
: '!» ‘S'
"i:
ill
I 1:
111 i >
’V'l
I I. i
, 'i
i I ■\
I'll
I.. i i
: I
I’ill
ill

11 ilii
. H.
.'.ii
1
lili
t;
.’•b
Mi
) •
I ,!
> I' ' >! 1 I
|i||
I ,
Itpi • ' I
I •
‘ »
ii
1:* i
111 • I
b :
’ I
11
!•
I'
I
I ^
1 !
i
. I r
I r
1 ■ ■
I 'Sb
111, I’
n,i, r ;
libi II
!1‘ ,i ;
'in.l;;
I; '' I

I'l.
tU';
[a'A
m
.!' Di v;:i'
? !••	'3^, •
V MX*.' •:■;!»'
.	* -tj -■::••• ■
■ .: . 3 •, ’ .' '
r- K ■ ’ 5 . .■' , '
iip-iSfli
‘ w
\V i*"’i
.J,.j
•	'• I't '	1. '
' vM..
i-j'	.
[>• *-•>
I ■.
'4 xiSib
h!
•Li
hiTIhi.-i r --ii >V-'
r- '

u
M
i
P '
'C.I :-;ii
WM
*1'
■D •
’::< AP ■ r,'.i;.':' ’Ci I
■ 1 »“ ’


•VI’;
bi '.'i	•'
!•!;’! J ifM

Ml

ii-1,
•IlfilJ .
iiVI
iSii!


.,'i: i“
^!i
C-'»
S:
H!i


hW

‘ ‘hiVh, ib'lhtV

r;- 3“
ilk’''-- ■'*
.if ;«i I ■ ’1^-’
If I, i.\t'


t.
!:VV
:11'l
•I'm
; Ij* njJ:;
Ij
i!i

\i:
Hm
! 1!! I»» :.•
3,
hi*
h“

.. Vi
T I ' N Aihi
-i*.

; t
M; '
rlHjjl
liil i
Cul
i'!:!

.i'lii.l
i|ii
fV.* j iV bi
fipM
■ n
;; .1
L i, (>
u
IJ' ;
i"'-
T!
1 ii aU'b :’! ihh-
ikiaiiii:
:>b,j bi
iVlijjil
n-
i;.
I
I:
il I
..".'I |f|
2o6
LETTERS.
that prevailed in France in this refpeft, whicli
condemned them to die in mifery. In (hort, before the day was over, fhe convinced them, that every prejudice, which rendered ufelefs men
born to Serve the ftate, was ridiculous and crimi-
nal, and ought to be Ihook. off by a noble foul; and, that to fet an example thereof, (he had reduced herfelf to the flation of a farmer’s wife.
This condition, (he told them, was not debafing, lince it was that of our primitive anceftors.
Abraham, who wms confidered as a prince, was
neverthelefs, only a fliepherd; Jacob, hisgrand-fon, was a Servant to his uncle; in (hort, Ihe proved by tv/enty inftances, that he who is of Service to the ftate, is fuperiouf to the ufelefs noble. I am fenfible, fays Mr. de Ferfal, (one of thefe gentlemen) that he who can Serve his
king and country, is unw'orthy the name of a
gentleman, if he refufes to do it through love of
eafe, or fear of danger j but, added he, chil-
dren like ours, whatever dedre they may have
to Serve their county, are under an impoffibility of doing it. A fortune is neceiTary to maintain
a gentleman in the Service, and they are abso-
lutely deftitute of any.
Alas 1 do you think, faid Clarifta, that your king and country do not want labourers, as
well
LETTERS.
207
well as Soldiers ? What would become of the laft, were it not for the fir ft ? War is made only to Secure fubjecfts the peaceable enjoyment of the fruits which the hufbandman procures. My hufband, fhe added, ftiall imitate the ancient Romans, who, at one time bore arms, and at another, difdained not to cultivate their little eftate, the inheritance of their anceftors. They feared not to commit the fate of the republic into the hands of one Cincinnatus, who was found at plough, when the eniigns of the dictatorship were brought him. This great man, conqueror almoft as foon as armed, returned with eagdtnefs to his rural employments. Ab-(lolonim, of the family of the kings of Sydon, became a gardener, and was found at work ’ in his garden, when news was brought him, that Alexander reftored him to his crown.
Neither have we ever difdained rural employments, replied Ferfal; but, the fmallnefs of our eftate puts it out of our power to employ our children in a manner more Suitable to their birth ; and, as this is an evil which cannot be remedied, we muft fn''mit, and bury our name in all its native purity. Determined to end the number of wretched beings, which an unhappy fruitfuiivefs in our children, would multiply to
infinity,
m ^

II
i!
ii !
' ' 1 T ti
i-il
. I : I
!■;
ill
tiU !■ I
>1 I I I
li;' C (
k\^\
i !I i
11 •
1.1
ri-'iiJi I

Hllj t
208
LETTERS.
infinity, we are thoroughly refolved never to confent to the marriage of any of them; for there is little probability, that a young lady of equal rank, who is rich, fhould think of raifing our family again ; every one mufi not exped to meet with fuch good fortune as the baron D’Aftie has done.

This expreffion was extremely rude, and, I bluSned at it, for my fon ; he pretended not to underftand it, and refuming the difcourfe with the utmoft coolnefs, you are in the right, Sir, fays he, few people can expe<5t a happinefs like mine ; but, know, that I don’t think this happinefs confifis in the nobility and iinmenfe fortune of my wife. Had fhe been born a fliep-herdefs, and had her anceftors fince Noah never been of any other profeffion, I would havechofe and preferred her to a princefs, who pofleffed not her virtues. I acknowledge, replied Ferfal, that the virtues of your wife are fufficient to jufiify a mif-alliance; yet, I don’t think it right to mif-ally one’s Self; and, I fhould never forgive my children if they were to be guilty of a fault of this kind.
I am entirely of your opinion. Sir, fays 1; but we don’t mean the fame thing by an improper
hi; t
LETTERS.
209
per alliance. To make an improper alliance,
is to marry a woman of a bad charaQ;er, or one who. copies of a family difhonoured by vice. I
confider as a gentleman, the man only who poffeffes truly noble fentiments ; and, I Ihould think my fon very badly allied, if he had married fuch a perfon, though her nobility had been as antient as the times of Pharamand. Every man virtuous in a fuperiour degree, is worthy of
being noble, and is fo in my eyes.
I (liall not repeat all the arguments we ufed in trio, before we could get the better of the
wretched prejudice of thefe poor folks j and
what is very lingular, the v/omen held out a great while after the men were convinced. I
have faid this was lingular, but it is not fo in the leaff j and, with fubmiffion to lady Harriet, a foolifh woman is four times more filly than a
man, and obfirinacy is always in proportion to
ignorance and folly. We let four days pafs.
to confirm our profelytes in their new fentiments; and, in fpite of the progrefs, they imagined they had made in their new philofophy, they were ready to revolt, when we informed them we could fettle four of their daughters, who had not the lead: inclination for a religious life, which they were, notwithftanding, refolved to
embrace.
I'
r'
I: !
.!!!
<; i I
!i'l
I:
1!
I ,

i u;
: o.
i|
:
liil

I •,
, i k
i I
' ■ • ii!
• r
• I »
I	;
II	'
■: 1
hi
'111!
I’l: ’ M’
if!
L I
i hi
o,.
« .1
'i:	V.
'•It
: .I t
1
^ ■ bii
t; ' ,1
•I - '
I'!!
i!h
4 'I
I' i'l j;
I'; 'll

S/I'li
• ■*/ c
•' V'.



VVD'ii
niVil
|S;')
Si
Si'b i'
'L -^''1 ’> %
m
,1 )'i
u\\i •!' ••i’lN
ill
chi i
S|fi
Sliii
i.!sl
''tlUrf''
i<:v 'I
LrJ. ‘,1
’jrsi!:*
■‘TS
S!rri:i


Ll’' 'i I'lil’
r,
• 1
I •:
Siilii
IfA'
:jr'
<:'f
* r.
•s
iii
«'V'
III tl'<

(i c

s.
ct-
> h
S’'?
•4<^ i

,!»i4\:

• fi'
.isr

'iV'..;
■l/.i
i'
.♦o;r
«■! t'l
Oil;!
V'.\
'ill'!!'
•VI''
" 1'' •
'11

:c i:
' }■
‘M
210
LETTERS.
embrace, if we could not induce them tocotn-
pafiionate their cafe. My Son, Since our firft
interview, liad Seen the farmer, whofe two fons
were in love with two of thefe young ladies.
The other two were beloved by their coufins j
who not haying a large portion to offer lik« the farmer’s fons, were quite in defpair. My foa raifed their fpirits. Ciariffa had amindtomak* them the firft inhabitants of a plantation (he had projected; and give them wherewithal to liv« there. The baron found the farmer very tractable; his fons had threatened him to enlift
themfelves in the army, if he did notconfentto their marriage ; and, as they v;ere his only fons, for it is not ufual with us, to fet any great value on girls; the good man had given them leave to do as they thought proper. It came into the baron’s head, to propofe to him one of Ferfal’s fons for his third child, who was a very genteel young woman. You would have me then left alone, and abandoned in my old
age, fays the honeft man, with tears in his
eyes. Quite the contrary, fays my fon, embracing him. Your farm is lonely, and (lands by itfelf; our defigq is to furround it with an
hamlet, of which you will be the head and
the father, fince your three children Shall be the
firft
L E T T E R
S.
2II
the firft inhabitants. God blefs you, and all
your undertakings, replied the farmer j but, I
am very much afraid my daughters-in-law and
fon-in-law will defpife me. The two gentle-
men, my neighbours, are very good kind of
people, but they are haughty; indeed, if they
refernbled you, I would on my knees beg of them their daughters, and offer mine, who has
had a very good education in a convent; as to my fons, they know how to read and write, that’s allj they never till now gave me any caufe to complain of them. And they will never give you caufe again, fays my fon j leave the management of this affair to me. With all my heart, replies the old man ; I have pretty near fifteen hundred pounds in ready money, I will fhare it equally between my three children j and, if I don’t die very foon, they may expe6i; more. We don’t deSire fo much of you, fays my Son; you ought not to ftrip yourfelf quite, you fhould keep Something to reward thofe children, who, by their refpe£lful behaviour fhall deferve it beft. The peafant was charmed with my Son’s care to Secure his future felicity, and left him abfolute mailer to aT as he plea-fed.
As this had paffed before our laSt interview
with
f'

iTii

', ; I
li:
,!:ii
i'b!
!i ■ :|i
i' : iL
■PI Ml,
1 I
:i' !
'i!i’
I'Si
1'
ii:
! t
tell
I !! ■!
■ I:
If.
..I
I
11 • |h
! i
I!
i'O
!i Hi'



;iui
i'lji*
'I !1
lb;

L11
1!
j 1 1 * C • 1
b|

, 1
. Mi
!r '
; • I
: !: ii

I ;
‘ ' I •'
! ’I '
lo : I
,! I)
‘: • i
ii't : *•

I, I '
i;
' ! n I
t'. t ( i
i'ic

I !i !
M : -I
:U
r.'

-f:
!'	T.|{
l'-M
• C *
111
) ■
(.	.'M
S' !'d’ b VM

'i:
;	. ,i
/ Siii
1 ■ (, *
' •:
,• .DSl
-V'ii
", i'"
. .1)' "f.\

•V ;
‘I I'-l • ,
I ; :■ ill.' ; I
te. r ‘ t ‘
b’l.i.':!’ . ' C.i • •j.'cVS':
. <
■di
’V
;.J> ■
;Chl
' IsF-
l| I l !
hi
ifiOS'
bifiiiS
-h 'U •• ,•■• .-v
I I'l,'
' ■', ■ •' ,
L;.
.r.-
» ■ \ . *
' dS'b
.{.I'jVi'jh
i,’ ' , V.' •
■ fli
L'lS'i*
‘ i •*
1' .
,11,
:.;4,
l,L:i 1
Jt 1 tI' !’
' ' a * .
•: «
s.
;! r§
litLijiiJi
Sl3|
:, L'S*

•Ll? ;l:
ii‘. '1 . »
liVbdd
ihi: d' 1 ‘'C
1'^ •
jlL . bis
'll
iil|:
*.
y-\vM'
•i 'iiif.
■icii
• !;■': -'S' 3 ■!<:o
; »'i 1
bi:i.i
' t- ililt:''
' bVl'Il
■. t'
t ■	'!•!.
I-'S ; .'lit: I , • . ,,,,
V- |:l'
212
LETTERS.
with the gentlemen, we offered on the farmer-s part three hundred and iifty pounds for each of bis Sons immediately ; and, we agreed, that each of the Sons-in-law fhould make a prefent of twenty guineas to his father-in-law, in order to reconcile thefe gentlemens wives to the matches.
I took this opportunity to propofe the farmer’^ daughter as a match for one of their fons, whom fhe fhould prefer before the reft; aad every thing was prefently fettled. As it, ftill wants Seven months of the time fixed for mar-
t
riages in our parifh, we have undertaken to take care of the girls till then ; and we requ:r« their future hufbands to be aftiduous, during the whole of this time, to the inftrudlions of our paftors. Our three gentlemen certainly have more occafion for this laft claufe than the farmer’s fons, for they are ftupidly ignorant. We promi e their parents to take four more of their daughters, as foon as thefe are married; we already have views about them, which pleafe God will in time be accomplifhed. Here then is a new hamlet, which w^e are going to eftablilh, madam; we only want a clergyman like tho'e God has beftowed on us already, to watch over this future habitation. Our paftors would willingly facrifice a part of their revenues, to enable him to live comfortably; fee, madam,
whether
LETTERS.
213
whether you cannot procure us Such a perfon. All thofe who are educated at St. Sulpice, are perfons of excellent principles j their worthy fuperiours might find fome one who would fuit, if you would be .kind enough to explain our plan to them. I reckon the days with impatience, till the time arrives that I (hall have the honour to pofiefs you, and return you thanks for being the mother of a daughter, who cbnftitutes my whole happinefs. lamas much obliged to you for it, as if it had been in your power not to have been fo. My refpefls, if you pleafe, to lady Harriet: Ihall we never have the pleafure .of feeing her.?
s’-
LETTER.

' '(•
’ ’‘h o:;!
I •
♦ '
i 'll.,
b-lMi
I
' M
i"il I' !t:
1	' I I
1' • ’ I
l|‘
IV i
” I 1!';
• t • ;
!< >
I’ i'*'
. I ' , I
•(
.
L1' I h
: 1
■ o •
L ■
!r
!!i
11

iii
|! h
I; I. jl I'l,
i;i!
iii ii
li! i
'I;
. i;! ! i
:d:i
‘ iT
V‘ *
1! ,r"
10
' ‘; I

ill
i]
nl
!l
III
ill
ii
j|i ,, M l If!
i;
i!'
ifi
in ! !
iii
i£'!
ill

ifc’sh •
h'!)‘
Ir'
f:
II
III'
'^iS
iiV
<• <.
-Ul
H/i
,S I
P' •
li
'|!i'
r,
I:
l!‘
'll 1
•:,iTji 1^1
,.l!	;
S:'v33 '■:
yLki'.
“!iK
214
LETTERS.
LETTER XLVI.
CLARISSA TO LADY HARRIET,
O
H my God! my dear Harriet, I was eafy and merry, at a time when I was threatened with the greateft misfortune that could poffibly happen to me. At reading our mother’s letter, which informed me of your dangerous fituation, I was as greatly fhocked, as I Iliould have been to have Seen you in fuch extreme danger. Do not imagine, my fears and anguhh were for yourfelf; no j death feems to me ftripped of all its horrors, when I have rea-fon to think it only the beginning of a better life j it was for myfelf I wept, for Mr. Balfour, for iis all. My thankfgivings to the Lord, for his goodnefs in preferving a perfon fo dear to me, have been proportionable to the value I fet on
the favour he has beftowed. This is telling you, that I never returned thanks fo heartily before. I was exatSfly in the fame fituation, when you acquainted me with my mother’s refurreftion, I think thefe two Sentences exprefs every thing. You are fenfible I am quite a novice in thefe matters j I had never feen any body in your fituation till I came here ; and our women get through it k> eafily, that I was deceived with
refpeft
^ 1:
.U'
LETTERS.
215
fefpecfc to what, you had to Suffer. Ah ! if you are ever again in the fame way, come, come, my dear lifter, come and partake the benediction which God fhowers down here on the
daughters of Eve; they only Suffer enough to fulfil the menace of the Almighty. Does he
moderate their pains in proportion to the inno-
cence of their lives ? They would have Suffered
nothing in the terreftrial paradife, and this place recalls the idea of it; for to eat our bread vvith
the Sweat of our brow, to us Seems lefs an evil, than a remedy againil vice, wearinefs, and discontent, the confequences of an idle luxurious life. My mother-in-law, w'ho is much better fkilled in theSe matters than our mother, affures
me, that I fhall have an eaSy and happy delivery ; and I rely on her promiSes.
The Spring begins to reftore to our labourers
all their former a6fivity : the hamlet of chriftian
union Seems to rife above the earth ; the walls
only were built; and in a week, almoft every thing has been nearly finifhed. The hamlet of
the family is begun, which is the name we have
given to that which is to be built half way be-
tween the farm and our gentlemens houfes, ex-aSlIy where our parifh ends. If God gives a
hlefling to our intentions. Soon this vaft terri-
tory,
!iM
'ill
Im
111
I
I !
! 11
Si
tii
' I
i'!'
ii "
' . ?
' ' 1!
\ i
11 •
I ):
l-b;
■' * I
' I
IL : 11 L
:: J
t :
hi
I’.-l
1 ■ I '
I 1
i I,'I
b 'i'i;
I 'I
1: •i;:i
S I '
!: li:
Id
<1
I	I!;lI
L Ol I J
II	S
I \

!!■: ;
I :,
• 111

! ' ‘t
\ I '
i ,
I
(■ i
: 1 ,i

!• .
ibii
i'
• . ■; 1
bi ‘ i
?■ ; )''■ i
Ailfi
!l |.

! V ■
\
■F
ir-
ai6
LETTERS
' I
. .ri


I’','.
«.
t ‘.
11.
1 : • 1

ic<
\
M.
t*/
T
i-M
: t
i-'t
1
■i'o
•V ;
tory, on which not a Single houfe could be feen, will become one continued village.: we may labour a great while before we want land, and the ov^erplus of our hands will produce manu-faCtures. A great lord, to whom I propofe to pay my refpeQis foon, pofleffes here an eftate four leagues in circumference, and Sacrifices this great extent of ground, to the pleafure of coming here to hunt ten or twelve times in the autumn. What a fhame! This land might maintain Several thoufand men, and is made the dw'elling place of a thoufand hares, which, not Satisfied with this vafi; pofiTeflion, defiroy and ravage every thing, which has the misfortune to be planted or cultivated on the frontiers of their empire. The unhappy peafant, almoft dif-tradfed to fee the hopes of his harvefl, and the fruits of a whole year’s labour defiroyed in a moment, muft Scifle his fighs and complaints, left he Ihould be taken up by the game-keepers; but if he Should unfortunately kill one of thefe hares, the galleys are talked of. What tyranny! Surely thefe lords, who Set So little value on whatever does not relate to themfelves, mult have bowels of iron. Do they imagine that all nature Ihould labour for them alone! Thefe are, fay they gravely, the prerogatives of our
birth and fortune. What dreadful and horrid
pre-
H
Hi
LETTERS.
217
rogatives are thefe, which give a right to be cruel, barbarous, and unjuft ! Oh, I will, if
neceflary, throw myfelf at the feet of this man
and fay to him :
Sir, I come to propofe to you a pleafure wor-
thy of a nobleman, of a king, in return for
the trifling amufement which this iramenfe
warren procures you; you divert yourfelf wdtb.
feeing your hares among the bullies ; permit me
to change the Scene, to diverSify the pidlure, to
augment your glory, and even your revenue
Confine your hares into any fixed compafs you
pleafe, if you cannot refolve to part with them
entirely ; we will fence them in if you require
it; leave us the refidue of this uncultivated
iand; fuffer us to employ our Sweat and labour, to render it fertile. You Shall Soon fee
rife from the earth a new race, who fliall lifp out your name which their parents have taught them to bleSs, You fliall be the father of
thefe new families, who will owe their exis-
tence to you : you will fee them increaSe be-
fore your eyes ; they will multiply your vafSels
and thofe of your children. I afk this favour
in the name of the Moft High, who has not
created the earth for the pleafure of Some few, but for the ufe of mankind in general. VoL. II.	L	A colony
' M
; j
' ft;
!: M
!b‘
I'
I ,ii
I'll
; I
i I
». i;
I ■ .!
' t
ft!
!1‘-' * i »
!hi;
I
' i
i '!•
! ’'
!i i

d'
! .
! Ml', I .
11
I' ft
1 : ;
I Mil
!iii
I
I I L
\-'
11
I ::! 1
H:
1 |M
I ' i

11;
’ I
t :
(I •

: I •
(1
■ilii
:i!
1 '
• 1
;! I
T:
'll
IT
i: '
'i!
n:
It.
' t ... '
I
1 T ' •
ift!
hii
, !
I' i
3
t 71

it
f t'
' ii
2I§
L E T TER S.
A colony planted in the middle of the plain,
will proclaim to future ages, that Lord fuch an
one, ennobled as much by his virtues as hh birth, was capable cf facrincing one of his pleasures for the benefit of mankind. If this effort
Seems difficult and painful to you, you will partake the heroic glory of triumphing over your-felf. All eyes are fixed on you : how many perfons who are your inferiours, will think themfelves obliged to follow your example! I
behold, on all fides, the flames devour thefe
ufelefs plants : and the earth enriched with their cinders, produce the more plentiful crops, on
account of its having been always uncultivated.
We are eager to find iflands in the new world
at a great expence, France is depopulated to
people thefe climates ; and we have, in the very centre of the kingdom, defert places which might be rendered fertile. What new Sources of plen-
ty does your example open to your country! Prefer the glory of a legiflator, of a creator, to
ufe the expreffion, to that of a great and powerful man, of a conqueror, of a rich man. Re-
deem your fins by this good work ; at the hour
of death, when every thing leaves you, it will
be your confolation and joy, and the foundation
of your hope.
Do
ii t
i 1-

Tb E T T E R S.
Do you think, my dear, there can exift a being hard hearted enough to reSift thefe juft confiderations ? For my part, I cannot believe it; and I (hould think myfelf criminal, if I. refifted the impulfe which moves me to prompt him to this good work. Adieu, my dear Harriet, I leave off to read the account my huSband has promised you, which he has juft fin idled ; tho’ I have Seen it by bits, I am very defirous of revifing it altogether: it is a true confedion,

[acquaint you beforehand.
c
•4
L2
LETTER
:ri-l
i!>’
t'
f'* ;
I
If'
Itv
I
I

I
rti
fii
t ■/:
•|V’
K
3>?:
C5-
l‘:i
I?'
H?

•h'

,iC h* ' lit-R
HSil
M ■
t
JJi


IL
l.i
I.


i 1
!'■
j{''
II
'S
h
k
“I
R.
liX. r ' 'C.
I
i:

1

h
T.
i.i
Ir
>'F
!il
‘I '

i|i-
IS^i.
,i:
220
LETTERS.
LETTER XLVII.
From the Baron DAS T IE to Lady HARRIET,
Madam,
WH11/ E I only viewed it at a diftance,
I imao;ined I had courage fufficient to
perforin the painful talk which you impofed on me. At the time of execution, my courage fails me. I pretend to your friendfhip, to your
efteem ; and how can I flatter myfelf ever to pof-fefs either, when I have (hewn you how little I
deferve thefe Sentiments ? In facf, if I had this
confeiSion to write over again, I am afraid I
(hould be guilty of palliating fome circumftances,
that I might appear lefs culpable to you. How-
ever great my faults have been, I neverfhelefs
think them cancelled, if it is fufficient to have
bewailed them with tears of blood, to ufe the expreffion. No, nothing can furpafs my repentance. God feems to have forgot them, madam ; and I flatter myfelf, you will not remember them, and puniflh me for my obedience. Before I can proceed to this humiliating confeflion, I am forced to refer to the time which preceded my exiftence. What aggravates my fault is, my fcorn and contempt of the example and
counfel
I
I.
'.n:
,»k.
H! ■
LETTERS.
f
221
counfel of a mother, who has always imitated the virtues of her anceftors ; I am perhaps the iirft of my family, who, for a long feries of ages, has fhewn himfelf unworthy of the blood from whence’ he fprung.
The Hijiory of the Baron D’A S TIE.
M Y anceftors did not always live in fuch poverty as that in which my great grandfather left his fon ; but rliis poverty proceeded from a glorious caufe. Since it was owing to his loyalty to his king, which he prefervec! at a time when every one embraced the party which coincided beft with his int^refts, and this alone caufed the ruin of his eftate. My grandfather finding it out of his power to maintain himfelf in the fer-vice, confined his whole ambition to cultivate alternatively his little eftate, the fciences, and his only daughter’s education, whofe mother died- as foon as fhe was born. I Snali nor take notice that fhe was a perfedt beauty ; I hope, madam, you will be a judge of it fome time or other yourfelf. Notwithftanding her trouble and laborious employments, fhe yet preferves fo great a Share, that few women are to be compared to her, T'his beauty may be confi-dered as the fource of all her misfortunes, if
L 3	that
i
f
' t
ii

: *
!|t

2^12
LETTERS.
that name may be given to accidents, which have conduiSted her to perfeQ:ion and happinefs: fhe lived tranquilly in retirement and poverty, when the arriere ban was publidied to affembk the nobility.
Fancy, madam, the extreme mifery of a man, who has no more to fubfift himfelf and daughter on than Seven guineas a year, and who could not even depend upon that without procuring it by the Sweat of his brow, and alTiduous labour. Such was my grandfather’s lituation. He might have found a reSource in the poverty even of his neighbours ; he was adored in the village; and there were none but would have looked on his acceptance of a part of their neceffaries, as a favour done them : he received, with thankful-nefs, the lincere offers of theSe poor people, without being tempted to take an advantage of them : his maxim was, that a real gentleman fhould beftow with pleaSure, but never receive, except when the refuSal of a favour might endanger his life. The Sale of his trifling patrimony might pay his daughter’s penfion in a convent, and fit himfelf out to Serve his mafter; he therefore reSolved to Sacrifice it. Alas I this resource failed him, and being obliged to appear at Bourdeaux without delay, he was forced to
pre-
E E T T E R S.
223
prefent himfelf there in the equipage of a beggar. Being repulfed at the door of the intendant’s office, he had the utmoft difficulty to get to the intendant’s antichainber, wh\>, coming out of his apartment, enquired of his Servants why they Suffered that wretch to come up : then turning towards him. Said, What do you want, honeft man ? I have appeared to the Summons, replied my grandfather, firmly. My name is D. B. and I come to offer my king the remains of a blood, accuftomed for many ages to be fpilt for' its country. This name was too well known not to ftrike the intendant; he Saluted my grandfather, begged pardon for his miftake, took-
him by the hand, conduifed him into his clofet, and generoufly offered him his purfe, to equip himfelf in a more decent manner. Sir, replied my grandfather, I do not refufe your alSiftance;
I have fought a refource from the Sale of my very Small patrimony, but not finding an oppor- -tunity to difpofe of it, I am deSirous of mortgaging it; and fhall regard, as an effential fer- -vice, the acquisition you make of it: on this condition, I thankfully receive your generous offer. You are fenfible, a gentleman cannot, with decency, receive favours but from his king.
It is from him.that I make you this offer, replied the intendant, amazed at his difinterefted-
/
L T
nefs.
1
i

l< I
lii
k
f]'
1^:



i;
224
LETTERS.
nefs. Yet, in compliance with your delicacy, I undertake to difpofe of your eftate for you very advantageoully ; in the mean while, I hope you will accept of my houfe and table. Permit
me to introduce you to my wife; (he knows how to honour virtue, under whatever form it
appears ; do me the favour to accompany me to
her apartment.
Haughtinefs is the only refource of a noble mind, when endeavours are ufed to crufli it.
When we ceafe trying to humiliate it, a noble
mind returns to its natural ftate, and thinks it a
duty to return more politenefs than has been received ; for pride is a neceflary ingredient, when properly applied. My grandfather therefore laid afide his haughtinefs which he had alTumed, to
Ijupply the place of an equipage Suitable to his birth : and replied to the intendant’s politenefs, hke a perfon who was not born in the ftation in which he appeared to be, and Seemed neither humbled nor elevated at being placed at his table in fuch an indifferent drefs. The inten-
dant’s wife was a lady of extraordinary merit j
and having learnt that Mr. D. B. had left be-
hind in his cottage a daughter about fifteen
years of age, defired, as a favour, he would permit her to take care of her at her own houfe,
during
!
LETTERS.
I25
during his abfence : Ihe Soon loved this young lady as well as if Ihe had been her own daughter. The peace, which Soon followed, permitting the gentlemen who were alTembled for the arriere ban to return home, Ihe prevailed on my
grandfather to leave his daughter in her care ; and, as his expences at Bourdeaux had almoii confumed the whole of his little fortune, the intendant procured him a gratification from
court, which enabled him to augment it to its
prefent value
It was at this intendant’s houfe, that the
baron D’Aftie faw my mother ; he enjoyed a for-
tune which enabled him to difregard the want
of one in a wife, and thought himfelf happy to
obtain her hand. I was the only fruit of this
marriage j and my mother, who by the change of her condition did not forget the great princi-
ples of virtue Ihe had imbibed in her youth, would not trull to any one the care of inculcating them in me. I loll my father when I was enter-
ing my ninth year; and, as there never was a more tender father or hulband, none was ever
more regretted. My grandfather died foon after,, and thefe fucceflive lolfes were in danger of canf-
ing another. Maternal love, to ufe the exprelfi-
on, performed a miracle in my favour, and with-
L5	held


■ ii
11'
lldi
a
> •!
< t
l|
I I
, Ii
1
Ii
o. u . 1»
id
: bi
'il
■■(hi

, I
i ‘ ’ c
i I«
I'

01"

226
LETTERS.
held the foul of my mother, which was almoft on the wing to follow what was moft dear to her in this world.
Refolved to furmount in my favour, her ex. cellive grief, madam D’Aftie renounced every thing which might take her attention from the care fhe propofed to bellow on me ; and retired to a very fine eftate of my father’s, where fhe propofed to pafs the remainder of her days in retirement, when a piece of injuflice, which could not be forefeen, obliged her to return to the world.
A fteward who had lived eighteen years in my grandfather’s fervice, by my father’s fide, produced, of a fudden, an account, by which his mailer owed him near three thoufand pounds, money advanced at different times. As the debt, which he produced, bore interell, it a-mounted to double the firll mentioned fum; and he infilled on being paid the whole. It ■was notorioully clear that the deed, on which this man founded his demand, was a forgery; it was, however, necelfary to convi(£l him of this, and commence a fuit: whatever averfion my mother had for going to law, Ihe was my guardian, and could not in confcience abandon
my
LETTERS.
227
my intereft ; fhe, therefore, courageoufly entered
into this career. So thorny, and difagreeable to
a perfon of her difpofition. To heighten the
misfortune, my deceafed father had Several re-
lations and friends in the parliament of Bour-
deaux ; they were excepted againft, by our ad- -
verfaries; and the caufe was moved to the par-
liament of Tholoufe; where, after three years
proceedings, in fpite of our utmoft endeavours
to convidl our adverfary of forgery j the judges, though Satisfied themfelves of the juftice of our caufe, were, at length, obliged to give judgment againft us, according to the letter of the law j and we loft our Suit with cofts. .
I had accompanied my mother to Tholoufe; and was witnefs of the incredible trouble this un-
happy alfair gave her. I fet up a Ihout of joy, when I faw it finilhed; preferring the poverty to which we were afiout to be reduced, to the
fear of her ruining her health, which I valued beyond all riches. It was to her I was indebted for this fortitude, fhe had herfelf fet me the ex-
ample. She uttered no complaints againft her judges ; nor did a Angle reproach, againft the
God
ravilhers of my fortune^ efcape her lips, knows, fays fhe, embracing me, what is beft for you i think, without hesitation, my fon,
that
I
! id
1


ill
; ■(
Ml
11.
(*
I
!i
Lllr’
.M
I.■ I !!•
ii!
Hi
mi:

* 1
!!!t
Hi
:h
ii
!0
> I ■'!. ; I
I c '

• . i‘ 1. dJ ;
' I ’ I .
. l
' r I
II:
1; I
, , .
I .

1 i
lO

b!,
oil
; I
Hi
228
LETTERS.
that you would have made a bad ufe of what you have loft 5 the chriftian fortitude he infpires us with, is infinitely more valuable than the greateft treafures. He gives us more than he has taken away, and, thefe are bleftings, which are beyond the reach of the injuftice of man. He reftores us to the humble retired induftrious life of our anceftors j and, though he is the author of our patience and fubmifllon, he will recompenfe us an hundred fold, even in this life, if conSiftent with his glory and our fal-vation.
1
0
c
If
if
V'
ill'
i
(i;!
h’
1^1
•1;^
k
Si
• o .
i*‘ '
i:!
Oh ! truly heroick woman, you were then inspired. God, by your mouth, declared the in-cftimable bleflxngs he defigned me ; and which,
■ I fhould_ never have arrived to, by any other way. Yes, madam, to the lofs of this law Suit I owe my Clarifla ; it is, at leaft, the firft origin of my happinefs j but, can I recolledf without horror as it has alfo been, through my fault, the occafion of the ill condudf, which I (hall never ceafe to bewail, during life, though divine mercy has changed the poifori into a remedy. My mother’s courage and tranquillity under fuch an- heavy ftroke, heightened the admiration her beauty had excited. Several lovers paid their addrefles y but, faithful to my father’s
afties.
LETTER S.
229
jlhes, (he was not moved by their advantageous offers, and was preparing for her departure, when Ihe received information of a vifit from her adverfary.
Her firft determination was to refufe to fee him ; and would to God Ihe had kept this re-folution. She reproached herfelf for it, and fearing to preferve the leaft fpark of refentment againft a man whom Ihe had fo much reafon to hate, received him with a politenefs that mull have confounded him. He was accompanied by a girl about two years older than myfelf; Ihe certainly was not a beauty; and, at prefent, when I coolly recollefil the features which Subdued me then, I clearly perceive Ihe was hardly indifferently handfome : at this moment Ihe appeared to me quite charming. You will be allo-nifhed, that a lad not thirteen years of age, Ihould be fufceptible of a tender pallion. Alas, madam ! indifferent to all other blellings, a romance which I had read above a year before, unknown to my mother, had taught me that I had an heart; and, that I could only be happy or miserable thro’ this heart. The paflion I conceived at this time for Rofella, which was the girl’s name, was, perhaps, more the effe<5l of a delire to love, and want of an objedl, than of an imprellionj and, without I had happened
to

li
'll
v\
■‘■‘i
;i t ( '■
h
• ;h'. ■ I
:h! iSi t
*, n I
|1
'' 1.1; ■ < '.i|!
I V'

' i'!
I . I
l!ii
bi'j i>
hh
: i
III
i|,! i-
■S''
■ 1:1
’h!. I M
i' *>

ll!
’ ■ I I l!
: 1!!
lit
■ '•Km'
: :Di:i
I
‘hite
c :
M l
I K .
'III!

Ml’
’ !
H ' ’ ,

1|. ;
il
f I ‘
•lit'
K '1
ib;!];'!!'. 1"' ih
N;' i :
i!io |:tb
!; ' •' In
t.
h . j::li
'i
■ o.

Ml
23*3
LETTERS.
to have read this romance, would doubtlefs have been attended with no confequences. The dif-courfe of her father finilhed what my inclinations had began. Madam, fays he, to my mother, you fee at your feet, the mod: unhappy of mankind ; (and he had, indeed, thrown himfelf at her feet.) My duty to this child, whom I love entirely, has not permitted me to liften to the fentiments of my refpe6Iful attachment to your family. I was a long while filent about the fums that were owing me; and, if I had remained childlefs, I Ihould have rather chofe to die in middling circumftances, than drip the grandfon of my mader, from whom I haye received a thoufand tedimonies of his goodnefs. Judge, madam, of my veneration for his memory, by the propofal which I have the boldnefs to make to you. I know the nature of the de-ceafed Mr. D’Adie’s fortune ; what he has left will fcarcely fuffice to pay what is due to me j and, I cannot think, without trembling, on the fad fate you and your fon are on the point of undergoing. I come to olfer you all the recompense in my power; if you will confent to the marriage of Mr. D’Adie with my daughter, fhe fhall bring him for a fortune, the whole eftate, which a jud decree has deprived him of. I am fenfible die is defeended from an obfeure family;
but,
i.
LETTERS.
^31
but, her charms and fortune give her a right to
except every thing ; and Ihe would already have been placed in a rank fuperiour to what I afk of
you for her, if I had not preferred the delicate
pleafure of making the fortune of my mailer’s grandfon, to the marrying her to a man as rich as Ihe is herfelf, from the cellion of the whole
of my fortune.
During this dilcourfe, my mother’s face was as red as fcarlet, and Ihe felt the utmoft indig-
nation, fo that it was eafy to forefee the anfwer Ilie would make ; and without yet well knowing what palTed in my foul, I could not help trembling at the apprehenf-on of it. She was, however, more
moderate than this wretch could have expelled, fo great was her command of her paflions. Sir,
fays Ihe to him, I wilh the propofal you have
prefumed to make me, had remorfe for its prin-
ciple ; and, had I the power to engage my fon.
to facrifice the eftate, which you unjullly withhold from him, I fhould think this Sacrifice in-
conliderable, if it could obtain you, from God, a Sincere repentance. This wilh, chriftian
charity obliged me to form in your favour. But
the moft cruel extremity Ihall never force me to
confent to an union, which, I think debaling. If you were only of low birth, I could get the
better
11
!i
I '
; I.
. 1
t
l!i
: L
. I 11
<' I
' .u
\ \ * r s

: L:
I' 'I
h L
* I ^
I' *
-b
.11


<«,
i t
«I
!i

1 I
(I i
■lb!
;l'’l
‘!:'i
;	:' : 1'. I •
; NT!,!:
' i.
I '
i I
I • t
,p
11
!, • lie n 1 :!j
, 1 1 I
mil
Oil
232
L E T T E R S.
better of the prejudice which forbids improper alliances, in favour of your generofity, in feek-ing the alliance of my fon, when ruined beyond refource. Do yourfelf juftice. Sir, and fay to yourfelf what I fpare your ears the hearing of. Were you a prince, I would refufe you my fon, if you were capable of a crime which you would repair wkh another. I pray Heaven to pardon you, as I forgive you, I repeat it again j and, it is lefs for my fon’s intereft than your own, that I warn you, that the reftitution you would have made us, does not in the leaft difcharge your confcience from the obligation of doing it in another manner.
You are wanting in refped to your judges,
replied this wretch, raifing himfelf from the ground, with a furious air. You dare accufe them of injuftice, and me of robbery? Tremble for the effeas of my juft refentment; and, fince you rejed my goodnefs, exped'every thing
from my hatred.
Thefe v/ords fufpended the growing inclination I felt for the daughter of fo guilty a father j and, notwithftanding my youth, I know not whether he would have efcaped rhy refentment, if he had not immediately ridded us of his odious
prefence.
LETTERS.
233
prefence. Yet, I effayed to engage my mother
not to confound the daughter, who was inno-
cent, with her guilty father: by the warmth.
with which I defended her, my mother perceived what a rilk I Ihould run, if I faw her
again ; and haftened her delign of removing me
from a place, where my virtue, yet weak, had
been in danger. The new employments, to which I Was forced to Submit, foon weakened
an impreffion, which had only been proportionate to my age; notwithftanding, there always remained a tender remembrance of this
young perfon ; which was, as it were, the feed
of the violent palTion (he infpired me with, in the fequel. I was never able to comprehend her in
the juft contempt which I had for her father.
who forgot nothing he thought capable of doing
iis an injury; and extended to the higheft pitch.
the indignation with which the judges already
beheld him, by the endeavours he ufed to poi
fon the few words my mother had fpoke.
I fhall not repeat what paft during the firft years of our abode in the country ; my dear Clarifla has already acquainted you with it: I (hall only add, I have reafon to be convinced, that the caufe of premature exceffes, is to be fought for, only in the idlenefs, in which, young people
are
!|i
I!
■rfi
■;» r I
1' i
I!:
il
I . '
I'
)!i!l

1'
, I
111
>\ !. • j *
l «!
dii
, I • \
I:
i
't
*	!. n
\ I
I
i!:i
c ' •!
< • ' 1 .
!' '• u
ilbll
ii


< M
..j

:	I
it; !i
II
III
I
'U
; till
I 1!
I T
I ;

; ■ 1!!
I I
I ' i 1 i
, !|-
234
LET T E R S.
are fuffered to remain. I am, unhappily, born-with the moft lively paffions : I had fcarcely time to be fenSible of this, my time was divided between ftudy and labour; I knew no other recreation than the diverSity of my exercifes; a fenfible converfation, or works of charity. A day fo employed, to me feemed fliortj I had not time Sufficient for what I wanted to do; and, to make ufe of a trite expreffion, but which is too true, not to deferve to be preferred before every other: The devil could not have found a moment to tempt me.
If my mother had confulted only her own inclination, Ihe would not have wiffied me any greater happinefs than what I then tailed. In the mean while, Ihe faw' the time draw near, when I Ihould want a eomnanion chofe for me:
k
our village offered to her choice, amiable, dif-creet, virtuous young women ; but, though Ihe was fenSible of the neceffity of facrificing prejudice to my happinefs, fuppoling I had taken a liking to any one of them, Ihe thought it her duty to Spare no pains to prevent fuch a Hep. By inculcating every day, that true nobility
conlilled in virtue alone; Ihe, at the fame time, inlinuated, thatthofe, in whom both thefe
I
advantages were found, could not be too much
refpedled;
LETTERS.
235
rerpe6Ied; that a girl of a good family, had.
generally, a better education than one Sprung from the dregs of the people; that it was the
defign of Providence, for perfons to match them-
felves with their equals ; and that circumftances
which very Seldom happened, were neceflary to
juftify a deviation from this rule. Thefe repeat-
ed lefibns, uttered as if without defign, infenfi-
bly made an impreflion on me, and preferved me from the danger of allying myfelf with any of thofe amongfl: whom I lived, I was, not-
withftanding, in a fituation which did not per-
mit me to expe6l a Suitable alliance; my mother,
therefore, thought it her duty to endeavour to
change it.
My fon, fays Ihe, when I had compleated my
eighteenth year, you have not feen me murmur in the leafi;, againfi: the order of Providence,
I even
when it configned us to this Solitude, own, that hardly any condition of life, would to me be preferable to this which you lead here; and that, if it belonged to me, to defire or choofe one for you, I fliould confine my whole ambition to this.
But, as it is requifite, that God alone fliould place us according to his defigns, I fhould be afraid of encroaching on his right.
You muft
by keeping you longer with me.
found

!•
!i
I
ill
!
i'
I L
it!
L?
ill
' I ' 4
• j
: 1!
I
•' I
) ;


■ I, >
' {'I !
((!!
! I
■ .

1!’
!l 'll
i
■ii
^!ii ,. •(
I' '1
•I
I '	‘ »
I Ml
i '-f I
' f	*
li
: I' '
J ■
1 • •	';
ii;
' '!! t
; III!
, I
!i;

j ; I
'1
l! i

i'ii
iilLi

iit:
iih ii

236
LETTERS.
found your o\vn heart, in order to find its determinate refolution. I Saved Some jewels from the wreck of our fortune; which I fold for a thousand crowns, and have placed this fum in the hands of a merchant at Bourdeaux. The capital, at prefent, amounts to Something more; and, I have deftined this fum towards finifiiing your education. If you have any particular inclination, either for the army or the gown, I Shall conSider this inclination, as the beginning of your vocation, and will Sacrifice every thing, to put you in a condition to follow it. Take eight days to coniider of what I propofe ; con-fult with Mr. Duboc the younger; he thoroughly knows your difpofition; I Shall blindly fubfcribe to whatever you determine upon together ; and, on my part, Ihall pray to the Lord to enlighten you.
I obeyed my mother; and after having well weighed the' duties of every ftate, which might be proper for me, I found none more excellent, or more noble, than that in which God had placed me. To Soften the manners of thefe fimple men; who, in return for the bread, with which they furnifli the ungrateful citizens, are defpifed by them as vile flaves; to learn them to fanftify their poverty and their labours;
to
LETTERS.
237
I applaud. Said my mother, the defign
to perform to them the refpe^Iable oBices of a father, comforter, Supporter, friend, and peace maker: can I afpire to a more excellent calling ?
you have to finilh your days in the laudable employments, in which you have already paft tht early part of your life j but, my dear child, you know no other condition than this ; perhaps, your difguft for others is only founded on your ignorance of the advantages they may procure you. To remove all my doubts on this head, I think it neceffary that you Ihould try fome other way of life. Among my remaining friends at Bourdeaux, I reckon a lawyer of undoubted probity. His delicacy has not Suffered him to pufh his fortune fo far as moft part of his brethren j befides, being burdened' with a numerous family, necellity, as well as inclination, has engaged him to Separate himfelf from'the great world, where one is expofed to an expence, which equally impairs our Salvation, health, and fortune; fo that there your innocence and morals will be Safe. I arti told he has Several very amiable daughters; I fhould be charmed if your heart chofe one of them. During this year you fhall try your inclination for the bar. If you perfevere in preferring your firfl: way of life,
you fhall return with the companion of your life,
1
and
u
i
w
n
!l
23?
LETTERS.
and acquire a new means of Serving our poor, by preventing difputes, that may arife, and by deciding between them, conformable to th® Jaws of this province, which you fhall particularly ftudy. But, if your inclination alters, I fhall fpare nothing to Support you in the pro-fellion you wilh to purfue, and, in which, I hope to fee you make a rapid progrefs, provided you continue to fear and Serve the Lord. Remember frequently thefe words of the prophet: Unlefs the Lord buildeth the houfe, it fhall not ftand firmly. Let him then be the archite6l of your ftate, whatever it be. Depend more on his afliftance, than on your own talents and application ; he never abandons thofe who put their trull in him ; and, as beft Suits his defigns, extends or contrails their lights.
You will, doubtlefs, be Surprized at the hopes my mother entertained of feeing me an able lawyer, from my having negle<5led to inform you, that I had employed the two years I remained at Tholoufe, in purfuing my fludies j and that, wheil I left this city, I wrote, and fpoke Latin, as fluently as my native language.
I was not left to the common methods. An able man, who, willingly complied with my
mother’s ideas, Shortened my labour vaftly.
She
P7
LETTERS.
2^39
to follow the carriage on horfeback.
She efteemed learning ; yet, frequently faid, flie would chearfully have given up a knowledge of languages ; if, to acquire this accomplilhment, I muft have rifked my morals, and been expofed to the contagion of colleges. Mr. Duboc finifh-ed my education ; and few boys of my age had made fo great a progrefs. Alas ! madam, I had •made but little, in the fcience of Sciences, the art of conquerring myfelf; you will form a better judgment of this, by the fequel.
My departure was fixed for the day appointed for carrying our goods to Bourdeaux, and I was
Being
tired of this flow pace, I told our women I would go on before, and wait for them at the inn to return their horfe. I had breakfafted in the carriage, and did not propofe flopping a-,gain till I arrived at Bourdeaux. About three miles from this town, I felt fuch an exceffive hunger, that, not being able to reSift it, I flopped at an hedge alehoufe to take a little refrefh-ment. 1 was going to mount my horfe again, when a very handfome chaife flopped at the door, to give the miflrefs of the houfe a little parcel, which the poflillionOiad undertaken to deliver to her. Curiofity oecafioned me to look at the lady who was in the chaife, and, though
at
! J



L
O
I •’
I I
240
LETTERS.
at the fight of her, Ifelt an emotion, of which, I could not conceive the caufe; in all probability, this rencounter would have been attended with no confequences, if this lady, viewing me ear-neflly in her turn, had not endeavoured to re-colledl my features. Lefs timid than me. She afked me, in a tone of voice which charmed me, whether fhe was miftaken, in fancying file had feen me before. I don’t remember to have ever had that honour, madam, replied I j yet, I can’t help thinking, your features are not entirely unknown to me; and, if I might believe an emotion, which I never felt but once——Ah ! you are the baron D’Aftie, replied fhe, with tranfport: the place we are in at prefent, is improper for a recollection of one another; but, my houfe is but a very little way off; do me the honour to accompany me there, that we may explain to, each other, many cir-cumftances of confequence to us both.
You, doubtlefs, find me very weak, madam ! I thought at this moment of being only polite; or rather, I did not think at all; the emotions of my heart had fufpended all the functions of my mind ; I was impelled away. Subdued, and without anfwering a fingle word, I ftepped into the chaife, the door of which, this lady had
ordered
letters
241
ordered her fervant to open, and ride my horfe ; and, at the fame time, as if fhe had been afraid I Ihould efcape, bid her coachman make all polTible expedition. Scarcely was I placed by this fyren’s fide, than I felt a tremor, which feemed a prefage of my future misfortunes ; and I do not know whether I fhould not have remained in a ftupid Silence, if (he had not began with reproaching me, for having fo entirely forgot her, as not to recoIle£h her name. Some vague words void of meaning, were all my anfwer. I arrived at her houfe, got out of the
cliaife, and prefented her my hand, to afTift her in getting out, as it were mechanically. I endeavoured to forget the remembrance of this name, which fhe accufed me of having forgot; and, not being able to fucceed therein, afked myfelf, by what enchantment I found myfelf in company with the daughter of my molt cruel enemy; for you certainly guefs, madam, that it was Rofella, whofe fortune and hand had been offered me, whom I met. She was toe experienced, to be miftaken with refpe6f to the caufe of my confuSion; and, however flattering for her charms, fought to diminifh it. What fhall I fay.? My talents and remorfe were unequal to a palTion, which had got fuch poffeflion of my heart, as to deprive me even of VoL. II.	M	the
'th
T1.1' 1- 5; b
I 'i '!!
i!!
\\
itnii iliii
f * . *
' I . •
\ «
liiii'
I :hi
'll II: '
I*:
i .
:!
. !i
HI
Ml
» I
111
} 1
li
1
1
ip
[I '•
IM
U

242
LETTERS.
the defire of attempting to fubdue it: (hutting my eyes againft the abyfs into which I was about to plunge myfelf, I forgot every thing which religion, honour, and filial tendernefs, ought to have objedted againft a perfon who did not even endeavour to make me purchafe her defeat. The new Rinaldo of this dangerous Ar-inida, I loft at the fight of her the remembrance of the whole world. She at length recalled me to
f
myfelf, by faying, we are notin fafety here longer than to-morrow; your mother will not delay making an exadt fearch after you. I am too well known at the place where you met me, to flatter myfelf with the polfibility of efcaping her enquiries ; I (hall lofe you, and this will break my heart. Ah! replied I, with tranfport, who could tear you from my arms ? I would die in your prefence, before I would futFer myfelf to be feparated from you. Your age, fays (he, Still fubjedls you to her tyrannic yoke; I know her implacable hatred to me, and what have I not done to appeafe it ? My father, on his death-bed, commanded me to make you a Second offer of my hand and fortune ; (he rejedled both. Alas ! of what does (he accufe me ? Have I been a party in the persecution which you have Suffered ? Have I not done all in my power to repair the injury ? Doubt not but (he will foon be
acquainted
LETTERS.
243
acquainted with the vifit, that you have made me: afuperior order wrill Separate us; and, who can tell how far She will carry her hatred ? I will not difguife from you the dangers to which my in-confiderate blind paffion for you expofes me. I am older than you, I have Solicited your hand j I (hall be accufed of having Seduced you; and, if grief for the lofs of you, (hould not finifh my wretched life, I (hall be in danger of lofing it on a Scaffold j I (hall be accufed of a rape.
Ah ! I would perhh a thoufand times. Sooner than expofe you to the leaft danger, faid L fpeak, my dear Rofella, I am ready to follow you to the fartheft part of the univerfe. Let us feek an afylum, in which I may give you the quality of my wife; my mother’s tendernefs for • me will prevail over her averfion for the daughter of her enemy. But, if fhe remains inflexible, we will wait patiently in a foreign country,
till the time when the law gives me a right to difpofe of myfelf. But, alas! ought you to receive no other fruits of my tendernefs, than the cruel neceffity of banifhing yourfelf ?
We do not defcend gradually into the abyfs of guilt, as you perceive, madam 5 we roll therein with a Surprizing rapidity. What a change had
M 2	twenty-
!ii
1!
I '•
i
I’ll'i
: h

. 1 ti
i
u
Ti
I!
ii!
V
244
L E T T E R S.
twenty-four hours made in my inclinations i I am aftonifhed I did not die with frisht, to find myfelf in itich a (hort fpace of time fo unlike my-
felf. Alas! the kind of intoxication into which
I was fallen, fo ftupified rny fenfes at firfl, that I felt but little remorfe. But, I payed dear, in thefequel, for this criminal felicity, which gave me then too much pleafure to endeavour to undeceive myfelf; the fatal dream lafted but a
. lliort time, and my awaking was terrible.
1
Rofella, lince her father’s death, had lived in the mod Scandalous debauchery. This wretched ufurper of my fortune, had in a few years dif-lipated the greateft part thereof: his daughter, brought up in luxury and pleafure, could not refolve to renounce it; and had fought a refource in libertinism. At the time fhe met me, Ihe had juft received advice, that the father of a young fellow, whom fhe had ruined, had obtained an order to confine her: fhe was, therefore, determined to quit the kingdom ; and, was charmed to find a man who was willing to attend her. Nevertheless, fhe loved me at this moment, as well as a woman of her charadler is capable of loving: but, the Sequel Showed, that her ungenerous foul, was capable of Sacrificing every
thing to eafe and luxury. Poor, blind wretch
that
L E .DT E R S.
245
that I was ! I looked on her propofal to abandon
every thing for the fake of following me, as a
proof of the rnoft perfedl: love ; and, if I had then
had it in my power to have difpofed of a crown, I (hould have efteemed its pofSeliion only, as it gave me an opportunity of throwing it at her feet.
Our departure was fixed for the following night, the time when we fuppofed my mother would firfi; have an account of my flight; and, though I forefaw the cruel pains, this tender mother would fufl'er, I had the barbarous
colirage to ftifle the cries of nature j and, fet out, without endeavouring to moderate her grief, by giving her hopes of feeing me again fome time or other. Rofella had already taken mea-fures to go to England ; and procured paflports for herfelf and fervants under fidfitious names ;
yet I have learnt, fince my return, that we fhould not have efcaped the vigilance of the gentleman who had obtained the order for her confine-
ment, if he had not thought it more advan-
tageous for his fon, to let her quit the kingdom ;
fo that we met with no difficulty. We pafled
the night in packing up goods ; this wretch, not
content with leaving considerable debts un-
paid, had the bafenefs to ftrip the houfe of its beft furniture ; fuch as India hangings, bed fur-
window curtains, and feather beds.
mture,
M 3
I was

\
! i
, . I
li
i:
!!
I';
M
I (
'	:! I'
i
246
LETTERS.
I was innocently an accomplice in this robbery ’; I was ignorant that the houfe to which (he conducted me, had been hired ready furnilhed; but
my ignorance in this refpeCt, did not in my opinion, exempt me from the neceflity of making a reftitution : and, my firft care, as foon as God opened my eyes, was to entreat my mother to employ, for this purpofe, the money (he had placed out for my ufe. Permit me to throw a veil over the remainder of my error ; I pafled fix months at London quite intoxicated with a pafiion, which fo engrofi'ed my attention, that I was incapable of thinking of any thing except my love. At quitting Bourdeaux, Ro-fella made me promife to marry her when we came to London, and I regarded this engagement as the feal ©f my happinefs. Heaven, which was willing to fave me at the time when I took every ftep to ruin myfelf, did not permit me to confummate my ruin, by an alliance with this deteftable wretch. She eluded, under fe-veral pretences, the offers I frequently made her on this head; (he, doubtlefs, already premeditated the horrid treachery (he was afterwards guilty of; and was afraid of giving me a. power over her, which I might claim on fome future occafion. As her will was a facred order to me, I thought, as (he endeavoured to make me believe, that her averfion for the in-
LETTERS.
247
diflbluble tie, proceeded from the delicacy of her paffion j fhe feared, Ihe faid, left marriage fhould prove the tomb of my love, and net all my proteftations could chear her up againft the fear of my coldnefs, which would certainly be her death. Had I been Ids blind, I fhould have perceived in her the fymp-toms of an inconftancy, which fhe pretended to fear from me j fhe often found pretences for going out without me j the decreafe of our ftock, Ihe faid, laid her under a neceftity of cultivating an acquaintance withfomeBourdeaux merchants who were fettled at London, through whofe means fhe hoped to procure feme part of her rents; fhe every day brought me good news on this fubje£l j and at laft, told me, that one of thefe merchants would advance her a considerable fum. This gentleman was in the country, about feven miles from London ; fhe had acquainted him of her marriage, and he required a receipt from under my hand for the money. We refolved, therefore, to wait on him the next day. In the night, Rofella complaisted of a violent cholic, and could not get a wink of fleep. Alarmed at her illnefs, I conjured her to put off the journey ; fhe told me, in the morning, that fhe found herfelf Scarcely able to undertake it, though her pains were abated,
M 4.	and

H
if
III
i.‘:i
I
ill I ; I
II !
T'
t ‘ I
! i
:|i!;
I, 'I '
1!-il
HI 11' I
i:l!
11
'1.
iii
ii
!H
11
>• ’
i! 'i! I!!! '{j be
; f!
.1!
I:
i!i
: I i' b I
Cllli,
I'Ll'
f
L E T T E R S.
and that Ihe was So fatigued as to require red; yet, added (he, it is of the utmoft confequence to us, not to let this affair cool, and I will at all events endeavour to go, unlefs you will yourfelf carry an excufe to him ; I will give you a note to acquaint him of the accident that has happened to me, and will write a receipt for the fum he is to pay, which he expedls you Ihould hgnalfo. I made no other objections to Rofeila about this journey, than what her condition furnifhed, and the uneaiinefs I fhould be in to leave her to the care of a Servant only. She repeated fo often, that file was quite recovered, except the fatigue, that I agreed to leave her alone, provided Ihe gave me her word to fend an exprefs after me, if (he found the lead return of her diforder.
I confefs, madam, I am Shocked and humbled at the corruption cf the human heart, when I recolleS; the circumftances of the treachery, of which I was going to be the viClim. I had juft given this infamous creature proofs of the utmoft tendernefs; I had been more dead than alive. It the idea only of the pain lire pretended to have felt. My parting with' her was fo tender ! How was it poffible for her not to be affeCIed with it r Mow could (lie have the barbarity

Hi
LETTERS.
2AQ
barity to abandon me to the emotions of defpair, to which ihe muft think I Ihould become a prey ? But, why be aftonilhed at the terrible depravation of an heart abandoned to lin ? Was I myfelf, lefs culpable than Rofella, who had racked the heart of my tender mother, and for fix months plunged her into the utmoft an-gui(h ? This reflection which I at prefent make, unfortunately did not occur at that time, or it would have fpared me many afflictions, or would have fanCtilied them. But to return to my narrative^--- -
I went to the inn from whence the ftage-coach fet out, which was to carry me to the merchant’s ; and waited there an hour, which to me feemed an age. It was hill worfe when we were upon the road. Our coachman had parcels to deliver at twenty different places, fo that we were two long hours travelling fix miles.
9
Being at lafl: arrived at Brentford, our coachman aflced me, w'here 1 would pleafe to be fet
1
down. I fhowed him my direction, which he
t
examined attentively; and then, told me, he had never heard of any fuch people, as the merchant faid he lodged with. • I was therefore obliged to run from door to door with my direction in my hand, Pleafe to take notipe, that this vil-
M 5	lage
!
1
u
1
!i
:»I
ill
! I i
250
LETTERS.
lage is a full mile and an half in length, and that, being obliged to flop continually, I was a great while before I got to the end of it. Wonder at my ftupidity and blindnefs, I had not the lead: fufpicion of the treachery that was intended; and, after being certain there was no other village of this name, I perfuaded myfelf there was fome miftake in the direftion, and that the perfon I wanted, lived in fome place, the name of which refembled this. To heighten my mif-fortune, I faw my fervant arrive, who told me, his miftrefs had fent him to defire me not to ftay dinner, and to return as foon as I had finilhed my bufinefs, becaufe fhe found herfelf worfe. Had I had wings I Ihould have flown to London ; for want of this affiftance, I rode port, and came to town in lefs than an hour. I had the mafter key of the houfe in my pocket, and attempted to open the door, but found it bolted within. I fancied that my fervant had played me this trick; I did not dare knock at the door, for fear of difturbing Rofella j I was, therefore, obliged to walk up and down the ftreet, like a madman, kicking my heels, and curling tfie footman. At lafl: my impatience got the better of me ; I went back to look for my fervant, who was to return in the ftage; the coach was arrived, but no fervant^ he had been fet down at the turnpike.
(r.i
LETTERS.
251
pike. I returned home like a man out of his lenfes; and having knocked in vain Several times, I delired a neighbour to lend me a ladder, to get down into the area. I fly to Rofella’s chamber, find the door open, and the room ftript; that is to fay, of our boxes, deaths, and her toilet. A(k me not what I then became. I was thunder-ftruck, became motionlefs, and doubted not
V
but I had been betrayed. Neverthelefs, there
were moments when I fought another caufe, or what I called my misfortune; and being unwilling to negled any opportunity of clearing up this matter, I went to a (hop a few doors off, to endeavour to get fome information. While I was afking ufelefs queftions, the penny poll man knocked at our door, and the miftrefs
of the houfe calling him back, he gave me the following letter.
Rosella’s Letter to the Baron D’Astie.
I PITY your miftake, my poor baron, and will fhow you that you have not loved an ungrateful perfon, by affording you the means of forgetting me ; for your foolifh paffion might carry you to extremities, for which I Should be forry. I fwear, my dear, I did not deceive you, when I faid I loved you j and you may boaft of having
fixed

1
M!
L
ih
il!
i!ll
; I
li
' • \
' ' 1
*1' ' »h ‘'
ill
t
> ■ ! 1
t i I
. I
I ' ^
':i
: ; (
i f
♦' 1
ijili
!l
f :
‘ > I <
< i
' i!;
I I'
I:
I ;
) I
i. -tt
•dji
i i' 1
• nil

I : '
1::
hi

•;' '! I
ii'
(
i t
iiii'
I I M
, I I
-iliu
' hi
; I
f;
I
. I
lb ’’ '
! ' I
:lil
I :
11 :
'! i'
' I
\
! 1MI •: ■
' : > I i ’ ''Ml
,; t.
25^
LETTERS.
fixed my inconftant difpofition for three whole weeks. After this time, Surfeited with the violence of your fine Sentiments, I endeavoured through pure generofity to difiemble the change of mine. I have diffembled long enough to think myfelf quit with you; but in truth, I was quite tired out, and Should have died of the fpleen, notwithftanding the little interludes I have managed, if I had diffembled any longer. If any thing can confole you, remember that your predecessors have not been fo well treated; and that thofe who Succeed you muSl not ex-pe£t fo much coinplaifance from me. Return and plant cabbages, my dear; it is the only thing I think you fit for. If I had thought you a man capable of furmounting ridiculous prejudices, I might have employed you ufefully for our common intereft; but what could be done with a man of a fcrupulous probity, who has not underfianding enough to comprehend that every thing ought to give place to the neceSTity of enjoying the pleafures of life; and, that every thing which procures them is lawful. Adieu, my dear, take my word for it, you will always be a fool.
Acknowledge, Madam, that I willingly undergo the whole Sliame of my fault. I am
fenfible
LETTERS.
253
feiifible how heartily you will laugh at reading this letter; which I fhould have foftened, had I not rather expofe myfelf to it, than be wanting in the Sincerity I promifed you to obferve. You muft dpubtlefs think that Such an epiftle entirely extinguifhed my love ; it did not Survive this bafe letter a Single minute; indignation and lliame were th« only emotions I felt. I then recollected a thoufand circumftances which ought to have given me an infight into the character of this vile creature ; Ihe had owned that the furniture which Ihe had taken away from Bour-deaux, did not belong to her, and had diverted herfelf with the exclamations of grief of the mif-trefs of the houfe, who, Ihe faid, was avarice
itfelf. She had laughed at my reproaching her with having made me an accomplice in this piece of injullice ; in Short, I found great difficulty to juftify her to myfelf on Several other occalions, wherein I discovered that Ihe had no principle. As Ihe was extremely giddy headed, I fancied her heart had no Share in this diScourSe ; that it was a conSequence of the bad education Ihe had received, and that it would be an eaSy matter to reCtify her Sentiments. Her letter convinced me that her morals were depraved and corrupted beyond all probability of amendment; and, I returned thanks to Heaven, for having
ridded
di
i I
;i
t:
!'i
f
‘ -
' 11 11
tii
i;

\ \
I
i!
!
254
LETTERS.
ridded me, in Spite of myfelf, of fuch a- danger ous creature.
I had only a moment to make thefe different refledfions; for Scarcely had I time to read my letter, before three men, who were loiterins about, came up to me ; and one of them tap-ped me on the fhoulder, and told me, that
4
he arrefled me by the king’s order. I only underftood thefe few words, to which he added a great many more, which I did not in the lea ft comprehend, though the charitable fhop-keeper endeavoured to explain them to me. At laft, a gentleman came who fpoke both languages ; he told me, that I was arrefted at the Suit of the landlord where we lodged, to whom a quarter’s rent was due ; and that the man afked me, whether I chofe to pay the debt, or give bail; and offered to keep me at his own houfe a few days, till I had acquainted my friends with the affair, and could procure bail.
I returned him thanks for this offer, his motive for which I was ignorant of j and at the fame time acquainted him, that I Should not be any better able to pay the debt, or give Security in a week’s time, than at prefent, lince
every
LETTERS.
255
every thing in the world had been taken from
me, except the cloaths on my back; and that
being a foreigner, I had no acquaintance in England. This declaration reftored to thefe people all their cuftomary brutality, which had been fufpended through hopes of getting fome money out of me, during the time I remained at their houfe j for my drefs, which was very genteel, had deceived them, and they imagined I was capable of Spending a great deal of money. The Ihopkeeper and fome neighbours, who had aflembled together, alone feemed touch-
ed with compaflion, and colle61:ed among one
another a guinea for me, which I at firft obfti-
nately refufed; and which he, who Served as
an interpreter for me, forced me to accept, by
telling me, that in prifon I Ihould have nothing
allowed me towards my maintenance: I there-
fore received this alms {for Things ought to be
called by their proper names) and aflured thefe
charitable perfons, that I hoped God in his
goodnefs would enable me to return them what
they fo generoufly lent me; for they were poor people, and this trifling fum was confiderable
with regard to their fituation in life.
The bailiff at the fight of this guinea, made
me an offer of his houfe a Second time, which
my

•i b
’ )•
,! 11 i I
n;

rl :
15' 1
1 •;
t I
: 1
>	<1
l;i
«I I
1 i
1,1
1 '
! I
) ,
' 1 \ ;
I :

. I

1 I
I ' I
I'
I' ■
( ; 1 .
, ; 1
I i
!1
256
LETTERS.
my interpreter difluaded me from accepting, be-caufe I had not more than Sufficient to defray the expences of fuch a place above two days at fartheft : I therefore defired them to conduct me to prifon immediately ; and the bailiffs, to punilh me for having refufed their offer, dragged me away in an ignominious manner, though I made no refiftance, and begged of them to let me have a coach, to Spare me the fhame of being expofed to the eyes of the populace.
My fituation, doubtlefs, appears very terrible to you; yet this was only the prelude to what I was to fuffer. The fame evening detainers were laid againft me to the amount of twenty guineas, by Several different perfons; fo that, reckoning the expences of the arrefts, and the gaol fees, I found myfelf a prifoner for . forty guineas, without the lead hopes of being able to pay my debts; and with great propriety might have faid, on entering the prifon, in ■. facula faculorum. You will be Surprized that : I did not think of imploring my mother’s af-iiftance. I confefs, madam, I Ihould have preferred death, to the Ihame of letting her know the extremity I was reduced to through my folly. An haughty obftinacy perfuaded me, that ’
myfelf alone ought to bear the whole weight
of
LETTERS.
257
of the misfortunes I had brought upon my head;
after all, Said I to myfelf, it is impoffible they fliould extend farther than the courfe of my life; it cannot be long, if what I am told is true. Entirely deprived of every refource, I mud die of hunger In the prifon, and this is my refolution.
It was late when I arrived at the prifon. I
was put into a room without a window, where
was nothing to lie down upon, or even to lit on, and there palTed a night, which feemed to me fo long, that I thought it would never have been over. As I fat on the floor, every thing which had pafled for the laft fix months, occurred to my imagination in fo lively a manner, that it is furprifing I was able to Support fuch terrible imprefilons. From what a ftate was I
fallen ? How immenfe did the diftance feem.
which Separated me from this happy ftate! I
founded my ftrength, to try whether there re
mained any hopes of getting over it; and find-
ing in myfelf only weaknefs, blindnefs, and im-
potence, I became a prey to defpair : my crimes feemed to me of fuch a nature, as to exclude me
for ever from the mercy of God ; I looked on myfelf as a vi6tim deftined to ferve as an exam-
ple to thofe who Ihould be tempted to follow my
fteps.
• iiyi

; M i'
• 11
ill' i I
it

.* f j •;
u !
»'i .1

u
' !}
i!'
,:li!
>1 |l
I

i I : I * I
L ;! 1
lU
ill
■ 1
1 i>
\ f-
!ii
I * • • \
' t
111
tfi
I u
Itl
^5 8
LETTERS.
fteps. However great the chaftifement I experienced, I venture to fay/l judged myfelf as rigoroully as God himfelf would have done ; if he had in the inftant precipitated me into hell, I Ihould not have murmured in the lead, fo fen-fible was I of deferving this. My fubmiffion to my prefent misfortunes, arofe therefore from a thorough convi6Iion that I deferved them ; and when I had loft all hopes of repairing my paft faults, I took a firm refolution not to commit a new one, by my murmurs, the injuftice of which I Ihould have myfelf condemned.
Day furprized me in thefe thoughts : the gaoler’s Servant opened the door of my room, which looked into a large yard, and told me I was at liberty to walk there. This trifling alleviation affected me but little, and I remained motionlefs in the fame place, without wilhing for, forefeeing any thing, or paying the leafl: attention to the noife that was made in this yard, which was filled with a great number of prisoners. The gaoler’s fervant, who opened the door, fancying I did not underftand him, told thofe who were walking about, that there was a new comer, who, according to all appearance, did not underftand a word of Englilh. A poor
joiner.
li L i 1
LETTERS.
259
joiner, who had been an inhabitant of this
wretched placfe upwards of eight months, took
pity on his countryman, for he thought I was
a Frenchman, and entered my room j and after having Saluted me very civilly, offered me his fervice, and did it with fuch an air of fincerity.
as overwhelmed me with gratitude. A perfon muft be in a fituation like mine to be thorough-
ly fenlible of the value of a friend, who makes an offer of himfelf through pure generofity : as
to me, I confidered this man as an angel, though
his figure, drefs, and language, declared him.
as he really was, a man of mean birth and no education.
The Sentiments of my heart appeared in my
countenance; and Dupont (for this was the
young man’s name) laid to me in his coarfe
manner. Come, countryman, take courage j
it is ten o’clock; in all probability, you have
neither breakfafted this morning, nor Supped
laft night j do me the favour to drink a pint
of beer with me; my example will comfort you.
I am Sure: it is true, you have the air of a
gentleman, and I am only a poor devil, that
can’t do a great deal j however, what little is
in my power, I offer you chearfully: one fhould
not
if; :
• I '
ih I
' I, ! ■
Hli
11
! I
.1
' I
I :
: I
•i -
T,;i
l;
i|.' I '! I r i ii

i;
1' I t
J'
1
1	'
iC ;;
., i ' '

: 'Mil
! i
'iil
• ; f
'll. .
b ■ I i
I i i;
11
t ''

!i'
I
T ti ! ; 1 'll il
11
’ I
il
26o
LETTERS.
not affli6): one’s Self beyond meaSure, elfe one might hang one’s Self, like an Englilhman.
Though f drove not to follow Dupont, he dragged me into a room near mine, where he had made a joiner’s bench and a feat, and forced me to eat a morfel ; which littie nouriSnment raifed my fpirits. During breakfaft, Dupont, to excite my confidence, related by what unfortunate accident he came into prifon.
I came into England, faid he, to endeavour to get money, from the encouragement of feve-ral of my countrymen, who had brought home fufficient to fettle themfelves in their own country in a decent manner. The beginning did not anfwer my expectations ; though I may fay, without vanity, that I am no bad workman; but I was badly cloathed, and a fhabby drefs is no very good recommendation. A French tajdor offered to let me have a fuit of cloaths, for which I fhould pay him whenever it fuited me; and told me he had a fuit ready made by him, which would fit me exaCfly. I did not think it right to incumber myfelf with this debt, becaufe I was fearful I fliould not have it in my power to pay him, and thanked him for his kindnefs. The next day, while I was abroad
• •
enquiring
LETTERS.
261
enquiring for work, the rafcal Sent the Suit of deaths to my lodgings : it was. a great deal too tight and too Ihcrt for me ; fo that if I had been willing to have taken thefuit, I could have made no ufe of it, wherefore I fent it back the fame day. The next morning this villain arrefted and wanted to oblige me to take thecloaths.
me
I was brought to this place, where at firft I made
9
a very foolilh iigure. An honeft Englifhman, who underftood both languages, comforted me, and defired his lawyer to do me what fervice he could ; he accordingly went to find my rogue, but the bird was flown ; and, fearing from me the fame treatment I had fuffered from him, had returned to Franc
e.
I proved that I had not ordered this' fuit of cloaths. I was difeharged by the court, and thought I had now regained my liberty. Notin theleaft; jufiice will lofe nothing. I was informed that I muft remain in prifon till I paid the gaol fees. I in vain re-prefented, that, having been arrefted unjuftly, as had been proved to the fatisfaeftion of the court, I ought not, in confcience, to pay for the rods that had been employed to chaftife me, when my innocence was known; but I fpoke to the deaf: for my comfort, I was informed, that I was entitled to redrefs, from the perfon who had
caufed me to be arrefted, and that I might oblige
him
M
! /
f
11
> ! ; 1
i
5 ■

262
LETTERS.
him to pay me my expences, or put him into gaol. Fine reafoning ! Thofe who talked thus, knew very well, that it was an impoflibility, fince the man was gone to France; and, befides, as we fay, where there is nothing, the king muft lofe his right. One ought to fay as much of the officers of juftice, who are hardly juft, fince they have detained me eight months without allowing me any thing for my fupport; and I ftiould have been ftarved to death here, if it had not been for a mafter, who would give me half a crown a day if I had my liberty ; but, taking an advantage of my confinement, generoufly
allows me only a crown a week.
Dupont, after having repofed this confidence in me, expelled mine in return ; but my affair was too delicate, to be entrufted to a ftranger. I only told him my cafe was not like his, that I really owed what I was arrefted for, but that it was impoffible for me to pay it, fince I had been robbed in my abfence of every thing in the world ; and that, as I knew no trade, I muft cxpeQ: to perifh with hunger, fince I had no more than fix and twenty ftiillings. That is fomething however, replied Dupont ; and if the people who arrefted you are inflexible, they
will be forced to allow you fomething towards
your
LETTERS.
263
your maintenance. I will Speak to my friend the lawyer, he loves the French ; and not-withftanding his profeflion, is, I alTure you, a
very honeft man : befides, you may command
the little I have; I pity Such a man as you.
who is not accuftomed to Suffer hardfhips like
a poor fellow as I am, who was born poor.
I embraced honeft Dupont, and fhed tears of gratitude; and, without accepting his offer, afked a piece of fervice of him, which would coft him lefs, and which I had more prelling occafion for. My cloaths were very genteel, but I had only two fhirts ; one of which was very fine, and had laced ruffles. I was deSirous of exchanging my flender wardrobe, for a Suit of cloaths more Suitable to my condition, and a few fhirts. Dupont Spoke to Some raf-cally Jews, v/ho go from prifon to priSon to cheat the prisoners, by felling goods to them
very dear, and buying for little or nothing, what they want to get rid of. My new friend
was ready to beat them, when they offered me
no more than thirty-fix fhillings for my cloaths
and fhirt; the lace of my waiftcoat alone was
worth more; he therefore defireu me to have
patience, and di61:ated a letter for me to his
lawyer, who came to vifit us the next day: indeed.
■ '*i
! ;
I I
. I ■
k	. *
.	. i
' ‘ I 11
I j
'	' t
1 :
1.1
*	' t
I r t
I . I
.1
! '1
I ! 1
I
; i
1 :
I I
I I
I •
' 1
; I

264
LETTERS.
deed, he was a man the lead: fit for his profef-fion of any perfon I ever met with; he had a noble benevolent foul, which would not permit him to be guilty of the rapine, fo common to the generality of his brethren, and fettled more differences in a month, than they created mif-chief in a year. I am extremely forry his name has flipped my memory.
This worthy man procured me fome deaths and a balance in money, in exchange for mine ; and having enquired who was my principal creditor, promifed me to call on him. Unfortunately this creditor was gone a journey into the country for three months, fo that I was informed that I mull have patience till his return. Though I lived only on bread and water, I was fenfible.my money could not hold out fo long; and thinking it lefs difgraceful to earn my livelihood in any way whatever, than to be burthen-fome to poor Dupont, whofe allowance was already very Spare, I fought all pofllble means to avoid it.
There were in this prifon Several perfons who lived in an expenfive manner, and remained there only to tire the patience of their creditors, and bring them to reafonable terms; thefe people had
neat
' • L'
I
/ - »
LETT E R S.
26 s.
neat apartments, and wanted for nothing. 1 offered my fervice to one of them, who Spoke a little broken French, and promifed to perfeQ;
him in this language in a very little time; he
accepted my propofal, and taking a liking to my
converfation, generoufly invited me to his table.
This gentleman, whofe name w'as Nil, had a
place which brought him in a very pretty income, but was arrefted through the extravagance of
his wife, who had contra6led large debts with-
out his knowledge ; and he infifted on his credi-
tors making Some abatement of their demands, becaufe they ought to have confulted him before they Supplied the extravagance of his wife. This perfon had three daughters who dreffed very genteelly, and came to fee him every now and then. It happened pne day, that the elcleft, as file was coming to fee him quite in a full drefs, and without a hat, was catched in a great fhower of rain, about two hundred yards from the pri-fon, and was quite wet through; her cloaths were foon dry; but, as (he. had only a .very Small cap on, her hair; was quite out of curl, and I offered to drefs ic During the fix months I paff-ed with Rofella, I often did her this piece of fer-vice ; and, as fhe had a very good tafte for drefs, I had learnt from her inftruclicns to drefs hair
much better, than I fhould have done from an
N	hair-
VOL. II.
i \
! : ' i
I ;
! 1
t <
i
11
1	i
. t
CD
cl
: 11

‘ '1'
t ■.
‘ 11 < ■
; f
I I
ii
. i
■ I'

‘ I •
• 1 .
I I I
I I I

• I

I ; 1 ■ I !
11 i,
. t
. t
’ . '.
■ . I . ‘ (
!!! i 0
j t 11
. 1
' I
: I
! I
> I
i T
t ,

266
LETTERS.
hair-drelTer. The young lady was vaftly pleafed with my manner of dreffing, and this infpired her father with a thought, to which I owe all my happinefs.
Nil had a brother a few miles from Windfor, who was a peruke-maker by profeflion j he had but little bufinefs in the winter ; but the village which he lived in, and the environs thereof, were in fummer full of families, who came from London, and employed him ; fo that he always kept a Frenchman to drefs the ladies, becaufe the people of this nation have more tafte than the Englilh. He knew that his brother wanted a journeyman, and his friendlhip for me induced him to write to his brother, in order to procure me this place, without my knowledge. During this interval, my principal creditor returned to town; and' the charitable lawyer, whom I have mentioned, had perfuaded him to forgive me a debt which I was incapable of paying. My other creditors, low people, would abate nothing of their demands j fo that I was ftill de-, tained for twenty guineas, including the gaol fees. Nil propofed to his brother to pay this fum for me, on/condition that I Ihould article myfelf to him for two years. Mifs Nil, whom I had already drefled, pretended to be defirous of
continuing
. • I
L E T T E R s.
267
continuing under my hands ; and Mr. Nil th« younger was fo pleafed with my fkilJ, that he conlented to every thing his brother propofed.
I have mentioned nothing of what pafTed in my breaft during the three months and an half that I remained in prifon, where I thought I muft have ftaid till there was an a6t of grace, which was not expe6Ied to happen foon. Nothing that I Suffered outwardly, came near the torments which preyed on my foul. Whatever endeavours I ufed to re-animate my hope, my ingratitude towards God and my mother, appeared to me fo enormous, that I did not think it polTible ever to obtain pardon. How dreadful a flate ! How often did that happen to me, which is related of a celebrated Herefiarch, with refpeil to Heaven. I have loft it through my own fault, and beyond all poflibility of recovery, faid I to myfelf Shedding a torrent of tears. Alas ! I might fay with the prophet king, that my bread was bedewed with my tears. This affliction was fo violent, as to almoft annihilate every other fenfation : the pride fo natural to man was quite extinguished in me, and any per-fon might have fhewn the greateft contempt for me, without my thinking I was treated unjuftly. I was therefore thankful, when my proteCtor
N 2	informed
c ;
11
. u •
i!i:
■ ) I
. I ■!
*■
; i
; ' I
I
I t ! 1
i ! I
. ' ’
I f
t : I
! > I :
.1.1
t , • I
(	.
I	I
I t
268
LETTERS.
informed me what his brother would do in my favour, and did not think: myfelf above tlie employment w'hich was propofed to me ; and which was ftill too good for a wretch who had with juftice been driven from fociety. I had the pleasure to fee Dupont releafed before me : fome charitable perfons paid his fees, and I left him with a mailer, in whofe fervice he got a comfortable livelihood.
For four montlis after I arrived at my new habitation, I had but little emplojment, and certainly did not get as much money for my mafter as I coll him. I mull here do the Ens:-
o
lilh the juhice to refute a prejudice which I myfelf entertained as well as others : and declare, that it is impofiible to find hearts more efientially good, and more inclined to aflift thofe in whom they remark good morals, and a love of induftry. This remark is not in the lead mifplaced, madam, though I have the honour to fay it to an Englilh woman. You are acquainted only with perfons of your own rank, and perhaps perfuade yourfelf, that the lower kind of people in England have hearts as hard and rough as their out-fides. You do them injuftice; they pity the unfortunate whom they think virtuous ; I was upwards of a year in mifery ; and mud declare,
from
LETTER S.
269
from my own experience, that they are very compaffionate and obliging : it is true, they do a fervice with the tone and air with which a Frenchman would exprefs an injury ; but this is becaufe their unpolitencfs is equal to their benevolence. Unhappily, this hrft quality conceals the hift, which is the reafon why they are thought cruel and barbarous.
After I had been Some weeks with Mr. NiC . he took notice to me that I did not go to church.
I thought, faid he, you had been a French refugee ; but according to all appearance, I am -miftaken, and you are a Paphl. Though I was afraid I (hould make him my enemy, by acknow-ledgitig my religion, I did not heSitate a moment to do it; I (hould have been afhamed to have ■ difTembled in Tuch a matter. I was agreeably furprized at his anfwer. My lad, faid he, I have known many very honeft people among the Catholics, and I don’t like you a bit worfe ' than I did before, now I know you are one; but whatever our religion is, one ought to discharge the duties it requires ; you have a chapel in the next town, which is Served by a very honeft man, whofe good condu6t edifies the whole neighbourhood, I will give you liberty to go there every Sunday. Believe me, one ought
N 3	not
:!1
;
\ •
1
. f
i r
; 1
i i
iiii

1!
270
LETTERS.
not to be remifs in th-’s article : negligence in religion conduds to libertinihn : and I fhouid be forry you (hould fall into a disorderly way of life, through your being in my Service.
I ought not, madam, to endeavour to conceal from you the depth of the abyfs into which I was fallen j I had not entered into a place of worlhip Since my arrival in England, and I felt, a general tremor, when my mafter propoled to me to aSTift at this awful myftery. My a-wakensd faith made me fear, left lightnings IhoUid dart from the altar, which I was going to pollute with my looks ; in a word, I was in the Situation which Montalvo deferibes in Such an affeding irwnner j yet I was afraid of giving offence to my mafter, and pretended to be very thankful for the permifiion he gave me, determined however not to profit by it. Alas ! Sin deftroys our natural and acquired qualities. This was the firft time in my life I had defeended So low as to be guilty of a lye ; I naturally loved truth, and this good difpofition had been cultivated carefully by my mother. So that I had an averfion for the leaft diffimulation : this averfion gave way to the dread which the fight of my judge infpired me with j it Seemed to me as if his minifter would have read my unworthinefs
in
E T T E R S.
271
in my countenance, and would have driven me from the c^pany of the faithful, from whence I bad already voluntarily banilhed myfelf.
I have already mentioned that my mafter
paid for my board, at a little inn where he eat himfelf, and which was the only one in the vil-
lage. One day while I was there getting my dinner a poft-chaife arrived, attended by a Servant on horfeback. This man, after having
looked at me earneftly Several times, exclaimed,
I am not miftaken, it is our dear baron D’AIlie
and immediately dismounting, was with me before I had time to examine his face attentively. He was a Servant of my father’s, whom my mother had kept until we loft our law-fuit; and
who, full of gratitude for the favours he had re

ceived, came every year from Bourdeaux to renew his alTurances of the mod refpe6tful attachment. Good God ! cried he, in what a fitiia-tion do I find the fon of my worthy mafter! I immediately defired him to be filent; and, as his mafter was to dine with a friend who lived
in this village, he made hafte to get his bufineSs done, in order to return to me. What would
not your diftra<3:ed mother give to have the pleasure of feeing you again! faid he : Alas ! this worthy lady has been in a languilhing ftaite ever
fine©
N4
> ; > i
I;
• I*
I
1 >
i I
i > !
I '
! •
f 'b
» i»!
! J'
i _ ;
1 ' I
I L;
II
I)
; I

I'li
''li
1 ;
! ’I
: !M
. -1
•i
, ♦ ^ > I ■
' ii
‘ ll
! b'i
• iii
‘
t
i I'
'I
I
i b
I !
' !
:
I
i ,
■	• ■ t
! i
lb'
‘ " j( i!=
^ li
' H
. , i
' Tl 'li '
^ !ll!!
•. *
' C ‘ b >'
i.ll
li:,
il)|!
•• t
, l'
1 •' J
' L ;
; M
!|l

I i
2.72
L E T TER S.
Since your departure; her tears are her food^ and if you defer letting her hear from you, you will have her death to reproach yourfeif with. Alas ! my dear friend, replied I, Ihe is thoroughly avenged ; and the curfe, which Ihe no doubt has pronounced againll me, has been attended wdth terrible confequences. Inftead of curling you, Said Henry, fhe incellantly prays to Heaven for your return. Be alTured, my dear maBer, notwithftanding the length of the journey, you would foon fee her if Ihe knew you was here ; can you have the cruelty to fufSer her to end in grief her days which flowed fo quietly before your fright ? HaSen to reflore her to life by your prefence; and, if I can be of any ufe towards haifening this good delign, do not Spare me ; my perfon, my little fortune, and even my life, is at your Service.
I embraced this faithful Servant with a torrent
of tears, which relieved rny heart from the hor-
rid weight that opprefb me, and confeffed to him
the whole of my ill conduQ:^ and the misfortunes
which I had undergone in confequence thereof.
Henry interrupted me Several times, to curie Ro-
fella, and from him I learnt the infamous life
fhe had led at Bourdeaux. He informed me
alfo that my mother knew I,had fled with her ;
but
^ 0
’ *1 • ' I
LETTERS.
273
but had not been able to find out where I had
Secreted myfelf, notwithftanding her endeavours
for that purpofe.
Henry entreated me to Set out for my mother’s
immediately; and, thinking that what I was
indebted to my mafter was the only obftacle to
my return, inlifted upon advancing me that fum.
You will find, by reading my letter to my mo-
ther, what were the reafons which prevented
my accepting his offer. • I recommended Secrecy to him, with refpedl to my Situation, and gave him my word that. I would write diredtly to my mother, and throw myfelf at her feet as Soon as poffible,' and promifed to let him hear from me every now and then, while he remained in London, where my mafter propofed to ftay the whole winter. .
I came from this conversation more caft down
and weakene,d, than if I had Suffered a long ill-nefs ;
and at my return, my mafter Scarcely knew me. But the change of my mind wasftill greater ; the affurance of a pardon from my tender mother. Seemed an earneft of that which
God was willing to grant me ; and blufhing to
4
have defpaired of his-mercy, I took a firm re-
solution to reap the advantage of it as Soon as
N-5
poffible.
<; ‘

’ (
t

!J I
i
li
I 1

I
274
LETTERS.
poffible. I had the whole afternoon to myfelf. I took this opportunity to wait on Mr. Baker, who gave me encouragement, and Ihowed me, that of all my crimes, I ought to bewail the moft bitterly, my defpair of God’s mercy. He undertook to add a letter of his own, to that which I wrote to my mother, of both which I fend you a copy.
Mr. Baker’s Letter to the Baronefs D’Astie.
Madam, a prodigal fon overwhelmed with fhame and grief for his paft ill conduct, borrows my voice to implore your mercy and forgivenefs. I venture to aflert, that God has already granted it to his fincere repentance, and I cannot think you will be more inexorable. The greatnefs of his fault had plunged him into defpair ; for upwards of a year that he has been feparated from the wretch who was the caufe of his flight, he would have attempted to move Heaven and you madam to companion, if he had thought his crimes capable of pardon. God, moved, doubt-lefs, with the fervency of your prayers, has not Suffered him to reft quietly in his guilt; and I conlider the extreme mifery to which he has been reduced as a Special inftance of grace. He would not hefitate a moment Setting out to throw
hirafelf
Ml.
LETTERS.
2"S
hlmfelf at your feet, did not honour and juflice
oblige him to fulfil his engagements with a man who has taken him out of prifon, where he was
confined for debt. This honefl man, a barber
by trade, has advanced him twenty guineas, on condition that he Ihould article himfelf to him
for two years, to drefs ladies hair, in which he
If to have advanced the re-
fucceeds very well, mainder of this fum would have been Sufficient,
I Ihould have found means to have Sent him to
you before j but this would have ruined his mailer, who could not immediately have found another perfon to Supply his place ; and perhaps never will be able to replace him to the Satisfaction of his cullomers. If you permit me, ma-
dam, to acquaint you with my opinion on this
matter, I think you ought to trull to Providence.
He feels the humiliation of his Hate tp the very
marrow of his bones, if I may exprefs myfelf thus: he ought to drink to the very dregs, the cup which has been prepared as a pimiffiment for his faults. Be eafy about him ; he has So fully placed his confidence in me, that I have the companion of a father for him ; and did not the duties of the holy minillry, which I have the honour of exerciling, though unworthy thereof; I fay, did not my duty induce me to take particular care of him j yet, his good qualities.
M .

Hi
Mi':

I \)
. I ‘
-i'h
ilhb
i'l;

illi'i
1 I . .
' f


. 1
i's. .!
b h'l

’I
1
.■ I i
I ;	;	.
ihii
i I
'lib

(
.IL.I
■F.':
li
.«•
, 11 I ■ 4 .
I . » •
• lb j
Ui'
'I ’ ■	;
’ i
hi! r'
h': r'l'M ’
i'll ‘ ’ :
Hill
'■hoc
liiid!
hMil
;i:h

II c
< < '
: . ^
!' IIO.M;
1.'
' ; i! c ■ i
i'l '! •;
F:*
Co! ■ ^
i;;
1! i
; ' I
!l:ii
f V ,' 1 •

• . 1 >
i. I 'ill'.
276
LETTERS.
lities have So attached me to him, that I confi-der him as doubly my neighbour.
Be Satisfied concerning his faith, it has neither been Shaken, nor runs any rifk of being So. They are leSs induftrious to make proSelytes in England than in any other proteftant country. Befides his mafter has no diflike to the Catholics ; as he is entirely ignorant himSelf of the do<Strines of the church of England, which religion he profefTes, there is no danger of his attempting to make your Son adopt them. Moreover, this ignorance is general enough to inSpire you with confidence, even though Mr. D’Aftie had not been So well inftru6Ied. ConviStion of mind has no Share in the convcrfion of any one here, and the EngliSh proSelytes are induced thereto from their depravity of heart alone. Thank God, your fon runs no riSk on this head, and his converfion is, in my opinion, So lincere, that it may be depended upon for Some time at leafl, for human frailty is great.
I am, with the utmoft refpeSS,
Madam,
Your mofl: obedient humble Servant,
Baker, Frieji.
fhe
{■
n
LETTERS.
277
The Baron D’Astie’s Letter to the Baronefs
D’AsTIE, his mother.
0
Oh ! moft refpe6table of all women ! Oh!
deareh, and yet moft injured of mothers ! how
fhall a fon fo ungrateful as I have proved, be able
to exprefs his repentance ? How exquifite Soever
my remorfe, can it equal the pangs with which
your tender heart has been racked for thefe two
years, that, hiding myfelf from your goodnefs, I have followed the painful, road of vice ? Ah !
however vile the condition is, to which I have
reduced myfelf by my folly, it v/ould ftill have
charms for me,, if I could get rid of the tor-
menting idea of haying difturbed the ferenity
• __________________ _
of your days. You have been fuperiour to the lofs of your rank; I have feen you Support, without murmuring, the affliftions inseparable
from a middling ftate of life, that nearly ap-
proached poverty ; alas, to me it was referved to find the fenfible part of your foul. The lofs of your fon alone could make you Ihed tears, which the moft unfortunate events had not been
able to force from you. How bitterly did I weep, what anguifti did I feel, when the faith-
ful Henry gave me the affe<£ting account of the
dreadful Situation to which my flight reduced
you ! Chance, or rather Providence, condufled
him
‘ 1
i!'i

278
LETTERS.
him to my fight in the retinue of a nobleman, whom he has Served Some months, and this was the moment which God had marked from all eternity in his mercy, to revive, through him and you, my truft in him, which was almoft entirely extinguilhed. This was the greateft of my crimes, and the only one in which I have perfevered. Yes, madam, for upwards of a year I have detefted from the bottom of my heart my other faults; and without hopes of appeaf-ing Heaven, have carefully avoided irritating it more. I return thanks to God for having broke my fhameful bonds, and Submit with pleafure to the humiliating confequences of my ill con-duft j and death would to me be preferable to the heinoufnefs of a relapfe.
I have been cruelly deceived and abandoned. I have loved the moft infamous wretch in the whole world. Excufe any farther account of my ill conduct.' Regret more that^ Shame flops my mouth j I am unwilling to pollute your mind with a recital of the infamous life I led for fix months in a total forgetfulnefs of Go^ and my Salvation. Ungrateful towards my Creator, who from my infancy had loaded me with the mofl precious favours, is it to be wondered at, that I
was fo to you ? Alas! my whole life, however
long
I ;
I '
’ 1
' .
• I
LETTERS.
27f
long it may be, will not Suffice to expiate my
faults} you (hall behold me bewail them to my
lateft breath j would to Heaven I could fee you
this moment; but, my Anannias approves my motives for delaying my departure, and will inform you about them. I do not in the leaft
murmur at the length of my exile; the pain which your abfence caufes me, will in part ex-
piate my offences, for this is wh^t gives me the greateft unealinefs.
I prefume to join to this confeflion of my iU
conduct, a petition for a favour which will con-
tribute to calm my remorfe. I have innocently
been concerned in an a6l ofinjuftice, and have
become an accomplice in a robbery, by help-
ing the wretched partner of my flight to carry off effects which I thought were her own pro-
perty : though I have in no refpeft benefited by this robbery, yet, I think myfelf obliged to make the owner fatisfadion for the lofs Ihehas fuftained.
You deftined a fum for my maintenance at
Bourdeaux; may I venture to entreat you to
Sacrifice a part of it, to difeharge me from the
dreadful burden of having wronged another?
I flatter myfelf you will be better able to do it.
as all your Schemes for fettling me at a diflance from you are vanilhed. My weaknefs has determined
f ■ ;
ii'!
M .)
I ;
«
I ;• 111
11
. I;
:ii
lii
> 1 !l

tb;
i!i

111
I ;
11
;i
il
i I!
I 1
1
ill:
1-1
! [
28o
LETTERS.
termined my vocation, and I am too much afraid of the treachery of my fenfes, to expofe myfelf thereto a fecond time. I chearfully dedicate the remainder of my life to rural employments,, and leave the choice of a proper companion for me, entirely to you, for I cannot again truft myfelf on fuch an important concern.
Mr. Baker keeps up my fpirits, in hopes of a favourable anfwer. Alas ! I fhould not fur-vive a fentence fuch as I deferve, if goodnefs did not temper juftice.
Baronefs DAJiifs Anfiver to the Baron D'Ajiie
her Son.
The reproaches with which you load your-felf, my dear fon, prevent any from me j and your happy return to virtue recompenfes the uneafinefs your ill conduct gave me. Comprehend by this the excefs of my joy. What thankfgivings do you owe to God for the repentance he has granted you, for the happy opportunities he has procured you, and for your life, which he has fpared, in order rhat you might improve it. The particulars of your ill conduct, with which you was afraid to acquaint
me, I knew before from Henry, whom you
had
.X
LETTERS.
281
had entrufted them with, and who wrote an account of it to me direitly ; fo that I received his letter at the fame time with Mr. Baker’s and
yours, I have returned Sincere thanks to God,
for having granted fuch a charitable paftor to my poor Grayed flieep, which he has brought back into the fold. Be governed entirely by his advice, my dear child. A firft fault gives, indeed, an experience which, though fatal, may be neverthelefs ufeful; but, it weakens the foul, and renders it lefs fit to refift: fin. Yours
• »
will long be fenfible of theftains it has contratSl-

ed ; they have increafed that weaknefs of foul
which renders you fufceptible of every impreffion.
• t
1!
!'i
■ I ‘: I
I fhall not be eafy about you, till I fee you fettled by marriage ; therefore, I expe<5l your com-
ii
I	I
II
pliance with the efforts I am going to make, to get you out of your prefent fituation, if it can be done with the confent of the honefl: man who
•	I '
‘ < «
•	i .
took you out of prifon, and without doing him
the utmoft prejudice : I refer this to Mr. Baker’s
prudence, to whom I have communicated my
!.
intentions, and into whofe hands I refign the
authority God has given me over you.
If I had not promifed in the beginning of my
' j ‘
letter, not to reproach you, I flvould complain bitterly of your difiruft of me. Am I not your
friend.
' b I
Ml !

Mi I 11
Ml
Ml
II
282
LETTERS.
friend, as well as your mother ? Ah ! had you been witnefs to what I felt on your account! My firft motion was to throw myfelf on my knees, and I remained in this pofture, as it were out of my fenfes, fo long, as to make poor Mary very uneafy. I might have been taken, like the mother of, Samuel, for a drunken woman, the agitations of my countenance were fo extraordinary. Even at prefent, I have not entirely recovered my Spirits, and am fiibjed to fuch an univerfal trembling, that I have been forced to borrow the alfiftance of Mr. Duboc the younger to write to you. Don’t let this give you any utieafinefs, I am very well, except this trembling.
(Mr, Duboc writes as from Umfelf.)
I HOPE my dear fon will put entire confidence in what I fay, your dear and refpe<SIable mother is quite out of danger. It is true we were under Some apprehenfions for her yefterday, and it was neceflary to bleed her j but this entirely removed her diforder : Ihe had refifted the tranfports of her grief, but could not Support her joy. She is at prefent fo well recovered, as to refufe my alfiftance to write to Mr. Baker, and intends to do it herfelf, the day after to-morrow,
therefore
LETTERS.
285
therefore you may make yourfelf eaSy about her health.
My brother and I have (hared your mother’s
joy; it will not be compleat until we have the
pleafure of embracing our dear child, with the fame fentiments of joy as the father of the pro-
We
virtue will ftrengthen you in good, the remainder
of your life, by convincing you how little de-
pendance you ought to place on your own
ftrength. We expert, with impatience, the effe£l: of the propofal which we have defired Mr.
Baker to make to the perfon, to whom you
have articled yourfelf; and whatever he requires.
we will endeavour to comply with. Our very
humble refpe6ts to this worthy paftor.
{The Baronefs finijhes herfelf.)
Only obferve my fine writing; I ri(k it to remove my fon’s uneafinefs, and to fign the
pardon which the moft tender and indulgent
of mothers grants him.
m
ii
t
i 1
, • . !
,r f
284
letters.
Lhe iBaronefs D’Astie’s X^'Z/rr to Mr. Baker
Sir,
c.
When MelTrs. Duboc engaged tor me two days ago, they certainly inuft have depended on a miracle ; I was So bad, that they had juS; ad-miniftred the facraments to me. God has heard the prayers of our holy paficrs; and, as my cafe was a hidden violent oppreffion of the heart, attended v/ith an apopleQic fit, the phyfician gave hopes of my recovery, after three bleedings in the foot, which relieved me. I take the ear-lieft opportunity, Sir, to return you my fincere and hearty thanks/for your goodnefs to my poor child, and to entreat you to keep up his ftag-gering faith. My letter, as far as I can recol-lefl, was capable of reviving his miStruft \ my head was extremely difordered wlien I didlated it, and my apopleffic ht had not fo entirely left me, as to leave no room to tear a return. S;nce my fon has confeffed to you all the events of his life, you mud be fenSible, from rny excehive tendernefs for him, what I muft have fuhered during his abfence ; and, what a Surprizing effect your letter and his had on me; I entirely loft my fenfes, and was three days in the utmoft
danger. Everlafting praife be given to the eternal
LETTERS.
285
nal goodnefs which has preferved my life, to be-
llow on me the pleafure of embracing my repenting fon..
God has confounded my human prudence.
by annihilating all the meafures I had taken to remove my fon from the ftation in which he had
placed him. However, I am of opinion, after the moft Severe Scrutiny, that prejudice had no
I
Iliare in my proceedings. I meafure the glory of an adlion only by its utility to fociety ; I think it our Creator’s intention, that men in a Bate of
fociety Should employ themfelves for the hap-pinefs of each other, in obedience to the orders of him who is goodnefs and charity in his ef-fence. Thoroughly affedled with this fenti-
ment, the deftination of my fon, to me feemed more noble than that of a general or a magistrate. Thefe are employed to repair the ills
which avarice produces ; he who becomes the
legiilator of mankind, by his difcourfe and example prevents them. If I had abided by this Sentiment, my fon had never quitted this ftate; but, as it is dangerous to rely too much on ones' judgment, I Sacrificed my opinion in favour of the ideas commonly received, and perfuaded my-felf that it was my duty to endeavour to place my fon in an employment more Suitable to his
birth.
286
LETTERS.
birth. Notwithftanding, I don’t know whether this reafon alone would have been Sufficient to overcome my reluctance, to expofe him to the dangers of the great world; but, I had another alfo, and both together prevailed on me to content.
With the befl: natural difpofition in the world, my Son poflelles the moft lively paffions. Celibacy would have been a dangerous ftate for him; but, how could I properly marry him where we refided ? Our country girls, for the moft part, pofleffed the virtues of their condition, but wanted thofe which were neceflary for the rank in life, to which a marriage with my fon would have raifed them. We are fur-rounded, indeed, with poor gentry, among whom I could eafily have procured him a wife; but, I could not think of this without horror. They not only were as clownifh, ill-bred, and ignorant as the farmers daughters, but were in-fupportably proud; which made me dread both for him and myfelf, the necelTity of palling our lives with one of them. I imagined that I had found a juft medium; the lawyer to whom I fent my fon, had a virtuous wife, who had given her daughters an excellent education ; they had been brought up ftrangers to the great
world;
LETTERS.
287
world, in a love of induftry, and domeftic employments, which are proper for all women, efpecially for thofe of Small fortunes. My whole ambition was, that he might take a fancy to one of thefe young ladies ; I formed a charming profpefl of the fweets that I Ihould tafte in the Society of a daughteri-in-law capable of re-lilhing our way of life j and, perhaps, depended too much on the little Schemes I Should put into ekecution, in confequence thereof. I repeat it, God has overturned all my projects, and I perceive no way of fettling this dear child, fo as to make him happy. He muft therefore be truft-ed to Providence, and this is the resolution I embrace. In my opinion, it is jealous of the refource which I have Saved for him; I muft, therefore, renounce it. I mean. Sir, the fum which I depofited to fettle my fon j I chear-fully Sacrifice it to juftice, and to the hopes of feeing him the Sooner. By the account that he Sent me of the goods which were carried away from the houfe where Rofella dwelt, I conceive about fifty pounds will make the owner a proper fatisfa^ion. I beg you would offer the remainder to my Son’s mafter, in order to indemnify him for the lofs he Avail fuftain by my Son’s absence. I hope he will take pity on a diftra^ed mother, who would offer him millions as a recompense.
I- E T T E R s.
Sent.
compenfe, if She poISeffed them, and would ftill think herfelf in his debt, for the fervice he has done her fon, by taking him out of prifon. But, if you Ihould be of opinion that he cannot, without too great a prejudice, deprive, himfelf of my fon’s affiftance, rill the bad weather drives the company, who in Summer refide thereabouts, back to London ^ I mull offer this crofs to the Lord, and wait fome monthS; longer; for I would on no account have him ,difpleafc his benefactor, by leaving him without his con-
If this misfortune Should happen, the only comfort I (hall have, will confift in a firm confidence that you will continue your charitable care of him ; be his father, I conjure you 5 I give up into your hands all the authority which God has given me over him, and Ihall be as eafy, as it is poffible to be in circumfiances like min^e.
Pray defire my fon to write to me as often as poffible; I hope you will accompany his letters with a line from yourfelf. Ah ! if my fubmillion to thofe who direct me did not detain me here, I fhould not fear the dangers of a long journey to have the pleafure of embracing him the fooner, and affuring you, by word of mouth, that nothing can equal my gratitude for the trouble you I	have

L E T V E R S.
aSg
have taken to bring my poor ftrayed ftieep back to the fold—I am, with refpe£I, ,
Yours, &c.
Mr. Baker’s Letter to the Baronefs D’Astie.
Y ES, madam, Providence which had un-
dertaken in a particular manner the care of your fon, has Ihowed itfelf jealous of the precautions which prudence induced you to take for his
eftablifliment. . It had greater defigns on him, and has began to manifeft them in fuch a fur-
1 •
prizing manner, that we ought absolutely to truft him to its care; I fay we, madam. *
This
amiable young man, by honouring me with the
Sentiments of a tender and dutiful Ion, has kindled in my breaft the tendernefs and alFedlion of a father. Like you, I have purfued the nar-
1 !
row views of human prudence ; and, like you, have been deceived thereby. What a chain of
! I
events have I to relate, and what happinefs do I
forefee for you ? You placed your authority in
my hands, madam; I have made fuch ufe of it.
as Secures the Salvation and felicity of your fon.
and procures you fuch a daughter in law, as you would yourfelf have chofe: a young lady whofe diftinguilhed beauty and high birth are her leaft qualifications j a young lady who would
Vgl. II.	O *	be

2'go
LETTERS.
be one of the richefl. heirefles, if hei* duty did not difpoiTefs her of Several millions ; I fay duty, but I ought to make ufe *of another word. Madam, your daughter-in-law, without being wanting in her duty, might referve to herfelf immenfe riches; a defire of pradfifing all the virtues in the moft eminent degree, renders her as poor as your fon. I Ihould not declare, without trembling fuch a marriage to a lady, lefs fenfible than you of the vanity of every thing except virtue ; but, after the knowledge of your charadler, which I have received from the baron, I Ihould think myfelf guilty of a piece of in-juftice, was I to fear your accufing me with having paid more regard to your Son’s inclination, than to the intereft of his fortune. Learn, madam, by what Heps Divine Wifdom has conducted this affair, and hope that it will finilh as happily as it has began.
As foon as "I received the letter which you honoured me with, I prepared myfelf to ufe my utmoft efforts to difengage Mr. D’Aftie; I Ihould have' fet out that very day, but the duties of my fundlion confining me all day, I wrote him word he Ihould fee me the next day. Judge my fur-prize when I faw him in the evening about ten ©Mock-arrive at my houfe, in, the utmoft confu-
lion 5

\ y.
LETTERS.
291
fion; a circumftance which Iliowed he had Some-’ thing extraordinary to communicate to me. Nothing could be more So. Returning home at day-break from drefling a bride, he had met in a lonely place a young woman, or rather, he faid, an angel. Her drefs, .though in diforder, declared her a perfon of quality; Ihe was frightened at the fight of him, and offered him her purfe, taking him for a robber, or Something worfe; at laft, the necelfity of an immediate and Safe afylum,- had obliged this young lady to accept his offer of his chamber, where ffie had been the whole,, day, .
You know-your fon ; to penetrate the Sentiments of his heart does not require much ftudy, they are marked on his countenance. It was therefore eafy for me to, perceive the impreffion this unknown lady had made on him ; and I acknowledge it filled me with apprehenfion. We have in the neighbourhood two bad houfes, which are receptacles for- disorderly women ; and it happens fometimes that they are cruelly treated by the men whom debauchery induces to frequent thefe places ; I therefore at firft thought this perfon was one of thofe unfortunate creatures, whom the fear of feme deferved bad treatment, had forced to fly. The baron diredly
O 2 -	perceived
2Q2
LETTERS.
perceived my thoughts, and without giving m« time to Speak, Said : Ah, Sir! be careful how you conceive unjuft fufpicions ; to fufpeft Mifs
Darby, would be to accufe virtue itfelf------1
interrupted him in my turn. What, is Mifs Darby the perfon to whom you have afforded an afylum ? I have not the honour to know her per-fonally; but, for thefe fix months that this lady has lived in the neighbourhood, fhe has been the edification thereof; I hardly hear any thing elfe talked of except her virtues and good actions. How could fuch a perfon poflibly be reduced to fuch an extremity ? I am ignorant, replied the baron, of the motives which induced her to efcape from her father’s houfe; my re-fpe(ft prevented me from afking any queftions. By her orders, I went to Old Windfor; the whole place was in an uproar, on account of the flight of this charming perfon’s mother, who had juft gone off with a young fellow, whom her daughter was to have married the very night fhe made her efcape, I learnt from her chambermaid, that Mifs Darby had freely confented to this marriage, and that fhe could attribute her flight to nothing but a letter that fhe received an hour before the ceremony was to be performed. Mr Darby gives out that his daughter has
gone oflT with a lover}. I have proof to the contrary.
LETTERS.
293
trary, fince I found her alone ; befides, one need only fee her, to be fatisfied (he is the moft prudent, as well as moft charming of all her fex.
You do the lady juftice, replied I to the baron, and her mother is alfo a woman of diftin-guHhed excellence. Her father is fuppofed to be but fo fo ; and I make no doubt he has been the oecafion of his wife’s and daughter’s flight j but, my dear friend, I am afraid of the confe-quences of fuch an accident, with refpedl to you ! Mifs Darby is immenfely rich—And I have not the temerity to afpire to her hand, replied the baron ; I am delirous only of Serving her, and of placing her in a Safe afylum, and will die of grief that I am unworthy of her. This is rather too precipitate a refolution, faid I; fuppofe her heart Ihould not be already engaged, who knows how far gratitude might carry her. Not to make this letter a volume, I (hall inform you that I faw Mifs Darby the next morning, and learnt with admiration, that (he had expofed herfelf to fo many dangers, to avoid the crime of marrying an apoftate prieft, whofe ftate had been concealed from her, and whom (he imagined a man of quality, through her father’s alTurance who purfues her as his greateft enemy, in order to appropriate to himfdf the great eftate (he
inherits
294
LETTERS.

inherits from one of her aunts, who was a ca^ tholic like her; and that this heroine was defir-ous of purchafing the return of her father’s love* at the expence of her whole fortune; that fhe could not make him a ceffion of her fortune, unlefs (lie married, and, that not being able to flatter herfelf with the hopes of an^hufband of equal rank when Ihe was deftitute of the advan-^ tages of fortune, Ihe was determined to confider virtue only in the perfon with whom flie united her fate. I had only to applaud the choice Ihe had .made of your fon, whole rank Ihe was ignorant of, when there was reafon to imagine that her father fufpe£led her afylum j and, as Ihe could not decently travel about except with an hulband, I determined to marry her to the baron immediately, and make the young couple depart that very night, taking upon myfelf to fatisfy his mailer. You will accufe me, perhaps, of being too precipitate, madam ; fufp.end your judgment I conjure you, till you have learnt by a more circumllantial account the impoflibility of waiting for your confent in form. The young
4
people will pafs a few days at my mother’s, to whom I have recommended them. I have only acquainted you in general terms with the mif-fortunes of your virtuous daughter-in-law; I
hallen to the afliftance of her virtuous mother,
who
letters.
295
who (hares with her the hatred of an unjuft father, and might perhaps fall a vidim to it. I am, with the moft profound refped.
Madam, Yours, &c.
You fee, madam, by readrng thefe letters, that Mr. Baker, without being guilty of indiscretion, had a right to difpofe of me, without waiting for my mother’s confent, lince Ihe had remitted to him all her authority over me, and had acquainted him Sufficiently with her views concerning me, to convince him that by taking this hep he Ihould perfedly fulfil them. He let her know by a Second letter, the refolution we had taken to retire to my dear Clariila’s tutor, and gave her a full account of every thing which my wife has informed you of. Therefore, madam D’Aftie Sent us her confent to Bourdeaux, without the leaft hefitation; which file certainly would not have done, as Clarifla has remarked, if Ihe had not been acquainted with the charader and virtues of her whom I was about to give her for a daughter and companion.
You know the happy conclufion of bur adventures. I am very much afraid that I have been guilty-of an indifcretion, ,in giving you too
true
2q6
LETTERS.
true an account of my errors. You will fay, doubtlefs, Oh! this libertine does not deferve my Clarifla. I am of your opinion, madatn j Ihe might have met with an hulband more worthy of her; but, had Ihe had an opportunity of chuling from amongft all mankind, Ihe could not have found one deferving of her, one who would have been more fenlible of her value, or more firmly refolved than myfelf, to adore her without diminution, the reft of his life.
The two friends left off writing., becaufe lady Balfour went to viftt her friend^ along with Mrs. Darby^ andfaid there a confderable time.
End of the Second Volume.
- '.-C

' >

■t- •


I
- -'H.-



•1N.-.
i'*: X. ^ ■ >	•■
>.‘*T''>^'^'-- '

<- -'-< -L...	.
.'■ -■'	.N TA.T. >.-J ...•

•«£,
^	^ • *	•'Njc/;-/N • ' / ••
C'CVr '	- •
sing.<=:r
MEND’HALL
COLL.
j L
‘r.





*,	- f^'.r
.:■ ;-.v .5f_- >:'.•.,'•V'i'O •	.•
'*2^ .
A

.r*
- -iT'-'U”
<*ie-	.*•
^	^	"v:-.	-. T

t.

h..-‘. 'd ^ V.-/-	-.. S---V
" •‘.'. .-.Vv •'
' Kir
*
'.'i-
• • w *' *' “	^
% ,N
'u
. ♦ '*■
/ '. r.


4- -
'l(»r.i:^

&
/ ^

Z-^Ta.
tv' '
• "D'SVTj
K-	-
'
^.^,V'
.r^ Ci., '
•■i.	-:>»
vr
-■ * w ♦
/

■
.'U

;-o . ^ A

. >
N
;'-Si.
- Ail' / ^ -	^ N
- '•	•	-,.	■ %r,.-	-	•	-___ ♦■; - ; -	^	■	■
:AA - N
v-Vv^-T-. Jf:
■ A K^.-:
''U-.
SfV

^t.‘ ■

V .
’ c^r* •
t-*'
r.'
V i>


->

>'
'viTr:

> . - * ' S'

_v
-	■'-.c-.-	-	.	A^riAA'x-Hn

'^'- >•
': -•' ' • ''.„ *^ 1 ^^^StrW- •
./
-• A ■'
^-.NV
,>''

V': •
■>.i£
* ••'. *
•^v^? »
Vi.i-
' ./
; ii' /
• . •' i ‘S
.L, -T^	' ^	i>^7'ratai


t
• AT
c/ i


z «►

''■ *. .' • *'
; * • ■''- - '•>	• -i
.	'=i",'SL:;-i-^^'l'
^N.'N-'>^_
i '
^ov
>\.

S^'O -

	» - ^	' , ■ <- “r:* t »	» *
	* ,* ‘	f'	V
	% A ,		
* V	S	• %* ’**	
i	V b ' ■' '■■		1
	t *-• % K	f^- •.	1 1
ir^'i -■/ -		. « V [ ■■ - <= . *-^	'•'" w . ]
	;	) .	i
	*. '-„ *" .	h ' • "h	t
T	'> . c	'■' '■ ‘^.'	■'. V s
•C V' -	'*

*?■
inches

	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10	11 (A)	12	13	14	15
L*	39.12	65.43	49.87	44.26	55.56	70.82	63.51	39.92	52.24	97.06	92.02	87.34	82.14	72.06	62.15
a*	13.24	18.11	-4.34	-13.80	9.82	-33.43	34.26	11.81	48.55	-0.40	-0.60	-0.75	-1.06	-1.19	-1.07
b*	15.07	18.72	-22.29	22.85	-24.49	-0.35	59.60	-46.07	18.51	1.13	0.23	0.21	0.43	0.28	0.19
D50 llluminant, 2 degree observer
Density
0.04
0.09
0.15
0.22
0.36
0.51
lOI I
doll par Inch (opd««l}
§1 Si
500	200
600	300 \ 1 1^00
700	
	
800	“500
850	550
	


centimeters
I I IteI I I I IiI I|2>I IM >I II31I I I I I I I|4I I I I I I I I|5I I I I I I I I|6I I I I I I I I|7 I II I I I I I Is I I I I I I I I |9 I I I I I I I I I 70
16 (M)	17	18(B)	19	20	21	22	23	24	25	26	27	28	29	30
49.25	38.62	28.86	16.19	8.29	3.44	31.41	72.46	72.95	29.37	54.91	43.96	82.74	52.79	50.87
-0.16	-0.18	0.54	-0.05	-0.81	-0.23	20.98	-24.45	16.83	13.06	-38.91	52.00	3.45	50.88	-27.17
0.01	-0.04	0.60	0.73	0.19	0.49	-19.43	55.93	68.80	-49.49	30.77	30.01	81.29	-12.72	-29.46
0.75
0.98
1.24
1.67
2.04
2.42
SN: OL0007
Colors by Munsell Color Services Lab ^



k
r’^*'* \	.' •• -i »-^T>"^ ..
► ‘i..	-
-‘SN—»-


'.I';;
r	j,
. .r 1
' 4
' «J ' 'T* '
r*
V.*. •

• c V ■'' '

W ' / *>'- -.
CC'vT','. .
. - : ''• /' .
.. -•	: N
- ^ -■ C''T;•'''*■;■> •.
1.' t- ..	• ••

•	. u ..vC'IV.*'	•
	
t \ \	
i ,1 ■ ' 4	• « ✓ * ' •
■ : ' 1	}‘
	V .. iA 1 -' ■ • ^ ; 1 • . U'' '
.. V' ^ •	p . r • « ^ k
9 A •	« 1
' J , ' ' 1 ''	' A V ( . » » ^
i^Ssiiiiafc'£-''.C7r	
	
<K