M4    	t M v m i Xmttam i umiii mrnAmmmt^mimmmmm^t^m^m \ i
j	'	*.	V	—
: I ~ ~h	~~ i I :
Pacquetfrom VFilh:	j
Or a New	1
GO L L E CT1O Nd
'OF : - I
•	if
Ormnal Letters i
: —	■ O	; I	.
ON	'	'	,
SEVERAL SUBJECTS^
Containing	j
PleaSant Memoirs, Intrigues and 1
Adventures that lately hapned I
.AT	I	,
London,	Hampton Court., Tunbridge,	j
Epfom,	TsLorth Hall and the	^Bath.	j.
WITH '	I
Several Satyrical Characters, both of I Ladies and Gentlemf n, in Prole and I VerSc; with Original Letters by King f J	, Charles II. and the late Q^of Sweden, j j
Written and Coliecsted by (everal HandsJS ! I
■«——----------------^^. i I c
‘	I'
.^LONDON,	I
1
Printed Sor Sam. BrifcoefSind Sold by John Nutt'
near Stationery Hal!1701.	I
MB .».n ..fir—     
■	•	i ^
" -	'	; : i/
'	I
' ^
e	...
f
m
!
3P-
I	•
■ •	t
A
P A c Q u E T from PfIL Ks:
O R, A
COLLECTION
9
O F
Diverting Letters.
%
A
• «
Newly Written from London, Tunbridge, Epfbm,	Bath, &c.
I
!
iy A Letter from Tunbridge, to a Friend in London ; being a Character of the Wells^ ;■	and Com^any there.
y	.
I Dear Frkndj
1^ '^’^7 ^ hi are fenfible the Reafbns that
V	V induc’d me to make my 4ppear-
%	ance at this general Rendezvous,
^ Tunbridge,wcrt neither the Air nor theWa-Lters, but purely the Curiofity of feeing the
^ People and the Place; to which, till now,
V	^ '	A'c.	I
IS
' *'•
* a ATdcquet fiom WiVCs.
I	was as great a Stranger as yourfelf: an( lince I promis’d to tranfmit to you a Cha racter of this Countrv Parade, I have her undertaken to difcharge my Duty ; I fhal therefore proceed to give you first a De fcription of the Wells, and next of th Company \
It is fituated upon the fide of a Heath jfb barren and fb poor, that had it not pro duc’d a Well, it would have yeilded No thing: Much Pains I perceive have bcei taken to improve the Walks, thp’ to littL purpofc; for New TunbriIge-weEs at IJling toHy as much exceeds the Old for Pleastire as a Girl of fifteen does a Woman of fifty for a Bed-fellow. The Fidters are as faw cy as Bum-baylissfe at a Seflions-houfe> an( tug you by the Sleeve for Half-a-crown thi very first tinie of your appearance. Thi chief Diverfion at the Wells, is to Stan one at another; and he or She that is bef drefs’d,isthe greatest Subject of the Morn ing’s Tittle-tattle. Thechiefest Com pie ment among the Women is, I hofe the Wa BE tersfa.fi well with your Ladijhif \ which is
in plain Englifhj I hope, Madam, you p-f well. The Sons and Daughters of For time thrive here So mightily, it is hard t( * ^ know the Lady from the Jilt, or the Lore
from the Sharper, all Higglede-piggledc
mh
*
A Vdcquet from	iVCs,
itiixone among another, like Skulls in a Charnel-houSe, or Knaves and Cuckoldsf at my Lord-Mayor’s Show. A Glals of Rheni^Sh is here prefcrib’d as the only Cordial with the Waters; and a Handful of Comfits esteem’d the best Breakfa st. Phy-sttians Swarm here like Pick-pockets at a Fair; and Quality neither Eat, Drink, or . Exonerate without the Advice of a Doctor. The chief Leacliery of the Beau’s is, to, watch the Ladies into their private Apartments, and if their Ears are but blest with a Whiz when a Belfa opens her Sluce, they think themfelves as happy in their own Fancies, as an old Leacher that peeps thro’ a hole and fees a Nymph in her Bathing-, tub. Batchelors and their Mistreffes come
I
hither in Pairs; but marry’d People come down fingle. Men without their Wives,; and Women without their Husbands; fb that I fiippofe, whilst one part are here pieafing their Palates with a new Difli, the other may be gone to the Bath to feast, their Appetites with a frelh Dainty. The. chief Virtue afcrib’d to the Waters are the,
~ *	f
following two: They very often cure the Green-ficknefs in Maids, and caufe Fruit-fulnefs in marry’d Women, provided they-are but properly administer’d by a young
vigorous Fhyfitian: The old grifly Gjf^*
4 A Pacquet from Willh.
nifts have but little BufineSs here; th youngest Doctor, by the, Female Sex, i esteem’d the ablest, and runs away wit the most Practice; for which. Reafon believe theWomen come hither to be Kils’ for Health-fake, much rather than be Ph) Sick’d; and when the Patient is fb bad tte neither Lip nor Belly-Salve will do h< good. She may be honestly given over j past Cure. Some Fools indeed, thro’ the great Opinion of the Waters, have mac their Bodies Such perpetual Aquaduct' that they have waSh’d themfelves ini meer Skeletons, and go creeping aboi like West-Indian Creoiians troubl’d wii the dry Belly-ach, It’s a rare place for Beau to be Jilted in a Wife, for many 1 up to be great Fortunes, who feed the Mouths with their'Fails, and cover the •; Backs with their Bellies. . Maiden-hea here bear an extravagant Price, for a gre Lover of Priority, gave fifty Guinea’s f one at Second-hand, tho’ he bought it f Span-new, but unhappily heard fbon < ter, it had been fold for a Hundred a Fo night before; and when he.found himf cheated by his Commodity - broker, w forc’d to undergo the laSh of the old Pi
verb, A Fool and his Money were foon Part
Handfbme Men come here to a good M;
k
« •
A Vacquet from Will’i-. c
ket, they may felS themfelves for what Money they pleafe, il they will but turn Slaves to pamper’d Leachery : Here are a great many Gold-mines to be found under the Petticoat, where an able Workman may line his Pockets at the trouble of Dig-ing. , Here are many parts acted worth a wile Man’s Observation; Gentlemen play the Fool, Ladies play with their Squirrels, poor Wh— play the Jilt, Sharpers play the Knave, the Beau’s play the Bubble, the old Women the Bawd, the Servants the Pimp, and the Fidlers play like Devils.
Their chiefest Pastimes, next the old Trade of Basket'making, are the following four: Bowling at RuB-htillj where Fools lofe their Money, and Knaves win it; Dancing upon Southhorough-greedy wdiere he that has another Man’s Wife bv the Hand ov’r Night, often makes him a Cuckold ' before Morning ; Walking in the Grove, where the Ring-doves Cooe above, whilst the Lovers Bill below, and project all things in order to make themfelves happy at their next merry meeting; and Gaming at the Groom-Porter’s, where every one strives to win, whilst the Box runs a-way with the Money.
Lodgings are fb dear and fb fcarce, that a Beau is fometimes glad of a Barn, and a
A a 3	Lady
4
« -
6 A Facquet from W'iXi^s,
%
Lady of Honour content to lye in a Garret : The HorSes being commonly put to Grafs, for the Servants to lye in the Stable. My Landlord was a Farmer, and his very Out“houSes w^ere fb full, that having ihear’d fbme Sheep, he abated me Half-a-crown a Week, to let the Wool lye in my Bed-chamber ; by which means a Tick one Night had bury’d himfelf fb far in my Belly, that I was forc’d next Morning to borrow a Shooe-maker’s Pincers to pluck the bloodrthirsty Vermin out of his Neft by the ArSe, before I could get rid of him, for he had fill’d his Belly fb mil, and Buck fb clofe by the strength of his new Diet, that he held his hold like a Bull-dog; foi which Offence I puniSh’d him Blood foi Blood, according to the Old Law.
The most Noble of their Provifions, is a Pack-faddle of Mutton, and a Wheat-ear-pye, which is accounted here a Feast for an Heliogabalus; and is indeed fb costly a Banquet, that a Man may go over tc AmflerdamArQ^Lt half a dozen Friends witi a FiSh-dinner, and bring ’em back agair into their own Country, almost as cheaj as you,can give yourfelf and your Mistref a true Tunbridge-EntQvt?im\n.ml. The Lt quors chiefly produc’d by this part of th< Ciountry, are Beer made of Wood-dryk i	Malt
A Pacquet from WillT. 7
Malt, and Wine drawn out of a ® rch-tree; the first is infected with Such a fmoaky Tang, that you would think it was brew’d in a Chimney; and every Pint you drink, instead of quenching your Drought, begets a Thirst after a Gallon ; the latter, as ’tis ordered, drinks almost like Mead, and niiakes a Man’s Mouth stnell of Honey if he had aBee-hive in 1; is Guts,and js (b abominable windy, that the breath pf a Man’s Breech, after drinking off a Bottle, is strong enough to found a Trumpet. Here is plar-ret good at a great Price, but at the common Rate not drinkable: We have rattle-
*	.	.	r	J*
headed Vintnei*s, and drunken Drawer^; and the Rooms we are forc’d to fit in, are, Some of’em, as Unfurnifh’d as the Garrets of a SpungingshQufe, being hung with Plai-sterers-tapistry, border’d round with Black like an old W bore’s Pin-up-petticoat, fur-niSlf d with a Spanifh Table, that stands as ticklish as the Nofe of an old flux’d Strumpet, round which are three or four era fie Turkey-vjoxk Conveniencies, which, by often carrying Double, are over-occupied into filch a Weaknefs,*that they Squeak when they’re fat in, like a Litter of fucking Piggs in the Sow’s abfence; Tho’ 1 must confeS, for the Reputation of the Place, in the greater Taverns you have better Ufage,
A a 4	but
8 A Idcquet from WillV.
but you must pay as dear for it, as a Country ’Squire does at Moll QmrkPs for tickling his Rump with a Pair of Whore’s Kidneys.
Therefore if the Truths I’ve told you, will encourage you to follow me, pray let your Pockets be well furnifh’d, for if here you either want Money,or Spend it Sparingly, you’ll be as little look’d upon as a Man would amongst a Parcel of Beau’s, that Ihou’d pluck out an Oval Watch or a Pumf SnuSb-box. In your next let me hear what you have determin’d to do, as to your coming, or not, and you will oblige
I
0
$ ^
0
Tour Friend and Servant^
•
\
\
9
t
«
0
•*
> •
J
\
« •
*
ft
A Pactjuet from WillT. 9
A Letter of Advice from an old experienced City-Leacher^ to his Daughter at the Boards ing-Schooly being Rules to raifeher Fortune.
Dear Daughtery
I	Hear you are a very forward Baggage of Fifteen, and the World thinks you Handfbme: Your Gifts and Acquirements must fiipply the Wa nt of Money; for tho’ your Education has been large, your Fortune will be but little; it being a Rule with us Citizens, to bestow most upon our Daughters Breeding, when we have least Portions to give ’em, upon this Constdera-tion. That in cafe we cannot make ’em Fortunes to match with Tradefmen, we are in hopes, if they are Beautiful and Well-bred, they will have Graces enough to recommend ’em to Gentlemen; for it a Shopkeeper takes to him a Wife without a Portion,he’s pointed at as much for a Fool,, as a Man is for a Cuckold, whofe Wife is brought to Bed within three Months after he has marry’d her • But Gentlemen of E-states may pl^ the Simpleton at any time, and its being fo common a thing, makes it past off as much unregarded, as Champar-ty in Lawyers, or Simony amongst Clergy-
V
|0 A Iacquet from WilF.r.
gy-men; therefore, fince the Happinefs < that part of yoiir Life to come depends uj bii the good Management of this weight Foint, Matrimony, I think it neceffary t ^rni you with thefe following Instruct Oils, that in cash Fortune flings a Man e Merit in your way, yop may know ho\ to counterfeit tkosh outward Signs of ir ward Excellence, as may deceive the wish! Man into a great Opinion of your Vertue* tho’your natural Inclinations may be loof and vicious; Or if it be your fortune t fluSh a welhfledg’d Woodcock, in whoE You can be happy, I Shall teach you wit what alluring Arts and prevailing Subtle ties he is most likely to be taken.
Jf you would pi'oeure the Esteem of ai ingenious Man, be as rnodest in his compa ny as a Nun at High Mafs; yet let you Carriage be as stately as an Alderman’ Daughter’s at a publick Feast; for ’tis i receiv’d Opinion among the Judges of you Sex, That st referv’d Behaviour is the SiireS Sign of Vertue, and Pride in a Woman th best Guardian to sheure it. BeSure be a Iparing of your Words, as vyife Men are o. their Promishs, or Courtiers of their Per formances; and when you do fpeak, let ii be fbmething that’s pretty, but as concifi as the Prophecy of an Oracle; for an inge
niou!
It Pdcquet fiom Will’ i.	11
nious Man dreads the Tongue of a talkative Woman much more than a Squirrel does the NoiSe of a Drum, or an Atheist a,Clap of Thunder. Take care to be o-bliging,but not free; and tho’ referv’d, yet not haughty ; for Scorn. or FondneSs to a deshrving Man, are equally intollerable, • Tho’ you love the Town as dearly as an old Citizen’s young Wife does Ttmhridgc, or Epfom^ yet be careful how you acknowledge you are enamoured witn its Vanities, condemn the noiste Hive, and Shew Aver-fion to its vicious Pastimes; fpeak Slightingly of the Plsty-houfe, tho’ you admire it as much as a ^ealot does the Church, or a Beau a Dancing-fehool, and fhew a feem^ ing Inclination to a fedate Country Life, tho’ ’tis what you abominate as much as a marry’d Woman does Barrennefs, or a Libertine the Thoughts of Wedlock. Be always ready to acknowledge the Sovereign Authority of a Husband, and the Duty and Submiflion of a W ife, tho’ your headstrong Temper is as great an Enemy to Obedience, as a Fanatick is to Loyalty, or a prbiid Woman to mean Apparrel: Let the Clergy thus be your great Example, preach up PaSlive Obedience and Non-refistance towards a Husband, as they did towards their Prince, it will pleafe your Suiter to affert it, tho’
T'	you
II	A'Iacquet from WillT.
you nev’r defign to practice it. When Ik offers you a Prefent, neither Iliglit it, no be fond on’t, but receive it with as much In difference as Hypocrites fay their Prayer^ or read a Chapter in the Bible. W hen he of fers to kifs you, neither turn your Head to wards him, nor Srom him, you may ver ture to let him modestly take a Salute, br be fure don’t you offer to give it him; b careful alfb that you pout not out your Li whilst he is poflesting of the Favour, fc that’s as much as to fay Yes, to what is ol ten obtain’d without asking for. If he ai tempts to gripe your Thigh or Finger, c handle the Bottom of your Stomacher, th( you are never fb well pleas’d with what he going about, you must put on a counterfe Frown,and feem to be as i\ngry as a Judg when,thro’ Mistake, the Bribe is prefente to himfelf, that Should have been given i his Lady. If he offers to touch your Bui bies, you must cry, Nay, pray, Sir : if I huggs you about the Middle, you mu cry, O fye. Sir 1 And if he preSumes i tickle the Palms of your Hands, you mu then cry, Foh. .Never rail against any your own Sex, for that difcovers ill N ture. Never commend one Man in tl hearing of another, for that’s ungratef to him that loves you. Tho’ you fan(
Wii
A Fdcquet from W illT.	i ^
W^ine as much as a Beau does Chocolate, never be feen to drink any in the company cS a prudent Man that Courts you, Idl it wastes away Dilcretion, which is the Bridie of the Tongue, and cauSes the unruly Member to betray your Weakoels. Never mifs Church, tho’ you go tost with as ill a Will as a Scold does to a Ducking-stool ; and if you cannot anfwcr the Reader as you ought to do, diffemble with your Lips and your Eyes as if you did; for without a little Hypocrifie you’ll never be thought a devout Christian: Let your Table-library in your Bed-chamber be fur-niShed with good Books, and tho’ you mind ’em as little as a Cuckoo does her young Ones, yet turn down a frest Leaf in the Practice of Piety every Day,and lay it open in the Window. Hold up.your Pan when any body names Smock; blust when any body praifes you; turn your Head when any body looks at you *, bow when you are drank to fitting; courfie when you’r bow’d to standing-: and whenever your Lover fays, God five the King, be Sure you cry, Amen; and it will oblige him wonderfully ; for Loyalty in a Woman, tho’ it fignifies nothing, will fbme-times take with a Man of Worth as much as any thing : Mind theSe Rules with an
ingc-
ij. A Fdcquet Irom WiilT.
ingenious Man, and you may prpbab gain your Ends to your Life’s Happinef therefore every Morning, after your Pra; ers, Con this over as your next best Le ion, till you have it as perfect as an Actre has her Part, and one time or other yc may chance to find it ufeful.
But if it be your fortune to be lik’d by Fop, poffefs’d of an Estate stifficient t maike your Life comfortable, you mu then cnange your Behaviour as much as Camelion does its Colour, turn your Ri lerv’dnefs into Freedom, your Silence ini Tattle, your Gravity into Air, your Difcn tion into Vanity, your Wit into Puns, an fee all over Action like an Eel new-takei according to the following Directions; fc the Surest way of Trapaning a Fool, is b humouring the Cockfcomb with the lik Folly, as the Fox catches the Hare, b distembling, the like Fear, &c.
In the first place you must mimick hi Cringes andForirialities, ^s if you were hi Monkey; and Shew as many Antick Ge stures in your Complements as a Kittej playing with a string: be as stngular in e very thing as if you would fet your felf uj for an Original Belfa, and let one Won ih five be French in whatfbever you tall
of; Stalk abbut the R6bm" like a Peacod
ij
I
I
Pacquet from WilFr.	. 15
in the SunSiiine, and, Ape-like, never cost-tinue a Minute in one Posture: Lausfial-ways when you Speak, and endeavour rcl make every thing a Jest, tho’ not a word of Wit in’t; talk always within his Sphere; complain the Weather’s very hot in Summer, tho’ you find your leif in an Ague,^ and cry it’s cold in Winter, tho’you are witliin two Foot of a roasting Fire; rail against your own Sex for a Parcel of tawdry Minxes ; but let your own Apparel; in gaudy Colours out-lhine the Rainbow: affert Freedom in a Woman is the ostiv
1	"	m
Sign of Vertue, and that the filent Lady-is the still Sow that eats up all the Draught* You must be Sure to praile'all gay FooL to be pretty Gentlemen ; and he that stings a-way his Money most like an A is, to be a Mast of wonderful Generolity: You must rail against the grave wiSe Man, and call him the World’s Slave, one that lives upon Earth as if he did Pennance for the Sins of his Ancestors: Exprefs a Hatred to all Me^ rit; call the ParSon Heaven’s Dark-Iant-lK)m, the Soldier a Clodskul’d Heroe, the Ttadestnan nasty Mechanick; and Seem to admire no Mast but the very Blockhead you defign to make your Market on; ap« plaud his Deportment, tho’ ’tis more ridi«^ eulous than a- French Dancing*master’s f
ap-
j6 a Tdcquet from WillV.
approve his Wit, tho’ it be more nauSeor thap a Player’s ; and commend his DreS tho’ ks more Santaftick than Sir FofU. HiittePs; rail against Sermons as a ufele Cant in fb knowing an Age, and commen Plays as the more edifying Doctrine: Ca all Schollars but a Parcel of Book-learn’ Dunces, and justifie Beau Wilfon was a cur ninger Man than an ArchbiShop of Cante\ bury. Flatter him as if hie were a Princ for the more you deceive him that wa^ the more he’ll love you. Eeasexpensh to him as you can, ’tis the best way to f cure him, for a Fool will never part wit that eafily he has purchas’d dearly, tho’ ben’t worth keeping. Sonietimes con plain you have hurt your Knee, fbmetimi that your Stomacher hurts your Belly, ; play him round the BuSh where the Gan lies, and you’ll find him the more eager f< the Sport. Now and then ihew him tl Small of your Legg, but feem not to kno that he. fees it; then cla p your Hand dov your Breasts, and complain of a Flea, ’tw make him with his Fingers in the far place. Now and then fpread the Toss of his Neckcloth, or stroke a straglii Hair of his Wigg into exact Order; gi him a tickle of the Side, or take him by t Hand, play the part of a Gypfie, and t
hi
A Pacquet from WillT. i 7
him his Fortune ; for Fools are as much to be won by Love-toys, as Children are with Nicknacks; thereSore do but play the Fool with him as much as he does with himfelf, and you may draw him after you as Amber W'ill a Straw, and influence him far more than all the Stars in the Hemisphere. To Shew your Airynefs, you must flutter about the Room like a Bird in a Cage; and when you hear him humming a Minuet, you must be ready to dance to it. You’li have no occafion to alter your Carriage for what Company you See Iiim in, for none will play with him but Puppies of the fame Kind, only of another Litter. The Documents 1 have given you are fuflicient for the prefent; and if you chance to entangle fuch a Fool as I have hinted at, in the Net of Wedlock, I will then further instruct you how you Shall ufe him; in the mean time study both your Parts, that you may act either to the Life, wshen occafion requires it ; and nothing stiall be wanting, but Money in me, to compleat your Happinefs, therefore take care to marry him that wants it not, and you will add great Comfort to the gray Hairs of your aged Father,
B !>	A
t
Ij	I % A Iucquet from WillV.
, V.'r'-i'
I * '	•	■ X .*■.	I	• ^	^	4
t '	.	, . Vr ^ V
1
■ A Letter of Nervs to <S/r D. Clarke; be I	aft Account of Divid'd^ Bear-garden, 1
andyHQ^s Mujick-houfe^
I;	SadlerV IF?iZf, Ifiington.
I	•
, \
' ■ ' 6’/>,
BEing fenfible News from London i
welcome to you Country Gentlem . as a latge Fee to an old Lawyer, or I	Covenant to a Scotch Man, I though
j	could not merit the Reward of a Haui
I	of Venifbn better, than to oblige you w
the following Entertainment; which, t it be but coarfe Fare indifferently Cool yet, I hope, it may stay your Stomach rhe Market is better stock’d, and I hj Leifiire to prepare you a more accepta ' Meal.
Here has been lately calv’d in this To’ a Male-Squab Dromedary, as much to i Surprise of the City Politicks, as if tf had been threaten’d by a Blazing Star, a Whale that had Swam up to Cuckol Point: The Astrologers have made th Conjectures upon this Monster’s Birth, a do all agree, the Prodigy preSages, T1 many ill Things which have lain in i Dark a great while, will in little time
brought to Light \ and that the Down
. 1 .
I
I
A Pacquet jtm WilTT. 19
of Quakerifrn will be the Rife of a new Faction in the Church, to the great Satisfaction of Rome, and Vexation of the Eng-liQi Clergy. Tis believ’d by fbme Fools in this I'own, that tho^ ScotUttd be a cold Country, there will be warm Doings there before the Summer be over; and tho’ the
• . * • ■	0 •	\ s
hardy Loons are fb much afflicted with
the Scrubado, that a reafbnable Man can
Scarce conceive they Should be made to fcratch where it does not itch, y^t it is now credibly reported, the Spaniards have done it mofi effectually, and have quite routed the poor Gold-finders out of their Lmd of Promife; upon which the Scots are fb highly incens’d, that they have taken an Oath of Abjuration against Poverty, as well as Epifcqpacy; in order, first, to grow Rich, and then to be Revengeful.
i
t
Some of the Highlanders lately arriv’d here, give us this Account of	That
^tis fb Sudorifick a Country, they were forced to pluck off their Shirts once an Hour, and wring ’em as a Landrefs docs wet Linnen, to refrelh their Bodies; and that with perpetual Sweating they fmelt as four as a Parifh-child wallowing in its own Puke; protesting the exccfflve Heat of the Climate made ’em fb Yellow, and fb
B b 2	Freckf
0
CIO A Tdcquet from WilF^.
Freckly, that their Faces look’d gilded 1 a Meadow with Piffabeds and Butterflc ers in the middle of or like the Hi lappet of a Bedlamite’s Shirt stain’d o with Fea-t-ds. Gold, he Said, there wa nough in the Country; but found, accc ing to the old Proverb, they must
it before they mar it; which they tempted to do: but never mistrusting falfe Dice that were against’em, lost 0	ventur’d, and were forc’d to ret
^	home like a Parcel of brainiest Bub
from a Sharping Lottery.
Effom-mlls have difoover’d this Y that our Citizens Wives are very loosty ven most of ’em, to the great East Quiet of their Hubands, being gont drink the Waters, having been hard bo in their Shops for m.ore than a whole V ter, they have prudently taken the Bei of the Seafon to refreSh their Bodies ^ a little Liberty in the Country. The ( tlemen Pentioners of the Petticoat are ced to follow after for their own Sul ance, as Pickpockets do the Judges in t Circuits, to avoid the Pinches of along cation; You know ’tis natural for e Whelp to purfue his Game; and w Should the Crows Rendezvous, but ir
Ditch where the Carrion lies ? On
♦
• •	% ,
A Vacquetfrom Wilij. a\
n
days in the Afternoon the Husbands on Horfeback march out of Town in Troops, as iS the whole City was an Array of Royal Regiments: all Sunday they Spend in their Wives company, which Day they fet apart from the rest of the Six to do Family-drudgery, in Contempt of the Tenth Commandment: on Monday Morning early they return to open Shop, flowing into the Town in Droves, like Oxen on a Friday into Smthpld-M.2iv\itty or like Country Attornies at the latter End of a Term.
The Envoy from Morocco with his Lac-quer’d-fac’d Attendance, has lately done his Majesty’s Bear-garden the Honour of his Prefence, in order to fee a Tryal of Skill perform’d between two eminent Masters of the Noble Science of Defence; who, for the Credit of the EnglilhNati-on, almost chop’d one another to minc’d Meat, giving fiich a bloody Entertainment to- the Barbarian Spectators, that they hoop’d and hollow’d to exprels their Satisfaction, as if they had been Hunting an Estrich. A Butcher fqueezing in amongst the rest of the Rabble, and knowing not who they were, W*—ds^ fays he, what hav^ we got here ? A Parcel of drunken G ‘.mejiers who have loH their Cloaths at IIaz,ard, and _. MC Jent hither fcervPd uf in. Blankets to he
B b 3
p-	•
A Pacguet from W ilFj .
,gtiiAd At: Egady fays he, you had need he merry Indeed \ I am fure if I was in yo Cafe, infiead of (bowing my felf at the Ben gar deny I fhould fneak home like a drunk FaIJon, damn Fortum for a Jilt y and hid t Devil take the Dice, Hujhy hujhy fays
nothcr standing by, you had heB have a a what you fayy fir thefe are the Molotto
haJfadorSy who are come the I^ord knows h
far out of their own Country on purpofe to thejfjng. Are they fo? fays the Butche I could find in tny hurt to tell , if U will come next Thurfday, they (hall fee ; Dog run. As the two Fellows were tl Dialoguing, one of the Gladiators gave 1 Adverfary fiich a Chop in the Noddle, if he had defign’d to have cleft it, as a Be ing-cook does a Sheep’s Head for the P( ridge-pot, which occafion’d fiich a Sho that had a Regiment of City-cuckolds, t on a grand Training-day, taken the Dur
hill in BunhiLfieldSy to Show the Mob t
Policy of War, they could not have expr more joy for their mighty Succefs over t Heap of Sir-reverence, than was Sho\ here in Contempt of the Victim, and F nour of the Conqueror.
Here has been lately a wonderful D covery made by a true Son of the Chur 6f England^ from whence the Samyfons
t
A Facquet from WillV. n ^
the preshnt Age derive their Strength, most credibly afferted by feveral Clergymen, and believ’d and and reported by many Zealots, as in manner following, (viz.,) There l>ein2 about this I'own a modern Contender with Mankind fdr Strength and Agility, who, tho’ he be no bigger in Stature than a middle-Siz’d Wine-Porter, has often, to the Admiration of all .Spectators, taken two as lusty Fellows as you stall find upon the Butter~box~rvdk at high Change, plac’d ’em upon a Joynr-stool, and lield ’em up at Arms-end, as eafily as l ime does his Hour-glafs, Supporting ’em in tliis Posture for as long a Space as a stuttering Man would require to pronounce Cacademon in; having repeated this Experiment of his Strength in many Publick - houfes a-bout Town, he at last rais’d himlelf to as great Fame as his Horfe-drawing Brother had done before him: But being one Day met with by a Parist-derk, a Didimm of the Church, who would give no Credit to the Report, unlefs he had leen the Peiform-ance, being too converfant with Priests to believe too fbon in Miracles, offer’d to wa^ ger a Dozen of Drink with this Goliah in Epitome, that he could not lift him and another after the manner aforelaid; the Wager being commenc’d, the Parochial
B b 4	Tag-
azj. A fdcquet from WillV.
T agger of the Prayers and Collects, mount ed his Wooden fcdeftal with his choSe; Partner, upon which, for want of room they were forc’d to hug one another a ciofe as a Pair of Lovers in Copulation, t keep them Selves from falling; having tht plac’d themSelves in proper order, flanc ing like the Sign Gemini painted on a Coi jurer’s Door-caSe, up rifes the Giant in M iiiature, and furiouSly attempts to perfon the Wonder ; but his Strength fail’d hin and he became a Laughter to the who Company: Upon which, in a great Past on, he ask’d them what they had in the Pockets; both feeling, to fatisfie their di appointed Sampfon^ the Clerk found a. Con mon-Prajer^Book about him^ and the otb one of George KjitEs Sermons, which I defir’d ’em to fling by upon the Table; being done, he lifted ’em with as much ea as a Cook would tofs aPancake,to the gre Astonishment of all that beheld him: T1 poor Clerk, befides loflng the Wager, tur bled off the Stool one way, and his Cor panion another, both likely to break the Necks; which they look’d upon as a ji Judgment for laying aSide the Works RighteousheSs, to Submit to the Power ^tlie Devil. This Report being Spread broad, and receiv’^1 as an undoubted Trut
ha
A Tdcquet from WillV. 15
hath rais’d the Common-Prayer to fb high an Esteem amongst Presbyterians, and G. KjitEs Doctrine to fb great Credit amongSt Quakers, that both Sects come over as Sast to the Church oS England, as ever Beggars did from France, or Boors from Holland, in the late Revolution.
Some time Since there was brought from the Devil‘ss Arfe PtE Peak, to Miles\ Mu-fick*houfe at 1/Ungton, a strange fort of a Monster, that does every thing like a Monkey, but is not a Monkey ; mimicks Man like a Jackanapes, but is not a Jackanapes; jumps upon Tables, and into Windows upon all Fours like a Cat, but is not a Cat; does all things like a Beast, but is not a Beast ; does nothing like a Man, yet is a Man: He has given Such wonderful Content to the Butchers of CUre-market, that the Houfe is every Day as full as the Beargarden ; and draws the City-Wives and and Prentices out of London, much more than a Man bang’d in Chains for Ravishing his Sweetheart, and Knocking heron the Head to oblige her to keep CounSel: It happen’d lately upon a Holiday, wlien honest Men M^alk’d abroad with their Wives and Daughters, to the great Confumption of hot Buns and Bottle-ale, that the Fame of this Mimick had drawn into the Mustek-
4
f
I'	16 A Facquet from WillT.
j fick-houfe as great a Crowd of Spectatoi
as the notable Performances of Clm ! of Barmt ever drew to the Theatre; ti I Frape being thus affembled in the low
Room, and the better fort of Guests beir elimbM into the Gallery ; a little Creator who before walk’d erect, and bore the mage of a Man, transform’d himfelf ini ; a Monkey, and began to entertain tl
Company with fuch a parcel of pretty Pu| Tricks, and mimical Actions, that the were all as intent upon the Baboon’s F< garies, as if a Mandrake had been tuml ; ling thro’ the Hoop, or a Hobgoblin dai
cing an Antick ; Whilst the Eyes and Ac miration of the Affembly were thus deej ly engag’d, the Skin of a large Alegatoi stuff’d with Hey, hanging within the To of the Houfe, and the Rats having bui row’d thro’ the Celin, could come dow at pleafure and fport upon the back of th Monster, one of the revengeful Vermir to put a Trick upon fbme of his Prothe Bacon-bellies, who being forward to pee into every Hole, were entic’d by the fine of the Hey to creep down the Serpent Throat, his Jaws being extended , an< whilst they were ranfacking their WeB In dim Hey-loft, the unlucky CheeSe-biter, a ’tis fuppos’d, to Shew his Malice to th
rest
t
• »
A Pdequet Jrom Willh. ay
rest, who it’s likely upon fbme Difgust, had excluded him their Company, knaws in two the Cord, to he even with ’em, down comes the Aligator with his Bell y full of Rats upon the head of the Monkey, and laid him Sprawling like a dead Frog kill’d by a dry Summer, giving fbme of the Spectators a wipe with his Tail as he fell to the Ground, who ran away as much frighted as if they had been astauited by a Flying Dragon ; the Rats with in-fide being under a great Consternation at fb violent a Shock, came running out of his Mouth in a wonderful Hurry, like fb many Saylors from between Decks, when a Ship at Midnight has struck upon a Rock; The Rats thus bolting into the Room from between the Aligator’s Jaws, thofe Emblems of Destruction, were as much Surpris’d as the People, fbme falling foul upon the Teeth thro’haste to fee what was the matter,rip’d their Guts out by the way, and hung upon the ill-favour’d Instruments of Mastication, like the Limbs of Traytors upon Spikes; others, in the Harry, for want of Care, had wedg’d themtelves in between his pointed Grinders, and hung fprawl-ing like fb many Soldier’s Companions between the inflexible Teeth of an Ivory-Loufe-trap; thofe that without Hurt e-
fcap’d
i8 A Pdcquet from WilFi'.
shap’d the dangerous Weapons with whicfi hisjaws were fortified,by clearly leaping o« ver thosh Shagged Pallifadoes,within which they were encompafs’d, being amaz’d ai the disorder’d Crowd, ran up the Womenj Petticoats for Shelter, that had they beer all in hard Labour in the middle or theii long Oh, the Surprising Accident could noi have been heighten’d with more intollera-ble Screaming: I could not forbear laughing to she what a furious Attack the Rati made upon the Rabble at their first leap ing out of their new-faShion’d Nest; the} were sh reSoIute in their Onsht, that th( Sally made by the Grecians upon the Tro jans, oijt of the Belly of the Horsh, couk not be more terrible to the Inhabitants o the Town, than this Small Party of litti Quadrupedes were to the Female trem bling Spectators; shme of the more Wick ed thought Beelzebub was come among! ’em, in order to devour ’em, and that h was Spewing up a Legion of young Devil for the Same purposh; most of the PeopI were sh shar’d they run out of the Houi without paying their Reckoning, and fe\ who were got Safe into the Fields, wer Pershns of Such tender Conshiences, as t run any Hazard in returning to Show the: HoneSty: The Women were most of’ei
ru
%
1
A Pacquet fiom W iirj. a 9
run into the Garden, where, to Sright down the little Devils, who had taken Sanctuary in their Plackets, they fell to Shaking their Petticoats like a Woman crept out of the Straw, when fhe shatters her Mice to help Conception in a Sruitlcfs Neighbour. A Butcher amongst the rest of the Company, being attended with a brindle Runner at the rough Game, who, as he lay Couchant between the Leggs of his Master, efpying the fell Monster in the middle of the Room, gave a leap from the place like a Lyon at his Prey, shishs the inanimate Scarecrow with as little Mercy as a Bailiff does a Prishner after making an Eshape, baiting the ill-favour’d gaping Shell with as much Fury, as ever St. George did the Dragon in defence of a Maidenhead, that it made as good Sport for us in the Gallerie, as the old EaH-IndiA Compa: ny found at the worrying of the Tyger: A greater Confufion, for the little time it lasted, was never shen amongst Bullies in a Bawdy-houSe, or Butchers at a Bear-gar-den; shme Swearing, Some staring, shme laughing, and my Host chafing at the great Difbrder, that had ten Couple of BArdholomew - fair Fools, in their painted
Pontificallibuffes,been to have baited a Poet to Death with Puns, W itticifms, and
Cun-
A Facquet from WillT.
Cunnundrums, on the neglected Stage DorfeFdarden Theatre, it could not ha more diverted the Spleen, or cur’d the E pocondria in a melancholy Spectator, th the many pretty Accidents that luckily« tended the Downfal cS the Aligator.
Pardon me, dear Friend, that I have n thing to recommend to you more wort! I	of your View; my Defign at this time
I	only to make you Laugh : I know at I
I.	Sure whiles you love to be merry ; and
what I have writ will but in any meafij gratifie your Humour when you are So < fpos’d, it is all that’s coveted by
Tour ajjfured Friend^
%
%
.1111 . im9	.
4
$
%
I
%
A Pacquet fiom WillV. 51
A Love-letter from a Gent km ah to a Crook-' ed LAdjtj 8cg.
MAIAmy
YOu have often charg’d me with Flattery in my Addreffes to your Ladi-fhip, and think I cannot love you for a Wife, becaufe of your Deformity: To deal plainly with you, ufingno more Diffimu-lation than one GenevA Christian would do with another, upon my word. Madam, the Singularity of your Shape, next to the Prettinefs of your Fortune, was the Second Motive that induc’d me to bear an honourable Regard to your dear diSlocated Per-fbn, whom lam very defirousof making my lawful Copartner, for the Sundry Rea-Ions following:
In the first place. Madam, I have taken inte my Confideration the common Frailties of your Sex, having found, by Obfer-vation in this debauch’d Age, that Incontinence is ufually as inherent in a pretty Woman, as CovetouSnefs in a Clergy-man, or Jealoufie in an old Fumbier; and have
from thence concluded that Such Vertue is
% ^
the most fecure, amidst the Wars.of Venusy th^t has the least Beauty to invite Love’s
Cham-
\
t
01 A Facquet from'W'lWs.
Champions to attack it; then confequent ly that Woman is most likely to prove: nappy W^ife to a Man who dreads Cue I	koldom, whofe Vertue, like your Ladi
I	Ship’s, is fortified with fb strong a Bull
work, that none, linlefs thro' Spight, mor
I	than the Honour of the Victory, would at
;	tempt to conquer.
Secondly, Madam, I Should think m; 'I	Self exempted stem the great Trouble c
Difeovering your Difpofition, which fbm times proves a Seven Years Task for a mai ry’d Pilot to fathorn, before he finds or the way to steer rightly for the Safety c his Family ; but in you I take it for gram '	ed, your Conditions are as crooked as th
, Mould they’re cast in, and do affure you, ii	had rather marry a Woman like your La
diSbip, who I have good reafbn to believ
II	would be ill-humour’d to every body, tha
I	a compleat Beauty, who, thro’ the Sweei
li	nest of her Temper, would be good-na
I	tur’d to others, as well as my felfi
;!	Thirdly, Madam, Becaufe you are
Lady of incomparable Breeding, and ha\
i	double the Complaifancc of a straight W(
man, for you never Cur’ste but you Bo^ at the lame time, alfo hate to Shew tl
II	ill Manners of turning your Bacfofide uj
I;	on any body; and an humble Deportmei
i,i	. beir
ii	‘
•: i
!ii < •
ii:
A Pacquet from Willby, 55
being a great fign of Grace, makes me believe you a good ChriStian, tho’actuoked Difciple ; and that you labour hard in the Paths you tread, to be tliought an upright Woman.
t
Fourthly, Madam, I confickr there’s but little Difficulty in making yuu conformable to my own Temper, becaufe you are , already bent to my Bow, and can do no i otherways than stoop to any thing I stall ddire you to Submit to, which humble .Condefcention must contribute highly to a Husband’s Happintfs: Befides, Should you chance toover-hear a loud unmannerly Laugh or idle Jest arile in Company^ you’d be apt, for the eafe of others,, to take it all upon your ovvm Back.
Fifthly, I am perfwaded, Madam, you will make Matrimony a very healthful State, for I dare fwcar, wliofoever mar- s ries you, will never bring himfeif into a
Consumption by a libidinous Excels with his own Wife.
. »
Sixthly, Madam, I confider the Gqd of Love is a great Archer; and you being as crooked as a Bow, and I as streight as an Arrow, were we both lock’d up together in the cafe of Matrimony, the blind Deity, who delights fb much to Shoot at Hearts^ would doubtlefs think us fit In-
C G	struments
I	’	•
(
*
I
i
5^4 A Vdcquet from WillT.
i
strimients upon Occafion, for the Bufij of Love, and by Vertue of his Power wc in all Amity preferve our Happinels, ; ■	I doubt not, but whenever I am drawr
I	to the head, I Shall hit the Mark.
I*	~
Seventhly, Madam, I must needs c fefs, I love a Woman, as a true Spc man does Venifbn; who, if the Meat but well feafbn’d, and the Crust but gi in its kind, has very little regard to FaShion of the Pasty; fb I doubt not I	your LadiShip (tho’ Nature has mouh
you into a homely Form) has as good FI to fatisfie the Appetite of a hungry Lot I	as if your stdes had been railed accord:
I	to Art, up to the best Proportion; Befic
I	in Fruit we always find that Crumplii
i	are the Sweetest.
I	.	♦
t
\
I hope, Madam, the Reafbns I have ven you will prove flifficient to convii you I can love you for a Wife, notwi standing your outward Imperfections, all I would defire with a Female He mate to Sweeten the BitterneSs of that bi die of Rue, are Riches and Vertue, t '	one to fecure me from Want, and the
ther to defend me from Guekoldom; ; of all Misfortunes that attend this Li
I	there are none which I dread more th
I	I
i
j
!
A Tacquet from WillV- 55
being a Buck or a Beggar: Therefore, Ma^ dam, if you will undertake to protect from the two Evils aforementioned, S will venture to plunge my felf into thatOce-an of Troubles, Matrimony; and with all good Nature and Industry (notwithstand-ing your Small Inducements) will honestly perform the refreshing Duties of a Husband ; for, to tell you the Truth, what I chiefly covet is, to live well y andtheGa-mel laden with Indian Riches, tho’hehas an ugly Bump on his Back, is, to me, far more welcome than an AlexmdePs BucH fhAm; for I must needs confels to your LadiSbip, I never value what Beast I ride upon, provided Frii but eafily carry’d: fo begging ydii will be pleas’d to take thefe things into your Gonfideration, and think me worthy of a Satisfactory AnSwer, and you will for ever Oblige, Madam, the most honest Plainctealer of all yow* Admirers,
'T"*** ' rnmmmn
»
C c # A id
.•	A
♦
/
\
!
I g6 A Pacquet from Will’j.
I
I
j
1 «
I I
I
_ _ _	<
A Letter from An EnamouPd BeaUy to a 'i
Beautiful Ladjy upon his feeing her m
Exit from that Odoriferous Treafury
Humane SuPerjluitieSy the Houfe of O-
I	I
! ' ■ '*
‘	!
'	‘	» •
Madamy
WHen Accident first drop’d in :
way fb lovely an Object as y< lelf, no Convict, at the fight of a Reprie ;	or Mifer at the finding a Bag oS old
hujfesy could have thought his Eyes mi blest than mine were with your Bea u which had So powerful an Effect upon i i	working Imagination, that I could \
conceive you to be any thing lest tha Piece of unknown Divinity, by chai fallen into this lower World, and hy \ coldnefs of the Air you past’d thro’ fro2 into a vifible Figure, wherein we mi^ clearly diScern the Form and Deportmi of thofe Beings about us arm’d with I mortality.
My Admiration of your Perfections depriv’d me of my Reafbn, and nouriSl my odd Conceit to fb great a height, tl I could not for my Life believe a Perl adorn’d with (iich awful Graces, could produc’d by the ordinary means of Gei ration,or that humane Acquirements cot
ii
»
A Facquet from WillV.	5 7
improve an Object to fb great an Exceh lence, being fully perSwaded thofeCele^ stial Forms required not for Sustenance, f'uch grcfs Foods as are eat and drank to Satisfie the craving Appetites incident to ' our feeble Carcaies, which labour under the innumerable Iiiconvcniencies of a stort liv’d Mortality, but imagin’d, by , your Angellick-iooks, you were of Rich a Chamelion-Nature, that a Bottle of Mom--f slier Air would have feasted your Cheru-bimical PrettineSs, for at least the term ■ of an Apothecary’s Prentistiip, and that you had no more occafion for a Cook or Kitchen in your Family, a Houfe of Office in your Garden, or a Clofe-stool in your BeTchamber, than a Dutch Cripple has for a Pair of Scares, or a dead Bawd for a Brandy-bottle.
I have often purSiied your nimble Footsteps in a dewy Morning, to try if I could difeover, by the Print of your Pettitoes, whether fb beautiful an Object could be compos’d of Such grofs Matter as we common Mortals; but mine Eyes were still fb dazzl’d with the Statclinefs of your Carriage, the Proportion of your Wast, and the charming Plumpnefs of your hin-dermost Allurements, tfiat I was no more able to difeern any Impreflion of a grave
Cc j	Sub’
5 8 AS^acquet fiotn WillV.
Substance tipon the Ground you trod upor ' than if I had been following fair Rofamond
Ghost upon a marble Pavement, or ha been dancing after a Fairy crols a Fai i mer’s Hall, who was running at Mic j	night to drop a Silver penny into a Buck<
!	of Water to encourage the Maid’s CfeanI
I nefs. Having laboured for fbme tin:
under this lunatick Deception, I thougi !	my Self at last in the Condition of Ixio,
I	and that I had unhappily fallen deeply i
Love with a Piece of Divinity that woul Jilt Rie at long-run, and prove hut a me( Shadow in my Embraces,but however, a ter many as ferious Deliberations as rr I	Frenzie would admit of, I thus determin
I	in my felf, that if you were not to be ei
I	joy’d, you were still to be ador’d ; fb r
!	Solv’d, if the Purity of your Nature w;
;	stich as could not admit of the former,
would take Pleafure in the latter; and il ! found you unqualified for a Bed-fellow,
Question’d, not but I Should find you qua! Bed for a Goddest, it being my full Intel to conquer you sts the one, or Submit you as the other; but Providence, in tl ! ripe ,Age of true Devotion, not fufferii
me to straggle from the right Worfhi I was plealed to clear my Eye-fight by tl
following Accident, and at once covinc !	'	n
I ^	.
I
APacquet fiom ^[\Vs,	59
me, I was about to turn Pagan to a falsh Divinity.
Riling early one Morning to my Cham?> ber*window, about the time that JpollPs EUnders had juft climb’d with their gilt Charriot above our Horizon, and having the opportunity of over-looking your Ladir Ship’s Back-lide (that is your Garden, Madam, I mean) which I always obferv’d was lb well Weeded, that there was not Jeftfb much as a Nettle for a Scold to pifs on; and as I was thus plealing my light with the va** rious Colours, and delighting my Noftistls with the mixt Effluvia’s of’ your odork Serous Flowers, who Should I fee but your Sweet Ladiliiip pop out of a ftinking Com veniency very looliy attirM in your Morn-ing-drels, to my grpat Surprife, as well as Difapointment j for the Mift which your artfull Allurements had caft before my Eyes, thro’ which I had always Seen you, was now difpersM by the Truth of your own Nature, which I found limply apparent without the leaft Ornaments or Arts to hide your Imperfections; your Face uncover’d with Pommatum, look’d as freckly as theTemples of a Carrot-pa ted . Milk-wench, and your Cheeks and Lips which before Seem’d fo rolie, by the ast
fiftance of SpaniSb Wool, look’d now as
C c 4 pale
\
\
\ •
t!^o A Pacquet from Ysfill^s.
pale as if a Green-ficknefs .Appetite inclin you to feed on nothing but Oat-meal ar Tobacco-pipes, Love’s fieShly Custjions Delight, which when trusM up with i artificial Bump appear’d So plump ar inviting, look’d as flat and as thin as tl -Buttocks of a Barhary Gelding, teem’d -flabby as the Udder of an old Cow,, ar trembl’d as you walk’d, like a Quakini pudding just plac’d upon the Table. U] on the Word of an honest Neighbour, M; dam, I never felt a greater Alteration b tween Winter and Summer, than I four in my own MicrocoSm, for my Bloo< which before was fo terribly inflam’d wit the foorching Influence of your WaSl jPaintand Patches, Rump-pads and Bu tock-bolsters, was fb frozen and congeal’t when I unhappily found my Godde turn’d into a Ghost, and the wonderfi Bleffings I expected from your Beauty t be all frustrated; that I fell down at ra Window in a Swoon under the Difaj pointment, and instead of Love, thougl: Oiould have died of an Appoplexy: Bi recovering again, was fb vex’d to thin that your Ladilhip, wliomi had chote as Diety to facrifice my Love to, Should ^2 and drink like us common Mortals, an do the more beastly Offices of FleSh an
Bloo(
A facquet fiom
Blood, that all my former Affections were
instantly chang’d into Averfion, and I can now with as muchPleafure look upon a Dutch Mastiff,or an old Cat with fore Lyes, as gaze upon a Piece of Mortality that has fb deceiv’d me; and therefore can remain no more than your Ladifhips
Neighhotir in Charity, and that’s all^
»
• . *
«
*	*	•	si
I
«
4
V •
*
V
•	4	♦
•	V
♦
1
$
4
4
4
- .1
^ •
B	«
A
i	4
i
t	»
t
f
4
\
/
•	• £ • \
• ♦
It*.,
P	•	^
0
4
t
0
t
%
•	f
/
V
I
^2 , A Pacquet Jrom WilVs.
%
%
Mr. D---------s, to be leftt at Wi]
Coffee-boufe m Goverit-garden.
1
' frcmijif/fg ou his Word to give h a pound of Snuff*
Sify
WH^n I Saw you last, ypu gave i
your Word, that you would te iTic a pound of Snuff in two Days tim blit what fignifies your Word, for if y bad kept your Word, I had had it lo ago. Now tho’ you left your W o i with me, I don’t know what to do w; it; Pm afraid no body will take yt W o R D, (I mean, for a Pound of Snul iiolcfs you retrieve it very Soon. But ;	may be, you only defign’d a Complimt
to my Understanding; believing I kn( you fb well, as not to depend upon yc Word, for Words are but Wii I	and fb indeed a Word to the Wist
j
fusticient. However, you will find, you continue thus to forfeit your W o r that your W ord, by the by, will 1 come a By-W o R D. Nevertheless, for thing may be laid in favour of your W oi !	as for Example: That, tho’ it brought i
not a Pound of Snust^ and confequen
prov
4
I	•
I
I
i
A facquet Jrom WillV.	'
proved a W o r d of no Weight; yet ’tis certain, I have taken Snuff at it, in fbme meaSure, Perhaps you may not like my Quibling, becaufe it is playing upon a W OR®; but when your Word ceafes to past in Earneff, then it naturally paffes into a Jeff:; and fb, in a W o r d, your W o R n is the Occafion of thefe Words
t	%
I’ve writ, and of many niore Words which I have still to fay, when I have ^ farther opportunity of Wording on’t with you by W o r d of Mouth, which fhall be the ne)rt time we meet, upon the W o R p of
i r
%
• r
%
Xonr Humble Servauh
> ■	\ s
#
I
•	■ U
A	•
m ■■
#
4	.j.	■	*
*
4	«»	■’
^ X. r
From,
>‘tv
' IE: V •
■;■ ^ ^ >.' ■'.
•	-	♦	'	-	f
^	»	-.j	,
■: Alrfv^- . . - <
b^N
# 7 -x^
« %
I
I	44 FacqVet from WillV.
f	' *	*	rr^	♦
t
I •*	^
*«
From d. Lady at the Batb,fc H-—- B— Effy in London,
4
\
I	fin ficcount of the Int re agues of the B
- and the chief Divert ion of both Si during the Summer-feajon : With a Jl Charaffer of the Place and the Jnh tants^ Sic. Alfo a new Poem upon
i	Ladies.	:
1	' '	•
?
6Vr,
THe many Importunities you h
us’d that I’d oblige you'with a I ter from the Bath, in Relation to the fairs of thisAlubdous City, gives me r Son to believe you fufpect me to be a Pe coat-wit, a Shee-mortal with a Male Sc
I •	that has let drop Pattern,Sampler and Bt
bin, to turn Scribling Characterifi. Bi I	’^puld have you to know,that tho’ weW
I	men are good Projectors of Love-plots, (
I	cellentPoiiticians at a Hard-labour, wii
Pratlers at a Gofiiping, and can Sometin I	ptizzle the Parfbn at the making of a Ch
’ ifian; yet we must not pretend to tl I	notable Tallent, Wit; which is a Propei
I	only to be boasted in your happy S(
I	to whom partial Providence, or your me
;	partial Policy,has made us filly Creatun
I	* b
I
\
I
(
!
A Pacquet fiom WillV.
*	*•...
but inglorious Servants, and confequentlyS arc never liister’d in Qualifications, or the World’s ESfeem,to rile equal with you,our Masters.
We can Sometimes Rave, ’tis true, as Emphatically as a Drttry-Une Actor, just ^
stagger’d from the Horie-sto^e^Tavern to \ the Stage; efpeci^lly under aLover’s Slight^ aRivai’s In justice,or a Gallants Difappoint-ment; and can Rail against thofe Vices we most practice, as bitterly as the black Robe does against Women, Wine and CovetoufheE. In stiort, we can Scold when we are vex’d, like a peeviSh Serjeant at the Bar ; or perhaps give as bad Words upon occafion,as 2.Billiftgfgate FiSh-woman, fomented with the Slander of barren Sow: fb that if there be Wit in Scurility,! do not ' know but Some of us may be qualified to past, in a mistaking Age, for good modern Satyrists, tho’ not like thofe of old, whom Painters reprefent with A lies Ears, and Goats Legs: Nature having fram’d us of a quite different Composition, giving us a Snake’s Head and a Wafp’s Breech, fq that when angry, if our Tongues fail us, by a Sting in our Tails, we often revenge our Injuries.
But however, Sir, fince you, according to the custom of the Male Sex, have been
very
ill ±6	A Tacquet fibm WillV.
! i i ■	•
’ i
very forward in your Solicitations,and ] a Woman ought, have been hitherto ba< ward in granting your Request ; yet stiow you, the most Unwilling of ( Sex may be brought to comply with c( tinned Importunities; I have at last fi mitted to gratifie your Destres, and st i	therefore proceed to give you the best I
!	foription of the Bath, my Knowledge of i
I	Place, arid the Weakest of myCapac
^'	are able to oblige you with. I Shall first 1
gin with the Company, .and rank ’em gether in the fame Order they fell unt my Observation:
Here Qualities Wives and their W( built Stallions cajole one another as pi lickly as if Cuckoldom went by Destir and extrinficai Necestity was ajustifiai Plea for committing Adultery: Husbai of the higher Rank come hitner with th Mistreffes, who wallow together with< r	Shame, in Vice and Luxury, whilst th
abfent Wives are indulging themfelve; Tunbridge in the like Liberties: For ’ti Rule with Phisttians to incur theAnathe ofpartingMan and Wife, and ifthe Pi be good for one, nothing more proper the other^ than Tunbridge Waters, 1 dies of all forts, are as plenty as Fruit i
CGstermonger’s Shop; fome great, fb
liti
♦
A Fdcquet from VvliliT. 4.7
fitde, {bme Sweetings, Some Crabs, feme ripe, Some rotten. In Short, a lustful ficurean may pleafe his Paliat from the Goldest-Pepin to the Open-arSe; Tho’ I laid of all forts, I meant to except Virgins j for I mustconfefs, I believe Maiden-heads at Maturity, are here as fcarce a Commodity, as godly Books in a Lawyer^s Li-^ brary. The meanest Courtezan, if but tollerably equip’d according to the Mode, has her Minion as well asj^nefactor; one ) j that feeds her, and another that file feeds.
A Lady of Pleafure being the Efcutcheon, of Iniquity, and the Cully and Fully her two Supporters, hanging thus like St.
Clock,betweenBtii^r^^r and for both to knock at in their turns ; whilst She, like a true mettled Gentlewoman, is willing to hold ’em tack: tho’ like the two Clock-work Loggerheads, they were ble to strike the garters: My own Sex,* that labour under any IndiSpofition, are here as Politick as Nigardly, for they fiiia up in one, both Phyfician and Gallant, and make him do fomething more for his Fee^ than prescribe to the Apothecary. The precife Lady too, wants not the Cunning, to at once cheat the World and fave Charges converfing with few effe but tlie Clergy, as most jshitabk to her Piety; who,
^	'	r
to
1
I ’	i
j	A Facquet from WillT.
to gratifie their Care of her precious So i!	has fbmetimes a good Living, but at
ij	times	a Pulpit at a Preacher’s Servi
II	where	he may thump till his Heart ak
before he will hurt the Cupieon, a jj	make the most of his Text, before fh<
I	complain of the length of his Sermon; i
knowing^ by Experience, if the Subject well Squeez’d, ’twill afford abundance I	Matter: In Short, they are pair’d th
I	The English Lady and her Captain M
;	donnely bymyShoul, Mzd^m Buxom ^
’Squire Limberham walking together, li i	the two Emblems of PharoaEs Drea
L
Plenty and Famine, one being as plui as a Pincufhion, and the other as thin a Comb-caSe. The Skeleton of a Lo cringing to a	Head-dreSTer, a:
he was begging a little found FleSh I	cover his rotten Bones, that the Wal
band of his Breeches might Sit eaSie wi out gauling his Hips: The common T derand the Beau, who struts by the S of his Mercenary MistreSs, like a Dui hill Cock by his Favourite Pullet,to wa her from aiSpencing her Favours to Neighbouring Rivals; the preciSe Hy crite and the Brawny Chaplain, asdoSi NunandFryar: They eat together, w together, bath together, pray together,?
t
4
A Pactjuet from W iir.r. 35
as many believe^ do Something elfe toge-^ ther j for in Such a merry Age as this, the Lambs of the Lord must play j And indeed, how fearful a Sinner must that Woman be^ that dares not venture as near Helkgates, as her holy Guidethatconducts her?
About len a Clock in the Morning, all thele have recourSe to the Bath^ where, to mortifie the Pride of my own SeXj all Degrees of Females, from the Countefs to the common Crack, promiScuouSIy stew together,like Beef,Mutton, Pork, Sheeps-heads, Dumpling,Pudding, Carrots, Turnips, and Cabbage, in a Boiling-Cook’s Copper, at an Irifh Ord’nary, alfb Lords, Pimps, Me-chanicks, Stallions, Gamesters, Cullies and Bullies, every one expecting to receive Benefit from the univershl Vertueofsthis kirld Nature’s Bagnio, which,like a Quack’s No^ flrum^ is preferib’d by most Phyfkal Wife^ akers, in all forts of Distempers, as Pox, Gout, Stone, Rheumatifm, old Pains and Aches,ScrophulousTumours,Knots,Nodes, Boils, Buboesj and Barrennefs, with an &c» to include other Difeafes, too tedious to be mention’d, befides the numerous Astem-blyof afflicted Sinners. There are an intriguing Train of Amorous Water-wagtails, who come hither for Pleafiire only. Some to make therofelves amends for their
D d	De*
54	^ Fdcquet from WillV.
j	Deficiencies of their Spoufes, others t<
venge their Parents Negligence, and ;	vide themfelves with Gallants, for wa
the Dad’s Care to procure ’em Husbai and a third Sort, who (poor Creatures forc’d to fling themfelves upon their Bj like a Cat in a Skirmifh, and labour I .	and Thigh, for a bare natura 1 Su bfister
It is pleafant to obferve, what falfe and stumbles the Ladies often make ii Bath^ to tumble into the Arms of thei I	vers j and how ready the next Beau
catch at fb happy a Wind-fall, and what cleanly Conveyance a Bill of D< I	palmed out of the Crown of a Gal]
I	Cap into his Mistrefs’s Handkerchief;
I	how She, by the like Legerdemain, wi
the help of Powder-le-pimp,can conju I	a Note of Aflignation out of her Ii
Bowie which mats before her, fraij with Sweet-meets, or the like, and p I	with undifcernable Dexterity, (as She
I	gines) into the Hand of her next J
I	Neighbour, tho’ perhaps, for all her
!	ning, ’tis vifible to all thoSe whole Ey
upon her; for Love it Self being blind I	to conceive others under the fame Ci
stances.
Some more nice Ladies, under th I	tcnce of Modesty arid Privacy, fee th
I
«
)
f
1
1
<
)
T*'
A Pacquet fiom WillT. 5 5
geant of the Bath^ for Admittance at Midnight, with none but her Woman to attend her,in whom Ihe confides as much,as a Plotter against the State does in a Confederate, where She Spends but few Minutes, e’er her nimble Gallant Springs down from his Chamber-window, by the AssTistance of his
Valletand a Hempen Con veniency,and like
an impatient Leander, Swims croSs to his ex-pesting IIeroe; upon which, the Maid being a notable Baggage, of a diScerning Faculty, and not So ignorant, but to gueSs it the PurpoSe for which theSe Pains were taken, retires at a proper distance, whilst perhaps by the help of the Prolific Quality of the Bathf and a little pleaSing Industry, an Heir is conjur’d up to Some Fumbler's E-state, to the Husband’s great Satisfaction, and the unexprestible Joy of the whole Family ; which being done, the strenuous Gallant vanishes in ObScurity, and the honest Lady returns to her Lodgings, looking, like Solomon*s AdultereSs, as if stie had done no Harm. Such Intrigues as theSe, arc as common as falfe Dies at a Gaming Ord’na-ry,by which means,Quality are often made Cuckolds by Scoundrels, and many happy Children enjoy good Estates by the Mother’s fide,when the Natural Father had never more Acres than what he could plough
Dd 2	with
i	t
56 A Vdcquet fiom WillV.
I	with his Genitals. Having given yc
I	Short Specimen of a copious Subject, w
I	instead of a Letter, is much fitter for a T
I	tile : I lhall now, avoid Prolixity, and,
I	you a Shoit Character of the Town,
I	the Inhabitants, which I defire you
accept, as follows:
i	The Tovm is the most finful Part (
good BiShoprick, where the Company I	rupt their Infides as often as they cle
their Out; blacken their Souls tho’ d !	waih their Bodies; both Sexes mine
much more what the Phyfician fays, t what the Parfbn preaches. The Bath ii is a Hell-kettle of hot Water, where ast ed Sinners stew out their Dileafes, and Liquor that remains, is a Mefs of Porri for the Devil. The Temple of the I is made a Houfe of Aflignation; the w ed Congregation, a Convention of lui Hypocrites; the Pews built Ogling beigl for the Conveniency of Temptation. Sermon turn’d into Ridicule, by the Be and Belifa’^s, and the Parfbn, but doe Af Andrew that gathers the Parade togetl the Situation of the Church is very o modious for Gamesters, one Door oper upon the Raffling - Shop, and Bowli Green, fb that the Bones of the Devil r|ttkd over the Bones of the Dead,
r	____
A Vdcquet from WillV. 57
the Quality themfelves, whilst their Footmen ( purfiiant to their good Example) make Hazard-tables of the Tortih-stOHes ; and, thoughtlefs of Mortality, upon Holy Ground, at a bad Chance, calf the Devil to their Assistance : The Gentry upon the Green, are well worth a Wife Man’s Ob-■ Serration, where they ufe more Language to their Bowls, than the Driver of a Waggon does to a Team of Horfe, and much after the Same manner, only the Dialect is Somewhat different: For as the Carter crys, Grr, the other crys, ¥lea\ and as Kd^h crys,JT(3, the Bowler crys, Ralt j both Terms ufed in the fame Sence, tho’ Some thing in found they vary, fbme calling as ctrnestly to their Bowls to mend their pace, as if the Lignum Vita Meffenger was as inr telligible, as he who Sent it of an Er- , rand to.the Block; another stamping at the Trigger, to stop the Fury of his Bowl, as if at one stroke with his Foot, he could give an Earth-quake to the UniverSe, every one Shewing luch Antick Postures in his Turn, as if all the Tumblers in the Kingdom were met together, to Shew the Spectators the Flexibility of their Joints, The Lodgings, h\s true, are pretty neatly fur-hifh’d, but as dear to thoie that occupie lem, as Shops in Cheapfide; and if you
^ ■	P d t chance
3 b A FAcquet from WillT.
cliance to be fb ill, as to require the Ust a Warming-pan, it will cost you as mi in Brofh-wood, to make Coals to wa your Bed, as in Town you may buy a I of ordinary Sheets; for Firing being fb ry dear, that a Family might have tl Victuals drest in LcWc;?, could it be f down hot by the Coach, and Save Moi by the Bargain. The Inhabitants, f Months in the Year, are as proud as Lt fer^ and as fawcily imperious to their L( gers, as a rich Victualler to a Parcel Journey-men Taylors; but as humble i other Eight, as a LondondVintncv., ir long Vacation : The Servants, like th Masters and Mistreffes, are as Mercen; as Town-Strumpets; and if they anfv you but what’s a Clock, they’ll expect! Pence for their Labour; the Women bei
as ready to open their Legs as their Mout
if they can get but any thing by i Bargain; but without Interest, do ev( thing as unwillingly as a Dog that turn Spit, or a Mifer, that lends his Mon upon doubtful Security. A thoufand tin as much could I fay of this Renown Place,- were it proper to make a Letter long as an Independent Sermon,but kno ing what I have already writ,will tire ye Patience, I will change the Scene, a
pref(
• *
dl Vucquet from WillV. 59
prefent you with a Panegyrick on the
chief Beauties at the :
----rs has all the Charms,^ has all the Arts
Of Drcfs.^ to captivate and mine Hearts t Jdo Tongue cart fpeak.^ no Language can exprefs^
How Bright.^ how Charming.^ how Divine Jhe is e In her fair Face.^ her Shape^ her. Air^ her Aiein^ Heav’n is dijplay’d.^ and Paradife is feen.
Each lovely P oft are doth our Hearts enthral \
Whether fie Jtands.^ or leans or Jits.^ we fall:
Each charming Motion doth command onr Love j With her oar Hearts^ with her onr Pulfe doth move. Bat oh! What RhePrick can deferibe her Gate. When at her Heels ten thoufand Capids wait!
She negligently treads with Janty Air^
And carelefs gives the fad Beholders Care:
Nor is her Body^ than her Mind^ more bright *
Nor are her Lyes more fparkling than her \ Vit.
In fjort^ woad Mortals know what .Angels are f They look, they move^ they walky they fpeak like Her.
\
Fair D —U has the Irijh Billows ct ofs*d^
To make Invafon on the Brit if) CoaH ^
Armies o/Gij(pids do the Fair attend.^
And irreffably her Power extend:
In vain the Englifi) boaIt of ViSlories^
Ireland gains greater Conqnefis by her Eyes.
\
•k
When W—fly Dances not the Spheres above^. With Jo MHch Grace and Harmony do move j At every fiep Jhe takes with graceful Ar$^
$he fets her Foot upon a vanqHifPd Hettrt %
D d 4
t
.A Tacguet fiom WilFi.
where € re {he turns heyfelfy with dangerous Like the bright Lightningy does Jhe move and kill. I	When Jhe^ we all do move.^ and (hakCy when Jlte
Lends with her Foot, and trembles with her Knee
' • • * ^ •
'	With every motion of her Hand.^ jhe throws
'Vs down.^ and tramples on m aspegoes ;
*The lovely Conquerour walks d.re the PlaWy And in frond Triumph f rides d.re Heaps of SU '	J)o not.^ fair .Madam.^ on the F-rofirate tread •
Ho not infulty bright Tyrant.^ ore the Dead Ah ! Wound not with your Foot • alas.^ there files Lndugh HefitruSHon from your Charming Lyes.
\
i
I	■	(W’h
i	When T) — d fings^ her Breathy like fome fin
Shakes ^4 difiurbSy and agitates the Mind,
WhenD--------d dancesy Love arms every Part'y
Her Heady her Footy her ArmSy her Handfs a Da Lut Oh !	— d talksy jhe.Graces throng
About her LipSy and dance upon her Tongue •
'	. Mirthy Humoury Wity gay Converfation fhine
Jn her H’ifcourfey and make her Words Divine t Eafie and unconfirain d her Wit doth fioWy Js freOy while we that hear hery are not fo.:
|:	But.only J attempt to praife her Wity
i i	For to /peak of it IJhould write with it.
I I	,
I :
I ;
I	Nor muB we here forget her lovely NeecCy
\	Mankind^s fir B State appears in her fair Lyes ^
!	Atonce there’s Fmiecence and Faradife.	,
1 I
!:
I
!	G ■ to vpith m^xvellous, harmon'mu Art,
I	jPAg./ on the FlutCy and on the Hearer’s Heart y
i	The Infirumenty and wCy at once are firuck :
And wh^jkejhakes the NotCy our Souls are fiook
A Facquet from Willh. 41
Strange Pow^r of Art ^whkh thus canfl Arma fonnd^ Andgi"^^ v>Mh Air the firength and might to wound !
k
Bright L——11 maJies every Heart her Prize^
At once Victorious by her Voice and Eyes •
In the amazing Beauties of her Face^
With mighty Pleafure^ mighty Vain.^ we gaze •
And when the Syren Iings.^ her Tuneful Breath,^ tike PeJHkntial Fire.^ gives certain F>eath»
In Face and View the Angel doth appeary	O:
Por all we know of what thefe Spirits are.^ ^
Js only that they Smg.^ and that they\e Fair, ^
i
f
m
.1 am, Sir,
\ ^
Your Humble Servant,
r. •'	1-**	*	^
i
f
%
*
n
a
»
/
k
41 AFacquetfiomWi^Cs.
'
j \
To Mr, Gabriel Ballam: To be left ’	WillVC(^e-^c»/^Covent-garden,
' i
i	I	,
Sir,
'TT'Ho’ I have been under the Scene
Q^B
1 Silence, yet now I appear to p: my Fromife to him that can Sorgive: 1 II	make an Apology, is Effeminate; or
j!	tell Bufinefs was the Caufe, is Threa
11	bare: And therefore, I confofs I ha
I j	committed a Soloecifm in Friendship; a;
ii	lend this Sheet to do Penance. T0 furni
j; i	you with News, I cannot; and to tell y
Ii:	Cambridge Jests, that’s Foreign *, fince the
like their Learning, are confin’d only their own Meridian: To tell you their I fputes in Divinity, is altogether as stran| fince that’s out of your Sphere, and con quently/must Affront, rather thanobli you: but to add fomething for your T Pence,Cc//ier’s Book is greedily Swallow and all your little carping,envious Anfwc are, like their Authors, fcandalous. D-^ i' is the most rejected, fince his Book anfiv
cot his Title, nor his Title Mr. Colliei
In’	'
iS	^1*. y,—,0ok is not yet defoanted on, fii
ij	its Arrival is not of a Day. I can’t furn
I	you wit! A more Lines now, fince I am j
fcv iog to be Gap’d Master of Arts j therefi
P'l- '	■ '
'	A Pucguet fiom WAVs.
beg your Excufe till I arrive at Newfort^
Fttgnely whither J gang on Thurfday.
%
Your Affured Friend,
Anthony Smith.
%
T0 Mr. Anthony Smith, M. A.
Sir,
YOur Learned Cambridge Epistle I receiv’d with no common Satisfaction; for truly, Sir, it carries that Air of a Philofophy-Lecture, that I cannot fancy any thing lest, than that you have honoured me with feme Part of your Exercife that Gap’d you with your New Title of Master of Arts. I confefs, you happy Universtty-Gentlemen, with your feven Years Labour amongst Books and Letters, arrive to the Crowning your Heads with that Honourable Cap; and then, in half a dozenYears more, amongst Men and Manners here in London, you fill them with Brains too: For indeed, you Politick Architects of Literature, wifely Roof first, and then Floor, Finifh, and FUrnifh afterwards.
I affure you, Sir, you have no occafion of
doing
%
f »
; I
11	A Facquet fiom Will V,
^ I doing Penance in a Sheet, as you call yoi ; Letter; and I lefs of giving you your ow
dear Cc///>r’s Blesting, viz>. 4ssoLUTIO^ And now I talk of that famous Autho ; I	whole Book you tell me is fb greedily fwa
I	low’d amongst you, I am afraid your Cttn
bridge Swallow is better than your Dig(
I	fiion, and that Mr. Collier, Slips down wit ! I you like an Eel through a Cormorant; f(
ptherwife, if you would give your felvi
II	the leifiire of chewing upon it, you woul
h	hardly fin4.it fb palatable a Piece: F(
I	really, Sir, I arn afraid his Sophistry is j
,	much 0]iit of your learn’d Sphere, as yoi
Divinity ( you are pleas’d to fay ) is out ( mine, elfe you would not be fiich over-pa iionate Admirers of that Greatest of Car] ! I ers, and have fiich very humble Though
of the little, envious ( and therefore fcaj dalous Ones) his AnfiVerers; but poflibl your Cambridge Opinion of that Stage-Ci tick, may, like the rest of your Learninj i; be confin’d, as you call it, to your own M
ridian, and then you cannot do yourfelve nor the World rtiore Justice, than to kee them both amongst you, efpecially if yoi Opinion and Learning are both Of a Piec
I' ■	■ , I : i	C ■	i i
am^
i	Totir moft hninhle Servant^
'	GabrieL Baliai
Pi
« '
<
■ ! » ^
i
»
'	A Pacqaet from WillT. 4.5
l'
I
I
r
j P. S. Mr. Gongreve'’/ Aftfmr is come out^
wherein he f roves Mr. Collier to be a very heneH Mm\, by his falfe and imperfeI^ Cita^ tions^ and his becoming Affurance, in Charge ing him with his own Nonfence: All this is very vlain^ and fully proved, with mildy yet force able Arguments, As to Mr. Dennis, / muH be filent, for I have not yet read him,
¥
A Letter from an AcIrefs of the Play-Hou/e, to a Stroler in the Country, concerniug Re* formation of Manners, and the Suppreffing of Drolls in Bartholomew-Tt/r.
X
My dear Harlikin,
IWas in great Hopes we fhould have once more met, according to our old Custom, at the grand Revels at St. Bartholomew, to have folac’d our Selves over a fat Pig and a Bottle, and have Droll’d upon the past Hardships of a long Vacation; but the Master-Bee of the great Hive, the City, to pleaSe the peeviOi Wafps, and zealous Horn-heads of the Canting Crew, has buzz’d about an Order, There Shall be no Fair, to the Frustration of our Hopes, and Disk ppointment of our Creditors, that the Tally-Men walk about biting their
Thumbs,
4
V d.
■I- I
I
I 4.6 A Tdcquet fiom Wilier.
I	Thumbs, like a broken Gamester at;
1	_	^	,
ii! Ordinary: And our adjacent Cooks ai
II	Ale - houfe - keepers, have fb alter’d th( ;|| Countenances, that they look upon
ji	Players with as evil an Afpect, as a ri
|!!	Citizen does upon a poor Relation, or ;
ji uncharitable Ufiirer upon an infblve j i	Debtor.
1' 1
![ I	But notwithstanding the fabulous B
i ports of totally Abolishing the Fair, t II [	great Defign was concluded in Prejudi
|| i chiefly to our Quality or Function \ a I j enquiring into the Reafbns of this our t i| rible Perfecution, I found the follow! :i I Charge had been exhibited against us: j I	The Principal Caufes of the Wickedn
l|; of the Age, fay, the Reforming Zealc
are prophane Drolls, wherein they us’d ridicule the Grandure of the City, in C(
I	tempt of the wife Magistrates thereof a
il I	make a Lord-Mayor ( as in the Renowi
II	Play of Whittingtofty ) beholding to
ij I	mean a Creature, as a Tabby Cat, beca
^ I She was a good Moufcr,fbr hisRiches a
his Mayoralty; and are fbvery infbl in the face of the City, as to hire a Paun gutted Porter, for half a Crown a Day represent an Alderman in a Scarlet Go\ when a Lean-ribb’d Scoundrel, for 1 micking a Fool in a Blew Jacket, £ i I	' h
ii;
A facquet from WillT. 4.7
have Forty Shillings; which indeed (lay they ) are inSiifferable Indignities to be put on the Worthy Magiftrates of EngUntLs Fam’d Metropolis : Further, charging us with teaching upon our Stages, the wick-ed Mystery of Intriguing, Instructing their Wives, by our Plots, to be too cunning for their Husbands; and their tractable pretty Daughters, to be too witty for -their Parents: Allcdging, That had not the Drolls been timely fupprefs’d thro’ the Piety and W ifdom (tho’ ifome fay Interest) of Domine Oroonoko^ they would have fuffered under the frightful Apprehenfions of Cuckoldom over-running the City, as bad as Schifm has done the Church; and that their Wives, in a little time, w^ould have thought Liberty of Confcience as good a Plea for withdrawing their Love from their Lawful Husbands, and transt ferring it to their Gallants, as a double- ^ refin’d Christian does for renouncing the Lawful Church, and betaking himSelf to a New Religion: So that , from thefe Confidcrations, we are depriv’d of our ancient Priviledge, and are decreed to fuffice Nature with Potatoes and Small Beer, du-ring the merry Seafbn of the Fair, in which we us’d to indulge our Appetites with the palatable Dainties of Pig and Pork, and
wafh
11 ij.8 A Fdcquet from WillV.
; I wafh away the Remembrance of om* p I! Poverty, with the Delights of the Boti 11 How far their new Policy of Undoing y
goor Strolers, and we the Underlings is Majesty’s Servants, contributes to ( !i ^ Reformation of Manners, t cannot te 11 but I am Sure it has drove most of our I III	dies to fo humble a Condefoenston, that,
II1	I hope to be kifs’d, few of them have V
, i tue enough to withstand the Temptati I of Half an Ounce of Silver, or a good D 11	ner; which prevails upon ’em now far me
11	than a Week’s dole Siege,with all the fi
i i mal Attacks of Love and Flattery: Ai ' I leveral of our Youngsters, who in Wi 11 ter-time, think of nothing but great Fc
tunes, have been forc’d, thro* this heai |:	Disappointment, to list themfolves in
the Service of Ale-wives, Chamber-mait and Cooks Daughters, that they may wi lest Trouble, rub thro’ the DiiHculties I; a long Vacation. How you fare in ti I:	Country, I know not, but I am Sure ’i
^ lb hard with us in Town, that we a
forc’d to make a Penny-worth of Gh tprlings go as far as we us’d to do a Poui ofSauiages,
11!	Yet, notwithstanding their Pious Su
i	predion of Prophane Drolls, as they a
111	pleafed to call ’em, thus much for tl
il ■	Coinfc
1 I !
:: i
I >	>
1 ;
I- i
t ■
A Vafquet from W illhr.	5 5
Comfort of all Libertines, they may be as drunk at the Fair without Notice, as an Alderman at a Lord-Mayor’s Feast,Swear as many Oaths as a Hackney-coach-man at a Stop in the Street: And as Sor the Wag-tails of my own Sex, they abound in all Parts of the Fair, as much as Pig and Pork in every Cook’s Shop in Smith-feld; and tho’ there are no Drolls to begin an Amoiir at with a Lady of the Mask,yet he, whole Tail is in tune to dance Adames Jigg, may have recourfe into Cock, Hofier^ or Chick-lane, where he may meet with bad Women enough, and good Conve-niencies for his Purpofe, be greatly Wick-fed at a Small Expence, and have a fair Opportunity of committing thofe foul Sins in private, which fb publick a Place as a Droll-booth cannot postibly admit of: I cannot but with great Pitty and Concern, reflect on the w^retched Condition of Poof Hackney-Harlots, that miferable Part of my own Sex, in this Reforming Age, who having heretofore no more to maintain than their own Selves by their Sins, are how by the wife Conduct of the Society of Vice-mongers, ehjoyn’d the Pennance of being twice as wicked, to fustain a numerous Rabble of their Mercinary Perfe-tutors, fb that it need not be doubted but
E e	in
#
V
I ^4 A Pacquet from WillV,
I '	—_	'
in few Years, if the Same Care which v. wifely begun, be but piouSly continued,
! i	fhall have the Comfort of feeing the V
Stalks of Iniquity,bruis’d,flatted andcu fhiall as Ninepenny Mundungus, and \ I	be made to vanifh throughout all Englu
j!	like a Whiff of Tobacco.
Ip	A Work of fuch Difficulty as the Re
H	mation of a lewd Age, is an Undcrtafe
i	of fuch great Importance that it can m
|‘	• but Slowly: and truly fb it does^ fb
makes its Progreffion by fiich imperce I	ble Degree^' that all the Good they li
(I	been doing ff>r this many Years, is as
to none but them feIves difcernable. i	however, they tliink it no Small Step
wards the good End of their great Del to removethbsh two Evils/romtheFaii Drolls and the Mufick^hostfes, Wliich depriv’d fbme that were honest, of a ji I	stable Livelihood, and has occafion’d t
i	that were bad, to become ten times wc
but yet notwithstanding their great 7 to the Reformation of Manners, and 1 prefSng of Indecencies, for fqme Rea best known to themfelves, they have fer’d the Dancers of the Ropes, to sti Concupifcence in Youth, by flx)win I , once, both their Ar—s and their Acth
I	but’ds thought, a way will be fonn
1
A Facquet Irani WillT. 35
the next Seafbn,to make ’em dance in a mo defter Drefs, or put larger Pockets in their Diminutive Trunks,which the Reformers, when they fee fit, will teach ’em to know the Ufe of.
• ♦ , * ' •
POT Magijlrdtes are rvifer foundy As ev^ry Age grows ripery And thofe that dance on Smithfield-^rei^^i!^> MuH pay the City-Piper,
The two greatest Evils, attended with the worst Confequences, which are most predominant in this WickedRendezVouzof St. Bartholomew^ are the Poxirig of Youth, and the Picking of Pockets; and if the Wist dom of the Reformers could but find out a Way to dam up thofe poifbnous Aqua-ckicts which occafion the one, arid to raife Whitloes Upon the Fingers of thofe who perpetrate the other, it would certainly, at once. Spoil the Trade of both, to the wonderful Satisfaction of the Publick, who are great Sufferers by thefe two frequent Abu-&: The Bufinefs of Reformation, is a pious Work, I cannot but acknowledge, which every good Christian is bound to stunk cotrimen stable i but however, that Work may be as \Vell let alone,as for want of pfojper Expedients to be always a be-
£02 ginning
1:
1:	56	A Pdcquet fiom WillV.
;	ginning and never to be ended. Hav
I i	no more to fay in Profe, I Shall entert
j I	you with a Copy of Verfes Something
plicable to the Bufinefs in hand, and fb ■ i	main
! ! . ^
M .	Tour tUfconfoUte Confitient
i	^
1
ff
I	Postscript.
I	••	^	^	■	M ‘	'
i j	jjOw firangely pious is our Nation grown^
j	Such a Reforming Vlge fare ne\ e was known
ThcLeacher of the Peace^ who loves the Will punifj what he caPt forbear to-afi y I	And oft commits the JMifs of puhlick Trade
I	To Bridewell, whom he wijhes in his Bed.
I i	Poets too.^ like .Magifirates reprove^
f	Andfcourge that Vice the moPtfwhich mqfl they i
t	»	*
i	■	^	.
ii	«
' i
The common Scoundrel fo reform’d is grown 1 He perfecutes the Lady of the Town.^	^
And lives on her poor Prudg’ry^ not his own. j \	For fakes the Rog’ries he was us’d to play^
I	That brought his Neck in danger ev*ry day.
mNow turns Informer.^ gets a painted Staff.^
And by betraying others^ lives more fafe.
'■S
But'above all in this low’r World accurBy We Play’rs fure are perfecuted worBy Whofe very Bills are under fuch Difgrace^^
I	My Lord--May’r puBs ’em downyWhilB J)r» Cafi
Struts on Church-^walls.^and Pocky Bills take pl^ce. ’Tis firange fuch vile Profanefs (but ’tis true)
, "Ln thefe good times efcapes the Clergy’s vieWy
W
A 'Pdcquet jrom w m s, T7~
JKhcn 0 Hr poor Poets for fuch Jlcndcr Evils \As (Sad and Fac were watiPd like any Devils^
The Hockley rough Game range the City fhro\ . jyifverfe thetr Stlls antongSl the crop-’eard-Crew.
Which fhovps his Majefifs Servants.^we his Play'rs’y By horn-head Cits,^ and thetr more pious ^d.ay rr,
Are Itfs TefpeSied than his Majefiy s Bears, J j Blit that rohickgrieves m farving Sinners moEr.^
Js the great Benefit oth Fair tK ve lost.
Which kept us all in decent Repr^ration.,
And gave us Credit thro the long JFacation.
But nqw thef'vepFt down Drolls .fur Cooks feemjhie^ And every Ale-ho'ufe Scoundrel looks awry.^
If we ask either mercenary Sotf
I o rruB m with a Dinner,, or a Pot-.,
Good Heavens ajfiB us in this vacant time^ '
When honeB means to live are made a Crime. -
^ And for the future give us Prefervation^
From thefe fevere EfeBs of Reformation,
\ ( . .
%
• *
\
* «
f,
* %
To
.
•	5
«
• * ••
«
*	*	j
* • »
I
/
i
k‘	'	.	,
¥
« » t
*
\
Ill	28 A fdcquet from	WillT.
i!	^
» ' I
I	j
II	Tho. Cheek, EJf, to. Henry Brett, Eff, -
|i I	Cowley, in Gloucestershire.
I'	^ ^	^ '
i	Sir,
li* ■
I Have a great mind to write to you, hi am st little disturb’d about the mai i	ner of doing it; becaufe I am not fuffic
11	ently affur’d, you will	be	fatisfied with
h Letter, wherein I give it under my Han l| that I have no ready CaSh of Wit aboi I me: Therefore, Sir, fince Wit is not no li the Bufinefs, you must e’en be content 1 li	take what follows.
|i|	This is as unpomifing a Beginning, ;
I a Man would wifh, and if I were as yo fi I would read no farther; yet, prithee d( I	if it be for no other reafon, but to be co
ji	vinc’d that I have kept my Word. Yc
I may imagine ’tis not very hard for a Me I to keep his Word in an Affair of this N
ture; but if I Should not, I flatter my fo that you might be perfivaded to forgr me; when in breaking my Word, I Shou I break a Jest at the fame time. Howev
it be,' you will find that I make ufe of tl
as frequently, as if I defign Something by it; but upon examinatio I hope to make it appear, that 1 am ; || much a Stranger to the thing, as most i
|ii	■ ou
ii’
o'
• i
i •
A Racquet fiom W ilF.^.	g 9
our modern Poets are. Yet I would not
\
have you Suppofe^ that I have the least defign to write a Satyr againB fVB, as a late Author has done ; who through his whole Poem, has been fb finccrely Un-witty, that he leaves us no room to doubt of the Reality of his Intentions; No, Sir, as this is altogether forreign to my Inclination, fb I question not, but I Should be very unSucceSsful in the Performance ; being apprehenfive, that I might be fb unfortunate by Some unfeafbnable Impulfe of Fancy, as to betray the Caufe I endeavoured to Support, and fb make the World fufpect that I writ Booty. AfTuming fbmc Vanity on this occafion, I have thought a thoufand times, that Witandl fhould never have parted; I relistf d all its Frolicks, was never pleased without it, and never difcouraged by the No-taste of fbme Coxr combs of my Acquaintance ; who, by the by,were Perfbns of no inconstderable Quality, (for Folly does not degrade a Man,) and are nov/ the Acquaintance of Statet men and PrivyrCouncellours: I fay, that parting with Wit, was a thing I could never have foreign; and tho’I was Something averfe to it for a while, yet I found at last,it was very neceffary and expedient:
For n^twit^anding the glitterir^ Figure
Ee 4	It
ij.o A Tdcquet from Will’i.
it makes, I don’t perceive it is any re: Advantage to a Man, who endeavours t make his Fortune: On the contrary, ’t I	generally an Obftruction to a Man’s Pn
, ferment; for they, who are in Powe have their Frailties and Imperfections lil other Men, and are extreamly jealous ( too nice an Obferver, (Such as, we ma fupppfe a Man of Wit to be:) Now the reflect thus. That tho’ by their Bounty ar Favours, they Should endear Such a Ma I	to their Interest; yet they look upon hii
!	in his Nature, to be a fort of a wild Beai
I	whole Fiercenefs, tho’they might in Son
meafure reclaim and overcome by the !	Kindnefs; yet, (like the rest of the Sava^
I	Race,) they fuSpect he may, one time»
other, have feme fiidden start of his inbo: I	Cruelty, and invincible Temper to fly o
!	in the-Face of his Keeper, thp’he was ti(
down by a Chain of a thoufand Obliga I	ons. In feveral advantagious Profestior
j	the being Only thought a Wit will go
great way to the Undoing a Man; efpe( I	ally if it has the Misfortune to be joyn*
I	with Poetry: we have a,n Instance of tl
!	kind, in the Perfbn of a very eminent Cit
:	Phifitian, whpfe Wst and Poetry, if
had been as extraordinary, as, the vain * pinion he had of it himfelf^ he had in i!	c	coveraf
I ‘	•
p '
[ I
II
! i
r—	0
A Pdcquet Jrom Willh. 4.1
coverably lost his Practice; but by the happy Influence of his benevolent Stars, he had not fwallow’d So large a Dofe of Wit, as to work his Destruction ; and fb, (like the infignificant Efforts of old Age, with an infectious Harlot,) his very Impbtency fav’d him.
Demetrim of the Imer-Temple, has lately shld his Chambers, and has taken a Lodging near the Play-houfe : ’t\yas laid, that he intended to turn Coke upon Littleton into Blank Verfe, (to fbften, in fbme Mea-Sure, the Ruggednefs of the Expreffion:) He might perhaps have fiicceeded as well in it, as a certain Spark of my acquaintance, of whom it is reported, that he attempted to Translate a very odd kind of st Book, call’d HudibrrUy into French Meeter. This
Gentleman is frequently poffest,----with
Poetick Rapture, and all the Family complains that he disturbs ’em at Midnight, by repeating Versts: Particularly, last Night reciting feme incomparable Sublime Fustian of his Own compofing, he made liich a horrid rumbling Noist, as alarmed three Watchmen, together with his Rival the Bellman, that were walking under his Window; who immediately knock’d up his Landlady,to enquire if the Houst were hauhted: When he is in Bed, one would
ima-
4^ I(^cquet from WilFi*.
imagine he might be quiet for that Nigl but ’tis quite otherwife with himj f when a new Thought, as he calls it, com into his Head, up he gets, lets it dov in Writipg, and fp gradually encreafes t detested Bulk of his Poetick Foolerie which (Heayen avert it,) he threatens Print; and then, O ye courteous Reade and credulous Bookfellers, look about y for Mifchief is coming towards ye. Ti unhappy Perfbn, (before the Curie of Pc try had leizM him,) was in a pretty w pf thriving Bustnels,
%
His Chambers ecehoed with the graufttl lIoife Of harjh Contention^ and litigious Brawls.^
And he ohferved (better than the Mufitians)
JSy the rmlodiofss fonnd of chinking Fees •
%hat Difcord makes the fweetefb Harmony.
Thus he in troubled Waters^ I ‘ From Strife He dre,w the Joy and Comfort of his Life.
Lhd. Clients were with refilefs Cares opprefs*d^ He fill preferiId a Calm within his BreaSt: And laugPd to fee rich Fools promote Debates Fill Lawyers parceled out .yand purchased their Eft a\ But now the Scene is chan£d.^ and he^s in Pain^ Fhe Mufes Fhroes diftrafh his feeble Frain. ISfature Aarm^d declines the unequal Foil 5,
ATtd like a Gun d.re loaded does recoil:
His Genius Jhrinks^ and bids him write no more; But Fate is in\ and he can nFr gvue dre.
He raves ^ he foams ^ and feems like one pofteJk:
And is what he could never write ■ a Jeft^
t: .	. • * . - < . ,
« •
A racquet jfom WillT.
I have now done with this Gentleman,
whom I leave at Temple-bar \ and go directly on to the City, where I obferve, that Wit makes but a very indifferent Figure, nay, even on a Lord-Mayor’s Day, with all the Pomp of Pageants to fiippiort it; and I’ve not heard that any c)f that
Character have fin’d for Alderman. When
%	—1^	’
they ufe the Word, ’tis generally in an ill Sence, as when they have cheated a Man in a Bargain,they cry they have Outwitted him. A remarkable Gallick Wit, whole
in Per naff us were very confider-able, yet upon account of the Uncertainty of the Income, has very prudently withdrawn his Effects, and converted his Sub-Itance to Indian Ware,which Undertaking Exactly agreeing with his Genius, prolpers lb fast, that he has more Ladies^t his Shop every Afternoon, than he uled to have in the front Boxes, on the third Night of a new Play. Our ISland is very much addicted to Trade, but Wit is a Commodity, that few People deal in, and will never be a Staple Commodity till the Natives are better acquainted with its Value; I fbretel, that this may probably happen in the next Century, but no Man that is already born, will live to lee it. Perhaps you may not a little wonder how
JL
V
j	A fAcquet fiom WillV.
I came to fb great a Knowledge ; but i '	‘^tis to obferve the Stars, the Stars,
I	Friend, for you must know I often fit
a Nights. Well, Sir, you may lai I	if youpleafe, but what I tell you is v
true for all that.- I fuppofe by this tir
your Countenance is fettled, and a N I	may go on without Interruption. I
then, fince Wit is not worth one’s wf to deal in, you can’t blame me for difj felling my Self of stieh Lumber. Indei I	I never had fb great a quantity as to b
I	confiderable Loofer by it; but that lit
I	Stock I had, diverted me from a bet
. fort of Trafick. To manage rightly, c I	chief Dealings Should be of a more prc
I	table kind, and W it, a Trade, fliould coi
I	in by the by ; methinks Wit is like a A
j	strefs, a pretty thing for a Man’s Diverfk
'	and fit to be enjoy’d at leifiire Hours; t
I	if once a Man becomes wedded to it, ’
I	like marrying one’s Mistrefs; letthofe tl
I	have tryed it, inform you how they like
To carry on the Allufion, if Wit be a A j	strefs, I have fbmetimes found her ve
rampant, for She has ravifhed me in yo Company : the thing might be indictab but that I have confeffod, iTeceived a grc deal of Pleafure and Satisfaction in i which I believe is generally true in oti
Rape
%
A Facquet jrom WillV.	^ 5
Rapes; but they have not the Grace to own it. Railcry apart, thefe Sew Observations I have made on Wit and Poetry, I wholly shbmit to your Judgment: I do notpre-^ tend to teach you any thing on this Subjects who are better qualified to give me Instructions ; which Favour, I the more earnestly request of you, that I may in ab-fence improve as much by your ingenious Letters, as I ufed to do in your Company, by your witty Convershtion; which is admired by none, fb much as by
♦
#
Tour real Friendj
\
and humble Servanty
9
\
Tho. Cheek.
/
H
•	* •
. ^ . • * '
\ •
*, , ,
#
t	■	-	.	i
!
t
i
V	»	Mr
*	^	^ n	■	O
#
V.
»
«; •	. .
I	‘	. X.
• b
t %	I	» •	^
I	•	i
I -
«
$
• #
I
i	.
t
t	•-	c	, r • D
*
46 di PacquS Iroifi Wil Fi^.
To Mr, Gabriel	—.
Dtar -—.
■«
^f^Hou it Seetfis hast a mind to past fi JL a Wit, by the Very fame means th: .Mjofs JacVDati? thought fit to let up for Beaux. (By the way I must tell you, th the Transfbrmation of Beau to W it, h fbmething more of the Miracle in it, thi " the change of Jack-Dam to Beau) Yc
B—, with borrowM Plumes hast the imp’d thy Wings* But I took more pa ticular notice of a couple^ that were pluci ed from a certain Bird of Night; which We give Credit to W— the Owner is very filthy obfeene Animal; from whic ominous Creature, may Heav’n defend i MeftalSj that is, we in the Country her call him B^//, but the Gods, that is, tho in Cerve^t-Garde/fy have named him Breai a-day. But it is time to begin to fpea plain Englilh, for you,if I am not mistake pretend to no other Language: But the as you have writ for the Witty Club, tl Witty Club may understand for you. I loc upon your last to be the Act and Deed ' them all. And you Shall henceforward 1 Secretary to them, as Julian was to the
Mistreffes. Tho’ I must tell you by tl
wa
%
A facquet from WillV. 47
way, that the Affection which Ibme of them Show for the Mules, is not unlike that merry Pa (lion, which put the little French Parlbn into an amorous Fit for the Queen. Return them all Thanks, in my Name, for the Honour they have done me, in offering to admit me, in my Ablence, a Member of their Noble Society. But, Do-miney non [urn Dignus: However, I think my felf obliged to make them as extaraordL nary a Compliment, as the Morocco Am-bafiador would have thought himfelf engaged to return the Univerfity of Oxford^ if in the midst of their extream Civility, they had offered to make him D. D. But to (peak to that part of your Letter which concerns yourfelf: I do not wonder, that you go to the Play-hou(e only stjr the fake of your MistreSs; but methinks, at the Mufick-meeting the Italians Noice might have Charms for you. But as you go thither too, you (ay, only for thefiike of your Mistrels, I will believe, to oblige you, th^t file does not go for the EunueH^s. Now I . go to your Comedy here, pufdy for the Comedy (ake, which is a PolitickCountty Club; and partly for the Mu(ick fake I go to our Mufick-meetirig, which is a pack of (hrill-mouth’d Beagles for Trebles, and a pack of deep-mouth’d Bumkins for Bafts.
And
*
4-8 ALacquet from WillT.
And whenever our Confbrt begins, h; the Men in in Spight oS their Sou are our Audience. Once more I falute t Witty Club; tell them, that they liti deferve that Name^ if they have not me Wit, than to take any thing ill I have Sal ASTure them, that I know how to reSpe their good Qualities, and that I Shall e deavour to fet off their Bad, which is Friend’s Parti
. . * • *•
y
•	9	•
• §
Dear  -------—,
>	4
Toursy Si
*	V
Foftferipty
In your first Letter you gave me notice < Ibme Gentlemen who defigned to wrn to me. The Post before that, I had a ver Witty Letter from one of them: It, no hard matter to guest that it was frot Mr. Wycherly. But CA—— Wit, if he fer any, either went astray, or cameShori Who fliould wonder at either ? ■
' V:	^ / m
. . .
Y	-	■	L
' ■ . ^ .
-r»-
i
^ A Idcquet from Will'i'. 49
I
9
r
\
I
I
[ iSfr.. Gabriel B--------Anfwer do Mr. John
, '	fo he leftat WilVs Coffee-houfe.
I
I
[' *
YEfterday I receiv’d a Letter from you, where you fiifpect the Rabble to have a hand in my Letter ; but you may affure your Self it is not So, for 1 writ both mine in my Clofet, and no body has teen ’eni but your Self; I do not fay this to value my Self upon two frivolous Letters, but that I would not have you SuSpect the Rabble of fb much Dullnels: indeed both yours I have strown to the Rabble (as you call ’em) or rather the Witty Club; and I have Showm’em to Some of the Grave Club, and to Some who are neither of the ^ Rabble nor grave Club, but *TiVo covent-gar-both; and upon my word, denciubsJocati’d.
they like ’em as well as I do. Since I writ to you, I have happen’d upon an In-treague with a Woman of very great Quality, (there’s a Subject for your next Letter) which takes me up So much, that I have hardly time to eat: fb you must not expect fb just anAnfwer to your Letter (by reafbn of the length) as I would have done, had I been at liberty; fb I hope you will excufe me: Our Correspondence hitherto methinks,looks as if we were feafbn-
F f	ing
#
50 ^ Ji rdcquet p:om \\JiWs,
ing a Sallad between us: lam for fbftni it with Oil,and you are still louring it w Vinegar. (But pardon me) reflecting \ on your last, if I drefs the remaining p of my Letter according to your own Pal You hit me in the Teeth of having butc Language, which I am very well conte ed with, for I fear more Tongues tl one would make me vain like other Fol and fb much Knowledge as you have, stract me; but if I can make a Shift write a Letter with indifferent Sence a , good Breeding, (a thing harder to co by, than Latin or Greek,) I fhall m . have occasion to doubt whether the R; ble’s Wit iliall take any thing ill of i whenever I fhall write to ’em; which I lure they do not of you, becaufe they h that Satyr (in its strictest Sence) is the curable DiSeafe of your Mind ; tho’ an lential Part of the witty and learned i D——, and becomes you just as well the Marks of the Small-Pox does a cert MistreSsof mine, who has lately had’t which tho’ it does not let her off at all,
I am refblved to fancy her as much as fore,becaufe fhe cannot help her Blemifl
t
14m joursf 1
%
I.
I	•	•
A VtXcquet pom WillT, 51
% «
ro Mr. —--------
I . Received yours, which was the iiiOr^ welcome, becaufe it came without Invitation. I take it very kindly that you would write to me, more kindly than it you had made me a Prefent: For we certainly fhew most Kindnefs for any one, in that which we do for him contrary to the Bent of our natural Tempers. Now I have obferved that you have been con-fiantly lefs inclin’d to Shew your Parts than your Generosity; At the very time that you have been Prodigal of Pelf, you have been a Niggard of Wit. By a Greatnefs of Mind you have Squander’d the first, as a very worthiest thing; and by a just Discerning been thrifty of the last, as a very valuable TreaSure. But your Letter has given me Some hopes, that you begin to take the Advice which I have lb often given you; and that is, that for the Conveniency of Life, you would grow a little more frugal of Gold, and a little more free of your &nce. And I begin to imagine that you have till now been covetous of the latter^ only becaufe you were laying in a Stocky that for the time to come you may be never
F f 2 without*
■ A Pacguet Jfotn WiIlT.
without the Ready. I was fbrry to he
my Friend ------------^ibble, tho’, to give tl
Devil his due, it was not the worst th ever I heard. But I was in hopes th Quibbles and Puns, might have been cry down with the White Farthings. Anc have been credibly inform’d that fVtU, Z
upmhsLsrbfus^d to ta.kQCat7mdrttms of S— for Vfquebaugh any longer; tho’one wor fwear that Irifh Wit might go for Irifh I quor. I wisti you had fent me fbme me News, tho’ I can make you but fmall P turn in Specie. My humble Service to Congreve^ tell him that I wiSh him go Luck, and expect that he Should reconc Fortune to Merit.
I
»
«
♦
I
I
\ * •
I
I	>
I
i
I	'
t
I
1
i
I
!
!
I	•
;
m
‘ .
I*	^
I	A Tacquet from WillV.	5 5
Ta ikfr. Gabriel B-----.
H	'
A
■ .	r . g
Dear Gabriel,
WHen thy last was written,thou hadst
put on the Lyon’s Skin, and mad’st i a wonderSul comical Figure in it. But I did not think toiiicenfe thee, nor the rest of the Rabble,quite contrary I thought to divert you. You fay, you take it ill, that I Should upbraid you with understanding no Language but EngliSh. Why,
: what a Pagan Apprehenfion hast thou, Gabriel f The Devil a jot did I upbraid' thee; Quite contrary, I commended thee for being willing to iinderstand no Language but plain Englifh: And that, as I take it, has quite a different Meaning, With what unreasonable Wights have I had to do! W^ho are offended at my Endeavour to pleafe them, and take my * Commendations Sor Injuries. I am accus’d, you Say, of ill Breeding for that Letter,
: Why, prethee, Gabriel^ every Man has not had the Breeding that thou hast. I wilh you had Sent me the Names of the ' Sparks who would reconcile Punctilio to Satyr. It has been a damn’d inveterate I Quarrel, and requires wife Mediators.
But now I talk of Satyr, that ygu fey is
F f I	the
%
54- Pttcquet from WillV.
theDifeafe of fbcne Peoples Minds. AI; poor Devil 1 Thou do’st not know that ii a Maxim in Phyfick, that Some Difea Ihew the Health, and Strength, and \ gour of the Party affected: If we belie HipfocrateSy Hunger is a Difeafe; n< Reafbn tells us the fame thing: For, li other Distempers, it fhews a Defect Nature; but where it fhews a Defect, fhews a Force too; and when that E eafc is pretty acute, the Patient is fiire do well: I will let the Application alon for in writing to one of thy com mu pative Spirit, a Man is fure to write fbme body who can understand. But t I will fay, that if Satyr be a Difeafe, t acuter it is, the better. But why d( talk of Difeafes to thee ? For indeed, C hrieL (without Satyr) thou art no Pf
lltian,	'S
I
♦
f
1 See,
4
/ '
. . t
\
,
.
I
(
A Pacguet from WillV.	5 5
Mr. R— to Mr. C—
Deur T om,
j
I Receiv’d your Letter, and give you Thanks for your News. In Requital I Shall Send you Some concerning our Friend: In doing which, I comply both with his Defire and yours. He has been fick almost ever Since he came hither, tho’, excepting once, he has liv’d with exact Regularity. He Says, he believes the Devil restrain’d his Surfeit from breaking out till he was reconcil’d to Sobriety, to ren-* der it odious, and Set them afrefh at Variance. I remember when I was at PtiriSy there was a young Nun, whofe Circumstances in Some meafiire reSembled our Friend’s: She had a Pox broke out upon her immediately after She had taken her Vow of Chastity. He bids me tell you, that he has been once Drunk Since he came to this place, and once Witty, and a damnable Sot ever stnce. Our Friend, I Siippofe, rallies. But one thing is certain; that Wine is as Sure to exalt Wit, as Paint is to heighten Beauty; but then,as the Devil will have it,(hearken to this, and tremble Torn) they both decay the very things they em-
belkih) even while they are giving them
F f 4 Luftrc.
I 56 A Paccjuet from'WiWs.
Lustre. But Tom., he bids me tell you, yo must not believe him Vain becaufe he Say he was Witty ; for he fays it was among Such prodigious ’Squires,that none but a S( would have been Witty in fiich Compan^ Our Friend, methinks, has ReaSon: For is as much more fcandalous to be Witi with Fools, than it is to be dull among Men of Wit, as an Error in Judgment more ridiculous than a Defect in Fancy. I fays, he has.%^hundred times fince he can to this place regretted the Rabble, nay, 1 has regretted the Grave Club ; nay, he h
wished himfelf even in the Witty Clu which he believes is by this time erecte
He begins to look upon Ball----as a gre
Man, upon Jack G—^— as a Prodigy, ai upon W-— as a Demi-god. Indeed a Da we do well enough here ; for a Days \ converfe with the Living-dead,that is,wi tliofe wsho being dead yet Speak : but t Night, Tomy the Night, in which we 2 doom’d to the Dead-living, that is, to th( who being alive. Say nothing, is infiippo ably irkfbme; Darknefs in Greenland is r ihore grievous to the Wretch that isli
there, than it is diSmal to us in
% •
I am yours,
«
9
I	•
w
I A Tacquet from Willh. 57
I
Ti?CIoe, /tr North-hall, in HartfordShirC^
that defiPd him to write an Epitaph upon [ her Lover.
t
»
I
j
1
BEhold, Madamy the Power you have
over me I I have obey’d your cruel Commands, and against my Self have im-ploy’d my Pen in Commendation of my Rivaly a piece of Gallantry, I’m perfwaded few Lovers have come up to 1 Nay, I go yet farther, I hear you figh for him, and feeing your Tears, lerve only to fill up the Glories of my Rival; I have but one Comfort in all this, which is, to confider that he is Dead; But fb great is your Concern for him, it makes his very Jfhes formidable, and Death is not powerful enough to Secure me against him; his Shadow triumphs in Spite of Life, and'all the Eloquence of and Blood! I am glad he knows nothing of it, and hope the Pains you feel, will instruct you to pity thofe you give: but to keep you no longer, Ma-damyin Sufpence,! give you at once a Proof of my very little Skill, and very great O-bedience.
An
‘4
-	V
•	t
• I
'•	. -A
Urn
%
5 8 A Pacquet
»
An Epitaph on Mirtilh,
7'He Pleafant^ Honefb and the EvAVe Mirtillo,
Lies undijiingtiijyd w the Grave •
:	Cod.d all Mens hraife^ all Womens Love
•	Or his own Aierit Fate remove..^
I	No death hfd known.^butJrom his Mifireffs chart
Nor Jlept m any Grave bat Clce’r Arms.
I
Now, Madam! you are properly t ij	Author of thefe ill Verfes, for had r
I	you bid me, I had never writ 'em; y
have put me upon two very Shocking I I ployments, to commend my Rival, and ip write VerSes! all the Amends I defire i|	your double Cruelty,is, that youM reme
;|j	ber the	Dying, while	you read of l
l[	Dead.
I
1 ----------------------------—_______________________
I
iii! 1^	To Cloe, at North-hall.
1- ’
||	"^^NOu	have Suffer’d	nothing, MatL
y by her Ladifhtp'^s Abufe of you ; \is observ’d, that Women never rail I at the HandSbme. They fee a thoufi Faults in thofe that Eclipfe ’em, and very indulgent to them that can’t. Is
i Madam, but I believe the DiSlributior
Ij	f
I >
UD
A Pacquet fiom WillT. 59
Womens Mdiccy pretty equal, and that Cloe has her Share tcx); but Providence has not yet given her an Occafion to fhew it; no more than it has given her Ladilhip a Subject for her good Nature; for ’tis hardly more difRcult to find a Woman Handfbmer than C/cf, than it is to meet one fb Difa-greeable as her Ladijbip, She fays you Paint / but Paint was never fb fine! at least, what her Ladijbip ufes is not. Be not liirpris’d, Madam^ at her Freedoms; The Old and the Vgly have been the fame in all Ages; a pretty Woman is feldom out of Humour, and the homely never in. They are forc’d in their own Defence, to fet up cither for Wit and Drinkings or Piety and Cenfure: But fiich is the Power of Ratafia ! her Ladijbip wou’d fain pals alfb among the Beautiful and the Toung! which puts me in mind of an Ode of a certain Latin Poet;
which becaufe it does not much differ from
♦ •
the Character	htv Ladijbip^ I have put
^to Englijb for Cloe'^s Entertainment.
.fti
0
6o di Fdcquet from WillT.
!
)
!
i
An Imitation of the i^th Oirof the 4tl Book oiIIoracej Audivere Lyce, &c.
I	1 Smile at DtXvsIs jruitlefs Carey .
Delia’i Oldy and would be Fair ;
Will dance and laughy and lijp and jingy And mimick Touth in every thing y Tet thefcy alas! in Delia prove But dull Incentives unto Love:
I	The amorous God from Delia flieSy
I	In Cloe’j blooming Cheeks he lies;	^
I ‘	Melts on her LipSy and[parkies in her Eyes.
i	In vain you firive to keep himy Delia I
I With falfe Teethy Paint and Ratafia,
f|	Tour Wrinkles all your Arts reveal;
1	Tko*LoveisblindyyethecanfeeTy
Then prethee,DQ\is.yCeafe to Drefsy I	It does but beightenUglinefs.
I’ '	Tour Gemms wou^d charm in Cloe’^ Ear.,
And every Glance d Cupid bear:
;i	But Jewellers in this agreey
No Stone will play near FiftyThree,
Tet thd*fhe carUt our Pajfron movey \ Gold will always pur chafe Love ;
I	Make Rooks and broken Heroesfighy '
A needy Noble too may die ,	^
Forjhe has ajlrange Tafre of Qmlity, ' I Kjnd Delia ne'*re a Slave will wanty '	While fhe can fuch Favours grant \
!	Whii
-	4
1
\
I
I
]
f A Pacquet fiom WilVs. 6i
I While fhe has 'Jewel,, Lovers Supporter,
Or Two-pepce left to charm a Korter:
At length when jhe can bribe no more, . T Sh^H beg Lovers Charity pom Door to Door, ^ And Jighing cry-- No Mortal want a Whore ! '3
s.
I
A Love-Letter Jrom Madam-------, to Henry
G------, EJf,
ft
IF you have a Soul that is capable of Gratitude, lam fecure of your Love; tlio’ for what ReaSon I ShouM defire it, when it is neither to your Advantage , nor my own, is very unaccountable; I ■ have done too much for you, not to do I more; and yet the farther I engage my Self, I Shall with greater Difficulty retrieve , I my Error. You must own, that no body i but who lov'*d you to a Vault, wou’d have run the Hazard of their Fortune and Repu^ ration', how I have expofed both, and with what Willingnefs, I wou’d have thrown away my Life too; my Soul reflects with Shame : I can’t tax you with j Inconstancy, fince I took you to my Arms ; but I do myfelf the utmost Impru-[ dence that can be, Satisfied with a Wretch who has been the common Pleafure of the
I Town, You fay you never lov^d before,
but
6i A Tdcquet from WillV.
but how do I know that ? ’Tis hard, if m Years Conversation, and with the Subtle of our Sexy has not learnt you that eafie A ofFlaftery. Gods! how I hatemyfelff I	loving you? Oh that I cou’d not belie’
you, I neither can nor will believe yoi and wifh thefe Thoughts wouM d rive r to a Distrust; that Distrust to Madne that I might pull out thefe Eyes for behol ing you with PleaSure. Oh Harry, I 1 ;	Laugh at my Paffion, and without Fe<
1	view the Racking of my Remorfe; yo
own Vanity and my EVeakneJs makes y Triumph: Forgive the impatient Sail of niy Love, I may excufe you, but I cc I	demn myfelfi ’Tis not your Fault I lovi
I	and you may with Justice excufe yo
1	want of a Return; for Since I am by r
j	Inclination,against my Will, hurried to
i	Extreitiity in my Lotve, why mayn’t y
I ^ be fb in ybur Hate ? It may be fb^ but i	not let me know it, for if there be Reven
I	on Earthy I’ll glut myfelf in the Extras
I	gatice of Fufy. Oh! I Shall write myf
to DifiraBion,! have engaged my Though I	in a hundred Difficulties: I fee you fai
aild yet believe you irne. I Sind myf 1	d bcelved, that ’tis necestary 1 Should ne\
Sbe you fnbre. But, oh! the tor menu
Thought,all theWorl
I	MiJ
i
t
f'
A Facquet from Willhr. 6 5
Mifery^ is in lofwg you: this is what I wouM have conceal’d, for if you fhou’d proveI wou’d not give you the Advantage of knowing your own Power.
But whU Pride can you take in making me the miferablest Creature breathing, that I love you, is no more than others have ' done; and if you give me time, ’tispofli-ble I may be content to follow their Example, that you fhou’d leave me too, and Sure I have merited fb much; that you wait the opportunity of Freedom, and certainly your Neceflity and my Affairs will not be long in bringing me to my Reafbn, you may then take up with your R—— and
N-------and if you can defeend lb low,
with you C^— tOo, but fiire Damnation wou’d be your next Choice; for to prove you of a Piece, you must prefer IAeU to the Happinefsof Heaven, who cou’d Hie to that abandon’d Wretch, from one that is
fb intirely
^ %
Tours, 8ra
■
»
%
A
I	64.	A Fdcquetfrom WillT.
II
i •	■
\
1
A Love-Letter from Madam —, to H-
H-------,
I Am just now got loofe from tnofe Pi fures that have engag’d me for t Month past, and I have no other Exc for my Abfence, or not Writing, but owning to you, that this is not only 1 first Minute of Retirement,but of T hou< too: I know the Inconvenience of t Confession, and expect to meet you, w I	a Severe Account of my Follies: If the 1
knowledgment of my Guilt, wou’d B lance your Charge; I wou’d clear t Debt before I Saw you ; but Repentar is what I dare not promife, becaufe ‘ what I fear I Shan’t perform. Tell n my dear Amintor, what hopes of Remec , for a Man given up to Pleastires, the V lence of whole Pafston, is not abated by long Enjoyment; fb constant am I, to wf you call Folly,that I can reflect on my Cc I	dition without Deflres to be freed from
t
I	can I believe that time will reduce me frc
I	thisCourfe, and yeti Shall with Terr
i	hear your Rebuke, and with the utm(
Impatience bear the Reproaches of n own Reafbn. But Gods I how little arr moved by thefe Reflections? Oh, r
Frier
I	•
I
.
. »
JTacquetfromYYWVs, <5f •
Friend, I am lost, for being in the PoS-festion of my PleaSures. It is impoflible to behold their Vanity. I feel the Sa-tisfactioj? of the PreSent, and regard the Change which this Moment Suggests, as a Matter of Speculation, and am as indifferent, as if they were Ci?i-merd.s. Oh! ’tis talking against Be^ monstration: For if I would oppofe my prefent Satisfaction, with the Thoughts that I shall repent of them, while thole Thoughts keep their Horror at a distance, they ioSe their Force, and are of no more Effect to relieve, than the Thoughts of Pleafure, to a Man in Pain. If we could be So happy as to govern the Prefent, by the Example of the Past, and the rational ConSequence ^ of the Future , the Conduct of our Lives would arrive to Perfection, and we Ihould ceafe almost to think our Selves Men. But Oh, Anriintor! Tis not So whth me: With what Violence to my Nature , have I Suffered this Debate ? The Extravagance of my Love has an hundred times appear’d with all its Ravishments. Oh, what a Month of Pleafure was the last! I could with M. Antony^ look down, and pity the neglectful World, who study ail things elfe
G g	but
s',	,
66	A Jacket from V VilliL
4
but Love. O I ove, Love ! Thou u utterable PleaSure ! How hast thou e alted me, and made me Rival to t Monarchs of the East ? For thou, wi more abundance, hast postest Youi Beauty, Constancy, and PaSfion unbou ded as.thy own. Oh, ExtaSie, distoh in PleaSure! Thus I lie. But See, lee, r Amintor: See, she comes, to chide i for my long, long Abfence. Ch, I h( her, tho* at a distance, with a gen Murmuring, cry, Qome^ mj Love; you i to hlame.^ to le thus from me. Forgiven my dear Friend,, while I sty to thoSe ir fistible Charms. If I can ever leave 1 again, you shall hear from me, who ; as much as my Soul will let me be, m faithfully,
- -	\ *
^	Pours.
t
\
I
f
‘	• '	,	-m P. „	,	.
V ^	■	• E
%
i
■t
A^acht fromW''^s. 67
t
•	f
' f(jng Charles the Second s Letter to the I Duh of York in his Exile,
k •
I*
i'
'	.	Whiteha), Febr. z8.	'
5	.	■	, •	■	#	*	.
L	■
I Have already given you my Reafons at large, why I think it fit that yoti i should ablent your Self Sor Some, time ■ beyond Sea. As I am truly Sorry lor the Occafion, So you may be Sure I shall never defire it longer than it will be absolutely neeefiary both for your Good and my Service. In the mean time, I thirjk it proper to give you under my Hand, that I expetst this ComplianGe from you, and deSire it may be as Soori as conveniently you can : You may ea-Sily believe with what Trouble 1 write this to you, there being nothing I arrt more Senfible of than the constant
f
Kindnefs. you have ever had for me, and ! hope you aie So just tomcj as to be afiured that no Abfence, or any thing dSe, can ever change me from ever being truly and kindly
%
Toursj
• » • »
.CHARLES REX.
Q g X	Re-
t
’ i I
I	^8 jTactjuet from	Will's,
!;!	Relponce de (a Majcste SereniSIimc
La Reine Christine' de Swede i
I
';»
k Lectre de Monfieur le Cheva iii	her de Terlon.
' i
PUifque vous Iefrez de Javoi
mes Sentiments fur la pretendu 11	ext-erpdtion de Lberefie en France^ j
I	fuis ravie de vous le dire fur un j
I	grand SuAt. Qdmme je fai profeffion d
j	ne Craindre et de ne flater perfonne.^ j
I	vous advoueray franchement.^ qde je ne Ju,
I	pas fort perfuadee du fucces de ce gran
i|	dejfein,, et que je ne fcaurois nden rejouit
j:	comme Lme chofe fort	advantageufe,^
Ij	nojire SainIle Religion. Au contraire j
[	prevois Men des prejudices.^ quun procea
I	fi noutieau fera Naitre par tout. D
I	hon foy^ ejles vous hien perjuade de I
j	Sincerite de ces nouveaux Qonvertis ? j
I	fotthaitte qdils oheifent	fincerement
I	Dieu et a leur Roy ; Mais je crains leu
li	opinidtrete ^ je ne vaudrois pas avoir fu
nwn Qompte touts les Sacrileges.^ que commei teront ces Qatholiques forcez pardes Mijfit I	naires qui traittent trop Qavallierement, m
I	Saints Mifleres, Les gens de guerre font dt
Etranges ApoIlres^ je les crois plus pn pres a tuer.^ violer et Voler qua pelfm der^ Aujf des relations^ des quels on %
det
. 1
4
I
A facquet from VViilV.
peut douter^ nous apprennent quils S'’aqui-tent de leur Mifion fort a leur Mode, fay pitie des gens., qtion ahandonne a leur dijcrejjion., je plains tant de Families ruF nees^ tant d’honnejies gens reduits a Iau' mone., et je ne puis regarder ce qui fe paffe aujourdLuy en France fans en avoirCompafi--on, Je plains ces Malheureux d'ejlre nay dans lErreurt, mais il me femMe qui Is en font plus dignes de pitie que dehaine; Et comme je ne voudrois pas pour VEmpire du monde a-voir part a leur Erreus., je ne vaudrois pas aufff eflre caufe de leur Malheurs.	Jecon-
fidere atjourd'htiy la France commA une Malade^ a qui on coups hr as & jamhes . pour la guerier dunq MaI quun peu de Par " tience & de douceur auroient entierrement guery. Mais je crains joiF que le Mai ne ^ s aigrhije., ^ qilil ne fe rends enfirt meura-- ) Me,, 'que ce feu Cache fous les cendres ne fe rallume un jour plus fort que jamais., ^ que IErefte Majquee ne devienne plus dan-' gereufe. Rien nejl plus Louahle que le def-[ten de Convertir les HeretiqueSy & les In* fdeles. Mais la maniere dent on sf prend eft fort nouvelky & puis qtie nqfire Seigneur ne sefl pas Servie de cette methods pour convertir le monde, Elle ne doit pas eflre la MeiUeure. J^admire & ne com* pren pas ceZele, & cette Politiquey qui me
Gg 3	paf-
fo A Tacquet from Willh.
• *• •
pajfent, & je fuis de plus ravie de ne It Lomprendre pas. Croyez vomquecefoii prefent le temps de convertir les IIugenot. de les rendre hon CathoUques dans un fieci on ton fait des attentate Ji vifthle en Pram contre le refpeti.^ ^ la foumijfton.^ qui fit. deus a tEglife Romaine.^ qui eft tunique t Vmehranflalle Fondemont de nofire Religeo puis que c eft a elle a qui nofire Seignet a fait cefie magnifique promeffe que k portes de VEnfer ne preveaudront pas coi tre eUe } Cependant jamais la fcandaleuj liherte de IEglifei Galicane n a e(ie pou^ fee plus pres de la Reheliion.^ quelle ne^ a prefent. Les derniers Fropofitions fignet ^ puhliees par le Qlergf de France foh telles.^ qd.elles nont donne qitun trop aj. parent I riomphe a therefie.^ ^ je penfe que j furprfe doit avoir efie fans egale., Je vo^ ant pen de temps apres perfecute'e par ceut< qui ont fur ce point fondamental de nofir Religeon des dogrnes ^ des fentiments con formes aux fiens.^ vojla les pmjfantes ra^ fons, qui rdempechent de me rejouir de cefi pretendue Exierpation de tHerefie. IIh \	terefi de tEglife Romaine m efi fansdout
I	, aujfy cher.^ que maVie ; mais cefi ce mefm
interefi qui	fait avoir avec douleur c
qui fe paffcy ^ je vous advoue aufft que j'ay m
affez la France pour plaindre la defolatio
dlu
II	^ tiv
I	m
R	—
A Racquet from V Vill^.	71
d.un fi leau Royaume. Je fiuhaite de tout mon Cceur de me tromper dans mes con-jehiures ^ que tout fe termine a la plus grande gloire de Dieu^ ^ du Roy vojlre Maitre. Je m’ajfure mefme que vous ne douterez pas de la fineerite de mes veeux^ ^ que je fuis, 6(C.
A Rome le 2.
Fevr. i68€.
«
%
t
To Madam in the Country.
My Dearejl Madam.^
1 Thought it impoffible that any thing cou’d have been entertaining tome in your Absence. But I find 1 was mistaken ; Sor Yesterday I met with Your Letter, which did not give me a little Plea-Sure. I am very much tired with the Town (tholit cannot be called the Town when You are out of it) and have a most passionate Defire to See You. 1 hope your next will tell me when I may know when I am to be the happiest Man upon Earth, tho’ I am ever So, when I am in Your Memory. I cou’d be angry with Mr. ----------, who is now talking to
me, becauSe he is the Occafion of my
G g 4	COH’*
4
N 72 A Racquet from, VVillh.
concluding this Letter, before 1 have te You how much I am
i
Tours.
J
I
4
T9 the fame.
Dear eft Mariam.,
I that ortend, and You that a punish’d. All I can lay , is, 1 endeavour my future Behaviour shall co: vince you that I have no PleaSure in to meriting You ; and when I do So, yt may conclude, I Suffer in my tendcre Part at the fame time I give you Pai lam at this time a little melanchab and too’ it should continue to the End ( my Life, I flioffd not be difiatisfied, b caufe I Suffer for your fake, f or if I shou purchaSe an Acquaintance I value So mud at leSs than tire LoSs of my eternal Quie I should have it too cheap; but now i’ll 1; ment no more, unleSs it be, that i cannot st you: And when I do not, my Eyes will t of no uSe to me, but to fired Tears for voi
Absence, which I fiiallthinklong> tho’i
be but of a Minutes Continuance. An Sp, my Dearest,	Good Night.
X
A Tactjuet: fromYViWs, 75
•	f
a
To his Loving Friend., Mr----——, lately
fallen into the Surgeon s Hand,
SI By
News you fent me, Surprizes me
I very much.
What!-----my Friend in the Surgeon's
Hands, and thy Friend’s Friend in the Bailiffs Hands !
Tis Some ill Planet Sure, that reigns; and bears a Spight to Old Southampton--Buildings.
When I reflect upon your Several Misfortunes, I find Some Analogy betwixt them ; for it would not be improper to Say, that you are clapt, and he is clapt up. Again, I find a considerable Difrc-rence; tor your Body is in danger, whilst his is Secured : And as he rails at the Cruelty of one Sex, you vent your Spite at the KindneSs of the other. But, Prithee, Jack, let me know whom you are indebted to, for this Favour; that if I should steer my CourSe that way, I may avoid that fatal Shelf, where your frail Vestel Iprung a Leak, and Suffered Ship-wrack.
A
j
74	^ Racquet from WillV.
t
Is it th Apothecary s Wife,
Who in her Hushanf s Lap fo tamely fat
And lau<^Ewhilji you were gruhling—
vou know what •/
Iffo— • who knowSy hut the confoundei
Jade
Defignd it to promote her IIuslani Trade t
Amongf her Friends^ if Favours thus jh
placOy
Profit muft needs come Running in apace The ProjeIi^s new • hut various are th
WileSy
^	Bafe Woman ufes , when Jhe Man he
guiles.
Therefore to you, my haplefs Pickki
Friendy
Thd.Sy as my hejl Advicey I recommend. Arrefl the Cuckold; for without Di]
putCy
Tou can prove Damagey and thafsCauj of Suit.
Ild.U nd.er Jiand Trial in fo Soul a Cafey But rather than fuhmit to the Di/grace . Of the vile Injury you took Offence at; His Pocket for her Placket fhall compen fate. Adieu.
lam,
Your Humble Servant, RICHARD SWA^
FRI
♦ •
I
A Racquet from VVillh.
-	p	it'
FRIDAY.
I	«
♦
V	;	^
«
1
Dv 4Sr. Farquhar.
IF I ha'lit begun thrfte to write, and a$ often laid down my Pen, may I never take it up again. My Head and my Heart have been at Cuffs about you. Saysmy Head, ‘Youre a Coxcomb for troubling your Noddle with a Lady,
‘ wshoSe Wit is as much above your Pre-‘ tenfions, as your Merit is below her ‘Love. Then anSwers myPIeart, ‘Good ‘ Mr. Head, You are a Blockhead: I know ‘Mr. F-~—'s Merit better than you. As ‘ for your part, I know you are as?
‘ whimfical, as the Devil, and changing ‘with every new Notion that offers:
W
‘ blit for my part, I am fixt, and can ‘ stick to my Opinion of a Lady’s Me-‘ rit for ever ; and if the Fair she can ‘ Secure an Interest in me, Monfieur ‘ Head, you may go whistle. —— ‘ Come,
‘ come, (anSwer'd my Head) you, Mr.
‘ Heart, are always leading this Gentle-
‘man into Some Trouble or other.
$
‘ tVas’t not you that first enticed him ‘to talk to this Lady f Your damn’d ‘ confounded Warmth made him like this
‘ La-
%
• /
^6 A Tactf net from WiH’r.
‘ Lady; and your Bufie Impertiner ‘ has made him write twice to her: Yc , ‘Leaping and Skipping disturbs ] ‘ Sleep by Night, and his good Hume ^ by Day. In short, Sir, I will hear ‘ more of her.— I am Head, and I ‘ be obey’d.— You lye Sir, replied r ‘ Heart\being very angry) lam Head ‘ Matters of Love. And if you do ‘ give your Confent, you fiiall be f ‘ ced : For I am Sure, that in this Ca ‘ all the Members will be on my fi ‘ what Say You, Gentlemen Hand ‘ Oh! (fay the Hands) we would r ‘ want, the Pleafure of touching a st
‘ Skin for the World.------- Well, wl
‘fay You, Mr. Tongue?— Zounds, fa ‘ th^ Tongue, there’s more Pleafure ‘Speaking three Soft Words of N ‘Hearts Suggesting, than whole Ora ‘ ons of Seignior Head s.— So, fm f ‘ the Lady, and here’s my honest Neig ‘ hour Lips will stand by me. By t: ^ Sweet Power of Kistes, we will (i plied the Lips:) And prefently Some !	ther considerable Parts standing up f
;	the Heart, they laid Violent Hands u
on poor Head, and knock’d out 1 :	Brains. So, now Madam, behold me
perfect a Lover .as any in Cbriflendom.,n
Hea
j
I
I
i
, \
■%
\
A Tacquet from WillV.
Heart purely dictating every Word I Say. The little Rebel has thrown it felf into your Power; and if You don’t Support it in the Caufe it has taken up for your fake, think what will be the miserable Condition of the Headiest and Heartlefs.	Farquhar,
to a Lady, whom he never faw: Being a true Relation of a Saturday Eights Adventure. By Mr. Farquhar.
#
I Have now, Madam, had time to reflect on Saturday Nightst Adventure : and if I have reflected on any thing elfe Since that, may I never be blest with Sucli an Adventure again. A Lady in a Malque, with a pretty Hand, that presently got hold of my Heart, defires to know where she shall See me after the Play; At the Rofcy Madam, Said I. There the Lady calls, like a Woman of Honour, where I was found, like a Man of Honour, and without much Ceremony, leaves three honest Gentlemen, and two roasted Fowds, to venture my Self, Neck, and Gizard, with tw'o strange Ladies in a Coach. Compliments (which, by the way, w^re pretty plain on my fide) being
past
^8 ATacquetfrom Will^.
past on both fides; the Ladies would ( nothing under the Role, but must drive the Fountain in the Strand. If the Ladi had inform'd me of their Quality, I h; called for Burgundy; but feeing nothii about them that promifed beyond Qove% Garden^ I thought a Bottle of New Fren might be Suitable. They both were love with me,* but one a little furth gone than t’other; their DiScourSe w Modest , and they drank like Wom< of Quality ; for Our Bottle was Soon oi I was then impatient to return to n: Fowls ; for I could not feed upon Cove ed Dishes. Tlie Lady that was most love with me, promifed t(? take off h Mask, if I should See her home. I promiss to Wait on her home, if she wuuld let n lie with her all Night. I was a Blockhei for that: for the Lady was angry, m with the Matter, but the manner of tl Exprestion : But I thinking still of Coven Garden., was not So very nice in my PhraS but at last, away we drove, and Set dow one Lady, the Lord knows where: Tf t’other (relying, I Supppfe, more upon ni Modesty than her own) had the Coura^ to stay alone with me in the Coach which, after Several Turningsi, stoj where we lighted, in Golden-Square ; st
ac
1	JJ^actiuetfromWiWsi 7^
adviSed me to make the Coach wait; which I thought a very good hint to discharge it., She conducted me up Stairs to a very ftately Apartment; and ; she, according to her Promife, took off • her Mask; but pulSd her Hoods fb a-I bout her Face, that I was as far to Seek for her Beauty as before. After Some I foolish Chat, in comes a Maid, with a red-hot Warming-Pan, and retires into a Bed-Chamber ; and returning prefently, told her that her Ladiship’s Bed was rea-I dy; dropt a modest Curtefie, and made her Bx/t : the LaIy told me, stwas time for me to go to Bed. Madam, Said I,
I with all the Speed Sm able ; and began I to unbutten : but in fpight of all my haste, she was a-bed beiore me. Our Conversation was free, natural, and pleafant, till ten a-clock next Morning,
I The Chamber was So dark, that I could I not See the LaIy’s Face ; lo v\as forc’d to depart as great a Stranger to that, as when I met her first ; tho’ I know e-I very other part about her Sowell, that I j Snail never forget her. I hope Your La-I diships will pardon my Familiarity:
I For, by Heavens, (can no more forbear i whifpenng my paSt joys to my Self, than 1 could abstain repeating them with
YoUj
/
8 o	A Racquet from WiU’x,
. You, would youblefs me with a fecc Opportunity. I have Sent you a N for the Pit, to See the Jubilee., to m row, tho’ I would rather try the Po\ of my Love, by finding you out in i Front Boxes. I’m Sure you can’t behai Some; for Nature never made any thi entirely Perfect. In short, if I ca find you out by Instinct, never trust r when I Say I love, which must be as gr a Curfe, as your Favour will prove a Bl Sing to. Madam,
Tour moft humUe Servan
\
I
To Mrs.
Madam,
§1hm got to the Rofe, whence, I fe
to know how my Dear is. BleSs r with a Line, my Dear. If I durst; would vi fit Yov.
j **
i
^Tis a cold frojly Night.,
My Defires are warm:
My Love makes a Fire To keep me from Harm.
I
•u
A Racquet from YYillA.	81
%
But Jhouldyou prove Cruel^
And your Favours with-hold.^
My Fire goes out For want of its Fuel.^
And /, poor /, mufl perifh with Cold.
So much for Rhime; now for Reafon.
I love you, my Dear, and I have a thousand ReaSons for it: And if you don’t believe the, by Heaven, you wrong the faithfuilest Man on Earth.	'
Pray Madam, don’t put me to the Ex-, pence of Vows and Oaths. I hate Swearing under my Hand. I love you, in plain downright Terms. But what Sort of Love, I can’t tell you, till I have th^Honour and Happinefs of feeing and conversing with you once more. You have Art enough to engage my Friendship, and Beauty enough to engage my Love; You shall make a Friend of me, and 111 aSpire to make a Mistrefs of You"; but if You willblefs me with the Know-ledge of Time and Place of waiting on you, you shall make a Friend, Lover,
Fool, or what you pleafe of, Madam,
Tour Admirer.^
g
H h ,	% '■ /
%
81	A Jacket from V VillT
the fame.
»
OU were So engaged vith VVi jL last Night, Mad^, that an hon( Man could not be happy ^ and I’m So e gaged with Wits now, that I can’t wri Senfe. I am very uneafie, and I doi know for what. I can drink no Heal that can restore my Cure. I am stuj and Lifelefs; for my Love is where,-Gad damme. Madam,—- I wish 1 h never Seen You. You made a turn the------. to Night, that has changed t
. • Scene of my Happinels.---------------Now ’
out-----and I good Company again,—
Sir, my humble Service to you j and 11 this Lad/s
0
%
moft humble Servant*
9
N
%
♦
A Tackei fromYV ilSx.	8 j
r
k	•
I
Sy the fame
Madam.^
WHen I left You, my Dear, I went
to the Tlay ; from thence to Wit and Wine; which detained me till Four this Morning: Then I went to bed, and dreamt of her, whole Health 1 came from Drinking, 'Twas Yours,
by Gad.------Now, Madam, Tve given
you art Account of my miS-Ipent Hours, for Such I must reckon thofe that I throw away in any Company but Yours j but Love and Fortune cannot be reconciled. They are both blind, and therefore can never meet; but You and I can fee: for we love one another. ITI anSwer for You, and Y ou shall do the Same for me.
V	•
Witnefs my Hand,
%
t
*
Hh a	By
i
I
I
I 84 Jfacqmt from VVillV. .
I
1'
1	%_—
\
Ma/Itim,
♦
’T^IS a hard Cafe, that you should < I sturba Man oS his Natural R( at this rate. If I have flept one VVii to Night, may I fleep to all Eternii The very Thoughts of You made r wakeful, as if I had had your dear f in my Arms. Zounds , Madam, wl d ye mean ? ConSider, I'm a Man ; a m( tal, wishing, amorous Man.
3iy Heart is your Eyes are Fire. Tou are all Charms^ and I all der Deft jm ft art flaring mad In Mind he gad.
Fo day 1 languijh with Sorrow.
But Jince 1 cant crownit.^ til drink till I drown it^
And make my filf well hy to morrow.
Madam, lam,
tour mofl-—-what you pleafe hy]o^
9
” JTacquetfrom VViUX 5^
To a Mafque on Twelfth day.
\
'^1^0 be a Man, and honourable, § You’ll Say, Madam, are Contradictions. But to be a Man, and not curious, were a greater Contradiction. Now, Madam, amidst all theSe Contradictions, ril Say one thing very reafona-hly. Your Letter is very Witty ; You may be very handSome, and I have a MistreSs already : she has Charms enough to fecure my Heart hitherto; but cant well tell whether they are of force to maintain their Ground against Yours. If You think the Vithry worth your Trouble, ’twill be the best way to take a GarriSon poshest by So powerful an D-nemy. You may at last come and view the Fortifications ,* and if you be an In-gineer worth a Farthing, you may prelent--ly gueSs whether the Fort be impregnable or not. Though this be the last Day of Chriftmas^ it may prove the first of my Jubilee, if Your Ladiship pleaSe to honour me with your Commanas wshere I shall wait on You. I am, Madam,
Tour mofl humble Servant,
Wildair.
Hh 3	■ Ce-
Al Tacquet from
Celadon to Mrs. C---11.
YOU may be afliired, Aflrea.^ th;
neither Grief nor Love will brea the Heart of any Man, Since neither < them have killed me, though I have bee forc'd to be two Days without the H( nour of feeing You. When I parte from you, to begin this tedious Separ tion, I remember you promifed me Letter; the Expectation of which was Comfort to mein my Abfence : But whe J came to Tov n this Morning, and four none ; if ever you Saw or could fancy Man wild with Delpair, just Such a thir was I: The mnldeSi of my Thoughts wa that I was forgotten and deServedly Sligh ed ; that Something of Disadvantage t me had occurfd Since I Saw you; and th; Some body, I don’t know who, has bee doing, I don’t know wshat, to ruine rt in your Esteem: For You are in yourN; ture generous, and a strict ObServer < ' your Word. Sure therefore, it must I Something extraordinary that could pn vokeyou to be at once both unkind an unjust to	Tours,
CELADON.
P.
A TacqueiJrorrTy V illV.	S/
F. S.
I would have wrote more : but I find my Self in a trembling DiSorder, as you may perceive by my manner of w’riting, which I can no more give an Account of, than You can, why you are pleas’d to admit of Letters from
Tour Humhle Servant.
4 ■
Mrs. C--------IIV Anfwer. .
I Can guest (without the help of a Conjurer} at Celadons Difeafe ; The Thimble upon the Seal of your Letter, allures me your Trembling was caus’d by Some Female Spright. I can’t find in my heart to pity you. Since ’tis a Malady you voluntarily draw upon your Self. But let me caution you by the way; do’nt affect it too frequently., lest the Angry God should make you feel his Power in Reality-----I find we both lay under a Mi-
stake : You expected a Letter Teflerday^ and I a Vifit. I would not stir abroad, nor was I good Company at home.
H h 4	1
88	A ^ac^et f rom V Villh.
1 was asr much out of humour at m Disappointment, as if I had been real! in Love with you. I know not wh fort of Lethargy has Seiz'd me : but’t the Opinion of all but my Self, that am inclining to that Folly. But I ai reSolyed to pray hard against it; An if the Devil be but fo much m
•	w
Friend, to keep you out of my Sgl for Four and twenty Hours, I ai certain 1 shall be out of Danger. I dieu.
N
' , . • **
‘	^	4
astrea,
*	‘	s	^	•
«
*	,	y
V	..
' . ' . V - •
Letter II.
«
CeladonMrs. C-----------11, in anfwer to
Copy of Verfes fhe fent him.
hy making Juch a Pother^ ‘ * XV l 0/ being toft this way andt other.{
, Methinks 'tis plain you want a Rud-\ iers : L .■ ;■
^ c
i
0
.	.	Whic,
4
%• «
V	V	'	.
<•
V
ATacquetfrom VVillV.	89
fVhkh^ if my Counfel might prevail,^ j Topi I get^ and faften to your Tail > The next time you refoIve to fail, > Then youd not fear a Storm or Qmck^ fand^
VVhen once your Ladifhip is maniid.
And jhouldyou touch my Rock, of VVit^ y Why fhould \ou he afraid of it>	V
For I jh all fink and you fhallfplit.	y
But to defend to Thrafe of Land.^
Andfpeak what both may underjiand.
Tou fay you ventuPd a Surprize^
And went much wounded from my Eyes; And when recover d and grown better There came a parlous witty Letter/ Which bound your Heart fafi as witht
Fetter.	j
Madam., all Women mufi fuhmit To my joint Force of Eyes and Wit.
Where der I come^ I make fure Slaughter :
But were \you deaddead as DifS-Water,
I have a Cordial InfeIlion.,
Willcaufe a fpeedy RefurreIlion.^
A bleffed Medicine nd.er failing Thofe that, like you., are givn to failing.
Three Dofes does it ^^fometimes more. According as I am in ftofe, ,	•
;L	But
t
A
?o A Tacquet from Wilhr.
But Jhod.dit fail., pray what of that ?
Though I have kiUA you like a Caty
As I Jhall fndy *ere I have doney
Tou have alas more Lives than one.
But one thing more, and I have en ded:
Tour two lajl Un^s have much oVen ded.
%
f
Tou feem unkindly to fufpeIl
I Jhou'd my glorious Brize negleIi •
Or elfe mifufe the Botwryou gavCy
And frown ungently on my Slave.
But did you know your Man through-'
outy	/
Totid he afh andd of fuch a Doubt:	^
Tor fm as merciful as flout.
No more Boetryy I befeech you : T’i too chargeable a way of writing to bt pleafant to a Man that’s forc’d to hire So unlucky am I too at this Juncture, tha my Hackney’s at Grafs, which must Seem both for a Rcafon why your AnSwer ha been delayed So long, and for the Faint nefs of his Performance. Give me leav( to tell you with as much good manners a: I can, that not one of thoSe fine Sayings you would flatter your humble Servan with,fits eafie on him.They become him a ill as the Jubilee Beaus Cloaths dp j
For
A^accjuet from VVillT 91
Porter; or as fine Trappings would an Afs: Let me intreat you therefore to . believe that I know my Self, and can’t bear being laugh’d at by one I would make my Friend, Immoderate unde-Serv’d PraiSes , are the Severest Lampoons ; and you must have a very mean Opinion of him you give ’em to, if you think he’ll take ’em: Let Example instruct you. I check my Pen when I find it inclines to any thing that can be wrested to a Compliment, tho’ all I could lay, would be lefs than you truly deServe. Oblige me with more Truth and lefe Wit, as you value the Friendship and Conversation of Your Humble Admirer,
celAdok
P. S. Send me word if I may have leave to viSit you to morrow.
ir
%
<
I
^ r
Mrs,
%
0
i
A ^act^uet from WillT ,
. I	Mf^ C--------IIV. Anfwer.
in * •
1 Was just concluding our Acquaintanc( was at an end, when I perceiv’d t Porter make up boldly to the Door ,* anc laluting it with three Swinging Blows, which Signify’d he came in haste, and had Matter of Importance to deliver: The Door being opened, immediately he produc’d his Authority, your Letter, which 1 had no Sooner open’d, but I perceived by your Poetry.^ you Sent him on a Speedy Mestage, SuSpecting I had met with ill Weather, and ran you adrift, and might want a Pilot to bring me Safe in Port; but I can’t help telling you I am not So ill a Mathematician (tho’ a Woman} but I know how to steer my Courfe, and where to cast Anchor too. I guest C pur Acquaintance will be but of a short
Longitude, if your Fegafus take shch a Latitude in his Stile. I am Sorry you misunderstand my Intent, which was only to divert you over a Bottle, and my Self from the Spleen. I never had the feast Defign of coming to any Particulars. And I’m as little concerned to know if you are Couragious, as whether you are Merciful or not : For I’ll alTure
you,
A ^dctimt from WiU’x.	9 J
you, my Condition is not So defperate as you may imagine, Railery is allowable Srom Women Sometimes, as well as from Your Sex. If I remember. Truth and Sincerity Swhich ought to be cloathd in MotIefty) were the Principles you profest, and Seem'd to defend. Bijt I find thofe are Points as far out of a Lawyer s way, as good Manners from a Dutchman; especially a Templers. Therefore I fear I must be forced to remove my Caufe into another Court; or withdraw my Action into Statu quo • for this Declaration of yours has put a Demur to my former ReSolves. You defire me tx> write Truth; it is the only good ^ality I pretend to. Wit was never my Talent, which You are not unfenfible of, and makes you uSe me So freely. I hope you’ll not condemn this; for I think there is nothing like a Compliment in the whole Scrowl. Take it as You pleaSe from
ASTREA.
P. S. I mujl fee your Anfwer 'ere I know whether I fhall givey ou leave to vifit me or not.
* »
' ' t..	^ Ce-
94 AJ^acquetfromWilYs^
Celadon to Mrs.	—^11.
V
Madamy
YOur Paffion becomes You well e
nough : The little Heat You hav put your SelS into, with the bare Ap prehenfion of an Affront, gives yoi more than ordinary Brightness, whicl shines to Advantage in an Air of Re fentment throughout your Letter. Bu if You would have thought it wortl your while to have read mine twice or indulg’d me the Liberty you allow’c all Mankind, and which You are noi ashamed to make uSe of your Self fbme-times, of rallying ^ I mean, You woulc not have found So much Subject for Satyr ^ as upon a rash curfory View, You did, when You condemn’d me for a Fault I never intended to be guilty of. No, I afliire you, ’twas the farthest from my Thoughts. Believe me, I judge my Self in this Point as nicely as You can do; and could I convict my Self of any Indecency either in Language or Carriage to a Woman, Td punish my Self with a Severity which Vouinyour
Ju-
A facquetfrom WillV. 9 f
Justice could not but approve of, and reSolve never to lee the Face of a Woman again. Self-denial I would not practise upon any other Consideration, than a Crime I could never forgive my Self; and which I should think I could never do or Suffer enough to atone for. Tis strange to me, that You, who have So good a Relish, should let your Self fall into a Mistake, and not diScern that whatsoever ill Face my Poetry might carry with it, it was ’ innocent at bottom ; Nay, in Truth, ^twas but what You drew me into : So that if there was a greater Latitude taken than ought to have' been (wshich I vow I don’t remember and have no Copy to recollect by} I don't know how you’ll acquit the Lady that wrote Vcrshs to me first. If she had kept back the CauSe, the Effect had not been. Moderate therefore, your Reproaches : Be Friends wfith me, and fall out with your Self. Keep me to Profe and there’s not a Man moderater, and more nicely obServes the Decorums Ladies ought to be treated with: But when I am forc'd to make Room for a Mufe in my Breast, I am poiieft You
have Seen that the very being of the
Fe-
^6 A ^dccjuet from^A^s.
Female kind So near me, has an Tnflueni upon me extraordinary : It shall be tr Care therefore, not to loSe by my Mu what I gain by Fortune. Certainly Yc have been very ill ufed by Some of tl Gown, which provokes you to condenn us all. for Monsters, Creatures void bot of good Morals, and common Civiliu I have very little to fay for my Self: bi if you'll give me leave. I’ll shew you tl: Face of a Man shall be an Instance tte they are not all past the Grace of repen ing and reforming too, by the filer Reproofs of others Good Works, dreamt of you all Night: and in fpigt
:	of your Rigour, had I you in my Arms, it:
!	impostible to deScribe the Extafie; 'twoul
be too transporting to be revealed by
i
I
CELADOi
I'
I!
i|
I
I
I
I
I '
A Tacquetfrom VVillV. jp7
'	s	^
Mrs. C--------llV Anfwer.
r	.
p	t	•
9
\
IF Yoiir DteamS be So pleafant, eri-joy them still; they are the only Certain Pleafures ; all others are tranfi-tory and Subject to Changed A thoii-Sand things may dccur to make us happy 5 should we indulge the Folly of Love. I will not inSert the Particulars; the better to difarm your DeSence: For one of Your Profession knows how to defend a bad CauSe as well as a goocl one. BeSides, I cannot expect more plaufibie Arifwers, than You have given me already. Nay, I am inclinable to believe you above the common Level of Mankind , which makes ine deal more fincerely with YoUj than with the-Generality of your Sex : Therefore let me dillwade You from the Purfuit of what, if really obtained, would not be, worth your Care. If You have diSco» ver’d any little Whim in my Hiimour, that agrees with Yours (for no Woman ' but is Mistrefs of Some Charm iii Some Eyes') think at the fame tinie, that that I is not enough to engage the Heart of Celadon* think that I have t thouSand
It ^
I 1	1313“
98 dfdchtfromWiXh.
unanswerable Faults in t’other Scab Whatever Your Imagination Sliews yo in Savour of me, Turn but the PerSpe ctive, and it will shew You more t the contrary. As for Example 5 Fane me all that’s ill; think me (for ough You know, I may be) a Mistrefs east to be enjoy 4; one that may be bougl with fordid Gold., wdien the most nice Rk
torkk fails to move. Think me this.
/
- fay; then ask your Self if. You still lo\ Aprea. Perhaps you’ll Say, this is a odd Letter; but no matter, I hope you never have CauSe to tax me with Decei nor think me vain, when I Say, I ha\ as true a Notion of Honour., as Yoi Sex can have: And when I See a Ma deferves it, I can ufe him So, if Celadi pleaSes to continue our Correfpondence t writing; but I never must See him more.
4
r
Ce]
» *
$
* /
A^cicht fromNS'^s. 99
CeladottC----------^IL
✓
NEver fee my dear Aftrea more!
If my Eyes are the Subject of Your Averfiori) by all that’s good, ^ to have You in my Arms, fd pluck em out. There is not any thing So dear to me. Nothing can, I think, except Your Self, be dearer to me than my Pyes; but I would renounce ’em, to purchaSe a Felicitywhich only You can raiSe me to. Be every thing that You have named to fright me, be worfe, be common, be rotten, falfe, defigning, be nothing but what is bale and infamous ;
I will not stop in my purfuit; but be content to share Infection with You, might I but taste thole ravishing Enjoyments which You, and none but You can give, and have my Portion of thoSe Charming Tilings your Mind produces. Good Gods ! What have I been Saying of a Woman that comes nearest to Perfe-stion of any of her Sex, and contains more Vertues in her than a whole Convent does. Every thing You do or fay, is a Charm to me : Your very Anger has a Beauty in’t, as Y^ou exprefs it; And like
I i z	a
0
I
i
i
!
I	too A^aajuet from VVillV.
I	.
a gentle Wind, it more encreafes tte abates my Fire. RcverSe your Crr Sentence, I beSeech you, Madam , ar fuffer me to vifit y^ou. You know yt can command my strongest Pastio with a Look, diXid'ea^lj dilarm me
my most violent Resolutions. I lovett
much to dare to be
%
Tour Servant.^ ctc.
\
t
• #
r
«
•»
s
Sevc
i
s
' / * * *
%
«
#
«
V
I
f	J Tdequet from VVilik.. i o i
I
Seven Pafllonate Love-Letters written by Celadon to hisMistreSs.
LETTER I.
Madam,
1 Return’d to Town on Sunda'^; But have been fb tir’d with my Journey, that I have not been much abroad. Bu» SineSs will yet Some Days be So much my Enemy, as to deprive me of a PoJi~ Ulity of Seeing the charming Original of that Idea, that has never been from me Since I first Saw you: Yet I beg a Line or two from Your dear Hands , which will give me Life enough to Support the hard AbSence, that NeceJ/tty impo-fes on me. The Retreat I have been to See, is very charming indeed ; yet it wants two things to render it agreeable enough to me to make me go to it ; that is, a Purling Stream, and Such a GoddeSs of the Woods as You are. If you See Mr B----1, tell him, if he in-
tends to communicate his Affair to me, it must be very Soon, and I must .See him at my Lodging to appoint Some Hour that I can Spare. I beg your Par-
li c	dpn,
' ^
0
102 A Racquet from WillV.
don, Madam, that my Letter to yo contains any thing b ut Love : For ir deed when I have So much, that no Let ter can Suffice to evpreSs the thouSandt Part of it, stis a Folly to lofe an; Room : But then, on the other hand, m Love is beyond ExprelSion ; for whate ver I can Say, will never be So capabl of expressing how much 1 love You, S well as one Hour’s Converfe : Nay, on Look, one Eloquent and Expreffiv Look, , and one tender Pressing with m; transported Band, one fO! that I durf
fay it} one RaviSning KiSs------- But whi
ther are my wild Thoughts carrying me To joys, That no Langt^age and n Tongu.e can tell. ‘Th HeaEn to haVi Tou^ hut without Tou., HelL
In Spight of Mr. Collier, I Sa3 So; and may he that thinks it an) ~ .DrofaiierieSs to compare his Missrels’5
Smiles to Heaven, and the want of ern, to Hell 5 may he; I Say, always feel the latter,but never arrive at the ssrll: But whal I do Hay aCurfe on him that Nature has
curs’d already, by an unSound Mind, incapable of Love in an unSound Eodv. She has made him a Jack-Puddings to pleafe the Town without being capable of receiving any Joy himSelf Now,
' Cur-
MB.
% ' * *
A Tacquet from VVillV.	i o'j
Curfes on him again for drawing me into this Digression, from the most Charming of her Sex; and only leaving me room to Subfcribe my Self, Madam,
%
Tour Sincere a?A Fait hjul Slave^
CELADON.
______^_
LETTER If.
*
♦
\
MatIam^
I Sent an AnSwer Yesterday, and hope the Porter deliver’d it right; and that I believe will overcome your Infidelity as to my Love. I go out of Town tomorrow or Sundayand shall return on Monday or Tuefday; the greatest Satisfaction of which Return, is the Hopes of feeing You, Madam, and being once more happy in your Conversation, a Confirmation of which, I shall long for from Your dear pretty Hands. I con* fefs, if I could be perSwaded to be prudent, I should indufirioujly avoid feeing You anymore : whereas all this Weeks Endeavours have been to order Matters So, if I can, as never to be without feeing
I i 4	You ;
V
104	^ Tafquetfrom VVillh.
You; but that would be too much tc your Disadvantage. Ill Company at Sel domest, is a Tax upon your good Na ture; but to defire to put it too oSter upon you, may be too Sond an Arro' ’ gance to be pardon’d : And Since witf iHeavsh we must leave all things to it! DiSpoSal; So 1 shall not preSume to dl red: my Heavsh in You, what MeaSurei of Dispensation to allow to a miSerabh Sinner. The Divines tell us, our owr Merits can never purchaSe Heavsh and Some Lovers fay the Same of theii Mistrefies. However I agree with th( former, I declare my felS against the latter F or certainly Love merits the belov’d which, if you refuSe, you ought t( fufier Violence, as they tell us that a hove the Stars does, and the Violeni take it by force, Tberet’s Scripture Soi you, Madam ; and if You improve noi by my Doctrine, be it upon your owr Head ; I have discharged my Duty, have told You that you ought to re ward a Lover; and if you will not be* iieve me, remember Infidelity is a hei* nous Sin; and I know not what Judg* ments may fall on your Head for it
You know we are to be Saved bv Fait!
* ^
poly I that is (as our Calvinist Divines
t
4
■ i ^
' A Tactiuet from WAVs, lof
inform us^ without the Help of Works* This I urge, becaufe you may perhaps allow that Love is to be rewarded, but at the Same time question mine, when I asture you of it : And Since you have but the Word of any Man for his . Lovf.^ Pray let my Word be taken as well as anothers. Befides, Im not fb much a Calvinifl and Lutheran in Love ; but that I allow of the-“ Merit of Good Works; that is, in proportion to any ones Ability. The Widows Mite must convince the Reality of her Zeal, as well as the Princes richer Sacrifice. But I know not what Religious Vein Tm got into, that T can’t get out of the Circle of the Church for my Life. Therefore to conclude with it as I began, In our Church we exclude all Unbelievers from Salvation : So, look after your Precious Soul.^ and think of pitying
t
Tour Sincere Slave and Admirer^
*
%
CELADON.
m
\
m
LET-
0
■
io6 A (Pacquet from'Will^s,
I
L E TTE R III.
Madam,
1
The enclos’d was writ last Night;
and becaufe it should not mifcar-ry, I call’d with it my Self, and yet it mifcarried : for I could meet with no body but a strange Gentleman and a ' Child; and thinking neither of them fit for the Conveyance of it to the pretti-tiest Hands in the World, I brought it back with me; and finding that it is Mrs.
•------'’s Lodgings, I ventur’d to direct
both in a Cover to her for You, wishing you all the Joys you are capable of giving me, and thofe are enough in Conlci-ence for one body. I am, Madam,
Tour Devoted Adorer^
CELADON.
LEf-
i
’ i
L
N
A'Pacquet from VVillh. 107
letter IV.
»
J
MrtIdrn,^ ''
Tj' Ither I have very little Patience, or a very strong Dcfire ; Sor I am not a-ble to bear this Fatigue or Expedation. Every one that has knock’d at the Door theSe two Days, has put me into an :^go-ny; my Heart Surpriz’d me with larger " and quicker Beatings, wdfich almost: depriv’d me of Breath. In short, liri forced to lend this Mestenger, to know whether You have Elonour enough to be as good as your word : Or, whether a Woman’s or Courtier s PromiSe be of the fame nature, only a civil Impofition, which with the Knowing ought to go for nothing. I am not able to bear this Uncertainty ; and I defire Yomat least to be So just, as to let me know whether I shall be So happy to fee You to day or-not ; Forfince I cannot study, I willelle go lofe my Self a little out of Town, and lofe thofe Thoughts v/lstdi too much difquiet my Mind ; tiiough I have not stirr’d out fince i Saw You. 'Tis a fort of Barharity You shew^ towards me to pcrfw^ade my easte Faith to a
Be-
ft
i pH, . A Tacquet fromWiWs.
Belief that You do not deSpiSe me, and at the farne time refolve not to eafe that Pashon, Such a Belief muff hevK tally produce in the Breast of one that loves So well as does,
Madam^
Tour Sincere Friend and Servant.
CELADON,
«
«
/
V
Letter V.
I Am, my Everlasting Charmer, niirn-bring the Hours and Minutes with Impatience ; and hope You will let it be as early as possibly You can quit !<■:	your Sweet Bedfellow, that You will
come to morrow Morning : For the i Day.^ nay, the Tear^ has not Hours e-nough to tell all the Story of my Love. Tho' 1 have this Day been forc’d into Company about earnest Bufinefs, and Some of it very warm; Yet lean Safely fay it. You have not been out of my Mind a quarter of an Hour: Nay, in the In-
tervals
A Racquet from Wilhr. 109 t
%
tervals I made two Efcapes into the Fields i to think only of You. I was to go from my Lodging to German-jlreet, and as the nighest Way, went round about by Maryhone; becauSe I could So have the longer time to think of my Dear, Dear Charming Cfelia : and to go from thence to Brook-flreet in Holhorn : I e’en went o’er the Fields as far as Mary hone, and round to GraysAnn Lane., till now I am come home by 10 a-clock, where I, as the best and last thing I do, write this to fend to You early in the Morning.
I hope You will rest better than I shall to Night : for 1 have new Matter of Jealoufie, but that You shan’t know till I See you here. By Heavsh I love you too extravagantly; But Love comes on me now like a Torrent; there is no re-fisting him. Well, I am yours: and will be yours, as long, nay, longer than You will like it. And I foreSee as great a Pain now when once You are weary of me, as You are not kind. Yet if you knew how I lov’d you, you would uSe me with Some
J	^	__
regard, to my TenderneSs ; and believe me. Madam, my Love does but begin where other Mens ends: But I must not run on at this rate every time | I shall elSe have you fling afide my Letters
with-
i 16	A Tacquet from Wiilii.
without reading, like a great Counter that has too much Bufinels on his Hands * and then I should loSe a douhle Pleafure * For I am not only pleas’d while I am writing to you ; but while I am thinking that at this time are the prettiefl Eyes in the World employ cl by me. Gods! the most Charming Face that ever I beheld! Indeed, I never Saw any thing So very tranfpartingly pretty as You were last Sunday. The nearer You Come to Nature, the more Charming You are, and must still be more So when you have lest horroiPd from Brest. Such an. one would make me juftifie Adam s Tranf-greffion, as	repreSents it, who in-
deed has much excus’d our first Fathers 1 Frailty, and put it into fo advantagious
a Light, that any of hst Sons would justi-fie his Fall, by conieffing the fame Weaknest. O Lord! whither am I running? Flow can I, when I write to You, think or Speak of any thing elfe ? Twas a Fault, my Charmer! but I hope you’H forgive it me when I ilianst my Self. I long,
I am impatient for Wednefday Morning. If You can fend me a Word or two trom your dear Hands by the Porter^ he Ihali call as he comes back. Do, comply with my Fo/Iy ,* Love makes Fools of
us
A Racquet from WillV. 111
MS all. Let me have a Line or two from You this Morning^ if you are awake; if not, let it alone ; becaufe 1 m obliged to go out by Eight or Nine at farthest; but shall be at home, I hope in the noon, at least, by Five or Six a-clock in the Evening ; So that if you Send then, I shall be Sure to have it.
Fly fafl, ye Minutes; bring the mjPd-for Day,
Thads big with the Divine Enormous
"	'?rA
To do more Mifchief, Jehu could com^ mand	^
The rowling Sun to make immediate fland.
Then cannot LOVE precipitate his
Flight,
And haften on amain the Tardy Might > And then as fviftly bring the Joyous Morn,
With which my Pangs fhall end, and Hap^ pinefs return ?
When Cselia breaks upon me with her Light,
More charming than the Day-fpring, and
more bright,
%
A
»
Ill A Racquet from WiltV.
A Thoufand Trdnfports will my Hear fur prize: .	- . ^
For fhe a Thoufand HeaEns will ddr, from her hrit^ht Eyes.
All Extacy ! my Soul no ^vulgar Joys fhai prove.
Oh / TU dijfolve in this Mxt rejams o
Love!
Oh ! hajie.^ dear Morn ; with Fury onwarc move!
i
Thou hrin^fl me Cselia, and with her Lifi and Love.
Vri ■ \
0
Pardon this Extempore Rapfody; Sdr 1 can’t be Sedate enough to think as I ought I am So full of Expectation; and indeed fov take up my whole Thoughts, and yeti am all in Confufion within too. Only this is the constant and intelligible ReSult of all. that I am your Faithful
ceLadon.
* .•
4
\
tp
%
4
LET.
? *
, A Racquet front V Villi.	! l %
LETTER VI.
OMy EverlaSlirig Charmer, let me
not live a Day longer < tharl to morrow, rather than you should forfeit your Word to Morrow. You are not a Moment out of my Thoughts, tho’ I have been in Company and a-bout Bufinefs all this day. I retire into my Heart to think of You; and if the Divines could find out Something as agreeable to our Imagination, we may eaSily comply with St. Paul., and pray always. . God forgive me if I Sm in my Worship of You. I can't think I do; and yet I have no part of my Soul f my own. Fm all and intirely Yours. Let but to morrow come, and let but Ctz-lia keep her Word, and hear how much I have to fay. Say ? Yes, in Looks, in Words, in every Action ; all are and must be full of Love : So much Love has Pofieffion of me, I am Love, as Cowley Says; nay, and which is more, shall ever be fo.| Be just therefore, be compassionate : Tave me from Distraction! Keep me your Slave oh, ufe not a Mark of your Tyrannybut Pity ^ and lawful
K k	Reign#
114	^ Jacket from V ViliT
Reign. Tis great, vhen Vis in your Power not to Jejlroy. Heav’n is only Fleavsh when it preServes : Tis Devih Work to Ieftroy.^ to Janin and torture. Be like the HeavV in your Mind, that youi Per Son reprefents. Come, come, let me Swear, protest Ten ThouSand Vow? and Oaths, enough to melt the most Obdurate Heart. See all my Agonies, hear all my Eloquent Sighs ; and witi: thoSe tender charming Eyes,behold the Eager neSs and SoStnels which Love produces Come, Oh come! to damn me entirely iSYou will not fave. If I must have • Hell, do You bring it: I shall think th( Judgment just, becaufe Yours : Anc the Charms of my Severe Judge. wil Sweeten evh the Torments which ih( ordains. Come, if it be but to See nv die ; to trample in the Cruelty of you proud Beauty ; Yet remember, Yoi deftroy the most Sincere, constant and faithful of \ our Lovers. '1 i
m/
true, every body must love You becaufe You are Charming ; becaufe yoi must pleafe every body; and lo the; love You meeriy for their own fakes but you will not find many who wall le this first Motive of Love tranfport then
beyond all Considerations of themSelves
be
«
A Jacket from VVillV.	11 f
but I am So much Youts ; You are So ahfolutely my Sovereign, that I have no Thoughts but to pleaSe You, nor any Happinefs without your being pleaSed. There is nothing that I am capable of doing, that I would not do to pleafe You : And I should think my Self too happyif my Power bore Proportion to my Will. I would if I could, make you Emprels of the World ! But that woffd be no Advantage to Love. Noife, Pomp and Ceremony wou’d deflroy the Pleasures of a mutual Paffion : And all the Softnels and Pleafures of two Tender Hearts, would be lost in Vanity and Shew.^ in empty Applaufe of buSie Fook and Knaves, in cringing Sycophants.^ and Selfish Rogues, that flatter to be flatter’d and advanc’d. Oh! no: Give me no 'joys that are lovelefs and unendear’d ; but give me Qaelia, kind tender, just, quiet, Soft Retreat; Constancy, Peace, murmuring Brooks, and tumbling Streams, cool Shades, and Love in every Place, in Shades, in Shine, in Brooks and Glades, in CW/<?, who is her Self a Heavh and Paradice : But should I run the pleafing Idea farther, I should never have done; for I can frame no Scheme of Happinefs where Ctelia has not her Share, her chief
K k X	Man*
%
/
* ''
lid ATactjuet from VVillr.
Share ; v»shere she is not all, at least the Manna., the Sweetning Drop that gives a , TaSte to all that can ever be eSteem'd and lov’d by her
CELADON.
My Service to your charming Bed fellow^ and my generous Advocate.
LETTER VII.
Infallthle Lady.,
\/OU are infallibly come at two or ¥ three a-clock. I staid Dinner, till
Aim..	J
it was Four, in firm Belief , that when you had lent on purpoSe to me to let me know^ that you would infallibly perform your ProiniSe, you would not fail. I got the best Fricafie of Rahhits that e-ver I eat: So good, that I relish’d it in Spite of vexing; which I did heartily. Wt I had Some Oisters to whet your Sto-|H mach, and a Fowl to make up your little I^L Dinner, which I keep cold, in hopes
You will yet come to night. For God’s fake, Madam, let me know why You ^^ufe me So. Tis not generous ,* and I
-	... -
J Racquet from VWxWs,	\\y
hope L shall reflect enough upon it to endeavour to curb fb unlucky a Paffion.
A Woman of Honour shou’d let no Bu-finefs make her break her repeated Pro-miSe. I’m Sure I wou’d not let any hinder me of this Day’s Curfe of Expectation. If this be Love., the Devil take Love., Since it only qualifies a Man to be us’d like a Dog. But Madam, be aiSur’d So Tyrannic a Sway will make me a Rebel : And tho’ I love You much. Such Ufage will bring me , I hope, to my Self. I am SenSible You never intended to come, and only abus’d my^ Credulity., to make your Self Sport. Madam, there is a gentle Way of making the most free People Slaves; and you have it in your Power to make me So: But, like Some . Monarchs, you take the wrong way, and will only force me to endeavour to throw off fb proud and heavy a Toak. That, I believe, you don’t value, being So well furnish’d with Subjects : Yet le^' ^ me tell you. Madam, You might have been So generous, not to have abus’d Al yj Man, merely for loving you. But I de- < Serve it, truly deferve it, that could ^ think.——— Well, Madam, be yet Soy just as to let me fee you once more, if it be but to tell nie, that I am a trpubleSome
^ K k 3	im-
«
n 8 A Tacquet from WillV.
impertinent and credulous CoxcomI, tc think a Woman could ' keep her Pro-miSe, or be Senfible of a real Fission. If it bepoffible, let me fee. you to bight ^ If you come not to me, I will to you j
Nor will I come away, till I fee You. 1 will wait at home till Eight at Night, who am more Yours, I find to my borrow, than I am my own,
/
CELADON.
Betwixt 5 and
6 a-clock.	■ ■
1
♦
■ ■ ?
V
A
*
»	I
« % m
4
9
r
*
*	V
.	V'
%
i
V	.	• K ■ V
<?
ATacquet from VViUV. up
A Comical LoVe-Foyage to Hampton-Court, written in a Letter to a Friend at the Bach.
Friend Jack,
rHE Day you went out of Town and
left your dear Aurelia as well as my Self, to mourn your AbSence , you are Senfible I was just entering upon a new Intrigue, which you then Seem’d very de-firous to know the Event of. I have here accordingly undertaken to divert you with a rough Draught of my Armour, which I allure you was not unattended with Some uncommon Acci-. •
dents.
You have already Seen the fair In-chaotrefs; therefore I need not give you her Character. The lame Morning you began your Journey^ I had promis'd to un^ dertake a Small Voyage with her Ladiship up to Hampton-Court.^ she pretending to be very defirous of leeing that famous Pa- ' lace, lomuch talk'd on; to which, being Countreyshred, she was an ablolute Stranger, you may be Sure 5 1 iking my Com» pany well, I could not think amils of our
,	Kk 4
■ •
9
no A^dcquctfromVN'A^s,
Ramble, recollecting fbme Women are like Foxes, and will venture to do thofe things abroad which can't be done near home without the Danger of Discovery.
Being always as punctual in the Affairs of Love, as an Exchange Merchant is in Payment of Money, I waited on her at her Lodgings exactly at the time ap-ppinted , and hapned to catch her not quite dreSs'd ; tho’ for fear, I SuppoSe, I should pop upon her unawares, a little before the Hour, flie had taken Special Care, I perceive, to remove all NuSan-ces, having pick’d the Gumm out of the Corners of her Eye-lids, lick’d up a few Carr away-Seeds to Sweeten her Breath, tho* pretending for the VSind; rubb’d behind her Ears with a little Orange-flower Waterand taken away the Frowfinefs of her Fore-top andSowreneSs of her Arm-pits, with a Puff or two of Jejfamin Powder-, fo that I found my delicious Creature, H| when I gave her a Salute, in as fweet a ■P Condition as a Trunk full of old Linnen
laid up in Lavender ^iVidiRofe-Leaves^lh^t, ft; i had I kifs’d the Breech of a Mofcovite Cat,
my Senfes could not have been refresh’d E with a* greater Fragrancy. After I had r done as much Penance in waiting till she I	was
^ A J^actiuet from VVillV. \ 21
was drest, as a City Dunn does to fpeak with a Nobleman, she with much ado, had brought her Head-dreSs, Hoods, and Andershams in Subjection to her nice Fancy, altho’ I look’d upon her all the while, with as much EarnestneSs as a Priest might do upon an Evil Spirit; Yet could I perceive no more Alteration Sor the better, aSter an Hour and half’s unne-cestary quidling of her Ornaments, than you shall find in a Negro's Complexion aSter Scouring his Infernal Face .with a Pound oS Soap or a Quart of Hungary^ Water.
When she had thus finish’d her Mornings work, being lac’d up in her Stays, as tite as a Lekejlerjhire Wooll-pack, I handed her down stairs into a Coach, and there made Love in a Tub till we came to the Water-Side, where a ravein ous Astembly of Amphibious Scoundrels, Some with their Mouths full of Bread and CheeSe, and Oiiions, were ready to pluck us out of the Windows of our Leathern Sanctuary, before the Driver could have recourse to the Door to deliver us fairly into the vile Hands of the wrangling Fraternity. At last we pitch’d upon a couple of Red-Cap’d Tritonswho handed us into their Wherry^ and became of
a
^ 2 i	A Taccjuet from Wilh^.
\ Sudden as civil and compIaiSant as if
they had been bred at an Academy ; fo that I found they only Scolded about who should carry the Fare, as Lawyers do at Wefiminfler about who shall carry the Caufe. When I had Seated my Mi^ streSs on my Right-hand, according to the Foolish Custom of Englandand gave her the Superiority in Place, which their Sex are proud enough to claim, and ours foolish enough to give, tho’ contrary to the Laws both of God and Nature, our brawny Slaves Sate down to their Stretchers, and puffing and blowing at every Pull, like a Phtyficky Man in a Sweat, they row'd us onward of our Way, being every now and then Saluted with a Broad-Side of Such fcurrilous Words and Bawdy PhraSes, that put my Lady s Modesty very much to the Blush, and me to a confounded Puzzle to defend our Selves, that I was forc'd to exert my Parts, and pelt our Adverfaries in the ||B Billingfgate Dialect, of Rogue, Taylor,
Whore, Semstrels, Scoundril, Informer, ^ Cuckold, Mechanick, Jilt, Exchange-
Woman, and all the ill Language I could i	muster up to make Suitable Returns, lest
I	my Mistrefs should think me a Blocks
I head. The Time I propos’d to fpend in
exhb
J^actiuet from VYiTs. 123
exhibiting my Love to my fair Companion, and preparing her Heart for my DeSign, with Such mollifying Endearments and prevailing Dalliances, as were necefia-ry to warm the Inclinations of a Female Lover ; I was forc’d to employ in studying wdiat to Say to the next Boat we met with : For the first Word, like the first Blow, I found, was half the Battle. After this manner we Smoothly Slid along upon the Slippery Surface of the gentle Thames; listening at Spare times to the whispering Flags and Ofiers that adorn’d herpleaSant Banks, and bow’d their limber Heads in Gratitude to the delightful Breeze that fann’d their verdant Blades into So muSical a Motion. The Weather prov’d So temperate and extream-ly favourable (the Sun shining forth with stich an aulpicious Lustre} that a finer Day could never blest a Lord Mayor’s Shew, nay, the Coronation of an Emperor. At length we arriv’d at Mortlack. took a little Refreshment at the Old Cuckold-making Tenement, the Garter ; and to enliven our Legs, which were almost numb’d for want of Action , we walk’d to Richmond^ where we ordered the Boat to meet us, by which means w^e avoided a tedious Circumference, which
would
f
%•
114 A Tactfuet fromWilYs.
would have tirM us by Water, We walked crofs the Fields link’d Arm in Arm,
7
as loving as any Man and Wife; and entertain’d one another’s Ears with unstudied prittle prattle ; just Such kind of amorous Fustian as Love popp’d into our Mouths, came Simply out again, without any Amendment; that had a couple of Bow’ftreet Criticks been walking behind us, we should have given ’em more DiverSion than a Dialogue in the Pit between a Beau and a Mask, or the most elegant Piece of Courtship in a new Academy of Compliments. When we came to the ancient Town afore-mentioned, we refumed our Places in the Boat; and after two or three Hours laborious Tugging against the Stream, we arriv’d at the famous Port to which w’e w^ere confign’d, where I handed my fair Fellow-Traveller on Shore, and discharg’d our Sweating
(. Drudges; and having not above eighteen P Pence in Silver left in my Pocket, I put S my Fingers into my Phobb to examine I wdiat Gold I had. lodg’d within the. Waste-band of TreaSure; but finding it as empty as a Skull in a Surgeon’s Window,
I presently recollected, that over Night,
I had taken out Seven Guineas and laid ’em I in my Study-Window: arid thinking I’d
A	-.. had
!
[
A Taequet from WilSr.	12 y
had ’em about me,came out and forgot tern. This dishonourable Misfortune, you must believe, made my Heart broil with Vexation, like a Mutton-Chop upon a Gridiron. Now, thought I, I have brought my Hogs to a fair Market; what to Say, or do, or how to come off handSomely, to my Mistrels under this shameful Disappointment, I know no more than a Corn-cutter. At last, I concluded, the best way was, to tell her the Truth of the matter ; which, after as many Hums and Hates and Coughs and Spits,as a bashful Evidence makes before he Speaks to a Court of Judicature, I open’d my Sorrowful Cafe, but as awkardly as a Midwife talks Scripture, or a Priest Bawdy; upon which I found by her Looks, flie Seemed as much Surprized as I my Self was daunted at the Accident. After a little Paufe,! hope,Sir, lays she,Since you have brought me out thus far from London., you’ll have the Honour to contrive Some way to convey me Safe home again: for indeed. Sir, fays she, I did not take care fas I find, I ought to have done) to bring Money out with me, believing I could have no OccaSion for Expence in a Gentleman’s Company, who has given me in Words fuch Aflurancesof his Friendship: To which I made her a Suitable Answer,
r
\l6	JTacquet from Wi\\*s.
, \
fwer, begging her she would remove al fevere CenSures and Reflections, dioug’ justly c|ue to stich inexcuSable Forgetful lieSs; $nd that she Would be pleated t( tarry but a little time in aTavern,till I step to a Friend at a Small distance Srom Ilamp tonTownfiom whom I was aSTured oS aSup ply : She Seeming to be well Satisfied a what I propos’d, wc went accordingly in to a HouSe, where I leSt her over a Pint o Canary and a Rowl. Now, had I as Sa: to go, as Waltham upon Thameswhich i: two good Miles or better, where a Frienc had reSided about 6 Weeks For his Health
but needs must when the Devil drives
>
So adding Mercurial Wings to my Feet, i out-ambl’d a Chair-man ; and now anc then to Further Expedition, put my Sell into a Dog Trot,till I Sweated more than 2 a Peny-Post Man at Midfummer and all but to little purpote , for when I came thither, my Friend u’as gone tc London tht Day before. This Disappointment upon the Back of the other, w^as an insupportable Grievance , and made me Scratch my Ears like a bilk’d Hackney-Coachman, oraCobler, that wants Mo> ney for his Morning’s draught; and found upon further Consideration, I had no way left, but to be a good Husband, and to
leave
■ ■. \' A
JfacquetfromWilVs, 117
leave my Swordj which was Silver, Sor the Reckoning; So fixing to this Re-Solution, I return’d back more like a running Footman than a Gentleman; and coming to the Tavern, receiv’d the startling News from the Master of the Houfe that my Lady w^as gone to London with my	j
Lord Such a one; whole Title for fear of Scan. Mag. I dare not mention. Thefe strange Tidings amaz’d me much more tiian the fight of a Mazing Star, or the feeling of amEarth-quake. Pray Mast er,faid I, * unriddle this strange Mystery to me, how, i||i which way, after what manner this Bufi-nefs came about: Why, Sir, Said he, I shew’d you and the Lady into the best Room in my Houle, which my Lord, when he comes hither, defires always to be shew’d into. I told his Lordship it was taken up, who had another Perlon qf Quality with him. He ask’d me by whom ; and you being gone. Sir, I told him, by a Single Lady: Upon which they Smil’d; and both went into the Room to her; but what they Said or did, I know not: And after they had drank but one Flask of Wine, they left a Crown for that and the Lady’s Pint of Canary, and led her into the Coach ; who shew’d no Signs of Un-willingnefs, but rather Seem’d by her
Looks
C
,128 JTacquetfromWiWd.
Lfecks to be well Satisfied. And this Sir,! fays	all that T know of tli
Matter; ' pn^ithat they ordered th ,p^P" CoaclBfo|‘'^!jD5«^;^. This intolerable L ijlftlg, fage>-lBddd‘h5e#'et'’ vex and ..rave, like
horn<'mad^Gi«:kold,^\vho had catch’d h l|N, Witein:Adijltei£5N thus fatigu’d, dil
fea. •appointedfjilted, tea^^ and after fb od
I C a manner, I th#^ht #as enob^ to ovei
pow^ the Patience oF a 5^^, or* the Ph lofbphy of an EpiIietiis. IWihis vexatioi ConditicMj^^ent down to the Watel’-fid< where,, by great AcQident, I got a Sixpen PaSIage the fame Night, ar^^as heartil glad to Squeeze in amongst Trunks an Boxes, Baskets and blue Aprons; and,
£ thank my Stars, about 11 a-ctbck^ Nigh
I arriv’d Safe at London; where I remain a inveterate an Enemy to the Femile Ses as he that has lost his Nofe by engaginj with i the Petticoat; but to you
. An ajf %red Friend and Servant.
FINIS.
•	’ •	C- ^
'A ■ '
'■ :	'	o - o
p. of p
AhC
•si" \ w
PR
3olU
f
I'loi