Perfidious F—-
LETTERS
From a
NOBLEMAN ' Two ׳Ladies,
Under the Borrow’d Names of
Cofydonfilarinda <3c	I :؛
With the
Ladies Anfwers.
:	* ٠ Printed in the Year, 17.1.
Price ، /. 6 d.
-■»—-    ------ - -
ء
X fardFkWiUimsrlfr
¡SIR)
-am iome ء ![Mi confels '-e؛؛ ual؛confider the u ، ؛ of Dedicators, who لع0لأءح١
they have. finii ج
mi؛ .!?their Works, pitch Az Patron
The Epijlle
Patron to whom they may afcribe all the Vertues or their Hero : or make him an Iaftanceu ٥f all the Perfection and Excellencies of that Piece ؛ by this common Judgment of Dedications, a hafty Reader may be apt to think, I affront my Patron, by engaging him in the defence of a Book wherein I have endeavoured to fet off the Baieneis and Ingratitude of fome Men in their proper Colours ؛ hereby making
.V r : :N - ؛.־i
*Dedicatory.
all Mankind my Enemies ؛ for Strangers will look upon it as a Satyr leveld at the whole Sex, and my Friends be dilfatisfy’d with the Protection of what feems writ׳ againft themfelves, and ought rather to be laid at the Feet of fome Difconfo-late Lady : But the contrary will foon appear, and١ that *twas this very Confi. deration made me pitch upon you, as the only Man whofe Vertues I could op-pofe to the Vices of
A 5 don;
7؟he Ebijffe׳
don; thereby ihewing the World I did not involve the whole Sex in his Guilt-for how many Crimes lo-ever I made him guilty of. intake fufficient amends by giving an Inftance of twice as many V ertues in you.
٠ Condon ’sConquelfs were not rais'd׳ like other Hero’s, upon the Foundation, or by force of his Noble Exploits,, but rather by die Practices of a Subtile Man upon a Credulous Woman, and . . ٠ ٠ ٠ ٠ , ,٠· the
;״· ٠״٠־;■··٠־■׳■־٠·:׳-;■־٠؛٠
١١
‘Dedicatory.
the growth of his Suceeis has been influenced only by a feeming Greatnefs, which ierv’d to dazle the Eyes of the weak lighted. and lead thejr، aftray from the Paths of Vertue: but, Sir, who ever would perfue ·thole He-roick Paths leading to true Honour, need no longer be at alofs for a Noble Guide, if they know you.
Having thus , in fome: meafure, remov'd the Objections that but too readily
The Epiflle
Iy offer’d themfelves again{؛ any reception this poor Piece might expeit from Men; and given fome Rea-fons for my choofing you in particular, as the moil fit Perfon, whofe Noble Ge-nerofity might afford a fe-eure Retreat and fafe Refuge to the diftrefs’d Clarin-da, give me leave, Sir, to acquaint you alfo with the Reafons, why above all People in the World, fhe fhould find that Protection fhe defires in you. -
’ I is.
! Dedicatory٠ ’Tis Title enough to the Protection of a Moble Generous Soul, to ffand realy in need of it : The poor Clarinda certainly has . this Plea, and as for your part, Sir, you are not now to be diftinguiih’d. She was betray’d by a Man Bafe and ungrateful, one whole Per-fon, with bor rowed L uiire and affeCted Charms, in-Ihar'd her Heart; but fhe’s now introduc’d to a Man of real Worth , one whofe
Mind
؛The Epiflte
Mind is illuftrated with Vertue, the Beauty and Majefty of which can't fo much as be thought of without Love and Veneration .٠ In Short, to recover that good Opinion of Mankind which ihe loft by Cory don, *tis neceftary ihe be acquainted with you, nor need ihe fear a cold Reception, where Honour and Affability make their con-ftant Refidcnce.
To
Dedicatory! ׳
To. Conclude, Sir in . your favourable Entertain-وءأل٠س ine is. more happy than if ihe never had been tftfaerwife, .and'the Good؛ neiS yo.u Upiverfaily diffufe
Foruneotn:ifri؟؛g٩!^ but fweeten the ;;عي
ةةةةهجس
٢er,fo great.May ¿ءلآ ^d joynag heartily in con-tributinV what they can to your HappineCs, as they do
in
The Epijlie, 8cc. ٠ in a juft Admiration of you؛ and may this,and every new Year, augment the Bleffiiigs of the paft, which are the Wiines of,	|
four mojl Obedient ٠ n	ffutri
pil
(i)
LETTERS
From a
NOBLE Lor¿
misTRess؛
Under the Borrow’d Names of
Corjdon. ثا\\ة CUriniit.. Letter). lo €اعو٣لا.
₪Tbou Treafur« of my Sof ! call thee־? what Epithet -find tender, --enough to exprefs my une٠iuall’d
ج ;إ p B y tnd-
C 2 )
Fondnels ٠؛ My poor trembling heart ( a young Pra&itioner in thefe Affairs, and only taught by you ) doubts every Expteifion, left it want power; or toreveal my Flames, or keep yours ؛ever burning. Be {till, thou truiling Flatterer, he will be always mine : he is too Noble,too Generous,to betray; and I am happy, happy above my Sex : One piercing Look or falling Accent from his charming Tongue, gives greater Blifs than all the flupid World can know; one f.ft hour of ®elting Love outweighs the Lofs of Parents, Family, and Fame.
Oh, my loved Lord, why did the created Powers form thee lb divine i each aiding Angel lend a Grace to fi٠ niUf the bright work, and ilamp the glorious Heroe fupernatural. Oh, I rave 1 and fixing all my Heaven on thee, my doting Love grows up to Adoration.
You bid. me write of my Self, my ؛Health, if I ؛ liked my Solitude, and each minute Particular: Alas ! how can I deicqpd from Extanes to Trifles
caret bat you.;؛|Is not wcirthv l obey: The Place؛ai؛/C0iged pieafes ! as mias I defrretobe -pleaied when Abfence readers tafte even the Coriveniencies: of life ةج1 and Joys lhan ail Com.
11¿ pany, thcirAUcsrare ;loft my ؛ pt in thoughtas i؛١vr fo ؟On only ^leftions' are, .When 'the Poft how often 'I may. lend? ح comes in Oh Write to me, my Condon (for fo e 'to callyej؛I think you gave jpe lea write to me quickly left I grow ¿ad with thinking, left Grief deftroys . thofeCharms you have lo often fwoin does poffeis, whidilpreferve alone for you. oil give me a Letter ,tliat I may -read it 0,’er and o’er a s, kifs it, blufli at my؟۶fand tim؟٤h Folly, put it in my Bofom, and' caij it You, .for I Woud have it very You.'
Let it be on'l'y Truth, and fure Truth an^You are one. What do you do at Court ? How pafs your Eienlngs now after the Duty oer? Tell'me all,'؛ e, and then you never؟ be juft like .nd؛ will know when to ؛ -
( 4 ؛
Qh thofe dying Eyes ! at parting, Bow often has the dear Reflexion renewed the hilling Transports? Well, you love me, I am fure you do $ and with that pleafed Thought I leave ye, Farervel, Yet I muit go on: Oh love and pity me. Now־ adieu. Wou’d you had heard that Sigh. Aelieu.. ١
LET.
LETTER II.
Corydon to Clarinda. j
יOurs, my charming Garinda^ I receiv’d at One this Morning, having juft left my Lord ٠— and the Marquis of —٠ at the Rummer, with whom I drank your Health : The Toaft was every Mans Inclination, and you was mine by Jove; a thou-fand times I wiih’d you prefent, io contriv’d, as to appear inviftble to all but me: then I grew uneafie with my Company, all their Diicourfes were impertinent, and each returning Giafs became as naufeous as the Embraces of a Woman in the abfence of ٠my lov’d Clarinda woud be to G. rydon. Your Letter, my Dear, 1׳ read it o’er and o’er , and printed i Kiiles on every Line; and when it blufil’d, poor Rogue, I hid it in my Bofom, and then methought it whifper’d, as I remember you lome.
B 3	times
ز 6)
timeswoud,/# Life! my CoryJottf The Devil take, Cuilom; Were ع؛ ,not for that, you might be here with' me, or .1 there witli y.ou, and no no-tice taken. Why flioud Generous Souls be fetter'd to the dull Rules of Cuftom ? Nothing butCuikt makes a Crime; ,and Fools are ilill the moft cenforjous. ؛ A curfe on. their prying. Curiofity. i can let Tradefmen cheat Parfons get drunk, and Wives Cuckold their Husbands , without the leaft Concern ; then why fliould the... bufie World di.urb our Loves ? But no matter ; I hope a little 'time will re-Inflate us in our former Tranquillity. I doubt not but when-you are known to ,be, in the Country,, Fame, who yery often ؛errs, will be؛ thought to have bely'd you. I٠m fure if Lovers have any Friends above, yourRepu-ration will.؛be their Care. ٠h howl iliou’d rcioyce to lee that day when ١ve might hourly jneet with frequent Opportunities of renewing our fierce Embraces, when we., might give oUr felves. over to Loving, not ־(ear the
watch
7 ؟ )
watchful jealous eye. Believe me;״. Clarinda, I have tailed no real Joy fmce you left me, nor is it poilible I ihou’d till you return. I’m glad to7־ find you like your Solitude; for that’s״ a friend to Love. My Dear, I cannot tell you how I fpend my time, only this, that I’m lure I pafs none fo pleafantly as that in Writing to you. I am all E&afie when I think on thee,, and that’s every moment; nay, I break forth in very Poetry ؛
Oh, in what Raptures did I lately ham f Now, with what Anguijh I your Ahfence mourn !
Think of thofe Joys¡ believe thefe Rains, and then.
1 Forget me, deaf Clarinda, if yen cm,
׳ Ns, thou hleft Angel of my Eyes and ٠ Soul!
Nothing thy conflant Faith can e'er remove,
This Thought does evry anxious Doubt contr'ouj,
And joins nty Heart to thine in bonds of mutual hove٠
B؛؛،¿.	So
٠ a ! ٥ ؛§i
(8)
S& may juft Heavn its Blejftngs deal to me,
As I perform the Vows I've made to thee.
Thus, my Dear, I conclude; and beg you to be content, and reft as certain of my Love as of the returning Day ; and believe, you never ihall have caufe to love lefs
Your Faithful
Qorydou٠
..,,..LET. -
(■0 )
; ٠ LKTTER III..',
C/arinda to Corydon.
יF after mad Impatiencies, furious Wiilies, and wild De fires, when the Bleiling is receiv’d I Ihou’d chide my Cory don i wou’d lie not think it ilrange > yet fo I mud : Your Letter bears too loofe a Stile for my HerbicR Love ; with more Care and greater Study you made your firft Approaches to my Virgin-heard؛ ؛ Oh Corydon! what a Curfe is this on Womankind! Your Dotage is all before a Conqueil, Ours begin when you are Bankrupts. How came I to fay that, tlie fattheil from my Thoughts ? Cou’d I believe thy vaft flock of Love does or will receive the lead Decay ? The bare Apprehenfton would kill me, and Death’s fatal Stroke prevent fome greater Ruin.
Remember, Cory dm, you cannot have Forgot it ; yet Til repeat the
B 5.	pleafmg
pleafing Story ؛ The linage always , fills nay Mind, each Beauty itroveto captivate my Cory don, and every Dart was aimed at you; my Eyes alone avoided you; I heard your Praifes all the Day, your God-like Mein and glorious Actions; I fear’d your Power, apd Hood upon my Guard; found your Deiign; for 1 ne’er look’d up but I beheld you upon my Face ; or ir you came near in the Crowd, where daily we fee each other , how ١vou’d you ugh ؟ and־ when by any accident your hand was offered., it trembled fo, that I changed Colour too. Thefe were the publick Signs of Love : but oh! at length, with never-ceaiing Diligence tracing my Steps with endlefs Care ,٠ Cory dm found me alone in the Clofet of the —٠ What did you then ? Down at my feet the lovely Heroe fell, and cry’d, inhumane Fair, What do you mean by perfecting thus your Slave > If : your Refolve is Hate, end with my Life my Sufferings; for whilft I live, I muff, I will purfue you with my
، Love,
l٠؛Ve. Say, Coryd'on, was I nor dif-crcet ? 1 broke from thy Arms. Which grafpt fny Knees, without one Syllable i!r ^nfwcr, *a.d fled to my:Coiii. panions, who asked me if I had ibe'a a Ghoft, my Surprize was fuch ؛ you followed, faw the pale Confunoft/and better skill’d than poor unwary I, made, I fear,a too kind CoflitrU&ion ؛ then. My Lord, what pains youtOok to make a friend]hip wherever I did, that I could vifit ilo where bat I found my Cory don.
This gave you frequent Opportunities; and twas at my dear Lucinds Apartments firit I heard with patience what you had to fay: and oh! when Women liilen to the foftning Tale of Love, like parlying Towns beiieged, they feldom fail the wiih’d Surrender.	v l٠»٥t :·׳.٠
What ami doing, fooliih Creature!٠* Why does this lov’d Remembrance of my pair Weaknefs hang on myjp£-**f Well؟ I have done.
NoW hear the Difference of our prefent Lives. You are'in the m id it
”	■ ־־ ؛ ·٠ of
of all your Friends, in the. midii of all Diyerfions; 1 baniih.d from all, knowing no living Creature but my defiring no Companion but W٩man٠ my Book, cheriihing no Thoughts but thoie of thee: if I walk, inquiil·. tive Gazers watch me: then reclufed fuch is my So ״I never peep abroad litude. But my Love will come and cheat me there’s another Hope to ftrengthen my Courage when I muft pronounce that melancholiy Word
Adieu٠
...	A 11K b l ; v:؟٠١Y٠
׳־;.٠ ·٠. '־٠ - ‘	-٠	· ־	-. ٠ ٠ :٠ ٠-. A ٠ ·١ ;f ' -- ־٠ : 5
.،-٠٠·.'؟■ ·׳ ״■־<٠׳ ؛ «٠٩ ?١- ٠j\JL
٠١	٠	,	.	٠ -	\"'^־٠_-־V ־- Sj.r .؛-،;'¿؛i،<٥٠٠،؛٦
v׳ ־:־;״־׳~ ^٠:٠
LETTER IV. :״ Cory don to C/arinda. ^' ؛ T١^ H Y ail thefe Doubtr and Fears, " my Love? Why this needlefs Repetition? Does my Clarinda think I am grown lb fiupid, fo lifelels, for fo I mull be when I forget the -kail Particular of what has pail between us, thole foft Embraces, moaning Sighs and melting Tears, which were too precious to fall unobferv’d, are iliJl frelh in the Memory of Cory don. What mail 1 fay more ? I think there is nothing more of confequence to fay, except I entertain you with Truths ob٠ yious to every eye; as, that,tisDay when the Sun ihines, ’ and when؛ he’s gone ’tis Night; or, that I love you dearer than all the Women in the World, as great a Truth as either of the former,, and ought to be as well known to. you. For my part, I think the telling of this over and over, as p	fome
Tome Men do their Paffions, ought-to be tirefome to Women of your Nicety, and as naufeous to the Mind, as Meat often dreil to the Stomach : for to be always in the high Road of making Loye, a Man muit Bake, Boil, Roail, Halli, and Mince Ids Love, to find Variety for his Miftrefs, Who perhaps does not think, becatife *ti$ brought .warm to her./ it has fo often been cool d by another, and only toil up again for her Palate. Thefe common Practices of Love ought to be below a Woman Of your Settle, whofe T>elicacy ihoifd refiili a Plate (tho١ no bigger than a Saucer) of fomething new, above thofe vail Di(h٠ es of repeated Cramb.؛ lam now in hafte, ;being juit going to wait upon the King!׳ yet you fee I״prefer Love to all, and flay to write; this long Letter, when it might be eafie for me to tear what: I have done, then tell you vvitcily؛ ihf$ ؛Letter is■־an Emblem of my Heart rent׳ and torn for you... Meet trifling, ahd ought nefmore to pafs for Love than Childrens Toys
for
for Riches, or a gilded lum؛> of bafe Metal for true Sterling. There’s fomething JB true Love diftingurfK-able from afiedfced Pailions, fomething of Excellence which can’t be diicerifa but by a Trial that the Counterfeit can’t undergo, an intrmfick Value that h as fomething more thari Gilding or Varnifh to fee it off؛ and fucli is mine for you. Tho. ١vc mult lament the Misfortune of being parted, My Dear, yet remember we arc to meet again with the greater Pleaftire. The Tears, ٠tis true; were on you، fide only ; but believe me, I had my fhare of Trouble too: and give me leave to tell my dear Clarinda, that ihe chides Without reafon ؛ fof if؛ffie confider?d, ibe؛ would nnd it imppm.־ bie that a. Man in Publick Bufineft,‘ as I am, can exempt ، my felf flotrt Company always. For my part}־ I drag my felf from one place to ؛a¿¿״, ther, and meet with ٠. frequent Ocean؛.· ons of being Uneafie؛ but then. the Thoughts of yoil,1 My Bear, and' oi your Love, relieves my weary Mind ٠
؛ i ٠	for
٠٥)
for fure I may endure a troublefome World as long as I am happy in you, who to me is the beft Delight of m Nature made fuch dear* foft, engaging Creatures as you to reconcile that part of Mankind that can de-ferve you by loving you! to the Dif-quiet of the World ;; it ،would Tearce be worth our while to ٠Lve־£lie: ; Ye-fleraay .l paid a Viijt to my Lady.— out of refpedf to you My 'Dear, and for the fake of an Opportunity to talk of her who employ SialTmy ft houglits. She was very jnq$i%i$ e, what was become of you,' and :laid a thoufand kind things of you, and pr١؟ft me very hard to know how to write to you-f but I did؛ not tell her, nor will, till I have, a Con١n؛uffi٠o from you to do io. From thence I took a Walk over the Park, where I ran over in my Mind every thing that pleafes me in you ; your Fondnefs, that,is irre-fiilibly engaging,g and appears unde-tign’d; your faithful Love, that lam convinc’d will never alter ; the pretty things you fay, and thofe you write.
and
and thofe thouiand Charms that pof-feis every part of you; in ihort, My Dear, you are the Book I dudy now, and I will not quit you to range after any imaginary Plcafure or iordid Profit. I cannot tell why Love, which is the moil Natural, as well as Nobled Pailion, ihou’d not fit our Minds for the bed things: it enlarges the Soul, and I fancy my felf better in ieveral refpedrs. as well as happier, fmce I knew you whom I love lo dearly, lb ١ dearly, that, even you can hardly love me fo much; and nothing in my life ever pleas’d me fo well as my loving you. Re double) redouble, Amour une peine ft chere. Adieu, my Love, I ihall expert a Letter from you next Poil; and pray believe that I am.... Sure I am — ٠٠ Yours entirely.
Since I writ this I received both the Enclofed; which I fend in hopes they may divert my folitary Dear، Adieu٠
LETTER
(it)
׳ ; L£TT;|!Rي'.ق;يا;:ام١ ־
minatoCorydon.
I) lord.
*N fpight of y^r Denials, I have !
little airy Damon traces your$A$i_ ons even into your very- Cabinet : now this Familiar credibly informs me, you know how to fend a Letter to my Clcvrinda, I’d take the Gheft’s Wo^ for a thouia^ Pound, tbere. fore p.y do not fail.
. ٠ ي إ^:: '.٠ ; ٠:: i ١
¡¡¡¡¡¡¡1!?;;/.; I III
;
،دول
LETTER VI. ز
Luciruto CUmk
В: Нои little Thief thou.1 firilyou blit that I forgive you ; the» you fteal your felf away; a Grime to Friendfoip I cannot pardon... They tell us you are. in the Norththe .World: believes it؛ but thofe Difgui. fos are too thin for one who loves lihe me. T read inG٠^؛٥«’s Triumphant Ey.es a-better Fate than your Abfence at that Diftance in that cold Region ; and- rigid-..Relations woud be no Friends tothe.Heity he adores. Hear Clarinda, by our paft Vows ؛ حever-laftin^ Friendfoip, ة me hear from thee; -for all theGourtand Wrald is infipid to me fince you have left it. Write to me, ٠ Dear, becaufe ل would not have ־the adorable juftly ־call’d ungrateful, which foe muft be if foe forgets- fo faithful a Friend as	/	٠٠
( 2 X)J
LETT E R VII.
Ciannda to Cory dun,
■rOur Pacquet came feafonably to wake, me out of forrie melan-cholly Reflexions which Conquer my Refolves againft ’em, and too often feize my Soul, nay they begin to have an EfleX upon my Body ; nor will my Youth, and that flrong Cordial Love, long prefer ve the Jewel Health; but your Letter has rous’d the darling Paflion, and now I feel no Pain: Charming Pleafures ihrill thro. my> Veins, and Tides of Joy chear my beating Heart, ، ٠ I am alfo pleafed and furprized at my Lucinds Letters; and be allured ٠ My Lord\ your Vifiting her infinitely obliges me ; for if ever true ¥riend-fhip pofleit the Hearts of Women, the Sacred Gueit is lodged in ours.
Yet fo nice my Notions are of Love, I denied my feif any Joy but
what
what you create: forbear converiing with that precious, peculiar, only valued Friend, left the little God iliould be offended if 1 took one Thought, from himbut her kind Reproach, and.your Encouragement, liave؛ revi.. ved Friendfhip’s Ardour* toward that charming fair one, I have writ to her, and lent you the Copy, for I was aihamed (My Souls Blifs) to let it go thro’, your hands, tho’ ’tis to my deareft Friend. I iliall grow bolder. I do remember well, when ffrft I gave my Cory don leave to write, how I trembled at the wifli’d Receipt: My Spirits fired my Face with Bluihes, then funk into pale Confufion ; and tho’ alone, long١l feared to break the Seals. Now advanced in Courage I write to thee ؛ I call thee Life and Soul, and all thofe fond Words I uled to bluili to read. I prithee do not give it £b liarih a Name as Chiding, when I tell my Fears. The Merchant whofe rich VefTel is at Sea, if all his Treafure’s there, does he not dread a Storm? You are my only Treafure;
׳-;j■;؛. ׳؛	Tem.
■
( 2 2 )
Tempers or Allurements may ruin hefoíeís me ; the ferene Face of Beau-try, or the Frowns of Power, each wou’d deftroy my Peace. Oh woud niy Heroe quit the glorious Pomp and Dangers of the Court for my calm Harbour, for Solitude and me, how many various ways I’d find to charm! Sometimes, like the ArcadianNy mphs, Fd range the Groves and Plains, whilft flowry Chaplets crown’d my flowing Hair: fometimes! Oh Fool! this is Romantick all, as old Trofptr foes the Day-dreams of a Maid in Love. You are fix.d in Glory’s Circle; I funk, never more, I fear, to rife ; no matter, give to the Ambitious Honour, to Church-men Luxury and Power, to Mrfers Wealth, to fighting Kings War and Conqueit, to poor Ciar inda your eternal Love, and my Reward exceeds all theirs. You bid me write next Poit; you fee I do. Next, and every Poít, I pray do you remember, and fear not, your
Clarinda,
LET.
C 23	)
LETTER, VIII. J؛j
CtarinAa to Lucim,
*HE Lunatick, my dear Lucina٠ flies all Humane Converfation; and that is belt; for Follies that are incurable fhould not be expofed: But you . that take the pains to fearch a wretch that owns her felfpofleft,what mull you exped from her degraded thoughts >r Reafon I have banifh’d, and then you’ll guefs what I am a Slave to. My Letters ٠· will be only filled with Ravings, ftill hinting at the caule, the lovely cauie, that will ex-cufe me, that mu ft excufe me to Lucina. She knows his Charms, has heard his Vows, and often whifper-ed Pi tty to my yielding Soul. Oh be kind to him and me J fee him often, and fometimes talk of her who always thinks of you, and whom you will ever find the trueit of her Sex.
Love
. ״ \	٠־ ٠־ ■ .٠־ _ . _ ٠ ־٠  -.׳ . ■ ■ ٠. _ ־ _ _ ٠،
C24 >٠
Love and Friend {hip are the Idols of. Clarindds Heart.
LET T E R - IX.
٠ Corydon to Clarmda٠	I
BUre Heaven has no pity for us that Love ! If it had, we ihould not have been parted thus long. I had flown to your Arms ere this, if the curft Clog of bulinefs had not hinder’d. Let me beg of you to be contended for a little time, and you ihali fee I will contrive fome way that we may be almoit always together. Did you but know the impatience I am under when I am from you, it would as much convince you of my Love, as the pleafure I take when I am with you, which is not to be counterfeited. Ask your own Heart, whether it does not think I am in earneit in what I fay to you ; fure it is fo much my fecret Friend, that it will tell you I
love
love you. I will certainly he With youthe beginning of next Week, an¿ lye_a Night where you pleafe 'tO dil-pofe of me. I hope y ou have per. fedly recover’d your Journey, which ! call the. Pilgrimage of Love. I am 0؛ ل٤اtm؟nt ^r evety paih my Dear־ ؛els. By thy. Mouth,, thy H؛ir,־thy Eyes, and evCry other Charm, Icoii-jure thee to take care of thyielf. Be ea/ie and cOptented, fecuie of ׳my Lovel and of every ־thing that is iti my Power. Oh, thou haft melted my spujand Iihall never forget thee. Could you be 'fo ־kind to quit all for jpe? Cau you deny youffelf all o-ther Pleafures 'for thoie few that, are in my Power to give ج Can you for־״ -get the Splendor of a Court for me ? Iknow you can d־o all this ־ ؤand in ؟turn, lean only fayl love you. Next Week ,־ nay, the beginning of next VVeek, weihallmeet, my dear Life. Can there' be a tranfpOrt fancied greater, wben I lhall prefs thole Lips and wand־er 0-ver that world of BeaU ty. ’Since we parted how dully:does
c	time
( 2 6 )
١ time move on ? But vve muft learn to bear abience. tho’ we can never make it eafie to us. Separation will always be, as Cowly fays of Life, an incurable Difeafe. How do you ipend your time now, my Dear? Let me know bow, you generally divide the Day, that I may iometimes have the plea-fure of thinking what you are doing, fo apt are we to be miitaken in our Judgment of our felvesr, we do not know the Force of our Pafiions till we have the experience of their itrength. I wiili any Man could draw the Temper and Difpofitions of my Mind, as well as the Completion and Features of my Face, then you fhould have a Piture of that,my Dear,where״ in you lliould fee my love to you had taken a full poifeilion of my Heart, and that, that govern’d every other Pailion. I have juft now been reading over all your Letters to me, and I find it is a good way to move and enereale the love that lies in the Heart; and therefore,, my Dear, I enjoin you to read over, all mine, from the firii
( 27 )
1 ever writ to you to the lail, and put ’em into the order of time they were writ .in,, and then, My Dear. run over in your mind all the moil remarkable Pailages that have happen’d iince we knew one another,؛ and whatfoever has ihewn my Fond-nefs to you moil, think upon that moil. Thus, My Dearefl, do I with you; thus I confirm my felf in that Paiiion which is already fixt in my Heart. You may believe me, My Dear, I have minded no Pleafure fince you left me, but thought perpetually of you; and io I wou’d have you do of me ; and as a proof of my Love, I am defirous you fliou’d love me. Had I an Indifference for you, I ihould not care whether you lov’d me or not: but I hope I lhall never live to fee that day, I ihali mention your pretty Letter, My Dear, to Lucinda With whom I am to fup to Night.
I go with greater Satisfaction fince I have your Leave to vifit her; for believe me, My Dear, were it not for your fake, I did not care if
'	there
^	^ - - ־׳-1<^*-•‘־ ■־-־ ־-~ ׳־ -f؛׳ ١. ...	, ٠ . ------ ׳' ?؛؟'׳-״ -־_:
( 28
there were not fuch a thing as a Female in the World, id indifferent I am grown for all the Sex but You : by Gad I am, believe me, love me, and I am happy. Adieu bewitching Charmer. W	M
_	׳ ٠٠ ־	—٠٠	” ” ٠<	^ ^
LETTER
( 20 )
LETTER. X.
Cl armda to 'My Cory don,
SEver was I fo frighted as when I read your lafl. I charge you by all our Loves, by all you hold moil dear, by all that s Sacred, come not near us. What I wiflfd at firil I fwcon at now: a remote Country fbr Silence and Obfcurity 1 why ,tis the
י¡ P.ace for Tattle and Glaring it؛ already they are alarm’d ac me؟ my being dean, and perhaps a little different Mein from what they are u$*d to؟ has fet the Village in a murmuring Enquiry: Shou.d God. like you appear, the whole County wou’d be in Uproar. Forbear, My Dear, or let your Love think again, and contrive fome better way.
Wou١d I cou?d believe you have read all my Letters over again., as I, were you near me, cou’d convince
C 3	you
you I have all yojurs
without opening my Cabinet,'is the
fir¿, p g y	.
.... Will file then hear me! Oh God, .hat ihall I lay! 1-that have writ.to Qyeens, now a־m dumb.׳ Love choaks my ^ords, my Fen drops from my 'trembling .hand ر Sure' this violcht pafilon brings Death or Diftradion/ Either gives me Eafej but you can give me Heaven, where were thy ؟eauties formed. I will not fay mot¿, fcecaufe indeed the reft i.s Madnefs.
Then Condor!) how fweet was the inclining Glance .لم Lucina led me ؛ ٠٠؛ ! made Grcve, at our great Mlftreftes Palace of ؛-״-.She walk’d on ل Iknew the dear Contrivance, nor eonfented, ־nor refifted, fuch. is the ) douhtful Yielding of young Lnno-cenee to Love.s alluring Charms. Yon. came,, what eager Blulhes fill’d your Che־eks.'. what Fires darted from your "٠■■ wiihing Eyesلم. ׳ your Siglis were ma-ny, but your Words ١vere few؟ fliort, were the ftol’n Minutes ؟ th'e Impreft fion lafted ever., evem for ever, on
cl a:
Heart. Bur then, My Lord٠> . how long was your Petition? how long you whifpera, Do you not hate ١؛ me ? nor wou’d you ever leave till you had heard with a true but faltering Tongue, / love you. You caught me in your Arms : where for that bleil moment, where were our Souls ? -Sure mine Was fled, and yours juil trembling at your lips, hover’d on my Bofom. Oh Corydon! ceajfe, ceaie to charm me; give my labouring Spirits Eafe. Farewel. Contrive dome other way to fee me.	v;
B4 LET-
־'٠' '٠ ؛ ؟٠,׳־־“ ٠ ٠ ٠ ■ ,"׳ - ' -٠ , v ־؛؛ : -١ ׳1- ■־ ٠ - ٠ ٠٠ "-־*' '٠
Corydoil to Clitrink
»1 is it poflibleiTfr/Wtf iliould deny her Corydon, the only Sa׳* tisfadion of his Life إ but you ihall be obeyed in this and every -thing., yet I niuft try how far your Love will carry you to meet my Wilhes ؛ for oh I grow'impatient: now't© fee the dear Objed of my Soul, Lucki7, whofe defires in fome meafure run with mine as to the feeing you my becaufc (he cannot tafte the Plcafiires you can giv¿! Every Kifs from you .draws my Soul u-p to my Lips,־ then' flioots it back witb tickling Fleafures that runs through every Vein, fodi£ ferent are your Kifles from what I ever tafted. I kifs’d Lucina, who wants-not Charms even-go create fond De. fire in' the molf rigid Breaft, and yet ’twas tafllefs all-to me. We have con-
trtv’d
I ׳ء ا ■ — ء٠ ٠ ء■ V -	ذ؛	: ا\ -١
( 33 )٠
triv’d Kenfington for your Abode ؛ where Lucina has promis’d to be your daily Vifitor; and in her Company I know Clarinda won’t mifs her Cory-don; forgive me, Dear eft, I mean when . Buiinefs calls him from her Arms־, which I’ll take care {hall be as feldom as po/Tible. Let wretched Souls who are not capable of this divine Pamoifc labour and groan under the burthen of State Affairs, I would only have . Clarinda mine.
Let me know by the next Poif, My Deary if you approve of the Place pro< pos d, elfe I’m again unhappy; for it is impoifible for me to live without you : think on that, and thenfave or kill your Corydon.
I alfo fend My Dear another of i>٠ etna's Letters, to perfwade her to what my Soul longs for, your Ap٠ proach.
LETTER.in Lucina £0 Clarinda.
»Ang r: (My !¡ear) thoT atn a Widow, if ever I heard fo much ofLove before as your Condon fills my Ears ١vith٠ ’TiS well I d.te تة0ءه Clarhidds Name ذ I hear- if, I. am %e, perpetually; Corydon has got a Cuilom to vifit me evCry day, Ott. ly to talk of Clarinda, I ¿ever was a Confidant till now: but m.y. Love to you makes your Lover’s Story plea-
ب ز . ..ا
Eray haften to us'i-.I amfure all.-: tilings are in your power; and why you fliould let a paffion cool, that may tedotincl lo much to your Advantage, m to lue a Miracle
i will tell you more when I fee.you ا.ذ defer not, for what I have to fey is-worth your attention, and ''as tru¿' as my Affection to clarinda) and my Zeal to ferve her. Adieu.
'	١ , ✓ ١ C٠rj(i٠٩
( 35 )
Condon faith we meet r&yxThurf-dayf which my plealed Eyes' fljali ten you whether I am glad , pf dr
no. 2.v' ١- ,؛:■	'٠' ׳:
LETTER XIII.
Cl arm da to Lucim,
■ ' Hat Which ٠ all the happyWorld woii’d rejoyce at, gives me Grief; for my Prophetick Soul forebodes fome future 111, nor will allow me fuch a Friend and fuel! a Lover: perhaps ,tis the effed: of Solitude, and the Spleen, which your beloved fight , may remove. Uie no Argument to me relating towards Intereft: I have took an uncommon Romantick way to oblige fine Notions, that are remote from fublunary things ؛ If thefe Ideas fail, I have no recourfe but to Death, nor no Sanctuary but the Grave.
Chide״
Cliide me now؟, for this is fed melan* cholly itufF: tiie Company I love, nay I might fey adore, may perhaps revive my wonted Gaiety: however, in all Humours and all Conditions ٤ am wholly Yours.-
....	١	LET- ٠
٠ j./־
'	( 37 )
LETT E R XlV, Clarindato
will you tempt me again fity mull renew a thoufand Reflexions that will rob Clarinda of her Peace. I am grown almoll into a perfeX Stupidity: It is a kind of a dead Sea-calm, whole Emotions I am lcarce fenfible of. Your Syrenes Voice calls me again amidfl.the Waves, the Rocks, and certain Storms. Methinks this fecond Defire is like your firil. like the firil Lure of Love which fliook my even Temper, and gave me high-ell Pleafure and higheil Pain. If I confult my Realbn, how often do I wilh for that foft ilate of dull Security, when all my Care was Drels and innocent Divertion > but comes Love, my Tyrant and your Friend, that whifpers o’er our Joys, repeats your Vows, your Sighs, and all yourTranf-
ports?
tys )
ports, I yield, I yield؛ my riiing: Heart owns your Victory׳, and urges me to fly where I may meet thole charming Eyes.
Ask your Heart numberlefs Que^ ftions, if like mine it has been fin. cerely true, ne’er let any Idea in but mine, or any pleafing Thought but Love > This and much more I have to da I come my Cory don ^ Clarinda comes.
I fend to you my Letter to Lucina ,٠ I told you I ihou.d quickly get that Alfa ranсe.
■ LET.
LETTER XV. Corydon to Clarmda،
111 being near your Corydon di-means my Love > Were I ill-natured and fplenetick, I Ihou’d draw ilrange Conclufions from your Scruples, and cram my Letter as full of jealous Sui-picions, as an old fuperannuated Lady of our Acquaintance; does to her young Gallant ؛ but I know thy Soul’s above the common Wickednefs of being falfe, and ,tis a glorious Virtue to be true, and fuch I know thou doll poflefs. Haile then, my Clarin-dat and with thy Smiles chear the Heart of thy now almofl expiring eery don. I ihall expe¿، you on Thurfday Night at Lucindas;؛ I wou’d meet you at the Coach were I fure you wou’d not chide me; for thou art as tmierous as a confcious Murderer, whole own Shadow frights him. Your
١ Friend
( 4٥ )
Friend is impatient for your coming, and my Opinion is, that we iliali be leis fufpe&ed here than you feem to apprehend.
Excufe Haile, and believe me to be entirely Yours.
٠aagjgfflBi—■mss***——٥   ؛   ■v! - — ־
^ ١٠ ٠ ٠ 	j 1 ^ ٠ ^	l
١ ؛4 )
LETTER XVI.
C/arinda to
I Am come to Kenfingtons but find neither Condon nor Lucina: Forgive my Impatiency, which cannot live without feeing you. I have dif-patch.d a Meilenger in your Search. I may excufe your *Abfence, for my Haile has made me here long before the appointed hour. You expreis my Condition aright when you tell me 1 am full of Fears; indeed 1 am. Hope, Love, and Fear of a Cenfori. ous World, give me fey ere Anxieties biit your Sight, will drive all thefe Cares away. ’Tis Cory don alone can bring Peace and Joy to Clarmda.
LETTER
letter xviL
Cory don to Clarinda...
■ Need not tell you, my dear, that I have not ftifd out to day, for chat you may conclude by my not'being at Lucinda s before you :' You may be fur. ’tis no f mall Indifpofi-tion cou’d keep me within, when by going abroad I might purchafe the greateft pleafure in the World, your company. For what Offence I know not, Heaven has inflicted this Puniih. meat upon me, except it fears your Eyes Ihou.d rival it, and I became an idolater. Let me beg you to be eaiy and contented, as much, I mean, as it is poiiible For you to be, when lam from you I hope Lucinda*s company will in iome meafure divert my ab٠ fence, and make the hours pafs more agreeable. To Morrow will come, my Love, and if I live to fee it, I will fee you, tho١ my life ihou’d pay the price; till then Adieu.
LET.
\	C/annda to Cory don,
i Write, my Lord, by Luc has com.
mand, to tell youhow we have fpent the Evening, truly in reading all your Letters. Lucha flattets my difeaie, and perfwades me you can never be unconilant, tho. I have al- ١ moil brought her to my Opinion i The foil Letters have moil Refpedl and Tendernefs j the lafl, more care-lefs and familiar. Sure uniting, the Flame ihou’d increafe it, I’d give the world to know, whether my Corydon loves me better or worfe, fmce I have own’d I love him. Lucha writes the next lines, as you fee by her hand.
Better now, but whether he will longer for your kindnefs profeft, I dare not fwear for him ; I hope io, tho’ Mankind generally after the mighty
buh.
C 44 J
buiinefs of^a Conqueil is over grow Idle, and when they have reached the flying fair leave to perfue.
Hear ye that, my Lord:, Chrindas timourous nature creates a thoufand fuch apptehenfions, this dear Friend who over-looks me too too often iboths my fears, and fans my flames, by calling you excellent and Charm* mg, Glory of your Sex and Age ٠١ Oh, my belt life, do you never meet with the pleafure of hearing me com. mended, I Court, I dote on your praife. but I am fond as artlefs, in.
٠ nocence as harmlefs Maids, who never were betrayed. Farewel; to mot. row Dine with us if you can. Lucina’¿ TPo/lcript.
Oh, happy happy you, fure never Man was bleil like my Lord ٠٠־—, CIdr’tnda is.a little World of Charms؛ her Looks, her Will, her Air gives me tranfports, tho’ a Woman؛ what
then,
( 45 )
then, mud you feel; how can you forbear, the publick teilimony of
^our love, and bind her ever to your eart, with that Charm which Death alone diilolves; ^tis the only wonder I have in the Affair, that you defer.
١
٠ ^٠	٠ ٠ · ^٠
LET.
LETTER XVHL
Corydm to Clarinda.
IUil as I received an Order to attend our great Mailer to Wind-for, I got your Bllet-doux I know not whole properly to call it, for your Queries, Anfwers and Surmifes are fo prettily interwoven, that I know not who’s the Miftrefs, who’s the Friend,* that by the way, tho’ Cory don is not authentick, for thy heart tells thee Clarinda claims the fuperibrity, tho’ one wou.d fwear Lucina were no itran-, ger to my heart, (he knows fo well its fecret thoughts, and you may believe her, when ihe tells you I ihall be for ever conilant, for {lie !peaks my Sentiments exactly; and as to your Queilion, whether I love you better now than before, I anfwer, better, better, a thoufand times, and the difpute Ihall be hereafter who
lov’d
( 47 )
lov'd moft. Now one word to your Friend, and then I’ve done, for my Coach waits, but ail fhail wait, till you’re anfwer’d.
Now, Madam, what ihali I lay to !return your Civility, I can only wifh I had another Heart to offer you, fo nearly you reiemble her who has poiTeffion of this, that I gou١d never make a better choice, and fince our Loves are mutual, tis piety there ihou d be any thing wanting to compleat our mutual happi-n؛el١s, hut impoiilbilities are not in the reach of Mortals; all that are allow’d to us, is but barely wifhing, which does but inhance the pain. I have ten thoufand obligations to you; .firil for your kind thoughts of me ؟ fecondly, the care you take to divert Clarinda, whofe pleafure I wifh equal to my own; and ihe ihali never find me wanting in ought that may conduce to it. And now Ladies both, lam ibrry I can’t dp my؛ lelf the Honour of Dining with you to day, but I know nothing ihali
hinder
( 8, 4 ؛
hinder the iatisfa<5tion to Morrow, which I propofe in your charming Converfation; till when I am, dear C larinda,
Your Faithful Lover, and 'Jjicinashumble Servant.
Q.orydon..
■	_ ٠-٠^	٠— _^ ٠
٠٠BHCte|٠٠tt٠٠٠MH٠٠٠M٠HHQaMa٠٠٠B٠MM٠٠٠٠٠)VS٠٠٠٠٠C٠M٠i٠i№٠p٠٠٠٤4٠MV٠BV٠٠٠٠٠il٠nHB٠KB3٠B٠٠٠٠(^٠0٠٠BS٠i٠^ii٠٠j٠٠٠i^؛^v^
׳.^^..'.،^".٥٠؛
^ I¿¿ Jr ..,	-: ·.	.٠١
٤·*3fw ־	LET-
( 49 ٠)
LETTER XIX.
١	.	٠
Clannda to Corydon,
HOthing bat your dear Self cou'd be welcomer than your Epi-flle, which I muil fay vve received iince my Luc in a fhared it ؛ but for my Life I can't get her to fet her Fiil to this: file vows ihe won’t: ihe write to a'Man ٠—٠ no, ihe !corns it. My Lore¡) Am not I mighty gay ? Me-thinkslam. Ah this SunJhinel ,twili not 1 ail, there is a gloomy Fate, I fear, belongs to me. My dear Lu-cina jogs my hand, and will not let me entertain a melancholly Thought. Hold—٠ what am I talking on? wide of the matter: for you muil know, 'My Lordy it is abfolutely necefiary you Dine with us to day, becaufe there is iome delicate, delicate, I won't tell you what: come and fee. Make much of this Note, for I cannot tell
D	where
where e٥g|gg٤ ٠iave ٤'uc٤1 another See what a Blot fhes made as I was faying Poor Clarind a. LETTER XX.
Cory don to Ciarinda.
■ His comes to kifs my dear CL-rindas Hand, and tell her I’m juft wak’d from a very pleaiing t Dream: Methought I had got a Lady in my Arms, pretty, and witty, ^nd kind as my Defires cou’d frame;
٠ I believe you guefs the Perfon. Duce take Imagination, I fay— for I ne’er had more mind to real Subftance than at preient. Now, My Dean 1 mu ft rife, waih my Mouth, and then drink your Healths inChocolet; and I expert to be pledg’d by you two Ladies in Ra-tifea٠ Hark! methinks I hear that Lady
I 5ا )
·dy (thatwou’d not write t. a Man) fay. What does he take Us for 1.11 ب rattle, him --- Prithee -up. the Cudgels for me. and tell her lhe muft either ftriiftly obferve the Rules.of ٩iality, .־or fefign her Pre-tenfions٤ و.ءا؟ءor that's a main Ingre-dient in the Comp^ition، Hold— ل had like to have forgot Thanhs for my Entertainment Yefterday, which was the. beft furnifo’d Table I ever din’.d at־ ؛Beauty enough to warm an Anchorite, Wit enough, to confound a S.t٩te^a٩,. and good Humour enough to baffle the Spleen ofa Critick ؛ thjfe were the Banding Difoes ---- The reft I remeihber were excellent in their kind ~ء~ not forgetting the Venifon which ! think was aS good .as I ever eat... إل pofoible, I’ll fee you as foon as the H؟ufe breaks 'Up -ذ but in the Evening I wont fail 5־ till when, be. heve me
Your'impatient Condon.
٠٤	LET.
-
( 5 2	)
LETTER XXI.
Corydonto j
M Hat I left ^Clarinda to guefs at, I muft explain to you. The kind Lady I mention’d was your dear Self: wou’d to Jove it had been .real. According to Opinion of the Learned, the Imagination represents the Image of things in the Mind, that ٠ are not prefent to the Scnce; fo your Image being perpetually in my Mind, no wonder that Sleep fhou’d bring you to my Arms. Oh Lucinda ! ’ds impoilible for a Heart, tho ne’er fo well fortified with Refolution. to hold out againil Beauty irrefiftible like yours. Your Eyes difperfe Darts of luck magnetick Power, that you ne. ver fail to captivate whoe’er you look on. For my part, I own my felf your Slave,, your Wit has charm’d my Soul, your Beauty made a per-fed Conceit o’er my Heart, and
. your
your good Humour has drawn my Inclinations into, the Confederacy.
I’m uneaiie when from you, and not contented when with you, wanting opportunity to tell you how much I am , Madam, your paiiionate Adorer,
Condon.
٠٠
Shew this to your Friend if you dare..
 ٠٠ ״""—׳■I■■3~ — .... ■■■׳:*r  - — ■■٠-^-٠---^-	.1־■*' ■■-٠ ■ —r
٠،
' :· ■ ١
١	I ^^٤٠." ■|jjj
؛ ־	( 54؛
LETTER XXII.
Climniato Condon.
My Lor¿,.	: :
SOur not coming lad night, occ؛e-fions this Epiftle § it is fent thus early to prevent fuch naughty Morning Dreams , and fuch bold Billet Deux, I allure you Lucina vows never to fee your Face again: fhe fays you are a faiie, perfidious, barbarous ٠— I cannot for my heart write all the hard Words fhe thunders in my Ears : and this is all forfooth be.. caufe you fufpedted we wou?d be fuch a couple of Errant Lady Errants to pledge you in a Cup of Ratefea. Well, Cory don, if I make up this matter you mud have a care how you offend a fecond time : tho if I judge other Hearts by my own, your Pre-fence will make ample Satisfaction. But fetting this Mirth aftde, which fcldom belongs to me my Dear, thou
Life
C 55 ) Life of mv Deiires, Darling of my Days, and conftant Image of my. Nights, the perpetual Idea of my waking Thoughts, and Angel of my working Fancy when lockt in Slumbers, then ¿ven then, Beloved, I muil leave thee again, Fate and Fame, my Enemies, thy fuppliant Slaves, they: decree that I muil leave thee, read the enelofed and fee if I can reil in Peace. ׳	, jig |i |
’־١*.. - fl-~.·٠	־■-־LJ،№٠, 1 ،٠־. "؛٠٣. /.׳l).. .
٠ _
D4	LET-
5M
(.50	'١
letter XXIII.
To Mrs.— at Kenfingcon. Madam,
₪0 you imagine you can flay unobferved near the Court, near your Relations, and in themidfl of an admiring World, who fearch for you as Tertians vvou’d after the Sun, were that obicur’d; retire or elie appear in Publick. Oh, be careful how you truil my Lord of ~— and be aifured it is a Friend that gives this Caution.
Alafs, what Friend foe’er it is the Advice comes now too late. I have ventured ail my flock ©f Love and Faith, fhould you now prove falfe I have nothing left to loofe. Oh thou unneceiiary Friend, all aid is pail like Pillows to the dying. Imay be preferved in Torture, but cannot live without him. Oh fwear again, again begin the Tale of Love, or i fhall fear
I
- y: v 7	:	^	؛
( 57 )
I know not what to fear; forgive me Cory don thefe wild Excurfions; Luci'na knows not the latter part of this Letter, I wou’d not difturb her or you with my Concerns, for lam never, never ib happy as when I fee that faithful Friend and charming Lover pleafed, fomething !have more to tell you, which is not fo proper to be writ. Adieu.
D 5	LET.
§g٠^؟|j
_ .1 " *٦ ■ _ : ■ - - “٠T ' . ٠־־ . ~" - V ٠ - -־ ٠'■--- -“- ־ — -٠■/■- - ٠ ٠ ٠٠	. ־ -. . - '
(58)
LETTER XXIV.
١	Corydon to Clarinda.
ST is impoffibie to defcribe the concern tby Letter put me into, what damn’d officious Devil this unknown Friend can be, I can’t guefs for my Soul, but that it is fome implement of Hell I’m certain, for none ©lie cou’d be to bold to Caution ٥٠/€׳ rind am ought againit her Caryacn, for if there- ever were fuch a thing as true Love. 1 love thee, My Deary what other proof can I give you than what I have already, think Clarinda, and if there be a thing in the power of Corydon to clear the icruples of the Woman I adore, ask boldly, and if I do it not may you hate me, which is the greateft Curie I can invoke on the head of your faithful Corydon,
. , ׳ -	.٠-	؛	%
(59)
I will wait: on you inuantly to know the Secret, and tell you my ielf how much I am
Tours,
I am fo intolerably out of humour; that I cannot find one Gallant Ex-preifion to your fair angry Friend, in faith you are both tormenting Baggages, and that Tie Band by.
·٠i*־״٠il 11 ....	-٠'׳» ٠-٠٠■>٠-.-٠.״.٠״ i«r«T״,i I .11 I ٠a I؛.".«.■.Il ،.■III ■aiii.٠AMiiiiii٠¿.....؛......*.،¿، ٠ -
is:5M٥١ )mrn'mmmm
. ־.j jp
( 6 o )	٩
LETTER XXV. Clannda to Cory dm,
BAfl: Night ( ray Lord ) I well remember you made me pro-Hlife to tell you this Morning, if my Mind and Refolutions were the fame : Oh 1 be allured I am not altered for all Refledtions, but confirm my Opinion. I muft go that’s certain, or be expofed to what will break my Heart, and why ihould you withiland it; you know I go yours, I live but to think on you, I rejoyce in nothing but my Love to you, which now is grown my vital part, and all my Health and Peace, and even Life depends upon my Pailion. You often bid me ask and have, and at the fame time you know I have no o-therwiih but you ; do you propofe the Method for our Happinefs, fix it to your unerring Judgment, or be Love your Guide. I’le not fubmit a-
lone«
lone, that is too poor a Word; no, I’le facrificeall, all to make you ea-fle. Generous Condon can not uie Clarinda ill.
The trufting, charmed, the loving, doting, dying, fond Clarinda come/ and help contrive my Journey, the time will quickly now run on in fwift hours of Pleafure unobferved , if wants obicure will come, then the rugged Traveller Will drag his pintti-١ on’d Wings, and each flow beating Minutes march feems a long age of Woe; but I anticipate my Sorrows; Joy of my Soul farewel.
.٠ Tojljcript. /	;
' Lucina is grown Ihy, and will hot help me out. My Letters,I fear, wants lprightlinefs.to pleafe a Man of your Eire, my love is،fierce as yours,that’s all I boaft of, Adieu.	..
1.ETTER
■ ( 61 § ٠٠־ j||
Corydon to Clarinda, |١y^Uil 1 propofe the Method pinefs I then let it be to love for e-ver, for fure there is no Blifs beyond it,for where two Hearts are bound by mutual Love, no petty Quarells dare intrude, or caufelels Jealoufies defboy their Quiet; Love and Honour are the only tyes upon our Actions, and he that breaks either of them will have no regard to Laws, we have had but too many Prefidents lately, in England the Power of the Parliament fuppafies/ that of the Church. Be ailured, my Deat־eft, that I Love and I do no more know the time when I fhall not do fo, than when I fhall dye. Believe me, and take care of your felf, and me in you.
If you are bent upon going, 1 will fee you to Night, tho’ if, you might be
prevail.
;<؛־٠-٠-;٠،٠١.־؛;٠ :٠. ;٠¿ .׳<.٠	٠ ٠;-־.־ : ٠. ٠ - ١ - ■ ־ .. \
- -	-	٠	■	-m ٠
б¡) )
I ,׳prevail’d upon to flay till fuejday would beg to be excufed till to Mor. row Morning, {race fome Affairs of Coniequence require my attendance upon his M.—у in his Clofet this Evening ; but if Clarhda Commands all things iliail be defer٠d for her. Pafifcript.
٠ Anfvver per Bearer, that I may ٠ ؛;. .take my Methods according
. ٠ -٠-Л؛״-.؛ ־ ٠^ ٠i־t:' ٠ ־ ־־؛־ !i.. ٠■٠٠ ٦ ٠٠٠٠٠٠٠■־ ٠. ¿؛o—	־ ٠ ־ ٠״ ٠ ٠٠ ■ r"-١١^i٠؛ ״٠■ "٠" ٠״־ ״:١ .٠ ٠
( #4 )
LETTER XXVII.
Coryion to Lucina. ,׳
the
fair Luchda think I have put upon her concealing .my Letter
from Clarzmla*-- Why Faith—
That I am not indifferent to her־-— Pardon my Vanity, hut you can't in؛ reafon deny me the liberty of making the beft Interpretation for my Love I can, fince to have a fhare in your efteem is the uttnoft extent of my Defires, and the hopes of once acquiring it is the only comfort of my Life. Oh Madam, cou’d you but conceive the dilorder of my Heart when I’m oblig’d to carefs one for whom I find my Flame declining, and at the fame time to entertain another Which I know Tm Fated to adore, with cold complafance or artful Gallantry. I am almoit mad—־ I have juit writ a ihort Letter to Qlarhda,
which
( .5 )
which I fuppofe you 11 fee, for my part I have with the greateft violence imaginable fbrc d my felf to write kindly to her, Diilembling is no؟ my Tallent, and ’tis with the greateft regret in the World that Tm oblig’d to practice it, and I am fo much a lover of plain dealing, that 1 fear ihe’l quickly difcover the Impolture.
I was under Tome Apprehenfions that Lucinda was the Perfon that had caution’d Clarinda ; but lince I faw her my Sufpitions are chang’d, and I look upon it as a happy Omen in driving her into the Country ,to make room for my humble Addreilès to the dear Lucinda^ which in fpight of her coldnefs Cory don will perform, v If you value the well being of a Perfon prefers you to all Confiderà. tions whatfoever, fend one Line to your faithful Slave.
LET..
٠■:■ ■:٠ ; ٠ X 66' : :■('׳
ه t Ti l. IYIII ; Clarindd to Coryion, :[׳ بי He three Words I. lent by· your Meifenger, tells you I -Obey, your defire in my flay rill اًئي/]ج but having pail an Evening withOu؛ feeing you־ or LuciM) lure I cannot employ it fo much to my Satisfa&b on as Scribing to you firfti I wou’d ask you wheher you think your felf or Lucka happier than I, you ntake a Celebrated: Figure, fo does fhe; you give and receive Vifits, have Circles, Levees, Ruells, fee the lame؛ Itheperfe# Devotee to Love and Solitude- quit all tliis Grandeur, lofoin Thought, feeding on Contem-plation, catch but now'and then ,a gleam of ־Blifs, and fondly think I ،. am 'over-paid.. Oh Corytlonwhy do you talk to me of Church or Par!
ص : liaments. I ftudy .nought but Love... my Soul, that Heavenly spark, form- ؛
ed by enligntening Fire, but then in Bounds confined,, and darkly fent in queil of Happinefs, centers all its Joys in you, nor mounts to the Ce٠ leflial Orb from whence the Infpira״ tion came. Whoever is a perfect Lover can never bean Atheift ; oh 1 they will find there’s fomething more, much more, both in their Pains and Tranfports than a Mechanick Engine, plain Nature, like its fellow Brutes, cou’d feel ؟ give them ye Powers but one .Moment my wrack of thought, or my Delight, and they.i foon coiv fefs the Immortal part. I mall be puniihed for this I know. I ihall. but Tie go on tho’ inevitable ruin waits me.
I humbly conceive you think me mad, I am lb, and I’le indulge it,Tie Love till I have forgot all other ufe of Life, lull dote on my prize, my bleil, happy, lovely and beloved j thus will I talk, and rave, and write, time (hall unheeded pais, the labouring Spirits, when worn out with
mighty
(6%)
mighty Agitation, then will ceafe to work and all this violent Pailion be forgot. Am I not happy now I think I have been in the upper Region. Adieu, come and reclaim me from Romances, you have not ufu. ally thefe flights from Clanuda.
Lucina to Corydon.
BUre inch an Example of Falihood no Age can Parallel,make love to me Clarindd s Bofotn Friend, write to me, well never be alone one Minute, it muft be other Peoples Fates only can preferveyou, HouFes, Churches, nay, I beleive, the very Sky wou’d fall upon you if caught at convenient diftance from Mankind ؛ what vile Interpretation did you put upon my concealing your Perfidy from Clarinda ; no, no naughty Man ’twas my fear to diflurb that Charming Friend, elfe I had thrown ’em at her Feet immediately, and ftampt upon ’em ؛ I beleive that you depend upon that Graceful Perfon, Mein and Gallantry to conquer all Hearts that run the dangerous rifijue of conver. iing with you ; bnt I will arm my felf with Friendiliip, Gratitude and .·٠־٠	Juilice,
¡8® ■ ' ( 70·) juitice, thefe iliali for ever againfl ail your powerful Actacques prelerve
the incenfed Lucina.
LETTER XXX.
Corydon to'C/arinda*
BEieive me Qlarinda, bufinefs never fat more heavy on my Soul than laft Night, a thoufand times I wiih’d my felf with you, if I am thus reftlefs now you are near me, what mail I be when you are gone.
I know not what’s the matter with me, but I am grown uneafie of late, methinks I’m never pleas.d but when I am in your Apartment at Kenftng.-tbn ; I grow weary of the fatigue-ing Affairs of State, and wou’d be glad of a retreat free from Court, and all its flattering Greatnefs, in
fome
I ٥| )
lome lonely Cell with her I love. Oh Qlarinda^ pity me for I am now in need of pity ^ I cou’d curfe every bar to my happinefs, wou’d curling do; but when I confider all things will have an end, I know there is no lading Pleafure on this fide the Grave, this thought arms me with refolution to endure the utmoil frowns of Fortunej whilft you are well and happy Qorydon can bear them all.	J
Pie fee you in the Evening.
■;.־٠١	׳	״٠
LET.
، 72 )
LETTER XXXI.
Corydon to Lucina,
יOur very Anger is fo charming that I muft offend again, to be again Chailis’d, I iliall not endeavour to clear my felf of ought you are pleas’d to lay to my charge, but plead guilty to each Particular, and throw my felf upon the Mercy of - my Judge, who cant in Confcience puniili me, being in a great meafure the occafion of my Crime ؟ had you been leis Charming. I had been more Conftant.to Clarinda; your putting ־־٠٠ me in mind of Judgments, I vow, ٠ makes me tremble lead they ihould reach you, for Heaven never fuifers Murderers to go unpuniihed, perhaps you lmi.le at all the Mifchiefs which your Eyes commit,and cry- the Ad is not yours , but let me tell the cruel Fair, pretended Ignorance will be no Plea in Loves Court of Judicature.
I
٠٠
(. *7 ؛
I can’t help laughing at your reli-gious icruple; ,for my part Ira 'too good a Proteftant to think Heav willpunilh US Mortals for perfuing its own Decrees؟ and lay you what you pleafe, I mall never b¿ brought to believe, ought but a. divine Infpi.. ration in my Love for you: Thete-fore. Madam, fpight of yourRefolu״ tions, I w؛u hope, nor is ذ it po^ble '.you foou’d .lay any -claim t¿Grati-tude or Juftice, whilli you are deaf to the fute of-your Admirer.
¡ii I I -	;	¡1	/
٠؛
LET
III¡
٠, 74 I
.. X-ETTER XJ؛X؛y.
Cliifiniato Corydon.
SUrc my Charming Cory dm borrowed that melancbolly Expref-iion from his thoughtful· QUrin4a to meditate either on difappointments, or the !aft period of our Ambition, Love and Care: The Grave fuits not the gay, happy Corydon, whofe Soul is fo dilpofed and adapted to ؛Ms lovely form, that ail his Actions move eaiy, and incline to an agreeable mirth and harmony, then his Manly reafon frees him from all the little fears our Sex is fubjed to. i, moil timorous of my Kind, am doubting Hill, and frighting my Repofe a. way.
Lafl Night, wearied with thought, parting indeed was the fad Theam; ileep came to my relief, but, oh, my Dream diftraded me; methought my better An.el came, Ffaw the lovely Boy, his ihining Looks confirmed ١	_ , .،.١٠\	him,
c 7.5 )	,
him, more than mortal, refplendent Glory filled c،he room, for my fancy worked me even where I realy was filent with Fear and Awe; after a tuneful found I heard, I thought I heard diilindly theie words in a Voice as foft as Corydons, When fir(l he whif-pered Love i ah, thou fond, foolifh fair, vohofe Heart was made too foft for thy more rugged fate ; awake from the bewitching Lethargy of Love, and lift thy Eyes to brighter ' glories f At this he fpread his {liver Wings, and darting ٠ Beams of dazling Brightnefs, that my weak Eyes cou’d fcarce perfue the wondrous trad: of Light,, yet I did, and there beheld a glorious Troop in diilant Air. I heard diilolving Melody, my Ears catch’d imperfedly the found, yet the Words feem’d thefe: He is falfe ؛ and fair Clarin-da’s ours. That Accent, tho١ divine, waked me, with terrour I called a-loud on thee, protefled thou were true, and contradided all the amaz-E 2	ing
٠	...I. ٠ ٠
( 7 6 )
ing Vifion. Hail to me, my Love, and if thou can ft not Swear new Paths, run o’er all the old, that I may ne’er, tho١ Angels fpeak it, believe that Cory don can be falfe to his Qlarinda٠
٠	.٠	؛.·	/
LETTER
( 77 )
LETTER XXXV.
Condon to Luciiu.
i Can no more help writing to the fair Lucinay than ilie can making Conqucfts where’er ihe comes. You ٥re miftaken if you think your filence؛■ will makeme defift-.No.Ym refolv’d to proceed let what wilLattend. Fortune if ill favours the Bold, and only؟ Cowards fly their ground; whole Sauls are incapable of glorious Adi. ons, I cannot fear, having Love and^ Honour for my guard; Love bids me hope, and Honour pleads my Caufe; and Lucina muil be more than cruel to	both. Tell me no more
׳ of your fricndlHip to Clarinet a, lead I turn your own Argument upon you Tor do you think fhe’d kiis the hand،.؛ that kills the Man ilie loves ? To iliovv your friendihip to her, be kind and pitty me; I wilknot leave to pet. fecute you, till in pure compailionto your felf you condeicend to hear me.
b1 ״،	It:
(.7-8
It was not without the greateil violence to mv inclination, that I heard׳ the tender iighs, law the melting Tears, you paid Clarmda at parting,
I grew Jealous of every look, and tho\ flae is Woman I envied her the ole ding;, nay, now, the very Idea of it diflrads me; write, Madam, or my .pa/fion will hurry me to your A-partment ؟ nay more, perhaps force me to declare my Flame, tho١ a thou.. fand Eyes were by. I wait the return of my Servant with your An- , fwer, which wifi make happy, or miferable, -Madam,
Your Ladyihip.’s devoted Slave,
LET-
٠٠؛؛
('79 )
LETTER XXXVi.
.	Lucina to Corydm.
■RE the moil excellent qf Man!·־ ئج Rill the falfeft, .hen Na^
ا ture gives every other Grace ر Does ! fltepurpolelyohiit Truth and Con-״' ftancy ? Can Coryden forget his Clarin*-del) the. fofteft Maid, the Gentleft Kindeft Fair, that ever yet was form, ed? Is foe not Young, Beautiful and Good as Angels are ح Can'ye-forget'' her Love, her Faith, her Tendernefs, with what a loft regard Ihe viewed her: Qorydon at parting؟ Iter lovely Eyes feem'd to ash it hewou’dftill be True,, but he is Falfe, ForEvorn؛ Oh, who ihali whifper the fad Tab to her ؟ may no officiOus Tongue ever reveal .the perjured־Story: Methinhs I am guil-ty too,'and' confcious of yours, T dare not write ro my clarinda. I charge )TQyCcrydon, return׳ to yourfirft Vows, and this, one erring hep, this juft growing falfliood hall be as fe-ب E 4٠	cret,
؛
٠ ^٠ ;
crct as the flames in Urns, whole fickly fires are never feen by mortal Eyes; but if you perfiit. what can ye hope, inevitable mine follows; ruine on poor Clanmar your felf and me.
■;^'٠:־־ | j '	; ٠" L ET~
LETTER XXXVII.
Clarinda to Qorydon٠·
i^T/Hat! a Poft gone, and no J\j news from QorydonIs he not well ? Or is he careiefs grown ? Either is artorm^nting thought; thou BleiTing of my d^ys do not forget me. Crown my/folitude with thy dear Letters, and I am Content. Is that fo much? Yet that is all I ask; I know my Love has buiinefs attending that great؛ Monarch, who always fmiles upon him. I know it is a world of care: Thus do I frame Ex. cufes for thee. Oh, I mull: for my own Quiets fake, for fhou’d I once believe negled: the caufe my grief wou’d know no bounds,I foon ihou d grow the Image of defpair, my wan Cheeks and languid Eyes woud fright the fools that are fo eager now to gaze; away difponding fears my Love is Conilant, his Vows are true,
his
iiis paílion all unchanged ííncerity;me-thinks, fbmthing crys hold Ciar in da. he’s a Man, and Men are all by Nature falle, let em be lo my Cory don. not made of the courfe fluff, the reft were formed, he is Angelical and all Divine, write to me then, and chafe my Melancholly Dreams, to guilty Bofomes, let not mine be the Manfion, for Love, even the God of Lovefbe filled with whatLove ffys dif-pair, tell my Lucina, !lie’s unkind, tell her I lovejher next my Cory don adieu.
٠ — ־_־	٠ ٠ ٠־ _— —٠ ־_ ־	I - 1. - .	־ ־ ~	-٠. -٠- ٠־ —— ٠" ” — ٠-٠ ~ ٠ .)< ٠
٠٠’ ٠ ٠٠	٠ .٠ ^٠. ^٠ ■— — — ٠ — ٠٠ — ٠— — ٠ -٠. ٠٠־ ٠ ٠) —٠ — — ־-٢ — ... '٠١^- ^٠	~ f -—	—	~	-	-^	 ٠“	٠-٠ ٠ ٠	— ٠ . — — 
LET-
LIX;CEE ؛XXKOTP ٠ j Cory don to Lucina١ ٠
₪Eafe cruel Fair thus to torment me, why do you *p my remembrance the only tilings I wou’d forget, yet this pleads for me, I never wrongedC/٥r/»i؛/،?,and now repent I ever lov’d her. She is indeed all you can fay, hay .؛alias Charms might fix Inconilaiicy it ie١lf، but yours furmount, Heaven knows I have ilrove again!! this growing flame, arm’d my felf with refolution to fupprefs it; but the more I endeavour’d to ilifle it, the more fierce it burn’d; fo that concluding the ٠ hand of Providence was in’t, I ventur’d to declare my_ Pafiion. Ohi Lucina, be merciful, as you are fair and deftroy not my hopes with fuch fe vere Reflections. Sutter me to appear before you, which I dare not do without your leave, lb abiblute is yopr Command over your difpajr.. ing Slave.	LET.
LETTER XXXIX.
Cory don to Clarinda٠
BOurs I receiv’d my Dear, and can juft tell you I am well, but fo hurried up and down, that I cou’d icarcefind time to write this ihort Letter: You muft not be uneafy, my Dear, at miffing of a Poll, two, or three, opportunities does not always offer, and. a Man wou’d not forfeit his Reputation upon ib trivial a Concern as that of a Letter: I will allow you to write every'Poft who have nothing elfe to do; but for me who you are ienfible have a Thoufand things to employ my thoughts, you muft forgive unlucky Bufinefs; once a Week, at leaft, you ihall not fail: if I have Jeiiure, ofcener : For you may be allured Ijlhall mifs no Opportunity, ftnce my time’s not fpent any where fo much to my fatisfa&ibn as
when
_ ٠ '؛<٠	_ V  ٠^ ٠٠ ٠٠ ■.^١^. ٠ ٠	٠-٠٠^	_ ٠^ 1 ^^٠ ٠^.^؟ I _	^١٠ ٠ ־٠	٠٠ ٠	·I	^  ٠^^	٠_٠^.	٠٠^” ١ ... ٠ ٠٠ 
( 8؟ )
when writing to Clarinda whofe ve־. ry humble Servant I am.;
TOSTSCRITT.
I have not feen Lucina, nor don’t know when I lhall; you had beft write to her your felf, perhaps ihe Hands upon Pun6tilioe’s,and ’tis you¿؛ Duty to write fir ft.
٠ I	LET-
LETTER XL.
Clarinda to Cory don,
1١יUch comfort as fome fad Mother ١ Felt, when; bet only Son, the darling Heir of Kingdoms died, ( can I add a greater fimiie) fach Comfort did your Letter bring. Is it a trifling concern to preferve my Life, for of that confequence your Letters are. What will become of me? Oh, I am finking down apace, my Melancholly fancy form’d this fad Idea long ago. ,Tis not my Fortune finks me, but ,tis you, I fcarce believ’d what I read, but thought my Eyes miftaken: They, alais, convinc’d me thole well known Chara&ers are yours. Be filent rather then write fo to me ,٠ my Soul is great as thine, nor is my Birth inferior: Think not I have nothing elfe to do, for if you have left ٠ me I have great Affairs both with Heaven and Earth.
Firft
( 7؟ )
Firil I have a caufe to plead with Heaven, my Youth, my Innocence, which the juft Powers will fure forgive, and fave than a noble Family,. they’l not deny me refuge.
What pettilh anger does my folly raife, I have no refuge but in thee, be-caufe I will have none, but do not ule me ib, leaf! you repent too late, and never find in all your fearch of Love, fuch another doting Fool as your Clarinda.
LET-
٠ k ■ ' ٠ ؟^؛^٦٠١٠	١
 ־ ٠ ' ، <----٠- ~ ، ٠
LETTER XLT. ٠ Qlarinda to Lucina
HAppy Lucina, if thou knowefl not Love, ihou.d l fend thee a Copy of Qorydons laft Epiftle, fure thy Friendihip wou’d join with me to Curfe Mankind : But why do I com-plainof him, I am by all abandoned, Lucina has loft the remembrance of the Wretch that lov’d her. Oh, ill repaid in Love and Friendihip, what I have now to wiih is, that you may meet a happier fate, a" Swain,if poflible,more lovely ,and truer far than Cory don: But as I faid to him, fo will I repeat to you, you cannot find a Friend more faithful than Qjlarinda.
LET-
( 8 9 )
LETTER XLII.
Lucina to Cory don.
¥ Have found your ill natur’d pur-J[ pole by my dear Clarindds Letter ; how dare you be fo unkind to her, and have the Confidence to believe I iliall entertain one good Thought of you. I give you leave to come and fee me,only that we may talk of her, that I may convince you, never any Woman loved you more than me does, or deferved you better. Had it been my date to have look’d uponyou without injuringmy-Friend, I ihou’d have thought you the molt amiable of Mankind: but that con-fideration renders you the moil de-teft’d. I am angry at the perverfe. nefs of our fate which fcarce allows me to fay civily, Adieu.
POSTSCRIPT.
Ivvrite to her this Poll, failure you, but what to fay Heaven knows.
LET-
١ :	,	( 1-90'	'
LETTER XLIlf.
Larina to Clarinda.’
STupified vvith Sorrow for die lofs of yourdear Society, ! thought I ihou’d never have brought mV־ feif into the Power of exereifing any faculty. I am fure, now I endeavour.
I fhafl infinitely Tali illort of expref. fing my ardent AfFedfion to my charming Clarinda: If the Men are falfe, their own perfidiouFnefs be their Puniihment. Let us Love on.
I have oftentimes la mind to come down |to you, for there arethings which I cannor، at this diftance, tell you؛ that troubles extreamly your everlaitihg Friend Lttcinai
LET.
90)"■ ־-؛1¡
LETT ER XLIV.
Lucina to Corydcn.
My Lord,
KAft Night being vexed at your j Addreiies, and fond of my Friend״ I have fent her fomething ,by this Poil I fear will too much diiturb her. Pray do you write a kind *Note, to remove her fufpicions and fears : Do this as you wou’d oblige one you profefs more too than ihe wifhes, unlefs circumftan. ces were otherwife. You know whol I mean, farewel, learn to be conilant.v and then befure you fhail be eileemed by Lucina٠
־؛؛.i	؛١ ■i :׳- v.r i;. ٠־؛	. i r ؛■■: | r. v-:١........ J '
LET-
■ ."־· ■ ·■ - ١■_ ·"	v :	;־״٠ .٠ ׳٠ ٠ '
Cs>2) H
LETTER XLV.
Cory don to Clar in da.
SAd Clarinda been in London I ihoud have fworn (he was juft: come from feeing the Fall of A· lexander when ihe writ this Letter: tis fo larded with Romantick flights. Prethee call back thy Reaion whilfl in fight, leaft it out flip thy reachs. Your Fears are all as falfe as they are unreafonable. What if the hurry of Buflnefs won’t permit me to write every Poll, muft it then follow of neceflity, that you have loft me ؛١ In. deed Clarinda yoa difpleafe me with your Fears, and if you ihou’d find what you feem fo often to fufpeft, blame your felffor it; for as nothing engages a Man of Honour fo much as a generous Confidence, fo nothing nettles him more than a perpetual diftruft ؟ why lliou’d you anticipate your Grief, ftay till you find me
falfe,،
( 91 )
falfe, as a witneis of your Love be eafie and contented, which is the only way to fecure your Cory don, LETTER XL VI. t	Cory don to Lucina
؛Am forry I can t obey the charming Clarwda in every thing, I’m fure ’tis my de/ire to do fo,but when ihe|commands things fo unreafonable I muft difobey her, as I would the Gods themfelves, (as Lifmachus fays; Ah Madam/ why wou■ d you make a Villain of me ? Why iliou'd I counterfeit a Paflion where I have none, no tender one I mean, doubt. 1 lefs I Iiave a friendihip for Clarwda. and ihall have to my Lives end, but the better part of me is wholly devoted to the Divine Lucina; why wou’d you diilurb your Friend, whofe Repofe you feem lo much concern’d for, ifyou have faid ought that may
difcjuiet
( i>4 J ’
difquiet her in your lail Letter, ’tis fit you contradict it by an other, but that as you pleafe, for my part my Conicience will be clear; ,tis honourable Love I make to you, and Marriages were made in Heaven you know. Thus far I’m fure I m in the right; now wou’d any reafonable Man think me mad, that after having obtain’d leave to wait on my Miftrefs, I ؛،hon’d ftay to write to her ؛ True, but what has Reafon to do with Love ? Nothing at all, — and yet it has too, for 1 have a great deal of reafon in writing this Letter, by which l hope to prevent a Thonfand Interogotaries about Clarinda, which I proteft neither to hear nor anfwcr one, but every iyilable you mention of her fhall entitle me to a kiis ؟ therefore Madam, proceed as you pleafe with
your devoted Cory ion,
LET-
(If¡ I
L E TTE R XLV1I. %:. Qlarlnda to Qoryclen.
،Will no more trouble you with my Fears, I alone was bom to feller, and fo: will with fuch a .Refig-nation bear my woes, till I ihame my leverer Deftiriy, and make the World again(! its Nature, Laws״ and letded ١ Pradwce· own X have, been very hardly, ·uied.
Oh why did not this Almighty bufmefs prefs thus hard upon your Heart in the; ErS: perfuic of Love, Jet an؛ Impartial Judge confider, and in appearance you then had more dian now, your Fortunes and your Honours were but growing ripe, your great !Made؟ had no other Favourite, the .Ml is lure fulfilled, ؛Ambition is fatisfied, and the deike of Wealth is gorged, the King can live iome hours without you too, ail are plea-fed,only Love and I complain ٠ where are now the foft Expreifions, the bewitching
( g6 )
Witching Language that ingaged my unwary Heart, then I was your little Cherub, the Angel Heaven had lent to blefs your days, and give a taile of Joys Immortal ؛ this and a Thou-fand Words more tender filled your Letters in the gay blooming hour of Love, when the leaft fcrip from me, jwou.d fet your Pen a flowing, till Sheets were covered with exceilive Paflion. Now, oh fad reverfe, I may unheeded blot long Pages with my Truth, my Vows, and unregarded Love.
Of what ufe is my undoing ? to warn my Sex fignifies no more than all dire Examples do that went before. I knew in Hiltory, in Poems, in many a melancholly tale of Truth how falfe Men were, yet I believed, milled, doted, and am I fear undone, nay, even you perhaps may charm ibme eafie Fair, tho١ fhe ihoud know our Story, for Women too often think they may fecurethat Lover on which foflie fad forfaken Nymph exclaims.
7 P	٠	My j
91 )־ )
My Woman م when I!ill heat her ) daily tells me how ihe meets with nothing but Praifes of my 13eau١ ؟.y٠ what defies Ed but vouchsafe t© ■؟lefs their Eyes fometimes, then ج ؟y to m־y GlaiS, ash that If I am لافخ fo fair .and. young to. catch ¿؛؛ ۶azers , why Qorydon s Flame re-bates nor Courts nOr Dyes as he -was ١vontfor his 0larinda. Oh, there is am.؛g؛ty re.afon,tho. a moft ungratefui one, I am his already and cateiefs of ي tile Conqueft whiCh with toil he wo؟, his Heart grows fond of new ۶e؛fuits. I '!aid I wOud no more difturhyou with my Fears, but tis irnpoifible, they arC infeperable to ۶ne who loves like me, forgive and love me if you can, if nor remember poor Clarindei dyes.
F t¡
LETTER XLVIIL CUrinda to Lucina٠
₪ncc I Had yours, which I confefs alarmed me, tho if I may venture to *charge what my Soul loves, Larina, with a Crime, I think ihe .writes too darkly for that dear Friend ! took her for, for if you know my .Ctrydon falfe tell me the Particulars, ؟־ ١twill ؟be Charity to let me dye a-؛pace, fuch a wretch ihould not linger ؛long in pains, in pains exceilive, fo *ineTm fure will prove; but as I ؛!.aid before ; fince I received yours I had another from Corydon, much of the fame itamp, a little foften’d, but oh too haughty for my foft Temper. .Ah my Lucina! I perceive he that was my Slave in the firil Reign of Love, is grown my Lord and Tyrant now; well let my Ruin caution thee, believe not Man״ not for his Oaths, his Tears, his Ptavers de-
' ٢٠٥׳ je&ed
( 99 )
je۵ed dying Eyes, nor all thetrains -ointra^ our weaker SexJ ei؛ he lays 1C	all, or؟ ؛her wit؛
Where LovO׳,Marry forlntereft only is hardly, ever named , but only. Joyntures Settlementsand all
؛Trade , the pruden ج٤١لءج!ءقللءلي
Pta&iccj then you will nevCr tali ravelike mC, Count like me the ٠٩؛a dnight hours,and wake and' watCh؛^ ill Morning; but why do I pretend؛ give Advice, who. want my felf ح Councii andComfort, Farewel. Write roe (۶you l٠ve Iff you donOt ٠٠؛ once ،огйкеп of all the ؟a ب ؟1.55 ro ۴orldl value, and Flefoon forfake Adieu my Dear. аду only دئ y ٠	.Comfort
־ ر-'؛ا ־ ־ إ
{;1׳Q٠ y
I f ETTEI XIAX.
Lucina tQ Corydon.
—	٠
My Lard,
S Think I cannot better anfvver Iaf٤٠ Nights prefitng Convention, than by fending dear Clarinda's Letter, which is juft now in my Hand. I ، cou.d not read it without wet Eyes, :if you can, fure I with her may caH you Barherous; Can you after this defert'fuch Goodnefs, and after that think I’ll receive your Apoilate Vows? Weil, if you can you are a bold Man, ١the Sin lies at your !Door, I hope to have no hand in it؛־ I think Repentance your only way ؛to Happinefs ; if you are obilinate 1 ؛!hall pray for Grace to continue fo ;؛as well as you, I know you are a Traytor, a falie Ingrate to Love and .Qlmnd# :therefore you fliou’d expe# ...thing'1 but hate from
iLmina٠
LET-
..٠—٠ ٠	;
LETTER I.
Corjdon to Clarinda.-
■ Is much parft the power“ of frail Humanity to judge of Futurity, Madam, cou’d we fet a bound to٠٠our PaiTions.and limit their Motions by certainty, we-might fee a rule to our Lives, and fo prevent: Providence which delights to iliovv its Power by difappointing our firm., eft Intentions, I did and do refolve to love you؛ but cannot keep up to . that effeminate fondnefs which I perceive you expert I ihall be al٠ ways ready to ferve you in the qua-litygo،؛ a Friend, as much as ever, which Paffion I think preferable to Love, Fm fure at leaft *tis the moil lafting of the two, and if you’l come to Town, Fie be one of your. Vifitors if you pleaie to let me knew* your Days of Audience, and if you.
F 3	will
( *٠٥ ؛
will promife to return the Obligation I ihould be very proud to receive you.
Tis true Ambition is fatisfy.d, the King is iatisfy.d, all are fatisfy’d but you, which ihews that to.fatisiie Glarinda is beyond the Art of C٠. rydett*
' LET.
?؛.!.;I .
,LETTER Li
.٢٠.<-■< . ٠ ٠ ٠ ٠־
Coryim to Lucinth
*Hat Man is there on Earth that has not ibmetime do&& what might puli immediate V enhance on him, were not Heaven more merciful than we deferve، we ftould all be the Lord knows where ; but our Religion teaches us to hope for pardon of our Sins, .and roy fin. .erity for your Eileem; for faith,£/٠?-dam, I am fincere with you, and when I ceale to be io, may Heaven and you renounce me, a leverer Curie even you, in favour of your Friend, cou’d not impofe.
But why ihou’d the fair Lucina hate me, becaufe I can’t love another ? It is a very odd reafon, and £ believe the firfl: of that kind that e. ver was given by your Sex. The Language of your Pen wou’d drive me to perfed Madnefs, did not that
F!	of
[ *.4	)
of your Eyes come in to my relie؟ they tell me a fofter Story; nor is it poiiibk fo much Beauty, Vertue and Coodnefs, fo nearly ally.d to Per. fe&ion, as Lucina is, ihou’d want the forgiving Quality; no *twou’d be the height of Impiety but to doubt it; therefore Madam, you fee I am refolved -to love you in fpight of all that you can fay or do t© your J
Cory dom
Ideftgn to wait on you in the E٠. vening, and bring Clarinda's Letter, with the Copy of my Anfwer, till when I am,	■ ■	٠ ٠
Madam, your mofl
ebeiUnt Servant,
LET-
f
■h
J ( ».5 ) .
LETTER Lir:
Clarinda to Corydm. y O؟٤٠ ^ou ١؛Sf *١ac٤ Confli&s my ״
you are falie ,twill but iticreafe your ibort; Good God, what have I done, what horrid Sin committed to merit fuch a Puniihment as this? Why thou barbarous charmitfg Man, why didft thou chofe out me to ruin ? Was I too happy ?Had you fo much of Hell to envy my Repofe’becaufe my unfpotted Fame ifood fair becaufe 1 was adored and praifed by all, therefore did you reiolve. to blaft my Youth¿ and make me grow even hatefuf to my feif: Qh mo it .unheard of .Cruelty, had Ifpread the fubtle trains of Beauty, Jor ·defign’d a Con.. queft, you yet had left to. fay, She helps betray her[elf; but oh your Sou 1 your faithleft Heart well knows 1 feared and fled before you ; but you
؛؟■ .٠ '■־	i
l: :::₪₪m₪₪₪₪iBi
( 10# )'
I iuppofe laughed at my. guard, and. knew your Charms cou’d conquer e. very cautious Maid," they did I own it. I love you, dye for you;, oh prepoftorous Fate, can that produce your hate. You wou’d have me come to Town and you will vifit r٩e, lure you or I, or both are mad, can you behold me with indifference ? Am ٠/ fo altered ? Are your Vows lb loon forgot? No, no ’tis buf: a tnal, yet do not, do not, cruel Lorydcny do not proceed, ’tis too fevere for o٩e juft enter’d into Sorrows, whofe fhin. ing kdorning promifed a more happy Day; cou’dft thou fee me now thus in the filent Night, when all are lock’d in peaceful reft, alone complaining and foriaken, fure thou wou’dft pitty me, fure thou woudft fly to my relief, revoke the cruel words thy guiltytLetter brings،, ،and healing my difpau fw؟ar once again thou only art ^	,	- ٠ ٠.
ClarindaS.
LET.
■
٠، _ ־ ٠٠ - ٠— - ٠٠ - - _٠- ٠٠ _ ^ ־ ٠ - — ٠ _—٠ -٠.   .٠
f 1.7 )
LETTER till.
Lucina to Corydon٠
؛will not fee you to Night I an١ reiblved, Ido confefs I cannot help reading your Letters, tho’ I am very angry with you, and with my. Eyes too I ailure you if they encoii. rage you ; one rcafon why leant fee you to Night is,becaufe I am en״ gag’d at my Lady — where I fun״ pofe you’d be welcome, as the Dtree take ye you are every where, unlefis it be to
JLuctw,
*Pojlfcript. -׳ ٠ ٤■־׳- <;.٠.٠׳
I have lent you inelofed tiny Letter to Oarinda; poorThingjWoifd I cou'd perfwade her to hate Mankind as I do, pray obferve it when you read it., tis my real Sentiments uponHonour.. ١
LET״
LETTER LIV.
Lucina. to Clannda.
My Dear,
■Y all the Amorous Stars that Ruled your Birth,which I de fie, 111 never love	take your
Advice,and Intereft ihall only be my Guide, if there’s any thing fo mad to venture, then at their own peril be it: Prithee do not talk of dying, hvoand make new Conqueits, ask me not after Gory don, fay only to thy felf, he is a Man, and then-conclude the reft; think on greater Miferies than the Difappointments of Love, and that will make what you fuffer fit eafie. I arm my felf even for a breach of Friendihip, becaufe I have lately itudied fo much Philofophy as to find nothing in this mutable World is Permanent. I wiih you happy Clannda, I wifh I never had been Born.
There
( ... ١
There now I think I am as Melancholy and as Sententious as you for the Heart of you.
Luc in a.
LETTER LV.
Corydon to Clarinda,
SO charge me with your Ruin, is to tax me with want of Gratitude, that I confefs provokes me, I wou’d not have the leaf؛ of the Creation think me guilty of a bale Adion, even to an Enemy, much lefs to one that I am bound by fo many Obligations to be civil too, as I am to Clarinela. Faith Madam, you argue very well, and in the pritieft Stile imaginable,but youmufV give me leave to bid the Devil take me if I catr 8f will believe a Woman of your Senie cou’d exped a certainty in Nature ; Fortune and length of Days
change
( I 10 )
change all things you know, you may call me Barbarous, Cruel, or what you pleaie, but all Worldly Affairs are Tranfftory, as I am at prefent; for / am now awake, and muff; go to Sleep, as Toon as / have told you that / am more yours than you believe.
Cerydon.
Faß iz a Cleck.
LET.
letter lvl
Corydon to Lucina.
■ O be Three hours in the cofe.
pany of the Miitrefs of my Soul without having an opportunity of !peaking one word of what I iuf-fer u ibr !..or؛ was, / think,the height of Torment, to talk, and not to talk of Love; tp whifper, and yet not dare to whilper the loft Tale, was more crois to my purpofe than the Game ,we play’d at, like Tantalus 1 had my Foog i. veiw, and periilfd in pte hghf of Plenty, / half fui; . ped ypu gave me the /nvitation to my Lady — to exercife your Cruelty ,٠ 1 fanqy,/look’d like an AfS.and / heartily wiih no body difeover’d it ؛ buf... your felf, for methinks a Lover when he makes his hrft Addreiies is the filliefl Figure of the whole Creation, and / wou.d ilill keep up the Name of Man, tho. Love rules all
my
(2اء؛
my Faculties, and makes me ad whate’er he pleafes: / read your. Letter to QlarinL·) and like your Politicks well enough, and if you-,can’t he brought ־to'my Terms, to exchange Heart for Heart, 1.11 fuhmit to yours; let fntcreft be yohr Mo. tive, whilft Love is mine j. let me hut reach' the top of my Defires, /
. .. care not by what means ر rife, fo far I’m -.a true States-man you ICeMa. dam. ·· ׳;}	١
ر defign tofupivith you to Night,, that is,, if your Ladyfhip will give me leave k butTbar all Games؛ ^ar-ticularly Crols Purposes, nay. even a :third Perfon, fo fete a Tete is the-heft Company in the World, cl^eci. .ally ,to one ofmy Gonftitituon.
I am, Madam¡ what you ?kafir ly;Hearns¡
,'قد:.ء׳
/‘humbly ask your Ladyihips Par״ don if / am too familiar, but I hope on our long and intimate /icquain.. tance / may prefume to baniih that curfe of Converaftion or writing For* mality, efpecially when a Man fpeaks his Heart, as / am lure / do to Z٥»٠ etna»
^	^	٠١" ٦٠ ٠	٠	... ...٦	... ^ ٠
| 114 )
LETTER LVIL Clarmda to Corydon٠ My Lord,
*Am well convinced after the receipt of your laft / ought never to write again,but/have already broke: many rules / fhou’d have obferved ilri&Iy, as my Sex, my Quality and Fortune required ; your Infinuations, your well a<3־ed Paflion drew me into ever lailing Love, for fo mine muil be how ffiort foever your unconilant date remains, and when Women Love then let them bid adieu to Hap-pmefs if they love like me; Ido confefs in all my height of Glory, when the World call’d you mine, when at my Feet youfwore the Prieil . if /fo pleafed ihou’d make you io ;
/ iliII doubted, trembled, and by Prophetick Fears forefaw this Fate, your Failhood, yet give me leave to
fay
لا٠ م)
fay ا do believe fince firft vour Per-Jtir.d Kind, the firft Inoocehce decei. ved no Story can ever e^ualminejef؟ in my very Bloom of ״Youth, on'¿ who loved to ٠٠ filch exccfs, that in Romances 0. fiich a Character i¿ found ؤ one who made her God of y٠u٤ and there's my fault؛ forgive me Heaven, like the fad' Penitent I will return, and will never think of Poiiy more f But oh! how latri¿ is ٤h٩t Contrition forcd bythy hafe flds; BafenefS, twas a hard Word, hut .*is aTruth, befides .Ideal with Heaven a־s you in the extremeft fit ٠f your Demotion dealt by me'ؤ I-am by .Halves fincere, and your re. turning hindnefs wou’d daftj my PI .US Vows 5 what fliall Ido خ lam unfit to Live or Dye, to Love ־or Hate, fure my hurraing Senfes will turn my .Thoughts already wild -to mere Confufion; relieve me Mad^ nefs. re.lieve me BeaveA, oh dearer than all, fove me Qorydon.
I
016־)
Ifaid Iwou’d. ״. more pronounce, or write that dear Name, ah fpight ٠۶ ail my Indignation it lang؟ u۶on my Tongue and Pen، Oil, that as-؛!!ePoets feign I mighc drinklirr^/yy here, and forget a few paft YearS؟ tliou, guilty و thou canft Sleep, and fearce. an. opiate Draught will lull-my Sorrows ي no niatter, there may 0ذلجاة٠ tiWeWhen, refieölng HorrorS may hreahthy reft,asthouhaft done
da , ة ;
:^;Vi ־ II¡
r T ;;LVin. .
Ctarinda to Lucina٠
IS it then io ordain’d, that when Cory don is loft Fate has yet another blow and Imuitlofe Luc ha too ? ،Had Providence .in its ؛fever e Decree doomed ״fuel! a Woe for her, to what ¿kind Bofom cou’d I thought flic wou’d have flown but to her Clarh٠٠ da'*$ ? For me there is no fhelter now. my Family's incenfed.my Lo؛ver falie. ؛my Friend as cold and as referved ٠ as all the Happy are to the Sad and Miferable. In this Retirement and Afflictions fcarce to be injured by a Temper and Conilitution foftas mine, I have found one faith- -ful Creature, you recommended her to me, and fure Nature never made any thing lb Compailionate / ilie weeps whene’er ihe perceives I do. thd’ me knows not why, and her Service has no.other fault but being too
impor-
( ،;٠٥
importunate to ferve me; you may well fay I forget who I write to,when !entertain you thus, but my ihare of Comforts being very fmall,Idwell upon the ihadow of one, a Faithful Servant, I fear I have nothing elfe to boaft of now; I love you Lucina, but my Spleen is fo great, methinks imCt Corydon defpifes me all theWorld ihou’d, for after his proving ungrateful nothing will appear a Miracle to
Clarinda٠
____________________________________
( f Ip )
letter lix.
Luciria to Corydon٠
*Hoii'd I forbid your coming I fuppoic you wou.d not mind it, for you have got an aifurance to take my very denials quite contrary ; I have juft received another Letter from Qlarinda, and fee the power of guilt, I dare not open it, but have laid it Sealed into my Cabinet ,٠ you need not fear I ihall provide a Third if I have a mind to keep you to my felf, had poor Qlarinda been fo Cautious you might have ftili been hers, ٠؛ there is nothing fo dangerous or fo likely to begin an Amour as a frequent Converfation, had not you gaind good ground as a Friend. I iheu'd never have liftened to you in the capacity of a Lover; but whenever I wou’d entertain a kind thought of you, as, Heaven forgive me, I am too to. often inclined towards.
the
(٠ 120 (١
؛¿he injured Clarinda comes crofs my Amufements and damps all cifing Jcy, you have learnt long ago to appear powerful when preient, nor can I cliafe you from me when a'b-fent; thefe are fatal Symtoms, and fliew too evidently the approaching death of Friendihip; hut 1 will flru-gle a little longer, and deny my felf the plealure of faying truly I am
Mur Luc in a*
I..II	LET-
3... ־	| ٠׳ *׳٠٠
٠	lr »v —~~~ — - —_ ٠ _ ٠ ٠	i ٠٠^'.־
12؟؛ I )
LETT E R LX.
Corydon to Lucina.
יIke aReprieve to the Condemn'd*
that’s a Simile too poor, like_٠
what ft all t compare it too, I, there’s the Query, For ’tis impoflible to defer! be the mighty Tranfports which your Letter gave me; if the bare imagination gives fuch Blifs. what muft real Poileilion be, too mighty to be born ; oh my Lucina, For i muftcall you lb, why will you ftrive to op. pole the Decrees of Heaven, for fure i am, that has ordain.d you mine ? Why do you ftrugle with your Inch-nations? Speak the kind Word, and fay you are wholly mine,do, my Fair-eft, blefs your Corydon, fay but that, and the Holy Man fhall joyn our Hands, and tye you ever to me؛.; think not on Clarinda,, but let Friend-ftip ceafe till Love is fatisfykl, and
ih m
( (22 ا
؛¿hen renew your Vows; ills cannot take it־, ill .from you, .if ihedoesj let .her expoftulate with Heaven, fince tis not in your ־.power to prevent your Deftipy 5 your, .Letter has 0-pen.d a palfoge to a Thoufand Que-ftions, .which,؛are ,to'..tedious.to in-fort, fince my impatience will not fuffer me to־ Wait your Anfwer.there. fore as foon .as l ean he Dreftexpeft .me, for Ilhall fly to your dear Arms With a־ Bridegroom's haft, and tell you all my Love,and force that Con. feffion from your Tongue which yo'ur Letter dares but ־half declare.־ A-dieu thou Charmer of my Soul,, for one fix Miribtes excule
Your QrxryJoi
د;٠ ء;1لب ٠) ٠_ .:٠٠ءمي:; 1. ٠
ا٠؛ ٠ا٣ - ٠٠¿, .٠ ؛ ا_
L,fe;T٠
*T23. ) ٠ ,٠'٠٠ :'־ )
LETTER LXI.
Corydon to Clarindm.
■Have been iludying theie twohours, Madam, what I ihou’d fay to you, but your Sentiments of Love and Friendihip are ib different from mine, that ’tis no wonder we can t agree, I would have you ad: with Reafon.and you’d have me Mad; thus while we drive different ways ’tis impoffible we ihou’d ever meet! I cannot for the Soul of me fathom your deffgn, I ltill love you with as much Honour as ever I did, yet you complain ; Is it poflible that a lenfible Woman ihou’d prefer aRomantick Letter to downright Truths : I’m fure I ihou’d like yours much beter were the Stile more Modern, nor ihou’d I think you lov’d me one jot thedeis, indeed C/a-r'mda you both diilurb your ielf and
by your foolim Suppofitions, ؛י;. prethee be more difcreec, and think
better pf؟
Cordon. ٣د٠١لا
-LET؛ ٠ ; . I
(I f۶؛ J t E TTER Cvrjdon to Lucina٠ ^
■He dear remembrance of iaftS Nights Converfation,and what I e’er this time to Morrow ihall pof. fefs, have keep me as waking all Night as if I had had ray fair Lucina in my Arms,! have counted each fuc. ceeding Hour with impatience, for-every Moment feems a Year till you ״٠ are entirely mine ؟ I am juft going to compleat what you defired, and at Nine this Evening I’ll wait on my Charming Bride; I have order’d my Chaplain to attend me there, who־, ihall receive our Mutual Vows, and Crown my Happinefs with inexprc£ iifele Pleafure. Oh! illould I de־.-Icribe the mightyTranfports which I felt when my Lucina fpoke-that dear obliging Word, I will b& youn, it G 3 ,,	׳ would
would require more tiine than I ؟an f^re, being impatient for the wilh’d for' hour, till which every ׳thing will put me out of humour, allbut the thoughts of' my fair Lucina) whofe I am fincerely.
د I ٠ ٠ ٠
٠٠ : ;;II
ر.؛ذ’٠ار	-LET.
( J 2 J jt;
iettei lxih.
To the Charming	-	٦
KEis, I will call you io ftill, and* forever ; you are not lefs Fair becaufe your Lovers Perfidious, the ١ lame bufie Friend that cautioned you at Kenfingtonr whom 1 fuppoie you laugh’d at for his pains, has taken little more, and found you out at a ? remoter diftance to fend you fuch News as all the To١^n feems Furpri-zed at, Yefterday my Lord —٠٠ was Married to —.... Now wouMX bo١: preaching again if I thought you’d -mind me,advifing you to defpile this, falfc Friend and treacherous Lord, whilft Beauty, Wit, Goodnefs, all the Yertues and the Graces are yours, rendering you too too amiable for the Peace of Mankind :,whilft. I fay all this and more is undifputa. bly your due, fcorn the unthinking - G 4 .	Wretch ,
Ci؟	(؛*؛
Wretch who has ventur’d to wrong fuch Merrit ٠ return thou foft lovely Charmer, return and glad the. World and me, thefe are the wiihes of a iincere Friend, tho I believe it will be very hard to perfwade you there , is in Nature luch a thing. I know there is, and one that inceifantly Petitions Heaven for your Happinsfs and Peace.	7	PP
L I_T٠
; ■r ٠; L ET J:E;R7L%Lyi.;٦¿
A Letter from Cladnda’x Woman - ־٠ to Luclna.
Madam*
I Send your Lady ini p with this a Letter my Lady received by the Poft from an unknown Hand, the News it contains, whether talfe or true I cannot tell, but as it is I think it has kill'd her ; ilie has had feveral fainting fits, fo long and fo terrible, that we all thought her dead, in the fad interval of Senfe and Life fhe feels filch peircing Woe, that we know not *whether to lament her moil in the pain of her Grief, or Pangs of Death; I befeech you Madam, either difprove this fatal Story, or footh her ،Sorrows fo to reconcile her un-equal. Torments; flie knows not ^	G 5	cf
( ٠3٥ )
of my ١٠ writing, I humbly ask your Ladylhips Pardon,and beg you wou’d fend fome Comfort tp my diftreffed Lady. ٠ I am,
Madam٠ your moft
eledient Servant*
1.	٠	.	'	"
١
.؛LET
(3٠ا)
LETT. ERLXV.-
Mis -™ءتا0ا Lori آئ־“־
My Lo٣٥١
»LL fond Names for ever be for.؛;
got, and oh thou Charmer Love,that pleafinghabitude of Mind, ..ever and (or ever, be thou forgot, ٠ tis now؛'ten Pays fince 'the fad Ti. dings came which pubfrckFame con־؟ firms, you cannot think what a fwift progrefs I have made to ,that laftBed of Darknefs, where even happy you muft come blended in Death, the True, .the Falfe, ־the Faithful, 'Cruel, and'the Kind,., fooner or later all lye down and are in Duft forgot-ten ;this is my Epithalamium, this my Bridal Song, yet I think IhadnOc difturbed you with' it, only I wou’d te.11 you how ׳calm.Iam,.-how.' 'free from. Anger, Fury or Revenge,. Oh may thy Perjury efoape unguniihed both' by Heaven and Men ز yet le't
m؟
I¡¡¡1 ;־
־־;. .-.-...ج:-	-- ' .
( .32 ١
me warn my Sex, You fair Innocents, when like me in your foft Bloom, when Bright and Young, Arm,Arm your tender Boloms againit the Tray tor the Deitroyer Man z force your lilrening Ears from the bewitching Tale, for if you hear lik۶ me, you furely are undone.; but a. bove allflyfecret Love, where headlong Pafiion feayes unconfulted Friends and Fame, where fruiting your perfidious Conqueror,you think you are fafe, fuel! fafety is in Storms without a Pilot, iuell fafety in midfl of Flames, in Peits, in Wars or Far mine, fuch ftfety is the Honour of a Man whom Oaths, whom Love, and Thoufand , Thouiand Tyes have bound ؛ with Flattery you begin your emit Artifices, what pains you take to raife the.work of Ruin ? Oh. how !bate my Eyes ’caufe you have praiL ed them, ’caufe they have Been plea?, fed with gazing at a rhing fo falfe ; perhaps you cannot fpare a blifsful Minute to read this, I care not, Lain s٠؛t loliciro^s you ihou’d/ yet will L
go on, fpeak o’er my Wrongs, and fix in Charadters indelible my Injuries, that being paft, I’ll write no more, no more complain, but loft in filent Cpntemplation difdain this leiler World, where Faith, Friendihip, and all the Sacred Laws, Both Humane and Divine, are broke ; where־ Guilt and Greatneis joyn, where nothing is fincere, nor nothing truly happy, and as my load of Mifery exceeds whate.er my Sex: had felt before, io lhall ؛my Patience, Refignation, i and ٠F$rgiy.enpfs، I fuppoie you wonder I complain not of your Bride,¡ wou’d if polfible forget that ever fuclt a Woman was, as, I will daily ftrive to baniili from; my Thoughts the Bridegropm^ievelin everlaftingJoys| ftudy {till new pleafures to ,employ your Senies, for thinking will deftroy your Happinefs, efpecially if, you remember me. which that you never may, I wilh and bid you here eter؛ »ally Adieu.	; ٠ .٠
?he End of thefe fetter¿ ٠ :־
( .34 )
d Letter to Mr. V—־ containing a-Jbort Defence of Ariftotle., in omfition to a ModernDifaurfe on Comedyy &C.
sm
IWiih you may find the Task you impofe on mo of any ufe to you, then I ihall have no reafon to complain of the Trouble; but I believe you are the only Man that ever read Ariftotle, that had the ihadovv of a Reafon againu any thing he has laid m his Foeticks. You may reply, that theAuthor of the Short Difcourfe^ho fo rigoroufly attaques him,muil without queilion have read him over, and if fo, that then you are not the only Perfon that diflikes him after reading. I muff beg yours and the Author’s pardon too, if I am apt to believe that you have ]both forgot him, be״
cauie
( ،35 )
caufe you both meddle not with one Word that he fays, excepting the Limey of Time,Place and Adion, which if you remember Ariftotle* is neither the only nor the chief part of his Book. ■	؟
If I were inclin’d to Anftver this Gentleman that is io fevere upon this Philofopher, Critic, and Poet: I could ealfily demonftrate the uncon-cluiiveneis of his Arguments; but I ihall content my felf with a bare Vindication of Arifiotle, and leave you and your Friend in the full erijoy״ ment of your own peculiar Opinions.
And in deference to you, I will fuppoie that out of fome Ancient Ma- ٠ nufcrips unknown to the reft of the World, you have recover’d that Book of Ariftotle's that treated of Comedy, and which has been invifible above thefe ifoo Years to all the diligent Enquirers after it. If you have done this the Learned World will be extremely oblig’d to you, if you communicate it to them; and the Square
Caps
Caps themfeives freely fogive both your Pleaiantrie upon them, and that for aPrefent your felves have fo little an efteem for. -٠, .... ...٠٠·.·*٠'
But if in reality you have not recover’d this Piece, really the misfor-tune is fo much -the* greater, becaufe all, you have both faid, is dire&ed a. gainft. a thing that is not in Rerun¡ Naturay and you unmercifully treat Ariflotle as a Scoundrel Delinquent, without a pojhbility of knowing his Guilt, or what he fays to deferve your Anger ; For the truth on t is. Sir9 we know not one Word of the Matter; and Ariflotle for all that appears؛ to the contrary may be: as innocent of what he's accus’d,؛;of as the ٠ Author himfelf, -for except two or three Chapters, all the Paeticks of A· riflotle, that, remain, treat wholly of Tragedy, and that in fo clear and de-monilrative a manner, that ,tis beyond a poilibility of confuting by Reaion one Rule he advances.. But as for Comedy and Epick Poeiie, we have not fo much left of it as can perfwade
«s
US هء Imagine it ب - - , -pliment
rite, Homer, or 0؟ Arijlophanes ; for Tragedy, notthiEpopee, vvashisDar.: lingjio iii a Courtdid a ManofLearn-ing make to that great Prince.
Some Critics are of Opinion, that Horace took all that he fays o'f Co-medy his ء of Poetry йот this Book thatis loft of Ariflotle*s, grant, ing -that to me, 'twould not be imper-tincnt to examine whether that which Horace advances on that Subjeft will not 'hold goodas weli here in £٠جر lane) as at Athens and Rome) and then when we .have done fo, Idare appeal to your felves, your own Judgments, whether it would or not. Ard if this befojWhy have you taken. ٠' fuch pains to abuie a Man of'your own Opinion. /
I perCeive by the Modern Author.s Second .Draught of a Play, he, would have fome Order, DependanCe, and Decorum in a Play, and. that he does not think Confufion the greateft Ex. eellence of Modern Comedy, if then
ء:;; ١ he
he had diílik’d that Model he fuppo. fes Ar'Jtotle has given us, why has he not given us one more reafonable.and more adapted to the Englijh Stage ? ,Tis true he owns that we may have a Play call’d a Hiitory of the World* from the Creation down to Lewis the XIV. and the Scene Europe, Afia, A-frica, and Americay with equal Pro. bability, as zd hours, and Qovent-Garden and its purlieus ,٠ yet by /his a. vowing his Pra¿fice to be contrary to Liberty, we may imagine he believes within himielf, that a more Confcio. nable Compafs is more Eligible.
I lhallpafs over a Remark obvious enough in this Letter, that, a״ great part is built by the Author on a fup. pofition of Artftotle's being no Poet, which muit fall to the Ground, when in the Advertifcment quoted from Scaliger, he tells us of an admirable Fragment of Poetry of that Philofo. pher’s ; nor will ? infift on an other miitake of this Gentleman’s, that all the other Philoiophers had a touch at Poetry, dividing it into I don’t know
how.
(Ns.0
how many Parts, &c, when the Wit of them all amounted not to one of Martial's Epigrams; firft he miitake£, that all the Philofbphers had a touch at Poetry in the fence he means it; for none but Ariflotle have left us any Treatile of that Art ؛ next I dare be poittrve there is more Wit to be col״ leered out of the whole number of Philofophers, than will make two of Martial's Epigrams, if not more; for I won’t be fo Dogmatical as thisGen״ tleman.
But to obferve all the miftakesof this Letter, and re&ifie them aslbme would do, would be to fill a much larger Volume than that which contains that Letter. I ihali only aflure him, that Regularity is not an Enemy to Variety, as the Silent Woman, the Fox, and the Alchymifl of Ben Johnfon may teilifie, and that the Irregular Authors have not been the fupport of the Stage,as t\\QOrphan, All for Love ,Ve-nzceprejerv a9 vainly pretend,and iome others may prove. On the contrary the moil: regular Pieces of the other Poets pleafe not.	And
( Ho)
And now I ihatll only give you a tafte of what Horace fays of Comedy,* and defire die Author to tell the World which of the Rules he has left us, is not of ufe for a Modern Comedy ev n in Drury-Lane, and add only one Familiar Qaeilroniobe Anfwcred at the fame time, Whether there benny difference betwixt Comedy and Farce. and what that difference is ? Now to؛* Horace٠
Tntererit mu!rum Bavu$. loquatur a& Eros^	;
Maturufne fenex, anadhue Fiorente Jit*' ■٠:venta ٠
Fervidus ; :am Matrona potens^ an (eduL· Nutrtx
Mercatorne magus ٠'٠: Cult orne - *virenth Agelli
CokLs, an Ajfyrtusr Thelu mtritm٠ an Argis٠,· &c٠.
Again,	r;
Mtatis cujufy not an dt fmt til¿ motet Mohi lihus que de got Naturis1 : dan dm ■& awt/Sy tkCi .
؛.	Refpkete
Kef pice re exemplar vitae momma·, juheho -Dottum imitatorem &٠ veras hmc duce·
.re voces. ٥i٢j ...
To begin With the IgiL Horace ad. vifes a Learned Imitator or Poet to confult the Life. and thence draw what he has to٠iay. Look youithere is the Gentleman’s confu Iting thePoct, x&c. Ariflotle therefore is not fo much too blame as he imagines if Horace has copy <1 him, fince he Is exa&ly of our Modern Authors Opinion. He tells us before, that the Poet muft make his Dramatick Perfons fpeak according to their Quality, Age, and Nation ; that a Shepherd, a Man of Quality, a Frenchman, and a Bramin of the Eafl Indies ihould not talk all alike, without any diflindion of . Character. This our Magnify d Shake-fpear has obferv’d, one of his chief Excellencies ؛ being his diftin&ion of Chara&er, and I believe this Gentleman would not think it proper that 'Dzcke, in the Trip, Ihould fpeak like Sir Harry Wild-Air, &c. So thus far
٠ ٠_	....	٠־
t ٠42 )
Ariftotles Rules of Comedy will fit Drury-Lane, and as for the Mechanic Rules of the Unity, tho’ extremely conducive both to Pleafureand Excellence. yet they are the laft dwelt upon by the Noble Critic in his Poet¿* mes, which are full of Leflons as true and as excellent as thefe 1 arid it is their evident Truth and Value that maintains their Efteem with all that ever read them, not die Prefcriptioa of 2.000 Years. There is no ipfe dixit made ufe of, and he appeals to Reason alone, and Nature in all that he fays, and till this Gentleman can convince us, that Reafon and Nature are things incompatible with the Englijh Drury·Lane Stage, Arijlotle will be admir’d, and of all too in Drury-Lane as much as at Athens, If his Philo. fophy had been built on fo firm a Bails it had Rood to this Day, and no body that knows any thing of the Reception and Rejecting of the Philo-fcphical Writings of Arifiotle ^ but knows there is no parallel in the cafe betwixt either his Rhetoric and Poetu
ques9
( 43 ا ),
queS) and them. Le Clerk in his Lb-gic. at .the fame time that he con-futes his Dialeftics extols his Criti-cifm; bQt this is a Spbje& too Copi. .US for a Letter, and I fliall keepSy more extenfive Argument'S till we meet: For toAnfwerall thathas been faid again# him, a Man need only fhew what Ariftotle fays, as .the Man that rofe up'and walked before the Sophift that argu’d again# Motion., Before I conclude I mu# fay‘two ء.or 'three Words to fet - the Gentleman right ',as to Socrates ( one of the be# Mentliat ever liv'd without the bene-fit 0.f the Chriftian 'Religion )Jhe was nohe of tlie Sophirters, hut a 'lover' of Truth, and a confounder of thofe who built more on Form and Words,thaa Matter and Tru.th, anddy’d 'a Mar. tyr for the Unity of th¿ Godhead, and his Death, compafsd by Arijlom phaneS) 'in .feme meafiire, is now Ho-nour to theRrofeffion.
FINIS;