Si



\t i
. Vt


» ^ I
)]

cr	0)	r~	
*	»	*	
		CO	
CJl	CO	CD	
b	fo		
--si		NO	
		CD	
00	CD	cn	NO
	—k	4^	
N>		CO	
ro	R	4^	
N>		CD	CO
ro		bo	
CD		'nI	
to	t	4:-	
to	CO	4s»*	K.
bo	bo	NO	
on	o	CD	■ .
to		CD	
	CD	CD	CD
	bo	bn	
CD	N)	CD	
	t		
,	CO	■vl	
O	CO	O	CD
CO	4^	bo	
C71	CO	NO	
cn	CO	CD	1'^
CD	4^	CO	
O)	NO	bn	
o	CD		
i.		CO	
CD		CD	00
b	bo	b	
		NO	
-*» cn
00	00 hO
01	bi ro oi
Ji. O
oo o o>
• CD
O O N3
Ko b> o
CO O N5
N> _k O 00 CD
O • CD ^ CJl
-Si
CO
CD
N)
ro
CO
c;i
500	200
600
700
300
i400
•500
550
|V) iO
lo lo
(inodol wMt >«4 «*««

ro
o	t O	4^ CD	CD j
b	Lk	NO	g|
	CD	cn	
		CO	
o	O	00	
b	Lk	b	-nJ
	00	NO	
		NO	
o	o	00	COO
b o	2	b CD	B|
	1		
o	o	CD	V
*-sJ	b	Lk	CD
CO	cn	CD	
o	cb	00	NO
Li.	bo	NO	O
CD		CD	
O	1 o	CO	NO
4^	NO	4^	
CD	CO	4».	
'	NO	CO	
CD	O		NO
4^	b	4^	NO
CO	00	1	
cn	rb	-nJ	c
cn	4^	NO	NO
"*CD		4^	CO
CO	cn	CD	
*			
			
			
CD		•xl	
00	CD	NO	NO
CO	bo	b	4^
- o	CO	cn	
4		NO	
CD 4**	CO b	CD bo	NO cn
CD	CD		
CO	1 CO	cn	
O	00	4^	NO
-nJ	b	b	CD
		...X	
CO	cn	4w	
o	NO	CO	NO
b	b	CD	--4
mJt.	o	CD	
00		00	
	CO	NO	NO
NO	4i^	•>4	coo
CD	cn	4^	
	cn	cn	
NO	o	NO	NO
	bo		CD
K)	coo	CD	
to	1 NO	cn	
CD		o	CO
	Lk	b	O
O)			•
			
1 CO
CJi
‘‘ o>
Call/MSS #:
Bib ID:
Collection:
P*'3291_a6_l32 176 1
iV., A*i*.V.Vi».*.»AVA*.S*,*.W.'AV.V.S'.VV.*.*^ V.*	• • •	....	i
.	. ------^
11968^	^
.. ..... I
■J

---—--------

				
Total # Images: # Foldouts: Pages To Dig:
JjV.V.-.-.V.... v.v V.. .X. ^...	.
i	... ........................ M . . K. .
J:	^...
508
.VAVASW.SS..S.. ... ... .«ASVA-. W....AV. ,V..
P-----------------------

^ >
i .———

•.V.V.V.V.-.V.V.V.'.W

Condition Notes:
•y.v.w.w,
2 volumes in 1
		
.•.V,*.V.-.v.%v.V^,*.v.SV,*.yA*.V.V.-,V.*.V.V.V.*.
‘AV
.V•VAVAV.y iVAV.*AV
•.yV^.V.SVAV.*.-.V.V.VAV.V.«.-.*.V.V.-.V

Notes/lnstructlons
'*W«V«'**/A*.*AVASVAWV?
:j*.*.v.*.v.v.v.*.*.*.*............,.,...............,.........



M	..•••••
Image name convention
pr3291_a6_l32_1767_body0G01.tif
i•AVAVX^^VAy.V.VA•.V^W«%v.-rt^^VA^^VA•>
?
Jj
!;
>
i

'‘•‘•'•‘‘‘•■•'•‘•‘•■•'•'•’•••■•■••.•.•.•i'.V.V.V.V.V.'.V.'.
>V.*.*.-.'|
.•.N*.*.*,WAV.*A*.V^.f,*,*.V.*.V.V.-.-,*.v


od

CO
d ____
sAa.
Don ytMams
RARE BOOK COLLECTIOM
. LIBRARY aNIVERSITYoi PENNSYLVANIA
S23
3
^ if«rv ‘ *
j*
U645
IVtiH V
?
THE
GODFREY F. SINGER MEMORIAL PRESENTED BY
MR. AND MRS. JACOB SINGER
•V.
.‘■A



J


LT »
A

1
in-. .
.lJL\




— -••''' LA^-»r‘
t-cfs S-

1 r
V
»■'
*.
••v:	V

S

•I *
V
V
. \*-
*»•
rrii

{,
sfc" /» ■ '•;--*«
y.-v
- I,
C .»“•
'■ V ■
* i /,*’ : i ‘ ■ *	•' , ' 4
%t-:L
\	^ • -X »’
■ - ' — “ '	* ’^A,	, *r
' ' .r
'■ v- 'L
V,
. -r-
t,
■ \
'‘Vi'S
* r
t .
f*'-. hyi^
• ^

> •

:/•
*.v
t. 1	•.
'••4 .
.>
-
\
J
s
* *1
» A
- *- ^
;,,V	' 'O,*:*'•/♦-.
.S.	>■
^^. ^'i«iwX . .s'

vt
... :.g»S"4^ - --’: 6S4iia
■ ' . i-< '* !^' *'• -iV V- "
■ 'ii'bc' ' ' ■ 1	^* ■.* tv ' i.**'- V	..	•"*^ ’t*i»:
fri'-f -■ i '	'	-■•■: •■ A
• fiT^**'’-*i	•> '-■	‘	•*■•»..	s
;id^bb'.‘N^	■■■	■-L- ■ ■	vCl;’^'''!'	■•- '•'.'■^‘■V^^
^	.	-•,. - .A	i* •	"-A-	V
‘.:-;‘v .,•	•' ^Kv' ,- y\iV- ■ Kt .. > -;

v/'*
J'.
* . *
\
%	-i.
tr - V - -' •^‘2
30
VI,


■ • ■ «r
"-	• ’« 'i <*r
V ’VJVn .., . .
V .: >.'' ,».«r ' .	#. ' M
.	-.	■ ..'	. ..•■ -^.r

/r? <. ^
\
V.* i-\’ 'O'T-C V-.VS' c	5
Cv.'r**->'<A - • ' **‘i~

^‘^/.•'•'	•... -K-Vr/t

- ■ mL M ■


^ •*' t •
V • tSfc •
•«, >•>•*• 'ry.'t
*	: ■ Jt t
k	- ■ f w *•
■»>'
y.. V
:'. I .
\ •
N >	, S
V
e «
1>.
T ■':
'I
< ■ ^.
s?C .
•j •
V
;i •
Si . £ <

/
• .	^ -f
•* #
^ r ' ^
• ^. * ¥
I
" J
yji.
t
A
4i'

•CVf?

^ k
u. -Jr
,	^	^ __________________ .	>M *^-,
■	’i., • • A-	^
** .'• #JL-..■	yV'	- -_ -	'• '.	*■ ^
"A;'


/• V' ':t(ih '^<L.--‘i
‘.'-	'.f	. ". n.^ ’
v?;-vSi
L' . •
f'-
t
.' 'J
Idr •■.
V : ' /'A
Am
w V. Jp
.(y
■ V
^0 "’'
K*
"r c
A- V
e -
^ 7 ^ ^"'. i-
?V .
\ >

■ ^ ^ *
• * ® . .. * ♦
V-: •*:“■;.•'>•
: AVv- v^T- L - -	-4
• . \
'■'r'-C'-'i	7-
'Hd.»	.-'A	r.-*' ■' '-	' 7 ♦
''	* -	>,"•.*•* i'
■	■	:-r L .. , ; '.V	rf/•- '
• -V ...

i*
Ij •
"' ->,• ■**
ik’’ ’••■
'A ;?
• 1
’ • . 'L , •	\ ' ‘ • " "
*» N
. (. ,
•; • -.LV- '■• . , ♦'*• .
- ( *1- . • • •
. I .
irt
i^Ast
• 4
« V *
'i T
: '. Li. .'■L\ \ ■ ■~y >> «■
O.'-' ^ . - • ■'•■'
■■ ■ r>

	
	
	■■' .V-fC
#•3®	■«hhAv.>h
- ' y r- • r ■■■■
f t • .• W
.V
V*»• t
/
. >
•■.•■	'v'-.■>,

r-."	, .i*-y i AA* -'A
V *	.>►,..•
h .^N.:
f*
ffriA.
»' • /i*'. •'	! ''	■■'''
Kr -.,• : ■	/ r-
t •
. ..VR
‘' V' A+.'	.
/
■ . j

A..
^. • • 1 »*: •-t • *
r. .
jt-;

'• •-• . > • ■•'
• z	• \	•

V.
THE
H
TOR
O F

V. / ../
Mifs PITTBOROUGH.
In a SERIES of LETTERS.
By ^ LADY.
t'
IN TWO VO L;U M E S.
VOL. I.
LONDON:
* /
Prir.ted for A. Millar, and T. Cadell, in ' the Strand; and J. Johnson and Co. in Pater-nofter Row. v
MDCCLXVII.


y
A..
* ?
#
A
/ •
' j
>

. * r
«t
r. c-
K %.
h ^

* f
/
y
y
P .( . /*
U. of Pa. Library
Ln a
0Q;j:
r..


^ ^ ^
*^w	^
I	•-	••*••	•
• ■• •••••••«••••••
>3t^
^v ^v ov
THE
HISTORY
O F
Miss PITTBOROUGH.
^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^
LETTER I.
/
Mifs PiTTBOROUGH tO Mifs NaNCY
PiTTBOROUGH.
f
«j-''
,p
a
fv
h>

S-

H Y, my Nancy,- do you'
^	^ alone delay your congratu-
^ larions on my entrance into
a new untried world ; efpe-ciallv as it is Such a world, my dear, if we may truft re'port, as is moft aptly cal^lated to give your friend the higheft delight. I eonfefs, 'indeed.
VoL. I.
B
I am-
<
it’i
£>
<£
CT
n
a S4 40
2
The History of
I am at prefent a ftranger to all thofe gay flattering Scenes my foolifli heart has So long panted after. But is not the hour of my introdudHon at hand ? I have pre-determined to remit you vrhole volumes in their praife, provided they anfwer my high-raifed expectations.
I will acknowledge to you, that the town in itfelf is far from making the mofl: agreeable appearance, unlefs one was capable of admiring things for being merely prepofterous : the height of the houfes, the dirtofthe ftreetSjand extent of the buildings. Severally coming under that denomination.
But, giddy creature that I am, why do I thus Suffer my vivacity to tranSport me beyond mySelf? and negleCt telling you in its due, consequently the firfl: place, what unSpeakable regret I feel at being Separated at So unmerciful a diftance from my beloved Sifter and mofl: engaging companion : yet why may not Sober truths be
ex-
Miss PITTBOROUGfl.
exprefled in lively language ? •— gravity is by no means a proof of lincerity; for wd are taught by every day’s experience, that hypocrify bears no peculiar charadleriftici
Never did honeft dame Nature produce greater contrails than you and I : light and (hade, earth and air, are but weak emblems: — we have our oppofite views, our oppofite arts of pleafing, our oppofite difpofitioned admirers. Yet notwithftand-ing all thefe oppofite articles, including at the fame time our taftes and inclinatioxiSi we are moft indiflblubly attached to each other by alFedlion’s tye, infinitely ftrongcr
than that twig confanguinity.
By the way, it appears to me, from the little observation I have hitherto been capable of making with refpeft to the conduit and converfation of our numerous
' '
vifitants, that the nearelt and deareft rela-tionlhips are confidered as a mere farce in this polite part of the globe.
B 2	You
4	The History of
You may hear one woman traduce an*-other, with all the virulence, to ufe a mafculine phrafe, of her fex. — A man (with fuch rancour as no expreflions can give you an idea of) fhall profefledly pro-
fecute and perfecute his congenial mortal;
«
yet Ihould you enquire into the merits of either the male or female caufe, or the parties connexions, twenty to one but you found the provocation a trifle, and the traduced and profecuted wretch, the father, brother, .After, or mother of the traducer and profecutor : who, upon fuch an occaSion (a ftranger in particular), could forbear crying out, oh ! oh ! theSe are perfons among whom I muft be greatly upon my guard ; for if they are capable of treating their own flefh and blood fo mercilefsly, what have not I to apprehend ?	'
. But, prefumptuous prating girl, how dare you prefume to cenfure and lafh mankind ? you who are, at this iundlure.
as
Miss PITTBOROUGH.
5
as it were, merely dropped from the clouds, unknowing as unknown, talk of degeneracy: — look to yourfelf; your paf-fions are ftrong, your reafon as yet in its cradle; how do you expedl to Hem the great torrent with Security ? — blinded by felf-love, mifled by felf-wifdom (and naturally fond .of every Species of gaiety)
i
— take care we may not add — undone by Self-confidence: pertnefs, vanity, and youth, are dangerous companions, not to mention — Nay, Nancy, none of your Severity; Surely in the Second perSon one might have Said a civil thing : — but vour over-Squeamilhnefs has thrown me out of my train I
f
I am, moft certainly, at preSent Surrounded with bewitching Snares; a Splendid habitation, numerous retinue, with
t
every other elegance the ambitious Sigh for, are provided for my accommodation :
my neat rural habiliments are to be ex-
B 3
changed
6
The History of
changed for all the luxury of fafliion. and expenlive adornments.
Methinks It is pity though to renounce the little prim air I was wont to affume.— Six thoufand pounds would, indeed, have enabled as well as authorized me to flutter before this late period, had not our prudent mother (perceiving the wild bent, I prefume, of her younger daughter’s inclir nation) intended our quaker-like appearance for a curb-bridle ; — but here am 1 a living proof how little internals are ed by externals. Had flie been continued to us, I fliould not even now have been permitted to launch at large j and yet you cannot deny but I have the experience of
4
full eighteen winters to boaft of. — How unaccountable her averlion to public life : how happily correfpondent her fpoufe’s inclination : — by mutual confent the good fouls buried themfelves in gloom and foli-tude, from the Second year of their union,
when
Miss PITTBOROUGH.
7
when life was in its gayeft prime, except, indeed, a grand annual excurfion to our neighbouring city ; from whence, as I have been informed, they conftantly returned rather difgufted than amufed. — Is it poflible, Nancy, that I derived my origin from fuch a pair ?
My t'rades-people have juft brought home my gay trappings, and moft en-chantingly elegant they are.—How impatiently fhall I wait the arrival of that ftated period for being drawn forth. — Great bodies, my demure fifter, you will pleafe to obferve, moft invariably move by rule i little ones, perhaps, by reafon.
You remember De la Fontaine’s Ihep-herd.—I fhall only reverfe the fcene. He, upon receiving difguft at court, moft pathetically welcomes his ruftic garb, that had been exchanged by his prince for a pompous robe : but it is my intention to
B 4	caft
8
The History of
caft ofF the Simple country lafs with fuit^ ^ble feelings.
Adieu (my eyes languifliing in unifon with my expreffions) ye humble long-ac-cuftomed garments! my round-eared caps,
&c, &c. oh 1 adieu 1-r-Adieu the pleafures
» '
I was wont to tafte unruffled as unruffiing! — Adieu much valued Spot of my nativity and childiBi Sports !— Adieu that Soft, that rullic-hke repoSe, derived from Sober hours ! — But above all, adieu, a thoufand times adieu, my dear, dear Nancy ! I am compelled to y'dd myfelf a captive to unweildy affluence, and difgufting cere-rpony ?
What will, alas! become of my poor head, or poorer heart, in this wildernefs of folly, I am unable to conjedure — except with regard to the article of afSedion for you ; where, and where only, it will ever remain immutable.
LET-
Miss PITTBOROUGH.
9
^	ft	A	A	A	A	A	*
LETTER II.
From the fame, to the fame.
I
HAT would I not give that you
could now behold me. I am
%
fruzeed and furbelowed up to my very ears. My neck, I bluflr to acknowledge it, is difplayed with the fame unconcern with which you would fhew your naked/ face : — I don’t above half like it j but you know the fafhion-mongers, not I, am to
blamCj
And where do you think I am going, butterfly-like, to unfold my gaudy wings — but to the play. ^—The old houfe is firft complimented with my appearance — in compliment you muft underfland though,
to
10
The History of
to my own .judgment; for where elfe could I find a Garrick ?
My expectations are at their laft gafp— I die with impatience : the party is fuch — but I cannot defcribe them until my return. — I am now Summoned, adieu ! adieu !
Eleven o’clock.
O Nancy 1 you muft allow me, from my prefent exaltation, to look contempt on little folks below; — my Spirits are all delightful hurry and 'pleafing perturbation. — What were Csefar’s conquefts to
- the handfomeft, fineft, bravefl: -Could I but have been certain my tears Searched his heart, and he really appeared difturbed, I would have exhauft-ed them all; provided they could have contributed to fix, not wafti away, my remembrance.
Well,
mine; >
fellow ?
Miss PITTBOROUGH. ii
Well, but the particulars ? Poor foul, what odd notions do you entertain ! — To be Sure I can be as compofed and collect-ed as yourfelf, who love and hate, and ling, and chat, with the fame equal heavy feelings.	^
You was once, by accident, prefent at a review : what people make fo ftriking, fo pleafing an appearance as your officers; the colour of their deaths, the power of the fun upon their complexions, the big looking cockade, and proteding promife, their every feature communicates, is irre-fiftible.
We
cowardly; no wonder then that we are inftindively attached to an open countenanced commander.
Obferve the operations of nature in every other created fpecies : — the brutes confider caves as their aflylum, confe-
quently
12
The History of
quently repair to them upon every ruTpi-cjon of danger; the birds from confcious Security Sing fweeteft in the defarts; and the fifties warily quit the friendly fhelter-ing banks.
The merchant and mechanic we behold with approbation and gratitude, as they contribute to our eafe, convenience, and emolument.—The lawyer, with a mixture of apprehenfion and confidence, as he can both preferve and deprive us of our property. — The phyfician has our befeeching, yet impatient eye ; we have faith in his prescriptions, but would find their good ef-fedts inftantaneous. — The clergy (good ones I mean) infpire us with reverential awe, as we cannot but conSider them as a prelude to the laft great Scene of mortality.
But with the Soldier it is widely difFer-eni •, the loves and graces all wanton in
his train, health and vivacity Sparkle in his
eye.
Miss PITTBOROtTGH.
A
*3
«
eye, and the laurel wreath that binds his brow, at once befpeaks both pall and future protection.
- Well, but the play ? How could you
alk fo mat a propos a quellion ; — and 'mull then a real give place to a fictitious hero; ~be it fo. — But, oh ! you have feared from my imagination fome of the brighteft ideas that ever yet prefented themfelves. Now I am reduced to your level, pray ob-ferve the change — the play, why, ah ! it was a good one j for Shakefpear was the author.
Of all the bubbles mankind are expofed to, none can exceed that bubble, education. A blockhead, if he has the misfor-tune to be born a lord, for example; (fcandalum magnatum, out of the queftion ; for I believe no one will prove fo hardy as to deny but lords may be blockheads now and then), how unmercifully is he doomed to be 'flogged from one clafs to another, in
order
H
The Histort?* of
order to render him a member of the literati.—Alas ! how inefFe<3:ual.
A houfe-maid (it is a rude kind of fi-mile, but Some of Mr. Bayes’s will keep it in countenance), when (he lights her lire, if, with more frugality than prudence, Ihe has haftily extinguiflied the allifting' tallow taper, and perceives but here and there a feeble fpark ; puffs, puffs with a light cautious hand, confcious how fatal even one rough blaft would prove: but when Ihe finds the blaze has kindly communicated itfelf around, and that not only the leffer but greater combuftibles yield to its genial power; fhe lings, or William’s Ghoft, or Chevy-Chace; and blows it foon into a flame.
The foundation muft be, in nature — clay will not burn; and \vhat water could have quenched our ShakeSpeare’s fire ? —It is ours to cultivate with judgment ; but that Being that Spoke us what
we
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 15
We are, alone can plant: — but I am terrified at my own wifdora ; thefe Sentiments flow with So ill a grace from my pen, that I cannot bear to behold them: yet, ere I refume my proper Self, I muft give you one piece of information, that I am convinced will appear no lefs aftonilhing in your fight than it did in mine. —It is too true, my dear filler, tender fenfibility is utterly exploded amongft per-fons of fafhion. Plebeians alone are allowed to feel ; and I could perceive that my breeding was held in the higheft contempt by the polite circle I was caft in, merely for my betraying Some Symptoms of humanity at the ftrong painted Scenes of horror that were introduced to my view. Nay, So powerful vsras the genuine dictates of my uncorre£ied nature, that I was frequently loft to my companions, mySelf, and all the world, until I had the mortification of being awakened from the pleafing delufion by burfts of laughter, frivolous chat, or undue admiration of the quick
darting

16
The History of
darting eye, or agreeable voice of the performer : — and not as I had flattered my-felf by ufeful observations, or judicious refle£lions upon the juftice he was doing the author’s meaning, or the operations of a no lefs well-regulated than well-diflen>-bled paflion.
It was v:ell Tor me that my heart was not equally expofed to view with my too refra<!iIory eyes ;—I had been undone for a fine lady, maugre all my efforts :	for I
know not why it was; but a pleafing kind of melancholy prevailed over even vanity itfelf, and involuntarily led me to draw a parallel between human tranfadlions, and the fi£lion that then engaged my attention. — O life ! what art thou (whifpered a mental Something I was till that time utterly unacquainted with) but one continued fucceflion of falSe representations;— we Sweat, and fret, and labour, to Support Some charadler that ftrikes our fancy, or with or contrary to our natural bent —no
matter
Miss PITTBOROtJGH.	ij
matter which, provided we can hobble on without the public ear being too palpably grated by our nqify prompter. — But enough of fuch Sentiments. —• It is your conversationj and papa’s inftrudlive lectures, that thus disqualify me for the life I love, I will immediately' unlearn all that you and that good gentleman have taught; and, with an airy head and callous heart, take the lead at each belle af-feinbly. — But it is a vain attempt.—I have wrote myfelf into the horrors. Spleen, &c. &c. and cannot fliake them off. — I will therefore wifli you a Soft repofe, and no lefs pleafant dreams than I hope to expe-
rience.
That ever a red-coat Ihould be capable
%
of making fuch havock and devaftation in' a woman’s heart!
VoL. I.
C
L ET
i8
The History of
m	w	V	w	«ip
•	V	•	%	•
i	8	«	•	•
^ • *'8 * 8>« * «
t»* •r»e«fe^^i*te5«»H»^^i»#»ee6efl»^ffHf*
m	m

0tu» IT

St''
LETTER III.
Colonel Dingley. to Mr. Brooksbank
Have news for you, Ned, that will greatly Surprize you; and procure you a laugh, though at your friend’s expence. I acknowledge the juftice of your mirth; I anticipate your raillery; and, notwith-ftanding the aukward figure I am fenfible a man makes when he betrays his owa infirmities, I will for once be beforehand with a bufy tattling world, and inform you — of what it would be impoffible to conceal.
I hope you will, however, believe that it was no common means that could Subdue my boafted indifference.—No, I have a thoufand times convinced you that I was
proof
Miss PltTBOROUGR 19
proof againft the blaze of beauty, the glare
V
of wit, and the moft ftriking graces of per-fonal accomplilhments.—^It was, indeed, a charm Superior to all thefe that infenfibly fpread its influence over my heart j nor had
t
I the leaft intimation of the bulinefs, until it was perfe^ly accompliftied.
Oh ! Why will that lovely fex labour to render themfdves unamiable .? — Why the ftudied ftep, the artful fmile, the fu-perfluity of ornaments ? when they only undo the moft finiftied work of nature, and fubftitute a blemifli for perfeflion.
Some hours leifure, and the appearance of Garrick in the character of Richard, induced me to engage a folitary place in the fide-box, that I might indulge myfelf, free from all that impertinent interruption a party is too liable to produce.
As my Servant had received due orders for his condu£tj I drank my coffee with
C 2
teat
20
The HistorV of
great deliberation, and only reached the houfe a few minutes before the performance began.
On entering the box, I was a little diP concerted to find that my indolence had occasioned my Servant’s mixing with an elegant Set of compan)', whofe conversation would have been highly grateful to me; amongft the number of which was Mrs. Hutchens, and a young lady, whofe face I was well convinced had never before made a public appearance.
A
From a piece of good breediing,' that did violence to my inclination, I would have declined taking the place my Servant had provided j it was in the front row; — and there were Several ladies to demand their preference: —• but by a then pleafing ob-ftinacy, the dear creatures are too apt tot afieft on many unpleafing occafions, I found myfelf compelled to accept it; and in the fame inftant was fenfible of the
hap-
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 21
happineSs it procured me, by placing me next the lovely ftranger.
k
Never did I behold fo intelligent a
countenance j her eyes, her mouth, her every feature, conveyed — but I will not attempt to defcribe the 4nnocence, the -benevolence, that evidently appeared in her whole composition. —You mull fee her, and judge for yourfelf. — Howevpr, as there is danger in the encounter, I will jnot baftily expofe you to it.
I was no lefs aHonifiied at the polite .eafe with which my fair companion received my firft compliment, than .ftruck by her perfon, and as we foon entered into general chat, I had an opportunity of remarking, that her obfervations had -the beauty of propriety and originality ; her queftions the force of judgment, and her language the utmoft refinement.
C 3
s •
22
The History of
■What
when a remote village (for fuch was the place of this lady’s nativity and education) can afford fo compleat a chara6ler.
My acquaintance with the aunt was undoubtedly a pas pour tout with the
s
blooming niece, whofe amiable unreferve, artkfs vivacity, and modeft confidence, charmed and entertained me beyond what I am able to exprefs.
With what delight did I obferve the genuine operation of that variety of paf-fions the performance naturally excited in her breaft, unwarped by prejudice, and uncontaminated by affe(5lation.
Now her lovely bofom was agitated with horror ; and now her tendernefs was evinced by a falling tear —now difguft was alone predominant — and now aftonifh-ment, for a moment, held even feeling in
fufpence:
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 23
fufpence: — the villainies, the artifices of Richard, occafioned many beautiful changes in her afpe<St. — Lady Anne’s
weaknefs and credulity had her higheft
/ '
disapprobation. —She even condemned the author for drawing fo unnatural a character ; and humoroufly infilled upon it, “ that no age could have furnilhed him “ v:ith an original!”—But when that pathetic Scene was exhibited, where the wretched queen is torn from her helplefs, her beloved children ; the Soft Sorrow of her heart became irreftrainable: in Short, — fhe in that inftant compleated her con-queft j and your friend yielded himfelf a willing captive.
You will, perhaps, conclude that I mean to improve my acquaintance with this paragon : — you are a fly fellow, and Seldom miftaken in your conjedlures. — Yes, I acknowledge I am all impatience to recommend myfelf to her favour; for Such lovelinefs will bebefet, wherefoever it
C 4
appears j
2.4
The History of
appears ■, and too probably, Ned, the leaft delay might throw me for ever at a distance, whilft Some happier confident being bore away the prize.
It is a queer fort of an affair though — to have one’s head and heart thus turned topfy turvy.—I that was wont with Bene-di6I to behold one lady fair-ryet find my-felf well, See. &c. —that could find charms in retirement and felf-contemplation — to be fo miferably reduced to the whiners’ clafs, as not to be capable of one idea, ab-ftradled from the beloved objedl that has fo lately poffelTed my tendereft Sentiments.
-Farewell, honeftNed ! I unbefpeak not your gay condolance ; be what you pleafe, fay what you pleafe; our long accuftomed friendfhip is your fandlion; and my unabated efteem, a never-failing fecurity a-gainfi: every fpecies of difpleafure.

LET-
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 25
V/Vi’V/’W* Vi*Vi Vi* (f<K*Vi***i*i***i!»i Vi’Vi

LETTER IV.
• »
Mifs Nancy Pittborough to MiSs
PiTTBOROUGH.
Wlfh, my dear Sifter, that like the travelled pidgeon, you may not Soon repent quitting your peaceful happy home: dangers, difafters, innumerable await you ; and many School-boys, perhaps, already Suspend a fatal fling to wound, at leaft^ your repofe.
With what unfpeakable rapture fliall I receive you once more into our innocent retreat, if you fliould be fo fortunate as to efcape the evils that threaten you.
That ever vivacity Ihould render any one unamiable: —but yours, like the beauty of a rofe, is not without the hidden thorn.
Your
26 The History of
I
Your firft letter is a too juft emblem of your heart, warm, inconftant, vain. — How do you neglect the purpofe of your being, and abufe one of the beft of underftand-ings ! and v/ith endowments that would enable you to Ihine, on every benevolent, every rational occaSion, aim at no higher excellence, than the taudry trim that fafliion can beftow.
You, my dear, are an inconteftible in-
«
ftance that vanity is far from being the produdb of any particular foil: had you been bred in the gay metropolis from your earlieft infancy, you could not have been a more finilhed coquet; nor would your Simple misjudging heart have felt a ftrong-er flutter at a beau.
And ftiall it be faid that my Sifter, whofe education has been moft unexcep-tionably delicate and prudent —who has not only received the cleareft definition of propriety and decorum, but has been carefully
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 27
fully inftru^Ied in every religious duty Ihall it be faid, that flie, taken by the eye and the ear, fancy, idle degenerate fancy, her fupreme judge and monitor — Suffered her inclinations to be enflaved by the empty charms of the martial ftrut, and martial habiliments!
I fhall never forgive myfelf for promoting this journey, if an improper connexion fliould be the confequence: but it has ever been my weaknefs to give you, at all times, and upon all occafions, the preference. I, in many degrees your Superior, in the article of gravity at leaft, fliould have been in no danger from Such an excurfion; as I Ihould have played a timorous, cautious, and confeqilently Sure card : for . I am convinced there are more young women undone by Self-confidence and credulity, tfian by any real propenfity to error.
Excufe
\
2
8
The History of
Excufe -me, but this is not the only circumftance I lament: — and can you, v.?ho have ever piqued yourfelf upon your Spirit and refolution, tamely Submit to be fafliion-led : even beyond what is con-fillent either with decency, or your own private tafte ? Is it not a Severe reflection upon your boafled firmnefs, to want courage to go hand in hand with propriety ? at the Same time that your attempt to exculpate yourfelf, by charging tiie whole blame upon the fafliion-mongers (as you gayly ftile the original inventors), juftly expofes you to the imputation of mean-nefs. I'hey indeed Spread the Snare; but they cannot force or Surprife you into it ; , as they have no power over your judgement, or inclination. 7'hey cannot render folly other than Solly; and though the general practice may familiarize it, in Some degree, and leflen what is prepofteious, its' unfuitablenefs and pernicious tendency will ever remain.
Your
Miss PITTBOJIOUGH.
29
Your perfon, whatever eftimation you may Set upon it, will, I fear, prove your greateft misfortune : — it is impoflxble to
behold it with indifference :
the bloom
of health and peace that glows upon your cheek —the agreeable vivacity that Sparkles in your eye — with the arch fmile,‘occa-lioned by a rather becoming dimple, that plays about your not ill-fhaped mouth, muft procure your vanity a perpetual feaft. But, my dear filler, fit loofe I befeech you to every flattering insinuation. —It is innocence and good humour that enlightens your countenance ; deprive yourfelf of them, and even your plain-faced fifter may pretend to vie with you. However weak the confeflion, I myfelf have frequently been delighted to trace the gaiety of your heart in every Speaking feature j and when
I thought it my duty to chide you for
* ^
Some little impropriety in your Sentiments, or expreflions, thofe lines of Mr. Pope have officioufly fuggefled themfelves;
If,
30
The History of
, If to her Ihare fbme female errors fall. Look on her face, and you’ll forget them all.
notwithftanding they have been fo vilely proftituted, at a vicious fiirine. But, my dear, though, in the over-flowings of my affeiSlion, I could thus excufe follies that I confldered as having no other Source than youth, and a chearful unreftrained imagination, I Should not have the leafl: charity for pradlical error; — but 1 have hope that, like the coward, your big words proceeded merely from confcious Security.
f
Under the paternal roof, and at a happy diftance from the men, how have you bluftered:—you was for leading all in chains; and, like Congreve’s Melamont,-making lovers when you pleafed, letting them live as long as you pleafed j and when you was fo weary of them as to fuffer them to die, in order to pleafe your-felf, making more. But remember, man is not a creature to be played with, meek
and
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 31
and harmlefs though he may appear : can the Iamb efcape the lion’s paw unhurt ? — their natures are callous, impatient of eontroul, enterprifing, revengeful: — they have defign in every aflion, their expreS-fions are the refult of premeditation; and all connexion with them is as dangerous as the eye of the bafililk.
Admiration is a tribute we involuntarily pay to beauty: — gratitude is a noble Sentiment ; but as it is ever attended with a fenfe of obligation, is Sometimes painful : —
but efteem is a lively, yet deliberate, ap-
/
probation j has its foundation in good opinion, is increafed by observation, and confirmed by every newly discovered per-fedlion; it is the only Senfation we mortals are capable of feeling juftly, as it is free from all the prejudice and violence of pafiion, the heat of ambition, the narrow hopes and fears of Self-love, and the fordid anxiety of felf-intereft. Be it your bufinefs, your glory, to cultivate
friend-
3^
The History of
I
friendfhip upon this balls only, as it is
i
the only one that can promife permanence ; for the attachment of a day, give it what name you pleafe, is neither more nor lefs than idle caprice.
You are now juft entering into lifej and have it as yet in your power to efta-
blifii that kind of reputation that appears
«
moft eligible in your fight; but it is a work that muft be ever effedling, from the impoffibility of its ever being wholly ac-complilhed; one neglect, one drowfy interval, may unravel the labour of years j and though, like Syfiphus, you may by indefatigable induftry get the ftone once to the top, yet will it roll back with the ut-moft impetuofity, unlefs you are perpetually upon your guard.
I tremble for your future fate; yblir open, unreferved, volatile difpofition, will expofe you to a thoufand inconveniences from both fexes i thofe who are pradlifed
in
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 33
in deceit, will be apt to confider even the
I
amiable didlates of your heart as proceeding from the fame unworthy Sourcej and the quicknefs of your fenfibility by exciting warm attachments and warm re-fentments, will be ever producing you unavailing repentance and mortification.
Can you, for the fake of our paft friendihip, have patience to read this Idhg lecture, that has no other end in view than your happinefs and advantage ? And, with all humility, would caution you at this critical juni^ure (as your gOod genius) to beware.

VoL, I.
D
LIT-
34
The History of

iTnl •	Cni #t% cv% •a*	#Wi • wrm	#!•	wru #rn	■»«	wr% vn
«	m	m	m	•	il	*	*'•	«	«	*	#-*-9	<	•	•	•
»••&••••• ••• •»%
LETTER V.
Mifs PlTTBORQUGH to Mifs NaNCY
PlTTBOROUGH.
LESS me! what a frightful pi<3;ure have you drawn of the dear world, and dearer worldlings. How prettily we can prattle about we know not what, mere bugbears of the imagination: that envy, hatred, and malice, thofe charac-teriftics of ancient virginity, Ihould ever find a place in your heart. “ The men callous, impatient, enterprizing, revengeful — I muft laugh in your honeft face. Why, I tell you, they are the fofteft, fimpering, frilking dears, that ever nature produced : fo tame, that you meet them carried about in their leathern conveni-
I
ences, with powdered heads, folitaired
bofoms.
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 35
¥
bofoms, and hands of a fimilar complexion with the driven fnow, gently crofled. Supporting their hats, in the moft dove-like polition. What a fweet efFeminate fitua-tion, cooped up according to their old grandmother’s maxims for longevity to preferve their heads and feet from the inclemency of the weather.
The colonel calls it ridiculous, a dif-grace to the mafculine charadler; — but I fay no: it is for tKe emolument of the women, as it prevents all that terror and apprehenfion we country girls efpecially, were wont to feel at the fight of a male mortal: but Surely, I add upon thefe oc-cafions, times muft be greatly changed, or my mama would never have cautioned me to be fo much upon my guard, with re-fpe£l to fuch a Species.
The colonel lives with us, I think; appears perfedlly at my devotion; and, Ihall I confefs it, in fpite of all your wife, Sober
D 2
ad-
36
'She History of
admonitions, I am half tempted fo cut a flourilh or too, only to put his profeilionS to the teft.
Do not look fo grave upon the occa-fion; I will neither play the fool, nor the mad-woman :—but who can refift the natural curiofity of finding Out a man’s heart ? in conimon cafes, I grant you, impoffibi-lities are no eligible attempt; but here
you muft excufe me, indeed you muft.—
%
But how can you ? Why thfere again. How often muft I repeat, that it is not in the nature of things to be able to judge of inclinations we have never felt:—fo no more of that, my good fage After.
The colonel is the youngeft of general Dingley’s fons; he is poflefled of a fine fortune beftowed upon him when a boy, by a diftant relation, whofe namefake he happened to be. — His age is a very pretty fuit-able age for a damfelof eighteen, as I apprehend
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 37
hend him to be upon the verge of five or fix and twenty. Shall I give you his picture, without the lead extenuation, o,r fetting down ought in malice. — I have not considered him Sufficiently; but take him piece-meal, and judge for yourSelf.
4
4
He is a good fize, neither too tall, too Ihort, too fat, or too lean; — his complexion florid —his eyes penetrating—his mouth pleafing, and his teeth but one degree inferior to your own : add to which, an infinuating manner, a manly addrefs, a well cadenced voice, and a happy flow of expreffion; and you haye the whole mortal at once compleat.
You will, perhaps, conclude from the particulars Ihave now prefented you with, that I have not been over-fparing in my observations : — but take my advice, Nancy, never give your opinion of effects without being acquainted with the caufe.
D 3
Be
38	The History of
%
Be it known to you then, that as he is exadlly one of your beauties, neither a Drawcanfir, nor a petite maitre, from a Sympathy of Sentiment (though not very common with us, as you in general poffefs the queereft fet of thoughts imaginable) I have been induced to bellow no inconSi-derable fliare of attention upon this gentleman 5 — that is, I have regarded hirn as an objedt perfe(SUy calculated to pleafe the tafte of one I have the higheft aiffec-tion for ; and in fliort — but, perhaps, I am not quite fo clear upon the fubjedi as
t
you could wilh; and rather puzzle than explain my meaning ; we will, therefore, take the man up where we fet him down. ,
You by this time conceive yourfelf to be a pretty good judge of his compofition:
r
again
ead the paragraph relative to him once you have—^'and find no defeats, no exceptions. —Why, child ! I have not yet mentioned his mind 3 and there, and there
i .	.
only,
Miss PITTBOROUGH.
39
only, I will require you to allow him de-fedlive.
A
But his faults are of fuch a nature, that I know riot how to communicate them.— He h as, he has, upon my honour it is So Simple, that if I was not apprehenfive of
P
deceiving you into too good an opinion of him, I would never mention it: — but he has fuch far-fetched notions of delicacy, decorum, and fuch-like.ftulf, that, accord-ing to his account of it, a Sifter or wife of his would have but an ill time of it, if in all their words and adions they were not as arrant prudes as a Certain relation of mine down in Gloucefterfhire. ‘
I have heard him fay, in mixed companies, afluming at the fame time a moft consequential air, that a woman ought not to be Surprized, if Ihe Suffers her conduct to be light, at being held in light eftimation; we can only judge from appearances ; and when indifcretion and le-
D 4	vity
40
The History of
yity glare in the conducSI, it is uncommonly charitable to conclude, that the heart has no fliare in them: — that no-thing fixes or deftroys the reputatioii of our fex So much as a judicious, or injudicious choice of our companions ; what is a voluntary adf, befpealcs our natural Sentiments : and if we can Suffer ourfelves to be amufed with idle, giddy, and to© frequently licentious chat, we fhall find it difficult to perfuade pur graver friends, that our tallies and judgments are in reality much more refined ; but that we cannot help playing the fool now and then.
\
He further fays (I almoft hate the formal odd creature) that women ought to be perpetually upon their guard, not only with refpedl: to their condudf, but their very looks ; we are often rnoft obferved when we are leaf!: fenfible of it; he has known ladies fink into contempt with their greateft admirers, by only an approving fparkle of the eye, at either an improper
Songs
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 41
%	j-
fong, a well drawn, though unworthy,
f
character in a play, or the accidental approach of a notorious, though handfome,
%
rake ; — there is no reconciling contra-
t
dictions; — it is dangerous to refine too
much : — and if we cannot find au^ht to
%
approve, we have nothing for it, but absolutely to di'approve ; we lofe ourfelves , when we Suffer real vood, and what ap-pears barely fufpicious, to balance one moment: — but I am fick of fuch odious antiquated notions. —r How came ,I to have the patience to give you fuch a cata-logue ?
I do fupppfe all thefe wife Sentiments are dropped for my benefit, in order to decoy me into a little nafty, narrow track, called prudence, where are innumerable brambles and thiflles from its being So generally unfrequented, — No, if 1 live I will trip another way ; and if he bears me all that good-will I have reafon to fufpeifl’, ^is wifdom Ihall hobble, amble, or
make
42
The H I STORY of
make a trip of it, if he is able j but pofi-tively he fliall come after me. — I would beckon — he would run ; and fo, my dear, it would be ten to one, but if, as your experienced ones fay, there is a precipice at the extremity of this flowery path, but his honour might tip over in catching at your friend — whilft Ihe, by an agile and unexpected turn, avoided both him and the declivity.
And would you be fo ungenerous as to let him dafli himfelf to pieces ? — How could I help it, you know — if he was fo weak as to fufSer love to put out the eyes of circumfpeCtion, what fliould I have to anfwer for ? — If I lead, is it of neceflity he fliould follow ? There is a proverb, indeed, for thofe who are driven ; but nothing upon earth can excufe a voluntary purfuit.
But charity', humanity — ftupid ! Who
knows any thing of them in this polite
?
age:
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 43
9ge ? — His perfon, indeed, might excite one’s companion, becaufe it happens to be a very decent hero-like perfon; — and one might be unwilling to lofe it, for fear one fhould not be able to meet with fuch another: — thus you fee felf-Iove is a moft excellent principle: — and I think, upon reflefUon, inftead of the method I pro-pofed, I will have a cord to draw him on occasionally ; fhould he make the leaft re-fiftance, it is but throwing it from one; but otherwise, if he capered on like the fore-horfe of a team, tofling his head, and disregarding his fleps, it would be kind to convince him of his folly, by letting him down fome little way, at lead, and then Saluting with — I hope, fir, you will find this a ufcful lefTon.

But I am certainly infatuated to be thus furnifhing an enemy with weapons againfl my Self; I will, th erefore, intreat you to believe, that even the giddieft heart is capable of one fteady Sentiment or that
I
*
mine


44
The History of
mine is an exception to the general rule j for fincerdy I love you with undiminifhed afteCtion, notwithftanding all my flights and fancies.
«	••r«	<	•	m	9	m	•••	«	9	•	■	9	m
LETTER VI.
From the fame, to the fame.
H !' here we have him again : the colonel is at bn akfaft with us, my dear: — he eats but little; looks up, down, around, with an uncommon vacuity of afpect. — Hands me my tea — pfha, how the cup and faucer chatters ■! I fancy, not-withllanding all his pretenfions to fo-briety, he was laft night engaged in fome irregularity.
You’ll pardon me, fir, the poll! — How filly, how foft, how pleafing his countenance ! on my word I fufpedl he is hatchr
ing
Mis^ PITTBOROUGH. 45
ihg Some important matter—a love declaration perhaps—but I am prepared j —nor fliall he ever difcover my real Sentiments of him. Rack, torture, twill, turn, I Shall be proof againSl all his wiles : — for to give up one’s Sentiments, is to give up one’s power; and, as you quoted Mrs.Melamont upon me on a former occalion, I will tell you that I think, in her words, that when one has parted with one’s power—one in-ftantly becomes old and ugly.
But after all, my dear,, is not' hope arid fear, judicioufly varied, the richeft food for a lover ? a little cold water now and then to dilute the one — the cordial of a
few kind words to mitigate the other,
/
would have both a happy and ufeful ef-fedl.
What an agreeable employment — to Suit the fubfiftence to the appetite — to ob-ferve the beginnings, unfoldings, and maturings of each Separate paffion — to fee
them
/
46
The History of
them now expand, and now recoil, accord* ing to the encouragement they received.
But how is this ? — I am alone with this formidable, this bewitching looking fellow ;■ and he does So intreat and intreat me to liften to a few Soft things —that for his fake, for curiofity’s fake, for vanity’s fake, and, if I was weak enough to add, for love’s fake, I fear I fliould not do my-felf injuftice j I am above half inclined to obli ge him.
O
Eleven o’clock p. m.
Well, all is over ; and we are the loves and the doves, and all that; — what, he knelt, he fwore, he adored ! upon my honour you are miftaken. .
m
He only told you, in plain terras, he
Well
fmcerity.
Really,
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 47
Really, Nancy, you make one look very foolilh : — ■what then would the man be at ? I’ll tell you —he Said that of all the women he had ever met with, I was the moft agreeable to him*
So cold ! aye. So chilling cold:—that my perfon, fine though he acknowledged it, had but in a Small degree contributed to engage his attachment. Don’t you admire-his Sagacity in attaching himfelf to what he will never be able to comprehend or obtairi the leaft acquaintance with : but the beauty of all is, that this infide of mine, notwithftanding the charms he is-pleafed to impute to it, has its imperfections : — my vivacity (that is the rank weed that muft be eradicated) — what an amazing circumftance ! — both delights and torments him : pray obferve, it is a dangerous weapon in inexperienced hands.
I thank him for that; not quite, fo inexperienced as he may imagine j of
which
48

The History of
which I poflib’y hereafter may favour him with a proof.

That many would put a conftrudioh upon it (a weighty argument, indeed, and urged with judgment) that my innocence (the fugar-plumb) could have no conception of; and that if I would pardon him, (the wretch) he would prefume to tell me, it had already been more than once moft vilely mifconftrued.
Wicked irifinuation—malicious aiSUon ! was the daring monfter of his own hopeful Species, he Surely made him eat his
>
words j but I fhall forbear all enquiry, to’ avoid obligation.
That he feared he was paying but ill-court (a gleam of common fenfe) to a young lady’s heart, by Speaking bold truths (Sufficiently bold, Mr. Colonel, I muft confeSs) : but that his opinion of underftanding was Such (how irrefiftible)
that
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 49
,r
that he was convinced he had no difplea-fure to apprehend.
\
*
Artful intimation ! calculated to deprive one’s juft refentment of every graces
That it would be his pride, his higheft
r
fatisfadlion, to be permitted to have an intereft in my reputation (a ^pretty fool
4
indeed he would make of me); and to be indulged with communicating his experience in, life, with all due deference (another Sweetener) to my judgment, for my benefit (a prodigious gainer I fliould find myfelf without doubt) — that a falfei' ftep was much Sooner taken than retrieved (a Second Solomon) ; and that, in proportion as I excelled my Sex in perfedlions (absolute daub), I Ihould find the difficulty in obtaining their charitable confi-deration.
How I defpife both him and them for
their harrow mindednefs.
VoL, I.
E
That
"0
The History of
That his fortune and connexions my friends were no ftrangers to.
A happy,circumftance truly! though,
by the way, I muft acknowledge a coach-
1
and-fix is no contemptible acquifition.
And that, if I would condefcend to approve the latter, the former fliould be left entirely to their difpolltion.
A compliment, to the wifdom of fome folks, goes a great way: — but mercy on us, how I was terrified at even this diftant attempt to enfnare my liberty ! and I feemed tumbling into the tremendous ftatc of matrimony all at once.
That my friendlbip (good lack!) was all he at prefent meant to folicit (admirable humility!) except (the rogue to pop in his faving claufe fo unexpe6Iedly upon one) I would vouchfafe to honour him with the fplendid diftindlion in
public,
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 51
public, of being my moft favoured attendant. Alias, a fpy upon my every action.
That I fliould never find him prefuming upon indulgence (oh, the fyCophaiit!)—he did not want to fallen himfelf upon me, but to follow me like my fliadow. A moll handfome refle£lion of a fine lady: ■— and fo, I think, ended this mufty declaration — perhaps I may not have given it exadtiy in his own words—Some little variation or fo, as a foil for my comments j but, upon the whole, it is a ftrong likenefs.
Are not you Surfeited to death ? -i- well then might I: — I had nothing for it, but to yawn at proper intervals —to lift up my eyes in profound admiration — to pout — but here and there a not ill-Iounding ex-preffion ; and the profpecl of the coach-and-fix, already mentioned, infenfibly difpelled all difpleafure from my brow.— I, indeed, have fome reafon to fear I made
E 2
Dut
52
The History of
but a very aukward figure upon the occa-fion.
The miftaken colonel, looking upon my Silence, and filly confufion (according to the old hearty Englifh cuftom), as a mark of confent, had the temerity to Seize my hand, kilTed it with Suitable ardour, and talking himfelf perfe6tly out of breath, of joy, happinefs, tranSport: I began to think I had a fair opportunity of re-
t
venging myfelf for all I had fufSered ; — therefore, affedfing the utmoft anxiety and apprehenfion, —pray, fir, cried I, take care how you come down, they are really very ugly fteep fteps.
Madam! returned he, with the wildefi: Hare : — I was half frightened j but had Sufficient courage to reply, in the Same alTumed accent,—I mean, fir, that it was a very difficult defcent from the eminence to which but a few moments ago you was exalted j but I congratulate your efcape.
O na*
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 53
O nature ! .what neceflity for cafements in the heart, when our features^ are So ex-■preflive of its operations ?
Refentment! mortification! —itis well, madam, — you have made me very ridiculous.

Blefs me, fir, faid I, flaring in turn, what offence? — can you be fo ungrateful as to be difpleafed at my care for you ?
How the paflionate creature Swelled. — But recolledling that he was an extravagant favourite of my aunt’s, and her vi-fitor, I began to apprehend I had carried matters too far : — and, would you believe it, was fo humble as to Seek a reconciliation. — I hope, fir, you have fo much of the Chriftian difpofition, as to be capable of forgiving and forgetting on due Solicitation. — It was enough — my, extended hand did the bufinefs — which he half de-
E 3
vouring.
54	The History of
vouring, mumbled fomewhat I neither underftood, nor wiftied to underftand ; and immediately his whole features took the moft Smirking turn imaginable — when in pops the old lady — and the whole myf-tery was at once unravelled.
Should you have fufpedled that our aunt was a plotter ? No matter for your fuf-picions, I tell you file is an arrant one -r; it was all her Scheme — the preachment, probably, only a repetition of her very expreffions. — She certainly gave him his cue — as well as contrived the tete a tete, or my Swain, I am convinced, would have purSued a leSs antiquated plan,
Encouraged by the apparent good foot-r ing we were upon, file was for ofEciouIly beftovv^ing my hand in form, as an earneft at once of her approbation, and in order to hook me into a pofitive engagement.
She
Miss PITTB.DROUGH. 55
$
She advanced—the colonel looked confident— told no tales. — Don’t you tremble for your Sifter’s fate.
Oh, the Sacrifice! hide me, hide me, I am unequal to the fight. —You foolifh girl you, did you imagine 1 Should not prote<ft myfelf from fuch horrid violence ?
But how ? nay, if you are fo very impatient, you muft go uninformed j my pen can never keep pace with your rapid imagination.
You ftruggled, fainted, ran away;-—not one of the three I do aflure you. — I would have afliimed a ftern brow, but that would not have Suited the old lady; — a fmile, you know, would have been too encouraging for the gentleman : — fo, fteering fkilfully between Scyila and Charibdas — with “ Softly, Softly, my good madam, I “ hate repetitions—let me be given away “ but once, I befeech you. —I believe the
E 4
“ colonel
\
56
The History of
‘‘ colonel is too well-bred to play the “ encroacher, and too well Satisfied with “ the favourable acknowledgments 1 have “ already made, to complain.”—! came off with flying colours. •
Our aunt gave me an approving twinkle of her eye (for glance you could not call it) : my admirer, indeed, railed his with melancholy-deliberation — Sighed — as if he had Said —there is no remedy !—cruel and provoking though thou art — 1 muft ftill love on ; but as this half-rebellious behaviour was unperceived by the good lady — the affair ended with the utmoft appearance of general fatisfadlion.
But I muft obferve, that my aunt’s over-fight was rather owing to accident than any defedl in her penetration ; — for that vile coug-h fhe has for fo Iona
o	o
been fubjeil to, happened to Seize her at the very jundture I could have wifhed j — and continuing; until the colonel was iu
the
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 57
the utmofi: harmony of Spirits, from merely the filly incident of hitting his head againft mine, by his ofiicioufnefs in reaching the gaily-pot we are wont to have recourfe to upon fuch occaSions, it was impoffible (lie fhould fufpecl he had felt the fmalleft difcontent. Now I recolledl myfelf, on my word I believe he almoft kifSed me — head did I Say — how could I make fo egregious a miflake—it was his face that came bounce againft mine ; and an admirable hard one it is !
But not a Syllable of all this to papa:—. he is too conliderate, and too wife, even to deSire to See the nonfenSe that pafles between a couple of Silly girls: — that’s a good papa ; whilft you forbear to Seek, your dutiful daughter will never hide.
After all, is it not w^rong-judged in your elderly folks, to reduce their poor .children to ftratagem, in innocent cafes —
as
58
The History of
as it only teaches them tricks they would never otherwife have thought of; and early qualifies them for that very worft of employments — intrigue. — How in-excufeable fhould we be, were we capable of abuSing fuch indulgence as we experience.
e


•»
LET-
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 59
• »«»i
4 i :
ti'

	
• • •
•:.....
• _ *•
.....I......r«t»«
• •
• •N

LETTER VII.
Colonel Dingley to Mr. Brooksbank
Your friendly impatience to be informed of my fuccefs in my amour Ihall be gratified. O Ned ! I blufli to acknowledge it, but this feeming innocent, this child of nature, proves a very tartar.
I cannot give you an indea of the Scurvy
treatment I am obliged to Submit to —but
I mufl: make a virtue of necelfity j for I
find it would cofl: me dearer to reiinquilh
her, than to Suffer myfelf, loaded as i am
^ 0
with chains, to grace her triumph.
Wherefoever flie appears, fhe commands admiration; her perfon is irrefifti-
ble}
6o
The History of
ble; whilft modefty, candour, humanity, and fweetnefs, evidently Ihine forth in every adtion : but, confcious of her own power, and naturally inclined to play the giddy humourift, though flie communicates delight to every other pcrfon that addrelTes her, (lie cruelly contrives to torture me. We have now been acquainted a whole month, not a day of which (nor without unfpeakable reludlance an hour) but I have fpent part of it with her. In general conversation, none can excel her, but a ute a fete Shews her to the beft advantage.
How have I been charmed with the Sentiments that have flowed from her lips in her Serious refledling moments.
Once, in particular, flie was fo perfedly the woman I could wifh her, that I was drawn in to make a Ober, unornamented declaration of my tender attachment to her j and depending upon the goodnefs of
her
Miss PITTBOROUGH.
61
her underftanding ; and, as it proved, with
equal wifdom upon my own rhetoric, at-
\
tempted to convince her, that the indulgence of the only foible I can difcover in her whole compofition, would be pro-dudlive of very unpleafing confequences.
She feemed attentive — the flattery was .was too intoxicating for human nature to Support.—I prefumed to take her hand, preflfed it with a flmilar degree of rapture,tha£ glowed in my heart —and, I believe, was half frantic in my profeflions of love and gratitude—when Suddenly fhelet me down with fuch precipitation that I verily concluded I Ihould never have recovered my-felf. I would not again feel what I did upon that occaflon, from a confcioufnefs of the point of ridicule I mufi: appear in, and the disappointment of all my pleafing hopes, for a diadem.
I do fuppofe my vifible mortification and chagrin, gave no Small pleafure to her
vanity,.
62
The History of
vanity ; and whether her good-nature, of fly vivacity, was predominant, I will not take upon me to determine; but in the midfl: of a thouSand heroic refolutions of renouncing fuch vilebondage, never beholding her more, &c. &c. file moft invitingly extended that very hand I had So fondly doated on, and with an affectation of for-' row for having offended, that communicated the utmoft joy to my heart, begged me to forgive and forget the folly fhe had
practiced.
_ ^ _
What partj Ned, would you have aCted under fuch trying circumftances ? widely different to mine, I dare believe.--My very foul was harmonized —it was no time for difllmulation ; no time for difcre-tion : I threw myfelf, therefore, entirely, into her power, crying out, “ this is too, “ too great condefcenfion; I am over-paid “ for all the mortification you have given “ me;—but do not ufe me the worfe for “ finding me fo devoted to you, that I
(C
am
cc
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 63
am incapable of having any will but
“ yours.”
Good Mrs. Hutchens dropped in at this inftant; I had not only obtained her
0
permiflion to pay my addrelTes to her charming niece, but fhe was pleafed to honour me with her higheft approbation. She perceived the happinefs that warmed my heart, in my every feature; and imagining flie Ihould ferve us both, by forwarding our attachment, would have bellowed Mifs Pittborough upon me in form, with a view, as I apprehend, no lefs to demonftrate her good liking of your friend, than prevent that volatile lady from looking any farther for an admirer : but not-withftanding I flattered myfelf I had Some little reafon to expert fuch a mark of her efteem would not have been reluctantly granted, Ihe had the dexterity to evade the propofition, to her aunt’s entire Satis-
9
faction; and on my lifting up my eyes, by an involuntary impulfe of difcontent,
gave
64
TThe History of
gave me a look that immediately reduced me to order.	, .

i
Where, Ned, is our boafted Superiority ? — where our firmnefs ? when we caii Suffer ourfelves to be So wantonly played upon ; —are we only valiant, like the worft of cowards, where we are fenfible our power is defpotic ? — and Shall the woman, whofe confidence in our honour has induced to place her whole happinefs in our hands, alone experience the complicated ungenerous weight of our perverfe inclinations ? I am refclved not to a£l So unworthy a part —‘ my tendernefs, my com-
plaifance (if ever I do become a hufband)
/
Sliall remain in full vigour, in Spite of the matrimonial privilege, and whatever abatement my love might receive from time and long acquaintance — fhould add proportionable increafe to thofe other feelings-.
And Siipuld I even find myfelf deceived in the object of my choice, and that more
than
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 65
than half her perfe<SIions were the refult of that natural artifice, an endeavour to recommend herfelf to the heart of a man flie approved, or, as too frequently is the cafe, merely the creation of my heated brain, my complaifance fhould refirain me from betraying the ungrateful difcovery, my tendernefs caft the veil of friendly toleration over the common infirmities of
\
humanity; — thus converting the lover into the kind companion, and confiderate friend, had I not an illiberal or illiterate mind to deal with, I fhould reap fuch happy confequences from my condufl, as would leave neither of us reafon to repent our union.
But if heaven has referved fo great a bleffing for me as this lady’s hand, I fhall have no opportunity of convincing you of the Sincerity of my prudent refolves, as all our life would be a Scene of love.
VoL. I.
F
LET-
66
The History of
t«t»	•f#» n ■t»«	tM*
•	9	H
LETTER VIII.
From the fame, to the fame
R E S H caufe for uneafinefs from every quarter ! Mifs Kitty Hutchens is at length returned from her Hampfhire ex-curSion; and my miftrefs is again playing off her torturing fancies.
You know Mifs Hutchens was never a favourite with me ; her perfon, her mind, are equal impediments : and I now fear I Ihall have lefs reafon than ever to be fond of her company.
There cannot be greater contrails than thefe relations; the one is a coquet by nature, the other from playfulnefs and inno-
cent vivacity.
Kitty’s
\
Miss PITTEOROUGH. 67
Kitty’s foul is narrow, fufpicious, revengeful. — Mifs Pittborough’s open, unoffending, generous j fhe has no little palHons to gratify, from having no Superior : — the world and all its inhabitants contribute to promote her felicity ; therefore ill-nature or disappointment have never ftt upon a Single feature.
With refpe£l: to her 'own Sex, Ihe is compaffionate, benevolent, and Sincere: — is any one deformed in perfon, Ihe is Sure
of her favour and countenance
de-
jected in mind, or difeafed in body, her Sympathy is ever theirs; — is their character attacked, Ihe is their infallible advocate; — are they diftreffed in their circumftances, her purfe and heart is open for their relief: — yet, too giddy for reflection, fhe frequently incurs the cenfure of the malevolent; — too honeft for de-ceit, fhe becomes an eafy dupe to the deceiver; — and naturally fond of every fpe-cies of raillery, where the objeCt is jufli-
F 2	fiable,
68
The History of
liable, fhe gives continual ofFence to the vain and afSedled, who retain a malicious imprelEon of that feverity that has wounded without amending them, and has long Since been forgotten^ with the oecaSion, by the agreeable raillier.
I v/ill not difplay the oppolite inclinations of her unamiable coufin j flie is at prefent Sufficiently mortified to Secure her from my Satire; burfting with envy at that Superiority that her Self-approbation and vanity would, but cannot. Secure her from being fenSible of, ftie induftrioufly labours to improve every little giddy opportunity of condemning and ridiculing her lovely vifitant; but the attempt is So evidently incited by the worft of paffions, that it ever fails of fucceSs, and only increaSes her own difiatisfadlion and torture.
Tmufi: acknowledge that there is one part of MiSs Pittborough’s condudt tliat lies too open to MiSs Kitty’s ill-natured
attacks,
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 69
attacks, and occaGons me unfpeakable un-eafinefs. —f will not conceal it from you— one blemilli, amongft So many perfe6lions, ought not to be wondered at; notwith-ftanding it is of Such a nature as to call an appearance of impropriety upon aflions that are in themfelves both unexceptionable and innocent.
Lively to excefs, and perfedlly unde-iigning, fbe Suffers herfelf to be amufed with the conversation of Such beings, as from their infignificance, or felf-confe-quence, are highly contemptible; — a Superannuated beau, a military coxcomb, a fribble of whatever denomination, or a hard-mouthed ftudent, are Sure to obtain a diftindlion and attention with her; that, however flattering to them, is by no means a credit to her fine underftanding.
The gouty Sir Matthew Sanxfey is at prefent her reigning favourite ; — he ogles her, with indefatigable induftry, through
F 3	his
70
The History of
his frefti-wiped fpeflacles, gives her everj? advantage at cards, is eternally of her opinion; and, could he but throw afide his crutches, I dare believe would become my competitor for her hand at the enfuing rid otto.

She appears delighted with his parade and affiduity: — Smiles upon him with the utmoft complacence — fuIFers him to prefs her hand,, with antiquated gallantry,, each time he prefents her the cards; — and, in Ihort, it is but Seldom that I can obtain a fingle glance. I am not fo abfurd as to be diflatisfied with her behaviour from conceiving fhe has any meaning in it; but as it deprives me of the pleafure I was ac-cuftomed to enjoy, of entertaining her without the interruption of an impertinent, I own it Sets very uneafy upon me: add to which, it lays me under the difa-greeable neceffity of paying Some civil attention to the equally negle£ted Kitty:
it has been my misfortune, ever fince l
was
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 71
was acquainted with that lady, to be favoured with no inconfiderable Ihare of her approbation, when the fmarteft beau flie
can pick up; other wife I am totally neg-
\
ledled and difregarded.—I have heard her
declare “ How much flie hates fuch un-
\
“ natural mixtures as gravity and youth — “ a philofopher and a Soldier, what con-
“ tradidtions?
and with fuch a fet of

features too, as utterly difcountenance “ the absurdity.” — This may Serve as a Specimen of her happy talent for raillery— her expreflions are, indeed, common place —her observations trite and defpicable.
Mrs. Hutchens has been Somewhat in-difpofed for thefe few days paft; fo that we have Seen but little company, except the gouty baronet. Mifs Pittborough affects a referve that gives me no Small pain—is lefs flighty than ufual.—I in vain watch for a Angle look ; (he beftows not one upon me; and as for a moment’s con-
F 4	verfation
72
The History of
verfation—it is to the laft degree im cable.
What will be the confequence of this-change I know not; — but I greatly apprehend Some new torture. I wifh Mrs. Hutchens would favour me with a little private chat, perhaps fhe might be able to ^hfcover: — but, no, fhe would never forgive any indirect meafures to obtain a knowledge of her intentions : —* flie has not a common mind — and muft not be treated with roughnefs, indelicacy, or artifice. —Your advice would be very Salutary:—pity the perplexity of your friend; but I charge you not to attempt ridiculing it—the wound is too green to bear a probe — if ever it can be healed by the methods I have reafon to think you would prescribe, it muft he a work of time.—My good wifhes attend you: — you fhall hear from me again very foon.
LET-
Miss PITTBOROUGH.
73

LETTER IX.
Mifs Hutchens to Mifs Binfield.
Greeable to your injun£lion, I am. now Set down to give you a defcrip-tion of this country coufin ; for whofe fake my over-complaifant mother has drawn me to town, before you could conveniently accompany me. I know not what to fay concerning her : flie fancies herfelf a compleat beauty : — but in my opinion has hardly the lead: pretenfions to even the agreeable.
Her cheeks are moft dazzlingly red ; —* her eyes Spirited, yet heavy and ill-coloured ; — her hair (untaught to comply with Pidgeon’s discipline) rudely exuberant; — her mouth, playing in a thoufand Superfluous Smiles, befpeaks the felf-fatisfadion
of
74
The History of
of her heart j — her hands and arms a dead white, —and her fliape moft extravagantly genteel, render her entirely inelegant and unfalhionable.
But who do you think has devoted hira-felf to her Service; — colonel Dingley! true, upon honour! — he either does admire (or incomparably well diflembles an admiration of) her whole perfon, manner, See. Sec.
\
I am miftaken if flie does not pay him for former infenfibility; for flie feems to polTefs a comfortable Ihare of perverfenefs and vanity: but thefe observations are at pajfant’y for I have not had above two hours conversation with her. My mother extols her to the Ikies, has been unfpeak-ably happy in her company, and doubts not but I Ihall find her highly agreeable.
It is not the firft error I have known that ’lady fall into from judging of her
daughter’s
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 75
t
daughter’s inclinations by her own then fhe is So intolerably officious with refpe(SI to the colonel, So apparently promoting his growing approbation of her divine niece, that I believe I ffiall moft heartily repent my journey.
I really wonder he can have the confidence to viSit at our houfe, after fo plainly indicating his diflike of a certain
inhabitant: — but your military men can
»
do any thing.
I am prepofteroufly difgufted already ; how I fliall Support myfelf until your arrival I know not: — but I am well convinced that pleafure will be a ftranger to my heart, and joy to my countenance, until we meet again.
LET-
yS
The History of

LETTER X.
xMifs PiTTBORouGH to Mifs Nancy
PiTTBOROUGH.
■\7’OU never Saw our coufin Kitty—flie •*■ returned from Hampfhire but lafi: night. Upon my word the young woman would be a very decent well-appearing young woman, if fhe would but give nature fair play ; but fhe is fo over-run with vanity and affeclation, that I believe we fliall be very fafhionable relations.
My good aunt hangs with apparent delight upon her every expreffion, though I will prefume to afSrm, that we have had much fmall talk introduced fince her arrival.
I can-
Miss PITTBOROUGH.
77
I cannot enter into the Sentiment that maternal fondnefs Ihoold So Sar blind us, as to render us inSenSible to the Sollies of our offspring, or create perfedlions that have no exiflence but in our own doating fancies. — Can we not at all times diftin-
guifh between black and white?—But, in
/
fliorr, Nancy, I am not a mother, consequently an incompetent judge of the matter. — I am not to be told that Self-partiality is an innate principle: — and are not our children our Second Selves ?
She arrived in a kind of evil hour; to which circumstance, perhaps, the unfavourable imorenion I have received of her
k
is chiefly owing.—My aunt was anxioufly buSying herSelf in Some little preparations for her reception, whilft the colonel and your Sifter were engaged in a delightful tete a tete. — My heart is narrow and feLflfii; I feel it palpably, or I Should not So ludfantly have forgone my own little fatis-faiSlions, for the more important purpoSe
of
re-
1
8
The History of
of warming a truly worthy maternal bo-fom. By the way, I greatly apprehend that my lively coufin has by no means a due fenfe of the obligations fhe is under to this beft of mothers — a ftrong mark of a bad difpofition. — Her air is Supercilious; and a kind of felf-applaufe, or confcious merit, appears in her whole deportment.
She, indeed, condefcends to give my aunt’s opinion a patient hearing; but makes no Scruple to diflent from it; or even ridicule it, where it is fo unhappy as to meet with her disapprobation.
But, perhaps, I am premature in my judgment: there are a people upon earth who improve on acquaintance; I Sincerely wiih it may be the cafe in this inftance; but my antipathy is uncommonly flrong, and as uncommonly unaccountable. She afFecls to treat the charming colonel with coldnefs and difregard —I fay affects; for it is impoffible they Should be her real fen-
timents:
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 79
timents : — he is not a figure to be disregarded, but by your abfolute infenfibles, a clafs I am perfuaded Mifs Kitty does not belong to : befides, fhe So greatly over-adls her part upon the occafion, that I cannot help fufpe£ting : — but why do I trouble you with fufpicions j — you who I have So much reaSon to be convinced are an enemy to every Species of diftruft: — but give me leave to tell you, however amiable your diSpofition, it is extreamly impolitic j — and notwithftanding it might qualify you for the company of faints and angels, is altogether unbefitting this lower world:— the language of modern politeneSs is utterly difiimilar to the language of the heart, and would entirely miflead a literally believing mortal.
But I have news for you that will afto-nilh you : — ah ! why was nature So lavilh of her gifts ? — there is no refilling me ! — appearing and conquering is with me the fame thing ! — though I muft confeSs my
newly
8o
The Hitosry of
nev.’ly acquired Have took no Small pains to render himfelf Such, as without the aliiftance of a glafs my charms would have been wholly undiscovered by him.
Hov/ I value raySelf for my Sincerity! — many would have been So diSengenuous as to impoSe their conqueft upon you for at leaft an Adonis, in order to enhance the value of it, and give an exalted imprelSion of their extraordinary attradlions ; but I am Superior to every Such little artifice; or perhaps I conceive it to be a higher honour to warm an almoft expiring, or at belt frozen, heart, than merely engaging the admiration of the young and gay— who are So prone to admire, that it is no leSs wonderful'if a new face fails to attach them for the Short period of its novelty, than that the moft compleat toaft Should be capable of reanimating the gout-Slruck bread: of right honourable three-fcore.
How
Miss PITTBOROUGH
Si
How juftly does rural life polTefs your approbation.—How unfpeakably happy the elFefls of pure air, repeated exercife, and riling with the dawn, upon the conllitu-tion. —Our father has attained the eminence of fixty-fix : his countenance undeprived of its floridity; his heart of its vigorous pulfation, or his memory of retention ; (not to mention other mental advantages:) — but in town! it is quite otherwise : — the bloom early decays, the nerves are early unftrung, and difeafes, unknown to the Spartan race, make an early prey of the once not lefs hardy
Briton.
I am far from wifhing to revive the tremendous amufements of that warlike age; but I would not only contribute my voice, but moft extenfive intereft, tobanilh luxury and effeminacy from this my native land. —Both male and female, my Nancy, are gone aftray: — no heart glowing with parental or maternal fondnefs .(except in VoL. I.	G	here
82
The History of
here and there a fingle inftance) no pious filial emotions are now to be found; — the love of admiration and pleafure abforbs every other feeling; and the wrinkled ma”
tron, and Superannuated coxcomb, re-
!
luftantly give place to the forward preffing of their equally misjudging offspring.
Thefe are the colonel’s Sentiments, good fober foul. How could you poflibly miftake them for mine ? — and yet I Suffer myfelf to be So unaccountably milled by them, as to joii\ with him in his repetition of that queer ftale epilogue,
O may again the happy time appear, &c. &c.
which, if you will.give yourfelf the trouble of turning over your Cato, you will find tacked to the end of it, and thereby Save me the trouble of tranfcribing it.

I am, my dear girl, (though by no means what you or the wife colonel could wifli me) no lefs your affedlionats friend,
than
Miss PITTBOROUGH.
83
than if I was compofed of the very materials with yourfelf — and — him ; I Was within an ace of faying : -ri but, notwith-ftanding the tolerable fhare of my good opinion he has infinuated himfelf into, I Ihould have thought you degraded by the comparison.
G2
LET-
Sa
The History of
ereeMe^^ietieeeeetf S*-*:
A	•	•	2	**	•	N*	•	j	#	•	<*	•
LETTER XL
From the fame, to the fame.
Observed in my laft epiftle, with a great degree of Sagacity, what extraordinary efFe6Is different air is wont to produce upon the conftitution. The purity, Serenity, yet brifknefs, of our village breezes, was ever communicating the rude glow of health to one’s cheek, hurrying one’s blood with ruftic rapidity through
yet inspiring one’s heart with only the mildeft, meekeft, and moft gentle SenSations: to ramble an infinite extent of green fields — to behold profpe£Is beyond the aching eye’s termination — to mix with four-footed beafts — ^nd liften to the half-torn throats of filly
— is the utmoft
height
one s veins
inceffant Screaming birds
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 85
height of our village enjoyments. In town
the cafe is widely different
frefh.
or
more properly the thick air is by no means permitted to falute the face of a finilhed belle—or fun-fhine to incommode
♦	r
her fight: — the nature of her amufe-ments, indeed, are fuch, that it is ne-ceffary for the day to repair the exhaufted ffrength and Spirits of the night; for the mind and body are So unhappily unfociable, that what enraptures the one, enfeebles the other.
For example, a ridotto — what proves the dirty compofition of this human part of ours, equal to that drooping wearinefs that involuntarily fteals upon us, in fpite of all our efforts, even when Sparkling at that elegant, that well regulated affembly ? — the muSic infenSibly lofes its charms — our feet refufe to perform their office; — and the Sober hour of five in the morning finds our eyes above three parts clofed.
G 3
Ari-
86	The History of
A ridotto is a place of all others the moft delightful to perfons of fafhion, as few of an inferior rank are fo hardy as to fliove their faces there —your cits, indeed, affedl a fort of toleration; but they are
very diftinguilhable from the politer com-
1
pany, both in their appearance and behaviour.
It is impoflible to acquire thofe birthrights of nobility, an undaunted look—a loud accent — a laugh at once expreffive of felf-fufficiency and contempt—an Ama-zonian gracefulnefs of motion — and an eafy afllired difregard of thofe low illiberal forms —time, place, and circumftance.
Kitty was drawn forth in all her beft airs upon the occalion: — your friend, rather with a degree of (take it without dif-guife) elegant Simplicity — her whole deportment befpoke her barbarous intentions — whilft a certain perfon appeared as un-
confcious
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 87
confcious of her power, as unprepared for conqueft.
I
#
The colonel being fomewhat in dif-' grace, although of the party, was not permitted to come within a furlong of a certain lady — every feature did vifiole penance—but not in a Sufficient degree to obtain immediate absolution.
I
Kitty was charitable to excefs, and laboured to Supply every deficiency — but it was not the thing — penfivenefs and contrition hung ftill upon his brow; lior
t
could all her witticifms, or little arts, dif-pel them.
The coach arrived; unfortunately the baronet was neareft my hand — it would have been Singular to refufe him the favour ; — therefore Don Difmalo was reduced to the neceffity of Squiring the remaining lady.
G4
I all
88
The History of
I all Spirits, the colonel in doleful dumps —the knight as brhk as bottled ale, which you know is feldom free from froth — and Mifs Kitty as near being angry as pleafed.
were Soon
conveyed to the delightful
fcene of a£Iion.

The baronet’s importance ceafed on our
— gouty feet are but
entering the room
ill-qualified for motion —I looked round — not one pretty fellow’’ within view : — his grace — the vifcount, only a degree Superior to monkeys: — I condefcended to call: an eye of encouragement upon the really
handfome colonel: —well, it is a valuable
»
difpofition that is eafily intreated—he flew to obey my commands ; and w'e were inseparable the reft of the evening.
This fame love, Nancy, is a wonderful kind of a diforder — affe£Is the fight, un-derftanding, nay, whole compoSition.— The colonel, is naturally one of your very amiable, your very unalTuming beings j —
6
but
Miss PITTBOROUGH.
89
but the diftin£lion paid him by your acquaintance rendered him quite another
creature
— exultation, heart-felt exultation, over-fpread his countenance : — he feemed to conSider him Self as a Superior Species to the reft : — and, perhaps, could you but have beheld him (though from a diffimilar motive) you would have fub-fcribed to his opinion. — I do allure you the whole aflembly did not afford a more compleat, more noble figure.
Mrs. Kitty picked up the long-fided heir of an earldom : — flie would have triumphed, but for the apparent abfurdity of the attempt.
The knight lamented his inability for my favourite exercife j — but foon found confolation in a brilliant party for quadrille.
The hours paffed rapidly on — ^t four the entertainment broke up^ and, with
■ the
QO
The History of
the reinforcement of his effeminate lord-fhip, we were eondu£l:ed home without accident or interruption. Heated, drowfy— fatigued, delighted, I retired to my pillow;
and found a repofe that much more than
/
compenfated the preceding evening’s con-fumption of ftrength and Spirits, and enai* bled me to undergo a Second frolic.
#
Two o’clock, noon.
Sullen looks — Mrs. Kate is mortally offended — unhappy I — my Superiority is infupportable to her ; and So, my dear, by adding ill-humour to her other perfections, file will iinqueftionably remedy the killing evil.
You will but too probably accufe me of want of charity, refpedling this girl:
but 1 do affure you, in Sober SadneSs, fhe
has
\ I
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 91
has a malicious, ungrateful, and revengeful heart; as I could give you many in-ftances, if I could prevail upon myfelf to ftain my paper, or pollute my pen with fuch unworthy fubje£ls.
LET-

\

The History of
•	• S t immmZmZZ m Z m m m %
LETT E R XII.
Mifs Nancy Pittborough to Mifs
PiTTBOROUGH.
AV E I the power, my deareft Sifter, to render you Serious by intreaty —
I fear I have not; and yet I am perSuaded
1
you would Sacrifice every thing, but your vivacity, to make me happy.
I am fenSible it is my misfortune, that when I wifti to advife, I become inftantly gloomy: but if you would confider the motive, you would not be difgufted at the confequence. My apprehenSions for you are equally ftrong with my afFe£lioh : how then is it poflible that my ftile ihould be lively, when my heart is opprelTed ? •
A
I would
. Miss PITTBOROUGH. 93
I would not be fuperftitious, yet am unable to Subdue Some very unaccountable and alarming fuggelHons.
O let me conjure you not to trifle with your happinefs! Never was man, from appearances, So calculated to your tafte as the colonel, or So well qualified to protedl and condud you through the intricate path of life: — do not, therefore, occafion idle delays ; — a good work cannot be too foon accomplilhed; you are utterly unfit to be trufted with yourfelf: — Some giddy flight you may unwarily be guilty of, may, but too probably, either totally difguft him, or fix an unfavourable impreflion upon his heart, that can never perfedlly be erafed. This new admirer that you treat fo ludicroufly, take care that he does not prove an inftrument of unavailing mortification and repentance.
Men of fenfe, my dear, notwithftanding they may, for a time, appear without gall,
and
94
The History of
and Submit to be unworthily flighted, and unduly tormented, will, when leaft ex-pe£Ied, in the language of the poet,'
— refume the empire which they gave, And Soon the tyrant fhall become the Have.
A generous mind, I grant you, muft be incapable of defcending to ungenerous adlions; but we arc So frequently deceived by the fuggeftions of our own hearts, that it is dangerous triifting frail mortality.
A woman of your Spirit and difpofltion, that has p radii fed fo many fliifts and turnings, when chafed, ought not to be Surprised if the face of things at the long-run Ihould be changed, and the fame torment-
9
ing arts played off*, in order to difcover if file has any real affedlion for the man fhe has been pleafed to honour with her hand, that fhe made ufe of, merely as fhe per-fuaded herfelf to try the Sincerity of his attachment, though, in reality, to gratify her narrow defpicable vanity. How other-
wifs
Miss PITTBOROUGH.
95
\
wife can we account for the inconfiftences in the charadler of a coquet ? — Can we love an object whilft we wantonly torture it ? — I own it is a refinement of cruelty I am utterly unacquainted with.
That you would but follow your demure fifter’s example ! Her gentle fwain experiences a happy exemption from doubt and fulFering : — under the fandlion of the father’s approbation, he fears not accefs to the daughter ; nor does he apprehend that her afpedl will ever be unfavourable towards him, unlefs his condudl Ihould fub-' ftantially merit it.
The day for our union is fixed ; we both
%
look forward to it with as much confidence as the inftability of human life will admit; well convinced that, unlefs fo.me calamity that ftrikes our health or cxiftence falls upon us, that morning’s fun will find us unchanged in our fentiments. We
have long forborne to feek a fatisfa£lion
out
96
The History of
out of ourfelves: — our wifhes, our concerns are for each other’s happinefs and prosperity, in which our dear father’s has ever been included : — and, however un-fafhionable or contemptible we may ap-pear in your Sight, we would not exchange the peace and rational delight our Simple limited profpedls afford us, for all the Splendid follies grandeur, is capable of bellowing.
the colonel can
m
. Perhaps you will think this the dulleft of all my dull epiflles; but let the Sincerity of it atone for the want of fprightly ornaments; honeft truth Ihines faireft when leaft adorned: •— teach you leffons equally profitable more agreeable language; liflen, therefore, to him, and the genuine didlates of your heart ■— your love for him is as evident as the fun at noon day: — entitle yourfelf in a legal manner to his friendship and protedlion — and my beft congratulations lhall await you j forfeit his
efteein,
Miss PITTBOROUGH.
97
efteem, and depend upon it bitter repentance will be your portion : — the future employment of my pen unavailing condo-lance.

LETTER XIII.
Mifs PiTTBOROUGH tO Mifs NaNCY
PiTTBO’ROUGH.
She only lov’d the loving He,
He only lov’d the lovely She.
There, my dear, in that borrowed
couplet is contained the likenefs and lovingnefs of my intended brother and yourfelf. — I hope the latter part of the fable, relative to the cage, &c. will never be applicable to fuch a pair : but the croaking of ravens is harmony, in my imagination, to the fofteft breath of matri-
VoL. I.
H
mony
98
The History of
mony. O! how I tremble at your hardy approach to a precipice, that my head is abundantly too light to permit me to venture even within Several acres of its leaft formidable verge.
I grant you there is a round about, but very intricate, track, by which it is pofli-ble to defcend with little or no precipitation : but then the hazard is So extreme, that it requires a cool judgment, quick penetration, and an immoderate fhare of meeknefs, fteadinefs, forbearance, and resolution, to weather the point with any
degree of Safety.
*
The firft ftep terrifies us;—-we retreat— advance — retreat again — until our helpmate, rafli and enterprifing in his own nature, wearied by a repetition of our idle timidity. Sets ofF alone, fairly abandoning us to every danger and inconvenience, un-aflifted, unprotected, and unencoiiraged by
I *	K*	f	f
his prefence and example,
To
Miss PITTBOROUGH.
99
To be Sure your profpeils, as times go, are rather flattering than other wife — as the man you propofe Setting out with is, in appearance, a Sober, Sedate, Sure-Sooted man j and, in a manner, exempt from every vicious, reftive, or frolickSome inclination :— but are you certain he will continue So ? — is he not human ; consequently changeable: — is not the engagement indiflbluble ? muft you not abide by the evil as well as enjoy the happy conSe-quences (if any can attend the lofs of liberty) ? can he feel a calamity and you not participate ? I know your heart too well — it will derive all its future felicity from his Smiles; and, by a Single frown, would be over-whelmed with unSpeakable anguilh.
O, my dear, what ugly likenefl'es have you frequently drawn of that maSculinc Sex ; and, I now begin to fear, with too much juftice: — have you not painted them as unfathomable in their fchemes — un-
II 2
con-
100
The History of
controulable in their inclinations — obfii-nate in their refolves, and irreftrainable in their refentments ? — have you not described Self-gratification as their Spring of a£lion — deSpotic power their pretended birth-right — want of tendernefs their boaft— and a contempt for every religious duty their glory ? — have you not ftrongly inculcated the opinion into my heart, that they early imbibe wrong irnprefiions of us females? — ridiculous, mercenary, weak, and artful beings, would you not perfuade me they are taught to conSider us ?— how mortifying the thought —that we accufiom ourfelves to be Smart upon them : — they are not without their Sullen rough repartees—we refuSe them — it is death to their pride — they will marry us in Spite of ourfelves, and have ample revenge.
They redouble their flattery (is not this the very leflTon you have learned me}j our Vanity aflifts their artifices — we become the dupes — the triumph is wholly theirs.
But
Miss PITTBOROUGH. loi
But what is all this to you and your gentle artlefs Swain ? ~ I indeed expelled the queftion; — yet am but ill-prepared to anfwer it — and can only fay, that experiments are by no means eligible, as difap-pointment is as likely to be the fruits of our labour as the deSired fuccefs.
I thought the colonel — that is fo like you ruftic dames — a pretty fellow is no Sooner mentioned, than the licence, ring, and parfon, dance before your eyes; and a wedding is marked down as an infallible contingence — whilft we fit loofe to every fuch domeflic idea : —admiration is all we aim at — and a proper difplay and exertion of our power, the whole bulinefs of our lives. To make a fenfible man play the fool, is it not exquifite? To be curfed, renounced, and beloved, in the fame in-ftant — to fee them now ftruggling to get free — and now eagerly re-embracing the fond infatuation, is rapture to every woman of Spirit’s heart; and you will allow
H 3
I was
102
The History of
I was never deficient as to that article.
But I will, for once, become the very thing you wifh me — difmifs my felf-con-fequence — hold my levity fufpended—Ihut my eyes to every idle prejudice — and tumbling Mrs. Vanity indignantly from her throne, candidly confefs, that, by your prudent choice, you cannot fail of procuring yourfelf every valuable, every rational felicity j that my union with the colonel would, in all probability, redlify and regulate all thofe idle inclinations that fo
terribly miflead me : — and that we may
0
both of us be fo happily and advantage-oufly difpofed of, is at prefent the fincere defire of my heart; but how long it may continue fo is very uncertain, I mean as to that part that refpedls myfelf.
LET-
Miss.PITTBOROUGH. 103

e	•
LETTER XIV.
Mifs Hutchens to Mifs Binfield.
Ortified to death, and fatigued with playing the hypocrite, how is it poffible to enter upon entertaining fub-je(3:s — the town at prefent has no charms for me; a crowded aflembly creates dif-guft, and retirement is all gloom and horror, for want of your agreeable company.
How much food fliould we find for fa-
tire ; how inexhauftible our mirth
if
you could but once behold this imaginary goddefs — I abfolutely am funk in my own opinion, no lefs than I am neglected in every bright circle: this coufin, this coufin appears with unfpeakable eclat j and I feem
H 4	dwindled

104
The History of
dwindled into an humble nymph—Cie the Diana, I merely one of her train.*
But I live in hopes of fome favourable change—file feems dancing upon the edge of a precipice ; and, if I can conveniently contrive it, fhall not want a little Ihove to determine her fate. The filly colonel has not a willi beyond laying his liberty at her feet: — but (he truly Spurns the bleffing, for no other reafon that I can difcover, than that it may be eafily obtained. — She cannot forbear playing off fome airs and graces with Sir Mathew Sanxfey — I think it will do by and by —if fhe makes a tool of him merely for the pleafure of tormenting one of the fineft fellows in England, why fhould he not be made an inftrumentof her punilliment? — With your afiiftance I am Sure I could effedl her re-du£lion from this moft arrogant height, to the lowly eftate of unavailing mortification' — but I can do nothing without you.
Who could, with any degree of patience,
bear
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 105
bear to be fhouldered out of every one’s approbation j even my mother’s aftedlion for me is diminifhed fince her introduflion into her family ; and that by an artifice fo pretty, and fo amiable, that the world either will not, or cannot dete£l it.
The colonel is ever extolling her open-nefs and generofity —I have, indeed, been favoured with a fpecimen of each — for fhe has not fcrupled openly to ridicule my drefs, my behaviour, and, as I have been informed, generoufly laments, in my ab-fence, the weaknefs of my underftanding, and the pernicious elFedls of my mother’s ill-judged indulgence.
%
Sir Mathew and this incomparable one have for Some time been upon fuch good terms, that the poor flighted foldier has been forced to feek quarter from a lefs hoftile party : — you know my folly, nor Ihall I ever conquer it — and as it is my misfortune to be the prey of a hopelefs
paflion,
io6
The History of
paffion, I own it is a great fupport to my pride, that the obje<5I fufficiently juftifies the partiality he has infpired. Had I the fame power over him that he has been pleafed to inveft this lady with — how differently I fhould exercife it — but this is idle prattle — yet you have often flattered me that he does not diflike me, notwith-ftanding the many flights I have fuftained; and that half the uneaSinefs I have fuffer-ed, has been owing to my own petulance, that would not fufFer me to wait a favourable turn, without playing off fome flirting airs, that inftead of anfwering the delired purpofe, have only drawn upon me additional negle<51: : therefore, who knows, if I could have followed your advice, and this all-conquering beauty had not been call in his way, what efFed time, a good fortune, and fome other advantages might have produced, notwithftanding his too natural infenfibility; at leaft I had not forfeited that fupport of the wretched — a ray of hope — which her prefence totally
ob-
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 107
obfcures.— Self-prefervation incites me to remove her — and removed flie flia’l be or I will die in the attempt. I conjure you, my dear friend, to deftroy this evidence of my folly — you have hitherto been faithful to me — forfake me not at this trying jundlure — but permit me to pour my grievance into your bofom.
LET
io8
The History of

LETTER XV.
Mifs PiTTBOROuGH to Mifs Nancy
PiTTBOROUGH.
T is impoffible I Ihould be miftaken! Kitty, the felf-fufHcient Kitty, is moft certainly Smitten with this man of valour
I
— he cannot Surely —but the SuppoSition is odious —I have already obServed that flie is not, even vyhat nature intended her, agreeable — and I know the colonel to be an utter enemy to every Species of affedla-tion.
Yet I own it teazes me to fee him fo alliduous, as the flirting girl has now and then the art to render him— and I fear flie perceives it, as I have detedled her calling
kind
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 109
kind of triumphant glances upon me on fuch occafions.
1
I muft be Satisfied myfelf—and give her the mortifying fatisfaiSlion, that I poISefs a Superior power over him, or I cannot exift ~ my Superannuated gallant will be here this afternoon — I have it — and you Ihall know my Succefs.
Tuefday morn.
I am undone, my dear Nancy — the
colonel defpiSes my folly — condemns my
proceedings; and has even prefumed to
ledlure me with the utmoft Severity : but
it Ihall coil: me dear, but I will make him
repent his prefumption and arrogance. —
O, I could pull my cap with vexation ! —
but it is refolved —his Rubborn heart Ihall
%
bend, or mine Ihall break. — No, madam,
faid
IIO
The History of
Ci
faid he to my aunt, as Kitty, in order to increafe my mortification, told me — “ I will no longer continue the dupe I have “ been — my eyes are opened — and not-“ withftanding I flill admire her few per-“ Sections — I can happily fee her defeds likewife — nor Ihall I be eafily lured a
(6
‘‘ Second time into her Snares.

Who could have believed him capable of Such cold deliberate difrefpedl — what was uttered in my prefence might be the efFedt merely of palHon — but to referve his contempt and defiance for a private ear^ and that too the ear of the greateft enemy I have upon earth — malice—and can never be forgiven
was the overflowings of
I have obligations to my pride I never yet fufpedled it capable of conferring — it has been, and is my only Support — or I fhould fink with confufion and mortification. He had the confidence to afk me, if I could fuppofe him weak enough to enter-
6
tarn
Miss PITTBOROUGH. in
tain the prepolterous idea, that my appro-
bation of Sir Mathew was real
“ he was
but too fenfible of the motive ; but that the artifice was insufficient to produce the intended efFe£t: — he owned I had the power of moft cruelly tormenting him; and he was, perhaps, as foon blown into a flame as I unkindly wilhed ; but that power muft be Supported by

<c
<c
((
6(
cc

probability.
39
Audacious creature—but I will be com-pofed, and take a Severe deliberate revenge. I am born for mortification j for, inftead of recommending myfelf to your com-
4
paffionate confideration, I fhall incur your ridicule, or at beft a mofl: tedious lecture — I cannot bear it at this period 3 nor fliould I, in the fmalleft degree, profit by even the wifefi; Sentiments that can fall from your pen: — therefore Spare me, Nancy, I befeech you, and do not add to my prefent dilSatisSadlion,
LET
II2
I
The History of

LETTER XVI.
Mifs Nancy Pittborough to Mifs
PiTTBOROUGH.
Ndeed, hiy dear lifter, you are greatly miftaken in your opinion of my heart;
t
pity is a requeft I never yet denied the unhappy ; and unhappy I muft confider you in the moft comprehenSive fenfe of the word.
Providence has been peculiarly gracious to you ever Since the firft inftant of your exiftence : — you had the beft of mothers continued to you fo long as her care was eflential to your well-doing : — you have ever enjoyed an uninterrupted fliare of health, contentment, and reputation nor need you have one wilh ungratified, if
'	you
f
Miss PITTBOROUGII. 113
you could but once perSuade yourfelf not to fufter them to exceed the bounds of reafon and propriety.
But all theSe bleffings which thoufands vainly figh for, are not only totally disregarded by you, but madly thrown away — whilft error alone has the direction of your purfuits ; and mortification, inftead ofpro-mifed pleafure, becomes the fruits of your labour.
How grating muft it be to fenfibility like yours, to feel the honeft reproaches your heart undoubtedly fuggefts to you —to fee yourfelf in the odious, though jufi: light of an ungrateful, giddy, misjudging being, hurried on by a fatal levity into improprieties, that your very nature is repugnant to, yet reftrained by a falfe, a contemptible pride, from making an honourable retreat.
VoL. I.
I
I hav
n
w
114
The History of
I have no quarrel with you, my good girl, for being fubje£l to follies and vanities ; but for tamely fuffering your whole life, happinefs, and fame, to become a prey to them. The firft is your misfortune, the fecond your higheft fault.
Was you lefs capable of conquering your perverfe inclinations, had you never been taught to diftinguilh between right and wrong, or never amiably and voluntarily rejedled the, former, and adopted the latter for your rule of adlion (except when you indulged a few idle Sallies, that by having no particular aim, could be productive of no bad confequence) I fhould addrefs you in very different terms; and, inftead of awakening reflections, you would receive my moft friendly advice, and ftrongeft admonitions : — but how abfurd we fhould deem an unlearned peafant, whofe vanity fhould incite him to preach to a learned congregation, is a queftion that requires no folution.
I have
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 115
I have already given my Sentiments upon repeated occaSions fimilar with the present ; and can therefore only intreat you to determine, without further perplexity or unmeaning evalions, to make both me and yourfelf happy^
Return, O return to propriety and peace ! for they cann(?t be Separated ; Ihevv the greatnefs of your foul by acknowledging a due fenfe pf lately praclifed folly ; and once more re-eftablilh yourfelf in the heart you love.
Believe me, it is not an antiquated principle, that kindnefs Biould refult from af-feftion, or that efteem can perifh, without involving tendernefs in the fame ruin. The conflidi may be Severe; but too frequent repetitions of ill-treatment will cure the moft lively paffion: and you may, in Some meafure, judge from the pain the colonel’s affumedneglefl ofyou (for alTumed I amperfuaded it muft have been, if he ever
I a
was
ii6
The History of

w
was guilty bf negleil) has given you, how well you could bear his abfolute breaking with you. I will not give you the leaft account of myfelf, or affairs, until you have, by making proper atonement for paft iranfgreffions, entitled yourfelf to Some pretenSions to rationality^
LET-
\
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 117
-SJ
rf.«.

•	i	•	•	^
«	•	•	«	•

LETTER XVII.
Colonel Dingley to Mr. Brooksbank.
A M flung to the foul by the folly of a woman, whom I perfift to love in defiance of my better judgement.
Never was fafdnation equal to mine — contempt, every kind of contempt, but the one I have met with, I couid have borne with patience ; but to be treated like a driveller, to have my peace attacked by fo trite, fo palpable an abfurdity, as giving the preference to a lump of illiterate and infirm mortality, is, beyond all concep-

tion, mortitymg.' ’Sdeath ! and yet it has Succeeded ; — its end been perfe<5lly an-fvvered—ridiculous though I feel it —I am
I 3
mor-
ii8
The History of
mortified j and She, no doubt, exults in the fuccefs of her artifice.
\
I perceived the fhallow plot, before it was even ripe for execution; and, not-withftanding the,difficulty of the attempt, was prepared to give her fcorn for fcorn, I, indeed, was fo far duped by the treachery of my own heart, as to perfuade myfelf, that fh.e was greatly funk in my opinion, that her beauty was a trifling polTeflion, her mental endowments all rendered corrupt and unamiable, by one inclination,
t
that from the pain and mortification it occasioned me, I could never bring myfelf to even palliate for the future : but the wretched tool had the prefumption to offer, and ffie the cruelty to permit him to Salute her, on taking his leave for'the evening only j which, in one inftant, overthrew all my great refolves. Had you but Seen how I Supported myfelf the preceding part of the day, you would never have fufpeSied me capable of betraying
*	my
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 119
my dignity, or that rage and jealoufy could exift in So cold a breaft as mine.
O, how I reproached her ! called her honour, difcretion, underftanding in quef-tion — ridiculed the pra£lice Ihe had been guilty of — nay, was So far transported, as to afFe(St a talent I never had the lead pre-tenfions to, and, till that moment, mod heartily defpifed, ycleped mimicry — and at length — worked her mortification and refentment to fuch a pitch, that (he quitted the apartment in tears, proteding fhe would never fee me more.
But Surely a heart fo gentle, humane, and amiable as her’s, cannot be capable of perfevering in fuch a horrid refolution. —I have not flept the whole night, nor perhaps may ever deep again, unlefs Ihe will be reconciled — my very brain is Ihook — 1 find it impoflible to live without her — and therefore do think it is a thoufand
I 4
times
120
rhe History of
i
times more eligible to be deemed a fool than become a madman.

Noon.
A pretty piece of work I have made of it; I am jail returned from a Scene, the remembrance of which I fliall never lofe, but v/ith iny exhtence.
She is ill — tlying for aught I know to the contrary, and has moft pathetically forniven me.	' -
o
I entered Mrs. Hutchens’s parlour with
#
my ufual familiarity, not expedbng to fiad MiSs Pittboroueh there ; but how fliall I
o	^
exprefs my aftonihiment and afEidtion, when I beheld her fainting in Kitty’s
arms.
I had
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 121
»
I had conceived that nothing could be
more lovely than the bloom of her countenance ; but I found her charming languor ftill more attradlive.
She opened her eyes
I would have re-
tired, apprehenSive of difcompoiing her, and in order to recover myfelf — but file fmiled upon'me with unfpeakable complacence ; and begged file might not fright me away. Down 1 fat upon the firft chair — unable to reply; I was, indeed, half chcaked.
“ You and I, colonel, refumed fhe, were “ but indifierent friends lafi: night; but if “ you have no objedfion, all hoftilities “ fiiall ceafe between us ; and we will treat each other for the future in a more “ fuitable manner: you, as a gentleman, “ had fome right to complain of my con-“ ducd ; and I, as a proud female, could “ not be perfcclly fatisfied with yours: —
“ but
f
122
The History of
“ but I am not well, and fliould be glad “ to retire: — you will remember, fir, added fhe, in the moft kindly accent as Ihe rofe to quit the room, “ we are to “ meet (if ever we do meet again) as “ friends and acquaintance ought to do.”
I attempted to fpeak — but found it ftill impoffible: — Ihe perceived my diforder; and, with a condefcenfion and goodnefs that I could little have expected, held out her hand to comfort me.
On my knees I would have killed it, but fhe would by no means permit me; “ I am no deity now fir ; faid flie, I fen-“ fibly feel I am not — low and w^eak —I cannot receive adoration — perhaps”— but fhe did not finifh the Sentence; and I could only follow her with my eyes.
Alas, my friend, I fhall never fee her more ! —She hardly appeared to be an
inha-
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 123
inhabitant of- this world — nor will Ihe
k ■
long continue So — Ihe was too, too good to live — too great a blefling to fall to my Ihare ; nor will there remain one female on earth, in any degree, comparable to her.
LET-
124
The History of

t M
LETTER XVIII.
From the fame, to the fame.
HAVE Spent the whole day at Mrs, Hutchens’ — but what a day — appre-henSion, anxiety, and bitter remorfe, my only companions.
Mrs. Hutchens never once quitted her lovely charge ; but her daughter, from an impertinent oificioufneSs, frequently ftolea quarter of an hour to confole me, as flie called it. Malicious, infernal confolation! her lips fpeak one language, her eyes another:—but I defpife and detefi: her as Sne deferves.
Mifs Pi ttborough’s d;f)rder. is a fore throat and violent fever — the phySician is
doubtful 5
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 125
9'
doubtful; I am diilra<3:ed ; yet fhe, I hear, is perfe611y refigned. , She was delirious in the afternoon — and called upon me with extreme tendernefs, as the apothecary informed me, who happened to be prefent — what hateful forms, that I, who am moft interefted, mud be denied the fight of 'her ! — But if my whole fortune cant fave me from the horrid calamity of lofing her, without one lall farewel look, it fhall not fall upon me. I have determined to bribe her nurfe, who is a difiant relation of one of my Servants, to convey me into her apartment, and permit me the heart-wounding fatisfaclion of tracing the power of death, in each cruelly altered feature.
1 ✓
/
What amends can I ever make you for peftering you thus with my affairs,' efpe-cially as they are of fuch a nature as cannot afford you the lead' entertalinment ?
I write.
126
The History of
I write, indeed^ at preSent, in order to keep myfelf from greater mifchief; and I can only expe£l you to read from a Similar motive. My heart is miferably deprefled — yet I fear what I now Suffer is only a prelude to what is in ftore for me — can I fupport? — But adieu ! — To-morrow I Sliall endeavour to carry my favourite Scheme into execution, and fhall then refume my prefent employment.
LET-
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 127

LETTER XIX.
_ /
From the fame, to the fame.
HAVE feen her, Ned, feen the dear lovely expiring creature, without the knowledge of any one perfon but the nurfe —what will not money accomplifh ? — I watched the greateft part of the night in her chamber, filent, ■ folemn, and gloomy as the regions of death. She lay veryftill, except at intervals—I never faw
-in one of
her deliriums Ihe caught my hand to fave
her from fome imaginary danger — it was
\
daggers to my heart, as I could not be in-fenfible to the impoffibility of preferving her from the grave.
a fever rage with fuch violence
I have
128
The History of
\
I have only increafed my own difEcul-ties by the very ftep I flattered myfelf would lefien them: — could I but have continued by her until her dilTolution, I think the ftroke would be lefs Severe—but it is a groundless fuggeftion-rmy imagination is difturbed ; and I fancy a million of absurdities — it v/ould be highly improper for me to be prefent at Such an exigence, as in all probability, by being unable to conceal my own agonies, 1 might in a moft dreadful degree increaSe her’s; the moment of death is not a moment for cdnfufibn.
9
She is by no means So much altered in her countenance as I expected ; but her voice is quite changed — laboured, thick— Alas, it is the voice peculiar to her alarming circumftances!
What muft not her father, her Sifter feel, if they are acquainted with her condition ? — But no, I remember Mrs. Hutchens
Said
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 129
Said fhe fhould conceal the melancholy tidings as long as poffible. — How Shall t difpofe of myfelf when fhe is no more—' the objefl of my tendereft, my firft affection ? — I wifh I may be able to a£t with the leaft confiftence—but I fhall then have no choice—no purfuit.
Will you, can you, Ned, embrace fuch a heavy incumbrance as the company of a man funk down with afilidtion 5 — for a military life will lofe its charm ? — will it not be too Severe a tax upon your friend-lliip to footh, to Support, to Save me from defpondence ? —But I have ever found you friendfhip’s Self, and therefore can rely upon your bell kindnefs.
\
Voi. I.
K
LET-
130
The History of


LETTER XX.
Mr.BROoKSBANK to Colonel Dingley.
AM Sorry to find you So very difSerent in preaching and practice. Did I labour under a fimilar calamity to the one you deplore, how many philofophic arguments would you not urge to teach me refigna-tion ? I, indeed, greatly lament the untimely fate of this valuable lady. — I will tell you, Charles, lovely as your pen was ever accuftomed to draw this drooping flower, I could not perfuade myfelf but that half the perfecStions you fo liberally imputed to her perfon and mind, were merely imputed ones. I am no ftranger to the partiality of a man in love. But I had occafion within thefe few weeks paft
to
Miss PITTHOROtJGH. 131
to vifit a perfon at a fmall diftance from that village that gave her birth ; and you will not be furprifed that I indulged my curiolity with fome little enquiries concerning her, especially as it was attended with no other trouble or expence, than an extreme delightful walk. The country is beautiful, even to excefs — one fine prof-pe6l fo immediately fucceeding anotherj that, like iTfop’s afsj one cannot eafily determine which to feaft upon. I Was fo fortunate as to overtake a very intelligent perfon at Some little diftance from the houfes, who, with a volubility naturally far from inconfiderable, (and deriving additional vigour from gratitude) poured forth a whole volume of intelligence relative to his benefailrefs : — in fliort, I was convinced that Ihe was efteemed a little goddefs to the utmoft verge of this happy retreat — no one thinks they can fuflSci-ently extol her humanity or generofity; for whoever affects the one, is^ Sure to participate the other.
K 2
At
f.
132
The History of
AtTuch an early age. Surrounded as Ihe was with every charm of approbation and indulgence, to lull thofe valuable inclinations to fleep! I own it is aftonifliing Ihe could be attentive to diftrefles, flie could
i
Scarcely have any idea of, had Ihe not pursued the moft efFe^Iual method of obtaining information, becoming a voluntary fpedlator of them.
To vifit the Sick, to clothe the naked, and comfort the afilided, was her every day’s employment} and So far from being wearied, Ihe would frequently lament, that there was not above eighteen hours in the twenty-four that could be employed to advantage.
But, notwithftanding theSe beauties in
her charadler, Ilie never could have made
/
you happy — giddy to excels, and a ftranger, if not an enemy, to controul, where would have been the focial friend, the endearing companion ? —• And in proportion
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 133
portion to the greatnefs of the perfe6Hons fhe was really miftrefs of, would have been your concern and mortification, to find her, in Some eflentials, fo inexcufably defective.
\
I mention thefe particulars merely for your ufe; forget them if fhe lives j but if you lofe her, let them never be forgotten. That misfortunes are bleffings in difguife, is an adage of fuch reputation as to require no comment; and, perhaps, this feeming evil may deliver you from the moft fhocking reality you ever experienced.
Your peace was moft certainly in imminent danger from this lady’s conduCt, even in a fingleftate; and had fhe married you, and continued her flightinefs, or beftowed her hand upon Some happier rival — you would have confidered a natural deprivation of her (and fuch, however dreadful, is the prefent that threatens you) as a
K 3
Species

H4
The History of
Species of felicity in comparison of thofs already mentioned.
I grant you, Such ftrokes are not eaSily overcome ; yet with the affiftance of your own reaSon, and the conversation of friendihip, I do hope to See you bear it with manly fortitude. I think as highly of MiSs Pittborough on one hand, as I disapprove her on the other ; and had there been any probability of her being your’s, fo far from pointing out, I would have been the firll: to draw a veil over her defedts. — Haften to me fo Soon as her fate is determined, and I will endeavour to receive you to tranquility, if not happinefs,
LET-
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 135


S	V/V/(hK*
LETTER XXL
Mifs Hutchens to Mifs Binfield.
VERY pretty incumbrance this fine lady has at length rendered herfelf! — She is, indeed, my dear girl, confined to her bed with a violent diftem-per; from whence there is but little probability of her ever rifing again. I am buried alive—we are denied to every creature ; and, as it is my mother’s pleafure to confine herfelf to a difmal fick apartment, I am compelled, for the fake of decency, however relu(Slant, to follow her example.
Yet do not conclude that this love has divefted rne of humanity; I Ihould not only compaflionate this relation’s Sufferings,
K 4	but.

The History of
but, with the utmoft diligence and plea* Sure, endeavour to mitigate and relieve them, had they not been derived from fo unworthy a Source. You muft know that, without any provocation upon earth, Ihe was pleafed to quarrel with the colonel— he, limpleton-like, could not conceal the uneaSinefs her behaviour gave him—She, elated with fuccefs, refolved to give him a proof of her power beyond human patience to Support. It was So foolilh an alFair, that I do not remember particulars — but, contrary to her expectation of feeing him at her feet, acknowledging her Sovereignty, and intreating forgivenefs, Ihe roufed the lion in his den^ he Jialked abroad, and ihe wide foreji irembled at his roar — in other words, he was fo highly provoked by her ingratitude and folly — that he no longer Scrupled venting his due reSentment. — The pretty foul Ihed Some crocodile tears — he was within an ace of being Softened, when Suddenly Ihe bounced away with all the dignity and
6	rage
j
k
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 137
rage of a tragedy queen, I mean an itinerant one — for there was much more of the low fury than majefty in her afpe£I.
Well, how he raved
againft himfelf
though you muft obferve — for the dear
creature’s tears had fo efteilually wafhed
away her tranfgreffions, that he was ready
to hang himfelf for having forced them
from her proud heart — I would have
opened his eyes in a particular or two —
but I thought he would have eat me : — I
really could not have conceived that even
paffion was capable of rendering his face
fo deformed, had I not received ocular
» ^
demonftration. — He at length took an abrupt leave, curling himfelf, his evil ftars, but excluded the author of all he fuffered ' from every ftiare in his execrations.
It was death to me, you may eafily believe, to behold Such a Scene j and whilft I
was ruminating upon the ftrange witchcraft
138
The History of
craft of my coufin, I received an account of her being very much indifpofed, and that file had retired for the night.
Confcious that file deferved no fmall punilhment for the prepofterous part fhe had 3(5Ied — I could not for my foul pity her — and did not doubt but a third part of the indifpofition was merely counterfeited, in order to intimidate her Have into due obedience.
The morning arrived — flie obeyed the breakfaft fummons, though file looked like a witch j and I am firmly of opinion had never clofed her eyes the whole night. My mother was feared at her countenance, and a profufion of tender enquiries of her health (and not one reproach) was the confequence. She faid her throat was • .much affedled, and fhe believed flie was in a high fever—the bell — I wonder it could refift fuch a tremendous pull—inftantly
brought
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 139
brought a herd of fellows into the room — John was difpatched this way, Thomas that — for proper affiftance.
I thought Ihe would have fainted
The gentlemen of the faculty arrived — and with that confequential air peculiar to their profeffion, declared her to be far gone in a defperate diftemper. — My mo-ther-
whilftl received the information with fur--prifing magnanimity. You very high-fpirited people, when free from every dif-agreeable attack, are ever remarkably low when they conceive themfelves to be in danger.“Such was this lady; (he drooped, fhe languifhed. —Phlebotomy was judged
e—her delicate apprehenfions were admirable. — My mother wifely perfuaded her to have the operation performed in her own apartment —but no— the parlour had its attraction — the colonel would otherwife have been deprived of a (hock bis too fimple heart was but ill capable of fupporting.
The
re
140
The History of
The operation over—the gentlemen and mama retired — this haughty beauty con-defcended to Sift me, though with the ut-moft diftance and circumfpedion, relative to the colonel’s behaviour.—When people angle with Such dexterity, ’tis pity they fhould be disappointed. A Speech occurred to me, which I could have willied him to have made: I ventured, however, to place it to his account — it fhot through and through her gentle heart, and fhe Sunk, with becoming grace, into my arms.—At this unlucky inflant the enamoured youth Sneaked into the room — with a view, no doubt, to obtain a mitigation, if not an absolute revocation oS his cruel Sentence. You are no ftranger to the manly beauty of his countenance — what a metamorphofis — no hunted devil ever looked like him — he ftarted — he made an effort to retreat — but the dying fair — with unfpeakable judgment opened hep eyes at the very jundlure-
where he was—he obeyed—who could do
and befought him to continue
o
more
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 141
more or lefs on Such an occafion ? —The fcene was as fulfome as folly and artifice could render it; and, notwithftanding all her complaints, I am miftaken if the colonel was not In an infinite worfe ftate than herfelf. However, as the old-falhion-
ed proverb fays. Mocking is catching ; fo what was at firfl: little more than well-managed hypocrify—has been within an ace of carrying her off. She continues ilill in very imminent danger, and the uncertainty of the event — is torture to the colonel, ‘
He paffes his hours in our parlour— alone, difconfolate — and I can perceive
V
that every endeavour to amufe, does but increafe his vexation.—But, dear creature, how unmercifully am I trefpaffing upon your time, patience,
and g
O
-na-
ture ! But 1 know you will excufe it all when I tell you, that it is an unfpeakable relief to me to communicate my fenti-meiits to you, as I can Safely rely upon

'our
142
The History of
your prudence and confidence.—I will write again fo Soon as I come out of fuf-pence.

LETTER XXII.
Colonel Dingley to Mr. Brooksbank,
9
A Strange comforter thou art, truly,
Ned ! “ If Ihe dies, think unfa-“ vourably of her, it will lell'en your “ afflidtion — if Ihe lives forget every de-“ fe<5f, and once more confider her as “ Perfedf ion’s Self.” — A very pretty whim-fical abfurd kind of a dodirine ! —No, Ned, had I moft unhappily been deprived of her — our friendlhip had attained a final termination— your prophane advice—you are a fad dog —but Ihe lives, the violence of
her dillemper is paft, and I have no power
of
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 143
of refentment remaining. What happy profpe^ts break in upon me — I Shall once more behold her lovely, though impaired,' countenance—I Ihall be permitted to con-verfe with her — whole hours, perhaps, converfe with her, and the only defeat of her nature, the left of her humanity, may, perhaps, be more than half extinguilhed.-If you could but be a fpeclator of the fancies by which I am agitated, I am convinced you would be tempted to take out a ftatute of lunacy againft me, in favour of my next heir. I have not yet been admitted an eye-witnefs of the returning health, or rather retreating diftemper of this miftrefs of my affections j but lam-fufficiently credulous to truft each flattering report. I conftantly reSide in the firft parlour — every foot-ftep that I hear upon the ftairs, throws me into a tumultuous kind of Satisfaction. The door flies open — Does fhe continue in the fame promifing Hate ? — Heaven avert every unfavourable Symptom ! — Has Ihe mentioned me? —
Does

144
The History of
Does fhe fleep ? Can flie eat ? Are her looks in the fmalleft degree improved ? Thefe fucceffive queftions are addreffed to every creature that approaches me, and on their retiring—the door is again Ihut to -I took three or four lively hops upon the carpet — call my eyes in the glafs — fmile at my frantic behaviour — open the firft book I meet with— the page is dull—the print wretched — though I am not able to dillinguifli a Single letter.
A rap at the door—it is thephyfician—I will pay my compliments — pho, no,’tis only the apothecary — he is an honeft countenanced man—it is his medicines that have reftored me to new life — he fhall therefore, he muft, be my friend.
Thus is my time Spent, and thus fliall I continue to Spend it — until I experience Sympathetic Serenity, from beholding it in the object my foul doats on.
LET
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 145
% •

* • *
* •
LETTER XXIIL
From the famcj to the fame.
AN there, Ned, upon earth be a happier mortal than your friend. I was not even tortured with expectation ; but the news of her beinp- able and defirous
O
to fee me, was communicated, and I conveyed to her apartment in one and the fame inftant. A gentle blufli over-fpread her countenance when I approached, and I was even permitted to congratulate her on her recovery, in a manner that affedled rny whole frame — for never till that moment had I touched her lips. She is greatly reduced j languid j drooping — a foft forrow
Heals upon my heart
VoL, I.	L
but when I re-
col lei^
146
The History of
colle(fl her late condition, —I revive, and am all rapture and love.
I was compelled to make but a fhort vifit j but Ihe kindly condefcended to tell me, when I was preparing to retire, that it fhould be my own fault, if I was not her daily viSitant: — you may be certain I fhall have much to anfwer for upon that account. Kitty fpitefully remarked — that it was almoft worth dying to be fo out-rageoufly lamented.—I was within an ace of making her a tart reply y but judged it impolitic to offend her at that jundlure. That I could but annihilate the hours that lye between me and a Second vifit— but, as Scriblerus obferves, it is a very modeft wifli — confidering of how little confequence one individual is in the whole creation.
I have burnt your laft letter, and may the remembrance of it perifh with it: — it
was
Miss PITTBOROUGH.
147
Was aclumfy, ill-digefted produ(5Hon —and utterly unworthy of the writer: — you was not wont to be So illiberal — but I forgive you on condition that you never fufFer any future occafion to draw you into a like tranfgreflion.
A
L 2


148
Th6 History of
••••e«S**«««#»«9S«S
t :
•	•	t	•	•
LETTER XXIV.
Mifs PiTTBOROUGH tO Mifs NanCY
PiTTBOROUGH.
danger was extreme
HAVE the pleafure to find that my dear Sifter has happily been exempt, by my aunt’s prudence, from every anxiety fhe would infallibly have Suffered, had fhe been informed of the near approach I have made to the grave. , Four days my
— but I am now per-fedlly reftored to health, though terribly emaciated. The valuable colonel has been So amiably interefted in my fate, that I will not anfwer for the confequences. — My ftrength, both of body and mind, is greatly impaired — and if he Should find an unlucky opportunity of renewing his importunity.
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 149
portunity,, I fear I fhould foon become that loft thing, a wife !
But Kitty Hutchens will take care to prove an impediment to every private interview—I am greatly indebted to her you
muft allow.
I can write but little at a time ; but as I find myfelf able to refume my pen for a few moments at leaft, — I muft take up Mrs. Kitty where I fet her down, and for once degrade myfelf fo far as to make her my principal fubjedl.
Methinks ’tis very odd that people can be fo dull of apprehenfion as this girl affe^ls to be—’tis true, my eyes at prefent are not very intelligent—but the colonel’s have for thefe three days paft moft pathetir cally intreated one half hour’s tete-d.tHe — ft>e, however, remains callous, and he
^ 3
muft
150
The History of
muft fubmit. I fancy my difpofition has undergone an equal change with my per-fon, by my late illnefs — I Seem not to have one flighty inclination left — it muft be confeflfed I am far from the fame wo» man in any refpedl—my complexion — my whole countenance is deprived of all that ever was agreeable in it: — but as my admirer has frequently declared, that perfon was but a Second or third consideration With him—you know I can be in no danger of lofing him —a Soldier muft be incapable of making a difhonourable retreat. But however he may be Satisfied with my outfide---how will he rejoice at the happy alteration within? — Inftead of finding me as heretofore froward, frolickfome, and fo forth-T-if I ftiould become the meek docile animal both he and you have fo induftri-oufly laboured to render me ! You muft be fenfible, that notwithftanding your arguments were very prettily urged — and his admirably Supported, that they could be by no means fo convincing as an attack
upon
Mis5 pittborough
I5I
upon the health. — We immediately become detached from a world we are unable longer to enjoy j and I fear much good resignation deferves no better name, than making a virtue .of neceffity.
Wednefday.
Mifs Kitty at laft, contrary to her inclination, has been compelled to gratify the colonel’s moft earnefl: dcfire — nor has he failed to make due advantage of it. I have no power of refiftance left — he bore all before him — and found me fo paffive, fo encouraging (not to give it a worfe name) that he ventured to lay his whole heart before me.
As to my abated charms—he efteems it a moft happy circumftance:—my lofs is fo trifling, in comparifon of his gain, that, excepting the pain I endured, he ftiall ever
L 4
re
152
The History of
remember it with heart-felt fatisfadlion. He even went fo far as to mention consulting my aunt refpedling deeds (of pur-chafe, Nancy, though he did not give them that odious name) talked of Spending Some time at his country houfe — many improvements to be made there — Ihady walks —elegant alcoves — inviting Breams and a moft lovely companion.
I could not deny but it was all very
pretty
but as the road lay, I had ob-
! _
je£Uons — a church ! — a ceremony
I
could not eaSily reconcile mySelf, efpecially as I felt a kind of natural antipathy at that juncture to travelling. But I had reafon tp apprehend, from his Smiling countenance, that roy looks did not give much ftrength to my expreffions — and he Bill jperfiBed in the fame dull Brain.
The SubjefI: heavy and Soporific in its nature — no wonder I was overcome. — I
him to retire -?■ whilB I indulged
the
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 153
the Soft invitation — and fo Soon as I a-waked I would let him know.
He was all obedience — pleafure glowed upon his cheek; and I dare believe that we were equally happy in our Separate, as we had been in our united Itate: for my own part I acknowledge I never enjoyed a Sweeter repoSe, and found my Self quite a new creature. A ray of my former vivacity began to dawn upon my heart — that beat with unaccuftomed vigour;—but ob-
i
Serve, Mrs. Anne, I nevertheless continued the fame harmleSs, paffive creature as before—except, indeed, a fenSe of obligation,
%
uncommon to my breaft, that occaSioned me Some little agitation. I was So condescending as to remember the promiSe I had made my companion; —therefore Sent for him fo Soon as I had recolledtcd my-felf a few minutes, and compoSed my dreSs. r— He made his appearance in a twink— received many handfome profeflions of my gratitude—for as I was convinced the reft
I had
154
The History of
1 bad experienced was owing chiefly to his converfation, I did not Scruple to acknowledge it. My fine Speeches had not, however, the moft elevating efFedI upon him: — I pitied his pride and ftupidityj-for really, my dear, the man looked as if he either could not comprehend me—or was at a loSs to determine whether I meant -to compliment or affront him, by telling him that he had talked me to fleep.
I fliall to-morrow dine in the parlour, and begin to breathe Somewhat at large.— I have been all SubmifEon hitherto to all their prescriptions; — but I Shall Soon caft off the trammels, and judge for mySelf.
LET-
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 155
X •	•	• X X X X X X • X •	« X^X X 'X X
5:1
i t i i ::	::	s:ti»:s;s:*
LETTER XXV.
Mifs Nancy Pittborough to Mif*
PiTTBOROUGH.
Tremble, my deareft girl, but to think of the danger you have efcaped I — What then Ihould I have felt had I been apprifed of your labouring under it ? As Providence has gracioufly Spared you, my aunt’s condudf cannot juftly be condemned — but had you been loft to us for ever, what amends could file have made me, for depriving me of my fhare of neceflary attendance, and taking a laft farewel of one fo tenderly beloved ? I cannot foibear rer fuming my former employment, of endeavouring to open your .eyes to Some evils that again Seem to threaten you j — it is a
part
156
The History of
part of friendlliip not to be eafjly difpenfed with. Your heart, my love, has by no means received either a due impredion of the mercies you have experienced, or of the inftability of human felicity. Is it not aftonilhing that, fufceptible as you are in general, you fhould be callous here?-But no, your giddy imagination prefents you with no other idea of what is paft -than a common incident, as likely to have befallen any other perfon as yourfelf.—But, believe me. Such judgments are highly er* roneous: — if we are to conSider ourfelves as under the immediate protedlion and direction of an all-wife Power, —can we conceive that whatever Seeming accidents reach us, have no further meaning in them, than merely affedling our corporeal part“ a
“ Sparrow cannot fall to the ground without “ the permiflion of its creator— will we
then deem ourfelves of lefs value than they.'
?
A vifltation of the kind you have met with, could not be more eflential for any
human
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 157
human being than yourSelf; I willi I could add falutary at the fame time ; the eminence of pleafure you had attained — the blooming graces of your perfon —^.and the idle admiration by which you was fur-rounded, contributing to perfuade you that you was more than mortal.
But furely the fudden change ought to have furnifhed you with a new fet of fen-timents. — How could you wdthiland fuch palpable convidlion of the infufficiency of
p
youth, prosperity, and adulation, to preserve you from the hand of ficknefs, or the jaws of death. Notwithllanding this fub-je£l may not be fo entertaining as many others, do not treat it with difgufl: or disregard ; for none can exceed it in importance. You would moft have committed Some grofs error, to the
I 9
deftrudlion of your peace, if not your reputation, had you not been fo happily prevented — and you ought to efteein all you have Suffered, as the moft fortunate of
events.
certainly

The History of
events. Let me conjure you, my deaf miftaken girl, to reap all the benefit the bleffing is capable of. —Avoid every return
to error, as you would a poiSoned dart — accuftom yourfelf to weigh and deliberate your future fteps — and then, and then only, will your heart remain a ftranger to repentance. But Ihould you relapfe upon the re-eftablifliment of your health into your wonted giddy courfe — you will not only lofe the moil valuable of lovers —but become an obje6l of general contempt. Perhaps my letter, if you do vouchfafe it a reading, may produce the fame drowfy cfte£ls as the colonel’s converfation : —but take my word for it, they are equally calculated to promote your real happinefs.— Liften, therefore, for the time to come, with an ear of complacence to his honeft rational propofals, and beftow a favourable eye upon my eplfiles.—We could, in a very fhort time, convince you, if you would but diveft yourfelf of vain and abfurd prejudices, that you have hitherto been merely
grafping
Miss PITTBOROUGH- 159
grafping a fhadow, and have moil blame-ably neglected the lubftance.
Cuftom can reconcile us to evil — nor is its power iefs prevalent with refpe£i to what is good. — Do not fuffer So ineftimable
o
a gem as your excellent underhanding, to be loft, or, at beft, abufed, in your pof-feftion. — If you are inclined to call in its affiftance, it will enable you to live a life of reafon j but, ufelefs as you render it at prefent, and Seemingly ina£live, be affured it will revive to add a poignance to the reproaches of conscience, and prove your greateft torment. I Supprcfs the further dictates of my heart to prevent your being wearied, and will only renew this fubjetft, ' at your own requeft (a pleaSure I fear £ Shall not Soon receive) or upon Some new provocation — and I will only add, that your happineSs is my happineSs — nor can mortification or disappointment affedl you, without my participation. You have ever loved me — can you then wound me in my
tendcreft
i6o
The History of
tendered part ? I could forgive, I could Support your negle£t of mej but I fliall
never
iw	iiwglWwU KJI ilXw ^ U L
be equal to your misfortunes.
/
I have been a wife a fortnight this day, and little did I imagine the unfavourable aufpices under which my change of condition commenced : — but I am not naturally fuperftitious; and if I was, I could find no evil omen in your prefervation. My father is happy in his Ton^ and his fon exults in the new relation he has acquired : their difpofitions are fo exaftly iimilar, and the defire of promoting each other’s felicity, fo reciprocal, that the dif-parity of their age is perfedlly loft. You may conceive my feelings, as you are well acquainted with my tendernefs for both; nor do I apprehend any other interruption to our general Satisfaction, than what we may derive from you. I mention that circumftance as a further ftimulative to your looking about you, as I know you generous to an extreme j and that how-
2	ever
Miss PITTBOROUGH. i6i
prodigal you might be inclined to be^ refpedling your own ftore, you would be a mifer of another’s property.
%#/
>	I
LETTER XXVI.
Colonel Dingley to Mr. Brooksbank,
YOU complain of negleft—why faith,
Ned, I beg your pardon; but my hours are at prefent fo agreeably taken up, that I have Scarcely one to throw away upon any occafion. But don’t let it affedb you, my boy ; for in every other refpe^l: I
am as much yours as ever.
\
I am above half inclined to flatter myfelf that my difficulties are at an end ; this amiable woman is, in every particular, fo very propitious. ~I have free leave to purfue
VoL. I.	M	the
I •
j62
The History of
the di£tates of my heart — prattle love without interruption or reftraint, and have a fair profpe<5t of prevailing upon her to be rnine, before fhe can receive any further contamination. Her vivacity, indeed, is fo far recovered, that I could not anfwer for the confequence if Ihe vvas to get loofe in her Single ftate—fhe certainly is not accountable to any one for her actions — and file is not of a difpoSition to Submit to impertinent controul. But if once her fate was united to mine, I am convinced that the gentleft perfuafions would be fufficient to preferve her from irregularities i my authority, as I myfelf fliould never prefume upon it, would have the greater weight with her, and her gratitude effedf: more than a thoufand arguments. How can I be furprifed at the lengths her vivacity tranfports her, when .even my fedatenefs is but a poor fecurity for me, when exalted by her approbation : with her it is a conftitutional, with me pnly an occafional animation. The Brsngth
of
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 163
of it, therefore, muft be extreme, and the merit of having it under due regulation, unfpeakable. She is at prefent exempt from every care : — no demands upon her tendernefs — no demands upon her prudence — nO demands upon her condefeen-fion. But when once initiated into the amiable chara£lers of the wife and mo-ther, flie would fiqd full exertion for them all. O Ned ! Can you have forgotten the defeription I gave you of her when at the play ? Has fhe not lovely fenfibility ? — Did not her tears, judicioufly beftovt'ed, bear teftimony of the goodnefs of her dif-pofition ? The innocent diftrefs of the children —the heart-rending Sorrow of the parent—did they not Suitably afFecI her? — Ah, file felt it all! — and hiding her face to conceal the beautiful effedls of her humanity, made me wholly her’s. Mrs. Hutchens and I have formed a plot upon her excellent niece : — her Sentiments and mine perfedlly correspond—fhe will See but
company
fhe will give into but few. M 2	parties.
164
The History of
parties, until I have obtained the prefent of her hand.—-The buftle of preparations, it is hoped, will prove fufficient amufe-ment 5 — and I’ll venture to truft her with her own condudl afterwards. As to you, Mr. Edward, I expe£l: your prefence upon the occafion, with every elTential to do your friend honour: —• no excufes you can offer will be accepted : — your miftrefs’s conftancy cannot be fufpe<5led — and your Separation, for a fliort period, will but tend to augment the happinefs of your future interviews.
LET-
^ -I
Mis PITTBOROUGH. 165

LETTER XXVII.
N
Mifs PitTborough to Mifs NancV
PiTTBOROUGH.
OW unfortunate, my dear lifter, that your very inftru£tive, your valuable epiftle fliould reach me in Such an hour of gaiety, as to anfw^er no other pur-pofe than to make you appear to my imagination as a mere Hottentot.
And So you would ferioufly perfuade me that I am reftored to health for no other purpofe than, as a proof of my gratitude. Sic. Sic. to become as gloomy and fandfi-fied as yourfelf?
Notwithftanding all the fufpicions you fo wifely and civilly entertain of the un-
M 3	foundnefs
166
The History of
foundnefs of my heart, give me leave to tell your matronly ladyfhip, that I am no more capable of rendering myfelf a limilar being to you, with refpe£l to outward appearance, than it is pofiible for you to exchange your difpoSition for fuch a one as mine j and yet I am bold to affirm that I have a due fenfe of the bleffing I have recovered ; and, as a proof of my Setting a juft value upon it, I mean to enjoy it to the utmoft.
My good difcreet aunt, and the Sober defigning colonel, I find have united forces in order to matronize me, thereby hoping to clip the wings of my vivacity, and qualify me for the domeftic hop. What obligations do I not owe them for their kind intentions ? though I cannot entirely fub-fcribe to the admirable meafures they feem difpofed to purfue.	’
And is liberty then fo light a conftders-tion with them and you, as to be Sacrificed
tO'
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 167
to Such narrow views, as making a pudding? — How I contemn your little mind-nefs! —No, it is the foul of happinefs, and ihall not expire unfairly.
You are really a very pretty advocate for the matrimonial caufe. — My father is turn-ed threefcore. —Well, fays you, I am fa “ happy, it is impoffible for me to defcribe “ how happy I am. — My hufband and fa-“ ther are fo much alike, that bating a few “ wrinkles, you might miftake the one for “ the other.” A moft amazing fatisfadtion, upon my word, to fo young a woman ! — But now your elderly appearing gentlemen would bv no means fuit me: — I am
J
for an animated, notan inanimate being— one who could fly, not hobble, to protect me in cafe of danser-i—who could be learn-
o
ed with the learned —‘ amufinR with the
o
gay — a handfome figure in every perfon’s eftimation — and mafter of an arm, fo well llrung, as to be able to break my bones
M 4
upon
i68
The History of
upon Suitable provocation. Still life! can it have any charms ?
‘‘ My dear, I am quite of your opinion.’* “ Ah, my love, I knew thou wouldftj for we never difagree.’*
How fulfome — how odious ! —
I
“ Madam, I infill: upon your compli-
ance.

“ Sir, you miftake, your power is not “ altogether fo abfolute.”
Madam, I would advife you not to be too provoking.”
“ Oh, fir ! fo well bred a gentleman
I
“ can never forget the treatment due to a “ lady.’*
“ But, madam, if you are pleafed to “ a(9: inconfiftent with your charader,
“ you
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 169
“ you ought not to be furprifed if I deviate “ from mine.”
“ Yes, fir, my furprife v/ould be un-fpeakable, as I am only a weak frail woman, you one of the lords of the
CC
Ci
cc
creation.

There’s the life of living for you ! have you any thing in your humdrums that can come in competition with it ?
But, to be ferious, I muft acknowledge that this colonel poflefies a moft extravagant fhare of my good opinion :—his ten-dernefs, his complaifance, are not without their beauties : •— but a hulband, my dear, is fo prepofterous a being-- — So like the giant, with his feven-leagued boots, that our nurfery maid ufed to tell us of, that I own I am terrified at the bare idea of Such a huge mortal falling to my lot. Then you muft have no eyes, nor ears, but for this
— you muft never
mafter of your fate:
be
\
170
The History of
be weary of liftening to his naufeous tales^ wherein he, the hero, has pe
/
wonderful atchievements as requires your whole flock of credulity to believe only the third part :	— you mufl model
your perfon, both dreSs and addrefs, to his pretty fancy, and twenty to one but his grandmother’s poke — may enjoy a larger fliare of his approbation, than his mother’s pinners :—you mufl conform to his hours — yawn when he yawns — retire when he retires, or perhaps barely efcape Suffocation, by fitting a whole evening under a cloud of his raiSing. - Oh, I could never endure it!
Or, in all probability, as the man chofen for me is a foldier, he would have the mo-defty to requeft me to turn campaigner: — fo loving, how could one refufe ? To be Sure the inconvenience of travelling, and the hardy accommodations of a tent —the hazard of being furprifed by the enemy into a ftate of captivity, or having a bullet
dilpatch
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 171
drfpatch one in one’s fleep, are circura-ftances by no means inviting : — but then our fond hufband cannot bear a Separation j and our hearts are too tender to deny them any thing.
Perhaps the Several officers belonging to the corps, when no immediate danger was apprehended, might be permitted to Spend the evening with their colonel and his lady : — the honour how great to them the happinefs how extreme to us : — a relaxation from their fatigue — a cordial to their commander’s Spirits — who cracks his bottle and his joke with equal humour.
They have their jeft, in return, a little tawdry or So; — but who could reftrain ^hem, when, in all probability, they might have but few days to live ?
Oaths are Ihocking to ears that are not properly feafoned ; — but if a man could not tdl his Itory (a good one too in every
other
f '
172
The History of
other refped) without fuch embellifli* ments — why you know — it would be cruel to deprive him of his fatisfaflion, or one’s-felf of the beft entertainment a camp could afford. The fignal is given for en-
: — the parting is very pathetic.—I weep! — he Sighs ! — but muff tear him-felf from me. The guns rattle in my ears — I am ready to die with apprehenfion; — but foon after, my hulband returns victorious, with only the lofs of his thumb: — the fight of blood is more than I can Support : — I faint; — my hero laughs : — the wound is dreft, and we return to our native country.
A knightfhip is the confequence of this noble enterprize. —
I Ihared the fatigue
and now (hare the glory likewife. — “Your ladylhip!” — What a defperate pretty found — especially as it was obtained only by my hufband’s depriving a few miferable wretches of their lives, at the immenfe Small hazard of his own. Wherever I go
I am
Miss PITTBOROUGH.
173
I am perfe6IIy idolized. — “ Your lady-fhip muft have Seen a vaft deal of the “ world.”
“ O madam ! bloody Scenes have but
“ little to amuSe.

“ O dear, your ladylhip! — I wonder “ you did not die upon the Spot.
53
I
His knightftiip is promiSed a handfome poll as the reward of his valour : — but a peace enSues ~ the miniftry is changed — and hfe finds himfelf funk into oblivion. He exalts his voice wherefoever he comes : — fights his battles over and over again — whilft I give the confirming Yes to all that he is pleafed to relate. His efForts, however, prove ineffedlual : — his country
— and who^ remembers what is paft ? — He has the mortification to fee his head taken down from every petty ale-houfe — for the more important purpofe of doing honour to the
member
wants his fervice no longer:
The History of
member of a neighbouring county; ~ or, perhaps, only replacing a new painted grinning Saracen. — He, in Ihort, has nothing for it, but to fly to his patrimony in Wiltfhire — teach his children to avoid public fpiritednefs, if they would avoid ill-treatment and difappointment — and herd ■with every thick-headed Squire within fifty miles round.
I, his fpoufe, have by this time pafTed my
— coIle6t a firing of ufeful re-
meridian
ceipts
make pofSet ’ drinks
prepare
falves. Sic. Sic. — I have enough upon my hands: — my bufband foured by neglecl
— except when
neglefls me alfo
himfelf —
returns of the gout make him fenfible I am one degree better than common lumber.—
e IS
at length, taken off by an uncommonly fevere attack — and does not leave me one fix-pence more than my jointure; —and, having educated his heir (myeldeft cub) agreeable to his own tafle and principles, he even thinks that too much for
me.

' \
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 175
*
me. — Thus, Nancy, I who now (how* ever qualified by nature) fhine in the box, and Sparkle at the ball — by a too early Sacrifice of my liberty, and adherence to a Set of formal romantic notions of dutiful-
I
nefs, lovingnefs, &c. &c.—Should pafs my days without enjoyment — die in obfcu-rity — unpitied, unlamented, by even the
very beings I had given life to.----------If
you can expe£l me to fall in love with fuch a piece, you are by no means the girl I take you for : — but, alas ! that appellation no Ion ger Suits you, and I know not what judgment to form of you in other particulars.
LET-
176
The History of

#9	99	#9 AA
! i>fV >iV ilftt !>rt^ !A?	*A*^**»^y*'^%^
LETTER XXVIII.
From the fame, to the fame.
Forefee a rupture of no fmall confe-quence is at hand : — my aunt bears all before her—the jeweller—the mercer— the millener, &c. &c. are fucceflively rapping at the door the whole morning long. — We are denied to every one, my old
admirer, fir Matthew, in particular: —
%
fufficient this condudl to roufe the fpiritof a meeker woman than myfelf. — But I have ftill a further, nay an irrefiftible fti-mulative : — for Mifs Kitty, (I am infinitely obliged to her upon this occafion, however) by revealing the train of their meafures to her favourite Abigail, in a '	private
Miss PITTBOROUGH. iij
private tete-a-tete (when I was fuppofed to be at too great a diftance to reap any bene-*-fit) has enabled me to counterwork them in every mean particulati
What! is it then judged neceflary to confine me to a dark room, in order to fuc-ceed in their darker purpoSes ? But I will burft out when they leafl: expert it. If 1 expreSs an inclination to go any where, the anfwer is, “ My dear, you are yet
“ too weak to bear much fatigue
o
we
<c
will make a little party at home.
“ Kitty, indeed, is engaged ; but the “ colonel and Mrs. Hobbes (a woman “ only Ten years older than herfelf) will “ complete a Sett.” — So down we fit fliuffling and cutting—now the cards—and now a harmlefs joke —until the noify hall-clock diftinilly deals us out ten Sober ftrokes, —when I am hurried to my apartment, as if my very fate was hinged upon that fingle period.
VOL. I.
N
I ever
178
The History of
I ever promifed myfelf I would at lead renounce my virgin ftate with all pollible eclat;—but, inftead of fulfilling that promise, if I do not Speedily exert myfelf, I ftiall be huddled into a wife—and there’s an end of me.
I cannot but be highly diverted at the furprize I fhall occafion them.—My aunt
will pioufly lift up her hands—the colonel, blefs us ! how he will rave—and the fullen Kitty perhaps once more attempt to be Smart. ’Tis pity, though, to disappoint all their flattering expedlations. — I am fo very good-natured, eafy, and all that, that I could almoft find in my heart to become the dupe of their clumfy arti^ fice, rather than give them pain,—But then I recollect that fuch paflivenefs would but ill-fuit the martial charadler of my future hufband ; therefore re-confirm my resolution of running refty.
How
Miss PITTB.DROUGH. 179
How fliall I break the ice ? —Suppofe— no, that will never do; — I muft not over-flioot myfelf, or I Ihall indeed give them the advantage, and prepare a heavy penance for myfelf.
I will only intimate to the porter fomc enfuing day (flipping a trifle at the fame time into his hand) that my aunt no longer requires him to deny her to common vifitants, as I am now too well re-covered to be affedled' by it. I know the old lady’s whimflcal notions too well to apprehend being betrayed to the fellow ; for whatever difpleafure flie may pleafe to let fall upon my devoted head, fhe would rather die than expofe the folly and infirmities of her family to her fervants.
How transporting the thought! — The colonel and I are tete-a-tete (for this good gentlewoman has not forgotten the days of her youth, and does now by us, as fhe would have wifhed at that period
N 2
to
i8o
The History of
to have been done by, moft kindly withdrawing to her clofet Soon after the cloth is removed.) Well, as I was faying, we are tete a-tete —the fame tale on his part, the ufual attention on mine.—A loud rap at the door—no matter, the porter has orders to admit no company—when in hobbles moft unexpecftedly my old gallant.
I, as if deriving new life from his prefence, give him the kindeft of receptions;—then, fmiling, accufe him of ne-gledl, in not waiting upon me fooner— protefting him the man on earth I moft wilhed to fee. He, kiflirtg my hand, juf-tiSies his own Innocence, convinces me, from an immoderate catalogue of circitm-ftances, that not a day pafled without his Sighing at my door,—with many pretty, pleafing, genteel intimations of all he futTered for my fake.
\
I all gratitude — he all love — forget that any one is prefent but ourfelves-until,
in
Miss PITTBOROUGH. i8i
in conduoUng me to a chair, we ftumble againft the poor petrified colonel, who is So apparently chagrined, confounded, mortified, and 'aftonilhed, that we are terrified at his countenance. I recommend the breathing of a vein, as the beft relief for a Sudden ftupor, or fit of infenfibility r—when the paffionate creature — no longer able to contain himfelf—with a wild look, and threatening voice, vows never to fee me more —and immediately burfts out of the anartment.
We laugh aloud, in order to increafe his fury—fit down to piquet—and have got through three cool pleafant games, before my aunt, with her high-fwelled features, vouchfafes to join us. She calls many bitter and reproachful glances at me.—I fhrug my Ihoulders, as a token of my ignorance of her meaning :^fhe fits the baronet out, (though Seated upon thorns) — when file pours forth So tre-meiidous a ledture, that I either am (or
K3
affedt
c

i82
The History of
aIFe£l to be) miferably fliocked —(can fe-verity Suit with delicacy?)—complain of faintnefs—and am for hurrying to my
apartment.
#
But fhe, apprehenfive of Some bad consequence, prevents my defign; and, relaxing her features, Softening her accent, and presenting me with a few decent Speeches, Soothes me not only into com-pofure, but prevails upon me to pardon her. The colonel too is confidered as a firft-rate offender—but by the good lady’s interceffion, and a profufion of acknowledgments and conceffions on his part, is once more reftored to favour—and So the frolic ends.
The matrimonial preparations are Suspended, as they are apprehenSive of teaz-ing me, if they introduce the fubjeci too Soon—by which means I difentangle mySelf from their Snares, —and if I am ever So far caught again — why Set me
down
Miss PITTBORQUGH. 183
V
down for any thing,—every thing,—but a woman of fpirit.


LETTER XXIX.
Mifs Hutchens to Mifs Nancy Pitt-
BOROUGH.
AM forry, my dear coufin, to disturb your prefent felicity with Such difagreeable news as I have to communicate ;—but, as Mamma fays, you muft know it—and therefore the Sooner the better.
Indeed I was always concerned to fee the intolerable flightinefs of my coufm’s behaviour, though I was far from fufpeft-ing what it would produce.—O how I have heard her declaim for an hour toge-
N4
ther
184
The History of
ther upon the beauty of honour, and the felicity of a conduct that merited no reproach j—but they were not the Sentiments of her heart, it is pretty plain, or Ihe would never have permitted her wed-ding'cloaths to be made for one occafion, and idly embraced another.
And fuch a man too it is Ihe has flighted,—that half the ladies have been pulling caps for! I think I may venture to fay, Ihe did not know what Ihe would have, and dearly perhaps repents by this time; but her pride will never Suffer her to acknowledge it.
No other man would have borne the treatment the colonel has received from 1—but he would believe it was all
n
h
harmleSs giddinefs, and that matrimony would perfectly reclaim her: —-I am mif-
taken, but it does with a witnefs She went off but this very morning : we fuf-ped fjjr Matthew is the companion of her
flight.

Miss PITTBOROUGH. 185
flight, but are far from being at any certainty :—but you lhall hear from us again fo foon as we are able to obtain fome fa-tisfadlory information. I think ’tis pity fhe ever came to London : fhe might, perhaps, have avoided every error under my uncle’s obfervation and protedlion ;—but file was fo fet up in this place with the idle homage her perfon (from being new) procured her, that it is no wonder her head was at laft affedled.—Make proper tenders of my duty and refpedls, and believe me to be upon this occafion moft Sincerely concerned for your uneafmefs, as
I aiTj &c.
LET-
i86
The History of

LETTER XXX.
Mifs Nancy Pittborough to Mrs.
Hutchens.
EAR madam, I intreat you will explain by the very return of the poll, what misfortune has befallen my poor miftaken Sifter. How could Mifs Kitty be fo little fenfible of our affedlion for the dear fugitive, as to intermix the moft cruel refledfions with a piece of intelligence that has wrung all our hearts ?
My fifter (unhappy though Ihe may be) pofielled many valuable perfedHons, at leaft Ihe had a nature Soft and open to diftrefs. — Had Mifs Kitty erred, Ihe would generoully have extenuated (not malici-
oully
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 187
1
oufly aggravated) the matter; and from feeling herfelf, would not have wounded her friends fo mercilefsly. Never let her write again : her language is. the language of the envious and malevolent.
Excufe me, my dear aunt; I have all the refpe£l for you that your goodnefs de-mands; —but I, cannot tolerate the pert and illiberal, let them be whomfoever they may.
Pity our diftrefs, forgive my petulance, for never mother loved a child with more tendernefs or partiality than I my Sifter. Reftore her to us, if poftible. Single; let her not become a prey to Some infmuating wretch, who muft have ftrangely mis-led her.
Write, write, my good madam, by the firft opportunity. I cannot leave my father, or I myfelf would endeavour to recover her 3 £he is a jewel of ineftimable
value.
The History of
value, notwthiftanding a Single flaw, which cannot be overlooked!
LET T.D R XXXI
Lady Sanxsey to MiSs Nancy Pitt-
BOROUGH.
HAT have I done ? Oh my lifter, my folly, pride, and ingratitude, have at laft planted daggers in my breaft, and I fear the breafts of my friends like-wife.
/
But it is paft, irrecoverably paft, and I will endeavour to make the pnly atonement in my power,—bearing the bitter confequence with tolerable patience and refolution. — Refolution ! what a dreadful found ! I have deprived myfelf of the only man on earth I ever could love
thrown away my perfon and happinefs
upon
Mi§s PITTBOROUGH. 189
upon one I hate—and then talk of resolution. But I will be compofed ; I might have taken a worfe ftep.—Sir Matthew is not So defpicable as I have depicted him.—He is barely turned of forty ; but having lived pretty freely, and being naturally near-Sighted, he is by no means an eligible figure.
O mifery ! the colonel Was—but the conflict is over, and he mufl: no longer be mailer of my heart.
Sir Matthew’s ellate is very confidera-
ble, and I do believe he is a man of ho-
*
nour. He has promifed me a handfome Settlement fo foon as I am of age; —but can he heal—Yet why accufe him ? I only was to blame.—I almoll propofed the elopement myfelf—merely for the plea-fure of being purfued ; but my punilhment is juft, and I will not repine. Heavens! what will become of me ? how Ihall I bear the inevitable, the killing elFeds of
the
igo
The History of
the conne£lIon I have entered into?—Sir Matthew my hufband !—I cannot Survive the thought!—but it will not, cannot be diffolved, — and death alone has power to releafe me.
*
That I had but the bofom of friendship to repofe myfelf upon, though but for a Short period !—I might perhaps recover my reafon — become capable of re-colle£Hon — and at length reSigned.
Sir Matthew has it in his own breaft at this jundlure either to fix my efteem or eternal difguft, by the ufe he makes of the authority I have in veiled him'with, — If he compels me to live with him in my prefent difpofition of mind, he is a monller, and I Sliall—but I am at his mercy, and mull abide by every horrid conSequence. Adieu, my dearell filler; my only confolation is, that you have Secured your happinefs by your prudence, and I can only lament my not having followed fo worthy an example.
LET-
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 191

LETTER XXXII.
Colonel Dingley to Mr. Brooksbank
OW little do we know of our-Selves, or what we are, or are not capable of enduring in this life! — I that was for dying if Mifs Pittborough' was not reftored to me, have been enabled to Survive a more terrible misfortune.
O Ned, I have indeed loft her, loft the woman I loved better than mv own foul i yet I am neither funk to the grave, nor are my fenfes in the leaft impaired. She has dealt cruelly by me,—yet may every good angel protedb her, and foften
the mifery I have too much reafon to ap-
0
jjrehend flie has prepared for herfelf I
She
192^
The History of
She did not hate me j—her eyes have fpoke the contrary a thoufand times: — yet fhe has torn herfelf from me for ever, and given a mortal wound to my ever-lafting peace.
I wilh I could be fufficiently mafter of myfelf to give you an account of the horrid affair j — but I am unequal to it at prefent:—tendernefs and refentment rend me in pieces. — I mufl: rave.
*


*
It is not a fubje(3; that can ever be handled cooly ; years and years muft pafs before that period arrives. — So lovely, fo encouraging, fo feemingly Sincere ! — fo near the fummit of all I wifhedl — What a defperate fhock rnuft I not have received ?—But Kitty, Kitty caufed my deftrudlion ; — and may I never behold her more, and I will endeavour not to curfe her too bitterly.
You
Miss PITTB.DROUGH. 193
You' may remember the Scheme I told
m
you Mrs. Hutchens and I had formed.-—* That fatal Scheme has ruined us both. She perceived our views, was juftly offended at them, and by an artifice we were too Ihallow to penetrate, produced the calamity I ftiall ever deplore.
Had we proceeded difSerently !—but file was not born for me. — 1 Should have been too too happy.—Alas ! the contrary extreme muft now be my portion. Deceived and flattered by appearances, I thought mySelf Secure, and overflowing with felf-fatisfadbon, and big with felf-conSequence, I flipt away after dinner to quicken the attorney, whoSe flow progreSs with the deeds was become intolerable to me, as I confidered them as the only impediment to our union.
Having received fatisSadlory aflurances of diSpatch, I took my leave—hummed a tune as I croflfed Lincoln’s-Inn—pitied
VoL. I.
o
every
194
The H.i STORY of
every perfon I met for not being So happy as myfelf—and returned to Mrs. Hutchens’ to conclude the day where I began it. But how was I diSconcerted, on entering the dining-room, to find that wretched thing Sir Matthew Simpering, and, as he evidently imagined, entertaining a woman So Superior to himfelf, that I was aftonilhed he could Support the mortifying confcioufneSs of the ridiculous attempt. Temper is not my greateft boaft : —my head and heart were inftantly in a flame— I was even mean in my repartees;—but Mifs Pittborough was So cruel as to make “im amends by her Smiles for my acrimony.
I, however, outftayed him. Mrs. Hutchens Severely rebuked her niece for her behaviour—and I boldly ventured to ex-prefs my disapprobation.
Oh how lovely, how provoking flie looked !—“ It was mighty well!—Ihe “ had indeed prepared herfelf for a lec-
<(
ture
MiSs PITTEOROUGH. 19^
ii
cc
cc
cc

cc

(C

4C
ture
to be fare fome ftrokes had ex-ceeded her worft expectations—but Ihe could bear them all*—A very pretty figure file was fenfible the muft make.
o
in fufSering herfelf to be So roughly treated by a perfon who had not the lead: right to afSume So daring a privi-
lege :
but it was her aunt’s houSe
«>
and {he was pleaSed not only to give a fandion to Such ill breeding, but viSibly encouraged it ]—and therefore {he was content.”
“ For God’s fake, my dear madam,” faid I, “ do not mifconftrue the liberty
I have taken with you.—I am the lafl perfon who would attempt to controul your inclinations.—I indeed could not behold your approbation of that wretch, without being flung to the foul;—and I did hope that the terms we were upon”—

cc
4C

What

terms,"' faid {he hallily,
could either authorize or e:^:cufe fuch
O 2	“ be-
jg6
The History of

cc
cc

(C
4C
(C
cc
(C
cc
behaviour ?—If I had really proceeded the lengths in your favour, you have So induftrioufly endeavoured to precipitate me—muft I have lived for you alone, \vithout ever receiving or returning the fmalleft civility of the reft of your fex ? — But you have happily fhewn yourfelf in your proper colours-^ and I blefs myfelf that I have efcaped your narrow arbitrary power.”
I
Mrs. Hutchens was highly offended at this fpeech ; — accufed her of ingratitude, unworthinefs, and diabolical pride j—ad-vifed me never to make her of anv con-
J
Sequence for the future, for that fhe was undefervino- of Such a heart as fhe knew me
o
to be mafter of.
Dear-bought compliment!—fatal offi-cioufnefs !—inftead of Serving, fhe has irreparably undone us.
“ And do you think, madam,” returned Mifs Pittborough, her complexion
greatly

(C
cc
cc
cc
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 197
greatly heightened, “ that I could ever confent to marry a man. So'every way my Superior ? The obligations he has conferred upon me would alone have “ proved an insurmountable obftacle, as I really muft acknowledge I have too proud a heart to thank any one for receiving my hand and Since I am urged to it, I muft tell you, that, not-withftanding Sir Matthew is not altogether So Sightly as that gentleman (looking contemptuoufly upon me) I would, and do, infinitely prefer him, as he was equally affe^ied at the ill-neSs I have So lately recovered, though he has been too genteel to make a me-ritofit.”
(C
cc
((
cc
((
C(
(C
I would have behaved with my uSual Servility—confefled mySelf to .blame—in-treated forgivenefs—but Mrs. Hutchens
would not permit me. “ You may in-“ deed, fir,” Said fhe, “ thank yourfelf
in a great meaSure for my niece’s
»
“ haughty
O 3
✓
198
The History of
t
“ haughty treatment of you.—You have ‘‘ fed her vanity until flie fancies her-felf a goddefs.—And yet,’’ added ftie Smiling, “ She has no more delicacy or “ regard for her deltyfhip than to herd “ with a Vulcan. —But I inSift upon it,” continued flie in a more Serious accent, “ that from henceforward fhe may a;3: ‘‘ what part flie pleafes.—You will al-ways be a welcome viSitor at my houfe, “ but I will only conSider you in the ufual light of a friend,—as I hope you will in a verv fhort time be able to be-
J
hold the woman who has treated you So unworthily, with Suitable indifFer-“ ence.—I cannot believe her So abfurd “ as really to have any favourable difpo-
“ fitiori towards Sir Matthew; but if She
\
has, fire will meet wuth the punilh-
»
ment due to her levity; for I can take upon me to fay, that his mind is more deformed by ill-nature than his body by difeafe. With any other coxcomb I might be alarmed ; but here the decep-

(C
4C



4C
4C
tion

cc
4C
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 199
tion is So low. So obvious, that upon reflection I am angry with myfelf for not laughing at it, inftead of being dif-
‘‘ turbed.

Th is was the rock on which my happinefs Split: — out of absolute perverfenefs, Ilie alFeCted to approve what fhe would other-wife have defpifed :—but I will not abufe liinL
She perfifted in this conduCt for a whole week, whilft I appeared aukwardly com-pofed, and clumfily indifferent. — How little did I forefee the fatal termination !— I am again loft—a few moments recollection will enable me to proceed.
The eighth day after this disappointment of my hopes, having come to a resolution of renouncing my affumed ne-gleCt, and by every fubmiflion flie could require, eftablifli myfelf once more in her good opinion; I dropped in as ufual
O 4
/
at
200
The History of
at Mrs. Hutchens’s; for, notwithftand-ing Mifs Pittborough’s brow had, during that tedious interval, continued ever unfa-vourable, I was unable to liv.e without the Sight of her.
I perceived a wildnefs in the fellow’s looks that opened the, door; but my heart •yvas too full of the work I wilhed to ac-complilh, to fufSer me to attend to any thing that did not immediately relate to Mifs Pittborough. Kitty inftantly made
her appearance : an air of triumph and
%
malicious fatisfa6lion was viSible in her
1
countenance.
1
My coufm is gone out, fir,” faid (lie; “ and I fancy we Ihall fee no more “ of her for this day.”—“ Your mamma, I fuppofe, is with her,” I would have added :—but file interrupted me with faying, “ I am at prefent quite mifirefs of the “ houfe, therefore cannot expefl to be favoured with much of your good com-
((
pany
>5
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 2or
pany
’ Unfeeling, callous wretch! Thus was I deluded out of a whole day, and that fweet amiable creature fell a fa-crifice. I palTed a miferable afternoon and reftlefs night,—from my impatience to Ihake off a practice I was become un-fpeakably weary of.—I formed a thoufand Speeches to excufe my behaviour; addrelTed them to her in idea a thoufand and a thoufand times; and from the Soft flattery that at length ftole upon my heart, of finding her propitious, I dropped into a fleep, at an hour v/hen I fhould have been upon the wing :—but it is over, and I muft never fee her more.
The next morning, however, revealed all the horror of my circumftances.
I
“ I will follow her, madam,’’ cried I in a kind of frenzy to good Mrs. Hutchens, “ and either recover her, or perilh in “ the attempt,—She has only taken this “ ftep to roufe me from my feeming le-
ii
thargy;
202
The History of
I
« thargy	is juftifiable in her pro-
« ceedings : — Ihe is 'properly confcious « of her worth,—and has too great a “ mind to pardon indignities unfolicited. “ Dp not attempt to detain me,” (fhe was for proposing Some other perfon, as beft capable of the purfuit) “ my life, my foul, depends upon my fuccefs;— “ and I fhall be outrageous, if oppofed ‘‘ in this mypoSitiye determination.”
I need not tell you the expedition I ufed in my journey;—but file had a whole day’s advantage of me, and v/as beyond my reach. What bitter imprecations did I now utter againft myfelf and the hard-natured Kitty, — and the next moment
prayed as heartily for forgivenefs ! — In
✓
this ftate of mind I reached Edinbursh,
o
I had traced her all the way from inn to inn,—and drove the laft ftage in tortures not to be defcribed. I jumped from the carriage the inflant it flopped,—
and
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 203
\
and violently Seizing the firft man I Saw, alked if Such a perfon (imperfe6lly describing her) was not in the houfe. He told me She was, and with great civility condudled me to the apartment Sir Matthew had made uSe of.
\
My heart—I could Scarce contain it I abruptly broke into the room,—and found her alone, pale and penhve. She ftarted, and aroSe.—I caught her in my arms,—and preffing her to my bofom, cried in diftrafted Sentences—“ Pardon, “ pardon !—you fliall—you mull be only “ mine.”
“ Oh fir,” Said Ihe, in a voice that pierced my very Soul, and half fainting at the fame time—“ You are come too “ late.—I have already difpofed of my-“ Self,—and have not another hand to “ beftow.”—At this inftant—the wretch Sir Matthew ftalked into the room.
She died away,—whilft he, disregarding
her
204
The History of
her condition, looked fternly upon me, demanding what bufinefs I had there ; — adding, “ That lady is rny wife.”
That cruel infult drove me to diftrac-tion.—I Snatched up a piftol—“ Unfeel-“ ing monfter! to triumph over mifery “ that you yourfelf have occafioned.”
I
I
Mifs Pittborough opened her lovely
“ My hulband !” was all fhe could I felt their meaning,—and down
eyes utter.
dropped the weapon prepared for deftruc-tion upon the floor, and happily difcharged itfelf without any mifchief.
«
Sir Matthew offered his arm to the drooping victim.—“ You had better leave “ this apartment; that madman will only “ difcompofe you.”
“ You are protedled, fir,” returned I. “ Mortally wounded as I am,—I feek “ no fatisfa£lion,—convinced of the im-
ii
poffibility of obtaining it.”
I en-
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 205
%
I endeavoured to rife,—but found my limbs unable to Support me.—He dragged the deareft obje6l from my Sight—more dead than alive—and left — oh he left me—but you can have no idea of it.
I charge youj Ned, as you regard my peace or reafon, never to tear open this vi'^ound afrefli by attempting confolation.
I am not to be confoled.—There was but one circumftance that could in any degree have alleviated fo crufhing an evil. Had flie the leaft profpedf of happinefs, that would have been a Support;—but She is no lefs undone than myfelf, and death alone--
But do not be alarmed.—I am not fo
/
hardened as to commit a deliberate Suicide.—I Survived a moment—I faw her torn from me, — reliuftance and horror/ in her countenance. — I was then preserved Sroin guilt, and you have nothing now to fear.
Take
206
The History of
Take notice, however, that I will quit this country on Some defperate enterprize; and fhould a bullet in mercy find its way to my heart,—though under the direding hand of my moft mortal enemy,—I will thank him with my lateft breath,—as it is the only means that can reftore me to reft and peace.

LETTER XXXIII.
Lady Sanxsey to Mifs Nancy Pitt-
BORdUGH.
OW, my dear fifter, I have fome‘ reafon to hope, that the meafure of my punifhment is complete,—and that futurity cannot have fuch another ftiock in ftore for me, as I yefterday experienced.
O I will tell you all, and, when once my miferable bofom has relieved itfelf, by
a com-
Miss PITTBOROtJGH. 207
a communication of its Sorrow, I ’will endeavour to bring good out of evil, and' reft Satisfied with my Sate.
Prepofterous promiSe !—delufiva expectation !—never, never again will the cup of Satisfa6lion reach my lips. — What happy days have I not enjoyed ! Neither Sicknefs (except in a late disregarded in-ftance) nor disappointment Sound the way to my habitation. But that exemption from corporeal Suffering rendered my mind diSeaSed, Sar beyond the poffibility of cure.—Not the ftrongeft and moft valuable admonitions of friendfhip,—nor the moft pathetic perSuaSions of love, could Save my foul from the mortal pangs it now endures.
Juft turned nineteen, and loft to every
felicity !—But I have carved my own for--
%
tune j—would to God I could likewiSe di-
geft it!
I re-
2o8'
The Hi story of
I remember our parting well, —You, my dear, had Some Singular forebodings of my evil deftiny. — How did you intreat me not to fufSer pleafure to intoxicate my reafon, nor to promife myfelf I could gather rofes, infenfible of the thorn ?
I, giddily Secure, laughed equally at your tender apprehenfions, and prudent advice; and impatiently wilhed for the arrival of my aunt’s carriage, to deliver me from a repetition of the fame heavy, dull ledture.
/
It did arrive;—my heart was divided between the tranfport of emerging from obfcurity, and the reluctance to be Separated from you. — Tears, however, involuntarily efcaped me.—We drove from the door; —how little did I then imagine I was driving to deftruCtion !
My aunt, with great good humour, rallied me upon the foftnefs of my nature,
telling
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 209
»
telling me, that our friendfliip had but few precedents in the world, to which fhe was about to introduce me, to keep it in countenance ; —and fball I confefs, that, notwithftanding I was' fenfible fhe in reality highly approved the Scene fhe had been witnefs to, I was more than half afhamed', that I had betrayed fo much of the ruftic in her prefence, determining for the future to affume a lefs fufceptible character, in order to qualify myfelf for fafhionable circles.
I adhered with a'fatal fteadineSs to this; worthy refolution j and, except that now and then the genuine dilates of my nature were too powerful for reftraint, I might be faid to be a few removes only from infenfibility.
You know what enfued. —My weak imagination, dazzled by gay trappings arid fplendid gewgaws, and my brain heated by the rich draughts of flattery I imbibed.
VoL. I.
P
left
210
The History of
left me doubtful of my mortality. What exultation,—what delight did I not receive from paining a worthy heart! — But the work is at length accomplilhed, ^and a. glorious w’ork it proves !.—Nor can
I Support
Well, well, they fay ca-
lamities may be lightened by being judi-cioufly borne, —and the parti have already adled leaves no doubt of my discretion upon every occallon.
Had the colonel but underftood the art of diffimulation — had he not, with a franknefs and generoSity almoft peculiar to himfelf, put his heart into my hands, — I fhould not fo wantonly have undone either him or myfelf! — He conceived ideas of my principles that v^ere utterly erroneous.—I have indeed proved myfelf an angel—but it is an angel of darknefs !
I loved—tenderly, Sincerely loved him, but could not rellft the temptation of
exercifing my power
and I apprehended
that
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 211
%
♦	V
that the bare confeffion of the Sentiments he had infpired me with, though to the deareft friend on earth, would be a diminution of that power.—It was my intention, my deSire to be his at the long-run but So fine a creature, truly, was not to be obtained in a common way. O vanity!—vanity I—thou art in general only deemed an infirmity, but in my breaft haft proved a moft pernicious vice !
So recently recovered from a moft alarming diftemper !— fuch inconteftible, fuch engaging proofs as I was every hour receiving of the colonel’s valuable attachment I—But I was Superior to them all, my offended pride required Satisfadlion—■ I Scorned to be entrapped, though the Snare had every charm to flatter my inclination, —and one frolic more I was bent upon carrying into execution, —and you are but too Senfible how dearly that laft frolic has been purchafed.
P 2	My
212
The History of
My aunt’s incredulity, and the colonel’s Seeming acquiefcence with her opinion, were the grand ftimulatives.—Sir Matthew I judged a proper tool for my purpofe, — and the conversations between Kitty and her maid, which I could now almoft SuSpe6l were defigned for my too bufy ear, contributed in a very great degree to drive me to the extremity.
Sir Matthew, equally vain, and equally mis-judging with mySelf, was elated with my preference of him, — and a journey to Scotland tickled his fancy (though from different motives) in a Similar degree to mine.
How did I pleaSe mySelf the three firft ftages with anticipating the triumph I had prepared for mySelf! — I compoSed Several very long and very abSurd Speeches for the occafion, and believed each carriage I heard was my purfuers.
Sir
4	•
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 213
Sir Matthew’s conversation, though extremely brilliant, was by no means the objedl of my attention : — I had other game in view, — and I ftill continued to Support mySelS with the confident hope, that we fhould Soon be overtaken.
My Spirits, however, began to Sail me the Second day.—I contrived twenty little unneceflary delays,—but they were intirely disregarded ; — and it was but too vifible that Sir Matthew was capable of acting a negligent as well as a fubmiflive character.— Our cruel expedition was far from receiving any check, until we reached the end of our journey.
My heart Sunk within me as I alighted. How did I caft my eyes now on this fide, now on that! —how did I not deSpife my own folly and precipitation!—when Suddenly my pride returned to my aid.
“ What, and was I not worth the fol-
6i
lowing/
?
But they ftiall repent their
P 3
light
214
The History of
light eftimation of me.—Do they intia-gine I will voluntarily return—intreat
make the colonel one of
my bell curtSies for accepting my hand ? No, I will die firft;—and whatever

cc
cc
Ci,
cc
forgivenefs
were my intentions when I firft fet out, “ I have now Sufficient provocation to difpofe of myfelf, and I will be this man’s wife ?”
Sir Matthew left me a few moments to my own refledlions — What a conflidl ! — But refentment was predominant—I became impatient for the performance of the ceremony, which was hurried over at Sir Matthew’s return, and I rendered the
moft miserable woman breathing !
#
I begged Sir Matthew would give me leave to retire and acquaint my friends with the ftep I had taken. —He, affecting great politenefs, complied with my re-queft, and went, as I afterwards learned, to view the town during my being employed ; —
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 215
ployed ;—^and I had * leifure not only to difpatch my laft letter, but to indulge the moft killing refle£lions.
I had determined, however, to preserve the appearance at leaft of refignation, and was fitting —like Patience on a monument Smiling at grief—when I was Surprised by a great noiSe at the door; — and before I had either power to rife, or
^ny degree of recolle61:ion, who fhould
’ *
rufh into my preSence but the injured co-lonel, in an agony much better to be conceived than defcribed. He Seized me as his own — his words were Scarcely articulate—but yet Sufficiently intelligent —I had but juft time to reply, and was endeavouring to difengage myfelf from his
(
arms, when Sir Matthew returned.—The contraft completed my wretchednefs ^ my chofen, my intended —my real and abhorred hufband at once before my eyes ; —but I was not long in a condition to make comparisons.
P4
My
ai6
The History of
My infenSibility continued but for a moment.—Providence was So gracious as to reftore my reafon, though not my utterance, except for three words only, or murther had been the confequence of my folly. A brace of piftols lay upon the flab—I fuppofe Sir Matthew was indif-creet — the colonel diftracled — and the former owes his life to a fingle exclama-
o
tion I made in his favour.
I will not recoiled!: the reft.—I Suffered myfelftolofe fight of all I held dear,— and my afflidlion was greatly encreafed by being rather ridiculed than pitied.
But be that day for ever blotted from my remembrance !—Sir Matthew, upon the whole, treats me much better than I deferve, and his future kindnefs will undoubtedly depend upon my good behaviour.
Th us, Nancy, am I reduced from commanding to fubmiffion j —and, inftead of
having
Miss PITTBOnOUGH. 217
I *
having my every inclination gratified al-moft before I could communicate it, I am under the mortifying neceffity of Sacrificing my will to that of, another,— and that other——
Farewel, my filler, I am not fo mi-ferable as I have defcribed:—do not therefore let your happinefs be clouded or
t
interrupted on my account.—Write to the
colonel —give him every pollible confola-
\ _
tion—and, if I cannot aflure you of my felicity, you may depend upon my being perfedlly refigned.
• f
f *	•
LET-

218
The History of

LETTER XXXIV.
MiSs Nancy Pittborough to Lady
Sanxsey.
HAT fhall I fay to my beloved, my unfortunate Sifter, under, her prefent circumftances ?—How .convey coh-
folation clear of reflexion, or convince
^ *
her that my pity, my Sympathy, are hers, without adding frefh ftings to her afflidlion ?

Alas, my dear, it was but too necelTary for you to learn the lefibn of mortification;
that path is very Ilippery that is Screwed with flowers. — A greater evil might have befallen you ; your honour, your fortune is Secure—but your talk, I grant you, is
rather hard to perform. Confider the
/
facred engagement you have entered into,
and
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 219
and that whatever were your motives, nothing can excufe your fulfilling it. Do not fuffer your thoughts to dwell upon im-^ proper objedls, but at all times accuftoni yourfelf to turn them upon the moft favourable fide of your hufband’s charadler. — Cultivate, and by your, approbation, do juftice to his real perfections,—and as tenderly compaflionate and conceal his infirmities, remembering that they are merely the charaCleriftics of mortality.
4"
As to the world, it will foon forget the ftep you have taken ; your fortune and title will fecure you from cenfure. — Error and a coach and fix muft be incompatible.
You have not forfeited the friendlhip of any one,—and you have it more than ever in your power to obtain an approbation you have hitherto been a ftranger to,—I mean the approbation of your own heart.
#
My father conjures you to be niindful of the character you have thought proper
to
220
The History of
to aflume, as you muft hereafter expert to Hand or fall in his affeftion, by that teft of your prudence, refolution, and repentance.
He knows you to be capable of many great and good actions, and he has too much candour to conclude even in general (and too much partiality in this particular inftance) that one falSe ftep can never be retrieved.
Your own underftanding, alHfted by cool refiedlipn, will enable you to form a very different judgment of life, its pleasures and disappointments, than you have hitherto entertained.—You will be taught, nay convinced, that misfortunes depend in great meafure upon ourfelves, — as our imagination may conftitute, or our rea-fon diminifh, more than half the grievance.
You will find, likewise, that every perSon you have connexion with (however
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 221
ver Seemingly blefled) have their Secret
anxieties, and that yours perhaps, not-
•
withftanding their preSent acuteneSs, are
infinitely inferior to many.
%
The hand of death has probably robbed one of all he held dear; — Some Severe chronical difeafe deprives another of all poSfibility of enjoyment;—a .third labours under thofe mortifications derived from the perverfenefs and undutifulnefs of an only child ;—a fourth is funk down by the compunflion of an evil confcience, —^ his friend died by his hand;—a fifth—but it is madnefs to attempt enumerating the
9
evils mankind are fubje«£l to,—and you will be Satisfied that devoting your attention to one man, agreeable to your duty, and reducing your approbation for another into the Sober Sentiments of friendihip, is by no means So formidable a difficulty in pra6lice as in proSpedl.
As to your requefl: of writing to the perfon whoSe welfare you have So much at
heart,
222
The History, &c.
heart, I am far from being clear with refpeft to the propriety of it; but I will beftow Suitable consideration thereon, provided you promife me never to enquire either into the effeds or certainty of my compliance ; —the fubjed is abundantly too tender even to be touched upon at prefent; — a year or two hence perhaps may render you equal to it.
On every proper occaSion my-beft Services ftiall be yours,—and, if I cannot mitigate, I fhall ever Sympathize in your misfor-tunes.
End of the First Volume,
U, of Fa,
UbraPJi

r »



''v*^
.	» r rf f.

? =
lV .

-. ^-.r-'-iv
\,

*' X
wSjC
V:
' - \ *
'/ •.
*■ <• —
‘T.	■ jt

V ■	> .g
• • .-■ J- ’n ,
I:



\ ;
• > ■ \ >
•- rr:,
r'

^ r

\
> .»

>
\
*■. ^
r
35f
•V

F- •

’•''ntf-
• -'i.
■ ^ •
•	• C. '>
L T
(
> C'
?a
' r'^r' "■• ''
•cT^-t'yT
-w -
V ...r • • 4-'c-:
4 *	■j-' ■‘ ■ /'t
I.N	

/•.
\
•3^‘"
; '.V-
“* - f.
-5
tc


rrj
^ f
/'

I
-^-;-N>-	-^r

c 1 .>- '•
« ^
£

-i.
		c-.-'A-'.						1	» ^ ■'. ..\ ■■	►		'
			•							. .		
						-			V.	• - .		<
						' ' '				, • ^	*	
	4	-• ••s'W. '* • '•				''%A :	-	.		'•V		. ft • «
V' .	. V -
BOOKS Printed for A. Millar, and T. Cad ELL, oppoSite Catharine-Street, in the Strand.
I.	Fielding’s Works, i2mo. or any of his Pieces Separate.
II.	The Female Quixote, or the Adventures
of Arabella. 2 vols. 2d. Edition.
III.	Henrietta, 2 vols. 2d. Edition.
A	^
IV.	Hillory of Sir GeorgCyEilifon, 2 vols.
V.	Hiftory of the Countefs of Dellwyn,
2 vols.
VI.	The Old Maid. By Mary Singleton, Spinfter, i vol. A new Edition.
VII.	The Memoirs of the Countefs of Berci, 2. vols.
VIII.	The Adventures of David Simple,
5 vols.
IX.	The Adventures of Roderick Random, 2 vols.
^ \
X.	The Rambler, 4 vols.
XI.	The Adventurer, 4 vols.
XII.	Sermons to Young Women, 2 vols. By Dr. Fordyce, 4th Edition.

THE
H
T O
Y
O F

Mifs PITTBOROUGH
In a SERIES of LETTERS.
By a LADY.
IN TWO VOLUMES.
/
VOL. IL * •
LONDON:
Printed for A. Millar, and T. Cadell, in the Strand ; and J. Johnson and Co. in Pater-noller Row.
• MDCCLXVIL


■f
A;
;■ ■='^&---=- . -'		r.- .■ ' y ’-- - --- ■• ■ A--, " - "	1 /
	•	L-' • C-' ■ ■;*'-%■ .-•3* ;.---;^.=,-'.„T>.V'.'r-. *iv - - -. -_ .	1 •
		^ .N-'N	•
	1 •'V	Vv	% ': 'i

■


V-*'
/.
• • 1 1
V .

%
I-

SLd.-.l
•

/	J * , ,^ .
••
- i
#
V ’	\. r -
'yi-f: r~' i-
- r


J
* ^ .

j-' -I
'V95^'Is • ■" -w- • ■ rZ^-.x^ .•*•.-
A'-'l I4L' '' ^
:A~'

A'
/>
* ' h : S'i,^.-'V
J

;?vv
• \
A ■•••.»'••- •
-_>,>• V '
' ■ ■•>'■
■	' V
-«	T



3
- .‘>v
N
/ ,

^■r«S t . -
- ■^ ■" '... \
\ •
• • • - - *

^ ■ --;■ S	^
■ ■' •' <. ' '1 >.
e.> ■ :-	v,;-^-
u >
\

v.J;.'-'
A«".

-A
^ Ty-O.y.,
- -•-^•
•■>'*• ^ A ■■	t.-
>
\ .*

iN

/
U. of Pa.
Libraqi




• • • _ • •
****'5U*"***«**^* Jit*****®**”* JiJ
• •Ml*
^
7
n‘



V* ••
%XM •	•
#1%	<rA\ «
#*
THE
HISTORY
O F
Miss PITTBOROUGH.

LETTER I:
MiSs Hutchens to MiSs Binfield,
s at
<C^c$oc^^}S' My dear girl, the criSis i
length palled, and MiSs Pitt-^ borough as wretched a thing
either you oiT could wilh her. But my happineSs, notwithftanding, is rather incomplete. Methinks it would be the higheft pleasure, to be an eye-witnefs of her flouncing VoL. II.	B	and
2
The History of
and bouncing j for I am perfuaded her entanglement will fit very uneafy upon her.
I followed your dire£Hons literally with refpeft to enflaming her pride, by well-timed conversations with my Betty, who is as fly and artful a young woman, as any flie in Chriftendom.
We dHTembled the greatefi: apprehen-
V
fions left file fhould obtain a knowledge of what we So judicioufly prepared for her ear; and fo little difficulty did we find
r	**
in working upon thofe lively paffions of her heart, vanity and Self-Sufficiency, that
file even went before us in accomplifliing her own mortification.
But what muft be our next ftep requires confideration: the colonel has forfaken our houSe, and, in order to effedlually remove himSelf from objedls that are become difguftful to him (amongft which number
is
Miss PITTBOROUGH.
3
is your unfortunate friend) is immediately going abroad ; never more perhaps to return.
Surely no man alive was fo infatuated; notwithftanding all the ill treatment he met v/ith previous to the gra^nd abfurdity of her elopement, nor the elopement it-felf, have been able to fhake his unexampled alFedtion : he purfued her with all the expedition money or impatience could procure j but having been amufed by my dexterity with an opinion during a whole day, that Ihe was only gone out with my mother, all poffibility of overtaking her was cut olF. Well, after all, if I am to be fo unhappy as to remain excluded his approbation, it is infinite confolation, that I have prevented fome folks, with all their haughty coquettifli perfedtions, from being united to him.
f
How amazingly fickle and perverfe are thoSe incidents of which Mrs. Fortune is
B 2	fuppofed
4
The History of
\
fuppofed to have the regulation ! A blef-fing Ihall frequently and repeatedly fall into one perfon’s lap, though as repeatedly brulh’d off and disregarded, which another dies with mifery from being unable to obtain.—And can there be any bleffing Superior to colonel Dingley’s love.?—So hand-fbme, fo brave, fo completely formed for pleafing a youthful heart!—But he Is loft ,to me, moft irretrievably loft :—yet I fear I can never wholly Subdue an attachment, that has been produdiive only of pain and vexation.
I wonder what lady Sanxfey will do with herfelf:—She can never have the confidence to appear in town, at leaft till the matter is Somewhat blown over ; and I am fenfible the country is her averfion. How Small and ridiculous file muft feel, when Ihe condefcends to contemplate her liufband’s Sweet perfon (eSpecially as comparisons Vi^ill be apt to fugged: themfelves) j and a huSoand (he will find him in the
moft
\
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 5
moft rigid fenSe of the word. Pride, pride, has, indeed, met with a Severe fall ; but I have hope, it will prove an ufeful leffon of inftry61:ion to her :—and if giddinefs and vanity were her only faults, as all her bright admirers feem to be convinced, in all probability I Ihall live to fee her Per-fedlion’s Self; for if Ihe will but renounce the one, I can truft the baronet for redu-cing the other.
I wrote an account of her llippery conduct to her ruftic relations; and, would you believe it, have thereby incurred their mortal difpleafure. — But it is pretty plain fhe has painted me in moft unfavourable colours, and that prejudice is at the bottom of their undue diftatifadfion.—Would I
t
4
had no greater misfortune to cope with, my philofophy would then approve itfelf as unqueftionable as unihaken !
My mother has contrafled the utmoft: gloom upon the occafion, grieves for the
B 3	colonel’s
6
The History of
colonel’s SufFerings, yet pities the infolent cruel author of them. Ah ! had her own miserable child afled a Similar part, refent-ment, not compaffion, would have been her portion. Strange ! that we can forgive in a common relation or friend, what we fhould deem unpardonable in our immediate offspring.
My couSin could not have chofen a more lucky (or, as Some people would call it, unlucky) period for her elopement, if Ihe is averSe to obfervation and cen-fure ; for there happening to have been a dearth of Scandal for a whole preceding v/eek. She has been mauled- with unfpeak-able Severity. Yet I believe there is more of juftice than acrimony in this proceeding ; for as file was expedled to Surpafs all the red: of her Sex as much in the beauty of her mind, as She had the reputation of doing in her perSon, you know, to be de-tedled in Such an abominable trip, was fufhcient to excite amazement, and uni-yerfal condemnation.
Miss PITTBOROUGH
••7
/
I now more than ever Sigh for your company ; the world Iliould afford pleafure for our public hours, and her ladyfhip has kindly fecured us from finding a void even in our greateft retirement.
Indeed, my dear, as your father’s health ftill continues, without either rhime or rea-fon, in the fame ftrange indeterminate ftate as when I left you, I could almoil be fo uncharitable as to fufpedl, there is more of humour than real diforder in the cafe ; however, you muft allow me to fay, that, at beflr, there is an equal fhare of the one and the other. How can he be fo unrea-fonable as to require you to wafte your bloom in an obfcurity, which, if one may judge of his paft difpoSition by his prefent converfation, would have been altogether
infupportable to himfelf in youth and vivacity ?
his day of
If he is difgufted with courts and courtiers, can he expedl that your blood fiiou'd
B 4
receive
8
The History of
receive the unnatural contagion ? Upon my word, if I had fuch a father to deal with, I would foon cure him of burying me alive :—but do not let this fally of friendly dilTatisfa6lion give you the leaft offence, as I am far from meariing to in-finuate the moft diflant refleclion upon your Spirit or refolution, and only Seek to relieve an overcharged mind, overcharged with mortification by the disappointment of its wifhes. Accept my beft thanks for the Service you have done me, and let me foon receive your congratulations.
L E T-
Miss PITTBOROUGH.
9

LETTER ll.
Lady Sanxsey to Mrs. Batson.
My dear Nancy, tell me no more of the impropriety of a fubjedl I mull ever purfue; my big heart would burft, if it was not for this relief. I will be upon my guard with every other per-
fon, but into your bofom I muft pour my
* «
undifguifed Sentiments.
Can any fituation have fuch horrors as mine ?—To live with the man I deteft
to Suffer—but I will think no more of it.
«
Where is that amiable, that injured colonel ?-—does he not defpife me as I de-ferve ?—can he ever bear—-But what is that to me ?—it is neceffary for my peace, it is neceffary for my reputation, that I
fhould
10
The History of
fliould never fee him more. Yet methinks it would be a great fatisfa£tion to know his Sentiments. — Can he mention me without curfes—though it is not in his nature to curfe even his greateft enemy ?—
Will he ever be fo far mafter of himfelf
• ^
as to make another choice—and entertain her with the tale of my ill-treatment of him ? — That, that would be a ftroke which would level me with the earth.
But no: he is too generous, too humane, to ridicule the unfortunate. ' It would not be effential to the promotion of his intereft—and he could never make it
Oh ! I have given him a fuf-
his fport.
ficient antidote againft my v/hole fex : Fie will not in a hurry approve again ; at lead:, that calamity muft be at a dif-tance.
What fay you, my filler ?—-If he was fo entirely attached as I had reafon to believe^ if he could not only pardon all the
efFedls
Miss PITTBOROUGH. h
eIFe£ls of -my folly, but unite himfdf to
can he love again ? can
them for ever ; his heart fo far fliake off my remembrance, as to receive a new impreflion ? Surely it , mull: be impoliible. No other objecSI could engage my afFe£i;ions. I am indeed giddy, but not capable of playing the general lover.—He was the firft of his fex I ever did approve, and his image will never be effaced from mv breaft, whilft animation
remains.
My God ! I am married
yet dare to make this confeffion. But the truth of it is moft inconteStible, hov/-ever blameably divulged.—l^he Secret is too considerable for me to contain, and without your participation I Ihould Sink beneath its weight.
Sir Matthew has rofe extremely in my good opinion within thefe lad: four-and-twenty hours, as compaflion for my Sufferings Seems to have Subdued the pride of his heart, and he has condefcended to footh, inilead of reproaching me. This
behaviour
12
The History of
behaviour ftiall have proper merit with me ; I will endeavour to become fenlible of the really difficult talk it is upon Such an occaSion to a6l with generofity. The fhock his vanity muft have fuftained, and the weeping, almoft lifelefs companion he has hitherto found me, was more than Sufficient to render him morofe and unfriendly ; and if he will forget the in-difcretion that has thrown me into his power, I will pafs an a<St of oblivion upon all his Succeeding words and adlions.
But, my dear, dear Nancy, can I ever reconcile myfelf to his narrownefs of mind, defedlive underftanding, and that want of tendernefs that is evident in his nature ?—Is this the companion I muft prefer to all his fex ?—You, my thrice happy filler, fenfibly experience the felicity arifing from the union of the heart: Are you not prepared from an affedlionate defire of pleafing, to comply with every requeft or propqfition ? do you not behold
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 13
t
*	f
hold your huSoand’s countenance with approbation and delight ?—are not his endearments both acceptable and grateful to you ?—^Judge, judge then of the wretched contrail.
Sir Matthew has a feat within twelve miles of PortfmoutH, to which place I have intreated him to convey me, no lefs for his reputation fake, than the recovery
t
of (at lead) my outward compofure. I have reprefented to him, with how improper a grace we Ihould make our ap-r pearance in the polite world, under my prefent depreffion of Spirits ; and that by indulging me in that trifling particular, he would intitle himfelf to my chearful acquiefcence with his future commands.
He did indeed confent to gratify my inclination, but a denial from many perfons, would have been infinitely more engaging :—though it could not perhaps be otherwise—as his Sentiments were far from
correspond-
u
The History of
corresponding with mine :—He gave up a point, and I ought to be content.
I fliall expert once more to hear from you before we quit this place j and if you have either love, pity, or charity you know my meaning—therefore deal me out Some confolation.
L E T-
Miss PITTBOROUGH.
15
- V/*''*/	Vi V^*Vi* s *»
§•*

LETTER III.
Mrs. Batson to Lady Sanxsey
Am afraid, my dear Sifter, that the measures you are purSuing for the recovery of your peace, ivill be far from an-fwering your expedlations. What charm do you expe6I to find in Solitude to com-pofeyour diflatisfadlions ? Believe me, you will onte increafe them.—We may lofe our wretchednefs for a moment in a crowd :—but in retirement it will ever cleave to us.
Why, my love, will you perpetually harp upon a ftring, that you are fenfible can never produce harmony, and without being of the leaft advantage to yourfelf,
is fo utterly difpleafing to me ?
■Your
i5
The History of
Your own breaft will iind you Sufficient employment to regulate, to reprefs every unworthy fuggeftion, and to cultivate and cherilh Such as are judicious and valuable—why will you then Seek to in-creafe your difficulties ? Are not your hands tied up ? your power limited ? nay even your compaffion cannot be too Spa-ringly bellowed : your mind muft be hardened into propriety, and every Soft, every deluding fenfation guarded againft with the utraoil vigilance. Is it not madnefs to feed an already defperate diftemper ?
But in order to Silence you for ever upon fo improper a fubjedl, I will inform you, that I have received a very fatisfadlory account'of that perfon’s health, you fo much wifhed me to enquire after : he bears his late disappointment with all manly refolution, and wifely determines to leave a country (for at lead: a Short period) where his fortune has been fo unfavourable. May happinefs and fuccefs be
6
his
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 17
his attendants, and the cruel fhock he fuf-

tained this day fortnight, the very laft that may ever fall to his fliare !
I now infill upon his never more being mentioned ; it is criminal, it is odious to know one man the mailer of your hand, and voluntarily Suffer another to be mailer
f
of your heart—Be affured I will on no confideration be acceffary to keeping a paffion alive, that mull be extinguilhed, or my affedlion will become the forfeit: calamities will ever endear you to my heart, but guilt infallibly exclude you.
VoL. II.
C
LET
iS
The History of

LETTER IV.
Lady Sanxsey to Mrs. Batson.
Y dear agreeable falfe prophet, L how do I congratulate both you and myfelf on the invalidity of your pre-
didlions ! ’ The country an unfit place
0
for me at this jundlure ! my eledlion of it injudicious-! you was never fo out in your conjedlures. It was undoubtedly under the influence of my happy ftars .that I refolved to take the journey, as I have derived a happinefs from it that crowded cities could never have afforded
rae.
Oh Nancy, do not chide me, nor Suffer your ever friendly brow to be con-tracied j at lean: until you have read a
faithful
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 19
faithful account of the whole tranfadion
f
So take it in due form, as it really happened.
Sir Matthew and myfelf, after a moft difagreeable journey—mifery the companion of my breaftj and mortified pride rankling in his—reached this moft deplorable of manSions. The hand of time is every where confpicuous on the mouldering walls ;—moths have for years uninterruptedly preyed upon the furniture j owls, rooks, daws, and every Species of ominous creatures feem to claim it for their own.
A houfe-keeper incomparably well Suited
to the antiquity of the place :—but I will not opprefs you with hideous descriptions.
The third day after our arrival. Sir
✓ ^
Matthew made an excurfion, to what place, or upon what occafion, I never gave myfelf the trouble to enquire; but
C 2	abfcnt
20
The HI s<r o E. Y of
abfent he informed me he fhould be until the evening.
N
Relieved from my greateft mortification, I began to caft about for Some means of amufing myfelf: — to little purpofe j for amufement and this manfion I found were incompatible : I therefore determined to order the chaife, and take a folitary view of the country. I did fo—telling the man to drive me any, where, within ten or twelve miles, that would afford me the moft agreeable profpedl.
I had travelled about an hour, without finding the defired diffipation, when the beating of drums communicated a throbbing to my heart.—The horfes, as the found was fudden, began to run reftive. The man advifed me to alight, but my neck was not of fuch confequence to me, as for me to be willing to preferve it, by foregoing fo pleafing a fight as I promifed
myfelf (a red coal being a feaft my eyes
• /
■	had

MI ? s PIT T B O R O U G H .	2.1
had long vainly fought for) j and therefore I ordered him to go on as he intended, fori was not at all afraid.
He obeyed without farther hefitation, and at the winding of the road turned full ■upon a little army of men, marching with all military parade. The ftartled horfes were pleafed to take a bank—the chaife over-turned—but as the braces were dex-teroully cut by the fword of .a valiant knight, your filler efcaped every bad con-fequence.
The poor poft-boy was indeed confide-rably hurt, and the attending fervant would have been puzzled which firft to affift, his raiftrefs or the difabled party, had not a hero-like figure approached the chaife to the relief of the former ; v/ho, miferably frightened by the accident, but much more by the objedt before her, nioft conveniently fainted, as it concealed other emotions.
C3
At
^ ■*
22	The History of
i
I
At length, however, ftie revived : but unable to Support the Surprize of finding herfelf in colonel Dingley’s arms, fhe a Second time cloSed her eyes, from incommunicable SenSations, not inSenfibility.
A little cottage that was fortunately Situated near the road-fide received us : the
poor
fellow
bled Ihockingly, and the other was diSpatched for a Surgeon, whilft
I
the hoSpitable owner of this uncouth retreat presented your friend with a cordial of her hufband’s preparing.
A matted chair (preferable at that in-llant to a throne) proved a comfortable Support, and the compaflionate colonel, forgetting to quit a hand he had for Some time held between his with the moft friendly apprehenSion for my Safety (tho’ as I was tolerably vrell recovered, it was then evidently rather matter of civility than necefnty) placed himSelf upon a bench that flood commodioufly contiguous ;
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 23
O.US : never was tenderneSs more finely de|>i6Ied !
I was however, at length. So unhappy as to recolledl the impropriety of the appearance, and by attempting to withdraw my hand from the colonel’s, awakened his apprehenSion likewife,—His countenance pierced me to the foul ;—he clafped his
hands together
and turning from me-
&
It v/as a bitter moment.
A Silence enfued ; a Silence that Spoke the anguifli of our hearts.
I, Sir, am obliged to your care
“ unmerited—un------” “ Spare me, ina-
dam, cried he, rifing haftily, madnefs and recolledlion are with me the fame “ thing—I am—but you muft—it cannot
“ be recalled —- therefore

He with-
drew with great precipitation into a mifer-able filed or out-houfe, and did not return until the Surgeon arrived.
O'-
C4
The
24.
The History of
The good woman, with a confideration no other perfon was capable of, told me, that if I would pleafe to follow her I might avoid, the difagreeable fight of the poor
fellow’s wounded head and arm------“ She
had a little chamber, though but a little one, and if his honour would pleafe to go with me and partake of fuch
cheer as her hovel afforded, he fhould
\ ^
not go dinnerlefs that day howfomdever.
God blefs him, he was a noble look-ing gentleman, and fhe only wiflied her poor dear Matt (her fon, who it feems was a foldier) was under his command-------but God’s will muft be
<C
cc
€C
CC
cc
cc
cc
cc
cc
cc
done.

I attempted to avail myfelf of this very agreeable offer, as it hvas neither decent nor eligible for me to continue where I was, but found myfelf unable to move. A trembling Seized me ;—The colonel was not in a much better condition:— and I was indebted to the furgeon, who conveyed me in his arms.
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 25
He was for breathing a vein (as he politely phrafed it); but I infilled upon his taking due care of my fervant, before he bellowed any upon me.
The feene became more and more in-
terefting.
We were alone:—the colonel
unable to utter one fyllable, and you may judge of my mortified and afilidled condition. “ I know not, fir, whether to
tc

lament or rejoice at the accident that has thus unexpedledly thrown me in your wayj—as I am fenSible your opinion of muft be very unfavourable “ —but------
((

‘‘ My opinion, my dear madam, cried he eagerly, is by no means unworthy of you. Hovvever you may have been miflaken, I am convinced you had premeditated no evil defign. againft me ; “ it was our mutual misfortune that I WaS
h
a day too late in my purfuit, by a cruel deception Mifs Hutchens was
pleafed
(C
cc
iC
iC


26
v:
The History of

/

cc
pleaSed to pradlife;—rand to that cir-cumftance alone I impute all I have, and may hereafter fufFer.’^
Unfeeling girl ! little did I fufpeft her to have been the caufe of my moft fatal disappointment.
. “ You are very generous, fir, returned “ I, but I cannot acquit myfelf of the ‘‘ higheft blame ;—and I own, I am but “ ill capable of Supporting the humiliating “ reflexion, that you muft have a ftrange
“ idea of that woman’s delicacy, who “ could Sacrifice her perSon to gratify her reSentment.
“ My heart, madam, (however efSential to my peace,) can never be compelled to retain a difadvantageous impreffion of you ; it ever prefents you to my imagination the fame lovely amiable creature it was wont to confider you, “ and your lofs will prove an inexhauitible*
“ Source
<(


Miss PITTBOROUGH. 27
#
” Source of anguilh.—Witnefs the change ‘‘ you behold in my whole appearance.
“ 1 am fliattered to death :—1 abandon rny “ country.—Are thefe tokens of difefteem ? “ Oh Mifs Pittborough ! (for I never “ will allow you any other name) — Yet “ I know not what I would a(k—but do


(C
(C

not defpife my memory—and Ihould you hear that I have happily fallen as
r
becomes my rank and character, do not deny me one valuable tear, as it is the only one I could wifh your eyes
to be acouainted'with
n
Here the good woman made her ap-pea ranee, and perhaps very feafonably, as the fubjecl began to be abundantly too tender for my circumftances. She Spread a clean, but coarfe cloth over a table, oh which She inftantly conveyed Some refreshment ; but as 1 never tailed it, I will not deceive you as to its meiit.
The
28	The History of
The Surgeon having drefled his patient, waited upon me with an agreeable account of him. “ No danger upon his honour
“ only an ugly contuSion and again intreated to breathe a vein for me.
I endeavoured to excufc mvfelf; but the worthy old hofpitable creature urged fo many arguments, and the colonel fo many intreaties, that I at laft complied.
j The Surgeon, who happened to be a forward inquifitive fellow, having long observed the colonel’s anxiety and confu-fion, was for prescribing for him likewife ; intimating, at the Same time, “ that the “ gentleman mull: be uncommonly in-“ terefted, to occaSion Such uncommon
The colonel, provoked at his boldneSs, fternly rebuked him. I was Sorry he was So hafty, as the fellow Soon
after withdrew Vi^ith viSible marks of dif-
\
,pleaSure and reSentment in his countenance.
The
agitation.”
Miss PITTBOROUGH. ia
(C
<c

cc

(C
The chaife was now in a condition to convey me home, and my Servant had provided a proper driver (delays therefore would have been prepofterous). — I intended to have played the heroine, but the colonel’s behaviour Ihook all my refolves. I will not, madam. Said he, for your fake attempt condu£Hng you to your carriage.—I feel I fhould but ill acquit myfeif j—but before I lofe fight of you for ever, permit me to alTure you, that, my heart will retain the moft tender afFeilion for you—fo long as its pul-“ fation remains :—that in every climate,. “ in every Situation, your happinefs will-“ be dearer to me than all my other united “ concerns ;—-and that if ever I do prevail upon myfeif to revifit my native country, the defire of learning Some happy tidings of your welfare will be my only motive.—Oh madam ! there “ was a time when, on fo tedious a fe-paration as this promifes to prove, you would have honoured me with fome.
* ‘ mark.
(C
cc

ii
cc
(C
The History
mark of your efteem :—but I do not now alk it.—-May you be as bleffed
“ as aIHuence and a
Smiling
world
4C
€C
can make you I—and, whatever is my
fat
e
99
►
I only curtfied, and retired:—had I fpoke, I had betrayed myfelf to the wholg hovel :—but getting haftily into the chaife, I gave a vent to my tears j—nor fufpedled I had reached home, until the carriage Hopped to give me that information.
I endeavoured to twinkle the miH from my eyes ;—but in vain ;—they were per-fedlly Swelled up :—I therefore complain-
t-
ed of weaknefs, faintnefs, and was hor-
#
ribly inSincere, to conceal my real disorder.
I went to bed, but fleep you may guefs, did not pay me a very early vifit;—nay I am hardly fenfible if I flept at all : however, finding my fight improved, I
^ got
Miss EITTBOROUOH.
31
got up again at Seven o’clock in high Spirits, drank my tea, and took up my pen.-----
the fatisfadtion I
•You, I doubt not, will impute
Source.
enjoy I am ftill beloved
to Its proper notwithftand-
ing I am dead to him :—he will love only
0
for me—he will never raife another to that happinefs I have So wantonly forfeited Forgive me this one weaknefs : do not condemn me for exulting, that I have one confolation left, and continue to be my tender and compaflionate friend.
/
Let-
32
The History of


LETTER V
Colonel DingleY to Mr. Brooksbank.
A
RE you, Ned, of the opinion, that time is an infallible remedy for every mental difeafe ? or can you perfuade yourfelf that Some cafes are too defperate ever to admit of alleviation ? It is true, I am become lefs outrageous, than on my firft experiencing my moft afflicting dif-appointment, but the weight of it is not one jot more tolerable.
Company diftradts me—and retirement is the haunt of black defpair—the bot-■ tie proves an unvailing refource, my brain bids defiance to intoxication—amongft my own fex I find only infenfibility and brutality—and I will not mention the fenfa-
tions
1
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 33
tions a female figure occafions me.—-The dangers ’ of the fea, the difficulties of a fiege, may perhaps prove more Salutary; for, notwithftanding I have but little of that Wretch’s charadler about me, who boafts “ that horrors are not difpleafing to him, and that the rocking battle-ments and raging tempeft Suit the gloomy habit of his foulyet I have reafon to believe, that the moft dreadful
f
objedls and moft daring encounters will afford me the greateft confolation.

44
44
I have for Some time been indefatigable
#•
4
in procuring an appointment, that, I flatter myfelf, will anSwer my every purpofe; and if the gentleman can be prevailed upon to exchange with me, it will not be
•	*	• r
many days before I fliall embark for----------
to reinforce the befiegers; the paffage is but fhort, but the Scenes are expeded to be bufy ones: you fliall hear from me again fo Soon as we have fettled the mat-
ter.
How little did I imagine that I
VoL. II.
D
fho uld
34
The History of
fliould ever quit England, the beloved Spot of my nativity, and you my much valued friend, without regret ? But my feelings are all abSorb’d by the recent calamity that has vifited me j as lefler evils are ever Swallowed up by greater.
Had you but Seen the objedf of my ten-dereft afFedlion, Seen her before the rough hand of disappointment had reach’d her cheek, I fhould have been abfolved ia your conlideration, however frantic or rafh my condu6I :—but I fhall ramble, ramble wide from every rational point, if I once touch that key. Oh I am mifery-llruck!—irreparably undone ! and thofe years that in the courfe of nature may be mine, can only lengthen out, not abate my afilidion. Slovenly in my perfon, and bewildered in my fenfes—no trace or likenefs of your once gay friend remains.
L E .D
Miss PITTBOROtJGH. 35

LETTER VI
From the fame.
A
Ccording to my promife, I once more write to you before my embarkation, nor will I take upon me to fay
it fliall be the laft time*—We know not
«
when to bid adieu to thofe we love 5 but you are fenfible, Ned, that the dif-tance that will foon lie between us, will prove an impediment to the fame frequent intercourfe—as the winds and feas are no^ at all times propitious.
I arrived at Portfmouth only late laft night, and as the companies are exercifed every morning early at fome little diftance from the town, preparatory to our grand
D 2	review
36
The History of
review on Monday next (when the remainder of the regiment is to be affembled) I did not fee any of the officers until I join’d them in the field.
As we were returning to our quarters in tolerable order, a moft unexpected accident gave new vigour to all thofe tender fenfations I was fo induftrioufly endeavouring to ftifle.
A chaife v/ith only z lady in it turned Suddenly upon us ; the' horfes, young; and high-rhettled, began to plunge, the- Boy was thrown, and as I forefaw the confe-quences might not only be fatal to the lady, but many other perfons, I commanded a halt, and, with the affiftance of a brother-officer, before the creatures could difengage themfelves from fome en-
tanglement of the fhaft or harnefs, cut the braces, and happily prevented all further mifchief.
It
Mi^ PITTBOROUGH. 37
It was not till after the performance of this neceflary bufinefs, that I perceived the lady to be no other than my Mifs Pitt-borough.-^I Bew to her affiftance, and have reafon to believe there was more terror in my appearance, than the danger I was delivering her from ; for having once recolle6led liie, flie funk down in the chaife in a moft pitiable condition. Some of the men conveyed the Servant to an adjacent cottage, in which place I determined to lodge his lovely millrefs, until Ihe might with Safety be removed : but confcious of the fcene her recovery would produce, and unwilling to have any Spectators, both for her fake and my own, I ordered the march to be refumed, and every officer to his proper ftation, telling them that I myfelf would take care of the lady.
It was Some time before flie began to revive, notwithftanding the beft affiftance I could procure j and when flie did open
D 3	her
38
The History of
her eyes, and again beheld her fupportihg, though Self-drooping friend, flie immediately turned her dear face from me, in
\
apparent embarraflment and confulion. I knew not how to a6l;—but to leave her, 1 felt was impoflible.—Indeed I had loft every cruel remembrance, and all my heart was tendernefs and love. But I did not long enjoy the happy delufion ; apru-
I
dent referve, on her part, conveyed the inftant idea of my wretchednefs.—The rack would have been heaven to what I
then endured :—but I was fo far mafter of my reafon, as by a hafty retreat to Spare her the mifery of beholding my fe-vereft emotions.
A hardened kind of compofure Succeeded this grievous agony. “ I can now look upon her, thought I, in the light She deferves.—Has Ihe not difpofed of “ that hand to another, that in honour and juftice belonged only to me ?—has She not rendered me miserable beyond
all
Miss PITTBOROUGH.
39
all poIHbility of relief?—and fhall her “ prefence occafion me Such unfuitahle “ fenfations, unmindful of fo great, fo “ unfpeakable an injury ? No: I will return and convince her that, notwith-Banding all her lovelinefs, her levity and inconftancy has broke the charm, and I no longer confider her as worthy
<(
((
<c
my tendernefs or afFe<5Iion.
3^
I was hurrying into the cot in this Savage difpofition of mind, when, no lefs Suddenly than unexpeftedly, the hero was
loft in the man.—“ And dare I
again
a
complain, cry’d I, in an half articu-“ late accent ? I, who have brought de-“ ftruftion upon the mofi: valuable of “ her fex ?—Was it not my own neglect “ of her — my prefumptuoufly afllimed “ and injudicious negle<Sl—that impelled “ her to take the deSperate fteps fhe has “ done ?—Was fhe not all amiable con-“ defcenSion, all modeft: encouragement, “ before fhe rufpeiSled fchemes were form-
■ -X.	•
D 4
mg
40
Th? History of
and ought I not to
‘ ing againft her ?—V^as it. for rne to ‘ attempt to reftrain Tier inclination ? ‘Was not her approbation I then en-‘ joyed voluntary ?—
‘ have waited her own time for the in-‘ eftimable prefent of her hand ? She ‘ has only punilhed the guilty in what ‘ relates to me, and is herfelf an un-‘ happy innocent victim.—What ravage ‘ has not difcontent already made in her ‘ fine face ? Where is that bloom, thofe ‘ beautiful fmiles, that were wont to ‘ adorn it? Blafted, for ever blafted by ‘ a bafe contrivance ; and the wretch not ‘ only lives, but would meanly excul-‘ pate himfelf by calling refle€lions upon ‘ her.”
Some little buftle in the cottage alarming me for Mifs Pittborough’s fafety, I inftantly emerged from my hiding-place, but had the fatisfa£Hon to find her greatly recovered, and the caufe of my apprehen-fions no other than the arrival of a furgeon.
A wild-
Miss PITTBORDUGH. 41
A wildnefs in my countenance, and vifible confufion in my behaviour. Soon engaged the mortifying attention of this felf-fufficient fello^v, who, as I afterwards difcovered, concluded I was the lady’s relation—a relationfhip, Ned, that I would have purchafed—but no matter he was to my great misfortune miftaken in his conjeftures. Nothing could be more aukward and conftrained than the whole Scene.—1 would have given millions for one five minutes private conversation, but there appeared no probable means of obtaining that happinefs—when, beyond my beft hopes, the good wo.man, by a piece of overftrained civility, procured me the wifli’d-for interview, nor fhall fhe go unrewarded.
My military garb fo forcibly recommended me to her old honeft heart, that Mifs P'ttborough Seemed to have but a Second place in her ronfideration—and the propofal of our withdrawing into another
A2
The HI ST OR Y of
ther little cabbin, was apparently as much intended for my emolument as her convenience :—“ The gentleman truly muft not go without his dinner.”
Her motive, however, was too worthy not to be excufed:—maternal tfendernefs, if ^ weaknefs, is of the moft amiable kind. An only child abroad, in the army—uncertain whether living or dead—drew the tears from her venerable eyes, which I will make it my bufmefs, if poffible, to wipe away.
In repairing to the propofed retirement, the Surgeon had the honour of affifting the lady j—an honour that my regard for her reputation would not permit me to afpire to : the felf-denial coft me dear, but repays me v/ith intereft in the confciouSnefs of its propriety.
The moments that were granted me by the abfence of the Surgeon, and honeft
parade
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 43
parade of the old woman, were, however, far from being employed in the manner I had promifed myfelf.—Her pardon, her frieiidlhip were to have been Solicited; but the big requeft was incapable of finding utterance. She, rather more coi-!e£Ied, broke the painful filence—-exprefled a kind fenfe of the little Service I had done her, condefcending at the fame time to intimate Some delicate apprehenfions refpedting the opinion I mufi: entertain of her conduct.
How Inadequate my expreffions to my feelings! I would have knelt and revealed my whole foul to her, had not the place been an infuperabie objeifHon,—Diftance and coolnefs was all I had to depend upon ;
and in Spite of every tender fuggeftion, I ftri£lly adhered to them. No refent-ment remains in her bread:—felf-accufed I intirely acquit her—and at length was a Second time deprived of all I hold valuable.
But,
44
The History of
But, Ned, I did prefume to tell her that I could never ceafe to love:—nor was Ihe offended ;—and I find myfelf greatly relieved by that (however unavailing) confeffion. The opportunity fo unexpected—the reception fo favourable -—may it not prove a happy prefage of future felicity ?—The gout is not quite fo quick in difpatching thofe it attacks, as a cannon ball, but is often as fure. Mean and unworthy fentiments !—but, alas ! they are the fentiments of my heart.
The good woman, on returning from her departed gueft, was alarmed at the palenefs and horror of my countenance. “ Your honour is ill, cry’d llie j what ‘‘ can I do for you
“ You muft not be uneafy, returned I; I fliall be better prefently.—I will fpend “ the afternoon with you, if you can but « procure me a difh of tea;—and we
“ will
Miss PITTBOLOUGH. 45
will have Some converfation relative to your abfent fon ; perhaps, I may be able hereafter to give you a fatisfaftory ac* “ count of him.’'
cc
<(
I will not trouble you with the grateful profeflions I received from this worthy creature :—the human heart in its natural Hate — where vice has not ftruck root—is truly amiable.—I derived more real pleafure from the rude civility and genuine gratitude of this cottager, than I ever experienced in any tete-a-tete, except with yourfelf, and one certain perfon, who muft ever be excepted.
I took down her Son’s name in my pocket-book, and have agreed to cor-* refpond with this humble friend.—She is to inform me, from time to time, of the good or ill-fortune of her fair neighbour ;—and I am to remit her news that as nearly concerns her. I am by no means the wretched thing I was j perhaps, indeed*
46
The History of
deed, I am only' feeding a diftemper, that will, at the long run, feed upon me;
but I am for prefent eafe, whatever the purchafe.
LETTER VII.
Lady Sanxsey to Mrs. Batson.
My dear lifter, am at prefent neither , in extraordinary health or Spirit?. Your kindly intended letter f affedled me greatly: you fee things in a ftrange unnatural light, but I am not now capable of disputing with you. The coIo*
nel is embarked.
No more interviews
need be apprehended;—and the laft was fo innocent, from being unfought for,
•f- This letter is not Inferted,
that
Miss PITTBOROUGH.
47
that I fhall ever remember it with pleasure, notwithftanding your exprefs disapprobation.
Misfortunes are not now flow to vifit me:—my life is almoft infupportable ; but I myfelf have occafioned my fufSer-ings: —I will therefore Suffer without
« •
complaining
Sir Matthew, unfortunately for us both, has again altered his behaviour.—A ftern brow — unkind concife replies — fhort meals—and long abfences—are all he gives me to boaft of. What is the caufe of his diffatisfadlion I know not:—I had almofl: faid I am utterly regardlefs of it;—but if he expedls to win my affections by fuch rough meafures, he will find himfelf greatly deceived.—I can and will forbear reproaching him j but if I deteft and de-fpife him, he may thank himfelf.
His
48
The History of
His haggard houfe-keeper officioully intrudes herfelf upon my privacy, curio-lity and ill-nature in her eye ; but as I know not guilt, I am not alarmed at this appearance of fufpicion :-:it may'be her
way, however extraordinary or difpleafing,
I have not an enemy upon earth that I would not pity under fuch horrid cir-cumftancesbut I am not rigidly dif-creet, therefore not rigidly feversi
How capable I was wont to find you, of tender Sympathy; but you have enlarged your connexions, and have but lit-
*
tie to bellow upon the undeferving.
My ink is exhaufted j I mull obtain a frefli Supply before I can proceed.—Yet what would I fay ? My friend, my fitter, is no more:—to whom then Ihall 1 fly for the balm of confolation ?
Mv
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 49
My God ! what infolence ! my orders disregarded — my requefts denied!—but it
is well : —the mean caution Suits the nar-
#
row foul that didlates it. And would he deprive me of the only happinefs I am capable of enjoying r —Perhaps it may not be in his power—my dear, dear pen, no ftratagem fliall be unattempted —no means untried — to preferve thy ufe.
But what can have fuggefled this arrogant conduct ? — With whom does the v/retch (letitpafs, Nancy) think I would correfpond ? — The colonel is at a diftance, — and for all the reft of his fex,—I neither know them, or wdfh to have the leaft knowledge of them.
V
I am now but too fenfible of the impropriety of relying upon that man's honour, for the future happinefs of your life, who is well acquainted that another is the ob-je£l of your regard.
VOL.II.
E
Sir
50	The History of
V
Sir Matthew’s vanity v/as gratified in the firft inftance by my hand :—my Succeeding behaviour excited his malice and revenge. — Repent accepting him ! —humiliation and mortification fhould be my portion;—nor will he, I fear, be appeafed, but by my intire deftruftion. I can but be rebuked, therefore my Sentiments fhall not be Suppreffed.—Is this a being that I have choSen in preSerence to colonel Dingley, —who is not only mafter of every perfonal recommendation, but evidently pofTelTed of humanity, generofity, and love ? — How fondly did he doat upon me ? — and when the hand of fickneSs robbed my countenance of every attradSion for the reft of his Sex, — how was his tender-neSs and affiduity augmented ?—His was the voice of friendship, the moft endearing friendftiip—Soothing, harmonizing ; his looks replete with benignity—and. his actions unSpeakably engaging. How would he have hung over me in tender ap-prehenfion and anxiety at the cottage,—
bad
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 5c
had not his refpedl, his delicacy, reftralned him ?—My honour was his firft, his principal care. Oh 1 I read all the valuable meaning of the referve he impofed upon himfelf, and Ihall ever remember it with the higheft gratitude and approbation.
How difmal the change ! Sir Matthew did not return till very, late he was informed generally of the accident, — and very politely blamed me for going out alone.
“ He would rather have given fifty pounds than his horfes fhould have met with fuch a fright,—or fo worthy a Servant received fuch injury:—hoped it would be a caution for the future ; — and “ if I chofe to ride out when he him-

(6

iC



cc

Self could not accompany me, that I would permit the houfe-keeper to attend me, who would point out a very
»
different, and much properer route.— What pleafure I could propafe to my-
F o	a frlf
52
The History of
CC



Self in going So near the end of Portf-niouth town, he really was at a lofs to conjedlure ; but there was no accounting at all. times for people’s humours
and fancies.”
I made no reply to this very endearing harangue —“ Hispoffible, thought I, that “ he has drank too freely, and by refent-ing incivility, I may expofe myfelf to
infult.—I am bitterly confcious he has “ Some reafon to be diffatisfied with me.”
The morning, at length, arrived. —He haftily left my apartment, and has continued diftant, fulien, and unkind ever Since. But he Ihall meet with due contempt.—The woman who vouchsafes to feek the reafon of unkindnefs, betrays a defire of removing it; a defire'that he is too indifferent to me, and too ungenerous ever to excite.
Pie Sets a very pretty hulband-like example—excludes me from the knowledge
of
Miss PiTTBOROUGH. 53
of whatever palFes in his breaft—and is undoubtedly too reafonable to expedb a contrary condudl from me. — Diftafte and difpleafure will hereafter be the only feelings I fhall be able to entertain for him.


LETTER VIII.
From the fame.
H ! my filler, the Ihocking Secret is at length revealed, —and I have the additional misfortune of fufpedled virtue to contend with ! How little did I forefee the malicious, the bafe conftrudlion that has been put upon the poor worthy colonel’s behaviour!—The whole accident, from firft to laft, is confidered as the eiFe£l of premeditationand, not-withftanding I was perfe6Uy ignorant of the road the fellow was taking—had from
E3
m
54
The History of
my firft Setting out Submitted mySelS entirely to his choice, —and from my Situation was excluded from every pollibility of learning that the colonel was at Portsmouth j—every circumftance of that day’s
I
fatal excurSion has unhappily concurred to fix a fiain upon my reputation, and I am neither heard nor believed. — This wicked baronet imputes even my requeft of being brought to this odious place to my expedlation of being call in the colonel’s way,—calls me pradfifed deSigner—artificial deceiver—and himfelf a wretched injured dupe.
And do I live to b.c thus accufed, innocent as I am even in intention ?—But
I
that blefled innocence proves my great Support.—Let him condemn—let him vil-lify me, agreeable to the rancour of his own corrupt heart.—Colonel Dingley knows it is unmerited, and his good opinion, and conicious integrity, is more than Sufficient to make me Smile at his black vagaries.
But
t U
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 55
But the world — and what is this world ? A bug-bear of the imagination !—I fhall never more be permitted to enjoy it, un~ lefs my conftitution out-lafts this monfter of a hufband !—And let it amufe itfelf with tearing my fame in pieces j—I (hall ftill remain uncontaminated,—-and rife the higher in that efteem, that is Superior vt^ith me to every other conlideration.
I am, however, permitted to write, on the pretty modeft condition—that all my letters Ihall be conveyed to the poft-houfe either by himSelf or one of his diabolical melTcngers.—With all my Spirit!—and fliould he be tempted to view his own like-nefs from the pen of an injured wife,—let him add another meannefs to thofe he has already pradlifed, and break the Seals. I am not Sufficiently myfelf to draw him at prefent in his proper colours j but he niay depend upon it, the lines Ihall be both ftrong and juft, when I do take him in hand.
Ea
But
56	The History of
But I Ihould inform you how clumfily he was pleaSed to difcover his bafe fufpi-cions to me.
I was—(hall I tell vou how I was at that inftant employed, when the dinner-bell Summoned me to appear before him ?
Pope’s Eloife, I believe, by accident, lay
%
open upon ^y toilet:—Some lines of it are very ftriking, efpecially what then more immediately engaged my attention, as I was palpably convinced, that
Of all afflidlions taught a lover yet,
“ ’Tvoas much the hardeft Science to forget.”
'	o •
My inclination would have prompted me to indulge a thoufand melancholy Soft re-fie6lions,—but I nevertheless delayed not to attend my gloomy tyrant.
On entering the parlour, the firft ob-]eO: that Saluted my eyes was that very
impertinent Surgeon, of whom I gave you
a Ihort
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 57
fhort delcription in my cottage-ad ven-
ture.
The Sight of him So unexpefted—Some recolledlions—I however bluflied, and was unable to conceal my Surprize, or, if you pleafe, in the baronet’s own fweet words, guilty confulion 1
(C
I hope, madam,” faid the grovel
I fee
you
ling, half-advancing reptile, “
pretty well recovered from your late “ accident.—I really had much apprc-“ henfion of Some bad conSequence.

Your fright”—He hemmed—paufed
and call: a look of meaning upon the doughty Sir Matthew.
« Yes, madam,” faid the knight, it “ feems you was moft extraordinarily af-feded for fo common an occafion, as well as the gentleman who did me the “ honour to ftiow you great civility.—I underftood, indeed, that he was arrived
4(
la
sS
The History of
“ in this part of the country,—But I little expeded to hear that my wife had had “ an . interview with him, or was capa-ble of enjoying a couple of hours pri-“ vate converfation with a man who So recently attempted to murder her huf-band.—But perhaps it was not pofiible “ to refufe fo trifling an indulgence (how-ever inconSiftent with honour or pru-dence) as I underfland the gentleman’s tendernefs and afliduity was fuch, as naturally enough led my friend, here, into the opinion, that you was his property, not mine.—But I am furprifed “ fo well-bred a fpark fhould commit fuch a breach of good manners,, as to “ return only abufe for the civil concern exprelTed for his health.—It was no “ lefs foreign to his general charadter, “ than impolitic at that jundture,—as it could not fail to convey a prejudice, “ where it would have been his interefl: t'- to have recommended himfelf.”



Aflonifh-
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 59
I
Aflonilhment — contempt — mortification and anguifli for Some moments Sealed my lips ; — and recollection occurring,
0	« •
previous to the power of utterance, I dif-dained making a defence at fo defpicable a tribunal,—but, burfting into tears of indignation, relieved my own bread:, and, I believe, both difappointed and flung the other wretches.
The baronet flared—damped—and was perfeClly frantic with rage and refentment.
Mr. Surgeon in vain endeavoured to account for a Silence So far different to what he expeCted the affair would have produced.—Fits, revilings, and every Species of low fury, he had prepared himfelf to encounter upon the occaSion, from a good woman’s having fallen to his lot, who was by no means Sparing in either violence or ill language, on the flighted provocation.
Whatj
6o
The His tort of
“ What, madam,” exclaimed
(you ‘ am
will find him out by proper marks)
I not worthy an anfwer ?—and do you add neglect to the other injuries I have Suftained ? — A pretty return, indeed, ** for my temper and forbearance this whole v/eek paft.—I was convinced you had your private motives for chuf-** ing a retreat fo ill adapted to your na-** tural inclination ; and, when I found the enemy was fo near, judged it ne-ceffary to be upon my guard ;—howc'-
ver, as I was far from fufpedfing that
/
you had been before-hand with all my precautions, I obServed the utmoft mo-deration,—and
«,c


Ihould have removed
every reftraint on the removal of the caufe ;—but, notwithstanding the hurt
one of my Servants had received, and
/
the abfence of the other, prevented
it
66
them from making observations on your s** Gondudt, yet you fee the knowledge of it was not to efcape me j and, in Spite
“ of
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 6i
€C
4C

CC


of the gentleman’s prudence, in
ing leaft in Sight, and amufing one per-fon, and employing another, to prolong his fatisfadlion ; — there was Sufi-dent evidence both of his and your unworthinefs.”
“ Be affured, fir,*’ faid I, with a firm but difpaffionate accent, “ it is not the “ matter you charge me with, but the “ manner that I contemn. Had you re-“ quired an explanation of every particu -“ lar of my condud that day, I fhould “ have considered you as entitled to re-“ ceive it.—I wanted not to be confronted


by Such a—gentleman.—I had nothing “ to difguife, nothing to conceal,—and “ whatever I may now fufSer in your opinion, from mifreprefentation, I am convinced will be entirely obviated, “ by enquiring of your Servants how the “ accident was produced.—Let me intreat “ you, fir, to examine them;—their integrity, their confequence, their tefti-
monj


62
The HI s T o R y of
“ mony cannot be inferior to what has “ already had weight with you j—and I “ am willing to abide by your juftice and judgment, when you have thus cleared up every fhadovv of defign or impropriety
te
<e
cc


rd-
‘‘ You muft excufe me, madam, turned the Sneering baronet ;—“ but I
(C
cc
have not been fo backward in obtaining every poflible light into this affair, as “ you may imagine.—I have not only “ received the fellows confeffion of their “ ignorance, from your good manage-‘‘ ment,—but likewife the honefl: report “ of the poor deluded cottager, who, I “ believe, v/ill be Some time before file “ recovers her Surprize at your confidence *‘,and artifice.—Little did fhe think fo young, fo modeft a looking lady could have been capable of Such impro-‘‘ per behaviour.—Have you any thing farther to propofe ?”
cc
I ac-
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 63
“ I acknowledge, fir,” Said T, “ that “ your whole condu<ft upon the occafion “ is admirable.Far be it, therefore, “ from me, to except againft what is So evidently unexceptionable.—I have one fatisfa£tion, however, beyond the reach of the moft malicious induftry, or moft “ injurious attacks,—a confcioufnefs of
—but 1 will not mention it-


my own
you
“ cannot, dare not fufpedf it—and as I ‘‘ Ihall never be fo abandoned, as even to “ difrcgard appearances,—my future be-“ haviour Ihall be as blamelefs as my pad “ intentions ;—and 1 will compel you to “ be alhamed of your prefent fulpicions, “ I hope you will not infift upon my llt-“ ting down with fuch a wicked (not to “ mention how defpicable a) being, who “ has <not only attempted to ftab an hi-“ therto unblemilhed reputation, but to “ fow diflenfion between parties whofe “ happinefs ought td be held facred !”
So faying, I was for retiring with precipitation j—but my lord and mafter was
by

64

The' History of
hy no means in the complying mood : /he tberefdre, by his authority, or rathe? my condefcenfion, placed me on my ufual feat, and I did the honours of his table with the utmoft grace a proud offended heart would permit.
But, notwithftanding my paffivenefs with refpedf to the above-mentioned article, I was neither difpoSed nor confent-ing to participate the repaft,—but remained filent, referved, and unfociable ;—the latter of which my unfoiled plate was a moft inconteftible proof.—I at length obtained a happy releafe,—and have thus prefenced you with a a faithful account of every particular. How it will terminate I know not; but as inflaming his groundlefs jea-loufy would but prove a confirmation with the world of the juftice of it, I am determined to Support every conSequence in fuch a manner as 1 flatter myfelf will beft conduce in the end to niy iuftification.
y %

« ^ *.
*4
Adieu,
Mis3 PITTBOROUGH. 6j
Adieu, my dear Sifter j—cruel or kind, I find my affeilion for you incapable of diminution.



LETTER IX.
Mifs Hutchens to Mifs Binfield,
4
A Letter from Sir Matthew Sanxfey
to mamma! — what can it contain ? I die with curiofity. — She cannot Surely he dead—Ihe has never run away.—I mufl: endeavour to learn the particulars.
#
m
m
m
My mother has been pleafed to relax Somewhat of her reServe,—and, on my entering her dreffing-room, put the letter Ihe had juft received into my hands.— “ Read it,” Said Ihe, “ Kitty,—read the “ mortifying contents!—I aui, indeed, VoL. II.	F	fbn’y
66
The History of
Cl
Cl
Cl
Sorry you fliould purchafe your knowledge of an ill-natured world at fo dear a price, as on the prefent occaSion. “ That poor thing is mod vilely, and, I “ do believe, unjuftly traduced.—-I can-“ not trace the lead probability of deSign “ in the whole affair,—and mud conSider “ it as merely the effect of one of thofe “ unlucky chances that Sometimes befal
“ the mod prudent and conSiderate of us
%
“ all. Yet, my child, it may teach you this one important truth, that indiscretion is as capable of giving an irreparable dab to the faired reputation as “ actual crimes ;
Cl
Cl
Cl
Cl
as in the latter cafe
the very word is public in the fird in-“ dance, the former feems to imply more than our fight or penetration can reach.”
A pretty kettle of filh has (he made of it truly !—Nothing would Serve her lady-fhip, but retiring in the dumps to Sir Matthew’s old manfion near Portfmouth ; — a mod convenient Situation for what
Soon

Miss PIT TBOROtl(CH
67
Soon enfued. The knight had an en-
/
gagement-T-left her a few hours to her own inventions :—Ihe began immediately to exercife her authority as miftrefs.—The chaife by her orders is drawn out,—.and away Ihe drives with pleafure enough I’ll aiifwer for her.
The fellow had his cue.—Deep-laid artifice!—-You or I could by no means have acquitted 'ourfelves fo cleverly upon fuch an occafion. He takes a route that brings them pop upon the colonel, who was- either returning from a review, or fome preparatory parade ;—and, the more efSedlually to conceal madam’s forward-nefs and indlfcretion, at the hazard of his own neck, overturns the carriage, and well was he paid for it without doubt!
A cottage (you may judge how accidentally) was at hand. — The lady is conveyed to it by her gallant lover j—one Servant is difpatched for a furgeon—the
F 2	other
A'
68
The Hi s T o R y of


other incapable of attending to any one but himfelf,-—consequently the whole care of his miftrefs fell to the colonel’s fliare.
Thepoor ignorant woman gives a ftrange account of that part of the Scene fhe was permitted to be witnefs of.->-Such loving.
whining.
and fuch
Such Sighing, fuch dying, as Surfeits one but to think bf. The Servant, at length, returns with the Surgeon,—who was led into an error by (at leaft) the colonel’s fond behaviour, that I fuppofe occafioned my delicate coufin Some very delicate fenfations. As Sure as you are alive, he concluded they were man and wife.
It feems the gentleman Snapped him
I
up very ftiort, on his communicating the 'opinion he had conceived;—which, by the wuy, was very impolitic, as it only opened his mouth againft them both. Madam was brought home in a fine condition but as Sir Matthew forbore being
in-
MI s 5 PIT T B O R O U G H. 69
and the Servants told no tales, flie hugged herfelf with the hope that all
i
would blow over.
:. The baronet, by his lady’s perverSe Bars, was engaged that very day fortnight in a hunting match j—and who Ihould belong to the fag end of the company, but the very Surgeon already mentioned ?
I
V
The whole party dined together,—and the fellow happening to be naturally volu-ble and communicative, and not perfonally acquainted with the baronet, gave them the cottage adventure, as an addition to their entertainment.
The ears of all prefent (except thofe of the dull doating hulband) were Suitably tickled ; -- but that unfortunate gentleman (who does not poITefs the brighteft underftanding) unable to Support the mirth of the company, though by no means
as the Surgeon had prudently
F3
I
named
70
The History of
named no names,—was lb mean and ri-diculous as to beihrew his own neft.
The company immediately Screwed their
s	•
features into a lefs riSible form,—aiTedled to condole their neighbour’s misfortune; who, calling about for revenge, and a proper unravelling of every horrid circum-llance, gave Mr. Surgeon an invitation to dine with him the next day. In fhort,
I
my lady, to her unfpeakable confufion, was confronted ;—and Sir Knight fuIHci-ently convinced of his diflionour.
So far for information. —He then in-
/
treats my mother to do him the juftice to believe him incapable of taking a brutal or rafh revenge ;—but hopes neither fhe, nor any other of his wife’s relations, will condemn him for Iliewing fomerefentment, where the provocation is fo flagrant: — that he found the colonel was embarked; but nevertheless he had retrenched her la-dyfhip’s liberty, and could not fay when
he
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 71
he Ihould prevail upon himfelf to enlarge it:—that Ihe had deceived him in a very
notwithftandino;
o
he
groSs degree; for, was fenfible fhehad Some liking for Ding-ley, be had ever conSidered her as a woman of the niceft honour, and the lall perfon who would have brought either berfelf or him into dif-reputation.
He then concludes with wifhing he could prevail upon mamma to viSit Hamp-iliire, in order to fatisfy herfelf that he has not exaggerated matters; and, if pof-fible, trace out Some favourable circum-ftance to deliver his mind from the horror with which it is oppreffed.—He cannot bear to be ftigmatifed, as is ufual in fuch cafes :—and he is convinced no perfon but herfelf can obviate that misfortune.”
My mother inSifted upon my returning the curious epiflle (which I did without one comment the inftant I had perufed
F 4	it)
72
- -The H T o R Y of
it) or I would have prefented you with a faithful tranfeript, . ;	,
»
Something may perhaps be flruck out of this incident.—Suppofe I fhould be able to prevail upon her to let me be her proxy, —and by that means facilitate your journey j—for, though you are many miles diftant from Sir Matthew’s, it Ihall go hard with me but I will make you a vilit. What a happy adventure, if productive , of fuch happy confequences! Adieu.
I -

L E .D
V.
t t


Mis
s
C' N
v^. r
73
C*
' t
■ • \ r
c * J
SV . T
-'. * *
v>
*'Xf

V

c >
L E T T E R X.
r f
t, -	*
Mifs Hutchens to Mrs. Batson.
* *r
Madam,
\
Otwithstanding your very genteel requeft to mamma, never more to permit her own child to a6I the fecre--tary’s part, I am again commiffioned to he the conveyancer of difagreeable tidings.

My coufin has unhappily rendered her-lelf the whole country and town’s talk, is a prilbner in her own houSe,—and, as her indiscretions have been moft glaring, it is very uncertain when She may obtain her enlargement.
For my part, I cannot conceive what ^end Ihe could propofe to herSeJfin grant-
mg
74
The History of
iing the colonel an interview in an obfcure cottage. Could fhe fuppofe the bofom of ignorance- was a proper repofitory for fo iinportant a Secret ?—But your very wife
ones are ever the mod liable to fall into
»
error. It Seems the colonel was So very unguarded in his behaviour, as to give
•The old cottager called in a who being So Situated as to ©ver-hear their whole conversation, made Such a report, as I would much rather you fhould conceive, than I deScribe.
l3ie alarm*, neighbour,.
It was at all times evident, that your fi'fter w5s by no means indifferent reSpeff-mg kr colonel, —though Ihe delighted in displaying her power, and rendering him
r
riciculous;—nor was it neceffary to in-■porm-. any beholder how deeply ,he was caught. I only mention this circumflance
as a Stronger proof of the impropriety of rheir meeting privately. — I ow'ii it is both mortifying,., as well as a very'Scandalous
affair. I am attacked wherever I appear;
andj
Miss PIT'TBOROUGH. 75
* •
and, notwithftanding all my efforts, am capable of making but an indifferent defence.
\
f
Suppofe my uncle was to exert himfelf upon the occafion ?—Perhaps he might be able to eliedl a tolerable accommodation ;—otherwise God knows- what may be ' the confequence. — Her reputation, howeVerCln all events, is utterly demo-lilhed ;—and though I may be fo unhappy as to incur your difpleafure a Second time, in return for my concern for a thoughtlefs
relation, I muff prefume to repeat my’’ wilh, that Ihe had ftill remained Safe in, your harmlefs village. — A difpofitibn that is naturally mifchievous, cannot be better reftrained than by pure air and narrow precindts.
Mamma joins in proper condolance for this family-misfortune, with, &c. &c.
LET
•7
76
The History of

»v

f-
.w ^
j
LETTER XI.


Mrs. Batson to Mrfs Hutchens.
/

Madam,
Should think myfelf inexcufahfe, if I was to treat this Second friendly ep-iille of yours as I did a forrher one, as it really demands Something more thaii contempt.
Notwithftanding I have reafon to b-ment the opportunity my poor Sifter’s con* dudf has furniftied you with, of Ihining
K- •	•	.
at her expence, 1 own you. have reafon to rejoice at it, as neither I, nor any other perfon either of your family or acquaintance, could otherwise have discovered the ' .value of your heart.
O Kitty, youth and profperity moll . .■intolerably mifleacl you !■—But beware' of
Miss •.
-I
7L
misfortunes :—you are by no means the more fecure from having hitherto e(capod;
and bitter remorfe alone would be your portion in a fallen Hate, from your having been incapable of fixing one friend, even-in the day of your faireft reputation.
As to the worthy though unhappy ob-jedf of your former envy and prefent af-feifled contempt, 1 mufl: tell you, that Ihe had fufficient charity to cover (if pof-fible) even crimes j — confequently the few indiscretions Ihe has committed, carry an amiable palliation along with them :— and I do proteft to you, that, afperfed and vilified as She is at this period, fhe has a thoufand times more merit in my eyes than the little, malicious, pert, unfeeling mortal, that would hunt her down, only for her Superior excellence.
Come, Mifs Kitty, I intreat you would
come and. vifit our little village.
Her
praifes, the praifes of every one that has
known
78
The History of
known diftrefs, would Icon grate your unwilling ears. She never exulted in any one’s misfortunes;,— Ihe never handed about a cruel Scandalous tale, whatever its foundation,—but induftrioufly checked its progrefs, whenever propagated : —flie was a general reftorer and preferver of peace; — the aged and alHidlcd found eafy accefs to her ; —and Ihe rejoiced in a far greater degree, when Ihe could warm the heart
•	V
of the one with joy, and the other with confolation, than Such a difpofition as yours is capable of doing, even upon fo agreeable an occafion, as levelling per-fedlion.
I have enclofed Some letters to my aunt, that will fet this matter in a very different light to what it at prefent appears. —She W'ill not fail to do the injured juftice,— and perhaps you may very Soon be enabled to enter public affemblies without your delicate and friendly apprehenfions of mortifying attacks,. Truth will and muft
8
prevail,
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 79
prevail, however crulhed For a time; and I only hope, for the reputation of the family, that your future conduct may never bring a greater ftain upon your honour, or wound your mother’s peace more infupportably, than the late fteps of nvy valuable Sifter has done.
No human being ever could attain perfection, or I fliould flatter my Self with living to fee the only blemilh in lady Sanxfey’s nature totally eradicated. As I write to my aunt, I have no coiumiflions to charge you with ;—therefore only beg your acceptance of all due thanks for the favour you have conferred upon, &c.

So
The ill STORY of

LETTER XII.
Mrs. Batson to Mrs, Hutchens,
My Dear Madam,
A M SenSible how great a fhock it muft
I
be to your humane heart, to have the reputation of a poor unthinking (tho’ by no means criminal) creature toffed about So mercilefsly as my Sifter’s is at prefent. But . I will not complain of the world ;—what quarter can be expedlcd from ftrangers, when our own family begin the cry againtt us ?
A
However blameable lady Sanxfey’s con-duel, with refpedt to the difpofition of her perfon, the accident that has wounded her fame is as groundlefs as malicious, 1 cannot give you a better idea of the world’s injuftice, than by putting herun-
difgui fed
Mrss PlTTB.DS.OUGH.C^ 8i
I
difguiSed Sentiments into your hands.— Her language was ever the language of Sincerity, and, however Ihe may have de-fcended to err, Ihe Scorns to deceive.
As to the wretch who is now moil unhappily mailer of her fate, Ihe is abundantly his Superior, even, in her prefent disgraceful circumllances j—for,: at leall, her manner of Supporting his ill treatment of her has a merit in it, that his ungenerous foul mull never pretend to. I have hitherto dealt out reprehenSion and in-Ilrudlion with a liberal hand j—but I mufl: acknowledge, notwithllanding the advantage a mere Ilander-by has, upon every occaSion, over the parties engaged, (from being free from paflion, and devoid of pre-jud ice,) that Ihe Could not have a£led more properly by the bell advice I am capable of giving, — than Ihe has now done from the didlates of her own prudence and under-Ilanding.—Yes, my aunt, I am proud to think with how much dignity and pro-
^ VoL. II.	G	priety
82
The History of
f
priety Ihe has condufled herfelf towards ' her candid judge, and mofi: corjcienticus
r_
accuier.
I would be the lad perfon to encourage or juftify rebellion in a wife j — but, considering the natural pride of ray Sifter’s
heart (the bad eiTeifts of too great indul-
/
gence) and the wrong, provoking, and
illiberal meafures Sir Matthew has taken
_ •
with her, I could not deny her the afylum of friendftiip, if ftie was to deliver herfelf from all undue reftraint, by an abfolute elopement.	[
It is^well her enemies had the prudence to'lie clofe until the colqinel was Safely embarked :—1 am miftaken if he would not othervvife have moft Severely chaftiftd
them j—not that it would have contributed in the leaft: to heal her wounded ,—but human nature could not have-
fam
borne fuch viliany unmoved.
The
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 83
The teftimony of the Servants, the poor old woman’s depoSition, would have more weight with the fenfible and well-difpoSed, than any other evidence j — and I fliall never reft, until a proper perfon is employed to examine them. I need not apologize to you for giving you this trouble, as I am fenfible your heart is Such, that you find your reward in the execution of every worthy and benevmlent a<3:ion.
LETTER XIII.
Goody Jackson to Colonel Dingley,
Good Your Honour,
S the old proverb fays, When we “ want to beat a dog, we are ne-“ ver at a lofs for a ftick.” —That fweet gentlewoman that you brought to our hut in fo piteous a condition, has been very
G 2
roughly
84
The History of
roughly handled Since you left thefe parts, and for no varfal thing, but your honour’s kindnefs to her.
Here have I and my poor gaffer been raifed out of our beds, both early and late, to tell gentlefolks and gentlefolks the fame ftory.



(C


(C
Why,” fays I, “ fo far from any harm being; done, there was not the
“ lead Sign of a bad intention :
the gentleman, God love him, is but ill rewarded for his goodnefs. — To be Sure, “ I thought he would have died upon the
I
Spot with grief;—and when he went under the fhed, though I durft not fpeak, I fee’d all through a hole in the thatch, and verily thought he was dif-“ tradled mad. — Ah, that heloves the lady, “ is as certain fure, as that I Hand here “ alive;—but with no more ill than the “ Jove of a baby. —It pitied me Sorely to ‘‘ See the fad condition (he was in ;—and
“ then
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 8
ft
“ then the Speeches he made, — and, “ again, her anfwers, would have pierced “ a heart of ftone:—I am Sure not even ‘‘ patient Griffel, or the Children in the
Wood

But, howfomdever, all would not do; —I can’t Speak your gentlefolks lingo,— and So they put ill JiruStions on what I Said, and turned it all their own way.. Indeed, I know my own : know—if Some folks (good for nothing as they are) had
not been falfe-hearted and bribed, as a
\
body may fay, this could never have happened.—Well, pride and malice Seldom thrive. — I my Self fee him o’er-paid for his trouble, — and he need not fure have blabbed. But God’s will mull be done ! The Lord fend the poor lady may not be brought to her grave amongfb them. I hope your honour,will not blame us, nor be lefs kind to poor Matt, if you Ihould light of him j—for we would ferve you by night or by day, and have reafon to
blefs
G 3
86
The History of
bleSs the hour that brought you to our hut.
I walked o’er to your landlord at Portsmouth, as you diredted, and got him to write this, as. Lord help me, I can neither write nor read, or I would tell you what he fays of you j —but he will put nothing in that he does not like, —and I had a deal of treaty to get him to give my own ftile j —“ But,” Said I, “ his ho-“ nour knows my heart So well, that if “ you will not write it as I fpeak it, he won’t be above half-pleafed.”—So no more at prefent, than kind love to Matt, from your honour’s &c, &c.
LET-
Miss PITTBOROUGH.


LETTER XiV.
Colonel Dingley to Mr. Brooksbank.
T is true, Ned, that I have removed myfelf at a cruel diftance from my beloved MiSs Pittborough, but have by no
'f
means found the diflipation I fought for. However, I am at prefent roufed from my melancholy depreffion, by an unex-petted incident. My mind, in fome degree, experiences its ufual activity;—my invention is caftins; about for wavs and
O	J
,—and' my imagination has ftarted (with Tome friendly affiftance) animper-' fe£t plan of a purfuit, that will afford me much bufinefs, if not amufement.
means
You mufl; have learned the termination
S
of our expedition from the public papers. ■—Be that as it may, I am not now dif-
G 4
pofed
88
The I-iis TORy of
pofed to enter upon the fubjedl; —I have
f	1
more interefting employment for my pen. “Read, read the enclofed ; —and if I do not fix upon Some method of punifhinsr
i	^	^	'
every malicious accomplice in this laft black afFair, —conclude that my misfortunes have deflroyed both my capacity and underftanding !
Mifs Kitty Hutchens, as the grand original, fliall alfo be duly remembered.— The obligations fhe has conferred upon me, fhall be repaid with intereft. —I will
A
Secure her from every Species of injury; but her humiliation fhall be Severe, and as confpicuous as the Sun ! My plot is pretty well formed with refpeft to her, •but not yet- ripe for execution : — I will 'not, therefore, anticipate the pleafure a full communication will hereafter afford you, by premature hints.—As for Mr, Surgeon, and his co-operator. Sir Knight
of the ppfl:^ they may depend on my beli
• « *
Services.
Do
/
Miss PITTBOROUGH.
89
Do you not admire the honeft fimplici-ties of the poor creature’s ftile ?— (for I am fenfible every expreffion is her own) her amanuenfis is a worthy hearted fellow, and would neither add nor diminifli, except where he himfelf was concerned.
Little did I imagine, when I gave her the injundlion to inform me of every change or incident, and engaged his pro-mife of aflifting her good intention with his Ikill in a fcience it is her misfortune
t .
to be unacquainted with ;—that fhe would fo foon have had So juft and fo extraordinary an occaSion for comply ing with it.
1 do affure you, I have gained a treafure in her fon Matt, whom ! have placed about myfelf.—His difpofition is fo valuable, and his underftanding fo ftrong, that (but for the cloud of illiteratenefs) I would have, made a better proviSion for him 5-—but is not contentment Superior to worldly honour or affluence ?
t I ■ I .	, ^
I fhall
go ■ The HisToRY of
h
I
I Ihall return to England in a few weeks at fartheft but obferve-----incog/—as a
report will prevail, and you muft give a
/
fandlion to it, by alFedling to believe it, that I am making a fecond tour to thofe places you and I viSitod with fo much delight Some feven or eight years ago, to finilh our education, as the phrafe is. 1 do not
mean to truft myfelf with even one fight of
\
the perfon on earth I moll: wilh to fee, whatever opportunities my difguife may furnifn me with, as the feaft would be dearly bought, and only revive fatal remembrances.




6^


My dear Mifs Kitty Hutchens, how far was I from conceiving that your idea
could ever give me delight!—But I now
0
profefs myfelf your very humble fervant;
nor will I renounce the intire devotion of my perfon and abilities to prove myfelf fuch, until I have brought you to ac-knowlege the julfice of my proceedings.

for
Miss PITTBOROUGH.
9f

“ For your fake, and the fake of a few “ other perfons almofl: equally beloved, I forego all rny former refolutions ;—for “ your fake I feel the utmofi: impatience to return to a country 1 fo lately quitted ■“ with anguifli and difguft j — for your fake I w'ill exert the choiceft endowments of my head and heart; nor wdll I Spare a considerable expence to convince you of my beft friendihip.
(C


“ How could I be fo long blind to your “ numberlefs perfedlions ? Are not your
■“ eyes brighter than the day, your lips the “ pureft coral, your voice the perfedHon “ of harmony, and your breaft the refi-“ dence of the Graces? No rafli defign, “ no envious fenfation, no-breach of ve-“ racity, no malicious pleafurc ever agi-“ tated your gentle heart. '	*


“ Ah, why was It necefiary for me to wander far, far diftant from your habi>
tation to difeover your ineftimable worth r
■But
02	The History of
/
But do not punifh me for an involun-tary tranfgreffion —rBlindnefs is a mis-“ fortune, not a fault.—I no Sooner fee “ my error, than it is lamented by me.— Pity therefore, moft kindly pity the con-** dition you have reduced me to ;—receive me into favour, and prove propitious to “ my v/ilhes.”
Prithee, Ned, don’^t conclude that this a-poftrophe to Mifs Hutchens is the ebullition of a frantic brain:—no, my underftand-ing has Seldom been clearer than at prefent,—
But you need not puzzle your rather ftupid imagination for a folution of the myftery, for 1 tell you as a friend, that you would find yourfelf as wide from the point in the conclusion as beginning of your conjectures j,—and reft affured that in due time I will prefent you vChth a key.
Is this the language of an undone wretch.? a wretch that cannot boaft even the moft diftant ray of hope for his Support ?—who
has
Miss PITTBOROUGH.
93
has So recently been deprived of the greateft bleffing nature could bellow, and not only finds it torn from his own hands, but committed to the poflefiion of—It will not do: how foon I am out of my depth, when I once venture into this troubled water ?
But let me tell you, notwlthllanding I cannot conquer my weaknefs, I have learnt to reftrain it. — A neglected perfon, an in-confiftent behaviour, no longer tell officious tales, and proclaim me unfortunate;—but I am become Spruce, colledled, chatty, and compofed. —I can afk a quellion with tolerable pertinence, and give orders without exciting the Hare of amazement. — I can fpend a comfortable hour with honeft Matt Jackfon, who, though my fervant, is encouraged to relate his humble adventures with the prolixity he loves.

He indeed is nowand then fobeyvlldered, in his relation, he know^snot how to difen-tangle himfelf, a perverfe Sufan having led
him
94
The History of
him a moft dtfgraceful dance; but a fmife from his mailer,accompanied with an “Oh Matt, never be alhamed of what emperors *‘and kings have praftifed ages ago.—The little god delights in Sportive tricks—and “ the more lincere the heart, the more ridi-culous the behaviour; — ” cuts the thread, and he again runs on a vail length without any interruption. I know you will rejoice at every expedient that contributes to lull the Sorrows of your friend into a pleafing forgetfulnefs, though for ever fo fhort a period.
Philofophers and princes have had their rattles, nor are Matt JackSon’s amours lefs innocent or lefs entertaining than the bell of them.
lE.D
Miss PITTBOROUGH
95

LETTER XV.
Colonel Dingley to Goody Jackson.
My Worthy OldEriend,
^	I
Sincerely thank you for your kind letter, and rejoice that I have the power to make you Some amends in the perfon of your Son.
The place had Surrendered before our arrival, consequently there was no other work left for us to do, but to eftablifh a garrifon. I Soon found your Son out amongft the recovered prisoners: he had languilhed Some months with a wound in his fhoulder. I put him under our Surgeon’s care, and he is even now So well, as to be able to walk abroad. He would have wrote to you him-
felf.
gS
The History of
Self, but for reafons you need not be informed of: however, he will put his mark to my letter for your better fatisfadlion. But though ftoutly recovered, I believe he is disqualified for his majefty’s future Service, I will therefore take him into mine; and if kind treatment can compenfatc for the lefs honourable appointment, he fhall be no loier.
I am much concerned at the trouble you
mention has been given you ; but I hope foon to be in England with your fon in my hand, when we will forget all former disappointments, and give one hour to the honeft raptures that will warm your valu-* able hearts.
I am, &c. &c.
P. S. My thanks and good wifhes at tend my old friend and landlord*
LET
'•r -f
■ i',
3
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 97

LETTER XVI.
Lady Sanxsey to Mrs, Batsonl
TILL, my dear Sifter, things continue in the Same mortifying ftate ; all accommodation I fear is impracticable. He cannot forget, and /am incapable of forgiving ; therefore the breach muft ever remain.
We dined together yefterday, when he vouchfafed to tell me, in a mumbling unfriendly accent, that he expected a vifttor.
I received the information with modeft fi-lence,—which was conftrued into negledl, contempt, and a horrid offence. We had a pretty warm altercation on the Subject, when he flounced out of the room, and I retired to my own apartment, to this my
VoL. II.
H
darling
oS
The H I STORY of
darling employment:
which was mod
profitably, or moft Satisfactorily entertained, I v/ill not prefume to determine.
I am greatly puzzled to gueSs who it is^ he can expedt j but I dare believe it is Some
I
bottle companion, that, however he may contribute to chear his hours, will only render mine more miferable.
Oh my Sifter, how does the expreffion of one of your letters written in my day of folly, occur to me, whenever I view my faded form : “ It was confeious integrity alone that could enlighten my counte-“ nance.” I have deprived myfelfof that, and every charm is fled, agreeable to your fatal prediction.
I have lately read over the matrimonial Service, and am aftonifhed I was not froze with horror at that tremendous charge ; As you Shall anfwer it at the dreadful day
I
of judgment, &c.” But though I ac-
knowl°^“
o
Miss PITTBOROUGH.
99
knowlege it is far from being any extenuation of my guilt, I really was fo agitated by refentment and mortified pride, that I was incapable of attending to one fyllable. A pretty condition of mind, indeed, for entering into fo Solemn an engagement! and the event is as happy as fuch a beginning promised.
I have been a wife now turned of two months, and have never been permitted. Since the fatal accident of the chaife, to have one will or inclination of my own gratified.—I have not a retiring place^ my clofet is no 'longer an afylum j I am as liable to be broke in upon there, as in the moft public apartment.
If I attempt to perform any a6l of de -votion, I am Sure to be interrupted ; and I am fo difcompofed by the Several paffions that are roufed by a Senfe of indignities, that I cannot return to it. But I have heard my dear father Say, that the duties
Hi	of
ICO
The H I S T O R Y of
of a chriftian do not conSift in outward forms ; for that, by conforming to the ne-cellity of our conditions for confcience fake, and performing the good within our power, will be much more acceptable than the barely honouring or praifing our Creator with our lips, when our hearts are far from him.
I am much beholden to you, for the af-feiSlionate concern you exprefs for my health and reputation : you may depend upon it, it' fhall be my care, as far as I am able, to heal the one, and preferve the other.—But I hear a chaife : — this impulfe of curiofity convinces me I am by no means dead to the world, though literally buried to all its enjoyments.

Well Nancy, Sir Matthew has indeed taken a rrroft effedfual method to recommend himfelf to my favour, by the companion
Miss PITTBOROUGH. loi
panion he has choSe for me.—What! was the favage triumph incomplete, unlefs in participation with'another ? Was it not fufficient that he himfelf beheld the cruel efFe<51:s of his feverity in my emaciated body and depreffed fpirits, but he muft fummons rny conftant well-wilher Mifs Kitty Hutchens to be a witnefs of it? — But I will even in this refpedf, as heretofore, defeat his malice by patient refignation..
She will, I doubt not, be all ill-natured pleafure from top t© toe;—nor will flie let one opportunity flip, of punilhing my well-remembered defpicable vanity and exultation at the ridotto. I, indeed, had fome little excufe for my folly; for I had not then forfeited — the colonel was my
t
own.—But her motive for punilhing it, can have no other foundation than barbarous revenge. We were at leafi: upon equal terms, and I could only make myfelf ridiculous and contemptible; but fhe will
Hr
now
IG2
The H I S 'T o R Y of
4
now be gihlty of the moft ungenerous inSult.
I am called to Supper with what appetite I may.
♦*!^	<► O	^	♦ ♦	© -^
LETTER XVII.
Mifs HuTCHEI^iS to Mifs Binfield.
t
My dear girl, I have moft Successfully carried every point my heart was Set upon, and have now the pleafure of writing to you from Sir Matthew Sanx-Sey’s.
My mother had a multitude of reafon^ for declining the baronet’s invitation, but clofed with my propolai of becoming her representative, with all the willingnefs I
could either wifh or delire. I Sent a few
* . . 1 • • »
compliments and apologies to his knight-
fhip.
Miss PITTBGROUGH.
10-3
(hip, and intreated him to accept of my company in fuch ftrains as (if I am not amazingly miftaken in his difpofition) met with his higheft approbation.
I wrote to her ladylhip’s miferable moping Sifter previous to my journey, but did not mention one Syllable concerning it:
I knew her too well to expofe myfelf to the danger of an impediment. I really queftion, fuch is her diflike of my hard nature (as Ihe politely calls it), and dotage
of her lifter, but that, rather than not
*
have prevented my going, flie would have torn herfelf from father, fpoufe, and beloved ehimney-corner.
Well, but I am arrived.,Nothing worth mentioning occurred in my journey. Sir Matthew gave me a moft genteel reception, —We talked the matter over,—Ihook opr wife heads with great judgment,—lamented our lhare in madam’s difgrace, —and laid the ground-work for fome future de^
tedions.
H 4
My
104
The History of
My lady was pleafed not to make ner appearance until the Supper was Served in. She Saluted me coldly, —and took her feat
with well-diflemble,d dignity. —It is plain
•»
the colonel has told her the impofition I pradlifed upon his credulity.
Sir Matthew, with all the indifference of a Seyen years marriage, (though you well know when he was-nooSed) disregarding his lady, paid me all the civility and court imaginable. My tafte, my underftanding, my good-nature, and politeneSs, were very prettily complimented by him ; —and upoii the whole, I don’t think him in any degree So deSpicabie as uSual,
Upon my word, her ladyfhip is finely altered : her eyes are funk into her head ; —the much admired daub of her Cheeks totally wafhed off j—her face the length of my arm; — and her voice humility itSelf.— O matrimony, matrimony, what miracles thou art capable of producing !
She

Miss PITTBOROUGH. 105
She retired Somewhat Sooner than the rules of good-breeding prefcribe«~but left
me her baronet to coquet and entertain me-
« * »
To-morrow we are to traverfe the antiquated garden ;—repeat couplets from a variety of poets, who have been foolifhly enamoured of rural Scenes; — drink our eoIFee in a ruinous alcove; and conclude the evening at piquet.
In a day or two we Ihall take an airing to the cottage of cottages,—where the Surgeon of Surgeons will be appointed to meet us, and her proud ladylhip is deftined to be of the party.—Judge of my friendihip, when in the midft of fuch bufy Scenes, I with pleafure devote a not inconfiderable fliare of my hours to your amufement.
Tuefdaynoon,
As I hate to do things by halves, I was Mnwilling to difpatch my letter without acquainting
io6
The History of
quainting you with the fuccefs of our ex-eurSion to Goody Jackfon’s, as I think the old wretch is called. Behold me, then returned, and no great light obtained. The woman is partial, the Surgeon referv-ed, and my lady as mute as a mackarel.
She disdains, you muft underllrand, at-tempting to juftifyherSelf:—the world has her conSent to judge her as unfavourably “■ as it pleaSes.—Unmerited cenSure is but “ a flight calamity,—when compared with
cruel inSult” (including my behaviour I fappoSe in the latter.)
I am glad, however, that we have picked up a companion that is tolerably lively and intelligent.—We took his furgeoa-fliip home with us, and, in Short, contrived to Spend a very Sprightlyilh kind of an uninfipid evening.
But I begin to apprehend that I Shall
foon grow weary of my Situation, unlefs.
I can
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 107
I can be So happy as to contrive Some means of obtaining your company.—I muft flatter up this mortal of a baronet, and who knows but I may bring matters, to bear ?


LETTER XVIIL
Lady Sanxsey to Mrs Batson.
AM humbled, my Nancy, to the very
duft. My prefent condition affedls me
$
beyond what I have ever yet. experienced ;
and I am abundantly convinced, that no misfortunes are So grievous as thofe that hear a confcioufnefs along with them that we ourfclyes have been the author of them.
What was flcknefs to the mifery I now endure j Surrounded by Sympathizing aS-
Sifting
io8
The History of
fjffing friends ; —nothing left unfaid, no^ thing left undone, to footh the mind into peace, and relieve the fulFering body ?
I would gladly fupport myfelf with re-Iblution and propriety, notwithftanding the weight of my mortifications is intolerable to me, for many'reafons. To make atonement, nay, if poffible, wipe off the remembrance of paft follies ; to preferve
your heart from too great affliction ; to merit the continuance of a certain perfon’s
n j and defeat the fnalice of the molt unfeeling wretches upon earth ; is worth a ftruggle. — They Ihall not triumph whilft my health and reafon remain unaffected : fliould they fail,—I know not •how low I may fink.
But I am miferably harraffed. No fatls-faCtion without, — reproaches and bitter repentance within ;—bandied and ridiculed on the .one hand, —brow-beat and mifufed ©n the other ;—-is it to be borne ?
Your
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 109
Your condudi as free from blame,' as your heart has ever been from unworthy inclinations, how inconceivably happy are your days in comparifon of mine !
An afSedfionate, indulgent, and difcreet child j a faithful, obliging, and tender wife; — a Sincere, conftant, and invaluable friend ; — and a kind, judicious, nay almoft prophetic advifer; is not the oppofite fate we have incurred moft incontcftably juli ? Had I but beheld you with the fame eyes fome few months ago, how great would have been my deliverance!—But no. 1 fiould then have retained my propenSity error (which nothing but the fevere hand
4
ofalflidtion was able to eradicate,) and per-' haps Ihould have plunged myfelf into evils beyond even what could reach me in my prefent hate.
You muft allow me to fay, that the forfeiture of one affection, that is fo umnerit-edly continued to me, would have exceeded
a mil-
lid
The History of
a million other calamities; and that the certainty, that however I may Suffer in the world’s opinion, I fliall be amply recompensed there ; that my undue persecutions, as he was the innocent cauSe of them, will not fail to endear me to his heart; Spreads a gleam of Satisfadlion and confo-lation over the whole dark Scene, and will bear me through a long, long Succeffion of difHculties.
The cruel knight, exulting Kitty, and baSe Surgeon, are the only companions I have allowed me. The Servants are all creatures of Sir Matthew’s chuSmg ; Argoseyed, malicious-minded, unfeeling. —Tears would but expoSe me to ridicule ; —an out-rasreous behaviour would but furnifli them
o
with weapons againft me ;—and even my command of temper and conftrained resignation fubjedls me to the vilefl of SuSpi-
t
cions and cenfure, — Do you not think, my filler, I have a hard card to play ?—Yet be allured 1 will play it with judgment, and
have
■ Miss PITTBOROUGH. hi
have hope (however extravagant) that the came will ftill be mine.
A high fpirit has ever been imputed to me ;—but can any meeknefs, any forbearance, furpafs what I now pra£life? Who would have imagined, that Ihe who was So fufceptible of every the moft minute indignity;—whofe pride was flaming out .alraoft before the fliadow of provocation could reach it;.—who v;as- fo tenacious of her rights and privileges, that, in order to Secure them from infringement, fne would defend them before they could be juftly Said
; — could ever have tamely
\
/
to be attacked ; -fubmitted to fuch unexpe^ed, fuch unjuS-tifiable reftraint.?
But do not put a better eonflrudiion on
my behaviour than it deferves. I ftill feek, 1 ftill thirft for admiration, though of a more fubftantial kind than ufual;—for the truth is, my Sentiments and inclination
luve taken a quite new turn.
112
The Hi STORY of
What does my good father Say of hfs mortified daughter’s conduct?—In what eftimation am I held by your generous huf-band ? If they are Severe in their cenfures, where fliall 1 hide my head ?—But it is im-poffibie; they are, as far as human frailty will admit, the fame to-day, yefterday, and to-morrow.—They are endued with the moft lively fenfations of humanity ;—eyery religious duty is ftridtly obferved by them; their hearts, their arms, will ever be open to the repentant, consequently their companion and good wilhes will be mine.
How, in the wanton gaiety of my difpo-fition, have I thrown afide your Salutary epiftles, as dull and phegmatic! —I am fen-fible of the fate fuch a letter as this would have met with from me;—but iths my friend and filler who will receive it, and to have me Somewhat rational will be a recommendation with her beyond the moft brilliant flrokes of humour.—If 1 forbear writing unt 1 I can meet with an agree-
3
able
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 113
I
able fubjedl, I fear I muft wait till time' would be no morej at ieaft with
Your’s, &c. See.
« I

•	m
LETTER XIX
Colonel Dingley to Mr. Brooksbank.
Othing new, Ned, under the fun.
Your old friend colonel Dingley no longer cxifts; —he has for Some days been tfanfmigrated into John Jones, an humble one-ey’d Welchman, and Servant
to captain Briton^ a gentleman you are un-
/
acquainted with : in which capacity he and his wife, a pretty Spruce handy young woman, arrived Safe, latelaft night, at Ports-
mouth, accompanied likewife by honeft Matt Jackfon, the colonel’s once choice companion and very great favourite. '
■ VOL. II*	1	A black

114
The History of
A black bandage over the left eye^ an intolerable ftoop in the fhoulders, and a pair of aukward dangling arms, arc all the perfonal perfections this John Jones can boaft. — How ftrange a metamorphofis of your quondam ftrutting friend !— The good wife is to continue only one five minutes longer in this corrupt place, as flie has relations to vifit, in a diftant part of the country j but John is to be conducted, immediately after her departure, to Jack-fon’s cottage, there to enjoy pleafures unknown to afpiring hearts.
However colonel Dingley, by one fin-gular attachment. Suffered his life to be a continued gloom, in the perfon of John Jones, he is far from being an objedl of companion. He can boaft as indulgent a mafter as ever fell to worthy lad’s Ihare; has free accefs to his purfe ; their wardrobe
is in common ; and when John is difpofed
• ^ •>
to crack a chearful bottle, he is by no means deemed an unacceptable tete-a-tete, for the captain.
Miss PITTBOROUdH.
The truth is, that this noble captain Briton has not a Single Spark of pride in his whole compoSition ; — nor is it polKble to perSuade him that this Simple Servant (becauSe he is happily poirefled of the reputation of an honeft fellow) is not a more reSpedable and valuable perSon, than the
l
Simpering countenanced^ but baSe-hearted lord.
Poor Matt was finc^ely grieved at lofing his patron j but as the calamity was
N
irretrievable, he was too much the hero not to Submit with a Soldierly relignation.
#
#
#
m
Saturday Evening.-
Never was any thing So comfortable as my prefent Situation : the grateful cottagers make but little or no diftindlion between me and their own Son, as they un-derftand I was his friend in his hour of afflidion, and an equal favourite with
I 2
colonel
f i6
The Hi s T 0 R1^ of
colonel Dingley — which is more than fuf-ficient to engage their warmeft fervices and attachment.
Captain Briton goes to-morrow to Sanx-fey church, on purpofe to feaft his eyes with a view of Mifs Hutchens; who it Seems has been Some time upon a vifit at the baronet’s. Sorely to the mortification of her amiable coufin.
From the love I bear her, I have frequently made her the fubjedl of my con-
/
verfation, and have given him an honeft description of both her mind and perfon j and, would you believe it ? he is become fo enamoured of them, by the mere ftrength of imagination, that had we not fo unex-pedtedly found her in our very mouths on our firfl; arrival, he had refolved to ride poll: to London, in order, if poflible, to recommend himfelf to her favour.
He
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 117
He has a friend or two whom he in-

tigue.
tended calling upon in this part of the world, when he had happily fucceeded
%	I
with the lady ; therefore, her prefent Situation will fave him much difficulty and fa-
-He is a very pretty martial look-ing figure, — fports his Bruffels ruffles and diamond ring,—-and has a fund of elegant fmall-talk at his fingers ends ; therefore if Mifs Kitty fliould make a conqueft of his heart, and he vigoroufly attacks her^s, who knows what may happen ?
^ ^
Sunday Evening.
The bufinefs is done, Ned.—Mifs Kate has Ihot the captain’s heart through and through, and he is preparing to begin a regular fiege : he was for ftorm, but l fay, no. 1 love people fliould ufe their own discretion upon thefe occafions 5 we are Sure no provifions can be carried into the garrifon without our knowledge, as we
I 3
haife
Ji8
The History of
have already Secured every pafs ; therefore the lady’s ftrength and refolution Ihall be brought to the teft, by being ftarved into compliance.
He ogled her So particularly even on this his firft reconnoitring, as to attradb her observation; and inftead of receiving re-bukive, he protefts fhe bellowed many encouraging glances upon him ; but how far his vanity may deceive him in the affair, I will not be anfwerable.
Sir Matthew and a certain lady were likewise at church. — One Sigh for old acquaintance fake is but natural.—Thecap-taindeferibes her as ftill lovely,though pale and dejedied. — How the colonel would have raved at the recolledlion of what Ihe ought to have been, had he heard this report! — He would rather have loft his life than have Suffered Sir Matthew to perSift in this cruel and unjuft treatment ©f herhe would have left nothing unat-
3
tempted.
Miss PITTBOROUGH. li^
tempted, nothing unaccomplilhed, to clear her reputation from that flur, the blackeft malice alone could ever have fix’d upon it j —he would—but as for poor John, he can only wifli it was poffible to produce fome happy change in her affairs, for poverty and ignorance muft reftrain him from even one prepofterous Scheme, which could not fail to expofe him to contempt, mortification, and difappointment, in-ftead of rendering him Serviceable, and occaSion Mifs Pittborough an increaSe of infult and bafe feverity.
I 4
LET
120
The History of

LETTER XX.
Mifs Hutchens to Mifs Binfield.
ESTORED to new life, how a-
greeably was I furprifed, my dear, this blelTed morning, to find a well-dreffed officer in fo mean, fo difmally Situated, a church, as the one I at prefent frequent. The congregation, except the baronet’s family, confifts merely of a handful of miserable ruftics, the inhabitants of an irregular range of thatched hovels at about a mile’s diftance.
The poor wretches were utterly incapable of devotion j —the elegant ftranger’s
4
dazzling coat, immenfe genteel fword, ^ and, in fhort, whole appearance fo per-feflly Suitable,and cpnfifterit with the man
of
V I
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 121
of fafliion, petrified them with allonifh-ment and admiration.
I had the pleafure foon to perceive that he was a man of gallantry. — He Singled me out, not in preference to the Hotten-tots, but her languifliing ladyfliip, as beft meriting his attention and contemplation. I proteft the unexpectednefs of his prefence, and the diftinClion he was pleafed to pay me in the face of all beholders, inspired me with uncommon vivacity.—I played off a few attractions j —had the Satisfaction to perceive they were not thrown away upon him ; — and in our return home, putting my head out of the window, from a curiofity I could not reftrain, with rapture difcovered that he was jogging after us in clofe conference with one of Sir Matthew’s Servants.
My lady appeared wholly abftraCted from this Scene, that communicated Such
delight to my heart; nay, I queftion if
fhe
122.
The History of
Sse was fenfible of the leaft addition to ^he congregation:her vanity Beeps,— ancf Ihe has for fome time made no other mife of her once kiHing eyes, than to read, weep, and IbehoJd common objects.
«
The knight is a little fmart upon me, ainJ acGufes me of having committed deli-, berate murder. He fays, “ he never law the to fuch advantage in his life—perfectly ir-‘‘^reBftible j—but it is both cruel and un-j'uftifiable to attack a ftrangerin fo clofe, fo vigorous a manner, as to deprive him “ of all poflibility of refiftance or defence.’^
Th is piece of raillery was fuggefled by the buz that ran through the family, fo loon as we reach’d our gloomy habita-that Mifs Hutchens had made a j,—but as we are moft remote from every amufement, and the baronet keeps hut little company, except his companions of the hunt, I almoft defpair of this charming adventure pro* •ucing any happy eiFeds.
Miss PITTBOROUGH.
112
I own if he is a man of Spirit and ad-drefs, it would not be an unconquerable difficulty to introduce himfelf, and a little flirtation highly eligible at this junilure, on my part; for the colonel’s abrupt departure, — unabated diflike, — and every mortifying and difcouraging circumftancc of that moil difagreeable affair, have funk my gaiety to fo lovv an ebb, that I even languish for diffipation.
Shew me the woman, either in town or country, that can behold a red coat with indifference ? — There is a bewitching je neLai quai in the very colour, — and all your fine tall fellows, from the uniformity of their honourable livery, are in much the fame degree ftriking. Indeed, I mufl: allow that the colonel has infinitely the advantage of this ftranger in both features and figure ; — but his ftiibborn negledl has piqued me unfpeakably, — and 1 begin to be convinced both of the folly and abfur-dity of labouring to fix fo frigid and (in-
sular
124
The History of
gtilar a heart, el'pecially after the ravage her ladyHiiip’s condudl has made in it;— therefore, I am So far from being averfe to the devoirs of this wandering knight, which fome peculiar chance has call in my ^Tay, —that I proteft I Ihall be Somewhat chagrined, though I cannot fay entirely
if I never behold him more.
Sir Matthew refumed his raillery after dinner, far from difagreeably, and has promifed to do every thing in his power, towards procuring me the additional plea-fure of a gay acquaintance : —he fays, he is fo extremely fenfible of the heavy dull life I lead, and how uneafily in reality (though patiently in appearance) it mull: be Supported, that he thinks it incumbent upon him to purfue every ftep that is in the leaft degree promifing of amuSement.
I confefs his converfation was never more pleafing to me than at that period, as it communicated a cheating hope to
my
Miss PITTBOROUGH. ^25
tny breaft, not utterly inconSiftcnt with probability. You may judge how de-firable the enlargement of my acquaintance muft be, when I tell you, that the baronet and Mr. Surgeon (who I believe, by the bye, feels a growing tendre for the wife of his friend) are the only per-fons I have had an opportunity of coii-verfing with ever Since my arrival. — I have had a diftant profpe6f, indeed, of a whole crowd of bucks, with heated complexions, and all the rapture of eager purfuit dancing in their eyes; — but the hounds have foon forced them from my Sight, and nothing has remained but odious ina-nimates.
With you the cafe was widely difFerent: we were within a comfortable diftance of public diversions; and as our dirpoSitions and fentiments were exadly fimila.*-, even our moft retired hours had their pleafures. — That we could but be re-united !
Tuefday
126
The History of
#
#
#
Tuefday Night*
Sir Matthew has proved himfelf a man of honour, and introduced captain Briton (the beau already mentioned) at four o’clock this afternoon, to your happy friend. Upon my word, he far exceeds my mod flattering expectations, and treats her filent, dilTatisfied, lumpifli ladyftiip with proper negleCl.
Nothing can be more lively or aflidu-ous: — he Sings fome very pretty Soft Songs, —fays the moft engaging pretty things,—-and, in fhort, has difSufed Such an air of aiety around, that I could fancy it all enchantment. He is juft returned from a-broad ;—his drefs and behaviour befpealc him a man of family and fortune ; —and he has innumerable recommendations of tafte, -wit, &c. &c.

I fancy
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 127
I fancy my lady would rather be ex-cufed giving us her company, but ithe makes it a point to avoid all Singulardty therefore condefeends to treat this gueft (as (lie can make no reafonable obje£Iiou to him) with the utmo-ft told complai-fance.
The coloitel cannot fail <of Being brought to her remembrance, by the prefence of this captain, as their deaths are
perfedlly alike.—I have obferved her to
*
figh many times,—but that is no unoiSu^I thing with her, except indeed, that ihe has breathed them this afternoon with an uncommon degree of foftnefs. We are to ride out together j — to walk, and fweetly con%)£rfing forget allFmie\,—we arc to be partners at a ball Sir Matthew pro-mifes to procure us ; —and, in fine, lead a life of mortality, not inanimation.
%
The baronet pick’d him up, it feoms, in his own gtouhds j—the captain had

128
I
The History of
Ilrolled, as he acknowleged, for many hours (you may guefs the attradlion), and being Somewhat weary, was Seated upon a ftyle with a flute in his hand, when Sir Matthew popped upon him.
Some little civilities pafTed ; — the baronet immediately recognized him, and as a genteel appearance in the country, ef-pecially. of the military kind, is a fufn-cient recommendation, he invited him to his houfe, to partake of a friendly difti of tea, and our conversation.
Sir Matthew tells me the captain was rather confuSed at the alraofl: unhopedfor pleaSure he thus kindly oiSered him, —and which he embraced with apparent fatisfadSion and delight. —We have him here, my girl, however, and if we do
^	J	'
not keep him, it will be our ownfaults*
I am determined from this very day, to
banifli all unavailing' wilhes refpedling
the
Miss PITTBO^OUGH.
129
the colonel from my heart ; —and refolve (perhaps you will fay, like Reynard in the fable, but no matter, if it does but an-fwer my purpofe) Since I cannot get him, to think no more of him. I will endeavour to perfuade myfelf that he is far from the fine looking fellow I was wmnt to con-fider him ; and as in all probability I Ihall never fee him again, I do not defparr of being fuccefsful. — No mighty affair for a colonel to be fuperfeded by a captain, efpecially as the one is fo very forbidding,-the other fo engaging in his behaviour^ at Icaft, fo far as relates to me.
V
>1
VqlAL
K
LE.D
iro
The History of
*irfV**NV* *'W* *A*V* N'V* *'vv*	*\'V*	■* "'x'V* *a'*J'**	* ‘W:* * /V*	* iTV'*’v^ ‘»®
VO CO CO co <^o <T0 VO Co Co Cv Co C\^ Co	co
LETTER XXI.
Lady Sanxsey to Mrs. Batson.
ITTY is upon the high ropes; She has picked up a fv/ain (with the baronet’s kind affiftance) that Ihe is apparently delighted with. I was greatly apprehenSive that her fatisfaclion would have been produ£Hve of much uneaSinefs to me, but have been moft agreeably disappointed.
My perfecutlon for the three days this young fellow has been with us, has al-moft totally fubSided. He treats me with all that diftant refpefl I could either wifh or defire; and as he has recommended himfelf to MiSs Kitty by the: hneneSs of his cloaths, and a profufion of complai-fance;—to the baronet, by his facetioufnefs
and
Miss PITTBOROUGH.

and good humour;—So from the article a-bovementioned, I own, he is not without Some Ihare of my approbation.
Captain Briton, though by no means handfome, is really very agreeable ; he feems naturally to have more of honefty and humanity in his compoSition, than folly or effeminacy; but in order to pleafe Such ladies as his prefent dame, he renders him-felf not many removes from a finifhed coxcomb.
His behaviour, however, is at times very inconfiftent and contradi61:ory, from his adapting it with great judgment to the humour and inclinations of his immediate companion. — With Sir Matthew he Sings' a good Song ;—takes his glafs freely, tho'’ not indifcretely	and throwing off the
fop both in appearance and converfation^ is quite the plain downright Soldier (a chara6ter he	heard that gentleman
greatly extol); for, however fribbling him-
K
Self

132
The History of
Self, he is far from dilliking mafeuline'
company.
With me, as it has happened more than once in the three days that we have been
alone for a few moments, he is Serious,
✓
reflecling, and tenderly obliging. Companion Seems to Soften his eye ; his accent is the accent of benevolence j and if I am
not greatly miScaken, franknefs and can-
>
dour are his moft prevailing charadleriftics.
Yet on Kitty’s approach he So inftantly and naturally affumes that idle gaiety .peculiar to her tafte, that, I confefs, I know not what to make of him.
Sir Matthew’s acquaintance with him was mere accident. He brought him to tea with us; and after the firfl ceremonies had in Some meafure familiarized us,—he began to trifle fo prettily with Mils Kitty; '—amufed the baronet fo agreeably;—and at the fame time bellowed Some little, not unacceptable, notice upon your poor long
negleded
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 1J3
negledled Sifterthat in the end we were all So well-pleafed with him as to be tm-willing to lofe him ; and on his offering to take his leave, — SirMatthevy So warmly Solicited him to favour us with his company for a few days ; obviating every ob-jedion he made, refpe<fting his being unprepared and unprovided for fo unexpected a civility, and that the family he belonged to would be alarmed at his abfence, by propoSing to fend a Servant to acquaint them with hi$ place of refidence, and procure him what neceffaries he ftood in need of; that he at length yielded, on condition that he might be permitted to add the incumbrance of a favourite Servant to the one he feared he himfelf fliould prove; all which was fettled to his Satisfaction, and here we have had him ever Since.
As an inftance of his goodnefs of heart, I muft mention the humane attention he expreffed to this favourite domeftic’s hap^'
K3
pinefs
J34
e History of
pineSs, to whom he profefled himSelf greatly indebted. — ‘‘ The poor fellow,” faid he, ‘ cannot boaft any perfonal ad-
vantages ;
tc
he has one misfortune that
cc
a
(C
cc
(C
proved a great denial to him for Some “ time—(the lofs of an eye, ladies, in an honourable and worthy caufe). With me, indeed, it had a contrary effedh; it was his greateft recommendation ;
“ as in my opinion, one eye that evinced a valuable heart, was a thouSand degrees preferable to both the former, with only a void for the latter.—I took him therefore into my fervice ; and he has “ on fo many occaSions demonftrated an alFedlion for me nearly paternal, and “ is ever fo deeply afilidled when alarmed by either the uncertainty or danger of
my Situation, that I own the pleafure
/
I fhould otherwife enjoy in this good company, would have a continual allay, from the irrepreffible refledlion of the pain 1 fhould occafion him.” This, together, with the behaviour already men-
tioned
CC
CC
cc
cc
cc

Miss PITTBOROUGH. 135
tioned, renders him the moft approved
$
companion I have for Some time met with.
He belongs to the
agreeable to
G>
There is one circumftance relative to him, however, that I could wilh had been otherwife: as it revives all thofe fenfa-tions in my breaft, you So ardently wilh me to lofe for ever.-army, my Nancy, drelTes his profeflion, and has been only one week returned from abroad.—Can you expedt my curiofity to fleep ? will you not allow it to be both natural, grateful, and innocent, to wifh I could with decency enquire — But do not be concerned j the whole world Ihould not bribe me to commit fo great an impropriety.—I may feel anxieties, —but I will confine them to my own breaft, or, what is exacftly the fame thing, to the breaft of my friend.
K 4
LET-
/ ’
13.^
The History of
..V


LETTER XXII.
From the Same.
Have been a good deal difcompofed by captain Briton’s introduSbon of a Subject I am Sclll unequal to : it might be kindly intended ;—bu,t the efiedt, 'for that inflant, was moft palpably cruel.
VT have a Second addition to our family, the bleflcd Surgeon, my beSc of friends: Sir Matthew could not be content without his preiencc.--------

-----We were all
walking in the garden after tea, con-verSmg on in.difterent fubjects, when un-cxpedtedly the baronet, Mifs Kitty, and the laft arrived viSitant flew away, in order to decide Some Supple difpute relative
to a profpeSl, or Some Such trifle.
Captain
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 137
Captain Briton no Sooner perceived we were alone,, than he rather abruptly mentioned the poor injured colonel.. “ I,’*

cc
iC
Said he, “ madam, was prepared by that gentleman to admire the beauties of your character, long before I had the
pleafure of feeing you.—You are the
( '
continual fubjedb of his converfation ;
and he has repeatedly enjoined me, if ever I was So happy as to be introduced to your acquaintance, to allure you, that his fiiendfhip and highefl: approbation is as much your’s as ever. Nay, madam, 1 will acknowlege that it was owing to the intereft he takes in your happinefs, and in order to execute the commifiion he has charged me Vv^ith, of remitting an account of your health and Situation, that I made that Seemingly accidental viSit to your “ church; and whatever attraflions MiSs “ Kitty can boaft, the Serving my friend “ in So eli'ential a point as his peace and happinefs, was my principal induce-
ment
(C

a
u

(C
(C

4C

U
44
I
The H I S T O R Y ol


merit for loitering in that field, where, beyond my heft hopes, I v/as fo fortunate as to meet with Sir Matthew j for, notwithftanding I was far from flattering myfelf with obtaining the opportunity I now enjoy, of accomplifh-ing the utmoft extent of his wilhes, I
fit;
46
was unwilling on fo important a bufi-nefs to rely upon common report re-
6C
44
fpedling your health, efpecially as your countenance conveyed no favourable idea of it; and my Scheme was to have found means of chatting with fome of the domeflics, from whom I might have drawn more certain intelligence. —For-give'me, madam, if I have disordered you,—and be aflured it fliall be thelafl, as it is the firft time : but may I pre-fume to tell him your good wilhes at-‘‘ tend him? — He was determined never more to expofe himfelf to interviews that mu'ft coll him fo very dear, and the method he has purfued cannot fail of being elFeclual 3 for he is nov/ mak-

«C
44
4; 4
4 6*
46
46
46
46
46
44
44
3
mg
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 139
\
ing a Second tour of Europe.”—He paufed, and as I was fufSciently colledled, I told him.
“ That I could not but acknowlege he “ had occasioned me many mortifying re-membrances ; but as I was now no lefs changed in mind than perfon. Since his friend’s acquaintance with me, I was far from being unwilling he Hiould in-“ form him of both : That thenrft was an obligation I owed to him ; the Second “ intirely my own work, and I was unr
A
“ folicitous concerning it:—but that a “ fenfe of the injury I had done him, and “ his unexampled generofity in pardoning “ it, had taught me the necefSary lelTon “ of eradicating many errors I had been. “ prone to, and regulating my conduct “ by the rules of reafon and propriety :
“ That my gratitude would ever be his,
“ and that he had ftill the pov/er of in-
/
“ creafing it;—for that, in eftablifhing “ his own peace, he would infallibly re-
Bore
MO
The History of



Itore minCy by enabling me to recoii. cile rnyfelf in a great raeafure to the moft unv/orth.y action of my life..
** You are fo much the gentleman, fir,’' continued I, that I cannot apprehend the Icaff indecorum from you, and therefore will forbear mentionins; how


highly improper it would be for me to hften to any future converfation of this “ kind,—for very many reafons. —You are now in a country where you can-not Ions; be a ftran^er to a Scandalous
o	o
flory,. in which your friend has no in-conhdcrable Share j but I do beg you will make no other ufe of that know-lege,. than fparing me upon every future occaSion ; as the colonel’s being made acquainted with it, could only
much uneafinefs to





be produ(3:iye of
him, if no wmrfe confequence.”
The captain politely bowed, telling me fame inilant,, tliat I might depend

upon
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 14.1
upon his avoiding every flep that conli .polTibly be either ofFenSive or difagree-able;—and as our Ilrolling company rejoined us immediately, the whole palTel. cfF with a tolerable grace.-
What do you thinlc of my conduR uprm this occaSion ?—Ought I to have fail more ? Could I have Said lefs ? — Was there •one article to excite the Sighteft difplea-fure ? All that concern in his countenance, all the little attentions and aflidui-ties I obferved in his behaviour, are -now accounted for j —and I have the 'fatisSac-tion to perceive, that pity not contempt informs his bofom, notwithflanding how
>	o
juftly 1 merit the latter.
Indeed, my dear girl, I find my heaTi£ more at eafe than ufual. —T'he diiflipations the colonel will neGelTarily meet with,— and a long continued abfence, muftreflore him to that happinefs I had So cruelly interrupted.—I have but one narrow-, anl
pernaps
142
The HI s T 0 R of
perhaps improper Sentiment concerniitg
him ; — “ May he become as cold asrefig-“ nation and friendlhip can make him I — but Save me, heaven, from the grievous “ misfortune of living to know he has devoted himfelf to another !”
How little did I expedl things to take fo favourable a turn ! 1 told you I fliould Surmount my late deprefilon.—Sir Matthew feems to have forgot that ever I of-fended him; and the kind Kitty, from having neither an opportunity, nor the leaft encourao-ement to treat me with in-
o
folence, condudts herfelf with tolerable decent civility.
/
The captain’s man has begged leave to vifit fome relations during his mafter’s continuance with us. — I was rather forry ue did not fee him, as from the mention the captain made of his goodnefs of heart, I Biould have taken a pleafure in looking at him j—but, however, you will believe
I can
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 141
l ean without difHculty Support the dif-
/
.appointment.


4 t
LETTER
JLJL^A-#
Colonel Dingley to Mr. Brooicsbane
This fame: John Jones, Ned, is a lad of inconceivable refolution.— He had a temptation call; in his way a few days ago that brought It to a Severe tell:,:—■ the conFiidt w'as great ; a whole army of paSions endeavoured to Shake it ;—but it, nevertheless, came ofF visflorious.
.• /
Captain Briton, who is a man of a mod: enterprifing genius, and inSinuating manners, has not only got footing himfelf at Sir Matthew Sanxfey’s, — but the dog had the modeify to Solicit permiiTion to fend
for
144
The History of
1
for John, and the good fortune (as h deemed it) to obtain it.
But too many obje6Hons lay in the poor fellow’s way; — the hazard with refpeft to his own repofe,—and the lady’s dearer reputation, —were not to be fur-
mounted :
for as the world is So in^eni-
o
oufly malicious as to ftrike deadly ftrokes without even a fliadow of foundation, if was but natural to apprehend its fevereft cenfure, if circumftarices were once ambiguous, or unguarded ;—and it was far from being improbable in the prefent in-Ilance, if ever a certain frolic fhould get air, that many would conclude there was more of love for the one lady, than a de-fire of humbling another in the cafe; cfpecially if fuch an advantage was taken of it, as introducing a fufpicious and highly improper perfon under the baronet’s roof*
The

Miss PTTBOROUGH. ' 14^
The buSinefs I am now engaged in, at
prefent, has So far contributed to the re-
covery of my fpirits, together with the
agreeable accounts I receive of the eafe
D
and fatisfaction Mifs Pittborough feems to
enjoy, that I really have but little to com-
plain of.—Matt and I pafs our evenings at
cribbage, or in fome innocent converfation,
over a mug of his mother’s .own beer.
It w'ould be the higheft feaid for your hu
manity, could you but behold the change
that happinefs, and an exemption from
labour, has produced in tbefe worthy crea-
tures’ countenances : —where the furrows
of anxiety or old age are incapable of
being filled up,' contentment feems more
immediately to fmile, as if ambitious to
make every atonement for having fo long
negledled Such extraordinary worth.
NeatncSs and well-regulated plenty are
confpicuous in each corner of this late
unfightly cabbin j whilft fighs, tears, and
VoL. II.
L
<^very
/I*
146
The H I STORY of
every other attendant on cruel difappolnt-ment, fhrink behind my chair, in vifible apprehenSion of being totally difcarded.
Never was woman more extolled for infernal graces than Mifs Pittborough by my happy friend !—Her perfon I have rea-fon to believe has undergone a Severe alteration, but the beauties of her mind Ihlne forth in all their native luftre. Vi-vacity has given place to matronly decorum j but as her referve is adorned with fweetnefs, fenfibility, and politenefs, not the refult of four diflatisfaiflion, or fly hy-pocrify, it is unfpeakably amiable, and muft be permanent.
The captain, from a too forward zeal to communicate a ray of pleafure to Mifs Pittborough’s heart, as he would conceive her dejedlionto be chiefly on the colonel’s account, ventured to mention him.—Oh, Ned, what lovely, though I apprehend
painful
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 147
painful confufion did it not occafion her!—but it was the confufion of friend-Iliip, not difpleafure.
She liftened w'ith willing attention to a hditious account of his wandering refo-lution ; and imagines him by this time on feme diftant part of the continent; where Briton aflured her, her image would be his companion; his undiminiflied love, the quickeft pulfation of his heart, and a knowlege of her happinefs, the moft eflential information for his peace.
She not only permitted but dehred him to give his friend afSurances of her good v/iflies, her gratitude, and approbation of his condudf. — How Salutary, how reviving, how flattering this condefeenfton !
r
—Then with a prudence that does honour to her Sex, begged, that the fubje£l might never more be introduced, for reafons his own good-fenfe could not permit him to be ignorant of;—and fuch traces of fa-
■-Cf	5
L 2
tisfa
61 ion
148
The History of
tisfa£Hon have ever Since been viSible in her afpeclj as evinces the fuccefs of this friendly attempt to comfort her, by putting a period to her fufpence, refpedling a fugitive’s fate.
A, Ned, is a prime, nay, an almoft peculiar perfedlion of the fair fex; we admire, we fuhfcribe to the excellence of it, even in the difappoiMment of our willies.
Though nature may have been Sparing of perfonal charms, yet with this endov;-ment, the young can never fail to pleafe; and without it, the utmoft lovelinefs mull: fmk into .difefteem : it is as imperceptible in its operation (where an innate principle), yet as a£live and inexhauftible as the blood, that now quits, and now returns to the beating heart; and its beauty is equally concealed from its polTeiror.
/
Did
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 149
Did the innocent and inexperienced but know its value, what a happy regulator it would prove of their conduit !—In-Head of making unworthy conceflions to gratify the importunity of the ungenerous and deSigning, it would teach them to look them into confufion, and awe them into virtue.
How fatal that tender fenSibility, that artlefs apprehenSion of wounding the peace of a lover, by judicious rigour! — it is a wound that heals without any application and fo far from proving of bad confequence to either party,' confirms the attachment of the one, and dif-plays. the worth of the other.
Such are its effects in a fingle ftate ; — but in the married it becomes of ftill more importance.—The double truft a wife is charged with (her hufband’s honour, no lefs than their own, depending upon her good condudl) demands a double exertion
L 3	of

The History of
for
it IS not
of this all-faving virtue; enough that her confcience is free from jblame, but her behaviour muft bid defiance to fufpicioil.
What, in appearance, can either be more natural, or innocent, than that MiSs Pitt-borough fliould have exprefSed a friendly curiofity concerning the colonel’s fate ? — Where the offence againft modefiy or decorum ?—She was alone with a friend ;— fhe knew him to be at an immeasurable diftance, and incapable of every thought to the -prejudice of her honour or reputation ;—She could rely upon her own integrity of intention :—therefore, why not for a moment indulge the remembrance of his love ; — and hear his Sentiments and .declarations once more repeated by this chofen confidant ?
But, no : her delicacy Secured her from adling fo indifcreet a part.
Might not
the captain conclude flie had a more
tender
Miss PITTBOROUGET. 151
tender motive than friendihip for making him the fubjedl of her conversation ?
Would he not communicate both the foundation and nature of Such an inference ? Might not the colonel be more than half inclined to conSider them as an indirecf -encouragement to flatter himfelf that on
one contingence file was ready to be his, if he even reSifted the temptation of calling himfelf in her way, from being af-fured he was far from being indifferent to her.
The captain has many friends; takes his glafs with a freedom that warms his blood, though many degrees inferior to
intoxication.
Might he not in the' over-
flowings of his good-humour betray the dixlindlion (he paid him by her confidence,—as from the very nature of the ’ fubjedl would feem to imply,—efpecially, as it was ever introduced at fiolen periods, from a confcioufnefs of its unfuitableiiefs for every ear.—Thefe friends, in the courfe
L 4
of
152
The History of
of their connexions, would probably be as unguarded as himfelfj and for the fake of embellifliment, exaggerate the whole matter; — until he would be absolutely constituted a go-between, a perfon introduced merely for the convenience of interchanging, or communicating the parties Sentiments;— wlii 1ft they them-felves would be fo far from fufpe£fing the confequence of their indiferetion, that they would even Shudder at the private idea of fuch a practice. Notwithftand-ing which, every unfavourable report would again be revived, every little cir-cumftance recolletSted ; — until it was worked up into the very worft that could be propagated ; — until the very worft would be believed.
I need not trace the confequences, as they are Self-evident;—not even an incident common to humanity, by giving the colonel a juftiSiable opportunity of re* newing his pretenSions, could wipe off
V ^
the
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 153
the ftain ;—and the mortifying refleflion, that the cenfure had appearances, though' not reality for its foundation, would deprive them of that all-confoling confci-oufnefs that ever attends blamelefs in-
nocence
Adieu. ..

LETTER XXIV.
Mifs Hutchens to Mifs Binfield.
YOU tell me that you die to know how I go on, and whether my captain’s admiration and allegiance is augmented or diminilhed.—-I 'with pleasure confefs the former ; —we are now upon terms, talk over our intentions without referve,—and are determined Soon to put it out of the nature of things to dif-
apppint us,
••
I know
H4
The History of
I know not why, but I have my forebodings, that this match would never meet with my mother’s approbation j — therefore, in order to Save myfelf from the mortification of a denial, 1 do not propofe alking her con fen t; — but Ihall make her acquainted with it,— So Soon as it has taken place.
I have no notion, I muft confeSs, of all that authority your parents alTume
4
itpon fuch an occafion, efpecially as it is an authority, they themfelves, when under the fame circumftances, do not fcruple to difclaim.
My mother’s condudl was not unexceptionable with refpedl to this article
%
(though dt is true, flie did at lafi: teaze granny out of her confent), therefore, you know I can plead indiredt example for my fandion.
My
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 155
N
My fortune is as fixed as fate (except what my mother may have faved out of her jointure, which is never worth regarding), nor can her moft inveterate dif-pleafure caufe the leaft diminution in it. —
I have not enquired into the captain’s laft penny, according to your prudent elderly maxims, nor do I wifh to give my-felf any trouble concerning it:—his behaviour befpeaks him a gentleman,—his profeflion intitles him to consideration; and if he cannot boaft a great eftate, why I think we muft be Satisfied with his obtaining fome higher advancement, and I may ftill be the colonel’s lady.
In fhort, you need not now be told that my home was by no means t» my mind : my mother, indeed, does not exa£f, but infenfibly fteals my compliance with her will.—Now I cannot but be hurt upon fuch occafions,—though I am unable to
prevent it; for is it not the higheft re-
\
fleilion upon one’s undefftanding to be
drawn
3

T h e History of
^■rawn in to forego one’s Inclinations, though in themfelves of ever fuch little confequence, by the artful management ©f any peiTon living i
?
Then I find myfelf immoderately impatient to have the whole inTpection and diredlion of my own condudl.—Is it not mortifying,, when an enchanting party is
, to have mamma referred to for her approbation ?—to have one’s drefs real ated by a fancy twenty years older than one’s own ?—to have one’s expences limited ?— and, finally, to be watched as a cat does a'rat, to. prevent one’s forminff improper connexions I
___	___	4
I have often told you what I would do, if I was punifhed with fuch a father as your’s ; — and if 1 do not fit this mother of mine, for all the reftraint flic has hitherto heaped upon me; — v/hy then confider me in the light of a mere bully, fond of big WQids, but capable of little
practices.
Miss PI TTBO RQU.D H., .151
The captain has laid down a very pretty plan of operation.—He is the molt delightful, gay, entertaining .companioffl you ever met with, and fo fly a wretch^ there’s no enduring him. Would you be-lieve it, he has the artifice to take her l:v-dylhip in her own -toils ? — So demure 1 fo fober ! —fo humane !—fo obliging!
■ that it is eafy to perceive She is prodigi-©ufly pleafed with him ; —and we have .the higheflr Scenes of ridicule, when alon(^ that can be conceived.
I toO'humour the impofition —afie^ immenfe friendfliip ;—and have prevailed upon Sir Knight to relax an abundant degree of his furlinefs.
She is really become a very convenient^ inofSenfive creature, therefore intitled t®
$
fome encouragement.
o
Mr. Surgeon be-
holds her with dlfSerent eyes j but ihe .is fo v/rapt up in referve, that he is com-pelled to remain at humble diftance.: — he
'Qr.a.ws
*58
The History of
draws off the lord of the manSion for want of better employment, who, to com-pleat the prepofterous ridicule of his character, is now ftudying anatomy, and the animal ceconomy : —the good dull foul re-
i
tires to her clofet, and leaves us for whole fuccefllve hours, intire matter of the field.
I never was fo lively, fo degagee, in my whole life, as at prefent; how happy, how pleaSmg, the union of hearts!—The ftiff ttarch’d irreclaimable colonel has irt-tirely lott my approbation.-^To love and not be beloved, how unnatural! — 1 am a-ttonilhed at my owm idle perverfenefs.
/
My lady is grown not only fedate, but religious. I was in hopes (he would have compleated her chara(tter, by abfolute en-thufiafm : but, no ; ttie will be equally lukewarm upon every occafion ; cxcefs even of religion and virtue is held with her as the beginning of folly, and I do alSure you, fire keeps a Iliarp look-out, to
prevent a
relaofc.
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 159
Well, I honour her at this period, for fetting up for a reputation ;-^fhe v/ill admirably Support her pretenfions, efpecially if that bewitching colonel fhould revifit England, and once more caft himfelf at
i
her feet.
The war is now happily at an end; happily indeed for me, or I might ere now have loft my captain; and yet that fan-taftical fellow, inftead of repenting the absurdity of a voluntary banifhment, is hopping from Dan to Beer-fheba, with the fame meaning that admiral Anfon’s enemies report he made his voyage round the world, the merely having got out of his latitude.—But let him difpofe of himfelf as he pleafes, I Shall not now be offended at it.
My captain is prepared to admire you: — it is fettled, that our firft viSit fhall be to your Sweet Self; therefore, you muft not be Surprized, if you fhould fee a carriage
i6o
The History of
riage within thefe ten days, with all imaginable expedition flying up your avenue.
I will prefent him,—you flaall approve him,—and then, my dear, my felicity will be rendered compleat.
♦
' .
. /
• . • They tell me Portfmouth is a miferable town j—is it not ftrange that I fhould have lived five months at the trifline: dif-
o
tance of twelve miles only, without having once vifited it? — But what is an ex-curfion without a party ? Next week we are all to go—the fhips you know muft be worth feeing—my lady, Sir Matthew, captain Briton, Mifs Hutchens, and the half-licked Surgeon. He is a married man ; married,' for his fins .I fuppofe, to the arranteft termagant in nature. —One great reafon, perhaps, that he is fo captivated by the oppofite extream.—His Sneaking kindnefs, as before hinted, is very prettily advanced : I have deteded many ftriking Symptoms in his- behavi-
Qyrj__but it is no afi'air of mine
would
\
iss PITTBOROUC^H. i6i
•«vould Ton any consideration meddle with it:—her ladyftiip’s own prudence is Surely a Sufficient guard Sor her own virtue though I muft own, if I was as grofly.neg-leded by any he, in his majefty’S'whole dominions, I ftiould be apt to Seek cbn-Solation whereSoever I could find it.—
r
I would not Sor an eye, an ear, or half a dozen' of my precious limbs, have the captain equally attach’d to any Set of pet-ticoatSj—Saving your humble Servant, &c.
w Vi’Vi*ViVi’*'Vi•
LETTER XXV.
\
Colonel Dingley to Mr. Brooksbank
I
y mafier has engaged himSelf- to eScort the ladies, on Monday next, to Portsmouth ; nor can my attendance,
i
he fays, be diSpenSed with.—A new livery is beSpoke ] —- a new bandage prepared VoL. II.	M	for
i62
The History of
for my eye;—but how fliall I Support — No matter, I muft go through with it; half chkra(5lers are eafily dete6l:ed, and who fliall fay I aci only by halves ?	. ,
But my heart, I fear, will be very ungovernable,—my behaviour very incon-fiftent; —yet if I am taken ill, you know, —how can I help that ?—Thegood company will both excuSe and pity me.
This monfter of a Surgeon, my mortal enemy, will, I fear, bring himSeif even
into a worfe Scrape than I had intended
%
him, if he is not upon his guard. My captain has alarmed me prodigioufly, by only a flight intimation, that he Sufpefts he has the infolence and temerity to admire my colonel’s Mifs Pittborough. She is too humble, and too little attentive, to make the difcovery ; the knight too thick-headed, and too proud, to entertain the really pr.epoScerous idea; and as for that devil incarnate Mifs Hutchens, I
' 2
am
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 163
am well convinced what ufe ihe would

make of Such ah incident.—Heaven preserve the dear creature from all evil!
But, Ned, if he fhould dare to infult her,—his heart’s blood fhould make atonement.—Rafh as unmanly refolution ! — his life is not derived from me, nor can any circumftance give me a right to deprive him of it:—I would, however, maul his pretty perfon fo handfomely,— that he fhould retain palpable and vifible marks of my refentment to the end of " his life.
But this approaching day, this day oi jubilee to every heart but mine,—how fhall I Survive it ?—To See that loved, that amiable woman negledled by the moft groveling of wretches, on the one hand j — and ogled by a mean reptile, on the other : —to fee dejedfion over-cloud features that were formed whh the mofl: perfedt Sy-metry ;—and So apparently intitled t6 every
M 2	peaceful.
164
The HisTORt of
peaceful, every pleaSing diftincSlion !—But this is an ill preparation, as it impairs my already too weak abilities to fuflain the encounter !—Ah poor John Jones, now, and now only, art thou in a condition to be pitied !
#
Monday Morning.
, Here, Ned, you may behold . ho-neft Matt and myfelf prepared to fally forth on this grand expedition.—I have not flept the whole night; anxiety, apprehenSion, tendernefs, and refentment, alternately agitate me ; and I now repent expoSmg myfelf to fuch unequal confliils:—but we mull experience, before we will be con* vinced of our own infufficiency.
#
#
Six o’clock, P. M.
In what words fhall I relate this day’s dventure I an adventure, which, reSpect-
incr
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 165
icg my fhare in it, ought to be wrote in letters of gold :—but the blackeft of cha-railers are abundantly too fair to mention
the infamous author.
%
I will only afk one queftion, and then give it hiftory-wife,~and command your attention.—All is well, and now my pen is at your Service.
How reludlantly I yielded to captain Briton’s arguments, refpeiling the necef-fity of my attendance, you are already well acquainted with’: happily, however,
1 did at length yield, and with palpitating heart, or rather, in pretty much the fame condition in which a poor criminal (to the emolument of each unfeeling Spectator) is dragged along by flow degrees to Tyburn, did I follow the gaily drelTed captain to Sir Matthew’s ;^for as the ladies had ofFered him a feat in the coach, from an over-ftrained point of complaisance, he did npt think it fufficient to
M3
meet
i66
The History of
meet them upon the road, and be taken upi, but he would needs Hart with them in the firft inftance.
By the time we arrived, the coach was in readinefs; and the Surgeon (who had flept there the preceding night, and was to fquire them on horSeback) had mounted his proud fteed, which was pawing about
w
the court-yard, impatient of reftraint; and I could xperceive that Mifs Kitty, brimfull of vanity, and the knight grinning with felf-complacence, only waited for the lovelieft part of the company, to be ready alfp,
A hag, greatly refembling Mrs. Salmon’s mother Shipton, entered the parlour
with precipitation, I thought I Should
- »
have fainted.—“ No accident, I hope?” cried the Surgeon, as She palled the hall-door in her return.—“ No: only my
“ lady finds herfelf a little indifpofed, and “ as file would not be an interruption to
plea-


Miss PITTBOROUGH. 167
pleaSure fhe is incapable of participating, begs fhe may be permitted to ftay
“ at home.

I revived infcnfibly on hearing a language So puncSlually repeated, that was by no means ftrange to rny ears;—but calling a look upon the Surgeon, Saw disappointment and chagrin had driven the ruby from his cheek, and that he was preparing to dismount j though for what pur-pofe, I was unable to conjedure.
Some little dilSatisfaftion in the parlour was the confequence of the melTage they had received.—Mifs Kitty flouncing into the coach, declared aloud, that £he loved airs in her heart.—Sir Matthew followed, protefting he was quite of her Sentiments; but he would endeavour to make her amends for the Slippery trick his Vt^ife had played her, by procuring her a more eligible companion, at a friend’s houfe, at Some little diftance,—The cap-

tain
i6S
The History of
tain call a lignificant glance upon me; whilft Mr. Surgeon, on being offered the vacant place in the coach, until they reached the other lady, declined it with viSible confuSion, —
Hammering
out,
That perhaps her ladyfhip might be fo ill ‘‘ as to require his attendance ; and there-“ fore he would wait an hou;: or fo ; and “ as the Sight was nothing new to him, “ he fliould be no lofer, as he would do himfelf the pleaSure of joining them at “ dinner.”
Captain Briton again looked upon me with meaning: — my heart underftood him, and I got off my horfe unobferved by a fellow, whoSe deep defigns, and imex-pefted fuccefs, abforbed every other consideration.
f
I entered the houfe foon after, at the invitation of Sir Matthew’s huntfman; who found me fo disordered, that he was by no means Surprized I did not follow
3
my

CC
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 169
%
iny mafter :—he kindly conduced me to the kitchen fire, and giving me a Salutary cordial, I began to be more compofed. The Surgeon, in my hearing, defired Mrs. Hag to furniSh him with proper apparatus for bleeding her lady ; —telling her he would wait in the dreffing-room for her commands: — “And as it is very early,” added he, “ perhaps her ladyfliip may not be diSpofed to rife j—you had therefore better get your own breakfaft, before you “ inform her for whar purpofe I remain “ behind.” I defired my friend the huntf-man to go with me into the garden, as I hoped the air would be of ufe to me ; he did fo, and fo Soon as .we had gained a
i
handfome terrace, that was extended each way beyond the front range of the apartments, I began to enquire into the Situation of the rooms, for entertainment, &c.—Thehuntfman, in gratifying my cu-riofity by a defcription of the houfe, informed me, that Sir Matthew’s chamber-windows commanded that walk, a cir-
1	^	'
cumftance
170
The History of
cumftance that determined me not to leave it; I therefore prevailed upon him to confine
h
himSelf, for my convenience, to that Spot, left I fhould have any return of my fainting-fit;— a requeft too plaufible to be re-fufed, and we'entered into more familiar converfation. I had the pleafure to find the fellow honeft-hearted, and well affe(fted towards his lady, of whom he Spoke in the moft compaftionate and honourable terms. —The wretch !—flie has, my friend, been a great fufferer,—and I fear no deliverance is at hand.—Nothing on earth could equal my miferable apprehenfions !—every noife threw me into a trembling !—the Surgeon’s guilty countenance—biitthe moment was not arrived, when my whole ftock of courage and forbearance was to be brought to the teft.
I believe it was only one quarter of an hour in reality (though an age in appearance) that I remained fo unhappily agitat-when the huntfman ftarting, cried
ea;
out
Miss PITTBOROUGH.
171
out, “ 2iounds, my lady’s in fits !—■ that’s “ her voice, I’ll be Sworn for it.”
\
“ Where, where, my friend,” exclaimed I, and flaring with horror,let uafly to “ her afliflance.” “ We’ll call the maids,” returned he. The gardener’s ladder happened to fland againft a jeflamine tree at a little diflance, that wanted his care.—The huntfman ran into the houfe,—whilft I with all imaginable expedition and dexterity, mounted the window, —and providentially Saved the deareft, beft of women from the laft deflrudiion. Barbarous ruffian!—her handkerchief was bound over her mouth like a bar of iron ;-^a work he had but juft: compleated,—when I with due vengeance Seized him by the collar; — and the poor releaSed half-dying creature haftened to unfaften the door to procure me affiftance. —The women were So terrified at what
4
they Saw, that they were hardly capable of beftowing proper care upon their lady; — and had not my friend the huntfman,
prompt-
I'll
The History of
V
prompted by his humane curioSity, followed cloSe at their heels, the wretch would not only have efcaped my hands, but I fhould likewife have been difeovered : — however, by his timely interpoSition, both were luckily prevented. — The bandage indeed, by his ftruggling, was torn from my eye; but, in order to guard againft a misfortune of the fort, I had that morning, by Captain Briton’s advice, put on the additional covering of a large piece of flicking plaifter, which remained unmoved. We inftantly bound the rafeal hand and foot, and locking him up in a fecure clofet, left him to his meditations.
■ The huntfman was So delighted with the part I had adled, and rejoiced at his lady’s deliverance, that I was compelled to partake a bottle with him, and his mirth likewife, at lead: in appearance, notwith-. Banding my heart was bleeding for his injured miftrefs.
At
Miss PITTBOROUGH
173
At Idngth the houfe-keeper came down, and gave me the comfortable information, that her lady was much better than could have been expedfed, conSidering the fright; but that her nofe and mouth were greatly hurt. She had with her ufual good-nefs enquired who She was indebted to for her prefervation ; and on being told it was captain Briton’s fervant, ordered this woman to beg, that he would wait his mailer’s return at her houfe, and command every thing he fhould ftandiin need of;—adding, that a§ foon as flie was tolerably compofed, fhe Ihould be glad to thank him herfelf for So Singular a Service. Thus, Ned, have 1 a Second time rendered myfelf ufeful to this angel of a woman.—May I not flatter myfelf that I am yet referved to heal all her misfortunes ?
I was doubly dillrefled by what I heard. — To appear before her and preferverhy proper charadler, was, I feared, impoffible: to fell the Service I bad done hex,—my ut-
ter
174
The History of
ter abhorrence : —but how to avoid either the one or the other, I was unable to con* jeclure.
Happily for us both,—when (he came to recolledl: Some few particulars of the late dreadful fcene,—Ihe had unconquerable'objections to feeing me again and fending me her purfe, in which was twenty guineas, and a valuable ring! had obferved her to wear in thofe days of happinefs,— that are novf no more, — (he bid the bearer tell me, “ that Ihe had too good an opinion of “ my underftanding, to apprehend I would “ mifconftrueherdecliningherfirllpropofal “ of thanking me perfonally,—as Ihe was “ too v/eak and low to bear fuch an interr “ view :—that fhe was far from meaning “ what Ihe then Sent, as a reward for the ob-“ ligation! had conferred upon her; for that “ Ihe would convince me upon many future “ occaSionSj that fhe did not think any pecu-niary return adequate to my merit; and that ihe heartily wiihed me every happi-
nefs
Miss PITTBOROUGH; 175
nefs this world could give.” The change in her refolution was too natural, and the motive too obvious for me to be furprifed at it i and thus her delicacy refcued me from the much dreaded encounter.—I only divided the money with the huntfman, left I fiiould betray myfelf by my generollty j and it was with great difficulty that I prevailed upon him even to accept the moiety of - what he could not perfuade himfelf he was the leaft intitled to:—he has both a great and an honeft foul.
^ ^ ^ ^
Ten o'clock.
The company are returned. Captain Briton was by no means furpris’d at what had happen’d; acknowleging it was no more than he had long expedled from the fellow’s behaviour.—Mifs Kitty declared herfelf aftonifhed at the wretch’s audacity : ftiehad, indeed, perceived he admired “ her ladylhip ; but as^^fhe had^conceived it
“ only
176
The History of
“ only to be an humble hopelefs paffion, “ (he had never thought it necelTary to “ mention it.”
The baronet bit his lips,—his complexion underwent many changes,—but he did not favour them with his Sentiments. As for the lady who had partook of their day’s pleafure, Ihe had luckily been Set down at her own houfe, or She would have been a fpedlatorof the whole Scene. After we had all been examined and re-examined, they began to deliberate concerning a proper punifhment for the delinquent. The offence was insufficient to bring him to the gallows; —his circumftances and fftua-tion in life Secured him from every profe-cution for damages, or the more frequent fatisfadlion of the Sword.—At,length itwas
determined to duck him well in the horSe- ’ pond,'—give him a genteel toSs or two in a blanket,—and oblige him to beg pardon for his attempt to affront- a worthy family, in the public papers :—all of which itihall
be
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 177
be my bufinefs to fee moll punctually performed.
Honeft John received the thanks and compliments of every one prefent j but it was obfervable, that Sir Matthew’s were the coldeft and moft conftrained.— You know how much I defpife him, without further comment.
• •
•	m
»#•»
LETTER. XXVI.
t '
Mifs Hutchens to Mifs Binfield
N
N O T H E R pretty piece of bufinefs!
*
This curious mortal of a furgeon has been.pleafed to appear in the character ofTarquin,—my lady his beautiful Lu-cretia;—but as there happen’d fome interruption to the performance, they neither of them fhone in any extraordinary degree: a one-eyed fellow, fervant to captain Brito, was the hero that refcued her from the ravilher’s hands. What a pity colonel
VoL. II.
N
Dingley
.,178
The History of
- d '
Dingley was abSent at that extraordinary
t •
period, as the Ilory might then have made a very elegant appearance, when modelled into coherence by Some Ikilful hand ! How
I
unec|uaHy adventures, as well as riches, are in general diftributed I~ Many peiTons pafs their whole days without meeting with one that deferves the leaft notice ; whillb others have fuch a fuccefiion of them fall to their fhare, they know not which way to turn
«	w	4	'	*	*
themfelves:—Would I had been born under the latter planet!
I, however, have this confolation, that it is never too late to ftrike a bold Broke, and force one’s felf into buftle and obferva-
tion:— the next fortnight, my dear, fliall
♦
proclaim v/hat I am capable oh
We had a prodigious pleafant day of it; the captain in high fpiritsj a good, decent, lively, plain girl, proved an excellent foil; and even the baronet Said handfome things.
How little conception had we of the def-perate attack her ladyBiip fullained ? S ure-
<
3

Miss PItTBOR(S)UGH. 179
• . ' ■	''
ly this afSalr will wipe off all diSagreeable' .remembrances;—Sir Matthew can no Jcnger doubt her virtue. — She Screamed, my girl, lire Screamed Sor alTiftance ;~but the wretch vv:-is a ruffian, make the be'ft of
him;
How tenderly ffriirig are lief’ nerves I At preSencIhe droops, the dies., Captain Briton rather hangs his ears with concern Sot her; —but pity is peculiar to the brave. How do { rejoice at the whole train of incidents that hafe conSpired to brinR me
i.	O
to this on'ce hateful place !—I ufed to wifh that this lady coufin had never flipt from under her father’s wnng ; or at leaSr, that my mother had not So officiouily fofter-ed her;—but had things been only one jot otherv/ife than they are, I had SHll vainly Sighed for the colonel, and, the captain w’o'uM never have Sighed for me : So that, upon the whole, E muff deem myfelf a considerable gainer. They have pronounced a Severe Sentence upon the culprit;—for.my
N 2	part.
i8o
The History of
part, I wonder his ears were Spared and if he does but get out of their hands in whole bones, he can never be fufficientSy thankful. To be Sure, it might have proved far from a laughable affair; but as it did
s
turn out, I can fee no harm in confeffing, that the deplorable obje£t, when he was •dragged from his den, excited both my ridicule, and compaffion. His neck and heels were,within an ace of meeting;—half un-dreft, — half ftarved ;—for he had lain in that condition the whole day, without being allowed the leaft refrefliment; he was a ftrange fpedlacle !—And then his mean fubmiffions, and meaner intreaties for pardon, rendered him thoroughly defpicable.
Mamma begins to hanker after the Egyptian onions; or, in other words, is become impatient to behold her darling daughter. —Your pardon, my good madam; but I fear we Ihall not be fo happy as to meet at prefent;—-There are more words to that bargain than you are aware of.
I	Do
Miss PITTBOROUGH. i8r
t
Do you conceive it pofSble, my dear, that all the violent afFe<5lion fhe has hitherto profelTed for me, nay, on fomeoccafions, absolutely demonftrated, can ever be ex-tinguilhed by one Single ait oS difobedi-ence ?—Can fhe abandon me to all the miseries of matrimony, without the leaft compuhdlion ?—Be it So then; for if marriages and hanging actually depend upon deftiny,—it would be in vain to endeavour to avoid either the one or the other.—That fame dodlrine of predeftination, is a very pretty dodlrine for people under my cir-. cumftances ;—“ It was my fate, fay they; “ how therefore could I, weak and frail “ as I am, in any degree refill: ?’^
What a happy man this fame captain, in fixing his alFedlions upon fo rational a being as your humble Servant! I neither expedl nor require perfedlion j unreasonably require what I am fenfible I myfelf can never attain. Not. one unnecelTary pang have I given him ; played off none of my coufin’s enchanting airs and graces j—but,
N 3
la
I'Si

The History of
in conformity to the di£Iates of an honeft, nncorrupted nature, have neither too ftu-dioufly concealed, nor too glaringly revealed my approbation and good-liking.
*
I apprehend I have adled with more propriety upon this occaSion, than any other in my whole life ; and I have reafon to believe, the captain is equally Satisfied with my condudl and love. So far I have
condefeended to obferve
my
mother’s
wholefome leclures, —“ Never to give pain “ to that man’s heart I meant to make my
t . i	*	f	^	*''5-	•
hufband; as I might depend upon it, that the injuftice at fome future period would ‘‘ be retaliated —-with a thoufand other articles, duly remembered, tho’ not worth a place in this letter :—I have, or rather
•• .*•
lliall reap the benefit of them all, as I have moft judicioufly avoided preparing a rod formyfelf.
LET-
*
• ??
Mifs PITTBOROUGH. 1R3

LETTER XXVII.
Lady Sanxsey to Mrs. Batson.
Alas, my dear Sifter ! for what infults
am 1 referved!—^^Was it not fiiffici-ent that I fubmitted, wdth almoft more than human patience, to every bitter confe-quence of my unhappy folly ?—was not the fubduing my pride, vanity, and felf-fufficiency, a ta(k I found myfelf but ill able to perform ?—^that this new calamity, this new humiliation, Ihould fall upon me, to fwell the triumph my wretchedneft but too evidently gives to many hearts. I Ihall not, however, long complain of a fate 1 have fo juftly merited;—a flow, but Sure-working defpair already preys upon my vitals;—and the arms of death will prove my leaft deceitful afylum,
But abominable wretch that I am, to ^ok only to the misfortunes,—runmindful
N 4	of
184
The HI S T o R Y of
of the mercies I have experienced.—It muft be acknowleged, that a froward heart is not eafily corrected: evil habits, when Strongly confirmed by long pradtice, cleave clofe, and the rent that Separates them from our nature, muft be both refolute and fe-tere.—But I will endeavour, in Some mca-fure, to methodize my thoughts, for your better comprehending them.
The gay, the all-prevailing Kitty had formed a party for an idle excurfion; and I was deftined to participate, or at leaft dif-fcmble a participation of her pleafure j but when the morning arrived, I found myfelf fo ill-affedled to the journey, that I ventured under the fandlion of my friend captain Briton’s prefence, to beg the company’s excufe, and the baronet’s perpiiftion toftay at home.
He furlily complied with what he called myperverfe fancies;—Kitty w'as fmart, as ufual upon fuch occaSions; neither of which reached my repofe: and as it was very early in the morning, and I found.
myfelf


/ '
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 185
mySelf inclined to fleep, 1 made no Scruple to yield to So Soft an influence.
%
I never at any time was Sufpicious my-felS; and in order to avoid every Species of Sufpicion, or difagreeable treatment, I had made it a point ever Since my diSgrace, to leave the door of my apartment at the mer-
cy of my inquilitive duenna, and equally inquiSitive hufband.
rant;
How long I had Slept I am v.'-holly igno-—I was however at leno;th awaken-
o
ed, though not alarmed, by Some one’s entering the room :—but before I had time to enquire what her diligence fought after, (concluding it was the houfe-keeper) and why I was difturbed, contrary to my orders, I heard the door bolted, and locked on the inSide.
1
I drew open the curtain v/ith precipita-. tion; but judge of my horror and confu-Sion, (for 1 am incapable of defcribing it) when I beheld that forw'ard, bold Surgeon,
to


iS6
The Hi s T o R Y of
to whofe report of me I am indebted for all the mortifying rcfietlions my chara£Ier has fuftained, was the perfon who had thus feeured me to himfelf, as I doubted not, for the bafeft of purpofes.
4C
c
€C
I afked him, with as much command of my temper arid apprehenfions as I could poffibly affume, why I faw him there ? He drew inftantly to the bed-fide, and violently Seizing me, cried, “ My dear creature fliall be informed;—only don’t betray ‘ yourfelf, and your honour is Safe ;—but if you are fo weak arid Simple as to “ disregard the voice of reafon and love, “ you muft take the confequence both of my roughnefs and the world’s cenfure; a world that is prepared to judge you with the utmoft feverity, from errors in your condudl in which I had no (hare.
I was charmed with you the firfl: moment I beheld vou, and have long; wilhed
J	*	O


for Some Such happy opportunity of being upon the tender-terms with you, as

Mis5 PITT-BOroHGH. iBf
,piuft hereafter be the cafe, unlefs'y-ou “ are bent upon your own deftru6lion.”
fiC
cc


C4
cc
CC
cc
cc
cc
cc
cc
cc
cc
cc
cc
cc
cc
cc
cc
cc
“ Hear me, hr,” cried I, ‘‘ I befeech you to hear my fixed determination. I ac-knowlege I am fenfible no left of the power you have obtained over me, than the good-nature of the world.
■Your generofity upon this occafion would intitle you to my higheft gratitude j—nor would I ever complain ot what is paft:—but as to purchafing the fhadow of a reputation at the expence of my honour, — be affured I never will;—and if you do oblige me to alarm the houfe, my cries fhall never ceafe nntil they have brought fome one to my afliftance, or my ftrength entirely ex-haufted ;—and perhaps, in fo great an exigence, I may find it little inferior to your own.—Spare, fpare me, therefore, the neceffity of exerting it j leave my room immediately, and every return you can reafonably afk, or I with propriety grant, fliall be yours.”
«
Madam
iB8
The History of
“ Madam,’’returned the villain, “as a “ proof how much rather I would' owe “ my fuccefs to your favour than com-“ pulSion, I will for a few moments de-“ lay {hewing you what I am capable of “ performing. — I have contrived my mat-“ ters too v;ell to apprehend interruption : V confider, therefore, how idle it is to re-“ Serve yourfelf wholly for a man who “ negle61:s and difregards you, and for whom you never had, nor ever can have the flighted: degree of affeilion. “ You have Suffered in your reputation ; if innocently, revenge yourfelf on a bafe world, by an aflion that can never tranfpire to glut its malice, and make me who love you, and am capable of “ Serving you in many particulars, com-“ pletely happy.”


a
i(

cc
“ My God 1” exclaimed I, clapping my hands together, “ what an alterna-“ tive !—either to tear open the late “ wounds of my reputation afrelh, by “ furnifliing the public with a new fund
“ .for
\

Miss PITTBOROUGH. 189
for Scandal, or, in order to preferve it in “ its prefent doubtful Bate, Submit to
every kind of abufe brutality and luft ‘‘ are capable of exciting. No, fir, I “ have nothing more to offer •, you know “ my final refolution,”
A ftrong handkerchief which he had drawn out of his pocket during my laff Speech, and, unperceived by nie, rolled up to a comfortable thicknefs, was how un-expedledly clapped before my mouth, which (except by one loud Scream that ef-caped me in the fame inffant it reached my face) effectually deprived me of every power or poffibility of calling afiifiance. He was fo inhuman as to tye it in fuch a manner, that I concluded I muff die for want of breath, my noftrils being greatly confined.
He held both my hands in one of his, without proceeding to one liberty j and coolly taking my garters from a chair, “ Thefe,” faid he, “ will anfwer the pur-
pofe
160
The III STORY of
“ pofe of fetters; and fo, my good madam “you will be quite fecured.”
I now gave myfelf over for loft : the agony of my mind is inconceivable;—when, beyond probability or expectation, a man Suddenly bolted in at the window, and delivered me from every threatening evil.
He was fo ftrong a fellow, and disappointment had rendered him fo defperate; that had I fainted, I know not what might have been the confequence to my deliverer ;—but happily I had both fo muck ftrength and prefence of mind, to unfaftea the door, and let in half a dozen people, who were liftening to, though unable to comprehend, the noife they heard. —The w'omen foon got me to bed, whilft the men took proper care of the monfter.
They with'greaf difficulty removed the obftrudtion of the handkerchief, and I was once mors permitted to breathe.
But
Mjs9 PITTBOROUGH. iqi
But I have received great hurt; my hofe and mouth bleed an alarming quantity, which has So weakened me, that I apprehend (in conjun(fIIon with a Bow fever that hangs upon me) nothing leSs than a confumption will be the confe-quence. The worthy fellow who was fo aclive in my deliverance, proves to be that valuable Servant captain Briton- once mentioned with peculiar regard.—Great, unfpeakably great, are my obligations to him ; and I will Brain a point, rather than he fhall 'go unrewarded.
w
Sir Matthew has not fhewn metheleall: tendernefs, notwithftanding all I have Suffered j—however, as he is fo gracious as to refrain from unkind refledlions, and troubles me with but little of his company^ I will be.content.
%
I know not how to a£l with refpeft to the captain. Surely he will have fo much discretion as to conceal, the matter from his friend :—it would be very aukward
for
1Q2
The History of
for me to intimate any concern about h, as it would feern to imply an expe<9:ation I would not be Suppofed to entertain. Yet I know the colonel to have So nice a fenfe' of honour,—and I do believe his regard for me is Such, that he would not forbear chaftifing-'the villain with his own hand, if Sir Matthew does Suffer him to efcape with too much lenity. But why do I encourage fuch unneceflary appre-
s
hcnSions ? —Perhaps, before the news can
reach him, I fliall have paid that debt of nature, the demand of which has already ftruck my heart. Alas, my Nancy, I fear we Shall never meet asain !—Misfor-
tunes, like vices, are progrellive a great-nd a greater .have Succeeded ; —until
er a
this laft has wound up the whole, and will inevitably crufh me to atoms.
Preferve my letters, my filler, for the benefit of your pofterity>—Let them read what I was ;—let them read what I became;— and do you inform them of the
termination.—Tell them that vice had no
/
place
Miss PITTBOROVGH.
place in the catalogue of my tranfgreffions, and yet that death alone could Secure me from cenfure, or heal my peace.-—Tell them how much I loved their valuable md-ther; how fenfible I was of the juftice, propriety, and neceffity of her advice; but that vanity and Self-Sufficiency fteeled my heart again!! it,—or I had efcaped every misfortune.—And oh ! do not let me at laft die in vain j—but conjure them to reap the advantage I have procured them,—in teaching them to fhun fo fatal an example.
•	•	•	•	•	•	•	*4-	¥
LETTER XXVIII.
Mrs. Batson to Lady Sanxsey.
Intreat mv dear Sifter, notwithftand-
✓ ^
ing her recent mortification, not to forego her worthy reSolution, of bearing every calamity with firmnefs and refig-
nation.
VoL. II,
o

194
The History of
Do not now leave the vi^ory incom-pleat;—a well regulated corps receives repeated Blocks undaunted ; and it is that compofure alone that can Save them from becoming a prey to the enemy.—If they but once turn their backs j—if the order of their ranks is but once too much broken ;— a precipitate, confufed, and fatal retreat muft be the confequence ; and after having fuftained the heat and fury of the battle, until the lignal was already given for flying before their conquering
arms, they in one unguarded moment fufFer the palm to be Snatched from their hands j and their lives and liberties become one horrid facfifice.

My patience, I confefs, in -one re!
is perfedlly exhaufted.—Your native air, and the Soft foothings of friendlliip, would he highly Salutary in your prefent circum-ftances.—Propofe making us a Speedy viSit, to your haughty monarch ; he muft
be incapable of oppoSing fo reafonable an
%
inclination j—or if he Ihould, 1 my Self
will
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 195
%
will immediately come and fetch you, for you Ihall not be loft.
He either knows not your value, or hi? heart is moft baSely corrupt, to Suffer you thus to wither in your bloom, unfhei-tered and unpitied. Indeed, my good girl, your day of probation has been of long continuance, but depend upon it your reward is at hand. 1 have watched over your conduct with both a fteady and anxious eye, and have had the happineSs to find it, ever Since you became a wife. Such as I could have wifhed ; and one-and-twenty is but an early period, to have run the race of folly to an end.
My father, my hufband, join with me in befeeching you not to difregard my re-queft of coming to us. Our affe^dion for you is increafed by your increafe of merit, and I once more repeat, that if it is pof-fible to Save you, you fhall not be loft. As to your ambition of ftanding fair in the colonel’s opinion, it is both natural
O 2
and
iq6
The History of
and laudable.—How Providence dlfpofes-every thing in your favour is ftrikingly evident from your accidental acquaintance with captain Briton. —Not one of your perfedlions are to be unknown ; your prudence, your refignation,» your delicacy, and your love of virtue, even for its own fake, are all happily evinced by your late condudl j and I think it is moft advifeablej to leave the concealment or divulging of it intirely to the captain’s own option : he undoubtedly knows the man he has to deal with, and whilft he does juftice to your reputation, muft be incapable of wounding your repofe.
f	»
I am greatly puzzled to divine what fo good a kind of man can find in our llrange unfeeling couSin Kitty, to attach him.—How will his friend ever be brought to approve fuch a choice r —Will it notoc-cafion an infallible breach between them ?
I could almoft be tempted to wilh, from downright malice, that he would change
his
Miss PITTBOROUG H, 197
his mind, and leave her in the lurch: — Ihe deferves Such treatment more than any young woman I ,am acquainted with. Keep up your Spirits, my love, we muft Tee her punifhed, mortified at Icaft nor will (he at the long run efcape ;—^^fhe has apparently a bad difpofition. All your errors, by playing merely upon the Surface, were Soon brought to light, and have as Soon dyed away; but her’s will never per-fe£lly be erjidicated 3—they are interwoven with her na,ture, they are commixed with her blood, and lie too deep ever to be ex-haufied. —Another and another will Succeed ;—yet another and another remain until the end of her life. Nor will that lafi: fcene, I am afraid, afford either more inffrudiion to her acquaintance, or honour to herfelf, than thoSe She has already paffed. I am Surprized my aunt can Suffer her at So early an age, to be thus giddily miffrefs of her own inclinations, efpecially as ftie has not only an extenfive know-lege of life, but human nature itfelf; but, in Short, that is her foibleShe is too
O3
partiaJ
19S
The History of
partial to fee errors, Ihe would be too tender to corre£i:; therefore, to avoid giving pain to her own heart, or.vexation
to her child, flie is content to remain in
\
a paffive half blind (late, and leave her to her own inventions. 1 beg I may hear from you again very foon,—Make your propofal of vifiting us with becoming courage ;—do not be frowned into me§n con-cellions :—the tyrant would tremble, if the coward dared but once to rebel. Shew him the difference between voluntary fub-miffion and undiftinguilhing implicit obedience, and let me foon embrace my long loft Sifter.

LETTER XXIX.
Mifs Hutchens to Mifs Binfield.
NOTHER letter from mamma, replete with the dire fummons of return, oil return !—What can I do ?—-I am Somewhat Similarly circumftanced with
your
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 169
your heroines in romance
and th^
queftion is, Shall I break mother’s heart, or my ovm ?—Why truly, between you and I, I have no ill defign upon either ;•>— bi^t as I am fenfible of the means of de-ftroying or preferving the one, and can only guefs at the effedfs my condu£l would produce upon the other; you know it would not be politic to quit a certainty for an uncertainty. I am, however, mi--ferably ftreightened j.—turn to the right, the left, or follow my nofe 3—I proteft I know not which to prefer:—love pulls one way, duty another.—I cannot long bear the fevere conflidl, but muft yield to the moft prevailing power.
Almighty Love, is it pofiible I fhould ever renounce thee ? — and fober duty, how fliall we break hands ?—Yet, when were we fo familiar ?—Cramp my genius, my, inclination within the narrow rules of duty ? I ever fcorned the thought j —and as I proved fuperior to every fuch paultry fuggeftion at fifteen, would it not be fcan-
O 4
dalous
7.00
The History of
dalous to Suffer myfelf to be overcome h\r it at twenty ?
Mamma, if I do rebel, will deal me out a long, long ledlure r-tell me “ Ihe lias remained Single ever Since I was two years old, for my Sake alone ; —devoted all her wilhes, all her attention to my welfare ; — watched over me with the unwearied eye of parental tendernefs ; and Suffered me to enjoy my unreftrained inclinations, except when they glaringly demanded re-ffraint; and even then, Ihe was far frorn ftepping in with the authority of a parent, intreaties, not violent oppofition being her refource upon Such occafions, in order to convince my reaSon, and obtain her purpoSc by voluntary concellion.” So far good, mamma j—but have not I repeatedly pro-feffed myfelf obliged to you for your care and kindnefs ?—and have I any other return in my power ? —Did you not find a Secret gratification in my infantine endearments ?—and did you not rather love me for your’s, than my owii fake?*—Was
not
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 201
cot my happinefs an elTential to your hap-pinefs ?—for could you have, enjoyed peace, if I had been afflicted with fick-nefs or misfortune ?—Did I not fubmit in general to your perfualions, even to the punilhment of my own heart; — and thereby render the exertion of that authority you mention unnecellary ?—and if myrea-fon remained unconvinced, my compliance was yours.”—“ So far good, daughter.” Well now, with refpe£l to the fmgle article of matrimony, which of us ought more immediately to be confulted ?—It is not a point to be trifled with, or complimented out of one’s own hands,—ras repentance would but fucceed in vain; — and as I do know mamma fo well, (Ihe would eafily be reconciled, my girl, when ftie found there was no remedy; —but would never be brought to bellow her fandiion upon this chofen fwain, without Spending an age in enquiries refpe^ing his difpofition, charadler, fortune, connexions, ^5cc.^&c.) Ihe fliall hear no more of me, until I have aflumed the penitential s.
/

The H I s T o R V of
Sentials,. By being converted into Mrs.
Belides, fhe ffill retains- a- high opinion-af nay dainty couSui’s wifdom, and would mfallibly confult her upon the occaSion.— Hevenge, I know from, experience, is.fweet; fce-would either Set her face wholly againft the match; or, what is exa(ffcly the fame ing.,. throw out inuendos of its impropriety ; and fo, in order to pleafe her, and compliment her judgment, I fiiould be Bendered miferable all my life long..
O, but we are to have a funeral!—Her .Jadylhip. is going faft, at lead in imagination, j: though it is mod apparent, that her Ibrd' and mafter, from the confequences of former irregularities, is in much the greater ger^, The captain almoll offended me laft nighL—I was adviSing him to embrace the opportunity her death would furnifh Mm withy of difplaying his wit;
You
fhall
5?
faid L “ and
I will Set it to fbfier muSic.,”
3
He
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 203
He appeared chagrin’d, actually Sighed ; “ Poor lady ! alas, Ihe deferves a better “ fate !” “ How, Sir,” cried I,“ I thought her ladylhip pofl'efied no larger a fhare “ of your approbation than mine ?”— “ True, madam,refumed he, “ but ap-proaching death will awaken compaf-“ lion in breads that are not accudomed “ to feel it.’’
A pretty rebuke truly ! but I pafled it over unnoticed, or rather unrefen ted.
How different her charadler and mine ! She wasfo Simple as to defeat her own pur-pofes, by fluttering out of duefeafon; burl referve my eclat until the gentleman is fairly noofed,—when I mean to appear in my own proper colours. I would pipe and whine indeed I and die of the pip, becaufe fpoufey would neglect me, or was incapable of kind-nefs! No: I would run here, there, and every where in qued of diffipation. If my home was unplcafant, it fliould be no home for me. 1 would not fink beneath the weight,
but
The History of
hiut rattle my chains aioud, until I brought Some gallant knight to my affiftance, who breaking them afunder, Ibould lay both my own and his liberty at my feet.—I would fmile encouragement upon him,—accept of his profFered Services, —keep the brute in awe, by having my Cicifbeo (agreeable to the prevailing cuftom of Vienna, as de-fcribed by a certain lady) to attend me wberefocver I was difpofed to appear. A married woman, if flie has but fuificient Spirit to caft ofF the yoke of unjuftifiable authority, has a thoufand advantages un-
— A hufband command ! a hulband govern ! A very pretty ftory truly ; — but let them, they would have my confent, provided they wifely chofe a proper dominion :—their own violent tempers, and perverfe narrow inclinations, would find them full employment.' I will fet you Such an example of conjugal aft’ediion, and female powder, that you ftiall blefs 'yourfelf that you did not take the
for want of proper capacity,
and
stnknown to a virgin-ftate.

di and
• V
MI s s PI T V B OS. oil G H, 3 GJ
jadgment, and So forth,’—fall into fatal and irretrieveable errors.
How I long to revifit the circles I was wont to frequent, under petticoat gov^ern-ment, to give them a Specimen of the wide diftindlion 1 make between a dependant and an independant ftate !—I will fo teaze, fo pleafe, and fo aftonifh a little multitude of butterflies, that but lately forfook me, to Swell my lady’s pride !—efpecially if fhe ftiould live and fufFer herfelf to be hauled with her pallid, death-like countenance a-mongft us j —for I believe I may without vanity pronounce, that her Superiority re-fpedting your humble Servant, has attained a final period.
She is pofTefled of Some very handSome jewels ; her grand-mother’s, I think (for as to her own mother, a more complete country mope never exifled). They were new-Set when ftie was fuppofed to be upon the brink of Such a match as would have efFediually deftroyed me, had it taken place,—Now,
"if
20&
The History oS
J
if one was Sure Ihe had not above a month or So to live, and that her queer baronet would So far^open his heart, as, by way of reward for the Sacrifice of time 1 have made him, prefent one with them, it would be a kind of temptation to pofipone one’s intentions for that period.—But I fear it would not anfwer :—Ihe is delicate in ap-pearance, but tough in reality, and may creak on many a long year. —I will not therefore hazard the lofs of a hufband, for
I
a precarious profpe£l of a diamond necklace : — fo that, if Ihe will not flip off in one poor week, Ihe may live Seven years for aught I care. The Surgeon-fellow has undergone a discipline, that, if I am not greatly miftaken, he will • be far from lofing the remembrance of in a hurry, and has been Suffered to depart.-—His condudi:, howTver, has given Such offence, and his treatment fo Sunk him in the good opinion of his friends and patients, that it is thought, he will not be able to continue in the country, but muff Seek a Settlement elSe where.
Our
Mis s P IT T B OP. OU GH. 203?
Our late harmony has been torn from ub by his clumSey rough paw ; — my lady is invisible,—the knight Surly,—^^the ca,ptatE Serious, and your Sriend I don’t knovp howilh.—What the muddy calm will prcH-•duce is yet in embrio.
LETTER
Colonel Dingley to Mr. BRooKSBANa&,
ILL you not be SurpriSed to.heai^ that John Jones, notwithftandin^. his Several attachments to this part of .the country, is about to remove, — having de--termined to fix hiS -reSidence (accompanied ■by his loving wife, and much valued .friend of the cottage) at Tdinburgh, at.leaftfaf Some time. No great preparation is neceiS--Saryj— poor folks are eaSily .tranSported, from one quarter to another.—^But-haw comes he to quit captain Briton’s Service.^ Only in order to render himSelf more Ser-
viceable to him, as will be Seen hereafter.
20S
The History of
He has already given his wife due notice of his defign j nor doubts her acquiefcence^ as Ihe never yet attempted in one Single in-ftance to oppofe his pleafure. The Hate of Separation Ihe has for Some time experienced, muft have been very painful to her.—Poor dear foul, how does Ihe not long to behold my face ?
#
You Gannot conceive what a Smart, fen-fible, good-natured thing it is j—Ihe would throw herfelf away upon me, contrary to all her friends advice : —they thought proper in return to renounce her;—but I happily found means to reconcile them. She underwent much fatigue during her abfence from England ; but bore it with a magnanimity peculiar to herfelf; —nor fliall She ever repent either her choice or eondudl. If ever I Ihould revilit Wiltfhire, I will bring her in my hand ; —and, in the mean time, befpeak your friendship and favourable confideration for her. I intend to take Sir Matthew’s houfe in my v/ay ;
one parting look,—one farewel Sigh,
at
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 209
•H
at leall to the walls, is all I promife or dare
truft myfelf with. If you fhould have much leifure, and Some little curiofity to enquire
into particulars, let me hear from you a-gain by the return of the poll:—delays will be dangerous ; for perhaps this very John Jones may foon be taken ofF the great ftage of adtion, and dwindle once more into an abfolute nothing.
LETTER
Mr. Brooksbank to Colonel Dif^OLEV
u
PON my honour, Charles, you trifle mofl: intolerably with a heart th^ has ever beat with friendly anxiety refpe£t-ing your affairs. I know not what cdn-ftrudlion to put upon your prefent frolic or phrenfy:—you are rational and intelligent, except in the articles of your change of name and condition.—Why will you torture me with fufpence ?—why vrill you not reveal your whole defigu ?—It cannot be
P
VoL. IL
from
V 4
210
The H I S T o R Y of
from want of confidence in me ; and as to your playfulnefs, it is utterly inconfiftent with the character of my friend. I have never before heard of a captain Briton, or at leaft that you had an acquaintance of that name ; v^'here can you have pick’d him up? and what can be your view in aflurning the habit of a fervant ? You are a man of honour, or I fliould be alarmed at your proceedings, fkulking about the country in dlfguife; and more efpecially a country that you ought, for your peace fake, above all others to Ihun.—Putting your friend upon making lOve to a woman you defpife, and now fleering off for Scotland at an hour’s notice, are circumftances So myfte-T rious, that I am unable to unravel them.
Bel ieve me, Charles, the wifefl: ftep you could take is to fly to me; — there is danger in your prefent Situation no lefs to lady Sanxfey than yourfelf:—you have been happily Serviceable to her;—let that content you, and do not ruin with one hand, what you have accompliflied with the
other.
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 211
other. I will not much longer keep your (perhaps unwarrantable) Secret.—How do I know but I may be indiredUy carrying on Some horrid plot,—and, as an acceffory, be brought in for a fliare of the punifhment?
If you do not explain yourfelf, by Some early opportunity, to my entire fatisfadlion, I am determined to apply to a magiftrate,
—	lay the whole bufinefs before him, and having obtained due authority, apprehend you for a vagrant. As for your Dulcinea, fhe may ftroll at large ; —I know her not,
—	nor will I concern myfelf about her j — Some camp-trull I fuppofe at beft:—but for you, depend upon it, I will blow up all your fchemes, and oblige you to produce my friend colonel Dingley upon the fpot. What have I to do with your John Jones’s, Matts of the cottage, or foppifli captain Britons?-- They have amongft them, 1 fear, murdered the man Hove j but I will call them to a moft fevere account.
To be Serious: Your letters are fuch a mixture of the comic and tragic, that I
P2
know
212
The History of
#
know not whether to laugh or cry at them.
I
If thefe declarations do not bring you to reafon, violent methods muft.—Can you not conceive the fatisfa£lion you deprive me of, by thus unkindly abfenting yourfelf, if not from my knowlege, at lead; from my fociety ?—Nor can it be poffible to make me an adequate return. My forbearance has been hardly conftrained. I would have chid you weeks ago for your cruelty, had I not flattered myfelf Some innocent confpiracy was maturing againfl: fine mifs Hutchens.—I own I could not even have wilh’d to prevent your humbling her hy every juftifiable means j—I would have her Smart in her vanity, and pretenfions to Superiority, where fo few can be Superior ; but her perfon, fortune,and reputation ought
to be facred. Let me receive an immediate
0
anfwer from colonel Dingley, a categorical anfwer to the following Interrogatories.
Is he, or is he not ftill my friend ? Is my peace and happineSs ftill of any confequence
1	to
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 213
to him ?—Does he mean to perfift in entertaining me with only whipt Syllabubs, when my conftitution evidently requires more fubftantial food ? Let him anSwer theSe queries in the firft place, and perhaps I may extend my demand to the Solution of many others remaining in thebreaft of his highly tantalized friend.

LETTER XXXII.
Colonel Dingley to Mr, Brooksbank.
HY, my good, honeft, tefty Ned, what a buftle doft thou make
V
about the moft innocent, the moft tripling affair in nature ?—Muft I repeat all that I have already faid ? — As how that colonel Dingley is no longer colonel Dingley, and that John Jones is literally John Jones, and much at your Service.—What a deal of unneceffary trouble could you now find in your heart to give a poor, harmlefs fellow, who is your entire v/ell-wifher. But,
P 3
fcr
214
'The History of
for your comfort, the farce is almoft ripe for exhibition,—and you Ihall be permitted to fhovc in your miferable long lean face, for your entertainment and fatisfa61:ion, the au-,thor’s night;—but Sooner I cannot promife. I fed unufual pleafure at the near approach of my willies j but what will become of me, when they are accomplifhed ? — I cannot live without employment;—my difeafe is diverted, nay almoft fufpended, amidft bufy Scenes j but on my return to idlenefs, would return upon me with double vigour. You Surely can ftrike out Some little office forme;—awhipperin, for example, anaf-fiftant in the ftable, or at worft recommend me in your neighbourhood as an able hand
N
at taming a ihrew. I will not truft myfelf to be Serious ; youknownot how much depends upon my Supporting my prefent charader with proper dignity, — or you would never attempt to make me relinquilh it. Do not write to me in a rational Strain, until I Set you the example;—the ball, alas! will drop too Soon, I fear, for my repofe.
Mifs
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 215
Mifs Kitty has conSented to favour cap-
'	j
tain llriton with her hand; — and he, I hope, is too much the man. of honour to treat her unworthily.
My wife arrived laft night in order to accompany me.—I told you how impatient Ihe would be to return to my arms, after having ojpce made her peace with her relations. She approves my fcheme in the highefl: degree, and is now anticipating her future happinefs.
The fair Sex are abundantly more
prompt to take felicity upon credit, than
%
us heavy phlegmatic mortals.—'Fheir imaginations are both ftrong and lively : —un-cloycd vv^ith biifinefs, unincumbered by re-ficdlion, on they go. The profpedl: is delightful and extenSive ; they enjoy it to th utmoft.—A cloud fuddenly arifes.—No matter : it v/ill never reach them in their prefent Situation.—They do, however, get
well foufed ; —whimper a little, Shake their
0
but the next hour as fondly embrace

ears :
P 4
2i6
The History of
brace Some new infatuation. — Whilft we, weighing v/ays and means,—.circumftan-ces and events,—probabilities, poffibilities, and their contraries, — neither tafte the paft, prefent, or future, in an adequate degree. Wifdom, my friend, is but a troublefome companion in this path of life.—How many evils does it not unne-celTarily make us attentive to ? how many
how
dangers does it not alarm us with ?
?
many deaths does it not occafion us to die r Without it our fight is happily con-traded :—we feel the calamity only when it reaches us —(and who can deny but that the evil in expedation, generally exceeds the reality) j we lofe it the inftant it is furmounted ; —and again look forward with joyful, and unapprehenfive hearts.
Take my advice, Ned.—You are dif-pofed to change your condition ; — prepare the collar,—flip your neck without hesitation fairly into it;—it is time enough to complain, when it becomes uneafy:
but
Miss PlTTBOROUGHi 217
but if you once fancy that you can Separate the convenience from Some little inconveniences, good bye to you, ■ your fate is determined. Perhaps this is the laft rambling letter you may receive, though not the leaft pleafing ; for when I fall
again.
I never more Ihall rife.
Ah, woe is me that have a wife ! —What an impediment to my advancement!—Sir Matthew’s old toothlefs houfekeeper was inclined to behold me with an eye of approbation. She has feathered her neft pretty handfomely ;—an endlefs wardrobe ;—many valuable pieces of furniture;
two hundred pounds judicioufly tyed up in the foot of a worn-out flocking ;—be-fides India bonds to a very considerable amount:—but as it is impoflible for me to give myfelf a legal claim to all this treafure, I muft endeavour to content my-fclf without it.
Nor, indeed, to confefs a truth, would I forego the pofleflion of my tender, my
fenfible
2i8-
The History of
€
fenfible Fanny for all Ihe can, or may be able to bellow.—My Fanny! who is the fofteft, the moft endearing companion j the moft indulgent, moft compaflionate of friends; and the moft grateful and obliging of v/ives, that ever fell to wicked mortal’s lot.—Nay, Ihe is abundantly too good for me ; — nor can I make her amends for all fhe has done and fufFered for my fake. She preferved my life by her care and afliduity j—Ihe revived my Spirits by her vivacityand if my Scheme Iliould be produdtive of the expecfed fatisfadlion, it is to her alone that I am indebted for it.—Do not, therefore, I conjure you, de-fpife'her humble birth, or obfcure deftiny ; —let the goodnefs of her heart obtain favour in your Sight; —you will never repent aught you may determine for her advan-
I could expatiate whole hours upon
tage.
yet leave the theme un-
her perfeSHons,— exhaufted :—Ihe is a pattern for wives; — a treafure to her huSoand : and from beintr poftefled of that ineftimable gem, contentment, is herfelf as happy, as Ihe renders
Miss PTTBOROUGH. 219
ders all thoSe who have connexion with her. — But I fuppofe you are heartily weary of my unintelligible jargon yet reft af-fured, that I have a recompence in ftore for all your Sufferings.
^ ^	^	^	^	^ ^	« <• ^ ^	«> <>	o- -4» a	« ««,
LETTER XXXIIL
Mifs Hutchens to Mifs Binfield.
Edinburgh.
ELL, my dear, I have at laft ftruck my threatened bo|d ftroke for a hufband, as you will find by the date of my letter ; but Such a huSoand is v/orth
procuring on any terms
His Servant was
difpatched laft week, in order to fettle himfelf in Some decent habitation for our reception, an inn being a ptepofterous place, in the captain’s opinion, to convey a lady to. We have laughed all the way at the thoughts of the heavy buftle our flight will occaSion both in town and qoun-
tD-
220
The History of
try. My lady, notwithftanding fhe was pleafed to take the fame route fome fix months ago, with a perfon no more to be compared tocaptain Briton than I to Hercules:^ will, I doubt not, be very liberal of her cen-fures. It will prove a cordial to her
drooping fpirits ; difpel thofe vapours that
* - '
have for fome time overwhelmed her j — and in fine, refiore her to new life and vigour. Nothing can be more engaging than the. captain’s behaviour, or more entertaining than his converfation. He was acquainted with every town through which we pafled ; —pointed out every profpedl worthy obfervation; and told me every gentleman’s feat, with little agreeable anecdotes relative to the families, the flying carriage gave us a tranfient view of. Commend me to your fober timid lafles, who never have the courage to leave mamma’s apron-ftring ;—who accept a clumfey ancient batchelor of her providing, without either offering the flightefl: obiedlion,—or even wifhing fo to do ;—who fubmit to •be led to church, pafiive, eafy vidlims, in
the
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 221
face of an odious congregation ; —and exchange her roof for that of their newly elected, or rather conftituted, tyrants, as a matter merely of common accident and
4
neceffity.
As for my own part, I now declare, in the prettieft, Snugged, neateft of apartments, that if it was poIHble for me to be removed by enchantment into my mother’s houfe j—and I was convinced that fhe w^ould not only approve and promote the match I have now travelled fo many miles to bring to a conclufion, — but that fhe would honour the ceremony with her prefence, and Smirk, as mothers are wont to do on fuch occafions ; —I Iliould a thoufand times prefer the plan I have purfued j — expofe myfelf to Some few frowns, a very infupportable lecture, and all that disagreeable round-about I apprehend I fliall be obliged to take, before I fhall be able to eftablilh myfelf once more in her good graces ;—and Ihould even
think the pleafant journey I have enjoyed
moft
222
The History of
moft cheaply purchafecl, with even the additional Severe penance my very good friend lady Sanxfey may perfuade her to inflidl.
To-morrow morning the bleffed knot is to be tied.— How difrerently do different optics represent one and the Same ob-je£l:! — Some girls flounce and fluller them-felves with the notion of forfeiting their liberty, and foregoing all the pleaSures of their lives.—I confeSs that Seems to have been the original intention of the Solem-
nity ;
but if we had not innumerable
inftances of a contrary confequence, matrimony would have but few votaries, especially at my age. What at twenty, like the ridiculous Jeweffes, carry a badge of my flavery about me, and Still lick my lips at Scenes I am far from having loft my reliSli for, from idly fuppofing them inconSiftent v/kh the dignity of my matronly charaiSter ! But 1 have already explained mySelf Sufficiently upon this Subject. I defire you will be prepared for accompany-
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 223
companying us in our London journey ; I
m
positively will not appear without you j — and if you are not confenting to your own happinefs, —my hero lhall carry you off by violent methods ;—and'I will undertake to reconcile you to your fate.
r
Afternoon.
The good father who is to perform the ceremony, and a friend of his procuring to adt the bellowing part (vulgarly called giving one away), have been introduced to me. How little does my eafy undivining mother conceive the Situation her daughter is now in, or the bufmefs that engages her !—On my word, if it was not for the utter impoflibility of the thing, I fhould have her flap upon me at the mofl: unfavourable of junctures, and my w'hole Scheme difconcerted in a twink.
LET-
224
The History of
LETTER XXXIV.
Lady Sanxsey to Mrs. Batson.
%
TRANGE news, my dear Sifter ! The worthy appearing captain Briton has defcended to So mean. So Scandalous an a£Iion, as carrying ofF a raw unthinking girl, who, regardleSs of the confequence, has consulted no other monitor than her Yanity, and is captivated by no other charm than a gay outSide.
l am both mortified and aftonilhed at being made the dupe of his artifice.—How did he impofe upon my eafy credulity, engage my approbation and good opinion, by a conduit fo uniform and unexceptionable, that I considered him as abundantly too good for the creature he has made choice of!—But to fteal away in fo un-genteel. So ungentleman'like a manner,
and
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 225
and never having revealed either his cir-cumftances or intentions, —befpeak'him of a very different compofition to what I imagined.
There muft, my Nancy, be Some de-
fedt in his fortune, or deception in his
«
pradfices,—or he would never have entered a family in the disadvantageous, the despicable light of a run-away and fedu-cer; for fuch I am perfuaded my poor aunt will conflder him. I every day was expedling proper propoSals to be made by him, or I Ihould not have Suffered matters to proceed the viflble length they even had done.
I am grieved to think, how the fond mother’s heart will be wounded by this premeditated adl of difobedience; — nor can I give her other confolation than af-furing her, that his behaviour was the behaviour of a gentleman,—his conversation agreeable (o every tenor of propriety and honour, — But this will little avail
VoL. II.	Q.	her.
The History of
Ber, when fo recent an inftance of his deviation from every favourable appearance,—contradi^s what he would have intifnated were his real principles.
I know not how to conduct myfelfupon this occafion. —Confeffing the hint he once gave me refpefting the colonel, can be of no Service to either the afflicted mother or misjudging daughter, and might too probably draw ungenerous reflediions
TMrnnn mf»-
upon me
SThe world we know is malicious,/and has fo fruitful an invention, that I fhould not be Surprized (on. fuch a circumftance’s tranfpiring) if it was to charge me with being acceflbry to the whole Scheme, if not the foie concerter of it;;;—with encouraging the captain to vifit at our houfe; ~ teaching him to recommend himfelf to Sir Matthew, in order to Secure his footing;—-and by displaying the charms of Mifs Kitty’s handfome fortune, inciting^ him to the bold ftep he has fo fuccefe^ fully carried into fexecution..
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 2
I am So weak and low, that I will not anSwer for the conSequences of an addi-tional Ihock ; but if you think it neceiTary I fhould expofe myfelf to it, I will gladly run all hazards. My faculties are really fo impaired, I dare not rely upon my own judgment in any cafe ;—therefore fliall come to no abSolute determination, until I receive your friendly and judicious advice. Sir Matthew, by his invitation of her to his houfe,, has rendered himfelf in Some meafure anSwerable for every evil that may befal her;—nor am I forry that he fhould bear the burthen.
As to your very kind, your very agreeable requeft of feeing me at your village, I own it grieves me that I cannot comply with it; but I will give you my objedlions, and exculpate myfelf from every undue charge by anticipation. In the firft place, then, I have realbn to believe that I am fo
much reduced in my ftrength and Spirits, as to be unequal to the journey ;—and as to obtaining Sir Matthew’s confent, l am
0.2
con-
228
The History of
convinced I could as eafily level mountains, and rellrain the impetuous waves. I would not be uncharitable, but the man who could for So long a time behold the viSible decay that has overfpread my countenance unmoved,—muft be incapable of giving into any propofition merely to prevent its fatal continuance.
Be content, my lifter;—peace and this world are irreconcileable :—I fall a martyr to my own indifcretion;—but what my bloom and years have loft, I hope my mental part has gained. — I have made the beft preparation I am able, as I can perceive no poffibility of avoiding the blow, to Support it with due refignation.
But I have a ftronger motive to detain me, than either of the foregoing.
Sir Matthew has fo heated and fretted
himfelf for Some time paft, that he has
thrown his whole mafs of blood into a fermcnt.“~His head and ftomach have been
more than once Severely attacked, though
for
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 229
a fliort period ; and unlefs the diforder can, be brought into the extreme parts, and terminate in a good fharp fit of his gouty diftemper, the odds are greatly in his dif-favour j—and notwithftanding I Seem to be in almoft the laft ftageof my exiftence, I may yet Survive his diffolution. I have hitherto Supported my charadler of a wife, with all the decency and propriety my unhappy circumftances would admit.—I
him
only a tool of my refentment, and have much to be forgiven. The profpeft of death may occaSion a change in his fenti-ments;—and if we can mutually pardon, and mutually aflift each other, —in this moft trying, this moft important of exigencies j-
certainly injured him, in making
perhaps, in great
we may
meafure atone for our mutual tranfgref-fions.
I believe Sir Matthew has been very faulty in the beginnning of his life.—May all his errors not only be recollected, but expiated ! But fo far however from pro-
0-3
moting
230
The Hi s T o R y of
moting this necefSary work, by yielding to felfilh considerations, and absenting myfelf at this jundlure, I Should drive him to all thofe paffionate extremes a weak mind and fufSering body are So liable to fall into. I know the goodnefs of your heart too well, to apprehend you will either disapprove or attempt to Ihake my resolution,—especially as you may reft affiired of this melancholy truth, that it is beyond the power of medicine, or the moft friendly affiduity, to reftore me. ^I am a mere walking ghoft, and actually totter on the verge of eternity.
Adieu, my beft beloved, my moft valuable of lifters. — Our feparation will be only momentary 3—when you have fought your good fight, and finijhed your courfe,—we ihall again be re-united for ever and ever. Do not let the dropping off of So miSerable a weed affedt you beyond meaSure ; the fault was in the foil;—but by being transplanted, its rancour will be loft, and it will then Shoot up to full perfedlion.
LET
M19 s P IT T B O R Otr G H. 231
tM*
S' »S • uT 'S S^S S «*S m m S S t '' m : j$ " i ■_
LETTER XXXIV.
Colonel Dingley to Mr, Brooksbank, ♦
Edinburgh.
Agreeable to my promise, I am
now Set down to unravel that my-ftery that has So long perplexed you, every circumftance of which has concurred to my entire fatisfadlion; and you may judge of my prefent rapture, by the continual hints I have thrown out relpedling the importance of my fuccefs.
I arrived in this town, in the chara(Ser of John Jones, on Tuefday laft, accompanied by my Jgy^ng fpoufe and honeft Matt,	before informed you were
markeu down for my fellow-travellers. We fdund but little difficulty in obtaining a tolerable habitation; and with great diligence, began to prepare ourfelves foe our mailer’s arrival.
0.4

232
The Hi s T o R Y of
He was a day later than we expedled : however, the fmoalcing horSes, and enflam-ed complexion of his lady, beSpoke their expedition. Never did I think that Kitty’s eyes were capable of fuch agreeable vivacity,—as the only Sparkle I had ever Seen them adorned with, was what malicious pleafare communicated. She pafSed the chief. part of that afternoon in writing.—.Die captain did me the honour to make me his companion over a bottle, and a chearful one it was; nor did we either diflioneftly or churlifhly exclude my worthy Fanny from her juft participation.	••
The evening arrived
pleafure ftill danced in her countenance; —fhe was Superior to all your little fqueamifti fancies aflumed upon theSe occaSions :—fancies, that, notwithftanding their folly, are not without their beauty; —and retired to reft with heart-felt fatisfadlion. The clergyman had paid his compliments to the lady, and engaged to have a friend of his ready in due time in the morning, to aflift at the appointed ceremony.
At
Miss PITTBOROUG H. 233
' At length the morn arrived, and Heavily in clouds brought on the day.
Breakfaft waited Some time : no parfon
made his appearance. The captain ftorm’d,
%
the lady intreated him to be compofed. Delays in their circumftances were by no
means dangerous:—it was impoffible they
. «
fhould be purfued,-—and fhe was an utter ftranger in that part of the world j — therefore it would be agreeable to her to take a little walk, and perhaps the gentleman might be ready by their return. — The captain acquiefced, on condition that he was firft permitted to enquire into the caufe of his disappointment. —“ Some indifpenhble
I
“ bufmefs had called him abroad, but he “ had left word he would attend them in a “ couple of hours.” Mifs Kitty’s countenance rather lowered ; —the captain once more began to fly out; whilft poor John Jones retired in Sullen diflatisfadfion to his apartment, from v/hence he never more returned. You,Ned, are perfedtly unacquainted with Edinburgh,—its Situation, —&c. I
need
o
34
Th« History of
need therefore only tell you, that the captain and his elected bride, having Ilrolled, hy way of amufement, over the greateft part of the town, —were mofc unfortunately met in their return, on the rtioft populous ipot, by your friend colonel Dingley, who JJarted, Hared, and for Some moments remained incapable of Saluting them in a proper manner.
Mifs Hutchens, from an opinion of her fecurity, was far from being difconcerted at; the encounter j—but tolling up her head with a contemptuous and felf-Sufficient air, pulled her captain by the lleeve, and defir-ed him “ not to take any notice of that fel-low’s infolence;” (the colonel obftru61e4 their paflage, and rudely enough attempted to Seize her hand) “ I will give you his
added file, “ at a proper feafon, and account for this exti'aordinary ill-
breeding.”
o
Hold, miSs Hutchens,” cried the colonel, preventing her flipping by him, as
was
“ gentleman.

Miss PITTBOkOUGH. 235
was evidently her intention ; ‘‘ you may “ Spare yourfelf a relation that would be “ neither new nor entertaining to that
Then turning to Briton, he jocofely accofted him with, “ What, “ Tom, are you alhamed of your old ac-“ quaintance ?—I remain the fame man ‘‘ you ever knew me; but I own, it was “ not without much difficulty that I dif-. “ covered the drummer thro’ this fine dif-
What bufinefs can have brought you here ? Do you know that lady ? “ Are you not a finiflied raScal, to be im-“ pofing yourfelf, as it is plain you have “ done, upon her eafy credulity for a per-“ fon of confequence ?—Was it for this you follicited your difcharge ? — and “ made free—But no matter, your life is “ as much in my power as defertion would have rendered it j but”
“ guife. ((
(C
A numerous crowd had aflembled during this harangue.—The captain fell upon his knees, ajnd, in the moft Servile terms,
intreated pardon and mercy, mercy and
par-!-

The History of
pardon ; acknowleglng in the face of the whole mob, that he was the moft hardened of Sinners : for that he was already married to an honeft. Sober woman, who loved him to diftradiion. T he mob, enraged by this confeffion, having learned his buSinefs at Edinburgh from the delighted Matt’s officious communicativenefs, were for treating him very roughly; but the colonel humanely prevented their intention, by beckoning his fervant, who he perceived on tip-tee at fome little diftance, a happy fpedlator of the whole Scene, and delivering him to his cafe until further orders ; who, with the affiftance of two fellows he had fome little knowlege of, conveyed him Safely to the colonel’s inn, though not without a rude falute or two from the attending rabble, who with loud huzzas and hidings accompanied him to the very entrance.
The ftory was in every body’s mouth ; ‘‘ How that mifs Kitty Hutchens, a
young lady of great fortune, had narrow-
“ly
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 237
i
» . \
“ ly efcaped marrying a drummer,’'^ with
every poffible aggravation j “ and all by the “ accidental interpofition of one colonel “ Dingley.” The mortification and con-fufion of Kitty’s afpeft is unSpeakable : the colonel was apprehenfive, left the violence of her paffions might have fonie bad effect, unlefs timely di(charged j-—he therefore addrefled her in a fneejfing kind of accent, and offered her his protection, until ftie could conveniently return to London. “ Take me,” faidflie, “ take me but out of “ this mob j I have nothing further to alk.” He tucked her arm under his, (as fhe apparently ftood in need of Support) and conducting her in fuch a manner as to gratify the Spectators with a view of her per-fon, lodged her Safe in a houfe of reputation j when ordering coffee, he moft pro-vokingly congratulated her upon her happy deliverance. It anfwered the defired pur-pofe.—Oh, how Ihe ftamped and raved, and played the heroine !—laying it thick upon your friend for the part he had aCted, To expofe her !—-make her a town’s
“ talk!
23^
The History of
talk !-—furnilh a paragrapivfor the pub-“ lie papers !—and render it imppffible for “ her ever to: jOiew her face again, was the “ height of malice and cruelty;—but Ihe “ fuppofed he took a pleafure in beholding “her diftrefs, the moft cutting part of “ which was, the owing an obligation to “ fuch a”—Ihe look’d the reft, and a moft infernal look it was. He begged her to be compofed;—told her, “ he had fo great “ a regard for her mother, that he rejoiced “ in the Service he had done her, notv/ith-“ Handing Ihe was fo offended at it; — and if Ihe would honour him with any com-“ mands'to that worthy lady, they Ihould “ be faithfully executed,—as he was go-“ ing to write to her that very moment.”
Here her proud tears burft forth again. — “ What a representation he would make of “ the affair! — She could not expedl him to “ conceal, —Ihe could not expedt him to “ extenuate a Single circumftanceIhe was “ undone ; — and neither time nor chance “ could reftore her peace. But however,” a
diabo-
Miss FITTBOROUGH. 239
diabolical pleafure informing her every feature, “ fhe had one confolation even be-“ yond his powerLady Sanxfey, the ‘‘ woman on earth from whofe knowiege “ fhe fhould be moft anxious to keep an “ affair of that fort, was in no condition to “ exult ;—rnor did fhe believe fhe could live “ till the news reached her.”
This ftab went deep. —The triumph for fome minutes was wholly her’s j—but the pleafing hope immediately fuggefted itfelf, that file had only mentioned that cruel circumffance,—in order to wring his heart in return for the mortification he had oc-eafioned her. You may guefs the effed: it, however, produced on the colonel’s mind. With refpedl to herfelf, he even wifiled it
. V
was poffible to aggravate every pang fhe endured, and punifla her with a repetition of the late fcene;—but was obliged to, content himfelf with only writing to her mother in much more unfavourable terms than he otherwife would have done j—^and inclofing a paragraph to the printers of fix
different
240
The History of
difFerent news-papers to be inferted Immediately.
Thus by the fly, artful, and indefatigable induftry of poor John Jones, has the proudeft, vaineft, and moil unworthy heart that ever woman pofTelTed, been
«
moft palpably humbled ; for every circum-ftance in appearance merely accidental,— as the parfon’s failing his appointment,
s
&c. &c. was all the efFedl of his well-
I
timed policy; and as the joy of her having efcaped fo fatal a fnare will be a compensation, in the fond mother’s opinion, for the difgrace and difappointment of young madam ; the fellow is fo hardened as to believe he {hall never repent his frolic. The Secret is in So good hands, that it is in no danger of tranfpiring; and the laugh will be miSerably againft the unhappy Kitty.
All her Severity refpefting her amiable coufln, muft infallibly be recollected upon this occafion ; which will tend to the aggravation of her own proceedings: nor
can
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 241
can fhe ever again dare to decry the errors of her fex, who had herfelf So egregioufly erred ?—What! confenttogoofFwith a nian upon a two months acquaintance only! his family, his connexions, his fortune unknown !—What inexcusable indifcretion, and abominable abfurdity!—especially as the event fo glaringly evinces the blame-ablenefs of her choice:—for it mufl: be acknowleged, that fuch is the candour of
\
the public, that, however unworthy the caufe, if the effect is but advantageous, it looks no further, or at worft is eafily appealed.
And now, Ned, if you pleafe I will introduce Tom Briton to your acquaintance, in his own proper perfon.—But as I have already Swelled this letter to an enormous length, I will difpatch it for your peru-fal; nor Ihall you long wait for the hero’s hiftory.
VoL. II.
R
LET-
242
rr>
•TT* ^ r "
a
••;?	-:+,	V..T.
The History: of
■<.
A

LETTER XXXV.
.» A
Colonel Dingley to Mr. Brooksbank,.
OME, my friend, we will foufe into the tale, without either preface or introduction.
On my arrival at Portfmouth, in order for my embarkation, in the fame houfe where I was accuftomed (and on. this oc-cafion lodged) lodged alfo this worthy young man. His afpeCt was clouded with dejection,—his mind vifibly difturbed, and his fortune, from fome hints my landlady had obtained, to the laft degree defperate.
An air of gentility in his perfon, and engaging candour of his countenance, inclined me to wilh for fome conversation with him.—“ He is unfortunate,” faid I, confequentlycompaffionate; and by finding a comforter himfelf, may be taught to ‘‘ aflume that character, and in fome mea-

(C
4(
Sure
rt ■
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 243
Sure contribute to heal my deep wound-^ “ ed bofom.”
I in vain, for Several days, fought an opportunity of calling myfelf in his way without abruptnefs; his modeft referve and honell fliame ] inciting him to fly an, however, kind purfuer.
\
I mentioned my ill fuccefs to my landlady; who having conceived a high opinion of her gueft, and at all times defirous of obliging me, very readily undertook to bring us together.
V
The firft interview was mutually painful; a diffidence on his part, and a fear of oppreffing the unfortunate on mine, laid us under great conftraint.
We repeated the fame Scene again and again ; until I by a frank communication of my own circumftances, brought him to difclofe the nature of his.
He was, I found, fo unhappy as to lofe a good father in his twelfth year —
R 2
•hi
mothe
244
The History of
mother naturally gay, and only then im the prime of her life, looked out immediately for a Second partner. Nor was fhe long unfuccefsful:—a fellow of great volubility, and Some Small Ikill in phyfic, paid-his addrefles, and foon became mafter of her perfon and fortune.
Her firft hufband, a mercer,, was fo in^ fatuated as to leave her a difcretionary power refpedling all his affairs 5 as like-wife of the education and difpofition of this^ his only fon. She, with the fame genero-rofity, made no terms with his fucceflbr ; but became, with her child and fortune, entirely at his mercy. The man was, however, far from ill-natured, though prodigal and foppifli; he inftantly parted with the honeft ftock in trade,—fet up his equipage,—and was dubbed phylician. He continued the boy at School until he attained his Sixteenth year, and then removed' him with great eclat to the univerlity, Tom (for that is honeftly one of his names) concluding from his father’s manner of
living.
iss PITTBOROUGH. 245
living, and the almoft extravagant Supplies he received, that his fortune was conlider-able, did not Scruple to indulge a youthful inclination. His ftudies, indeed, were not negledled, as they proved his delight; he purchased a handfome library, dreft with elegance, gave pretty entertainments to his brother ftudents, and was well received by every female within ten miles round. The vacations were Spent in London; at one of which periods his father kindly intimated, “ that he did not require him to apply, himfelf to any particular branch of literature, as he was far from intending “ to clog So promifing a genius with the trammels of buSineSs; but when he was “ Sufficiently qualified, would purchafe a
genteel employment for him under the “ government, thatfliould not fall fllort of “ his moft flattering expeilations.” Thus entirely releafed from every doubt or ap-prehenflon refpeiling his future proviflon, and naturally gay, facetious, and enter*' taining, he devoted a larger Ihare of his
I
;time to pleaSure, than he had ever before



246
The History of
ventured to do; nevertheless alv^rays keep* ing to the windward of extravagance ; or in other words, regulating his expenses by his remittances. In this round of diffipa-tion, love, however, paid a vifit to his heart: — the lady unexceptionable ; —the relations of each party upon amicable terms. He made no Secret of his prepoflef-fion in her favour, and was encouraged to , hope Ihe would one day be his j her father only prudently promiUng, that he would fee what Mr. Blake would do for him, before he confented to the matter beina:
o
carried further than friendly vifits: — which viSits were little lefs than fpending their whole time together, and could not - fail of increasing their mutual approbation. Thus Smoothly did they glide on for four . fucceffive years; when Tom having attained the period of three-and-twenty, began to prefs his father for the promifed eftablilhment; who with an agreeable Smile affuring him, every thing fliould be fettled to his entire Satisfaction within the enfuing fix months, rendered our lover completely happy.
MisVHT.DB.DROTOH.
' V^he Goxcbfnb hkd ever affected to boaft of his great intefeft v^kh perfons in power.—My lord-duke was Spoke to upon the occasion, and no doubt remained^ but that Tom was born to be a great man. His miftrefs’s father, delighted with the prof-pe£t of his daughter’s fliining at court, redoubled his carelTes of the young fellow, voluntarily telling him, “ That the day “ that put him in pofSeffion of fuch a “ place as would Suit his purpofe, fhould “ put him likewise in polleffion of three “ thoufand pounds, and his Fanny’s “ hand.” What could be more flattering than his profpe(ks !—My lord-duke pulhed with great vigour,—every hour was expelled to bring welcome tidings; and in order to be prepared to keep his word, the old fellow had Mifs Fanny’s cloaths made, and held in readineSs. But, alas ! that day of happinefs had never been enrolled iii the book of Fate;—for, on returning one evening from viSiting the young lady, and anticipating in idea the felicity that aw^aited him, he found a Surly
R 4
fellow
The History of
248
fellow Seated in his father’s hall, who roughly demanded his bulinefs.
provoked by his infolence, yet disdaining to anSwer him, he would have rulhed into the parlour when an ugly Salute from the gruff meffenger’s club felled hirp to the ground, from whence he was raifed only to learn the ffory of his ruined for-
tune
and fink again beneath that more
powerful blow.
The cafe was, that execution upon e??-ecution was out againft his father, who had thought proper to abfcond that very afternoon with his wife lady, without giving him the flighteft intelligence ; — carrying off every thing of value they could lay their hands on.
The kind of night he paffed is much cafier to be conceived, than defcribed. He repaired early the next morning to the houfe of his miftrefs, in order merely to acquaint her with the cruel change he
had
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 349
had experienced, and take a laft farewel; for he was too fenfible of her father’s turn of mind, to flatter himfelf, that any cir-
9
cumftance could compenfate the lofs of fortune, in his Sight. But the taflc of revealing his unhappy fate was not referved for himthe news had flown fwifterthan love i and thofe very doors that were wont to open almofl: fpontaneoufly at his approach, were now as ftrongly barricadoed againft him, as if he had been a robber.
As he well knew the narrow foul he had to deal with, this fliock was by no means So Severe as might have been expelled ;—but to lofe fight for ever of his beloved Fanny, the object of bis tendereft afFeClion, was not fo ealily borne:—he, how'ever, refolved, upon Some little recol-ledlion, never again to expofe himfelf to fo grofs an indignity, but to fhun the face of every former acquaintance. He wrote to Oxford to his tutor, begging him to difpofe of his books, furniture, and apartments to the bell advantage; and after
discharging
250
The History of
9
discharging a few little bills, remit hiin the overplus immediately. This bufinefs was Soon performed, though not at all to his fatisfaiSbon, as he had promifed him-felf a much larger Supply than he found he was intitled to : — for ignorant as he was of every method of procuring a livelihood, and entirely friendlefs, he found his whole poffeffions did not exceed two hundred and Seventy pounds.
He took himfelf a little lodging, where defpair was his only companion ;—nor had he Sufficient ftrength of mind to fix upon one Scheme of future provifion. As he was mufing late one evening in his chamber, with diftra£lion, horror, nay, guilt in his heart,—for it had occurred to him, that his life was ofno confequence to any one; — that he had a hand to execute, — and was entirely in his-own power; — when the maid of the houfe, gently tapping at his door, delivered him a letter. The hand was not unknov/n to him ; he broke the Seal, trembling with a variety
of
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 251
of paflions, and to his unfpeakable afto-nifiiment, read that his Fanny waited in the parlour, until that note had prepared him to give her a welcome reception.
Half frantic with joy, he was flying to receive her;—but was prevented by a female figure that flood without the door, and in a low voice intreated him not to be-
tray himfelf.—I can guefs your feelings,” faid fhe, by my own ;—but our prudence “ is all we have at prefent to rely upon.”
They then fat down to confult what flep was moft eligible, under their critical circumflances. She informed him, “ That
“ one of her father’s fervants having by accident feen him in the ftreet, and out of mere curiofity traced him to his

ti
lodging, had mentioned the circum-flance only that very day in confidence to the upper-maid, who kindly revealed it to her, though far from fufpedting the confequence it was of to her, or the effedl it produced.—She faid, (he had
«(
a
n

Ion 2:
252
The History of
“ long been clear in her refolution of “ fharing his fortune, if fhe ever was fo “ happy as to learn the place of his re-“ treat; that fhe had brought away in “ money and ejfSeils about three hundred pounds, which fhe confidered as no lefs “ his property than herfelf j—-that their ‘‘ engagement was not of Such a nature as to be diflblved either by misfortune, “ or the prudential views of a father, who had no one reafonable objedlion “ to offer; concluding with begging he would think of leaving England with
tt
all poffible expedition.

/
Poor Tom was fo flruck by this proof >of her attachment, and fo greatly affedled by fome refledlions upon the mifery he Ihould reduce her to, by availing himfelf of her partiality and generofity, that he was unable to reply. She, v»^ho pofleffes an uncommon Share of vivacity and goodnature, rallied him upon his gloomy reception of an offer, that file expedled would have procured her many fine compliments;
. -	— when.
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 253
—when, recolle6I:ing himfelf, and being abundantly convinced that Ihe could not return again to a roof flie had abandoned j and from fome other convi6lions, the propriety of which he had not leifure to con-fider, he at length yielded to the tide of joy that he had been labouring to Item, and all his foul was gratitude and love. She had given herfelf for his Sifter to the people of the houfe, and as fuch was treated with great civility, during fome part of the next day, in which time he prepared a proper place to convey her to,>, but judged it heft to remain himfelf in his old lodging, to prevent fufpicion.
He enquired at the Jamaica cofFee-houfe for a paflage in the firft fhip def-tined for that ifland, and by the expiration of that neceflary period (or rather, what the new and extraordinary laws of this country require, previous to the performance of the marriage ceremony), met with one to his wilh : and the third day after that event had taken place, em-
'	barked
254
The History of
barked in high Spirits with his lovely wifcj at Gravefend ; mutually flattering them-felves, that they fhould leave every mif-fortune behind them.
But unhappily there was another difficulty in ftore for them, which they but
1
little apprehended ;—they were wrecked a few leagues beyond the Nore, and with the utmoft hazard efcaped with their lives, and the little money they had in their pockets ; their danger having been fo extreme, that no one thought of any thing but per-fonal preservation. Unknowing what to do in this exigence, and meeting with a conveyance, they had come to Portfmouth, from whence Tom propofed working his paflage to Some of the new colonies, and there eftablifiiing himfelf in the beft manner Providence fhould enable him. He had applied by the name of Brown to fome perSons in London, whom he knevr were acquainted with the neceflary fteps, and was waiting their anfwer with a great degree of impatience, when I became acquainted
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 255
quainted with him, from the double ap-prehenhons of his unprotedled Iltuation’s expofing him to being prefled on board a man of war (a circumftance his wife declared file could never furvive), and the certainty that they were exhaufting their little fund, without the leafl: degree of probability of obtaining a frefli fupply;— but as they conceived a decent appearance would be their beft fecurity, however Cutting their refle£Hons, they had perfifted to fupport it, except Some intimations, which in the anguilh of his heart Tom had let fall, and had not efcaped the ob-fervation of his landlady.
Such is the hiftory of Tom Briftow, alias Brown, alias Briton; you cannot, therefore, be Surprized to hear he found a tolerable friend in me.—I eaSily perfuaded him to become a volunteer, as I promifed to fupport him with my friendihip and in-tereft.
Content
256
The HisTORY of
Content Soon bid the rofes refume their former feat, and never was there a more pleafing or agreeable companion than the reanimated Fanny,—Her vivacity has frequently beguiled my misfortunes, and the fcheme 1 have fo recently carried into execution, was intircly of her planning. To heighten the ridicule, Tom inlifted himfelf, on a vacancy happening, as drummer ; which office he occupied one whole month before our return to England, when I civilly prefented him with his discharge, having by the intereft of a friend of mine in Ireland (to whom I related the ftory of his misfortunes) obtained him a very genteel poll: in the Irilh Cuf-toms, to which country he is now repairing with all poffible expedition. Fanny’s father, overcome by m>y interceffions (or rather by the all-prevailing appointment his fon-in-law had procured) confented to receive a vifit from his child (my reputed wife). He returned her with his bleffing, and five hundred pounds in her pocket,
promising
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 257
promising from thenceforward to con-
lider her, as her hufband fhould continue
0
to deferve.
You muft and fliall fee them before they quit England, and to them I refer you for a more minute account of our plot: and I am certain you will acknowlege more amiable couple cannot exift.
\
He was formed by nature for the com-mhlion I intrulled him with, as he was not only mafter of every necefl'ary qualification, but loved a frolic at his heart.— Had we by any perverfe accident failed in our defign, and detedfion, inftead of fuc-cefs, been the fruits of our labour j it would have been evident that no real evil could be intended the adorable Mifs Kitty, as her lover was not only predifpofed of, his wife attending on his every Hep, but moft unqueftionably in all his former con-dudl, a man of true and nice honour. But as her whole punifliment will depend upon the affair being kept a fecret;—I refledt with pleafure, that no one has been in the
VoL. II.
s
final left
258
The His Tor y of
fmallefl: refpeft intrufted, but thofe who can be relied upon.
To this couple I owe every fatisfa£lion I have fo unexpectedly tailed ; they have proved the indireCl means of preferving me from the moll dire dellruClion, in the perfon of my Mifs Pittborough j you will not, therefore, deny them the next place to her and you in my friendihip and af-feClion. I muft add, that, notwithlland-ing I had not the leaft reafon, to doubt
the young man’s veracity, I fo far aCled
the fufpicious part as to write to his tutor,
#
and Some perfons in London, to enquire
9
his family and charaCler. From them I received many lights into his real merit, his modefty was far from communicating, as never mortal was more extolled for every valuable endotvment, or more compallion-ated under misfortunes.
I hope, Ned, I have now made ample
all former trilHing ; — and
for
amends
proved myfelf both a rational, honell
man, and your Sincere friend
LET-
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 259
LETTER XXXVI.
From the fame.
Have received a letter of thanks from Mrs. Hutchens, for my care of her daughter.—She looks (according to njy predi£Iion) rather to the greatnefs of her iverance, than the greatnefs of her in-difcretion, and has difpatched her woman to convey her fafe once more to her maternal arms. Another happy point gained I for I could not have exulted, if her peace had been deftroyed. She-informs me, that Sir Matthew’s health is in a declining ftate.—I am a man, Ned, not an angeC—but as pleafure’s cup is ever dalhed with care, fo this piece of intelligence is accompanied with moft alarming accounts of Mifs Pittborough’s decay! — She is, alas, fuppofed to be far gone in a con-fumption.
S 2
The
26o
The History of
The wings of my vivacity are totally clipped.— I cannot bear the thought ; and if I lofe her a Second time, no means on earth can Save me from diftra£lion. I have ventured to write her a long letter, in hopes to amufe her,—exculpating the late captain Briton from all blame ;—have deferibed my motives for putting him upon a£ling the character in which flie knew him,—and Kitty’s mortifications, in the moft lively colours;—racknowleged my-felf to be the very John Jones, for whom file exprefied fo much kindnefs and approbation ; — prefented my beft wifties for the reftoration of her health, in Suitable terms to our prefent Situations; and do flatter mySelf She will not be diSpleafed, A proper perSon will be employed to deliver it into her own hands. So that I have
no disagreeable conSequence to apprehend
«
on that account. And now, Ned, having nothing more topurSue, (the Surgeon, you know, has met with his Small reward ; and SirMatthew’s Seems to be approaching) and I intend to make you an early vifit;
and
Miss PITTBOROUGH 261
— and if Heaven Ihould prove So gracious as to call the Baronet hence, and afford the moft diftant probability of Mifs Pitt-borough’s avoiding the fame fate, you fhall not find me an unpleafant companion.
Tom and his v'ife have quitted Edinburgh incog.; —and will Soon reach your hofpitable dome: — Kitty and I leada whim-fical kind of life.—I cannot give you an idea of the hatefulnefs of her difpofition.
I have ferved her, and yet Ihe Seems to confider me as her mortal enemy.—I verily believe the lofs of her drummer fits heavy upon her heart, in Spite of its natural foft-nefs ; and that if we had not given him a wife, Ihe would. But whence this flight ? Oh, Ned ! the fate of this dear, dear woman opprefies me beyond meafure :— but I will hope, though perhaps againft pror bability. —If the Baronet Ihould not recover, — how long, how tedious a time mull; be Sacrificed to forms and ceremonies, before I may, with decency, Solicit fom tender, consideration ?—Muft I conllrain
Ok
S
my Self
262
The History of
mySelf not to behold her, when every im pediment is removed, — and love

no
more my involuntary crime?—I know but one means of reconciling myfelf to the
unnatural penan
9
I would fly, Ned, to
her relations :—Her father, brother. Sifter, Ihould be mine:—ftie alone ftiould be
4
the fubjedl of our conversation ;—and that conversation would in Some meaSure com-
4
penSate the impoSed abSence.
f
a	m	m	*	*	#	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	*	*
4.S	•	•	•	•	•	*	•	•	•	•	•	•	•	«-
I
LETTER XXXVir.
Lady Sanxsey to Mrs. Batson.
Slave, my dear, been greatly, and I will acknowlege, not diSagreeably Surprised by receiving the inclofed. — This wicked colonel !—But I have reaSon to rejoice, abundantly rejoice. — Kitty de^ Served the fate She has incurred; and may it prove equally Salutary in the reformation of her condudi,—as my misfortunes have done in mine ! O my Sifter, I foreSee what would be the conSequence of the
con-
His imagination indeed is
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 263
contingence that is So likely to take place ! But it is too late;—the colonel would a Second time demand my wretched hand too late,—for death will prove his Second rival.
I find not the leaft amendment in my own health; and Sir Matthew’s diSorder is So greatly increaSed, that I know not but every hour may be his laft. He, poor man, is very impatient! —The tyrant makes his approach with all his terrors about him! -infinitely difturbed; nor have I any reafon to flatter mySelf with a favourable change.
How have you revived me, by your friendly alTurances, that if I do live one week longer you will reach this gloomy man-
fion, and that both my father and my brother have determined to accompany you ! —And am I ftill of Such confequence to your happinefs ?—VS'ill not Heaven—I am called away, —Sir Matthew is juft departing.
^ ^
Six o’clock.
The melancholy Scene, my After, is over,, and Sir Matthew has already attain-
S 4	ed
/
264
The History of
ed the regions of eternity,—He was inSen-fible before I reached him,—and far beyond all poflibiliry of relief or afliftance. Alas, my frailty has received a new Ihock ! — Surely hypocrify is too odious to be ac-ceptable with you on any occaSion ;—and the perpetual unkindnefs I have experienced, an infuperable bar to affliflion or lamentation.—But I was referved for this lafl; trial of my weaknefs ; and find myfelf by no means fo detached from the world, as I but half an hour ago imagined.
Come then, my-Sifter, my friend, come and afiiSc me in conquering this amazing reluclancy to be diflblved in a nature fo decayed ;— teach me to refume the refig-nation that has So cruelly forfaken me; forget the colonel,—and lay myfelf down in peace. I am the mereft memento of mortality you eyer beheld; — yet my
heart involuntarily {brinks at the bare thought of that diflblution, it has fo long pretended to figh for as its ultimate hap-pinefs, O haften, Nancy, ha{len to me !
I am
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 265
I am more than ever undone unlefs I fee your face ! — Pity the confufion this incident has caufed me, and footh me once more into a bleffed calm. — This is the lail effort of my pen ;—I can no more^—my nerves are utterly unftrung.

LETTER XXXVIII
Colonel Dingley to Mr. Brooksbank.

ATT has this inftant received a letter from his mother.—Sir Matthew is at length no more,— and Mifs Pittborough is Scill permitted to furvive him. My heart finks, my friend, beneath the flattering hope.—She is,—-Ihe fliall be mine.-^Polt horfes are preparing. — I feek the village you have already vifited 5
j
nor will 1 ceafe follicitation, until her After at leaft confents to accompany me to
her. Not one fupporting, not one tenderly aflifting friend ! how ftiould fhe but be
loft ! A thoufand romantic flights fuggeft
them-5.
Vv
.266 The History of
themfelves.—I am for affuming now this, now that difguife, in order to introduce myfelf into her beloved prefence, and render myfelf Serviceable to her.—I am more alarmed, more wretched than ever.—The grave even Swallows hope itfelf; then judge of my fate if flie fhould be Snatched from me. Had fhe died inftead of Sir Matthew, I think I could have been re-
n
ligned i but to have her Survive, — and Survive him only for a fhort period,—is torture, is madnefs. My letter could barely have reached her before his departure. — She knows all my proceedings.—Surely £he will endeavour to live for my fake.
I am absolutely frantic !—can neither write, nor abHain from it. —But the horfes are ready, and I fee the probability of a ^period, at leall, to my fufpence.
LET-
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 267

LETTER
Mrs. Batson to Lady Sanxsey.
Y dear Sifter muSc not be furprifed, if we reach her in a few days,— accompanied by a ftranger j who, to avoid every offence to decency, will afiume a fieftitious name ; bnt will on no consideration be reftrained from Seeing her. I would by no means give a fan£Hon to So unnatural an impropriety, as introducing a profefied lover to view the miferable remains of his rival, under any other cir-cumftances; but the colonel’s cafe is So very Singular, and his humanity and gene-roSity So great,—that I own I willingly yielded to his importunity, as I was incapable of requiring a Self-denial in another, I was confeious I mySelf could on no account have pracliSed.
Should your apprehenSions for your health be juftly founded, what amends could I make him, for depriving him of
the
2.
68
The History of
/
the fight of you ? ■— He is Scarce rational at prefent:—we muft not overcharge an af-fii6led mind.
Confider, my dear, the obligations you have to him ; conSider the rights of friend-Biip he has to preSume upon j—and every objection rnuft be Silenced.
But I vrill fay no more upon a fubjedt that requires fo little defence. — You cannot refufe a father’s injundlions; nor he-fitate to put your reputation in his hands.
Receive us with the bell grace you can
a fume.
VSeHand in need of comfort.
Smile us therefore into hope, that an exemption from fatigue, and compofure of fpirits, may efredtmore than half your cure, ■The colonel has amazing faith in the
O
e^cacy of our prefence;—and I truSc he will not be difappointed; but if he was not allowed to be an eye-witnefs of our efforts to Save you, no power on earth could convince him, but there had been Some deficiency, fo induftrious are the unhappy to
inci'eafc their own torments.
L E 'I

Miss PITTBOROUGH. 269 LETTER XL
Mrs. Batson to Mrs. FIutchens. Dear Madam,
Doubt not but you are anxious to hear
the fuccefs of our journey.
/
I can venture to tell you my lifter does recover, but by fuch flow degrees, that there is no anfwering for the event. I do not apprehend her diforder to be a con-fumption ; —ftie has no cough :—her decay was as imperceptibly as her return to health; — andftole on her fo gently,that lofs of appetite and reft alone, awakened her attention to it.
I
Her youth is all we have to depend upon, and even that is a flender tv>rig. It can be no Secret with you, that She has been a very great Sufferer.—I wifli all the perfons concerned againft her may repent;—and if {he lives, even my forgivenefs fhall be theirs : but Surely no cruelty vvas ever fo anexampled, —as opprefling the unofFend-
in<y
270
The History of
ing to the very grave;—for fhe was incapable of being any one’s enemy buther own.
At prefent her fpirits are fo tender, and her voice and ftrength fo far gone, that I do not venture to afk her one queilion ; but I believe no language, but her own, can paint her perfecutors in their proper colours ; and even -there would be wanting that ftriking fhade, a malignant heart alone is able to give.
t
Sir Matthew has done her the juftice to beg her pardon, and leave her every thing in his power;—how poor a reccmpence!
He is dead, however, and my refentment
flops at the grave.
I am, &c. &c.

X

U

• • *
•	p	V
• ••It
:	t	:
•	m	•
IM*
X
L E T T E R XLI.
V
Colonel Dingley to Mr. Brooksbank.
A
Whole week have I watched over this drooping flower (as defcribed in my laft*), yet are my aching eyes unable to perceive an increafe of ftrength.
* This letter is omitted*
Miss PITTBOROUGH. 271
m
—But, Ned, every thing is progreffive, from bad to worfe, from better to beft, there is no Handing Hill;—therefore, as flie does not fall off, there is grounds for hope.—If file lives flie is mine !—Oy death, for once renounce thy nature, and voluntarily forego this one precious vl£lim.
m
Morn,
She has had a comfortable night; we are all in high fpirits.—If ever flie is able to try its efficacy,—her native air is pronounced, as a grand fpecific.—She Smiles with ineffable, with the molt friendly complacence upon me.—Friend-fliip is love, and love is fnendfliip j I know of no diftin£lion.
Three days have I been writing what you now receive,—as I was determined not to difpatch uncertain intelligence. She is vifibly better, and it is hoped will foon be able to undertake a journey to the village, at leaft in Revell’s machine.—I Ihall guard my treaSure on horfe-back, with a vigilance love alone is capable of j—you Ihall hear from me again very foon.
272
The History, &c
LETTER XLII.
From the fame.
t
ARK’E, Ned, I command you to throw open your cellars, to chear the hearts of your poor neighbours,—and let Tom, my Fanny, and yourfelf rejoice in the returning happinefs of your friend i — happy beyond’ the power or poflibility of description !
The journey performed beyond our moft flattering expedlations ; —the kind efFedls of change of air already ftrikingly viSible in her complexion ;—the muflc of her voice in a great degree recovered, — and her heart new animated;—what joy can equal mine ! To behold her thus, thus, thus to converfe with her, is it not rapture,—is it not felicity ?—and I with plea-fure give that year to form and ceremonies, that has given me once more to life, and unfpeakable fatisfadlion.
FINIS.
U. of Pa.
Library
» -	< I ■ ' ♦ l\ » V
, •. •
\
.* ■ •>.


rJ.-' •• V-. ■ . ..'V-
J


.■:A^

i*.
« - >»•■* 1?“
r
'.*••••' .” :.-
t r-
- « -

LvC
'«- X ' % t . A	•
.J C' . C’h

'■>3

*■ *.'.
> X*
-■ : V. f V..:.-.': '•>,:..4.r,..—■':; :	' ■■.
-C -	:.	•■•r'.-' ■
••	-	^	«1 . . ,	.	. . T* * •.
••'-
*~'■ -'.D■fL♦•
- -Ai
•	^	^	^	A9
'■\Ni:v:-VCc-Cv;C^
• ^	-	*'■•«■- -‘A-- 'T'-
.'V‘.*-'■-V 'V-:'.C-	Vv .
<•:— - ■ — .	-i • r‘ • . ' >	- .	• 7	1
■;'7--■’.	•	■' ■'■ivN
. rt
C- h
\ •
■V' -V

f.‘,^ r-

V ■

/ ..


/	•- -■••. -..v .. i	-i'. • -•
Is	
✓»	•* • *
	A'-
Xi	• ^ h' 1 « • ._. . r
. ^
;< >*,	V	'
.	n:- .- •	77	.
,. l ^	,»•	'* . -	•-•rf	.-
•	« - - •.	1: 5 ■
•	,v • •?• .
■ * ■ : .
' -. *''' <*-
F .
. I
S ■


> •
-f- ■>

%
. ' L*>
-i *:
. -
- ■ V
<V ‘ *
M-
•>.. -- .j
■ - ' - ■ ■ . - ^. . ... .
" • • ■• •' •-., V T . • .A.' . <;r:
- -V- - -1V
.	' . ••- t .	Afx-	. -.


V

' ' ' ^ Vf<‘
c
» V V

mm ■
* : • • vV
'’ •tri
lild

^ >


ll
if
fe
•:.N; ■

Jr
1. *.
_
\
5 i« a« f

. f

"	’ 'j t! ■ ..a'	-	■'- ’’	c-’^&ff^aBiB^'*-''•’•'■’■•>--• -t'".

• • » « ' . » «

■' i . s .
z' '
^ V
1 . . -■ ■■_ >^
»*<.».	' '. ^ ,	A^*' V. ‘ ‘ U .	' l'.‘ '	• L* ...	’ »	*
^ .Ad '
VC	•*•« ■	.	V*i
>%•

'^<i	. .	.*•'
• ,1 <	/t>4»y-.^
y L..
'iAr:
i'.

■f VV -

^ 1
V- •',
)
r ' ■
..I
.c.-
f' ■
•Osh"N^ . : .... :■ »>*i	- H . ‘ • * M j«'	%	» •	«			• ’, 1 <v .1^ • « ' • >' i
V P.', ’.	1“	•		V	■ A'		■ N ■ ^
■k> '■' -< *			• .	A *	.	/ ^ • r	. • ' ♦ * * \ %
n .S-C. .r.
'	'-I	"
■•V. -_-.
'	• •• -S
:’tC^ ' '-
'FV
St. “• -V:


/*

V ' ’-'f A.
\ >
tiJ- -V-i; *':>'•*.'*•,
. i. ' ■ ^ t -tr ->s V
r?r

■•i-' ■
ii '
'.
< *. *, . y


s
>;•

«i
V •!'

■ . ' I .	• •-
P .
' ; ■ t .
' T •
' %
1	'-L




4

;»•

r
1.
S ■ . ■rriri- f' , wV-‘-
. • t*'	•	*	• •	.	•
«
-■ ''f.^'-
:iv.
Jfti
h
\ ’


V»-‘C^ _,.i...	'; ■
V:A-T-
'""hi


'^'‘ <. 'rS.'