f	%
• * • *
- 'A
■	'	I
' >
'. ^
_
* »
# •
*1
/ i.	"
V	^	*
1
• * \
s
> •
. ^ ^ •
;
\ . *
>
» ^
# -► ^
* % •
*’	•	.	‘	'	V
^ \
• * • \ ^
w'	-	^ *	*•
^ •
> • * •• •
L- -
« *
\ '
^ 3^ '
•	-	Jer	'	■	X	.
•	*	• '	i- /	*
•s.
• : .-	- *■■ - .	,	'.	' V
-.' . ' c- . -	■ . . '
5§2^*-7*	-,	.	'	*	■	♦	-	h .
L'-' '.- > ' ■- ' ■ . •■-	^	'	■ ■ -	■ '• .	■ ■ - ■
- h’ •	••	.	-»
'	f'.. :	•d.'-''	■S^^'.^. Af. ■	,	■
■■ - -vv'-'	' ■■
Vi V-	••.:	.	••	%	-	'	.	•	•
■ ■' / ■ ■ . ■ - .;-'
WWVd.^:-
yMLALAi LLA _________-	.'-	- ■ : - .- - . ’   . ■ '
Ni
>-
■IV ^
_ -c ^ ■■	' 1	.	*
- . '-
S '	- •' I	/	I
id /^l
3
»	. s
THE
GODFREY F. SINGER MEMORIAL PRESENTED BY
MR. AND MRS. JAOOB SINGER
—	• • M. —'	' *	*
«
r.
I
* I	^
■ *■	■ * • ' *
i
'	i
•'	I
I
1
' * '* N	^
A ' \
^	i
r
" ' , - ' 1
I
4
\
^	\
\
■ . !
f
:	i
♦ ' '1
\	.
••	I
»
i
I
I
^	I
I
'* )
1
I
!
* i
1
~^df
*
• - v\	.
• ^ • \
r »	•	f	I ,
** * “ ' ‘ *
4
0
\ * ,'* ’
\
4
♦
i
• >
•	I
%
X
> •
. ^ '
s.
i
»
t
f
I
. ■ ' ,
. ■ ■ r
; r:Mr
N	'■	.	■
-• ‘C^S ,	■
* •• ■•.!>:■
. ■
' A ■m-
. ■' . ■ ' .
■h:	.	'
. ■■•	-I
*v.» '	ir	'
- I-	>
"f	“	'	' ■
•■,>;'	I ‘	^
^
■	■	f?	■	'
< ' ' » ' ■
' ii
- -	s
T'	*	■ •
; ♦ • •
4	-	'	,	^
. ■■ S '
■	J	i
. .-;•	••
•• -c- ^	-t..
t.	♦	.	,	■
.1 .
m	'
*'♦
^ i'
' y	^	-	f
N	*	•	.
t ‘
y	''	■■
V	I
s *
V'*. '	1 .'	/	V
^A.i
U-
• j*	^
I ' Wfi *
• -••V
n;N	'
. ** v
•
■	' ,
i. 'V	' ■
rj -	>
u*^' . •	'	'	/
Nr	■ . ■
* ■
I- - - ' /	■
CSf	'	> ^
1 ■ ' ^
■
. s/ •	*	*	.
>T	.
. ■' . ■ -. .. vr *	.V	-
i ■	''
L V'	'	* ■
A;	>V •	_	. ^	■. ;■ '	,.	.	■
■	.	■	•	-.	■ >■	■	•• V ■ • .	. V . ;
■/i'i :	^	■> ,	■•	-	'	,	'	-	.	'
.0 Jk • :	4	\
%
*
*
r
t
•V
1
/
I
«
/
(^
$
/
• V	■
/
t
9
#
’ \
»
X
9
*
>
>
i
C*
«
>
I
**
. '
#
w	.
.t
THE
Platonic Lovers :
CONSISTING OF
Original LETTERS,
I N
PROSE and VERSE,,
That paSs’d between an Englijh Lady, andl
an Englijh Gentleman in France, under the borrow’d® Names of Clio and Strephon j who took an,. AlFeftion to each pther, by reading accidentally one another’s occafional Compofitions.
WITH
.A
A Critical ESSAY ; containing Some
Remarks upon the Nature of Epiftolary and Elegiac Poetry ; and on the moft beautiful Pajfages in thefe Epistles. By the Ingenious Mr. John Porter.
r * '	\
The Third Edition, Corrected.
% ________________ _
■ But oh ! encroaching Mortal as thou art,
“ Let JHII thy Spirit have the greateji Part;
f ‘ Tou may admire me all the Ways you can;
•“ Give me the Lover, but keep back the Man.''*
»
Clio to Str ephon,79.
LONDON:
Printed for John Wilford, at the Lhree Flower-de-Luces behind the Chapter-Houfe, near St. Paul's; and Richard Chandler, at the Flozver-de-l,iice without Tymple-Bar. M,pcc,xxxii.
I
\
«
ft
\
\
V
♦
4
9
i
4	«
THE
CONTENTS.
TO Strephon, who having had a fine D<?-
fcription of Clio’j Petfonf by a Lady from whom he firji receiv'd Clio’j Verfes in Commendation of a Book which he had pub-lifif d., fent a Letter., fignifying his Define to fee her.	Page i.
An Epi[ile from Strephon to Clio ; wherein he fends his Soul before to prepare her, and tell her the indifferent Figure of his whole Per-fion., that fhe might not be furprized when he came to fee her.	4.
Clio’j Anfwer, by wa^ of Dream., in her r-^fine Garden on the.	Plain of	St.	Dennis.	7.
i Going with an Intent to fee Clio, hut not \ bold enough to enquire for her: Or, the Com-;> bat between Hope and Fear.	i o.
Taffo’j Jerusalem.	Book	the fecond.	15.
5 A Fragtnent from the third Book of Taffo’j t Jerusalem.	37.
S	To
4
i •
✓
The C O N T E N T S.
■ffi? Strephon, on his excellent Verfes, and on his Verjion of Taffo.	49.
Srrephon’r Anfwer, being in a Dream ; or, the Recapitulation. By way of Dialogue. .52.
‘To Strephon, in Anfwer to the foregoing Letter.	59.
To Strephon.	63.
Strephon to Clio.	66.
Clio te Strephon.	-68.
Dn Clio’i Letter, wherein fhe tells me of hcFSicknefs, and received on the Eight when the great 'Storm of Thunder and Lightmng was.	69.
An Anfwer to Clio (who fpeaks of Pla~ tomck Love) fent to her juft after her recovery.	,73.
' To Strephon, in Anfwer to -both Ms (admirable lAtters, of his Illnefs and Plato nick
Love.	7-6.
^To Clio, of whofe Recovery Strephon was juft then informed; wherein he dells her of his Love.	81.
To Strephon.	84.
' To Clio, who juft After fhe dells me, fhe gives me Leave to love, which jhe expreffes < in the fineft of Verfes, tells me in a Letter juft
after, that fhe"* s going to a Brother in Spain. 86.
In
\
\
I
The C O N T L W T b.
In Anfw.er to two Letters Stv^t^hon finds me: In one he tells me his Paffim is increas*J^ in the other advifis to go to Spain. JPage'H^.
Strephon’j Com'plaint continued.	9,4.
Lo Strephon.	^ 7.
An Anfwer /o Clio’j Idjl Letter % where to heal my Complaints, Jhe offers me Friendjhip infiead of Loveand on a Report that Clio (when Jhe gave me Leave to love) was married at that very Lime, or aflually near it.	100
Clio to Strephon, having fint me twent, Profe Letters to excufe that Sally of PaJJiony into which <I?eMMffisfforth in-Ms lajt Letter of Verfes, uponAiffdIfe vReportitbat A Lady gave out, of TtiyJkei^gmarued.	105.
Strephon ^oJ^liio.	' 106.
Clio /d)^Strephon.	109.
Strephon Tc»C;Glip.	iii.
Lo Strephon, oniMsMoem, intitled Buck-ingham-HouSe.
Lhe Interview, being in the Spring, jufi after Strephon had been very much affixed
with Illnefs, and fame private ^Difappointments
in Life.	116, 119,
ClioD Pifiure. By herfelf.	122.
A critical Effay, containing fome Remarks upon the Nature of Epijiolary and Elegiack
Poetry^
%
The CONTENTS.
Poetr'j^ and the moft beautiful Faffages in ths foregoing EpijHes of Clip and Screphon. By way of Letter from Mr. John Porter, to his Friend Richard Pocock, of TurBeld-Court,
V*
in the County of Bucks, Efq\ Page 125,
4
4
• #
%
THE
/
TO
Mrs. JuDiT H B O N D.
MAT) A M,
G ARC E any Poet of Fi-
gure hasTeen ever known
I to paSs free, and with Suc-» cefs, into any Part of Par-naffusj without having first paid hi$ Compliments to Beauty. As almost all Men, once at least in their Lives, are, according to their publick Profest lions and Behaviour, pafstonately court-
A 2	3j
\
»
IV U Jhi U 1 (J A T 1 U JN.
Jy to it; So it would be, indeed, aWon-der, if the ProfelTors of the gentlest: Art, Should not, at Some Time or other. Shew themfelves fo in their Writings. VerSes are, by their foft Nature, wonderfully well adapted to exprefs, pathetically, and harriioniousty, theTender-nestes .of Love, and the Triumphs of Beauty; and then to whom, but to a Lady equally Good, Lovely, Beautiful, and Ingenious, should they be dedicated, and made facred ? From hence, Madam, arife shme of my Motives for offering this little Prefent to you, who have always sh many constant Charms, that you need not add to ^them, by being Surpriz’d into a Sudden and accidental Blush at the Accep-
r
tance of it, when you are first told it confists of a Collection of Loye-'Verfcs.
It
%
dedication. V
It is not a fingular Sentiment, but it is the receiv’d Opinion of the wilef and better Part of Mankind, that a Subjed more noble and delicate than'
of Honourable Love, (and it is upon ^to the following Verfes were, formM,) cannot enter into the Heads or Hearts of Men and Womens nor can a Theme more fweetly pleafing, or more exquifitely elegant, employ the Pens of poetick Writers, or the Eyes of polite Readers of either Sex. You, Madam, who perufe the Works of the best Spirited Writers, with a Genius like their own, must have remark’d with Pleafure, this pretty PassSage in the Celebrated Cabo of Air. Addifon,
4
The Strong, the Brave., the Virtuous, and the WiSc,
Sink in the Soft Captivity together.
A ^	Amidst
%
vi DEDICATION-
Amidst the Conflicts which this Paflion excites in human Breasts, this fofc Captivity is the agreeable and welcome Portion of our Sex, and Vidlory is the glorious Share of yours. Thus, while the strong, brave, virtuous, wife Men joy and pride themfelves in be-, coming the voluntary Captives of the Fair; the strong, brave, virtuous, and wife Women need not certainly be a-stiamed of their Conquests. I join the Epithets ftrong and brave to Women ; first, becauSe that finer Half of
the Species may compare Records with the other at any Time, and count out with them Heroines for Heroes, whole Actions shine as eminent, and blaze as illustriousty bright in Story: And Secondly, becaufe I am likewife authorized in it by the most fine znd we lb-
bred Exprellion of the greatest inspired
JL/ JC# JL/ X V-# XX X X KJ XN • V11 -
red Sage that ever lived, Solomon.^ who (when he charmingly fays, A firong md virtuous Woman., who {hall find ? Her ^rice is above Rubies., and {he de-^ ferves being fought for to the utter— mofi Bounds of the Earth') fhews that it is the highest Point of Wifclom to endeavour to obtain her. Wit therefore is certainly employed with Wif. dom, when it is directed to this End \ and Verfes, that are made to win law-
^	f	^	^
fully upon the Affections of good and valuable Women, are not only what Poets may very commendably write, but Philosophers themfelves may read, and own themfelves pleafed at reading, without the least Offence to their great Gravity and Prudence.
What I have here remarked, Is abundantly fusticient to correct the
A 4	wrong
\
\
VIII U b 10 1 (J A T1 U JN*
*
wrong Judgment of Some Men and Wo-men, and to argue and convince them of their being too rigidly devout, and too austerely (not to fay morofely) wife, who mifcall every Compolition of this Nature, a vain Endeavour to pay Idolatry to Beauty, which they unreafona-bly fall out with for being tranfient, as all the best BleSIings and Poffestions
befides on this Earth are. What is
^ »
this better than a preposterous Complaint against the finest Eyes, becaufe, though they fhine like Stars, they do not last as long, and enjoy not as much . of their Duration, as they pofTefs of their Lustre. Thefe are the People, who would fupercilioufly forbid all the written Raptures of this kind, though they are as honest and mannerly as they are natural. This ill Opinion of a Severe elder Sort of People, in one
Extreme,.
0
JLJk	JL	JL A	*^SL
r
Extreme, took its Rife first out of a too-far-carried Spirit of Oppofition to the still worfe Opinion of a gayer Set of JO mg People, who had run into a contrary Extream, and valued no Ver-fes but what ought to be contemnM, and were written in a vile unmannerly Spirit of Debauchery. Thefe err'd vehemently on both Sides ; the first Seem'd to
f
think, there was no Such Thing as being grave, without being dull, becaufe the ^ Second knew not how, according to the Proverb, to be merry and 'wife. The
Mirth of one was turn'd into Distb-
#
lutenefs, and the Sobriety of the other into Sadnefs; as if there was no Medium between a Libertine, and a Stoick, between an Epicure and a Cynick, or in more commoh Words, between aa airy ill-bred Rake, or a furly ill-.bred Clown.
A 5" A A-
•y	N
/
f
MAT>AM,
The wifeft Philolbphers among the Antients, thought of Beauty and Love after a more juft, and a more refin'd Manner; that is to fay, more like rational Men, and more like fine Gentlemen. I know this is an uncommon Way of Ipeaking to Ladies, efpe* cially concerning a Book of Poetry and Love; but then I amfpeaking to a Lady whole Abilities are uncommon, and will juftify me if I proceed to fpeak to her in fuch a Manner, as shews I know she never thinks Good Senle remov'd from Good Breeding. In the Opinion of ^latOy (whofe Life and Character you have read,) Beauty is a human Splendor, amiable in its own Nature, that has the Power to ravish the Mind through the Eyes. We are told by Some
Authors,
V
Authors, that the divine Socrates was charm'd So far with Beauty, as to be in-Love with Theodata.^ the then reigning Belle of Athens. The grave, the fevercj the stern Cato^ had fuch a profound Reverence for Beauty, that he was often heard publickly to profeSs, It was no lefs a Crime to injure it., than to fack a Temple. How near does this glorious moral Heathen approach to the infpired Sentiments, receiv'd by the true Gentlemen of Christianity, who are by their excellent Dostrine, (that is to ‘fay, in otherWords, in Spite of young Cavillers,) the Beft Breeding in theWorld, taught to look upon the Fair ones, as fb many Temples, in which the Deity takes Pleafure to inhabit, and therefore have a divine Fear to utter any Thing that may pollute their Ears, or to offer any Thing that might any Ways injure their
Modesty
* ^
I
%
I
«ar- ^	^ m
Modesty and Honour ? A Patriot and a Philosopher that could fay So fine, ih good, and courtly a Thing, defervM to be the Father of Such Daughters as Govern is defcribM to be by our Shake-- ' fpeari., and Aafcia by oiir Addijbn,~ -d. Clio’s Lines are all of stich a Sort, as niight have been infcribed to Ladies of their Taste ; and, if they had been lefs refined, they Should not have been pre-fented to you. For a Veneration, next to that, which a -^oXiiQ Roman would have paid to a Daughter of Cato^ I would defire to pay to a Grand-daughter ' Thomas Bond., who asted fb brave, fo loyal, and constant a Part on the Side of King	II. in the Adver-
iity of his Exile; and aster his happy Restauration, made fuch a confpicuous and praife-worthy Figure in his Court, that his Character, if drawn at full
• ft
Length
/
#
\
JL^ JLJ A-X JL	JLJk, JL *
Length by a good Historian, would be a national Benefit, by the glorious Pattern it would afford to Succeeding Gentlemen, how to comport themfelves in Places of the greatest Importance, Trust, and Honour, in thofe two very different Seafbns, the Days of Adverfity as well as Prosperity, and how to behave themfelves with Integrity, Prudence, Motleration, and Refolution, in the due Management of Royal Treafures.
You will find, Madam^ that chear-ful Kind of Humour, and that quick Sort of Wit prevail in her Manner of Writing, which publick Fame commends you for, and by which, with an agreeable Violence, you acquire a powerful and a pleafing Command over all the little polish'd Affemblies of both Sexes, that you charm, adorn, and enrich by
your
X X- -
your defirable Conversation. There is not a fingle Epistle of hers, that in-Spires the Paffion of Love, but what at the fame Time very naturally and gracefully instnuates the Love of Virtue, and a great deal of ufeful Knowledge ; and So, while it innocently engages and moves the Heart, nobly rai-fes the Genius, and mends the Mind. Thus Chastity and Complacency may be Said to go hand-in-hand with every Compofition, which has always an Air that is at once virtuous and obliging: All this is So well perfyrmM, and So dexterousty executed, as to make the Goodnefs of each pretty Reader more beautiful, by tempting her to wear an innocent and graceful Smile at the Peru-
lal of the innocent and graceful Turns that are to be met with frequently in her Letters, amidst the furprizing Train
of
of Sudden Joys, and Sudden DiSquiets, Fears, Hopes, Doubts, AlTurances,
Jealoufies, Confidences, Disappointments, Expectations, Pains, PleaSiires, Animofities, Renewals of Friendship, which Love creates, with a Variety of other Viciffitudes, the different Descriptions whereof cannot fail of entertaining. Where, and what Harm is in all this, that should make Loye-VerSes Hand in need of any Apology, to the most: grave referv’d PerSbnages living ? But then the wrongly Gay, who delight in falfe Mirth, may learn too in their Turns, that in order to make Love-VerSes want no fuch Apology, a very Scrupulous and religious Regard muff be had in treating So nice a SutyeCt. What Fire, and yet what Purity of Thought j what a yehement Ardour,
and
\
m.
AV1 xA JOj JLx X jTx X X	•
' * ^ -
and yet what an exact Chastity of well-weigh'dWords and Exprestions; in fine, to lay all at once in two beautiful Words
of Pliny Sy what a SmiBity of Manners must reign throughout all fuch Love-Pieces? filch Pieces, I mean, as are to Ihew the delicate and nicely-temperM, natural Warmth, (that is to fay,) the Life and Vigour, without any one of the irregular Impulfes, without any one Symptom of the intemperate and excef-five Heats, (that is to fay,) the Fever
and the Dileale of Love. Writers in thele Descriptions of the warm Affections, either in their own or other modest Breasts, would do well to have an Eye to the Delcription given by Tacitus (whofe History you have in Englijb) of the fine famous Mount Lib anusy which, he fays, was jhady among great
HeatSy
4
%;
■c
. •	•	A
xy jgi XJ X /X X X Vy x\* AVix
Heatsj and faithful to the Snow, it
bore upon it.
4
How much Clio intended to do fo in thefe Epistles, let two of her own Lines, taken out of them, exprefs.
/
Chaste as Onndd.%^ let my Numbers flow.
But with AJired.% Warmth inSpire the Snow.
And what Ihe fays of your humble
_ _ < ,
Servant Strephones Letters, upon the lame Account, is the best, ‘if (as I h^ve Realbn to fear) not the only Cdmmen-dation they deferye.
t
I read thy Souf tho’ to thy Form unknoW'n, And gueSs its gentle Temper by my own; Thou art compajftonate.^ Angels are.
And hast of friendlefs Innocence a Care.
To
f
xviii DEUICATION.
To Beauteous Chastity 1 See thee bend, -n The Goddefs does into thy Soul deScend, /
And with vidlorious Chaplets crowns myC Friend.
Thy temperate Veins do with her Licence-move,	/
For fhe allows of Poetry and Love, '	^
Which, as Sweet IVaJler lings, is all they\
do above,’
With modest Warmth stie gives them leave te beat.
Nor bids me disapprove the Godlike Heat.
It was, upon thefe fame Accounts,
that that curious Writer and excellent
Divine, Do(stor Sprats late Bishop of Rochefler^ Said, He was not ashamed
to COMMEND jVfr.CowleyMistress.
I am not only not ashamed for my Part,
but
DEDICATION, xix
but proud to fay, that the Book of that
most witty, as well as most modest Poet, was the Delight of my younger Years;
and to rested that, when I was a Boy, I could even only chufe to repeat many pretty PafTagcs, which he, when a Boy, wrote, in fuch a Manner, as to give Pleafure to Perfbns of mature Age and Judgment; though perhaps I might be more excufable not to have mendoned this, having stnce learned fb little from fb great a Master. But you will have Some Favour for a near Relation of your own, for having been fb early an Admirer of Mr. Cowleywho was the Favourite of your great Ancestor, his best Patron, the Earl of Kt. Albans., and wrote many of his most celebrated Pieces, while he lived a darling Do-
mestick in that Seat, which defcended
from
XX U U i c; A T 1 U IN.
from that Earl, his Mecanas., to your Grandfather the Lord Jermyn^ If I have copied but few of the Beauties of Mr. Cowley., I bring you my Mufe Clio, who is a Rival to Mr. Cowley\ much admired OnndUj and cannot, I believe, be thought inferior to her. And whatever Figure a Poet may make in his own Perfon, he is contented if the Mufe, that infpired him, be ap^ plauded.
- • - ■
I MUST take notice to you, Madam., of one Thing, which you will find more at large by perufing the Book, That thefe Letters pafs’el through the Hands of many Friends, and by that
>	9.
Means Copies of them were publickly feen, when the Writers of them had never feen one another, and fb fell into
y
the
DEDICATION, xxi
the Hands of a Gentleman, who published them, and inshrib’d themr^ to a Pershn of Such Worth, as I am proud to be able to call my Friend, Sir
Richard Steeley whofe Commendation
• * %
join’d with that of Several other moft ingenious Perfons, had first, I believe, made them fb much and ib favourably taken notice of: If it had not been for that Accident, they had never appeared
at all y and now they- do appear the fe-
♦
condTime, by the Demand the Publick , has made for them, Strejhon himfelf thought it more proper to recommend them, through yours, to the Favour of the Ladies.
1
MAT)AMA
9
4
xxu DEDICATION.
I
0
MAT^AM,
I have run into a large Preface to a little Book, when I intended to be forming a Dedication of it, and have made it, in a Manner, Time to end, before I can be almost properly faid to have begun my Defign.
Bowing, therefore, as I write, I beg
you to accept this little Prefent, and take it into Favour; and by way of
Thanks for your kind Acceptance of it,
I must only offer this oneWilh before I
take my leave.-If, while you are
amufing yourfelf with this Book, and with Some Reflections it may awake concerning the Power and Triumphs of ; Love and Beauty, you Should happen one Day to approve fome happy fine Gentleman fox a Husband, out of the
Nnm-
12 ts U 1 c; 1 1 C2 IN. XXIU
Sfumbers which your Qualifications nuft have made your juft Admirers; I leed only wilh that he may be as well lefccnded, as you defer ve; as happy in VittuQ and Fortune, as you will make lim in your Tove; that he may be as Deautiful in his Perfon, and as belov’d 3y all his Acquaintance, as my dear Friend your Brother; that he may make fuch an indulgent Husband as your Mother enjoy'd; and if Heaven thus calls you to Marriage, and blefles you with Children, I need only wilh for your confummate Happinefs, that they may Ihew fuch an equal tender, and obliging Duty to their Parents, as you and your Brother have ever ex-crcifed towards yours.
I COULD not poflibly wilh you left, and Invention itfelf cannot polli-
bly
/
xxiv D E D I C A T I O N.
bly help me to stame a Wish that will be more for your Happinefs; and therefore with that I will conclude, taking
Leave, under my poetical Name, to call my Self, Madan>,
Tour MoI Obedient
*
Moji T>evotedj And MoJi Humble Servant^
r
9
STREPHON.
r
\
THE
1
THE
O F
Clio and Strephon".
\ mu ..mu ...... ... ■ n	■■■■ i ■ ■ i ■ iw——...
To Strephon,
who having had a fine Defcription of ClioV Verfon, by a Lady front vohom he firfl received Clio’; Verfes in Commendation of a Book roFtch he had publifijed, fent a Let-t^r) fig^iffi^^S Defire to fee her.
N. B. The two £rli Copies of Verfes are miftaid. and. not to be found. '
BROUD to be prais’d by thy excelling Pen,
With partial Eyes I view my Form again j Yet nothing there to my Advantage find, -v But the good Humour glowing in my f
Mind,	f
Which thy inIpiringVerfe had left behind,
B	'	AH
I
*
ft	.	•
z Clio to Strephon,
All I can boaft, is by thy Hand bellow’d j
And I return it back from whence it flow’d.
From Flatt’ry fb, fo artfully exprels’d.
Who can-defend a vain Poetick Bread?
In fofteft Sounds ’tis to the Heart apply’d:
Ah! vyho can be infenfible of Pride ?	- ]
If thy great Sire would crown my Ibft Defign,
I’d raife thy Vanity, as thou do’fl mine.
To rile in Verfe my Thought has vainly try’d,
Apollo’s thine; and partial to thy Side,
No Beam upon roy barren Fancy fliines j They’re all contra<£led to thy dronger Lines.
Thy Fame and Merit, equally fecure
Would bear —— but how fhould I the Ted eri^
dure?
All o’er Confulion I thy Eyes fhould meet.
And blu(l)ing, from the nice Survey retreat.
Far from the Picture thy bright Pencil wrought I fliould, by thee, as by my felf, be thought: j I fliould a Coward grow, and fink with Fear,
Tho’ Diflance gives me Some Aflurance here:
But Heav’n forbid that you fliould ever fee That Outfide, which the vulgar World calls Me.
Trud me, bright Youth, no Danger would appear.
Or to your Eyes, or your well-judging Ear.
Nature has been ungentle to my Face,
: With artlefs.Fingers fliadow’d ev’ry Grace:
ife Deep
V
*-'• -V.
Clio to Strelhon. ^
■ Deep has (he left her cruel Marks behind,
(s if fhe meant to fear my very Mind.
Ay Skin flie fullied with a fillow Hue, rhat Icarce my Soul is feen to fparkle thro’ :
(little Voice my kinder Stars have lent,
•y which they mean to hufh my Difeontent j life could I fearce my Imperfeftions bear, r’unpleafing Perfbn, and my Pealant Air. ilor can I at the odious Glafs attend,-n hopes thefe haplefs Features to befriend,: larelefs and dull, IVe fcarce a Wifh to pleafe}
'ond of this Solitude, and humble Eafe. lere I forget my own unlovely Form j ..augh at the World, too low to feel the Storm^
Vhich does the potent Buftlers oft invade, tnd (hakes the taller Poplars of the Shade, lappy and Rich, if my mean Song can raife rhy Plealiire, or excite thy tuneful Lays.
Vhate’er thy Perlon be, I (hall o’er pafs j	,
Vho would throw Diamonds by, to look on Glafs?
)r who would mind the Stars imperfe£t Light,
Vhen the great God of Day attracts the Sight?
CLIO.
% -
Bz	AN
0
• The Lady had the Small fopt j but a very little^
f
\
A N
r
ET^	*T O IHM "]r	'T^
X	A X	xj	Jli
«
F ROM
Stre p HON to Cli o,
If^herein he fends his Soul before to prepare her., and tell her the indifferent Figure of his whole ^erfon^ that fhe might not he furpnzfd when he came to fee her.
BH E N Clio’s laft he firft began to read f\
Thus Ijghing to himfelf, her StrephonC
Sighing, as if that Sigh foretold him dead.
Well then thou pant’d (my Soul!) thou would’ft depart, From Strephon’s Bread, and fly to Clio’s Heart!
Yet learn (my Soul) and, oh! betimes beware,	"y
Too well thou know’d the Danger of the Snare, i r J^ow weak thy felf, how powerful the Fair,	^
If
V
r
^TKETnON b(J	^
If go thou wilt, in this laft Breath be gone,’
But drive, be fiire, drive hard, or thou’rt undonei
When Clio’s Lines afrefli thy Strephon read,
Thus his Soul anSw’ring to thy Strephon Said,	>
To Strephon then half languiflaing, half dead.	3
Yes, tho’ fhe’s born by Nature to fubdue,
By Heavens, ’tis glorious Fate. - ' and I’ll purfue; |r
Conquer Ihe can but fare fhe can’t undo:
But if fhe can —— and Ta>ilt —— I’ll be her Prrtce ;
For if my Niggard Stars won’t let me Rife,	■ ^
Oh! let meDiZby Clio’s	Eyes.	3
Just at thefe Words he felt his Strength decay,
And, finking in a Trance, he drove to fay,	C
Oh! bear thefe Words, my Soul, then fleet awayi 3 ' Tell her, in this, her Strephon did enrol, j With tend’red Wifhes, his departing Soul.
Oh! beg her take thee to an Angel’s Red,
And fold thee kindly in her balmy Bread.
Tell her, their Spirit to her Soul fliall cleave,’
^ /■
When on her Bread the panting Verfes heave:
Then if thy Body ling’ring comes behind,
To feek its Treafure, and its Soul to findj Oh! tell her by what am’rous Marks ’tis known,'
Led its thin Frame be fliiver’d by her Frown:
B j	TeS
%
t
• *
\
I
€ bTREPHoN to Clio:
Tell her, that as in fbme Poetict Scene Ghofis are defcrib’d to skim along the Green*}
So, if (he e’er defcries on Benriid Plain,
A tall and thin, a pale dejedled Man,
Awkward in Port, and overwhelm’d with Spleen,
In whom the Image of Defpair is (een ;
Tell her, with Anger not to arm her Eye,
^ut pleading Mercy ——— whifper ——~ That is I.
Say, that thus far I of that Figure boaft.
That Clio got the Soul, and made the GhoJI.
If with her Smile flie will that Lofs repair, i’ll mend and alter that dejedfed Air,
Bid her widi Tendernefs the Vifiort u(e.
And be my Midrefs, as Are is my Mufe.
Say, you ray foft Ambaflador was fent.
To beg her Bofom for my eafy Tent}
That, like a trembling Bird by Parents lod, '
Harm’d by ungentle Hands or nipping Froft}	f /
Pining I mud, and melancholy ftray.
Till love, and (he, revive and make me gay.
I’ll do it all, the Soul departing stid,
'And bid the Body fall entirely dead.
\
St RE PH ON.
%
V	CLIO^S
'BY
Way of D R E A M,
IN
Her Fine Garden
ON THE
Plain of St. D'e n n i s.
D ay, by what mighty Pow’rs harmonious
Our SpiritsTympathize and correfpond?
As thy foft Soul departed from thy Bread, Mine, with unufual Tendernels opprefs’d. Repos’d within a melancholy Shade,
Where Nature has my little Study made:
Clole are the Boughs to one another join’d.
That only Clio can an Entrance find.
I
B 4.	Sad
\
6 C.LIO to bTRETHON.
Sad Philomela had begun her Song;
And Love and Mufick warbl’d on her Tongue Tho’ of her Lover (he fo fweetly plains,
To thine, oh! how inferior arc her Strains!
Charm’d by tbyVerfe, and by her Songs to relf,’
My yielding Eyes the God of Sleep confefs’d:
But tho’ his leaden Rod triumphant reign’d.
My grateful Hand, with Care, thy Lines contain’d. Methought I heard a tuneful Voice behind,	V
Oh! where fliall I the gentle Clio find?	C
Guide me. Sweet Boy, for thou haft made me v blind.	•“
Soft was the Sound, as Winds that brufh the Grafs,
And fighing o’er the falling Bloflbms pafs;
Or as poor Ecchds Voice, when, out of Breath,
Her panting Lungs have figh’d themfelves to Death.
The gloomy Arbour Suddenly grew bright,	A
And I beheld a lovely Youth in white,	C
Supported by two Gods, both Strangers to my C
Sight.	^
They both ■were crowdd, methoughts, but different Vizy The one with Lovers Tears, and one with Bays:
But as I gaz’d, an Arrow ftraight appear’d.
My Heart beat faft, and for its Safety fear’d.
Oft had I Seen the Boy on Canvas glow.
But Scarce e’er felt the Power of his Bow.
Apollo led thee trembling to my Feet;
I roSe methought, thy lovely Form to meet;
And
And as my Eyes more curioufly lurvey’d,	-y
I law your Robe of deathlefs Numbers made,	C
Which, as you graceful mov’d, around you play’d.
Your languid Eyes were to the Earth declin’d j Yet, as they downward bent, the Mufcs (hin’d.’
The am’rous Myrtle bloom’d upon thy Bread:,
And thus thy tuneful Soul it lelf exprels’d.
A TREMBLING Bird, that has its Parents lod,’
Wounded by cruel Hands and nipping Froftj Pining, alas! I melancholy dray,
Till Love and Clio fraile, and make me gay.
From Strephon’s Bolbm I this Night am fled} ^ Aloud I cry’d. Is then my Poet dead ?	^
My Arms I folded, and declin’d my Head.	'	^
Adieu fweet Poetry ! Expire my Lays,
Or only live to figh and fing his Praile.
A finer Voice no Youth couid ever boad.
He charm'd the World, but ClIo’s Heart the mod*
Oh! that ray Fate would one Requed allow j I’ve heard of Tranfmigration, grant one now:
Permit his Soul to dwell in Clio’s Bread,
Let hers depart, and fly away to Red}
For it is weary of this wretched Clay,
Wants higher Joys, and longs to wing away.’
Sure, there are better Worlds,* than this, above,
¥
Where there is Innocence and faithful Love;	;
B y	Sm^ ;
*
\
Small Diffhence ’tween our Bofoms would be known; For Clio’s Paffions all are like his own.
t
He4?e Sorrow, fuch as Verfe can hardly paint.
Withheld my Voice, and made my Spirits faint.
I wak’d, and found my lovely Vifion fled,
And figh’d, as I forfook my grafly Bed,	>
Oh! live my Strephon, ’till I wi(h thee dead-	^
Clio,
4
-
. p	_ Going
m •
\
\ ,
s*
Going with
An Intent to See C LI O,
But not bold enough
To Enquire for Her:
)
OR, THE
COMBAT
4
BETWEEN
\
HOPE and FEAR:
LESS me! how Brange the Hearts of Men
This Moment bold, and yet the ncyiS
With whatvaft Joys, what Ecllahes, infpir’d,
Did I propofe to fee whom I admiPd?
Big with w'w Hopes I march'd fecurely on.
And thought I’d Com age to be fo undone.
But
/
12 bTR,EPHON CXIO.
But when I reach’d the Confines of the Place,	~p
To which, tho’ graceful, thou do’ft add new Grace, r My beating Heart began to fink apace:
How did it pant with Joy, and wifh ’twas near.
And yet, when ’twas fo, palpitate with Fear?
Now,, by thy Charms allur’d, I feek the Track,
Arm’d v^ith frefh Hopes; frefh Fears affright nae back. Thy av/ful Beauties, in my .Mind, I view,
And Hopes and Fears alternately fiibdue,
’Twas in that doubtful Hour of Love-debate,
When now I courted, and then fhun’d my Fate;
’Twas then (my Conqu’ror!) that before my Sight My Thoughts prefented thee divinely bright:
’ Twas then, that all thy mighty (elf appear’d.
Like Venus lov’d, but like Minerva fear’d.
All the three Graces triumph’d in thy Face,
And in thine Eyes did Light’ning Glories blaze;
Next on my lelf I call a low Regard,
And ask’d my Bofom how it flood prepar’d?
V/hat Merits it could boaft, that humble I
Should rifque the Vengeance of that pow’rful Eye?
r
It told me, ’twas prophane to wifh the Joy,
And Light’nings, what they gilded, might deftroy.
My Fears were to a Giant’s Stature grown,
And not a V/ifn I dat’d to call my own i
In
*
\
V
onCJi-rnuiv	i <
In Agonies confus’d, my Heart was tofs’d,
And all my Hopes were in a Pannick loll.
Thus, llrange myfterious Cowardice in LoveS I lofe the Minutes, which I Ihould improve.
In Love to Death with her I never law j I run to fee — and, e’er I lee, withdraw.'
S 0 the bold Boy, untrain’d to Martial Art,
Proud of th^ youthful Blood that warms his Heart?
With Ibme great Hero’s roritten Worth infpir’d.
By borrow’d more, than real Courage, fir’d.
Flies to a Siege, and thirfty for Renown, '
With his own Hand he takes, in Thought, the Town ? But when the Light’nings blaze, and Thunders roar, Wilhes the Safety, he defpis’d before.
Yet, as the Youth once frighten’d, with Delight May read again, and, fir’d again, may fight,
’Till his Sword, tracing thole recorded Deeds, Tranlcribes, on yielding Walls, the Worth he reads:
So vyill I read thole pow’rful Lovers Arts,
Who, their own vent’ring, won fair Ladies Hearts;
Mean while, remember ho'w my Soul is loH,
And animate withVerfe thy hover's Ghoji.
Thou know’ll, thou faid’ll my Form thou wou’dil o’er-
pa,fs.
And love the Soul amidft its homely Cafe.
Once
\
%
I
/
M	S
I
Once more, ye Heav’ns, infpire her fo to (iagi	i
And bring the News, my Angel, on thy Wing,’
STRErnoN;
P. S. Though I dare not come my lelf, I have ven* tur’d to do a Thing almoft as boldj and that is, to fend you two little Fragments of Tad.o, which I have tranfla-ted into the Englijh. I believe you have read Fairfax, and then you will wonder, perhaps, that I, who could write no better, attempted them after fo great a Man,
The two Fragments, that accompanied this Let-* ter, having been recover’d by the Editor, are now inferted as follows, in their proper Place, in this new Edition.
^
>
*
r*
TAsso’s
\
,	^	I
T A S S O ’ s Jerusalem.'
BOOK the Second,
^—>—i*—*»«^ ■ I till.. II I twmimrnnn —i———i——^—■^—W———iM^ii—l^i^i——^
*■■"■' ————m—iP.~ ■ ■ ■! ■! ■ III 1^^—»tw^——i—^———^^W——
^ ’
The Argument.
The ChylI^idns hefiege the Tow ft • Ifmeno, an Aipofiate from Chr\L tian'ity^ and. a Maghcian-i advifes the Infidel King to feize from the Chrifiians, that reeve Inhabitants in his Town-, an Image of our Lady y and /;e, hy laying that under Inchantment^ pretended to fruftrate all the Vefigns of the Befiegers* The King feizes the Imagey places it under firong Guards in a .Mof^ue* The I?7id.ge is furpriz^d from the Guards. The Ki?ig refolves upon a general Majfstcree of all Chrifiians in the Town^ unlefs the Offender be diff Covered. Sophronia, a young Ckrifiian Lady of Sodality^ takes the Cri?ne upon herfelf to fave fo many from fuffering. Olindo in Love with Sophronia, endeavours to clear her Injtocence^ and tifes Arguments to prove the Guilt wholly his own. The King con* demns them both to be tied Back to Backto a Stake^ and burnt to Deaths Clorinda, an Heroic Trincefs among the Infidels^ com* ing to offer her Affiance in the Wars to the King^ mov d with this Spsliacle of the condemn d Lovers:, and being acIiUainted with the Keafon^ Jufpended the Lxecutionj and then procured their Var-don of the King.
SI H I L E thus the Tyrant, in his raging ^
I SluicM Christian Blood, and future Battles^
His barbarous Prefence old Ifmeno fought-
If mem
4
Ifmeno yawning Tombs of Marble made
Yield up, in living Forms, their buried Dead.	i
Ifmeno could, by Force of Magick, make
I
Hell’s Monarch, in his own dread Regions lhake;
Call Fiends, his Envoys, from their drear Abode,
-And hold or loofe them, at his powerful Nod.
A Chriftian once, now breaking Chriftian Vows^ lio Uahome he, with impious Homage, bowsj Yet midft his Charms, O vile Remains of Faith-!
Invokes both God and Satan in a Breath.
Forth from dark Caves, where, far from vulgar Eyes,
He skulk’d to learn his Art’s black Myfteries j To Court he came, to Court black Arts did bring.
And grew Chief Council to the Tyrant King.
/
And thus he fpoke •, My Lord, you fee, the Foe,
Flufh'd with the Old, does for New Conquefts glow.
Our Trembling Town the near Approaches dreads,
Thinks the black Tempeft’s burfting o'er our Heads.
’Tis oiTrs, iny Liege, to adf a manly Part,
Fortune (lands, always, by the brave of Heart:
And well for uS propitious Fates ordain.
That you fhould lead the Men, o’er whom you reignj You, that do all Things, which a princely Mind Could for the SubjeCl’s Safety have deflgd’d.
Thus, in his Poll, if ev’ry Man behaves,	o
If thus each Subject a<Sls, the Chriftian Slaves	^
Will gain but Ground enough tO' make them Graves. J
>
For
\
•	r
jf jlx O O \A b J Ci LiidlClll# ‘	/
For mcj my Lord, I come to beg a Share Of all your Fortunes in the Courle of War:
If ahrthat Ages beft Advice can do	^
Pan ferve you, nay, join Magick Science too,	^
ril ranlack both, and offer all to you.	^
lil prefs the banifh’d Angels to your Aid,
They fhall your Counfels, they your Armies lead, C And bear a Part in each heroick Deed.	3
But firft it fits, that I unfold the Scene,
And tell you, whence th’Inchantment fhall begini Hid from our Eyes, within a Chriftian Fane Low in a Vault, an Altar long has lain.
Where, with great Pomp Priefls (hew th’unletter’d Crowd, The figur’d Mother of their buried God:.
She’s call’d their Virgin, and before her Face Gold Lamps wi''h Oil feed a bright pageant Blaze':
Thefe hang all round her, in long Order wrought. Which cred’lous Fools with wild Devotion brought,'
This your own Royal Hands muft move away.
And to the facred Molque the Prize convey:
There I’ll foon bind it down with wondrous Churmsi And lay fuch Spells upon the Chriftian Arms,
Our Walls, while that fhall in my Hands remain, Attempt they may, but ft'.all attempt in vain.
Full of this Speech, and big with his Advice, Th’impetuous Monarch to the Temple fiiesi In vain the Priefts a holy Refeue try’d.
He curs’d their Pray’rs and Tears, their God defy’d:
Wickedly
i O X IX O OO	i
Wickedly re&Iute he Seiz’d his Prey,
And bore it, with ignoble Pomp, away!
In his vile Chapel, where falfe Worfliip cries	^
Too oft for Vengeance from th’aifronted Skies,	r |
With Sacrilegious Joy, he laid the Sacred Prize.	- ■
Straight his Magician fought th’unhallow’d Place,
And mutter’d Blafphemies around its Face.
' i -	-	^	—
When the returning Dawn, with Streaming Light, Shot through the chequer'd Air, and (freak’d it white. The Guards all wak’d, but wak’d with vaft Surprize,
The Image gone, they Scarce believe their Eyes^
They feek it long, but long they (eek in vain,
Then, in a Body, to their King complain. .
The King dark mad, of ev’ry Senfe bereft.
Stamp’d, rav’d, and to the Chrirnans fwore the Theft j And fUre that pious Robbery was done For Mother Church, by Some religious Son j Or elfe high Heaven itfelf, that muft difdain To fee its Queen, in Effigy, remain So long impriibn’d in fb vile a Place,
Stoop’d to its Aid with more immediate Grace,
But whether Heav’n or Earth demands the Claim,
Reds undetermin’d by the Voice of Famej Yet, of the two, ’tis bed to judge it dill Due, more to heav’nly, than human Skill,
Mean-
^
/
V
\
•L XX O O v-/ b J UXctlCill#	X ^
Meanwhile, their Rounds the bufy Heralds march’d,
All Houles rifled, and.all Churches fearch’d:
All Men were try’d to bring the Crime to Light, rhat Racks could terrify, or Gold invite. fmeno too his magick Pow’rs employ’d.
But fruiclefs all his Dreams, and unenjoy’d:
?or Heav’n fif done or not by heav’nly Arms)
Clouded his Viflons, and fupprefs’d his Charms.
When the dire Tyrant found that nought avail’d,
That nor his Threats, nor his Rewards prevail’d j
Back on the Chriftians all his Rage return’d.
And his fierce Heart with Flames of Fury burn’d:
All Thoughts of Mercy in his Mind Ilibfide,
A.nd Vengeance riles with a fvvelling Tide;
rill in thele Words, while red his Eve-Balls roil,
•/
Forth rufh’d Wrath’s Torrent, from his flormy Soul, . Since they have rout’d my Rage to this De- V
gree,	C
I’ll make their unknown Robber know, faid he, - C I’ll reach him, in a general Maflacree.	r
Yes, rather than that Wretch my Wrath fhall fly,
Perifh the Juft, and let the guildefs die.
Juft! —— who are juft ? —— That Word’s unjuftly us’d. To favour them, I have myfelf abus’d.
There lives not that one Man, among the whole.
But would abjure my Title from his Soul,
.... ^
Theh>
20 i AOO C2 s jeruiaiem.
}
Then, grant Ibme few of fuch vile Mifcreants free i From the new Guilt of this Enormity;
Since former Crimes make good their prefent Doom^
I’ll pay that mdent Grudge, I owe them. Home.
Up, Up, for Honour’s fake, my Friends, your Lord T Speaks the Command, your Sovereign gives the Word} V Dilpatch, and put them all to Fire and Sword.
*	' li e <	<	.	'
> •
Thus to the giddy Populace he faidj And in a Moment Fame the Tidings Ipread:
The fatal Tidings reach’d the Chriftians Ears,
The fatal Tidings each aftonifh’d hears j Half Thunder-ftruck to find their Fate fo nigh.
Merely for Fear of Death, they almoft die. ,
Quite of all Prefence of-their Minds depriv’d.
They no Defence, they no Efcape contriv’d }
Fram’d no Excuies, none they thought would pals.
Nor were they bold enough to beg for Grace. . Left to Defpair, when all juft Hopes were gone, ' Safety they found, where they could hope for none.
i
A Maiden, ’mongft their Number, chanc’d to be.
Juft in the Pride of her Virginity:
Her noble Mind a royal Greatnefs wears.
And early Wifdom meets her ripen’d Years j ' 0 Tho’ wond’rous wife, yet is fhe fair as wile.
But ftill that Beauty Seems not much to^pfize.
Or
. •>
t	^
#
/
<
T A S S O ’ s Jeriifaleiij. 21
Or prizes Beauty only, Vaule his Sent
To be its Sifter Virtues Ornament.	'
This Jewel long within a Cottage lay
Obicure, and cover’d from the Face of Dayi
WfaoSe Luftre clouded, as it were, in Night,
Doubled its Value, when it came to Light,
Free from Court Airs to Solitude Ihe Hies,
From flattVing Whifpers and deluding EyesI Yet this fair Guardian of Ib fweet a Face,
Can’t keep fo dole, but one may fnatch a Gaze;
And that, once gain’d, muft furely breed Defire,
Where once to fee is always to admire.
You, Cufid, reftlefs that fhe lay conceal’d,'
To greedy Youth her tempting Charms reveal’d \
You, that can feign, this Minute, to be blind.
And can, the next, more Eyes than Argus find;
You did, thro’ thoufand Guards, with ftolen Flight,' ~ Ride, on the Ray-lhot Arrows of his Sight,	C
To the chafte Objed, and diredl: them right.	S
O LIN DO his, Sophronia was her Name,’ '
Both in one Town were bred, their Faith the Same»
Tho’ beauteous (he, he could witst Beauty vie.
And reach her modeft Charms with Modefty:
Much lov’d hcjj little hop’d, no .Suit he mov’d.
He knew not how, or durft not (ay he lov’d j And, as for her, mpft certain’tis, that (he His I.ove, or could notjr or (he would not (ee:
•»
f
t
\
V
» ,
zi Tasso’s Jeriifalenn
Thus all his (laving Pains, and anxious Care,
Or were unleen, or worle, unpitied were.
Meanwhile the dreadful News Ilie up^derftood Of the near Deluge of the Chriftian Bipod.
Her Soul of all, that’s * great and gen’rous, made. Summon’d its helpful Virtues to their Aid.
To manly Deeds this Maiden’s Thoughts h(pire.
But Virgin-Blufhes check the bold Defire}
Alternate Virtues in her Mind contend,
Modefiy (huns, what Courage would commend;
This gain’d the Point; or, rather, both agreed Themfelves, by joimng Forces, to exceed.
As while more brave, more bafhful Ihe became,
So Courage kindled with the blufhing Flame.
Abroad, amidft the gathering Mob (he goes.
Nor hides her Face, nor does her Face expofe i She went referv’dly, but gcnteely well Beneath the decent Umbrage of a V eil;
’Tvvas hard to (ay, if Artifice or Chance Gave her a pretty Air of Negligence:
But (ureall Nature, Love, and Heav’n conipir’d,;
To fit her out for being moft admir’d j And join’d their Strength together to impart Some namelefs Pow’r beyond the Reach of Arti The lofty Dame ador’d by all that view’d,
Unheedful pafs’d the gazing Multitude,
Till
N
\
/*
...
TASSO’s Jerufklem. zy
rill to the Prefetice of the King (he came, iVhofe Eyes, all red with Anger, feem’d to flame.
Fearlefs fhe fac’d him clofe, her Ground maintain’d,
\nd a whole Storm of gloomy Frowns fuftain’d,
I COME, Said fhe, my Lord (fb pray fulpend \ while your Anger, and my Words attend,^
[ come to bring a welcome Sacrifice, rh’Offender’s Head to pay th’Offence’s Price,
The King half-Smitten does the Fair behold Modefily brave and reverently bold: ifis Looks chang’d ftrangely j lo! difperfing oow^ rhe low’ring Clouds quit his unbending Brow, i^ury itfelf grew calm, and for a while His fallen Majefty vouchsaf’d to fmile:
Her radiant Eyes alone with Sovereign Sway Could gild his gloomy Looks, and paint them gayl She, that, alone, Such Conquefts could imj>rove,
Difdains his Anger, and avoids his Love.
A Smile had don’t, but Smiles Ihe laid apart,
No backward Beauty wins a backward Hearf;	;
He feem’d to with by Pity to be prefs’d,
While Joys unufual melt his hardy Brcaft,
t
Tell on (faid he) fo I’ll reprieve from Death The fond Aflbciates of thine idle Faith.
Thew
»
%
24 T A S S O ’ s Jerufalem:
/
/
Then flie ...... The Criminal before you flandsi
'Mine ms the Theft, and thefe the guilty Hands;
Me, me you want; now Set your Heart at reft.
And empty all its Paffions on my Breaft.
Thus bravely lavifh of her noble Bipod,
Her Head Ibe forfeits for the publick Good:
O fair-fac’d Fidion! where’s a Truth fo clear,’
That equal Judges would to thee prefer?
The Tyrant paus’d; nor, as he wont to do.
Into warm Passion’s Bidden Sallies ssew>
But calmly laid, —— I pray you. Maid, relate,’
.Who was your Counfel and Confederate?
Said fhe. No Partners in my Trophies ssiine.
I’d the good Pride to make them wholly mine, Glorioussy conicious to myfelf alone.
My own the Counfel, and the Deed my own*
To juft‘Revenge then, fternly he replies.
Thou, only thou, fhalt fall a Sacrihee,
’Tis juft, indeed, faid ftie, ’tis meet that T,
Who ssngly gain’d the Glory, Singly die.
r
s
SWELLINS
I
«
\
* •
TA S S O s jerulalem. 2 5
Swelling he ask’d her, with oVr-awing Pride,
Where Ihe the Image had prefum’d to hide?	C
I	HID it not, the fearlels Maid replj’d,	‘
I offer’d up in Flames the facred Pledge,
And fet it free from future Sacriledge :
Look for the Thief, but let the Theft alone j Here am I ftill, —— but that’s for ever gone: —
Know too I’m wrong’d in that opprobrious Name,
That was no Theft, nor I a Robber am j Juftly I refcued a much injur’d Prey,
’Twa^you unjuftly ravifh’d it away.
Stung to the Soul, with what h’impatient heard.
His Teeth he gnafh’d, and all a Fiend appear’d:
He gives a Loole to his deftru£tive Rage,
And certain Death his horrid Looks prelage.
Her noble Mind, chafte Heart, and charming Face,
Raile no remaining Glimpfe of Hopes for Grace.
Love comes too late to interpofe his Shield,
When Savage Nature grows too fierce to yield.
She is led Captive, and, all wild with Wrath, -The Tyrant doom’d her to be burnt to Death.
Officious Ruffians round the Vidtim prefs’d,
Prophan’d her Veil, and tore her facred Veft.
Round her fbft Arms, while hard rough Cords they ty’d. Her Bread: juft heav’d, but ne’er a Sigh fupply’d:
C	Sileat
V
••	4
2 6 T A S S O s Jeruialem.
Silent flie flood amidfl the clamorous Crew,
But ruddy Roles from her Cheeks withdrew :
Yet, when they vanifli’d, new appear’d to Sight,
Not fickly pale, but raviflringly white.
The Spreading News drew gath’ring Crowds to Tee, Spediators of the moving Tragedy :
Among the refl did young OUndo come.
None knew the Maid, all knew, too well, her Doom. Some iecret Dreads this Youth’s fond Bofom move.
He knows not why, yet fears it is his Love.
This thought-born Grief, e’er known^ a real Pain Grows in his Fancy, and diflradls his Brain.
But when he fetter’d law the beauteous Dame,'
Guiltiefs efleem’d, yet Sentenc’d to the Flamej Saw all the bufy Miniflers of Fate,
'With greedy Cruelty, impatient wait;
Headlong he flew, and fhould’ring thro’ the Crowd,
To the icing’s Prelence, thus he cry’d aloud.’"-.-..
Not flie, not She is guilty of the Fa£t,
Vainly flieboaflsof what (he did not adlj The Ample Maid is by herfelf traduc’d.
Prompted by Pride, through Folly felf-accus’d;
.A Work So great. So full of Danger too.
She knew not how, (he durfl not, could not do.
. <
,;How flrould (lie all the prying Watch deceive?
,.Aad by V/hat Art thepond’rous Image heave?
Euti
' / J	*	.
TA S S O ’ s Jerufalem. 2 7
■ * 1
But, if fhe did it, let her name the Way,
^Twas I, my Lord, I bore the Prize away.
In Pain for her he lov’d, he courted Pain,’	">
(Pity who lov’d fo much, fliould love in vain)	^
And thus the, fatal Credit ftrovc to gain.	3
Up your high Molque, juft where the. Lamp of Day, Thro’ Chryftals perforates its lucid Way.
With wond’rous Pains I climb’d the fteep Afcent,
And through a Breach almoft impervious went.
The Honour and the Death is due to me.
She (han’t ufiirp the glorious Penalty.
Mine are thofe Chains, they rattled as I pa ft.
And leem’d to bid me come with eager Haftej For me the Fire ftays, juftly flow, awhile.
And here I claim it as my Fun’ral Pile.
%
SOP HRO NIA rais’d her Head, with humble Grace,’ Bent down till then, and fhew’d her blooming Face:
Her Face appear’d like op’ning Paradife,
And mild Compaflion languifn’d in her Eyes,
Which turning meekly to the Youth, the Maid,
With all the Sandity of Manners, faid.
V
Hapless young Man! why are you raMy ccme
V
To draw down on you this untimely Doom ?
C 2	Think
/
28 T A S S O ’ s Jeriifalem.
Think you that I’m unable, without you.
To bear the worft the Rage of Men can do ?
Know I’ve a Heart, that’s brave enough to die 'Without the poor Relief of Company.
These were her Wor3s; but, fix’d beyond Controul, Remain’d the fatal Purpole of his Soul,
G glorious Pair! O mournful, pleafing Sight!
Where Love and Virtue amicably fight,
Where'Death’s the Laurel, that the Vidtor wears.
And Safety’s all the 111, the vanquiflr’d fears.
While each contends to merit all the Blame,
The gen’rous Copflidl rais’d the Tyrant’s Flame.
Then fcornful laid the King, with fheering Spight, p In whofe mifconftruing, and difiioneft Sight,	f
They, with his Torments, feem’d his Pow’r tossight; ^ You both fhall triumph, both the Laurel gain,
Pity, who drive fo well, Ihould drive in vain.
His ready Slaves watch his imperious Nod,
And the .poor Youth with heavy Fetters load.
And now the loving Captives, Back to Back I Spitefully turn’d, are faden’d to the Stake.
Now to a Pile the builded Faggots grow.
Broad the Blaze crackles, add the Bellows blow.
Burding in Tears, and lamentably lad,
.The Youth complaining, thus befpeaks the Maid.
%
And
j
'V
/
TA s' S O' s Jerusalem. 2 9
'And are thefe then the Bonds, by which thou’rt ty’d, To my defiring Arms a lovely Bride?
Little I thought, that fuch would be the Fire,
Which llrould with equal Warmth our Hearts inQ>ire:
Far other Flames than thefe 1 hop’d to prove,
But fare there’s no fuch Cheat as flatt’ring Love.
With filken Ties he my fond Heart cnlhai’d;
But my crofs Fortune Iron Chains prepar’d.
Too long thefe Arms thy ablent Form repin’d.
And, now they meet, alas! in Death they’re join’d.
Me though my niggard Stars ne’er kindly led,
A joyful Confort to your happy Bed;
’Twas kindly done of them to let me be.
At leaft a Sharer-in your Deftiny.
Your cruel Lot I cannot help but mdurrii Not fo my own, lince near your Side I burn.
But, oh! how throughly happy were my Doom!
By Heav’ns I’d blels the pleafing Martyrdom,
If we were fiiffer’d Bread and Bread to join.
I’d breath my Soul from my own Lips to thine;
Then fucking, thy lad hoarded Breath improve.
That Fate might take the Leavings of our Love.
This faid, in Bitternefs of Soul he fighs.
Whom Sweetly counlelling, flie thus replies.
C 3	Quite
/ >
3© TASSO s JeriUalern.
Quite other Thoughts, and better Tears, my Friend, Our Cafe demands, and for a nobler End.
Think of your Sins, call all your Faults to Mind,
Think v/hat Rewards converted Hearts will find.
Where Pleafure fills the infinite Abode,
And where the Promifer himfcif is God.
Bear in his Name thefe Pains j—■— they^ll Joys become, Then wing thy Way to thine eternal Home:
The Sky how clear, behold, the Sun how bright I See how they comfort! Look how they invite!
The Pagan Mob, compaffionately bent,
V7ith their loud Cries the circ’Iing ^Ether rent.
The fobbing Chriftians half afraid to moan,
Choak’d their fwell’d Hearts to ftifle in each Groans From mingled Cries a ftrange odd Hearing came,
Which pain’d the Ear with Sounds that want a Name; Forc’d was the King himfelf to bear a Part;
It pierc’d his Ears, and reach’d his harden’d Heart:
He felt Compaffion pouring in apace.
But had a flrunge Remorfe to yield to Grace}
Chid his own Softnefs, yet he feadd to Jtay,
Turn’d his a If-vanquifli’d Eyes, and ftalk’d away.'
Yet while one Grief fuch various People prov’d.
Thou floodft, Sophronitt, ’niidft the Flames unmov’d:
Thou
* * % I
/
TASSO’s Jerufalem. 3
Thou’midfl the gen’ral Groans, didft Silence keep,
Wept for by all, not once was leen to weep.
While thus the circ’ling Danger nearer grew.
One, like a Warrior drefs’d, appear’d in View:
Awful in Port, and in Demeanor high.
Full of fuch Grace, as fpoke Nobility j Whole foreign Habit, and whofe Arms proclaim Their Owner far from diftant Nations came.
A Tygrefs grac’d the Helm, the famous Creft,
Each aw’d Beholder’s gazing Eye pofleft :
In former Wars Clorinda wore the Sign,
All guefs’d ’twas Ihe; nor did they wrong divine.
Early fhe learn’d, a Stripling, to defpile The Modes and gayer Arts, which Women prize: Arachne’s Looms and Needles fire difdain’d,
Nor let the DiRaff foil her haughty Hand.
Free from the lilken -Indolence of Drefs,
And from the wanton Clofet’s foft Recess,
She took a Pride, unufual, to maintain Her Honour fpotlefs in the open Plain:
When yet a Child, fhe’d with her Infant Hand Guide foaming Bits, and fiery Steeds command;
Broad Faulchions brandifh, and flrong Spears fhe’d weild. And taught her Limbs to bear the hardy Field:
CroSs Mountains high, thro’ deep thick woody Ways She’d urge fhagg’d Lions, and provoke the Chace.
I
C 4	Curious
32 TASSO’s Jertifalera,
Curious to fee, and to enquire what Fault To fuch a fatal End the. Captives brought.
She urg’d her neighing Steed'j ador’d fhe rode Thro’ op’ning Lanes, made by the yielding Crowd; And thus, arriv’d, addrefs’d, with awful State,
The chief commanding Officer of Fate.
Say who thele Captives, fpeak the Reafons, why They’re doom’d to this unhappy Deftiny ?
Brief was his Anfwer, but compleatly good}
He Said nb more than jud the Thing he fliould.
She heard it with agreeable Surprife,
And both appear’d not guilty in her Eyes;
She ftraight refolv’d t’avert th’impending Blow,
If Piay’rs or Tears, or Force of Arms would do;
Then to the Provofts of grim Death Ihe faid.
In Words, that fhew’d her born to be obey’d.
Dare not one Man, not one among you all,
Do the dread Duties of his bloody Call,
Till me your Monarch hears, hears what I fiy?
I’ll pafs my Word, he pardons the Delay,
Struck, by her god-like Prefence, deep with Awe,’ They’re all obedient, and confus’d withdraw.
Sh£
She to the Soldan did, with Speed, refort.
And chanc’d to meet him on her Way to Court.
I AM ClorindUy Said the Martial Fair,
That Name perhaps has reach’d your Royal Ear.
My Lord, T come, with Joy to guard in Fight,
Your Subje£ts Safety, and your Regal Right:
Ready, as you fhall give the ready Word,
I’ll fmooth the Paths of Danger with my Sword.
Name, or fome great or humble Enterprize,
That I don’t dread, nor (hall I this defpife j But a£l, as your high Pleafure (hall ordain.
Within the Walls, or in the open Plain.
Then thus the Kingi Where does that diftant Land,-Tho’ ne’er (b far remote from Ajia^ (land?
Where does that Region, (o divided lie
From the bright Orb, that circles round the Sky,
But knows the trav’ling Honours of thy Name,
And (bunds (O glorious Virgin) with thy Fame?
Since join’d with mine thy pow’rful Sword appears,
I take new Courage, and difmifs all-Fears:
Were, now, whole Armies, on their March for me, Lefs fhould I hope in them, than now in thee.
Now, now, methinks, each precious Moment’s loft,
ISuUoigne, too long, detains his lagging Hoft.
/
C y	F—r— But
i
%
J •	J
— But you enquire, what Feats you fhould purfuei "y I and the World (illuftrious Virgin) know,	^
That hardefi: Tasks alone are worthy you;	J
Thine, o’er our Champions, be the feeptred Care,
, And be thy Word, their Law, the Word of War.
He fpokej (he courteous thanks him for the Praile# Then, graceful, her Difcourle reluming, fays.
Doubtless, ’twill feem a Thing intirely new.
To claim Rewards, e’er Service fhews them due:
Yet of your Bounty confidently fure,
One Boon I beg, and deem the Grant lecure :
^Tis that you would the Jentendd Pair releafe,
I will endeavour to deferve the Grace;
As a pure Gift, their Lives I beg, I crave}
And yet, methinks, they much hard Meafiire have: Uncertain Crimes for milder Judgments cry,
But that, my Lord, I’ll pafs in Silence by. ni pafs by Proofs, that my whole Soul convince.
That make me conlciousof their Innocence.
I urge but this—----tho’ loud the Tongue of Fame
Lays the whole Load upon t’ne Chriftian Name,
I muft beg Leave to differ from you, there.
Nor fiiall my Thought, without good Grounds, appear; Wrong did your Conj’ring Counfellor perfuade,
V/rong was that Image to the Molque convey’d:
Th’Ir-
V
i
N
jtx o o vy o	uidiCiiJit	^ y
Th’Irreverence to our facred -Laws is plain.
And the Magician’s Motion was prophane.
Not our own Piftures muft Admittance find,
\
Much lefs an Image of the Chriftian Kind.
’Twas Mahoune did the mimick Form remove; 'y The Miracle defcended from Above,	r
Perform’d by pow’rful Mahomet to prove Each A6t is lawlefs, which his Mofque defiles With falfe Religion’s fuperftitious fpoils:
Still let Ifmeno try his boafted Charms,
And fight in Magick, fince he can’t in Arms: '
But let us Soldiers, Soldiers Weapons try j Arms are our Trade, let us on Arms rely.
With the(e braveWerds the beauteousWarrior ceas’d. And left the King to ponder her RequeH:.
In ill, tho’ ftubborn, ftern Revenge his End,
Stranger to Pity, and averle to bend i Yet fain he would oblige the pleading Fair,
And mov’d by pow’rful Reafons grants her Pray’ri
So great an Interceffor, he reply’d.
Ask what (he will, muft never be deny’d.
Let them have both their Lives and Freedom too. Whether	or to Mercy due.
If guiltlefs, ’tis but juft to let them free.
And, if they’re guilty, they’re a Gift to thee.
Ak:^
30 lAb&u sjeruiaiem.
t
And now they^vt freed:  -----And now OUndo found
His Deed as happy, as it was renoreddi
His well-try’d Faith convinc’d Sbphronids Eyes,
And bad her Heart with gen’rous Ardour rife:
The waken’d PafTions rouz.’d her heaving Breaft,
Shone thro’ her Eyes, and Love for Love confefs’d.
Not, as a Lover, thus belov’d he grows.
No ’twas the Sufferer, that made the Spoufe.
Still the King view’d them with a jealous Eye,
Nor fo much Virtue could endure fo nigh j Thence doom’d to Exile, by his harfh Command, T Tho’ weary both, both loving, Hand-in-hand,	r
Sought the laft Limits of the Holy Land.	^
N. B. The other Fragment out of Tajfo, which contains Part of the celebrated Epifbde of Clonnda and Tan-credi, fhould have been added here, together with proper Notes upon both of them ; but that Defign has been prevented by theUeath of Mr. Porter, who wrote the Remarks at the Beginning of the Book.
A
f '■
r
\
A
FRAGMENT
From the Third Book of
TAS S O’s Jerusalem.
The Argument.
The Town being invejied by the Chrijlians, Clorinda a Pa-gan Vrincefs in a vigorous Sally begins thetVar-, and, after having fain, in fingle Combat, one brave Chriflian Commander, encounters the Heroick Prince TmcxediU "who beating off her Helmet, dijcovers her to be a Lady, ■who had formerly engaged hir Heart.. Meanwhile the Pagan Monarch in the Town is reprefented Jetting on a Tower with Erminia, a Princefs fecretly in Love with Taitcredh and (he informs the King who the feveral Chrifian Heroes are, as they approach the Town.
Be A N W HIL E, from fome great Watch-
Tower’s arduous Height,
Which could, o’er MountainTops, command j
Of
26 liiDovD s jeruiaiem.
Of Plains remote, a Guard look’d watchful down^
And law a Temped: moving tow’rds the Town.
The Duft appears, while Ipiry Volumes rife,
A huge black Cloud advancing thro’ the Skies;
It feem’d to lighten, as it nearer came,
Lab’ring with fiery Deaths, and big with Flame;
At lafi: the beamy Shields his Sight furprize.
And Men, and Horfe, with Terror pale he fpies.
“ What Clouds of Duft I fee, aloud he cry’d,
‘‘ Where mingling Gleams, like threat’ning Meteors^ “ glide!
t' Up, up, you Citizens, your Town defend,
** Fly to your Arms, and to the Walls aScend;
“ Behold the Foe,” —■ Then ftraight, with frelb Alarms^ He urg’d their Hafte, and call’d, To Arms, to Arms! ‘‘ They’re here, they’re here; fee, fee, the Duft inrols “ In one tremendous Cloud the darken’d Poles.” '
Ww •	*
Young Wives, old Matrons, all confus’d with Dread, Their Offsprings after them, promifcuous, fled.
Unfit for Arms, each reverend hoary Sire Does, fhaking more with Fear, than Age, retire:
Pale, to their Mofques, the trembling Virgins fly.
War with their Tongues, and pray for Vi£tory,
But Men of Martial Hearts, and boafted Might,
Buckle their Armour on, and claim the Fight;
Refblv’d to conquer, or refblv’d to fall.
Some line the Gates, and lome aScend the Wall;
Like
*
V
Like Clouds embatterd, Tempefts to perform,'
They’re wedg’d in Ranks, their Ranks the King does C form,	C
And, like an airy Demon, guides the Storm.’	<
He to a Tow’r, his Orders giv’n, withdrew; Between two Gates, with an alpiring View.
Well plac’d to regulate his Troops below.
And mark the Movements of the fieging Foe,
Its haughty Battlements it rear’d with Pride,
And over-look’d the Hills on ev’ry Side.
Thither this King, the fair Ermbia led,
Erminia to his Court, for Refuge, fled.
When Antioch fell to Chriftian Arms a Prey,'
Where flain, her Sire, the Lord of Antioch lay.
Meantime Clorimda bad the Gates unbar.
Made thefirft Sally, and commenc’d the War.
Her ma,ny Chiefs attend, and num’rous Bands 5 Both Troops and Chiefs the Martial Maid commands. Bold in the Face of Danger, leads the Way,
Foremoft of all, and eager for the Fray.
Argcmtes^ jealous of the dubious War,
In fecret Ambufh watch’d with anxious Care;
I
Ready, if ill Succefs fhould turn the Fight,
To flop the Paths of Death, and aid her Flight:
.	But
\
i
JL fLJL KJ KJ	j
But dauntlefs was the Female Warrior’s Bread,
And fuch a Soul her fparkling Eyes confefs’d, V That Courage blaz’d abroad, and fir’d the reft. ^ With Voice Majcftick, with intrepid Mein,
She mov’d a Champion, and fhe fpoke a Queen.
- “ On us, Ihe Said, all A[iAs Hopes depend,
“ Bravely begin, fince Honour is the End :
The pregnant Seeds of future Glory lay,
** Let Conquefts teem from this aulpicious Day.”
Thus while (he fpoke, fhe "French Batallions fpy’d, Drive captive Herds to feed their Army’s Pride.
The bleating Flocks, and lowing Cattle mourn Their Keeper’s Lofs, and bellow to return.
Swift to their Refcue, the Fierce Virgin flies.
And nowi in Thought, redeems the woolly Prize.
As quick to meet her (Guar do was his Name)
Sprung the French Chief, and equal was his Flame.
A Man he was, indeed, of paflTing Might,
But not her Match} unequal to the Fight;
Brave they both fought, till Death’s decifive Wound. Drove Guardo headlong tumbling to the Ground* Difmay’d the French, the tragick Sight beheld}
With Shouts of Joy the Pagans fliook the Field:.
Hence, Augurs grown, and of this Omen vain.
They fancy’d Conquefts, from one Combat, gain.
She
s
TASSU s jemlaleffl. 41:
she tempts their Ranks, and, in a Prefs of Foes,
Her Maiden Arms a hundred Mens oppofc:
Her Warriors wade red Paths, her Sword had made. Which mow’d a- Paflage through the falling dead:
They pufli’d the Fortune of their lucky Day,
And from the Foe redeem’d the ravifh’d Prey.-
WiTH Condudl brave, retiring flow, the French Sell their Ground dear, and yield it Inch by Inch 5 Till, with Advantage, on a riling Ground,
Their fainting Party, timely Succour found :
For, quick as Air, the gully Whirlwinds rend,
Or flaming Bolts from burfting Clouds defcend,
Tancredi fir’d, at Godfrey's awful Nod,
March’d up his Squadron like a leading God.
The Youth does, gayly terrible, advance In threatful Guife, and fliakes his pond’rous Launcei
HiM-, from on high, the Pagan King beheldj’
The cholen Warrior of the lifted Field And thus addrefs’d Erm'miu, heav’nly fair.
Whole Form majeftick grac’d the neighb’ring Chair,
Who felt fbft Paflions in her Bofbm rile,
A panting Struggle,-and a War of Sighs.<^
“ Taught by Experience, you, O Princefs, know,
Tho’ flicath’d in Arms, the Chiefs, that lead the Foe.
Who -
■ U
s
4
42 TASS Os Jeriualem. i
♦
Who is he, marches with that awful Grace,	|
4
Bears that high Port, and boafts that princely Face?’’
Sighs fill her Lips, instead of a Reply,
And starting Tears stand struggling in her Eyai She choak’d the Groans, and held the Bubbles in.
Not Ib, fhe held them, but they might be Isen;
Her Ihowy Lids a fcarlet Circle stain’d.
And half a Sob its plaintive Pastiige gain’d:
Then, thus flie feign’d, and thus diflerabl'd well Her Love, inmimick Anger’s borrow’d Veil.
*' Him! Yes, among ten thoufand him I know5
** Too well, alas I----the Caufeof all my Woe.
*' Oft have I feen him in the fanguine Plain,
“ Like fwifc Destruftion, pile up Hills of Slain;
“ I’ve feen him^ stuice away my Subje£ts Blood,
Till Streams it fill’d, or grew it felf a Flood.
“ Like Time’s and Death’s, his fcythy Sword can mowi “ And, ah ! as deadly, and as fure the Blow.
His Wounds are mortal ail 5 they reach the Heart, Phyfick they poze, and baffle magick Art:
’Tis Prince Tadcredi\ O could, once, thefeEyes,
“ But once, in Chains behold him, e’er he dies!
Alive I’d have the Slave, for Vengeance’ fake j ‘L’Twcrc the best Comfort, Sweet Revenge could take.*^
Ths
\
TASSO s Jeruialem. 45
V
The Royal Hearer, fuch is Woman’s Art,	"p
Drew from the cover’d Truth, fhe did impart,	^ .
i’ierce Meanings, foreign to her tender Heart. ^
Now did Clorirald to the Fight advance,
\nd at Tmcredi couch’d her pointed Launce,
Slow, Face to Face, the Champion and the Fair ", ^lung’d, till both Spears flew fplinter’d in the Air, ^ 3ut her defertiog Armour left her bare.
^or, ftrange ! at one dread Tilt, its Laces broke,
-ler naked Head the Traytor Helm forfook: iVav’d in the Wind, her Silver Trefles flew,
Ind all the Beauty flood confefs’d to View:
Light’ning her Eyes, diffus’d a radiant Fire,
[^harming, tho’ fierce, they kindled foft Defirei )he, whole fweet Rage could Anger’s felf difarm,’
Vhat would fhe do, if Smiles improv’d the Charm? .
D nowAancredi, where is, now, thy Soul! iVhat Wifhes in thy lab’ring Bofbm roll!
\t whom, quite loft in Wonder, doft thou gaze?
\rt thou a Stranger to that lovely Face?
ifes, ’tis the fame, the fame that once infpir’d
rhy longing Soul, and all	fir’d.	'
\sk thine own Heart, for that can tell thee beft,
cVhere, deep, her lovely Image lies impreft,
‘
Too
0
/
44 T A S S O s Jeruialem.
Too lure, ’tis fhe, that at the lonely Stream Did, where thou fought’ft to cool, thy * Blood-ia* flame;
Her crefted Helmet, and her painted Shield He knew not firft, but her Face once beheld, Amazement froze the Current of his Blood,
He grew to Srone, and like a Statue ftocd;
She, her Head guarding,: with redoubled Fire, ^ Attack’d the Chief, then did the Chief retire ;
. .Whizzing aloft did his bright Faulchion wield.
And fought the mingled Harveft of the Field.
Clofe fhe purities him,- and aloud fhe cries,
“ Turn, if thou dar’ft, again, to face thefe Eyesj” v And double-Death fhe threatens as fhe flies.	J
Struck, and ftill ftruck, he ne’er return’d a Stroke:
Lefs on her Sword he fix’d his guardful Look,
Than on the Deaths, that fparkl’d from her Eye, y/hence Cupid bad unerring Arrows fly.
i	' ' > -
Within himfelf, and to himfelf he faid.
In vain thofe Wounds are aim’d j flie, lovely Maid! y In vain, with boafted Strength, uplifts that Arm,
Tho’ bound with Steel, that Hand can do no Harm:
‘‘ But
* Tancredi and Clori«da in the firji Book are deferibedy after a
toarm Battlei to have met at a Fountain^ vahere he fell in Love with
her*
%
T A S S O ’ s Jerulalem, 4 5
** But not in vain fhe Biews that naked Face,
‘‘ Like Ligkt’ning, bright and fatal is the Blaze, ^
** Its Beams fly pointed, and, each Darf takes Place.”
At length, though Hopes of Pity he had none.
Yet he relblv’d to make his Paflion known, ^
Refolv’d, before he periih’d, to declare The wounded Captive to the cruel Fair.
His Face, unfoldicr’d, wore a fuppliant Lookj And, fpeaking thus, he trembl’d while he fpoke.
O Thou, who from thefe Thoulands, mark’fl: out me. Of all thy foie diftinguilh’d Enemy:
Leave we the mingl’d Hoft, and private try.
Which is the bolder Champion, thou or I:
Soon will a Angle Combat let thee know.
Whether my Valour equals thine, or no.
Helmleft altho’ fhe was,, her Head all bare,
His Challenge ftrait accepts the martial Fair,	V
And bold fhe follows, to the dual War;
The wondr’ing Chief, in ftrange Confufion tofi’d.
And a)) the Champion in the Lover loft.
Now in a fighting Pofture flood the Maid,
And aim’d a deadly Blow, when thus he
‘‘ Hold, let us firft, before we prove our Might,’
Settle.fbme previous Articles of Fight:
Since
4^ T A S S O s Jerulalem:
Since Peace, with me, relentlefs you difdain}	“y
Since, if I begg’d it, I Ihould beg in vain,	?
Be thefe the Terms, the beft I hope to gain. J Tear out this Heart from milerableme,
“ No more my Heart, if it dilpleales thee:
'' Wretched in Life, if it offends thine Eye,
It will a very willing Martyr die.
“ Long fince it wholly appertain'd to you}
Time I ihould yield, and you fhould Seize your Due, f Behold, thefe nerveleSs Arms I low incline,
A guardlefs Breaft, fulpended, they refign.
Why ftrikeft thou not a Heart So free to bleed ?
Or would’ft thou have me help the languine Deed ?
‘‘ Speak, from this Iron-Houfe my Limbs I’ll tear,
And to thy thirfty Sword my Bolbm bear.”
Unhappy, thus hisWoes before the Maid,	"y
In melancholy Sighs, ^Tmcredi laid,	^
And more perhaps, much more he would have laid : But Tramplings, thick and thicker, beat the Ground, And flop the reft, with their untimely Sound.
For mov’d by Stratagem, or urg’d by Dread,
Hafty, the Pagans, from the Chriftians, fled.
One, that purfued, ftaunch in the deathful Trade,’
Saw by the Winds her ringling Curls dilplay’d i And, as he pafs’d behind her, lifting high ■His deadly Faulchion, with a Ruffian’s Eye
/
Aim’d,
\
I
EAbbU s jemiaiem. 47
- •»
^im’d, at the Part expos’d, a barb’rous Wound;
Forth leap’d Tancredi, with a Sudden Bound,
(\nd, flop your Hand, he cry’d; and, at the Word,
Warded the whi^2,ing Murder with his Sword.
Vet not all vain the Blow, it juft delcends.
Where, near her fnowy Neck, her Head depends:
Few Drops, for glancing was the Wound, and flight.
Her Locks vermilion’d, and fo ftain’d the white.
As Rubies, fet in Silver, we behold.
With darting Crimibn, warm the fulgid Mold*
Now would Tancredi make the Villain feel The Death he ftrovc to give, and grafp’d his Steel,’
The Prince, whole Rage he fliun’d with hafty Dread,
Follow’d all Vengeance, he all Terror fled.
Swift, the Purfued, and the Purfuer, go.
As feather’d Arrows from the twanging Bow.
In deep Sulpence, the wond’ring Maid beheld The fpeedy Racers fcow’r the diftant Field;
Loth to purfue, her Flight (he meditates.
Joins her own Troops, and with the Rout retrcafsi She turns, returns, now flies, now puts to Flight,
Now Battle gives, and now recedes from Fight.
’Twas hard to fay, while fhe difdain’d to yield,
Whether fhe chas’d, or fled the lifted Field.
So the ftout Bull on following Dogs will turn The pointed Vengeance of his goring.Horn;
' Amaz’d
/
/
/ -
48 TASSO s Jemlalem.
Amaa’d the gen’ral Hunt fhrink back apace,	’t t
But once he turns to fly, renew the Chace;
New Heart they take, the Savage tempt again,’
Full Speed, full cry, they mouth along the Plain.
High, at her Back, the fair Clorinda held The ample Orb of her defenfive Shield^
Its ample Orb protected, as (he fled.
From fwrft purfuing Darts, her helmlefs Head.
So manly Moors, that in tough Sports contend,
.'Shielded, their Heads from rapid Balls defend.
9
%
*
T 0
/
f
/ ■' y
1
T O
STREPHON,
O N H I S
Excellent VERSES,
¥
And on his
VERSION of T A S S O.
H, where Ihall I from fuch fweet Sounds -
^	retire!	J
^ The God of Love himfelf has tun’d thy C
Lyre,	C
And taught it ev’ry Paffion to infpire.
With Wit, with Art, and pow’rful Flatt’ry ftrung.
The Heav’n-born Mules dwell upon thy Tongue j Their befl-lov’d Ovid, whom they made their Choice,^ Had not a greater Skill, nor Sweeter Voice,•
p	My
/
50 Clio to STREPHoNa i
My Heart, tho’ far from the Coquette remov’d. Receiv’d,thy Praile, and filently approv’d. mhcWorld, which leem’d a Trifle to my View,
Is lefs defpisA, fince ’tis adorn’d by youj And I Its empty Pleafures could endure.
Were but my Soul of fuch a Triend fecure.	I
\
How few in all the Tour of Life we find,	|
That either can improve, or charm the Mind?
Scarce can my Thought, in all the boafied Crowd,
Recal one Friend to make my Mem’ry proud.
Tho’ much of Flattery my Youth has prov’d,
(For I have been what others call belov’d,)
Yet Rill my nicer Inclination found
Some happy Fault to keep me yet unbound.
My Mule has been my Tleafure, and my
And I no other Tetters wifh to bear :
%
To that^ O gentle Bard! thy Tondnefs give,	,
And let thy inoKevfive Rival live:	"
From that thou canft no Danger apprehend,
Apollo’s thine, and e’ry Mufe thy Friend.
No After-Ages will repeat my Name,
Nor can I rob thee of thy purchas’d Fame}
Yet if thy Verfe does Clio’s Name adorn,
I wifia her hot to greater Glory born.
Secur’d by thee, what petty Bard will dare To wound my Weaknefs when thy Guard is there?
So great thy Reputation, and fb bright,
.ThacI flaall fhine, reflexive by thy Light.
Sa
\
Clio h Strephon.	5 L
So have I feen Ibme little flying Cloud
Gilt by the Sun, a while look gay and proud j
But, if its Beams their lovely Shine withdrew.
Its Ihort-liv’d Beauties Swiftly vanilh’d too,
/
Lead on, my Gen’ral, then s and I may be,
Tho’ many Ranks below, infpir’d by thee.
Beneath thy Laurels, Oh.\froteSl hiy 'Fear,
And Jhade thy little trembling 'Volunteer.
Perhaps ClOrinda was a Coward too,
’rill fhe was taught to tread the Field by you;
Oh! how I emulate the martial Maid,
And read thv Tasso, till I’m not afraid !
How am I charm'd with ev’ry finijh‘d Line /
And joy that Fairfax’ are fo faint to thine!
You taught the Fair to wield the pointed Dart,
And Ihew’d the fbftcft Vein inTANCREo’s Heart.
Oh ! skill’d in Love and Verle, thy Power employ/
To aid the dying-Empire of the Boy !
He yields apace——and noTANCREoi Ihines,
But in thy Form, and thy excelling Lines.
CLIO.
r
4
D a	Strephon’s
I
^4
N
1
i
Strephoffs AN S WE K
Being in a
D R E A M:
O R, T H E
RECAPITULATION.
4
4
BY
Way of DIALOGUE, j
{
H Y Vcrle, which run with Down upon their
^ Meafijre my Hours, and make my Minutes
And when, in Reading, all the Day is (pent.
Not all the Day can yield me full Content j I ftart from Bed to Phoebe’s paler Light,
. And, Glutton-like, devour ’em o’er at Nightj
y	.	♦	.	..	..	....
Then
IT
4.
DTRETHOJN TO V^LIU.
Then walk my lonely Chamber, round and round.
And kist the skilful Hand, that gave the Wound.
At length, when Nature, with Fatigue opprefs’d.
Forces my dozing Head to fink to Reft,
Still my awaken’d Soul is juft the fame,	^
Unweary’d ftill that courts thee, lovely Dame,	^
And to it felf prefents thee in a Dream.	^
Methought, on Dennis’ much-lov’d Plain I lay.
And Fancy turn’d the Noon of Night to Day:
Phoebus appear’d } Wit reign’d upon his Brow,
And Wits Reward, the facred Laurel B .-ucrh :
*	d
The Genial God, thro’ ev’ry Feature, fmii’d.
And with theft Promifts my Ears beguil’d.
...
<
Study, weFomeri’d Bard, thy Voice improve.
Mine gain’d but Laurels, thine fliall gain thee Love.
Wrapp’d with the Prophecy my Harp I ftrung,
And, what I can’t awake, afleep 1 fung :
Sweet was the Song, for Clio was the Theme,
Clio! my Love! my Wifh! my Blifs! my Fame!
My Song rewarding to my vaft Surprize,
The witty Fair-one danc’d before my Eyes:
The Villon ftruck me with religious Awe,
As wheg their Goddefles old Poets faw.
P 3<'
4
W
^	O X Ja. Ju it -Cl. \y	y i/	X-r X \^#
■\
With ,Eyes as radiant as the Beams of Day,' y. Blooming with Heav’n-born Youth, and fprightly gay, > Thus, my dear Cuo faid, or feem’d to fay.	J
t
CLIO.
Oh! where frail I from Such fweet Sounds retire ?	0
The God of Love himfelf has tun’d thy Lyre,	?
And taught it ev’ry Paffion to infpire.	'
That Ovid, whom the Mules made their Choice,.
Had not a greater Skill, nor fweeter Voice,
STREP H O N.
Oh! never, Clio, never hence retire,	-j
Thee gone (for thou. Love’s Goddefs, doll infpire,) C Dumb muft my Tongue be, and unflrung my Lyre. 3 The am’rous Ovid ne’er had liich a Choice Of Wit and Beauty to employ his Voice:
Hadft thou been born to blefs his happy Days,
No Name but Clio had adorn’d his Lays.
Oh! tell me, can thy Soul be e’er inclin’d.
That is fo witty, to be half as kin4t
Canft thou not, tell me, canft thou not improve
Thy Wit with Tendernefs, and (loop to Love.
To love a Man, who to his laft Hour^s End Would study hoarly to be more thy Friend ?
CLIO,
\
4
'	CLIO.
How/«w in all the Tour of Life we find.
That either can improve or charm the Mind ?
Scarce can my Thought, in all the boafted Crowd,
Recal one Fruud to make my Mein’ry proud.
S T R E P H O N.
No Wonder, Clio, thou Ib few Oiouldfi: fee
I
Pleafing, for Pleafure is confin’d to thee;
Crowds of Admirers ne’er flrould make thee vain,’
But, they may boaft, that by thy Charms are llain.
So not the God, to whom Perfumer arile.
With od’rous Pray’r, and welcome Sacrifice ;
Not he is honour’d, but the Man that prays,
Becaufe a Deity accepts his Praife.
Be thou my Saint, thy Altars Til adorn.
And each new Day, new Incenie will I burn}
Be thou my Angel, thou, like Angels fair,
Then will I pray, and thou flialt hear my Pray’r,
CLIO.
Though much of Flattery my Youth has prov’d,
(For I have been what others call belov’d)
Yet------
D 4	S T R E-
%
/
>
JQ OTRJiTJtlOJN TO
STREPHON.
Have been belov’d! belov’d thou’lt ever be,
While I have Ears to hear, or Eyes to fee.
For in thy Form, and in thy Voice I find,
AH that can pleafe the Eye, or charm the Mind.
But how can I, unhappy, hope to gain
Her that has been So lov’d, ——but lov’d in vain?
CLIO.
Yet ftiil, my nicer Inclination found Some happy Fault to keep me yet unbound.
STREP HON.
Happy thofe Faults I ever (liall efteem,
That for my fake referv’d thee fafe from them j Who elfe had triumph’d in that boundlefs Joy,
That does my Thoughts and ev’ry Wifh employ.
OF all my Faults, one Fault alone thou’it prove.
If that be one, Extravagance in Love:
That you’ll forgive; for Love fhould ever rife Proportion’d, as its Objedt’s fair and wife i And fure, if Love fhould like thy Merits be.
No Love can ever be too great for thee.
CLIO,
c L I O.j
My Mufe has been my Plea(ure and my Care,
And I no other Fetters wifh to bear :	vi - '
To that, O gentle Bard ! thy Fondnefs give.
And let thy inofFenfive Rival live j
From that thou can’ft no Danger apprehend j
Apollo’s thine, and ev’ry Mufe thy Friend.
No After-ages will repeat my Name,
Nor can I rob thee of thy purchas’d Fame,-Yet if thy Verfe does Clio’s Name adorn,
1 wifh her not to greater Glory born.
S T R E P H O N.
Clio is all my Pleafure and my Care,
And I no other’s Fetters wifh to wear.:
To me then, Clio, all thy Fondnefs give.
And let thy trueft, tend’reft Lover live.
Of that I can no Danger apprehend.
If ev’ry Mufe is, as thou fay’ft, my Friend ;
Heav’n knows, of all the Nine, but One I chufc.
Ye Heav’ns! Let Clio be that friendly Mufe 5 Then future Ages will repeat my Name,
For, if fhe’d wear it, fhe would give it Fame,
D y	C L I Oi
\
t
i
CLIO.
My Heart, tho* far from the Coquette remov’d. Receiv’d thy Praife, and filently approv’d.
The World, which feem’d a Trifle to my View,
Islels defpis’d, fince ’tis adorn’d by you i '
And I its empty PleaSarcs could endure,
^Were but my Soul of fuch a Friend fecurc.
S T R E P H O N.
/
I juft was going full of Joy to tell.
That my fond Soul would in her Bofbm dwell For an Eternity —— But Fortune’s Spight,
Juft at that Moment tore her from my Sight,	C
Finifh’d my Dream, and mademe’Bgli all Night. j
/
Yet, Phoebus, yet thy Prophecy I’ll prove.
For Dreams, thy Poets faypjdefcend from ^ove,
'Then I’ll purfue the Bleflii^spf my Dream O er Demid Plain, and view the lovely Dame,
strephon;
\
/
i	i
,f
/
TO
X
^
I
TO
Srjy T> T7 T) ICf XT
1 JK Jb A rl vJ rN ^
In AnSwer to the
Foregoing L E T T E R,
Which was kept a whole Month by a liady.^ to whom the Care of it was intrufied.^ before it was deliver d to C LI O.
By Eyes wept o’er the Verle that ftray’d (o ^ '
What Hand could rudely treat thy cha'rni'^
Scarce can my angry Heart forgiye the ' Wrong!
bleeds within me, while thou fadly plains.
It feelsThy Voice, and fbfcens at thy Strains.
I flev/ to (HU them, as the tender Dam Hades to the Bleatings of her fav’rite Lamb.
What have thy Numbers fuffer’d for niy fake.®
Oh! how Ihall I a juft Atonement make!
i
r -y
I
p,
\
,I rhourn their Sweetnefs was fo much diftreli.
And lay the ■vtomded Beauties to my Bread.
From them I will no hidden Dangers fear.
They will not harm thy Little Trembler here]
I read thy Soulj tho’ to thy Form unknown,
And guefs its gentle Temper by my own.
Thou art compajjionate, as Angels are.
And haft of friendlefs Innocence a Care:
To beauteous Chastity I lee thee bend,
The Goddefs does into thy Soul defcend,	^
And with vidtorious Chaplets crowns my Friend. 3 Thy temp’rate Veins do with her Licence move,
For Jhe allows of Poetry and Loze,	f
Which, as Tweet Waller lings, is all they do above. With modejl Warmth, Jhe gives them Leave to beat. Nor bids me dilapprove the God-like Heat.
I hear thy Song with innocent Delight,
Nor chide the foft Delujions of the Night;
I blefs the God who to thy Dreams is kind,
Still may my Image dance before thy Mind^	^
And in thy Sleep thy fairy Temples bind.
Let Clio’s Vingers with the Mufes join,
Let grateful Clio make her Poet fine,	^
Whole Verfe has made her humble Merit fhine.
Blujl} not, ye Prudes, to hear my modejl Praile,
Who ne’er felt the Magiik of his Lays i In Forrrrs delightful may I ftill appear,
For ever may he dream, and I for ever hear I ®
The
%
*s
\
V
t
The Laurel and the Bays to thee I’ll give.
Let Clio only in thy Numbers live.
To evVy Thought of thine I’ll lay a Claim,'
I’ll give thee Friendfhip, thou muft give me Fame,
With Tendernefs I will thy Prelents ufe.
And be a Mother to thy tuneful Mufe.
The Ibft Ambafladors you hither lent.
Now fleep at Eafe, my Bofom is their Tent.’
Like trembling Birds, who have their Parents lol^’ Harm’d by ungentle Hands or nipping Froft,
Pining, alas! they melancholy ftray’d,
’Till Love and I reviv’d them in this Shade.
My guardian Angel (hould have been their Guide,’
And to his Wings thy am’rous Paper ty’d:
In bearing of the glorious Sheets along,
Apollo would have caught the flying Song •,
And, as he cut along the lower Sky,
Thy Verfe had taught his Pinions how to fly.
Here, it with Peace and rural Sports (hall dwell,
I, for its Mafter’s fake, will treat it well;
But let not her, you praife, a Flatt’rer be,
’Tis rather for its fake I’m kind to thee.
W
Thou art a Judge, O fweet excelling Youth!
And canft, perhaps, forgive an honeft Truth.
In cv’ry Line I fee thy Features glow.
From ev’ry Thought, thy Shape, thy. Air, I know,
I
/
I fee the Joy, with which thy Cheeks are drefs^d. When any Turn is happily exprefs'd;
The Pow’r of Verfe my ravifh’d Soul has prov’d,
So canft thou charm, andfc» is CLia mov’d.
What artful Methods the Poetick find,
To Ileal themfelves into the Reader’s Mind ?
I fhould receive thy dangerous tVa with Care^
For, Oh! the Toet lies \nAmbu{h there.
I lee, I hear thee, thy perfuafive Art!
Oh! keep thy Verfe, and let me keep my Heart j Or if, O gentle Bard! thou art my Friend,	f
While thou attack’d, inftru^t me to defend.
CLIO,
j
I
N
V
TO
/
T O
i
Lhe Letter to vyhich this Anfwer is made.^
was loft.
%
UCH Verfe as thine, all Forms can plea- ’JS ling make,	C
M	whatfcever one you like to take, C
1^^^^ Is pleafing to me for my Poet’s fake i =^' Even thy Ghoft is charming to my Sight,
Whilft it appears adorn’d in Black and White; '
Not all the gaudy Colours of the Eafl:,
. Could to my Eyes be fuch a perfedl Feaft.
Of other Spirits I am much afraid.
But walk with thine, and court the gentle Shade; Whene’er the bufy World is lain to Reft,
I fly unfeen to thy aetherial Breaft,
Alone at Midnight I converfe with thee.
And Venus lends her brighter Beams to me,
TheSriarf fhine forth, they once were Lovers too^
4.ad all the flanets Sure are brib’d by you:
Thj
/
f
Thy Body mufl: not all our Meetings know.
For that’s a Man, and therefore is my Foe.	.
Ab! tell it not that I can write fo kind.
It will be jealous of thy purer Mind,
And fondly will attempt to claim fome Part,
And rob its Rival Shadow of my Heart.	-
Off have I pray’d, and Heav’n has heard my Pray’rJ To grant a Lover made like thee of Air,
For 1 am tir’d with being long purfu’d	|
By low Delires of mortal Flefh and Blood,
A greater Complement you cou’d not pay.
Than throwing all the Drofs of Love away.
Then coming to my Bofbm thus refin’d,
And leaving Sex and Intereft behind.
What Tell-tale famil'uir to my Heart,
Gou’d this dear Secret to thy Ear impart.
One Way there was my nicer Tafte to move.
And that alone was Numbers drefs’d in Love.
No golden Show’rs cou’d here a Conqueft gain,’
I have beheld thole Trifles with Difdain}
Vice I have Seen in gaudy Triumph fhine.
And Man fiirvey’d in ev’ry mean Defign;
Low at my Feet I’ve feen thefe Monarchs lye,'
And ask’d my blufhing Soul, the Reafon why j Youth or gay Looks have made tbcWretchet bend,
And Slaves a While, in order to afcendj But yet my harmlefs Pity I let fall,	T
To lee theie mighty Matters of the Ball,	f
Pbedient to a fhort-liv’d Beauty’s Call.	^
Such
I
I
V>i-ilU O X ivx/r Jn.lJiiN»
Such earthly PafBons, Virtue needs mud blamSi
But thine is Pure a more tranfcendent Flame,	?
For which ev’n Love itfelf’s too mean a Name.
Oh! let it then for heav’niy Friendfhip go.
Such as good Souls retain for Friends below.
Such! as thine wou’d, for happ’lefs Clio find,
Shou’d you afcend, and leave her here behind.
By Heav'n thou art infpir’d, for Ibmething rliore Shines in thy Verle, than I have found before.
Humour and tV/t I have with Pleafure found,	^
But thine is with a povv’rful Softnels crown’d.
From which I muft my lift’ning Senfes guard,
Oh ! ask not my Repofe for thy Reward,
E’er I behold thee, let me here compound,
Retire, retire, methinks I hear the Sound,	^
But, Oh ! my Feet are faften’dto the Ground,
Such Force has Verfe when guided by thy Hand,
It does eachAtom of my Soul command.
Thus Ipeaks my Soul- but it,alas ! is join’d,
To human Clay, which is to Rules confin’d,	^
And thou thy felf wou’d chide it, if too kind:
Yet W'hatfoever rigid Form attends.
Let us at lead.....eternally be Friends,
And I intreat thee, Oh! my charming Spright,	1
In Yerfe to viht Clio ev’ry Night,
CLIO,
St RE-
%
r
•«
StrE P HON ro C LIO.
My C I I O,
I
BH AV E been made this Day the mod unbp;
py of Men. A Fellow of a very four Countenance, who w'as certainly born in an ill Hour, or his Tongue could never have told fo much bad News in fo few Words, inform’d me tbt my Clio v/as very much indifpofed. Death with liis Scythe in one Hand, and his Hour-Glals in the other, ilia-king malicioufly the few remaining Sands, and warning me that my laft Hour was near expir’d, could not have touch’d me like this bafe Informer, who would with his faucy-r>i'BciousTongue force into my unwilling Ears, the Story of your wanting your Health.—— I will not believe it.----- The Guardian Angels that attend you could
not be fo negligent, as to let ycu be in any Air where
Sicknefs could reach you.......But, for fear of theworft,
1 will trouble you with no more, than firft a Prayer to yourfelf, that you would let me know how you do j and telling you in the next Place, that I am upon my Knees,
offering up another Prayer to yopr Guardian Angeh, that
the/
i
--- — i
«
they would be more diligent in finding Means of reftoring you to your Health, than they were in preventing your^ Illnefs.—— I (hall Scarce rife frorti the Cufhion my Knees are bent upon, nor unclafp my Hands, nor flop my Lips from inccflant Supplication, till your Reply comes. — May it be a comfortable one, and by lignifying your Recovery, fecurc my own from athouland Fears, more tormenting than the Agonies of Death would be to my dear
Clio,
Tour Moji Affediionate.^
And Affi-Aed Siwant,^
S T R E P H O K.
f
Clio
4'	^	^
*
V
Clio to Strephon'.
;
My Friend,
H E poor Man indeed told you Truth,'., for I have been, and Bill continue very ill, jl^pjTj^y though I am fomewhat better, which I
impute to your Prayersand Friendfhip, 1 am charm’d with your Eijays, which make Religion, what it really is, the 6neft Subject upon Earth. Since my Illnels, I have read and admired thofe refined Notions, and am proud. He, that can think fo divinely, flrould think of me at all. —— You are very good
to a Stranger, and Clio is a thoufandWays your Friend.— Believe me, notwithftanding the Want of Health, (lie finds real Pleafiire thus converfing with you. •— You can write, tho’ my Indilpolition will not let me. ——If it was not for Illnefs I would not leave you fb foon.—— Verfe is healing to the Mind.
^ Oh/ then the Sacred Remedy apply,
[	And pleadd VU live j if not, roith fleafure die.
CLIO,
0 N
I
( y
t
)
.A
O N
Clio’s LETTER,
WHEREIN
She tells me of her Sichnefs^ and received on the
Night vjhen the great Storm of Thunder and Lightening was.
Bate, on the dreadful’ft oF recorded Times,
I Virgil’s	read in Dryden’s	:
How Cvesar’s Death, e’er C^sar dead be-
Thunders proclaim’d thro’ Heaven’s fhiv’ring Frame.
How howling Ghofis yell’d in the nightly Shade,
Till Tempefts, dropping Fire, the Sprightsdilplay’d;
My Midnight Studies, ftruck with pleafing Dread,
And Parent Barch I left, and fought my Bed j When, lo! incompafs’d with a fudden Flame,
I found their Verfe and Nature were the fame.
Not with Prefumption, but with humble Awe,’
I view’d the Sky, and, what I read, I Saw i
It
V	»
✓
9
70 StrethoM to Clio.
It fiadSd a rapfl intolerable Light,
And turn’d to blazing Day the pitchy Nighti There, juft receiv’d, and, yet unopen’d, lay Thy Letter kept to blefs the foU’wing Day:
Straight my foreboding Soul was much difmay’d,
It knew not why, but trembled for its Maid;
Fear’d what the greateft Man’s Deceafe fore-fign’d, Fore-ftiew’d the lick’ning ^neen of Womankind.
Frighted I ran, the doubted Letter took,
And, as I broke the Seal, my Fingers Ihook:
But, when I read that Sicknefs harm’d my Dame,
Read the fad Tidings by the difmal Flame;
Then, tho’ then loud did Jove’s chief Thunders roll,
Far greater Tempefts labour’d in my Soul;
And yet (my Clio) ’midftthat Storm of Care,"
Ev’n thy fweet Mufick was too harjh to bear.
Yes, thy own Verfe, where Sweets Eternal reign’d, 'Grew harjh, quite harfo! — thy lUnefs they contairik Truft me (my Love) I fympathize with thee.
Now, while I write, each Nerve’s in Agony:	■
Troops of fad Fears make ev’ry Heart-String quake, | And reigning Agues all the Fabrick fl^ake.
Not Ib; when all my Nerves well pleas’d did move,
W hile I was finging Tunes of thee and LOve,
V/hen on your Harp (more pleas’d) I’ve heard you fing.
And ev’ry Nerve has danc’d to ev’ry String.
Notv
w
%
V
\
StrepIIon to Clio. yt)
low interrupting Sobs, that Mufick break,’ lute muft each Mufe be, and mere Nature Speak.’
ut Nature can’t-----for Nature’s overcome,
mall Sorrows Speak — but Solemn Grief is dumb: et if (ye Heav’ns) if yet ye can but hear, didft the loud Storms, that deafen evVy Ear; will fubdue my Grief, and fay one Pray’r :	"V
Sihen Lighi’ning next breaks thro’ the cloudy Air, if .ook thro’ thole Clouds, and when you fee, you’ll C
fpare.	S'*
0
And you that are to me a dearer Part, rhan the laft Drop is to a bleeding Heart;
)o not, o’ercome with Spleen, the Wits Difeafe, rhink Heav’n will Virtue^ Wit, and Beauty Seize, fo think ’twould be at Such a vaft Expence Is making thee, then Snatch theeftraight from hence* ^ s doing Injury to Providence.
Don’t be fo cruel to thy felf nor me,
rhou (hal’t not ate —■— thou lhal’t tranjlated be.
I
When late, ah! be it late ! when ’tis defir’d,
So feek the heav’nly Joys, of earthly tir’d ;
May Some good Angel join his Lips to thine*
Thou to his Lips thy balmy Breath refign;
He’ll catch thy Soul wrappM in thy fpicy Breath*
And disappointing the grijn Forms of Death,
I
Shall
Strephon to Clio.
N
shall thee, all fhiniag, to that Heav’n tranflate,
(Where Spirits of thy Rank compound the State;
Here ends the Pray’r, which high Heav’n appeas’d, ^ The Skies all open’d, and the Saints well pleas’d, C View’d her, ill Omens and the Tempeft ceas’d. 5
STREPHON.
4
✓
.	>P-
■ ■	'	AN
I
A N
w
answer to Clio,
A
\
[IVho /peaks of Platomck Love^) fent to her jujl after her Recovery from an Indifpojition of Health,
%
BnricTmrmill’tt-T. SickncSs left you, till I knew you
cur d>
^iZJpl Did I once mention what my Self endur’d ?
Unlefs, when pitying you with Pains op- . preft,
I pray’d, that quitting yours, they’d Seek my Breaft.
Now, *tis my Turn, to name poor Strephon’s Pains,
(Vnd thine to pity now, whilft he complains.
To thee (O Clio !) is all Nature known.
Painted in Verfe, for Poetry’s thy own:
Thou know’ft the Pangs of difappointed Love Muft, as its Objed’s dearer, Iharper prove, rhou know’ll, that, as our Souls are tend rer made, rhofe fofc Imprcflions are the deeper laid.
That,
i
5
74 Strephon to Clio.
1
That, when ‘coy Ladies Lovers Hopes controul.
They to Diftra<9rion drive a manly Soul.
Thou know’ll thy ielf the noblefi Form on Earthy That ever gave the noblefl Paffion Birth j I Know’ll ev’ry Glory fhines confefs’d in thee.
And everlalling Tendernefs in me.
And, fhall l» deary unkind, viBorious Fair,
,Bej:ender’d up a Prey to wild Defpair?
Thoul’t anfwer No, — then coldly call And, Spirit-like, perhaps, my Soul commend.
If Love was only fcated in the-Mind,
As cruel now I call. I’d own thee kind.
Does not each Line, which fl have written, proved
That I adore thee with redoubled Love?
\
That I admire thee all the Ways I can :
As Spirit much, but Hill much more as Man t And who wants Arguments, by which ’tis prov’d,
That Heav’n fram’d Women, fo to be beloy’d ?
Tell me not then, thou dear too cruel Fair!
Thou oft haft pray’d, and Heav’n has heard thy Pray’r f To grant a I.over made, like me> of Air.	J.,
No------’Were I Air indeed,------nay, purer far
Than the moft pure Celeftial Beings are ;
By jovE himfelf! I’d a£l my (elf like Jove,
I’d put a Body Qii, and feek thy Love.
X ,	Ah! ,
' I
•X
« «
Strephon to Clio. 75
11	that I could but put a Body on,
it mine is coarfely made--and I’m undone!
10’ golden Show’rs are Things that you difdain,
;t, for thy fake, I’d come in golden Rain: t, ah! my niggard Stars, to wound me Home, ve me, Toithout the Wit, the Poet’s Doom.
I
Ought I, in Prudence, all at once to name
ch Faults----which now a days are counted Shame ?
IS, I am ^roud to own ’em all to you,
fppy and Rich in this illuftrious View.	^
)u call’d me Friend^ and I’ll be ever true.	3
Now tell me, if my Verfe can pleajing make, lis Form, which I am forc'd, not pleas’d to take ? ill me, no wealthy Beau thy Love fhall gain, lat thou’lt behold the Trifle with Difdain.
Dt fo, thou’lt fay — Thou’lt fay, thy Soul is join’d ) human Clay, which is to Rules confin’d;	^
id I mufl: chide my Stars, that ’tis not kind.	^
—— Still let me, like a Lover made of Air, fer thy Words, but offer as my Pray’r.
Yet whatfbever rigid Forms attends.
It us at leaft--eternally be Friends.
S T R E P H O N.
E a	TO
T O
In Answer to both his
Admirable Letters,
O F H I S
Illness and Platonick L ove.
\
WONDER not at what thy Verfe per-
_ pi I know its Pow'r, and underfiand its Charms, | '	The Storm grows gentle, and its Sound obeys, |
And even Thunder Ibftens at thy Lays. ^
I
Angels themfelves, from their own Heav’ns defcend, They hear, - and wonder, and become thy Friend:
Not all the Swetefi Inftruments combin’d,	1
The fofreft Lute, and fprightly Viol join’d,	r
Nor David’s Harp, like thee, can raife the Mind. ^ j
I
My
\
ULIO to STREPHON.	77
My Soul, which is, of tend’reft Atoms, form’d,
;
Is, as the Poet pleafcs, chilTd or roarm’d:
The warring Skies receiv’d thy Pray’rs that Night,
For all my Spirits were refin’d and light.
The haggard Spleen was driven from my Breaft,
And I with fmiling Chearfulnels was blefs’d,
Tho’ Nature feem’d, as if fhe dying lay,
I
And trembling fear’d the laft tremendous Day,
Yet fearlefs I the angry Clouds furvey’d.
Thy friendly Wilhes hafted to my Aid:
A fweet Compofure oii my Eye-lids fell,
And all Things in my tranquil Soul were well.
But, e’er I flept, I offer’d up my Pray’r,
That Heav’n my Poet, and my Friend wou’d (pare, ^ For he was worthy of its utmofl Care.
Oh! let the Dull, fatd I, from hence remove.
Who know not how to Jing, nor how to love.
But with my Praifes I fhou’d Chidings join.
Thy Body is inform’d of our Defign.
Did I not tell thee it a Share wou’d claim.
And drive to damp our everlafting Flame ?
And Clio has a Rival now I find.
Who knows the Ibfteft Secrets of thy Mind:
Thou art not an Intire Angel yet,
But haft a little of the Serpent’s Wit:
A Day will come, thou wilt be all refin’dt 'thy Body as immortal as thy Mind j
E j .	Then
/
/
\
f
I
fjO V>niO W OXKJit'llOJM.
Then near thy heav’nly Term my Soul fliall (lay,
And pafs with thee the never-ending Day,
A little longer, tedious Life will end.
And we like Stars together ihall afcend:
Or fhou’d I lofe thee in the fliining Throng,
I Icon fhould find thee, by thy deathlefs Song,
Sure a peculiar Briightnefs thou wilt wear.
From all the fparkling Crowd of Poets there.
Sing on, and fhorten Life’s infipid Race,
I long to meet thee in a nobler Place,
Where Spirits of our Ranks appear in State,
And thofe of lower Merit humbly wait.
I fear you will this haughty Notion chide.
And think it tafies too much of earthly Pride:
Thy manly Breaft, with brighter Virtues fir’d.
Will fcorn a Thought Ambition has infpir’d.
Oh! guide me, to my Weaknefs be a Friend,
And learn my trembling Finions to afcend:
TSt World and Youth, and Flattery purfue.
But I fhall conquer if inform’d by you.
Shew me the Dangers that lie fcatter’d round.
And lead me lafe through the inchanted Ground.
But ceafe to think thy noble Mind undone,
Tho’ Nature put thy Body loofely on.
If ’tis unworthy of the brighter Gueji,
Which warms thy Ferfe, and fparkles in thy Breajl,
I can forgive thy uningaging Clay,.
I
Stjppofe it even vvhat thy Numbers .lay.
Happy
/
\^LIO vQ u^A IvJu X JtlU Ja »
Happy art thou from vain Addrels fecur’d,
And all the Pains, poor Clio has indur’dj
The Praife of Fools, which Bill has been my Fate,
Which I avoid, and of all Torments hate.
Left to the World, to Solitude I ran.
To drefs my infant Mind, and reft from Man;
In Letters, now and then, they will appear.
And, in that Form, I can endure them here.
But thine have all my foftejl Mom ents fhar’d.
And to my grateful Bolbm ftiH preferrid:
Increafe my Number ^ I (hall never tire,
With reading what thy Paflion does infpire.
What would’ft: thou more? -r-— thy Numbers I ap-
prove,
I like my (elf-----and give thee leave to love.
But, Oh! incroaching Mortal as thou art.
Let ftill thy Spirit have the great eft Part;
You may admire me, aU the Wayt you can.
Give me the Lover, but keep back the Man:
Yet even him, perhaps, my Eyes cou’d bear,
Becaufe thy Soul, (which is my Friend.) lives there.
Let Clio ftill her Empire, there, maintain,
Sweet are her Laws, and gentle is her Reign,	y
She (hall not tyrannize, nor thou complain.	^
I JUST again have read thy Letters o’er,
And therefore can indure my own no more:
A
E 4	From
\
ULIO rt? Sj^TREPHOlSr.
From whence do all thy foft Expreffions come.
Sure not from Iwe, for Love, you know, is dumb-^
But fiich a Tujfon may I never prove,
Give me a /peaking and a writing Love,
One, that can with fuch Eloquence perluade.
And juftify the Kindnefs of a Maid,
CLIO.
i
I
4
•	• ' ^
V
•*
TO
\
/
\
V
\
{
•	.. . '-C'jer--
4?^ I	It^ul WIvJ Ulfc ^ vf	TiUfMJlFJE^ ■ P*U^ rr WfJK# W-^^M	rutflulBil
^sTT iW	^/T/ ovV fSa il^l TUul®® lAijssfeitf	VSSr ^/iXliyrKl V#r^#r^'5^
TO
CLIO.
O F
Whofe Recovery Strephon zy4ir	^'®'‘
forrAdy wherein he tells her of his Love.
N this fmall Time, fo great my PafTion’s
It leaves no Minute of my Tinte, my own j My fbfteft Thoughts on Clio’s Lines employ’d.
Still find out fomewhat new to be enjoy’d: Over and over I thy Versts read,
Still Sickening with a Flame, which ftill I feed:
So parch’d in Fevers drowthy Wretches lie.
And drink they will, tho’, when they drink, they die.
A s fleeplels Men for fatal Opiates long.
And future Griefs for prefent, Eafe prolong.
So, when I read, two Paffions I fuftain,
’Tis always Fleafure, but ’tis always Pain^
*
E y	When
t
I
, When now I recollect thy Thoughts divine,
I wifli my Soul as f$mfy’d as thine;
Yet heav'aly Thoughts, that human Paflions movci Tempt fne to venture, and reveal my Love:
Dropping the Spirit, Td the Man commend,	j
Tdm wou’d I pleafe, but (hudder to offend.
Pleas’d with the Images of Thought at leall,
I nurfe and fondle them within my Breaft:
Then with the borrow’d Wings of Love I fly, ■) To thzt green Bow'r, where Clio us’d to lie,	V !
And make Imagination be my Eye.	y
By Fancy’s Force, I fee my lovely Maid,
Reclin’d, and fleeping on her gralTy Bed;
Gently I breath amidft the gladden’d Air,
That plays among the Lab’rinths of her Hair,
And bid it Ibfcly whifper in her Ear:
Oh ! wake not--------only dream that Strephon’s here,
Then, from thy blufliing Lips, a Kils I fteal,	T
And beg of the next heXmy Vital Gale,	r
Which to thy panting Breads thy Lungs exhale, ^ To carry to thy Heart a Tide of Heat,
And teach thy Pulfe the March of Love to beaB But fpeechlefs, motionlefs, the Fair-one lies.
Sleep fcals her Fancy, as it feals her Eyes.
That Silence, in her Sleep, defiroys my Peace,
As Speaking did before, but different Ways.	C
®h! that fhe ne'er had [poke, or ne’er rooHld eeafe! j
Ah I
Ah! then (cry I) (he dreams not, lovely Dame !
She peps- •‘"—his I, tho’ broad am>sike,t\\sX dream. Oh! that my Clio did but dream fo too!
What now is only Thought, would Icon be true.
\
This faid, I juft was yielding to Defpair,
But thy laft Letter diflipated Care,
There, there you fay------my Numbers you approve.
You like yourfeif ■ '—and give me leave to love. Leave? —— O ye Cupids bear the Tidings high.
As the bright Orb that circlesvound the Sky,
To diftant Worlds my plighted Love proclaim.
To diftant Nations her dear Accents name:
She gives me Leave—.— O found thofe Words again! And found them, Till the lovely Maid I gain!
S T R E P H O N.
-	V
«
»
T O
t
/
T O	j
STREPHON.
H .	'	*
\
r
My Friend,
I
U L L Bufinefs, that came as unexpefted '	unwelcome, call’d me from
l^Si ^	Home for two or three Days, and has fa-
tigued me extreamly. At my Return I
repaid with your ingaging Letters; but at the fame Time I receiv’d one from an only Brother in Spain, in which he invites me thither. The paf-fionate Defire I have to fee him, after feven Years Ab-
fence, will, I fear, perfuade me to venture j yet lafliire you there is nothing belonging to my native Country, (where we both intended fliortly to return j I fhould
grieve to leave moi^, than your thnder Correlpondence, which affords me j(b mueh Pleafure; But I muft (fhould I go) entreat a Continuance of it ; it will help to make a foreign Climate plcafant to me, and I fhall take thofe Lines you already favour’d me with, as fbme of the mod: valuable Things I have. I believe it will be fbme Months
yet e’er I go j therefore let me in them hear from you
very
J
\
A
\ '
very often, and do all you can to perliiade mej that my Memory (hall not die with you in my Abfence, which perhaps may be two or three Years. I go to a Brother, who is much dearer to me than my felf, whole Abfence has been one of my greateft Shocks in Life, and help’d with the Murder of the beft Father in the World, tofpoil my little Genius. I wi(h, my Friend, you could fee this dear Relation of mine, who, I muft fay, is the moft per-fe<a of his kind, a fine Perfon, with fine SenSe, and the greateft good Nature. But then you would fey Clio did not deferve your Notice: However, (he is ever, and ever will be,
' Your Mojl Faithful
Obliged Friend^
CLIO,
TO
\
«/•
A\w.:r<§i>	gIT^
TO
C L I O,
II
WHO
yujl after JJje tells mepe gives me Leave to Love, which pe expreKes in the fine ft of Verses, tells me in a Letter, jufi afterthatpe's go-
ing to a Brother in Spain.
%
a WE heard of Merchants loft by Fortune’s
And Mem’ry now prefents them to my
—•— Ay, there’s the Coaft	methinks they fmile
to fee
Th’indulgent Surface of yon curling Sea,
The gentle Winds, with their propitious G^/w,
Juft to their Wifh inipiring all the Sails,
Of Ships rich laden, which had long been tofs’d In Boift’rous Storms, and given o’er for loft.
Their Shouts run echoing round the hollow Shore,
Each thinks he hugs his Bags of Indian Oari
Blefles
0
r
Blefles his Stars, and cries, that Fortune’^ Hand,
Their Wealth infur’d, and brought their Ships to Land.
But Fortune’s various Goddefs cry*d------- not So
#
And bad the blufirimg God of Wmds tO“blow 5 Obedient ^Eolus unlocks his Caves,
Sends Winds to drive the Ships, and fret the Waves;
This Way and that impell’d, the Billows roar.
And bear them, in a Moment, far from Shore;
In vain they murmur, and in vain they pray.
The louder Storms drown all they have to lay;
Deaf are the Seas to their unpitied Cries,
Winds upon Winds, and Waves on Waves arife,	^ -
And hide the Jinking Fines from weeping Eyes. 3
How nat’ral ’tis to feel a Wretch his Moan,
When fmall Refleflion makes the Cafe one’s own ?
Richer were I, than thofe that fhare the Eaji,
It thy Soft Form my clalping Arms potlels’d: j On Seas of Troubles has my Mind been tofs’d,
Long Ibught, thro’ Rifques of being ever loft;	^
Thy Arms its Harbour, and thy Smiles its Coaji;	^
Sometimes in Hope, but ofc’ner in Defpair,
’Till you at length inclin’d to hear my Pray’r.
Just as to home-row'd Barks, xddincreajing Shores,
Jet forth, and feem to meet the lab’ring Oars,
So tow’rds/>b' Bofom did I f»iftly fteer.
The Way feem’d Jhortedd, and the Sky was clear;
You
#
#
You feem'Fapproaching —-— Nature’s felf was gay, '
And I ferener than a Summer’s Dayj
But Dfeftiny’s Black Clouds Bill lurk’d behind^
My Stars grew cruel, juft as you grew kind:
Me! fruftrate Hopes convey to Dennis’ Plain,
And Fortune fnatches thee away to Spain.
Yet hear my Clio, thy befl: Friend advife;
[Tho’ thy Fw«^’s Gounlel melts thy Lover’s Eyes]
Since thou haft got an only Brother there.
Wife like his Sifier, like his Sijier fair.
Since he has Ible Pofleflion of thy Mind,
Which might poflefs the Hearts of all Mankind,
Might all, that can its lov’d Acquaintance boaft.
Render its Slaves, but Strephon ftill the moft.
Go------yes thou (halt —— my Hand (hall be my Foe,
My Hand fhall lead thee, fince thou’rt bent to go.
And if bafe Fortune were lefs harjh to me,
I’d the Companion of that Voyage be.
But as to Fortune in this earthly State,
My Name’s writ backyvard in the Books of Fate;
Go------fhare the Pleafures of a Brother’s Breaft, ^
And leave a Lover void of ^oy and Rejl,	^
For me no matter-----Clio will be blefr.
To feme dark lonely Cave I can retire.
Weep away Life, and with a Groan expire.
STREPHON.
f
In
t
Ifi AnSwer to
Two LETTERS
■
Strephon Sends me:
In One he tells me his Pajjfion is increafd^ in the
other advifes me to go to Spain.
^	Thought----which I fhould “N
moft commend,	^
The Lover, the Thilofopher, or Friend,
They all delight fo much, they all So high\ afcend.	,
Urely thole Titles do Ib well agree,
rhe pleating Wonder is all nevo to me,	f
(thoufand dift’rent Virtues Jhine in thee.
ily Friendfhip you deferve fo many Ways,	^
rhy tender Paflion, and inchanting Lays,	^
nipire my grateful Song, to chaunt thy Fraife,	^
Fre<
y ....
I
«
Preferring Clio’s Int’reft to thy own, fuch a Compliment I have not known.
Thy kind Philolbphy I do approve,
Nor think thy Offer an Affront to Love,	r
For I by common Methods never move.	^ i
i
Yes, I will go-----you further my Defign,	Y :
My Soul grows ftrong, while it communes with thm \ ^ i For Friend, nor Country will I much repine.	^
Stay but a while, I’m ready to attend j Thy gen’rous Arm, and faithful Comfel lend:
This little Bark , Oh 1 teach me how to guide.
Far from the Rocks of Levity or Bride,
For, Oh! I go, where I mud think to find.
Things of thy Form, voithout thy God-like Mind.
Still lively Youth upon my Temples plays,
Tho’ I to ’oanifh it, have had Allays;
Which if I had but Courage to repeat.
Thy Tears wou’d flovr, and haplefs Clio’s meet.
A Murdedd Father! -------Nature here expires
Faint on the Rack, and drops its fofteft Fires;
For ever does the Profpeit frefh appear.
And, while I write, Blood crimfons ev’ry Tear.
Oh! have cny manly Heart-Strings e’er been try’d,
Has Sorrow dragg’d them hard on ev’ry Side?
Has no kind Thought prefented to revive
The breaking Springs of Life, and keep thy Hope alive?
Have e’er thy lagg ng Veins forgot to move.
Been dead to Mttfick, Wine, and gentle Love ?
Oh !
oh! lay, haft thou luftain’d this deadly Woe?
Our equal Souls fhall then acquainted grow.
And fure thou haft fome mighty Sorrow known,
Some bitter Draught has in thy Cup been thrown, Q Tis by thy Numbers fraught with Sadnefs fhown. ^ Sweet Melancholy in thy Verfe appears,
Bur, Oh! how graceful are her charming Tears!
Each Sigh that mingles v/ith her moving Words,
Each tuneful Stop a Harmony affordsj But yet be Jlill, in happy Silence reft,
Nor let my Parting pain your gen'rous Breaft,	q
Ceale to remember Cuo, and be bleft.
Let partial Fate be cruel to thy Name,
Since it is written in the Book of Fame’, '
♦
To whatfbever Nation I’m convey’d,.
My Poet fhall be ftill immortal made;
I will thy Merit and thy Lays rehearfe.
And eharm the witty	with thy Verfe;
rho’ skill’d in Love, they humbly (hall fubmit lo thy fuperior Tendernefs and tVit.
Spain fhall not ftill her nobler Lovers boaft.
Nor always triumph o’er our froz.en Coafi}
Far from the Sun, the Lord of fprightly Fires, Britannia lies; but fhe has foft Ddires :
The God of Love flies here with flower Wing, ^ But yet her Martial Sons can love and fing,	^
For here Bays, Laurels, and the Myrtles fpring.	^
v_tfx_, j Kj t,\j u X i\.jc,r xauLV •
Thy Numbers are fb tender and fb bright^
They Ihall appear, and do thy Nation 'Right.
But while on Fancy's Wing I fly to Spain,
A mburnful Thought recalls me back again.
Thou wilt thy abfent Clio’s Eyes forget.
But I mijlake, thou haft not feen them yet i Soon all thy Soft Ideas thou wilt lofe,
That fire thy Soul, and animate thy Mufe:
The Wheel of Fortune may its Humour Ihow,
And, often turning round, may caft thee low;
Wilt thou remember abfent Clio then,	^
And know the FiBure of her Soul again,	?
Which file has fent thee painted with her Fen f j I hear thy fighing Heart affirm it will.
My Faim is lojl, and all my Fears are fiill.
Oh! what ftiall I return thy Soft Regard,
Be everlafting Friendfhip thy Reward,
Such as thy Soul fo ardently demands^
Whofe truest Value Strephon understands.
CLIO.
4
ON
ON THE
FoUowing LINES
I N
CLIO’s Letter.
^	'di^oughty which I fhould moB
Lovery the Thilofophery or "Friend. Pi'eferring Clio’s Int’reft to thy own.
Is fuch a Compliment! have not knownr Tliy kind Phtlofophy I do approve,
Nor think thy Offer an Affront to Love;	^
For I by common Methods never move.
Yes, I will go-You further my Defign, ^c.
/..In happy Silence reft,
Nor let my Parting pain your gen’rous Breaft,	^
Ceafe to remember Clio, and be blefs’d.	j
Stre-
y
/
'	I
. . • ' .	1
S TR R P H O N	Complaint Continued.
HEN (cruelyou will go! you will!Y
g| And artful Blames upon my Cemfel lay, C g As if that drove, nay, pfied you away, r
Judge, judge ye Heav’ns, Oh! lend an cqual Ear, Hear this evading, this upbraiding Fair;
What? if one Moment from my Love I flolc.
And gave cold Friend (hip leave to fway my Soul, if, out of Sealbn ryJfe, and dully £ood.
My yadgment counlell’d, what my tVill withfloodj Should (lie, unfairly rcitty, take that Part,
And play my erring Head againft my Heart?
Soon, and too true my Prophecy wiil prove,
That on my Ruin fhe’ll her Senfe improve,	C
tier Wit I find's an Enemy to Love.	^
Talk then no more to me of Eame and Bays,
Nor freeze my Mind with chilly Friendihip's Praile^
/
They ’re.
Strephon to Clio. 9	'
.-I
rhey’re Guga-sos to the Love at which 1 aim,'
fou gave me leave, and I the Licence claim.	S
’reach not up Brain’d Philolbphy to me,
rhou little SopHisTER in Poetry,
rhat in falfe Arguments dofi: boajl an Arty
Vnd roak’ft a very Flay-Thing of my Heart:
a Love, not witty let us be, but true..
rhat’s Death to me, that is e^J-efi to you.
Yet let thy Confcience liften if it can,’
\nd own the changing Maid and conftant Man $
rhat I did bid thee go-----1 do allow,
ft.nd as a Friend, perhaps fhould do it now.
But, as a Lover, in the foll’wing Lines,
How do I grudge what Amity refigns ?
Did you not plainly by broad Hints perceive,’
rhat, when I laid I’d come to take my Leave, ^
[ meant I’d come to beg a kind Reprieve.	'
Don’t I there tell thee, if we were tp part,
T would bur ft the vital Strings that hoM^my Heart?
That I muft to fbme lonely Cave retire.
Weep Life away, and with a Groan expire!
All this you read, you knew; and was it kind.
To lay you’d go and leave your Swain behind!
Her farewel Words (poor STREPHONj thou muft hear*
Be fteel’d to Grief, which thou art doom’d to bear !
« I
Parting
%
^ STRETHolsr Clio.
Parting Ihe j&ys ——In happy Silence reft,	y
Nor let my Parting pain your gen’rous Breaft,	>
Ceafe to remember Clio, and be blefs’d:	^
What is this lefs, than if (he was to fay.
Speaking her colour’d Words a plainer Way,
*MI pu(h thee pale and dying from my Breaft,
-And tell thee fmiling... in the Grave there’s Red.
Tfhus JUll Complains thy
!
%
; ST REP HON.
t
T 0
T O
E T Clio thy complaining Heart appeafe.
The Hand that wounded, Ihall reftore thy
-	' Receive it. Strephon, from rtiy grateful Feni
Lift up thy Head, and fhine in Verfe again j Cllo! a deathlefs Tnendjhip Bill retains,
A H^onder and a VaJJlon for thy Strains:
Sweet is the Harmony each Verfe affords.
As falling Kiv'lets, or as warhling Birds,
The Morning Lark, and Ev’ning Nightingale ',
Arc hoarfe to thee —— Renesv the pleating Tale'.
'll who ana plac’d fo far in ^Senfe below.
In fainter-Notes my Gratitude will fhowj But, where the Beauties of my Numbers fail.
Thy Love fhall fioop to raife me, and prevail.
Thou haft a Bondnefs for my little Senfe, iTis all that I can plead in its Defence:
\
I
F	bhr
V
i ..
a
/»
,98 Clio to Steelhon.
Oh! had I not a Friend within thy Breaft,
How wou’d my artlefs Song endure the Ted!
The gentle Lover I muft ftill retain,
Or ne’er appear, in Poetry again.
Tis neceffary you Ihould love me Jlill,
And my prophetick Heart divines, you will:
But give me leave to tell you, in -tehat Way^
Hard is the Task, but Strephon will obey 5 Be all thy Willies temperate and cool.
But Strephon whilpers, who can loveby ?
Clio can to thzt Miracle pretend.
And knows,to fraBice what fhe does commend.
In happy Order, all my TaJJions move,
For Clio’s a thilofo^her in Love:
Where Love, and Form, and Fortune have conlpir’d.
To make the charming Orator admir’d When dying Fyes and Vom of ardent Truth,
Have been addrefs’d to my defencek/s Touth,
And I my felf a kind of Pleafure found,	T
For Vanity has gladen’d at the Sound,	r
; Ev’n then I fled from the inchanted Ground.
Let me not boafl: too far: I felt a Pain, ,
‘ *	\
In going, and a Wifh to turn again j So much of Felly has my Bofom known,"
But fteel’d with Time, it is a Stoick grown.
Lovers, and Friends, thofe only Joys below,	'y
If I thy Clio’s Inclinations know,	V
.And.flying Yputh itfelf, Ihe could forego.	J
Half
V
Clio to Strephon. , 199
Half of my Sands are ebb’d, what do remain.
Fall when they will, are fcarccly worth my Pain:
But when the folitary laft appears.
And Clio’s few dear Friends are bath’d in Tears,
It will her laft, and only Glory be,
'.That once her Name was lov’d, and fitng by thee.
CLIO.
k
»
c
t
F 2	AN
An AnSwer to
Clio’s Last LETTER;
<ar
WHERE
^0 heal m'y Corriplaints.^ Jhe offers me FriendJlAp injiead of Loveand on a Report that Clio, (^when floe gave me leave to love') was married/ at that very ‘Time.^ or aSually juery near it,
HEN from a louth fome haughty fair “\
^g Long, \ with obdurate Pride, his Court^
Love-ficl^'^t,length upon his Bed he lies. ' In vain Uardd Dodbors trifle with his Heart,
Their Druggs he baffles, and difovtns their Art:
His Vitals lingYmg with the hidden Blow,
He drops a Wonder to the Shades below :
But, timely if ffe comes, that caused his Pain,
As-much a Wonder, from his Bed the Sxoa 'm	C
Springs to he - Arms, and hifs tceU again.	S
«
In
i.
a
In thy laft Letter, thou prefcrib’ft with
And only playdft the skilful Dotlods Part, rhou lay’ft thou’lt my complaining Heart appeafei Thy Hand, that vpounded, (hould reftore my Eafe.
Not fo — Hot fo — Two pow’rful Hands you boaft,
Tach Hand can make One only raife a Ghoft.
Alternate thro’ thy loft Epillles move	“p
rhe Hand of Friendfhip ^ the Hand of Love’., ^ ftnd, when wounds, that can’t the Wound remove.-^ Why then, when I the Wounds of Love endure.
Does — Friend/hip's Hand adroiniRer the Cure?
YouA have each Wijh be temperate and cool,
Boaft that You can, and bid Me love by Rule,
Can Warmth and Coldnefs in one Bread agree ?
In You I find they can, but not in Me.
One Swam, while I thy cooler Friendjhip prove,	,
Basks in the warmer Sunthine of thy Love.
Yet where’s the need ttKtreat me with Dildain,
Thy Slave infulting whilft he drags thy Chain ?
Tell me (proudVidior) why tMs^frefh Surprize?
Why am I told of Vows and dying % es?
Of ardent Love by Ibme loft Swain pfofefs’d.
That rais’d a painful Pleafure in thy Bread ?
It was to fay (is that my Pleafing Pain !)
She, that fo lov’d, could never love again;
That kind to others, to my felf alone
Her fumifFd Bofom is a Stoick grown.
%
0
F %	ARTFUL
V
^ ' ' A KT'FUL Enjlaver of my freeborn Mind,’	i
Yet, in one Thing, I’ll own thy Art was kind:
Thou would’ft not dafh me from theTop of all
My lifted Hopes, but mollify’d the Fall.
Full well you knew, 1 thought your Breaft my own,
There fat my Heart fecure as on its Throne.	.
Yonr changing Jhoughts, that were my hidden Foes, T
Would not tpo quick their promised Heir depofe,	r i
But the fad Secret they by Halves difclole.
You, like fbme fubtle Minijler of State,	^
To make me Littley as you made me Great,	f
Drew me by flow Degrees to abdicate.
Thou faidfl: thy Indrejl call’d thee crofs the Main>
And a lov’d Brother courted thee to Spain.
I innocently facrific’d my Reft j
Happy in this alone that thou’dfl be blefs’d:
Too true, I did intreat thee to be gone.
And limply unawares my lelf dethrone:
But you, much confeious of fbme inward Guilt, Knowing thy Strephon’s Blood muft fure be fpilt»
To feed my Sorrows, and make Death prevail.
Told of thy murdedd Sire a doleful Tale.
Then crafty ask’d. If I could undergo
Some heavy Weight of vaft impending Woe,	I
And fo prepar’d me for the coming Blow.	3
Thou
/
/
N
N
4
L
Thou hint’d at length, to finilh thy D'efigni'
Love was mother's Share, and Death is minet This kinder from anoiher's Mouth had came.
And not from thiney that rdidd the fatal Flame:
You, of all Nymphs, might this fad Story fpare To haplefs, faithful Strephon’s trembling Ear.
Ill	News has many Feet, and comes too foon.
And it has brought me Word that I’m undone.
Jf whatlVe heard (O Clio) fhouldlie true,
Me have the Fates drove rightly to undo,	?
And Wtt was mod feverely plac’d in You.	^
I’ve heard ("I wifh I had not Ears to hear.
Or die more Patience, what I’ve heard, to bear;)
I’ve heard, by Heav'ns! I have from drong Report^
You Uredded, when you gave me leave to Court.	^
You did not, could not, ’tis aduldrate News,
Credit I did, and I do JliU xeivSe’,
^Bright was the Dame that did thofe Tidings bear,’
And if Maids can be falje^ that are fo fair,	C
There may'nt — Tes / —. nt^ay be Room for my Defpair. J
Was this thy friendly Farting from thy SwainJ Vlssthis the Voyage you would make to Spain?
Was it for fuch an Abfence Strephon mourn’d?
And is thy Brother to a Husband turn’d?
If it be true, dear Blafier of my Youth,
Tho’ you mud blujh, yet oron the dabbing Truth s
F 4	Foip
>	'4
2	O X JX. X/ .tr xjL v^x\ u u v> j_i X Ky»
For fhould I live, perhaps, another Day,
I Ibmew'hat har/h of thy dear Name might fay;
Strike dumb that Madnejs; and, to lay me dead.
Tell me Ibme happy Swain enjoys thy Bed:
Priding in Truth, I’ll my laft Hours employ.
Smile in the Pangs of Death, and wifh thee [oy.
\
\
STREPHON.
f
“N
#• ^
\
#
u
■ “ r. C
" Clio
.	-4
1
ri! '
Sunday Nrghtj going to Bed*
Clio ta Strephon",
having
Sent me twenty Profe Letters to excufe that Sally of Pajfion., into which he hurfts forth in lots lafi Letter ofEerfes^ upon a falfe Report that a Lady gave out.f of my being married.
Ha M but this Moment return’d from Pahis,'
*
after a long Abfence from this my delight--	ful Retirement, and hade to affure you, how
agreeable your Penitence is to me, and that I orgive you with more Pleafure than I -punijldd you. For :was with the utmofi ReluBancy I loft your Commerce. t was the greatejl Liberty I ever allow’d rnyfelf in Lifcj ut even that, you fee, I could refign, when it grew in-^nvenient. I again indulge my Heart with your Letters, vhile they continue fo innocent and ingaging. Your Ho-our and your Senfe will always hereafter regulate thena-t for the Tajle of Clio, and then fhe will thinlc no me of that little Flight of Paffon^ in which had the-
F y	lead
;
lead Share, and even Love itfelf is not infftring without it. I wilh not your Taffion, for me (gentle Strephon) fo great as your Genius., nor do I find any tyrannical Plea-fare, either in your Adoration, or your iJInefs. I intreat *t may never injure your Healthy which is of much Value to me. Let me imagine that Part of your Letter a •well-bred Titiion — My Repofe requires it. For I fhould be truly uneajy to give you one real Pain —< Live and refine the World — be gay, and favour Clio with your Remembrance — as the greatefi Compliment you can pay me, fend me an Exprefs of your Recovery. I wifh for nothing more, and take it very ill, you would pretend to die without my Leave, which I can never grant you, while you love me in fuclr a refpeUful Manner. Every Happinefs attend you: 1 think you ought to efieem this a very high one, that I once more a jfure you, tho’ after fq much Hurry, and being in Hafte to go to Bed,
Float I am Jiill
&
Tout Faithful Friend.^
CLIO.
S T R
¥
%
%
\
' * -	*
AS^Hr^>SS«& ii^®L>63i8i»-^^:::^^Sl^®^	J/lSTvtiiL4^SS^^^&
yjM^MJm^w AjmgfLf^^mxr	^EAIftHMMS^S^^Ib.vlbvlB^vQr^9^^BB8^ ^^^^5flSB55SS9BfcS^^^^^r/Ai^p .^MBfUk^TBkASr^^^ti^ X««X
Paris, Monday F(?»i* o^Clo^k in the ^fternoon^
Ilck in Bed*
StrE P HON ro C LIO.
IC me not, Clio, If I’m welt, or id.	^
r°'^	^ anlwer Bill	>
^ dl, a you pleafe, atid Dying, iiyou wid.^
S T R E P H O N.
P. Si No Evil comes fingle: Juft as I incurr’d your yifpleafure, a heavy Stroke of Fate reach’d me as to my ritvate 'Fortunes, and both have touch’d me fo fenfibly, bat I fear I fhall really die with a broken Heart. But,
• I might have, once more, the Leave of feeing you,-for the former, till you grant a frefh one, I fear I have )rfeited, by being indifcreetly extravagant in my Love, id my Fears of lofing you,) I think I can promife my :lf a Recovery, both from my Indifpofition of Mind, and Ib of Body, Since the Fault proceeded from a Height
of
N
I
4
i
j
of Klndnefs, you will, to fpeak in the moft religious Terms of the Country we are in, be kind enough to grant the Fenitent Lover a plenary Indulgence and Ahfolution, under your own Hand. But let it be in Verfe^ for, to ufe your own Beautiful Expreffion, Verfe is healing to the Mind.
oh I then the /acred Remedy apply,
And pleadd TU live, if not, with fleafure die.
s T R E p H o N./
m
’»
«
Clio
.^U((S^lfiuunSa<^
Clio to Strephok.
€) U L S, that by Mind and Genius are al-
h’^>	C
By Sympathy and Inclinations ty’d,	^
For one another mourn —— forgive my \
Teride.
till live, and living ling to keep my Fame, dr Time and Years will murder Clio’s Name i Inlefs thy Verfe their Woundings countermand, ind I be lav’d by thy fuperior Hand.
Jot Sacuarissa had immortal prov’d,
F Waller had not fung, and had not lov’d j ’hole Eyes, which Xds&World, are funk oxx'iideai, ut glitter frefh, when his bright Lines are read.
Jo Charms of Beauty everlafiing prove,
Jnlefs embalm'd with Poer^y and Love.
Ve lee the Luftre of,the Nut Brown Maid n Chaucer’s Numbers to our Eyes .convey’d;
(.nd nevo adorn'd by our-excelling Pry’r,
'he fhines upon us with redoubled Fire.
'uch are thefe Eyes of mine----for Strephon’s Song ^
s fweet as theirs, as arduous, and as ftrong,	^
lian make mine e^ual, and preferve as long,	^
■>.	....	Cet
Let others guefs my Merit By thy Strain^
I ask no more...— then Clio will be vain.
I grieve that aught fhould wound that gentle Mind To me £o pleajing, to my Mufe fo kind.
Whole foft DifcourSes have delightful made This Corner of theWorld, and blefi my Shade.
But ling again, and all thy Strength oppofe To rigid fortune, and her weighty Blows,
Nor talk of dying thus----for that would he
A Lofs to all Mankind, a Wrong to me:
If Clio, o’er thy Soul a Bight may boaft.
In this important Thing obey her mofi.
And, when thy Sorrows will afford thee Leavel Stray hither, that we may together grieve.
From the Tlain of	T T O'
St.Denni*.	J-i X vy,
\
STRE-
/
Strephon to Clio.
O U R laft Letter was indeed a Cordial to my Hopes — I am very much recover’d ifil and reviv’d; but my Genius ftill retains too great a Damp upoh it from my Afflidlions, to be able to anfWer you in Verfe — Before it can be brighten’d up again, Irnuft derive a new Infpiration from the of that, indeed, according to the Description which I have often heard of your Perfon, and the Idea which I have often conceiv’d of your Difcourle, would Supply the very Defeat of Nature, and make a Poet of me, if I never had been one before. I long to exceed all the Things I could ever yet write my Self, by having anifiterview with you for my inspiring Subject—Gr/ef Ihall then be forgot, and I will be nothing but Joy — DuUnefs Iball then be laid afide, and I will rife up even into a kind of Rapture and laudable Enthufiafm. Tho*, now I can Scarce write Rrofe tolerably well, (So much can AfHiaion deprefs the Genius of the moft lively Man,) yet then, when I have that Intervievo with you for my Subjebl,
I will not only rife above myfelf, but allb attempt to ri-val the greatejl Majlers in the Art of Love, where they
addrefs themfelves to the abfolute Mifirejfes of their Hearts.
I
f'.'.	c '■
• > i
• ••
I think -ephat l (hall want in Genius, will be Jo much move than made up by the SubJeB, that I fhall not (in that one Poem on our Interview) be afraid of being compared witli Tibullus, Catullus, Propertius, Ausonius, or even the great Ovid himfelf, or of being thought a Writer inferior to the beji of them. In the moan Time I have lent you a Poem I wrote about a Year ago, which I intituled Buckingham-Houfe: It was alfb put into Latin, and written to (hew Ibme French Gentlemen, that all the finefi Talaces were not confin'd to a [maU Difiance from Paris, I delire your Opinion, if I have done (bmejuftice to that
fine Scat. I will fpeedily wait on you (fince I have your Leave again) to know your Sentiments concerning it from your own Mouth ■— I am, my beft Friend, and my
deareft Phyfician>
♦
Your Recovering^
And Grateful Patient.^
S T R E P H O N.
TO
T O
ON HIS
POEM,
Intituled
)V CKING HAM-H OUSE.
% ^
aHI S lofty Pile unenvying I furvey’d',
Gods plac’d above, and Beauties in Its C
Till by thy Verfe it was immort^Uiadc. -only wilh to be a Buckingham,
Ihilft you in deathlefs Numbers ling his Name, lor does mv. Heart with fo much Fondnefs beat.	"5
or his high Titles, or his lovely Seat,	|r
s for thy Bays, and ever-flowing Wit.
Thy,
Thy Fancy can a finer Vlew create.
And Groves, and Birds, and Streams her Pleafure waiti Even the Deities vvith Tranfport gaze.
And form’d of Marble fbften at thy Lays.
Then what Imprelfions Sheffield’s Soul mufi; find}
A Poet too, of thy own noble kind.
Some fine Idea happily exprefs’d Glows on his Mule, and marks it from the reft. Methinks in thine a Kindred-Grandeur Ihines Related to his Soul, and to his Lines:
Youth will reanimate his chilly Veins,
And wake again at thy infpiring Strains.
Apollo ne’er with greater Joy furvey’d The (hining Turrets rife, o’er which he play’d.
Than Sheffield the Produ6tions of thy Mind,
Where manly Senfe to Harmony is join’d.
“ Joyful, he cries, the Age, I leave, will lee A Youth, that knows to ftrike the Lire like me.
“ Receive the Chaplet, which my Temples bound,
‘‘ And be thy Mule v^ith all my Beauties crown’d.
Not I my lelf have greater Pow’r to lave “ The Poets Bays, or Laurels of the Brave.
“ She Skill of Architedfs the Painter’s Art,
I
‘‘ Have to the finiflr’d Strudfure done their Part,
But, oh 1 thy Mufe, Superior to the reft.
Its Guardian Angel lings its Wonders beft,
« TheSe
' Thefe Walls by cruel Time may Suffer Wrong,
' And only fbine in thy immortal Song:
' Not Cooperi-mu fliall e’er furvive its Farnet ' Nor is it fung with a diviner Flame.
' Thefe Trees may fink, my Fleafure and my Care, V ' And Sheffield’s Name, which now they proudly L bear,	C
Be trod with vulgar Feet, and perifh there.
' The ProfpeB lojl, the Limes all humble laid.
Not all their Gods can guard x\A\t fav’rite Shader ' Some Foreign Prince, favage and unpolite.
May wound the Grove, beneath whole Shade Iwritcl W here are the Branches, once fo fweet and young,
' Where Ovid figh’d his Flame, and Virgil fung?
' Yet Time thy Verfe, and aU '\X% Charms fliall fpare,
■ And Sheffi eld’s Name fhall bloom forever there.
' Phoebus, the God of Mufick and of Thought,
' Shall guard \h& Wonders, h.c himfeIf hzs wrought. |
‘ When his fierce Steeds drive to the laft great Day,
' And o’er the melting Clouds bound fwift away j ‘ When from their gilded Harnefs they fhall fly,
' And bear to Earth the Light’ning of the Sky j ‘ Then common Verfes, with each Poet’s Name,
‘ Expiring fliall ajffi the mighty Flame:
‘ Thine fhall unbounded be convey’d abovey ‘ And teach xh& Angels how to fing and love..
€ Lia
THE
/
Vlain 0/St * Dennh«
T H E
INTERVIEW,
Being in the
SPRING,
JUST
After Strfphon had been very much afftidled
with Illnefs,^ and feme private Difappointments
J ■/*	T ^
J H#
*w
r
STREPHON to CLIO.
H i Clio, whilft before thy Feet \ bend.
Poet’s Fancy (hall afeend. Thou canft drive Winter from the Northern
Hajien the Summer, and unbind the Frojt.
See i
Strephon to Clio; fij,
ee! the BirJs leave their Nefis to hear thy Voice,
11 Nature gladdens^ and My Cares rejoice.
t
'he Gloom hWs oflF, with which my Soul was prp/?,
,nd Love and	elate my Breaft.
)h! ev’r^ '2aJjton is with Wonder fraught,
ife of my Lays! and Godde(s of my Thought}
hRG IL and Homer on Temples
>art me their Beauties, whilft I gaz,e on thine.
Ye fludious Wretches, throw your Rules afide,'
.earning creeps Jloro to Tame',' ■■■a tedious Guide i fruft me this Charmer has a nobler Art,
•	I* • ^ •
ind inakes a Roet ~— when Ihe tcounds a Heart] lafte then ye Toilers, and rMs Wonder prove,	;
fo be immortal, you muft learn to love.	■;
lame waits upon her, and ajfudd Succefs fiends the Numbers She vouchfafes to blefs,
^RioR may boaft the learned Minds to move,	r”f|
lut Clio brings me Souls that know^ to love. rhe Reader’s Her	Ihall corifefi,
^nd overflovo with Strephon's Tendernefs-,
Uor Age nor DuUnefs can Her Lover find.
Whilst Her Eyes roing his Blood and chear his Mind,
Tm World fiiall wonder by whatwew found Art
I baffled Death-~w^Ais Clio in my Wart.
T Ht
\
\
%
%
K
i
. /
• ’
:n8 STRETHoNdf(7 Clio,
THY Conveyfe can the Scene of Life prolongt For Vciuid Gold pours flowing from thy Song,	>
Which feeds the SoHf and keeps its Spirits Jlrong,	J
Thou too immortal by the Mufes Care,
Shalt Jhine in Dujl, and be for ever fair.
Angels (hall guard it, and thy Lovefs Song,
From vulgar Teet, and ev’ry common Wrong.
Ye Feevifs Beauties, who but Jhine an Hour',
Bnvy to Death fuperior Clio’s Pow’r;
Sec livid Malice, your boajled Cheeks,
Your Lovers fhudder, and the Mirror breaks.
The blujhing Grape your Influence denies^
And only fparkles nov/ from Clio’s Eyes.
/
The murder'd Fans are all in Paflion torn,
And Gods and Goddejfes expire forlorn^	I*
Clio looks down with Fity — and with Scorn. 5 So the tall Poplar views the Shrubs below.
Shoots to the Skies, while they neglebied grow.
FLY from the Glafs, overtake Her noble Flight,
So (hall the Winter of your Days be bright.
When fhe refigns, your Triumphs may fucceed.
Thus may your Lovers fing, and Steel may read;
He is the Taster to the Goddefs Fame,
And weighs the Feeds Senfe, the Loveds Flame.
STREPHOR
THE
I
I	k
✓
*
0
THE
[NTERVIEW.
i
CLIO to STREP HON.
aO iST to the Worldi and negligent of Fatne,"J)
I lay! till Xou from great ApOllo came, ^ Waking my Soul to Numbers in his Name.
Rise Clio, rife! with tuneful Voice you laid, "y Leave fond Amufements, and thy mofly Bed,	^
>oar on the M.u[e$ Wings, and be immortal made. 3.
I wonder’d, and I trembled at the Sound,
For yet no Buys had Clio’s Temples crown’d:
She knew not Fume, nor what her Sturs delign’d, ^ Carving her Thoughts on feme fmcoth Poplar’s Rind, ^ To hurtnlofs Sonnets all her Verfe confidd.	^
The
)
I 20 Clio to Strethon,
»
r	•.
\
The Flame of Wit on Holidays (he bore.
Among the Swainst nor could Jhe hope for more;
A Wedding fofy, or a Valentiney
She knew to write, and that feem’d vtondrous fine. i I dream’t not great Apollo meant me morey Till thou wer’t fent ^/^hright Ambajfador:
Sweet Poefy (eia’d my Bojom zt thy Sight,	\
No more, you cry’d, in Trifies take Ddight,	C
Read all the Summer's Day, and aU the Winteds'S Night.	: ^
Orinoa’s and Asthma’s Thoughts perufe,
Blending thSr diifFeni Beauties in rhy Mufe.
Chafie as Orinda’s let thy Numbers flow,
Bufwith AstrjEa’s Warmth inipire their jp,
And, Ob! when tender Vajfion is thy Theme,
Copy the Language then of Sappho’s Tlame,
Paint thou the Pajfion, but, if that can be!
Amidft the Dangers, keep thy Bofom free.
i Thus, as you (peak, the God of Ver(e defcends Into my Soul—— I loath my duller Friends j 'Tea-Table Converfations I avoid,
Averfe to Nonfenfe, with their Scandal cloyed,
The darkfome Groves fweet Solitude I (ought.
Where modefl Silence is a Friend to Thought i Deftre of Fame pofieft my labVsng Mind, y%ifeVand read, ’till ev’ry Mufe grew kind:
\
>
Smooth*
X
Clio to Strephon. 121
%mooth-tongu'd Applaufe my lucky Thought purSu’d,
And almofl ruidd Clio’s Solitude',
rhe Morning wonders that my -watchful Eyes
Rf/2 with the Moon, and yet with Phoebus rife.
[from Orinda to great Shakespeare change, iVith Wonder, and with Envy, there I range;
Vly Soul all mov’d, I cry, give Shakefpearis Fame,
3 Heav’ns 1 and when you pleafe, dillblve this Frame.
[ ask not Life^ nor Fortune, but the Art^
\s He does mine, to touch the Reader’s Heart-,
[.et others be content to pleafe the Sight, het Me afford more exqnijite Delight} rhe foy of Admiration I would prove, ro fhort-liv’d Toajls, I yield the God of Love:
-et Mb, hereafter be with Tranfport read.
My Numbers fhining, when my Eyes are dead:
Mine’s an Ambition that nor likes, nor needs rhe gilded Chariot, or the dapled Steeds, low dull (my StarslJ was giddy Phaeton? would not wifh the Chariot of the Sun,
'Cor Juno’s Birds, to hear me thro’ the Skies, lut on the Wings of Verfe alone I toijh to rife.
c LI o.
G	Clio’s
' ' '
*
Clio’s PICTURE.
*
%
•	A
#i«««~‘«»»*“*""«»‘i»<^^*""*“*""“'»i’""“’^"..... '" ' ■'■■•■	imm^rnmmm,	... ,■■■ i i ■««
By HerSelf.
i
Here let the Mufe perform the Painter’s
And Rrike the Pifture of my Face and
Pqefy is call’d the Image of the Mind,
In mine my Soul and Body both are join’d. Large is my Forehead made, not wond’rous fair.
But Room enough for all the Mufes there j
4
Full are my Eyes, arid of a harmlefs blue.
As if no Wound they made, or Dart they knew.
My Eyebrows, circ’ling o’er, a Shade beftow.
Veiling the Dulnefs of the Eye below.
Nature, fo niggard to the upper Part,
Fell to my Lips, and gave a Dalh of Art:
Oft have I heard her faithful Lover fwear.
That Poetry and Lore were (hining there.
Even
f
\
\
Clio’s PICTURE. 123
Even and white mj’ Teeth, but rarely fhown.
In Life I’ve little Caufe for fmiling known;
The Lofs of Friends fell on my tender Years,
Dafli’d ev’ry Hope, and turn’d my Smiles to Tears.
A gloomy Sweetnefs on my Features hung.
Sorrows my Pen, and Trembles on my Tongueii Slow is its Speech, and with no Mufick fraught.
Wronging the Richnefs of my Soul’s beft Thought.
/
But, whither is the mournful Pencil (Iray’d,
My Hair dark brown wants not Buceliad Aid, F
Flovvs in the Wind, nor of the Comb afraid^
Beneath my Waift in nat’ral Rings defcends,
Or pliant to the artful Finger bends,	V
When it betides, that Drefs and I are Friends.
Eafy my Neck, but of no darling White
Veil’d by the Lawn from the enquiring Sight.
My Shoulders full as Nature’s felf informs:
Small are my Fingers, nor too plump my Armsj
To the nice Eye no Tranfport they afford.
But to the Ear they prefs the fpeaking Cord j
Then mv Cares murmur with a lower Breath,
' /
Drop from my Eyes, and weep themlelves to Death*. Ev’n now they prefs to wrong this artlefs Draught, Brib’d by my Fate to ruin ev’ry Thought.
G 2	My
J
/
lA Clio’s PICTURE.
4
My Feet with no ungraceful Motion tread,
Tho’ Ifaads Steps are from my Mem’ry fled.
To decent Height my Stature is inclin’d,
Worthy the Mules, and a gen’rous Mind.
To thy kind Eyes Clio Submits her Form,
Thy Verfe can give it,every abfent Charm.
Thou, in whom Art and Love, and -Nature fhincs. Immortalize my Pidure in thy Lines.
\
■ A
^ «
#
%
A Critical
E S S A Y,
Containing Some Remarks upon the Nature of Epistolary and Elegiack
p o E T R Y/
And the most
Beautiful Passages
7
«
In the Epistles of
Clio and Strephon.
K
^ • •
By Way of Letter from Mr. John Porter, to his Friend Richard PococK ^ Turfield-Court, in the County ef Bucks, Efqi
Dear Sir,
^ I" Editor of the foregoing Poems being pleafed to pafs a Compliment upon my Judgment, first defired me to
Opinion of this Performance.
And really, when I had read them
‘	G 3	over,
*
t m A Cnticfal Miss AY on the
over, I own I was teiMted- to Speak my Mind of them, and, by way oSGratitude, to make a Small Retiuti of PraiSe to a Work, which administer/d So much Heafure to'me in the Reading. I wasmnwilling to do this in publick Print, after Such a Manner, as to Seem delivering my Opinion to the World, ijecaufe that' Would carry with it' too much- of the' Appearan'co of a profefi Cmuky a' Thing., which I dare openly profeSs I am not; and I wish, what I havb here written, does not more plhinly declare' that Truth for me, than I do:- for my SelE I therefore chufe to give mine rather as a private Opinion to a Friem^.^ who'j if he could not intire-Jy come into my Sentiments, would be So kind, at least,, aanot to ceiefme me. The* first Moment I thought of doing it, to what a Man may. call his Friend, in the genuine and extenfive Senfe of the Word, you wilS not Wonder, that you was the first Perfon I pitched upon, who have a long, Time favoured me with ybur Converfation,. and enjoined me to make Freedom and Farniliarity the chief Articles of it; and therefore I begin without further Ceremony.
IT has been remark’d by the ingenious Major Pack, that, though there is nothing, in which Wit, Humour, and Gallantry, makes So great a Figure as in Letters, yet the Engiip have not many Collecstions of Familiar Letter^ that are of any Value; and I must add, that in my Reading, I don’t remember to have met with any in Verje^ I mean, where a. Correfpondqice has
been
- r
%
N
been carried on for a Space of Time, ThoSe few, that ever appear’d, Seem’d to be the Works of In-i^ention, and Starts and Sallies of Fancy, and have (as they proceeded from nothing but a Lust :)f Wit) been accordingly filled and crowded with indecent Images. But thele, which I offer :o you, have, befides their Novelty, many innocent Charms, that make them Sweetly entertain-ng. The Correspondence between Clio and Strephon first took its Rife from the Liking % md Esteem which they had for each other, from, a meer Acquaintance with their Writings, and at last, in the ProgreSs, it grew'^ into an Ideal Love^ when they had no Knowledge of one another, but by Descriptions from a third Perfon; and the' Book itfelf concludes with the JirJl Interview they ever had. Where a mutual and paffionate Flame was thus first lighted up in the Minds of y’oung People, what Elegance of Expreffion is it we might not expedl from them.^ When Love makes its Inroad through the Eyes to the Heart of Man, Love is Seldom the CauSe of a lasting Esteem; but both the FondneSs and the Value Dali with Enjoyment, and vanifh with the tasted Charms. But where reciprocal Esteem is got into the very Soul, a bare Liking of Perfons con-nedls them in an indissoluble Tie of Love and Friendfhip; No Esteem can be lasting, w'hich is grounded upon that capricious Humour of the Eye, which we falfely, though commonly call Falling in Love with any Body; but Love is eter-
G 4	nal,
IZo II Vw/llLlLdl XZ/b bA X un TI06
nal, where a true inward Esteem is its Forerun-* iier. It would be thereSore to do them an Injury, to pretend to make a thorough Parallel between theirs and any other Love Epijiles., there never having appear’d any before of the Same Nature, and thefe being ferfeSi Originals in their Kind. Letters of Love and Friendfliip between a young Lady and a Gentleman, who never beheld one another’s Faces, no not So much as in Effigy, are Things, I believe. So very rare.^ that they have been never heard of till now; and yet 1 believe I may Say, there are other Things be-stdes ^srare belonging to thefe Letters, and thofe are the beautiful and inimitable Turns of Wit, with which they as Jingularly expreSs the Pastion of flieir Minds, as the Passion is itSelf fingular. The next Rarity of them is, that there is all the Softnefs of Love, without the Indecency of it; and even the Man’s Part, if it betrays a Thought or Willi beyond what the purest Maid might en tertain with Safety to the Virginity of her Mind, it is with a Tendency to that State, which is very honourable, and than which nothing but Virginity itSelf is more laudable; and the Fair, in full Possession of all the treaSured Beauty, Virtue, and Bloom of Fifteen, may read every Line of if, with as much Innocence, as fhe may hear a kind Expression, or behold a Look, more kind than ordinary, paSs between her Father and Mother.
But Sir, I would not have it thought, that I endeavour to talk thefe Epistles into Credit, mere-
h
/*
ly becauSe I like them, and have aTasse Sor them iny Self: For, if I did not believe they would certainly procure a great Reputation for them-felves, I would never have preSamed to offer them to you. But I have a Mind to venture into the World my Remarks upon Some Passages, that I think more particularly beautiful, and my Observations upon Several Turns of Wit, Humour, and Passion, which I take to be peculiar to this kind of Epistolary Poefy. By this Means,. vrhen I come to hear whether you and theWorld * cenSure or approve my Notions, I fliall reap the Delight and Benefit of finding my own Judg-ment.^ either confirrn'dj or elfe fet right and irn-'
Proved.
In theSe Remarks, I Shall first have an Eye to :he Part which the Lady bears in this Work; fiie ndeed plainly appears to be feitFair-one mMindy. iS well as in Sex: And if the Signs of bold and“ nanly Strength are here and there to be found in he (jenius of Strephon.^ the Syrens.^ the SmileSy ind the Graces.^ warble.^ conquer.^	^^nd awe
ilmost in every Line of Clio, and her Mind vaS'furely formed to excite Such an intelleSinal 3ourtfliip. I almost grow a Rival to the Poet, vhen, I write of his MistreSs that I never Saw, ind I fancy every ingenious Man will be the ame that reads her._ When first the Word Angel vas attributed to	I believe it was in Some
Vleastire properly applied to a Fair-one that re-embledCLio; and the Term has been ssiameful-y miSuSed by others ever fince, till it is now a-
G y	gain
gain applied only to her,, from the nearer ReSem-blance flie Seems to bear to thole bright Spirits, than to any of the wittiest of her own Sex.
#
Firft LETTER, Page i.
the very first Letter of hers which is extant, the Poetry is full of DVe, but as full of Puri-^ ty \ fhe fliews herSelf eminently distinguiflied from all her Sex. For tho’ fhe has (as I have been informed) as many exterior Charms, as might alone render a young Woman very vain of herSelf, yet, though her Male Correspondent press-Scs very hard to See her, fhe artfully diSparages her own PerSon, to try, as it were, if Wit alone could be enough of itSelf to win him, and owns' that the Same Power in a Man would prevail with her, let his perSonal Appearance be what itwmuld.
I think fhe Speaks of herSelf under the pretended DiPdvantages of the Small Pox, and a fpoiled Completion, in Lines as fprightly and tempting as I ever read.
But Heav’n forbid that you fliould ever fee That Outfide, which the Vulgar World calls me. Nature has been ungentle to my Face,
With artlefs Fingers fliadowed ev’ry Grace :
Deep has fhe left her cruel Marks behind.
As if fhe meant to star my very Mind.
My
«
I
My Sk'n flie fullted with a fallow Hue,
That fcarce my Soul is fecn to Iparkle thro’.
4
She then comforts herSelf under theSe affumed Disadvantages with what (when flie calls them her little Talents in Poetry) fhe proves to be the greatest that can be; and then artfully steals into the Reader’s Soul, by convincing him, that ^||je Favour, which fhe would do him in overlooking. alfcorporal Imperfedlions, was immenSely due^^ from him to herSelf in theSe concluding Lines. ^
Whate’er thy Perfon be, I fhall o’er-pafs,
Who would throw Diamonds by to look on Glafs?
Or who would mind the Stars imperfecst Light,
When the great God of Day attradis the Sight ?
I
Second LETTER, Page 4.
\ \
^ H E AnSwer which Strep hon makes, ap-pears to be skilfully Suited to the Taste of his MistreSs: He had told her before (as appears by her first Letter) what Idea he had formed of her Perfon from Description, (and ’tis really a Pity it is lost.)
And he therefore now tacitly acquiefces in what fhe fays of herSelf, and makes his Advantage of it, by giving her a Description of his own Perfon, which he calls an indifferent Fi-5ure, and by defiring her, as it were, beforehand :o keep her Word with him, and to let that be no
Obstacle
<
.Dbftacle to her bestowing her Love upon him, when he fliould come to make his Appearance before her, and makes that Confidence in her Promise, a Sarther Argument still, why he must venture to See her.
Third LETTER, Page 7.
%
TJ ER Reply to this is by way of a poeUck
Dream, where fhe makes her Fancy kindly represent loim to herfelf in most advantageous Colours, notwithstanding thofe in which he had painted himfelf to her Imagination before. The whole Epistle is /qfi:, tender., and engaging ; and, though it is even fuppofed to be a Dream of a Woman., concerning her hover., it appears more like the virtuous Rapture of a kind well-wilhing Friend., and is filled with moral and pious Semi-raettts.
Fourth LETTER, Page 11.
TNSPIR.D with Such a good-natured Opi-nion, -as fhe has of him, he next (what we might naturally enough exped from him) WTut to See her, but he is forced to wuite her Word of it, or file had been ignorant of the Matter; for, it Seems when he came even to her HouSe, his Heart failed him, and he had not Courage enough to venture in, or even to enquire for her. This
(whe-
Nhether an affeflionate Truth., or a well-bred Fidtion) was certainly (where a virtuous Mind was first to be engaged and fubdued) a majierly Step towards gaining Pity., Benevolence., and Af-feSiion. And Such a Figure of a Man s Modejly., where a Virgin Mind, So witty and So pure, was to be tempered and melted into Love, was his hfi Expedient; for it naturally mollifies the most rigid Virtue, by not feeming to dare to aim at So high an Attempt. True Virtue is generous and humble in icfelf, pities thoSe who are too much awed by it, and, out of meer Humanity, condescends to be familiar', but where Boldnefs prejfes upon her Retirement, and invades her Privacy, stie is alarmed, and takes State upon her with a decent Pride. Thole lofe Ground who would think to gain it, as is pra6lifed with good Succefs in the ordinary CourSe of Courtjloip. A Woman’s Love, which begins in her Eye, is of a coarfer Mold, than Love which begins in her Mind. In that her Body has the fir(i Share, and tempts the Mind to her own Frailty, in this tho. Blind of the Woman is free from all Frailty of its own, and if llie confents at least to love, Ihe gratifies the Frailty of the Man, and not her own, ■ecVih, permits the frail human hover, in order to enjoy more clofely the purer Part of him, the Angelical Friend. In this therefore he has uSed the true Art of a Courtier; an Art the more to be admired, becauSe it isjufi, and yet uncommon, delaying to fee a MistreSs, whom he longed, and whom he had Leave to fee. In order to diSpoSe
her
4
her Mind for Love, while he thus covertlyhtgslt,, he Sends her the Part of Love between (Florinda andTANCREDi, which is one of the
most moving EpiSodes in all Torquato Tasso, transsated by his own Hand.
N. B. These Fragments from Laffo.^ which were given over for lost, have been recover’d ssnce Mr. Portefs Death, who would elfe have given us his Remarks, and are here infer ted with the Letter which accompanied them to Clio.
Fifth LETTER,- Page 49.
f
^ LI O’s AnSwer to this Letter of his, and on ^ his Verfion of Tasso, which he Sent her at the Same Time, is So entirely beautiful, that no particular Part of it can be named as fine, without doing Injury to the others that remain unnamed. Foritis one continue dBenuty ^l\\ throughout, beginning with an Exclamation of her being forced to retire, even from his Voice., becauSe his Modefty won upon her So much in not appearing himfelf, Ihews the GreatneSs of the Generojl-ty of Mind, I defcrib’d above, to the highest Perfection, and renders her more amiable than ever, and makes her move Love more in Proportion, as stie appears more mov'd with it herfelf: P’or, there, ev.en a Pajfion is built, where it is very rarely bu stt, upon the JirongeJi Foundation of the ftridiefi Honourfne.fiundefl’Judgment, Now
)
}
t
'I/ .....................r--------- “3^
I canst refist the Temptation of fingling out Some Lines of hers, which, I will venture to fay, arc more than any Man could deServe, tho’ Ihe is pleas’d to addreSs them to her Strephon;’ (I fancy I am here growing again his Rivaf and that I envy him as much a Mistrefs, whom I never Saw, as he lov’d her before he Saw her,) and I fingle them out, becaufe I own they pleafe my Taste particularly, and becaufe the ExprelSions mostly Seem to be turned in that graceful., eajy, natural, and yet firong Manner, for which Mr. Addifon, who is now Immortal, was So eminently confpicuous.
The World, which leem’d a Trifle to my Viewi Is lest dest)is’d, fince ’tis adorn’d by you;
And I its empty Pleafures could endure.
Were but my Soul of fuch a Friend fecure;
How few in all the Tour of Life we find.
That either can improve or charm the Mind ?
Scarce can my Thought, in all the boasted Crowdi Recal one Friend to make my Mem’ry -proud,
Tho’ much of Flattery my Youth has prov’d,
(For I have been, what others call, beloFdf^
Yet still, my nicer Inclination found Some happy Fault to keep me yet unbound.
After this, turning all her Pleafure and Care to her Mufe, and praying him to do the like; and then running imperceptibly into the Praife of
the
jCi b bA 1 un lue
the TenderneSs of his Compofition concerning the Loves of Clorinda and Tancredi, to evade the Love offered by him to herfelf; all theSe, I Say, are Beauties, which, if they were to be found in any of the antient Writers of poetical Love Epijiles., I except not even the great Masters, Ovid and Libullus themfelves, many Pages would be filled by Commentators in their PraiSe.
Sixth LETTER, Pageyi.
HE next is Strephons Letter; and there he recapitulates in a Dream all the Lady has Said to him, and anfwers it Paragraph by Paragraph, by way of Dialogue, turning all very dexteroufly to his own Favour. But the Place, which he Seems most to turn to his Advantage, is that, wherein he introduces her endeavouring to divert his Mind from the farther PurSuit of Love, and to join with her in cultivating thoSe Social Studies, which WTre vdiolly to terminate in the Mufes, whom file is pleas’d to call his Friends; and that consequently, by his Interest in them, he may perpetuate her Fame, which, fhe modeftly instnuates, would not long Subfist without his Help; ThefeWords of hers he turns thus; and where fhe Seems most to avoid his Co.unfnip, there he pustieth it the most home.
Clio
\
JEjJpijTlCS Oj V^llU ClYlbvv OLXCpilUHt ^ j /
Clio is all my Pleafure and my Care,
' And Tno other’s Fetters wifli to wear :
To me then, Clio, all thy Fondnefs give.
And let thy trueft, tcnd’reft Lover live.
Of that I can no Danger apprehend.
If ev’ry Mufe is, as thou lay’ft, my Friend.
Heav’n knows, of all the Nine, but one I chufe.
Ye Heav’ns! let Clio be that friendly Mule;
Then future Ages will repeat my Name,
For, if (he’d wear it, fhe wpu’d give it Fame,
Seventh LETTER, Page S9-
foregoing Letter had, it Seems, the MiS-i -*• fortune to be detain’d a whole Month by a Lady, to whom the Care of it was entrusted, before it was deliver’d to Clio, which occassons, in her Anfwer, many Expressions of Regret, and tenderest Refentment, upon the Account of her not receiving it Sooner. She praiSeth the ChaJUty of his Dream, and fignisses, that the Goddefi of that Virtue gave her Leave to approve it; and, when fhe has anSwer’d the Objeaioa of thoSe Prudes, who might make an Exception against her going Such Lengths in her Favour to him, fhe flies into a metaphorical Rapture of Poetry, that the Letter did not Sooner come into her Hands, which, if Longinus was again to live, and to be the Judge of, he would certainly place
down
1 j o FL v^riLiLcu Cj s sil X vn irjt^
down as an Example of the Sublime. The ■ Words are theSe:
*«
My guardian Angel fhould have been their GuideJ And to his Wings thy am’rous Paper ty’d:
In bearing of the glorious Sheets along,
Apollo would have caught the flying Song j And, as he cut along the lower Sky,
Thy Verfe had taught his Pinions how to fly,
H er placing him afterwards in So liveN a Manner before her Sight, and expressing heiTdeas, that ssie fees his very Features, his Shape, his Air, his Look glowing.^ as it were, when he fortunately hits upon an Expression, which he thought would pleafe her, is a Mafier-Stroke in Writing, which Mature must have didtated, andy^r^ could not teach; and like theWay with which Women charm their Lovers, when they own they are charrd.d., and by which, when they ssgnify their Lovers steal into their Minds, they rather sseal into the Minds of their Lovers: She Seems to be perSuading, whilst ssie fears to be perfuaded; and her Mind, in the Clofe of this Letter, appears to be brought to thatProgrefs in idealLovCy as a young Woman’s is in pradiical Courtfhip^ when her denying is So faintthat it may pafs for Granting: And this ssie expreffes in So artful A. Manner, as might inflruS the most courtly Maid how to afi on the fame Occassoii.
‘	s
The
^	\M	JL	J ^ j
The Pow»’r of Ver/e my ravi(h*d Soul has proved,
*So can’ll thou charm, and fo is Clio mov’d.
What artful Methods thePoetick 6nd,
To deal themlelves into the Reader’s Mind ?
I fliould receive thy dang’rous Wit with Care,
For, Oh! the Poet lies in Ambufh there.
I fee, I hear thee, thy perfuafive Art!
Oh! keep thy Verfe, and let me keep my Heartj Or if, O gentle Bard! thou art my Friend,
While thou attaclc’ft, inftruil me to defend.
Ai-'
Eighth LETTER, Page 63;
I N the next Letter Strephon may be SiippoSed to try his utmost Interest in her Breast, upon this Encouragement, tho’ the Letter is unfortunately lost; whereupon Clio, in her AnSwer to it returns to her firjl Intrenchment,^ and places all her PraiSes in Platonick Love wndfure Friend- -(hip. She calls him a Spirit., alluding to his f(rr-mer Dream., his Breaji., (he fays, is Aithereal;, (he owns that, in that Senfe., fhe converfeth with h\m •xt Midnight I that fhe has pray’d to have a Lover like him made of Air \ Says his is not an earthly F^ajfion., but a more tranfeendent Flame., and that Love itfelf is too mean a Name for it. But, before flie concludes, (he acknowledgeth the Power of his Verfe has excited Some Soft l^eelings in her Bofom, vows fhe will retire, yet
owns
t ^
N
•	V	^	-- —	^	- W ^	^	^ ^
\ 0 ^
owns fhe cannot; defires him not to court her, for fear file fliould yield; and a thoufand other beautiful Tendernesses fiie expresses altogether; but, at last, file hath Recourfe again to her Jirong-eji Retreat.^ turns all this Tide of Rapture into meer fp’mtual FondneSs, claims her Lover’s Ap-probation for the Honour of doing So, and, at the lame Time as fhe rejefis his Love., file demands his eternal Friendpip., and intreats him in his fpi-ritual Capacity to vijlt her every Night.
Thus (peaks my Soul; but it, alas 1 is join’d,	^
To human Clay, which is to Rules confin’d,	^
And thou thy felf would’ft chide it, if too kind;
Yet whatfoever rigid Form attends, i Let us at Icaft——eternally be Friends,
And I intreat thee, Oh! my charming Spright*
In Ver.fe tovifit Clio ev’ry Night.
Ninth LETTER, Page 66.
^HE next Letter is Strephon’s, and contains a melanchollY Account of the Interruption of the Gaiety and Pleafure of their Loves: The Subjedl of this Interruption is nothing leSs than his receiving the ill News that the MistreSs of his tender Affedtions is fallen fick. The greatejl Beauty that I obServe in this Letter is, that the Heart of the Writer appears plainly to have a greater Share in the Compojition of it than the
Head,.
'x
s
Eptfiles of Clio and Strephoii. 3 41
Head. His Description of Death approaching in ill its Terrors with Impatience to demand him, uid Saying it would be leSs dreadful than that ill Mews; and then next his disbelieving it upon her 3eing the Care of Heaven, and again; turning sack to his first Fears, are the perfedl Nature, Hid the true Workings of a Mind distress’d for ■ :he IndiSpofition of a MistreSs, His turning-and falling immediately to his Prayers for her Reco-ifery, and fignifying that \\q'^\\\remain upon-Ms Knees till an ExpreSs brings him the glad Tidings 3f her restored Health, are Such lively Strokes of Imagery, that I fancy him before my Eyes in that Supplicating Pojiure,- And I remark, that it is the first Letter we have of his in Profe., which in Some MeaSure fiiews the PalTion between them to be natural., and not feign’d, in as much as her IllneSs put him under too great a Perturbation'of Mind, to exprefs himfelf in his darling IVay of Courtjhip,, that of Poetry.
Tenth LETTER, Page68.
%
O E R AnSwer to him is likewiSe in ProSe, and
(lie adapts every Thing to the Subjedl of her IllneSs: In the Midst of it fhe is not, indeed, employ’d in the Reading of his Letters; that would have been an improper AmuSement for a fick Woman. No,	Religion'., but even that
must be in his EJfays., which, as fhe tel is him, he makes, as it really is, the fineji Subjedl upon
Earth.
I
142 A Critical E s saY on the
Earth. And here I obServe, that thoSe Essays were probably that Book, the reading of which, as mentioned in the Title of the first Page, gave her the first Liking to him, and occafioned their Correspondence.—As, when flie is ill, fhe is re-folved to Seem to owe her Serious Devotion to him, So, upon the first Appearance of her growing better, the only real Pleafure fhe Seems to be able to take is, converfing with him again in Verfe, which fhe calls healing to her Mind, and concludes with defiring it in the following Rapture.
Oh ! then the facred Remedy apply,
And pleas’d I’ll live, if not, with Pleafure die.'
Eleventh L E T T E R, Page 69.
T N the next Letter Strephon anfwers the Re-quest of his Clio ; and now his Mind is more at EaSe on the Confideration of her being in a likely Way of Recovery, writes to her in Verfe and makes her Sicknefs the SubjeSi of his Letter; and, the whole, (if I may give my Opinion) Seems to be a ftudiedPiece; it is not like his other Letters; his undertaken rather as a Lask., than by Choice; it has more of Art than Natptre in it: There are many Sublime Touches in it that demand our Approbation.^ nay, even force our Admiration.^ although the others, according to my Taste, are much more taking.
Twelfth
/
»
(
Bpifiles of Clio and Strephon. 14 5^
Twelfth LETTER, Page73.
next Letter is alSo written by Stre« PH ON, and is an AnSwer to Clio’s Letter on Platomck Love.^ writ just before her SickneSs : In this he returns to hh formerIVay of Courtfhip, writers with all the Softnefs in Nature; he takes Occasion to argue, from his TenderneSs to her in her Illnefs, that fhe stiould return the Same Compassion to his Mind labouring under the Pangs of Love; and exploding., with a great deal of Humour., that too fpirituaUzdd IVay of Court-pip in the Platonick Kind, he tells her, that he is her Lover in plain Lerms, that he is compofed of 'Body as well as and, therefore, with their Angelical Converfe, they ought to mingle the DiScourfes of Woman and i\\o.Man: He ventures to own thofe two dreadful Disadvantages in a Suiter, the Difagreeablenefs of his Perfony and tBe low (Condition and Poverty of his Fortune., and throws the Issue of his Plea wholly upon her Mercy and Generojityy the two Virtues
upon which he could most rely, as being the most predominant in her Soul.
f
Thir-
'4 Critical E s sat on ths
Thirteenth LETTER, Page 76.
^ LIO intitles her;next Letter An AnSwer to ^ both Strephon’s admirable Epistles concerning her lllneSs and Platonick Love. In the first fix and twenty Lines of this Letter flie makes him the highest Compliments upon the Verfes he writ on her IndiSpofition during the Time of the great Storm. Storms., Ihe fays, grow gentle., Fbunder Softens at the Sound of his VerSe, She compares them to all the Sweetest Instruments of Mustek, even up to SDawd's Harp; fhe owns that the PalTions of her Soul are chilled and warmed, as the Poet pleafes; Ihe deferibes the Angel’s descending, hearing, and wondring at his Voice, becoming his Friends, and carrying up his Prayers for her in the Midst of the Storm; to the EstedI: of which Prayers Ihe beautifully attributes the Recovery of her Health; and, whilst file is prailing the Loftinefs of his Expressions, ex^ ceeds them with her own, and is, herfelK the heft Example of the Sublime Ihe commends. At the twenty Seventh Line Ihe begins to take him to Task for writing his other Letter against Pla-tonick Love, with a Vein of exquilite Humour and Pleafantry: The Words are theSe;
But v/ith my Praifes I fhou’d CFtcUngs join.
Thy Body is inform'd of our Defign.
Did
Epiflles of Cl io and Strephori. 145
Did I not tell thee, it a Share wou’d claim.
And drive to damp our everlafting Flame ?
And Clio has a Rival now I find.
Who knows the Ibftefl: Secrets of thy Mind:	i
Thou art not an intIre Angel yet.
But haft a little of the Serpent’s Wit.
After this little Sally of Humour is over, wherein the Sound of the Verfe is perfectly altered to the Senfe^ and the Stile made more familiar.^ the to exprefs that of Raillery ; Ihe, at last,' gracefully affumes the Platonick again herfelf, and flying into a frelh Rapture upon Angelical Love, fhe again makes the Words agree with the Senfe, and is all Pompous., Magnificent.^ and Sonorous. The Lines are thele j
A Day will come, thou wilt be all refin’d>
Thy Body as immortal as thy Mind;
Then near thy heav’nly Form my Soul fliall ftay^
And pafs, with thee the never-ending Day.
A little longer, tedious Life will end.
And we like Stars together lhall alcend:
Or fht»u’d I lofe thee in the fliining T hrong,'
> I foon fhould find thee, by thy deathlcfs Song;
Sure a peculiar Brightnefs thou wilt wear,'
From all the fparkling Crowd of Poets there.
Sing on, and (horten Life’s infipid Race,
I long to meet thee in a nobler Place,
H	V/here
w
,146 A CriticalT s say on the
Where Spirits of our Rank appear in State,
' And thole of lower Merit humbly wait.
But when file has Ihewn all this Divinity of ' Mind (as I may call it) fne is still afraid that fiie must be Wornan at laji, and apprehends falling into the Frailty of consenting to his Delires, though the very Ground upon which fhe fears to doit, is a Virtue, and not a Frailty: She fees his Mind amiable, and hears from his own Mouth, that he has a Body which disturbs his Mind with the Inclinations of Love; and yet he has told her it is a deformed one, and not likely to gain a Return of Astedioii from the F’air. Therefore out of meer Pity stie encourages him; fhe adrnits the Lover to fecure the Friend.^ and can be Said to do no more than just generoujly to bring.^ or rather force herfelf to en-'dure the corporal Man, for the fake of the tmel* lediual one.
But ceafe to think thy noble Mind undone,
Tho’ Nature put thy Body loofely on.
If his unworthy of the brighter Guest,
Which warms thyVerfe, and (paritiesin thy Breast,
' I can forgive thy uningaging Clay,
^ Suppofe it even what thy Numbers %.	^
After this w’^e may expect her ConSent; for Pity, as yix.SDryden fays, still foreruns approaching Love, as Lightning does the Thunder. But
Oh!
flies of Clio and Strephori. 14 7
Oh! how full of Beauty is the yielding Maid! Did ever So much fearful granting., retracing., hlufhing.^ trembling,, bewitching	appear in
Aftion. as there is here lively painted in Expref-, /ion ?
-	c
What would’ft thou more ? — thy Numbers I prove,
I like my lelf — and give thee leave to love.
But, Oh! incroaching Mortal as thou art.
Let ftill thy Spirit have the greatefl Part;
You may admire me, all the Ways you can.
Give me the Lover, but keep back the Man:
Yet even him, perhaps, my Eyes cou’d bear,
Becaufe thy Soul, (which is my Friend,) lives therei Let Clio ftill her Empire, there, maintain,	",
Sweet are her Laws, and gentle is her Reign,	v
She fhall not tyrannise, nor thou complain.	j
She has no Sooner conSented, but fhe Seems
♦ /
beautifully afhamed of the conlenting Letter; ssie can endure her own Writings ho longer, and his only are Suitable to herTaste; Iheexpostulates with him, that Love ought to be dumb., but when he is the Lover,, it ought to fpeak., becauSe his Eloquence alone is able to jujitfy a Maid^s being kind.
I juft again have read thy Letters o’er.
And therefore can indure my own no more;
H a	From
V	-
«
148 A Critical Es say on thio
From whence do all thy lost Expreffions come.
Sure not from Love, for Love, you know, is dumbi But fuch a Paffion may I never prove.
Give me a /peaking and a writing Love,
One, that can with fuck Eloquence perfuade.
And jujiify the Kindnefs of a Maid.
The whole Letter may stand a better Example of Epistolary-Poetry, than any one I can find a> mong the Antients: It Seems to have been writ' ten by a Lady who had a full.and lawful Call from Minerva and Nature to Poetry, and to have been led by Nature likewife to this Soft Subjedl: of Love ; So that there is left no Room to wonder that this stiould be one of the most perfect Pieces in the Compofition, in which both Art and Nature have confpired; and really where a Woman born by Nature m lEit nnd Poetep., writing to a Man fhe loves for his Senfe, and by whom stie is belov’d for her own, first acknowledges her Confent to his Gourtfliip, what Beauties might one not expedl in a Letter where IVit and Nature, Art and Study, Love, Modejiy, Paf-fion, and Virtue, join their Forces, and exert themfelves to make it fine ? This must be the Verfe which contains in it Such Charms, which cannot jfail to affed all Hearts with PleaSure, that are capable of receiving any, and to Sooth all Minds that are fufceptible of the Notions of Love: When fhe commends his Wit, her owii Lines are full of it; when stie Speaks of the Lofti-
uefs
V*
I
I
■
Ir
tpljtles oj C.110 ana btrepnon, 149
neSs of his Expressions, her own are much more Sublime; and when ssie rallies him for not being able to keep within the Bounds of Platonick Love, her Words gently steal and Aide into a Smoother CourSe of Stile; flie conveys her Notions familiarly, and in the ealiest Way imaginable ; but when fhe enters upon the Praife of Platonick Love, she grows again divine, like her Subjedl, her Sentiments rife with the Theme, and her Expreshons with her Sentiments; when she touches upon Morality and Virtue, she does it with the nicest Propriety and Delicacy; when she pities the Passion that disturbs his Breast, she in-fenssbly leads herfelf into Love, and to uSe the Expression of the ingenious Major ‘Pack., She ir
born gsnily doivn the Sfide of Lendernefs., in foft and eafy Gales of Pajfion. And all the while fhe is thus yielding, Virgin Modejly (if I may be allowed So bold a PhraSe) glows and blujhes., as it were, in her very Lines, and adds ^thoufand nei^ Charms to the other 'Beauties of this Poem.
Fourteenth LETTER, Pag.Si.
'^HE next Letter is Strephon’s; in which he expreffeth the Increafe of his Paffion, and describes the different Feelings which work upon him with greater Vehemence than ever. While he is reading over and over again the last condescending Letter, he would fain give Spiritual Love the Drop, and quit it entirelyhe has iioth,ing
H 3	more
150 A Critical E s say on the
more oS the Angel left in him, but turns perfe£l:'-ly Man, and has no Iboner obtained the least GlimpSe of a Promife, but he is> passionately ea^ ger.^ impetuous., and prejfmg for Enjoyment. But yet, amidst all the Hurry of his Dessre, he takes the nicest Care not to be So passionate as to prove ossenfive; he paints Enjoyment, but then it is in The purest Images; he artfully makes Fancy personate himSelf, and in a Tranfport of Imagination, catches her steeping in her Garden, (alluding to her Letter, intitled. The SDream, p. 7,) goes as far intheluScious DiScription as stealing a Kifs from her, and wissiing it might excite in her the fame ’Defires, as he felt, by Sympathy; and concludes with a Sigh that he could go no farther, and that what he even poffest was only iiiThonght, and not in Reality; but then he comforts himfelf with the Hopes of amore actual Enjoyment from the Leave stie had given him to Love. That kind Leave he dwells upon, with all theFondneSs of a defiring Lover; he sties into a Rapture upon it; he gains his Mistrefs in Thought, and finillies his Letter in an Extafy.
This faid, I juft was yielding to Delpair,
But thy laft Letter diffipated Care:
There, there you fay — my Numbers you approve^ T'ou like yourfelf—-and give me Leave to love.
Leave? ~ O ye Cupids bear the Tidings high,
As the bright Orb that circles round the Sky j
To
^	L. .i
rLfipies Of v^uu ana ocrcpnuu. i 5 1
To diftant Worlds my plighted Love proclaim.
To diftant Nations her dear Accents name:
She gives me Leave—O found thofe Words again! And Sound them, ’till the lovely Maid I gain!
Fifteenth LETTER, Page 84.
A S it commonly happens in other Things,when Hopes are at the highest, that they meet with unexpeded croSs Accidents, and have the greater Full; So fared it with Strephon in his Love: When his Imagination was wound up to the highest Pitch, and he thought his MistreSs his owe; a Letter full of killing News comes to his Hands from Clio, wherein stie tells him fhe has heard from an only Brother in Spain., who invites her thither: She tells him the passionate Dessre fhe has to fee him after Seven Years AbSence, will prevail with her to venture; yet at the fame Time fhe assures him, that fhe fhould be grieved to leave nothing more than his tender Correspondence, and intreats him to, contrive Some Way of keeping it up. Thus all his Hopes are defeated at once, and w'hen he thought he was nearest obtaining the Lady, fhe was going to Spain., the furthest from him: He did not want the Means of contriving a Correspondence with her in a foreign Climate, but what he most passionately wanted was, a much cloSer Correspondence.
H 4	This
N
/
This unexpe6ied DistreSs gives an Occafion for one of the most passionate, (and what I thiiik one of the best) Letters he has written.
Sixteenth LETTER, Page 8 6.
CTREPHON in the very Beginning of this Epistle Seems perfe6Uy Thunder-struck with the News of his Mistrefs’s Departure; bewilder’d, as it were, withWoe^ he begins his Letter as Nature always didlates in Such Cafes, abruptly, as Rhetoricians call it, and in this Place it is the greatest Beauty fo to begin. Starting, as it were, in SurpriSe, he pidlures, to his Imagination, a Number of Merchants standing on a Shore, beholding their Ships richly laden, and under Sail, dancing towards them on the curling Waves with a flattering Gale, thinking their Merchandizes already Safe in their Hands, exulting and leaping with Joy at the happy Sight, andbleS-stng Fortune as a Goddefs that was indulgent to theirWiihes; but then he immediately paints the Wayward Female Deity, amidst all her capricious Humours of Mutability and Inconstancy: She fpightfully commands, and Aeolus obeys, the Winds rife blushing, the Clouds gather, the Seas Swell into Mountains, the Merchants complain in vain, the tall Masts fink behind the rissng Billows, and they have no farther USe for their Eyes but to weep. After this lively Pidlure of , Woe, he brings the Parallel home, and carries
home
home the Allegory throughout with great Exa6l-iieSs and Nicety. She is to him more precious than the Diamonds; the Fludluations of a Mind in Love he justly compares to the troubled Sea; her Arms are his Secure Harbour, and her Smiles are his inviting Coast. At lash by her Gonfent he Seems approaching to her with the greatest Security ; but just at that Instant, the Same fickle GoddeSs of Fortune Snatches her away from his Sight. This Allegory Suits So much to my Taste, and is So full of lively Imagery, that I must insert it here, as being one of thofe 1 account the most beautiful Passages. After having represented the Merchant’s DistreSs as above, he carries on the Comparison.
How nat’ral ’tis to feel a Wretch his Moan,
When fmall Reflession makes the Cafe one’s own ?
Richer were I, than thofe that fhare the Eufi,
If thy Soft Form my clafping Arms possess’d:
On Seas of Troubles has roy Mind been tofs’d, ^ Long fought, thro’ Rifques of being ever losh F Thy Arms its Harbour, and thy Smiles its Coast : ^ Sometimes in H ope, but oft’ncr in Defpair,
’Till you at length inclin’d to hear my Pray’r.
t.
Jus4 as to home-row’d Barks, th’increafing Shores,
Jet forth, and feem to meet the lab’ring Oars,
So tow’rds thy Bofom did I fwiftly steer.
The Way fcem’d Ihorten’d, and the Sky was clears
H y	You
/
r
/
You feem’d approaching— Nature’s felf was gayi
And I ferener than a Summer’s Day j
But Deftiny’s black Clouds Bill lurk’d behind.
My Stars grew cruel, juft as you grew kind:
Me! fruftrate Hopes convey to Demid Flain^
And Fortune Ihatchcs thee away to Spain.
But there is a Secret Beauty which I remark in this Poem, that Ihews a great deal of A.rtdn the Writer; When her Brother had SeiKfor her, an only Brother which Ihe had not Seen So long, and it appear’d to Suit both with her Inclination and Interest to go to him, tho’ the Lover must be unwilling to part with her, yet it was not confistent with his Peirt of Friendjhip too firongly.^ and too plainly todijfmdeheiixom the Voyage\ and for this Reafon it is, he compares the LoSs of her to the Losses of Merchants at Sea, that he might have an Opportunity of describing the Inconstancy of the Heavens, a Calm first, and a Storm immediately Succeeding, in order to inflil into her Breast, with a great deal of hidden Art (where ' he does not Seem to defign it) a great many Fears and Dangers to deter her from attempting the Ha-2ard of a Voyage. After this, when he is reduced to the Necessity of either dissuading her from ‘going contrary to her declared Inclinations, or elSe perSuading her to go quite contrary to his own, he behaves himSelf very artful in So nice a Crists, dividing himfelf into the Lover and the Friend: As -a Lover he has Stears in his Eyes,
which
which he makes his dumb Advocates Sor her Stay. As a Friend he confults her Inclinations, her Pleasures, andInterest; he not only plainly adviSes her to go, but hastens her, and offers him-felf to lead her to the Ship with his own Hand; at the Same Time bemoaning his low Condition of Fortune, and Sorrowing that he was not in Circumstances to bear the Expence of travelling with her, and that therefore he must be left behind. This I count another beautiful Passage, every Line is wonderfully adapted to move Pity-and Compassion, and excite Love and Esteem.
Yet hear, my Clio, thy best Friend ad vile,
[Tho’ thy Friend’s Counlel melts thy Lover’s Eyes ;3 Since thou hast got an only Brother there.
Wife like his Sister, like his Sister fair.
Since he has foie Postestion of thy Mind,
Which might postefs the Hearts of all Mankind, Might all, that can its lov’d Acquaintance boast.
Render its Slaves, but Strephon still the most 5 Go — yes thou (halt — my Hand stiall be my Foe, ' My Hand (hall lead thee, stnee thou’rt bent to go.
And if bafe Fortune were left harfh to me.
I’d the Companion of that Voyage be.
But as to Fortune in this earthlv State,
My Name’s writ backward in the Books of Fate5 Go — ftare the Pleafures of a Brother’s Breast,
And leave a Lover void of Joy and Rest,
For me no matter •— Clio will - be blest,	^
To
%
To feme dark lonely Cave I can retire,
Weep away Life, and with a Groan expire.
Seventeenth LETTER, Page 8 o,
^ LIO, in her Anfwer, replies to both bis last ^ Letters at the fame Time. In the one he had told her his Passion was increas’d, and in the o~ ther he adviSed her to go to Spain,. In this LeN ter we must conssder (duio no more in her An» gelical Capacity of Platonick Love, but as aVir-gin that had admitted the Courtihip of a Man, and as a Woman that was So far overcome, as to own that the Courtihip proceeded by her Leave, and that Ihe well approved of the Courtier. When we have placed her in this new Light, we can’t much wonder that Ihe rallies her Lover, upon his Saying this Moment, that his Passion was increas’d;, and at the next, advissnghertogoquite away from him into a foreign Country; but then Ihe rallies So, as not to Seem to rally at the fame Time, and indeed accufes him with a great deal of courtly Decency. She would appear to commend him for his Advice, and stgnifies that Ilie doth not take it as an Argument of his Passion being abatedbut yet, by her Way of concluding from thence,, with a Resolution of going, and lignifyiiig,. that he farthers her Dessgn, ssiews that what Ihe Said before, carries with it only an Air of Compliment, and that the JVoman	at
the Bottom of it all. She inwardly condemns
his
\
his Advice, whilst (he extreamly commends it, and palpably takes it for an Affront to Love, whilst Ihe openly profeffes fhe does not. This flie beautifully performs in the following Lines, with her ufual Art and Addrefs.
I’m loft in Thought — which I fhould moft com-^
mend,	C
The Lover, the Philofopher, or Friend,	v
They all delight fo much, they all fo high afcend.
Rarely thole Titles do £o well agree,
The pleafing Wonder is all new to me,	^ ^
A thoufand dift’rent Virtues fhine in thee.	^
My Friendllu'p you delerve fb many Ways’^
Thy tender PafBon, and inchanting Lays,	^
Infpire my grateful Song, tp chaunt thy Praife. Preferring Clio’s Int’reft to thy own,
Is fuch a Compliment I have not known.
Thy kind Philolbphy I do approve,	“p
Nor think thy Offer an Affront^ to Love,	^
For I by common Methods never move.
Yes, I will go— you further jhy Delign,
She proceeds then under the Covert of a Moral, and defiring his farther Counfel in the Con-dudl of Life, artfully to excite his JealouSy, by fignifying the Dangers Ihe may have from the Gourtfliip of other Men in Spain,, that may be leSs generous Lovers than himfelf, and notwithstanding what Ihe formerly Said to the Dilparagc-
ment
I
ment of her own Beauty, fhe here pats him in Mind, that Ihe has Some Charms, and a great deal of Youth. TheWords Seem to me exceeding pretty.
Stay but a while, I’m ready to attend j Thy gen’rous Arm, and faithful Counfel lend;
This little Bark, Oh! teach me how to guide.
Far from the Rocks of Levity or Pride ;
For, Oh! I go, where I muft think to find,
< Things of thy Form, vvithout thy God-like Mind, Still lively Youth upon my Temples plays.
However, fhe is willing to explain that there is Some Love at the Bottom of his Expressions, and has So much Pity for him, that fhe endeavours to Sooth the Melancholy which he express-Ses at his Disappointment in lossng. her, and the Narrownefs of his Fortune, which restrains him from bearing her company in her intended Voyage, This ssie does by telling him that he has her for a Companion in Misfortunes, and that fhe too had met with her Share of Sorrow; and relates to him a moving melancholy Story of lossng her Father, who was bafely murder’d; and then addresses him upon the Subjedl; of his own Grief, for which he has no Such moving Caufe as fhe has had; and adviSes him to bear the Parting from her with an equal Mind; and comforts him farther with this Ressedlon, that if his Name had no Place in the Books of Fortune,
tune, it had a very bright one in the Books of Fame, and was configned to Immortality: She tells him then in the finest Compliment that can be, how far (lie would have a Hand in Spreading his Fame, especially in Spain.^ where (he was going. This Part of her Letter, which is a lofty and Sublime Panegyrick, Seems to me to be written in the Manner, and with that very Same Vigour and Spirit which was the peculiar terijlick of the immortal Is/lv./lddifon, when he employ’d his divine Pen in Panegyrick, who (for I must just take this Small (Occafion of oIFering Some little Incenfe to the Manes of that great Poet) in my Opinion far excells Mr. IValler in that IVay; tho’ my Lord. Eochefler first, and Major afterwards, ixWow IValler to have had a Talent above any Man in Sub- i jests of Panegyrick and of Love; and if Mr. Addifon has exceeded him in one, I may venture to fay this, that Clio is at least Mr. fValleFs Equal in both Capacities; fhe has a Fancy as Jirong., Sentiments as elevated, .md a Judgment as correfi.
Let partial Fate be cruel to thy Name,
Since it is written in the Book of Fame;
To whatfbever Nation I’m convey’d.
My Poet lhall be ftill immortal made;
I will thy Merit and thy Lays rehearle.
And charm the witty Spaniard with thy Verlej
-	Tho*
Tho’ skill’d in Love, they humbly lhall Submit To thy SuperiorTendernels and Wit.
Spain (hall not ftill her nobler Lovers boad.
Nor always triumph o’er our frozen Coaft;
Far from the Sun, the Lord of Iprightly Fires, Britannia Hesj but (he has fbft Defires;
The God of Love flies here with flower Wing,
But yet her MartiaSSons can love and fing,	^
For here Bays, Laurels, and the Myrtles Spring,
Thy Numbers are So tender and Ib bright, j They lhall appear, and do thy Nation Right;
Here again fhe returns (ssnce flie had before confess’d a Liking to him) to (hew that Love and Conjiancy remain in her own Bofom, and wittily takes an Occafion (passingly) to put him in Mind of his own Want of both.^ in not yet taking the Advantage of feeing her, which he might have done if he would. Then fhe warmly expostulates with him, whether he would at least remember thofe Letters of hers, in which She beautifully fays She has Sent him the Pidiure of her Soul painted with her Pen. Next flie kindly takes his. Part against her own Expostulation, and concludes with promistng herfelf a lasting Place in his Remembrance, and him an everlasting Friendfliip for his own Reward. TheSe are the Lines;
But while on Fancy’s Wing I fly to Spain,
A mournful Thought recalls me back again j
Thou
*
I
jbptjues Of ^110 ana Dtrepnon. i o i,
'thou wilt thy etbfent Clio’s Eyes forget.
But I mlflake, thou haft not leen them^e/;
Soon all thy Soft Ideas thou wilt lofe,
That fire thy Soul, and animate thy Mule;
The Wheel of Fortune may its Humour fliow,
And, often turning round, may caft thee low;
Wilt thou remember abfent Clio then,	'y
And know thePidure of her Soul again,	q
Whichfhe has lent thee painted with her lent I hear thiy JlgFmg Heart affirm it will.
My Vain is lofi, and all my Vears are JliU.
Oh! what (hall I return thy fofc Regard,
Be everlafting Friendftiip thy Reward,
Such as thy Soul fo ardently demands^
Whofe trueft Value Strephon underftands.
Eighteenth LETTER, Page 94.
V.
T N Anfwer to the foregoing Letter Stre-PH ON grounds his, which he calls his Complaint ; he ads the Lover now, as he had done the Friend before, and as he then adviSed her to go, he now implores her to stay; he begins with even calling her cruel to think of going, and where flie terms it his CounSel, he accuses her of laying artful Blames upon him: He distinguiflies between his Friendfliip and his Love with a great deal of Humour and Pleafantry, and tells her that She is a little SopBjier in Poe-
try^
»
I
joz A c>riticai Ji s say on we
try., not to make the Same Distin£l:ion. This Raillery in Argument continues for about twenty Lines, wherein he accuSes himSelf for having aded the Friend at all, calls it being wife out of SeaSon, and dully good, to permit his Judgment to counSel what was repugnant to his Will, and then Smartly argues her of being unfairly witty to take that Part against him, where he owns his Head had erred against the Dictates of his Heart. And this Part of the EpiS-
tle is written in a Stile particularly familiar and luitable to the Subje6t. When he has endeavour’d, as much as he can, to rally her . out of her Defign of following his Advice in going to Spain, he tries next what Gravity will do, and conliders her Departure as a Matter important to his own Repost: He afrelh takes RecourSe to his Intreaties and Prayers for her Stay, begs as a condemned Man would for a Reprieve, accuSes her for entertaining a fingle Thought that he could part from her without Pain, expresses the Agonies of his Heart, on the doleful Occafion, and uSes all the tender Words, he can, to rewW Pity and Compassion within her Bofom.
Nineteenth LETTER, Page py.
A S the Aim of Strephon’s last Letter was to move Pity, we may judge how far Art and Nature join’d in stirring up that Passion,
by
%
K
Oj wllU (PfHy OLACpnUli# y
by finding in this AnSwer of Clio, that her Heart was affedted with it, flie administers Comfort to him in the tend’rest Manner (he can. And in the two first Lines (for I never heard that the Lady understood the Latin of Ovid, neither do I know that that Part of him was ever made EngUJJsf) file has fhewn her Genius to be perfedlly OviDi-^ AN, for they are Word for Word the Same.
jyi/cite Jamri, per quern didiciliis amare j
Una Manus volts vulnus opemque feret.
Let Clio thy complaining Heart appeafe,
The Hand that wounded ihall reftore thy Eafe.i.
i	•
She Says all the kind Things to him that are possible, to convince him that he has still her Ef-teem; and what is more, (he revives him- with the Knowledge that ssie herSelf is alfo convinced on her Part, that he has a Love and Fondnefs for her, and ’tis necessary (he ssiould continue it. Nay, furthermore, as if Ihe herSelf dessred it, file very wittingly prophesses that he will continue thoSe his AfFediions to her. Thus far ssie Sj^aks in all theTenderneSs'Of a kind MistreSs; but still the refenting Woman is to punilh the erring. Suitor, a little longer, for committing Such an Affront to Love, as letting his Friendlhip gain the better of his Passion, and advissng her to go.*—— That unpallatable Advice sticks uppermost still, and (he must punissi him a little more before the
Crime is. attoned for. It is but reasonable for
her,,
i©4 " '^ruiccii nssAit on vm
her, fhe thinks, to offer him Friendfhip instead of Love, in her Turn, stnce he had Set her the Example; for this End fhe instrudls him what kind of a Friendfhip his must be to pleaSe her; that his Wiflies must be temperate and coost and that he must prescribe Rules to his FondneSs. She owns the Task to be difficult, but at theSameTime requires his Obedience, and propoSes herfelf for his Example, asserting that (he is a PhiloSopher in Love; fhe then condemns herfelf of Vanity and Folly, for having felt So much as a (ingle Pleasure in So fine a ^ntleman’s Courtlhip, even at thofe Years which (he calls her defenceleSs Youth, but her Heart is now steel’d by Time, and grown a perfedi: Stoick; So that unhappy StRephon, for one (ingle Error, Seems to have all his Courtfiiip to begin a*new. But when (he has impofed upon him this Severe and cruel Task, there still appears So much remaining Kindnefs, as obligeth her to give him Encouragement enough to keep him from Defpair in the Performance. She owns that Love and Friendlhip are the only Joys of this Life, and Youth the Time in which they best take root and flourifh, and fays fhe fancies fhe could refign them all; and talks very morally of Death, but prettily infinuates fhe has Some doubt whether fhe perfedly knows her own Mind, in that Cafe, if fhe was put to the Trial; and to (hew him how vast a Portion of Esteem he enjoys in her Bofom, fhe fays, that if fhe was dying, and encompassed by her dearest Friends, bathed in Tears, the last and only (51ory fhe Should
then
Epiflies of Clio and Strephon. 16 5
then take, would be, that flie was once loved, and had her Name Sung by him. Affedlion and Constancy is here So well pictured, that it gives him more Room to hope, than any Thing Ihe could Say before gave him CauSe to distrust. The Lines are thefe;
Lovers, and Friends, thole only Joys below,
If I thy Clio’s Inclinations know,	C
And flying Youth itfelf, (he could forego.	J
Half of my Sands are ebb’d, what do remain.
Fall when they will, are fcarcely worth my Paint But when the folitary Last appears,
And Clio’s few dear Friends are bath’d in Tears,
It will her last, and only Glory be,
That once her Name was lov’d, and fung by thee.
I can’t part with theSeVerSes before S make one Remark or two more upon the fingular Beauty of them; I think it is the famous Monfieur Bruyer., who when he had a Mind to expreSs the FondneSs that a celebrated young Beauty had for her own Charms, is applauded for finding out this lively Way of expressing it, viz. Thatthelafi
SThing a fine young Woman thinks of when jhe dies.^ is the Lofs of her Beauty. If he has rightly judged the Temper of a Woman, we may argue from hence the ExceSs of FondneSs in thefe VerSes, where a young beautiful Woman assures her Lover, that the last Thing Ihe ssiall think of, or glory in, will not be her own Charms, but
his
t
i66 A Critical E s say on the
\
his Wit, and the Love and Esteem he bore her. Some Criticks who are of a more morole Temper than 1, who are more given to Search after Faults than commend Excellencies, (and when they do commend, they do it very Sparingly,) may blame me for dwelling So long upon this Passage; but I think I fhall lufficiently anSwer them, by telling them that Tibullus and Ovid, who were the Masters of this kind of Epistolary and Elegiack Poetry, are of the Same Mind with niy Self; Tibullus was the first Author of two VerSes, the which Clio’s refemble, in his first Elegy, the latter Part of which is addreSs’d to his Delia.
Te fpeBem, fuprenja mihi xum •venerit herd.
Te teneam momns deficiente mmu.
Which I take the Liberty thus to transsate,
Oh! may thefe Eyes, while thine divinely blazc> "y Fix on their Luftre, at my Dying gaze,	>
And doling lhatch the Beauties of thy Face.
Thele Hands, when all their Force the Nerves relign. At the kft tremble, Ihdl be gralping thine.
Ovid, in his ninth Elegy of the third Book on the Death of Tibullus, Ihews that he was per-fedly affedled with the Beauty of thefe Lines, 'above any other in Tibullus’s Works, by quoting the Senfe of them in his PraiSe, in the following Lines.
, Delia
I
t
V
Efifiles of Glio md S trephon. 1^7
Delia difcedens, Feiiciusj inquitt amutst Sum tibi: Vixijif dum, tuus ignis eram.
C«i Nemesis, ^uid, ait, tibi fint mea damna dolo&t Me tenuit meriens deficiente^ mam.
Thus EngUJPd by Major Pack.
Delia departing from the wiournful Train,'
Cry’d, “ Haplefs Obje6t of my prefentPain! V
y I charm’d thee once, nor charm’d thee then in V
vainj
Vigour and Joy danc’d fparkling in thy Eyes.”
Stung with the Thought, proud Nemesis replies;
“ Boaft not the Sallies of his roving Youth.”
Hislalt faint dying Gralp confirm’d his Truth,
Twentieth LETTER, Page loo.
STREPHON’s AnSwer in the foregoing Letter is fill’d with a Matter of frefii Complaint, arifing from a Report which it Seems he had heard from the Mouth of another Lady, that Clio was adlually married, or very near it, at the Time (he gave him leave to love; the whole is written with a gallant kind of DiSorder, and Ihews the true Perplexity of his Soul when he •writ it. It Seems to have been pen’d down by Startsy just as Fears., yealoufies., Rage., Hofes.,
Doubts^ Wipes., and 'Dejires., ruled most predominantly
t6% A Critical E s say on the
minantly in his Mind, and dictated by Turns: He hopes and dcSpairs ; he believes and is not willing to believe, the Story in one Breath, as I may Say, (that is in one Period.) I fancy I See him writing before me when I read the following Lines.
If what IVe heard (O Clio) fhould be true,
Me have the Fates ftrove rightly to undo,	^
And Wit was moft feverely plac’d in You.
I’ve heard (I wifti I had not Ears to Bear,
Or elfe more Patience, what I’ve heard, to bear;) I’ve heard, by Heav’ns! I have from ftrong Report,
You wedded, when you gave me leave to court.
You did not, could not, ’tis adult’rate News,
Credit I did,, and I do ftill refufe;
Bright was the Dame that did thofe Tidings bear, And if Maids can be falle, that are fb fair,	A
There mayn’t ~ Yes! —- may be Room for my De- ^ .fpair.
&	V
This last Line has an inimitable Beauty in the Sudden Break, and the just reverting of the Self Same Thought.
After this, as if he takes it for granted, he expostulates with her upon her conceiv’d Falsehood, very warmly calls her the dear Blaster of his Youth; fays, that if he fhould live, he fears he fhould fay Somewhat harfh of a Name, tho’ still dear to him, (tho‘ confessing it would be a MadneSi So to do,) and conjures her therefore to
tell
I
Epiflks of Clio and Strephon. 16^
tell him the Satal Truth, that Some other Perfoii is happy in the Enjoyment of her; and lignifies, that the News coming from her own Mouth would be the best Expedient to keep him from complaining of the Cruelty he had met with, by striking him dead at once. All theSe Passions are hit off at Such a Heat, that they are better felt than describ’d, as yourSelf may judge from his own Words. .
If it be true, dear BlaRer of my Youth,
Tho’ you must blusti, yet own the stabbing Truth: For fhould I live, perhaps, another Day,
I Ibmewhat harfh of thy dear Name might styj Strike dumb that Madnefs} and, to lay me dead.
Tell me fome happy Swain enjoys thy Bed:
Priding in Truth, I’ll my. last Hours employ.
Smile in the Pangs of Death, and wisti thee Joy.
The two last Lines are a Copy of the Same beautiful Inssnuation of his Constancy in Death, as thofe Lines of hers were, which I remark’d upon at the Concluston of the tiventieth Letter ^ and he copies them with as much JustneSs and Eloquence from her, as Ovid did his, which are, in the Same Place, quoted from Tibullus.
■1	Twenty
\
I
,170 A v^riticai SAY on the Twenty firft L E T T ER, Page 105.
"D Y Clio’s ProSe Letter, which follows, it ap-^ pears, that She made him do Penance Sufficiently for this TranSgreffion, in obliging him to write at least twenty Letters to excuSe himfelf, for giving So eafy a Credit to So falfe a Report. It would be a long Work to point out the Several artful Turns in this Letter of hers, wherein fhe figiis his Pardon; for Strokes of Wit and Humour abound in every Line, and I refer you to it, not doubting but you will find the fame Plealure in reading it as I did.
Twenty Second LETTER,
Page 107.
T N SxREPHoffs Reply to this, I find nothing ■*- remarkable; but only, in order toconnetl: the Senfe of the Epistles together, I stiall obServe he took her DiSpleastire, and Some of his own private Misfortunes So much to Heart, that he fell lick upon it, defires Some Verfes from her as the best Comfort to a distemper’d Mind, and begs, in order to confirm his Recovery, he may have leave to See her.
Twenty
t
Eptjiles Of Clio ana btrephon. 171:
Twenty third LETTER,
Page 109.
^ LIO in her next is very indulgent; ssie tells ^ him, that flie mourns Sor him herSelS, as is natural to Souls that are allied by the Same Genius and Inclinations, and asks Pardon verypret^ tily, indeed, for what (lie calls her Ambition, of bearing Such an Alliance of Mind to him; Oie even invites him to come to her, and make her a
Sharer of his Sorrows.
' - /
Twenty fourth LETTER,
Page Ilf.
CTREPHON, in his Reply to this Letter, ^ boasts of his being very much recover’d and reviv’d ; but that his Genius still retains too great a Damp from his late Afflictions to be able to anSwer her in VerSe; and that before it can be brighten’d up again, he must derive a Infpiration from the Sight of her : He fends her however a Poem upon Buckimham-Houfe.^ * which he wrote
1 2	a
* Thh Toem on Buck Ingham-Ho ufe is note inferted in its Tlace^ of which the now deceas'd Mr, Porcerj /aid in his f{,marks 9n tl^
Vfi Edition^ it ms great Fitj it hfid.
/
1
17 i d.L <uriticai li s sa y on Inc
a Year beSore; and I think it great Pity that Such a Poem as that Ihould have been lost, which fhe ^ thinks fit So warmly to commend in the Versts which fhe'has written thereon; they begin at Page iiy. and are all So admirable in themfelves, that were 1 to give them their due ApplauSe, I Ihould be obliged to quote them here as one entire continued Beauty: I must beg leave therefore to be excuSed for contenting myfelf with stngling out the ten last VerSes only, which conclude the Poem, and which 1 take to be written exadlly in the Addifonian Manner.
Phoebus the God of Mufick and of Thought,
Shall guard the Wonders he himlelf has wrought.
When his fierce Steeds drive to the Jaft great Day,
And o’er the melting Clouds bound fwift away.
When from their guilded Harnefs they (hall fly,	,
And bear to Earth the Light’ning of the Sky :
Then common Versts, with each Poet’s Name,
Expiring Ihall aflift the mighty Flame.
Thine Ihall unwounded be convey’d above.
And teach the Angels how to fing and love,.	I
Twenty
N
JL' W	^	i
Twenty fifth LETTER^
Page 116*
A T last our Lovers are met, and they both give us indeed an elegant Account of their Interview. Some in this Place would expedl Stre-PHON, at leass, to be a little more than ordinary luScious in his Expressions; but we find his wonted Modesty ssill prevails, but not So far as to deprive him of a Lover’s \Varmth; he draws Beauties where they ssiould be drawn, from all the natural Circumstances attending the Visst. The very Time of Year, the Climate ssie lives in, the IllneSs he is So lately recover’d from, his own private Misfortunes, are all madetheInstruments of her Praife; and as his Fancy took its first new Vigour from her Benevolence, he invokes her as a Mufe, as ssie bears the Name of one in the Beginning of his Poem. And truly-afterwards he stems to have received the Inspiration he had implor’d ; he even rivals the very Excellency of his MistreSs, and writes beyond himfelf; he makes good his Words in a former Letter, where he prophefiedthisof himfelf in the following Words,
‘‘ viz. I think what I stall want in Genius, will “ be So much more than made up by the Subjeff,
13	“ that
I
%
1	** \-»iXLiv-ciA ii/o	X vff>
** that I fhall not (in that one Poem of the Inf er-“ view) be afraid of being compared with Tibul-
“ LUS, CA.TULLUS, PROPERTIUS^ AUSONlUS,Or
“ even the great Ovid himSelf, or of being thought “ aWriter inferior to the best of them.” 1 will not
i
inSert any of it here, but I venture to make this Judgment upon the whole my Self, that every stngle Line contains a new Beauty; and I don’t at all doubt, but I fliall have the Satisfadlion to hear my Judgment confirmed by that of the more Beamed. If the Interview of Strephqn justly destrves this PraiSe, Inced not attempt to make any farther Panegyrick upon Clio’s, than this; that as he has been Superior to himfelf in hisCom-pofition. So fhe at least is equal to herSelf in hers; and when stie is equal to herfelf, I know no Female Author deServes a Superior Charadler, not excepting the Orinda and Astrea, fhe Speaks of in it, who were an Honour to our Englijh Nation, nor Madam Dacier who is an .Ornament to the French.
I have been long in my Criticifm, but hope it will be excuSed upon this Confideration, that altho’ I give it the Title of a Angle Letter, yet it contains Remarks upon more than twenty. If in reading thofe you meet with the fame SatiS-faffion and Pleafure as I did, I (hall content my Self with having barely recommended them to your PeruSal, without defiring any further Ap-plaufe of my Manner of doing it, than knowing that you excufe this, and approve thofe. If I
have
(
I
thmptss oj v^iio ana^ outcpiion. 175-
have not been So accurate in my Expressions, as a Criticism upon a Piece of Poetry might Seem to require, l am Sure you have Humanity enough to let me plead my Familiarity with you, as a good ReaSon why I did not study them better, ssnce a Man ought never to study what he has to Say, but alwaysTo write as he talks to his Friend. If the Criticism upon the PoeSy happens to mark out more Beauties than may Seem So to PerSons of a thorough poetical Taste, I can pleaSe my Self with this Conssderation, at least, that I have Scarce Angled out one Passage, wherein the Sentiments contained, carry not witlr chem a delicate Taste of Friendssiip, Love, or Morals, or wherein the Expressions have not a happy Turn of genteel Raillery, and are always delivered with courtly Manners.
I SHALL conclude therefor® with Saying of them, the very Same Thing that the ingenious Major P Ac K.has Said of the Roman Elegiack Poets in his Essay.
“ From the little Draft of their Gharafters, “ one may judge how edifying any of their “ Compofitions must needs be to an elegant “ Understanding., And indeed what Sincerity “ in Friendssiip, what FondneSs in Love, what Kindnefs to Relations, what Instances of all the Social Virtues do we not meet with in “ thefe Writings ? not to mention a thouSand “ Ornaments of Wit, a wonderful SweetneSs ‘‘ and cafy Cadence in their Numbers, and So.
“ true
/
“ true a Pi£l:ure of Life and Love, that will “ recommend the Manners of this Age to Poste-“ rity.” I am, Sir,
Tour moft Devoted.^
And Obliged Humble Servant.^
John Porter:
/
A	. ^
AT. A. Siiiec TTc had'iiot a Print of Clio to grace the Frontispiece of this Book, we have at the End given her Pidlure drawn by her own Hand, which is taken from Mr. Ham--rnond.% MiScellany.
FINIS.
0
• •
%
§
Some BOOKS lately Bunted for
J. Hooke.
f
a OEMS upon Several Occasions. By the Reverend Mr. Pomfretjviz* T The Choice. H. Love triumphant over ReaSon. III. Cruelty and Lust, ly. On the divine Attributes. V. A Profpect of Oeatii. vx. On the Conflagration, and last Judgment.. The flcventh Edition, Corrected. With fome Account of his Life and W^ricings. To which are added^ his Remains, lamo.^ Price 2 s.
The Art of Englijh Poetry- Containing, L Rules for making VerSes. II. A Coliection os the most Natural, Agreeable, and Sublime Thoughts, Alluflons, Similies, Descriptions, and Chara6bers of Perfons and Things, that are to be found in the best Englijh Poets. HI. A Dictionary of Rhymes. By Edward Bysjhe Gent. The Seventh Edition, corrected and enlarged.
2 VoL lamc. Price ys.
The Hoop-Petticoat, an Horoi-Comical Poem. In Two Books. The ThirdEdidon. By Mr* Gayy 8vo. Price i s-
The History of the Conquest of Mexicoj by the S'^aniards* . With fine Cuts. Done into Englijhy from the Original Spanijb of Don Antonio de Solisy Secretary and Historiographer ^to his Catholick Majesty. By Thomas Townfend Efqs	Price
j 1. I s.
N
Dr. Burnetts Theory of the Earth ; Containing an Account of the Original of the Earth, and of all the general Changes it hath already undergone, or is to undergo, tili the Confummation of all Things. In Four Books. I. Concerning the Deluge. IL Concerning Paradife. IIL Concerning the Burning of the World.
IV A
j3ULf IS. d rrmted for J. Hooked
IV. Concerning the New Heavens and New Earth. With a Review oS the'Theory, and of its Proofs, efpecially in Reference to ^ Scripture. With Nineteen curious Cuts. The Sixth Edition. aVols. 8vo. Price iis.
A Compleat Treatife oS Moral and Intellectual Virtues ? Wherein their Nature is fully explain’d, and their Ufefulnefs proved, inafmuch as they regulate all the Branches of Life, under the Sollowing Heads, viz* I. The Nature oS Ethicks. IT. Fortitude. III. Temperance. IV. Liberality. V. Magnificence.
Magnanimity. VII. Meeknefs. VIII. The three converSa-ble Virtues, viz* Comity, Veracity, and Urbanity. IX. Modesty. X. Taciturnity: Or, the Government of Speech. XT. Justice. XII. Intellectual Virtues, viz* Art, Prudence, UnderSfanding, Science, and WiSdom, <^’c. By jRr<^rfc/7j[fev’Br.D.^nd late Fellow oi	FrmihYid^e^ The Second Editioh, Cor-
rected, 8vo. Price y s.
The Life of General	oi AlheYmarle: Containing, »
I. An Account of his unparallel’d Conduct, furprizing Actions, and providential Succefs, in accomplishing the” Rcstauration of Monarchy. II. A particular Relation of that most memorable March from Coidjiream to London-^ the Preparations for it in Scotland^ and the happy ConSequences of it in England^ 3.. Many Mistakes committed by our Historians, particularly the Eari of Clarendon^ concerning the General’s Administration, rectified. Publifh’d Srom the Original Manufcripc oiIhomas Skinner^ M. D. With a Preface in Vindication of General Monk^s Conduct. B7 William Webfier^ M. A. The Second Edition, corrected, 8vo% Price y s.
Thoughts on Religion, and other curious Subjects. Written originally in French by Monfieur PafcaL Transtated into EngUpy by Bafil Kennety D. D. late Principal of Cor^^us- Chrijii CollegCy Oxotiy 8 VO. Price 4-s. ^d.
The Lives of *fohn TiciiSy Prince of Mirandoluy and of the celebrated Monfieur Tafcal^ with a Parallel between thofe two Christian Worthies. By Mr. Jefup* The Life of Ficus is collected from the Writings of Several learned and faithful Historians, more particularly from thofe of Sir Ihetnas ^ore Knu
Lord
nuuiviS rrmvea jor j.jtlooke.
Lord High-Chancellor of England* The Life of Monsteur Tafcal is taken from Some original Papers, written by Madam Veriery his Sister, of which the learned M. Bayle, in his News from the Kefublick of Letters^ for the Month of Decembery 1^84. Page 531. among many other extraordinary Commendations, hath this very memorable Saying, Ajt hundred Volumes of Sermons are not worth this fingle Life^ &c. 8vo. Price 3 s*
A Journey through the ALujirian ISletherlands: Containing, The modem History and Defcriptidn of all the Provinces, Towns, Castles, Palaces,	of that fruitful, populous Country, fo
long the Scene of Wars and dreadful Ravages^ till it was by the Treaty of	yielded to the Emperor of Germany^ With
an Account of all the remarkable Battles and Sieges; taken from the most Anthenrirlr TsTarratives. To which is prefix’d. An Introduction: Containing uu^	niitoiy ot the whole
Seventeen Provinces. By the Author of the Journey through England and Scotland^ 8vo. Price 4 s.
Origines Hebraese: Or, The Antiquities of the Hebrew Re-publick. Being an Explanation of every Branch of the Levid-cal Law, and of all the Ceremonies and Ufages of the Hebrews^ -both Civil and Sacred. By T'homas Lewis^ M. A. 4 Vols. 8va* Price 20 s.
The History of the Parthian Empire, from the Foundation of the Monarchy by AirfaceSy to its final Overthrow by Artaxerxes the Perfian^ contained in a Succestion of twenty-nine Kings. Compiled from the Greek and Latin Historians, and other Writers, and the Chronology fettled. By Thomas Lewisy M. A. 8vo* ITice y
Sadducifmus Triumphatus: Or, A full and plain Evidence, concerning Witches and Apparitions. In Two Parts. The first treating of their PoSTibiiity, the Second of their Real Existence. By Jofeph Glanvily Chaplain in Ordinary to King Charles II. and F. R. S. The Fourth Edition, with Additions. The Advantages whereof the Reader may vinderSland out of Dr. H.	Account, prefix’d hereunto. Alfo TwoAuthen-
tick, but wonderful Stories of certain	Witches. Done
into Englijh by Dr.Horneck. With Some Account of Mx^Glan* vir^ Lhe and Writings, 8vo# Price js.
The
%
\
1
t
✓
BOOKS Bnnted for J. Hooke*
Tho Moral Characters of 'Theophrdftu^. Transtated from the Greeks with Notes* To which is prefix’d, a Critical Estay on Characteristick Writings. By Henry Gaily-, M. A. Lecturer of St. Faults Cov^-Garden^ and Rector of Wmden in Buckingham* JhirCi 8vo. Irice 4 s.	^
The Works of Monfieur D^e SuEvremond. Made EngliJIo from Ae Original. With the Life of the Author. By Mr.J)es Maizeaux^	To which are added, the Memoirs of the
Dutchefs of Mazarin^ &c. The Sedond Edition^, Corrected and
Enlarged, 3 Vols. 8vo. Price 14 s.
»
The ^ijght Volumes of Letters writ by a Turkif^ Spy, who liv’d five aiid~Tourty.Dreax5-Triiaiicover d at P^m; Giving an impartial Account to the Divan at ConJiantino]?le of the most remarkable Tranfactions of Europey and discovering feveral Inti igues and Secrets of the Christian Courts, especially that of Vranccy from the Year 1^37* to the Year 1682. Price 18 s.
The Characters of the feveral Noblemen and Gentlemen that have died in the Defence of their refpective Princes, or the Liberties of their Country. 'Together with the Charadlers of thofe who have fuffer’d for TreaSon and Rebellion for the last three hundred Years. With an Account of their Behaviour and Speeches at their refpective Executions* By Mr. Salmon, Svo. Price
5s.
The Falfe Friend and Inconstant Mistrefs. An Instructive Novel. To which is added. Love’s Diversion 5 cifplaying the Artifices of the Female Sex, in their Amours, Drefs,
With Directions for the Education of both Sexes, and a Collection of Moral Letters, on curious Subjedls. By John Lyly, M. A. one pf the Refiners of the	Tongue in the Reign of Queen
"Elizabeth^ 8vo» Price 25.
...
%
'X
\
9
%
*	V
t
t
f
%
/
> '
f
t
% •
K ^	^ 4
' 0
1
# •
« r	•
Jt»	.	•	.
#» *
•	’ i •
f
V.
s . ^
<;.	.	r •	•
:V‘	■	'
y .
t
•	.•■4
' .	V	‘
-I
«
:%1	M'	■ -'V
'	-r
>■ ^
•C -;S^	D
■ ‘Li!:..
.
I
«
I
•\
f
:i	v,‘ V
. ' ' i
■0
•t '	.
t	•	'	■ ■ '	.	' . -
V
.	I
.r	.	•-••'.•
"■	• j».	-
i A • j	■., ■ - ■■
w •	■	,	- .•
i	■ 'A
.	'.f
/ ‘ -
^ (D i	A
. \
.	. j‘	Vt .
f ^
■% \ ri. V	m
■ ■■	\ t J c>.	'	^
' .# ■ ■ ■ ■ ■
\
i	•
I
4*
4
J
%
» • ■» *
i
f <
/ ’
1
» • «
i
I
%
t
#
/ •
« •
'	I
t	•	I	'
>
#
«
^ /
«
%
• . /
f	N ^•
^
•*v
\
\ • ^
/
I
'	I
»•%
• >
\
V	#
V
' •
*#
V	.
*
f	* ^
' C' *A . .
i
>
t	,	,
^ ■ .^■
»
I
I
, 0
t	•^>.	'	'
0
■ ■ c	.....
* '• ■ . *'' •
C'tVb	.	■	'	■	‘
--i^r'V	-- \VK ...	f -	'	■	.	.	.	^	.	' •
✓
#
% •
>
/ _
# *
- ' .#
\
s
• \
*^* ■• *■ , ••
/•
fc I —■	-^T- —-•-* '■*-~7J I I# L’. .
u ——e^TT^-^^^saAi.^. rr- ■
— -	- sr^ ->s>
r *
p ik
.zrc=^^■	iffi'-r? ’■': -i-—--iii*^
V ^ ^
~ - ^'=c=?iSt'
t
%
i? V ?■
• 1. - '
i ^
)
i i \'
' • - -xfci.mraai 'mrAsitarTS'^-'^
^	-=yn;-=s=i===^^....
'	V*t /•/ <
______________________=-=^'.
^ _______________>
« *
♦
\
•	t
\
0
^	k.
T ■ r	*
^	%r*